T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by Johns Hopkins University Press
March 2014
Vol. 67   No. 7
 
To order
Call 800.548.1784 or 410.516.6987; fax 410.516.3866;  
e-mail: jrnlcirc@press.jhu.edu; or visit us online at  
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
essential.
Deborah Stevenson, Editor 
UniversiTy of illinois aT Urbana-Champaign
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books provides 
concise summaries and critical evaluations of current 
children’s books. This invaluable resource assists 
readers with questions regarding the ever-evolving 
children’s literature field. Reviews give an in-depth 
look at a selected book’s content, reading level, 
strengths and weaknesses, and quality of the format, 
as well as suggestions for curricular use. 
Published monthly (except August). Volume 67 (2014).  
ISSN 0008-9036; E-ISSN 1558-6766.
the Bulletin of the Center  
for Children’s Books
annUal individUal sUbsCripTions
$55.00 (print); $60.00 (online)
annUal insTiTUTional sUbsCripTions
$100.00 (print); $110.00 (online);  
$140.00 (print & online)
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
March 2014
Vol. 67 No. 7
347  the BIg PICture
 
 The Children of the King  by Sonya Hartnett
348  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
369 • Hi, Koo!: A Year of Seasons  written and illus. by Jon J Muth
370 • How I Discovered Poetry  by Marilyn Nelson; illus. by Hadley Hooper
376 •  Aviary Wonders Inc. Spring Catalog and Instruction Manual: Renewing the 
World’s Bird Supply Since 2031  written and illus. by Kate Samworth
382 • The Ghosts of Tupelo Landing  by Sheila Turnage
383 • Next  by Kevin Waltman
385  ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons
386  suBjeCt And use Index
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R Recommended.
Ad Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor (KQG)
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Thaddeus Andracki, Reviewer (TA)
Amy Atkinson, Reviewer (AA)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
Alaine Martaus, Reviewer (AM)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Kim Naples, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print $100.00 or electronic $110.00; combined print & electronic $140.00; 
multiple institutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, 
$55.00; students, $20.00. In countries other than the United States, add $17.60 per subscription for 
postage; subscribers in Canada and Mexico add $13.20. Single copy rate: $11.00. Volumes available 
in microfilm from ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes avail-
able in microfiche from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription 
checks should be made payable to Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address 
should provide both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin 
of the Center for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. 
Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 
2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 410-
516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/journals/
advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2014 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image from The Children of the King by Sonya Hartnett. Illustration copyright ©2014 by 
Andrea Offermann. Reproduced by permission of the publisher, Candlewick Press, Somerville, MA.
March 2014 • 347
the BIg PICture
The Children of the King
by Sonya Hartnett
When German bombs begin to fall on London, Cecily Lockwood, her older brother 
Jeremy, and their mother leave the city for the safety of the family’s country seat, 
Heron Hall.  On the way there, Cecily impulsively insists they also take in an evacuee 
child, and so calm, intrepid May, more grown at ten than Cecily is at twelve, joins 
them at the Hall.  The country peace can be deceiving, however: Cecily frets that 
May proves to be an independent being rather than a grateful toy, Jeremy seethes at 
being forced to flee when he wants to help defend his home and country, and the 
girls are intrigued but troubled by the strange boys they find hiding in the ruins of 
nearby Snow Castle.  As Uncle Peregrine, owner of Heron Hall, spins the tale of 
the fallen stronghold, it becomes clear that centuries-old stories and centuries-old 
savagery have surprising relevance to the children’s current lives.  
The scenario here is familiar and even cozy: a country house, well-heeled 
children, a mid-century adventure, and possible ghosts, and even the wartime at-
mosphere is pleasantly adventurous at the Lockwoods’ safe distance. With skilled 
layering, though, Australian author Hartnett embraces this scenario in a way 
that its fans will appreciate but also subtly tweaks it, making classic pleasures and 
contemporary judgment strangely comfortable partners.  Her writing is superb, 
carrying echoes of Austen but also touched with a perceptive yet incisive wit that 
recalls Muriel Spark, and the book stealthily alludes to the Lockwoods’ considerable 
privilege and shades its dismantling. Cecily (blessed with “well-fed certainty”) has 
never encountered a situation that her beloved father can’t solve and sees no reason 
why the war will be any different; Jeremy both struggles against the luxury of safety 
(and the “agony of being insignificant”) and the threat to his future enjoyment of 
the life he has expected; Jeremy’s eventual break with parental control shatters his 
mother not just because of maternal anxiety but also because this is the first time 
she’s failed to get her way.  Similarly, the third-person narration focalizes through 
Cecily but wryly and persistently observes her limitations (“Cecily had taken to the 
role of instructor with ease, and found it hardly any bother to be constantly criticis-
ing and instructing”), a technique that heightens her contrast with self-possessed 
May, whose inner thoughts remain uncatalogued, and whose secret remains hidden 
(from Cecily, at least) until just before the end.
An underlying theme of humanity’s lust for power and its terrible con-
sequences plays out most overtly in Uncle Peregrine’s story: told in episodes, with 
archetypal terms for characters rather than names, it’s actually the tale of Richard 
III and the young princes in the Tower, who are rumored to have ended their days 
at Snow Castle.  The interpolated tale becomes gripping in its own right, and it 
348 • The BulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
converges with the World War II story in places both expected and unexpected, 
with the long-gone victim princes perhaps able to make their final peace with the 
help of Cecily and May, and possibly providing one last connection for May with 
her beloved late father. Yet other themes rise strongly as well:  Cecily and Jeremy 
begin to realize the human limitations of their parents; Cecily begins to reach just 
a little past her comfortable complacency; all of the characters face the reality of 
change in both their loved ones and the world they know.  
Together, it’s an atmospheric concoction, haunted in the nicest possible 
ways, and readable at various levels of sophistication (and also suitable for an ongo-
ing readaloud).  Fans of classic children’s literature will delight in seeing a familiar 
plot so richly interpreted, and sharp readers will appreciate the provocative new 
resonance under the old story.  (See p. 360 for publication information.) 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
Arnett, Mindee  Avalon. Balzer + Bray/Harper Collins, 2014 [432p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-223559-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-223561-9 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Seventeen-year-old Jeth Seagrave and his crew of teenage miscreants are the best 
thieves in the universe, stealing spacecrafts and stripping them of their valuable 
metatech. Now they are being sent on their most dangerous heist yet, pursuing a 
downed ship into the mysterious Belgrave Quadrant and retrieving its cargo. Jeth 
is uneasy, but he can’t pass up the reward, which will be enough to get himself, 
his sister, and his crew out from under the thumb of the gangster they work for. 
Venturing into the most unpredictable corner of the known universe, he expects 
trouble, but not in the form of an attractive teenage girl and her two compatriots, 
who are on the run themselves. The three turn out to know more about the secret 
cargo, the Belgrave, and metatech than Jeth could imagine, and he must decide if 
he should rely on their help or betray them for his own freedom. A well-plotted 
and suspenseful space adventure, this novel is perfect for science fiction fans who 
prefer reasoned plans of escape over a chase-filled adventure. The story moves at a 
steady pace, piling on the secrets and betrayals and gradually entwining the reader 
in its myriad twists and turns. Much of the narrative is dedicated to meticulous, 
inventive world-building, including a kind of Bermuda Triangle in space, and to 
Jeth’s attempts to puzzle his way out of seemingly unwinnable situations; though 
the characterization isn’t deep, the ragtag crew of misfits adds plenty of appeal. With 
March 2014 • 349
its focus on fighting the good fight despite an unfair world, the story is likely to 
appeal to fans of Capetta’s Entangled (BCCB 1/14).  AM
Benton, JiM The End (Almost); written and illus. by Jim Benton. Scholastic, 
2014 [34p]
ISBN 978-0-545-17731-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad  4-7 yrs
“Once there was a bear named Donut. And he burped.” The story’s supposed to 
end there, but Donut isn’t really ready to go home, despite the insistence of the 
stern narrator, and the bear makes a few desperate attempts to stick around, includ-
ing donning a mustache and hat and wearing a sign that says “YOU CAN’T SEE 
ME.” An exasperated narrator finally concedes and sends the blue bear to the castle 
of rainbow candy unicorns with a robot and talking ice cream cone, but alas, the 
pages run out and do indeed put an end to Donut’s story—unless, of course, you 
want to read it again, per Donut’s enthusiastic request. Donut’s kinship to Benton’s 
Happy Bunny franchise is apparent in the bear’s crayon-like and rounded outline, 
crisp pale blue, and emotive mannerisms. The book’s design is sharp, with mini-
mal figures against goldenrod pages in the bold, digitally created art. Postmodern, 
breaking-the-fourth-wall picture books have become an established genre by now, 
though, and there’s not much to this one to distinguish it in a genre that’s included 
stellar works such as Willems’ We Are in a Book! (BCCB 10/10) and Gravett’s Again! 
(BCCB 9/13). Additionally, the humor often overly relies on gags like burps rather 
than the cleverness of the construction. Still, Donut stealthily tip-toeing across the 
page in red-sneakered feet going “SNEAK SNEAK” is going to garner giggles, and 
this would have plenty of possible pairings for a disruptive storytime, especially for 
audiences who can’t bear a story to end.  TA
BerMAn, Steve Red Caps: New Fairy Tales for Out of the Ordinary Readers. Lethe, 
2014 [214p] illus.
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-59021-282-0 $10.00
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-12
A bit of magic, sometimes helpful, sometimes sinister, runs through each of these 
thirteen short stories, most previously published, that all feature a gay or lesbian 
protagonist. The degree of focus on sexual orientation varies as much as the stories 
themselves: Cecil’s struggle to define his desires without labeling himself brings 
queerness to the forefront as he debates the significance of names with a silky-voiced 
Tooth Fairy in “Persimmon, Teeth, and Boys.”  Another set of boys are brought 
together by a matchmaking yearbook. Saul’s affection for guys, however, takes a 
backseat during his encounter with sibling vampires in “All Smiles,” while Amelia’s 
clandestine relationship with Stephanie is ultimately the least of her worries after an 
infected bite drives her insane in “A Calenture of the Jungle.” Tales volley in tone 
from sweet, hopeful, and occasionally humorous (the script for an off-Broadway 
musical detailing the homoeroticism in Moby Dick is particularly amusing) to chill-
ing, as when an older babysitting brother loses his charges to a vengeful ghost. The 
final story, directly addressing the reader, blends magical realism with just a bit of 
fairy tale in a quest that takes “you” through the shady underbellies of everyday 
closets and ultimately turns into a powerful and poignant coming-out story. Several 
stories include people of color (mostly African Americans and Puerto Ricans) as 
350 • The BulleTin
protagonists and/or love interests, along with nods to Jewish and Asian cultures, 
broadening the already inclusive reach of this collection. Stylish and compelling, 
this will find an audience with many a teen, gay, straight, or those that refuse to be 
labeled. Final art not seen.  KQG
Bick, ilSA J. White Space. Egmont, 2014 [560p] (Dark Passages)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-419-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-420-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
Horror writer Frank McDermott has been secretly channeling his stories from the 
beyond through the use of the famed Dickens Mirror, eventually becoming ensnared 
by the evil that haunts the mirror. His five-year-old daughter, Lizzie, seeks to help 
her father escape the madness of the mirror but ended up providing a host for the 
evil herself. Now father and daughter’s meddling has released the characters, both 
good and bad, into indistinct universes of time and space called Nows, where their 
stories and monsters mingle and they can be killed because they are outside their own 
book-worlds. Lizzie hopes that if she assembles the right configuration of characters 
she will be able to reach her father, who is lost in the Dark Passages. Her main hope 
is Emma, a girl who, as a character in an unfinished novel, has seemingly escaped her 
narrative confinement and is able to write her own stories, and thus may be able to 
fashion Lizzie’s happy ending. The problem is that the characters don’t know they 
are characters, and when they find out, they waver between disbelief and existential 
angst, and by the end of the book it is unclear who is writing whom, and whether 
Lizzie is a lost little girl or the host of an evil spirit vying for release. The premise 
of this formidable brick of a book is soundly intriguing, and the details are clever 
in their literary conceits and originality. The plot, however, is marred by gratuitous 
and attenuated horror scenarios whose excess makes them unintentionally comic 
and squanders the adrenaline. Bick’s fecund imagination and insatiable rage for the 
macabre make the book read like a textbook for phantasmagoria artists and effects 
designers, giving relatively short shrift to the promising plot development even as 
the events grow more elaborate. However, the concept allows her the luxury of 
cramming four or five horror novels into one, so readers who think they can’t get 
enough may well find that they have met their match here.  KC 
BlueMle, elizABeth Tap Tap Boom Boom; illus. by G. Brian Karas. Candlewick, 
2014 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-5696-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-8 yrs
A rainstorm begins slowly with a “Tap TAP” of drops spattering the city landscape, 
and as the storm builds, street carts selling rain gear appear on the sidewalk, umbrel-
las go up, and, eventually, people flee to the subway for protection: “Downstairs 
we wait./ Folks congregate./ We squeeze./ Whose feet and knees are these?” The 
unexpected underground gathering encourages a neighborly feeling, and strang-
ers share pizza and make friends while waiting out the storm. Finally, the storm 
dissipates and people emerge from their subway shelter: “We race upstairs./ Shake 
drops off hair./ ‘Look up!’ we cry./ Surprise in sky.” Sure enough, a rainbow appears 
as folks return to their big city business:“‘Til the next/ Tap TAP Tap TAP/ BOOM 
BOOM/ ‘Til the next/ Tap TAP/ BOOM BOOM!” The sonorous language of 
March 2014 • 351
Bluemle’s rhythmic text makes it a pleasure to read aloud, and though the rhymes 
are sometimes approximate (“One girl all fancy/. She’s late for dancing”), the overall 
narrative is smooth. Karas’ illustrations—a mixture of photographs, gouache, and 
pencil—are as expressive and detailed as always, and the combination of media 
expertly captures both the energy of a big city and the quietness of a pause in 
the commotion. A multicultural cast of distinct figures, several of which can be 
followed throughout the book, moves across the pages. The large, clear sans serif 
font and short, simple phrases might also put this within range of novice readers 
who can handle an occasional challenging vocabulary word. Save this for a rainy 
day, or pair it with Hesse’s Come On, Rain! (BCCB 4/99) for a dynamic duo of 
city shower stories.  JH
Bock, cAroline Before My Eyes. St. Martin’s Griffin, 2014 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-250-04558-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-250-03567-7 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Claire is weighed down with the responsibilities of taking care of her little sister 
and their home after her mother suffers a debilitating stroke. Max chafes under 
the pressure of appearing to be the perfect son of politically ambitious parents, 
and he seeks relief from physical and emotional pain in prescription drugs that 
he buys from Barkley, a boy he works with. Barkley is suffering from the onset of 
paranoid schizophrenia, shutting out his clueless parents as he spends more and 
more time gaming on the internet and launching a one-man campaign to save the 
environment from plastic water bottles. When his efforts to reach Max’s dad, the 
senator, go unheeded, the voice in his head encourages him to take action, and the 
summer ends in tragedy. While Barkley and Max are distinctly unlikable in their 
coarse treatment of others, their intense sadness makes their actions comprehensible 
in sympathetic ways, particularly when balanced against their responses to Claire, 
who inspires them to warped forms of kindness. From a narrative standpoint, a near 
drowning acts as an obvious metaphor for these teens who feel suffocated by their 
lives; the depressive angst and helplessness felt by the characters are relentless to 
the point of needing the climactic release of Barkley’s mass shooting, which serves 
to release Max and Claire from their inward focus and see beyond their present 
circumstances. Readers who enjoy diving into such deep waters will appreciate the 
way Bock both pulls them under the waves of depression and mental illness and 
lifts them out again.  KC 
cAStellucci, cecil Tin Star.  Roaring Brook, 2014 [240p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-775-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R  Gr. 7-10
Tula Bane is glad to be part of a human colony bound for a new planet and even 
more excited to be singled out by their charismatic leader, Brother Blue. When she 
stumbles across his dangerous secret, though, Brother Blue attacks her and leaves 
her for dead on an isolated space station, the Yertina Feray, full of strange aliens. 
Desperate to survive, Tula finds work with Heckleck, an underground alien trader 
dealing in secrets and favors, and over the years she makes a life for herself, plotting 
her revenge against Brother Blue and connecting with other aliens aboard the Yer-
tina Feray, including the surprisingly young ruling constable, Tournour. Now three 
352 • The BulleTin
other humans have arrived on the station, and as Tula uses her connections to help 
them, she finds herself caught up in an unexpected romance with the handsome 
Reza Wilson and learns that these young people may hold the key to reaching her 
nemesis. This compact but complex and well-written novel offers a pleasing blend 
of coming-of-age story and space adventure. The engaging storyline takes the reader 
through various surprising twists and turns while remaining true to its emotional 
core. Though bitter at her situation, Tula is nonetheless a charming heroine, able 
over time to establish real ties with her alien neighbors. Those aliens, particularly 
Heckleck and Tournour, are wonderfully drawn, strange and lovable guides for the 
often lost Tula. A subplot involving the intergalactic Imperium and a secret alliance 
of rebels provides plenty of intrigue and sets the scene for possible sequels.  AM
chAn, cryStAl Bird. Atheneum, 2014 [304p]
ISBN 978-1-4424-5089-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-8
Daughter of a Jamaican father and her half-Mexican, half-white mother, Jewel has 
always felt out of place in her small Iowa town. More importantly, she feels out of 
place in her own family, having been born on the day her then five-year-old brother 
John, whom her grandfather nicknamed Bird, tried to fly off a bluff and died. Her 
grandfather hasn’t spoken a word since, and her birthday is a day of sadness for her 
parents. Jewel’s father believes duppies, malevolent spirits, were responsible for her 
brother’s death, and while her mother considers this superstitious nonsense that will 
prevent her daughter from being practical, she nonetheless doesn’t support Jewel’s 
desire to become a scientist. When Jewel meets John, an adopted black boy staying 
with his uncle, she finds a kindred spirit, someone as out of place as she is and as 
interested in astronomy as she is in geology. Her grandfather, however, believes that 
John is a duppy, coming to claim his other grandchild. Chan has carefully crafted 
John and Jewel as effective foils for each other; their shared interest in science propels 
multiple metaphors that help Jewel figure out what is solid and knowable versus what 
must be taken on faith or intuited. John’s family situation also provides an inverted 
mirror for Jewel’s, offering both of them a chance for reflection and growth as they 
start to assert themselves and insist that their parents stop taking them for granted. 
Their process is realistically fumbled yet ultimately successful; both character arcs 
show a deep respect for readers’ abilities to negotiate the complexities of belief and 
doubt, and to find meaning via character reflection.  KC 
church, cAroline JAyne Ten Tiny Toes; written and illus. by Caroline Jayne 
Church. Scholastic, 2014 [22p]
ISBN 978-0-545-53601-1 $8.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 6-36 mos.
“Mouth, ears, eyes, nose,/ arms, belly, legs, and ten tiny toes.” That’s all the equip-
ment the toddler with the dot eyes and strawberry-blond haystack hair needs to get 
this interactive show on the road. Each leaf of the board book is a two-line direction 
to squirm with a purpose: “Touch your mouth and open wide./ Touch your arms, 
wave side to side.” The tightly focused, literal drawings (along with the help of an 
enthusiastic adult) will get tiny listeners into the swing of things, while slightly older 
rugrats will pick up on the imaginative play that depicts the little tyke’s teddy bear 
reacting to or joining in the activity. The chantable “mouth, ears” refrain adds the 
March 2014 • 353
final dimension to the visual/auditory/kinesthetic learning style trilogy, which is 
just a fancy way of stating the obvious—streamlined figures, a strong rhyme, and 
lots of motion are still the main ingredients for an effective first book.  EB 
cooper, MichAel l. Fighting Fire!: Ten of the Deadliest Fires in American History 
and How We Fought Them. Holt, 2014 [224p] illus. with photographs
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-8050-9714-6 $19.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-7
Ten chapters, arranged in chronological order, highlight major skirmishes in the 
ongoing war for human control over fire, a war that fire largely seems to be win-
ning. In each case, tactics were in place, from the building materials ordinances 
of colonial Boston to fireproof building design in 1906 San Francisco. Case after 
case, however, proves that ordinances are worthless if they’re not enforced (see 
Baltimore, 1904), and the standing superstructure of an edifice is no protection 
when the roof and interior floors burn or melt away (as again in Baltimore, and 
the Twin Towers attack). Although each chapter stands as a self-contained episode, 
reading the title in its entirety leads the audience to a broader understanding of how 
human negligence and error and fire’s deviousness and intensity collaborate in the 
infernos. Unfortunately, when it comes to the physics of fire and the engineering 
of firefighting equipment, this title comes up somewhat short, with only a scanty 
background on fire’s behavior and little detail on the incremental improvements 
in the fire engines on display throughout the book and in an appended gallery. 
Illustrations are a mixed lot as well, ranging from effective full spreads such as 
the Cocoanut Grove night club, with its charred tatters of the interior decor that 
spread the fire, to space fillers such as a scene of “New York City schoolchildren 
similar to those who perished on the [General] Slocum.” Quotation sources and a 
glossary are included, as well as lists for further reading, museum visiting, and web 
browsing, all of which would benefit from annotation. An index will be included 
in the bound book.  EB
czukAS, liz Ask Again Later. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 2014 [336p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-06-227239-3 $9.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-227241-6 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys    
Ad Gr. 7-12
Prom night is fast approaching, and you’re set to go with your best friends, the 
No Drama Prom-a Crew. Then your French class partner asks you to be his date, 
because even though he’s gay he wants to take part in this quintessential high school 
experience. You want to help, but your brother reveals he has volunteered you to go 
with his recently dumped buddy, even though you don’t run with his party crowd. 
You don’t know what to do, so decide to flip a coin. Heads? You’ll go with beefy, 
boozy Troy. Tails? It’s off to prom with kind, closeted Ryan. So it goes for high school 
junior Heart LaCoeur, whose subsequent prom night narrative alternates between 
the two possible results of the coin toss. Both scenarios involve typical prom trap-
pings (think dress disasters and house parties) as well as the bafflingly temperamental 
behavior of her No Drama friend Schroeder. When the two potential trajectories 
of the evening merge, Heart learns the reasons behind his behavior—and begins 
to question her strict “no dating” rule. Prom-curious readers will enjoy taking both 
potential paths alongside Heart, whose down-to-earth qualities trump her inability 
354 • The BulleTin
to see the proverbial forest. Unfortunately, the relationships are pretty shallowly 
treated, especially the familial ones: the absent-mother subplot is flimsy and forced, 
and the superficial treatment of Heart’s strained relationship with her brother fails 
to satisfy. Nonetheless, the story’s accessible humor and adolescently flippant, if 
self-conscious, tone will keep teens turning the page. The ultimate message—what 
will be, will be—makes a fitting object lesson for those readers stressing about their 
love lives, whether or not it involves a prom date.  AA
donAldSon, JuliA Superworm; illus. by Axel Scheffler. Levine/Scholastic, 
2014 32p
ISBN 978-0-545-59176-8 $16.99   
R 5-8 yrs
All the critters around love Superworm—who wouldn’t, when he can both spring 
into action to save Beetle from the well and become a nifty skipping rope for the 
bored bees? All of the “hip hip hoorays” for Superworm carry down to Wizard 
Lizard, though, who sends his servant crow off to kidnap Superworm, whom the 
lizard magically compels to dig for treasure. The other animals spring into action 
and hatch a plan to wrap the lizard up in a web and toss him in a dump, freeing 
Superworm. Though the text is a bit lengthy, the strong iambic tetrameter makes 
for a bouncy, rhythmic readaloud, and with a bit of preparation, kids can join in the 
repeated chant for Superworm (“Hip, hip, hooray for SUPERWORM!”). The breezy 
illustrations, with their detailed pen work, have a pleasing balance of full-bleed pages 
and vignettes against white pages. The googly-eyed bugs are friendly and inviting, 
and the sinister, dark hues of Wizard Lizard and his crow contrast nicely with the 
full rainbow used for Superworm and his friends. A goofy addition to friendship- 
tale picture books, this wriggly tribute to dirt-crawling friends might also work as 
a unique addition classroom study of poetry.  TA
ehlert, loiS The Scraps Book: Notes from a Colorful Life; written and illus. by 
Lois Ehlert and with photographs. Beach Lane/Simon, 2014 64p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3571-1 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3572-8 $10.99   
Ad Gr. 2-4 
Noted illustrator Ehlert offers a casually organized look at her artistic process, with 
very brief explanations of how she got started making art and books and how she 
gets ideas for her art and books, along with some quick looks at the materials and 
basic steps she goes through in constructing a picture or a book. Kids (or adults) 
looking for specific instructions for making similar art or straightforward biographi-
cal info will not find it here, but those who enjoy getting a glimpse into the creative 
lives of artists and writers will appreciate the insider’s perspective Ehlert provides. 
Illustrations from some of Ehlert’s previous books are interspersed with new col-
lages, sketches of ideas and book layouts, and photographs of Ehlert as a child 
and adult, of her studio, of objects that have inspired her work, and of her various 
collections of artistic and natural items. The narration is somewhat meandering; 
the compositions, while eye-catching and vibrant, are crammed into a small trim 
size, and some of the pictures would have benefited from further explanation. The 
simple text, though, could easily either be read aloud to a group (although some 
of the smaller illustrative details may not translate well to a crowd) or read alone 
by upper primary or middle graders. This could also be a pleasant and accessible 
addition to a unit on artists or writers for the same age group.  JH 
March 2014 • 355
eSBAuM, Jill I Hatched!; illus. by Jen Corace. Dial, 2014 [34p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3688-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 5-7 yrs
In rhyming text, a newly hatched killdeer chick documents his first day in the 
world as he learns to run, checks out his physical appearance, scavenges in the dirt 
for lunch like Mama, and experiences his first poop (“I stop because . . . look out 
below!/ Something’s falling from my . . . Oh”). All this information comes in handy 
when a baby sister hatches that evening, and he assures her that he can teach her 
everything she needs to know—or almost everything: “Hey, wonder what these 
flappy things are for?” he queries on the last page. Esbaum’s text is as quick-paced 
and lively as the killdeer chick himself, and the well-crafted rhymes are amusing 
as well as informative. Unfortunately, Corace’s ink, watercolor, and pencil images 
are sometimes too busy and the chick’s figure too undefined for a text that focuses 
on the specific details of a real bird’s appearance and actions. Also, in most of the 
pictures, the chick’s “white” body parts (quite snowy on a real bird) are confusingly 
rendered a pale robin’s-egg blue, nearly the same shade as the pond water into which 
he peers. The chick himself is cute and personable, but it is sometimes tricky to 
pick him out against his similarly colored backgrounds, making this challenging 
for large-group viewing. Still, resourceful adults with access to bird guides and 
photos of actual killdeer can supplement the art after sharing the entertaining and 
instructive text.  JH
FitzgerAld, lAurA MArx Under the Egg. Dial, 2014 [256p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-4001-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
Barely scraping by but self-reliant, thirteen-year-old Theo and her artist grandfa-
ther, Jack, spend their days tending the vegetable garden and chicken coop in the 
backyard of their New York City family home, trying to keep up with ever-needed 
repairs, and looking after Theo’s brilliant but childlike mother. After Jack’s sudden 
death, Theo must run the house on only a few hundred dollars while trying to 
make sense of her grandfather’s final words imploring her to “look under the egg.” 
When she accidentally spills rubbing alcohol over one of Jack’s paintings, revealing 
another picture beneath, she must uncover whether it’s a true Renaissance work—a 
Raphael, to be exact—and find its rightful owner. With the help of neighbors and 
new friends (including a tattooed librarian), Theo both unravels the mystery and 
builds a community around her. In an engaging, if rather implausible, narrative, 
author Fitzgerald weaves together art history, world history, and personal history, 
and she creates a protagonist winning for her determined and capable nature and 
a plot refreshing in its subject matter. The mystery is, like Agatha Christie’s, a 
ride-along rather than a solve-along, with the key plot point inserted just before 
the big reveal, but there’s plenty of the pleasure coming from watching events 
unfold and seeing Theo put the pieces together. This novel will please readers who 
enjoy a quirky and resourceful female protagonist and, ideally, share her interest 
in Renaissance art.  AA 
356 • The BulleTin
FreytAg, lornA My Humongous Hamster; written and illus. by Lorna Frey-
tag. Holt, 2014 [26p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-9918-8 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 4-7 yrs
An unseen pet owner narrates this “what if” story about a pet hamster, imagining 
his meteoric growth: He  will get BIGGER and BIGGER. Then he will be . . . HU-
MONGOUS!” The following pages amusingly ponder what the now-humongous 
hamster might do: use a Ferris wheel as an exercise wheel, rescue folks who need 
help, or give kids rides on his furry back. The narrator is certain the enlarged rodent 
would “miss us playing together,” however, suggesting that he would “shrink back 
to normal hamster size again and be ready for another hamster sleep, in his usual 
hamster house . . . until the next time he gets HUMONGOUSLY HUNGRY!” 
There isn’t much substance to the story, but it is a kid-pleasing concept, and the 
images of the giant hamster, his beady black eyes shining against his reddish-brown 
fur, looming large against a city skyline like a benevolent Godzilla, will likely incite 
plenty of giggles. The digital alterations to the photographs are somewhat crude, 
though, with shadows sometimes missing or misplaced and a lack of depth in some 
images. This might still work in a fanciful storytime about oversized pets, particularly 
when paired with Pilkey’s Dogzilla or Kat Kong or even Syd Hoff’s classic, Danny 
and the Dinosaur (BCCB 9/58). A creative and tech-savvy teacher or parent could 
also use this as a springboard for a similar imaginative photo/story project.  JH
Fry, erin  Secrets of the Book. Two Lions/Amazon, 2014 [294p]
ISBN 978-1-4778-4716-9 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7
Suffering from a degenerative eye condition, twelve-year-old Spencer Lemon doesn’t 
think of himself as hero material, so he’s surprised to become the guardian of a 
powerful magical book that can bring historical figures back from the dead. As the 
book’s new protector, he can get advice on his swing from Babe Ruth or have Julia 
Child sauté him some pork chops, but he must never show the book to anyone. 
Unable to resist, he immediately shares the secret with his autistic best friend Gregor, 
and now Socrates is loose on the streets of LA, a gun-toting Teddy Roosevelt is in 
the house, and a mysterious German man is on their trail, intent on taking the 
book for himself. Spencer’s beginning to think he’s up to the challenge, though, and 
he might just find a way to protect the book and save themselves before history’s 
vilest villains are released back into the world. This thoroughly enjoyable story 
offers a high-spirited adventure enhanced with a dose of educational fun. Spencer 
and Gregor are likable heroes, realistically dealing with their respective limitations 
without becoming flat representatives of special needs kids. The historical element 
of the novel lacks nuance, as people are either good (Teddy Roosevelt, Einstein) or 
evil (Stalin, Hitler), but there are hints that some former villains can find redemp-
tion. The violence here is mild, but the tension is real, as the boys face down guns 
and chase bad guys into the woods. Still, all ends well, and a few remaining secrets 
at novel’s end hint at possible sequels, which should please history and time-travel 
fans who will enjoy following along on this excellent adventure.  AM
March 2014 • 357
gArdner, SAlly Operation Bunny: Wings & Co.: The Fairy Detective Agency’s First 
Case; illus. by David Roberts. Holt, 2014 [192p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-9892-1 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-6
Orphaned as a baby and adopted by the shallow Ronald and Daisy Dashwood, 
young Emily Vole hasn’t had much luck in her life; when Daisy Dashwood gives 
birth to triplets, Emily’s position as “daughter” abruptly changes to “unpaid domestic 
servant.” At the age of nine, though, Emily gets a break when she befriends the 
kind and unusual old lady next door, Miss String, and her human-sized talking cat, 
Fidget. From Miss String and Fidget, Emily learns about a magical detective shop 
and also discovers that, despite her lack of magical abilities, she is the next Keeper 
of the Keys, a set of animated, sprite-like keys that once belonged to a powerful 
magician. When the evil witch Harpella strikes with her magic lamp, killing Miss 
String and turning the Dashwood triplets into mindless zombies and dozens of 
people into colorful bunnies, Emily manages to save the day with the help the 
keys, Fidget, and a crabby wingless fairy. The writing in this British import is so 
focused on being arch that it’s tough for the story to get any real momentum, and 
the lack of tonal differentiation means it’s a challenge to keep everything straight 
(explanations of the parameters and roles of the fairies are particularly incomplete). 
Nonetheless, the characterizations are entertaining (especially Fidget), the satirical 
edge of the writing can be amusing, and the Cinderella/Harry Potter rags-to-witches 
plot has appeal. The plentiful black and white art has a quirky edge, reminiscent of 
Sophie Blackall, in its detailed linework that suits the fantastical tone of the story. 
Though billed as both fantasy and mystery, this title (the first in a series) is heavier 
on the fantasy than the mystery, and fans of Roald Dahl or the Clover Twig series 
may find some new favorite characters here.  JH
giBBS, StuArt Poached. Simon, 2014 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-6777-4 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-6779-8 $10.99   
R Gr. 4-7
When Teddy (from Belly Up, BCCB 6/10) sneaks into the koala habitat at Fun-
Jungle, the massive zoo-cum-amusement park where he lives with his primatolo-
gist mother and photographer father, it’s really only to escape the security guard 
who’s after him because a school bully coerced Teddy into pulling a prank. The 
next morning, however, Kazoo the koala has gone missing, and security footage 
shows Teddy as the only person who entered or left the exhibit all night. Accused 
of koala-napping and therefore under strict surveillance, the seventh-grader must 
investigate to discover the true marsupial thief before the security guard who’s got 
a personal vendetta gets him thrown in juvie—and Kazoo dies from starvation. 
Gibbs again combines the enviable and well-researched setting of FunJungle with 
high-adrenaline escapades (what could possibly top explosions in the shark tank  
. . . with Teddy inside?), as it’s clear that someone wants to cause FunJungle—and 
maybe Teddy—serious harm. Teddy’s sleuthing remains clever in the face of high 
pressure and multiple red herrings that will keep readers guessing until the end, 
while his troubles with the bully keep the boy solidly in middle-school territory 
and create situations that are both tough and humorous. With ecological concerns, 
corporate intrigue, and high-power action, this has all of the koala-fications for 
358 • The BulleTin
a an appealing adventure; with Teddy’s inability to keep his head down, it seems 
possible that we’ll be seeing him again. He’ll be welcome.  TA
gileS, l. r. Fake ID. Amistad/Harper Collins, 2014 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-212184-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-212186-8 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys    
R* Gr. 7-10
Nick Pearson is just the latest alias for our narrator, a teen whose family languishes 
in WitSec (Witness Security) until his mob-connected father can testify against boss 
Kreso Maric, who has gone missing. Nick is understandably wary of cultivating 
friendships in his new high school, especially since his father regularly pulls some 
fresh scam that gets the family tossed out of each relocation, but this time around 
Nick finds some genuine companionship with Eli Cruz, the dedicated (and sole) 
staff member of the student newspaper. Nick is intrigued by Eli’s investigation into 
something referred to as Whispertown, a term that has come up in connection 
with Nick’s father, and he’s even more intrigued by Eli’s luscious sister Reya, who’s 
ready to pitch over her suffocatingly jealous boyfriend, Zach. The responsibility 
for uncovering the secret of Whispertown suddenly falls into Nick’s hands when 
Eli is found dead in the newspaper office, the apparent victim of a suicide that no 
rational friend or family member believes for a moment. Giles ups the ante of YA 
witness-protection tales with a chilling foray into a much broader conspiracy, teasing 
readers with plausible suspects and clever misdirections that play off the tropes of 
running-from-the-mob stories. Dialogue is razor sharp, and family dynamics within 
Nick’s stressed-out household are poignant and unsettling. Nick gets to the sorry 
bottom of the mystery, but the resolution hints at a troubling near future for both 
the emotionally exhausted young man and his latest hometown. Of course, some 
grace-saving sequel might come along to smooth away ambiguities, but teens who 
are willing to trade off a happy ending for a truthful one will be just as content to 
leave Nick right where Giles has steered him.  EB
gill, J. duddy The Secret of Ferrell Savage. Atheneum, 2014 [192p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-6017-1 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-6019-5 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-6
Ferrell Savage doesn’t even realize that his family has a terrible secret until Bruce 
Littledood, a fellow twelve-year-old with a knack for genealogical research, arrives 
on scene. Bruce is angry that Ferrell’s accidental death-defying stunts at the town’s 
Big Sled Race overcome his own impressive win, and, in revenge, is threatening 
to reveal the histories of Ferrell’s and his best friend Mary Vittles’ families, unless 
Ferrell shows up for a rematch down a steeper, more dangerous hill. Ferrell and 
Mary undertake investigative work and discover that one of Ferrell’s ancestors was 
Alferd Packer, a traveler whose snowed-in conditions caused him to eat his five 
traveling companions, one of whom was Mary’s relative. The two friends agree to 
the contest, only to get stuck together in a whiteout themselves, which forces them 
to overcome the potentially deadly circumstances. The subject of cannibalism is 
treated with cheerful absurdity: Ferrell and his family are vegan because his parents 
believe that they can’t otherwise control their inherited taste for flesh, and Mary 
points out the implications of their names. Ferrell is compellingly drawn, as he 
March 2014 • 359
struggles to deal with newfound fame while hiding his burgeoning (and seemingly 
reciprocated) feelings for know-it-all Mary. A screwball take on an unusual topic 
that’s tempered with sweetness and honesty, this will appeal to youngsters who want 
to sink their teeth into something a little less conventional.  TA
gordon, Stephen g. Expressing the Inner Wild: Tattoos, Piercings, Jewelry, and 
Other Body Art. Twenty-First Century, 2014 56p illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-1467-9 $33.26
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-2548-4 $24.95   
Ad Gr. 6-9
Body adornment and modification are well established markers of status, artistry, 
rebellion, and the sheer joy of ostentation, and this title reminds adolescent read-
ers that even the most outré of contemporary styles has probably been bested in 
other times and cultures. Six chapters feature jewelry, hair, nails, makeup, tattoos, 
and piercing, first surveying twenty-first-century Western examples (think Nicki 
Minaj’s wigs) and then comparing them with the faraway (e.g., the Miao of China 
have Long Horn hair wraps that emulate and honor water buffalo) and the long 
ago (for example, samurai topknots were originally designed to keep warrior’s hel-
mets from falling off). Discussion is neatly organized, but coverage never expands 
beyond brief observations into substantive explorations. Topics appear to be limited 
to body art that spans a significant time range, and thus scarification makes the cut 
(so to say), while other permanent modifications such as foot-binding and skull-
shaping, which have passed into history, do not. Readers who get beyond browsing 
the striking color photographs will probably recognize that this slim volume isn’t 
going to delve into the embellishment of human civilization, but it might lead 
to further reading on a newly whetted interest. An index and reading list, which 
careens wildly from gagamedia.net to the University of Pennsylvania Museum of 
Archaeology and Anthropology, are appended.  EB
grAvett, eMily Matilda’s Cat; written and illus. by Emily Gravett. Simon, 
2014 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-7527-4 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-7528-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-6 yrs
Dressed in a ginger cat costume, young Matilda tries to engage her pet cat in a 
variety of activities to no avail. Despite the narrative insistence that it’s her pet who 
likes these things (“Matilda’s cat likes playing with wool”), illustrations show the 
ginger tabby cat cowering at the ball of yarn lobbed at him by Matilda, running 
in fear from the bike, and watching, nonplussed, as Matilda clambers about in 
a couple of cardboard boxes. A fed-up Matilda eventually trades her cat suit for 
pajamas and heads for bed in a huff, but luckily, there is one thing that Matilda’s 
cat does like: Matilda. The final pages show Matilda and the cat snuggling in bed 
(followed by the cat savaging Matilda’s dog-shaped slippers). The listlike narrative 
is carefully and crisply structured, with activities satisfyingly listed in groups of 
three, save for the final reveal of the cat’s actual desire. Gravett’s simply composed 
pictures feature a blank white backdrop and keep the focus on the soft-edged but 
strong figures of the cat and Matilda, who resembles Sendak’s Max both in her 
furry outfit and clamorous demeanor. The contradiction between the text and the 
put-upon cat’s comical expressions is the real hoot here, and young pet owners will 
360 • The BulleTin
particularly relate to Matilda’s desire to have her cat behave according to her whims. 
This would partner well with the similarly themed Duncan and Dolores by Barbara 
Samuels (BCCB 3/87) or, for a contrasting portrait of activities favored by felines, 
with Schwartz’s There Are Cats in This Book (BCCB 12/08).  JH 
green, tiM New Kid. HarperCollins, 2014 [320p]
ISBN 978-0-06-220872-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
Tommy Rust is just about to make a critical play when his father tears up to the 
baseball field in their car, packs Tommy in, and drives off to a new town. This isn’t 
the first time such a departure has occurred, and Tommy knows the drill: assume a 
new name—this time he chooses Brock Nickerson—and lay low in their new digs. 
Cruising below the radar isn’t easy this time around, since Brock is befriended by 
bad boy Nagel, is wooed onto a travel team by his middle school’s alcoholic coach, 
catches the eye of coach’s niece, and finally works up the courage to confront and 
even defy his commanding father. Make no mistake, though, this is still solidly 
within Green’s familiar sports territory, and Brock grows into a promising pitcher 
even as he struggles to get his father to explain their bizarre situation. Witness in 
protection? Good guy secret agent? Bad guy thug? Readers are as confounded as 
Brock about his father’s situation and his real status, and it is this ambiguity that 
elevates the title from the mundane to the engrossing. A bittersweet ending that 
diverges from the pattern of middle-grade sports plots will shake series fiction 
readers out of their comfort zone and ready them for the challenging work of YA 
sports writers awaiting them down the line.  EB
hArtnett, SonyA The Children of the King. Candlewick, 2014 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-6735-1 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-7042-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 5-8
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 347, for review.
hegAMin, tonyA cherie Willow. Candlewick, 2014 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-5769-7 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-6770-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Willow is a slave on a farm just on the Maryland side of the Mason-Dixon line, 
where her master, Rev Jeff, is respectful and even kind. Rev Jeff is particularly gener-
ous toward Willow and her father, who was reared alongside Rev as a brother and is 
blood-related to him; in fact, if Rev fails to have children, Willow’s father believes 
that Willow’s child should rightfully inherit Knotwild, and he seeks to arrange a 
marriage for Willow. Willow, who can read and write and is not overly taxed due 
to her delicate health, might not desire freedom, but she definitely does not want 
to marry the man her father has chosen for her. As both Rev and her father begin 
to insist more forcefully on her obedience, she meets Cato, a free black man from 
Pennsylvania, who has felt called to do more than just look out for himself. His 
efforts to help move “packages” across the Mason-Dixon line have largely failed, 
but when he meets Willow, he falls in love, and they both have to figure out what 
March 2014 • 361
they are willing to sacrifice for love, family, and freedom. This richly textured nar-
rative deftly teases out attitudes that are too often simplified elsewhere. The slaves 
at Knotwild are neither happy nor complacent in their enslavement, but they each 
have values and priorities that mitigate open resentment; on the other hand, Rev’s 
kindness cannot fully redeem his willingness to buy and sell people and deny their 
full humanity. Cato and Willow do fall in love awfully fast, but there are enough 
references to Romeo and Juliet to see where that comes from, and Papa’s realization 
that he has internalized a slave mentality to the point where he is willing to enslave 
his daughter for his own ends adds provocative gender reflection to an already 
intelligent story. Hegamin touches on themes rarely treated with such grace and 
nuance; her combination of history, thoughtful reflection, suspense, and romance 
will satisfy broad readerly tastes.  KC 
hood, SuSAn Rooting for You: A Moving Up Story; illus. by Matthew Cordell. Dis-
ney Hyperion, 2014 [28p]
ISBN 978-1-4231-5230-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 3-5 yrs
“I am NOT coming out!” announces a tiny green seed: it’s plenty safe deep in the 
ground, and who knows what’s lurking out there in the dirt, digging in the dark? 
Of course, playing it safe is pretty boring, so maybe the seed will just stick out 
one little root . . . and maybe just a shoot, too. A pebble proves to be a temporary 
setback, but an affable, bespectacled earthworm offers some encouragement, giving 
the developing daisy the boost it needs to get past the surface and unfurl into its 
full flowery self. The story is simple, and the worm’s gentle rhymes keep a pleasant 
rhythm going: “There are friends to feed you,/ friends to weed you,/ and friends 
indeed who/ really need you.” The full-page flaps that unfold as the flower sprouts 
add some suspense, and they also the increase the fun for use in lapsits or storytimes, 
as does the book’s vertical format as the daisy grows and grows. Cordell’s scrawling 
illustrations temper the earnestness of the inspiration, and the rich, earthy palette 
necessary for the worm and the dirt is balanced by the jellybean purples of nearby 
beetles and greens of the foliage above ground; the seed’s round face shows just how 
worried two lines and a dot can make a face look. This would make a fine book for 
personal sharing with younger ones, and the intrepid might consider pairing it with 
Donaldson’s Superworm (reviewed above) for a squirmy storytime.  TA
JohnSon, chriStine, ed. Grim. Harlequin Teen, 2014 [480p]
ISBN 978-0-373-21108-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr.7-10
The title and back matter suggest that this collection of eighteen original stories 
inspired by familiar fairy tales (and authored by well-known writers such as Jackson 
Pearce and Sarah Rees Brennan) will play up the darker and more sinister elements 
of the tales. Instead, only a few entries linger over the more gruesome fairy-tale ele-
ments, and the vast majority are romances with fairy-tale endings: evil is definitively 
dispatched, and boys and girls, mostly coupled, live happily ever after. Bluebeard 
and Beast, for instance, take new identities as contemporary bad boys, and Puss in 
Boots is a stuffed but sentient cat who tries to help an aspiring rock star realize his 
dreams. The twelve dancing princesses are escapees from a posh boarding school, 
where their nocturnal romps exact a stiff price. The three pigs are bad actors who 
362 • The BulleTin
deserve the fates they suffer at the hands, or more precisely, the teeth of a female 
shape-shifter. However, the tale of a girl who falls in love with an artificial life form 
and has to set her entire space colony adrift in order to save him is less familiar (Pi-
nocchio? Pygmalion?), as is the tale of a group of boys who seduce girls in order to 
eat them in vampiric fashion, and there are no notes to provide clues. The complete 
lack of peritextual materials is odd in a collection of this sort and the romances are 
ultimately fairly bland, but readers who like their supernatural romances in small 
bites may enjoy the collection nevertheless.  KC
JoneS, urSulA, ad. Beauty and the Beast; illus. by Sarah Gibb. Whitman, 
2014 [34p]
ISBN 978-0-8075-0600-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-9 yrs
Most of the familiar elements from the classic fairy tale are present in this retelling, 
from the shallow, jealous sisters to Beauty’s request for a rose to the Beast’s near-
death experience resulting from Beauty’s prolonged home visit. Jones’ iteration, 
though, manages to be both elegant and casual, with a refreshing sprinkling of 
humor throughout: “‘Does that mean we’re poor now?’ Beauty asked her father. 
And all the suitors backed out of the room so fast they jammed in the doorway. 
‘Was it something I said?’ Beauty asked.” The text is accessibly written, with shorter 
sentences and mostly elementary vocabulary putting the tale, despite its length 
here, within the comprehension of many younger listeners. The theme is also made 
overt in the dialogue, with the Beauty stating at one point that “some monsters 
look awful, but inside they are really very kind, and some people look very kind, 
but inside they are monsters.” Gibbs’ illustrations are effective in their composi-
tions and ornate details, lending enough structure and weight—particularly in the 
spreads utilizing intricate black silhouettes accented with more minimal color—to 
balance the candy-colored pastels of the clothing and décor. While Marianna and 
Mercer Mayer’s Beauty and the Beast (BCCB 12/78) is still hard to beat visually 
and textually, adults trying to broaden the horizons of kids who stubbornly insist 
on preferring the ubiquitous Disney princesses will find this title an easier sell and 
a perfect bridge to a different fairy-tale presentation.  JH
kehoe, StASiA WArd The Sound of Letting Go. Viking, 2014 [400p]
ISBN 978-0-670-01553-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Ever since Daisy’s autistic younger brother, Steven, turned from unresponsive little 
boy to threatening manchild, she and her parents have lived on a knife-edge of 
tension, fearing that a loud sound, a burnt waffle, an errant bad smell could trig-
ger a violent outburst. Daisy empathizes with her parents’ desire to escape, finding 
release herself through playing her trumpet in the soundproofed room her parents 
have built for her. She knows that both her musical success and its limitations are 
due to her brother’s condition; her survivor’s guilt trumpets from every poem in 
this staggeringly honest verse novel about living with someone at the far end of 
the spectrum. What sets this work apart is that it tells the whole truth about that 
experience, from the strain it puts on a marriage, to the financial drain, to the com-
pulsion to hide how bad things are and the isolation that brings, to the heightened 
emphasis on control and perfection that she and her mother experience, her with 
March 2014 • 363
her music and her mother with her decorating and cooking skills. Readers may be 
surprised when Daisy balks at the idea of sending Steven to a group home, but it’s 
just another way in which the book renders the deep ambivalence of the sibling 
experience with striking insight; Daisy wonders if she will ever be able to experience 
relief without guilt, and she questions whether there might be something in her that 
is broken and autistic, keeping her from true feelings. Kehoe also deploys a complex 
yet accessible metaphor via Daisy’s contemplations about slavery in her U.S. history 
class, and she crafts a romance with a not-so-bad-after-all bad boy that begins as 
rebellion but ends as something like redemption. Gracefully eschewing platitudes 
about acceptance and advocacy, this is as real, poignant, and messy as it gets.  KC 
kerley, BArBArA A Home for Mr. Emerson; illus. by Edwin Fotheringham. Scho-
lastic, 2014 [52p]
ISBN 978-0-545-35088-4 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-6
In this compact biography of Emerson, Kerley carefully selects those elements 
of Emerson’s life that contribute to her tightly crafted narrative arc that stresses 
the hope, community and optimism required to create the life of one’s dreams. 
Omitting mention of Emerson’s grief over losing his first wife and the death of 
his five-year-old son, she focuses entirely on his success in building a comfortable 
home of his own in Concord with his second wife, surrounded by natural beauty, 
crammed with books, and often visited by friends and children with whom he could 
share ideas and hospitality. As a result, Emerson’s joie de vivre explodes from the 
pages as the book captures his take-charge approach to crafting the kind of life he 
envisioned after he left his impoverished childhood in Boston. When his beloved 
home is ravaged by a fire, the community repays his genial hospitality by responding 
with vigor and restoring the house while the elderly Emerson is in Europe trying 
to overcome his loss but yearning for home. The bold, digital illustrations employ 
a mid-century palette of sunset, avocado, and cerulean, with firmly sketched black 
linework that recalls linocuts; they effectively play at the intersection of representa-
tion and symbolism, with cartooned versions of Emerson walking around his village 
and its wooded environs interacting with neighbors and friends, but also literally 
diving into tree-sized books and walking and flying jubilantly over maps of the 
world to symbolize his virtual and actual travels. The visual metaphors communicate 
both emotion and action in ways highly accessible to young readers, and Kerley 
extends the message by including a page of activities and advice to help children 
inventory their own spirits so that they, like Emerson, can “build therefore [their] 
own world[s].” This and other memorable Emerson quotations are included on the 
endpapers and at the beginning and end of the book itself; an author’s note fills in 
missing pieces in the biography and provides source notes for the quotations.  KC
khoury, JeSSicA  Vitro. Razorbill, 2014 [384p]
ISBN 978-1-59514-605-2 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys    
Ad Gr. 8-12
Every pilot in Guam knows to steer clear of Skin Island, an outpost of the Corpus 
medical research group. Still, when Sophie Crue shows up, seventeen, gorgeous, and 
anxious to find her mother, eighteen-year-old Jim Julien flies her to Corpus anyway. 
A bad landing that leaves them temporarily stranded brings back Jim’s misgivings, 
364 • The BulleTin
however, and he’s suspicious at the arrival of the overly friendly Nicholas, who seems 
to know more about Sophie than he should. Sophie nonetheless follows Nicholas 
into the jungle in hope of finding her mother and the super-secret lab; there she 
discovers that her mom isn’t a miracle-maker but is instead experimenting with 
mind-control implants and twin embryos, including Sophie’s own twin. Meanwhile, 
Jim discovers Sophie’s twin, Lux, and helps her escape, and now Sophie, Jim, and 
Lux are on the run for their lives from the unscrupulous researchers seeking to 
keep their secrets. With its intriguing blend of science fiction and mystery-island 
adventure story, this novel offers a multitude of heart-racing fun. The action 
scenes are exciting, with plenty of chases, gun-battles, near-escapes, and kidnap-
pings. Unfortunately there’s too much inaction outside of those scenes, bogging 
down the overall pace with ponderous introspection from the main characters and 
long spates of overexplaining the island and the various villains’ true intentions. 
The chemistry between Sophie and Jim is immediate and intense, but once they 
reach the island, they spend much of the novel on solo adventures, undermining 
the romantic potential. Still, fans of the author’s Origin are likely to be drawn to 
Khoury’s new work and pleased by casual references to the events from that title, 
while aficionados of clone and neuroscience fiction may find the underlying nar-
rative compelling.  AM 
kiely, BrendAn The Gospel of Winter. McElderry, 2014 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8489-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8491-7 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
When his father leaves for good, sixteen-year-old Aidan seeks comfort where he 
has been seeking it for the past few years, with the well-liked parish priest. Father 
Greg pushes him away, and when Aidan goes to their private place in the church 
basement, he learns why: he is being replaced by a younger boy, which forces him 
to confront the fact that Father Greg’s attentions were not an expression of love at 
all. Fearing exposure, the senior priest convinces Aidan to keep silent about Father 
Greg, to consider how much good he has done in the community, and to think 
about the way people would look at Aidan if they knew. Convinced but still con-
fused, Aidan tries to sort out his feelings by spending more time partying with his 
friends Josie and Mark and remaining silent as scandals break in the priesthood, 
until a nearly tragic event convinces him to go public. Kiely’s lyrical prose is never 
explicit; readers will need to infer some details regarding what exactly happened 
between Aidan and the priest as well as between him and Josie. The sentiments and 
emotions he and Mark experience are sometimes overblown in their angst-ridden 
expression, but in this they fall into the grand tradition of fictional teens waxing 
eloquent in their distress, giving voice to truth even if that voice is more artful 
than realistic. Aidan’s initial determination to remain silent and even to defend 
his abuser makes sense given his desire to protect his mother from pain as well as 
to shield his own reputation; further and more tragically, part of him still believes 
what the priest told him about love, at least until he learns what real friendship 
means through Mark and Josie. Through sensitive handling of a timely issue, Kiely 
charts a potential path toward healing.  KC
March 2014 • 365
leWiS, AMAndA WeSt September 17. Red Deer, 2014 [224p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-88995-507-3 $14.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-7
Among the tragic stories of World War II is the torpedoing of the City of Benares, 
a luxury liner ferrying refugees from war-torn Europe to North America. The pas-
sengers included some ninety British children and their adult escorts, headed to 
the distant relatives and complete strangers who would shelter them throughout 
the duration. Here Lewis recreates a fictionalized account of the evacuation and 
attack, seen mainly through the eyes of three child survivors. Intertwining stories 
begin with each child’s departure—Bess, nearly fifteen, who is eager to reach Canada 
and the promise of a university education; Ken, thirteen, who considers the whole 
voyage and relocation an adventure; Sonia, eleven, who, accustomed to touring, 
travels first class with her mother and siblings. Their journeys to Liverpool for 
embarkation, their delight in the opulence of the ship, and their harrowing survival 
stories will have strong appeal for readers entranced by Titanic tales or those who 
encountered the City of Benares’  story in Heneghan’s Wish Me Luck (BCCB 4/97), 
and Lewis ably incorporates the protocols for wartime transport and search-and-
rescue operations that contributed to the disaster and its aftermath. Introductory 
and closing notes provide extra historical background, and an author interview and 
list for further reading are included.  EB
litWin, Mike Lost in Bermooda; written and illus. by Mike Litwin. Whitman, 
2014 [140p]
ISBN 978-0-8075-8718-8 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-4 
Chuck the cow lives on the island of Bermooda, a “Moo-topia” that was once the 
site of a shipwreck and is now populated by a variety of animals who have evolved 
from the livestock onboard to walk on two legs, speak English, and use electricity 
(er, “boltage”) and a variety of other human technologies and implements. When 
Chuck discovers Dakota, a human boy who has been washed ashore, he’s surprised 
to find that Dakota is not the bloodthirsty, beef-eating monster “hu’mans” are 
rumored to be and decides to take the boy home, disguising him as Sea Cow, until 
he can try to get him back where he belongs. A plot by the richest bull in town 
to take over the island complicates matters and makes keeping Dakota’s identity 
secret even more essential. Though some of the vocabulary will prove to be a chal-
lenge for transitioning readers, the deluxe-size print, brief chapters, and goofy but 
painterly digital artwork of the chunky, tropical characters increase the readability 
of this friendship tale. Litwin packs a lot of action into a little book through the 
pair’s attempts to get Dakota home, while still making both Chuck and Dakota 
well-rounded and adding bumps along the way in their relationship. Although the 
conclusion is a little puzzling—Dakota is revealed to be an orphan and is adopted 
into the family without his disguise, but he’s still called a Sea Cow—it is fulfilling, 
and young readers will wonder if we might return to this island paradise in future 
books after this moo-ving story about friendship across difference.  TA
366 • The BulleTin
lynch, chriS Little Blue Lies. Simon, 2014 217p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4008-1 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4010-4 $10.99   
R Gr. 9-12
Oliver, son of a wealthy financial adviser, and his girlfriend Junie Blue, daughter of 
a toadie for the local crime boss, are spirited recreational liars. O is so accustomed 
to their mutual mendacity that when Junie abruptly dumps him, he assumes it’s 
a joke—wrongly. He’s not buying her weak implication that this is all about the 
incompatibility of their separate worlds, though, and when she twice disappears on 
brief “vacations,” only to return with bruises and burns, O is convinced she needs 
his protection. But from whom? The boss, One Who Knows, is certainly a suspect, 
and Junie’s own father, Ronnie, is vile enough to batter his daughter if it advances 
his boss’s agenda. Rumors and inquiries lead O to suspect that Junie is holding a 
winning lottery ticket, which she is stubbornly refusing to share with One Who 
Knows, a policy that locals realize is a sure way to get yourself killed. O traces the 
boss’s true identity and sets up a deal to appease him and save Junie, but his little 
cabal releases some family secrets he’s now forced to confront. The rose-strewn fairy-
tale romance, complete with luxury hotel accommodations and a matinee worthy 
getaway in a vintage Corvette, is a surprise in this otherwise dark genre, but this is 
a gritty mystery with breakneck pacing and characters and dialogue as smart and 
sharp as Lynch makes them. Expect fans to pass this title from hand to hand.  EB
MAcgregor, roy The Highest Number in the World; illus. by Geneviève Des- 
prés. Tundra, 2014 32p
ISBN 978-1-77049-575-3 $17.99   
R 5-8 yrs
Gabriella, who insists on being called Gabe, has just achieved her nine-year-old 
heart’s desire: “Today, Gabe had made The Spirit, the best hockey team in town,” 
dazzling everyone with a move of her own making, now acknowledged as “The 
Gabe.” Her joy is short-lived when the coach informs her that a number 22 jersey, 
the same number as Gabe’s idol, Olympic women’s hockey star Hayley Wicken-
heiser, isn’t available, and Gabe descends into a grand funk, burying her number 
9 jersey on the closet floor. Grandma arrives for a chat with a reminder about how 
lucky Gabe is to play at all (Grandma had been kicked off her team when someone 
recognized her boy’s disguise) and an observation that Gabe’s despised number 9 
has belonged to so many star players on so many teams that it has been retired and 
hoisted to the ceiling beams in arenas all over North America. Of course this sends 
Gabe back to the ice, with a dream of having her own 9 someday raised to the 
rafters. Després’ chipper gouache paintings nail the humor in Gabe’s drama-queen 
meltdown—scarlet-faced, and hauling her be-jerseyed sock monkey around merci-
lessly by the leg—while demonstrating through the diverse gallery of teammates 
just how far girls have come in the sport since Grandma’s day. Hockey never gets 
the same picture-book love as baseball, and when an excellent title like this comes 
along, scoop it right up.  EB
MArcionette, JAke Just Jake; illus. by Victor Rivas Villa. Grosset + Dunlap, 
2014 [160p]
ISBN 978-0-448-46692-7 $11.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 3-6
Unhappy about having to move during the middle of his sixth-grade year, Jake 
March 2014 • 367
hopes his recently developed “rules of AWESOMENESS” will help him fit in at 
his new school. If nothing else, his pastime of creating Kid Cards—trading cards 
of his classmates—will keep him busy as he climbs the social ladder. After a few 
rough starts, Jake finds a group of friends, but things come to a head when a minor 
miscommunication with a loner kid results in the class bully needlessly coming to 
Jake’s defense in order to gain the attention of Jake’s older sister. The bully backs 
out of the fight when he discovers that Jake hasn’t been on his side all along, only to 
try to get revenge—in an attempt that backfires and makes Jake even more popular. 
Written in short chapters interspersed with digitally assembled, caricature-like pencil 
sketches (including plenty of examples of Kid Cards) and cutouts of photographs, 
this novel is a short and sweet introduction to a series following in the thematic 
footsteps of Ignatow’s The Popularity Papers (BCCB 5/10). Unfortunately, the plot 
rambles quite a bit, and it’s occasionally difficult to follow where the story’s going. 
Jake’s a good kid, though, and his rules of AWESOMENESS, which at first seem 
self-aggrandizing, actually turn out to be solid advice, if a bit preachy. The attrac-
tive style and the lure of a kid author (Marcionette wrote the manuscript when 
he was twelve) will likely surmount any shortcomings in kids’ eyes, making this a 
likely pleaser.  TA
MArko, cyndi Kung Pow Chicken: Let’s Get Cracking; written and illus. by Cyndi 
Marko. Scholastic, 2014 72p (Branches)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-61062-9 $15.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-545-61061-2 $4.99   
R Gr. 2-3
   Kung Pow Chicken: Bok! Bok! Boom!; written and illus. by Cyndi Mar-
ko. Scholastic, 2014 [72p] (Branches)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-61064-3 $15.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-545-61063-6 $4.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-3
After accidentally taking a dip in toxic sludge at their uncle Quack’s labora-
tory, second-grader Gordon Blue and his little brother/sidekick Benny gain 
superhuman—er, superbird—abilities, becoming Kung Pow Chicken and Egg  
Drop. Let’s Get Cracking follows the novice superheroes as they search to discover 
why Granny Goosebumps is selling glowing cookies that, when eaten, cause the 
poultry population to shed their feathers in a dramatic “POOF!” Bok! Bok! Boom! 
sees our heroes trying to thwart evil Dr. Screech as he kidnaps opera star Miss Honey 
Comb, planning to use her voice to destroy the public library, as he has an aversion to 
quietude. The combination of chickens and kid superheroes is absurdly compelling; 
primary-graders will chortle over all the poultry puns, elementary-school humor 
(“Ack! Leotard wedgie!”), and Benny’s smart-aleck asides and frequent exclamation 
of “Ham and eggs!” Marko’s art is as playful as her text, and Gordon, in his square 
spectacles and striped tie, and Benny, who is still incompletely hatched and whose 
only visible features are his eyeballs (seen through a gap in his shell) and his pro-
truding legs, are appropriately both comical and heroic in their depiction. There’s 
a graphic-novel flavor to the layout, with compositions ranging from double-page 
spreads to panel sequences (often set against a colored backdrop), while text blocks 
share duties with speech bubbles in telling the story. The simple vocabulary and 
small chunks of text make this extremely accessible to the primary-grade crowd, 
and kids who want something short and funny but are not quite ready for Pilkey’s 
Captain Underpants or Super Diaper Baby series will find this just their speed.  JH
368 • The BulleTin
MikAelSen, Ben Jungle of Bones. Scholastic, 2014 [224p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-44287-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-63362-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-7
Dylan Barstow is one angry young man, unable to come to terms with the death of 
his journalist father in Darfur. Acting out has finally brought him to a crossroads—
a stint in juvie or an extended stay with his ex-Marine uncle Todd in Oregon. 
Todd immediately puts Dylan on a training/discipline program involving running 
(Dylan’s not bad at it), respectful speech (Dylan’s mouthy and resistant), and ma-
laria pills (Dylan flushes them down the toilet) in preparation for a trip to Papua 
New Guinea to locate the remains of a B-17 bomber that crashed in the jungle in 
World War II, leaving Dylan’s grandfather as the sole survivor. Of course, every 
lesson Dylan refuses to learn and precaution he refuses to take becomes another 
giant step toward disaster in the jungle when he’s separated from his uncle and left 
isolated and fighting for his life. Readers will readily catch the dual genres of this 
title—action/adventure story and cautionary tale. The former is more successful, 
straying off course only when a shape-shifting native rescues Dylan in an act of 
authorial mercy. The latter is problematic, though, since the moral of this story 
should demand Dylan’s demise, and Mikaelsen settles instead for a boatload of 
sermonizing, which even the most well-behaved, self-righteous of readers are likely 
to find tedious. Still, Dylan’s trainwreck of a life, topped off with a happy ending, 
may hit the ideal excitement level for a middle-grades quick pick.  EB 
Moore, kelly 
Neverwas; by Kelly Moore, Tucker Reed, and Larkin 
Reed. Levine/Scholastic, 2014 [320p] (Amber House)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-43418-8 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-57632-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-12
After altering time to save her younger brother and aunt (in Amber House, BCCB 
11/12), sixteen-year-old Sarah Parsons wakes up to a different world entirely: her 
parents are happily married, her family is wealthy and politically involved, and her 
grandmother’s estate, Amber House, is Sarah’s house and a prized jewel of the South. 
In addition, the South is now a segregated nation called the American Confedera-
tion of the States, and it’s on the verge of revolution. The victorious Third Reich, 
dominating Europe since World War II, has now set its sights on the flailing ACS, 
placing Sarah and her family, supporters of the ACS’s next president, in danger. 
Amber House and its past hold the key to righting the world, but first Sarah must 
figure out her ancestors’ roles in history and what she is willing to sacrifice to restore 
the right version—or what she thinks is the right version—of reality. This second 
installment of the Amber House trilogy requires a bit more world-building and 
explanation than its predecessor, but the plotting remains sophisticated and intri-
cate, with a careful and deliberate unspooling of events that manages to effectively 
portray how the smallest of actions might change the course of world events. Am-
ber House as a setting is deliciously creepy, with ghost children running rampant, 
doors opening and closing at random, and hidden passages leading to even more 
secrets. This version of Sarah might trust the visions Amber House reveals to her, 
March 2014 • 369
but readers of the previous installment will know there is something more sinister 
in the air and wait with bated breath for the conclusion.  KQG
Mutén, Burleigh Miss Emily; illus. by Matt Phelan. Candlewick, 2014 [144p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-5734-5 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-7010-8 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-6
The introduction to this slim, illustrated verse novel explains that the reclusive poet 
Emily Dickinson enjoyed the company of the children who lived nearby, often join-
ing them in their pretend play. In this fictionalized account of those interactions, 
Dickinson takes the lead, inviting the children to dress as gypsies and slip out in 
the dead of night to greet the circus that is coming to town. Such an adventure is 
shockingly inappropriate and therefore must be undertaken in secrecy, which must 
be breached when the young narrator, Mac, sprains his ankle on the way home. A 
disgraced Mac is delighted by an unprecedented visit from Dickinson, who takes 
full responsibility and leaves the children with a story, and his punishment is lifted 
with a visit to the circus as well. While the tale has a measure of old-fashioned 
charm and mild historical interest, there is not much substance; the poetry, for the 
most part, is more prosaic than genuinely evocative of the elegant, significance-
laden imagery of Dickinson’s own work, and the sense of adventure is relatively 
slight. The adult-inspired imaginative play and Mac’s pastor father’s admonitions 
that his actions reflect on the family may have appeal for temperamentally earnest 
children and their parents, however, and the story may hold interest for children 
being introduced to Dickinson’s poetry by presenting Dickinson herself as child-
friendly. Historical notes on the characters and bibliography are included. Final 
art not seen.  KC 
Muth, Jon J Hi, Koo!: A Year of Seasons; written and illus. by Jon J Muth. Scho-
lastic, 2014 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-545-16668-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-4
This creative poetic sequence follows the seasons through twenty-six haiku, part-
nered with illustrations that feature Muth’s familiar anthropomorphized panda as 
he explores the joys of fall, winter, spring, and summer along with his child friends. 
The poems are deftly aimed at kid experiences (“Eating warm cookies/ on a cold 
day/ is easy”), and the phrasing is often evocative; additionally, the alphabet threads 
through the sequence, with each poem containing a capitalized word beginning 
with its relevant letter. Muth’s delicate watercolors are triumphant, setting tender 
washes of sky and grass against the very kidlike poses of Koo the panda as he cranes 
his neck skyward or peers intently at ground-level action; their clarity is a particu-
larly fine partner for Muth’s easygoing, freeform haiku (an introduction states his 
reasons for eschewing the conventional syllabic rules). This has potential for both 
reading alone and aloud, since the poems are accessible enough to serve as youthful 
writing prompts but are also crisp and vivid as oral verse.  DS
370 • The BulleTin
nApoli, donnA Jo Storm. Wiseman/Simon, 2014 [368p]
ISBN 978-1-4814-0302-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
The rain starts like any other rain with a dark cloud and a few drops, but then the 
deluge relentlessly continues. By the third day, sixteen-year-old Sebah has lost her 
brothers and her home to the flooding; by the second week, she is starving and 
stranded in a tree until a boy from her village finds her, they build a raft, and he 
claims her, with her consent, as his wife. By the end of the month, however, he too 
has been swept away and, before meeting the same fate herself, she manages to climb 
aboard a giant ark. Yes, it is indeed Noah’s ark and since she’s aware that her status 
as a stowaway on the ship defies Noah’s plan, Sebah decides her best bet is to hide 
with the animals below. As the rains continue, however, and Sebah’s belly grows 
heavy with a baby, her survival may depend on revealing herself. Napoli mines the 
Biblical story—one of the original apocalyptic tales—to find a different spiritual 
subtext, transforming it from a tale not about obeying the will of God but about 
how the very act of survival is sometimes the greatest leap of faith of all. The book 
depicts Noah as a man struggling with an enormous burden, and his strict reli-
ance on his faith acts as a direct foil to the non-religious Sebah, whose reasons for 
living are bound both literally and figuratively to the fertile earth (she’s a gardener 
in addition to being pregnant). There is room, and perhaps requirement, for both 
types of faith in Napoli’s interpretation, and the ultimate survival of Sebah’s and 
Noah’s families underscores that message. Fans of Life of Pi will find a similar blend 
of gritty survivalism and spiritual contemplation in this maelstrom of a tale.  KQG
nelSon, MArilyn How I Discovered Poetry; illus. by Hadley Hooper. Dial, 
2014 [112p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3304-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 7-12
This slender verse memoir draws on both previously published and new work to 
paint “a portrait of the artist as a young American Negro girl,” following young 
Marilyn from 1950 to 1959, age four to thirteen. The nearly fifty poems (each 
subtitled with location and date) offer snapshots of her life with her family as they 
followed a peripatetic Army existence, moving from place to place as her father, a 
high-ranking officer, changed postings and her mother found new teaching jobs. 
Her family were often the “First Negroes” for townies and classmates, but they 
nonetheless generally rooted into each new place, Marilyn finding solid friends 
and excelling academically. Notes of the era are effectively played as young Mari-
lyn imagines fighting the Red Menace and absorbs adult commentary about “that 
lady in Montgomery” and “a boy named Emmett.” The tightly written yet musing 
poems (many of them unrhymed sonnets) effectively capture single moments as 
slices of a larger, longer trajectory of growth, travel, and inquiry. Young Marilyn’s 
capable, confident family (“Daddy corrects white men who call him boy./ Even 
when they’re in police uniforms”) provides a solid foundation for both her and the 
narrative trajectory, and her need to find herself over and over again in each new 
location provides an unusual opportunity for self-awareness and reflection that 
understandably translates into becoming a poet. Attractive and subtle design adds 
appeal, with poem titles in slate blue and simple decorative spot art, usually dichro-
matic, neatly supplying both a retro visual quotation and contemporary currency; 
March 2014 • 371
occasional family photographs provide additional immediacy. Use this to bring a 
vivid personal touch to an exploration of the era, or as a gloriously personal entry 
in a poetry unit that will prompt eager imitation. Final illustrations not seen.  DS
o’donnell, toM Space Rocks! Razorbill, 2014 [336p]
ISBN 978-1-59514-713-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-7
Life on the asteroid Gelo for young Chorkle and the other Xotonians has changed 
completely since a ship full of humans landed on their planet to start mining 
iridium. When the Xotonians engineer an asteroid quake to finally frighten off the 
human spaceship, four human kids get left behind during the emergency takeoff, 
and Chorkle (who had actually been on a recon mission to spy on the kids) ends 
up leading the kids to safety through tunnels infested with ravenous thyss-cats. 
During their underground trek, Chorkle and the group discover a Xotonian ruined 
city and a battle between the Xotonians and the Vorem, an alien species bent on 
universal domination and whom most residents of Gelo had believed mythical. 
What appears at first glance to be a tale of kooky alien-human antics, complete with 
cultural misunderstandings, linguistic adjustment, and fried cave slugs (“Xotonian 
burritos”) actually ends up as hard sci-fi, with universe-saving epic battles and 
complicated moral choices, making for a richer reading experience. Unfortunately, 
the transition from madcap to meaningful is jarring and the pace uneven, with 
the first part rather tediously drawn out and the conclusion too rushed. The tone 
is similarly bumpy, mixing galactic grandeur with gleeful silliness and a misplaced 
touch of romance between two of the kids at the end. Chorkle is endearing as a 
narrator, though, enthusiastic even as an outsider in the Xotonian world, and the 
humor throughout makes this a possible stepping-stone for readers needing a leg 
up before tackling more traditional stellar epics.  TA
oFFill, Jenny Sparky!; illus. by Chris Appelhans. Schwartz & Wade, 
2014 [32p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-97023-8 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-87023-1 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98859-2 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-7 yrs
A young girl desperately wants a pet but has to find one that will meet her mother’s 
low-maintenance stipulations, so she’s delighted to discover that a sloth would fill 
the bill nicely. Her sloth soon arrives, his limbs and head poked through holes of 
his shipping box, and the girl dubs him Sparky and plants him in a tree, where 
he is quite content to stay. Know-it-all peer Mary Potts is dismissive of Sparky, 
prompting the protagonist to promise a “Trained Sloth Extravaganza” in which to 
show off Sparky. He’s pretty limited in the tricks department, though, and Mary 
Potts remains unimpressed; the girl, however, doesn’t let that ruin her outlook and 
continues to love Sparky just as he is. There’s a subtle dry wit to Offill’s cogent nar-
rative (“I kept wishing I had written Two Tricks on the poster, instead of Countless 
Tricks”), which makes a clever partner to Appelhans’ endearing watercolor and pencil 
illustrations. The long-armed, wide-eyed Sparky has an adorably teddy bear-like 
posture and expression, while subdued tones of blue, brown, and gray are attractively 
372 • The BulleTin
highlighted by brighter touches of red against a creamy matte background. Pair this 
with Cooke’s A Little Book of Sloth (BCCB 2/13) to maximize its “Aww!” factor.  JH
oliver, lAuren Panic. Harper/Harper Collins, 2014 [416p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-201455-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-228559-1 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
The annual game of Panic is an open secret in the small town of Carp, a place 
devastated by the recession. All of the high school kids of Carp put a daily dol-
lar in the pot for graduating seniors to compete for by taking on a series of risky 
challenges and ending with a high-stakes game of automotive chicken that has 
already left one girl paralyzed. Three players—Nat, Heather, and Dodge—each 
with a specific motive for entering, form an alliance, but as the stunts get more 
dangerous and Heather’s home life falls apart, tension strains their relationships. 
It’s certainly an exciting story, and the narrative arc of the book leads ultimately to 
Heather’s happy ending as she overcomes her fear of being forever stuck in poverty. 
Unfortunately, the book tacitly affirms the risky path she takes to get there; the 
game results in the death of one man and causes several other nearly fatal episodes 
as the teens participate in activities that are illegal, dangerous and all too imitable. 
While the epilogue explicitly chides Heather for having been afraid to move forward 
and change her life, the rest of the book advocates for deliberately putting oneself 
and others at unnecessary and stupid risk as a fully legitimate, if uncomfortable, 
means to achieve personal and financial growth. The cheery ending therefore cre-
ates emotional dissonance for what started out as a suspenseful cautionary tale. It’s 
tough to sanction the way Heather earns her bright new outlook, but the appealing 
idea of a secretive and dangerous game may be enough to keep readers involved, if 
not morally unquestioning.  KC
poliSner, gAe The Summer of Letting Go. Algonquin, 2014 [320p]
ISBN 978-1-61620-256-9 $17.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 6-10
It’s been four years since her little brother, Simon, drowned, but fifteen-year-old 
Frankie and her family are still shattered by the tragedy. Frankie’s also feeling left 
behind by her best friend, Lisette, who’s in a sparkly new romance with Bradley, 
for whom Frankie also has feelings. What changes her summer is a little boy she 
begins to babysit, whose eager fearlessness helps Frankie recapture some of the 
pre-tragedy joys of having a little brother—and whose extraordinary connections 
to Simon suggest to Frankie that her new charge may be Simon’s reincarnation. 
Frankie’s guilt about Simon (she was supposed to be watching Simon when he died) 
and the family’s subsequent dissolution are believably conveyed, and her absorption 
with her new charge (also called Frankie) is an understandable development. The 
multiplicity of plot threads overburdens the book, however, and little boy Frankie 
lacks authenticity; additionally, the book brushes off Frankie’s serious childcare 
lapses (usually due to mooning over Bradley). Serle’s The Edge of Falling, reviewed 
below, is a superior story of coming to grips with the legacy of a sibling’s death, but 
the enticing themes of forbidden romance, possible reincarnation, and expiation of 
guilt will likely have enough emotional pull to attract readers.  DS
March 2014 • 373
reynoldS, JASon When I Was the Greatest. Atheneum, 2014 [240p]
ISBN 978-1-4424-5947-2 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-9
Allen “Ali” Brooks is a good kid who manages to avoid the street drama in his 
Brooklyn neighborhood, but the fifteen-year-old also doesn’t have many friends 
other than his younger sister, Jazz. When Needles and Noodles, a pair of brothers 
Ali’s age, move into the decrepit brownstone next door, Ali is willing to overlook 
their potentially troubling behavior to gain a couple of pals. Needles has Tourette 
syndrome, and his behavior is always a wild card in social situations. Noodles car-
ries a load of resentment for how his brother’s syndrome drove their father away 
and, subsequently, the family into poverty, and his anger manifests in a tendency 
toward thuggishness and a willingness to play his friends. Ali lets himself get drawn 
into a what-could-go-wrong scheme to crash an over-eighteen party with the two 
brothers and something does indeed go wrong: when Noodles ticks off partygoers, 
Needles tries to defend him and accidentally stabs a man with the knitting needles 
he carries to control his tics. Noodles abandons his brother, Ali comes to the res-
cue, and by morning the word is on the street that Ali is targeted for a beat down, 
or worse. The scope of the boys’ misdemeanor and predicament is believable, as 
is the fallout to their friendship and the need for adult intervention to defuse the 
threat against Ali. That the drama results in the reunion of Ali’s separated parents 
is, perhaps, a bit of wishful thinking, but it serves as a reminder that adults, like 
their heedless kids, often need second chances, and that a neighborhood of flawed 
but kind grownups can pull in harness to keep kids on the right track.  EB
roSengren, gAyle What the Moon Said; illus. by Jonathan Bean.  Putnam, 
2014 [224p]
ISBN 978-0-399-16352-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
A ring around the moon is an omen; so is seeing a spider before breakfast or crows 
atop a fence, and opening an umbrella inside the house. Esther’s Ma imparts these 
old-world lessons to her children in their Chicago home, where they live a modest 
but happy life until the onset of the Great Depression. When Pa loses his job and 
the family moves to a small farm in Wisconsin, ten-year old Esther embraces the 
adventure, excelling in school and devising new ways of getting taciturn Ma—
who’s particularly reserved with Esther—to love her. Their exciting pioneer life 
takes a bleak turn as food becomes scarce, the family must sell their possessions, 
and Ma’s temper shortens with each passing day. When Esther falls deathly ill, 
she learns the difference between demonstrative affection and love in action and 
realizes that omens are often what we make of them. Rosengren’s depiction of the 
Great Depression from a child’s perspective rings true, with the direness of finan-
cial circumstances not as keenly felt as the desire for approval from one’s mother. 
Though Esther’s constant worry over her mother’s love feels forced at times, the 
sentiment will resonate with young readers whose parents show love in ways other 
than constant displays. The author’s keen understanding of the emotions and 
preoccupations of late childhood shine through Esther, including the struggle to 
interpret adult behavior and reconcile family rules with personal truths. Sensitive 
and engaging, this novel would work as an accompaniment to a classroom unit 
374 • The BulleTin
on the Great Depression, as well as in the hands of a child who thinks her parent 
loves her but isn’t always sure.  AA
ruBin, SuSAn goldMAn Everybody Paints!: The Lives and Art of the Wyeth Fam-
ily. Chronicle, 2014 105p illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-8118-6984-3 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 6-10
Few artistic families have achieved the success of the Wyeths, with significant 
American painters in three generations: N. C. Wyeth, his son Andrew Wyeth, 
and Andrew’s son Jamie Wyeth. Rubin traces the life and exploits of these artistic 
generations, following the family’s creative tendencies generally (“Everybody in my 
family paints, excluding possibly the dogs”) and focusing specifically on the lives 
of N. C., Andrew, and Jamie. As usual, Rubin has performed extensive research, 
including interviews with Jamie Wyeth, and the book is rich with quotes about 
the Wyeth family’s life and art, so the daily life of painting and country pastimes 
is vividly conveyed. What’s missing, however, is any additional perspective—it’s 
rarely made clear how an artist’s work related to ongoing artistic modes or what 
influence it left outside of the family, so readers may not learn why the Wyeth fam-
ily is of interest in the first place. Additionally, the book never explicitly justifies its 
focus on the three most famous Wyeths in light of the stated artistry of the whole 
family (Carolyn Wyeth in particular seems to get short shrift, with her teaching of 
Jamie a greater focus than her own artistic career). Layout is elegant and austere, 
with contrasting, often white text against colored pages, and most spreads include 
a crisply framed reproduction of a Wyeth work (though actual photographs of the 
Wyeths are disappointingly sparse). Novices will need more context, but readers 
looking to imagine an artist’s life for themselves or just keen to hear the stories 
behind some of the twentieth century’s most iconic images may be intrigued by the 
human and artistic portraits here. End matter includes a list of locations of Wyeth 
artwork, a list of sources, and an index.  DS
rule, Adi Strange Sweet Song. St. Martin’s Griffin, 2014 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-250-04816-5 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-250-03634-6 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
With a name like Sing and with two world-renowned musicians as parents, seven-
teen-year-old Sing da Naveli was always destined to be a musician. Now she’s here 
at her dream school, Dunhammond Conservatory, and the academy’s production 
of Angelique, Sing’s favorite opera, offers Sing a chance to finally prove her worth 
to her father—if she can land the lead role. The opera, however, is rumored to be 
inspired by the bloody past of the school and a supposed evil that lurks in the forest 
that surrounds its grounds. As rehearsals begin, Sing finds herself as inexplicably 
drawn to the forbidden forest as she is to Nathan Daysmoor, a broody young 
man assigned to be her vocal coach. The cache of standard YA elements—a girl 
suffocated by parental expectations, a wickedly handsome love interest, a catfight 
among Sing’s peers—make a compelling story. A second narrative strand follows a 
mythical beast in the surrounding woods, from its fall from the heavens centuries 
ago, to its despair at killing its sibling, to its joy at birthing a cub, to its recent 
interest in human activity and specifically, their ability to feel joy and despair. The 
two storylines come together in a climactic scene that demands an accompaniment 
of swelling music, and the resolution manages a bittersweet blend of tragedy and 
March 2014 • 375
happiness. Music buffs will relate to Sing’s passion and insecurities, and readers 
who enjoy a good melodrama will be captivated.  KQG 
rutkoSki, MArie The Winner’s Curse. Farrar, 2014 [368p] (Winners)
ISBN 978-0-374-38467-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 7-10
When the Valorians defeated and subsequently enslaved the Herrani people ten 
years ago, young Kestrel assumed a life of luxury and privilege as the daughter 
of Valoria’s greatest military general. Such comfort, however, comes at a price: at 
seventeen, Kestrel must now make a decision to either marry or join the military, 
a choice that she keeps putting off to pursue music, scandalizing the gossips of 
high society. Her purchase of a handsome slave, Arin, who might be a musician, 
further incites chatter, and her public defense of him brings ruin to her reputa-
tion. Ultimately, however, the society goings-on and Arin and Kestrel’s growing 
feelings for each other cease to matter when Arin successfully stages a rebellion 
and reclaims Herrani, organizing the killing and/or enslavement of any remaining 
Valorians. The coup occurs about midway through the book and it is the ensu-
ing reversal of roles that allows these characters to fully develop, giving definition 
and depth to both Kestrel and Arin as real people as opposed to just parties in a 
forbidden romance. That’s not to say that the romance isn’t heartstoppingly lovely 
and admittedly steamy to begin with, because it is, but the raising of stakes and 
the reluctance of the couple to give up their respective cause, even as they confess 
their love for each other, lends their relationship a complexity not often seen in the 
genre. An author’s note cites Greco-Roman culture as inspiration, and the lush, 
sumptuous setting certainly has a Mediterranean feel and the military strategizing 
calls up Homeric epics. A last-minute compromise between the lovers secures a 
sequel, and fans of Kristin Cashore and Robin Lefevers will be pleased to have a 
new romance to follow.  KQG
rylAnder, chriS Codename Zero. Walden Pond/HarperCollins, 2014 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-212008-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-212010-6 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-7
Carson Fender is just doing what he does best—pulling off an epic middle-school 
prank—when a black-suited man desperately thrusts a package into his hands, 
directs him to deliver it unopened to Mr. Jensen, and is then abducted by two 
pasty-faced men in a dark SUV. The first problem is that there are two Mr. Jensens 
on staff at Eric Hill Middle School; the second problem is that Carson can’t resist 
opening the package, which contains a device that launches a countdown to its 
own self-destruction. The game is afoot, and Carson is promptly drawn into a top 
secret, extra-governmental, world-saving organization that’s taking on a raft of 
bad guys working behind the scenes at a traveling carnival. This seriocomic action 
story struggles to amalgamate several subgenres—spy parody (both Mr. Jensens are 
with The Agency), friendship story (schoolmate Olek, in the witness protection 
program, turns into a true pal), and thriller (threatened lives and battered bodies 
twist lightweight comedy into real peril), making the overall tone of this series 
opener somewhat chaotic. Moreover, even readers who easily suspend disbelief will 
find the Fender family’s apparent obliviousness to Carson’s leg cast and bandages 
376 • The BulleTin
(results of the big climax) hard to swallow. The central premise of a middle-school 
populated by undercover agents is a promising one, though, and kids who like to 
settle into a series will be happy to know there’s more to come.  EB
SAMWorth, kAte Aviary Wonders Inc. Spring Catalog and Instruction Manual: 
Renewing the World’s Bird Supply Since 2031; written and illus. by Kate Sam-
worth. Clarion, 2014 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-547-97899-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-6
In this satire on environmental collapse set in the near future, many of our avian 
friends have sadly been extinct for decades, but Alfred Wallis and his Aviary Wonders 
Company enthusiastically supply hobbyists with everything they need to create their 
own birds. Readers browse the current color catalogue to select parts to customize 
their own beautiful marvel, beginning with basic bodies and adding wings, beaks, 
feet, etc. appropriate to the lifestyle one chooses for their own beastie. Lots of samples 
are provided based on birds of the yore (and informative insets are included that 
remark on the passing of various species). Do you prefer a wader like an ibis or egret? 
Perhaps a swimmer such a swan or guillemot? Tails suitable for each bird come in a 
variety of aesthetically pleasing designs, and lots of helpful guidance is offered on 
how best to select the correct legs, wattles, combs, etc: proper attachment of each 
feature, and troubleshooting hints are also included. This is as cleverly executed as 
it is edifying, with a fair amount of information on physical adaptation, and the 
catalog conceit actually advances the organizational success. The gilding-the-lily 
exaggeration of birds’ natural beauty is satire at its child-appropriate best, and the 
subtle digs at our perennial efforts to domesticate animals for our pleasure won’t be 
lost on young readers. Pair this with Annette Cate’s Look Up! (BCCB 3/13), grab 
the binoculars, and let’s go bird watching while we still can.  EB
ScheFFler, Axel, illus. Flip Flap Farm; by Nosy Crow; illus. by Axel Schef-
fler. Nosy Crow, 2014 24p
ISBN 978-0-7636-7067-2 $11.99   
Ad 6-8 yrs
Eleven common animals are introduced here with a jaunty two-stanza verse (“My 
fleece is fluffy, soft, and white”) and a simple, hearty full-page illustration. The 
trick here, however, is that the spiral-bound pages are horizontally bisected at a 
neatly hybrid point in both text and art, so that viewers can turn the above sheep 
into a “shabbit,” a “shicken,” or a “shig.” The verse here is cheerful, but it’s mostly 
greeting-card-style filler, failing to add anything to the concept or to maximize the 
humor potential of the mismatched couplings the way text in other such split-page 
books (Moerbeek’s New at the Zoo, BCCB 11/89) does. However, the concept 
remains inviting, and the layout details (the animal’s name running vertically next 
to the poem, the animal’s utterance appearing both on top and bottom halves of 
the page, background colors providing additional color-coding and emphasis of 
the mismatch) add visual appeal and coherence; the spiral binding is particularly 
helpful, allowing kids to mix and match freely without straining the book. Schef-
fler’s wide-eyed animals are archetypal yet personable, often smiling faintly as they 
carefully pose for maximum meetup possibility. Even kids who can’t read the poetic 
text will appreciate the Frankenpossibilities, and the experience will prepare kids 
(if not necessarily immediately) for Prelutsky’s Scranimals (BCCB 10/02).  DS
March 2014 • 377
SchMidt, tiFFAny Bright before Sunrise. Walker, 2014 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-8027-3500-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Jonah has a huge chip on his shoulder after his mother divorces his father, remarries, 
and moves the family to the ritzy town Jonah can’t wait to leave after his upcoming 
graduation. Brighton lives in the shadow of her psychologist father, whose death 
has left her determined to follow his advice on making the world a better place 
through optimism and good works. Her attempts to reach out to Jonah, whom 
she sees as the grumpy new kid, are rejected out of hand, but she persists, because 
if she can get him to volunteer, she will have achieved full participation for Key 
Club, something only her father was able to accomplish before her. Through a series 
of events, they end up going to a disastrous party, which turns into an all-nighter 
of getting to know each other’s secrets and breaking down walls. Although the 
premise is admittedly cheesy, Brighton and Jonah are both well-developed, likably 
flawed characters. Their romance develops slowly but sweetly, with the inevitable 
misreadings of actions and intentions showcased through their alternating narration. 
Jonah is enough of a hound to amp up the sexy but self-aware enough to keep it 
under control; Brighton is severely nice even when she wishes she weren’t. Their 
perspectives reveal telling gender differences without overplaying or caricaturing 
them; in short, the kinds of things that could go wrong with a book like this don’t, 
and readers will drift pleasantly along through a night that ends in a well-earned 
kiss. Along the way, the book tells the story of how that first love can help you see 
the good and the bad through new eyes and launch you out of yourself toward 
becoming someone that you like better.  KC  
SchreFer, eliot Threatened. Scholastic, 2014 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-55143-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-55144-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Luc, a Gabonese AIDS orphan who expects to be indebted forever to the corrupt 
man who paid his deceased mother’s hospital bills, seizes an opportunity to pilfer 
a metal suitcase, hopefully full of money, from an Arab man in a street cafe. The 
plan doesn’t work quite the way he intended: “Professor” Abdul Muhammad of 
the University of Leipzig instead pays off Luc’s creditor on the condition that Luc 
accompany him as a research assistant in his study of chimpanzees in a remote region 
of Gabon. Luc’s no angel and knows a scam when he sees one, but he figures he will 
re-steal the suitcase and abandon Prof as soon as he can. What Luc doesn’t count 
on is his growing bond to the shady researcher who is clearly not all he claims to 
be, and to the chimpanzees that Luc has been taught to fear all his young life. As in 
Endangered (BCCB 1/13), Schrefer focuses on the delicate, fraught nature of contact 
between humans and their primate kin and conveys in vivid detail the individual and 
communal behaviors that seldom enjoy such rich, unanthropomorphized treatment 
in fiction. Luc’s and Prof’s marginalized status within their own cultures demands 
thoughtful comparison with the chimpanzees that struggle to define their roles 
in the group, but Schrefer respectfully declines to turn the chimps into mini-mes 
with recognizably human emotion and motivation. Readers are again treated to a 
thought-provoking study of endangered creatures—both the poached and hunted 
chimpanzees and the exploited and neglected children with little hope. Notes on 
Gabon and on Schrefer’s research are included.  EB 
378 • The BulleTin
Serle, reBeccA The Edge of Falling. Simon Pulse, 2014 [304p]
ISBN 978-1-4424-3316-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
The death of Caggie’s sister last January left Caggie emotionally devastated and 
distant, so much so that even her devoted boyfriend, Trevor, eventually broke up 
with her. Now Caggie is returning to her toney Manhattan school for senior year, 
and she’s dreading two things in particular: having to see her classmates, especially 
Trevor, and having to deal with the aftermath of her supposed heroism in rescuing 
Kristen Jenkins from a suicide attempt, when Caggie knows that what actually 
happened was something very different. In brash new boy Astor, though, she’s 
finding somebody she can forget the past with and lose herself in—despite signs 
that she may lose more with Astor than she realizes. Serle brings new dimension to 
the grieving sibling story, avoiding the overworn last-chapter telling of the tragedy 
and instead saving the unfolding of Caggie’s own near self-destruction for the dé-
nouement. Caggie’s attraction to Astor is understandable, both for the obliterative 
power of lust and for the potent bonding over mutual damage, but her relationships 
with friends, nonfriends, and the semi-mysterious Kristen are equally well drawn. 
Astor is flagged pretty early as seriously bad news, but it’s believable that Caggie’s 
willing to overlook the warning signs, and the exact nature of his downward spiral 
(and her pull out of it) is a surprise. The book adds dimension with its sharp and 
understanding portrait of the wealthy Manhattan milieu, but it never sinks into 
a reductive assessment of its residents as either emotionally bankrupt or shallow 
caricature. A compelling drama with a sympathetic protagonist, this is a sensitive 
look at the way grief can distort a life.  DS
ShAhAn, Sherry Skin and Bones. Whitman, 2014 [259p]
ISBN 978-0-8075-7397-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 8-12
At home, he’s Jack, but here in the Eating Disorders Unit he’s been dubbed Bones 
(by his roommate, who’s known as Lard) on account of his anorexia. Bones is a 
stubborn patient, exercising like crazy and trying to cheat the weigh-ins; his recovery 
is hindered further when he falls for Alice, a pro-ana dancer who makes Bones her 
secret rehearsal partner and applauds his dangerously underweight form. Bones 
is unable to resist Alice’s increasingly self-destructive requests, and he struggles to 
find a way to please her even as he moves toward health. The writing is simple and 
accessible, and Bones’ warped self-image is effectively conveyed; it’s also clear to 
the reader that Alice is more in love with her disease than with any boy, and that 
Bones is just a convenient means to an end for her. However, characterization is 
generally scanty and sometimes puzzling (sixteen-year-old Bones is bewildered 
by what’s apparently his first wet dream), motivations are fairly stock, and the 
details of the EDU vary from credible to dubious, making the journey ultimately 
superficial and message-focused. The subject remains compelling, however, and the 
camaraderie between Bones and Lard is endearing, so readers who were absorbed 
by Metzger’s A Trick of the Light (BCCB 9/13) may find this thought-provoking. 
A recipe, oddly, is appended.  DS
March 2014 • 379
Skinner, gArd Game Slaves.  Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2014 [336p]
ISBN 978-0-547-97259-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 9-12
Phoenix and his team are the best non-player-character villains in the video game 
universe, advanced AIs who can strategize and even change tactics from session 
to session—the ultimate challenge for any gamer. New fighter Dakota, however, 
doesn’t want to kill and denies that they are simply computer programs, leading 
Phoenix’s team to discover that they are human slaves whose minds are cabled 
into the gaming system. They manage to escape from their virtual prisons, but 
only to discover that reality of the near future is more nightmarish than any game 
and that after years of a comatose existence they are hardly in the shape to fight 
for survival. Additionally, game-creator Blackstar is hunting them and will do 
anything to get Phoenix and his friends back into the game. Gritty and teeming 
with violence, this novel is simultaneously action-packed and thought-provoking. 
The initial intriguing premise of self-aware game characters transitions seamlessly 
into a story of imprisoned human minds, allowing the novel to explore the very 
definitions of reality, consciousness, and free will. Phoenix starts out as an overly 
confident jerk, making his growth compelling as he suffers in the face of a dawn-
ing consciousness, struggles desperately to return to a state of ignorance, only to 
change his mind and fight for his freedom. The novel’s use of gaming parlance, 
from worlds to weapons to modes of game play, rings true throughout and is sure 
to gratify gamers. Readers looking for smart, original sci-fi and gamers who wish 
they could live in a virtual world will happily immerse themselves in this story and 
hope for possible sequels.  AM 
StArMer, AAron The Riverman. Farrar, 2014 [320p]
ISBN 978-0-374-36309-3 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
For fourteen years, Alistair has managed to keep his head down and stay mostly 
ordinary, but one misstep—writing a weird story about aliens for seventh grade 
class—brings odd duck Fiona Loomis to his doorstep, requesting that Alistair 
write her biography. What she then tells Alistair is even stranger: she can travel to a 
magical place called Aquavania, where she and other kids like her essentially create 
worlds of their own, but the entire system is in peril from a menacing figure called 
the Riverman, a soul-sucking shadow who is responsible for the disappearance of 
several children and who is after Fiona next. Alistair is at first skeptical but then 
soon enchanted; convinced that Fiona is really trying to communicate some peril 
she’s experiencing in real life, he becomes obsessed with saving her, pinning the 
supposed kidnappings on her unbalanced uncle. Strange memories of a time when 
Alistair too was called to Aquavania come unbidden to him just as the behavior of 
a friend takes a dark turn, leaving Alistair with no one to trust, perhaps not even 
himself. Somewhere between Holly Black’s Doll Bones (BCCB 6/13) and Nova 
Ren Suma’s 17 & Gone (BCCB 3/13) in audience and tone, this blend of magical 
realism and mystery blurs the line between reality and fantasy, setting up a creepy 
unease that both disturbs and propels the reader forward. While it is awash with 
familiar tropes—the steady, humble protagonist, the sleepy small town with secrets, 
the manic pixie dreamgirl, the menacing male relative, etc.—the deliciously tangled 
web of a plot defies categorization and leaves each character utterly untrustworthy 
380 • The BulleTin
while ultimately questioning the act of storytelling altogether. The events of the 
ambiguous ending can be interpreted in a few different ways, but each is so tragic 
that readers will be left pondering Alistair’s fate long after closing the book.  KQG
StevenS, courtney c.  Faking Normal. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 
2014 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-224538-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-224540-3 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Lex knows that what happened to her was rape, but she feels responsible anyway; 
she couldn’t actually form the word “no” while it was happening, and the guy 
who did it was so sad and needy that it seems a violation of her ingrained nice-
girl sensibilities to call it what it was. After watching years of domestic violence 
culminating with his father’s killing his mother, Bodee has been sensitized to the 
pain of others; he knows Lex has been hurt, and he knows that she is self-harming, 
and he is determined to help her in ways that he failed to help his mother. The two 
form an intense friendship that allows them to be honest with each other, slowly 
opening up more and more as they break down each other’s walls. Lex’s narrative 
voice has a honeyed Southern quality laced with surprising homespun similes; her 
introspection is honest and credible as she works through why she can’t seem to say 
no when a boy makes unwanted advances, and what responsibilities she has in the 
aftermath of her rape and to whom she owes them. Bodee is the ideal companion 
for her; indeed, he would seem almost too perfect if his backstory hadn’t provided 
him with an opportunity to learn the exact sort of wise compassion and gentleness 
Lex needs. Comparisons with Anderson’s Speak (BCCB 10/99) are inevitable; while 
this title does not have the literary qualities of Anderson’s text, Lex as a character is 
older and has different kinds of supports than Melinda, including faith and solid 
friends of both genders, making this a gentler exploration of acquaintance rape 
that doesn’t excuse the rapist but does grant him full human complexity. Readers 
will end up a bit wistful in their desire for a Bodee of their own, but they will be 
heartened by his faith that “it won’t come with a bow on it, but God’ll tie it up.”  KC 
SteWArt, MeliSSA Feathers: Not Just for Flying; illus. by Sarah S. Bran-
nen. Charlesbridge, 2014 32p
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-58089-430-2 $17.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-58089-431-9 $7.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60734-627-2 $6.99   
R 4-7 yrs
Compact, consistent entries, most set in attractively composed double-page spreads, 
focus on the many ways in which birds benefit from their feathers. Some uses are 
not too surprising, such as the wintry Maine blue jay’s feathers that “trap a layer of 
warm air next to its skin” or the peacock’s glorious feathers that help him attract a 
mate. The book, though, also features plenty of feather utilities that kids (and adults) 
may not have known or carefully considered, such as the club-winged manakin’s 
ability to make “squeaky chirping little trills” with its curved and ridged feathers, or 
the spongy feathers of the Pallas’ sandgrouse, who uses them to bring water to his 
nesting chicks. Each bird gets a lovely portrait set in its habitat, captioned with its 
identity and a precise geographic location. A brief paragraph, just the right length 
for classroom or storytime sharing, explains the utility of the bird’s plumage, and 
March 2014 • 381
the entries are unified by a line of oversized font that runs across the tops of the 
spreads and compares feathers to a familiar human device: “Feathers can dig holes 
like a backhoe . . . or carry building supplies like a forklift.” Beautiful and concise, 
this is an excellent resource for units on animal adaptation, and a treat for the 
youngest bird lovers. An author’s note on research, and a caution concerning the 
prohibitions on gathering wild bird feathers, are appended.  EB
StoWer, AdAM Slam!: A Tale of Consequences; written and illus. by Adam Stow-
er. Owlkids, 2014 32p
ISBN 978-1-77147-007-0 $17.95   
Ad Gr. 2-4
Who knew that slamming a door could lead to such chaos? Not our protagonist, a 
boy who carelessly slams the door as he and his dog head out for a walk. With music 
blaring through his earphones and his attention on the paper he holds, he doesn’t 
notice that his slam has caused his ball to slide off the roof where it was stuck. That 
falling ball hits a cat, who bolts into a passerby, causing her to drop her groceries 
in the street, which leads to a traffic accident and a fish truck’s losing its contents, 
which eventually snowballs into a dragon coming out of the sewer, tiny aliens 
parachuting down on earth, and an even more massive traffic accident—as the boy 
remains oblivious. This lacks the cleverness and underlying control of Armstrong’s 
similarly themed Once upon a Banana (BCCB 12/06); some of the ensuing events 
seem like they’d have happened anyway sooner or later, and the similar-value pastels 
can make it a challenge to piece out the individual disasters. It’s still an amusing 
calamitous fantasia, though, with seek-and-find appeal in the ongoing trajectory 
of various items and critters and in surprising takes on the town both above and 
belowground (the sewer contains a collection of goblins and a piratical skeleton 
as well as some long-suffering workers). The comic sound effects and a few bits of 
speech-balloon dialogue are the only text, making this an easy outing for kids who 
prefer catastrophe to literature.  DS
trAcy, kriSten Hung Up. Simon Pulse, 2014 [208p]
ISBN 978-1-4424-6075-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
It all starts with a wrong number: Lucy’s trying to leave messages about an order 
she placed but is actually leaving them on James’ voicemail; when James finally 
picks up and explains, the two begin to banter, and a telephone relationship is born. 
That relationship becomes close and confessional, but as it moves toward meeting 
in person Lucy begins to worry, because she hasn’t been honest with James about 
who she really is. From Bells Are Ringing to Couloumbis’ Not Exactly a Love Story 
(BCCB 12/12), the telephone romance has been a narrative staple, and Tracy mus-
ters a rapid-fire banter for her conversants (in dialogue formatted like a playscript) 
that’s mannered yet witty and funny (Lucy, for instance, is “a very accidentally 
contentious person”). The eventual revelations are foreshadowed rather than com-
ing as surprises, so the pleasure here is watching the protagonists gradually trust 
each other with more of the truth. While it’s overall somewhat more artful than 
authentic, the play between James and Lucy is rhythmic and entertaining, and the 
format could prompt a readers’ theater performance or serve as an inspiration for 
young writers to create their own dialogue narratives.  DS
382 • The BulleTin
turnAge, SheilA The Ghosts of Tupelo Landing. Dawson/Viking, 2014 [368p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3671-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 5-7
Readers first met Mo LoBeau and her somewhat reluctant sleuthing sidekick, Dale, 
in Three Times Lucky (BCCB 7/12), when they helped solve a murder in their be-
loved hometown of Tupelo Landing, NC, and founded the Desperado Detective 
Agency. Mo is now itching for a new case (Dale decidedly less so), and she finds it 
when Miss Lana and Grandmother Miss Lacy make the winning bid on the Old 
Tupelo Inn with all its fine print, which includes, of all things, acknowledgment of 
a ghost on the premises. As Dale’s brother and Mo’s heartthrob, Lavender, strives 
to renovate the old inn in time for the community’s 250th birthday celebration, 
strange things happen, making it hard for him to keep laborers. Could it be the 
ghost, or is someone else trying to sabotage the renovations? And whoever is re-
sponsible, what are their motives? Mo’s spritely narration alternates between pithy, 
wise remarks and wide-eyed misdirections as she attempts to uncover the truth, 
outwit and outdo the annoying Attila Celeste, keep Dale from chickening out on 
the investigation, and figure out how to deal with Harm, the new boy who could 
turn out to be either friend or foe. With less real danger here than in the first 
book, some Scooby Doo twists, and a bona fide ghost, this is sure to please both 
fans and readers new to Mo, who remains as quotable as she is lovable. Gems like 
“The problem with having a temper is you find out what you’re going to say at 
the exact same minute everybody else does” guarantee head-nodding identification 
with the obstreperous heroine; we certainly hope there is more to come from the 
Desperado Detectives.  KC 
vigilAnte, dAnette Saving Baby Doe. Putnam, 2014 [240p]
ISBN 978-0-399-25160-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 6-9
A cry in a building-site portable toilet leads thirteen-year-old Lionel and his friend 
Anisa to the discovery of an abandoned newborn baby. Their swift delivery of the 
baby girl to the hospital leads to initial suspicion (especially by Anisa’s mother) that 
they are the baby’s parents themselves; even after that misunderstanding is cleared 
up, Anisa’s mother forbids Anisa to associate with Lionel. Meanwhile, Lionel, 
himself abandoned by his father, fears that Baby Doe will be hurt by a similar loss, 
so he schemes to bring her home with him. Realizing baby supplies cost money, a 
rare commodity around his house, he reluctantly agrees to take on some work for 
a local drug dealer, promising himself it will be a one-time job. Vigilante returns 
here to the same minority-dominated Brooklyn neighborhood (Lionel and Anisa 
are Latino) and group of kids featured in The Trouble with Half a Moon (BCCB 
1/11) and offers a similar straightforward and accessible narrative style. The plot 
unfortunately spirals out of control with a multitude of final tragedies, and the 
unlikely resolution to the Baby Doe story (the baby’s teenaged mother is identified 
and gets to take her baby home) is hardly as happy as the book paints it. However, 
Vigilante writes about tough subjects with an engaging clarity and a tender touch, 
making this story a gentle younger version of urban lit that might also appeal to 
reluctant older readers.  DS
March 2014 • 383
WAlterS, eric The Rule of Three. Farrar, 2014 [416p]
ISBN 978-0-374-35502-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R  Gr. 7-12
When computer-based technologies worldwide inexplicably stop working, the world 
descends into chaos. Sixteen-year-old Adam Daley, his police chief mother, his best 
friend Todd, and his neighbor Herb (a retired foreign operative) manage to calm 
the population of their small rural neighborhood and keep the impending violence 
at bay. Everyone agrees to pool their resources and work together, but it’s not long 
before Adam’s community of survivors is threatened by well-armed outside forces 
with no interest in cooperation. Desperate for any sense of joy, Adam takes to the 
sky in his ultralight airplane, and what starts as a lark may just become his neigh-
borhood’s best chance at fighting back and surviving. A post-apocalyptic narrative 
that is solidly grounded in the present day, this novel offers a compelling what-if 
scenario that will leave readers hugging their cell phones and worrying about their 
water supply. With its carefully crafted mix of bleakness and optimism, it manages 
to avoid the utter nihilism of much similar catastrophe-focused fare without feeling 
naïve. Much of this balance is the result of Adam’s narration, as he wants to believe 
in the best of people and in hope for his community’s survival, but he still manages 
to remain realistic in the face of death and ruin. A solid fit for fans of Pfeffer’s Life 
As We Knew It (BCCB 12/06), this disaster-survival story will also please readers 
who just enjoy watching teens take the lead.  AM
WAltMAn, kevin Next. Cinco Puntos, 2013 287p (D-Bow’s High School 
Hoops)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-935955-64-1 $16.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-935955-65-8 $11.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-935955-66-5 $11.95   
R* Gr. 6-9
Derrick “D-Bow” Bowen has the same hoop dreams as every other rising freshman 
hot shot—to speedily convince the coach and upper-class players on the high school 
team of his awesomeness and to become the starter that will lead them to the state 
title. D-Bow has speed on the court and power on the dunk, but his jump shots 
need a total overhaul. He’s willing to learn, and Coach Bolden is willing to teach, 
but skills development and the integration of a new member into the team take 
patience, a virtue in short supply among adolescent boys charged up for a stellar 
season. A private academy that regularly grooms players for Division I college play 
is wooing D-Bow as well, and his own calculus of individual success versus team 
loyalty is complicated by his parents’ debates over race, class, and neighborhood 
loyalty. Though the familiar smackdowns, beat-ups, and general comeuppances that 
typically lead to life lessons learned and victory in YA sports fiction are all pres-
ent, the book bypasses the customary convolutions in this sharply honed drama, 
making D-Bow’s story even more realistic and engaging for its sheer credibility. 
There are no good guys or bad guys here, no crimes or even bad decisions, just the 
strenuous effort of personal discipline and team-building that any athlete D-Bow’s 
age might encounter. Waltman’s acute ear for dialogue and effortless mastery at 
describing extended plays add the flash and velocity to keep readers fully invested 
in the outcome of the raggedy season. If the projected series develops as steadily as 
D-Bow himself, Waltman may take this one all the way.  EB
384 • The BulleTin
WArd, JenniFer Mama Built a Little Nest; illus. by Steve Jenkins. Beach Lane, 
2014 [38p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2116-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4945-9 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-8 yrs
This gallery of nest-building offers a look at fourteen different kinds of avian homes, 
each introduced with a rhyming quatrain, a brief prose description, and a full-
spread illustration of the relevant nest and habitat. The nest-building possibilities 
are impressively varied, ranging from a hummingbird’s wee spiderweb-reinforced 
home through a grebe’s floating twig island nest to an eagle’s huge eyrie. Though 
occasionally the scansion of the poetry stumbles, most of the verses are neat and 
effective and some genuinely witty, and the overall point about the intricacy and 
diversity of birds’ nests is effectively made. Jenkins’ familiar cut-paper art is some-
what more painterly than usual at times, with soft striations in the cactus wren’s 
feathering and smoky dappling on the breast of the swiftlet, but his intricate 
geometry remains typically effective in its conveyance of details in the spiky cacti 
or the hummingbird’s knobbly little nest. A note glossing some of the terms and 
giving more information about the bird species would have been welcome; there 
is, however, a list of bird-related website resources.  DS
WellS, roSeMAry Sophie’s Terrible Twos; written and illus. by Rosemary 
Wells. Viking, 2014 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-670-78512-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 2-4 yrs
It’s Sophie’s second birthday, and the terrible twos are right on schedule. She doesn’t 
want to wear her pink dress (“No pink!”), her new fairy wings won’t fly, and her 
breakfast blueberry pancakes are inedible (“Sophie didn’t like to eat two things 
mixed together”). Luckily for both Sophie and her increasingly vexed parents, 
Granny knows just what to do. In this charming return appearance of her latest 
rodent heroine, Wells captures the good, bad, and ugly of being a two-year old 
with accurate specifics and amusing readaloud phrasing (“I know someone who has 
turned the corner onto Grumpy Street,” says Sophie’s mother). Watercolors, ink, 
and gouache lend themselves well to contained but highly detailed scenes, where 
the personalities of central characters and mere passersby alike vividly emerge, 
particularly through their nuanced sartorial choices. Wells’ sweet but smart draw-
ings flesh out the well-paced text and provide additional humor, as when Sophie’s 
blocks stray into the page gutter during one of her temper tantrums. The size and 
detail of the pictures make this a good lap read, with plenty to talk about with those 
young readers who will sympathize with Sophie and covet her winning birthday 
present—in a lovely nod to Max and his wolf suit, a sabretooth tiger costume that 
displays the wild thing within every toddler.  AA
March 2014 • 385
ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons: resourCes for teAChers And LIBrArIAns
MAcdonAld, MArgAret reAd Teaching with Story: Classroom Connections to 
Storytelling; by Margaret Read McDonald, Jennifer MacDonald Whitman, and 
Nathaniel Forrest Whitman. August House, 2013 227p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-939160-72-0 $24.95
Organized around “Seven C’s of Storytelling,” this practical, straightforward guide 
from legendary authority MacDonald and her co-authors walks librarians and educa-
tors through the process of incorporating storytelling into classroom. Community, 
Character, Communication, Curriculum, Cultural Connections, Creativity, and 
Confidence are each explored, with chapters focusing on the general benefits of 
storytelling, the specific technical skills stories might help develop with different 
aged students, along with the text of two to three stories for use. The chapter on 
Communication, for example, discusses the significance of storytelling when it 
comes to emergent literacy with preschoolers as well as its usefulness in develop-
ing writing skills and reading comprehension in older kids. Cultural Connections 
examines the way storytelling ignites curiosity about other cultures, and the chapter 
provides tips on how to use students’ cultural backgrounds as a springboard, utilize 
stories from other cultures respectfully, and provide opportunities to cross cultural 
interactions. The tales included span the globe, varying in origin from Britain to 
Pakistan to Brazil. Perhaps most useful is the third part of the book, which cites 
specific Common Core standards that storytelling can fulfill and references research 
studies that will help teachers and librarians make the case that “Once upon a time” 
might be more valuable in the classroom than another worksheet.  KQG 
386  •  The BulleTin
Abuse–fiction: Kiely
Accidents–fiction: Stower
Adventure: Fry; Khoury; 
Mikaelsen; O’donnell; Oliver; 
rylander
African Americans: nelson
African Americans–fiction: Chan; 
Hegamin; reynolds; Waltman
Aliens–fiction: Castellucci; 
O’donnell 
AlternAtive HiStOry: Moore
Animals–fiction: litwin
AntHOlOgieS: Berman; Johnson
Appearance: gordon 
Art and artists: ehlert; rubin
Art and artists–fiction: Fitzgerald
Autism–fiction: Kehoe
Babies–fiction: vigilante
Basketball–fiction: Waltman
Bears–stories: Benton
Behavior–stories: Wells
BiBle StOrieS: napoli
BiOgrApHieS: ehlert; Kerley; 
nelson; rubin 
Biology: Stewart 
Birds: Stewart; Ward
Birds–fiction: Samworth 
Birds–stories: esbaum
BOArd BOOKS: Church
Bodies–stories: Church 
Body modification: gordon
Books and reading–fiction: Bick; Fry
Books and reading–stories: Benton
Brothers and sisters–fiction: Hart-
nett; Kehoe; polisner; reynolds 
Bullies–fiction: Marcionette 
Cannibalism–fiction: gill 
Cats–stories: gravett
Chickens–fiction: Marko
Chimpanzees–fiction: Schrefer
Cities–stories: Bluemle
Crime and criminals–fiction: Bock; 
giles; lynch; reynolds
death–fiction: Chan
depression–fiction: Bock
depression, the–fiction: rosengren
deteCtive StOrieS: turnage
disasters: Cooper
disasters–fiction: napoli
drug abuse–fiction: Bock
dystopias–fiction: Walters
eating disorders–fiction: Shahan
england–fiction: Hartnett 
Ecology: Schrefer
Ethics and values: Arnett; Hegamin; 
Jones; Khoury; Skinner; vigilante 
Families: rubin
Families–fiction: Bock; gill; Hart-
nett; Schmidt
Families–stories: Wells
FAntASy: Berman; Bick; Fry; 
gardner; Moore; rule; rutkoski; 
Starmer
Farms–stories: Scheffler
Fashion: gordon
Fathers–fiction: green
Fires: Cooper
Floods–fiction: napoli
Flying–fiction: Walters
FOlKtAleS And FAiry tAleS: 
Johnson; Jones
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in All-CApS 
refer to genres and appeals. in the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
March 2014  •  387
Friends–fiction: Chan; Marcionette; 
Starmer; Stevens
Friends–stories: donaldson
games–fiction: Oliver; Skinner
gays and lesbians–fiction: Berman
ghosts–fiction: Harnett; turnage
glBtQ people–fiction: Berman
grandparents–fiction: Chan; Fitzger-
ald
grandparents–stories: Macgregor
grief–fiction: Mikaelsen; polisner; 
Serle
growth–stories: Hood 
Hamsters–stories: Freytag
HiStOriCAl FiCtiOn: Hart-
nett; Hegamin; rosengren
History, U.S.: Cooper 
Hockey–stories: Macgregor
HOrrOr: Bick
Hospitals–fiction: Shahan 
HuMOr: Benton; Czukas; donald-
son; Freytag; gibbs; gill; gravett; 
litwin; Marcionette; Marko; Of-
fill; Samworth; turnage; Wells
identity–fiction: Skinner
imagination–stories: gravett
islands–fiction: litwin
Kidnapping–fiction: Starmer
latinos–fiction: vigilante 
Literature, American: Kerley; 
Mutén
Magic–fiction: gardner
Mental illness–fiction: Bock
Mothers–fiction: Khoury; rosengren
Moving–fiction: Schmidt
Music and musicians–fiction: rule
MySterieS: Fitzgerald; gibbs; 
giles; lynch; turnage
Nature study: Stewart; Ward
Orphans–fiction: gardner; lewis; 
Schrefer
pandas–poetry: Muth 
pets–stories: Freytag; gravett; Offill
plants–stories: Hood
pOetry: Muth; nelson; Scheffler; 
Ward 
poverty–fiction: Oliver
priests–fiction: Kiely
prom–fiction: Czukas
rain–stories: Bluemle
rape–fiction: Stevens
Readers theater: tracy 
Reading aloud: Hartnett; Muth
Reading, easy: litwin; Marko
Reading, reluctant: Stower 
relationships–fiction: Czukas; 
Hegamin; lynch; polisner; Serle; 
Shahan; Stevens
revolution–fiction: rutkoski
rHyMing StOrieS: Bluemle; 
esbaum
romance–fiction: rutkoski; 
Schmidt; tracy
SAtire: Samworth
Schools–fiction: Marcionette; ry-
lander
SCienCe FiCtiOn: Arnett; 
Castellucci; Khoury; O’donnell; 
Skinner
Seasons–poetry: Muth
Secrets–fiction: giles; gill; green; 
Kiely; Starmer; tracy; vigilante
Ships and sailing–fiction: napoli
SHOrt StOrieS: Berman; John-
son
Siblings–stories: esbaum 
Sisters–fiction: Serle 
Slavery–fiction: Hegamin
Sloths–stories: Offill
Space travel–fiction: Arnett; Castel-
lucci
Spies–fiction: rylander 
Sports–fiction: green; Waltman 
Superheroes–fiction: Marko 
SurvivAl StOrieS: lewis; Mi-
kaelsen; Walters
time travel–fiction: Moore
tOddler BOOKS: Church; Wells
tourette syndrome–fiction: reynolds
twins–fiction: Khoury
verSe nOvelS: Kehoe; Mutén
videogames–fiction: Skinner
voyages and travel–fiction: Arnett; 
napoli
World War ii–fiction: Hartnett; 
lewis 
Worms–stories: donaldson
Writers and writing–fiction: Mutén
Writers and writing: Kerley; nelson 
Zoos–fiction: gibbs 
 N. Charles Street • Baltimore, MD  • ... • .. • www.press.jhu.edu/journals
BOOKBIRD
A Journal of International Children’s Literature
Roxanne Harde, E
Published by the International Board on Books for 
Young People (IBBY).
Published quarterly
: - / -: -
The BULLETIN of the 
CENTER for CHILDREN’S BOOKS
Deborah Stevenson, E
Provides concise summaries and critical evaluations 
of current children’s books.
Published monthly (except August)
: - / -: -
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE*
R. H. W. Dillard, E--C
Amanda Cockrell, E
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published annually
: - / -: -
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE 
ASSOCIATION QUARTERLY*
Katharine Capshaw Smith, E
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published quarterly
: - / -: -
The LION and the UNICORN
A Critical Journal of Children’s Literature
David L. Russell, Karin E. Westman, 
and Naomi J. Wood, E
An international theme- and genre-centered 
journal committed to a serious, ongoing discussion 
of literature for children.
Published three times a year
: - / -: -
*Please contact us for more information or to join.
Johns Hopkins University Press Journals in 
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE
