T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by The Johns Hopkins University Press
March 2007
Vol. 60   No. 7
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
March 2007
Vol. 60 No. 7
281  The Big PicTure
 
 Remembering Mrs. Rossi  by Amy Hest; illus. by Heather Maione
282  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
283  • Please Write in This Book  by Mary Amato; illus. by Eric Brace
294  • No Sword Fighting in the House  by Susanna Leonard Hill; illus. by True  
 
 Kelley
310  • I Hate Books!  by Kate Walker; illus. by David Cox
311  • Max Counts His Chickens  written and illus. by Rosemary Wells
313  • X-Indian Chronicles:  The Book of Mausape  by Thomas Yeahpau
315  ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons
317  suBjeCt And use Index
280 • The BulleTin
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
 
 
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the  
 
 
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Hope Morrison, Reviewer (HM)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Cindy Welch, Reviewer (CW)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Katrina Bromann
Melissa Zilic
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print or electronic $80.00; combined print & electronic $112.00; multiple in-
stitutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, $50.00; students, 
$15.00. In countries other than the United States, add $13.20 per subscription for postage; subscrib-
ers in Canada and Mexico add $9.35. Single copy rate: $9.00. Volumes available in microfilm from 
ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche 
from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be 
made payable to The Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Divi-
sion, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 
410-516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/jour-
nals/advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.uiuc.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2007 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image by Heather Maione from Remembering Mrs. Rossi ©2007.  Used by permission of 
Candlewick Press.
March 2007 • 281
the BIg PICture
Remembering Mrs. Rossi
by Amy Hest; illustrated by Heather Maione
Annie Rossi is eight years old, leading a quiet life with her professor father and 
schoolteacher mother in a “tall brick building on a wide winding street called 
Riverside Drive” in New York City, when Mrs. Rossi dies suddenly of pneumonia. 
Now Annie is finding her way through the landscape of loss, helped by her loving 
father and by the creation of her mother’s sixth-grade students: a memory book 
entitled “Remembering Mrs. Rossi.” Hest’s four chapters correspond roughly 
to the seasons, with a focal event in each, beginning with Annie’s receiving the 
memory book in late fall; winter brings a school-closing snow that sends Annie 
to college with her dad; spring brings the celebration of Annie’s father’s birthday; 
and summer brings a vacation by the shore and an unauthorized walk into town 
with the girl next door. 
Death is no stranger to children’s literature, and dying often makes for 
powerful fiction, but that’s not the direction this book takes. Remembering Mrs. Rossi 
isn’t a dramatic story of tragedy but the basic everyday-life story it looks like, with 
its generous-sized print and illustrations of home and classroom activity—it’s just 
that here mundane reality has taken an unexpected path. The easygoing chapters 
deftly lace Annie’s bereavement into her and her father’s daily life, so that Annie’s 
activities have a familiar quotidian focus even when they’re touched with longing 
for her mother. This treatment allows the book to tackle the kinds of loss that 
sometimes escape examination: the disappearance of family memories, the inability 
to take family operation for granted, the vanishing of a partner in intimacy. Annie 
isn’t just robbed of a beloved parent but also of the pattern her mother brought to 
Annie’s life (her father “doesn’t know the rules,” Annie thinks in sad frustration 
when important customs go unobserved. “Mommy knows!”), and she’s upset at the 
unfairness as well as the loss itself (“Everyone has a mother, and she wants one, 
too. She wants her very own mother, now!”). As a result, the book conveys loss 
in terms that all kids can understand regardless of their personal experience, and 
youngsters with different flavors of parental loss (parents’ leaving of the house can 
have a similar impact to parents’ leaving of the world) will recognize the grieving 
and the undermining of normal existence. 
Hest’s fluid present-tense narrative is rich with character and feeling; 
she’s tenderly perceptive in her exploration of bereavement at the third-grade level, 
but she’s also skilled at creating a vivid, believable protagonist going through her 
changed days. The respectful focus on description rather than didacticism allows 
characters the full spectrum of emotions in response to the situation (the book 
concludes with “Remembering Mrs. Rossi” itself, containing the believably varied 
282 • The BulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
contributions of Mrs. Rossi’s students), an approach that’s more reassuring than 
an overt emphasis on adjustment. This treatment means that Annie’s bereavement 
isn’t presented as a novelistically convenient smooth progression but a more real-
istically complicated experience. She enjoys new experiences and old habits with 
her father or an adventure with her summer-cottage neighbor, but she’s still hit by 
her mother’s absence at unpredictable as well as predictable times. She’s comforted 
by her dad, the memory book, and her own unique memories of her mother, but 
there are days where it’s still a struggle to make it through without her mother’s 
loving presence. 
Ultimately, Annie is a credible kid who’d be fine literary company in any 
circumstance; readers will therefore particularly empathize with her in the face of her 
tough year, and she’ll speak for many kids undergoing their own family upheavals. 
Black-and-white line-and-wash art has the same friendly accessibility as the text. 
(See p. 294 for publication information.)
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
AdA, AlmA Flor, ad. Tales Our Abuelitas Told: A Hispanic Folktale Collection; 
ad. by Alma Flor Ada and F. Isabel Campoy; illus. by Felipe Dávalos, Viví Escrivá, 
Susan Guevara, et al. Atheneum, 2006 [128p]
ISBN 0-689-82583-8 $19.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 6-10 yrs
This collection of twelve tales opens with an introduction describing their cultural 
origins and discussing the “cultural crossroads” of Spain, with its strategic geographic 
position and historical role in intercontinental exploration and colonization, and 
the intersection of indigenous and colonial Spanish culture in the New World. The 
stories themselves are a combination of old favorites and tales newly discovered 
during research for the book, and each entry is followed by a narrative commentary 
from either Campoy or Ada, in which personal reflections, source notes, and edito-
rial license are detailed. The stories themselves range in length from the six-stanza 
poem “The Castle of Chuchurumbé” to the thirteen-page “The Little Horse of 
Seven Colors,” and most are set in pastoral mountain landscapes; there’s a good mix 
of animal characters (including the legendary Ratón Pérez) and humans (includ-
ing popular figures such as Juan Bobo). Unfortunately, the retellings themselves 
lack polish, with the dialogue often choppy and the pacing slow; the collection 
is therefore more useful as a resource for selected tales and as a study in folklore 
and the historical evolution of folklore. Nonetheless, libraries that offer bilingual 
storytimes and serve populations who may be familiar with the stories may still get 
extensive use out of this volume. The stories are sprinkled with illustrations from 
four different artists of Hispanic descent, each of whom brings a distinct style to 
the collection; final illustrations not seen.  HM
March 2007 • 283
AmATo, mAry Please Write in This Book; illus. by Eric Brace. Holiday House, 
2006 97p
ISBN 0-8234-1932-0 $16.95   
R Gr. 2-5
“Hello, boys and girls, you have found this book! I hid it in the Writer’s Corner, 
hoping you would. During Center Time, you can come to the Writer’s Corner 
and write in this journal. Write about anything you want.” These opening lines 
deliver both the premise of the story and what will eventually become the central 
conflict of this comic and clever read. It doesn’t take the students of Ms. Wurtz’s 
elementary-school classroom long to discover the blank notebook; soon they are 
writing back and forth to one another in praise (“A message to Lizzy from Yoshi 
. . . I love your poem. And your picture. You are sooo talented”) and in putdown 
(such as Luke’s suggestion that Lizzy has smelly feet). What quickly arises is a battle 
of the sexes, wherein the boys write gross things and draw nasty pictures and the 
girls come back with rules (“New rule by Lizzy: You may draw pictures as long as 
they are nice!”) and doodles of rainbows and bunny rabbits. Throw into the stew 
a few supporting roles (Carmen, who is always worried about getting in trouble; 
Milton, who really wishes the class would just write facts and who doodles to scale; 
Keesha, who is obsessed with horses), and you’ve got a brilliant cast of easily iden-
tifiable grade-school archetypes and heaps of humor all delivered in this inviting, 
seemingly handwritten format. The central tension is between bossy, smart Lizzy 
and Luke, who uses the pages of the journal to compose short works of fiction that 
offend half the readers and delight the rest; eventually the students overcome their 
conflicts and work together to write one big story. Amato never strays from the 
journal format, getting maximum story for modest helpings of text and thus making 
this perfect for novice readers. Brace’s comic sketches, sprinkled throughout the 
pages as if doodled by the students, successfully match the persona of each writer 
and contribute greatly to the realistic journal feel of the volume. This would adapt 
well to a reader’s theater piece, and it will certainly offer boundless entertainment 
to the many solo readers who are lucky enough to find it.  HM 
Auch, mJ One-Handed Catch. Holt, 2006 248p
ISBN 0-8050-7900-9 $16.95   
R Gr. 4-7
Just a moment’s carelessness when helping in his father’s meat market sends Norm 
Schmidt off to the hospital lapsing into shock with a meat grinder still attached 
to his left hand (“Whatever you do, don’t sell that chopped meat I made. . . . You 
gotta do a new batch”). That matter-of-fact-attitude and wry, slightly grim sense 
of humor will carry him through the coming sixth-grade school year as he relearns 
how to carry out everyday tasks when he’s short one hand. Tying shoelaces, but-
toning a shirt, and stocking canned goods are challenging enough, but Norm’s 
determined that he’ll also make the baseball team—no mean feat because, as his 
best friend, Leon, bluntly points out, he was never all that good a player to begin 
with. Still, Leon’s encouragement, Mom’s tough love, and his own motivation and 
resourcefulness get him to his goal, and he picks up a new buddy with a couple of 
social problems of his own along the way. Auch loosely bases Norm’s story, set in the 
late 1940s, on the experiences of her husband, who also lost a hand in an accident. 
This no doubt goes a long way toward accounting for the authenticity of detail 
as Norm figures his way past physical problems, and the lack of self-pity (tearful 
frustration at times, but never self-pity) that marks his character. There’s very little 
heart-wrenching here, but plenty of intentional and unintentional joking among 
284 • The BulleTin
the guys whose curiosity over the missing hand is strong but whose attention span 
even for disaster is remarkably, and credibly, short. Kids will be fascinated with just 
how Norm learns to cope, and Norm won’t mind a bit if they watch.  EB
BArnes, JenniFer lynn Tattoo. Delacorte, 2007 [272p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90363-4 $11.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-385-73347-X $7.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 6-8
Bailey and her three best friends didn’t go to the mall looking specifically for tat-
toos, but as they search for the perfect accessories to wear at an upcoming school 
dance, they decide that the mysterious temporary tattoos they find at a new kiosk 
will attract attention. Indeed, the tattoos do have quite the impact: each girl is now 
endowed with a power (telekinesis, pyrokinesis, telepathy, and prophecy), and the 
quartet is burdened with the seemingly impossible mission of stopping the wrath-
filled Alecca, who seeks untold power and vengeance and will stop at nothing to 
achieve her goals. Things become a bit complicated: Alecca is one of the three fates, 
driven by rage and heartbreak after she discovers the other two in a passionate 
embrace; Bailey is a centuries-old descendant of the fates, and her powers turn out 
to be permanent rather than controlled by the temporary tattoos; and hundreds 
of high-school kids will die in three days if the four friends can’t put together all of 
the pieces and save the day. Part mystery, part romance, and part girly adventure, 
the storyline is lightning paced and humorous. Unfortunately, the writing is not as 
engaging as the plot: overwrought dialogue, heavy exposition, and soon-to-be-dated 
pop-culture references weaken the overall impact. In addition, the underlying moral 
that perfection is not only unattainable but also undesirable is starkly incongruous 
with the fact that the four heroines (gorgeous, brilliant, and altruistic) are, in fact, 
perfect. Despite these issues, this wry novel may be an easy sell to junior-high girls 
who will likely admire the secure friendship of the four, sympathize with their oc-
casional weaknesses, and cheer their impressive (if unlikely) victory.  AS
BAuer, mArion dAne A Mama for Owen; illus. by John Butler. Simon, 
2007 32p
ISBN 0-689-85787-X $15.99   
Ad 4-6 yrs
Owen the baby hippo has become quite the literary celebrity these days (see 
Hatkoff’s Owen & Mzee: The True Story of a Remarkable Friendship, BCCB 5/06, 
or Winter’s Mama, BCCB 5/06); here veteran author Bauer takes a more fictional 
look at his popular story. The book starts by chronicling Owen’s happy life with 
his mother, which comes to a sudden end when “the rain fell and it fell and it fell,” 
swelling the river until it washes Owen and his mother out to sea. When the waves 
wash him alone back in again, a lonely Owen finds a tortoise, colored and shaped 
just like Owen’s mother, and he adopts Mzee as his new mother. The story suffers 
from indeterminate genre—it’s too factual to be simply fiction and too fictional 
to work as a true story (the tale elides over factual details such as human interven-
tion and Owen’s move to the wildlife park, as here he basically finds Mzee on his 
own when he’s washed up), and it’s reductive in its flat insistence that Mzee is a 
mother substitute; nonetheless, it’s a well-spun story with gentle repetition and 
careful structuring bolstering the telling. Soft, misty textures and dusty lilac tones 
predominate in the acrylic and colored-pencil illustrations, wherein the modestly 
anthropomorphized hippo and tortoise beam like contented boulders; the result 
March 2007 • 285
is a little on the sweet side—it’s the prettiest tsunami ever seen—but it’s also vi-
sually uncluttered and darn near kid-irresistible. While kids will likely recognize 
that the story isn’t, in cold examination, quite as upbeat as the telling, this softly 
cushioned account may be a useful version for audiences not old enough for the 
more informative Hatkoff book. A brief author’s note fills in some of the factual 
blanks in the story.  DS
BirdsAll, oliviA Notes on a Near-Life Experience. Delacorte, 2007 [224p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90385-5 $17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73370-4 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-12
“Something is broken in my family,” thinks fifteen-year-old Mia as her parents’ 
relationship becomes overtly strained; in fact, her father soon moves out, leaving 
Mia, her older brother, Allen, and her younger sister, Keatie, flailing to make 
emotional and practical sense of their upended family life. There’s also a good 
change for Mia: her brother’s inseparable friend, Julian, on whom Mia has long 
had a crush, is now returning Mia’s interest, but will she even be able to enjoy this 
one welcome development as she struggles with the effects of the family cataclysm? 
The topic of divorce may have lost its literary trendiness, but it’s still a shattering 
reality for a large number of families every year, and Birdsall treats the issue with 
keen perception. Her fluid and articulate writing gives Mia a thoughtful, poignant 
voice as she contemplates the destabilization of her family constellation (“I want 
to know how adults decide when the truth is necessary and when it isn’t, and if 
there’s some kind of age requirement for it,” she thinks as she finally grasps how 
serious the parental breach really is). It’s a particularly sharp portrayal of the way 
all the wounded in the family go to ground separately (the hurting parents aren’t 
really helping or even seeing their hurting children, which is why Mia’s brother 
gets away with skipping school and getting drunk) and of the ripple effects of such 
a trauma, with Mia’s best friend frustrated at being always the support and never 
the supported. Readers will appreciate the frankness of this exploration, but they’ll 
also cheer Mia’s romantic success and her progress toward wholeness in the face of 
familial fracture.  DS
Birdseye, Tom A Tough Nut to Crack. Holiday House, 2006 113p
ISBN 0-8234-1967-3 $16.95   
R Gr. 3-6
After Cassie Bell’s father finds out that his own father had an accident on his John 
Deere (in truth, he had already fallen off the tractor when it crashed into the neigh-
bor’s sliding glass door), Cassie, her dad, and her eight-year-old brother, Quinton, 
depart Portland, Oregon, for Dad’s old Kentucky home. To make matters more 
interesting, Cassie’s father hasn’t spoken to her grandfather in decades. Expecting 
Grandpa Ruben to be a miserable, ornery old coot, Cassie is both pleasantly surprised 
and ultimately confused to find him a jolly, gentle man with a knack for bad jokes 
and a keen sense of humor. The titular “tough nut” is the challenge of figuring out 
what exactly happened between her dad and grandpa to cause years of silence, and 
Cassie sets about solving this mystery with gusto. Cassie is a splendid protagonist; 
she has a quick and humorous knack for assessing people’s characters as well as a 
tendency to fall into some pretty entertaining situations, most of which deal with 
her role as a displaced city girl stuck on a farm (most notably her attack by wild 
turkey). The novel is effectively paced, with the central conflict introduced almost 
286 • The BulleTin
immediately, and the details necessary to understanding that conflict subsequently 
delivered to great effect. Outside of the Bell family, there are only a few other char-
acters, namely the neighbor Vicki Higgins and her son TJ, and each character brings 
a unique point of humor to the storyline without detracting from the central plot. 
The story ends well, not in the happily-ever-after sense but in the believable sense 
of a family with baggage committing to work through that baggage together. Fans 
of family fiction and humor alike will be drawn to Cassie’s quest.  HM
cAmPBell, PATTy Robert Cormier: Daring to Disturb the Universe. Delacorte, 
2006 287p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90074-0 $17.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-385-73046-2 $14.95   
R Gr. 9-12
Young adult librarian Patty Campbell is a longtime friend, fan, and literary biogra-
pher of the late Robert Cormier, and all of that shows in what is labeled a “literary 
appreciation” of his work, which builds on her 1985/1989 title Presenting Robert 
Cormier  but adds substantial amounts of new material. Beginning with three 
chapters that introduce his life and legacy as the most influential writer of young 
adult fiction to date, she proceeds to offer straightforward analyses of each of his 
novels for young people. Although her “appreciation” leaves little room for detrac-
tors, critics, or even thoughtful skeptics, her commentary is useful in unpacking 
Cormier’s complicated plots and pointing out the narrative structures, themes, 
and intentional use of symbols and motifs in the works. Her major contention 
is that Cormier is nothing less than a literary genius who took care to layer his 
work; casual readers will find satisfaction in the crust of an exciting story, while 
those who care to dig will be rewarded with rich veins of symbolism and metaphor 
that reinforce multiple thematic perspectives on evil, isolation, and the necessity 
of the individual to take a stand. She adopts a tactful biographical approach to 
Cormier’s themes, repeatedly emphasizing that though Cormier’s vision and plots 
may be dark, his intentions are like his personality—well meaning, respectful of 
young readers, and ultimately gentle. Her hagiographic tone will doubtless inspire 
suspicion—has anyone ever been this nice?—but if the beloved Bob has or had 
personal detractors, no one’s come forward yet. Despite the adulation, however, her 
analyses of the individual books are solid and instructive. English teachers would 
do well to familiarize themselves with the content here; not only does it offer good 
discussion fodder, but it’s also potentially the stuff plagiarized term papers are made 
of. An extensive bibliography and lists of resources, reviews, awards, and interviews 
are provided.  KC
cheshire, simon The Prince and the Snowgirl. Delacorte, 2007 [160p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90359-6 $11.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-385-73342-9 $8.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-12
The prince of the title isn’t really a prince, but a prince lookalike; in fact, Tom earns 
a helpful income from appearing professionally as the double of Prince George, 
the young (and fictional) heir to the British throne. This resemblance also draws 
the girls, except, unfortunately, the one girl Tom would really like to draw: bril-
liant and beautiful Louise, his good friend and skiing teammate, who’s currently 
involved with the very shallow Allan. When a trip to the ski championships results 
in Tom’s being mistaken for the real Prince George at the posh hotel where they’re 
March 2007 • 287
staying, he decides to make the most of it (“Consider possible consequences? Me? 
Nahh”) in the hope of impressing Louise, a scheme that backfires when the real 
Prince George turns up at the hotel as well. Tom’s offhand, sardonic narration is 
often genuinely charming, and Louise, who’s both a real babe and a rapturous lover 
of advanced physics, is nicely original as the protagonist’s dream girl; the book 
enjoys making some points when the real Prince George proves to be a spoiled 
and selfish troublemaker, a considerably lesser being than Tom’s incarnation (and 
Tom’s mother’s dream) of him. Though there are a few glitches—the subplot sur-
rounding Tom’s friend Jack is forced and the mistaken-identity whirl tips into the 
sitcommy—the book largely manages to be bright as well as breezy, and fans of 
romance will enjoy this frosty and amusing outing.  DS
coBurn, Ann Glint. Eos/HarperCollins, 2007 423p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-084724-7 $18.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-084723-9 $17.99   
R Gr. 5-8
As young children, Ellie and her younger brother, Danny, acted out complex 
adventures featuring Argent, a fictional character whom they created to distract 
themselves during difficult times. Five years later, Danny has disappeared on his 
eleventh birthday, and Ellie, frustrated with her exclusion from the police search, 
begins an unofficial hunt for him. Meanwhile, Danny, drugged and rapidly de-
clining, only knows that he seems to be in a concrete basement, and he returns to 
Argent’s story to comfort himself. As Ellie pushes herself beyond her usual timidity 
to face her increasingly creepy boyfriend, the growing accusations directed at her 
father, and her own fear as she discovers ominous clues about her brother’s location, 
Argent’s story takes a parallel path, as Argent begins a quest to save a kidnapped 
baby dragon and along the way determine her own destiny. Intriguingly, there are 
two potentially separate novels that constitute this British import: both Ellie and 
Argent are well-developed and vivid protagonists, and their individual stories over-
lap only through Danny, whose imagination gives Argent life and whose absence 
drives Ellie to reconsider hers. The result is a compelling mystery (complete with 
convincing red herrings) and a creative, rich fantasy, both of which are sufficiently 
well told to satisfy their respective audiences.  AS 
colemAn, rowAn Ruby Parker Hits the Small Time. HarperTempest, 
2007 [240p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-077630-7 $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-077628-5 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-8
Ruby Parker has been playing Angel, a character on a soap opera (“Angel’s main 
thing is finding out stuff and stopping it in the nick of time”), since she was six; 
now that she’s thirteen and going through a physically awkward stage, her career on 
the show is in peril. Confiding in her parents is out, because they’ve just split up, 
leaving Ruby attempting to sort out her pain at the family breakup and her worry 
about her job and her identity on her own. This British import is clever in its depic-
tion of Ruby as a young television star, who gets loads of fan mail from yearning 
kids seeking guidance (Ruby’s smooth, highly scripted responses are ruefully ironic 
in light of her own turmoil) but who’s so completely credulous that she believes 
every self-serving word in her jealous co-star’s interviews. Ruby’s narration is also 
believably limited even as it’s articulate about the pain, anger, and awkwardness of 
288 • The BulleTin
a kid dealing with a parental divorce (“I felt like hurting my mum and dad was the 
only thing I could do to make them see how much they were hurting me”). Plot 
contrivances mar credibility, however, often turning the book purposive, as when 
Ruby discovers that the class mean girl is just lonely and longing for real friends, or 
hackneyed, as when her actor schoolmate proves to be harboring a silent crush on 
Ruby, and the dialogue tends to be corny. The divorce story may still win readers 
with its sad familiarity, though, and the soap-star drama adds an appealing twist 
that may intrigue starstruck middle-schoolers.  DS
dAhl, lesley The Problem with Paradise. Delacorte, 2006 209p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90352-9 $17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73335-6 $15.95   
Ad Gr. 6-9
Casey is not looking forward to spending her summer on the island of Tartuga, 
along with her two little brothers, her father, and her father’s new wife, not to 
mention the sea turtles her father is studying and her father’s vaguely sinister re-
search assistant, Anderson. No email, no cell phones, no TV—this is not her idea 
of paradise. At first, her fears are confirmed: the island is undeniably beautiful, 
but it’s also unbelievably hot, and she soon tires of having to trail around after 
her younger brothers, making sure they don’t drown or get hurt. Enter Anderson’s 
hunky sixteen-year-old nephew, Jonah, who comes to help Casey’s father but soon 
finds Casey just as interesting as the turtles. Though she enjoys Jonah’s attentions, 
the quiet on the island has rendered Casey introspective, and she decides she needs 
to stop being so passive and whiny and figure out who and what she wants to be. 
When a tropical storm demands that she take charge and make smart, life-saving 
decisions, she rises to the occasion with a new-found maturity. Because of the mix 
of genres—adolescent romance, Will-Hobbs-like nature adventure, and environ-
mental fiction (turns out Anderson has been poaching turtles right under everyone’s 
nose)—this will especially appeal to girls moving out of their tomboy years, but 
the plot points range from device-y to downright melodramatic. If the appearance 
of a cute boy of just the right age on a deserted island doesn’t strain credibility, the 
fact that all adults leave the island just as a storm is brewing, Casey’s little brother 
breaks his arm, and Casey makes the grisly discovery of turtle shells in Anderson’s 
workshop might just break the faith. Then again, for an early adolescent fantasy of 
adventure and empowerment, this offers plenty of thrills and what-ifs.  KC  
douglAs, lolA More Confessions of a Hollywood Starlet. Razorbill, 
2006 [224p]
ISBN 1-59514-051-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Former drug addict and teen star Morgan Carter is now living “out” in Fort Wayne, 
Indiana, having had her identity exposed by a jealous classmate in True Confessions 
of a Hollywood Starlet (BCCB 2/06). She decides to stay and finish her junior year 
in as much obscurity as she can muster, partly to continue her so-far-successful 
recovery, and partly to see what, if anything, will become of her fledgling romance 
with the very down-to-earth Eli. The stalkerazzi are back, though, and the public-
ity, combined with Eli’s mother’s fears that Morgan’s problem with drugs is not in 
the past, proves too much for their relationship, which founders most of the year. 
Meanwhile, Morgan is trying to come to terms with unfinished business, namely 
the unreported rape that continues to haunt her, even more so now that her agent 
March 2007 • 289
stepfather is using her to court Harlan Darly, her rapist, as a client. Morgan’s stepdad 
orchestrates publicity that portrays actor Harlan as a scorned suitor with a broken 
heart, and Morgan is forced to play along, knowing that it is her fault that her 
stepfather’s career needs the boost in the first place. Finally, though, she decides 
to tell her story without naming names, hoping that it will help other girls just as 
her story of addiction and recovery has. In general, this sequel lacks the emotional 
depth and complexity of its predecessor; Morgan’s compelling need to get back at 
the girl who outed her is overdrawn nearly to the point of chick-lit banality, and 
the process of facing up to her rape is not as well depicted as was her rehabilitation. 
Readers will also be disappointed in Eli, who never emerges as the hero we want 
him to be, though that’s probably more realistic than not. Still, Morgan continues 
to be an effective and believable voice for the insecurities, small victories, pain, 
and perseverance of those in recovery, as well as for the humanity of the celebrities 
teens choose to worship.  KC 
Ehrhardt, KarEn This Jazz Man; illus. by R. G. Roth. Harcourt, 
2006 32p
ISBN 0-15-205307-7 $16.00   
R 5-9 yrs
Move over, “old man,” and play your knick-knack somewhere else; your familiar kid 
tune has been co-opted by a nine-man combo of jazz headliners: “This jazz man, he 
plays four,/ He conducts ’em through the score,/ With a ‘One, and-a-two, and-a-’/ 
Give the man a hand,/ This jazz man he leads the band.” A flip to the appended 
notes offers a thumbnail bio on Duke Ellington, who “tailored his sophisticated 
musical pieces to each of his dozen or so musicians, while anticipating how all of 
the instruments would sound in unison.” Ehrhardt therefore plays to two audiences 
at once—those who are content to sing along with the semi-predictable verses that 
highlight a variety of instruments, and those who are curious as to who the real 
guys depicted in the illustrations might be. Roth delivers effective caricatures in his 
collage and print pictures, with crisp-edged cut-paper figures, grainy texturing, and 
waves of hand lettering that undulate through the spreads in a potpourri of styles. 
A possible drawback to the overall design lies in the relatively pale hues laid against 
white background, which won’t show well in a group of kids ready for a singalong. 
But for kids who want to see what an all star performance would look like with 
players from Mingus to Parker to Armstrong, this is the gig to catch.  EB
EilEnbErg, Max, ad. Beauty and the Beast; illus. by Angela Barrett. Candlewick, 
2006 64p
ISBN 0-7636-3160-4 $17.99   
R* Gr. 4-6
Eilenberg sets his version of Beauty and the Beast in the nineteenth century, intro-
ducing readers first to a doting father, aptly named Ernest Fortune, who loves his 
three daughters to the point of being naïve about their faults. His motto, “Fortune 
by name, fortune by nature,” becomes a theme-unifying refrain for the principal 
characters, Beauty and Beast, whose names also seem to match and, in the case 
of Beast and Fortune, complicate their natures. Beauty is portrayed as a romantic 
with hopes of meeting her perfect prince, but she is not without a wry and gentle 
sense of humor. The story follows the familiar trajectory, with marvelously effective 
embellishments of the wonders the castle holds for Beauty—rooms and grounds that 
answer to multiple possibilities for solitary entertainment. Barrett takes advantage 
of the nineteenth-century setting to infuse her delicate, quietly colored watercolors 
290 • The BulleTin
with a gothic sensibility; her landscapes are alternately menacing or fanciful, as 
befits the mood of the characters and the tone of the story. Her Beast, though quite 
shudder-worthy, is supple and expressive, and he marries perfectly with Eilenberg’s 
subtle prose evocations of his inner turmoil. In a move of expert storytelling, the 
well-crafted tale ends where it begins, with a father’s beaming pride over his role 
in his daughter’s fortunate match. Even collections with a glut of Beauty and the 
Beast variants need to make room for this one.  KC  
FAn, nAncy yi Swordbird. HarperCollins, 2007 [240p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-113100-8 $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-113099-0 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 3-5
In this debut novel written by a sixth-grade girl, birds enact an epic struggle for 
peace and freedom. The cardinals and blue jays have been close friends, but now 
each group suspects the other of theft; soon, in spite of the fact that the accusations 
are based on little more than speculation and rumor, an all-out war is brewing 
between the two factions. There is much more at stake than stolen food, however, 
when both groups discover that a cruel hawk is collecting (and killing through 
relentless labor) slaves to build his dream castle in the hopes of achieving ultimate 
power, and the cardinals and the blue jays are next to be enslaved unless they join 
forces to defeat the overlord. Fan enlivens a well-worn and purposive plot by using 
avian protagonists, who make use of their talons, wings, and the natural resources 
around them to battle against oppression. Unfortunately, one of the key morals of 
the story, the suggestion that power and greatness can reside in each individual (even 
the smallest bird), is weakened through the inclusion of Swordbird, a mythic savior 
that ultimately gets the credit for saving the day. While the animal protagonists 
suggest comparisons with Oppel’s Silverwing trilogy (Silverwing, BCCB 1/98, etc.) 
or even Jacques’ Redwall books, this stand-alone novel is more of a fable than an 
adventure story, with action that occasionally lacks fire and a heavy-handed moral. 
The depth and range of the characters and their hard-won victory of freedom 
over tyranny compensates somewhat, though, and young readers (and budding 
authors) may find it inspiring to read a published book written by someone close 
to their own age. Integrated pencil sketches complement the text and make the 
novel more accessible for a younger audience, as do an effective map and list of 
major characters.  AS
FrAdin, JudiTh Bloom Jane Addams: Champion of Democracy; by Judith Bloom 
Fradin and Dennis Brindell Fradin. Clarion, 2006 216p illus. with photo-
graphs
ISBN 0-618-50436-2 $21.00   
R Gr. 6-10
Although Jane Addams is best known in her roles as advocate for immigrants and 
the poor through the establishment of Chicago’s Hull House, proponent of women’s 
suffrage, and Nobel Peace Prize–winning pacifist, the Fradins look beyond her many 
agenda to portray a privileged young woman with more education than opportunity 
for service, a chronic sufferer from depression, a gadfly battling Chicago machine 
politics, and quite likely a naïve dreamer who truly believed in the possibility of 
total disarmament. Their coverage of this beloved (and, at least for a time, reviled) 
woman is admirably broad but, in spots, somewhat uneven: whereas the authors 
fairly address evidence for and against Addams’ possible lesbian relationship with 
March 2007 • 291
Mary Rozet Smith, they pay far less attention to her Hull House collaboration 
with Ellen Gates Starr. Likewise, they offer adequate background for understand-
ing the public backlash against “Saint Jane” in World War I but overlook much of 
the controversy that accompanied her early reform efforts and her struggles against 
popular (if corrupt) alderman Johnny Powers, even among the population she most 
wished to serve. Nevertheless, this balanced view of Addams’ public and private 
personae, with its wealth of photographs that trace her journey from serious child 
through kind but steely adult, and careful source notes, bibliography, and index, 
should provide young adult readers with a solid introduction to one of the premier 
figures of the last century.  EB
gelleTly, leeAnne Gift of Imagination: The Story of Roald Dahl. Morgan 
Reynolds, 2006 160p illus. with photographs
ISBN 1-59935-026-2 $27.95   
Ad Gr. 6-9
Roald Dahl lived a fascinating life and left a legacy that extends far beyond his oeuvre 
of books for children. Readers will be surprised to learn that, with no medical train-
ing, he helped invent a shunt that relieved the effects of water on the brain (because 
his son suffered from that condition), and that he developed a post-stroke speech 
rehabilitation therapy for his then-wife that continues to be used in the United 
States today. They might also be surprised to realize that he wrote the screenplay 
for the fifth James Bond movie and for Chitty Chitty Bang Bang, and that he was 
a dog-fighter in WWII. It is fortunate that his life is so jam-packed with unusual 
and interesting events, because that will keep readers going through this rather dry, 
standard treatment of a multi-layered personality. The prose is straightforward and 
readable enough, and as such belies the energy that must have driven this formidable 
man of many projects and intense temperament. For instance, Gelletly chooses to 
relegate all discussion of his difficult and sometimes downright mean personality, 
which included what one publisher called his “bullying,” and which led to a divorce 
(his first wife called him “Roald the Rotten”), to one chapter inexplicably called “A 
Big Friendly Giant.” She also skims the discussion of the controversy surrounding 
charges of racism regarding the Oompa-Loompas, saying only that “after listening 
to complaints . . . Dahl found himself sympathizing with the critics.” Choosing to 
emphasize Dahl’s playfulness and his accomplishments, she presents a rather lim-
ited and perfunctory picture of the author, edited, perhaps, for children—a tactic, 
ironically, Dahl himself would likely resist. A timeline, bibliographies of Dahl’s 
publications and Gelletly’s sources, notes, websites, and index are included.  KC    
greene, sTePhAnie Sophie Hartley, on Strike. Clarion, 2006 152p
ISBN 0-618-71960-1 $15.00   
R Gr. 3-5
Nine-year-old Sophie Hartley (from Queen Sophie Hartley, BCCB 4/05) is beginning 
to feel victimized in her big, hectic family; it seems that every time she attempts to 
sneak out the back door to go to her friend Alice’s house, her mom nails her for not 
doing her chores. In fact, Mrs. Hartley is so tired of having to constantly remind 
her children of their duties that she comes up with a solution so that “everyone 
will know what they have to do, and when, without my having to say a word,” but 
from the moment she sticks the job board up on the fridge, tensions are high in 
the Hartley household. When Sophie and her thirteen-year-old sister, Nora, begin 
to notice that the boys get away with doing less work, the girls decide to go on 
strike (one night, they actually hide a bag of dirty dishes under Sophie’s bed rather 
292 • The BulleTin
than clean up after dinner); much to their shock and dismay, the Hartley parents 
strike back, refusing to do laundry or cook meals. This entertaining portrayal of 
domestic unrest will ring true to many young readers who have gone head-to-head 
with their parents; the Hartley kids know the situation is most dire for them when, 
at the times Mr. and Mrs. Hartley should be angriest, they are instead laughing 
together (“It was horrible to be in a bad mood and have the person responsible 
for it acting so happy,” Sophie muses). While the narration is a little overweighted 
with whining and complaining, the tendencies are justifiable in light of the plot; 
Sophie remains a bright and likable character, and the Hartley house, mess and all, 
proves a perfect setting for the story.  HM
hArley, Bill The Amazing Flight of Darius Frobisher. Peachtree, 
2006 160p
ISBN 1-56145-381-1 $14.95   
R Gr. 4-6
Darius is heartbroken when his father fails to return from a ballooning expedition, 
but his woes are just beginning. Instead of being allowed to stay with his lovable 
but slightly incompetent housekeeper, Miss Hastings, he is forced to move in with 
his crochety aunt Inga, who offers him only a bed in a damp basement. Menaced 
by a bullying neighbor, the abjectly lonely boy discovers three things that help him 
survive: a rickety bike, a kind librarian, and an eccentric old man who fixes bikes, 
and whom Darius is sure he saw flying on a bike late one night, though Daedalus, 
the old man, denies it. The story is well paced with some undemanding mystery, 
following a predictable path—Darius and Daedalus become friends, and when 
things look darkest for Darius, their friendship turns out to be the catalyst for his 
salvation in more ways than one—with a few unexpected turns. Character develop-
ment approaches the Dahl-esque here, with the larger-than-life villains one-sided 
and excessively rotten, though Harley does allow for a measure of forgiveness for 
Aunt Inga (it’s true that she was never nice to Darius, but Darius never gave her a 
chance either). Harley’s easygoing storytelling style will engage readers who like a 
mildly intrusive but not overly clever or ironic narrator. Suspense builds steadily 
for the perennially appealing put-upon orphan, beset on all sides by the vicious 
injustice of mean people, and the climax is spectacularly delivered by a miraculous 
trip on a flying bicycle built in a basement workshop; oh, yeah, this taps into some 
classic mechanic-geek fantasies. Dahl fans and budding engineers will enjoy the 
ride.  KC
hArness, cheryl The Tragic Tale of Narcissa Whitman and a Faithful History of 
the Oregon Trail; written and illus. by Cheryl Harness. National Geographic, 
2006 144p (Cheryl Harness Histories)
Library ed. ISBN 0-7922-5921-1 $25.90
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7922-5920-3 $16.95   
R Gr. 5-8
Raised in the religious fervor of the Second Great Awakening, Narcissa Prentiss 
was more than ready to hit the trail West and save Indian souls for the Lord—just 
give her a proper missionary husband and point the way. In fact, that turned out 
to be the easy part, as the mission society organizer introduced her to a very willing 
Marcus Whitman and, after a few months separation during which he went West 
to scout the optimal location for conversions, they were married and made their 
way to Oregon in the company of the Spaldings (a somewhat dour ex-suitor and his 
wife). However interested the Indians may have been in the white men’s religious 
March 2007 • 293
songs and tales, they had hoped for more practical “medicine” and certainly had 
no intention of giving up their beliefs for a pack of condescending encroachers. 
Narcissa’s tale therefore ended in massacre, and her distinction of being one of the 
first two white women to cross the continent earned her no more than a grave on 
the Pacific coast. Harness spends more of her narrative on historical background and 
details of the westward journey itself than on the unraveling relationship between 
the missionaries and their Cayuse “flock,” but she does a creditable job tracing the 
convergence of personal quirks and national movements, ernest intentions and 
tragic misunderstandings. Her black-and-white artwork is often crammed with 
detail to the point of murkiness, and the timeline that runs along the bottom of 
the text, which laudably includes a broad range of world events, also holds some 
glitches (Napoleon is reported dead in 1814, only to properly reappear at Waterloo 
in 1815; the Alamo is depicted at the 1836 battle in its post-1850 reconstruction). 
The chatty tone and fast pacing—not to mention the titular promise of a very bad 
ending—should nonetheless keep readers thoroughly engaged. A bibliography and 
index are included.  EB
hArPer, chArise mericle Flush!: The Scoop on Poop Throughout the Ages; written 
and illus. by Charise Mericle Harper. Little, 2007 [32p]
ISBN 0-316-01064-2 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 5-7 yrs
Thirteen poems humorously address aspects of excretory history in roughly chrono-
logical order, beginning with traditional uses of urine and precursors of toilet paper, 
proceeding to touch on Roman lavatorial habits and medieval European sanitation 
practices, then discussing the development of flush toilets, different global practices, 
and the technology for handling elimination in space. As poetry, the verses are 
ungainly and labored, with scansion and clear syntax tossed away in the dogged 
pursuit of often-strained rhyme; some of the facts conveyed are pretty vague as to 
time or place (there are no notes on sources, either). The subject is pretty hard to 
resist, though, and kids will be enraptured by the details of butt-wiping Romans, 
chamber-pot-slopping English, and sewer-touring Parisians. Each spread offers a 
sidebar of “Fun Facts,” while the concluding poem will encourage an enjoyably 
raucous finish as kids give vent to the suppressed with a resounding “POOPY! 
POOPY! POOPY!”  Though compositions are sometimes unbalanced, the acrylic 
and collage illustrations offer lots of lively elements, such as comic speech balloons 
and diagrams, to pore over and giggle at, if there’s any giggling energy left after the 
poopy humor of the verse. Youngsters not yet ready for the more solidly factual 
examinations of Nicola Davies (Poop: A Natural History of the Unmentionable, 
BCCB 11/04) or Susan Goodman (The Truth about Poop, BCCB 6/04) will likely 
enjoy dipping into this—just make sure they wash their hands.  DS
hershey, mAry The One Where the Kid Nearly Jumps to His Death and Lands in 
California. Razorbill, 2007 [288p]
ISBN 1-59514-150-2 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-8
When Alastair was eight years old, his ski trip with his father abruptly ended when 
Alastair jumped off of a ski-lift and broke his leg so badly it had to be amputated. 
Now he’s thirteen and a rebellious adolescent, reluctantly embarking on a summer 
in California with that same father, now divorced from Alastair’s mother. It’s a 
294 • The BulleTin
summer of surprises: his young stepmother, Skyla, is a double amputee herself, and 
her lovely niece, Jesse, turns out to be the girl Alastair bonded with on the plane 
ride—and also a soap-opera star. When Jesse coaxes Alastair into participating in a 
charity athletic contest with the soap’s cast, Alastair turns to a legendary local swim 
coach to transform him into an athlete, but he may have gotten himself into more 
than he’s bargained for. The story wherein a kid reshapes his character as well as 
his physique under a wise old mentor is a hoary plot indeed (Karate Kid is, in fact, 
explicitly referenced), and the book grabs at every sentimental twist possible, from 
Alastair’s father’s unexpected participation in the contest to the mid-race heart attack 
(and eventual death) of Alastair’s coach; plot tramples over likelihood and character 
consistency or development. The image of Alastair’s defining plunge off the lift is 
haunting, however, and the story interestingly operates not as a disability drama 
but as a coming-of-age/coming-to-parental-terms story, with Alastair’s amputation 
largely mentioned only in passing except in his self-claimed nickname of “Stump.” 
Alastair’s smart-mouthed narration may please readers with a taste for rebellious 
irreverence, and those who can overlook the predictability of the story may therefore 
applaud Alastair’s taking responsibility for himself and kicking competitive butt, 
with or without prosthesis.  DS
hesT, Amy Remembering Mrs. Rossi; illus. by Heather Maione. Candlewick, 
2007 184p
ISBN 0-7636-2163-3 $14.99   
R* Gr. 2-4
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 281, for review.
hill, susAnnA leonArd No Sword Fighting in the House; illus. by True 
Kelley. Holiday House, 2007 [32p]
ISBN 0-8234-1916-9 $14.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-4
This easy reader introduces Arthur and Lance, a pair of obstreperous brothers. Their 
mother hopes to win the Daffodil Days prize (a month’s supply of fertilizer) for her 
flowers, but when she’s out preparing, the boys break the important household rule 
of “no sword fighting in the house.” In the second chapter, the boys obey that rule, 
instead jousting on cowback in the yard—which results in bovine trampling of the 
contest daffodils; in the final chapter, the judge, keen to unload fertilizer, concocts a 
“most room for improvement” prize for the boys’ mother’s garden, and the spreading 
of the award is the boys’ punishment. Some of the jokes and vocabulary require a 
fairly high comfort level with the printed word, but readers will revel at the sardonic 
and absurd wit mustered in the spare prose (“I’m all a-twitter,” says a deadpan Dad 
about the prospect of Daffodil Days); chivalry-inclined youngsters will note that 
the whole thing is a modern-day romp of Arthuriana, between Dad’s hard work up 
at the castle, the boys’ taste for swordplay and jousting, and, of course, the names, 
including that of their neighbor, Gwenn. Kelley’s line-and-watercolor illustrations 
are poker-faced about the knighthood joke, making the scenes determinedly or-
dinary depictions of a rowdy pair of country kids and offering a broadly comedic 
complement to the text. With its combination of mayhem and dimensionality, 
this may appeal to older reluctant readers as well, and novices will find the silliness 
ample reward for their perseverance.  DS
March 2007 • 295
hodges, mArgAreT, ad. Moses; illus. by Barry Moser. Harcourt, 2006 32p
ISBN 0-15-200946-9 $16.00   
Ad Gr. 3-5
Never straying too far from the Book of Exodus, Hodges retells the story of the 
Israelite patriarch who led his people out of bondage in Egypt and set them on 
the journey back to the land of Canaan. Lingering over some episodes and gliding 
briskly past others, she begins with the plight of the Israelites at the time of Moses’ 
birth, the story of his discovery in the Nile by Pharaoh’s daughter, and his slaying 
of an Egyptian slave driver, then fast forwards through his stay in Midian (here 
unnamed), the encounter with the burning bush, and his successive meetings with 
Pharaoh and the subsequent plagues. The longest stretch of narrative then recounts 
the Passover and the flight through the Red Sea, and the account draws to an end 
with a brief mention of years of hunger and hardship ahead, the Ten Command-
ments, and Moses’ glimpse of the promised land just before death. In limiting the 
scope of Moses’ event-filled life and designating the climactic event as the flight 
from Egypt, Hodges seems to have fashioned a work best suited for Passover or 
Easter seasons. However, background on how the Israelites came to be in Egypt, 
details about preparing for the Passover and flight, and serious consideration of 
the generation spent in the desert are noticeably lacking. Moreover, although the 
telling is smooth and lucid, there is no particular poetry to the language to recom-
mend it over a good translation of a Tanakh or Christian Bible. Moser’s full-page 
watercolors, however, do add considerable drama, from the sun-drenched figure 
brushing dripping blood onto the lintel of his mud-brick house, to the eerie night-
time scene of a multitude of refugees crowded shoulder to shoulder as they await 
deliverance at the shore of the Red Sea. A final spread that features the tablets 
with the Commandments and contrasts ancient and modern Hebrew characters 
should also be of interest, particularly to readers accustomed to “numbering” the 
commandments differently.  EB
hume, lAchie Clancy the Courageous Cow; written and illus. by Lachie 
Hume. Greenwillow, 2007 [32p]
ISBN 0-06-117249-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-8 yrs
The only beltless cow in a herd of Belted Galloway cattle (black cows with a white 
band across their midsection), Clancy “was different, and nothing could be done 
about it.” His beltlessness proves to be an advantage, however, when it comes to 
getting into the rich pastures occupied by the fat Herefords, who can’t see the all-
black Clancy sneaking into the field at night. Clancy bulks up so well that he’s 
chosen to represent the Belted Galloways in the annual wrestling match that decides 
possession of the good grazing; when he wins, he declares that it’s time to “pull 
down the fence and be cows together,” a decision particularly celebrated by Clancy 
himself—and his Hereford mate, Helga. The acceptance-of-differences theme is an 
old standard, but Australian author Hume provides a singular and quirky explora-
tion of it; though the plot meanders to the point via the scenic route, the scenery 
is fairly entertaining, with the detailed examination of cattle wrestling particularly 
likely to get kids mooing with laughter. Stylized line-and-watercolor cartoons feature 
comically flat perspectives, with spare and simple backgrounds adorned with blocky 
herds of cattle peering at each other through googly eyes. With its sly silliness and 
dorky competitiveness, this is sure to tickle young human livestock.  DS
296 • The BulleTin
ichord, loreTTA FrAnces Double Cheeseburgers, Quiche, and Vegetarian Burritos: 
American Cooking from the 1920s through Today; illus. by Jan Davey Ellis. Mill-
brook, 2007 64p (Cooking through Time)
ISBN 0-8225-5969-2 $25.26   
Ad Gr. 6-9
It’s hard to resist food, as a subject or a substance, and Ichord makes it the focus 
of her social history. She divides her chronicle into three sections, the first 1920 
through 1959, the second 1960 to 1989, and at last 1990 until today, in each case 
emphasizing particularly significant directions or effects, whether it be the ration-
ing and victory gardens of World War II, the French cuisine popularized by Julia 
Child and other prominent chefs of the 1960s, or the contemporary concern with 
nutrition and overeating. The narrative is disjointed at times; quotes of questionable 
relevance appear in spots, and the recipes that conclude the chapters aren’t always 
completely germane or authentic (“Wartime Cake,” for instance, is unlikely to have 
actually involved cooking spray). National habits are often misleadingly treated as 
homogeneous in the earlier sections; there’s also little reflection on matters such as 
healthfulness or flavor until the more contemporary discussions, which is an odd 
lacuna in light of the obvious changes in emphasis in these areas over the years. There 
are plenty of edible infobites here, though, and readers will enjoy learning about 
the introduction of food phenoms such as Rice Krispies, TV dinners, and fast-food 
hamburgers. They’ll be intrigued to see the way the food landscape has changed, 
and they’ll join the author in pondering future possibilities. Line-and-watercolor 
spot art decorates the pages; an appendix gives instructions for expanding recipes 
for classroom use, a note describes the author’s research, and a bibliography and 
index round out the end matter.  DS
Johnson, KAThleen JeFFrie Gone. Brodie/Roaring Brook, 2007 [176p]
ISBN 1-59643-138-5 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
The son of alcoholics, his mother ostensibly on the wagon and his father institu-
tionalized after a drunken accident left him brain-damaged, Connor lives with his 
aunt and feels like he’s never really wanted anywhere. High-school graduation offers 
the hint of new possibilities, especially in his relationship with his young teacher, 
Ms. Timms, when it becomes clear that his crush on her is reciprocated. Soon the 
two are swept up into a passionate affair, a relationship Connor is determined will 
finally provide him with the love and belonging for which he’s always yearned. 
Needy, deprived Connor (“He’d always been invisible, that was just a fact of his 
life”) is credible in his conviction that romantic love will be his salvation, filling all 
his emptiness; the book never explicitly links his idolization of his teacher with her 
previously authoritative role or Connor’s inadequate mothering, but that’s a likely 
connection the book allows readers to make on their own. Ms. Timms, however, is 
overconveniently messed up from start to finish, suffering from drug addiction as 
well as judgment issues, and the flowery, romance-novel descriptions of the sexual 
encounters point toward a novel with a very different message about passionate 
attachments. Nelson’s Teach Me (BCCB 9/05) therefore is a more successful and 
poignant look at teacher-student romance, but the exploration of Connor’s hard 
road to finding a place in the world may still absorb readers.  DS
March 2007 • 297
Jones, Frewin The Faerie Path. Eos/HarperCollins, 2007 [320p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-087103-2 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-087102-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-9
Anita hoped that her sixteenth birthday would be a perfect day spent with her 
loving boyfriend. Instead, the couple is attacked while boating, and an injured 
Anita is plunged into a confusing morass of dreams, visions, and alternative reali-
ties. In the parallel world, Anita is Tania, the long-lost princess of Faerie. Slowly, 
Anita/Tania learns that a spell gone awry sent her from Faerie centuries ago, and 
she has been trapped in an Earth-bound reincarnation cycle since. Her boyfriend 
is there, too, though in Faerie he is the servant of her betrothed, sent to lure her 
back through whatever means necessary. Except for brief visits back into her hos-
pitalized Earth body, the heroine spends most of her time in Faerie, reconnecting 
with her adoring father, learning about the disappearance of her mother, and trying 
to recapture her lost life with the help of her sisters. Although it seems as though 
Anita/Tania must choose one permanent home, both feel equally familiar to her: 
she is reluctant to give up either her pleasant Earth life or her newfound magical 
existence in Faerie. Luckily, she is clever, daring, and brazen enough to attempt to 
have it all; she defeats the villain, gets her man, figures out how to cross between 
the two worlds, and determines a possible location for her mother, all in a few short 
weeks. Jones is careful to not let the inevitability of her heroine’s success weaken the 
dramatic tension of the novel: the protagonist faces daunting challenges, wrenching 
decisions, and genuine heartbreak as she strives toward her goals. In addition, the 
descriptions of Faerie are haunting and elegant; readers will easily understand why 
she is so reluctant to leave. Though the obvious sell is to fantasy buffs, romance 
fans will find the story of a love that literally crosses worlds to be a captivating and 
irresistible read as well.  AS 
Kelleher, vicTor Dogboy. Front Street, 2006 214p
ISBN 1-932425-76-4 $16.95   
R Gr. 9-12
In this Australian import, Kelleher explores the measure of man through the life 
of a boy raised by a dog. As a newborn, the abandoned Dogboy is nursed by a dog 
and raised along with his canine sister, tolerated as a presence on the fringe of the 
villagers’ lives. He learns to speak, though he refuses to learn the rules of grammar, 
and he learns the nuances of canine life, though the natural world never accepts him 
as a true dog. Loneliness and constant longing to fit in haunt Dogboy throughout 
his childhood, adolescence, and early adulthood as he travels in search of a real 
home. Existence is punishing for everyone, however, as crippling droughts, sectar-
ian violence, and human cruelty are dominant in most lives; Dogboy, without the 
guidance and protection of a family, suffers even more keenly than the rest. Kelleher 
has written a challenging novel: Dogboy, irascible and bereft of empathy, is rarely 
a likable protagonist, the wide range of the novel (birth through adulthood) is 
ambitious, and there are few happy endings (or even happy middles) for any of the 
characters, human or canine. However, there is an elegance, profundity, and richness 
of language that balances and complements the often-depressing plot. In addition, 
the troubling of the widely held belief that humans are superior to animals offers 
an intriguing philosophical issue that will likely haunt readers long after they finish 
the novel. Those searching for an absorbing, contemplative, and more sophisticated 
read than the standard YA fare will find that this story fills the bill.  AS
298 • The BulleTin
KrensKy, sTePhen Too Many Leprechauns: Or How That Pot o’ Gold Got to the 
End of the Rainbow; illus. by Dan Andreasen. Simon, 2007 32p
ISBN 0-689-85112-X $12.99   
Ad  5-8 yrs
Finn O’Finnegan, who “looked like a rogue and walked like a rascal,” returns to 
his hometown of Dingle, only to be informed that the town has been overrun by 
leprechauns who work noisily all day and night making fairy shoes and that no one 
in Dingle has slept for weeks with all the racket. Knowing a bit about leprechauns 
himself, Finn comes up with a plan that plays on the leprechauns’ own greed and 
pride, tricking them away so he can hide their gold by secreting it at the end of the 
rainbow. It is only when they promise to leave Dingle forever that he shows them 
where the gold is hidden, but in the end, it seems the leprechauns were secretly 
pleased, as “they’ve kept their gold at the end of the rainbow ever since.” The story 
is pretty tenuous; there’s not much style in the writing or energy in the characters, 
and the text blows right past the actual relocation of the gold. Nonetheless, it’s a 
lighthearted adventure, and its trickster elements play nicely into the pourquoi tale, 
resulting in a fanciful original piece that is well suited for readaloud. Anderson’s 
rich oil paintings, whether individually framed full-page scenes or double-page 
spread views, depict a pastoral Irish village with details and inhabitants that oblig-
ingly look the part: the round, rosy-cheeked leprechauns sport pointed green hats, 
buckle shoes, red thatches of hair, and wild, bushy eyebrows, and Finn’s long-
limbed, lanky figure stands in perfect contrast to the squat troublemakers. While 
an obvious selection for St. Patrick’s Day, this has year-round readaloud potential 
for young listeners.  HM
Krisher, Trudy Fallout. Holiday House, 2006 315p
ISBN 0-8234-2035-3 $17.95   
Ad Gr. 5-8
Gen Hardcastle’s father is obsessed with tracking hurricanes and protecting his 
family from the Red Menace; her mother is obsessed with her Tupperware busi-
ness and her work with the neighborhood Welcome Wagon; and Gen, well, Gen’s 
just happiest writing a bit of poetry, keeping her head above water freshman year 
in high school, tuning out her bickering parents, and avoiding friendships. The 
arrival of new schoolmate Brenda Wompers and her parents to Gen’s conservative 
North Carolina community is a shocker—the Wompers are dyed-in-the-wool 
atheists, outspoken critics of the school curriculum, disbelievers in the promise of 
a bright atomic future, and tacky dressers to boot. They’ve bought a well-estab-
lished souvenir business and converted it to a rag-tag venture, replacing key rings 
and candy with secondhand clothing and local history books, and drawing Gen 
into their circle of three. Gen thrives on the attention of these adults who invite 
her to express opinions, and she’s giddy with the prospect of a true friendship, 
yet she resists accepting their radical agenda wholesale and wishes they would be 
as tolerant of her religious beliefs as she is expected to be of their atheism. In the 
end, the issue won’t be resolved by Gen but by a combination of business failure 
and community pressure that drive the Wompers on to other pastures. Although 
Krisher forms a skeletal plot around Gen and Brenda’s status as losers at school and 
Mr. Hardcastle’s growing mania in building a fallout shelter, most of the novel is 
devoted to establishing polarized points of view through strained conversations: 
“In the event of a disaster, we’re protected by all the new interstate highways that 
can help us speed safely out of town”; “Ultraviolet rays are bad for your skin. I’m 
afraid public opinion has yet to catch up with science.” For really intriguing Cold 
March 2007 • 299
War–era fiction, consider David Almond’s The Fire Eaters (BCCB 5/04), but this 
might entertain readers who enjoy tales of kids bucking the system.  EB
lAnge, KAren e. 1607: A New Look at Jamestown; illus. with photographs by Ira 
Block. National Geographic, 2007 48p
Library ed. ISBN 1-4263-0013-1 $27.90
Trade ed. ISBN 1-4263-0012-3 $17.95   
R Gr. 4-8
There’s been a flurry of archaeological activity at the Jamestown, Virginia, site since 
remains of the original fort were discovered in 1994. With more than a dozen years 
worth of revised scholarship now available, the four-hundred-year anniversary 
of the colony’s founding promises to be more than an opportunity for patriotic 
platitude. Here Lange gives a brief history of the settlement and its tumultuous 
early years but also shows readers the way discovery of specific artifacts and the 
application of archaeological techniques help historians reinterpret seventeenth-
century Englishmen’s experiences. Counting copper artifacts and correlating them 
with dates yields patterns of trade between the whites and the Powhatans; correlat-
ing tree-growth rings with settlement dates suggests that the Englishmen weren't 
necessarily as lazy as they were once thought to be—they arrived during the worst 
drought in eight hundred years. Lange pays attention not only to the mercurial 
contact between the Powhatan and the English but also to intertribal alliances and 
rivalries that directly affected the way the newcomers would fit into established 
regional politics. She closes with discussion of the way the upcoming anniversary 
should best be marked—is “celebration” really an appropriate way to observe an 
event that not only displaced the original inhabitants but also took a fatal toll on 
the majority of settlers themselves? Source notes, an annotated bibliography, and 
an index are useful addenda; the meager explanation of the color photographs of 
historical reenactors (mostly taken at the reconstructed Jamestown Settlement, not 
the actual site of the fort) is buried deep in the annotation of a website. Nonethe-
less, this slim volume should please both history and archaeology enthusiasts and 
serve as that “one good book” to prep for a site visit.  EB 
lArson, KirBy Hattie Big Sky. Delacorte, 2006 289p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90332-4 $17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73313-5 $15.95   
R Gr. 6-9
There’s not much future in Iowa for sixteen-year-old Hattie Brooks, whose guard-
ian aunt is urging her to quit school and take a domestic job, so the opportunity 
to prove up a Montana homestead claim left to her by a deceased uncle seems 
a longshot worth taking. She’ll have the better part of one year to complete the 
fencing, bring forty acres under cultivation, and raise the nearly forty-dollar fee to 
own the property free and clear. Neighbors welcome her and assist wherever they 
can—advising on crop choice, stretching fence wire in spare moments, donating a 
few chickens, sharing heaving equipment, and offering moral support and friend-
ship. But Hattie’s particular closeness with the family of German immigrant Karl 
Mueller and his American wife, Perilee, catches the attention of Traft Martin, scion 
of a wealthy ranching family and head of a nativist contingent of townsfolk who 
whip up anti-German sentiments as World War I rages in Europe and claims the 
lives of American soldiers. Martin keeps Hattie wary and off balance—charming her 
with hints of romance one moment, cajoling her to sell her farm the next; reasoning 
with her about making ill-advised friendships, and then turning to thinly veiled 
300 • The BulleTin
threats. Hattie’s determination and loyalty to the Muellers is unshakable, but just 
when it looks like she will succeed, Nature throws a knockout punch worse than 
anything Martin or his ilk could devise. Larson’s tale is inspired by an ancestor 
who, as a single young woman, did prove up a Montana claim, but she turns to 
more common experiences of failure to fashion Hattie’s fictional story. With the 
literary Great Plains overpopulated by plucky 1800s girls on covered wagons, it’s 
refreshing to bring the homestead experience into the twentieth century and meet 
a strong-willed young woman who meets failure with dignity, shoulders her debts 
with good-natured resolve, and plans her future with cautious optimism.  EB
lAuBer, PATriciA What You Never Knew about Beds, Bedrooms, & Pajamas; illus. 
by John Manders. Simon, 2006 32p (Around-the-House History)
ISBN 0-689-85211-8 $16.95   
Ad Gr. 2-5
This title is bound to be a bit more, well, soporific than the crowd pleasing entry 
on Tubs, Toilets, & Showers (BCCB 7/01), but there’s still plenty of fun here to 
keep kids from dozing off. As Lauber makes her whirlwind tour of the world’s 
notable bedchambers, a pair of clear themes emerge—the lack of privacy in sleep-
ing arrangements until fairly recent times, and the disparity in nighttime comfort 
between the rich and poor. Fans of earlier titles in the Around-the-House History 
series will recognize the broad humor in Manders’ watercolor scenes: a barbarian 
stomping a comfy Roman bed into splinters at the fall of the Empire; travelers cram-
ming four to a bed plus cat and chicken in a medieval hall; a Gilded Age he-man 
modeling Dr. Jaeger’s wool head-to-toe sleep suit. It’s a fairly spotty and superficial 
overview, and readers will probably notice that there’s information missing at the 
most modern end of the spectrum, particularly in the arena of bed construction: 
waterbeds are never mentioned, much less inflatable mattresses, heated mattresses, 
or the ever-fascinating Murphy beds and coin-op massaging beds. And in the brief 
spread on nightclothes, there’s a nod to those who nap nekkid, but no reference to 
folks who favor snoozing in their skivvies. Recreational readers will still appreciate 
the breezy format, but don’t overlook the potential for an offbeat goodnight story 
for younger listeners.  EB
leAviTT, mArTine Keturah and Lord Death. Front Street, 2006 216p
ISBN 1-932425-29-2 $16.95   
R Gr. 7-9
Keturah, age sixteen, always assumed that she would eventually marry for love. 
After she follows a majestic hart deep into the woods and becomes hopelessly lost, 
however, she meets Lord Death, who apparently has more say over her future than 
she does. Keturah is clever and spirited, though, and she convinces the brooding 
Lord Death to give her one day to find her true love. Rather than focus solely on her 
search (even Keturah doubts her ability to find a fated romance so quickly), Keturah 
determines to secure the futures of her grandmother, her two best friends, and her 
bedraggled town before she dies, and she coaxes Lord Death into giving her small 
increments of extended life. Keturah does not seek to cheat her destiny, though, 
only to forestall it, and she would have willingly accepted her fate even if she hadn’t 
discovered her soulmate in Lord Death. The passionate relationship of Keturah and 
Lord Death, blossoming out of an early fascination and strong friendship, is both 
realistic and otherworldly. Leavitt integrates the sweeping romance with a timeless 
story of a headstrong girl who is certain that, given enough time, she can create a 
perfect world. And indeed, happy endings abound in the novel, though Keturah’s 
March 2007 • 301
notion of a faultless and effortless true love are fortunately banished in favor of 
a recognition that sacrifice and compromise accompany relationships as often as 
ideal moments do. Lord Death, mysterious and gorgeous, and Keturah, brilliant 
and beautiful, will be irresistible to romance fans as well as those who like a bit of 
passion woven into their fantasy.  AS 
lehmAn-wilzig, TAmi Passover around the World; illus. by Elizabeth Wolf. Kar-
Ben, 2007 [48p]
Trade ed. ISBN 1-58013-213-8 $15.95
Paper ed. ISBN 1-58013-215-4 $7.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 3-6
This global exploration of the Passover celebration takes a multicultural look at the 
Passover Seder, examining the customs and traditions associated with the holiday in 
eight different countries on four different continents. This is an intriguing idea: it 
makes perfect sense, in light of the way traditions hold sway at holidays, to use the 
holiday focus to explore the different traditions of Judaism in a number of countries. 
Many of the sections focus on Jews who are preserving traditions of regions they’ve 
left, which is a nice nod to this key aspect of holiday practice. Unfortunately, the 
customs are described in fictional pieces that are inclined to be both cheesily and 
awkwardly written, and the included recipes sometimes seem more like filler than 
culturally relevant dishes. While the faces in the thickly painted color illustrations 
are somewhat vaguely articulated, the featured celebrants are a clearly multicultural 
crowd; monochromatic taupe pencil drawings decorate textual margins. Opening 
sections outline the basics of the Passover Seder; each chapter sports a map (though 
it’s odd the Gibraltar map doesn’t actually show the island of Gibraltar) and includes 
sidebars that provide additional information. A “Passover Potpourri” section gives 
tidbits about another handful of traditions, there’s a concluding roundup spread 
of recipes, and a glossary explains Hebrew and Yiddish terms.  DS
lesTer, Julius Cupid: A Tale of Love and Desire. Harcourt, 2007 198p
ISBN 0-15-202056-X $17.00   
R Gr. 9-12
The epic romance of Cupid and Psyche is revisited in this tale, which is narrated by 
an omniscient, wry observer whose asides are as much the story as the relationship 
itself. Although he checks in now and then with a personified version of the story, 
who demands he stay on track, it is clear that the nameless narrator is responding 
to and being changed by the timeless and universal elements of this bond just as 
readers are expected to. And indeed, there are few more sweeping star-crossed loves 
than that of Cupid, immortal god who is bound to Venus, his mother, and Psyche, 
incredible mortal beauty who has incurred the jealous wrath of Venus. As with 
Block’s recent classical revision Psyche in a Dress (BCCB 11/06), the main elements of 
the story will be familiar to fans of the myth, though the tone here is quite different. 
One of the most intriguing aspects of the novel is the more intricate exploration 
and explanation of the often-opaque motivations of the mythic characters: why 
is Cupid unable to resist his mother, why doesn’t anyone rein in Venus, and why 
would Psyche favor her sisters over her beloved? Occasionally, the narrator seems 
a bit over-clever and obtrusive, though the voice is mostly a humorous, insightful, 
and sophisticated complement to the central romance. With its classical content 
and the sexy allure of the romance, this novel would be an ideal text to pair with 
a more orthodox version of the myth for a high-school audience; philosophical 
debates about fate, family, and love will abound.  AS 
302 • The BulleTin
mArillier, JulieT Wildwood Dancing. Knopf, 2007 [416p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-93364-6 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-83364-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 6-8
Jena is not the oldest of her family’s five daughters, but she has always been the 
protector and virtual leader in her family. In particular, she is the enforcer of the 
rules each full moon when the sisters leave their castle in Transylvania and travel to 
an alternative, magical world where they spend the night dancing at a ball. Though 
the most important rule for the five sisters is that romances are forbidden, Tati, 
the oldest sister, cannot help but transgress when she falls in love with a shadowy, 
tortured man who appears to be a prisoner of the Night People. While most in-
dividuals in the magical world are complex and mysterious, the Night People are 
downright dangerous, and the sisters’ involvement with them has implications 
in their own world as well. Warm, lush descriptions of the intricate elegance of 
the extravagant fantasy world contrast with the stark, often harsh environment 
of the girls’ everyday lives where their mother is dead, their father is ill, and their 
power-hungry cousin is trying to take over their lives. Unfortunately, as rich and 
well developed as the two settings are, the characters (especially the humans) are 
often flat and predictable: each sister is locked into a personality type (the scholar, 
the romantic) and none of them grow or change, even as their two worlds shift in 
profound ways. In addition, several key elements of the story are left unexplored, 
and readers may feel swept towards a conclusion that therefore feels sudden and 
incomplete. However, Marillier successfully juggles the inclusion of an impressive 
array of supernatural elements (including portals, vampires, and frog princes) while 
still creating a cohesive novel. Fantasy aficionados hoping to delve into an intricately 
explored otherworldly milieu may therefore, even if all of their questions are not 
answered, find this a satisfying read.  AS
mAss, wendy Jeremy Fink and the Meaning of Life. Little, 2006 289p
ISBN 0-316-05829-7 $15.99   
R Gr. 5-8
Jeremy doesn’t stray far from his front door in the residential enclave of Murray 
Hill in Manhattan, and why should he? Everything he’s ever needed has been 
within walking distance. The summer of his thirteenth year promises change, 
though, when a box inscribed with the words “The Meaning of Life, for Jeremy 
Fink to Open on His 13th Birthday” arrives in the mail, sent from a lawyer who’s 
been holding it since Jeremy’s father passed away five years earlier. The box has an 
intricate locking mechanism, and Jeremy is persuaded by his best friend, Lizzy, to 
go to extraordinary (and illegal) measures to try to find the keys which the lawyer 
says he lost. After getting caught, they are sentenced to community service with an 
eccentric old man who requires them to deliver strange packages to people, each 
of whom has something to teach them about the meaning of life. If this sounds 
contrived and purposive, it turns out that it is; the entire scenario was orchestrated 
by Jeremy’s dad, who believed in the prophecy of an Atlantic City fortune teller 
that he would die when he was forty, and who wanted to leave his timid son an 
adventure that would help him think about the things that really matter. There is 
nothing subtle about the lessons Jeremy learns, but the didacticism is forgivable 
because the story wears its theme on its cover, so to speak, and the lessons are worth 
learning. Jeremy’s relationship with Lizzy is refreshingly straightforward; they remain 
kind and open with each other despite the budding concerns of puberty that usu-
March 2007 • 303
ally strain boy-girl friendships. The jaunt through the city and the encounters with 
strange and wise old characters have a distinctly Konigsburg feel to them; readers 
who enjoy books like From the Mixed-up Files of Mrs. Basil E. Frankweiler (BCCB 
3/68) will warm to this.  KC
mcPherson, JAmes m. Into the West: From Reconstruction to the Final Days of the 
American Frontier. Atheneum, 2006 96p illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-689-86543-0 $22.95   
Ad Gr. 6-9
In the decades immediately following the Civil War, the United States underwent an 
intense period of nation building, both mending a country ripped apart by war and 
populating territory along its ever westward shifting frontier. McPherson attempts 
to integrate these two movements in a series of two- to four-page chapters that offer 
a brief overview of a given theme. The history is solid and accurate, but coverage 
is generally too shallow to engage a reader with genuine interest in a topic, and the 
writing is often too dry to stimulate interest for a newcomer. Although there is a 
rough chronological order to the presentation, topics lurch between political and 
social concerns, and some topics, like the entry on scalawags and carpetbaggers, 
amount to little more than an extended definition. The wealth of full-page period 
photographs and engravings (some of which have been tinted) are likely to be this 
title’s most powerful draw, and students trolling for ideas for research projects may 
well unearth a theme that piques their interest. Given the somewhat haphazard 
organization, the thorough indexing will be appreciated; a bibliography of print 
materials is included, but a list of websites is far too general (e.g., www.nps.gov; 
www.loc.gov) to be of much assistance without specific search strategies.  EB
morPurgo, michAel, ad. Beowulf; illus. by Michael Foreman. Candlewick, 
2006 92p
ISBN 0-7636-3206-6 $17.99   
R Gr. 6-9
With its grisly battles between horrific monsters and resolute heroes, Beowulf has 
inspired much of western fantasy literature, from epic quest novels to comics, and 
thus persists as a culturally significant narrative. In this accessible, three-chapter 
retelling, Morpurgo uses alliterative adjective-noun pairs and modifiers—“death-
dealing dragon,” “sainted survivor,” “foul flame-fiend,” etc.—to effect a heroic 
rhetorical prose style as he describes the Geatish warrior’s larger-than-life encounters 
with Grendel, his sea-hag mother, and a dragon who got up on the wrong side 
of his hoard. Foreman’s watercolor illustrations are somewhat lighthearted for the 
subject matter, failing to evoke the bloody mood of this classic work despite some 
creative interpretations of monsterdom. Still, Morpurgo’s prose, especially in a 
spirited readaloud, will fire imaginations and elicit the heart-pumping, wide-eyed 
response that has kept this tale alive and vigorous through the ages.  KC
murPhy, Jim Desperate Journey. Scholastic, 2006 278p
ISBN 0-439-07806-7 $16.99   
R Gr. 5-8
If the work involved in hauling a boat along the 1848 Erie Canal wasn’t hard enough 
for twelve-year-old Maggie Haggerty, her father’s propensity for brawling with bul-
lies (just to put them in their place, you understand) adds a further complication. 
With payment on their boat coming due and a critical shipment of stoves and plows 
requiring prompt delivery to Buffalo, Papa and his brother Henry are arrested for 
304 • The BulleTin
beating up another canal-boat worker and leaving him near death. While they await 
trial, it’s up to Mrs. Haggerty, Maggie, and younger brother Eamon to complete 
the shipment and claim the bonus money needed to keep the family both literally 
and figuratively afloat. Initially the Haggertys are too proud to accept the proffered 
aid of canal workers eager to repay past kindnesses, but they are eventually forced 
to accept the assistance of Billy Black, an old man who appears from nowhere and 
sticks to them like a burr, insisting that the Lord himself has sent him to help as 
atonement for past sins. Plot points are a bit pat, as the family hauls and poles its 
way to Papa’s acquittal and a predictably happy ending, but the details of canal life 
and the personal struggle of two squabbling siblings to mute their bickering, at least 
temporarily, are credible and involving, and even the mysterious Billy Black turns 
out to be merely eccentric rather than bizarre. Historian Murphy prewrites a note 
with more information about canal life, and a glossary is included.  EB
noyes, deBorAh When I Met the Wolf Girls; illus. by August Hall. Houghton, 
2007 [40p]
ISBN 0-618-60567-3 $17.00
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
The story of Amala and Kamala, feral girls found in India in 1920 in, the account 
goes, a wolf’s den, is an enduringly fascinating one; Noyes, author of One Kingdom: 
Our Lives with Animals (BCCB 12/06), offers a fictionalized exploration of the girls’ 
arrival and lives at the orphanage that housed them. The narrator, Bulu, is another 
orphanage resident, and she tells in lyrical ragged-right prose of her fear of the wild 
jungle on the other side of the orphanage fence, the girls’ disruptive presence at 
the facility, and her fascination with troubled, nearly language-less Kamala, who’s 
left on her own after her little sister dies. The narrative arc is a quiet one, with 
Bulu gradually adapting to Kamala and seeing in her a symbol of the taming of the 
jungle that Bulu had once feared, but the story will be compelling in its strange-
ness even to those who don’t catch the subtle signals of the story’s direction. Hall’s 
acrylic illustrations are a little disconcertingly cartoonish in their toothy-grinned 
orphanage residents with stick-figure limbs, but there’s a thematically appropriate 
echo of Henri Rousseau in the depiction of the tenuous boundary between the 
wild and the domestic. This will make an illuminating partner to Yolen’s nonfiction 
The Wolf Girls: An Unsolved Mystery from History or to Gerstein’s story of another 
feral child, Wild Boy (BCCB 12/98). An author’s note provides more information 
about Amala and Kamala and gives her sources.  DS
o’connell, reBeccA Penina Levine Is a Hard-Boiled Egg; illus. by Majella Lue 
Sue. Brodie/Roaring Brook, 2007 [176p]
ISBN 1-59643-140-7 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
Penina’s main problem is her bratty, attention-seeking little sister—until her sixth-
grade class is asked to write letters from the Easter Bunny for creative writing, and 
Penina, who’s Jewish, can’t bring herself to complete an assignment that’s a participa-
tion in another faith’s holiday. She and her teacher, Mrs. Anderson, find themselves 
at an impasse, since Penina’s receiving a zero for the assignment until she produces 
it; when Mrs. Anderson attempts a non-apology apology (“She’d said the words 
‘I’m sorry,’ but she’d also said ‘If’), Penina’s intemperate response gets her in further 
trouble. The setup isn’t very contemporarily likely, and the book is a little muddy 
March 2007 • 305
about some of Penina’s practices (a comment by her best friend suggests that there 
may be further restrictions, such as keeping kosher, that are never explained), but 
it’s also believably nuanced in its depiction of Penina’s dilemma. It’s plausible that 
her resistance semi-randomly crystallizes (and that she also thinks the assignment 
is dumb), but that once it takes hold, it’s serious; Mrs. Anderson is also a credibly 
complex character, genuinely well meaning yet also using good intentions to cover 
her stubborn dogmatism. Careful explanations of Passover traditions ensure that 
gentile readers won’t get left behind, and youngsters in general will sympathize with 
a kid who stands up for herself when she’s wronged (and gets away with crossing 
a teacher). Final illustrations not seen.  DS
osTow, micol Emily Goldberg Learns to Salsa. Razorbill, 2006 200p
ISBN 1-59514-081-6 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Emily is shocked and panicked when she learns her grandmother has died, but her 
feelings become disturbingly complicated when she realizes that it is not her beloved 
paternal grandmother, with whom she has dinner every Friday, who has passed, but 
her Puerto Rican mother’s mother, a woman whom she has never met. Instead of 
taking the cross-country road trip she had planned with her best friends, she finds 
herself in Puerto Rico for the summer, staying on with her mother, who has lapsed 
into an uncharacteristic depression. Emily finds her Puerto Rican relatives rigid 
and cold, especially her haughty and distant same-age cousin, Lucy. When Lucy 
has a pregnancy scare and needs her cousin’s help, though, the girls become closer, 
realizing that it wasn’t Emily’s mom who abandoned her Puerto Rican family but 
Emily’s grandmother who rejected her daughter for marrying a Jewish man; this 
new understanding encourages Emily to embrace her newfound heritage. This is 
an intriguing concept, and a lot of kids in families of mixed ethnicity will recognize 
the challenges Emily faces. The energy implied by the title never quite manages to 
infect the pages of this coming-of-age narrative, though, since the action is tame 
and languid. Emily’s emotional passivity, legitimate though it may be, makes for 
affect-dampened storytelling; in multiple scenes, Emily gets to the door of Lucy’s 
room in an attempt to talk to her, only to chicken out at the last minute, and that’s 
often what the book feels like for the reader, a door that almost, but doesn’t quite, 
open, leaving readers to fill in the emotional gaps with their own experiences. For-
tunately, Emily’s awakening maturity and growing appreciation of her extended 
family will resonate in ways that help them do just that.  KC
PATerson, KATherine Bread and Roses, Too. Clarion, 2006 275p
ISBN 0-618-65479-8 $16.00   
Ad Gr. 5-8
The 1912 strike in the Lawrence, Massachusetts woollen mills finds Mama and 
Anna, the two breadwinners of the Serutti family, out among the protesters, young 
Rosa Serutti near frantic for their safety, and life-hardened Jake Beale little better 
than a street urchin now that he has no paycheck to bring home to his abusive, 
alcoholic father. Rosa and Jake’s lives brush briefly when she grudgingly allows 
him to spend a couple of nights in their cramped but heated rooms—a kindness 
he repays by swiping some of their food. Later, the two are thrown together again 
when many of the strikers’ children are sent to out-of-town host families to avoid 
the growing hostilities, and Rosa and Jake end up in Vermont in the care of Italian 
stonecutter Mr. Gerbati and his wife, Rosa under her mother’s orders and Jake as 
a stowaway under an assumed name. Roughly the first half of the novel revolves 
306 • The BulleTin
around the strike and Rosa’s anxieties, with walk-on appearances by labor leaders 
Elizabeth Gurley Flynn and “Big Bill” Haywood, while the second half shifts to 
life at the Gerbatis and Jake’s ambivalence toward the couple, who offer him both 
the care and the strict discipline he has never experienced. An awkward support-
ing cast and a deliriously happy ending are less than convincing; moreover, with 
backstory about the wage cuts that ignited the strike relegated to endnotes, Paterson 
dodges the irony of how protective legislation that promises long-term benefits to 
women and children can result in short-term havoc to individual families’ means of 
support. Nonetheless, she remains a smooth storyteller, and this is an informative 
exploration of a key moment in U.S. labor history. While this title isn’t up to the 
standard of Lyddie (BCCB 2/91) or Auch’s Ashes of Roses (BCCB 7/02), it may get 
younger readers launched on labor problem fiction.  EB 
PreluTsKy, JAcK Good Sports: Rhymes about Running, Jumping, Throwing, and 
More; illus. by Chris Raschka. Knopf, 2007 [40p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-93700-5 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-83700-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 3-5
Esteemed poet (and now Children’s Poet Laureate) Prelutsky turns his attention 
to the sporting world in just under a score of brief poems. Featured sports include 
karate, track, ice skating, and Frisbee in addition to the more usual sports of foot-
ball, basketball, and baseball, and they’re all seen from a kid’s-eye view, with some 
participants victorious, others defeated, and others simply out for a good time. The 
verses are more jingly and forced than usual for Prelutsky, and the absence of poem 
titles means it’s occasionally unclear when one poem ends and the other begins; 
nonetheless, this is a cheerful collection with a reassuring acknowledgment that 
expertise isn’t everything. Raschka’s illustrations feature his familiar daubed figures, 
here in juicy, gleaming tones of royal blue, coral, and lime. The verses’ bounce 
and sass particularly lends them to oral uses such as reading aloud or even group 
recitations, and the topic may draw ordinarily poetry-resistant kids to celebrate the 
rhythm of words as they celebrate the rhythm of game play.  DS
PrimAverA, elise The Secret Order of the Gumm Street Girls; written and illus. by 
Elise Primavera. HarperCollins, 2006 441p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-056947-6 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-056946-8 $16.99    
Ad Gr. 4-6
The girls who live on Gumm Street can’t stand one other. Safety-obsessed Pru thinks 
Franny is foolhardy and Cat is a show-off; average Franny is jealous of Cat and 
thinks Pru is a nerdy prude; Cat thinks Pru is a big baby and Franny is beneath her 
notice. When Ivy moves into a ramshackle house on Gumm, Franny finally thinks 
she might have a friend, but forces conspire to keep them apart, or one force, to be 
exact—a Jinx that has been following Ivy for the past seven years. Over the course 
of this intricately plotted tale, Ivy discovers that she is descended from Dorothy 
Gale and that the inhabitants of Oz aren’t finished with the Gales quite yet. The 
girls have to overcome their distaste for one another and use each of their particular 
talents to escape the clutches of the wicked witch responsible for the Jinx and her 
nieces, lately of Oz but now living in the strange pink underground world of Spoz. 
There’s lots of fun to be had here in this adventurous big-print story, but much of 
it is of the sort that tries too hard to be zany and clever and ends up feeling rather 
March 2007 • 307
corny and forced. For instance, the witches of Spoz, which is a world dedicated 
to unorthodox and sometimes murderous beauty treatments, have enslaved and 
taken as their food source a race of inoffensive potato people who live under Spoz 
in the muddy land of Spudz—well, you get the picture. If you don’t, there is lots of 
quirky, Quentin Blake-style spot art to augment the wackiness. The above-ground 
plot is more successful, with clues about Oz connections carefully laid out and real 
pathos created by the endearing character of Mr. Staccato, the caretaker of the silver 
slippers that rightfully belong to Ivy. Serious Oz fans won’t take this seriously, but 
for those who’ve seen the movie and who like their humor on the over-the-top side 
of goofy will enjoy sifting the clues and putting the puzzle together.  KC
redsAnd, AnnA Viktor Frankl: A Life Worth Living. Clarion, 2006 150p il-
lus. with photographs
ISBN 0-618-72343-9 $19.00   
Ad Gr. 10 up
Considered one of the most influential books of the twentieth century, Viktor 
Frankl’s Man’s Search for Meaning, which recounts Frankl’s first-hand experiences 
during the Holocaust and his development of the principle of logotherapy, is re-
quired reading at many high schools and colleges. This in-depth biography offers 
additional details on the man behind this groundbreaking volume, from his child-
hood in Vienna, to his practice as a doctor before the war, to graphic accounts of his 
experiences in four different concentration camps, to the years following liberation 
when he worked to heal himself and share his ideas on logotherapy with the world. 
The basic principle of logotherapy is that finding meaning in life can enable a person 
to survive, even in the worst conditions. Frankl taught logotherapy long before 
his own first-hand experiences with suffering, working as a young medical student 
with suicidal patients in Vienna hospitals before the war, but it is his application 
of the principles of logotherapy to his experiences in the concentration camps that 
is most remembered. Unlike many well-known Holocaust survivors, Frankl was a 
figure of prominence, most notably in the areas of psychology, social psychology, 
and psychoanalysis, long before the war, and these areas are explored in some depth 
in the earlier part of the book. Unfortunately, the writing is stodgy, the narrative 
sometimes disjointed, and the explorations of Frank’s work densely written, making 
this tough going for the average high-school reader. Nonetheless, those particularly 
interested in Frankl’s unusual character character will find this worth pursuing. 
Of special interest to readers will be the section which explores both positive and 
negative reception of Frankl and Man’s Search for Meaning. Though Frankl is not 
a biographical figure sought out by many, those already interested in the man and 
his writing will find more context and information here. Archival photographs, 
including images of the Holocaust and Frankl family photos, and maps are included, 
as are an author’s note, source notes (which disappointingly fail to provide page 
citations), a bibliography, recommended reading, and an index.  HM
ruBy, lois Shanghai Shadows. Holiday House, 2006 284p
ISBN 0-8234-1960-6 $16.95   
R Gr. 5-8
The Shpanns are among the lucky ones, at least if avoiding probable annihila-
tion is an adequate definition of good luck; the Jewish family has the means and 
the will to leave their comfortable life in Vienna in 1939 and make their way to 
Shanghai, where a multinational community of emigrants, refugees, and expatri-
ates of all stripes has been established under a reasonably tolerant Chinese regime. 
308 • The BulleTin
Quarters are cramped, work is hard to come by, especially for gifted violinist Mr. 
Shpann, and news trickling in from Europe is disquieting, to say the least, but Ilse 
and her parents and brother Erich are simply relieved to be far from the coming 
war. With Japan’s entry into hostilities, however, the war manages to find them, as 
the Shanghai Jews face an increasing number of restrictions that finally culminate 
in enclosure in a ghetto, near total loss of job opportunity, and the now real pos-
sibilities of disease and starvation. The Shpanns are also plagued with a peculiar 
complication—Mrs. Shpann is disclosed by the authorities to be an “enemy” alien, 
technically still married to an American whom she never officially divorced after 
leaving him decades earlier, and she is sent to an internment camp. Narrator Ilse 
relates how the family fares from their arrival in 1939 until their post-war departure 
for America, making do under increasingly repressive conditions, dealing with the 
fallout from the bombshell about her mother’s past, and feeling both guilty and 
grateful to have escaped the fate of their compatriots back home. Ilse is a believ-
able character, healthy and resilient enough to weather physical hardship, naïve 
enough to flirt with resistance activities as a boredom-busting lark, savvy enough to 
work the system when her mother and brother are desperate for aid, and teenager 
enough to eke friendships and even a bit of romance out of her situation. Here is 
an underexplored corner of World War II that historical-fiction buffs will definitely 
want to examine.  EB
sAyres, meghAn nuTTAll Anahita’s Woven Riddle. Amulet/Abrams, 
2006 352p
ISBN 0-8109-5481-8 $16.95   
R Gr. 6-10
When teenaged Anahita, a seminomadic Afsharian carpet weaver living in nine-
teenth-century Iran, learns that her father wishes to arrange a marriage between 
her and the extremely undesirable Khan, she is overcome with rage and fear. For-
tunately, Anahita shares with her father, the leader of their tribe, a love of riddles, 
and she somehow convinces him to host a contest in which prospective husbands 
must guess at a riddle that she has woven into her wedding carpet, or qali. Sayres’ 
novel follows Anahita and her tribe over the course of the year, preparing to mi-
grate in the spring, traveling with the tribe to its summer camp, returning to the 
village for the fall and winter. Anahita’s tale is interwoven with the stories of Reza, 
a teacher, Arash, a prince, and Dariyoush, a fellow Afshar, all of whom wish to 
win Anahita’s hand. While a historical novel dealing with a young girl avoiding an 
arranged marriage is hardly groundbreaking, Sayres’ novel is beautifully written 
and rich in cultural descriptions and characterizations, making it a standout. Of 
particular note is the effectiveness with which Sayres draws the suitors; all three 
are extremely well-crafted, multidimensional characters who, like Anahita, long 
for something more out of life, and readers will likely find it difficult deciding 
whom to champion. The growing tension between traditional tribal customs and 
a modernizing nation are at the heart of Anahita’s world, and this backdrop offers 
a perfect setting for her own rapidly changing existence. Offering history, romance, 
literature, and an element of mystery, this novel will appeal to a wide cross-section 
of readers. A glossary and author’s note are included.  HM
March 2007 • 309
schAeFer, cArole lexA Dragon Dancing; illus. by Pierr Morgan. Viking, 
2007 32p
ISBN 0-670-06084-4 $16.99   
R 3-6 yrs
After their teacher reads them a story about a dragon, the kids in Mei Lin’s class 
collectively create a group dragon costume. That’s when the adventure really be-
gins: lined up in a row, dragon parts in hand, the children imagine themselves as 
a dragon “zig-zagging over snowy mountaintops,” “slip-sliding across foamy seas,” 
and “creep-crouching through tall forests,” until they hear their teacher calling 
them back for snacktime. As in Someone Says, which features the same group of kids 
engaged in similar play, Schaefer’s energetic story pays homage to the wonders of 
the imagination. The dragon’s parts are described in onomatopoeic verse (“boink-
boink eyes,” “ricky-rack backs”), contributing even more playfulness to the already 
lighthearted story. Morgan’s illustrations make use of thick lines and bold colors 
to depict the multicultural cast of kids clad in multicolored play clothes. The art 
works closely with the text to foster the sense of the fantastical; the key illustra-
tion, wherein the children are huddled together in a dragon-like shape, holding 
their dragon noses and eyes, is overlaid with the outline of a festive dragon, thus 
heightening the illusion of their illusion. The dragon’s linework body goes on to its 
own independent life, its back appealingly sprinkled with geometric, candy-colored 
moons and drops and polka-dots. This lends itself well to either early childhood 
classrooms or public library programs for the younger set; either group will likely 
be willing to work together at imagining a dragon to take them on an adventure 
to a faraway land.  HM 
sheldon, dAvid Barnum Brown: Dinosaur Hunter; written and illus. by David 
Sheldon. Walker, 2006 32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-9603-6 $17.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-9602-8 $16.95   
R Gr. 2-4
Nineteenth-century paleontology was clearly no gentlemanly affair; first Othniel 
Marsh and Edward Cope raced, feuded, and cheated to discover specimens for 
their respective museums. Then, with a public crazed for all things dino, a Second 
Great Dinosaur Rush was just over the horizon, and one of its main contestants, 
Barnum Brown of the American Museum of Natural History in New York, would 
rank among the most successful fossil hunters. In this picture-book account, Shel-
don delves back into Brown’s childhood to establish his early interest in fossils but 
spends most of the time on Brown’s adult career, with particular emphasis on his 
discovery of Tyrannosaurus rex and subsequent finds of nearly complete skeletons. 
While some of the meatier details (Cope’s and Marsh’s intentional destruction of 
sites; the inaccuracy of the T. rex’s originally reconstructed posture) are saved for the 
closing note, there’s plenty of juice in the story about keen rivalries and surprising 
finds. Mixed-media scenes blend solidly rendered literal interpretations of the action 
in the text, more translucent depictions of Brown’s imaginings, and a rather fanci-
ful spread of five grinning, chummy dinos unearthed by the Brown and the rival 
Sternberg expeditions. Quibbles notwithstanding, the popularity of T. rex among 
young dinophiles should secure this title a place on their must-read list.  EB
310 • The BulleTin
sTewArT, seAn Cathy’s Book: If Found Call (650) 266-8233; written and illus. by 
Sean Stewart and Jordan Weisman. Running Press, 2006 [144p]
ISBN 0-7624-2656-X $17.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
When Cathy’s older, mysterious boyfriend, Victor Chan, dumps her, she goes from 
being Artgirl to being stalker girl, calling his cell phone, going places she knows he’ll 
be, breaking into his house and his lab, etc. She finds more than she bargained for, 
namely, that Victor is older than he looks—immortal, in fact. The intrigue leads her 
on an eerie trek through Chinatown to a dangerous confrontation with Ancestor Lu, 
one of the Eight Immortals of Taoist legend, who is trying to find a way to confer 
immortality onto his young daughter, no matter the cost to the rest of humanity. 
Victor and Tsao, another of the Eight, are in a battle to stop him, but Victor has 
been distracted by his budding love for Cathy. The story is told in a particularly 
realistic journal form, with sophisticated and sometimes strikingly beautiful spot 
art, doodles, and handwritten commentary sprinkled liberally throughout. Read-
ers who follow the instructions to call the phone numbers and visit the websites 
are rewarded with messages from the various characters, but the mystery/romance 
plot, with its intricate twists and turns, enticing and likable main character, and 
fascinating connections to Chinese lore, makes for an intriguing read whether or 
not one follows all of the extratextual clues.  KC 
TAnKArd, Jeremy Grumpy Bird; written and illus. by Jeremy Tankard. Scholastic, 
2007 [32p]
ISBN 0-439-85147-5 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 3-6 yrs 
Bird wakes up “too grumpy to fly,” so he heads out for a walk instead. He’s soon 
joined by Sheep, Rabbit, Raccoon, Beaver, and Fox, who all fail to see Bird’s sulk 
and find the notion of a walk appealing. Annoyed at his friends’ tagging along, 
Bird amuses himself by leading an impromptu game of follow-the-leader to see if 
his friends keep copying him; when they do, the game tickles Bird out of his bad 
humor. The story runs out of steam at its resolution (a suddenly cheered Bird invites 
everybody back for snacks), but the basic premise is solidly amusing; the mad-at-
the-world march will amuse youngsters, who may recognize Bird’s persevering 
poutiness from their own moods and who will giggle at Bird’s snarky responses to 
his inquiring friends. Tankard’s art is labeled as “ink and digital media,” a rubric 
that doesn’t convey the graphic richness of landscapes shadowed with trees in classic 
brushwork, textured with touches of photographic collage and random and subtle 
planes of color, and focused on comically compact animals outlined in huge, broad 
black lines. Act this out for a lively storytime, or just use it to soothe the ruffled 
feathers of your own grumpy birds.  DS
wAlKer, KATe I Hate Books!; illus. by David Cox. Cricket, 2007 [88p]
ISBN 0-8126-2745-8 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-4
Third-grader Hamish is an inventive and lively storyteller, a fact that has allowed him 
to get by in school and at home without anyone noticing that he can’t really read. 
Now he’s been found out, and Hamish is despondent, certain that his parents will 
be horrified at their lackluster son (“I couldn’t expect them to love me as much when 
March 2007 • 311
they found out”) and discouraged because he’s so far behind his classmates (“What 
was the point of trying? Everyone else could read already, and they were learning 
more words all the time”). The resolution (Hamish’s older brother teaches him to 
read) is breathtakingly abrupt after the long focus on Hamish’s non-reading, but the 
story turns what could have been a programmatic fable into a vivid and poignant 
chronicle of a kid who’s essentially been too clever for his own good without even 
realizing it. The depictions of Hamish’s classmates and family are energetic and 
particular, and Hamish himself is a believable little guy who, prizing excitement 
over diligence, legitimately finds his own creative tales more interesting than the 
bland drone of adults reading what’s actually on the page. Brief chapters make this 
an appropriately unthreatening read (and an effective readaloud to boot), while 
Cox’s informally scrawled line art adds invitation to just about every page.  DS
weinheimer, BecKie Converting Kate. Viking, 2007 [320p]
ISBN 0-670-06152-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
“You were born into the fullness of the gospel,” Kate’s mother reminds her, try-
ing to keep her daughter in the fold of the Church of the Holy Divine. Now that 
Kate’s a teenager, though, she’s rejecting her mother’s faith, reveling in her first taste 
of school attendance (home-schooling is de rigueur for young Church members 
prior to high school), and deeply missing her father, who split from Kate’s mother 
on religious grounds and who died suddenly last year. While the explorations 
of belief sometimes lack depth (there’s little questioning of the judgmentality 
of Kate’s politically dogmatic new friend, and Kate’s as insistent as her mother 
but about different customs), this is really a story of adolescent individuation 
more than religious conversion. The religious component to the plot allows that 
developmental drama to play out with particular resonance, since the elements 
of parental restriction and Kate’s coming into her own are writ larger than in the 
usual treatment of independence; there’s also a subplot wherein Kate makes her 
own stand on ethics and faith when a popular local pastor loses his job as a result 
of homophobia. The book also makes clear that Kate is demonizing her mother 
and sanctifying her father when the truth is somewhat more complicated, even as 
Kate’s struggles against her mother’s strictures are legitimate and sympathetically 
depicted. Religion and religious differences are serious issues to many young adults, 
and even those breaking from their parents on more secular fronts will sympathize 
with Kate’s struggle.  DS
wells, rosemAry Max Counts His Chickens; written and illus. by Rosemary 
Wells. Viking, 2007 32p
ISBN 0-670-06222-7 $15.99   
R 2-5 yrs
Wells’ beloved bunny sibs, Max and Ruby, are back to engage in a familiar Eas-
ter-time activity, the candy hunt. The Easter Bunny has made his rounds hiding 
marshmallow chicks throughout the house, and, as might be expected, Ruby is an 
ace at ferreting them out. While she shows off the one found under her pillow, 
and the next in her dollhouse (“That makes two!”), and so on as the numbers ac-
crue, Max is leaving a comical trail of domestic destruction in his wake as he tries 
to score a chick of his own. “There were no chicks in the toothpaste tube,” as one 
can plainly see from the squeeze snaking from its opening, and “no chick was hid-
ing in the orange juice,” as the torrent of splashing juice attests. By the time Ruby 
312 • The BulleTin
reaches ten and Max is still at zero, Grandma is less concerned with the mess than 
Max’s chickless state, and she summons the Easter Bunny to make an emergency 
visit and feed an equitable number of chicks through the mail slot and into Max’s 
waiting basket. Spring-color borders frame the action, and a bold numeral and line 
of countable chicks top each spread, making this a truly useful beginners’ counting 
book. The real pleasure, though, lies watching Max do his signature Max thing, 
trailing behind Ruby but somehow managing to come up even in the end. This 
will be a treat well after the Peeps™ have gone stale.  EB
wilce,ysABeAu s. Flora Segunda: Being the Magical Mishaps of a Girl of Spirit, 
Her Glass-Gazing Sidekick, Two Ominous Butlers (One Blue), a House with Eleven 
Thousand Rooms, and a Red Dog. Harcourt, 2007 431p
ISBN 0-15-205433-2 $17.00   
R  Gr. 6-9
Flora’s future has been decided for her since her birth: she will continue the family 
tradition of joining the military on her fourteenth birthday, which is upcoming. 
Though Flora herself has different plans, she is distracted from informing her 
domineering mother and haunted, depressed father after she agrees to siphon some 
of her will into a magical force, a house Butler, whom her mother had banished 
years before. Weakened but still present in the house, the Butler (who in his full 
powers controls cooking, cleaning, and maintenance of the family estate) detects 
Flora’s resentment about her obligations and manipulates her into helping him 
regain his position. Throw in a daring attempt at saving a rogue pirate from death, 
a disappearing Flora as her life force is nearly drained from her, and several dramatic 
revelations about Flora’s family that will change her forever, and it becomes clear 
why an upcoming birthday suddenly seems less important. Flora is a wry, affable, 
and witty protagonist with whom readers will easily identify, even in her short-
comings (namely, her faulty judgment about the Butler and her parents). She is 
also surrounded by a rich and well-developed cast of characters, both magical and 
mortal, who help Flora find her way out of trouble and toward a more desirable 
future. First-time author Wilce recognizes the importance of creating a magnificent 
and vivid setting, in this case the quirky family house, Crackpot Hall, in which her 
characters’ adventures, mundane or fantastic, can play out. Although this novel’s 
most likely home is with fantasy buffs, the complex family relationships and Flora’s 
coming-of-age story may appeal to realistic fiction fans as well.  AS 
willis, JeAnne Who’s in the Bathroom?; illus. by Adrian Reynolds. Simon, 
2007 [32p]
ISBN 1-4169-3516-9 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 3-5 yrs
A long line for the potty leaves squirmily waiting kids wondering “who’s in the 
bathroom?” They go on to query, in this rhymed story, the reason for the delay: 
“Is it an elephant having a poo? . . . A whale who is doing the world’s biggest pee? 
. . . Has a sloth gone to sleep and forgotten to flush?” When the kids finally bang 
on the door to find out what’s going on, the sluggard proves to be a baby octopus 
diligently following his mom’s instructions and “washing his eight little hands.” 
That’s a fairly slight payoff for such a long setup, and the verse itself is sometimes 
strained (American audiences may also miss some of the references in this British 
import); while a few young listeners may be alarmed by the toilet mishaps of animals 
falling in and getting stuck, hardier souls will howl at the extended dive into taboo 
March 2007 • 313
humor as the book rips the figurative door from that room kids are repeatedly told 
not to talk about. The jokes achieve a surprising range, covering a full spectrum 
of bathroom activities and pitfalls, many of which kids will recognize. Smoothly 
shaded line-and-watercolor illustrations streamline the images to focus on the 
struggling creatures within and without, of which the animals are definitely the 
most expressive; depictions of poop and pee production aren’t subtle, but they’re 
comic and imaginative. Youngsters will rejoice that there’s finally a story set in that 
most important of rooms, and this might even make for a satisfying share with a 
younger sibling just learning to master the potty.  DS
winTer, JeAneTTe The Tale of Pale Male: A True Story; written and illus. by Jeanette 
Winter. Harcourt, 2007 32p
ISBN 0-15-205972-5 $16.00   
R 5-8 yrs
The Pale Male of the title is an unusual resident of a Manhattan penthouse: a red-
tailed hawk. He and his mate, Lola, build a nest on the decorative cornice over a 
window, much to the delight of birdwatchers and naturalists who are thrilled to see 
the first red-tailed hawk nest in the city and the fuzzy chicks that soon inhabit it. 
The residents of the penthouse and building, however, are less pleased that “evidence 
of Lola’s meals falls to the balcony below” (and probably a fair bit of droppings 
as well), and the nest and its supporting pigeon spikes are summarily removed in 
winter when the chicks are gone; soon, though, public protest forces the building 
to reinstall the spikes, and Pale Male and Lola settle back in to their home. The 
story glosses over a few details provided in the brief concluding author’s note (the 
nest stood for over a decade before its removal, and Pale Male has had mates other 
than Lola), but it’s effectively condensed, focusing on the story of the animals’ rare 
habitation and the popular support for their tolerance. Winter neatly sets up her 
situation by explaining in a few choice words a redtail’s taste for high perches and 
the unusualness of this particular setting, then dives right into an appealing animal 
story in simple yet telling prose. The straightforward narrative avoids turning the 
apartment dwellers into villains and the protesters into heroes (though of course 
animal-loving kids will automatically be on the birds’ side nonetheless). Winter’s 
acrylic illustrations, nesting in trim frames against pages in luscious tones of lav-
ender, aqua, and gold, display a neat and geometric New York starring the feathery 
hawks, who are slightly toylike in their compact handsomeness. Fact-based animal 
stories have a particular fascination for youngsters, and they’ll be rapt with these 
raptors. An author’s note describes in more factual detail the saga of Pale Male’s 
long residence in New York.  DS
yeAhPAu, ThomAs m. X-Indian Chronicles: The Book of Mausape. Candlewick, 
2006 231p
ISBN 0-7636-2706-2 $16.99   
R* Gr. 10 up
Mausape and his friends Brando, Hoss, and Maddog are X-Indians, a term Yeahpau 
coined to describe his experience of growing up as a member of “a race that was 
losing its culture and a generation that was losing its mind.” In a series of inter-
connected short stories, Yeahpau traces the growth of these boys, from the loss of 
Mausape’s grandfather to an encounter with the vicious Deer Lady, through their 
multileveled entanglements with tribal spirits and distilled ones, to their various 
ends—some successful, some violent, some mystical. The stories are compelling 
and disturbing, laced with the irony of living between two worlds, an experience 
314 • The BulleTin
that Yeahpau captures with laconic intensity. Yeahpau’s X-Indians have come to 
a point where their only language for the beauty and violence of the spirit world 
has been overwritten by the coarse banality of street slang; for instance, when 
Mausape’s guardian angel is so overcome with desire for him that she falls to earth 
and assumes a sublimely perfect human form, his response is “She was Great-Spirit 
given, and Mausape knew he better hit that.” Yeahpau is a master storyteller for 
his generation, showing with uncompromising force and edgy humor the fraught 
intersections between Kiowa tradition and a hard-driving adolescence and early 
adulthood steeped in a haze of anger, poverty, crime, sex, drugs, and alcohol. Even 
a hokey premise like putting Mr. Al Cohol on trial for crimes against the Indians 
and the X-Indians yields a gasp of insight when Cohol testifies to a grisly parody of 
the well-known Christian poem of solace, “Footprints.” Tough and provocative yet 
laced with wicked humor, this is an honorable successor to Sherman Alexie’s The 
Lone Ranger and Tonto Fistfight in Heaven in both candor and grace.  KC  
zimmer, TrAcie vAughn Reaching for Sun. Bloomsbury, 2007 [192p]
ISBN 1-59990-037-8 $14.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-7
At school, Josie’s cerebral palsy makes her an outsider in her seventh grade; at home, 
she’s mostly looked after by her strong-minded country grandmother, while her 
single mother labors to complete her degree and presses Josie to keep up with her 
exercises and physical therapy. In a series of free-verse poems divided by season, 
Josie tells of the changes she undergoes in this year when she finds a close friend 
in a new neighbor and classmate, Jordan, and when her grandmother suffers a 
debilitating stroke. The plot and characters are largely predictable, and the writ-
ing is sometimes overwrought—poems often succumb to the cliché of using their 
conclusions as dramatic emotional punchlines, and the phraseology is occasionally 
strained or puzzling. It’s an emotional story for all that, with a sensitive perspective 
on Josie’s physical difference, a difference that she sees from the outside when her 
grandmother struggles with her own physical limitations. There’s also some gentle 
reflection on Josie’s physical and mental maturation, and the flower metaphor that 
runs through the book may be unsubtle, but its clarity will assist young readers’ 
understanding. Though this is more good-hearted then well written, it’s an easy-
reading drama that may particularly entice reluctant readers.  DS
March 2007 • 315
ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons: resourCes for teAChers And LIBrArIAns
mATThew, KAThryn i. Developing Better Readers and Writers Using Caldecott 
Books. Neal-Schuman, 2006 256p
Paper ed. ISBN 1-55570-557-X $59.95
More than fifty lesson plans based on Caldecott medal or honor books help K-12 
students move from reading someone else’s work to creating their own. Lessons (each 
matched with NCTE/IRA standards for English Language Arts and AASL/AECT 
standards for Information Literacy) are grouped into eight genres (realistic fiction, 
historical fiction, traditional literature, poetry, fantasy, informational nonfiction, 
memoirs/autobiographies/biographies, diaries and letters), and they also include 
websites and books for teachers and librarians, parents and caregivers. Matthew 
provides separate author/illustrator, title and subject indices, and a short essay on 
writing workshops that helps explain her approach to the material. The strengths of 
this offering are the thirty blackline masters (from story maps to character charts) 
and short sidebars that bring authors and illustrators to life: students will learn 
that Mirette’s walk on the high wire is a metaphor for author McCully’s feelings 
about writing, and that author/illustrator Zelinsky’s preschool drawings included 
geishas driving tractors. There are a few weaknesses—for example, the majority 
of the activities focus on text rather than the artwork/illustration for which the 
Caldecott was awarded, and some lessons are designated as appropriate for a range 
as broad as grades 4-12 without indication of different approaches within such a 
wide spread. Nonetheless, this is a solid educational resource; picture books have 
long been valued by those working with ESL students or students reading below 
grade level, and Matthew’s spotlight on Caldecott books provides an introduction to 
these gems for students who may have missed them the first time around.  CW
sAlem, lindA c. Children’s Literature Studies: Cases and Discussions. Libraries 
Unlimited, 2006 153p
Paper ed. ISBN 1-59158-089-7 $42.00
An incident in a college literature class, where a student refused on religious grounds 
to read Harry Potter, caused Salem to rethink the way she prepared pre-service 
teachers to handle similar situations in the future. The results of her reassessment 
appear in this book, where each of eight chapters is a mini-lesson covering, in turn, 
literary quality, challenged materials, religion, translated and ESL materials, violence, 
characters with disabilities, gender, and GLBTQ concerns. Each chapter includes a 
brief essay touching on historical background and the diverse perspectives involved 
in the controversy, a case study or studies, discussion questions, and resources for 
further exploration. From Texas textbook evaluations to what constitutes a canon, 
the case studies are drawn from the real world, and the discussion questions rely 
on both the earlier chapter material and students’ own life experiences. Back mat-
ter includes an index, an extended bibliography and a listing of both on-line and 
print book review resources—although some print sources, such as the Bulletin 
itself, are listed only in the on-line section, creating the impression that they are 
only available via the Web. Salem notes that the background material is not meant 
316 • The BulleTin
to be comprehensive, but at times the snippets she provides lack coherence, which 
may handicap newly minted teachers and library media specialists. However, this 
title presents a thoughtful approach to youth literature discussions that will help 
future teachers and library media specialists clarify their professional beliefs before 
they are challenged on them by parents, administration, or the public.  CW
March 2007 • 317
Activism: Fradin
Actors–fiction: Douglas
Addiction–fiction: Douglas
ADventure: Barnes; Dahl; 
Primavera
Animals: Winter
Animals–stories: Bauer
Archaeology: Sheldon
Baseball–fiction: Auch
Bathrooms–stories: Willis
BeDtime StorieS: Lauber
BiBLe StorieS: Hodges
BiogrAPHieS: Fradin; gelletly; 
redsand; Sheldon
Birds: Winter
Birds–fiction: Fan
Birds–stories: tankard
Books and reading–fiction: Walker
Brothers–fiction: Hill
Brothers and sisters–fiction: Birdsall; 
Coburn
Brothers and sisters–stories: Wells
China–fiction: ruby
Cold War–fiction: Krisher
Competition–fiction: Hershey
Counting BooKS: Wells
Cousins–fiction: ostow
Cows–stories: Hume
Crime and criminals–fiction: Co-
burn; murphy
Death–fiction: Hest
Dinosaurs: Sheldon
Disabilities–fiction: Auch; Hershey; 
Zimmer
Disasters–stories: Bauer
Divorce–fiction: Birdsall; Coleman
Dogs–fiction: Kelleher
Dragons–stories: Schaefer
easter–stories: Wells
emotions–stories: tankard
ePiStoLAry noveLS: Amato
Ethics and values: Fan; Johnson; 
Kelleher; Krisher; o’Connell; 
redsand; Weinheimer
FABLeS: Fan
Families–fiction: Birdseye; Dahl; 
greene; ostow; Wilce
FAntASy: Barnes; Coburn; Fan; 
Jones; Leavitt; marillier; Primav-
era; Stewart; Wilce
Fathers–fiction: Hershey; Hest; 
mass; Weinheimer
Feral children–fiction: noyes
FoLK-LiKe tALeS: Krensky
FoLKtALeS AnD FAiry tALeS: 
Ada; eilenberg
Food and eating: ichord
Friends–fiction: Barnes; Harley; 
mass; Zimmer
Friends–stories: Bauer; tankard
gifts–fiction: mass
grandmothers–fiction: ostow; Zim-
mer
grief–fiction: Hest
growing up–fiction: Wilce
Health: Harper
HiStoriCAL FiCtion: Auch; 
Krisher; Larson; murphy; Pater-
son; ruby; Sayres
History, colonial: Lange
History, U.S.: Harness; ichord; 
Lange; mcPherson; Paterson
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. in the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
318  •  The BulleTin
History, world: Lauber
Holidays: Hodges; Krensky; 
Lehman-Wilzig
Holocaust, the: Redsand
Housekeeping–fiction: Greene
HumoR: Amato; Birdseye; Harper; 
Hill; Hume; Tankard; Wells; 
Willis
Identity–fiction: Kelleher; Yeahpau
Imagination–stories: Schaefer
Ireland–stories: Krensky
Islands–fiction: Dahl
Jews: Lehman-Wilzig; Redsand
Jews–fiction: o’Connell; Ruby
Labor movement–fiction: Paterson
Language arts: Amato
Latinos–fiction: ostow
Latinos–folklore: Ada
Literature, children’s: Campbell; 
Gelletly
Literature, classical: Lester
Literature, English: Campbell; Gel-
letly; morpurgo
Love–fiction: Johnson
middle East–fiction: Sayres
monsters–fiction: morpurgo
mothers–fiction: Hest; Weinheimer
music and musicians–stories: Eh-
rhardt
mYSTERIES: Coburn; Harley; 
Stewart
Myths, classical: Lester
Native Americans–fiction: Yeahpau
Nature study: Winter
orphans–fiction: Harley
Passover: Hodges; Lehman-Wilzig
Philosophy: Redsand
Physical education: Prelutsky
PoETRY: Harper; Prelutsky
Reading aloud: Prelutsky; Walker
Reading, easy: Amato; Greene, Hill; 
Noyes; Walker
Reading, reluctant: Amato; Hill
Relationships–fiction: Cheshire; 
Dahl; Douglas; Jones; Sayres
Religious education: Lehman-Wil-
zig
RHYmING SToRIES: Ehrhardt; 
Willis
Romance–fiction: Birdsall; Cheshire; 
Eilenberg; Johnson; Leavitt; Les-
ter; marillier; Stewart
Royalty–fiction: Cheshire
Rural life–fiction: Birdseye
School–fiction: o’Connell
Science: Sheldon
Secrets–fiction: Wilce
SHoRT SToRIES: Yeahpau
Sisters–fiction: marillier
SoNGS: Ehrhardt
SPoRTS SToRIES: Auch; Prelutsky
Storytelling: Ada
Storytime: Krensky; Schaefer; Tan-
kard; Wells
Teachers–fiction: Johnson
Television–fiction: Coleman
West, the: Harness; mcPherson
West, the–fiction: Larson
Witches–fiction: Primavera
Women’s studies: Fradin
Work–fiction: murphy
World cultures: Lehman-Wilzig
World War I–fiction: Larson
World War II–fiction: Ruby
