H
I 
I 
N 
I S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
-
ALA Booklist stars
re
s.
I
a
;c
-E
d
"A trenchant and powerful fable ... [with] dialogue so inventive
and witty that it achieves a kind of hyper-reality." -The Horn Book
"A deeply felt, unusual, and absorbing story." -School Library Journal
Ages 10 up. $14.95TR (0-06-028236-3); $14.89LB (0-06-028237-1)
A Laura Geringer Book
Two Newbery Honor Books by Bruce Brooks
THE MOVES MAKE THE MAN 
WHAT HEARTS
Ages 12 up. $15.89LB (0-06-020698-5) 
Ages 12 up. $14.95TR (0-06-021131-8)
$4.95 Digest-size PB (0-06-440564-8) 
$5.95 Repackaged PB (0-06-447127-6)
S4.95 Rack-sized PB (0-06-447022-9) 
A Laura Geringer Book
SHarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
10 E. 53rd St., New York, NY 10022
"Eleven-year-old Alice has
stopped eating: hospitalized
for bronchitis, she figures
if she doesn't eat, she
cannot be sent home to
her alcoholic mother and
bitter stepfather, or to her
[ineffectual] father.
Hospitalized with Alice
is Rex, a boy who rages
against his terminal illness.
... [Incorporating] in
eerily perfect detail the
light-filled hallucinations
that come with starvation
... Brooks here tells a very
powerful story very simply."
-Starred 
review / Booklist
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
October 1999
Vol. 53 No. 2
A LOOK INSIDE
43 
THE BIG PICTURE
The Folk Keeper by Franny Billingsley
44 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
46 
* Ragweed by Avi; illus. by Brian Floca
52 
* Babe Didrikson Zaharias: The Making ofa Champion by
Russell Freedman
53 
* Santa Who? written and illus. by Gail Gibbons
54 
* Bluish by Virginia Hamilton
66 
* The Gargoyle on the Roof by Jack Prelutsky; illus. by Peter Sfs
68 
* Harry Potter and the Prisoner ofAzkaban by J. K. Rowling; illus. by
Mary Grandpre
75 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
76 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
mlý
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL
61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor (MD)
Deborah Stevenson, Associate Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison
Elaine A. Bearden, Reviewer (EAB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Janice N. Harrington, Reviewer (JNH)
Fern Kory, Reviewer (FK)
CENTER STAFF
Melanie Kimball
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $60.00; individuals, $50.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $5.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from Bell & Howell, 300 North Zeeb
Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson Associates,
P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to the
University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 51 E. Armory Ave., Champaign,
IL 61820-6601. E-mail: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu
Visit our homepage at http://edfu.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1999 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Leonid Gore from The Folk Keeper ©1999. Used by permission of Atheneum
Books for Young Readers.
OCTOBER 1999 
* 43
THE BIG PICTURE
The Folk Keeper
by Franny Billingsley
Fantasy is a genre that permits a certain indulgence in extremes, easily encompass-
ing life-altering events and monumental emotions. When composed with grace,
the language of fantasy makes the abstract concrete; unexplained longings and
dark fears, the thirst for freedom and the need for love are captured in words that
give them form and substance. With The Folk Keeper, Franny Billingsley has writ-
ten a novel in which powerful words equal powerful enchantment, and she has
done so with some powerful words of her own.
For four years, orphan Corinna Stonewall has been hiding her gender
beneath the trousers and dirty face of Corin, a Folk Keeper, one of few individuals
gifted with the talent to keep the fierce and ravenous Folk content and confined
behind various portals from underground caverns to the upper world. In the cellar
of the orphanage, Corin/Corinna "sits with the Folk for hour upon hour in the
dark, drawing off their anger as a lightning rod draws off lightning." When the
Lady Alicia comes to her with a deathbed request from her elderly husband, Corinna
leaves the orphanage behind to become Folk Keeper for the Manor at Marblehaugh
Park, on the northernmost island of Cliffsend. She soon discovers that the Manor
Folk are stronger than those of the orphanage, and her usual tricks and persuasions
will not work with them. At great spiritual and physical cost, Corinna manages to
restrain the seething Folk, even as she discovers truths about her origin that exhila-
rate and endanger her. Her odyssey of personal discovery brings her a dear friend
in Lady Alicia's son, Finian (aka Fin), and a dangerous enemy in Fin's wicked
uncle, Lord Edward.
Corinna narrates her own story through entries in her Folk Record; those
entries provide unintended insights into her own wild psyche and fierce emotions
and become the story of both her liberation and her redemption. In the course of
this carefully nuanced tale, Corinna grows and changes from an adolescent girl
with a single-minded determination to ensure her own survival at any cost to a
young woman who, in spite of herself, responds to the only kindness she has ever
known. The romantic tension between Corinna and Fin is beautifully under-
stated: Fin honors Corinna's wish to be Corin, even as he falls ever deeper in love
with her; Corinna fights her attraction to Fin, determined not to surrender herself.
Their union is far from a foregone conclusion, and that suspense adds an exquisite,
subtle energy that is maintained until the final pages.
The remote island of Cliffsend is peopled with intensely rendered indi-
viduals that make an indelible mark on Corinna, and the reader. Key characters--
the gracious Lady Alicia, struggling to manage the Manor and its lands; the sinister
Sir Edward, scheming to have the Manor for himself; the tender Fin, undeceived
44 
* THE BULLETIN
by Corinna's disguise-are archetypal yet original, distinctively fulfilling their func-
tion in the plot. Corinna, herself an archetypal (and therefore potentially flat)
character, is given dimension and motivation, her willful words and innate wit
marking her as a force to be reckoned with.
As she did in Well Wished (BCCB 4/97), Billingsley creates a consistently
complex fantasy world that steps just beyond the familiar into wonder. The natu-
ral landscape and seascape are permeated with a tempestuous magic that is barely
contained. The sea is a constant, brooding, nearly sentient presence: "The sea up
close is enormous. I squeezed my eyes against it for a moment, which is ridiculous,
like fighting a giant with a pin. It comes to you anyway, through your ears and
nose and skin and tongue. It is a savage, muscular thing, a vast dim wetness batter-
ing at the land and the air and all your senses." The supernatural beings of this
untamed terrain-selkies, hell hounds-emerge from the darker pages of faery
lore, and the Folk themselves are a revelation. There are no Tinkerbells or gauzy
godmothers in this fantasy world; the Folk are the dark ones, the spawn of an
Unseely court, voracious ("They are mostly mouth. Wet mouth and teeth") and
implacable.
In imagistic language, Billingsley masterfully combines elements from
traditional folklore with more mundane things like greed, murder, and betrayal.
The trajectory of the plot creeps slowly from the darkness of a Folk Keeper's cellar,
gathers momentum during a Midsummer Eve masquerade, roars to a revelatory
crescendo in an underground cavern, and resolves itself in a sea change and a
choice. Breathtakingly imaginative, with an earthy magic that grounds it in pas-
sion, this is sophisticated fantasy from a powerful pen. (Imprint information ap-
pears on p. 47.)
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ABELOVE, JOAN 
Saying It Out Loud. Jackson/DK Ink, 1999 
[13 6 p]
ISBN 0-7894-2609-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Mindy has been having a fairly normal teenage existence, alternately ignoring and
infuriating her high-strung mother, when it turns out that her mother's neck pain
stems from a brain tumor. Suddenly Mindy is adrift, and her cold father offers no
support. After surgery removes a huge malignancy, Mindy's mother loses the abil-
ity to speak and to recognize loved ones (Mindy's desperate, forbidden drive to the
hospital gives her one last horrifying glimpse of her insensate mother), dying soon
after. Abelove's writing is heartfelt (the placement of the story in the early 1960s,
for no particular period reason, suggests a possible autobiographical origin) but
precise in its evocation of the fractured yet intense consciousness of a grief-stricken
teen. It's particularly authentic in its depiction of strain laying bare a family's
secrets, making Mindy shift her focus from her own adolescent concerns to the
never-acknowledged patterns of her family structure (especially telling is the char-
OCTOBER 1999 
* 45
acter of Mindy's father, who refers to his dying wife only as "she" and speaks of her
death in terse euphemisms). Fortunately, the support of Mindy's good friends
leavens the book as well as helping Mindy, allowing her and the reader to look
beyond tremendous guilt and loss to the restorative chance of a future legacy of
love. DS
ADLER, C. S. 
Winning. Clarion, 1999 
[160p]
ISBN 0-395-65017-8 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-7
Eighth-grader Vicky is drowning in a sea ofaverageness, taken for granted at home
in the shadow of her showy older brother and dismissed as the C-student friend-
of-the-brain at school. Her real love is tennis, and as she improves enough to
compete on the school team, she begins to see herself in a new light but also finds
that the changes bring challenges in relationships new and old. Always a reliable
creator of sympathetic but unflashy heroines, Adler has again drawn an effective
portrait of a girl whose merits lie not in her standing out from the crowd but in the
individual merits that get lost among it; the author is a quietly helpful writer,
engaging in simple explanation rather than allusion, which allows her to treat some
serious emotional issues without taking them beyond the reach of less experienced
readers. The treatment of Vicky's developing athletic prowess is particularly au-
thentic and engaging, giving a look into the rewards of hard work and diligent
practice without unrealistically suggesting that stardom, rather than personal satis-
faction, is the prize. Many youngsters will see themselves here, and they'll appre-
ciate the literary support. DS
ANDERSON, LAURIE HALSE 
Speak. 
Farrar, 1999 
[198p]
ISBN 0-374-37152-0 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 7-10
Melinda is undergoing the freshman year from Hell-infamous for calling the
cops on a summer party and getting people with major social cachet into trouble,
she's a complete pariah at school, resorting to a makeshift friendship with a disori-
ented yet perky new girl. At the heart of Melinda's anguish, however, is a secret
about that party: she called the police after being raped by upperclassman Andy
Evans, but she has never told anyone of the assault-and has talked about little
else either ("All that crap you hear on TV about communication and expressing
feelings is a lie. Nobody really wants to hear what you have to say") since then.
She tells her story in journalesque block paragraphs, often relating dialogue in
playscript form wherein the Me: character has no lines and responds only with
silence. Inside her head, however, Melinda is bitterly articulate (often with a darkly
funny edge) about her situation and the limited opportunities for consolation.
She finds that consolation in a quiet oasis she makes in an abandoned closet at
school and in Art class, taught by the sympathetic Mr. Freeman, which gives her
an avenue of expression and a chance at external success. Anderson doesn't over-
burden Melinda with insight or with artistic metaphors (she's working on a tree in
Art), and readers will find it gratifying that not only does she undergo gradual
emotional recovery, she also gets to trounce her attacker-and send him, in turn,
into silence. The book is also keenly aware of the corrosive details ofoutsiderhood
and the gap between home and daily life at high school; kids whose exclusion may
have less concrete cause than Melinda's will nonetheless find the picture recogniz-
able. This is a gripping account of personal wounding and recovery. DS
46 
* THE BULLETIN
Avi 
Ragweed; illus. by Brian Floca. 
Avon, 1999 
[192p]
ISBN 0-380-97690-0 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Ragweed, a country mouse, leaves the security of Dimwood Forest to find adven-
ture in the big city. He quickly proves that he is no country bumpkin, making new
friends, giving two villainous cats a well-deserved comeuppance, growing emo-
tionally, and nailing the urban street-speak. The characters are memorable and
distinct, from the endearing white mouse Blinker, to Clutch, the street-savvy, skate-
boarding girl-mouse who teaches Ragweed the ropes. If a good story requires a
villain, then Silversides, the nasty, mouse-eating president of Felines Enraged Against
Rodents, or F.E.A.R., is purrfect. Avi helps readers understand Silversides' mo-
tives and even empathize with the poor kitty, but not so much that they won't
cheer her demise at the story's denouement, when the members of F.E.A.R. are
satisfyingly flushed away into a sewer. The "likes" and "you know what I'm say-
ings" do wear a bit thin, and although the cliches ("If I don't try to do some-
thing... I'll never be able to live with myself") are enlivened when spoken by
mice, they are still cliche. Nonetheless, Avi's quietly humorous phraseology ("re-
venge is at paw") will draw chuckles, and his message-that fear and regret hamper
living-is simplistic but worthy. This begs to be read aloud or better yet turned
into an animated feature; for animal fantasy readers, it'll be the cat's meow. JNH
BAUER, MARION DANE 
An Early Winter. Clarion, 1999 
[128p]
ISBN 0-395-90372-6 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Granddad has been diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease, and preteen grandson Tim
is deep in denial, attributing the memory losses, confusion, and erratic outbursts of
temper to simple old age and pressure from unsympathetic family members.
Granddad also has lengthy periods of perfect lucidity, and during one of these
stretches Tim convinces his grandfather that, if they sneak off on a fishing trip and
demonstrate that they can manage just fine, the rest of the family will lay all talk of
Alzheimer's to rest. The trip begins well, as the pair impishly borrow a camper,
stock up on some supplies, and find their favorite spot on the lake. But it soon
becomes clear that Tim isn't experienced enough to have planned for all contin-
gencies, and an accident in the inflatable raft strands them on the far shore and
sends Granddad into a bout of dementia that Tim cannot manage. The plot focus
is on Tim's gradual understanding and acceptance of his grandfather's malady, and
Bauer clearly conveys that there are no easy answers for disease management and
no happy ending for victim or relatives. Particularly remarkable, however, is Bauer's
sensitive probe of once-proud Granddad's own embarrassment over his mental
lapses and resentment of (and resistance to) his growing dependency. A rosy con-
clusion just isn't possible, but readers will find comfort in the assurance that
Granddad has the unconditional love and support of his family. EB
BIAL, RAYMOND 
One-Room School; written and illus. with photographs by
Raymond Bial. 
Houghton, 1999 
48p
ISBN 0-395-90514-1 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Evocative photographs of rough-hewn log schools, soddie schools, dug-out schools,
whitewashed clapboard schools, and classroom paraphernalia from bygone times
accompany a text that traces the history of America's single-room schoolhouse,
OCTOBER 1999 
* 47
celebrates its achievements, and nostalgically sighs for the pedagogic simplicity it
supposedly offered: "The quality of education received in most rural schools far
exceeded current standards . . . over the years they provided a fine education to
millions of Americans, and they still have much to teach us." Although Bial recog-
nizes the physical discomforts of the ill-heated buildings, the arduous expectations
placed upon teachers, and the social frictions that often emerged among closely
confined classmates (especially where an immigrant population was introduced),
it's the community suppers, strict (and presumably fair) discipline, standardized
(and presumably beloved) textbooks, and wildflower-emblazoned walks to school
that leave an impression here. Coal buckets and lunch pails, outhouses, inkwells,
water basins, and potbellied stoves, which appear in Bial's photographs as lovingly
restored museum pieces rather than hard-handled artifacts, may prompt some
questions and memories between children and elders sharing this title. However,
readers after a less sentimentalized account of education in the "good old days"
will still want to turn to Loeper's Going to School in 1876. EB
BILLINGSLEY, FRANNY 
The Folk Keeper. 
Karl/Atheneum, 1999 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-689-82876-4 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 6-10
See this month's Big Picture, p. 43, for review.
BODKIN, ODDS 
Ghost of the Southern Belle: A Sea Tale; illus. by Bernie
Fuchs. 
Little, 1999. 
32p
ISBN 0-316-02608-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Reckless, arrogant Captain LeNoir of the Southern Belle, who races Yankee fishing
schooners just to tempt fate, has tossed his good luck talisman to the narrator ("If
a ship captain says something brings him luck, I believe him, even if he is a Rebel"),
the son of a Gloucester cod fisher who commands the Candace. It is one of a pair
of Chinese chime balls, and it signifies Luck; its mate, which stands for Daring,
LeNoir keeps for himself. As fate or superstition would have it, LeNoir's luck is
now literally gone; the Southern Belle crashes on the rocks during a storm, and due
to the tempest's ferocity, the Candace is unable to honor the code of the sea with a
rescue attempt. The Southern Belle, now a ghost ship, is out for revenge, and only
the narrator knows how to lay the spirits of its crew to rest. Any reader who's
caught wind of a ghost ship legend will recognize the formula, but this is creepy
without being sensational, an adventurous ghost tale with wide appeal. Fuchs' oil
paintings, awash with spewing foam and eerie foreboding, set the right bone-chill-
ing atmosphere, and viewers can strain their eyes along with the crew to spot the
flailing arms of drowning men and the vaporous outlines of treacherous rock in
the roiling sea. Use this to set literary sail on some dark and stormy night. EB
BOOCK, PAULA 
Dare Truth or Promise. Houghton, 1999 
[176p]
ISBN 0-395-97117-9 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 9-12
Skittish after an incident at her former school, Willa is unprepared for her attrac-
tion to Louie-Louise-who works with her at a local restaurant. The attraction
is mutual, and the two girls fall passionately in love. When Louie's suspicious
mother confirms her worst fears about her daughter's relationship, however, she
48 
* THE BULLETIN
insists on a separation, and Willa, stunned at Louie's apparent capitulation (and
the replay of the end of her relationship with her previous girlfriend), feels not
only abandoned but betrayed. First published in New Zealand, the book special-
izes in high melodrama and strong emotions; while some of the melodrama is
excessive, seemingly making things hard for the lovers merely for the sake of en-
hancing the tension, it's refreshing to see a gay/lesbian themed novel with some
genuine heat (Willa's night visits to Louie are, of course, all the more exciting for
being clandestine). The writing is lively and personable (there's a glossary of Kiwi-
isms included), but the real draw here is seeing Willa and Louie go through the
Romeo-and-Juliet wars and come out not tragic but triumphant-and together.
DS
CAZET, DENYS 
Minnie and Moo Save the Earth; written and illus. by Denys
Cazet. Jackson/DK Ink, 1999 
[48p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-7894-2594-7 
$12.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-7894-3929-8 
$3.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-4
Minnie and Moo Go to Paris; written and illus. by Denys Cazet. 
Jackson/DK
Ink, 1999 
[4 8p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-7894-2595-5 
$12.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-7894-3928-X 
$3.95 
R Gr. 2-4
Bovine buddies Minnie and Moo (of Minnie andMoo Go to the Moon and Minnie
and Moo Go Dancing, BCCB 9/98) return here in a new pair of adventures. In
Save the Earth, Minnie and Moo stave off an alien invasion-without even know-
ing it, since the aliens appear as annoying insects who bother the girls as they're
soaking in the hot tub and who devastate Minnie by flying off with her hunk of
Brie. Then the friends Go to Paris-or, more accurately, think they've gotten to
the Eiffel Tower when they find an electrical tower, along with similarly mistaking
other bits of the local landscape (an African theme park for Africa, a car wash for
China) for stops on a global tour. Like their predecessors, these are loopy little
extravaganzas filled with cow jokes (Moo offers Minnie cheese "made by my aunt
in France"), dry humor (when Moo's "borrowed" bus initially seems too large for
the garage, "After a few tries, Moo made the garage a little bigger"), and giggle-
worthy lines ("'I never think,' Minnie said proudly. 'I am much too busy'"). Cazet's
watercolor illustrations are more blurry-edged and crowded than in the previous
books, but Minnie and Moo still retain their rotund charm, and their luminous
surroundings make for an attractive and tolerant setting. These gleeful fantasias
are currently the cream of the beginning-reader crop. DS
CHARLIP, 
REMY 
Sleepytime Rhyme; written and illus. 
by Remy
Charlip. 
Greenwillow, 1999 
24p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-16272-X 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-16271-1 
$16.00 
R 
1-3 yrs
A bedtime lovesong meant for crooning while rocking a baby to sleep, Charlip's
rhyming text is nothing short of unconditional adoration: "I love you./ I think/
you're grand./ There's none/ like you/ in all the land./ I love/ your hair,/ your
head,/ your chin,/ your neck,/ each ear,/ both cheeks,/ your skin." The rhythmic
verse on the left-hand page is accompanied by full-page watercolor illustrations on
the right of a mother and child cuddling and cozying on a divan. Simple shapes
OCTOBER 1999 
* 
49
and strong lines are warmed with tones of rose, gold, and violet in compositions
centered on the mother, round and soft, curving her arms around the babe who
smiles and clings to her neck. The view through the large window behind mother
and child changes with each spread, showing other smiling mother/child pairings:
cats, hills, trees, clouds, rainbows, moons, etc. The whole book is designed to
reflect and reinforce the bonding of parent and child. Violet endpapers decorated
with yellow parent-and-baby stars give an opening clue to what reader and listener
will find within. JMD
CLIMO, SHIRLEY, ad. 
Magic & Mischief Tales from Cornwall; illus. by Anthony
Bacon Venti. 
Clarion, 1999 
[127p]
ISBN 0-395-86968-4 $17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-8
Ten tales of Cornwall featuring supernatural beings (giants, piskies, spriggans,
knackers, changelings, etc.) are accompanied by explanatory bits of traditional lore
(how to please piskies, ways to scare spriggans, etc.) in this handsomely presented
volume. The humorous "Duffy and the Bucca" is a variation on Zemach's Duffy
and the Devil, but the rest of the tales are unusual enough to make a unique contri-
bution to world folktale collections. Climo's style is polished and literary, and her
selection of tales to retell from detailed sources leans toward the humorous happy
ending with just the occasional creepy shiver (the knackers down in the tin mine
are especially dark). Mermaids in love with landmen, giants pining for children,
and fairies who teach a neglectful mother to mend her ways are just a few of the
characters readers and storytellers will meet in these cleanly designed pages. Un-
fortunately, Venti's full-color oil paintings have an unsubtle cartoony quality that
contributes little to the overall tone; the muddy palette and unexpressive charac-
ters are too stolid to add much magic. Still, the subject matter here will guarantee
readers, and those looking for a handy collection of unusual British tales should
look this way. JMD
DESSEN, SARAH 
Keeping the Moon. 
Viking, 1999 
228p
ISBN 0-670-88549-5 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 7-10
While her fitness-guru mother takes off on a tour of Europe, Colie heads up to her
aunt's for a small-town summer. Colie's aunt is a cheerful eccentric, reveling in
garage-sale reject clutter and indifferent to the opinion of others; this is incompre-
hensible to her deeply defensive niece, who runs to all-black fashion and sports a
lip ring. Colie surprises herself, however, by finding a niche at the Last Chance
Bar and Grill, where waitresses Morgan and Isabel mother and harry her, respec-
tively, into a different approach to life and to her self-image. As in Someone Like
You (BCCB 6/98), the author gives strong emphasis to the topic of friendship, in
this case with a collection of examples: the strong friendship between hard-edged
Isabel and hopeful Morgan, the budding friendship between Colie and the two
young women, and the quiet friendship building between Colie and Norman, the
young art-school student who works at the Last Chance and rents an apartment
from Colie's aunt. The book makes some interesting points about self-definition
as Isabel, herself an outcast remade into a beauty, shoves Colie down transforma-
tion road ("It's like the hidden secret that no one tells you. We can all be beautiful
girls, Colie. It's so easy. It's like Dorothy clicking her heels to go home. You
could do it all along") and Colie, in a gratifying showdown, spurns her erstwhile
50 
* 
THE BULLETIN
nemesis. Dessen pulls her punches a bit by making chaste Colie's fast reputation
merely a smear campaign, which left-handedly suggests that the problem with the
gossip was that it was incorrect. It's honest in its assessment of the downside of
transformation, however (Colie almost leaves Norman behind in the dust), and in
the need not being everybody's (Colie is mistaken in thinking that she and her
aunt are kindred persecuted spirits). The appealing milieu and the female bond-
ing, plus the possibility of great and desired change, will make this a satisfying read
for girls in search of literary sisterhood. DS
ENGLISH, KAREN 
Francie. Farrar, 1999 
199p
ISBN 0-374-32456-5 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
Francie is an eighth grader in postwar rural Alabama who is waiting impatiently
for her father, a Pullman porter, to send enough money to bring the family to
Chicago. While she waits, she has to put up with jealous classmates, nay-saying
neighbors, and her own doubts, as well as the indignities and dangers associated
with being black in the white South; she's also tired of the constant drudgery of
her chores at home and the work she does when she accompanies her mother to
town to do laundry, clean, or cook and serve at parties given by affluent whites.
Francie's first-person account encompasses an interesting array of characters, some
glimpsed briefly (like Alberta, the female hobo) and some who have more impact
on her life, like Jesse, the sixteen-year-old she tutors in reading and whose flight
she later aids and abets-at considerable risk to her family and community-when
he is falsely accused of striking a white man. In a fitting conclusion to a novel full
of strong women and absent men, it is Francie's mother who finally buys the
tickets for Chicago (the novel ends on the optimistic note of Francie and her family's
driving to the station). The rich detail of this story about the "bad old days" would
be even more useful if the era were more clearly specified, and the plot is more
sequential than suspenseful. Despite these flaws (and some minor inconsistencies
and flatness of language), Francie's account offers a clear view of the day-to-day
lives of African-American women and children who had to fend for themselves
while watching what they said and did in front of the white folks. FK
FLEISCHMAN, PAUL 
Mind's Eye. 
Holt, 1999 
[112p]
ISBN 0-8050-6314-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Fleischman's short play showcases Elva and Courtney, two patients at a hospital
for the disabled. Eighty-eight-year-old Elva is elderly and infirm, and apparently
without kin; Courtney is a sixteen-year-old new arrival and recent accident victim,
her "spinal cord ... severed completely at the first lumbar vertebra." Elva engages
the reluctant Courtney in an imaginary tour of Italy, encouraging the teenager to
use her imagination to open up her world. The older woman uses the journey to
take the trip to Italy she never made with her deceased husband, Emmet, and her
descriptions of the sites and of Emmet's response to them is poignantly lyrical.
The tour is enlivened by Courtney's less poetic but certainly powerful images of
the destruction of museums and Renaissance masterpieces, and by her solitary
sidetrips, during which she imagines herself a blind lover. The two patients be-
come solace for one another before Elva dies in her sleep; in the final dialogue
between Courtney and Muriel, the new roomie, Courtney tells Muriel about the
imaginary tour, incorporating Elva, Elva's Emmett, and her own imaginary lover
OCTOBER 1999 
* 51
(now conveniently dead of a brain tumor) into a fantasy that appears to have taken
on a most unhealthy life of its own. The playscript format makes this a fast-mov-
ing read, and Fleischman reveals quite a bit about his protagonists in their conver-
sations. The implication is that Courtney undergoes a change of heart due to Elva's
intercession and achieves a certain freedom because of her newly inspired imagina-
tion; unfortunately, the ambiguities that accompany this implication rob it of reso-
nance-by the end, she seems more isolated than ever. Glimpses of Courtney's
rehab, of her high-school friends, and of her fellow patients are included, but they
are slight and inconsequential. It is the dialogue between Elva and Courtney that
is the focus of this book, and that dialogue is ultimately unsatisfying. JMD
FORRESTER, SANDRA 
Dust from Old Bones. 
Morrow, 1999 
164 p
ISBN 0-688-16202-9 
$16.00 
M 
Gr. 6-8
Forrester's tale of cousins struggling against limited life choices is set against the
backdrop of the multiracial society of nineteenth-century New Orleans. Thir-
teen-year-old narrator Simone and her family are gens de couleur libre, free people
of color, mixed-race members of the financially prosperous merchant class. Simone,
dark-skinned and dark-haired, envies her fourteen-year-old cousin Claire-Marie,
whose pale skin and blonde hair mean a rich white protector (a man who will keep
her as his mistress) after she makes her debut at the quadroon balls. When Claire-
Marie's white father (her mother Vivienne's protector) deserts them, cutting off
their allowance and selling their house, Vivienne begins to sell off her belongings,
including two enslaved sisters, and Simone risks everything to help the sisters es-
cape to freedom. Prodigal aunts, voodoo, a dying family patriarch, and hidden
family secrets crowd the sensational plot, but the writing merely plods along, never
achieving an involving pace. Simone tells her story through pedagogic entries in
her journal, providing historical background that interrupts the smooth flow of
the text. Limited characterizations and a stilted reportorial style distance readers
from both emotions and events, and while the unique racial and class system that
existed in New Orleans at this time is certainly fascinating, the storyline does not
support its representation effectively. JMD
FRANK, LucY 
Oy, Joy! Jackson/DK Ink, 1999 
[288p]
ISBN 0-7894-2538-6 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-10
High school freshman Joy is being good-natured about giving up her room in her
family's crowded New York City apartment to her elderly Uncle Max, but she's
having a little trouble with his constant well-meaning interference in her love life-
or lack thereof. In addition, her best friend Maple has fallen hard for a punk
musician and has pretty much forgotten Joy is alive, and Joy's younger brother
(with whom she now shares a room) doesn't know the meaning of the word "bound-
ary." Joy does some well-meaning interfering herself, resulting in her uncle getting
together with his old friend, Rose, and she manages, without Uncle Max's help, to
wind up with a very nice boyfriend of her own (the scene where she and he bond is
a hilarious one involving two escaped hamsters and a terrier). Granted, things tie
up very neatly: Uncle Max moves to Florida with his new romance, Joy and Maple
finally make up, and Joy's family gets to move into Uncle Max's much bigger
apartment. Frank takes her time, though, setting up her plot carefully, exploring
the feelings of the aging Uncle Max, and even depicting Joy's relationship with her
52 
* THE BULLETIN
brother as an exasperated dance of affection. Distinct characterization is a strength
here, as is a careful sense of place (New York City doesn't overwhelm the plot, but
it definitely flavors it). This is a well-constructed piece of fiction with well-con-
ceived characters and a wholesome little romance-two wholesome little romances,
if you count Uncle Max and Rose. JMD
FREEDMAN, 
RUSSELL 
Babe Didrikson Zaharias: 
The Making of a
Champion. Clarion, 1999 
[192p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-395-63367-2 
$18.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-9
Self-promotion, media frenzy, pro/amateur status conflicts, product endorse-
ments-nope, it's not athletics in the '90s. Turn back about half a century to
"The Babe"- 
not Ruth, but Didrikson, who "in the eyes of many... was and still
is the greatest woman athlete of all times." Mastering sport after sport and romp-
ing to victory after victory with an apparent effortlessness that belied arduous prac-
tice and fanatical commitment, Didrikson not only awed spectators but alienated
a fair share of competitors with her declasse Texan-isms and in-your-face bragga-
docio. Freedman retraces her sporting career, detailing landmark matches in track,
tennis, and golf with the martial enthusiasm of a military historian describing a
battle. But he digs far beneath the hoopla of competition to locate the source of
her drive-a need to prove a woman's worth in a masculine field? raw egoism?
sheer delight in the rush of winning? curiosity to test and determine her own lim-
its? Freedman allows her critics plenty of air time ("she was out for Babe, honey,
just Babe") and stares candidly at her over-the-top crudities (a blown golf shot
garnered "Man! All that work and the baby's dead!"), but his own assessment,
when offered, is kind: "In the eyes of her teammates, she was a brash and self-
centered young woman.... But her boasting, more than anything, was a display
of the confidence she felt in her abilities and an expression of her joy in winning."
Lavishly illustrated with black-and-white photos and meticulously referenced with
notes and a bibliographic essay, this title is a first choice for readers after the scoop
on this flamboyant athlete. EB
GASKINS, PEARL FUYO 
What Are You?: Voices ofMixed-Race Young People. 
Holt,
1999 
273p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8050-5968-7 
$18.95 
R Gr. 7-12
In this thought-provoking and accessible collection of interviews, poems, and es-
says, multiracial teens and adults describe the experience and challenges of their
heritage. Ranging in age from fourteen to twenty-eight and representing a variety
of racial combinations, forty-five young men and women discuss their racial iden-
tity, including peer acceptance, dating, parents, and the pressure to deny half their
identity or fit into narrow definitions of race. Under broad topic areas ("Are You
This, Are You That?"; "Sticks and Stones"; "Who's That White Lady?", etc.), each
chapter presents related interviews; between chapters are longer profiles that offer
extended portraits of selected interview subjects. Distinct voices, an engrossing
topic, frank discussions, and engaging personalities represented in a multitude of
black-and-white snapshots give the book an immediacy that will appeal to young
adult readers. The work offers opportunities for classroom discussion, including a
"Bill of Rights for Racially Mixed People," which says that youth have the right to
identify themselves differently from how their parents may identify them.
OCTOBER 1999 
* 
53
Monoracial as well as multiracial readers may find that this book increases their
understanding of social diversity; it will especially be useful for multiracial families
and their advocates. The end of the book provides an informative list of social
organizations, media, resources, magazines, and e-zines. For a historical and schol-
arly overview of the multiracial experience, teachers will want to pair this with
Nash's Forbidden Love (BCCB 6/99). JNH
GIBBONS, GAIL 
Santa Who?; written and illus. by Gail Gibbons. 
Morrow,
1999 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-15529-4 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-15528-6 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
In what amounts to an act of professional bravery, one of the leading ladies of
preschool nonfiction walks the wire between truth and lore in this examination of
the many guises of Santa Claus. She keeps her balance by focusing steadily on the
way Western cultures have come to visualize him over the centuries, from his gen-
esis in philanthropic Saint Nicholas, to his American iteration in colonial New
Amsterdam as Sinter Claes, through his literary transformations at the hands of
Washington Irving and Clement Moore, to his enduring image from the pen of
Thomas Nast. A nod is given to gift-givers such as Christkindl, Father Christmas,
Befana, and the Jule-Nisser, but the spotlight never strays far from S.C. himself,
allowing listeners to regard other seasonal stars as alternate paragons of generosity
rather than as rivals or-worse-pretenders. Cheery watercolor cartoons abound,
framed in the ribbons and evergreen sprigs and ornaments of Christmas Present.
There may be a lingering inquiry or two regarding Claus' omnipresence in stores
and street corners come December, but you really don't expect anyone to make
that question go away, do you? EB
GILMORE, KATE 
The Exchange Student. Houghton, 1999 
[224p]
ISBN 0-395-57511-7 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 7-10
Daria, teenage naturalist and wildlife biologist, already has a room full of exotic
species when her family's household acquires a new addition. The exchange stu-
dent of the title, Fen, is one of a group of teenagers from the planet Chela, sent to
Earth as representatives of their culture. This is post-cataclysm Earth, a world
whose animal and human population has been decimated. Animal conservation is
of primary importance, and Daria is dedicated to that mission. The chameleon-
like, secretive Fen's discovery of and reaction to animals breaches his natural re-
serve and leads to a bond between him and Daria. It is clear throughout the novel
that Fen and his fellow Chelans have an ulterior motive for being on Earth, and
the ultimate revelation that Chela has suffered the same sort of natural disaster as
Earth and that nothing is left of their animal population, is somewhat anticlimac-
tic. The conclusion, in which Chelan and Earth scientists decide to collaborate on
restoring the animal populations of both Chela and Earth, is abrupt and facile.
Still, while the text does get a bit messagy, the characterization of Fen and Daria,
their growing relationship, and their mutual passion for animals, makes for some
very thought-provoking reading. Science-fiction fans with a bent toward interspecies
understanding will be pleased. JMD
54 
* THE BULLETIN
GRALLEY, JEAN 
Hogula: Dread Pig of Night; written and illus. by Jean
Gralley. 
Holt, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-5700-5 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
The titular porker lives with his faithful servants, Chad and Igoretta, in the requi-
site creepy castle, and he has a sinister MO: "When he finds you, he'll snort you
into a deep piggie snooze!" Despite the joys of mild evil, Hogula is lonely and
yearning for friendship. After a showoff turn at the mall that unfortunately gains
him no friends, he leaves a shoe behind. Elvis Ann finds it and trick-or-treats her
way around town trying to match it up to an owner ("Like, is this your shoe?"),
and eventually the shoe (well, glove) makes it back to Hogula; after a brief setback
(Elvis Ann proves to be the Dread Queen of Kissyface) they bond in mutually
blissful friendship. This is a rousingly silly campy pastiche, and youngsters will
appreciate the blend of fairy tales, Dracula allusions, and Halloween fun, especially
if the reader-aloud has a useful repertory of voices (time to buff up that Bela Lugosi
imitation). The illustrations are vaguely Peggy Rathmannesque in their energetic
ink lines and cheerful gouache tints; the multitude of speech bubbles (including an
upside-down "Sigh" as Hogula dangles alongside his hanging bats) enhance the
already high-spirited tone with a comic-book flair. This will make a snortingly
funny Halloween readaloud, and don't forget to read the Hogula headlines ("Por-
cine Fiend Snorts Victims into Deep Sleep") on the endpapers. DS
HAMILTON, VIRGINIA 
Bluish. 
Blue Sky/Scholastic, 1999 
[128p]
ISBN 0-590-28879-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-7
Fifth-grader Dreenie is reluctant best friends with Tuli, sometimes resenting Tuli's
put-on Chicana mannerisms and wistful longing for family. When Natalie (Blu-
ish) arrives in their classroom in her wheelchair, puppy in tow, the three form a
delicately balanced alliance. Dreenie doesn't realize that "Blewish" is a derogatory
word for being black and Jewish, and she thinks that the name "Bluish" suits Natalie
because "this girl is like moonlight. So pale you can see the blue veins all over. ...
Her hands look like moonlight fishes about to dive and flop off the arms of her
wheelchair." The class circles around the prickly Bluish at first cautiously, fearing
the leukemia from which she is still recovering, but then more easily, as she be-
comes part of their community. Hamilton allows the three girls' characters to
unfold along with their story, never rushing the moment. The handling of Bluish's
illness and her classmates' concern is genuine and unsentimental, and the friends'
patience with and unity against that illness is simply but effectively depicted. In-
terspersed among the third-person narrated chapters are entries from Dreenie's
journal, a structural device that provides an intimate, inside voice that draws in
readers and unobtrusively adds depth and complexity to the action. The scene in
which Bluish finally takes off her knit cap and reveals a newly growing fuzz of red
hair, "the color of a new penny," is throat-catchingly funny. This novel transcends
genre labels with its honest and masterful depiction of the rewards and difficulties
of friendship. JMD
HENKES, KEVN 
Oh!; illus. by Laura Dronzek. 
Greenwillow, 1999 
24 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-17054-4 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-17053-6 
$15.00 
R 
1-3 yrs
Henkes' playful paean to snowfall ("The snow falls and falls all night./ In the morning
everything is white./ And everyone wants to play./ Oh!") will strike a responsive
OCTOBER 1999 
* 55
chord in young toddlers. The square trim size is small enough for little hands, and
the simply drafted acrylics (featuring a palette heavy on azure sky and white snow)
have the familiarity of classroom-friendly student art, which lends a cozy cachet to
the proceedings. The very simple storyline-the inspired snowplay antics of squirrel,
rabbit, cat, dog, children, and cardinals-will easily transmit in lapsit storytimes
and lends itself to all kinds of winter, weather, and animal activities. Henkes' text
has an ingenuous excitement that will appeal to the very young, and it may even
remind older listeners of the time when snow days were a very good thing. JMD
HOLLAND, ISABELLE 
Paperboy. Holiday House, 1999 
137p
ISBN 0-8234-1422-1 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
The family responsibilities of Kevin O'Donnell have made him older than his
twelve years. His mother is dead, his father is out of work and hospitalized, and
Kevin is hard-pressed to find paying work that will feed him and his younger
sister. A chance encounter with the owner/editor of the New York Chronicle gets
him a steady job as a messenger; running errands for the staff clarifies Kevin's
desire to work for a newspaper and to find a way out of his family's grinding
poverty. When Kevin is falsely accused of stealing money from his employer's
wife, he quits his job; penniless, hungry, and desperate to pay the rent before he
and his sister are thrown out on the street, he steals a purse from a grocery store.
He is caught by the police and taken to jail. Freed by the intercession of the parish
priest and his former employer, Kevin is reinstated in his job, his father gets out of
the hospital, and the back rent is paid. Holland gives a colorful, sensory picture of
New York City in the 1880s, contrasting the bustling streets and tenements with
the quieter ways of the upper class editor's lifestyle. The racism against the Irish,
the crowded living and dangerous working conditions, and the role of the church
in daily life are all vividly depicted. While Kevin's characterization is well-rounded,
the character of Kevin's employer, so important to the Algeresque plot, is distant
and hazy, and secondary characters are sketchily drawn. The pace is quick, and
Kevin's dilemma is an involving one. Unfortunately, the conclusion relies on the
sort of neat end-tying that just doesn't do justice to what has come before. JMD
HOWARD, ELIZABETH FITZGERALD. 
When Will Sarah Come?; illus. with photo-
graphs by Nina Crews. 
Greenwillow, 1999 
24p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-16181-2 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-16180-4 
$16.00 
R 
2-5 yrs
Jonathan watches forlornly from the porch as big sister Sarah goes off to her first
day of school. He plays with his blocks but sadly says, "I want to play with Sarah.
When will Sarah come?"; he rides his toy fire engine "ZOOM ZOOM
BARRUMMM!" but still he sighs, "I want to ride with Sarah." Jonathan spends
his day actively playing with this and that, but always in the back of his mind is the
question, "When will Sarah come?" Finally, "A yellow school bus is coming! The
bus is stopping. The bus is stopping! It's Sarah! Sarah is home. ZOOM ZOOM
BARRUMMMM!" Howard's simple text captures the melancholy Jonathan feels
at the loss of his companion to more "grown-up" things like school; the text also
captures his impatience as he waits for her return home. Crews' camera follows
curly-haired, brown-skinned Jonathan in his yellow slicker, documenting his wait-
ing day in a series of color photographs. The large sans serif font is placed cleanly
on the white space around the various images, and the occasional blurry photo
56 
* THE BULLETIN
gives a sense of active motion. With opportunities for sound-effects participation
and for discussion of small but important life changes, this is a tidy package to
share with young listeners, either singly or in groups. JMD
HUBBARD, PATRICIA 
Trick or Treat Countdown; illus. by Michael Letzig. 
Holiday
House, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1367-5 
$15.95 
R 
3-6yrs
Count up from "One haunted house groans" to "Twelve creeping cats hide" and
down again in this tropically colored counting book with a Halloween theme.
The counted characters ("Two tall tombstones moan. Three green witches cackle")
are set in a tree-branch frame with a jack-o'-lantern on top (the jack-o'-lantern
glows with the appropriate number); each frame is set on a vividly hued page, with
a wide border. The colors are birthday-party bright, the drafting is smooth (even
though the "ten hairy werewolves" look like bears), and the compositions are un-
crowded enough for group viewing. The illustrations are more snuggly than scary,
and this downplaying of spookier Halloween motifs continues in the reassuring
verses that intermittently interrupt the countdown: "'Boo's and 'Oooo's and skel-
eton screams,/ All make-believe on Halloween." This is a playful title with partici-
patory possibilities. JMD
JAMES, BETSY 
Tadpoles; written and illus. by Betsy James. 
Dutton, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-525-46197-3 
$14.99 
R 4-6 yrs
Molly gains a new understanding of her baby brother, Davey, by watching frog
embryos develop from tadpoles to frogs. The story is told in straightforward,
accessible language, revealing Molly's frustrations and emotional development
through dialogue and the interplay between text and illustrations. A child's per-
spective is credibly presented, and Molly's unhappiness rings true when she must
return the frogs to the pond. Her mother's response when Molly claims owner-
ship of the frogs ("Or do they belong to themselves?") might go over the head of an
egocentric preschooler, but young readers struggling with new siblings will iden-
tify with Molly and see the parallels between the changing tadpole and Davey's
learning to walk. The book ends by describing the life cycle and care of frogs.
Cheerful watercolor and colored pencil illustrations reflect the everyday events of
the text, while circular inserts show the developing embryos and their metamor-
phosis into frogs. A springlike palette of sunny colors (changing to purples and
greens when Molly unhappily learns that she must give up her frogs) and pleasing
compositions give the expressive figures of Molly and Davey charm and appeal.
Parents looking for a novel way to prepare siblings for a new baby or to explain
physical development will hop into this one. JNH
JOHNSTON, TONY An Old Shell: Poems ofthe Galdpagos; by Tony Johnston; illus.
by Tom Pohrt. 
Farrar, 1999 
54p
ISBN 0-374-35648-3 
$15.00 
R Gr. 4-6
In thirty-four poems (free verse and haiku) Johnston describes the natural world of
the Galipagos Islands, depicting a variety of subjects from whales, buccaneers, and
birds to the sea and insects. Lyrical and fluent, the poems describe the beauty and
fragility of the Galipagos and showcase Johnston's musical voice: "And now the
great crepuscular choir/ comes singing./ Every bush throbs with its/ hymn/ of
stars/ of dreams/ of wings./ I know the words/ by heart/ so now/ I sing." Readers
OCTOBER 1999 
* 
57
will enjoy the poetry's imaginative language ("skibbling over the sand"), creative
line breaks, alliteration, judicious rhyme, and its clean, eye-inviting spareness (the
ink of text and art is a chocolatey off-black attractively set against creamy pages).
Pohrt's line drawings resemble a naturalist's sketches, and their soft focus, smoky
shading, and irregular edge lines suggest the islands' fragility and complement the
poems. This work will appeal to students who are ready for poems that don't
always rhyme or tell stories; it may also find a place in natural history and science
curricula. JNH
JOYCE, WILLIAM 
Rolie Polie Olie; written and illus. by William Joyce. 
Geringer/
HarperCollins, 1999 
[48p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027164-7 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027163-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
In rapping, rhyming verse, Rolie Polie Olie-a swell, rechargeable guy who lives
on a planet somewhere in space-romps through a day with his family. Together
they dance, clean, and play: "Then Momma said,/ 'Chores must be done.'/ And
Olie moaned,/ 'Oh, that's no fun!'/ But Zowie helped,/ and so did Pop./ They all
jumped on/ the hip-hop mop/ and mopped the house/ from tip to top!" Rolie's
idyllic childhood is interrupted only when his play leads to misbehavior. His
loving family quickly forgives him, and everyone goes to bed with hugs and kisses.
The work's airbrushed computer graphics suit its electronic, robot-like protago-
nist. Joyce creates a color-saturated, superreal world with acidic lighting and cir-
cular shapes, reminiscent of computer-generated cartoon animations such as Antz.
The characters' bright yellow faces with black hair (and spiky antenna) and black
circular features catch the eye and pull the viewer into the text, while creative
typography (the cursive L's and Y's mirror each other) rounds it all off. Despite
the techno-futuristic setting and digital images, the narrative itself is unfortunately
neither innovative nor compelling. What will catch and hold readers is the relent-
less rhythm sustained through end rhymes, alliteration, assonance, and wordplay.
Edgy illustrations, rollicking language, the word "underpants" (always a crowd-
pleaser for preschoolers), and a visually cute protagonist, however, do not quite
recharge a ho-hum plot. JNH
KENNEDY, KIM 
Frankenfrog; illus. by Doug Kennedy. 
Hyperion, 1999 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2323-2 
$16.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0373-8 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
The mad Dr. Franken has invented (among other things) an "incredible HYPER-
SIZING tonic" that works "wonders on lollipops," but while the mad scientist
and his Mungers (helpers) are munching on giant suckers, "a fly took a nosedive
into the hyper-sizing tonic and emerged as... a hideous HYPERFLY-a droolish,
ghoulish creature that towered over the doctor and his Mungers!" The huge fly
starts to "multifly," and Dr. Franken recruits a fly-eating frog from "Croaking
Acres," the local swamp-side cemetery. With the help of "leap-electronics" and
"croak-conductors," voila! FRANKENFROG! The doc wants the frog to eat the
flies, but all Frankenfrog wants to do is go back to the swamp. His return causes
consternation among the regulars, and poor Frank is left on his lonesome. The
sudden appearance of Hyperfly, clutching the mad doc and his helpers in her
58 
* 
THE BULLETIN
grasp, with dinner on her mind, galvanizes him into action. The text rolls along
like a hyperactive horror movie, just waiting for a reader to exploit the melodra-
matic possibilities. The illustrations resemble warped if slightly amateurish Looney
Tunes, the characters bug-eyed and maniacal. The garishly colored, chaotic com-
positions are crowded with mad scientist paraphernalia and are sure to spark some
ideas for Halloween redecorating. JMD
KIMMEL, ERIC A., ad. 
The Rooster'sAntlers: A Story ofthe Chinese Zodiac; illus. by
YongSheng Xuan. 
Holiday House, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1385-3 
$16.95 
Ad 
4-8 yrs
This meandering pourquoi tale explains why roosters dislike centipedes by telling
the story of how Rooster was tricked by Centipede into giving Dragon his beauti-
ful coral antlers. (Dragon needed Rooster's antlers to cover his baldness, which he
saw as an obstacle to his being chosen by the Jade Emperor to be one of the dozen
animals honored in the twelve-year cycle of the Chinese calendar.) Centipede is
actually not much of a trickster-he gets the antlers from Rooster by asking him
for them, explaining why Dragon wants them-and the lesson about hubris Cen-
tipede learns later in the story seems out of place, but the basic theme of sharing
should speak to young listeners. Cerulean blue paper provides a restful back-
ground for the strongly lined cut-paper figures, and the rich colors allow the illus-
trator to focus the reader's attention on the main action. The author's note at the
end explains a little bit about the Chinese calendar, and an appendix describes the
traits attributed to each animal. A chart on the back jacket allows children and
adults born between 1960 and 2007 to fulfill their natural human desire to iden-
tify which animal is associated with the year of their birth. Those of you lucky
enough to have held onto Ed Young's The Rooster's Horns (BCCB 5/79) may find
this retelling more formal than energetic, but it's still a substantial and appealing
variant. FK
LAFAYE,A. 
Nissa's Place. Simon, 1999 
24 4p
ISBN 0-689-82610-9 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
In this sequel to The Year of the Sawdust Man (BCCB 7/98), Nissa is adjusting to
life in her small Louisiana town after the departure of her mother and her father's
subsequent remarriage. She misses her mother desperately, however, and after
Heirah Rae returns to Louisiana for an emotionally complex visit with her daugh-
ter, Nissa accompanies her back to Chicago to see her mother's life in the big city.
The visit is an eye-opener, especially after Nissa's father and his now-pregnant new
wife travel to the city as well, and Nissa begins to come to terms with the different
decisions her parents have made and to develop her own project: a hometown
library. LaFaye's picture of small-town Louisiana existence in the heart of the
Depression shimmers with leisurely life, and Nissa's gradual adjustment to her
parents' split and its implications is thoughtfully explored. The characterizations
(especially the apotheosis of Heirah Rae, who has more than her fair share of the
book's focus and sympathy; Nissa's also a preternaturally perceptive thirteen-year-
old) are romanticized, however, and the book's stately pace makes the final chap-
ters' library-creation plot (wherein Nissa grapples with the issue of segregation)
seem hasty by comparison. This may nonetheless appeal to readers absorbed by
the contemplative mood and the emotional intensity of Nissa's wonderings. DS
OCTOBER 1999 
* 
59
LEVINE, GAIL CARSON 
Princess Sonora and the Long Sleep; illus. by Mark
Elliott. 
HarperCollins, 1999 
[9 6p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028065-4 
$8.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028064-6 
$8.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Yet another generation of royalty in the Kingdom of Biddle is in crisis. Uninvited
fairy Belladonna has crashed the christening of Princess Sonora and has laid the
all-too-familiar curse of death by pricked finger. The well-known remedy has
been applied by fairy Adrianna, and as any savvy reader knows, the princess and
her court are eventually in for a lengthy snooze. In this third entry in the Princess
Tales series (see BCCB 5/99), Levine refashions "Sleeping Beauty" not through
zany twists or iconoclastic up-ending, but with character development absent from
the original (Sonora's extremely unwilling to get hitched simply on the tenuous
claim of a stranger's kiss; Prince Christopher is justly leery of smooching a maid
covered in dust and cobwebs) and a peek at pertinent developments beyond the
castle walls throughout the "missing" hundred years. Levine certainly knows the
way to happily-ever-after, adhering to the time-honored route while relishing char-
acters and incidents along the way; fans of her previous retellings will happily pack
their bags for a return trip to Biddle. EB
LEWIS, MAGGIE 
Morgy Makes His Move; illus. by Michael Chesworth. 
Houghton,
1999 
[80p]
ISBN 0-395-92284-4 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Morgy MacDougal-MacDuff is newly arrived in New England from California,
and he's having some transplantation glitches. He gets off to an embarrassing
start, acquires his "own personal bully" in the big fifth-grader Ferguson, who stuffs
leaves and snow down Morgy's shirt out on the playground, and ends up demoted
to remedial hockey with the little kids. He finds some compensations, however, in
a new friend, an eventful, snowed-in Thanksgiving, and finally in the arrival of
twin baby sisters, whom he can teach all about the place he now calls home. Relo-
cation stories abound, but this one has a poker-faced humor and an economical
way with words that keeps the account sparkling ("There were so many kids on
top of me," says Morgy flatly about a hockey pile-up, "it was dark"). Morgy's
energetic family is unforcedly charming, and the discovery that his mother's dili-
gent knitting student, Rudolf, is the feared Ferguson is ruefully amusing as well as
inevitable. With the flair of Barbara Park but a relaxed spareness all her own,
Lewis makes Morgy an entertaining standout who would be well worthy of a se-
quel. The cheerful exaggeration ofChesworth's black-and-white art suits the easygo-
ing story. DS
MACY, SUE, comp. 
Play Like a Girl: A Celebration of Women in Sports; comp. by
Sue Macy and Jane Gottesman. 
Holt, 1999 
32p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8050-6071-5 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
Macy and Gottesman have collected an array of photographs and quotations that
give readers a glimpse into the nature of women's sports. Action-packed color
photographs of various athletes pair with quotations about their particular sports,
some quoted from athletes themselves (Chris Evert) and some from writers (Ellen
60 
* THE BULLETIN
Gilchrist). The clean layout, with contrasting text jumping out of blocks of back-
ground color, highlights the drama of the photographs while providing for ample
space surrounding the quotations. Unfortunately, the athletes seen in the pictures
are only identified in the closing photo credits, forcing the reader to flip to the
back of the book to identify the women, and the uninitiated may mistake the
pictured athletes for the sources of the quotations; the book also never really be-
comes anything but a scrapbooky moodpiece for aficionados (albeit an engaging
one). Still, it's powerful for girls to see women athletes in the midst of competition
and then realize their own goals are in reach. EAB
MAYER, MARIANNA 
Women Warriors: Myths and Legends ofHeroic Women; illus.
by Julek Heller. 
Morrow, 1999 
80p
ISBN 0-688-15522-7 
$18.00 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
A dozen heroines are presented in this collection based on the traditions of as
many cultures. The goddess Devi of India conquers the Evil One; Hiera, an Ama-
zon queen, defeats a greedy king; Yakami ofJapan slays a sea monster; and Winyan
Ohitika inspires Sioux warriors by daringly counting coup against their enemies.
Each woman is introduced by a full-page painting that precedes her story; a his-
torical note opens each tale. Despite the intriguing subject matter, the text is dry
and the storytelling lacks pace. The watercolors are often poorly drafted, with
pedestrian compositions; while there is a certain energy to the battle scenes, faces
are indistinct and episodes chosen for illustration lack variety, depicting both the
obvious and mildly sensational. Still, Boadicea battling the Romans for Britain,
young Mella braving the cave of the python to gain medicine for her sick father,
and Queen Semiramis achieving supreme power in Assyria are certainly heroines
worth knowing. The romance of the subject, fueled by popular female telewarriors,
should be enough to lure even reluctant readers. An introduction and included
notes give some historical background; a pronunciation guide, map, bibliography,
and annotated index are included. JMD
MAYNARD, BILL 
Quiet, Wyatt!; illus. by Frank Remkiewicz. 
Putnam,
1999 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-399-23217-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-7 yrs
Whether it be big kids building a model plane, Wyatt's older sister washing the
car, or his father getting an egg out for breakfast, Wyatt would like to join in and
fly it/dry it/fry it, but the answer is always no ("Quiet, Wyatt," says his dad. "You're
not old enough to fry an egg"). Tired of being shushed and excluded, Wyatt clams
up completely: he doesn't tell the big kids where their lost plane is, he doesn't
mention to his sister that rain is coming, and he doesn't warn his father that the
egg is rolling off the counter. He finally breaks silence, however, in order to save a
puppy hiding underneath the mail truck, whereupon Wyatt's verbal contributions
are finally appreciated and inclusion is finally his. The story wanders about a bit in
the middle, when it deviates from its pattern of internal rhyme, but the "Quiet,
Wyatt" refrain keeps the rhythm moving and offers a gratifying opportunity for
audience participation. The fable-esque structure makes it clear that literal reality
isn't the name of the game here and keeps the sudden turnaround on Wyatt's
inclusion from jarring, but the humorous touch at the end (Wyatt playing drums
to the tune of his pup's howling) ensures that matters don't get too elevated.
OCTOBER 1999 
* 
61
Remkiewicz' art has a softer edge than some of his other work; muted colored-
paper backgrounds and smudgy colored-pencil accents give a tactile texture to the
illustrations, making towheaded Wyatt a roundfaced kid next door in fetching
green suspenders. Used in tandem with Loud Emily (BCCB 10/98) or The Loud-
ness ofSam (4/99), this would be an entertaining volume-based readaloud; just try
it, Wyatt. DS
McGILL, ALICE 
Molly Bannaky; illus. by Chris K. Soentpiet. 
Houghton,
1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-72287-X 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-7
Servant Molly Walsh had the misfortune to milk an ornery cow; she spilled a pail
of milk, and for her "theft" was deported to the American colonies as an inden-
tured servant. After serving her seven years, she staked claim to a farm, and when
it proved too much to handle alone, she bought an African slave named Bannaky,
whose knowledge about agriculture and irrigation practices helped Molly's farm
succeed. The two fell in love, Molly signed Bannaky's freedom papers, and they
were married, despite colonial laws forbidding their union. Their eldest daughter,
Mary, also married a freed African slave, and their son was the highly regarded
scientist and mathematician, Benjamin Banneker. The serendipitous events of
Molly Walsh Bannaky's life as fictionalized here are engaging enough to maintain
interest without sensationalism. McGill tells this tale in an informed, observant
voice that weaves together the chance encounters and quirks of fate into a satisfy-
ing revelation. The writing is descriptive but spare, the implied emotions more
resonant echoes than obvious pronouncements. Soentpiet's watercolors use the
contrasting play of light and dark to cast the figures in this family drama in bold
relief. The compositions, in arrangements reminiscent of historical tableaux, have
a weighty, monumental feel to them; the expressions are sometimes awkwardly
articulated, but the impact is still strong. A historical note is appended. JMD
McKEAN, THOMAS 
Into the Candlelit Room and Other Strange Tales. 
Putnam,
1999 
[22 4p]
ISBN 0-399-23359-8 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Five different narrators each get a crack at telling their unusual personal stories:
Vladimir and Sharon write in their respective diaries, Becky Sue uses a college-
application essay, Leah pens a sequence of letters to a friend back home, and the
unnamed narrator of "Lily" offers no writerly frame at all. Some entries employ
traditional supernatural elements (Vladimir is tempted by one of Satan's suave
minions, Sharon has an encounter with a fortune-teller, and Leah sees a ghost),
whereas others have a different flavor of creepiness (Becky Sue unintentionally
reveals her repeatedly murderous history, and "Lily" is either a baby sister so tiny
and evanescent that most people can't see her or a figment of the narrator's mother's
imagination). Though the first story is slightly unbalanced by its twist (Vladimir's
diary proves to be a false trail laid for the demon, but the revelation comes too late
for his character to engage reader sympathy), McKean makes some particularly
good use of conceptual corkscrews, setting them up for easy negotiation (readers
will, for instance, guess before Leah does that she's wrong about who's a ghost and
who's a real person, and Sharon's finish will ring a bell with those youngsters
62 
* THE BULLETIN
familiar with urban legends) without belaboring them. Curricular possibilities are
also rife here: Becky Sue's self-aggrandizing essay is a textbook example of irony,
and "Lily" would effectively open up a discussion of ambiguity. Kids looking for
something with a bit more scope and richness than Judith Gorog's collections will
find this satisfyingly offbeat. DS
MELTZER, MILTON 
Witche 
WitchesaWitch-hunts: A History ofPersecution. Scholastic,
1999 
[12 8p]
ISBN 0-590-48517-2 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
Respected historian Meltzer takes a long view of the persecution of supposed witches
and of the social and psychological forces behind such group scapegoating. The
book discusses historic (generally European) views of witchcraft, looking at spe-
cific cases in England, Ireland, Germany, and of course Salem Village; the influ-
ence of the church, politics (James I of England had written a tract about the
detection of witches), and the pivotal text Malleus Maleficarum are also explored.
Further chapters examine the Holocaust as witchhunt, the McCarthy blacklist,
and contemporary fears of Satanism and misconceptions about neopaganism. The
overview gives a fresh slant to the Salem history, the psychological approach is
absorbing-Meltzer links persecution to an unwillingness to accept the role of
chance in human affairs and a desire to find a cause for all ills-and the cultural
examinations of the disproportionate persecution of women and the role of chil-
dren in the witchhunts are piquant. Unfortunately, the other persecutions are
cursorily examined and the commonalities underexplored (was the disproportion-
ate persecution of women part of his other examples, for instance?), and there are
a few redundancies and confusions that mar the text. Still, this is a provocative
and useful new approach to a somewhat shopworn subject; it might be interesting
to use it in concert with Giblin's When Plague Strikes (BCCB 10/95) for a discus-
sion of historical responses to tragedy that are themselves tragic. Source notes and
an index are included. DS
MEYER, CAROLYN 
Mary, Bloody Mary. 
Gulliver/Harcourt, 1999 
[22 4 p]
ISBN 0-15-201906-5 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
The title's slightly misleading since this novel features Mary Tudor's account of
her pre-Bloody days, starting just when Anne Boleyn enters the picture and con-
cluding with Mary's introduction to Queen Jane after Anne's execution. Meyer
cheerfully ahistoricizes, turning Henry VIII's repudiation of Mary's mother into a
heightened version of a contemporary divorce soap as Anne coquettishly seduces
Henry away from his first wife and daughter and proves to be a shrill and control-
ling harpy of a second wife, poisoning her husband's mind while her stepdaughter
languishes in poverty or suffers servitude to her baby half-sister. The riches-to-rags
plot has all the martyrish appeal of a literal Little Princess, and readers will relish
seeing the evil homewrecker Anne get her comeuppance. The characters are car-
toonishly drawn, though, with Anne particularly overblown and stereotypical; nor
is historical basis in fact enough to make Mary's romantic interest in Reginald Pole
credible or compelling here. So long as readers don't mistake this for biography,
however, they'll have an enjoyable time identifying with Mary as the put-upon
princess ousted by Dad's midlife crisis. DS
OCTOBER 1999 
* 63
MOLLEL, TOLOLWA M. 
My Rows andPiles ofCoins; illus. by E. B. Lewis. 
Clarion,
1999 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-395-75186-1 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Saruni is saving his money for a bicycle so he can help his mother to market with
her vegetables. He saves every coin, avoiding the temptation ofchapatis, kites, and
whistles, arranging his money in piles and rows. When he thinks he has enough,
he goes to the bicycle dealer, only to find out he is far from his goal. His parents
discover his plan, and his father "sells" Saruni his old bicycle; Saruni's mother then
returns Saruni's hard-earned cash to him, saying, "It's a reward for all your help to
us." This tale of family life in Tanzania focuses on the hopes and dreams of Saruni,
a good-natured boy and thoughtful son. The gentle momentum of the story never
falters as Saruni counts and saves his money, helps his parents, and learns to ride
his father's bicycle. Lewis' realistic watercolor illustrations use light as an integral
part of the composition in scenes shot through with sunbeams and contrasting
shadows. Recurring images of Saruni's savings, in piles and rows, remind readers
and listeners of his secret goal. An author's note explains Tanzanian currency and
gives some background for the tale; a brief glossary defines Maasai and Swahili
words used in the text. JMD
MOON, PAT 
The Spying Game. 
Putnam, 1999 
[208p]
ISBN 0-399-23354-7 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
Twelve-year-old Joe Harris' life was changed irrevocably when his father was killed
in a car accident, an accident that may have been the fault of another driver, who's
being investigated for negligence. Joe has no doubts, and he eschews friends and
diversions to track the driver, taking a paper route in order to spy on the man's
house and family, developing a notebook documenting his activities, and engaging
in anonymous threats and harassment (painting "This Car Kills" on the offending
vehicle, for instance). Though the family soon moves away, the driver's son, Alex,
proves to be a classmate at Joe's new school, and Joe's private campaign becomes
public-and more dangerous than he had intended. Moon pulls readers right into
Joe's single-minded pursuit, effectively emulating a viewpoint that sees other im-
portant matters only on the periphery; the family's post-tragedy dysfunction is
evident, as is the price Joe is paying for his mother's good-hearted attempts to
"protect" him. This isn't a horror story, however, and Joe's moral growth, as he
moves to stop his classmates' bullying of Alex, is believably depicted as well. This
is in some ways a British counterpart to VanOosting's The Last Payback (BCCB 6/
97) in its emphasis on the bitterness, anger, and need to find blame that are the
legacy of such tragedies; readers will find Joe's emotional odyssey gripping to the
end. DS
NOLAN, 
LUCY. 
The Lizard Man of Crabtree County; illus. by Jill
Kastner. 
Cavendish, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-7614-5049-1 
$15.95 
R 
6-9 yrs
"It all started the very same day that James Arthur decided to be a shrub. If he
looked like shrub, maybe something interesting would happen .... Anyway, he
plastered leaves all over himself and acted like a bush." Nothing of note occurs,
and James decides to wash himself off in Miss Bunch's pond. Miss Bunch sees
64 
* THE BULLETIN
James' distorted shadow on her barn and raises the alarm about "a giant Lizard
Man, with green scales and big claws and a pointy head... heading straight for her
pond." The tale escalates from here as Crabtree County mobilizes to catch the
Lizard Man; James himself investigates, but despite visits to the pond by daylight
and moonlight (after which additional Lizard Man sightings are reported by oth-
ers) he has no luck tracking the creature down. When the Lizard Man is seen
jumping "a truck headed for Alabama," everyone is relieved, except James Arthur:
"He sat on a rock and pouted. No fair! Something exciting had finally happened
in Crabtree County... and James Arthur never saw a thing." Nolan tells her story
with tongue-in-cheek flair, and her cadenced text just hollers to be read aloud.
Kastner's offbeat oil paintings support and enhance the text, telling the "real" story:
James Arthur-as-shrub is the Lizard Man, a fact that makes the tale doubly hu-
morous. Illustrations feature Crabtree County at its small town best, and the
characters are bucolically expressive. This is a fine example of a successful marriage
between text and pictures, and kids will laugh out loud at James Arthur's search for
excitement. JMD
O'CONNOR, BARBARA 
Me and Rupert Goody. 
Foster/Farrar, 1999 
[112p]
ISBN 0-374-34904-5 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 4-6
"Uncle" Beau Goody's general store has always been a haven of peace and predict-
ability where Jennalee spends nearly every waking hour that she's not in school.
Away from her houseful of noisy and nosy siblings, Jennalee cherishes the routine
of emptying pop bottle tops from the cooler, setting out the sale table, "buttoning
up" the door at the close of the work day, and hanging out with the old man who
clearly enjoys her company and values her aid. The arrival of Rupert Goody, a
slow-moving and slow-thinking black man who claims to be Uncle Beau's son,
throws a wrench into Jennalee's life, and the little girl is particularly riled by the
fact that Uncle Beau ("a one-hundred-percent pure North Carolina paleface") ac-
cepts Rupert's claim and welcomes him into his (well, their) home. Rupert takes a
shine to Jennalee, imitating her words and actions, craving her very chores around
the store, and generally driving the prickly girl to the end of her rope. It takes a
couple of dangerous accidents, a string of premature judgments and harsh words,
and a lot of patient love from Uncle Beau to bring her around. O'Connor lovingly
limns the Smoky Mountain community, insular but not narrow-minded, that calmly
accepts Rupert with a simple "Well, I'll be." Jennalee is vividly drawn, bristling
with every slight, achingly dependent on the stability she can only find with her
elderly companion. Rupert's sunny (yet never buffoonish) nature shines steadily
forth, an undoubted inheritance from his kindhearted father and the beautiful,
smiling mother who has left nothing behind but a photograph. EB
OPDYKE, IRENE GUT 
In My Hands: Memories of a Holocaust Rescuer; by Irene
Gut Opdyke with Jennifer Armstrong. 
Knopf, 1999 
[272p] 
illus. with pho-
tographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-99181-6 
$19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-89181-1 
$18.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 9-12
Polish Catholic Irene Gut was sixteen years old and studying to be a nurse when
the Nazis invaded her homeland. Evacuated from the hospital, she was captured
OCTOBER 1999 
* 65
first by the Russians and then by the Germans. She found herself toiling as a
munitions worker, but her ability to speak German, Polish, and some Russian
made her valuable to the occupying forces; she gained a fairly comfortable position
as waitress and housekeeper in the German officers' mess, which overlooked the
Glinice ghetto. She began to smuggle food to the imprisoned Jews in a box she
slipped under the fence; soon she found herself taking chances that meant her life
if she were caught. Opdyke's memoir reads like a wildly escalating adventure,
hair-raising and suspenseful: a young woman with no power dares to save Jews
right under the eyes of the Nazis, with a quick lie, a flirtatious smile, and an arro-
gant manner sometimes all that stands between her and death. The language is
poetic and forceful as Opdyke and Armstrong tell of the humanity and compas-
sion Opdyke discovered amidst the brutality and insanity of Hitler's Final Solu-
tion. The book downplays Opdyke's heroic actions: "You must understand that
I did not become a resistance fighter, a smuggler ofJews, a defier of the SS and the
Nazis all at once. One's first steps are always small: I had begun by hiding food
under a fence." Armstrong includes a note about the writing of the book, describ-
ing the hours of interviews she had with Opdyke, now an American citizen. This
is a worthy addition to the growing body of literature reflecting the Holocaust
experience, made even more powerful by the quality of the writing and immediacy
of the tone. The memoir includes photographs and a historical note. JMD
PATERSON, KATHERINE 
Preacher's Boy. 
Clarion, 1999 
[17 6 p]
ISBN 0-395-83897-5 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Reverend Hewitt's son, narrator Robbie, has always known he's not the model
preacher's kid his siblings are, and when a visiting minister delivers a fiery sermon
hinting at an apocalypse as the century turns to 1900, Robbie decides to throw
caution and faith to the wind and have a good ol' time in his few remaining months
on earth. It isn't easy, though, to chuck away ten years of honest upbringing and
innate goodness; readers quickly see that Robbie's overconfident mouthiness masks
a heart of gold and that he will meet the main plot challenge-to help an impov-
erished girl hiding out in the hills near his home. Paterson captures the warmth
and messiness of a close-knit family: the father whose displays of vulnerability
sometimes offend critical Robbie; the mother, whose mealtime offerings are con-
crete, loving responses to family members in distress; mentally disabled sibling
Elliot, whose loyalty and affection make claims on Robbie that he can't always
muster the patience to fulfill. Robbie himself is a fully realized character, bristling
with adolescent demands for independence and craving affectionate touches from
his parents, yet resisting them when they are offered. Leavened with a liberal
measure of humor, Robbie's tale will resonate with readers at another century's
close. EB
PERKINS, LYNNE RAE All Alone in the Universe; written and illus. by Lynne Rae
Perkins. 
Greenwillow, 1999 
[160p]
ISBN 0-688-16881-7 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Friend-drift can be a life-changing experience, and Debbie should know: her pal
since third grade Maureen has suddenly taken a shine to nondescript Glenna Flaiber,
and despite Debbie's attempts to keep Maureen for her own, the twosome is either
66 
* THE BULLETIN
going to become a trio or a different pairing entirely, with Debbie left out. As the
better part of a year passes, Debbie adjusts to her loss, eventually finding a new
friend in Patty Tsimmicz, who allows her to laugh at an awkward situation ("Patty
had helped me over an imaginary bridge from Stupidland to the Land of Knowing
a Good Joke"). The agony of change is depicted well here, Perkins (author-illus-
trator of the stellar picture book Home Lovely, BCCB 9/95) fluidly evoking the
day-to-day sensibilities of a junior-high girl as Debbie wonders not only at her
changing relationship with Maureen but also the possibility, never quite fulfilled,
of friendship with tough Marie Prbyczka. The narrative, flecked unselfconsciously
with spiky-lined spot art, has a tone and observational turn reminiscent of Lynda
Barry, albeit with a gentler approach; while some of the period details (the book
appears to be set in the late 1960s or early '70s) may go over readers' heads, there's
no distancing of the all-too-familiar experience. Empathy and a distinctive voice
make this a particularly approachable portrait of a girl moving into a new aware-
ness of the world. DS
PRELUTSKY, JACK 
The Gargoyle on the Roof; illus. by Peter Sis. 
Greenwillow,
1999 
40p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-16553-2 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-09643-3 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 3-6
The Prelutsky-Sis team, which created The Dragons Are Singing Tonight and
Monday's Troll (BCCB 3/96), just rolls on like a well-oiled macabre machine. This
collection of seventeen poems isn't limited to gargoyles, featuring also trolls (one
lonely individual acquires a phone with a "troll-free number"), werewolves (one of
whom disappoints her vampire family with her nonconformity), griffins, goblins,
a basilisk, and various and sundry other horrors. Prelutsky's versification remains
fresh and varied, offering tender lullabies, creepy short stories, and entertaining
absurdities that will delight readers-aloud and readers-alone. Sis' ethereal but sin-
ewy illustrations, with their cobweb tracery of hatching (sometimes in ghostly white),
restrained palettes, and magical realism, create a concrete otherworldliness wherein
the griffins and gargoyles are at understandable ease. The combination is as engag-
ing as ever, and libraries that have enjoyed creepy success with the first two titles
will wish to give this one a perch. DS
ROOT, PHYLLIS 
Grandmother Winter; illus. by Beth Krommes. 
Houghton,
1999 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-395-88399-7 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-7 yrs
In the first part of this original pourquoi tale, Grandmother tends her snow-white
geese and then makes a quilt: "stitch by stitch,/ stuffing it full of feathers." Then,
"when the days burn down/ toward the longest night," Grandmother shakes the
quilt and "Flake by flake/ the snow begins to fall." The rest of the book docu-
ments what people and animals do "when Grandmother shakes her feather quilt":
"children come running from their homes,/ catching snowflakes cold on their
tongues"; "Brown bats hang head-down/ bundled in blankets of wings." The
efficient rhythmic text is full of gentle action and color, making this a terrific
readaloud, and the inevitable movement of all these creatures towards some form
of hibernation makes this a natural for bedtime. There is an admirable specificity
about animal names and behaviors, reinforced by the homey folk-art inspired
OCTOBER 1999 
* 
67
scratchboard illustrations tinted with watercolors, which invite children to look
"under leaves and in hollow logs" for where the "mourning cloak butterflies sleep."
At home, at school, or at the nature center, with or without hot chocolate, this is a
warm, satisfying read. FK
ROSALES, MELODYE BENSON, ad. 
Leola and the Honeybears; ad. and illus. by
Melodye Benson Rosales. 
Cartwheel/Scholastic, 1999 
[34p]
ISBN 0-590-38358-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-8 yrs
In this African-American retelling of "Goldilocks and the Three Bears," Leola is
the spunky child ("sweet as brown sugar" when she gets her way and "stubborn as
Grandmama's old mule" when she doesn't) who wanders into Pine Hollow Woods.
As if she's wandered into "Little Red Riding Hood," Leola meets the outsized and
snappily dressed 01' Man Weasel, who threatens to eat her whole. She runs from
him to the safety of a "charming little inn" run by the three bears. Repetition and
the use of different sized letters to differentiate GREAT BIG Papa Honeybear
from his MIDDLE-SIZED WIFE and LITTLE SON harken back to Joseph Jacobs' nine-
teenth century version, while the mild southern speech, country setting and quasi-
southern foods (like boysenberry grits) move the fantasy a little closer to home.
01' Man Weasel and the personified animals seen in one crowded illustration may
be intended to evoke the personified animal characters of African-American folk-
lore, but their role is undeveloped, leaving them as too-cute gimmicks. Full-page
oil paintings and spot art emphasize Leola's dynamism and expressive face, while
the depictions of the folk-art bears (Papa is black, Mama is ivory, and Little
Honeybear is brown) and the rest of the fantasy world have a poster-art glitziness.
Though this version is somewhat muddled in content and style, children familiar
with more basic versions of the tale will be intrigued by the way this modern
variation fleshes out the familiar characters and setting. FK
ROSEN, MICHAEL J. 
Thanksgiving Wish; illus. by John Thompson. 
Blue Sky/
Scholastic, 1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-590-25563-0 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
This is the first Thanksgiving since the death of Amanda's beloved Bubbe, the
wonderwoman who each year single-handedly prepared the massive feast and kept
all the family traditions running effortlessly. Amanda's parents have invited every-
one to gather at their new home, convinced that with pooled contributions and
assistance, they can pull off in twenty-four hours what used to take Bubbe a week.
The army of modern appliances mustered in the cause of the festivities promptly
assault the house's aging electric system, leaving the relatives in the dark with their
half-cooked viands. But Betty Yee, a grandmotherly neighbor whose own meal
was dispatched much earlier, responds to their blackout and soon has their dishes
warming, pots boiling, and pans roasting in microwaves and ovens up and down
the block. This most welcome gesture, however, can't compensate Amanda for
the loss of Bubbe's annual wishbone-breaking rite, and it takes the cooperation of
the entire extended family, along with their new friend Mrs. Yee, to recast the
tradition to honor Bubbe's memory. Thompson's full-page paintings, which offer
unabashed homage to Norman Rockwell, could be just too sentimental to digest
were it not for the counterpoint of the so, so modern upsets that enliven the family's
68 
* THE BULLETIN
preparations and ground the whole in reality. Listeners' families may fall short of
this ideal, responding to kitchen mishaps with less grace and to family sadness with
less delicacy, but almost everyone can identify a family tradition worth saving and
draw an encouraging example from Amanda's clan. EB
Ross, EILEEN 
The Halloween Showdown; illus. by Lynn Rowe Reed. 
Holiday
House, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1395-0 
$15.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Grizzorka the Witch needs a new Halloween cat, so she steals Tabithia from her
Grandmother Katt. But Grizzorka has underestimated the old feline, and Grand-
mother Katt prepares to make war on the witch. With the help of Spider, Frog,
and Bat, the old cat escapes Grizzorka's traps and rescues her grand-kitty. The
folkloric format of this tale is very similar to the Russian Baba Yaga stories, and the
accumulation of events has a certain irrepressible momentum. Unfortunately, the
storytelling is awkwardly wordy and occasionally precious, relying on cute asides
and rhyming dialogue to carry the plot. The illustrations, with a preponderance of
black, orange, and blue, have a childlike naivete (the figures of the characters look
like poster paintings done by students for classroom decorations) that defuses any
inherent scariness. Young listeners may appreciate the kidnap-and-rescue drama,
but some judicious editing on the reader-aloud's part will be necessary to pick up
the pace. JMD
ROWLING, J. K. 
Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban; illus. by Mary
Grandpre. 
Levine/Scholastic, 1999 
[448p]
ISBN 0-439-13635-0 
$19.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Harry has finally had it. His guardians, the Dursleys, are bad enough, but when
Aunt Marge shows up for a visit bent on unpleasantness, Harry rebels. Running
off into the night, he's picked up by "The Knight Bus," which delivers him to the
Ministry of Magic, which, surprisingly, sets Harry up in an inn and keeps an eye
on him till the new term starts at Hogwarts School of Magic. It turns out that
Sirius Black, minion of the bad guy, Lord Voldemort, has escaped from the noto-
rious Azkaban Prison, and there is every reason to believe he is trying to kill Harry.
A mysterious new professor of the Dark Arts, attempts on Harry's life, a map that
knows where everyone is, and a dangerous game of Quidditch are only a few of the
elements comprised in this fast-paced third entry into the series. As Harry, Ron,
and Hermione get closer to the truth, danger gets closer to them, finally climaxing
in a horrific scene with some of the scariest critters ever conjured by a writer's
imagination, the Dementors. Rowling's characterizations are succinctly evocative
and often slyly funny, ensuring that readers develop a fondness for her players, care
what happens to them, and come back for more. Promising hints of a more pleas-
ant domicile will satisfy readers waiting for Harry to get the loving home life he
deserves. JMD
SLOAT, TERI 
Patty's Pumpkin Patch; written and illus. by Teri Sloat. 
Putnam,
1999 
32p
ISBN 0-399-23010-6 
$15.99 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
In rhyming verse ("Come look inside my patch and see/ A world of life from A to
Z.// The frost is gone, spring is here,/ Put the tractor into gear,/ Plow the field of
OCTOBER 1999 
* 69
weeds and grass-/ It's pumpkin-planting time at last!") Sloat takes viewers on a
tour of a pumpkin patch during its planting, growing, and harvesting seasons. Oil
pastel and acrylic illustrations feature green tendrils, yellow flowers, and big or-
ange pumpkins in a well-kept field. A large variety of farmy fauna-crows, mice,
dragonflies, inchworms-get their spot in the sun. The addition of a running
border along the bottom of already crowded pages turns this pep talk for pumpkin
growers into an agri-alphabet; the capital and lower-case letters frame the object
and word beginning with that letter. The attempt to be all things (alphabet book,
gardening book, and storybook) to all audiences means there is just too much
going on; the sing-song rhythms of the rhyming verse and the busy illustrations do
little to add focus. Still, this is one of those books that ranks high on the useful
scale; pumpkin-patchers (and parents) will happily embrace it. JMD
SMITH, D. JAMES 
Fast Company. Jackson/DK Ink, 1999 
[190p]
ISBN 0-7894-2625-0 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
In alternating chapters, narrators Cat and Jason reflect on the tragic events of their
fifteenth year, in which each harbors a secret that can only be revealed with the
greatest risk. Jason is a dedicated rollerblader and petty hoodlum, dabbling in
theft, vandalism, and harassment; on the night he and his crew, the Ravens, lift
some sound equipment from a local church, he accidentally smashes into a young
bystander, Baby Saul, and kills him as he flees from the police. A Raven turns
traitor and Baby Saul's brother is after Jason for some answers, and, very likely,
revenge. Cat is goofy in love, more with the idea of Jason and his single-minded
dedication to his sport than with the boy himself. She becomes pregnant and,
when she finally works up the nerve to tell him, sees her worst fears materialize as
Jason fails to offer any form of support. At the conclusion, Cat's life will straighten
out and move happily forward (she miscarries the baby and thus makes a conve-
nient escape from life-altering consequences). Jason, though, is left paralyzed after
a confrontation with Baby Saul's brother, and he will apparently follow in his
drunken father's footsteps, tinkering with equipment out in the garage. A host of
subplots and extraneous characters ranging from Cat's mother's sax-playing boy-
friend (he spends some time in a coma), a crusty high school teacher (he's raising a
retarded son), and a mysterious bum named Horace (he's a sort of weird sounding
board for Jason) clog up the already murky waters of Smith's plot. Nonetheless,
the secluded corners frequented by the bladers and the raw, honest emotion of
these troubled and somewhat callous kids will appeal to readers who like to probe
the dark side. EB
SONES, SONYA Stop Pretending: What Happened When My Big Sister Went
Crazy. HarperCollins, 1999 [160p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028386-6 $14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028387-4 $14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 6-9
The world changes for the young narrator when her sister explodes in a manic
episode and ends up in the hospital, and in a series of poems (largely free verse) she
tells of the months following that bring her anger and fear, social stigma and new
love, and eventually adjustment and reconciliation. The subject is gripping and
the ambivalent emotions sincere (an author's note explains its basis in Sones' own
70 
* THE BULLETIN
life and lists resources for assistance), but the overall effect falls short. The images
are generally flat and predictable, the ironies run to cliche, and the poetry is too
often prosaic ("Sometimes I have too much homework/ so I stay home/ and my
parents go without me.// Sometimes I/ just say I have too much homework").
Familial upheaval is a subject close to the bone for many readers, however, and the
edge of the topic may suffice to keep them interested. DS
SPRINGER, NANCY 
Sky Rider. Avon Camelot, 1999 
[128p]
ISBN 0-380-97604-8 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 5-8
Dusty is currying her horse, Tazz, as a final loving gesture before he's put down by
the vet for navicular disease, when a strange young man appears by the barn door.
The young man touches Tazz, apparently curing the animal, and Dusty gives up
her horse to him. The next day she discovers that the young man is Skye Ryder, a
high school student, who was killed on her father's property by a booby-trap set to
chase off trespassers. Ryder's ghost is bound to the earth seeking vengeance on
whoever killed him; Dusty soon realizes the unintentional murderer was her alco-
holic father, who has taken refuge in the bottle. Dusty mediates a confrontation
between her father and the ghost of Skye Ryder, making her father accept respon-
sibility for his actions and saving Skye from losing his soul. If Springer had kept
this a simple ghost tale of vengeance and redemption, it might have worked. Un-
fortunately, the main story is cluttered by a multitude of peripheral plot threads,
such as Dusty's memories of her mother and her mother's penchant for seeing
spirits and angels, Dusty's own inherited sensitivity toward the same, Dusty's per-
manent back injury (miraculously healed by Skye) caused by an accident in which
her drunken father was driving, and memos from a heavenly Sector Supervisor
(who turns out to be Dusty's mother) commenting on Skye's spiritual progress.
The facile plot lacks logic and cohesion, and Springer's characterizations are just
too shallow to support the many leaps of faith necessary to make this a successful
ghost and/or angel tale. JMD
STANLEY, DIANE 
A TimeApart. Morrow, 1999 
26 3p
ISBN 0-688-16997-X 
$16.00 
R Gr. 6-9
Ginny's mother is undergoing treatment for cancer, and thirteen-year-old Ginny
finds herself shipped off to her English father in the meantime. Ginny resents the
relocation on principle, and she's shocked to discover where she'll be living with
her father: in an experimental-archaeology re-creation of an Iron Age Celtic com-
munity, where she must wash her hair with clay, wear homespun and archaic clothes,
and cook food over an open fire in hand-formed pots. Despite settling into the
pretechnological existence and gaining some closeness with her father, Ginny misses
home desperately, and she determines to take action when it seems that no ar-
rangements are being made for her return. There are a few narrative bumps (the
parental dramas sometimes overbalance the plot, Ginny's culinary and travel com-
petencies are gratifying but not entirely credible, and many of the characters aren't
well delineated), but Ginny's summer of change makes for absorbing reading.
Stanley (author of biographies such as Joan ofArc, BCCB 9/98) uses her fascinat-
ing and original setting to good effect-the physical details of smell and labor are
intriguing, as are participants' varying degrees of devotion to the project. There's
a touch of survival-story appeal to the eking out of an agrarian living-readers
OCTOBER 1999 
* 
71
with a taste for robinsonnades or those with an interest in history will particularly
enjoy the unusual approach. A note explains the genesis of the book and the real-
life archaeological re-creation that inspired the story. DS
STEINER, JOAN Look-AlikesTM Jr.; illus. with photographs by Thomas
Lindley. Little, 1999 [32p]
ISBN 0-316-81307-9 $12.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 5-10 yrs
While there wasn't any particular need to create a version ofLook-AlikesTM (BCCB
9/98) that's "a little bit simpler,/ Bigger and bolder," it's still entertaining to have
more of the intricate scenes created by Steiner's clever assemblage of everyday-life
objects. Eleven spreads depict places ranging from a parlor (with ravioli pillows)
to a farm (where garlic clove ducks face off with a peanut-shell chicken over a
puzzle-piece pond), with a couplet for each rhyming spread offering a starting clue
to one of the look-alikes contained therein. The diverting details (check out the
chocolate-doughnut wheels on the school bus) are creative and brain-teasing, pro-
viding plenty of poring-over pleasure for those kids looking to move on from ISpy.
A key at the book's end lists the objects within each spread. DS
TALBERT, MARc 
The Trap. Jackson/DK Ink, 1999 
[14 4 p]
ISBN 0-7894-2599-8 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-8
In this animal tale with a thoughtful twist, Ellie's pet cat Bob is killed and eaten by
a coyote. As Ellie deals with Bob's death and her own desire for revenge, she
begins to rethink her relationship to both domestic and wild animals. She also
takes responsibility for Fang, the stray dog that got caught in the trap she set for
the coyote, and decides how to deal with the boy who helped her set that trap and
who has since set a second trap near her New Mexico home. Animal imagery
permeates the book: sleep comes to Ellie on little cat feet, and she dreams about
cartoon coyotes and roadrunners. In her waking life, Ellie faces the grittier task of
dissecting the coyote scat where she finds the first evidence of Bob's fate. Though
Talbert offers detailed description of the novel's natural and the domestic land-
scapes (and coyote scat), the heart of the book is the emotional relationship be-
tween this preadolescent girl and a series of animals, some of them predators, some
of them prey, some of them both. These animals offer Ellie-and readers-many
thought-provoking situations in which to explore the idea that animals will be true
to their natures. FK
THEROUX, PHYLLIS 
Serefina under the Circumstances; illus. by Marjorie
Priceman. 
Greenwillow, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-688-15942-7 
$16.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
Seven-year-old Serefina "loved her grandmother for two reasons: She told good
stories and she took Serefina seriously." Serefina's grandmother thinks Serefina is
"destined for greatness" because of her wonderful imagination, but her grand-
mother also tells her that "having an imagination is a blessing unless you let it run
away with you." The relationship between Serefina and her grandmother is a solid
one built on mutual love and understanding; the relationship between Serefina
and her brother, Buster, is just as affectionate, and thereon hangs Theroux's tale:
entrusted with the secret of her little brother's surprise birthday party, Serefina
72 
* THE BULLETIN
manages to keep it to herself-until Buster starts crying. While the story of a vivid
imagination has allure, it is the relationships depicted here that make the emo-
tional connection necessary to involve readers. Priceman's gouache illustrations
combine images of real events (eating breakfast, skipping rope) with images that
depict the dark-haired Serefina's imaginary visions: "a long line of people with
imaginations" are hung on the laundry line to dry; during a spelling bee she has the
antenna and striped body of a bee; the surprise party secret, beginning as a tiny
green sprout, grows until tendrils and vines overrun the compositions. (Luckily,
the publishing gremlin that misspelled "Bismarck" as "Bismark" and allowed
Serefina's teacher to wrongly identify it as the capital of South Dakota cannot
disrupt this story's charm.) Theroux has a natural storytelling voice, and children
with vivid imaginations of their own will take tremendous pleasure in the depic-
tion of Serefina's, even while they take consolation in the fact that their imagina-
tions (which might sometimes get them into trouble) may make them "destined
for greatness" as well. JMD
ToLAN, STEPHANIE S. Ordinary Miracles. Morrow, 1999 
22 1p
ISBN 0-688-16269-X 
$16.00 
R Gr. 5-8
To all observers, Mark Filkins is the mirror image of his twin brother, Matthew,
and the very real but inexplicable "twin thing" that governs the harmony of their
actions seems unassailable. But Mark is beginning to experience an urge to estab-
lish an identity separate from his older, quicker other half, and his newly formed
habits of taking off on his own and espousing contrary ideas confuse Matthew. At
this vulnerable point in the boys' relationship, in steps Dr. Colin Hendrick, Nobel
laureate scientist and pride of Bradyville, Vermont, who is dying of pancreatic
cancer and who has come home for his final months. Mark, son of a conservative
minister, is intrigued by Hendrick's research in genetic engineering, and after
meeting him informally in the park and formally in his eighth grade science class,
he becomes Hendrick's protdge. Their working relationship not only blossoms
into a friendship but also allows both to exchange and explore perspectives on life's
mysteries-Mark, from the point of view of a devout Christian challenged by the
benefits and costs of cutting-edge science, and Hendrick as a committed scientist
with a deeply spiritual (if unorthodox) take on the mechanisms of the universe.
The book loads on weighty philosophical issues but provides a plot tense enough
(is Hendrick's remission prayer-induced, and will it last?) and characters strong
and complex enough to support them. Tolan (who first depicted Mark and
Matthew's family in Save Halloween, BCCB 10/93) sustains a deep respect of sci-
entific and religious viewpoints and concludes there are shadowy mysteries and
miracles that, at least so far, elude our best attempts to illuminate them. EB
VANDE VELDE, VIVIAN 
There's a Dead Person Following My Sister
Around. Harcourt, 1999 
143p
ISBN 0-15-202100-0 
$16.00 
R Gr. 4-7
Despite the rather jolly title, this is quite a serious ghost story. Ted, age eleven,
doesn't bat an eye when his five-year-old sister Vicki turns up at the breakfast table
with an imaginary friend, but when he wakes from a nightmare to find her scream-
ing in his bedroom doorway about a "bad lady," he sits up and takes notice. It
seems Vicki is being visited by not just one ghost, but two-a five-year-old girl
named Marella and her mother Adah, who died while fleeing slave hunters just
OCTOBER 1999 
* 73
before the Civil War. Ted's investigation into the haunting takes him to an old
attic trunk, an ancestor's diary, and the discovery of the tragic fate of mother and
daughter. Vande Velde proves she has an ear for contemporary dialogue in the
snappy exchanges between siblings and cousins that provide the humorous down-
to-earth counterpoint for the often eerie depiction of the haunting. The history of
people escaping slavery via the Underground Railroad, Ted's discovery of unknown
bravery on the part of his ancestors, and his serious contemplation of racism and
its impact on the lives of individuals combine in a solidly built plot. In Ted,
Vande Velde gives us a thinking reader's hero, a young man with a lively sense of
humor, imagination, and bravado, who nonetheless recognizes and responds to
injustice and blatant racial hostility with as much shock as he responds to the idea
of ghosts possessing his little sister. A spooky last-minute plot twist, a bittersweet
climax, and a humorous conclusion helps make this an unusually rich and thoughtful
supernatural tale. JMD
WADDELL, MARTIN 
The Hollyhock Wall; illus. by Salley Mavor. 
Candlewick,
1999 
26p
ISBN 1-56402-902-6 
$15.99 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
With the help of her mother's imagination, Mary's wish for a place to play turns a
kitchen pot into a garden with real plants, a clay boy, and a ribbon stream. Magi-
cally, Mary enters the garden and befriends the clay boy, whom she calls Tom.
The imaginary garden turns real when she visits her grandmother's new house and
discovers that it has a garden just like the one she imagined. Inside, she finds a new
playmate, also named Tom. In a conversational tone reminiscent of bedtime fairy
tales ("There once was a girl who lived with her mother at the top of a very tall
house"), the narrative unfolds quickly. Beneath the magical realism, everyday de-
tails (cooking fish on a fire of sticks, splashing in a pool, etc.) surround a childlike
sense of logic: Tom doesn't speak outside of the pot because he's made of clay, and
clay doesn't talk. Unfortunately, a preponderance of "she saids" and "he saids"
interrupts the story, making it a choppy readaloud, and the actions of the main
characters are more list-like than lively. Mayor's mixed-media illustrations of felt,
fabric, found objects, and photography provide depth, texture, and a comforting
touchability. The choice of media (stuffed, embroidered fabric) limits the charac-
ters' expressions to interest, delight, and friendliness, while photographic spreads
of a terrarium-like tableau make the imaginary garden real. Just as the text shifts
between different "realities," so too do Mavor's double-page spreads, and young
listeners will enjoy going back and forth between them. JNH
WALTER, MILDRED PITTS 
Suitcase; illus. by Teresa Flavin. 
Lothrop,
1999 
[112p]
ISBN 0-688-16547-8 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Long on limbs but short on coordination, Xander is a disappointment to his ath-
letic father, an embarrassment to his older sister, and an object of ridicule among
his sixth grade peers. When his daddy insists he ease up on drawing ("artists don't
get college scholarships as easily as ball players") and drags him to the community
center for basketball, Xander hits it off with Jeff, the coach, who quickly under-
stands that it's not the young man's drive that's missing, just rudimentary training.
Sent back to basics by Jeff, Xander jumps rope for stamina and balance and drills
74 
* THE BULLETIN
for coordination; he actually achieves respectability on the court and explores other
sports as well, even discovering an aptitude for pitching that startles and delights
his father, who, now convinced his son is not a slacker, even relents concerning
Xander's artistic pursuits. Although her gym, court, and diamond scenes never
quite ignite with the pizzazz sports readers crave, Walter delivers several reassuring
messages: it's good to seek out hidden talents; practice and training pay off in any
endeavor; growth spurts and their resultant awkwardness need not be the adoles-
cent kiss of death (not to mention that it sure feels great to one-up the class jocks).
Black-and-white full page illustrations will be included in the bound copy. EB
WILLNER-PARDO, GINA 
Figuring Out Frances. Clarion, 1999 
[14 4 p]
ISBN 0-395-91510-4 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-6
"Best friends should always like the same stuff," thinks ten-year-old Abigail, and
she and her friend Travis seem to be doing pretty well in that area. Things change,
however, when Travis moves in with his mother and stepfather next door to Abigail
and a school friendship between a fourth-grade girl and a fifth-grade boy proves
difficult to sustain. To further complicate matters, Abigail is attempting to solve,
for a class project, the mystery of her Alzheimer's-stricken grandmother's past that
leads her to mistake Abigail for a long-lost and unidentified "Frances." Willner-
Pardo tellingly captures the often confusing nature of shifting grade-school friend-
ships, with Travis genuinely valuing Abigail but also selling her out by telling her
secrets to his new fifth-grade friends for quick social gain-whereupon Abigail
scorchingly retaliates by using his greatest insecurity against him. The book's
unlabored parallel of the changes in that friendship with shifts in family under-
standing (Abigail's mother keeps hoping Abigail will want to wear pink and do
gymnastics) and with Grandma's buried friendship adds to the resonance. Grandma
herself is a well-drawn character, not just an affliction, who was clearly a kindred
spirit of Abigail's in her youth. Youngsters negotiating the rocky terrain of grade-
school alliances will relate to Abigail's struggles. DS
OCTOBER 1999 
* 75
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
Mediavilla, Cindy. Arthurian Fiction: An Annotated Bibliography. Scarecrow,
1999. Paper ed. ISBN 0-8108-3644-0; $24.50. 157p.
If you're feeling lost amid a clanging cacophony of knighthood, this bibliography
will help you sort the jousts from the japes. Mediavilla annotates well over 200
titles suitable for young readers, separating the annotations into seven thematic
sections, so that fantasy with a feminist slant, futuristic tales, and classic chivalric
romances all get their due attention. Each entry includes standard publication
information (the author helpfully makes a point of noting which titles include
maps) and a general age-group guideline (Middle School Level, Junior High School
Level, High School Level) and then proceeds to detailed evaluative description
(few of the annotations run shorter than a half-page, and several, especially for
series, run longer than a full page). Her spirited engagement with her subject and
her wide-ranging selections (everything from Indiana Jones mysteries to John
Masefield's retellings, with writers as diverse as Marion Zimmer Bradley, Nancy
Springer, and Deepak Chopra represented) make this particularly valuable. It's a
pity she didn't extend her reach to include the worthy Arthurian picture books
available, but perhaps they'll make it into the next edition. Appendices include a
listing by reading level, a "core list" of Arthurian texts, and a selection of useful
short-story collections; there is an index. DS
Russell, David L. Scott O'Dell. Twayne, 1999. ISBN 0-8057-1682-3; $32.00
14 6p. (Twayne's United States Authors Series)
This capable entry in Twayne's sturdy series treats the grand old man of American
historical fiction for young people. Russell examines O'Dell's career in painstak-
ing detail, text by text, remaining clear-eyed in his assessments of the author's
strong points (sense of place and environmental sensitivity) and weak points (the
creation of character). He also makes an effective case for O'Dell as a pioneer in
both ecological and multicultural concerns as well as in the genre of historical
fiction generally (though he mistakenly attributes administration of the Scott O'Dell
Award for Historical Fiction to the Bulletin, when it's actually administered by
longtime O'Dell friend and former Bulletin editor Zena Sutherland). Accessible
to young readers interested in expanding their background knowledge as well as to
adult scholars, this is a useful exploration of one of American children's literature's
most influential figures. Endnotes, a selected bibliography, and an index are ap-
pended. DS
76 
* THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
African Americans-fiction:
English; Hamilton; McGill;
O'Connor; Walter
African Americans-stories:
Howard; Rosales
Africa-stories: Mollel
Alcoholism-fiction: Springer
ALPHABET BOOKS: Sloat
Angels-fiction: Springer
Animals-fiction: Avi; Gilmore;
Talbert
Archaeology-fiction: Stanley
Art: Steiner; Waddell
Aunts-fiction: Dessen; Forrester
Baseball-fiction: Walter
Basketball-fiction: Walter
BEDTIME STORIES: Charlip
BIOGRAPHIES: Freedman;
Opdyke; Sones
Brothers and sisters-fiction: Adler;
Frank; Vande Velde
Brothers and sisters-stories:
Howard; Theroux
Bullies-fiction: Lewis
Cats-fiction: Avi
Chairs-stories: Jackson
China-folklore: Kimmel
Christmas: Gibbons
CONCEPT BOOKS: Sloat
COUNTING BOOKS: Hubbard
Cousins-fiction: Forrester
Cows-fiction: Cazet
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Anderson; Moon; Smith
Dating-fiction: Frank
Death and dying-fiction: Abelove;
Moon; Talbert
Death and dying-stories: Rosen
Depression, the-fiction: LaFaye
Disabilities-fiction: Fleischman;
O'Connor; Paterson
Divorce-fiction: Meyer
Ecology: Gilmore
Ethics and values: Moon
FANTASY: Avi; Billingsley;
Rowling
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Abelove; LaFaye; Meyer;
Springer; Stanley
Fathers and sons-fiction: Holland;
Moon; Walter
FOLK AND FAIRYTALES:
Climo; Kimmel; Levine; Mayer;
Rosales
Food and eating-stories: Jackson
Friendship-fiction: Cazet; Dessen;
Fleischman; Gilmore;
Hamilton; Perkins; Tolan;
Willner-Pardo
Friendship-stories: Gralley;
Waddell
Frogs-stories: Kennedy
FUNNY STORIES: Gralley;
Kennedy; Nolan
Gangs-fiction: Smith
Gardens and gardening-stories:
Sloat; Waddell
Ghosts-fiction: Bodkin; Springer;
Vande Velde
Grandfathers-fiction: Bauer
Grandmothers-fiction: Willner-
Pardo
Grandmothers-stories: Rosen;
Ross; Theroux
Great Britain-folklore: Climo
OCTOBER 1999 
* 77
Halloween-stories: Gralley;
Hubbard; Ross; Sloat
HISTORICAL FICTION:
English; Forrester; Holland;
LaFaye; McGill; Meyer;
Paterson
History, U.S.: Bial
History, world: Meltzer
Holidays: Gibbons; Rosen
Holocaust, the: Opdyke
Homosexuality-fiction: Boock
Illness-fiction: Abelove; Bauer;
Hamilton; Stanley; Tolan;
Willner-Pardo
Imagination-fiction: Fleischman
Imagination-stories: Theroux;
Waddell
Irish Americans-fiction: Holland
Journalism-fiction: Holland
Libraries-fiction: LaFaye
LOVE STORIES: Boock
Luck-fiction: Bodkin
Magic and magicians-fiction:
Rowling
Mental illness-poetry: Sones
Money-stories: Mollel
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Abelove; English; LaFaye;
Willner-Pardo
Mothers and daughters-stories:
Waddell
Mothers-stories: Charlip
Moving-fiction: Lewis
Nature study: Johnston
Nature-poetry: Johnston
Nature-stories: Root
Orphans-fiction: Billingsley
Pets-fiction: Talbert
Physical education: Macy; Walter
Pigs-stories: Gralley
POETRY: Johnston; Prelutsky;
Sones
Princesses-fiction: Levine; Meyer
PUZZLE BOOKS: Steiner
Racial identity: Gaskins
Racism: Gaskins
Racism-fiction: English
Reading aloud: Climo; Johnston;
Nolan; Prelutsky
Reading, ·beginning: Cazet
Reading, easy: Lewis
Reading, reluctant: Smith
Religion-fiction: Tolan
School-fiction: Anderson; Hamilton;
Lewis; Perkins
Schools: Bial
SCIENCE FICTION: Gilmore
Seasons-stories: Root
Sexual assault-fiction: Anderson
SHORT STORIES: McKean
Sisters-poetry: Sones
Slavery-fiction: Forrester; McGill;
Vande Velde
Snow-stories: Henkes
SOCIAL STUDIES: Gaskins;
Meltzer
South, the-fiction: English; LaFaye
SPORTS STORIES: Adler; Walter
SPORTS: Freedman; Macy
Stepmothers-fiction: Meyer
Storytelling: Bodkin; Climo; Root
Storytime: Gralley; Henkes; Howard;
Jackson; Maynard; Root
SUPERNATURAL TALES: Bodkin;
McKean
Tanzania-stories: Mollel
Twins-fiction: Tolan
Uncles-fiction: Frank; O'Connor
Voyages and travel-fiction:
Billingsley; Bodkin
Winter-stories: Henkes; Root
Witches and witchcraft: Meltzer
Witches-stories: Ross
Women's studies: Freedman; Macy;
Mayer; Meltzer
World War II: Opdyke
Tundra books
"I turn to The Bulletin for book reviews I know I can count on. They are lively,
perceptive-too good to miss."-Nancy Larrick, educator, author, anthologist
THE BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
featuring more than 70 full-length book reviews each month
written by influential children's literature experts
Srelied on by thousands of teachers and librarians
Published monthly except August. Institutions, $60 ($67 foreign);
individuals, $50 ($57 foreign); single issues, $5.50.
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS PRESS
1325 South Oak Street * Champaign, IL 61820 * Phone: (217) 333-8935 * Fax: (217) 244-8082
www. press.uillinois.edu/journals * http://edfu.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
- "[Crackling] with intensity and often with hilarity, this is a
taut and unforgettable portrayal of friendship and its sometimes
terrible price."
-Starred 
/ Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
V 
"With this unsettling, coolly polished novel, Lynch
demonstrates once again his profound understanding of society's
casualties, misfits and losers."
-Starred 
/ Publishers Weekly
Ages 12 up. $14.95TR (0-06-028330-0) $14.89LB (0-06-028331-9)
- HarperCollinsChildren 'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York, NY 10022 
www.harperchildrens.com
I: 
Aft 
PAMn
'VI
LUTSKY
-TER SIS
* "Prelutsky
and Sis are at it
in, concocting
r spine-tingling
umorous verse
gremlins,
ilisks, and their
aders like stringed
ping them rapt
;es in tempo and
itecture of his
twork is a
on to the verse."
6.00/0-688-09643-3
ncomparable pair
iging Tonight
froll
illiam Morrow & Co., Inc.
www.williammorrow.com
"Plenty of punch and pizazz!"*
"Isadora has created a striking alphabet book in homage to the
pop art she admired as a child...Simultaneously complex and
unpretentious, this alphabet book deserves a long shelf life"
-Horn Book
"Isadora matches letter with object in imaginative ways that are
right on a child's wavelength" -School Library Journal
"Visually stimulating, and fun" -Kirkus
*Atlanta Journal and Constitution
Ages 3-7 / 0-670-88329-8 / $15.99
Viking Children's Books
A division of Penguin Putnam Books for Young Readers
visit out website at www.penguinputnam.com
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.S.A.
RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED
Choosing
Books for
crIAVilra
THIRD
EDITION
I Rviedan udaed
A former
Parents' Choice Award Winner
edition:
iable
kind."
Sbeginning
agazine
hearne.html
Ir
0008-9036(1
1 -A
0008-9036(199910)53:2; 1 -A
PERIODICALS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
_1) 
I~ 
B''· ·---
i 
·:I::
.z 
,,
.i
