T H E
B U L L E T I N
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN’S BOOKS
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by The Johns Hopkins University Press
July/August 2012
Vol. 65   No. 11
2715 N. Charles Street • Baltimore, MD 21218 • 1.800.548.1784 • 410.516.6987 • www.press.jhu.edu/journals
The Bulletin of the  
Center for Children’s Books
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
Provides concise summaries and critical evaluations 
of current children’s books.
Published monthly (except August)
issn: 0008-9036 / e-issn: 1558-6766
Children’s literature*
R. H. W. Dillard, Editor-in-Chief 
Julie Pfeiffer and Michelle Ann Abate, Editors
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published annually
issn: 0092-8208 / e-issn: 1543-3374
Children’s literature 
assoCiation Quarterly*
Katharine Capshaw Smith, Editor
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published quarterly
issn: 0885-0429 / e-issn: 1553-1201
The lion and the uniCorn
A Critical Journal of Children’s Literature
David L. Russell, Karin E. Westman,  
and Naomi J. Wood, Editors
An international theme- and genre-centered  
journal committed to a serious, ongoing discussion  
of literature for children.
Published three times a year
issn: 0147-2593 / e-issn: 1080-6563
*Please direct inquiries and orders to the ChLA:  
www.childlitassn.org.
The Johns Hopkins University Press Journals in 
ChiLDreN’S LiterAture
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
July/August 2012
Vol. 65 No. 11
545  the BIg PICture
 
  The Great Cake Mystery: Precious Ramotswe’s Very First Case  by Alexander 
McCall Smith; illus. by Iain McIntosh
546  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 revIewed tItLes InCLude:
551 •  A Passion for Victory: The Story of the Olympics in Ancient and Modern 
Times  by Benson Bobrick
552 •  Jimmy the Greatest! by Jairo Buitrago; tr. by Elisa Amado; illus. by Rafael 
Yockteng
557 •  Kids of Kabul: Living Bravely through a Never-Ending War  written and 
illus. with photographs by Deborah Ellis
582 • Insurgent  by Veronica Roth
589  suBjeCt And use Index
592  AnnuAL Author And tItLe Index
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R Recommended.
Ad Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR Not recommended.
SpC Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the  
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor (KQG)
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Claire Gross, Reviewer (CG)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
Hope Morrison, Reviewer (HM)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Melissa Funfsinn, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print or electronic $93.00; combined print & electronic $130.00; multiple in-
stitutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, $55.00; students, 
$20.00. In countries other than the United States, add $16.50 per subscription for postage; subscrib-
ers in Canada and Mexico add $11.99. Single copy rate: $10.00. Volumes available in microfilm from 
ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche 
from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be 
made payable to The Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Divi-
sion, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 
410-516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/
journals/advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2012 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image from The Great Cake Mystery: Precious Ramotswe’s Very First Case ©2012 by Iain 
McIntosh and used by permission of Anchor Books/Random House.
July/AugusT 2012 • 545
the BIg PICture
The Great Cake Mystery:  
Precious Ramotswe’s Very First Case
by Alexander McCall Smith; illustrated by Iain McIntosh
An international star as an adult in the phenomenally successful The No. 1 Ladies’ 
Detective Agency series, Precious Ramotswe is here a slip of a girl, living in Botswana 
with her loving father and just beginning to think about being a detective when she 
grows up. Her chance appears sooner than she expects, though, when her classmates’ 
carefully cherished sweet snacks start disappearing whenever they’re left unattended. 
She’s even more determined to find the culprit when people start unfairly accus-
ing and subsequently harassing a boy, Poloko, based largely on his known love of 
sweets. Finding the local monkeys in possession of some of the spoils, she realizes 
that the mischievous critters have been helping themselves to the kids’ treats, but 
she also knows that she’ll have to ensure the monkeys are caught red-handed by 
the class in order to convince them of Poloko’s innocence. 
Stylistically, this is a splendidly accessible and inviting volume. The 
third-person present-tense narration is simultaneously matter-of-fact and engaging, 
setting the scene for young readers with straightforward explanation (“Botswana is 
the country she lives in. It is down toward the bottom of Africa”) and describing 
the stakes in kid-understandable terms (“You can lose a plain piece of bread and 
not think twice about it, but when you lose one spread thickly with strawberry jam 
it’s an altogether more serious matter”). That simple declarative style also allows 
Smith to lay out some truths about humanity and its tendency to believe what it 
finds it convenient to believe until forcibly convinced; in fact, Precious is a hero not 
just because of her blossoming deductive abilities but because they operate in the 
service of her strong moral sense. The characterization is economical and effective, 
and it ups the moral challenge by demonstrating that nice, likable kids are capable 
of jumping to conclusions and inspiring a group to cry “Thief! Thief” without 
justification (on the other hand, “Precious wonders what it would be like to hear 
somebody shout that about you—especially if you are not a thief and never have 
been”). This ethical slant on the situation and the role of the detective are highly 
original in a book for this audience, and since they’re explored with the simple 
clarity of playground fairness, they’ll be immediately accessible to the readership. 
Yet the book is nonetheless a fairly light-hearted work, keeping the situation in 
perspective, cushioning it with details about the setting and Precious’ life, and the 
adorable villains and Precious’ clever trap to catch them out are sure to delight 
young mystery fans. 
546 • The BulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
The unusual art employs delicately stylized prints that sometimes recall 
the detailed control of Michael McCurdy, in a limited palette of cherry red, choco-
late brown, and soft gray that’s sometimes only used one or two colors at a time. 
The illustrations interweave comfortably with the text, keeping the look of each 
spread open and inviting, but they also support the storytelling, offering easy-to-
read phonetic takes on character names, clever diagrammatic elements (a cutaway 
of Poloko’s pocket reveals his sweets stash), and a helpful frontispiece that locates 
Botswana in Africa and includes a map of the country.
The book’s easy readability makes it inviting to youngsters, and with 
its accessible voice and short chapters, it would make an appealing readaloud as 
well. This is a perfect early detective tale for those not quite ready for sleuths such 
as Margolis’ Maggie Brooklyn (A Girl’s Best Friend, BCCB 5/11) and Frazier’s 
Suzanna Snow (Midnight Tunnel, BCCB 3/11), but all kinds of readers will enjoy 
befriending Smith’s charming and independent-minded heroine. (See p. 584 for 
publication information.)
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
Aguirre, Jorge Giants Beware!; written by Jorge Aguirre; story by Jorge Agu-
irre and Rafael Rosado; illus. by Rafael Rosado. First Second/Roaring Brook, 
2012 202p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-59643-582-7 $14.99   
R Gr. 3-6
There’s not enough excitement in Claudette’s small town of Mont Petit Pierre, 
so, taking up the monster-slaying mantle set down by her now invalid father, she 
sets out to defeat the legendary baby-feet-eating giant that dwells in the nearby 
mountains. Joined by her best friend Marie, a princess in training, and her younger 
brother Gaston (who is far more experienced with a fork and knife than a sword), 
Claudette embarks on a journey fraught with danger as she and her pals outsmart 
witches, battle river gods, discover inner strengths, and learn that monsters aren’t 
always what they appear to be. Although the tale in this graphic novel has certainly 
been told before, the spunky Claudette and her quirky company are irresistibly ap-
pealing, and Aguirre and Rosado employ some pretty foolproof, kid-friendly tactics 
to keep the story moving along at a brisk clip (Claudette, for example, uses the 
explosive power of her smelly feet to defeat a man-eating forest). Most charming, 
however, are the vibrantly hued illustrations that feature a red-headed, diminu-
tive Claudette, who makes up for her tiny size with a cavernous mouth that often 
July/AugusT 2012 • 547
overtakes her face as she screeches out various orders and threats. The character’s 
cartoonish figures are expressive, with a simple quirk of the eyebrow indicating 
smugness or fear, and the full-color landscapes are riddled with visual jokes and 
puns. Entertaining, lively, and downright goofy, this will find an audience among 
fans of fairy tales and comic books alike.  KQG
AmAto, mAry Guitar Notes. Egmont, 2012 [272p] illus.
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-125-9 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-124-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-300-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Tripp and Lyla have a lot in common—their love of music, their experience of 
losing a parent (Lyla’s mom when she was six, Tripp’s dad a couple years ago), their 
quiet discontent with their lives. The schoolmates don’t meet, however, until they’re 
assigned to use the same practice room on alternating days. What starts as a passive-
aggressive exchange of notes about etiquette (Tripp leaves some trash on the music 
stand) grows into a genuine correspondence and finally an in-person friendship, 
with the two bonding over music, private fears, and mutual songwriting inspiration, 
all in secret from parents who’d rather Tripp was pulling up his dismal grades and 
Lyla continuing to focus on her promising cello career. This tale of unlikely but 
desperately needed connection pulls all the right strings, drawing both protagonists 
out of their unhappy shells so gradually that their climactic duet performance at 
a wedding feels as cathartic as it is earned. Though the eleventh-hour twist takes 
things over the top, it’s otherwise a familiar formula done well. Amato brings these 
characters to life with pitch-perfect detail and wrenching anxieties that will resonate 
strongly with readers. Reviewed from an unillustrated galley.  CG
Armstrong, AlAn Racing the Moon; illus. by Tim Jessell. Random House, 
2012 [224p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-95889-2 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-85889-5 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89309-4 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
M Gr. 4-6
Alex mostly hangs around with her older brother, Chuck, who shares her interest 
in the electronics and rocketry that are all the rage after the close of World War II. 
A chance encounter with a new neighbor, Captain Ebbs, is a masterstroke of luck 
for eleven-year-old Alex. Not only is the woman fascinating in her own right—she’s 
an Army officer who helped solve the problem of feeding masses of impoverished 
Europeans at war’s end—but she’s also connected to none other than Wernher 
von Braun, the idol Chuck longs to meet. Chuck is one complicated guy—he’s a 
technical-school dropout with reading disabilities, with an astonishing talent for 
tinkering in electronics and a stubborn daredevil streak that’s a true peril to him-
self and his sister. Captain Ebbs recognizes Chuck’s abilities and tries to give him 
support and direction, but his resistance to playing by her rules leads him to steal 
a boat with Alex and break into a government-restricted launch site to watch the 
liftoff of one of von Braun’s rockets. Historical figures Ebbs and von Braun do not 
interact convincingly with the fictional siblings, and it’s a stretch to accept that even 
the most tenacious do-gooder (to say nothing of understanding parents) would 
548 • The BulleTin
put up for long with Chuck’s intransigence—much less reward it with tutoring, a 
job, and flight lessons—or that Chuck would ultimately drop his bad habits and 
suicidal thoughts in the course of single day. Alex, ostensibly the focal character of 
the novel, gets lost in the shuffle, and her activities don’t carry the intrinsic inter-
est of Ebbs and Chuck, whose backstories would be worth knowing. An author’s 
note does not offer any substantial background on the real-life characters; final 
illustrations not seen.  EB
Ashley-hollinger, mikA Precious Bones. Delacorte, 2012 344p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-99046-5 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74219-1 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97421-1 $10.99   
R Gr. 5-8
In 1949, on the outskirts of a lush Florida swamp, ten-year-old Bones finds plenty 
to occupy her time. For pets, she’s got three dogs, a pig, a goat, and a raccoon. For 
friends, she’s got Little Man, who’s a year older than her, and Mr. Speed, a young man 
who has suffered some brain damage in the war but is still a wealth of knowledge 
about the wildlife in Florida. Most important, though, she has her sensible mama, 
Lori, and her storytelling, fun-loving father, Nolay. Nolay is “mighty proud to be 
a cracker” and to be part Miccosukee Indian, and he doesn’t take kindly to a pair 
of real estate men from New York who come sniffing around for cheap property 
to buy. When one of the men goes missing and another is found dead, Nolay is 
arrested, and Bones is desperate to find out what really happened. Against the 
backdrop of the murder mysteries is a detailed portrait of a bygone lifestyle, where 
girls and boys learn to use a gun when they’re six and spend their days outdoors, 
fishing, frog gigging, and visiting their neighbors, including a visit to Nolay’s fam-
ily’s Miccosukee village. Bones is a sure-footed tour guide through this untamed 
landscape, wide-eyed but never twee, competent but aware of her own limitations. 
Her summer is one of somewhat reluctant growth, as she begins to sort out her 
father’s fanciful tales of swamp lore from the more prosaic truth and faces the loss 
of a dear friend while coming to terms with real adult evil. Her father in turn faces 
his own need to develop a more mature outlook as he realizes the impact his words 
and behavior have on his maturing daughter. The last line of each chapter telegraphs 
plot twists, introducing some suspense in a tale that will already hold high interest 
for nature-loving readers longing for their own wild playgrounds.  KC
Aylesworth, Jim Cock-a-doodle-doo, Creak, Pop-pop, Moo; illus. by Brad 
Sneed. Holiday House, 2012 32p
ISBN 978-0-8234-2356-9 $16.95   
R 3-6 yrs
This verse celebration of a day in the life of a big farm family is rich with musi-
cal rhymes, lilting phrases, and onomatopoeic details. It begins with the rooster’s 
crow, then breakfast (“Ham pop-pops/ in the frying pan”) then follows the various 
members of the family through their daily tasks. Animal activity is also included, 
from the “Yip, yip, yip” of the pups to the “smack smack” of the cud-chewing cows, 
to the grunting pigs, wallowing in the cool mud. While there is certainly no shortage 
of picture books depicting life on a farm, this one is notable both for its diversity 
of activities and its bouncy narrative line; the verses beg to be read aloud, and the 
picturesque language draws a detailed picture of the work being done around the 
farm. Sneed’s watercolor illustrations, inspired, according to a note, by the Ameri-
July/AugusT 2012 • 549
can regionalists such as Thomas Hart Benton, offer portraits that are both larger 
than life and firmly grounded in reality. Bodies are slightly exaggerated, with large 
heads and lengthy limbs extending from smaller bodies, but the style works well 
in juxtaposition with the family farm tale. Audiences and readers-aloud alike will 
delight in this engaging exploration of farm life.  HM
BAcigAlupi, pAolo The Drowned Cities. Little, 2012 434p
ISBN 978-0-316-05624-3 $17.99   
R Gr. 7-10
In this companion to the Printz Award–winning Ship Breaker (BCCB 9/10), 
Bacigalupi returns to the dystopian wreckage of the southeastern United States in 
the not-too-distant future. We’re a bit farther inland this time, among subsistence 
farmers and hunters who are trying to scratch a living in the wilderness and hoping 
to avoid attacks from the warring militia who have moved into the power vacuum 
created when Chinese peacekeepers left for home. War encroaches anyway, and a 
half-Chinese, half-African-American girl named Mahlia, considered a social pariah, 
is an easy target for the boy soldiers who invade her community. Her sole bit of luck 
is happening on an injured and dying Tool, a hybrid manbeast introduced in the 
previous novel. Tool holds her friend Mouse hostage while Mahlia goes for antibi-
otics, but the soldiers—who have a score to settle with Tool—delay her mission. 
Soon Mahlia takes off with Tool, Mouse is recruited by the United Patriot Front, 
and the UPF is out for revenge against Mahlia for setting vicious coywolv (sic) on 
them. Tool is a sturdy unifying element for the first and second volumes, and his 
character allows Bacigalupi to expand and develop the politics of his imagined 
world while recasting the hybrid this time around as a metaphor for war itself. As 
in Ship Breaker, some main characters escape with some slim hope for a better life, 
but the senseless battle for a ruined land goes on. Expect a third volume; this just 
can’t be over yet.  EB
BAiley, em Shift. Egmont, 2012 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-358-1 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-359-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
After her parents’ divorce and her own attempted suicide, Olive is back at school, 
but she’s no longer the plastic popular girl she once was. Now she’s what her former 
friend Katie calls a “road accident”—angry, standoffish, and overweight, with a 
snarky new best friend, Ami, who stands by her no matter what. Enter Miranda 
Vaile, a new girl who comes dragging a bad reputation. Olive and Ami think there’s 
something off about Miranda, especially the way she obsessively watches and imi-
tates Katie. Soon, Miranda and Katie are best friends, but it seems that the more 
Miranda comes out of her shell, the more Katie retreats into one; in fact, Katie 
seems to be shriveling to the same degree that Miranda sparkles. Olive and Ami 
become convinced that Miranda is a shapeshifter—a parasite that literally drains the 
life out of her host. When Katie dies as a result of anorexia, Miranda needs a new 
host, and despite Ami’s warning, it appears that Olive will be her next victim. The 
subtle but persistent horror of this story resides in Miranda’s inexorable charm set 
against Olive’s painfully rendered vulnerability; she’s cut herself off from everyone 
who might help her, including a boy who shows both an interest and a willingness 
to believe that Miranda might not be fully human. Because Olive is revealed to be 
550 • The BulleTin
an unreliable narrator, Miranda remains an unresolved enigma, but whether she’s 
a paranormal being or simply a toxic seductress, her creep factor is undeniable. 
Readers with a taste for psychological tension that simmers just below the boiling 
point will nibble their nails all the way through this Australian import.  KC
BArdugo, leigh Shadow and Bone. Holt, 2012 [240p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-9459-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
In the country of Ravka, under siege from a monster-infested rift of impenetrable 
darkness known as the Fold, Alina is just an inconsequential orphan whose greatest 
worry is growing apart from her best friend Mal, the closest thing she has to family. 
When Mal is attacked during a bloody crossing of the Fold, Alina saves him without 
thinking, discovering that she has the power to summon sunlight—which is deadly 
to the monster. Whisked away from her life as a mapmaker to train with the Grisha, 
witches who defend Ravka from the Fold and other enemies, Alina is inducted 
into court life and groomed by the Darkling, the ageless and charismatic leader of 
the Grisha, who believes that she has the power to drive back the Fold once and 
for all. The complicated politics of the royal court, the perennially appealing arc 
of a heroine finding her strength, and generous helpings of intrigue and treachery 
build to a satisfying reveal that blasts the plot open for future series installments. Set 
against a chilly, well-realized landscape drawn from Russian folklore, this distinctive 
fantasy balances epic stakes and human foibles as it explores a country wracked by 
centuries of gridlocked war. Readers will be rooting for this lonely, tough heroine 
as she navigates perils physical, magical, and emotional.  CG
Bemis, John clAude The Prince Who Fell From the Sky. Random House, 
2012 [272p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96752-8 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86752-1 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89804-4 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
In this intriguing animal fantasy turned post-apocalyptic tale, an old bear defies the 
traditions of her world to care for an orphaned human boy. Casseomae’s peaceful 
ursine existence living and foraging among the ruins of the “Skinless Ones” (i.e., 
humans, whose whose dominance over the natural world was finally brought to 
an end by the wolves long ago) is interrupted when a “metal bird” crashes near her 
home and the old bear discovers a human boy among the wreckage. Reminded 
of the many cubs lost to her, Casseomae is drawn to protect the boy, despite the 
fact that the Forest’s ruler, the wolfish Ogeema, will most certainly want this new 
Skinless One dead; with the help of a clever but temperamental rat and a faithful 
dog, Casseomae leaves her territory in search of a safe place to raise the boy her-
self. This isn’t a warm and fuzzy animal fantasy but a bleak-toned tale of pointed 
social commentary; the animal characters are deftly drawn, reflecting the strict, 
heartless survival code that defines their existence, while a few terrifically poignant 
moments reveal their more benevolent, relatable attributes. Fans of zombie books 
and other end-of-the-world scenarios will be thrilled by the multiple chase scenes 
and the death-at-every-turn motif, and the clearly built world and brisk dialogue 
will make this an easy transition for middle-school readers looking to jump on the 
YA dystopia bandwagon.  KQG
July/AugusT 2012 • 551
Beyer, kAt The Demon Catchers of Milan. Egmont, 2012 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-314-7 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-289-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Sitting down to finish up her algebra homework one night, sixteen-year-old Mia 
is suddenly possessed by a violent demon; four days later, she gains consciousness 
again after an exorcism performed by a distant relative expels the spirit from her 
body. The relative, an elderly cousin Mia has never met, and his grandson, a stun-
ningly handsome boy, whisk Mia off with them to Milan, where they can offer her 
the protection of their house, fortified against such spiritual invasions, and train her 
in the longstanding family tradition of fighting demons. The possession that takes 
place in the opening pages makes it immediately clear that the demons here are no 
campy, Buffy-styled hellions but rather the old-school type of Luciferean offspring 
that turned poor Linda Blair’s head a full 360 degrees and spawned Rosemary’s 
baby. Although Mia is under the demon’s control for only few pages, her actions 
during that time and her subsequent visions lend her narration a small but titillat-
ing bit of unreliability, making the reader question both her motivations and her 
interpretation of reality. For all of its supernatural premise, however, the story is 
also a love letter to Milan, celebrating the Italian city’s food, art, and fashion, while 
incorporating some of its more sordid history into a chilling tale of spirits gone 
bad. Viewers of SyFy’s Ghosthunters International will find this creepy travelogue 
delightfully up their alley, and readers may never look at their math homework 
the same way again.  KQG
BoBrick, Benson A Passion for Victory: The Story of the Olympics in Ancient and 
Early Modern Times. Knopf, 2012 143p illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96869-3 $22.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86869-6 $19.99   
R Gr. 6-9
This overview of the original Greek and revived modern games opens with a chro-
nology and a prologue teaser about a 1924 Olympic athlete who survived the wreck 
of the Titanic. The text shifts then to chapters on the hundreds of years of ancient 
Olympic history, during which the games were variously viewed as celebration of 
human physical development or training for war, depending on one’s philosophy 
and politics. Pretty well shuttered by the Christian Church in the fourth century 
in the interest of obliterating all pagan practices, the games lay dormant until a 
few eccentric English towns launched their own small competitions in the 1600s 
and 1700s, and then Pierre de Coubertin stirred enough European and American 
interest to refashion the games for a modern age in the nineteenth century. Though 
the occasional detail is slightly confusing, Bobrick’s text sparkles when he covers 
the goofy organizational missteps of the earliest modern games and discusses the 
condescending prejudice of the “civilized” nations against their small-fry competi-
tors. The controversies surrounding participation in the German Olympics of 1936 
and the intrusion of two world wars into the traditional “Olympic Truce” are also 
sensitively discussed. Readers gearing up for the London games will want to take a 
look at this, along with Davida Kristy’s Coubertin’s Olympics and Susan Bachrach’s 
Nazi Olympics (BCCB 3/00).  EB 
552 • The BulleTin
BuitrAgo, JAiro Jimmy the Greatest!; tr. from the Spanish by Elisa Amado; illus. 
by Rafael Yockteng. Groundwood, 2012 44p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-55498-178-6 $18.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-55498-206-6 $18.95   
R* 5-8 yrs
In this picture book from an award-winning Colombian author and illustrator, 
Jimmy’s been growing up in a one-donkey seaside town in Latin America, where 
there’s nowhere to go except church and the boxing gym. The gym owner has just 
realized that Jimmy (who looks initially to be a young teen) is big enough to get 
in the game, and since there’s not much else to do, Jimmy starts to train. He even 
puts on his unused glasses to read a box of clippings about Muhammad Ali, and 
Jimmy recognizes a kindred spirit there: Jimmy’s shoes had been stolen, and Ali’s 
bike had been stolen; most convincingly, Ali was “handsome and smart like me!” 
As Jimmy’s interest in boxing grows, so does his confidence and quiet commitment 
to his town, and when his trainer leaves for a bigger career in bigger places, Jimmy 
is content to stay. If Sara Varon (Robot Dreams, BCCB 11/07) drew humans, these 
are the humans she would draw: bug-eyed, amiable, and far too intent on their own 
insular world to mug self-consciously for a picture-book audience; though Jimmy 
and most of his fellow gym rats are dark-skinned, characters appear in the full palette 
of human colors. Comic-book conventions definitely influence Yockteng’s artwork; 
although the scenes follow a traditional half or full spread format, motion lines and 
repeated ropes, knife blades, and legs are cleverly used devices to convey action. In 
a splendid example of the power of showing rather than telling, the final view of 
Jimmy’s town, with its power lines, extra buildings, increased animal population, 
and bright blue refrigerator demonstrate visually how Jimmy’s decision to remain 
to support his community has made everyone’s life a little easier: “We dance and we 
box and we don’t sit around waiting to go someplace else.” Now that’s something 
worth thinking about.  EB
cAdnum, michAel Seize the Storm. Farrar, 2012 [240p]
ISBN 978-0-374-36705-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-9
On board Athena’s Secret, chugging leisurely toward Hawaii, are a mother and 
father who are barely speaking, a daughter who’s smitten with her first cousin, and 
a crew member who’s smitten with the daughter. Dead in the water floats Witch 
Grass, with two bullet-riddled bodies and a sack containing $800,000. Overhead, 
a seaplane with a crime lord’s teenage son (on his first mission from Dad) and two 
supportive hit men hunts down Witch Grass  and the money that never made it back 
to its “rightful” owner. Anyone who’s ever cracked the spine on an action thriller 
will know just where this is heading, and if you can correctly guess the final body 
count, you can almost write the plot yourself. “Almost,” however, is the critical 
term here, because Cadnum has a couple of surprises, involving some interesting 
weaponry in a storage compartment on Athena’s Secret and pervasive greed among 
the entire cast that leads readers to flirt with the idea that maybe the Good Guys 
in this affair put themselves directly in harm’s way. A storm, a shark, broken com-
munications equipment, and a torn sail complete the list of accoutrements for a 
hellish encounter. Bon voyage.  EB
July/AugusT 2012 • 553
cArlson-Voiles, polly Summer of the Wolves. Houghton, 2012 [352p]
ISBN 978-0-547-74591-6 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
Nineteen months after twelve-year-old Nika and her younger brother, Randall, 
were orphaned by their mother’s death, they are uprooted from their foster home 
and sent to stay with their father’s estranged older brother, a wildlife biologist who 
is researching wolves on a remote lake island in northern Minnesota, until a more 
permanent situation can be worked out. On her first day accompanying Uncle Ian 
to work, the siblings find a dead female wolf and rescue her cub, to whom Nika 
forms an immediate attachment. As she helps raise the cub, she also begins secretly 
taking care of an adult wolf who’s escaped the cruel cage of a nearby wolf hunter. 
Nika’s losses and anxieties—the deeply felt instability of her life, her lack of con-
trol over her own future, her feelings of having no true place in the world—neatly 
parallel the wolves’ situation, but Carson-Voiles never pushes the simile too hard, 
letting both stories unfold naturally in tandem. The wealth of information about 
wolf development and the rescue and care of wild creatures will appeal to budding 
naturalists, while the vivid, kid-accessible descriptions (“Nika hated people talking 
about what had happened to her family. It made her feel like a run-over animal lying 
in the street, everyone standing over her, looking down and discussing the nature of 
her injuries”) pack a strong emotional punch. Nika’s tenuous bonds to the wolves 
and to Ian are compassionately drawn, and readers will be aching for Nika to find 
her place to call home. Match this with Townsend’s Sundown Rule (BCCB 3/11) 
for an exploration of the bittersweet healing power of connecting to nature.  CG
cAssidy, Anne Dead Time. Walker, 2012 [256p] (The Murder Notebooks)
ISBN 978-0-8027-2351-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
When Rose was twelve, her mother and stepfather disappeared and were presumed 
dead, and she and her beloved stepbrother were separated to live with relatives. 
Five years later, Rose and Joshua are back in touch as he has moved to London, 
where she lives with her emotionally distant and demanding grandmother. Against 
her grandmother’s wishes, they begin spending time together, and she is troubled 
to learn that Joshua is still searching for their parents, enlisting the help of his 
computer-geek roommate. She encourages him to let it go, but when she witnesses 
the murders of two of her classmates, she begins to understand how hard it is to 
wait for the police to follow their rule-bound procedures for investigating crime. 
Her sidestepping of those rules leads to answers about who killed her classmates 
but credibly compromises justice as her evidence is inadmissible. Nonetheless, in 
the process of her snooping, she accidentally stumbles upon some leads about her 
parents, and this promising series opener ends as she and Joshua find out that their 
parents are in fact alive. The pace here could certainly be tighter, and the storytelling 
is somewhat digressive; additionally, Rose’s confusion over her more-than-sisterly 
feelings for Joshua is a bit clumsily handled. However, these sins aren’t uncom-
mon in series openers, where character and backstories need attention. By the 
end, Rose, Joshua, and the geeky roommate are starting to jell as a team, and the 
mystery of their parents’ disappearance promises international intrigue to come in 
future volumes. Mystery fans weary of paranormal twists may welcome these teen 
sleuths who set out to solve ordinary crimes committed by ordinary people.  KC
554 • The BulleTin
cheng, AndreA The Year of the Book; illus. by Abigail Halpin. Houghton, 
2012 146p
ISBN 978-0-547-68463-5 $15.99   
R Gr. 3-5
The other fourth-graders make a big deal out of Anna’s Chinese heritage, but she 
doesn’t even speak or understand much Chinese; in fact, she’s sometimes embarrassed 
by her Chinese-born mother’s cultural missteps. Additionally, she’s hurt by what she 
sees as her former friend Laura’s abandonment, since Laura has started hanging out 
with the more socially dominant Allison. Her solution to these worries is to lose 
herself in a book, and, increasingly, her books become her protection whenever she 
feels vulnerable. However, Laura eventually realizes that friendship with queen bee 
Allison is a complicated undertaking, and as she and Anna rekindle their friendship, 
Anna becomes more willing to set aside her books in order to interact with people. 
This is a remarkably pithy and nuanced portrait of a fourth-grader and her world, 
and the streamlined simplicity of Cheng’s writing and the brief page count make 
it accessible. Anna’s embarrassment about her mother, couched in disdain, is spot 
on, for example, as is her mother’s resultant frustration with her prickly daughter. 
The friendship drama is also well played, and many girls will recognize their own 
relationship struggles in these pages. This would make an excellent choice for a 
mother-daughter book group, and classrooms and libraries may want to stock 
multiple copies as well. Halpin’s monochromatic illustrations portray the characters 
with a warm, wide-eyed amiability tempered by crisp lines and a slight angularity 
that keep the scenes interesting as well as attractive.  JH
christensen, Bonnie I, Galileo; written and illus. by Bonnie Chris-
tensen. Knopf, 2012 [40p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96753-5 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86753-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
The fictionalized voice of Galileo offers a pensive account of his life’s work. Now 
“a blind old man locked away in the hills of Arcetri,” he plays out his final years 
in a sort of house arrest imposed by the inquisitors of the Catholic Church for his 
heretical writings about a heliocentric universe. A tone of confident pride tempers 
the sadness and bitterness of his situation, though, and he recalls with a touch of 
swagger how, “like a clever cat, I landed on my feet” after leaving the university 
without a degree and becoming a scholar who pushed the limits of academic cus-
tom and scientific inquiry. Although Galileo is most famous for his courageous 
support of Copernican theory, his work on scientific instruments—compass, tele-
scope, and microscope—is also discussed. More concrete and accessible than Sís’ 
Starry Messenger (BCCB 11/96), this offers middle-schoolers a solid introduction 
to a towering figure. Gouache and oil paintings with heavily textured dark line 
and jewel-toned colors are suggestive of woodcut; diagrams in both simple and 
ornamented styles help illuminate Galileo’s observations. Endpaper maps feature 
pertinent Italian sites; end matter includes a chronology of events related to Galileo’s 
life and legacy, lists of his experiments and discoveries, a glossary, and a brief list 
of print and online sources.  EB
July/AugusT 2012 • 555
christensen, Bonnie Plant a Little Seed; written and illus. by Bonnie Chris-
tensen. Porter/Roaring Brook, 2012 [32p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-550-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-7 yrs
On a snowy winter day, two friends—a tow-headed girl and an African-American 
boy—page through a seed catalog and dream of their future garden. Come spring, 
they get to work, planting and caring for their vegetables. The plants continue 
to grow until it is autumn and time for the harvest, and the story ends with a 
Thanksgiving table weighed down with the fruits (and vegetables) of the kids’ 
labors. Christensen’s ode to vegetable gardening employs rhythmic cadence and 
careful repetition to capture the anticipation and excitement of growing plants 
from seeds; the children don’t just wait but “water and wait and wait and dream . . .  
and dream and wait some more.” Gardening facts are occasionally interwoven 
into the story and illustrations (“Some plants grow up, some grow down, some 
grow fast, some grow slowly”), and the narrative is alive with sensory details, from 
vivid descriptions of the plants and flowers, to the sounds (“Our garden sings with 
buzzing bees, with rustling leaves and cawing crows, with gentle rain and whirring 
wings”) and tastes (“When the fruit’s the perfect size we munch it warm right off 
the vine, sweet and sharp upon our tongues, we hold the taste of summertime”). 
The painted woodblock illustrations offer vibrant depictions of the growing garden, 
and the textures add an organic appeal; occasional seeds are sprinkled throughout 
the pages for further visual interest. A page of facts about gardens and gardening 
is appended.  HM
cohen, rich Alex and the Amazing Time Machine; illus. by Kelly Murphy. Ot-
taviano/Holt, 2012 [176p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-9418-3 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-6
In the hands of fifth-grade genius Alex Trumble, a few mirrors, a laser pointer, 
and a souped-up iPod combine to become a portable time machine that allows 
its owner to traverse the space-time continuum. Good thing, too, because Alex is 
desperate to alter a past that has his brother kidnapped by henchmen from the 
future, his parents devastated, and his present self pursued by the bad guys who 
took his brother, who did so to prevent Alex from inventing the time machine at 
all. It’s all a bit confusing, but suffice to say that two hundred years from now, a 
maniacal general has taken over the world and sent the only person that could stop 
him back to Alex’s time, and Alex’s time machine returns the man to the future 
where he defeats the general, making Alex a target for the general’s revenge across 
the paths of time and space. Time-travel logic can be confusing, and Cohen lays 
it all on a bit thick here, brandishing contradictory theories and technical jargon 
with little contextualization and whole lot of vague, incongruous explanations to 
back it up. The threat, however, is real enough in the form of the brutish thugs 
chasing Alex, and the fifth-grader’s ability to quickly assess the situation and act 
accordingly, often with astoundingly successful results, will make him a hero among 
certain readers. Hard sci-fi buffs will want to get their time-travel fix elsewhere, but 
readers who like their protagonists to have all the answers—even if those answers 
are a bit convenient—will enjoy finding an expert in Alex.  KQG
556 • The BulleTin
cooper, elishA Homer; written and illus. by Elisha Cooper. Greenwillow, 
2012 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-06-201248-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 1-2
It’s summertime, and Homer, the big yellow Lab, stretches out comfortably on the 
porch right from the start of the day. The other dogs invite him to “chase and race 
around the yard,” but he demurs; the little girl tries to coax him to check out the 
field, but he politely passes (“Thank you, but no”); and so on. When the wanderers 
return at the end of the day, he hears their stories with kindly approval. Finally, he 
silently stretches and heads into the darkening house for supper and a cozy sleep 
on an armchair in the living room, noting that he has everything he wants: “I have 
you.” This reads like a tribute to a beloved canine elder statesman, and though it’s a 
pretty low-event story, kids living with their own adored older dogs will appreciate 
the doggy perspective, expressed with simple sweetness, on a quietly enjoyable day. 
Cooper’s watercolors balance lightness of palette with geometry of composition, 
as the patterned regularity of the porch backgrounds image after image; the low 
horizon line emphasizes both the low canine viewpoint and the wide-open world 
of a summery beach stay. The concept is a little abstract for younger picture-book 
audiences, but the simple text is a natural for reading alone; it could also make a 
splendid reading-out-loud duet with kids hamming up the roles of eager adventurer 
and contented porch-sitter.  DS
dekeyser, stAcy The Brixen Witch. McElderry, 2012 [208p] illus.
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3328-1 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3330-4 $9.99   
R Gr. 4-6
When twelve-year-old Rudi Bauer finds a golden guilder, belonging to the local 
witch, it brings him so much annoyance that he puts it back on the mountainside 
where he found it. Then the town of Brixen is overrun with rats, which Rudi and 
his wise grandmother suspect to be the work of the witch. Nothing succeeds in 
removing the pests until a mysterious fiddle-playing stranger offers his services for 
a guilder. When Rudi goes to retrieve the witch’s coin, he finds the witch, who 
explains that the rats have been inflicted on the town by her ambitious, thieving 
servant (the fiddle-playing stranger). When the town can’t pay his fee, he takes 
Brixen’s children, and it’s up to Rudi to put things right. This is a vivid and intrigu-
ing take on “The Pied Piper of Hamelin,” and the smart and honorable (but still 
believably frightened) Rudi provides young readers with a relatable point of entry 
into this old legend. Piquant descriptive details (such as the local girls’ jumprope 
rhymes), slightly stylized dialogue, and Nickle’s occasional black silhouette-style 
illustrations evoke a satisfyingly old-fashioned (but unspecified) European-like set-
ting. The pacing is leisurely enough for readers to speculate on the coming events 
but brisk enough to keep the action moving forward. Hand this to kids who like 
their fiction steeped in folklore.  JH
dicAmillo, kAte Bink & Gollie: Two for One; written by Kate DiCamillo and 
Alison McGhee; illus. by Tony Fucile. Candlewick, 2012 [96p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-3361-5 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 2-4
Polar-opposite friends stumpy Bink and lanky Gollie have returned, and they’re off 
July/AugusT 2012 • 557
to the state fair. In the first episode, Bink is determined to win at Whack a Duck 
but keeps beaning the game operator instead (“I fear this can only end in tragedy,” 
says Gollie); in the second, Gollie’s dream of being in a talent show turns into a 
nightmare; in the third, the friends visit a fairground fortuneteller. B&G again hit 
that sweet spot where picture books, graphic novels, and early readers converge. The 
text is almost entirely dialogue, the back-and-forth banter between the two girls 
evincing the unmistakable well-worn rhythm of a long friendship; the illustrations 
add dimension to the action (as in the sequence where Gollie stands mute from 
stage fright in front of a packed audience, with each scene drawing back farther 
and showing her smaller and more outnumbered), and the colored figures with 
their zesty lines contrast with the monochromatic backgrounds. The book follows 
a satisfying trajectory from the first story’s slapstick through the second’s pathos to 
conclude with the affirmation of friendship in the third, and the blend of humor 
and sympathetic warmth buoys the story throughout. This endearing partnership 
remains a treat to follow, and readers will be as delighted as Bink and Gollie about 
the fortune-teller-certified long-term soundness of their friendship.  DS
ellis, deBorAh Kids of Kabul: Living Bravely through a Never-Ending War; writ-
ten and illus. with photographs by Deborah Ellis. Groundwood, 2012 143p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-55498-181-6 $15.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-55498-203-5 $15.95   
R Gr. 6-9
This nonfiction counterpart to The Breadwinner and its sequels consists of inter-
views of twenty-seven survivors of the Taliban regime and the subsequent war in 
Afghanistan, all between ten and seventeen years old. The interviews are presented 
in paragraphs with the questions removed, although it is fairly clear in reading them 
what sorts of prompts were provided; each subject, for instance, talks in a fairly 
consistent order about his or her family, current life, school (if he or she attends 
one), memories, fears, and finally, his or her hopes for both a personal future as well 
as the future of Afghanistan. First giving the name and age of each interviewee and 
often a picture, Ellis then provides context for the interview in a brief introduc-
tion that describes the larger cultural and historical reasons behind the particular 
situation the person finds him or herself in; these introductions are extremely 
useful in helping readers see the big picture of how the prolonged war has proven 
devastating to domestic life. A subtle but informative contrast then emerges as the 
interviewees describe how much better their lives are now than when they lived 
under the Taliban, and most credit the value of the education they are now able 
to receive for the hope they have for their futures. Some of the interviews remain 
bleak, however; in particular, the voice of a ten-year-old boy living in a refugee camp 
with nothing to do and little hope of change is heart-rending. Obviously useful for 
current events curricula, this book will also be valuable for inspiring extracurricular 
service projects; resources are included for further research.  KC
emerson, keVin The Lost Code. Tegen/HarperCollins, 2012 [448p] (The 
Atlanteans)
ISBN 978-0-06-206279-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 8-10
The ozone is severely depleted, radiation and ocean levels alike are on the rise, the 
planet’s habitable zones are shrinking, and the EdenCorp biodomes scattered across 
558 • The BulleTin
the world are reserved for only the luckiest and wealthiest of the dwindling human 
population. Owen wins a lottery to attend a summer camp at Eden West, where a 
near-drowning leaves him with mysterious neck wounds that turn into gills, and 
he starts to hear a siren calling to him from the lake with a cryptic message. It turns 
out that EdenCorp is in search of a genetic connection to the legendary civilization 
of Atlantis—and they’re not above a little invasive medical experimentation to find 
it. Readers in search of a gritty dystopia may find the biodome setting shields them 
too much from the grim world-ending going on outside, but the wild aerial chase 
of the ending promises to carry future volumes into the larger world. The familiar 
array of apocalypse-ready themes, ranging from corporate greed to the fragility of 
the environment to human arrogance, are on display, harnessed to a combination 
of science and mysticism (light on the science) with complications that don’t always 
compensate for the excess of exposition needed to convey their relevance. Still, 
the broad strokes of conflict and characterization make this a movie-ready action 
flick at heart; with an easy romance and a social world primarily built on well-
trodden summer camp tropes, it’s a lighter alternative to the bleak post-apocalyptic  
waterworld of Bertagna’s Exodus or Bacigalupi’s Ship Breaker (BCCB 6/10) and an 
accessible entree to the dystopia trend.  CG
Fern, trAcey Barnum’s Bones: How Barnum Brown Discovered the Most Famous 
Dinosaur in the World; illus. by Boris Kulikov. Ferguson/Farrar, 2012 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-374-30516-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 7-9 yrs
Should Gallup choose to poll primary schoolers on their favorite dinosaur, bet your 
last dollar on the winner being Tyrannosaurus rex. Why, then, has its discoverer, 
Barnum Brown, not enjoyed more fame among legions of dino fans? Fern redresses 
this oversight with an appealing picture-book account of the dapper Mr. Brown 
(who often went digging in his suit) from his early years annoying his mother 
with his crates of specimens (Mom banished them to the laundry house) to his 
career prospecting for bones for Professor Henry Osborn of New York’s American 
Museum of Natural History. Brown became known both for the sheer quantity 
of bones he bagged and for the novelty of his discoveries, particularly enough T. 
rex parts to reconstruct most of a complete skeleton. Kulikov’s take on Brown’s 
exploits is playful and imaginative, catching Brown from tipsy perspectives as he 
dashes across continents with bones precariously in tow, and is roundly acclaimed 
by bug-eyed, gape-mouthed admirers, human and equine. A double-page spread 
of T. rex on museum display shows the bones positioned in a horizontal stance that 
was not understood during Brown’s time—a glitch that can be pleasantly addressed 
by pairing this title with Kathleen Kudlinski’s Boy, Were We Wrong about Dinosaurs! 
(BCCB 1/06) An author’s note and selected bibliography are included.  EB
FreedmAn, russell Abraham Lincoln and Frederick Douglass: The Story Behind an 
American Friendship. Clarion, 2012 [128p] illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-547-38562-4 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-9
Although the noted abolitionist and the sixteenth president met only three times, 
each claimed the other as friend. Here Freedman explores the similarities of philoso-
phy and experience that softened the ground for the unlikely friendship, opening 
July/AugusT 2012 • 559
with a glimpse of Douglass’ first trip to the White House, turning to compact but 
substantive biographies of each man, and then tracing the wartime pressures that 
made Douglass come calling on a man he doubted would prove a true ally to the 
anti-slavery cause. Freedman does not deviate an inch from his customary knack 
of selecting the precise details an adolescent reader will require to sort through 
complex issues and often conflicted personalities, and he incorporates them in 
smooth, effective storytelling. The actual meetings between Douglass and Lincoln, 
relatively long in coming within this text, happily arrive as a climax rather than a 
disappointing delay, and readers come away with a strong sense of just how remark-
able a handshake could be between an ex-slave and a head of state. Period artwork 
and photographs are included, as well as source notes, a forthcoming index, and 
the text of “Dialogue Between a Master and Slave,” a contemporary abolitionist 
piece that influenced both Douglass and Lincoln.  EB
Friend, nAtAshA My Life in Black & White. Viking, 2012 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-670-78494-3 $17.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-670-01303-6 $8.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 8-10
Two things change Alexa’s life when she’s fifteen: “My best friend betrayed me. And 
my face went through a windshield.” Prior to that she’d enjoyed the easy confidence 
of being the beautiful one, who drew universal approbation and attention from 
passing fashion photographers. Then came the drunken party where she found 
her boyfriend receiving a blowjob from her best friend, Taylor, and ended up in 
a car accident after leaving the party in a fury. The damage is sufficient to require 
a skin graft that leaves Alexa’s pretty face permanently changed, so she hacks off 
her hair, eats herself silly, and stocks up on hoodies to cover herself, returning to 
school in a very different persona as she struggles with her estrangement from Taylor 
and her new role in a family that had celebrated her for her beauty. That’s a solid 
and adolescent-appealing premise, and the accessibly written story is particularly 
perceptive at conveying Alexa’s past ignorance about what her beauty spared her 
from and the contrast with what she experiences now—it’s not so much that she’s 
become a target as she’s no longer spared from the cruel trash talk that most teens 
must endure. There’s too much contrivance in the plot, though, from convenient 
eavesdroppings to fortuitous encounters, and characterizations are more function-
ary than vivid (save for that of Alexa’s older sister, Ruthie, who surprises Alexa by 
becoming her anchor amid the storm). Especially since the medical details remain 
pretty vague and disappear quickly, the alarming initial intimations about Alexa’s 
injuries ironically make her eventual scar seem pretty minor. The concept still will 
elicit plenty of discussion, though, and the book could make an interesting partner 
to Klam’s The Pretty One (BCCB 4/06) or Westerfeld’s Uglies (BCCB 2/05).  DS
gAle, emily Girl Out Loud. Chicken House/Scholastic, 2012 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-30438-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-41517-0 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Kass Kennedy is not a singer, nor does she wish to be. Unfortunately, her bipolar 
dad, on a manic high, is nonetheless convinced that her vocal talents are enough to 
wow the world on The X-Factor, and he’s pushing and guilt-tripping fifteen-year-old 
560 • The BulleTin
Kass into compliance. She’d like to rely on her friends for help, but sweet-natured 
Char is upset that Kass has been getting attention from Cassian, the boy Char 
likes, and analytic Izzy is occupied with mollifying Char. When Kass finds out 
that her always-dutiful mother has been secretly having an affair (and with Char’s 
father to boot), and then her first kiss with Cassian turns into a nightmarish non-
consensual groping, she’s left with no one to turn to. Kass is utterly believable as 
a girl who’s average and fine with it, and whose relationship with her father is an 
understandable mixture of resentful anger and protective love. Characterizations 
are strong throughout and dynamics are sharply observed, from the way that Kass’ 
father’s illness is the catalyst for snowballing family dysfunction, to the fact that 
Kass’ absorption in her own problems leads her to shortchange her friends. The 
subplot of her relationship with Cassian is particularly well negotiated, in that he’s 
genuinely sorry for what he did, but she’s legitimately limiting their rapprochement 
to friendship. Mostly, though, it’s a briskly toned yet sympathetic portrait of a girl 
stuck with a problem she can’t fix and can’t find help with, and the book is utterly 
understanding about how quickly isolation can overtake a young person struggling 
with family difficulties. Plenty of teens have parents who are projecting their own 
dreams onto their kids, and they’ll feel for Kass in her fight for autonomy.  DS
giBBs, edwArd Little Bee; written and illus. by Edward Gibbs. LB Kids/Little, 
2012 24p
ISBN 978-0-316-12707-3 $8.99   
R* 2-4 yrs
Everybody’s on the move in this rhyming board book, and they’ve all got good 
reason: the little bee’s on the wing because a hungry frog’s after him, the frog’s actu-
ally jumping away from a snake, the snake’s slithering away from a mongoose, and 
so on up to the “big hunter”—who’s running because the little bee is flying after 
him. Audiences will immediately catch on to the pattern in the sprightly, simple 
Q&A couplets (“Little bee, little bee, why do you flee?/ Because there’s a hungry 
frog chasing me!”), and the punchline has genuine, amusing, and audience-suitable 
punch. The full-bleed spreads employ a politely modest backdrop of stylized and 
color-coordinated foliage to support the starring animals, who are bursting with 
vivid saturated colors in frescoesque layers and sharply outlined with squiggly, 
snarly, splotchy line. The figures are comic enough to take the tension out of the 
pursuit, but they’re still high-impact and expressive presences who seem as ready to 
jump off of the page as jump into the next spread. Page turns offer opportunities 
for a “guess the answer” reveal of each critter’s pursuer, and the movement across 
the spreads (the lion, for instance, appears first entering the spread on the left, then 
he’s in full glory in the middle, and then his tail hangs behind as the rest of him 
has moved off the scene) is carefully sequenced for maximum impact. This would 
be an excellent pairing with Rosen’s Tiny Little Fly (BCCB 12/10) for an early duo 
of insect capers; be sure to let youngsters have a feel of the sparkly real-cloth wings 
on the cover.  DS
grAhAme, ABBy Wentworth Hall. Simon, 2012 276p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5196-4 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5198-8 $9.99   
Ad Gr. 7-10
A crumbling estate and a modernizing world is making it difficult for the esteemed 
Darlington family to maintain its indulgent lifestyle in 1912, but Lord Darlington, 
July/AugusT 2012 • 561
its patriarch, is determined to see the family name—and its wealth—continue. 
Fortunately, a year abroad has tamed his daughter Margaret, former wild child, 
into a mannered young lady, ideally suited to marry her way into money—perhaps 
to Teddy Fitzhugh, heir to a diamond fortune and newly arrived houseguest at 
Wentworth Hall. Younger sister Lila, however, refuses to be overlooked in favor of 
Margaret yet again, and she is willing to do anything to get Teddy’s attention, even 
if it means betraying Margaret’s former indiscretions. Meanwhile, the servants are 
all atwitter with the latest gossip regarding a local newspaper column satirizing the 
Darlingtons, one that reveals information that only an insider at Wentworth Hall 
would know. YA fans of Downton Abbey will immediately recognize the upstairs-
downstairs setup, but even readers who have never heard of the Dowager Countess 
will be compelled to fly through the pages of this supremely soapy but utterly read-
able piece of historical fiction (emphasis on fiction) as scandal abounds, traditions 
are defied, and true love conquers all. Grahame packs in the drama with not one, 
but two, illegitimate children; plenty of sniping sibling rivalry; a breathless, forbid-
den romance; and a hopelessly optimistic ending; unfortunately, that doesn’t leave 
a whole lot of room for character development and most of the players are a bit 
two-dimensional while the stilted, often corny dialogue exists mainly to drive the 
plot along. Still, lovers of historical gossip about the well-heeled and glamorously 
clad will likely find themselves suitably titillated.  KQG
hAhn, mAry downing Mister Death’s Blue-Eyed Girls. Clarion, 2012 330p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-547-76062-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-547-82237-2 $16.99   
R Gr. 7-10
It’s 1956, junior year is just wrapping up for Nora, and a summer stretches ahead 
that she intends to fill with friends, movies, and dreams of a real boyfriend. Two 
of the girls she hangs around with goad her into attending a drunken party in the 
woods, where Nora witnesses Cheryl flirt with a new conquest, fend off her angry 
ex, Buddy, and humiliate yet another boy making advances. There’s school the 
next day, but Cheryl and a younger pal, Bobbi Jo, never show up, and their bullet-
ridden bodies are discovered on the route to the school. Buddy, who has threatened 
Cheryl in the past, is immediately suspected of murder, and even though the police 
release him for lack of evidence, his life in the small town is ruined. Nora, however, 
can’t quite bring herself to join the crowd in condemnation of “the killer,” and her 
growing sympathy for Buddy’s plight only complicates her attempt to deal with the 
deaths and the knowledge that, had she and a friend not been a bit late for school 
that morning, they would have undoubtedly shared the victims’ fate. Hahn bases 
her story on a homicide among her own teen acquaintances, and it’s clear by the 
raw grief of Nora’s narration (which alternates with that of Buddy and the killer) 
that Hahn is still exorcizing personal demons. The veracity of this tragedy raises 
the stakes for readers who are already fans of Hahn’s supernatural fiction, and the 
coming-of-age component of Nora’s shattered naïveté is all the more searing. In an 
author’s note, Hahn says, “I’m not the only one who has never forgotten a single 
detail of that morning in the park.” Readers aren’t likely to forget either.  EB
562 • The BulleTin
hAnd, elizABeth Radiant Days. Viking, 2012 287p
ISBN 978-0-670-01135-3 $17.99   
Ad Gr. 9-12
Eighteen-year-old Merle is an art student in 1977, and her unconventional talent 
attracts the attention of her teacher, Clea, who engages her in a sexual relationship 
and steals her art, presumably to promote it and claim Merle as her protégé. Soon, 
however, Clea has broken up with Merle and she is left homeless and broke. She 
runs into Ted, a homeless man with unmatched guitar skills, who is rumored to 
have taught some of the greats, including Dylan himself, before self-destructing. 
Meanwhile, teenaged poet and enfant terrible Arthur Rimbaud, in his own time of 
1870, runs away from his domineering mother but can find no shelter or respite in 
a Paris under siege. He too meets an unusual homeless man, and one fateful night 
the two teens inexplicably find themselves together on the streets of Georgetown, 
sharing their magic and leaving brilliant threads of influence that reach across time 
to change each other’s art. In a plot that’s clearly a homage to Rimbaud’s influence 
on generations of writers, poets, artists, and musicians, the mythic elements, in-
cluding Ted’s resemblance to Orpheus, work significantly better than the plot itself, 
which doesn’t cohere as well as it might. Merle’s and Arthur’s stories run closely 
parallel to one another, with Arthur’s story drawn from his actual biography, but 
the intersections are far too brief to be narratively satisfying. The lyrical, imagistic 
language is a rare treat, however, for artistic teens who relish evocative metaphors, 
and the introduction to Rimbaud’s work will appeal to the restless teen spirit long-
ing to rebel against all that is banal.  KC
heAly, christopher The Hero’s Guide to Saving Your Kingdom; illus. by Todd 
Harris. Walden Pond/HarperCollins, 2012 438p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-211743-4 $16.99 
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-211744-1 $9.99   
R Gr. 4-7
What’s a prince gotta do around here to get a little respect? That’s the question Prince 
Liam, Prince Frederic, Prince Duncan, and Prince Gustav (you might better know 
them as the Princes Charming from Sleeping Beauty, Cinderella, Snow White, and 
Rapunzel, respectively) find themselves asking after the storytelling bards get a few 
facts wrong and end up portraying the princes as generic fools who play second 
fiddle to the heroics of their princesses. The four royal lads join forces to clear their 
names (or at least establish that they have a name other than Charming) and set 
off to rescue Cinderella. That’s despite the fact that she does not actually require 
any rescuing (the clever and resourceful gal quite willingly left the palace in search 
of adventure) and despite the fact that their bumbling questing puts the princes’ 
lives and kingdoms at stake. Healy has given fans of fractured fairy tales a real treat 
here, with a fantasy world that is recognizable in its once-upon-a-time elements 
but turned upside down by well-mannered giants, pint-sized bandits, and a fame-
obsessed witch. The boyish camaraderie among the princes is particularly charming 
(pun fully intended) and each is imbued with a distinctive personality that allows 
them to be mostly sympathetic but also just a bit laughable. The humor comes 
as much from the absurd situations the princes find themselves in as it does from 
their various personality quirks that heighten the story’s ridiculousness. Thankfully, 
the author is an equal-opportunity mocker, allotting a similar amount of folly to 
Ella and her fellow princesses; readers who believe strongly in the equality of the 
sexes—both in smarts and not-so-smarts—will find plenty to love here.  KQG 
July/AugusT 2012 • 563
heppermAnn, christine City Chickens. Houghton, 2012 53p illus. with 
photographs
ISBN 978-0-547-51830-5 $16.99   
R Gr. 3-5
This photoessay chronicles the work of Mary Britton Clouse and her husband, 
Burt, who have created an inner-city rescue shelter for abandoned and relinquished 
chickens in Minneapolis. Heppermann engagingly outlines Clouse’s motivations 
(“Chickens are the most abused, exploited animals on the planet. . . . They are the 
ones who need friends the most”), her methods and shelter set-up, and, of course, 
the various chickens who have become temporary or permanent “guests.” At a 
time when backyard chicken coops are becoming more common, the book offers 
kids and adults a timely and fresh perspective on pet poultry. On a page aimed at 
educators, the author suggests a source for alternative lessons to classroom hatching 
projects, since “hatching projects encourage the view that animals are disposable 
objects instead of beings requiring a lifetime of care and commitment.” Brief 
information on caring for city chickens is also provided. The clear photographs 
and informative text provide strong evidence for the abuses chicken face and for 
their enormous appeal as pets. Although the compositions occasionally get a bit 
busy, the combination of multiple typefaces, numerous photos, muted earth tones, 
and decorative details generally results in an attractive, homespun-looking whole. 
Animal-loving city and country kids alike will find this worth clucking about; 
either way, adults should be prepared for the inevitable question afterwards: “Can 
we get a chicken?”  JH
horowitz, dAVe Chico the Brave; written and illus. by David Horowitz. Paulsen/
Penguin, 2012 32p
ISBN 978-0-399-25636-3 $16.99   
R 5-7 yrs
Chico the chick, a resident of the mountains of Peru, is afraid of everything. When 
his father tells him a (made-up) story about the “Golden Chicken” (“The Golden 
Chicken is a good guy—a superbird. Whenever there’s trouble, he, um, swoops 
down from those there mountains and saves the day”), Chico gathers his courage 
enough to go out looking for this chicken champion. A tough band of llamas 
tauntingly suggests that the Golden Chicken can be found only atop an alarmingly 
high mountain, but timid Chico presses onward. Reaching the mountain’s peak, 
Chico discovers that there is no Golden Chicken, but a brisk wind sets him flying 
through the sky, just in time to scare off the Llama Llama Gang who have been 
terrorizing the town in his absence: “‘Uh-oh,’ said one of the llamas. ‘You think 
that’s the Golden Chicken the kid was talking about?’ ‘I don’t know,’ said another 
llama, ‘but let’s not stick around to find out.’” Although the solution to Chico’s fear 
is a little contrived, Horowitz’s blithely absurd story and illustrations are humorous 
enough that kids won’t much care. Chico is a sympathetic little guy, shaped like 
an upside-down yellow teardrop with an enormous orange beak and spindly legs, 
and underdogs will cheer at his triumph over the bad (but funny) llamas. Amusing 
details in the vibrant acrylic and black pencil illustrations, such as the wanted poster 
featuring “LLENNY” the llama and the bottles of “Llamonade” (“Muy delicioso,” 
states the label) that the mustachioed llamas are drinking, further ratchet up the 
silliness. Chico may not prompt the faint-hearted into sudden bravery, but plenty 
of kids will chuckle at this chick’s accidentally discovered audacity.  JH
564 • The BulleTin
hutchins, hAzel Up Cat; illus. by Fanny. Annick, 2012 22p
ISBN 978-1-55451-388-8 $6.95   
Ad 3-5 yrs 
     Up Dog; illus. by Fanny. Annick, 2012 22p
ISBN 978-1-55451-389-5 $6.95   
R 3-5 yrs
Concept books with a difference, these two board books explore numerous per-
mutations of the word “up,” with each page offering it in a phrase, often a simple 
two-word compound verb (“open up,” “mess up,” “gather up”), that documents the 
critter-related activity as pooch and kitty go through their days. The kitty wakes for 
a day of kitty play (“leap up”) until there’s too much mayhem for the owner, who 
puts the cat up to the windowsill only for Puss to slip right back into the house. 
The dog’s happy day starts with an excursion outside and a subsequent return to 
the house with a muddy bone. After the mess gets too much for the pup’s owner, 
the dog is banished until the house and yard (and he himself) are put back to 
rights and he can go back inside for a cuddle (“Snuggle up”). Up Dog is the better 
of the two, with its effective story trajectory and largely successful use of the text 
structure; Up Cat is more of a list, and events get perplexing at times (what’s the cat 
scratching up and covering up? How come the cat transports from the armchair in 
“curl up and” to a rug in “soak up the sun”?). Fanny’s art beams with unassuming 
charm; saturated painterly digital colors suggest acrylics, styled with a few touches 
of patterning and slender black outlining. Both Dog and Cat have huge baby heads 
with wide, endearing eyes, and they scamper through an open world inhabited by 
a few homey pieces of furniture and cheerful decorative flowers. With their simple 
texts and inventive and rather sophisticated riffs on a single word, these could have 
potential for beginning reading and early language arts use as well as playful lap 
sharing with audiences who will enjoy following the animal antics.  DS
JeFFers, oliVer The Hueys in the New Sweater; written and illus. by Oliver Jef-
fers. Philomel, 2012 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-399-25767-4 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-7 yrs
The Hueys—white oval figures with stick appendages and minimal facial fea-
tures—all “looked the same, thought the same . . . and did the same things.” Rupert 
Huey, however, decides one day to knit himself “a nice new sweater” in a vibrant 
shade of tangerine, causing much consternation among the Hueys until Rupert 
convinces Gillespie to knit a matching sweater (“That way, he would be different 
too!”). Soon everyone’s clad in an orange sweater—and then Rupert decides to don 
a hat. Readers familiar with Willems’ Naked Mole Rat Gets Dressed (BCCB 2/09) 
will find this covers similar ground; while Willems’ take is the more amusing of 
the two, Jeffers’ tale is more focused and ironic. The Hueys’ amusing categoriza-
tion of wearing a sweater as “different,” even when they’re all wearing the same 
sweater (“Before long, they were all different, and no one was the same anymore”) 
contrasts humorously with the illustration in a clever disconnect that will prompt 
young audiences to discuss whether or not the Hueys are actually “all different.” 
The Hueys are a visually endearing bunch (made, according to a note, “with pencils 
and a bit of orange”), depicted as mere pencil outlines when they’re against white 
backgrounds and white figures when against pastel backgrounds (though when 
they gain individuality by selecting their own hats at the end, they transform into 
July/AugusT 2012 • 565
peachy pink figures sporting clothing of various styles and colors). The minimalist 
appearance of the Hueys will make them easy for kids to imitate artistically, and 
those who can’t wait for the Hueys’ next outing (jacket copy indicates this is the 
beginning of a series) may want to create their own Huey-themed adventures.  JH
Jennings, pAtrick Bat and Rat; illus. by Matthew Cordell. Abrams, 2012 34p
ISBN 978-1-4197-0160-3 $16.95   
R 5-7 yrs
Best friends Bat and Rat are also musical partners: “Bat wrote the music and played 
the piano. Rat wrote the words and sang.” When Rat suffers, one hot night, from 
writer’s block over a song about her favorite things, they head to the ice cream parlor. 
Unfortunately for Bat, his tower of scoops falls into the gutter, leaving only one scoop 
on the cone. Luckily, it’s a scoop of Mint Fly Chip, which Bat proclaims his “favorite 
favorite,” a phrase that inspires Rat to finish her song (which includes lyrics such 
as “My favorite cheese is runny and smelly./ My favorite noodle is vermicelli./ My 
favorite headwear’s a porkpie hat./ But my favorite favorite is Bat”). Although this 
premise is about as thin as Rat’s beloved vermicelli noodle, Bat and Rat’s midnight 
milieu of music composition and performance is an intriguing (and often amus-
ing) one. That’s especially true in the illustrations, lively pencil and watercolor art 
accented with humorous detail; particularly funny are Bat’s dramatic reactions to 
the demise of his ice cream and the background appearances of the other nocturnal 
critters, such as the cockroach-looking hotel concierge, that also inhabit this world. 
This could easily put some levity into a study of nocturnal animals or be used as a 
kickoff to a discussion about favorite things; it would also be a novel selection for 
a nighttime library storytime/jam session.  JH
kirBy, Jessi In Honor. Simon, 2012 235p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-1697-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-1699-4 $9.99   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Honor is devastated when her Marine brother, Finn, is killed in Afghanistan. 
His last letter arrives a few days after his funeral containing tickets to the farewell 
concert for a singer they both loved, so she decides she has to go, even if it means 
driving alone from Texas to California and missing her college freshman orienta-
tion. When Rusty, Finn’s estranged best friend from high school, insists on coming, 
Honor reluctantly agrees to take him along, and the two set out on what becomes a 
healing voyage of understanding for each of them separately, as well as a new start 
for them together as friends, and maybe something more. The classic tropes of 
the coming-of-age road trip are all present and accounted for here, augmented by 
imagistic descriptions of the landscapes of Texas, Arizona, and California. Rough 
weather both outside of the car and in it causes delays and misunderstandings that 
resolve themselves as Honor remembers just how much Finn took care of her over 
the years; indeed, the narrative of Finn as caregiver after their parents died shows 
him as an unbelievably precocious five-year-old, with memories and emotional 
maturity far beyond his years from the start, who then turns into a steadfast and 
responsible teenager who thinks only of his sister’s well-being. The people Honor 
meets along the way are overly symbolic, making the plot seem far too conveniently 
orchestrated to be credible. Honor and Rusty, on the other hand, are believably 
flawed, enough so that it’s easy to see why they need the Finns of the world as 
anchors. Their enviable roadtrip portrays the universe as resonant with beauty and 
566 • The BulleTin
responsive to personal grief, which is just what many teen readers need as they cope 
with the losses in their lives.  KC
kitAnidis, phoeBe Glimmer. Balzer + Bray, 2012 347p
ISBN 978-0-06-179928-0 $17.99   
R Gr. 9-12
When Marshall and Elyse wake up naked in bed together, they’re disconcerted, to 
say the least. What’s worse is they don’t know each other or remember how they get 
there; in fact, they don’t remember themselves—not their names, their histories, 
their families, anything. They decide to stick together and soon discover that the 
town where they apparently live is an odd place indeed. Anyone there who suffers 
an unpleasant experience immediately falls into a deep sleep and awakens a few 
minutes later completely happy, with no memory of the argument, accident, or 
other mishap that preceded the nap. Elyse, however, can see the ghosts who seem to 
be responsible for the naps, and Marshall has a strange tattoo that repels the ghosts 
from touching him; in fact, they have been on a mission to free the town from its 
enslavement to a malevolent occultist. Clever plotting enables readers to consider 
both the costs and benefits of living with only pleasant memories; the town’s happy 
zombies are frighteningly weak in their passivity, but the number of tourists look-
ing to forget their histories highlight the temptation of losing the pain of the past. 
Perceptive readers will thus find thematic shades of The Giver here, even though 
the story itself is very different, as Elyse and Marshall must use a combination of 
magic and self-sacrificing heroism to fight a mythic foe. Both Elyse and Marshall 
are feisty and flawed, making for a satisfying and romantic action-adventure with 
the by-now-obligatory supernatural twist, perfect for a quick summer read.  KC
krAmer, stAcy From What I Remember; by Stacey Kramer and Valerie Thom-
as. Hyperion, 2012 462p
ISBN 978-1-4231-5508-9 $16.99   
R Gr. 9-12
Kylie wakes up on graduation morning extremely hungover and more than a little 
fuzzy about how she ended up in Mexico, let alone half-naked in bed with Max, 
the cutest boy in school. After this overly sensational beginning, the story flashes 
back to tell a surprisingly well-developed tale of the angst of transitions. Kylie is 
the hyper-responsible scholarship girl at a posh high school who disappears every 
day after school to take care of her brother with Asperger’s, while Max is the golden 
boy who feels he has to give up his artistic dreams to be a lawyer so that his dy-
ing father won’t worry about him. When they are assigned to do a final project 
together, the two end up, through an almost plausible chain of events, stranded in 
Ensenada, where they search each other’s souls as well as their own, and come up 
with a match. Additionally, Kylie gains insight into her father’s emotional coldness, 
Max develops the spine to deal with his current girlfriend, and Kylie’s crossdress-
ing gay friend Will, coming to the rescue for her as usual, finds his first true love. 
Kramer and Thomas’ prior experience in the film industry really shows here in the 
quick pacing, the exotic, romanticized setting, the uplifting personal epiphanies, 
and the teen-movie ending. Happily, then, this has all the right ingredients for an 
engrossing summer read—romance, of course, both gay and straight, empathy-
inspiring characters, a nasty girl whom it’s perfectly okay to hate, and the mildly 
exhilarating danger that comes from those bad decisions that end up making the 
best stories after everyone is home safe and sound. Pack it in the beach bag along 
July/AugusT 2012 • 567
with sunscreen and shades, take a break from ACT prep, and put a Do Not Disturb 
sign on the worry side of your brain.  KC
kyi, tAnyA lloyd Seeing Red: The True Story of Blood; illus. by Steve Rolston. An-
nick, 2012 121p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-55451-385-7 $22.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-55451-384-0 $14.95   
Ad Gr. 6-9
Look past the camp cheesiness of the gray, black, and red layout, the throwaway 
vampire romance comic strip, and the winkingly named host, Harker, and you will 
find a surprisingly thoughtful overview of customs and attitudes regarding blood. 
More anthropologist than ghoul, Kyi arranges her material by topic: religious 
rituals, coming of age rites, blood as a comestible, blood and kinship, forensic in-
terpretation of prints. Modern Western cultural mores are interwoven so smoothly 
among practices generally considered exotic that any attempt to divide sanguinary 
attitudes into enlightened “us” and weird “them” seems fairly specious. Insistently 
underscoring the serious side of this discussion, “Harker’s Notes” at the end of each 
chapter offer open-ended questions and comments that prompt readers to turn a 
critical eye on their own feelings toward blood. Cartoon artwork is frequently at 
tonal odds with the text, but the comprehensive index, list for further reading, and 
selected sources (many of which are quite accessible) will appeal to readers who 
take this topic seriously—dead seriously.  EB
lAckey, mercedes Dead Reckoning; by Mercedes Lackey and Rosemary 
Edghill. Bloomsbury, 2012 [320p]
ISBN 978-1-59990-684-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
West Texas in the late 1860s promises trouble for even the most experienced 
desperado, but what Jett Galatin witnesses in the small town of Alsop is far more 
disturbing than any rough-and-tumble barfight. Narrowly escaping the zombies 
that leave Alsop a virtual ghost town, the normally unflappable and solitary Jett, 
who has spent the last few months disguised as a man as she searches for her miss-
ing brother, joins up with two other lonely souls: White Fox, an Army scout on 
the lookout for his pal and a homestead, both of which have gone missing, and 
Gibbons, a science-minded Yankee sent West to investigate her father’s claims of 
a giant airship abducting entire villages. Together, the trio determines that the 
mysterious disappearances are more than likely a result of zombie attacks, and they 
set their sights on Jerusalem’s Wall, a ranch turned home to the cultish Fellowship 
of the Divine Resurrection. Lackey and Edghill give readers a good old-fashioned 
mashup here, paying homage to the western, zombie, and steampunk genres without 
wandering into the campiness of satire. Sure, there’s a bit of fun to be had in Jett’s 
over-the-top stoicism, Gibbon’s neurotic experimenting, and White Fox’s . . . well, 
general foxiness, but readers looking for a spoof of the latest YA trends may instead 
find themselves genuinely terrified by the story’s chilling depiction of reanimated 
corpses and the greedy con-man who exploits them. The third-person narration 
keeps all three of the main characters at an arm’s length, mirroring the emotional 
detachment of traditional Westerns. Still, there’s plenty of charm in the understated 
romance between Jett and White Fox, while the friends’ promise to meet up again 
lays the groundwork for a sequel. Vampire cowhands, anyone?  KQG
568 • The BulleTin
lAne, AdAm J. B. Stop Thief!; written and illus. by Adam J. B. Lane. Porter/
Roaring Brook, 2012 [32p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-693-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-7 yrs
Deciding that he is now a big boy, young Randall McCoy proceeds to eschew such 
things as booster seats, bedtime hugs and kisses, and even Mr. Pigglesworth, his 
stuffed pig. When sleep proves impossible without his plush porcine pal, Randall 
goes to retrieve Mr. P., only to discover a thief in the act of stealing him. Repeat-
edly crying “Stop thief!”, Randall pursues the robber (via a dotted yellow line) 
through the zoo, a chocolate factory, a museum, and a fair. After the thief boards 
a hot-air balloon, a skyscraper puts a stop to the escape all right, but as the thief 
dangles from the building, “It was Randall to the rescue!” Once he returns home 
and his parents put their tired son to bed with kisses and Mr. Pigglesworth, this 
time Randall is perfectly happy to let them. This is pure little-kid fantasy, with 
Randall’s magnified exploits representing the grownup heroism to which many a 
tot aspires, while the cozy bedtime ending gives them the security they still require. 
The chase and the ending ramble just a bit, but kids will enjoy following the path 
that the thief and Randall take through the various settings, and while some kids 
may question Randall’s sudden altruism towards the thief, they will certainly be 
relieved to see Randall reunited with the adorable, top-hatted Mr. Pigglesworth. 
Lane’s cartoony illustrations use muted brights (appropriate to the nocturnal setting) 
and dynamic, action-packed compositions to complement his humorous text, and 
the red-pajamas-wearing Randall is a stalwart, if pint-sized, protagonist. Pair this 
with Spinelli’s more realistic A Big Boy Now (BCCB 3/12) for a storytime about 
becoming “big,” or share it as a lively bedtime read.  JH
lArBAlestier, Justine Team Human; by Justine Larbalestier and Sarah Rees 
Brennan. Harper/HarperCollins, 2012 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-208964-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-208966-3 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
In this authorial dream duo’s alternative world, vampires’ existence is common 
but not welcome knowledge. When Mel’s best friend Cathy falls for Francis, a 
gentlemanly but rather self-important vamp teen new to their school, Mel’s deter-
mined to stop the ill-fated romance. Larbalestier (Liar, BCCB 11/09) and Brennan 
(The Demon’s Surrender, BCCB 9/11) gleefully skewer the contemporary vampire 
romance with everything from a “Say Not Tonight to a Bite” PSA campaign to a 
never-ending flow of zingy one-liners, balancing the zany satire with some heartfelt 
friendship drama and an awkward romance between Mel and Kit, a human boy 
who was raised by Francis’ family and who challenges Mel’s stereotypes of vampires. 
The world-building here is first-rate, feeding seamlessly into the plot, and Mel’s a 
brash, hilarious, and believably flawed narrator who isn’t afraid to rush in and get 
her hands dirty when she thinks something is wrong. Add in a mystery involving 
the school principal’s missing husband and some light thematic touches surrounding 
the complexities of prejudice and the existential nature of undeath, plus zombies (of 
course), and you have the perfect blend of humor, heart, brains (braaaaaaaainssss?) 
and thrills. This will be equally loved by readers who swoon for vampires and readers 
July/AugusT 2012 • 569
who, like Mel, can only shake their heads and say, “A vampire who wants to go to 
high school? That is the most ridiculous thing I’ve ever heard.”  CG
leeds, constAnce The Unfortunate Son. Viking, 2012 [256p]
ISBN 978-0-670-01398-2 $16.99   
R* Gr. 6-9
The volatile temper of the Count de Muguet, combined with his intolerance of 
any physical imperfection (save for a peculiar deformity of his own), impels him 
to derail two young lives. Beatrice, daughter of one of his knights, sees her father’s 
unjust execution at Muguet’s hand and is banished to live with her nurse, Mat-
tie, in the cottage of Mattie’s fisherman brother, Pons. The Count’s own son Luc, 
born with one ear, is banished in infancy to farmers who he is raised to believe are 
his own family. Shortly after Muguet’s death, Luc senses a change for the worse in 
his adoptive father, and the teenage boy moves in with Pons to learn to fish. It’s a 
wonderful arrangement: Luc brings Pons luck at sea, Mattie has an extra pair of 
hands around the house, and Beatrice and Luc are mutually attracted, with the 
elder siblings’ obvious blessing. The idyll is shattered, though, when Pons’ boat 
is attacked by Saracen pirates who kidnap Luc and sell him into slavery in North 
Africa. His master Salah, an enlightened Arab scholar and skilled physician, offers 
Luc education, skills, and a broader view of the world—everything the young man 
could appreciate except his freedom. While Luc chafes under Salah’s velvet despo-
tism, Beatrice refuses to accept that Luc is lost to her and instigates a search that 
uncovers family she never knew she had, the truth about Luc’s parentage, and the 
depths of the deceased Count’s villainy. Although the novel’s cover art emphasizes 
the act of piracy, this is more a story of intrigue and romance, with a well-integrated 
exploration of the meaning of freedom. Fifteenth-century France may not be the 
most requested topic for young historical fiction lovers, but Leeds’ stellar central 
cast, with their great hearts and plausible flaws, is bound to charm the audience.  EB
lester, helen All for Me and None for All; illus. by Lynn Munsinger. Hough-
ton, 2012 32p
ISBN 978-0-547-68834-3 $16.99   
R 4-7 yrs
When the neighborhood park plans a community treasure hunt, an overly confident 
pig, Gruntly, shows up declaring that he is going to win: “All for me and none for 
all!” However, Gruntly rushes ahead, missing key information in the instructions 
and ending up behind the others, and thus stumbles upon the unexpected lesson 
that sharing is actually a pretty good thing. Lester’s slyly humorous characterization 
is understated (“Gruntly was skipping along, wolfing someone else’s doughnut and 
collecting illegal flowers”) are enjoyably witty, and Gruntly in particular is both 
outrageous and familiar. This will be a definite hit on the storytime carpet; Gruntly’s 
errors during the treasure hunt have to do with predicting the wrong rhymed word 
(while the clue directs participants to go to a tree, Gruntly is already heading to 
the sea), and participants will love shouting out the correct answers. Munsinger’s 
familiar watercolor, pencil, and ink illustrations make Gruntly unmistakably the 
star, with flyaway linework enhancing his bristly outline in scene after scene, and 
there’s an enthusiasm to his pell-mell self-focus that makes him rather endearing. 
This playful approach to important lessons in sharing and listening is a sure winner 
for classrooms and families alike.  HM 
570 • The BulleTin
lo, ginnie Auntie Yang’s Great Soybean Picnic; illus. by Beth Lo. Lee & Low, 
2012 [32p]
ISBN 978-1-60060-442-3 $18.95   
R 7-9 yrs
While out for a drive on a family visit, the Yangs and the Los stumble across a field 
of soybeans, something the adults had never before seen in the United States and 
the children had never before seen at all. An affable farmer agrees to let them pick 
some, and later that day the two families sit down to piles of salty boiled soybeans 
in the pod: “That was our family’s first soybean picnic.” Over the next forty years, 
the tradition continues and grows, as newly arrived Chinese immigrant families 
are invited along and new generations are born; by the end, nearly two hundred 
people attend Auntie Yang’s annual event. The story, based on the Lo family’s own 
history, is lengthy, but it rings with the authenticity of a beloved family tale, and 
the dialogue is homey and familiar; the story’s trajectory from soybean encounter 
to pleasant picnic pastime to huge event is narratively satisfying, and the underlying 
message of food as a way of connecting families is subtle yet matter-of-fact. Beth 
Lo, a ceramic artist, provides the unique art, in which ceramic plates are painted 
with images from the story and then photographed. The effect is a little static, the 
layouts are identical throughout, and the eye is drawn to the object as much as to 
the scenes depicted on it; the colors are cheerful and the details abundant in the 
scenes, though, and listeners will likely want a closer look when storytime is through. 
A detailed author’s note provides further information about Auntie Yang as well as 
some facts about soybeans. A brief glossary is also included.  HM
longshore, kAtherine Gilt. Viking, 2012 [416p]
ISBN 978-0-670-01399-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 8-10
In the “maiden’s room” of the duchess of Norfolk’s Tudor manor, which houses 
the young female relatives, everything revolves around magnetic Cat Howard, the 
self-dubbed “Queen of Misrule.” Narrator Kitty Tylney, another room resident, is 
Cat’s best friend, and she watches with admiration, envy, and a little concern as Cat 
manages to wangle a place at court in the service of Henry VIII’s new queen—and 
then to replace her as Henry’s new wife. Now in Queen Catherine’s retinue, Kitty 
moves uneasily among amoral courtiers and fears for her friend as Cat’s self-willed 
arrogance leads her into danger. Longshore paints doomed Catherine Howard 
as a manipulative queen bee out of her depth, whose arrogance and entitlement 
blind her to the needs—and power—of others. It’s not a deep portrayal, but Cat is 
compelling even as she’s unsympathetic; in fact, she completely overshadows Kitty, 
whose romantic travails (she’s torn between a sexy bad-boy courtier and a high-
minded guy from home) are protracted and comparatively uninteresting, dragging 
the book’s pace to a crawl. Longshore, who’s clearly done her historical homework, 
takes full advantage of the Tudor standards (it opens with Kitty’s witnessing a rape 
by a courtier) and surroundings (there’s plenty of lush detailing of Cat’s queenly 
wardrobe), but Cat is a completely contemporary American teenager with her dislike 
of “bitchy girls” and her interest in men being “great in bed.” The book focuses on 
the high-school priorities of girlfriends and boyfriends, keeping the king and more 
serious issues—his children, the era’s intense religious divisions—peripheral. It’s 
therefore a very different exploration than Libby’s poignant The King’s Rose (BCCB 
3/09), but it’s an enjoyable, if slow-paced, example of chick-lit in costume.  DS
July/AugusT 2012 • 571
mAgoon, keklA 37 Things I Love (In No Particular Order). Holt, 2012 [224p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-9465-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Since a construction accident left her father irreversibly comatose and hooked up 
to machines, Ellis has been drifting through life in the wake of her strong-willed 
friend Abby. She spends her after-school time visiting her dad in the nursing 
home, pouring out her troubles to him; when her mother mentions again that it 
is time to let him go, Ellis is furious. In an attempt to avoid her mother and her 
own broken heart, she lets Abby talk her into sneaking out to a party, where she 
reconnects with Cara, an old friend. Ellis’ emotional confusion is considerably 
heightened when both Cara and her brother show a romantic interest in her, with 
Cara actually making a second-base move. Longing to tell her father, she heads to 
the nursing home only to find that he has died, and she is finally forced to deal 
with all of the emotions and relationship problems that she has been deflecting 
for so long. While her father’s death isn’t surprising, it plays its part well in this 
emotionally sensitive look at what’s worth keeping and when it’s time to let go. 
Ellis’ dysfunctional friendship with Abby is especially well drawn, as Ellis knows 
full well why she continues to let Abby treat her poorly. Her burgeoning relation-
ship with Cara is carefully motivated; her vulnerability and grief enable Ellis to see 
in Cara the specific qualities that make Cara a loving partner. Ellis’ moments of 
clear insight are what signal to the reader that she will in fact weather this storm of 
confusion and loss. She is both utterly ordinary and not, navigating high school 
relationships in the midst of stunning pain, and she loses and regains perspective 
in ways that readers will experience as honest and relatable.  KC
mAtson, morgAn Second Chance Summer. Simon, 2012 468p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4169-9067-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4391-5752-7 $9.99   
R Gr. 7-10
The Pennsylvania lake house meant summer to Taylor until she was twelve, when 
she stopped going; now she’s seventeen, the family is returning to the house, and 
it’s going to be very different: her father is dying of cancer, and this is how he 
wants to spend his last summer. This already difficult situation is complicated 
by the fact that Taylor upset her two best lake friends, her then-boyfriend Henry 
and near-neighbor Lucy, and then fled town and never made amends, so they’re 
treating her frostily upon her return. Soon, though, she’s back in Henry’s arms and 
Lucy’s confidence, but her father’s decline may compel her to flee again. The book 
is long but the pages turn swiftly even as they convey that unmeasured pace of 
summer, and Taylor’s transitions are effectively developed. While twelve-year-old 
Taylor’s mistake is held against her more than is realistic, her gradual reconnec-
tion with her friends is believably awkward and slow. Her eventual romance with 
Henry is lush and summer-perfect, with cinematic scenes of mad kissing below 
the stars or amid a dramatic storm. Most moving of all, though, is her witnessing 
of her father’s gradual decline and her family’s reaction to it as their lives change 
irrevocably. The exploration of the father-daughter relationship is warm, sensitive, 
and heartbreaking, with Taylor realizing how much she counts on the man she’s 
going to lose. Between the dreamy romance and the four-hankie family story, this 
is a satisfyingly emotional summer tale.  DS
572 • The BulleTin
mcAuley, Amy Violins of Autumn. Walker, 2012 [336p]
ISBN 978-0-8027-2299-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 8-10
Betty, alias Adele, is an American Special Operations Executive spy in 1944 working 
with her friend and fellow spy Denise to train the growing resistance movement in 
Nazi-occupied France. Their missions grow increasingly dangerous as Betty proves 
herself again and again in the face of blatant sexism and hostility from the resistance 
fighters, who resent that the Allies sent women to their aid. At the same time, it 
becomes increasingly apparent that there’s a double agent in their midst. Finally, as 
they attempt to sabotage a local Panzer factory in time to impact D-Day, Adele is 
captured by the Gestapo and tortured for information. McAuley offers a somewhat 
shallow treatment of the terrors of occupation, and the details of Betty’s missions 
are glossed over, with the focus more on adventure and emotional reaction than 
historical detail and atmosphere. This is a more sensationalized and less innova-
tive treatment of female spies in World War II than Wein’s similarly themed Code 
Name Verity (BCCB 6/12). However, readers looking for a historical wartime caper 
tale that is heavy on quick-thinking adventure and paranoia (plus a ghost of a love 
triangle) but somewhat lighter on emotional devastation may find this accessible, 
fast-paced adventure and its capable, gutsy heroine to their liking.  CG
mccully, emily Arnold Late Nate in a Race; written and illus. by Emily Arnold 
McCully. Holiday House, 2012 24p (I Like to Read Books)
ISBN 978-0-8234-2421-4 $14.95   
Ad Gr. 1-2
This new entry in the “I Like to Read” series tells the tale of Nate, a reluctant 
mouse boy who would much rather sleep than participate in a running race with 
his siblings Jane and Jake. Nate is late to breakfast (“It is late. Nate is still not here”), 
but eventually his father gets him out of bed and out the door and his mother gets 
him signed up for the race, despite his protestations (“Nate says, ‘No. I like to go 
slow’”). When the race begins, Nate is still standing at the starting line, until an 
image of his mother cheering him on comes to mind, and he starts to run as fast 
as he can, ultimately winning the race. That’s a perplexing turnaround of ques-
tionable credibility, so there’s not much dramatic satisfaction in the conclusion. 
Otherwise, though, this early reader makes effective use of very short sentences, a 
limited number of words, a simple storyline, and lots of phonetic repetition and 
rhyme (certain sounds are repeated in close proximity, allowing new readers multiple 
opportunities to practice new skills). The line and watercolor illustrations depict 
a serene animal village full of grass and trees and enthusiastic little critters ready 
for a run. McCully returns to her more streamlined style here, with her featured 
mice simply drawn in a slightly cartoonish, largely textureless style. The volume 
is formatted larger than most of its kind; the full size pages allow for lots of space 
and for the use of a very large font size, which may offer some appeal. This is more 
useful as a decoding startup than as an actual story, but those seeking to develop 
the early readers section of their library may want to have a closer look at Nate’s 
misadventures.  HM
July/AugusT 2012 • 573
mcelmurry, Jill Mario Makes a Move; written and illus. by Jill McElmur-
ry. Schwartz & Wade, 2012 32p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96854-9 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86854-2 $16.99   
R 5-7 yrs
Mario the squirrel loves to come up with “amazing moves,” such as “Tail, Don’t 
Fail,” “Bowling Ball,” “Super Looper,” and his big move, the “Amazing Amazer.” 
While the last astounds Mario’s family (“‘Astonishing!’ said his grandpa. ‘Alarming!’ 
said his auntie. ‘Aaaaa!’ said his cousins, who didn’t know words’”), it fails to impress 
pal Isabelle, who has her own amazing move. Fortunately, a disheartened Mario 
is cheered when Isabelle asks to learn his special move, and the two then combine 
in a duo. Although the plot is slight, the essence of it—wanting recognition for a 
special talent—rings true, and many kids will empathize with Mario’s need to amaze 
and with his search for a skill that will set him apart from the crowd. McElmurry’s 
succinct text and the snappy dialogue between Mario and Isabelle make this a fine 
choice not only for a standard readaloud session but also as a possible readaloud for 
two voices. The autumnal-toned gouache illustrations are as crisply composed and 
amusing as the text, and McElmurry adds humorous penciled diagrams on graph 
paper for the squirrels’ intricate moves. Mario and Isabelle (and the other critters 
in their forest milieu, including an inexplicably bonnet-clad bear) are cute but not 
saccharine in their rendering. Ending the book is a list of squirrel traits under the 
heading “If You Are a Squirrel,” including such tidbits as “You have four front teeth 
that never stop growing.” Share this with kids, then hand them some graph paper 
and stand back as they document their own “amazing moves.”  JH
mcQuerry, mAureen doyle The Peculiars. Amulet/Abrams, 2012 359p
ISBN 978-1-4197-0178-8 $16.95   
Ad Gr. 7-10
In this alternative steampunk version of America’s past, Lena travels to a town on 
the edge of the Scree, a wilderness said to be populated by persecuted “Peculiars” 
like herself, in hopes of tracking down her absentee father and unearthing the truth 
of her own nature. Urged on by a smarmy but convincing marshal who wants her 
to spy on a quirky local librarian-inventor, Lena takes a position at the library and 
begins poking into the mysterious goings-on at her new employer’s gadget-littered 
household. This is only the beginning of an incident-filled plot that includes 
self-righteous missionaries, fast-talking developers, and a collection of misfits and 
misanthropes living on the edge of civilization, plus thrilling aerial escapes and a 
rumpled but dashing romantic prospect in Lena’s employer’s mild-mannered as-
sistant. Lena herself, unfortunately, does not live up to all this excitement. She’s 
dangerously naïve almost to the point of infantilization, and her heedless tattletaling 
isn’t quite believable, especially coming from someone who is herself persecuted for 
difference. In addition, the book uses the alternative-past conceit to replace actual 
indigenous populations with magical ones, an erasure that was similarly problematic 
in Wrede’s much more innovative Thirteenth Child (BCCB 9/09). Still, the book 
fully captures the pull of the wilderness adventure, and the setting is so vividly 
described as to be a character in its own right; steampunk fans will find much to 
enjoy. An author’s note differentiates actual history from literary invention.  CG
574 • The BulleTin
menotti, AndreA How Many Jelly Beans?; illus. by Yancey Labat. Chronicle, 
2012 24p
ISBN 978-1-4521-0206-1 $18.99   
R 4-7 yrs
This oversized picture book, perfect for classroom sharing, follows a simmering 
rivalry between a girl and boy over jelly beans. Emma takes ten, but when Aiden 
gets twenty without any adult argument, Emma naturally wants even more. And 
so it escalates: twenty-five, fifty, seventy-five, one hundred, and beyond; far beyond, 
even to the thousands and finally a million. At each step, the requisite number of 
jelly beans is displayed (or presumably so—would you like to count them?), until 
the multicolored dots look more like a Seurat daydream than distinguishable can-
dies. The children and their backgrounds are simply rendered in black ink with a 
single splotch of colored floor, the better to show off the bright confections. David 
Schwartz has notably broken ground for the exploration of large numbers in his 
perennially appealing How Much Is a Million? However, Menotti’s outing culminates 
in a ten-section foldout so awesome and unwieldy that no reader will be able to 
hold it up single-handed. Is it really “one million jelly beans”? Take it on faith.  EB
moskowitz, hAnnAh Gone, Gone, Gone. Simon Pulse, 2012 251p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5312-8 $16.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-0753-4 $9.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-0754-1 $9.99   
R* Gr. 9-12
One year after 9/11, in the midst of a string of unexplained D.C.-area sniper attacks, 
Craig and Lio are trying to come to terms with their mortality. Their attraction to 
each other just complicates things, since Craig isn’t over his ex, who had a mental 
breakdown after his father died in the Pentagon crash, and Lio doesn’t understand 
why he survived the same cancer that killed his twin. Is it just a numbers game? 
This all sounds like a lot to pile on, but Moskowitz makes it work with lyrical prose 
and quiet, often heartbreaking character moments that clearly communicate the 
oppressive fear gripping the city and the desperate sadness of the two protagonists 
as they fumble towards bringing each other back to life. Bursts of sharp humor (“I 
guess his face explains why I kissed him”) and some warm, understated moments 
of family bonding keep the angst in check. Introverts will recognize themselves in 
Lio, who feels deeply and says very little, while Craig’s post-breakup acquisition 
of a veritable menagerie of pets (who escape early on and must be tracked down 
throughout the book) is an awww-inducing demonstration of both his big heart 
and his slightly unbalanced mental state. The sense of yearning—for connection, 
for understanding, for safety—is palpable throughout, and readers who reveled in 
the emotional highs and lows of Green and Levithan’s Will Grayson, Will Grayson 
(BCCB 5/10) will find this romance equally satisfying.  CG
murrAy, Alison One Two: That’s My Shoe!; written and illus. by Alison Mur-
ray. Disney Hyperion, 2012 [32p]
ISBN 978-1-4231-4329-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* 2-5 yrs
The little girl and her pup from Apple Pie ABC (BCCB 6/11) have returned, and 
the mutt’s up to mischief again. Initially the enumeration is benign—one dog, 
two shoes—but soon the dog has snatched one of his mistress’ red Mary Janes, 
July/AugusT 2012 • 575
and we’re counting the objects he’s encountering as he gleefully flees his pursuing 
owner. After bounding past things like tulips (six), trees (seven), and items on the 
laundry line (eight), he’s startled into a hasty retreat by encountering cheeping chicks 
(nine) and their protective flock (ten). The text employs the classic “five, six, pick 
up sticks” structure that combines counting with rhyming couplets; aside from 
numbers, the compact-lined verse focuses mostly on action (“Three . . . Four//Out 
the door!”). The art is Murray’s familiar high-spirited digital retro, with maximum 
contrast between muted shades of aqua and teal and the popping red of the girl’s 
sweater and shoes. There’s a handmade feel from the deft striations in line and the 
underpainted backdrops, and there’s a thoughtful rhythm in the compositions that 
bespeaks craft at every page turn. The numbers themselves are effectively and clearly 
anchored into the layout, with each text iteration adjoining a big blue box sporting 
the numeral in white, with thumbnail silhouettes of the countable things (the “Six” 
that leads past six tulips, for instance, offers six miniatures of the flowers below a 
numeral 6) helping connect art and concept. The oversized page design makes this 
shareable in groups, while a more intimate reading will give youngsters a chance to 
finger-count the objects and point out the illustrative gems.  DS
myers, wAlter deAn Just Write: Here’s How. Collins/HarperCollins, 
2012 161p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-220389-2 $17.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-06-220390-8 $7.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-220391-5 $6.99   
R Gr. 6-9
As the author of over 100 books, Walter Dean Myers certainly has the chops to 
offer advice to young people who aspire to a career in writing. His personal story, 
which should alone provide inspiration for struggling teens who don’t think they 
stand a chance to succeed in anything, opens the book. Reared by foster parents 
who, though loving, suffered from alcoholism and depression, he fought his way 
through an angry adolescence and narrowly escaped arrest before doing a stint in 
the army and taking on various menial jobs before finally selling his first book. 
While he provides direct instruction by sharing his own methods for outlining and 
story structure, his main stress is on the hard work and discipline it takes to stick 
with your writing to completion, emphasizing these qualities even over and above 
natural talent. In particular, he shares the story of his work with Ross Workman, 
a teen he met via email who took on the challenge of co-writing the novel Kick 
(BCCB 3/11) with Myers. In detailing his experience with Workman, Myers dis-
cusses the sometimes arduous process of developing characters and plot outlines, 
performing research, working with editors, suffering the loss of confidence, and 
successfully revising. Short chapters lend themselves to discussion in the writing 
workshop or classroom. Excerpts from Myers’ own notebooks are not as clear for use 
as examples as they might be, but his personable prose style is accessible to nascent 
writers. An afterword by Workman provides even further inspiration, but neither 
Workman nor Myers shies away from the frank admission that writing for a living 
is hard work; they simply insist that, with persistence and a plan, it is doable.  KC
576 • The BulleTin
nAscimBeni, BArBArA Animals and Their Families; tr. from the French by Lesley 
Zimic; written and illus. by Barbara Nascimbeni. Owlkids, 2012 64p
ISBN 978-1-926973-32-6 $17.95   
Ad 2-5 yrs
Nascimbeni introduces youngsters to thirty-two animals and their sounds, habitats, 
and food in this attractive French import. Each spread features, on the verso, a 
black silhouette of the animal against a white background with the animal’s name 
in large black typeface, while the recto side shows a color, illustrative rendering 
of the male, female, and juvenile (with proper gender and juvenile names where 
possible) of the species. Each right-hand page also lists, in small circles at the page’s 
bottom, “My Sound,” “My Home,” and “My Meal.” The elephant spread, for 
example, shows two large elephants (one labeled “bull” and the other “cow”) and 
one small one (“calf”), along with the information that “I trumpet” (in the “My 
Sound” circle), “My Home” is “savannah, forest,” and “My Meal” is “grass, leaves, 
plants.” For some species, however, no information is provided for some categories 
of information (gender or juvenile names or the animal’s sound), and there’s no 
explanation anywhere in the book for the absence; the habitat labels vary from the 
specificity of “Australian plains” (the kangaroo) to the problematic vagueness of “sea 
ice” (the polar bear). Nascimbeni’s affectionate animal portraits give this loads of 
visual appeal, though; the rosy-cheeked critters, in soft grainy textures that suggest 
colored pencil, are literal enough to maintain the instructional tone of the informa-
tion, but they are also cheerfully cuddly (the piglets and rabbit kits are particularly 
winning). Despite some flaws, the handsome art, sturdy book construction (both 
pages and cover are extra-thick), kid-centric topic, and simplified presentation of 
information give this a number of uses.  JH
omololu, c. J. Transcendence. Walker, 2012 [336p]
ISBN 978-0-8027-2370-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
A visit to the Tower of London leaves sixteen-year-old Cole Ryan with the sneaking 
suspicion that she might be crazy. Fortunately, Griffon Hall, a swoonworthy looker 
of a guy, gracefully steps in to her life and informs her that her recent visions of 
her own imprisonment and execution are actually evidence that she is one of the 
Akhet—a people who can remember their past lives and use their accumulated 
knowledge to better the world. Not all reincarnated souls are so benevolent, how-
ever, and a series of accidents indicate that a wronged spirit from Cole’s past is out 
for vengeance. As her visions become clearer, Cole learns some disturbing things 
not only about her previous selves but who Griffon may have been to her—and 
why he can’t be trusted now. Omololu wisely keeps the narrative tightly focused on 
Cole’s current crisis even as she introduces a bit of worldliness through the various 
flashbacks; Cole’s voice is appropriately self-centered, concerned mostly with how 
her new status as an Akhet will affect her life in the present. Her visions of the past 
and her interactions with Griffon, who she finds attractive as much for his good 
looks as for his endless amount of Akhet wisdom, serve to broaden her horizons 
even as they challenge her notion of herself—an experience to which many teens 
will readily relate. Unfortunately, Cole’s whiplash reactions to every new bit of 
information she uncovers makes her unreliability as a narrator more frustrating 
than intriguing, and the convenient appearances of Akhet experts just when Cole 
requires knowledge will strain reader credulity. Still, the sexy biracial love interest 
July/AugusT 2012 • 577
(who, for a pleasant change, is actually dark-skinned on the cover) may provide 
broader appeal, while the concept of reincarnation brings a thoughtful twist to the 
supernatural romance and may grant the title multiple lives in circulation.  KQG 
pererA, AnnA The Glass Collector. Whitman, 2012 [352p]
ISBN 978-0-8075-2948-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
The Zabbaleens of Cairo, a group of mostly Coptic Christians, are the Egyption 
city’s “garbage people”; as a Zabbaleen, fifteen-year-old Aaron collects and sorts 
through Cairo’s trash, then sells the recyclables to a merchant every two weeks in 
exchange for measly pay that barely provides for food. Aaron’s specialty is glass; 
he is particularly adept at finding valuable pieces and sorting through the smallest 
scraps without injuring himself. When Aaron is caught with a vial of perfume that 
he rescued from a perfume shop’s garbage, he is accused of theft and publically 
disowned by his stepfather, leaving him with even fewer options than before. 
Eventually, he agrees to do the vilest of the vile jobs—to work as a medical waster, 
sorting through bags of trash and biohazardous materials from hospitals in search 
of recyclable items. Aaron’s life is a downward spiral of misery and despair, and the 
deep sadness of his tale is weighed down even further by the repulsive, stomach-
turning details of sorting through garbage, excrement, and waste. The imagery is 
powerful, and the depiction of urban squalor chilling. The plot is less successful, 
however, with nothing happening aside from Aaron’s descent, and the optimism 
of the ending is implausible. Readers who stick it out, though, will be glad to see 
Aaron at the threshold of a new beginning. An author’s note provides historical 
context as well as information about the Zabbaleen of Cairo.  HM
picoult, Jodi Between the Lines; written by Jodi Picoult and Samantha van Leer; 
illus. by Yvonne Gilbert and Scott M. Fischer. Bestler/Simon Pulse, 2012 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4516-3575-1 $19.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4516-3582-9 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-8
Veteran adult novelist Jodi Picoult teams up with her teen daughter on this fantasy 
about a bookish teenage girl who falls in love with a character in a children’s fairy 
tale. As Delilah reads the tale, she discovers it is no ordinary book; the illustrations 
move, and the characters’ lives go on when the book is closed. While most of the 
characters are content with their roles, Prince Oliver longs to escape the tedious 
cycle of reliving the same story every time the book opens. When he realizes that 
Delilah can hear him, he calls out to her, and as they plan ways for him to escape, 
they fall in love. The story is told through three different voices: Oliver’s, Delilah’s, 
and the narrator of the fairy tale itself, and these are distinguished by font style so 
that readers will have no trouble tracking the three perspectives. Delilah’s desires 
are clear and simple: she is drawn to Oliver because they are both fatherless, and 
because she wants a boyfriend and she thinks he is really good-looking for an illus-
tration (which he is, as evidenced in the full-color art and spot silhouettes scattered 
throughout). Hence, she speaks for every girl who finds fiction more satisfying than 
reality. Similarly, Oliver feels trapped by the role he is required to play, desiring to 
be a real hero instead of a paper one, and falls in love with Delilah because she is 
literally the first person who hears him. There is no subtlety or complexity, here, 
578 • The BulleTin
unfortunately, either in the motivations for the narrative or in the relationship; 
Oliver and Delilah’s expressions of their feelings for each other are romantic clichés 
devoid of nuance or depth. However, the concept and the book’s very simplicity 
may still appeal to younger adolescents, who will enjoy diving into their favorite 
books and hoping their prince will come.  KC
powell, lAurA Burn Mark. Bloomsbury, 2012 [416p]
ISBN 978-1-59990-843-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-10
In an alternative Britain in which a small percentage of the population develops 
witch powers in their late teens, witches are highly stigmatized and regulated by the 
Inquisition. Once registered, they have a choice: wear an iron collar to block their 
powers, be deployed in a handful of government jobs, or be executed by fire. For 
fifteen-year-olds Lucas and Glory, developing powers is life-changing. Lucas is the 
son of the chief Inquisitor; his entire life plan is now ruined. Glory has grown up 
attached to the Wednesday Coven, one of the most powerful families in a sort of 
supernatural mafia, but she finds that there has been some savage betrayals within 
the family in the name of ambition. When Lucas agrees to infiltrate the coven in 
service of the Inquisition, the two meet and uncover a tangled web of secret plots 
that implicates both the coven and the Inquisition in a recent series of witch at-
tacks. There are obvious parallels to Black’s Curse Workers series (White Cat, BCCB 
9/10, etc.), and fans of those books will eat up the fresh perspective this brings 
to the supernatural genre. As in any good mafia tale, this is a world populated by 
charismatic, dangerous secondary characters with ambiguous motives and dubious 
morals, where paranoia is just good sense and trust rarely leads anywhere good. 
Glory and Lucas nonetheless fall into a snappy, suspicious rapport that will invest 
readers in both their growing relationship (refreshingly, not necessarily romantic) 
and their respective plights. The book handily resolves this plot but opens up some 
new intrigue in the secrets it reveals about both protagonists’ dead mothers, leaving 
plenty of room for sequels. Readers will be eager to further explore Powell’s well-
developed world in all its brutality and magic.  CG
poznAnski, ursulA Erebos: It’s a Game. It Watches You; tr. from the German by 
Judith Pattinson. Annick, 2012 434p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-55451-373-4 $29.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-55451-372-7 $19.95   
Ad Gr. 7-10
When Nick gets a copy of the bootleg MPORG (multi-player online role-playing 
game) that’s being handed around at school, he’s a bit skeptical of the rigid rules 
surrounding its use: he must play alone, he can’t ever tell anyone what he’s doing, 
and if he ever messes up he’s out of the game forever. Soon he’s completely addicted, 
missing school and ignoring friends. Then the game, which knows things about 
him that it shouldn’t, starts to mix the virtual reality with the real, hanging his 
game success on inexplicable tasks in the real world that begin to have increasingly 
sinister consequences. When Nick is kicked out of the game for refusing to poison 
a teacher, he joins forces with a few other suspicious teens to figure out what the 
game’s, well, game really is. Unfortunately, it all turns into a thinly veiled parable 
about addiction and online privacy, and readers who picked up this book because 
of its gaming subject matter will be particularly insulted at the assumption that they 
July/AugusT 2012 • 579
can be so easily manipulated into doing horrific things. Still, the in-game action 
is compellingly portrayed, and the tense atmosphere is pure horror movie. Hand 
this to readers who like to read conspiracy at every turn.  CG
price, norA Zoe Letting Go. Razorbill, 2012 [272p]
ISBN 978-1-59514-466-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
M Gr. 7-10
Zoe doesn’t understand why her mother is taking her to Twin Birch or even what 
the place is. She certainly doesn’t look anything like the twiggy, hollow-eyed girls 
there, who clearly all have serious eating disorders, which she is certain that she does 
not. She writes to her best friend, Elise, describing the facility and its rules, but also 
reminiscing about the preceding two years of high school. Her letters indicate that 
she has become jealous of Elise, who is effortlessly beautiful but naïve about the 
cutthroat politics of popularity. The epistolary flashbacks also reveal that, after some 
humiliating experiences with older girls, Zoe and Elise developed an increasingly 
rigid diet plan, but in this, too, Elise has been more successful than Zoe, which is 
why Zoe really doesn’t understand her confinement to Twin Birch. Unfortunately, 
the therapeutics of Zoe’s situation don’t ring true. While she eventually admits what 
readers will have guessed early on—that is, that Elise is dead—she never actually 
comes to terms with the fact that she too has an eating disorder, nor do any of the 
adults help her understand that her support of Elise was problematic; instead, they 
are so invested in assuring her that Elise’s death is not her fault that they do not 
acknowledge the social aspect of the disease, although Zoe clearly does. Addition-
ally, an emphasis on food throughout the treatment program strongly suggests that 
tasty meals are the solution to the problem of eating disorders (though the included 
recipes are indeed excellent). Readers who are interested in a more honest depiction 
of the role partnerships can play in destructive behaviors would do better to read 
Anderson’s Wintergirls (BCCB 3/09).  KC
primAVerA, elise Libby of High Hopes; written and illus. by Elisa Primav-
era. Wiseman/Simon, 2012 [192p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4169-5542-9 $14.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5219-0 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 3-5
There’s nothing better than horses for ten-year-old Libby Thump, so she’s thrilled 
to discover that there’s a nearby riding stable that might offer lessons. In a pain-
ful irony, Libby’s parents do indeed fork out for lessons—for Libby’s older sister, 
Laurel. Libby does at least get the privilege of riding an old pony during Laurel’s 
class, and she hangs around the barn and learns as much as she can, taking a special 
interest in a retired jumper, Princess, and getting involved in the human drama 
of the stable’s owners. Primavera captures with easy sympathy the frustration of a 
kid who’s painfully close to getting what she wants, and the relationship between 
the sisters is plausible in its mix of envy, antipathy, and admiration; Libby’s glee-
ful immersion into the world of the stable is also credibly depicted. There’s too 
much plot going on, however, with Libby’s horsey yearnings, her falling out with 
an old friend, the stable’s issues, her sister’s lessons, and so on, and only the story 
of Libby’s yearning really emotionally engages. Young purists will wish for a little 
more equestrian authenticity, but dreamier youngsters won’t mind that the riding 
580 • The BulleTin
scenario is pretty much a kid-imagined reality rather than a plausible stable. Pen 
and ink illustrations exude cheerful energy, and chapter headpieces, shaded with 
hatching, occasionally recall the cartoon ponies of the great Norman Thelwell. 
Give this to kids looking for more after Haas’ Runaway Radish (BCCB 7/01).  DS
proimos, JAmes The Best Bike Ride Ever; illus. by Johanna Wright. Dial, 
2012 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3850-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys    
R 4-7 yrs
Ebullient young Bonnie O’Boy is excited to finally get a bike after seven straight 
days of asking for one (“I want a bike! I want a bike! I want a bike!”), so she rides 
off before her parents can give her any instruction (or a helmet). Unfortunately, 
Bonnie does not know how to stop the bike, and she proceeds to ride it over, on, 
and through a variety of obstacles and situations, including a jaunt over an enormous 
elephant and a trip up the Statue of Liberty. Bonnie loves it (“Not stopping was 
thrilling. Not stopping was breathtaking”) until she doesn’t (“Not stopping was—
‘Oh, yipes!’ ‘Watch out for that truck!’”). Luckily for Bonnie, the aforementioned 
truck is a toy, and while her collision results in a scraped knee, after a Band-Aid, 
a hug, a helmet, and a lesson about operating the bike’s brakes, Bonnie is soon 
ready for more cycling adventures. While Bonnie rides on (now safely), she thus 
begins making a new wish: “I want a pony!” Repeated words and phrases and 
droll storytelling make Proimos’ text a snappy readaloud selection, and the bike-
riding subject matter and outlandish obstacles will appeal to kids as well. Wright’s 
whimsical, childlike art (rendered in layers of acrylic paint on canvas and outlined 
with scratchy strokes of India ink) adds a visual twist for kids to appreciate: careful 
viewers will note that all of the “obstacles” Bonnie encounters are actually in her 
own yard. Thus, the Statue of Liberty that she scales is actually a toppled garden 
statue and the elephant she rides over is actually a large toy lying in the grass. This 
is a refreshing change from typical books about kids learning to ride a bike, and 
youngsters will respond to Bonnie’s enthusiastic approach—just be sure to get the 
kids helmeted and the bikes prepped before reading.  JH
pullmAn, philip Two Crafty Criminals!: And How They Were Captured by the Dar-
ing Detectives of the New Cut Gang; illus. by Martin Brown. Knopf, 2012 281p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-97029-0 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-87029-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98868-4 $10.99   
R Gr. 4-6
The mean streets of nineteenth-century London are about to get a bit nicer now that 
preteens Thunderbolt Dobney, his pal Benny Kaminsky, and a few of their fellow 
classmates are in the amateur detective business. Their first case unfortunately has 
Thunderbolt taking a hard look at the criminal possibilities in his own family, as a 
series of counterfeit coins seems to lead to the off-limits laboratory in Thunderbolt’s 
ramshackle house. After solving that case and clearing Thunderbolt’s family name 
(and relieving his suspicions), the kids investigate a theft at the local gas-fitters’ 
hall and manages to do some matchmaking on the side. The two stories, originally 
published separately in the UK twenty years ago, together carry enough old-world 
charm and good old-fashioned sleuthing to entice fans of Encyclopedia Brown and 
Nancy Drew to pursue mysteries across the pond. Peppered with British slang and 
July/AugusT 2012 • 581
steeped in the gritty-but-glamorous streets of  Victorian England, the mysteries 
bring a distinct sense of place to what are otherwise fairly straightforward plots. 
A nice bit of slapstick humor and a host of quirky but noble characters, from the 
hot-chestnut hawker intent on getting his visage in the waxworks museum to the 
painfully shy guy looking for love, round out the cast and give the entire endeavor 
a pleasingly wholesome feel. Occasional monochromatic line illustrations, with 
delicate, slightly eccentric styling, mirror the text’s jocular tone.  KQG
rodkey, geoFF Deadweather and Sunrise. Putnam, 2012 [304p] (The 
Chronicles of Egg)
ISBN 978-0-399-25785-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 5-8
Island life has been anything but idyllic for thirteen-year-old Eggbert: besides being 
subject to Deadweather’s terrible climate and its many drunken, and often abusive, 
pirates, the poor kid must also regularly dodge blows from his violent older brother, 
while garnering little to no sympathy from his emotionally distant father. So when 
a hot-air balloon accident seemingly kills his entire family and leaves Egg in the 
care of a wealthy merchant (and the merchant’s beautiful and fearless daughter), 
he’s not entirely distraught—until he realizes that his new guardian is most likely 
responsible for the death of his family and is looking to bump Egg off as well. What 
follows is a high-seas adventure in the grandest tradition, featuring epic maritime 
battles, elusive hidden treasures, tender romance, and of course, pirates—lots and 
lots of pirates. The fast-paced swashbuckling will surely satisfy fans of adventure, 
but it’s really Egg’s narration that makes this pirate story rise above its counterparts. 
Wittily observant and self-deprecating, Egg relays the series of absurd events that 
precede his escape from Deadweather with a fair amount of humor, while his deci-
sion to avenge the deaths of his family—despite their mistreatment of him—lends 
the tale a certain nobility, casting Egg as an accidental hero whose efforts to do 
the right thing are both admirable and somewhat haphazard. Colorful dialogue 
(including plenty of piratespeak) and a fully realized setting that will have readers 
wiping the sea spray from their brows round out this delightful nautical yarn that 
promises a sequel.  KQG
rosenthAl, Betsy r. Looking for Me. Houghton, 2012 172p illus. with 
photographs
ISBN 978-0-547-61084-9 $15.99   
R Gr. 3-5
Set in 1930s Baltimore, this novel in free verse explores the joys and tribulations 
of being number four in a family of twelve children. When Edith’s sixth-grade 
teacher gives the assignment to write a poem about her family, she is somewhat 
put off (“It’s not exactly fair/ because mine will have to be really, really long”) then 
dumbfounded when her teacher points out that she forgot to write anything about 
herself (“I blurt out, ‘I don’t know/ who I am in my big family’”). Edith may not 
have her role perfectly figured out, but she has plenty to say about growing up in a 
huge Jewish family in Catholic Baltimore during the Depression. Her observations 
are laced with abundant humor and wit, and while many of them focus on the 
small frustrations (wearing “hand-me-down/ down/ down/ down/ downs”), there 
are also some serious themes touched upon over the course of the story, namely 
the death of her baby brother and its profound effect on the family. The writing 
582 • The BulleTin
has the authentic awkwardness and lack of polish of a tween’s poetic efforts, and 
the author states that the events are based upon the life of Rosenthal’s own mother. 
This would serve as an excellent class readaloud as well as appealing to fans of both 
poetry and memoir. Archival family photographs, an author’s note, and a glossary 
of English and Yiddish terms are included.  HM
roth, VeronicA Insurgent. Tegen/HarperCollins, 2012 525p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-202404-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-211445-7 $9.99   
R Gr. 9-12
This sequel to Divergent (BCCB 5/11) hits the ground running with Tris and Tobias 
on the run from the Erudite, one of the five segregated aptitude-based factions of 
their society that worked together to keep things running smoothly—until now. 
Tris (part of bravery-oriented Dauntless) has a rare and secret affinity for multiple 
factions, making her Divergent, and now that the Erudite uprising seems to be 
going after the Divergent, she’s in an entirely new class of danger. From dubious 
sanctuary in Amity to an uneasy alliance with Candor to an even less comfortable 
alliance with an underground factionless movement, Tris, Tobias, and their small 
band of refugees struggle to unravel the mystery of Erudite’s motives while barely 
managing to stay alive through a plot of nonstop, adrenaline-heavy action. At the 
same time, Tris is increasingly self-destructive in the aftermath of her choices in 
the last book, creating a rift between her and Tobias. Packed with stunning twists 
and devastating betrayals, this sequel opens up the world-building to include some 
exploration of this society’s origins and relationship to the world outside their societal 
limits, raising the stakes even higher. Fans of the first book will not be disappointed, 
but they may find the wait for volume three even harder to bear.  CG
rusch, elizABeth The Mighty Mars Rovers: The Incredible Adventures of Spirit 
and Opportunity. Houghton, 2012 [80p] (Scientists in the Field) illus. 
with photographs
ISBN 978-0-547-47881-4 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-9
The latest Scientist in the Field title features the rousing success story of astronomer 
Steven Squyers, who planned and directed the creation, launch, and movement 
of two rovers exploring the Martian surface in search of evidence of water, and by 
extension, of life. After having NASA deny previous proposals, Squyers was given a 
hasty go-ahead to ready a mission for 2003, when Mars would be relatively close to 
Earth (less time and fuel needed for the journey) and to the Sun (the rovers would 
rely on solar power for all operation.) The rovers Spirit and Opportunity  would land 
on different parts of the planet and explore an approximate range of a third of a 
mile over three months—but they just kept on going. And going. Into craters, up 
hills, over rocks; getting stuck, working free, shutting down in the Martian winter 
and powering up again in spring. At the time of this book’s printing, the pair had 
found indications that water had been present on Mars in some form; moreover, 
silica deposits suggest that, if the Martian environment is like that of Earth, condi-
tions could have supported tiny life forms. Rusch follows both the engineering feats 
and scientific accomplishments of the mission in considerable detail, and while the 
layout is overcrowded and overvaried, requiring perserverance from the reader, the 
meat of the account still remains compelling. The energy and exuberance of the 
mission’s extraordinary success will keep committed readers fully engaged—cheer-
July/AugusT 2012 • 583
ing for intrepid Opportunity as it keeps on rolling, and perhaps planning their own 
rescue mission for Spirit, who’s been silent since March 2010. Source notes, an 
index, and a glossary are included.  EB
schwArtz, Amy Willie and Uncle Bill; written and illus. by Amy Schwartz. Holi-
day House, 2012 40p
ISBN 978-0-8234-2203-6 $16.95   
R 4-6 yrs
In each of these three short stories, young Willie’s uncle Bill comes to babysit 
him with exciting results. In the first story, Willie gives himself a haircut, and the 
consequent trip to the barbershop to tidy Willie’s artistry results in a very short 
haircut indeed, making Willie’s mother slightly leery about Uncle Bill’s aptitude 
for babysitting. In the second story, Willie and Uncle Bill make Icky Stew (about 
as tasty as it sounds), which they end up feeding to some willing seagulls. The 
third story finds Uncle Bill taking pajama-clad Willie to watch (and join in with) 
loud rockers “The Purple Tomatoes” as they conduct a late-night rehearsal in 
their garage. Although parents may not quite approve of Uncle Bill’s babysitting 
methods, Schwartz knows her young audience, and many kids will revel in Uncle 
Bill and Willie’s mildly illicit behavior. Schwartz’s short, clear sentences are easily 
comprehensible: “Willie and Uncle Bill played with Willie’s trains. They read a 
few books. They launched a few rocket ships. Then they ran out of toys.” Lanky, 
funky-haired Uncle Bill and tiny red-haired Willie are a visually appealing duo, and 
numerous patterns—on clothing, buildings, furniture—add interest and texture to 
the gouache and pen and ink illustrations, while plenty of clean white space keeps 
the compositions from becoming too busy. Hip aunties and uncles will be natural 
purchasers for this title, and kids who come to it through other routes will find 
themselves wishing they had an Uncle Bill as well.  JH
shAnk, mArilyn sue Child of the Mountains. Delacorte, 2012 259p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98969-8 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74079-1 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98929-2 $10.99   
R Gr. 5-8
Growing up in 1950s Appalachia, Lydia has experienced considerable loss in 
her eleven years. Her alcoholic father was killed in a construction accident, her 
brother died of cystic fibrosis, her beloved grandmother passed two years ago, and 
her mother is currently in prison on unfair charges. Lydia recounts her life in a 
notebook wherein she attempts to sort it all out, and the chapters are arranged 
topically, each focusing on an experience or a story from the past that is relevant to 
her present struggle. Part historical fiction, part mystery, this novel is particularly 
adept at intrigue, with the reasons for Lydia’s mother’s imprisonment enticingly 
hinted at until finally the full story is revealed, and a second mystery about Lydia’s 
birth surfacing later. There’s a warm authenticity to Lydia’s narration, written in 
mountain dialect. The flashback stories are filled with love and affection, making 
the subsequent losses all the more painful as Lydia remembers good times with 
her grandmother, brother, and mother before everything began to change. While 
the ending is somewhat contrived, with a compassionate lawyer stepping in to 
help Lydia’s family, readers will nevertheless cheer when justice prevails and Lydia 
and her mother are reunited. This is an honest tale, full of strong characterizations 
and evocative stories. A note about the author’s own West Virginia background is 
included.  HM
584 • The BulleTin
siegel, rAndy My Snake Blake; illus. by Serge Bloch. Porter/Roaring Brook, 
2012 [32p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-584-1 $16.99 
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 2-3
Lucky kid! For an early birthday present, our narrator’s father (much to his mother’s 
dismay) gives him a very long green snake. Fortunately for Mom, Blake proves to 
be a genteel and prodigiously talented reptile, able to coil himself into words and 
handy with assistance in opening doors. He and the narrator bond, with Blake 
helping with his homework and hissing at the kid’s enemies. This is more a sce-
nario than a story, and there are some gaps in the conception (it’s not clear how, 
for instance, the narrator is “there for him, too” when Blake freaks out his fellow 
passengers on a plane). It’s still an engaging concept, however, and many kids will 
appreciate both the absurdity and the alternative to fluffier pet stories. French artist 
Bloch draws with sly urbanity, his speedy sketches suggesting a slightly more linear 
Jules Feiffer; on most pages, the black lines are merely touched occasionally with 
shamrock green (for Blake himself) or bits of red against wide, airy backgrounds, 
adding to the slightly ’60s vibe. Partner this with Daly’s Prudence Gets a Pet (BCCB 
9/11) for a sequence of pet stories with quirky flair.  DS
smith, AlexAnder mccAll The Great Cake Mystery: Precious Ramotswe’s Very 
First Case; illus. by Iain McIntosh. Anchor/Random House, 2012  [96p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-307-94945-5 $13.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-307-94944-8 $12.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-307-74389-3 $6.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-307-74390-9 $6.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 3-5
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 545, for review.
spinelli, Jerry Jake and Lily. Balzer + Bray, 2012 335p
ISBN 978-0-06-028135-9 $15.99   
R Gr. 4-6
Twins Jake and Lily share a special connection: they finish each other’s sentences, 
each instinctively knows when the other is hurt, and they even occasionally share 
the same dreams and the accompanying sleepwalking. As their eleventh birthday 
approaches, however, Lily is becoming concerned that they will lose this connec-
tion (which she has dubbed their “goombla”). The two have moved into separate 
bedrooms and Jake is growing increasingly distant, often choosing to spend his 
summer days hanging with “the guys” and leaving Lily to while away the time 
with their hippie grandfather. The story, which the twins take turns narrating, lays 
bare the siblings’ insecurities, selfishness, and vulnerabilities and renders each kid 
utterly relatable, if not entirely likable. Twinned or not, most readers will be pain-
fully familiar with the unpleasant realization that life keeps changing and that those 
changes may alter relationships irrevocably. Although Lily’s incessant complaining 
borders on whininess, her experience mirrors the heartbreak most middle-graders 
encounter first, that of being dumped by a friend, and her despair is treated with 
genuine compassion and understanding by the author. Jake, on the other hand, 
will speak to kids whose need for freedom is fierce; his friendship with the neigh-
borhood bully complicates his quest for independence at any cost, offering readers 
July/AugusT 2012 • 585
the chance to contemplate the difference between truly shaping your own identity 
and merely trading one allegiance in for another. The siblings come back to each 
other in the end, of course, but they discover that their twin-ness no longer defines 
them, a fitting ending to this emotionally resonant tale.  KQG
summers, courtney This Is Not a Test. St. Martin’s Griffin, 2012 [320p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-312-65674-4 $9.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-250-01181-7 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 9-12
After the zombie apocalypse hits, six teens fight their way to the relative safety of 
the school, then barricade themselves in. After that, there’s not much to do but 
wait and slowly let themselves be torn apart by paranoia and mistrust. Summers 
crafts an astonishingly haunting and melancholy tale of the end of the world as 
narrator Sloane, whose father’s abuse and older sister’s abandonment pre-zombie 
attack left her suicidal, waits with virtual strangers for her chance to leave and die 
quietly without endangering them. The zombies are an oppressive outside force, 
but the action is minimal; this is all about the gradual psychological unraveling 
of the survivors that occurs in the quiet before the storm. The result is a tightly 
focused, slow-simmering narrative that builds as mounting external danger and the 
arrival of a possibly infected teacher forces them into impossible choices. Subtle 
parallels run between this and Sloane’s own conflicted emotional journey as the 
details of her sister’s betrayal are teased out and her death wish becomes apparent to 
the strangers—the drug-dealer turned surprisingly good leader, the popular twins 
whose parents the leader let die, the freshman who’s already useless with fear, the 
cool smoker who’s trying to keep the peace and save Sloane from herself—she’s 
trapped with. With devastating emotional realism, compelling three-dimensional 
characters, and an absolutely brutal plot arc, this is an unforgettable and powerful 
vision of the end of the world, up close and personal.  CG
tAylor, mArilyn 17 Martin Street. Dufour/O’Brien, 2012 202p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-84717-286-0 $12.95   
R Gr. 5-8
When an errant soccer ball shatters a Dublin store window, twelve-year-old Ben 
Byrne and his pals are stuck with the replacement cost. To raise his share, Catholic 
Ben takes on the job of shabbos goy for his new Orthodox Jewish neighbors, lighting 
the fire for them every Sabbath. Ben hides this activity from his bigoted father, but 
it’s worth the risk in order to make friends with the Goldens’ daughter, Hetty, whose 
standoffish ways don’t quite mask her reciprocal interest in Ben. Intrigued by stories 
of a German immigrant girl who is hiding in the area to keep from being deported 
back to Nazi Germany, Ben and Hetty track Renata down and enlist the help of 
both their families to offer the girl refuge, ultimately securing Renata’s safety and 
bridging the social chasm between Mr. Byrne and his Jewish neighbors. Although 
Renata’s story, which frames the novel with her opening and closing journal entries, 
supplies dramatic tension, the real draw here is witnessing the daily struggles of two 
very ordinary Irish families as they cope with rationing, labor actions, a bombing, 
and the constant fear that the enemy will cross the channel onto their shores. This 
Irish import will enhance any World War II historical fiction collection.  EB
586 • The BulleTin
turnAge, sheilA Three Times Lucky. Dial, 2012 [324p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3670-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7
Rising sixth-grader Moses (Mo) LeBeau enjoys her unconventional life in colorful 
little Tupelo Landing, NC. Washed ashore in a hurricane as a baby and rescued by 
the Colonel (who suffers from amnesia), she has since been raised by him and his 
longtime live-in girlfriend, Miss Lana. Together they run Tupelo Landing’s café, 
and when Mo isn’t there, she’s hanging out with her best friend, Dale Earnhardt 
Johnson III, or honing her sleuthing skills by trying to track down her “Upstream 
Mother.” Mo’s detective impulses kick in big time when lawman Joe Starr comes to 
town, investigating a Winston-Salem murder that might be tied to Tupelo Landing. 
When Mr. Jesse, the town’s reclusive old codger, is murdered as well, things get 
dangerous for Mo and for those she loves. Luckily, the truth about the murderer 
(and about the Colonel’s mysterious past) is discovered in time to save Mo and 
her family and friends. Sure, quirky literary small towns are a dime a dozen, but 
Turnage populates the fictional Tupelo Landing with several strong, original, and 
immensely likable characters. Mo’s deadpan colloquial narration is robust and often 
humorous, but her mysterious origins lead to some poignant observations as well: 
“Behind my back, Anna Celeste Simpson—my Sworn Enemy for Life—says I’m 
a throw-away kid, with no true place to call home. So far, nobody’s had the guts 
to say it to my face, but I hear whispers the way a knife-thrower’s assistant hears 
knives.” The well-plotted murder mystery (and a frightening encounter with Dale’s 
mean drunken daddy) provides genuine tension and makes the 300-plus pages 
fly past. Mystery lovers and fans of titles like Di Camillo’s Because of Winn-Dixie 
(BCCB 6/00) or Klise’s Grounded (BCCB 1/11) will definitely want to set a spell 
with Mo.  JH
VAsey, pAul A Troublesome Boy. Groundwood, 2012 [232p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-55498-154-0 $16.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-55498-155-7 $9.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-55498-201-1 $9.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-10
Teddy’s last school year has been such a disaster that his mother’s live-in boyfriend 
has shipped him off to St. Ignatius Academy, a Catholic boys’ boarding school known 
for literally whipping guys into shape. Teddy’s big mouth and bad attitude get him 
his fair share of punishment, generally detention or lockdown in a dark closet for a 
few hours. His new pal Tim Cooper, faring even less well, has caught the attention 
of Father Prince. When Father Prince isn’t watching the boys in the shower, he’s 
singling Cooper out for special attention after lights out, and it becomes clear to 
Teddy that his friend is being abused. The kindness of the school janitor makes 
life at Iggy’s almost bearable, but in the end it’s not enough for Cooper, who takes 
his own life. Teddy works up the courage to find one of the more open-minded 
brothers and lay Cooper’s incriminating diary before him; authorities are called in 
to investigate, Father Prince is removed, and it looks like some measure of justice 
has been achieved. Teddy is suddenly expelled as a troublemaker, though, and he 
discovers that the investigation was an internal matter and the entire scandal has 
been covered up. Yes, the tale of a predator priest seems like one that’s been done 
to death at this point, but Vasey is a master at probing the point at which harsh 
July/AugusT 2012 • 587
discipline turns to sadism, and vowed obedience to religious superiors turns to 
unconscionable betrayal. The 1959 setting of this Canadian import assists readers 
who follow the Church scandal in the news to understand how decades of buried 
dirty secrets can take so long to find the light.  EB
wAlters, eric The Matatu; illus. by Eva Campbell. Orca, 2012 28p
ISBN 978-1-55469-301-6 $19.95   
R 5-8 yrs
Today is Kioko’s fifth birthday, and in honor of the occasion his grandfather is taking 
him for his very first ride on a matatu, the bus that provides public transportation 
in rural East Africa. Following his grandfather’s directive to “watch for goats and 
sheep as well as dogs,” Kioko observes that the goats always hide from the matatu, 
the dogs always chase the matatu, and the sheep simply watch the matatu passing. 
Grandfather then tells Kioko a folktale about a time when animals were paying 
passengers on the matatu that provides an explanation for the very behaviors that 
Kioko noticed. Canadian author Walters, who runs a organization that helps Ke-
nyan orphans, does an exemplary job of providing a cultural snapshot of Kioko’s 
world. The affection between Kioko and his grandfather is effectively captured in 
Campbell’s lively oil paintings, which also depict a dynamic, color-filled village 
and expressive villagers. The volume is a bit on the text-heavy side, making it a 
rather long readaloud, but the pacing and the appealing illustrations should hold 
listeners through to the end. An author’s note provides an animated depiction of 
what it’s like to ride a matatu.  HM
wisemAn, eVA The Last Song. Tundra, 2012 225p
ISBN 978-0-88776-979-5 $17.95   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Fifteen-year-old Isabel de Cardosa is a privileged fourteen-year-old girl whose life is 
turned upside down by the Spanish Inquisition when she learns that she her family 
is of Jewish descent. Her father has arranged for her to marry the vile and lascivious 
Luis, whose “Old Christian” ancestry ensures that Isabel will be protected from her 
own tainted lineage. Isabel, however, has been learning about her Jewish heritage 
from Yonah, the son of a Jewish silversmith, and her attraction to Yonah grows as 
her abhorrence of Luis increases. When her father is imprisoned, Isabel goes to 
the Grand Inquisitor himself and executes an extortionate bargain that buys her 
family just enough time to escape Toledo. While the story is generally well plotted, 
it’s often overwritten. The first several chapters are riddled with absurdly obvious 
hints at Isabel’s Jewish heritage, and the characterization of Luis is similarly over 
the top, with his dialogue cartoonishly villainous. The love story between Isabel 
and Yonah is sweetly portrayed, however, and readers will cheer their happily ever 
after. History fans will be disappointed by the absence of any historical note, but 
they may appreciate the well-crafted descriptions of time and place and the look 
at this dramatic moment in history.  HM
588 • The BulleTin
zettel, sArAh Dust Girl. Random House, 2012 [304p] (The American 
Fairy Trilogy)
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96938-6 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86938-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98318-4 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
It’s 1935 and Callie LeRoux’s got the dust pneumonia in her lungs, but her half-
crazed mother refuses to leave their home in Slow Run, Kansas, despite the fact 
that everyone else lit out of their drought-stricken town a long time ago. A wicked 
dust storm brings a stranger to Callie’s door, a man with starry eyes who informs 
her that her father—who Callie thought was merely a black jazz musician who left 
her nothing but her mixed-race heritage and a heartbroken mother—is also a fairy 
prince, imprisoned by his people for falling in love with a mortal. Additionally, her 
mother, who Callie had thought was lost in the storm, has now been taken as well, 
and Callie herself is in grave danger. An attack by fairies in the form of giant grass-
hoppers further convinces Callie of the truth, and she sets out with her new friend 
Jack, a scrappy white boy familiar with the road, to find her folks. Unfortunately, 
deceitful spirits and otherworldly beings aren’t the only obstacles they encounter 
as Callie’s dark skin brings out the all-too-human specter of bigotry in the small 
towns they pass. The Dust Bowl era is brilliantly brought to life here with intensely 
vivid prose and nods to both jazz and folk music, while the supernatural element is 
believably woven into what is essentially a story of a girl’s coming of age. Callie is 
looking less for her parents than for herself, and her transition from a mixed-raced 
girl barely “passing” to one confident both in her heritage and her future is keenly 
felt; the cover image a girl with no discernible hint of African ancestry is therefore 
immensely disappointing as it fails to indicate the very real racial issues to which the 
book points. Regardless, this is still an intriguing blend of fairy lore and historical 
fiction that will please fans of both.  KQG
AnnouncemenT:
Little, Brown informs us that Carlos Ruiz Zafón’s The Watcher in the Shadows, 
reviewed in the June issue, has been delayed and will be published in June 2013.
July/August 2012 • 589
Adventure: Aguirre; Cohen; 
Lane; Leeds; McAuley; McQuer-
ry; Proimos; Pullman; rodkey; 
roth
Afghan War: ellis
Africa–fiction: Smith
Africa–stories: Walters
ALternAtive hiStory: Mc-
Querry
Animals: hepperman; nascimbene
Animals–fiction: Bemis
Animals–stories: Jennings
Appearance–fiction: Friend
Art and artists–fiction: hand
Asian Americans–fiction: Cheng
Asian Americans–stories: Lo
Astronomy: Christensen Galileo; 
rusch
Babysitters–stories: Schwartz
Bicycles–stories: Proimos
BiogrAPhieS: Christensen Gali-
leo; Fern; Freedman
Biology: Kyi
Bipolar disorder–fiction: gale
BoArd BooKS: gibbs; hutchins
Boarding school–fiction: vasey
Books and reading–fiction: Cheng; 
Picoult
Boxing–stories: Buitrago
Brothers and sisters–fiction: Arm-
strong; Carlson-voiles; Kirby; 
Spinelli
Camps–fiction: emerson
Cats–stories: hutchins
Chickens: hepperman
Chickens–stories: horowitz
Clothing–stories: Jeffers
Competitions–fiction: McCully
ConCePt BooKS: Menotti; 
Murray
Counting BooKS: Menotti; 
Murray
Creative writing: Myers
Crime and criminals–fiction: Cad-
num; Cassidy; hahn; turnage
Crime and criminals–stories: Lane
Current events: ellis; Perera
death–fiction: hahn; Magoon; 
Matson
demons–fiction: Beyer
dinosaurs: Fern
dogs–fiction: Cooper
dogs–stories: hutchins; Murray
dystopias–fiction: Bacigalupi; emer-
son; roth
eating disorders–fiction: Price
Ethics and values: hahn; hepper-
man; Kitanidis; Lester
Families–fiction: gale; grahame; 
Matson; rosenthal; Shank
Families–stories: Lo
FAntASy: Aguirre; Bardugo; Bemis; 
healy; Lackey; Larbalestier; 
McQuerry; omololu; Picoult; 
Powell; Zettel
Farms–stories: Aylesworth
Fathers–fiction: Ashley-hollinger; 
gale; Magoon; Matson
Fear–stories: horowitz
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. in the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
590 • the Bulletin
FoLKtALeS And FAiry tALeS: 
deKeyser
Folktales and fairy tales–fiction: 
healy; Picoult
Food and eating–stories: Christensen 
Plant; Lo; Menotti
Friends–fiction: Amato; Bailey; 
Cheng; diCamillo; Friend; gale; 
Longshore; Magoon; Matson; 
Powell; Price; Primavera; vasey
Friends–stories: Jennings; Mcelmur-
ry
gaming–fiction: Poznanski
gardens–stories: Christensen Plant
gays and lesbians–fiction: Magoon; 
Moskowitz
grAPhiC noveLS: Aguirre
grief–fiction: Kirby; Magoon; Mos-
kowitz; Shank
Health: Kyi
hiStoriCAL FiCtion: Arm-
strong; Ashley-hollinger; gra-
hame; Lackey; Leeds; Longshore; 
McAuley; Pullman; rosenthal; 
Shank; taylor; vasey; Wiseman; 
Zettel
History, U.S.: Freedman
History, world: Bobrick
horses–fiction: Primavera
huMor: Aguirre; diCamillo; 
gibbs; horowitz; Jeffers; Larbal-
estier; Lester; Proimos; rodkey; 
Schwartz; Siegel
identity–fiction: Friend; Zettel
identity–stories: Jeffers
insects–stories: gibbs
inventors and inventing–fiction: 
Armstrong
ireland–fiction: taylor
italy–fiction: Beyer
Jealousy–stories: Mcelmurry
Jews–fiction: rosenthal; Wiseman
Language arts: Myers
Latinos–fiction: Kramer
Latinos–stories: Buitrago
Literature, children’s: Myers
Mars: rusch
Mathematics: Menotti
Memory–fiction: Kitanidis
Mice–fiction: McCully
Mixed-race people–fiction: Zettel
Mothers–fiction: Shank
Music and musicians–fiction: Amato
Music and musicians–stories: Jen-
nings
MySterieS: Ashley-hollinger; 
Cassidy; Pullman; Smith; turnage
Nature study: Christensen Plant; 
nascimbene
night–stories: Jennings
orphans–fiction: Carlson-voiles; 
turnage
Paleontology: Fern
Persecution–fiction: Wiseman
Pets–fiction: Siegel
Physical education: Bobrick
Pigs–stories: Lester
Pirates–fiction: rodkey
Poetry: rosenthal
Presidents: Freedman
Princes–fiction: healy
Queens–fiction: Longshore
racism–fiction: Zettel
rats–fiction: deKeyser
Reading aloud: Smith
Reading, beginning: hutchins; 
McCully
Reading, easy: Cooper; diCamillo; 
Primavera
relationships–fiction: Amato; Kirby; 
Kramer; Spinelli
rhyMing StorieS: Aylesworth; 
gibbs; Murray
romance–fiction: Kramer; Leeds; 
Matson; Moskowitz; omololu; 
Picoult
royalty–fiction: Bardugo
Safety education: Proimos
School–fiction: Bailey; Larbalestier; 
Smith; vasey
Science: Christensen Galileo; rusch
Science and scientists: Christensen 
Galileo
Science and scientists–fiction: Arm-
strong
SCienCe FiCtion: Bacigalupi; 
Cohen; emerson; Poznanski; 
roth; Summers
July/August 2012 • 591
Secrets–fiction: grahame
Sexual abuse–fiction: vasey
Sharing–stories: Lester
Ships and sailing–fiction: Cadnum
Sisters–fiction: Friend; grahame; 
Primavera
Slavery: Freedman
Slavery–fiction: Leeds
Snakes–fiction: Siegel
Space travel: rusch
Spanish inquisition–fiction: Wiseman
Spies and espionage–fiction: McAuley
Sports: Bobrick
Sports–stories: Buitrago
Squirrels–stories: Mcelmurry
SteAMPunK: Lackey
Storytelling–stories: Walters
Storytime: Ayeseworth
Suicide–fiction: Summers
Summer–fiction: Cooper; Matson
SuPernAturAL StorieS: Bailey; 
Beyer; Kitanidis; omololu
SuSPenSe: Cadnum; Poznanski
therapy–fiction: Price
time travel–fiction: Cohen; hand
toddLer BooKS: nascimbene
toys–stories: Lane
twins–fiction: Spinelli
uncles–stories: Schwartz
vampires: Larbalestier
verSe noveLS: rosenthal
voyages and travel–fiction: Beyer; 
Kirby; Kramer; rodkey
War: ellis
War–fiction: Bacigalupi
Water–fiction: emerson
Witches–fiction: Bardugo; deKeyser; 
Powell
Wolves–fiction: Carlson-voiles
Women’s studies: McAuley
Work–fiction: Perera
World cultures: ellis; Perera; Walters
World War ii–fiction: McAuley; 
taylor
Writers and writing: Myers
Writers and writing–fiction: hand
Zombies–fiction: Lackey; Summers
592  •  The BulleTin
T  h  e  B  u  l  l  e  T  i  n
 
of the Center for Children’s Books
auThor/TiTle index, volume 65
sepTemBer, 2011—july/augusT, 2012
10 Hungry Rabbits. Lobel. 361.
11 Experiments That Failed. Offill. 99.
12 Things to Do before You Crash and 
Burn. Proimos. 272.
13 Gifts. Mass. 266.
13 Hangmen. Corriveau. 450.
17 Martin Street. Taylor. 585.
37 Things I Love (In No Particular Order). 
Magoon. 571.
8 Class Pets + 1 Squirrel + 1 Dog = Chaos. 
Vande Velde. 174. 
Abbott, E. Centaur’s Daughter. 241.
Abbott, T. Goofballs. 338.
Abdul-Jabbar. What Color Is My World? 
292.
Abela. Ghosts of Gribblesea Pier. 132.
Above. Bobet. 447.
Above World. Reese. 368.
Abraham Lincoln and Frederick Douglass. 
Freedman. 558.
Abrahams. Robbie Forester and the Out-
laws of Sherwood St. 293.
Acampora. Rachel Spinelli Punched Me in 
the Face. 68.
Achebe. How the Leopard Got His Claws. 
190.
Ada. Dancing Home. 4.
Adams. Sparks. 241.
Adderson. Jasper John Dooley. 496.
———. Middle of Nowhere. 497.
Adventures of Beanboy. Harkrader. 306.
Aesop. Mouse & Lion. 132. 
After Obsession. Jones. 150.
After the Snow. Crockett. 392.
Agee. My Rhinoceros. 133.
Aguirre. Giants Beware! 546.
Ajmera. What We Wear. 339.
Alex and the Amazing Time Machine. 
Cohen. 555.
Alexander, J. Paradise. 4.
Alexander, W. Goblin Secrets. 388.
All for Me and None for All. Lester. 569.
All Good Children. Austen. 242.
All Kinds of Kisses. Tafuri. 324.
All the Earth, Thrown to the Sky. Lansdale. 
154.
All the Right Stuff. Myers. 520.
All These Lives. Wylie. 537.
All These Things I’ve Done. Zevin. 180.
Also Known as Rowan Pohi. Fletcher. 254.
Alvin Ho: Allergic to Dead Bodies, Funer-
als, and Other Fatal Circumstances. 
Look. 263.
Amato. Guitar Notes. 547.
Amazing Adventures of John Smith, Jr. 
AKA Houdini. Johnson. 405.
Amazing Story of Arctic Migration. Dow-
son. 305.
America Is Under Attack. Brown. 10.
Americapedia. Anderson. 5.
Americus. Reed. 104.
Amir. Zahra’s Paradise. 133.
Amplified. Kelly. 209.
Ancient Egypt. Williams. 55.
And Then It’s Spring. Fogliano. 337.
Anderson, J. Americapedia. 5.
Anderson, R. Ultraviolet. 69.
Andrews. Me and Earl and the Dying Girl. 
444.
Angleberger. Fake Mustache. 445.
july/augusT 2012  •  593
Animals and Their Families. Nascimbeni. 
576.
Anna Dressed in Blood. Blake. 194.
Anna Hibiscus’ Song. Atinuke. 192.
Annie Sullivan and the Trials of Helen 
Keller. Lambert. 464.
Annoying ABC. Bottner. 195.
Another Brother. Cordell. 301.
Another Jekyll, Another Hyde. Nayeri. 471.
Anthony. Chopsticks. 389.
Anton Can Do Magic. Könnecke. 153.
Anyway*. Salm. 530.
Apothecary. Meloy. 159.
Applegate. One and Only Ivan. 293.
Arcadia Awakens. Meyer. 364.
Are You “Normal”? Shulman. 322.
Are You Awake? Blackall. 71.
Aristotle and Dante Discover the Secrets of 
the Universe. Sáenz. 370.
Armstrong, A. Racing the Moon. 547.
Armstrong, K. Enthralled. 93.
———. Gathering. 6.
Arni. Sita’s Ramayana. 191.
Aronson. Trapped. 6.
Around the World. Phelan. 102.
Article 5. Simmons. 372.
As I Wake. Scott. 108.
Asher. Future of Us. 191.
Ashes. Bick. 71.
Ashes, Ashes. Treggiari. 114.
Ashley-Hollinger. Precious Bones. 548. 
Astonishing Secret of Awesome Man. 
Chabon. 139. 
Atinuke. Anna Hibiscus’ Song. 192.
———. No. 1 Car Spotter. 134.
Atkins. File on Angelyn Stark. 242.
Au Revoir, Crazy European Chick. Sch-
reiber. 224.
Audition. Kehoe. 209.
Auntie Yang’s Great Soybean Picnic. Lo. 
570.
Austen. All Good Children. 242.
Auxier. Peter Nimble and His Fantastic 
Eyes. 69.
Avi. City of Orphans. 134.
Aviary. O’Dell. 99.
Ayarbe. Wanted. 497. 
Aylesworth. Cock-a-doodle-doo, Creak, 
Pop-pop, Moo. 548.
Babbitt. Moon over High Street. 445.
Baby’s in Black. Bellstorf. 499.
Babysitter Murders. Young. 120.
Bacigalupi. Drowned Cities. 549.
Backderf. My Friend Dahmer. 389.
Bad Island. TenNapel. 112.
Bad Taste in Boys. Harris. 20.
Baer. Frost. 135.
Bailey. Shift. 549.
Bake Sale. Varon. 114.
Balloons over Broadway. Sweet. 226.
Ballywhinney Girl. Bunting. 448.
Balog. Starstruck. 7.
Bandy. White Water. 7.
Bardugo. Shadow and Bone. 550.
Barn Boot Blues. Friend. 204.
Barnaby. Wonder Show. 498.
Barnes, Jennifer. Every Other Day. 243.
Barnes, John. Losers in Space. 446.
Barnett. Extra Yarn. 243.
———. Mustache! 192.
Barnhill. Mostly True Story of Jack. 70.
Barnum’s Bones. Fern. 558.
Barrett. Dark of the Moon. 135.
Bat and Rat. Jennings. 565.
Battle Fatigue. Kurlansky. 211.
Bauer, A. Gil Marsh. 294.
Bauer, M. Little Dog, Lost. 498.
Bausum. Marching to the Mountaintop. 
339.
Beard. Crocodile’s Tears. 244.
Beauty and the Beast. Mass. 519.
Becker. Sniffles for Bear. 70.
Beep and Bah. Burks. 342.
Beetle Book. Jenkins. 514.
Beginning of After. Castle. 73.
Belladonna. Finn. 16.
Bellstorf. Baby’s in Black. 499.
Belly Book. Manushkin. 265.
Bemis. Prince Who Fell From the Sky. 550.
Beneath a Meth Moon. Woodson. 379.
Benoit. Fall from Grace. 499. 
Bently. Great Sheep Shenanigans. 446.
Berk, A. Death Watch. 193.
Berk, J. Guy Langman, Crime Scene Pro-
crastinator. 500.
Berne. Still Waters. 244.
Bernheimer. Lonely Book. 340.
Bernobich. Fox & Phoenix. 193.
594  •  The BulleTin
Bessica Lefter Bites Back. Tracy. 483.
Best Bike Ride Ever. Proimos. 580.
Best Shot in the West. McKissack. 412.
Bestest. Ramadan. Ever. Sharif. 167.
Beswitched. Saunders. 274.
Betty Bunny Wants Everything. Kaplan. 
357.
Between the Lines. Picoult. 577.
Bewitching. Flinn. 350.
Beyer. Demon Catchers of Milan. 551.
Bick. Ashes. 71.
———. Drowning Instinct. 447.
Big Boy Now. Spinelli. 373.
Big Brothers Don’t Take Naps. Borden. 8.
Big Hugs, Little Hugs. Bond. 294.
Big Wig. Krull. 88.
Bigger Kiss. Walsh. 281.
Bigger Than a Breadbox. Snyder. 171.
Biggs. Everything Goes. 136. 
Bingham. Z Is for Moose. 387.
Bink & Gollie: Two for One. DiCamillo. 
556.
Bitterblue. Cashore. 453.
Bittersweet. Ockler. 415.
Black & White. Brimner. 196.
Black Boy White School. Walker. 327.
Black Gold. Marrin. 411.
Black Heart. Black. 500.
Black. Black Heart. 500.
———. Welcome to Bordertown. 8.
Blackall. Are You Awake? 71.
Blake. Anna Dressed in Blood. 194.
Bliss. Littlewood. 361.
Blizzard of Glass. Walker. 227.
Block. Pink Smog. 340.
Blood. Wignall. 178.
Blood Wounds. Pfeffer. 102.
Blue Sky. Wood. 431.
Bluefish. Schmatz. 106.
Blumenthal. Steve Jobs. 501.
Bobet. Above. 447.
Bobrick. Passion for Victory. 551.
Bon Appétit! Hartland. 511.
Bond. Big Hugs, Little Hugs. 294.
Bone Dog. Rohmann. 43.
Book of Blood and Shadow. Wasserman. 
378.
Book of Wonders. Richards. 317.
Bookspeak. Salas. 321.
Booth. Bronxwood. 194.
Borden. Big Brothers Don’t Take Naps. 8.
———. His Name Was Raoul Wallenberg. 
341.
Boreen. Higgins Hole. 341.
Born and Bred in the Great Depression. 
Winter. 230.
Born Wicked. Spotswood. 373.
Bostic. Never Eighteen. 295.
Bosworth. Struck. 501.
Bottner. Annoying ABC. 195.
Bowen. Scooter in the Outside. 342.
Bowers. Superman Versus the Ku Klux 
Klan. 295.
Bowler. Buried Thunder. 195.
Boy and a Bear in a Boat. Shelton. 532.
Boy Called Dickens. Hopkinson. 308.
Boy from the Dragon Palace. MacDonald. 
156. 
Boy on Cinnamon Street. Stone. 425.
Boy Project. Kinard. 406.
Boy Who Cried Alien. Singer. 480.
Boy Who Harnessed the Wind. Kamk-
wamba. 309.
Boy21. Quick. 418.
Boyne. Noah Barleywater Runs Away. 9.
Bradbury. Wrapped. 9.
Bradley. Jefferson’s Sons. 72.
Bramble and Maggie. Haas. 511.
Brave Music of a Distant Drum. Herbstein. 
513. 
Breadcrumbs. Ursu. 67.
Breaking Beautiful. Wolf. 537.
Breaking Stalin’s Nose. Yelchin. 179. 
Breitrose. Mousenet. 245.
Brendan Buckley’s Sixth-Grade Experi-
ment. Frazier. 351.
Brennan. Demon’s Surrender. 10.
Brezenoff. Brooklyn, Burning. 136.
Bridges. Gathering Storm. 296.
Brimner. Black & White. 196.
Brixen Witch. DeKeyser. 556.
Bronxwood. Booth. 194.
Brooklyn, Burning. Brezenoff. 136.
Brooks. iBoy. 196.
Brothers at Bat. Vernick. 535.
Brown, D. America Is Under Attack. 10.
july/augusT 2012  •  595
Brown, M. Waiting for the Biblioburro. 11.
Bruchac. Dragon Castle. 11.
Bug Shots. Siy. 278.
Buitrago. Jimmy the Greatest! 552.
Bumble-Ardy. Sendak. 109.
Bunce. Liar’s Moon. 245.
Bunheads. Flack. 203.
Bunting. Ballywhinney Girl. 448.
Buried Alive! Scott. 531.
Buried Thunder. Bowler. 195.
Burks. Beep and Bah. 342.
Burn Marks. Powell. 578.
Burnout. Vrettos. 116.
Burns. Merits of Mischief. 502.
Burt. Storybound. 448.
Bus Called Heaven. Graham. 398.
Busy Builders. Munro. 520.
Butterfly Clues. Ellison. 394.
Buzzeo. Lighthouse Christmas. 137.
———. One Cool Friend. 296.
———. Stay Close to Mama. 390.
BZRK. Grant. 456.
Cabinet of Earths. Nesbet. 315.
Caddy’s World. McKay. 411.
Cadnum. Seize the Storm. 552.
Caleb’s Wars. Dudley. 201.
Caletti. Story of Us. 449.
Cameron. Spunky Tells All. 137.
Camping Trip That Changed America. 
Rosenstock. 319.
Cannon. Sophie’s Fish. 449.
Capaldi. Red Bird Sings. 297.
Card. Laddertop. 246.
Carey, A. Eve. 197.
Carey, J. Dragonswood. 297.
Carlson-Violes. Summer of the Wolves. 
553.
Carman. Dark Eden. 246.
———. Floors. 138. 
Carmen. Myers. 33.
Carnesi. Little Dog Lost. 298.
Carson. Girl of Fire and Thorns. 138.
Case of the Deadly Desperados. Lawrence. 
407.
Cashore. Bitterblue. 453.
Cass. Selection. 502.
Cassidy. Dead Time. 553.
Castan. Price of Loyalty. 72.
Castellucci. First Day on Earth. 139.
———. Year of the Beasts. 503.
Castle, J. Beginning of After. 73.
Castle, M. Popular Clone. 298.
Castle of Shadows. Renner. 419.
Cat Found. Lee. 212.
Catastrophic History of You and Me. 
Rothenberg. 420.
Catching Jordan. Kenneally. 310.
Catchpool. Cloud Spinner. 391.
Cats in the Doll Shop. McDonough. 215.
Caveman. Trasler. 113.
Centaur’s Daughter. Abbott. 241.
Chabon. Astonishing Secret of Awesome 
Man. 139. 
Chad. Leo Geo. 391.
Chambers. Dying to Know You. 503.
Chari. Vanished. 73.
Charles Dickens and the Street Children of 
London. Warren. 176.
Cheng. Year of the Book. 554.
Cheshire Cheese Cat. Deedy. 251.
Chico the Brave. Horowitz. 563.
Child. Ruby Redfort. 504.
Child of the Mountains. Shank. 583.
Children and the Wolves. Rapp. 419.
Childs. Sweet Venom. 247.
Chin. Coral Reefs. 197.
Chirchir Is Singing. Cunnane. 75.
Chitty Chitty Bang Bang Flies Again. Cot-
trell Boyce. 343.
Choldenko. Giant Crush. 198.
Chomp. Hiaasen. 459.
Chopsticks. Anthony. 389.
Chopsticks. Rosenthal. 19.
Christensen. Fabulous! 12.
———. I, Galileo. 554.
———. Plant a Little Seed. 555.
Christmas Coat. Sneve. 170. 
Christmas Tree for Pyn. Dunrea. 142. 
Christopher. Flyaway. 198.
Chronal Engine. Smith. 372.
Chronicles of Harris Burdick. Van Allsburg. 
226.
Chronicles of the Red King. Nimmo. 161.
Cinder. Meyer. 314.
Circle of Cranes. LeBox. 465.
Circle of Secrets. Little. 213.
Circus Galacticus. Fagan. 254.
City Chickens. Heppermann. 563.
596  •  The BulleTin
City of Orphans. Avi. 134.
Clanton. Vote for Me! 504.
Clark, C. How NOT to Run for President. 
343.
Clark, J. Edumacation of Jay Baker. 299.
Clark, L. Peepsqueak! 299.
Clean. Reed. 42.
Cleminson. Otto the Book Bear. 300.
Cline-Ransome. Words Set Me Free. 300.
Cloud Spinner. Catchpool. 391.
Coat. Hippopposites. 505.
Coben. Shelter. 74.
Cocca-Leffler. Time to Say Bye-Bye. 301.
Cochran. Legacy. 247.
Cock-a-doodle-doo, Creak, Pop-pop, Moo. 
Aylesworth. 548.
Cockrell. What We Keep Is Not Always 
What Will Stay. 3.
Code Name Verity. Wein. 536.
Cohen. Alex and the Amazing Time Ma-
chine. 555.
Cold Cereal. Rex. 369.
Cold Kiss. Garvey. 145.
Cole. Money We’ll Save. 199.
Colón. Good-bye, Havana! 74.
Compestine. Crouching Tiger. 248.
Confusion of Princes. Nix. 521.
Conkling. Sylvia & Aki. 75.
Cook. Unraveling Isobel. 248.
Coombs. Hans My Hedgehog. 249.
Cooney. Lost Songs. 249.
Cooper. Homer. 556.
Coral Reefs. Chin. 197.
Cordell. Another Brother. 301.
Corey. Here Come the Girl Scouts! 250.
Corriveau. 13 Hangmen. 450.
Cosentino. Wonder Woman. 13.
Cottrell Boyce. Chitty Chitty Bang Bang 
Flies Again. 343.
____. Unforgotten Coat. 140.
Coury. Hanging Off Jefferson’s Nose. 505.
Cowboys. Harrison. 457.
Cowcher. Desert Elephants. 140.
Cowley. Friends. 199.
Coyote Under the Table. Hayes. 458.
Cracked. Walton. 428.
Crafty Chloe. DiPucchio. 252.
Craze. Last Princess. 506.
Crewe. Way We Fall. 302.
Crews. Jack and the Beanstalk. 14.
Crimi. Rock ’n’ Roll Mole. 141.
Croak. Damico. 345.
Crocker. Last of the Gullivers. 302.
Crockett. After the Snow. 392.
Crocodile’s Tears. Beard. 244.
Cronin. Legend of Diamond Lil. 506.
Crosby. Wiener Wolf. 14. 
Cross My Heart. Gould. 352.
Cross, J. Tempest. 344.
Cross, K. Girl in the Steel Corset. 15.
Cross, S. Kill Me Softly. 450.
Crouching Tiger. Compestine. 248.
Crow. Wright. 380.
Crowe. Just As Good. 303.
Crowley. Graffiti Moon. 344.
Cuevas. Masterwork of a Painting El-
ephant. 200.
Cumyn. Tilt. 141.
Cunnane. Chirchir Is Singing. 75.
Cupala. Don’t Breathe a Word. 303.
Curtis. Mighty Miss Malone. 304.
Curveball. Sonnenblick. 534.
Cuyler. Tick Tock Clock. 304.
Daisy’s Perfect Word. Feder. 453.
Dalen & Gole. Deas. 142. 
Daley. Pinch and Dash Make Soup. 345.
Daly. Prudence Wants a Pet. 15.
Damico. Croak. 345.
Dancing Home. Ada. 4.
Danforth. Miseducation of Cameron Post. 
346.
Dark City. Fisher. 16.
Dark Eden. Carman. 246.
Dark Eyes. Richter. 477.
Dark Inside. Roberts. 273.
Dark of the Moon. Barrett. 135.
Dark Souls. Morris. 96.
Darwen Arkwright and the Peregrine Pact. 
Hartley. 147. 
Daswani. Lovetorn. 305.
Daughter of Smoke and Bone. Taylor. 50.
Daughter of the Centaurs. Klimo. 359.
Davies, N. Just Ducks! 392.
———. Outside Your Window. 347.
———. Talk. Talk. Squawk! 200.
———. Welcome to Silver Street Farm. 
347.
Davies, S. Outlaw. 250.
july/augusT 2012  •  597
Davis, A. Hen for Izzy Pippik. 451.
Davis, H. Wherever You Go. 251.
Davis, T. Happy Families. 452.
Day in the Office of Doctor Bugspit. 
Gravel. 255.
de Graaf. Son of a Gun. 393.
Dead End in Norvelt. Gantos. 17.
Dead of Winter. Priestley. 271.
Dead Reckoning. Lackey. 567.
Dead Rules. Russell. 44.
Dead Time. Cassidy. 553.
Dead to You. McMann. 363.
Deadweather and Sunrise. Rodkey. 581.
Deans. Riding Out the Storm. 348.
Dear Bully. Hall. 206.
Dear Hot Dog. Gerstein. 80.
Deas. Dalen & Gole. 142. 
Death of Yorik Mortwell. Messer. 31.
Death Watch. Berk. 193.
Decker. Punk Ethic. 507.
Deedy. Cheshire Cheese Cat. 251.
DeKeyser. Brixen Witch. 556.
Demi. Joan of Arc. 76.
Demolition. Sutton. 375.
Demon Catchers of Milan. Beyer. 551.
Demon’s Surrender. Brennan. 10.
Denenberg. Titanic Sinks! 201.
Derstine. What We Wear. 339.
Desert Angel. Price. 221.
Desert Elephants. Cowcher. 140.
Diamond in the Desert. Fitzmaurice. 350.
DiCamillo. Bink & Gollie: Two for One. 
556.
Difference Between You and Me. George. 
455.
Dinosaur vs. the Library. Shea. 168. 
Dionne. Notes from an Accidental Band 
Geek. 252.
DiPucchio. Crafty Chloe. 252.
———. Zombie in Love. 76.
Ditched. Mellom. 413.
DJ Rising. Maia. 409.
Dolores Huerta. Warren. 429.
Don’t Breathe a Word. Cupala. 303.
Don’t Expect Magic. McCullough. 267.
Don’t Stop Now. Halpern. 19.
Don’t Think about Tomorrow. Schraff. 479.
Dormer. Obstinate Pen. 507.
Dot. Intriago. 85.
Double Dog Dare. Graff. 456.
Double. Valentine. 375.
Down the Mysterly River. Willingham. 
117.
Downham. You Against Me. 77.
Dowson. Amazing Story of Arctic Migra-
tion. 305.
Doyle. Greyhound of a Girl. 508. 
Dragon Castle. Bruchac. 11.
Dragon’s Tooth. Wilson. 229.
Dragonswood. Carey. 297.
Drawing from Memory. Say. 45.
Dreams of Significant Girls. García. 18.
Drink, Slay, Love. Durst. 77.
Drowned Cities. Bacigalupi. 549.
Drowning Instinct. Bick. 447.
Duck, Death, and the Tulip. Erlbruch. 202.
Duckling Gets a Cookie! Willems. 536.
Duddle. Pirates Next Door. 393.
Dudley. Caleb’s Wars. 201.
Dumpling Days. Lin. 360.
Dunrea. Christmas Tree for Pyn. 142. 
Durbin. Star Shard. 348.
Durst. Drink, Slay, Love. 77.
Dust Girl. Zettel. 588.
Dying to Know You. Chambers. 503.
Earwig and the Witch. Jones. 309.
Easter Bunny’s Assistant. Thomas. 325.
Ecton. Project Jackalope. 508. 
Eddie Gets Ready for School. Milgrim. 32.
Eddie’s War. Saller. 44.
Edumacation of Jay Baker. Clark. 299.
Edwardson. My Name Is Not Easy. 143.
Eep! van Leeuwen. 483.
Ehrenhaft. Americapedia. 5.
Eight Keys. LaFleur. 89.
Elephant in the Garden. Morpurgo. 217.
Elephant Mountains. Ely. 202.
Eleventh Plague. Hirsch. 84.
Elijah Door. Strauss. 534.
Ellen’s Broom. Lyons. 362.
Ellis. Kids of Kabul. 557.
———. No Ordinary Day. 143.
Ellison. Butterfly Clues. 394.
Ellsworth. Unforgettable. 144.
Else. Traveling Restaurant. 394.
Ely. Elephant Mountains. 202.
Emerson. Lost Code. 557.
Emond. WinterTown. 253.
598  •  The BulleTin
Engle. Wild Book. 452.
English. Nikki and Deja: Election Mad-
ness. 78.
Enthralled. Marr. 93.
Epic Fail. LaZebnik. 155.
Erebos. Poznanski. 578.
Erlbruch. Duck, Death, and the Tulip. 202.
Etienne. Harbinger. 349.
Evans, R. Michael Vey. 78.
Evans, S. We March. 253.
Eve. Carey. 197.
Every Other Day. Barnes. 243.
Every You, Every Me. Levithan. 90.
Everybody Gets the Blues. Staub. 374.
Everybody Sees the Ants. King. 210.
Everything Goes. Biggs. 136. 
Everything I Need to Know Before I’m 
Five. Fisher. 16.
Everything You Need to Survive the Apoca-
lypse. Klauss. 358.
Explorer. Kibuishi. 515.
Exquisite Corpse Adventure. National Chil-
dren’s Book and Literacy Alliance. 97.
Extra Yarn. Barnett. 243.
Extraordinary. Selzer. 277.
Fabulous Flying Machines of Alberto 
Santos-Dumont. Griffith. 81.
Fabulous! Christensen. 12.
Fagan. Circus Galacticus. 254.
Fairy Ring. Losure. 408.
Fake Mustache. Angleberger. 445.
Falkner. Project. 79.
Fall from Grace. Benoit. 499. 
Family Tree. McPhail. 469.
Fangbone! Rex. 317.
Fantaskey. Jessica Rules the Dark Side. 349.
Far from Shore. Webb. 52.
Fateful. Gray. 80.
Fault in Our Stars. Green. 457.
Feder. Daisy’s Perfect Word. 453.
Feiffer. No Go Sleep! 395.
Fenway Fever! Ritter. 527.
Fern. Barnum’s Bones. 558.
Feynman. Ottaviani. 37.
Fight for Freedom. Scarrow. 478.
File on Angelyn Stark. Atkins. 242.
Final Four. Volponi. 376.
Finding Somewhere. Monninger. 216.
Fingertips of Duncan Dorfman. Wolitzer. 
118.
Finn. Belladonna. 16.
First Day on Earth. Castellucci. 139.
First Girl Scout. Wadsworth. 280.
Fisher, C. Dark City. 16.
———. The Hidden Coronet. 16.
———. Lost Heiress. 16.
———. Margrave. 16.
Fisher, V. Everything I Need to Know 
Before I’m Five. 17.
Fitzmaurice. Diamond in the Desert. 350.
Five Funny Bunnies. Van Leeuwen. 427.
Five Lives of Our Cat Zook. Rocklin. 528.
Fix Me. Michaels. 268.
Flack. Bunheads. 203.
Flat Broke. Paulsen. 39.
Fletcher. Also Known as Rowan Pohi. 254.
Flinn. Bewitching. 350.
Flint Heart. Paterson. 100.
Floors. Carman. 138. 
Florian. Poem Runs. 453.
———. UnBEElievables. 351.
Flute. Gilmore. 398.
Flyaway. Christopher. 198.
Fogliano. And Then It’s Spring. 337.
Following Christopher Creed. Plum-Ucci. 
103.
For Darkness Shows the Stars. Peterfreund. 
524. 
Ford. Poisoned House. 144.
Forget-Me-Nots. Hoberman. 495.
Forgive Me. Levine. 407.
Fox & Phoenix. Bernobich. 193.
Fox and Hen Together. Rodriguez. 42.
Fox Inheritance. Pearce. 101.
Fox Tails. Lowry. 516. 
Foxley. Muncle Trogg. 395.
Fradin. Stolen into Slavery. 396.
Franklin. Tessa Masterson Will Go to 
Prom. 396.
Franklin and Winston. Wood. 119.
Frazier. Brendan Buckley’s Sixth-Grade 
Experiment. 351.
Frederick. Once Upon a Toad. 453.
Fredericks. Girl in the Park. 454.
Freedman. Abraham Lincoln and Frederick 
Douglass. 558.
Freedom Song. Walker. 377.
Freedom’s A-Callin Me. Shange. 277.
Freitas. Survival Kit. 203.
july/augusT 2012  •  599
French Ducks in Venice. Freymann-Weyr. 
255.
Freymann-Weyr. French Ducks in Venice. 
255.
Friend, C. Barn Boot Blues. 204.
Friend, N. My Life in Black &White. 559.
Friends. Cowley. 199.
Friends with Boys. Hicks. 401.
Frog and Fly. Mack. 409.
Froi of the Exiles. Marchetta. 468.
From What I Remember. Kramer. 566.
Frost. Baer. 135.
Fryd. Scandalous! 352.
Fukuda. Hunt. 509. 
Funke. Ghost Knight. 509.
Future of Us. Asher. 191.
Gale. Girl Out Loud. 559.
Game of Triumphs. Powell. 103.
Ganeshram. Stir It Up! 79.
Gantos. Dead End in Norvelt. 17.
García. Dreams of Significant Girls. 18.
Garvey. Cold Kiss. 145.
Gathering. Armstrong. 6.
Gathering Storm. Bridges. 296.
Gaughen. Scarlet. 397.
Gavin. Tales from India. 205.
Geithner. If Only. 397.
Gem. Hobbie. 460.
Gennari. My Mixed-Up Berry Blue Sum-
mer. 510. 
George, J. Tuesdays at the Castle. 145.
George, M. Difference Between You and 
Me. 455.
George Washington’s Birthday. McNamara. 
268.
Gephart. Olivia Bean. 455.
Geringer. Nicholas St. North and the Battle 
of the Nightmare King. 259.
Gerstein. Dear Hot Dog. 80.
Getting Over Garrett Delaney. McDonald. 
313.
Ghetto Cowboy. Neri. 34.
Ghost Flower. Jaffe. 461.
Ghost Knight. Funke. 509.
Ghosts of Gribblesea Pier. Abela. 132.
Ghosts of the Titanic. Lawson. 464.
Giant Crush. Choldenko. 198.
Giants Beware! Aguirre. 546.
Gibbs, E. Little Bee. 560.
Gibbs, S. Spy School. 398.
Giff. R My Name Is Rachel. 205.
Gifts from the Gods. Lunge-Larsen. 263.
Gil Marsh. Bauer. 294.
Gilmore. Flute. 398.
Gilt. Longshore. 570.
Girl in the Park. Fredericks. 454.
Girl in the Steel Corset. Cross. 15.
Girl Meets Boy. Halls. 353.
Girl of Fire and Thorns. Carson. 138.
Girl Out Loud. Gale. 559.
Girl Who Could Silence the Wind. Me-
dina. 470.
Girls of No Return. Saldin. 421.
Glass Collector. Perera. 577.
Glimmer. Kitanidis. 566.
Glory Be. Scattergood. 275.
Go Out and Play! KaBoom! 462.
Goblin Secrets. Alexander. 388.
Going Underground.Vaught. 175.
Goliath. Westerfeld. 54.
Gone, Gone, Gone. Moskowitz. 574.
Good Little Wolf. Shireen. 168.
Good Night. Snyder. 423.
Good-bye, Havana! Colón. 74.
Goode. Sister Mischief. 18.
Goodnight, Dragons. Roth. 370.
Goofballs. Abbott. 338.
Gould. Cross My Heart. 352.
Grady. I Lay My Stitches Down. 291.
Graff, K. Other Felix. 205.
Graff, L. Double Dog Dare. 456.
Graffiti Moon. Crowley. 344.
Graham. Bus Called Heaven. 398.
Grahame. Wentworth Hall. 560.
Grand Plan to Fix Everything. Krishnas-
wami. 27.
Grant, G. Steampunk! 91.
Grant, M. BZRK. 456.
Grave Mercy. LaFevers. 406.
Grave Robber’s Apprentice. Stratton. 426.
Gravel. Day in the Office of Doctor Bug-
spit. 255.
Gravett. Wolf Won’t Bite! 353.
Gray. Fateful. 80.
Great Cake Mystery. Smith. 545. 
Great Molasses Flood. Kops. 359.
Great Sheep Shenanigans. Bently. 446.
Green. Fault in Our Stars. 457.
600  •  The BulleTin
Green. Seeger. 423.
Greenman. Hooked. 81.
Greenwald. Reel Life Starring Us. 256.
Greyhound of a Girl. Doyle. 508. 
Griffin, B. Masque of the Red Death. 510.
Griffin, P. Stay With Me. 146.
Griffith, H. Moonlight. 399.
Griffith, V. Fabulous Flying Machines of 
Alberto Santos-Dumont. 81.
Grimes. Planet Middle School. 146.
Guitar Notes. Amato. 547.
Gus Makes a Friend. Remkiewicz. 221.
Gustafson. Lost Youth of Edgar Allan Poe. 
82.
Guy Langman, Crime Scene Procrastinator. 
Berk. 500.
Guys Read. Scieszka. 107.
Haas. Bramble and Maggie. 511.
Hahn. Mister Death’s Blue-Eyed Girls. 561.
Hall. Dear Bully. 206.
Hallowell. Wagons Ho! 147.
Halls. Girl Meets Boy. 353.
Halpern. Don’t Stop Now. 19.
Halpin. Tessa Masterson Will Go to Prom. 
396.
Hand. Radiant Days. 562.
Handler. Why We Broke Up. 256.
Hands Off, Harry! Wells. 53.
Hanging Off Jefferson’s Nose. Coury. 505.
Hannan. My Big Mouth. 19.
Hans My Hedgehog. Coombs. 249.
Happy Families. Davis. 452.
Harbinger. Etienne. 349.
Harkrader. Adventures of Beanboy. 306.
Harper. Henry’s Heart. 257.
Harrington. Saving June. 20.
Harris, C. Bad Taste in Boys. 20.
Harris, R. Who Has What? 83.
Harrison, D. Cowboys. 457.
Harrison, M. Tris & Izzie. 206.
Harry Houdini. Weaver. 228.
Hartland. Bon Appétit! 511.
Hartley. Darwen Arkwright and the Per-
egrine Pact. 147. 
Hartnett. Sadie and Ratz. 512.
Harvey. Stolen Away. 512. 
Haskell. Princess Curse. 148.
Haston. How to Rock Braces and Glasses. 
148.
Hathaway, B. Letters to Missy Violet. 399.
Hathaway, J. Slide. 458.
Haunted Hamburger. LaRochelle. 27.
Hautman. Obsidian Blade. 400.
———. What Boys Really Want. 354.
Hayes. Coyote Under the Table. 458.
Healey. Shattering. 149.
Healy. Hero’s Guide to Saving Your King-
dom. 562.
Heart and Soul. Nelson. 160.
Hellisen. When the Sea Is Rising Red. 354.
Hemlock. Peacock. 523. 
Hemphill. Sisters of Glass. 400.
Hen for Izzy Pippik. Davis. 451.
Henkes. Penny and Her Song. 401.
Henry’s Heart. Harper. 257.
Hepler. Love? 307.
Heppermann. City Chickens. 563.
Herbstein. Brave Music of a Distant Drum. 
513. 
Here Come the Girl Scouts! Corey. 250.
Here Lies Linc. Ray. 41.
Hereafter. Hudson. 21.
Hero of Little Street. Rogers. 528. 
Hero’s Guide to Saving Your Kingdom. 
Healy. 562.
Hey, 13! Soto. 278.
Hiaasen. Chomp. 459.
Hicks. Friends with Boys. 401.
Higgins. Lunatic’s Curse. 83.
Higgins Hole. Boreen. 341.
Hillenbrand. Kite Day. 459.
Hilmo. With a Name Like Love. 258.
Hippopposites. Coat. 505.
Hiranandani. Whole Story of Half a Girl. 
355.
Hirsch. Eleventh Plague. 84.
His Name Was Raoul Wallenberg. Borden. 
341.
Hobbie. Gem. 460.
Hobbs. Maggie & Oliver. 257.
Hoberman. Forget-Me-Nots. 495.
Hocking. Switched. 307.
Hodkin. Unbecoming of Mara Dyer. 149.
Hogwash! Wilson. 55.
Holder. Unleashed. 207.
Home-Field Advantage. Tuck. 51.
Homer. Cooper. 556.
Hood. Treasure Chest. 258.
july/augusT 2012  •  601
Hooey Higgins and the Shark. Voake. 428.
Hooked. Greenman. 81.
Hop. Moranville. 519.
Hope and Tears. Swain. 535.
Hopkinson. Boy Called Dickens. 308.
———. Titanic. 402.
Horowitz. Chico the Brave. 563.
Horvath. Mr. and Mrs. Bunny—Detectives 
Extraordinaire! 355.
Hound Dog True. Urban. 174.
House. Same Sun Here. 402.
House Baba Built. Young. 180 
House Held Up by Trees. Kooser. 463.
House in the Woods. Moore. 216.
House of 12 Bunnies. Stills. 374.
How Do You Hug a Porcupine? Isop. 22.
How Many Jelly Beans? Menotti. 574.
How NOT to Run for President. Clark. 
343.
How the Leopard Got His Claws. Achebe. 
190.
How to Babysit a Grandpa. Reagan. 475.
How to Get a Job—by Me, the Boss. 
Lloyd-Jones. 28.
How to Rock Braces and Glasses. Haston. 
148.
How to Save a Life. Zarr. 281.
Howe. Warriors of the Black Shroud. 403.
Hubbard, J. Try Not to Breathe. 356.
Hubbard, K. Wanderlove. 460.
Hudson. Hereafter. 21.
Hueys in the New Sweater. Jeffers. 564.
Huff & Puff. Rueda. 529.
Hughes. National Geographic Little Kids: 
First Big Book of Dinosaurs. 208.
Hugs from Pearl. Schmid. 276.
Hulbert. Who Has These Feet? 21.
Humming Room. Potter. 367.
Humphrey. Mission (Un)Popular. 84.
Hunt. Fukuda. 509. 
Hunter. To the Mountaintop. 356.
Huser. Runaway. 513.
Hutchins. Up Cat. 564.
I Don’t Believe It, Archie! Norriss. 472.
I, Galileo. Christensen. 554.
I Hunt Killers. Lyga. 467.
I Lay My Stitches Down. Grady. 291.
I Pledge Allegiance. Lynch. 214.
I Want My Hat Back. Klassen. 153.
I Will Come Back For You. Russo. 166. 
I. M. Pei. Rubalcaba. 223.
I’ll Be Watching. Porter. 165.
Ian’s New Potty. Oud. 270.
Ibbotson. One Dog and His Boy. 403.
iBoy. Brooks. 196.
Ice Island. Shahan. 321.
Icefall. Kirby. 211.
Ichiro. Inzana. 461.
If Only. Geithner. 397.
If You Lived Here. Laroche. 212.
Illuminated. Orloff. 270.
Immortal Rules. Kagawa. 515. 
Implosion of Aggie Winchester. Zielin. 
122.
In Darkness. Lake. 360.
In Honor. Kirby. 565.
In Trouble. Levine. 262.
Incarnate. Meadows. 412.
Inquisitor’s Apprentice. Moriarty. 217.
Insurgent. Roth. 582.
Into the Trap. Moodie. 33.
Intriago. Dot. 85.
Invisible Tower. Johnson-Shelton. 308.
Inzana. Ichiro. 461.
Irena’s Jar of Secrets. Vaughan. 280.
Irises. Stork. 324.
Is Everyone Ready for Fun? Thomas. 113.
Island’s End. Venkatraman. 115.
Isop. How Do You Hug a Porcupine? 22.
It’s Our Prom (So Deal With It). Peters. 
525.
Iva Honeysuckle Discovers the World. 
Ransom. 526.
J. R. R. Tolkien. Wallner. 175.
Jack and the Beanstalk. Crews. 14.
Jaffe. Ghost Flower. 461.
Jake and Lily. Spinelli. 584.
James. Life Is But a Dream. 404.
Jasper John Dooley. Adderson. 496.
Jay. Juliet Immortal. 85.
Jazz Age Josephine. Winter. 328.
Jeffers. Hueys in the New Sweater. 564.
Jefferson’s Sons. Bradley. 72.
Jenkins. Beetle Book. 514.
———. Just a Second. 150.
———. Time for a Bath. 22.
———. Time to Eat. 22.
———. Time to Sleep. 22.
602  •  The BulleTin
Jennings. Bat and Rat. 565.
———. Lucky Cap. 23.
Jensen. Meal of the Stars. 514.
Jessica Rules the Dark Side. Fantaskey. 349.
Jewel and the Key. Spiegler. 171.
Jim Henson. Krull. 88.
Jimmy the Greatest. Buitrago. 552.
Jinks. Paradise Trap. 404.
Joan of Arc. Demi. 76.
Jobling. Wereworld. 86. 
John. Thou Shalt Not Road Trip. 405.
Johnson-Shelton. Invisible Tower. 308.
Johnson, A. Lottie Paris Lives Here. 23.
Johnson, E. Possession. 24.
Johnson, J. This Girl Is Different. 24.
Johnson, M. Name of the Star. 86.
Johnson, P. Amazing Adventures of John 
Smith, Jr. AKA Houdini. 405.
Johnston. Levi Strauss Gets a Bright Idea. 
87.
Jonathan and the Big Blue Boat. Stead. 49.
Jonell. Lawn Mower Magic. 357.
Jones, C. After Obsession. 150.
Jones, D. Earwig and the Witch. 309.
Joyce. Nicholas St. North and the Battle of 
the Nightmare King. 259.
Judge. Red Sled. 208.
Jukes. New Kid. 260.
Juliet Immortal. Jay. 85.
Jurmain. Worst of Friends. 260.
Just a Second. Jenkins. 150.
Just As Good. Crowe. 303.
Just Behave, Pablo Picasso! Winter. 486.
Just Ducks! Davies. 392.
Just Write. Myers. 575.
Just Your Average Princess. Springer. 279.
Juster. Neville. 151.
KaBoom! Go Out and Play! 462.
Kagawa. Immortal Rules. 515. 
Kali’s Song. Winter. 430.
Kalman. Looking at Lincoln. 260.
Kamkwamba. Boy Who Harnessed the 
Wind. 309.
Kaplan. Betty Bunny Wants Everything. 
357.
Kargman. Pirates & Princesses. 152.
Karo. Lexapros and Cons. 462.
Kaspar the Titanic Cat. Morpurgo. 415.
Kasza. Silly Goose’s Big Story. 463.
Katz. Poems I Wrote When No One Was 
Looking. 208.
Keeping the Castle. Kindl. 516.
Kehoe. Audition. 209.
Kelly. Amplified. 209.
Kenneally. Catching Jordan. 310.
Kennedy. Wilma Tenderfoot. 152.
Kephart. You Are My Only. 87.
Keplinger. Shut Out. 261.
Kerley. Those Rebels, John & Tom. 239.
Kessler. Year without Autumn. 210.
Kibuishi. Explorer. 515.
Kids of Kabul. Ellis. 557.
Kill Me Softly. Cross. 450.
Kill Switch. Lynch. 517.
Kinard. Boy Project. 406.
Kindl. Keeping the Castle. 516.
Kindred Souls. MacLachlan. 312.
King of the Mound. Tooke. 427.
King, A. Everybody Sees the Ants. 210.
King, C. Seven Sorcerers. 25.
Kirby, J. In Honor. 565.
Kirby, M. Icefall. 211.
Kirkpatrick. Mysterious Bones. 25.
Kiss Crush Collide. Meredith. 314.
Kitanidis. Glimmer. 566.
Kite Day. Hillenbrand. 459.
Klassen. I Want My Hat Back. 153.
Klauss. Everything You Need to Survive the 
Apocalypse. 358.
Klimo. Daughter of the Centaurs. 359.
Knight. Wildefire. 26.
Knuckle & Potty Destroy Happy World. 
Proimos. 475.
Koertge. Now Playing. 26.
Könnecke. Anton Can Do Magic. 153.
Kooser. House Held Up by Trees. 463.
Kops. Great Molasses Flood. 359.
Kostecki-Shaw. Same, Same but Different. 
154.
Kramer. From What I Remember. 566.
Krishnaswami. Grand Plan to Fix Every-
thing. 27.
Krull. Big Wig. 88.
———. Jim Henson. 88.
Kurlansky. Battle Fatigue. 211.
Kushner. Welcome to Bordertown. 8.
Kyi. Seeing Red. 567.
Lackey. Dead Reckoning. 567.
july/augusT 2012  •  603
Laddertop. Card. 246.
LaFevers. Grave Mercy. 406.
LaFleur. Eight Keys. 89.
Lake. In Darkness. 360.
Lambert. Annie Sullivan and the Trials of 
Helen Keller. 464.
Lampson. This One Time with Julia. 360.
Lane. Stop Thief! 568.
Lansdale. All the Earth, Thrown to the Sky. 
154.
Larbalestier. Team Human. 568.
LaReau. Mr. Prickles. 310.
———. Otto. 89.
Larf. Spires. 424.
Laroche. If You Lived Here. 212.
LaRochelle. Haunted Hamburger. 27.
Last Airlift. Skrypuch. 533.
Last of the Gullivers. Crocker. 302.
Last Princess. Craze. 506.
Last Song. Wiseman. 587.
Late Nate in a Race. McCully. 572.
Lawn Mower Magic. Jonell. 357.
Lawrence, C. Case of the Deadly Despera-
dos. 407.
Lawrence, I. Winter Pony. 261.
Lawson. Ghosts of the Titanic. 464.
LaZebnik. Epic Fail. 155.
Leaf Can Be. Salas. 421.
LeBox. Circle of Cranes. 465.
Lee. Cat Found. 212.
Leeds. Unfortunate Son. 569.
Leedy. Seeing Symmetry. 465.
Legacy. Cochran. 247.
Legend. Lu. 213.
Legend of Diamond Lil. Cronin. 506.
Leo Geo. Chad. 391.
Lerangis. Somebody Please Tell Me Who I 
Am. 362.
Lester. All for Me and None for All. 569.
Let’s Go See Papá! Schimel. 275.
Letters to Missy Violet. Hathaway. 399.
Levi Strauss Gets a Bright Idea. Johnston. 
87.
Levine, E. In Trouble. 262.
Levine, G. Forgive Me. 407.
Levine, K. Lions of Little Rock. 311. 
Levithan. Every You, Every Me. 90.
Lewin. Puffling Patrol. 466.
Lewis. You Have Seven Messages. 90.
Lexapros and Cons. Karo. 462.
Liar’s Moon. Bunce. 245.
Libby of High Hopes. Primavera. 579.
Liesl and Po. Oliver. 162.
Life. Peet. 163.
Life in the Ocean. Nivola. 472.
Life Is But a Dream. James. 404.
Lighthouse Christmas. Buzzeo. 137.
Lights on the Nile. Napoli. 160.
Lin. Dumpling Days. 360.
Lindaman. Zip It! 466.
Lindsey. Shattered Souls. 262.
Link. Steampunk! 91.
Lions of Little Rock. Levine. 311.
List. Vivian. 484.
Listen to My Trumpet! Willems. 430.
Little. Circle of Secrets. 213.
Little Bee. Gibbs. 560.
Little Boy Detective Blue. Metzger. 32.
Little Dog Lost. Carnesi. 298.
Little Dog, Lost. Bauer. 498.
Little Rock Girl 1957. Tougas. 325.
Little Treasures. Ogburn. 269.
Littlewood. Bliss. 361.
Littman. Want to Go Private? 91.
Lloyd-Jones. How to Get a Job—by Me, 
the Boss. 28.
Lo. Auntie Yang’s Great Soybean Picnic. 
570.
Lobel. 10 Hungry Rabbits. 361.
Lonely Book. Bernheimer. 340.
Long, E. Up, Tall, and High! 311
Long, L. Otis and the Tornado. 155.
Long, M. Silence of Our Friends. 312
Long Sleep. Sheehan. 110.
Longshore. Gilt. 570.
Look. Alvin Ho: Allergic to Dead Bodies, 
Funerals, and Other Fatal Circum-
stances. 263.
———. Polka Dot Penguin Pottery. 28.
Looking at Lincoln. Kalman. 260.
Looking for Me. Rosenthal. 581.
Lore. Power of Six. 29.
Lorentz. No Safety in Numbers. 467.
Losers in Space. Barnes. 446.
Lost Code. Emerson. 557.
Lost Heiress. Fisher. 16.
Lost Songs. Cooney. 249.
Lost Voices. Porter. 40.
604  •  The BulleTin
Lost Youth of Edgar Allan Poe. Gustafson. 
82.
Lost! Orr. 100.
Losure. Fairy Ring. 408.
Lottie Paris Lives Here. Johnson. 23.
Love? Hepler. 307.
Love & Leftovers. Tregay. 326.
Love, Mouserella. Stein. 173.
Lovely Shoes. Shreve. 46.
Lovetorn. Daswani. 305.
Lowry. Fox Tails. 516.
Lu. Legend. 213.
Lucky Cap. Jennings. 23.
Ludwig. Pretty Crooked. 408.
Lunatic’s Curse. Higgins. 83.
Lunge-Larsen. Gifts from the Gods. 263.
Lupica. Underdogs. 92.
Lyga. I Hunt Killers. 467.
———. Mangaman. 264.
Lynch. I Pledge Allegiance. 214.
———. Kill Switch. 517.
———. Sharpshooter. 468.
Lyon. Which Side Are You On? 264.
Lyons. Ellen’s Broom. 362.
MacDonald. Boy from the Dragon Palace. 
156. 
Mack. Frog and Fly. 409.
Mackler. Future of Us. 191.
MacLachlan. Kindred Souls. 312.
———. Waiting for the Magic. 156.
Mafi. Shatter Me. 265.
Maggie & Oliver. Hobbs. 257.
Magoon. 37 Things I Love (In No Particu-
lar Order). 571.
Maia. DJ Rising. 409.
Mal and Chad. McCranie. 29.
Malaspina. Touch the Sky. 410.
Malkin. Swear. 92.
Mandel. Zoo Ah-choooo. 410.
Mangaman. Lyga. 264.
Manna. Orphan. 157. 
Manushkin. Belly Book. 265.
Marcel Marceau. Spielman. 112.
Marchetta. Froi of the Exiles. 468.
Marching to the Mountaintop. Bausum. 
339.
Margolin. Vanishing Acts. 214.
Margrave. Fisher. 16.
Mario Makes a Movie. McElmurry. 573.
Marr. Enthralled. 93.
Marrin. Black Gold. 411.
Marriott. Shadows on the Moon. 518.
Marsden. Starfields. 157.
———. White Zone. 517.
Martin, A. Ten Rules for Living with My 
Sister. 158.
Martin, B. Ten Little Caterpillars. 93.
Martin, C. My Beating Teenage Heart. 
158.
Martin, E. Oddfellow’s Orphanage. 313. 
Mason. Moon Pie. 266.
Mason Dixon. Mills. 95.
Masque of the Red Death. Griffin. 510.
Mass. 13 Gifts. 266.
———. Beauty and the Beast. 519.
Masterwork of a Painting Elephant. Cue-
vas. 200.
Matatu. Walters. 587.
Matson. Second Chance Summer. 571.
Matthew Meets the Man. Nichols. 365.
May B. Rose. 318.
Mazer. Somebody Please Tell Me Who I 
Am. 362.
McCall. Under the Mesquite. 267.
McCauley. Violins of Autumn. 572.
McCranie. Mal and Chad. 29.
McCullough. Don’t Expect Magic. 267.
McCully. Late Nate in a Race. 572.
McDonald. Getting Over Garrett Delaney. 
313.
McDonough. Cats in the Doll Shop. 215.
McElmurry. Mario Makes a Movie. 573.
McGhee. Bink & Gollie: Two for One. 
556.
McKay. Caddy’s World. 411.
McKinlay. No Bears. 469.
McKissack. Best Shot in the West. 412.
———. Never Forgotten. 159. 
McLaughlin. Scored. 215.
McMann. Dead to You. 363.
———. Unwanteds. 94.
McNamara. George Washington’s Birthday. 
268.
McNeil. Possess. 94.
McPhail. Family Tree. 469.
———. Pig Pig Meets the Lion. 363.
McQuerry. Peculiars. 573.
Me and Earl and the Dying Girl. Andrews. 
444.
july/augusT 2012  •  605
Me Want Pet! Sauer. 422.
Meadows. Incarnate. 412.
Meal of the Stars. Jensen. 514.
Medina. Girl Who Could Silence the 
Wind. 470.
———. Tía Isa Wants a Car. 30.
Mellom. Ditched. 413.
Meloy, C. Wildwood. 31.
Meloy, M. Apothecary. 159.
Menchin. What If Everything Had Legs? 
95.
Menotti. How Many Jelly Beans? 574.
Meredith. Kiss Crush Collide.
Merits of Mischief. Burns. 502.
Messer. Death of Yorik Mortwell. 31.
Metzger. Little Boy Detective Blue. 32.
Meyer, K. Arcadia Awakens. 364.
Meyer, M. Cinder. 314.
Michael Vey. Evans. 78.
Michaelis. Storyteller. 413.
Michaels. Fix Me. 268.
Middle of Nowhere. Adderson. 497.
Middle School. Patterson. 38.
Mighty Mars Rovers. Rusch. 582.
Mighty Miss Malone. Curtis. 304.
Mihaley. You Can’t Have My Planet But 
Take My Brother, Please. 470. 
Miles to Go for Freedom. Osborne. 366.
Milgrim. Eddie Gets Ready for School. 32.
Miller. Rock God. 364.
Million Suns. Revis. 316.
Mills. Mason Dixon. 95.
Minette’s Feast. Reich. 526.
Miracle. Scott. 531.
Miseducation of Cameron Post. Danforth. 
346.
Misfit. Skovron. 111.
Mission (Un)Popular. Humphrey. 84.
Mister Creecher. Priestley. 104.
Mister Death’s Blue-Eyed Girl. Hahn. 561.
Mistress of the Storm. Welsh. 53.
Mitakido. Orphan. 157.
Mitchell. When Grandmama Sings. 414.
Money Boy. Yee. 120.
Money We’ll Save. Cole. 199.
Monninger. Finding Somewhere. 216.
Monster Calls. Ness. 161.
Montgomery. Young Person’s Guide to 
Grown-Ups. 365.
Month of Sundays. White. 229.
Monticone. Phantom Limb. 170. 
Moodie. Into the Trap. 33.
Moon over High Street. Babbitt. 445.
Moon Pie. Mason. 266.
Moonlight. Griffith. 399.
Moore, B. Vodník. 471.
Moore, C. Stalker Chronicles. 414.
Moore, I. House in the Woods. 216.
Moranville. Hop. 519.
More. Springman. 481.
Moriarty. Inquisitor’s Apprentice. 217.
Morpurgo. Elephant in the Garden. 217.
———. Kaspar the Titanic Cat. 415.
———. Pied Piper of Hamelin. 218.
Morris. Dark Souls. 96.
Moskowitz. Gone, Gone, Gone. 574.
———. Zombie Tag. 269.
Mostly True Story of Jack. Barnhill. 70.
Mouse & Lion. Aesop. 132. 
Mousenet. Breitrose. 245.
Mr. and Mrs. Bunny—Detectives Extraor-
dinaire! Horvath. 355.
Mr. Prickles. LaReau. 310.
Mrs. Harkness and the Panda. Potter. 417.
Mrs. Noodlekugel. Pinkwater. 417.
Muncle Trogg. Foxley. 395.
Munro. Busy Builders. 520.
Murdock. Wisdom’s Kiss. 96.
Murray. One Two. 574.
Mustache! Barnett. 192.
My Awesome/Awful Popularity Plan. 
Rudetsky. 320.
My Beating Teenage Heart. Martin. 158.
My Big Mouth. Hannan. 19.
My Brother’s Shadow. Schröder. 167
My Family for the War. Voorhoeve. 485.
My Friend Dahmer. Backderf. 389.
My Friend Fred. Oram. 473.
My Heart Will Not Sit Down. Rockliff. 
318.
My Life As a Stuntboy. Tashjian. 173.
My Life in Black &White. Friend. 559.
My Mixed-Up Berry Blue Summer. Gen-
nari. 510. 
My Name Is Not Easy. Edwardson. 143.
My No, No, No Day! Patterson. 522.
My Rhinoceros. Agee. 133.
My Snake Blake. Siegel. 584.
606  •  The BulleTin
Myers. All the Right Stuff. 520.
———. Carmen. 33.
———. Just Write. 575.
Mysteries of Angkor Wat. Sobol. 111.
Mysterious Bones. Kirkpatrick. 25.
Mystery of the Missing Everything. Win-
ters. 179.
Mystery of the Missing Luck. Pearce. 39.
Name of the Star. Johnson. 86.
Napoli. Lights on the Nile. 160.
Nascimbeni. Animals and Their Families. 
576.
National Children’s Book and Literacy Alli-
ance. Exquisite Corpse Adventure. 97.
National Geographic Little Kids: First Big 
Book of Dinosaurs. Hughes. 208.
Nayeri. Another Jekyll, Another Hyde. 471.
———. Straw House, Wood House, Brick 
House, Blow. 218.
Near Witch. Schwab. 107.
Neimark. Secret Spiral. 34.
Nelson. Heart and Soul. 160.
Nerd Girls. Sitomer. 47.
Neri. Ghetto Cowboy. 34.
Nesbet. Cabinet of Earths. 315.
Nesbitt. Ultimate Top Secret. 35.
Ness. Monster Calls. 161.
Never Eighteen. Bostic. 295.
Never Forgotten. McKissack. 159. 
Never Sit Down in a Hoopskirt. Rumley. 
43. 
Never Weres. Smyth. 48.
Neville. Juster. 151.
New Kid. Jukes. 260.
Nicholas St. North and the Battle of the 
Nightmare King. Joyce. 259.
Nichols. Matthew Meets the Man. 365.
Nikki and Deja: Election Madness. Eng-
lish. 78.
Nimmo. Chronicles of the Red King. 161.
Nivola. Life in the Ocean. 472.
———. Orani. 35.
Nix. Confusion of Princes. 521.
———. Troubletwisters. 36.
No Bears. McKinlay. 469.
No Go Sleep! Feiffer. 395.
No Ordinary Day. Ellis. 143.
No Safety in Numbers. Lorentz. 467.
No. 1 Car Spotter. Atinuke. 134.
Noah Barleywater Runs Away. Boyne. 9.
Noe. Something to Hold. 315.
Nolan, D. Sea of Dreams. 219.
Nolan, H. Pregnant Pause. 98.
Norris. Unraveling. 521. 
Norriss. I Don’t Believe It, Archie! 472.
Northrop. Plunked. 522. 
Notes from an Accidental Band Geek. 
Dionne. 252.
Nouraee. Americapedia. 5.
Now is the Time for Running. Williams. 
117.
Now Playing. Koertge. 26.
Nowhere Girl. Paquette. 162.
Nye. There Is No Long Distance Now. 98.
O’Connell. Sharp Time. 219.
O’Dell. Aviary. 99.
Obsidian Blade. Hautman. 400.
Obstfeld. What Color Is My World? 292.
Obstinate Pen. Dormer. 507.
Ockler. Bittersweet. 415.
Oddfellow’s Orphanage. Martin. 313.
Offill. 11 Experiments That Failed. 99.
Ogburn. Little Treasures. 269.
Oliver. Liesl and Po. 162.
———. Pandemonium. 416.
Olivia Bean. Gephart. 455.
Omololu. Transcendence. 576.
Once Upon a Toad. Frederick. 453.
One and Only Ivan. Applegate. 293.
One Cool Friend. Buzzeo. 296.
One Dog and His Boy. Ibbotson. 403.
One Special Day. Schaefer. 478.
One Two. Murray. 574.
Only Ones. Starmer. 172.
Only the Mountains Do Not Move. Reyn-
olds. 222.
Oppel. This Dark Endeavor. 36.
Oram. My Friend Fred. 473.
Orani. Nivola. 35.
Orloff. Illuminated. 270.
Orphan. Manna. 157. 
Orr. Lost! 100.
Osborne. Miles to Go for Freedom. 366.
Other Felix. Graff. 205.
Otis and the Tornado. Long. 155.
Ottaviani. Feynman. 37.
Otto. LaReau. 89.
Otto the Book Bear. Cleminson. 300.
july/augusT 2012  •  607
Oud. Ian’s New Potty. 270.
Outlaw. Davies. 250.
Outside Your Window. Davies. 347.
Page. Time for a Bath. 22.
———. Time to Eat. 22.
———. Time to Sleep. 22.
Paintings from the Cave. Paulsen. 271.
Palacio. Wonder. 366.
Pandemonium. Oliver. 416.
Pandemonium. Wooding. 379.
Papademetriou. Siren’s Storm. 37.
Paper House. Peterson. 525.
Paquette. Nowhere Girl. 162.
Paradise. Alexander. 4.
Paradise Trap. Jinks. 404.
Park. Third Gift. 270.
Parker. When Dads Don’t Grow Up. 473.
Partials. Wells. 486.
Passing the Music Down. Sullivan. 50.
Passion for Victory. Bobrick. 551.
Paterson. Flint Heart. 100.
Patrick. Revived. 474.
Patten. Return to Exile. 163.
Patterson, J. Middle School. 38.
Patterson, R. My No, No, No Day! 522.
Paulsen. Flat Broke. 39.
———. Paintings from the Cave. 271.
Peacock. Hemlock. 523. 
Pearce, Jackson. Sweetly. 101.
———. Purity. 474. 
Pearce, Jacqueline. Mystery of the Missing 
Luck. 39.
Pearce, M. Fox Inheritance. 101.
Pearce, Q. Red Bird Sings. 297.
Peck. Secrets at Sea. 220.
Peculiars. McQuerry. 573.
Peepsqueak! Clark. 299.
Peet. Life. 163.
Penny and Her Song. Henkes. 401.
Pennypacker. Summer of the Gypsy Moths. 
523.
Perl. When Life Gives You O.J. 40.
Perera. Glass Collector. 577.
Peter Nimble and His Fantastic Eyes. 
Auxier. 69.
Peterfreund. For Darkness Shows the Stars. 
524. 
Peters. It’s Our Prom (So Deal With It). 
525.
Peterson. Paper House. 525.
Petrucha. Ripper. 416.
Petunia Goes Wild. Schmid. 371.
Pfeffer. Blood Wounds. 102.
Phantom Limb. Sleator. 170.
Phelan. Around the World. 102.
Picoult. Between the Lines. 577.
Pie. Weeks. 228.
Pied Piper of Hamelin. Morpurgo. 218.
Pig Pig Meets the Lion. McPhail. 363.
Piggy Bunny. Vail. 326.
Pinch and Dash Make Soup. Daley. 345.
Pink Smog. Block. 340.
Pinkney. Twinkle, Twinkle, Little Star. 220.
Pinkwater. Mrs. Noodlekugel. 417.
Pip’s Trip. Stoeke. 323.
Pirates & Princesses. Kargman. 152.
Pirates Next Door. Duddle. 393.
Pixley. Without Tess. 164.
Planet Middle School. Grimes. 146.
Plant a Kiss. Rosenthal. 369.
Plant a Little Seed. Christensen. 555.
Plant Hunters. Silvey. 480.
Plum-Ucci. Following Christopher Creed. 
103.
Plunked. Northrop. 522. 
Poem Runs. Florian. 453.
Poems I Wrote When No One Was Look-
ing. Katz. 208.
Poisoned House. Ford. 144.
Polka Dot Penguin Pottery. Look. 28.
Pon. What We Wear. 339.
Popular Clone. Castle. 298.
Porter, P. I’ll Be Watching. 165.
Porter, S. Lost Voices. 40.
Portis. Princess Super Kitty. 165.
Possess. McNeil. 94.
Possession. Johnson. 24.
Potter, A. Mrs. Harkness and the Panda. 
417.
Potter, E. Humming Room. 367.
Powell. Burn Mark. 578.
———. Game of Triumphs. 103.
Power Chord. Staunton. 172.
Power of Six. Lore. 29.
Powers. This Thing Called the Future. 41.
Poznanski. Erebos. 578.
Precious Bones. Ashley-Hollinger. 548.
Predicteds. Seifert. 108.
608  •  The BulleTin
Pregnancy Project. Rodriguez. 477.
Pregnant Pause. Nolan. 98.
Pretty Bad Things. Skuse. 47.
Pretty Crooked. Ludwig. 408.
Price of Loyalty. Castan. 72.
Price, C. Desert Angel. 221.
Price, L. Starters. 418.
Price, N. Zoe Letting Go. 579.
Priestley. Dead of Winter. 271.
———. Mister Creecher. 104.
Primavera. Libby of High Hopes. 579.
Prince Who Fell From the Sky. Bemis. 550.
Princess Curse. Haskell. 148.
Princess of Borscht. Schubert. 276.
Princess of the Wild Swans. Zahler. 329.
Princess Super Kitty. Portis. 165.
Prineas. Winterling. 316.
Probability of Miracles. Wunder. 328.
Proimos. 12 Things to Do before You 
Crash and Burn. 272.
———. Best Bike Ride Ever. 580.
———. Knuckle & Potty Destroy Happy 
World. 475.
Project. Falkner. 79.
Project Jackalope. Ecton. 508. 
Prudence Wants a Pet. Daly. 15.
Puffling Patrol. Lewin. 466.
Pullman. Two Crafty Criminals! 580.
Punk Ethic. Decker. 507.
Purcell. Trafficked. 367.
Purity. Pearce. 474. 
Putting Makeup on the Fat Boy. Wright. 
56.
Pyle. Take What You Can Carry. 525.
Quaranteen. Thomas. 482.
Queen of Kentucky. Whitaker. 378.
Quick. Boy21. 418.
R My Name Is Rachel. Giff. 205.
Rachel Spinelli Punched Me in the Face. 
Acampora. 68.
Racing the Moon. Armstrong. 547.
Radiant Days. Hand. 562.
Rah, Rah, Radishes! Sayre. 106. 
Ransom. Iva Honeysuckle Discovers the 
World. 526.
Rapp. Children and the Wolves. 419.
Raschka. Seriously, Norman! 272.
Ray, D. Here Lies Linc. 41.
Ray, M. Stars. 189.
Reagan. How to Babysit a Grandpa. 475.
Red Bird Sings. Capaldi. 297.
Red Sled. Judge. 208.
Reed, A. Clean. 42.
Reed, MK. Americus. 104.
Reel Life Starring Us. Greenwald. 256.
Reese, James. Strange Case of Doctor Jekyll 
and Mademoiselle Odile. 476.
Reese, Jenn. Above World. 368.
Reeve. Web of Air. 105.
Reich. Minette’s Feast. 526.
Reichert. Take Your Mama to Work Today. 
476.
Remkiewicz. Gus Makes a Friend. 221.
Renner. Castle of Shadows. 419.
Return to Exile. Patten. 163.
Revis. Million Suns. 316.
Revived. Patrick. 474.
Rex. Cold Cereal. 369.
Reynolds. Only the Mountains Do Not 
Move. 222.
Richards. Book of Wonders.
Richter. Dark Eyes. 477.
Riding Out the Storm. Deans. 348.
Ripper. Petrucha. 416.
Ritter. Fenway Fever! 527.
Robbie Forester and the Outlaws of Sher-
wood St. Abrahams. 293.
Roberts. Dark Inside. 273.
Robot Zombie Frankenstein! Simon. 532.
Rock God. Miller. 364.
Rock ’n’ Roll Mole. Crimi. 141.
Rock On. Vega. 484.
Rockliff. My Heart Will Not Sit Down. 
318.
Rocklin. Five Lives of Our Cat Zook. 528.
Rodkey. Deadweather and Sunrise. 581.
Rodriguez, B. Fox and Hen Together. 42.
———. Rooster’s Revenge. 166.
Rodriguez, G. Pregnancy Project. 477.
Rogers. Hero of Little Street. 528. 
Rohmann. Bone Dog. 43.
Roman. Teen Boat! 529.
Rooster’s Revenge. Rodriguez. 166.
Root. Scrawny Cat. 222.
Rose. May B. 318.
Rosenstock. Camping Trip That Changed 
America. 319.
july/augusT 2012  •  609
Rosenthal, A. Chopsticks. 19.
———. Plant a Kiss. 369.
Rosenthal, B. Looking for Me. 581.
Rosoff. There Is No Dog. 320.
Rossi. Under the Never Sky. 420.
Roth, J. Goodnight. Dragons. 370.
Roth, V. Insurgent. 582.
Rothenberg. Catastrophic History of You 
and Me. 420.
Rubalcaba. I. M. Pei. 223.
Ruby Redfort. Child. 504.
Rudetsky. My Awesome/Awful Popularity 
Plan. 320.
Rueda. Huff & Puff. 529.
Ruiz. Watcher in the Shadows. 530.
Rumley. Never Sit Down in a Hoopskirt. 
43. 
Runaway. Huser. 513.
Rusch. Mighty Mars Rovers. 582.
Russell. Dead Rules. 44.
Russo. I Will Come Back For You. 166. 
Sadie and Ratz. Hartnett. 512.
Sáenz. Aristotle and Dante Discover the 
Secrets of the Universe. 370.
Saga of the Sioux. Zimmerman. 123.
Saint Louis Armstrong Beach. Woods. 119.
Saint-Onge. Something’s Fishy. 39. 
Salas. Bookspeak. 321.
———. Leaf Can Be. 421.
Saldin. Girls of No Return. 421.
Saller. Eddie’s War. 44.
Salm. Anyway*. 530.
Same, Same but Different. Kostecki-Shaw. 
154.
Same Sun Here. House. 402.
Sandler. Tankborn. 105.
Santat. Sidekicks. 45.
Sarcone-Roach. Subway Story. 223.
Sass & Serendipity. Ziegler. 122.
Sauer. Me Want Pet! 422.
Saunders. Beswitched. 274.
Saving June. Harrington. 20.
Say. Drawing from Memory. 45.
Sayre. Rah, Rah, Radishes! 106. 
Scaletta. Tanglewood Terror. 274.
Scandalous! Fryd. 352.
Scarlet. Gaughen. 397.
Scarrow. Fight for Freedom. 478.
Scattergood. Glory Be. 275.
Schabas. Various Positions. 422.
Schaefer. One Special Day. 478.
Schanzer. Witches! 224.
Schimel. Let’s Go See Papá! 275.
Schmatz. Bluefish. 106.
Schmid. Hugs from Pearl. 276.
———. Petunia Goes Wild. 371.
Schraff. Don’t Think about Tomorrow. 479.
Schreiber. Au Revoir, Crazy European 
Chick. 224.
Schröder. My Brother’s Shadow. 167
Schubert. Princess of Borscht. 276.
Schumacher. Unbearable Book Club for 
Unsinkable Girls. 479.
Schwab. Near Witch. 107.
Schwartz. Willie and Uncle Bill. 583.
Scieszka. Guys Read. 107.
Scooter in the Outside. Bowen. 342.
Scored. McLaughlin. 215.
Scorpio Races. Stiefvater. 225.
Scott, Elaine. Buried Alive! 531.
Scott, Elizabeth. Miracle. 531.
———. As I Wake. 108.
Scrawny Cat. Root. 222.
Sea of Dreams. Nolan. 219.
Second Chance Summer. Matson. 571.
Secret Keepers. Yee. 487.
Secret Life of Money. Vermond. 375.
Secret of the Skeleton Key. Warner. 116.
Secret Sisterhood of Heartbreakers. Wein-
garten. 327.
Secret Spiral. Neimark. 34.
Secrets at Sea. Peck. 220.
Seeger. Green. 423.
Seeing Red. Kyi. 567.
Seeing Symmetry. Leedy. 465.
Seifert. Predicteds. 108.
Seize the Storm. Cadnum. 552.
Selection. Cass. 502.
Selzer. Extraordinary. 277.
Selznick. Wonderstruck. 109.
Sendak. Bumble-Ardy. 109.
Seriously, Norman! Raschka. 272.
Seven Sorcerers. King. 25.
Shadow and Bone. Bardugo. 550.
Shadows on the Moon. Marriott. 518.
Shahan. Ice Island. 321.
Shange. Freedom’s A-Callin Me. 277.
Shank. Child of the Mountains. 583.
610  •  The BulleTin
Sharif. Bestest. Ramadan. Ever. 167.
Sharp Time. O’Connell. 219.
Sharpshooter. Lynch. 468.
Shatter Me. Mafi. 265.
Shattered Souls. Lindsey. 262.
Shattering. Healey. 149.
Shaw. Tunnel Vision. 110.
Shea. Dinosaur vs. the Library. 168. 
Sheehan. Long. Long Sleep. 110.
Shelter. Coben. 74.
Shelton. Boy and a Bear in a Boat. 532.
Shift. Bailey. 549.
Shifting. Wiggins. 178.
Shireen. Good Little Wolf. 168.
Shreve. Lovely Shoes. 46.
Shut Out. Keplinger. 261.
Sidekicks. Santat. 45.
Sidman. Swirl by Swirl. 169.
Siegel. My Snake Blake. 584.
Sierra. Suppose You Meet a Dinosaur. 371.
Silence of Our Friends. Long. 312.
Silly Goose’s Big Story. Kasza. 463.
Silver Bowl. Stanley. 48.
Silvey. Plant Hunters. 480.
Simmons. Article 5. 372.
Simon. Robot Zombie Frankenstein! 532.
Singer. Boy Who Cried Alien. 480.
———. Stick Is an Excellent Thing. 
Siren’s Storm. Papademetriou. 37.
Sister Mischief. Goode. 18.
Sisters of Glass. Hemphill. 400.
Sita’s Ramayana. Arni. 191.
Sitomer. Nerd Girls. 47.
Six Days. Webb. 176.
Siy. Bug Shots. 278.
Skovron. Misfit. 111.
Skrypuch. Last Airlift. 533.
Skuse. Pretty Bad Things. 47.
Skye. Wonkenstein. 169. 
Sleator. Phantom Limb. 170.
Slide. Hathaway. 458.
Small Town Sinners. Walker. 52.
Smith, Alexander. Great Cake Mystery. 
545.
Smith, Andrew. Stick. 225.
Smith, C. Stars in the Shadows. 323. 
Smith, G. Chronal Engine. 372.
Smith, J. Storm Makers. 533.
Smyth. Never Weres. 48.
Sneve. Christmas Coat. 170. 
Sniffles for Bear. Becker. 70.
Snow in Summer. Yolen. 281.
Snyder. Bigger Than a Breadbox. 171.
———. Good Night. 423.
Sobol. Mysteries of Angkor Wat. 111.
Somebody Please Tell Me Who I Am. 
Mazer. 362.
Something to Hold. Noe. 315.
Something’s Fishy. Szpirglas. 39.
Son of a Gun. de Graaf. 393.
Sonnenblick. Curveball. 534.
Sophie’s Fish. Cannon. 449.
Soto. Hey, 13! 278.
Space Between. Yovanoff. 231.
Spaghetti Detectives. Steinhöfel. 49.
Sparks. Adams. 241.
Spiegler. Jewel and the Key. 171.
Spielman. Marcel Marceau. 112.
Spinelli, E. Big Boy Now. 373.
Spinelli, J. Jake and Lily. 584.
Spires. Larf. 424.
Spotswood. Born Wicked. 373.
Springer. Just Your Average Princess. 279.
Springman. More. 481.
Spunky Tells All. Cameron. 137.
Spy School. Gibbs. 398.
Stalker Chronicles. Moore. 414.
Stampler. Where It Began. 424.
———. Wooden Sword. 481.
Stanley. Silver Bowl. 48.
Star Shard. Durbin. 348.
Starfields. Marsden. 157.
Starmer. Only Ones. 172.
Stars in the Shadows. Smith. 323.
Stars. Ray. 189.
Starstruck. Balog. 7.
Starters. Price. 418.
Staub. Everybody Gets the Blues. 374.
Staunton. Power Chord. 172.
Stay Close to Mama. Buzzeo. 390.
Stay With Me. Griffin. 146.
Stead. Jonathan and the Big Blue Boat. 49.
Steampunk! Link. 91.
Stein, D. Love, Mouserella. 173.
Stein, E. White Water. 7. 
Steinhöfel. Spaghetti Detectives. 49.
Steve Jobs. Blumenthal. 501.
Stick. Smith. 225.
july/augusT 2012  •  611
Stick Is an Excellent Thing. Singer. 322.
Stiefvater. Scorpio Races. 225.
Still Waters. Berne. 244.
Stills. House of 12 Bunnies. 374.
Stills-Blott. House of 12 Bunnies. 374.
Stir It Up! Ganeshram. 79.
Stoeke. Pip’s Trip. 323.
Stolen Away. Harvey. 512. 
Stolen into Slavery. Fradin. 396.
Stone. Boy on Cinnamon Street. 425.
Stop Thief! Lane. 568.
Stork. Irises. 324.
Storm Makers. Smith. 533.
Story of Us. Caletti. 449.
Storybound. Burt. 448.
Storyteller. Michaelis. 413.
Strange Case of Doctor Jekyll and Made-
moiselle Odile. Reese. 476.
Stratton. Grave Robber’s Apprentice. 426.
Strauss. Elijah Door. 534.
Straw House, Wood House, Brick House, 
Blow. Nayeri. 218.
Struck. Bosworth. 501.
Subway Story. Sarcone-Roach. 223.
Sullivan. Passing the Music Down. 50.
Summer of the Gypsy Moths. Pennypacker. 
523.
Summer of the Wolves. Carlson-Voiles. 
553.
Summers. This Is Not a Test. 585.
Superman Versus the Ku Klux Klan. Bow-
ers. 295.
Suppose You Meet a Dinosaur. Sierra. 371.
Survival Kit. Freitas. 203.
Susan B. Anthony. Wallner. 485.
Sutton. Demolition. 375.
Swain. Hope and Tears. 535.
Swear. Malkin. 92.
Sweet Venom. Childs. 247.
Sweet. Balloons over Broadway. 226.
Sweetly. Pearce. 101.
Swirl by Swirl. Sidman. 169.
Switched. Hocking. 307.
Sylvia & Aki. Conkling. 75.
Symes. Yawn. 279.
Szpirglas. Something’s Fishy. 39.
Tafuri. All Kinds of Kisses. 
Take What You Can Carry. Pyle. 525.
Take Your Mama to Work Today. Reichert. 
476.
Tales from India. Gavin. 205.
Talk, Talk, Squawk! Davies. 200.
Tanglewood Terror. Scaletta. 274.
Tankborn. Sandler. 105.
Tashjian. My Life As a Stuntboy. 173.
Tavares. There Goes Ted Williams. 426.
Taylor, L. Daughter of Smoke and Bone. 
50.
Taylor, M. 17 Martin Street. 585.
Team Human. Larbalestier. 568.
Tebbetts. Middle School. 38.
Teen Boat! Roman. 529.
Tempest. Cross. 344.
Temptation of Angels. Zink. 431.
Ten Little Caterpillars. Martin. 93.
Ten Rules for Living with My Sister. 
Martin. 158.
TenNapel. Bad Island. 112.
Tessa Masterson Will Go to Prom. Frank-
lin. 396.
There Goes Ted Williams. Tavares. 426.
There Is No Dog. Rosoff. 320.
There Is No Long Distance Now. Nye. 98.
Third Gift. Park. 270.
This Dark Endeavor. Oppel. 36.
This Girl Is Different. Johnson. 24.
This Is Not a Test. Summers. 585.
This One Time with Julia. Lampson. 360.
This Thing Called the Future. Powers. 41.
Thomas, J. Easter Bunny’s Assistant. 325.
———. Is Everyone Ready for Fun? 113.
Thomas, L. Quaranteen. 482.
Thompson. Wuftoom. 482.
Those Rebels, John & Tom. Kerley. 239.
Thou Shalt Not Road Trip. John. 405.
Three Times Lucky. Turnage. 586.
Tía Isa Wants a Car. Medina. 30.
Tick Tock Clock. Cuyler. 304.
Tilt. Cumyn. 141.
Time for a Bath. Jenkins. 22.
Time to Eat. Jenkins. 22.
Time to Say Bye-Bye. Cocca-Leffler. 301.
Time to Sleep. Jenkins. 22.
Titanic. Hopkinson. 402.
Titanic Sinks! Denenberg. 201.
To the Mountaintop. Hunter. 356.
Tooke. King of the Mound. 427.
Touch the Sky. Malaspina. 410.
Tougas. Little Rock Girl 1957. 325.
612  •  The BulleTin
Tracy. Bessica Lefter Bites Back. 483.
Trafficked. Purcell. 367.
Transcendence. Omololu. 576.
Trapped. Aronson. 6.
Trasler. Caveman. 113.
Traveling Restaurant. Else. 394.
Treasure Chest. Hood. 258.
Tregay. Love & Leftovers. 326.
Treggiari. Ashes, Ashes. 114.
Tris & Izzie. Harrison. 206.
Troublesome Boy. Vasey. 586.
Troubletwisters. Nix. 36.
Try Not to Breathe. Hubbard. 356.
Tuck. Home-Field Advantage. 51.
Tuesdays at the Castle. George. 145.
Tunnel Vision. Shaw. 110.
Turnage. Three Times Lucky. 586.
Twinkle, Twinkle, Little Star. Pinkney. 220.
Twins’ Blanket. Yum. 121.
Two Crafty Criminals! Pullman. 580.
Ultimate Top Secret. Nesbitt. 35.
Ultraviolet. Anderson. 69.
Unbearable Book Club for Unsinkable 
Girls. Schumacher. 479.
Unbecoming of Mara Dyer. Hodkin. 149.
UnBEElievables. Florian. 351.
Under the Mesquite. McCall. 267.
Under the Never Sky. Rossi. 420.
Underdogs. Lupica. 92.
Unforgettable. Ellsworth. 144.
Unforgotten Coat. Cottrell. 140.
Unfortunate Son. Leeds. 569.
Unleashed. Holder. 207.
Unraveling. Norris. 521. 
Unraveling Isobel. Cook. 248.
Unwanteds. McMann. 94.
Up Cat. Hutchins. 564.
Up, Tall, and High! Long. 311.
Urban. Hound Dog True. 174.
Ursu. Breadcrumbs. 67.
Vail. Piggy Bunny. 326.
Valentine. Double. 375.
Vampire Stalker. van Diepen. 51.
Van Allsburg. Chronicles of Harris Burdick. 
226.
van Diepen. Vampire Stalker. 51.
van Leer. Between the Lines. 577.
van Leeuwen, Joke. Eep! 483.
Van Leeuwen, Jean. Five Funny Bunnies. 
427.
Vande Velde. 8 Class Pets + 1 Squirrel + 1 
Dog = Chaos. 174. 
Vanished. Chari. 73.
Vanishing Acts. Margolin. 214.
Variant. Wells. 228.
Various Positions. Schabas. 422.
Varon. Bake Sale. 114.
Vasey. Troublesome Boy. 586.
Vaswani. Same Sun Here. 402.
Vaughan. Irena’s Jar of Secrets. 280.
Vaught. Going Underground. 175.
Vega. Rock On. 484.
Venkatraman. Island’s End. 115.
Vermond. Secret Life of Money. 375.
Vernick. Brothers at Bat. 535.
———. Water Balloon. 115.
Viguie. Unleashed. 207.
Violins of Autumn. McCauley. 572.
Vivian. List. 484.
Voake. Hooey Higgins and the Shark. 428.
Vodník. Moore. 471.
Volponi. Final Four. 376.
Voorhoeve. My Family for the War. 485.
Vote for Me! Clanton. 504.
Vrettos. Burnout. 116.
Wadsworth. First Girl Scout. 280.
Wagons Ho! Hallowell. 147.
Waiting for the Biblioburro. Brown. 11.
Waiting for the Magic. MacLachlan. 156.
Walker, B. Black Boy White School. 327.
Walker, M. Small Town Sinners. 52.
Walker, S. Blizzard of Glass. 227.
———. Freedom Song. 377.
Wallner. J. R. R. Tolkien. 175.
———. Susan B. Anthony. 485.
Walsh. Bigger Kiss. 281.
Walters. Matatu. 587.
Walton. Cracked. 428.
Wanderlove. Hubbard. 460.
Want to Go Private? Littman. 91.
Wanted. Ayarbe. 497. 
Ward. When Blue Met Egg. 377.
Warner. Secret of the Skeleton Key. 116.
Warren, A. Charles Dickens and the Street 
Children of London. 176.
Warren, S. Dolores Huerta. 429.
Warriors of the Black Shroud. Howe. 403.
Wasserman. Book of Blood and Shadow. 
378.
july/augusT 2012  •  613
Watch That Ends the Night. Wolf. 118.
Watcher in the Shadows. Ruiz. 530.
Water Balloon. Vernick. 115.
Way We Fall. Crewe. 302.
We March. Evans. 253.
Weaver. Harry Houdini. 228.
Web of Air. Reeve. 105.
Webb, P. Six Days. 176.
Webb, S. Far from Shore. 52.
Wedel. After Obsession. 150.
Weeks. Pie. 228.
Wein. Code Name Verity. 536.
Weingarten. Secret Sisterhood of Heart-
breakers. 327.
Welcome to Bordertown. Black. 8.
Welcome to Silver Street Farm. Davies. 
347.
Wells, D. Partials. 486.
Wells, Robison. Variant. 228.
Wells, Rosemary. Hands Off, Harry! 53.
———. Yoko Learns to Read. 429.
Welsh. Mistress of the Storm. 53.
Wentworth Hall. Grahame. 560.
Wereworld. Jobling. 86. 
Westerfeld. Goliath. 54.
What Boys Really Want. Hautman. 354.
What Color Is My World? Abdul-Jabbar. 
292.
What If Everything Had Legs? Menchin. 
95.
What We Keep Is Not Always What Will 
Stay. Cockrell. 3.
What We Wear. Ajmera. 339.
When Blue Met Egg. Ward. 377.
When Dads Don’t Grow Up. Parker. 473.
When Grandmama Sings. Mitchell. 414.
When Life Gives You O.J. Perl. 40.
When the Sea Is Rising Red. Hellisen. 354.
Where It Began. Stampler. 424.
Wherever You Go. Davis. 251.
Which Side Are You On? Lyon. 264.
Whitaker. Queen of Kentucky. 378.
White. Month of Sundays. 229.
White Water. Bandy. 7.
White Zone. Marsden. 517.
Who Has These Feet? Hulbert. 21.
Who Has What? Harris. 83.
Whole Story of Half a Girl. Hiranandani. 
355.
Why We Broke Up. Handler. 256.
Wiener Wolf. Crosby. 14. 
Wiggins. Shifting. 178.
Wignall. Blood. 178.
Wild Book. Engle. 452.
Wild Women of the Wild West. Winter. 
230.
Wildefire. Knight. 26.
Wildwood. Meloy. 31.
Willems. Duckling Gets a Cookie! 536.
———. Listen to My Trumpet! 430.
Williams, Marcia. Ancient Egypt. 55.
Williams, Michael. Now is the Time for 
Running. 117.
Williams, S. Troubletwisters. 36.
Willie and Uncle Bill. Schwartz. 583.
Willingham. Down the Mysterly River. 
117.
Wilma Tenderfoot. Kennedy. 152.
Wilson, K. Hogwash! 55.
Wilson, N. Dragon’s Tooth. 229.
Winter Pony. Lawrence. 261.
Winter, Jeanette. Kali’s Song. 430.
Winter, Jonah. Born and Bred in the Great 
Depression. 230.
———. Jazz Age Josephine. 
———. Just Behave, Pablo Picasso! 486.
———. Wild Women of the Wild West. 
230.
Winterling. Prineas. 316.
Winters. Mystery of the Missing Every-
thing. 179.
WinterTown. Emond. 253.
Wisdom’s Kiss. Murdock. 96.
Wiseman. Last Song. 587.
Witches! Schanzer. 224.
With a Name Like Love. Hilmo. 258.
Without Tess. Pixley. 164.
Wolf Won’t Bite! Gravett. 353.
Wolf, A. Watch That Ends the Night. 118.
Wolf, J. Breaking Beautiful. 537.
Wolitzer. Fingertips of Duncan Dorfman. 
118.
Wonder. Palacio. 366.
Wonder Show. Barnaby. 498.
Wonder Woman. Cosentino. 13.
Wonderstruck. Selznick. 109.
Wonkenstein. Skye. 169. 
Wood, A. Blue Sky. 431.
614  •  The BulleTin
Wood, D. Franklin and Winston. 119.
Wooden Sword. Stampler. 481.
Wooding. Pandemonium. 379.
Woods. Saint Louis Armstrong Beach. 119.
Woodson. Beneath a Meth Moon. 379.
Words Set Me Free. Cline-Ransome. 300.
Worst of Friends. Jurmain. 260.
Wrapped. Bradbury. 9.
Wright, Barbara. Crow. 380.
Wright, Bill. Putting Makeup on the Fat 
Boy. 56.
Wright, R. Cheshire Cheese Cat. 251.
Wuftoom. Thompson. 482.
Wunder. Probability of Miracles. 328.
Wylie. All These Lives. 537.
Yawn. Symes. 279.
Year of the Beasts. Castellucci. 503.
Year of the Book. Cheng. 554.
Year without Autumn. Kessler. 210.
Yee. Money Boy. 120.
———. Secret Keepers. 487.
Yelchin. Breaking Stalin’s Nose. 179. 
Yoko Learns to Read. Wells. 429.
Yolen. Snow in Summer. 281.
You Against Me. Downham. 77.
You Are My Only. Kephart. 87.
You Can’t Have My Planet But Take My 
Brother, Please. Mihaley. 470. 
You Have Seven Messages. Lewis. 90.
Young, E. House Baba Built. 180 
Young, J. Babysitter Murders. 120.
Young Person’s Guide to Grown-Ups. 
Montgomery. 365.
Yovanoff. Space Between. 231.
Yum. Twins’ Blanket. 121.
Z Is for Moose. Bingham. 387.
Zahler. Princess of the Wild Swans. 
Zahra’s Paradise. Amir. 133.
Zarr. How to Save a Life. 281.
Zettel. Dust Girl. 588.
Zevin. All These Things I’ve Done. 180.
Ziegler. Sass & Serendipity. 122.
Zielin. Implosion of Aggie Winchester. 
122.
Zimmerman. Saga of the Sioux. 123.
Zink. Temptation of Angels. 431.
Zip It! Lindaman. 466.
Zoe Letting Go. Price. 579.
Zombie in Love. DiPucchio. 76.
Zombie Tag. Moskowitz. 269.
Zoo Ah-choooo. Mandel. 410.
Zubizarreta. Dancing Home. 4. 
