ILL I NO.
.5
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
i~
* 
b
-·I-m.(·.-_ 
.
..
_-. 
-
  ti 
.
1_·
"i 
."~
;·
r; 
"*) 
~
/115ý
y-·-
rl"
rB"~·ri~S~L~F~ 
·~ ~i~a) 
~J$F~ 
m-;s 
,1
T HE B UL LE T IN
July/August 2005
Vol. 58 No. 11
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
A LOOK INSIDE
475 
THE BIG PICTURE
Wiggle by Doreen Cronin; illus. by Scott Menchin
476 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
478 
* Let Me Play: The Story of Title IX, the Law That Changed the Future of
Girls in America by Karen Blumenthal
486 * The Widow and the King by John Dickinson
493 
* The Hello, Goodbye Window by Norton Juster; illus. by Chris Raschka
493 
* On Earth written and illus. by G. Brian Karas
497 * Day of Tears: A Novel in Dialogue by Julius Lester
518 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
521 
ANNUAL AUTHOR AND TITLE INDEX
½
I,
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except
August by the Publications Office of the Graduate School of Library and Information Science
(GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of
Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison
Hope Morrison, Assistant Editor (HM)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Timnah Card, Reviewer (TC)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Krista Hutley, Reviewer (KH)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
OFFICE STAFF
Krista Hutley
Maggie Hommel
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $75.00; multiple institutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each
additional; individuals, $50.00; students, $15.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $7.50. Volumes available in microfilm from ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann
Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box
1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to the University of
Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new address.
Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, University of
Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
All inquiries about subscriptions and advertising should go to University of Illinois Press, 1325 S.
Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903, 217-333-0950; toll free 866-244-0626.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The
Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email:
bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2005 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Scott Menchin from Wiggle ©2005. Used by permission of Atheneum Books
for Young Readers.
JULY/AUGUST 2005 
* 475
THE BIG PICTURE
Wiggle
by Doreen Cronin; illus. by Scott Menchin
Got a crowd of children who can't sit still? Have we got a readaloud for you! In
this exuberant picture book from the author of Caldecott Honor book Click, Clack,
Moo: Cows That Type (BCCB 9/00), bouncy, galloping meter and a beaglish ca-
nine protagonist encourage listeners to wiggle, wiggle, wiggle through the day.
Leading off with the questions "Do you wake up with a wiggle?/ Do you
wiggle out of bed?", the book explores a whole catalogue of ways to wiggle-the
jolly mutt wiggles (or considers wiggling) with gorillas, with his breakfast, in his
polka-dotted underwear, and on the moon. Compact tetrameter alternates freely
between questions ("Can you wiggle with your toys?"), advice ("Wiggle slowly
when with polar bears"), and invitation ("Would you join me for a wiggle?"), with
tongue-twisting repetition and alliteration combining with funny references to
maximize the silliness quotient. The final pages, spattered with stars and sporting
a snoring sleeper, end the book with a bedtime comment: "I think we're out of
wiggles now./ See you wiggle soon!" In spite of the book's obvious narcoleptic
intentions, the vivacious rhymes have such an energetic message that it will be
difficult to get listeners to sit still during the reading, much less fall asleep soon
afterward. That's all right, because there are plenty of other times that would be
improved with a good wiggle, and sometimes a rowdy pre-bedtime wiggle is just
what the doctor/dad/babysitter ordered.
For all their wiggly intentions, the illustrations are crisp and clear, con-
fining their wiggle-indicating to flurries of movement lines and a generous sense of
joyous urgency. The assertively uncluttered, digitally rendered illustrations in sunny
golds and lemons over complementary pastel backgrounds command attention
from a distance, a real boon to large readaloud audiences. The spreads make clever
use of texture and visual depth through the use of scattered photographs of real
objects interspersed on several planes with cartoon drawings that feature offset,
colored fill, lending the impression of movement to most of the spreads. (Para-
doxically, more peaceful layouts feature the likes of gaping-mouthed crocodiles
and a pride of polar bears.) The wide-eyed, large-bodied figures evince a stream-
lined yet solid charm reminiscent of P. D. Eastman's characters, adding to the
humorous appeal.
The real power of this book lies in the fact that it absolutely nails its
preschool audience: images, text, and message are perfectly aimed at delighting
bouncy youngsters with surprises and laughter, and the experience only gets better
with repeated reading-even the adults present will want to shake out a wiggle or
two. This effervescent offering simply howls for listeners and viewers to shimmy
along, preferably at every storytime over the course of a season ... or many sea-
476 
* THE BULLETIN
sons. With the magnetic appeal of its bold illustrations and chantable rhymes, this
could well be the book remembered and sought out in decades to come, when our
present young ones are toting around their own toddlers.
It's a wiggle worth sharing again and again. Get plenty of copies in rough-
and-tumble covers for lending, and after storytimes, expect to hear listeners chant-
ing the text from memory as they trundle away. (Imprint information appears on
p. 485.)
Timnah Card, Reviewer
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
AMATO, MARY 
The Naked Mole-Rat Letters. Holiday House, 2005 
[266p]
ISBN 0-8234-1927-4 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Only a few weeks into seventh grade, Frankie is already learning things she'd rather
not know-what it's like to not get the lead in a play, for example, or (even worse)
that your widower dad is secretly falling in love with someone in far-off Washing-
ton, D.C. Rather than let her world fall apart, normally honest Frankie begins
snooping in her father's email and eavesdropping on his phone calls. What she
finds out-that her dad is long-distance dating Ayanna Bayo, the naked-mole-rat
keeper at the National Zoo, whom he met on a business trip-soon has her skip-
ping school, forging email, and lying to her friends, teachers, and neighbors in
order to thwart the course of true love. Quirky and self-absorbed, Frankie is a
drama queen who will stop at nothing to ensure a desired outcome. Her frustrated
yet affectionate interactions with her two pesky younger brothers give her emo-
tional roundness, and romantic developments with the town bad boy are a fitting
catalyst for her eventual acceptance of the zookeeper as a potential friend, evident
in her journal entries and her continuing email to Ayanna (and Ayanna's graceful
responses). Frankie's small town is just the kind of place to seethe with the gossip
that brings Frankie's high flights to ground; meanwhile, the open ending, in which
the future of her father's relationship with Ayanna remains unresolved, is satisfy-
ing in its thematic conclusion and its realism. Over the top as Frankie is, her drive
and humanity are captivating, and her nonstop, exponentially compounded mis-
steps make a humdinger of a story. Admirers of Sharon Creech will sign right up
for this one. TC
ANDERSON, M. T. 
The Serpent Came to Gloucester; illus. by Bagram
Ibatoulline. 
Candlewick, 2005 
[40p]
ISBN 0-7636-2038-6 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-6
Between the summers of 1817 and 1818, sightings of an apparently playful sea
serpent were reported along the Massachusetts seaboard, sightings that were un-
JULY/AUGUST 2005 
* 477
usual not for their object but, as the closing note observes, "only because so many
people saw the monster." In 1817, people adopted a live-and-let-live approach,
but the following summer fishermen went out for the hunt, harpooning what they
were certain was the creature but finally pulling a mere mackerel onto the shore.
Anderson revisits the event through the memory of an old man, whose recollection
takes the form of a ballad shared with his grandson. The author brings effective
pacing and flashes of potent imagery to his storytelling, but his reluctance to ad-
here to a consistent scheme of rhyme or rhythm is a mixed blessing. Readers are
spared what could be a lengthy stretch of monotonous doggerel, but those at-
tempting a readaloud will occasionally find challenges: "When it left, we were
sorry and sulked./ We sat on the piers and the docks./ As the haddock were
caught and the boats were caulked,/ We looked for the beast from our widow's
walks." Ibatoulline's acrylic gouache illustrations are more uniformly successful,
from the Delft-tile-styled endpapers to the painterly town- and seascapes rendered
in the sober browns and muted blues of Dutch and Flemish masters but bright-
ened with gentle humor in the portrayal of Gloucester's startled, breathless citi-
zens. Middle-graders on patrol for sea monsters should, overall, be well pleased
with this tale "from the ancient and wrinkled old sea." EB
ARAKI, MIE 
Kitten's Big Adventure; written and illus. by Mie Araki. 
Gulliver/
Harcourt, 2005 
40p
ISBN 0-15-216738-2 
$15.00 
R 
1-4 yrs
Responding to her mother's invitation to look at a purple butterfly passing by the
window, a kitten goes off into the great big world to catch the winged creature.
This proves a considerable task, as the butterfly is always just a little too high or too
low, and despite the kitten's advances, she can't seem to paw it down. When the
butterfly ducks into the open window and passes behind the fishbowl, it is magni-
fied to an enormous size, and a freaked-out kitten ("Scaredy kitten!/ Raised-haired-
y kitten!/ Where-oh-where-is-Mama kitten!") goes flying back to the safety of her
mother's side. Both tone and premise resemble Henkes' Caldecott-winning Kitten's
First Full Moon (BCCB 3/04); the tension of a world that is both enormously
exciting and a little bit scary propels the simple plot, and the softly cadenced rhyme
matches the tiptoed advances of the young kitten. Using ink on watercolor paper,
Araki employs water for most of her shading, dropping blobs of moisture onto
fields of color and allowing the patchy results to add dimension to the simple
illustrations. Thick black outlines, white space, and an abundance of energetic
swooshes around the action imbue the tale with a sense of vigor while still main-
taining its intimate premise. The gentle trajectory of the kitten's efforts and ulti-
mate surrender are perfectly matched to the eager advances of a toddler, and little
ones are certain to identify with her bravado. HM
AUSEON, ANDREW 
Funny Little Monkey. 
Harcourt, 2005 
298p
ISBN 0-15-205334-4 
$17.00 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Fourteen, "freakishly short," and bullied by his monstrously large twin brother,
Kurt, Arty Moore has had enough. He decides to brave the bowels of his high
school to enlist the help of a boy he calls Kerouac, only to find that Kerouac heads
a shadow organization called Affront, which regularly takes on assignments to help
people with problems similar to Arty's. They've just been waiting for Arty to ask,
and they eagerly launch a revenge plot against Kurt, as well as welcoming Arty into
478 
* THE BULLETIN
their community, gaining him an unprecedented measure of popularity. Mean-
while, the rich, mysterious Leslie, "a girl with a body like a centerfold and a brain
like a search engine," has unfathomably started to pay attention to Arty. Arty
doesn't question these boons nearly closely enough, and as a result he learns more
about the subtleties of bullying than he bargained for. Auseon writes with a sar-
donic tone and an ear for the odd detail reminiscent ofM. T. Anderson; the text is
peppered with postmodern, thematically resonant weirdnesses, like the theft and
lynching of a large statue of a boxing turtle, a walk-in freezer off Leslie's kitchen
full of frozen animal corpses, and strange high-school denizens inhabiting strange
dens. Arty's voice has the sideways anger and ironic self-awareness of a hyper-
intelligent kid with a physiology that prevents him from being taken seriously.
Kurt, as it turns out, is more complex and vulnerable than Arty realizes, and be-
tween conversations with Kurt and with Kerouac, Arty learns that, even though he
is small and he has undoubtedly been victimized, he is also more than capable of
being a bully himself. This twist on the typical bully tale would partner well with
Cormier's The Chocolate War (BCCB 7/74), Gardner's InventingEliot (3/04), and/or
Giles' Shattering Glass (5/02) to provoke multifaceted discussions about the thin
line between victim and bully. KC
BELL, HLARI 
Rise ofa Hero. Simon, 2005 
4 62p
ISBN 0-689-85415-3 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Newly invaded by the military might of the Hrum Empire (modeled on that of the
ancient Romans), the Middle-Eastern-style land of Farsala is left without its former
ruling class, the deghans, in this second volume of the Farsala Trilogy (following
Fall ofa Kingdom). The few hundred deghan warriors who survived the Battle of
the Sendar Wall skulk in hiding while Jiaan, the bastard half-peasant son of their
dead commander, does his best to rebuild their strength. His half-sister, the deghass
Soraya, works covertly as a kitchen maid in the main Hrum encampment, trying
to track down her enslaved mother and little brother. Kavi, the peasant peddler
who betrayed their father's battle plans to the Hrum in the previous volume, now
works as a double agent, pretending to spy for the Hrum while in reality organiz-
ing an efficient resistance movement. Chapters devoted to each of the primary
characters are told from their points of view; occasional insertions from a myth-
like retelling (which interprets events very differently than do the character-fo-
cused chapters) call into question the validity of the mythical version. Emphasis is
placed instead on the experiences of the three young people whose exploits give rise
to the myth in later years. The characters learn and grow in exciting and realistic
ways throughout their ordeals, and their individual paths are handily and persua-
sively interwoven. The result is a compelling and thought-provoking exploration
of the nature of narrative as well as a full-bodied adventure-fantasy novel. A map is
included. TC
BLUMENTHAL, KAREN 
Let Me Play: The Story of Title IX, the Law That Changed
the Future ofGirls in America. Atheneum, 2005 
152p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-689-85957-0 
$17.95 
R 
Gr. 9-12
If it came as a surprise to Oregon Senator Ron Wyden, 2002 chairman of the
Senate's Science and Technology Subcommittee, that Title IX was more than a
sports law, can most citizens be blamed for equating it solely with the fate of women's
athletics? Blumenthal goes a long way toward dispelling this misconception, re-
JULY/AUGUST 2005 
* 479
minding readers of its original mission within a larger 1972 Education Amend-
ments bill, to assure that "no one could be closed out of any educational program
or activity receiving federal money simply because of sex." After explaining the
genesis of the legislation and describing the political machinations of its champi-
ons and adversaries, Blumenthal discusses how evolving guidelines and interpreta-
tions brought girls' school athletic programs into its purview, and how periodic
retrenchments regarding Title IX threatened not only newly established sports
programs but the civil rights of minorities as well. Legal wrangling doesn't always
make captivating reading, and the profusion of boxed insets (which are vital to
absorbing the total picture of Title IX influence) distracts from the continuity of
the main text. Overall, though, there's a wealth of well-organized information
covered here, and the stories of individual battles won and lost and social com-
mentary in the form of popular cartoons help keep things light and lively. This is
essential, if challenging, reading for YAs concerned with athletic and academic
gender equity and, with its ample bibliography, annotated source notes, and in-
dex, an excellent springboard for further research. EB
BOOTH, MARTIN 
SoulStealer. Little, 2005 
242p
ISBN 0-316-15591-8 
$14.99 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Twins Pip and Tim (from Doctor Illuminatus, BCCB 12/04) return for further
battles with malicious masterminds, aided by their friend, the six-hundred-year-
old boy Sebastian. Having defeated the evil alchemist de Loudeac over the sum-
mer, the sister and brother expect an uneventful entry into seventh grade. Instead,
their homeroom teacher, the chemistry master, turns out to be another power-
hungry holdover from the Middle Ages, and the class bully is his familiar, a Nean-
derthal-type known as a wodwo. The intrepid trio must first divine what these
mysterious villains are up to-plotting to flood the world with raw evil via the
power lines radiating from the Jasper Point nuclear plant-and then foil them
posthaste. Booth lets his main characters in for some actual slashing and hacking
this time, as the children repeatedly come face to face with the bad-tempered wodwo.
However, the story is laden with unnecessary excursions into mystical alchemical
tangents, making it more a tired theme park ride through a haunted mansion than
an adventure fantasy. Villains are all too easily defeated, and Sebastian's brief
undercover stint as a "normal" seventh-grader fails to mine much humor from the
situation. Nonetheless, a surprise showing by de Loudeac sufficiently maintains
the narrative line begun in the first book to engage many continuing readers, and
the promise of a third title will keep appetites whetted. An author's note gives
some historical background. TC
BURCHILL, JULIE 
Sugar Rush. 
HarperTempest, 2005 
[288p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-077620-X 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-077619-6 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 9-12
After her careless mother leaves the family, fifteen-year-old Kim is forced to change
schools: she goes from private Preston High to public Ravendene Comp, where
"all the girls were on the Pill at eleven; all the boys skilled thieves and fraudsters
by... twelve." Then she and her best Preston friend have a spat that leads to
Kim's artful adoption of a new best friend at Ravendene-Maria "Sugar" Sweet.
Entranced by Sugar's high-adrenaline, lowbrow life, good-girl Kim gets sucked
480 
* THE BULLETIN
into Brighton's underground party scene, where the drinks and drugs are second
in intoxication only to Sugar herself. Soon, Kim and Sugar are lovers as well as
friends, but sex clearly means different things to each of them: for Kim, it's about
love; for Sugar, it's about fun. The more possessive Kim becomes, the more slip-
pery Sugar gets, until the only thing the Gordian knot of their relationship can do
is snap. This candid look at loyalty and betrayal among teenage girls of different
economic classes and races nails several characteristics of its subject, from the spot-
on description of adults who try too hard to be hip, to the in-depth analysis of
friendships that require either "worship or all-out war," to the sharp, contemptu-
ous way the girls deal with each other. Yet none of the girls are as shallow as they
appear, especially Sugar, who despite her rapacious glee is also one of the most
vulnerable, enigmatic, and honest of the characters. Burchill's heavily British prose
is fast, breezy, and sometimes disorganized, but just like the characters, it flaunts
itself as the latest thing. The rather anticlimactic finish aside, this is a sometimes
gritty, sometimes glossy look at love and friendship. KH
BYRD, ROBERT, ad. 
The Hero and the Minotaur: The FantasticAdventures of Theseus;
ad. and illus. by Robert Byrd. 
Dutton, 2005 
[4 0p]
ISBN 0-525-47391-2 
$17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Theseus, secretly the son ofAegeus, king ofAthens, grows to be a brave and some-
what reckless youth before leaving home to meet his father in the city. On the
way, he overcomes several monstrous tyrants on the road, bringing his exploits to
the attention of Aegeus, who welcomes him with open arms, recognizing his son
by the golden sword and sandals he carries. Later, Theseus takes on the Minotaur
and frees the people of Athens from the gruesome sacrifice forced upon them by
King Minos-fourteen youths as fodder each year for the bloodthirsty beast who
lives in the labyrinth. Byrd's retelling is loosely constructed, with a bit of charac-
terization thrown in to tighten the slack threads; nevertheless, the tale is jauntily
presented in a literary style that is both lively and direct. The author even embroi-
ders this traditionally male-oriented tale (which leaves Ariadne to the amorous
advances of Dionysus while Theseus beats a hasty retreat back to Athens) with a
few pro-female embellishments to placate modern readers. The framing of the
story as an account of Poseidon's protection of Theseus works less well; the sea god
makes only a few brief appearances, mostly in the illustrations, in order to fore-
shadow his swift but late-in-the-game takedown of the giant bronze statue, Talus,
on Theseus' behalf. Byrd's line-and-watercolor illustrations, replete with wavering
hatching that gives the spreads depth, rely on sideways poses reminiscent of an-
cient pottery decoration that, paradoxically, serve to flatten the images. Hutton's
Theseus and the Minotaur (BCCB 10/89) may be a more dynamic treatment, but
this is an attractive, easily available option. TC
CHAMBERS, VERONICA 
Celia Cruz, Queen of Salsa; illus. by Julie Maren. 
Dial,
2005 
[40p]
ISBN 0-8037-2970-7 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 6-8 yrs
The charismatic chanteuse who helped mold the character of salsa music on the
world stage is the recipient of this reverent homage. The story follows Cruz from
her childhood in Havana, through her difficult choice between singing and teach-
JULY/AUGUST 2005 
* 481
ing careers, and on to her international distinction as a powerful artist whose vocal
zest, richness, and flair continues to win dedicated listeners even after her death in
2003. The prose occasionally dips into the saccharine, especially in Celia's mus-
ings, but it also incorporates some evocative imagery ("But when she sang... Her
father heard thunder. Her cousins heard the call of the sea. Her neighbors heard
a hummingbird"). Though there's a little confusion in the timeline (an encourag-
ing comment from her conservatory professor is quoted before the book mentions
her admittance to Cuba's National Music Conservatory), the story effectively traces
the general outline of the superstar's life, and the author's enthusiasm for her sub-
ject and appreciation of her accomplishments lend verve to the chronicle. The
mixed-media illustrations feature a palette of deep, rusty browns and hot mango,
lime, and turquoise that suits the rustic style of the figures and the Caribbean focus
of the text. Cutouts of printed music staves punctuate the vibrantly colored scenes,
emphasizing at every turn Cruz's dedication to the vocal art that made her famous.
This respectful offering will make a useful companion to Brown's bilingual My
Name Is Celia/Me Ilamo Celia or standalone introduction for kids who've not yet
encountered this musical icon. No sources are given, but an author's note, glos-
sary, and selected discography are included. TC
CLEE, PAUL 
Before Hollywood: From Shadow Play to the Silver Screen. 
Clarion,
2005 
[19 2p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-618-44533-1 
$22.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-12
Whereas many film history books focus on stars and auteurs, glitzy special effects,
or the evolving technical cornucopia of cameras and sound recording, Clee traces
the myriad forms of visual entertainment that influenced modern cinema. Even
more importantly, he evokes the kinship between modern moviegoers and their
forebears-the mutual eagerness to be tricked by visual illusion, the common de-
mand for increasing realism, the same restlessness to move on to the next novelty.
Although technical advances are clearly explained, readers are likely to deem more
memorable the descriptions of audience reaction to the inverted still images in the
fifteenth-century camera obscura, the panic engendered by projections of raised
spirits at eighteenth-centuryphantasmagoria, the mind-boggling handcraftmanship
that produced nineteenth-century panoramas, and early twentieth-century reform-
ers' efforts to censor "naughty" nickelodeons. Clee screeches to a halt with the
nascent film industry's move to Hollywood but leaves readers with a rich lode of
end materials for further research, rounding out book sources with a host of web-
sites and clear annotations concerning their scope and navigation. Black-and-
white photos and reproductions abound, and an index will be included. The 791s
simply cahn 't live without this, dahling. EB
CLINTON, CATHERINE 
Hold the Flag High; illus. by Shane W. Evans. 
Amistad/
Tegen/HarperCollins, 2005 
[3 2p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-050429-3 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-050428-5 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
6-lOyrs
Of the many tales of valor emerging from both camps of the Civil War, the doomed
attack of the Massachusetts 54th on Confederate Fort Wagner ranks among the
most celebrated. Under command of Colonel Robert Gould Shaw, the regiment
482 
* 
THE BULLETIN
of African-American soldiers demonstrated to skeptical countrymen their fierce
determination to fight for their own cause. The book follows freedman William
Carney into the battle as, suffering from multiple wounds, he keeps the Union flag
in view of his comrades and raises it over the South Carolina fort. Clinton spins
the tale with some obvious fictionalization, particularly pre-battle dialogue, and
lays the patriotic sentiment on thickly: "'Sure, son, keep your eyes on the flag,' said
Carney. 'Like hundreds before us and thousands after, just follow those Stars and
Stripes, and you can't go wrong.'" Evans' heavily brushed paintings pursue the
same tack, posing soldiers against minimal backgrounds in compositions more
reminiscent of monumental statuary than living warriors. The Union defeat and
retreat speed by so quickly that listeners may need to be reminded by the ending
notes or an alert adult that the Massachusetts 54th did not, in fact, carry the day
and that the stricken Carney does survive the engagement. Nonetheless, Clinton
renders a welcome service in bringing this story to a young audience, and the title
should be a useful addition to Veterans Day programming. EB
CODELL, ESME RAJI 
Diary of a Fairy Godmother; illus. by Drazen
Kozjan. 
Hyperion, 2005 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-7868-0965-5 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Mere months before graduation from charm school, gifted witch Hunky Dory
discovers a more satisfactory way to use her impressive powers: fairy godmothering.
To the despair of her teacher, her friends, and her mother-who has made a habit
of bragging that Hunky will be "the wickedest witch wherever the four winds
blow"-Hunky renounces witchery and takes up wishery, bestowing good gifts on
everyone she can get her hands on. To her credit, Hunky soon realizes that giving
people whatever they wish for isn't always wise, and that some wishes are best
fulfilled through individuals' own hard work. Also, her own training in wicked
witchcraft and her understandable desire to give the undeserving their just deserts
keep interfering with her newly acquired do-gooder instincts, and her solitary situ-
ation-no longer witch, not yet an F.G.-leaves her unbearably lonely. Hunky's
first-person narration strikes a balance between snarkiness and geniality that sets
the stage for her later side-switching and eventual confused ambivalence toward
both career paths. Snicker-worthy commentary peppers the pages, and the witches'
contraryish customs for expressing approval and affection (i.e., insults, complaints,
and the hurling of projectiles) add a welcome dash of stoogery. Unfortunately,
Hunky's philosophical ponderings slow the pace without developing her into a
well-rounded character, and the plot loses steam once Hunky leaves the high-
concept, wittily chronicled charm school. Fortunately, the story has enough jo-
vial conflict, gleeful intertextuality, and tasty quips that readers may still enjoy her
journey. Reviewed from an unillustrated galley. TC
COLLARD, SNEED B., III 
The Prairie Builders: ReconstructingAmerica's Lost Grass-
lands; written and illus. with photographs by Sneed B. Collard III. 
Houghton,
2005 
72p 
(Scientists in the Field)
ISBN 0-618-39687-X 
$17.00 
R Gr. 5-8
In a fortunate alignment of ambition and opportunity, Congressman Neal Smith,
who wished to restore native flora and fauna in his home state of Iowa, acquired a
large tract of cornfields in the 1980s and mustered federal support to open the
JULY/AUGUST 2005 
* 483
National Wildlife Refuge that now bears his name. Collard traces the efforts of
two of the many naturalists who have helped reconstruct the region into a native
tallgrass prairie. Once the land was thoroughly cleared and roads were rerouted,
botanist Pauline Drobney directed the identification, collection, and replanting of
indigenous seeds. With the grasslands and wooded savanna areas established, but-
terfly specialist Diane Debinski undertook the reintroduction of the dwindling
Regal Fritillary, devising strategies to promote their propagation among the now
flourishing wildflowers. There's far more to involve reader interest than dropping
seeds and shoots into the ground: controlled burns fertilize the soil and control
non-native flora; volunteer "seed seekers" roam the railroad right-of-ways for over-
looked plants; unusually rainy seasons threatened to drown the newly planted prairie;
and stubborn Regals cagily hide their eggs out of sight of vigilant scientists. Col-
lard occasionally misses an explanation (readers may ponder whether "dancing the
seeds" into the ground is a folk ritual or a tamping measure), and pictures some-
times stumble into position a page after the text reference, but these minor mis-
steps do not hinder appreciation of the complexities of land reclamation. With
the profusion of crisp photographs of the prairie in glorious bloom, readers may be
tempted to keep this title tightly closed during allergy season. Glossary, index, and
sources are appended. EB
CONLY, JANE LESLIE 
In the Night, on Lanvale Street. 
Holt, 2005 
250p
ISBN 0-8050-7464-3 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 6-8
Charlie (short for Charlene) and her best friend, Shannon, have had the run of
their Baltimore neighborhood as long as they can remember. Lately, though, drug
dealers have claimed the corner of Lanvale and Belair, and Charlie's neighbor, Mr.
Healy, has been found shot to death on his front porch. Only Jim (a mentally ill
former tenant of Mr. Healy's) is determined to track down Mr. Healy's killers, and
he enlists the help of Charlie and her seven-year-old brother, Jerry, to gather
testimony from frightened witnesses and to deliver calls for repentance to the dealers
themselves. The eeriness of Charlie's encounters with the Second Coming-obsessed
Jim and of her brother Jerry's unquestioning acceptance of all Jim tells him shrouds
the daily rhythms of life on Lanvale Street in danger and mystery. Jim's illness,
combined with the other adults' unwillingness to admit that anything is wrong on
their street, keeps Charlie (and the reader) wondering whom to trust-especially
when it becomes apparent that local boys were involved in the murder (and the
drug dealing) and that Charlie's trusted adult friends, fearing reprisals, are covering
up for them. Jim's fanaticism, Charlie's own Catholicism, and her friend Shannon's
atheism offer the girls opportunities to explore questions of right, wrong, justice,
and divine intervention in a natural context, while a tragic turn of events underscores
the need to take a stand and take action even when answers to those questions are
not easily available. The novel's meditative, measured pace allows the beauty of
Charlie's life on Lanvale Street to permeate even scenes of destruction, emphasizing
that this inner-city quarter is worth fighting to save. Readers looking for thoughtful
detective stories with a dab of psychological drama will settle right in. TC
CONSTABLE, KATE 
The Waterless Sea. 
Levine/Scholastic, 2005 
314p
ISBN 0-439-55480-2 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Heben, an exile from one of the Seven Clans who rule the desert isle of Merithuros,
is saved from pirate slavers by a group of magic-using chanters that includes Calwyn
484 
* THE BULLETIN
(from The Singer ofAll Songs), a gifted chanter with a talent for learning new kinds
of magic. Eager for aid but still suspicious of his rescuers' talents, Heben recruits
the chanters to help him save his brother and sister from imprisonment and death
on Merithuros for the crime of using their magical gifts; in the process of their
rescue, however, the chanters destroy the center of government and incite an ap-
parently long-overdue civil war. Only a great sacrifice by Calwyn can heal the soul
and ease the thirst of the parched land itself-a sacrifice which takes from her
everything she holds most dear. Beginning several months after the previous title
in the Chanters of Tremaris trilogy, this volume alternates between the challenges
facing Calwyn and her group and the solitary reminiscing of Calwyn's love inter-
est, Darrow, over his troubled childhood and adolescence. Two themes run through
the tale: the liberation of chanters from the limits placed on them by centuries-old
prejudice, and the death of the land of Merithuros as a result of its owners' wanton
ecological malpractices. While the first theme appears in many different situa-
tions, the second is concentrated in the illness and near-death of Calwyn and one
of her friends, a narrow focus that may cause that particular struggle to seem melo-
dramatic. In addition, the blandness of Calwyn's character may distance some
readers from the impact of her loss-especially since it seems highly likely she'll get
it all back (and then some) in the third book of the trilogy. Still, fantasy lovers will
recognize in this fast-moving epic a substantial offering in the traditional style. A
map is included. TC
Cox, JUDY 
That Crazy Eddie and the Science Project of Doom; illus. by Blanche
Sims. 
Holiday House, 2005 
[88p]
ISBN 0-8234-1931-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Matt and his best friend, Eddie, make a papier-machd volcano for the upcoming
third-grade science fair, but illness keeps Matt home one day after they build the
model. When he returns to school, he is greeted by catcalls of "Diarrhea Boy"-as
it turns out, hisformer best friend has let slip exactly why Matt was home. Hugely
embarrassed, Matt storms home and cuts the volcano model in two, presenting
Eddie with his half and a warning to stay away. The fair is just a few days away,
but neither boy can enter with only half a volcano, which means that Matt won't
win any prize money for a new skateboard and Eddie won't get the fifty extra-
credit points he needs to pass science class. Providentially, Eddie's little sister
needs rescuing from the roof, so the two friends have an easy way to mend their
relationship. Matt is a lively, sympathetic protagonist, and his mixed feelings about
his friend will find resonance with many readers. His verbal attack on Eddie in the
cafeteria after the diarrhea incident is overly dramatic, and there's convenience in
the boys' post-fair realization that friendship is more important than winning, but
Cox as usual captures the middle-grades world with vividness and sympathy. Eddie
is clearly a live-wire with a shortage of impulse control, the kind of kid who's both
an appealing and a troublesome friend; the ease with which the friends renew their
amity is consistent with the minor character of Eddie's infraction, and it's also
realistic that the boys' unimaginative project doesn't win any prizes. Sims' pencil
illustrations display rumpled, round-faced children with gawky, age-appropriate
energy. That goofy vivacity blends well with the breeziness of the story, creating a
book many children will enjoy. Instructions for making an erupting model vol-
cano are included. TC
JULY/AUGUST 2005 
* 485
CRONIN, DOREEN 
Wiggle; illus. by Scott Menchin. 
Atheneum, 2005 
34 p
ISBN 0-689-86375-6 
$12.95 
R 
2-4 yrs
See this month's Big Picture, p. 475, for review.
DALEY, MICHAELJ. 
Space Station Rat. Holiday House, 2005 
[182p]
ISBN 0-8234-1866-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Genetically modified for intelligence and trained for espionage, Rat can read, type,
use tools, and communicate with humans in a customized sign language; she can
also reason and plan, abilities she relied upon when escaping from the lab where
she was trained. During that escape, a wrong turn led Rat into the docked space
station, where she was trapped when the station went into orbit. Now the station's
waste-management system has reported stolen food, gnawed wires have been dis-
covered, and the station's defense robot has been sent to destroy Rat. Luckily, two
of the scientists have brought their twelve-year-old son, Jeff, with them, and in the
course of Rat's frantic evasion of the robot, Jeff is moved to intervene and save her
life (causing the robot a meltdown). Told alternately from Rat's and Jeffs points
of view, this succinct space adventure treats both rodent and human concerns with
respect, anthropomorphizing Rat only so much as is reasonable considering her
unique genetic makeup. In fact, it is Rat's instincts as well as her intelligence that
enable her to trust Jeff, an authorial choice that gives the whole story the ring of
truth. Jeffs own motivation to treat Rat as an equal springs from his neglect by his
busy parents and his need for a friend, not a pet or a plaything. Even the secondary
players-Jeffs parents and the station captain-are given personalities, goals, and
frustrations that enhance the robustness of the story. Brought to life with sympa-
thetic characters, tight plotting, and brisk pacing, this far-out animal fantasy is
light-years ahead of the competition. TC
DEmNO, MARFt FERGUSON 
Genius: A Photobiography ofAlbertEinstein. National
Geographic, 2005 
63p 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-7922-9545-5 
$27.90
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7922-9544-7 
$17.95 
R Gr. 5-9
For middle-schoolers who associate Einstein with a wild mop of hair, an abstruse
equation, and the moniker "genius," Delano offers an appealing way to deepen the
acquaintance. Without glossing over the physics-in fact, she makes a valiant
effort to explain the theories that space and time are relative to the observer and
that "there is a vast amount of energy bound up in a tiny amount of mass"-she
focuses more on Einstein's insatiable curiosity and freewheeling imagination, which
led him to observe closely, and to think creatively, and ultimately to tip some
scientific sacred cows. Delano sensitively presents the personal side of his life as
well: his erratic success as a student, his renunciation of citizenships, his commit-
ment to Zionism, his broken marriage, the uncomfortable knowledge that his ca-
reer and fame stretched long past his most productive youthful years. The gallery
of gray- and sepia-toned photos selected for the volume also help humanize this
larger-than-life figure, as viewers see him lounging with his family, taking his oath
of U.S. citizenship, posing in a feathered headdress with a group of Hopi, or merely
scratching his chin in front of a messy desk. The chronology, resource list, and
index will be of service to report writers, but general readers may find this biogra-
phy surprisingly approachable as well. EB
486 
* THE BULLETIN
DENDY, LESLIE 
Guinea Pig Scientists: Bold Self-Experimenters in Science and Medi-
cine; by Leslie Dendy and Mel Boring; illus. by C. B. Mordan and with photo-
graphs. 
Holt, 2005 
213p
ISBN 0-8050-7316-7 
$19.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-10
Science advances in different ways, with scientists sometimes serving as their own
subjects, and that's the focus of this collective overview. Dendy and Boring exam-
ine ten scientific advances that involved self-experimentation, such as investiga-
tions of human temperature and digestion, epidemiological exploration involving
self-inoculation with disease, and exposure to high speeds and deep water. Names
include the familiar (Pierre Curie) and the less famous, at least in the U.S. (Daniel
Carri6n, who died of his experiment with bartonellosis), locations vary from South
America to Europe to the U.S., and results range from the lethal to the relatively
benign. Thorough research, including primary material and interviews where fea-
sible, informs each chapter and helps provide detail. Unfortunately, the writing is
uneven, sometimes inclining toward choppiness and sometimes rendering con-
cepts unclearly, and the occasional questionable assertion sneaks through (heart
catheterization doesn't actually seem to be "the most-used medical procedure" at
only a million per year); some of the figures discussed are rather a stretch, since
Marie Curie didn't deliberately self-experiment and Stefania Follini wasn't actu-
ally a scientist. Though the ethics of experimenting on animals are frequently and
sometimes digressively mentioned, there's little discussion of principle in experi-
mentation on humans in general, and questions about self-experimentation itself
are relegated to the conclusion. This is still an interesting examination of science
in the front lines, and budding experimenters will be intrigued to see the lengths to
which their predecessors have gone. Photographs and illustrations are scattered
throughout; a timetable is appended, along with an extensive bibliography, source
notes, and an index. DS
DICKINSON, JOHN 
The Widow and the King. 
Fickling, 2005 
[6 24 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-75085-4 
$20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-75084-6 
$18.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 7-12
In this sequel to The Cup of the World (BCCB 11/04), British author Dickinson
picks up his story of sorcery and war ten years after the violent death of Lady
Phaedra's husband, Ulfin, the Count ofTarceny. At that time, it was prophesied
that their son, Ambrose, would one day bring about the downfall of Paigan, the
Prince Under the Sky, a centuries-old sorcerer who used ambitious Ulfin as a pawn
in his game of destruction. Paigan, who had been trapped by Phaedra in a stone
circle, has since broken free, and his escape sends now-twelve-year-old Ambrose
scrambling across the Kingdom, pursued by soldiers and sorcerer, to the fortress of
the Widow of Develin, who keeps a house of learning. Eventually, even this bas-
tion of peace fails to stand against the military strife stirred up by the poisonous
Paigan, and Ambrose returns to Tarceny, where he raises his father's banner and
declares his identity as the rightful heir. Ambrose's entirely credible growth within
several months from a rather bratty child to a naive but honorable ruler and truth-
seeker is one of the crowning achievements of this remarkable narrative. The other
is the development of Sophia, daughter of the Widow of Develin, from a deter-
mined but selfish adolescent to a formidable head of state who offers the Kingdom
a more secure future. Readers seeking romance will savor the poignancy of Sophia's
JULY/AUGUST 2005 
* 487
tragic affair with a man doomed to fall to Paigan; Ambrose, who sees Paigan clearly
when others cannot, provides a reflective focus, fighting evil with truth and later
poising himself for a solitary, wandering life, offering unbiased judgments to all
who will hear him. This hefty tome effectively uses every one of its pages, spinning
a delicately interconnected tale that gratifies on multiple levels and forming a lu-
minous and memorable high fantasy story. Maps are included. TC
FRANK, LucY 
Lucky Stars. Jackson/Atheneum, 2005 
[304p]
ISBN 0-689-85933-3 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-7
Told alternately from Kira's and Jake's points of view, this novel of middle-school
tribulations and romance begins when Kira's shiftless musician father invites her
to New York City for a visit, then saddles her with caring for his two young sons
and singing in the subway to make money to support all four of them. Jake,
skipping class in order to escape a domineering English teacher determined to
break him of his stuttering, is enthralled by Kira's powerful voice when he hears
her sing. Kira then shows up as a new student at his school-having told off her
father and arranged for a more normal life for herself-giving Jake the opportu-
nity to make friends with her. Inspired by Kira's skill and his own long-buried
desire to sing, Jake negotiates a class schedule change so that he and his best friend
(noisy, smart-mouthed, good-hearted Eugene Kim) can join chorus along with
Kira. The convoluted, tension-filled climbing action and the growth of romantic
feelings between Jake and Kira are deeply grounded in skillful characterization-
both of them convincingly step up to the plate to determine their own fates, in
spite of the bumbling efforts of the adults surrounding them. Best friend Eugene,
who functions as both a facilitator and an obstructionist throughout the novel,
takes over as storyteller for the final chapters, and his voice instills verisimilitude
into an ending-in which he settles for a secondary role in the triad-that other-
wise might have seemed overly pat. These plucky characters rival those of Joan
Bauer, and they will find admirers aplenty among her fans. TC
FUNKE, CORNELIA 
Pirate Girl; tr. from the German by Chantal Wright; illus. by
Kerstin Meyer. 
Chicken House/Scholastic, 2005 
[32p]
ISBN 0-439-71672-1 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 5-7 yrs
Captured by pirate captain Firebeard and pressed into labor aboard the Horrible
Haddock, young Molly refuses to give in to threats or queries for her parents' con-
tact information so a ransom can be demanded: "If I told you my mother's name,
you'd be so scared, you'd cry like a baby!" Instead, Molly peels potatoes by day
and sends off bottled messages by night, while the pirates are sleeping off their
evening revels. Her rebellion nearly lands her in the drink, but just in time the
lookout sights another ship-that of Barbarous Bertha, a pirate queen whose name
fills Molly's captors with terror and despair. Bertha is, of course, Molly's mom,
and Bertha's "ferocious crew" of don't-mess-with-me mamas quickly takes over
the Haddock and free the captive girl. This blithe yarn of piratical oneupmanship
carries overtones of Little Red Riding Hood (Molly was traveling to visit her grand-
mother with a basket of goodies), but the focus is all on the power of the resource-
ful and sinister females in the tale-pugnacious Molly more than holds her own
against Firebeard and his cronies until her scary mother appears on the horizon.
488 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Told in conversation-packed prose, the story rolls off the tongue; readers-aloud
with a penchant for the piratical "Aaargh!" will find numerous ideal opportunities
for inserting these throughout. The gouache and line illustrations of pudgy, pouty
Molly and the gangs of scraggly-limbed pirates deftly elaborate on the narration,
illustrating textual points but adding manifold sight gags that develop the charac-
ters and strengthen the punch of the climax (in which Molly's kidnappers cower
before her as she displays her dishwater hands to their discredit). Read this with
Oppel's equally entertaining Peg and the Whale (BCCB 7/00) for a side-splitting
salutation to strong-minded seafaring girls. TC
GARFIELD, HENRY 
My Father the Werewolf Jackson/Atheneum, 2005 
[240p]
ISBN 0-689-85180-4 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 6-9
While walking Pismo Beach one foggy night, Ken Paxton is attacked by a were-
wolf as his teenage children, Danny and Miranda, watch helplessly. Luckily, an
old man who's been tracking the monster is able to save Ken; unluckily, he cannot
stop Ken from now becoming a werewolf for three nights every month. To isolate
himself, Ken moves his family to Liverpool, Maine, where a nearby uninhabited
island provides a perfect hiding place during the change. Danny rows his father to
the island and back every full moon; while this keeps the town safe, the strain of
keeping the secret starts to show, and as winter descends with freezing wind and
ice, only time will tell if Ken will survive on the island alone. Garfield's werewolf
offering begins with a decidedly spooky, unhurried mood appropriate to its horror
vein, and the Maine landscape descriptions enhance the eeriness. However, its
fledgling credibility is wounded with the family's comically docile acknowledg-
ment of the existence of werewolves and Ken's resulting plight. Furthermore, the
generic third-person point of view doesn't connect with any of the characters,
preferring to report what they are thinking and doing without regard for develop-
ing distinct personalities; as a result, the events are observed from such a distance
that they feel paraphrased rather than experienced. Still, Garfield proves he can
write a taut thriller in the concluding third of the book when he tightens the story
to a close-up view of Danny and his faceoffwith his werewolf father over the safety
of the town. Readers who want more credible werewolves would do well to check
out Klause's Blood and Chocolate (BCCB 7/97), but those obsessed with monster
stories may nonetheless enjoy this tale's stately spookiness. KH
GUARENTE, G. A. 
Hook, Line & Sinker. 
Razorbill, 2005 
[208p]
Paper ed. ISBN 1-59514-011-5 
$7.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
Fifteen-year-old Fiona has a tankful of tropical fish in her bedroom, each bearing
the name of a boy who did her wrong. As the story opens, Fiona is purchasing a
new fish to symbolize the end of her latest relationship; upon exiting the pet store,
she runs into Ty, her best friend from elementary school whom she hasn't seen
since. Ty, now a total hottie, convinces Fiona to audition for a community theater
production of Grease. Unsurprisingly, she is immediately smitten, and so begins
the cycle of crush and disappointment (he's got a girlfriend, the sickeningly sweet
Carla from Fiona's class). The fish tank works to great effect as a device to explore
Fiona's romantic past, from Ska Boy, the spiky-haired band boy at the Jersey shore,
to #1 Sashimi, the hunk behind the sushi take-out counter at the mall. Through
JULY/AUGUST 2005 
* 489
the recaps, the reader gets to know Fiona, and her buoyant personality and self-
awareness make this a particularly pleasurable process. While Fiona does have a
best friend (and she is slowly developing a friendship with Carla, who isn't so bad
after all), her character's development is largely independent of anyone else; she is
boy-crazy and dramatic and confident, and these characteristics all work to great
effect in the course of the plot. A most satisfying ending (including a kiss with
Jonas, the boy who works at the pet store) caps off this all-around entertaining and
thoughtful exploration of one girl's search for the perfect catch. HM
HALA, 
ANN 
Siberia. Lamb, 2005 
[272p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90885-7 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-74650-4 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Halam returns to the theme of environmental responsibility (also explored in Tay-
lor Five, BCCB 3/04) with this science-fiction story about a future world so cold
that humans live in indoor cities and wild animals are extinct. Yet a way to bring
back the animals exists: scientists working for the government developed genetic
seed banks called Lindquist kits that hold the "seeds of all the wild animals that
once lived"; unfortunately, the government wanted the kits for another purpose,
and members who resisted have been killed or imprisoned. Little Rosita's parents
are two such people: her father has been murdered, and she and her mother are
sent to a prison camp outside the warm city in the freezing land beyond. There,
Rosita and her mother plan for the day when they will escape and deliver the
hidden kits to another city far across the ice, but after her mother is taken away,
Rosita reinvents herself, calling herself "Sloe" and becoming a cynic who no longer
believes in a better world. Still, Sloe is determined to honor her mother's wish-
but can she make the journey through the frozen wilderness alone? Sloe's world is
an extreme but telling extrapolation of environmental neglect, and her desperate
journey has enough tense moments, where Sloe must outwit indifferent or villain-
ous humans and battle harsh weather, to hold readers' attention. Sloe's matura-
tion from naive Rosita to a shrewd and determined girl is clearly shown, making
the success of her impossible journey believable. While the semi-scientific, semi-
magical Lindquist kits are compelling, they occasionally work a little too conve-
niently (i.e., the animals Sloe grows from the kits are always ones with the skills she
needs to extract herself from a dangerous situation), but this does not detract from
their purpose. Rather than tying up all loose ends, the conclusion offers instead a
more realistic and equivocal outcome, but readers who've followed Sloe's journey
will warm to the tentative hope for her world. KH
HEARN, JULIE 
The Minister's Daughter. Atheneum, 2005 
263p
ISBN 0-689-87690-4 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 7-12
In the England of 1645, twelve-year-old Nell, the granddaughter of the local cun-
ning woman, is a Merrybegot: a child who was conceived during the pagan ca-
vorting on the first of May and who is therefore sacred to the powers of nature.
Teenaged Grace, elder of two daughters of a Puritan minister and illicitly pregnant
by the blacksmith's son, cons her credulous younger sister, Patience, into blind
cooperation and stages a demonic possession to explain away her pregnancy, nam-
ing Nell as the witch responsible for the curse. Soon Nell has a noose around her
neck, and only a high-speed relay from piskies to fairies to young Charles II (pre-
490 
* THE BULLETIN
viously healed by Nell of a bullet wound) can save the young Merrybegot. Replete
with atmosphere and laden with fanciful interludes with crude piskies and heart-
less fairies, this is a historical fantasy to be reckoned with; even the highly improb-
able royal rescue is a thoroughly enjoyable romantic convention. Nell and Grace
are the hubs around which much of the action swirls, but it is quiet Patience who
provides ultimate closure. The primary story thread is told in present tense, alter-
nating with short chapters chronicling Patience's later confession to witch hunters
after her family has settled in Salem, Massachusetts. This split narration allows the
reader to see that "plain blank" Patience is intelligent, insightful, and persistent
enough to wait half a century to take revenge on the sister who manipulated her
into accusing an innocent girl. Simultaneously dramatic and frothy, and both
comforting and unnerving in its resolution, this tale of the minister's daughter is
really the story of three strong young women whose lives intertwine in disastrous
and provocative ways. An author's note gives historical background. TC
HEMPHILL, STEPHANIE 
Things Left Unsaid. Hyperion, 2005 
[272p]
ISBN 0-7868-1850-6 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
Junior year finds Sarah questioning her solid, unremarkable good-girl/high-achiever/
expectation-fulfilling role, at first because she astounds herself by tanking SAT
prep tests, but then because she makes a new friend, Robin (or, more accurately,
her new friend makes her). Robin is a rebellious chain-smoker who dresses all in
black and who cuttingly disdains just about everyone, and Sarah becomes her com-
pliant sidekick ("I am always given advice/ and I am always taking it") until Robin's
suicide attempt shocks Sarah into questioning their friendship and herself. The
free-verse poems that tell Sarah's story are subtle in their artistry and deft in their
phrasing; while the emotions are sometimes handled with a heavy hand, they're
pretty heavy emotions as Sarah negotiates her way past near-tragedy to self-defini-
tion. Hemphill conveys with particular perspicacity Sarah's believably compli-
cated, terrifically important relationship with all three of her friends (old friends
Amanda and Gina don't exactly mesh with Robin, increasing Sarah's anxiety level),
demonstrating the way friendships can ebb and flow, shape you and hurt you, and
effectively giving Sarah a history of adapting to her friends that makes her passive
acceptance of Robin's troubling ways almost inevitable. It's also credible that
Sarah's push towards autonomy from her parents doesn't actually correlate with
genuine independence or sense of self ("I am the perennial member of everything,/
the leader of nothing, not even myself"), which are slower in coming and harder in
earning. She's therefore a sympathetic protagonist with whom it's easy to identify,
and teens exploring their own shifting friendships and identities will relate to her
accessible verse story. DS
HILLMAN, LAURA 
I Will Plant You a Lilac Tree: A Memoir of a Schindler's List
Survivor. Atheneum, 2005 
243p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-689-86980-0 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 8-12
Between 1943 and 1945, Jewish teenager Hannelore Wolff moved in and out of
no fewer than eight concentration camps, ultimately surviving because her name
found its way onto Oskar Schindler's renowned list. While in the camps, Hannelore
met Dick Hillman, a Polish POW, and the two were married shortly after libera-
tion. This autobiographical memoir recalls the horror of Hillman's experiences as
JULY/AUGUST 2005 
* 491
well as her individual capacity to maintain some semblance of hope during the
darkest of times. Hannelore's physical movement through the story drives the
memoir; she is constantly facing a new set of circumstances, making new allies,
and attending to new jobs, and readers will find themselves deeply entrenched in
her day-to-day fight for existence. The love story of Hannelore and Dick is pow-
erfully recalled, and the juxtaposition of its tenderness and their horrific surround-
ings is quietly potent. Overall, though, the narrative is stilted, with choppy sentences
building on blunt statements, and while the frank tone is occasionally moving in
its very bluntness, more often it lacks emotional impact. Further, there is a repeti-
tion of details included in some recollections (the clothes she packed to bring to
the ghetto) and a complete lack of details in others (the explanation of Schindler's
list is very unclear), which may alternately overwhelm and confuse readers. The
story's content will undeniably pull readers in, however, and Hannelore's quiet
strength, as reflected in her narrative voice, could inspire enormous respect in con-
temporary audiences. A map is included. HM
HIRSCH, ODO 
Something's Fishy, Hazel Green. 
Bloomsbury, 2005 
207p
ISBN 1-58234-928-2 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Hazel Green (from Hazel Green, BCCB 10/03) returns to untangle another mys-
tery in this second in the series from Aussie author Hirsch. When a pair of gigantic
lobsters are stolen from Mr. Petrusca's shop, the fishmonger goes into a decline far
deeper than the theft warrants. While pestering Mr. Petrusca about his strange
depression, Hazel discovers that the genial middle-aged man feels like a failure not
just because his reputation as "The Fishmonger of Distinction" is besmirched, but
because the lobster thief left behind a note that the illiterate Mr. Petrusca could
not read. Humiliated, and fearful that his weakness will be discovered, he refuses
to tell anyone else about the note and swears Hazel to secrecy. In typical Hazel
Green style, she spills the beans to her primary confidantes: the florist, Mrs. Gluck,
and the brainiac boy known as the Yak. With the Yak by her side, Hazel solves the
mystery of the missing lobsters, and at Mrs. Gluck's insistence, she offers Mr.
Petrusca a way out of his self-imposed isolation. Hazel's highly populated neigh-
borhood-replete with friends and enemies of all ages-forms a setting that is
both comfortingly secure and socially complicated, qualities that infuse the story
with warmth and drama. Hazel herself is brash and witty, driven by curiosity,
honor, and loyalty, but at the same time she's refreshingly willing to lie to and
tease her friends just for the fun of it. However, Hazel can take it as well as dish it
out, and she must, since the secrets she keeps bring her some formidable peer
pressure. Reminiscent thematically of that middle-grade powerhouse Harriet the
Spy (BCCB 12/64), Hazel's latest quest for truth and justice shows her off as a
redoubtable, intelligent heroine, one readers will claim wholeheartedly as a stal-
wart friend. TC
HOOBLER, DOROTHY 
The Sword That Cut the Burning Grass; by Dorothy and
Thomas Hoobler. 
Philomel, 2005 
[22 4 p]
ISBN 0-399-24272-4 
$10.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
The fourth of the Hooblers' samurai mysteries (The Ghost in the Tokaido Inn,
BCCB 9/99, et. al) finds fourteen-year-old protagonist Seikei squarely in the cen-
ter of the action, with his patron Judge Ooka's role limited to sending him off on
492 
* THE BULLETIN
his latest adventure. The teenage emperor has suddenly refused to carry out his
duties, and without the regent's participation in the spring planting rituals, the
nation is in real danger of a failed harvest and widespread starvation. Seikei is
enlisted to visit the emperor and have a teen-to-teen talk with him about his re-
sponsibilities, but his mission takes a drastic turn when the emperor's highest-
ranked security minister instigates a plot to overthrow a powerful local lord, win
favor with the shogun, and keep the youthful emperor under his control. Al-
though readers who have come to expect some gripping fight scenes won't be
disappointed, the theme of noblesse oblige and coronation rituals steeped in ancient
mythology are equally engrossing. Established fans will be pleased to see Seikei
growing in confidence and maturity, and mystery aficionados ready to explore an
offbeat setting should be alerted to this successful series. EB
HOROWITZ, ANTHONY 
Raven's Gate. Scholastic, 2005 
[256p]
ISBN 0-439-67995-8 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Orphaned at age eight, juvenile delinquent Matt Freeman, now fourteen, is impli-
cated in the stabbing of a security guard. He is sent by a government agency to a
remote farm in the care of Mrs. Deverill, an evil old bat who uses witchcraft to
thwart Matt's every attempt to escape (and kill anyone who helps him). She and
the rest of her devil-worshipping village intend to sacrifice Matt on the Raven's
Gate, formerly an ancient stone circle but currently the site of an abandoned nuclear
plant, so that his blood will set free the Old Ones, all-powerful demons who make
modern ideas of the Devil look wimpy. Matt has been targeted by the worshippers
because he is one of the original Gatekeepers, now reborn-five powerful beings
who sent the Old Ones into another plane and sealed the Gate in ages past. Matt's
growing awareness of his own extrasensory and telekinetic powers adds tautness to
this deftly woven tale of prophecy, destiny, and near-apocalyptic struggle. While
some elements suggest Cooper's The Dark Is Rising series, Horowitz typically
includes modern technologies and government cover-ups, which meld unusually
well with their mythical backdrop; in that setting, the motivations of the disparate
characters appear natural, and Matt's eventual triumph over the powers that bind
him is riveting despite being foregone. The first in The Gatekeepers series, this
engrossing (and gory) fantasy will win fans from the get-go. TC
HUNTER, BERNICE THURMAN 
The Girls They Left Behind. Fitzhenry &
Whiteside, 2005 
[192p]
Papered. ISBN 1-55041-927-7 
$9.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Seventeen-year-old Beryl begins her diary, a bridesmaid's gift from her newly mar-
ried friend, in June of 1943, when most male friends her age begin to enlist in the
military and leave for postings in England. While Beryl is naturally concerned for
their safety, she's also quick to seize the opportunity to reinvent herself on the
wartime Canadian home front, affecting the name Natalie, taking a hiatus from
school to work in the armament industry, and rising to the rank of supervisor on
an aircraft line. Natalie's career advances, though, are clouded by news that her
beloved cousin Carmen is missing in action and presumed dead. Natalie is a con-
vincing diarist, more wrapped up in her own concerns regarding work and dates
and rationing than in patriotic ideals, and her pique at everything from lack of
JULY/AUGUST 2005 
* 493
steady dates to loss of her factory job to returning veterans rings true. Although
the chronology of the war lends some continuity to Natalie's story, no strong plot
line emerges to propel the action along. Carmen's miraculous reappearance at the
novel's conclusion seems a bit forced, and the author's daughter (who completed
the novel from a manuscript and notes left by her deceased mother) speculates that
the happy ending purposely "righted a terrible wrong"-the death of her own
cousin in World War II. This is a quick and undemanding offering, though, and
readers who may be daunted by denser historical fiction should breeze right through.
EB
JUSTER, NORTON 
The Hello, Goodbye Window; illus. by Chris Raschka. 
di Capual
Hyperion, 2005 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-7868-0914-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Nanny and Poppa spend most of their time in the kitchen, and when the story's
young protagonist arrives for a weekend visit, she always stops on the porch to
greet them through the big kitchen window. This window, however, is good for
many more things than greetings, both real (checking the weather in the morning)
and imagined (visiting with a Tyrannosaurus rex who, being extinct, doesn't come
around much). While the text is a little long and there is not much plot to this
playfully thoughtful celebration of childhood, Juster uses the physical window to
great effect in exploring the experience of staying with grandparents. Throughout
the child narrator's exposition on the window, she shares with the listeners her
observations about the house, and the items about which she comments are decid-
edly kid-oriented (the stepstool for washing her hands, the forbidden under-the-
sink cabinet). There is a delightful dose of preschooler ego ("When I get tired I
come in and take my nap and nothing happens until I get up") that is perfectly
matched by Raschka's chaotically uninhibited paintings, which similarly evoke a
kid-centered world. He uses color fearlessly to reflect the fantastical energy of the
child's narrative line, and his bold, splashy brushstrokes create an exciting and
fanciful world (though the facial expressions of the multiracial family are some-
times muddied in the process). This holds obvious potential as a story to be shared
by grandparents and grandchildren, but young audiences are likely to eagerly lis-
ten to anyone willing to read it to them. HM
KARAS, G. BRIAN 
On Earth; written and illus. by G. Brian Karas. 
Putnam,
2005 
32p
ISBN 0-399-24025-X 
$16.99 
R 
5-8 yrs
In Atlantic (BCCB 4/02), Karas treated the ocean, and now he's expanded to the
planet as a whole. In simple yet often lyrical prose, the book describes the Earth's
orbit, axial rotation, and axial tilt, explaining the effects we encounter in conse-
quence ("Shadows get long as day rolls into night.... Years go by, day by day. We
count them with calendars and candles"). Though young audiences may need a
little help in connecting the astronomical phenomena with their personal experi-
ence, the emphasis on the everyday (and everyyear) adds a homey touch to the
cosmic exploration. Karas' familiar illustrative informality, with naive touches in
draftsmanship and nubbly pencil textures roughening up the paint, additionally
renders the universe an accessible and even cozy place, while diagrams and visually
demonstrated concepts help convey the ideas. This would be a terrific introduc-
494 
* THE BULLETIN
tion to planetary science, especially suitable for sharing at sunrise or sunset or
while investigating the wonders of a globe. A succinct one-page overview closes
the book. DS
KIMMEL, ERIc A., ad. 
The Hero Beowulf illus. by Leonard Everett Fisher. 
Farrar,
2005 
32p
ISBN 0-374-30671-0 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Kimmel continues his project of introducing classic literature to young readers
(see Don Quixote and the Windmills, BCCB 7/04) with the epic tale of Beowulfs
battle with Grendel. Beowulfs early exploits involve killing trolls and sea serpents,
and when the young stalwart hears of the monster menacing Hrothgar's kingdom
of the Spear-Danes, he fearlessly takes off to vanquish Grendel or die in the at-
tempt. After giving up his armor so that no one can say he had an unfair advantage
over the loathsome beast, he begins his anxious night in Hrothgar's hall. When
Grendel appears, he mistakes the unarmed and seemingly sleeping Beowulf for an
easy meal, but he soon loses his appetite as he and Beowulf battle fiercely through
the night. The battle sees Beowulf the victor as Grendel's arm is wrenched from
his shoulder and the monster slinks into the marshes to meet his end. There is
nothing delicate or fussy about the illustrations; they have a chunky stolidity that
emphasizes the broad strokes of the tale and the boldness of the hero. Fisher spares
none of the horror as he shows the sea serpents munching on the men in their
mouths, the blood-stained waters as Beowulf hacks away at them, or the trium-
phant Beowulf waving Grendel's severed arm in victory as the monster slips away.
However, the gore is contained in relatively small stains of bright red and hinted at
in the vermilion endpapers. Beowulf has an appropriately clean-shaven, wide-
open Norwegian countenance with striking blue eyes, and while the monster devi-
ates somewhat from visual tradition, he is an aptly noxious green. The fatal ferocity
of the final battle is mostly left to the written text, which has a grim formality
throughout that suggests the high seriousness of Beowulfs quest. Readers with a
taste for mythic heroism and epic battle will find their appetites both whetted and
sated in one fell stroke here. A note provides sources and historical background.
KC
KRULL, KATHLEEN 
Leonardo da Vinci; illus. by Boris Kulikov. 
Viking,
2005 
[128p] 
(Giants of Science)
ISBN 0-670-05920-X 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
Krull inaugurates a new Giants of Science series, and if this volume is a reliable
indicator, readers can expect it to combine the depth of a standard-length children's
biography with the gossipy details that make her Lives of... titles (Lives ofExtraor-
dinary Women, BCCB 9/00, etc.) so popular. While many middle-schoolers will
recognize Leonardo as a painter who doodled remarkably prescient inventions on
the side (or, heaven help us, as the catalyst for The Da Vinci Code), Krull focuses
on his contributions to science, particularly his early use of what would later be
termed "scientific method," testing his ideas against real-world experience. At
Krull's hands, biography blitzes by at the speed of a well-paced novel, and Leonardo
emerges as a fully fleshed character: restless ("In a case, perhaps, of Renaissance
attention deficit disorder, he always wanted to be on to the next thing"), sexually
ambivalent, witty and well-liked, driven to explore subjects few natural philoso-
JULY/AUGUST 2005 
* 495
phers would tackle ("It is hard to exaggerate the creepiness of Leonardo's anatomy
studies"). Kulikov's full- and half-page black-and-white illustrations portray a gray-
bearded Leonardo exuding wide-eyed, childlike curiosity, who's equally at home
mounting an epic-scaled planetary entertainment for a wealthy patron or examin-
ing a draped cadaver in a shadowy, Gorey-esque stone chamber. Krull concludes
with notes on the diaspora of Leonardo's notebooks, a list of resources (with
children's works noted), and an index. This fairly begs to be booktalked, and it
just might lure some fresh readers over to the biography shelves. EB
LAKE, SANOE 
Surfer Girl: A Guide to the Surfing Life; by Sanoe Lake with Steven
Jarrett. 
Little, 2005 
144p 
illus. with photographs
Papered. ISBN 0-316-11015-9 
$12.99 
R Gr. 7-10
With a riot of color and an SUV full of fonts, surfer Lake regales surfer wannabes
with tons of big-sisterly advice on how to line up, literally and figuratively, with
the pack. There's a bit of boarding history and herstory, some tips on how to fit in
with the locals, fashion hints tailored to retaining one's suit amid bashing waves,
some serious consideration of surfing peril (from the remote possibility of shark
attack to the realistic threats of skin cancer, infections, assault by loose boards, and
come-ons by unwelcome guys), and a bevy of buff bods here for the emulating.
About two-thirds of the way through, Lake gets around to actual surfing instruc-
tion, and just deciphering the directions for moving from sitting to upright stance
while positioning the board in the sweetest part of a swell should convince readers
that this has as much chance of turning them into master shredders as Arthur
Murray footprints have of turning them into dancing queens. Still, Lake has a
pretty good grasp of her audience, inviting girls to "be a surfer, or just be like one,"
and her comments on etiquette and lingo (glossaries included) that play up the
need for courtesy and play down use of the term "dude" should minimize novice
faux pas. Grab the sunscreen and "go West, young woman." EB
LANE, 
DAKOTA 
The 
Orpheus 
Obsession. Tegen/HarperCollins,
2005 
[288p] 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-074174-0 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-074173-2 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 9-12
Sixteen-year-old Anooshka Stargirl and her older sister, ZZ Moon, have the acci-
dental fortune of meeting Orpheus, nerdy-cool rock star, one rose-tinted day in
New York City. Though Moon is the crushed-out one at first, after this meeting
Anooshka becomes obsessed with discovering the man behind the "beautiful, echoey
voice"; lured by his music and his online writings, which eerily express exactly
what she feels, she is sure they have a magnetic, almost mystical, connection. Even-
tually, she and Orpheus meet again, and again, and the enigmatic Orpheus be-
comes the only constellation in Anooshka's sky-until she realizes that stars, as
close as they appear to be, can never really be touched. At first, Lane's prose calls
to mind the surreal quality of a mirage, magically enticing but ultimately unfulfilling;
as Anooshka says about Orpheus' lyrics, "The words pop out like stars, even if
their meaning is obscure." However, as Lane descends into the depths of her
Orpheus and Eurydice-inspired story, the self-consciously cool prose finds its groove,
taking on the urgent, consumed mania of its narrator as she experiences the highs
and lows of obsessive love for the first time. Anooshka's all-encompassing desire is
496 
* THE BULLETIN
almost too intense to be real, but in such a mythical story, it's more than appropri-
ate, and her willingness to believe that Orpheus' emotional well runs deep rather
than dry is all too believable. Atmospheric black-and-white photos appear spo-
radically through the text, lending the book the ultra-cool, artistic feel of CD liner
notes. Readers familiar with the soaring heights, jangling nerves, and crushing
blows of voluntary enslavement to misplaced desire will no doubt find hope in
Anooshka's ultimate redemption and recovery. KH
LANTZ, FRANCESS 
The Day Joanie Frankenhauser Became a Boy. 
Dutton,
2005 
[2 0 8p]
ISBN 0-525-47437-4 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Joanie's sick of being a girl, since it means the boys won't include her in the sports
she likes, her mother won't let her play seriously anyway, and her teacher thinks
her hobby of writing action adventure is gender inappropriate. She's therefore
exhilarated when a typo introduces her to her new fifth-grade class as John rather
than Joan and her tomboyish appearance allows her to carry off the gender switch.
Initially, her new identity gives her the openings she'd hoped-she's playing foot-
ball with the guys and making friends easily with Casey, a nice boy with a taste for
joke-telling and a gift for baking-but soon she finds that boydom has its own bad
side as her new comrades hassle hopeful girl athletes and pressure one another into
dangerous stunts. The premise is basically a sitcom-level contrivance, and the
book never makes it more plausible than that, relying, ironically, on stereotyped
figures to convey the prejudices against which Joanie struggles; Joanie's superhero
fiction, occasionally interpolated, breaks up the narrative flow without making
any real contribution of viewpoint or message. There's still some undercover al-
lure in the details ofJoanie's gender-bending, and it's bolstered by a more nuanced
subplot about Joanie's fear for her ailing dog and the bonding she undergoes with
her mother as a consequence. This isn't exactly a deep psychological exploration,
but this light look into how the other half lives may intrigue girls who wonder
what the heck the guys are thinking. DS
LAROCHELLE, DAVID 
Absolutely, Positively, Not. 
Levine/Scholastic,
2005 
[2 2 4p]
ISBN 0-439-59109-0 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Sixteen-year-old Steven has a shameful secret: he square-dances with his mom-
and he likes it. Oh, and also, he might be gay. He's going to take care of that little
problem, however, and with the help of a sorely outdated library book on teenage
sexuality, he enacts a plan to become heterosexual: clipping magazine pictures of
women, mimicking the hockey team at lunch, snapping himself with a rubber
band when he thinks about guys, and, finally, engaging in serial dating. All this
gets him is a strained relationship with his best friend, Rachel, and the conviction
that there has to be something better than this. This coming-out story is enjoyable
in the way a good TV sitcom is enjoyable: while it's safe and a little old-fashioned,
it's also light, funny, and warm-hearted, with a cast of quirky yet recognizable
characters, a series of larger-than-life events, and an immediately likeable, sympa-
thetic protagonist. Don't come here looking to delve deep into teenage angst:
LaRochelle's impeccable comic timing leads to many snort-worthy moments, while
JULY/AUGUST 2005 
* 497
his sensitivity to the awkward work of developing any kind of sexuality in high
school means that Steven's most crushing embarrassments resonate for only a chapter
or two before he dusts himself off. Like any respectable sitcom conclusion, Steven's
misguided plans to be straight lead naturally into his, and his parents', tentative
acceptance of being gay-and he even gets a (sort of) date! LaRochelle's first book
provides a nice counterpoint to less gentle, more tension-filled coming-out stories,
making it a good addition for a younger audience. KH
LESTER, JULIUS 
Day of Tears: A Novel in Dialogue. Jump at the Sun/Hyperion,
2005 
177p
ISBN 0-7868-0490-4 
$15.99 
R Gr. 7-10
Lester returns to his project of putting a human face on the history of American
slavery (see To Be a Slave, BCCB 4/69) in this powerful fictionalization of the
largest slave auction ever recorded. The story unfolds as a series of spoken and
unspoken dialogues between the various participants, including Pierce Butler, the
owner whose gambling debts force him to sell more than 400 slaves in the two-day
event. His daughters Sarah and Frances, house slaves Mattie and Will, and their
daughter Emma also get their say, among others. The format is remarkably easy to
follow, and there is a clear distinction between what each character would and
would not say out loud; in longer passages, major characters reflect on the events
years later. Lester's dramatis personae fill familiar roles, but he makes them into
iconic representatives and brings the tragedy home afresh; by pursuing the lives
and fortunes of several characters, he is able to remind readers of the emotional
costs and collateral damage of slavery for the slaves, the slaveholders, and their
families. He also plausibly presents the possibility of divine retribution and re-
ward through the characters' interpretations of such things as the torrential rain on
the sale, the permanent loss of the slave seller's voice following the event, the even-
tual ruin and death of Butler, and the prosperity and happiness of Emma and of
Sarah Butler, who opposed her father's lifestyle. Peripheral characters pose some
of the most challenging moral problems in the text, including a man who takes his
own life when he is sold away from his true love, and a father who, having come to
appreciate the comforts of slavery under a generous mistress, struggles to gain his
son's respect even as he threatens his chance at freedom. This will make for a
stunning readers' theater or dramatic reading in classes or book groups, and it will
occasion equally stunning discussion afterward. An author's note explains Lester's
process of fictionalizing the actual events. KC
LEVINE, ELLEN 
Catch a Tiger by the Toe. 
Viking, 2005 
200p
ISBN 0-670-88461-8 
$15.99 
R Gr. 5-8
It's 1953, McCarthyism has embedded itself deep into the national consciousness,
and thirteen-year-old Jamie has a secret: her parents are staunch supporters of the
Communist party. When her father, a high-school teacher, is exposed on the front
page of the New York Times, her own world is turned upside down; she is inexpli-
cably switched from one homeroom to another, removed from the staff of the
school newspaper, forbidden to speak to her best friend, and constantly plagued by
the fear that her father will go to prison. In fact, he probably will; when called
before Senator McCarthy and his committee, Jamie's dad's bold condemnation of
their activities leads to a charge of contempt. The strength of this historical novel
is that it does not attempt to be a story about Communism so much as an exami-
498 
* THE BULLETIN
nation of the dynamics of discrimination and harassment; the bullying experi-
enced by those adults who identify with the Communist party is wordlessly juxta-
posed with the middle-school bullying that Jamie is experiencing as a result of her
family's beliefs. Through most of the novel, Jamie is unable to understand why
her parents insist on adhering to a political philosophy that endangers her family;
in the final chapter, as she watches her father's testimony on TV, she comes to
realize the significance of standing up for your ideals in the face of adversity, and
this movement is believably executed. The characters themselves are, for the most
part, more functional than memorable, and the long buildup to the inevitable
revelation of party affiliation may lose some readers early on; still, young people
today will find much to think about in this story of a time and a place when
adolescent secrets held enormous global significance. An author's note and list of
recommended reading are included. HM
LEVITHAN, DAVID 
Are We There Yet? 
Knopf, 2005 
[22 4 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-92845-6 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-82846-X 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 9-12
Danny Silver is a workaholic young ad executive, and his brother, Elijah, is a con-
templative high-schooler when their parents cunningly arrange for them to take a
vacation to Italy together. Their different personalities and the seven years that
separate them result in markedly different responses to the trip: Danny treats each
destination as a strict assignment, while Elijah relishes random wanderings and
serendipitous encounters, including one with a compelling young woman, Julia.
Throughout, however, they are acutely aware of each other, the significance of
their unlikeness ("Most of all, he thinks, My brother is so differentfrom me. He is so
wrong"), the lost closeness of their childhood, and, eventually, the possibilities still
open for a relationship with a brother ("Do you make him a large part of your life,
an equal to a wife or a best friend?... Do you let him know who you really are?").
Literal brotherhood is a strangely rare topic in young adult literature, and Levithan's
exploration of this relationship is slyly witty, poignant, and lyrical. Though the
third-person narration focalizes through both Danny and Elijah, the tone of the
prose matches Elijah's sensibility more than Danny's in its dreaminess and mea-
sured pace, which allow for a slow evolution of the brothers' personalities and
relationship as their travels through Venice and Florence reflect their travels through
emotional terrain. The quiet acknowledgment of the way travel can make one
more aware of oneself adds resonance and credibility to the story, and the book
avoids the pitfall of overtidy resolution with brothers forever comrades, instead
giving readers a pair of young men who have made an unexpected connection and
who see possibilities for more in the future. Readers will yearn for their own life-
changing travel, and they may be encouraged to reexamine their own sibling bonds.
DS
MACLACHLAN, PATRICIA 
Who Loves Me?; illus. by Amanda Shepherd. 
Cotler/
HarperCollins, 2005 
40p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027977-X 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027976-1 
$14.99 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
Just before bedtime, alone with her cat in her room, a little girl wonders who loves
her. Her wise pet reminds her of the people who love her even when she's cranky
JULY/AUGUST 2005 
* 499
and who demonstrate that love through the small and large acts of kindness they
perform for her. He reminds her too that her friends still love her even when they
fight and that her brother loves her even though he might not act like it. Reas-
sured, both girl and cat drift off to sleep. The text wavers between soothing and
sweetly dull, but its calm is offset by a very bouncy, spinny, constantly in motion
little girl with wild sprouts of black hair. The figures of both cat and girl sport a
two-dimensional geometry of squared-off edges reminiscent of Laurel Burch's fe-
lines, but their palette is more subdued; in fact, the preponderance of various yel-
lows dominates the visual field to the point of sallow monotony, despite the frenzy
of the figures. The motion of the pictures suggests that the little girl whirls through
her days in various moods, not all of them especially lovable, as when she is hurling
pasta around the kitchen or crossing her friends' names angrily off a list. She has
her sweet moments as well, though, such as when she is dancing for her grandfa-
thers or freeing a mouse that her cat has brought her as gift. All in all, this cata-
logue of unconditional love will likely appeal more to adults, but it could nestle
into the hearts of little ones who know all too well at the end of the day that there
have been moments ... but that their people and their pets love them anyway. KC
MADDERN, ERIC, ad. 
Death in a Nut; illus. by Paul Hess. 
Lincoln, 2005 
28p
ISBN 1-84507-081-X 
$15.95 
R 6-9 yrs
After finding his mother sick in bed, a forlorn Jack goes out to the beach for a
walk, and there he meets "the Grim Reaper, Old Man Death himself." Fearing
that Death is headed toward his mother's cottage, Jack pummels the old man until
he is small enough to fit into a hazelnut shell, which Jack then plugs up and throws
out to sea. He returns home to find his mother recovered; however, she is unable
to crack an egg, cut a vegetable, or kill a chicken (its head keeps flying back on its
shoulders). When Jack goes into town for some chops, he gets a similar report
from the butcher, who notes that "it's almost as if nothing will die anymore."
Realizing the foolishness of his actions, Jack combs the beach until he finds the
nut, releases Death, and sets the circle of life back on track. Adapted (according to
a brief note) from a Scottish storyteller's version, this literally titled tale offers a
comedic yet thoughtful examination of the interdependence of life and death. Jack's
brash actions are consistent with his childhood fear of losing a parent, and the
realization that these actions have a far greater impact than he had anticipated
comes naturally in the course of the tale. Hess' paintings are characterized by
broad planes of color (the stretch of sandy beach, the green slope of the hillside)
and deeply expressive portraits that depict the confusion of a citizenry that can't
seem to kill anything. Death himself is depicted as a bowlegged, white-bearded
elderly man with a gentle wisdom behind his round eyes. Young listeners will
appreciate that Death rewards Jack's repentant search with long life for his mother
almost as much as they enjoy watching Jack take down Death in their initial en-
counter. Pair this with Rees' Grandy Thaxter's Helper (BCCB, 10/04) for an amusing
comparison of avoiding Death's threat. HM
MAYNARD, JOYCE 
The Cloud Chamber. Schwartz/Atheneum, 2005 
[288p]
ISBN 0-689-87152-X 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Nate's life changes the day he comes home to find police at the family farm and his
father being rushed to the hospital with a gunshot wound to the head. Nate's
500 
* 
THE BULLETIN
mother, devastated at her husband's suicide attempt, shuts down, leaving Nate to
guide himself and his little sister, Junie, through their days as best as he can; he's
also trying to protect his mother from police suspicions that she, not her husband,
fired the weapon. Most of all he's missing his father, and he tries to extract infor-
mation about his whereabouts from the tight-lipped adults. Once he finds out
that his father is in the mental hospital on the other side of Montana, he conceives
a strange plan: to win the science fair with a homemade cloud chamber, a project
he and his father had always talked about building together, and then see his father
on the trip to the nearby state finals. Maynard's quiet creation of atmosphere is
effective: the broad empty spaces of rural Montana lend an echoing desolation to
Nate's situation, and there's bitter authenticity in the judgmental insularity of the
small town, wherein Nate's father's actions make his family into social pariahs.
The episodic nature of the narrative and the emphasis on atmosphere, especially
the constant period references to mid-'60s culture, unfortunately make the book a
stately and distanced read; the tendency toward overt contrivance (the wise hobo
who steers Nate right is straight out of central casting, and it seems only the need
for a dramatic reveal kept the family, now pledged to a policy of full disclosure,
from telling the kids their father had lost his sight) undermines the story's credibil-
ity. Patient readers may nonetheless appreciate the difficult adjustment of Nate
and family to the tragedy, and all will sympathize with Nate's desire to make things
right again. DS
MCCAUGHREAN, 
GERALDINE 
Not the End of the World. 
HarperTempest,
2005 
[2 5 6p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-076031-1 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-076030-3 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-10
Though it usually drifts placidly among the picture-book set, Noah's ark has taken
occasional tacks into more turbulent YA waters, as in L'Engle's Many Waters (BCCB
11/86), more recently, Provoost's In the Shadow of the Ark (BCCB 10/04), and
now with McCaughrean at the helm. Although less libidinous than Provoost's
cast (and therefore in the scope of a slightly younger audience), these voyagers are
burdened with drama of equal weight and their actions transpire largely under the
lens of another marginalized woman, here Noah's apocryphal daughter Timna. A
number of characters "speak" their own chapters, but Timna's voice and judgment
dominate as she observes her gentle father's unrelenting service to his personal
vision of God, her brother Seth's increasing religious arrogance that verges on
unholy madness, her mother's stoic and sharp-tongued defense of her husband's
course, and brotherJapeth's quiet resistance to family strife. Mostly, though, Timna
agonizes over her own rebellious act of sneaking a boy and his baby sister on board,
and she is torn between her natural impulse toward compassion and her suspicion
that she may be harboring a demon out to undermine the Lord's Earth-cleansing
work. McCaughrean's extra-Biblical characters not only expand plot possibilities
(and allow repopulation to proceed in a less incestuous fashion) but also promote
a more complex interpretation of the Genesis story than mere Divine vengeance.
The author's long experience in retelling religious myths is richly evident in the
animals' poignant testimonies (their view of the Creator varies according to their
status in the food chain) and especially in Seth's jubilant psalms of victory over
each sinner vanquished and each tribulation overcome. This isn't exactly strict
Scriptural interpretation, but those who are comfortable balancing fiction with
theology will find it a rewarding journey. EB
JULY/AUGUST 2005 
* 501
MCCLEMENTS, GEORGE 
The Last Badge; written and illus. by George
McClements. 
Hyperion, 2005 
40p
ISBN 0-7868-0956-6 
$16.99 
R Gr. 2-4
In order to earn his place in his family's Album of Scouting Greatness, Samuel
dares to dream the impossible dream: he will photograph the mythical Moon
Frog, a species that appears only once every thirty years in a location that can only
be determined through complicated astronomical calculations. It is so hard to
locate that no one has ever done it before, which is why Samuel is convinced that
finding it will earn him a coveted spot in the album. Meticulous preparations
secure his success, but when he begins to consider the implications of how the
scientific community will react to photographic proof of a new species, he decides
to keep his find a secret, only to discover that this very decision connects him to
the long line of familial scouting greatness. Mixed-media cutouts set on painted
backgrounds supply kitschy support and plenty of gags for this hero's tale. Samuel
has a comically retro, apple-pie-faced and knobbly-kneed sincerity as he pursues
his heraldically ugly quarry, and sequential art entertainingly shows Samuel pro-
gressing through the requisite perils of a scouting expedition that follows a kid-
made map, including landscapes both fantastic and grotesque. It's clear when we
meet his gung-ho dad that the geekiness that drives Samuel to earn badges in
Burping the Alphabet, Fever, Monkey Grooming, Toenail Clipping, and Ther-
monuclear Dynamics, among other feats of bravery and skill, runs in the family.
All in all, Grizzly Scouting sounds like way more fun than the regular kind; where
do we sign up? KC
MCCORMICK, PATRICIA 
My Brother's Keeper. Hyperion, 2005 
[19 2p]
ISBN 0-7868-5173-2 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-9
Toby Malone used to have a terrific big brother. The old Jake-the one who was
MVP of the high-school baseball team, the one who played with Toby and their
little brother Eli, the one who was easy to talk to-would never call Toby "dillweed"
in front of his friends, or quit baseball, or steal, or get high. But since their dad
left, Jake's become "cool and uninterested in things he considered immature,"
which seems to be everything that ever mattered to Toby. Toby, in an effort to
protect his mother, knows it's up to him to cover for Jake, but the longer he does,
the worse Jake becomes, until a dangerous series of events forces the family to
confront their long-ignored problems. McCormick's latest offering after Cut (BCCB
1/01) is a sensitive portrayal of a loving family struggling with rebuilding after a
massive upheaval. Toby's first-person present-tense voice, with its abundance of
punchy fragmentary sentences coupled with breathless run-ons, captures the slightly
scattered, exaggerated thoughts of a perennial worrier who is also quite funny.
Toby is entirely convincing as a thirteen-year-old, from his sensitivity to the un-
spoken code of body language between guys, to his fear and elation at his crush on
a girl, to his well-intentioned but misguided attempts to help his mother.
McCormick has a knack for balancing humor and pathos and for crafting a nu-
anced family where not everything has to be said to be understood (Toby's at-
tempts to be for Eli what Jake was for him, despite his own disappointment in his
older brother, is one example). Readers who already know that the most meaning-
ful moments are often hidden in the little ones will appreciate this compelling and
compassionate story. KH
502 
* THE BULLETIN
MCDONALD, MEGAN 
Saving the Liberty Bell; illus. by Marsha Gray
Carrington. 
Jackson/Atheneum, 2005 
32p
ISBN 0-689-85167-7 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-5
As the British advanced on Philadelphia in 1777, townsfolk rallied to protect their
church bells from troops bent on melting them down for ammunition and can-
nons. The State House bell, later to be dubbed the Liberty Bell, was smuggled out
of town in a wooden cart, allegedly by John Mickley, and buried under the floor-
boards of a church. Here McDonald imagines Mickley's son John Jacob recount-
ing the episode to his younger siblings upon returning from his secret mission.
The style is lively and dramatic, and the narrative adheres to the probable chain of
events-the midnight ride, the meeting with Washington troops who escorted
them to Allentown, the broken cart and the transfer of the bell, and the ultimate
hiding place at Zion Reformed Church. Unfortunately, the book never addresses
the mystifying question of how a 2,000-pound bell was lowered from its belfry
onto a wagon at dead of night or transferred from cart to cart on the road (nor does
it explain, for that matter, why John Jacob would entrust such a delicate secret to
little children). Carrington envisions the scene as a comedy, with wide-eyed, car-
toonish characters gasping and grinning at every turn. The bell is improbably
"hidden" under a bright plaid hoopskirt (a closing note characterizes this as "lore,"
but it also admits that "dirt, hay, straw, and manure were most likely used to
conceal the bell"), and the creaky wagon that "groaned like a cow birthing a calf"
passes a few yards from snoozing British sentries. Implausibility aside, McDonald's
youth-oriented perspective on this historical episode is likely to inspire genuine
interest in young readers. EB
MCDONALD, MEGAN 
Stink: The Incredible Shrinking Kid; illus. by Peter H.
Reynolds. 
Candlewick, 2005 
102p
ISBN 0-7636-2025-4 
$12.99 
R Gr. 2-4
When your big sister is Judy Moody (from Judy Moody, BCCB 5/00), you can bet
you're in for some rough times, and it sure doesn't help if you're the shortest
second-grader in your class. Stink is remarkably resilient, however, bearing up
against such tragedies as Judy's giving him hair gel that, instead of giving him
sticking-up hair to make him look taller as advertised, turns his hair orange, and
Judy's losing his class salamander down the drain and then turning the garbage
disposal on. He copes by drawing comics for each fresh disaster in his life and
championing his favorite president James Madison, who also happens to be the
shortest president in history. McDonald cleverly pits Stink's earnest and slightly
geeky personality against his sister's more adamant one, and she introduces some
characters we hope to see more of, especially Stink's friend, Elizabeth ("call me
Sophie of the Elves"), who looks like a small Edith Head. Reynolds' illustrations,
especially those that are featured in Stink's comic books, add to the quirky humor
and further develop mood and character with their perspective and energy. Read-
ers of Judy Moody who requested that Stink have a book of his own will not be
disappointed. KC
NEWMAN, LESLuA 
Jailbait. Delacorte, 2005 
[224p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90230-1 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73198-1 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 9-12
Andi's sophomore year is a lonely one: her best friend has moved away, she's
JULY/AUGUST 2005 
* 503
distant from her parents, her beloved older brother is away at college (after drop-
ping out twice before), and at the moment her closest confidante is the cow she
talks to on her way home from school. She's therefore responsive to the attention
when the man who regularly gives her a friendly honk as he drives by finally stops
and picks her up. Thus begins a strange routine, in which Andi spends afternoons
at a vacant house with Frank, dressing in sexy outfits he selects for her and receiv-
ing his sexual attentions; she ignores the fact that he doesn't know her real name
(she's told him she's Vanessa) and she knows nothing about him, she takes his
voyeurism and fear of legal consequences for chivalry, and she decides that this is a
significant, mature relationship wherein somebody is finally recognizing what she
has to offer. For most of the book, Newman effectively walks a delicate balance,
making Andi's willingness to go with Frank both believable and understandable
even as she lays out some clear indications that Andi's being used; the problem
isn't specifically what happens (at least initially, when Andi is compliant), it's that
Andi believes it's based on a meaning that isn't actually there. The book undercuts
its point by inexplicably setting the story in the early 1970s, making it ancient
history to young readers, and by eventually turning Frank into an obvious villain,
which unfortunately suggests that his malignity is the problem rather than the
ludicrous power imbalance between a thirty-year-old man and a fifteen-year-old
girl. Nonetheless, this is an emotional exploration of a vulnerable girl's temptation
into depths beyond her control. DS
NIELDS, NERISSA 
Plastic Angel. Orchard, 2005 
[208p]
ISBN 0-439-70913-X 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
It's the summer between eighth and ninth grade, and Randi's summer mission is
to start a rock band with her friend Gellie. Music would be a connection with
Randi's too-often-absent musician father as well as a possible route to popularity,
but it's also unfortunately a distraction from Gellie's budding career as a model
and actress, which Gellie's mother considers paramount. Randi becomes increas-
ingly invested in the band, Plastic Angel, and its possibilities, despite the fact that
Gellie's mother forbids her daughter's participation and Randi's own parents' marital
tension has erupted into separation. Nields is herself a musician, but that doesn't
result in any particularly compelling insider insights into the process; this is a fairly
standard tale of young people whose suddenly emerging abilities would take them
far if only their personal dramas would permit it. Randi herself has little character
beyond her desire for approval and Gellie's complicity, and the book tends to
reduce people and situations to extremes for contrast. That's not out of keeping
with a middle-school viewpoint, though, so readers may cheerfully share Randi's
sweeping judgments; many will also share her yearning for musical self-expression,
and they'll get vicarious enjoyment from the young artist's progress toward her
dream. DS
NILSSON, PER 
You & You & You; tr. by Tara Chace. 
Front Street, 2005 
301p
ISBN 1-932425-19-5 
$16.95 
R Gr. 7-10
The yous in question in this offbeat Swedish import are twelve-year-old Anon,
seventeen-year-old Zarah, and twenty-something Nils, whose lives run courses that
are bound to intersect. In his blue galoshes, Anon is out of step with his peers;
though bullied, he is nonetheless happy in his fantasies of his godlike father and of
504 
* THE BULLETIN
Sara, a girl whom he has invented from a wallet he found abandoned near the bus
stop. Zarah suffers from the malaise of the achingly beautiful; she gets whatever
she wants but knows that everyone, from her sexy criminal boyfriend, Victor, to
her co-worker Mia, with whom she desperately wants an uncomplicated friend-
ship, desires her. Nils is searching for a reason to live by exploring what it would
be like to die, spending the night in a coffin and talking his friend into burying
him alive for a couple of hours. When Zarah wishes for life to surprise her, it does
just that with Anon, who saves her, literally and figuratively, from a violent Victor,
and with Nils, who offers her the strange complementary self for which she has
been longing. Nilsson's literary art blends the philosophical with the quotidian,
producing a lyrical interplay that is never heavy-handed and is often quite funny.
He inserts prose poems from an off-scene narrator who directly addresses the char-
acters, querying their actions and motivations in order to lay bare the thematic
resonances that connect the characters. The overt symbolism of Anon as a Christ
figure (besides believing his dad is a god, he resurrects Zarah's cat and appears to
walk on water) and Zarah's and Nils' coincidental rebirths and yin-and-yang cor-
respondence might be overbearing if the daydreaming messiah in blue galoshes
weren't so darned appealing and the plot so overlaid with existential joy. Theirs is
a world in which to lose oneself for a pleasant while and emerge refreshed. KC
NYE, NAOMI SHIHAB 
Going Going. 
Greenwillow, 2005 
232p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029366-7 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-16185-5 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Florrie's passion for old things, especially "Old Buildings and Businesses run by
Real People," leads her to make a rather demanding birthday wish. She wants her
family and, later, her friends and whomever else she can get to join her in boycott-
ing all franchises for the sixteen weeks until the end of the year. She and her
friends then hold rallies and put up signs all over San Antonio to promote small,
family-owned businesses. The twin engines that drive this novel are Florrie's ec-
centric personality and her obsessive and articulate commitment to the cause of
preserving small businesses; there is, however, no real conflict within the story
until Florrie's sixteen-year-old heart finds itself drifting from her cause to a boy
who doesn't share her passion, but that is quickly dismissed as she recalls her first
love for saving small businesses. Instead, Florrie's efforts at combating the fran-
chises are applauded for their idealism, inspiring front-page news stories, TV re-
ports, and editorials, while a few brushes with the police end benignly. Thus,
Florrie's relentless activism is the plot, and it is only Nye's poetic prose and her
finely honed sense of character that prevent the agenda from overwhelming the
reader, while the vivid depictions of the side streets and unique attractions of San
Antonio offer additional allure. Despite the story's weaknesses, Nye renders Florrie's
obsession in ways that may resonate with fans of Joan Bauer and that could inspire
others to seek out and patronize the small businesses in their own communities.
KC
OLSWANGER, ANNA 
Shlemiel Crooks; illus. by Paula Goodman Koz. 
NewSouth,
2005 
[3 6p]
ISBN 1-58838-165-X 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
While Elias Olschwanger attends the synagogue one evening in 1919, two crooks
JULY/AUGUST 2005 
* 
505
(unknowingly influenced by the ghost of Pharaoh, who is "still sore about losing
his Israelite slaves") break into his saloon and attempt to steal crates of Passover
wine. Fortunately for Elias, the thieves' horse (possibly under the influence of the
ghost of the prophet Elijah, who could also "play a little dirty") chooses that mo-
ment to speak and yells out "Crooks! Crooks!," waking the neighbors and sending
the thieves running. The style--colloquial English sprinkled with perfectly ex-
ecuted Yinglish asides-is inviting, and the action of the thieving is fast-paced, but
the buildup to that point is long, rambling, and disjointed, including a humorous
but tangential retelling of the Exodus story. The woodblock and watercolor paint-
ings are uneven: some of the busier compositions overuse energetic swooshes and
slashes, resulting in a feeling of frenzy even when the story is calm, but the iconic,
standalone prints are effectively rendered, with bold black lines clearly defining
planes of color. Despite the occasional lack in logical flow, this is an entertainingly
executed tale that is chock full of subtle humor, and it is well suited to reading
aloud. This story (first published in a magazine) is based in part on the life of the
author's great-grandparents, saloonkeepers in St. Louis in the early part of the
twentieth-century, and an author's note including the text of the newspaper ar-
ticles that led to this story's composition is included. HM
PARK, LINDA SUE 
Project Mulberry. 
Clarion, 2005 
[232p]
ISBN 0-618-47786-1 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-5
Best friends Julia and Patrick want to come up with a prizeworthy animal hus-
bandry project for the state fair. Since their townhouses only allow pets that live in
cages, Julia's mom suggests raising silkworms as she did as a girl in Korea, and
Patrick is off and running with the idea before Julia can articulate her reluctance
for the project, which she feels is too Korean. She tries some minor sabotage, but
Patrick is so excited that she doesn't have the heart to do much more than hope the
project will fail. When things come together, however, she too becomes enthusi-
astic-until she realizes that in order to get the silk, they have to kill the worms
they've carefully raised. Park has a sensitive ear for the nuances of self-doubt and
burgeoning self-awareness that permeate junior-high experience, with Julia begin-
ning to notice uncomfortable things about her parents, her friends, and herself
that force her into moral decisions based on compromise and patience; for in-
stance, she realizes that her mother harbors racial prejudices that are not in keeping
with Julia's image of her. She further has to come to terms with her own selfish-
ness and discomfort with her heritage as she works out what is more important-
protecting her own prejudices or pleasing her friend. In between each chapter,
Park produces little dialogues between her as a writer and Julia as a character,
showing the give and take of the writing process and further exposing Julia's dis-
satisfaction with her seventh-grade self. Intended to reveal the conflictual relation-
ship writers sometimes experience with their creations, these interstitial dialogues
are a bit on the cutesy side, but the story they interrupt is compelling reading as a
narrative of friendship as well as of a fascinating science project. KC
PEARSON, MARY E. 
A Room on Lorelei Street. Holt, 2005 
26 6p
ISBN 0-8050-7667-0 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 9-12
Zoe is "seventeen years old . . . going on a hundred" when she finally flees her
home, where she's lone caretaker of her alcoholic mother, for a place of her own in
506 
* THE BULLETIN
a house on Lorelei Street. It's a struggle for her to earn rent and expenses on her
waitress salary, especially since she's trying to keep up with school and the tennis
team as well as negotiate her thorny relationship with family and friends. At Lorelei
Street, however, she finds a champion in the landlady, Opal Keats, whose warm
support begins to bolster her gradual movement toward self-definition. Zoe's a
young woman fighting tough odds, and Pearson paints a dark picture of the ob-
stacles she's overcoming: a grandmother who feels Zoe's job is to care for her
mother, a mother who's only interested in sex and alcohol, a father whose acciden-
tal death is suspicious indeed. As a literary character, however, she's fairly limited:
in action, she's mostly bitter and harsh, so she's sympathetic largely because of the
bad things that have happened to her and because of her yearnings; there's also
some sentimental overload in the portrayal of Zoe's grim existence and Opal's
plucky eccentricity that undercuts the effect of Zoe's growth. Pearson nonetheless
crafts smooth and thoughtful prose, and there's honesty in Zoe's tendency to make
mistakes that degrade her (such as resorting to taking money for sex) even as she's
trying to better herself. Readers drawn to rescue dramas may particularly appreci-
ate this story of a girl who's trying against odds to rescue herself. DS
PELLETIER, ANDREW T. 
The Amazing Adventures of Bathman!; illus. by Peter
Elwell. 
Dutton, 2005 
32p
ISBN 0-525-47164-2 
$15.99 
R 3-7yrs
A tranquil Saturday night is interrupted by calls for help from the vicinity of the
bathroom. Never fear, though, because Bathman is ready to answer any challenge.
Shedding clothes as he thunders down the hall, a young boy leaps into the tub in
Sendakian splendor (though he is more modest than Sendak's infamous Mickey,
whom he greatly resembles). He assesses the situation, interrogates the witnesses,
and finally takes the plunge to save the hapless Ducky from the evil Cap'n Squee-
gee. Pelletier certainly knows his way around classic comic books; this squeaky
clean protocomic features all of the elements of the genre it mimics, including
boxed text, advertising asides, and mock-heroic dialogue splashed with corny puns.
Spacious but animated full-color watercolors (what else?) keep the energy high as
our intrepid hero squares off against the foul villain, and comic elements, such as
direct hits with Tattoo Torpedoes in delicate places, will keep this narrative plenty
buoyant for young heroes of the bounding main, er, bounding bathtub. KC
PERRY, ELIZABETH 
Think Cool Thoughts; illus. by Linda Bronson. 
Clarion,
2005 
[32p]
ISBN 0-618-23493-4 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
It's a hot city summer, "so hot that chocolate bars melted before you could eat
them, and the pavement stuck to your sneakers," and to add insult to injury the
nights seem even hotter. Seven-year-old Angel tries to think cool thoughts, but
what really intrigues her is her aunt's childhood story of taking the mattresses up
to the roof and sleeping under the summer sky. Angel's mother gives permission,
and "Angel got to sleep on the roof in her underwear," listening to the grownups'
quiet talk; the rising dawn brings not only a cool breeze but a much-welcomed
rainfall, in which Angel, her mother, and aunt luxuriate (after bringing the mat-
tresses back inside). The story recalls Hesse's lyrical Come On, Rain!(BCCB 4/99),
and Perry is similarly effective at evoking the oppressiveness of summer heat and
JULY/AUGUST 2005 * 507
the painful slowness of time spent enduring it. The text runs on quite long for a
picture book, which tends to compound rather than relieve the sultry atmosphere,
but there's a lot of vivid scene-setting and quiet depiction of family relationships,
especially the connections between Angel's mother and aunt. Surges of color,
particularly candy hues of pink, violet, and orange, predominate in the acrylic-
and-oil illustrations, making the family's soothing cocoa shades look rather cooler
than their environs. The figures and backgrounds are strongly lined yet meltingly
skewed, with the people's features possessing a cubist sharpness that plays against
their curvy, rounded geometry; unfortunately, the high impact is often unrelieved
by balance or shaping, resulting in busy and unfocused compositions, and the
stylization of the figures dilutes their emotional impact. For those possessed of
sufficient ice cream or air conditioning to keep the audience cool for the duration,
though, this would make an atmospheric readaloud that may inspire intergenera-
tional sharing of summer memories. DS
PRICEMAN, MARJORIE 
Hot Air: The (Mostly) True Story of the First Hot-Air Bal-
loon Ride; written and illus. by Marjorie Priceman. 
Schwartz/Atheneum,
2005 
40p
ISBN 0-689-82642-7 
$16.95 
R* 
4-8 yrs
Priceman isn't the first children's author to capitalize on the kid-pleasing aspects
of the Montgolfier brothers' balloon launch, with its basket full of barnyard pas-
sengers (see McGrory's Mouton's Impossible Dream, BCCB 4/00). With its imagi-
native reconstruction of the flight and the riot of circus colors, though, this promises
to be the rendition of the historic feat to rivet young listeners. The opening spreads
suggest a traditional nonfiction picture book approach, with an opening date-
September 19, 1783-and historical background (delivered in present progressive
tense and cadence similar to that of the Provensens' The Glorious Flight). But soon
both text and illustration break into vertical panels as the airship rises aloft; text
trickles down to a few words, then animals sounds, and then ... a wordless fantasy
in which the voyagers muddle their way through a host of airborne dilemmas. A
young archer takes a shot at the basket, clothes fly off a laundry line in an updraft,
a church spire threatens to pop the balloon, and a dive-bombing fleet of birds tip
the basket. There's a flood (don't ask-it makes sense) and some quick bailing,
but not much can be done about the bird with his bill driven into the balloon;
down the balloonists go in a quartet of panels that capture the toppling aeronauts
startled silly. Now it's back to traditional text, the true ending of the tale, and an
endpaper recap of the episode. Illustrations are chock a-block with goofy shenani-
gans that demand several viewings to appreciate, and the emotive passengers should
keep the audience cackling in delight. And who's to say it didn't happen exactly
like that? EB
REICHERT, AMY 
While Mama Had a Quick Little Chat; illus. by Alexandra
Boiger. 
Jackson/Atheneum, 2005 
40p
ISBN 0-689-85170-7 
$15.95 
R 
5-7 yrs
Rose, a redheaded moppet with glaring red-and-blue striped socks, repeatedly an-
swers the door while her mother gabs on the phone, letting in a band of party
suppliers, a troupe of partygoers, a magician, and a jazz band. What's a girl to do?
Why, mingle with the guests, step in as the magician's assistant, and dazzle the
band with her rhythmic virtuosity on the drums-then send the whole party out
the door before Mama gets done chatting and goes to find Rose in bed, asleep.
508 
* THE BULLETIN
The scads of cheerful guests and performers speak graciously and appreciatively to
Rose, giving that long-suffering girl ample cause to finally capitulate and enjoy
being the life of the party, and the pictures packed with widely smiling visitors
bear out the happy-go-lucky tone of the text. Unfortunately, the effervescent rhym-
ing couplets that constitute most of the story shift meter with abandon, making
practice readings a must, and the intricately detailed illustrations will show to bet-
ter advantage on a lap than before a group. In spite of these limits on the book's
utility as a readaloud, this is an attractive tall tale with a winsome protagonist and
dramatic illustrations. The elaborate scenes are filled with slickly cartooned, exag-
geratedly fashionable people (though it's stereotypical that the jazz band presents
the only people of color there). The figures float in washes of gray and blue strate-
gically splashed with dabs of orange-red, with Rose's and her mother's hair and
footwear, as well as guests' clothing and an array of paper lanterns, accenting the
calmer colors and providing visual impact. Put-upon Rose is a natural successor to
those kids who entertained another surprise visitor in The Cat in the Hat. TC
REILLY, MATTHEW 
Hover Car Racer: Crash Course; illus. by Pablo
Raimondi. 
Simon, 2005 
207p
ISBN 1-4169-0225-2 
$9.95 
R 
Gr. 6-9
NASCAR meets science fiction in this story about hover-car racers, "part race-car
driver, part fighter pilot, all superstar." Jason Chaser, fourteen-year-old hover-car
racer, has just been invited to attend the International Race School, "the most
prestigious racing school in the world," with his twelve-year-old navigator (and
brother), the Bug. At school, lessons in race tactics and electromagnetic physics,
hours of pit practice, and weekly school races prepare young hopefuls for a possible
pro career. Competition from the best up-and-coming racers in the world, includ-
ing Jason's old rival and the first female racer to be accepted into the School, is
tough enough, but a string of sabotaged equipment leaves Jason at the bottom of
the standings, and if he can't find the culprit soon, he'll be knocked out of the
running for the all-important mid-year Sponsor's Event. The high-adrenaline,
high-stakes world of hover-car racing comes alive in this Australian import, com-
plete with in-depth descriptions of the look and handling of hover cars and three-
dimensional race maps. A brief look at the advent of the hover car and its worldwide
adoption is almost plausible in its simplicity, describing a world much like our
own. The plot-part school story, part sports story-is conventional and charac-
terizations are quick and dirty, but that's okay, since they both take a backseat to
the pulse-pounding racing action. Accounts of the races themselves are detailed
and drawn out for maximum intensity, giving a whole new meaning to the term
"speed reading"; this first in a series should give young speed demons a future to
cheer for. Raimondi's black-and-white action comics keep the look revved up.
KH
RICHARDSON, JUSTIN 
And Tango Makes Three; by Justin Richardson and Peter
Parnell; illus. by Henry Cole. 
Simon, 2005 
32p
ISBN 0-689-87845-1 
$14.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
A few years ago in Central Park Zoo, a pair of male chinstrap penguins, Roy and
Silo, pair-bonded; when another penguin couple had an extra fertilized egg, the
keeper gave it to Roy and Silo to incubate, and the result was a chick named
Tango, who happily grew up with Roy and Silo as parents. Richardson and Parnell
JULY/AUGUST 2005 
* 
509
turn this event into a sweet but not sappy story, writing with a matter-of-fact
simplicity about penguin practices and Roy and Silo's companionship and parent-
ing. Though celebrity cover quotes and flap copy hint at well-meaning lessons,
the text itself is blessedly light on heavy-handed extrapolation (just as well, since
the idea of taking domestic patterns from the animal kingdom would lead to some
infelicitous outcomes), instead focusing on the appealing story of the penguin pair
and their family. Cole's illustrations, watercolors touched with colored pencil, use
the penguins' contrasting black-and-white to good graphic effect, keeping other
colors slightly muted. Though the occasional touch of anthropomorphism in the
penguins' facial expressions is superfluous, since the birds have no shortage of
charm as they really are, the imaginative compositions provide plenty of liveliness.
While this could introduce a discussion about various kinds of families, it's also a
cheerful and endearing animal story that should please any aficionado of the zoo's
penguin enclosure. DS
ROCKWELL, ANNE 
Little Shark; illus. by Megan Halsey. 
Walker, 2005 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8956-0 
$16.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8955-2 
$15.95 
R 4-7 yrs
Immediately after his birth, Little Shark's mother and forty-nine siblings swim off
and leave him "on his own in the deep and dangerous sea. Swim fast, Little Shark."
Little Shark may be a sympathetic newborn, but he's also a formidable predator,
and Rockwell keeps both aspects of the fish in audience sight at all times. While
discussing the shark's adaptations for tracking and consuming prey, she also ex-
plains their need for constant movement in order to take in oxygen and offers a
few simple contrasts between sharks and other fish. Halsey's painted, cut, and
layered illustrations are well designed to maximize contrast within the underwater
scenes; featured fauna and flora in each spread pop slightly to the foreground,
while other marine life is painted onto the subtly streaked, waterspotted back-
ground. Other notable visual touches include an x-ray-styled comparative view of
cod and human bony skeletons with a shark cartilage skeleton, magnifying glass
close-ups of rounded fish scales and spiky shark denticles, and a spread that chal-
lenges viewers to identify the kind of shark Little Shark will grow up to be (blue
shark, in case you wonder). Rockwell reassures listeners of Little Shark's promis-
ing future: "See, no big shark has caught him. No fisherman has caught him
either. Little Shark will reach twelve or thirteen feet long, as he keeps growing
until he is old." How old? That, and other information of likely interest to listen-
ers, is buried in a closing note, and no remark is ever made as to the probable fate
of Little Shark's siblings. Still, this is a useful and attractive introduction to sharks
that will be particularly suitable for children who squirm at the sight or thought of
blood. EB
RODMAN, MARY ANN 
My Best Friend; illus. by E. B. Lewis. 
Viking, 2005 
32p
ISBN 0-670-05989-7 
$15.99 
R 
5-7 yrs
Six-year-old Lily sees seven-year-old Tamika at the pool every Wednesday and has
decided that the older girl would make a great best friend. Tamika generally ig-
nores her, preferring instead to play with the snobby Shanice, but that doesn't stop
Lily from going to great ends to win her attention (she buys a bathing suit just like
hers and works on perfecting her dive). One day, when Shanice isn't there, Tamika
spends the day with Lily; subsequently convinced that they are now best friends,
510 
* THE BULLETIN
Lily is stunned to be mocked by Shanice and her accomplice Tamika the following
week. In the end, Keesha, a different Wednesday pool-goer, surfaces, and the
promise of best-friendship looms bright for Lily after all. It won't take readers
long to recognize that Tamika doesn't have a whole lot to offer in the friendship
department; what stands out in the narrative trajectory of this story is the acknowl-
edgment that even devotions that don't make the most sense can have a huge
emotional impact on a little girl. Lily doesn't have a good reason to desire Tamika's
friendship (short of liking her cornrows), but that doesn't make the rejection hurt
any less. The first-person voice is laden with realistic angst and confusion as Lily
treads the murky waters of befriending the older girl, and young listeners will
likely be wholly satisfied to see Lily turn her attention to Keesha. Lewis' artfully
rendered watercolor illustrations realistically portray the insular community of the
public pool. The swimsuit-clad characters are perfectly proportioned (with six-
year-old bellies sticking out from two-piece suits) and the plays of light and shadow
against the moving water are skillfully created. Young listeners are likely to iden-
tify with the poolside politics played out in this tender story of the challenge of
building summer friendships. HM
RUDITIS, PAUL 
Rainbow Party. Simon Pulse, 2005 
248p
Paper ed. ISBN 1-4169-0235-X 
$8.99 
Ad 
Gr. 9-12
Gin has never been one to confuse sex with love, but she does seem to have a
skewed idea about party games: after hearing about "rainbow parties" (where girls
wearing different colored lipsticks perform fellatio on multiple boys, so that the
boys end up with rainbows on their penises) on a TV talk show, she decides that
this would a good way to make some mischief, help her best friend overcome her
shyness toward a certain boy, and gain a broader base of popularity than she cur-
rently enjoys. Beginning a couple of hours before the party, the book focuses on
the ensemble cast of invited guests as they decide whether or not they will go to the
party. This technique allows Ruditis to explore a variety of attitudes toward sexual
behavior, including whether or not oral sex is technically sex or if it even consti-
tutes any sort of intimate behavior at all. Reciprocity is also at issue in multiple
ways: some of the girls agree that it's unfair for the boys not to give as good as they
get, and while Perry has serviced Hunter forty-seven times (but who's counting?),
would Hunter's repaying the favor mean they were gay? For Gin, though, there is
no question: oral sex puts her in control of her partner's pleasure, and that's ex-
actly where she wants to be. Despite the salacious topic, Ruditis avoids shock and
titillation; the party preparations and discussions are handled with an almost clini-
cal detachment, and most of the would-be participants come to well-considered
decisions that would probably please their parents (the addition of a raging case of
oral gonorrhea completes Ruditis' cautionary tale). The resulting text is more an
attitudinal survey than a well-plotted narrative, but it guarantees readers will ask
multiple questions as they consider where they stand on the issue. KC
SEYMOUR, TRES Auction!; illus. by Cat Bowman Smith. 
Candlewick,
2005 
[32p]
ISBN 0-7636-1242-1 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
6-9 yrs
"Whee-oo! There's going to be an auction!" announces Aunt Lou, flying into the
kitchen with newspaper in hand. Perhaps the only other person as excited as Aunt
JULY/AUGUST 2005 
* 511
Lou is Miss Lodgson, her archrival in winning auction bids: "Nobody could out-
bid Aunt Lou and Miss Lodgson when they got going." Told from the first-person
perspective of a young niece, this is an entertaining romp of a tale through a local
county auction, chock full of goods both desirable (a set of blue china) and not (a
taxidermy groundhog). The plot, which mostly centers on this rivalry, takes a nice
twist when the niece, much to the surprise of all the folks in attendance, hollers out
a higher bid than either lady when a desired straw hat is on the block. The noise
and excitement of the auction is effectively captured by the auctioneer's running
speech; his long strings of selling songs appear in bold type laid out in arcs that
follow the curve of his bullhorn, and it is easy to hear his singsong holler in the
reading. There is a subtle humor in the fact that the two ladies are outbidding
each other just for the sake of outbidding (the stuffed groundhog goes for $175,
and Uncle Bill is in a perpetual state of near-fainting as his wife's useless catch
increases), and while young listeners may not get that right away, they'll still enjoy
watching the competitors' faces grow flushed as the bids escalate. Smith's water-
color-and-ink illustrations capture the frenzied excitement of the special day; she is
especially successful at making each of the random cast of characters look distinct.
Despite the mandatory clutter of an auction, pages never feel overcrowded or messy.
The intense energy of the face-off between Aunt Lou and Miss Logsdon is subtly
captured in eye shifts, facial movements, and body language as well as in the dia-
logue. Storytime programs are likely to benefit greatly from the noisy addition of
an auctioneer's siren call. HM
SIDMAN, JOYCE 
Song of the Water Boatman e& Other Pond Poems; illus. by Beckie
Prange. 
Houghton, 2005 
[32p]
ISBN 0-618-13547-2 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 4-7
Sidman, author of The WorldAccording to Dog (BCCB 3/03), turns to a different
aspect of the natural world here in this collection of eleven poems of pond life.
Featured denizens range from ducks to duckweed to dragonflies, many of them
narrating their own verse (a paragraph of biological explanation accompanies each
poem); there's also a seasonal arc as the poems progress from spring through sum-
mer, fall, and winter. Entries vary effectively in style and format: "In the Depths
of the Summer Pond" cleverly draws on "The House That Jack Built" to limn the
food chain, "Song of the Water Boatman and Backswimmer's Refrain" evokes sea
shanties and, of course, the Volga Boatman, and duckweed introduces itself in the
crisp free verse of "A Small Green Riddle." Throughout, soundplay is employed
with delicate exuberance, making these tasty verses for reading aloud as well as
alone, and the generously scattered imagery is telling and inventive. Prange's wood-
cuts recall those of her Minnesotan compatriot Betsy Bowen, but they evince their
own style as well, particularly in the touches of intricate patterning in flora and
fauna (the microscopic world of the water bear is especially elegantly conveyed);
compositions are exceptionally dramatic as they balance fluid curves, open space
of water and sky, and dense lines of landscape or creature. This would pair nicely
with Marilyn Singer's Turtle in uly (BCCB 9/89), or it would serve admirably on
its own as an atmospheric sequence to introduce kids to a world they don't know
or lead them to reconsider one they take for granted. A glossary of natural-history
terms employed in the poems is included. DS
512 
* 
THE BULLETIN
SIMMONS, MICHAEL 
Finding Lubchenko. 
Razorbill, 2005 
[288p]
ISBN 1-59514-021-2 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 7-10
Evan Macalister slides through most of his days with offhanded glibness and with-
out major event; though he's crushing silently on his good friend Erika, loudly
resenting his wealthy father's sternness and tight pursestrings, and secretly engag-
ing in some lucrative larceny from his father's medical-research firm, his life is
largely undisturbed by significant achievement. All this changes abruptly when
his father's colleague is found murdered in his office and Dr. Macalister is arrested
for the crime, which is apparently linked to illegal sales of the deadly smallpox
virus from his lab. Evan knows his dad is wrongly accused, and what's worse (in
his eyes, anyway) is his own implication: one of Evan's thefts from the building
was the dead man's laptop, which contains revealing yet cryptic messages about
solving the smallpox thefts by meeting up in Paris with somebody identified only
as "Lubchenko." Filled with the desire to protect himself and some modest incli-
nation to save his father, Evan cheerfully employs his father's credit cards to get
himself, his genius friend, Ruben, and of course Erika to Paris (and rooms at the
Ritz, yet) in the hopes of finding the mysterious Lubchenko. This has some initial
similarities to Simmons' sparkling Pool Boy (BCCB 6/03) in the incarcerated par-
ent and the resentful and smart-mouthed son, but those tropes turn here into a
witty-edged adventure that's just begging to be made into a movie, sardonic
voiceover narration and all. The crime plot itself is weak in spots, since the players
are pretty obvious from the get-go and Lubchenko, who handily cleans up the
matter for the teens, is found largely through diligent Parisian hanging out rather
than any clever footwork. That's okay-it's really Evan, the goofball moral light-
weight who's not entirely sorry that his dictatorial father has run into some trouble
of his own, who makes the story here. His narrative voice, filled with laconic
fragments and compact sentences, is relentlessly funny in its casual yet studied
offhandedness, and he's authentic in his ability to remain pretty much the oppor-
tunistic trouble-hound he is (his spree with Dad's credit cards supports more than
just detective efforts) despite the seriousness of the situation and despite his fairly
accurate self-perceptions ("I am a fount of bad ideas. And I've never had a bad
idea I didn't follow through on"). Evan might be a questionable real-life friend,
but he and his father's credit cards are great literary company on this offbeat ad-
venture. DS
SORRELLS, WALTER 
Fake ID. 
Sleuth/Dutton, 2005 
[25 6 p]
ISBN 0-525-47514-1 
$10.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 9-12
Every time sixteen-year-old Chass and her mom move to a new town, they go to
the public library and pick new names at random from a book, which is how she
ended up with the unlikely moniker of Chastity Pureheart. Chass knows they are
on the run, but she doesn't know why; all she knows is that her mom believes
music is bad luck. After a record three years in High Hopes, Alabama, Chass is
beginning to feel settled and is secretly developing her natural musical talent. Then
her mom disappears, and the police find her bloodstained car and six fake IDs at
an abandoned house. Chass realizes her mother has run again and, with the help
of two friends, Ben and Brittany, resolves to discover what her mother was eluding
before it finds her. Sorrells has written a convoluted, fast-paced thriller with mul-
JULY/AUGUST 2005 
* 513
tiple mysteries that eventually converge into one dramatic showdown over an acci-
dentally taped murder confession. Chass has an appealing voice, and her authority
issues and smart-mouth comments work well in the "at the mercy of the state"
position within which she finds herself. Despite the fact that Chass stumbles onto
clues more than discovers them and relies on adults more than the average youth
sleuth, her investigation moves forward under her own steam and she turns up
some chilling information. Chass' friends and the story's adults are perfunctory
characters, and the perfect way the threads come together (everybody tells every-
body else what they've been doing this whole time) is a bit of a disappointment.
Still, none of this detracts much from the immediacy of the danger and the neces-
sity of solving the mystery, and mystery fans will find this an entertaining choice.
KH
STOWELL, PENELOPE 
The Greatest Potatoes; illus. by Sharon Watts. 
Jump at the
Sun/Hyperion, 2005 
40p
ISBN 0-7868-5113-9 
$15.99 
R 
6-9yrs
Commodore Cornelius Vanderbilt loved potatoes; to that end, he traveled the
world on a quest to find the perfect potato dish, leaving many a business closed in
the wake of his scathing reviews. In 1853, he arrived in Saratoga; there, after the
persnickety Vanderbilt sent several potato dishes back to the kitchen, declaring
them inedible, a fry chef named George Crum deliberately served his customer a
plate of overfried, oversalted, thinly sliced spuds, and "he ate the whole plateful!
Then he demanded ... more? Yes!" While the invention of the potato chip may
not seem the most riveting of picture-book topics, the balanced combination of
fact (George Crum is in fact credited with having invented potato chips in Saratoga
in the mid-nineteenth century) and legend (Vanderbilt never made the described
quest, though he may have eaten in the restaurant where Crum worked) makes for
a comical exploration of food history. Stowell's newsy narrative style is entertain-
ingly dramatic, and it pairs nicely with Watts' stylized illustrations. Sweeping
lines and curls accentuate the frenetic energy of Crum's culinary activity, and ono-
matopoeic asides ("Sizzle!" "Dice!" "Poofl"), hand-lettered in a multitude of col-
ors, further contribute to the lively action. An author's note, bibliography, and
potato-chip recipe are included. HM
VAN DUSEN, 
CHRIS 
IfI 
Built a Car; written and illus. by Chris Van
Dusen. 
Dutton, 2005 
32p
ISBN 0-525-47400-5 
$15.99 
R 
4-8 yrs
It's a dirty job, but sometimes a kid's got to do it-apprise Dad that the family
station wagon is not up to snuff. Jack breaks it as gently as he can: "This car is
OK. This car is not bad./ But it's just a car. Nothing great. Nothing grand./ It's
nothing at all like the car I have planned." 
As a true visionary, circa the late
1950s, Jack articulates his own superior design: a vehicle of epic size, with rear jet
engines, jutting tail fins, and a bulbous Plexiglas dome. There's room enough for
a swimming pool, living-room furniture, and a snack bar dispensing such delights
as chocolate sodas and stringy cheese from an aerosol can. Should Dad become
indolent from all this luxury, Robert the Robot will gladly take the wheel. It's
road-, air-, and seaworthy, and it boasts an impact resistant polymer-gel body and
an environmentally friendly exhaust system that can "capture the odor of burnt
gasoline/ And change it to something more pleasing to noses-/ Like blueberry
514 
* 
THE BULLETIN
muffins or freshly picked roses." Jack's fantasy is faithful to his era, inspired by the
rockets and robots and Wienermobiles that litter his well-appointed bedroom in
his tidily manicured suburban ranch house and appropriately tricked out in Melmac
hues and dazzling chrome. Jack's (well, Van Dusen's) one anachronistic gaffe is a
reference to "Belize" (not so named until 1973) as a destination-but, hey, just try
to rhyme "British Honduras." When kids get an eyeful of Jack's new wheels, the
cruise night competition's bound to lose some of its Turtle Wax luster. EB
VANOOSTING, JAMES 
Walking Mary. 
HarperCollins, 2005 
[144p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028472-2 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028471-4 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Everyone in Framburg, Illinois, knows Walking Mary, the elderly African-Ameri-
can woman who dresses in a tattered mink coat, meets every train that passes
through the junction, and casts spells, according to rumor, on those foolish enough
to look her in the eye. Teenager Pearl Keenan, whose nearsighted vision was mi-
raculously improved when she locked gazes with the woman as a young child, may
be the first to explore who Mary really is and to reach out to her in friendship.
What begins as basic curiosity evolves into a daily appointment and, ultimately, a
mysterious late-night disappearance that proves deadly. Part urban legend, part
ghost story, VanOosting's short novel, based on an infamous character from his
own childhood, is engagingly written and chillingly eerie. The objective narrative
voice speaks both intimately and detachedly to the reader, and the chapters, which
function somewhat independently, are each carefully woven both internally and
with each other, resulting in a coherent cinematic recounting of events. The added
perspective of Frankie, Pearl's devoted little brother, imbues the tale with an in-
sider/outsider take on her unusual actions, and the uncomfortable family dynamic
(it is suggested that Pearl's father molests her) helps to explain Pearl's odd and
risky behaviors. Walking Mary is a fascinating, mystical character, and Pearl's
eager advances at befriending her along with her girl-detective approach will readily
engage even reluctant readers. HM
WALLACE-BRODEUR, RUTH 
Heron Cove. 
Dutton, 2005 
138p
ISBN 0-525-47393-9 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Sage's mother is "fixated on what she called her personal essence," constantly go-
ing off to take this course or that workshop; the summer that Sage is twelve, how-
ever, Mama's personal-improvement plans involve leaving Sage alone with her
elderly great-aunts in distant Maine. Expecting the worst, Sage is pleasantly sur-
prised by her aunties' warmth and welcoming and taken in by their knowledge of
family history. Over the course of the summer, Sage comes to recognize how
desperately she has longed for some semblance of family; her father, who didn't
even know she existed, passed away earlier that year, and her mother has main-
tained an uncomfortable distance from her own parents and, as of late, from Sage.
This contemporary novel has a quiet, period feel, due in part to the aunties' quaint
ways and the descriptions of the sleepy little oceanside town of Heron Cove. Aunts
Bea and Addie are kind, enthusiastic caretakers, and their unquestioned willing-
ness to support Sage through her processes of self-awareness drives the sharing of
family lore; Sage's devotion to them grows in response to this gentle care. While
the story deals directly with the tragic family history of the aunts' abusive father, it
JULY/AUGUST 2005 
* 515
is less successful in facing the deeper issue of Sage's frustrations with her mother.
When she ultimately realizes that, much as she loves Heron Cove, she wants to go
back to her mother, she is left fearing that her mother may not want her. When
her mother does return at summer's end, Sage's frustrations are neatly resolved
mostly offstage, leaving readers wondering about the details of the resolution. This
therefore lacks the edge of Horvath's similarly themed The Canning Season (BCCB
7/03), but certain readers are likely to identify with the role that family history can
play in helping an individual find identity. HM
WILLARD, NANCY 
Sweep Dreams; illus. by Mary GrandPrd. 
Little, 2005 
32p
ISBN 0-316-94008-9 
$16.99 
Ad 
5-7 yrs
A man who brings home a magical broom fails to give the broom the exercise she
needs until a helpful veterinarian sets him straight. Thereafter, the broom not
only sweeps the man's front walk every day, she dances with him through the
night-until another man steals her and advertises her as "Marvelous Martha-
the only dancing broom in captivity." Of course, the broom cannot be forced to
dance, so she ends up chucked in the river, whence she is rescued by the man who
loves her. However, having seen the world, the broom is no longer content with
domestic sweeping. Instead, she sweeps away the clouds and polishes a rainbow
before taking her rightful place as the sweeper-away of nighttime stars in the silent
hours before the dawn. Told in lyrical prose, this could be a beautiful tale; how-
ever, transitions between story beats seem arbitrary, with the plot trajectory be-
coming strange and random midway. Consequently, the man and the broom
become symbols rather than rounded characters, and their lack of personality leaves
the ending flat and saccharine. The oil wash and colored pencil illustrations are
rich in country reds, greens, and blues, overlaid with umber lights that give the
pages a luminous glow. Unfortunately, the visuals evince the same hit-and-miss
quality as the text: some spreads pull the viewer right into the page with freewheel-
ing curves and fervent color (as does the emotive image of the man waltzing with
his beloved broom), but others tend toward coyness in pose and a distancing graini-
ness of texture. Some viewers and listeners will eagerly fill in the blanks them-
selves, but others will opt for a more dynamic bit of bedtime whimsy such as
Tusa's How to Make a Night (BCCB 11/04). TC
WILLIS, JEANNE 
Tadpole's Promise; illus. by Tony Ross. 
Schwartz/Atheneum,
2005 
32p
ISBN 0-689-86524-4 
$15.95 
R 5-8 yrs
Interspecies romances hardly ever work out, but when a tadpole and a caterpillar
base their love vows on the promise that neither of them will change, you just
know from the outset that they are doomed. Sure enough, the shiny black tadpole
betrays his faithful vow to his beloved rainbow-colored caterpillar by growing legs
and arms and losing his tail. He assures her that he doesn't want these appendages,
only her, but she will not be mollified by his pretty words. As she cries herself to
sleep, he sinks to the bottom of his pond, sending his love to her in heart-shaped
bubbles that pop poignantly on the surface. Some time later, she awakens with
wings and forgiveness and returns to the pond to seek out her "shiny black pearl,"
whereupon their doomed fate becomes laugh-out-loud morbid. Ross' softly grayed
watercolors with their squiggly ink outlines provide the perfect complement to
this tale of love gone awry, filling the space around the lovers with little underwa-
516 
* THE BULLETIN
ter vaudevillian gags-the fish chasing the tadpoles, followed by the newly limbed
tadpoles chasing the fish, the tadpoles trying out their new arms by shaking hands
and tipping hats, etc. He manages the perfect balance of loss, despondency, and
bewilderment in the expression of the devoted frog waiting patiently for the return
of his lost love. The sideways layout of the book aptly matches both the subject
matter of a caterpillar hanging over a pond, the surface of which lands in the gutter
of the page, and the twisted nature of the tale itself. The final joke still plays well
the second and third time through, so expect calls for an encore. KC
WIZOWATY, SuzI 
A Tour ofEvil. Sleuth/Philomel, 2005 
[2 0 8p]
ISBN 0-399-24251-1 
$10.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 6-9
Several different human stories converge in a small cathedral city in Northern
France: eleven-year-old Alma, tired of perfunctory foster placements, seeks a per-
manent home; the children living with Madame Jouet fear that something terrible
has happened to four of their foster siblings, who have disappeared; Barlach, the
silent old streetsweeper, finds himself mysteriously drawn to the cathedral. It's at
the cathedral that the stories converge, because that's where Malocchio, the
cathedral's guide and caretaker, has been holding the kidnapped children, whom
Alma finds and determines to free-if she doesn't end up becoming Malocchio's
victim herself. Wizowaty laces her story with tantalizing near-mystical elements
and echoes of classic folk and written tales, and even the names of her characters
(Alma, the soul; Malocchio, the evil eye) suggest symbolic or allegorical signifi-
cance. The atmosphere of the small French town and the cathedral itself are effec-
tively conveyed, with modern touches blending with the traditional ways of the
area and the ancient echoes of the cathedral. The mystery itself, however, fails to
jell: the extent and methodology of Malocchio's crimes are unclear, and Barlach
(who strongly evokes To Killa Mockingbird's Boo Radley) doesn't end up playing
that direct a role, so there doesn't seem to be much point to his self-sacrifice;
moreover, Alma is really the only vivid character, so the narrative shifts, especially
to Madame Jouet's flatly depicted group ofkids, lessen the impact. Westall's Stones
ofMuncaster Cathedral (BCCB 4/93) is therefore a considerably superior cathedral
mystery involving missing children, but readers with a particular taste for moody
and textured setting may still relish the dark happenings in picturesque surround-
ings. DS
WRIGHT, RANDALL 
The Silver Penny. 
Holt, 2005 
197p
ISBN 0-8050-7391-4 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 4-6
His family's farm in post-Revolutionary America is a mite boring for free-spirited
Jacob (nicknamed Deb), especially since his mother won't allow him to pursue his
interest in hexes and charms. Disregarding her ban, Deb attempts a hex to cure
himself of wanderlust. That hex appears to fail, but when Deb breaks his leg too
badly to be healed, he fears the hex has worked all too well-in fact, his troubled
dreams reveal that his soul is being stalked through the spirit world by a loony old
man who keeps catching at Deb's wounded leg and threatening to imprison him
forever. Only Deb's possession of Grandpa's lucky silver penny keeps the wicked
old coot (later identified as Old Scratch) at bay. The arrival on the farm of an
otherworldly boy, Bray, further complicates the story; a true-hearted spirit, Bray
has come in search of the silver penny he gave away long ago after saturating it
JULY/AUGUST 2005 
* 517
with his tears (thus giving the penny its potency). When Deb retreats into the
spirit realm, sunk in depression over his accident, he is trapped there by Old Scratch;
generously, Bray offers his own pure self in exchange and sets Deb free. From that
point on, this offbeat frontier fantasy shows Deb laboring to come to terms with
the incapacitated body awaiting him at home while he trudges, quite whole, through
the hills and woods of an ethereal version of colonial America. A few coincidental
yet satisfying encounters with spirit strangers lead Deb to the point where he is
willing to give up the silver penny, rescue Bray, and resume his life where he left it
off. A disarmingly persuasive tale of a rambunctious boy who does his most-
needed maturing while wandering in the head, this unconventional story offers
readers a twisting, turning journey through the hinterland of the soul. TC
ZENATTI, VALIRIE 
When I Was a Soldier; tr. from the French by Adriana
Hunter. 
Bloomsbury, 2005 
235p
ISBN 1-58234-978-9 
$16.95 
R Gr. 7-12
In this French memoir, Val6rie, an Israeli citizen of five years, embarks on her two-
year compulsory tour with the Israeli Army. Apart from her natural reluctance to
leave her close friends, she enters the service with a fairly open-minded attitude
and a willingness to do what is expected of her. Nonetheless, separation pains
from family and girlfriends, an on-again/off-again relationship with her unfaithful
boyfriend, serious reservations about the justice of Israeli occupation in Palestinian
territory, and the possibility of failure in advanced secret-service training all take
their toll, leading to a physical breakdown and subsequent counseling but never
preventing her from carrying out her duty on a highly secret radio surveillance
team. Zenatti spends more time recounting her few months of training than her
stretch as a working corporal, and the single mission described here amounts to no
more than a couple of pages. There's enough relationship drama behind the scenes
to carry the tale, though, and American readers whose familiarity with the Armed
Forces is limited to voluntary enlistment should be intrigued by the very concept
of universal compulsory service. EB
There's a behind-the-scenes change happening at the Bulletin this summer: we're
beginning a partnership with Johns Hopkins University Press, who will be han-
dling our subscriptions and advertising starting with the new volume year. This
change shouldn't disturb our readers, since subscriptions will be automatically trans-
ferred, and renewal mailings will provide all the necessary updated information.
This partnership also means that the Bulletin will become part of Project Muse,
the electronic journals service; while we are discussing the possibility of remodel-
ing and remounting the Bulletin Online for independent subscriber access as well,
our current reviews will be available virtually to the many Project Muse subscrib-
ers.
We look forward to the new possibilities this partnership can bring, and we hope
you will continue to enjoy your Bulletin subscription.
518 
* THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
ADVENTURE: Byrd; Dickinson;
Funke; Horowitz; Kimmel;
Reilly; Simmons
African Americans: Clinton; Lester
African Americans-stories: Perry;
Rodman
Animals: Richardson
Animals-fiction: Daley
Animals-stories: Priceman
Asian Americans-fiction: Park
Astronomy: Karas
Auctions-stories: Seymour
Aunts-fiction: Wallace-Brodeur
Aunts-stories: Seymour
Aviation-stories: Priceman
Baths-stories: Pelletier
BEDTIME STORIES: MacLachlan
BIBLE STORIES: McCaughrean
BIOGRAPHIES: Chambers;
Delano; Hillman; Krull; Zenatti
Biology: Sidman
Birds: Richardson
Brothers and sisters-fiction: Booth;
McDonald Stink
Brothers-fiction: Auseon; Levithan;
McCormick; Reilly
Bullies-fiction: Auseon
Canada-fiction: Hunter
Cars-fiction: Reilly
Cars-stories: Van Dusen
Cats-stories: Araki; MacLachlan
Civil rights: Blumenthal
Civil War: Clinton
Commerce-fiction: Nye
Communism-fiction: Levine
Competition-fiction: Reilly
Competition-stories: Seymour
Cousins-fiction: Hunter
Crime and criminals-fiction: Conly;
Hirsch; Simmons; Wizowaty
Current events: Zenatti
Death-fiction: Nilsson
Death-folklore: Maddern
Demons-fiction: Horowitz
Devil, the-fiction: Wright
Disabilities-fiction: Halam; Wright
Dogs-stories: Cronin
Ecology: Collard
Ecology-fiction: Halam
Environmental studies: Collard
Ethics and values: Auseon; Conly;
Halam; Lester; Levine;
McClements; Newman; Nye;
Park; Ruditis
Fame-fiction: Lane
Families: Richardson
Families-fiction: Amato;
McCormick; Wallace-Brodeur
Families-stories: Perry
FANTASY: Bell; Booth; Codell;
Constable; Dickinson; Hearn;
Horowitz; Willard; Wright
Fathers-fiction: Amato; Garfield;
Maynard; Nields; Simmons
Films and filmmaking: Clee
Fish: Rockwell
Fish-fiction: Guarente
FOLKTALES AND FAIRY TALES:
Maddern
Food and eating-stories: Stowell
France-fiction: Wizowaty
Friends-fiction: Burchill; Cox;
Frank; Hemphill; Lantz; Nields;
Nilsson; Park; VanOosting
JULY/AUGUST 2005 
* 519
Friends-stories: Rodman
Frogs-stories: Willis
Gays and lesbians-fiction: Burchill;
LaRochelle
Gender-fiction: Lantz
Geography: Collard
Grandparents-stories: Juster
Growing up-fiction: Pearson
Guests-stories: Reichert
Heroes-stories: Pelletier
HISTORICAL FICTION: Hearn;
Hoobler; Lester; Levine;
Maynard; Olswanger; Wright
History, U.S.: Blumenthal; Clee;
Clinton; Lester; McDonald
Saving
History, world: Krull
Holocaust: Hillman
Household objects-stories: Willard
Houses-stories: Juster
HUMOR: Amato; Codell; Cronin;
Funke; Guarente; LaRochelle;
McClements; McDonald Stink;
Olswanger; Pelletier; Priceman;
Seymour; Willis
Identity-fiction: Hemphill;
LaRochelle; Nilsson; Sorrells
Inventors and inventing-stories:
Stowell
Japan-fiction: Hoobler
Jews: Delano; Hillman
Jews-fiction: Olswanger
Journals-fiction: Hunter
Kidnapping-fiction: Wizowaty
Kidnapping-stories: Funke
Latinos: Chambers
Literature, English: Kimmel
LOVE STORIES: Hillman; Willis
Love-stories: MacLachlan
Magic-fiction: Constable; Hearn
Marine life: Rockwell
Media studies: Clee
Medicine: Dendy
Mental illness-fiction: Conly
Military life: Zenatti
Monsters-fiction: Kimmel
Monsters-poetry: Anderson
Mothers-fiction: Pearson
Mothers-folklore: Maddern
Mothers-stories: Funke
Music and musicians: Chambers
Music and musicians-fiction:
Frank; Lane; Nields; Reichert
MYSTERIES: Conly; Hirsch;
Hoobler; Reilly; Sorrells;
VanOosting; Wizowaty
Mythology, classical: Byrd
Mythology-fiction: Bell
Nature study: McClements;
Rockwell; Sidman; Willis
Obsession-fiction: Lane
Parties-fiction: Ruditis
Parties-stories: Reichert
Persecution-fiction: Levine
Physical education: Blumenthal;
Lake
Pirates-stories: Funke
POETRY: Anderson; Hemphill;
Sidman
Pregnancy-fiction: Hearn
Prejudice-fiction: Constable
Rats-fiction: Daley
Readers' theater: Lester
Reading aloud: Anderson; Byrd;
Lester; Olswanger; Sidman
Reading, easy: Cox; Hirsch;
McDonald Stink
Reading, reluctant: Krull; Lake;
Reilly; VanOosting
Relationships: Zenatti
Relationships-fiction: Burchill;
Frank; Guarente; Lane; Newman;
Pearson
Religious education: McCaughrean
Revolutionary War: McDonald
Saving
RHYMING STORIES: Anderson;
Araki; Cronin; Reichert; Van
Dusen
School-fiction: Booth
Science: Collard; Delano; Dendy;
Karas; Krull
Science experiments-fiction: Cox;
Maynard; Park
SCIENCE FICTION: Daley;
Halam; Reilly
Scouting-fiction: McClements
Sea-poetry: Anderson
Secrets-fiction: Garfield
Sex-fiction: Newman; Ruditis
Sexism: Blumenthal
520 
* THE BULLETIN
Sharks: Rockwell
Ships and sailing-stories: Funke
Sisters-fiction: Hearn
Slavery-fiction: Lester
Space travel-fiction: Daley
Storytime: Araki; Cronin; Rodman;
Willard
Suicide-fiction: Hemphill; Maynard
Summer-fiction: Wallace-Brodeur
Summer-stories: Perry
SUPERNATURAL STORIES:
Garfield; VanOosting
Surfing: Lake
SUSPENSE: Sorrells
Swimming-stories: Rodman
TODDLER BOOKS: Araki;
Cronin
Urban life-fiction: Conly
Voyages and travel-fiction: Halam;
Levithan; McCaughrean;
Simmons
Voyages and travel-stories:
Priceman; Stowell
War-fiction: Bell; Dickinson
Weather-stories: Perry
Werewolves-fiction: Garfield
Wishes-fiction: Codell
Witches-fiction: Codell
Women's studies: Blumenthal
World War II: Hillman
World War II-fiction: Hunter
Writers and writing-fiction: Lane;
Lantz
Zoos: Richardson
JULY/AUGUST 2005 
* 
521
THE
BULLET
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
AUTHOR/TITLE INDEX, VOLUME 58
SEPTEMBER, 2004-JULY/AUGUST, 2005
10 Things to Do before I Die. Ehrenhaft. 166.
11,000 Years Lost. Griffin. 169.
21. Iversen. 340.
24 Girls in 7 Days. Bradley. 241.
47. Mosley. 453.
Abrahams. Down the Rabbit Hole. 324.
Absolutely, Positively, Not. LaRochelle. 496.
Ada. Mam: Goose. 370.
Adam and Eve and the Garden of Eden. Ray.
263.
Adler. Bones and the Big Yellow Mystery. 112.
. George Washington. 242.
Adlington. Diary of Pelly D. 371.
African Princess. Hansen. 170.
Agnes Parker... Happy Camper? O'Dell. 352.
Ahlberg. Half a Pig. 4.
. Improbable Cat. 58.
. Little Cat Baby. 59.
Akhenaten Adventure. Kerr. 214.
Aladdin and the Enchanted Lamp. Pullman.
456.
Aldrin. Reaching for the Moon. 424.
Alex and the Wednesday Chess Club. Wong.
152.
Alexander's Pretending Day. Crumpacker. 333.
Alexander. Xanadu Adventure. 196.
Ali. Media Madness. 371.
Alia's Mission. Stamaty. 266.
Alice the Fairy. Shannon. 143.
Alison Rules. Clark. 64.
Allan. Where Willy Went. 325.
Allen. Gotta Get Some Bish Bash Bosh. 197.
Alone in the World. Reef. 457.
Alosha. Pike. 34.
Alvarez. Finding Miracles. 158.
Always Remember Me. Russo. 459.
Amato. Naked Mole-Rat Letters. 476.
Amazing Adventures of Bathman! Pelletier. 506.
And Tango Makes Three. Richardson. 508.
Andersen. For Sure! For Sure! 59.
_ Little Mermaid. 159.
. Pea Blossom. 280.
.Tales of Hans Christian Andersen. 159.
. Ugly Duckling. 197.
Anderson, L. Prom. 242.
Anderson, M. Game of Sunken Places. 5.
. Serpent Came to Gloucester. 476.
. Whales on Stilts. 325.
Andy Warhol. Greenberg. 168.
Angel's Grace. Baptiste. 326.
Animal Stackers. Belle. 327.
Ant and Honey Bee. McDonald. 258.
Antarctica. Myers. 177.
Anybodies. Bode. 7.
Apples to Oregon. Hopkinson. 78.
Araki. Kitten's Big Adventure. 477.
Arbogast. Buildings in Disguise. 197.
Are We Alone? Skurzynski. 99.
Are We There Yet? Levithan. 498.
Armstrong. Photo By Brady. 323.
. What a Song Can Do. 5.
Arnold. Catalina Magdalena Hoopensteiner
Wallendiner Hogan Logan Bogan Was Her
Name. 6.
Aronson. John Winthrop, Oliver Cromwell, and
the Land of Promise. 6.
Arthur and the Minimoys. Besson. 374.
Asher. Too Many Frogs! 243.
Ashman. How to Make a Night. 113.
. To the Beach! 425.
Asleep in the Stable. Hillenbrand. 125.
At Jerusalem's Gate. Grimes. 292.
Au Pairs. De La Cruz. 14.
Auch. Chickarella. 372.
Auction! Seymour. 510.
Auseon. Funny Little Monkey. 477.
IN
522 
* THE BULLETIN
Avi. Book without Words. 426.
._ End of the Beginning. 113.
Avril Crump and Her Amazing Clones. Woolfe.
363.
B for Buster. Lawrence. 26.
Baby Babka, the Gorgeous Genius. Zalben. 153.
Baby Brains. James. 212.
Back to School, Mallory. Friedman. 16.
Bad Dog School. Joosse. 82.
Baeta. From Another World. 347.
Baker, E. Once Upon a Curse. 198.
Baker, K Lucky Days with Mr. and Mrs. Green.
326.
Ballpark. Curlee. 286.
Banerjee. Maya Running. 281.
Baptiste. Angel's Grace. 326.
Barfburger Baby, I Was Here First. Danziger.
68.
Barrett. On Etruscan Time. 426.
Barron. Great Tree of Avalon. 198.
Barry. Peter and the Starcatchers. 113.
Bartek. Funerals & Fly Fishing. 59.
Bartoletti. Hitler Youth. 427.
__ . Nobody's Diggier than a Dog. 199.
Basho and the River Stones. Myers. 135.
Basketball (Or Something Like It). Baskin. 281.
Baskin. Basketball (Or Something Like It). 281.
Bateman. Running with the Reservoir Pups.
199.
Bath. Secret of Castle Cant. 7.
Bauer, J. Best Foot Forward. 427.
Bauer, M. Bear Named Trouble. 428.
. If Frogs Made Weather. 372.
Bausum. With Courage and Cloth. 200.
Be More Chill. Vizzini. 43.
Bear Named Trouble. Bauer. 428.
Beard. Operation Clean Sweep. 60.
Beatrice Doesn't Want To. Numeroff. 138.
Beauty. Butcher. 284.
Because Your Daddy Loves You. Clements. 433.
Becker. Boredom Blasters. 159.
Becoming Naomi Le6n. Ryan. 97.
Beekman's Big Deal. de Guzman. 206.
Beetle McGrady Eats Bugs! McDonald. 394.
Before Hollywood. Clee. 481.
Before You Were Born. Schwartz. 400.
Bell, A. Little Mermaid. 159.
. Ugly Duckling. 197.
Bell, H. Rise of a Hero. 478.
_ 
.Wizard Test. 243.
Belle. Animal Stackers. 327.
Ben Over Night. Ellis. 435.
Benchley. Shark Life. 428.
Bennett. Not Norman. 328.
Bergstram. Good Night, Alfie Atkins. 373.
.Very Tricky, Alfie Atkins. 373.
Bermudez Triangle. Johnson. 128.
Bernasconi. Captain Arsenio. 373.
Bernier-Grand. Cesar. 60.
Bernstein. Magic by the Book. 244.
Bertrand. Granite Baby. 328.
Besson. Arthur and the Minimoys. 374.
Best Foot Forward. Bauer. 427.
Best Halloween Ever. Robinson. 36.
Betsy and the Emperor. Rabin. 141.
Between Heaven and Earth. Norman. 222.
Bial. Where Washington Walked. 244.
Big Empty. Stephens. 185.
Big House. Coman. 65.
Big Surprise in the Bug Tank. Horowitz. 212.
Big Ugly Monster and the Little Stone Rabbit.
Wormell. 3.
Bildner. Shot Heard 'round the World. 374.
Billy Clikk. Crilley. 11.
Bing Go Picnic. Dewan. 334.
Bing Make Music. Dewan. 334.
Bird. Johnson. 172.
Birdhouses. Schwarz. 400.
Bittle. MacLachlan. 27.
Bitton-Jackson. Hello, America. 375.
Black and White. Volponi. 466.
Black Canary. Curry. 286.
Black Juice. Lanagan. 298.
Black Taxi. Moloney. 397.
Blacker. Boy2Girl. 281.
Blackman. Naughts & Crosses. 429.
Blackwell's Island. Graff. 291.
Blood on His Hands. Roberts. 36.
Blood Red Horse. Grant. 385.
Blood Secret. Lasky. 84.
Blow Out the Moon. Koponen. 24.
Blue Girl. de Lint. 164.
Blue Roan Child. Findlay. 15.
Blueberries for the Queen. Paterson. 94.
Blumenthal, D. Don't Let the Peas Touch! 114.
Blumenthal, K. Let Me Play. 478.
Bode. Anybodies. 7.
Bodett. Norman Tuttle on the Last Frontier.
160.
Bolden. Champ. 200.
. Maritcha. 282.
. Wake Up Our Souls. 8.
Bollywood Babes. Dhami. 288.
Bond. This Place in the Snow. 160.
Bondoux. Destiny of Linus Hoppe. 375.
Bone. Fast Forward. 161.
. Sleep Rough Tonight. 376.
Bones and the Big Yellow Mystery. Adler. 112.
BooBoo. Dunrea. 70.
Book about Design. Gonyea. 439.
Book of Dead Days. Sedgwick. 183.
Book without Words. Avi. 426.
Booth. Doctor Illuminatus. 162.
. Soul Stealer. 479.
JULY/AUGUST 2005 
* 
523
Borden. Greatest Skating Race. 201.
Boredom Blasters. Becker. 159.
Boring. Guinea Pig Scientists. 486.
Boris. Rylant. 356.
Bound. Napoli. 222.
Bowen. When You Visit Grandma & Grandpa.
61.
Bower. How the Amazon Queen Fought the
Prince of Egypt. 329.
Boy and His Bunny. Bryan. 329.
Boy from the Basement. Shaw. 144.
Boy Kills Man. Whyman. 313.
Boy No More. Mazer. 175.
Boy Proof. Castellucci. 246.
Boy Who Drew Birds. Davies. 68.
Boy, the Bear, the Baron, the Bard. Rogers. 182.
Boy2Girl. Blacker. 281.
Boyfriend List. Lockhart. 300.
Boys of San Joaquin. Smith. 266.
Brackett. Home in the Heart. 376.
_ 
. Restless Genius. 115.
Bradley, A. 24 Girls in 7 Days. 241.
Bradley, K. President's Daughter. 245.
Bras and Broomsticks. Mlynowski. 221.
Brashares. Girls in Pants. 282.
Brave Dogs, Gentle Dogs. Urbigkit. 465.
Brave Santa. Poydar. 181.
Breaker Boys. Hughes. 80.
Brennan. Purple Emperor. 115.
Broach. Shakespeare's Secret. 429.
. What the No-Good Baby Is Good For.
430.
Broken China. Williams. 411.
Broken Song. Lasky. 445.
Brooklyn Rose. Rinaldi. 305.
Brooks. Candy. 245.
Brother Hood. McDonald. 216.
Brown. Kid Blink Beats the World. 162.
. Odd Boy Out. 61.
Browne. Into the Forest. 163.
Brownjohn. Ghost Ship. 457.
Bruchac. Code Talker. 246.
. Dark Pond. 62.
.Jim Thorpe's Bright Path. 8.
.Raccoon's Last Race. 116.
Brugman. Finding Grace. 201.
Bryan. Boy and His Bunny. 329.
Bryant. Georgia's Bones. 283.
Buchanan. Goodbye, Charley. 62.
Bucking the Sarge. Curtis. 67.
Buddy. Bustard. 283.
Buildings in Disguise. Arbogast. 197.
Bunny Mail. Wells. 231.
Burchill. Sugar Rush. 479.
Burn Journals. Runyon. 142.
Bustard. Buddy. 283.
Busted! Hicks. 77.
Butcher. Beauty. 284.
Buttermilk Hill. White. 186.
By These Ten Bones. Dunkle. 379.
By Word of Mouse. Spohn. 145.
Byrd. Hero and the Minotaur. 480.
Cactus Soup. Kimmel. 129.
Cadnum. Dragon Throne. 430.
. Starfall. 163.
Call Me Maria. Cofer. 116.
Camel's Lament. Carryl. 63.
Campoy. Mama Goose. 370.
Candy. Brooks. 245.
Captain Arsenio. Bernasconi. 373.
Captain Raptor and the Moon Mystery.
O'Malley. 352.
Carbone. Last Dance on Holladay Street. 431.
Carey. Double Life of Zoe Flynn. 9.
Carling. Sawdust Carpets. 330.
Carlson. Red Hot Salsa. 330.
Carman. Dark Hills Divide. 202.
Carmine. Sweet. 464.
Carmody. Night Gate. 202.
Carney. Dr. Welch and the Great Grape Story.
431.
Carryl. Camel's Lament. 63.
Carter. Grandma's General Store. 432.
Cassidy. Dizzy. 203.
Castellucci. Boy Proof. 246.
Catalina 
Magdalena 
Hoopensteiner
Wallendiner Hogan Logan Bogan Was Her
Name. Arnold. 6.
Catch a Tiger by the Toe. Levine. 497.
Cats in Krasinski Square. Hesse. 76.
Caught in the Act. Moore. 452.
Cecil. One Dark and Dreadful Night. 63.
Celia Cruz, Queen of Salsa. Chambers. 480.
Center of the World. Steinhbfel. 463.
Central Heating. Singer. 226.
Cesar. Bernier-Grand. 60.
Chace. You & You & You. 503.
Chaconas. Cork & Fuzz. 331.
Chambers. Celia Cruz, Queen of Salsa. 480.
Chameleon, Chameleon. Cowley. 332.
Champ. Bolden. 200.
Chanda's Secrets. Stratton. 100.
Charlie Bone and the Invisible Boy. Nimmo.
33.
Chen. Guji Guji. 9.
Cheng. Honeysuckle House. 63.
. Lace Dowry. 331.
Cheshire. Kissing Vanessa. 203.
Chickarella. Auch. 372.
Chicken Bedtime Is Really Early. Perl. 455.
Chicken Friend. Morgan. 349.
Child. Hubert Horatio Bartle Bobton-Trent.
432.
. I Am Too Absolutely Small for School.
10.
524 
* THE BULLETIN
Chipman. From the Lighthouse. 204.
Choi. Peach Heaven. 433.
Chotjewitz. Daniel Half Human and the Good
Nazi. 164.
Chwast. Had Gadya. 284.
Circles of Hope. Williams. 410.
Cirrone. Dancing in Red Shoes Will Kill You.
247.
City 1 2 3. Milich. 396.
Clark. Alison Rules. 64.
Clarke. Kalpana's Dream. 331.
Clee. Before Hollywood. 481.
Clements. Because Your Daddy Loves You. 433.
Clever Beatrice and the Best Little Pony. Willey.
103.
Climo. Monkey Business. 434.
Clinton. Hold the Flag High. 481.
Close Encounters of a Third-World Kind.
Stewart. 228.
Close Kin. Dunkle. 165.
Cloud Chamber. Maynard. 499.
Cobb. I Fall Down. 204.
Code Talker. Bruchac. 246.
Codell. Diary of a Fairy Godmother. 482.
. Sing a Song of Tuna Fish. 285.
Cofer. Call Me Marfa. 116.
Cohen. My Big Brother. 285.
Cohn. Shrimp. 247.
Cole. Fair Monaco. 117.
Colfer. Supernaturalist. 10.
Collard. Prairie Builders. 482.
Collier. Empty Mirror. 64.
Collins, P. Come Out, Come Out! 377.
Collins, S. Gregor and the Prophecy of Bane.
65.
Color of Fire. Rinaldi. 354.
Coman. Big House. 65.
Come Out, Come Out! Collins. 377.
Come, Llamas. Morris. 221.
Coming On Home Soon. Woodson. 272.
Confessions of a Closet Catholic. Littman. 257.
Confused Hanukkah. Koons. 130.
Conquerors. McKee. 217.
Conly. In the Night, on Lanvale Street. 483.
Conrad's Fate. Jones. 390.
Constable. Waterless Sea. 483.
Convicts. Lawrence. 343.
Cool Rubber Stamp Art. Price. 303.
Cool Scrapbooks. Price. 303.
Cool Time Song. Schaefer. 265.
Cooper, F. Jump! 205.
Cooper, I. Sam I Am. 248.
Cooper, M. Dust to Eat. 11.
Cooper, S. Magician's Boy. 332.
Corbet. Shelf Life. 377.
Corder. Lionboy: The Chase. 66.
Cork & Fuzz. Chaconas. 331.
Cottonmouth Club. Marcum. 449.
Counting Our Way to the 100th Day! Franco.
16.
Cowley. Chameleon, Chameleon. 332.
Cox. That Crazy Eddie and the Science Project
of Doom. 484.
Crack in the Line. Lawrence. 85.
Crampton. Red Bird. 345.
Crash Course for Molly. Eriksson. 379.
Crew. Pig on the Titanic. 333.
Crilley. Billy Clikk. 11.
Cronin. Wiggle. 485.
Cross. Dark Ground. 205.
Crossley-Holland. How Many Miles to
Bethlehem? 164.
. King of the Middle March. 248.
Crown Me! Lay. 174.
Cruise Control. Trueman. 148.
Crumpacker. Alexander's Pretending Day. 333.
Crutcher. Sledding Hill. 434.
Cry of the Icemark. Hill. 339.
Cryptid Hunters. Smith. 227.
Cuddle Book. Van Genechten. 231.
Cummings. Red Kayak. 66.
Cunningham. Midnight Diary of Zoya Blume.
378.
Cup of the World. Dickinson. 118.
Curlee. Ballpark. 286.
. Parthenon. 67.
Curry. Black Canary. 286.
Curse of the Blue Tattoo. Meyer. 31.
Curtis. Bucking the Sarge. 67.
Cutler. Rose and Riley. 287.
Dad Runs Away with the Circus. Keret. 129.
Dad, Jackie, and Me. Uhlberg. 407.
Dahlberg. Escape to West Berlin. 206.
Dale. Whispering to Witches. 117.
Daley. Space Station Rat. 485.
Dancing in Red Shoes Will Kill You. Cirrone.
247.
Daniel Half Human and the Good Nazi.
Chotjewitz. 164.
Danziger. Barfburger Baby, I Was Here First.
68.
Dark Ground. Cross. 205.
Dark Hills Divide. Carman. 202.
Dark Pond. Bruchac. 62.
Darkest Evening. Durbin. 207.
Dashwood Sisters' Secrets of Love. Rushton.
306.
Datlow. Faery Reel. 12.
David. Pickle & Penguin. 249.
Davidson. Jason & Kyra. 12.
Davies, J. Boy Who Drew Birds. 68.
Davies, N. Poop. 118.
Davis. Evangeline Brown and the Cadillac Mo-
tel. 13.
JULY/AUGUST 2005 
* 525
DayJoanie Frankenhauser Became a Boy. Lantz.
496.
Day of Tears. Lester. 497.
Days to Celebrate. Hopkins. 339.
de Guzman. Beekman's Big Deal. 206.
De La Cruz. Au Pairs. 14.
de Lint. Blue Girl. 164.
Death in a Nut. Maddern. 499.
Delano. Genius. 485.
Deliver Us from Normal. Klise. 256.
Demi. Mother Teresa. 287.
Dendy. Guinea Pig Scientists. 486.
Denenberg. Shadow Life. 378.
Destiny of Linus Hoppe. Bondoux. 375.
Deuker. Runner. 435.
Devil on My Heels. McDonald. 28.
Devil's Toenail. Prue. 35.
Dewan. Bing Go Picnic. 334.
. Bing Make Music. 334.
Dhami. Bollywood Babes. 288.
Diary of a Fairy Godmother. Codell. 482.
Diary of Pelly D. Adlington. 371.
Dickinson. Cup of the World. 118.
. Widow and the King. 486.
Dijkstra. Little Mouse. 249.
Dizzy. Cassidy. 203.
Do Your ABC's, Little Brown Bear. London.
346.
Doctor Illuminatus. Booth. 162.
Dodd. Princess of Neptune. 69.
Dodds. Henry's Amazing Machine. 69.
Does a Duck Have a Daddy? Ehrlich. 14.
Does a Mouse Have a Mommy? Ehrlich. 14.
Dollmakers and Their Stories. Goddu. 121.
Don't Let the Peas Touch! Blumenthal. 114.
Don't Tell the Girls. Giff. 383.
Doormat. McWilliams. 219.
Dorros. Julio's Magic. 207.
_ 
. Under the Sun. 250.
Double Life of Zoe Flynn. Carey. 9.
Down Girl and Sit. Nolan. 137.
Down the Rabbit Hole. Abrahams. 324.
Doyle. Splash, Joshua, Splash! 119.
Dr. Welch and the Great Grape Story. Carney.
431.
Dragon Keeper. Wilkinson. 313.
Dragon Rider. Funke. 72.
Dragon Throne. Cadnum. 430.
Dragons of Spratt, Ohio. Zinnen. 187.
Drake. Snow Amazing. 165.
Dread Locks. Shusterman. 461.
Dream of Freedom. McWhorter. 219.
Drowned Wednesday. Nix. 454.
Duncan Rumplemeyer's Bad Birthday. Stadler.
185.
Duncan. Honey Baby Sugar Child. 288.
Dunkle. By These Ten Bones. 379.
. Close Kin. 165.
Dunrea. BooBoo. 70.
. Peedie. 70.
Durbin. Darkest Evening. 207.
Dusk. Gates. 437.
Dust to Eat. Cooper. 11.
Duvall. Rabbit Goes Duck Hunting. 208.
Dyssegaard. Crash Course for Molly. 379.
. Good Night, Alfie Atkins. 373.
. Very Tricky, Alfie Atkins. 373.
Each Little Bird That Sings. Wiles. 270.
Edelstein. Kipling's Choice. 462.
Edge Chronicles: Beyond the Deepwoods.
Stewart. 40.
Edge Chronicles: Stormchaser. Stewart. 40.
Edwards. McGillycuddy Could! 250.
Egan. Trial of Cardigan Jones. 70.
Ehrenhaft. 10 Things to Do before I Die. 166.
. Tell It to Naomi. 71.
Ehrlich. Does a Duck Have a Daddy? 14.
. Does a Mouse Have a Mommy? 14.
Elephant in the Backyard. Sobol. 39.
Ella's Big Chance. Hughes. 126.
Ellis, D. Heaven Shop. 208.
Ellis, S. Ben Over Night. 435.
Emako Blue. Woods. 47.
Emberley. Ruby and the Sniffs. 15.
Empty Mirror. Collier. 64.
End of the Beginning. Avi. 113.
Enna Burning. Hale. 123.
Eriksson. Crash Course for Molly. 379.
Escape from Saigon. Warren. 101.
Escape to West Berlin. Dahlberg. 206.
Evangeline Brown and the Cadillac Motel.
Davis. 13.
Everything I Know about Cars. Lichtenheld.
344.
Eyes Like Willy's. Havill. 19.
Face Relations. Singer. 99.
Fade to Black. Flinn. 380.
Faery Reel. Datlow. 12.
Fair Monaco. Cole. 117.
Fake ID. Sorrells. 512.
Falcon's Malteser. Horowitz. 79.
Falcone. Walking with the Dead. 334.
Families Have Together. Ziefert. 414.
Far from Xanadu. Peters. 456.
Far Traveler. Tingle. 310.
Farley. Seven Tears into the Sea. 335.
Farmer. Sea of Trolls. 119.
Farrell, J. Invisible Allies. 335.
Farrell, M. Fire in the Hole! 209.
Fast and Brutal Wing. Johnson. 173.
Fast Forward. Bone. 161.
Feinstein. Last Shot. 288.
Finding Christmas. Ward. 186.
Finding Grace. Brugman. 201.
526 
* THE BULLETIN
Finding Lubchenko. Simmons. 512.
Finding Miracles. Alvarez. 158.
Findlay. Blue Roan Child. 15.
Fire Engine for Ruthie. Newman. 33.
Fire in the Hole! Farrell. 209.
First Crossing. Gallo. 290.
Fish. Matthews. 89.
Fisher, A. Story Goes On. 380.
Fisher, C. Snow-walker. 71.
.Sphere of Secrets. 289.
Fitch & Chip: Who's Afraid of Granny Wolf?
Wheeler. 44.
Five Ancestors. Stone. 267.
Fixed. Goobie. 384.
Flag with Fifty-Six Stars. Rubin. 356.
Flags of War. Wilson. 232.
Flame Tree. Lewis. 133.
Flanagan. Ruins of Gorlan. 436.
Fleabiscuit Sings! Shyer. 403.
Fleischman. Giant Rat of Sumatra. 251.
Fleming. Lowji Discovers America. 289.
Fleshmarket. Morgan. 92.
Flinn. Fade to Black. 380.
Florian. Zoo's Who. 381.
For Sure! For Sure! Andersen. 59.
Forging of the Blade. La Fevers. 131.
Fortune's Bones. Nelson. 259.
Fourth World. Thompson. 406.
Fradin. Let It Begin Here! 436.
.Power of One. 251.
Franco. Counting Our Way to the 100th Day!
16.
Frank, H. I Can't Tell You. 166.
Frank, J. Toughest Cowboy. 72.
Frank, L. Lucky Stars. 487.
Frank, M. Understanding the Holy Land. 381.
Fredericks. Head Games. 119.
Freedom on the Menu. Weatherford. 268.
French. T. Rex. 167.
Fresh Fish. Kilaka. 443.
Friedman, L. Back to School, Mallory. 16.
Friedman, R. Silent Witness. 437.
Friend Called Anne. Van Maarsen. 362.
Friend. Perfect. 120.
Friend. Stewart. 147.
From Another World. Machado. 347.
From the Lighthouse. Chipman. 204.
Funerals & Fly Fishing. Bartek. 59.
Funke. Dragon Rider. 72.
. Pirate Girl. 487.
Funny Little Monkey. Auseon. 477.
Furrow. Sly the Sleuth and the Pet Mysteries.
302.
Gallo. First Crossing. 290.
Game of Sunken Places. Anderson. 5.
Garfield. My Father the Werewolf. 488.
Garfinkle. Storky. 382.
Gargoyles, Girders & Glass Houses. Zaunders.
233.
Gaskins. I Believe In. 17.
Gates. Dusk. 437.
Gathering of Shades. Stahler. 405.
Gay. Stella, Princess of the Sky. 73.
Geisert, A. Pigaroons. 120.
Geisert, B. Lessons. 290.
Genie in the Book. Trumbore. 230.
Genius. Delano. 485.
Gentle's Holler. Madden. 447.
George vs. George. Schanzer. 226.
George Washington. Adler. 242.
George. Up! 382.
Georgia's Bones. Bryant. 283.
Gerstein. Old Country. 383.
Ghost Ship. Reiche. 457.
Giant and the Beanstalk. Stanley. 146.
Giant Hug. Horning. 212.
Giant Rat of Sumatra. Fleischman. 251.
Gibbons. Mummies, Pyramids, and Pharaohs.
17.
Giblin. Good Brother, Bad Brother. 438.
Giff. A House of Tailors. 121.
.Don't Tell the Girls. 383.
Gifts. Le Guin. 86.
Gilders. Kids' Guide to Zoo Animals. 209.
Giles. Playing in Traffic. 73.
Gillet. Standing Up. 336.
Girl, 15, Charming but Insane. Limb. 86.
Girls for Breakfast. Yoo. 412.
Girls in Pants. Brashares. 282.
Girls They Left Behind. Hunter. 492.
Glaser. Mrs. Greenberg's Messy Hanukkah.
167.
Gleitzman. Toad Heaven. 291.
Glorious Day. Schwartz. 98.
Gnat Stokes and the Foggy Bottom Swamp
Queen. Keehn. 296.
God and I Broke Up. Mazetti. 216.
Goddu. Dollmakers and Their Stories. 121.
Going Fishing. McMillan. 395.
Going Going. Nye. 504.
Going North. Harrington. 124.
Going. Liberation of Gabriel King. 438.
Golden Goose. King-Smith. 342.
Golding. Truth about Twelve. 74.
Goldschmidt. Secret Blog of Raisin Rodriguez.
384.
Golem's Eye. Stroud. 148.
Gonna Roll the Bones. Leiber. 132.
Gonyea. Book about Design. 439.
Gonzalez. Wings. 336.
Goobie. Fixed. 384.
Good Brother, Bad Brother. Giblin. 438.
Good Night, Alfie Atkins. Bergstrbm. 373.
Goodbye, Charley. Buchanan. 62.
JULY/AUGUST 2005 
* 527
Gooney Bird and the Room Mother. Lowry.
346.
Gordon. Three Little Rigs. 439.
Gorilla Doctors. Turner. 464.
Gothic! Noyes. 137.
Gotta Get Some Bish Bash Bosh. Allen. 197.
Graber. Resistance. 440.
Graff, N. Taking Wing. 440.
Graff, S. Blackwell's Island. 291.
Grand Tour. Stevermer. 153.
Grandits. Technically, It's Not My Fault. 210.
Grandma's General Store. Carter. 432.
Grandy Thaxter's Helper. Rees. 97.
Granite Baby. Bertrand. 328.
Grant. Blood Red Horse. 385.
Gray. Lovesick Salesman. 122.
Great Tree of Avalon. Barron. 198.
Greatest Potatoes. Stowell. 513.
Greatest Skating Race. Borden. 201.
Green. Looking for Alaska. 252.
Greenberg. Andy Warhol. 168.
Greene, C. Story of Halloween. 18.
Greene, R. Santa's Stuck. 168.
Greene, S. Moose's Big Idea. 385.
.Owen Foote, Mighty Scientist. 74.
.Queen Sophie Hartley. 337.
Greenfeld. Promise Fulfilled. 386.
Gregor and the Prophecy of Bane. Collins. 65.
Grey. Traction Man Is Here! 369.
Griffin, A. Where I Want to Be. 292.
Griffin, P. 11,000 Years Lost. 169.
Grimes. At Jerusalem's Gate. 292.
Grindley. Spilled Water. 75.
Gross. Turn to Stone. 293.
Grover. Hold Me Tight. 386.
Gruber. Witch's Boy. 337.
Guarente. Hook, Line & Sinker. 488.
Guinea Pig Scientists. Dendy. 486.
Guji Guji. Chen. 9.
Guys Write for Guys Read. Scieszka. 460.
Had Gadya. Chwast. 284.
Haddix. House on the Gulf. 75.
Hahn. Old Willis Place. 122.
Halam. Siberia. 489.
Hale, M. Truth about Sparrows. 169.
Hale, S. Enna Burning. 123.
Half a Pig. Ahlberg. 4.
Halpern. Toby and the Snowflakes. 157.
Hamilton. Wee Winnie Witch's Skinny. 18.
Hanley. Light of the Oracle. 441.
Hannah. Hot Jazz Special. 387.
Hannigan. Ida B. 123.
Hansen. African Princess. 170.
Hanson. Season for Mangoes. 387.
Haptie. Otto and the Bird Charmers. 388.
Hard Hat Area. Roth. 225.
Harper. Me Too! 338.
Harrington. Going North. 124.
Harris, M. Wake the Dead. 19.
Harris, R. Sweet Jasmine, Nice Jackson. 76.
Harrison. Mira, Mirror. 124.
Hartinger. Order of the Poison Oak. 293.
Hartnett. Stripes of the Sidestep Wolf. 294.
Haunting ofAlaizabel Cray. Wooding. 46.
Haunting of Granite Falls. Ibbotson. 22.
Havill. Eyes Like Willy's. 19.
Haycak. Red Palms. 210.
Hayes. La Llorona. 211.
Head Games. Fredericks. 119.
Hearn. Minister's Daughter. 489.
Heart on My Sleeve. Wittlinger. 152.
Heaven Shop. Ellis. 208.
Heck Superhero. Leavitt. 85.
Hello, America. Bitton-Jackson. 375.
Hello, Goodbye Window. Juster. 493.
Hello, Snow! Vestergaard. 311.
Help Wanted. Soto. 405.
Hemphill. Things Left Unsaid. 490.
Hen, a Chick and a String Guitar. MacDonald.
393.
Henry Works. Johnson. 128.
Henry's Amazing Machine. Dodds. 69.
Here in Harlem. Myers. 178.
Here Today. Martin. 215.
Hero and the Minotaur. Byrd. 480.
Hero Beowulf. Kimmel. 494.
Heron Cove. Wallace-Brodeur. 514.
Hershey. My Big Sister Is So Bossy She Says
You Can't Read This Book. 388.
Hesse. Cats in Krasinski Square. 76.
Hest. Mr. George Baker. 20.
Hewitt Anderson's Great Big Life. Nolen. 260.
Hicks. Busted! 77.
. Jitterbug Jam. 338.
Hidden Folk. Lunge-Larsen. 87.
Hide & Seek. Wong. 411.
Hightman. Saint of Dragons. 77.
Hill, E. Wildfire! 125.
Hill, S. Cry of the Icemark. 339.
Hillenbrand. Asleep in the Stable. 125.
Hilliard. Neil, Buzz, and Mike Go to the Moon.
424.
Hillman. I Will Plant You a Lilac Tree. 490.
Himalaya. Neale. 136.
Hinman. Stranger in My Own House. 441.
Hirsch. Something's Fishy, Hazel Green. 491.
. Yoss. 77.
Hitler Youth. Bartoletti. 427.
Ho. Peek. 170.
Hobbs. Letting Go of Bobby James. 78.
Hogan. Serious Kiss. 294.
Hold Me Tight. Grover. 386.
Hold the Flag High. Clinton. 481.
Holmes. Rider in the Dark. 211.
528 
* THE BULLETIN
Home for Foundlings. Jocelyn. 442.
Home in the Heart. Brackett. 376.
Honey Baby Sugar Child. Duncan. 288.
Honeysuckle House. Cheng. 63.
Hoobler. Sword That Cut the Burning Grass.
491.
Hook, Line & Sinker. Guarente. 488.
hooks. Skin Again. 171.
Hooper. Petals in the Ashes. 20.
Hoopster. Sitomer. 404.
Hoose. Race to Save the Lord God Bird. 126.
Hopkins. Days to Celebrate. 339.
. Oh, No! Where Are My Pants? 252.
Hopkinson. Apples to Oregon. 78.
Horning. Giant Hug. 212.
Horowitz, A. Falcon's Malteser. 79.
. Raven's Gate. 492.
Horowitz, D. Monkey among Us. 21.
Horowitz, R. Big Surprise in the Bug Tank. 212.
Horvath. Pepins and Their Problems. 79.
Hot Air. Priceman. 507.
Hot Jazz Special. Hannah. 387.
Houdini. Krull. 342.
House of Tailors. Giff. 121.
House on the Gulf. Haddix. 75.
Hover Car Racer. Reilly. 508.
Hovey. Voices of the Trojan War. 80.
How I Live Now. Rosoff. 37.
How Many Miles to Bethlehem? Crossley-Hol-
land. 164.
How Santa Really Works. Snow. 145.
How the Amazon Queen Fought the Prince of
Egypt. Bower. 329.
How to Make a Night. Ashman. 113.
Hubert Horatio Bartle Bobton-Trent. Child.
432.
Huckaby. Sequoyah. 225.
Hughes, P. Breaker Boys. 80.
Hughes, S. Ella's Big Chance. 126.
Hunter, A. When I Was a Soldier. 517.
Hunter, B. Girls They Left Behind. 492.
Hunter's Moon. Melling. 349.
Hurd. Sleepy Cadillac. 389.
Hurty Feelings. Lester. 133.
Hutchins. Sidewalk Rescue. 21.
I Am the Messenger. Zusak. 195.
I Am Too Absolutely Small for School. Child.
10.
I Believe In. Gaskins. 17.
I Can't Tell You. Frank. 166.
I Fall Down. Cobb. 204.
I See a Kookaburra! Jenkins. 389.
I Was a Non-Blonde Cheerleader. Scott. 358.
I Will Plant You a Lilac Tree. Hillman. 490.
I, Dred Scott. Moses. 350.
Ibbotson. Haunting of Granite Falls. 22.
.Star of Kazan. 171.
Ice Drift. Taylor. 267.
Ida B. Hannigan. 123.
If Frogs Made Weather. Bauer. 372.
If I Built a Car. Van Dusen. 513.
If Not for the Cat. Prelutsky. 181.
If We Kiss. Vail. 408.
Illustrated Mum. Wilson. 271.
Improbable Cat. Ahlberg. 58.
In the Night, on Lanvale Street. Conly. 483.
In the Shadow of the Ark. Provoost. 96.
In the Small, Small Night. Kurtz. 297.
In Your Face. Jackson. 81.
Indigo's Star. McKay. 29.
Ingledove. Youmans. 413.
Into the Forest. Browne. 163.
Invisible Allies. Farrell. 335.
Irving. Sound Like Someone Trying Not to
Make a Sound. 127.
Isabel of the Whales. Velmans. 311.
Isadora. Luke Goes to Bat. 295.
Iversen. 21. 340.
Ives. Scrib. 340.
J. R. R. Tolkien. Willett. 45.
Jackson Jones and Mission Greentop.
Quattlebaum. 35.
Jackson. In Your Face. 81.
Jacobson. Stained. 253.
Jaffa. Center of the World. 463.
Jailbait. Newman. 502.
James the Dancing Dog. Maybarduk. 175.
James, B. My Chair. 22.
James, S. Baby Brains. 212.
Janeczko. Kick in the Head. 341.
Jason & Kyra. Davidson. 12.
Jeapes. New World Order. 253.
Jenkins, A. Next Stop Neptune. 172.
Jenkins, E. My Favorite Thing (According to
Alberta). 23.
. That New Animal. 279.
Jenkins, S. I See a Kookaburra! 389.
Jennings. Out Standing in My Field. 295.
Jeyaveeran. Road to Mumbai. 81.
Jim Thorpe's Bright Path. Bruchac. 8.
Jinks. Pagan's Scribe. 341.
. Pagan's Vows. 127.
Jitterbug Jam. Hicks. 338.
Jocelyn. Home for Foundlings. 442.
Joe Louis, My Champion. Miller. 32.
John F. Kennedy. Sommer. 227.
John Philip Duck. Polacco. 96.
John Winthrop, Oliver Cromwell, and the Land
of Promise. Aronson. 6.
John's Secret Dreams. Rappaport. 224.
Johnson, A. Bird. 172.
.Sweet Smell of Roses. 254.
Johnson, D. Henry Works. 128.
Johnson, K. Fast and Brutal Wing. 173.
JULY/AUGUST 2005 
* 
529
Johnson, M. Bermudez Triangle. 128.
Johnston. Worm Family. 23.
Jones, C. Westward Ho! 442.
Jones, D. Conrad's Fate. 390.
Joosse. Bad Dog School. 82.
. Nikolai, the Only Bear. 213.
Jordan, R. Lost Goat Lane. 254.
Jordan, S. Andy Warhol. 168.
Journey of the One and Only Declaration of
Independence. St. George. 463.
Journey to the Bottomless Pit. Mitchell. 220.
Juan. Night Eater. 173.
Julio's Magic. Dorros. 207.
Jump! Cooper. 205.
Just Like That. Qualey. 456.
Juster. Hello, Goodbye Window. 493.
Kaaberbol. Shamer's Signet. 390.
Kalpana's Dream. Clarke. 331.
Karas. On Earth. 493.
Karr. Mama Went to Jail for the Vote. 443.
.Worlds Apart. 391.
Katz. Revolutionary Field Trip. 24.
Keehn. Gnat Stokes and the Foggy Bottom
Swamp Queen. 296.
Keller. Pearl's New Skates. 213.
Kelly, J. Mystery of Eatum Hall. 82.
Kelly, K. Lucy Rose: Here's the Thing about
Me. 83.
Keret. Dad Runs Away with the Circus. 129.
Kerley. Walt Whitman. 255.
.You and Me Together. 296.
Kerr. Akhenaten Adventure. 214.
Kessler. Our Secret, Siri Aang. 255.
Khan. Silly Chicken. 296.
Kick in the Head. Janeczko. 341.
Kid Blink Beats the World. Brown. 162.
Kids' Guide to Zoo Animals. Gilders. 209.
Kilaka. Fresh Fish. 443.
Kimmel. Cactus Soup. 129.
. Hero Beowulf. 494.
Kinerk. Timothy Cox Will Not Change His
Socks. 444.
King of the Middle March. Crossley-Holland.
248.
King-Smith. Golden Goose. 342.
Kipling's Choice. Spillebeen. 462.
Kissing Vanessa. Cheshire. 203.
Kitten's Big Adventure. Araki. 477.
Klise. Deliver Us from Normal. 256.
Knock! Knock! Wahl. 43.
Knuffle Bunny. Willems. 103.
Knutson. Love and Roast Chicken. 83.
Koertge. Margaux with an X. 83.
Kogler. Ruby Tuesday. 391.
Koja. Talk. 297.
Koons. Confused Hanukkah. 130.
Koponen. Blow Out the Moon. 24.
Krosoczka. Punk Farm. 392.
Krull. Houdini. 342.
.Leonardo da Vinci. 494.
.Woman for President. 84.
Kuns. While You Were Out. 130.
Kurtz. In the Small, Small Night. 297.
L'Chaim! Rubin. 225.
La Fevers. Forging of the Blade. 131.
La Llorona. Hayes. 211.
Lace Dowry. Cheng. 331.
LaFaye. Worth. 25.
Laguna. Surviving Aunt Marsha. 444.
Lake. Surfer Girl. 495.
Lake of Skulls. Stewart. 146.
Lanagan. Black Juice. 298.
Lane. Orpheus Obsession. 495.
Langrish. Troll Fell. 25.
Langton. Mysterious Circus. 445.
Lantz. Dayjoanie Frankenhauser Became a Boy.
496.
Larbalestier. Magic or Madness. 298.
LaRochelle. Absolutely, Positively, Not. 496.
Lasky. Blood Secret. 84.
. Broken Song. 445.
. Tumble Bunnies. 392.
Last Badge. McClements. 501.
Last Codfish. McNeill. 450.
Last Dance on Holladay Street. Carbone. 431.
Last Domino. Meyer. 450.
Last Shot. Feinstein. 288.
Last Universe. Sleator. 360.
Lawrence, I. B for Buster. 26.
. Convicts. 343.
Lawrence, M. Crack in the Line. 85.
Lay. Crown Me! 174.
Le Guin. Gifts. 86.
Leavitt. Heck Superhero. 85.
Lee, C. Friend Called Anne. 362.
Lee, S. Stan Lee's Superhero Christmas. 131.
Lee, T. Piratica. 132.
Legend of the Curse of the Bambino.
Shaughnessy. 402.
Leiber. Gonna Roll the Bones. 132.
Leonardo da Vinci. Krull. 494.
Lerangis. Smiler's Bones. 446.
Lessons. Geisert. 290.
Lester, H. Hurty Feelings. 133.
Lester, J. Day of Tears. 497.
.Let's Talk about Race. 343.
Let It Begin Here! Fradin. 436.
Let Me Play. Blumenthal. 478.
Let's Talk about Race. Lester. 343.
Letting Go of Bobby James. Hobbs. 78.
Leven Thumps and the Gateway to Foo. Skye.
404.
Levin. Silly Horse. 344.
Levine. Catch a Tiger by the Toe. 497.
530 
* THE BULLETIN
Levithan. Are We There Yet? 498.
Lewin. Top to Bottom Down Under. 299.
Lewis, M. Morgy Coast to Coast. 446.
Lewis, N. Tales of Hans Christian Andersen.
159.
Lewis, P. No More Cookies! 299.
Lewis, R. Flame Tree. 133.
Liberation of Gabriel King. Going. 438.
Librarian of Basra. Winter. 271.
Lichtenheld. Everything I Know about Cars.
344.
Lieberg. West with Hopeless. 26.
Light of the Oracle. Hanley. 441.
Light Years. Stein. 309.
Limb. Girl, 15, Charming but Insane. 86.
Lindbergh. Visit. 256.
Lindgren. Red Bird. 345.
Lion. Swollen. 87.
. Upstream. 447.
Lionboy: The Chase. Corder. 66.
Little Cat Baby. Ahlberg. 59.
Little Darlings. Llewellyn. 393.
Little Gentleman. Pearce. 180.
Little Green. Yu. 315.
Little Mermaid. Andersen. 159.
Little Mouse. Dijkstra. 249.
Little Shark. Rockwell. 509.
Littman. Confessions of a Closet Catholic. 257.
Lizette's Green Sock. Valckx. 465.
Llewellyn. Little Darlings. 393.
Lo. Mahjong All Day Long. 345.
Lockhart. Boyfriend List. 300.
London. Do Your ABC's, Little Brown Bear.
346.
Looking for Alaska. Green. 252.
Looking for Normal. Monthei. 397.
Lost Goat Lane. Jordan. 254.
Lost in America. Sachs. 357.
Love and Roast Chicken. Knutson. 83.
Love, A. Snow Amazing. 165.
Love, D. Secret Prince. 257.
Lovesick Salesman. Gray. 122.
Lowji Discovers America. Fleming. 289.
Lowry. Gooney Bird and the Room Mother.
346.
Lucky Days with Mr. and Mrs. Green. Baker.
326.
Lucky Leaf. O'Malley. 93.
Lucky Stars. Frank. 487.
Lucy Rose: Here's the Thing about Me. Kelly.
83.
Luke Goes to Bat. Isadora. 295.
Lulu Dark Can See through Walls. Madison.
448.
Lundin. God and I Broke Up. 216.
Lunge-Larsen. Hidden Folk. 87.
Lupica. Travel Team. 134.
Luther's Halloween. Meister. 31.
Lyon. Sonny's House of Spies. 27.
Lyons. Roy Makes a Car. 258.
MacCullough. Stealing Henry. 300.
MacDonald. Hen, a Chick and a String Guitar.
393.
Machado. From Another World. 347.
Mackel. MadCat. 301.
Mackler. Vegan Virgin Valentine. 88.
MacLachlan. Bittle. 27.
. More Perfect than the Moon. 134.
_ . Who Loves Me? 498.
Madam President. Thimmesh. 111.
Madame Squidley and Beanie. Mead. 30.
MadCat. Mackel. 301.
Madden. Gentle's Holler. 447.
Maddern. Death in a Nut. 499.
Madison. Lulu Dark Can See through Walls.
448.
Magic by the Book. Bernstein. 244.
Magic or Madness. Larbalestier. 298.
Magician's Boy. Cooper. 332.
Magyk. Sage. 264.
Mahjong All Day Long. Lo. 345.
Makeovers by Marcia. Mills. 220.
Mami~ Goose. Ada. 370.
Mama Went to Jail for the Vote. Karr. 443.
Marcantonio. Red Ridin' in the Hood. 448.
Marchetta. Saving Francesca. 88.
Marcum. Cottonmouth Club. 449.
Margaux with an X. Koertge. 83.
Maritcha. Bolden. 282.
Mark. Useful Idiots. 89.
Marrin. Old Hickory. 214.
Marsden. Moon Runner. 301.
Martha. Spirin. 361.
Martin, A. Here Today. 215.
Martin, D. Piggy and Dad Go Fishing. 449.
.We've All Got Bellybuttons! 258.
Martinez. Poe Park. 174.
Martini. Mob. 134.
Martino. Pinned. 347.
Mason, J. Princess School: If the Shoe Fits. 28.
Mason, S. Quigleys Not for Sale. 215.
Matthews. Fish. 89.
Matzo Ball Boy. Shulman. 359.
Maximum Ride. Patterson. 353.
Maya Running. Banerjee. 281.
Maybarduk. James the Dancing Dog. 175.
Maynard. Cloud Chamber. 499.
Mazer. Boy No More. 175.
Mazetti. God and I Broke Up. 216.
McCaughrean. Not the End of the World. 500.
. Odysseus. 302.
. Perseus. 394.
McClements. Last Badge. 501.
McCormick. My Brother's Keeper. 501.
JULY/AUGUST 2005 
* 531
McDonald, J. Brother Hood. 216.
.Devil on My Heels. 28.
McDonald, M. Ant and Honey Bee. 258.
. Beetle McGrady Eats Bugs! 394.
.Saving the Liberty Bell. 502.
_ .Stink. 502.
McGhee. Mrs. Watson Wants Your Teeth. 29.
McGillycuddy Could! Edwards. 250.
McKay. Indigo's Star. 29.
. Permanent Rose. 423.
McKee. Conquerors. 217.
McKernan. Shackleton's Stowaway. 259.
McKissack. Precious and the Boo Hag. 217.
McMillan. Going Fishing. 395.
McMullan. My Travels with Capts. Lewis and
Clark. 90.
. Pearl and Wagner: Three Secrets. 30.
McNaughton. Secret under My Skin. 218.
McNeill. Last Codfish. 450.
McNish. Silver Child. 348.
McWhorter. Dream of Freedom. 219.
McWilliams. Doormat. 219.
Me Too! Harper. 338.
Mead. Madame Squidley and Beanie. 30.
. Swimming to America. 348.
Measle and the Wrathmonk. Ogilvy. 139.
Mechling. Rise and Fall of a 10th-Grade Social
Climber. 395.
Media Madness. Ali. 371.
Meet Wild Boars. Rosoff. 459.
Meister. Luther's Halloween. 31.
Melling. Hunter's Moon. 349.
Mercado. Tripping Over the Lunch Lady. 135.
Mermaids Most Amazing. Oliver. 261.
Metz. Raven's Point. 90.
Meyer, A. Last Domino. 450.
Meyer, L. Curse of the Blue Tattoo. 31.
Michael Rosen's Sad Book. Rosen. 355.
Michael. Whispering Road. 451.
Midnight Diary of Zoya Blume. Cunningham.
378.
Midnighters. Westerfeld. 312.
Milde. Once upon a Wedding. 91.
Miles. Wild Science. 176.
Milich. City 1 2 3. 396.
Miller, C. No Easy Answers. 396.
Miller, W. Joe Louis, My Champion. 32.
Mills. Makeovers by Marcia. 220.
Minister's Daughter. Hearn. 489.
Mira, Mirror. Harrison. 124.
Missing Abby. Weatherly. 150.
Mitchard. Rosalie, My Rosalie. 451.
Mitchell. Journey to the Bottomless Pit. 220.
Mlynowski. Bras and Broomsticks. 221.
Mob. Martini. 134.
Molly McGinty Has a Really Good Day.
Paulsen. 140.
Moloney. Black Taxi. 397.
Mommy Mine. Warnes. 467.
Monday on the Mississippi. Singer. 359.
Monkey among Us. Horowitz. 21.
Monkey Business. Climo. 434.
Monsoon Summer. Perkins. 34.
Montanari. Tiff, Taff, and Lulu. 91.
Montgomery. Search for the Golden Moon
Bear. 176.
Monthei. Looking for Normal. 397.
Montmorency on the Rocks. Updale. 407.
Moon Runner. Marsden. 301.
Moore. Caught in the Act. 452.
Moose's Big Idea. Greene. 385.
More Mole Stories and Little Gopher, Too.
Segal. 401.
More Perfect than the Moon. MacLachlan. 134.
Morgan. Chicken Friend. 349.
. Fleshmarket. 92.
Morgy Coast to Coast. Lewis. 446.
Morpurgo. Private Peaceful. 177.
Morris, Jennifer. Come, Llamas. 221.
Morris, Jackie. Seal Children. 92.
Morton-Shaw. Riddles of Epsilon. 452.
Moser. Rise and Fall of a 10th-Grade Social
Climber. 395.
Moses. I, Dred Scott. 350.
Mosley. 47. 453.
Moss. Precious and the Boo Hag. 217.
Mother Teresa. Demi. 287.
Mr. Blewitt's Nose. Taylor. 406.
Mr. George Baker. Hest. 20.
Mrs. Greenberg's Messy Hanukkah. Glaser.
167.
Mrs. Watson Wants Your Teeth. McGhee. 29.
Mummies, Pyramids, and Pharaohs. Gibbons.
17.
Muth. Zen Shorts. 351.
My 13th Season. Roberts. 354.
My Best Friend. Rodman. 509.
My Big Brother. Cohen. 285.
My Big Sister Is So Bossy She Says You Can't
Read This Book. Hershey. 388.
My Brother's Keeper. McCormick. 501.
My Chair. James. 22.
My Curious Uncle Dudley. Yourgrau. 104.
My Father the Werewolf. Garfield. 488.
My Favorite Thing (According to Alberta).
Jenkins. 23.
My Guardian Angel. Weil. 102.
My Kindergarten. Wells. 150.
My Mom and Other Mysteries of the Universe.
Willner-Pardo. 151.
My Travels with Capts. Lewis and Clark.
McMullan. 90.
Myers, T. Basho and the River Stones. 135.
Myers, W. Antarctica. 177.
532 
* 
THE BULLETIN
. Here in Harlem. 178.
. USS Constellation. 32.
Myracle. Rhymes with Witches. 398.
Mysterious Circus. Langton. 445.
Mystery of Eatum Hall. Kelly. 82.
Naked Mole-Rat Letters. Amato. 476.
Napoli. Bound. 222.
. Sly the Sleuth and the Pet Mysteries.
302.
Nasty Book. Yourgrau. 414.
Naughts & Crosses. Blackman. 429.
Naylor. Simply Sarah. 454.
Neale. Himalaya. 136.
Neil, Buzz, and Mike Go to the Moon. Hilliard.
424.
Nelson, B. Rock Star, Superstar. 179.
Nelson, M. Fortune's Bones. 259.
_ 
. Wreath for Emmett Till. 351.
Never Cry Woofl Wattenberg. 408.
Never Mind the Goldbergs. Roth. 355.
New Found Land. Wolf. 104.
New World Order. Jeapes. 253.
Newman. Fire Engine for Ruthie. 33.
. Jailbait. 502.
Next Stop Neptune. Jenkins. 172.
Next-Door Dogs. Rodowsky. 458.
Nieuwenhuizen. In the Shadow of the Ark. 96.
Nields. Plastic Angel. 503.
Night Eater. Juan. 173.
Night Gate. Carmody. 202.
Nikolai, the Only Bear. Joosse. 213.
Nilsson. You & You & You. 503.
Nimmo. Charlie Bone and the Invisible Boy.
33.
Nine Days a Queen. Rinaldi. 263.
Nix. Drowned Wednesday. 454.
No Easy Answers. Miller. 396.
No Laughing, No Smiling, No Giggling.
Stevenson. 100.
No More Cookies! Lewis. 299.
No Shame, No Fear. Turnbull. 149.
Nobody's Diggier than a Dog. Bartoletti. 199.
Nolan. Down Girl and Sit. 137.
Nolen. Hewitt Anderson's Great Big Life. 260.
Norman Tuttle on the Last Frontier. Bodett.
160.
Norman. Between Heaven and Earth. 222.
Not Norman. Bennett. 328.
Not the End of the World. McCaughrean. 500.
Nothing Here but Stones. Oswald. 93.
Novak. Too Many Bunnies. 261.
Now You See It. Vande Velde. 231.
Noyes. Gothic! 137.
Numeroff. Beatrice Doesn't Want To. 138.
Nye. Going Going. 504.
O'Connell. Pulling Princes. 138.
O'Connor. Taking Care of Moses. 139.
O'Dell. Agnes Parker... Happy Camper? 352.
O'Malley. Captain Raptor and the Moon Mys-
tery. 352.
.Lucky Leaf. 93.
.. 
. Once upon a Cool Motorcycle Dude.
398.
Oates. Sexy. 302.
Odd Boy Out. Brown. 61.
Odysseus. McCaughrean. 302.
Ogilvy. Measle and the Wrathmonk. 139.
Oh, David! Shannon. 306.
Oh, No! Where Are My Pants? Hopkins. 252.
Old Country. Gerstein. 383.
Old Hickory. Marrin. 214.
Old Willis Place. Hahn. 122.
Oliver. Mermaids Most Amazing. 261.
Olswanger. Shlemiel Crooks. 504.
On Earth. Karas. 493.
On Etruscan Time. Barrett. 426.
Once upon a Cool Motorcycle Dude. O'Malley.
398.
Once upon a Curse. Baker. 198.
Once upon a Wedding. Milde. 91.
One Dark and Dreadful Night. Cecil. 63.
Onyefulu. Welcome Dede! 261.
Oops! Shannon. 306.
Operation Clean Sweep. Beard. 60.
Order of the Poison Oak. Hartinger. 293.
Orgel. Daniel Half Human and the Good Nazi.
164.
Orphea Proud. Wyeth. 314.
Orpheus Obsession. Lane. 495.
Oswald. Nothing Here but Stones. 93.
Otto and the Bird Charmers. Haptie. 388.
Our Secret, Siri Aang. Kessler. 255.
Our Tree Named Steve. Zweibel. 414.
Out Standing in My Field. Jennings. 295.
Owen Foote, Mighty Scientist. Greene. 74.
Pagan's Scribe. Jinks. 341.
Pagan's Vows. Jinks. 127.
Page. I See a Kookaburra! 389.
Papademetriou. Sixth-Grade. 455.
Paratore. Wedding Planner's Daughter. 262.
Park. Project Mulberry. 505.
Parnell. And Tango Makes Three. 508.
Parthenon. Curlee. 67.
Pascal. Ruling Class. 179.
Patchwork Path. Stroud. 229.
Paterson. Blueberries for the Queen. 94.
Patneaude. Thin Wood Walls. 94.
Patterson. Maximum Ride. 353.
Pattison. Searching for Oliver K. Woodman.
353.
Paulsen. Molly McGinty Has a Really Good
Day. 140.
__ 
. Time Hackers. 222.
Paver. Wolf Brother. 262.
JULY/AUGUST 2005 
* 533
Pea Blossom. Andersen. 280.
Peach Heaven. Choi. 433.
Pearce. Little Gentleman. 180.
Pearl and Wagner: Three Secrets. McMullan.
30.
Pearl's New Skates. Keller. 213.
Pearson, M. Room on Lorelei Street. 505.
Pearson, R. Peter and the Starcatchers. 113.
Peck. Teacher's Funeral. 140.
Peedie. Dunrea. 70.
Peek. Ho. 170.
Pelletier. Amazing Adventures of Bathman! 506.
Pepins and Their Problems. Horvath. 79.
Perez. Unexpected Development. 95.
Perfect Wizard. Yolen. 273.
Perfect. Friend. 120.
Perkins. Monsoon Summer. 34.
Perl. Chicken Bedtime Is Really Early. 455.
Permanent Rose. McKay. 423.
Perry. Think Cool Thoughts. 506.
Perseus. McCaughrean. 394.
Petals in the Ashes. Hooper. 20.
Peter and the Starcatchers. Barry. 113.
Peters. Far from Xanadu. 456.
Petersen. Rob&Sara.com. 223.
Peyton. Stealaway. 180.
Photo by Brady. Armstrong. 323.
Pichon. Very Ugly Bug. 399.
Pickle & Penguin. David. 249.
Pierce. Trickster's Queen. 95.
Pig on the Titanic. Crew. 333.
Pigaroons. Geisert. 120.
Piggy and Dad Go Fishing. Martin. 449.
Pike. Alosha. 34.
Pinned. Martino. 347.
Pirate Girl. Funke. 487.
Piratica. Lee. 132.
Plastic Angel. Nields. 503.
Playing in Traffic. Giles. 73.
Poe Park. Martinez. 174.
Polacco. John Philip Duck. 96.
Poole. Pea Blossom. 280.
Poop. Davies. 118.
Porter. Sky. 181.
Power of One. Fradin. 251.
Poydar. Brave Santa. 181.
Prairie Builders. Collard. 482.
Precious and the Boo Hag. McKissack. 217.
Predator's Gold. Reeve. 141.
Prelutsky. If Not for the Cat. 181.
President's Daughter. Bradley. 245.
Price, P. Cool Rubber Stamp Art. 303.
. Cool Scrapbooks. 303.
Price, S. Sterkarm Kiss. 224.
Priceman. Hot Air. 507.
Princess of Neptune. Dodd. 69.
Princess School: If the Shoe Fits. Mason. 28.
Private Peaceful. Morpurgo. 177.
Project Mulberry. Park. 505.
Prom. Anderson. 242.
Promise Fulfilled. Greenfeld. 386.
Provoost. In the Shadow of the Ark. 96.
Prue. Devil's Toenail. 35.
Pulling Princes. O'Connell. 138.
Pullman. Aladdin and the Enchanted Lamp.
456.
Pumpkin Cat. Turner. 42.
Punk Farm. Krosoczka. 392.
Purple Emperor. Brennan. 115.
Qualey. Just Like That. 456.
Quattlebaum. Jackson Jones and Mission
Greentop. 35.
Queen Sophie Hartley. Greene. 337.
Quicksilver. Spinner. 360.
Quigleys Not for Sale. Mason. 215.
Rabbit Goes Duck Hunting. Duvall. 208.
Rabin. Betsy and the Emperor. 141.
Raccoon's Last Race. Bruchac. 116.
Race to Save the Lord God Bird. Hoose. 126.
Rainbow Party. Ruditis. 510.
Rapp. Under the Wolf, Under the Dog. 182.
Rappaport. John's Secret Dreams. 224.
. Secret Seder. 303.
Ratastrophe Catastrophe. Stone. 228.
Rattlesnake Mesa. Weber. 269.
Rattlesnake Who Went to School. Strete. 40.
Raven's Gate. Horowitz. 492.
Raven's Point. Metz. 90.
Ray. Adam and Eve and the Garden of Eden.
263.
Reaching for the Moon. Aldrin. 424.
Real Slam Dunk. Richardson. 305.
Really Nice Prom Mess. Sloan. 462.
Red Bird. Lindgren. 345.
Red Hot Salsa. Carlson. 330.
Red Kayak. Cummings. 66.
Red Land Yellow River. Zhang. 154.
Red Palms. Haycak. 210.
Red Ridin' in the Hood. Marcantonio. 448.
Reef. Alone in the World. 457.
Rees. Grandy Thaxter's Helper. 97.
Reeve. Predator's Gold. 141.
Refugees. Stine. 361.
Reiche. Ghost Ship. 457.
Reichert. While Mama Had a Quick Little Chat.
507.
Reilly. Hover Car Racer. 508.
Repka. Stupendous Dodgeball Fiasco. 304.
Resistance. Graber. 440.
Restless Genius. Brackett. 115.
Revolutionary Field Trip. Katz. 24.
Rhymes with Witches. Myracle. 398.
Richardson, C. Real Slam Dunk. 305.
Richardson, J. And Tango Makes Three. 508.
534 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Riddell. Edge Chronicles: Beyond the
Deepwoods. 40.
. Edge Chronicles: Stormchaser. 40.
Riddles of Epsilon. Morton-Shaw. 452.
Rider in the Dark. Holmes. 211.
Rinaldi. Brooklyn Rose. 305.
. Color of Fire. 354.
. Nine Days a Queen. 263.
Rise and Fall of a 10th-Grade Social Climber.
Mechling. 395.
Rise of a Hero. Bell. 478.
Road to Mumbai. Jeyaveeran. 81.
Rob&Sara.com. Petersen. 223.
Robbins. Seeds. 305.
Roberto Clemente. Winter. 314.
Roberts, K. My 13th Season. 354.
Roberts, W. Blood on His Hands. 36.
Robinson. Best Halloween Ever. 36.
Rock Star, Superstar. Nelson. 179.
Rockwell. Little Shark. 509.
Rodman. My Best Friend. 509.
Rodowsky. Next-Door Dogs. 458.
Rogers. Boy, the Bear, the Baron, the Bard. 182.
Room on Lorelei Street. Pearson. 505.
Rosalie, My Rosalie. Mitchard. 451.
Rose and Riley. Cutler. 287.
Rosen. Michael Rosen's Sad Book. 355.
.Three Feet Small. 458.
Rosner. My Guardian Angel. 102.
Rosoff. How I Live Now. 37.
.Meet Wild Boars. 459.
Roth, M. Never Mind the Goldbergs. 355.
Roth, S. Hard Hat Area. 225.
Rottman. Slalom. 183.
Roy Makes a Car. Lyons. 258.
Rubin. Flag with Fifty-Six Stars. 356.
. L'Chaim! 225.
Ruby and the Sniffs. Emberley. 15.
Ruby Tuesday. Kogler. 391.
Ruckman. Rob&Sara.com. 223.
Ruditis. Rainbow Party. 510.
Ruins of Gorlan. Flanagan. 436.
Rules for Life. Ryan. 264.
Ruling Class. Pascal. 179.
Rumford. Sequoyah. 225.
Runner. Deuker. 435.
Running with the Reservoir Pups. Bateman.
199.
Runny Babbit. Silverstein. 403.
Runyon. Burn Journals. 142.
Rushton. Dashwood Sisters' Secrets of Love.
306.
Russell the Sheep. Scotton. 401.
Russo. Always Remember Me. 459.
Ryan, D. Rules for Life. 264.
Ryan, P. Becoming Naomi Le6n. 97.
Rylant. Boris. 356.
Sachs. Lost in America. 357.
Saenz. Sammy & Juliana in Hollywood. 37.
Sage. Magyk. 264.
Saint of Dragons. Hightman. 77.
Salley. Why Epossumondas Has No Hair on
His Tail. 98.
Sam I Am. Cooper. 248.
Sammy & Juliana in Hollywood. Saenz. 37.
San Souci. Well at the End of the World. 98.
Sanchez. So Hard to Say. 142.
Santa's Stuck. Greene. 168.
Saving Francesca. Marchetta. 88.
Saving the Liberty Bell. McDonald. 502.
Sawdust Carpets. Carling. 330.
Sayre. Stars beneath Your Bed. 399.
Schachner. Skippyjon Jones in the Doghouse.
357.
Schaefer. Cool Time Song. 265.
Schanzer. George vs. George. 226.
Schools Have Learn. Ziefert. 187.
Schwa Was Here. Shusterman. 184.
Schwartz, A. Glorious Day. 98.
Schwartz, H. Before You Were Born. 400.
Schwarz. Birdhouses. 400.
Science Verse. Scieszka. 143.
Scieszka. Guys Write for Guys Read. 460.
_ 
.Science Verse. 143.
Scott. I Was a Non-Blonde Cheerleader. 358.
Scotton. Russell the Sheep. 401.
Scrib. Ives. 340.
Sea Legs. Shearer. 358.
Sea of Trolls. Farmer. 119.
Seabrooke. Stonewolf. 265.
Seal Children. Morris. 92.
Search for the Golden Moon Bear. Montgom-
ery. 176.
Searching for Oliver K. Woodman. Pattison.
353.
Season for Mangoes. Hanson. 387.
Secret Blog of Raisin Rodriguez. Goldschmidt.
384.
Secret of Castle Cant. Bath. 7.
Secret Prince. Love. 257. 
-
Secret Seder. Rappaport. 303.
Secret under My Skin. McNaughton. 218.
Secrets of a Civil War Submarine. Walker. 466.
Sedgwick. Book of Dead Days. 183.
Seeds. Robbins. 305.
Segal. More Mole Stories and Little Gopher,
Too. 401.
Seidler. Toes. 38.
Sdlavi, That Is Life. Youme. 48.
September Roses. Winter. 45.
Sequoyah. Rumford. 225.
Serious Kiss. Hogan. 294.
Serpent Came to Gloucester. Anderson. 476.
Seven Tears into the Sea. Farley. 335.
JULY/AUGUST 2005 
* 535
Sexy. Oates. 302.
Seymour. Auction! 510.
Shackleton's Stowaway. McKernan. 259.
Shadow Life. Denenberg. 378.
Shadows of Ghadames. Stolz. 147.
Shakespeare's Secret. Broach. 429.
Shamer's Signet. Kaaberbol. 390.
Shannon, D. Alice the Fairy. 143.
_ . Oh, David! 306.
. Oops! 306.
Shannon, G. White Is for Blueberry. 402.
Shark Life. Benchley. 428.
Shaughnessy. Legend of the Curse of the
Bambino. 402.
Shaw. Boy from the Basement. 144.
Shearer. Sea Legs. 358.
Sheldon. Sophie Pitt-Turnbull Discovers
America. 402.
Shelf Life. Corbet. 377.
Sherman. Sun's Daughter. 307.
Shlemiel Crooks. Olswanger. 504.
Sholom's Treasure. Silverman. 307.
Shot Heard 'round the World. Bildner. 374.
Shrimp. Cohn. 247.
Shulevitz. Travels of Benjamin of Tudela. 461.
Shulman. Matzo Ball Boy. 359.
Shusterman. Dread Locks. 461.
. Schwa Was Here. 184.
Shyer. FIeabiscuit Sings! 403.
Siberia. Halam. 489.
Sidewalk Rescue. Hutchins. 21.
Sidman. Song of the Water Boatman. 511.
Siegelson. Trembling Earth. 38.
Sierra. Wild about Books. 39.
Silent Witness. Friedman. 437.
Silly Chicken. Khan. 296.
Silly Horse. Levin. 344.
Silver Child. McNish. 348.
Silver Penny. Wright. 516.
Silverman. Sholom's Treasure. 307.
Silverstein. Runny Babbit. 403,
Simmons. Finding Lubchenko. 512.
Simply Sarah. Naylor. 454.
Sing a Song of Tuna Fish. Codell. 285.
Singer. Central Heating. 226.
. Face Relations. 99.
. Monday on the Mississippi. 359.
Singer. Thesman. 309.
Sfs. Train of States. 144.
Sitomer. Hoopster. 404.
Sixth-Grade. Papademetriou. 455.
Skin Again. hooks. 171.
Skin You Live In. Tyler. 362.
Skippyjon Jones in the Doghouse. Schachner.
357.
Skull Talks Back. Thomas. 42.
Skurzynski. Are We Alone? 99.
Sky Carver. Whitlock. 410.
Sky. Porter. 181.
Sky. Townley. 42.
Skye. Leven Thumps and the Gateway to Foo.
404.
Slalom. Rottman. 183.
Sleator. Last Universe. 360.
Sledding Hill. Crutcher. 434.
Sleep Rough Tonight. Bone. 376.
Sleepy Cadillac. Hurd. 389.
Sloan. Really Nice Prom Mess. 462.
Sly the Sleuth and the Pet Mysteries. Napoli.
302.
Smiler's Bones. Lerangis. 446.
Smith, D. Boys of San Joaquin. 266.
Smith, R. Cryptid Hunters. 227.
Snow Amazing. Drake. 165.
Snow. How Santa Really Works. 145.
Snow-walker. Fisher. 71.
So B. It. Weeks. 44.
So Hard to Say. Sanchez. 142.
So Super Starry. Wilkins. 151.
So Yesterday. Westerfeld. 57.
Sobol. Elephant in the Backyard. 39.
Something's Fishy, Hazel Green. Hirsch. 491.
Sommer. John F. Kennedy. 227.
Song of the Water Boatman. Sidman. 511.
Sonny's House of Spies. Lyon. 27.
Sophie Pitt-Turnbull Discovers America.
Sheldon. 402.
Sorrells. Fake ID. 512.
Soto. Help Wanted. 405.
.Worlds Apart. 308.
Soul Stealer. Booth. 479.
Sound Like Someone Trying Not to Make a
Sound. Irving. 127.
Sowchek. Arthur and the Minimoys. 374.
Space Station Rat. Daley. 485.
Sphere of Secrets. Fisher. 289.
Spillebeen. Kipling's Choice. 462.
Spilled Water. Grindley. 75.
Spinner. Quicksilver. 360.
Spirin. Martha. 361.
Splash, Joshua, Splash! Doyle. 119.
Spohn. By Word of Mouse. 145.
Spradlin. Spy Goddess. 308.
Spy Goddess. Spradlin. 308.
St. George. Journey of the One and Only Dec-
laration of Independence. 463.
. Take the Lead, George Washington.
184.
.You're on Your Way, Teddy Roosevelt.
184.
Stadler. Duncan Rumplemeyer's Bad Birthday.
185.
Stahler. Gathering of Shades. 405.
Stained. Jacobson. 253.
536 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Stamaty. Alia's Mission. 266.
Stan Lee's Superhero Christmas. Lee. 131.
Standing Up. Gillet. 336.
Stanley. Giant and the Beanstalk. 146.
Star of Kazan. Ibbotson. 171.
Starfall. Cadnum. 163.
Stars beneath Your Bed. Sayre. 399.
Stealaway. Peyton. 180.
Stealing Henry. MacCullough. 300.
Stein. Light Years. 309.
Steinhbfel. Center of the World. 463.
Stella, Princess of the Sky. Gay. 73.
Stephens, J. Big Empty. 185.
Stephens, S. Princess School: If the Shoe Fits.
28.
Sterkarm Kiss. Price. 224.
Stevenson. No Laughing, No Smiling, No Gig-
gling. 100.
Stevermer. Grand Tour. 153.
Stewart, J. Close Encounters of a Third-World
Kind. 228.
Stewart, P. Edge Chronicles: Beyond the
Deepwoods. 40.
. Edge Chronicles: Stormchaser. 40.
SLake of Skulls. 146.
Stewart, S. Friend. 147.
Stine. Refugees. 361.
Stink. McDonald. 502.
Stollman. Dad Runs Awaywith the Circus. 129.
Stolz. Shadows of Ghadames. 147.
Stone, D. Ratastrophe Catastrophe. 228.
Stone, J. Five Ancestors. 267.
Stonewolf. Seabrooke. 265.
Storky. Garfinkle. 382.
Stormwitch. Vaught. 310.
Story Goes On. Fisher. 380.
Story of Halloween. Greene. 18.
Story of the Easter Bunny. Tegen. 268.
Stowell. Greatest Potatoes. 513.
Stranger in My Own House. Hinman. 441.
Stratton. Chanda's Secrets. 100.
Strete. Rattlesnake Who Went to School. 40.
Stripes of the Sidestep Wolf. Hartnett. 294.
Stroud, B. Patchwork Path. 229.
Stroud, J. Golem's Eye. 148.
Stupendous Dodgeball Fiasco. Repka. 304.
Sugar Rush. Burchill. 479.
Sun's Daughter. Sherman. 307.
Supernaturalist. Colfer. 10.
Surfer Girl. Lake. 495.
Surviving Antarctica. White. 409.
Surviving Aunt Marsha. Laguna. 444.
Sutherland. This Must Be Love. 229.
Sweep Dreams. Willard. 515.
Sweet Jasmine, Nice Jackson. Harris. 76.
Sweet Smell of Roses. Johnson. 254.
Sweet. Carmine. 464.
Swimming to America. Mead. 348.
Swollen. Lion. 87.
Sword That Cut the Burning Grass. Hoobler.
491.
T. Rex. French. 167.
Tadpole's Promise. Willis. 515.
Take the Lead, George Washington. St. George.
184.
Taking Care of Moses. O'Connor. 139.
Taking Wing. Graff. 440.
Tales of Hans Christian Andersen. Andersen.
159.
Talk. Koja. 297.
Tashjian. Vote for Larry. 41.
Taylor, A. Mr. Blewitt's Nose. 406.
Taylor, G. Wormwood. 230.
Taylor, T. Ice Drift. 267.
Teacher's Funeral. Peck. 140.
Technically, It's Not My Fault. Grandits. 210.
Teeny Tiny Ghost and the Monster. Winters.
46.
Teeth, Tails, & Tentacles. Wormell. 47.
Tegen. Story of the Easter Bunny. 268.
Tell It to Naomi. Ehrenhaft. 71.
Temerson. Destiny of Linus Hoppe. 375.
. Shadows of Ghadames. 147.
Ten Little Fish. Wood. 232.
Ten Thousand Charms. Watts. 409.
That Crazy Eddie and the Science Project of
Doom. Cox. 484.
That New Animal. Jenkins. 279.
Thesman. Singer. 309.
Thief in the House of Memory. Wynne-Jones.
412.
Thimmesh. Madam President. 111.
Thin Wood Walls. Patneaude. 94.
Things Left Unsaid. Hemphill. 490.
Think Cool Thoughts. Perry. 506.
This Must Be Love. Sutherland. 229.
This Place in the Snow. Bond. 160.
Thomas. Skull Talks Back. 42.
Thompson. Fourth World. 406.
Thomson. Gonna Roll the Bones. 132.
Three Feet Small. Rosen. 458.
Three Little Rigs. Gordon. 439.
Tiff, Taff, and Lulu. Montanari. 91.
Time Hackers. Paulsen. 222.
Timothy Cox Will Not Change His Socks.
Kinerk. 444.
Tincknell. Mystery of Eatum Hall. 82.
Tingle. Far Traveler. 310.
To the Beach! Ashman. 425.
Toad Heaven. Gleitzman. 291.
Toby and the Snowflakes. Halpern. 157.
Toes. Seidler. 38.
Too Many Bunnies. Novak. 261.
Too Many Frogs! Asher. 243.
JULY/AUGUST 2005 
* 537
Top to Bottom Down Under. Lewin. 299.
Toughest Cowboy. Frank. 72.
Tour of Evil. Wizowaty. 516.
Townley. Sky. 42.
Traction Man Is Here! Grey. 369.
Train of States. Sfs. 144.
Travel Team. Lupica. 134.
Travels of Benjamin ofTudela. Shulevitz. 461.
Trembling Earth. Siegelson. 38.
Trial of Cardigan Jones. Egan. 70.
Trick of the Mind. Waite. 312.
Trickster's Queen. Pierce. 95.
Tripping Over the Lunch Lady. Mercado. 135.
Troll Fell. Langrish. 25.
Trueman. Cruise Control. 148.
Trumbore. Genie in the Book. 230.
Truth about Sparrows. Hale. 169.
Truth about Twelve. Golding. 74.
Tumble Bunnies. Lasky. 392.
Turn to Stone. Gross. 293.
Turnbull. No Shame, No Fear. 149.
Turner, A. Pumpkin Cat. 42.
Turner, P. Gorilla Doctors. 464.
Tyler. Skin You Live In. 362.
Uglies. Westerfeld. 269.
Ugly Duckling. Andersen. 197.
Uhlberg. Dad, Jackie, and Me. 407.
Under the Sun. Dorros. 250.
Under the Wolf, Under the Dog. Rapp. 182.
Understanding the Holy Land. Frank. 381.
Unexpected Development. Perez. 95.
Unwitting Wisdom. Ward. 149.
Up! George. 382.
Updale. Montmorency on the Rocks. 407.
Upstream. Lion. 447.
Urbigkit. Brave Dogs, Gentle Dogs. 465.
Useful Idiots. Mark. 89.
USS Constellation. Myers. 32.
Vail. If We Kiss. 408.
Valckx. Lizette's Green Sock. 465.
Van Dusen. If I Built a Car. 513.
Van Genechten. Cuddle Book. 231.
Van Maarsen. Friend Called Anne. 362.
Vande Velde. Now You See It. 231.
VanOosting. Walking Mary. 514.
Vaught. Stormwitch. 310.
Vegan Virgin Valentine. Mackler. 88.
Velmans. Isabel of the Whales. 311.
Very Tricky, Alfie Atkins. Bergstrbm. 373.
Very Ugly Bug. Pichon. 399.
Vestergaard. Hello, Snow! 311.
Visit. Lindbergh. 256.
Vizzini. Be More Chill. 43.
Voices of the Trojan War. Hovey. 80.
Volponi. Black and White. 466.
Vote for Larry. Tashjian. 41.
Wahl. Knock! Knock! 43.
Wait! I Want to Tell You a Story. Willans. 314.
Wait. Wintering Well. 101.
Waite. Trick of the Mind. 312.
Wake the Dead. Harris. 19.
Wake Up Our Souls. Bolden. 8.
Walker. Secrets of a Civil War Submarine. 466.
Walking Mary. VanOosting. 514.
Walking with the Dead. Falcone. 334.
Wallace-Brodeur. Heron Cove. 514.
Walt Whitman. Kerley. 255.
Ward. Finding Christmas. 186.
. Unwitting Wisdom. 149.
Warnes. Mommy Mine. 467.
Warren. Escape from Saigon. 101.
Waterless Sea. Constable. 483.
Wattenberg. Never Cry Woof! 408.
Watts. Ten Thousand Charms. 409.
We've All Got Bellybuttons! Martin. 258.
Weatherford. Freedom on the Menu. 268.
Weatherly. Missing Abby. 150.
Weber. Rattlesnake Mesa. 269.
Wedding Planner's Daughter. Paratore. 262.
Wee Winnie Witch's Skinny. Hamilton. 18.
Weeks. So B. It. 44.
Weil. My Guardian Angel. 102.
Welcome Dede! Onyefulu. 261.
Well at the End of the World. San Souci. 98.
Wells. Bunny Mail. 231.
. My Kindergarten. 150.
West with Hopeless. Lieberg. 26.
Westerfeld. Midnighters. 312.
. So Yesterday. 57.
. Uglies. 269.
Westward Ho! Jones. 442.
Whales on Stilts. Anderson. 325.
What a Song Can Do. Armstrong. 5.
What the No-Good Baby Is Good For. Broach.
430.
Wheeler. Fitch & Chip: Who's Afraid of Granny
Wolf? 44.
When I Was a Soldier. Zenatti. 517.
When Ratboy Lived Next Door. Woodworth.
272.
When You Visit Grandma & Grandpa. Bowen.
61.
Where I Want to Be. Griffin. 292.
Where Washington Walked. Bial. 244.
Where Willy Went. Allan. 325.
While Mama Had a Quick Little Chat. Reichert.
507.
While You Were Out. Kuns. 130.
Whispering Road. Michael. 451.
Whispering to Witches. Dale. 117.
White Is for Blueberry. Shannon. 402.
White, A. Surviving Antarctica. 409.
White, M. For Sure! For Sure! 59.
White, R. Buttermilk Hill. 186.
538 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Whitlock. Sky Carver. 410.
Who Loves Me? MacLachlan. 498.
Why Epossumondas Has No Hair on His Tail.
Salley. 98.
Whyman. Boy Kills Man. 313.
Widow and the King. Dickinson. 486.
Wiggle. Cronin. 485.
Wild about Books. Sierra. 39.
Wild Science. Miles. 176.
Wildfire! Hill. 125.
Wiles. Each Little Bird That Sings. 270.
Wilkins. So Super Starry. 151.
Wilkinson. Dragon Keeper. 313.
Willans. Wait! I Want to Tell You a Story. 314.
Willard. Sweep Dreams. 515.
Willems. Knuffle Bunny. 103.
Willett. J. R. R. Tolkien. 45.
Willey. Clever Beatrice and the Best Little Pony.
103.
Williams, K. Circles of Hope. 410.
Williams, L. Broken China. 411.
Willis. Tadpole's Promise. 515.
Willner-Pardo. My Mom and Other Mysteries
of the Universe. 151.
Wilson, Jacqueline. Illustrated Mum. 271.
Wilson, John. Flags of War. 232.
Winchell Mink. Young. 48.
Windling. Faery Reel. 12.
Wing Nut. Auch. 425.
Wings. Gonzalez. 336.
Winter, Jeanette. Librarian of Basra. 271.
.September Roses. 45.
Winter, Jonah. Roberto Clemente. 314.
Wintering Well. Wait. 101.
Winters. Teeny Tiny Ghost and the Monster.
46.
Witch's Boy. Gruber. 337.
With Courage and Cloth. Bausum. 200.
Wittlinger. Heart on My Sleeve. 152.
Wizard Test. Bell. 243.
Wizowaty. Tour of Evil. 516.
Wolf Brother. Paver. 262.
Wolf. New Found Land. 104.
Wolfson. Silly Horse. 344.
Woman for President. Krull. 84.
Wong. Alex and the Wednesday Chess Club.
152.
_ . Hide & Seek. 411.
Wood. Ten Little Fish. 232.
Wooding. Haunting ofAlaizabel Cray. 46.
Woods. Emako Blue. 47.
Woodson. Coming On Home Soon. 272.
Woodworth. When Ratboy Lived Next Door.
272.
Woolfe. Avril Crump and Her Amazing Clones.
363.
Worlds Apart. Karr. 391.
Worlds Apart. Soto. 308.
Worm Family. Johnston. 23.
Wormell. Big Ugly Monster and the Little Stone
Rabbit. 3.
.Teeth, Tails, & Tentacles. 47.
Wormwood. Taylor. 230.
Worth. LaFaye. 25.
Wreath for Emmett Till. Nelson. 351.
Wrede. Grand Tour. 153.
Wright, C. Pirate Girl. 487.
Wright, R. Silver Penny. 516.
Wyeth. Orphea Proud. 314.
Wynne-Jones. Thief in the House of Memory.
412.
Xanadu Adventure. Alexander. 196.
Yolen. Perfect Wizard. 273.
Yoo. Girls for Breakfast. 412.
Yoss. Hirsch. 77.
You and Me Together. Kerley. 296.
You're on Your Way, Teddy Roosevelt. St.
George. 184.
Youmans. Ingledove. 413.
Youme. Sdlavi, That Is Life. 48.
Young. Winchell Mink. 48.
Yourgrau. My Curious Uncle Dudley. 104.
. Nasty Book. 414.
You & You & You. Nilsson. 503.
Yu. Little Green. 315.
Zalben. Baby Babka, the Gorgeous Genius. 153.
Zaunders. Gargoyles, Girders & Glass Houses.
233.
Zen Shorts. Muth. 351.
Zenatti. When I Was a Soldier. 517.
Zhang. Red Land Yellow River. 154.
Ziefert. Families Have Together. 414.
_ . Schools Have Learn. 187.
Zinnen. Dragons of Spratt, Ohio. 187.
Zoo's Who. Florian. 381
Zunshine. Silly Horse. 344.
Zusak. I Am the Messenger. 195.
Zweibel. Our Tree Named Steve. 414.
Books make great gifts, but Dick-
ing the perfect books for your
favorite youngsters can be daunt-
ing. Let the expert staff of The
Bulletin of the Center for Children's
Books help you navigate the book-
store wilderness full of shiny new children's
books.
Updated and expanded from last year's edi-
tion, the Guide Book to Gift Books contains
annotations of the best books for giving (and
receiving) and is available as a downloadable
PDF file that you can print out and use for
every holiday, birthday, or other gift-giving
occasion on your calendar this year.
Listed books have all been recommended in
full Bulletin reviews from the last three years
and are verified as currently in print. Entries
are divided into age groups and include
author, title, publisher, and the current list
price.
To purchase, go to:
www.lis.uiuc.edu/giftbooks/
F 
' 
the
Graduate 
S 
,oo 
ofibat 
& 
nouio 
ce
STORY: FROM FPAlUCE T• CYBERSPRCE
Connecting Children and Narrative
EDITED BY BETSY HEARNE, JANICE M. DEL NEGRO,
CHRISTINE JENKINS, AND DEBORAH STEVENSON
Papers Presented at the Allerton Park Institute
Sponsored October 26-28, 1997, by the
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois
In our interest in children's welfare, we often forget that
children are not simply passive receptacles for whatever
treasure or trash the adult world throws at them but are
lively agents who are continually interacting with their
environment. Children actively create meaning as read-
ers, viewers, and listeners. The 3 9'h Allerton Park Insti-
tute papers emphasize the critical need to connect chil-
dren and narrative as a way to affect their development
ISBN 0-87845-105-6; 
as listeners, readers, viewers, and evaluators of litera-
Number 39; 143 pages; 
ture-and information in all forms.
paper; $21.95*
The Bulletin Storytelling Review, Volume 1
Recommend-only reviews of storytelling
audio- and videotapes
EDITED BYJANICE M. DEL NEGRO AND DEBORAH STEVENSON
Add to your library this vital compendium of material
not regularly reviewed in other publications. Designed
to be a tool for selection and collection development,
the first volume of The Bulletin Storytelling Review contains:
* 162 alphabetically-arranged reviews of tapes by sto-
rytellers such as Joe Bruchac, Len Cabral, Donald
Davis, Barbara McBride-Smith, J. J. Reneaux, and
Laura Simms
* Price, distributor, and grade level information for
each review
* Ordering information for each distributor listed
* An index that allows readers to search for tapes by
type of story or possible use 
ISBN 0-87845-106-4; 99 pages;
paper; $14.95*
Based on research sponsored by the
Japanese-American National Museum
(Los Angeles), the University of Arkansas
at Little Rock, funded by the Winthrop
Rockefeller Foundation.
AUGUST
H USEX
www.augusthouse.com 
Phone 800-284-8784 * www.augusthouse.com
UNDER ONE FLAG
A YEAR AT 
ROHWER
Liz Parkhurs
Illustrations by Tom 
Clifton
ISBN 
0-87483-759-6
Hardback, 8.5" x 11"
Grades 4- 7
$16.95
CIIILltP
--
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I.
-
--------
FEE
BOOK
AND STORYTEUNG RSOURCE CATALOG
TO THE FIRST 100 LIBRARIANS
TO CLIP (OR COPY) AND RETURN THIS COUPON
Library:
Contact:
Street Address:
City/State/Zip:
e-mail:
Entry creates no obligation to 
winner
AUGUST
H USE
www.augusthouse.com
August House Publishers, Inc
201 E. Markham Street, Suite P-50
Little Rock, Arkansas 72201
FAX: (501)372-5579
m-mmmmmmmmmmm
~2- "[A] rich, smoothly written mystery...
Homey details add enormously to the texture of the
backdrop, and characters, including adults, are fully
realized. .
.
Great start for the Echo Falls series."
-Starred Review / Book list
~jc "A standout novel.. The no-nonsense tone
of the well-written prose, the multifaceted characters,
the hint of romance, and the subtly structured mystery
open the potential fan base to include just about everyone."
-Staffed Review / The Bulletin of the
Center for Children's Books
'*t~c "Abrahams is known as a writer of crime stories for
adults; this is his first foray into YA literature in a book that
will appeal to all ages...
The setting seems completely
real and the hero acts in
ways most of us readers
wouldn't dare to attempt.
Good, smart entertainment."
-Staffed Review / Kliatt
Tr 0-06-073701-8 $15.99 ($22.99)
Lb 0-06-073702-6 $16.89 ($23.89)
CD 0-06-078664-7 $27.95 ($39.95)
Ages: 10 up Grades: 5 up
LAURA GERNGER BOOKS
An Imprint of HarperCollinsPublishers
rr HarperChildren'S Audio
www.peterabrahams.com
www.harperteacher.com
I 
FREE 
m
TRIAL ISSUE
of an award-winning
publication!
Visit
www.TeachingK-8.com
Click on
FREE TRIAL ISSUE
U
Teaching K-8 is 
filled with hundreds of unique ideas
and activities that help teachers present new challenges
to their students, learn new concepts and develop new skills.
To receive your
FREE TRIAL ISSUE visit
www.TeachingK-8.com
Teaching K-8 Magazine
40 Richards Avenue * Norwalk, CT 06854
'ThESOCF
OFFIAT
fE 
1•O
*KUW .TI
I 
I 
e
^^^Tm~i~wv~
*"Frank's account... is clearly
written but not simplistic.
This is an excellent springboard
to current event discussions."
-Krus Reviews, starred review
* "The strength is ... in
organization and in language.
[Frankl uses a simple yet
wonderfully effective technique
to present the information.
Evenhanded and honest."
-Booklis 
starred review
ICHU 
0-U-UbU2- 
* $1. * AgeS 11 U
"This wonderful teaching tool provides adults with the perspective
and wisdom to present an unbiased account of this critical reality
to students."-VOYA
* School Librarwy ournal
Viking Children's Books
A division of Penguin Young Readers Group
nwww.penguin.com/youngreade
II· ;
p
Uniwrit
132) Sou
Chunpl4
U.SA
Aoo~!
0008II9036(20
-H
0008-9036(200507/08)58:11 ;1 -H
· I 
~I
,·r
~.::i~enr~F
Ut~iWLif]
132) Soul
Chunplie~
U.SA
Aoo~ 
S
Univerity of Illinois Prss 
PEIODI
1325 South Oak Street 
POSETGE
Champaign, IL 61820 
PAID
U.A. 
CHAMPAIGN, IL
ADDRESS SERVCE REQUESTED
Sir
rcNIL
You may now access The Bulletin Online with an individualized username
and password.
The Bulletin Online is available only to print subscribers, and includes the
1998-2004 volume years plus the current issues as they are published.
The online version allows you to search the current issue or the entire
database by author, title, age or grade level.
To access The Bulletin Online:
I. Go to httpl:/www.prairienet.org/ccb/
2. 
When accessing The Bulletin Online for the first time, use the sub-
scriber number that appears in the upper left-hand corer of the
mailing label on your print copy as both your username and pass-
word. This subscriber number will usually be a four- or five-digit
number but may also be a five-character letter/number combination.
3. After logging in for the first time, you will be required to change your
password to something other than your username. This password is
case sensitive and should be one word only. Please store this new
password in a safe place. Your username (which is also your sub-
scriber number) will not change.
Remember, The Bulletin Online is not licensed for public use; only indi-
vidual print subscribers and institutional subscribers' staff are granted
access, so please do not share your access codes. We are working to
expand The Bulletin Online's capabilities and therefore create broader
electronic subscription options for individuals and institutions.
Non-subscribers can learn more about The Bulletin of the Center for
Children's Books at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bb/
Please e-mail any feedback or questions to: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu.
