ILLINOJ
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
¼
I
j;l~·; ''"g
By LOLA M. SCHAEFER
Pictures by BARBARA BASH
~- 
"A fascinating combination of poetic text and artistic
illustrations that clearly explains the organization of nature in our
physical world. This is high art and a scientific classification that
can be easily understood by young children. The book starts with
a mole ... [and, following his gaze,] readers move upward to roots,
wildflowers, birds, and finally the moon. Turn the book around
and come down through the clouds to ocean waves, seaweed ...
and fish, to the bottom of the sea. [With its] melodic descriptive
text and brilliant artwork ...this expertly crafted book ...will be
enjoyed over and over again." -Starred 
review / School Library journal
Ages 4 up. $15.99 Tr (0-06-029757-3); $17.89 Lb (0-06-029758- 1)
6.. 
... 
.....
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
March 2003
Vol. 56 No. 7
A LOOK INSIDE
263 THE BIG PICTURE
Bubble Bath Pirates! written and illus. by Jarrett J. Krosoczka
264 NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
264 
Animal Sense by Diane Ackerman; illus. by Peter Sfs
269 * Rodzina by Karen Cushman
271 * The Magic Gourd ad. and illus. by Baba Wague Diakit6
283 * Abhorsen by Garth Nix
294 * Locomotion by Jacqueline Woodson
296 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
297 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin ofthe Centerfor Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Publications Office of the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of
the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of Illinois Press,
1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS)
Janice M. Del Negro, Contributing Editor (JMD)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JMH)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
OFFICE STAFF
Jennifer DeBaillie
Natalie Hoyle
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $66.00; individuals, $50.00; students, $15.00. In countries other than the
United States, add $7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya
Company Ltd. Single copy rate: $5.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus
Reprint Co., Route 100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from ProQuest, 300
North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
All inquiries about subscriptions and advertising should go to University of Illinois Press, 1325 S.
Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903, 217-333-0950.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The
Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email:
bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2003 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Jarrett J. Krosoczka from Bubble Bath Pirates! ©2003 by Jarrett J. Krosoczka.
Used by permission of Viking Children's Books.
MARCH 2003 
* 
263
THE BIG PICTURE
Bubble Bath Pirates!
written and illus. by Jarrett J. Krosoczka
There are innumerable lovely bedtime books, suitable for reading aloud with cuddles
during that standard daily ritual of childhood. Bathtime, however, is more of a
literary challenge: for a start, it'd be an unusually docile child who'd sit still for a
book while largely submerged, an unusual caretaker who could read while scrub-
bing, and an unusual book that would physically survive the watery excitement.
Once past those obstacles, however, bathtime is an experience rife with opportuni-
ties for all kinds of playfulness, subversively messy cleanliness, and adult-sanc-
tioned nakedness, and in Bubble Bath Pirates! Krosoczka makes the most of those
opportunities.
It's the piracy that's the real inspiration here, making bathtime into a
swashbuckling, splashbuckling triumph rather than a submission to an adult-en-
forced indignity. Credit clearly goes to the story's wise mother, who has displayed
considerable cunning in evolving what's obviously an established ritual to get her
two little guys into the bubbling tub, starting from her injunction to "Walk the
plank!" The happy little pirates rule the high frothy seas under the watchful eye of
"the pirate mommy," sailing pirate schooners through the bubbles and piratically
objecting to various ablutions ("'Blimey,' mumble her little pirates" as they un-
dergo shampooing). The end of bathtime is a glorious culmination, with a count-
down to plug-pulling ("Prepare the cannons!"); that's not the end, though, since
the slippery little customers evade their mother's grasp, gallop off for "buried trea-
sure in the kitchen" (heedless of clothing or bath towel), and dive into chocolate
fudge ice cream (official pirate bounty).
The text is boisterous but contained (which is more than the bathwater
will be), effectively balancing its rhythm with patterned dialogue wherein "pirate
mommy" offers a directive and her "little pirates" respond; the book is rife with
phrases that could be happily incorporated into audience bathtimes and give little
bathaneers an excuse to explore those marvelous bathroom acoustics with salty
bellows. Krosoczka's thickly textured paints, the solid figures, and the ebullience
(and the streaking) will remind some of Shannon's No, David (BCCB 9/98), but
this has plenty of flair all its own. Toothy grins (these are definitely pirates with
unusually good dental hygiene) and cheerful faces keep the mood as buoyant as
the bath toys, but the real bounty, aside from the ice cream, is the swashbuckling
detail throughout. Brandished cutlasses, a skull-and-crossbones hat, even a conve-
nient prosthetic hook suitable for pirates wishing to chase Peter Pan in the bath
will have kids clamoring for their own home equivalents, but the prize above prizes
will be the snarling rubber duckie with eyepatch (who figures prominently on the
book's cover and ours); you can practically hear him quacking a piratical poultry
"Arghh!"
264 
* THE BULLETIN
An attempt at a single-handed readaloud at bathtime will likely be
scuppered by overenthusiastic participation, but there are lots of creative ways,
short of laminating the pages, to find uses for this: staff bathtime with more than
one grownup (really, you'd have to be a commander of the stature of the pirate
mommy to hold effective sway over not just one but two such dastardly privateers
on your own anyway) and flood the occasion with uproarious glee and the floor
with spillover, or use this as a pre-bathtime enticement for reluctant washers. And
on a hot summer day, add some salty savor to backyard hijinks: read them this
while you squirt 'em with the hose. (Imprint information appears on p. 278.)
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ACKERMAN, DIANE Animal Sense; illus. by Peter Sfs. 
Knopf, 2003 
[48p]
ISBN 0-375-82384-0 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-9
This slender volume-in both thickness and trim size-gracefully and originally
presents animal experience, offering a trio of poems for each of the five senses.
Descriptive verse combines acuity with humor, discussing characteristics ranging
from the feathery closeness of penguins to the speedy vision of bees to the leopard's
predatory tastes. Though the phraseology is sometimes driven more by sound
than by sense, there's plenty of diverting and thoughtful verse that playfully ex-
plores various aspects of natural history, like a more intense and sophisticated
Douglas Florian. High points are the exploration of cows' taste for grass ("every
meal is grass with a side order of grass,/ plus huge dollops of grass smothered in
grass,/ followed by grass chops and, for dessert, more grass"), dogs' olfactory capa-
bilities (a urinary message reads "Jackie, 5:00 p.m., female, shepherd breed,/ cheerful,
well-fed, and on the mend/ from a nasty little cold, seeks a friend"), and the con-
struction of swans' wings ("Tiny air bubbles inside swan feathers/ trap all the col-
ors, splash them together"). Sfs, one of our most talented illustrators of poetry,
complements Ackerman's words with a delicate austerity, each cream-colored page
decorated with a single color (which corresponds or contrasts with the type color);
his stipple-reliant technique suggests pointillism in its broader use and engraving
in its finer, more formal employment. The quirky explorations of a popular sub-
ject make these likely lyrics for a broad range of poetry fans. DS
ANDERSON, WILLIAM 
River Boy: The Story of Mark Twain; illus. by Dan
Andreasen. 
HarperCollins, 2003 
36p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028401-3 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028400-5 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
This picture-book biography of one of America's most beloved storytellers plucks
the anecdotes from Clemens' life that will be most interesting for young readers,
MARCH 2003 
* 
265
from his boyhood on the Mississippi River, to his eclectic and fascinating travels
and careers; especially emphasized are incidents from Clemens' own childhood
that have been made famous in his fiction-the notorious whitewashing gambit,
the cave explorations, and the finding of the drowned slave. This is, however, an
airbrushed and adulatory portrait (there's no hint of any real setbacks or self-doubt,
let alone tragedy-the deaths of his children and his wife are left discreetly to the
timeline that follows the narrative), and the writing is sometimes more bland than
streamlined. Andreasen lifts his warm palette of sepia, ochre, and blue-green from
the shores of the Mississippi herself; the result is sometimes stiff and overprettified,
but the illustrations have a dreamlike nostalgia that captures the aura that has
come to surround Twain in our national imagination. While the book will prob-
ably hold more interest for children already familiar with Twain as a writer and
famous American, it can act as background to classroom readalouds of some of his
more youthfully appealing stories. KC
AYRES, KATHERINE 
Macaroni Boy. 
Delacorte, 2003 
[176p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90085-6 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73016-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Sixth-grader Mike Costa is luckier than a lot of kids in the Depression: his family's
business, Costa Brothers Fine Foods, is still hanging in there, he's got enough
pocket money for the occasional treat, and he's got a good friend in Joe Ryan. His
life isn't trouble-free, however, since he's plagued by the bullying Andy Simms,
who seems determined to make Mike's life miserable; he's also becoming increas-
ingly worried about his grandfather, whose wandering mind has been dismissed by
the rest of the family as age, but whose other symptoms lead Mike to suspect a
different kind of problem. This is an old-fashioned as well as a period tale, with
Mike a plucky, all-American protagonist with kin in a thousand other novels and
a formulaic flavor to his experiences (his realization that he's been antagonizing
Simms as much as the other way around, for instance). The overrigorous specifics
about Depression-era Pittsburgh (including the toxicity of the river's fish, which
prove to be poisoning Mike's grandfather) are often more belabored than atmo-
spheric. There's nonetheless a lot of life in this kind of story, and the pleasures of
Mike's friendship with Joe, the two boys' careful pursuit of the mysterious cause of
Grandpap's illness, and Mike's family's gradual acknowledgment of his growth
offer some genuine and uncomplicated satisfaction. Suitable also for advanced
primary-grades readers, this will provide some pleasure for kids secretly yearning
to kick around the streets with their pals in the good old days. DS
BARKER, CLIVE 
Abarat; written and illus. by Clive Barker. 
Cotler/HarperCol-
lins, 2002 
4 18p
ISBN 0-06-028092-1 
$24.99 
R Gr. 6-10
Candy Quackenbush has an abusive father, a passive mother, and a bullying teacher.
In a moment of breathless abandon, she flees the halls of her school and follows an
unused road to a grassy pasture where she meets John Mischief, an eight-headed
master criminal from the Islands of the Abarat. Given the opportunity, she
unhesitatingly joins with Mischief to escape her stultifying life and quickly be-
comes enmeshed in the machinations of politics and power on the fantastical ar-
chipelago. The pace is breakneck and breathless, the story brimful of mystery and
266 
* THE BULLETIN
tragedy. Barker jumbles a plethora of wildly diverse species, characters, and locales
into his phantasmagoric plot, and the beginning is so full that at first it appears to
be a confusion of strange characters and alternative locations. Once the heroine
sets forth on her journey, however, that confusion crystallizes into purpose. Candy
is on a quest, but she doesn't know it; she is in possession of a valuable talisman,
but she doesn't know what it is; and she is in grave danger from the Lord of Mid-
night, Carrion, although she doesn't know why. The reader begins to get inklings
of Candy's importance in the evolving mythology of Abarat long before Candy
herself, and that adds a souppon of suspense to the already packed pages. Assisted
by a variety of helpers, she negotiates her way through the islands and their strange
mixture of magic and technology. By the conclusion, Barker has established Candy
and friends as forces to be reckoned with in this almost overwhelmingly rich alter-
native world, and the cliffhanger conclusion will surely bring readers back for the
second installment. Fantastical color illustrations add to the dreamlike intensity of
the text. JMD
BROOKS, MARTHA 
True Confessions of a Heartless Girl. 
Kroupa/Farrar,
2003 
[19 2p]
ISBN 0-374-37806-1 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 9-12
It's a classic literary situation-a group of troubled people, prompted by event or
incursion, tell their stories to each other and/or the reader. Here the setting is a
failing cafe in a small Canadian town, and the catalyst is the arrival of Noreen, a
hostile, pregnant seventeen-year-old who manages to damage everything she touches.
As privileged insiders, we hear confessions of her past, which includes an abusive
stepfather and drunken, neglectful mother; Noreen has also visited her bitter afflic-
tions on a generous older sister and a long string of boyfriends, the latest of whom
is deeply in love with her and consequently deeply hurt by her. Brooks negotiates
all this with clarity and immediacy. Readers, too, may initially wish to wring
Noreen's neck, but she's rescued by a good-hearted crew: the lonely cafe owner,
Lynda, and her endearingly frank young son; Del, a laconic, guilt-ridden farmer
pining after Lynda; Dolores, the "oldest first nations waitress in Manitoba," who
has recently lost her only daughter to cancer and is in the process of losing her
oldest friend without realizing it; and a devoted dog that almost dies. The novel's
most riveting dynamic exists between Noreen and her sweet and sexy boyfriend,
Wesley Cuthand (also First Nations), as the couple's future is endangered by
Noreen's hard words and harder actions. There's at least reassurance that the oth-
ers will pair up; it's a matter of time and trust in Dolores' various spiritual re-
sources, including Jesus, the Higher Powers, the Creator, Mother Earth, and the
ancestors. Fortunately, Noreen is enough of an anti-heroine to balance all this
goodness and keep readers guessing-and dreading-what sparks are going to fly
next. BH
BURCHARD, PETER 
Frederick Douglass: For the Great Family ofMan. 
Atheneum,
2003 
226p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-689-83240-0 
$18.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-10
The life of the runaway slave, abolitionist orator, publisher, and statesman receives
an earnest but only partially successful treatment in this ambitious biography.
Douglass' early years in bondage, his close but stormy relationship with fellow
MARCH 2003 
* 
267
abolitionist William Lloyd Garrison, and his public efforts to muster support for
emancipation are covered with insight and candor. Despite Burchard's claim for
Douglass' wider-ranging civil-rights interests, coverage of his time in politically
oppressed Ireland and his attendance at the Seneca Falls convention do little more
than imply sympathy for other causes; indeed, criticism by his feminist contempo-
raries of his failure to support women's suffrage is buried (possibly with some
embarrassment) in the epilogue. Also condensed within the epilogue are a full
quarter century of work and domestic upheaval after the Civil War. Here readers
are hastily apprised of his love affairs, his career as a statesman in Haiti, a past
position as recorder of deeds in Washington, D.C., and various criticisms of his
"willingness to compromise" that might have been more effectively introduced at
an earlier point in the text. Occasionally, contradictions mar the prose: "America
was a disappointment to them [Irish immigrants]; they were angry and eager to
improve their lot. Most Irishmen were content to be employed as common labor-
ers, while their wives and daughters looked for work as household servants." There
is, however, enough detail (and fine source notes and bibliography) to make this a
viable resource for interested readers. EB
CARBONE, ELISA 
The Pack. Viking, 2003 
[176p]
ISBN 0-670-03619-6 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 5-8
A transplanted rural girl, Becky's a semi-loner in her suburban Washington school,
where she's got one friend (Omar, himself an odd man out because of his biracial
heritage) and where money and influence matter; in fact, her wealthy classmate
Kyle Metzger, whose joyriding ended in a collision that crippled Becky's brother,
not only got off penalty-free but now actually taunts Becky in school. Becky is at
first opposed to allowing Akhil, a very strange new boy, into her friendship with
Omar, but the more she gets to know Akhil the more fascinating and mysterious
she finds him. It's Akhil who senses that Kyle Metzger's growing anger presages
violence and who determines that the trio will ascertain and confound Kyle's plans.
The setup is volatile and intriguing, but Carbone's two dramatic plot strands end
up undercutting each other, and the treatment of both is ultimately reductive.
Kyle's violent plans (which lead to school shootings and bombings) are steeped in
narrative contrivance, and not only do the protagonists push ethical boundaries
dangerously in tracking Kyle, their discoveries ultimately have little impact on the
final violence (which conveniently kills Kyle as well). Akhil's secret-that he was
raised from early youth by wolves, making him a hot property for scientific study
and giving him unusual perspective on human social dynamics-is somewhat
thrown away, mainly furthering the Kyle-hunting plot. The provocative themes
and the romance-both in the story of Akhil's life and his growing relationship
with Becky-may be sufficient to keep the pages turning, but readers would be
better off with the classic wolf-child tale,Jungle Book. DS
CNEUT, CARLL 
The Amazing Love Story ofMr. Morfi written and illus. by Carll
Cneut. 
Clarion, 2003 
[2 6 p]
ISBN 0-618-33170-0 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
The Mr. Morf of the title is a dog, but no ordinary dog: he's a daring tightrope
walker in the circus, who's been "performing at the big top since puppyhood."
268 
* THE BULLETIN
One day the lonely grind finally gets to him, and he longs for the happy bonding
that seems to be the fortunate lot of his friends. When he mounts a search for a
friend to love, he's initially unsuccessful-the bird is soon flying away, the mole
gets lost underground, the wolf's motives are questionable-until finally he dis-
covers a friend ("So tiny, so sweet, and oh! so very different") in the flea named
Isabella, who's been tickling him till he giggles. Though there's a definite flair to
the writing style, the story is even more rambling than Mr. Morfs journey, and the
ending is somewhat abrupt as well as illogical (didn't Mr. Morf have fleas before?
How long is a flea really going to be around anyway?). The mixed-media illustra-
tions are the real draw here: Cneut's finely sculpted layers of pigment and crisp,
shadowed outlines suggest collage, and his delicate yet restrained detailing gives
the images a pleasingly old-fashioned air. The circus colors, especially the red, are
employed sparingly against paler backgrounds and more subdued tones, in keep-
ing with the poker-faced visual treatment of the silly story. There are more suc-
cessful stories of friendship (and, for that matter, dogs), but this may still divert
youngsters with a taste for the offbeat. DS
COOKE, TRISH 
Full, Full, Full of Love; illus. by Paul Howard. 
Candlewick,
2003 
[2 6p]
ISBN 0-7636-1851-9 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-7 yrs
Jay Jay goes to Sunday dinner at his grandmother's house, and he is hungry, asking
"Is dinner ready, Gran?" over and over. Gran keeps her impatient grandson busy
setting the table, watching the tropical fish, and looking out the window for fam-
ily, and when everyone in this extended African-American family has arrived
("Uncles and aunties, cousins and friends, Mama and Daddy") Sunday dinner is
truly ready. Cooke's simple ode to family gatherings takes on a rhythmic swing
with refrains describing how "full" things are at Grannie's house: cupboards full
of dishes, fish tank full of fishes, tin full of candies, and Grannie herself full of hugs
and kisses. The text skirts the almost inevitable sentimentality attached to this sort
of tale: Jay Jay isn't above getting into some mischief with the candy tin, and his
grandmother isn't above making sure someone else does the cleaning up after she
does the cooking up ("All right, you kids-one wash, one dry!"). Acrylic and
pencil illustrations (reminiscent of Helen Oxenbury's work) feature soft-eyed,
round-shaped, cozy figures in a sun-yellow kitchen, in compositions large enough
to be seen clearly by small groups. Scenes of Jay Jay and his grandmother and of
the family gathered around the dining room lingering over coffee are sure to trig-
ger some sharable memories for the adults reading this title; children listening will
be happy to hear them, and they'll want to make some memories of their own.
JMD
COWLEY, JOY Agapanthus Hum and the Angel Hoot; illus. by Jennifer
Plecas. 
Philomel, 2003 
50p
ISBN 0-399-23344-X 
$13.99 
R Gr. 1-3
Agapanthus Hum (of Agapanthus Hum and the Eyeglasses, BCCB 4/94, etc.) re-
turns in this easy chapter book about that major milestone-losing one's first tooth.
In seven short chapters, the irrepressible Agapanthus loses a tooth ("One day, it
fell out on a bite of carrot, and dropped like a pearl into her lap"), learns to angel
hoot (whistle through her "tooth tunnel"), sings duets with her dog, Major Bark
MARCH 2003 
* 269
(who howls when she hoots), and becomes the star of her classroom "Show-and-
Tell." Each little mini-drama in Agapanthus' young life (this is formatted as an
easy reader, but it would do equally well as a readaloud) is presented in immediate
language that clearly evokes the endearing main character and her "whizzy" per-
sonality, whether she is "humming a good buzzing song" in the garden or practic-
ing her "hoot-and-howl" act with Major Bark. Plecas' watercolors have a "whizzy"
aspect of their own: the wiggly lines seem to vibrate with enthusiasm. From her
shock of red pigtails to the constant disarray of her forever-falling eyeglasses, Aga-
panthus is a delighted mass of quivering energy; other dot-eyed characters are re-
markably expressive for their minimalist representation. Fans old and new will
welcome Agapanthus, a contemporary heroine who makes gaucherie a desirable
trait. JMD
CUSHMAN, KAREN 
Rodzina. Clarion, 2003 
[22 4 p]
ISBN 0-618-13351-8 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
It's 1881, and Rodzina Brodski is headed west from Chicago on an orphan train.
Rodzina is convinced that only people with dubious intentions would want to
adopt her, in part because of what a fellow street kid tells her ("That orphanage ...
sells [orphans] to families that want slaves") and in part because of her age (twelve),
size (husky), looks (plain), and ethnicity (Polish). As it turns out, she's right-the
only potential adopters she encounters along the journey are a pair of elderly sisters
who want an unpaid laborer and a scuzzy old geezer looking for a replacement wife
(and mother for his numerous children). Happily, Rodzina escapes both situa-
tions, but her heart grows heavier as she watches the younger orphans she's be-
friended and cared for along the way get snapped up by eager families until only
she alone remains. Will she be forced to enter the Boys' and Girls' Training School,
or can she convince the orphan-train chaperone (a frosty young female doctor
facing prejudices of her own) to adopt her? Though the answer will come as no
surprise to most readers, Cushman's "orphan-finds-a-home" happy ending is both
satisfying and reasonably plausible. Rodzina is an engaging, well-fleshed-out (lit-
erally) heroine whose matter-of-fact narrative voice is by turns curious, resentful,
humorous, and sad ("I cried myself to sleep so quietly that no one could hear. Not
even me"); her memories of and longing for her dead parents and brothers are
particularly moving. Historical fiction and orphan fans will find this a comfort-
able and informative read, while social studies teachers may find it useful as a
readaloud that touches on city life vs. rural life, westward expansion, and ethnic,
class, and gender inequalities. Cushman ends with a note on orphan trains and the
history of the "placing out" of children in Western society; a pronunciation guide
will also be included. JMH
DAMM, ANTJE 
Ask Me; written and illus. with photographs by Antje Damm; tr.
by Doris Orgel. 
Porter/Roaring Brook, 2003 
220p
ISBN 0-7613-1845-3 
$14.95 
R 4-8 yrs
More than a hundred simple questions are offered here to prompt children to
share their feelings and memories, aspirations and talents. Each query cuts through
the middle of the solid-colored page on the left of the spread, and a picture-
photograph or cartoon-styled painting-claims the recto. Many of the discussion
starters are straightforward: "Which animals scare you?" (a mouse creeps toward
270 
* THE BULLETIN
the bathroom while a shin and foot angle toward the page's edge, suggesting a
hasty flight); "Did you ever make your own toys?" (a photo of a cardboard and
cloth dollhouse displays a toy clearly crafted with more love than skill). Others are
more probing: "What rules have you made?"; "Have you ever been homesick?";
"Where would you like to wake up tomorrow morning?" Damm intends her title
to "stimulate conversation between parents and children," but it could also func-
tion as a resource for preschool and primary teachers looking for classroom ice
breakers. There are only a very, very few persons of color to be found among the
scores of images in this German import, and some dialogue facilitators will want to
prepare themselves for the answers to "Is there a bad word you think is funny?"
Still, this could be just the answer for those rare occasions when the challenge is
getting kids to talk. EB
DEAK, ERZSI, comp. 
Period Pieces; comp. by Erzsi Deak and Kristin Embry
Litchman. 
HarperCollins, 2003 
[160p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-623797-1 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-623796-3 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
This perkily packaged collection includes one poem and a dozen short stories about
girls getting their first period, from authors such as Linda Sue Park, Rita Williams-
Garcia, Carmen T. Bernier-Grand, and Johanna Hurwitz, among others. Most of
the tales are autobiographical or semi-autobiographical, and they present good
examples of how menstruation was viewed in the authors' personal pasts. The
tales therefore often have an old-fashioned tone that results in an odd dissonance;
despite the sisterly camaraderie lauded in the introduction, some of the stories
unintentionally perpetuate dated stereotypes about menstruation (including the
use of quaintly euphemistic terminology for menstruation, such as having "Little
Bears make you growl" or "Auntie pay you a visit"). Standout stories that avoid
the negative nostalgia trap include Jane Kurtz's "A Family Sandwich," wherein a
young girl comes to terms with her mother's death and her own place in the fam-
ily; Cynthia Leitich Smith's "The Gentleman Cowboy," in which the main char-
acter has a most embarrassing moment with a cowboy guide who luckily has four
sisters and lots of experience with feminine emergencies; and Uma Krishnaswami's
"The Gift," in which a traditional token of celebration is passed down through
three generations of women. A concluding section about the contributors allows
the authors to further contextualize their stories and their menses experiences;
biographical information is included. JMD
DEPAOLA, TOMIE 
Things Will NEVER Be the Same; written and illus. by Tomie
dePaola. 
Putnam, 2003 
[80p]
ISBN 0-399-23982-0 
$13.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-4
This fifth entry in dePaola's autobiographical series for young readers picks up
right where the last title (What a Year, BCCB 3/02) left off, with young Tomie
going back to first grade after the Christmas holidays. Winter sledding, family
stories, school musicals, Disney movies, amusement parks,'and the transition to
second grade all stand out as highlights for the lively boy. The author incorporates
a plot element from What a Year that results in a different look for this title: at the
end of the fourth book, Tomie was given a diary for Christmas by his grand-
MARCH 2003 
* 271
mother, and this new title is sprinkled with journal entries and drawings from the
budding artist. These entries break up the text in an unforced, natural way that is
sure to have visual appeal for transitional readers sometimes put off by dense text.
The storytelling in this title is lighter and more suited to the emerging personality
of the chatty young author (up until the final journal entry for December 7, 1941),
with more emphasis on action and feeling than on detailed minutiae that some-
times slow the pace. Full-page black-and-white illustrations and spot art scattered
throughout give a gentle sense of time and place, while still evincing dePaola's
recognizable and effective illustrative style. JMD
DIAKITe, BABA WAGUE, ad. 
The Magic Gourd; ad. and illus. by Baba Wague
Diakite. 
Scholastic, 2003 
[32p]
ISBN 0-439-43960-4 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Brother Rabbit is foraging for wild roots to feed his family when he rescues Cha-
meleon from a thorny bush; in his gratitude, Chameleon gives Brother Rabbit a
magical gourd that will fill with whatever he desires whenever he desires it. The
gourd not only feeds Brother Rabbit and his family but also their friends and
neighbors, and soon the magical gourd comes to the attention of a greedy king.
The king takes the gourd by force, but a second gift from Chameleon enables
Brother Rabbit to retrieve it and to teach the greedy king a lesson, too: "Let us
appreciate what we have been given." Diakite (reteller of The Hunterman and the
Crocodile, BCCB 2/97) offers a traditional tale from Mali that delivers its message
with gentle humor. From the quietly poetic opening ("It all began when the sun
refused to allow the clouds to gather, and there was no rain. First came drought.
Then came famine. Everyone was hungry") to the quietly wise conclusion ("As for
Rabbit and Chameleon, they have always understood that loyal friendships are the
true treasures that make one rich"), Diakite's subtly cadenced language moves
reader and listener along. Photographs of the decorative ceramic tiles, trays, and
bowls created by Diakite to illustrate this tale are set against glossy pages (each a
different background color); the ceramics are bordered with black-and-white de-
signs taken from traditional bogolanfiniw, or mud cloth, a textile technique spe-
cific to the Bamana people of Mali. Images on each ceramic piece pictorially spell
out the story, and a specially sculpted statue of Chameleon graces some of the
pages. While no specific source is given for this particular tale, the addenda do
include notes on the culture of Mali, as well as the symbolism in the art (each mud
cloth pattern has a specific meaning, for example). A glossary of Bambaran terms
used in the text and a note on folkloric variants are also included. JMD
DODDS, DAYLE ANN 
Where's Pup?; illus. by Pierre Pratt. 
Dial, 2003 
28p
ISBN 0-8037-2744-5 
$12.99 
R 
Gr. 1-2
This beginning reader cuts right to the search, if not actually the chase, as a di-
minutive circus performer wanders the circus looking for his misplaced dog. The
circus people are very busy indeed, preparing their acts and their animals, and they
each refer Pup's questing owner along to the next likely informant ("Don't know.
Go ask Jo. She's feeding Mo"). The search sequence is a touch lengthy, and the
book's novice readers may initially be puzzled by the slight conceptual twist that
has each respondent describing the action on the next spread, rather than the cur-
rent one. Overall, however, this is an inventive beginning reader in its plausible
272 
* THE BULLETIN
motivation for the helpful repetition, and the circus setting adds excitement. Dodds
streamlines the reading further, without draining the text of its energy, by building
questions and answers from short rhyming phrases with lots of recycled words.
Pratt's acrylics are a three-ring circus in their own right, providing wall-to-wall
rich color but especially relying on the reds and oranges of the big top and con-
trasting touches of peacock and gold (even the huge gorilla sports gold-touched
peacock drawers). For all his clown shoes and ruff, the knee-high protagonist is an
earnest and bespectacled little guy, marching determinedly through animal acts
and clambering up ladders to pose his important question. The final answer to
this question involves an effectively employed piece of paper engineering, as the
reader (and the protagonist) is told just to look up, "And up,/ and up" as the page
unfolds and unfolds at the top, revealing several tiers of an acrobatic pyramid with
a proud Pup at the top. Friendly to beginning readers without being condescend-
ing, this would also divert toddlers just getting started on narrative, who will glee-
fully join in on the repeated titular question. DS
FARRIS, CHRISTINE KING 
My Brother Martin: A Sister Remembers Growing Up
with the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.; illus. by Chris Soentpiet. 
Simon,
2003 
40p
ISBN 0-689-84387-9 
$17.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Farris introduces herself with a small inset black-and-white photo and a few
plainspoken words: "I am his older sister ... I knew him long before the speeches
he gave and the marches he led and the prizes he won." Here's a source of author-
ity that young children will understand-even a national hero of Dr. King's stat-
ure can't squirm out from under the glare of a big sister. By first presenting her
brother Martin's early years as fellow trickster and ordinary member of the noisy
neighborhood pack, Farris weaves the context into which his early experience of
social cruelty ("The [white neighbor] boys had told my brothers that they couldn't
play together anymore because A.D. and M.L. were Negroes") opens his eyes to
the need for social reform. Soentpiet's scenes, bathed in an unearthly garish glow
that fairly demands protective eyewear, tend to undermine Farris's attempt to con-
vey the cozy familiarity of their family's life. Grandma sits stiffly poised with a
frozen grin while Aunt Ida reads the siblings a story, neighbors react with minstrel-
show comic horror to a trick the youngsters play with their grandmother's fur
piece, and facial expressions and body language are often too exaggerated to be
credible. Nonetheless, by focusing squarely on King's early years Farris and Soentpiet
do manage to demonstrate for a young audience how even the most lovingly pro-
tected children could not avoid discrimination indefinitely, and how the family's
quiet but steely resistance to injustice helped set King on his future course. EB
FITZGERALD, ELLA, ad. 
A-Tisket, A-Tasket; ad. by Ella Fitzgerald and Van
Alexander; illus. by Ora Eitan. 
Philomel, 2003 
26p
ISBN 0-399-23206-0 
$15.99 
Ad 
2-4 yrs
The lyrics of Fitzgerald's swinging nursery rhyme (adapted by Fitzgerald and
Alexander from the traditional rhyme) are narratively expanded by computer-
enhanced mixed media. A little white boy writes a letter to his mommy, puts it in
his basket, and goes for a walk; when he drops the basket, "a little girlie picked it
up and took it to the market." The little African-American girl takes the basket to
the park; in the meantime the boy is having a temper tantrum ("She took it, she
MARCH 2003 
* 273
took it, my little yellow basket,// and if she doesn't bring it back, I think that I
shall die") and asking passersby if they have seen his basket. In the end, he gets it
back ("A-tisket, a-tasket, I found my yellow basket./ I thought I lost it to that
girlie,// but I found it after all"). What makes a memorable jazz recording doesn't
necessarily make a good picture-book text, and the printed lyrics lack the pizzazz
of Fitzgerald's spirited rendition, but there's enough of a narrative thread to keep
singing preschoolers interested. Some of Eitan's semi-abstract collage images are
overwhelmed by clashing patterns, but the strong figures have a dramatic impact
against artistically reproduced images of New York City. Those seeking a picture
book that combines visual and musical art will be better served by Raschka'sJohn
Coltrane's Giant Steps (BCCB 9/02), but this could make a mild musical diversion
for the preschool crowd. JMD
FREDERICKS, MARIAH 
The True Meaning of Cleavage. Jackson/Atheneum,
20043 
[2 24 p]
ISBN 0-689-85092-1 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
"Being guillotined only takes a second. Whereas freshman year lasts much, much
longer," thinks Jess at the beginning of the dreaded school year. Trouble almost
immediately comes from a surprising quarter, when Jess' magnetic friend and life-
line, Sari, begins to have ambitions beyond the friends' current socially marginal
status and manifests them in a particularly disturbing way: she makes a play for
the most popular boy in school, senior David Cole, who's involved in a steady
relationship with a long-term girlfriend. What's worse is that the play is, in Sari's
eyes, successful, since David secretly sees her when he can fit her into his schedule;
Jess is appalled by her friend's blindness to the fact that David is using the attrac-
tive and desperate girl for flattery and satisfaction while never intending to endan-
ger his real romance. Fredericks capably manages the difficult feat of providing
nuanced perspective on Sari's behavior (and Jess' reaction) without making Jess'
narration implausibly sophisticated. On the one hand, Sari is a glamorous friend
with interest in popularity that would leave Jess behind; on the other hand, she's
also a young girl completely out of her depth, mistaking use for love. No character
is entirely off the hook or on it: Jess succumbs to temptation and tells the biggest
mouth in school about Sari's secret fling ("I wanted to feel like I had something to
say. Instead of listening all the time"), and she also sees the dastardly David Cole
in a different light in the art class where he admires Jess' work as he struggles with
his own. This is sharply knowing about the social repositioning and rearrange-
ment of friendships new circumstances can bring, as well as the price the inexperi-
enced can find themselves paying. The girls' eventual rapprochement may offer a
more optimistic outcome than the often-unbreachable cleavages of real life, but
that's all the more reason to find this satisfying as well as insightful. DS
FURGANG, KATHY 
Flower Girl; illus. by Harley Jessup. 
Viking, 2003 
34 p
ISBN 0-670-88950-4 
$15.99 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
While playing hide-and-seek at her grandmother's house, Anna overhears that she
is to be the flower girl at Aunt Julie's wedding. Anna is dismayed; she'd much
rather play outdoors and ride her bike that go to a wedding. When her aunt,
mother, and grandmother begin taking gowns, gloves, veils, and old wedding pic-
tures out of trunks in the attic, Anna becomes intrigued, finally deciding this wed-
274 
* THE BULLETIN
ding business might not be so bad after all, even though she'd still rather play
outside with her cousins. Kudos to Furgang for giving voice to those girls who
aren't into girly pursuits like weddings and wearing flowers in their hair, but the
narrative itself is disjointed and full of gaps, requiring quite a bit of inference on
the part of the reader to discern the motivations behind both Anna's reluctance
and her eventual capitulation. Fortunately, Jessup's illustrations help fill in the
gaps and establish the tone; the colors are bold and the linework is spunky and
energetic. While the flower-girl scenario may make readership interest a bit nar-
row, the book can open up more general discussions of the crazy things adults ask
kids to do. KC
GILES, GAIL 
Dead Girls Don't Write Letters. 
Roaring Brook, 2003 
[14 4p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-7613-2813-0 
$22.90
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7613-1727-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Since the death of Sunny's sister, Jazz, Sunny's father has sunken further into his
alcoholism and Sunny's mother is nearly comatose from depression and medica-
tion, but Sunny still finds the situation preferable to life in the shadow of mag-
netic, vicious Jazz. She therefore doesn't share her parents' joy when a letter from
Jazz arrives revealing her survival, followed by the prodigal sister's return-except
it's not really Jazz. Sunny's desperate mother doesn't seem to realize that the young
woman is a very good imposter, but Sunny and her father, hiding their disbelief in
front of Sunny's mother and not-Jazz, attempt to unravel the mystery of this strange
interloper's appearance. The plot twists a bit too far and too fast, swapping some
mystery for confusion in the speedy resolution, but the set up is a gripping one
indeed. Giles (author of the compelling drama Shattering Glass, BCCB 5/02) makes
the most of Sunny's dysfunctional family and Sunny's complicated identity forma-
tion in the face of such misdirection ("When the real Jazz left for New York, I
knew my place in the world for the first time ever"), and there's not only delicious
suspense in the unfolding of the plot but also some effective emotional issues:
since the returned Jazz is definitely an improved model, does Sunny perhaps want
her to stay and be the sister Jazz never was? Echoes of Duncan's Summer of Fear
provide a good indication of the likely readers-Duncan fans and those who relish
a taut, suspenseful enigma will find themselves right at home here. DS
GLIORI, DEBI 
Flora's Surprise!; written and illus. by Debi Gliori. 
Orchard,
2003 
[26p]
ISBN 0-439-45590-1 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-7 yrs
Flora is the littlest member of a bunny clan that loves to garden, and while her
older sibs raise tulips, lettuce, and alfalfa sprouts, Flora takes a different approach,
optimistically planting a brick in a flower pot in hopes of growing a house. Not
surprisingly, her brick fails to make any progress towards house-ness, and Flora
must contend not only with her siblings' depressingly spectacular horticultural
results, but also with their skepticism and gentle condescension: "'I think your
brick is dead,' said Sam. 'It's NOT a BRICK!' wailed Flora. 'IT'S A HOUSE!'"
However, Flora ultimately triumphs, much to the surprise of her family. Her
potted brick does indeed produce a house ... for a small black bird who chooses
the pot as a nesting site. Flora's story is short and sweet (but not too sweet), and
preschoolers and primary graders who have had their own creative ideas dismissed
MARCH 2003 
* 275
by skeptical elders will easily sympathize with Flora's frustration and delight in her
success. Gliori's cheery illustrations are bold enough in color (bright spring greens,
oranges, and pinks are grounded with earthy brown tones) and composition to be
enjoyed from across the room, yet they are also pleasingly delicate in their detail-
ing. Gliori's nattily dressed bunny bunch are expressive, cuddly critters with creamy
fur, large pink noses, and pink-lined floppy ears, and tiny Flora is particularly
charming as she demurely inspects her siblings' plant projects and proudly totes
her potted brick. Adults in need of fresh secular springtime fare for storytimes will
find what they're looking for here. JMH
GREENSPUN, ADELE ARON Ariel and Emily; by Adele Aron Greenspun and Joanie
Schwarz. 
Dutton, 2003 
32p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-525-46861-7 
$12.99 
M 
2-4 yrs
Ariel and Emily, two girls on the verge oftoddlerhood, are best friends doing best-
friendy things. The text is essentially a list of things these best friends like to do:
"Ariel and Emily love to go to the park"; "Sometimes Ariel and Emily play by
themselves. But mostly they play together"; "Emily blows bubbles . . . and Ariel
helps her pop them." Color-tinted, computer-enhanced photographs show the
two girls in a grassy field, playing with balloons, making music, sharing "a squishy
banana snack," and so forth. Each photograph is set on meringue-colored paper
and framed by a faux-quilty border with scalloped edging, stripes, and flowers.
The palette is subdued, and even the traditionally warm colors of yellow and pink
are cooled by a prevalent olive green. Though the book could serve as a model for
adults who want to create such objects as gifts for their own children, the senti-
mental, scrapbook nature of this offering makes it too personalized for most gen-
eral audiences and too diluted for the age group it features. While it's true that
young children often like to look at photographs of other young children, there are
better picture books (such as Margaret Miller's Guess Who?, BCCB 9/94) to fill the
bill. JMD
HARTNETT, SONYA 
What the Birds See. 
Candlewick, 2003 
196p
ISBN 0-7636-2092-0 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Three children have mysteriously vanished from the neighborhood, sending the
media into a frenzy and parents into protective fits about the safety of their own
offspring. Nine-year-old Adrian, however, seems to be doing his own kind of
vanishing in a world increasingly uninterested in seeing him. Shunted from house
to house since the emotional meltdown of his mother ("Like the bundle that gets
handed about in the game of pass the parcel, he's been unwrapped and made
smaller as he's been pushed from each to the next. He is haunted by the prospect
of losing the last thin layer that protects him"), he's now living with his sharp-
edged grandmother, who's resentful at having yet another unsatisfactory child to
rear in the time she'd been hoping for some peace, and with his troubled young
uncle, who's virtually housebound after a traumatic accident. With his meager
relationships at school deteriorating, only his friendship with the three children
across the way, especially bold Nicole, the eldest, sustains him. As usual, Hartnett
offers a subtle, imaginative portrait rich in perception and implication; here she
also uses her measured pace to add a chilling undertone to her depiction. Though
there's little overt action, the step-by-step development of Adrian's dilemma (re-
ally the step-by-step eroding of Adrian) is taut and absorbing, and the book's cli-
276 
* THE BULLETIN
max is no less tragic for its seeming inescapability. Young adult readers shouldn't
be misled by the protagonist's age: there's enough horror behind the mundane
face here to absorb any fan of psychological drama. DS
HAUSMAN, GERALD 
Escapefrom Botany Bay: The True Story of Mary Bryant; by
Gerald and Loretta Hausman. 
Orchard, 2003 
[22 4 p]
ISBN 0-439-40327-8 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-10
Condemned to death for stealing a bonnet, nineteen-year-old Mary Broad is re-
lieved to learn her sentence has been commuted to a fixed term in the new English
penal colony to be established in Australia. Her relief is short-lived, though, when
faced with the reality of filth, disease, and sexual predation aboard the prison hulk.
Mary's status as mistress to one of the guards affords her a few privileges, but when
she bears his child on the outward voyage, her best hope lies in a hasty marriage to
Will Bryant, a fellow convict she had once met in England. Will's fishing expertise
secures them a better living at Botany Bay than other deportees enjoy, but the
couple are determined to escape; having weathered the hardships of an open craft
at sea, they land in the relative safety of Timor, only to be taken into custody again
after Will's alcohol-induced braggadocio attracts the attention of British officials.
An epilogue follows the known fates of some of the main players, but this thin
testament to the tale's veracity cannot quite compensate for the heavily fictional-
ized style into which Mary's story is cast. Though Mary is illiterate and impover-
ished, her narration is suspiciously well-spoken ("In my dreams I saw us break free
of human tyranny--only to fight against a stronger opponent: Nature"), and the
pretense of recounting her travails to her real-life advocate James Boswell crumbles
when he himself necessarily enters her tale ("I wanted to believe his sincerity, but I
couldn't. It seemed that all hope had just gone out of me"). Fictional liberties are
stretched taut here, but adventure fans may be too engrossed in the grim, tense
details to care. EB
HOLUB, JOAN 
Why Do Rabbits Hop?: And Other Questions about Rabbits, Guinea
Pigs, Hamsters, and Gerbils; illus. by Anna DiVito and with photographs. 
Dial,
2003 
48p 
(Dial Easy-to-Read)
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-2771-2 
$13.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-14-230120-5 
$3.99 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Holub (author of Why Do Dogs Bark?, BCCB 2/01) turns here to smaller members
of the pet world. Despite the title, this is more an overview than a behavioral
exploration, using a question-and-answer format to describe characteristics of vari-
ous furry critters and the husbandry thereof. Starting with rabbits, proceeding to
guinea pigs, and then discussing hamsters and gerbils together, the book covers
development and size as well as communication and favorite toys. Some basic
questions are left unanswered (how long do any of these critters tend to live in
captivity?), and information isn't always consistent from section to section (only
hamsters and gerbils have suggested tricks provided). There's still plenty of infor-
mation, though, and the emphasis on behavior and social needs will help young-
sters envision day-to-day life with their pet beyond the basic fuzzy cuddles. DiVito
provides a few lightly lined watercolors, but the real visual appeal comes from a
panoply of furry photographs showing the subjects at their adorable best. This
doesn't offer the depth of Wexler's single-species works or even the Silversteins'
Pocket Pets (BCCB 4/00), but it's a winsome introduction to some less-feted pets.
DS
MARCH 2003 
* 277
HUNTER, ERIN 
Warriors: Into the Wild. 
HarperCollins, 2003 
272p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-052548-7 $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-000002-3 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Rusty is a housecat recruited by some warrior cats to leave his comfortable Twoleg
home to join ThunderClan, a band of feral cats who live and hunt in a nearby
forest along with three other rival clans (ShadowClan, RiverClan, and WindClan).
After proving himself in battle, Rusty is adopted into ThunderClan, given a new
name (Firepaw), and apprenticed to a mentor for training. Firepaw identifies with
the fierce loyalties inherent to clan life, but as a former "kittypet" he is also more
willing to step outside clan tradition, a fact which both helps and hinders his ad-
vancement. Inter-clan rivalry and intra-clan battles for power lead to acts of be-
trayal and murder, and only Firepaw realizes the true culprit: Tigerclaw, respected
warrior and now deputy to leader Bluestar. The author's attempt to create a hier-
archical warrior-clan society falls a bit short: neither the imagined world nor the
characters within it are consistent or compelling. Characterization is limited es-
sentially to each individual's function within the clan, and the cast therefore re-
mains cartoon cats engaged in territory marking; the attempt to set up a cliffhanger
lead-in to the next book in the series results in some strained plausibility at the end
of this one. Still, this is essentially an action story, and while the pace occasionally
flags there are a lot of bloody tooth-and-claw battles here that may engage readers
of the Redwall series. JMD
JENKINS, STEVE 
What Do You Do with a Tail Like This?; written and illus. by
Steve Jenkins and Robin Page. 
Houghton, 2003 
[32p]
ISBN 0-618-25628-8 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 5-8 yrs
Jenkins, capable illustrator of other early natural history (Collard's MakingAnimal
Babies, BCCB 9/00), turns to a guessing game about anatomical function. Tan-
dem spreads treat each body part, with the first posing the question ("What do you
do with a nose like this?") and offering five examples cunningly positioned on the
page so as to obscure the rest of their owners. A turn of the page not only reveals
the animals in question (in this case, a platypus, a hyena, an elephant, a mole, and
an alligator) but also offers brief answers to the question for each, outlining the
special functions of each variant of the featured body part. The focus is somewhat
scattershot, but there's some thoughtful evocation of the breadth of the animal
kingdom's capabilities (an appendix provides detailed descriptions that expand on
the succinct in-text comments), and the guessing game will in itself stimulate partici-
pation and the interest of young biologists. Jenkins' cut-paper collage illustrations
are, as usual, ingenious and remarkable in their clarity, their several components
neatly articulating the anatomy of their subjects. With some kind of critter for
everyone, this will be useful for entry-level natural history. DS
KELLER, EMILY SNOWELL, ad. 
Sleeping Bunny; illus. by Pamela Silin-
Palmer. 
Random House, 2003 
[34p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-91541-9 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-81541-4 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
A cast of rabbits, both royal and fey, hop through this adaptation of a favorite fairy
tale. A good king and queen (bunnies both) have no children ("which was highly
278 
* 
THE BULLETIN
unusual in their family!"), but finally their longing is rewarded with Princess Bunny,
whom they love "from the tips of her silky ears to the ends of her dainty white
paws." Lack of appropriate tableware (eight fairies, seven golden plates) results in
the deadly wrath of Mildew, the uninvited eighth, falling on the bunny baby prin-
cess; luckily the gift of the seventh fairy, Primrose, turns death into a century-long
nap. Princess Bunny is awakened at the appropriate moment by the appropriate
prince, and the two "grew to truly love each other and eventually decided to marry."
All the fairies are invited to the wedding, even Mildew, and she gifts the happy
couple with "a magnificent set of eight golden plates"; subsequently "everyone
lived hoppily ever after." While there's no real wit in substituting rabbits for hu-
mans without much more textual play, there are clever moments in Silin-Palmer's
lushly romanticized paintings, especially in the mottoes and crests on the royal
shields and in the royal rabbits' couture. Meanwhile, an overabundance of piggy
sprites, magical rainbows, and serving rodents crowd pages adorned with enough
twinkly sparkles and effusive blossoms to push the oft overwrought visuals over the
top. Young romantics may be miffed at this rabbity revision, but less sensitive
souls are bound to laugh out loud at least once or twice. JMD
KROSOCZKA, JARRETT J. 
Bubble Bath Pirates!; written and illus. by Jarrett J.
Krosoczka. 
Viking, 2003 
34p
ISBN 0-670-03599-8 
$15.99 
R* 3-6yrs
See this month's Big Picture, p. 263, for review.
LEE, Ho BAEK 
While We Were Out; written and illus. by Ho Baek Lee. 
Kane/
Miller, 2003 
[32p]
ISBN 1-929132-44-1 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 3-6 yrs
When the people are away, the rabbit will play, at least according to this new
South Korean import. After the human family departs for an overnight, the house
bunny decides to take this opportunity to explore the intricate details of human
habitation and play house human for a bit. She digs through the refrigerator,
enjoys a late-night video with bag of snacks in hand, plays dressup, arranges for a
bit of in-line skating, and finally hops back to her official quarters just in time to
leave her family none the wiser-except for the rabbit pellets decorously scattered
about the house. The fantasy is all the more charming for its serene domesticity
and careful limits (grabbing titles off a bookshelf, "the rabbit opens one, but she
doesn't understand it"), which cleverly bring the rabbit's adventures just a hop
away from plausibility; the sweetly confiding tone of the text makes it pretty warm
and fuzzy in its own right. A copyright-page image and caption suggest that Lee is
a veteran roommate of rabbits, and his knowledge imbues his illustrations with
effective detail that anchor the whimsy: yes, it's a hoot to see the rabbit trying on
lipstick or scooting down the hall on a skate, but she's got serious lapine charm
even at rest. Softly granular line creates a rabbit reminiscent of some of John
Burningham's bunnies, with shapes emphasized by the restrained palette (many
spreads are almost monochromatic, using only gentle grays and taupes to deepen
the shadows, making the splashier, red-touched antics all the louder). The rabbit-
poop ending will tickle audiences and readers-aloud alike, and the irreverent on
both sides will particularly relish reexamining the pages and noting en route where
MARCH 2003 
* 279
the bunny leaves her little presents. Cuddly, determined preschoolers will bond
with this cuddly, determined rabbit. DS
LEVINE, KAREN 
Hana's Suitcase: A True Story. Whitman, 2003 
[11lp] 
illus.
with photographs
ISBN 0-8075-3148-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-7
Based on a radio documentary by the author, this is the dramatic story of Hana
Brady, a Czechoslovakian Jewish girl who was murdered at Auschwitz and whose
suitcase-half a century later-led the director of the Tokyo Holocaust Center,
Fumiko Ishioka, to document Hana's brief life. Alternating chapters describe Hana's
experience and Ishioka's pursuit of information about it, illustrated with black-
and-white photographs of Hana, her brother, George (the only survivor in the
family), her concentration camp drawings, and the Japanese involved at the Cen-
ter. The text is well written, moving, and accessible; the photos are involving and
the format is well designed. Tonally, the book raises some questions. Ishioka's
search reads like an exciting mystery; her jubilation at making progress toward the
discovery of Hana's fate is oddly juxtaposed with the tragedy itself and even sug-
gests a happy ending of hope for a peaceful future, when in fact there was no such
thing for either Hana or the other 15,000 children deported from Theresienstadt
to Auschwitz. Moreover, although the introduction does mention Japan as "a
country allied with Nazi Germany during the Second World War," Levine never
develops the connection. This is a dimension that would have deepened readers'
understanding of the poignancy and irony of Ishioka's search, not to mention
their understanding of political complexity and of inhumanity as more than an
isolated case of Nazi racism. Despite these omissions, the book works well as a
carefully researched representation of the Holocaust that is not too overwhelming
for elementary-school students to handle, so long as they have adult guidance for
broader historical context. BH
LITTLE, JEAN 
Willow and Twig. Viking, 2003 227p
ISBN 0-670-88856-7 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Twelve-year-old Willow, part Canadian Indian, and five-year-old Twig, part Car-
ibbean Black, have been abandoned repeatedly by their drug-addicted mother and
have never known either of their respective fathers. Willow has always taken care
of her deaf, emotionally disturbed little brother, and when their temporary caregiver
dies, Willow manages, through the Vancouver police, to contact her grandmother
in Ontario. Gram brings both children to her old farmhouse and eventually heals
them, securing their safety with permanent custody. The main characters are pre-
dictable though clearly rendered. Gram and her brother (a blind children's book
writer whose story character, Red Mouse, stars in Willow's fantasies from early
memories of Gram's house) show preternatural sensitivity, often second-guessing
what Willow has on her mind, just as Willow penetrates her great-aunt's obnox-
ious facade to the fear and insecurity behind it. Walk-on characters, especially the
good-hearted Chinese policeman and the mean-spirited Anglo policewoman, are
functional if clich6d. The plot outlines tough contemporary problems but sup-
plies the reassuring, old-fashioned guarantee of a happy ending. Fans of Little's
many previous books will know what to expect and will find the theme of orphan
rescue appealing. BH
280 
* 
THE BULLETIN
MACK, TODD 
Princess Penelope; illus. by Julia Gran. 
Scholastic, 2003 
[32p]
ISBN 0-439-22436-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
Penelope believes she's a princess (a fact she is willing to announce to all and
sundry at any given moment) because she has her very own bed in her very own
room just like a princess, she changes her outfits many times daily just like a prin-
cess, she has lots of thrones just like a princess, she make rules just like a princess,
and so on. The author has painted a lively personality portrait of a rambunctious
little girl with a terrific sense of her own self. Unfortunately, while the book is
chock-full of all the reasons Penelope is certain she is a princess, it isn't chock-full
of story: despite the visual and textual energy, nothing much happens, and there's
no tension or resolution. Gran's swirly and design-intense watercolors recall Rocky
and Bullwinkle's Fractured Fairy Tale cartoons: characters with pop eyes, squiggly
eyelashes, and rampant tresses run amok on pages awash with an overabundance
of pink and fuchsia. Though audiences may prefer princesses with more active
lifestyles (such as those in Lester's Princess Penelope's Parrot, BCCB 1/97, or
Munsch's Paper Bag Princess, to name only two), there is a certain hyper-vigor to
both Penelope and her visual representation that may suit hyper-pretend prin-
cesses just fine. JMD
MACPHAIL, CATHERINE 
Dark Waters. 
Bloomsbury, 2003 
176 p
ISBN 1-58234-846-4 
$15.95 
R Gr. 5-9
Col is a loyal McCann; his older brother, Mungo, a local hoodlum with a reputa-
tion for violence, takes after their deceased father, and Col isn't too far behind. He
has no intention of being a hero when he cuts school for a winter stroll by a frozen
loch, but when reckless ten-year-old Dominic Sampson falls through the thin ice,
Col can't stop himself: "The boy was sobbing now, and Col tried to blot out his
anguished cries. 'Please! Please! Somebody help me!' Not me. Not me, was all
Col could think. Definitely not me! In the same instant he was running, pulling
off his jacket, running towards the boy in the icy loch-and changing his life
forever." Waking up in the hospital with vague, horrific memories of being under-
water, Col is shortly overwhelmed by the understandable gratitude of Dominic
and his well-to-do family. What he is most surprised by, however, is the
community's change toward him: he is no longer the brother of a two-bit hood
doomed to repeat the family pattern but a hero who is obviously made of finer
stuff. The conflict between Col's changed present/potential future and his diffi-
cult past forms the crux of this novel. His moral confusion is set in relief by his
increasing fondness for the effervescent Dominic, as well as his growing sympathy
for Klaus, an illegal alien secretly living in an abandoned bomb shelter, who is just
the type of person Mungo would see as fair game. This is a fast-moving, pithily
written moral tale that would make an arresting chapter-by-chapter readaloud. A
concluding supernatural revelation could have been an awkward contrivance, but
MacPhail integrates it into the story with hardly a ripple and makes it the well-
spring for Col's own redemption. JMD
MBUTHIA, WAITHIRA 
My Sister's Wedding: A Story of Kenya; illus. by Geoffrey
Gacheru Karanja. 
Soundprints, 2003 
32p
ISBN 1-56899-896-1 
$15.95 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
Ten-year-old Mbui is very close to her older sister, Wangari, but she knows that
MARCH 2003 
* 281
soon her sister will leave to marry, since her future husband's proposal has been
accepted. Despite the excited preparations of relatives in their small Kenyan vil-
lage, Mbui remains sad at her sister's impending departure; the festivities of the
wedding day (traditionally a surprise to the bride) and some quiet sisterly counsel,
however, help Mbui be happy for her sister and adjust to family life without her.
The text is tender but straightforward, keeping the sisterly relationship enough in
the foreground to escape an overly touristy approach; it's also an amiable introduc-
tion to a tradition that will be unfamiliar to most youngsters, especially with its
focus on the Gikuyu people rather than the more commonly featured Maasai.
Unfortunately, the art falls below the text's standard: though Wangari has a queenly
carriage, other figures are drafted without grace or character, leaving clothes as
their only identifying feature (Mbui looks old enough to be Wangari's mother at
times) and their stiffly arranged limbs as their only vehicle for expression; thick
paints muddy and homogenize people and landscapes. This would nonetheless be
a pleasant addition to various curricular units, and it'll give young wedding junkies
a broader view of their favorite ceremony. A brief discussion of Kenya and wed-
ding traditions is appended, along with a glossary. DS
McKISSACK, PATRICIA C. 
Tippy Lemmey; illus. by Susan Keeter. 
Aladdin,
2003 
59p 
(Ready for Chapters)
Library ed. ISBN 0-689-85594-X 
$11.89
Paper ed. ISBN 0-689-85019-0 
$3.99 
R Gr. 2-4
Tippy Lemmey "was the only dog I ever knew who had a first and last name," says
narrator Leandra; Tippy Lemmey also apparently has a grudge against Leandra
and her friends, Paul and Jeannie, since every time the kids bike past his yard the
dog takes after them, growling and snapping. Mr. and Mrs. Lemmey, who are
keeping Tippy for their son (away fighting in the Korean War), do their best to
assure the kids ofTippy's friendliness and restrain him from frightening them, but
to the trio, Tippy remains a "living, breathing monster"-until one day he needs
their help. That plot twist, wherein Tippy falls prey to dognappers, is the weak
spot in an otherwise strong and solid early-grades drama that understands the ruin
a scary dog can make of eight-year-old lives. There's also humor throughout, even
in the acknowledgment of adult cluelessness about such a difficulty (Leandra's
protective parents initially think their daughter is being bullied by the Lemmeys'
son, making for a comedic scene at the Lemmeys'), and the style is easygoing and
confiding; the trio's friendship recalls the reliable comradeship of Ann Cameron's
Huey and Gloria. Young readers will know that not all such canine obstacles are
conveniently tamed by the end, but they'll be glad that the plucky companions are
rewarded with Tippy's loyalty. Black-and-white illustrations using pencil lines to
add texture to fluid wash add a vivid reality to the story. DS
McNEAL, LAURA 
Zipped; by Laura and Tom McNeal. 
Knopf, 2003 
[25 6 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-91491-9 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-81491-4 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Mick is stunned to discover trashed e-mail from his beloved stepmother, Nora,
that indicates she's cheating on Mick's father. He's furious with Nora but he's also
uncertain about his response, since he's hoping to confirm his suspicions and iden-
tify her paramour, but also to protect his father. Nora isn't the only perplexing
282 
* 
THE BULLETIN
woman in his life: he's trying to get up the nerve to ask out redheaded Lisa Doyle,
and he's not sure of the meaning of his friendship with a beautiful college girl.
Meanwhile, Lisa has strains of her own: her creepy Saturday-job supervisor is
sexually harassing employees and embarking on a relationship with Lisa's best friend,
while Lisa's interest in Mick is complicated by her yearning for a handsome Mor-
mon missionary. There are still more plot strands in this broadly scoped novel,
but the relaxed pace gives all the elements a chance to shine apart and together
without eclipsing the primary narrative light. Readers familiar with their literary
history will guess the identity of Nora's amour early on from the clues provided,
but that's not really the point: it's Mick's growth as he comes up to his sixteenth
birthday, having some maturation forced upon him and choosing to match it with
more of his own. There's a realism here that takes the narrative beyond the prob-
lem novel and into one of relationships, their difficult demands in the face of
human complexity and frailty, and their nonetheless often satisfying rewards. The
book never loses sight of the kids at the heart of this, however, which keeps this
accessible to the teens it's about. DS
MURPHY, 
MARY 
The Alphabet Keeper; written and illus. by Mary
Murphy. 
Knopf, 2003 
28p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-92347-0 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-82347-6 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 1-3
The Alphabet Keeper usually keeps her letters carefully caged, but one day during
cage cleaning her charges take off and escape through an opened window ("'Come
back!' screams the Alphabet Keeper, but too late"). She pursues them, but the
clever letters use their talents to elude her-for instance, when she chases them in
a bus, the letter h flies down and turns her conveyance into a bush, and when she
shouts at them to stop, the letters "jump backward and stop changes into pots,
which fall on her." The book somewhat loses control of the concept at the end (if
all the letters have gone to the moon on a rocket, what does that mean about
language on earth?), but this is a lively and playful word fantasy. The writing is
homey yet fluid, reaching beyond its game for continued sources of humor (kids
will particularly enjoy the Alphabet Keeper's falling over the edge converted from
the hedge and, of course, the plummeting pots), and the wordplay employs suffi-
ciently simple and familiar terms that beginning readers will find the game itself a
pleasant change from skills and drills. Murphy's tidy art keeps the fantasy satisfy-
ingly down to earth, with trim black outlines anchoring the solid figures and even
the fantastic alphabet personified with restraint (each letter has an eye and a small
Pac-Manesque mouth, but they're definitely more a significant collective than a
motley crew). Sharp-eyed readers will be tickled to catch some of the additional
commentary in the fleeing alphabet (they run particularly to ejaculations and ac-
tion words), and there are plenty of possibilities for stimulating use in language-
arts classes. DS
MUTH, JON J, ad. 
Stone Soup; ad. and illus. by Jon J Muth. 
Scholastic,
2003 
[32p]
ISBN 0-439-33909-X 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Three wandering monks (Hok, Lok, and Siew) discuss various issues while they
travel, until finally Hok, the youngest monk, asks the oldest, "What makes one
MARCH 2003 
* 
283
happy, Siew?" In search of an answer, the three men come upon a village that has
fallen on hard times: "'These people do not know happiness,' they all agreed. 'But
today,' said Siew, his face bright as the moon, 'we will show them how to make
stone soup."' Those familiar with versions of this traditional tale will know what
follows: intrigued by the notion of soup made from stones, each villager contrib-
utes from his or her own meager store until a rich and nourishing soup, enough to
feed everyone, becomes the center of a long-overdue community feast. Muth sets
his retelling of this tale in ancient China, using "the Buddha story tradition, where
tricksters spread enlightenment rather than seeking gain for themselves." He pushes
the moral just a bit instead of allowing the story to speak for itself ("How giving
the villagers had become!"; "You have shown us that sharing makes us all richer"),
but overall the retelling is comfortably conversational and easy to read aloud. Muth's
watercolors are balanced and graceful, making the most of fluidly lined figures,
architectural details, and airy white space. The three Zen monks are called by the
names of Chinese deities that bestow health, wealth, and prosperity; the art in-
cludes symbols from Eastern culture, explained in the author's note. JMD
Nix, GARTH 
Abhorsen. EOS/HarperCollins, 2003 
358p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027826-9 
$18.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027825-0 $17.99 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Lirael, the Abhorsen-in-Waiting, joined forces with her nephew Sameth (a.k.a.
Sam), charter mage and Wallmaker, in Lirael (BCCB 5/01), and now the power-
ful dyad returns to fulfill its destiny in the third volume of this fantasy series. In a
stunning opening Nix uses a particularly ruthless and meticulously planned assas-
sination in Ancelstierre (the modern, technological, non-magic world across the
wall from the magical Old Kingdom) to set the stage for the final battle between
the forces of life and death, good and evil. Meanwhile, in the Old Kingdom,
Lirael and Sam race against time to keep evil necromancer Hedge from releasing
an ancient and destructive being long ago imprisoned by the mythological Seven.
While Lirael had moments of relative calm, this title is more than three hundred
pages of breathless chases, near escapes, and intense confrontations. Accompanied
by Free Magic beings (the Disreputable Dog, Lirael's loyal canine companion from
the Great Library at Clayr, and Mogget, a most disreputable cat from the castle of
the Abhorsen), Sam and Lirael battle their way across a devastated countryside and
through the river of Death to save their world from total annihilation. This title
has a cinematic sweep that pushes everything along before it; the tense, climactic
confrontation at the boundary wall has a monumental scope that pulls threads
from the very beginning of the series into a tightly constructed, satisfying conclu-
sion. Nix's intricately imagined fantasy world is peopled by complex players wor-
thy of both their dramatic backdrops and their moral dilemmas. There is just
enough space left at the end of this title to make another entry in the series pos-
sible; here's hoping. JMD
O'CONNOR, BARBARA 
Fame and Glory in Freedom, Georgia. Foster/Farrar,
2003 
[112p]
ISBN 0-374-32258-9 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-7
All that stands between Burdette "Bird" Weaver and the Spelling Bee first-prize
trip to Disney World is her incompetence at spelling, and all that stands between
284 
* THE BULLETIN
her and a friendship with newcomer Harlem Tate is his reluctance to be befriended.
These are but trivial obstacles to one so determined as Bird, who, encouraged by
her neighbor and idol Miss Delphine, finds a way to combine the challenges and
realize at least the better half of her ambition. While O'Connor follows Bird's
twin assaults on a tough vocabulary list and dour Harlem's reticence, she also
reveals the subtle interplay among the members of fictional Freedom, Georgia's
suffocatingly close community, where the residents may know a bit too much
about one another's business, but quiet acts of neighborliness compensate. Bird's
strong will and good nature are reminiscent of Opal in DiCamillo's Because of
Winn-Dixie (BCCB 6/00), and like that other young heroine, Bird not only takes
responsibility for securing her own happiness but draws together the adult com-
munity around her, indirectly but effectively matchmaking spinster Miss Delphine
with the local tattoo artist and bringing light back in to the life of town recluse Mr.
Moody, who's also Harlem's father. In the end there may not be a trip to the
Mouse House in view for Bird, but she's well satisfied with her new best friend
Harlem, and readers will be too. EB
O'GARDEN, IRENE 
The Scrubbly-Bubbly Car Wash; illus. by Cynthia
Jabar. 
HarperCollins, 2003 
[26p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029486-8 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-694-00871-0 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
"What do we get for driving far?/ A crusty, dusty, dirty car." So the limo-length
family sedan pulls into the Scrubbly Bubbly Car Wash and antes up for a good
shower and rinse: "Steamy sprays beyond the brushes/ rinse us down in luscious
rushes/ at the drippity-droppity, bottom to toppity,/ lathery-blathery, scrubbly-
bubbly CAR WASH!" Steen and Karas' Car Wash (BCCB 1/01) is, arguably, the
gold standard against which legions of car-wash books will henceforth be mea-
sured, and Jabar's bubble-gum-hued scenes seem fairly prosaic next to that deep-
sea adventure. The view is strictly from the outside looking in, and that perspective
cannot replicate the delightful shivers of claustrophobia that are the real draw for
car-wash cruisers. There may be some technical confusion, too, over the depiction
of water drops stretched by the dryer, which look more like streaks of dirty green
paint, and a vacuum hose that appears to be spewing water rather than sucking in
air. Still, this title has its moments, from the posted levels of service (Bubbly,
Scrubbly Bubbly, and Super Fly Scrubbly Bubbly) to the fantasy architecture of
the enterprise itself-a huge, pink, sunglassed head (constructed, no doubt, of
fiberglass, ca. 1955) that swallows cars in its mouth and belches them out from the
other side. Kids who need gentle coaxing for their first drive-through wash-and-
wax should find this reassuring. EB
PENNAC, DANIEL 
Eye of the Wolf; tr. by Sarah Adams; illus. by Max
Grafe. 
Candlewick, 2003 
111p
ISBN 0-7636-1896-9 
$15.99 
M 
Gr. 3-6
The one-eyed wolf largely ignores the zoo visitors he encounters-the mothers
who warn their children about him, the artists who sketch him, even the keeper
who feeds him-but he cannot ignore the boy who comes every day and stares at
him. After the two lock gazes, theybecome psychically linked to one another. In
the eye of tie wolf, the boy sees the animal's memories: the wolf is Blue Wolf, son
MARCH 2003 
* 285
of Black Flame, caught when he rescued his sister from trappers. The wolf looks
into the boy's eye and discovers his past, too: the boy is Africa N'Bia, orphan,
former slave, storyteller, and friend to animals. His adopted father works at the
zoo, and there the boy reunites with all the animals he has bonded with in his
eventful life, animals which, by coincidence or fate, are all in this same zoo. There
are some lovely fragments in this import, first published in France in 1982, but
there is little to hold the pieces together. The plotting is purposive and contrived;
the pace is slow, and most of the action occurs in the misty and mystical past. The
point seems deliberately obscured; it is hard to say whether this story is about two
lost beings finding each other, about the need to be closer to nature, or about
something else altogether. As an allegory the tale lacks clarity, and as a fable it
lacks a moral conclusion. Full-page black-and-white mixed media illustrations by
Max Grafe add a somber resonance to the text. JMD
PERRY, ANDREA 
Here's What You Do When You Can't Find Your Shoe (Ingenious
Inventions for Pesky Problems); illus. by Alan Snow. 
Atheneum, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-689-83067-X 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Troubled by shoe loss, excessive vegetables, fluff between the toes, or crumbs in
the bed? Perry's perky poems introduce helpful solutions to these and other di-
lemmas, describing a splendid machine ("The Sure-Footed Shoe Finder"), helpful
spray ("Veggies Be Gone!"), invaluable product ("Filbert's Footsie Floss"), oblig-
ing pets ("The Crumbunny"), and other assistive possibilities for a total of a dozen
aids to everyday living. This is definitely high-spirited verse of the light variety,
enhanced by Seussian silliness and a seasoning of sophistication in both its ba-
roque creations and gleeful infomercial style. Some of the less reality-based entries
get a bit too much lighter than air, but there's a winning kid's-eye-view jocularity
to the creations that might genuinely be useful to enterprising youngsters. Snow's
illustrations make the most of the long, thin trim size and the Rube-Goldbergian
possibilities of the subjects. Sober black lines and textural crosshatching suggest
technical diagrams while geometric balance suggests sweet reason, but the beaky-
nosed figures capably demonstrating the products are clearly denizens of a ridicu-
lous world. This would also be suitable as a readaloud for younger audiences, or
use it to inspire youngsters to describe their own madcap inventions. DS
POSTHUMA, SIEB 
Benny; written and illus. by Sieb Posthuma. 
Kane/Miller,
2003 
[26p]
ISBN 1-929132-43-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-7 yrs
When a young dog can't find his precious bone, that's the first sign that something
is wrong with Benny. Walking indifferently through a field of flowers, past the
deliciously scented bakery, and all the rich smells of home (including the "wonder-
ful, filthy dog poop") makes him realize that something's gone wrong with his
sniffer. Benny's worried mother hustles him off to the doctor, who uses all his
technical expertise to diagnose a cold, from which Benny fortunately recovers in a
few days. The plot is a bit straggly in places (the shift from the lost-toy focus to the
not-well focus may confuse a few audience members), but the story of sickness and
recuperation has enough doggy humor to satisfy the bedbound and energetically
healthy alike, and the matter-of-fact approach to ill health and recovery will reas-
sure as well as providing an opportunity for further discussion. There's a touch of
286 
* THE BULLETIN
Susan Meddaugh's Martha to flop-eared, runny-nosed little Benny, and inventive
elements enliven the personable line-and-watercolor art: an underground cross-
section of Benny's digging ambitions reveals a blind mole with glasses and cane,
the doctor's technology involves elaborate loops of a wonderfully baroque "Sniff
Machine," Benny's mother comfortingly scratches her son's head as they visit the
doctor. Sickbed residents still restless after a dose of Wells' Felix Feels Better (BCCB
6/01) will find this helpful followup medicine. DS
REEDER, CAROLYN 
Before the Creeks Ran Red. 
HarperCollins, 2003 
370p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-623616-9 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-623615-0 $16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 5-9
The opening salvos, skirmishes, and maneuvers of the Civil War are seen here
through the eyes of three fictional teens who "witnessed" the action at Fort Sumter,
Baltimore, and Alexandria. "Timothy Donovan's Story" centers on a young bu-
gler who watches his cushy job sounding calls to order turn perilous as the federal
fort is attacked by South Carolina militia. "Joseph Schwartz's Story" picks up
three days later in Baltimore, when Union troops are mobbed by rebel sympathiz-
ers as they pass through the city on the way to Washington, D.C. "Gregory
Howard's Story" follows immediately after as Alexandria, Virginia comes under
Union occupation. The three tales amount to little more than thinly plotted mini-
history lessons, with the boys racing along the periphery of the action, reporting at
length to family and friends-and, too obviously, readers-on what they've seen
(". . . so now that they've taken over Annapolis, they can control the Chesapeake
Bay. And that means Baltimore is cut off from the South"). Reeder does, how-
ever, bring some under-examined political issues (such as Lincoln's suspension of
habeas corpus in occupied Maryland) into the light, and for that alone Civil War
buffs may want to invest some time here. EB
RODDA, EMILY 
Fairy Realm: 
The Charm Bracelet; illus. by Raoul
Vitale. 
HarperCollins, 2003 
[128p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-009584-9 $14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-009583-0 
$8.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Jessie is visiting her grandmother in the house called Blue Moon. Her mother,
Rosemary, wants Granny to move to the city with them, but Jessie does not want
her grandmother to leave Blue Moon, a house she has believed magical since her
childhood. Now, however, Jessie's grandmother has fallen and sprained her wrist,
and Rosemary is using that as an excuse to move Granny back to the city. More is
wrong than just a sprained wrist, however-Granny's charm bracelet is missing,
and with it seems to have gone Granny's memories as well. Jessie's efforts to find
the bracelet prove fruitless until the night she answers a call from the garden and
finds herself pulled through a door into the magical Realm. There she discovers
that her grandmother is fairy royalty, and that she and she alone can renew the
Realm's magic and thus save it from the wicked beings who threaten it. Originally
published in Australia, this is a change from Rodda's more adventurous Rowan of
Rin series (BCCB 6/01, etc.). While the exposition is predictable, the momentum
builds from the scene-setting opening and the action does finally take over the
somewhat derivative plot. This doesn't have quite the lure of Kathleen Duey's The
Unicorn's Secret: Moonsilver (BCCB 1/02), but transitional readers seeking a magical
niche will pause comfortably here. Final illustrations not seen. JMD
MARCH 2003 
* 287
SANDERSON, RUTH 
Saints: Lives &' Illuminations; written and illus. by Ruth
Sanderson. 
Eerdmans, 2003 
40p
ISBN 0-8028-5220-3 
$20.00 
M 
Gr. 3-6
Lives of forty Christian saints of the first millennium are briefly examined in single-
page treatments, accompanied by ornately bordered, "holy card"-styled portraits.
The entries, chronologically organized by century, are generally concise and di-
rect, but the composition is often awkward, with word repetitions, undefined ter-
minology ("Catherine is one of the Fourteen Holy Helpers"), and puzzling
juxtapositions ("Basil had a kind and sympathetic soul and was truly a humble
leader. When necessary, he engaged in battle against the enemies of the Church").
Coverage is inconsistent (readers learn that Brendan is the patron of sailors but
never-tsk, tsk-that Jerome is the patron of librarians), legend is seldom distin-
guished from fact, important report data such as feast dates are omitted, and source
notes are nonexistent. Even the romanticized pictures are unconvincing, from the
depiction of Ethiopian slave Saint Moses with lightly bronzed skin and delicate
Anglicized facial features, to the twin saints Benedict and Scholastica, so wildly
disparate in visage that they could be father and daughter. Well-to-do saints are
clad in fairy-tale garb, impoverished saints are crisply ironed and tidy, and even
emaciated hermit Mary of Egypt sports a particularly form fitting off-the-shoulder
animal skin. Brevity and sumptuous glitz may hold some appeal for browsers, but
children researching their namesakes are unlikely to find this very illuminating.
EB
SCHANZER, ROSALYN 
How Ben Franklin Stole the Lightning; written and illus. by
Rosalyn Schanzer. 
HarperCollins, 2003 
34 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-16994-5 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-16993-7 
$16.99 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
A life as ambitious as Franklin's calls for biographical focus and, with a nod to his
other pursuits, Schanzer zeroes in on the great man's accomplishments as experi-
menter, tinkerer, and inventor. The text rambles through a haphazard litany of
discoveries and inventions, tenuously strung together with teasing references to
how he "stole lightning" (i.e., performed his famous kite-in-a-storm experiment)
and "his most famous invention of all-the lightning rod!" Youngsters unac-
quainted with Franklin may take exception to this "most famous invention" claim
and may, after hearing about his other feats, decide that other contributions eclipse
Schanzer's choice. The tone is intimate and chatty, well adapted for sharing aloud,
and a leisurely reader with time to discuss the inventions along the way can make
the best of the problematic organization. Lighthearted, cartoony illustrations in
which a miniature Franklin bounds gleefully among his inventions keep the pro-
ceedings rolling, and anyone with the attention span to absorb more information
can consult the author's hefty end note. Consider this as a supplement to David
Adler's introduction, A Picture Book ofBenjamin Franklin. EB
SCHOTTER, RONI 
In the Piney Woods; illus. by Kimberly Bulcken Root. 
Kroupa/
Farrar, 2003 
[32p]
ISBN 0-374-33623-7 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 5-7 yrs
In a warm extended family of Grandpa, Mama, Papa, pregnant Big Sister Sada,
and her husband, Sam, young Ella is closest to her grandfather, who in his last year
288 
* THE BULLETIN
goes from slow spring walks to the "sandy, piney woods, near the sea" to confine-
ment in a rocking chair through the summer as his health deteriorates. The cen-
tral action springs from the pitch pinecones, which, he has told Ella, will not release
their seeds until the woods catch fire. Finally a storm brings lightning, "a sizzle, a
hiss, and a burst of flame," burning the old trees to leave room for new ones to
grow. Indeed, after Grandpa's death in autumn, Sada's baby is born, with a place
in Grandpa's room and Ella's heart as she plans to take him to the pinewoods to
see the "tiny trees . . . rising, green and strong and straight," one of them beside
Grandpa's grave where Ella planted a fire-burst pinecone. In a wisely balanced
graphic decision, Root's watercolors focus more on the people than the trees, light-
ening the symbolic load. Her deep blues and greens pull us in, while human
figures and diagonal compositions often tug us to the right, emphasizing action in
a way that keeps the extended metaphor and poetic language from becoming static.
The narrative itself is idyllic but well pitched, with enough pace to keep listeners
following Ella through her growing awareness of life cycles. This is a moving story
that adults would do well to read aloud with the expectation of cathartic tears,
especially among children who have experienced a death in the family. BH
SCHWARTZ, AMY 
What James Likes Best; written and illus. by Amy
Schwartz. 
Jackson/Atheneum, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-689-84059-4 
$16.95 
R 
3-6 yrs
James is an adventurous soul, traveling to four different destinations four different
ways: by bus to visit the twins, by taxi to see his grandmother and aunt, by car to
the county fair, and by foot to a play date with his friend, Angela. The events of
each brief excursion are precisely communicated, and at the end of each section
Schwartz includes a simple question: "And what do you think James liked best?"
The question is followed by suggested answers for readers and listeners to dis-
cuss-such as, in the first section, "Was it the robin? Or the toy fruit? Or the
muffin? Or was it Angela?" James' excursions are a preschool panoply of treats,
from the green and white stripes on the express bus to the little fork with which
James eats cheese, from the windshield wipers on his mother's car to the muffin he
eats at Angela's house, and the book includes enough different modes of transpor-
tation to make would-be travelers wiggle with glee. Schwartz's pristine illustra-
tions are streamlined and clean; the lucid, transparent colors make her gouache
and pen-and-ink illustrations (sans crosshatching and other details) seem almost
weightless. This is a terrifically simple, successful way to get readers and listeners
to interact with printed text. Whether you read it aloud to a group or use it one-
on-one, make sure to leave time for discussion among budding debaters. JMD
SHANGE, NTOZAKE 
Daddy Says. 
Simon, 2003 
[192p]
ISBN 0-689-83081-5 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 6-9
Fourteen-year-old Annie Sharon and her little sister, Lucie-Marie, miss their rodeo-
champion mother terribly, but Annie Sharon in particular is also angry that their
mother's wild ways ended up with her losing her life in an accident. Since they're
still a rodeo family, the constant reminders of the girls' mother are everywhere
(they still keep her favorite horse, the stallion that killed her), but Tie-Down, their
father, finds those memories too painful to share with his children. Annie Sharon
is determined to come to grips with her mother's legacy, however, and this leads
MARCH 2003 * 289
her not only to reject the maternal overtures of her father's girlfriend, Cassie, but
also to engage in her own dangerously wild behavior. Shange (author ofMuhammad
Ali, BCCB 12/02) offers some well-meant material about the history of black
cowboys and African-American rodeo stars, and it's refreshing to see this rarely
treated sport as the central point. Unfortunately, the narrative is unfocused and
awkward, with explanation substituting for evocation of emotion and character
and with little logic to most of the events; as a consequence, there's little involvement
with the characters or investment in their fates. The book also seems uncomfortable
with rodeo and confused about its practices, and cliche is piled upon cliche in the
drama of Annie Sharon's attempt to master her mother's dangerous horse ("Too
much spirit, that's his problem. . . . Maybe she loved him so much 'cause they
were just alike"). Readers looking for rodeo-flavored materials will be better served
by Ferris' Eight Seconds (BCCB 10/00) or Lynn Hall's Flying Changes (7/91). DS
SHANNON, GEORGE 
Tippy- Toe Chick, Go!; illus. by Laura Dronzek. 
Greenwillow,
2003 
[3 2p]
Library ed. ISBN 06-029824-3 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029823-5 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 3-6 yrs
Every morning, Hen and her three chicks eschew chicken feed in favor of more
appetizing breakfast foods found in the nearby garden-"sweet itty-bitty beans
and potato bugs." One day, they find their way blocked by a seriously grumpy
dog. When Hen informs her chicks that there will be no beans that day, the angry
children pull out all the kid stops-"We're hungry!" "You promised!" "We DID
our chores!"-and decide to take things into their own hands. In an inverted Billy
Goats Gruff scenario, Big Chick tries first with diplomacy, and Middle Chick
follows up with threats. When their efforts fail, Little Chick steps up and uses her
tippy-toe running technique (developed as a result of dawdling on her way to the
garden every morning and having to catch up) to entangle the dog in his own rope,
leaving him "too mad to think 'back up.'" The family then follows their diminu-
tive heroine safely past the bewildered dog to enjoy their breakfast treat. The
simple, lyrical text contains just enough repetition to make for an interactive read-
aloud; beginning readers will also enjoy mimicking the angry dog and the chicks.
Dronzek's jewel-tone spreads, sequential strip narratives, and isolated caricatures
deftly add a warm, subtle humor to the text. Her densely saturated acrylics with
bold black outlines masterfully articulate characters' emotions through just the
right angle of head or wing. This is a distinctly humorous narrative that will
charm hungry young audiences. KC
SHELDON, DYAN 
Planet Janet. Candlewick, 2003 
223p
ISBN 0-7636-2048-3 $14.99 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Sixteen-year-old Janet, disturbed by the superficiality of the world and especially
her family ("I have a Questing, Artistic Soul, and if I don't get away from all this
mundane crap, it will wither and die like a flower in a desert"), decides that it's
time for her Dark Phase. To this end, she and her friend Disha are going to engage
in serious, soul-searching activities and explore the black side of their wardrobes,
and Janet will document all her spiritual exploration in a diary. What the diary
really chronicles is Janet's complaints about her parents, "Sigmund" (Dad's a psy-
chotherapist) and the Mad Cow, and her desperate struggles to win Elvin, a young
290 
* THE BULLETIN
filmmaker, while she remains oblivious to some key facts: Elvin's trying to be
friends with Janet's photographer brother, Janet's platonic male friend has more
than platonic interest in her, and Janet's father is having an affair with a neighbor.
Though this has the gleefully gushing and self-absorbed tone (as well as the British
setting and voice) of Rennison's Angus, Thongs, and Full-Frontal Snogging (BCCB
5/00), it too often is what it's making fun of, and Janet's old enough that her
stunning superficiality seems more like an offputting personality trait than a stage
of growth. The lavish use of creative font is amusing, however, and there are rich
veins of humor mined from the various trappings of trendy teenage life, such as the
problems of nose rings when you're trying to hide under a table ("What I was
doing at that very moment was kneeling in some ketchup trying to unhook my
nose ring from his trousers without unhooking my nose as well") and crucial but
easily losable cell phones ("I reach out for it and it isn't there. My fingers touch the
air and I wonder why. Why? Why has this happened to me?"). Meg Cabot's All
American Girl (BCCB 12/02) is a better recent treatment of a wannabe deepster,
but this is still an amusing exploration of a character readers will enjoy thinking
they're nothing like. A glossary of British terms is included. DS
SHEPARD, AARON, ad. 
The Princess Mouse: A Tale of Finland; illus. by Leonid
Gore. 
Atheneum, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-689-82912-4 
$16.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Two brothers seek sweethearts to take to wife, following a family tradition that
dictates that the brothers find their brides by chopping down a tree and then trav-
eling in the direction the tree falls. The eldest brother causes his tree to point in
the direction of his already-identified sweetie; the younger brother, Mikko, winds
up walking into the woods. There Mikko finds a bride, a sweet gray mouse with a
velvety coat, and despite their obvious differences, the two swear to be true to each
another. On Mikko and the mouse bride's wedding day, Mikko's older brother
reacts to his future sister-in-law with scorn, kicking the small carriage that carries
her into the river. To the surprise of all, the dunking breaks an enchantment, and
from the water comes not a mouse but a lovely princess. Shepard, reteller of tradi-
tional tales such as Master Man (BCCB 2/01), curtails the traditional use of threes
in European folktales, limiting this tale to two brothers and one bride test, thus
leaving room for a bit more description. Although there is little tension in the
plot, the marital preparations of characters human and rodent are appealingly
handled, and the tone of the text itself is successfully humorous. Gore's acrylic
and pastel illustrations here have a lighter touch than some of his previous work.
The contrast between light and dark gives the images a stage-lit quality that adds
drama and intensity, while the palette (summery greens, blues, and yellows) main-
tains the lighthearted quality of this cozy adaptation. JMD
SIDMAN, JOYCE 
The World according to Dog: Poems and Teen Voices; illus. with
photographs by Doug Mindell. 
Houghton, 2003 
[80p]
ISBN 0-618-17497-4 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 6-12
Not a dog person? Then move along now, because this tender and eloquent vol-
ume is a canophile's paradise and tribute, inviting doglovers to roll in it with the
same luxurious glee with which their pets would greet long-dead carrion. Sidman
offers a score of fluid and lyrical poems, divided into four sections ("Awakening,"
MARCH 2003 
* 291
"Tag," "Understanding," "Happiness"), about various aspects of dog nature and
behavior, opposite personable (doggable?) photographic portraits in moody black-
and-white; each section is also sprinkled with two or three heartfelt essays by young
people on their own important canines. The three components braid together
beautifully: the poems offer telling and recognizable human views of dog life, and
the essays, beaming with the fresh-faced talent of their eager young authors, pro-
vide moving testimony to the value for humans of the human-dog relationship ("I
wouldn't trade him for the world, because he is my world"); the scenically blurred
photographs bring the dogs themselves literally into the picture, characterizing
without sentimentalizing. Suitable for reading aloud (or to one's dog) and panting
with eagerness to inspire similarly pet-oriented projects in an English class, this
will also extend a friendly paw to those reluctant readers, especially of poetry, who
can't resist soulful eyes and a wagging tail. DS
SLADE, ARTHUR 
Dust. 
Lamb, 2003 
[192p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90093-7 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73004-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
Robert Steelgate knows he should have offered to walk with his brother Matthew
into town on the day the younger boy accepted a ride from a stranger and disap-
peared. In spite of this burden of guilt, Robert knows he isn't responsible for the
disappearance of other children from the area, or the wave of forgetfulness and
odd behavior that has taken hold of the adults in his drought-plagued farming
region. Even his parents have ceased to show concern for their missing boy as, like
their neighbors, they become caught up in newcomer Abram Harsich's plan to
build a rain "mill" that will make their land fertile again. Few persons resist con-
man Harsich's influence, and one by one neighbors who won't join the construc-
tion crew pay the price with fatal heart attacks and devastated property. Robert
both observes and senses that all these occurrences are related, and when he mus-
ters the courage to trespass on Harsich's house and mill, he discovers a diabolical
pact that has put the missing children and townsfolk within the mysterious man's
power. Slade generates genuine edge-of-the-seat tension, cannily conjuring evil
from the very ordinariness of the Depression-era Canadian Dust Bowl town. He
succeeds so well, in fact, that the final unmasking of Harsich and his machine
come as a bit of a disappointment, relying on gizmos and aliens and supernatural
transformations rather than horrifying reality to carry the climax. Still, readers are
so compellingly swept into the action that they're bound to ride the wind wherever
Slade-and Harsich-take them. EB
STADLER, JOHN 
Catilda; written and illus. byJohn Stadler. 
Jackson/Atheneum,
2003 
32p
ISBN 0-689-84728-9 
$16.95 
R 
3-6 yrs
Catilda, a young kitten, loses her beloved teddy bear, Ollie, on a trip to the city, so
she goes in search of him. With the assistance of various helpers-a red bird, some
dolphins, a transporting cloud-she recovers Ollie, who is waiting for her in the
crown of the Statue of Liberty. The flame of the statue's torch bursts Catilda's
cloud like a bubble, but she is saved from tumbling into the bay by a passing prop
plane; when Ollie falls out of the plane Catilda leaps onto a rainbow slide which
conveniently deposits her in her very own room, and the red bird plucks Ollie
292 
* THE BULLETIN
from the sea and delivers him to Catilda, just in time for her to get into bed before
her parents come in and check on her. The fantastical rescue mission takes place
entirely in the art, while a conversation between Catilda's parents, who discuss
their daughter's loss, uses the text to provide a contrasting narrative. The back-
and-forth rhythm resembles that of Charlip's Fortunately, while the always-appeal-
ing notion of a child-and-lost-toy reality that escapes the adults recalls Vulliamy's
Small (BCCB 4/02). The text floats in dialogue balloons across the tops and bot-
toms of Stadler's simple watercolors; the palette is clean if a little bland, with sky
blue a prevailing hue. The figures are simple yet strongly patterned (prick-eared
Catilda, though white with orange features, resembles Felix the Cat), rising to the
challenge of supplying emotional engagement without the assistance of the con-
trasting text. Audiences will enjoy the discrepancy between the conversation of
the unsuspecting parents and the perilous adventures of Catilda. JMD
STRASSER, TODD 
ThiefofDreams. Putnam, 2003 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-399-23135-8 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
When thirteen-year-old Martin Hunter's parents go to China for a month on
business, they leave Martin, implausibly enough, in the care of his dad's estranged
brother, whom they haven't seen or spoken to for years. Uncle Lawrence is charm-
ing-so charming, in fact, that both Martin's Danish nanny, Elka, and his psy-
chologist, Dr. Rodriguez, soon become enamored of this mysterious stranger who
has a trunkload of strange equipment and only goes out at night. These elements-
the out-of-reach parents, the besotted nanny, the psychologist with divided loyal-
ties, and the slightly sinister uncle-are lifted straight out of a noir universe and
whet the appetite for some delicious creepiness to follow. Strasser, however, takes
a different and rather less successful direction. Upon finding out that his uncle is
a thief (a fact that the alert reader will discern far sooner than our protagonist),
Martin performs a bit of therapy, locating the source of Lawrence's miscreant oc-
cupation in his competitive relationship with Martin's father and convincing him
that he should turn himself in, pay his debt to society, and go straight thereafter
(supported by Martin and the lovely Dr. Rodriguez). The familial resolution is
similarly cliched, with Martin's mother regretting her preoccupation with work
(Martin's father apparently has no regrets about his own problematic parenting)
and making a lightning-fast shift to stay-at-home mom, waiting for Martin to
come home from school so that she can be there, literally, with milk and cookies.
The moral is as unambiguous as it is banal; nonetheless, it appeals to a certain kind
of idealism that believes that the lure of domesticity and common sense can indeed
triumph over all, and the dark and exciting setup will have kids reconsidering their
own mysterious relatives. KC
SWINBURNE, STEPHEN R. 
The Woods Scientist; illus. with photographs by Susan
C. Morse. 
Houghton, 2003 
[48p] 
(Scientists in the Field)
ISBN 0-618-04602-X 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-8
Swinburne's second offering in this solid series follows the life and career of Susan
C. Morse, forester, ecologist, and founder of Keeping Track, a nonprofit
community-based conservation organization that works to track the comings and
goings of local wildlife, to conceive creative solutions to preserve the habitats of
MARCH 2003 
* 293
our wild neighbors, and to protect the corridors that connect these habitats. Mingled
with facts and explanations about the habits and needs of woodland wildlife are
details from Morse's life, statements of her philosophy of conservation, and glimpses
of the kinds of discoveries adults and children make on the tracking expeditions
she leads. Morse's photographs of specimens intersperse with dramatic images of
the animals and landscapes themselves. Several provocative suggestions for classroom
and community activities are included, as are print and electronic resources for
further study, a glossary, and an index. Practical tips about tracking (how to practice
"safe scat," how to backtrack an animal to find out where it's been rather than
following it directly, how to read the signs animals leave on trees) will no doubt
encourage young readers to head to the woods. KC
TOMECEK, STEVE 
Stars; illus. by Sachiko Yoshikawa. 
National Geographic,
2003 
[32p] 
(Jump into Science)
ISBN 0-7922-6955-1 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Bold acrylic paintings with bright thematic borders invite children to investigate
the pinpoint lights in the night sky. The emphasis is on the composition of stars,
their appearance within constellations, and factors influencing their relative bright-
ness when viewed from Earth. While the textual data is reasonably child friendly
and well organized, the visually appealing diagrams are less than helpful. A spread
demonstrating the distances of various stars from Earth is so far out of scale as to be
misleading (even the nearer stars are out of sync with each other), and our Sun
isn't even included for comparison. A flipped chart of stars seen from the South
Pole never explains why the view is different down under. Moreover, the closing
"Star Light, Star Bright" experiment is truly problematic, encouraging children to
ponder the relative brightness of near and far stars by looking directly at approach-
ing and retreating flashlights in a darkened room. The inviting design may lure an
audience, but sky watchers will probably do better with Franklyn Branley's classic
astronomical picture books. EB
WALTON, RICK Bunnies on the Go: Getting from Place to Place; illus. by Paige
Miglio. 
HarperCollins, 2003 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029186-9 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029185-0 
$15.99 
Ad 
3-5 yrs
The bunny family has an ambitious vacation planned this summer, and they'll
need multiple means of conveyance to get them to all the sites. For "Bunnies, we'll
be traveling far,/ Every bunny, into the ... ," the audience should readily supply
the missing rhyme with just the visual prompt of the red convertible parked out-
side the window, but for listeners who don't immediately get the hang of the
narrative scheme, "CAR" heads the following page. After a brief ride "up a high-
way, down a lane./ Now, bunnies, all aboard the ... " they're guided by a dis-
creetly placed street sign to the railroad station and the now predictable "TRAIN."
Tractor, balloon, boat, bike, truck, bus, ferry, and taxicab haul the adventurers
from activity to activity, until the exhausted bunch boards a plane: "The bunnies
love to ride and roam,/ But best of all is coming.../ HOME!" Not all rhymes are
successful, and Walton occasionally struggles to pull the highlighted transport into
the poetic scheme. Moreover, there's a slight disparity between the very youthful
concept of naming transportation modes and the busily detailed watercolor scenes
294 
* 
THE BULLETIN
that need to be scanned for clues. Still, it's a pretty lively jaunt overall, and young
transport-spotters could turn this into an observation game on their next road trip.
EB
WILSON, KARMA 
Bear Wants More; illus. by Jane Chapman. 
McElderry,
2003 
34p
ISBN 0-689-84509-X 
$16.95 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
Bear wakes up hungry after a long winter nap, so off he goes in search of suste-
nance. Fresh shoots and grass are nice but insufficient ("He nibbles on his lawn/
till the last blade is gone./ But/ the bear/ wants more!"). One by one his friends try
to fill him up: Mouse with strawberries, Hare with clover, Badger with fish, and
Gopher, Mole, Raven and Wren with a feast of honey cakes, which Bear gobbles
until "his big tummy aches." Wilson's rhyming text is somewhat pedestrian, but
wordplay surprises add interest and the refrain provides an echoing continuity and
opportunity for participation throughout. The acrylic paintings tend towards the
slick and facile, but the cozy green forest is cheery if Disneyfied; the animal deni-
zens have bright, black-bead eyes and smiling muzzles (or beaks, in the case of the
feathered ones) and the fuzzy, fluffy bodies of stuffed animals. Lively performance
will overcome many of the book's flaws, and audiences at storytimes and bedtime
readalouds will enjoy this big friendly Bear in his big friendly book. JMD
WINTER, JEANETTE 
Niio's Mask; written and illus. by Jeanette Winter. 
Dial,
2003 
34p
ISBN 0-8037-2807-7 
$15.99 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Young Nifio is very excited about the upcoming fiesta, but his parents keep telling
him that his time in a dramatic mask and bright costume will have to wait until he
is older. The resourceful Nifio decides to make a mask of his own, watching the
maskmaker carefully and making himself into a perro (dog); at the fiesta, Niiio
throws himself into the perro's traditional role with glee, successfully catching the
tigre and thereby saving the corn (and making his parents very proud). The re-
striction of the text to dialogue balloons keeps the proceedings immediate, and the
little guy's secret participation and victory are enjoyable. Unfortunately, the plot
is surprisingly slow moving for such a stimulating subject, and it's predictable
every step of its traveloguish way. Winter has swapped her usual paints for felt-tip
pens here, and the result isn't as strong: though the black lines help emphasize the
clear and spicy colors, compositions are sometimes cluttered by the forest of line
and their movement and focus eclipsed by the busy outlines. The author'sJosefina
(BCCB 10/96) is a better book about the joys of folk art, but the tour through
various aspects of the fiesta may make a useful start for discussion, and kids may
still appreciate watching a comrade get around the restriction of "When you are
older." Appended information includes a brief glossary and other details of the
fiesta. DS
WOODSON, JACQUELINE 
Locomotion. 
Putnam, 2003 
100p
ISBN 0-399-23115-3 
$15.99 
R Gr. 4-8
In this poetic narrative, Lonnie Collins Motion (known as Locomotion) is an eleven-
year-old orphan living with Miss Edna, his foster parent. Since the death of their
parents in a fire five years ago, he and his younger sister, Lili, have lived apart; now
Lili is living with a "new mama" who doesn't want Lonnie ("Lili's new mama
MARCH 2003 
* 295
didn't want no boys/ Just a sweet little girl. Nobody told me that/ I just know it").
One of Lonnie's school assignments is keeping a poetry journal, in which he works
out his feelings and finds his poetic voice. This summary may sound prescriptive,
but the novel is far from it: Lonnie is an articulate child of tragedy, in recovery
from the loss of his beloved parents and saddened by his separation from his sister;
he has nightmares about the fire that took his parents, he wonders if he will ever
feel as though he belongs to anyone or anywhere, and he endures the loneliness of
the bereft. The poems change subtly from the beginning to the end of his journal,
reflecting both specific school assignments (the impetus for poems in various forms)
and his growing mastery of and comfort with poetic expression. Woodson is such
an accomplished writer that her verse, with its occasional flashes of metaphoric
brilliance, resonates as distinctively as her controlled prose. The author deals with
racism, grief, loss, and growing up without a wasted word but still in language
believable as that of an eleven-year-old boy. This is one of those rare titles for
young readers that considers complex issues of life, loss, and hope yet remains
accessible from tentative opening to hopeful ending. JMD
YEP, LAURENCE 
The Traitor: Golden Mountain Chronicles: 1885. HarperCollins,
2003 
[320p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027523-5 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027522-7 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Two preadolescent boys, alternate narrators, tell of rising tension between Chinese
and Anglo coal miners resulting in a massacre of the "foreigners," an incident that
actually took place in Rock Springs, Wyoming in 1885. The main characters here
are both outcasts among their own people, Joseph Young because he feels more
American than Chinese, and Michael Purdy because he is the illegitimate son of a
poor laundry woman. Meeting in a cave full of fossils, they form a friendship that
ultimately frees them both from the town' s vicious prejudice. Yep has researched
the historical background for this novel as carefully as he has for the other Golden
Mountain Chronicles, and the story has some gripping scenes-as when Joseph
defies his father to cut off his queue, an act that also cuts off his access to Manchu-
dominated China. The cast of characters is obviously balanced to include repre-
sentatives of diverse attitudes, but some of these, like the preacher's daughters, are
generically portrayed. Too often the characters repeat messages potentially or al-
ready delivered by the action (we hear four times in one early chapter that Michael
believes his mother's problems are all his fault). The book nevertheless depicts
indelibly and dramatically an aspect of American ethnic violence that is rarely
treated in literature for young people. An afterword places the story in U.S. his-
tory and in the development of Yep's series on Chinese-American history. BH
1"N , 0 
F
296 
* THE BULLETIN
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
TRACHTENBERG, ELLEN 
A Parent's Guide to the Best Children's Literature. Parent's
Guide Press, 2003 
[312p]
Paper ed. ISBN 1-931199-18-3 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys
Bank Street College alumna and former classroom teacher Trachtenberg has com-
piled a list of more than 1,000 recommended books, with the goal of providing a
general tool for adults seeking guidance through the plethora of titles available for
youth. The bibliography is divided into six chaptersl: Infant/Toddler Books,
Picture Books, Story Books, Easy Readers, Nonfiction (which is subdivided into
subjects), and Juvenile Fiction/Chapter Books. Entries include basic bibliographic
information, a recommended age level, and a brief descriptive annotation with
suggestions of additional titles by the same author, or titles with similar appeal.
Some chapters also include parent/child reviews, paragraphs on featured authors,
and topical digressions in shaded text blocks for additional insights into recom-
mended materials. Coverage is a bit uneven: there are 70 pages of picture books,
for example, but only 68 pages of nonfiction covering 42 subjects, the easy-reader
chapter leans heavily toward series reviews as opposed to reviews of individual
titles, and the fiction selection is a combination of standard classics and stock
popular fare. Still, the coverage of books for younger children is quite good here,
and the recommended titles are solid, if not extensive, across all topic areas. An
index will be included in the bound book. JMD
WILSON, ELIZABETH LARAWAY 
Books Children Love: A Guide to the Best Children's
Literature. Crossway Books, 2002 
illus. with photographs 
320p
Paper ed. ISBN 1-58134-198-9 
$14.99
Christian publisher Crossway/Good News here offers a revised edition ofWilson's
1987 title. The introduction clearly states the book's orientation and purpose: to
alert parents to well-written books that reflect basic Judeo-Christian moral and
ethical values. The book is divided into sections by subject with some subdivisions
for theme and age group; entries include bibliographic information, recommended
grade levels, and (for the majority of titles) extensive, informative annotations.
Many of the entries are relatively recent titles (1990s or later), with a few classic
books included, although some areas (such as Biography and Nature, Science, and
Technology) suffer from minimal or dated entries. Overall the literature selec-
tions are critically recognized titles that, although possibly conservative in subject
matter, are not necessarily stuffy, with Haugaard's Little Fishes recommended along-
side Jiminez' The Circuit and Bauer's Hope Was Here. Supplemental Teaching
Resources are dated, and there are no books about sexuality, but there are espe-
cially solid sections of craft and dance and theater materials. This title would be
useful for homeschoolers, for those libraries developing collections for this book's
intended audience, and for other adults seeking guidance to quality books for youth.
An author-title index is included. JMD
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Adoption-fiction: Cushman
Adventure: Barker; Hausman; Nix
African Americans: Burchard; Farris
African Americans-fiction:
McKissack; Shange; Woodson
African Americans-stories: Cooke
American Indians-fiction: Brooks
Animals: Jenkins; Swinburne
Animals-poetry: Ackerman
Animals-stories: Diakite
ANTHOLOGIES: Deak
Art and artists-stories: Winter
Asian Americans-fiction: Yep
Astronomy: Tomecek
Aunts-stories: Furgang
Babies-stories: Greenspun
Baths-stories: Krosoczka
Bears-stories: Wilson
BIOGRAPHIES: Burchard; Farris;
Levine; Sanderson; Schanzer
Biology: Swinburne
Birds-stories: Gliori
Brothers-fiction: MacPhail
Brothers and sisters-fiction: Little;
Woodson
Bullies-fiction: Ayres
Cars-stories: O'Garden
Cats-fiction: Hunter
Cats-stories: Stadler
Chickens-stories: Shannon
Circuses-fiction: Dodds
Civil War-fiction: Reeder
Contests-fiction: O'Connor
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Carbone; Giles; Hausman;
MacPhail; Slade; Strasser
Death-stories: Schotter
Depression, the-fiction: Ayres
Dogs-fiction: Dodds; McKissack
Dogs-poetry: Sidman
Dogs-stories: Cneut; Posthuma;
Shannon
Emigration-fiction: Hausman
Environmental studies: Swinburne
Ethics and values: Carbone; Damm;
Diakitd; Fredericks; Mack;
MacPhail; Muth
Families-fiction: dePaola; Giles;
Little
Families-stories: Schotter
FANTASY: Barker; Hunter; Nix;
Rodda; Slade
Fathers-fiction: O'Connor; Shange
FOLKTALES AND FAIRY TALES:
Diakitd; Keller; Muth; Shepard
Food and eating-stories: Cooke;
Muth; Shannon; Wilson
Foster children-fiction: Woodson
Friends and friendship-fiction:
Fredericks; O'Connor
Friends and friendship-stories:
Cneut; Greenspun; Schwartz
Gardens and gardening-stories:
Gliori
Grandfathers-fiction: Ayres
Grandfathers-stories: Schotter
Grandmothers-fiction: Hartnett;
Little; Rodda
Grandmothers-stories: Cooke
Health: Deak
Heroes-fiction: MacPhail
HISTORICAL FICTION: Ayres;
Cushman; dePaola; McKissack;
Yep
History, U.S.: Burchard; Farris;
Reeder; Schanzer
298 
* THE BULLETIN
History, world: Hausman
Holidays-stories: Winter
Holocaust, the: Levine
Humor: Lee; Perry; Sheldon
Identity: Damm
Illness-fiction: Ayres
Illness-stories: Posthuma
Inventions and inventors: Schanzer
Inventions and inventors-poetry:
Perry
Jews: Levine
JOURNALS: Sheldon
Kenya-stories: Mbuthia
Labor relations-fiction: Yep
Language-stories: Murphy
Language arts: Murphy
Magic-fiction: Nix
Mice-stories: Shepard
Music and musicians-fiction:
Cowley
MYSTERIES: Giles
Nature study: Jenkins
Orphans-fiction: Cushman
Pets: Holub
Pirates-stories: Krosoczka
POETRY: Ackerman; Perry;
Sidman; Woodson
Pregnancy-fiction: Brooks
Prejudice-fiction: Ayres; Yep
Prejudice: Farris
Princesses-stories: Mack
Quests-fiction: Barker
Rabbits-stories: Keller; Lee; Walton
Rabbits: Holub
Reading aloud: Ackerman;
Schanzer; Sidman
Reading, beginning: Dodds
Reading, easy: Cowley; dePaola;
Holub; McKissack; Rodda
Reading, reluctant: Sidman;
Swinburne
Relationships-fiction: Brooks;
Fredericks; McNeal; Sheldon
Religious education: Sanderson
RHYMING STORIES: Walton
Rodeo-fiction: Shange
Saints: Sanderson
School-fiction: Carbone; dePaola;
Hartnett
Science: Jenkins; Tomecek
Secrets-fiction: McNeal; Strasser
SHORT STORIES: Deak
Sisters-fiction: Giles; Shange
Sisters-stories: Mbuthia
Slavery: Burchard
Stepparents-fiction: McNeal
Storytime: O'Garden; Schwartz;
Wilson
Suspense: Slade
Teeth-fiction: Cowley
Toys-stories: Stadler
Transportation: Schwartz; Walton
Tricksters-stories: Shannon
Uncles-fiction: Strasser
Violence-fiction: Carbone
Voyages and travel-fiction:
Cushman; Hausman
Voyages and travel-stories: Stadler;
Walton
Water-stories: Krosoczka; O'Garden
Weddings-stories: Furgang;
Mbuthia; Shepard
Women's studies: Deak
World War II: Levine
/
I I 
V 
I ý' 1 
; 
, 
i, 
M 'r 
-
( 
"Each day, Hen takes her chicks into the garden for
'their favorite treat-sweet itty-bitty beans and potato bugs'-
until the day they find the path guarded by a loud and
grumpy dog. Hen despairs, but all three chicks think they can
best the brute. But [it's only] Little Chick 'tippy-toe, tippy-toe'
[who succeeds] and 'into the garden they go.' The story
structure has the appeal of 'The Three Billy Goats Gruff'...
[and] with the bold art and chant-along repetition,
this will serve equally well for preschool
groups or beginning readers."
-Starred review / The Horn Book
Ages 3 up. $15.99 Tr (0-06-029823-5);
$16.89 Lb (0-06-029824-3)
Bos
r,.IN C
Translated from the Spanish
by Margaret Sayers Peden
- "Acclaimed author Allende's first
YA novel, part thrilling survival adventure,
part coming-of-age journey, blends magical
realism with grim history and contemporary
, politics in a way that shakes up all the 
r
Susual definitions of savagery and civilization.
SAlex, 15... [accompanies] his journalist
Sgrandmother on an expedition deep into
the heart of the Amazon jungle. They are
searching for a legendary beast, a gigantic,
i. possibly humanoid creature that has been
glimpsed in the area .... Readers will race
through this for the story, then stop and
think about the issues of wildness, survival,
Sand the nature of beasts and humans."
-Starred 
review /ALA Booklist
Ages 10 up. $19.99 Tr (0-06-050918-X)
$21.89 Lb (0-06-050917-1);
Large Print Edition $19.99 (0-06-051195-8)
Unabridged English Audio $29.95 (0-06-051076-5)
Also available from rvYo
Spanish Edition $19.95 Tr (0-06-051031-5)
Unabridged Spanish Audio $29.95 (0-06-051077-3)
ISBN 
0-87845-105-6;
Number 39; 143 pages;
paper; $21.95*
STORY: FROM FmJEIACE TO CYBERSPACE
Connecting Children and Narrative
EDITED BYBETSY HEARNE,JANICE M. DEL NEGRO,
CHRISTINEJENKINS, AND DEBORAH STEVENSON
Papers Presented at the Allerton Park Institute
Sponsored October 26-28, 1997, by the
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois
In our interest in children's welfare, we often forget
that children are not simply passive receptacles for
whatever treasure or trash the adult world throws at
them but are lively agents who are continually inter-
acting with their environment. Children actively cre-
ate meaning as readers, viewers, and listeners. The
39 h Allerton Park Institute papers emphasize the criti-
cal need to connect children and narrative as a way to
affect their development as listeners, readers, view-
ers, and evaluators of literature-and information in
all forms.
The Bulletin Storytelling Review, Volume 1
Recommend-only reviews of storytelling
audio- and videotapes
EDITED BYJANICE M. DEL NEGRO AND DEBORAH STEVENSON
Add to your library this vital compendium of material
not regularly reviewed in other publications. Designed
to be a tool for selection and collection development,
the first volume of The Bulletin Storytelling Review con-
tains:
* 162 alphabetically-arranged reviews of tapes by sto-
rytellers such as Joe Bruchac, Len Cabral, Donald
Davis, Barbara McBride-Smith, J. J. Reneaux, and
Laura Simms
* Price, distributor, and grade level information for
each review
* Ordering information for each distributor listed
* An index that allows readers to search for tapes by
type of story or possible use
ISBN 
0-87845-106-4; 
99
pages; paper; $14.95*
F_ 
Availablc from the 
7
Graduatc School of Library & Information Scicnce
Publications Officc
L 
_A
Send order, to: GS I, IS I'Liblicmon, ( )[ficc, Roorn 24, 50 1 1:, 1 )aniel 'ýtrcci, Champaign, I I
01820. Prq-)ayrncnt n qiircd; Via, M ýtýter('ard. Amcn(ao I:Aprcýý, I )iscm Cr ai it i diecks,
(pavible to the I 'm-, crw, ý4 I Luoili JC(_Ct)[CJ.
Information tcýýardiiug odici. publik Mlon, (-art be ol)laincd 1).ý \\ riting to tile abo\ C
or cým 1), ýICCCIII!d M Our VC1) SitC: 11HI.: " /V \ý ýý.IIIAHUC.A]U /pUbOtY
'Pricc doe, \()I inckidc shiPping. Within dit 1ý11jwd Sý,ýtc" 
111c Shipping f"st 1, ý'; tol
the first boý,k. Sl fw each additi,,nal I)o(,k in the ;tmc wici. 0111',iLIC ol 1hc I'mici
rhe shippiiig o,,r i, Sý For the fini ho,ýk. 51,7ýfý fw 
ýi, h ýiitioi(,iul N-k iii ih, 
ot(i,ýi
AVc ,]up I -wrth (:hsý J.ibnw, Rýr,.
Univers
1325 So
Champi
U.S.A.
ADDRESS
~~:~prr~ 
d
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street 
PERIODICALS
Champaign, IL 61820 
POSTAGE
U.S.A. 
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
ADDRESS SERVICE REQUESTED
~51D
liI
~ALS
GNIL
;·~i. ·""'
*;
You may now access The Bulletin Online with an individualized username
and password.
The Bulletin Online is available only to print subscribers, and includes the
1998-2002 volume years plus the current issues as they are published.
The online version allows you to search the current issue or the entire
database by author, title, age or grade level.
To access The Bulletin Online:
I. Go to http://www.prairienet.org/ccb/
2. 
When accessing The Bulletin Online for the first time, use the sub-
scriber number that appears in the upper left-hand corner of the
mailing label on your print copy as both your username and password.
This subscriber number will usually be a four- or five-digit number but
may also be a five-character letter/number combination.
3. After logging in for the first time, you will be required to change your
password to something other than your username. This password is
case sensitive and should be one word only. Please store this new
password in a safe place. Your username (which is also your sub-
scriber number) will not change.
Remember, The Bulletin Online is not licensed for public use; only indi-
vidual print subscribers and institutional subscribers' staff are granted
access, so please do not share your access codes. We are working to
expand The Bulletin Online's capabilities and therefore create broader
electronic subscription options for individuals and institutions.
Non-subscribers can learn more about The Bulletin of the Center for
Children's Books at: http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb/
Please e-mail any feedback or questions to: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu.
SIIII 
0008-9036(20
I-A
0008-9036(200303)56:7;1 -A
'""."t~t~" 
',. -:1€
