T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by The Johns Hopkins University Press
January 2013
Vol. 66   No. 5
H“A visually exciting introduction to a well-known artist.”  
 
— School Library Journal, starred review
H “Children will be drawn to the story of someone no one 
believes in and who becomes a star anyway.”
 
 
 
 
—Booklist, starred review
H“Strikes just the right tone — jaunty, conﬁ ding, and 
aﬀ ectionate. Hall’s acrylic and watercolor paintings celebrate 
Rousseau’s style without parodying it. 
 
 
— Publishers Weekly, starred review
Picture book ·  Ages 5–9
ISBN 978-0-8028-5364-6 
hardcover · $17.00
Eerdmans Books for Young Readers
At your bookstore,
or call 800-253-7521
www.eerdmans.com
YR2502BCCB
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
January 2013
Vol. 66 No. 5
233  the BIg PICture
 
  Owly & Wormy: Bright Lights and Starry Nights!  written and illus. by Andy 
Runton
234  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
236 • One Gorilla: A Counting Book  written and illus. by Anthony Browne
236 •  A Splash of Red: The Life and Art of Horace Pippin  by Jen Bryant; illus. by 
Melissa Sweet
250 • Elemental   by Antony John
254 • Casualties of War  by Chris Lynch
270 • Paper Valentine  by Brenda Yovanoff
272  BuLLetIn BLue rIBBons 2012
276  suBjeCt And use Index
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R Recommended.
Ad Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR Not recommended.
SpC Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the  
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor (KQG)
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
Alaine Martaus, Reviewer (AM)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Melissa Funfsinn, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print or electronic $98.00; combined print & electronic $137.00; multiple in-
stitutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, $55.00; students, 
$20.00. In countries other than the United States, add $17.60 per subscription for postage; subscrib-
ers in Canada and Mexico add $13.20. Single copy rate: $11.00. Volumes available in microfilm from 
ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche 
from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be 
made payable to The Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Divi-
sion, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 
410-516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/
journals/advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2012 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image from Owly & Wormy: Bright Lights and Starry Nights! ©2012 by Andy Runton and used 
by permission of Atheneum Books for Young Readers.
January 2013 • 233
the BIg PICture
Owly & Wormy, Bright Lights and Starry Nights
written and illustrated by Andy Runton
How on earth do any of us ever learn to read? Just consider the daunting number 
of checkpoints en route to Independent Reading. Hold the book right side up. 
Check. Advance the story by pulling the right-hand page to the left. Got it. Follow 
the words from left to right, top to bottom. Right-o. Internalize the concept that 
letters stand for sounds that form words. Yup. Memorize letters and sounds. Uh-huh. 
Decipher letters in a variety of fonts. Yes. Depending on who’s at the pedagogical 
helm, hone phonetic or sight-reading skills. Whew. And now, perhaps worst of all, 
accept that there’s only one correct way to do this. No more head pats for parroting 
back what an adult has read and reread to you. No beaming smiles for supplying 
your own creative story to go with the pictures. Who thought this was a good idea?
Happily, Andy Runton has entered the scene with an approach that eases 
the transition from passive picture book consumer to active pre-reader—a strategy 
that mitigates the discipline of reading with some welcome wiggle room for imag-
ining your own script. With last year’s Owly & Wormy, Friends All Aflutter (BCCB 
3/11), Runton transformed his pocketbook-sized, black and white Owly graphic 
novels popular with upper elementary kids into full color, pint-sized adventures in 
picture-book trim suitable for an even younger audience. Not really wordless books 
in the tradition of David Wiesner or Arthur Geisert, whose ambiguities demand a 
fair amount of plot interpretation, Owly books adhere to an inarguable storyline 
and a set of broadly accepted textual conventions. Instead of words (save for a few 
onomatopoetic sound effects), Runton relies on comic-book-style word bubbles 
populated by pictures and symbols, most of which are part of our cognitive lexicon. 
A sudden idea is represented by the customary lightbulb (here wittily portrayed in 
the spiral shape of a compact fluorescent bulb); a red circle with a diagonal slash 
negates the picture it encompasses, and if accompanied by an exclamation mark, 
negates it emphatically indeed. The plot point is precise, but readers are at liberty 
to phrase the dialogue in a number of equally correct ways. A tearstained yellow 
frowny face with a question mark can reasonably be parsed as “What’s wrong?” 
“Why are you sad?” or “What’s making you cry?” 
None of this clever nudging would be worth a second look if not in the 
service of a great story. Fortunately, the game is fully worth the candle that figures 
here as a prominent motif. Owly is planning for a perfect evening of stargazing, 
with his telescope and tripod, a deep sky in full astral display, and of course a good 
friend to share it with. Scared of the dark, Wormy balks, but Owly brings out 
lanterns and candles to ease his fears. Then there’s the problem of the leaf cover at 
234 • The BulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
Owly’s tree house, which impedes the view. Moving to a hilltop clearing should 
do the trick, but here comes the rain. The buddies take shelter in a cave, where 
weird sounds and spooky eyeballs send them scurrying back out into the night, 
losing the telescope in their rush. This dismal field trip finally turns around when 
amiable Owly musters the courage to retrieve his telescope and thereby meets the 
equally amiable bats who join them back on the hilltop. Wormy’s not too keen on 
losing his comforting night lights, but with the candles snuffed, the whole crew of 
new friends are rewarded with a spectacular show of starlight. 
Although no mini-science lesson—e.g., the butterfly life cycle in Aflutter—
is embedded in this title (unless “Douse the ambient light” counts as an astronomy 
tip), readers will be quite happy to join Owly’s ever-expanding circle of friends. 
They may even miss the fact that there’s plenty of covert learning going on, as they 
become fluent with several punctuation marks, a host of standard symbols, and the 
rigor of sequencing. Expect to see some satisfied “I read it all myself!” smiles, and 
hope that Andy Runton’s got a few more Owly picture books in the pipeline. (See 
260 for publication information.)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer
Agee, Jon The Other Side of Town; written and illus. by Jon Agee. di Capua/
Scholastic, 2012 32p
ISBN 978-0-545-16204-3 $17.95  
R 5-8 yrs
A New York city cab driver is waved down by a strange fellow in a wacky mint-green 
jumpsuit and hat who requests to go to “Schmeeker Street” on “the other side of 
town.” At the touch of a button on the stranger’s remote control, a seeming dead 
end gives way to a parallel but very different city: it’s dotted with pink and mint 
dome-shaped houses, and places, things, and people have names that rhyme with 
normal New York people, places, and things (the driver has to take the Finkon 
Tunnel, named for Gabe Finkon, to get across town, and the stranger roots for the 
Spankees). Upon returning to his own side of town, the cabbie finds a mysterious 
change in his family: everyone’s wearing the same kind of mint hat as the stranger, 
and his wife is serving “tweet loaf with bravy” (“It’s very popular on the other side 
of town!”). Many kids will be amused by the reality-based silly names and intrigued 
by the idea of another place existing in conjunction with a real, well-known one. 
Agee’s writing is immediate and energetic, and his cartoonish, pastel-toned art is 
attractively strengthened by chunky, smudgy black outlines. The strange passenger 
is a short, rotund, mustachioed gentleman who carries a pink satchel, and his odd 
green hat is accented by an upright pink spiral, giving him a humorous contrast to 
the lanky cab driver in his powder-blue suit and driving cap. This amiably Twilight 
January 2013 • 235
Zone-esque story could be an amusing prompt for a creative-writing project or 
useful as an illustration of rhyming or nonsense words.  JH
Albin, gennifer Crewel. Farrar, 2012 357p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-374-31641-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-374-31644-0 $9.99  
R Gr. 7-10
When her ability to manipulate the weave of time inevitably attracts the attention 
of the Guild, Adelice Lewys is stolen away from her family and appointed to be 
a Spinster, one of the thousands of women who work the fabric of the cosmos to 
ensure that the people of Arras are suitably fed and clothed—and obedient. Swept 
up into a world of high fashion, ritzy parties, and cunning politicians, Adelice is 
aware her new status as an elite is a farce: the men of the Guild hold the true power, 
dictating what the Spinsters create, and her fellow women are too occupied with 
internal rivalries to seek more. When Adelice meets the head Spinster, she realizes 
she must choose between becoming a Guild pet or starting a revolution. Though 
the notion of a rebellious girl fighting against a tyrannical regime in a dystopian 
future is a familiar one, Albin layers her story with philosophical and ethical pon-
derings that will appeal to the thinking teen. The manufactured aspect of Arras 
is conceptually similar to the world in Fisher’s Incarceron (BCCB 2/10), offering 
an interrogation of relationships between reality, truth, and power. The additional 
exploration of gender roles is particularly compelling, and the portrayals of the 
Spinsters’ complicity in their own oppression and their passive acts of defiance cast 
an interesting light on the way in which a rebellion forms. Dystopia fans will find 
all the intrigue, romance, and drama they have come to expect from the genre as 
well as a few lingering questions.  KQG 
blAck, YelenA Dance of Shadows. Bloomsbury, 2012 [304p]
ISBN 978-1-59990-940-0 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 6-9
Ballet wasn’t originally Vanessa’s vocation, but ever since Margaret, her ballerina 
older sister, mysteriously disappeared three years ago, Vanessa has embraced the 
family dance tradition. She’s now a student at the New York Ballet Academy, the 
school from which Margaret vanished, and she’s enjoying the camaraderie of dorm 
life, beginning to fall for handsome classmate Zep, and thrilling to the possibility 
of being cast in The Firebird. If only that were all, though: a creepy practice room 
seems to contain the souls of past ballerinas, another dancer drops dark threats, and 
dancing sends Vanessa into a frightening trance that seems to be connecting her 
with an evil force. The writing does a lot more telling than showing, and the setting 
details are largely hasty and convenient, providing merely a superficial structure for 
the paranormal story. The supernatural ballet story is good B-movie fun, though, 
with cliffhanger chapter endings (“Before Vanessa could scream, a hand closed over 
her mouth”), generous helpings of sinister foreboding, and a fraught romance that 
may lead to the heroine’s doom, and the book moves much more rapidly than the 
page count suggests. This series opener leaves Vanessa still hunting for the truth 
about Margaret at the end, but she’s now aided by a group of enchanted dancers 
who have “pledged to protect the world from those who seek to use the dark powers 
of dance for evil ends.” How many ballet stories can promise that?  DS
236 • The BulleTin
browne, AnthonY One Gorilla: A Counting Book; written and illus. by Anthony 
Browne. Candlewick, 2013 26p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6352-0 $16.99  
R* 3-7 yrs
Browne makes a simple counting book into a celebration of the primate family in 
this radiant gallery of portraits. The text is spare: “1 gorilla”; “2 orangutans”; “3 
chimpanzees”; and so forth, concluding after “10 lemurs” with depictions of the 
author and an array of humans. The portraits, however, are extraordinary: Browne’s 
exquisite precision, with delicate hatching of fur and careful stippled delination 
of facial lines, becomes jubilant with color and personality. Each spread of pri-
mate faces is a stunning collection of individuals: the nine colubus monkeys, for 
instance, are as different in expression and feature as nine humans would be. The 
orderly presentations, full frontal view, and absence of background accentuate the 
human/primate comparison by suggesting that each species is sitting for a family 
portrait. Therefore, what would initially be a look at differentness—gazing at the 
snowy wonder of the octet of macaques, for instance—becomes an invitation to 
a narrative about the similarity of families, encouraging kids to wonder who’s the 
grandfather, who’s the shy sister, who’s the family showoff, etc. As a counting book, 
this has a simple majesty that will mesmerize some kids, but you could also use it 
to talk about biology in a pairing with Steve Jenkins’ nature study titles—or with 
collections of human family portraits.  DS
brYAnt, Jen A Splash of Red: The Life and Art of Horace Pippin; illus. by Melissa 
Sweet. Knopf, 2013 34p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96712-2 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86712-5 $17.99  
R Gr. 3-6
Though artistically inclined since childhood, African-American artist Horace Pippin 
had to limit his drawing and painting to a hobby, and then even that pleasure was 
denied him when he suffered an injury to his right arm in World War I. Back home 
and struggling with the limited opportunities for a man with a physical impairment, 
Pippin turned again to art, steadying his damaged right arm with his left. When his 
paintings were discovered by a local group of artists (including N. C. Wyeth), they 
gained recognition and acclaim in the art world and cemented Pippin’s reputation. 
Both Pippin’s life and art are compelling, and Bryant’s matter-of-fact, unassuming 
style is well suited to her subject. Sweet’s art, largely watercolor and gouache with 
layered collage effects, employs vibrant contrasts of reds and pinks against greens, 
with softly sketchy pencilwork adding both texture and precision. Pippin himself 
was very much a vernacular artist, and the narrative paintings effectively reflect his 
approach (though it would have been pleasing to have more examples of Pippin’s 
own work); quotes from Pippin are graphically incorporated into several scenes. 
The book concludes with an historical note about Pippin, a note from the author 
and the illustrator on their joint exploration of the subject, an extensive list of print, 
video, and internet opportunities for further information about the artist, and 
citations; closing endpapers offer a U.S. map identifying the location of museums 
housing Pippin’s works and some sample paintings. This would be a great creative 
partner to Lyons’ Starting Home: The Story of Horace Pippin, Painter or an entry in 
a discussion of American modern art.  DS
January 2013 • 237
burAk, kAthrYn Emily’s Dress and Other Missing Things. Roaring Brook, 
2012 232p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-59643-736-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-59643-834-7 $9.99  
R Gr. 7-10
The suicide of her mother and the disappearance of her best friend, Richy, have left 
Claire reeling. She’s caught in a grief and guilt cycle where she blames herself for 
arriving home too late to save her mother and for letting Richy go alone to meet a 
guy he was chatting with on the internet. She takes refuge in her writing, breaking 
late at night into Emily Dickinson’s nearby house, where she feels a strange sense of 
peace. Her dark poems alarm her student teacher, Tate, and he follows her, hoping 
only to save her from self-destructing but instead ending up getting involved with 
her romantically. When Richy’s body is finally found, Tate discovers a lead, and he 
and Claire set out to expose Richy’s killer. Burak’s airy, lyrical prose has a poetic 
sensibility that will sustain readers as they negotiate initially mysterious narrative 
gaps, and they will soon catch up to the story’s knowledge. This subtle and effec-
tive narrative technique charts Claire’s character arc as she slowly emerges from an 
emo fog into a more grounded stance, transforming from a melancholy Sylvia Plath 
wannabe to a smart, likable, even slightly feisty person to whom really sad things 
have happened. Readers will appreciate the emotional quality of both the mystery 
and the romance, and they’ll find Claire’s resilience heartening.  KC
chAddA, SArwAt The Savage Fortress. Levine/Scholastic, 2012 292p
ISBN 978-0-545-38516-9 $16.99  
R Gr. 5-8
If the heat and the crowded streets of Varanasi weren’t bad enough, thirteen-year-
old Ash Mistry finds out that India’s holiest city is home to a fortress of demons, 
effectively putting the kibosh on what he though would be a fun summer vacation. 
Pudgy Londoner Ash discovers that Lord Savage, a wealthy businessman leading 
an archeological dig in Varanasi with the help of Ash’s uncle, is actually marshaling 
an army of rakshashas (demons) to take over the world, but his plans hit a snag 
after Ash picks up a legendary arrowhead and begins to suspect that he may be the 
reincarnated soul of Rama, India’s greatest warrior king. With the help of a former 
demon and several other reincarnated souls, Ash prepares to take on Savage and 
perhaps even the gods themselves. A classic hero’s quest, this action-packed story 
has its protagonist making the transformation from portly, brainy everyday kid 
to courageous, physically strong warrior with relative ease. Chadda wisely keeps 
his hero’s mental state the same, however, so even after Ash has proven his abili-
ties, the boy is racked with self doubt and frankly resentful that this lot has fallen 
on his shoulders, two traits that will make him immediately relatable to a young 
reader. Graphic fight scenes leave little to the imagination, describing in cinematic 
clarity just what happens when one is attacked by a twenty-foot crocodile-demon 
hybrid. The incorporation of the Ramayana legend serves as a basic introduction 
to Indian deities; fans of Riordan’s Kane Chronicles, Indiana Jones, and the like 
will appreciate this non-Western take on fantasy adventure.  KQG 
238 • The BulleTin
clAYton, dAllAS Make Magic! Do Good!; written and illus. by Dallas Clay-
ton. Candlewick, 2012 98p
ISBN 978-0-7636-5746-8 $17.99  
M Gr. 2-4
Nearly fifty rhymed verses appear in this initially self-published collection of 
poetry. Subjects range from kid-appealing topics such as unicorns, rainbows, and 
dragons to more conceptual matters (“Try,” “Enemies, “New Start”), and the style 
is friendly and colloquial; visuals are inviting, with each spread partnering an airy 
visual vignette and a poem. The strongest poems here are the short ones, such as 
“Robots” and “Sunshine” (“She blew a kiss/ it missed my face/ and drifted into outer 
space . . . ”), that bring pithy wit. Longer ones, though, often shift meter wildly, 
making them hard to read and harder to read aloud, and lines are often inflated 
with filler material just to get to a rhyme. The tone tips into the sentimental and 
the didactic, and while the lessons in many of the verses are worthy, they’re also 
clichéd, adult-inflected, and occasionally plain peculiar (“Amanda the Panda,” for 
instance, uses a panda’s eating of bamboo as a story about destructive consumption 
of resources). Adults keen on strong messages may find some of these verses to their 
taste, but this is territory better covered by the likes of Silverstein, Prelutsky, and 
Florian. Vignette illustrations have a pleasing graphic snap, with linework hatch-
ing that recalls linocuts and a James Marshall–esque rotundity to the figures.  DS
cline-rAnSome, leSA Light in the Darkness: A Story about How Slaves Learned 
in Secret; illus. by James E. Ransome. Jump at the Sun/Disney, 2013 [40p]
ISBN 978-1-4231-3495-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 7-10 yrs
It’s deep night when Rosa and her mother slip out under the nose of the plantation 
patrollers and defy the law to learn reading and writing from Morris, a slave from a 
nearby plantation. It’s not just the three of them—there’s a collection of desperate 
scholars, young and old, and their school is a deep pit hollowed into the ground 
and disguised with branches. When patrollers catch two of Morris’ students as they 
try to slip back to the plantation unnoticed, Rosa and her mother don’t dare attend 
the sessions any more, but eventually a defiant and determined Rosa convinces her 
mother to brave danger for the freeing power of learning. The atmospheric text is 
filled with hushed whispers, frozen silences, and secret nighttime journeys, and it 
doesn’t shy away from the tremendous risk involved in the enterprise, mentioning 
right up front the savage whipping that’s been the punishment for learning in the 
past. In fact, that threat just emphasizes the notion that learning is an important, 
empowering, and even transgressive act (“In this school, they are taking in learn-
ing like it’s their last breath”), and while the book wisely avoids linking that belief 
to contemporary study, it’s certainly a notion that youngsters may find worth 
considering. Ransome’s watercolor spreads make excellent use of composition and 
perspective to maximize the drama and the secrecy, helping to keep scenes involving 
even amid the gloom of night. An author’s note briefly describes the historic “pit 
schools”; a trio of youth-friendly titles is offered for further reading.  DS
January 2013 • 239
cole, henrY, illus. Unspoken: A Story from the Underground Railroad; illus. by 
Henry Cole. Scholastic, 2012 40p
ISBN 978-0-545-39997-5 $16.99  
Ad Gr. 2-5
Inspired by family stories of relatives who lived through the Civil War, Cole pres-
ents in wordless format the experience of a young girl who discovers a runaway 
slave on her family’s property during the war. Rebel soldiers, identifiable by their 
stars and bars, pass by the farm while the girl goes about her chores. In the storage 
shed, an eye peeks out from behind a bunch of cornstalks, and although the girl is 
frightened, she returns at night with food wrapped in a napkin. Offerings of pie, 
biscuit, cornbread, and a chicken drumstick are delivered to the unseen refugee, 
and the family obviously professes ignorance when bounty hunters arrive with a 
handbill demanding the return of a runaway. When the child returns to the shed 
to make another late-night check on their desperate guest, the runaway has gone, 
but a cornhusk doll clad in the checkered napkin lies on the floor as a heartfelt 
thank-you. This is going to be tough to parse at times for youngsters: adult inter-
vention or the closing notes will likely be required to recognize the significance of 
the opening pages, which feature a quilt draped over the split-rail fence to indicate 
the house as friendly to runaways; it’s also never really clear how much the girl’s 
family actually knows. Still, this is an involving format for introducing children to 
the workings of the Underground Railroad, and the atmospheric pencil drawings, 
reminiscent of Chris Van Allsburg’s monochromatic work, will draw children into 
the tenebrous adventure.  EB
cronn-millS, kirStin Beautiful Music for Ugly Children. Flux, 2012 271p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-7387-3251-0 $9.99  
R Gr. 9-12
It’s the end of his senior year, and Gabe is ready to leave his life as Elizabeth behind. 
He’s told his family and his best friend, Paige, about his decision to become Gabe, 
but he hasn’t told Paige that he’s in love with her. While his family is having some 
mild trouble with his transition, his older neighbor and fellow music lover, John, 
is nothing but supportive. John is also helping Gabe realize his dream to be a radio 
DJ, and his late-night show on a community radio station has garnered a small 
but loyal set of fans who pull pranks to honor their favorite DJ. When one of his 
fans outs him as transgender, however, a few others threaten him, and things turn 
briefly violent before they resolve themselves. While Gabe is serious and understand-
ably nervous about his decision to alter his gender, he’s not overly angsty about it; 
instead, the book provides real hopefulness in the new life he dreams for himself. 
His parents are trying to adjust, but they backslide sometimes as they try to figure 
out why their daughter wants to become their son. Paige’s response is particularly 
credible: though she and Elizabeth have been best friends for a long time and she 
has embraced Gabe in theory, she’s conflicted when she realizes the possible social 
consequences of having a transsexual best friend, especially after she too is physi-
cally threatened. In general, though, this is a refreshingly positive picture of a boy 
standing up for himself against the odds and taking the consequences as they come. 
An extensive and highly readable author’s note defining the multiple identities that 
fall under the trans umbrella follows the text.  KC 
240 • The BulleTin
cuShmAn, kAren Will Sparrow’s Road. Clarion, 2012 216p
ISBN 978-0-547-73962-5 $16.99  
R Gr. 5-8 
Sold by his father to a cruel innkeeper for unlimited ale, twelve-year-old Will Spar-
row has finally had enough abuse and takes to the roads of Elizabethan England to 
make his own fortune. Thinking himself a sharp young lad, with his taste for lying 
and thieving, Will is surprised to encounter tricksters far more savvy than he and 
ends up with an empty purse and belly after being had not once, but three times. 
He eventually falls in with a traveling caravan of “oddities and prodigies,” but even 
here he is deceived: believing that the show’s cat-whiskered girl and bad-tempered 
dwarf deserve their poor treatment, Will attempts to ingratiate himself with the 
show’s ringleader only to discover that Master Tidball is as lazy and violent as the 
men Will has left behind. As usual, Cushman is adept at bringing the past to vivid 
life, with evocative details from daily Elizabethan life and authentic, often humor-
ous dialogue (“Pah, boy, be not afeared of this impolite porker”). Will’s experience 
as both a target of abuse and as a bystander to the sufferings of others brings a 
contemporary (but universal) twist to this historical tale, broadening its appeal; 
youngsters who have been lucky enough to avoid being bullied will recognize Will’s 
initial response of staying silent to save his own skin, and they will similarly relate 
to his internal struggle when he finally decides to help the “oddities” escape their 
master. Cushman includes as extensive author’s note on market fairs, traveling shows, 
and the economic climate of sixteenth-century England as well as a bibliography. 
Will’s journey has considerable classroom potential as supplemental reading for an 
Elizabethan unit or as a springboard for discussions on inclusions and exclusions, 
both contemporary and historical.  KQG 
dAlY, niki Next Stop—Zanzibar Road!; written and illus. by Niki Daly. Clarion, 
2012 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-547-68852-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 5-8 yrs
As in Daly’s previous title about the residents of Zanzibar Road (Welcome to Zan-
zibar Road), five short chapters follow elephant Mama Jumbo and her chicken 
son Little Chico, as Mama haggles vendors at the market near her African village, 
fixes a taxi with some bubble gum and her trunk, makes Chico a handsome little 
shirt, and eventually puts her son to bed after a busy day. There’s really not much 
action here, but the events are colorfully and engagingly described and Daly evokes 
a nicely specific sense of place even if the location given (“Africa”) is vague. Daly’s 
storytelling voice is invitingly colloquial (“The market was busy, busy! But that was 
fine, because Mama Jumbo really LOVED a loud, busy market”) and Mama Jumbo 
and Little Chico are both amusing and endearing. The art (line and watercolor 
touched with digital washes of color) is equally energetic but tempered by plenty 
of white space, keeping the compositions detailed but not cluttered; the spread of 
the market scene is particularly absorbing. The pleasantly plump Mama Jumbo, 
with her patterned dress and red “pom pom hat,” is clearly a unique individual, 
as is every member of the animal cast. Fans of Daly’s first Zanzibar Road title will 
find more to love here.  JH
January 2013 • 241
dAvieS, nicolA Who Lives Here?; illus. by Marc Boutavant. Candlewick, 
2012 22p (Flip the Flap & Find Out)
ISBN 978-0-7636-6236-9 $9.99  
R 4-6 yrs
 
 
 
What Happens Next?; illus. by Marc Boutavant. Candlewick, 
2012 22p (Flip the Flap & Find Out)
ISBN 978-0-7636-6264-6 $9.99  
Ad 4-6 yrs
In these two titles in a new series, biologist and veteran author Davies adds a 
guessing-game, lift-the-flap turn to introductory nature study. What Happens Next? 
draws on a three-quarter page flap to reveal the answer to its title question in several 
different situations: for instance, a chameleon eyes a “juicy grasshopper,” and a turn 
of the flap reveals that what happens next is the flick of a chameleon tongue making 
a meal of grasshopper. Who Lives Here? is a series of habitat-focused questions, with 
a question about a particular location (“Who lives in this warm and steamy jungle?”) 
facing an array of four liftable flaps with three wrong answers and a right one (it’s 
the sloth); each guessing spread is followed by a few lines explaining the animal’s 
suitability to its habitat. Who Lives Here? is the more successful of the two, with 
entertaining paper engineering and a layout that allows for a bit of gamesmanship 
in the question. Audiences will enjoy poring over the query page for illustrative 
hints in the landscape and additional education value is found in the information 
about the “wrong answer” animals. What Happens Next? has too broad a subject, 
and the page-turn effect is more a gimmicky extra than a playful interactive element. 
These have a very different look from Davies’ quiet single-species picture books; 
the digital art is crisply detailed, loudly colored, and slightly cartoonish in some of 
its designerly elements, and even Who Lives Here’s flaps (which are unfortunately 
rather flimsy) sport busy and vivid clues to the relevant habitat. These might be 
enjoyable complements to Steve Jenkins’ early nature study books such as Time to 
Eat, Time to Sleep, and Time for a Bath (BCCB 9/11), and even the least scientific 
of nature lovers will enjoy lifting flaps and guessing critters. Each book concludes 
with a quiz spread that gently queries audiences on which animals from the text 
go together.  DS
deAn, cArolee Forget Me Not. Simon Pulse, 2012 378p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3254-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3256-7 $9.99  
R Gr. 7-10
At first, Ally thinks she is hiding in her school’s haunted hallway to get away from 
the buzz of gossip, since a picture of her, naked in a boy’s bed, is being texted 
around school. She mulls over her life to this point, reviewing her sadness over her 
mother’s abandonment, the exhilaration she feels when she’s performing on stage, 
and the sweetness of her secret romance with Davis, who swears he’d rather be with 
her than his popular senior girlfriend Darla. What she can’t figure out, though, 
are who the other people in the hallway are—the nun who keeps knitting a small 
pink sweater that unravels as soon as she’s finished, the couple that never seems to 
stop kissing, and the angry, bossy boy who wants to play hangman all the time. 
Elijah, a boy in her class who is in love with her, knows who they are—they are all 
people who have died on the grounds of the school over the years. He also knows 
that Ally is there because she is on the threshold of life and death, in a coma after 
having jumped from the roof of the school. Can Elijah convince her that no matter 
how painful life is, it’s better than the alternative? The novel blends free verse with 
242 • The BulleTin
other genres, and the poetry is particularly effective, with Dean using various poetic 
and dramatic forms to indicate shifts in character, theme, and perspective. Most 
of the story is told through poems in the voices of Ally and Elijah, but there are 
also mini-plays featuring the ghosts in the hallway, allowing these characters to tell 
their stories in their own voices. Ally’s self-exploration is thought-provoking as she 
comes to understand the point at which the joy of performing and being noticed 
becomes a debilitating need, and she begins to realize that the path she is on will 
lead her nowhere good. The plot of the perils of pursuing high school popularity 
at any cost may be a well-worn one, but this sensitive and insightful treatment is 
as fresh and moving as it is beautifully written.  KC
deem, JAmeS m. Faces from the Past: Forgotten People of North America. Hough-
ton, 2012 [160p] illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-547-37024-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 6-10
Readers familiar with Jackson’s The Bone Detectives (BCCB 4/96) and McClafferty’s 
The Many Faces of George Washington (BCCB 6/11) have already considered how 
forensic sciences and facial reconstructions have been used in the service of crime 
investigation and envisioning historical figures. Here Deem takes a chronological 
look at nine cases in which such reconstructions help interpret a specific moment 
in American history. Each study is a well-polished gem of a tale, framing the details 
of archaeological excavation, historical background, public policy issues, cultural 
controversies, and final disposition of the human remains with an unwavering re-
spect for the dignity of the deceased and the communities that claim them. Packed 
with illustrations (color not seen) and carefully placed sidebar information, this 
title brings to life such diverse figures as paleoamerican Spirit Cave Man; “Pearl,” 
a slave from eighteenth-century upstate New York; a buffalo soldier whose corpse 
was reassembled and given an honorable burial; nine persons among the 1,271 
bodies found in pauper’s graves in an almshouse cemetery. Quotation sources and 
thorough bibliographic notes for each chapter are included, as well as an index 
and suggestions for further reading on each topic. A strong choice for independent 
reading, this will also be a boon to social studies and science teachers in search of 
classroom readalouds.  EB
dunreA, olivier Little Cub; written and illus. by Olivier Dunrea. Philomel, 
2012 32p
ISBN 978-0-399-24235-9 $16.99  
R 4-7 yrs
A solitary little bear cub is often hungry and sad until he is meets Old Bear: “‘Who 
do you belong to?’ asked Old Bear. ‘I belong to me,’ said the little cub. ‘But maybe 
I could belong to you.’” Lonely himself, Old Bear decides to take the cub home, 
tucks him into bed, and sends him off to sleep with a story. Dunrea keeps the nar-
rative of this prequel to Dunrea’s Old Bear and His Cub (BCCB 12/10) stalwartly 
concise and forthright, and the genuine sadness of the little cub’s loneliness makes 
the happy ending deeply satisfying rather than eye-rollingly sentimental. Children 
will easily relate to the little cub’s need to be cared for, even if they’ve never experi-
enced being parentless, and childlike aspects of Little Cub’s character (he wants to 
eat the honey in a tree but is afraid of being stung by the bees, he gets extra chatty 
at bedtime) create further opportunities for kids to identify with him. The pencil 
January 2013 • 243
and gouache illustrations are rich with autumnal color, and each scene is kept in 
artful balance by lots of clean, white space both within the illustrated page and on 
the facing page of text. Small, round-bellied Little Cub and hefty, bristly Old Bear 
are attractive visual complements, and the modest coziness of Old Bear’s home 
and possessions is made all the cozier by the chilly-looking sylvan scenery. Besides 
being shared along with its companion title, this might also be paired with Moore’s 
A House in the Woods (BCCB 12/11) or even Rylant’s Mr. Putter and Tabby series, 
or simply read as a reassuring bedtime book.  JH
elliS, deborAh My Name Is Parvana. Groundwood, 2012 201p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-55498-297-4 $16.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-55498-299-8 $14.95  
R Gr. 6-9
In this follow-up to the Breadwinner trilogy, readers are brought up to date on the 
fate of Parvana, who has struggled all her life to survive against the Taliban. Now a 
teenager, Parvana has been detained by American forces after being found wander-
ing amidst the rubble of her school in Afghanistan. Because she won’t speak to her 
interrogators, she is suspected of being a terrorist; her captors therefore deprive her 
of sleep in an attempt to get her to tell them what she was doing on the grounds 
of a school where they found the body of a woman and a cache of buried arms. To 
distract her from her captor’s questioning, Parvana mentally reviews the last few 
years of her life. She and her mother and sisters built a school for girls, making 
them the target of threats from men in the village who felt that girls should not be 
educated. However, their efforts are ultimately unsustainable: between the Taliban 
who used the school grounds to hide weapons, the men who threatened, tortured, 
and ultimately killed her mother, and the Americans who bombed the building 
despite Parvana’s painting “school” on the roof, her dreams of a better life for herself 
are once again put on hold. As in the other books in the series, Parvana here is shown 
to be a remarkably resourceful and highly intelligent young woman who maintains 
her optimism even through her anger at her circumstances and those who oppress 
her and the other women and girls in their culture. Her rescue is dramatic, and 
it offers hope for readers by suggesting that there are in fact people in high places 
who are working within Afghanistan to improve living conditions and educational 
opportunities for women and girls, but there is clearly a long way to go. Like the 
rest of Ellis’ work, this is purposive but effective; leavened with a likable character 
for whom readers will feel compassion and energized with breathtaking action and 
suspense that keeps pages turning, it will inspire readers toward outrage and perhaps 
even social action. An author’s note follows the text.  KC 
erlingS, fridrik Fish in the Sky; tr. from the Icelandic by Fridrik Erlings. Can-
dlewick, 2012 275p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-5888-5 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-6197-7 $16.99  
R Gr. 7-10
The onset of puberty sends Josh into a fever of existential angst. The Icelandic 
thirteen-year-old is worried about his overworked, passive mother, he’s angry with 
his estranged father, and he’s jealous of his best friend Peter’s intact and seemingly 
idyllic family. His life is further complicated when his older cousin, Gertrude, 
comes to live with him and his mother, invading his privacy and challenging him 
toward adulthood in both playful and poignant ways. Finally, his angst becomes too 
244 • The BulleTin
much for him, and he devises a plan to skip school for an extended period of time. 
He retreats to his secret place on the beach, where he contemplates suicide and his 
relationship to God, discovers the guilt-ridden pleasures of porn and masturbation, 
and tries to sort out what it means to be an adult in a deeply dissatisfying world. 
Josh’s philosophical musings are often funny (even when he doesn’t mean them 
to be), but the humor is always gentle, honest, and even loving as Erling credibly 
captures the hormone-addled frustrations of a thoughtful thirteen-year-old. Since 
Peter hasn’t hit this questioning stage yet, Josh has no one to really talk to, and he’s 
sorely missing his father. It is Gertrude who saves him on more than one occasion: 
a glimpse of her naked body in the bath brings him back from comically maudlin 
thoughts of suicide, and her distress after her boyfriend rapes her shocks him out 
of his taste for porn. This might not a be a book boys will openly seek out, but 
it is one that they will read discreetly and be glad they did, as it gives thoughtful, 
clear-sighted, and ruefully funny expression to the emotional and physical torments 
of adolescence.  KC
frenette, bethAnY Dark Star. Hyperion, 2012 356p
ISBN 978-1-4231-4665-0 $17.99  
R Gr. 7-10
As the daughter of Minneapolis’ most revered superhero, sixteen-year-old Audrey 
Whitticomb knows a thing or two about keeping secrets. Her mother clearly still 
has much to teach her, though, since Audrey has never suspected that Morning Star 
(as her mother is known to the populace) has been fighting anything other than 
your average thief or murderer on her nightly outings. When Audrey is attacked 
by a supernatural being, she uncovers the full truth of her mother’s identity: Mom 
is part of the Kin, a group of people with superhuman powers that fight Harrow-
ers, demonic creatures looking to infiltrate the mortal world. Audrey’s ability to 
psychically access people’s memories makes her Kin as well, but Mom isn’t about to 
let Audrey in on the battle, especially after she’s attacked again; instead, Audrey is 
grounded until further notice with her mother’s bossy (but totally cute) sidekick as 
a babysitter. With charming, authentic characterizations and stellar world-building, 
Frenette offers a marvelous debut, giving readers a taut, swoony, downright fun 
story that will have them reconsidering their notions of superheroes. Elaborating 
on the traditional superhero origin story, the author capably creates a believable 
backstory that places Audrey and her fellow Kin in the center of the action while 
the plot twists come as fast and as furious as the demon attacks. Audrey herself is 
reckless but not bratty, witty but never precocious, and her reactions to both the 
discovery of demons and her status as a Kin are believably authentic while her 
relationship with her mother is touching and entirely plausible for her age. The 
ending is a bit abrupt, but it lays the way for further installments, which will no 
doubt please readers who want to continue to prowl the mean streets of Minneapolis 
with Audrey at their side.  KQG
gAimAn, neil Chu’s Day; illus. by Adam Rex. Harper/HarperCollins, 
2012 32p
ISBN 978-0-06-201781-9 $17.99  
R 3-7 yrs
It’s a terrific day of outings for Chu, the young panda, as he and his parents go to 
the library, a local diner, and the circus. Chu has a bit of a sensitive nose, and it’s 
clear from his parents’ looks of dread as they ask him repeatedly “Are you going 
January 2013 • 245
to sneeze?” that his nasal outbursts can be fearsome indeed. When a cloud of dust 
gets him going at the library, his “aah-aaah-Aaaah-” buildup fortunately ends as 
a dud; same thing happens with the powder of pepper in the diner. At the circus, 
however, he finally can’t hold it in, and his sneeze upends the entire gala and rips 
through the town like a hurricane, leaving chaos in its wake. The simple text makes 
the most of the windup/false alarm joke, and Chu’s sweetly understated responses 
(“Oops,” says Chu matter-of-factly after destroying the landscape) add an ad-
ditional humorous fillip. It’s Rex’s art that really maximizes the comic potential 
here, though; the rich, saturated paints make his animal-inhabited world pop, and 
there’s delicious detail (mice using computer terminals in the card catalogue draw-
ers) and eloquent portraiture (the diner is a cross between Hopper’s Nighthawks 
and the cantina scene in Star Wars). The stricken faces on Chu’s parents forewarn 
readers that the sneeze is going to be a Big Deal, and the two wordless spreads of 
ongoing destruction (which even roars back to wreck the library and the diner) 
are a splendid climax. This will work best for close lapsitting, since kids will want 
to pore over the intricately fantastical pictures (invite them to hunt for the little 
snail that appears throughout), and it will delight any kid who warms to a bit of 
innocent mayhem.  DS
greenwood, mArk Drummer Boy of John John; illus. by Frané Lessac. Lee & 
Low, 2012 32p
ISBN 978-1-60060-652-6 $18.95  
R 6-9 yrs
Carnival is coming, and Winston, a young Trinidadian boy, is eager to win the 
delicious free rotis that the Roti King is offering to the best band at the celebration 
in the town of John John. Unfortunately, Winston doesn’t have a band, so he heads 
out to the junkyard to sulk and think. There he discovers the wonderful sounds 
that can be made from old metal containers such as biscuit tins and paint cans, 
and he forms his enthusiastic friends into a makeshift band playing discarded cans 
in “a rainbow of colors,” which then takes the honors—and the chicken roti—at 
Carnival. A detailed closing note explains that this is inspired by the life of Winston 
Simon, the inventor of the Caribbean steel drum, but even without knowing the 
history behind the story kids will latch onto the notion of a junkyard band and a 
lip-smacking prize. Greenwood’s text is a little lengthy, but it’s a winning story filled 
with joyous sound effects from all the John John bands, several of which play other 
make-at-home-friendly instruments (the bottle-and-spoon orchestra, which goes 
“jingle jangle tingle tangle clink clank clunk,” has particular appeal). Lessac’s vibrant 
gouache illustrations tastefully balance busy collections of people and instruments 
against swathes of verdant grass, blue sky, and turquoise sea, the constant horizon 
line visually moving the story along. While it could be used straight as a story of 
invention or music history, it cries out for a choral performance with kids on found 
instruments letting cacophony merrily ring out. In addition to the explanatory 
note, a glossary and pronunciation guide and a list of sources are included.  DS
greenwood, mArk The Greatest Liar on Earth: A True Story; illus. by Frané Les-
sac. Candlewick, 2012 32p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6155-7 $16.99  
R 6-9 yrs
Here’s a cognitive workout—a fictionalized story about a true story about a bogus 
life story. The central figure is Louis de Rougemont, alias Henri Grin, a man who 
246 • The BulleTin
launched a self-promotional career in the late nineteenth century by concocting 
tales of his fabulous travels and adventures and writing and lecturing about them 
to wildly enthusiastic—not to mention gullible—audiences. Ironically, some of 
the bits culled from his readings at the British Museum that would ultimately 
prove too much for his fans to believe (riding tortoises, encountering giant squid, 
and experiencing a rain of fish) had actually happened—though not to him. Fi-
nally unmasked as a fraud, Louis/Henri tried to reinvent himself as the “World’s 
Greatest Liar,” but he was booed off stage to eventually eke out a life on the streets 
of London. There’s a morality tale in here somewhere, but Greenwood lets de 
Rougemont’s claims and the public’s reaction speak for themselves without further 
homiletics. Lessac’s gouache paintings, replete with both her subject’s fantasized 
imaginings and his performance venues, are as appropriately naïve as the showman’s 
audiences. A closing note comments on the relative veracity of some of the wilder 
tales, and a brief list of sources is included. Greenwood admits to paraphrasing de 
Rougemont’s actual quotations, which of course are pretty much bunkum anyway. 
Try sorting that out.  EB
guion, meliSSA Baby Penguins Everywhere!; written and illus. by Melissa Gui-
on. Philomel, 2012 32p
ISBN 978-0-399-25535-9 $16.99  
R 4-6 yrs
An adult penguin is lonely until she discovers a bevy of baby penguins in a top hat 
that washes up onto the shore of her icy home. The grownup is delighted with the 
company, but she’s soon tuckered out looking after all the young’uns (“Happy as she 
was, she needed something. Just a minute to herself”). Refreshed by a momentary 
breather, she’s then able to rejoin the chicks for more penguin fun. While parents 
and teachers will immediately recognize themselves in the adult penguin, the theme 
of needing occasional time alone can certainly apply to children as well, and kids 
for whom socializing is sometimes stressful may particularly relate to the grownup 
penguin’s need for some space. The very idea of a plethora of baby penguins will 
sell this to numerous animal lovers, and Guion’s simple illustrations of the penguin 
chicks render them satisfyingly adorable. The casual pencil outlines, watercolor 
paint, and rounded figures with widely spaced dot eyes are stylistically similar to 
some of Oliver Jeffers’ art, although looser in feel. The soft gray and white capering 
penguin chicks are expressive as they jump rope, juggle balls, play in the snow, and 
generally frolic around (and occasionally on) the black and white adult penguin. 
This might partner well with some of Mary Murphy’s titles featuring penguin 
characters (I Make a Cake, etc.) for a family storytime audience, but it would also 
be a pleasant (and perhaps useful) selection for a tired parent to read to a child.  JH
hAmliSch, mArvin Marvin Makes Music; illus. by Jim Madsen. Dial, 
2012 32p
ISBN 978-0-8037-3730-3 $17.99  
R 6-9 yrs
The late composer Hamlisch leaves as a parting gift to young readers this memoir 
of his childhood experiences in music-making—falling in love with music and the 
piano, but pushing back against the rigors of practicing and a pedagogy based on 
classical works. Marvin’s rebellion, in fact, will probably sound pretty familiar to 
many children who are just taking up an instrument: “Why couldn’t he just play 
his own songs and have fun?” But Dad keeps the pressure on and arranges for 
January 2013 • 247
Marvin to audition for “one of the best music schools in the city.” It’s that Juilliard 
audition itself that provides the real kid appeal of Hamlisch’s tale, as father and son 
get themselves locked outside on the school’s rooftop, and the judges break into 
laughter at the yellow pajama bottoms that creep out from under the pant legs of 
Marvin’s scratchy new suit. There’s not a lot of autobiographical literature avail-
able for the picture-book crowd, and Hamlisch’s breezy narration strikes the right 
balance between goofy family story and gentle message on the virtue of disciplined 
study. No date-and-place biographical data is included, but Madsen’s caricatured 
paintings, slyly suggestive of a 1950s sitcom, set the audience into young Marvin’s 
New York milieu. A music CD will be included with the final copy.  EB
hArtmAn, brett Cadillac Chronicles. Cinco Puntos, 2012 255p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-935955-41-2 $16.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-935955-42-9 $16.95 
 Ad Gr. 9-12
Alex’s defiance of his ambitious mother’s politicking may be sensible, but it has 
landed him in psychiatric treatment for attention deficit disorder, oppositional 
defiance disorder, and depression. When Alex’s mother invites an elderly black 
man to come live with them as part of a program she’s sponsoring, her plan to look 
beneficent backfires; Lester is as defiant as Alex, and the two bond in the face of 
her overbearing ways. When she arranges to send Lester packing, Alex bribes him 
with a road trip escape to avoid a nursing home, and the two leave New York for 
points south so Alex can meet his father and Lester can to revisit his hometown 
and his sister. The road trip banter is enjoyable if predictable, with Lester dispens-
ing wisdom and Alex being more or less receptive. Lester’s health is fragile enough 
for a few suspenseful moments as well as plenty of foreshadowing of the eventual 
conclusion to this road trip. While the fulfilling of young male fantasies (including 
a rather gratuitous sex scene that draws on some troubling stereotypes) sometimes 
undercuts the lessons about racism, homophobia, and white privilege, this road 
trip hits all the required genre notes for teen male readers—the open road, a hot 
car with a big engine, getting over your mom and dad, a good fight, virginity loss, 
and a small dose of heroism. What’s fresh is the scene where Alex confronts his 
psychiatrist; his critique is devastating, timely, and on point, and it will give readers 
something to cheer about. This doesn’t stand up to Brian Meehl’s similarly plot-
ted and themed You Don’t Know about Me (BCCB 6/11), but it may nevertheless 
please readers, especially young men who yearn to hit the road themselves.  KC 
hickS, bettY The Worm Whisperer; illus. by Ben Hatke. Roaring Brook, 
2012 [192p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-490-5 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 3-5
Ellis Coffey doesn’t get to spend a lot of time outside of school with his fourth-grade 
classmates. Even before his father became debilitated with a back injury and Ellis 
had to pick up the slack at home while Mom worked several part time jobs, their 
farm’s location well outside their North Carolina town made sustaining friend-
ships pretty difficult. Now Ellis has discovered a way to combine family business 
with friendship and pleasure: if he can successfully train a caterpillar to climb up a 
string, Ellis can enter his new “pet” into the annual Woolly Worm Race, hang out 
with friends, and win the thousand-dollar prize which would cover the insurance 
248 • The BulleTin
deductible for his father’s back surgery. The story of a resourceful kid from a just-
gettin’-by family in a rural backwater will resonate with Barbara O’Connor fans, 
who will recognize that a happy ending is inevitably just a hundred-plus page turns 
and some spot art away. The Woolly Worm Contest, with its cheering crowds and 
mock steroid checks, is worth the price of admission, and kids who have not had 
the pleasure of attending the actual Elk Banner, NC event in person may want to 
organize one in their hometown posthaste.  EB 
holmeS, elizAbeth The Normal Kid. Carolrhoda, 2012 241p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7613-8085-6 $17.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-0261-4 $12.95  
Ad Gr. 4-6
“That’s your world, and it’s so right and so normal you never even think about it. 
Then it falls apart.” That’s what happened to Sylvan last year, in fourth grade, when 
his parents split and his older brother went to live with his dad. It’s now happen-
ing to his new classmate Charity, who is back in an America she barely remembers 
after her family abruptly left the missionary life and the Kenyan home she loved. 
Sylvan’s not sure he wants to jeopardize his status as a “normal kid” to befriend 
Charity, and he’s even more uncertain about partnering with weird Brian, who’s 
uncomfortable with social contact and loud noises, on a big class project. There are 
too many plot threads here, and contrivance (especially the kids’ misunderstanding 
of the principal’s class visit) sours several elements. Holmes is a capable and affecting 
stylist, though, and the narration, alternating between Sylvan and Charity, brings 
Charity’s story in particular to vivid life: she’s a third-culture kid who was most at 
home in Kenya and her pastor father’s church, but her dad’s defensive approach to 
his congregation led to his failure, loss of faith, and the family’s relocation. Readers 
may enjoy the dynamics of the school story, and they’ll appreciate the message that 
even difficult transitions are survivable.  DS
howe, JAmeS Otter and Odder; illus. by Chris Raschka. Candlewick, 2012 34p
ISBN 978-0-7636-4174-0 $14.00  
Ad 6-9 yrs
Otter wasn’t looking for love, “he was looking for dinner,” but when a limpid-eyed 
fish arouses unexpected emotion, he realizes something unlikely has happened: “I 
am in love with my food source.” Myrtle (as Otter hears the fish’s name of Gurgle) 
has fallen for Otter as well, but despite their love the two can’t make it work: “I am 
no longer sure a fish can love an otter . . . when the way of the otter is to eat fish.” 
Fortunately, a wise beaver introduces Otter to vegetarianism, and the two “lived 
happily ever after.” This strange and optimistic little fable is kin to Raschka’s Arlene 
Sardine (BCCB 9/98) and Willis’ Tadpole’s Promise (BCCB 7/05) in its cheerful, 
humorous weirdness, and the writing is prettily polished. The logic doesn’t really 
bear examination (all the fish Otter ate previously are never mentioned, nor is 
the fact that fish also eat fish), though, and between the arch tone and the lack 
of high-impact payoff, it’s an airy and insubstantial outing. The watercolor and 
colored pencil art is highly graphic and gestural, with the figures stylized scribbles 
(the fish are the traditional skewed figure eights beloved by child artists) that blend 
in to the busily design-rich riverscapes. While the resultant spreads are beautiful in 
their interplay of river ripples and riparian vegetation, they’re also too abstract for 
engagement, further reducing the impact of the tale. Audiences may still appreciate 
January 2013 • 249
the fractured fairy tale nature of the tale, however, and they might be persuaded to 
create their own humorous stories of surprising romance.  DS
JefferS, oliver This Moose Belongs to Me; written and illus. by Oliver Jef-
fers. Philomel, 2012 32p
ISBN 978-0-399-16103-2 $16.99  
R 5-7 yrs
When a moose shows up one day, Wilfred claims it as his own, names it Marcel, 
and proceeds to outline the rules for proper moose-as-pet behavior as he describes 
his enjoyable life with Marcel. He’s displeased to discover that he’s not Marcel’s 
only owner: an old lady, spying the moose, is overjoyed at the return of her beloved 
“Rodrigo.” Wilfred leaves their scene of reunion in a fit of pique only to get tangled 
up in string (always used on his wanders as a guide back home) and lies helpless 
until the moose scoops him up with his antlers (a side effect, though Wilfred 
doesn’t know it, of the moose’s retrieval of a tasty apple from the ground). Jeffers’ 
telling of this offbeat pet story is wonderfully droll and succinct, with comic irony 
between text and art: Wilfred’s textual description of Marcel’s reaction to the rules 
contrasts with art that makes it clear the moose is happily indifferent, going about 
his everyday business while Wilfred follows him around. The art—“made from a 
mishmash of oil painting onto old linotype and painted landscapes, and a bit of 
technical wizardry thrown in the mix here and there”—is striking and unusual; 
the brushy texture of slightly translucent brown oil paint effectively conjures the 
look of moose fur, and the large-headed Wilfred with his single swirl of hair looks 
a bit like a more confident, bow-tied Charlie Brown. Speech and thought bubbles 
are used to humorous effect as well, containing humorous images more often than 
words. The final page provides one last laugh as the moose approaches an old man 
who exclaims, “Dominic, you’re back!”  JH
JenkinS, Steve My First Day; written by Steve Jenkins and Robin Page; illus. by 
Steve Jenkins. Houghton, 2013 32p
ISBN 978-0-547-73851-2 $16.99  
R 6-9 yrs 
 “What did you do on your first day—the day you were born?” Veteran chronicler 
of the natural world Jenkins answers this question for twenty-two different species, 
ranging from mammals through birds and reptiles to insects. Each new baby gets a 
page or spread with an image and a couple of sentences to describe a key aspect of 
neonatal life (“My mother cleaned me, fed me, and kept me safe,” says the Siberian 
tiger kitten). While the absence of context can be a little disorienting, it allows for 
a tight focus on the subject, and the array allows for some interesting comparisons 
and contrasts in birthday expectations. In keeping with this attentive approach, 
Jenkins’ cut-paper figures are somewhat more streamlined than his more elaborate 
concoctions, but there’s plenty of vigor in pattern (the spread where striped zebras 
face a striped and spotted tapir is lively indeed) and creative positioning. Subtle print 
in the lower right corner of each page identifies the featured critter’s species. The 
style would work as an easy read as well as a readaloud, and the title would partner 
effectively with Jenkins’ Time for a Bath, Time to Eat, and Time to Sleep (BCCB 
9/11). The book concludes with more detailed information about the character-
istics and habitat of each of the babies, accompanied by a thumbnail image.  DS 
250 • The BulleTin
John, AntonY Elemental. Dial, 2012 [336p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3682-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr 9-12
When a violent storm threatens the tiny colony on Hatteras Island, sixteen-year-
old Thomas and the community’s other children are forced to evacuate and leave 
their parents behind. As the only person born without a power to control the ele-
ments, Thomas has always felt like an outsider and a burden to his community, so 
he makes it his duty to protect the others until the adults arrive. When the elders 
fail to appear after the danger passes, Thomas and the others make their way back 
to the colony, only to find their families missing, their homes destroyed, and their 
lives threatened by invading pirates. Unable to flee onto the mainland for fear of 
the plague that has made it inhabitable, the children take shelter in the ruins of 
an abandoned settlement on nearby Roanoke Island. As they search for food and 
supplies and craft a plan to save their families, they uncover a web of lies that 
undermines their faith in the adults who lead them and forces them to question 
everything they’ve been taught about their colony, their past, and themselves. A grip-
ping science fiction survival story with layers of both historical and futurist details, 
this novel provides action as well as world-building. While the plot and intrigue 
are its primary draw, the emotional interplay between characters, reminiscent of 
John’s earlier realistic novels (Five Flavors of Dumb, BCCB 1/11; Thou Shalt Not 
Roadtrip, BCCB 4/12), has equal resonance. The pirates are a believable threat, 
more in accordance with vicious historical realities than the comedic bad boys of 
contemporary popular imagination. While a few questions are left unresolved, the 
novel’s captivating storyline, rapid pace, and cliffhanger ending are sure to leave 
fans of novels like Grant’s Gone series (Gone, BCCB 6/08) absorbed with the action 
and anxious for a sequel.  AM 
Jung, mike Geeks, Girls, and Secret Identities; illus. by Mike Maihack. Levine/
Scholastic, 2012 308p
ISBN 978-0-545-33548-5 $16.99  
R Gr. 5-8
Vincent Wu lives in a town with its own superhero, Captain Stupendous, who has 
been fighting monsters, robots, and supervillains since before Vincent was born. 
He and his friends, Max and George, form the most knowledgeable (and also the 
nerdiest) of the four Captain Stupendous fan clubs in town, so when something 
goes wonky with Captain Stupendous, the superhero comes to the boys for help. 
They are surprised to discover that the superhero is really Vincent’s longtime crush, 
Polly, who recently became Captain Stupendous when the superhero’s former alter 
ego transferred his powers to her just before he died. Even more surprising is that 
Stupendous’ latest foe is Vincent’s father’s high school rival, who has turned into 
an evil genius named Professor Mayhem. When the professor kidnaps Vincent’s 
mother, Vincent not only has to help Polly learn how to be Captain Stupendous, but 
he also has to figure out a way to defeat Professor Mayhem and save his mom. This 
classic fanboy fantasy hits all the right notes as Vincent uses his wits to overcome 
some pretty formidable odds. Not only must he outmaneuver a dangerous foe, but 
he also has to fight for his place in his trio of friends and figure out how to handle 
sweaty palms and a first kiss; there’s even a little side plot about learning to accept a 
new boyfriend in his mother’s life as well. The dialogue is witty, the plotting clever, 
January 2013 • 251
and the sentiments are right on target for the age group; fans of Cody’s Powerless 
(BCCB 2/10) and readers who enjoy stories about superheroes, underdogs, and 
friendship skirmishes will all find something to like here.  KC 
kenneAllY, mirAndA Stealing Parker. Sourcebooks, 2012 [256p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4022-7187-8 $8.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
When Parker’s mother comes out, Parker’s family falls apart: her brother turns to 
drugs, her father reads his Bible and accepts the harsh judgments of his church 
friends, and Parker herself gives up her beloved softball and takes up kissing guys in 
order to prove that she’s nothing like her mother. At the behest of her best friend, 
Drew, she becomes the manager of the boys’ baseball team, where she quickly 
become attracted to and confused by the good-looking new coach, who’s six years 
her senior. Over a period of months, she develops a clandestine relationship with 
the coach but starts to question whether kissing secretly in his truck is enough; she 
wants a real relationship with a guy who likes her for who she is, rather than for 
what she does for him physically. She also realizes that the other guys she’s kissing 
may be misreading her intentions, that they too might want more from her than 
a one-night make-out session. Meanwhile, she’s starting to have feelings for a boy 
she never thought of before, only to find that Drew, who’s gay, likes him too. Set 
in the same high school as Catching Jordan (BCCB 2/12), Parker’s story is nearly as 
compelling as Jordan’s, with a similarly rich set of well-developed circumstances in 
a setting readers will surely recognize and relate to. Parker doesn’t have a group of 
supportive girls surrounding her as Jordan did, but this opens the door for her to 
reunite with her mother, an important and necessary step in her self-understanding. 
Her guy friends are complexly and sympathetically drawn, and Parker’s dilemmas 
will strike a chord with teen readers trying to sort out the dynamics of romantic 
relationships. Since that would be nearly all of them, this will have broad appeal 
among fans of realistic fiction.  KC 
kreSS, Adrienne The Friday Society. Dial, 2012 [448p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3761-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 8-10
In a steampunk version of Edwardian London, three young female assistants to 
the powerful try to make a name for themselves as the city’s most efficient crime 
fighters. Science-minded Cora, lab assistant to inventor and Parliament member 
Lord White, can rig an impressive explosion and handle an electric pistol with ease; 
Nellie, magician’s assistant to the Great Raheem, is a knockout blonde who can flirt 
her way into or out of any situation; Michiko, a samurai in training, has obvious 
fighting skills that are enhanced by her ability to be virtually invisible. The three 
girls meet on a densely foggy night when they stumble across a dead body; from 
there, the corpses begin to pile up around London, and only Michiko, Nellie, and 
Cora see the connection between the murders of high-ranked scientists and lowly 
flower girls and the recent robberies at London’s museums and laboratories. There’s 
a breezy, wink-at-the-reader tone as the story seamlessly transitions from altercations 
in dark alleys and narrow escapes in creepy graveyards to giggling fits at sleepovers 
and abundant costume changes. Unfortunately, this blitheness begins to feel a out 
of place the body count rises, and the girls themselves fail to develop beyond a 
252 • The BulleTin
superficial level. Additionally, the tangential plot pieces are forced together in an 
obvious and unfinished fashion at the book’s close. The charms of the three hero-
ines are nonetheless considerable, and when they form the guardian Friday Society 
(taking on the pseudonyms of Hyde, Lady Sparkle, and Silver Heart), readers will 
recognize that this alternative London is in good hands.  KQG
kreSS, nAncY Flash Point. Viking, 2012 [512p]
ISBN 978-0-670-01247-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Sometime in the future, the world economy has collapsed, and Amy’s comfortable 
middle-class life with her sister and her scientist grandmother has crumbled along 
with it, so the three now live in a shabby apartment without enough money to 
pay for Gran’s mounting medical bills as she dies of cancer. Amy therefore jumps 
at the chance for a job at a TV station, determined to get the hefty salary and full 
medical benefits. The job proves to be a role on a reality show where she and five 
other teens are placed in horrific and sometimes dangerous scenarios to test their 
reactions; viewers then bet on their responses, and those who accurately predict the 
players’ actions win large sums of money. As the show gains popularity, political and 
social tensions erupt, and violent social reality becomes almost indistinguishable 
from the increasingly amped-up scenarios Amy and the others have to contend 
with. Meanwhile, Amy’s jealous little sister attempts to insert herself into Amy’s 
fame, and Gran’s health deteriorates. The fantasy of a dangerous reality show will 
attract readers who found similar satisfaction in The Hunger Games; while Amy 
has nowhere near Katniss’ skill or courage, she manages to be more believable as 
she decides whom she can trust and where her loyalties lie. Her very ordinariness 
is what makes her a compelling character, who is simply trying to do the right 
thing in a wrong world. Readers who have had to adjust their own lifestyles due 
to the recession, as well as those who enjoy dystopian fiction set in a possible near 
future—where the monsters are still human and the dangers have to do mostly 
with compromising your ethics in order to survive—will find this absorbing and 
thought-provoking.  KC 
lAne, Andrew Black Ice. Farrar, 2013 [320p] (Sherlock Holmes: The 
Legend Begins)
ISBN 978-0-374-38769-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 5-8 
The third entry in Lane’s series on young Sherlock Holmes (Death Cloud, BCCB 
3/11) opens with a somewhat forced review of previous adventures and main 
players in Sherlock’s life, and then jolts into high gear with a nifty locked-room 
mystery that finds brother Mycroft dazed and confused with a bloody knife in his 
hand and a bloody body at his feet at the Diogenes Club. Of course he’s arrested 
for murder, and of course Sherlock and his tutor Amyus Crowe are on the case. 
The devilishly crafty details of the murder are, however, so promptly resolved that 
there’s nothing left to do but move the whole story into an action-style thriller in 
which Sherlock’s life is continually in peril, as bad guys chase him underground in 
London, a trained falcon attacks him in a museum, and more bad guys chase him 
through an underground river in Moscow. All the while, Lane busily drops winking 
hints of the detective Sherlock will become and references to names and phrases 
January 2013 • 253
in the stories a certain Dr. Watson will one day chronicle. One might expect this 
series to serve as a step-up for a later reading of Conan Doyle’s work, but readers 
will actually already need to know the originals to appreciate the title’s employment 
of Holmesian arcana such as the assumed name of Sigerson or the useful lessons in 
the application of theatrical nose putty; stylistically, there’s no echo of the consulting 
detective’s mature adventures, so it seems more an everyday detective story with 
a brand-name bump. Nonetheless, it’s an entertaining out, and kids who simply 
appreciate period thrillers will enjoy the romp.  EB
lAthAm, irene Don’t Feed the Boy; illus. by Stephanie Graegin. Roaring Brook, 
2012 280p
ISBN 978-1-59643-755-5 $15.99  
R Gr. 4-6
Eleven-year-old Whit Whitaker has been raised in the zoo where his parents work, 
with only the zoo workers, the animals, and his homeschool teacher as companions. 
Increasingly frustrated by his lack of social opportunities and his parents’ seeming 
lack of interest in him, Whit is thrilled to make friends with Stella, a girl his age who 
comes to the zoo every day to draw the birds. When Whit sneaks off to accompany 
Stella to her home, however, he learns that there are worse homes than the zoo: 
Stella’s dad, disabled by a truck accident years ago, is addicted to pain pills, is verbally 
abusive, and has a gun, which he used to wound Stella’s brother, who has since run 
away. Stella wants to run away, too, and she has a place in mind—the zoo—and 
Whit must decide whether or not to help her hide even as he figures out how to 
confront his own parents about his desire for a life beyond the bounds of the zoo’s 
fence. The intriguing premise of a kid raised in a zoo will appeal tremendously to 
animal-loving kids, and Latham provides lots of fascinating zoo specifics without 
disrupting the narrative flow. The story is credibly grounded, and Whit’s moral 
dilemma concerning Stella is compelling. the soft shading and simplified figures 
in Graegin’s occasional black and white illustrations are somewhat more warm and 
cozy than the story itself, but they’re attractive decorations. Kids who wish they 
could live at the zoo will find this a satisfying read.  JH
linko, ginA Flutter. Random House, 2012 342p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96996-6 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86996-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98636-9 $10.99  
Ad Gr. 7-10
Emery has been having seizures for as long as she can remember, and since her 
mother died, her scientist father’s interest in her case has meant scrutiny by a team 
of doctors. The doctors have contradicting theories about her seizures, but none 
of them accept her explanation that she’s actually traveling in time during the epi-
sodes, even when there is physical evidence to support her claims. She decides to 
escape the hospital and find her way to the town that she visits when she “loops,” 
which is how she describes her out-of-body experiences. She travels to Michigan’s 
Upper Pennisula, where she meets Ash, a good-looking cowboy with a secret. Their 
romance follows a painfully clichéd trajectory: initial resistance, violent emotional 
outbursts, mistrust, and misunderstanding overcome by irresistible attraction and 
ending with inevitable coupling. Additionally, the progress of their relationship is 
more attenuated than it needs to be, with Emery’s overwrought hesitations about 
her feelings for Ash taking up too many pages between action scenes that move the 
plot forward to solve the mystery of her seizures. The payoff is a dramatic and unex-
254 • The BulleTin
pected one, however, so readers who can appreciate a leisurely paced romance may 
enjoy what ends up becoming another riff on the supernatural romance genre.  KC 
lYnch, chriS Casualties of War. Scholastic, 2013 [192p] (Vietnam)
ISBN 978-0-545-27023-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 6-9
Four friends pledge to serve together in the Vietnam War. Four branches of the 
military draw the young men, with their very disparate personalities, into vastly 
different wartime experiences. Now the fourth and concluding title in this gripping 
series (I Pledge Allegiance, BCCB 12/11; Sharpshooter, BCCB 5/12; Free-Fire Zone, 
BCCB 12/12) belongs to brainiac Beck, who joins the Air Force in solidarity with 
his buddies, against the tearful wishes of his family. It’s fitting that Beck, the most 
introspective and articulate of the quartet, should have the last word. His airborne 
vantage point allows him to take in the big picture of the war, both literally and 
figuratively, as he struggles to justify his involvement in a senseless conflict by insist-
ing that he’s there to look out for his friends. By running missions to defoliate the 
river banks with Agent Orange, Beck assures himself that he’s making the country 
safer for Morris on his river patrol, and by extension, Rudy and Ivan fighting 
inland. But rationalization can only take Beck so far, particularly when he finds 
himself mourning the destruction of a gorgeous foreign land while simultaneously 
discovering that he, like his friends, is not immune to the allure of battle. Lynch 
choreographs an in-country reunion for the four friends, and the tragedy of one 
young man’s death is ultimately less devastating than the shock of how their rela-
tionships have been perverted by war. If readers are disappointed to realize that the 
high school pals won’t easily slip back into their old roles in Boston, well, that’s life. 
And if readers are stunned by the abrupt and brutal ending, well, that’s death.  EB 
mArtinez, JeSSicA The Space between Us. Simon Pulse, 2012 392p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2055-7 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2057-1 $9.99  
R Gr. 7-10
Being the daughter of a conservative pastor in a small town is harder for Charly 
than it is for her big sister, Amelia: Amelia’s a rule-follower who finds comfort in 
church, while Charly is the wild sister. When Charly becomes pregnant, the situ-
ation is beyond even Amelia’s control, and the girls’ rigid grandmother ships them 
both off to their late mother’s sister in Banff, a move that leaves Amelia sputtering 
with resentment. Her anger blinds her to any positive aspects of her situation as well 
as Charly’s needs, and the sisters drift apart for the first time in their lives. While 
Charly brings the drama, the story here belongs to Amelia, who has to recognize 
that she needs Charly as much as Charly has always needed her, but in a much 
different and even slightly dysfunctional way. Charly’s pregnancy forces that issue 
to the fore, and the girls must learn to separate to grow in positive directions. A 
cute, moody boy with a drug-addicted brother provides an opportunity for Amelia 
to see what she values in her relationship with her sister, as well as helping her see 
past her own reservations when it comes to a physical relationship, shadowed as she 
is in that area by both her father’s strict moral judgment and Charly’s bad choices. 
Eventually, both sisters work through what they need to in this immersive sibling 
story set in a frigid Canadian winter.  KC
January 2013 • 255
mcelfreSh, lYnn Strong Deaf. Namelos, 2012 122p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-60898-126-7 $18.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-60898-127-4 $9.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60898-128-1 $8.95  
Ad Gr. 5-7
The Gilbert family is a legendary one in the Deaf community, running Bradington 
Academy for deaf students and regularly participating in political action, such as 
protests at all-deaf Gallaudet University. To fourteen-year-old Marla, who attends 
Bradington, this identity is the core of her existence. To Jade, twelve, it can’t be, 
because she’s the only hearing member of her deaf family. The sisters’ simmering 
rivalry hits the boil when their parents move Jade into the senior summer baseball 
league along with Marla, where the girls’ sporting failures and triumphs and close 
friendships all become fodder for sisterly battles. The story deftly blends both 
familiar and unusual family dynamics, with the sisters’ ability to make each other 
crazy universally recognizable even as their concerns about exclusion based on their 
deaf and hearing status add a special slant. The details of a Deaf-dominant family 
are matter-of-factly incorporated into the narrative, with Jade taking them as much 
for granted as Marla. The constant ferocity of the sisters’ battling drowns out some 
of the more interesting aspects of the book, however, and the climactic drama that 
results in a new relationship for the two is a hackneyed device; the limited English 
used to relay the deaf characters’ thoughts and dialogue does effectively convey a 
different language use but marginalizes their communication. The sibling rivalry 
story will still ring true to many readers, though, and the identity exploration is a 
useful younger complement to Ferris’ Of Sound Mind (BCCB 10/01) and Johnson’s 
Accidents of Nature (BCCB 6/06).  DS
PArker, mArJorie blAin Colorful Dreamer: The Story of Artist Henri Matisse; 
illus. by Holly Berry. Dial, 2012 32p
ISBN 978-0-8037-3758-7 $16.99  
R Gr. 2-4
French artist Henri Matisse was not a prodigy. Growing up in his gray French 
town, he showed no particular talent (“He did not excel at school. . . . He did not, 
in fact, excel at much of anything—except, perhaps dreaming”) and he ended up 
as an unhappy law clerk in Paris. When he took up art to entertain himself while 
he was hospitalized, he found his calling, and he turned into a demon for hard 
work at his newfound passion. He threw himself into a world of color, gradually 
gaining success and recognition, and persevering with colorful cut paper when he 
could no longer stand at an easel. This is a straightforward and simple account of 
a famous life, and its focus on the unprepossessing start of Matisse’s career adds an 
intriguing (and reassuring) dimension. The real impact, however, comes from the 
art: Berry’s mixed-media illustrations are largely monochromatic pencil in earlier 
scenes of Matisse’s life, with only his dream visions sneaking in color and light; 
therefore the shift to the joyous and vivid intensity of the full-color scenes (echoing 
Matisse’s own style and incorporating elements from his work) is as transformative 
as the discovery of his vocation was for him. While this doesn’t have the flair of 
Jonah Winter’s Just Behave, Pablo Picasso (BCCB 5/11), it’s a solid picture-book 
introduction to a kid-appealing artist, and it would make a plausible introduction 
to a museum visit or cut-paper crafting. A brief note gives more information about 
Matisse, lists two more titles about him for young people, and mentions several 
museums that house his work.  DS
256 • The BulleTin
PAtel, SAnJAY Ganesha’s Sweet Tooth; by Sanjay Patel and Emily Haynes; illus. by 
Sanjay Patel. Chronicle, 2012 34p
ISBN 978-1-4521-0362-4 $16.99  
Ad 6-8 yrs
In this original tale based loosely on a legend from Hindu mythology, elephant-
headed and sweets-loving god Ganesha breaks his tusk on a “super jumbo jawbreaker 
laddoo.” Throwing the broken tusk away in frustration, Ganesha accidentally hits 
the poet Vyasa, who happens to be composing a very long poem, the Mahabharata: 
“It’s so long that no man could ever write the whole thing—all the pens in the world 
would break before it was done.” Ganesha puts his broken tusk to work as a writ-
ing implement and proceeds to transcribe Vyasa’s poem in its entirety. While this 
tale is amusing, its blithely irreverent take may leave many kids who aren’t familiar 
with Hinduism with some misconceptions about the religion’s mythology, despite 
clarifications in the ending author’s note. The writing is crisp and sometimes funny 
(“Ganesha is a Hindu god. He’s very important and powerful. And a tad chubby”), 
though, and those who don’t mind the liberties being taken with the subject mat-
ter may well find this diverting. Patel’s detailed digital illustrations are jam-packed 
with intricate geometric patterns and mandalas, sometimes leading to compositions 
that are eye-achingly busy. An attractive color palette of muted blues, turquoises, 
creams, and golds is enlivened by pops of fuschia and bright white, and Ganesha 
himself is rendered in shades of pink as a cute little guy with enormous eyes in his 
big elephantine head. Adults willing to supplement this with more faithful sources 
might use this as a lively introduction to Hindu lore; it could also be used as a 
prompt for an art activity involving pattern and color.  JH
Peloquin, lili The Innocents. Razorbill, 2012 259p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-59514-582-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-10158-917-5 $10.99  
R Gr. 7-10
Alice and Charlie have always been close friends as well as sisters, but after their 
mother marries a fabulously wealthy man and sets them down in a posh beach 
community for the summer their relationship is strained. Charlie seeks to fit in 
with the dissipated high-schoolers in town. who have too much money and too 
little supervision, while Alice keeps her distance. They do each find boys to obsess 
over, however; more importantly, Alice begins to have serious questions about 
her new blended family’s history. How did her stepfather’s first wife die? Did his 
daughter, who looks uncannily like Alice herself, really commit suicide and why? 
And exactly how long have her mother and stepfather have known each other? The 
girls themselves are pretty well grounded, and the secondary characters are unusu-
ally dimensional: the queen bee has depth and ethical character, her hangers-on 
are fairly self-aware, and the boys are simply tragic. The gossip is what’s delicious 
here, with a new intrigue around every corner and enough sins and secrets to sink 
a soap opera. Readers will guess the most important secret long before Alice herself 
figures it out, which just adds to the enjoyment. Compulsively readable, this brings 
the fluffy pleasure of a beach read, no matter what the season.  KC 
January 2013 • 257
PinkneY, AndreA dAviS Hand in Hand: Ten Black Men Who Changed America; 
illus. by Brian Pinkney. Jump at the Sun/Disney, 2012 243p
ISBN 978-1-4231-4257-7 $19.99  
Ad Gr. 5-8
The ten biographies featured in this title comprise what Pinkney refers to as her 
“black legacy time line” and indeed, the towering figures she presents could be col-
lectively regarded as a round-up of notable names, from Benjamin Banneker and 
Frederick Douglass to Malcolm X, Martin Luther King, Jr., and Barack Obama. 
Pinkney, however, relates their life experiences in a storyteller’s voice that is at once 
front porch intimate and Sunday preacher eloquent, a far cry from the staid tone 
generally reserved for biography: “To . . . antislave crusaders, Benjamin’s [Banneker] 
almanac was a freedom flag. They waved Benjamin’s manuscript high in the air so 
that pro-slavers throughout Maryland had no choice but to notice.” Approach-
able as Pinkney’s prose may be, the overall appearance of the volume is somewhat 
daunting, with lengthy entries presented on densely packed pages. Brian Pinkney’s 
artwork goes some distance toward making the layout more approachable with 
fabulous full-page watercolor portraiture and bits of spot art, but long stretches of 
uninterrupted text will probably leave readers aching for more pictorial relief. No 
specific source notes are offered, but a bibliography is included, as well as an index 
and timeline that clarifies the overlap of these ten remarkable lives within a broader 
historical context. Teachers looking for inspiring stories to share with their students 
will welcome this as a source for middle-school readalouds.  EB
PinkneY, JerrY Puss in Boots; written and illus. by Jerry Pinkney. Dial, 2012 34p
ISBN 978-0-8037-1642-1 $17.99  
R 6-9 yrs
All the traditional elements of Perrault’s classic cat tale are in place in this elegant 
retelling, with Pinkney maintaining a slightly mannered tone of dignified restraint 
while adding a few fresh, original narrative details. For example, Puss’s ultimate 
triumph involves not an ugly ogre but a “rich and evil sorcerer” who undergoes 
three transformations—bear, deer, and, finally, mouse—before Puss pounces and 
overcomes him. The storytelling itself is simplified and streamlined, making the 
events and characters more comprehensible to a younger audience; the lush graph-
ite, colored pencil, and watercolor illustrations are loaded with detail inspired by 
other illustrated versions of this story and by the fashions, objects, and landscapes 
of seventeenth-century France (explained at length in an artist’s note). Pinkney’s 
Puss is a lithe and handsome “black-and-white silver-tabby British shorthair” who 
looks perfectly at ease in his upright stance but still retains his catlike movement 
and expression throughout the pages—particularly stunning is the scene in which 
Puss leaps, his shadow looming on the wall behind him, upon the sorcerer-turned-
mouse. A few compositions are a bit busy, being overloaded with figures in fancy 
costumes, but overall the visual effect is one of aristocratic charm, and kids will 
enjoy speculating on Puss’s future, hinted at in the endpaper illustrations of Puss 
aboard a majestic ship.  JH
258 • The BulleTin
Ponti, JAmeS Dead City. Aladdin, 2012 277p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4129-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4128-6 $9.99  
R Gr. 4-6
When Molly Bigelow isn’t practicing her martial arts skills or fencing, the seventh-
grader spends much of her time at the city morgue, where her late mother worked. 
Molly’s self-defense skills and her ease with dead bodies come in handy during a 
subway encounter with a deranged zombie, after which Molly is introduced to 
Omega, a secret organization that aims to police and protect New York’s under-
ground undead population. Molly is also a natural when it comes to dealing with 
the undead, something that comes as no surprise to the other Omegas, who knew 
Molly’s mother as the most respected zombie hunter in all of New York. The zombie 
who was responsible for Molly’s mother’s death, however, is intent on putting an 
end to the Bigelow family’s zombie-fighting. From the eminently likable heroine 
to the action-driven plot to the smattering of code-breaking, this book has plenty 
to offer readers, particularly those looking for an opportunity to catch up on the 
zombie trend without being overwhelmed by gore. The book pointedly notes that 
not all zombies are bad (hence Omega’s dual mission of policing the violent zombies 
and protecting the harmless zombies), and the complexity humanizes the inhuman 
and provides the characters with discussion fodder between Molly’s narrow escapes, 
epic code-cracking, and occasional zombie-butt kicking. A twist on the final page 
ensures a sequel, and readers will be happy to follow Molly as she tries to negotiate 
the worlds of the living and the dead.  KQG 
PowerS, J. l., ed. That Mad Game: Growing Up in a Warzone: An Anthology of 
Essays from Around the Globe. Cinco Puntos, 2012 231p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-935955-22-1 $16.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-935955-23-8 $16.95  
R Gr. 9-12 
In her introduction to this anthology of autobiographical accounts of childhood 
experiences of war, Powers notes that the world has seen at least 160 wars since 
1945, and children are more likely to experience war during their lifetime than not. 
In these seventeen essays, most of them original to the collection, writers (almost all 
adult writers whose names will be new to young readers) recount their childhood 
and young adulthood experiences during wars in which they lost their homelands, 
their dreams, and their innocence. Historical facts and context set the stage for the 
personal stories, which range from experiences in the Japanese internment camps 
in the U.S. and the occupation of Holland during World War II, to personal and 
secondhand accounts of Vietnam from a soldier and the son of a soldier, to life in 
exile during the Cultural Revolution in China, to the ongoing unrest in Burma, 
among others. There is a riveting and revealing story of a pair of city boys who 
befriend a member of the Taliban in Afghanistan, and an account by a couple who 
have decided to rear their two young children in Juarez, Mexico, despite the fact 
that drug cartels have turned their city into a war zone. The stories are emotionally 
exhausting in their unflinching brutality, and thus perhaps best parsed out over 
time as teachers introduce students to the various conflicts. However, rich, detailed 
accounts like these of the displacement of war and its lingering effect on memories 
are essential to helping teens put a human face on tragedies that often seem too 
distant in both time and geography to grasp. These essays give readers a front-row 
January 2013 • 259
seat to the hunger, the hardship, and, ultimately, the resilience of people whose 
childhoods were forever marked by life on the front lines.  KC 
rhodeS, morgAn Falling Kingdoms. Razorbill, 2012 [400p]
ISBN 978-1-59514-584-0 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Three adjoining kingdoms have maintained an uneasy truce for a thousand years, but 
it’s destroyed when a wealthy nobleman of Auranos carelessly murders a peasant boy 
from Paelsia, inciting a rebellion that is soon backed by the royal family of Limeros. 
Four teenagers find themselves in the middle of the political machinations. Princess 
Cleo of Auranos, who was there when her betrothed murdered the boy, is unwilling 
to stand up to her domineering fiancé and to her father, the king. Jonas, brother of 
the slain boy, joins the resistance but begins to question the group’s morality when 
he finds them making unseemly deals with untrustworthy people. As the offspring 
of the ruthless Limeran king, Princess Lucia and Prince Magnus are expected to be 
as heartless as their father, and they have both the physical and supernatural abili-
ties to do so. Rhodes balances the macro-political plot developments with careful 
characterization, creating four complex protagonists whose actions and perspectives 
will challenge the reader. There’s a little overexplanation at times, but the different 
viewpoints combine in a complete picture of the world and its residents. The two 
female leads undergo impressive transformations from passive, unlikable girls to 
heroic women willing to fight for what they believe in, whether readers agree with 
their ideologies or not. Rhodes racks up quite the body count by the book’s end and 
even beloved characters are not safe, but the promise of more adventure, romance, 
and war is sure to bring readers back for the sequel.  KQG 
roSS, gArY Bartholomew Biddle and the Very Big Wind; illus. by Matthew My-
ers. Candlewick, 2012 92p
ISBN 978-0-7636-4920-3 $17.99  
Ad 6-10 yrs
This novella in rhyming verse follows the adventures of the titular Bartholomew 
as he catches a wind gust with a bedsheet and takes to the sky, navigating his way 
over his tiny town and onto exciting, magical lands. His first stop is an island of 
pirates where he spends a few weeks eating sweets and lazing around, but bore-
dom and curiosity eventually send him into the clouds again. He next meets a 
boy who shares his wanderlust, but Densy is unwilling to bend the rules to leave 
his order-obsessed community, so Bart once again departs for the sky alone. This 
time, however, the wind eventually stops blowing and Bart finds himself stuck in 
a canyon with other similarly displaced aviators. There’s a tall-tale feel to this high-
flying adventure, and even the chapters, each structured as a small parable, have 
a folkloric feel. Unfortunately, the ballad form lurches more often than gallops, 
interfering with rather than supporting the story, and both meter and rhyme stumble 
often, which will hamper both readers and readers-aloud. Myers’ bold, vibrantly 
hued oil illustrations add a dynamic touch, alternating between full spreads and 
spot illustrations that highlight key details from the text. The story’s flavor is best 
suited to a readaloud, but the nearly 100-page length makes it more appropriate 
as an episodic chapter-by-chapter than a one-time story offering. Adventure fans 
and imaginative youngsters willing to wait, though, may nonetheless wish to join 
in this flight of fancy.  KQG 
260 • The BulleTin
runton, AndY Owly & Wormy: Bright Lights and Starry Nights!; written and illus. 
by Andy Runton. Atheneum, 2012 40p
ISBN 978-1-4169-5775-1 $15.99  
R* 4-7 yrs
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 233, for review.
SAlomon, Peter AdAm Henry Franks. Flux, 2012 277p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-7387-3336-4 $9.99  
Ad Gr. 7-10
Despite the web of scars that cover his body, sixteen-year-old Henry Franks has 
no memory of the event that mutilated him and left his mother dead; nor does he 
remember any part of the life that preceded it. For a year now, Henry has tried to 
recall that life, one that his father informs him was happy and carefree, but Henry 
is plagued by bloody dreams of a little girl who calls him Daddy. As his discomfort 
in his own skin increases, Henry becomes convinced he is some kind of monster. 
Meanwhile, mysterious deaths have been reported in Henry’s small town, his fa-
ther is acting increasingly erratically, and his beautiful but loquacious neighbor is 
intent on finding out exactly who Henry is and what his past holds. Salomon sets 
a meticulous scene here, placing his inscrutable protagonist on the aptly named 
Jekyll Island (while Henry’s name clues readers in to the Frankenstein inspiration) 
in the middle of a hot, languid summer just as a hurricane threatens to bear down 
on the claustrophobic town. Unfortunately, the third-person narration is aloof and 
distant, and the pace, especially initially, is slow to the point of being glacial. Those 
who stick with it, however, will be rewarded with a surprisingly action-packed 
climax and a satisfactorily creepy ending that should have readers questioning the 
motivations behind seemingly monstrous acts.  KQG
Schrefer, eliot Endangered. Scholastic, 2012 264p
ISBN 978-0-545-16576-1 $17.99  
R Gr. 7-10
Fourteen-year-old Sophie is temporarily living with her mother, who runs a pro-
tected bonobo sanctuary in the Democratic Republic of Congo. Sophie’s relationship 
to the apes is governed more by her heart than her head, and her heedless decision 
to buy an abused bonobo from an impoverished and unscrupulous dealer has grave 
consequences when war comes to their region. Mom is away at a remote release 
site when the rebels take Kinshasa, and Sophie turns down the opportunity to be 
evacuated in order to stay with her new charge, Otto. The rebels attack the sanctu-
ary buildings, slaughtering most of the staff, but Sophie makes her way deep into 
the forested area behind the electrified fence and learns to live the bonobo lifestyle. 
There’s no permanent security here either once the power goes out, so Sophie and 
Otto hit the rebel-infested road, making their way toward the release site where she 
hopes to find her mother and protection. While there’s a lot of luck required to get 
Sophie to her happy ending, the carefully orchestrated details of her perilous trek 
and of the resilient ape community make her journey compelling. Sophie herself 
is one resourceful girl, relying on her knowledge of bonobo behavior and survival 
skills to make it to the release site alive. The fact that both her future and those of 
the bonobos hang in the balance doubles the stakes in this taut drama.  EB
January 2013 • 261
SchwAb, victoriA The Archived. Hyperion, 2013 [336p]
ISBN 978-1-4231-5731-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
When her grandfather died, twelve-year-old Mackenzie eagerly took up his mantle 
as a Keeper, hunting the halls of the Narrows and sending any restless dead back 
to the peace of the Archives, a library that holds the physical manifestations of the 
memories of the deceased. Four years later, Mac is numb with grief after her little 
brother is killed in a hit and run, and the necessity of having to lie to everyone in 
her life about what she does is taking its toll. Complicating matters is the recent 
uptick in the numbers of restless dead roaming the Narrows, a development that 
seems to be linked to a decades-old murder—that took place in Mac’s family’s new 
apartment. The premise of a place where the dead can still be “accessed” is one that 
is sure to snag readers, and the intriguing but complex backstory of the Archives 
and its various rules is made accessible through Mac’s flashbacks to her Keeper 
training sessions with her grandfather, a device that also serves to humanize Mac. 
Her narration alternates between being casually distant and painfully, in-your-face 
emotional, making it clear that her heartache over her brother drives her every move. 
When the true villain is revealed to be as grief-stricken as Mac, readers are forced 
to negotiate notions of good and bad as well as the purpose of grief and mourning. 
There’s plenty of action to balance out these more contemplative aspects, however, 
and teens who like a quick pace and a smart read will enjoy their journey to the 
Archives and hope for a return trip.  KQG 
ShAnnon, dAvid Jangles: A Big Fish Story; written and illus. by David Shan-
non. Blue Sky/Scholastic, 2012 32p
ISBN 978-0-545-14312-7 $17.99  
Ad 5-8 yrs
A child narrator relays with pride and awe the story his father often tells of an 
encounter with Jangles, a fish “so big he ate eagles from the trees that hung over 
the lake and full-grown beavers that strayed too far from home.” Dad’s story gets 
bigger with each fresh claim, escalating from details of whole turkeys used as bait 
to dynamite explosions that failed to get much of a rise from Jangles. Dad boasts 
that he was the one to finally bring the fish to heel (to fin?), hooking him, getting 
pulled down to his underwater home, listening to Jangles’ stories, and finally flip-
ping him and preparing for the kill. Jangles talked him out of it, though, and Dad 
ended up doing the right thing by letting him go. To prove his story, Dad now 
offers his offspring a tackle box, filled with lures that once dangled from Jangles’ 
mouth, as indisputable evidence. Dad may have pulled one over on his kid, but 
readers are far too savvy to fall for this flimflam, which is the whole fun of a tall 
tale anyhow. Unfortunately, the story itself is whisper thin, and the gentle moral-
izing is somewhat out of place in so rollicking a genre. The densely atmospheric 
paintings, though, add a touch of intriguing eeriness to a tale that plays out on 
moonlit lakes and in shadowy depths, and the dynamic compositions are ultimately 
as memorable as the hyperbole.  EB
262 • The BulleTin
Sheinkin, Steve Lincoln’s Grave Robbers. Scholastic, 2013 [224p] illus. 
with photographs
ISBN 978-0-545-40572-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 6-10
It’s not too much of a stretch to surmise that an audacious 1876 plot to steal the 
mortal remains of President Abraham Lincoln would have its roots in the Civil War, 
but the connection is far from intuitive—fortunately, Sheinkin lays it all out for 
the reader in this lively true-crime story. The Civil War necessitated the issuance of 
paper money in lieu of gold, making the work of counterfeiting more difficult but 
also more lucrative. Larcenous master engravers were suddenly much in demand, 
and forger Ben Boyd’s arrest and incarceration sent the earnings of high-stakes 
scammers such as Joe Kennally into a tailspin. Joe hatches a plan to steal Lincoln’s 
corpse (vulnerable in its crumbling, lightly guarded Springfield, Illinois mausoleum) 
and demand a ransom of $200,000 and the release of Ben Boyd. The plan’s first 
iteration fails due to the loose lips of a drunken conspirator, and the second plan, 
in which Lincoln’s coffin is actually pried partly out of its sarcophagus, goes awry 
due to the bungled attempt by the Secret Service to catch the culprits red-handed. 
While not exactly presenting the crime as a comedy of errors, Sheinkin nonetheless 
revels in its absurdities and delights in employing the jargon of the nineteenth-
century criminal class (glossary provided). The result is a flamboyantly fun read, 
spun with gusto and supplemented with an introductory cast of characters to help 
sort the good guys from bad guys at a glance. An illustration or two is included 
in each short chapter, and an index and source notes are forthcoming in the final 
volume. This will be a first choice for all Lincoln enthusiasts and required reading 
for school groups and tourists making their pilgrimage to Lincoln’s tomb.  EB
Shireen, nAdiA Hey, Presto!; written and illus. by Nadia Shireen. Knopf, 
2012 34p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96905-8 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86905-1 $16.99  
R 5-8 yrs
When pals Presto the cat and Monty the dog notice that a carnival is soliciting new 
performers, Monty proposes that they join up with their magic act and take turns 
at being the star. Although Presto is a model of patience and helpfulness (he quietly 
ensures that Monty’s tricks will work), he gets no respect from Monty, who continues 
to star night after night and grows so pushy and arrogant (“Hey, Presto! Get me 
a chocolate ice cream with extra sprinkles—now!”) that Presto sadly leaves when 
Monty is offered “a big bag of money” to do a magic show on TV. Though Monty 
is sure he will succeed, his show is a flop—until Presto shows up to save the day and 
Monty sees the error of his ways. Shireen’s clever and charismatic illustrations are 
what really make the story work, as her big-eyed, big-headed animal characters trot 
their way through the amusing, richly hued world she has created. Sweet, muted 
blue Presto is particularly endearing, whether faithfully assisting Monty, peering 
out from under his rumpled black hat, or humbly taking a much-deserved bow. 
Even small details get funny touches, such as Monty’s bag of money that is labeled 
“Cold Hard Cash,” Presto’s dragging away a resigned-looking bunny by the leg 
when Monty demands a new one for the act, and a pyramid of helmet-wearing 
penguins on a bike at the carnival. This could easily be plugged into pet-themed or 
January 2013 • 263
magic-themed storytime lineups, used as a prompt for discussion about friendship 
issues, or simply enjoyed as a diverting readaloud.  JH
Slonim, dAvid I Loathe You; written and illus. by David Slonim. Aladdin, 
2012 [24p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2244-5 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5709-6 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 5-8 yrs
A little monster questions the depths of its monster parent’s loathing in this comic 
reversal of those ubiquitous picture books about the depth of a parental affection. 
When Little Monster wants to know how much Big Monster “loathes” it, Big 
Monster unleashes (in rhyming text) a litany of blissfully disgusting examples as 
evidence of its intense loathing towards Little Monster. Still seeking reassurance, 
however, Little Monster worriedly wonders if a loss of monstrous behavior and 
characteristics would put off its parent (“Suppose someday I lose my stink?/ What 
would you say? What would you think?”) Big Monster devotedly vows, “Nice or 
nasty, kind or mean,/ I loathe you up, down, and between.” The message of love 
is clear, and the expression of it will be hilariously funny to the kids who would 
squirm or roll their eyes through Guess How Much I Love You. The rhyming 
text generally rolls smoothly and cleverly along: “Think how deep my loathing 
reaches—/ more than ticks or slimy leeches./ More than what the cat dragged in,/ 
with what the dog threw up thrown in!” The acrylic and charcoal illustrations are 
appropriately large and lively, and the monsters are fuzzy, big-toothed guys who 
look like a cross between Muppets and Mercer Mayer’s Little Critters. Slonim is 
especially good at evoking humor through the figures’ facial expressions and pos-
ture, whether depicting Little Monster in mid-bite on an upholstered chair or the 
hapless goldfish pop-eyed with terror as they sproing down the stairs. Share this as 
part of a monster-themed storytime, or use it as a bedtime book for those with a 
more astringent picture-book palate.  JH
Smith, chArleS r., Jr. Brick by Brick; illus. by Floyd Cooper. Amistad/Harp-
erCollins, 2013 32p
ISBN 978-0-16-192082-0 $17.99  
R Gr. 2-5
It stands to reason that building a government seat in a swampy, remote area of a 
newborn nation might be impeded by labor pool problems. The movers and shakers 
behind the construction of the first White House solved the problem in part by 
using slave labor, paying the owners for leasing out their servants. Although the 
work was exhausting and the heat and disease and mosquitoes nearly unbearable, 
slaves nonetheless learned valuable skills on the job—skills that many of them would 
later parlay into extra paid work by which they might save money to purchase their 
freedom. Repeated phrases throughout Smith’s rhymed verses, focusing particularly 
on the slaves’ toiling hands and the pay that passes them by, suggest the cadence of 
a work song, while Cooper’s stippled earth tone paintings highlight the set jaws, 
taut muscles, and weary but determined eyes of the laborers. A closing note offers 
a bit more historical background and a brief list of resources. Consider this as an 
imaginative supplement to units on the nation’s capital.  EB
264 • The BulleTin
Smith, lAne Abe Lincoln’s Dream; written and illus. by Lane Smith. Roaring 
Brook, 2012 32p
ISBN 978-1-59643-608-4 $16.99  
Ad Gr. 2-5
Quincy, a young African-American girl, has wandered off from her school group 
while touring the White House. If that in itself isn’t enough to signal a fantasy, then 
meeting up with the ghost of the sixteenth president surely is. Lincoln’s penchant 
for corny wordplay and his soft spot for children are evident as he engages with 
Quincy in an exchange of goofy jokes, but the child readily senses the gloom and 
unease that trouble her otherwise gracious host, and the root of his depression is 
worry over the current state of the Union. Quincy is able to reassure Lincoln that 
the states have remained united, and equality for all is “getting better all the time.” 
As to whether man continues to “fuss ’n’ fight with his fellow man,” Quincy has 
to admit, “We’re still working on that,” as a chair and broken glass erupt from the 
side of the U.S. Capitol. That’s reassuring enough to put the wandering soul to rest, 
and to shift the president’s persistent dream of a ship heading toward an unknown 
shore to that of a boat traveling toward the rising sun. A host of antique-style fonts 
and the dominant sepia, black, and red colors of the illustrations suggest printing 
of bygone days, but the lanky angularity and funky surrealism of the figures mov-
ing through the haunted White House and out into space are more akin to a Tim 
Burton creation. Two brief notes comment on Lincoln’s recurring dream and the 
White House dogs that avoided the “haunted” Lincoln Bedroom, but children 
unequipped with prior knowledge of the causes of the president’s depression won’t 
find much enlightenment here. The picture-book set will be better served by Maira 
Kalman’s equally imaginative approach in Looking at Lincoln BCCB 1/11), but this 
may be of passing interest to well-informed youngsters.  EB 
StiefvAter, mAggie The Curiosities: A Collection of Stories; written and illus. 
by Maggie Stiefvater, Tessa Gratton, and Brenna Yovanoff. Carolrhoda Lab, 
2012 291p
ISBN 978-0-7613-7527-2 $17.95  
R Gr. 7-10
In 2008, Stiefvater, Gratton, and Yovanoff agreed to start a blog wherein they’d 
take turns posting short fiction that would enable them to experiment with their 
craft and critique one another’s work. This book includes some of the pieces from 
the blog as well as other original short stories that highlight the process of a writ-
ing group. Most of the stories are preceded by comments from both the story’s 
author and one of the co-bloggers, highlighting some feature of the story that sets 
it in that writer’s oeuvre. For instance, Yovanoff comments on Stiefvater’s ability 
to create viable ensemble casts, and Stiefvater playfully teases Gratton about her 
infatuation with angst and brutality. Handwritten comments also pepper each story, 
with a handwriting key in the beginning helping readers figure out who wrote what. 
These techniques allow the writers to engage in an ongoing conversation about 
their processes, their obsessions, and their strengths. Also included are hand-drawn 
doodles and cartoons, as well as charts that list recurring themes in their work. The 
three provide insight on what they start with when they begin a story or novel—a 
name, a first line, an idea they want to play with—and reflect on recurring themes 
and motifs. Although they encourage one another to break boundaries, and each 
tries out territories that the others have previously mapped, their approaches to 
the paranormal are distinctive enough that fans of each individual author will find 
January 2013 • 265
the book satisfying. The end result of the combination of stories and formal and 
informal commentary is that readers will feel a stronger, more intimate connection 
with these writers as people, as well as gain insight into the kinds of support and 
critique that are useful in story-making and story-sharing. Oh, and since these 
three are rapidly becoming masters of their craft, the stories themselves are good, 
too, some even bordering on exquisite.  KC 
Stokke, regine Regine’s Book: A Teen Girl’s Last Words; tr. from the Norwegian 
by Henriette Larsen; written and illus. with photographs by Regine Stokke et 
al. Zest, 2012 331p
ISBN 978-1-936976-20-1 $16.99  
R Gr. 7-12
In August of 2008, Regine Stokke, a seventeen-year-old Norwegian girl, was 
diagnosed with acute myelogenous leukemia, a rapidly progressing form of bone 
marrow cancer. In November of that year, Regine began a blog to chronicle the 
progression of her treatment. Her goals were to educate people about what it is 
like to live with a serious illness on a day-to-day basis, as well as to raise awareness 
for the need for blood and bone marrow donations. By the time Regine died in 
December of 2009, her blog had attracted thousands of followers, and she and her 
parents had committed to turning it into a book so that her story could be shared 
worldwide. With photos of Regine and photos taken by Regine, who aspired to be 
an artist, writer, and photographer, this gripping true story documents her physi-
cal and mental state as her health progressively deteriorates. Regine shares factual 
information about the disease and the various treatments she received, as well as 
detailed accounts of how she feels and how she spends her days. Selected comments 
from her blog are also provided; most are understandably supportive, but also in-
cluded are some surprisingly negative responses from people who viewed her as a 
publicity hound and still others who were inappropriately macabre. Regine herself 
is honest about her highs and lows, her high points being her time with her family 
and meeting the bands she loves at concerts, and her lows becoming increasingly 
frequent as her pain worsens daily and it becomes clear that she will not survive. 
Deeply moving, this is not for the faint of heart; the medical tests Regine endures 
are unflinchingly described, and her sadness becomes palpable the closer she comes 
to the end. Most often this sort of plot is rendered through fiction; avid fans of 
morbidity literature who brave Regine’s powerful saga will likely have to confront 
their fascination in the same way her favorite black metal band, Ulver, did on their 
website after meeting her: “Our burdens are nil compared to yours. . . . Forgive us 
our pathetic coquetry with death. We don’t know what else to say.” Indeed.  KC 
Stone, tAnYA lee Courage Has No Color: The True Story of the Triple Nickles, 
America’s First Black Paratroopers. Candlewick, 2012 [160p] illus. with 
photographs
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-5117-6 $24.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-6405-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-9
The blatant injustice and grim irony of fighting European fascism in World War 
II with a segregated United States military may have been ignored or buried by the 
top brass, but it certainly wasn’t lost on the black soldiers trained for combat and 
then relegated to service positions. The extraordinary convergence of a Democratic 
266 • The BulleTin
president (FDR) up for reelection, a black sergeant (Walter Morris) determined 
to improve his company’s morale, a first lady (Eleanor Roosevelt) with an activist 
agenda, and a black Brigadier General (Benjamin O. Davis) putting pressure on the 
War Office made the formation of the 555th Parachute Infantry Company (later 
Battalion) a reality. The Triple Nickles, as they were nicknamed (the alternative 
spelling is traditional), seemed destined to break the pattern of blacks barred from 
combat. As highly trained as the white paratroopers with whom they nominally 
shared facilities, the 555th were battle ready and anxious for deployment, but it 
wasn’t until the close of the war that they were finally sent to Oregon on a mission 
to put out forest fires ignited by Japanese balloon bombs, the very existence of which 
was kept under tight wraps by the government. Was this a legitimate assignment, or 
simply another ruse for keeping a group of unwanted men from fighting alongside 
white soldiers? To date, Stone reports, no definite answer has been reached, but the 
lingering discrimination in the military throughout the war, and the skill, loyalty, 
and heroism of the paratroopers themselves, is unquestionable. Richly illustrated 
with photographs, this compelling story of the Triple Nickles’ training and Pacific 
coast mission will be of particular interest to young teens who have read Shelley 
Pearsall’s Jump into the Sky (BCCB 10/12), and the appended bibliography, timeline, 
notes, and index will guide their further exploration of these heroes.  EB
thomPSon, emmA The Further Tale of Peter Rabbit; illus. by Eleanor Tay-
lor. Warne, 2012 64p
ISBN 978-0-72326-710-2 $19.99  
R 4-7 yrs
In this original sequel to Potter’s classic story, Peter gets an unexpected visit to 
Scotland after falling asleep in the McGregors’ picnic basket. Escaping the basket, 
Peter runs into family friend Finlay McBurney and soon finds himself participating 
in the local Highland Games. After secretly devouring the interior of an enormous 
radish intended for the competition, Peter astonishes everyone by easily throwing 
the now-lighter radish a fair distance, thereby winning the games’ Golden Cup. 
However, Peter soon confesses his unfair advantage, the cup is returned to the 
rightful winner after a good laugh, and a homesick Peter is happily taken home. 
Though the plot meanders a bit, Thompson’s writing is pithy and dryly humor-
ous, and she is largely successful in making this tale both freshly original and an 
homage to Potter’s tale. Thompson is skilled at echoing Potter’s succinct narrative 
voice (“I imagine it will not surprise you to hear that Peter did not KEEP OUT. 
He WENT IN”) and at providing piquant details about the animals’ lives. Taylor’s 
art utilizes a warmer, brighter palette than Potter’s, but her figures and backgrounds 
look Potter-esque without being direct copies. Brown and white Peter is easily 
identifiable in his signature blue coat, and the ebony Finlay McBurney is striking 
against the other rabbits’ varying shades of brown. Traditionalists may balk at such 
interference with a classic, not only in the book’s content but also in its larger, 
picture-book trim size (which may disappoint those who love Potter’s diminutive 
volumes while pleasing those who have tried in vain to share Potter’s tiny pictures 
with a large group). Those willing to give this a fair shake, though, may find Peter’s 
new exploits a breath of fresh highland air.  JH
January 2013 • 267
thorPe, kiki 
In a Blink; illus. by Jana Christy. 
Random House, 
2013 [128p] (The Never Girls)
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-7364-2794-4 $5.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R Gr. 2-3
One minute, friends Kate, Lainey, Mia, and Gabby are playing soccer in the 
backyard, and the next, the girls finds themselves transported to a faraway beach 
populated by flamingos and fairies. It turns out that Prilla, a fairy who had been 
visiting the human world, accidentally brought the girls back to Never Land with 
a “blink,” and now the girls are stuck in Pixie Hollow until Never Land moves 
closer to the human realm again and they can “blink” back. The girls are hardly 
complaining, however, since they get to spend their time eating glorious feasts and 
learning how to fly with fairy dust. The appearance of Tinker Bell and several other 
Disney-sanctioned fairies give the book obvious appeal, yet the writing is actually 
quite sophisticated for the opening title of a commercial series. Simple, accessible 
sentences and plenty of dialogue make this an approachable early chapter book, 
and the changing viewpoints, as the narration focalizes in turn through each of the 
four girls and Tinker Bell, give an introductory lesson in perspective to transitioning 
readers. Details of life in Pixie Hollow will no doubt elicit squeals of delight from 
readers who enjoy portraits of life in the miniature, and this will please its target 
audience like a fine sprinkling of fairy dust.  KQG 
underdAhl, S. t. No Man’s Land. Flux, 2012 272p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-7387-3305-0 $9.99  
Ad Gr. 7-10
In Dov’s family, everything’s focused on Brian, Dov’s older brother, a former football 
hero now serving in Afghanistan. Sixteen-year-old Dov, self-described as “emo,” 
couldn’t be more of a contrast, preferring to hide behind his dyed black hair and 
hang with his friends (and his beloved gecko). When Brian’s injured in a lethal attack, 
Dov and his parents fear the worst, but they’re relieved when it turns out Brian’s 
injuries are comparatively minor and that he’s returning home. Once he’s back in 
the embrace of the family, though, it’s apparently only Dov who sees that Brian 
isn’t a tough, unaffected survivor but a deeply troubled young man. With his wry 
and self-deprecating sense of humor and genuine love for his brother undimmed 
by having to live in his shadow, Dov’s voice is compelling. The contrast between 
the adulation of the hometown hero and Brian’s own exhaustion is poignant, and 
the book is particularly good at conveying Brian’s frustration at a seemingly trivial 
existence, where he comes home from making life-or-death decisions to find he 
could be arrested for buying alcohol. Story and characters are too often overdrawn, 
though, with Brian’s climactic hallucination and violence contrivedly melodramatic; 
the subplot about Dov’s crush on a hot new girl fails to engage, and it leads to a 
predictable revelation about his longterm female friend’s true feelings. Dov is an 
enjoyable protagonist, however, and his keenly felt emo take on the situation will 
helpfully mirror many readers’ own reactions.  DS
268 • The BulleTin
vAil, rAchel Kiss Me Again. HarperTeen, 2013 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-194717-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-220288-8 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 6-9
In If We Kiss (BCCB 5/05) Charlotte “Charlie” Collins fell for Kevin Lazarus, 
fell out with her best friend, Tess (who had been going out with Kevin), and fell 
into the extreme awkwardness of having her crush become her stepbrother. Now 
fourteen-year-old Charlie is trying to balance the adjustment to having Kevin, his 
father, and his sister in her house with the electricity she feels whenever she sees 
Kevin—and the kissing they do whenever they have a chance. Can they make 
both their relationship and their family situation work? It’s not surprising that 
ultimately the relationship has to go, but it’s an awful lot of fun while it lasts, with 
Charlie dissolving into the bliss of an exciting secret (even a parent-mandated trip 
to the laundry room with Kevin is an opportunity for delicious flirtation) and 
good reciprocal kissing. Vail situates this story in plausible reality, keeping her 
characters believably complicated; Charlie in particular is a touching and relatable 
girl, especially in her self-consciousness around Kevin (“How to breathe normally? 
No memory of the technique,” she frantically thinks to herself mid-conversation). 
Charlie and Kevin’s ultimate realization that this romance thing isn’t working is 
maturely but credibly arrived at, and wistful readers can at least have the solace of 
turning back to delve again into some of the year’s most epic kissing passages.  DS
wAlker, SAllY m. Their Skeletons Speak: Kennewick Man and the Paleoameri-
can World; written by Sally M. Walker and Douglas W. Owsley. Carolrhoda, 
2012 136p illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-7613-7457-2 $22.95  
R Gr. 8-12 
“Thirty-five years ago,” Walker and Owsley explain, “the peopling of the Ameri-
cas, according to the Clovis-first theory, was a done deal. Today we are looking at 
multiple routes and peoples.” Readers not up to speed on the Clovis-first theory 
will get a brief cram course here; however, students who are already familiar with 
older theories involving an Asia-to-America land bridge crossing will better appre-
ciate Walker and Owsley’s dense, thoughtful discussion on how rapid changes in 
archaeological techniques and evidence reinterpretation have altered this model in 
recent years, and the subsequent cultural and political controversies among scientists, 
native claimants to ancient human remains, governments agencies, and the courts. 
Kennewick Man, a skeleton retrieved from the Columbia River in 1996, is the focal 
point of this study, an object lesson in how scientists can deduce amazing amounts 
of information from what may seem to the untutored viewer to be unimpressive 
dings, cracks, and concretions in bone or the simplest position of a limb in its final 
resting place. To demonstrate how far the field of paleoamerican studies has come 
in the past century, Walker and Owsley backtrack to discuss several other notable 
human remains that have altered the timetable of human settlement and place of 
origin. There’s a lot of technical information here, on topics such as isotope-based 
dating techniques, tooth-shape comparison, advanced CT scans, sediment accre-
tions, bone stress, wound recovery, and the like, but for serious readers who delight 
in forensic investigation or perhaps consider a future in the field, this material will 
January 2013 • 269
push their understanding further than most titles on this subject for youth reader-
ship. Source notes, bibliographies, and an index are included.  EB
wAlterS, eric 
Prince for a Princess; illus. by David Parkins. 
Orca, 
2012 [64p] (Echoes)
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4598-0200-1 $6.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4598-0319-0 $6.95
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 2-3
While it’s not quite the romance the title suggests, it is love at first sight when seven-
year-old Christina, affectionately called “Princess” by her parents, meets retired 
racing greyhound Prince. Thrilled by her new canine family member, Christina 
helps Prince adjust to domestic life, delighting in the opportunity to take him for 
walks (“There was something about the sight of a big dog and a small girl together 
that made people stop to chat”) and let him sniff around in the way he never could 
while he was racing. The one downside is that Prince gets very lonely when his 
people go away—so enter Chancho, the rescue Chihuahua. There’s no conflict 
in the story, and the viewpoint is largely that of the adults rather than Christina, 
distancing the child reader. The depiction of life with a beloved dog is endearing, 
though, and the short chapters (about three pages apiece) with accessible text 
provide a useful bridge between controlled vocabulary readers and longer chapter 
books as well as an effective readaloud opportunity. Each chapter sports a full-page 
monochromatic line and watercolor illustration, in a lively realistic style; Prince 
has a goofy sweetness, while the fact that Christina is dark-haired and Asian while 
her parents are fair and European suggests she might be adopted herself. This is a 
pretty effective advertisement for greyhound adoption, so readers’ families should 
be ready for pleas to expand their own families by one speedy dog.  DS
weill, cYnthiA Count Me In!: A Parade of Mexican Folk Art Numbers in English 
and Spanish; illus. with photographs by Jorge Luis Santiago. Cinco Puntos, 
2012 24p
ISBN 978-1-935955-39-9 $14.95  
R Gr. 1-4
Following up on Opuestos: Mexican Folk Art Opposites in English and Spanish 
(BCCB 10/09), Weill returns with another joyous celebration of Mexican folk art, 
piggybacked here on a counting-book theme. This time the featured craftsmen 
are a quartet of Oaxacan sisters who specialize in clay figures, creating a full cast 
of dancers, musicians, and costumed performers to march in the annual summer 
Guelaguetza parades, an indigenous cultural event in Mexico. Bilingual text covers 
the numbers from one to ten, but also comments on the role of each set of figures. 
“Two. Dos. Cover your ears! The fireworks are loud! ¡Tapate los oidos! ¡Los cohetes 
hacen mucho ruido!” Four tiny heads emerge from the bellies of the giant costumes 
they carry through the streets; five men and women raise their lanterns on long 
sticks; six dancers balance baskets of flowers on their heads. Though it offers little 
information about the Guelaguetza celebration itself (especially the recent contro-
versies surrounding its commercialization) save the fine-print directive on the jacket 
flap to consult Weill’s website, as a concept book and a bilingual introduction, this 
works splendidly. Young readers are likely to accept the colorful parade at face value 
and enjoy comparing the English and Spanish texts.  EB
270 • The BulleTin
winget, diAnnA doriSi A Smidgen of Sky. Harcourt, 2012 195p
ISBN 978-0-547-80798-0 $16.99  
R Gr. 4-6
Ten-year-old Piper Lee is not happy at all that her mother is planning to get remar-
ried. Ben, her mom’s fiancé, is okay, but he’s not like Piper’s dad, an adventure-
loving pilot who died in a rescue flight attempt when Piper was six; Ben’s daughter, 
Ginger (also ten), is a real pain as well. The wedding looks like a done deal until 
Piper goes online to find Ginger’s mother (who left her husband and child years 
ago), unleashing trouble that threatens to break up Ben and Piper’s mom as well 
as sadden Ginger. The internet also leads Piper to someone who claims to have 
information about her dad’s crash—his body was never recovered—but she learns 
that not everyone online is who they claim to be. Piper finally realizes she must 
try to patch up things between her mom and Ben, but before they can work it all 
out, there’s an inmate revolt at the prison where Ben is a guard and he is taken 
hostage for a day. Winget’s characters are likable, working class folks with believ-
able pasts and problems; Ben is particularly well drawn as a blue-collar guy with 
a slightly short fuse who nevertheless works hard to relate to Piper. Piper’s voice is 
authentically youthful, as are her questionable decisions, and plenty of kids will 
find common ground with her as she struggles with her mother’s remarriage and 
with the fact that her father is gone for good.  JH
Yolen, JAne The Curse of the Thirteenth Fey: The True Tale of Sleeping Beau-
ty. Philomel, 2012 290p
ISBN 978-0-399-25664-6 $16.99  
M Gr. 4-6
Magic tends to give thirteen-year-old Gorse a headache, and unfortunately she has 
to deal with a lot of it: as the thirteenth child of a fey mother and an elven father, 
she is part of a magical family whose powers are often called upon by the human 
king. Gorse is laid up in bed yet again when her family gets the call to attend the 
infant princess’ christening (and bestow magical gifts upon her), but she manages 
to drag herself after them; unfortunately, she doesn’t quite make it to the palace 
but instead falls down a “magick trap” that has her imprisoned underground and 
beholden to yet another unyielding royal, this time a member of the cruel Unseelie 
court. Culling material from several short stories she published in the 1980s, the 
prolific Yolen offers an uncharacteristic misstep here with a muddled plotline, an 
uneven pace, and an uninspiring heroine. Though the book is billed as the “true 
tale of Sleeping Beauty,” the connection to the original story isn’t made clear until 
nearly the final pages and even then, the reveal of Gorse as the fairy who accidentally 
cursed the princess is anticlimactic and convoluted. Fans of retold fairy tales will be 
better served by Yolen’s other offerings or Diane Zahler’s recent interpretations (The 
Thirteenth Princess, BCCB 3/10, The Princess of the Wild Swans, BCCB 2/12).  KQG
YovAnoff, brennA Paper Valentine. Razorbill, 2012 [368p]
ISBN 978-1-59514-599-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R* Gr. 7-10
In the six months since her best friend Lillian died, sixteen-year-old Hannah hasn’t 
really missed her: she hasn’t had to, since Lillian’s ghost haunts Hannah’s every 
move, whispering snarky comments and making Hannah question her sanity on a 
daily basis. When a serial killer starts preying on girls from Hannah’s small town, 
January 2013 • 271
Lillian insists that Hannah investigate. Since Lillian died from her anorexia, Han-
nah doesn’t understand what her friend’s connection to the murders might be, but 
she wonders if Lillian suspects Finny Boone, the juvenile thug to whom Hannah 
finds herself strangely drawn. Yovanoff (author of The Replacement, BCCB 9/10, 
The Space Between BCCB 12/11) subtly raises the tension of this evocative thriller 
with small details: dead birds litter the streets during an oppressively hot summer, 
and the killer leaves behind little toys and trinkets at his crime scenes. The portrayal 
of Lillian and Hannah’s toxic relationship is perhaps the most compelling element, 
and their occasional but emotionally loaded dialogue reveals a bond that is as 
twisted as it is strong. The underlying theme of the loss of childhood innocence 
is delicately conveyed, while Hannah’s ultimate response to her friend’s death, to 
the murders, and to her own confusion is an unexpectedly fresh rallying cry for 
all those girls who have been sold the message that power lies only in beauty. The 
slow-burn mystery and simmering romance will keep readers turning the pages, 
but it’s the painfully authentic depiction of the complexities of friendship that will 
leave them haunted.  KQG 
272 • The BulleTin
BuLLetIn BLue rIBBons 2012
Unusually, this year picture books have a very exclusive top echelon (in which 
animals are especially well represented).  Nonfiction, on the other hand, has a 
fuller list than in some previous years, and it’s one that’s particularly strong on 
curricular must-haves for history at various levels.  Fiction, however, is again no-
table for variety, with realism, fantasy, history, and visual narrative all present and 
accounted for. Overall, it’s a rewarding assortment, sure to please diverse tastes. 
If we have any brave individual dissents championing books that didn’t make the 
list, they’ll be on our website at http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu; that’s also where you can 
find a downloadable PDF of the list in trifold form.
 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
FICTION:
Cashore, Kristin. Bitterblue. Dial, 2012. Gr. 9-12 (May)
Framing her interrogations of strength, love, and morality within a young queen’s 
coming-of-age story, Cashore manages to create a tale that transcends the fantasy 
genre with its emotional and philosophical weight.
DiCamillo, Kate. Bink and Gollie: Two for One; by Kate DiCamillo and Allison 
McGhee; illus. by Tony Fucile. Candlewick, 2012. Gr. 2-4 (July)  
The endearing partnership of polar-opposite friends Bink and Gollie is the highlight 
of this delightful convergence of picture book, graphic novel, and early reader. 
Green, John. The Fault in Our Stars. Dutton, 2012. Gr. 9-12 (May)
With their razor-sharp wits but failing, fragile bodies, exquisitely characterized Hazel 
and Augustus embark together on a journey that’s both intellectual and romantic 
after meeting in a teen cancer support group.
Handler, Daniel. Why We Broke Up; illus. by Maira Kalman. Little, 2012. Gr. 
9-12 (June)
Supported by full-color illustrations and conversational prose, this fervent reflection 
on the dissolution of young love between artsy Min and basketball star Ed gets 
high school heartbreak just right.
McKissack, Patricia. Best Shot in the West: The Adventures of Nat Love. Chronicle, 
2012. Gr. 5-9 (April) 
Based on the autobiography of the Wild West hero Deadwood Dick, this brilliantly 
illustrated graphic novel is marked by graceful narration and startling, vibrant ac-
tion scenes. 
January 2013 • 273
Milford, Kate. The Broken Lands. Clarion, 2012. Gr. 6-9 (October)
New York City itself becomes a character in this captivating tale that features 
streetwise Sam and his immigrant pal Jin as they try to battle for the city’s soul in 
the late nineteenth century. 
Pearsall, Shelley. Jump into the Sky. Knopf, 2012. Gr. 5-9 (October)
Fans of Christopher Paul Curtis will find humor and insight in this tale of thirteen-
year-old Levi and his father, a member of the 555th Parachute Infantry Battalion, 
a legendary African-American division of the military in World War II.
Stead, Rebecca. Liar & Spy. Lamb, 2012. Gr. 5-7 (September)
Original plot elements and a cast of undeniably charming characters come together 
in this wholly satisfying tale of secrets, friendship, and underdogs. 
Stiefvater, Maggie. The Raven Boys. Scholastic, 2012. Gr. 7-12 (September)
Against a suspenseful hunt for ley lines and for a long-ago Welsh prince, a compelling 
human drama featuring psychic Blue and a group of wealthy boys from a nearby 
elite school plays out to make a thoughtful, genre-busting fantasy. 
Volponi, Paul. The Final Four. Viking, 2012. Gr. 7-12 (March)
A rousing March Madness matchup between swaggering, star-powered Michigan 
State and underdog Troy University offers edge-of-your-seat sports suspense and a 
mindful examination of four dynamic characters in the hands of college athletics.
Wein, Elizabeth. Code Name Verity. Hyperion, 2012. Gr. 9-12 (June) 
Wein masterfully delivers methodical, plot twist-driven suspense and sweeping 
wartime inquiry of hatred and heroes as captured British spy Verity and pilot best 
friend Maddie relate harrowing accounts of survival in World War II.
Willems, Mo. Listen to My Trumpet; written and illus. by Mo Willems. Hyperion, 
2012. Gr. K-1 (April)
The punchline of this latest installment of Willems’ dynamic duo will elicit both 
giggles and “awwws” from young readers as they relate to Piggy’s attempts to master 
the trumpet and be a good friend.
PICTURE BOOKS:
Bingham, Kelly. Z Is for Moose; illus. by Paul O. Zelinsky. Greenwillow, 2012. 3-7 
yrs (April)
In this cleverly silly staging of an alphabetical pageant, an endearingly goofy moose 
disrupts the order in a book that works both as funny alphabet book and comic story.
Buckley, Michael. Kel Gilligan’s Daredevil Stunt Show; illus. by Dan Santat. Abrams, 
2012. 3-7 yrs (October)
Gasp at the feats of helmeted superhero Kel Gilligan, a kid who amazes his parents 
by performing deeds such as getting dressed and using the Potty of Doom, in this 
gleefully over-the-top picture book.
274 • The BulleTin
Bunting, Eve. Ballywhinney Girl; illus. by Emily Arnold McCully. Clarion, 2012. 
5-8 yrs (May)
After a young Irish girl finds the remains of an Iron Age child preserved in the peat 
bog, she follows the scientists’ explanation of the body and thinks about the girl 
who died long ago; McCully’s delicate, luminous watercolors add character to this 
tender and unusual story.
Carnesi, Monica. Little Dog Lost; written and illus. by Monica Carnesi. Penguin, 
2012.  3-7 yrs (February)
Simple, immediate text paired with pale, chilly illustrations tell the riveting true 
story of poor Dog, caught on an ice floe in a river that’s heading out to sea, and 
the humans who saved him.
Fogliano, Julie. And Then It’s Spring; illus. by Erin E. Stead. Roaring Brook, 2012. 
4-6 yrs (March)
Spare, gentle prose describes the achingly gradual progress of spring in partnership 
with tender, fetchingly detailed illustrations that follow the gardening efforts of a 
determined young boy and the collection of critters that follows him.
Gibbs, Edward. Little Bee; written and illus. by Edward Gibbs. LB Kids/Little, 
2012. 2-4 yrs (July)
Vivid saturated colors and high-action line distinguishes the illustrations in this 
lively rhyming board book, where a little bee is only the first in a sequence of several 
critters fleeing from a pursuing animal.
Klassen, Jon. This Is Not My Hat; written and illus. by Jon Klassen. Candlewick, 
2012. 5-8 yrs (November) 
Crisp graphics reminiscent of Leo Lionni and a sardonic sense of humor combine 
in this picture book about a itty-bitty fish who stole a hat from a big fish and got 
away with it—or so he thinks.
Sauer, Tammi. Me Want Pet!; illus. by Bob Shea. Simon, 2012. 4-8 yrs (April)
Plenty of youngsters will relate to Cave Boy’s desire for a pet (though maybe not the 
saber-toothed tiger) in this chuckle-worthy tale that features Bob Shea’s saturated, 
thickly outlined illustrations.
NONFICTION:
Chin, Jason. Island: A Story of the Galápagos; written and illus. by Jason Chin. 
Roaring Brook, 2012. Gr. 2-5 (November)
Gorgeous watercolor illustrations composed in full-page spreads and helpful thumb-
nail panels join with thoughtful text to guide young readers through the scientific 
study of an ecosystem and evolution. 
Hoberman, Mary Ann. Forget-Me-Nots: Poems to Learn by Heart: illus. by Michael 
Emberly. Megan Tingly Books, 2012. Gr. 2-5 (June)
Noted versifier Hoberman gathers over 120 poems here along with guidance and 
tips for committing the poems to memory, making this a true treat for bards in 
the making.
January 2013 • 275
Hoose, Phillip. Moonbird: A Year on the Wind with the Great Survivor B95. Farrar, 
2012. Gr. 7-12 (September)
This high-interest nonfiction book provides an intimate look at the seldom-seen 
experiences of endangered red knot birds by following the migration of a single bird 
named B95 from Tierra del Fuego, Argentina to the Canadian Arctic and back again.
Jurmain, Suzanne Tripp. Worst of Friends: Thomas Jefferson, John Adams and the True 
Story of an American Feud; illus. by Larry Day. Dutton, 2011. Gr. 3-5 (January)
Jurmain uses the on-again, off-again friendship between two very different men 
as an entry point to explore the hard work of nation building; Day’s watercolor 
illustrations make this a lesson in both history and humor. 
Kalman, Maira. Looking at Lincoln; written and illus. by Maira Kalman. Penguin, 
2012. 5-8 yrs (January)
A bright palette combines with focused spreads to convey both a sense of whimsy 
and solemnity in this kid-friendly look at the life of the sixteenth president. 
Kops, Deborah. The Great Molasses Flood: Boston, 1919. Charlesbridge, 2012. Gr. 
4-7 (March)
The tale of this sticky disaster initially sounds like a joke, but Kops’ accessible and 
gripping account of the flood of molasses that swept through northern Boston 
makes it clear that the tragedy that took twenty-one lives is no laughing matter. 
Osborne, Barrett Linda. Miles to Go For Freedom: Segregation and Civil Rights in 
the Jim Crow Years. Abrams, 2012. Gr. 5-8 (March)
Focusing on the rarely discussed period between Reconstruction and the Civil 
Rights Era, this overview of racial oppression and the fight against it in the U.S. 
boasts meticulous organization ,compelling photographs, and the message that the 
fight extended beyond the famous. 
Rappaport, Doreen. Beyond Courage:  The Untold Story of Jewish Resistance During 
the Holocaust. Candlewick, 2012. Gr. 7-12 (November)
Organized in chronological order, these twenty-one stories of Jewish resistance 
against the atrocities of the Nazi regime are supplemented with photographs, maps, 
and a timeline and effectively shatter the myth of Jewish passivity.
Rumford, James. From the Good Mountain: How Gutenberg Changed the World; 
written and illus. by James Rumford. Roaring Brook, 2012. Gr. 3-5 (October) 
Presenting a history lesson in a series of riddles, Rumford offers a uniquely engaging 
look at the inventor of the printing press. 
Sheinkin, Steve. Bomb: The Race to Build—and Steal—the World’s Most Dangerous 
Weapon. Roaring Brook, 2012. Gr. 7-12 (October)
This fascinating true-life spy tale is edge-of-your-seat material, and history buffs, 
science fans, and YAs looking for a good thriller will all find much to be captivated 
by here. 
Vernick, Audrey. Brothers at Bat: The True Story of an Amazing All-Brother Baseball 
Team; illus. by Steven Salerno. Clarion, 2012. 5-9 yrs (June) 
The Little Golden Book–style illustrations joyfully evoke the golden age of baseball 
in this delightful true story of the Acerra all-brother baseball team.
276  •  The BulleTin
Adventure: Kress, A.; Ponti; 
rhodes; ross
Afghan War–fiction: ellis; underdahl
Afghanistan–fiction: ellis
Africa–fiction: Schrefer
Africa–stories: daly
African Americans: Bryant; Pinkney, 
A.; Smith, C.; Stone
African Americans–fiction: Hartman
African Americans–stories: Cline-
ransome; Cole
Animals: davies; Jenkins
Animals–fiction: Latham; Schrefer
Animals–stories: daly; Gaiman; 
Shireen
AntHoLoGieS: Powers
Anthropology: deem; Walker
Archeology: deem; Walker
Art and artists: Bryant; Parker
Aviation: Stone
Babies: Jenkins
Ballet–fiction: Black
Bears–stories: dunrea
Behavior–stories: Guion
BiLinGuAL BooKS: Weill
BioGrAPHieS: Bryant; Green-
wood Drummer; Hamlisch; 
Parker; Pinkney, A.; Powers; 
Stokke
Biology: davies
Brothers–fiction: underdahl
Bullying–fiction: Cushman
Cats–stories: Pinkey, J. 
Codes–fiction: Ponti
ConCePt BooKS: Browne; Weill
Contests–fiction: Hicks
Contests–stories: thompson
CountinG BooKS: Browne; 
Weill
Crafts: Weill
Creative writing: Stiefvater
Crime and criminals–fiction: Burak; 
Kress, A.; Peloquin; Salomon; 
Yovanoff
Crime and criminals: Sheinkin
Current events: ellis; Schrefer; 
underdahl
dancers and dance–fiction: Black
deafness–fiction: Mcelfresh
death: Stokke
death–fiction: Schwab
demons–fiction: Chadda
detectives–fiction: Lane
disabilities–fiction: Mcelfresh
dogs–fiction: Walters
dreams–stories: Smith, L. 
dystopias–fiction: Albin; John; 
Kress, n.
elephants–stories: daly
england–fiction: Cushman
eSP–fiction: Frenette; John
Ethics and values: Cushman; ellis; 
Hartman; Kenneally; Kress, n.
Fairies–fiction: thorpe
Families–fiction: Latham; Martinez
Families–stories: Slonim
FAntASY: Albin; Chadda; Frenette; 
rhodes; ross; Stiefvater; thorpe
Fish–stories: Howe
Flying–fiction: ross
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. in the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
January 2013  •  277
FoLKtALeS And FAirY tALeS: 
Pinkney, J.; Yolen
Friends–fiction: Hicks; Holmes; 
Jung; Kenneally; Latham; Lynch; 
runton; Yovanoff
Friends–stories: dunrea; Jeffers; 
Shireen
Ghosts–fiction: dean; Yovanoff
Grief–fiction: Burak; Schwab; 
Winget
Hinduism–stories: Patel
HiStoriCAL FiCtion: Cline-
ransome; Cole; Cushman; 
Greenwood Greatest; Lane; Lynch
History, U.S.: Cline-ransome; Cole; 
deem; Pinkney, A.; Sheinkin; 
Smith, C.; Smith, L.; Stone
History, world: Walker 
Horror: Salomon
HuMor: Agee; Gaiman; Jeffers; 
Jung; Slonim
identity–fiction: Cronn-Mills; 
Martinez
imagination–poetry: Clayton
india–fiction: Chadda
JournALS: Stokke
Literature, children’s: thompson
Loneliness–stories: dunrea; Guion 
Lying–stories: Greenwood Greatest
Magic–fiction: Yolen
Magic shows–stories: Shireen
Military history: Stone
Monsters–stories: Slonim
Moose–stories: Jeffers
Mothers–fiction: Frenette; Ken-
neally; Ponti; Winget
Moving–fiction: Holmes
Music and musicians: Greenwood 
Drummer; Hamlisch
MYSterieS: Lane
Nature study: Browne; davies; 
Jenkins
new York City–stories: Agee
otters–stories: Howe
owls–stories: runton
Pandas–stories: Gaiman
Parades–stories: Weill 
Penguins–stories: Guion
Pets–fiction: Walters
PoetrY: Clayton
Poets–stories: Patel
Politics–fiction: Albin; rhodes
Post-traumatic stress disorder–fic-
tion: underdahl
Presidents: Sheinkin
Presidents–stories: Smith, L.
Primates–fiction: Schrefer
Primates–stories: Browne
Princesses–fiction: Yolen
rabbits–stories: thompson
racism–fiction: Hartman
Reading aloud: Clayton; Pinkney, 
A.
Reading, easy: Jenkins; thorpe; 
Walters
relationships–fiction: Burak; Ken-
neally; Martinez; underdahl; vail; 
Winget
relationships–stories: Howe
Religious education: Patel
romance–fiction: Linko; vail
royalty–fiction: rhodes
School–fiction: Holmes
Secrets–fiction: John; Peloquin; 
Salomon
SHort StorieS: Stiefvater
Sisters–fiction: Black; Martinez; 
Mcelfresh; Peloquin
Slavery: Smith, C. 
Slavery–stories: Cline-ransome; 
Cole
Sneezes–stories: Gaiman
Soldiers–fiction: Lynch 
Stars–stories: runton
SteAMPunK: Kress, A.
Stepfamilies–fiction: Peloquin; vail
Suicide–fiction: dean
Superheroes–fiction: Frenette; Jung
SuPernAturAL StorieS: 
Black; Linko; Schwab
SuSPenSe: Yovanoff
television–fiction: Kress, n.
time travel–fiction: Linko
transgender people–fiction: Cronn-
Mills
278  •  The BulleTin
underground railroad–stories: Cole
verSe noveLS: dean; ross
vietnam War–fiction: Lynch
voyages and travel–fiction: Cushman; 
Hartman; ross
voyages and travel–stories: Agee; 
Greenwood Greatest
War: Powers
War–fiction: rhodes
Women’s studies: ellis
World cultures: Greenwood Drum-
mer; Patel; Weill
Worms–fiction: Hicks
Worms–stories: runton
Writers and writing: Stiefvater
Zombies–fiction: Ponti
Zoos–fiction: Latham
