T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by The Johns Hopkins University Press
July/August 2008
Vol. 61   No. 11
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
July/August 2008
Vol. 61 No. 11
455  the BIg PICture
 
 Metal Man  by Aaron Reynolds; illus. by Paul Hoppe
456  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
457  • My Dad’s a Birdman  by David Almond; illus. by Polly Dunbar
460  • The Penderwicks on Gardam Street  by Jeanne Birdsall
478  •  Outside Beauty  by Cynthia Kadohata
495  • Madam President  written and illus. by Lane Smith
497  •  The Mysterious Benedict Society and the Perilous Journey  by Trenton Lee 
Stewart; illus. by Diana Sudyka
503  suBjeCt And use Index
506  AnnuAL Author And tItLe Index
454 • The BulleTin
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
 
 
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the  
 
 
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Katrina Bromann, Reviewer (KB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Cindy Welch, Reviewer (CW)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Katrina Bromann, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print or electronic $85.00; combined print & electronic $119.00; multiple in-
stitutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, $53.00; students, 
$15.00. In countries other than the United States, add $14.30 per subscription for postage; subscrib-
ers in Canada and Mexico add $9.90. Single copy rate: $9.00. Volumes available in microfilm from 
ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche 
from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be 
made payable to The Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Divi-
sion, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 
410-516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/jour-
nals/advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.uiuc.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2008 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image by Paul Hoppe from Metal Man ©2008.  Used by permission of Charlesbridge.
July/AugusT 2008 • 455
the BIg PICture
Metal Man
by Aaron Reynolds; illustrated by Paul Hoppe
“Makin’ junk out of junk” may not be Mama’s idea of a proper job, but it’s end-
lessly fascinating to young Devon, who spends his free time hanging out in the 
workshop of sculptor Mitch, whom he dubs Metal Man. Mitch’s atelier is just the 
space to attract a boy with sweltering summer time on his hands a noisy garage 
filled with drums of scrap metal, power tools, and a welding torch that kicks up a 
shower of sparks that can sting a t-shirted boy like a thousand killer bees. Devon 
certainly doesn’t come for the company though; up ’til now Mitch has never had 
much to say beyond warning Devon to keep out of the way. Today, though, the 
terse artist asks Devon what the boy sees in his latest work and, evidently satisfied 
with the answer, invites him to suggest his own theme for a piece. Devon’s reticent 
to share his idea for a house within a star, since adults haven’t established much 
of a track record for taking his views seriously, but Mitch gruffly coaxes the vision 
into daylight and, under Devon’s direction, makes it tangible. When Mama sees 
the gleaming metal creation that bears Devon’s name on the back, she klunks it 
down on the air conditioner, that place where everybody hangs out, and finally 
gives Devon and Mitch their props. 
Reynolds works the picture-book format with the same mastery Mitch 
applies to rusty iron. A few offhand remarks, a couple of brief conversations, and a 
smattering of the young narrator’s own observations are transformed into a remark-
ably clear portrait of Devon as a kid with a lot more going on inside than the adults 
in his life have noticed or acknowledged. Mama’s views on all this time-wasting 
are summed up in her “junk out of junk” remark about Mitch’s enterprise, and 
school hasn’t been supportive either: “When I hang out with the metal man, I get 
it right. I see what I see. Not like school.” And Devon’s mad and growly reluctance 
to put his star-house vision into words painfully and brilliantly realized in a single 
page of staccato dialogue is the clear culmination of having his notions brushed 
aside once too often: “I got a spark in my head, but I ain’t sayin it with my mouth. 
I don’t know, I say. It’s a lie, but I tell it anyway.” “Yeah, you do,” he says. “Don’t 
be scared, boy. Bring it on out to play.” Given a shot of encouragement by his 
idol, Devon’s an artistic force to be reckoned with. Not only can he articulate the 
shape his star house should take, but he also demonstrates that he’s been watching 
Mitch’s craft with sensitive understanding all along, and he can wait patiently and 
trustingly while the cutting, welding, grinding, and polishing processes turn the 
most unpromising materials into a showpiece.
Hoppe’s mixed-media illustrations supply the heat and burly muscle the 
text demands. A controlled hodgepodge of broad brushstrokes and squiggly pencil 
456 • The BulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
lines, detailed representations of Mitch at work, and subtle backdrops of simplified 
forms and diminished colors all invite close, lingering inspection. Just as Reynolds 
deploys words economically, Hoppe limits his palette, mainly employing two 
dominant colors. Browns and related tans handle mundane affairs, the surfaces 
we all see, from the creamy chocolate skin tones of the African-American cast, to 
the drab workshop and the oxidized metals Mitch will call to life. Blues suggest 
possibility—the heavy machinery that transforms the metal, the hot blue sparks 
of the torch, the blue background behind Devon as he conjures his star house, the 
blue shadows cast by Devon when Mitch first invites him into the creative process, 
even the blue blouse Mama wears when she recognizes her son’s interior energy. If 
Devon is consistently shown as an ordinary kid, speaking volumes through supple 
body language and facial expressions, Mitch is variously portrayed as a mystery man, 
a sometimes giant, larger-than-life idol, or an accessible friend, just as Devon views 
him. He looms over Devon in their initial conversation, abates in size when they 
work side by side at the table saw, and fills a full two pages as a grinder-wielding 
titan, bringing out the shine in the metal (and, metaphorically, the boy) that was 
under there all the time.
Will Devon ever create these wonders entirely on his own? Who knows? 
Reynolds’ audience will certainly agree he’s too young to handle the tools and torch 
just yet. But whatever medium he ultimately adopts as his own or even if he never 
undertakes an art project at all Devon knows that he can find meaning in visual 
forms others may miss, that his ideas have value, and that some adults can listen 
and respect. It’s a message that any young artist in the making will welcome, but 
one that even listeners who will never progress beyond stick men can appreciate, 
too. (See p. 491 for publication information.)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer
Agee, Jon The Retired Kid; written and illus. by Jon Agee. Hyperion, 
2008 32p
ISBN 978-1-4231-0314-1 $16.99   
R 6-9 yrs
“It’s been a wonderful eight years,” says an overscheduled Brian, “but I need a break.” 
The former grade-schooler heads off to Florida, and he’s initially thrilled by life at 
the Happy Sunset Retirement Community, where he spends his time lazing in the 
pool, fishing, and going to the movies. Soon, though, he begins to miss the good 
things about being part of the kidforce (“He remembered singing in the school 
musical, making his little sister laugh, throwing Sparky the ball!”), and he decides 
he’s not ready to quit just yet. Though there’s a touch of mature perspective to the 
enterprise, Agee keeps the topic squarely kid-aimed rather than selling it out for 
adult laughs: audiences will warm to Brian’s retired plumber friend Harvey, who 
treats Brian’s career of kid with respect (“That’s hard work!”), and they’ll giggle 
and sympathize with Brian’s distaste for “watching long documentaries on TV” and 
July/AugusT 2008 • 457
“Wally’s prune juice smoothies.” The open, friendly text is happily partnered with 
open, friendly art sporting Agee’s trademark soft yet neat and sturdy charcoal lines, 
with compact planes of daubed color contrasting with the snowy oversized pages. 
There’s plenty of humor in the vignettes of Brian’s experience, especially since he’s 
a heart-on-his-sleeve guy whose boredom, distress, and, eventually, satisfaction, are 
comedically clear to viewers. Kids will immediately understand Brian’s desire for a 
break, and they’ll find it entertaining to design their own more successful versions 
of retirement.  DS
AguilAr, DAviD A. 11 Planets: A New View of the Solar System. National Geo-
graphic, 2008 48p illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-4263-0237-4 $25.90
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4263-0236-7 $16.95   
R Gr. 3-6
Rather than ignominiously booting Pluto out of the planetary fold, Aguilar, Direc-
tor of Science Information at the Harvard Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, 
shepherds it back into the flock along with its two dwarf planet buddies, Ceres 
and Eris, offering readers a readjusted and inclusive view of our Sun’s orbiters. 
There’s no real discussion here of why Pluto was downgraded (for that, see Scott’s 
When Is a Planet Not a Planet?, BCCB 10/07), but that seems less an omission 
than tacit acknowledgment that the dustup has been settled. What is included is 
a page or two of lucidly written highlights of each planet (terrestrial, gaseous, or 
dwarf), stunning illustrations (rendered by Aguilar, unless otherwise indicated in 
a caption), and insets showing the derivation of the planet’s name and its orbital 
path. End matter is particularly useful, comprising an index, glossary, web sites, 
a chart of fast facts, a chart of readers’ estimated Earth weight on other terrestrial 
planets, and a “Solar System in a Grocery Bag” that frames the planets’ in relation 
to common foodstuffs. This should be a staple item in middle elementary school 
collections, and it’s an attractive, browsable title for anyone musing over interplan-
etary adventure.  EB
AlmonD, DAviD My Dad’s a Birdman; illus. by Polly Dunbar. Candlewick, 
2008 120p
ISBN 978-0-7636-3667-8 $15.99   
R Gr. 3-5
Lizzie’s mother’s death seems to have sent her father over the edge, as he now pro-
poses to enter the Great Human Bird Competition with nothing more than “wings 
and faith.” Though initially skeptical, Lizzie is eventually won over by the beauty of 
her father’s homemade wings (constructed from real bird feathers of varying types, 
string, wire, cardboard, and other odds and ends) and by his naïve but persistent 
belief that he will be able to fly. Despite the well-meaning attempts at interference 
from Lizzie’s Auntie Doreen (who serves up her leaden dumplings in an attempt 
to keep the pair grounded), the father-daughter duo proceeds—but can they really 
reach the skies? Set in working-class northern England, this unusual story carries 
strong hints of Roald Dahl (though it’s considerably milder than some of Dahl’s 
works), and despite Almond’s occasional misstep on the wire between realism and 
whimsy, the end result works surprisingly well. Lizzie is a sympathetic heroine, and 
her struggle to keep the family boat upright against the current of her father’s ap-
parent mental imbalance will particularly strike a chord with kids who face similar 
parental shortcomings. Dunbar’s pencil, watercolor, and collage artwork is both 
delicately expressive and solidly substantive, and the scenes with dot-eyed Lizzie 
458 • The BulleTin
and her dad are sweet without being saccharine (Dad is especially endearing in his 
blue-striped jammies, sporting rumply hair and his lovely homemade wings). The 
buxom Auntie Doreen is a hoot in her flowered pinnie and bright blue high-heeled 
boots. Kids who like the fantastical elements of Dahl will flock to this; wing-mak-
ing is optional.  JH
AshmAn, linDA M Is for Mischief: An A to Z of Naughty Children; illus. by Nancy 
Carpenter. Dutton, 2008 48p
ISBN 978-0-525-47564-4 $16.99   
R Gr. 3-5
Twenty-six poems, bracketed by an intro and a cautionary valedictory, showcase a 
collection of troublesome tykes. The alphabetical theme extends not just to the name 
of the featured kid and his or her key characteristic (“Angry Abby,” “Catastrophic 
Coco,” “Kicking Ken”), but also to the verses themselves, which take alliteration to 
tongue-twisting heights (the “Terrible Twins” “terrorize their timid sisters/ Trash the 
house like tiny twisters”). The best of the entries have a Struwwelpeter-like trajectory, 
ending with a suitable comeuppance (Angry Abby makes a fatal misstep when she 
picks a fight with “that awful alligator”) that’s as enjoyably awful as the miscreants 
themselves. The verse is rollicking as well as snarky, varying format from entry to 
entry to keep things lively. Carpenter’s illustrations combine loose-lined scrawls that 
somehow have a touch of formality in their figure drawing, planes of digital hues 
in contrasting or coordinating colors, and elements of photocollage, making for an 
outré blend of slightly retro (there’s a touch of Harriet Pincus to the kids’ faces) and 
digital millennium. Kids taken with Gaiman’s Dangerous Alphabet (BCCB 6/08) or 
Kennedy’s classic Brats (BCCB 7/86) will find this their destructive cup of tea, and 
it could also provide lively fodder for a raucous cautionary readaloud.  DS
Bee, WilliAm Beware of the Frog; written and illus. by William Bee. Candlewick, 
2008 40p
ISBN 978-0-7636-3920-4 $15.99   
R 5-8 yrs
Don’t mess with little old Mrs. Collywobbles: she may look unintimidating, in her 
sweet little cottage at the edge of the wood, but she’s got surprises up her sleeve. 
That’s discovered by a goblin, a troll, and an ogre, who successively approach 
Mrs. C’s cottage with an eye to making a meal of her, or at least stinking her out 
of her house, only to find that the lady’s pet frog puts a quick end to their ambi-
tions by swallowing the intruders right up. Mrs. Collywobbles is very grateful to 
her helpful frog, but there are a few more surprises in store . . . Bee, author of 
Whatever (BCCB 12/05), again demonstrates his taste for the consumptive, and 
young audiences will devour with relish (or without) the story of eaters getting 
eaten; the double-twist at the end is a little random and it will probably catch 
even the most suspicious unawares, but they’ll adore its complete irreverence. The 
digital art is a wondrous balance of color and textures; the woods are lacily sinister 
earth tones, while Mrs. C’s yard is a tidy verdant sanctuary for lollipop-esque 
flowers in candy hues, all with graphic flair that marries design with functional 
illustration. Kids who like their picture-book sagas more tart than sweet (in other 
words, anybody who liked Willis’ Tadpole’s Promise, BCCB 7/05) will find this a 
tasty morsel indeed.  DS
July/AugusT 2008 • 459
Bell, CAthleen DAvitt Slipping. Bloomsbury, 2008 [224p]
ISBN 978-1-59990-258-6 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
Initially, it isn’t much of a blow to Michael when his father’s father dies, as his family 
hasn’t been in touch with the old guy since Michael, now in eighth grade, was seven 
years old. The matter becomes more immediate to Michael, though, when he begins 
to know things Grandpa knew, share Grandpa’s tastes, and see Grandpa’s reflection 
in mirrors instead of his own. What Michael is doing is “slipping,” dipping into 
the river between life and death, and while that’s great for his grandfather, who has 
unfinished business with the living that keeps him from resting, it leaves Michael 
increasingly at risk of entirely slipping away in the river. Bell capably crafts the fam-
ily dynamics and human behaviors that led to Grandpa’s initial estrangement and 
now replicatate themselves with his son; her portrait of a household where short, 
cello-playing Michael feels lost in his perfect older sister’s shadow is understated but 
credible. Michael’s narration is matter-of-fact and unfussy, so his worries—about 
his family, about his situation, about the fact that his former best friend is leaving 
him behind for cooler schoolmates—make him sympathetic rather than pathetic, 
especially since his perceptions are clearly correct. The book also manages to move 
Michael closer to everybody without overdosing on the warm fuzzies, so it ends 
up as a genuinely thoughtful but never embarrassingly sentimental look at the way 
guys, grown and otherwise, can have a tough time being close to those they care 
for the most.  DS
Berne, Jennifer Manfish: A Story of Jacques Cousteau; illus. by Éric 
Puybaret. Chronicle, 2008 32p
ISBN 978-0-8118-6063-5 $16.99   
Ad 6-9 yrs
The famed marine naturalist gets the picture-book biography treatment here, 
starting with his youthful fascination with the water and with invention. The book 
then describes his travels with the French Navy and his invention of the aqualung, 
which finally permitted him to make the undersea explorations of which he’d 
always dreamed; those explorations eventually opened his eyes to the toll human 
carelessness was taking on the oceans and made him a leading advocate for the 
environment. This is really a thematic evocation rather than a biography, since 
it’s more about Cousteau’s thoughts and evolving philosophy than his life details 
(there’s not a single date in the book proper, for instance, and only a peripheral 
one in the notes), and the writing is at times mannered in its tendency to make 
a stylistic trope out of repeated sentence fragments (“Films that played in movie 
theaters. Films that played on TV”). It’s therefore somewhat slight as a chronicle, 
but it offers a colorful and evocative picture of one man’s long love affair with the 
world below the waves. Acrylic illustrations make much use of smoky turquoise 
and jade green, even in the skies, suggesting the dominant shades of Cousteau’s 
water-focused existence, and one foldout vertical spread dramatizes the depths to 
which he would literally sink. Smoothly modeled figures of human (Cousteau is 
often distinguishable by his famous hawk’s nose) and marine critters populate the 
spreads, making the underwater world into a lively multispecies crossroads. This 
might serve as useful background information for a showing of Cousteau’s compel-
ling videos, and it would pique the interest of young ocean enthusiasts. There’s an 
appended author’s note with a few details about Cousteau’s life and some vague 
encouragement toward environmentalism; no source notes are included.  DS
460 • The BulleTin
BirDsAll, JeAnne The Penderwicks on Gardam Street. Knopf, 2008 308p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-94090-3 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-84090-6 $15.99   
R Gr. 4-7
The Penderwick daughters and their faithful hound have sturdily borne comparison 
to favorite families of children’s literature of yore; indeed, if you were to throw the 
March sisters and the Bastables into a large sack, shake them up, and tip them out 
into the twenty-first century, you’d have a good idea of the depth and derivation of 
characterization in this gently comic sequel to The Penderwicks (BCCB 9/05). In 
it, Daddy has been widowed for four years, and his sister decides it’s time to give 
him the mandate-to-date letter that his wife left in her charge in the days before her 
death. His four daughters are properly horrified at the possibility of a stepmother, 
but their attempts at sabotage are tempered by their reluctance to submit their father 
to the torture of a truly bad date. Predictably for a tale of such a nostalgic cast, 
the perfect woman has already moved in next door; Ianthus is a beautiful, brainy 
astrophysicist who also happens to be a widowed parent. As each girl finds herself 
embroiled in a crisis appropriate to her temperament, Ianthus proves a worthy 
confidante and advisor, and her toddler son and knowing feline charm the girls 
into the idea of a blended family almost before they know what’s hit them. Those 
who find the plot summary excessively sweet will probably find the book so, but 
there are plenty of readers young and old who can ride the sugar rush, especially 
as it is sandwiched in substantive wit with a healthy dollop of suspense predicated 
on lies and deceptions that inevitably collapse on themselves. All of the elements 
here—death, deceit, stepfamilies, first crushes, fits of temper, literary allusions, even 
crime and stranger danger—are meringue-light and completely lacking in edginess; 
instead, Birdsall pays tender homage to contemporary kids who don’t measure their 
worth in angst and brand names or walk around perpetually attached to devices 
but who do appreciate a solid, well-told story.  KC
BorDen, louise Off to First Grade; illus. by Joan Rankin. McElderry, 
2008 40p
ISBN 978-0-689-87395-9 $16.99   
R* 4-7 yrs
It’s that thrilling, nerve-wracking first day of first grade for twenty-three newcom-
ers to Mrs. Miller’s class. Their progression from home to school is documented 
in snippets of prose with ragged-right margins, with the speakers (named before 
each entry) proceeding alphabetically from eager young Anna to principal Mr. 
Zimmerman (Mrs. Miller and the bus driver Xavier fill out the roster for full 
alphabetical representation). The sequence is gentle yet genuinely perceptive in its 
documentation of the varying responses to the dramatic transition from home to 
school: some kids revel on the school bus together, some receive guidance from 
siblings, some clutch a parent’s hand, and emotions range from glee to trepidation, 
so odds are good that audience members will find their own feelings reflected. 
Rankin’s watercolor illustrations are tender, characterful, and slightly silly, with the 
cast all animals but their poses and lives resoundingly human (Otto, a pug puppy, 
gets red sneakers from his doting cloche-hatted grandmother, while bunny Yoshi 
clings to her floppy-eared dad, who hops along in comfortable sweats); colors are 
delicate but enjoyably juicy, and landscapes sport finely brushed detail that gives a 
little texture and backbone to their soft prettiness. Kids will find this a reassuring 
aid to imagining the unimaginable or a prompt to tell about their own first-day 
experiences.  DS
July/AugusT 2008 • 461
BriDges, shirin Yim The Umbrella Queen; illus. by Taeeun Yoo. Greenwillow, 
2008 [40p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-075041-1 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-075040-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-8 yrs
Umbrellas are a big deal in this country Thai village, and young Noot, a reliable 
participant in the annual New Year’s Day umbrella parade, dreams someday of 
being declared the Umbrella Queen. Eager to join the family tradition of making 
umbrellas, she proves herself gifted at painting decoration on them, but her tastes 
are unconventional, leaning to playful elephants rather than the traditional flowers 
and butterflies. Though she dutifully returns to the more marketable themes to 
support the family business, it’s her free-spirited elephant umbrellas that catch the 
eye of the king when he comes to the village to choose the Umbrella Queen. The 
text is somewhat lengthy, but the story is quiet yet charming, tactfully respecting 
both the family’s need to produce merchandise that sells and the young girl’s cre-
ative impulses, and giving her a child-appealing reward indeed. Yoo’s illustrations, 
linoleum prints touched with pencil, have a delicacy and richness unusual in prints, 
with several layers of color in each spread and the pencilwork adding detail. The 
result is print-orderly, with the creamy pages and strong emphasis on harvest gold 
and olive green suggesting craftwork themselves, even as smaller elements add more 
illustrative personality. Noot’s gamboling elephants are entrancing, but they’re also 
credible as design elements for her umbrellas. The story is well turned in its own 
right, and it could easily be enhanced with an Internet look of some contemporary 
examples of the famous Thai sun umbrellas and perhaps even a classroom design 
project.  DS 
Cottin, menenA The Black Book of Colors; tr. from the Spanish by Elisa Amado; 
illus. by Rosana Faría. Groundwood/House of Anansi, 2008 24p
ISBN 978-0-88899-873-6 $17.95   
Ad 6-9 yrs
“Thomas says that yellow tastes like mustard, but is as soft as a baby chick’s feathers.” 
So begins this creative exploration into color conveyed non-visually, with each spread 
presenting Thomas’ characterization of a different color, always evoking it through 
taste, smell, feel, or sound, never appearance (it’s likely but never stated that Thomas 
is blind). The pages, all black save for the white text (though the jacket does offer 
some lighter-toned graphic linework as well as lettering), use black-on-black spot 
lamination to convey color without color, with delicate traceries of feathers, cheer-
fully fringed kites, and spotty raindrops making themselves felt as well as seen; spot 
lamination also provides a Braille transcription of the text above the Roman-alphabet 
version (the Braille alphabet is included in back). Though the text is a little catalogue-
ish, this is an elegant and artistic project, and it’s sure to elicit some contemplation 
and discussion from young audiences. Ultimately, though, the aesthetic enterprise 
actually privileges the visual rather than conveying sightless experience, with all the 
sensual evocations of colors tightly tied to objects possessing the relevant hue, and 
the Braille isn’t sufficiently raised to be genuinely read via fingertip. The gleaming 
black lines on black backgrounds are less tactilely than visually interesting, since 
they’re a little samey to touch and not particularly evocative of the sensations the 
text describes; they do, though, offer new realms to explore for visually impaired 
kids left out of the fun of most picture-book pages.  DS
462 • The BulleTin
Crimi, CArolYn Where’s My Mummy?; illus. by John Manders. Candlewick, 
2008 [30p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-3196-3 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-6 yrs
Even little horrors have bedtime issues: Little Baby Mummy begs Big Mama 
Mummy for one more game of Hide and Shriek, but when he darts off into the 
graveyard, he can’t find his mother. What he can find is a sequence of monsters, each 
heralded by a creepy, scary noise (“Clank clink clank/ Woo boo woo/ Clank clink 
CLOO”) and revealed by a page turn; however, these monsters are the neighborly 
sort, well acquainted with the Mummy clan and preparing to hit the hay themselves, 
and they simply shoo Little Baby Mummy off to bed. LBM finally yelps for his 
mother when he encounters something really frightening—a mouse—and Mummy 
Mummy takes him home and tucks him in for cozy night’s sleep. The ironic reveal 
of LBM’s truly feared critter doesn’t have the comic impact it really needs after 
such a buildup, but the book does a nice job of setting up the encounter arcs with 
the scary monsters who aren’t so scary, and the additional detail that they’re doing 
bedtime prep themselves (prep that mother and son mummies themselves follow 
once they get home) adds to the absurd yet homey flavor. The gouache art is broadly 
comedic, with opaque pigments and touches of loud color ensuring that the chills 
remain jokey rather than sinister. Little Baby Mummy is a compact roundheaded 
dude whose beady eyes, facial bandage position, and body language are so expressive 
as to make viewers forget he’s essentially got no face. There’s obvious Halloween 
potential here, but there are plenty of kids who’d year-round rather head off to 
dreamland with a cool mummy than a cuddly critter, and they’ll appreciate this 
monstrous bedtime story.  DS
DAle, AnnA Spellbound. Bloomsbury, 2008 [300p]
ISBN 978-1-59990-006-3 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-7
Twelve-year-old Athene is so tired of her six-year-old brother, Zach, that when an 
opportunity unexpectedly presents itself, she gets rid of him, deliberately sending 
him to shelter under a particular tree, known to the gnome-like “Gloam” folk as 
the tree whose roots would pull you down into the land of the Low Gloam, where 
you would have to work forever. Soon overcome with regret, Athene, with the 
help of new friends from the Humble Tribe of the above-ground Gloams, goes 
forth to rescue young Zach and heads underground to look for him. There she 
becomes part of the multi-species (rabbit, fox, Gloam, and badger, just to name a 
few) workforce enslaved by the Low Gloam, and she spends every spare moment 
on two tasks: searching for her brother, and searching for a way to break the magic 
spell that keeps the workforce imprisoned below the English countryside. This is a 
charming cautionary tale for older siblings, with plenty of remorse, adventure, and 
success to keep youngsters turning pages. From Athene’s scheming to her change 
of heart, middle-schoolers will identify with her dilemma, and they’ll share her 
sense of empowerment as she finds a way to save the day. Plenty of action moves 
the narrative along, and simple magic comes into play at key moments, helping 
Athene and her posse solve problems without adult intervention. After following 
Athene on her rescue and retrieval mission, young readers will wish for their own 
time underground with stalwart Gloam-ish and animal companions.  CW
July/AugusT 2008 • 463
DAvis, tAnitA s. A La Carte. Knopf, 2008 [288p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-94815-2 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-84815-5 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Cooking is Lainey’s life: she’s grown up learning the ropes in her mother’s restaurant, 
she’s always trying new recipes, and she’s dreaming of being the first female African-
American celebrity chef. The fly in the batter is her longterm crush on Simeon, her 
grade-school best friend and now a big question mark, since he mostly just turns 
up to borrow class notes at the last minute and chow down on her sample baked 
goods, but Lainey’s devotion to him begins to lead her into carelessness that starts 
to damage her relationship with her mother. While this might at first seem to be a 
story about best friends turning to romance, Davis stealthily turns it into a more 
truthful tale of a girl stuck on a guy who’s taking advantage of her. Since readers 
view the situation through narrator Lainey’s eyes, they’ll understand her position 
and share some of her bias even as they realize before she does that Simeon’s all 
about Simeon. The tight relationship between mother (loving but definitely strict) 
and daughter (a complete novice at disobedience) is warmly depicted, but driven 
Lainey isn’t just a nice girl being done wrong—she’s clearly somewhat standoffish 
at school and even regularly rude to the son of her mother’s friend, who turns out 
to be an okay guy when she finally gets to know him. Refreshingly, she doesn’t end 
up in the arms of the unexpected boy either—the success here is Lainey’s pulling 
herself together to aim for what she truly wants, and readers will be glad to see her 
really start to cook.  DS
DohertY, Berlie The Girl Who Saw Lions. Porter/Roaring Brook, 
2008 [256p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-377-9 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
Nine-year-old Abela is left alone with her grandmother when her father, mother, 
and baby sister die of AIDS in their Tanzanian village; before she has time to 
properly grieve, she is whisked away to London by her uncle, who has a scheme to 
sell her and other little African girls to rich white families as servants. In the Brit-
ish city of Sheffield, a young girl named Rosa is trying to cope with the fact that 
her single mother wants to adopt a child; she’s hurt that she isn’t enough for her 
mother, until she finds out that her mother wants a child from Tanzania, where 
Rosa’s father originates, so that Rosa will have a sister who looks like her. Tired of 
being trapped in their flat by the woman her uncle married in an attempt to secure 
citizenship, Abela goes to school, where her plight draws the attention of social 
services and eventually leads her to foster care and then a permanent home with 
Rosa and her mother. By alternating perspectives between the two girls and also 
alternating point of view within their stories, Doherty is able to effectively draw out 
the emotion-laden nuances of the traumatized and grieving Abela and the relatively 
more privileged Rosa. Rosa is mildly and understandably selfish as the only child of 
a loving mother and doting grandparents; her changing reactions to her mother’s 
plan are completely reasonable, and her reluctant acceptance of an adoptive sibling 
is credibly portrayed. Abela’s journey is of course far more harrowing, and her stoic 
resilience will no doubt have the desired impact of inspiring compassion for AIDS 
orphans and illegal child immigrants. Elements such as the commonality of African 
464 • The BulleTin
refugees and the issue of asylum seekers mark this as British, but American readers 
will also find themselves deeply invested in both girls’ stories.  KC 
DoYle, mAlAChY Horse; illus. by Angelo Rinaldi. McElderry, 2008 28p
ISBN 978-1-4169-2467-8 $16.99   
Ad 3-6 yrs
A lovely palomino mare, the mount of a young girl, gives birth in spring to a 
sweet, gangly foal. As the year passes, the colt gets bigger and stronger, and next 
spring the girl is starting to train him and to dream about their future adventures 
together. There’s essentially no story here; the text, a British import retaining the 
technical terms of its homeland, is mostly a series of pleasant moments. Its very 
compactness, though, will help make it accessible to kids just heading out of the 
“Horsey!” stage, infatuated with velvety muzzles and foals and not yet insistent 
on verisimilitude in their pretend horse ownership. The real magnetism here lies 
in Rinaldi’s oil paintings: oversized pages and glamorized photorealism offer real 
competition to the pleasures of being there. While the draftsmanship is occasion-
ally a little strained, the up-close details of silky manes and limpid eyes will, as 
undoubtedly intended, make horse-mad youngsters sigh in sheer yearning, and the 
idyllic visions of a verdant meadow laden with buttercups or bedecked with but-
terflies, depending on the season, only add to the desirability of the fantasy. This 
lacks the compelling story of Doherty’s Snowy (BCCB 4/93) or other early horse 
books, but youngsters already heading down the conceptual bridle path will find 
plenty of fodder for dreams here.  DS
Dunnion, KristYn Big Big Sky. Red Deer, 2008 244p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-88995-404-5 $14.95   
R Gr. 9-12
This sophisticated science-fiction novel explores subjugation, resistance, and the 
mutability of identity through the life-changing events of one small group of tight-
knit female warriors. All of Earth is run by ScanMans, an alien race that saw the 
planet’s imminent collapse and staked a claim on the remaining population. Rustle 
and her four companions are being raised to be aggressive, clever, and above all, 
obedient. However, when they spot their own destruction, a “deplugging” of their 
current brains, in the works, they resist all of their training and make a run for what 
seems an impossible freedom. Though none of the five finds anything resembling 
utopia or even true happiness, each concludes that even a brief, violent, tortured 
free life is preferable to imprisonment. This grim overall theme plays out elegantly 
in the hands of Canadian author Dunnion, who imbues each of the five teens with 
a haunting balance of well-developed individuality and “pod” connection that 
shapes their actions as they move in and out of each other’s lives. In addition, the 
book vividly conveys the frightening glory of the open sky to five adolescents raised 
inside of a mountain training camp, adding atmosphere to the otherwise familiar 
landscape in which the escape plays out. The immediate immersion into a jargon-
filled vocabulary and futuristic societal arrangement requires much of readers, but 
they will be more than compensated with this tension-filled, haunting tale.  AS
Durst, sArAh Beth Out of the Wild. Razorbill, 2008 [272p]
ISBN 978-1-59514-159-0 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-8
Julie Marchen, Rapunzel’s twelve-year-old daughter who first appeared in Into the 
July/AugusT 2008 • 465
Wild (BCCB 7/07), now chases her charming father, the prince, from Massachusetts 
to California in a desperate attempt to prevent him from saving Snow White, who 
has been snatched by an unknown assailant. Although most of the fairy-tale folk 
now living in contemporary America are happy with their new lives away from 
the Grimm world of eating children, fighting dragons, and climbing beanstalks, 
someone has made a deal with the Wild (the pure essence of all fairy tales), and 
its thorny tentacles are threatening to bring a return to the days of yore. Unless 
Julie can recapture the seething green mass of trouble, expose its two-legged co-
conspirator, and stop them both, everyone will become part of the never-ending 
story. Durst drops new readers too abruptly into the nonstop action in this sequel, 
and newcomers will need to do some catching up in order to grasp the threat 
represented by the Wild; the plot is also episodic rather than cohesive, so it’s more 
diverting than involving. Readers will nonetheless be amused to see familiar villains 
and heroes, as well as the varied series of landmarks ranging from Disneyland to 
the Grand Canyon, on the cross-country chase. Durst’s humor continues to be 
firmly tongue in cheek, as when Snow is temporarily lodged at the American king’s 
castle known as Graceland, or when Julie follows her father on a flying bathmat. 
With its princesses, cooking cows, wicked librarians, and a teen who can save the 
world, this sequel will likely appeal to those who enjoyed previously tangling with 
the Wild.  CW
elYA, susAn miDDleton Bebé Goes to the Beach; illus. by Steven Salerno. Har-
court, 2008 34p
ISBN 978-0-15-206000-8 $16.00   
R 3-7 yrs
If Bebé could turn a trip to the supermercado into an adventure (Bebé Goes Shopping, 
BCCB 6/06), imagine what he can do at the seashore. Again, the huge-headed, 
springy-haired dynamo is one step ahead of his long-suffering but sweet-tempered 
mother, making a beeline for the waves, dumping sand on Mamá’s belly, tasting the 
seaweed (“¡Mala!”), crushing a fragile surfboard entry in a sand sculpture contest. 
Bebé may think he’s on the loose, but Mamá is always there to catch him up in her 
protective arms and settle him down—albeit temporarily—with a kiss. His antics 
transpire in smoothly scanning verse, the poetry heavily packed with bold-faced 
Spanish terms. Lots of bright colors and curvy lines pump up the energy level, 
and red figure outlining adds some subtle spice. A comprehensive glossary with 
pronunciations is appended for readers in need of a linguistic cheat sheet, and lus-
cious, leggy, doe-eyed Mamá may entice Daddy to volunteer for extra readaloud 
time.  EB
emerson, Kevin Oliver Nocturne. Scholastic, 2008 [224p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-545-05801-8 $5.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-6
Though he looks thirteen, Oliver Nocturne is actually a vampire going on sixty-
three years old, and he is nearing his time of cohesion, the process of a vampire’s 
joining to his own personal demon. When humans Emalie and her sidekick Dean 
come to the tumble-down ruin of the house that camouflages Oliver’s underground 
living quarters in order to document the presence of vampires in their contemporary 
Seattle neighborhood, Oliver finds himself drawn to them. During a perilous trip 
the threesome takes to the vast vampire city that thrives beneath Seattle, Oliver 
discovers that he is part human and that the man he thought was his father actually 
466 • The BulleTin
“turned” him and murdered his human parents. Bane, his brother, pushes Oliver 
to accept his vampiric future, and the result is Dean’s death, a rupture in Oliver’s 
friendship with Emalie, and a meeting with his soon-to-be demon Illisius, dur-
ing which Oliver learns of his portentous destiny. The story too often gets buried 
under world-building in this first title in a series, and the hanging plotlines and 
abrupt ending similarly suggest that some satisfactions will have to be obtained 
from subsequent volumes. The creepy details are abundantly supplied, however, 
and readers will relish the frisson of refrigerators full of flash-fried tarantulas and 
various blood types. The gore is present but it’s restrained, with Dean’s death, for 
example, pushed offstage in order to cast doubt on who really murdered him. 
Fans of young vampires or those intrigued by Oliver’s friendship with Emalie may 
therefore look forward to more time in Oliver’s world.  CW
ferris, JeAn Twice upon a Marigold. Harcourt, 2008 297p
ISBN 978-0-15-206382-5 $17.00   
Ad Gr. 5-8
Some people should never be pulled out of the river once they’ve fallen from grace. 
Such is the case with Olympia, the queen who attempted to kill her daughter and 
her husband in Once upon a Marigold (BCCB 2/03). She’s back, however, after 
having spent an amnesiac year being loving and kind in a small town. The restora-
tion of her memory also restores her noxious personality, and she heads back to 
Beaurivage to finish the plot she started—to kill her rivals and establish herself as 
sole ruler. Marigold, now married to Christian, plots with her imprisoned father, 
cousin, and Christian’s adoptive father, Ed, to overthrow the queen and settle her 
hash once and for all. They succeed in a bloodless coup and use a convenient spell 
to rid Olympia of her bad side, keeping the mild-mannered half of her personal-
ity, which had been beloved before her memory returned. Predictably plotted and 
simply not as witty as the first, this sequel depends for its charm on the reader’s 
fondness for its predecessor. Fortunately, it’s well paced, it’s generally entertaining 
enough through its continuity of character to function as adequate closure, and 
the new characters of Lazy Susan and Stan Lucasa add sweet spice, if a rather silly 
surprise ending, to the story. Fans don’t really need to go past the first title, but 
readers who absolutely require a beyond happily-ever-after may find this a divert-
ing continuation.  KC 
fleisChmAn, siD The Trouble Begins at 8: A Life of Mark Twain in the Wild, Wild 
West. Greenwillow, 2008 [224p] illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-134432-9 $19.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-134431-2 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-9
Whether readers are well versed in Twain’s prose or can claim little more than 
recognition of his name, Fleischman has much to offer them in this freewheeling 
biography. With fleeting attention to the drier data required for book reports (most 
of that, in fact, is best accessed through the appended timeline), Fleischman focuses 
on episodes from Clemens’/Twain’s peripatetic career, particularly those he spun 
into his comedy-laced lectures and incorporated into his stories and novels. A verbal 
showman in his own right, Fleischman is inclined to let Twain have his unedited 
say, and then straighten out the facts in his own good time, which may not occur in 
some cases until his final chapter, “The Truth, More or Less.” What truly sets this 
biography in a class by itself, though, is how enthusiastically Fleischman assumes 
July/AugusT 2008 • 467
Twain’s tone of humbuggery to play the warm-up act for his subject’s texts (“It was 
commonly held on the freshly plowed frontier that anyone who could count to 
twenty without taking off his shoes was qualified to teach school”) and the deep 
respect with which he treats Twain’s personal demons and social critique. Plenty 
of illustrations and photographs pepper the presentation, and end matter includes 
quote citations, an index, and, as a welcome bonus, “The Celebrated Jumping Frog 
of Calaveras County.”  EB
fleming, Denise Buster Goes to Cowboy Camp; written and illus. by Denise 
Fleming. Holt, 2008 34p
ISBN 978-0-8050-7892-3 $16.95   
R 6-9 yrs
When Brown Shoes, the owner of Buster the dog, goes away for the weekend, 
it’s off to doggie “cowboy camp” for Buster. Despite being greeted by Red Boots 
with “a big cowboy howdy” and receiving a snappy blue bandanna, “Buster was 
not happy. Buster was homesick.” Of course, as Buster’s stay progresses he gradu-
ally settles in, and though the book ends before he is reunited with Brown Shoes, 
things look pretty positive for the canine camper. Eleven short, titled segments tell 
Buster’s story in a chapter-book-like manner suitable for early readers as well as 
reading aloud, and a glossary of “cowpoke words” is included on the back cover. 
Although the camp activities seem, for the most part, appropriately dog-centric (the 
dogs play with balls and help gather sticks for the campfire), Buster’s worries and 
his subsequent adjustment to camp life will surely resonate with any human kid 
who’s had an extended overnight stay away from home. Fleming’s pulp paintings 
are vibrant, warm, and reassuringly solid, and the paprika-colored, medium-sized 
Buster emotes quite successfully through the varied positioning of his pointy ears 
(almost bunny-like in length), nose, and tail. Round up the kids (and maybe even 
the dogs) and share this one around the campfire.  JH
forester, viCtoriA The Girl Who Could Fly. Feiwel, 2008 [208p]
ISBN 978-0-312-37462-4 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7
The Institute of Normalcy, Stability and NonExceptionality, aka I.N.S.A.N.E., 
seems initially to be a haven for Piper McCloud when she develops the ability 
to fly, which makes her an outsider in her small community. Life in the concrete 
underground bunker is initially fairly pleasant, but soon Piper and her fellow in-
mates discover the real purpose of their stay there: Dr. Letitia Hellion, champion 
of all that is normal and unremarkable, is prepared to go to any length necessary in 
order to wipe out any traces of the rare or unusual in plants, animals, or humans. 
Since the children are each remarkably gifted—in addition to Piper’s airworthi-
ness, there’s Smitty’s X-ray vision, Daisy’s superhuman strength, Myrtle’s speedy 
feet, and Conrad’s peerless genius—they’re in serious danger; after an attempted 
breakout is foiled and Piper, a favorite among the group, returns from several 
months’ absence crippled in mind and body, the kids decide to fight back. Forester 
grounds this domestically rooted fantasy in a downhome and folksy world popu-
lated with characters named Sally Sue, Millie Mae and Rory Rae, but it’s effectively 
straightforward in conveying the menace of the facility and its mission. This is a 
strong adventure story, with a few dark moments that illustrate the consequences 
of evil, made all the more appealing by the opportunity for smart kids to overcome 
wrong-thinking adults.  CW
468 • The BulleTin
freDeriCKs, mAriAh In the Cards: Life. Jackson/Atheneum, 2008 [272p]
ISBN 978-0-689-87658-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
Friends Anna, Eve, and Syd return here, and this time it’s Syd’s turn to get a reading 
of the Tarot cards that have proved prophetic for her best buds (see In the Cards: 
Love, BCCB 1/07, and In the Cards: Fame, BCCB 1/08). Since Syd’s already anx-
ious—about her moody and increasingly unreliable father, about the distance she 
feels separates her from Anna and Eve, and about her beloved elderly cat—she’s 
thoroughly creeped out by a reading laden with death and doom. The girls wrestle 
with their belief in the cards, which have been steering Anna and Eve toward highly 
desirable outcomes, and things look up a little when Syd’s crush on Eve’s older 
brother looks to be going somewhere more concrete, but soon it seems that, cards 
or no, all three girls are hitting tough times. Fredericks adroitly ups the stakes for 
this presumably concluding volume by overtly addressing the fact that the cards 
aren’t destiny and by turning her lens onto the relationship between the friends, 
strained here by Syd’s feeling of outsiderdom and Eve’s jealousy when Syd embarks 
on her relationship with Mark. Syd’s narration is effective in conveying her biased 
viewpoint—she’s initially determined to loyally defend her father against what she 
sees as her mother’s judgmentality—while hinting at the realism beyond, and the 
exploration of her relationship with her father is much more than a problem novel 
about his drinking; in fact, that’s what finally opens her eyes to her tendency to 
model herself on her father’s weaknesses as well as his gifts. Though this is Syd’s story, 
all three girls have been given enough success in their desired areas to satisfyingly 
wrap up the trilogy, if such is the plan; on the other hand, the cards have provided 
a splendid way to focus and explore classic teen anxieties, and they may have still 
more secrets to reveal to our intrepid friends.  DS
frenCh, viviAn The Robe of Skulls; illus. by Ross Collins. Candlewick, 
2008 [208p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-3531-2 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-7
Young Gracie Gillypot has escaped from her evil stepfather and stepsister Foyce 
with help from a bat named Marlon, who has plans for her that involve a mysteri-
ous group he calls “the Crones.” Meanwhile, Foyce, pursing Gracie, comes upon a 
rather desperate sorceress named Lamorna and eagerly becomes part of Lamorna’s 
dastardly plan to kidnap all the area princes and maybe a few princesses, too, and 
turn them into frogs so that their royal parents will pay large amounts of money to 
have the spell undone. As Gracie flees and Lamorna and Foyce plot, young Prince 
Marcus—the naughty half of a pair of twin princes—plays hooky and discovers 
Lamorna’s plans just a little too late. This engaging frolic is campily over-the-top 
rather than scary, featuring deliciously resonant character names such as Mange 
Undershaft and kingdoms like Gorebreath and Dreghorn. Collins’ black-and-white 
line drawings, dropped haphazardly into the text, perfectly complement the story, 
offering visual metaphors for the heady narrative mix of melodrama and humor. 
Middle-schoolers will find a lot to love in the story elements, such as stew that 
is either satisfying or stupefying depending on the trueness of your heart, and a 
troll that cheerfully wears his head backwards for part of the story. This is a clever 
take on elements familiar to fairy-tale readers, one that will have them applauding 
Gracie’s, Marcus’, and Marlon’s ingenuity.  CW
July/AugusT 2008 • 469
gAlAnte, CeCiliA  Hershey Herself. Aladdin Mix, 2008 330p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4169-5463-7 $5.99   
Ad Gr. 5-8
With the aid of her friend Phoebe, Hershey has been trying to needle her mother’s 
tempestuous live-in boyfriend into leaving. Her plans go nastily awry, however, 
when Slade instead beats Hershey’s mother up, and Mom, Hershey, and Hershey’s 
baby half-sister leave in a hurry for a woman’s shelter. Once at the shelter, fourteen-
year-old Hershey finds her fellow shelter residents a surprisingly interesting bunch, 
and she even develops a secret pattern of music lessons with the hot-tempered Lupe, 
who’s teaching Hershey to play the piano. Hershey’s progress is so prodigious, in 
fact, that she decides to enter the town’s big talent show, in the hopes that the cash 
prize will be enough for her mother to start anew and to convince her to resist 
the pull of her abusive boyfriend. It’s unusual to see an abuse story that doesn’t 
just end with departure for the shelter but actually follows the protagonist’s life 
there, and Galante (who, according to a note, spent time in such a shelter) creates 
a well-drawn cast of residents with believable variety in their situations and their 
commitments to change. The book piles on too many plot threads, however, and 
plows through credibility in its determination to tie them all together; Hershey’s 
sudden eruption of piano skills, for instance, is never believable, and the focus on 
a small-town talent show that will make or break the futures of the various entrants 
is pure soap opera. Hershey remains a sympathetic protagonist, though, and readers 
will be happy to see her finding better times.  DS
gAlAnte, CeCiliA The Patron Saint of Butterflies. Bloomsbury, 2008 292p
ISBN 978-1-59990-249-4 $16.95   
Ad Gr. 6-9
Though they both have grown up at the Mount Blessing religious commune, best 
friends Agnes and Honey, who alternate narration, lead very different lives there. 
Agnes, who lives with her parents and younger brother, Benny, is devout and 
determined, seeking to emulate the self-recriminating saints she reveres; Honey, 
abandoned at the commune as a baby, secretly watches forbidden television and 
dares to doubt the word of the commune’s leader and his disciples. When Agnes’ 
grandmother comes for a visit, she’s horrified at the commune leader’s refusal to allow 
medical treatment for Agnes’ severely injured brother, and that becomes the final 
push for her to spirit Agnes, Honey, and Benny away from the commune. That’s 
not the end of the drama for the girls, however, as Agnes is appalled by the outside 
world and seeks to return to the fold, while Honey finds out shocking information 
about her own past. The religious commune makes for an interesting setting, and 
readers will certainly be inspired to contemplate moral and spiritual questions along 
with its young residents. The story is rich with implausible contrivance, however, 
from Honey’s discovery of her secret family (she’s actually Agnes’ cousin) to Benny’s 
being yanked away from a hospital sans pain pills the day after delicate and extensive 
surgery, and it’s never believable that Honey would be such a mainstream-culture 
kid merely from private exposure to television. The book also stacks its moral deck, 
conflating spiritual rectitude with cultural dominance and leaving a trail of holes in 
its objections to the Mount Blessing teachings that sharp kids will enjoy widening 
with informed argument. Readers may nonetheless find secret satisfaction in the 
repudiation of authority, food for thought in Agnes’ shocked view of the outside 
world, and enjoyment in the involving melodrama.  DS 
470 • The BulleTin
gArDner, sAllY The Red Necklace: A Story of the French Revolution. Dial, 
2008 378p
ISBN 978-0-8037-3100-4 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 6-9
The horrible winter in 1789 France isn’t just politically worrisome for Yann, a Gypsy 
boy whose special gifts make him an invaluable part of a performing troupe; first, 
his master is murdered by the machiavellian Count Kalliovski, and then his per-
forming compatriot and foster father is also shot, forcing Yann to flee to England. 
There he’s raised into young gentlemanhood, and he realizes that he yearns for 
Sido, the daughter of the French marquis who hired Yann’s troupe for its fatal last 
performance. Coincidentally, when the turmoil of revolution makes Sido’s worried 
English relatives wish for her to leave her unstable father (who is preparing to sell 
her hand in marriage to the count in exchange for forgiveness of his debts) and join 
them in safety there, it’s Yann who’s entrusted with the mission. That doesn’t really 
even scratch the surface of a plot crammed with sensational events (aside from mass 
guillotinings, there’s a stage gun altered to really fire and a wall that crumbles under 
the pressure of the revolting peasants), colorful characters (the Micawberesque actor 
who becomes Yann’s tutor), and dramatic devices (chanting automata that hide a 
secret, a garnet-studded necklace that marks a revenge murder). There are also several 
iterations each of hidden parentage and spurned seducers (well, the same seducer 
several times over the years), plus the ever-popular glamorous psychic Gypsies, ele-
ments that could make this a splendidly overegged pudding of historical romance. 
The assemblage ultimately lacks flair, though, with pacing that lags and sags and 
components jealously interrupting one another and interfering with any sustained 
involvement with any one development; these flaws make it difficult to keep disbe-
lief as loftily suspended as the plot requires. Skeptics, rigorous historians, and the 
impatient therefore need not apply, but those who enjoy the opera in the soap and 
the drama in the melo- may find this an enjoyable costume adventure.  DS
golDen, Christopher Poison Ink. Delacorte, 2008 [288p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90481-0 $12.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73483-7 $8.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 10-12
Sammi, TQ, Caryn, Letty, and Katsuko are a tight-knit group of high-school 
juniors who decide to cement their strong friendship by getting the same tattoo. 
The quintet settles out of necessity (since the girls are underage) on Dante’s shop, 
where the proprietor is as disreputable as his rundown neighborhood; there four 
of the girls go through with the procedure while the fifth, Sammi, changes her 
mind for fear of her parents’ reaction. Within a few days, the four tattooed girls 
shun their former friend and become infamous for their lascivious and aggressive 
behavior; Sammi then realizes that the tattoos have put her friends in thrall to dark 
puppet-master Dante and that only she can keep her friends from doom. There are 
missed opportunities here, particularly related to character development, which is 
rudimentary, and a romantic subplot that has possibilities for charm but is handled 
too hastily. The focus on action and sensation, though, will satisfy those in search 
of a quick horror read that includes girl-on-girl violence and a final scene very close 
to splatter-punk. Golden’s descriptions of Sammi’s confusion about her friends are 
effective, and since best-friend drama is a staple of the high school years, girls will 
particularly empathize with Sammi’s trials in finding, then losing, and then finding 
her friends again.  CW
July/AugusT 2008 • 471
grAY, ClAuDiA Evernight. HarperTeen, 2008 [336p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-128443-4 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-128439-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-10
Her parents’ new positions at a boarding school mean that Bianca is now surrounded 
by too-perfect students who make her feel she doesn’t really fit in. Unfortunately, 
they’re right: Bianca was born to two vampires, an exceedingly rare event, while 
the rest of the student population are all vampires who were turned as teens. She 
is thrilled, however, to meet the brooding, mysterious, and ultra-sexy Lucas, a new 
student who is part of a small group of ordinary mortals admitted as a school experi-
ment. A passionate romance ensues, though not without difficulties: Bianca goes 
too far and bites Lucas, requiring the headmaster to erase his memory; even more 
unfortunately, Lucas turns out to be an undercover vampire hunter. However, true 
love transcends such obstacles, and the decision of the two to run away together 
will have a dramatic impact on both the vamps and the organized group of hunters. 
Gray cleverly teases readers with questions about Bianca’s secret well into the novel, 
establishing an effective and well-developed mystery that, once resolved, shifts to a 
steamy romance featuring a couple that truly fits the star-crossed lovers definition. 
The quick pace, captivating gothic setting, and flashy, well-developed conclusion 
make this an ideal summer beach read for teens who enjoy a hearty dose of the 
supernatural mixed in with their romances.  AS
hAgue, miChAel In the Small; written and illus. by Michael Hague with Devon 
Hague. Little, 2008 124p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-01323-9 $19.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-316-01322-2 $12.99   
Ad Gr. 5-7
On what seems a typical September morning, the world changes forever as a blue 
light envelops the planet and shrinks the entire human population to mere inches 
tall. The loss of lives is catastrophic, and the people that remain face innumer-
able challenges just in accomplishing basic tasks, let alone in avoiding the myriad 
new ways in which they can be killed. Two siblings, separated by what is now an 
unsurpassable distance across the city, step up as leaders, gathering survivors and 
making plans for the future. Along the way, all of the remaining humans must 
grieve their losses, adapt to their new weaknesses, and accept the current reality. 
This graphic novel features impressive, intricately detailed artwork that is arresting 
in the powerful use of both color and shading. Unfortunately, the stiff dialogue 
and too-frequent exposition disguised as conversation jar the reader out of the en-
gaging survival story. In addition, the supernatural or interplanetary cause behind 
the blue light largely remains undeveloped, resulting in a cliffhanger ending about 
humans transforming into demons that seems bizarre and sudden. Although the 
art often veers into exaggeration rather than representation, especially in the facial 
expressions of the characters, this approach is ultimately successful as it heightens 
tension, particularly in spots where the text itself may lag. In spite of the flaws, this 
movie-ready plot (and indeed, the cover promises a motion picture is in the works) 
featuring two children who must take the helm while the grownups flounder will 
certainly appeal to kids, who will likely imagine their own courses of action were 
they ever in a similar situation.  AS
472 • The BulleTin
hArDinge, frAnCes Well Witched. HarperCollins, 2008 390p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-088039-2 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-088038-5 $16.99   
R Gr. 6-9
Ryan, Josh, and Chelle have no idea of the dire consequences that will result from 
taking a few moldering coins out of an old well in a seedy English village; they just 
need bus fare. Soon, though, they find that they’re in thrall to the grotesque spirit 
of the well and cursed to fulfill the wishes linked to the coins they stole. They are 
each given different gifts to accomplish their task: Chelle channels the thoughts 
of the wishers, Josh can manipulate metals and harness electrical forces, and Ryan 
receives warts on his hand that open into eyes that enable him to see beyond present 
reality. At first, their position as wish-granters has a certain appeal, but soon Ryan 
and Chelle discover that beneath every spoken wish lies a deeper and usually darker 
unspoken one, and the consequences of their manipulations become increasingly 
disturbing. Josh figures this out too, but he is intoxicated with the wicked power he 
wields, so while Chelle and Ryan attempt to pull back from the witch’s power, Josh 
seeks to accrue more. A serious creep factor attends this richly allusive tale; tendrils 
of ancient myths and stories recall the malevolent mythic creatures that dwell in 
the waters of the British Isles, the grisly horrors of chapbook baddies, The Tempest, 
Children of Green Knowe, and other wispy scraps of half-remembered legends that 
have haunted the dreams of readers throughout the centuries. The use of shop-
ping carts as the well-witch’s minions, spying on the children and herding them 
in directions she wants them to go, introduces an uncanny banality to the ancient 
evil that threatens to destroy them and brings a deliciously unsettling immediacy 
to the horror elements in the text. Hardinge’s keen sense of metaphor and exquisite 
prose create an immersive tonal experience that perfectly complements her water-
whelmed plot; this is definitely one to read with the lights on.  KC
hAYes, geoffreY Benny and Penny in Just Pretend; written and illus. by Geoffrey 
Hayes. Little Lit Library/RAW Junior, 2008 32p (Toon)
ISBN 978-0-9799238-0-7 $12.95   
R Gr. 1-3
lYnCh, JAY Otto’s Orange Day; illus. by Frank Cammuso. Little Lit Library/RAW 
Junior, 2008 40p (Toon)
ISBN 978-0-9799238-2-1 $12.95   
Ad Gr. 2-4
rosenstiehl, Agnès Silly Lilly and the Four Seasons; written and illus. by Agnès 
Rosenstiehl. Little Lit Library/RAW Junior, 2008 36p (Toon)
ISBN 978-0-9799238-1-4 $12.95   
Ad Gr. K-2
The Little Lit mavens come courting the emerging reader set with a trio of “step-
up” style graphic novels. Benny and Penny, a pair of mouse siblings, squabble over 
whether younger Penny is big enough to play pirate with her older brother. Benny 
tries to ditch her with the old hide-and-seek ruse, but Penny gets the upper hand in 
the game, proves to be the braver of the pair when confronted by a huge dragonfly, 
and finally earns her brother’s respect and a big “huggy.” Hayes makes the most 
of the comic-book format by varying panel sizes, occasionally omitting borders, 
spilling the action across frames, tossing in narration boxes, speed lines, sound 
effects, and emanata. It’s a little predictable and old fashioned, but the energy and 
the authenticity of most of the sibling interaction makes it the liveliest of this fresh-
man trio of beginning readers. Cammuso’s cat in Otto’s Orange Day is rendered in 
July/AugusT 2008 • 473
a style that cartoon viewers are most likely to consider the norm—highly stylized, 
with a huge head, small, anthropomorphized body, elastic facial features, and a 
dose of attitude. He doesn’t have much opportunity to show his chops, though, 
in a tame, Midas-inspired tale of a youngster who loves all things orange, uses his 
one wish from an unbottled genie to recolor his world, and then rues his choice. 
Lilly, aimed at the youngest audience, presents five teensy seven-panel stories that 
are more successful at showing children how a comic strip is sequenced than de-
livering a solid plot. Each series of identically sized panels features a single speech 
bubble in which Lilly (evidently repackaged from Rosenstiehl’s Mimi Cracra) 
comments on a seasonal activity: e.g., eating apples in fall, finding an occupied sea 
shell in summer. Pictures of sturdy little Lilly boast strong colors and streamlined 
compositions, but come up woefully short in the promised silliness department. 
With the bounty of comics now on offer, this trio is unlikely to lure many readers 
when the classic Donald Duck Adventures or the trendier Owly shares the shelf, 
but diehard early graphic fans who can’t get enough may still want to dive into 
these well-pedigreed offerings.  EB
heArn, Julie Ivy. Seo/Atheneum, 2008 [368p]
ISBN 978-1-4169-2506-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-12
Raised to the ripe age of five by a negligent aunt and uncle, Ivy is kidnapped by 
a “skinner,” a nineteenth-century criminal who steals the clothes off temporarily 
unattended children, and she is drawn into a lair of schemers and con men. Two 
years and one laudanum habit later, she returns to her relatives after a theft gone 
wrong, passes the years in an offstage semi-stupor, and returns to literary action 
at age fifteen when she attracts the attention of a pre-Raphaelite painter, Oscar 
Frosdick, who, smitten by her innocent looks and bright red hair, pays the greedy 
family to have her model. While the pre-Raphaelite circle can’t match her old com-
panions for larceny, they nonetheless draw the teen into danger, particularly when 
she piques the jealousy of Frosdick’s mother, who abandons her crusade against the 
neighbor’s armadillos and turns her wrath on Ivy. Demimonde cover art and jacket 
hype (“nineteenth-century sex, drugs, and rock and roll”) notwithstanding, Ivy’s 
tale is relatively chaste, with assaults on her virtue confined to the imaginations of 
her avaricious cousins, her modeling poses adequately if suggestively covered, and 
her laudanum addiction, which she fights valiantly throughout her ordeals, treated 
with realism and respect. A seriocomic tone permeates the novel, and readers of 
period romance will recognize that Hearn knows the tropes and doesn’t take them 
too seriously. Still, Ivy’s entanglements are fraught with real tension, and YAs who 
like their Brit lit on the seedy side will embrace this adventure. A note on the pre-
Raphaelites is included.  EB
henKes, Kevin Bird Lake Moon. Greenwillow, 2008 179p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-147078-3 $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-147076-9 $15.99   
R Gr. 5-7
Mitch is full of anger and resentment when his father announces that he has found 
someone else and is moving out. He carries his anger with him to Bird Lake, where 
he and his mother will spend the summer with her parents; his resentment deepens 
when the perfect family comes to stay in the house next door. Moved by jealousy, he 
pulls a few pranks, not knowing that the family’s four-year-old drowned in the lake 
474 • The BulleTin
eight years ago, and they have finally returned to see if they can bear revisiting the 
scene of the tragedy. Spencer initially mistakes Mitch’s pranks for his brother’s ghost, 
but when Spencer and Mitch become friends, Mitch confesses almost everything, 
and nothing really comes of his minor deceptions. Instead, this becomes a gentle 
story of the way friendship helps heal hurts and the fact that the choices we make 
are more important to who we become than the choices others make around us. 
Spencer’s sister Lolly is a mite too precocious for credibility and the plot is flat at 
times, but Henkes’ prose has a thoughtful, poetic quality that sets an appropriate 
tone for such a character-driven, inward-looking story. Ultimately, the book handles 
the coming-of-age thought processes of both boys, limned as they are with first- and 
second-hand grief, with grace and elegance.  KC 
heuston, KimBerleY The Book of Jude. Front Street, 2008 217p
ISBN 978-1-932425-26-0 $17.95   
R Gr. 6-9
Expecting to move from New York to Provo, Utah, Jude is disconcerted when her 
mother’s studies instead lead the family to Prague, behind the Iron Curtain. Jude’s 
disruption is internal as well as external, as she begins exhibiting the symptoms of 
Borderline Personality Disorder while in Prague and needs to be hospitalized in 
Nuremberg, away from her family, in order to begin the process of recovering and 
learning to live with her disorder. Since all of this takes place in 1989, there is a lot 
going on historically, and the perspective of American Mormons in Prague in a time 
of surveillance, upheaval, and transition would seem to be enough to carry a plot 
without the addition of Jude’s BPD; surprisingly, though, her inner chaos provides 
a particularly apt metaphor for the events of the time, and vice versa. References to 
their faith are coded at first, but as the story progresses, the family’s Mormonism 
and its implication for issues of health, persecution, and spiritual strength become 
important. The nature of Jude’s disorder is less clearly articulated, evoked through 
fragments that reflect more than explain, but Jude’s inner turmoil will resonate with 
readers, and the wise philosophy of living a life in the midst of loss and oppression, 
offered by an elderly friend, is worth the price of admission.  KC
hightmAn, J. p. Spirit. HarperTeen, 2008 [224p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-085064-7 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-085063-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-8 
Tess and Tobias, wealthy seventeen-year-old newlyweds living in New York in 1892, 
are ghost hunters, a curious hobby that seems to have arisen from their both losing 
their parents in a tragic theater fire. Tess is the more reluctant of the two, perhaps 
because she is also the more spiritually attuned, and when Tobias proposes that 
they travel to isolated Blackthorne, Massachusetts, to unravel the puzzling rash of 
violent deaths there, she feels in her bones that tragedy awaits. Their train derails 
just outside of town, and its occupants are swept up in what turns out to be a two-
hundred-year-old ghostly family dispute between the malevolent Malgore, her 
daughter, Abigail, and Abigail’s suitor, Wilhelm. Malgore’s hatred for Wilhelm has 
transformed her into something wholly evil, while the two lovers initially appear 
to be innocent victims of her mother’s wrath. As Tess and Tobias become more 
enmeshed in the drama of the dead, however, it becomes clear that things are not 
as tidy as they seem, and the ghost hunters are themselves at terrible risk. Though 
the Salem history to which Hightman ties his story ends up being more decora-
July/AugusT 2008 • 475
tive than important, it’s handy code for ghostly shivers, and there are plenty here. 
What gives the narrative its power is Malgore’s relentless pursuit of her daughter, 
the strong descriptions of the frozen and isolated countryside, and a despicable 
and frightening half-human, half-demon amalgam in Malgore, who seems through 
most of the story to be unstoppable. The clever change-up at the end will delight 
horror readers looking for that one last frisson.  CW
horáCeK, petr Beep Beep; ISBN 978-0-7636-3482-7; Choo Choo; ISBN 978-
0-7636-3477-3. Each book: written and illus. by Petr Horácek. Candlewick, 
2008 16p $5.99   
R 1-3 yrs
Get out of town! Or, if that’s too much trouble, do it literarily with these two sturdy 
board books suited for youthful adventurers. In Beep Beep, the family’s hitting the 
road for Grandma’s house, while in Choo Choo, a group of kids head to the beach 
via an old-fashioned steam engine. Each spread offers a spot of simple, sound- 
effecty text (“Vroom, vroom, along the highway”) as the trip progresses, and little 
grabbing hands will reach immediately to feel the contoured edges of pages that 
delineate distant mountains or car silhouettes. Each title also has a special die-cut 
effect on a page or two: Beep Beep’s muntined windows are tactilely intriguing but 
not much more, whereas Choo Choo’s train-tunnel entrance and exit, leading into 
and out of a darkened spread, are genuinely entertaining additions. A note indi-
cates the art is created with acrylic collage, though there seem to be some painterly 
and penciled effects as well, and the resultant cornucopia of vivid and attractively 
textured color will be eye-appealing to little ones. Even the littlest of listeners will 
relish the opportunities to honk, chuff, and follow the journey, and adults will enjoy 
the pleasures of travel unpunctuated by “Are we there yet?”  DS 
hYDe, CAtherine rYAn The Day I Killed James. Knopf, 2008 217p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-94158-0 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-84158-3 $16.99   
R Gr. 7-10
Against her better judgment, Theresa takes advantage of her next-door neighbor’s 
unrequited love for her and invites him to take her to a party to show her on-
again, off-again boyfriend, Randy, that he can’t push her around anymore. She 
even goes so far as to make out with neighbor James, which has the desired effect 
on Randy; while they engage in some reconciliation kissing, James roars off on his 
motorcycle, which is later found halfway down an embankment, with no evidence 
of skid marks or attempted braking as the heartbroken James sailed off the cliff 
to his death. Unable to find atonement for the part she feels she played in James’ 
death, Theresa tries therapy, and then shaves her head and runs away, only to find 
that boys still want a girl like her, who will play fast and loose with their hearts. 
She forms a strange alliance with an abused girl, Cathy; when Cathy inadvertently 
shoots her own brother, the two accidental killers embark on a journey that saves 
them both. Though the elements are melodramatic, the storytelling is effective. 
Theresa’s guilt emerges in clipped sentences and fragments that feel like truth to 
her but are more the guarded nuggets of eclipsed pain; as she moves through her 
healing process, she opens herself up to understanding her own defense mechanisms 
and works through her misplaced grief and self-involved interpretation of events. 
Her encounter with Cathy is admittedly random, but the parallels and differences 
in their situations allow Theresa’s cynical denials to evolve into real wisdom and 
give her a chance to practice that wisdom both with her heart and her mind. As 
476 • The BulleTin
the belief that heartbreak is fatal is a common fantasy of teens, this will find a ready 
readership, who will then be sobered by the lesson that, while there is no excuse to 
be careless with the heart of another, there’s always more to the story of a suicide, 
and there is always the possibility of atonement.  KC
Jeffers, susAn My Chincoteague Pony; written and illus. by Susan Jeffers. Hy-
perion, 2008 32p
ISBN 978-1-4231-0023-2 $16.99   
Ad 4-7 yrs
Farm girl Julie has long dreamed of having her own pony, and with her parents’ 
permission, she labors hard to make enough money to purchase one of the famed 
Chincoteague Ponies, who are annually thinned by being rounded up and auctioned 
off in order to reduce pressure on their island habitat. Once at the auction, Julie is 
dismayed to find that all the ponies, including a beautiful pinto filly she’s set her 
heart on, sell for prices beyond her meager funds. Her luck changes, however, when 
sympathetic crowd members contribute small sums that mount up, and when the 
filly returns for resale, the auctioneer declares Julie the buyer; the grateful girl then 
decides to earn enough money in the next year to pass the favor on to some other 
budget-bound pony seeker. There’s not a lot of logic here, since if Julie couldn’t get 
enough money in a year when she didn’t have a pony to support and take care of, 
she’s unlikely to earn more the next year (or even to make back more than the costs 
of the trip itself), and it’s never explained why her accompanying mother can’t chip 
in herself or decides to allow the acceptance of the funds. The pony-acquisition 
story is nonetheless one that will appeal to horse lovers, and the brief overview of 
the famous Chincoteague Pony Penning Day will intrigue youngsters unfamiliar 
with this colorful event. The gouache and colored-ink art, bordered with tidy 
lines, is at its best with the ponies, who evince a dreamy, toylike charm that will 
go straight to the heart of young horse fanciers; human figures run to the stiff and 
cartoonish, and the watery elements lack any suggestion of fluidity. In an opening 
author’s note, Jeffers explains her youthful fascination with the classic horse story 
Misty of Chincoteague (and includes a letter from its late author, Marguerite Henry) 
and states that the story is inspired by a real-life instance of auction-crowd generos-
ity. Despite the book’s flaws, this would double well with Doyle’s Horse, reviewed 
above, and kids too young for Misty will want to start here. DS
JenKins, A. m. Night Road. HarperTeen, 2008 361p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-054605-2 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-054604-5 $16.99   
R Gr. 9-12
Cole’s preference for solitude perfectly suits his existence as a vampire. He mostly 
avoids the social gatherings of vampires, where the feeding is easy (blood-giving 
groupies are as anxious for the rush as the vamps are for blood) and the same topics 
are discussed decade after decade, but he knows that he must come when called 
by the leader. He is asked to act as mentor to a newly turned vampire, and though 
he accepts, the sting of his most recent failure with a turned human (his girlfriend 
from over a century ago attempted suicide in the most gruesome way possible for 
vampires—death by sunlight) keeps him uneasy about the company and anxious 
for this assignment to be over. What follows is a cross-country road trip during 
which Cole finds much of his soul that he believed to be lost forever, and his charge 
comes to accept his new status with more grace than initially anticipated. Brooding 
Cole is not always an easy protagonist to like, but Jenkins adds enough layers of 
July/AugusT 2008 • 477
complexity and depth to his character to make him intriguing. The flighty, spoiled 
vampires who surround him are ideal foils to his asceticism, highlighting Cole’s 
reliance on experience rather than material goods as markers of his own self-worth 
and growth. Lest it all become a bit too heady or solemn, Cole’s old friend Sandor, 
a vampire with a good heart but nearly nonexistent attention span, adds levity to 
the road trip, softening the intense introspection of Cole and the adolescent sulk 
of his protégé. Vampire fans will certainly flock to this novel, though Jenkins fans 
may also see hints of her usual solemn boys reflected in these protagonists, even if 
they are bloodsucking immortals instead of human adolescents.  AS
JenKins, steve Sisters & Brothers: Sibling Relationships in the Animal World; by 
Steve Jenkins and Robin Page; illus. by Steve Jenkins. Houghton, 2008 32p
ISBN 978-0-618-37596-7 $16.00   
R Gr. 3-5
Husband-and-wife team Jenkins and Page offer another look at the animal world, 
here examining species according to their various sibling relationships. Each spread 
focuses on a species or two, offering a tabbed notation that describes the gist of this 
species’ sibling arrangements (“Competition,” “Living together,” “Stepsisters and 
stepbrothers”) and a paragraph that describes the relevant sibling behavior; animals 
featured range from arachnids and reptiles to birds and mammals. The text is a 
little choppy and the theme is strained at times; however, this is certainly an idea 
likely to attract the attention of young readers, themselves intimately familiar with 
the complexity of growing up with siblings, and there’s a clear and useful message 
of diverse practices in the natural world on family matters. Jenkins’ renowned 
collage illustrations offer tactile portraits of teeming termites and wrinkly naked 
mole rats, fuzzy-edged bear cubs and crisply assembled armadillos. Add this to 
the couple’s ever-expanding oeuvre of inviting early biology, or slyly slip it into a 
thematic discussion of siblings. A closing spread of “animal facts” offers thumbnail 
descriptions of the featured critters’ habitat and habits.  DS
JoYCe, grAhAm The Exchange. Viking, 2008 [256p]
ISBN 978-0-670-06207-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-9
An adornment becomes a burden when Caz is tricked into wearing a silver bracelet 
only to find that it cannot be removed. Suddenly, Caz herself changes, acquiring 
an ability to see into the inner thoughts and lives of those around her (she can 
tell when her mother is lying, or that her best friend secretly wants to talk about 
the abuse she endures at home). Though the woman who gave Caz the bracelet 
thought herself rid of a cursed object, Caz finds the insight into herself and others 
to be advantageous, and she is able to use this new gift in beneficial ways. Character 
development is key in this understated plot: although the mystery of the bracelet 
and its origins serves as an intriguing backdrop, Caz and her use of her new powers 
(and the various folks she helps, including the tortured woman who rid herself of the 
bracelet by forcing it on Caz) are the clear focus of the novel. This British import 
may therefore particularly draw readers branching out from realistic fiction, who 
will appreciate the protagonist’s subtle growth and newfound maturity. Regardless 
of what brings readers here, however, the elegant pacing, creepy and intriguing 
premise, and unexpected twist at the climax will grab them and keep them guessing 
(both about the bracelet and Caz) through to the end.  AS
478 • The BulleTin
KADohAtA, CYnthiA Outside Beauty. Atheneum, 2008 265p
ISBN 978-0-689-86575-6 $16.99   
R* Gr. 6-9
“I loved my sisters more than I loved anyone, maybe even more than I loved my 
mother.” So says Shelby, twelve in the summer of 1983 and second of the four 
girls her gorgeous mother had with four different men; as the girls and their 
mother crazily careen about the country running from or to fervent admirers of 
their mother, they absorb her instructions about what they need to know (how to 
be beautiful and appeal to a man) and tighten their sisterly bond. This traveling 
feminine circus comes to a sudden stop, though, when the girls’ mother suffers a 
serious car accident that leaves her hospitalized, and the four sisters are split up 
and sent to live with their respective fathers. This experience forces Shelby to get 
to know the dad she’s barely met as she agonizes over the fate of her favorite little 
sister, and the separation eventually sends the sisterhood into drastic action. This 
is a story of considerable originality, and what could be an overwrought problem 
novel ends up instead being a combination of poker-faced comedy and understated 
character and family study. The book gives the girls’ mother her full magnetic due 
and sympathizes with the decline of her powers even as her emphasis on man-trap-
ping is subtly questioned; she’s also tacitly given credit for having produced a stellar 
crop of kids and for having found several pretty decent guys for their fathers. The 
various configurations of girls and dads are by turns comedic and touching, with 
Shelby’s geeky dad quietly heroic in his dawning awareness of the importance of 
the sisterly bond to his daughter. Readers who like their family stories with some 
freshness and their sisterhoods literal will want to join this fascinating clan.  DS
KenneDY, JAmes The Order of Odd-Fish. Delacorte, 2008 [416p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90524-4 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73543-8 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-9
The day the impossibly large fish beaches itself and disgorges thirteen-year-old 
Jo, her aunt Lilly, and the missing building housing the Lodge of the Order of 
Odd-Fish is a day of rejoicing in Eldritch City, even though Jo and her aunt are 
considered outlaws. By the time their exile order is rescinded by the mayor, Jo has 
been named Lilly’s official squire and they are happily enmeshed in the affairs of 
the city and the lodge. All is not well, however, since the shadowy Sisters of Silence 
and a discredited lodge member known as the Belgian Prankster are on Jo’s trail. 
It turns out that Jo is the Ichthala, the missing piece of a seminal goddess known 
as the All-Devouring Mother, and legend has it that when Jo has been fed to the 
recently reassembled body of the goddess, the world as its inhabitants know it will 
come to an end. Kennedy has worked overtime to create his quirky world inhabited 
by cockroach butlers, a knight guided by his digestive system, and a plethora of silly 
lodge members who engage in everything from dithering to smell collection. The 
narrative is a crazy quilt of action, burdened with subplots involving the Ichthala 
legend and an aspiring but unsuccessful super-villain named Ken Kiang, but the 
author uses sheer force of will to bind it all together for intrepid readers, creating 
an adventurous romp with singular characters. Fans of humorous chaos will find 
plenty of stimulation here.  CW 
July/AugusT 2008 • 479
Kennemore, tim Alice’s Birthday Pig; illus. by Mike Spoor. Eerdmans, 
2008 54p
ISBN 978-0-8028-5335-6 $12.00   
R Gr. 2-4
Middle child Alice Singer has to put up with a lot, between her stuffy older brother, 
Oliver, who teases her mercilessly about her mispronunciation of the word “animal” 
(she can only say it as “aminal”), and obnoxious younger sister, Rosie, a three-
year-old terror who’s been kicked out of nearly every daycare in town. As Alice’s 
eighth birthday approaches, she yearns for the sweet little three-legged pig she’s 
fallen for on a class outing to a farm (“Whatever you got for your birthday, you 
didn’t want it to be something Oliver had already. You wanted it to be something 
Oliver didn’t have”). The gift, however, turns out to be not a pig nor, as she briefly 
suspects, a rabbit, but a guinea pig (“It’s the nearest thing to a pig we could man-
age,” explains her mother), which Alice falls for immediately and which she dubs 
“Aminal,” thus gleefully annoying her proper brother. British author Kennemore 
paints a delightfully humorous and realistic family portrait here, with hints of Hil-
ary McKay in her deft grasp of parent and sibling dynamics. Though this slim title 
comprises only fifty-four pages, the characters (including the parents) manage to 
be well developed, credible, and original, and the pace is snappy while still allow-
ing introspective moments. Periodic black-and-white illustrations in line touched 
with gray wash further enhance the story’s warmth and humor. Elementary-grade 
students, especially those with obstreperous sibs of their own, will undoubtedly 
relate to Alice’s difficulties and desires, and adults looking for a great little readaloud 
will find this a perfect choice.  JH
Kimmel, eriC A. Stormy’s Hat: Just Right for a Railroad Man; illus. by Andrea 
U’Ren. Farrar, 2008 32p
ISBN 978-0-374-37262-0 $16.95   
R 5-8 yrs
Train engineer Stormy Kromer comes home each night and reports to his wife on a 
vexing problem—he can’t find a hat that will suit his working conditions. The derby 
catches the wind and blows off when he sticks his head out of the cab; a chinstrap 
keeps the Stetson on, but the brim obstructs his vision. A newspaper-pressman’s 
hat catches fire too easily from the coal sparks, while a fireman’s hat is too hot and 
heavy. Stormy’s long-suffering wife listens patiently to each night’s installment of 
woe and tries to offer suggestions, but Stormy brushes her off with an “Aw, don’t 
you worry your pretty little head.” Ida finally blows her stack and demands that 
her husband articulate exactly what he needs; then she whips up a perfect number 
that not only becomes his personal pride and the model for the standard railroad 
man’s cap ever after, but also sets them up in business cranking out caps en masse. 
There’s an appropriate huskiness to U’Ren’s ink and watercolor scenes, and plenty 
of visual humor in Stormy’s headgear trials. Each experiment in haberdashery 
concludes with an “I’ll figure out somethin’” that invites the audience to moan 
right along. A source note on George and Ida Kromer adds little information to the 
story, but simply validating that this is based on a real-life couple will add interest 
for many listeners.  EB 
480 • The BulleTin
lArson, hope Chiggers; written and illus. by Hope Larson. Seo/Atheneum, 
2008 [176p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4169-3584-1 $17.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4169-3587-2 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-9
Ah, summer camp, where the combination of adolescence and proximity makes 
for a summer filled with hothouse-intense relationships of intimacy, jealousy, and 
insecurity and energized by the occasional ghost story. So it is in Larson’s graphic 
novel featuring Abby, a veteran camper returning to find a surprising friendship 
with new cabinmate Shasta, a glamorous but unpopular girl; Abby’s summer 
involves her anxious vacillation between Shasta and her old camp comrades, her 
friendship with an older girl, Rose, and her gentle flirtation with an Actual Boy 
at camp. Though the characters are similarly drawn, making visual identification 
initially a challenge, the black-and-white art is narratively effective in its cinemati-
cally laid out sequences. The episodic nature of the story authentically reflects the 
camp experience, with conversations at the lunch table or when walking from place 
to place more resonant than the scheduled activities. Characterization is conveyed 
by collections of stop-motion glimpses—readers may not really understand Shasta 
completely, but they’ll see both the creativity that draws Abby and the self-dramati-
zation that annoys others, while Abby is pitch-perfect as the go-along-to-get-along 
kid finally opting to make her own decisions but remaining uneasy about their 
consequences. Non-campers will relish the vicarious holiday, while veterans of the 
experience will appreciate the recognition and may want to have a go at writing 
their own camp memoirs.  DS
lemnA, Don When the Sergeant Came Marching Home. Holiday House, 
2008 215p
ISBN 978-0-8234-2083-4 $16.95   
R Gr. 4-6
Ten-year-old Don and his younger brother Pat are duly overjoyed when their father 
arrives safely home at the end of World War II. Dad’s dream of farm life, however, 
rocks their well-ordered urban world, and although Don still gets together regularly 
with old friends when his mother drives into town to buy supplies and sell eggs, 
his refashioned farm and school life now comprises pig swilling, egg gathering, cow 
milking, outdoor plumbing, and a one-room schoolhouse. Don grumbles, moans, 
and schemes his way in and out of his daily tasks, slowly amassing a hidden money 
cache that will buy him a one-way ticket to Hollywood and stardom (ten dollars 
should do it), but by the time his wealth has sufficiently accrued, things are look-
ing up on the home front and Don decides what readers already know—he’ll stick 
around after all. Lemna spins an old-school sort of tale, wholesome as brown eggs 
and organic milk, and the voice is definitely one of adult reminiscence. Grownup 
Don acutely remembers when it was like to be a kid at the mercy of adults, though, 
and the sting of kid-felt injustice tempers the gently comic episodes of crushing 
on the teacher, locking a cousin in the outhouse, enduring Sunday dinners with 
the tedious preacher, and Christmas shopping on a single dollar. Mom and the 
Sergeant’s parenting challenges are subtly but cunningly interwoven throughout, 
and readers come to realize along with Don that the burden of post-war readjust-
ment wasn’t strapped exclusively onto his fifth-grade shoulders.  EB
July/AugusT 2008 • 481
loBel, AnitA Hello, Day!; written and illus. by Anita Lobel. Greenwillow, 
2008 [40p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-078766-0 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-078765-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 1-3 yrs
As the sun rises, various animals greet the day with their customary sounds (“The 
Cow said, ‘Moo’”); as day ends and the moon appears, a lone owl calls “‘Whoo-
ooo.’ What she meant was . . . ‘Good night!’” Although the inclusion of a mouse 
(“Eeeek”) and a rabbit (“Pr-pr-pr”) add a bit of novelty, this catalog of animal sounds 
treads pretty familiar ground. However, Lobel’s attractive mixed-media artwork 
adds a breath of fresh air to an elemental text. Layering of various media provides 
rich texture and depth to the full-page illustrations of animals and landscape, and 
the vibrant colors are warm and cheery; the simple words appear in large bold 
print on the plain white facing pages. Good both for groups and for one-on-one 
lap reading, this is a sunny selection that will encourage little ones to join right in 
with the sounds they love to imitate.  JH
loCKhArt, e. How to Be Bad; by E. Lockhart, Sarah Mlynowski, and Lauren 
Myracle. HarperTeen, 2008 325p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-128423-6 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-128422-9 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Freaked out by her mother’s diagnosis of breast cancer, Jesse decides that the best 
medicine for herself would be to get out of Niceville, Florida for the weekend. 
She proposes the trip to Vicks, her best friend and co-worker at the Waffle House, 
as a road trip to visit Vicks’ boyfriend at the University of Miami, and Mel, the 
quiet rich girl who hostesses at the Waffle House, offers to foot the bill if they let 
her come too. Each girl tells her own story in a round-robin narration, parsing 
out nibbles of her truth to the other girls as they learn to trust one another and 
ultimately share all of their innermost secrets. The narrations, each written by a 
different author, are varyingly successful. Jesse, for instance, drifts in and out of a 
redneck persona and voice, and she is caricatured as a committed Christian with all 
of the guilt about sex and bad language and none of the faith and forgiveness. Mel, 
on the other hand, has moments of genuine wit, particularly in her banter with a 
boy they meet on the road, though her regional cred falters occasionally. Despite 
the promise of the title, the girls don’t get up to much badness; Vicks and Mel do 
get drunk and throw themselves at a boy they’ve just met, but he’s too honorable 
to take the bait, and he instead becomes the perfect love interest for the normally 
demure Mel. Everything else is pretty tame, with nothing fresh or compelling here 
beyond the by-now familiar dynamics of friendship-affirming chick lit. Still, the 
concept offers a diverting experiment in storytelling with an underlying energy that 
percolates from the sense that the authors had fun writing it; hence it’s an inspiring 
model for collaborative writing projects.  KC 
482 • The BulleTin
loWe, helen Thornspell. Knopf, 2008 [320p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-95581-5 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-85581-8 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Crown prince Sigismund is tired of being sequestered in a castle far away from his 
father and the court, but he is fascinated by local legends of the ancient wood that 
borders royal lands. People are forbidden to enter the wood, which is said to have 
a castle at its heart, and none can say whether the occupants of the mysterious 
castle are friend or foe; Sigismund himself encounters a lady through the castle 
gate who is clearly gifted with power as well as beauty. When Sigismund is finally 
allowed to come to court, he takes part in a stag hunt that claims the life of one 
of his retainers, and his grief distracts him so that he finds himself captured and 
imprisoned in a fairy hill, at the mercy of the evil Margravine zu Malvolin, the lady 
whom he had encountered at the castle. The Margravine must control Sigismund 
because he is destined to break the hundred-year-old enchantment on the castle 
in the wood, where a princess and her kingdom sleep behind a thorny veil. Once 
the enchantment is broken, the sorceress will be unable to bind the human and 
fairy worlds together, and her power will be gone forever. This “Sleeping Beauty” 
retelling skillfully expands the basic story of an uninvited guest seeking revenge 
into a full-bodied tale of ambition and romance. Additional richness accrues from 
the prince’s having magical powers of his own, and the loopholes in the sleeping 
counter-spell that allow prince and princess to meet before her awakening are clever 
indeed. The charming modifications hang together nicely with the traditional ele-
ments of the story, and romance readers as well as fairy-tale aficionados will delight 
in this deft handling of the tale.  CW
lurie, April The Latent Powers of Dylan Fontaine. Delacorte, 2008 208p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90153-6 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73125-6 $15.99   
R Gr. 7-10
Ever since his mother left, Dylan has been trying to hold things together, but his 
older brother Randy isn’t making it easy. He and his friends have taken over the 
house, smoking weed every day and practicing their music, hoping for their big 
break. His dad’s no help, only sparing time away from work when Dylan or Randy 
get in trouble, which is happening with alarming regularity. When Dylan discovers 
a large stash of purple bud and a set of scales, he’s convinced that Randy is dealing. 
Meanwhile, Dylan’s best girl friend, whom he wishes came with benefits, is making 
a film about him, challenging him to stop being so passive about his life and take 
some risks, which he ultimately does, ending up pulling himself and his family back 
from the brink of permanent dysfunction. Calling to mind Hinton’s classic That 
Was Then, This Is Now, this story of a guy in danger of losing his hero brother to 
drugs is updated in just about every way: Dylan is a well-off, hip guy from Brooklyn 
who knows his way around Greenwich Village, has a thing for vintage vinyl LPs, 
and can play a mean classical guitar. He’s not all that emotionally astute, but he 
acts when he needs to, and the generally happy ending is a result of a paradoxical 
recklessness that results in his taking responsibility for his own feelings and then 
intervening in the lives of his family. Readers tired of silent dinners, workaholic 
parents, and drifting siblings may well be inspired by Dylan to take some risks and 
discover their own latent powers.  KC
July/AugusT 2008 • 483
lY, mAnY Roots and Wings. Delacorte, 2008 262p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90494-0 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73500-1 $15.99   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Pittsburgh has been Grace’s lifelong home, but when her grandmother dies, she and 
her mother decide they must take her ashes back to Florida. St. Petersburg is home 
to the Cambodian community in which Grandma had made her American home 
and raised Grace’s mother, and it’s where she’ll have her Cambodian funeral and 
finally rest in peace; Grace is also hoping she’ll finally manage to meet her father, 
whose identity her mother has never revealed. St. Petersburg introduces Grace to 
an intense, close-knit Cambodian world the like of which she’s never known, and 
she gets perspective on all of her family that helps her find her own peace with her 
mother and her grandmother’s memory. Ly, author of Home Is East (BCCB 10/05), 
draws a vivid picture of a small family that’s been close yet uncomprehending of one 
another, wherein love, loyalty, and yearning can quickly break three into two against 
one or a trio of solitary individuals. The book capably blends the universal story of 
a daughter seeking individuation from a strong-minded mother with a more cultur-
ally specific tale, with “during Pol Pot” the turning-point time for all in the older 
Cambodian generation, and their American-grown daughters and granddaughters 
searching to find their own relationship with Cambodian tradition. This rich and 
interesting story is marred by slow and sometimes turgid storytelling, with shifts 
between past and present further undercutting the immediacy, and since Grace is 
actually less vivid a character than her mother and grandmother, it’s a challenge 
to find an emotional connection with her experience. Nonetheless, teens from all 
kinds of backgrounds will relate to the challenge of understanding puzzling family 
history, and they’ll be glad to see Grace building a new relationship with her mother 
and gaining a deeper sense of herself.  DS
lYnCh, JAY Otto’s Orange Day; illus. by Frank Cammuso.
See review under Hayes, p. 472.
mCCArthY, meghAn Astronaut Handbook; written and illus. by Meghan 
McCarthy. Knopf, 2008 36p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-94459-8 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-84459-1 $16.99   
R 4-7 yrs
Somewhere between “I wanna be a cowboy,” “. . . a ballet dancer,” “. . . a pale-
ontologist,” many primary schoolers pass through the “I wanna be an astronaut” 
phase. McCarthy offers them a brief overview of how to prepare and what to expect, 
highlighting some of the behaviors and interests that might lead to a space career. 
It will require a lot of study (“It isn’t always easy, but stick with it!”), the ability to 
be a team player, some toughening and conditioning, and the choice of a specialty. 
Then you get to the good stuff—picking the bagged food you get to eat in space, 
checking out the zero-gravity toilet, getting fitted for a space suit, and taking “the 
ride of your life.” There’s little depth to the text itself, but the pictures add substantial 
visual information, and a final page of “fascinating facts” adds more information. 
This is trimmed to just the right size, though, for preschoolers long on interest but 
short on attention span, and the cartoon-style astronauts-in-training, with their 
wide-set pop-eyes and stubby bodies, embrace their training and first flight with 
the innocent enthusiasm of overgrown rug rats. Matte colors and thickly outlined 
484 • The BulleTin
shapes will display nicely to a group of floor-sitters. Additional resources and a list 
of suggested places to visit are appended.  EB 
mCgill, AliCe, ad. Way Up and Over Everything; illus. by Jude Daly. Houghton, 
2008 32p
ISBN 978-0-618-38796-0 $16.00   
R* 5-8 yrs
“My great-grandmama’s mama told her and she told me this story about a long time 
ago,” says McGill about this family-heirloom version of “The People Could Fly.” 
The tale is set on the Georgia plantation where the narrator’s “great-grandmama’s 
mama,” named Jane, is enslaved. When five new Africans, unable to speak English, 
arrive, their self-possession draws interest from the slave community and suspicion 
from the overseer and master. After a morning’s hard labor planting cotton, the five 
slip away, whereupon the master and overseer pursue them; when they’re found, 
the five Africans step away into the air and take flight. Though the white men 
attempt to threaten Jane, the only black witness, into silence about the Africans’ 
escape, she spreads the tale far and wide. The storytelling voice is descriptive but 
restrained, effectively letting the story’s own power carry it, with occasional turns 
of phrase that enhance the vividness (“Ol’ Man Deboreaux rubbed his face like 
his eyes didn’t know how to tell him the truth”). The ancestral framing of the tale 
gives it an extra thematic resonance, with the tale-telling itself becoming the steps 
to flight of the woman left behind and, subsequently, her family’s legacy. Daly’s 
smooth, stylized watercolors with their trim, distant figures are an interesting choice 
for this emotional story; the scenes appear as dramatic tableaux, perhaps evoking 
their status as passed-down memory, since the scenes depicting the story’s transmis-
sion are more immediate. Kids will be fascinated by this classic African-American 
folktale, and this version, with its clear reverence for familial transmission, would 
be an interesting partner for Woodson’s Show Way (BCCB 1/06), perhaps even 
prompting young listeners to ask their own families about historic stories. McGill 
includes a note about her family’s history with the tale.  DS
mClAughlin, lAuren Cycler. Random House, 2008 [256p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-95191-6 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-85191-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Jill would be a typical prom-obsessed girly girl if not for the fact that for four 
days out of every month she undergoes a physical transformation and turns into 
Jack, a full-fledged lusty male with a fondness for internet porn and a lackadaisical 
attitude toward hygiene. The usual strategy concocted by Jill and her mother of 
largely pretending that Jack doesn’t exist (they keep him restrained in the house, 
they’ve fabricated an illness explaining her monthly disappearance, and Jill imme-
diately meditates to forget everything Jack did each time she reemerges) becomes 
unworkable when Jack realizes he is in love with Jill’s best friend and escapes the 
house to visit her in the night. At this point the straightforward examination of 
an average girl with a secret becomes a complex, philosophical exploration into 
gender politics and the mutability of identity. Chapters that alternate between 
Jill and Jack’s perspectives highlight the ways in which the characters are worlds 
apart in spite of their shared space: Jack’s snarky, wry observations on how, in his 
perception, Jill wastes her time in the body boil down her pages-long angst into 
snappy one-liners. While the novel loses its center a bit in the overload of quirky 
July/AugusT 2008 • 485
side characters including Jill/Jack’s yoga-loving, basement-dwelling dad and Jill’s 
bisexual boyfriend, there is an earnest appeal in the good intentions of nearly 
everyone in the story that reads as endearing rather than saccharine. Readers will 
cheer for the hard-won happy ending that will allow both romantic Jill and sardonic 
Jack to find space in the world.  AS 
mCmAhon, Jennifer My Tiki Girl. Dutton, 2008 246p
ISBN 978-0-525-47943-7 $16.99   
R Gr. 8-12
Tenth-grader Maggie divides her life into BTA, before the accident, and ATA, after 
the accident; the accident in question was a car crash that killed her mother and 
left Maggie limping and cane-dependent. Depressed and guilty (she’s convinced 
she’s to blame for her mother’s death), she’s thrilled with the attention of glamor-
ous and eccentric Dahlia, who sucks Maggie into her world of retro fascination 
(Dahlia’s a big fan of Jim Morrison) and her fringy, lawless family (Dahlia’s mother 
moves between charming spontaneity and clinically problematic mood swings). As 
Dahlia forms a band and captivates the male portion of Maggie’s old social circle, 
Maggie begins to realize that her devotion to Dahlia has gone beyond the friendly 
and into the romantic. Maggie’s narrative voice is compelling, dreamy and intense 
in a way that recalls Angela Chase’s voiceovers for My So-Called Life (and Dahlia 
is clearly Maggie’s Rayanne Graff), and the book is poignant in depicting the con-
trast between her self-image as “Frankenstein girl” and the heated, fantasy-tinged 
intimacy she experiences in her affair with Dahlia. It’s utterly believable that she’s 
engaging in romanticization as well as romance, and McMahon counters this nicely 
by allowing Dahlia to be fully human, capable of buckling under social pressure 
and being frustrated by Maggie’s starry-eyed views as well as getting caught up in 
the magic herself. The period would seem to be the 1980s, so social pressures are 
even greater than they would be contemporarily, but third millennium readers will 
have no trouble recognizing the combination of disaster and glory that so often 
marks first love. DS
meChling, lAuren Dream Girl. Delacorte, 2008 [320p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90510-7 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73521-6 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-12
On Claire Voyante’s fifteenth birthday, her beloved grandmother Kiki gives her 
a fabulous black and white cameo that, Kiki says, will enhance Claire’s budding 
ability to see the future. Kiki’s suggestion that wearing the cameo will help Claire 
aid the people around her is almost immediately realized when Claire is drawn into 
industrial espionage involving the wealthy father of her best friend, Becca. While 
Claire attempts to pinpoint the threat to Becca’s family, she can’t help noticing 
Becca’s very cute older brother, Andy, particularly since he seems to be noticing 
her, too. She soon discovers that Andy’s beautiful and extremely unpleasant girl-
friend, Rye, is in league with the bad guys, and Claire must find a way to stop her 
before real harm comes to her friends. Claire’s abilities manifest through visions 
and dreams that move the story along but never take it over, so that teens are likely 
to relish this book as much for descriptions of the lifestyles of the rich as for the 
paranormal touches. Fans of the 10th Grade Social Climber series (The Rise and 
Fall of a 10th-Grade Social Climber, BCCB 5/05), which Mechling co-authored, 
will feel right at home in the New York scene, which features the opulence of the 
486 • The BulleTin
Gossip Girls with little of the cattiness. Characters are down to earth and likable, 
and they include a lively set of secondary characters such as grandmother Kiki, 
who keeps Claire outfitted in couture from the ’60s and ’70s and who lives at the 
Waldorf-Astoria. Readers will enjoy immersing themselves in Claire’s turmoil as 
she surreptitiously obsesses about her best friend’s brother and solves a mystery that 
saves a ketchup empire.  CW
meDinA, niCo Fat Hoochie Prom Queen. Simon Pulse, 2008 290p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4169-3603-9 $8.99   
Ad Gr. 10-12
Margarita Diaz, dubbed Madge by her flamboyantly gay BFF Lucas, lives large in 
every way: a senior in high school, she parties her way through the weekends, never 
walking away from her namesake drink, a miniature bottle of Grey Goose, a beer 
funnel, a bong hit, or a bag of Krispy Kremes. She never walks away from a chal-
lenge, either, so when Lucas dares her to challenge Bridget Benson for the title of 
prom queen, she steps up. It turns out to be harder than it looks, because Bridget is 
a serious player. The history behind the two girls keeps Madge motivated, however; 
both fomer child actors, Bridget stole a role out from under Madge ten years ago, 
and has since become a notorious public figure, while Madge’s acting days ended 
when she came into her genetic heritage of ample cleavage and bootiliciousness. A 
Jerry Springer twist wakes Madge up to who she is and what she really values, and 
there’s a predictable round of kiss-kiss happy endings for everyone. The clichéd 
plotline acts as a scant cover for this everybody—rednecks, big girls, drag queens, 
and gay guys—gone-wild-a-palooza; scene after scene of over-the-top high school 
fantasy night life, including one particularly raunchy drag show, get more than 
tedious, and the dialogue is laced with urban slang that, while current, authentic, 
and sassy, seems more determined to outdo online commentary for tastelessness 
than to convey plot or character. However, with all the feel-good celebration of the 
aforementioned rednecks, drag queens, skinny gay boys, and hot big girls, there is 
something here for all those readers other books often ignore or treat with angst, 
and Madge does, as they say, learn an important lesson about love.  KC
miChAels, rune The Reminder. Seo/Atheneum, 2008 [192p]
ISBN 978-1-4169-4131-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Teenager Daisy, known as Daze, is stunned to hear her late mother’s voice com-
ing from her father’s locked workroom; upon breaking in to the room, she’s even 
more shocked to see her mother’s head sitting on her father’s desk, with cables and 
wires leading from her neck to his computer. It turns out that the head isn’t really 
her mother; it’s an artificial intelligence experiment that her father, in his grief, 
has constructed to look like his dead wife. Keeping the discovery to herself, Daze 
spends many afternoons talking to her “mom”; when it looks like the experiment 
may be removed, Daze panics and steals the simulacrum of her mother, intent on 
saving her this time as she could not save her from suicide the first time. This is an 
emotionally heavy story with a bizarre twist that takes the creepiness factor beyond 
The Twilight Zone to Stephen King. With its B-movie central image, the story 
treads a tenuous line between gripping and absurd, but the author’s sure hand at 
character development makes Daze’s preoccupation sympathetic (the revelation of 
the true nature of her mother’s death is especially poignant). The pacing and style 
will appeal to reluctant readers, while the plot points will satisfy those interested 
July/AugusT 2008 • 487
in the implications of artificial intelligence or who like their family stories with 
some edge.  CW
nelson, n. A. Bringing the Boy Home. HarperCollins, 2008 [224p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-088699-8 $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-088698-1 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-7
Tirio has always believed that he was cast out of his Amazonian tribe at a young age 
because of his deformed foot. Since then he has lived contentedly with his adoptive 
American mother, but as his thirteenth birthday approaches, he feels himself increas-
ingly called back to his tribe, knowing that were he home, he would be embarking 
on a coming-of-age quest. Awaiting a forthcoming trip to the Amazon, Tirio begins 
plotting to escape from his mother and fulfill the challenge alone, thus proving 
to those who shunned him that he is strong, worthy, and part of the tribe. Tirio’s 
narration alternates with that of Luka, another member of Tirio’s Takunami tribe, 
who is readying himself for the same birthday quest. Ultimately, neither Tirio nor 
Luka completes the journey in the expected way: Luka is required to marry instead 
after his father suddenly dies, and Tirio is unable to make his way alone through 
the jungle because he is guided by an insistent voice in his head. In a clever twist, 
Luka’s story, which seems to be concurrent with Tirio’s, actually takes place years 
before, and it is only gradually revealed that the voice in Tirio’s head (who announces 
himself as Tirio’s father) is Luka. Unfortunately, the complex reasoning behind 
Tirio’s tribal rejection is muddy, making the entire premise rather unconvincing. 
In addition, the mixture of authentic Amazonian plants, cultures, and rituals into 
what is ultimately a fictional tribe of people set in a mostly created jungle-scape 
suggests generic exoticism and would be less confusing if notes explained the differ-
ence between fact and fiction. In spite of the issues, Nelson presents two compelling 
coming-of-age stories, both of which feature protagonists who are memorable for 
their flaws as well as the ways in which they compensate for them.  AS
neumeier, rAChel The City in the Lake. Knopf, 2008 [304p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-94704-9 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-84704-2 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
When the prince disappeared, he left behind a king and queen haunted by their 
son’s absence, and a land and its people experiencing death at an alarming rate. In 
a remote village, a teen mage, Timou, waits at home for her father as he ventures 
to the castle to try to right things. After he fails to return, Timou eventually follows 
him, recognizing the fact that, whether or not she feels prepared, the fate of the 
whole kingdom rests in her hands. Ahead of Timou is a quest that will lead her not 
only to her true love and the recovery of the prince, but also to a showdown with 
her powerful and ominous birth mother, a woman whose identity has always been 
kept a secret by her father. This elegant, sophisticated novel will likely challenge 
readers even as it draws them in with complex characterization, intricate plotting, 
and sweeping descriptions of the curious double kingdom (a castle reflection in 
the lake represents a second kingdom) in which Timou and those around her 
reside. Timou, easily overwhelmed but firmly well intentioned, is amiable in her 
flaws; her beauty and obvious successful future are tempered by her slow path 
toward knowledge, grace, and adaptability. Fantasy fans seeking a book that will 
488 • The BulleTin
offer them profundity and elements worth further contemplation will find this a 
satisfying outing.  AS 
Ó guilín, peADAr The Inferior. Fickling/Random House, 2008 [448p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75146-9 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75145-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
This British import combines elements of The Truman Show with Lord of the Flies 
to produce a tense and memorable thriller about survival in a horrifying futuristic 
dystopia. Stopmouth has grown up knowing nothing outside of his own tribe’s daily 
struggle to eat and not be eaten. In fact, Stopmouth’s stutter decreases his value and 
moves him closer to being put up as a “volunteer,” who could be exchanged for 
food. The lives of everyone are jeopardized, however, when a mysterious woman 
literally falls from the sky, carrying secrets about the origins of this sadistic and 
primitive world, information about who is actually in control, and knowledge 
about how to get to the Roof, beyond which another world lies. The early action 
plot evolves into a quest novel, as Stopmouth and Indrani, the outsider woman, 
attempt a nearly impossible journey toward the Roof and the salvation they imagine 
beyond it. Throughout, a frenzied pace and constantly evolving (and escalating) 
danger will likely evoke a sense of urgency in readers that is reflected in the desperate 
battles of the protagonists. Although few characters are explored in much depth, 
the surface strokes that describe the savagery both within the human tribe and in 
the groups of animals that hunt and are hunted by them are memorable, and these 
brief descriptions pair effectively with the complex landscape hinted at primarily 
through Stopmouth’s naïve perspective. Readers may initially resist the ambigu-
ous ending, but they will ultimately find it appropriate given the uncertainty with 
which everyone in this haunting world lives and dies.  AS 
o’neill, CAthArine Annie and Simon; written and illus. by Catharine 
O’Neill. Candlewick, 2008 58p
ISBN 978-0-7636-2688-4 $15.99   
R Gr. 2-3
In this four-chapter easy reader, young Annie experiments with hairdos (and gets 
the comb stuck in her hair), goes canoeing in search of a loon, receives her first 
bee sting, and watches a meteor shower, all with the accompaniment of her near-
adult brother, Simon, and their disobedient pup, Hazel. Though sibling stories 
are a dime a dozen, it’s rare to find one at this reading level with this particular 
age dynamic, and the interactions between patient Simon and exuberant Annie 
are both credible and comical. O’Neill’s writing is concise, simple without being 
babyish, and amusingly wry; for example, when Hazel repeatedly barks on the loon 
trip, Annie eagerly says, “Hazel’s talking to the loon, Simon. Maybe I could talk 
to the loon, too” to which Simon replies (somewhat wearily), “Soon I’ll be talking 
to the loon.” Though her muted watercolor illustrations occasionally lack focus in 
their overall composition, the dash-eyed siblings (Simon is dark-haired and lanky 
while Annie is blond and petite) and the lively Hazel exude plenty of personality. 
Though children ready for beginning chapter books will easily manage this on their 
own, it might also be a fine readaloud for a slightly younger audience and a good 
choice for siblings to read together.  JH
July/AugusT 2008 • 489
pAtent, DorothY hinshAW When the Wolves Returned: Restoring Nature’s Bal-
ance in Yellowstone; illus. with photographs by Dan and Cassie Hartman. Walker, 
2008 40p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-8027-9687-5 $18.85
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-8027-9686-8 $17.95   
R Gr. 3-5
This carefully crafted natural history documents the important role of the wolf in 
the Yellowstone National Park ecosystem. Veteran biology writer Patent concisely 
chronicles the history of Yellowstone and the myriad effects caused by the eradica-
tion of its wolf population in the early twentieth century. The elk population then 
expanded and caused stress on the local flora, with resultant reduction of birds 
and animals dependent on the trees; coyotes, no longer having to compete with 
wolves, began to overfeed on the pronghorn population and shoulder out smaller 
predators like foxes. The book then describes the beneficial effects of the return 
of the wolves, including the movement of the elk away from the most vulnerable 
foliage and the tendency of wolves to leave scraps of their kills that then feed de-
sirable scavenger species. Though a couple of questions are left unanswered, the 
argument is clearly and convincingly compiled, with simplified single-sentence 
distillations of the larger text helpfully offering even briefer summations for the 
paragraph-intimidated. The pictures don’t have the clarity of portraiture found in 
the photographs of William Muñoz, Patent’s best-known partner, but they offer 
an impressive gallery of Yellowstone inhabitants, providing silent testimony to the 
diversity of the population there. Add this to an ecology unit for a comprehensible, 
focused picture of the delicate interworkings of Mother Nature. An index and a list 
of kid-accessible resources are appended, as is a brief photo quiz about the material 
covered in the text.  DS
pfeffer, susAn Beth The Dead and the Gone. Harcourt, 2008 [320p]
ISBN 978-0-15-206311-5 $17.00
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 6-9
This companion novel to Life As We Knew It (BCCB 12/06) treats the same global 
disaster, caused by an asteroid hitting the moon, but this time the focus is on New 
York City instead of rural Pennsylvania. There seventeen-year-old Alex must adjust 
quickly to being the sole guardian for his two younger sisters when neither of his 
parents returns home after the initial chaos caused by the impact. Although sem-
blances of normalcy remain in the form of school and some social services, there 
are few comforts and no luxuries in this new world where even one meal a day isn’t 
guaranteed, and stealing items from dead bodies in the road becomes a necessity. 
Tucked within the survival drama is a quietly effective coming-of-age subplot, as 
Alex weathers great loss and small successes with increasing grace. Unfortunately, 
the dialogue is stodgy and exposition laden, and most of the characters surrounding 
Alex serve as two-dimensional foils for his actions rather than engaging individuals 
on their own. In spite of the flaws, the author’s reexamination of the same destruc-
tion through new characters in a new location is clever and fresh, and although this 
novel would work as a standalone read, it could also spark an intriguing exercise 
in simultaneous reading.  AS
490 • The BulleTin
prineAs, sArAh The Magic Thief; illus. by Antonio Javier Caparo. HarperCol-
lins, 2008 [448p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-137588-0 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-137587-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 5-9
The city of Wellmet is in serious trouble due to a dramatic decline in its level of 
magic. The situation threatens to upset the already delicate balance of power be-
tween the duchess, who rules the city from her palace on the east side of the river 
in Sunrise, the Underlord Crowe, who keeps a mafia-like grip on the west side 
in Twilight, and the magisters, who control the magic from their islands in the 
middle of the river. Enter Conn, a raggedy street urchin who picks the pocket of 
wizard Nevery, but instead of slipping a handful of coins, he accidentally snatches 
the magister’s locus magicalicus, or wizardly stone. That his grave trespass does not 
kill him interests both him and Nevery; Conn thinks he’ll make a good wizard’s 
apprentice, while Nevery thinks he’ll make a useful servant. Confusion over his 
exact status gets ironed out after he moves in with Nevery and hired muscle Benet; 
Nevery constantly underestimates the boy, but quick learner Conn doggedly pur-
sues his own locus magicalicus and his status as a wizard, as well as taking a keen 
interest and vital role in halting the leaking magic and saving the city. Chapters 
are narrated by Conn, who tends to play his cards close to his chest; he is a careful 
thinker, however, and readers are lucky to be privy to his constant reflections, wry 
observations, and honest assessments. Journal entries at the end of each chapter 
provide terse recaps from Nevery’s point of view, and chapter-header sketches serve 
to further engage the audience. Prineas exercises tight control over her characters, 
rendering their actions credible and offering surprising revelations about their his-
tories. Conn’s voice is particularly solid, both measured and intense, making this a 
delight to read aesthetically, and additional appeal stems from the compelling plot 
and attractive setting. This is the first in an anticipated trilogy, and since Conn has 
a lot yet to learn, he is sure to draw avid fans back for more.  KB
rAvishAnKAr, AnushKA Catch That Crocodile!; illus. by Pulak Biswas. Tara, 
2008 40p
ISBN 978-81-86211-63-2 $16.95   
R 4-6 yrs
In this rhyming story imported from India, villagers are startled by an unexpected 
new neighbor: a crocodile. The croc is more than a match for those trying to rout 
it, crushing the policeman’s stick, turning the doctor’s tranquilizer back on him 
(“With a flick/ The injection/ Changed its direction”), and scaring the heck out 
of an arrogant local wrestler. The situation is finally solved by little Meena, a cool 
head amid the chaos, who baits the crocodile back to the river with the fish from 
her basket. While audiences are bound to question the seeming inconsistency 
between the river’s initial great distance and later proximity, this is a spirited and 
silly story that gains additional energy from its folkloric flavor. The compactly 
rhymed text mines additional humor from typeface-controlled effects and dynamics 
(the reluctant policeman strikes the reptile with a timid “Thwap!”, whereupon the 
creature promptly chomps the cop’s stick with a “SNAP!”). The illustrations are 
predominantly a chocolatey-toned black, in inky, soft-edged splodges that suggest 
block printing and employ negative space as cunningly as positive (the doctor’s 
bristling mustache and tufts of gray hair, for instance, are created negatively); 
July/AugusT 2008 • 491
daubs of green, with a crispness that suggests collage or digital application, pro-
vide enlivening contrast on every page. While the images may not carry well for 
a group readaloud, close-up viewers will be intrigued by the graphic patterns that 
constitute the crocodile and the comedic cast of dopey grownups. Use this as a 
contrast to less benign trickster stories or in partnership with other stories where 
the kid saves the day.  DS
reYnolDs, AAron Metal Man; illus. by Paul Hoppe. Charlesbridge, 
2008 32p
ISBN 978-1-58089-150-9 $15.95   
R* 6-9 yrs
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 455, for review.
rosenstiehl, Agnès Silly Lilly and the Four Seasons; written and illus. by Agnès 
Rosenstiehl.
See review under Hayes, p. 472.
rutKosKi, mArie The Cabinet of  Wonders. Farrar, 2008 [272p] (The 
Kronos Chronicles)
ISBN 978-0-374-31026-4 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
When Mikal Kronos creates a fabulous clock for the prince of Bohemia, a clock that 
can control the weather as well as tell the time, the prince repays him by stealing his 
sight. Kronos’ twelve-year-old daughter, Petra, determinedly heads for the palace to 
see if she can reclaim her father’s eyes; her task becomes harder when a mysterious 
spy from England (there on behalf of his queen) blackmails her into promising 
that she will find a way to destroy the weather-affecting abilities of the clock. Petra 
finds both the eyes and the heart of the clock in the prince’s cabinet of wonders, 
a well-guarded room filled with precious and bizarre artifacts, but will the prince 
follow her home to take his revenge? An author’s note places this story in Prague at 
the end of the sixteenth century but claims no historical accuracy; rather, Rutkoski 
effectively uses the romance of the region and the mystique of gypsy legends to 
evoke an atmosphere of danger and adventure. Her well-crafted fantasy world is a 
mix of magic and technology, horse-drawn conveyances and sentient tin toys that, 
along with the thoroughly likable characters, will quickly draw readers in and have 
them eagerly anticipating the next installment in this series.  CW
sáenz, BenJAmin Alire He Forgot to Say Goodbye. Simon, 2008 [336p]
ISBN 978-1-4169-4963-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
High school seniors Ramiro Lopez and Jacob Upthegrove approach adulthood 
wrestling with unsatisfactory lives entirely defined by the fathers who left them. 
Mexican-American Ram works at a burger joint, gets good grades, saves money for 
college, and tries to understand his self-destructive younger brother. Worlds away, 
rich Anglo Jake lives on the Oh-Wow West Side of El Paso with his mother and 
philandering stepfather, attends anger-management therapy, and tries to right all 
that is wrong with the world by finding an immigration lawyer for the husband of 
his family’s maid. The two young men meet outside their neighboring schools and 
become cautious friends, united by common feelings of loneliness, abandonment, 
492 • The BulleTin
and anger. Most absorbing are not the constant reminders about missing fathers 
but rather the influential presence of the remaining women: Ram and his mother 
cling to each other after his brother fatally overdoses on drugs; Jake purposely 
antagonizes a mother who never cared enough for him; feisty feminist Alejandra 
provides support and perspective as both best friend to Ram and new love inter-
est for Jake. Though agenda-driven messages and unnatural speech occasionally 
intrude on the story, the voices are realistic, from the considerable sprinkling of 
swearing to the commentary on the messed-up state of the world that’s par for 
the course for smart but not yet mature teens. Action generally takes a backseat 
to reflection as the disillusioned young men take turns journaling their individual 
identity crises in first-person narration that strongly echoes Holden Caulfield; 
with more than one nod to Catcher in the Rye, this should appeal to readers who 
like their heroes to have hit rock bottom and come up a little bit more optimistic 
about their futures.  KB
sChmiD, susAn mAupin Lost Time. Philomel, 2008 169p
ISBN 978-0-399-24460-5 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 5-7
Twelve-year-old Violynne, already struggling after the sudden and mysterious disap-
pearance of her archeologist parents, is devastated when her remaining home life 
is shattered: her aunt is suddenly arrested, her butler is missing, and her house is 
being carefully monitored. Soon, Violynne is swept into an adventure involving the 
Arbiter, their egomaniacal leader on the planet of Lindor; the Coil, a centuries-old 
underworld figure who seems to control everything; and an alien race who had been 
banished from the planet but are now seeking to reestablish themselves. Somewhere 
in the middle of all this, Violynne’s parents are stuck, literally trapped in time, and 
she must save them and herself from those who seek to use her family’s archeologi-
cal discoveries for evil effect—and who plan to get rid of the human evidence of 
their crimes. The haunting descriptions of the sophisticated, artistic alien race sent 
away from their home are memorable and elegant. Unfortunately, the over-the-top 
avarice and malevolence of the Arbiter and the Coil reduce the novel to a good 
vs. evil showdown wherein it is all too clear that good will triumph, even though 
it is equally clear that in this case, it is quite overmatched. In addition, Violynne, 
indulged and naïve, just doesn’t have the independent spirit necessary to carry off 
a one-girl mission to save the world. Nevertheless, science-fiction fans will still find 
much to appreciate in the nifty smart house, intriguing aliens, and movie-ready 
technological marvels throughout.  AS
sCott, elizABeth Stealing Heaven. HarperTeen, 2008 [320p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-112281-1 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-112280-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
“My name is Danielle. I’m eighteen. I’ve been stealing things for as long as I can 
remember.” That’s as her mother’s accomplice and now essentially partner, with the 
two of them specializing in the theft of silver, getting into houses of the wealthy 
through social engineering. Now in the posh coastal town of Heaven, Danielle is 
beginning to tire of her mother’s all-encompassing focus on ill-gotten gains, and 
she’s straying from the fold by secretly making a friend in local girl Allison and 
enjoying a flirtation with Greg, who is, of all things, a local cop. Though her mother 
fiercely disapproves of Danielle’s movement toward normal life, Danielle begins 
July/AugusT 2008 • 493
to realize that it’s time to make decisions for herself when her mother is diagnosed 
with cancer. Scott, author of the luscious Bloom (BCCB 7/07), is developing a 
nice line in romances with genuine personality. Danielle is an unusual protagonist, 
convincing in her combination of evident plausibility (she mingles freely and un-
remarkably with the non-criminal world in order to obtain access) and complete 
outsiderness, and her struggle with the influence of her charismatic mother will 
be familiar to many readers, criminal or no. Touches of characterization fill out 
secondary characters, with Allison a better friend than Danielle deserves (a fact of 
which Danielle is acutely and uncomfortably aware) and Greg an effective romantic 
foil but a real guy beyond that, with human limitations and regrets. This blend of 
old-fashioned love story with lively contemporary details will satisfy readers fond 
of a solid summer romance.  DS
sCotton, roB Splat the Cat; written and illus. by Rob Scotton. HarperCollins, 
2008 [32p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-083155-4 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-083154-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-8 yrs
New student Splat the Cat is very nervous about his first day of school, so he tucks 
his pet mouse, Seymour, into his lunchbox for moral support and reluctantly makes 
his way to class. Once there, though, he’s pleased to find friendly classmates, the 
information that cats are amazing, and the source of answers to his many, many 
questions. When Seymour pops out of Splat’s lunchbox, things look grim for a 
moment as “the cats did what cats do”; Seymour turns the tables on his pursuers, 
however, then saves the day for the kitties by opening the stuck door to the closet 
holding their snacktime milk, resulting in an official change of class philosophy 
on cats and mice. While the story is a bit of a collection of disparate parts, both 
the first-day-of-school plot and the mouse-confounds-cats plot unfold amusingly, 
with entertaining details and sturdily comedic rhythms in the compact sentences. 
The hilarious illustrations compensate for any plot deficit: Scotton’s cats are chunky 
rectangular blocks of felinity with delicately furry edges and absurdly slender tails 
curling around like attached feather boas, yet they’ve got an appropriate primary-
grades dorkiness to them (especially evident in the double-page spread where they 
greet Splat in all their friendly, gap-toothed, nose-picking glory). Colors are care-
fully contrasting, with inky black Splat and his gray classmates dominating the 
palette that’s enriched by muted limes and teals in the kitty clothes and punched 
up with elements such as Splat’s red bookbag. A splendidly absurd alternative to 
more orthodox first day of school stories, this will appeal to lovers of cats or just 
plain goofiness.  DS
sfAr, JoAnn Little Vampire; written and illus. by Joann Sfar; tr. by Alexis Siegel 
and Edward Gauvin. First Second/Roaring Brook, 2008 92p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-59643-233-8 $13.95   
R Gr. 4-7
This collection of three short graphic novels, two of which were originally trans-
lated as separate volumes in 2003, features Little Vampire, an aptly named young 
vamp. Throughout the three tales, a complete picture of the luridly gruesome but 
loving household in which Little Vampire lives emerges, as do complex discus-
sions on death, religion, and identity. In spite of his gray skin, ability to float, and 
tomato-colored dog, Little Vampire is rather typical, surrounded by a strange but 
494 • The BulleTin
warm extended family and caught up in everyday events that ultimately play out 
in significant ways. Although the plots are simple (going to school, learning self 
defense, and rescuing lab-experiment dogs), there is a richness to these stories, a 
depth that comes from the interactions between the characters, the sophisticated 
art, and the author’s willingness to embrace weightier topics (in one tale, a bully 
is actually eaten, though he is successfully brought back to life before morning). 
French author and artist Sfar offers endless details in his illustrations that will 
encourage repeat readings as much as the stories themselves. In addition, the vivid 
colors, occasionally bordering on garish, pair well with the exaggerated expressions 
and creepy otherworldliness of Little Vampire’s home and family. Although Little 
Vampire does not do any bloodsucking himself, there is plenty of gruesome activ-
ity around him to appeal to even the most hardcore horror fans, and the elegant 
meshing of text and the art that mirrors it, will satisfy readers drawn in exclusively 
because of the format.  AS
shAKespeAre, WilliAm The Merchant of Venice; ad. and illus. by Gareth 
Hinds. Candlewick, 2008 [80p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-3024-9 $21.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-3025-6 $11.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
In his third graphic novel treatment of a classic text (Beowulf, BCCB 7/07; King 
Lear), Hinds sets Shakespeare’s arguably most controversial play in a modern con-
text, or at least as modern as possible considering the plots of marriage by lottery 
and forfeiture of a pound of flesh to settle a debt. His figures sport contemporary if 
fancy clothes, and he begins the text by using language that, while relatively formal, 
is his own, not Shakespeare’s. As the play progresses, the language becomes truer 
and truer to Shakespeare’s, until the Bard’s own memorable passages take readers 
from the climactic courtroom scene to the end. This transition is so remarkably 
smooth as to be almost imperceptible, and the adaptation glides neatly over eli-
sions from the play; the plot and themes remain intact despite the cutting of some 
of the scenes, in particular the comic ones. The figures are, as a note documents, 
drawn from models, but their expressions have more vitality than such modeling 
often confers; the color scheme of gray, black, and slate blue, however, tips from 
subdued into monotonous. Ultimately, the modernization isn’t itself new, and this 
play isn’t really successful under the treatment; readers must be willing to accept a 
Sopranos-style code of justice, a Harry Potter-ish process of finding a husband for 
Portia, and a very politically incorrect meditation on identity politics in order to 
accommodate the shift, and playing these things out in double-breasted suits and 
sport coats renders them bizarre rather than helpfully informing them. However, 
this could still be useful as a read-alongside-the-original, especially for students 
struggling with the flow of the plot amid the Elizabethan language. A note explains 
Hinds’ approach to the adaptation.  KC 
simmons, miChAel Alien Feast; illus. by George O’Connor. Roaring Brook, 
2008 [240p] (Chronicles of the First Invasion)
ISBN 978-1-59643-281-9 $9.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-6
William decides to venture outside after he discovers that his stepparents have been 
devoured (except for their feet, which the invading aliens eschew); on his drive over 
July/AugusT 2008 • 495
to his beloved uncle’s house, he spots a neighbor friend, Sophie, whose parents are 
also missing but hopefully still alive. Thus the strange trio of William, his quite 
old but determined uncle, and Sophie embark on a two-part quest: to save Sophie’s 
parents and then save the world. Luckily, chicken pox has been determined to be 
fatal to aliens, so illness has done much of the work for this intrepid threesome, 
though plenty of the larger-than-life invaders still remain. There is surprising depth 
of character development for such a trim and comic novel, the first in a series, with 
all three of the protagonists so carefully described that the book’s surprising tragedy 
will elicit genuine emotional response. The story ends with frustratingly more ques-
tions than answers, though, and the humor (in repeated jokes, quirky behaviors, 
and interspersed black-and-white illustrations that often highlight or exaggerate 
amusing lines in the text) balances uneasily with the alarming number of attacks 
and deaths and the continuing risk for the protagonists. Nevertheless, readers seek-
ing a quick, snappy novel about kids facing an alien invasion with creativity and 
no small degree of fortitude may find this first adventure sufficiently intriguing to 
draw them back for future entries in order to see the story unfold.  AS
smith, lAne Madam President; written and illus. by Lane Smith. Hyperion, 
2008 [32p]
ISBN 978-1-4231-0846-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* 6-10 yrs
Most kids merely dream what they’ll be when they grow up; Smith’s heroine Katy 
lives the fantasy, charging through her day as self-proclaimed President of the 
United States. Up before seven, she starts off with orders for the staff (concerning 
breakfast waffles), snags a photo op on the way to school (baffling an unsuspecting 
Boy Scout troop), negotiates a peace treaty (between a snarling dog and bristling 
cat), names her Cabinet (Mr. Potato Head is an able Secretary of Agriculture and a 
see-through anatomical model handles the Interior), and relies on her Secret Service 
(cat) to protect her from suspicious schoolmates. She wields her veto power in the 
school cafeteria, obfuscates her oral report with firm repetitions of “No comment,” 
and works her weary way home, only to find that her mother has alerted her to a 
disaster (in her messy room). Order restored, Katy’s pooped by eight and leaves her 
clown-faced, stuffed vice president (do we detect some social commentary here?) to 
deal with the Freedonian ambassador. There’s a richness to this zany picture book 
in its respect for big dreams—Katy is clearly inspired by the national heroes from 
Frederick Douglass to Susan B. Anthony who populate her books and adorn her 
walls—and in its gentle nose-tweaking of the political milieu—what else would an 
aspiring woman president wear but a conservative pants suit? Katy is a square-jawed 
force to be reckoned with, by turns smug, determined, conciliatory, outraged, and 
sweetly childlike. That her classmates and offstage parents are oblivious to her es-
teemed office not only heightens the comedy but also underscores how little regard 
many citizens pay to the Chief Executive once the heat of election time has cooled. 
This is a must-have title that will unite both sides of the (lunchroom) aisle.  EB
sonnenBliCK, JorDAn Dodger and Me. Feiwel, 2008 [176p]
ISBN 978-0-312-37793-9 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
M Gr. 4-6
Taking a shortcut home from yet another humiliating baseball game, Willie Ryan 
comes across a fast-food bag in the middle of the woods. He picks it up only to 
496 • The BulleTin
have it transform into a teapot, out of which emerges a bright blue chimpanzee 
wearing an eye patch and surfer shorts who immediately proclaims himself to be 
Willie’s new best friend. Despite the strange appearance of his new companion, 
Willie quickly deduces that any creature who comes out of a teapot must be a 
genie, and he sets about making wishes to deal with his chief problems in life: an 
overprotective mother, an overinterested girl named Lizzie, and an overlong losing 
streak on the baseball field. Dodger, however, only succeeds in making things much 
worse, as he spreads blue fur and chaos in his wake. Still, by the time Willie finds 
out that Dodger isn’t a real genie but an inferior lackey, he’s grown attached to the 
obnoxious blue chimp, and he must make a hard decision about how to use his 
last wish. Sonnenblick is writing for a much younger crowd here than he usually 
does, and the result isn’t particularly successful; in trying to capture the attitude 
of a junior-high boy, the prose often seems written by one, complete with cheesy 
dialogue over-cluttered with “dude” and “awesome,” and slapstick scenarios ran-
domly inserted, relying on wet messes rather than tight comic pacing. The abrupt 
appearance of the real genie serves to get the plot out of the impasse it reaches with 
Dodger’s antics, but the resolution he brings about is convenient and unconvincing 
as he behaves against character to help Willie get his happy ending while leaving 
things open-ended enough for a sequel. Kids who feel generally oppressed by their 
circumstances will enjoy that it-could-be-worse feeling that Dodger’s “solutions” 
engender, but kids looking for middle-grades boyish humor will be better off with 
M. T. Anderson, Dan Gutman, or Dan Elish.  KC 
soto, gArY Facts of Life: Stories. Harcourt, 2008 176p
ISBN 978-0-15-206181-4 $16.00   
R Gr. 5-8
As he did some twenty years ago with Baseball in April and Other Stories (BCCB 
4/90), Gary Soto offers crisp, varied portrayals of what it’s like to be young and 
Latino in Fresno, California. Although many of the themes of dealing with eccen-
tric elders, figuring out the nuances of boy-girl relationships, and interacting with 
hostile Anglos are similar to those taken up in the earlier work, these ten original 
stories have twenty-first century contexts, concerns, and ironies. “Identity Theft,” 
for instance, concerns Ana Hernandez, who is dismayed when a new girl with her 
name comes to school and eclipses her popularity. “Citizen of the World” offers a 
girl’s experience as an illegal immigrant, reflecting her father’s lesson that “what was 
really important was being nice, being productive, staying in school, and honoring 
the country where you live.” “The Ideal City” focuses on a girl’s school project to 
create her perfect world, with the resulting presentation being so dissociative as to 
play out either eerie or comic, depending on the reader’s point of view. Soto is a 
master storyteller, and his range in this collection is such that most readers will find 
a character or a situation to latch on to here as they negotiate their own positions 
in a complex array of cultural, familial, and school identities.  KC
stAples, suzAnne fisher The House of Djinn. Foster/Farrar, 2008 207p
ISBN 978-0-374-39936-8 $16.95   
R Gr. 7-10
Ten lonely years living hidden away on the roof of her husband’s family’s Pakistani 
haveli is enough for Shabanu. Even though Nazir, her would-be murderer, remains 
a danger, she decides that she must risk his wrath to let her family know she is 
still alive. Her timing is fortuitous, as things are about to change dramatically 
for Mumtaz, the daughter she left behind when she staged her own death. Baba, 
July/AugusT 2008 • 497
Mumtaz’s doting grandfather, suffers a stroke; his death opens the possibility that 
Nazir will attempt to take over as tribal leader. Baba’s plan, however, is for Jameel, 
Mumtaz’s cousin and best friend, to assume that role and marry Mumtaz in the 
bargain. As Jameel and Mumtaz attempt to flee their future, a violent incident forces 
them to reconsider their duty to family and the future of their land. As she did in 
Shabanu (BCCB 10/89) and Haveli (BCCB 11/93), Staples transports readers into 
a land that is at once foreign and familiar, as matters of culture and family collide 
with matters of the heart. Shabanu, Mumtaz, and Jameel will certainly engender 
empathy as they chafe against their circumstances; both Mumtaz and Jameel, who 
has been reared in America and is not at all sure he wants his new position, have 
fallen in love with unsuitable partners, making their arranged marriage all the more 
poignant. Their ultimate decision reflects an ideology that will likely seem strange to 
American readers, but Staples’ careful and sensitive handling of cultural difference 
makes their actions and motivations accessible and even laudable. Although this is 
the third in a series, enough context is given so that readers who have not read the 
first two books can catch up quickly, and the emphasis on teen characters assures 
appeal; deft handling of plot, setting, pace, and character will make readers want 
to read or revisit the entire series.  KC 
steWArt, trenton lee The Mysterious Benedict Society and the Perilous Journey; 
illus. by Diana Sudyka. Tingley/Little, 2008 [448p]
ISBN 978-0-316-05780-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-9
Sensing that the gifted children who performed so heroically in saving the world 
the previous year (The Mysterious Benedict Society, BCCB 5/07) would be getting 
lonely without one other, their leader Mr. Benedict arranges a transatlantic scav-
enger hunt for them as an anniversary treat. Alas, he and his assistant, Number 
Two, are kidnapped by his old nemesis and twin brother, Mr. Curtain, while they 
are setting the clues, and the happy adventure turns perilous for the children, who 
naturally escape the watchful eyes of their adult guardians and set off to rescue their 
beloved benefactor. Enough clues have been laid for them to follow kidnappers and 
kidnappees to a remote island where a possible botanical cure for Mr. Benedict’s 
narcolepsy grows; unfortunately, that same cure has the power to plunge whole 
populations into deep sleep, making it attractive to the power-mad Mr. Curtain as 
well. Stewart knows his characters with the same deep intimacy as Rowling knows 
hers; the result is a remarkably self-assured mystery with the side benefits of devel-
oping character drama. His plotting is once again crafty and involving for readers 
as they figure out the clues alongside the children; the deliciously two-dimensional 
and sinister villains, as well as the helpers, both human and animal, lend a fairy-
tale buoyancy to their quest. Every bit as chunky and satisfying as the first, this 
adventure will delight fans, particularly as young Constance comes into her own, 
discovering new talents along the way. Sudyka’s black-and-white chapter headings 
add style and atmosphere.  KC 
thomAs, JAn A Birthday for Cow!; written and illus. by Jan Thomas. Harcourt, 
2008 38p
ISBN 978-0-15-206072-5 $12.95   
R 4-6 yrs
When Pig and Mouse whip up a birthday cake for their friend, Cow, goofy pal 
Duck persistently tries to include a turnip in some part, any part, of the proceed-
498 • The BulleTin
ings. After the baking duo refuses, understandably, to add the turnip to the cake’s 
ingredients, Duck suggests they use it as a mixing utensil or a festive cake topper 
(“No TURNIPS, Duck! CANDLES!!!” bellows exasperated Mouse). The friends 
proudly present their culinary masterpiece to Cow, who, it turns out, only has eyes 
for Duck’s turnip; no matter, though, since Pig and Mouse consume the cake, Cow 
devours the turnip (while Duck flashes two thumbs up), and everyone’s satisfied. 
Sure, the plot may be minimal, but that’s beside the point; it’s the unabashed sil-
liness that’s the real attraction here. Even the endpapers carry the humor along: in 
the final spread, Duck remarks thoughtfully, “Sometimes I brush my teeth using 
a turnip,” to which Cow responds, “Really? Me, too!” Thomas’s illustrations are 
chunky blocks of flat pastel color, thickly outlined with navy, which, along with 
numerous word balloons that practically explode from characters’ mouths, give 
the book a comic-strip or cartoon sensibility in keeping with the lively tone of the 
text. Large print and small amounts of it per page will entice emergent readers, 
and the boldness of the illustrations and amusing content make this an easy choice 
for group sharing, too.  JH
thomAs, JoYCe CArol The Blacker the Berry; illus. by Floyd Cooper. Cotler/
Amistad/HarperCollins, 2008 [32p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-025376-9 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-025375-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 5-8 yrs
Well-known poet Thomas offers a dozen free-verse poems in the voices of Afri-
can-American children, each describing and exulting in their own individual and 
beautiful skin color. The author takes the berry metaphor of the title and runs it 
through the poems, with one boy referring to himself as “raspberry-black (“I am 
African-Native-American”), a girl realizing her arms are “as bronze and golden” as 
the huckleberry bush, and another “as light as snowberries in fall,” while other kids 
are “biscuit brown” and “midnight and berries” dark. The poems are bolsteringly 
inclusive, gaining particular energy when they touch on family exchanges or stories 
(Grandma’s anecdote makes “Coffee Will Make You Black” a standout entry). Often, 
though, the poems are merely prettily descriptive and their eloquence flattened by 
the hard-pushed positivity; the berry metaphor also becomes somewhat strained with 
repetition. The berries can become a tad intrusive in the art as well, but Cooper’s 
misty pastels otherwise offer some evocative portraiture of bright-eyed youngsters, 
with hearty realism in gap-toothed smiles and individual faces that helps balance 
out the idealism of the settings. This is a topic not often overtly treated in literature 
for young people, and this collection could make a partner to other books about 
African-American acceptance such as Sandra Pinkney’s Shades of Black (BCCB 
1/01) or hooks’ Happy to Be Nappy (BCCB 1/00).  DS
thompson, KAte The Last of the High Kings. Greenwillow, 2008 [336p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-117596-1 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-117595-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-9
In this sequel to The New Policeman (BCCB 4/07), J.J. Liddy, who in the previous 
novel sought out extra time for his mother and discovered a pathway to eternity, is 
now an adult and a father. Music is still a key part of his family’s lives, though his 
youngest daughter, Jenny, is more interested in listening to the wind and wander-
July/AugusT 2008 • 499
ing the Irish countryside than participating in weekly dances or family activities 
at all. Her two closest friends are a ghost who guards a stone beacon, protecting 
it from an ancient enemy, and a púka, a shape-shifting goat from a parallel world 
with a mysterious agenda. The naturally flighty and distant Jenny (she turns out to 
be a changeling exchanged with J.J.’s infant daughter years ago for priceless wood 
to be used for instruments) is ultimately the only person who can save her family, 
town, and even the world as the evil forces who had always been warded off by 
the ghost gain in power. Thompson describes an elegant, sweeping Irish landscape 
so intricately portrayed that it becomes almost a character in itself. Although this 
novel could function as a standalone, as each character is carefully introduced and 
the main plot does not rely overmuch on the earlier story, readers will be more 
empathetic and engaged with the protagonist if they know the previous volumes’ 
stories about her adopted family and biological family, especially J.J., who sacrificed 
much in both novels in pursuit of music, often at the expense of those he loves. 
Although context is given for most of the Celtic mythological characters or terms, 
a glossary is included.  AS
thomson, melissA Keena Ford and the Second-Grade Mix-Up; illus. by Frank 
Morrison. Dial, 2008 [112p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3263-6 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-3
Despite her initial fears about being separated into an all-girl class while her best 
friend, Eric, is herded off with the boys, Keena Ford finds that she absolutely loves 
second grade. The course of true love doesn’t run any smoother than usual, though: 
Keena mixes up her date notation and can’t bring herself to own up when the teacher 
fêtes her with a birthday party five months early (“I really, really wanted a piece of 
that cake”), and she’s disloyally intrigued by Eric’s claims about his teacher, who 
ostensibly allows kids to chew gum and makes pudding pie every day. Can her 
beloved Miss Campbell forgive her for these transgressions? As a narrator, Keena 
has a touch of Junie B. Jones in her pell-mell approach to life and her tendency to 
make mistakes that readers will catch before she does, but there’s a deeper founda-
tion that’s reminiscent of Ann Cameron’s Julian, Huey, and Gloria stories (Gloria’s 
Way, BCCB 2/00, et al.). Dynamics are vivid and credible, with Keena believably 
blind to Eric’s anxiety about being left out, and with an old enemy (“I think it 
started when I might have taken her green crayon”) becoming a friend as alliances 
shift. There’s also a nicely realistic depiction of the family wherein both mother 
and father are seriously involved parents even if they don’t live together anymore, 
and the often annoying older brother offers an offhanded piece of kindness just 
when it’s badly needed (after Keena suffers grounding and humiliation when her 
real birthday is revealed). Keena is fizzy and enjoyable company, and her adventures 
will make lively reading aloud or alone. Final illustrations not seen.  DS
uehAshi, nAhoKo Moribito: Guardian of the Spirit; tr. by Cathy Hirano; illus. 
by Yuko Shimizu. Levine/Scholastic, 2008 [256p]
ISBN 978-0-545-00542-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7
In this Japanese import, the first in a series, Balsa, a loner bodyguard on a mis-
sion to save eight lives, meets with a client with whom she becomes emotionally 
involved. Her charge is a twelve-year-old prince who is harboring an egg inside 
500 • The BulleTin
him that, when hatched, will rehydrate and replenish the lands for 100 years. The 
prince is not only in danger from Rarunga, a demon that seeks to consume the egg 
before it hatches, but also from an earthly pursuer, his own father, who mistakenly 
believes that the egg Chagum harbors will, if hatched, bring misfortune and chaos 
to the kingdom. Balsa is less familiar with defenses against otherworldly creatures 
than human ones, but she is easily up to the challenge, defiant and unflappable in 
the face of grave dangers. Although the mysterious Balsa is the main focus of the 
novel, Uehashi imbues the side characters with enough personality to make them 
memorable as well: Chagum’s transformation from spoiled prince to sturdy fighter 
is inspiring, Balsa’s friends each offer distinct strengths that will aid and guide her, 
and the depth and complexity of the Hunters, sent by the king to kill the prince, 
keep them intriguing and sympathetic, even in their villainy. Tough women in 
fantasy are fairly common, but Balsa’s particularly driven personality and standoffish 
approach to the world make her remarkable even among fierce female characters. 
The design is thoughtful and attractive, with each section opening with a finely 
detailed black-and-white spread. Readers seeking more background on the Japanese 
myths and details that shape the novel will find that the lists of characters, places, 
and terms hint at realistic Japanese elements even while they ultimately reference a 
fictional land. In Japan, these novels are sufficiently popular to have been adapted 
into a television show and a manga series; given the strong characterization, sweep-
ing landscape, and compelling mix of realism and fantasy, American readers will 
also find the story appealing.  AS
vAlentine, JennY Me, the Missing, and the Dead. HarperTeen, 2008 201p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-085069-2 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-085068-5 $16.99   
R Gr. 7-10
Five years after his father disappeared, Lucas Swain has turned him into an icon of 
sorts, idolizing his stylish demeanor, wearing his clothes, and refusing to believe 
that he might have been the type of man who simply walked out on his family. A 
chance encounter with an urn of ashes left in a taxicab sets Lucas on a quest that 
ends with his coming to terms with the fact that he may have been wrong to think 
so highly of his dad. The urn in question contains Violet Park, a woman of whom 
he has never heard, but who played a pivotal role in his father’s disappearance and 
who seems to be insistent on getting her story told to Lucas from beyond the grave. 
With gentle proddings—a sense of contentment here, a nagging unrest there—she 
nudges Lucas toward clues that reveal her own final wishes and cause him to ask 
questions of his father’s best friend that help him face who his father really was. Lucas’ 
narration makes Violet’s mystical presence seem perfectly reasonable, rather than a 
timely coincidence appearing just as a sixteen-year-old boy is finally ready to accept 
unpleasant truths about a cherished fantasy; the story is handily plotted to keep a 
level of suspense going through a fair bit of repetitive (and thus entirely credible) 
introspection. Lucas’s hard-won insights about the constellation of relationships 
that constitute his family have a level of depth and wisdom beyond the norm of 
this genre; likewise his own relationship with a new girlfriend offers opportunities 
for epiphanies and emotional growth at a time when both need a fresh perspective. 
Missing parents with grieving kids may be overworked ground in YA fiction, but 
Valentine harvests an impressive yield of insight in this debut novel.  KC 
July/AugusT 2008 • 501
Winter, JonAh Steel Town; illus. by Terry Widener. Atheneum, 2008 40p
ISBN 978-1-4169-4081-4 $16.99   
R* 7-10 yrs
Part informative treatise on the heyday of the American steel industry, part paean 
to blue-collar labor, Winter’s poetic text traces the fiery journey of ore to iron to 
steel and celebrates the grinding, sweaty toil of the men who run it through the 
mill. The relentless heat and din of the 24/7 operation is captured in pulsing rep-
etitions: “Inside the iron mill,/ it’s like another world:/ fire and smoke,/ fire and 
smoke./ No matter the time of day or night,/ the men keep working,/ the machines 
don’t stop:/ fire and smoke,/ fire and smoke.” Everywhere there’s danger—rivers 
of molten metal, train cars of bubbling ore that teeter on overhead rails, furnaces 
that measure degrees in thousands rather than hundreds. The lunchtime whistle 
heralds the only respite the workers will enjoy, from the time they climb down the 
stairs on Goat Hill Path at the beginning of the shift until “another shift is over./ 
Time to punch the time-card./ Time to get paid:/ Three crinkly bills/ in a grimy 
hand./ That means food.” Widener’s husky acrylic paintings turn the towering 
machines, furnaces, and smokestacks into smoldering monuments to industry, 
and the smoke-infused air grapples with the brilliant orange flames for the right to 
color the sky. He also takes just enough artistic liberty with scale and perspective 
to allow the workers to emerge as masters of the beast, trudging home beat but 
not quite beaten. Blast some Aaron Copland in the background and make this the 
centerpiece for a Labor Day program.  EB
Wittlinger, ellen Love & Lies: Marisol’s Story. Simon, 2008 [256p]
ISBN 978-1-4169-1623-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
In this companion novel to Hard Love (BCCB 7/99), Gio, the zine author who 
struggled with unrequited love, takes a backseat to the young lesbian he fell for, 
Marisol. Marisol is pleased to reconnect with Gio in a weekend writing class, but 
she has more pressing issues on her mind: ignoring the romantic advances of a newly 
outed girl, Lee, whom she finds intriguing but too young, while actively pursuing 
a relationship with her hot writing teacher. Marisol, passionate and impetuous, 
learns the hard-won lesson that lust does not always translate into love, realizing 
too late what she missed in Lee, the girl who had been crushing on her for months. 
Wittlinger avoids an idealized ending, not only leaving Marisol to sort out the ro-
mantic mess she made of her life but also developing her as a character wise enough 
to realize she doesn’t really deserve Lee right now anyway. The emotional morass 
of Marisol’s life, surrounded by high-maintenance friends, caught up in her own 
desire to find significance through her writing, and haunted by ways she has hurt 
friends in the past, is complex and realistic; it will draw in both fans of the earlier 
novel, who will find her narrative voice an intriguing contrast to Gio’s masculine 
one, and realistic-fiction readers seeking a love story with depth. AS
WooD, JAmie mArtinez Rogelia’s House of Magic. Delacorte, 2008 [320p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90476-6 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73477-6 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-10
It’s the beginning of a sisterhood in Orange County, California, and this summer 
the magic lies not in a pair of pants but rather in curanderismo, a spiritual healing 
502 • The BulleTin
tradition that has been handed down through generations of Mexican-American 
women. Three fifteen-year-old Latinas, Marina Peralta, Fernanda Fuego, and Xochitl 
Garcia, aspire to learn the ritualistic art from a wise curandera, Rogelia Garcia, who 
is Xochitl’s grandmother and the new maid for the Peraltas. Though still reeling 
from the emigration from Mexico that claimed the life of her twin sister, Xochitl 
now joins Marina and Fern for a summer steeped in ritual and enhanced by its 
fair share of boy drama and anti-mother rebellions. Like any good sisterhood, the 
girls end up sharing their sorrows and growing closer through their trials: Marina 
finds the courage to respectfully stand up to her mother, Fern makes a move to get 
back her guy, and Xochitl lets go of her sister while accepting her new life and new 
friends. The girls’ supernatural talent progresses quickly (Marina can hear thoughts, 
Fern can see auras, and Xochitl can make herself disappear), and each girl develops 
an inner strength as she deepens her magical ability. By interlacing weighty ideas 
of embracing one’s heritage and saving the earth with frothy brand-name drop-
ping, Wood has created an unusual admixture that could draw in both spellmakers 
(spells offered at the end of the book include “Charging a Crystal Wand” and “Silky 
Smooth Skin Spell”) and gossip girls. While this doesn’t quite provide the vivacity 
that makes the original Sisterhood reign supreme, it offers a genuinely likable spell-
casting trio ready for believing, taking chances, and healing.  KB
July/August 2008 • 503
Abuse–fiction: Galante Hershey
Actors and acting–fiction: Medina
Adventure: dale; dunnion; 
emerson; Forester; French; Gard-
ner; Hague; Kennedy; Stewart; 
uehashi
Africa–fiction: doherty
African Americans–fiction: davis; 
thomson
African Americans–poetry: thomas, 
Joyce
African Americans–stories: McGill; 
reynolds
Alcoholism–fiction: Fredericks
Aliens–fiction: Schmid; Simmons
AlpHAbet booKS: borden
Animals: Jenkins, S.; patent
Animals–fiction: Jeffers; Kennemore
Animals–stories: borden; doyle; 
lobel; ravishankar; thomas, Jan
Appearance–fiction: Medina
Appearance–poetry: thomas, Joyce
Apprentices–fiction: prineas
Art and artists–fiction: Hearn
Art and artists–stories: bridges; 
reynolds
Asian Americans–fiction: Kadohata
Astronauts: McCarthy
Astronomy: Aguilar
babies–stories: elya
baseball–fiction: Sonnenblick
beaches–stories: elya
bedtiMe StorieS: Crimi
bilinGuAl booKS: elya
bioGrApHieS: berne; Fleischman
Biology: Jenkins, S.
boArd booKS: Horácek
brothers–fiction: lurie
brothers and sisters: Jenkins, S.
brothers and sisters–fiction: dale; 
Galante Patron; Hague; Hayes; 
Kennemore; o’neill
Cambodian Americans–fiction: ly
Camps and camping–fiction: larson
Camps and camping–stories: Flem-
ing
Careers: McCarthy
Careers–fiction: davis
Cats–fiction: lynch
Cats–stories: Scotton
Clothing–stories: Kimmel
Colors: Cottin
ConCept booKS: Cottin; lobel
Crime and criminals–fiction: For-
ester; Scott; Stewart
Cults–fiction: Galante Patron
Current events: Aguilar
death–fiction: Hyde; Michaels
disasters–fiction: pfeffer
divorce–fiction: Henkes
dogs–stories: Fleming
drug abuse–fiction: Hearn
dystopias–fiction: Ó Guilín
Ecology: berne; patent
eSp–fiction: Gardner; Mechling; 
nelson
Ethics and values: dunnion; 
Galante Patron; Jenkins, A.; 
lynch; Scott; Staples
explorers and exploring: berne
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in All-CApS 
refer to genres and appeals. in the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
504 • the Bulletin
Fairies–fiction: thompson
Faith–fiction: Galante Patron
Families–fiction: Almond; bird-
sall; Kadohata; lemna; lurie; 
neumeier; pfeffer; Sáenz; Staples; 
thompson
FAntASy: dale; durst; emerson; 
Ferris; Forester; French; Golden; 
Hague; Hardinge; Joyce; Ken-
nedy; Mclaughlin; neumeier; 
prineas; rutkoski; Sonnenblick; 
Stewart; thompson; uehashi
Farm life–fiction: lemna
Fathers–fiction: Almond; bell; Fred-
ericks; Kadohata; valentine
Flight–fiction: Almond
FolKtAleS And FAiry tAleS: 
McGill
Folktales and fairy tales–fiction: 
durst; lowe
Food and eating–fiction: davis
Food and eating–stories: bee; 
thomas, Jan
French revolution–fiction: Gardner
Friends–fiction: bell; Fredericks; 
Galante Hershey; Golden; Henkes; 
larson; lockhart; lurie; Medina; 
Sáenz; Stewart; thomson; Wood
Future: Ó Guilín
Gays and lesbians–fiction: McMa-
hon; Wittlinger
Gender–fiction: Mclaughlin
GHoSt StorieS: Hightman; 
valentine
Gifts–fiction: Joyce
Government: Smith
Grandfathers–fiction: bell
Grandmothers–fiction: Galante 
Patron; Mechling; Wood
GrApHiC novelS: Hague; 
Hayes; larson; lynch; rosen-
stiehl; Sfar; Shakespeare
Grief–fiction: Henkes
Guilt–fiction: Hyde; McMahon
Gypsies–fiction: Gardner
Halloween: Crimi
HiStoriCAl FiCtion: Gard-
ner; Hearn; Heuston; Hightman; 
Kadohata; lemna; Winter
History, U.S.: Winter
Horror–fiction: Sfar
Horses–stories: doyle
HuMor: Agee; Almond; Ashman; 
bee; Crimi; durst; elya; French; 
Hayes; Kennedy; Kimmel; 
o’neill; ravishankar; Scotton; 
Sfar; Simmons; Smith; Sonnen-
blick; thomas, Jan; thomson
identity–fiction: ly; Mclaughlin
immigrants–fiction: doherty
industry–stories: Winter
ireland–fiction: thompson
Jews–fiction: Shakespeare
latinos–fiction: Sáenz; Soto; Wood
Literature, American: Fleischman
Literature, English: Shakespeare
Magic–fiction: Ferris; lowe; prineas
Marine biology: berne
Mental illness–fiction: Heuston
Mothers–fiction: Hightman; ly; 
Michaels; Scott
Music and musicians–fiction:  
Galante Hershey
native Americans–fiction: nelson
Nature study: Jenkins, S.; patent
orphans–fiction: doherty
pakistan–fiction: Staples
pets–fiction: Kennemore
poetry: Ashman; thomas, Joyce
politics–fiction: Heuston
ponies–fiction: Jeffers
prejudice–fiction: Shakespeare
Quests–fiction: neumeier; Ó Guilín
Reading aloud: Ashman; Fleming; 
Kennemore; o’neill; thomson
Reading, beginning: Hayes; lynch; 
rosenstiehl; thomas, Jan
Reading, easy: Kennemore; o’neill; 
thomson
relationships–fiction: davis; 
lockhart; McMahon; valentine; 
Wittlinger
retirement–stories: Agee
rHyMinG StorieS: elya; rav-
ishankar
romance–fiction: Gray; lowe; 
Mechling; Scott
royalty–fiction: Ferris; lowe; ue-
hashi
royalty–stories: bridges
July/August 2008 • 505
SCAry StorieS: Hardinge
School–fiction: Forester; Gray; 
thomson
School–stories: borden; Scotton
Science: Aguilar
SCienCe FiCtion: dunnion; 
Michaels; Ó Guilín; Schmid; 
Simmons
Seasons–fiction: rosenstiehl
Self-esteem–poetry: thomas, Joyce
Shelters–fiction: Galante Hershey
SHort StorieS: Soto
Sisters–fiction: birdsall; Kadohata
Slavery–stories: McGill
Space travel: McCarthy
Spies and spying–fiction: rutkoski
Stepfamilies–fiction: French
Stepmothers–fiction: birdsall
Storytime: Agee; doyle; Jeffers; 
Kimmel; thomas, Jan
Suicide–fiction: Hyde
Summer–fiction: Henkes
SupernAturAl StorieS: bell; 
Gray; Hardinge; Joyce; Wood
SurvivAl StorieS: Hague; 
pfeffer
tattoos–fiction: Golden
thailand–stories: bridges
therapy–fiction: Hyde
toddler booKS: Horácek; 
lobel
trains–stories: Kimmel; Horácek 
Beep
transportation–stories: Horácek
vampires–fiction: emerson; Gray; 
Jenkins, A.; Sfar
voyages and travel–fiction: durst; 
Jenkins, A.; lockhart; nelson; 
neumeier; rutkoski; Schmid
Winter–fiction: Hightman
Wishes–fiction: Hardinge
Witches–fiction: Hightman
Work–stories: Winter
Writers and writing: Fleischman
Writers and writing–fiction: Wit-
tlinger
506  •  The BulleTin
T  h  e    B  u  l  l  e  T  i  n
 
of the Center for Children’s Books
auThor/TiTle index, volume 61
sepTemBer, 2007—july/augusT, 2008
100 Cupboards. Wilson. 229.
11 Planets. Aguilar. 457.
42 Miles. Zimmer. 448.
A La Carte. Davis. 463.
Abadzis. Laika. 70.
Ábalos. Grimpow. 240.
Abbott. Postcard. 370.
Abdel-Fattah. Does My Head Look Big in 
This? 4.
Abrahams. Into the Dark. 371.
_____. Up All Night. 414.
Absolute Brightness. Lecesne. 341.
Absolutely True Diary of a Part-Time 
Indian. Alexie. 72.
Ada. Merry Navidad! 202.
Adlington. Cherry Heaven. 415.
Adoff. Death of Jayson Porter. 322.
Adoration of Jenna Fox. Pearson. 350.
Adventures of Sir Lancelot the Great. Mor-
ris. 395.
After Tupac and D Foster. Woodson. 230.
Agee. Nothing. 71.
_____. Retired Kid. 456.
Aguilar. 11 Planets. 457.
Ahlberg. Previously. 126.
Ain’t Nothing But a Man. Nelson. 256.
Airman. Colfer. 328.
Alalou. Butter Man. 323.
Albert Einstein. Meltzer. 394.
Alcatraz versus the Evil Librarians. Sander-
son. 260.
Alexander, E. Miss Crandall’s School for 
Young Ladies. 126.
Alexander, L. Golden Dream of Carlo 
Chuchio. 71.
Alexander, S. She Touched the World. 371.
Alexie. Absolutely True Diary of a Part-
Time Indian. 72.
Alice’s Birthday Pig. Kennemore. 479.
Alien Feast. Simmons. 495.
All Asleep. Walsh. 358.
All the Lovely Bad Ones. Hahn. 386.
All We Know of Heaven. Mitchard. 437. 
All-I’ll-Ever-Want Christmas Doll. McKis-
sack. 179.
All-In. Hautman. 31.
All-Season Edie. Lyon. 434.
Almond. My Dad’s a Birdman. 457.
Almost Home. Blank. 130.
Alter. Ghost Letter. 240.
Amato. Chicken of the Family. 280. 
America at War. Hopkins. 388. 
Ana’s Story. Bush. 168.
And the Train Goes . . . . Bee. 7.
Andersen. Princess and the Pea. 5.
_____. Ugly Duckling. 281.
Angela and the Baby Jesus. McCourt. 179.
Angelina’s Island. Winter. 61.
Annie and Simon. O’Neill. 488.
Another Book about Design. Gonyea. 86.
Another Kind of Cowboy. Juby. 175.
Applegate. Home of the Brave. 241.
Apple-Pip Princess. Ray. 398.
Archer. Poison Apples. 127. 
Archie’s War. Williams. 271.
Arctic Adventures. Rivera. 108.
Armstrong. Raleigh’s Page. 166.
Aronson, M. Ain’t Nothing But a Man. 
256.
_____. Race. 127.
july/augusT 2008  •  507
Aronson, S. Head Case. 5.
Arrival. Tan. 201. 
Art’s Supplies. Tougas. 443.
Asher. Thirteen Reasons Why. 128. 
Ashman. M Is for Mischief. 458.
Aston. Not So Tall for Six. 323.
Astronaut Handbook. McCarthy. 483.
At Gleason’s Gym. Lewin. 95.
At Night. Bean. 73.
Attack of the Frozen Woodchucks. Elish. 
289.
Audrey, Wait! Benway. 321.
Aunt Nancy and the Bothersome Visitors. 
Root. 108.
Aurelia. Osterlund. 439. 
Aurora County All-Stars. Wiles. 193.
Averbeck. In a Blue Room. 372.
Avi. Beginning, a Muddle, and an End. 
372. 
_____. Seer of Shadows. 324.
Baby. Monninger. 41.
Baby! Baby! Ceelen. 286.
Baby Happy Baby Sad. Patricelli. 350.
Baby’s Day. Blake. 9.
Bad Luck Chair. Wilkowski. 116.
Baek. Be Gentle with the Dog, Dear! 373. 
Baker, B. One Saturday Evening. 72.
Baker, E. Wings. 415. 
Balch. Poet King of Tezcoco. 54.
Bang-Campbell. Little Rat Makes Music. 6.
Banks. Lenny’s Space. 128.
Baratz-Logsted. Me, In Between. 324.
Barker. Difficult Boy. 416. 
Barnes. Squad. 281.
Barrows. Magic Half. 242.
Barry. Big Yellow Sunflower. 373.
Barshaw. Ellie McDoodle. 6.
Baseball Crazy. Mercado. 346.
Baskin. Truth about My Bat Mitzvah. 282.
Bauer, J. Peeled. 373.
Bauer, M. Killing Miss Kitty. 7.
_____. Secret of the Painted House. 73.
Bausum. Muckrakers. 167.
Be Gentle with the Dog, Dear! Baek. 373. 
Bean. At Night. 73.
Bean Thirteen. McElligott. 40.
Bear’s Picture. Pinkwater. 397.
Bearskinner. Schlitz. 187.
Beastly. Flinn. 84.
Beaty. Doctor Ted. 325.
Bebé Goes to the Beach. Elya. 465.
Becker, B. Visitor for Bear. 203.
Becker, T. Darkside. 282.
Bee. And the Train Goes . . . . 7.
_____. Beware of the Frog. 458.
Beep Beep. Horácek. 475.
Beetle Bop. Fleming. 21.
Before I Die. Downham. 80.
Before John Was a Jazz Giant. Weatherford. 
360.
Before You Were Mine. Boelts. 167.
Beginning, a Muddle, and an End. Avi. 
372. 
Beige. Castellucci. 10.
Bell, C. Slipping. 459.
Bell, J. Dirty Work. 203.
Belton. Tallest Tree. 325.
Benedict. Opposite of Love. 203.
Benny and Penny in Just Pretend. Hayes. 
472.
Benway. Audrey, Wait! 321.
Beowulf. Rumford. 152.
Berlin. Puzzling World of Winston Breen. 
129.
Berman. Magic in the Mirrorstone. 326.
Berne. Manfish. 459.
Bernheimer. Girl in the Castle inside the 
Museum. 242. 
Best. What’s So Bad about Being an Only 
Child? 129.
Best Chef in Second Grade. Kenah. 213. 
Betwixt. Smith. 189.
Beware of the Frog. Bee. 458.
Beyond the Billboard. Gates. 24.
Big Bad Bunny. Billingsley. 374.
Big Big Sky. Dunnion. 464.
Big Fat Manifesto. Vaught. 310.
Big Mama’s Baby. Borgo. 74.
Big Plans. Shea. 353.
Big Slick. Luper. 146.
Big Yellow Sunflower. Barry. 373.
Billie Standish Was Here. Crocker. 13.
Billingsley. Big Bad Bunny. 374.
Billy Creekmore. Porter. 105.
Billy Tartle in Say Cheese. Townsend. 59.
Bingham. Shark Girl. 7.
Bird Lake Moon. Henkes. 473.
Bird Springs. Marsden. 39.
Birdsall. Penderwicks on Gardam Street. 
460.
Birney. Princess and the Peabodys. 130.
Birthday for Cow! Thomas. 497.
508  •  The BulleTin
Bishop. Nic Bishop Frogs. 283.
_____. Spiders. 74.
Black. Ironside. 8.
Black and White Airmen. Fleischman. 21.
Black Book of Colors. Cottin. 461.
Black Book of Secrets. Higgins. 142.
Black Pearls. Hawes. 427. 
Blackall. Knock, Knock! 93.
Blacker the Berry. Thomas. 498.
Blackford. Elephant’s Story. 375.
Blackwood. Great Race. 416.
Blake. Baby’s Day. 9.
Blank. Almost Home. 130.
Block. Blood Roses. 417. 
Blood Brothers. Harazin. 30.
Blood Roses. Block. 417. 
Bloor. Taken. 131. 
Blue Goose. Tafuri. 265.
Blue Like Friday. Parkinson. 302. 
Blue Lipstick. Grandits. 26.
Blume, J. Soupy Saturdays with the Pain. 
74.
Blume, L. Tennyson. 326.
Bodeen. Compound. 375.
Boelts. Before You Were Mine. 167.
_____. Those Shoes. 168.
Bolden. George Washington Carver. 283.
Bone by Bone by Bone. Johnston. 91.
Bonner. When Fish Got Feet. 131.
Book Book. Pietromarchi. 257.
Book of a Thousand Days. Hale. 88.
Book of Jude. Heuston. 474.
Book of Time. Prévost. 47.
Borden. Off to First Grade. 460.
Borgo. Big Mama’s Baby. 74.
Bottle in the Gaza Sea. Zenatti. 407.
Bowler. Frozen Fire. 417.
Boy Toy. Lyga. 97.
Boy Who Wouldn’t Swim. Lucke. 434.
Bradbury. Shift. 418.
Bradley, A. Hot Lunch. 9.
Bradley, K. Leap of Faith. 9.
Brande. Evolution, Me, & Other Freaks of 
Nature. 75.
Brannen. Uncle Bobby’s Wedding. 204.
Brett McCarthy. Padian. 348.
Brewer. Fartiste. 432.
Bridge to the Stars. Mankell. 218.
Bridges. Umbrella Queen. 461.
Brighton. Keep Your Eye on the Kid. 376.
Bringing the Boy Home. Nelson. 487.
Broach. When Dinosaurs Came with 
Everything. 75.
Brodsky. One Trick Pony. 204.
Broken Bike Boy and the Queen of 33rd 
Street. Flake. 20.
Bronze Pen. Snyder. 354.
Brooks. Mistik Lake. 132.
Brothers. Debbie Harry Sings in French. 
419. 
Brothers Torres. Voorhees. 404. 
Brown. Dolley Madison Saves George 
Washington. 132.
_____. Train Jumper. 168.
Bruchac. March toward the Thunder. 419.
Buddha’s Diamonds. Marsden. 298.
Buffalo Music. Fern. 423.
Bullyville. Prose. 106.
Bunce. Curse Dark as Gold. 284.
Bunker 10. Henderson. 173.
Bunting. Man with the Red Bag. 133.
Burleigh. Napoleon. 10.
Busby. First Kiss (Then Tell). 284.
Bush. Ana’s Story. 168.
Buster Goes to Cowboy Camp. Fleming. 
467.
Butler. Truth about Truman School. 376.
Butter Man. Alalou. 323.
Bye-Bye, Big Bad Bullybug! Emberley. 82.
Bye-Bye, Crib. McGhee. 435.
Cabinet of Wonders. Rutkoski. 491.
Cabot. Jinx. 76.
_____. Moving Day. 285.
Cadnum. King’s Arrow. 285.
Caletti. Fortunes of Indigo Skye. 286.
Callie Cat, Ice Skater. Spinelli. 190.
Cameron. Someday This Pain Will Be Use-
ful to You. 169.
Campbell. I Get So Hungry. 420.
Campoy. Merry Navidad! 202.
Candyfloss. Wilson. 116.
Canned. Shearer. 306.
Caple. Duck & Company. 76.
Captives. Pow. 45.
Cárdenas. Old Dog. 205.
Carlton. Lobster Land. 133.
Carson. Emi and the Rhino Scientist. 134. 
Cassidy. Looking for JJ. 77.
Castellucci. Beige. 10.
Castle Corona. Creech. 135. 
july/augusT 2008  •  509
Catch That Crocodile! Ravishankar. 490.
Caveney. Sebastian Darke. 420.
Ceelen. Baby! Baby! 286.
Chandra’s Wars. Stratton. 355.
Chaos Code. Richards. 185.
Chaos King. Ruby. 50.
Chappell. Total Constant Order. 243.
Chasing Tail Lights. Jones. 144.
Cheaney. Middle of Somewhere. 11.
Cheater. Laser. 215.
Cheese. Palatini. 44.
Cheng. Where the Steps Were. 327.
Cherry Heaven. Adlington. 415.
Chester. Watt. 155.
Chicken Dance. Couvillon. 135.
Chicken of the Family. Amato. 280. 
Chiggers. Larson. 480.
Child of Dandelions. Nanji. 347.
Childs. Oh. My. Gods. 377.
Chloe Doe. Phillips. 104.
Choices. Jacobs. 143.
Choldenko. If a Tree Falls at Lunch Period. 
205.
Choo Choo. Horácek. 475.
Cirrone. Prom Kings and Drama Queens. 
377.
City Hawk. McCarthy. 100.
City in the Lake. Neumeier. 487.
City of Ashes. Clare. 327.
City of Dogs. Michael. 148.
Clare. City of Ashes. 327.
Clements. No Talking. 77.
Click. Park. 182.
Cline-Ransome. Young Pelé. 287. 
Clinton. Phillis’s Big Test. 378.
_____. When Harriet Met Sojourner. 243.
Cocovini. What’s Inside Your Tummy, 
Mommy? 378.
Coffelt. Fred Stays with Me! 12.
Cohn. Naomi and Ely’s No Kiss List. 12.
_____. You Know Where to Find Me. 244.
Cole, B. Good Enough to Eat. 134.
Cole, H. Knock, Knock! 93.
Coleman. Freedom Train. 287.
Colfer. Airman. 328.
Collins. Medusa Jones. 244. 
Colonial Voices. Winters. 405. 
Come Juneteenth. Rinaldi. 48.
Comeback Season. Smith. 308.
Comic Book Century. Krensky. 176.
Compound. Bodeen. 375.
Confessional. Powers. 46.
Connor. Waiting for Normal. 378.
Cool Daddy Rat. Crow. 328.
Cooney. Diamonds in the Shadow. 3.
Cooper, E. Ridiculous/Hilarious/Terrible/
Cool. 288.
Cooper, H. Delicious! 78.
Corps of the Bare-Boned Plane. Horvath. 
31.
Cotten. Fair Has Nothing to Do with It. 
13.
Cottin. Black Book of Colors. 461.
Cottonball Colin. Willis. 311. 
Couloumbis. Love Me Tender. 379.
Couple of Boys Have the Best Week Ever. 
Frazee. 292.
Couvillon. Chicken Dance. 135.
Cow That Laid an Egg. Cutbill. 245.
Cowboy & Octopus. Scieszka. 53.
Cox. Puppy Power. 420.
Coyote Road. Datlow. 14.
Crane. Skin Deep. 288.
Crawley. Dog Poems. 78.
Creech. Castle Corona. 135. 
Crimes of the Sarahs. Tracy. 309.
Crimi. Where’s My Mummy? 462.
Crocker. Billie Standish Was Here. 13.
Croggon. Crow. 206.
Crooked Kind of Perfect. Urban. 267.
Cross. Derby Girl. 169.
Crow. Cool Daddy Rat. 328.
Crow. Croggon. 206.
Crowley. Very Ordered Existence of Merilee 
Marvelous. 245.
Crutcher. Deadline. 78.
Cuffe-Perez. Skylar. 421.
Cullen. I Am Rembrandt’s Daughter. 14.
Cumbie. Where People Like Us Live. 421. 
Cummins. Women Daredevils. 245.
Curse Dark as Gold. Bunce. 284.
Curse of the Romanovs. Rabin. 47.
Curtis. Elijah of Buxton. 79.
Cusick. Walk of the Spirits. 422.
Cutbill. Cow That Laid an Egg. 245.
Cycler. McLaughlin. 484.
da Costa. Hanukkah Moon. 80.
Dad’s Bald Head. Many. 38.
Daisy Dawson Is on Her Way! Voake. 445. 
Dale. Spellbound. 462.
510  •  The BulleTin
Dangerous Alphabet. Gaiman. 425.
Daring Adventures of Penhaligon Brush. 
Rogan. 185.
Darkside. Becker. 282.
Datlow. Coyote Road. 14.
Davies. What’s Eating You? 206.
Davis. A La Carte. 463.
Day I Killed James. Hyde. 475.
de Lint. Dingo. 380.
Dead and the Gone. Pfeffer. 489.
Deadline. Crutcher. 78.
Dean. Girlwood. 380.
Death of Jayson Porter. Adoff. 322.
Debbie Harry Sings in French. Brothers. 
419. 
Declaration. Malley. 218.
Deep and Dark and Dangerous. Hahn. 
28.
Defect. Weaver. 60.
Defying the Diva. Love. 341.
DeKeyser. Jump the Cracks. 329.
Del Negro. Passion and Poison. 207.
Delicious! Cooper. 78.
Delicious. Rubin. 259.
Deming. Iris, Messenger. 15.
Demon Queen. Lewis. 433.
Denise. Pigs Love Potatoes. 15.
DePalma. Nutcracker Doll. 170.
dePaola. Front Porch Tales & North Coun-
try Whoppers. 170.
_____. Knock, Knock! 93.
Derby Girl. Cross. 169.
DeSaix. Hidden on the Mountain. 16.
Dessen. Lock and Key. 381.
Deuker. Gym Candy. 16.
DeVita. Silenced. 17.
Diamond Willow. Frost. 424.
Diamonds in the Shadow. Cooney. 3.
Diary of a Wimpy Kid: Rodrick Rules. 
Kinney. 339.
DiCamillo. Great Joy. 170.
Did Fleming Rescue Churchill? Giblin. 
385.
Didn’t Didn’t Do It. Morrow. 42.
Difficult Boy. Barker. 416. 
Dillon. Mother Goose Numbers on the 
Loose. 136. 
Dingo. de Lint. 380.
DiPucchio. Grace for President. 289.
Dirty Work. Bell. 203.
Disreputable History of Frankie Landau-
Banks. Lockhart. 296.
Do the Math. Lichtman. 35.
Doctor Ted. Beaty. 325.
Dodger and Me. Sonnenblick. 495.
Dodsworth in New York. Egan. 81.
Does My Head Look Big in This? Abdel-
Fattah. 4.
Does Snogging Count as Exercise? Salter. 
186.
Dog and Bear. Seeger. 353.
Dog Poems. Crawley. 78.
Doherty. Girl Who Saw Lions. 463.
Dole. Down to the Bone. 329.
Dolley Madison Saves George Washington. 
Brown. 132.
Don’t Say That Word! Katz, A. 33.
Donaldson. Fish Who Cried Wolf. 422.
_____. Tyrannosaurus Drip. 423.
Donofrio. Thank You, Lucky Stars. 207.
Dowd. London Eye Mystery. 330.
Dowell. Shooting the Moon. 246.
Down to the Bone. Dole. 329.
Downard. Race of the Century. 208.
Downham. Before I Die. 80.
Doyle, B. Pure Spring. 17.
Doyle, M. Horse. 464.
Doyle, R. Wilderness. 136.
Dragon’s Child. Yep. 447.
Dragonhaven. McKinley. 147.
Dragonsdale. Drake. 18.
Drake. Dragonsdale. 18.
Dramarama. Lockhart. 36.
Draper. Fire from the Rock. 18.
Dream Girl. Mechling. 485.
Dreamrider. Jonsberg. 336.
Duck & Company. Caple. 76.
Duck Soup. Urbanovic. 267. 
Duck Who Played the Kazoo. Sklansky. 
263. 
Duggan. Royal Woods. 136.
Dunkle. Sky Inside. 330.
Dunnion. Big Big Sky. 464.
Durst. Out of the Wild. 464.
Dyer. Ibby’s Magic Weekend. 331.
Eason. Hungry. 137.
Easton. Hiroshima Dreams. 137.
_____. White Magic. 81.
Eaton. Facttracker. 332.
Edward Hopper. Rubin. 152.
july/augusT 2008  •  511
Edward’s Eyes. MacLachlan. 147.
Egan. Dodsworth in New York. 81.
Eggs. Singer. 401.
Eglantine. Jinks. 144.
Ehlert. Oodles of Animals. 381.
Elephant Quilt. Lowell. 392.
Elephant Run. Smith. 227.
Elephant’s Story. Blackford. 375.
Eleven. Giff. 211. 
Elijah of Buxton. Curtis. 79.
Elish. Attack of the Frozen Woodchucks. 
289.
Ellie McDoodle. Barshaw. 6.
Elliott. Jeremy Cabbage and the Living 
Museum of Human Oddballs. 382.
_____. On the Farm. 290.
Ellis, A. This Is What I Did. 19.
Ellis, D. Sacred Leaf. 208.
Elya. Bebé Goes to the Beach. 465.
Emberley. Bye-Bye, Big Bad Bullybug! 82.
Emerson. Oliver Nocturne. 465.
Emi and the Rhino Scientist. Carson. 134. 
Emmy and the Incredible Shrinking Rat. 
Jonell. 213. 
Empty Kingdom. Wein. 360.
Engelbert. Poet King of Tezcoco. 54.
Engle. Surrender Tree. 382.
English. Nikki & Deja. 246.
Entertainer and the Dybbuk. Fleischman. 
83.
Enthoven. Tim, Defender of the Earth. 290.
Ephron. Frannie in Pieces. 138. 
Ever. Levine. 390.
Evernight. Gray. 471.
Everything You Want. Shoup. 401.
Evolution, Me, & Other Freaks of Nature. 
Brande. 75.
Exchange. Joyce. 477.
Eye of the Crow. Peacock. 104.
Fabled Fourth Graders of Aesop Elemen-
tary School. Fleming. 83.
Face to Face with Caterpillars. Murawski. 
42.
Face to Face with Frogs. Moffett. 283.
Facts of Life. Soto. 496.
Facttracker. Eaton. 332.
Fahy. Unspoken. 291.
Fair Has Nothing to Do with It. Cotten. 13.
Farmer. Land of the Silver Apples. 82.
Fartiste. Krull. 432.
Fat Hoochie Prom Queen. Medina. 486.
Fearless. Woodruff. 406. 
Feldman. Gollywhopper Games. 332.
Felin. Touching Snow. 19.
Fern. Buffalo Music. 423.
Ferraro. How to Hook a Hottie. 291.
Ferris. Twice upon a Marigold. 466.
_____. Underground. 209.
Fienberg. Number 8. 171.
Fight Game. Wild. 115.
Finding Daddy. Plummer. 184.
Finding Home. Markle. 253.
Fine. Jamie and Angus Together. 20.
Fire from the Rock. Draper. 18.
First Kiss (Then Tell). Busby. 284.
First Light. Stead. 56.
First Shot. Sorrells. 154. 
First the Egg. Seeger. 188.
Fish Who Cried Wolf. Donaldson. 422.
Fisher. When Ruby Tried to Grow Candy. 
209. 
Flake. Broken Bike Boy and the Queen of 
33nd Street. 20.
Fleischman, J. Black and White Airmen. 
21.
Fleischman, P. Glass Slipper. 138. 
Fleischman, S. Entertainer and the Dyb-
buk. 83.
_____. Trouble Begins at 8. 466.
Fleming, C. Fabled Fourth Graders of 
Aesop Elementary School. 83.
Fleming, D. Beetle Bop. 21.
_____. Buster Goes to Cowboy Camp. 
467.
Fletcher, Charlie. Ironhand. 383.
Fletcher, Christine. Ten Cents a Dance. 
383.
Flinn. Beastly. 84.
Fold. Na. 346.
Football Genius. Green. 87.
Footwork. Orgill. 222. 
Forester. Girl Who Could Fly. 467.
Forever Rose. McKay. 345.
Forssberg. Sex for Guys. 171.
Fortunes of Indigo Skye. Caletti. 286.
Found. Haddix. 386.
Four Legs Bad, Two Legs Good! Johnson. 
175.
Fox. Traces. 384.
Franco. Summer Beat. 22.
512  •  The BulleTin
Franklin. Other Half of Me. 84.
Frannie in Pieces. Ephron. 138. 
Frazee. Couple of Boys Have the Best Week 
Ever. 292.
Freak. Matas. 343.
Freak. Pixley. 105.
Freak Show. St. James. 57.
Fred Stays with Me! Coffelt. 12.
Fredericks. In the Cards: Fame. 210.
_____. In the Cards: Life. 468.
Freedman. Who Was First? 139.
Freedom Train. Coleman. 287.
Freeman. Trouble with Twins. 210.
French. Robe of Skulls. 468.
Friedman. Year My Sister Got Lucky. 333.
Friesner. Nobody’s Prize. 424.
Front Porch Tales & North Country 
Whoppers. dePaola. 170.
Frost. Diamond Willow. 424.
_____. Monarch and Milkweed. 384.
Frozen Fire. Bowler. 417.
Full House. Hautman. 88.
Funke. Igraine the Brave. 247.
Gaiman. Dangerous Alphabet. 425.
_____. InterWorld. 22.
_____. M Is for Magic. 23.
Galante. Hershey Herself. 469.
_____. Patron Saint of Butterflies. 469.
Gallagher. Opposite of Invisible. 211.
Gallo. Owning It. 247.
Game. Myers. 396.
Gantos. I Am Not Joey Pigza. 23.
Garden of Eve. Going. 86.
Garden. Hear Us Out! 23.
Gardner, L. Into the Woods. 85.
Gardner, S. Red Necklace. 470.
Gates. Beyond the Billboard. 24.
Gauthier. Girl, a Boy, and a Monster Cat. 
85.
Geisert. Hogwash. 292.
GemX. Singer. 354.
General Winston’s Daughter. Shinn. 153.
Generation Dead. Waters. 446. 
Genesis Alpha. Michaels. 41.
Genies, Meanies, and Magic Rings. Mitch-
ell. 101.
George Washington Carver. Bolden. 283.
George, Jean. Goose and Duck. 248. 
George, Jessica. Sun and Moon, Ice and 
Snow. 248.
George, M. Looks. 425.
Gershator. Sky Sweeper. 25.
Getaway. Vere. 60.
Ghost Letter. Alter. 240.
Ghost Ship. Wilkins. 446.
Ghost, the White House, and Me. St. 
George. 264.
Giblin. Did Fleming Rescue Churchill? 
385.
_____. Many Rides of Paul Revere. 211.
Giff. Eleven. 211. 
Giles. Right Behind You. 25.
Gimme Cracked Corn & I Will Share. 
O’Malley. 44.
Ginger Bear. Grey. 27.
Gipi. Notes for a War Story. 139.
Girl at Sea. Johnson. 90.
Girl in the Castle Inside the Museum. 
Bernheimer. 242. 
Girl Overboard. Headley. 335.
Girl Who Could Fly. Forester. 467.
Girl Who Saw Lions. Doherty. 463.
Girl, a Boy, and a Monster Cat. Gauthier. 
85.
Girlwood. Dean. 380.
Glass Slipper. Fleischman. 138. 
Go, Go America. Yaccarino. 406. 
God Box. Simon. Sanchez. 225.
Godbersen. Luxe. 249.
Gods of Manhattan. Mebus. 393.
Going. Garden of Eve. 86.
Golden. Poison Ink. 470.
Golden Dream of Carlo Chuchio. Alexan-
der. 71.
Golden Rat. Wulffson. 62.
Goldfinger. My Dog Lyle. 25.
Golding. Niner. 386.
Gollywhopper Games. Feldman. 332.
Gone. Grant. 426.
Gonyea. Another Book about Design. 86.
Gonzales. Imaginary Enemy. 333.
Good Enough. Yoo. 361.
Good Enough to Eat. Cole. 134.
Good Masters! Sweet Ladies! Schlitz. 51.
Good Neighbors. Thompson. 402.
Goose and Duck. George. 248. 
Gordon, D. Smitten. 172.
Gordon, R. Tunnels. 292.
Gorilla City. Ward. 359.
Grace for President. DiPucchio. 289.
july/augusT 2008  •  513
Graff. Life and Crimes of Bernetta Wall-
flower. 293.
Graham. “Trouble with Dogs,” Said Dad. 
26.
Grandits. Blue Lipstick. 26.
Grant, K. How the Hangman Lost His 
Heart. 250.
Grant, M. Gone. 426.
Gratz. Something Rotten. 140.
Gray. Evernight. 471.
Great Adventure. Marrin. 298.
Great Joy. DiCamillo. 170.
Great Race. Blackwood. 416.
Green. Football Genius. 87.
Greetings from Nowhere. O’Connor. 301.
Gregory. Pink. 87.
Grey. Ginger Bear. 27.
Grimpow. Ábalos. 240.
grl2grl. Peters. 184.
Grove. Rhiannon. 141. 
Guess What I Found in Dragon Wood. 
Knapman. 214.
Guinevere’s Gift. McKenzie. 299.
Gym Candy. Deuker. 16.
Haddix. Found. 386.
_____. Uprising. 172.
Hague. In the Small. 471.
Hahn. All the Lovely Bad Ones. 386.
_____. Deep and Dark and Dangerous. 
28.
Hair Dance! Johnson. 175.
Hairy Hezekiah. King-Smith. 92.
Halam. Snakehead. 426.
Hale. Book of a Thousand Days. 88.
Hall. Noah Confessions. 28.
Halpin. How Ya Like Me Now. 29.
Hampton. War in the Middle East. 141. 
Hanging Woods. Sanders. 303.
Hanson. How to Save Your Tail. 29.
Hanukkah Moon. da Costa. 80.
Harazin. Blood Brothers. 30.
Hardinge. Well Witched. 472.
Harmon. Last Exit to Normal. 334.
Harper. Secret Life of Sparrow Delaney. 30.
Harris. Runemarks. 293.
Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows. 
Rowling. 109.
Hartland. Night Shift. 142. 
Haseley. Twenty Heartbeats. 334.
Hatkoff. Knut. 173.
Haunted Playground. Tan. 180.
Hauntings. Hearne. 31.
Hautman. All-In. 31.
_____. Full House. 88.
Hawes. Black Pearls. 427. 
Hawkes. Wicked Big Toddlah. 89.
Hayes. Benny and Penny in Just Pretend. 
472.
Hays. Portia’s Ultra Mysterious Double 
Life. 335.
He Forgot to Say Goodbye. Sáenz. 491.
Head Case. Aronson. 5.
Headley. Girl Overboard. 335.
Healing Water. Hostetter. 388.
Hear Us Out! Garden. 23.
Hearn. Ivy. 473.
Hearne. Hauntings. 31.
Heaven Looks a Lot Like the Mall. Mass. 
98.
Helakoski. Woolbur. 212.
Helen Keller. Sullivan. 190.
Hello, Day! Lobel. 481.
Helman. Hide and Seek. 250.
Henderson, J. Bunker 10. 173.
Henderson, L. Kiss Me Kill Me. 294.
Heneghan. Magician’s Apprentice. 427.
Henkes. Bird Lake Moon. 473.
Hennesy. Pandora Gets Jealous. 294.
Hernandez. Suckerpunch. 251.
Hero. Moore. 101.
Herrick. Naked Bunyip Dancing. 387.
Hershey Herself. Galante. 469.
Heuston. Book of Jude. 474.
Hidden on the Mountain. DeSaix. 16.
Hide and Seek. Helman. 250.
Higgins. Black Book of Secrets. 142.
Hightman. Spirit. 474.
Highwayman’s Footsteps. Morgan. 221.
Hills. What’s Up, Duck? 336.
Hinds. Merchant of Venice. 494.
Hiroshima Dreams. Easton. 137.
Hodgkins. Whale Scientists. 174.
Hodgman. House of a Million Pets. 125.
Hogan. Pretty Face. 336.
Hogwash. Geisert. 292.
Hogwood Steps Out. Mansfield. 393.
Hollow People. Keaney. 145.
Holm. Middle School Is Worse Than 
Meatloaf. 89.
Holmes. My Travels with Clara. 212.
514  •  The BulleTin
Holt. Piper Reed, Navy Brat. 89.
Holubitsky. Tweaked. 428.
Home of the Brave. Applegate. 241.
Honeybee. Nye. 348.
Hood. How I Saved My Father’s Life. 251.
Hooper. Newes from the Dead. 387.
Hope Chest. Schwabach. 304.
Hopkins. America at War. 388. 
Horácek. Beep Beep. 475.
_____. Choo Choo. 475.
Hornby. Slam. 174.
Horowitz. Twenty-Six Princesses. 428.
Horse. Doyle. 464.
Horvath. Corps of the Bare-Boned Plane. 
31.
Hostetter. Healing Water. 388.
Hot Lunch. Bradley. 9.
Hot, Sour, Salty, Sweet. Smith. 263.
Hound of Rowan. Neff. 150.
House of a Million Pets. Hodgman. 125.
House of Djinn. Staples. 496.
How I Learned Geography. Shulevitz. 307.
How I Saved My Father’s Life. Hood. 251.
How Mama Brought the Spring. Manush-
kin. 253.
How Many Seeds In a Pumpkin? McNa-
mara. 40. 
How Not to Be Popular. Ziegler. 272. 
How the Hangman Lost His Heart. Grant. 
250.
How the Ladies Stopped the Wind. Mc-
Millan. 100.
How They Met. Levithan. 216. 
How to Be Bad. Lockhart. 481.
How to Build a House. Reinhardt. 399.
How to Hook a Hottie. Ferraro. 291.
How to Paint the Portrait of a Bird. Prévert. 
258.
How to Save Your Tail. Hanson. 29.
How Underwear Got Under There. Shas-
kan. 55.
How Ya Like Me Now. Halpin. 29.
Huge. Paley. 45.
Hull. On Rough Seas. 429.
Humphreys. Vendetta. 90. 
Hungry. Eason. 137.
Hurricane. Trueman. 357.
Hurricane Song. Volponi. 403.
Hurwitz. Mostly Monty. 32.
Hush. Napoli. 300.
Hyde. Day I Killed James. 475.
I Am Invited to a Party. Willems. 156. 
I Am Not Joey Pigza. Gantos. 23.
I Am Rembrandt’s Daughter. Cullen. 14.
I Am Scout. Shields. 442.
I Get So Hungry. Campbell. 420.
I, Matthew Henson. Weatherford. 228.
I, Vivaldi. Shefelman. 306.
I’m Being Stalked by a Moonshadow. 
MacLeod. 217.
Ibby’s Magic Weekend. Dyer. 331.
Icecore. Whyman. 270.
If a Tree Falls at Lunch Period. Choldenko. 
205.
Igraine the Brave. Funke. 247.
Imaginary Enemy. Gonzales. 333.
Imaginary Menagerie. Larios. 296.
In a Blue Room. Averbeck. 372.
In Aunt Giraffe’s Green Garden. Prelutsky. 
46.
In the Cards: Fame. Fredericks. 210.
In the Cards: Life. Fredericks. 468.
In the Small. Hague. 471.
Indian Tales. Nanji. 181.
Indigara. Lee. 216. 
Inferior. Ó Guilín. 488.
Ink Exchange. Marr. 435.
InterWorld. Gaiman. 22.
Into the Dark. Abrahams. 371.
Into the Ravine. Scrimger. 188.
Into the Woods. Gardner. 85.
Iris, Messenger. Deming. 15.
Ironhand. Fletcher. 383.
Ironside. Black. 8.
Isadora. Princess and the Pea. 5.
Iserles. Tygrine Cat. 389.
It’s Not Fair! Rosenthal. 441.
Ivy. Hearn. 473.
Jacobs. Choices. 143.
Jamie and Angus Together. Fine. 20.
Jazz Baby. Wheeler. 192.
Jeffers. My Chincoteague Pony. 476.
Jenkins, A. Night Road. 476.
Jenkins, E. Skunkdog. 429.
_____. What Happens on Wednesdays. 
143.
Jenkins, S. Living Color. 32.
_____. Sisters & Brothers. 477.
Jennings. Pirates of Turtle Rock. 389.
Jeremy Cabbage and the Living Museum of 
Human Oddballs. Elliott. 382.
Ji. No! That’s Wrong! 390.
july/augusT 2008  •  515
Jimmy’s Stars. Rodman. 441.
Jinks. Eglantine. 144.
Jinx. Cabot. 76.
Jocelyn. Ready for Summer. 430. 
_____. Ready for Winter. 430.
Johnson, D. B. Four Legs Bad, Two Legs 
Good! 175.
Johnson, Dinah. Hair Dance! 175.
Johnson, M. Girl at Sea. 90.
Johnson, V. My Life as a Rhombus. 252.
Johnston. Bone by Bone by Bone. 91.
Jonell. Emmy and the Incredible Shrinking 
Rat. 213. 
Jones. Chasing Tail Lights. 144.
Jonsberg. Dreamrider. 336.
Joyce. Exchange. 477.
Juby. Another Kind of Cowboy. 175.
Judge. One Thousand Tracings. 92.
Jump the Cracks. DeKeyser. 329.
Jumpy Jack & Googily. Rosoff. 399.
Kadohata. Outside Beauty. 478.
Kaline Klattermaster’s Tree House. Kimmel. 
339.
Kandel. Scarlet Stockings. 337.
Kaput & Zösky. Trondheim. 403. 
Katz, A. Don’t Say That Word! 33.
_____. Oops! 295.
Katz, K. Peek-a-Baby. 33.
Kayla Chronicles. Winston. 271.
Keaney. Hollow People. 145.
Keena Ford and the Second-Grade Mix-Up. 
Thomson. 499.
Keep Your Eye on the Kid. Brighton. 376.
Keeping Corner. Sheth. 262.
Keeping Score. Park. 349.
Keeping the Night Watch. Smith. 413.
Kenah. Best Chef in Second Grade. 213. 
Kennedy, J. Order of Odd-Fish. 478.
Kennedy, M. Me and the Pumpkin Queen. 
34.
Kennemore. Alice’s Birthday Pig. 479.
Kennett. Pharaoh. 430.
Kephart. Undercover. 252.
Kerby. Owney. 430.
Kerley. What to Do About Alice? 295.
Kerr. Someone Like Summer. 34.
Key to Rondo. Rodda. 224.
Kibuishi. Stonekeeper. 338.
Killing Miss Kitty. Bauer. 7.
Kimmel, Elizabeth. Spin the Bottle. 338.
Kimmel, Eric. Stormy’s Hat. 479.
Kimmel, H. Kaline Klattermaster’s Tree 
House. 339.
King. Mouse Noses on Toast. 214.
King’s Arrow. Cadnum. 285.
King-Smith. Hairy Hezekiah. 92.
Kinney. Diary of a Wimpy Kid: Rodrick 
Rules. 339.
Kiss Me Kill Me. Henderson. 294.
Kissing the Bee. Koja. 145.
Kitten Tale. Rohmann. 225.
Klam. Pretty One. 340.
Kluger, J. Nacky Patcher. 35.
Kluger, S. My Most Excellent Year. 295.
Knapman. Guess What I Found in Dragon 
Wood. 214.
Knock, Knock! Blackall. 93.
Knowles. Lessons from a Dead Girl. 215 
Knuffle Bunny Too. Willems. 156. 
Knut. Hatkoff. 173.
Kogler. Otherworldlies. 431.
Koja. Kissing the Bee. 145.
Konigsburg. Mysterious Edge of the Heroic 
World. 93.
Korman. Swindle. 340.
Kostick. Saga. 432.
Krensky. Comic Book Century. 176.
Krull. Fartiste. 432.
_____. Marie Curie. 94.
Kvasnosky. Really Truly Bingo. 433.
Laika. Abadzis. 70.
Lanagan. Red Spikes. 176.
Land of the Silver Apples. Farmer. 82.
Larios. Imaginary Menagerie. 296.
Larson. Chiggers. 480.
LaRue for Mayor. Teague. 356.
Laser. Cheater. 215.
Last Chance for Paris. McNicoll. 435.
Last Exit to Normal. Harmon. 334.
Last of the High Kings. Thompson. 498.
Lat. Town Boy. 177.
Latent Powers of Dylan Fontaine. Lurie. 
482.
Le Guin. Powers. 77.
Leap of Faith. Bradley. 9.
Leaves. Stein. 57.
Lecesne. Absolute Brightness. 341.
Lee. Indigara. 216. 
Lemna. When the Sergeant Came March-
ing Home. 480.
Lennon. Questors. 178.
Lenny’s Space. Banks. 128.
516  •  The BulleTin
Les Becquets. Season of Ice. 239.
Lessons from a Dead Girl. Knowles. 215 
Lester. Sheep in Wolf’s Clothing. 94.
Let Sleeping Dogs Lie. Pressler. 222.
Levin. Unmaking of Duncan Veerick. 146.
Levine, G. Ever. 390.
Levine, J. Topsy-Turvy Bedtime. 391.
Levithan. How They Met. 216. 
_____. Naomi and Ely’s No Kiss List. 12.
Levitin. Strange Relations. 95.
Lewin. At Gleason’s Gym. 95.
Lewis. Demon Queen. 433.
Lichtman. Do the Math. 35.
Life and Crimes of Bernetta Wallflower. 
Graff. 293.
Life Is Fine. Whittenberg. 269.
Light of the World. Paterson. 257.
Likely Story. Van Etten. 444. 
Linden Tree. Mathews. 39.
Lindenbaum. Mini Mia and Her Darling 
Uncle. 96.
Lindgren. Oink, Oink Benny. 391.
Lipsyte. Yellow Flag. 96.
Little Blue Truck. Schertle. 442. 
Little Friendly Advice. Vivian. 357.
Little Hoot. Rosenthal. 303.
Little Klein. Ylivisaker. 312. 
Little Rat Makes Music. Bang-Campbell. 6.
Little Vampire. Sfar. 493.
Living Color. Jenkins. 32.
Lizard People. Price. 106.
Lobel. Hello, Day! 481.
_____. Nini Here and There. 36.
Lobster Land. Carlton. 133.
Lock and Key. Dessen. 381.
Lockhart. Disreputable History of Frankie 
Landau-Banks. 296.
_____. Dramarama. 36.
_____. How to Be Bad. 481.
Lombardi. My Summer on Earth. 392
London Eye Mystery. Dowd. 330.
Long. Stop Kissing Me! 37.
Looking for JJ. Cassidy. 77.
Looks. George. 425.
Lorey. Nightmare Academy. 97.
Lost Art. Morden. 438.
Lost Boy. Newbery. 300.
Lost Time. Schmid. 492.
Louisiana’s Song. Madden. 38.
Love. Defying the Diva. 341.
Love & Lies. Wittlinger. 501.
Love Me Tender. Couloumbis. 379.
Love, Stargirl. Spinelli. 154.
Lowe. Thornspell. 482.
Lowell. Elephant Quilt. 392.
Lowry. Willoughbys. 342. 
Lucas. Whale. 37.
Luchsinger. Playing by the Rules. 297.
Lucke. Boy Who Wouldn’t Swim. 434.
Lucky. Vail. 444.
Lucky Place. Vincent. 445.
Luper. Big Slick. 146.
Lurie. Latent Powers of Dylan Fontaine. 
482.
Luxe. Godbersen. 249.
Ly. Roots and Wings. 483.
Lyga. Boy Toy. 97.
Lynch. Otto’s Orange Day. 472.
Lyon, A. All-Season Edie. 434.
Lyon, G. My Friend, the Starfinder. 297.
M Is for Magic. Gaiman. 23.
M Is for Mischief. Ashman. 458.
MacDonald. Trolls, Go Home! 38.
MacLachlan. Edward’s Eyes. 147.
MacLeod. I’m Being Stalked by a Moon-
shadow. 217.
Madam President. Smith. 495.
Madapple. Meldrum. 436.
Madden. Louisiana’s Song. 38.
Maddern. Nail Soup. 217.
Maddigan’s Fantasia. Mahy. 98.
Magic Half. Barrows. 242.
Magic in the Mirrorstone. Berman. 326.
Magic Pickle. Morse. 438. 
Magic Thief. Prineas. 490.
Magician’s Apprentice. Heneghan. 427.
Maguire. What-the-Dickens. 147.
Mahy. Maddigan’s Fantasia. 98.
Malley. Declaration. 218.
Man with the Red Bag. Bunting. 133.
Manfish. Berne. 459.
Mankell. Bridge to the Stars. 218.
Mansfield. Hogwood Steps Out. 393.
Manushkin. How Mama Brought the 
Spring. 253.
Many. Dad’s Bald Head. 38.
Many Rides of Paul Revere. Giblin. 211.
Maple Syrup Season. Purmell. 258.
March toward the Thunder. Bruchac. 419. 
Marie Curie. Krull. 94.
july/augusT 2008  •  517
Mark. Museum Book. 178.
Markle. Finding Home. 253.
Marr. Ink Exchange. 435.
Marrin. Great Adventure. 298.
Marriott. Swan Kingdom. 343.
Marrone. Uninvited. 219.
Marsden. Bird Springs. 39.
_____. Buddha’s Diamonds. 298.
Mass. Heaven Looks a Lot Like the Mall. 
98.
Matas. Freak. 343.
Mathews. Linden Tree. 39.
Matthews. Outcasts. 254.
Mazer, A. Sister Magic. 99.
Mazer, N. Missing Girl. 219.
_____. Ten Ways to Make My Sister Disap-
pear. 99.
McCarthy, Maureen. Rose by Any Other 
Name. 344.
McCarthy, Meghan. Astronaut Handbook. 
483.
_____. City Hawk. 100.
McClements. Night of the Veggie Monster. 
220. 
McCourt. Angela and the Baby Jesus. 179.
McDonald. Stink and the Great Guinea Pig 
Express. 344.
McElligott. Bean Thirteen. 40.
McGhee. Bye-Bye, Crib. 435.
McGill. Way Up and Over Everything. 
484.
McKay. Forever Rose. 345.
McKenzie. Guinevere’s Gift. 299.
McKinley. Dragonhaven. 147.
McKissack. All-I’ll-Ever-Want Christmas 
Doll. 179.
McLaughlin. Cycler. 484.
McMahon. My Tiki Girl. 485.
McMann. Wake. 345.
McMillan. How the Ladies Stopped the 
Wind. 100.
McMullan. When I Crossed No-Bob. 254.
McNamara. How Many Seeds In a Pump-
kin? 40. 
McNicoll. Last Chance for Paris. 435.
Me and the Pumpkin Queen. Kennedy. 34.
Me Hungry! Tankard. 56.
Me, In Between. Baratz-Logsted. 324.
Me, the Missing, and the Dead. Valentine. 
500.
Mead. Vampire Academy. 148.
Mebus. Gods of Manhattan. 393.
Mechling. Dream Girl. 485.
Medina. Fat Hoochie Prom Queen. 486.
Medusa Jones. Collins. 244. 
Meehl. Suck It Up. 394.
Meet the Dancers. Nathan. 397.
Meldrum. Madapple. 436.
Meltzer. Albert Einstein. 394.
Memoirs of a Teenage Amnesiac. Zevin. 
118.
Mercado. Baseball Crazy. 346.
Mercer. Switched. 101.
Merchant of Venice. Shakespeare. 494.
Merry Navidad! Ada. 202.
Metal Man. Reynolds. 491.
Michael. City of Dogs. 148.
Michaels. Genesis Alpha. 41.
_____. Reminder. 486.
Middle of Somewhere. Cheaney. 11.
Middle School Is Worse Than Meatloaf. 
Holm. 89.
Midsummer Knight. Rogers. 49.
Mills. Totally Made-Up Civil War Diary of 
Amanda MacLeish. 255. 
Milway. One Hen. 299. 
Mini Mia and Her Darling Uncle. Linden-
baum. 96.
Miss Crandall’s School for Young Ladies. 
Alexander. 126.
Miss Fox. Puttock. 223. 
Missing Girl. Mazer. 219.
Mistik Lake. Brooks. 132.
Mitchard. All We Know of Heaven. 437. 
Mitchell. Genies, Meanies, and Magic 
Rings. 101.
_____. Ugly Duckling. 281.
Mlynowski. How to Be Bad. 481.
Moffett. Face to Face with Frogs. 283.
Moloney. Trapped. 180.
Monarch and Milkweed. Frost. 384.
Monkey with a Tool Belt. Monroe. 437. 
Monninger. Baby. 41.
Monroe. Monkey with a Tool Belt. 437. 
Moore. Hero. 101.
Mora. Yum! ¡Mmmm! ¡Qué Rico! 180.
Moranville. Snows. 149.
Morden. Lost Art. 438.
Morgan, A. My Worst Best Sleepover Party. 
220.
518  •  The BulleTin
Morgan, N. Highwayman’s Footsteps. 
221.
Moriarty. Spell Book of Listen Taylor. 102.
Moribito. Uehashi. 499.
Morris. Adventures of Sir Lancelot the 
Great. 395.
Morrow. Didn’t Didn’t Do It. 42.
Morse. Magic Pickle. 438. 
Moser. Squirrel’s World. 102.
Moses. Sallie Gal and the Wall-a-Kee Man. 
255. 
Mostly Monty. Hurwitz. 32.
Mother Goose Numbers on the Loose. 
Dillon. 136. 
Mother Goose’s Little Treasures. Opie. 182.
Mouse Noses on Toast. King. 214.
Moving Day. Cabot. 285.
Muckrakers. Bausum. 167.
Muddle Earth. Stewart. 113.
Muhammad Ali. Winter. 307.
Murawski. Face to Face with Caterpillars. 
42.
Murdock. Off Season. 43.
_____. Princess Ben. 395.
Murphy. Real Benedict Arnold. 149.
Museum Book. Mark. 178.
My Chincoteague Pony. Jeffers. 476.
My Dad’s a Birdman. Almond. 457.
My Dog Lyle. Goldfinger. 25.
My Dog May Be a Genius. Prelutsky. 398.
My Friend, the Starfinder. Lyon. 297.
My Life as a Rhombus. Johnson. 252.
My Most Excellent Year. Kluger. 295.
My Mother the Cheerleader. Sharenow. 54.
My Summer on Earth. Lombardi. 392
My Swordhand Is Singing. Sedgwick. 226.
My Tiki Girl. McMahon. 485.
My Travels with Clara. Holmes. 212.
My Worst Best Sleepover Party. Morgan. 
220.
Myers. Game. 396.
_____. Sunrise over Fallujah. 396.
_____. What They Found. 150.
Myracle. How to Be Bad. 481.
Mysterious Benedict Society and the Peril-
ous Journey. Stewart. 497.
Mysterious Case of the Allbright Academy. 
Stanley. 265.
Mysterious Edge of the Heroic World. 
Konigsburg. 93.
Mystery of the Third Lucretia. Runholt. 
352.
Na. Fold. 346.
Nacky Patcher. Kluger. 35.
Nagda. Perfect Cat-Sitter. 221.
Nail Soup. Maddern. 217.
Naked Bunyip Dancing. Herrick. 387.
Nanji. Child of Dandelions. 347.
_____. Indian Tales. 181.
Naomi and Ely’s No Kiss List. 12.
Napoleon. Burleigh. 10.
Napoli. Hush. 300.
Nathan. Meet the Dancers. 397.
Neff. Hound of Rowan. 150.
Nelson, B. They Came from Below. 43.
Nelson, K. We Are the Ship. 347.
Nelson, M. Miss Crandall’s School for 
Young Ladies. 126.
Nelson, N. Bringing the Boy Home. 487.
Nelson, S. Ain’t Nothing But a Man. 256.
Neumeier. City in the Lake. 487.
Newbery. Lost Boy. 300.
Newes from the Dead. Hooper. 387.
Nic Bishop Frogs. Bishop. 283.
Niem. Buddha’s Diamonds. 298.
Night of the Veggie Monster. McClements. 
220. 
Night Road. Jenkins. 476.
Night Shift. Hartland. 142. 
Nightmare Academy. Lorey. 97.
Nikki & Deja. English. 246.
Nilsson. Seventeen. 301.
Niner. Golding. 386.
Nini Here and There. Lobel. 36.
Nix. One Beastly Beast. 103.
No No Yes Yes. Patricelli. 350.
No Talking. Clements. 77.
No! That’s Wrong! Ji. 390.
Noah Confessions. Hall. 28.
Nobody’s Prize. Friesner. 424.
Nolen. Pitching In for Eubie. 222.
Not So Tall for Six. Aston. 323.
Notes for a War Story. Gipi. 139.
Nothing. Agee. 71.
Nothing but Trouble. Stauffacher. 308.
Noyes. Red Butterfly. 181.
_____. Restless Dead. 103.
Number 8. Fienberg. 171.
Nutcracker Doll. DePalma. 170.
Nye. Honeybee. 348.
july/augusT 2008  •  519
Ó Guilín. Inferior. 488.
O’Connor. Greetings from Nowhere. 301.
O’Malley. Gimme Cracked Corn & I Will 
Share. 44.
O’Neill. Annie and Simon. 488.
Off Season. Murdock. 43.
Off to First Grade. Borden. 460.
Oggie Cooder. Weeks. 268.
Oh. My. Gods. Childs. 377.
Oink, Oink Benny. Lindgren. 391.
Okorafor-Mbachu. Shadow Speaker. 256.
Old Dog. Cárdenas. 205.
Oliver Nocturne. Emerson. 465.
On Rough Seas. Hull. 429.
On the Farm. Elliott. 290.
Once upon a Time in the North. Pullman. 
440.
One Beastly Beast. Nix. 103.
One Good Punch. Wallace. 192.
One Hen. Milway. 299. 
One Saturday Evening. Baker. 72.
One Thousand Tracings. Judge. 92.
One Trick Pony. Brodsky. 204.
Oodles of Animals. Ehlert. 381.
Oops! Katz. 295.
Opie. Mother Goose’s Little Treasures. 182.
Opposite of Invisible. Gallagher. 211.
Opposite of Love. Benedict. 203.
Order of Odd-Fish. Kennedy. 478,
Orgill. Footwork. 222. 
Origins. Thompson. 266.
Osterlund. Aurelia. 439. 
Other Book. Womack. 361.
Other Half of Me. Franklin. 84.
Otherworldlies. Kogler. 431.
Otto’s Orange Day. Lynch. 472.
Out of the Wild. Durst. 464.
Outcasts. Matthews. 254.
Outside Beauty. Kadohata. 478.
Outside Rules. Robson. 49.
Overlord Protocol. Walden. 310.
Owney. Kerby. 430.
Owning It. Gallo. 247.
Ox, House, Stick. Robb. 48.
Padian. Brett McCarthy. 348.
Page. Sisters & Brothers. 477.
Palatini. Cheese. 44.
Pale Male. Schulman. 261.
Paley. Huge. 45.
Pandora Gets Jealous. Hennesy. 294.
Parade of Shadows. Whelan. 269.
Park. Click. 182.
_____. Keeping Score. 349.
_____. Tap Dancing on the Roof. 151.
Parker. Piano Starts Here. 349.
Parkinson. Blue Like Friday. 302. 
Parr. We Belong Together. 183.
Parrotfish. Wittlinger. 61.
Passion and Poison. Del Negro. 207.
Patent. When the Wolves Returned. 489.
Paterson. Light of the World. 257.
Patricelli. Baby Happy Baby Sad. 350.
_____. No No Yes Yes. 350.
Patron Saint of Butterflies. Galante. 469.
Peacock. Eye of the Crow. 104.
Pearson. Adoration of Jenna Fox. 350.
Peek-a-Baby. Katz, K. 33.
Peeled. Bauer. 373.
Peet. Penalty. 183.
Penalty. Peet. 183.
Penderwicks on Gardam Street. Birdsall. 
460.
Perfect Cat-Sitter. Nagda. 221.
Perfect You. Scott. 305.
Peters. grl2grl. 184.
Pfeffer. Dead and the Gone. 489.
Pharaoh. Kennett. 430.
Phillips. Chloe Doe. 104.
Phillis’s Big Test. Clinton. 378.
Phooey! Rosenthal. 50.
Piano Starts Here. Parker. 349.
Pietromarchi. Book Book. 257.
Pigeon Wants a Puppy! Willems. 405. 
Pigs Love Potatoes. Denise. 15.
Pink. Gregory. 87.
Pinkwater. Bear’s Picture. 397.
Piper Reed, Navy Brat. Holt. 89.
Pirates of the Retail Wasteland. Selzer. 
400.
Pirates of Turtle Rock. Jennings. 389.
Pitching In for Eubie. Nolen. 222.
Pixley. Freak. 105.
Pizza, Pigs, and Poetry. Prelutsky. 440.
Playing by the Rules. Luchsinger. 297.
Plummer. Finding Daddy. 184.
Plum-Ucci. Streams of Babel. 439. 
Poet King of Tezcoco. Serrano. 54.
Poison Apples. Archer. 127. 
Poison Ink. Golden. 470.
Porter. Billy Creekmore. 105.
520  •  The BulleTin
Portia’s Ultra Mysterious Double Life. 
Hays. 335.
Portrait of Pia. Russo. 109.
Postcard. Abbott. 370.
Pow. Captives. 45.
Powers. Confessional. 46.
Powers. Le Guin. 77.
Prelutsky. In Aunt Giraffe’s Green Garden. 
46.
_____. My Dog May Be a Genius. 398.
_____. Pizza, Pigs, and Poetry. 440.
Pressler. Let Sleeping Dogs Lie. 222.
Pretty Face. Hogan. 336.
Pretty One. Klam. 340.
Pretty Tough. Tigelaar. 266.
Prévert. How to Paint the Portrait of a Bird. 
258.
Previously. Ahlberg. 126.
Prévost. Book of Time. 47.
Price. Lizard People. 106.
Princess and the Pea. Andersen. 5.
Princess and the Peabodys. Birney. 130.
Princess Ben. Murdock. 395.
Prineas. Magic Thief. 490.
Project 17. Stolarz. 190.
Prom Kings and Drama Queens. Cirrone. 
377.
Prose. Bullyville. 106.
Pssst! Rex. 107.
Pullman. Once upon a Time in the North. 
440.
Puppy Power. Cox. 420.
Pure Spring. Doyle. 17.
Purmell. Maple Syrup Season. 258.
Puttock. Miss Fox. 223. 
Puzzling World of Winston Breen. Berlin. 
129.
Questors. Lennon. 178.
Rabbit’s Gift. Shannon. 189.
Rabin. Curse of the Romanovs. 47.
Race. Aronson. 127.
Race of the Century. Downard. 208.
Raleigh’s Page. Armstrong. 166.
Ransom. Seeing Sky-Blue Pink. 151.
Ravishankar. Catch That Crocodile! 490.
Ray. Apple-Pip Princess. 398.
Ready for Summer. Jocelyn. 430. 
Ready for Winter. Jocelyn. 430. 
Real Benedict Arnold. Murphy. 149.
Really Truly Bingo. Kvasnosky. 433.
Reaves. InterWorld. 22.
Red Butterfly. Noyes. 181.
Red Glass. Resau. 107.
Red Necklace. Gardner. 470.
Red Spikes. Lanagan. 176.
Redheaded Princess. Rinaldi. 351.
Reeve. Starcross. 224.
Reincarnation. Weyn. 311.
Reinhardt. How to Build a House. 399.
Remembering Raquel. Vande Velde. 191.
Reminder. Michaels. 486. 
Resau. Red Glass. 107.
Restless Dead. Noyes. 103.
Retired Kid. Agee. 456.
Rex. Pssst! 107.
_____. True Meaning of Smekday. 258.
Rex Zero, King of Nothing. Wynne-Jones. 
447.
Reynolds. Metal Man. 491.
Rhiannon. Grove. 141. 
Rhodes-Courter. Three Little Words. 302. 
Richards. Chaos Code. 185.
Ridiculous/Hilarious/Terrible/Cool. Coo-
per. 288.
Right Behind You. Giles. 25.
Righty and Lefty. Vail. 191.
Rinaldi. Come Juneteenth. 48.
_____. Redheaded Princess. 351.
Rivera. Arctic Adventures. 108.
Robb. Ox, House, Stick. 48.
Robe of Skulls. French. 468.
Robot Dreams. Varon. 155.
Robson. Outside Rules. 49.
Rodda. Key to Rondo. 224.
Rodman. Jimmy’s Stars. 441.
Roe. Thaw. 399.
Rogan. Daring Adventures of Penhaligon 
Brush. 185.
Rogelia’s House of Magic. Wood. 501.
Rogers. Midsummer Knight. 49.
Rohmann. Kitten Tale. 225.
Root. Aunt Nancy and the Bothersome 
Visitors. 108.
Roots and Wings. Ly. 483.
Rose by Any Other Name. McCarthy. 344.
Rosenstiehl. Silly Lilly and the Four Sea-
sons. 472.
Rosenthal, A. It’s Not Fair! 441.
_____. Little Hoot. 303.
Rosenthal, M. Phooey! 50.
july/augusT 2008  •  521
Rosoff. Jumpy Jack & Googily. 399.
Rovetch. There Was a Man Who Loved a 
Rat. 225.
Rowling. Harry Potter and the Deathly 
Hallows. 109.
Royal Woods. Duggan. 136.
Rubin. Delicious. 259.
_____. Edward Hopper. 152.
Ruby. Chaos King. 50.
Ruelle. Hidden on the Mountain. 16.
Rules of the Universe by Austin W. Hale. 
Vaupel. 228. 
Rumford. Beowulf. 152.
_____. Silent Music. 351.
Runemarks. Harris. 293.
Runholt. Mystery of the Third Lucretia. 
352.
Rupp. Sarah Simpson’s Rules for Living. 
259.
Russo. Portrait of Pia. 109.
Rutkoski. Cabinet of Wonders. 491.
Sacred Leaf. Ellis. 208.
Sáenz. He Forgot to Say Goodbye. 491.
Safe. Shaw. 153.
Saga. Kostick. 432.
Sallie Gal and the Wall-a-Kee Man. Moses. 
255. 
Salter. Does Snogging Count as Exercise? 
186.
Sanchez. God Box. 225.
Sandell. Song of the Sparrow. 51.
Sanders. Hanging Woods. 303.
Sanderson. Alcatraz versus the Evil Librar-
ians. 260.
Santore. Silk Princess. 186.
Sarah Simpson’s Rules for Living. Rupp. 
259.
Satchel Paige. Sturm. 309.
Savadier. Will Sheila Share? 400.
Sayre. Trout Are Made of Trees. 260.
______. Vulture View. 152.
Scarlet Stockings. Kandel. 337.
Scary States of America. Teitelbaum. 58.
Schertle. Little Blue Truck. 442. 
_____. Very Hairy Bear. 187.
Schlitz. Bearskinner. 187.
_____. Good Masters! Sweet Ladies! 51.
Schmid. Lost Time. 492.
Schmidt, C. Useful Fools. 187.
Schmidt, G. Trouble. 352.
_____. Wednesday Wars. 52.
Schrag. Stuck in the Middle. 52.
Schreiber. Vampire Kisses. 261.
Schulman. Pale Male. 261.
Schwabach. Hope Chest. 304.
Schwartz. Starring Miss Darlene. 53.
Schwarz. Timothy and the Strong Pajamas. 
304.
Scieszka. Cowboy & Octopus. 53.
_____. Smash! Crash! 305.
Scott, Elaine. When Is a Planet Not a 
Planet. 110.
Scott, Elizabeth. Perfect You. 305.
_____. Stealing Heaven. 492.
Scotton. Splat the Cat. 493.
Scrimger. Into the Ravine. 188.
Season of Ice. Les Becquets. 239.
Sebastian Darke. Caveney. 420.
Secret Life of Sparrow Delaney. Harper. 30.
Secret of the Painted House. Bauer. 73.
Secret World of Hildegard. Winter. 117.
Sedgwick. My Swordhand Is Singing. 226.
Seeger. Dog and Bear. 353.
_____. First the Egg. 188.
Seeing Sky-Blue Pink. Ransom. 151.
Seer of Shadows. Avi. 324.
Selfors. To Catch a Mermaid. 110.
Selzer. Pirates of the Retail Wasteland. 400.
Serrano. Poet King of Tezcoco. 54.
Seventeen. Nilsson. 301.
Sex for Guys. Forssberg. 171.
Sfar. Little Vampire. 493.
Shadow Speaker. Okorafor-Mbachu. 256.
Shakespeare. Merchant of Venice. 494.
Shanahan. Sweet, Terrible, Glorious Year I 
Truly, Completely Lost It. 111.
Shannon. Rabbit’s Gift. 189.
Sharenow. My Mother the Cheerleader. 54.
Shark Girl. Bingham. 7.
Shaskan. How Underwear Got Under 
There. 55.
Shaw. Safe. 153.
She Touched the World. Alexander. 371.
Shea. Big Plans. 353.
Shearer. Canned. 306.
Sheep in Wolf’s Clothing. Lester. 94.
Shefelman. I, Vivaldi. 306.
Sheff. Tweak. 226. 
Sheth. Keeping Corner. 262.
Shields. I Am Scout. 442.
522  •  The BulleTin
Shift. Bradbury. 418.
Shinn. General Winston’s Daughter. 153.
Shooting the Moon. Dowell. 246.
Shoup. Everything You Want. 401.
Shulevitz. How I Learned Geography. 307.
Shusterman. Unwind. 262.
Sight. Vrettos. 115.
Silenced. DeVita. 17.
Silent Music. Rumford. 351.
Silk Princess. Santore. 186.
Silly Lilly and the Four Seasons. Rosen-
stiehl. 472.
Simmons. Alien Feast. 495.
Singer, M. Eggs. 401.
Singer, N. GemX. 354.
Sís. Wall. 69.
Sister Magic. Mazer. 99.
Sisters & Brothers. Jenkins. 477.
Sitting Bull Remembers. Turner. 267.
Siy. Sneeze! 111.
Sketches. Walters. 268.
Skim. Tamaki. 369.
Skin Deep. Crane. 288.
Sklansky. Duck Who Played the Kazoo. 
263. 
Skunkdog. Jenkins. 429.
Sky Inside. Dunkle. 330.
Sky Sweeper. Gershator. 25.
Skylar. Cuffe-Perez. 421.
Slam. Hornby. 174.
Sleator. Test. 402.
Slipping. Bell. 459.
Smash! Crash! Scieszka. 305.
Smiles to Go. Spinelli. 443.
Smith, C. Twelve Rounds to Glory. 307.
Smith, H. Keeping the Night Watch. 413.
Smith, J. Comeback Season. 308.
Smith, L. Madam President. 495.
Smith, R. Elephant Run. 227.
Smith, S. Hot, Sour, Salty, Sweet. 263.
Smith, T. Betwixt. 189.
Smitten. Gordon. 172.
Snakehead. Halam. 426.
Sneeze! Siy. 111.
Snows. Moranville. 149.
Snyder. Bronze Pen. 354.
Someday. Spinelli. 55.
Someday This Pain Will Be Useful to You. 
Cameron. 169.
Someone Like Summer. Kerr. 34.
Someone Named Eva. Wolf. 117.
Something Rotten. Gratz. 140.
Song of the Sparrow. Sandell. 51.
Sonnenblick. Dodger and Me. 495.
_____. Zen and the Art of Faking It. 227.
Sorrells. First Shot. 154. 
Soto. Facts of Life. 496.
Soupy Saturdays with the Pain. Blume. 
74.
Spell Book of Listen Taylor. Moriarty. 102.
Spellbound. Dale. 462.
Spiders. Bishop. 74.
Spin the Bottle. Kimmel. 338.
Spinelli, E. Callie Cat, Ice Skater. 190.
_____. Someday. 55.
_____. Summerhouse Time. 56.
_____. Where I Live. 112.
Spinelli, J. Love, Stargirl. 154.
_____. Smiles to Go. 443.
Spirit. Hightman. 474.
Spitz. Yeah! Yeah! Yeah! 264.
Splat! Walters. 358.
Splat the Cat. Scotton. 493.
Squad. Barnes. 281.
Squirrel’s World. Moser. 102.
St. George. Ghost, the White House, and 
Me. 264.
St. James. Freak Show. 57.
St. John. White Giraffe. 112.
Stanley. Mysterious Case of the Allbright 
Academy. 265.
Staples. House of Djinn. 496. 
Starcross. Reeve. 224.
Starring Miss Darlene. Schwartz. 53.
Starry Rift. Strahan. 355.
Stauffacher. Nothing but Trouble. 308.
Stead. First Light. 56.
Stealing Heaven. Scott. 492.
Steel Town. Winter. 501.
Stein. Leaves. 57.
Stewart, P. Muddle Earth. 113.
Stewart, T. Mysterious Benedict Society 
and the Perilous Journey. 497.
Stink and the Great Guinea Pig Express. 
McDonald. 344.
Stolarz. Project 17. 190.
Stonekeeper. Kibuishi. 338.
Stop Kissing Me! Long. 37.
Storace. Sugar Cane. 113.
Storm. Young. 362.
july/augusT 2008  •  523
Stormy’s Hat. Kimmel. 479.
Strahan. Starry Rift. 355.
Strange Relations. Levitin. 95.
Stratton. Chandra’s Wars. 355.
Streams of Babel. Plum-Ucci. 439. 
Stuck in the Middle. Schrag. 52.
Sturm. Satchel Paige. 309.
Suck It Up. Meehl. 394.
Suckerpunch. Hernandez. 251.
Sugar Cane. Storace. 113.
Sullivan, E. Ultimate Weapon. 58.
Sullivan, G. Helen Keller. 190.
Summer Beat. Franco. 22.
Summerhouse Time. Spinelli. 56.
Sun and Moon, Ice and Snow. George. 
248.
Sunrise over Fallujah. Myers. 396.
Super Guinea Pig to the Rescue. Weigelt. 
229. 
Surrender Tree. Engle. 382.
Swan Kingdom. Marriott. 343.
Swan Maiden. Tomlinson. 114.
Sweet, Terrible, Glorious Year I Truly, 
Completely Lost It. Shanahan. 111.
Sweethearts. Zarr. 272.
Swindle. Korman. 340.
Switched. Mercer. 101.
Tafuri. Blue Goose. 265.
Taken. Bloor. 131. 
Tallest Tree. Belton. 325.
Tamaki. Skim. 369.
Tan. Arrival. 201. 
_____. Haunted Playground. 180.
Tankard. Me Hungry! 356.
Tap Dancing on the Roof. Park. 151.
Taste for Rabbit. Zuckerman. 230.
Taylor. When a Monster Is Born. 114.
Teague. LaRue for Mayor. 356.
Teitelbaum. Scary States of America. 58.
Ten Cents a Dance. Fletcher. 383.
Ten Ways to Make My Sister Disappear. 
Mazer. 99.
Tennyson. Blume. 326.
Test. Sleator. 402.
Thank You, Lucky Stars. Donofrio. 207.
Thaw. Roe. 399.
There Was a Man Who Loved a Rat. 
Rovetch. 225.
They Came from Below. Nelson. 43.
Thirteen Reasons Why. Asher. 128. 
This Is What I Did. Ellis. 19.
Thomas, Jan. Birthday for Cow! 497.
Thomas, Joyce Carol. Blacker the Berry. 
498.
Thompson, C. Good Neighbors. 402.
Thompson, K. Last of the High Kings. 
498.
_____. Origins. 266.
Thomson. Keena Ford and the Second-
Grade Mix-Up. 499.
Thornspell. Lowe. 482.
Those Shoes. Boelts. 168.
Three Little Words. Rhodes-Courter. 302. 
Tigelaar. Pretty Tough. 266.
Tim, Defender of the Earth. Enthoven. 290.
Timothy and the Strong Pajamas. Schwarz. 
304.
Tiny Tyrant. Trondheim. 59.
To Catch a Mermaid. Selfors. 110.
Tomlinson. Swan Maiden. 114.
Topsy-Turvy Bedtime. Levine. 391.
Total Constant Order. Chappell. 243.
Totally Crushed. Willard. 270.
Totally Made-Up Civil War Diary of 
Amanda MacLeish. Mills. 255. 
Touching Snow. Felin. 19.
Tougas. Art’s Supplies. 443.
Town Boy. Lat. 177.
Townsend. Billy Tartle in Say Cheese. 59.
Traces. Fox. 384.
Tracy. Crimes of the Sarahs. 309.
Train Jumper. Brown. 168.
Trapped. Moloney. 180.
Trolls, Go Home! MacDonald. 38.
Trondheim. Kaput & Zösky. 403. 
_____. Tiny Tyrant. 59.
Trouble Begins at 8. Fleischman. 466.
“Trouble with Dogs,” Said Dad. Graham. 
26.
Trouble with Twins. Freeman. 210.
Trouble. Schmidt. 352.
Trout Are Made of Trees. Sayre. 260.
True Meaning of Smekday. Rex. 258.
Trueman. Hurricane. 357.
Truth about My Bat Mitzvah. Baskin. 282.
Truth about Truman School. Butler. 376.
Tunnels. Gordon. 292.
Turkienicz. My Worst Best Sleepover Party. 
220.
Turner. Sitting Bull Remembers. 267.
524  •  The BulleTin
Tweak. Sheff. 226. 
Tweaked. Holubitsky. 428.
Twelve Rounds to Glory. Smith. 307.
Twenty Heartbeats. Haseley. 334.
Twenty-Six Princesses. Horowitz. 428.
Twice upon a Marigold. Ferris. 466.
Tygrine Cat. Iserles. 389.
Tyrannosaurus Drip. Donaldson. 423.
Uehashi. Moribito. 499.
Ugly Duckling. Andersen. 281. 
Ultimate Weapon. Sullivan. 58.
Umbrella Queen. Bridges. 461.
Uncle Bobby’s Wedding. Brannen. 204.
Undercover. Kephart. 252.
Underground. Ferris. 209.
Uninvited. Marrone. 219.
Unmaking of Duncan Veerick. Levin. 146.
Unspoken. Fahy. 291.
Unwind. Shusterman. 262.
Up All Night. Abrahams. 414.
Uprising. Haddix. 172.
Urban. Crooked Kind of Perfect. 267.
Urbanovic. Duck Soup. 267. 
Useful Fools. Schmidt. 187.
Vail. Lucky. 444.
_____. Righty and Lefty. 191.
Valentine. Me, the Missing, and the Dead. 
501.
Vampire Academy. Mead. 148.
Vampire Kisses. Schreiber. 261.
Van Etten. Likely Story. 444. 
Vande Velde. Remembering Raquel. 191.
Varon. Robot Dreams. 155.
Vaught. Big Fat Manifesto. 310.
Vaupel. Rules of the Universe by Austin W. 
Hale. 228. 
Vendetta. Humphreys. 90. 
Vere. Getaway. 60.
Very Hairy Bear. Schertle. 187.
Very Ordered Existence of Merilee Marvel-
ous. Crowley. 245.
Vincent. Lucky Place. 445.
Visions. Matas. 343.
Visitor for Bear. Becker. 203.
Vivian. Little Friendly Advice. 357.
Voake. Daisy Dawson Is on Her Way! 445. 
Volponi. Hurricane Song. 403.
Voorhees. Brothers Torres. 404. 
Vrettos. Sight. 115.
Vulture View. Sayre. 152.
Waiting for Normal. Connor. 378.
Wake. McMann. 345.
Walden. Overlord Protocol. 310.
Walk of the Spirits. Cusick. 422.
Wall. Sís. 69.
Wallace. One Good Punch. 192.
Walsh. All Asleep. 358.
Walters. Sketches. 268.
_____. Splat! 358.
War in the Middle East. Hampton. 141. 
Ward. Gorilla City. 359.
Waters. Generation Dead. 446. 
Watt. Chester. 155.
Way Up and Over Everything. McGill. 
484.
We Are the Ship. Nelson. 347.
We Belong Together. Parr. 183.
Weatherford. Before John Was a Jazz Giant. 
360.
_____. I, Matthew Henson. 228.
Weaver. Defect. 60.
Wednesday Wars. Schmidt. 52.
Weeks. Oggie Cooder. 268.
Weigelt. Super Guinea Pig to the Rescue. 
229. 
Wein. Empty Kingdom. 360.
Well Witched. Hardinge. 
Weyn. Reincarnation. 311.
Whale. Lucas. 37.
Whale Scientists. Hodgkins. 174.
What Happens on Wednesdays. Jenkins. 
143.
What They Found. Myers. 150. 
What To Do About Alice? Kerley. 295.
What’s Eating You? Davies. 206.
What’s Inside Your Tummy, Mommy? 
Cocovini. 378.
What’s So Bad about Being an Only Child? 
Best. 129.
What’s Up, Duck? Hills. 336.
What-the-Dickens. Maguire. 147.
Wheeler. Jazz Baby. 192.
Whelan. Parade of Shadows. 269.
When a Monster Is Born. Taylor. 114.
When Dinosaurs Came with Everything. 
Broach. 75.
When Fish Got Feet. Bonner. 131.
When Harriet Met Sojourner. Clinton. 
243.
When I Crossed No-Bob. McMullan. 254.
july/augusT 2008  •  525
When Is a Planet Not a Planet. Scott. 110.
When Ruby Tried to Grow Candy. Fisher. 
209. 
When the Sergeant Came Marching Home. 
Lemna. 480.
When the Wolves Returned. Patent. 489.
Where I Live. Spinelli. 112.
Where People Like Us Live. Cumbie. 421. 
Where the Steps Were. Cheng. 327.
Where’s My Mummy? Crimi. 462.
White Giraffe. St. John. 112.
White Magic. Easton. 81.
Whittenberg. Life Is Fine. 269.
Who Was First? Freedman. 139.
Whyman. Icecore. 270.
Wicked Big Toddlah. Hawkes. 89.
Wild, K. Fight Game. 115.
Wild, M. Woolvs in the Sitee. 155.
Wilderness. Doyle. 136.
Wiles. Aurora County All-Stars. 193.
Wilkins. Ghost Ship. 446.
Wilkowski. Bad Luck Chair. 116.
Will Sheila Share? Savadier. 400.
Willard. Totally Crushed. 270.
Willems. I Am Invited to a Party. 156. 
_____. Knuffle Bunny Too. 156.
_____. Pigeon Wants a Puppy! 405.
Williams, B. Tunnels. 292.
Williams, M. Archie’s War. 271.
Willis. Cottonball Colin. 311. 
Willoughbys. Lowry. 342. 
Wilson, J. Candyfloss. 116.
Wilson, N. 100 Cupboards. 229.
Windling. Coyote Road. 14.
Wings. Baker. 415. 
Winston. Kayla Chronicles. 271.
Winter, Jeanette. Angelina’s Island. 61.
Winter, Jonah. Muhammad Ali. 307.
_____. Secret World of Hildegard. 117.
_____. Steel Town. 501.
Winters. Colonial Voices. 405. 
Wittlinger. Love & Lies. 501.
_____. Parrotfish. 61.
Wolf, A. Zane’s Trace. 193.
Wolf, J. Someone Named Eva. 117.
Womack. Other Book. 361.
Women Daredevils. Cummins. 245.
Wood. Rogelia’s House of Magic. 501.
Woodruff. Fearless. 406. 
Woodson. After Tupac and D Foster. 230.
Woolbur. Helakoski. 212.
Woolvs in the Sitee. Wild. 155.
Wulffson. Golden Rat. 62.
Wynne-Jones. Rex Zero, King of Nothing. 
447.
Xu. No! That’s Wrong! 390.
Yaccarino. Go, Go America. 406. 
Yeah! Yeah! Yeah! Spitz. 264.
Year My Sister Got Lucky. Friedman. 333.
Yellow Flag. Lipsyte. 96.
Yep. Dragon’s Child. 447.
Ylivisaker. Little Klein. 312. 
Yoo. Good Enough. 361.
You Know Where to Find Me. Cohn. 244.
Young. Storm. 362.
Young Pelé. Cline-Ransome. 287. 
Yum! ¡Mmmm! ¡Qué Rico! Mora. 180.
Zane’s Trace. Wolf. 193.
Zarr. Sweethearts. 272.
Zen and the Art of Faking It. Sonnenblick. 
227.
Zenatti. Bottle in the Gaza Sea. 407.
Zevin. Memoirs of a Teenage Amnesiac. 
118.
Ziegler. How Not to Be Popular. 272. 
Zimmer. 42 Miles. 448.
Zuckerman. Taste for Rabbit. 230.
