ILLIN O
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
4 
0
*..-.*·! - *
FIRE 
N MOUNTAIN
JANE KURTZ
ILLUSTRATED BY E. B. LEWIS
A "A newly illustrated version of a well-known Ethiopian folktale about
a clever shepherd boy and his sister.... Lewis has done an outstanding job
of capturing the warmth and simplicity of the tale through his beautiful
watercolor paintings .... A well-written retelling that's sure to be enjoyed
whether read individually or aloud."
-
Starred, School Library Journal
"The watercolor illustrations have a heavy-paper texture that, combined
with the muted but intense tones of olive and sand, gives the pictures a
pleasing weight..... Many kids will enjoy this quiet story of a little guy's
victory." -
Bulletin of the Centerfor Children's Books
"A handsome and evocative book for story hours or independent reading."
-
The Horn Book*
$15.00 / 0-671-88268-6 / Ages 4-7
SIMON & SCHUSTER BOOKS FOR YOUNG READERS
An imprint of Simon & Schuster Children's Publishing Division
866 Third Avenue * New York, NY 10022
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
February 1995
Vol. 48 No. 6
A LOOK INSIDE
189 THE BIG PICTURE
Zoom illustrated by Istvan Banyai
190 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
195 
* The Watchers: A Mystery atAlton Towers by Helen Cresswell
205 
* Shadow Catcher: The Life and Work of Edward S. Curtis by Laurie
Lawlor
208 
* Little Kit or, The Industrious Flea Circus Girl written and illustrated by
Emily Arnold McCully
216 * A Village Full of Valentines written and illustrated by James Stevenson
218 
* All the Small Poems and Fourteen More written by Valerie Worth;
illustrated by Natalie Babbitt
220 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
221 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin ofthe Centerfor Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
STAFF
Roger Sutton, Editor (RS)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Susan Dove Lempke, Reviewer (SDL)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Heather McCammond-Watts, Editorial Assistant
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS ADVISORY BOARD
Leigh Estabrook, Dean, GSLIS, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Selma K. Richardson, Professor, GSLIS
Christine Jenkins, Assistant Professor, GSLIS
Richard C. Anderson, Director, Center for the Study of Reading, UIUC
Jean Osborn, Associate Director, Center for the Study of Reading
P. David Pearson, Dean, College of Education, UIUC
Violet J. Harris, Associate Professor, College of Education
Nancy O'Brien, Education Subject Specialist, Library, UIUC
Peggy Miller, Associate Professor, Department of Speech Communication, UIUC
Ann D. Carlson, Associate Professor, GSLIS, Rosary College
Janice Harrington, Head of Children's Services, Champaign Public Library
Elizabeth Huntoon, Director Systemwide Children's Services, Chicago Public Library
Janie Schomberg, Librarian, Leal Elementary School, Urbana, Illinois
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $35.00; individuals, $29.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Roger Sutton, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 1512 N. Fremont St., #105,
Chicago, IL 60622
Second-class postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1995 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Istvan Banyai, from Zoom ©1995 and used by permission of Viking
Children's Books.
FEBRUARY 1995 
* 
189
THE BIG PICTURE
Zoom
illustrated by Istvan Banyai
Zoom's concept is fairly simple: each illustration draws back a level from the pre-
viously depicted scene, so that more of the picture is revealed and the situation
turns out to be different than the viewer had expected. In other words, the first
picture is of a big spiky red thing, but the next illustration backs off to show a
rooster with a spiky red comb; the next picture backs off to show the rooster being
observed by two figures; and so on, frame by frame, until the figures are revealed to
be toys on a table, the table of toys turns out to be the back cover of a catalogue,
the boy holding the catalogue turns out to be on a ship, which turns out to be
pictured in an advertisement on a bus, which turns out to be ... well, you get the
drift.
The book has no text, except for a few signs in the illustrations, and that's
just as well because words would interrupt the delicious swoop from perspective to
perspective. In fact, the verso pages are all glossy black, serving almost as stage
curtains in their dramatic severance of one act from another. Yet the illustrations
retain a visual as well as narrative interconnectedness: the simplicity of Banyai's
straightforward line work, with its restrained detail, combines with planes of cheerful
and uncomplicated (but never babyish) colors and a recurrent visual motif of
spatterwork to further link these disparate images together.
There have been various books and visual brain-teasers that have relied
on short-term use of this conceit, asking you to guess, from a rough, pitted red
surface, that you're really viewing a strawberry in a way you never have before.
What makes Zoom unusual is its -relentless expansion: sixty-four pages later, we're
still broadening our view of the original scene, which has in the meantime evolved
into a television show, a stamp, and a view through an airplane window in addi-
tion to the initial shifts from barnyard to toy to catalogue to ad.
Such cumulation has an enduring appeal, and kids will enjoy closing the
book and trying to recall the various stages through which the pictures have passed.
Conceptually, however, this is also reminiscent of that favorite youthful method of
writing out location: name, address, city, county, state, country, continent, hemi-
sphere, planet, solar system, galaxy, THE UNIVERSE. The book is playful, of
course; postage stamps don't really contain pictures of television shows containing
pictures of advertisements containing pictures of catalogues, and there's occasion-
ally a poker-faced humor in the images themselves (as in the Native American
cowboy watching television outside his trailer). But there's a strategic moment-
see if the kids can find it-when the pictures don't just draw back but actually
change: up until this point, each succeeding picture has altered the concept of the
previous image but retained an exact, if smaller, version of that picture, so that the
ocean liner on the sea is the same drawing but we now know it to be a placard of a
190 
* 
THE BULLETIN
ship rather than a ship itself. But once the letter gets to Solomon Island, Banyai
actually allows the scene's details to alter-we actually see the letter carrier turn
and leave the island in his boat-while the concept remains unaltered: we simply
draw back in increments from this final "real" scene, so that the trick now is that
we are viewing what we think we're viewing. The zoom-out takes us past the
airplane looking down on the island, through the clouds, until we are looking
down on our own planet which eventually shrinks down to a dot, so that we finally
see a world, as Blake suggested, in a grain of sand.
Of course, Horton Hears a Who also involved a world in a grain of sand,
or to be specific a dust speck, and the Magic School Bus has zoomed kids in and
out of some micro- and macro-cosmic places; youngsters might enjoy using such
books as a referent before plunging into Zoom. Older kids, however, will appreci-
ate the book's kinship with Wiesner and Van Allsburg in its suggestion that things
are not what they seem, or sometimes even what they are. And none of those
books equal Zoom's achievement in making plot and perspective into not just a
game, but into the story itself.
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE 
;0
ADA, ALMA FLOR 
Where the Flame Trees Bloom; illus. by Antonio
Martorell. 
Atheneum, 1994 
75p
ISBN 0-689-31900-2 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Ada explains in an introduction to these family memories that her family lived in
Cuba, spending their evenings telling the stories Ada retells here (she adds a few
paragraphs to provide background explanations as needed). Most of the stories
either reveal qualities that Ada admires in her relatives, as in the story about her
grandmother encouraging her school pupils to talk to a lonely-looking man, or
they tell about turning points in lives, as when her uncle realizes the importance of
his teaching job when he mistakenly believes that his pupils have been killed by
lightning. Ada skillfully depicts the country of her childhood with its coconuts,
flame trees, and heat, and her writing evokes the warmth and character of her
family. However, the stories are mostly low-key, quiet explorations of character
and values (the one with a family friend dangling beneath a train being a notable
exception), and they generally stay true to life in having no grand finale. The
descriptive passages may turn readers with a taste for more action away, and the
ink wash drawings, while in keeping with the tone of the stories, don't add much
child appeal. Reading the book to young listeners, though, could prompt them to
share moments from their own family stories. SDL
AITKENS, MAGGI 
Kerry, a Teenage Mother; illus. with photographs by Rob
Levine. 
Lerner, 1994 
48p
ISBN 0-8225-2556-9 
$14.21 
R Gr. 5-10
With a text that will be accessible to preteens as well as older readers, this book is a
straightforward and sympathetic portrait of a girl who became a mother a long
FEBRUARY 1995 
* 
191
time before she planned to. There's no preaching, but there's no glamorizing,
either, as Aitkens follows Kerry through her routines of caring for baby Vanessa
with strong support from her family and boyfriend but without much money, and
without any help from Vanessa's father, who is in prison for selling drugs: "It's
kind of funny. You meet a guy and think you know him, and then you end up
finding out that he's totally different from what you thought." The author pro-
vides a good balance between the particulars of Kerry's life and the general situa-
tions that most teen mothers face, and Levine's candid black-and-white photos
reinforce the picture of Kerry as a determined young woman and loving mother;
they also bless the account with a reality that will tell readers that, yes, indeed, it
could happen to you and it won't be fun, however cute the baby may be. (One
does hope, although the text never says, that Kerry is now using the contraception
she failed to employ before.) A reading list includes nonfiction surveys, parenting
manuals, and Susan Kuklin's excellent What Do I Do Now (BCCB 11/91), which
is a more comprehensive followup that could show readers some other choices that
pregnant teens have made. RS
ARNOSKY, JIM 
ISee Animals Hiding; written and illus. by Jim Arnosky. 
Scholastic,
1995 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-590-48143-6 
$12.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
These cleverly camouflaged animals may be easy for young readers or lap-sitters to
find, but when viewing the book in a group or from a distance, children can expe-
rience for themselves how difficult it can be to spot a well-camouflaged beast.
Woodcocks, with feathers of browns, grays, golds and roses, "spend much of their
time on the woodland floor [and] have patterns and colors like those of dry leaves."
Deer are shown both in summer, and in winter when they have changed into their
"grayer winter coats that better match the gray and brown trunks of leafless trees,"
and Arnosky paints a herd of twenty deer behind trees for children to count. Snow-
shoe rabbits, owls, snakes, and bitterns are some of the other animals hiding in
their variety of ways, all depicted in Arnosky's graceful watercolors. He includes
some of the less familiar ways animals hide, such as the bittern turning its head up
to imitate a cattail, and his tone is always gently observant, neither anthropomor-
phizing nor patronizing. This would be an excellent choice for encouraging obser-
vation of animal traits and an appreciation for the beauty found in different natural
settings. SDL
BANYAI, ISTVAN 
Zoom; illus. by Istvan Banyai. 
Viking, 1995 
[64p]
ISBN 0-670-85804-8 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-5
See this month's Big Picture, p. 189.
BARRY, DAVID, ad. 
The Rajah's Rice: A Mathematical Folktale from India; illus.
by Donna Perrone. 
Scientific American/Freeman, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-7167-6568-3 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
When the best doctors in the land cannot help the Rajah's ailing elephants, Chandra,
the Elephant Bather, discovers and cures the infection. A grateful Rajah offers her
a choice of rewards, but Chandra asks only that he give her overtaxed neighbors
192 
* THE BULLETIN
the amount of rice amassed by doubling the grains placed on each consecutive
square of his chessboard, an amount, the Rajah discovers to his dismay, which
eventually would have covered India "knee deep in rice." Barry is clearly more at
home in math than in folklore: no sources are offered, his retelling only begins to
sparkle as the rice piles up on the board, and the tale's moral-the high price of
shortsightedness and greed-is considerably softened in the rosy conclusion.
Perrone's jewel-toned illustrations feature some decidedly unappealing elephants
and a stiff-jointed, perpetually grinning Chandra. But the purpose of this retelling
is to explicate a mathematical concept, and the concluding illustration of a chess-
board with symbols representing the results of each doubling (256 bowls = 1 wheel-
barrow; 256 wheelbarrows = 1 festival hall) is clear and effective. The youngest
readers will easily get the point; truly ambitious older students may even take the
book's appended challenge to compute the volume of 256 World Trade Centers or
one Mt. Kilimanjaro. EB
BLACK, CHARLES C. 
The Royal Nap; illus. by James Stevenson. 
Viking,
1995 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-670-85863-3 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
Woe to the subjects of the restive King Gordo if the regnant hippo doesn't get his
forty winks from one to three each afternoon, and just lately a steady "hic . ..
hic ... hic" from the bowels of the castle is wearing the royal temper dangerously
thin. But even after the hiccuping culprit, the old pot-scrubber Gerald, is discov-
ered and banished to the Cold and Snowy Land, the king cannot sleep-until the
sorrowful, lute-plucking Phoebe (who is also, fortuitously, Gerald's daughter) pro-
vides the tuneful remedy for her liege's insomnia and negotiates for her father's
return. Stevenson's ever-expressive critters provide the right touch of mock melo-
drama, and the hiccups, snores, and a bleary-eyed and pajama-clad Gordo are sure
to win the approbation of the story hour set. EB
BRUCHAC, JOSEPH, ad. 
Gluskabe and the Four Wishes; illus. by Christine Nyburg
Shrader. 
Cobblehill, 1995 
32p
ISBN 0-525-65164-0 
$14.99 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Four Abenaki men paddle to the fog-enshrouded island of the reclusive god-hero
Gluskabe to make wishes. Impressed by their determination, Gluskabe hands each
a bag with his granted wish inside, but warns them not to open the bags until they
reach home. The man who desired possessions peeks inside, and his canoe in-
stantly sinks under the weight of his treasures; likewise the man who wished to be
taller is transformed into a pine tree and the man who craved immortality becomes
a boulder. Only the man who wanted to become an able hunter for his tribe obeys
Gluskabe's command, and he is rewarded with "the voices of the animals them-
selves, telling him about their ways." The reader may excuse the didacticism for, as
the opening note explains, "these stories are strong teaching stories." However,
Bruchac observes the three transformations with a coldly clinical eye, ignoring the
possibilities for irony, or even horror, that the tale bountifully offers. Shrader's
pastels capture the mystic haze that surrounds Gluskabe's island; the adventurers
are neatly individuated, but rigidly posed. Bruchac states that he has researched at
least four written versions of the tale, but he does not provide citations. EB
FEBRUARY 1995 
* 
193
BUFFIE, MARGARET 
Someone Else's Ghost. Scholastic, 1995 
[2 56 p]
ISBN 0-590-46922-3 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Jess' impetuous father has moved her and her mother from Winnipeg to a dude
ranch in the wilds of Alberta after the death ofJess' brother; Jess' grieving mother,
sunk into depression, thinks she encounters the ghost of her dead son but in fact is
seeing the ghost ofIan, a boy who died on the ranch years ago. This is a promising
premise for a ghost story, but Buffie impedes the drama of the tale with subplots-
Jess' possible romance with the ranch's young hand, Ben, and Ben's abuse at the
hands of his grandfather-and with the interspersed sections of Ian's diary, which
slow the pace down considerably. Still, the characters, especially Jess's determinedly
optimistic and often heartless father, are vividly drawn and the ghostly adventures
intriguing. Young readers will appreciate Jess' confusion at supernatural and fa-
milial events and will warm to her strength and honesty. DS
BURNS, KHEPHRA 
Black Stars in Orbit: NASA's African American Astronauts; by
Khephra Burns and William Miles. 
Gulliver/Harcourt, 1995 
72p 
illus. with
photographs
Trade ed. ISBN 0-15-200432-7 
$18.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-15-200276-6 
$8.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Written by the son of a Tuskegee Airman and based on a film documentary, Black
Stars in Orbit is less a collection of dry biographical facts on African-American
astronauts than a social and political history of the treatment of blacks by NASA.
Early black pilots are mentioned very briefly, while more time is spent on the
fighter pilots of World War II, the Tuskegee Airmen. Moving on to the treatment
of African Americans at NASA, a description follows of the frustrating career of
Captain Edward J. Dwight, Jr., who claims Colonel Charles Yeager tried many
times to force him to resign using threats and racial insults; it should be noted that
Yeager's side of the story is not presented. The next African American enrolled in
the training program was Major Robert H. Lawrence, who "faced less overt dis-
crimination ... than Captain Dwight," but was tragically killed in a crash while
the pilot survived: "Many people feel that the investigation into the crash never
gave a satisfactory explanation why one man's chute opened and the other man's
did not." The rest of the book covers the seemingly easier careers of later astro-
nauts such as Guion Bluford and Mae Jemison, and includes the story of how
Nichelle Nichols, Star Trek's Lieutenant Uhura, helped recruit blacks and women
for astronaut training. The writing is powerful a id occasionally even lyrical; how-
ever, while the authors' sense of outrage is communicated well, the book is missing
any notes which might help substantiate their hints, for instance, of a conspiracy
leading to Major Lawrence's death. There is an index; a bibliography and a direc-
tory for further information would also have been welcome. SDL
CHAPMAN, CHERYL 
Snow on Snow on Snow; illus. by Synthia Saint James. 
Dial,
1994 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1457-2 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1456-4 
$14.99 
R 
3-7 yrs
A young boy wakes on a winter morning, eats his breakfast of "food next to food
next to food," puts on "clothes over clothes over clothes," and heads out into the
194 
* THE BULLETIN
snowy world with his furry dog, Clancy. The snow is piled so high that after one
trip down the hill on the sled, "down down down the slopes, spinning out at the
end," Clancy disappears from sight. The boy and his friends look behind trees and
bushes, but can't find him: "Tears on tears on tears froze my face." Of course, the
story ends happily "ever after ever after ever after." Chapman's spare and poetic
text, which she notes was inspired by Christina Rossetti's poem "In the Bleak
Midwinter," combines very well with Saint James' strong, dramatic oil paintings,
which use bold colors and crisp outlines, leaving faces blank. The thick paint
lends texture to the flat perspective of the pictures, which work well with one
exception of a group of bushes that, seen from above, look more like grass. Right
down to the African-American hero, both the theme and the artwork are reminis-
cent of Ezra Jack Keats' The Snowy Day, but the two books are different enough to
be complements rather than duplicates. SDL
CHOCOLATE, DEBBI 
Elizabeth's Wish. Just Us, 1994 
104 p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-940975-45-9 
$3.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
In this second installment in the NEATETM series (see also BCCB 3/93), talented
singer Elizabeth, beset by laryngitis and a sprained ankle, is still determined to win
a citywide musical contest sponsored by a popular radio station. At the same time,
she and her friends are engaged in an argument about whether rock or rap will be
featured at their school dance and are also raising money for the dance by selling
African clothing and accessories. It's a busy little story, and a subplot about
Elizabeth's friend Tayesha being taunted for her fair skin (her mother is white)
never quite gets its due and is wrapped up in a desultory fashion. Still, the book
has all the things series fiction fans like, and the conclusion-Elizabeth wins the
contest and donates her $2,500 prize to a homeless shelter-is both wish-fulfill-
ing and highminded at the same time. RS
CHORAO, KAY 
Number One Number Fun; written and illus. by Kay
Chorao. 
Holiday House, 1995 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8234-1142-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
NR 4-7 yrs
Chorao's characteristically endearing and sprightly illustrations are not enough to
redeem this haphazard approach to math. Ringmaster Rat poses questions in (du-
bious) rhyme: "Four chickens on one side . . . four on the other,/ how many
chickens ... balance together?" He is holding a sign with the addition problem
written out, "4 + 4 = ?" while on the other side a mouse dangles from a balloon
with "8" printed on it. Confusion abounds as Chorao shows the chickens on the
top half of the page, and again on the bottom half, so that many children will-
correctly-count 16 chickens on the page. The subtraction problems have the
additional clutter of animals falling out of the pictures, providing funny touches
but muddling the counting work. A wagon, carrying a variety of critters for count-
ing, has animals not for counting confusingly built into it, and on one page the
question "How many mice and cats wearing hats?" is answered with the number 9
even though only the four cats are wearing hats. None of the problems seems
related to the others, and only the toppling pyramid of pigs shows numbers in
action. This circus stars some adorable animals, but the number "fun" quickly
turns to number frustration. SDL
FEBRUARY 1995 
* 
195
COLMAN, PENNY 
Toilets, Bathtubs, Sinks, and Sewers: A History of the
Bathroom. Atheneum, 1994 
70p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-689-31894-4 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
We may use plumbing every day, but histories of plumbing are few and far be-
tween, and here Penny Colman attempts to address that deficit. She examines
how various civilizations, ranging from ancient Mesopotamia through Renaissance
Europe to contemporary America, have dealt with waste removal, sanitation, and
water management, and she describes archeological finds, quotes from letters, and
includes photographs of various plumbing arrangements and facilities to enhance
her account. The book never quite becomes the lively look at an unsung part of
culture that it could be: the writing is sometimes disjointed and choppy, the pic-
tures are occasionally tangential, and the tone is determinedly matter-of-fact and
restrained, with little leavening humor allowed to creep in. (It's also too bad that
there's no picture of a contemporary men's urinal, since that's an aspect of plumb-
ing that young female readers are likely to find more mysterious and interesting
than the habits of the Sumerians.) It's still a useful survey of a little-chronicled
aspect of human existence, and the breadth of its scope combines with some pi-
quant detail (astronaut potty habits, for example) that will intrigue young readers.
There are no source notes for quotes, but a bibliography is provided; an index is
also included. DS
CRESSWELL, HELEN 
The Watchers: A Mystery at Alton Towers. 
Macmillan,
1994 
20 6 p
ISBN 0-02-725371-6 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
In a dark and magical variant of From theMixed-Up Files ofMrs. BasilE. Frankweiler,
Katy and Josh run away from the grim institution where they've been living since
their mothers became ill and seek a new home at Alton Towers, a vast amusement
park centered on a garden of hidden nooks and pathways. They soon discover that
there are other homeless children hiding in the park, as well as a silent bag lady
who turns out to be more than she seems. She enlists Katy and Josh in a classic
struggle between the King, an old man whose music keeps the world safe, and his
adversary, a young bully determined to take the King's magic harp and rule the
alternate world where the King shelters the lost and abandoned children he has
called throughout time. While there's no stinting on the spooky atmosphere, the
book's blend of high-fantasy theme and realistic setting is easier to get into than
the more intricate and deliberate world-building of Susan Cooper or Ursula Le
Guin; the steady focus on Katy and Josh coupled with the equally steady suspense
will bring in genre fans of several persuasions: fantasy, mystery, adventure. RS
DEEDY, CARMEN AGRA 
The Library Dragon; illus. by Michael P.
White. 
Peachtree, 1994 
32p
ISBN 1-56145-091-X 
$16.95 
M 
6-9 yrs
"Wanted: Children's Librarian. Sunrise Elementary School seeks a thick-skinned
professional to help reduce inventory damage and loss." This tiny want ad, adrift
in the white space of the opening page, may lure a librarian or two with the prom-
ise of a funny book about their home turf, but will it interest their young patrons?
Deedy's story of the fiery dragon (Miss Lotta Scales) who takes on the job is like-
liest to appeal to the media specialist who will recognize the issues raised: the
196 
* THE BULLETIN
correlation between modeled reading and student grades, book conservation vs.
circulation, student "ownership" of their library, and the thorny dilemma of fic-
tionalized biographies. Limp wordplays and tautly stretched metaphors are over-
done, and the splashy airbrushed artwork provides the tale with more sight gags
than illumination. Little Molly Brickmeyer softens up the old reptile, and while
the transformed Miss Lotty, "librarian and storyteller," may now be professionally
correct, most listeners will agree she was more interesting when she breathed fire.
EB
DEWEY, ARIANE 
Naming Colors; written and illus. by Ariane Dewey.
HarperCollins, 1995 
[48p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021292-6 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021291-8 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-6
While not as detailed, comprehensive, or well-documented as Heifetz' When Blue
Meant Yellow, reviewed below, Dewey's etymology of colors is lots more fun to
look at, with each page splashed with lively watercolor depictions of the color
sources under discussion and with an index that includes a color swatch for each
color named. The organization is primarily topical, with sections on "Colors from
the Garden," "Spicy Colors," "Jewel-like Colors," etc., and all the basic shades get
some play (although the use throughout of grey for gray may be confusing for
American readers). Heifetz's book will be more useful for reference and research;
Dewey's is for a younger audience and will more readily attract browsers. RS
DONAHUE, JOHN 
An Island Far from Home. 
Carolrhoda, 1995 
179p
(Adventures in Time)
ISBN 0-87614-859-3 
$14.96 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Ever since his father was killed at Fredericksburg, Joshua Loring has hoped that
the war will last long enough for him to reach enlistment age and get even with the
Rebs. But when his Uncle Robert, a commanding officer at Fort Warren, encour-
ages Joshua to correspond with a Confederate prisoner about Josh's age, the venge-
ful Yankee boy begins to understand the common threads that draw soldiers into
opposing sides of war. This Civil War novel deals in ideas rather than in battles,
and Joshua's adamant rejection of the enemy, which gradually gives way to curios-
ity and finally to understanding, is realistically paced. But the tale is ultimately
flawed by an ending involving Joshua's break-in to Fort Warren and last-second
rescue by Uncle Robert, an abrupt genre switch to action-adventure which seems
as gratuitous as it is improbable. EB
DUNCAN, ALICE FAYE 
The National Civil Rights Museum Celebrates Everyday People;
illus. with photographs by J. Gerard Smith. 
BridgeWater, 1995 
64p
ISBN 0-8167-3502-6 
$16.95 
R Gr. 4-6
The Lorraine Motel in Memphis, Tennessee, site of the assassination of Dr. Mar-
tin Luther King, Jr., has been transformed into the National Civil Rights Mu-
seum. Author Duncan takes us on a tour of the museum's exhibits, which cover
the years from 1954 to 1968. Her theme, "a powerful movement .. , conducted
by ordinary men and women with everyday lives," is repeated throughout, focus-
ing less on individuals than on group protests. The author explains clearly the
historical background; she recreates the sometimes terrifying moments but em-
FEBRUARY 1995 
* 
197
phasizes the inspiring aspects of the protests. The book combines historical pho-
tographs with pictures (sometimes stiffly posed) of school-age visitors of many
races visiting the museum and standing among the life-size plaster statues. The
crisp contemporary photographs of the children, which allow readers to see them-
selves in the situation and capture their interest, generally precede the often fright-
ening and intense historical photographs; one example is children seated at a lunch
counter with statues of protesters, followed by a picture of the real protesters with
white men dumping salt, sugar and mustard over their heads. While subject head-
ings would have been helpful in breaking up the text, the book's clean design with
red accents keeps the mood upbeat. A chronology, list of further reading, and
bibliography are included. SDL
FRIEDMAN, AILEEN 
The King's Commissioners; illus. by Susan Guevara. 
Scholastic,
1995 
[3 3p]
ISBN 0-590-48989-5 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
6-9 yrs
When the King has appointed so many commissioners to handle special details,
such as the Commissioner for Flat Tires and the Commissioner for Mismatched
Socks, that he has lost track of them, he decides to organize his adjutants, or "at
least to count them." He tells his two advisors to help him count the commission-
ers as they come through the door, and even though the Princess bursts in and
makes him lose his count, he knows that his advisors will still have the answer.
However, one advisor has made tally marks broken up into pairs while the other
has counted in groups of five, and it takes the Princess to explain to her father (by
counting the Commissioners in lines of ten) how these different ways of counting
work. While not coming up with a dazzling plot, Friedman has managed to create
the bones of a story with some funny details, and she smoothly integrates the math
into the story. Guevara's exuberant acrylic paintings add enormously to the feel-
ing that this is supposed to be fun. Her freewheeling use of perspective, her amus-
ing uniforms for the Commissioners (who each wears a beanie with a symbol of his
or her job on top), and her lively princess in a great cowgirl outfit will convince
any nonbelievers that this math book, anyway, is okay. Friedman concludes with
several pages for adults on teaching math to children. SDL
GOLDMAN, E. M. 
The Night Room. 
Viking, 1995 
[22 4p]
ISBN 0-670-85838-2 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Lois Duncan meets William Sleator in a tale that pits seven high-school juniors
against their futures as designed by a virtual reality program, Argus, that sends
each of them to their tenth high-school reunion. The projected futures are drawn
from information each student has given in an interview, which in one case leads
to a wry moment when class genius Barbara Flores, who told her interviewer she
was interested in working with designer genes, discovers she's become a famous
creator of sportswear. Graham Hork, a struggling, sober child of alcoholics, finds
himself drunk at the reunion, and with a wife who has seen him this way many
times before. Each of the subjects is upset to discover that popular Sandy, whose
turn is to be last, is remembered at the reunion as the nice girl who died in her
junior year. Something about the program is not right, and the students become
determined to find out what before Sandy takes her turn. Why the kids believe
198 
* THE BULLETIN
Sandy will actually die if she goes into Argus is not clear (in fact, all the computer
business is too fuzzy), and the denouement in general is not as skillfully projected
as the preceding build-up, but the mix of players is well-differentiated through
effective dialogue and the suspense judiciously leavened with an authentic measure
of high school camaraderie, competition, and romance. RS
GRAMBLING, Lois G. 
Can I Have a Stegosaurus, Mom? Can I? Please!?; illus. by
H. B. Lewis. 
BridgeWater, 1995 
32p
ISBN 0-8167-3386-4 
$14.95 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
A young boy comes up with a variety of reasons that a Stegosaurus would be a
handy pet to have around. He suggests that with a Stegosaurus, he could gallop to
the North Pole to fill Santa in on anything he left off his Christmas list, and "who
wouldn't give a special treat to a little Stegosaurus ringing their doorbell on Hal-
loween when a BIG STEGOSAURUS was with him?" A Stegosaurus could eat
his "yucky" vegetables, and take his class to the museum if his teacher (in a concern
that seems unlikely in a small child) "forgot to reserve the school bus." Though
Grambling supplies a great pair of twists at the end, the bulk of her story is repeti-
tive and has been more entertainingly covered in previous books, most notably in
Hoffs Danny and the Dinosaur and Most's If the Dinosaurs Came Back. Lewis'
illustrations vary in quality, as for instance on the page with a comically quizzical
Santa, an eager dinosaur, and a blank-eyed, inexpressive hero. Despite the book's
blandness, it could, with its rhythmic text, be a useful addition to story hours with
lots of young dinosaur lovers. SDL
GREENE, JACQUELINE DEMBAR, ad. 
Manabozho's Gifts: Three Chippewa Tales; il-
lus. by Jennifer Hewitson. 
Houghton, 1994 
42p
ISBN 0-395-69251-2 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Most readers will not recognize the name Manabozho, but they already know this
legendary Chippewa hero under his more familiar moniker, Hiawatha. In these
three tales, each of which can be enjoyed independently, Manabozho assures the
survival of his people: he saves them from the cold by stealing fire from a magi-
cian; he delivers them from winter starvation by discovering wild rice; he restores
the balance of nature by rescuing the world's last, wilting rose. Retellings are based
on a variety of carefully credited sources; Greene also notes her own modifications
of season, shape-shifting, and magical words. A deep respect for nature emerges
through the Manabozho legend, and the environmental message is clear ("You all
knew that the roses were in trouble, but none of you tried to help"). A brief
foreword comments on the hero's ancestry, powers, and legacies; several large,
handsome woodcuts embellish each tale. EB
HAMILTON, VIRGINIA Jaguarundi; illus. by Floyd Cooper. 
Blue Sky/Scholastic,
1995 
[4 0p]
ISBN 0-590-47366-2 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Since the land where he lives is being cleared and settled, Rundi Jaguarundi de-
cides to head north to the Rio Bravo in search of a forest canopy. Coati Coa-
timundi agrees that this is a good plan, and they spread the word to the other
animals to meet and discuss it in the Great Pineapple Field of the Fallen Timber.
Kit Fox, Howler Monkey, and several other rare or endangered animals join them,
FEBRUARY 1995 
* 
199
but the other animals decide against heading north. Big Brown Bat advises them
that adapting to the changing environment is the best way, while Jaguar roars his
defiance, saying, "I'll never flee, nor change my ways." Once Rundi and Coati
have crossed the river, they are disappointed to find more settlers, but, being too
tired to continue, decide to follow Big Brown Bat's advice and adapt. There is
little action or conflict in this book, and the language is slow and stately, but
children often feel so deeply for the plight of animals that the dignified pace won't
discourage their interest. Cooper's paintings are darkly mysterious, with animal
faces gleaming out from the background of shadowy plants and rocks. His cats are
particularly successfully drawn, although the occasionally odd use of perspective
makes other animals difficult to see in their entirety. This might be a little too
quiet for story hour but could prove a boon for primary-grades discussion of ani-
mal endangerment in the face of diminishing resources, and a closing section gives
information on the animals shown in the story. SDL
HEIFETZ, JEANNE 
When Blue Meant Yellow: How Colors Got Their Names. Holt,
1994 
171p
ISBN 0-8050-3178-2 
$14.95 
R Gr. 5 up
Unlike Dewey's Naming Colors, reviewed above, this is a reference book, but, like
the best of those, it is fun to browse, and Heifetz's writing and thinking are as
lively as Dewey's artwork. Unfortunately, illustrations here are limited to a glossy
one-page supplement of teensy color swatches, but each is coded to the text and
will give readers at least a glimpse of what color they're reading about. Heifetz's
arrangement is alphabetical, save for the fact that each letter-section begins with an
out-of-order feature, "turquoise," for example, which saves us from beginning with
the more matter-of-factly defined "tan" but which may be irritating for someone
trying to look something up quickly. The stories are great-"Turquoise" begins
with an explanation of how the stone came to Europe from the Middle East via
Turkey, but then moves into a crosscultural consideration of the conceptual differ-
ences between green and blue and concludes with a Dineh origin myth. "Dapple
Gray" leads into a discussion of colors named for animals; the shorter entries are
often equally intriguing, such as that for "Government Wall Green": "A color
standardized by the federal government's General Services Administration for use
in official buildings." Each entry includes the date of first known use; an introduc-
tion gets you thinking about the whole color and language business; an extensive
bibliographic essay and source notes for quotations complete the volume. RS
HIGHWATER, JAMAKE 
Rama: A Legend; illus. by Kelli Glancey. 
Holt,
1994 
2 2 6p
ISBN 0-8050-3052-2 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Jamake Highwater, well known for his Native-American-themed books, turns to
Indian mythology in his newest work. It starts with a jolt: "IT WAS A DEAD
BODY." When Prince Rama uncovers the body of a woman, he falls into a trance;
he wakes after seeing a vision of a beautiful woman, Sita, whom he eventually
marries. When she is kidnapped by the demon Ravana, Rama and his brother
launch a quest to retrieve her, helped by monkeys, bears, the great bird Sampathi,
and even the ocean itself. The final battle is a grisly one indeed: "From the severed
necks of the demons there came a spout of green slime that splattered into the air
and rained down upon the princely brothers." Unfortunately, most young readers
200 
* THE BULLETIN
will probably not know that in the Ramayana (Highwater's source material ac-
cording to his note at the end), Rama is an incarnation of the god Vishnu-he
mostly seems like a lovesick prince here. However, the central problem with the
book is Highwater's florid writing style; adjective piles upon adjective, similes and
metaphors abound. Sometimes it works, as when Rama's mother speaks of her
son: "Rama is the river that flows from me. He is the life that I will live when I can
live no more. He is the sunshine of ten thousand days I shall never see .. 
"
Sometimes it doesn't: "She was a long river of life gently arching its back as it
flowed endlessly through sunlit meadows." Overall, Highwater has attempted to
combine too many sources (along with the Ramayana he incorporates, as he ex-
plains, elements of fairy tales, his travels in Bali, and even a somewhat jarring note
from The Wizard ofOz) into a story which loses much of its adventure under the
weight of the excess verbiage. SDL
HINTON, S. E. 
Big David, Little David; illus. by Alan Daniel. 
Doubleday,
1995 
32p
ISBN 0-385-31093-5 
$14.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Nick comes home from kindergarten feeling puzzled: a child in his room has the
same name as his father, and also, like his father, has black hair and glasses. When
he asks his father, "He's not you, is he?" his father blithely replies, "Oh, yes, that's
me." Nick doesn't entirely believe him, but can't quite trip his dad up with any of
the questions he asks, and his mom plays along. At Parents' Night at school,
Nick's dad goes around claiming each of Little David's things as his own, and Nick
"was feeling very strange. He didn't want his dad to be Little David." When Little
David and his parents arrive, Nick gets his revenge in a very funny conclusion.
Hinton's flair for writing with immediacy and with snappy, realistic dialogue car-
ries over to the picture-book form. However, adults are likely to find the book far
funnier than children will, appreciating such jokes as when Nick quizzes his dad
with "What did Kelsey do in class today?" and his mom replies, "I hope it wasn't
kiss Little David." Children are also unlikely to fathom such ruminations as "It's
just hard to play pirates on the playground when you're big. It's hard to even want
to play pirates on the playground." Daniel's illustrations do match the story's tone
perfectly, using intense colors (featuring Nick's bright red hair) and lots of white
space to create people jumping with vitality. Hinton and Daniel combine to create
an original and entertaining family, but while adults may laugh out loud, children
may be left wondering what's so funny. SDL
HIRscHI, RON 
When the Wolves Return; illus. with photographs by Thomas D.
Mangelsen. 
Cobblehill, 1995 
32p
ISBN 0-525-65144-6 
$14.99 
M 
Gr. 3-6
Subject is occluded by rhetoric in this poetic rhapsody (which unfortunately be-
gins with a misspelled word) about how the restoration of wolf populations can
bring back "a harmony" lost when Europeans conquered America. While the book
could have been a welcome ecological complement to more straightforward infor-
mational titles about wolves, such as Seymour Simon's Wolves (BCCB 11/93),
there is an almost complete lack of pertinent facts such as how many wolves are left
and where they are; readers not already familiar with the animal may also be led to
believe that wolves only exist in North America. Folklore uneasily jostles with
natural history when Hirschi tells of Pacific Northwest Indian legends about how
wolves were originally orca whales that crawled ashore and that "soon spread coast
FEBRUARY 1995 
* 
201
to coast," and throughout the text there is more neo-Indian nostalgia for the (un-
documented) old ways than there are concrete suggestions for the future. While a
mention of the wolf as a "key predator" is made in an afterword, the concept is not
made clear in the text, which makes some statements perplexing: "When wolves
return, deer will run free. Moose will give birth to long-legged calves." Wolf or no
wolf, moose will give birth to long-legged calves, and the book similarly sacrifices
sense for rapturous effusion throughout. Color photos of wolves and prey are
plentiful if tangential; a directory of wolf-preservation groups is appended. RS
HOYT-GOLDSMITH, DIANE 
Apache Rodeo; illus. with photographs by Lawrence
Migdale. 
Holiday House, 1995 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8234-1164-8 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Hoyt-Goldsmith, author of Cherokee Summer (BCCB 4/93) etc., here turns her
attention to the Apache of the Fort Apache Indian Reservation in Whiteriver,
Arizona. Using ten-year-old Felecita La Rose as its focus and narrator, the book
summarizes Apache history, customs, and daily life, and then goes on to its feature
event: the rodeo. The author mentions the rodeo's practical applications ("The
riding and roping that the cowboys do to manage the White Mountain tribe's
large herd of beef cattle are also the skills they use in the rodeo") but emphasizes
the training and fun of competition, as Felecita and her brothers practice barrel
racing, calf roping, and calf riding, and her father competes in roping events and in
bull riding. Felecita's narration occasionally tends toward the flatly encyclopedic
(and is never convincing as the voice of a ten-year-old), and the book's layout, with
competing print of photo captions and of text, occasionally combined with dis-
tracting decorated borders, is uninspired; the title is also a bit misleading, since the
rodeo action disappointingly doesn't really start until more than halfway through
the book. It's still a warm and attractive picture of a life many kids will find
desirable, and one that they wouldn't have thought about without this kind of
introduction. The explanation of the rodeo (a piece of Americana rarely dealt with
in children's literature) is clear, and the pictures of daily life and rodeo action are
sharp and vivid, if somewhat predictable. A glossary, index, and map showing the
location of the reservation are included. DS
JANNEY, REBECCA PRICE 
The TrailofFear. Word, 1994 
119p 
(The Heather
Reed Mystery Series)
Paper ed. ISBN 0-8499-3631-4 
$4.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
"'Now, tell me all about this mystery, Kelly!' Heather Reed exclaimed, her hazel
eyes aglow." From the first sentence, we know we're in Nancy Drew territory, and
Heather proves herself an able and plucky sleuth as she seeks to track down who's
behind the plot to sabotage and shut down Camp Mohican, a Poconos camp run
by the grandparents of Heather's friend Kelly. Because there's little characteriza-
tion here, it can be difficult to keep everybody sorted out, but there's plenty of
action as Heather and her friends close in on the "scoundrels" who, having heard
of Heather's detecting abilities, are determined to-at the least-scare her off.
The book, seventh in a series, is published by a Christian press, but that's evi-
denced only by the occasional mention of prayer and, in one cliffhanging chapter
ending, the strategic placement of a comma: "'God, help me!' she cried as the
canoe plunged over the falls." RS
202 
* THE BULLETIN
JENNINGS, PAUL 
Undone!: More MadEndings. Viking, 1995 
[112p]
ISBN 0-670-86005-0 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Jennings, Australian author of offbeat collections such as Unreal and Uncanny
(BCCB 9/91), here returns with eight more short stories. The book's subtitle may
emphasize endings but Jennings in fact excels at beginnings that will hook young
readers: "A person who eats someone else is called a cannibal. But what are you
called if you drink someone?"- 
from "You Be the Judge"; "I, Adam Hill, agree to
stand on the Wollaston Bridge at four o'clock and pull down my pants. I will then
flash a moonie at Mr. Bellow, the school principal"- 
from "Moonies." The tales
that follow these openings generally fulfill their eccentric promise well, presenting
bat-boys, insect transformations, artistically painted buttocks, cod-liver-oil revenge,
mind-reading cows-in short, an inventive collection of creatures and concepts
that will entertain fans of the bizarre. The generous inclusion of irreverence, broad
physical humor, creepy crawlies, and gross details makes these stories appealing to
kids who find most short stories oversubtle; these tales tend to be better developed
than those in his previous books, too, so that readers will relish each tale's compe-
tent progress to a fitting and usually ironic end. DS
KARAS, G. BRIAN 
I Know an Old Lady; illus. by G. Brian Karas. 
Scholastic,
1995 
[32p]
ISBN 0-590-46575-9 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-8 yrs
From the cover art featuring a cutlery-wielding villainess pursuing terrified ani-
mals across a field, one immediately knows that Karas will wrest every ounce of
demented absurdity from this familiar cumulative ditty. A spiky-haired boy with
binoculars, camera and notepad spies on the carnivorous crone from the apart-
ment across the street as she tosses a series of progressively larger animals down the
hatch and waxes a bit rounder, a little greener, and decidedly more maniacal with
each course. Karas' acrylic and pencil cartoonish pictures range from droll under-
statement (a meek-looking neighbor ponders his dog's empty collar with only the
mildest surprise) to comic crudity (the bilious, bloated old lady savors the last few
inches of cow tail). For the uninitiated, melody and lyrics have graciously been
appended. Hilarious and revolting-how could a kid ask for more? EB
KEHRET, PEG 
Danger at the Fair. Cobblehill, 1995 
[14 4 p]
ISBN 0-525-65182-9 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
"I'm going to scream and scream and scream," declares Corey, anticipating the fun
he's planning to have on the thrill rides at the fair, but little does he know that
laryngitis will not only keep him from screaming, it won't allow him to tell any-
body about the pickpocket team he sees working the crowd-a hokey plot device
that allows this novel to go on somewhat longer than it really should. Corey and
his big sister, Ellen (also featured in Terror at the Zoo, BCCB 2/92, and Horror at
the Haunted House), have quite a day at the fair, what with the pickpockets, their
murderous accomplice, and The Great Sybil, a fortuneteller who enables Ellen to
get in touch with the spirits via automatic writing and thus discove: that Corey is
in big trouble. The spirits talk like Spirits ("It is for you to know that the smaller one
FEBRUARY 1995 
* 
203
faces great danger") and the thugs talk like Thugs ("You don't give up easy, do you,
girlie?"), and the plotting is equally formulaic, but the code words here are unde-
manding and action-packed-reluctant readers will have a good time. RS
KING-SMITH, DICK 
Three Terrible Trins; illus. by Mark Teague. 
Crown,
1994 
105p
Library ed. ISBN 0-517-59829-9 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-59828-0 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 2-5
After Mrs. Gray has lost her second husband to a cat, she resolves that although
"trins" (like twins only three) are usually considered unlucky, her newborn mice
Thomas, Richard, and Henry will become "guerrilla fighters in the cause of
mousedom . . . dedicated to waging unceasing war" on the two housecats. She
trains them to be speedy, to avoid mousetraps, and to work together, because
"unity is strength." The white cat is quickly driven away, but the black cat and the
grouchy farmer are more difficult to deal with. Although their house has a strictly
divided class structure, the well-bred Attic trins make friends with a lowly
Cellarmouse who becomes their new stepfather, and they begin a soccer league
with team members from the whole house, using the farmer's glass eye as a ball.
King-Smith writes with his usual light touch and humor, with the farmer's eye
adding a rather macabre touch; the references to getting drunk on hard cider, also
referred to as "scrumpy," may puzzle younger readers. Due to the brevity of the
tale, the trins don't have many chances to demonstrate how "terrible" they can be,
but the large print and breezy story make this a good choice for the short-chapter
crowd and for reading aloud. SDL
KLASS, SHEILA SOLOMON 
Next Stop: Nowhere. 
Scholastic, 1995 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-590-46686-0 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Fourteen-year-old Beth Converse is resentful when her flighty mother takes off
with her third husband to Italy, leaving Beth to stay-for an indeterminate amount
of time-with her ceramicist father in small-town Vermont. Beth misses New
York and, even more, her gentle Russian immigrant boyfriend, Josef. Beth's diffi-
cult father has a jaundiced view of Beth's New York life, his ex-wife, the market in
which he attempts to sell his art, and the world generally, and Beth finds herself
intermittently battling and making peace with the father she is finally getting to
know. Klass has a sympathetic understanding of the burdens of divided loyalty
and the strain of relating to a non-custodial parent ("You make complicated ar-
rangements to get together with a distant parent and he takes you out. It's a guilt
trip for him. You pretend. He pretends. Ho, ho, ho. We're family having fun"),
and she's straightforward about the anger Beth feels as a result of these pressures.
The characterizations of both parents is oversimplified almost to the point of cari-
cature, however (as is the depiction of her father's customers): the portrait of
Beth's privileged and rootless mother hasn't the complexity that would give it
depth or the satire that would give it bite, Beth's father appears pretentious rather
than principled, and Beth's sudden nicknaming of him (she dubs him "Pablo")
seems arbitrary. Readers will enjoy Beth's tender romance with the nearly ideal
Josef, however, and they'll empathize with her feelings of powerlessness and her
struggle to understand her flawed but loving parents. DS
204 
* THE BULLETIN
KRULL, KATHLEEN 
Bridges to Change: How Kids Live on a South Carolina Sea
Island; ISBN 0-525-67441-1. 
One Nation, Many Tribes: How Kids Live in
Milwaukee's Indian Community; ISBN 0-525-67440-3. 
Each book: illus. with
photographs by David Hautzig. 
Lodestar, 1995 
48p 
$15.99 
(A World of
My Own) 
R Gr. 4-7
Following up her journalistic portraits of kids in New York's Chinatown and in a
Latino neighborhood in Southern California (BCCB 5/94), Krull here looks at life
in Milwaukee's Indian community and in the African-American towns on the
Georgia Sea Islands. Both books are crisply designed and written, focusing minor-
ity experience through the daily life of a few ten- to twelve-year-old children, al-
ways acknowledging the fluid borders between cultural specifics and the larger
American society. Thirza and Shawnee are both students at the Milwaukee Indian
Community School, which, along with providing instruction in the usual run of
subjects, gives Indian kids from many tribes a cultural context for their studies:
Shawnee, for example, constructs a science-fair experiment to see whether a hogan
or a tepee better retains heat. Travis and Martha receive daily lessons in black
history from their families, their school, and most pervasively the rich historic
legacy of the freed slaves on their island of St. Helena who built their own commu-
nities after the Civil War. Sharp color photographs show the kids in a variety of
ordinary diversions (going to the mall, riding bikes) as well as participating in
ethnic traditions; each book is a blend of the culturally specific and the everyday
that will draw in the reader who wants to read about "kids like me." An up-to-date
reading list and an index concludes each title. RS
LAKIN, PATRICIA 
The School Nurse: The Mystery Illness; ISBN 0-8114-3876-8;
The Custodian: Trash and Treasure; ISBN 0-8114-3865-1. 
Each book: 
illus.
by Doug Cushman. 
Lucas*Evans/Raintree Steck-Vaughn, 1995 
(My
School) 
32p 
$13.98 
M Gr. K-3
In a series of six books set at Parkside Elementary School, Patricia Lakin covers
some of the jobs adults do at school: principal, teacher, physical education in-
structor, bus driver, and, reviewed here, nurse and custodian. In The Mystery
Illness, Asian-American nurse Margaret Yoo's day includes writing a newsletter to
parents about chicken pox, bandaging a scraped knee while encouraging the child
about her spelling test, stopping a nosebleed, giving a dose of medicine, and infor-
mally diagnosing a child's allergy to nuts. In Trash and Treasure, custodian Earl
Mason performs a variety of jobs from finding lost objects to raising the flag to
making a presentation to the school children on recycling. The series presents a
self-consciously utopian society, with each member of the school team a different
ethnic group, and a similarly mixed student body (the girl in the wheelchair is the
one to find a missing locket because "in my chair, I'm eye level with it"). The
custodian in particular is painted as saintly in his interaction with the children,
and his role seems more administrative than hands-on; the final page lists his du-
ties, which include "supervise daily cleaning," implying that custodians do not do
the cleaning themselves. Children may also be unfamiliar with the term "custo-
dian," which in many schools has been replaced by the building "engineer." The
bland, sing-songy texts are paired with cartoonish pictures where each face looks
unaccountably surprised, and while the series may help children to perceive the
adults in their schools as sympathetic people, it does not do much to clarify what
their jobs are or how they qualified for them. SDL
FEBRUARY 1995 
* 205
LAWLOR, LAURIE 
Shadow Catcher: The Life and Work of Edward S.
Curtis. Walker, 1994 
132p 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8288-4 
$19.95
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8289-2 
$20.85 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Edward S. Curtis' exhaustive twenty-volume photographic study of Native Ameri-
cans took nearly thirty years to complete and offers some of the most memorable
portraits of American Indian life and famous Indian leaders. Curtis, Lawlor ex-
plains, was a midwestern farm boy who headed west with his family at the end of
the nineteenth century and tried to make his fortune in photography, eventually
falling into the huge project that was to be the focus of his life; Lawlor weaves his
biography around his stunning images of a way of life disappearing even then, and
now all but gone. Curtis is not, in himself, a particularly magnetic figure, and his
work takes precedence in this book much as it seemed to in his life; adults may
warm more quickly than kids to his story. Like other interesting books about
recorders of history (Sullivan's Mathew Brady, BCCB 11/94, or Sufrin's George
Catlin, 12/91), however, this not only captures a piece of the American past but
raises interesting and discussable questions about its transmission. Lawlor empha-
sizes the importance of Curtis' timing-he encountered most tribes before they
were unwilling to talk to white outsiders but not long after they had been deci-
mated by European encroachments and military-and kids reading the book will
get a real sense of the steady erosion of the once all-encompassing civilizations.
Curtis' photographs, really the raison d'etre of the book, are near-mesmerizing in
their mute narrative power and haunting portrayals; they're quite a contrast to the
watercolor Indians who populate so many children's books, and the cream-col-
ored pages and brown print of the book give the images an appropriately dignified
setting. Appendices describing Curtis' twenty-volume work and listing the source
of the photographs are included; there are also a biography and an index. DS
LAWRENCE, LOUISE 
The Patchwork People. Clarion, 1994 
230p
ISBN 0-395-67892-7 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 7-10
It's the twenty-first century, and the world is in trouble, with haves and have-nots
being sharply divided and natural resources dwindling. In Cardiff, Wales, Hugh
and his friends try to stretch their parents' government allowances by doing odd
jobs and picking up tips for carrying bags at the railroad station. Chance keeps
bringing Hugh together with Helena, the wealthy, protected daughter of a colliery
manager; when Helena tells Hugh that there is employment in her father's new
mine, he and his friends head to Ynysceiber only to find that no jobs exist and that
they must now struggle to make ends meet in a strange and hostile place, under an
impersonal and soul-crushing system. The main stories here-Hugh's determina-
tion to find a life worth living in a world where that's nearly impossible, Helena's
gradual awareness of the inequities of the world and the price others must pay for
her privilege, and Hugh's and Helena's romance-aren't always subtly written but
are consistently intriguing and blend together well. Lawrence's futuristic world is
credibly similar to contemporary life; she's simply depicted the expansion of cur-
rent problems, and her treatment of bleak and despairing poverty has a distinctly
Dickensian ring to it. The closeness between Hugh and his friends (and his pain
when his decisions interfere with that closeness) and the detailed immediacy of
their situation makes this book an unusual thing: a highly readable political novel.
DS
206 
* THE BULLETIN
LEEDY, LOREEN 
The Edible Pyramid: Good Eating Every Day; written and illus.
by Loreen Leedy. 
Holiday House, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1126-5 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 1-3
Animals visit a pyramid-shaped restaurant hosted by a cat, who explains the United
States Department of Agriculture's food pyramid. Asides from the animals lend
humor, as when a frog hopes that "their flies are fresh," but for the most part this
is a straightforward discussion of the food groups. The bottom of the pyramid is
where the most servings in a nutritious diet should come from, and Leedy also
gives it the most pages, devoting one spread to the different types of breads, one to
cereals and rice, and one to pastas. Next come the vegetables, then fruit, then milk
and cheese, where, oddly, a frog is shown bottle-feeding a tadpole who is saying
"Mmm, I love milk Mom!" The next spread shows a rather uninteresting selection
of meats, fish, and poultry (and virtually identical poached and fried eggs), then
nuts and dried beans, and finally fats, oils, and sweets. Leedy then discusses how
to count servings, but never clarifies how to count foods which cross categories,
such as ice cream, which is in both the milk and the fats/sweets categories. Chil-
dren will get a good basic overview of the food groups and how to apply the knowl-
edge to their own diets, but Leedy's approach overall could use some spice. SDL
LEMBER, BARBARA HIRSCH 
A Book of Fruit; written and illus. by Barbara Hirsch
Lember. 
Ticknor, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-395-66989-8 
$14.95 
Ad 
3-7 yrs
The simplest of text accompanies these hand-tinted photographs of fourteen fruits.
The first page says merely "Fruit... " The next spread opens to show a photo-
graph of a single peach on the left. There are two photographs on the right, one
showing peach trees, and a smaller one partially inset showing a peach attached to
a branch. On the left appears the word "Peach" and on the right, "Peach orchard."
Each spread has the same format, with the single fruit isolated, sometimes cut
open, and each photograph captures the beauty of that particular fruit in well-
composed shots. Lember's hand-tinting sometimes makes the fruit appear almost
three-dimensional, while in the shots of trees and bushes she has given the back-
grounds mysterious, almost spooky lighting. As a book of lovely photographs, this
works very well. However, as a book to satisfy the curiosity of children wanting to
know more about how fruits grow, it is not entirely successful. In some pictures,
the fruit on the trees or vines is difficult to distinguish, especially with the smaller
fruits and berries. It also might have been helpful to state the type of plant each
fruit grows on (that grapes grow on vines, for instance, or blueberries on bushes),
rather than just where they are grown ("cranberry bog," "raspberry field," etc.).
The final page concludes, "Fruit grows in many places," but the places don't in
fact look very different, and one gets no sense of which parts of the world different
fruits might grow in. This may be the child's equivalent of a coffee table book
with alluring photographs but little information. SDL
LEWISON, WENDY CHEYETTE 
The Rooster Who Lost His Crow; illus. by Thor
Wickstrom. 
Dial, 1995 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1546-3 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1545-5 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 3-7 yrs
Rooster faithfully performs his job of waking up the farmer to feed the animals
FEBRUARY 1995 
* 207
until the day that a tiny bee flies up his beak as he's beginning to crow, "scaring the
cock-a-doodle-doo right out of him." Rooster looks everywhere the other animals
suggest around the farm, but in each place, "no cock-a-doodle-doo was there." It
isn't until a fox sneaks into the chicken coop that Rooster finds his crow and scares
the fox away, and "all was right with the world." While this ending will not come
as a surprise to any grownup, it's a sprightly story with a repeated chorus, making
it an immediate storyhour favorite. Wickstrom's jaunty illustrations in pen and
ink, watercolor, and gouache, show a sunny, cheerful farmyard filled with the
usual suspects, in sizes large enough for everyone in a group to see. SDL
LONDON, JONATHAN 
Like Butter on Pancakes; illus. by G. Brian Karas. 
Viking,
1995 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-670-85130-2 
$13.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
3-6 yrs
As "first light melts/ like butter on pancakes" across the pillow of a sleeping tot, the
kitchen drags itself to life ("Papa's kettle whistles/ Mama's bacon sizzles/ slippers
whisper/ across the kitchen floor") promising the boy another great day on the
farm. First there's the bunny-slippered pajama dance to be done, and a pancake
feast to be eaten; there are haystacks to be tumbled in and barnyard animals to be
chased. With a jolt of where-has-the-day-gone surprise, a luminous orange sunset
and the farmhouse bell herald "Time to wash up!" And after supper it's back to
bed, as the moon-washed house dozes off "and the spoons sleep nestled/ in the
kitchen drawers." Each mixed-media composition celebrates the play of light that
marks the hours-the even purple before dawn, the shocking burst of morning
yellow that batters its way through the windows, the puddles of cold white moon-
light on the bedroom floor. Squiggly line, scribbly crayon, and smudgy watercolor
on a variety of textured papers capture the naive ebullience of a little guy who
clearly knows how to seize the day. EB
LOUGHERY, JOHN, comp. 
Into the Widening World: International Coming-of-Age
Stories. Persea, 1995 
[288p]
Paper ed. ISBN 0-89255-204-2 
$11.95
Reviewed from galleys 
SpR 
Gr. 10 up
Anthologist Loughery has taken the subtitular "international" seriously; this col-
lection is divided into five regional sections, "South America and the Caribbean,"
"North America," "Europe and Russia," "Africa and the Middle East," and "Asia
and the South Pacific," with five or six contemporary stories from various coun-
tries representing each region. While well-known authors such as Mario Vargas
Llosa, Margaret Drabble, and Yukio Mishima are represented, most names here
will be unfamiliar to American readers and many stories appear in translation.
The stories generally focus on young protagonists, and the writing is imaginative
and stylish throughout. It's also continually dense, subtle, and allusive to a degree
that makes this book a daunting challenge for most teen readers, and the intensity
of the pieces-and the often adult themes-is rarely lightened by humor, so ulti-
mately this is an adult collection or a classroom resource rather than a volume
youngsters will read through for enjoyment. This is, however, a useful comple-
ment to bland, dated, and limited short-story collections; individual entries such
as Thomas King's eloquent "Borders" would make for provocative high-school
readalouds or assignments. Biographical notes for the authors are appended. DS
208 
* THE BULLETIN
LYTTLE, RICHARD B. 
Mark Twain: The Man and His Adventures. 
Atheneum,
1994 
231p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-689-31712-3 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Mark Twain is arguably the quintessential American author, and Lyttle, biogra-
pher of Ernest Hemingway (BCCB 6/92) and others, here chronicles Twain's
quintessentially American life. The book's subtitle is right-it was an adventurous
life: Lyttle documents Twain's work as a riverboat "cub" (novice pilot), time as a
speculator and newspaperman in Nevada's Gold Country and in California, his
trip to the Sandwich Islands, his first voyage to Europe, and then his compara-
tively settled existence as a husband, father, and popular if not always totally re-
spectable writer. The biographer gives time to the many tragedies of Twain's life
and the sorrows he suffered, but also conveys the freshness of his humor through a
multitude of quotes and anecdotes (although Lyttle's paraphrases of pranks or
jokes sometimes fall a bit flat). Kids awed by literary lions will find this a pleas-
antly demystifying read-Lyttle paints Twain as rewarding if occasionally irascible
company and a smartass to boot-and it may awaken their interest in some of his
less ubiquitous works, such as his travel writing. The source notes are disappoint-
ingly scanty; two bibliographies appear, one of Twain's work and one of secondary
works as well as Twainiana such as letters; an index is included. Black-and-white
photographs appear throughout. DS
McCULLY, EMILY ARNOLD 
Little Kit or, The Industrious Flea Circus Girl; written
and illus. by Emily Arnold McCully. 
Dial, 1995 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1674-5 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1671-0 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Kit is a young girl who sells flowers to keep herself alive in Victorian London.
When "Professor" Malefetta comes offering "a bed, meals, a few pence for hard
work-and the company of artists," she leaps at the chance, taking advantage of
the fact that Malefetta thinks she is a boy. At first she is disappointed that the
"artists" turn out to be costumed fleas, but they amaze her with their act, and she
begins to sympathize with the "poor, exhausted little creatures" and eventually
runs away, taking the fleas with her. Readers will need to take this for the Victo-
rian melodrama it is and to accept melodramatic conventions in plot and pictures
to properly enjoy it. McCully's good people have lovely faces and beautiful hair,
and the evil characters have twisted faces and missing teeth. For heroes and villains
alike, her watercolors are lushly glowing; pastel highlights burnish Kit's golden
hair. Each illustration holds meticulous historical detail without ever being busy.
McCully's notes on the verso of the title page give background information on flea
circuses, which one might otherwise be tempted to disbelieve. This makes a fine
companion to McCully's previous costume dramas such as the Caldecott winner
Mirette on the High Wire. SDL
MCKENZIE, ELLEN KINDT 
Under the Bridge. Holt, 1994 
140p
ISBN 0-8050-3398-X 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Life has become difficult for fifth-grader Ritchie Willis. His problems include a
mother who has been taken away during the night, a stem father more interested
in the war news from Europe than in answering questions, a seriously ill younger
sister, and a bully at school. His life begins to brighten, however, when his sister
FEBRUARY 1995 
* 209
Rosie gets a letter, supposedly from the troll who lives under the bridge behind
their house. As the letter-writer tells of the troll's predicaments, Ritchie and Rosie
become involved in his story, which gets them through their mother's absence.
Thad Grailowsky provides another bright spot; a musician who lives next door, he
encourages Ritchie's piano playing and listens sympathetically. McKenzie weaves
her threads together elegantly, giving the troll's story a certain poignancy and giv-
ing Ritchie dignity without losing his childlike outlook as he narrates the book.
She creates the World War II setting vividly without overexplanation, and though
one plot thread is cliched, as Ritchie and the class bully realize what the life of the
other is like, it is nonetheless effective. Ritchie, Rosie, Thad, and the troll provide
rich material for class discussion as well as individual contemplation. SDL
MAHURIN, TIM 
Jeremy Kooloo; written and illus. by Tim Mahurin. 
Dutton,
1995 
[32p]
ISBN 0-525-45203-6 
$13.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 3-5 yrs
Any word fancier who's ever attempted to make an ABC story using each consecu-
tive letter of the alphabet knows it just ain't as easy as it looks. Mahurin has
devised a coherent, albeit stretched, tale of a cat who, after guzzling the milk in all
the glasses on the table ("A Big Cat Drank Every Full Glass. Hiccup!"), drinks the
milk carton dry too. Guiltily fleeing the dining room wreckage, the exhausted
Jeremy Kooloo hits the sack for the night, "Tired Under Very Warm XYZzzz."
Each double-page painting, dominated by warm, burnished reds and browns, is
generously framed by off-white space; oversized-type text marches across the top.
This cat is stiffly drafted and rather limited in his expressions considering the breadth
of his exploits; nonetheless, each scene is so closely coordinated with the simple
text that emergent readers will lap up the context clues. Sneak this one away from
the pre-schoolers to encourage older children to try an alphabet story of their own.
EB
MAZER, ANNE, comp. 
Going Where I'm Coming From: Memoirs ofAmerican Youth:
A MulticulturalAnthology. Persea, 1995 
[176p]
Trade ed. ISBN 0-89255-205-0 
$15.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-89255-206-9 
$6.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Mazer, capable anthologist of America Street (BCCB 11/93), returns with another
collection of varied authors, who here offer autobiographical accounts of their
youth. "A multicultural anthology" this certainly is: authors included are Hisaye
Yamamoto ("The Enormous Piano"), who grew up in America speaking Japanese;
Ved Mehta ("Sound-Shadows of the New World"), who arrived from India at
fifteen, struggling with the English language and with a new country's reaction to
his blindness; Luis J. Rodriguez ("Always Running"), who tells how his family's
California addresses fluctuated with its fortunes. While many of the perceptions
included in this anthology are adult despite the youthful ages of the protagonists
(and some pieces may therefore simply seem to young readers like adult reminis-
cence), the stories here are more keyed to teen reading levels than are those in
Loughery's collection, reviewed above. The best stories bridge the gap between
adult recall and youthful immediacy and would make intriguing readalouds as
well as class assignments: Naomi Shihab Nye's "Thank You in Arabic" tells the
story of her family's intense and vivid year in Palestine getting to know their roots;
210 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Willie Ruff, in "A Call to Assembly," relates in musical prose ("I was a slave to my
ear and in love with my shackles") his experience at a job that taught him bitter
truths of bigotry and showed him beauty in the form of sign language. A helpful
paragraph of explanation and authorial biography precedes each story. DS
MYERS, EDWARD 
Forri the Baker; illus. by Alexi Natchev. 
Dial, 1995 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1397-5 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1396-7 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
The people of Ettai at first enjoy the amazing variety of breads Forri the baker
comes up with, but eventually they get bored: "Pen bread. ... Who wants to write
with bread?" Forri's bakery goes out of business, but when neighboring barbarians
invade with their dazzling array of weapons, Forri's bread and his ingenuity save
the town. Myers writes with a storyteller's flair, and this folk-like story is an ap-
pealing original tale. Forri is the quintessential creative genius who is unappreci-
ated by those around him, and the story overall has an optimistic feeling even in
Forri's darkest hours. Natchev's watercolor and colored-pencil illustrations show
a fictitious medieval European town made of stone, with lots of turrets and brightly
colored roofing. Forri and the townsfolk have comically long, pink noses and
wide eyes, while the barbarians are thickly whiskered and heavily armed but look
so impassive that they aren't frightening. The party at the end of the book is par-
ticularly satisfying both in words and pictures as the townspeople feast on Forri's
newest creations. SDL
NEUBERGER, ANNE E. 
The Girl-Son. Carolrhoda, 1995 
131p 
(Adventures
in Time)
ISBN 0-87614-846-1 
$14.96 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Induk Pahk's widowed mother is determined that, against the advice of powerful
male relatives, her daughter will become an educated woman. Through her mother's
sacrifices, Induk, passing as a young boy, enters an all-male school, later attends a
mission school where the eight-year-old lives independently as the school's sole
boarder, and finally completes her studies to become a teacher. Readers will be
intrigued by cultural details of life in turn-of-the-century Korea-boys wear pink,
girls spend an entire class day pickling cabbage, and Woolworth's lead pencils are
exotic imports. However, characters remain one-dimensional, narration is often
simplistic ("I was glad. It was always nice when a baby was born, especially a boy.
This baby had been a boy. I was glad they were so happy"), and the tale's main
draw-the girl-disguised-as-boy storyline-is only a fleeting chapter long. Younger
or less skillful readers may enjoy this fact-based tale, but most upper middle grad-
ers are likely to prefer Watkins' faster-paced Korean adventures (So Far from the
Bamboo Grove, BCCB 6/86, etc.). A historical epilogue, an appendix on Korean
birth signs, and a bibliography are included. EB
NIMMO, JENNY 
Rainbow and Mr. Zed. Dutton, 1994 
192p
ISBN 0-525-45150-1 
$14.99 
R 
Gr. 6-9
The continuation of Ultramarine (see BCCB 7/92) finds Nell (Rainbow) in early
adolescence, painfully aware of her own social backwardness and envious of older
brother Ned's chance to sail off on an animal rescue mission with their mysterious,
adored father. Nell stoically accepts an invitation to visit with distant relatives in
FEBRUARY 1995 
* 
211
hope that "the timorous bits of her would be snipped away," but she is lured to an
island by the reclusive Mr. Zed-Nell's Uncle Zebedee, an evil enchanter who, in
his lust for power, has plundered from the Furthest Ocean crystals which hold the
secret to life's origins. Zebedee is certain that Nell's kelpie heritage will enable her
to interpret the tiny voices of the crystals, and he holds his niece virtually hostage
while awaiting both her acquiescence and a final confrontation with his childhood
enemy-Nell's father. If the delicately ambiguous relationship between fantasy
and reality that graces Ultramarine is missing from the sequel, Nimmo more than
compensates with a coming-of-age tale of equal delicacy. Nell's self-doubt and
self-discoveries are subtle, complex, and thoroughly believable as she tests the
strength of her absent father's love, even while tearfully admitting her bond to
Zebedee, who "saw me as someone special, someone he wanted with him-al-
ways." EB
OPPENHEIM, SHULAMITH LEVEY 
I Love You, Bunny Rabbit; illus. by Cyd
Moore. 
Boyds Mills, 1995 
32p
ISBN 1-56397-322-7 
$14.95 
Ad 
2-5 yrs
Micah loves flannel Bunny Rabbit so much he shares his applesauce, chocolate
milk, and adventures with her until she can hardly be seen beneath the mess. Mother
helps Micah give her a bath, scrubbing at her stains, but decrees afterward that
"Bunny Rabbit is a mess .. . It is time, Micah, to buy a new rabbit." Such
callousness seems unlikely, but Micah accompanies his mother to the toy store,
tucking Bunny Rabbit inside his coat and whispering "I love you, Bunny Rabbit."
Finally sensitive to her son's feelings, Mother ends up buying him a milkshake
instead. Oppenheim tells this universal preschool tale with simplicity and under-
standing, albeit somewhat flatly, and makes the point that children associate re-
jecting a dirty stuffed animal with a parent rejecting the child for being messy.
While Moore depicts both Mother and Micah with greeting-card sweetness and
little personality, her predominant tone is playful, with colored pencil and water-
color streaking color and swirling patterns into backgrounds and borders. SDL
PECK, RICHARD 
The Last Safe Place on Earth. Delacorte, 1995 
[116p]
ISBN 0-385-32052-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Todd Tobin's family has recently abandoned a suburb with escalating school vio-
lence for a safe haven in picture-perfect Walden Woods. Todd and his adopted
sister, Diana, ease right into tenth-grade social respectability in their new high
school, and romance even looms on Todd's horizon in the shape of little sister
Marnie's babysitter, the fetching Laurel Kellerman. When the Tobins' outdoor
Halloween display is vandalized and Marnie's behavior becomes increasingly bi-
zarre, it is clear that all is not well in this "last safe place" and that Laurel and her
Satan-fearing church congregation are at the root of the trouble. Todd's chatty
narration is at once tense and witty, and Peck dashes off some great lines with his
customary aplomb ("My technique with girls needs work." "Work? It needs gov-
ernment funding"). But the tautly drawn tale which makes such a promising start
eventually devolves into a pile of fragmented subplots which include parental alco-
holism, book-banning, child neglect, homophobia, and physical abuse; antago-
nists are facilely dismissed as troubled or unbalanced. Each issue raised deserves
fuller treatment than it receives, and readers may well feel short-changed. EB
212 
* THE BULLETIN
PENNER, LUCILLE RECHT 
A Native American Feast. Macmillan, 1994 99p
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-02-770902-7 
$14.95 
R Gr. 4-7
In the tradition of her Eating the Plates: A Pilgrim Book of Food and Manners
(BCCB 9/91), Penner offers this history/cookbook of Native American foods. She
organizes her chapters by how the food is obtained (agriculture, for "A Great Mys-
tery" and "Treasure"; hunting for "The Hunt") or how or when it is prepared
("Feast and Famine" for, obviously, feast and famine). It's not always immediately
clear why a particular recipe turns up in a particular chapter, but it's a tasty, occa-
sionally exotic collection: as Penner says, "some Native American dishes ... may
seem strange to many of us today. Yet others, like baked beans, succotash, and
roast turkey, are familiar." She includes information about and recipes from tribes
from the east and west, north and south, and many concoctions promise to be
highly kid-appealing adventures (the purple "Wild Grape Dumplings," for ex-
ample, or "Popped Wild Rice"). The book suggests more easily available alterna-
tives for many unusual ingredients (although sometimes this would Europeanize a
recipe beyond interest, as when it suggests replacing buffalo steaks with, simply,
steak). Big print and a variety of illustrations-photographs, old engravings,
sketches-increase the volume's accessibility; a bibliography and ndex are included.
Food is a great medium for an entree into cultural understanding, and this will
sharpen many young readers' appetite for both snacks and lore. DS
PETERS, LISA WESTBERG 
The Hayloft; illus. by K. D. Plum. 
Dial, 1995
[48p] 
(Easy-to-Read)
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1491-2 
$12.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1490-4 
$12.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. K-3
In these three easy-to-read summer stories, Caroline Rose and her younger sister
Ivy share small adventures revolving around the hayloft in their barn. In the first,
they attempt to make the family cat, Hebby, go for a walk on a leash, and in the
second, they look for ways to escape the heat. The last story has the two girls
spending the night in the hayloft with the bats and Hebby. Parents and farm
activity are nowhere in sight, and though urban children may relish these outdoor
stories, neither Caroline Rose nor Ivy exhibit much personality. Plum's illustra-
tions, somewhat reminiscent of Trina Schart Hyman's, combine watercolor, dye,
gouache, and pencil for intense colors and some pleasing lighting effects; the two
children look energetic and playful, and even the inanimate objects seem lively
almost to the point of busyness. Overwhelmed by the illustrations, the stories
seem pale, but libraries needing more easy readers or female main characters will
find this a useful addition. SDL
PLEASANT COMPANY 
Addy's Cook Book: A Peek at Dining in the Past with Meals
You Can Cook Today; ISBN 1-56247-123-6; Kirsten's Cook Book: A Peek at Dining
in the Past with Meals You Can Cook Today; ISBN 1-56247-111-2. 
Each
book: 
Pleasant Company, 1994 
4 4p 
illus. and with photographs 
(American
Girls Pastimes) 
Paper ed. $5.95 
R 
Gr. 4-7
The American Girls phenomenon rolls triumphantly on-now all the Girls have
their own cookbooks so that young aficionados (aficionadas?) can cook along with
their heroines. Each cookbook has clearly demarcated sections: a quick overview
FEBRUARY 1995 
* 213
of cooking in the era described ("Cooking in the Civil War"; "Cooking on the
Frontier"), a description of kitchens from that time and place, a note on table
settings-i.e., whether dishes matched or were even used, and a double spread of
"Tips for Young Cooks"; these are followed by the recipes (divided into "Break-
fast," "Dinner," and "Favorite Foods") and by suggestions for a theme party. These
are clearly and admittedly cookbooks for cooking with adults, but they're ones
that parents might not mind getting into. Recipes are fairly straightforward, with
clear step-by-step instructions and marginal diagrams; the books are peppered
throughout with chatty bits of information about food supply ("Plantation owners
sometimes allowed enslaved people to have small vegetable gardens"), utensils,
and pastimes that connect each book more firmly to its era. While the recipes
occasionally fudge realism in favor of palatability (Addy's dishes, for instance, in-
clude an unlikely amount of expensive cream), the books generally demonstrate a
good awareness of their heroines' financial standing and of their access to food
supplies. The combination of attractively glossy format, solid cultural examina-
tion, and just plain culinary fun makes these appealing to a wide variety of readers
and young chefs. DS
ROBERTS, WILLO DAVIS 
The Absolutely True Story ... How I Visited Yellowstone
Park with the Terrible Rupes. Atheneum, 1994 
154p
ISBN 0-689-31939-8 
$14.95 
R Gr. 3-7
In this book, "written" by eleven-year-old Lewis Q. Dodge, the young narrator
tells of his vacation trip to Yellowstone Park with his new neighbors, the Rupes.
Delighted at first with the very loose rein the Rupes keep on their children and the
steady diet of snacks and sweets, Lewis and his sister Alison become disenchanted
and then horrified as the trip progresses. Mr. Rupe, who has refused to exchange
their large, luxurious rental motorhome when a clerk tries to convince him he has
taken the wrong one by mistake, turns out to be both a terrible driver and an
inconsiderate boor, blocking cars in their parking spaces and yelling at the irate
drivers when they return. Lewis notices that everywhere they stop they see the
same blue car with two men in it, and when four-year-old Billy Rupe begins flash-
ing hundred-dollar bills, Lewis deduces that the men are after the money-and
just whose money is it? Roberts, who in the author bio notes her extensive
motorhome travel experience, has clearly had a good time writing away her frustra-
tions with her more obnoxious fellow travelers, making the Rupes delightfully
horrible, while keeping Lewis and Alison both reasonable and likable. Though
there are no real surprises in the mystery plot, the story whizzes along, and readers,
unlike Lewis, will be sorry when the trip is over. SDL
Ross, GAYLE, ad. 
How Turtle's Back Was Cracked: A Traditional Cherokee Tale;
illus. by Murv Jacob. 
Dial, 1995 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1729-6 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1728-8 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Possum enjoys perching in a persimmon tree and throwing fruit down to his good
friend Turtle, so when Wolf stands behind Turtle and steals all of the persimmons,
Possum becomes annoyed. He throws the next persimmon down so hard it sticks
in Wolfs throat, choking him to death, but Turtle manages to convince himself
that "he alone, Turtle the Mighty Hunter, had slain the greedy wolf." Taking the
wolfs ears as tribute, Turtle makes them into spoons, showing them off every-
214 
* THE BULLETIN
where he goes, which proves a mistake when the wolves hear about the spoons and
decide Turtle must die. His quick-wittedness, proving him narrative kin to Brer
Rabbit in the briar patch, saves him, but he ends up with a cracked shell. An
experienced storyteller, Ross knows how to move a story along and fill her charac-
ters with sparkle and personality. While the story has some sharp edges, the out-
come seems just and there are moments to make kids laugh aloud. Jacob's acrylic
paintings tend to be very dark, with lots of woodland and nighttime scenes, but
the many decorative touches, such as the sky with its swirls of color and the Cherokee
motifs in the borders and animals' clothing, help lighten the feeling. Ross gives
source notes at the beginning, and includes a one-page summary of Cherokee
history at the end. A good companion for Mollel's The Flying Tortoise (BCCB 10/
94). SDL
RUBY, Lois 
StealAway Home. Macmillan, 1994 
192p
ISBN 0-02-777883-5 
$15.95 
R Gr. 5-8
As enforcement of the Fugitive Slave Act and rival territorial claims threaten to
turn Lawrence, Kansas into a battleground, the Weaver family, which is solidly
committed to the antislavery cause, finds itself divided concerning resistance strat-
egies. Young James favors his neighbors' call to arms; father Caleb fights his battle
within the court system; mother Millicent (against her husband's wishes) harbors
runaway slaves in their home. But when an Underground Railroad conductor,
Miss Lizbet Charles, becomes critically ill while in hiding, Caleb and James must
take drastic measures to prevent her discovery. Interwoven throughout this tale of
a Quaker family in Bleeding Kansas is a contemporary detection story in which the
current owners of the Weavers' house discover the bones of a young woman sealed
into a cubicle behind an upstairs wall. The Shannons research the history of their
house and town and peruse Millicent Weaver's diary, drawing tantalizingly close
to the truth behind Lizbet's death. Ruby offers a fully realized portrait of the
zealous and outspoken Lizbet and treats the Weavers' often contradictory religious
convictions with respect. The Shannons' almost giddy fascination with the skel-
eton in their closet provides an effective counterpoint to the serious drama played
out over a century before. EB
SANFIELD, STEVE 
Strudel, Strudel, Strudel; illus. by Emily Lisker. Jackson/Or-
chard, 1995 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08729-8 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-06879-X 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
In this tale of those foolish people in Chelm, where they have posted a sign saying
"Search Here" under a light so people will know to look for their lost things where
it is bright enough to see, we hear the explanation for another of the town's signs.
This one reads: "A teacher may not live on top of a hill. A teacher may not own a
trunk with wheels. A teacher may not eat apple strudel." It seems that the craving
of schoolteacher Zaynul and his wife, Zeitel, for apple strudel led to disaster when
each of them agreed to deposit money in a trunk to save up for strudel, but then
neither of them followed through. In their argument, they ended up falling into
the wheeled trunk, which then rolled out their door and down the hill, and then
crashed into the market square. Children will find this scene hilarious if they get
that far; ten pages pass before the action of the story begins, and many listeners will
be long gone, especially since children are unlikely to feel much interest in the
FEBRUARY 1995 
* 215
craving of the teacher and his wife for strudel. Lisker's rollicking oil paintings,
styled after Chagall, may keep their attention through the dry spots, though. Cheer-
ful reds, blues and oranges and amusing touches like the goat peeking in Zaynul
and Zeitel's window help keep the book looking lively, and once Sanfield hits the
action his skill with words becomes apparent. SDL
SMITH, LUCINDA IRWIN 
Women Who Write: VolumeII. Messner, 1994 
228p
ISBN 0-671-87253-2 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
In this followup to Volume I (BCCB 12/89), Smith offers biographies of seven
canonical women writers and interviews with twenty-two contemporary ones, plus
some analysis of the history of women writing and some helpful advice to young
writers. Smith candidly admits to asking forty writers, eighteen of whom turned
her down, but the collection here is still fairly diverse: veteran authors such as Fay
Weldon and Margaret Atwood rub shoulders with first-time novelists such as
Katherine Vaz; different genres are represented, such as mysteries (Sue Grafton),
screenplays (Melissa Mathison), poetry (Rita Dove), and young adult literature
(Cynthia Voigt); the inclusion of authors such as Charlayne Hunter-Gault, Denise
Chavez, Hisaye Yamamoto, and Louise Erdrich emphasizes the cultural diversity
of contemporary writing. The interviews themselves vary intriguingly in tone and
in their advice to young writers, but provide some insight into both the process of
writing and the skill of these particular authors. Smith's own lengthy section on
writing is superfluous in the face of the words of her interviewees, however, and
her choices for biography perplexing (why bring in Murasaki Shibu, for instance,
when the rest of the book limits itself to writers in English?); since no publication
information is given in the interviews and many of the authors' works go unmen-
tioned there, the lack of a real bibliography for the writers addressed is lamentable.
Still, the direct voices of these writers, many of whom will be new to young read-
ers, will enlarge their picture of writing and of authors. Included are a useful list of
suggestions for further reading about writing, endnotes and an index; a black-and-
white photograph precedes each author's section. DS
SOBOL, DONALD J. 
"My Name Is Amelia. " Karl/Atheneum, 1994 
105p
ISBN 0-689-31970-3 
$12.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Sobol wanders far afield from Encyclopedia Brown territory in this science fan-
tasy, and if his reach sometimes seems a little overly ambitious, he still grasps an
action-packed adventure featuring two strong female heroines-one of them the
young Amelia Earhart. The other is sixteen-year-old super-capable sailor Lisa
Maddock, who stumbles upon a mysterious island in the Bahamas after falling off
her boat during a midnight accident. She drifts to the island on a sturdy wooden
raft that happens to be floating by, courtesy of... George Washington, who built
the raft in a vain attempt to escape the island and the power of Dr. Freemont, a
super-scientist who has discovered how to "snip" historical figures out of their
time and whose leadership talents he hopes to employ in building a more perfect
Earth out in space. The "snip" means he actually gets a double of the personalities,
who otherwise go on with their lives in their own eras. Clear? While the details
don't overcome their contrivance to the point of being convincing, there's still
some exciting suspense as Lisa and her new friend, the ten-year-old Amelia, plot to
escape the island despite Dr. Freemont's pleas and threats and misguided idealism.
It's a short, quick read, unlikely but inviting, and ends with the girls successfully
escaping with a promise to keep the island secret forever, and with a new life for
216 
* THE BULLETIN
the duplicate Amelia (who, oddly, does not seem overalarmed when Lisa divulges
her original's famous fate). RS
STEVENSON, JAMES 
A Village Full of Valentines; written and illus. by James
Stevenson. 
Greenwillow, 1995 
[40p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-13603-6 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-13602-8 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. K-3
Seven quick, funny stories depict Valentine's Day in a village populated by a vari-
ety of animals. Clifford, a turtle, only sends a valentine to someone if they send
one first-he hasn't gotten a valentine in fifty-six years. Mice Mona, Tina, and
Mary Lou squabble over who will do which chore in the valentine-making project,
but come to a satisfactory agreement. Murray bemoans his inability to cut a straight
heart, but his friend David gives him another way to look at it. Stevenson has
done a masterful job of creating stories easy enough for new readers to read alone,
each with a twist or joke based on a character's personality. The characters come
together for a grand finale in a village Valentine Show, and we find out what Gus
the tailor was doing with his enormous ball of string in the sixth story. This joyful
book will make young (and old) fingers itch to begin making (not buying) valen-
tines no matter what time of year it is. SDL
TATE, ELEANORA E. A Blessing in Disguise. Delacorte, 1995 [17 6 p]
ISBN 0-385-32103-1 $14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
Zambia, now twelve, has lived with her Aunt Limo and Uncle Lamar ever since
she was four, when her mother was hospitalized for alcoholism and drug addic-
tion. While she loves her relatives (even bossy cousin Aretha) she fantasizes about
living with her father, high-flying Snake, who owns a fancy nightclub over in Gumbo
Grove and seems to give Zambia's half-sisters Seritta and Meritta all the money
and credit cards and clothes a girl could wish for. But Snake's business dealings go
far beyond the nightclub, something the neighbors have whispered and that Zam-
bia slowly sees for herself when Snake opens up another nightclub across the street
from her house in Deacon's Neck. The poor but quiet village becomes plagued by
noise and drugs and violence, and Zambia has to choose sides between her glamor-
ous father and the "dull" but caring family that raised her. With a far bleaker
theme and atmosphere than Tate's previous two books about Gumbo Grove, South
Carolina (The Secret of Gumbo Grove, BCCB 6/87, Thank You, Dr. Martin Luther
King, Jr.!, 6/90), the story is honest about the way an African-American commu-
nity can be threatened from within and "how these things can flash through a
family and burn everybody." While there is a lesson here, and readers may find
that Zambia takes too long to learn it, the novel is saved from preachiness by
Zambia's impulsive, colloquial narration and her true-to-twelve fascination with
the night life and its supposed glamor. RS
TAYLOR, MILDRED D. 
The Well: David's Story. 
Dial, 1995 
[96p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1803-9 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1802-0 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-7
Like The Friendship and Mississippi Bridge (BCCB 12/87 and 10/90), The Well is
FEBRUARY 1995 
* 217
a short, dramatic pendant to Taylor's longer novels (Rollof Thunder, HearMy Cry,
etc.) about Cassie Logan's family. David Logan (Cassie's father) tells this story
from his childhood, when the conflict between his family, comparably well-off
black landowners, and the neighboring white Simmses, struggling tenant farmers,
was just as volatile as it would be during the lives of his children. There's a drought,
and the Logans possess the only well in the area that has not gone dry. Black and
white alike come for water freely given by the family, but the Simms boys can't
seem to stand the necessary charity, and their resentment explodes when David's
big brother Hammer beats Charlie Simms after Charlie hits David. The Logan
brothers actually think that Hammer has killed Charlie, and while it's not that
bad, it's certainly bad enough. Taylor knows how to write forcefully yet briefly,
and if the angels are entirely on the side of the Logan family, the conflict is com-
pelling and painful, as in a scene where the sheriff and Mr. Simms force David's
mother to whip both her sons. Kids intimidated by the lengthier entries in this
family saga will find this a fairly easy place to start; you might want to couple a
readaloud of this title with a booktalk for Roll of Thunder, thereby assuring kids of
Taylor's skill with a story of any length. RS
VAN LAAN, NANCY 
Mama Rocks, Papa Sings; illus. by Roberta Smith. Apple
Soup/Knopf, 1995 
33p
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-94016-2 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-84016-8 
$15.00 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
As the title suggests, the text of this Haitian-set bedtime book rocks and sings a
rhythmic chant as it counts the children that make their way to the young narrator's
house. At first the family is just her and her parents, but then a baby cousin comes
to stay while her parents work, a hungry neighbor boy shows up, a homeless boy
follows Papa home from the town, more cousins arrive, and Mama brings a baby
home from the market. Each arrival is punctuated with a lullaby for whoever is
youngest in the house at the time: "Mama rocks. ZI-ZAH ZI-ZAH/ Baby weeps.
WAH WAH WAH/ Papa sings. SHU-LA SHU-LA/ Baby sleeps. ZEH ZEH
ZEH." Listeners are going to need some context for all these fosterings, and the
frequent employment of Creole ("ti gason trails him [Papa] home-se yon gris
siprise!") will require flipping to the glossary at the beginning of the text. While
the words at least imply the hard conditions facing Haitians today ("Friend Clive
says, 'Mwin gran' gou!' He goes begging in the street") the pictures present a clean
and sunny tropical setting, with the family's small shack looking like a cozy rustic
hideaway. The pinks and greens and blues are pleasingly intense, and children will
enjoy counting all the newcomers. The ending, in which all the children go away,
is quite puzzling. We can infer that the cousins went back to their parents, but are
the strays simply put out into the night? RS
WEIDT, MARYANN N. 
Oh, the Places He Went: A Story about Dr. Seuss-Theodor
Seuss Geisel; illus. by Kerry Maguire. 
Carolrhoda, 1994 64p (Creative Minds)
Library ed. ISBN 0-87614-823-2 
$11.96
Paper ed. ISBN 0-87614-62*7-2 
$5.95 
R Gr. 2-4
As quirky as his books, Dr. Seuss, or Theodor Seuss Geisel, provided lots of enter-
taining anecdotes and quotations for biographers. He grew up a few blocks from
a zoo and was encouraged by his mother to draw pictures of animals on scraps of
wallpaper, although his animals never resembled those at the zoo. Later, his art
218 
* THE BULLETIN
teacher was not impressed, but he maintained his own point ofview: '"That teacher
wanted me to draw the world as it is,' Ted said, 'and I wanted to draw things as I
saw them."' Though he made a good living in advertising, he wanted to write a
children's book, and he didn't let the failure of his first book, or the twenty-seven
publishers who rejected his second book, stop him. A college friend became his
editor at a twenty-eighth publisher, and And to Think That I Saw It on Mulberry
Street came out in 1937. Geisel died in 1991, forty-seven books and many awards
later. Although her style sometimes fails to reflect the liveliness of her subject,
Weidt skillfully connects events and people with Geisel's work; she draws on her
interviews with Geisel friends and experts as well as the articles cited in her bibliog-
raphy. Maguire's black-and-white illustrations are competent but stiff; the book
would have been greatly improved by samples of Dr. Seuss' own artwork. SDL
WILD, MARGARET 
Beast. 
Scholastic, 1995 
[112p]
ISBN 0-590-47158-9 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Jamie is convinced that a beast, as real as the bully who torments him at school, is
stalking him at night. Constructing increasingly elaborate rituals ("tapping the
doorknob four times, aligning his slippers exactly, and rubbing the bedpost twice")
to keep the beast at bay, even imagining that the family's garden has turned into a
wasteland, Jamie finds that fear has taken over his life. Meanwhile, another boy
dreams of being the Gamesmaster, a sinister Peter Pan who turns ordinary children's
games into nightmares. The Gamesmaster is eventually revealed to be the bully,
Brendan, who takes out the abuse he suffers from his father on the dream-children
and on Jamie. Underneath the scary dreams and illusions is a predictable story of
the bullied become bullier and of his victim's retreat into fantasy. Wild's depic-
tion of the concrete nature of childhood fears is impeccably convincing, recreating
the certainty-not dream nor fancy-that something is under the bed or outside
the window (although the fact that Brendan actually was outside Jamie's window,
gazing in at normal family life, makes the psychology somewhat distractingly con-
flicted). The therapeutic diagramming of the story isn't quite up to the power of
its images, but the menacing atmosphere evokes a reality of the imagination that
many kids will have visited. RS
WORTH, VALERIE 
All the Small Poems and Fourteen More; illus. by Natalie
Babbitt. 
Farrar, 1994 
194p
ISBN 0-374-3021111 
$18.00 
R 
Gr. 4up
The late Valerie Worth leaves this seemingly final legacy: the complete collection
of her "small poems" for children. Those familiar with Worth's previous volumes
know her precision, her quiet inventiveness, her keen eye, and will recognize
Babbitt's unassuming but adroitly complementary drawings in the corner of each
airy page. As the title suggests, this volume has fourteen new poems in addition to
those previously published: entries such as "Autumn Geese" ("One long/ Ragged/
Thread// Unravels/ The whole/ World") and "Skeletons" ("Is it the/ Curve of
their/ Breezy ribs, the/ Crook of their/ Elegant fingers ... ") are vintage Worth, if
not quite demonstrating the continual surprise of her best work. Should you buy
this book for those fourteen poems? Well, there are few enough poems in the
world of such Worth; to possess them all, in a volume of pristine completeness,
would seem both useful and singularly appropriate. DS
FEBRUARY 1995 
* 
219
WRIGHT, BETTY REN 
Out ofthe Dark. Scholastic, 1995 
[128p]
ISBN 0-590-43598-1 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Jessie is terrified to discover that the ghost in her nightmares also appears to be
materializing while she is awake. Wright's many fans will enjoy this scary story,
especially since the ghost is neither a "friend" nor an illusion, but a spirit from the
past malevolently intent upon hurting, maybe killing, Jessie. While the frights of
the haunting are expertly paced and displayed, Wright also surrounds the special
effects with the very ordinary pressures of Jessie's life: tensions between her finan-
cially hard-pressed parents, and a bitter, disabled neighbor girl who can't seem to
decide whether she wants to be friends with Jessie or not and who scoffs at her
reports of the ghost. And in her search through her grandmother's girlhood diary
to find clues about the haunting, Jessie thinks she discovers something about her
beloved Grandma that she would rather not know. Send kids sated with or scared
by the lurid paperback horror series here: the spooky cover will invite them in and
the storytelling won't let them down. RS
WYETH, SHARON DENNIS 
Always My Dad; illus. by Rall Col6n. 
Apple Soup/
Knopf, 1995 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-93447-2 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-83447-8 
$15.00 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
Stylish yet tender watercolor-and colored-pencil drawings etched with sinuous pat-
terns and crosshatching illustrate a mood piece about a young African-American
girl's longing for her father, almost always away looking for work. Once, while
staying at her grandparents' farm for the summer, the girl and her two younger
brothers do get to see their father for awhile, and she learns that although he has to
leave yet again, he always thinks of her and will come back "soon." The writing is
quiet and easy, but while it's an effectively bittersweet portrait of a father and
daughter's bond, the book hasn't enough of a story to make it seem more than a
nostalgic fragment, an impression exacerbated by the retro mood of the pictures
and idyllic rural setting. Too many questions are raised and left unanswered: we
don't know when or where the book takes place, and it is not clear whether the
girl's parents are separated by law or simply by economic hardship, but children in
whatever circumstances longing for a mostly absent father may enjoy the reassur-
ance of love presented here. RS
220 
* THE BULLETIN
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
Lenz, Millicent. Young Adult Literature and Nonprint Materials: Resources for
Selection; by Millicent Lenz and Mary Meacham. Scarecrow, 1994. 33 6 p. ISBN
0-8108-2906-1. $37.50.
For those of you with a taste for lists of lists, this one's for you. Lenz and Meacham
have compiled an imaginative, thoughtful, and broad-ranging guide to sources
bibliographic and otherwise. Seven sections, each with several-to-many subsec-
tions, include Professional Resources, Periodicals, Resources for Research, Specific
Genre and Catalog Selection Tools, Subject-Specialized Biographies (broken down
by subject), Using Books with Young Adults, and Tools for Selection of Audiovi-
sual Materials. Each individual numbered entry includes publication information,
price, print status (including whether a new edition is anticipated), and availability
in alternate forms such as CD-ROM or online; a sizable annotation outlining the
arrangement, scope, and specific strengths and weaknesses of the source follows.
Lenz and Meacham have included not just traditional sources such as best books
compendiums and teaching guides, but also less obvious sources such as adult
scholarly works on genre, review guides to music CDs, and browsers' guides to
literature. Just the book to grab if you need to know where to find a bibliography
of horse books in the morning, CD-ROM reviews at lunch, and grant-seeking
ideas in the afternoon. An index to titles, an index to subjects, and a directory of
publishers are included. DS
Hunt, Peter. The Wind in the Willows: A Fragmented Arcadia. Twayne, 1994.
(Twayne's Masterwork Series.) 14 2p. ISBN 0-8057-8816-6. $21.95. Papered.
ISBN 0-8057-8817-4. $12.95.
Hunt, renowned critic of children's literature, here offers a book-length examina-
tion of this classic English work. His compact and methodical study offers a sec-
tion on literary and historical context and then discusses the narrative patterns, the
symbolism and use of the characters, the book's underlying themes, and Grahame's
style, incorporating previous Grahame scholarship throughout and continually
probing the issue of the book's real audience. An "Approaches to Teaching" sec-
tion offers a guide useful for study as well as pedagogy; a chronology of Grahame's
life, a bibliography, and an index are included. DS
Alderson, Brian. Ezra Jack Keats: Artist and Picture-Book Maker. Pelican, 1994.
224p. ISBN 1-56554-006-9. $50.00.
Drawing heavily on the Keats collection at the University of Southern Mississippi,
this attractive and glossy-paged book offers an overview of Keats' life and work as
well as a glimpse into the collection's holdings. Alderson's British viewpoint and
strong opinions keep the text fresh but always admiring; a reminiscence by Keats'
longtime friend Martin Pope adds a personal touch; pictures by Keats, pictures of
Keats, and Keats collectibles such as fan mail and other ephemera brighten the
pages throughout. Several appendices, a list of Keats' books, endnotes (cross-refer-
enced to the catalogue numbers in the collection), and an index are included. DS
FEBRUARY 1995 
* 
221
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
African Americans: Burns; Krull
African Americans-fiction:
Chocolate; Tate; Taylor
African Americans-stories:
Chapman; Wyeth
ALPHABET BOOKS: Mahurin
Amusement parks-fiction:
Cresswell; Kehret
Arithmetic: Barry; Chorao;
Friedman
Art and artists-fiction: Klass
Art: Banyai; Dewey; Duncan;
Heifetz
Astronauts: Burns
Aviation: Burns
BEDTIME STORIES: London;
Van Laan
BIOGRAPHIES: Ada; Lawlor;
Lyttle; Weidt
Books and reading-stories: Deedy
Brothers and sisters-fiction:
Kehret; McKenzie
Brothers-fiction: Taylor
Bullies-fiction: Wild
Canada-fiction: Buffie
Cats-stories: Mahurin
Censorship-fiction: Peck
Civil Rights Movement: Duncan
Civil War-fiction: Donahue
Color: Dewey; Heifetz
CONCEPT BOOKS: Banyai;
Barry; Chorao; Friedman;
Lember
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Roberts
Cuba: Ada
Death-fiction: Buffie
Dinosaurs-stories: Grambling
Divorce-fiction: Klass
Ecology: Greene; Hamilton;
Hirschi
Ethics and values: Lawrence; Peck
FANTASY: Cresswell; Highwater;
Nimmo
Farm life-stories: Lewison;
London
Farm life-fiction: Peters
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Klass; Nimmo; Tate
Fathers and daughters-stories:
Wyeth
Fathers and sons-stories: Hinton
Fear-fiction: Wild
FOLKTALES AND
FAIRYTALES: Barry; Bruchac;
Greene; Ross; Sanfield
Food and eating: Leedy; Lember;
Penner; Pleasant Company
Food and eating-stories: Karas;
Myers; Sanfield
FUNNY STORIES: Jennings;
King-Smith
Ghosts-fiction: Buffle; Wright
Growing up-fiction: Loughery;
Mazer; Nimmo
Guidance: Aitkens
Haiti-stories: Van Laan
Hippopotamuses-stories: Black
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Donahue; McKenzie;
Neuberger; Ruby; Taylor
History, U.S.: Donahue; Duncan;
Krull; Lawlor; Penner; Pleasant
Company; Ruby
222 
* THE BULLETIN
History, world: Colman
India-folklore: Barry; Highwater
Kansas-fiction: Ruby
Korea-fiction: Neuberger
Language arts: Dewey; Heifetz;
Mahurin
Literature, American: Lyttle
Literature, children's: Weidt
Literature: Smith
LOVE STORIES: Klass; Lawrence
Mice-fiction: King-Smith
Mothers and sons-stories:
Oppenheim
MYSTERY STORIES: Janney;
Kehret; Roberts
Native Americans: Hoyt-Gold-
smith; Krull; Lawlor; Penner
Native Americans-folklore:
Bruchac; Greene; Ross
Nature study: Arnosky; Hirschi
Nutrition: Leedy
Occupations: Lakin
Orphans-stories: McCully
Photography: Lawlor
POETRY: Worth
Pregnancy, teenage: Aitkens
Prejudice: Duncan
Prejudice-fiction: Chocolate;
Taylor
Reading aloud: Greene; King-
Smith; Loughery; Mazer
Reading, easy: Neuberger; Peters;
Stevenson
Reading, reluctant: Chocolate;
Sobol; Wright
Rodeos: Hoyt-Goldsmith
Runaways-fiction: Cresswell
Sanitation: Colman
SCARY STORIES: Buffie; Wright
School: Lakin
School-fiction: Chocolate;
Goldman; Peck
SCIENCE FICTION: Goldman;
Lawrence; Sobol
Sex education: Aitkens
SHORT STORIES: Jennings;
Loughery; Mazer
Sisters-stories: Peters
Social studies: Krull
South Carolina: Krull
Story hour: Black; Bruchac;
Deedy; Grambling; Hamilton;
Karas; Lewison; Mahurin;
McCully; Myers; Ross; Sanfield;
Stevenson; Van Laan
Toys-stories: Oppenheim
Underground Railroad-fiction:
Ruby
Vacations-fiction: Roberts
Valentine's Day-fiction: Steven-
son
Wales-fiction: Lawrence
Winter-stories: Chapman
Wisconsin: Krull
Wolves: Hirschi
Women's studies: Smith
Word War II-fiction: McKenzie
WORDLESS BOOKS: Banyai
Work-stories: McCully
0600A
S"If you can't get to the U.S. Holocaust
Memorial Museum...you must read this book."
-Kirkus 
Reviews (pointer review)
*"One of the best books available for introducing the subject
to young people." -ALA Booklist (starred review)
"An extensive reading list, chronology, and index make the book
an excellent source for research. -The 
Bulletin
"A very personal approach to Holocaust history and a very
effective one." -School 
Library ournal
Age 10 and up 0316692646 (1945) $19.95 hardcover 0-316-07484-5 (10.45) $10.95 paperback
LITTLE, 
BROWN 
AND COMPANY
S* School Library Journal stars
crystal-clear voice is pleasant
to listen to ... Ehlert's brightly colored collage
illustrations are breathtaking. Invitingly innovative." -
LJ
All ages. $24.95TR (0-06-022867-9); includes hardcover book and full-length
cassette in a specially designed case. A Laura Geringer Book
* HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
S10 
East 53rd Street, New York 10022
-
ALA Booklist stars
E 
an ITjllj b7
c Touching
A Let's-Read-And-Find-Out Science® Book * Stage 1
by Carolyn Otto
Full-color pictures by Nadine Bernard Westcott
"Science writing for preschoolers
doesn't get much better than this.
Otto evokes the physicality of the
child's experience as she gives
precise, factual information about
the sense of touch. Bright, clear
illustrations show a child as he talks
about discovering shape, texture,
and temperature in everyday
things .... Another excellent
concept book in the Let's-Read-
And-Find-Out Science series."
-Booklist
Ages 3-6. $15.00TR (0-06-023324-9)
$14.89LB (0-06-023325-7)
$4.95PB (0-06-445125-9)
IOther 
-
Science 
Bo
FROM TADPOLE TO FROG
Stage 1
by Wendy Pfeffer
Full-color pictures by Holly Keller
Ages 3-6. $15.00TR (0-06-023044-4)
$14.89LB (0-06-023117-3)
$4.95PB (0-06-445123-2)
ELEPHANT FAMILIES
Stage 2
by Arthur Dorros
Full-color pictures by the author
Ages 5-9. $15.00TR (0-06-022948-9)
$14.89LB (0-06-022949-7)
$4.95PB (0-06-445122-4)
WHAT LIVES IN A SHELL?
Stage 1
by Kathleen Weidner Zoehfeld
Full-color pictures by Helen K. Davie
Ages 3-6. $15.00TR (0-06-022998-5)
$14.89LB (0-06-022999-3)
$4.95PB (0-06-445124-0)
OIL SPILL!
Stage 2
by Melvin Berger
Full-color pictures by Paul Mirocha
Ages 5-9. $15.00TR (0-06-022909-8)
$14.89LB (0-06-022912-8)
$4.95PB (0-06-445121-6)
WHY DO LEAVES CHANGE COLOR?
Stage 2
by Betsy Maestro * Full-color pictures by Loretta Krupinski
Ages 5-9. $15.00TR (0-06-022873-3); $14.89LB (0-06-022874-1); $4.95PB (0-06-445126-7)
i HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
10 East 53rd St., New York 10022
*'This anthology... is a meta
that constitute this nation. . ..
also thought-provoking." -starr
CELEBRATE AMERI
Edited by
Published in ass
National Museum of America
All ages * Tr.:1-56282-664-6 $18
S". .. Mo's profound reaction to a dinner of cheese souffle and
string beans [is to]... transform himself into increasingly mon-
strous monsters as he eats his way through his home and neigh-
borhood .. . Humor pure and simple, an entertainment that
vents the imagination wholesale. Dig in."-pointer, Kirkus Revews
THE BOY WHO ATE AROUND
Written and illustrated by Henrik Drescher
Ages 4-8 
Tr.: 0-7868-0014-3 $14.95 * Lib.:0-7868-2011-X $14.89
Illustrations from top: Guests © 1994 by Ellen Thompson; Wish You Were
Here © 1994 by Frank Gargiulo; Celebrate America © 1994 by Malcah Zeldis;
The Boy Who Ate Around © 1994 by Henrik Drescher.
phor for the collective attributes
Both aesthetically rewarding and
d, Sdho Library Journal
CA: In Poetry and Art
Nora Panzer
ociation with the
n Art, Smithsonian Institution
.95 * Lib.: 1-56282-665-4 $18.89
S
HYPERION BOOKS FOR CHILDREN
114 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10011
* 'The departure of [his best friend] Brady sets the tone for a year
full of changes for [Jackson], as his mother remarries, he acquires
stepsisters, he falls in love. ... 
Shoup demonstrates a rare under-
standing of the pivotal role friendship plays in the lives of young
adults-or anyone." -starred, 
Bulletin of the Centerfor Chidren's Books
WISH YOU WERE HERE
By Barbara Shoup
Ages 12andup * Tr.: 0-7868-0028-3 $16.95
is parents that the guests should
rvest feast are rebuked, Moss runs
Dorris's writing is elegant, full of
3hors." -School Library Journal
of 1994-Book Links
ESTS
ael Dorris
$13.95 * Lib.: 0-7868-2036-5 $13.89
r
SScholastic Inc., 555 Broadway, New York, NY
41*
I;l
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.S.A.
RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED
FOCUS: Five Women Photographers
by Sylvia Wolf
"From its dynamic title and eerie cover image to its clear-eyed prose,
Wolf's study of five photographers and their medium is a model of
understated originality....Art appreciation of this calibre should not
be missed by interested readers of either sex." Publishers Weekly
Ages 9 and Up, $18.95, ISBN 0-8075-2531-6
Albert Whitman & Company
6340 Oakton Street, Morton Grove, Illinois 60053-2723
.
A A
,· 
~831
i 
di
SECOND CLASS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
* Starred, Booklist
* Starred, Publishers Weekly
* Pointer, Kirkus Reviews
Julia Margaret Cameron,
Margaret Bourke-White,
Flor Garduflo, Sandy Skoglund,
Lorna Simpson
.0, 
1 0
4-.
<» * 
<t
r 
* 
* 
.... 
'4
