T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by Johns Hopkins University Press
November 2014
Vol. 68   No. 3
JHU Press Journals…
…break new ground 
…win awards 
…advance scholarship
The Johns Hopkins University Press is 
not just a publisher. We’re your partner in 
taking your journal beyond paper. JHUP 
has published scholarly journals for more 
than 130 years and combines a tradition 
of accomplishment with innovating 
publishing and marketing strategies. Our 
stewardship of original ideas and research 
since 1878 puts us at the forefront of 
publication and association management. 
Our staff simply helps you make ideas 
available to a world wide audience. We work 
with you to develop an online presence, 
publicize your work through Facebook 
and Twitter, share your message through a 
specialized list serv, and much more.
We invite you to join us as we continue to 
chart a vibrant new course in publishing. 
Please visit www.press.jhu.edu/journals 
for more information.
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
November 2014
Vol. 68 No. 3
141  the BIg PICture
 
 The Key That Swallowed Joey Pigza  by Jack Gantos
142  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed TiTles include:
144 • Sam & Dave Dig a Hole  by Mac Barnett; illus. by Jon Klassen
152 • The Farmer and the Clown  illus. by Marla Frazee
161 • Glory O’Brien’s History of the Future  by A. S. King
166 • How It Went Down  by Kekla Magoon
168 •  Children Growing Up with War  written and illus. with photographs by 
Jenny Matthews
184  ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons
185  suBjeCt And use Index
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R Recommended.
Ad Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor (KQG)
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Thaddeus Andracki, Reviewer (TA)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
Alaine Martaus, Reviewer (AM)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Melissa Albarran, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print $103.00 or electronic $115.00; combined print & electronic $144.00; 
multiple institutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, 
$55.00; students, $20.00. In countries other than the United States, add $17.60 per subscription for 
postage; subscribers in Canada and Mexico add $13.75. Single copy rate: $11.00. Volumes available 
in microfilm from ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes avail-
able in microfiche from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription 
checks should be made payable to Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address 
should provide both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin 
of the Center for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. 
Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 
2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 410-
516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/journals/
advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2014 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image from The Key That Swallowed Joey Pigza copyright ©2014 by Lane Smith and used by 
permission of Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
November 2014 • 141
the BIg PICture
The Key That Swallowed Joey Pigza
by Jack Gantos
It’s always bittersweet to see the finale of a beloved series, especially when it means 
saying goodbye to a captivating character. So it is with this fifth book featuring the 
irrepressible Joey Pigza (Joey Pigza Swallowed the Key, BCCB 11/98, etc.), which is 
announced as his final title, but author Gantos has given his hero a truly satisfying, 
genuinely crowning valedictory.
After various family upheavals, Joey is back in his old house with his 
mother (now split from his father) and his beloved baby brother, Carter Junior. Or 
at least he was living with his mother, until her depression returns and she fearfully 
checks herself into the hospital to protect the baby (“I don’t want to do to him what 
I did to you,” she heartbreakingly tells Joey). Joey dives into action (his natural state 
anyway) and picks up the household reins, taking care of Carter Junior at first on 
his own and then with the help of his friend Olivia, “the meanest blind girl in the 
world.” After Joey’s father shows up and makes a foiled attempt to kidnap Carter 
Junior, Joey, in a neat callback to the first title in the series, finds the dropped key 
to his father’s apartment and uses it to explore the life his father is hoping to create 
anew—and to face off with his father about the life he can’t leave behind. 
In the frenetic Joey Pigza books, Gantos remains elementary school’s 
answer to Hunter S. Thompson, and as usual he makes the life of a boy with a lot 
of problems into a pell-mell adventure without a jot of sententiousness and with 
a good solid heart. More than most multiple-title protagonists, Joey has genuinely 
changed and grown, and that trajectory is made vividly clear in the text as Joey wist-
fully longs for the days when he was the person with the problems, not the person 
solving them: “Now I had to be the mature Joey, the think-before-you-speak Joey, the 
better-than-Dad Joey, the hold-the-fort-for-Mom Joey, the keep-the-baby-safe Joey, 
the answer-man-with-a-plan Joey.” That Joey, however, is still utterly irresistible, and 
now he gets to be absolutely victorious as well, in a showdown with his irresponsible 
father that many kids will yearn to emulate (when his father commands, “Show 
me some respect—I’m your dad,” Joey snaps back, “Earn some”). He understands 
that he now has more ability to set limits than his father does, and when his dad 
seeks to take Carter Junior and start anew, leaving the rest of the family behind, 
Joey insists on family reunion or nothing: “Right now, I’m the man of the house 
and my rule number one for you is, no family, then no baby.” That may not be a 
family dynamic or solution recommended in any counseling textbook, but it’s got 
a realistic pragmatism about what functionality means in many households, and it 
does indeed restore some to Joey’s when his parents carefully, tentatively reunite. 
142 • The bulleTiN
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
Even kids whose own experience is more orthodox will recognize that 
this conclusion counts as success for the Pigzas and a triumphant coming into his 
own for Joey, the boy whose unstoppable energy has become a force for good. Fans 
who’ve followed Joey’s chronicles will regret the series’ ending, but the inimitable 
Joey will live on indelibly in memory and in new generations of readings. (See p. 
154 for publication information.)
 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor 
AbAwi, AtiA The Secret Sky. Philomel, 2014 [320p]
ISBN 978-0-399-16078-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Knowing that her role in her small Afghan village will change now that she’s coming 
into womanhood, Fatima, a girl of the Hazara tribe, is desperate to hold onto the 
freedom of childhood. When Sami, a Pashtun boy who was once her best friend 
and constant companion, returns early from a failed stint at a madrassa (an Islamic 
religious school), the two fall into their old routine of meeting in the local woods 
and spending their days together. Such companionship, however, is viewed as un-
forgivably sexual by the village, and when Sami’s cousin Rashid reveals their secret, 
the pair is forced to flee from parents who would see them beaten and married off 
separately (custom forbids their marrying each other) as soon as possible. Obsessed 
with seeing them punished, Rashid reports their activity to a local warlord loosely 
associated with the Taliban, triggering a nightmare of violence that horrifies even 
Rashid, as Fatima’s baby sister is killed and Sami’s family’s land is violated as the 
warlord hunts the pair down. The romance here, while sweet and tender, serves 
mostly as a catalyst to explore the larger cultural influences and conflicts that make 
up Afghanistan. Characters therefore occasionally seem more like token represen-
tations of various beliefs and traditions (e.g., a friend’s grandmother insists that 
Fatima learn to read, while Rashid spouts off Taliban rhetoric), but the collective 
whole makes for a fascinating, if disturbing, examination of what Abawi calls in 
her author’s note a “traditionally conservative society” faced with globalization and 
modernity. Despite the violence and brutality they encounter, Sami and Fatima 
make it out alive and together, providing a bit of hope in an otherwise bleak tale 
A glossary is included.  KQG
November 2014 • 143
Akins, kAren Loop. St. Martin’s Griffin, 2014 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-250-03098-6 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-250-03099-3 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-10
In the twenty-third century, a select few have the genetic ability to travel through 
time. These “Shifters” are tightly controlled by the government, trained in special 
schools, and sent on time-travel missions by the upper elite. Bree is using her Shift-
ing midterm, a trip to the twenty-first century, as an opportunity to gain more than 
just a good grade in history; an offer from a shady conman to deliver contraband 
back in time might just be able to pay the medical bills for her comatose mother. 
The mission goes awry, however, and Bree ends up accidentally bringing back 
twenty-first-century resident Finn, who insists that he knows a future version of 
Bree, a version who made him promise to protect her, though from what he can’t 
say. Akins fully embraces the mind-bending complications inherent to time-travel 
plots, creating a world in which time travel is possible but not entirely understood 
and its rules are more mere guesses than scientific fact. This makes any implausibility 
easier for the reader to swallow and also lends a breezy casualness to the premise that 
suits Bree’s narrative voice, an amusing mix of snark, befuddlement, and dogged 
determination. Multiple threads are tied up with infodumps in the final pages, but 
these are balanced out nicely with wicked chase scenes, including a scaling of the 
Washington Monument. Readers might want to double back a few times to fully 
realize the sequence of events, but it’s a return trip worth taking.  KQG 
AslAn, Austin The Islands at the End of the World. Lamb, 2014 358p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-99145-5 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74402-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-37421-7 $10.99   
Ad Gr. 8-10
Leilani loves her Hawaiian life of surf and sand, but all that goes by the wayside 
when events overtake the world and begin to erode civilization. Electronics sud-
denly don’t work, human society deteriorates with shocking speed, and the rest 
of the world seems even worse off than Hawaii, where Leilani and her father are 
focused on trying to get back to the island where the rest of her family awaits. In 
the meantime, Leilani, who has epilepsy, is running low on her medication, and her 
seizures are rough, knocking her out for precious days that she and her dad need to 
pursue whatever unlikely travel options open up for them. There is a sweetness to 
the strong bond that father and daughter form; while they clearly loved each other 
before, there is nothing like fighting against the whole world as a united duo to 
get home to really cement a connection. Unfortunately, the alien invasion/nuclear 
meltdown/environmental catastrophe triple event is a lot of end of the world to un-
pack, especially as some of it is mixed up with religious/spiritual hints that Leilani’s 
epilepsy might help her be part of a global solution. Nevertheless, the Hawaiian 
setting is elegantly and lovingly developed—it is abundantly clear that Aslan has 
a deep respect for the cultural and geographical features of Hawaii—and there’s 
some ironic pleasure in viewing the end of the world from a seeming paradise.  AS 
144 • The bulleTiN
bAcigAlupi, pAolo The Doubt Factory. Little, 2014 [496p]
ISBN 978-0-316-22075-0 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
This politically charged thriller explores the issue of public information through 
the character of Alix, a naïve teen who never gave much thought to how her dad 
earned his riches until she is kidnapped by Moses. Moses and his gang, a ragtag 
group of brilliant and culturally savvy teens, seek to reveal the truths that corrupt 
companies are hiding about their drugs. Each teen has been personally impacted, 
and the group is hoping that a smart protest will draw attention to the issues. The 
activist group balances pranks, capers, and espionage to good effect; although they 
are young, they manage to gather quite a bit of intel and wake up the world, at least 
in small ways. While the romance between Moses and Alix seems more plausible 
as Stockholm syndrome, given his stalking and kidnapping her, Alix herself is a 
great protagonist, as she adapts quickly to new information thrown at her while 
weighing it carefully with her familial obligations. The book’s snappy pace, caper 
set-up, and sharp political perspective easily save the (novel’s) day and will bring 
in readers of thoughtful high action.  AS
bArnett, MAc Sam & Dave Dig a Hole; illus. by Jon Klassen. Candlewick, 
2014 40p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6229-5 $16.99   
R 5-8 yrs
Accompanied by their faithful pooch, Sam and Dave dig a hole, declaring “We 
won’t stop digging until we find something spectacular.” Unfortunately, their de-
termined excavations don’t unearth anything at all, let alone anything spectacular, 
and finally they fall asleep at the bottom of their hole. Meanwhile, the dog digs a 
little further after a bone, opening up a hole through which the boys plummet down 
and down and land with a thump at the place where they started—or is it? The 
deliberately poker-faced, almost banal flatness of the text (“‘I am tired. I cannot dig 
anymore.’ ‘I am tired too,’ said Dave”) isn’t the joke here but the straight man to 
the ironic humor of the art (the boys’ elaborate subterranean efforts carefully lead 
them just past several increasingly huge diamonds). Additionally, the narrative’s 
matter-of-factness serves as a comic contrast to the weirdness of the events and 
the slyly surreal ending, where only the dog seems to notice the telling differences 
(green collars, flowers, and fruit instead of red, a duck weathervane instead of a 
chicken) between their starting and finishing places. Klassen’s colored pencil and 
digital art has an orderly geometry, especially with the sharp vertical and angles of 
the hole, that parallels the text’s tidy style, but soft textures, the increasing mud-
diness of the boys, and the dog’s subtly comic expressions keep things engaging 
as well as stylish. Kids will enjoy playing “spot the differences” once they figure 
out the joke; don’t skip over the half-title page featuring the little red apple tree, 
which subtly cues the audience to notice its transformation into a pear tree. Young 
excavators will appreciate this surreal modernization of the old notion of digging 
all the way to China.  DS
November 2014 • 145
behA, eileen The Secrets of Eastcliff-by-the-Sea: The Story of Annaliese Easter-
ling & Throckmorton, Her Simply Remarkable Sock Monkey; illus. by Sarah Jane 
Wright. Beach Lane/Simon, 2014 280p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-9840-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-9842-6 $10.99   
Ad Gr. 4-6
Throckmorton S. Monkey, a stuffed sock monkey, belongs to nine-year-old Annal-
iese Easterling and her family. When Annaliese’s great-grandmother hosts a ninetieth 
birthday ball for all the sock monkeys she has made, Throckmorton is beside himself 
with glee. Great-Grandmama has more in store than just a birthday celebration, 
however: she helps Annaliese make a sock monkey (complete with a diamond-stuffed 
red felt heart inserted into its innards) for Annaliese’s mother, Olivia, who left the 
family when Annaliese was a baby, while simultaneously inviting Olivia to attend 
the party as the singer for a hired band. Meanwhile, a sock monkey thief (who ap-
parently believes all the sock monkeys have diamonds hidden in them) is menacing 
the toy population. Throckmorton is an engaging narrator, and budding mystery 
lovers may enjoy piecing together the story of Olivia’s return and also figuring out 
the identity of the thief. Unfortunately, though, the pacing lags, the sock monkey 
angle is sometimes gimmicky, and the characters are underdeveloped. Still, youthful 
fans of cozy manor house mysteries and those who believe their stuffed animals 
can come to life when unattended may be an appreciative audience. Understated 
and fluid monochromatic illustrations add atmosphere.  JH
betts, A. J. Zac and Mia. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2014 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-544-33164-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
The hospital is old hat for Zac, who’s recovering from a bone marrow transplant 
after long treatment for leukemia. The experience is new for his hospital neighbor 
across the wall, Mia, who’s got osteosarcoma in her ankle, and who’s devastated 
(despite the excellent outlook for her disease). As the only two teenagers in the 
adult unit, the two soon bond, so Zac is regretful when he’s discharged without 
being able to tell her goodbye and disappointed when he can’t get in touch with 
her after he goes home to the family farm. Mia, however, is desperately fleeing the 
reality she can’t face after her cancer results in an unexpected amputation, and on 
her careening runaway journey she unexpectedly finds sanctuary at Zac’s home. The 
shadow of The Fault in Our Stars lies over any such plot, but Australian author Betts 
takes his own road here, especially in panicky, pugilistic Mia, who has clung to her 
physical charms as her only power and sees herself now as irrevocably disfigured 
and therefore valueless. Zac and Mia each narrate portions of the book, allowing 
readers to get a glimpse at the thoughts behind the faces they present to the world 
and creating some interesting suspense and irony when one voice goes silent to 
allow the other to speak. There’s complexity in their sometimes thorny relationship 
that makes this compelling as more than just a romance, but their connection is 
ultimately satisfyingly heartfelt. Hand this to readers looking for a love story with 
shadows but not inevitable doom.  DS
146 • The bulleTiN
boorMAn, kAte A. Winterkill. Amulet/Abrams, 2014 [352p]
ISBN 978-1-4197-1235-7 $17.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-10
Emmeline isn’t much for following rules, mostly because she’s not convinced they 
should even apply to her. Since she is already considered Stained because of her 
grandmother’s supposed meretricious acts as an adulterer, disobedience is a risky 
strategy. Yet the threat of being killed or left for the mysterious, supernatural forces 
outside the village gates isn’t sufficient to discourage Emmeline from eyeing the 
boy of her choice, to convince her to marry a religious leader who has selected 
her, or to stop her from meddling into the history of the village, which may be all 
lies. The interactions with both men (the one Emmeline fancies and the one who 
picked her) are mostly distractions from the core of the novel, Emmeline’s quest 
for truth in a world that seems built on fabrications and outright, vicious lies. Her 
damaged foot, threats against her life, and pleadings from those around her don’t 
slow her as she firmly decides that knowing horrible things is far superior to living 
a shadowed, obedient life. Readers who have found themselves battling for their 
own versions of righteous truth-seeking will cheer Emmeline’s grit, even while they 
see that the box she is opening, once unsealed, will change far more than her own 
life, and that there is no guarantee it will all be for the better.  AS
bosch, pseudonyMous Bad Magic; illus. by Gilbert Ford.  Little, 2014 393p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-32038-2 $17.00
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-32040-5 $9.99   
Ad Gr. 4-6
Clay hates magic, blaming it for the disappearance of his magician older brother, and 
his opinion only gets worse after a phrase he writes in his journal, “Magic sucks,” 
mysteriously appears in giant letters on a school wall. Before he can find out what 
really happened, Clay is whisked off to Earth Ranch, a camp for bad kids, and he’s 
far too busy simply trying to survive there to worry overmuch about being framed 
for graffiti. The camp offers live volcanoes, llamas, libraries that may or may not 
hold ghosts and grimoires, and a bizarre number of overlaps with The Tempest, which 
Clay had conveniently read just before camp. The other campers, who may possibly 
all be hired actors, are genuinely funny and memorable: they all play roles in Clay’s 
summer of self-discovery but are also well developed on their own. Unfortunately, 
the frequent author asides, jokes, arch commentary, and footnotes (Snicket style) 
are overdone to the point of being sometimes frustrating, and they distract from 
the core story. In addition, the mystery references are so obscure, particularly for 
non-Shakespeare buffs (which, given the target audience age, is likely most of the 
readership) that even astute readers won’t be able to sort out the puzzle before Clay 
does. Nevertheless, Clay is so appealing and he so deserves a break that folks may 
find themselves checking back in to make sure he’s okay in the remaining two books 
of this anticipated trilogy. Full-page black and white illustrations have an amiable 
and slightly cartoonish vigor that helps ground the story.  AS
boyd, lizi Flashlight; written and illus. by Lizi Boyd. Chronicle, 2014 34p
ISBN 978-1-4521-1894-9 $15.99   
Ad 3-5 yrs
In this wordless picture book, a child camping at night in a forest uses a flashlight 
to explore the flora and fauna of the area; when he trips over a rock and drops the 
flashlight, the animals take their turn with the light, highlighting various parts of 
November 2014 • 147
the child and eventually helping him find his way to his tent. Trees, plants, animals, 
the tent, and the child are outlined and detailed in a uniform light gray against the 
black backgrounds; more luminous plants and animals (birch trees, firefly wings) 
and the full moon are rendered in white while small details such as leaves and a 
luna moth are colored in soft tones. Within the light’s triangular beam, patches 
of landscape and various animals also appear in color. There really isn’t much of 
a story here, and the spreads sometimes suffer from inconsistency, especially in 
the coloring of elements in shadow. There’s a childlike charm to Boyd’s delicately 
detailed gouache paintings (printed on matte paper), though, and the game of 
following the flashlight and picking out the various animals as they move around 
from page to page (sometimes appearing in the light and sometimes in the dark) 
is an engaging activity for kids. Readers who are captivated by a flashlight’s power 
but who are not quite ready for Snicket and Klassen’s spectacular The Dark (BCCB 
6/13) may find this a thought-provoking introduction to the light and shadows, 
and it would be a natural choice for a bedtime story hour or a handy precursor to 
a nighttime walk.  JH
bryAnt, Jen The Right Word: Roget and His Thesaurus; illus. by Melissa 
Sweet. Eerdmans, 2014 [42p]
ISBN 978-0-8028-5385-1 $17.50
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-4
Most kids will encounter a thesaurus at sometime in their education, and Bryant 
encourages a sense of wonder about the kind of guy who would dream up such a 
tome. A shy nature and early childhood domestic instability seem to have pushed 
young Peter Roget toward angling for control in his life, which manifested in a 
penchant for list-making. By the age of twenty-six in 1805, the polymath had 
already cranked out a debut version of what would become his namesake work, 
but ordering all the ideas ever conceived was still a sideline activity, pursued in mo-
ments when he wasn’t working as a physician or dabbling as a naturalist. Enjoying 
an unusually long lifespan, he was able to buckle down late in life to create his 
famed thesaurus (which, Bryant notes in an afterword, was organized thematically 
rather than alphabetically). Bryant presents a compassionate view of Roget’s psyche, 
highlighting eccentricity rather than borderline lunacy, but implying nonetheless 
that it takes unusual, if not abnormal, audacity and drive to embark on such a 
venture. Sweet has a positive field day mining Roget’s notebooks and his 1852 
first edition Thesaurus for typefaces and design elements to incorporate into her 
drawings and collages, with myriad visual temptations luring viewers into a fine 
browsing experience, and introducing them to the organization of words by idea 
that Roget employed. Brief bibliographies, quotation sources, a timeline, and notes 
from Bryant and Sweet are included.  EB
cArnesi, MônicA Sleepover with Beatrice & Bear; written and illus. by Monica 
Carnesi. Paulsen/Penguin, 2014 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-399-25667-7 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-6 yrs
Beatrice the bunny and her buddy, Bear, have a great spring, summer, and fall 
together, but when winter comes, Beatrice discovers that bears hibernate. Beatrice 
envisions hibernation as a fun-filled sleepover for her and Bear to share, so she’s 
148 • The bulleTiN
hugely disappointed when Bear instantly falls asleep (“Winter is ruined!” she cries). 
However, it occurs to her that Bear has never properly experienced the joys of win-
ter activities, so as he hibernates she sets out to document it all for him—making 
“snowbears,” ice skating, creating bunny angels in the snow, and so forth—in a 
scrapbook. Come spring, Beatrice shares her work with Bear, who appreciates her 
effort: “It was the perfect gift to read together again and again.” Gentle humor and 
pithy writing keep this warm friendship story from becoming too sticky-sweet. The 
artwork, done in India ink, watercolor, and colored pencil, has a cheerful vibrancy 
both in its vividly seasonal palettes and buoyant textures. Visual details—Beatrice 
tries a teal sleep mask, for example, during her hibernation attempt and wears scarlet 
water wings when the pair goes swimming in summer—are also sure to amuse. This 
would work well as part of a unit or storytime on winter or hibernation, or as simply 
an affectionate portrait of a friendship that accommodates personal differences.  JH
cohn, Ariel The Zoo Box; illus. by Aron Nels Steinke. First Second, 2014 48p
ISBN 978-1-62672-052-7 $17.99   
R Gr. 1-3
In this graphic-novel/picture-book hybrid, two siblings open a forbidden box and 
must must use courage and ingenuity to escape what comes out of the package. 
Erika and Patrick really should know better, but who can resist a zebra-striped box 
when you are home alone? What emerges changes their whole world, as multi-
tudes of animals escape and all head in the same direction. The kiddos hope their 
animal costumes will keep them camouflaged as they follow, and they all end up 
at a zoo where humans are the captives. Of course the kids are discovered, but all 
ends well before the parents find out. While the obvious comparisons with Jumanji 
will perhaps leave this book feeling a bit less inspired, there is still a great deal of 
creativity and originality brought to both the illustrations and the story itself. The 
crisp panels and left-to-right visual cues will help even the earliest readers feel 
comfortable diving into graphic novels, and the vocabulary is mostly simple, and 
it’s effectively contextualized when not. There isn’t much variation in the faces of 
the protagonists, but the visual representation of the sometimes creepy, sometimes 
funny animal zookeepers and attendees are nuanced and intriguing. Adult readers 
may have a couple of questions about unsupervised children or how the hatbox 
holds scores of animals, but the target audience will likely not spend an instant on 
either of those concerns and just enjoy the outrageous adventure.  AS
deMetrios, heAther Exquisite Captive. Balzer + Bray/HarperCollins, 
2014 [480p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-231856-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-231858-9 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
A violent coup usurps the power of the ruling jinni class, and teenaged Nalia is 
the only surviving member of the powerful Ghan Aisouri race. Despite her ability 
to wield all four of the elements, Nalia is unable to help herself as she’s sold into 
the slave trade on Earth and forced to grant wishes for Malek, a sadistic sociopath 
and wealthy playboy. Back in Nalia’s homeland, Arjinna, the fighting continues 
with the brutal Ifrit coming into power by dark magic; now the leader of a second 
rebellion, one to restore peace, has come to Nalia looking for help. Before she can 
do anything, however, Nalia has to pry herself free from Malek, a task made more 
November 2014 • 149
difficult by her possible romantic feelings for him, her definite romantic feelings for 
Raif, the rebellion leader, and the presence of a jinni-eating ghoul sent by the Ifrit 
to dispose of her. The prose is overly expository when it comes to world-building 
and too flowery when it comes to emotions, providing obstacles for both fantasy 
and romance fans. The story remains compelling, however, with the ethical dilem-
mas and brutal realties of the Arjinnan crisis given as much heed as the swoony 
romance between Nalia and Raif and the disturbing but fascinating push and pull 
between Nalia and Malek. A final wish by Malek keeps all players in the game for 
a sequel, so readers intrigued by Nalia’s quest for freedom may wish to follow her 
in the next installment.  KQG 
denenberg, bArry Ali: An American Champion. Simon, 2014 81p illus. 
with photographs
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-0141-8 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-0143-2 $10.99   
Ad Gr. 4-7
Noting that “Muhammad Ali’s story in the popular culture . . . has been sanitized 
and transformed into something easily digestible and unthreatening,” Denenberg 
attempts to retell the story through a blend of documentary photographs and fiction-
alized media pieces that will offer readers a glimpse of what contemporaries would 
have followed in the news. The material covered here is standard in traditional Ali 
biographies—the rhymed trash talk designed to entertain his audience and rattle 
his opponents, his troubled affiliation with the Nation of Islam, his adamant refusal 
to be drafted during the Vietnam War (“Man, I ain’t got no quarrel with them 
Vietcong”), and the brutal comeback fights against Ken Norton, Joe Frazier, and 
George Foreman. However, the fictionalized format does little to evoke immediacy, 
since so many of the “articles” simply read like standard chapters arranged under 
a headline. Moreover, efforts to incorporate sections of historical background oc-
casionally fracture the chronological order of events. Scrapbook-style layout and 
plentiful illustrations will draw browsers, though, and an excellent timeline that 
contextualizes personal events into the broader culture could be a boon to report 
writers. An extensive bibliography of adult materials is also included.  EB
denise, AnikA Baking Day at Grandma’s; illus. by Christopher Denise. Philomel, 
2014 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-399-24244-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 3-6 yrs 
Three little bear cubs trek through the winter snow to their grandma’s house, where 
they bake together. The bears enjoy licking the spoon, dancing to a phonograph 
record while they wait for their cake to bake, and cutting, frosting, and wrapping 
the finished product for holiday gift-giving. As they walk home in the moonlight, 
they happily contemplate a return visit soon. The lively rhyming text (“Flip the 
pan, and out it pops!/ Cut in squares and frost the tops”) sets a cheery tone for this 
cozy chronicle, and kids will quickly join in on the simple but catchy refrain: “It’s 
baking day! It’s baking day! It’s baking day at Grandma’s!” Christopher Denise’s 
illustrations, which have a saturated, painterly look despite their digital rendering, 
are the real star here, however. The ebullient ursines, with their oversize snouts and 
teddy-bear-like fur, are warm and cuddly and brimming with character, especially 
as they march through Grandma’s kitchen wielding their baking tools (one cub 
150 • The bulleTiN
amusingly carries in the mixing bowl upside-down on his head). Warm tones, soft 
edges, and the golden glow of sunlight filtering through the windows add to the 
snugness. This would make a satisfying partner to Elliott’s equally comfy Knitty 
Kitty (BCCB 8/08, also illustrated by Christopher Denise); a splendid addition to 
a storytime centered around bears, baking, or gift-giving; or a delicious time-filler 
while waiting on a batch of cookies to finish baking.  JH
doctorow, cory In Real Life; illus. by Jen Wang. First Second, 2014 175p
ISBN 978-1-59643-658-9 $17.99   
R Gr. 7-10
Anda is thrilled when she’s invited to join a huge online game called Coarsegold. 
At first wandering for a while, she is then sucked into a situation where she kills 
off the avatars of farmers (characters who are paid real money, albeit very little, to 
gather items for other players). It initially feels good to be powerful in ways she can 
never be in person, until she befriends one of the farmers and learns he is a real guy 
in China who is being severely exploited. Suddenly, the consequences of gaming, 
and the people who participate around the world, become much more complex to 
Anda, even if she doesn’t yet fully comprehend the nuances and economic machi-
nations. Although the core story was originally published in 2004 (on Salon.com), 
every element is still relevant, and the addition of Wong’s stunning artwork adds a 
great deal. Lush, hyper-saturated colors of the game environment contrast elegantly 
with the muted but complementary shades used to represent the real world. Free 
and loose formatting allows for striking full-page emphasis or meandering visual 
cues that reflect the text, but there is enough paneling to keep readers easily follow-
ing the story. An educational introduction offers further insight into gaming and 
the economies and political implications behind them; if readers take the time to 
actually delve into it, their experience of Anda’s journey will be richer for it.  AS
duffy, chris, ed. Above the Dreamless Dead: World War I in Poetry and Comics; 
illus. by Hannah Berry, Stephen R. Bissette, Eddie Campbell, et al. First Second, 
2014 144p
ISBN 978-1-62672-065-7 $24.99   
R* Gr. 9 up 
As the World War I centennial bandwagon pulls into town, laden with a fresh 
crop of literary tie-ins, readers would do well to revisit the Trench Poets, whose 
lacerating irony and bleak humor grappled with the obscenity of the barbed wire 
and gas-infused new age of battle in which they served. Bringing the work of Sieg-
fried Sassoon, Wilfred Owen, and their peers to a new audience with vivid visual 
interpretations are over a score of comic-book artists (many of whom might be 
familiar to mature graphic-novel readers) who interpret and sometimes expand on 
the original work. Poems are organized simply into three sections: “Call to War,” 
“In the Trenches,” and “The Aftermath.” Artistic styles range from George Pratt’s 
smudgy, nightmarish visualization of Owen’s “Greater Love”; to Hannah Berry’s 
more photorealistic backstory for Wilfred Gibson’s “The Question”; to Carol 
Tyler’s simple, almost retro-like extrapolation of Robert Graves’s “Two Fusiliers.” 
Hunt Emerson supplies what might ironically be called comic relief with his ribald 
cartooning of several soldier songs that skewer trench life, superior officers, and 
the regretted enlistment of many soldiers. Back matter includes brief bios of the 
featured poets and comics creators, as well as commentary (often with term defini-
tions) on each poem, highlighting the creators’ approaches to their assigned work. 
November 2014 • 151
This should encourage high school English and history teachers to supplement or 
even toss the textbook guide and, more importantly, impel young adults to reflect 
on war with poetry in one hand and a newspaper in the other.  EB
ehrlich, esther Nest. Lamb, 2014 [336p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-38608-1 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-38607-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7
Eleven-year-old Naomi, known as Chirp, loves living on Cape Cod and being 
close to its attendant bird population. When her mother’s symptoms turn out to 
be multiple sclerosis, however, the news casts a pall over the family, and Chirp 
feels left behind as her older sister moves into teenagerhood and her psychiatrist 
father focuses his attention on his wife, a former dancer deeply depressed at her 
impairment. As her mother’s depression leads to hospitalization and further distress 
for the family, Chirp grows closer to her classmate and neighbor Joey, who has his 
own family problems; when new tragedy strikes her family, it’s to Joey that Chirp 
turns. Ehrlich vividly evokes the details of her 1972 setting with copious details 
about music and other media, while Chirp’s travails will ring true to readers of any 
era. Chirp’s family—the loving but mansplaining doctor dad, the mother whose 
exuberance hides fragility, the sister in teenage rebellion—is satisfyingly drawn, and 
Joey, with strong hints about his abusive family and subtler ones about his OCD, 
is portrayed with effective spareness. There are some echoes here of Ruth White’s 
Memories of Summer (BCCB 9/00), and readers who appreciated that period tale 
of a family holding itself together in the face of adversity will sympathize with 
Chirp’s desperation.  DS
elliott, dAvid This Orq. (he cave boy.); illus. by Lori Nichols. Boyds Mills, 
2014 32p
ISBN 978-1-62091-521-9 $15.95   
R 4-6 yrs
Poor Orq the cave boy; like modern kids, he wants a pet, but his mother won’t let 
him keep Woma, Orq’s beloved woolly mammoth (“Woma shed. Woma smell. 
Woma not house-trained”). Even Orq’s plans to teach Woma adorable tricks fails, 
but when a sabertooth tiger sets her sights on Orq, Woma’s defense of him endears 
the mammoth to Orq’s mom and wins her a home. This plot will be deeply familiar 
to fans of Sauer’s Me Want Pet! (BCCB 4/12), and while that book is overall a 
snappier package, Elliot has a nice line in dry humor and rhythmic telegrammatic 
prose. The illustrations combine soft, pencil draftwork and hatching with tempered 
touches of digital color, while the figures are tightly and precisely, if cartoonishly, 
composed against creamy matte backgrounds. Audiences will be amused by this 
in its own right, and it could stimulate some interesting compare-and-contrast 
discussion with Sauer’s title.  DS
feiffer, Jules Rupert Can Dance; written and illus. by Jules Feiffer. di Capua/
Farrar, 2014 32p
ISBN 978-0-374-36363-5 $17.95   
Ad 5-7 yrs
Orange marmalade cat Rupert stealthily picks up some dance moves from his 
young owner, Mandy, but only practices when she isn’t around to see him—until 
152 • The bulleTiN
the night that she wakes up and catches him dancing in her dance shoes. Mandy 
is thrilled and immediately sets about trying to further Rupert’s dance instruction, 
to his utter dismay: “Rupert was mortified. The fun in dancing was to do it his 
own way. In secret. And without having to take lessons.” As Rupert hides from 
her, Mandy worries about him, until she comes up with a plan to act as though she 
needs assistance with a dance step. Rupert can’t resist her invitation to help (“Yes, 
for the first time since his secret was revealed, Rupert danced”), and the two develop 
a dance partnership. The story is too slight to be entirely satisfying, but Feiffer is 
at his best with the absurdly comic, and some of that hilarity is on display here as 
the lanky Rupert dances his little feline heart out. The familiar scribbly lines of 
Feiffer’s drawing and shading are at times unwieldy, but they do effectively capture 
the joie de vivre of Rupert’s and Mandy’s dancing. Despite some shortcomings, 
kitty fans will still find entertainment value here, particularly if this title is paired 
with photographs from Burton Silver’s 1999 satiric work for adults, Dancing with 
Cats, or with appropriate YouTube videos.  JH
frAzee, MArlA, illus. The Farmer and the Clown; illus. by Marla Frazee. Beach 
Lane/Simon, 2014 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-9744-3 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-9745-0 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* 4-6 yrs
In this wordless picture book, a white-bearded old farmer is distracted from pitch-
ing hay by the progress of a nearby circus train; when one of its young riders, a 
small ruffed clown in a peaked red hat, bounces off the train, the farmer goes to 
investigate. The lost tyke attaches himself to the old man, and the farmer takes the 
little clown back to his farmhouse, where, after a washing at the end of the day, the 
visitor’s perky cheer fades along with his clown makeup, leaving just a lonely little 
kid. The kindly farmer watches over his charge through the night and the next day, 
providing his own clownish cheer and a day full of farm work and play, until the 
circus train returns to pick up its lost lamb, and the little clown affectionately parts 
from the farmer. Frazee imbues her simple story with the immediacy and pathos of 
a short silent film, and both the clown kid and the old farmer are dramatic body 
actors: the kid’s overemoting and excitedly flapping limbs make him the fizzy center 
of most spreads, and his disconsolate drooping is as sad as a puppy whimper. The 
pencil and gouache landscapes draw on soft, smoky grays and yellows and sometimes 
grayish yellows, giving the wide-open plains a period, possibly Depression-era feel 
that adds atmosphere and enhances the importance of the warmth between the two 
protagonists. Audiences, especially those cuddled in willing adult laps, will enjoy 
filling in the gaps of this story brimming with both pathos and comfort—and those 
viewers worried about the newly bereft farmer will appreciate the last page, where 
a circus monkey stealthily follows the man back home to start a new story.  DS
french, siMon My Cousin’s Keeper. Candlewick, 2014 234p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6279-0 $16.99   
R Gr. 5-7
Kieran is displeased when his cousin Bon, eleven years old like Kieran, comes to 
stay with Kieran’s grandmother and, part-time, with Kieran’s family. While Kieran 
knows that Bon has a rough time and that Bon’s mother is deeply troubled, Kieran 
can’t forgive Bon for stealing a couple of toys two years ago, and he knows that 
November 2014 • 153
associating with weird, scruffy Bon will wreck the favor he’s trying to curry with 
the popular alpha boys. He therefore distances himself from Bon at home and 
joins the gang in bullying Bon at school, until finally the scorn of Julia, the girl he 
likes, begins to give him the courage to break free of his friends. Australian author 
French gives Kieran’s narration vivid authenticity, making him understandable in 
his youthful complacency and desperate self-centeredness despite his unsympathetic 
behavior toward Bon. The book is particularly sharp in identifying the uneasiness 
kids (and adults) can feel in encountering somebody whose life hints at messiness 
and dysfunction that they’d rather not contemplate (when Julia says “Bon needs 
someone who cares about him,” Kieran thinks, “I didn’t want to understand why 
she had said this”); ultimately, though, it’s this unease that propels Kieran, with 
believable slowness, to break away from his jerk friends and acknowledge the hurt 
he’s caused. Discussions will be sure to start from this, and it may cause some kids 
to reflect on their own behavior and good fortune.  DS
funke, corneliA Emma and the Blue Genie; tr. from German by Oliver Latsch; 
illus. by Kerstin Meyer. Random House, 2014 [96p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-37542-9 $12.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-37540-5 $9.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-37543-6 $7.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 2-4
Young Emma and her faithful dog Tristan are looking for some peace and quiet 
away from her noisy brothers, so they wander down to the seashore. What they 
find instead is a mysterious green bottle, which when opened releases a blue genie. 
Unfortunately, Karim the genie can’t grant Emma any wishes just yet as his powerful 
nose ring was stolen by an evil yellow genie. After agreeing to help Karim, Emma 
finds herself whisked off on a magic carpet to a world of desert sands, dromedaries, 
and caliphs. There’s a Dahl-esque charm to this compact fantasy, particularly in 
the two genies, whose inclinations toward the absurdly melodramatic and comedic 
flair rival only each other. The story, originally published in Germany in 2002, 
shows its age a bit in its cultural assumptions—the major one being that the desert 
setting and its residents are appealingly exotic fantasy and less of a real place in 
the world. The full-color illustrations, rich with sunny yellows, flaming reds, and 
jeweled blues, include some drolly humorous details and pack quite the dramatic 
punch as occasional full spreads (though the portrayals of the genies echo some old 
regional stereotypes). The tight prose, accessible length, and overall whimsy might 
make this a nice introduction to Funke for readers not quite ready for her longer 
Inkheart trilogy (Inkheart, BCCB 3/04) and The Thief Lord (BCCB 11/02) .  KQG
gAiMAn, neil The Graveyard Book Graphic Novel: Volume 1; ad. by P. Craig 
Russell; illus. by Scott Hampton, Tony Harris, Kevin Nowlan, et al. Harper/
HarperCollins, 2014 188p
ISBN 978-0-06-219481-7 $19.99   
R* Gr. 6-12
Neil Gaiman’s Newbery Medal–winning novel takes on new dimensions and a 
likely new cadre of readers with this remarkable translation to the graphic novel 
format. Adapted by previous Gaiman collaborator P. Craig Russell and rendered in 
full-color panels by a variety of artists, the novel faithfully recreates the adventures 
of Nobody Owens, the living boy raised by ghosts who haunt the village graveyard. 
154 • The bulleTiN
The first in a planned two-volume set, the title chronicles Bod’s adoption and early 
education by the graveyard citizens, his friendship with Scarlett Perkins, and his 
encounters with ghouls, the Sleer, and a pair of unscrupulous treasure hunters, 
ending the original novel’s Interlude. Gaiman’s distinctive writing style remains 
intact in bits of dialogue and description, while meticulous drawings convey the 
story’s implicit eeriness and violence without being overly gruesome or terrifying. 
Memorable characters spring to life, even as the illustrations keep the focus on Bod 
in all his curiosity and mischievousness. The narrative moves seamlessly between 
illustrators, each of whom craft a single chapter in his or her own unique style; 
shifts between artists are perceptible, with slight variations in color palette and 
more notable differences in shading, level of detail, and thickness of outlining, but 
not distracting. Readers familiar with Russell’s adaptation of Gaiman’s Coraline 
(BCCB 9/08) will likely recognize his style and influence but will appreciate the 
introduction to new artists, while fans of the text-only version of the title will find 
comfort in Russell’s fidelity to the original. At the same time, older readers and 
fans of Gaiman’s The Sandman and Books of Magic who might be reluctant to 
pick up a children’s book will thrill to the stylistic similarities to those well-loved 
series, providing the novel with a whole new group of likely fans.  AM
gAntos, JAck The Key That Swallowed Joey Pigza. Farrar, 2014 [160p]
ISBN 978-0-374-30083-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 141, for review.
glewwe, eleAnor Sparkers. Viking, 2014 [336p]
ISBN 978-0-451-46876-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
Marah Levi is halani—one of the lower class, unable to do magic like members of 
the elite class, the kasiri. Her father is dead, her mother works too hard, and her 
younger brother, who is deaf, is becoming restless and sneaking out during the 
day when he is supposed to be safe at home or with friends. Marah has a part-time 
job working at a bookstall, where she indulges her passion for languages. When 
she impulsively saves a young kasir girl, Sarah, from being hurt in a crowd, the 
girl invites her home, where she finds a kindred spirit in Sarah’s brother Azariah. 
He seeks her help in translating a book in a banned language, and together they 
find the cure for a disease that is killing halani and kasiri alike. Their work uncov-
ers a sinister plot, however, putting them in grave danger. Marah is an appealing 
heroine—warm, compassionate, and smart—and the plot pleases by requiring 
Marah and Azariah to develop and use their special talents to save the city while 
losing a small bit of their innocence. They both lose someone they love as well, 
a circumstance that ups the emotional stakes without overtaking the plot. The 
social climate of the alternative world resonates with many a historical and current 
situation; the result threatens to become a tad message-heavy, but the plot moves 
quickly enough and with sufficient twists and turns to make the politics intrigu-
ing rather than overbearing. Marah’s talents extend to an ability to pour out her 
emotions in virtuoso violin music; similarly multitalented middle graders will find 
in her a kindred spirit.  KC
November 2014 • 155
grAhAM, bob Vanilla Ice Cream; written and illus. by Bob Graham. Candle-
wick, 2014 38p
ISBN 978-0-7636-7377-2 $16.99   
R 4-7 yrs 
A young sparrow looking for a meal in a dusty Indian town finds one in a bag of 
rice on a truck headed to port. The sparrow burrows happily into the bag, which is 
hoisted onto a freight ship, and travels across the ocean to an apparently English-
speaking big city. The sparrow flies into this new environment and crosses paths 
with Edie, a toddler in a stroller out at a café with her grandparents. When the 
family’s dog lunges for the sparrow, the grandfather’s ice cream cone goes flying, 
and ends up on young Edie’s lap: “Edie Irvine, also young and curious, for the very 
first time . . . discovers the taste of vanilla ice cream.” The seemingly random trajec-
tory of events actually makes for an intriguing and imaginative story, and Graham’s 
brief, spare text (some spreads are in fact wordless) and expansive, trademark ink 
and watercolor illustrations keep the action tightly focused. Series of panels are 
effectively deployed to build drama and depict the progression of the action; as 
the ocean liner travels further and further away from India, for example, gradually 
decreases in size from panel to panel. This could spark an interesting discussion 
about unintentional animal stowaways or trigger some thoughtful musing about 
the ways in which one small action can result in a domino-chain of events.  JH 
hAhn, MAry downing Where I Belong. Clarion, 2014 [240p]
ISBN 978-0-544-23020-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7
School is tough for twelve-year-old Brendan, a small-for-his-age foster kid, and 
when threatened by bullies, he finds refuge in the forest near his home, a place 
that satisfies his love of nature and pagan leanings. He’s at first resistant when a 
girl named Shea, a fellow outcast classmate, joins him in the woods, but together 
they develop a safe place in a great tree and a relationship with a kindly bearded old 
forest-dweller, whom Brendan believes to be the mythological Green Man. When 
harm comes to both the tree and the Green Man, Brendan must face tragedy, but 
these challenges ultimately make him realize that his life is fuller than he believed. 
Hahn is a master of this kind of accessible middle-grades story with an intriguing 
hook, and Brendan, both a voracious reader and a capable young outdoorsman, is 
highly sympathetic as he begins to realize that he can be valued. His conception 
of the Green Man is effectively poised between possibility and wishful thinking 
(Shea openly suggests that the man might actually not be the spirit of the woods 
he seems), and Brendan’s gradual acceptance of the truth—the man is a homeless 
vet—doesn’t undermine the man’s importance to him and Shea. The fantasy of 
a forested getaway spot and the universality of Sam’s self-doubt give this strong 
appeal to a wide audience, who will start prowling their own neighborhoods for 
secret arboreal hideaways.  DS
hAle, shAnnon The Princess in Black; by Shannon and Dean Hale and illus. by 
LeUyen Pham. Candlewick, 2014 89p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6510-4 $14.99   
R Gr. 2-4
Decked out in a her sparkly tiara and frilly pink dress, Princess Magnolia is having 
hot chocolate and scones with the ever-proper and ever-prying Duchess Wigtower 
156 • The bulleTiN
when the princess’s glitter stone ring rings, alerting her to a nearby monster attack. 
Quickly excusing herself, Princess Magnolia heads to the broom closet, where she 
transforms into a black-clad, masked hero. With the help of her trusty steed Blacky 
(alias Frimplepants the unicorn), the Princess in Black manages to wrangle the 
offending monster with some seriously impressive moves (Sparkle Slam! Twinkle 
Twinkle Little Smash!) and get back to the castle before the snooping Duchess finds 
any evidence of Magnolia’s secret life. Meanwhile, Duff the Goat Boy (whose goats 
the PIB was protecting) realizes that Princess Magnolia and the Princess in Black 
may be one and the same—and that he’d like to join her in her monster-fighting 
ways. The Hales translate the humor and adventure that characterize their Rapunzel’s 
Revenge (BCCB 9/08) into prose form for a younger audience with aplomb and wit, 
giving amusing nods to both the Disney princess tradition and the superhero genre. 
Short sentences, a simple vocabulary with the occasional challenge, a manageable 
length, and a near picture-book level of illustrative density give this chapter book 
immense accessibility. Pham’s watercolor and ink art has a goofy cartoonishness, with 
the Princess’s doe-eyed damsel figure contrasting entertainingly with her ninja-like 
moves, and the monsters themselves are a parade of wacky Muppet-like creatures. 
Whether they prefer pink sparkles or superhero capes, readers, especially newly 
independent ones, will find themselves anxiously awaiting the next installment of 
the PIB’s adventure.  KQG 
hArris, robie h. What’s So Yummy?: All about Eating Well and Feeling Good; 
illus. by Nadine Bernard Westcott. Candlewick, 2014 34p
ISBN 978-0-7636-3632-6 $15.99   
Ad 3-6 yrs
Having spent many volumes enlightening children about how they got here (It’s 
Perfectly Normal, BCCB 10/94, et al.), Harris now explains how to keep them-
selves in good shape. The answer is pretty simple—eat nutritious foods and keep 
moving—a message that’s clearly getting through to the garrulous sister and brother 
featured here preparing for a family picnic. While Harris’ narration proceeds in 
bland text (“The food and drinks that go into our bodies at breakfast time fill us up 
and make our bodies feel good”), Gus and Nellie converse in speech bubbles about 
their enthusiasm for nutrition: “I just ate oatmeal and milk and an orange. Now I 
feel strong!” It would take a persnickety mommy blogger to dispute the advice here, 
which centers on fruits, vegetables, a variety of proteins, whole grain carbs, and 
limited sugars. Allergies and other food reactions get a nod (Nellie can’t eat peanuts; 
many adults and kids avoid glutens), and the chipper observation that there are 
plenty of food choices out there should be of comfort. Unfortunately, herein lies the 
book’s blind spot—Nellie and Gus’ happy biracial family, surrounded by a diverse 
community of well-fed people, obviously have the means and opportunity to eat 
very well, with grocery stores, farmers markets, and community gardens supplying 
their needs. Meanwhile, hummus, veggie chips, and smoothies are all effortlessly 
at hand, and a swap from peanut butter to almond butter occurs easily with no 
mention of costliness. Nellie and Gus’ pedantic dialogue handily pushes home the 
point, but whether all readers can benefit from the lesson is up for debate.  EB
hAughton, chris Shh! We Have a Plan; written and illus. by Chris Haugh-
ton. Candlewick, 2014 40p
iSbN 978-0-7636-7293-5 $15.99   
R* 4-7 yrs
An intrepid collection of four adventurers, equipped with nets and cage on their 
November 2014 • 157
trek through the wild, sights a bird; the littlest cheerfully calls “Hello, birdie!” only 
to be shushed by the other three, because “we have a plan.” The aggressive three 
move on the bird (“tiptoe slowly tiptoe slowly now stop. SHH!”) and pounce 
(“GO!”) only to topple into each other as the bird easily flies away; each new plan 
ends up in similar failure. Eventually, the happy little wanderer treats the birdie to 
some bread, which brings flocks of birds to him; the excited bird hunters get ready 
to take advantage of the situation, but they’re then chased away (little guy in tow) 
by a fearsome avian bigger than they are. Both unharmed and uneducated by the 
experience, they then focus on the new target of a squirrel (“SHH! We have a plan”). 
There’s a bouncy staccato music in the carefully structured text, and listeners will 
quickly anticipate the patterns and helpfully join in on the repetitions as they root 
for the little guy who knows better than the big fools. Haugen’s art is original yet 
easily legible; the stumpy figures seem humanoid, but with their long heads and 
voluminous contrasting noses, they’re somewhere between cartoon Easter Island 
moai and basset hounds. The digitally created nocturnal landscape draws on a 
multitude of blue shades, from pale teal to dark midnight, punctuated by the vivid 
red of the bird and the whites of our protagonists’ eyes; there’s a crisp geometry in 
the neatly horizontal groundline and the stylized patterns of the bird’s plumage, 
but occasional softer edges suggest cut paper collage. The temptation to act this 
out will be almost irresistible, so channel the impulse into an organized (or even 
semi-organized) performance.  DS
heinz, briAn Mocha Dick: The Legend and Fury; illus. by Randall Enos. Cre-
ative Editions, 2014 32p
ISBN 978-1-56846-242-4 $18.99   
Ad Gr. 3-5
Heinz offers his addition to the canon about the “great white whale” with a picture-
book account that takes a broad view of the exploits of the actual albino sperm 
whale, beyond its encounter with the whaleship Essex, which served as the basis for 
Melville’s novel. Heinz restores the name bestowed on the marine mammal by early 
nineteenth-century whalers, Mocha Dick, in reference to the Chilean island near 
which the whale was sighted. The book relays brief tales of the creature’s famously 
cunning attacks with grace, zest, and a good amount of seafaring argot, much of 
which stands undefined. The subtitle inclusion of the word “legend” implies that 
Heinz is off the hook for neglecting source notes, but specific references to dates 
and ships are sorely in need of citations. The real draw here is Enos’ stunning lino-
cut collage, as refined as delicate scrimshaw, but with characters reflecting modern 
comic book art, hues borrowing from the big sixty-four crayon box, and narrow 
borders sporting whaling motifs, all of which result in a festive, cosmopolitan look 
befitting that most global of nineteenth-century industries. Kids who pick up one 
of the many abridgments of Moby-Dick may want to read this in tandem for an 
expanded view of the legend.  EB
hiAAsen, cArl Skink: No Surrender. Knopf, 2014 [288p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-97051-1 $21.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-87051-4 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97406-8 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-9
Richard’s best friend/agemate/cousin, Malley, is a drama queen and a chronic 
runaway, so Richard initially isn’t too disturbed when she goes AWOL. This 
158 • The bulleTiN
time, however, it looks serious: she’s not texting or emailing, and when she finally 
reestablishes contact, it’s clear she’s keeping up a chipper phone voice while send-
ing Richard coded hints as to her whereabouts. She’s in need of rescuing from a 
stalker she unwisely befriended in a chat room, and Richard’s chance encounter 
with a bizarre beach bum—an elderly, massive, one-eyed giant bent on meting out 
justice to sea turtle egg snatchers—gives him just the partner he needs to charge 
into the Wild and get the job done. In fact, the man is no beach bum but Skink, 
the ex-governor of Florida, officially recorded as dead but still equipped with a few 
valuable connections who cover his behind throughout his eco-protective, vigilante 
adventures. Skink, a character from other Hiaasen novels, zanily upstages narrator 
Richard and even threatens at times to leave the sobering themes of online preda-
tors and habitat erosion in his dust. Readers won’t mind a whit, though, as this 
breakneck road and river trip turns on a dime from hilarious to chilling. This is 
far, far tamer than the gleeful raunch of Hiaasen’s adult novels, and except for the 
fact that it’s more heavily character driven than his previous YA works, the Hoot 
(BCCB 11/02) set will feel right at home.  EB
holt, k. A.  Rhyme Schemer. Chronicle, 2014 [176p]
ISBN 978-1-4521-2700-2 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7
The youngest of five boys in his family, Kevin knows what it’s like to be bullied. 
He pays it forward, too, picking on kids who are easy prey and ripping pages out 
of old library books and transforming them into found poems that attack teachers. 
That all changes when Robin, one of his former victims, finds his poetry notebook. 
Then predator becomes prey: Robin threatens to expose Kevin unless he creates 
more of his cool attack poems, hated by teachers but loved by the kids, and gives 
Robin credit for them. Mrs. Little, the librarian, discovers Kevin’s secret and his 
talent, and soon he finds there’s more satisfaction in wrestling with words than there 
is pummeling his peers. Holt’s free verse and found poems create a voice for Kevin 
that reveals the anger and pain beneath his bravado. His struggles with his brother 
Petey create credible cause for his bullying behavior; alternately, the support of Mrs. 
Little, his brother Paul, and Petey’s bandmates makes Kevin’s transformation seem 
natural, motivated by real, incremental successes. The found poetry appears both 
as photographs of the pages of books Kevin has defaced and helpful transcriptions 
in a handwriting font; teachers should be prepared with a book they are willing to 
cut up so that readers can try their hand at Kevin’s poetic style.  KC
hopkins, ellen Rumble. McElderry, 2014 [560p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8284-5 $19.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8286-9 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
In this latest verse novel, Hopkins’ protagonist Matthew Turner is angry. At the 
heart of his rage is the suicide of his brother, Luke, which he attributes to aggres-
sive bullying by Christians who disapproved of Luke being gay, but Matthew is 
also confused by his father’s infidelity, his Christian mother’s drinking and vent-
ing, and his Christian girlfriend’s growing attachment to her youth group and its 
good-looking minister. Hopkins uses all of her Christian characters as sock-puppets 
to mouth caricatured intolerance and hypocrisy; the only measure of grace and 
November 2014 • 159
forgiveness Matthew finds comes from Alexa, who follows the trope of the good 
bad girl, offering experienced sexual healing without asking for anything except 
the opportunity to earn the love of Matthew in return. Despite her ministrations, 
Matthew’s epiphany has to wait until he is burned and temporarily blinded and 
deafened by an explosion triggered by a man suffering PTSD, rounding off the 
attempt to cram as many possible social, religious and political points of conten-
tion into a single problem novel. Interestingly, this layering of broader issues onto 
Matthew’s story of personal grief, as well as a lack of ideological nuance or fairness 
and the formulaic portrayal of the females in the story, makes for an unfortunately 
credible portrayal of adolescent male rage, which expands outward in all directions, 
divides the world into black hats and white hats, and finds multiple targets on which 
to land. Less credible is the intelligently crafted and highly articulate expressions 
of that anger by such a straitened thinker. Nevertheless, fans of Hopkins’ previous 
titles and Chris Crutcher’s raging against the machine may appreciate Matthew’s 
voice.  KC 
howell, siMMone Girl Defective. Atheneum, 2014 301p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-9760-3 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-9762-7 $10.99   
R* Gr.9-12
Living above the family record store with her alcoholic, failed-rock-star dad and 
her autistic little brother, fifteen-year-old Skylark Martin is beginning to feel lost 
and alone. She becomes charmed by vivacious older girl Nancy but fails to see the 
darker realities behind Nancy’s life of reckless abandon. Soon Skylark’s brother’s 
obsession with detective work and Skylark’s own fascination with Nancy have her 
exploring the seedier parts of their fading Australian tourist town, alongside the 
cute, slightly mysterious Luke Casey. Together they track down vandals through 
an underground world of sex, drugs, and music, only to find that the petty crimes 
may connect to the tragic death of Luke’s sister. Part coming-of-age tale, part family 
story, and part mystery, this novel provides the reader with a well-crafted, layered 
narrative that still keeps the focus on Skylark’s personal journey. The writing style’s 
cadence and phrasing perfectly suit both the character and the story; Skylark’s often 
lyrical narration embodies her musical passions, her naïve viewpoint, and her inner 
confusion. The mystery elements are executed with a light touch, adding a sense 
of intrigue without becoming the central plot. Likely to suit fans of Marchetta’s 
Jellicoe Road (BCCB 11/08), this novel will also please readers who like their nar-
rators as active as they are introspective.  AM
hughes, shirley Digby O’Day: In the Fast Lane; illus. by Clara Vulliamy. Can-
dlewick, 2014 96p
ISBN 978-0-7636-7369-7 $12.99   
R Gr. 1-3
Digby O’Day, a nattily dressed, floppy-eared dog, is devoted to his automobile, 
even if it isn’t always the most reliable vehicle. When a malfunction results in Digby 
and best buddy Percy (a smaller, pointy-eared canine) nearly dropping off a cliff, 
a “friendly family” (a human dad, mom, and three kids) comes to their aid while 
Digby’s snooty neighbor, Lou Ella, doesn’t bother to even stop. Digby’s car is repaired 
just in time for a town-to-town race, and Digby and Percy prove their kindness by 
stopping mid-race to help the friendly family, who themselves are now experiencing 
car trouble, while elsewhere Lou Ella pays the price for her rudeness. “Interviews” 
160 • The bulleTiN
with the characters, author, and illustrator; maps; a quiz; and suggestions for car 
games and an artistic activity round out this beginning chapter book. The cheerful 
text is accessible to young readers and the numerous monochromatic illustrations 
provide both visual support and textual respite. Kids who like both cars and dogs 
will especially enjoy taking a ride with Digby and Percy.  JH 
Johnson, AlAyA dAwn Love Is the Drug. Levine/Scholastic, 2014 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-41781-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-66289-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Bird would never want to do anything to disappoint her driven parents, or to ruin 
her own chances for success. She can’t resist Coffee, though, a rebellious, magnetic 
loner who doesn’t hesitate to call her out on her contradictions and hypocrisies 
while spouting endless conspiracy theories and cooking up designer drugs to sell to 
high-schoolers. When an accident (that likely wasn’t one) lands Bird in the hospital, 
she awakes to find the world grappling with a global explosion of a deadly virus 
and realizes that she can’t trust her former intimates—including her own parents, 
who are involved with the virus. Enter Coffee, who can surely elucidate things for 
her if they can both stay alive long enough to meet up and talk. The present-tense 
narration and movie-ready pacing (many of the episodic scenes are ideal for fades 
to black) are effectively used to evoke the global urgency and the often bewilder-
ing speed with which the world is changing around Bird. While the core is a fairly 
ordinary suspense tale (there’s really no doubt who the bad guys are, it just falls to 
Bird to spot them all and make sure they are brought to justice when possible), the 
sharp, urban setting and the inclusion of a diverse cast (African-American Bird and 
other characters are smoothly identified in natural ways within the story) elevate 
the overall achievement. Fans of Johnson’s earlier The Summer Prince (BCCB 4/13) 
will find that the author’s sharp bite and cyberpunk inclinations are still strongly 
present here.  AS
Johnson, rebeccA l. When Lunch Fights Back: Wickedly Clever Animal De-
fenses. Millbrook, 2014 48p illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-2109-7 $29.27   
R Gr. 3-5
Teeth, claws, camouflage—been there, read that. Johnson moves on to less celebrated 
means of self-defense in the animal world, some of which are still under scientific 
investigation. Eight short chapters of a few double-page spreads apiece focus on how 
a faunal milquetoast sends predators slinking or howling away, at least long enough 
for the prey to escape. Among the highlights are a mantis shrimp with a knockout 
punch strong enough to shatter glass in a scientist’s aquarium; toxic projectile def-
ecation and vomiting by seemingly helpless hoopoe and fulmar chicks; suffocating 
slime that keeps sharks from munching on the deep-sea hagfish. Johnson begins 
each chapter with a tense scenario of a probable encounter and then follows with 
“The Science Behind the Story” bit, which introduces a scientist investigating the 
featured creature and offers the best current explanation of how the defense strategy 
works. This approach extends the potential audience for this title to even younger 
children in a classroom setting, where a teacher can zero in on an animal, punch 
up the dramatic hook, and paraphrase the explanation. Careful readers will note 
that there’s some speculation at play here, and adults may want to check out some 
November 2014 • 161
of the scientists’ publications and websites, as well as videos suggested herein. Large 
trim size, crisp color photographs, and engaging “blood” splatters in the layout are 
sure to make this a science class favorite.  EB 
kAdohAtA, cynthiA Half a World Away. Atheneum, 2014 [240p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-1275-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-1277-4 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
Adoption hasn’t exactly been a fairy tale for twelve-year-old Jaden, who joined his 
American family after years of living in Romanian orphanages; though he’s past 
his fire-setting stage, he’s still largely indifferent to his adoptive parents and mostly 
expects that they will abandon him. That expectation is heightened now that his 
parents are adopting another child, a baby from Kazakhstan, whom Jaden is sure 
will replace him. When Jaden and his parents travel to Kazakhstan, the situation is 
very different from what they’d been led to believe, and as his parents attempt to 
bond with a different child than the baby they’d set their hearts on, Jaden forms 
a friendship with Dimash, a mentally disabled toddler in the institution. Kado-
hata takes a bracingly different tack here from the usual rosy literary treatment of 
international adoption, acknowledging the long-term hardship of kids like Jaden 
and the sleaziness that can affect the process, even as it’s clear adoption is the best 
chance for a decent life these kids have. The spare third-person narration effectively 
conveys Jaden’s emotional detachment, but it also enhances his unexpected mo-
ments of connection (with the agency’s cranky and colorful driver as well as with 
Dimash). Overall, the story serves as a reminder that neither growth nor family 
always come as expected, and that neither have to be perfect to be welcome.  DS
king, A. s. Glory O’Brien’s History of the Future. Little, 2014 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-22272-3 $18.00
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-22274-7 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 8-12
High school graduation is approaching, and Glory’s still stuck in the stasis that 
has enveloped her family since her photographer mother’s suicide over a decade 
ago. On a weird night with her friend Ellie, the two goofily drink beer that they 
treat as a ceremonial liquor, imbued with the dust of a long-dead bat; following 
the ingestion, they find themselves psychically hearing quick “transmissions” from 
people with information about their past or their future. Glory wants to peel the 
veil from her own past as well, so she starts diving into her mother’s notebooks and 
photography portfolio, asking her father more about their life and their long-term 
connection to Ellie’s family and the commune Ellie lives on. At the same time, 
the transmissions bring her a disturbing picture of a troubled national future, but 
she’s intrigued by what her role in it may be. King continues to be one of the most 
original (yet accessible) YA writers today, and the magical realism element accentu-
ates the humanity of the narrative by looking past people’s momentary selves to 
place them in times both past and future. Glory’s archeological uncovering of her 
family’s past is delicately depicted and also genuinely suspenseful, as she finds out 
more about the mother who’s been largely cloaked in silence since her death and 
yet has loomed understandably large in Glory’s emotional landscape. The savage 
dystopian future that appears in quick insets is underdrawn, but it’s not really the 
162 • The bulleTiN
point—it’s about Glory’s finding a way back to the time stream and walking toward 
her future by uncovering her past.  DS
koyczAn, shAne To This Day: For the Bullied and Beautiful. Annick, 
2014 [72p]
ISBN 978-1-55451-639-1 $19.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-12
One teen’s poem, a response to the bullying he endured, turned into a viral video, a 
TED conference presentation, and now this collection. Thirty artists each worked on 
their own assigned sections to offer a visual complement to the poem, with Koyczan 
offering a passionately written introductory essay that balances his own experiences 
with general facts about bullying in schools. The poem is searing, exposing the short 
and long-term impacts of bullying, and rallying those who engage with the poem 
to take action and become active participants in stopping bullying. The textual 
layout is logical as well as creative, and the effect of each section paired with such 
varied artwork invites repeated examinations. The range of art in this trim book is 
extraordinary; this is a true double-impact collection with the power of the verse 
itself interpreted in drastically different ways through the illustrative choices, from 
realistic sketches to comic book–style renderings to abstract representations of the 
tone rather than words on the page. A resource list, afterword that offers the history 
of the poem and selected quotes from the illustrators’ comments on bullying, and 
illustrator credit list (most with websites) all combine to make sure that readers 
who want to know more have all the tools they need.  AS
lArson, M. A. Pennyroyal Academy. Putnam, 2014 [320p]
ISBN 978-0-399-16324-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
After facing the perils of the enchanted forest and barely escaping the clutches of 
a witch, a young girl with no name begins to think that running away from home 
was a bad idea. She’s on a mission, though, to find Pennyroyal Academy, the premier 
training school for future princes and princesses, which is accepting lowborn girls 
for the first time. Once there, the girl, now called Evie, manages to make friends 
with the school’s other outsiders, and together they help one another succeed. 
Outside the gates, the war against the witches is growing closer, while inside, Evie 
and her friends are plagued by their snobby classmate Malora, who seems intent 
on ridding the school of the lowborn. Evie meanwhile is keeping dangerous secrets, 
and as layers of curses are lifted, surprising revelations about both Malora’s past 
and her own come to light. When the war with the witches makes it way to their 
door, Evie and her outsider friends may just be the best chance the school has at 
survival. This imaginative fantasy adventure offers a compelling narrative with just 
the right mixture of scares and laughs, victories and failures, friendships and light 
romance. Building self-consciously on familiar fairy-tale tropes, from orphaned 
princesses and evil stepmothers to fairies, knights, and dragons, it still manages to 
present them in fresh, playful ways. Evie and her friends are an appealing group, 
each with his or her own strengths and foibles, and readers will immediately wish 
to join their ranks to battle the forces of evil. The novel sends some mixed messages 
on the nature of royalty, but readers who wouldn’t mind a little mud on their shiny 
princess dress will find a lot to love here. The first in an expected series, this novel 
is a perfect fit for fans of Hale’s Princess Academy (BCCB 9/05) and the novels of 
Gail Carson Levine.  AM
November 2014 • 163
legrAnd, clAire Winterspell. Simon, 2014 [464p]
ISBN 978-1-4424-6598-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
New York City is on the brink of the twentieth century, but the upcoming year 
holds little promise for Clara Stole: her mother’s brutal murder is yet to be solved, 
her crime-lord father is dissolving into his grief and alcohol, and his “colleagues” are 
pressing Clara to set various debts straight or else. Complicating matters further is 
her beloved godfather, Drosselmeyer, whose increasingly eccentric behavior draws 
Clara to an empty ballroom in the middle of the night, where she finds herself 
fighting off enormous ratlike creatures, watching a metal statue come to life, and 
witnessing the kidnapping of her father by some faerie creature. Clara makes her way 
with Nicholas, the now very alive and very handsome statue, to Cane, an alternate 
realm where she believes her father is being held. Yes, this is The Nutcracker, but it’s 
no sugar-sprinkled production: Legrand pulls on the subtle threads of romance and 
violence from her source material to weave a tapestry both deliciously sensual and 
disturbingly brutal. Cane is a place of desperation and depravity, with the wickedly 
beautiful Anise (the Sugar Plum Fairy figure) its ruthless ruler. Clara is the usual 
mix of vulnerability and strength for a YA heroine, but a betrayal by Nicholas 
brings her under the tutelage of Anise for a short time, and, in a fascinating twist, 
it’s here that she comes into her own, gaining agency in her sexuality and in her 
newly developing magical powers. The backstory of Clara’s family, their role in New 
York, and their links to Cane is deftly woven into the overall story arc. A bounty of 
lust, gore, and moral dilemmas, this is sure to please fans of dark fairy tales.  KQG 
link, kelly. ed. Monstrous Affections: An Anthology of Beastly Tales; ed. by Kelly 
Link and Gavin J. Grant. Candlewick, 2014 [480p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-6473-2 $22.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
In this deliciously gory collection of fifteen original stories, the concept of monster 
is explored from a number of different perspectives. While the theme is certainly 
familiar, the diversity of interpretations of monsterhood is an asset, and the book 
sets a fresh and amusing note with the opening pop quiz that assesses readers’ views 
of monsters. The fifteen stories mostly examine literal monsters, from vampires to 
harpies to ocean beasts, as in Paolo Bacigalupi’s “Moriable’s Children,” a chilling 
and unforgettable look at the bond between an abused harbor girl and the kraken 
who wait for her to join them in the sea. There are also, of course, explorations of 
humans as monsters, most memorably in Nic Houser’s “Son of Abyss,” where the 
ability to control others (and make them do fairly gruesome things) is paid for in 
flesh sacrifices. Horror and fantasy buffs will recognize plenty of the contributors 
here, and the author notes will lead them to further works by writers they don’t 
know or didn’t previously associate with the genre. Fans will be happy to find a 
well-edited, sharp collection of new stories about their favorite topic that covers 
both the creepy and alluring elements of monsters.  AS 
lippert-MArtin, kristen Tabula Rasa. Egmont, 2014 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-518-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-519-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
Sarah really wants the new life that has been promised to her once her brain is 
adjusted and she can be rid of the criminal history she has been told she possesses. 
164 • The bulleTiN
Of course, you should never believe the folks in lab coats who promise that erasing 
your brain is the best possible move, and indeed, governmental experimentation 
and dastardly goals are involved in the real plans for the subjects’ brains. What fol-
lows this revelation is a sharply paced, complex story about who is cheating whom, 
who is really in charge, and what Sarah can be once she is actually out from under 
those who see her as simply an experiment. Lippert-Martin almost pulls off the 
endless plot twists and character revisions, but at the core, it sometimes feels like 
there is no true protagonist, since Sarah is a blank slate onto whom whatever villain 
or strong force is nearby imprints a new version of her. It’s therefore hard to find 
anyone to root for here, as secondary characters generally lack agency (whether 
they are soldiers or medical professionals who just follow orders or the other teens 
who have been experimented on), and Sarah herself is too slippery to connect with 
easily. Nevertheless, a tough chick who doesn’t let anything stop her including an 
epic blizzard, a whole mess of bad guys, or even huge gaps in her own memory, 
and who also doesn’t seem particularly interested in romance or being saved, is still 
a welcome addition to the sci-fi mix.  AS 
lord, cynthiA Jelly Bean; illus. by Erin McGuire. Scholastic, 2014 125p 
(Shelter Pet Squad)
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-545-63597-4 $5.99   
R Gr. 2-4
Shy apartment-dweller Suzannah (a second-grader) longs for a pet but can’t have 
one. Her mother convinces her to give volunteering at the local animal shelter a try, 
and Suzannah quickly comes to enjoy making treats and toys for the animals and 
giving them extra attention. Trying to find a new home for Jelly Bean, a relinquished 
guinea pig, leads Suzannah and the other kids of the Shelter Pet Squad to market 
Jelly Bean to local teachers as perfect classroom pet material. The strategy works, 
and Jelly Bean finds a happy home in a kindergarten class, while Suzannah has made 
a new circle of friends. A large font, fairly short sentences, and an uncomplicated 
vocabulary will make this series opener accessible to novice chapter-book readers, 
and the attractively cartoonish monochromatic illustrations provide additional 
support. Lord’s deft pacing and the specific details of shelter volunteering (the 
kids receive clear enough instructions on setting up treat “challenges” for the dogs, 
for example, that readers could replicate them at home) will keep kids captivated, 
even if the character development is somewhat slight. Additional information on 
guinea pigs, shelter animals, and toys and treats for pets is provided, along with an 
author’s note about her own adopted-from-a-shelter guinea pig. Fans of Messner’s 
Marty McGuire Has Too Many Pets (BCCB 4/14) or the Animal Ark Pets series will 
want to sign up for the Shelter Pet Squad.  JH
losure, MAry Backwards Moon. Holiday House, 2014 134p
ISBN 978-0-8234-3160-1 $16.95   
R Gr. 3-5
As the two youngest witches in their coven, Bracken and Nettle spend their days 
flying on their broomsticks among the ravens and conversing with marmots, but 
their peaceful idyll is disrupted when they see two humans in their valley—a valley 
that is supposed to be inaccessible to mortals under the protection of the Veil. As 
it turns out, the Veil is weakening, as are the eldest witches in the coven. Nettle 
and Bramble are forced out into the human world to find the Door, the rumored 
entrance to another protected land and also the very same thing their two mothers 
November 2014 • 165
were searching for when they went missing years ago. With the help of a few human 
friends made along the way and one loquacious raccoon, Nettle and Bracken find 
the door; they also, however, discover their mothers, living in the human world 
with no real memory of their formerly witchy lives and the daughters they left 
behind. The plotting’s a bit slight but it’s also straightforward, making this cozy 
fantasy particularly accessible to genre newbies. Bracken and Nettle are distinct 
characters, each with their strengths and weaknesses, and Losure lets both the girls 
simply be themselves, allowing Nettle her stubbornness and Bracken her passivity 
even at the end of the book, in lieu of having them learn some moral lesson about 
their flaws. The situation with their mothers is resolved with a similarly realistic 
and bittersweet tone, as the resilient girls go through the Door, accepting that 
they must leave their mothers behind to move forward. A quick fantasy and an 
interesting character study, this will find an audience among readers who are just 
past chapter books but not quite ready for the likes of Diana Wynne Jones.  KQG 
lynch, chris 
World War II #2: Dead in the Water. 
Scholastic, 
2014 [192p] (World War II)
ISBN 978-0-545-52298-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 5-8
Hank McCallum fully expected to enlist in the Navy right beside his brother, Theo, 
but their father insists that he’s only willing to sacrifice one son to the coming hos-
tilities, and so they need to sign up for different branches. With that portentous 
farewell, and the mixed advice of church and family to treat the enemy with mercy 
or blow him to kingdom come, the young men go their separate ways, Theo to 
the Army and Hank to the Navy. Hank, aboard the USS Yorktown, is swept off to 
battles of the Coral Sea and Midway, serving as an “airedale” who services fighter 
planes, and spreading the gospel of baseball among his shipmates during rare mo-
ments of down time. He seizes many opportunities to be of positive service, from 
the discipline and pride with which he carries out his duties, to the loyal friend-
ship he shares with a Negro League player who is assigned to mess hall duty for 
the duration. The dilemma of how to treat the enemy is, ironically, the least of his 
worries, as the pivotal battles in which he serves leave him fighting for his life in 
the stricken Yorktown. With Hank as narrator, readers are lulled into the reasonable 
belief that Hank survives to tell his own tale, but Lynch refuses to put minds at 
ease, and this title’s conclusion will send readers scurrying to Wikipedia to find out 
the fate of the Yorktown and to calculate Hank’s chance for survival. Although part 
of an ongoing series, this volume stands sturdily on its own as a expertly crafted 
war story, with fluid prose, bleak humor, careful attention to historic detail, and a 
view of “The Good War” worth pondering.  EB
MAcy, sue Sally Ride: Life on a Mission. Aladdin, 2014 [160p] (The Real-
Life Story)
ISBN 978-1-4424-8854-0 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 3-5
Macy traces the life of shuttle astronaut Sally Ride from her early years as a talented 
student and tennis player, through her tenure with NASA, and on to her post-flight 
work as physicist, author, and advocate for drawing more girls into science fields. 
The book carefully follows the training and mission details for Ride’s two flights and 
166 • The bulleTiN
her service on the commissions investigating the Challenger and Columbia explo-
sions. The burden of notoriety that Ride, a very private person, had to shoulder as 
a pioneering woman aviator is also deftly conveyed. The story lags a bit, however, 
when Ride shifts from astronaut to professor/advocate, with various engagements 
flying by pretty swiftly, and a little too much text padded with adulatory prose. 
Personal details of Ride’s adult life are nearly nonexistent here, with the briefest of 
references to her marriage to astronaut Steve Hawley and fleeting, almost gingerly 
reference to her subsequent relationship with scientist, co-author, and partner Tam 
O’Shaughnessy. Inserts, a photo section, wide leading, and a manageable page 
count, though, may recommend this to readers just moving from longer picture-
book bios into full-length work. Timeline, sources, lists for further reading, and 
an index are included.  EB 
MAgoon, keklA How It Went Down. Holt, 2014 [336p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-9869-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
One moment a sixteen-year-old African-American boy is hurrying away from the 
grocery store, and in another he’s shot dead by a white man, in an event that’s 
interpreted differently by everyone near it. Was Tariq a thieving gang member who 
threatened somebody with a gun, or was he a kid heading home to his family who got 
victimized by a vigilante? The book explores the incident and its aftermath through 
short impressions from nearly twenty different people: Tariq’s friends and family, 
neighborhood residents black and white, the political activist reverend who comes 
to the neighborhood to raise media awareness, while the shooter and the victim are 
noticeably silent. The many voices provide poignant insights into the forces at play 
in the impoverished neighborhoods, where joining a gang is tough to resist, but 
the various perspectives also offer compelling and plausible insights into the way 
perceptions and preconceptions shape narratives and affect our actions. Individual 
stories are absorbing and complex, from the three boys who were Tariq’s childhood 
friends and who have ended up on very different paths, to the gang leader who’s 
triumphantly certain Tariq went down in battle, to the political pastor who’s torn 
between what’s advantageous and what’s right. The book is therefore an interesting 
complement to Myers’ Monster (BCCB 5/99) in its explorations of moral shifts, 
but it’s also an effective treatment of the way individual and media narratives have 
their own momentum independent of the truth and the way life can victimize a 
kid before a bullet gets there. This is sure to elicit discussion from readers, and the 
individual voices would also provide dramatic readers theater performances.  DS
MAguire, gregory Egg & Spoon. Candlewick, 2014 475p
ISBN 978-0-7636-7220-1 $17.99   
Ad Gr. 6-9
Her father is dead, her mother is dying, and her two brothers are missing, so Elena 
Rudina, a starving peasant in the early twentieth-century Russian countryside, has 
little hope of survival. Young Mademoiselle Ekaterina de Robichaux is traveling 
with her governess to be presented at the Tsar’s ball in St. Petersburg when her 
train is derailed in the nearly abandoned town of Miersk, where she finds Elena 
to be an entertaining distraction during the delay. The two girls look an awful lot 
alike, and when Ekaterina is accidentally left behind, Elena takes her place on the 
train as Ekaterina tries to survive in the Russian hinterlands. Maguire would hardly 
November 2014 • 167
leave a swapping-places story at that, however, and he mines a wealth of Russian 
folklore, with elements from firebirds to ice dragons to Baba Yaga, to create a lush 
and literary tale. The overall story arc takes a laboriously long time to get under-
way, though, and its periodic bouts of environmental moralism are awkwardly 
injected. Baba Yaga, with her rapid-fire historical and cultural references, is the 
most memorable among an otherwise bland cast of characters, and her humor runs 
the gamut from potty to highbrow, rewarding readers willing to persist through 
the slower patches. The book’s folkloric structure, wealth of dialogue, and possible 
curricular connections might also make this useful as a classroom readaloud for 
late elementary audiences.  KQG 
MAngAn, lucy Inside Charlie’s Chocolate Factory: The Complete Story of Willy 
Wonka, the Golden Ticket, and Roald Dahl’s Most Famous Creation. Puffin, 
2014 213p illus. with photographs
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-14-751348-9 $19.99   
R Gr. 10 up
Guardian columnist Lucy Mangan channels the irreverent and energetic wit of Dahl 
himself in this comprehensive exploration of the fifty-year-old but still enormously 
popular Charlie and the Chocolate Factory (BCCB 4/65). She draws on everything 
from personal memory to interviews and memoirs to the history of chocolate to 
literary criticism, then uses them to highlight Dahl’s writing process, the controver-
sies, the transfer of the book to stage and screen, its interpretation by illustrators, 
and its many appearances throughout popular culture. Some of her chapters are 
accessible enough to appeal to middle school, while her thoughtful analysis of the 
differences in appeal between the 1971 film and Tim Burton’s remake and her 
witty send-up of the critical reception and literary theory surrounding the book will 
impress readers with some literary sophistication as well as affection for Dahl. Her 
whimsical authorial interjections as well as her own rejection of pompous dismissals 
of Dahl’s achievement ally her firmly with those who are and those who once were 
child readers, and the many photographs, international book covers, and reprinted 
illustrations are golden tickets to a museum quality history of the book. Her many 
opinions about the nature of children’s literature in general have an outlaw feel that 
will appeal to tweens and teens, and her joyful devotion to Dahl’s project makes 
literary research itself seem downright scrumdiddlyumptious.  KC  
MArkle, sAndrA The Case of the Vanishing Little Brown Bats: A Scientific Mys-
tery. Millbrook, 2014 48p illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-1463-1 $29.27   
R Gr. 3-6
Outside the upstate New York cave, little brown bats are flying when they should 
be hibernating; inside the cave, bat corpses lie on the floor, and noses of sleeping 
bats are encrusted in a furry white substance. Even worse, the scene repeats the 
next year in more caves. The little brown bat, an integral player in ecological bal-
ance throughout the region, is obviously in danger, and scientists collaborate first 
to find the cause, and then to find a solution. Markle retraces scientists’ race to 
eliminate climate change, viruses, and pesticides as culprits, and then shows how 
a change in investigative strategy leads them to discover a fungus at work. Now 
the problem turns to the various approaches to fungus control proposed to keep 
stricken bats safe and prevent the spread of their condition as the illness steadily 
marches westward through the United States and Canada. Although this short 
168 • The bulleTiN
work is not divided into chapters, section headings clearly demarcate themes and 
guide readers methodically through the investigation. In-text definitions; plentiful, 
clearly captioned color photographs; a glossary, index, and suggestions for further 
research all combine to support middle-graders as they learn how to read science 
and enjoy untangling a truly intriguing real-life mystery.  EB
MArr, MelissA Made for You. Harper/HarperCollins, 2014 358p
ISBN 978-0-06-201119-0 $17.99   
R Gr. 9-12 
Granddaughter of the owner of the local winery on one side and the most well-
respected preacher in town on the other, Eva dates the right boy, Robert, but se-
cretly pines for the wrong one, Nate. Eva’s real problem, though, is one she knows 
nothing about: one of her friends is an unhinged stalker who has decided that if he 
can’t have Eva, he has to kill her. He hits her with his car, but she lives, suffering 
a traumatic brain injury that leaves her with the inexplicable power to experience 
people’s future deaths by touching them. Unsettling as this is, she knows she must 
find a way to use her power when the killer strikes again, this time leaving corpses 
that contain messages for Eva that she can’t begin to decipher. Meanwhile, she 
and Nate rekindle their friendship, and both find themselves wanting more. The 
story shifts among three narrators: Eva, her devoted friend Grace, and the killer. 
His chapters are genuinely chill-inducing as he justifies his obsession with Eva 
through twisted religious rhetoric. Grace and Eva are thoroughly likable, articulate 
and strong-willed girls, with the additional fillip for Eva of bearing the burden of 
much Southern and family tradition. Her mother’s officious attempts to remake 
herself into a model parent after Eva’s assault are wryly and subtly comic; between 
the suspense, the horror, the romance, and the wit, this will have equal appeal for 
fans of Sarah Dessen and Rosemary Clement-Moore.  KC
MAtthews, Jenny Children Growing Up with War; written and illus. with pho-
tographs by Jenny Matthews. Candlewick, 2014 48p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6942-3 $17.99   
R Gr. 4-7
Matthews draws from the fruits of her years of work as a freelance photojournalist 
to illuminate the plight of child exiles and refugees in war-torn regions of the world 
over the past two decades. Although a brief glance at the layout suggests a somewhat 
chaotic approach, the material is actually organized following the UN Convention 
on the Rights of the Child. After an introduction to how she conducts her work, 
particularly traveling into dangerous areas, Matthews looks at how displacement 
undermines the “right to a name and nationality”; fractured families undermine 
the “right to affection, love, and understanding”; the collapse of health care sys-
tems undermines the “right to adequate nutrition and medical care”; reliance on 
child labor undermines the “right to develop individual abilities”; and the clos-
ing of schools undermines the “right to free education.” Captioned color photos 
spotlight children from war zones in Africa and the Middle East, while the text 
goes beyond description of the scenes to consider the photographer’s own response 
to the children she meets, as well as the ethical implications of plying her trade 
among the world’s suffering. Valuable end matter includes succinct overviews of 
“The Main Conflicts” in ten countries, websites of NGOs active in these areas, a 
glossary, a map noting world conflict zones, and an index. Sadly, it’s impossible to 
keep this kind of journalistic coverage up to the minute, but the issues raised here 
November 2014 • 169
will help readers view the news with empathy and the documentary photographer’s 
job with respect.  EB
Myers, wAlter deAn On a Clear Day. Crown, 2014 [256p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-38754-5 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-38753-8 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-38755-2 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Two decades into the future, America is very recognizably America, but eight mega 
corporations, the C-8, now have a stranglehold on the global economy. Sixteen-
year-old Dahlia Grillo, who has lost most of her family, is getting by in a small 
apartment, but she does miss the routine and camaraderie of high school since it 
was replaced by universal online education. When a pair of teens familiar with 
her math prowess shows up at her door to recruit her into a resistance movement 
against the C-8, she’s therefore game. She joins a team of six other kids (including 
a chess prodigy and an ex-con) to attend a conference in London, at which other 
teen and young adult groups meet to strategize resistance activities. However, noth-
ing much seems to come from the meetings until Dahlia’s group is approached 
by a young Moroccan warlord, Sayeed Ibn Zayad, set on intimidating them into 
withdrawal. Now they must speedily assemble the pieces to a transnational puzzle 
that includes the C-8’s announcement of a projected spike in profit, the discovery 
of a promising process for cell mutation control, and Sayeed’s ambitions to become 
a global player. The kids-versus-evil corporation theme is already well established 
in YA lit, and this title faces stiff competition from novels that devote more page 
space to creating a fully realized dystopia. Moreover, Myers never really plays his 
strong suit—character development—settling instead for a septet of teens who don’t 
amount to more than their assigned skill sets. Still, the implication that the even 
the most optimistic technological developments may prove toxic under unbridled 
corporate control is worth serious YA consideration.  EB
neri, g. Knockout Games. Carolrhoda Lab, 2014 293p
ISBN 978-1-4677-3269-7 $17.95   
R Gr. 9-12
After her parents split, Erica is angry that she has to move to a poor neighborhood 
in St. Louis and be one of the few white people in her high school. She gets at-
titude from one girl in particular, but when the two girls get into a fistfight over 
Erica’s digital camera, Erica takes the blame and Destiny rewards Erica by inviting 
her into Destiny’s crew as a filmmaker. What Destiny’s filming, though, takes 
Erica by surprise: the kids, most of them in middle school, are trying to impress 
their magnetic older leader, Kalvin, by knocking out a random stranger with one 
punch. Initially repulsed, Erica feels a rush when her videos go viral, but she gets 
an even greater rush when she knocks someone out herself. Her new emotions are 
entangled with the glow she feels under Kalvin’s approval, even when, against her 
express wishes, he films them having sex and shares it with Destiny. By the time 
Erica realizes how troubled Kalvin is, everything has gone too far, and Erica has to 
face some harsh consequences. Rather than merely trading on the latest sensation, 
Neri crafts a hauntingly realistic story about the unintentional slides into moral 
uncertainty that can happen when a person feels lonely and unloved. Through Kal-
vin’s slick assurances, readers will half believe that knocking out a stranger is really 
170 • The bulleTiN
no big deal compared to what you gain from it: a physical high from the exercise 
of power and violence, and the admiration of people who seem worth attracting. 
It’s only ever a half belief, however, as Neri manages to get readers to both share 
and disengage from Erica’s perspective through her positions on both sides of the 
camera. This is a hard yet important story to share, even when the novelty of this 
particular violent “game” fades into the next one.  KC 
novAk, b. J. The Book with No Pictures. Dial, 2014 [48p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-4171-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-7 yrs
You might think that a picture book with no pictures would be boring. You might 
also think that someone who wrote the adult-centric comedy of television’s The Of-
fice wouldn’t be able to hit the sweet spot with preschoolers. You would be wrong. 
This picture book with no pictures knows a thing or two about both books and 
kid-friendly comedy, the most important of which is that when adults read picture 
books, they have to read all the words, even if those words say “I am a monkey 
who taught myself to read.” Playing with font color and style to distinguish among 
the straightfaced narrative voice of the book, the nonsense words, silly songs and 
howl-eliciting phrases, and the presumed indignation of the reader-aloud who has 
to suffer the book’s manipulations, this is a natch for both lap reads and storytimes, 
but it would also work well in a lesson for older readers on graphic design or oral 
performance. As a foray into a self-conscious understanding of book behavior, it 
has less existential angst than Mo Willems’ We Are in a Book (BCCB 10/10), and 
its explicit targeting of readers by lapsitters makes it all the funnier. Librarians 
may have to sell this book to their pre-readers, but do it with a wink and it’s sure 
to go viral; once children get the joke, they’ll want to play it on as many of their 
grownups as possible.  KC
perkins, stephAnie, ed. My True Love Gave to Me: Twelve Holiday Stories. St. 
Martin’s Griffin, 2014 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-250-05930-7 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4668-6389-7 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-10
In a nod to the title’s musical inspiration, twelve tales of holiday romance by notable 
YA authors make up this festively cheerful collection. Both realism and fantasy are 
represented: Rainbow Rowell’s opening “Midnights” provides snapshots of Noel 
and Mags’ relationship on each New Year’s Eve of their high school years, offering 
a brief but compelling look at a friendship as it moves towards something more. 
Stephanie Perkins contributes a delightful meet-cute at a Christmas tree lot followed 
with some romantic banter and concluding with a breathless kiss. David Levithan 
provides an alternative to the collection’s otherwise predominant heteronormativ-
ity with his portrayal of two boys finding warmth and solace on Christmas Eve in 
their romance even as their family foundations are shaken. Kelly Link and Holly 
Black go for more dark, supernatural fare with their individual stories, though each 
ends happily, and Laini Taylor’s fantastical tale of the literal elevating power of love 
caps the collection. Most of the stories center on Christmas, but Hanukkah, New 
Year’s Eve, and Winter Solstice are also featured. Satisfying and just sweet enough, 
like a good Christmas cookie, this will obviously appeal to those readers who get 
November 2014 • 171
out the holiday decorations the day after Halloween, and it may even convert a 
Scrooge or two.  KQG 
perry, MichAel The Scavengers. Harper/HarperCollins, 2014 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-202616-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-223909-9 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7
Ford Falcon is the new self-chosen moniker of our protagonist, who decided that her 
old name of Maggie was unsuitable for a post-apocalyptic Out-Bubbler (someone 
who has chosen life outside of new protective domes). Ford’s mostly busy helping 
to care for her mother, father, brother, and neighbors, scavenging for barter items, 
keeping spirits up, and fighting off the GreyDevils (zombie-like people who are ad-
dicted to a genetically engineered corn that heals but also causes horrific withdrawal 
symptoms if not consumed regularly), and, even with the hardships, she loves her 
life. Her father holds terrible secrets that put everything she loves at risk, however, 
and Ford needs to find a way to save them all. Ford’s humor indicates that she 
has no intention of letting life beat her completely, no matter the obstacles. Her 
resilience is one of the most memorable aspects of this novel, and Perry carefully 
balances the protagonist’s occasional vulnerable moments with healthy doses of the 
bravado any kid would need to endure the situation. The intense family dynamic, 
wherein Ford is often the most parental of all, is also beautifully conveyed; it’s 
clear how she is formed out of the love of her family and friends even though she 
mostly seems to be the one giving back to each of them. The grim subject matter 
and uncertain ending (a sequel seems likely) will likely push the target audience 
a bit, but Ford Falcon capably demonstrates how a smart, determined kid might 
handle the end of the world and her place in it.  AS
prince, liz Tomboy; written and illus. by Liz Prince. Zest, 2014 255p
ISBN 978-1-936976-55-3 $15.99   
R Gr. 7-12
This graphic memoir focuses on gender identity and the ways in which young 
Liz, from early childhood, resisted her girl label even while struggling constantly 
to understand what it was that actually made her female. The book begins with 
Liz as a very young child and continues through adolescence, in a series of related 
vignettes. One of the most important insights—hard won after over a decade of 
searching for something about herself to love—that Liz gains is that gender can be 
identified on one’s own terms: girl doesn’t have to equal cheerleader. This recogni-
tion at least sets her on a path where she can look back with more equanimity on 
her own life, and with more grace for other girls whom she had mostly dismissed. 
The illustrations, deceptively simple black and white line drawings, mainly re-
flect the text, though there are moments when the grimace/scowl on Liz’s face is 
(amusingly) absent in her verbal response. The comic book–style panels and the 
clear speech bubbles make the format accessible to all of the autobiography and 
GLTBQ readers who may not read many graphic novels but should absolutely see 
what Liz has to say.  AS
172 • The bulleTiN
rAe, Andrew Moonhead and the Music Machine; written and illus. by Andrew 
Rae. Nobrow, 2014 176p
ISBN 978-1-907704-78-9 $24.95   
R Gr. 10-12
This quirky, sometimes bizarre graphic novel features Joey Moonhead, a normal 
teen except for his head, which is a moon. It’s never explained whether this is lit-
eral or figurative (evidence exists pointing to both), but that’s not the focus of the 
story. Aside from the anatomical quirk, this is a high school drama, focusing on a 
geeky kid who daydreams about the hot, popular chick, ignores the outrageously 
cool and equally hot, if nerdy, girl who actually likes him, and dreams of being a 
rock god. Joey’s undaunted by his abysmal failure at creating a rock star instrument 
out of scraps, since he’s got lives to change with his music anyway, and a few good 
friends willing to help him do so. The story itself is familiar, but the true glory of 
this graphic novel lies in the spectacular illustrations. Multi-page spreads invite 
lingering, and readers will be rewarded for careful examination of illustrations as 
there are clever details hidden in most (Joey’s fantasy hookup, for instance, is a 
marvel of fertile imagination featuring breast mountains, too-graphic-for-O’Keeffe 
flowers, and copulating bunnies). The exquisite color choices and format decisions 
highlight Rae’s impeccable eye for illustrative work. Joey’s story may be standard 
material, but the visual rendering of it is truly something exceptional.  AS
rAy, MAry lyn Go to Sleep, Little Farm; illus. by Christopher Silas Neal. Hough-
ton Mifflin Harcourt, 2014 40p
ISBN 978-0-544-15014-0 $16.99   
Ad 3-6 yrs
In this gently rhyming bedtime tale, animals all around ready themselves for bed 
(“Brown rabbits snuggle in a sleepy rabbit heap”) as a little girl winds down her 
day in her bedroom. Initially, the lively little girl playfully emulates the animals, 
curling up in her bed the way the bear curls up in a log, or settling underneath it 
the way mice settle down underneath the tree roots; eventually, though, she’s too 
tuckered to do anything but drift off to sleep as her parents give her goodnight 
hugs and kisses. Though the scansion sometimes stumbles, the text offers an allur-
ing blend of comely imagery (the evening is “speckled with stars like the spots on 
a fawn”) and lullingly somnolent phraseology (“All around, dusk turns to night”), 
touched with occasional fancy (“Chickens roost where chickens will”). Twilit hues 
in a limited palette (slate blue predominates) on matte pages give the mixed-media 
art an inviting retro flavor. The shadowy landscapes and animal scenes have sturdy, 
occasionally comically touched appeal (snoozing critters emit snoring Zzzs) and 
some pleasingly sweeping vistas. The draftsmanship tips at times from the naïve into 
the awkward, though, and the concept is confusing, with the kid/animal parallel 
pattern set up only to be swiftly abandoned. Still, kids, especially fans of cuddly 
creatures, may find this a suitable nudge off to dreamland.  DS
rocklin, JoAnne Fleabrain Loves Franny. Amulet, 2014 275p
ISBN 978-1-4197-1068-1 $16.95   
Ad Gr. 5-7
Recovering from polio in Pittsburgh during the summer of 1952, ten-year-old 
Franny takes to checking the cobwebs of her home for messages after becoming 
enamored with Charlotte’s Web. A tiny creature does make contact with Franny, 
whose illness has left her in a wheelchair, but it’s not a spider but rather a flea 
living on her dog who leaves her mysterious epistles. Fleabrain’s survival of a past 
November 2014 • 173
flea-eradication attempt seems to have left him with special powers, including the 
ability to read and write, and he and Franny strike up an unusual friendship, one 
that satisfies both lonesome, intellectual flea and lonesome, intellectual girl. Another 
run-in with flea powder leaves Fleabrain with even more powers: he’s able to make 
Franny (in her wheelchair) levitate, and they embark on a series of good deeds in 
the community during the night. Meanwhile, Franny deals with the heartbreak 
of her peers’ fearful exclusion of her, and, eventually, her school’s decision to not 
readmit her as long as she’s in a wheelchair. Rocklin gets high marks for originality 
here, and for the incredibly sympathetic portrait she paints of a polio survivor in 
the days before inclusionary laws and wheelchair accommodations were the norm. 
Unfortunately, some of the more magical moments are a bit too unsubstantiated 
to hold up, and some readers may find their eyes glazing over as the loquacious 
Fleabrain launches into one of his spiels. An extensive and thorough author’s note 
provides additional information about polio and the history of Salk’s vaccine 
development and a bibliography is also included. This would make an interesting 
pairing with Peg Kehret’s Small Steps: The Year I Got Polio (BCCB 11/96), or a good 
choice on its own for kids who like their history with a sprinkling of whimsy.  JH
rubin, susAn goldMAn Stand There! She Shouted: The Invincible Photographer 
Julia Margaret Cameron; illus. by Bagram Ibatoulline; photographs by Julia Margaret 
Cameron. Candlewick, 2014 73p
ISBN 978-0-7636-5753-6 $16.99   
R Gr. 4-6
As the offspring of an East India Company employee, Julia Margaret Pattle was a 
true daughter of the raj, educated in England and France, well equipped to handle 
the social obligation of her class, and a successful member of the “fishing fleet” who 
came of age and hooked a good husband back in India. A contented marriage to 
the considerably older Charles Hay Cameron resulted in six children and access to 
a cadre of artists and scientists who helped form Julia Cameron’s worldview and 
aesthetic sense. So, in her forties, Cameron enjoyed both the leisure and curiosity 
to make good use of the camera she received as a gift from her children. Self-taught 
and determined, she enlisted (well, bullied) friends and neighbors into posing for 
portraits and for romantically composed dramatic scenes, notable for the soft, 
hazy focus she discovered by accident. Cameron’s late-blooming career, personal 
idiosyncrasies, and accessible if quirky photographs make her a good subject for a 
youth biography, and the spacious layout and beautiful full-page photo reproduc-
tions are particularly inviting. Ibatoulline’s spot art and full illustrations approach 
photorealism as they evoke a mood of Victoriana and often recreate Cameron’s 
interactions with her subjects. Quotation sources, photo credits, and an index are 
included, as well as an adult bibliography and list of museums that feature Julia 
Margaret Cameron’s work.  EB
sAlisbury, grAhAM Hunt for the Bamboo Rat. Lamb, 2014 [336p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-94070-5 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-84266-5 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97970-4 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Salisbury returns to the theme of his previous acclaimed books (Under the Blood-Red 
Sun, BCCB 11/94, etc.), the plight of Japanese-Americans in World War II, who 
174 • The bulleTiN
were American patriots mistrusted by both homeland and enemy. Zenji Watanabe’s 
flawless mastery of English and Japanese is well known to his ROTC officer, so the 
recent high school graduate is quickly recruited into military intelligence and sent to 
Manila, just in advance of U.S. entry into the war. Of course, Pearl Harbor ups the 
ante of his mission, and his superiors instruct him to allow himself to be captured 
among the Filipinos rather than Americans, the better to gain further intel, as well 
as to maximize his own chances for survival. Unfortunately, when he’s rounded up 
into an internment camp, Zenji is singled out by his captors as a possible American 
spy or Japanese traitor, either of which is likely to assure his execution. Salisbury 
bases his novel on the wartime experiences of decorated Army intelligence agent 
Richard Sakakida, with other real life figures taking on supporting roles. Although 
the dialogue-rich text is accessible to younger readers, the complexity of Zenji’s 
cat-and-mouse game and the intensity of the torture scenes suggest a more mature 
audience with some background knowledge of World War II. This is a worthy 
companion piece to the Under the Blood-Red Sun titles, now remarketed as the 
Prisoners of the Empire series.  EB 
sAuerwein, leigh River Music. Namelos, 2014 120p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-60898-186-1 $18.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-60898-187-8 $9.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60898-188-5 $8.95   
R Gr. 7-10
This quiet novel spins its stories of Southern life in the aftermath of the Civil War 
through a multiplicity of voices, among them Rainy, a young girl who does not 
know who her mother is; Will, the gentle farmer who took her in as an infant; 
and Marie Bijou, the former slave turned companion of Gabrielle, a fragile white 
woman transplanted from New Orleans to North Carolina. These and other 
characters paint lyrical word portraits of the way their histories, especially during 
the war, shaped their present circumstances and set them on a path toward futures 
they hadn’t imagined, with Gabrielle’s estranged husband headed to California; 
Marie, her husband, and her brother setting up a carpentry shop in New Orleans; 
and Will and Gabrielle coming together as a family with Rainy. Stories from the 
Reconstruction era are rare for young adults; while deeply steeped in the concerns 
of its time period, this one also speaks eloquently to perennial longings for family 
and new beginnings in the aftermath of pain, loss, and shame.  KC
schulz, heidi Hook’s Revenge; illus. by John Hendrix. Disney Hyperion, 
2014 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4231-9867-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 5-8
Jocelyn Hook is the only daughter of the pirate known as Captain Jas. Hook, who 
was, unbeknownst to her, recently consumed by the Neverland crocodile. She’s an 
unruly child, proud of the father she knows only by reputation and strongly desir-
ous of living up to his legacy. Her grandfather’s attempts to rein her in fail, and 
the finishing school he sends her to is rapidly becoming unbearable, when destiny 
arrives in the form of a letter informing her that her father is dead and that she is 
his only hope for revenge against the beast who claimed his life. Jocelyn feels more 
than up to the challenge, but, like Wendy and her brothers before her, she discovers 
that Neverland is not what she imagined, and she realizes that she might not be 
November 2014 • 175
able to live up to her father’s fearsome reputation. Peter Pan makes only a cameo 
appearance here, but the other denizens of Neverland are put to grand comic use 
as Jocelyn swashbuckles her way through multiple adventures on her way to claim 
her place as the captain of her father’s ship. The real charm here is in the unnamed 
narrator, whose arch and clever diction and open disdain for children make him 
the perfect purveyor of Jocelyn’s story; both narrator and protagonist are prideful 
and cruel, such that he relishes her successes at villainy as much as her near-misses. 
Readers will delight both the story and the storytelling.  KC
shull, MegAn The Swap. Tegen/HarperCollins, 2014 383p
ISBN 978-0-06-231169-6 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 6-8
Both Ellie and Jack are uncomfortable in their own skins. No worries—a magical 
nurse at their middle school will fix that with a spell that makes them change places 
and remain trapped in each other’s bodies, at least until Monday when they can 
find the nurse and get themselves righted. Until then, both promise to fly under 
the radar and then fail spectacularly at doing so. Hijinks ensue, of course, but there 
are also surprising vulnerabilities that they bring to their temporary new roles that 
will leave both of their lives changed even after they revert. Alternating narration 
gives each protagonist space to share his or her misadventures and discoveries, and 
the pace, helped by flexibility in chapter length, is dramatic and effective. It is truly 
unfortunate that a pat, too-perfect ending will likely leave even the most earnest 
readers rolling their eyes; in addition, key scenes where Ellie and Jack are both in 
the same place lose impact from being confusingly written. Even so, readers who 
ever looked at their peers, particularly of the opposite sex, and wondered what re-
ally went on in their private lives or personal thoughts may find this to be a sweet, 
amusing look at all the things we could never know about someone else unless we 
were literally swapped with them for a bit.  AS
slAde, suzAnne With Books and Bricks: How Booker T. Washington Built a School; 
illus. by Nicole Tadgell. Whitman, 2014 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8075-0897-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 6-9 yrs
Former slave Booker T. Washington’s childhood and single-minded quest for an 
education has been the subject of several picture-book biographies, but here Slade 
highlights a precise episode in Washington’s later life, when he arrived at Tuskegee, 
Alabama as an educator and discovered he had no proper building in which to teach. 
The leaky wooden edifice, crammed with students, needed to be replaced with a 
sturdy brick building, but there were no bricks and no money with which to buy 
them. The solution, so obvious to Washington but so trying for his students, was 
to make their own bricks. This required digging deep for Alabama clay, mixing it 
with mud and straw, molding it, and firing the bricks in a homemade kiln. The first 
batch of thousands of bricks were lost to a faulty kiln, as was the next batch, and 
the next. At this point, Washington knew a proper kiln was required, and he sold 
his own precious gold watch for it. The bricks were fired, the first of many build-
ings was erected, and the rest is Tuskegee Institute history. Slade supplies enough 
background on Washington’s childhood to provide context but keeps the focus 
mostly on this single event, putting further information on the institute itself into 
closing notes. Tadgell’s watercolor illustrations are literal enough to offer viewers 
176 • The bulleTiN
a sense of place and process, while a recurrent rainbow theme—most effectively 
used to illuminate Washington’s features as he teaches under an umbrella in a 
rainstorm—reminds them of the elusiveness of Washington’s dream. Quotation 
sources and a short bibliography are included.  EB 
surovec, yAsMine A Bed for Kitty; written and illus. by Yasmine Surovec. Roar-
ing Brook, 2014 [40p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-863-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 3-5 yrs
Little Chloe is delighted to bring her beloved cat (who “loves sleeping”) the gift of 
a new bed. In true feline fashion, however, Kitty prefers to sleep everywhere but 
her bed—Chloe’s sock drawer, the sink, a potted plant, the bag the bed came in. 
A disappointed Chloe sprawls on Kitty’s bed, finally catching Kitty’s interest; what 
the cat wants, though, isn’t to lie on her bed, but to lie on Chloe who’s lying on 
Kitty’s bed. This is cat and kid reduced to their simple essence—the cat is sweet 
and completely unbiddable, and the kid wants to delight her beloved pet. Audiences 
with cats of their own will readily recognize the dynamic, and the spare text, with 
its gently controlled vocabulary, will be easily accessible to young listeners (and to 
novice readers). The stylized, simple line and digital color art recalls Dick Bruna 
and Eric Hill, with both Chloe and Kitty endearingly toylike, while a sly polka-dot 
theme and some realistic clutter add energy to the scenes. This will ring true for 
young pet owners and pet owner wannabes, who will all be eager to chime in with 
true or fictional accounts of their own charges.  DS
sussMAn, elissA Stray. Greenwillow/HarperCollins, 2014 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-227455-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-227458-8 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Princess Aislynn tries to control her “curse”—the innate magic within every woman 
in Aislynn’s world—and make herself suitably passive as marriageable material, but 
a slip up reveals the full extent of her supposedly wicked abilities. She’s therefore 
sent to Elderwood Academy to be trained as a chaste fairy godmother and cured of 
her impure tendencies. Even at Elderwood, however, Aislynn finds that her magic 
is acting up, and she’s terrified that she’s destined to be a “stray,” a woman who 
falls away from the righteous Path and under the sway of the Wicked Queen. Sev-
eral new acquaintances at her new school, including a handsome gardener named 
Thackery, reveal that the Path and those that teach it might not be as wholesome 
as they claim, and Aislynn is faced with a new reality in which her powers might 
actually be an asset. Sussman paints a particularly intriguing portrait in Aislynn 
of a girl entrenched in a culture that shames women and their magical abilities; 
she honestly believes in her own wickedness and, at least initially, is unable to 
see herself any other way. Even when she is left with no choice but to rebel, she’s 
plagued by self-doubt and even, at points, self-mutilation, offering readers a look 
at the emotional and physical scars such shaming leaves. The motivations of those 
responsible for the Path are frustratingly unclear, however, and the villains are almost 
caricatures in their cruelty. The ending is also so abrupt and unresolved that readers 
are left with more questions than answers, but a hinted-at sequel might clear those 
issues up. Fans of fairy-tale tropes turned on their heads may therefore be willing 
to stick around to see exactly how Aislynn fares with her new perspective.  KQG
November 2014 • 177
titchenell, f. J. r. Splinters; written by F. J. R. Titchenell and Matt Cart-
er. Jolly Fish, 2014 [328p] (The Prospero Chronicles)
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-939967-39-8 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Rumors of paranormal activity have made Prospero, California a tourist hotspot for 
supernatural enthusiasts, but sixteen-year-old Ben Pastor discovers the true horror 
behind the kitsch when he returns to the small town after a ten-year absence. He’s 
initially there to attend the memorial service for Haley Perkins, a childhood friend 
who has been missing for two months and is presumed dead, but Ben turns into 
the town hero when he finds a bedraggled Haley stumbling down the street with 
no memory of what happened to her. Meanwhile, Prospero lifer Mina Todd knows 
full well what happened to Haley and must convince Ben that his friend has been 
replaced by a Splinter, one of the monstrous, body-snatching creatures that live 
in the local abandoned mines; an encounter with another Splinter persuades Ben 
to join Mina’s attempt to hold back the Splinters’ efforts to take over the town. 
Narration alternates between the two protagonists, with Ben mostly playing the 
straight man to Mina, who mixes Holmesian logic and Fox Mulder’s paranoia and 
throws in a dash of deadpan wit. Indeed, the balance of horror and humor here 
has a very X-Files feel about it, with our two heroes engaging in amusingly clever, 
whip-smart dialogue as they do battle with some genuinely terrifying Splinters, 
the descriptions of which will have fans of monster films utterly enthralled. Mina’s 
perspective immerses readers in the action almost immediately and gives readers 
an easy reason to suspend their disbelief. A promising series opener, this will satisfy 
those readers who like their scary stories to be as clever as they are chilling.  KQG
tougAs, shelley The Graham Cracker Plot. Roaring Brook, 2014 [288p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-988-7 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-6
Daisy is certain of her jailbird father’s innocence, and she’s shocked when she ar-
rives with her grandmother on a regular visit to the low-security prison to find Dad 
(who jokingly refers to himself as the Chemist) badly bruised from a beating. She 
pitches a fit and has her visiting privileges temporarily revoked, so in her mind the 
next logical step to is to save the Chemist by breaking him out of jail. Her accom-
plice is Graham, part friend and part social embarrassment, the son of a mother as 
dysfunctional as Daisy’s own. Since neither kid is adequately supervised, it’s not all 
that difficult for them to rally the services of Graham’s brain-damaged cousin and 
set into play a dark comedy of errors that ends (after car theft, house vandalism, 
and the concoction of a delusional plan to emigrate to Canada) in actually crashing 
the prison fence. Dad is not, however, sprung, and Daisy finally learns the truth 
that relatives have shielded her from all along—that the Chemist produced illegal 
drugs and is guilty as sin. While the details of the breakout plot play as a madcap 
caper, the more sobering threads of child neglect and accident-induced brain trauma 
get swept along in the comedic current and threatened with trivialization, leaving 
the narrative tonally uneven and emotionally confusing. Readers who can accept 
Daisy as the still immature and largely unreliable narrator she is, though, may find 
her adventure appealing and, ultimately, quite touching.  EB
178 • The bulleTiN
vAn leeuwen, JeAn The Missing Pieces of Me. Two Lions, 2014 [240p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4778-4729-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
Ten-year-old Weezie tries everything she knows to make her mother happy, but 
she fears her mother doesn’t really love her. Her kind neighbor tries to assure her 
that she is a good girl, and that her mother is so hard on her because she’s lost so 
much and because raising three kids on her own, each with a different dad, is hard. 
Momma also won’t tell Weezie who her father is, so Weezie does some sleuthing to 
try to find him on her own. With the help of an old friend and a new one, Weezie 
locates her father’s mother, but it’s only through bonding with the father of her 
youngest sibling, who has his own problems with her mean-spirited mother, that 
she finally learns to stand up for herself and insist that she be allowed to meet her 
only remaining grandmother. Though Weezie’s story is heartbreakingly sad, she 
herself remains low-key and pragmatic about the whole thing, doing what it takes 
to survive life with a difficult woman with exceptionally poor parenting skills. 
The memories she shares of her jolly grandmother make Weezie’s empathy and 
good nature believable even amid her grim confession circumstances; readers will 
relate to her tenacity and resilience despite the ’80s setting that has her looking 
through newspapers and using payphones to track down her dad. The fact that 
Weezie ends up feeling okay about herself without her and her mother coming to 
terms is refreshingly honest as well as heartening for readers whose adults aren’t as 
emotionally available as they’d like them to be.  KC
verdAy, JessicA Of Monsters and Madness. Egmont, 2014 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-463-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-464-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Summoned by her father to Philadelphia, seventeen-year-old Annabel Lee finds 
the cold, dreary streets of the early nineteenth-century city an unwelcome change 
from the sunny heat of Siam, where she and her now-deceased mother had been 
living for the last ten years. The erratic moods of her doctor father, his foreboding 
and shadowy estate, and a recent spate of murders nearby make Annabel even more 
uncomfortable, but she manages to befriend a few of the house servants, who warn 
her not to wander the grounds at night and particularly to never enter her father’s 
laboratory. She also finds a companion in Allan Poe, one of her father’s assistant, 
and an enemy in Edgar, her father’s second assistant, whose cruel behavior disturbs 
her almost as much as his eerie resemblance to Allan. The murders increase in fre-
quency along with the odd behavior of her father, Allan, and Edgar, and Annabel 
finds herself in the middle of an unfathomable horror when the life of her servant 
friend is threatened. The multiple allusions to Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde, Franken-
stein, and Poe’s works make for more of a cluttered pastiche than a stylish homage, 
and the classic gothic elements—the creepy house, the mad scientist, etc.—feel 
like generic retreads, as does Annabel’s twisted romance with Allan/Edgar. Still, 
the themes of death, morality, love, and desire are all here, and the tone moves to 
true horror when Edgar reveals the extent of his dirty work in vivid and visceral 
detail. Readers just discovering classic horror works might be intrigued, and the 
book’s quick pace will be particularly appealing to those readers still intimidated 
by Shelley and Stevenson.  KQG 
November 2014 • 179
voigt, cynthiA Mister Max: The Book of Secrets. Knopf, 2014 356p (Mister 
Max)
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-97124-2 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97684-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-7
It’s been just six weeks since twelve-year-old Max’s parents were waylaid and spirited 
off to a South American country (in The Book of Lost Things, BCCB 10/13), and 
although locating and rescuing the pair is high on the boy’s priority list, so is staking 
his own claim to independence as a “Solutioneer,” a self-created career mashup of 
problem-solving and detection. In this round, Max tackles issues small and large, 
from the plea of a schoolboy to discover what his father does when he slips out at 
night (with a sweetly benign conclusion), to the Queensbridge mayor’s request to 
solve a series of small business arsons, an investigation that leads directly to Max’s 
kidnapping and a theatrical performance by his friends. The series continues to 
be distinguished by Voigt’s successful melding of genuine tension and humane 
approaches to thorny problems. As the cast of local characters grows, so does the 
character of the city of Queensbridge as a robust fictional setting. Max, his grand-
mother, and his friends may not be in residence too much longer, though, as the 
save-the-parents plot heats up and a trip to Andesia is likely to whisk them all into 
further adventure and—dare we hope?—danger.  EB 
wAters, tAwni Beauty of the Broken. Simon Pulse, 2014 [368p]
ISBN 978-1-4814-1857-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 8-10
Mara has grown up as her father’s favorite, but she knows that she still has to tiptoe 
around him to avoid setting off his abusive rages. He’s quick to take his anger out 
on her mother, who has mostly drifted off in an alcoholic cloud, and her brother, 
who now has permanent brain damage from an attack. Her growing certainty that 
she is in love with her friend Xylia, a free-spirited San Francisco girl who simply 
doesn’t belong in their conservative New Mexico town, forces Mara to realize that 
she may not be her father’s golden child for much longer. Even as she worries that 
he might kill her, she pursues a romance with Xylia, giddily falling into the first 
joyful thing she has known for years. The romance itself is passionate and sweet, 
building at a realistic pace and offering Mara a glimpse of the possibilities of the 
world beyond her hellish four walls. Unfortunately, the avalanche of grief, while per-
haps not unexpected given a life built around an endlessly cruel man, is numbingly 
intense, and Mara’s detached response—she pretends she doesn’t exist and ignores 
the needs of those around her—is painful and unsatisfying. In addition, while the 
lyrical tone is artful, it gives Mara’s narration a sophisticated distance that’s at odds 
with her character and situation. Nevertheless, readers who like their true love to 
have some intense obstacles will be rooting for Xylia and Mara all the way.  AS
weingArten, gene Me & Dog; illus. by Eric Shansby. Simon, 2014 42p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-9413-8 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-9414-5 $10.99   
Ad 5-8 yrs
In rhyming couplets, our young narrator, Sid, contemplates his dog, Murphy, 
and Murphy’s view of the world—which revolves around Sid. Sid muses about 
180 • The bulleTiN
the contrast between his own philosophy (“most things happen just . . . because”) 
and Murphy’s Sid-centric approach that credits Sid with every blessing and every 
curse; though Sid feels a bit of an imposter, since he knows he’s not as mighty as 
Murphy thinks, he decides ultimately they’re still a pretty happy pair. There’s an 
unusual touch of epistemology here, with the kid’s nascent awareness that life isn’t 
fair and his understanding that his dog’s view is flattering but inaccurate; there’s 
also a nicely unstated implication that the canine’s perspective reflects the child’s 
own younger view of his parents. However, phrasing is sometimes awkward, with 
words and details inserted to pad out lines, and there’s little actual story. The 
digital art is smooth and efficient, with a Watterson-esque edge to the cartoonish 
draftsmanship for Sid, while dachshund Murphy (and the simple backgrounds) 
suggest Laura Vaccaro Seeger’s Dog (Dog and Bear, BCCB 6/07, etc.). This could 
be a quirky entry in a dog-themed sequence or a prompt for a discussion about 
viewpoint and authority.  DS
westerfeld, scott Afterworlds. Simon Pulse, 2014 [608p]
ISBN 978-1-4814-2234-5 $19.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
This creative novel combines two books in one: firstly, the story of a young author 
living on her own in New York, and secondly, the whole content of her book. Teen-
aged Darcy can’t believe that she got her first novel accepted, and that she is now 
truly living a writer’s dream, editing and planning her sequel while she lives off her 
advance. Alternating with the story about Darcy is the story by Darcy, which stars 
Lizzie, a girl who edged a bit too closely to death (she survived a terrorist attack) 
and now is entrusted with guiding the dead to the afterlife. Darcy draws from her 
own life and the lives of those around her to tell Lizzie’s tale, and the overlaps are 
satisfying to spot: both teens fall madly in love, both realize sharply that their flaws 
(they are both impetuous and prone to meddling) can actually impact others, and 
both rely deeply on the core comfort of family. It is to Westerfeld’s credit that the 
chapters supposedly written by Darcy read very much like the work of a young 
female author; fans of his will likely spot nuances of Westerfeld’s style within, but 
the Lizzie and Darcy chapters are clearly tonally differentiated. There is a surprising 
amount of in-depth information about the publishing process, which writerly fans 
will find engrossing but average readers may find a bit daunting. That is a minor 
quibble, however, in what is otherwise a rich, complex, and deeply clever double 
novel that is worth every bit of the 600 or so pages used to tell it.  AS
white, kiersten The Chaos of Stars. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 2014 280p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-06-213587-2 $9.99   
R Gr. 7-10
One might think that being the daughter of Egyptian gods would be a sweet gig, 
but twenty-first-century teen Isadora is having none of it. She’s appalled by her 
family’s history of murder, incest, and brutality; she’s peeved with her workaholic 
father, Osiris, and preening and now pregnant mother, Isis; most of all, she cannot 
get over the fact that her immortal parents chose to make her mortal. When Isis 
foretells some untold danger that threatens Isadora and insists that Isadora leave 
Egypt to live with her brother Sirus (also mortal) in California, Isadora therefore 
jumps at the chance. There she manages to have ordinary teen experiences, includ-
ing getting a summer job and negotiating a romance with the gorgeous Ry, but 
November 2014 • 181
danger follows her; in the end, she must save herself and her immortal parents. 
Framing the complicated nature of the parent-teen relationship within the even 
more complicated structure of Egyptian mythology is a clever move on White’s 
part, and she manages just the right amount of family dysfunction, humor, and 
poignancy in the story while also incorporating plenty of Egyptian history. Readers 
will immediately recognize that Isadora’s parents truly do love her, but plenty of 
them will also relate to her angst over not being loved exactly the way she wants 
and realizing that her parents, while gods, are as flawed as she is. The mystery plot 
occasionally gets a little buried under relationships in Isadora’s witty and insightful 
narration, but readers looking for a paranormal take on normal family dynamics 
will be charmed.  KQG 
white, kiersten Illusions of Fate. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 2014 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-213589-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-213591-9 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Determined not to end up as merely the mistress of some nobleman, teenaged 
Jessamin is working her way through boarding school in the dreary, rain-drenched 
country of Albion, missing the warmth and sun of her island home in Melei. Her 
plan to return home as a teacher is disrupted when she meets and falls for Lord 
Finn Ackerly. Their push and pull romance points Jessamin in the direction she’s 
been trying to avoid, that of being the love interest of a wealthy Albion, and it 
also draws her into an unknown world of magic and privilege, wherein Finn has 
enemies who see Jessamin as a target. Characterization is key in a story so reliant 
on familiar romance tropes, and White succeeds admirably with her portrayal of 
the feisty but flawed Jessamin and the equally appealing Finn. The action picks up 
nearly right away with Jessamin and Finn’s whirlwind meeting and a subsequent 
threat toward Jessamin’s life, but the initial quick pace leaves little time for world-
building, forcing characters to later explain various details in rather large chunks 
of expository dialogue. The colonialist relationship between Albion and Melei 
presents an interesting backdrop, but the ethnic and racial tensions that ensue are 
oversimplified. Still, a wicked plot twist will have readers gasping for air, and a 
happy ending, complete with a swoonworthy kiss, is likely to please.  KQG
willey, MArgAret Beetle Boy. Carolrhoda Lab, 2014 208p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-2639-9 $17.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-4626-7 $9.99   
R* Gr. 8-12
When Charlie’s mother leaves, six-year-old Charlie tries to comfort his crying father 
by telling him a story about a happy little beetle who talked and wore glasses. His 
father’s quickly drying eyes saw dollar signs in his son’s stories; he typed them up 
and conned a friend into illustrating and printing them, and soon Charlie was on 
the Michigan author circuit as the world youngest published author. At least one 
other author, a crotchety old woman named Martha, saw his treatment for the abuse 
that it quickly became, as Charlie’s father pushed a reluctant Charlie to pretend to 
be something he wasn’t, and Charlie eventually escaped to spend his final school 
year living with Martha. Now eighteen, Charlie is still haunted by dreams of a 
giant beetle threatening the most intimate places of his home—his bedroom, the 
kitchen—and looming like a guilty shadow over all his memories. His well-meaning 
182 • The bulleTiN
girlfriend tries to help him, but Charlie’s childhood experiences have left him with 
no resources, other than memories of his gruff savior Martha, to cope with his 
girlfriend’s meddling version of kindness. The strata of Charlie’s trauma peel back 
gradually through dreams and flashbacks to reveal a highly sensitive boy who was 
badly used and then abandoned by his opportunistic father; readers will feel the 
ache screaming from his dreams into his waking responses, which would otherwise 
seem inexplicably harsh. His debt to Martha threatens to go sadly unpaid until he 
confronts his own sense of guilt and responsibility for his brother and his mother, 
making for a subtle yet psychologically resonant conclusion.  KC   
wolitzer, Meg Belzhar. Dutton, 2014 [272p]
ISBN 978-0-525-42305-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 8-10
When her boyfriend, Reeve, whom she’s only known for forty-one days, dies, Jam 
sinks into a deep depression. She and Reeve were like two halves of a whole, and 
her life has lost all joy and purpose without him. Desperate to help her, her parents 
send her to a boarding school for emotionally fragile, gifted teens, where she ends 
up in an elite English class taught by a legendary elderly teacher, Mrs. Quenell. 
The five specially selected students will be studying one author, Sylvia Plath, 
throughout the entire semester, and they are required to write in journals that Mrs. 
Quenell gives them the first day. Within days, they realize that the journals have 
the power to return them to the period immediately preceding the trauma that 
has left each of them fragile. They bond over their secret journeys to the land they 
call Belzhar, but they also bond with one another, sharing the pain of their pasts 
and helping each other heal. The prose is flawless and the emotions palpable, but 
Wolitzer ultimately doesn’t trust her audience to tolerate ambiguity, partial healing, 
or indeed anything less than happy endings for everyone. Mrs. Quenell provides 
a Dumbledore-style explanation of their experiences at the end of their semester, 
and Jam’s healing seems far too tidy given the depth of her delusions; however, the 
sure-footed storytelling may please readers who enjoy the melodrama of pain and 
recovery without too much psychological reality.  KC 
wood, fionA Wildlife. Little, 2014 [400p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-24209-7 $18.00
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-24206-6 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
For the final term of the school year, sixteen-year-old Australian girls Sib and Lou 
are two of many who forgo traditional schooling to join a wilderness school in the 
Outback. Overnight hikes, rock climbs, and the threat of wild animals are nothing, 
however, compared to the relationship drama that ensues. Lou, still reeling from 
the accidental death of her first love, struggles to find a private space to mourn 
in a shared cabin full of nosy girls and fights pressure to reengage with the world. 
Sib, meanwhile, treads well-worn, conflict-ridden paths with her quarrelsome 
best friend, Holly, while finding her footing in a new relationship with the most 
popular boy in school. Though the two teens have little in common, they bond 
over a shared friendship with autistic classmate Michael. This beautifully written 
novel, a companion to Six Impossible Things, a title published only in Australia, 
remains at its core an eminently relatable story of relationships gained and lost. 
November 2014 • 183
Physical trials become mirrors for steps in a personal, emotional journey toward 
inner-strength, independence, and interdependence, but the novel avoids the pitfalls 
of heavy-handed metaphor and sentimentality. The viewpoint alternates between 
Sib’s narration and Lou’s journal, providing the reader with the opportunity to view 
the characters from both inside and out, making them even more likable and real. 
Lou has the wittier voice and the more compelling storyline, but readers will still 
appreciate Sib’s struggle to be true to herself. This novel will resonate with readers 
who like clever, introspective stories of girls coming into their own.  AM
yAccArino, dAn Zorgoochi Intergalactic Pizza: Delivery of Doom!; written and 
illus. by Dan Yaccarino. Feiwel, 2014 [368p]
ISBN 978-1-250-00844-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R  Gr. 4-7
Several centuries from now, the very best pizza in the galaxy is made in a small 
family pizzeria by the Zorgoochis, and the family business is now struggling by 
the encroachment of subpar but hyper-efficient chain Quantum. Thirteen-year-old 
Luno Zorgoochi has been apprenticing in the pizzeria, learning how his ancestor 
once found the Golden Anchovy, the most prized topping of all, which will grant 
its holder the wisdom to achieve their deepest desire. Now he’s ready to go on his 
first solo delivery run: aided by his pals Chooch, an oaf of a robot built from an 
old pizza oven, and Clive, a super-intelligent mutant clove of garlic, Luno man-
ages to dodge killer mushrooms and navigate his way around fire planets. Mean-
while, Vlactron, formerly a Zorgoochi apprentice and now owner of Quantum, 
is gaining ground on dominating the pizza industry . . . and he’ll stop at nothing 
to use Luno to lead him to the Golden Anchovy in order to rule the universe. As 
you might expect from a sci-fi novel almost exclusively about dough topped with 
sauce and cheese, this doesn’t necessarily have much substance, but it does have 
plenty of spunk, with some seriously imaginative world-building and wisecrack-
ing absurdity. The episodic nature of Luno’s early stops (which do require a bit of 
patience) and their developing into a full-blown bad-guy battle gives the whole 
thing the feel of a much zanier Wrinkle in Time (BCCB 3/62), and a final gasp as 
the curtain closes sets readers up for more cheesy adventures. Sturdily outlined, 
cartoony spot art and full-page illustrations break up some of the length. Use this 
as a space-traveling readaloud with broad appeal, or whip out a few pies and bring 
it to your next middle-school book club.  TA 
184 • The bulleTiN
ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons: resourCes for teAChers And LIBrArIAns
hArrington, eileen g. Exploring Environmental Science with Children and Teens. 
ALA Editions, 2014 254p
ISBN 978-0-8389-1198-3 $50.00
isAAcs, kAthleen t. Bugs, Bogs, Bats, and Books: Sharing Nature with Children 
Through Reading. Huron Street Press, 2014 260p
ISBN 978-1-937589-58-5 $19.95
Both Harrington and Isaacs introduce their nature-based books by citing the 
prevalence of “nature deficit disorder,” an increasing disconnect from nature among 
modern, and particularly urban, kids; each book aims to reestablish that connec-
tion through literature and library services. Harrington takes a programs-based 
approach and includes a wide range of activities for kids from preschool to high 
school; each of the eight chapters include practical guides for structuring various 
activities (storytimes, book clubs, museum visits, etc.) along with samples. The 
“Science Behind the Topic” sidebars are comprehensive and informative without 
being overwhelming, making them particularly useful to practitioners who lack a 
scientific background but nonetheless want to engage with these topics. Harrington 
also encourages collaboration between public libraries, school libraries, museums, 
and nature centers in her chapters on citizen-based science and environmental 
action clubs, listing a host of already operating examples. Isaacs focuses more on 
literature, providing a chapter on selection guidelines and then providing descrip-
tions of over a hundred recent picture and nonfiction books, divided topically into 
chapters (“Backyard and Garden,” “Animals,” etc.). Suggested activities such as 
taking a river walk and starting your own nature journal are also included. Taken 
together, these two books make a tidy little collection to help professionals in both 
public and school libraries (as well as classrooms) spark patrons’ interest in nature 
or build on their already budding fascination. 
November 2014 • 185
Abuse–fiction: Waters
Adoption–fiction: Kadohata
Adventure: Akins; Cohn; 
Funke; Lippert-Martin; Perry; 
White Illusions
Afghanistan–fiction: Abawi
African Americans: Slade
African Americans–fiction: Johnson; 
Magoon
Anger–fiction: Hopkins
Animals: Johnson, r.
Animals–fiction: Cohn; Lord
Animals–stories: Boyd 
AntHoLogieS: Link; Perkins
Astronauts: Macy
Athletes: denenberg
Bats: Markle
Bears–stories: Carnesi; denise
BedtiMe StorieS: ray; Surovec 
BiogrAPHieS: Bryant; denen-
berg; Macy; Prince; rubin; Slade 
Biology: Johnson, r.
Birds–stories: graham; Haughton
Books and reading–fiction: glewwe
Books and reading–stories: novak
Boxing: denenberg 
Brothers and sisters–fiction: Howell
Brothers–fiction: gantos
Bullies: Koyczan
Bullies–fiction: French; Hahn; Holt
Camp–fiction: Bosch
Cars–fiction: Hughes
Cats–stories: Feiffer; Surovec
Christmas–fiction: Perkins
Clowns–stories: Frazee
Counseling: Koyczan
Cousins–fiction: French
Crime and criminals–fiction: Ma-
goon; Marr; neri; tougas
Current events: doctorow; Mat-
thews
dancing–stories: Feiffer
death–fiction: gaiman; Westerfeld
depression–fiction: ehrlich; gantos
disabilities–fiction: Aslan; rocklin
dogs–fiction: Hughes
dogs–stories: Weingarten
dystopias–fiction: Aslan; Johnson, 
A.; Myers; Perry
education: Slade
eSP–fiction: King
Ethics and values: Abawi; Baciga-
lupi; doctorow; French; Magoon; 
Matthews; neri; Sussman
explorers–stories: Barnett 
Faith–fiction: Hopkins
Families–fiction: Beha; ehrlich; 
gantos; Hopkins; Kadohata; 
Perry; van Leeuwen; Waters; 
Willey
FAntASy: Boorman; Bosch; Cohn; 
demetrios; Funke; glewwe; Hale; 
Larson; Legrand; Losure; Magu-
ire; Shull; Sussman; Westerfeld; 
White Chaos; White Illusions
Farms–stories: Frazee; ray
Fathers–fiction: Aslan; Schulz; tou-
gas; Willey
Films and filmmakers–fiction: neri
Florida–fiction: Hiaasen 
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. in the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
186 • The bulleTiN
FoLKtALeS And FAiry tALeS: 
Maguire
Food and eating: Harris
Food and eating–fiction: yaccarino
Food and eating–stories: denise 
Fraud–fiction: Willey
Friends–fiction: Hahn; Lynch; rock-
lin; titchenell; Wood
Friends–stories: Barnett; Carnesi
games–fiction: doctorow
gangs–fiction: neri
Gender studies: Prince
genies–fiction: Funke
ghosts–fiction: gaiman
gLBtQ people–fiction: Waters
gods and goddesses–fiction: White 
Chaos
grandparents–stories: denise 
grAPHiC noveLS: Cohn; duffy; 
gaiman; Prince; rae
grief–fiction: King; Wolitzer
Hawaii–fiction: Aslan
Health: Harris 
HiStoriCAL FiCtion: ehrlich; 
rocklin; Sauerwein; van Leeuwen; 
voigt
History, U.S.: Slade 
History, world: duffy; Heinz
Holidays–fiction: Perkins
Horror: Link; titchenell; verday
HuMor: Barnett; Bosch; elliott; 
Feiffer; gantos; Haughton; novak; 
Perry; Weingarten; yaccarino
identity: Prince
identity–fiction: Betts; Lippert-Mar-
tin; Shull
illness–fiction: Betts; ehrlich; 
glewwe; Johnson, A.
india–stories: graham 
insects–fiction: rocklin
Japanese Americans–fiction: Salisbury
Language arts: Bryant; Holt; Mangan
Literature, children’s: Mangan; 
Schulz
Literature, English: Heinz; verday
Literature, European: Legrand
Loneliness–stories: Frazee
Magic–fiction: Bosch; demetrios; 
Legrand; Shull; Sussman
MAgiCAL reALiSM: King
Memory–fiction: Lippert-Martin
Missing persons–fiction: Hiaasen; 
voigt 
Monsters–fiction: Link; titchenell
Mothers–fiction: Losure; van Leeu-
wen
Music and musicians–fiction: rae
MySterieS: Beha; Hiaasen; Howell; 
voigt; White Chaos
Mythological creatures–fiction: Hahn 
Mythology, Egyptian: White Chaos
Nature study: Johnson, r.; Markle
night–stories: Boyd 
nutrition: Harris
Parties–fiction: Beha 
Pets–fiction: Lord 
Pets–stories: elliott; Surovec
Photography: rubin 
Physical education: denenberg
Pirates–fiction: Schulz
Poetry: duffy; Koyczan
Prehistoric people–stories: elliott
Princesses–fiction: Hale
rabbits–stories: Carnesi
race relations–fiction: Magoon
Readers theater: Haughton 
Reading aloud: Maguire
Reading, easy: Cohn; Funke; Hale; 
Hughes; Lord 
reconstruction–fiction: Sauerwein
refugees: Matthews
relationships–fiction: Abawi; Betts; 
Boorman; Howell; Kadohata; 
Myers; rae; Westerfeld; Wolitzer; 
Wood
rHyMing StorieS: ray; Wein-
garten
romance–fiction: Bacigalupi; Betts; 
Waters; White Illusions
royalty–fiction: Hale; Larson
russia–fiction: Maguire
Sailors–fiction: Lynch
School–fiction: Larson; Wolitzer; 
Wood
Science: Markle
SCienCe FiCtion: Akins; John-
son, A.; Lippert-Martin; Myers; 
verday; yaccarino
November 2014 • 187
Seasons–stories: Carnesi 
Secrets–fiction: Boorman; King; 
tougas 
SHort StorieS: Link; Perkins
Sleep–stories: Surovec
Soldiers–fiction: Salisbury
South, the–fiction: Sauerwein
Space travel–fiction: yaccarino
Sports: denenberg
Stalking–fiction: Marr
Superheroes–fiction: Hale
SuPernAturAL StorieS: Marr
SurvivAL StorieS: Perry
SuSPenSe: Bacigalupi; Johnson, A.
time travel–fiction: Akins; Wolitzer
toys–fiction: Beha
verSe noveLS: Holt; Hopkins
voyages and travel–fiction: Kadohata; 
Wood
voyages and travel–stories: graham
War: Matthews
War–fiction: demetrios
Whales: Heinz
Witches–fiction: Larson; Losure; Suss-
man
Women’s studies: Macy; rubin 
WordLeSS BooKS: Boyd; Frazee
World cultures: Abawi
World War i–poetry: duffy 
World War ii–fiction: Lynch; Salis-
bury 
Writers and writing: Mangan
Writers and writing–fiction: Holt; 
Westerfeld; Willey
 N. Charles Street • Baltimore, MD  • ... • .. • www.press.jhu.edu/journals
BOOKBIRD
A Journal of International Children’s Literature
Roxanne Harde, E
Published by the International Board on Books for 
Young People (IBBY).
Published quarterly
: - / -: -
The BULLETIN of the 
CENTER for CHILDREN’S BOOKS
Deborah Stevenson, E
Provides concise summaries and critical evaluations 
of current children’s books.
Published monthly (except August)
: - / -: -
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE*
R. H. W. Dillard, E--C
Amanda Cockrell, E
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published annually
: - / -: -
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE 
ASSOCIATION QUARTERLY*
Claudia Nelson, E
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published quarterly
: - / -: -
The LION and the UNICORN
A Critical Journal of Children’s Literature
David L. Russell, Karin E. Westman, 
and Naomi J. Wood, E
An international theme- and genre-centered 
journal committed to a serious, ongoing discussion 
of literature for children.
Published three times a year
: - / -: -
*Please contact us for more information or to join.
Johns Hopkins University Press Journals in 
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE
 
To order
Call 800.548.1784 or 410.516.6987; fax 410.516.3866;  
e-mail: jrnlcirc@press.jhu.edu; or visit us online at  
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
essential.
Deborah Stevenson, Editor 
UniversiTy of illinois aT Urbana-Champaign
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books provides 
concise summaries and critical evaluations of current 
children’s books. This invaluable resource assists 
readers with questions regarding the ever-evolving 
children’s literature field. Reviews give an in-depth 
look at a selected book’s content, reading level, 
strengths and weaknesses, and quality of the format, 
as well as suggestions for curricular use. 
Published monthly (except August). Volume 68 (2015).  
ISSN 0008-9036; E-ISSN 1558-6766.
the Bulletin of the Center  
for Children’s Books
annUal individUal sUbsCripTions
$55.00 (print); $62.00 (online)
annUal insTiTUTional sUbsCripTions
$103.00 (print); $115.00 (online);  
$144.00 (print & online)
STATEMENT OF OWNERSHIP,
MANAGEMENT, AND CIRCULATION, 10/1/14
Title: Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books. Pub. No. 0008-9036. Frequency: Monthly 
(except August). Eleven issues published annually. Subscription price: $110.00 institutions, 
$55.00 individuals. Location of office of publication: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 
2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, MD 21218. Headquarters of publisher: Same. Publisher: The 
Johns Hopkins University Press, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, MD 21218. Editor: Deborah 
Stevenson, University of Illinois, 501 E. Daniel Street, Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Owner: 
University of Illinois, 501 E. Daniel Street, Champaign, IL 61820-6601. The purpose, function, 
and nonprofit status of this organization and the exempt status for Federal Income tax purposes 
have not changed during the preceding 12 months.
Extent and nature of circulation 
Av. no. copies 
Actual no. copies
 
each issue 
single issue pub.
 
preceding 12 months nearest to filing date
A. Total no. copies printed 
1,195 
1,259
B. Paid circulation, mail subscriptions 
805 
915
C. Total paid distribution 
846 
966
D. Free distribution 
23 
26
F. Total distribution 
872 
995
G. Copies not distributed 
323 
264
H. Total 
1,195 
1,259
I certify that the statements made by me above are correct and complete. William M. Breichner,
Journals Publisher.
