H
ILLI 
NOI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
Soi 
r 
d
I of Library and Information Science
ii
.. 
_r;
i
I: 
:1
I
"~; 
*-~
:B; 
n7
books.
Updated and expanded from last year's edi-
tion, the Guide Book to Gift Books contains
annotations of the best books for giving (and
receiving) and is available as a downloadable
PDF file that you can print out and use for
every holiday, birthday, or other gift-giving
occasion on your calendar this year.
Listed books have all been recommended in
full Bulletin reviews from the last three years
and are verified as currently in print. Entries
are divided into age groups and include
author, tite, publisher, and the current list
price.
To purchase, go to:
www.lis.uiuc.edu/giftbooks/
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
February 2005
Vol. 58 No. 6
A LOOK INSIDE
241 
THE BIG PICTURE
24 Girls in 7 Days by Alex Bradley
242 NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
242 * George Washington: An Illustrated Biography by David A. Adler
244 * Where Washington Walked written and illus. with photographs by
Raymond Bial
246 * Code Talker: A Novel about the Navajo Marines of World War Two by
Joseph Bruchac
247 * Shrimp by Rachel Cohn
274 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
275 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except
August by the Publications Office of the Graduate School of Library and Information Science
(GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of
Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Timnah Card, Reviewer (TC)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Krista Hutley, Reviewer (KH)
Hope Morrison, Reviewer (HM)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
OFFICE STAFF
Krista Hutley
Maggie Hommel
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $75.00; multiple institutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each
additional; individuals, $50.00; students, $15.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $7.50. Volumes available in microfilm from ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann
Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box
1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to the University of
Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new address.
Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, University of
Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
All inquiries about subscriptions and advertising should go to University of Illinois Press, 1325 S.
Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903, 217-333-0950; toll free 866-244-0626.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The
Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email:
bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2005 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Robert Dale from 24 Girls in 7 Days ©2005. Used by permission of Dutton
Books.
FEBRUARY 2005 
* 241
THE BIG PICTURE
24 Girls in 7 Days
by Alex Bradley
After Jack Grammar goes down in flames when asking a girl to the senior prom,
his dear friends Natalie and Percy secretly run a personal ad in his name soliciting
a date for the dance. Responses come flooding in such number that a nervous Jack
and his overhelpful friends work out a plan: in the week remaining before the
prom, he will date a short list of twenty-four girls, from whom he will choose his
partner for the dance. Throw in a mysterious pseudonymous email correspondent
and you've got a plot that in unskilled hands could be a corny yukkety-yuk fest; in
Bradley's hands, you get a helplessly funny, subtly meaningful, and irresistibly
charming account of one boy's intensive education in relationships of all kinds.
Jack may harbor some of the houndish impulses of his age group (he's
indignant at the ad's assertion that "Jack Grammar would never try to fondle your
butt during a slow dance"), but he is an anxious amateur with girls; he's been
kissed all of once, he's outstripped by his five-year-old nephew in girlfriend num-
bers, and he babbles idiotically at any inkling of romantic possibility, a state with
which readers will identify even as they take notes on his education. Yet behind
that social embarrassment lurks a good guy who gets along with his friends' grand-
mothers and younger sisters, and, more importantly, a genuine romantic, indoc-
trinated by his older sisters' long-ago games of prom with five-year-old Jack as the
handsome escort ("I loved the idea that prom was a night of magic and possibility.
I believed in prom before most boys had even heard of it, and I still believed. Not
that I'd ever admitted that to anyone"). It's therefore not surprising that he genu-
inely warms to many of his ad respondents, who are always depicted interestingly
no matter how briefly, but that he remains uncertain about what romantic path he
should take.
The book's sparkling wit would make even the most conventional ro-
mance an enjoyable read, but the plot keeps feinting at predictability and deliver-
ing surprises instead. Readers may think they know where they are with plot turns
such as Jack's awakened romantic interest in his female best friend (after a detailed
kissing lesson from which many readers will doubtless also benefit) or his growing
rapport with his enigmatic email pal, but these elements prove to be more oppor-
tunities for freshness and originality while still remaining true to the dynamics of
the story. And despite some missteps, misbehavior, and misunderstandings, there
are really no villains here (the social anxiety of Jack's situation provides sufficient
tension); the book instead views humanity with unusual affection, regretting the
unintentional hurts Jack inflicts along his way and quietly illustrating the many
and unexpected possibilities to be found in people once we get to know them.
And that's true even of Jack himself. "You don't seem like you're hiding from the
242 
* THE BULLETIN
world," says his sometime jogging partner about the changes she's observed, and
she's right; he's not just realizing he likes what he finds out in the world, he's
beginning to trust himself (with the encouragement of his mysterious correspon-
dent) to deal with it.
Basically, this is the perfect literary valentine. The sincere sweetness and
overall warmth of the book make it a gratifying counterbalance to the preponder-
antly cynical YA novels of romantic tribulations, yet there's enough humor and
angst to ensure that it's easily as enjoyable (and enough intelligence to make it
meaningful). Whether male or female, readers will empathize with Jack's uncer-
tainty about the meaning and practice of romance, even as they share his yearning
for its rewards, and many young women will long to be one of the magic twenty-
four. (Imprint information appears on p. 245.)
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
//I 
i
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ADLER, DAVID A. 
George Washington: An Illustrated Biography. Holiday House,
2004 
274 p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8234-1838-3 
$24.95 
R Gr. 6-10
Children's collections are certainly not suffering from lack of material on our first
president, but Adler nonetheless offers an ambitious title worth its shelf space.
And what a lot of shelf space it requires: the brick-thick volume not only com-
prises all the requisite data on the warrior statesman, delivered with merited adula-
tion tempered with judicious observations of the Founder's moral blemishes and
personal peccadilloes, but also a mind-boggling wealth of addenda. There's a ge-
nealogy and a pair of maps to start, and fully sixty-five pages of closing material:
Washington quotations, brief bios of Revolutionary War American generals and
cabinet members, a timeline, a list of battles, source notes, bibliography, and in-
dex. Prospective readers who regard the grim black jacket and sheer heft with
dismay will need some soothing assurances that the writing is smooth, the page
stock thick, the historical illustrations multitudinous, and much of the end matter
extraneous for all but the most enthusiastic history buffs. Think of this as one-
stop shopping for all your Washington research needs. EB
ANDERSON, LAURIE HALSE 
Prom. Viking, 2005 
[2 2 4 p]
ISBN 0-670-05974-9 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 9-12
Ashley may be a senior, but unlike her best friend, Natalie, she's not particularly
excited about the prom; it's touch and go whether she's even going to bother to
attend enough classes to graduate, and she's looking forward to renting an apart-
ment with her sexy though unreliable boyfriend, TJ. When a teacher absconds
FEBRUARY 2005 
* 243
with the prom funds, Ashley's desire to support Natalie's prom dream leads her to
pitch in with the effort to save the event; as the date draws closer (and Natalie
suffers a broken bone that puts her out of planning commission), Ashley finds
herself the main architect of a dance she doesn't even want to attend-or does she?
By her terms a "normal kid" rather than a "good kid," Ashley represents a point of
view not often seen in literature for young people, that of the kid who's not expect-
ing or desiring to go to college, who's satisfied with her working-class surround-
ings and future. Her cheerful pell-mell family and neighborhood is depicted with
tenderness as well as humor, and the edge-of-Philly school, where "good fights"
are those between kids of the same race (because they don't incur school lectures
on tolerance), where corporate sponsorship proved a godsend, and where somebody's
bound to be caught going down on her boyfriend in the middle of prom, are
treated with matter-of-fact yet affectionate briskness. Anderson keeps the pace
swift, dividing the narrative into numbered sections that are more brief scenes
than chapters and emphasizing snappy dialogue that's imbued with the reality of
longtime friendships. The Cinderella theme is handled with the lightest of touches
(readers may not even initially pick up on the heroine's name); it's not really a
story about Cinderella so much as a tale about the impulse to have one's moment
of celebration, and readers will revel in Ashley's opportunity while dreaming of
their own. DS
ASHER, SANDY 
Too Many Frogs!; illus. by Keith Graves. 
Philomel, 2005 
32p
ISBN 0-399-23978-2 
$15.99 
R 
4-6 yrs
Rabbit lives a quiet, orderly life that gives him great pleasure-until the energetic
Froggie invites himself into Rabbit's house to make snacks in Rabbit's kitchen,
lounge on a pile of Rabbit's pillows, and hear Rabbit read stories aloud each night.
When Froggie brings his whole family to join the fun, however, Rabbit has to
speak up. "I never invited you in," he says. "So I do mind. Very much indeed."
Luckily, Rabbit realizes how much fun Froggie can be, and he, Froggie, and Froggie's
numerous relatives settle into a pleasant routine of snacks and story sharing. Spreads
of exuberantly asymmetrical bulbous shapes in neon shades of aqua, mustard, lime,
and coral sport deliciously organic details-mushrooms on the doormat, ladybugs
on the lamp-which give Rabbit's solitary life a quirkily attractive style. The art's
a little slick and overbusy, but the eccentric energy of the subjects' tufty ear hair,
pop eyes, wide grins, outstretched arms, and nubbly tongues lends the images
impact. The well-paced text plays with rhymes and rhythm, offering readers aloud
extensive latitude for entertaining performance and listeners entry via several re-
peated refrains. Frogs and rabbits alike will gather to enjoy a group sharing of this
warm-hearted book. TC
BELL, HILARI 
The Wizard Test. 
Eos/HarperCollins, 2005 
[17 6p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-059941-3 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-059940-5 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 5-8
Upon turning fourteen, Dayven must take the test that reveals his affinity for
magic use and determines whether he is fit to continue in his career as Watcherlad
for the Lordowner of the valley. Dayven rejects his undeniable ability to recognize
and control magic, believing that such talents bring him frighteningly close to
becoming a heretic and a traitor, like his grandmother, a wizard who was executed
244 
* 
THE BULLETIN
for her crimes. However, the Lordowner finds that Dayven's inborn affinity for
wizarding makes Dayven a good recruit to spy for him on the wizards, whose
magic the Lordowner uses but whose motives he does not trust. Dayven's subse-
quent apprenticeship to Reddick, a traveling wizard supposedly addicted to drink,
immerses the boy in his new career of espionage, as Reddick drags him across the
valley to a city where the Lordowner's enemies conspire to depose him. Dayven's
mastery of his magic follows the same line of progress as his understanding of the
political, economic, cultural, and environmental forces at war in the valley, i.e., a
smooth and regular rise to both magical skill and honorable action in service of the
highest ideal available to him. Unfortunately, the story is often thinly written,
with characters superficial in thought and development, which prevents the story
from attaining real resonance. Novice fantasy fans may nonetheless appreciate this
uncomplicated, approachable adventure, and its brevity may make it a useful addi-
tion to an already well-developed collection. TC
BERNSTEIN, NINA 
Magic by the Book; illus. by Boris Kulikov. 
Foster/Farrar,
2005 
[2 40p]
ISBN 0-374-34718-2 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Siblings Anne, aged eleven, Emily, aged nine, and Will, aged six-and-a-half, find a
mysterious book among those brought home from the local library in Queens. As
the children read the book, it becomes apparent that the stories are all about them
(since Edward Eager is explicitly mentioned, the echo of his Seven-Day Magic,
BCCB 1/63, is likely intentional), and they get pulled into a series of fantastical
adventures drawing directly from Green's Robin Hood, The Scarlet Pimpernel, an
illustrated encyclopedia of bugs, and War and Peace. This homage to the joys of
reading rises above didacticism by means of skillful prose, rounded characters, and
playful plot twists. The abrupt endings, which dump the tale-travelers willy-nilly
back into their native reality without explanation, edge the stories toward superfi-
ciality, but this effect is offset by rich intertextuality and dips into metaphysical
realms through narrative confrontations with death and the devil. Black-and-white
vignettes of the children's exploits display oversized, large-eyed heads and slender
extremities evocative of eighteenth-century illustrations, their intricate graining
lending the images a roughness intriguingly at odds with the delicate balance evi-
dent in most of the compositions. A stronger offering in the same vein as Trumbore's
The Genie in the Book (BCCB 1/05), this novel may entertain even those readers
who haven't read the works honored with an in-text allusion, while those who have
will welcome back old friends with open arms. The author's acknowledgments
include a bibliography of works referenced. TC
BIAL, RAYMOND 
Where Washington Walked; written and illus. with photographs
by Raymond Bial. 
Walker, 2005 
48p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8900-5 
$18.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8899-8 
$17.95 
R 
Gr. 4-8
In sharp contrast to David Adler's opus on George Washington (reviewed above),
Bial presents a relatively skeletal biography of the Great Man and enlivens a rather
dry text with stunning color photographs of extant sites relevant to Washington's
story. Readers will not gain any particularly nuanced insights into Washington's
days as an Indian fighter, his strengths as a general, or his shaping of the Executive
FEBRUARY 2005 
* 245
Office, but they will get a strong sense of the turf on which Patriots made their
stand for independence. Granted, many of the well-preserved or reconstructed
sites evince museum tidiness and polish (after all, many are now museums), but
Bial takes pains to present less traditional views of Mount Vernon, a peek inside a
Valley Forge barrack, a shot of the rickety stockade fence that boasted the proud
moniker "Fort" Necessity. For students who respond more empathetically to pic-
tures than to words, this may be just the approach to shake Washington's dusty
old bones back to life. Source notes, a reading list, and "Places to Visit" are ap-
pended, along with an index. EB
BRADLEY, ALEX 24 Girls in 7Days. Dutton, 2005 
2 65p
ISBN 0-525-47369-6 
$15.99 
R* 
Gr. 7-12
See this month's Big Picture, p. 241, for review.
BRADLEY, KIMBERLYBRUBAKER 
The Presidents Daughter. Delacorte, 2004 
16 6p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90179-8 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73147-7 
$15.95 
R Gr. 3-6
The family of President Teddy Roosevelt finds the Executive Mansion a bully
place to reside, and it is ten-year-old Ethel's greatest sorrow that she is sent away to
the National Cathedral School to live during the week. She struggles to keep her
chin up, but the girls at school tend to take her descriptions of her family's life as
evidences of snobbery. Her life is made more unbearable when her father invites
Booker T. Washington to dine at the Executive Mansion, a bold move that meets
with much rancor in the press and among Ethel's schoolmates. Meanwhile, though,
her weekends are full of fun, with energetic scrambles through Rock Creek Park
that leave hapless senators and ambassadors who tag along winded and wet, family
horseback rides and other adventures with the menagerie of pets that the Roosevelt
children brought with them, and roller-skating in the East Room and the base-
ment. Brubaker laces her fictionalized version of Ethel's life as the president's
daughter with real incidents that will inform and delight readers, such as how the
Roosevelts decided to change the name of their new home from the Executive
Mansion to the White House, how Ethel crawled under the length of the table at
a state dinner to deliver a message to her father on a dare, and how older sister
Alice began making up descriptions of her and the First Lady's gowns to send to
the press, making it look as though they had massive, elegant wardrobes instead of
the two or three formal gowns they wore repeatedly to state functions. Ethel's fate
at boarding school begins to turn when she realizes that it is she who has been
withholding friendship, rather than her peers, making this a well-shaped coming-
of-age story as well as a rollicking account of a truly remarkable American family.
For readers ready to step up from accounts of fictional American girls, this offers a
substantial yet accessible glimpse into turn-of-the-century American history. An
author's note includes a bibliography and research notes. KC
BROOKS, KEVIN 
Candy. Chicken House/Scholastic, 2005 
[359p]
ISBN 0-439-68327-0 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 9-12
In London for a doctor's appointment, Joe meets a captivating girl named Candy
at the train station, but his rhapsody is cut short when a man who's clearly Candy's
pimp breaks up the interlude by threatening Joe. She remains irresistible to Joe,
246 
* 
THE BULLETIN
who finds ways to see her again (and, in a triumphant moment onstage with his
band, to perform the song he wrote for her), and who develops a growing determi-
nation to save her from her dangerous life of drugs and prostitution, even if it
endangers himself and his family. Brooks (author of Kissing the Rain, BCCB 2/04)
is articulate about Candy's allure and Joe's yearning for the sexuality she repre-
sents, even as he makes clear that Joe is a sheltered kid out of his depths in the
rough world of the city. The book is less successful, however, when it plunges Joe
into that world; his encounters with crime and violence are suffused with the thrill
of the forbidden more than with any nuanced human understanding, so the drama
is more coolly glitzy action-adventure than compelling film noir. Young Tarantino
fans may nonetheless still appreciate the smooth writing and eventful menace of
Joe's walk on the wild side. DS
BRUCHAC, JOSEPH 
Code Talker: A Novel about the Navajo Marines of World War
Two. 
Dial, 2005 
[24 0p]
ISBN 0-8037-2921-9 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-12
In a retrospective narrative addressed to his grandchildren, Ned Begay describes
his degrading experiences with biligaana (white) schools as a youngster and his
frightening yet liberating tour of duty as a Navajo code talker in the Pacific in
World War II. Ned's explanation of the challenges Indians faced in times of war
and peace is moving but never mawkish; the delicate position of all indigenous
peoples is made painfully obvious through carefully worded tribal declarations and
individual avowals of loyalty to the government that has oppressed these people
for generations. However, this is a book about victory, not victimization; the
focus is firmly on the resiliency and grace of Native America in the most trying of
times. Part of that grace is displayed as Ned depicts white soldiers, Japanese civil-
ians, and Pacific Islanders with compassion (his view of the Japanese military is
understandably less evenhanded). Though Ned's own character is laid back and
sympathetic to an almost eerie extent, he consistently attributes his own unshak-
able serenity to the support he receives from his family and community through
their participation in the Navajo Way. Other famous code talkers are introduced
throughout (along with a certain future president), several of whom respond less
well to their ambiguous status after serving honorably in the military. That realis-
tic perspective, combined with multiple heart-stopping battle scenes, makes this
detailed novel a dramatic yet thoughtful complement to nonfiction offerings such
as Aaseng's Navajo Code Talkers (BCCB 12/92). An author's note and selected
bibliography expand the historical picture. TC
CASTELLUCCI, CECIL 
Boy Proof Candlewick, 2005 
[208p]
ISBN 0-7636-2333-4 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 9-12
Sixteen-year-old Victoria prefers to be called Egg, after the heroine of her favorite
science-fiction movie. She makes sure she looks and acts like Egg, too, and behind
her shaved head, colored eyebrows, white cloak, and distantly cool faqade, she feels
safe and invisible. Though she takes pictures for the school paper and allows the
Science Fiction and Fantasy Club to associate with her, she considers herself far
superior to everyone else-until the new kid, Max, appears. Max isn't fooled by
her shell, and Egg begins to believe that he is someone who might understand
FEBRUARY 2005 
* 
247
her-and she fears it. As Max cracks her defenses, forcing Egg to reevaluate her-
self, her attempts to regain control land her in the worst kind of social isolation,
and to pull herself out of it, she has to admit that she needs people after all. The
story of an alienated teenager learning to connect isn't new, but Castellucci has
updated it into a geek-chic fairy tale for the contemporary teenager, and it works.
Egg doesn't just find love and friendship; she also finds a purpose and direction for
her life. Hollywood, with its bright lights and big dreams, permeates the charac-
ters without making them superficial; it becomes, instead, a way to talk about
artistic integrity and social activism without preaching. Egg's divorced parents-
her has-been actress mother and creature-creator father-and her cinephile friends
are fleshed out and believable, and the dialogue is authentic. Egg's stripped-down,
laser-like observations are funny, moving, and at times poetic, creating a fresh
voice that will be immediately appealing to readers. This is an affirming story
about a girl waking up to her true potential. KH
CIRRONE, DORIAN 
Dancing in Red Shoes Will Kill You. 
HarperCollins,
2005 
[2 24 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-055702-8 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-055701-X 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
A junior at a high school for the arts, Kayla lives for the ballet, and she's hoping
desperately to be chosen to dance Cinderella in the school's production. She's
stunned when she discovers that she's been passed over because her generous chest
was considered to be aesthetically inappropriate ("You mean I got this crummy
stepsister role because of my boobs?"), and when her teacher tells her frankly that
she should consider breast reduction if she wants to succeed in her chosen career,
she finds herself not only examining the possibility of surgery but also contemplat-
ing her art's view of the female body. Though a subplot featuring the title phrase
(Kayla's impending boyfriend has a performance-art piece mistaken for a death
threat) is unnecessary and overdone, this is otherwise smart and humorous, nego-
tiating some provocative territory with grace and flair and employing the Cinderella
motif with quiet effectiveness. Cirrone paints the ballet world knowledgeably,
spicing up the picture with ongoing rivalries and dastardly maneuvers, and that
setting gives the question of Kayla's proportions a particular and genuine urgency.
Kayla's bloc of artistic friends (her gay best friend, her artist older sister, the boy in
which she's interested) provides a useful forum for debating the aspects of the
issue, and they also offer the safety valve of the inevitable jokes. Though more
breezily toned than Perez' similarly themed UnexpectedDevelopment (BCCB 10/04),
this offers more thoughtful consideration of female body image, so it will appeal to
readers looking for exploration of that subject as well as to ballet fans. DS
COHN, RACHEL 
Shrimp. Simon, 2005 
[2 88 p]
ISBN 0-689-86612-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 9-12
Cyd Charisse (from Gingerbread, BCCB 4/02) is back, both from her first literary
outing and her summer in New York, and she's hoping her return to San Francisco
means she can renew her romance with her adored surfer boyfriend, Shrimp. Re-
lationships aren't that simple, however: Shrimp has returned from a jaunt to New
Guinea with his errant hippie parents in tow, he's wary ofCC's flighty history, and
248 
* 
THE BULLETIN
he wants to take things slowly. Initially hurt, CC begins to find some merit in that
idea, especially after Shrimp reacts badly when she confides the news of her pre-
Shrimp abortion. When Shrimp does finally win CC back, she's a more thought-
ful and perceptive young woman, bolstered with actual female friends (her first!)
and even some decent family relationships-all of which makes her rethink the
life-on-the-beach-with-Shrimp future she'd taken as written. CC's narration has
all the fresh and individual expression of the first book, but the Little Hellion, as
her stepfather fondly calls her, has believably grown and believably matures further
in this volume. It's still evident that CC is a bright young woman with genuine
capabilities (her coffee-bar skills expand into restaurant skills, capitalizing on her
business sense and interest in cooking) who nonetheless knows that college is not
for her, a position that many teens will understand; it's also refreshing that the
book doesn't break loyalty with its character to make her decide college is her
destiny. Instead, there's a tactful and tender description of her gradual realization
that her destiny isn't Shrimp, as her broadened view allows her to see that she is
beginning to outgrow him even as she still loves him, and it's a further credit to the
book that CC's evolution is achieved without trashing the sweet and worthy Shrimp.
In a genre currently flooded with chick lit that delights in stylish giddiness, CC
remains a reassuring counterbalance, a voice that yields to no one in intoxicating
style but underpins it with real substance about that last step into adulthood. DS
COOPER, ILENE 
Sam IAm. 
Scholastic, 2004 
252p
ISBN 0-439-43967-1 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
When the rambunctious family dog knocks over the "Hanukkah bush," which
was a holiday compromise between Sam's Jewish father and Christian mother,
simmering questions about religion begin to boil in the Goodman household. A
first night of Hanukkah/Christmas Eve celebration features grandmothers behav-
ing badly, and the holidays deteriorate from there. Back in school, Sam's ques-
tions become even more pressing as he begins a Holocaust unit. He develops a
habit of asking God the really hard questions, but he finds that the answers have to
be worked out through the usual channels-thinking, reading, talking with people
who have differing opinions, and ultimately, deciding things for himself. The
merits here are delivered with a controlled predictability: there are plenty of mildly
funny episodes, serious discussions, a relationship pursued for the wrong reasons,
and one suspenseful car accident that ends well but forces everyone to focus on
what brings them together, rather than what drives them apart. The book's attri-
bution of emotional states to Sam is sometimes rhetorically stilted ("Sam stood in
front of his family feeling like he was clothed as much in embarrassment as he was
in chinos"), and the secondary characters are cliched for easy digestion. Still, the
conflict will resonate for readers who are questioning their own relationships to
the religious traditions of their families, and Sam's settling in to a comfortable
position somewhere in the middle may help them chart their own path. KC
CROSSLEY-HOLLAND, KEVIN 
King of the Middle March. Levine/Scholastic,
2004 
409p
ISBN 0-439-26600-9 
$17.95 
R 
Gr. 7-10
A new crusade has been launched to liberate Jerusalem from the Saracens, and
sixteen-year-old Arthur di Caldicot (from Arthur: At the Crossing-Places and Arthur:
The Seeing Stone, BCCB 2/03 and 2/02) and his liege lord Sir Stephen de Holt
FEBRUARY 2005 
* 
249
have joined the campaign. Arthur's life continues to subtly mirror that of the
legendary King Arthur, whose story can be magically followed via a seeing stone
given to Arthur by the mysterious Merlin. Urged by the wizard to "keep asking
the right questions," Arthur receives with caution the prejudiced pronouncements
of military and church leaders regarding Saracens and women, and the casual com-
promise of ideals in favor of political expediency. Not surprisingly, the whole
crusade and even his newly taken knightly oath become a betrayal of Arthur's
ethics, and he welcomes the opportunity to leave the Christian army and escort the
wounded Sir Stephen on his return journey to the Middle March-where he finds
even more correlations between his life and that of the once and future king. Young
Arthur's own conscience and sweetness of character allow him to avoid some of
the pitfalls which plagued King Arthur, a circumstance that gives the reader hope
that young Arthur will be successful in establishing a quiet Camelot in his small
fiefdom. Crossley-Holland's short, evocative chapters and sensitive descriptions
lend this third book the same gentle perceptiveness evident in the first two vol-
umes of the trilogy; in this installment, that dreaminess partially masks a sharp
focus on the clash of principles with power struggles on the crusade and in the
seeing stone, an emphasis that focuses young Arthur's questioning on the defini-
tions of loyalty and betrayal and on the contradictions of waging war for a righ-
teous purpose. A glossary, timeline, and list of characters are included. TC
DAVID, LAWRENCE 
Pickle d&Penguin; illus. by Scott Nash. 
Dutton, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-525-47102-2 
$15.99 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
It's often lonely at the top, especially when you're the only talking pickle in the
world. Hosting your own TV show, having an elegant apartment in New York,
traveling to "exciting places like Shanghai or a bowling alley"-what does it all
mean without a friend? Pickle is elated, then, when he meets a depressed penguin
on a trip to Antarctica who agrees to come home with him. Unfortunately, Pen-
guin and Pickle get separated in the big city, and Penguin becomes hopelessly lost.
He makes his way to the Statue of Liberty to request her help; meanwhile, Pickle
has deployed all the resources at his disposal to find his friend, which he eventually
does on a tip from the hot-pretzel guy. Nash's clean and tidy compositions pro-
duce a world in which these characters seem as utterly at home and ordinary as the
people who surround them; his city streets, studio interiors, and apartment scenes
have an everydayness to them that renders a pickle flying by in a blimp a perfectly
reasonable expectation. Penguin's naive perspective and wide-eyed wonder at the
world produces some funny moments as he encounters strange things like trees
and skyscrapers, and David portrays Pickle's existential predicament with appro-
priately understated drollery. Unfortunately, this doesn't quite realize the distinc-
tive possibilities of its premise: neither Penguin's nor Pickle's character generates
sufficient empathy to make this tale really endearing, and the storytelling doesn't
disguise the randomness of the events. This quirky tale therefore falls somewhat
flat on rereading, but the first time through is nonetheless a charm. KC
DIJKSTRA, LIDA 
Little Mouse; illus. by Piet Grobler. 
Lemniscaat/Front Street,
2004 
32p
ISBN 1-932425-06-3 
$15.95 
Ad 
3-5 yrs
A little mouse announces that when she marries, she would "want to marry the
strongest being on earth." Her foster father the hermit leads her from suitor to
suitor, but the sun, the cloud, the wind, and the mountain each in turn point out
250 
* THE BULLETIN
another power is greater than theirs. The marriage-brokering hermit is pleased to
see that what undermines the mountain is, in fact, a mouse, who proves to be
exactly what the little she-mouse seeks. There's not a mouse-squeak of acknowl-
edgment that this Dutch import is in fact a folktale and that Dijkstra is an adapter
rather than an original author, but the adaptation is an effectively streamlined one
that pares the tale down to quick-moving elements of dialogue and description.
The illustrations set the hermit amid a menagerie of colorful birds; their jewel
tones, the hermit's multicolored robes, and the spare, stylized draftsmanship recall
Jane Ray, but there's a droll edginess to the spiky details of flora and fauna and a
surreal charm to the strange and unexplained inhabitants of this world. Miss Mouse
is a pert little figure with huge lemur eyes and crisply attentive whiskers that nicely
coordinate with the perky bow on her head; she's so appealing that it's too bad the
compositions often lose her tiny form amid the action and the emphasis on the
hermit. This is therefore more scattered in its impact than some other versions of
the tale (such as Ed Young's Mouse Match, 12/97), but it's nonetheless a tale filled
with appeal for young audiences, who will doubtless relish the notion of small
creatures possessed of great might. DS
DORROS, ARTHUR 
Under the Sun. Amulet/Abrams, 2004 
212p
ISBN 0-8109-4933-4 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 6-10
Ehmet and his best friend, Milan, have learned to negotiate the dangerous alleys of
their war-torn home of Sarajevo, but when bullets rip through Ehmet's home, his
father decides that Ehmet and his mother will be safer in the country. So begins
Ehmet's odyssey through Bosnia into Croatia and eventually to a place known as
"The Children's Village," where war orphans are rebuilding their lives under the
care of a few benevolent adults. Ehmet's adventures on his voyage introduce the
reader to the multiple facets of the Bosnian conflict. Ehmet's mother is assaulted,
very likely raped (though the references are oblique enough to pass by Ehmet and
most readers), and eventually dies on the road. He encounters mistrust from former
friends because of newly problematic ethnic differences, he loses contact with his
father, who has been taken to a secret prison camp, he flees conscription by Mus-
lim fighters, and he is taken against his will to a refugee camp. He also meets with
acts of kindness along the road from a Muslim family who care for and bury his
mother, and an elderly couple who take him in and try to help him find his family.
Though this catalogue of events seems a bit much to happen to one person, the
book participates in a long tradition of war narratives, such as Rifles for Watie, The
Red Badge of Courage, and My Brother Sam Is Dead, that provide similarly compre-
hensive treatments of their conflicts through the experiences of a single character.
The result is an action-packed, fast-paced narrative with a satisfyingly optimistic
outcome. Readers will be especially taken by the existence of a village built and
populated almost entirely by children; Dorros gives a brief but effective homage to
this symbolic and actual site of hope in a time of strife. KC
EDWARDS, PAMELA DUNCAN 
McGillycuddy Could!; illus. by Sue Porter. Tegen/
HarperCollins, 2005 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029002-1 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029001-3 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
2-4 yrs
McGillycuddy the kangaroo visits his neighbors, the cow, sheep, chicken, and
duck on the farm next door. Figuring out McGillycuddy's social status involves
FEBRUARY 2005 
* 
251
identifying what he can and can't do: "I make milk for the farmer to drink. Can
you make milk?" Of course, being a male kangaroo, McGillycuddy can't, but boy,
does he try. He tries to make wool and eggs, too, with the same disappointing
results. He can hop, jump, and bounce, but those aren't skills his neighbors appre-
ciate. Dejected, McGillycuddy heads for home, but not before a hungry fox at-
tempts to make supper plans involving the duck. Suddenly McGillycuddy's talents
are valuable-he hops, he jumps, and he kicks that fox out of sight. This self-
valuation story offers a bare-bones, dialogue-heavy text that provides readers aloud
much scope for vocal gymnastics, along with some amusing watercolor illustra-
tions featuring the pink-cheeked kangaroo straining to grow wool and lay an egg.
The roly-poly animals (even the predatory fox) sport butterball bodies and ami-
able expressions that soften their treatment of poor McGillycuddy (and the duck).
The abrupt intrusion and subjugation of the fox makes for a random ending, though
it does provide the kangaroo with the requisite opportunity to show how his gifts-
and therefore everyone's-should be cherished. TC
FLEISCHMAN, SID 
The Giant Rat of Sumatra or Pirates Galore; illus. by John
Hendrix. 
Greenwillow, 2005 
[208p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-074239-9 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-074238-0 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Part of Edmond Amos Peters, known simply as "Shipwreck" to the pirate crew
who fished him out of the ocean, wants to get home to Boston as quickly as he can,
but part is reluctant to leave Captain Gallows, whose self-confident swagger he's
come to admire. The choice may no longer be his to make, though, as Captain
Gallows suddenly brings his ship The Giant Rat of Sumatra into port in Califor-
nia, announces he will start up a cattle ranch, and entrusts the Rat's eyes-a pair of
brilliant emeralds-to Shipwreck for safekeeping. Gallows has been amassing a
fortune in piracy just to wreak vengeance on the California rancher who had forced
him into labor when he was an orphan, and to win the heart of the orphan girl who
had been held along with him. Now not even the political and martial turmoil
surrounding California's struggle for independence from Mexico will stop him
from besting Don Simplicio and taming his Candalaria, now turned bandit Seno-
rita Wildcat. And where does this leave Shipwreck? Pretty much stuck in the role
of narrator, and that's the problem. This is really Gallows' story, and Shipwreck
never emerges as interesting enough in his own right to establish a strong kid
connection. Still, there's an undemanding breeziness to Fleischman's style, and
readers who enjoyed By the Great Horn Spoon! (BCCB 3/64) and Bandit's Moon
(11/98) will doubtless want to complete the trilogy. EB
FRADIN, JUDITH BLOOM 
The Power of One: Daisy Bates and the Little Rock Nine;
by Judith Bloom Fradin and Dennis Brindell Fradin. 
Clarion,
2004 
[178p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-618-31556-X 
$19.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-10
Drawn into the politics of desegregation through her work on her husband's news-
paper, The Arkansas State Press, Daisy Bates became a prime mover behind the
integration of Little Rock's Central High School and mentor for the nine black
students who were the first front-line fighters in the Arkansas civil rights battle. As
252 
* THE BULLETIN
this episode is both Bates' crowning achievement and a pivotal moment in Ameri-
can history, the Fradins' compelling account of the Central High saga and its young
players has appropriate pride of place within this biography. However, details of
the balance of Bates' personal story-early experiences of racism, a lengthy extra-
marital affair with her future husband, her final attempt to revive her late husband's
newspaper-never quite rise to that level. The plethora of information culled
from extensive interviews too often amounts to little more than adulatory memo-
ries, and even the black-and-white photographs are generally uninvolving. While
this title is not as strong as the Fradins' previous works on Ida B. Wells (BCCB
4/00) and Mary Church Terrell (9/03), Daisy Bates and "the Nine" are crusaders
equally worth knowing. EB
GREEN, JOHN 
LookingforAlaska. 
Dutton, 2005 
[2 7 2p]
ISBN 0-525-47506-0 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 9-12
Tired of a featureless life, Miles Halter decides that boarding school is the place for
him to seek "the Great Perhaps," so he begins his junior year at Culver Creek in
Alabama prepared for event. And that's what he gets, caught up instantly in a
long-running prank war involving his roommate, Chip-always known as "the
Colonel" for his military masterminding of mischief-and his close friend, the
beautiful and quixotic Alaska. Soon Miles is, like many before him, besotted with
Alaska, reveling in her friendship and hoping for more, despite the fact that Alaska
has a long-term boyfriend. This delicious combination of the attained and the
unattainable comes crashing, literally, to a halt when a drunken Alaska dies in a car
accident, leaving her friends devastated. Green gives the time-tested plot of board-
ing-school maturation its full and considerable due, evoking the substantial appeal
of the situation's hothouse intensity, heady independence, and endless possibili-
ties. Miles is a witty narrator who manages to be credible as the overlooked kid,
but he's also an articulate spokesperson for the legions of teens searching for life
meaning (his taste for famous last words is a believable and entertaining quirk),
and the Colonel's smarts, clannish loyalties, and relentlessly methodological ap-
proach to problems make him a true original. Alaska is sufficiently shadowed from
the start that her fate isn't really surprising, but it's nonetheless heartbreaking and
dramatically effective in its impact on those left behind, who compulsively try to
piece together their friend's final actions (was it an impulsive suicide?) as they
bring their questions about life's meaning to bear on an all-too-personal level.
There's a certain recursive fitness here, since this is exactly the kind of book that
makes kids like Miles certain that boarding school will bring them their destiny,
but perceptive readers may also realize that their own lives await the discovery of
meaning even as they vicariously experience Miles' quest. DS
HOPKINS, LEE BENNETT, ed. 
Oh, No! Where Are My Pants? and Other Disasters:
Poems; illus. by Wolf Erlbruch. 
HarperCollins, 2005 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-17861-8 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-17860-X 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
A collection of fourteen poems, most original to the collection, addresses many of
the perils of youthful existence, ranging from bathing-suit mishaps to best-friend
relocation, from getting stuck on the top of the Ferris wheel to getting sensible
FEBRUARY 2005 
* 253
shoes for your birthday. There's little variety in form and format, so the impact is
blunted by sameness, and some of the verses are more literal than imaginative.
They're nonetheless all accessibly pitched to their young audience, who will appre-
ciate the compact rhymes and sympathetic approach to griefs, embarrassments,
and fears. Erlbruch's illustrations use sandy, opaque strokes of pigment, bordered
by thick black lines, on earthtoned paper, with figures cut around the edges and
then placed on contrasting backgrounds. The subdued tones and visual restraint
unfortunately further dampen the effect of the poems, but the faces are often tidily
or comically expressive, giving a further occasion for viewer empathy. This is a
promising topic of which more could have been made, but youngsters may still
find that understanding and Schadenfreude suffice to satisfy. DS
JACOBSON, JENNIFER RICHARD 
Stained. Jackson/Atheneum, 2005 
200p
ISBN 0-689-86745-X 
$16.95 
Ad Gr. 8-12
Gabe has always called the shots in his long-standing friendship with seventeen-
year-old narrator Joss (Jocelyn), and if he is not the sole cause of her shaky self-
esteem, he's a strong contributor. Attention from an attractive new transfer student,
Benny, should be just the ego boost Joss needs, but Benny suddenly throws on the
romantic brakes, burdened, he claims, by Father Warren's warnings against sexual
sin. Now Gabe is missing, last seen leaving the church grounds, and Joss, as his
oldest friend, is called upon by a host of adults-from Gabe's parents to Father
Warren-to provide needed insight into his whereabouts. One missing boy, one
conflicted boy, one Catholic priest: it doesn't take a rocket scientist to calculate
the trajectory of this tale. Gabe is hiding in shame after being molested by Father
Warren, and Benny is being groomed to be his next victim. While readers can
expect little shock and less suspense, they may appreciate Jacobson's careful profil-
ing of the three teens immediately affected by the priest's predation, as she reels
out troubled, and painfully credible, family backgrounds with a subtlety that her
overall plotting lacks. Moreover, the 1975 setting lays the proper track for the
head-on collision between loosening sexual standards and good ol'-fashioned Catho-
lic guilt. Mystery fans won't be overly impressed, but teens who like their psycho-
dramas "ripped from the headlines" can queue right up. EB
JEAPES, BEN 
The New World Order. Fickling, 2005 
[4 48p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-75015-3 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-75013-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-12
The invasion starts simply enough: Parliament's army is attacking the king's forces
at Donnington Castle in Newbury, 1645, and into the English Civil War wanders
a stranger named John Donder. Donder, however, is not the ordinary man he
appears: he is also General Dhon Do of the Holekhor, an alien race with superior
technology poised on the verge of invading England. Though Dhon Do heads
this invasion, his past haunts him: stranded in England for many years prior, he
fell in love with a woman and voluntarily converted to Christianity before he was
forced to leave, finding upon his return that she left him a son before she died. As
Dhon Do seeks to temper his lord's increasingly ruthless orders with his own re-
gard for the English and bitter enemies within the Civil War attempt to unite
against the Holekhor, twelve-year-old Daniel, who is half Holekhor and half En-
glish, seeks to conquer his own divided loyalties and pick a side in this rapidly
254 * THE BULLETIN
escalating war. This alternative history does justice to the morass of politics and
religion that fueled the English Civil War, while throwing them into relief with
the addition of a third force. There are heroes and villains on both sides, further
reinforcing the conflicted loyalties at the heart of the war by making the reader
unable to choose sides. The invasion does end in a peaceable compromise, but
only after some heart-wrenching tragedies and applause-worthy triumphs. Though
the narrative skips among various characters, Daniel remains a focal point readers
will be able to follow. Fans of alternative history will relish the treatment of this
historic conflict, and the realistic warfare, sympathetic characters, and flawless pacing
will pull in a variety of readers. KH
JOHNSON, ANGELA 
A Sweet Smell of Roses; illus. by Eric Velasquez. 
Simon,
2005 
32p
ISBN 0-689-83252-4 
$16.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Two young sisters sneak out of their house early one morning to join Dr. King and
the other freedom marchers in a peaceful civil rights protest. Hustling their way to
the front of the crowd, they listen to his opening words, "Then we start to march,
Minnie and me. We look ahead and walk faster like him. Clapping time with our
feet. Looking ahead, just like him." There's some verbal backlash from some of
the town's white citizens, but after a closing speech by King, the marchers disperse
and the girls scurry back home to face their worried, but ultimately proud, mother.
Although Johnson states in an brief opening note her desire to highlight the often
unsung participation of children in the civil rights movement, this account, set in
an unspecified place, softens almost beyond recognition the hostility and danger
children did encounter on similar marches. Likewise, the ugly jeering of the crowd
is reduced to a stilted, awkward shout of "You are not right. Equality can't be
yours." Velasquez's charcoal scenes-dramatic monochrome against a cream back-
ground-individuate the proud determination of the marchers, the stony resis-
tance of the police, and to a lesser extent, the rage of the opposition. The
introduction of a single red focal point into many scenes, however, seems con-
trived and, in the case of the sisters' teddy bear's neck ribbon, rather precious. For
a more realistic, yet child-appropriate, view of the desegregation struggle, consider
Toni Morrison's Remember (BCCB 7/04). EB
JORDAN, ROSA 
Lost Goat Lane. 
Peachtree, 2004 
197p
ISBN 1-56145-325-0 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 4-8
Often left on their own while their mother works, Justin, Kate, and Chip become
acquainted with their nearest neighbors, the Wilsons, when Kate's nanny goat
decides to visit their billy goat. After initial suspicion, the Wilsons' daughter,
Ruby, enters into an unlikely friendship with Kate, with Ruby helping Kate learn
how to be proud of her developing body, and Kate helping Ruby start her own
business. The families become further intertwined as the Wilsons' son, Booker,
helps Justin realize that he has to fight for his dreams rather than giving up when
things look hard. Mom's discovery of these friendships makes her unreasonably
angry, causing Kate to worry that her mother is prejudiced (the Wilsons are black),
but it turns out the situation is more complicated: as a divorced woman in a small
Florida town in the 1970s, Mom worries not only about appearances but also the
possibility that the Wilsons will judge her. Jordan packs a lot of moral complica-
tion and wisdom into a well-crafted and often suspenseful story, which is based on
FEBRUARY 2005 
* 
255
a cable movie for which she wrote the screenplay. Her characterizations are mul-
tilayered and believable; with Kate as focalizer, the reader has to suspend his or her
own prejudgments on a moody and unreachable older brother, a cranky mom,
and a potential friend with a generally testy attitude and mercurial mood swings.
Booker is a bit too good to be true, in the usual style of a wounded healer (his
baseball career was cut short when he lost his feet in a land-mine incident in the
war), but the book carries its uplifting message of the power of friendships lightly
enough to keep the story buoyant. KC
KERLEY, BARBARA 
Walt Whitman: Words for America; illus. by Brian
Selznick. 
Scholastic, 2004 
56p
ISBN 0-439-35791-8 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Though he may be considered the quintessential American poet by some, Walt
Whitman is unlikely to be a familiar figure to most young readers, and Kerley's
evocation cum biography offers a thoughtful introduction for those not ready for
Meltzer's Walt Whitman (BCCB 3/02). She focuses on sensibility more than re-
port-writing facts (the poet's birthdate isn't even mentioned in the main narra-
tive), but she covers important elements of Whitman's life: his work as a journalist,
his poetic ambitions, his love of America, his closeup observations of the Civil
War, and his visits with sick and wounded soldiers. More than that, however, she
conveys his embodiment of an American aesthetic ("Walt wrote poems as free-
ranging as his big, robust country") and his role as window on a seminal American
era, and she manages to do so in terms accessible to middle-school readers. The
tone is straightforward rather than adulatory, with admission of Whitman's set-
backs; though there's no mention of his sexuality, the subject isn't Whitman the
man so much as Whitman the poetic voice of Civil War America. Layout tucks
the text in neatly bordered boxes, subordinating it to the oversized illustrations
often in full or three-quarter spreads. Unfortunately, the illustrations aren't up to
carrying the book: though the compositions are balanced and interesting, colors
often tip into the garish, with strong hues warring for attention and distracting
from the lines, and unnaturally pink skin tones unfortunately accentuating the
doll-like effects of the stiff draftsmanship. Ultimately, this is likely to be most
effective as a curricular addition to literary or Civil War coverage, where its ability
to evoke era and context will be welcomed. Several pages of end matter include
further details on Whitman's life, Lincoln's presidency, and Selznick's work on the
illustrations, as well as several poems and excerpts; endnotes and source notes are
also included. DS
KESSLER, CRISTINA 
Our Secret, SiriAang. Philomel, 2004 
2 1 8 p
ISBN 0-399-23985-5 
$16.99 
R 
Gr. 5-8
When Namelok witnesses the birth of a black rhino in a copse not far from her
home, she vows to protect mother and baby according to the Maasai tradition of
caring for all wildlife. Knowing that her initiation ceremony will prevent her from
slipping out to be with her rhino family, she shocks her mother by asking to delay
the important rite. Then she discovers the mother rhino dead, with her head
savagely butchered by poachers who want only her horns, and she vows to find the
culprits. She soon realizes that the baby rhino is still alive, and she spends several
nights alone in the bush tracking her "sister" as well as the "Beast." To her dismay,
she finds that she has been tracking her own father, who, despite his lifelong com-
256 
* THE BULLETIN
mitment to traditional Maasai values, led the trackers to her beloved rhinos in
order to make enough money to relocate his family. Kessler paints a vivid and
glorious picture of the wonders of the African bush as seen through Namelok's
eyes; more poignant, though, is the portrait she paints of a people in transition,
where the tender affection between generations is strained by the unsettling of
traditional ways of life. As the children struggle to adapt to modern conventions
and challenge the habits and customs of their elders, they nevertheless show a deep
fidelity to the spirit of the Maasai values of family loyalty and the protection and
care of the animals that share their world. Namelok is a bold yet respectful hero-
ine, whose "conversations of one" will connect her with readers whose experiences
are worlds away. A glossary and author's note are included. KC
KLISE, KATE 
Deliver Usfrom Normal. Scholastic, 2005 
[2 4 0p]
ISBN 0-439-52322-2 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
"Like a baseball manager readjusting his starting lineup," says Charles Harrisong,
"I constantly revised The Most Embarrassing Things in My Life list," and as a
sensitive sixth-grader with a oddball low-income family in the otherwise normal
Normal, Illinois world, he's got a lot on that list. He becomes particularly aware of
those embarrassments when his older sister, Clara, makes a run for class president,
which results in her becoming the target of ridicule (classmates deface her cam-
paign posters with imprecations of "Poor White Trash" and "Ugly Bitch"). Charles'
parents make a radical decision, abruptly leaving Normal behind for a boat on the
Alabama coast, but the Harrisong misfortunes continue when the family discovers
that the "barge houseboat" they bought sight unseen is a crapped-out piece of
junk. Klise gives sympathetic voice to Charles' relentless anxiety, allowing for
both his age-authentic hypersensitivity to imagined failure and denigration and
also his awareness of his family's real differences and strains; there's also a rueful
yet bubbling humor in his observation of his family's idiosyncrasies and his own
obsessive self-consciousness. Those characteristics and the markedly retrospective
tone recall Gantos' Jack series (starting with Heads or Tails, BCCB 7/94), but this
book isn't as successful in shaping the chronicle of events into a novel; there's more
anticipation of event than event itself, the affirmative ending seems overoptimistic
and forced, and the viewpoint is overlaid with adult perception. Nonetheless, the
understanding and humorous narration and the underdog protagonist will likely
elicit reader enjoyment as well as sympathy. DS
LINDBERGH, REEVE 
The Visit; illus. by Wendy Anderson Halperin. 
Dial,
2005 
[40p]
ISBN 0-8037-1189-1 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
Beth and Jill, "tall sister and small sister," travel to their aunt and uncle's farm,
where they eat and drink scrumptious farm fare and run merrily over every square
inch of the property. The rhyming quatrains, split into couplet duos with each
couplet serving as a caption for the page's illustration, crystallizes the girls' visit
into a series of image-centered nuggets, each framed in a different opening/closing
line pair: "Highway and country lane, dirt road and dust,/ Beth watches leaves
whirling up in a gust./ Jill sees a mailbox covered with rust./ Highway and country
lane, dirt road and dust." These textual tidbits are expanded upon in Halperin's
FEBRUARY 2005 
* 257
signature many-paneled spreads, the soft pastels of her peaceful pastoral scenes
lending the story a reminiscent, timeless air. There's plenty of adult-appealing
atmosphere in this idyllic rural vision of a flower-bedecked countryside, but kids
looking for action may need to hunt diligently through the illustrations for satis-
faction; sometimes it's also a challenge to find the correlation between art and text.
A picture book to be lingered over rather than bounced through, the volume pos-
sesses a demure prettiness and placid forward movement that invite audiences of
temperate temperament, ready for a pleasant day in the country. TC
LITTMAN, SARAH DARER 
Confessions ofa Closet Catholic. Dutton, 2005 
193p
ISBN 0-525-47365-3 
$15.99 
R Gr. 4-7
Justine Silver pines for a bit of religious rigor in her life, but her suggestion that the
family keep kosher is a little more Judaism than even her Sabbath-observant par-
ents can tolerate. Roman Catholicism, as practiced by her friend Mary Catherine
McAllister, might be just the ticket, though, with all the comforting self-righ-
teousness that Lenten meat abstinence and small acts of sacrifice seem to promise.
Justine sets up church in her closet, confessing her sins to her teddy bear (Father
Ted) and assuming her own nun alter ego, complete with a napkin pinned to her
hair. The impracticalities of this arrangement eventually become evident-from
the mice attracted to her matzoh "communion wafers" to the deeper longing to be
true to her Jewishness-and when her beloved Bubbe takes ill and dies, Justine
needs a more stable spiritual foundation than make-believe. Although Littman
flubs slightly on her overdrawn "typical" Catholic family and her odd mixture of
pre- and post-Vatican II Mass details, she ably balances the comic aspects ofJustine's
rituals with genuine respect for the preteen's spiritual quest. Adult counsel is wise,
but not overbearing, as Mrs. McAllister, a priest, and a rabbi encourage her to
blaze her own unique trail to God, within the traditions of her religious heritage.
EB
LOVE, D. ANNE 
The Secret Prince. McElderry, 2005 
[240p]
ISBN 0-689-84426-3 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 4-6
Left as a newborn outside the cave of the aged warrior Morwid, Thorn knows
nothing of his parentage or destiny. Luckily, Morwid has a book of prophecy that
identifies Thorn as the prince who will free the populace from the rule of the cruel
Northman, Ranulf, via the discovery of a long-lost magical amulet. Once Morwid
has trained Thorn in all skills princely, the twelve-year-old is sent on his quest with
nothing but a mysterious utterance by the local seeress to guide him. Fortunately
for Thorn, trustworthy companions and further prophecies await him at every
turn, the amulet is easily encountered, the false king Ranulf is effortlessly deposed,
and the rest of the Northmen vacate the kingdom without a fuss. The tale is told
in a slightly overblown style punctuated with often-stilted dialogue. While most
of the characterizations are either flat or impenetrable-Thorn's is especially flimsy,
as his attitude toward his newfound twin sister and his quest changes every fifteen
pages-it is the consistent dependence on coincidence that lays the story low; even
the fulfillment of prophecy must have some grounding in natural cause and effect
to be believable. Stronger fantasy offerings for this age group can be found in
Collins's Gregor the Overlander (BCCB 1/04) or Sage's Magyk (reviewed below).
TC
258 
* 
THE BULLETIN
LYONS, MARY E., ad. 
Roy Makes a Car; ad. from a story collected by Zora Neale
Hurston; illus. by Terry Widener. 
Atheneum, 2005 
32p
ISBN 0-689-84640-1 
$16.95 
R 
5-10 yrs
Among the stories collected by Zora Neale Hurston during her tenure with the
Federal Writers' Project is the unpublished account of Roy, a phenomenal Florida
mechanic back in the day when a high-performance car could still raise some eye-
brows. Fed up with the number of collisions on the road, Roy boasts he can make
a crash-proof car, and his incredulous neighbors dare him to make good on the
claim. Does he ever! His auto can scissor-lift over a passing roadster or hunch
down and glide beneath a Mack truck. A later winged model "didn't drive on the
ground hardly at all," and God was so impressed, he "whipped out His money and
bought Roy's car on the spot." Lyons speculates that Hurston may have polished
up the tale a bit, and surely she did a little Simonizing herself, but in the tradition
of tall tales that's no more than expected. Widener is just the man to do the
bodywork and customizing here, with square-jawed, chocolate-skinned Roy beam-
ing self-confidence that borders on cockiness, and the cast of stretchy vehicles and
gaping disbelievers about as long and tall as the tale itself. A substantial endnote
addresses Hurston's involvement in the FWP, dangling a little bait to involve older
children who might want to peek into this corner of American literary history.
Everyone else can just enjoy the ride. EB
MARTIN, DAVID 
We'veAll Got Bellybuttons!; illus. by Randy Cecil. 
Candlewick,
2005 
[32p]
ISBN 0-7636-1775-X 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
1-4 yrs
A basic call and response sentence-"We have ears and you do, too./ We can pull
them. Can you?"-changes to include hands, necks, feet, eyes, mouths, and
bellybuttons, which can be respectively clapped, stretched, kicked, closed, opened,
and tickled. After the tickles come the giggles, both on the page and on the story-
time floor, as animals from the African savannah demonstrate how they and the
listener are the same. Oils in purple, orange, aqua, and deep pink display a robust
texture and shading that enhance the rounded composition of each spread-an
exaggerated facial curve is mirrored throughout the giraffe herd, while the bulging
line of an elephant belly is echoed in the arched back of a nearby monkey. The
result is a deceptively simple-looking series of illustrations that accentuate the nu-
anced repetition of the text while providing an understated richness of visual de-
tail. This interactive book with its irresistible ticklefest ending will soon be a
standby in your storytime. TC
MCDONALD, MEGAN 
Ant and Honey Bee: What a Pair!; illus. by G. Brian
Karas. 
Candlewick, 2005 
32p
ISBN 0-7636-1265-0 
$13.99 
R 
5-8 yrs
Good friends Ant and Honey Bee are preparing to attend their friend Cricket's
costume party, but they're looking for a change from their usual pilgrim outfits.
Ant likes the idea of some kind of complementary duo ("She looked in the kitchen.
Peanut butter and jelly? She looked in the bathroom. Toilet paper and toilet?"),
and finally they settle on going as a washer and dryer. Unfortunately, these cos-
tumes make maneuvering difficult and they're subject to misidentification ("Danc-
ing computers. Very clever!"), and then when the rain falls they turn to "soggy
FEBRUARY 2005 
* 
259
blobs of wet cardboard"-which the friends cunningly reinterpret as an anthill
and a beehive. The story doesn't have the economy and focus of some other friend
dramas (such as Lobel's classic Frog and Toad), but the text sports lively dialogue
and humorous details, and the costume dilemma will loom large and important to
young audiences. Karas, with his signature skinny-legged, bulbous-headed fig-
ures, seems born to portray insects; in fact, despite their antennae and, in Honey
Bee's case, wings, his rotund-thoraxed insects look more peopley than his people
do. The insect's-eye view of the world, with its head-high grass and towering
flowers, sits comfortably with the quotidian human details of cardboard and safety
scissors, and a slightly smoky palette gives the visuals an autumnal feel that sug-
gests Halloween use without limiting its time to any particular occasion. Many
youngsters won't have access to the instructions for giving a bug party printed on
the back of the jacket, but this may still operate as an impetus for costume parties
in any season. DS
McKERNAN, VICTORIA 
Shackleton's Stowaway. 
Knopf, 2005 
[33 6p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-92691-7 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-82691-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-10
In 1914, Ernest Shackleton sailed off in the Endurance for a planned transantarctic
expedition; unbeknownst to Shackleton, among his passengers was an eighteen-
year-old sailor named Perce Blackborrow, who stowed away on the ship when his
application was rejected. Rather than putting the lad off at the first resupply stop,
Shackleton kept Blackborrow on, thus including him in one of the great Antarctic
adventures of all time. McKernan provides a fictionalized account ofBlackborrow's
experience, related in third-person narration and Blackborrow's invented diary
entries, as the Endurance is trapped in the Antarctic ice and crushed, the men
travel in small open boats to the desolate Elephant Island, and they attempt to
survive there while Shackleton and a small crew sail on further to seek rescue for
the stranded company. This is one of the famous epics of exploration, and there
are already plenty of good accounts for young readers (Armstrong's Shipwreck at
the Bottom of the World, BCCB 2/99, and Spirit of Endurance, 10/00; Kostyal's
Trial by Ice, 12/99, etc.) or that are accessible to young readers; this version sur-
prisingly glosses over some of the exciting bits, and it sometimes loses touch with
period sensibilities or terminology. On the other hand, the young stowaway makes
for an interesting and unusual focus, allowing the emotional ramifications of the
experience to play out on a very personal level (the subsequent death in World
War I of one of the expedition's most reliable members, a close friend of
Blackborrow, is given particularly dramatic emphasis as a result), and the story
remains as gripping as ever. The book provides an epilogue describing the fates of
the crew, a list of sources (both published and unpublished), recommended titles
for further reading, a timeline, and a list of the expedition members. DS
NELSON, MARILYN 
Fortune's Bones: The Manumission Requiem; notes and anno-
tations by Pamela Espeland. 
Front Street, 2004 
32p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-932425-12-8 
$16.95 
R Gr. 9 up
The eponymous Fortune was, in fact, a man, a slave who died in Connecticut in
1798. After his death, his master, Dr. Porter, took his bones for anatomical refer-
ence, and his skeleton was passed down through generations of the medically in-
260 
* THE BULLETIN
dined family even as its unwitting donor was forgotten. In the 1930s, the skeleton
was given to the Mattatuck Museum and displayed there to the gleeful horror of
decades of schoolchildren; not until the 1990s was its origin, and the history of
Fortune, uncovered. Nelson, author of the mesmerizing Carver (BCCB 9/01),
turns this saga into a poetic narrative modeled on the form of a requiem mass,
complete with indications for vocal parts; the six-poem sequence, interleaved with
explanatory notes and artwork, gives the viewpoints of Fortune's wife, Dr. Porter,
Dr. Porter's descendants, and Fortune himself, punctuated by choric lyrics. The
poet again writes tender and compelling lines, displaying subtle mastery over the
varying voices and unerring craftsmanship in her language. Though the notes'
exposition is sometimes a bit uneven, they provide a rhythmic as well as concep-
tual counterpoint, unpeeling the story as the poems explore it further; further
dimensions are added with images of history, the bones as artifacts, and the re-
imagined Fortune (the thoughtful design extends to the faintest ghosting of the
musical score on the endpapers). While there are indications that music for the
requiem has been written, it's not clear whether Nelson wrote in expectation of
partnering her words with music or if she chose the requiem form purely for its
poetic utility and aural implications, with no anticipation of a score. The entries
certainly have their own music, but the linguistic intricacy in several is likely to be
overpowered by a musical partnership, so the sequence may be at its best here or in
unaccompanied oral performance. Either way, the poems offer vivid immediacy
and thought-provoking interrogation of a multitude of concepts such as view-
point, ownership, self, and freedom; readers drawn by the arresting story will find
themselves enticed into a rich experience of language and history. DS
NOLEN, JERDINE 
Hewitt Anderson's Great Big Life; illus. by Kadir
Nelson. 
Wiseman/Simon, 2005 
40p
ISBN 0-689-86866-9 
$16.95 
R 
4-6 yrs
Born to a family of giants who believe that big is best, the normal-sized and there-
fore comparatively tiny Hewitt Anderson is a source of constant worry to his dot-
ing parents. When the learned Dr. Gargantuan offers to make Hewitt's problem
his special concern, the Anderson parents decide instead to teach Hewitt some
survival skills and save "their puny, frail, delicate bundle of joy" from a life as a
scientific curiosity. Of course, Hewitt's resourcefulness allows him to be the one
to teach and help his parents, and even to save them and the meddlesome doctor
from accidental imprisonment and burnt roast beef. Convinced now that Hewitt
is as perfect as he can be, the Anderson family accepts "what Hewitt knew all
along-there is power in small if you believe in yourself." This tall tale is told in
warm, intimate tones sure to make listeners feel a part of the family. Recurring
images in the text and the illustrations of little Hewitt being lovingly cared for by
his oversized parents build an impression of security, while the sheer size of Hewitt's
surroundings creates an intoxicating feeling of freedom. Varied layouts increase
that sense of liberty, as the viewer's perspective swings low and high, out and in,
playing with the space just as Hewitt himself does. The detailed paintings, which
burnish every shade of the characters' bronze and chocolate complexions, never-
theless retain a sketchlike style, the crosshatching of lines on Mr. Anderson's palm
as roughly delicate as the springy tufts on floating bits of feather. Nelson's gleam-
ing treatment of spurting water (during one of the Andersons' survival lessons) is
especially evocative. While the message is familiar from works such as Anderson's
Big Cheese of Third Street (BCCB 3/02), this affectionate new incarnation will
FEBRUARY 2005 
* 
261
prove a valuable resource for celebrating all the ways we are wonderful just as we
are. TC
NOVAK, MATr 
Too Many Bunnies; written and illus. by Matt Novak. 
Porter/
Roaring Brook, 2005 
[16p]
ISBN 1-59643-038-9 
$7.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 3-5 yrs
Overcrowding is apparently a problem in rabbit holes, or at least it is for Chubby,
Fuzzy, Floppy, Whiskers, and Bob. Chubby, smarter than the average bunny if
not by much, finds an empty hole across the field and moves in, but the spacious
new place soon fills up as each remaining bunny makes his or her way across the
field, making the new hole just as crowded as the old one. The dumb bunnies are
dorkily funny in their own right, and youngsters will especially giggle at the end-
ing, which leaves the rabbits tearing back across the field to inhabit that nice roomy
hole they've all just vacated. A die-cut touch adds additional appeal: the big
bunny hole pierces the middle of most pages, with bunny heads departing one by
one from the recto views and accumulating in the hole on the verso as the hole-
mates recreate their household and their problem anew. There's plenty of comedy
in Novak's illustrations even without that touch of engineering, with the bunnies
gormlessly bucktoothed and empty-eyed, and the other inhabitants of the field-
especially the frustrated ladybug whose front walk becomes increasingly bunny-
trodden-scornful observers of the lapine folly. Canny youngsters will not only
enjoy the story, they'll appreciate the circular plot for what it is-a diabolical re-
reading trap to send one's adults through time and time again. DS
OLIVER, NARELLE 
Mermaids Most Amazing; written and illus. by Narelle
Oliver. 
Putnam, 2005 
32p
ISBN 0-399-24288-0 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 2-4
This introductory overview enticingly details possible historical, folkloric, and sci-
entific origins of mermaid legends, combining genuine newspaper reports, histori-
cal records of sightings, and acknowledged folktales to give readers a factual
perspective on the piscine phenomenon. The prose is relaxed and uncondescending,
presenting facts, myths, and eyewitness accounts with evenhanded respect, all the
while clearly identifying which genre is which. Intricate linocuts, sometimes re-
flecting the style of the region discussed, float on pages often washed in marine
tints; touches of realia add dimensionality and, appropriately, suggest mermaids
bedecked with glittering jetsam, while informational captions explain thumbnail
and vignette images. The endpapers provide maps of the world, with textually
referenced locations pinpointed for easy correlation. This congenial, reasonable,
wide-ranging treatment of a popular subject merits repeated reading, and it will
give fans a stable point of departure for further investigation. A list of sources is
included. TC
ONYEFULU, IFEOMA 
Welcome Dede!: An African Naming Ceremony; written and
illus. with photographs by Ifeoma Onyefulu. 
Lincoln, 2005 
32p
Paper ed. ISBN 1-84507-311-8 
$7.95 
R 
6-9 yrs
Amarlai, a Ghanaian boy, is this photoessay's tour guide, inviting the audience
along as he and the rest of his village wait for his baby girl cousin to be given a
262 
* THE BULLETIN
name. Portraits and elegantly composed shots of radiant family members partici-
pating in the naming ceremony of the child convey the details of life in Amarlai's
village. Straightforward explanations of tribal traditions and the importance of
appropriate naming, given in Amarlai's voice and reflecting his excitement, draw
the audience into the ceremony and infuse the photographs with additional per-
sonality and warmth. Inset definitions of terminology and customs expand this
narrow yet vivid picture of a Ghanaian experience, though the unimaginative lay-
out of these elements gives the book a rather pedestrian air that lessens the impact
of the photographs. A map of Africa highlights Nigeria, birthplace of the author/
illustrator, as well as Ghana, and an introduction outlines the basic practices cov-
ered in the text. While texts such as Harris' Hello, Benny! (BCCB 11/02) and
Lund's Tell Me My Story, Mama (BCCB 4/04) offer lively renderings of Western
babyhood, Onyefulu's photographic portrait of the beginning of an African life
provides a lively complementary perspective. TC
PARATORE, COLEEN MURTAGH 
The Wedding Planner's Daughter. Simon,
2005 
[208p]
ISBN 0-689-87340-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 4-6
Willafred has been longing for a father all her young life, since hers died in mid-
romantic gesture the day after marrying her mother; her yearning comes not only
from her desire for a parent but also from her wish that her coolly efficient mother
would end her rejection of anything smacking of love. Their new home on Cape
Cod offers some promising possibilities-an attractive poet next door likes
Willafred's mother and Willafred likes a nice boy in her class-but more than that
it offers Willafred a feeling of permanence she's never found in her peripatetic
existence, and she desperately hopes her mother will settle down with the poet so
the whole family can finally put down roots. Willafred's narrative is believable in
its desire for stability, and the details of local Cape Cod color firmly set the story in
its region; the glossy particulars of her mother's wedding-planning business (from
which Willafred is firmly barred, lest it plant romantic ideas in her head) add
frothy interest. Many elements are not successful, however: the characterizations
are often scanty or stock (especially the cliched earth-mother preacher), the back-
story of Willafred's father's tragedy is never fully explained, the Dickensian echoes
in Willafred's mother's name (she's Mrs. Havisham and Stella to boot) are con-
trived and ineffective, and the subplot ofWillafred's secret assistance in her mother's
business is just bizarre. There's also a failure to bring the varying moods and
scattered elements together cohesively (even nomenclature is confusing, with
Willafred's mother referred to variously as Stella, Estelle, and Mother and another
character known as Mum), and the conclusion seems mechanically applied rather
than reached. For exploration of a girl's desire for parental remarriage and her
exploration of her own identity, Naylor's Alice books are still the place to go. DS
PAVER, MICHELLE 
WolfBrother. HarperCollins, 2005 
[30 4p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-072826-4 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-072825-6 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
After the Ice Age but before agriculture and metalwork have become widely known,
tribes of hunter-gatherers live among the trees of a great forest covering northern
FEBRUARY 2005 
* 
263
Europe. Within that forest, thirteen-year-old Torak flees from a giant demon-
possessed bear that has slain Torak's father and now stalks the boy. Guided by an
orphaned wolf pup, Torak travels east and north to find the Mountain where the
World Spirit resides and seeks the Spirit's help to vanquish the bear, whose rage
threatens to destroy the forest and all who live within it. The story, told from both
Torak's and Wolfs points of view, glides on lines of smooth prose, with concrete,
multisensory descriptions establishing the reality of the setting and the complexity
of the social networks Torak must negotiate in order to gain the freedom and the
help he needs to finish his quest. The duality of the insights given by Torak and
Wolf strengthens the reader's belief in the bond between the two travelers and
heightens the pathos of the climax (which, on the other hand, suffers slightly from
too-rapid pacing and a deus ex machina resolution). Plot threads deliberately left
loose indicate a sequel (confirmed by the touting of this book as the first in The
Chronicles of Ancient Darkness series) and whet the reader's curiosity as the story
ends. A combination of historical fiction, science fiction, animal story, and fan-
tasy, this novel invites a wide readership. A map and an author's note providing
some anthropological background are included. TC
RAY, JANE, ad. Adam and Eve and the Garden of Eden; ad. and illus. by Jane
Ray. 
Eerdmans, 2005 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8028-5278-5 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-8 yrs
Drawing upon Islamic as well as Judeo-Christian traditions, Ray closely follows
the familiar creation story but tweaks the ending to make the expulsion from the
garden into something of an ecological celebration: "God gave Adam and Eve
warm clothes to wear. He handed them seeds and cuttings from the garden. Then
God sent them out into the world.... In the bare earth beyond Eden, Adam and
Eve planted a new garden foa their family." Ray's Eden is a lush, dreamlike fantasy
in which newly created Adam nestles between the delicate (possibly feminine?)
hands of God, and the garden is a riot of plant and animal life, spilling into and
out of subtly patched borders reminiscent of quilt squares or plots of tilled land.
The closing border, which merits close examination, incorporates images of death,
decomposition, and rejuvenation, which visually underscores Ray's implication
that, at least in an ecological sense, mortality is more the promise of a new begin-
ning than the fulfillment of an angry deity's curse. This will prompt children who
have mastered the plot of the Genesis story to begin to ponder its implications. EB
RINALDI, ANN 
Nine Days a Queen: The Short Life and Reign of Lady jane
Grey. HarperCollins, 2005 
[192p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-054924-6 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-054923-8 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
As history buffs know, the teenaged Lady Jane Grey was queen of England for only
a few days before Mary Tudor ascended the throne, leading to the erstwhile queen's
imprisonment in the Tower and eventual execution. Rinaldi describes Jane's life
as the daughter of a prominent and politically ambitious family and a royal relative
high in the line of succession, which made her a pawn of various powerful sectors,
ranging from her parents to the Seymour family (one brother in charge of the boy
king, Edward VI, another married to King Henry VIII's widow and casting his eye
264 
* THE BULLETIN
on more profitable connections) to the determined Dudleys, who grabbed Jane as
a highly advantageous daughter-in-law. The book plausibly depicts Jane as a well-
educated young woman who's nonetheless out of her depth in the world of Tudor
machinations, confused by contradictory signals and changing fortunes, who to
the end believes that her old friend Mary will offer a reprieve to the obviously
manipulated girl. Less plausible are some of the anachronistic views, and some
mistaken nomenclature and terminology further mar the narrative's credibility;
there's also such dizzying progression from event to event that there's little oppor-
tunity to absorb the emotional upheavals or to develop any genuine sympathy for
the protagonist. Nonetheless, Rinaldi does a good job of sorting out the various
factions and their power over (and, in the case of Thomas Seymour, attraction
for) Jane, as well as their objections, both genuine and ostensible, to the accession
of Catholic Mary, and the combination of pageantry and maneuvering will likely
appeal to fans of historical romance. A brief author's note and bibliography are
included. DS
RYAN, DARLENE 
Rules for Life. 
Orca, 2004 
163p
Paper ed. ISBN 1-55143-350-8 
$7.95 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Izzy's world is shaken when her widowed father announces out of the blue that
he's in love with his colleague Anne and that they're going to get married. Sixteen-
year-old Izzy has been the responsible one in the family ever since her mother's
death, especially during her older brother's bout with substance abuse, and she's
not convinced of her flighty father's commitment, so she largely ignores the changes
in her family. She even tries to ignore Anne's growing pregnancy, but she realizes
she's needed when Anne undergoes a dangerously premature labor (while Izzy's
father is, as she predicted, away). Unlike most new-stepparent dramas, this fea-
tures a family that had its rocky issues in its first incarnation (Izzy's parents in fact
divorced and then remarried before she was born) and still has challenges that
make adapting to a new spouse pale by comparison. Izzy's alteration toward Anne
isn't instantaneous and it isn't magical-Anne's baby doesn't survive, and Izzy's
brother begins abusing again, but Izzy begins to appreciate that Anne's contribu-
tion to the family can lighten some of the load Izzy has been carrying-if Izzy lets
her. This is therefore a satisfyingly prickly family drama, likely to be welcomed by
young adults beginning to acknowledge the merits of family connections in spite
of their difficulties. DS
SAGE, ANGIE 
Magyk; illus. by Mark Zug. 
Tegen/HarperCollins, 2005 
[57 6p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-057732-0 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-057731-2 
$18.89
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-6
As the seventh son of a seventh son, Septimus Heap was destined to become some-
one special. At least, everyone thought so until he died suddenly in infancy and his
place in the Heap home was taken by a foundling baby girl, whom his father found
abandoned in the snow. Ten years later, the girl Jenna is discovered to be the
mislaid heir to the throne-an empty title, since her mother the Queen has been
assassinated at the behest of the evil wizard DomDaniel, and a dreary tribe of
Custodians has taken over running the Castle. Now the whole Heap family-six
boys, two parents, and Aunt Zelda-must join with two ExtraOrdinary Wizards
(one alive, one dead) and a mysterious orphan known only as Boy 412 to over-
FEBRUARY 2005 
* 
265
throw the powers of the Darke and restore Jenna to her rightful place. An affable
incarnation of the lost-heir tale, Jenna's (and Boy 412's) story is packed with per-
sonable minor characters and histrionic villains, engaging verbal interchanges, and
witty commentaries on the foibles of individual cast members. The eccentrically
spelled ("Darkenesse" and "Magykal" are representative) and liberally bolded en-
chantment terminology can become tiresome; however, these quirks of typographical
representation are minor drawbacks compared to the pull of genuinely warm do-
mestic relationships and acutely practical character development. Heavily tex-
tured pencil sketches head the chapters, their rough lines providing open-ended
visual cues which spark the reader's imagination without constraining it. This first
book in the Septimus Heap series is a cheerful, clever offering; readers seeking a
lighthearted dip into the world of fantasy will find safe haven here. An informa-
tional/recreational CD is packaged with the book. TC
SCHAEFER, CAROLE LEXA 
Cool Time Song; illus. by Pierr Morgan. 
Viking,
2005 
32p
ISBN 0-670-05928-5 
$15.99 
Ad 
4-8 yrs
When day is done on the savannah, the animals revel in the cool of the evening by
stamping their feet, rustling the leaves, and calling out to each other in wild voices.
This simple sequence of events is made special by the succinct, cadenced text,
which relies on sound effects and internal rhyme for emphasis. Strikingly com-
posed chalk illustrations drench each page in a variety of colors whose brightness
tantalizes the eye. Animal shapes are shadowed in heavy, rough chalk lines of
purple, cerulean, ginger, and lemon, and their vocal counterpoint is embodied in
vivid, radiating chalk squiggles that seem to twist and jiggle over the page. Unfor-
tunately, the modest touches of personification explode midway into cutesy an-
thropomorphism, and the palette forsakes its initial strong but controlled contrast
for garish cacophony. The startlingly didactic ending, in which the animals' song
unaccountably becomes a plea to the humans to care for the planet, may taste a bit
sour; however, the deep indigo and plum hues of the final pages, accented with
racing hot pink, lime green, and saffron yellow streaks, are seductive enough to
make the pill go down easily. TC
SEABROOKE, BRENDA 
Stonewolf Holiday House, 2005 
[231p]
ISBN 0-8234-1848-0 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Except for a vague memory of singing, seven-year-old Nicholas remembers noth-
ing of his life before the Orphanage, but he has suffered enough cruelty to know
that it is best to play dumb when you don't know what's going on. This policy
serves him well after a tall stranger brings him from the Orphanage to a remote
castle for observation-Nicholas' pretense that he can only speak and understand
English tricks the castle staff into discussing confidential matters in "the Orphan-
age language" in front of the boy. His long self-training in psychological barrier-
building also protects him from the frequent doses of truth serum and sessions of
questioning through which the staff attempt to weasel some unidentified bit of
information out of Nicholas' unresponsive brain. Seven years later, when Nicho-
las realizes what it is the staff seeks and to what lengths they will go to get it, he and
his fellow prisoner Larka escape from the castle and lead their pursuers on a cross-
country chase toward the promise of freedom. Seabrooke's smooth prose knits
266 
* THE BULLETIN
scenes seamlessly together across the seven-year plot span and creates an appeal-
ingly kind and intelligent narrator in Nicholas. Other characters receive adequate
attention to establish them as threats or friends (or both), increasing the tension
and mystery of the tale, which are built up from the first page as tidbits of informa-
tion drop in conversation and wisps of memory. By the climax, readers are eager
to find out why in the world so many people want to pick Nicholas' brain, but the
answers are unsatisfyingly scanty, for narrator and reader alike. In a standalone
novel (no mention is made of an explanatory sequel), this lack of closure weakens
the power of the plot. Readers hooked on the thrill of danger, ambiguity, and risk
may enjoy this story in spite of the anticlimactic ending; however, they will find a
more compelling story of loss and self-discovery in Cross' The Dark Ground (BCCB
1/05) or Sedgwick's The Book ofDead Days (BCCB 12/04). TC
SMITH, D. JAMES 
The Boys ofSanJoaquin. Jackson/Atheneum, 2005 
[240p]
ISBN 0-689-87606-8 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-7
In the summer of 1951, Paolo O'Neil, one of many children born to his Appala-
chian Irish father and Italian immigrant mother, revels in his family status of trouble-
maker. Calmly leading his deaf cousin and adoring younger brother into a series
of adventures, Paolo learns to drive a car, punches and then befriends the local rich
kid, discovers the benefits of dancing the foxtrot with homely high-school girls
(who know how to appreciate a man), and gets involved in the theft and recovery
of the weekly tithes from the local Catholic church. In this blissful romp through
a surprisingly diverse California community (the family's neighbors include Irish,
Japanese, and German immigrants, and one very hairy man reputed to be the
descendant of a mountain man and a she-bear), Paolo's narration rolls off the
tongue, his small-town twang and apt metaphors enlivening each line. His charac-
terizations of neighbors, friends, and family members are perceptive yet generous,
his observations keen but structured by his twelve-year-old powers of comprehen-
sion. With a nostalgic ambience reminiscent of Peck'sA Year Down Yonder (BCCB
1/01), the story moves at a leisurely pace just right for enjoying all the facets of the
liberated days of summer without losing sight of the central plot thread involving
the discovery of the donation thief. While the near-drowning and rescue of Paolo's
younger brother allow for a brief foray into triteness, the overall quality of the
prose, plot, and pacing make this a standout choice for reading aloud or for curling
up with to enjoy all alone. TC
STAMATY, MARK AAN 
Alia's Mission: Saving the Books oflraq; written and illus.
by Mark Alan Stamaty. 
Knopf, 2004 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-93217-8 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-83217-3 
$12.95 
Ad Gr. 3-6
Within the comic-book tradition of perilous missions and international bedlam,
Stamaty presents the contemporary story of Alia Muhammad Baker, chief librar-
ian of the Central Library in Basra who, on the eve of the 2003 Iraq invasion,
managed to save nearly three-quarters of the collection before the building was set
ablaze. This is the same territory covered by Jeanette Winter for a younger audi-
ence in The Librarian ofBasra (reviewed below), and the format shift here from
picture book to sequential art is a canny one for the middle elementary grades.
Stamaty moves through the narrative headers and dialogue bubbles at heart-thump-
FEBRUARY 2005 
* 
267
ing pace, relating Mrs. Baker's real-life triumphs in a style that intuitively signals
heroism for comix and manga fans. However, readers who feel most at home in
this genre may also be the most disappointed by the stodgy monochromatic art-
work, the lumpish, misshapen figures, and the annoying little talking book that
introduces the proceedings with the condescending observation, "It's not neces-
sary to see through walls or fly or have super powers at all to be a real-life super-
hero." Stamaty does fill in a couple of blanks left by Winter, such as the probable
reason that official permission to move the books was denied and why the books
were shifted several times among various locations. He closes the tale with a de-
scription of a new library facility in the works and an implied appeal for readers to
contact the ALA International Relations Department "to learn how you can help
preserve libraries." Sadly, the best short-term preservation solutions may require
kryptonite. EB
STONE, JEFF 
The Five Ancestors: Tiger. Random House, 2005 
[22 4p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-93071-X 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-83071-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Each of the five youngest monks at Cangzhen Temple in seventeenth-century China
is a master of a kung fu style that represents his inner being: Fu (Tiger), Malao
(Monkey), Seh (Snake), Hok (Crane), and Long (Dragon). When the temple is
attacked by a vengeful former student, the sixth young monk, Ying (Eagle), who
leads the Emperor's soldiers, only the five survive. They run into the forest, in-
structed by their Grandmaster before his death to separate and seek out their un-
known pasts in the hope that they will find a way to change Ying's heart. In this
first volume of a planned five-book series, the aggressive Fu ignores Grandmaster's
wishes and doubles back, intending to stop Ying from possessing the temple's
secret scrolls, until he finds men hunting a tiger and makes a unwise mistake in
intervening. The quest of the warrior monk, deadly elegant in battle yet bound by
a sacred honor, is a popular story, and Stone delivers all of the surface appeal here:
numerous fighting scenes, pseudo-Buddhist philosophy, an exotic setting, and a
hint of mysticism. There is unfortunately not enough plot or character develop-
ment to fully flesh out the book; Fu is appealing because of his hot-headed imper-
fections, and readers do learn more about Ying's grievances, but by the end of this
installment little has changed. Furthermore, the narrative is overly expository, the
battle scenes so painfully detailed in terms of visual fighting tactics that they lose
some of their immediacy. Still, the read is fast paced and accessible and the fight-
ing style patterned after animals is intriguing; in light of the promise of plenty of
action and even more secrets to unfold in later books, young warriors-to-be will
likely read the whole series. KH
TAYLOR, THEODORE 
Ice Drift. Harcourt, 2005 
224p
ISBN 0-15-205081-7 
$16.00 
R Gr. 5-8
Alika and Sulu, Inuit brothers in 1868 Nunavut, are stranded on an ice floe that
cracks away from shore and drifts out to sea. Although the boys are well supplied
with dogs and provisions for their seal hunting trip, nothing could adequately
prepare them for the six-month ordeal ahead. Fourteen-year-old Alika is an expe-
rienced hunter, and with the help of their dog Jamka to scent seal holes, food is the
least of their worries. Polar bears, brutal cold, Sulu's sickness, isolation, loneliness,
268 
* 
THE BULLETIN
and the inevitable deterioration of the ice floe as the summer approaches keep
them in constant peril. Their parents make several attempts at search and rescue,
but they are forced to abandon their efforts. When the boys' floe is reduced to
little more than an ice raft, a lucky wind blows them within hailing distance of
more southerly hunters, and after many months ashore in a strange community,
they make their way back home aboard a kabloona (white men's) steamer. Taylor
distills much of his tale from an account of Captain George Tyson of the Polaris
who, with eighteen crew members (including two Inuit men), survived for six
months on a floe. Taylor's matter-of-fact tone adds an appropriate dash of fatal-
ism to this man vs. nature epic, and the boys' struggle to survive in a world that is,
literally, closing in is chilling in every sense of the word. Even devil-may-care
middle-schoolers might think twice before leaving their gloves, earmuffs, and trail
mix at home this winter. EB
TEGEN, KATHERINE 
The Story of the Easter Bunny; illus. by Sally Anne
Lambert. 
HarperCollins, 2005 
40p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-050712-8 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-050711-X 
$12.99 
R 3-6 yrs
It's true that an egg-delivering rabbit is a strange concept, so some explanation of
the phenomenon might be in order, and that's just what this gentle picture book
offers. Apparently, a gifted old couple used to prepare baskets filled with painted
eggs and chocolates and bring them to all the children in their village, observed
closely by their faithful rabbit. When they oversleep one Easter, the helpful rabbit
pitches in to make the deliveries, and in subsequent years he takes over the duties
in their entirety, moving out to the woods in order to keep his industry hidden
from curious eyes. There are plenty of holes in the story (where did the old couple's
tradition of painting eggs come from, and what happened to those nice folks after
the rabbit left?), but it's also tender and imaginative without slipping into the
cutesy; tightly focused images, rhythmically descriptive phrases, and careful repeti-
tion make it a neatly crafted small fable. Lambert's art sets the story in an appro-
priately picture-book village filled with winding streets, thatched roofs, and
Gemiitlichkeit, but there's some depth to the idyll, with the changing seasonal
details of the scenery, the rabbit's thoughtful mien as he labors, and the silent but
evident presence of the church in the center of the village. This is particularly
likely to have cross-generational appeal for sharing, and it will serve as a sweet
introduction to the tradition for the younger participants and an affectionate fic-
tional backstory for Easter veterans. DS
WEATHERFORD, CAROLE BOSTON 
Freedom on the Menu: The Greensboro Sit-ins;
illus. by Jerome Lagarrigue. 
Dial, 2005 
32p
ISBN 0-8037-2860-3 
$16.99 
R 6-9 yrs
Connie loves her Saturday shopping trips with her mom to downtown Greens-
boro, but she has never been quite satisfied with the promise of a homemade ba-
nana split since she couldn't have one at the segregated lunch counter. Dr. King's
arrival in town signals exciting changes, and Connie's older brother and sister soon
become involved in NAACP voter registration drives and civil rights protests.
Connie is too young to march, but she follows the action on TV and through her
older siblings, and she is surprised to see a group of her brother's friends taking
seats at the forbidden lunch counter. After a winter of boycotting the store by
FEBRUARY 2005 
* 269
shopping from catalogues, she and her family drive downtown to find that the
lunch counter sit-ins have finally had their effect; the ladies who worked behind
the counter are now sitting in front in their best dresses, eating egg salad. Lagarrigue's
roughly textured paintings set a dignified stage for the events, but while undoubt-
edly beautiful, they seem a bit muddy and dark for the subject matter, which
emphasizes clarity of intention and purpose. The homogeneity of their style fails
to track the emotional trajectory of the story from bitter disappointment to grim
determination to tense anxiety to elated success. However, the text plucks out the
moments of the conflict that are most likely to have meaning for a child and that
will lead readers to understand the motivations, necessities, and consequences,
both good and bad, of civil disobedience. Connie's child's-eye view of the sit-ins is
briefly supplemented by an author's note that links the Greensboro action to other
instances of activism. This book makes a fine addition to the growing number of
youthfully accessible and historically important narratives of the civil rights move-
ment. KC
WEBER, EDNAH NEW RIDER 
Rattlesnake Mesa: Stories from a Native American
Childhood; illus. with photographs by Richela Renkun. 
Lee & Low, 2004 
132p
ISBN 1-58430-231-3 
$18.95 
R Gr. 5-8
In a series of tightly crafted vignettes, EdNah New Rider Weber tells of her expe-
riences growing up Navajo in the early twentieth century. Though she lived quite
happily at the Crown Point boarding school with her father and aunts and uncles
after her beloved grandmother died, her father decided to send her away to the
Phoenix Indian School, a military-style institute that he had attended in his youth.
Her life there was hard, but she and her comrades seem to have taken the rigid
routines as a challenge and managed together to "mak[e] ourselves little survivors."
Weber's storytelling captures the wistfulness of a childhood fully lived and well
remembered. Telling of people, places, traditions, and ceremonies that were im-
portant to her, she conveys that, despite their best efforts and their sometimes
overwhelmingly harsh discipline, the boarding schools failed to "educate the In-
dian out of them," and she and her schoolmates even managed to find laughter
and joy (often in the best rude boarding-school tradition). The black-and-white
photographs are somewhat confusing: their graininess is apparently deliberate,
and it confers on the images a mistiness that suffers a tad by comparison with the
vibrancy of the narrative; they also seem to be contemporary images posed to echo
Weber's long-ago experiences, though that's never explicitly stated. They none-
theless manage to reinforce the emotional distance and complexity of memory in
the stories through their alternating between wide-open landscapes, tight closeups
of children's faces, and even more focused images of elderly hands doing beadwork
and smoking cedar in ceremonial pottery bowls. This would make an intriguing
counterbalance or alternative to Rinaldi's fictional My Heart Is on the Ground (BCCB
2/99) to bring the study of the Native American experience into the twentieth
century. KC
WESTERFELD, SCOTT 
Uglies. 
Simon Pulse, 2005 
[4 4 8p]
Paper ed. ISBN 0-689-86538-4 
$6.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-10
Tally is an ugly, waiting eagerly for her sixteenth birthday, when surgery will make
her into a Pretty and she can join her old friend Peris in the life of the beautiful in
270 
* THE BULLETIN
New Pretty Town. In the meantime, she revels in hoverboarding and pulling
tricks with her rebellious friend, Shay, who doesn't share Tally's anticipation for
joining the Pretty world. When Shay runs away to join dissidents outside the city,
Tally is blackmailed by the city's Special Circumstances unit into following Shay
and uncovering the location of the antiestablishment rebels, a task that becomes
more difficult when Tally's sympathies begin to skew toward the rebels, especially
their charismatic leader, David. While some of the details of the novelistic world
are unclear (why did society come up with age-connected tiers of prettiness, and
are the Special Circumstances people deliberately formed to look frightening?)
and some elements seem driven by didacticism, there's an innate fascination to the
concept of equality through universal beauty. Westerfeld has backed up his cre-
ated culture with sufficient anthropological grounding for credibility ("The big
eyes and lips said: I'm young and vulnerable, I can't hurt you, and you want to
protect me. And the rest said: I'm healthy, I won't make you sick"), and the usual
pleasures are present in the classic combat between the dark authoritarian under-
side of apparent utopia and the outsiders whose greater understanding threatens
the protected world. The book plays to full effect Tally's shifting loyalties and her
later secret guilt (the rebels don't know that she is the one who, unwittingly, brought
the authorities down upon them), and it keeps the stakes high by meting out hard
fates to likable characters. Readers' curiosity will be further piqued by the open
ending, and that plus the morality of Tally's world will be sure to engender plenty
of discussion and enjoyment for fans of futuristic fiction. DS
WILES, DEBORAH 
Each Little Bird That Sings. 
Gulliver/Harcourt, 2005 
[2 64p]
ISBN 0-15-205113-9 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-6
Ten-year-old Comfort Snowberger, daughter of a dynamic family, feels safe and
blessed. Since the Snowbergers run their community's funeral parlor, death is a
natural part of their existence, and the family celebrates the "messy glory" of the
life of each person who passes through their Serenity Suite on the way to the cem-
etery. The deaths of Comfort's adored live-in great-uncle and great-great-aunt
within the same year are still hard on the whole family, particularly on Comfort's
eight-year-old cousin Peach, who just can't handle the bad news. Comfort's best
friend, Declaration, has her patience strained by Peach's wailing, by the dog Dismay's
exuberance, and by Comfort's propensity for writing provocative Life Notices in-
stead of relying on the more traditional obituaries for the dear departed. A rift in
the friendship gapes wide on the weekend of Great-great-aunt Florentine's fu-
neral, when Peach is visiting in all his drizzly irksomeness and it seems to Comfort
that not one more thing can go wrong. A flash flood proves otherwise and forces
Comfort to confront the fact that while death is everpresent, so is life. The family
takes on joyous dimensionality through Comfort's first-person narration, her memo-
ries and comments highlighting each person's quirkiness and tenderness. Comfort's
own liveliness is evident in her vivid voice and in the newspaper notices and friend-
to-friend notes included in the text. These written inserts sometimes take on a
more sophisticated tone than a ten-year-old would usually achieve, but Comfort's
point of view throughout the body of the narration remains consistent. Her emer-
gent comprehension of the significance of both life and death creates a credible
and persuasive conclusion, resulting in a novel that is both more hopeful and more
witty than Creech's similarly themed Chasing Redbird (BCCB 3/97). TC
FEBRUARY 2005 
* 271
WILSON, JACQUELINE 
The Illustrated Mum. 
Delacorte, 2005 
[224 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90263-8 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73237-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Ten-year-old Dolphin adores her mother, who is colorful both figuratively (Mari-
gold loves spontaneity and imagination) and literally (Marigold has covered her-
self, over the years, with fantastical tattoos). Dolphin's older half-sister, Star, used
to be similarly besotted, but she's grown increasingly frustrated with acting as the
adult of the family when Marigold's manic phases lead her into irresponsible en-
thusiasm or her depressions leave her unable to get out of bed. When a chance
encounter brings Star together with her father, she takes the opportunity for a
stable home life with him; though Dolphin is invited along, she refuses to abandon
Marigold, so she's on her own when Marigold slides further into frightening inca-
pability and disorientation. This is a compelling story, but Wilson clutters it with
contrivance, especially in the successful discovery of not only Star's but also
Dolphin's father, and the resolution is overhasty and unrealistically cheerful in
light of what's transpired. Dolphin's narration is nonetheless moving: she's fiercely
loyal to her mother, but she's beginning to realize just what Marigold's incapabil-
ity is costing her, especially in her separation from Star, who's been the person on
whom she's really relied. Marigold is also sympathetically portrayed, since it's
clear that she's had a troubled history that makes her wariness of the authorities
understandable, but readers will nonetheless remain firmly on Dolphin's side as
she struggles to maintain her family. DS
WINTER, JEANETTE 
The Librarian of Basra: A True Storyfrom Iraq; written and
illus. byJeanette Winter. 
Harcourt, 2005 
32p
ISBN 0-15-205445-6 
$16.00 
R 
6-9 yrs
As fighting draws near Basra in 2003, librarian Alia Muhammad Baker's chief
concern is the safety of the city library's books. Denied official permission to
move the collection, she enlists the aid of a local restaurant owner to haul away
whatever they can and store it at his business. They're just in time, for "nine days
later, a fire burns the library to the ground." Soldiers visit the restaurant owner,
but although they do not discover the secreted books, Alia knows the collection
must be moved once again. This time she hires a truck and distributes thirty
thousand volumes among her friends for safekeeping: "She waits ... and dreams
of a new library. But until then, the books are safe-safe with the librarian of
Basra." Winter's brightly colored, doll-like figures in stylized, shallow-perspective
scenes bring the details of war to child-accessible scale without trivializing its per-
ils, and the scenes ofAlia's fears (tanks firing on flaming buildings) and dreams (a
reed boat peacefully punting through the marshes) are neatly juxtaposed. In an
closing note Winter traces the source of her story to an article in the July 27, 2003
New York Times, but although the simple veracity of Ms. Baker's accomplishment
may impress youngsters with limited understanding of the Iraq war, this account
leaves out information available in Stamaty's (reviewed above) and may well raise
more questions than it answers. Why wouldn't the governor allow the books to be
moved before the coming invasion? Why would books need to be hidden from
soldiers? For that matter, who were these soldiers? And why, in this war-torn
country, does Ms. Baker think her books are temporarily safe? The audience can
only hope this story-in-progress has a happy ending, and that we will be privileged
to learn it. EB
272 
* THE BULLETIN
WOODSON, JACQUELINE 
Coming On Home Soon; illus. by E. B. Lewis. 
Putnam,
2004 
32p
ISBN 0-399-23748-8 
$16.99 
R* 
5-8 yrs
World War II affords Ada Ruth's mother new employment opportunities, so she
heads off to Chicago to work on the railroads while her daughter stays in the
country with Grandma. Grandma promises that Mama will be "coming on home
soon," but Ada Ruth misses her mother terribly; as the snowy winter settles in and
still no letters arrive from Mama, the little girl relies on her thoughts of Mama and
on the warm companionship of a stray kitten, despite Grandma's warning that the
kitten won't be staying. The text's trajectory moves with sureness through Ada
Ruth's anxiety to Grandma's softening toward the kitten and Mama's happy re-
turn; the inevitability of the conclusion means it won't surprise grownups, but
there's still plenty of tension in Ada Ruth's momsickness that's earned her an end-
ing of joy and wishes granted (though Mama seems to have little reason beyond
narrative suspense for her failure to write). Woodson's spare lyricism resists senti-
mentalizing, with the text focusing instead on understated specifics and matter-of-
fact exposition. The always illustratively eloquent Lewis reaches a rare peak here.
Evocative portraiture steeped in realism imbues Grandma's face with strength and
love and Ada Ruth's wiry little form with longing (though one of the most moving
images is Grandma and Ada Ruth, followed by the determined kitten, viewed
from the back as they trudge through the snow); delicate mottles in the earthtoned
palette convey the well-scrubbed textures of the wooden house, with the snug and
protected interiors contrasting with the wide white-blanketed landscapes. This
begs for an intergenerational readaloud, and as a family-focused historical story
with a palpable plot, it could serve as an inducement forjthe sharing of more per-
sonal family stories. DS
WOODWORTH, CHRIS 
When Ratboy Lived Next Door. Farrar, 2005 
[192p]
ISBN 0-374-34677-1 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Twelve-year-old tomboy Lydia takes an instant dislike to the aggressive Willis and
his interfering pet raccoon when his family moves in next door. However, it's
1962, when neighbors are supposed to be neighborly, and through the nurturing
efforts of her live-in great aunt, Lydia is led into association with Willis' timid
stepmom and stepsister, Beth. Willis' alcoholic father remains frightening but
distant, but when she meets Willis' courteous, hardworking fourteen-year-old
brother, Elliott, Lydia knows he is the real deal. Unfortunately, Elliott loves his
brother, so Lydia fakes friendliness toward Willis while she builds her relationship
with Elliott, all the while needling Willis on the sly. The strategy backfires, and
Lydia is faced with the need to mend fences with the misunderstood younger
brother while desperately missing the older one. Lydia's robust voice carries the
book, her point of view both limiting and illuminating the growth of many differ-
ent relationships throughout the story. The sympathetic, deftly drawn characters
develop authentically, and even a flimsy secondary plot thread (Lydia's mom's
adjustment to the decade-old death of her first husband and son) and a slightly pat
ending can't dampen the vigor of Lydia's love for the people closest to her. Fans of
Creech and DiCamillo will want to give Woodworth a try. TC
FEBRUARY 2005 
* 273
YOLEN, JANE 
The Perfect Wizard: Hans Christian Andersen; illus. by Dennis
Nolan. 
Dutton, 2005 
40p
ISBN 0-525-46955-9 
$16.99 
R Gr. 4-6
This illustrated biography begins with three epigraphs, one from Andersen's own
work and two from contemporaneous commentators, which provide the central
concept of the book: that Andersen's writing reflected images from the major
episodes of his life. Brief, conversational sentences in short, readable paragraphs
connect the primary phases of Andersen's experience to the themes of his written
pieces through carefully chosen descriptions and quotes from Andersen and his
critics and peers. Excerpts from his stories are given with titles at appropriate
points throughout the text, emphasizing that correlation. Though Yolen describes
Andersen as an "annoying, awkward boy," and references many of his peculiarities
in the text, her overall tone is one of salutation rather than scrutiny, as she cel-
ebrates his triumphs and venerates the genius of his writing throughout the book.
Colored pencil and pastel drawings show Andersen at illustrative moments, often
emphasizing his prominent nose and physical lankiness, but the figures are awk-
wardly posed and the hues sometimes muddy. Inset ovals display scenes from his
stories, presenting the characters with smoothed features and button eyes, charac-
teristics which sometimes bleed over onto the real people shown in the larger illus-
trations. This visually complicated but thematically unified offering will provide
some accessible biographical explanation for a man likely to be considerably feted
in this bicentennial anniversary of his birth. A list of sources is given with an
author's note explaining that her adaptations are based on several translations,
some of which are referenced in the list. A publication timeline of Andersen's
stories is included. TC
274 
* THE BULLETIN
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
REID, ROB 
Cool Story Programs for the School-Age Crowd. ALA, 2004 
182p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-8389-0887-X 
$32.00
The eighteen story programs for K-4 students collected here are notable for their
unusual topics and their broad inclusion of a range of materials (picture books,
chapters in longer books, short stories, poetry, music, readers' theater). The col-
lection itself is remarkable for the author's visible effort to create a programming
text that allows and in fact encourages public librarians and media specialists to
adapt material to their own purposes and collections. As detailed in the introduc-
tion, Reid's objective was not to match materials to a predetermined theme but,
rather, to let the materials he wanted to use guide the choice of topic. What results
is a tremendous mix of such offbeat themes as "Clickety-Clackety, Creaky-Squeaky
Stories" (stories that feature alliteration and tongue twisters) and "Underwear and
Other Unruly Clothing" ("Is there a more charged word than underwear?" Reid
asks). Users are strongly encouraged to adapt the specific programs; in addition to
a lesson plan outline and detailed summaries of each of its components, there are
supplemental sections designed to give the story program planner greater ease in
creating a unique program. The "Mix-and-Match" sections offer alterative titles
to those included in the lesson plan, which are organized by material type (e.g.
"Mix and Match Picture Books," "Mix and Match Poetry," etc.). The "Tweaking
the Program Theme" sections give detailed suggestions for taking the program
down to preschool or up to fifth and sixth grades. Novice and seasoned profes-
sionals alike will want to have this ready-to-go guide close at hand the next time
they are planning a program for the elementary-school set. HM
FEBRUARY 2005 
* 275
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Abuse-fiction: Jacobson
ADVENTURE: Crossley-Holland;
Fleischman; McKernan; Stone;
Taylor
Africa: Onyefulu
Africa-fiction: Kessler
African Americans-poetry: Nelson
African Americans-stories: Johnson;
Nolen; Weatherford; Woodson
Alcoholism-fiction: Ryan
Animals-fiction: Kessler
Animals-stories: Edwards; Schaefer
Babies: Onyefulu
Ballet-fiction: Cirrone
BEDTIME STORIES: Schaefer
BIBLE STORIES: Ray
BIOGRAPHIES: Adler; Bial;
Fradin; Kerley; Weber; Yolen
Birds-stories: David
Boarding school: Weber
Boarding school-fiction: Green
Books and reading: Stamaty; Winter
Books and reading-fiction:
Bernstein
Brothers and sisters-fiction: Ryan
Cars-stories: Lyons
Cats-stories: Woodson
China-fiction: Stone
Cities-stories: David
Civil rights movement: Fradin
Civil rights movement-stories:
Johnson; Weatherford
Civil War: Kerley
Costumes-stories: McDonald
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Brooks; Jacobson; Smith
Crusades-fiction: Crossley-Holland
Current events: Stamaty; Winter
Dancers and dancing-fiction:
Cirrone
DANGER: Brooks; Stone
Dating-fiction: Bradley, A.
Death-fiction: Green; Wiles
Easter-stories: Tegen
Ecology: Kessler
Embarrassment-poetry: Hopkins
Emotions-poetry: Hopkins
Ethics and values: Cirrone; Cooper;
Crossley-Holland; Green; Jordan;
Kessler; Littman; Westerfeld
Explorers and exploring-fiction:
McKernan
Faith-fiction: Cooper; Littman
Families-fiction: Klise; Ryan; Wiles
FANTASY: Bell; Bernstein;
Crossley-Holland; Love; Paver;
Sage
Farms-stories: Lindbergh
Fathers-fiction: Wilson
FOLKTALES AND FAIRY TALES:
Anderson; Dijkstra; Lyons; Oliver
Friends-fiction: Anderson;
Castellucci; Green; Jacobson;
Jordan; Wiles
Friends-stories: Asher; David;
McDonald
Future-fiction: Westerfeld
Gifts-stories: Tegen
Grandmothers-stories: Woodson
GRAPHIC NOVELS: Stamaty
Growing up-fiction: Castellucci;
Cohn; Green
HISTORICAL FICTION: Bradley,
K.; Bruchac; Crossley-Holland;
276 
* THE BULLETIN
Fleischman; Jeapes; Johnson;
Jordan; McKernan; Rinaldi;
Smith; Stone; Taylor;
Weatherford; Woodson;
Woodworth
History, British: Jeapes
History, European: Dorros; Rinaldi
History, U.S.: Adler; Bial; Bruchac;
Fradin; Kerley; Nelson; Weber
HUMOR: Bradley, A.; Cohn;
David; Hopkins; Klise; Littman;
Novak; Smith
Identity-fiction: Castellucci;
Seabrooke; Westerfeld
Insects-stories: McDonald
Inuit-fiction: Taylor
Knights and chivalry-fiction:
Crossley-Holland
Literature, American: Kerley
Literature, children's: Yolen
Magic-fiction: Bell; Bernstein; Sage
Medieval life-fiction: Crossley-
Holland
Mental illness-fiction: Wilson
Mermaids: Oliver
Mice-stories: Dijkstra
Mothers-fiction: Paratore; Wilson
Mothers-stories: Woodson
MYSTERIES: Jacobson
Mythology: Oliver
Names: Onyefulu
Native Americans: Weber
Native Americans-fiction: Bruchac
Neighbors-fiction: Woodworth
Orphans-fiction: Sage; Seabrooke
Parties-stories: McDonald
POETRY: Hopkins; Nelson
Prejudice-fiction: Dorros
Presidents: Adler; Bial
Presidents-fiction: Bradley, K.
Proms-fiction: Anderson; Bradley,
A.
Queens-fiction: Rinaldi
Quests-fiction: Love
Rabbits-stories: Novak; Tegen
Racism: Fradin
Racism-stories: Weatherford
Reading, reluctant: Oliver; Stone
Relationships-fiction: Brooks; Cohn
Religious education: Cooper;
Littman; Ray
RHYMING STORIES: Lindbergh;
Martin
Romance-fiction: Bradley, A.;
Cohn
School: Weber
School-fiction: Bradley, K.; Green
SCIENCE FICTION: Jeapes;
Westerfeld
Secrets-fiction: Seabrooke
Self-image-fiction: Cirrone
Sharing-stories: Asher
Ships and sailing-fiction:
Fleischman
Sisters-fiction: Wilson
Sisters-stories: Lindbergh
Slavery: Nelson
Spies and spying-fiction: Bell
Stepmothers-fiction: Ryan
Storytime: Asher; Edwards; Martin;
Nolen; Ray; Schaefer
SUPERNATURAL STORIES:
Paver
SURVIVAL STORIES: Taylor
SUSPENSE: Brooks
TALL TALES: Lyons; Nolen
TODDLER BOOKS: Martin
Voyages and travel-fiction: Dorros;
Fleischman; Klise; Love;
McKernan
Voyages and travel-stories: David
War: Stamaty; Winter
War-fiction: Dorros; Jeapes
Weddings-fiction: Paratore
Wolves-fiction: Paver
Women's studies: Cirrone
World cultures: Kessler
World War II-fiction: Bruchac
Writers and writing: Kerley; Yolen
SPICY HOT COLORS
I 
lillV 
U^Irl
LIBRARIANS, REVIEWI
AND KIDS AGREE
"Learning a foreign language
has never been so much fun as
in this bouncing introduction to
names of nine colors in Spanish
Snappy, image-filled verses brin
life some of the hues and tradit
of Latino Culture."
-School 
Library Journal
"This zingy color primer takes it
inspiration from "the spicy hot (
[that] sizzle on a Saturday nigl
throughout Latin America."
-•Phlihare WIVaAl
"Spicy Indeed. This boldly designed book is
a welcome treat after the more sedate books
that introduce children to colors. A Brilliant
feast of color that will entice children as it
helps them learn a few Spanish words."
-Booklist
"Shahan's phrases encourage the reader's &
listener's paraticipation by snapping, whacking,
or tapping along...Barrgn's work echo the
exhuberance of the verse."
-Kirkus 
Reviews
Sherry Shahan
Illustrated by Paula Barrag6n
ISBN 
0-87483-741-3
$16.95
Sewn hardback binding
8.5 x 11"
24 pages; all full color
AUGUST
H USE'
www. augusthouse. cor
August House is the Storytelling Source.
AUGUST 
HOUSE 
/ P.O. 
BOX 
3223 / LITTLE 
ROCK, 
AR 72203 / 201 EAST 
MARKHAM 
72201 /1-800-284-8784 / FAX 
501-372-5579
iT
r+ 
,r~rlJ~i
FREE
TRIAL ISSUE
of an award-winning
publication!
Visit
www.TeachingK-8.com
Click on
FREE TRIAL ISSUE
-.
7^1 iTti *k 
E
Jutý 3^
Teaching K-8 is 
filled with hundreds of unique ideas
and activities that help teachers present new challenges
to their students, learn new concepts and develop new skills.
OFC 
To receive your
FREE TRIAL ISSUE visit
www.TeachingK-8.com
Teaching K-8 Magazine
40 Richards Avenue * Norwalk, CT 06854
1325Sou
;~ ·Fi:.
1325Sou
;~ 
·Fi:.
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.S.A
ADDRESSSERSaCa RBQOBTBD
i
yofllinois Pres 
P™orAj
POSTAGE
1325 Soh O 
Sr~
PA, 
61820 
ID
SCHAMPIGN, 
IL
ADuRss SEVC REQUTED
i*
~I· 
~?~
i*
~I· 
~?~
1998-0) v
Th online we
daabs by ;
To access Th
I. GotohN
Z 
When»
.sc~rib
word. Tl
numtber
case sen:
scriber n
vidual p rin
accss so pl<
iexpand TheI
elecroic su
·Non-subscril
hildrn' KoI
LS
"1,IL
~~~acc
~ 
~ 
Onl&
199~ 
vailwr
~ 
online verscu
~ 
by ~
To access ~ Bul
I, GOuz~
z 
~en~
sc~r mr~
~llnlZ: 
~ 
1
~rd. 
~t 
a
nuntber ~ 
n
3; ~rl~
case ~nS~
~rd 
In r
serlbe~ Ru~
~~bet, 
~B
vidual p~ 
rubtc;
~~, 
so p~51sa (
ilexprnd ~ 
Wulleil
el~ic 
su~ri
·N~rcrtttc~nc
~"s~u
PI~~ ~I 
any
You may now access The Buetn Online with an individualized u
and password.
The Bulletin Online is available only to print subscribers, and includes the
1998-2004 volume years plus the current ssues as they are publised
The online version allows you to search the current ssue or the entire
database by au 
r, title, age or grade level.
To access The Bu 
n Online:
1. Go to http 
ww.praenet.orcc
2. 
When accessing The 
Online or the first time, use the ub-
scriber numb 
that appears 
the 
r 
nd c 
r of the
mailing label on 
r 
nt copy as both your use 
and pass
word. This subscriber umber will u 
ly be a fou or ve-digit
number 
may also be a 
er letter/nber 
combination.
3. After logging in for the 
t 
you will be required to change your
password to something other than our u 
. This passord is
case sensitive and s 
d be one 
only. Please store this new
password n a safe place. Your use 
me (which s also our sub-
scriber number) will not 
ang
Remember, The Bu 
Onl 
is not licensed for public us 
only ndi-
vidual print su 
ribers and instu 
subscribers' taff 
e granted
access, so please d 
s 
r access codes. We are worng
expand The Bu 
Online's c 
lies and 
re create broder
electronic subscri 
ons for in 
and in
Non-subscribers can 
more about 
ot Cter for
Children's Books a h 
/wwwli
Please 
y feedback orqe 
ons to: 
cb@al 
is.uiuc.edu.
-
:::::: 
:: 
--
;. 
:' 
: I : 
: 
: ; :
I~~hed 
u~
~an;, 
~ 
includes the
~ 
BrS PUbljsFBd,
Issue or dre enldre
d~, use the tub-
rnd c~t~r of the
se~ 
md ~
fouF or f~
rFul~ ~ c~ 
your
~· ~ls~la
lasa tton~ thlt new
I Is ~ 
~P 
sUb-
rbrre us~ only Indl-
ire ~ ~ng 
~
n t~ 
b~r
U~lituiuc.edu,
,,f
-els --A 
_rQ
