ILLINOI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
"Toby loves to play hide-and-seek,
and in this story young readers canjoin his
parents in trying to find him. Steig's brief text
has just the right amount of tension to draw
young children into the game; and Euvremer's
warm, cozy illustrations encourage them to follow
Toby from one hiding place to another. A welcome
addition to other popular hide-and-seek titles." -SLJ
"It's a charmer." -Kirkus Reviews
"Toddlers will have fun with the interactive game and
the cozy mischief [in this] classic picture-book story."
-ALA 
Booklist
AUPQ 
O 
-h
$13.89LB (0-06-205083-4)
IMICHAEL DI CAPUA BOOKS * HARPERCOLLINS PUBLISHERS
A OP• 
.4- 
h
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
June 1997
Vol. 50 No. 10
A LOOK INSIDE
347 THE BIG PICTURE
The Never-Ending Greenness written and illustrated by Neil Waldman
348 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
353 
* The Secrets ofAnimal Flight written and illus. with photographs
by Nic Bishop
354 * Willy's Silly Grandma by Cynthia DeFelice; illus. by Shelley Jackson
354 * Painting the Black by Carl Deuker
363 * Lives of the Athletes: Thrills, Spills (And What the Neighbors Thought)
written by Kathleen Krull; illus. by Kathryn Hewitt
377 * The Last Payback by James VanOosting
380 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
381 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin ofthe Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
STAFF
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor (JMD)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Amy E. Brandt, Reviewer (AEB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Pat Mathews, Reviewer (PM)
Susan S. Verner, Reviewer (SSV)
Pam McCuen, Editorial Assistant (PMc)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $40.00; individuals, $35.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 51 E. Armory Ave., Champaign,
IL 61820-6601. E-mail: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu
Visit our homepage at http://edfu.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1997 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Neil Waldman, from The Never-Ending Greenness ©1997 and used by
permission of Morrow Junior Books.
JUNE 1997 
* 
347
THE BIG PICTURE
The Never-Ending Greenness
written and illustrated by Neil Waldman
The goal is never to forget, but the question remains of how to remember the
Holocaust for children, especially young children, who have no knowledge of World
War II. Neil Waldman has given us his answer in The Never-Ending Greenness,
which focuses on the survival of refugees from the Holocaust. Beginning with a
tree-lined springtime scene in Vilna, the Jewish narrator recalls a childhood inter-
rupted by Nazi soldiers who force his family into a ghetto, from which they escape
into the surrounding forest. Later, in Israel, the boy transplants seedlings to his
house where he can water them and nourish his dream of forests covering the
barren hills around him. Postimpressionistic paintings flicker leaf-like shapes of
colored light across panoramic landscapes. From the two dramatically gray ghetto
scenes to pastel shades and deepening green hues, the illustration offers a spectrum
of despair changing to hope, a hope celebrated every year with an Israeli tree-
planting holiday called Tu b 'Shvat.
Not for the primary-grade audience seeking standard suspense, The Never-
Ending Greenness is nonetheless perfectly paced as an unfolding of personalized
history reflected in a life cycle like an unfolding of leaves. And the intensity of the
boy's project is magnetic enough to build a bridge of identification with today's
young listeners who have no experience with devastated wastes of wartime gray. If
the survival of a whole family is unrealistic or at least unusual in terms of what
happened to millions ofJews, Waldman has ultimately projected the survival story
of a people-perhaps the only happy ending for a story where so many individuals
perished.
Our first impulse, of course, is to protect children from historical night-
mares, and it took three decades for the Holocaust to make its way into juvenile
literature at all. When it did, the format was young adult (Yuri Suhl's On the
Other Side of the Gate, BCCB 9/75, for instance, or Milton Meltzer's Never To
Forget, 9/76). As aging survivors felt compelled to pass on their stories in memoir
or autobiographical fiction, and schools incorporated the subject into elementary
curricula (sometimes mandated, along with other minority history), books about
the Holocaust-including enduring, surviving, and escaping it- crept into younger
formats, including easy-to-read works such as Isabella Leitner's The Big Lie (1/93)
that are accessible at a third- and fourth-grade reading level. The next step, inevi-
tably, was picture books, a genre already prepared for wartime desolation by
groundbreaking works such as Maruki's Hiroshima No Pika (10/82). Just as inevi-
tably, the subject was sometimes mishandled. Wild and Vivas' Let the Celebrations
Begin! (9/91) treats concentration camp liberation like a picnic, but other picture
books-including The Lily Cupboard by Oppenheim (3/92) and Elisabeth by
348 
* THE BULLETIN
Nivola (3/97), in which the main characters survive, and Flowers on the Wall by
Nerlove (3/96) and Star ofFear, Star ofHope by Hoestlandt (6/95), in which they
do not-have managed a better balance in reflecting tragic situations for young
listeners, upon whom we all wish happiness along with a conflicting quota of truth.
Each of the picture books wrestles with a central question of how much
to tell: in content, how much of the horror; and in form, how much of the con-
text. These issues in turn raise a critical question of whether the picture book
comprises a self-enclosed world like other literature or whether it must depend in
some cases on adult interpretation. For instance, Sim's In My Pocket (reviewed on
p. 374) gives no historical context for a young Jewish refugee's experience; it's a
book that would be incomprehensible without adult "translation," but of course
an argument could be made that these are books best left to explanation by the
adults reading them aloud, anyway. Gallaz and Innocenti's Rose Blanche is also
mystifying without background commentary and connections. Are the Holocaust
and its thematic variations too complex and terrible a subject for preschool or
primary-grade understanding? That's a decision every parent and/or educator must
make not only for herself but also for each different child in her care and each
different book in her ken. Like all "trends," this one will go through cycles of truth
(innovation) and consequences (commercialism). How many outstanding picture
books have emerged, really, on the subjects of child abuse or AIDS?
What we do know is that social context affects and even effects text. No
one in the 1950s could have imagined the publication of a children's book as grim
as Pausewang's The Final Journey (12/96), which begins with the protagonist's
boarding a train to Auschwitz and ends with her stripping for the "showers." Yet
Schindler's List is shown on TV, with children wandering in and out of living
rooms all over the country. Through the pervasive presence of multimedia, the
worlds of adulthood and childhood that underwent separation in the nineteenth
and early twentieth centuries are once again fusing. Children see all but know
little. And we are left to explain what we can, through books such as Waldman's
Never-Ending Greenness, and to do what we can, which is sometimes nothing more
or less than planting a tree. (Imprint information appears on p. 377.)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ADA, ALMA FLOR 
Gathering the Sun: An Alphabet in Spanish and English; English
tr. by Rosa Zubizarreta; illus. by Sim6n Silva. 
Lothrop, 1997 
40p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-13904-3 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-13903-5 
$16.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
A series of expository poetic pieces on the lives of migrant farm workers is arranged
according to the Spanish alphabet in this bilingual picture book. From Arboles
(Trees) to Zanahoria (Carrot), Ada selects various elements from the itinerant lives
JUNE 1997 
* 349
of farmworkers and creates short verses, most of which commemorate the fruits of
the harvest and the closeness of family. Each double-page spread features two
letters; each letter is in a red-bordered text box accompanied by a short piece in
Spanish, with the English translation alongside it. Silva's paintings are garish with
summer colors, the verdant green fields aflame with red fruits and flowers, and,
except for the spread where it's raining on a field of lettuce, even the sky is a hot
summer blue. While there is little differentiation between the old faces and the
young ones, the massive compositions have an elemental appeal. Both the format
and text dogmatically serve the theme, although Ada's over-earnest approach to
giving children a look at their own and other people's lives is understandably sym-
pathetic. JMD
ALARCON, FRANCISCO X. 
Laughing Tomatoes and Other Spring Poems/Jitomates
Risuefios y otros poemas de primavera; illus. by Maya Christina
Gonzalez. 
Children's Book Press, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-89239-139-1 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Seventeen poems celebrating spring, each appearing in both English and Spanish,
run riotously across the pages in this energetic collection. Every double-page spread
seems to have something to shout about, from "Dew"/"El rocfo" ("the fresh/ taste/
of the night"; "el fresco/ sabor/ de la noche") to "Las canciones de mi abuela"/"My
Grandma's Songs," from "Strawberries"/"Las Fresas" to "Suefio"/"Dreams." Some-
times the poem in Spanish is first, sometimes the poem in English, but the lan-
guage is concrete and immediate every time, and it's enriched by celebratory visual
images. Gonzalez' watercolors extend Alarc6n's poems, each double-page spread
replete with blossoms, suns, dancing children, singing grandmothers, and fields
bursting with corn, strawberries, and, of course, tomatoes. While the composi-
tions are often crowded, sometimes uneven, and frequently unsubtle, the palette is
bright with lavenders and pinks, and individual compositional elements have a
joyful sense of magical realism that includes grinning portraits, tomato smiles, and
floating chiles. Alarc6n includes an Afterword/Posdata that talks briefly about
poetry, the poems in this collection, and how he came to write them. The book
opens with the words "A Poem/ makes us see/ everything/ for the first time"; "Un
poema/ nos hace ver/ todo/ por primera vez," and this collection certainly proves
the point. JMD
ANDERSON, MARGARET J. 
Children of Summer: Henri Fabre's Insects; illus. by
Marie LeGlatin Keis. 
Foster/Farrar, 1997 
[112p]
ISBN 0-374-31243-5 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
This unusual fiction is based on the scientific writings of French scientist Fabre
(1823-1915), who is known as the founder of experimental entomology. The
narrative voice belongs to Paul, youngest son of Fabre, who describes his father's
"tricks" played on assorted insects; these were ingenious experiments designed to
record and analyze their behavior. The format is a series of vignettes, each focused
on a different insect, in which Fabre and his offspring learn something about the
subject under study. Though this gimmick strains credibility, it does a serviceable
job conveying scientific information. Indulgent readers willing to swallow the
setup will pick up some fascinating bits: cossus grubs are great on the grill; scarab
beetles can be lazy and deceitful; those deafening cicadas really are deaf; southern
350 
* 
THE BULLETIN
France harbors scorpions (is no place perfect?). Read this one for its insect info
only, not for its stick-figure characterizations and pedestrian prose. Keis' illustra-
tions competently reflect the historical period while depicting the respective crit-
ters in their environments. Included are a table of contents, biographical note,
glossary, and index. SSV
AUCH, MARY JANE 
Journey to Nowhere. 
Holt, 1997 
202p
ISBN 0-8050-4922-3 
$15.95 
R Gr. 4-7
In 1815, Mem (short for Remembrance) Nye and her brother have been rather
abruptly packed up with a few of the family's most vital belongings and are headed
from their comfortable but overworked farm to Papa's new uncleared acreage in
New York. The further they journey from civilized Connecticut, the cruder the
roads, the accommodations, and their fellow travelers become. Upon arrival, Papa
demonstrates that he doesn't really know how to build a cabin or clear his new
tract, and Mama threatens to alienate their new neighbors by railing against liquor.
Mem's adventures on the early leg of the journey seem somewhat cobbled together;
separation from her family in a thunderstorm smacks of a plot device to introduce
some information on mountain lions, snake-bite treatment, and turkey droving.
Still, Auch offers a refreshingly believable portrait of a family under stress; these
hardy pioneers actually bicker and hurl a little cranky sarcasm at each other as the
trials and errors of wilderness living take their toll. Readers who like to imagine
themselves into times past will readily empathize with the testiness, bumbling, and
perseverance of these survivors. EB
BIAL, RAYMOND 
Mist over the Mountains: Appalachia and Its People; written and
illus. with photographs by Raymond Bial. 
Houghton, 1997 
48p
ISBN 0-395-73569-6 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 4-7
In this strikingly beautiful photoessay, Bial again demonstrates his skill as a pho-
tographer as he takes readers to the "undeniably lovely" area called Appalachia. A
textual overview of Appalachian culture, geography, history, and people weaves its
way through an abundance of clear, crisp photographic images: the inside of a
canning cupboard, old photographs adorning a log cabin wall, the stark whiteness
of the clapboard siding on a country church, an exquisitely handmade dulcimer, a
misty mountain scene. The text addresses popular beliefs about the region while
supplying information in a highly readable text. Farming, religion, music, Jack
tales, and folk arts are just some of the topics elucidated. Though somewhat tour-
isty and pristine, this is not an entirely romanticized view of life in the mountains:
the ravages of the logging efforts, the hardships involved with coal production, and
the deep poverty of much of the region are addressed forthrightly. Although a
glossary would have been beneficial, this volume will serve as a worthwhile intro-
duction to "the spirit ofAppalachia." A list of further reading is appended. PM
BISHOP, Nic 
The Secrets ofAnimal Flight; written and illus. with photographs by
Nic Bishop. 
Houghton, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-395-77848-4 
$14.95 
R Gr. 3-6
Ever gazed at the sky and marveled at hawks gliding effortlessly, puzzled over the
jerky movements of bats at dusk, been dive-bombed by mosquitoes, or wondered
how flies can loop-the-loop? In clear prose, this book tells us exactly how different
animals fly and shows us with crisp photos and detailed diagrams. Bishop makes a
JUNE 1997 
* 
351
convincing argument for the practicality of flight (no obstacles, safety from preda-
tors) and explains why our flying friends need to find lots of high-energy foods,
such as worms, insects, and seeds. Along the way, the reader is treated to fabulous
flight factoids: a 150 lb. person would need a wingspan of 120 feet to fly; bats can
make sharp turns because their wings are made of skin and don't leak air; insects
and hummingbirds hover by flipping their wings upside down; a bumblebee can
fly 2,000 miles on one teaspoon of nectar. With refreshing candor, Bishop admits
that scientists still don't know how birds fly 2,000 miles non-stop or why monarch
butterflies migrate to the same corner of Mexico year after year, but that won't
keep this title from flying off the shelf. Suggestions for further reading are ap-
pended. SSV
BRISSON, PAT 
Hot Fudge Hero; illus. by Diana Cain Bluthenthal. 
Holt,
1997 
72p 
(Redfeather Books)
ISBN 0-8050-4551-1 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Three short stories are divided into shorter chapterettes in this droll entry into the
beginning reader genre. The "Hot Fudge Hero" of the title is Bertie (a hot-fudge-
sundae lover), who wins a bet by making friends with the neighborhood
curmudgeon, learns the difference between "fast magic," "slow magic," and
perseverance with the help of his fairy godfather, and bowls his first strike with an
ugly orange (but still lucky) ball. Brisson's text is lighthearted and even-handed as
the intrepid Bertie marches resolutely from adventure to adventure. The text is
arranged in short lines with wide leading and margins that will tempt even the
most reluctant or timid reader. Bluthenthal's black-and-white cartoons have the
same affectionate whimsy as the text, and they reflect and add to the inherent
humor. This is going to be a favorite readalone for a lot of kids, and a favorite
readaloud for their grown-ups, too. JMD
BYARS, BETSY 
Death's Door: A Herculeah Jones Mystery. 
Viking, 1997 
[12 8p]
ISBN 0-670-87423-X 
$13.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-7
In this fourth book in the series, both Herculeah and her semi-stalwart sidekick,
Meat, dodge the bullets of the Bull, a hit-man hired to kill Meat's Uncle Neiman,
the quiet owner of a mystery bookstore, Death's Door. Meat does the grunt work,
figuring out from a newspaper photograph why his uncle is the target, while
Herculeah gets swept up into the hair-frizzling action (including a harrowing, curb-
bumping car ride with a near-blind Uncle Neiman at the wheel). The quirky
characterization and dialogue marking the earlier books run a small risk of predict-
ability here, yet the appeal of Herculeah's sixth-sense resourcefulness and Meat's
wistful romanticism takes a backseat only to an intense and suspenseful mix of
mistaken identities and assumptions. The pace will no doubt drive readers past
death's door to the next Herculeah-an case. AEB
CANNON, JANELL 
Verdi; written and illus. by Janell Cannon. 
Harcourt,
1997 
48p
ISBN 0-15-201028-9 
$16.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
Verdi is a green tree python (Morelia viridis), who is enthralled with his youthful
good looks ("He was proudly eyeing his bright yellow skin. He especially liked the
bold stripes that zigzagged down his back. Why the hurry to grow up big and
352 
* THE BULLETIN
green? he wondered"). Verdi's distaste for the green oldtimers in the jungle whom
he thinks are lazy, boring, and rude leads him to his impetuous resolve: "I will stay
yellow and striped forever." But there is no fountain of youth for the wide-eyed
Verdi, and he finally realizes the benefits of maturity when the old snakes rescue
the reckless young reptile in a particularly poignant scene where their green tails
become a kind of emergency pallet for the injured snake. The tale ends with an
enlightened but now very green Verdi who takes on some young yellow whipper-
snappers declaring, "I may be big and very green, but I'm still me!" In this take on
the generation gap, snake-style, Cannon again puts to good use her artistry with
luminescent acrylic paintings. The text in this careful mix of snake fact and fiction
is overlong for a picture book, but the brilliant yellows and verdant greens of the
art ease the reader through the story smoothly. Double-page spreads divide most
of the action of the story into pen renderings and text on one page and vibrant
jungle scenes on the other. This pythonesque tale of midlife crisis may have as
much appeal at the nursing home as it does in the nursery school. "Snake Notes"
are appended. PM
CARLE, ERIc 
From Head to Toe. 
HarperCollins, 1997 
26p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-02023516-0 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023515-2 
$16.95 
R 2-4 yrs
Twelve lively beasts from the domestic cat to the dromedary invite children to
imitate them as they stomp, wriggle, thump, and clap across the double-page spreads
of this concept book. The movements are more original than the usual exercises of
touching head, shoulders, knees, and toes-the crocodile wriggles its hips, the cat
arches its back, the giraffe (you guessed it) bends its neck. This isn't as bouncily
rhythmic as Zita Newcome's Toddlerobics (BCCB 2/96) but children will enjoy
the calisthenic cavorting as they follow along with this rambunctious variant of
Simon Says. An attractive picture book in Carle's signature style of vivid cut-
paper collage, this is a thumpingly good choice for toddler and preschool storytimes.
PMc
CARLSTROM, NANCY WHITE 
Raven and River; illus. by Jon Van Zyle. 
Little,
1997 32p
ISBN 0-316-12894-5 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
A raven flies over a frozen river, its black wings a startling contrast to the white
snow below, calling for the river to awaken from its icy slumber. Set in the Alas-
kan wilderness, this is a prose-poem to the raven, the river, and the return of
spring. Carlstrom's language is rhythmic with hypnotically repeating elements, as
squirrel's "bright eyes sparkle, like a river shining," wolf "takes off, like a river
running," and snowshoe hare "bounds over familiar paths, like a river dancing."
Van Zyle's acrylic paintings have panoramic sweep and naturalistic views, some-
times placing the animals firmly in the foreground, where they dominate the com-
positions, or against the Alaskan landscape, where they are dwarfed by their
surroundings. The understated text takes off slowly but builds momentum as it
progresses, until the climax of the ice breaking on the river. Carlstrom's conclud-
ing lines are disappointingly anticlimactic, and, considering the clarity of the pre-
vious text, somewhat cutesily obscure. Still, this is a different approach to
change-of-season books, and it will make an interesting addition to other, more
traditional seasonal tales. JMD
JUNE 1997 
* 
353
CURRIE, STEPHEN 
We Have Marched Together: The Working Children's
Crusade. Lerner, 1997 
88p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8225-1733-7 
$14.96 
R Gr. 4-7
Among the strikers who suspended Philadelphia's textile industry in the summer
of 1903 were thousands of children under the age of sixteen who performed mo-
notonous and even dangerous factory work for a fraction of adult wages. Taking
up the strikers' cause, Mother Jones organized a few hundred workers, about half
of whom were children, into a march on New York City to force child labor issues
before the public eye. Currie admits that little reliable information is available
about the children who participated in the march; liberally peppered with "we
don't know"s and "perhaps"s, the children's story essentially becomes Mother Jones'
story, which is nonetheless a gripping one. She's depicted here in her media-
grabbing glory, organizing the workers at a Hoboken hotel where she had been
invited by the owner to stay for free and displaying some of the children in animal
cages at a carnival to dramatize the confinement of underage factory workers. Plenty
of sepia-toned period photos (many by Lewis Hine) tell as affecting a tale as the
text; readers who want to know more might turn to Freedman's Kids at Work
(BCCB 10/94). EB
CZERNECKI, STEFAN, ad. 
The Cricket's Cage: A Chinese Folktale; ad. and illus. by
Stefan Czernecki. 
Hyperion, 1997 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2234-1 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0296-0 
$14.95 
R Gr. 4-6
During the Ming dynasty a Chinese emperor named Yongle demands the design
and construction of four watchtowers, one for each corner of the wall around the
Forbidden City. Despite the best efforts of his trusted minister, the master builder,
and Kuai Xiang the carpenter, nothing pleases the emperor. Then the carpenter's
lucky cricket designs himself a more comfortable cage; Kuai Xiang builds the cage;
and the cage is mistaken for a model of the tower and taken to the emperor, who,
in true folktale style, embraces it as the essence of what he has been searching for.
Bright yellow dragon-patterned borders surround text blocks and paintings; the
cricket is used as a repeating motif on the bottom of the text blocks, while the
paintings themselves depict the action of the tale in rich reds and blues, with dra-
matic accents in black and green. The figures and settings are stylized and sophis-
ticated, the compositions balanced and effective. The extremely formal language
borders on the austere, and the insertion of double-page spreads without text tends
to interrupt the flow of the story, adding to the somewhat distancing effect. Red
endpapers with yellow dragons open the tale with a flourish, and an author's note
(including the English translation of a Chinese poem shown in an illustration)
gives extensive background information. JMD
DADEY, DEBBIE 
Shooting Star: Annie Oakley, the Legend; illus. by Scott
Goto. 
Walker, 1997 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8485-2 
$16.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8484-4 
$15.95 
R 
6-10 yrs
There's a fair amount of truth about "Little Sureshot" laced in here among the
whoppers, and half the fun for younger listeners will be in reckonin' which is
which. Annie's early years supporting her widowed mother, her marriage to erst-
while shooting rival Frank Butler, her European triumphs of marksmanship, her
354 
* THE BULLETIN
tour with the Wild West Show, and her friendship with Sitting Bull are all in the
record. In the best tradition of frontier hyperbole, however, Dadey reminds her
audience that it was Annie who shot those craters in the moon, reversed the flow of
the Snake River, and blasted a star into Pike's Peak and the Hawaiian Islands.
Oakley is cleverly and affectionately caricatured in Goto's flamboyant acrylic and
oil paintings, and if the draftsmanship is somewhat stiff, the too-too solid figures
boast a monumentality befitting a legend. Concluding notes, entitled "The Truth,"
are included to set the credulous straight. EB
DEFELICE, CYNTHIA 
Willy's Silly Grandma; illus. by Shelley Jackson. 
Jackson/
Orchard, 1997 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-33012-5 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-30012-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 5-8 yrs
"On Saturday his lovin' grandma said, 'Willy, don't you go walking by the Big
Swamp at night. Something could give you a fearsome fright."' But just as he has
done the other six days of the week, Willy says "Silly Grandma" and methodically
defies her superstitious warnings that it's bad luck to cut your toenails on Sunday,
sing before breakfast, lay hats on a bed, walk with one shoe on and one off, count
the stars, and bring an axe or hoe in the house. Still, when Willie does encounter
a bogeyman-and this is one scary double-spread demon-Grandma is the first to
reassure him it's only wind, branches, and starlight (having seen the apparition
themselves, young viewers may not be so sure). The text is cadenced with rhythms
born to be retold or read aloud, while the sly ink and crayon illustrations are skill-
fully drafted, dynamically composed, deeply textured, and formatted with vari-
ously shaped frames. The African-American characters radiate expression in face,
gesture, and posture, their warm brown skin tones dominating coloration in many
of the scenes. A mite spooky for the younger preschool audience, this will be a
major hit with primary-grade listeners and a must for Halloween storytimes. BH
DEUKER, CARL 
Painting the Black. 
Houghton, 1997 
24 8p
ISBN 0-395-82848-1 
$14.95 
R* 
Gr. 7-10
Ryan Ward's senior year takes an unexpected turn when Josh Daniels moves in
across the street and persuades him to get into shape to catch for him during
baseball season. A gifted but ego-driven athlete, Josh consistently makes magic on
the gridiron and on the diamond; clinching his status among both students and
faculty, he begins pushing the limits of school rules and social propriety, harassing
female students and moving cafeteria furniture to establish a little kingdom for his
fellow players. Ryan is uneasy about Josh's darker side but he remains loyal to his
new friend, even when he discovers Josh sexually assaulting the class valedictorian.
Realizing how close he himself has come to being seduced by Josh's win-at-any-
price philosophy, Ryan finally gives evidence against Josh to the police. For those
not up on their baseball jargon, the title term refers to a pitcher's ability to put the
ball over the edge of the plate, "right between being a strike and a ball... so that
nobody really knows what it is." Deuker drives his plot along the edge of the plate
too, making Josh's slide to perdition seem so very understandable-and almost,
but not quite, excusable. Josh really is as good an athlete as he claims to be; the girl
he harasses in the lunch room is a tease; the girl he assaults is not above verbally
humiliating him in class. After Josh's conviction, he is merely sentenced to com-
JUNE 1997 
* 355
munity service and is, moreover, signed to a pro contract upon graduation. It ain't
pretty, but it's real. EB
DORROS, ARTHUR 
A Tree Is Growing; illus. by S. D. Schindler. 
Scholastic,
1997 
32p
ISBN 0-590-45300-9 
$15.95 
R Gr.3-5
It is difficult to separate the concisely elegant text from the nearly lyrical illustra-
tions in this distinctive nature book. Dorros discusses trees-how they grow, their
structure, root systems, leaves, seasonal changes and other qualities-in two differ-
ent styles of text. The primary, unitalicized text gives basic information; the sec-
ondary, italicized text goes into that information in slightly greater depth, allowing
the book to be read on several levels. In addition to the two levels provided by
Dorros' text, there is a third level, provided by Schindler's illustrations. Etchings
filled in with colored pencil on pastel and parchment papers, they are stunningly
executed, with a breadth of detail that draws in the viewer. Each double-page
spread contains a quarter-page panel paired with a one-and-three-quarter page
illustration, the panel giving additional visual details not included in the larger
picture. Both the layout and Schindler's technique add tremendously to the im-
pact of this title, the etched lines providing a unique, delicate nuance. Trees,
leaves, wildlife, and other design elements are all clearly labeled, as author, illustra-
tor, and reader follow trees through the seasons. JMD
DRAPER, SHARON M. 
Forged by Fire. Atheneum, 1997 
151p
ISBN 0-689-80699-X 
$16.00 
M 
Gr. 7-10
Gerald's life is haunted early: when he's only three, he accidentally sets fire to the
apartment where his drug-addicted mother, Monique, has left him alone. After
she's imprisoned for neglect, he lives with his indomitable great-aunt Queen, but
when Monique is released from prison (with a new husband and a daughter, An-
gel, born during her incarceration) he ends up living with her following Aunt
Queen's sudden death. Gerald bonds with his little sister but hates and fears his
abusive stepfather, who soon also goes to prison for his molestation of Angel; un-
fortunately he is eventually released, and his hold over the family becomes stronger
when Monique is seriously injured in an accident. Then Gerald's friend Rob dies,
and then there's another fire which kills the stepfather. It's all too much for the
reader as well as Gerald, and the writing isn't capable of turning this sequence of
events into something other than relendess melodrama that ultimately numbs rather
than engages. There's also a tendency for the point of view to wander, especially at
the beginning, which makes it hard to focus as firmly on Gerald as one might wish.
The relationships between Gerald and Rob's supportive family and between Gerald
and Angel are strong and appealing, but that's not enough to overcome the heavy-
handed plotting. DS
DUFFEY, BETSY 
Virtual Cody; illus. by Ellen Thompson. 
Viking, 1997 
[80p]
ISBN 0-670-87470-1 
$13.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 2-4
It's Cody of Hey, New Kid! back again, this time having to admit to the entire
third grade that his parents gave him his really cool name to honor a loved one in
their past. Okay, so it was a dog, as Cody discovers while checking out the family
scrapbook, but Cody was a very special dog-a hero dog, according to his mom,
356 
* THE BULLETIN
who claims the pooch rescued her from drowning when she was little. The "vir-
tual" element here is thin indeed, and it mostly hinges on a rather gimmicky
cyberdiary Cody keeps in which he comments on events, illustrating his feelings
with little Internet hieroglyphics such as =:-o. What saves this slight story from
wooferdom is Duffey's breezy writing and fast pace, which should hook kids just
beginning chapter books. SSV
EHLERT, Lois, ad. 
Cuckoo: A Mexican Folktale/ Cucut: Un cuento folkl6rico
mexicano; ad. and illus. by Lois Ehlert; tr. into Spanish by Gloria de Arag6n
Andijar. Harcourt, 1997 
35p
ISBN 0-15-200274-X 
$16.00 
R 4-6 yrs
Cuckoo has a very high opinion of herself, from the lovely way she looks to the
lovely way she sings, but the other birds are beginning to get a bit tired of her
preening ways. When a field fire threatens the seeds the birds have put aside to
ensure they don't go hungry, it is cuckoo who braves the flames and rescues the
hoard, losing her bright plumage and melodious voice to the sooty smoke. The
other birds recognize her heroism, "and they all agreed in the end: You can't tell
much about a bird by looking at its feathers." Ehlert's simple retelling of this
Mayan folktale features appealing characters, danger, suspense, and a happy end-
ing. The design of this oversized picture book allows the placement of the bilin-
gual text in such a way as to make both the English and Spanish equally accessible,
while the large black type set against the vibrant backgrounds lends itself easily to
both group readalouds and beginning individual reading. Ehlert's illustrations,
from cut-paper fiesta banners to tin work to wooden toys, are based on motifs in
Mexican folk art and combine geometric forms and pulsating colors into strong,
striking compositions suitable for large groups. A specific source note is included.
JMD
EVANS, KAREN L. B. 
You Must Remember This; by Karen L. B. Evans and Pat
Dade. 
Hyperion, 1997 
139p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2075-6 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0090-9 
$13.95 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Ella Jackson couldn't be more excited when a new teacher, Ms. Sewall, shows up at
her school on a grant to teach a term of filmmaking. Ella's great-uncle Buddy was
among the earliest black filmmakers, and although he is now a barber and reluc-
tant to discuss his doubtless colorful past, Ella is certain that her class project will
lure him into opening up about celebrities such as deceased actress Ella DuChamps
(for whom Ella was named) and the old film reels stored in an off-limits trunk.
Evans and Dade keep the action rolling with the impish ten-year-old's misadven-
tures in the film lab and her scheming onslaughts on Uncle Buddy's privacy. The
revelation that Uncle Buddy's final film Heavenly Hostess is an embarrassing piece
of exploitative black buffoonery is honestly and sensitively handled; Uncle Buddy
explains how his own "sin of pride" led him to misplace his faith in the Hollywood
studio system and to let down his actors: "In my eyes I had failed, as a man and as
a director. I couldn't protect them. I sold out and they paid for it." The challeng-
ing issue of racism in the early film industry is approached here much more suc-
cessfully than in Laurence Yep's The Case ofthe Goblin Pearls (BCCB 5/97), but
readers may want to consider the parallels between those of Uncle Buddy's experi-
ences and those of Yep's fictional Chinese screen star, Tiger Lil. EB
JUNE 1997 * 357
FINKELSTEIN, NORMAN H. 
With Heroic Truth: The Life of Edward R.
Murrow. Illus. with photographs 
Clarion, 1997 
[175p]
ISBN 0-395-67891-9 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-12
Murrow was an undeniable hero of his day, but the trick here may be in selling the
subject to a CNN generation who find standard television network news stodgy,
let alone radio broadcasts of World War II. Finkelstein's somewhat adulatory
biography opens with the story of Murrow's famous broadcast unmasking Senator
McCarthy, and then proceeds in standard chronological order delivered in acces-
sible, if not zippy, prose. Along the way some of the lesser known events in Murrow's
life are revealed: his first national radio broadcast resulted from an inebriated
Murrow snatching the microphone away from the regular announcer; despite know-
ing the enormous extent of U.S. losses at Pearl Harbor, Murrow chose not to
report this in deference to the war effort; the correspondent's frequent and heroic
attacks on McCarthy almost cost him his passport. Going beyond the usual narra-
tive of biographies, the author details the networks' frantic postwar scramble to
control and exploit a new medium, television, and the unhappy effect of the tri-
umph of entertainment over hard news. While this is pure History 101, the issues
haven't changed and budding journalists will take comfort from Murrow's cour-
age and resourcefulness. A photogallery and index are included. SSV
FRENCH, FIONA, ad. 
Lord oftheAnimals: A Miwok Indian Creation Myth; ad. and
illus. by Fiona French. 
Millbrook, 1997 
26p
ISBN 0-7613-0112-7 
$15.95 
Ad 
5-9 yrs
In this retelling of a Miwok creation myth, Coyote gathers the animals to discuss
"how to make the Lord of the Animals. If he is to rule over us, he has to be a very
superior creature." Each animal is convinced that the Lord of the Animals must
possess the attribute he values most: mountain lion wants him to be strong, swift,
and silent; bear wants him to have a big growl; deer wants him to have antlers, etc.
The animals agree to make mud models of their ideal, but they fall asleep over the
unfinished forms. Except for Coyote, who stays awake and makes his model by
the light of the moon: man, who "is Lord of the Animals because he is cunning
and clever-just like Coyote!" A specific source note indicates that the tale is a
vestige from the once numerous Miwok, American Indians of coastal California,
and there appears to have been some effort to incorporate images and motifs from
the art of the coastal California nations. Still, the compositions are excessively
crowded, with a clashing palette of uncomplementary colors that reduces the geo-
metric patterns to a confusing visual muddle. French's storytelling, however, is
gracefully surefooted, and the text lends itself easily to a number of oral interpreta-
tions, from reading aloud to creative dramatics. Use this one with groups who like
to make their own pictures. JMD
GAUCH, PATRICIA LEE 
Christina Katerina and Fats and the Great Neighborhood
War; illus. by Stacey Schuett. 
Putnam, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-399-22651-6 
$15.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Christina Katerina has been in a multitude of eponymous picture books, and here
she's engaged in a classic neighborhood power skirmish. Obnoxious Tommy
Morehouse co-opts Christina's loyal lieutenant, Fats, and then excludes her from
play; Christina calls in the reserves (Doris and Joanne), so does Tommy, and the
358 
* THE BULLETIN
war is on. The scary ghosts and pine-cone pitching are fun, but Christina misses
Fats and is hurt at his defection-until Tommy pushes too far and Fats proves true
to his old loyalties. This isn't quite as snappy as some books on the subject, and the
incivility-rapprochement cycle is fairly predictable. There's a nice blend of the joy
and bitterness of neighborhood skirmishing, however, with Fats' refusal to come
find Christina in hide-and-seek more hostile than any missile could be. The acrylic
and gouache art is suburban verdant with some enlivening reds and purples; the
multiracial group of neighborhood kids is lively and authentically determined. There
are some good possibilities for entertaining readaloud expression here, and kids
familiar with uneasy neighborhood detente will relish a story about when it all
breaks down. DS
GEISERT, ARTHUR 
The Etcher's Studio; written and illus. by Arthur
Geisert. 
Lorraine/Houghton, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-395-79754-3 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
A boy helps his grandfather the etcher, and he watches and narrates the process as
he assists ("I put wood in the stove while Grandfather inked and wiped his plate").
When it comes time for the boy's most important job, coloring the prints by hand,
he passes the time by imagining himself inside the pictures, where he's sailing a
boat round Cape Horn, flying over the town in a balloon, venturing undersea, and
roaming through a jungle. The blend of story and information here isn't as effec-
tive as one might wish: the process of etching isn't described clearly enough within
the story to be a plot of its own, and the concept of exploring the prints, though
appealing, seems to be more a reason for energetic double-page views than an end
in its own right. The detailed depictions of the old-fashioned studio and the im-
pressive equipment and materials are intriguing, however, as are the colored etch-
ings (including a few piggy homages) hung about the studio walls. Particularly
enjoyable are the two final spreads, which offer a labeled tour of the studio and a
step-by-step explanation of etching-which is the sort of information we were
looking for right at the start. Technically minded kids looking for something
beyond Kehoe's A Book Takes Root (BCCB 9/93) may want to come up and see
Geisert's etchings. DS
GEORGE, KRISTINE O'CONNELL 
The Great Frog Race and Other Poems; illus. by
Kate Kiesler. 
Clarion, 1997 
40p
ISBN 0-395-77607-4 
$14.95 
R Gr. 3-6
This is a country-life selection of poems; they deal with ploughed fields, tadpoles,
home-laid eggs, and farm dogs. The poems are quiet and observant, tending to-
wards free verse and sometimes reminiscent of William Carlos Williams ("A crow
stole the cone/ and six tiny sparrows hopped/ vanilla footprints/ across the side-
walk"-"What Happened to the Ice Cream Cone Someone Dropped"). The phrase-
ology is fresh and apt, employing tactile as well as visual conceits, and the subjects
are kid-appealing ones indeed. Kiesler's oils are reminiscent of Ronald Himler's
watercolors, especially in palette, but an awkwardness with faces occasionally mars
the human figures, whereas the delicate waterbugs and the sweep of the ploughed
fields are impressively conveyed. Also useful as a source for poetic readalouds, this
will provide an engaging entree for readers otherwise skittish of poetry. DS
JUNE 1997 
* 
359
GRINDLEY, SALLY 
Why Is the Sky Blue?; illus. by Susan Varley. 
Simon, 1997 
26p
ISBN 0-689-81486-0 
$16.00 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
In this take on an intergenerational theme, "Donkey was very old and knew a lot
of things" and "Rabbit was very young and wanted to learn." Donkey attempts
over and over again to instruct Rabbit, but the hyperactive hare never contains his
youthful exuberance long enough to hear the answer. Instead he goes solo to
investigate why the earth is brown, why berries are red, why birds fly, what about
the sun, the moon, the stars . . . you get the idea. The two characters, mildly
reminiscent of Christopher Robin's pals, play out the story on spreads of spring
green fields dotted with white and yellow blossoms against eggshell-pale skies full
of cottony clouds and lots of wide-open white space. The plump gray Donkey and
his rollicking rabbit friend have an endearing, stuffed-animal quality that graces
the whimsical mood of the story, which concludes with Donkey predictably learn-
ing a few things from Rabbit. A shared joke about why the sky is blue ("It's
because that was the only color left in the paint box," says Rabbit), which Donkey
finds wildly funny, probably won't strike young listeners in quite the same way,
but you could use this one in conjunction with George and Martha or Frog and
Toad for a friendly storytime. PM
GUTMAN, BILL 
Becoming Your Cat's Best Friend; ISBN 0-7613-0200-X; Becom-
ing Best Friends with Your Hamster, Guinea Pig, or Rabbit; ISBN 0-7613-0201-
8. 
Each book: illus. by Anne Canevari Green. 
Millbrook, 1997 
6 4p 
(Pet
Friends) 
$15.90 
R Gr. 2-5
Pets are always an enticing subject, and Millbrook's "Pet Friends" series provides a
useful and appealing introduction to their keeping. Topics covered for all species
include food, exercise, housing, breeding, and health; the cat's full-volume treat-
ment allows for more detailed discussion of behavior as well. The prose is brisk,
avoiding the canned flavor prevalent in such series, and the emphasis is on respon-
sible pet ownership throughout (the books advocate the spaying and neutering of
cats, emphasize the caged pets' dependence on their owners, and discuss the occa-
sional necessity of euthanasia). Green's colored-pencil vignettes, lively cartoons of
absurd pet situations, don't add any information but keep things humorous. There
are more in-depth treatments of these subjects elsewhere (erome Wexler's Pet
Hamsters, BCCB 2/93, and Dick King-Smith's ILove Guinea Pigs, BCCB 4/95),
but readers will find here an accessible introduction that should provide them with
useful ammo for a parental pet proposal. Each book includes suggestions for fur-
ther reading and an index. DS
HARRISON, DAVID L. 
The Animals' Song; illus. by Chris L. Demarest. 
Boyds
Mills, 1997 
32p
ISBN 1-56397-144-5 
$14.95 
R 
3-6 yrs
A red-haired pirate girl's silver flute ("Toot toot/ Tootity toot") begins an accumu-
lation of animals and sounds in a long parade that wends its way over a countryside
to end in the sleeping buccaneer's bedroom. "She met a boy/ With a rumity
drum,/ Rum tum/ Rumity tum," a hooty owl with a hootity hoot, a gentle cow
with a moodily moo, etc. until "they danced and sang,/ Tootity toot,/ Rumity
tum,/ Hootity hoot,/ Yippity yap,/ Moodily moo,/ Neighdity neigh,/ Doodily
360 
* 
THE BULLETIN
do ... the whole day through." Demarest's watercolors are positively jolly, with
the grinning characters singing and dancing their noisy way across a varied layout
of single and double-paged spreads. This cumulative rhyming tale goes on a bit
too long, but it still packs a strong rhythmic punch and will surely make storytime
lively-and loud. JMD
HIATT, FRED IfI Were Queen ofthe World; illus. by Mark Graham. 
McElderry,
1997 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-689-80700-7 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Fiery-haired older sibling muses on how perfect her life would be if she were in
command-she would, for example, possess an endless supply of lollipops that
need never be shared and exhibit a flawless piano technique that requires no prac-
tice. She'd be a magnanimous monarch, though, bestowing upon her little brother
a lick or two of the coveted lollipops and allowing him occasionally to accompany
her on his screechy recorder. The sugary predictability of her imaginings is only
somewhat mitigated by her tart concluding observation, "Sometimes I might even
let him sit next to my throne and pretend to be a king. But NEVER of the whole
wide world." Graham's oil paintings are hazily luminous, as befits a daydream,
and the palatial settings should appeal to youngsters with their own aspirations to
royalty. EB
HILL, DAVID 
Take It Easy. 
Dutton, 1997 
[112p]
ISBN 0-525-45763-1 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
It's been three months since the death of his mother, and Rob is still filled with
anger. His father thinks that a hiking trip in the New Zealand wild will be just the
thing for him, so Rob joins a collection of other teens on a camping trip. When
the park ranger leading them dies in the night, the young people are left on their
own. In their efforts to get rescued, they get themselves lost even further and one
of the group suffers serious injury, whereupon Rob and one of his companions-
and finally just Rob-must make it through the wilderness and obtain help. Sur-
vival stories are rarely particularly original, but this is more predictable than most,
and the mowing down of characters that makes Rob a lone hero is quite contrived.
The interspersed commentary from the search helicopter adds to the program-
matic nature without enhancing the drama. On the good side, the book has the
perennial appeal of the survival story, and the teen characters, though a bit repre-
sentative, have a lively camaraderie that makes their plight involving as well as
challenging. Will Hobbs fans who want a Down Under slant on their favorite
themes will enjoy Rob's odyssey. DS
HONEYCUTT, NATALIE 
Twilight in Grace Falls. Jackson/Orchard, 1997 
1 8 1 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-33007-9 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-30007-2 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Dasie's world is starting to disintegrate. First, her beloved older brother Sam leaves
home for military service, knowing that their tiny Pacific Northwest town holds
no future for him. Then the lumber company around which Grace Falls revolves
shuts its doors, and it looks like the end of the community. Dasie's friends move
out of town, Dasie's school prepares to close and to bus the kids miles away to
JUNE 1997 
* 361
another town, and even though Dasie's father eventually gets another local job (as
night watchman, keeping an eye on the silent lumber mill where he used to work)
it's clear that nothing will ever be the same. This is a real original: a sensitive but
unsentimental exploration of a small-town way of life squeezed out by a changing
economy. Honeycutt adeptly depicts the way the lore of lumber permeates daily
existence, occasionally and effectively intercutting dialogue from the local
lumberman's hangout into the narrative and making plain Dasie's father's fierce
pride in his skills and his hope that his nephew, if not his son, will follow in his
footsteps. This kind of story doesn't often make it beyond the headlines; for a lot
of kids, this will be an introduction to a new world just as that world begins to
disappear. DS
HOPCRAFT, XAN 
How It Was With Dooms: A True Story from Africa; written by
Xan Hopcraft and Carol Cawthra Hopcraft; illus. by Xan Hopcraft and with pho-
tographs by Carol Cawthra Hopcraft. 
McElderry, 1997 
6 4p
ISBN 0-689-81091-1 
$19.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Dooms was a cheetah raised from a kitten by the Hopcraft family on their Kenya
game ranch; seven short chapters describe his arrival and youth, his friendship
with young Xan (who narrates), various aspects of his daily life, and his final sick-
ness and passing. Flap copy states that this book was dictated to his mother by
twelve-year-old Xan, and this approach has its drawbacks: the writing is some-
times awkward ("Just like very small human babies who are too small for their
shots, you have to be careful to keep [cheetah kits] away from diseases"), and the
story of Dooms' daily life doesn't have much shape to it. The visuals are often
enchanting (Dooms as a baby peeking out of a basket) and often startling (an
angelic Dooms licking his lips clean of gouts of blood), but the scrapbook flavor
makes things frustrating: the photos are sometimes small or poorly lit, it's not
clear who most of the subjects are and why some photos are where they are, and
the younger Hopcraft's drawings add little but increasing distraction to a layout
that's over-heavy on design. It's hard to keep a good cheetah story down, however,
and the combination of information and personal (feline?) biography will keep
many kids intrigued until they're old enough for Elspeth Huxley's The Flame Trees
ofThika. DS
JAFFE, NINA, ad. 
The Mysterious Visitor: Stories of the Prophet Elijah; illus. by
Elivia Savadier. 
Scholastic, 1997 
112p
ISBN 0-590-48422-2 
$19.95 
R Gr. 4-6
While Elijah of the Bible is a holy prophet, Elijah of Jewish folklore is magical, and
these eight tales celebrate his role as mysterious stranger, wish-bestower, and dream
figure. "Things are not always what they seem" is the most common motif, for
Elijah often appears as a pauper testing hospitality. Those who deny him may be
punished in strange ways, as are the arrogant couple whose son is turned into a
bear (ultimately redeemed, like Beauty's Beast, by a beautiful loving woman). Those
who honor him, like the old teacher hazarding a long journey at Elijah's behest, are
rewarded with material wealth as well as spiritual contentment. The collection is
varied in tone and tale type: "Elijah and the Fisher Boy" echoes the old theme of
"The Fisherman and His Wife," but "Where Is Elijah?" seems to incorporate a
more contemporary existentialist twist. A man who yearns for a glimpse of Elijah
is instructed by his rabbi to provide the Passover meal for some immigrants. His
rabbi then hands him a mirror: "Look closely and you will see, my friend. This
362 
* 
THE BULLETIN
was the face of Elijah tonight." Longer than traditional folktales but fine for read-
ing aloud or alone, these are elaborated with an accessible balance of narrative and
dialogue. The jubilant watercolor paintings that introduce each story are light-
filled, with vivacious coloration and spontaneous movement. The book is spa-
ciously designed, the documentation generous. Specific source notes, glossary,
bibliography, and list of recommended readings deepen a sense of the community
from which the tales emerge. BH
JONES, CHARLOTTE FOLTZ Fingerprints and Talking Bones: How Real-Life Crimes
Are Solved; illus. by David G. Klein. 
Delacorte, 1997 
[11 2p]
ISBN 0-385-32299-2 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 4-6
Lifting prints, analyzing fibers, constructing a criminal's psychological profile, catch-
ing crooks with the aid of slime-shooting weapons-this is just the stuff to rivet
the most reluctant middle-grade readers. However, in an effort to run the gamut
of forensic science, Jones in fact covers nothing thoroughly, leaving the audience
with plenty of leads but little explanation. "If a bloodhound finds a criminal, the
testimony of the dog is admissible in court." How? "A crime lab can restore the
[gun's filed down] number by using an acid or chemical etching solution.... The
numbers reappear for only a short time, though." Why? "Researchers have tried
to make smart guns for years. The idea is that an officer's gun would not work for
anyone except the officer." Why haven't they succeeded? Lapses in logic mar the
text ("The scene of a crime is nothing like a dentist's office. Things are not quiet
and peaceful"), which occasionally sinks to downright silliness (a disadvantage to
using detector pigs-"Pigs make disgusting noises"). Surrender this title to casual
browsers, but set your serious sleuths on the trail of Donna Jackson's Bone Detec-
tives (BCCB 4/96). EB
KERR, M. E. 
"Hello, "ILied. HarperCollins, 1997 
[176p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027530-8 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027529-4 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 9-12
Lang Penner is spending the summer of his seventeenth year in the caretaker's
cottage at Roundelay, home of reclusive rock legend Ben Nevada. (Lang's mother
is Nevada's summer chef.) Lang, a just emerging homosexual, is trying to "help
out, hide out, cool out, come out," and it's not easy. Huguette, the daughter of
Nevada's dead true love, comes to visit from France; Lang becomes her guide and
friend, and, in a scenario worthy only of true confession magazines, they have
Huguette-initiated safe sex. Afterwards she blames Lang because he's "supposed"
to be gay. Kerr hints throughout this rather soapy summer spectacle that some-
thing terrible is going to happen, but unless you count Lang and Huguette's one
"moment of madness," nothing terrible really does. Pacing is slow, the rock 'n'
roll subplot is labored and self-conscious, and much of the surprisingly humorless
text is message-driven-some people are gay, some people are straight, society
ruins us with its expectations of conformity and normalcy, parents warp kids' minds,
drugs are bad, music is good, etc. Lang, certain he is homosexual but uncertain he
wants to deal with the difficulties of being honestly out, is believably ambivalent.
His long-term relationship with actor boyfriend Alex is the honest crux of the
novel, but it never gets enough attention to lift this title above its summer-beach-
movie atmosphere. JMD
JUNE 1997 
* 363
KRULL, KATHLEEN 
Lives of the Athletes: Thrills, Spills (And What the Neighbors
Thought); illus. by Kathryn Hewitt. 
Harcourt, 1997 96p
ISBN 0-15-200806-3 
$19.00 
R Gr. 4-8
Those familiar with this creative duo's earlier books on artists (BCCB 11/95),
writers (10/94), and musicians (4/93) will know what to expect here: a collection
of biographies, each a few pages with some additional tidbits, a full-page caricature
portrait, and a secondary thumbnail sketch of aspects of the subject's life. Hats off
to Krull for variety-the twenty subjects here include Canadians (hockey player
Maurice Richard) and Brazilians (soccer player Pele), decathletes (Jim Thorpe)
and surfers (Duke Kahanamoku), off-court heroes (Arthur Ashe) and off-diamond
tempests (Babe Ruth), groundbreakers (Babe Didrikson Zaharias) and more re-
cent phenomena (Flo Hyman). The continuity's occasionally a little jumpy, the
neighborly-opinion device dips into contrivance, and the living are distinguished
from the dead only by the absence of death dates. It's still a breezy, energetic, and
eminently booktalkable collection, however. The art is sophisticated but friendly,
adding to the appeal for many a reluctant reader. This may encourage single-sport
fans to broaden their scope and those less sportive to take a lap around the bio-
graphical track. DS
LARSON, RODGER 
What IKnow Now. 
Holt, 1997 
[272p]
ISBN 0-8050-4869-3 $15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
"It was the summer of 1957 when I turned fourteen and I met a man named Gene
Tole ... and I fell in love with him, but didn't know it at the time," says protago-
nist Dave, essentially summing up the book's action on the first page. This story
takes place against the backdrop of Dave's parents' separation, sending Dave off
with his mother while Dave's brother is stuck with his angry and judgmental fa-
ther. Through Gene Tole, a horticulturist, Dave begins to see the possibility of a
different kind of manhood, and he attempts to come to terms with the meaning of
his feeling for his hero when Gene proves to be gay. The resolution here is more
one of worldly awakening and sexual questioning than coming out, however: it's
not stated outright that Dave is actually gay, and none of his feelings are incom-
patible with a heterosexual adolescent's crush. Larson unfortunately has a ten-
dency to catalogue at length rather than describe, which slows the pace down without
ever getting us anywhere. It's nonetheless gratifying to see a nice kid discover
possibilities beyond his own circumscribed life, and the story of mentoring and
hero-worship has its poignancy. DS
LASER, MICHAEL 
The Rain; illus. by Jeffrey Greene. 
Simon, 1997 
[32p]
ISBN 0-689-80506-3 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
4-8 yrs
"The rain fell on the city, the town, and the forest." So begins this tribute to rain
in an eye-catching collection of paintings rendered in darkly beautiful pastels that
depict the gray and moody loveliness of a rainshower and the people in it. We
view a man boarding a commuter train, a teacher grading homework by an open
window, a girl and boy exploring the forest, and an old man on a city street expe-
riencing the rain in a series of vignettes that eventually reveals their connection to
each other (everyone's related except the old man). The idea has merit but it never
delivers anything more than a pretty layout. The minimal text endeavors to in-
364 
* 
THE BULLETIN
volve the reader emotionally as the rain stirs a kind of awakening in each character
("Seeing that no one else was around, he tipped the umbrella to the side and let the
rain fall on his face. The drops on his lips made him smile") but only succeeds in
seeming sentimental, adult-oriented, and vapid. Inconsistencies further water down
any effectiveness this tome might have enjoyed as observant viewers will notice
that the children (who "were so wet that their clothes stuck to them and their hair
straggled down in front of their eyes") have dry hair and are wearing raincoats. By
the last line ("Later, when they were all asleep, the rain became softer . . . and
softer... and then it stopped") kids may be clamoring for some thunder and
lightning. PM
LEE, DENNIS 
Dinosaur Dinner (With a Slice of Alligator Pie); comp. by Jack
Prelutsky; illus. by Debbie Tilley. 
Knopf, 1997 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-97009-6 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-87009-1 
$17.00 
R Gr. 2-4
Dennis Lee is probably Canada's most popular children's poet, but his work isn't
all that well-known in the U.S. Jack Prelutsky has selected a pleasing variety of
Lee's poetry covering a multitude of topics. There is verse on child-rearing ("Mrs.
Murphy,/ If you please,/ Kept her kids/ In a can of peas. .. "), unmentionables
("Mrs. Mitchell's underwear/ Is dancing on the line/ Mrs. Mitchell's underwear/
Has never looked so fine ... "), and the ever-popular topics of food and eating
("Alligator pie, alligator pie,/ If I don't get some I think I'm gonna die"). Some
poems are thematically familiar ("I Eat Kids Yum Yum!" recalls Nash's "Isabel,"
"Being Five" is reminiscent of A. A. Milne, and a multitude here are drawn from
nursery and playground rhymes), making them all the more appealing. Lee is
particularly good at chantable verse, which would lend this collection to reading
aloud as well as individual discovery. Tilley's illustrations are eminently suitable
for their job; the line-and-watercolor images range from vivid spot art to shadowy
full-page spreads, and she's always fleshing out the poetic picture with details with-
out outshining the text. Hand this one to kids who aren't yet (ready for) Brats
(BCCB 7/88). DS
LERMAN, RORY S. 
Charlie's Checklist; illus. by Alison Bartlett. 
Orchard,
1997 
26p
ISBN 0-531-30001-3 
$14.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Charlie is a black-and-white puppy looking for an owner, and, as any normal dog
would, he runs an ad in the personals to find one. Assisted by his friend Chester,
the boy from the farm next door, he sorts through the responses according to his
criteria and eventually settles on a girl in a ritzy London penthouse-until he
realizes how well faithful Chester stacks up against his checklist. The plot has
tinges of both contrivance and predictability, and a few glitches may confuse read-
ers (it takes several spreads, for instance, to make clear that Charlie's the dog and
not the boy). There's nonetheless an endearing charm to the idea, and the kid 'n'
dog pairing will please the young audience. The illustrations are filled with broad
brushstrokes and vivid hues, with Chester's red-and-white striped overalls firing
up the scenery and Charlie possessing a loopy and lop-eared appeal. The happy
pair's final rural idyll will evoke envy in many young applicants for dog-owner.
DS
JUNE 1997 
* 
365
LONDON, JONATHAN 
Ali, Child of the Desert; illus. by Ted Lewin. 
Lothrop,
1997 32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-12561-1 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-12560-3 
$16.00 
R 
6-9 yrs
Ali is finally old enough to go on the yearly cross-Sahara journey to the Rissani
market, and he is determined to "show his father that he was ready to be a man." A
violent sandstorm separates the boy and his father, and Ali is fortunate to come
upon a Berber goatherd, his grandson, and his flock on their way to the moun-
tains. They give Ali dates, bread, sweet mint tea, and the option of coming with
them if his father does not find him. They pass the night with the old man's
stories of his life as a warrior-tribesman of the Berber, and in the morning Ali
decides to wait for his father. The goatherd leaves Ali with his musket, telling him
to "fire the musket every time the sun moves a hand's width across the sky." Ali's
father finally locates him, and the boy says simply, "I waited for you." While this
is an affectionate snapshot of Saharan cultures, it is also a survival story told at a
very elementary level. The theme of a young boy proving himself to his father and
achieving manhood is a universal one, and this strongly plotted title communi-
cates that theme quite successfully. Lewin's watercolors are nearly photographic in
their realism, and the expanse of sand and sky is effectively utilized to give a sense
of the immensity of the desert. JMD
LOPEZ, LORETTA 
The Birthday Swap; written and illus. by Loretta Lopez. 
Lee
& Low, 1997 
[3 2p]
ISBN 1-880000-47-4 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-9 yrs
In her debut as an author, Lopez borrows from her childhood to give children a
warm, handsome pictorial of five-year-old Lori's surprise birthday party. Her teen-
age sister, Cookie, is the intended birthday girl, or so Lori thinks, but as Cookie
explains later, "Because my birthday is in the summer, I always get a big party. But
since your birthday is in winter when it's too cold, you never get one. So this year
I thought I'd swap with you. After all, I'm getting a little old for this." Textual
and visual hints layer this offering with clues that let observant readers in on the
secret: Dad and Mom inquiring what Lori would want for her birthday (a puppy);
Mom speaking quietly with the pifiata maker; Mom making Lori wear her new
dress to church that day; her brother slipping out of the church early to pick some-
thing up for the party (the puppy). Brilliant, deeply hued pictures done in gouache
and colored pencil possess a'60s retro flair and exude the festive atmosphere. Deco-
rative borders surrounding much of the text extend the party mood while showing
the contents of the broken pifiata, luscious party food, a cavorting puppy, mariachi
band instruments, and more. This is a birthday treat that succeeds in portraying
this Mexican-American family in a sweet story without a sugar overload. Team
this with A Birthday Basket for Tia by Pat Mora and don't forget the pifiata. PM
LOWELL, SUSAN 
Little Red Cowboy Hat; illus. by Randy Cecil. 
Holt, 1997 26p
ISBN 0-8050-3508-7 
$14.95 
R* 
5-8 yrs
Okay, maybe we don't actually need another new version of Little Red Riding
Hood, but it can still make life fuller. Lowell's variant is awash in Western flavor,
with Little Red ducking rattlesnakes and wending through canyons to get to
366 * THE BULLETIN
Granny's, and the wolf wearing a "cowboy hat three shades blacker than a locomo-
tive." The showdown at Grandma's ranch moves along the classic lines, with
Grandma finally chasing the "low-life lobo" offwith a shotgun ("You'd look mighty
good as a rug, Mister Wolff"). There's a rawboned energy to the writing that
invigorates the tale and suggests from the beginning that the arrogant wolf is in
way over his head. The line-and-gouache art avoids the Santa Fe cliches and sticks
to yellows and browns enlivened by green cacti; the images are deliberately two-
dimensional and wittily exaggerated, with Red's impossibly shaped horse a par-
ticularly appealing absurdity, resembling an oil-drum on stilts. (Alert viewers will
appreciate Little Red's felicity with a slingshot, though the stunned rattlesnake
doesn't.) Round this up with Lisa Campbell Ernst's Little Red Riding Hood: A
Newfangled Prairie Tale (BCCB 10/95) and see where else your audience can envi-
sion the heroine hanging her cap. DS
MCCAUGHREAN, GERALDINE, ad. 
The Silver Treasure: Myths and Legends of the
World; illus. by Bee Willey. 
McElderry, 1997 
129p
ISBN 0-689-81322-8 
$19.95 
R 
Gr. 4-6
From Bolivia to France, from the Middle East to the Catskill Mountains,
McCaughrean capably retells twenty-three myths and legends. The design echoes
that of McCaughrean's earlier collaboration with illustrator Willey (The Golden
Hoard, BCCB 7/96) with generous borders, profuse and colorful paintings, and
involving language. McCaughrean includes a Maori myth about the acquisition
of the fish net, the Greek story of Oedipus, the Swiss legend of Wilhelm Tell, and
the Alaskan Merit myth of Raven and the Moon, all with a liveliness of tone that
adds spark to the retellings. It is impossible to judge how much of the humor and
unique slant is McCaughrean and how much belongs to the originals, as the notes
are generic with only one specific source cited, so those seeking evidence of au-
thenticity will have to look elsewhere. The stories jump from hero legends to
origin myths to romances, and the lack of thematic cohesion makes this a series of
strong stories strung together on a very slender thread. Willey's culturally dispar-
ate characters have a tendency to look remarkably alike, but her dramatic palette
combines reds, blues, and greens into oddly lit tableaus, and adds a visual flair to
the proceedings. JMD
MACDONALD, SUSE 
Peck, Slither, and Slide; written and illus. by Suse
MacDonald. 
Gulliver/Harcourt, 1997 
[4 8p]
ISBN 0-15-200079-8 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 2-5 yrs
Here is an enticing gallery of animals on the move to inform and entertain a very
young audience. The first in each pair of double-page spreads provides a set of
clues. First there's a fallen tree (gnawed to a point at one end), a heap of piled
sticks, a paddle-shaped tail following a sleek brown body into a stream, and a
rickety tower of block letters forming the word "Build"; flip to the next page to see
"Beaver" swimming into its island lodge. Two curvy gray-brown shapes and the
tip-top of a bulky head are accompanied by the word "Touch"; the next spread, of
course, reveals those shapes to be a pair of caressing "Elephant" trunks. Animals
and their environs are fashioned in tissue-paper collage, thickly textured with acrylic
paints-big, bright, and inviting for little hands to point and paw. The typeface
and typeset of the motion verbs cleverly mimic the action itself: each tipsy letter of
the word "Touch" does just that; "Wade" creates ripples as it dips into the flamingo's
JUNE 1997 
* 367
pool; "Reach" climbs and angles parallel to giraffe's long stretch of a neck. For
listeners ready to venture beyond simple identification, MacDonald includes an
informative paragraph about each of her stars in an appended section of "Animal
Facts." Sit, snuggle, and share. EB
McKISSACK, PATRICIA C. 
Ma Dears Aprons; illus. by Floyd Cooper. 
Atheneum,
1997 
32p
ISBN 0-689-81051-2 
$16.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
In this tribute to her great-grandmother, McKissack tells the story of Ma Dear,
African-American single mother and domestic worker in the turn of the century
South. Her son David Earl always knows what day it is by the "clean, snappy-fresh
apron Ma Dear is wearing-a different one for every day of the week." Divided
into aprons and days of the week, the story follows Ma Dear as she accomplishes
the jobs that support them: laundry on Monday, ironing on Tuesday, etc., until
finally it reaches Sunday, the one day there are no chores and no aprons. Inter-
spersed with Ma Dear's back-breaking jobs are brief, warm scenes that illustrate
the obvious affection between mother and son, as Ma Dear tells David Earl stories
of his father, takes him to hear the music of Madam Pearlie, and saves hard-earned
money for his schooling "come next year." The ending, however, is perplexingly
abrupt, and readers may turn the page looking for some more obvious closure.
While the compositions are uneven and the scenic renderings are generic, Cooper's
oil wash paintings have a golden glow, and the close-ups of mother and son have a
remarkably loving aspect. JMD
MATTHEWS, ANDREW, ad. 
Marduk the Mighty and Other Stories of Creation; illus.
by Sheila Moxley. 
Millbrook, 1997 
96p
ISBN 0-7613-0204-2 
$16.90 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Twenty-two creation tales and two prophetic tales of Armageddon and Ragnarok
are made accessible in this eclectic collection. Ranging across a variety of cultural
landscapes, Matthews' retellings include the Biblical Genesis, the Pima Indian tale
of Walking Man, the Yoruba story of Olodumare, creation myths from the Indian
Upanishads, the Mayan Popol Vuh, the Norse myths, and others. The absence of
source notes seems odd in a collection of origin stories, and the lack of cultural
context is a serious flaw to any in-depth appreciation. A "Who's Who?" type
glossary identifies players, but adds little to the overall understanding of the text.
Moxley's acrylic interpretations of the tales are a panoply of hot colors, primitive
drafting, and unusual if occasionally crowded compositions that dramatically re-
flect the text. This can be used most effectively in combination with other similar
collections, such as Penelope Farmer's Beginnings (BCCB 11/79) and Virginia
Hamilton's In the Beginning (BCCB 10/88), which give some notion of the reli-
gious and cultural framework that surrounds and sustains these myths. JMD
MITCHELL, RHONDA 
The Talking Cloth; written and illus. by Rhonda
Mitchell. 
Jackson/Orchard, 1997 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-33004-4 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-30004-8 
$15.95 
R Gr. 2-5
Amber is visiting her Aunt Phoebe, "a collector of life" as Amber's mother calls
her, and reveling in the Africana that decorates her apartment. "Aunt Phoebe
knows things," and she explains those things to Amber and her skeptical father.
Phoebe explains the origin of adinkra cloth to her niece, telling her that the cloth
368 
* THE BULLETIN
originated with the Ashanti people in Ghana, and that each cloth "talks" because
each color and symbol means something. Amber then imagines herself an Ashanti
princess connected to a long line of ancestors, all wearers of the adinkra. This is an
African-American family history lesson set forth in an accessible, gentle narrative.
Aunt Phoebe and Amber's father are brother and sister, and their banter has the
tone of a long-standing, well-understood family joke. Amber is a glowing, smiling
young girl with a believably strong interest in her aunt's stories of her travels and of
African culture. While the human figures are somewhat stiff, the compositions of
Mitchell's oil paintings are inviting, the colors warm and rich against the cool
white background. Large text with generous leading adds to the simple layout
making this a visually uncluttered, easy-to-read title. JMD
MOWRY, JESS 
Babylon Boyz. 
Simon, 1997 
188p
ISBN 0-689-80839-9 
$16.00 
R Gr. 7-12
Oakland is a rough place for young African-American men, and these three kids
have it even worse for being outsiders even among their classmates: Wyatt is sub-
stantially overweight, Pook is gay, and Dante, born to a crack-addicted mother,
has heart problems that make exertion dangerous. Their tight friendship helps
them survive, but that may change when they find a substantial package of pure
cocaine and must decide whether to sell it, thereby poisoning people, or to destroy
it and forego the badly needed money. Grim, atmospheric, and passionate, this is
a compelling portrait of life against astronomical odds. Mowry is occasionally a
bit programmatic with his plot, but he can also be marvelously inventive: Dante
begins attending drug rehab under false pretenses (he just wants the associated in-
class candy privileges), has his first (not entirely satisfactory) experience with sex,
and ends up unintentionally finding a boyfriend for Pook. It's a hard-edged, well-
written description (Mowry is particularly adept at dialogue) of a violent world
with tough choices (Dante fears he's "a house nigger himself who might be selling
everyone down the big river"). Kids who relished Myers' Scorpions (BCCB 7/88)
will want to have a look at life on the other coast. DS
OUGHTON, JERRIE 
The War in Georgia. Houghton, 1997 
183p
ISBN 0-395-81568-1 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Shanta Cola Morgan's thirteenth summer is a difficult one. World War II ration
booklets are not a problem, but the lack of folding money is. The family is desper-
ately poor, and Grandmorgan (her grandmother) can barely make ends meet. Uncle
Louie and his wife Louray have separated, Louray moving out with five-year-old
daughter Honey, leaving an achingly empty space in their lives. When the Wall-
ing family moves in across the street, Shanta gets her first good break in a long
while-she and Denny, the twelve-year-old daughter of the house, and Earl, Denny's
twenty-one year old brother (who has a steel plate in his head and insists on being
called Roy Rogers)-become fast friends. The action of the novel is split between
the Morgan family's adjustment to the separation and Uncle Louie's progressively
more severe arthritis, and the increasingly apparent abuse of the Walling family by
Mr. Walling. It is that abuse that finally propels Mrs. Walling to flee with her
daughters, leaving Earl at the scant mercy of his father and uncle. Sharp character-
ization sparkles cleanly through Oughton's novel, from Uncle Louie to
Grandmorgan to the neighbor who hasn't left her house since her son went away
to war, but as the prologue and epilogue make clear, this is an adult narrator's
memory of her youth, and an adult voice informs and shapes the narrative. Shanta's
JUNE 1997 
* 369
mature sensibilities are colored by the advantage of hindsight, and they have the
bittersweet tone of a time treasured and lost. JMD
PARKS, ROSA 
I Am Rosa Parks; by Rosa Parks with Jim Haskins; illus. by Wil
Clay. 
Dial, 1997 
[48p] 
(Dial Easy-to-Read)
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1207-3 
$12.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1206-5 
$12.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 1-3
Divided into four chapters, this easy-to-read autobiography opens with a simple
explanation of segregation, concretely illustrated by Rosa Parks' refusal to give up
her seat on the bus. Flashbacks give the outline of Mrs. Parks' upbringing, mar-
riage, and subsequent involvement in the civil rights movement, culminating in an
account of the bus boycott that is often seen as the start of the civil rights move-
ment in the United States, about which Parks says, "I know that many people
started the civil rights movement. And many people worked very hard to win the
rights that black people have today. But I am glad that I did my part." Awkward
drafting of the human figures and uninspired compositions mar the watercolor
illustrations, and Parks' inspiring story is ill-served by a choppy text. Still, this will
give beginning readers easy access to an integral piece of American history, written
by a living witness with outstanding credibility. JMD
PETERSEN, P. J. 
White Water. 
Simon, 1997 
[112p]
ISBN 0-689-80664-7 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Greg is a timid urbanite, more interested in rock concerts than rock climbing, but
his father wants him to be more adventurous. This means a vacation ofwhitewater
rafting with Dad and James, Greg's young half-brother; it also turns out to mean
terror and daring when a rattlesnake bites the boys' father and they have to struggle
downstream unaided carrying the dangerously ill invalid. This has the classic, if
predictable, trajectory of a survival story, where the unlikely hero meets the chal-
lenge of physical danger. The whitewater scenes here are excitingly depicted, and
Greg's travails suspenseful. The particular advantage of Petersen's narrative is its
accessibility to younger readers; even those kids not quite ready for Hatchet can
enjoy the boy-against-nature thrills. DS
PINKNEY, BRIAN 
The Adventures of Sparrowboy; written and illus. by Brian
Pinkney. 
Simon, 1997 
40p
ISBN 0-689-81071-7 
$16.00 
R* 
5-8 yrs
Before he does his route, Henry the paperboy always reads the paper, first the
headlines and then the comics. The headlines are depressing but the comics alle-
viate their impact, especially Falconman, a motorcycle policeman who trades pow-
ers with a falcon to become a superhero "sworn to defend the defenseless." Henry's
encounter with a sparrow (a la Falconman) causes him to become Sparrowboy,
local paperboy hero, who saves a cat from a bully, saves a pair of twins.from the
bully's mean dog, and saves the sparrow from the cat, making Thurber Street a
safer place: "All was quiet along Thurber Street as Henry rode home. Trouble was
nowhere to be seen. And everything felt just a little better." The illustrations are
vintage Brian Pinkney, the scratchboard and gouache technique instantly recog-
nizable, but a stronger, more vigorous line enlivens the solid compositions as Pinkney
combines comic and picture-book design elements for a remarkably successful ef-
370 
* THE BULLETIN
fect. Traditional double-page spreads are interspersed with comic-strip frames and
text boxes as Henry takes control of his own little piece of the world. This likable
picture-book fantasy addresses a common anxiety, and it gives the solution with
the imaginative empowerment of an African-American child hero. JMD
PRYOR, 
BONNIE 
Toenails, Tonsils, and Tornadoes; illus. by Helen
Cogancherry. 
Morrow, 1997 
166p
ISBN 0-688-14885-9 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Martin is a fourth-grade middle child who feels out of place in his family of over-
achievers: mom's the mayor, dad's a doctor, big brother's a star athlete, big sister's
a brain, and little brother's terminally cute. In addition to all that, he's been
ousted from his room by his eccentric great aunt, Henrietta, who's settled in to
train for the Boston Marathon (even with a bruised toenail, hence one of the titu-
lar elements) and shows no signs of ever leaving. And thank goodness for that,
since it's Henrietta who links what is essentially a series of unrelated vignettes,
giving some semblance of plot to the story. This one's got sequel written all over
it (check Martin's earlier appearances in Vinegar Pancakes and Vanishing Cream,
etc.), which isn't necessarily terminal: Martin is likable enough, and you've got to
feel for a boy who has to play the role of Becky Thatcher in a musical about Tom
Sawyer (don't ask), loses his tonsils, has one too many girlfriends, and endures a
family reunion, but his sudden transformation into a town hero (saving Henrietta
from a tornado) seems like overkill. Pryor does clearly make her point-most
folks are pretty durn nice if you just give 'em a chance. Cogancherry's pencil
drawings, liberally scattered throughout, are affectionately rendered and help brace
up the comedic tone. SSV
QUIRK, ANNE 
Dancing with Great-Aunt Cornelia. HarperCollins, 1997 
[160p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027333-X 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027332-1 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Connie, a thirteen-year-old from Queens, elects to spend some quality time with
her great-aunt Cornelia, a Manhattan grande dame. The plot situations recall the
movie hijinks of madcap heiresses as Connie gets a close-up look at the foibles of
the rich and urban, meets the girl genius next door, and finds out the truth behind
a deep dark family secret. The conversation is lively if occasionally arch, and char-
acters are amusing if shallowly drawn (the most interesting is Connie's older sister
Eleanor, who apparently believes everything she hears from talk-show psychics on
Cassandra Live!). Connie-as-narrator has a patient, long-suffering sort of voice as
she tries to reconcile her two worlds-the doggedly middle-class Queens commu-
nity she lives in, and the glamorous, nifty cultural world of Great-Aunt Cornelia.
Readers will want to know more about Connie (and Eleanor), and next time it
would be okay if they never made it downtown. JMD
RANKIN, LAURA 
Merl and Jasper's Supper Caper; written and illus. by Laura
Rankin. 
Knopf, 1997 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-98105-5 
$16.00
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-881-5-0 
$17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
When Ann is called to dinner, she's not the only one who's hungry: her unfin-
JUNE1997 
* 
371
ished drawing features a cat, Merl, and dog, Jasper, sitting with uplifted forks at a
dining table, waiting for their supper. Even though they are merely outlined fig-
ures, the two come to life when a breeze blows them off the page; true to their
nature, the cat and dog begin to search for food. Luckily for them, Ann has left
several open books on the floor, and the critters leap from the pages of one familiar
fairy tale to another looking for a handout. An original conceit, to be sure, and the
cognoscenti will delight in anticipating the proper meal (such as porridge in the
bears' cottage and a pie filled with blackbirds on the king's table) in the proper
story. The cat is the brains of the duo; realizing that their food must be created,
she picks up a pencil and does just that-on the pages of their own story. Ann is
none the wiser upon her return (the feast having been inhaled) and promptly adds
to the drawing an enormous pie for dessert. The final picture shows the pie cut,
with Merl and Jasper hunkering down to their slices. Rankin's strong black line
drawings contrast effectively with the softer pastel-hued backgrounds; the white
space within their outlines hold up against the richness of the color. These unruly
characters bring a winning anarchy to Fairytaleville. SSV
REEDER, CAROLYN 
Across the Lines. Atheneum, 1997 
[22 4p]
ISBN 00-689-81133-0 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
No sooner do the Yankees land near Edward's Virginia plantation home than
Simon, a family house slave and Edward's constant companion, claims his free-
dom by joining the Union side as a "contraband" camp follower. Accepting any
menial work that comes his way, Simon rudely awakens to the fact that the Yan-
kees who supposedly espouse his freedom are often outright bigots ("It struck him
that Negroes who had been valuable property to their masters might be worth
nothing at all to a northern general"). Meanwhile Edward, his mother, and two
siblings flee to relatives in Petersburg, which quickly comes under siege by the
Yankees, and Edward's disgust with his older brother Duncan's virulent milita-
rism leads him to welcome Southern defeat, if that defeat secures peace. Ulti-
mately the two boys function more as observers than participants in the epic events
swirling around them, and their mutual regret at parting, though often reiterated,
is contrived and thinly sustained. Camp scenes and battle plans may appeal to
middle-grade military tacticians, however, and Civil War buffs reading their way
across the many battlefields will want to add Petersburg to their list. EB
ROBERTSHAW, ANDREW 
A Soldier's Life: A Visual History of Soldiers Through the
Ages. 
Lodestar, 1997 
[48p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-525-67550-7 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-10
What could be more appealing (to kids at least) than an illustrated history of the
uniforms, equipment, food, weapons, and armor of soldiers from Roman times
until World War II? Decked out in period uniforms, modern men (yes, men,
since the book includes only male soldiers) pose for the large, sharp color photos,
which clearly show the equipment at their disposal. The book is a U.S./British
collaboration, concentrating on western Europe and North America. The design
of the pages is visually appealing, with a crisp and uncluttered look that makes
picking out the details enjoyable. Author Robertshaw is a military historian who
draws his subjects from various reenactment groups on both sides of the Atlantic.
Helpful appendices include a timeline (509 B.C. to 1945), glossary of military terms,
372 
* THE BULLETIN
index, and a list of American battlefields to visit. This is a bang-up job on an
eternally enticing topic. SSV
ROCHE, DENIS 
Ollie All Over; ISBN 0-395-81124-4; Only One Ollie; ISBN 0-
395-81123-6. 
Each book: written and illus. by Denis Roche. 
Houghton,
1997 
14p 
$4.95 
R 
1-3yrs
These simple, effective board books are warmly colored, solidly made and, even
with their minimal text, strongly plotted. In Ollie All Over our anthropomor-
phized puppy hero Ollie "was hiding. His mother wasn't finding him, so he hid
some more." Discerning toddlers will chuckle as Ollie hides "behind a chair/ in
front of the curtains/ up on a shelf/ down the stairs" and "ON his mother's lap/
where he was finally found!" In Only One Ollie the young pup is suffering from a
perennial dilemma-everyone is just too busy to play with him. "So he decided to
count. He counted two blue sofas/ three round carpets/ four large steps" etc., until
he reaches his "ten brothers and sisters, who now had time to play with only ONE
Ollie." Roche's simple text rolls right along in both titles, through Ollie's cozy
house where his bespectacled mother absentmindedly wanders past her son's hid-
ing places and through the very simple counting concepts illustrated by a bustling
bunch of siblings doing household chores. The compositions are uncluttered and
the palette is bright without being garish. These do what board books are sup-
posed to do-they introduce concepts easily and with toddler-appealing style. JMD
ROSENBERG, Liz 
Eli and Uncle Dawn; illus. by Susan Gaber. 
Harcourt,
1997 
32p
ISBN 0-15-200947-7 
$15.00 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
Young Eli leaves George, his stuffed elephant, in the woods after a picnic with his
magician uncle, Dawn. Eli frets about George and, in a fantastical turn of events,
wafts gently out his bedroom window on blue shade to retrieve him-only to meet
up with his magical uncle (now a bear) engaged in the same errand. The evening
ends with George safely home and everyone enjoying a midnight snack in Eli's
room. This is a simple story with some appealing elements-the lost stuffed ani-
mal, a magician uncle who pulls flowers out of sugar bowls, a dreamlike flight
through a nighttime sky-illustrated in full-page spreads and smaller visual vi-
gnettes in an appropriately subdued palette. Gaber's watercolor, acrylic, and col-
ored pencil compositions vary in their effectiveness, and the facial expressions are
sometimes jarringly cartoonish, but kids will warm to the uncle hanging out the
attic window, the little boy worriedly gazing into the darkness from his front porch,
and the large but gentle bear-uncle looming over young Eli in the nighttime woods.
Though Rosenberg overcrowds this simple tale with the inclusion of too many
subplots (why does Uncle Dawn live in the attic? Why doesn't Eli's father appre-
ciate Uncle Dawn? And who named him Dawn, anyway?), listeners probably
won't care. It's enough that Eli lost George and found him again, and nighttime
snacks of banana and peanut butter sandwiches are bound to put visions of mid-
night picnics into sleepy little heads. JMD
SAVAGE, DEBORAH 
Under a Different Sky. 
Houghton, 1997 
276 p
ISBN 0-395-77395-4 
$15.95 
M 
Gr. 7-12
It's senior year, and Ben's not so sure he wants his planned career as a garage
mechanic in his small Pennsylvania town. His dreams lie with his gifted Appaloosa
JUNE 1997 
* 
373
stallion, Galaxy, whom he has trained from a foal, and on whom he would like to
compete. The private girls' school next door brings Ben's family revenue from
boarded horses, and it also brings Lara, a troubled adoptee who is drawn to Ben
but afraid to reveal her secrets to him. As Ben's dream moves tantalizingly closer,
Lara's fears increase, threatening to destroy them both. There is way too much
going on here, with a passel of subplots on both Ben's and Lara's side, so that the
drama of each individual event is lost in the crowd. The components also slip into
cliche (the unfettered bond between boy and horse, the angry adoptee, the small-
town limitations), and the over-romanticized writing exacerbates the problem as
well as making the pace plodding rather than collected. The ultimate effect is to
render the reader indifferent to the lengthily depicted storms of emotion. Savage's
To Race a Dream (BCCB 11/94) was a better horse book; for a better one still, hit
the old classics by Patsey Gray and Dorothy Lyons. DS
SEVERANCE, JOHN B. 
Gandhi: Great Soul. Clarion, 1997 
143p illus. with
photographs
ISBN 0-395-77179-X 
$15.95 
R Gr. 6-9
The chronology of Gandhi's life-his childhood, his education in England, his
awakening to his life's mission-is juxtaposed against the historical crises of his
day, including apartheid in South Africa, British colonialism in India, and reli-
gious conflict between the Hindus and Muslims of his homeland. Severance spends
a substantial portion of this biography tracing the development of Gandhi's phi-
losophy of non-violence, or satyagraha, his insistence that the untouchables of India's
caste system be included in the free India, and his unswerving belief that right
would prevail over might. The book does not deny the man in favor of the saint:
Gandhi's schism with his sons and his disagreements with his wife are not ignored,
although the outcomes are sometimes unclear. Did Gandhi ever reconcile with his
sons? Why did he refuse to allow his wife to be treated with penicillin when she
had pneumonia, possibly hastening her subsequent death? Although the text re-
fers often to Gandhi's beloved status among the people of India, it never quite
makes the emotional connection between the man and his followers. However,
the life of Mahatma Gandhi, entwined as it was with the emergence of India from
British colonialism, is a complex one, and Severance does a credible job in making
it accessible against the background of Gandhi's time, culture, and religious be-
liefs. The physical layout is an attractive one, with black-and-white photographs
on nearly every double-page spread breaking up widely leaded text blocks. A map,
pronunciation guide, bibliography and index are included. JMD
SHARRATT, NICK 
Ketchup on Your Cornflakes?: A Wacky Mix &- Match Book;
written and illus. by Nick Sharratt. 
Scholastic, 1997 
24p
ISBN 0-590-93106-7 
$10.95 
R 
2-8 yrs
Yes, horizontally split pages are a gimmick, but they can result in some wonder-
fully amusing projects. The opening spread here asks on the left, "Do you like
ketchup on your cornflakes?" and on the right shows a tilted bottle of the red stuff
ready to drip onto a bowl of cereal. Flipping through the Dutch-door pages,
however, allows one to replace "Do you like ketchup" with "Do you like tooth-
paste," "Do you like a wool hat," "Do you like a teddy bear" and other incongru-
ous substances, while "on your cornflakes" can become "on your apple pie," "on
your head," "in your bathtub," and a variety of other locations. This resembles
374 
* THE BULLETIN
Margaret Miller's Where Does It Go? (BCCB 10/92) with all the added fun of
doing it yourself. What's particularly nicely crafted about this book is the combi-
nation of absurdity and simple puzzle-solving; yes, it's a giggle to talk about ice
cream on somebody's head, but oh, how satisfying it is to find that wool hat. The
drawings are simple and declarative in bold and contrasting colors; the rainbow of
background hues allows the "right" answers confirmation through color-coding,
since the orange top goes with the orange bottom (the first and last spread of
necessity both employ pink, but the ketchup will still find its way to the french
fries). The spiral binding makes opening and flipping around easier, and the tough
glossy card-stock pages should withstand being used as handles and perhaps even
some more aggressive attempts at separation. Useful as toy, game, and concept
book, this seems likely to provoke endless giggles and riffs on the theme. DS
SIM, DORRITH M. 
In My Pocket; illus. by Gerald Fitzgerald. 
Harcourt,
1997 
26p
ISBN 0-15-201357-1 
$16.00 
Ad 
5-7 yrs
One of several recent picture books about children escaping from the Holocaust,
this will require an adult interpreter, since it assumes a knowledge of the context-
a Kindertransport at the beginning of World War II-and never defines the dan-
ger from which the young narrator is fleeing. She opens with a memory of the
boat trip, flashes back to a Hamburg railway station where she had to part from
her parents, recalls some details of the subsequent train ride, and then describes
disembarking from the boat for another train ride, after which she's met by Scot-
tish foster parents and a language barrier ("I have a handkerchief in my pocket" is
the only English she knows). Her adjustment, too, has a subtext of ungrounded
references: there's no explanation for the fact that "in Germany, I couldn't play in
our street with other children because I was Jewish," and a vague ending evades the
question of what happens to her parents. Spacious oil paintings encompass the
spare text in reflection of the large world encompassing this small child's journey.
Defined more by color than by outline, the shapes are vivid yet vague, as figures
often seem when remembered from long ago. Overall, this is an impressionistic
fragment of the past that will speak movingly to adults; translated with historical
background, it may also touch children, who can relate to the anxiety of separation
whatever their circumstances. BH
SINGER, MARILYN 
Deal with a Ghost. Holt, 1997 
[192p]
ISBN 0-8050-4797-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
Sent to live with her grandmother after her mother deserts her for a new boyfriend,
Deal (short for Delia) has a firm policy of maintaining her emotional distance
from those around her. But things aren't working out exactly as planned: her
grandmother, though frosty, is clear-eyed and attentive; and Laurie, her (male)
partner in a glee club duet, has an unusual talent for bypassing her defenses and
getting uncomfortably close. This doesn't stop Deal from playing "the game": an
expert flirt (a skill she apparently learned from her man-crazy mother), she snags
golden boy Mark from his golden girlfriend Tina, almost without effort or desire.
Her romantic shenanigans disturb the ghost of Marie, a teenage girl killed forty
years ago in a car accident after her boyfriend was snagged by (are you ready?)
Deal's grandmother and namesake, now revealed as a high-school vamp. The
JUNE 1997 * 
375
ending is straight out of a fifties' teen-angel ballad: Mark has a motorcycle acci-
dent, golden girl Tina confronts Deal in the hospital cafeteria, Mark recovers, and
Deal decides that she wants to be a good girl after all: "Providence or heredity?
Curse or coincidence? What was this game played out generation after genera-
tion? ... Whatever it is, it ends now, with me. I can change. I have changed."
Too neat? Undoubtedly. But gripping nonetheless, as the ghost of Marie Scarpetti
manifests in the school music room moaning, "Delia, oh, Delia ... the heart... I
want the heart. . . " Brrrr. JMD
SotA, MICHfLE Angela Weaves a Dream: The Story ofa Young Maya Artist; illus.
with photographs by Jeffrey Jay Foxx. 
Hyperion, 1997 
[48p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2060-8 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0073-9 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
This photoessay presents a fictionalized account of a young girl from the village of
San Andres in Chiapas, Mexico, who enters a contest for novice weavers. Only
after months of initiation into the folklore of weaving, preparation of yarns and
loom, memorization of the seven village patterns, and practice under the exacting
supervision of her abuela can Angela actually begin to exercise her skills. Soli
stresses the sacred nature of the craft, which blends ancient Mayan and Catholic
religious traditions: Abuelita tells Angela several of the myths associated with pat-
terns; boxed inserts guide viewers to interpret the sacred symbols within the pat-
terns; Angela prays beneath the statue of Santa Rosario, her village's weavers' saint,
and finally hangs her winning entry on the saint's huipil. This over-ambitious
melange of fiction and explication, however, is erratically organized (e.g., weaving
is begun before the reader is shown how the loom is threaded), and photos are
often out of sync with the text (the yarn dyeing process is shown two pages before
it is explained). Glossary, maps, and notes, combined with the substantial text,
will offer patient readers a thorough introduction to this contemporary Mayan art.
EB
SPRINGER, NANCY 
Secret Star. Philomel, 1997 
138p
ISBN 0-399-23028-9 
$15.95 
M 
Gr. 7-9
Tess Mathis is a musically gifted fourteen-year-old who lives in grinding poverty
with her disabled stepfather. She can't remember anything about her life before
she was ten years old, and it doesn't bother her much, until the appearance of
Kamo Rojahin, a scarred, one-eyed stranger who insists he's her half-brother. Kamo
(who is searching for the man he believes to be his and Tess' biological father)
motivates Tess into examining her recurrent nightmares for clues to the traumatic
incident that robbed her of her memory. Confronted by a gun-wielding co-worker
(who tried to force himself upon her sexually, but that's another plot thread), Tess
is jarred into remembrance: her stepfather shot her biological father, was then shot
by his wife, her biological mother, who then shot herself, all of which Tess wit-
nessed. When she reveals this to Kamo, he regretfully acknowledges that he is not
her half brother; when she confronts her crippled-since-the-shootings stepfather,
he claims self-defense and she forgives him. Then she discovers that Kamo is the
current media rock-and-roll darling "secret star," and she decides to be a drummer
in his band when she grows up. The multitudinous plot lines have all the elements
of a daytime soap opera, and about as much logical continuity. This chronology
376 
* 
THE BULLETIN
of events may constitute a booktalk dream come true, but it's still not enough to
overcome the deep purple prose and the shallow movie-of-the-week characteriza-
tions. JMD
STINE, R. L. 
It Came from Ohio!: My Life as a Writer; as told to Joe
Arthur. 
Parachute/Scholastic, 1997 
140p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-590-36674-2 
$9.95 
R* 
Gr. 3-7
In this disarmingly amiable autobiography, Stine tells of his upbringing near Co-
lumbus and his high-school and college creative projects, writerly and otherwise.
Then he chronicles his colorful professional career, ranging from teaching ("I em-
phasized the comic books because I loved comic books and I thought maybe some
of my students did too. Besides, they might have a few titles I hadn't read") to
writing for a magazine ("My job was to write article after article about soft drinks,
soda cans, syrups, and the people who made them") until finally he happens on
books and the motherlode of Goosebumps. This isn't the most sophisticated writ-
ing in the world, but the straightforward language and multitude of exclamation
points keep things appealingly colloquial, while the plethora of pictures (including
bits and pieces of Stine's early work) make the enterprise into a goofy gallery.
Stine is a gleeful raconteur, sophomoric in the best sense of the word; the strong
impression here is that his success comes from sharing his audience's tastes. The
end result is almost irresistibly collusive, including the audience in the fun and
presenting writing as an attainable goal. R. L. Stine's "Top Twenty Most-Asked
Questions" are answered in an appendix. DS
TUCKER, KATHY 
Do Cowboys Ride Bikes?; illus. by Nadine Bernard
Westcott. Whitman, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-8075-1693-7 
$15.95 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Tucker's last volume of verse treated pirates (BCCB 10/94), and now she turns her
attention to the riders of the range. Fourteen spreads with a stanza apiece light-
heartedly answer various questions about cowboys: where do they live? What do
they wear? How do they talk? The poems don't match the zing of those in the
previous book; the constant shifting between anapests and iambs makes the rhythms
confusing, and the concepts aren't as whimsically imagined. Westcott's efferves-
cent watercolors depict flashily clad cowpokes astride big balloony horses while
tending oversized and good humored cattle. This doesn't quite have the music of
the jingle of spurs, but young buckaroos may still want to mosey through. DS
TURNER, ANN 
Mississippi Mud: Three Prairie Journals; illus. by Robert J.
Blake. 
HarperCollins, 1997 
48p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024433-X 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024432-1 
$15.95 
R Gr. 4-7
Neither the luridly hued cover art nor the misleading subtitle prepare readers for
these twenty-one insightful poems, which capture the dreams and experiences of a
trio of siblings journeying West by covered wagon. In the opening entry, "Leav-
ing," eldest daughter Amanda catalogs her hopes for their new home, especially
"land where I could run and shout/ with no one to tell me/ I was not a lady."
"Town" describes her disappointment upon passing through a shabby prairie burg:
"It's gone already, like a peppermint sliver/ swallowed up whole. ... What if after
all this way/ what we come to is less/ than what we left behind?" Brothers Caleb
JUNE 1997 
* 377
and Lonnie have quite different concerns. In "Jake," Caleb tells of the death of a
stray dog they picked up along the way ("Pa says it's no use mourning a dog,/ but
he don't sleep regular/ now Jake is gone") and Lonnie chronicles the coming of
their baby sister in "Columbia" ("They never tell you,/ not the important things./
But I'd been watching Ma's aprons,/ how they got higher and higher./ I knew
what was growing underneath"). Blake's double-page paintings-stiff, literal in-
terpretations of Turner's poems--detract from the delicacy of the text. Fortu-
nately, the poems will see their best service as readalouds, rendering the artwork
expendable. EB
VANOOSTING, JAMES 
The Last Payback. HarperCollins, 1997 
[144p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027492-1 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027491-3 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-7
Sixth-grader Dimple Dorfman and her twin, Dale, were inseparable, until one
night at the home of Dale's friend (and Dimple's prospective fiancee) Ronnie
Delaney the boys' playing with a gun leaves Dale dead. Dimple's parents are
devastated, but she is almost entirely angry: angry that no one will tell her what's
going on, angry at the way outsiders are making this into their event, and most of
all angry at Ronnie Delaney-and she's planning vengeance. There's a straightness
to Dimple's narration that is both realistic and heartbreaking, and VanOosting is
unerring in his depiction of community and familial responses to death. The final
dramatic resolution and realization (Dimple discovers the shooting was Dale's own
fault) is a little set up, but the characters are telling and true throughout. Unsen-
timental but deeply felt, this is a well-wrought account of a strong girl going through
a very tough time. DS
WALDMAN, NEIL 
The Never-Ending Greenness; written and illus. by Neil
Waldman. 
Morrow, 1997 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-14480-2 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-14479-9 
$16.00 
R* 5-8 yrs
See this month's Big Picture, p. 347, for review.
WEITZMAN, DAVID 
Old Ironsides: Americans Build a Fighting Ship; written and
illus. by David Weitzman. 
Houghton, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-395-74678-7 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Weitzman begins with a concise, lucid explanation of how piracy against our young
republic impelled Washington to commission the first U.S. naval vessel, and he
ends with a rousing epilogue recounting the Constitution's first battle. It is the
lengthy description of the ship's construction, as witnessed by young John Aylwin,
the son of a ship carpenter, which comprises the bulk of this title. A densely
detailed text covers model making, design transfer, wood selection, copper sheath-
ing, cannon forging, and sundry aspects of rigging and arming the frigate. Readers
are broadsided with the jargons of naval engineer, carpenter, smithy, sailor, and
gunner, most of which go un- or under-defined; those interested in a casual flip
through a picture-book presentation may quickly find themselves at sea. Acknowl-
edgments indicate that the John Humphreys mentioned in the text was indeed the
ship's designer, but whether Aylwin or construction chief George Claghorne are
historical figures is never addressed. Handsome line drawings in ample, creamy
378 
* THE BULLETIN
space invite close, leisurely examination; the ship's elevation is copiously labeled
fore to aft on the front endpapers, while back endpapers reproduce the same eleva-
tion, relabeled in alphabetical order. EB
WESLEY, VALERIE 
Freedom's Gifts: A Juneteenth Story; illus. by Sharon
Wilson. 
Simon, 1997 
[32p]
ISBN 0-689-80269-2 $16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
6-8 yrs
This year (1943) June's cousin Lillie is making her annual summer visit to Texas
in time for the Juneteenth picnic and celebration, which commemorates the day
on which Texas slaves finally learned they had been freed. Lillie, a New Yorker,
regards her rural relatives with ill-concealed disdain and, spying a "whites only"
water fountain, she taunts, "Living in the South makes you like a slave, June. A
dumb old slave." Aunt Marshall, herself an ex-slave, describes for the girls the joy
of being reunited with her sister on the first Juneteenth, but acknowledges Lillie's
criticism of Southern-style segregation: "We're as free as I'll be in this lifetime.
Free as I'll be before I die. But not as free as you'll be someday." The lengthy text
yields scant plot, as the little girls sulk, Aunt Marshall holds forth, and Lillie pre-
cipitously decides that Juneteenth is a pretty good holiday after all. Nor does
Wesley give readers any indication that 1943 New York wasn't the mecca of racial
harmony Lillie implies to her cousin. Wilson's grainy pastels, however, conjure
the festivities of a summer long past and make this a visually attractive, serviceable
introduction to a lesser-known holiday. EB
WILLARD, NANCY 
The Magic Cornfield; with photographs by Nancy
Willard. 
Harcourt, 1997 
[48p]
ISBN 0-15-201428-4 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 2-4
"This sounds like nonsense to me. After walking all day, I long to hear a sensible
voice .. ." Young readers and/or listeners may identify deeply with this statement
by Tottem Perhaps, a strange horned cloth-doll that gets lost in a cornfield on the
way to his cousin Bottom's 100th birthday celebration in Minneapolis. A magic
moving mailbox transfers Tottem's confused messages onto postcards that are sent
from oddly named towns all over the U.S. (Dime Box, TX; Bird-in-Hand, PA;
Peculiar, MO; Chicken, AK; etc.), duly processed with appropriate stamps. Fac-
ing the postcards are full-page color photographs of objects surrealistically posited
against painted or realistic backdrops. Some of these pictures are amusing-a
napkin-wrapped crab claw poised to steal a bite of meringue pie, for instance,
reflects Truth or Consequences, NM-and some are sinister, such as the two rag-
ing wooden horses "following a little girl who was whistling 'Yankee Doodle'"
(Hungry Horse, MT). Overall, though, text and art appear to be a random mean-
dering of imaginative free associations that finally wind down when a Baroque
angel buying canned goods for the poor (Shopville, KY) promises to carry weary
Tottem to the border of the cornfield. The message, according to some happy
children playing near his exit point, seems to be that "you could have left the
cornfield a long time ago if you hadn't believed in magic." And so he should've,
because the last scene shows him sadly ensconced with Bottom in snowbound
lawn furniture, several months too late to "enjoy the garden" to which his cousin
has invited him for angel meringue pie, and there's not a bite in sight. Perhaps the
JUNE 1997 * 379
crab claw ate it all? A disappointing trip for one who guided us to the stars in A
Visit to William Blake's Inn (BCCB 12/81). BH
WILLIS, NANCY CAROL 
The Robins in Your Backyard; written and illus. by Nancy
Carol Willis. 
Access/Cucumber Island Storytellers, 1997 
32p
ISBN 1-887813-21-7 
$15.95 
R Gr. 2-4
From the arrival of robins in your backyard in March to their departure for warmer
climates come the following autumn, Willis gives readers a close-up look at exactly
what's going on in those nearby but hidden nests. The robins claim their territory,
mate, build a nest, and lay the eggs; they defend the eggs from predators, care for
the hatchlings when they emerge, and teach the fledglings what they need to know
to survive. While the humans (only appearing in the first and last spreads) are
somewhat stiff and awkwardly drawn, the bright-eyed robins are intriguingly per-
sonable. Willis' full-color illustrations fill the single and double-page spreads with
compositions designed to appeal to individual readers or groups, including a close-
up look at the embryonic robin, the featherless hatchlings, and the rapidly growing
nestlings. The text is straightforward and simple, downplaying anthropomorphism
in favor of a more naturalistic approach to the robin's life cycle. Willis includes
such kid-pleasing details about the young birds as "If you grew at the same rate,
you would weigh 90 pounds by the time you were ten days old!" and "The young
robins stretch their necks, clamoring for food. Each can eat fourteen feet of earth-
worms in one day." A section on "How to help a baby songbird," a glossary, and
a timeline are included. JMD
YUE, CHARLOTTE 
Shoes: Their History in Words and Pictures; written and illus. by
Charlotte and David Yue. 
Houghton, 1997 
[92p]
ISBN 0-395-72667-0 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-8
Following hot on the heels of Laurie Lawlor's Where Will This Shoe Take You?
(BCCB 1/97) is this take on the fashions and foibles of footwear. The Yues tread
some of the same ground, but trim their categories of foot coverings to three (san-
dal, shoe, boot), add prefatory material on the anatomy and the physiology of feet
and their relation to shoe design, and devote more attention to the actual manu-
facture of shoes. Illustrated with black-and-white drawings rather than photos,
this entry less successfully conveys the relation of footwear to the complete con-
temporary costume with which it was worn. Still, the modest sketches of towering
chopines, long-toed poulaines, and lace-trimmed cavalier boots more than ad-
equately illustrate "what foolish things humans are willing to do for fashion and
beauty." EB
^ 
l'QS
380 
* THE BULLETIN
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
Clark, Trinkett and H. Nichols B. Clark. Myth, Magic, and Mysterj: One Hun-
dred Years ofAmerican Children's Book Illustration. Roberts Rinehart, 1996. Trade
ed. ISBN 1-57098-080-2; $50.00. Paper ed. ISBN 1-57098-079-9; $29.95. 242p.
illus. with photographs
Based on an exhibition mounted at the Chrysler Museum of Art, "this undertak-
ing explores the art of illustration in a broader and more meaningful art-historical
and sociological context." It's certainly a more visual one than many books afford:
the pages are thick with color reproductions large and small as well as the more
usual black and white. The text is an inviting combination of historical overview,
technical description, and chatty account (including a few bits of racy adult gos-
sip). It doesn't approach Barbara Bader's American Picturebooks: From Noahs Ark
to the Beast Within for scholarly depth, and the thematic divisions between the
chapters aren't entirely clear, but the currency and the plethora of visual examples
keep things both fresh and informative. Michael Patrick Hearn contributes an
introductory chapter; endnotes and a detailed catalog of the illustrations are in-
cluded. DS
Preiss, Byron, ed. The Best Children's Books in the World: A Treasury ofIllustrated
Stories. Abrams, 1996. ISBN 0-8109-1246-5. $29.95. 319p. illus. with photo-
graphs
This collection features fifteen picture books from sixteen different countries (a
few joint efforts, a few overlaps) combined into one oversized volume; there is
brief commentary for each title, as well as an introduction by Jeffrey Garrett and
an explanatory afterword by the editors. The stories within may well appeal to
children, but the coffee-table size and compendium flavor of the volume direct it
more towards adults, who are less likely to mind the books-within-a-book appear-
ance of the framed and multipaneled pages (text translations are included along-
side wherever necessary). The commentary is more promotional than analytical
but does include valuable information on significant writers and illustrators who
may be unknown to many American readers and professionals. Ultimately, how-
ever, what's important here are the books, titles that have been feted in their coun-
try of origin but overlooked, if released at all, in the U.S. They don't all epitomize
the American idea of a picture book, but their difference is as educational as their
appeal. DS
JUNE 1997 
* 381
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Aeronautics: Bishop
Africa: Hopcraft
African Americans-fiction:
Draper; Evans; Mowry
African Americans-stories:
McKissack; Mitchell; Pinkney;
Wesley
Alaska-stories: Carlstrom
ALPHABET BOOkS: Ada
American Indians-folklore: French
Animals-stories: Carlstrom;
French; Grindley; Harrison
Animals: Carle; Hopcraft;
MacDonald
Appalachia: Bial
Art and artists-stories: Geisert;
Rankin
Aunts-fiction: Pryor; Quirk
Aunts-stories: Mitchell
BEDTIME STORIES: Rosenberg
BIOGRAPHIES: Dadey;
Finkelstein; Krull; Severance;
Stine
Birds: Willis
Birds-stories: Ehlert
Birthdays-stories: Lopez
Botany: Dorros
Brothers-fiction: Petersen
Brothers and sisters-fiction: Auch;
VanOosting
Brothers and sisters-stories: Hiatt
Camping-fiction: Hill; Petersen
Cats: Gutman; Hopcraft
Cats-stories: Rankin
Cheetahs: Hopcraft
Child abuse-fiction: Draper
Child labor: Currie
Children's literature: Stine
China-folklore: Czernecki
Civil rights movement: Parks
Civil War-fiction: Reeder
CONCEPT BOOKS:
MacDonald; Roche; Sharratt
Cowboys-poetry: Tucker
Cowgirls: Dadey
Crickets-stories: Czernecki
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Byars; Jones; Mowry
Death-fiction: VanOosting
Desert-stories: London
Dogs-fiction: Duffey
Dogs-stories: Lerman; Rankin
Dreams-stories: Hiatt
EPISTOLARY FICTION:
Willard
Ethics and values: Deuker
Families-fiction: Honeycutt
FANTASY: Pinkney
Farm workers: Ada
Fathers and sons-fiction: Hill;
Petersen
Fathers and sons-stories: London
Films and filmmaking-fiction:
Evans
Flight: Bishop
FOLKTALES AND
FAIRYTALES: Czernecki;
Ehlert; French; Jaffe; Lowell;
McCaughrean; Matthews
Food and eating-stories: Rankin
Friends-stories: Gauch; Grindley
Friends-fiction: Brisson
Games: Sharratt
382 
* THE BULLETIN
GHOST STORIES: Singer
Grandfathers-stories: Geisert
Grandmothers-fiction: Singer
Grandmothers-stories: DeFelice;
Lowell
Guns-fiction: VanOosting
HISTORICAL FICTION: Auch;
Larson; Oughton; Reeder;
Turner; Wesley
History, U.S.: Turner; Weitzman
Holocaust-stories: Sim; Waldman
Homosexuality-fiction: Kerr;
Larson; Mowry
Horses-fiction: Savage
India: Severance
Industry: Honeycutt
Insects-fiction: Anderson
Israel-stories: Waldman
Journalism: Finkelstein
Judaism: Jaffe
Kenya: Hopcraft
Language arts: Ada; Alarc6n
Latinos-poetry: Ada; Alarc6n
Latinos-stories: Lopez
Law enforcement: Jones
LOVE STORIES: Kerr; Savage;
Singer
Magic-stories: Rosenberg
Mexico-fiction: Sola
Mexico-folklore: Ehlert
Military history: Robertshaw
Mills-fiction: Honeycutt
Mothers and sons-stories:
McKissack
Mothers and sons-fiction: Brisson
Music and musicians-fiction:
Kerr; Springer
MYSTERIES: Byars
Nature study: Bishop; Dorros;
Willis
New York City-fiction: Quirk
Pets: Gutman
Pets-stories: Lerman
Physical education: Krull
POETRY: Alarc6n; George; Lee;
Tucker; Turner
Racism-fiction: Evans
Rain-stories: Laser
Reading aloud: DeFelice; George;
Jaffe; Lee; McCaughrean;
Matthews; Mitchell; Stine
Reading, beginning: Brisson
Reading, easy: Duffey
Reading, reluctant: Hill; Petersen
RHYMING STORIES: Harrison
Rural life: Bial
SCARY STORIES: DeFelice
School-fiction: Deuker
Seasons: Carlstrom
Segregation: Parks
Sexual harassment-fiction: Deuker
Shipbuilding-stories: Weitzman
Sisters-fiction: Quirk
Sisters-stories: Lopez
Slavery-fiction: Reeder
Slavery-stories: Wesley
Snakes-stories: Cannon
Social studies: Bial
Sports: Krull
Sports-fiction: Deuker
Stepfathers-fiction: Springer
Storytelling: Ehlert; French; Jaffe; Lowell;
McCaughrean; Matthews
Storytime: DeFelice; Ehlert; French;
George; Grindley; Harrison; Lee;
Rosenberg
Superheroes-stories: Pinkney
SURVIVAL STORIES: Hill; London;
Petersen
TALL TALES: Dadey
Television: Finkelstein
Textiles-fiction: Sola
TOY BOOKS: Sharratt
Toys-fiction: Willard
Transportation: Weitzman
Trees: Dorros
Uncles-stories: Rosenberg
Weapons and warfare: Robertshaw;
Weitzman
Weather-stories: Laser
West, the-poetry: Turner
World War II-fiction: Oughton
World War II-stories: Sim; Waldman
Writers and writing: Stine
-', Starred in School Library Journal
"The Barefoot is an escaping slave whose flight is
aided by the wild animals of forest and swamp.
[An] outstanding collaboration ... Edwards's
spare text builds suspense ... [and with Cole's
full-color] illustrations readers will feel as if they
are in the swamp. Teachers will want to use this
title when teaching about the Underground
Railroad, while in public libraries it will be perfect
for programs on African-American history."
-School Library Journal
Ages 5-9. $14.95TR (027137-X); $14.89LB (027138-8)
Also by Pamela Duncan Edwards and Henry Cole
FOUR FAMISHED FOXES AND FOSDYKE
$14.95TR (024925-0); $14.89LB (024926-9); $5.95PB (4/97) (443480-X)
SOME SMUG SLUG $14.95TR (024789-4); $14.89 LB (024792-4)
LIVINGSTONE MOUSE $14.95TR (025869-1); $14.95LB (025870-5)
i HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
ISBN prefix: 0-06- 
10 East 53rd Street, New York, NY 10022
By
PHYLLIS
ROOT
Illustrated by
KEVIN
O'MALLEY
"Dueling musicians make their
fiddle strings sizzle in this cornfield-
showdown. ... The only thing
missing is a bluegrass soundtrack."
-Publishers Weekly
"This deserves a long shelf life...
if you can keep it on the shelf at all."
-The Bulletin of the Center
for Children's Books
*Kirkus Reviews
(pointered review)
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019 
LE $15.93/0-688-12853.X
/
LE $15.93/0-688-12853-X
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019
readers 
who enjrrbnhiioyed L~ 
uuhIATr 
"Shoul
cience 
fction 
andiuoi 
1' , 
N 
ER C~V 
in the
*yberspce 
will find 
D 
E 
"The story
hris [seuel] equally 
UR~~ 
liner
ntertining."-ooklist 
AAejyb
~guaranteed! fun, 
IVACHINE 
-Puybl
ast-pacd adventure."
-Schoo 
irry Jura By Richard Peck 
~o-8037-
Also:·;·· 
starin Josh and Aaron
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.S.A.
RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED
"A RIGHT TO CHILDHOOD"
The U.S. Children's Bureau and
Child Welfare, 1912-46
KRISTE LINDENMEYER
Warring factions in the United States often use
children as weapons for their political agendas as
Americans try to determine the role-if any-of
the federal government in the lives of children.
But what is the history of child welfare policy in
the United States? What can we learn from the
early efforts to found the U.S. Children's Bureau
and its eventual dismemberment in 1946?
Kriste Lindenmever unflinchinalv examines the
PERIODICALS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
bureau's successes and failures. She analyzes infant and maternal mortality,
the promotion of child health care, child labor reform, and the protection
of children with "special needs," all from the bureau's inception during the
Progressive Era through World War II. 
800/545-4703
Cloth, $49.95; Paper, $21.95 
ymLr 
/,
UNIVER 
SITY 
OFILIN 
IS 
RES 
125outOa 
S 
treet -
C
0008-9036(199706)50111 
1*1 
1-4
0008-9036(199706)50:10*; 1 -4
* 
4
~-~r 
CC~s~CC~V
,
JT. 
.*
