IL L INGI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
··
" -- 
-- 
----
him ... [which] leads to a showdown with the Fairy Queen. lwithl
a wacky cast of characters, including the Wee Free Men, who are six-inches
high and speak in a broad Scottish brogue, [this is] a funny and thought-
provoking fantasy. A glorious read." -Starred review / School Library Journal
S"This ingenious melange of fantasy, action, humor, and sly bits of
social commentary contains complex underlying themes of the nature
of love, reality, and dreams. [Pratchett] fans will not be disappointed."
-Starred review / Kirkus Reviews
4- 
f 
"Prnatrht's tnuch is liPhf hut assured as he steers the tale easily
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
July/August 2003
Vol. 56 No. 11
A LOOK INSIDE
435 THE BIG PICTURE
Mystic Horse ad. and illus. by Paul Goble
436 NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
446 * Beggingfor Change by Sharon G. Flake
451 * Moo Cow Kaboom! written and illus. by Thacher Hurd
453 * Shakespeare Bats Cleanup by Ron Koertge
455 * The Dream Bearer by Walter Dean Myers
457 * Mrs. Chicken and the Hungry Crocodile ad. by Won-Ldy Paye and
Margaret H. Lippert; illus. by Julie Paschkis
458 * The Wee Free Men by Terry Pratchett
468 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
470 
ANNUAL AUTHOR AND TITLE INDEX
4
tT "
r ,3^
'^.a,-.^~
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except
August by the Publications Office of the Graduate School of Library and Information Science
(GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of
Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS)
Janice M. Del Negro, Contributing Editor (JMD)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
OFFICE STAFF
Jennifer DeBaillie
Natalie Hoyle
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $70.00; individuals, $50.00; students, $15.00. In countries other than the
United States, add $7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya
Company Ltd. Single copy rate: $5.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus
Reprint Co., Route 100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from ProQuest, 300
North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
All inquiries about subscriptions and advertising should go to University of Illinois Press, 1325 S.
Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903, 217-333-0950; toll free 866-244-0626.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The
Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email:
bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2003 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Paul Goble from Mystic Horse 
2003. Used by permission of HarperCollins
Publishers.
JULY/AUGUST 2003 
* 
435
THE BIG PICTURE
Mystic Horse
ad. and illus. by Paul Goble
Charged with even more motion and emotion ("Abandoned, lonely, unloved!/ ...
There is an old horse in our midst/ Who is without an owner,/ Abandoned, lonely,
unloved!") than the stunning Girl Who Loved Wild Horses, which won the 1979
Caldecott Medal, this book moves beyond kinship with the animal world to a
cycle of death and resurrection through animals' kinship with the spirit world.
Skillfully adapted from a Pawnee story collected by George Bird Grinnell and
published in 1889, the story portrays a poor orphan lad whose kindness to a cast-
off horse draws jeering from the well-mounted warriors in his tribe. In face of an
enemy attack, however, the boy obeys the sickly animal's command to cover it
with river mud and ride four times into battle counting coup with a willow stick.
The horse, magically renewed as a prancing steed, is then killed when the boy
disobeys with a fifth charge. Grieving deeply afterwards throughout a heavy rain-
storm, the boy sees the horse rise, healed, and rides him home, along with a herd of
wild horses, to lead his people and care for his old grandmother "for all her years."
In responsibly citing the story's source, Goble acknowledges the fact that he has
"had to make changes from the original because certain aspects do not translate
well into today's thinking"-perhaps the boy's killing of the enemy on whom he
counts coup, and more probably the butchering of the horse by the enemy when it
falls after the fifth charge. And from the tale that Grinnell heard during the time
he spent with the Pawnee in Nebraska, Goble has omitted an earlier episode in
which the rejuvenated horse carries the boy toward a buffalo herd to kill a spotted
calf, for whose skin the chief has promised his daughter in marriage. The result of
this selection is a shorter but sharply focused tale. Goble's hope that "the spirit of
the story is still there" is assuredly fulfilled in his dramatic yet sensitive reconstruc-
tion.
Though the story itself has deep appeal, it is the artistic contextualization
that gives perspective on the tale as part of a "horse culture" rather than a piece of
isolated lore. Each illustrative feature adds to the cultural grounding. Eerie blue-
and-white endpapers portray the mythic appearance of horses from frothy waves
into the green-and-yellow sunshined world, whereupon they turn into a variegated
herd thundering across the half-title page. Thus readers witness the "spirit horses,
Arusa, surge up from the womb of Mother Earth, through the waters of a sacred
lake, to spread out and replenish the wild herds." Traditional designs decorate the
copyright information, two pages of meticulous background information on the
tribe, and the beginning and end of the legend, which is clean in both verbal and
visual composition.
The illustrated scenes are dynamically paced and emotionally expressive,
with startling contrasts--one double-page spread is vertically barred with birch
436 
* THE BULLETIN
trees, another shadowed with a massive blue-black thunderhead generating metal-
lic streaks of rain over the huddled figure of the boy. A stylized pool of blood, with
a butterfly hovering close by, swirls from the dead horse's mouth as the boy throws
himself over his fallen mount; later, as the boy hugs the resurrected horse, pools of
rain swirl over the entire page. This is one of Goble's deepest creations--durable
enough to support imagined journeys of courage and transformation again and
again, alone or aloud. (Imprint information appears on p. 447.)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ANHOLT, LAURENCE Jack and the Dreamsack; illus. by Ross Collins. 
Bloomsbury,
2003 
26p
ISBN 1-58234-786-7 $16.95 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
Philosophical young Jack declares that "the trouble with dreams ... is that you are
always asleep when you have them," so he resolves to stay awake when he goes to
sleep so he can observe his dreams properly. That night the boy takes a sack "to
put his dreams in" and goes off "to search for the middle, the very center of all
dreams everywhere." Jack travels through some surreal dream terrain, finding "a
small white snail dog," "telephones with beards," a "Finger Forest," a "Human
Zoo," etc.; to all of these his response is "AMAZING!" Finally he reaches "the
very top branch of the giant Fruit Salad tree that grows right in the center, smack-
dab in the middle, in the very bellybutton of all dreams." Jack returns home, his
sack heavy with dreams, but when he opens the sack it's empty but for a tiny
Dreamseed, which, when planted, grows through the roof. Anholt's text is some-
what self-conscious, but it rolls along rhythmically right from the opening lines.
Although the pace falters when Jack's journey descends into the list-like accumula-
tion of Dreamthings, the momentum is strong enough to keep the story from
stalling. The art depicts Jack's dream world and the stuff within it very literally,
which sometimes makes the visuals flat, but despite the Candyland look of the
images there are some effective surreal moments. Use this tale to trigger a discus-
sion of dreams and dreaming, awake and sleeping. JMD
BAKER, LESLIE 
The Animal ABC; written and illus. by Leslie Baker. 
Holt,
2003 
34p
ISBN 0-8050-6746-9 
$15.95 
Ad 
2-4 yrs
The format is a classic one: a page (or spread) features a letter in upper and lower
case, an inviting illustrtiion of an animal whose name starts with (or, with X for
"ox," includes) that letter, and a caption offering the animal's name in large print.
Baker's watercolors are the main reward: fluid, eloquent, and imaginative, they
JULY/AUGUST 2003 
* 437
bring their able ant, cuddly koala, curious quail, and roguish raccoon to vivid life,
offsetting tenderly drafted subjects with dappled and dreamy backgrounds and the
occasional festive accessory (autumn leaves drift down towards the vole as he peers
out at the viewer with acorn in paws). Unfortunately, a few animal faces are cute
where others are expressive; more problematic are some of the choices for letter
representatives, since youngsters just grappling with the alphabet are going to have
a hard time wrestling with the word "uakari" or understanding the specific nature
of the yellowtail (it would also be useful for the letters to have been more obviously
identified within the words). This therefore isn't going to challenge the shelf space
of great alphabet books such as Brian Wildsmith's ABC (BCCB 6/63), but its
traditional subject, tight focus, and inviting illustrations will make this a cozy start
for many young abecedarians. DS
BOND, REBECCA 
When Marcus Moore Moved In; written and illus. by Rebecca
Bond. 
Tingley/Little, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-316-10458-2 
$15.95 
R 4-7 yrs
Bouncing around on the unloaded furniture in the early morning, Marcus Moore
is ready for action in his new neighborhood ("'I'm here!' said Marcus Moore"), but
"there was no one there." Soon somebody does come by, but "by" is the operative
word: the girl skips past him "like a sunny sidewalk dancer," she rides past him on
her bicycle, she marches by him as she beats her drum, and Marcus Moore despairs
("And there was only grim and gray, and there was only him"). Fortunately, the
girl returns, knocking at the door of his makeshift streetside house and introduc-
ing herself as Katherine Brown, and Marcus' new neighborhood seems a good
place again ("And at once he felt all rosy. Like that, his street had changed").
Bond's text has a pulsing rhythm and a taste for repetition ("at 44 MacDougal
Street when Marcus Moore moved in") that suggests an unrhymed ballad, but it
never discomfits reader-aloud or audience by demanding a poetry vs. prose call.
Instead, audiences can relish the happy reliance on sound in words ("She stomped
and tromped and swaggered") and sound effects per se ("And BOOM-BA-DEE! BOOM-
BA-DEE! BOOM-BA-DEE! Like that she banged her drum"), while appreciating the
plainspoken yet evocative images of an urban street in summer ("And in the early
evening, when the day was blue and dusty, with smells of dinners cooking, with
lightly layered dark"). The smudgy, mottled acrylics are a perfect partner to the
text: Bond is particularly effective at catching the fidgety, hanging-out poses of a
young boy hovering in front of his new steps (Marcus idly trails a string down the
sidewalk and upends himself on a waiting chair) and depicting the companionably
narrow streets of the urban neighborhood (often from a bird's-eye view). Reloca-
tion is hard, but this should lighten many a young mover's load. DS
BOWLER, TIM 
Storm Catchers. McElderry, 2003 
200p
ISBN 0-689-84573-1 
$16.95 
Ad Gr. 6-10
On a dark Cornish night, Ella is abducted from her home, leaving her little brother,
Sam, behind and her parents and older brother, Fin, distraught upon their return;
soon a ransom note arrives, cautioning the family to tell no one. Fin attempts to
use the old magic of dowsing (with a makeshift pendulum over a map) to find his
sister's whereabouts, but it's little Sam who proves truly gifted and whose results
suggest Ella is nearby. When the kidnapper orders Fin to destroy the ransom
money, Fin begins to realize that this is a kidnapping of revenge, not greed, that
it's tied into secrets about his father's past, and that it's up to him to find Ella and
438 
* THE BULLETIN
bring her home safely. Bowler never quite makes the most of his supernaturally
touched atmosphere, but there's a very readable suspense to the unfolding plot,
especially in the cutting back and forth between the viewpoints of Ella with her
captor and Fin and the others at home. Unfortunately, the suspense is largely
dissipated by a labored climax that crams too much backstory and explanation into
the last quarter of the book, thus undercutting the impact of both the events and
the revelations. Between the family secrets, supernatural touches, and central drama,
however, there's probably enough to keep genre fans absorbed. DS
BRADLEY, KIMBERLYBRUBAKER 
ForFreedom: The Story ofa French Spy. 
Delacorte,
2003 
181p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90087-2 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-72961-8 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 6-9
In this historical novel set in Cherbourg, France, Bradley provides a fictionalized
account of the true story of Suzanne David, a young French opera singer whose
work as a spy for the Allies was instrumental in the success of the 1944 Normandy
invasion. After a grisly narrative hook, wherein thirteen-year-old Suzanne wit-
nesses the mangling of her neighbor-including the woman's decapitation and a
fetus ripped from her womb-during a bomb raid on the beach, the story settles
into the constant suspense, fear, and tension of living in an occupied city. Suzanne
continues to pursue her career as an opera singer despite the war, and she begins to
perform around the city, finally realizing her ultimate dream of singing the role of
Carmen in Paris. When her doctor realizes the freedom of movement she enjoys,
he enlists her help in the dangerous work of carrying messages. Over three years,
she delivers countless messages to an ever-decreasing number of fellow espionage
agents, until one day she too is betrayed. The subject matter is naturally involving,
and the juxtaposition of Suzanne's successes as a singer and as a spy moves this
gripping narrative along at a firm clip. Characterization is thoughtful enough to
add interest, with Suzanne feeling romantic or heroic on the stage but alarmingly
clumsy and obvious as a spy, a realistic emotional detail that contributes to the
tension of the story. Add this to Number the Stars to show another face of the
heroic resistance of young people during the war. KC
BRINSON, CYNTHIA L. 
Seeing Sugar. Viking, 2003 
[96p]
ISBN 0-670-03646-3 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-5
Kate Martin bristles with jealousy as her teacher banishes her to the back of the
room in order to give her prized front-row seat to new student Sugar Rose Simms.
As a result, everything changes for Kate; she hates fourth grade, distrusts her for-
merly beloved teacher, and realizes with horror that she can't see the board from
her new seat. Quite reasonably, she blames Sugar Rose for her misfortune and
swears off all things sweet. New glasses afford a new perspective, however, and she
grabs her mother's camera to document the world she has been missing. Looking
through her fifth eye-the lens of the camera-Kate realizes that Sugar Rose is no
saccharine usurper, but a shy, vulnerable girl who could use a friend. This is a
quick, simple tale of preadolescent jealousy turned to empathy, and Brinson shows
a keen sensitivity to the overblown intensity of preadolescent troubles. The meta-
phors of sugar avoidance and vision correction are somewhat pointed, but they
help carry the more abstract emotions and render the text a possible gateway to
JULY/AUGUST 2003 
* 439
more sophisticated literary fare. From new rivals and new glasses to new friends
and new hobbies, many younger readers will find themselves in this book. KC
BUTLER, DORI HILLESTAD 
Trading Places with Tank Talbott. Whitman,
2003 
139p
ISBN 0-8075-1708-9 
$14.95 
R Gr. 3-6
After a near-drowning mishap the previous summer, eleven-year-old Jason Pfeiffer
dreads the swimming lessons his parents are requiring. When he discovers that the
school bully, Tank Talbott, is taking ballroom dancing in the same facility, he
avoids being beaten up for the terrible knowledge by coming up with a brilliant
idea: he and Tank, who share a resemblance that causes them to be mistaken for
one another, can take each other's classes. As Jason neatly avoids his watery fate by
passing himself off as a dancing Tank, he begins to see how demoralizing people's
reactions to Tank can be (and where Tank gets his bullying habits from); the pair's
enforced partnership also leads to an unintended friendship as they bond together
over Jason's in-progress monster-movie script. Butler ingeniously takes the tradi-
tional adult injunction to "put yourself in his shoes" and does just that to her main
character, employing a sufficiently legitimate conceit for the shift to undermine its
didactic edges and even managing a situation that renders the success of the swap
fairly realistic. There's plenty of humor in the situation (particularly when the
girls in the dancing class all figure out that Jason's not Tank and get crushes on
him), but it's effectively paired with Jason's broadening perspective ("Two min-
utes ago he was afraid no one would think he was really Tank. Now he was afraid
everyone would think he was"); Tank's modest transformation is couched in fairly
believable terms as well. Readers will find themselves sympathizing with both
kids, as well as thoroughly enjoying themselves. DS
CART, MICHAEL, ed. 
Necessary Noise: Stories about Our Families as They Really
Are; illus. by Charlotte Noruzi. 
Cotler/HarperCollins, 2003 
239p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027500-6 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027499-9 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Gathering together an impressive list of superstars of YA fiction, including Joan
Bauer, Emma Donoghue, Nikki Grimes, Lois Lowry, and Walter Dean Myers,
among others, this anthology presents an array of ten stories about families in
various states of disarray. Standout entries include Grimes' "The Throwaway: A
Suite" which tells the story of Hagar and Ishmael in blank verse from Ishmael's
point of view, and Myers' poignant "Visit," where a father who had abandoned his
son, physically and emotionally, twenty-five years before is called upon to be his
last visitor and witness to his execution. Other stories are more light-hearted:
Lowry's "Snowbound" pokes fun at the inappropriate college boyfriend (this one
disdains soap, manners, and eating "mammal"), and Bauer's "Hardware" plays out
a David and Goliath scenario when a family decides to defend their hardware
business against the encroachment of a Waldo's superstore. Unfortunately, many
of the stories fail to meet this standard, offering well-meaning examples of family
diversity but little memorable literary experience; Cart's own story seems themati-
cally out of place, and his dogmatic introduction is worth skipping altogether.
Half of the stories do work, however, which makes the collection worth dipping
into if not reading through. KC
440 
* THE BULLETIN
CERULLO, MARY M. 
Sea Turtles: Ocean Nomads; illus. with photographs by Jef-
frey L. Rotman. 
Dutton, 2003 
40p
ISBN 0-525-46649-5 
$17.99 
R Gr. 2-5
Lush, arresting photography of the ethereal-looking sea turtle and its tropical habi-
tats is the stand-out feature of this combination information/call-to-conservation
text. Chapters include accounts of how research on sea turtles is conducted, how
the turtles themselves are adapted to ocean life, how their extraordinary birth dra-
mas and elusive childhoods are enacted, and what efforts are being made to protect
this endangered species. Interspersed with the narratives of the chapters are insets
providing additional information about selected areas of interest, including how
to tell a boy from a girl sea turtle and how the earless turtles' hearing is tested.
Notably absent is any information about how turtles mate, though there are sev-
eral good pictures with accompanying text about the process of laying and burying
the fertilized eggs. The main chapters have a sandy background, while the insets
feature a black background; the alternating colors evoke the dark sea and the sandy
beaches that make up the habitat of these placid reptiles and subtly emphasize the
importance of dark and light to the turtles' survival. Information about conserva-
tion, as well as a glossary, bibliography, and index, are included. KC
COHEN, CARON LEE 
Everything Is Different at Nonna's House; illus. by Hiroe
Nakata. 
Clarion, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-618-07335-3 
$16.00 
Ad 
3-5 yrs
A little boy muses on how the world seems to be a different place when he leaves
the city to visit his grandparents in the country: "Everything is different at Nonna's
house. No honk, honk taxis jam the street. And no way-up buildings crowd the
sky. At Nonna's house, the yard is wide and quiet. And the whole blue sky reaches
all the way down to the flower beds." The leisurely pace of country life is given its
laudatory due by the youngster, who points out all the ways country life is superior
to city life, from the lack of rushing in the mornings ("There's always time for
blueberry pancakes") to the fact that flowers grow outside the kitchen door instead
of having to be purchased at the florist's shop. The rather list-like text is held
together by the boy's exclamatory inferences about how he is different in the coun-
try than in the city ("I'm such a big boy at Nonna's house!"), exclamations which
in the end close the story into a neat circle. The sentimental text is lengthy, how-
ever, and it takes a bit too long to get to the admittedly valuable point: that the
boy is the same competent child whether at his grandma's or at home. Nakata's
light and airy watercolors help balance the sometimes overly sweet text: the sunny
country images have a plethora of cheery yellows and blues, the compositions have
an easy flow, and the characters are simple-featured but expressive. Children and
their loving adults will be comforted by the sincerity of the book's message and by
the security pictured in the close family relationships. JMD
COLFER, EOIN 
Artemis Fowl: The Eternity Code. Miramax/Hyperion,
2003 
309p
ISBN 0-7868-1914-6 
$16.95 
R Gr. 5-8
Artemis Fowl (of Artemis Fowl BCCB 7/01, and Artemis Fowl: The Arctic Inci-
dent, 6/02) is back, and this time he's bitten off more than he-and his nearly
indestructible bodyguard, Butler-can chew. When a plan to extort money from
communications magnate Jon Spiro by holding back Artemis' new invention (the
JULY/AUGUST 2003 
* 441
C Cube, a combination of computer and fairy technology) goes awry, the Cube is
stolen, and Butler is seriously wounded. Artemis' quick thinking and large wallet
get his beloved bodyguard on ice, cryogenically speaking, long enough for Captain
Holly Short of LEP (fairyland's Lower Elements Police) to come to the medical,
magical rescue. The theft of Artemis' invention also puts all of fairyland at risk of
exposure, so one daring plan later Artemis, Holly, Juliet (Butler's younger sister,
just as deadly ifa bit unorthodox), and Mulch Diggums (digger dwarfextraordinaire)
infiltrate Spiro's citadel in downtown Chicago to retrieve the Cube. Colfer com-
bines fantasy with science-fiction hardware to satisfying effect, and fans of the
previous titles won't be disappointed. The action is gratifyingly fast and cun-
ningly complicated, and the return of familiar favorite characters (plus the ex-
panded role ofJuliet, the bodyguard-rising) provides a cast worthy of the adventure.
The villains are organized-crime caricatures limited by their stereotypes but still
effective as plot participants; main characters are allowed more depth, and Artemis
in particular is evolving into a character dealing with complex moral issues. The
conclusion-wherein Artemis and entourage are mind-wiped of any memories of
the fairy realm-leaves Artemis without the conscience he has gained through his
association with the fairies, a situation that reprises'ethical questions raised at the
beginning of the book. Will Artemis find the clue he planted that will lead to total
recall? A sequel, if not secure, is eminently feasible. JMD
COREY, SHANA 
Players in Pigtails; illus. by Rebecca Gibbon. 
Scholastic,
2003 
34p
ISBN 0-439-18305-7 
$16.95 
R 
6-9 yrs
If you can only imagine "Take Me Out to the Ballgame" as sung by a gravelly
Harry Caray or a chorus of beer-soaked male spectators, then you probably haven't
heard all the verses. The "voice" belongs to fictional Katie Casey (no relation, we
presume, to the venerable Mudville slugger), who drags her beau to the ballpark.
Corey warps the 1908 "baseball mad" maid ahead to 1943, where she becomes an
archetypal player on the Kenosha Comets of the All-American Girls Professional
Baseball League. While this contortion is an unnecessary stretch, the story of
Katie's long step up to the plate is lots of fun, as World War II and a visionary
Philip Wrigley offer aspiring women players a chance of a lifetime. Corey has an
eye for the details that will satisfy the picture-book set-from naysayers behind the
scenes and hecklers in the stands, to prissy, impractical uniforms and mandatory
charm-school manners on the field. Gibbon sets her lanky players against airy
white space and swathes of summery pastels, coyly contrasting their tomboyish
grace with the more demure stylishness of their stay-at-home sisters. A lengthy
author's note supplies information about the league, and lyrics to "Take Me Out
to the Ballgame" and the "Victory Song" of the AAGPBL grace the endpapers. A
more enticing title than Adler's Mama Played Baseball (BCCB 4/03), Pigtails is a
solid hit. EB
DAVIS, REBECCA FJELLAND 
Jake Riley: Irreparably Damaged. HarperTempest,
2003 
265p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-051838-3 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-051837-5 
$15.99 
R Gr. 9-12
Lainey has been friends with Jake since he came to live with his father, her father's
farm tenant, a few months ago upon his release from an institution for youthful
442 
* THE BULLETIN
offenders. Now that Jake's interest in Lainey is becoming intrusively sexual, Lainey
is legitimately afraid of him, but she's also scared of what will happen to him if she
shares her fears with authorities, such as the school counselor who has labeled him
"irreparably damaged" ("I'm not sure it's entirely true that I don't need help, and
I think Jake does need help. We just don't need it from her"). As Jake's behavior
becomes more dangerous (he threatens to kill Lainey if she reveals his private con-
fidences to her), Lainey becomes increasingly torn between defending herself by
getting Jake put away permanently and defending the good that she knows still lies
in a young man whose chances for the future are rapidly dwindling. This is a
tautly written psychodrama with thrilleresque spice: Davis' stage-management of
events is sometimes a bit obtrusive, but the tension of Lainey's dilemma is both
palpable and plausible. The adults' vacillating treatment of the situation is cred-
ible as well, with incidents galvanized by teachers breaching student trust and par-
ents hoping for the best at the wrong moment, leaving Lainey largely on her own.
Lainey is tough (the capable farm girl lands a punch on Jake's nose that breaks
both his nose and her hand) but also sympathetic, and the book effectively taps
into her ambivalence about her own sexual feelings, both to suggest the possibility
of her overreaction to some ofJake's behavior and also to link her unease with his
own. Fans of Lois Lowry and Gail Giles as well as subtler ethical dramas should
find this a gripping read. DS
DITERLIZZI, TONY 
The Field Guide; written by Tony DiTerlizzi and Holly Black;
illus. by Tony DiTerlizzi. 
Simon, 2003 
107p
ISBN 0-689-85936-8 
$9.95 
R Gr. 3-5
DITERLIZZI, TONY 
The Seeing Stone; written by Tony DiTerlizzi and Holly Black;
illus. by Tony DiTerlizzi. 
Simon, 2003 
108p
ISBN 0-689-85937-6 $9.95 
R Gr. 3-5
When nine-year-old twin brothers Jared and Simon Grace and their thirteen-year-
old sister Mallory move into their great-aunt Lucinda's decrepit Victorian man-
sion, they are not necessarily looking for adventure: their father has moved out,
their mother is broke, and they have no place else to go. In The Field Guide, the
first volume of this projected five-volume series, Jared discovers a secret room in
the old house that points him toward the life's work of a family ancestor: Arthur
Spiderwick's Field Guide to the Fantastical World, a book about the habits and pe-
culiarities of fairies, brownies, etc. The siblings subsequently discover they have a
house-boggart cum brownie, Thimbletack, who advises them to get rid of the book.
Despite Thimbletack's warning, Jared holds onto the Guide, and in the second
book, The Seeing Stone, readers see the indirect result: Simon is kidnapped by
goblins, and Jared and Mallory go after him. This new series has two things Lem-
ony Snicket's series doesn't: magic and pictures. DiTerlizzi (author/illustrator of
Ted, BCCB 2/01 and illustrator of The Spider and the Fly, 11/02) and Black (au-
thor of Tithe, BCCB 1/03) have created an old-fashioned fantasy romp festooned
with eye-catching visuals. At about one hundred pages, each volume ends just
when the going gets good, a ploy that will certainly bring readers back for more.
The authors have a smooth, quick storytelling style, and the dialogue among the
sibs (and their interactions with their nearly overwhelmed mother) have the reso-
nance of true sibling sniping. With its reader-friendly concept and sophisticated
packaging, the Spiderwick Chronicles will be a hit, which may well be considered
an Unfortunate Event for competing series. JMD
JULY/AUGUST 2003 
* 443
DONNELLY, JENNIFER 
A Northern Light. 
Harcourt, 2003 
389p
ISBN 0-15-216705-6 
$17.00 
Ad 
Gr. 9-12
Sixteen-year-old Mattie is burned out by the hard work and responsibility of man-
aging the household since her mother passed away. A promising writer, whose
sampling of poetry has secured her a college scholarship, Mattie's surrounded by
reminders of the life that may await her if she stays on the family farm: her beloved
teacher's abusive husband, her best friend's travails in childbirth, the grinding bore-
dom of chores, and a circle of acquaintances with no appreciation of books and
learning. There's a powerful contradictory force at work, though-Royal Loomis,
a young farmer to whom she's drawn more by hormones than by heart. A farm
disaster and her father's need for ready cash send Mattie off to work at a local
resort for the summer, where she is entrusted by a pretty patron, Grace Brown,
with a stack of love letters to be burned. This unusual charge leads Mattie to
ponder the mystery of Grace's subsequent drowning and hardens her resolve to
leave the farm for good. Donnelly infuses her story with details surrounding an
actual 1906 murder, and as she gradually draws Mattie's and Grace's stories to-
gether, readers might reasonably expect that a genuine murder mystery is forth-
coming. Discovery of the circumstances of Grace's life and death merely functions
as the final epiphany that sends Mattie running toward a brighter future, though,
and as teens finally watch Mattie choose New York over Royal Loomis, they may
feel they've been cheated out of the better half of a very long story. EB
DOWNS, MIKE 
The Noisy Airplane Ride; illus. by David Gordon. 
Tricycle,
2003 
32p
ISBN 1-58246-091-4 
$14.95 
R 
6-9 yrs
Evocative sound effects combined with chipper couplets depict an airplane flight
from boarding to deplaning, focusing on one boy's trip to see his grandmother.
The second-person narration ("The tug's hooked up; you won't be late") pulls
audiences right onto the tarmac, while simple explanations help demystify the
strange sights and, especially, sounds ("CLUNK Wheels up WHIRR Flaps up") that
can make novices aloft uneasy. The awkward and labored couplets are the book's
weakest spot, but otherwise this is one of the more thorough and helpful introduc-
tions to flight to appear for young audiences. The coverage is broad indeed, and
airline-pilot Downs knows his noises, detailing the loud "Ker-oosh" of the air-
plane toilet, the "Roar! Roar!!" of the thrust reversers, and even the "Splash!" of
the young boy's overturned in-flight beverage ("That's okay, just wipe it up").
The technical details will be interesting to gearheads as well as reassuring to the
nervous, and a final spread provides further explanation of some aspects men-
tioned in the text and describes a few more possible components of the aviation
experience. Gordon demonstrates great finesse in his computer-created art, with
the "daubs" of color gradation, saturation of hues, and a tendency towards high-
lighting suggesting acrylic paintings. Though perspectives become confusing in a
couple of images (and purists may object to the somewhat inconsistently depicted
airplane), the artist also has a keen eye for the dramatic composition, making the
most not just of his gleaming aircraft but the opportunity for unusual views of and
within it. Aside from being a useful volume for kids aloft, this will offer exciting
opportunities for youngsters playing pilot on the ground, and for adults who want
to be prepared for in-flight questions of"What's that noise?" DS
444 
* 
THE BULLETIN
DRAPER, SHARON M. 
The Battle ofJericho. Atheneum, 2003 
297p
ISBN 0-689-84232-5 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Jericho longs for the social capital that belonging to the Warriors of Distinction, a
prestigious high-school "service" organization, will afford him-access to better
girls, better parties, and better grades. Publicly, the Warriors are known for their
successful toy drives. Privately, they operate as a secret fraternity, complete with
harrowing and often viscerally disgusting initiation rituals. Despite repeated warn-
ings from teachers, parents, and even the school janitor, Jericho and the other
pledges, including Dana, the first girl ever allowed to pledge the group, participate
in increasingly debasing tasks ostensibly meant to facilitate manly virtues. When
the hazing goes fatally awry, Jericho realizes with a tragic vengeance what he al-
ready knew-that the humiliation was unmotivated, cruel, and ultimately, worse
than futile. While the plot moves with reasonable speed, the narration has a clipped,
stilted quality that interferes with the timing. The teen voices ring true only inter-
mittently; they speak either in glib, flagged insults or self-revealing, staged narra-
tives, with an annoying preponderance of exclamation points peppering their
utterances. While Draper's universe remains as dark as one of Cormier's, her
presentation is not nearly as artful, subtle, or morally ambiguous, which may turn
out to be a boon for some teens; the straightforward sentence structure, intense
situations, and deliberate moral inflection will strike a chord with reluctant read-
ers, who may then think twice before they allow themselves to be sucked in to
similarly destructive situations. KC
DYER, JANE 
Little Brown Bear Won't Go to School!; written and illus. by Jane
Dyer. 
Little, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-316-19685-1 
$15.95 
R 4-6yrs
Little Brown Bear would much rather have a job like his mom and dad than go to
school, so when they drop him off at his schoolroom door, he sneaks over to the
local diner and applies for one. Though he can take orders, he hasn't yet learned to
write. Similar fine motor difficulties greet him as he attempts jobs at a beaver's
building site, a sheep's knitting establishment, and a bulldog's barbershop. When
he manages to offend a lion by creating an unorthodox coiffure, he decides that his
best option is to return to school to see what his friends are doing. Peering in
through the window, he sees them succeeding at kid-friendly versions of the occu-
pations at which he has failed, and his self-confidence is restored when his teacher
offers him a job he can do. Dyer may be poking gentle fun at children whose
ambitions outrun their abilities here, but the seriousness with which Little Brown
Bear's employers take him mitigates any offense. The airy compositions accentu-
ate the lightness of the fantasy; with her delicate watercolors, Dyer excels at creat-
ing animals that are cuddly and expressive without ever losing their dignity. Unlike
most back-to-school books, this one isn't about the jitters, making it a treat for
those who aren't afraid of going back to school but think instead they'd just be
happier doing something else. KC
ELYA, SUSAN MIDDLETON 
Oh No, Gotta Go!; illus. by G. Brian Karas. 
Putnam,
2003 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-399-23493-4 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 4-6 yrs
Out for a Sunday drive with her parents, a little girl is happily ensconced in the
JULY/AUGUST 2003 
* 445
back seat (her favorite spot) when she is overcome by an overwhelming urge:
"'Where is un bafio? ýD6nde esti? I really do need one,' I told mi mamA." Madre
and padre waste a few precious moments asking why the other didn't check to see
if their daughter had to go before they left the house; meanwhile, the erstwhile
(and nearly floating) narrator intones piteously, "I drank lots of juice," bringing
the crux of the crisis home. The family drives around seeking a restroom, but all
the shops are closed. Finally, a desperate Papi asks for directions: "Papa saw a
worker out pouring cemento. He backed up to ask the big stranger--extraiio,
'Ripido, mister! Please, where is un banio?"' The little girl makes it into the
bathroom of an elegant restaurant with no time to spare; then she and her parents
sit down to dinner-during which the little girl drinks lots of limonada. The
unexpected rhyming of the English and boldface Spanish words give the rhythmic
text an ebullient humor enhanced by Karas' understated gouache, acrylic, pencil,
and collage illustrations. The palette is sunny southwest pottery colors-clay or-
anges, sky blues, and dusty greens-and the spreads are a mix of full- and half-page
compositions and small vignettes. The text and illustrations provide the little girl's
perspective, from her view of her parents' heads via her perch in the rear, to her
"Hurry, Papal. iMis rapidamente!" as she drums her heels frantically on the back
seat with the intense look of a child in serious need. The power of suggestion
being what it is, listeners will be laughing themselves silly all the way to the banio.
A glossary and pronunciation guide is appended. JMD
ERNST, LISA CAMPBELL 
Hannah Mae O'Hannigan's Wild West Show; written and
illus. by Lisa Campbell Ernst. 
Simon, 2003 
4 0p
ISBN 0-689-85191-X 
$16.95 
R Gr. 2-3
It all starts when Uncle Coot sends the infant Hannah Mae a cowgirl hat: "It was
then that little Hannah Mae knew she would someday be a rodeo star." Faithfully
supplied by Uncle Coot and supported by her loyal, if bewildered, parents, she
manages to train as a cowgirl "with a few minor city adjustments," riding pony-
ride pony Sassafras and practicing with flocks of hamsters, which she and Sassafras
tend and herd with diligence and flair. When she and Sassafras finally arrive at
Uncle Coot's ranch all ready for the roundup, however, her uncle refuses to let the
petite pair out on the range-until the ranch is threatened by an ever-multiplying
influx of "a heap of hateful hamsters" ("No one could sleep for nightmares, or eat
for fear"), which the veteran hamster-wrangler then rounds up in a twinkling and
tames in a trice. This is goldurned funny from start to finish, capably
counterpointing the enjoyable and easygoing ranch flavor with the gleeful absur-
dity of the evil hamster menace. Though the lengthy text is likelier to succeed as a
readalone, the text is plumb full of diverting lines ("Who would have thought it'd
be hamsters that did us in?") that will give readaloud audiences a chance to pause,
giggle, and catch their breath as well as giving readers plenty of entertainment.
Ernst's cartoon lines and smoky pastel inks in gentle sunset colors make this a cozy
adventure indeed, and the scenes are all the more comic for their toylike flavor.
The hamsters, both urban and rural, are definitely the crowning touch: those
western hamsters look quite amusingly vexed, and youngsters will yearn for the
parlor-floor hamster corrals with which Hannah trained. Readers who've enjoyed
Western sagas such as Lowell's Little Red Cowboy Hat (BCCB 6/97) will particu-
larly enjoy this rootin', tootin' good time; if you read it to a class, make sure the
class hamster gets a front-row seat. DS
446 
* THE BULLETIN
EULO, ELENA YATES 
Mixed-Up Doubles. Holiday House, 2003 
[185p]
ISBN 0-8234-1706-9 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Tennis was the bond that drew Hank's family together, and ultimately, when his
tennis-coach mother chose profession over husband, it was what broke the family
apart. Now ninth-grader Hank, his older brother Jerome, and little sister Sarah are
in Dad's custody, in a new house, trying to rebuild their lives. Hank delivers a
feisty, wisecracking narrative on the day-to-day business of his life, detailing in
particular how he's drawn into a friendship with nerdy Tremont next door, how
he transforms Tremont into a socially respectable guy (now and evermore known
as Monty), and how Monty transforms him into an academically respectable guy,
able to accept that his parents' divorce is as irrevocable as their love for their chil-
dren. Along the way there are tennis skills lost and regained, bitter go-rounds with
Mom whenever she makes room for a kids' visit, and a doomed scheme to reunite
the parents. There's never really a moment's doubt that they'll all come through
fine in the end; in fact, it might have been better for Eulo to end a chapter early
with a "They all lived happily ever after" than to submit Hank (and her readers) to
the final pages of family love fest: "Looking at my parents play together and kid
each other and win their match against the other couple was something out of a
dream. The only thing I could think of was that our parents loved us more than
anything in the universe." Come for the tennis, stay for the friendship story, and
hurry through the treacly ending. EB
FLAKE, SHARON G. 
Begging for Change. Jump at the Sun/Hyperion,
2003 
[240p]
ISBN 0-7868-0601-X 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 7-10
When Raspberry's mother is brutally attacked by a neighbor girl, Raspberry's re-
sentment at her hard life begins to cloud her judgment. In her anger and uncer-
tainty, she lashes out at her friend Zora by stealing money from Zora's purse, not
because she needs it, but simply because Zora has everything that Raspberry wants--
a loving father, a nice home, no need to scrimp and save. Zora sees Raspberry's
thievery as a betrayal of their friendship that she cannot forgive; Raspberry herself
fears that.her action (and another theft) links her to her strung-out father, who
keeps returning to steal from Raspberry and her mother. This sequel to Money
Hungry takes readers back into the struggles of Raspberry and her "girls"-Ja'nae,
Mai, and Zora-to work out the complex dynamics of need, greed, and friendship
in a densely textured world complicated by Raspberry's junkie father, Ja'nae's irre-
sponsible mother, Mai's conflicted relationship with her Korean father, Raspberry's
crush on a young man, and the growing relationship between Raspberry's mother
and Zora's father. Flake's strength in these two books lies in developing genuine,
believable adults and children who continue to grow and change through their
relationships with each other. The disparate plot threads are capably intertwined,
and the central characters, especially those that carry over from Money Hungry,
have substantial back stories and distinctive voices. In fact, it is the tightly inter-
woven plot threads that contribute to the plausibility of Raspberry's hopefulness
despite her history;,her community consists not only of junkies and hard-edged,
violent girls, but also of adults and friends with a long history of supporting one
another and forging successful lives because of that support. KC
JULY/AUGUST 2003 
* 447
FRENCH, JACKIE 
Hitler's Daughter. HarperCollins, 2003 
[12 8p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-008653-X 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-008652-1 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-10
Unlike the misleadingly coy glamour girl depicted on the cover, central character
Anna evinces a reserved, serious manner as she recounts a strange historical episode
as part of the "Story Game" with which several kids entertain one another while
waiting for their school bus every morning. Their setting of rural Australia soon
alternates with Nazi Germany, where a nanny responsible for Hitler's unacknowl-
edged and lonely little daughter moves her deeper into hiding as the Third Reich
crumbles. Anna's thoughtful friend Mark becomes obsessed with the tale of Hitler's
daughter; as unlikely as it seems, Anna appears to be recollecting facts with an
incredible amount of detail ("It was only a story.... Just a story, nothing more. It
wasn't true-but there were true things in it"). In fact, it is the reactions of the
listeners, two transformed and one belligerently clueless, that echo the past with
contemporary themes. Mark's ethical questioning is supported by a gripping drama
that forces the reader to stretch toward new understanding, both of what is actu-
ally happening at the book's conclusion, and of what it means. French's style is
precise and effective. Her descriptions vividly profile even secondary characters:
"He was old, with a long salt-and-pepper moustache that looked like it would fall
out if he blew his nose too hard." As for Hitler's secret daughter-the small dark
girl with the limp and the terrible red birthmark disfiguring her face, the one with
the kind heart and quick mind, the one provided with everything except the love
she so desperately needed-she is unforgettable. BH
GOBLE, PAUL 
Mystic Horse; ad. and illus. by Paul Goble. 
HarperCollins,
2003 
[34p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029814-6 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029813-8 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 3-5
See this month's Big Picture, p. 435, for review.
GOODMAN, ALISON 
Singing the Dogstar Blues. 
Viking, 2003 
26 1p
ISBN 0-670-03610-2 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Joss Aaronson is a bio-engineered "comp-kid," conceived in a Petri dish for her
neglectful mother's convenience. One of a dozen students selected for an exclusive
program at the Centre for Neo-Historical Studies, a time-traveling institute, Joss is
chosen to partner with the first alien ever to study at the Centre, a Chorian known
as Mavkel. The Chorians are a dual-gendered, paired race, that is, they are each
part of a telepathically linked "birth pair." Mavkel's partner, Kelmav, has died,
and while this would usually mean the end of Mavkel as well, the Chorian Elders
have saved him in order to send him to Earth as a single ambassador. Mavkel is
desperate to telepathically pair with Joss, and much of the novel revolves around
this need; Joss, in the meantime, is trying to discover the identity of the anony-
mous sperm donor who is her father. Goodman's futuristic fantasy takes off run-
ning, and the pell-mell pace is sustained throughout. Joss is an arresting narrator,
her sometimes bitter tone of voice at odds with emotional needs readers will recog-
nize. The Chorians are revealed just enough to be intriguing, and the culture
groups and social mores of the future are sketched in without being limited or
448 
* THE BULLETIN
seeming artificial. Unfortunately, the plot begins to loosen up about halfway
through the novel, and by the end it has unraveled, not entirely, but sloppily. The
decisive illegal time jump-Joss and Mavkel jump into the past to discover the
identity of her father-is a device as obvious as an intergalactic mothership on a
clear day. Still, Joss and her world are compelling, and so are the individuals-
alien and otherwise-she manages to care about within it. JMD
GREENSTEIN, ELAINE 
Ice-Cream Cones for Sale!; written and illus. by Elaine
Greenstein. 
Levine/Scholastic, 2003 
[32p]
ISBN 0-439-32728-8 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 5-8 yrs
There are competing claims for bragging rights to the first ice cream cone, and
Greenstein dips into the past for the real scoop on its invention. First she reviews
the best-known claimants-ice cream and waffle sellers at the 1904 St. Louis World's
Fair, a Turk inspired by the paper cones of Parisian almond vendors, a pair of
sweethearts who converted an ice cream sandwich into a flower vase and cone.
Trumping all this hearsay ("But who is the true inventor? None of them!"),
Greenstein offers into evidence her Exhibit A, a patent for the ice cream cone mold
of one Italo Marchiony, dated months before the opening of the St. Louis fete.
Although her speculation on the genesis of Marchiony's invention will hardly con-
vince a discriminating jury (involving as it does a fictional bake shop, an errant
hound, a flying ice cream ball, and a lucky catch), it's hard to argue against Patent
No. 746971, and an endnote and quite extensive bibliography further suggest that
Greenstein knows whereof she speaks. Gouache paintings are rendered in a tasty
confection of pale lemon, peach, and strawberry, with bolder dashes of blueberry,
lime, and, of course, maraschino cherry. A closing photograph testifies that the,
ahem, cone of contention did indeed delight fairgoers, but kids can now raise their
triple dips confidently in a toast to the great Marchiony. EB
HAHN, MARY DOWNING 
Hear the Wind Blow. 
Clarion, 2003 
[208p]
ISBN 0-618-18190-3 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
With Papa dead, his older brother Avery under siege at Petersburg, and their farm
pretty well laid waste, Haswell Magruder is almost past caring who wins the War
between the States; he just wants Avery home and some responsibility lifted from
his thirteen-year-old shoulders. The remaining family is delivered a fatal blow
when Union soldiers raid the house in search of a Rebel soldier the Magruders had
sheltered, the commanding officer attempts to seduce Mrs. Magruder, and she
kills him in self-defense. The shooting drives the fragile woman to madness and
death, and now Haswell and his younger sister, Rachel, are forced to find their way
to relatives. Their welcome is precarious, because Uncle Cornelius is cozying up
to Union soldiers for protection and sustenance; Haswell's soon brought up on
charges of stealing a Union officer's horse, and with some unexpected aid the boy
escapes and hits the road toward Petersburg to drag Avery back to his familial
responsibilities. This is a classic kids-in-war story, complete with lucky breaks, a
noble steed, a snarling villain, and a happy ending, but Hahn supplies enough dirt,
hunger, blood, exhaustion, and raw anger to keep the proceedings edgy. Rachel is
deftly limned, a little spitfire whose worldly wisdom and big mouth keep Haswell
ever in the way of danger. Even if the fiction shelves are drooping with middle-
grade Civil War novels, find room to squeeze in one more. EB
JULY/AUGUST 2003 
* 449
HAUSMAN, GERALD 
Castaways: Stories ofSurvival. Greenwillow, 2003 
[17 6p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-008599-1 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-008598-3 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-10
A half-dozen original short stories explore human confrontation with the sea, fo-
cusing on characters who survive battles with the briny but never decisively win
the war. Hausman bases each tale on a true event, stripped to the bleached bones
of a plot and reanimated with details drawn from various historical and legendary
sources as well as the author's own experiences as an open-sea swimmer. Here
readers meet castaway Peter Serrano, whose body reacts defensively to the blister-
ing sun of his lonely island by growing a dense coat of hair, rendering him repul-
sive to the people who finally rescue him. There's the young Widow Carey, sole
survivor of a shipwreck, who stubbornly remains near the site where she lost hus-
band and child and becomes a near-mythical healer among her rescuers. Deep
diver Henri Roi cheats death at sea so many times he becomes known as "the man
who would not go bottom"; Philip Ashton's deserted island supplies all his physi-
cal needs, but he nearly loses his sanity to imaginary beasts. Hausman relates his
tales with folkloric dignity and genuine respect for the trauma of his characters,
and the mood is more often one of eerie loneliness than thrill-a-minute survival.
Closing notes cite the sources for each story and discuss how (and sometimes,
why) plot and character were adapted. This is a thoughtful collection that should
appeal to armchair adventurers and psychologists alike. EB
HAUTMAN, PETE 
Sweetblood. 
Simon, 2003 
[192p]
ISBN 0-689-85048-4 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
"I am not dead," says sixteen-year-old Lucy, "I am Undead." She's not speaking in
strictly classical vampirical terms, but of her theory that those whose lives would
have been lost but for modern technology belong to a new kind of undead. She
herself is Undead indeed, a resentful diabetic who has a hard time managing her
glucose levels and who has recently spiraled into a particularly ferocious adolescent
rebellion; prompted by some obvious connections and the fact that her diabetes
was diagnosed a month after she was bitten by a bat, she wonders if vampire leg-
ends actually arose from misunderstood diabetes, and she therefore feels a strong
kinship with vampires that leads her to vampire-themed chatrooms (under the
handle "Sweetblood") and goth classmates-and to a rather frightening man who
may be an actual vampire. Vampires seem to be an infinitely flexible subject, and
Lucy's perhaps-not-metaphoric reinterpretation of the phenomenon is startling
and provocative, with the book making effective and imaginative use of the inti-
mate (though not quite intimate enough) relationship that Lucy has with her blood.
Her narration deftly and often wittily expresses her rage, especially against her
parents ("We face off: the evil sugar-bitch daughter and the whiny hand-wringing
mother"), her sadness ("Cheerfulness does not play well here in Lucyland, where
we take our angst seriously"), and desire for exploration ("He talks to me like an
equal, an adult, an intelligent person who doesn't have to go to school or be home
by eleven or check her blood sugar every three hours"). Hautman's conclusion is a
little muddy, since there's little reason given why Lucy's near-fatal ketoacidosis
should precipitate her radical change of attitude, but there's enough attitude that
readers won't care; this is still an absorbing account of a young woman's angry
romance with the dark side. DS
450 
* THE BULLETIN
HAYDEN, TOREY 
The Very Worst Thing. HarperCollins, 2003 
169p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029812-X 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029792-1 
$15.99 
R Gr. 4-6
After years in foster care, David has a lot of entries on his mental list of Very
Worst Things, and his new placement is providing plenty of opportunities for the
list to expand: they've moved him back to fifth grade from sixth, the bullies in the
class tease him about his stutter and push him around, and he can't seem to make
any friends. In an after-school rage in the woods one day, he destroys an owl's nest
but repents in time to save one of the eggs; after he grudgingly shows the egg to
Madeleine, a classmate (on whose family's land the nest was located), the two
determine to incubate the egg and raise the chick. Madeleine-who insists David
call her Mab-is also a class outcast (she's been skipped forward two grades), and
the two develop a tentative friendship over the hatching egg and then the growing
owl, who's sheltered in Mab's family barn. Increasing trouble at school makes
David cling even harder to his beloved owl, whom they've named King Arthur,
and when it seems to be time to get King Arthur ready for a return to the wild,
David refuses to let go of his Very Best Thing. Some of the elements here are
familiar from other books involving foster children or the raising of wild animals,
but Hayden writes with an understated confidentiality, showing more than tell-
ing, that breathes new life into old themes. She's particularly adept at quietly
conveying the authentic paucity of David's skills, both in academics and in social
situations, and his growing and novel pleasure in his competence with animals at
Mab's farm. The book also wisely resists sugarcoating its conclusion (while David
does settle into his foster home, his refusal to release King Arthur results in the
bird's death), retaining its understanding of painful truths until the end. With its
sympathetic insight and straightforward writing, this will also suit some advanced
primary-grades readers, but it's got sufficient tension and appeal to keep older
readers (and perhaps listeners to a chapter-by-chapter readaloud) absorbed. DS
HOLM, JENNIFER L. 
The Creek. HarperCollins, 2003 
232p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-000134-8 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-000133-X 
$15.99 
R Gr. 7-10
From the moment the red Trans Am prowls through her quiet suburban neigh-
borhood, heralding the return to the neighborhood of notorious local thug Caleb
Devlin, Penny Carson's carefree childhood takes a sinister turn. As pets begin to
disappear and Zachary, the neighborhood misfit, apparently gets beaten up, par-
ents blame Caleb and forbid the children from playing in the woods behind the
house. The situation escalates to a dangerous fire and the murder of a small child,
all of which is attributed to Caleb. By now, however, Penny has good reason to
suspect that someone else is behind the crimes, but no one will believe her. Afraid
to present her evidence, she resorts to some sleuthing on her own, revealing the
real murderer. Rather than learning from their erroneous assumption, the adults
remain true to form, unfairly shifting the blame for all of the events to the new
neighborhood villain, thus demonstrating the enduring and destructive power of
scapegoating. Though the main character-a spunky prepubescent girl with only
boy companions-has become something of a signature for Holm, this explora-
tion of the dark margins of suburbia marks a quite successful departure from her
previous fare. A peripheral but interesting feature of the book is her deft handling
of Penny's first stirrings of puberty; at first sweetly marked by a tentative kiss from
JULY/AUGUST 2003 
* 451
one of her male friends, the experience turns acidic through a near-rape by Devlin,
and Holm doesn't shy away from taking her main character briefly into a dark
night that acknowledges the edgy pleasures of being sexy and mean. The book is
chock-full of creepy moments, genuine tragedy, and sinister secrets, some of which
remain even after the mystery is solved. It's a good thing the plot moves quickly,
because this one is hard to put down. KC
HORVATH, POLLY 
The Canning Season. 
Farrar, 2003 
195p
ISBN 0-374-39956-5 
$16.00 
R Gr. 7-12
Ratchet's mother, Henriette, has never been that interested in her daughter, but
it's still a surprise when Henriette out of the blue sends Ratchet off to Maine for a
summer with elderly relatives, Tilly and Penpen Menuto. Contentedly set in their
eccentric and isolated ways, the old sisters don't have much idea of what to do with
their acquired thirteen-year-old, so Ratchet mainly finds herself being the audi-
ence for detailed stories of strange events in the sisters' history. Soon fourteen-
year-old Harper joins the entourage when her mother, or foster mother, leaves
Harper after mistaking the Menuto house for the nearby orphanage, and the two
young teenagers and the two venerable sisters form a strange but solid household.
Fans of Horvath (author of Everything on a Waffle, BCCB 3/01, The Trolls, 2/99,
etc.) will recognize some familiar themes: the constant storytelling, the sometimes
unbreachable distance between people who should be close, the affectionate ec-
centricity. The eccentricity is key here: the book, like Tilly and Pen themselves,
has basically created its own world, with reality occasionally receiving polite atten-
tion, but no so much as to encourage it to become overconfident; this is rather a
Carrollian Wonderland of abrupt appearances, strange characters, and random
logic, but one carrying within it desperately important stories of abandonment
and of human connection. Amid the narrative's constant wry humor is a lurking
darkness, apparent in Tilly's and Penpen's mother's violent suicide, the foul-
mouthed, nasty governess of their youth, the marauding, occasionally man-eating
bears, the mysterious growth that Ratchet bears as an excuse for (and sign of) her
mother's rejection. The interpolated stories make the narrative somewhat ram-
bling, but Horvath is balancing her very specific tale of one summer's events with
its years of causes and its years of effects (the book concludes with a chapter de-
scribing Harper's and Ratchet's adult lives). Ultimately, there's a valid message
about the challenge everyone faces in making sense out of all the disorganized
currents of existence: "It was if they had all made a promise to come into this life
bringing with them all their own information, as if where they had been, what they
needed, what they knew, all their stories, was fission, creating critical mass, so that,
at one point, she would glean a small nugget of understanding." DS
HURD, THACHER 
Moo Cow Kaboom!; written and illus. by Thacher
Hurd. 
HarperCollins, 2003 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-050502-8 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-050501-X 
$15.99 
R 4-6 yrs
Hurd's splashy colors and sprint-to-the-finish text will compel busy librarians to
grab this just as their preschoolers settle down (euphemistically speaking) for a
picture-book program. In folkloric terms, its Hero makes a Journey, overcomes
Difficulties, and returns Home. More specifically, the hero is a cow, the journey is
to outer space, and the difficulties involve Planet 246, where aliens are holding an
452 
* THE BULLETIN
intergalactic rodeo featuring "Bucking Zonkos." Moo Cow refuses to cooperate,
invoking wrath and much whacking with hats: "LAZY, USELESS, UNCOOP-
ERATIVE, UNINTELLIGENT EARTHLING MOO COW!" Moo Cow then
elects to whirl, twirl, dance, prance, bounce, boogie, and buck, whereupon the
freaked-out aliens blast her back home in a flying saucer ("Beep Beep!... Thunk!
. .. SHA-ZOOM!!!") past the moon to the pigs and chickens on her very own
farm, which look suspiciously like the zigs and zickens on Planet 246. Think red,
pink, yellow, orange, brown, green, blue, gray, black, white, and you will still have
left out various elements of the color spectrum speeding through and exploding off
these pages. Then plan to calm the group down with a sedate reading of Leaf and
Lawson's classic Ferdinand, followed, possibly, by an uplifting rendition of Cronin
and Lewin's Click, Clack, Moo (BCCB 9/00) BH
HURST, CAROL OTIS 
The Wrong One. 
Lorraine/Houghton, 2003 
156 p
ISBN 0-618-27599-1 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
When Ruth Spencer and her children move into their down-at-the-heels new house,
the youngest child, Korean adoptee Sookan, is terrified; shouting "Ee-guh Aniya"
every time she nears her room, she's unable to clearly convey the exact nature of
her distress. The youngster is assigned a new room, and older sister Kate eventu-
ally figures out that the little girl is troubled by "the wrong one." After a visit from
Agatha Paran, an older woman who claims to have lived in the house as a child,
Sookan determinedly leads her siblings on a basement-to-attic quest for "Pah-rahn
Agassi," the blue lady. They uncover a few marketable antiques that help their
cash-strapped mother meet the bills and then hit the motherlode with a William
and Mary doll, precious enough to secure their financial future. The doll appraiser
turns out to be none other than Agatha Paran, who pays them off and then myste-
riously disappears. They suddenly note the linguistic similarity between Pah-rahn
Agassi and Agatha Paran and, well, that's pretty much that. Hurst pumps a lot of
atmosphere into the shabby house and convincing frustration into Sookan's at-
tempts to communicate her supernatural knowledge, but lack of detail regarding
Agatha Paran, her true relationship to the house, Sookan's sensitivity, and the eerie
blue light that has something to do with the blue lady leads to a vague chill rather
than a bone-wracking shiver. Still, for younger readers dipping their toes cau-
tiously into ghostly dramas, this could elicit just the right "Oooh!" EB
KARR, KATHLEEN 
The 7th Knot. 
Cavendish, 2003 
[192p] 
illus. with pho-
tographs
ISBN 0-7614-5135-8 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Brothers Wick and Miles Forrester, each unruly and incorrigible in his own way,
are consigned to the care of obscenely rich Uncle Eustace, a robber baron bent on
amassing an art collection to out-Rockefeller Rockefeller. The teens have little
initial interest in trailing the Old Masters throughout Europe in the company of
their crusty relative, but Albrecht Diirer piques their interest, and soon they escape
onto their own private mission to locate his long missing "Knot" series. Their
quest entangles them with the nefarious Diirerbund (a quasi-nationalist organiza-
tion, fictionalized here to suit the 1890s setting), Graf Otto von Klein's fleet of
world-threatening airships, and Uncle Eustace's valet Jose Gregorio, who's actu-
ally an art scholar and agent for the British and French governments. It takes
JULY/AUGUST 2003 
* 
453
awhile to get the plot well off the ground, and too often repartee between siblings
substitutes for action. While this doesn't boast the tight pacing of Karr's phreno-
logical adventure titles (Skullduggery, BCCB 4/00; Bone Dry, BCCB 10/02), a
chase through Neuschwanstein and an escape in a dirigible provide their own plea-
sures, and kids who appreciate the historical/comic book exploits of Indiana Jones
and his ilk should give it a go. EB
KOERTGE, RON 
Shakespeare Bats Cleanup. Candlewick, 2003 
116p
ISBN 0-7636-2116-1 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Banished from the ballfield and confined to quarters with a severe case of mono,
Kevin Boland is so desperately bored that he swipes his dad's book on how to write
poetry and versifies just for something to do. As he putters among various forms,
from haiku and rhymed couplets to pantoum and sestina, he begins to realize a few
truths about poetry and himself. First, he's better at this writing thing than he
thought he would be. Second, he can say some things in the privacy of his note-
book that he'd never admit aloud: like how much he mourns his deceased mom,
and how his girlfriend has been little more than a passing physical pleasure. Third,
maybe baseball and poetry can peacefully coexist; after all, they both rely on rules,
or there's no game. His efforts are, realistically, a mixed bag of strained blundering
and swift, stunning insights, and his comments on struggling with his newfound
craft are often quite witty: "So I re-visioned that sonnet. I didn't/ change much,
but I did remember how/ when I was looking for rhymes I was like/ some guy
pawing through his sock drawer/ for a pair that matched." Kevin's collected works
reach well beyond introspective meandering; they actually add up to a concrete
plot which follows Kevin through weakness and recovery, back onto the ballfield,
where he now "rides the pine" with the bench warmers he formerly pitied; into the
heat of a new romance with a girl he respects as much as likes; and just possibly up
to an open mike at a poetry reading. Koertge sturdily spans the intimidating
literary/sports divide, and teen eggheads and athletes alike are invited to cross the
bridge. EB
LASKY, KATHRYN 
Lucille Camps In; illus. by Marylin Hafner. 
Knopf, 2003 
28p
Library ed. ISBN 0-517-80042-X 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-80041-1 
$14.95 
R 3-6 yrs
It's just not fair that piglet Lucille has to stay home while Dad takes her older
brother and sister camping. Lucille stomps, cries, and sulks, but then, while she
takes a nap, she dreams up a wonderful idea. With her mom's help, Lucille turns
their living room into a campground, complete with a tent, sleeping bags, and
marshmallows roasted in the fireplace. She and her mom watch the moon and
stars out the window before snuggling off to sleep. The story makes a fine readal-
oud for younger children, and the text is simple enough for beginning readers.
Pen and ink illustrations with full-color watercolor washes keep the reader on track
with homey details and expressive emotions, especially where Lucille is concerned.
Character is particularly well-drawn here; Lucille's tantrum and sullenness, the
older siblings' thoughtlessly cruel gloating, and the mother's attempts to distract
her daughter all have the ring of truth to them. Lucille's own solution to her
problem is creative and plausible enough to inspire young readers to go and do
likewise. KC
454 
* 
THE BULLETIN
LJUNGKVIST, LAURA, ad. 
Snow White and the Seven Dwarf; ad. and illus. by Laura
Ljungkvist. 
Abrams, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-8109-4241-0 
$14.95 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
Snow White falls prey to her wicked stepmother once again in a simplified adapta-
tion of the traditional tale. In this version the Queen, Snow White's stepmother,
is not a witch, just a vain woman with a magic mirror and a homicidal bent. The
Queen orders Snow White taken to the woods and left to the wild animals, and,
when that fails, the Queen herself poisons an apple and leaves it by her stepdaughter's
breakfast plate. Discovering that Snow White lives and is going to marry Prince
Sunray ("His skin was the hue of the blue sky on the morning he was born, and his
hair the color of the sun"), the Queen "became so enraged she ran into the forest to
find and stop them. All she found however were the wild beasts, and she was never
seen or heard from again." The pedestrian language is repetitive and sterile, and
the awkward flow of the text makes this difficult to read aloud. There is a techno-
perkiness to the computer-generated look of the gouache illustrations, however,
that draws the eye; the art is designerly, with geometric shapes strongly reminis-
cent of Colorforms. The colors are opaque and the palette retro; a single line,
similar to the unbreaking line of an Etch-a-Sketch, runs in the foreground through-
out the illustrations, forming objects in the compositions that free-float on the
pages. Ljungkvist's note explains her process ("I read a number of versions that I
found on-line and in books. The original story is very long, so I chose to keep only
those elements that were crucial to the plot"), although no specific sources are
given. While this retelling lacks the dark lyricism of Paul Heins' or the exquisite
tone of Randall Jarrell's, those seeking a faster version with lighter baggage may
find this fits the bill. JMD
MEAD, ALICE 
Year ofNo Rain. Farrar, 2003 
130p
ISBN 0-374-37288-8 
$16.00 
R Gr. 4-7
In her latest account of children in harm's way, Mead turns her attention to the
ongoing civil war in Sudan, unfolding the story ofyoung Stephen Majok. Stephen
lives in a typical Southern Sudanese village, where inhabitants face everyday chores
while enduring constant threat of invasion from both Northern soldiers and South-
ern rebels. When the Red Cross makes a food drop nearby, soldiers move in, kill-
ing Stephen's mother and kidnapping his older sister, Naomi. Because Stephen
and the other boys of the village had been sent into hiding to avoid being pressed
into service, they escape, but they find they have no idea where to go or what to do.
Acting mostly on rumors, they resolve to travel to one of the refugee camps on
Sudan's borders, but they have little sense of which camp will welcome them.
After facing hunger, thirst, and malaria in their travels, they finally decide that, for
better or worse, they should go home. Stephen is an endearing, warmhearted boy
who is committed, as his mother wishes, to pursuing an education so that he can
become a teacher. His books comfort him as he travels, and he uses his skills to
comfort the other children by teaching them the alphabet as they go. The pathos
of a young boy who fiercely desires nothing more than to go home, even when that
home is an abandoned hut in a devastated village, may seem unaccountable to
adventure-attuned Western readers, but the young boys' constant bickering, as
well as their loyalty to each other, will be sufficiently recognizable. Readers will get
a strong sense of what these boys value, making this a nicely textured addition to a
JULY/AUGUST 2003 
* 455
social-studies curriculum on the plight of children during wartime. A map of the
area and a factual introduction to the civil war open the book. KC
MURRAY, JAYE 
Bottled Up. 
Dial, 2003 
[22 4 p]
ISBN 0-8037-2897-2 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Pip has been fairly comfortable with his misery, sleepwalking stoned through high
school, gritting his teeth in the face of his dad's alcoholic rages, and acting as the
parent to Mikey, his six-year-old brother, so he's resentful at his principal's insis-
tence that he either attend counseling or face expulsion. It's hard for him to give
up the comparative peace of life sponging off of his dealer friends and burying his
distress in pot and booze, and it's harder still to face the frightening realities of his
existence, especially the fact that Mikey is starting to emulate his adored older
brother's disaffected and self-destructive ways. The terse style is effective, and
there's real insight into the viewpoint of a kid who's so locked into his unhappiness
that he can't comprehend any solution beyond cutting himself off from his feel-
ings. The book is also authentic in its depiction of a family stuck in silence mode,
treating the dangerous behavior of the adults as if it were an everyday thing, even
as the children are increasingly blamed for whatever goes wrong. Unfortunately,
the heavy hand of prescription is too evident in much of the events, and the ex-
pression of Pip's inner thoughts sometimes turns from tautly styled to corny and
cliched, tilting the book towards old-fashioned made-for-TV problem drama. That
makes it a more melodramatic reading pleasure, but that's just what some readers
are looking for, so Pip's struggle with his dark side may be just their cup of temper-
ance beverage. DS
MYERS, WALTER DEAN 
The Dream Bearer. Amistad/HarperCollins,
2003 
180p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029522-8 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029521-X 
$15.99 
R* Gr. 6-10
David's home life is tense: his mother is struggling to get an empty Harlem build-
ing made into a homeless shelter; his father, who's on medication that minimizes
his psychological problems but doesn't really control his flashes of rage, has been
hired by the building's owner in an attempt to make its purchase more difficult.
Now David's brother, Ty, is starting to spend a whole lot of time on the streets,
and his family fears he may be selling drugs. Twelve-year-old David is keeping to
the straight and narrow, doing well in school, hanging out with friends, and wish-
ing his mother's life could become easier, when he meets Mr. Moses, an old man
in the park who declares himself to be a "dream bearer," and whose stories of
struggle fascinate David even as they unsettle him ("There was something real
about the dream that I didn't know how to explain but that I could feel"). Myers
deftly captures not only a boy's growing understanding but also his increasing
awareness of the limits of his-and everybody's-understanding ("But now the
need to understand everything was creeping up on me. People who at one time
were just around now needed to be fitted together into a picture that kept chang-
ing as I tried to bring the pieces together"). The figure of the dream bearer re-
mains credible as an old guy in the park talking about the past even as his
self-description and David's reaction gives him a more mystical significance. Ulti-
mately the novel is most memorable for David's decision to reach out to his troubled
456 
* 
THE BULLETIN
father while he still can, thereby choosing a different path than Ty (whose fate the
novel leaves inconclusive). Throughout his nuanced examination of this unhappy
family, Myers retains his usual gentle, plainspoken accessibility, making this a
thoughtful book that will reach many young readers. DS
NAPOLI, DONNA Jo 
The Great GodPan. Lamb/Random House, 2003 
14 9 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90120-8 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-32777-3 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
The goat god Pan is caught between his animal and divine natures. He is attracted
to humans yet despised by them for his duality; he is loved by the gods, but as a
favorite pet rather than as an equal. A meeting with Iphigenia, believed to be the
daughter of King Agamemnon and Queen Clytemnestra (actually daughter of
Theseus and Helen, soon to be of Troy), results in Pan's losing his heart to the
doomed young woman and leads, eventually, to his final sacrifice. Napoli explores
the character of Pan through his life's journey, including his incestuous concep-
tion, his search for meaning in immortality, his desire for the love and approval of
his father, Hermes, and his musical duel with Apollo. Throughout it all Napoli
downplays the lustful nature of the god, making him more misunderstood than
rapacious, especially in his love for Iphigenia. Napoli is well-versed in traditional
myths and fairy tale characters, and she is often expert at the reinvention of their
motivations (The Magic Circle, BCCB 4/93; Zel, 7/96, etc.). Unfortunately, the
goat-god's responses are based on thinly drawn characterization, and his final self-
less act (he takes the place of the sacrificial Iphigenia) has limited impact. Still,
Napoli delves through layers of ancient legend to nourish this re-imagining. Readers
familiar with classical myth will enjoy picking out the bits and pieces that Napoli
exploits here, and they may even be inspired to do some delving of their own.
JMD
NELSON, THERESA 
Ruby Electric. Jackson/Atheneum, 2003 
28 4 p
ISBN 0-689-83852-2 
$16.95 
R Gr. 4-7
Ruby Miller thinks in screenplays, turning the mundane conditions of her life into
elaborate productions of agitated melodrama. Most often, she turns her fertile
imagination to her father, absent these past five years without explanation, which
must mean, of course, that he is involved in some top-secret operation. Mean-
while, her life is plagued by the amorous attentions of Big Skinny, her absorption
in writing a script inadvertently results in the tragic loss of her little brother's
comfort puppet, and her mother is becoming alarmingly close to her boss. The
young girl who romanticizes her absent father and is disillusioned when she finally
meets him is no doubt a standard character, but what makes this story worth stay-
ing through the credits is Ruby's crackling energy throughout. When the besotted
Big Skinny hopefully sprays some bad love poetry on the concrete wall of the LA
River across from her house, she realizes that something has to be done, and a
series of events leads her to the idea of painting a mural over the offending text.
Her speech to introduce her idea to the civic officials may elicit some unexpected
laughter (she finds nothing funny about "neighborhoods panting for the pictur-
esque like river rats in a drought"), but it carries the day. The comic relief pro-
vided by Big Skinny and his friend Mouse adds to the book's charm; through their
surprising commitment to the mural project, Ruby is forced to reappraise her as-
sessment of them as the "seventh grade version of Dumb and Dumber." Readers
JULY/AUGUST 2003 
* 457
will delight in Ruby's sardonic wit and her way with words both in the interstitial
screenplays and in her internal dialogue; many will want to buy a ticket for this
one. KC
ORMEROD, JAN, ad. 
If You're Happy and You Know It!; illus. by Lindsey
Gardiner. 
Star Bright Books, 2003 
26p
Trade ed. ISBN 1-932065-07-5 
$15.95
Paper ed. ISBN 1-932065-10-5 
$5.95 
R 4-6 yrs
In this lively take-off on a storytime favorite, a little girl sings the titular ditty,
clapping her hands with abandon. She is interrupted, however: "'No, no, no,'
said the small brown dog. 'If you're happy and you know it,/ wave your tail -
swirl, twirl!/ If you're happy and you know it,/ whisk your tail around to show it./
If you're happy and you know it,/ wag your tail!'" The dog is, in turn, gently
taken to task by a blue-striped elephant with a "rather insignificant" tail, who flaps
his ears instead. The elephant is taken to task by the crocodile (with no ears to
speak of) who snaps his teeth. Each new verse elicits a counter-verse from a listen-
ing animal who offers an action specific to its physiognomy or abilities, until fi-
nally the little girl says, "So when I'm happy ... I can do my own thing!" The
scansion is sometimes forced and the illustrations are occasionally more perky than
substantive, but Ormerod's merry mayhem may be just the thing for active listen-
ers longing to do a little chest beating a la the story's gorilla. The mixed-media art
has a cartoony insouciance that keeps the images from tipping too far into cutesy;
the sherbet-colored palette is cheery, the touches of collage add a circus-like jollity,
and the drafting (lots of motion lines and squiggles) enhances the already frenetic
energy of the text. Preschoolers (and energetic storytime givers) are going to hap-
pily clap, thump, and screech their way through this rowdy retelling. JMD
PAYE, WON-LDY, ad. 
Mrs. Chicken and the Hungry Crocodile; ad. by Won-Ldy
Paye and Margaret H. Lippert; illus. by Julie Paschkis. 
Holt, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-7047-8 
$16.95 
R 5-8yrs
Paye and Lippert (retellers of Head, Body, Legs: A Story from Liberia, BCCB 5/02)
here offer another traditional story from the Dan people of Liberia. Mrs. Chicken
is very taken with her reflection in a puddle ("'Cluck, cluck,' she said proudly.
'What a pretty chicken I am!'"), so much so that she walks to the river so she can
see her wings in a larger reflection. In the river, "Crocodile lay very still and
waited. 'Yum, yum,' she thought. 'That's my dinner.'" When Crocodile catches
Mrs. Chicken, the vain but canny hen declares that Crocodile shouldn't eat her
because "I'm your SISTER." Crocodile takes a bit of convincing (Mrs. Chicken
exchanges her eggs for Crocodile's eggs and claims the resulting family resem-
blance of the switched hatchlings are proof of sisterhood), but in the end Mrs.
Chicken and her chicks get safely home. "Since that day, Mrs. Chicken and her
children have never gone near the river, and they always take their baths in puddles.
'Big enough for us,' Mrs. Chicken tells her children. 'And MUCH too small for
crocodiles!'" The retelling is lively and dramatic, and the pithy dialogue provides
numerous opportunities for hamming it up and acting it out. Paschkis' gouache
illustrations have a folk-art clarity that makes them optimum for group viewing;
fluid lines and subtle patterns (the crocodile's skin is a muted green check) add
variety to the high-contrast shapes in their green-gold palette. This is sure to
458 
* THE BULLETIN
become a readaloud and storytelling favorite. A brief note credits Paye's grand-
mother as his source for the tale. JMD
PRATCHETT, TERRY 
The Wee Free Men. 
HarperCollins, 2003 
263p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-001237-4 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-001236-6 
$16.99 
R Gr. 6-10
Tiffany, age nine, has only recently decided she wants to be witch, but apparently
her career decision comes just in time: her world is colliding with the "land of
dreams come true." Luckily for Tiffany she has some unexpected help: the Nac
Mac Feegle, the Wee Free Men of the title, are bound and determined to help the
aspiring witchlet keep the Queen of the Elves and the nightmares that follow her
at bay. The Nac Mac Feegle are pictsies (not pixies), who are covered with blue
tattoos and half-naked but for kilts, and whose talents run to fighting, drinking,
thieving, and magic of a most practical sort. Their plans are complicated when
Tiffany's younger brother, Wentworth, is kidnapped by the Queen and spirited
across the border between the worlds. Tiffany (armed with a cast iron frying pan)
and the Feegles (armed with the battle cry "Nae King! Nae Quin! Nae laird! Nae
master! We willna be fooled again!") embark on a rescue. In the course of said
rescue Tiffany retrieves her brother, saves a baron's long lost son, and slams the
door between the worlds with such ferocity that it will stay shut for a long time.
Pratchett invites readers into his well-established realm of Discworld where action,
magic, and characters are firmly rooted in literary reality. Humor ripples through-
out, making tense, dangerous moments stand out in stark contrast. This fast-
paced adventure, with its exasperatingly mischievous characters, will be an easy
booktalk. Just read the part where Tiffany whacks a Jenny Green-Teeth with the
back of that cast-iron frying pan after using Wentworth for bait ... JMD
PRIESTLEY, CHRIS 
Death and the Arrow; written and illus. by Chris
Priestley. 
Knopf, 2003 
161p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-92466-3 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-82466-9 
$15.95 
R Gr. 5-8
Reports of murder in the streets of 1715 London are nothing unusual, but when
the weapon seems to be a "Mohock" arrow and the murderer forewarns his victims
with a calling card that features a skeleton with an arrow, the sensational case
rattles even the most jaded urbanites. Fifteen-year-old printer's apprentice Tom
Marlowe is drawn into the investigation when his closest friend Will, a good-
natured pickpocket, is killed and it appears he was, against all reason, employed by
the villain himself. Priestley spins a classic closed-room mystery (in this case, a
cosed courtyard), with its genesis across the Atlantic in a tangle of French/Indian/
British atrocities, its action played out on treacherous London rooftops and within
the walls of Newgate, and its chilling climax at the "frost fair" on the frozen Thames.
A cast of Hogarthian extras keeps the atmosphere thick and the plot boiling, and
readers who like their mayhem spiked with slimy cobblestones, blind alleys, and
bloody vengeance should speed right through. EB
PROSE, FRANCINE 
After. 
Coter/HarperCollins, 2003 
330p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-008082-5 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-008081-7 
$16.99 
R Gr. 7-10
A fatal shooting at nearby Pleasant Valley High School has sent Central High into
JULY/AUGUST 2003 
* 
459
a state of heightened alert, and clinical psychologist Dr. Willner has come on board
to establish and implement a new security plan. At first Tom Bishop and most of
his classmates are, at worst, annoyed by metal detectors and mandatory school
assemblies; only kids like stoner Silas with something to hide are truly upset.
However, as Willner draws tightened reins into a stranglehold over the school,
protests begin to mount and the protesters, from academic stars to teaching staff,
begin to disappear. A steady stream of email to school parents assures them that
everything is done in the students' best interest, and even when kids are pulled
from school and sent off to rehabilitation camps, the brainwashed parents are con-
vinced that no measure is too drastic to ensure the safety of Central High. Tom is
finally able to convince his father, who has largely ignored Willner's emails, to take
the situation seriously, and when they discover that Pleasant Valley has now been
vacated and closed and all its students gone missing, they manage to flee before
Tom becomes another of Willner's victims. Prose leaves some substantial holes
gaping in her plot-particularly the nature of the email brainwashing and the total
disappearance of a student body that's been much in the national news. Readers
who squander their time probing these shortcomings, however, will miss a whole
boatload of X-Files-styled, paranoiac thrills. Dr. Willner will be floating through
many a teen nightmare. EB
REGAN, DIAN CURTIS 
Chance; illus. by Dee Huxley. 
Philomel, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-399-23592-2 
$15.99 
R 
5-8 yrs
Baby Chance is tired of his father's bad guitar playing, the dog's slobber, and his
mother's two-baths-a-day regime, so he picks up his blankey, horsey, and rattle
and leaves home. His travels take him to a bear's den, a monkey house at the zoo,
a sea lions' rock at the beach, and a cave in the desert. The animals teach the baby
new skills, but he eventually tires of each of the various lifestyles until finally, on
his very first birthday, he goes home to the mother and father (and even the dog)
he has come to miss. Chance's narrative voice has the tongue-in-cheek tone of a
tall tale, from the opening story of his naming ("Ma'd told Pa, 'Gonna chance
weedin' marigolds and hope this baby don't pick today to be born.' But I did. So
... Pa named me Chance") to the subsequent meanderings of a newborn gone off
to seek his fortune. The countrified text sometimes bogs down in its own wordi-
ness and the conceit spins out so long it becomes a mite tenuous, but the humor
holds it together. Full-spread pastel and colored pencil compositions allow for the
effective sweep of sky and terrain, and the various animals have the comforting
look of soft stuffed toys. Baby Chance swaggers across the pages, the central focus
of the compositions, in luminous white footsie pajamas that retain their glow
throughout the baby's exploits. Primary graders will appreciate Chance's parting
wisdom that, despite bugs and baths, there's no place like home. JMD
REICHE, DIETLOF 
I, Freddy: Book One in the Golden Hamster Saga; tr. from the
German by John Brownjohn; illus. by Joe Cepeda. 
Scholastic, 2003 
201p
ISBN 0-439-28356-6 
$16.95 
R Gr. 3-5
Freddy, the narrator of this humorous jaunt, is a Mesocricetus auratus, or golden
hamster. After determining that life in a pet-shop cage isn't for him, he makes sure
he is the chosen hamster when Sophie's loving father seeks a gift for his daughter.
Although pleased with his new home and new owner (Freddy reiterates that five-
year-old Sophie is "a girl in a million"), clever Freddy has ambitions other than
460 
* 
THE BULLETIN
eating himself into a stupor and running in circles on a wheel. He wants to learn
to read, and, once that is accomplished, he wants to read whatever he can get his
paws on. The driving premise here is somewhat hackneyed and the plotting gets a
bit extreme, but Freddy has a superior, smart-alecky tone that is funny enough to
carry the events of his days. Just as Dick King-Smith does in his domestic animal
fantasies (such as the similarly themed TheJenius), Reiche makes even the most
mundane events humorous from the hamster's point of view; younger children
may well appreciate Freddy's literary epiphany and even find it inspires them to try
their hand at autobiography. Hey, if a hamster can do it... JMD
RITTER, JOHN H. 
The Boy Who Saved Baseball. Philomel, 2003 
216p
ISBN 0-399-23622-8 
$17.99 
R Gr. 5-8
Dillontown, California is dying, and its best hope seems to be flooding the Lucky
Strike baseball field into a lake and doing a deal with an upscale housing developer.
The major landowner is, however, amenable to giving the town a last chance be-
fore selling out; if the local kids can beat their long-standing rivals, the baseball
diamond is saved and the developers are history. The town's summer baseball
camp gets a big boost from the mysterious arrival of Cruz de la Cruz, a boy who
rides into town on horseback on opening day, charmed by the field, the players,
and the prospect of meeting the town recluse, Dante Del Gato, a former hitting
phenom who took to the hills after leaving his San Diego Padres teammates in the
lurch at the 1984 World Series. Cruz is convinced Del Gato knows the secret of
perfect hitting, and the boy, who has a theory of his own, talks the ex-pro into
coaching the team. Ritter taps into literary and cinematic conventions ranging
from the classic western, to the eerie mystery, to the Cinderella sports season, and
spices it all with a dash of humor that cues kids not to take this all too seriously.
Even the blatant improbabilities (the players spend a day cobbling together a so-
phisticated computer/GPS program to drill their hitting) have their charm, and
the plot sprints nimbly to its foregone happy ending. While this is a far cry from
Ritter's more serious and probing Choosing Up Sides (BCCB 6/98), it's likely to be
an amiable, offbeat crowd pleaser. EB
ROBERTS, DIANE 
Made You Look. 
Delacorte, 2003 
150p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90119-4 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-72979-0 
$15.95 
R Gr. 4-6
Jason is over the moon at the news that his family will be traveling to California for
their vacation; he sees the trip as a chance to try out for the high-energy TV game
show Masquerade Mania, to say nothing of the fact that he will be flying in a plane
for the first time and doing something that his archenemy, the wealthy Amberson
Anderson, can't begin to copy. His parents have different ideas of fun and adven-
ture, however, and they decide that instead of flying, they will camp across coun-
try. Worse, they'll be using the dreaded "Camp'otel," a strange contraption that
fits on top of their SUV. No matter-Jason is willing to put up with anything to
achieve his goal. His best friend Freddy, who joins them on the trip, acts as his
manager, drilling Jason constantly on quiz-show-appropriate trivia. Following a
series of tragicomic mishaps, Jason does in fact end up a contestant on Masquerade
Mania, where he meets with even more surprises. Though the up-to-the-minute
details may date the book rather quickly, the story is as high-energy as the game
show itself, punctuated with witty details of the everyday life of junior-high boys
JULY/AUGUST 2003 
* 461
and topped off with a highly satisfying, wish-fulfilling conclusion. There are no
deep messages or life lessons here-just light-hearted summer reading fun. KC
RYLANT, CYNTHIA 
God Went to Beauty School. HarperTempest, 2003 
[64p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-009434-6 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-009433-8 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 7-12
Kids who feel down home with God are going to love this book. Rylant has
loosened up with the Lord and shared some of His everyday activities in twenty-
two page-and-a-half poems, plus one more complex ten-pager. It's all free-verse
storytelling: "God Bought a Couch," "God Made Spaghetti," "God Took a Bath,"
"God Went Rollerblading," "God Saw a Movie," "God Got Cable"-you get the
picture. Despite the relaxed tone and easy sense of humor, Rylant keeps her short
(predominantly dimeter) lines tight, her words selective, and her meanings sur-
prising yet accessible. When "God Caught a Cold," he found that "it's hard to/
thunder/ 'THOU SHALT NOT!'/ when it comes out/ 'THOU SHALT DOT!'/ No-
body takes Him/ seriously." "God Went to India" to visit some elephants, his
favorite creation because "They love their children,/ they don't kill,/ they mourn
their dead./ ... Elephants visit the graves/ of those they loved./ They spend hours
there./ They fondle the dry bones./ They mourn./ God understands mourning/
better than any other emotion,/ better even than love./ Because He has lost/ every-
thing He has/ ever made./ You make life, you make death." It's a smooth transi-
tion to the next poem, which deals with the sacrificial death of God as a human on
earth and subsequently His everlasting life. This is the kind of thematic juxtaposi-
tion typical in Rylant's shaping of the collection into a cohesive narrative, bound
by associative references throughout. Tonally speaking, here's Julius Lester's What
a Truly Cool World (BCCB 2/99) all grown up into an appealing poetry book for
teenagers. BH
SAYRE, APRIL PULLEY 
One Is a Snail, Ten Is a Crab: A Counting by Feet Book; by
April Pulley Sayre and JeffSayre; illus. by Randy Cecil. 
Candlewick, 2003 
34p
ISBN 0-7636-1406-8 
$15.99 
R* 
3-6 yrs
The countable feet to which the subtitle refers are not linear but anatomical. All
these feet are enjoying a day at the beach, hanging out in groups that simply beg
for enumeration. Sayre gets right to the point: "1 is a snail," and a purple mollusk
propels his way across the sand, while an arrow and a parenthetical "This is a
snail's foot" point out the relevant appendage. For "2 is a person," a bathing-
trunked boy bends over to inspect his own tootsies, while arrows again point to
obvious body parts. After 4 (dog feet), the arrows disappear and viewers are on
their own, as human, dog, insect, arachnid, and crab feet make up even numbers
to ten, and combine with the single snail foot to make odd-numbered groupings.
After ten, the numbering jumps to decades, ("50 is five crabs... or ten dogs and a
crab"). So what makes this offering different from your run-of-the mill counting
book? Quite simply, this provides little arithmeticians with something they'll ac-
tually get a kick out of counting. The entire cast sports the cuddly, affectionate
dopiness generally reserved for beloved stuffed animals and skillful cartooning. A
pindot-eyed hound sniffs a pindot-eyed snail (obviously, they make 5); the snail
glances with vague surprise at the grinning pindot-eyed insect hitching a ride on
his shell (yes, that's 7); crabs cavort in a conga line, and a hundred snails catch
462 
* THE BULLETIN
some rays on the closing spread. Colors are as bright as a new beach blanket, and
dense stippling lends a tactile dimension to broad sweeps of sand and sky back-
ground. All groupings are arranged for easy enumeration by kids not quite ready
to make the leap to intuitive multiplication. These are the most invitingly count-
able critters since Geisert's pigs. EB
SCHOTTER, RONI 
Captain Bob Takes Flight; illus. by Joe Cepeda. 
Schwartz/
Atheneum, 2003 
34 p
ISBN 0-689-83388-1 
$15.95 
R 3-6 yrs
The little captain has already discovered that make-believe is the key to coping
with cleanliness (Captain Bob Sets Sail, BCCB 9/00), and now he applies his fertile
imagination to the task of straightening his room. The Control Tower (Mom) has
commanded him to "Clear the runway!", and with a look of grim determination
(or is that a petulant scowl?) he packs his flight bag, boards his aircraft (a pillow-
lined cardboard crate) and swoops around the wide blue skies (okay, his bedroom)
dropping socks into drawers. Somewhere mid-flight the captain engages in heavy
woolgathering, which Cepeda craftily captures in topsy-turvy scenes that blend
elements of the fantasy flight with concrete, recognizable details of furniture and
playthings. By the time "a blast of southerly, strangely motherly wind" blows in to
summon Bob for lunch, the captain is ready with a good report and waiting for a
hug and kiss from the Control Tower. Skeptical viewers may question how that
room got clean when Bob was sitting in a box, and adults may need to regretfully
explain that daydreaming seldom affects housekeeping in so happy a fashion.
Nonetheless, Cepeda's airy world of "cloud cluttered skies," where a boy in a pack-
ing box tethered to a coatrack can float high above the rug, is an inviting place in
which to linger. EB
SEGAL, LORE 
Morris theArtist; illus. by Boris Kulikov. 
Foster/Farrar, 2003 32p
ISBN 0-374-35063-9 
$16.00 
R 
5-7 yrs
In a spiritual mix of Edward Lear and Edward Gorey, with painterly effects and
humorous proportions all his own, artist Kulikov has encompassed Segal's mis-
chievous text about an enfant terrible named Morris. This little nonconformist's
refrain, "I don't want to," is just as often met by his mother's response, "Yes you
do... NOW!" This particular dispute centers on the purchase of a gift for another
boy's birthday party, for which Morris does not wish to leave his painting. Spurn-
ing conventional suggestions of a ball, a dump truck, and some blocks, Morris
insists on selecting paints and then refuses to give them up at the party. As his
obstinacy grows, so does the box of paints, till he is unable to hold it and eat cake
or play with the other presents. Finally, Morris opens the box himself and leads
the others in a spree of unfettered artistry, crowned by painting the birthday boy's
knees with "the two yellowest suns that you will ever see." It's a great ending to the
party, but a little anticlimactic in terms of the story. Despite that letdown, this is
a rambunctious book well paced to the energy and interests of its audience. Segal's
witty insight into human behavior is characteristically understated: "How about a
ball?" asks Morris' mother. "I've got a ball," says Morris. "Morris, this is a present
for Benjamin," his mother reminds him. Kulikov's marble-eyed characters reflect
the same kind of humor as he plays with a visual balance between skillfully grounded
drafting and fantastical compositions in dominant tones of khaki and burnt or-
ange. Indeed, the strongest aspect of the book is his visual interpretation of the
story as art-on-art. BH
JULY/AUGUST 2003 
* 463
SILVERMAN, ERlCA, ad. 
When the Chickens Went On Strike: A Rosh Hashanah Tale;
illus. by Matthew Trueman. 
Dutton, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-525-46862-5 
$15.99 
R* 
5-8 yrs
"Customs come and customs go. I learned this from chickens." Such a combina-
tion of the cosmic and the commonplace typifies this appealingly absurd picture
book. The young narrator, who cannot refrain from making trouble even during
Rosh Hashanah services in his Russian-Jewish prayer house, is counting on Kapores
to purify him. This ceremony involves having a chicken waved around one's head
with a chanted accompaniment of prayers (the rite is gentled here from an earlier
tradition of killing a chicken on the Day of Atonement to expiate one's sins).
Unfortunately, the chickens are on strike, and they will not be captured by coax-
ing, force, or negotiation. "What if we compromise?" asks the rabbi's wife. "You
can use a turnip!" answers the rooster. Seeing that the villagers are about to force
the issue, the narrator warns the chickens to escape. Somehow he also manages to
behave better afterwards, which surprises his family and confounds predictions of
dire consequences ensuing from the loss of the cleansing ritual. Silverman's adap-
tation of Sholom Aleichem's story is resonantly worded for oral effect, and
Trueman's layered paintings have a smooth glaze over mottled colors that enriches
the fine-etched human figures as well as the highly expressive chickens (victorious
white-lined fowl even cavort across the hen-red endpapers). Hebrew lettering on
the picture of a book at the story's end has a double meaning: not only is this the
end of the story, but it's also the end of a custom challenged by child and chicken.
"Where is it written," queries one broody hen, that chickens are required for
Kapores? "Good question," thinks the narrator. An author's note describes both
the custom and the source. BH
STEPTOE, JAVAKA 
The Jones Family Express; written and illus. by Javaka
Steptoe. 
Lee & Low Books, 2003 
34p
ISBN 1-58430-047-7 
$17.95 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
Steven has been entranced with his traveling aunt ever since he was three, when he
tried to hide in her suitcase; since then, Aunt Carolyn has always sent him post-
cards from wherever she travels. Now Carolyn is coming home for the annual
block party, and Steven wants to get her a special present. He takes his $10.75
over to Nostrand Avenue ("You can buy almost anything there"), but despite his
best efforts, neither the drugstore nor Ms. Ruby's shop yields the gift he wants.
Help comes from an unlikely source-Steven's Uncle Charles, who is better known
for snitching pancakes than being helpful. Charles' apartment is full of junk, but
amongst the throwaway stuff Steven finds an old model locomotive, and, with a
little ingenuity, he transforms it into the Jones Family Express, complete with a
fresh coat of bright red paint and family photos in the windows. Aunt Carolyn is
touched, and gives a present in return: a postcard, "Good for one trip with Aunt
Carolyn." Steptoe (illustrator of In Daddy'sArms IAm Tall, BCCB 2/98) offers a
story based, according to the jacket flap, on incidents from his own life. The
family closeness and camaraderie are lovingly communicated, as are the family
foibles (Uncle Charles eats off other people's plates, Granddad has a secret barbe-
cue recipe everyone knows, etc.). Unfortunately, the meandering text sometimes
wanders too far afield, which makes the pace slow and the action clumsy. The
urban neighborhood is evoked not only through the story itself but also through
the cut-paper and mixed-media collage illustrations. Though the compositions
464 
* 
THE BULLETIN
are sometimes cluttered and faces occasionally stiff, the art is emotionally vibrant
and energetically rendered. Cross-curricular uses for this title could include retell-
ing family stories and compiling neighborhood lore, as well as seeing how much
information students can fit on a postcard. JMD
TAT, CHRIS 
How to Be a Kid; illus. by Jim Paillot. 
Sterling, 2003 
96p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-8069-8503-8 
$6.95 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Books purporting to side with kids against the enemy adults aren't unheard of (see
Wisniewski's Secret Knowledge of Grown-Ups, BCCB 7/98), but it's unusual to
find an author who genuinely deserts the adult lines to provide kids with ammuni-
tion against his own kind (and, of course, against other kids). That's just what
Tait does, though, in this slim and easily concealable volume that gives detailed
instructions for twenty-five important kid skills, ranging from social engineering
("How to fake looking sick") to musical accomplishments ("How to whistle with
two fingers") to athletic achievements ("How to cannonball into a pool"). There
are a few glitches in the text and there's a fair amount of wishful thinking in the
faking-out-adults entries (and the amorality may go a bit far for grownups in a few
spots), but there's also a treasure trove of information about classic youthful pas-
times such as armpit farts, spitballs, and towel snaps. The gleefully goofy authorial
style ("It is your duty to make root beer come pouring out the nose of your friends
and family") is enjoyable and generally free of condescension, and the instructions
for the physical activities are fairly clear and helpful. Rarely has a book cried
"Confiscate me!" with such verve, but that's where its charm lies; while some amus-
ing uncles and clever babysitters will get a lot of mileage out of its material, this is
really a book at its best behind adult backs. Glitzy color illustrations in the wackily
cubist style of Nick Jr. cartoons add the perfect irreverent visual touch, and orga-
nized disruptors will appreciate the inclusion of an index. DS
THOMSON, SARAH L. 
Imagine a Night; illus. by Rob Gonsalves. 
Byron Preiss/
Atheneum, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-689-85218-5 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Thomson's imposed text loosely connects a series of surrealistic paintings by artist
Gonsalves. "Imagine a night" is the opening line on every spread, inviting viewers
to use the illustrations as a way to trigger their own imaginations. Images of a
snowy street merging into coverlets and pillows, trees transforming into women
with lanterns, tattered curtains becoming a nighttime cityscape all test observers'
abilities to reconcile the realistic with the fantastical. Gonsalves' art combines
magic and realism into precise images that test the boundaries of visual imagina-
tion; these paintings are certainly worth a look, and several are even worth ponder-
ing. Unfortunately, merging an unconnected series of paintings into a picture
book requires a strength of text that this book simply doesn't have. It is strongly
reminiscent of Van Allsburg's The Mysteries ofHarris Burdick (BCCB 9/84), but
where Van Allsburg was conceptually open-ended, the text here is inconsistently
literal, sometimes reflecting the action of the paintings, sometimes not, and often
limiting the imaginative possibilities of individual images. The paintings on their
own may function as a springboard to creative writing projects or fantastical draw-
ing assignments that aim to encourage viewers to reinterpret the possibilities that
exist in the everyday world. JMD
JULY/AUGUST 2003 
* 465
VANDE VELDE, VIVIAN 
Wizard at Work: A Novel in Stories. Harcourt,
2003 
134p
ISBN 0-15-204559-7 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 6-9
It is summer vacation for the wizard (who runs a wizard training school), and he is
looking forward to some fishing and gardening, peace and quiet. Alas, it is not to
be, because no sooner does he get ready for some blissful alone time than he is
interrupted by a variety of folks who simply must have his assistance: a bewitched
princess in a tower, a town beset by immature unicorns, a prince who needs help
defeating a dragon, a duke whose castle is being haunted, and a royal couple with
a daughter who doesn't fit the standard princess mold. The wizard (never named)
is a not-yet-jaded fellow with a strong sense of justice and a slightly warped sense of
mischief; in the course of these fast-moving episodes (one short introductory piece
and five interconnected yet standalone tales) he learns not to judge by appear-
ances, makes sure his petitioners get what they really deserve, and finds true love.
Vande Velde knows her way around fairy tales and fantasy and has a wicked sense
of humor about both. Her wizard is an admirable fellow with foibles as well as
powers, and the supporting players have just enough specificity to round them
from caricatures to characters. Like a good folktale, the pace is quick, the humor is
effective, and the lessons are painless. Offer this to fractured-fairy-tale lovers seek-
ing nontraditional levity in traditional trappings. JMD
VOAKE, CHARLOTTE 
Ginger Finds a Home; written and illus. by Charlotte
Voake. 
Candlewick, 2003 
[34p]
ISBN 0-7636-1999-X 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 3-6 yrs
Little listeners will be caught up immediately in the stray cat's plight: "Once there
was a little orange cat who lived in a patch of weeds at the end of a garden. His ears
were black with dirt. He was very thin. His fur stuck out. His tail was like a piece
of STRING!" The skinny feline's luck changes, however, when a little girl starts
leaving plates of food for him; eventually the cat relaxes enough to let her pet him.
The little girl calls him Ginger, and after much perseverance, she coaxes him into
her house, but when the nervous Ginger bolts before the little girl can close the
door, the child mourns the cat she believes is lost: "The little girl was very sad. She
was so upset she didn't notice . .. when Ginger came creeping back in." The
author, who previously told the story of how a long-domesticated Ginger adjusted
to a new kitten in the house (Ginger, BCCB 4/97), here tells the true story of how
the cat came to live with her family. Voake's loose-lined watercolor and ink illus-
trations suit the scrawny feline to a crooked whisker. The layout is effective, with
single images sitting amidst the large typeface on pale yellow pages: Ginger the cat
steps amongst the words, his body a scrawl of scribbly lines; the rescuing little girl
is a solid reassuring presence in her polka-dot pinafore and sensible sweater. Pre-
schoolers will hold their breath hearing of Ginger's dangerous life and fortuitous
rescue. Team this prequel with Voake's own Ginger and perhaps Duncan's I Walk
at Night (BCCB 2/00) for a storytime purr-adise. JMD
WHEELER, LISA 
One Dark Night; illus. by Ivan Bates. 
Harcourt, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-15-202318-6 
$16.00 
R 3-5 yrs
A "wee little mouse" and a "wee little mole" live in a "wee little house" in the
forest; close by, "In a BIG GIANT lair,/ Near a BIG GIANT glen,/ Lived a BIG
466 
* THE BULLETIN
GIANT bear/ In his BIG GIANT den." One dark night Mole and Mouse go for
a walk, while at the same time Bear is hankering for something tasty to eat. The
inevitable happens when a lost Mole and Mouse run into Bear in the dark woods,
but there's a twist: "The SOMETHING was Bear,/ Who grumbled ... / 'You're
late!'/ Then they skipped hand in hand,/ From the glen to the lair,/ For a BIG
GIANT feast// With their best friend BIG Bear." Wheeler goes back and forth
between the activities of little Mouse and Mole and big Bear, combining the two
narrative threads together into a semi-scary story with a resolutely happy ending.
The pace is so tightly controlled that the suspense is palpable, despite the easy
rhymes and cozy-looking woodland characters. Bates' wax-pencil crayon and wa-
tercolor illustrations are somewhat slick, but he has a good handle on comfy caves
and bucolic woods, and the compositions effectively emphasize the smallness of
Mole and Mouse in contrast to the huge and ornery Bear. Wheeler's rhyming text
would fall into singsong except that the capitalizing of certain words results in a
readaloud blueprint that effectively delivers this just-scary-enough storytime tale.
JMD
WREDE, PATRICIA C. 
Sorcery and Cecelia, or, The Enchanted Chocolate Pot: Being
the Correspondence of Two Young Ladies of Quality Regarding Various Magical Scan-
dals in London and the Country. Harcourt, 2003 
320p
ISBN 0-15-204615-1 
$17.00 
R Gr. 6-10
Cousins Kate and Cecelia live during the Regency period (along with Lord Byron,
Lady Caroline Lamb, and the Prince Regent), when manners are all, the way a
man ties his cravat can decide his future, and young women live to be presented at
Almack's. This Regency world has something the usual romances do not, how-
ever: magic, wizardry, and dangerous games afoot. When this epistolary novel
opens, Kate has gone off to London to be presented along with her ravishing older
sister, Georgina, while Cecelia languishes in the country. The two are prodigious
letter writers, however, and manage to tell each other all despite their physical
distance. Being somewhat overly energetic in nature, the two young women soon
find themselves in dangerous company, Kate with the dashing Mysterious Mar-
quis, Cecelia with the Marquis' equally dashing friend, Mr. James Tarleton, and
both young women with the wicked wizards Miranda Griscomb and Sir Hilary
Bedrick. The letters fly fast and furious as the girls wreak romantic and magical
havoc among the Haute Ton, while attracting satisfyingly suitable suitors almost
despite themselves. Characterizations may be a bit stock, but this is a genre hom-
age, after all, and it's important that the classic figures (the rich and rakish hero,
the stubborn but desirable heroine, the overtly respectable but secretly wicked
villain, the forthright and formidable grande dame, etc.) appear. While there are
some minor loose ends, this is witty, light, and funny, and all in all a fine romp;
Regency romance as well as fantasy fans are going to line up for it. An afterword
tells how what began as a series of letters written as a lark turned into this book and
a planned sequel. JMD
YOLEN, JANE, ad. 
Mightier Than the Sword: WorldFolktales for Strong Boys; illus.
by Raul Col6n. 
Silver Whistle/Harcourt, 2003 
112p
ISBN 0-15-216391-3 
$19.00 
R 
Gr. 3-6
In this companion volume to Not One Damsel in Distress: World Folktales for
Strong Girls (BCCB 4/00), fourteen folktales from around the world feature he-
JULY/AUGUST 2003 
* 467
roes who triumph with their hearts and minds instead of their fists and fury. Yolen
balances lightly on the curl of her storytelling wave: the language is solid, the pace
is quick, and the narrative smooth. Despite the fact that Yolen put this collection
together to emphasize heroes that demonstrate that "the true heroes are the ones
who solve their problems-and the problems of the world-without ever having
to resort to force," there is plenty of action in her selections. In "Eating with
Trolls," Ash Lad defeats a frightening but not-too-bright troll who just doesn't
know when he's had enough; "Thick-Head" puts forth a clever hero who bargains
his way into a rich marriage; mistreated "Hired Hands" are liberated by a newly
hired wit who knows how to keep his temper; and a canny fisherman improves his
station in life in "The Fisherman and the Chamberlain." Some entries' parallels to
more familiar tales (the Irish "Jack and His Companions" resembles "The Bremen
Town Musicians"; the Finnish "Mighty Mikko" is reminiscent of "Puss in Boots,"
etc.) make this title valuable for comparative folktale curricula and collections.
Col6n's full-page black-and-white line drawings are gracefully composed and ca-
pably drafted. Notes on each tale give publishing history and/or cultural context;
a bibliography includes at least two written sources for each tale. JMD
ZUSAK, MARKUS 
Getting the Girl. Levine/Scholastic, 2003 
261p
ISBN 0-439-38949-6 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Cam and his older brother, Rube (from Fighting Ruben Wolfe, BCCB 3/01), re-
turn in this examination of the nature of love, romantic and otherwise. Rube
hasn't changed since the last book; he's still a love 'em and leave 'em kind of guy.
Cam, on the other hand, is figuring out the kind of guy he wants to be, and it isn't
Ruben. Currently a loner ("You're a bit of a lonely bastard aren't y'?" his brother
says), Cam is as desperate for human contact as he is for an emotional outlet, and
he finds that outlet through a form of self-expression that is almost the antithesis
of Rube's bloody battles in the boxing ring: he writes. On scraps of paper he keeps
stuffed in his pockets, Cam evokes his world in smears of words that manifest his
longing. When Rube and Octavia (a young woman Cam sees as a cut above the
rest of Rube's previous girlfriends) break up, Cam emerges from his solitude into a
world with Octavia in it; he reveals himself to her, and she has the intelligence to
welcome that revelation. Zusak rides his prose as if taming something wild, giving
a sense of Cam's emotional upheaval without losing control of the momentum
and pace. Solid characterizations ground the action, with Cam's personality art-
fully limned in a first-person narrative interspersed with his own writings; clipped
staccato language, concrete and minimal, evokes the power and complexity of his
yearnings. The relationship between Rube and Cam is the cohesive element in a
novel that explores Cam's growing, passionate connections to the world. Readers
making their own connections, passionate and otherwise, will revel in Cam's suc-
cess. JMD
im-v
468 
* THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Adoption-fiction: Hurst
ADVENTURE: Colfer; Hausman;
Karr; Pratchett; Priestley
Africa-fiction: Mead
African Americans-fiction: Draper;
Flake; Myers
African Americans-stories: Steptoe
ALPHABET BOOKS: Baker
Animals: Baker; Cerullo
Animals-fiction: Hayden
Animals-folklore: Paye
Animals-stories: Regan; Wheeler
ANTHOLOGIES: Yolen
Arithmetic: Sayre
Art: Thomson
Art and artists-fiction: Karr
Art and artists-stories: Segal
Aunts-fiction: Horvath
Aunts-stories: Steptoe
Aviation: Downs
Babies-stories: Regan
Baseball-fiction: Koertge; Ritter
Baseball-stories: Corey
Bears-stories: Dyer
BEDTIME STORIES: Anholt
BILINGUAL BOOKS: Elya
Biology: Cerullo
Birds-fiction: Hayden
Books and reading-fiction:
DiTerlizzi; Reiche
Brothers-fiction: Murray; Zusak
Brothers and sisters-fiction: Hahn;
Pratchett
Bullies-fiction: Butler
Campers and camping-stories: Lasky
Cats-stories: Voake
Chickens-stories: Silverman
Civil War-fiction: Hahn
COUNTING BOOKS: Sayre
Cousins-fiction: Wrede
Cowboys-fiction: Ernst
Cows-stories: Hurd
CRAFT BOOKS: Tait
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Bowler; Colfer; Davis; Holm;
Priestley; Prose
Current events: Mead
Divorce-fiction: Eulo
Dreams-stories: Anholt
Drug abuse-fiction: Murray
Ethics and values: Butler; Davis;
Draper; Flake; French; Holm
Emotions-stories: Ormerod
EPISTOLARY FICTION: Wrede
Faith-poetry: Rylant
Families-fiction: Cart; Horvath;
Myers; Steptoe
FOLKTALES AND FAIRY TALES:
Goble; Ljungkvist; Paye; Yolen
FANTASY: Colfer; DiTerlizzi;
Pratchett; Thomson; Vande
Velde; Wrede
Fathers-fiction: Bowler; Flake;
Goodman; Murray; Myers;
Nelson
Fears-fiction: Butler
Flying-stories: Schotter
Food and eating-stories: Greenstein
Foster care-fiction: Hayden
Friends-fiction: Butler; Davis; Eulo;
Flake
Friends-stories: Bond; Wheeler
GHOST STORIES: Hurst
Gifts-stories: Segal
JULY/AUGUST 2003 
* 469
Grandparents-stories: Cohen
Hamsters-fiction: Ernst; Reiche
HISTORICAL FICTION: Bradley;
Donnelly; Hahn; Karr; Priestley
History, U.S.: Greenstein; Hahn
Holidays-stories: Silverman
Horses-folklore: Goble
HUMOR: Elya; Ernst; Nelson;
Regan; Roberts; Tait; Vande
Velde; Wrede
Illness-fiction: Hautman
Imagination-stories: Schotter
Inventions and inventors-stories:
Greenstein
Jealousy-fiction: Brinson
Kidnapping-fiction: Bowler
Magic-fiction: DiTerlizzi; Wrede
Mental illness-fiction: Myers
Moving-stories: Bond
Music and musicians-fiction:
Bradley
MYSTERIES: Donnelly; Goodman;
Holm
Mythology, classical: Napoli
Native Americans-folklore: Goble
Nature study: Cerullo
Ocean-fiction: Hausman
Pets-fiction: Reiche
Pets-stories: Voake
Photography-fiction: Brinson
Physical education: Corey
Pigs-stories: Lasky
POETRY: Koertge; Rylant
Princesses-stories: Ljungkvist
Reading aloud: Hausman; Yolen
Reading, beginning: Lasky
Reading, easy: Brinson; Butler;
Reiche
Reading, reluctant: DiTerlizzi; Tait
Relationships-fiction: Zusak
Religious education: Rylant
RHYMING STORIES: Wheeler
ROMANCE: Napoli; Wrede
Rosh Hashanah-stories: Silverman
Rural life-fiction: Donnelly
Rural life-stories: Cohen
School-fiction: Draper; Prose
School-stories: Dyer
SCIENCE FICTION: Goodman
Secrets-fiction: Draper
SHORT STORIES: Cart; Hausman
Sleep-stories: Anholt
Social studies: Mead
SONGS: Ormerod
Space travel-stories: Hurd
Spies-fiction: Bradley
SPORTS STORIES: Eulo; Ritter
Storytelling: Yolen
Storytelling-fiction: French; Horvath
Storytime: Bond; Cohen; Elya;
Goble; Hurd; Lasky; Ljungkvist;
Ormerod; Paye; Segal; Voake;
Wheeler
Summer-fiction: Horvath
SUPERNATURAL STORIES:
Bowler; Hurst
SURVIVAL STORIES: Hausman
SUSPENSE: Prose
Television-fiction: Roberts
Transportation: Downs
Twins-fiction: DiTerlizzi
Vampires-fiction: Hautman
Voyages and travel: Downs
Voyages and travel-fiction: Roberts
Voyages and travel-stories: Regan;
Steptoe
War-fiction: Hahn; Mead
Wizards-fiction: Vande Velde
Women's studies: Corey
Work-stories: Dyer
World War II-fiction: Bradley;
French
Writers and writing-fiction:
Donnelly; Koertge; Nelson; Zusak
470 
* THE BULLETIN
THE
B ULLET
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
AUTHOR/TITLE INDEX, VOLUME 56
SEPTEMBER, 2002--JULY/AUGUST, 2003
100 School Days. Rockwell. 76.
12 Again. Corbett. 54.
17. Rosenberg. 248.
33 Snowfish. Rapp. 375.
7th Knot. Karr. 452.
A-Tisket, A-Tasket. Fitzgerald. 272.
Abarat. Barker. 265.
Abe Lincoln. Winters. 379.
Abhorsen. Nix. 283.
Ackerman. Animal Sense. 264.
Act I, Act II, Act Normal. Weston. 427.
Action Jackson. Greenberg. 108.
Ada. Daniel's Pet. 140.
_ 
iPfo Peep! 388.
Adams. Eye of the Wolf. 284.
Adelita. dePaola. 151.
Adler. Mama Played Baseball. 302.
.Picture Book of Lewis and Clark. 302.
Adoff. Song Shoots out of My Mouth. 224.
Adventurous Chef. Arnold. 142.
After. Prose. 458.
Agapanthus Hum and the Angel Hoot. Cowley.
268.
Agard. Under the Moon & over the Sea. 225.
Agnes Parker... Girl in Progress. O'Dell. 326.
Ahlberg. Bit More Bert. 96.
_ 
. Cat Who Got Carried Away. 389.
Aiken. Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs. 186.
Airborne. Collins. 394.
Alberto the Dancing Alligator. Waring. 129.
Alchemy. Mahy. 321.
Alder. Crossing the Panther's Path. 4.
Alex Ryan, Stop That! Mills. 323.
Alexander, L Rope Trick. 186.
Alexander, V. A-Tisket, A-Tasket. 272.
All the Way to Lhasa. Berger. 49.
All You Need for a Snowman. Schertle. 210.
All-American Girl. Cabot. 147.
Allen, S. Read Anything Good Lately? 303.
Allen, W. Swords for Hire. 389.
Allende. City of the Beasts. 225.
Almond. Secret Heart. 140.
Almost Home. Baskin. 351.
Alphabet Keeper. Murphy. 282.
Alphabet under Construction. Fleming. 56.
Alt Ed. Atkins. 226.
Alvarez. Before We Were Free. 97.
Amazing Air Balloon. Van Leeuwen. 424.
Amazing Love Story of Mr. Morf. Cneut. 267.
America the Beautiful. Bates. 391.
American Plague. Murphy. 413.
Among the Betrayed. Haddix. 58.
Amy. Hooper. 160.
Ananse and the Lizard. Cummings. 195.
And in the Morning. Wilson. 337.
Andersen. Nightingale. 97.
.Nightingale. 98.
.Thumbelina. 4.
Anderson, J. Last Treasure. 348.
Anderson, L. Catalyst. 141.
. Thank You, Sarah. 225.
Anderson, M. Feed. 98.
Anderson, W. River Boy. 264.
Andryszewski. Terrorism in America. 5.
Angel. Stauffacher. 127.
Angel Factory. Blacker. 189.
Angels Sweep the Desert Floor. Chaikin. 9.
Anglin. One and Seven. 420.
Anholt. Jack and the Dreamsack. 436.
Animal ABC. Baker. 436.
Animal House and Iz. Hicks. 404.
Animal Sense. Ackerman. 264.
Anna Sunday. Keehn. 23.
Annabel the Actress Starring in Hound of the
Barkervilles. Conford. 53.
Annie Rose Is My Little Sister. Hughes. 317.
IN
JULY/AUGUST 2003 
* 471
Annoyance Bureau. Frank. 154.
Aoki. White Swan Express. 208.
Appelt. Bubba and Beau Go Night-Night. 349.
Apples. Robbins. 171.
Ardagh. House Called Awful End. 141.
Ariel and Emily. Greenspun. 275.
Arnold, A. Adventurous Chef. 142.
Arnold, C. When Mammoths Walked the
Earth. 98.
Around the World in Eighty Poems. Berry. 187.
Arrington, A. Camp of the Angel. 390.
Arrington, F. Prairie Whispers. 349.
Arro. Good Night, Animals. 142.
Artemis Fowl: The Eternity Code. Colfer.
440.
Arthur: At the Crossing-Places. Crossley-Hol-
land. 231.
Ashman. Babies on the Go. 390.
Ask Me. Damm. 269.
Asquith. Babies. 350.
At the Edge of the Woods. Cotten. 102.
Atalanta and the Arcadian Beast. Yolen. 337.
Atinsky. Tyler on Prime Time. 5.
Atkins. Alt Ed. 226.
Auch. Souperchicken. 391.
Auntie Claus and the Key to Christmas.
Primavera. 123.
Auschwitz. Lawton. 163.
Avi. Crispin. 46.
. Silent Movie. 303.
Ayres. Macaroni Boy. 265.
Babies on the Go. Ashman. 390.
Babies. Asquith. 350.
Babies. Heiligman. 59.
Baby Elephant. Lang. 366.
Baby Lion. Lang. 366.
Bachelor and the Bean. Fowles. 312.
Bad Girls in Love. Voigt. 84.
Bad News! I'm in Charge! Ingman. 406.
Bahr. My Brother Loved Snowflakes. 142.
Bailey. Stanley's Party. 350.
Baker, E. Frog Princess. 226.
Baker, L. Animal ABC. 436.
Ballad of Sir Dinadan. Morris. 324.
Ballad of Valentine. Jackson. 202.
Banks. Dillon Dillon. 47.
. Mama's Coming Home. 304.
Bany-Winters. Funny Bones. 6.
Barefoot Book of Knights. Matthews. 26.
Barker. Abarat. 265.
Barlow. Jirrbal. 47.
Barnaby's Bunny. Rouillard. 329.
Bartlett. Seal Island Seven. 48.
Bartram. Man on the Moon. 142.
Baskin. Almost Home. 351.
Bates. America the Beautiful. 391.
Batt. Faerie's Gift. 304.
Battle of Jericho. Draper. 444.
Bauer. Stand Tall. 48.
Be Boy Buzz. hooks. 160.
Beacon Hill Boys. Mochizuki. 246.
Beale. I Am Not Esther. 142.
Bear Wants More. Wilson. 294.
Bears Make Rock Soup. Erdrich. 196.
Beautiful Blackbird. Bryan. 227.
Before the Creeks Ran Red. Reeder. 286.
Before We Were Free. Alvarez. 97.
Begging for Change. Flake. 446.
Behind the Mountains. Danticat. 232.
Belinda the Ballerina. Young. 338.
Bell. Goblin Wood. 392.
Belton. Pictures for Miss Josie. 392.
Benduhn. Gravel Queen. 305.
Bennett. Grandad's Tree. 305.
Benny. Posthuma. 285.
Berenstain. Down a Sunny Dirt Road. 144.
Berger. All the Way to Lhasa. 49.
Bergman. Musical Beds. 187.
Bernie Magruder & the Bats in the Belfry.
Naylor. 326.
Berry-Picking Man. Buchanan. 353.
Berry. Around the World in Eighty Poems. 187.
Best. Goose's Story. 6.
Betsy Who Cried Wolf. Levine. 65.
Better Than Running at Night. Frank. 56.
Beware! Stine. 80.
Bial. Tenement. 99.
Bible. Noah's Ark. 188.
.Stories from the Bible. 6.
Big Bear Ball. Ryder. 77.
Big Blue Spot. Holwitz. 317.
Big City Cool. Weiss. 214.
Big Day on the River. Wilson. 428.
Big Momma Makes the World. Root. 247.
Bird and His Worm. Kaczman. 162.
Bit More Bert. Ahlberg. 96.
Black. Field Guide. 442.
. Seeing Stone. 442.
. Tithe. 188.
Black-Eyed Suzie. Shaw. 34.
Blacker. Angel Factory. 189.
Blackwood. Year of the Hangman. 144.
Blizzard's Wake. Naylor. 207.
Bloody Jack. Meyer. 167.
Blue Roses. Boyden. 7.
Blues Journey. Myers. 415.
Bluitgen. Boot Fell from Heaven. 306.
Blume. Double Fudge. 99.
Blumenthal. Six Days in October. 145.
Bluthenthal. I'm Not Invited? 306.
Body Marks. Gay. 155.
Boling. New Year Be Coming! 189.
Bond. When Marcus Moore Moved In. 437.
Bone Dry. Karr. 63.
Bones of Fred McFee. Bunting. 50.
Boo Hoo Boo-Boo. Singer. 34.
472 
* THE BULLETIN
Book of Alfar. Hassinger. 58.
Book of Mean People. Morrison. 206.
Bookstore Valentine. Maitland. 204.
Boot Fell from Heaven. Bluitgen. 306.
Born Confused. Hidier. 237.
Bottled Up. Murray. 455.
Bottner. Scaredy Cats. 393.
Bouchard. That's Hockey. 145.
Bow Wow Meow Meow. Florian. 312.
Bowler. Storm Catchers. 437.
Boy Who Saved Baseball. Ritter. 460.
Boyden. Blue Roses. 7.
Bradley. For Freedom. 438.
Brashares. Second Summer of the Sisterhood.
351.
Bravemole. Jonell. 21.
Brennan. Faerie Wars. 352.
Brett. Who's That Knocking on Christmas Eve?
49.
Bridges. Ruby's Wish. 49.
Briggs. Ug. 190.
Bringing Up the Bones. Zeises. 215.
Brinson. Seeing Sugar. 438.
Broadley. Pedro the Brave. 226.
Brodsky. Buffalo. 306.
Bronto Eats Meat. Maloney. 410.
Brooks, K. Lucas. 393.
. Martyn Pig. 7.
Brooks, M. True Confessions of a Heartless Girl.
266.
Brown, D. Far Beyond the Garden Gate. 146.
. Mack Made Movies. 352.
Brown, Jeff. Stanley, Flat Again! 307.
Brown, Jo. Pirate Jam. 352.
Brown, M. Robin's Room. 8.
Browne. Warriors ofAlavna. 50.
Brownjohn. I, Freddy. 459.
Bryan. Beautiful Blackbird. 227.
Bubba and Beau Go Night-Night. Appelt. 349.
Bubble Bath Pirates! Krosoczka. 278.
Buchanan. Berry-Picking Man. 353.
Buddha Boy. Koja. 407.
Buffalo. Brodsky. 306.
Bunnies on the Go. Walton. 293.
Bunting. Bones of Fred McFee. 50.
Burchard. Frederick Douglass. 266.
Burgess. Ghost behind the Wall. 227.
. Lady. 51.
Bury the Dead. Sloan. 78.
Butler. Trading Places with Tank Talbott. 439.
By the Side of the Road. Feiffer. 15.
Byalick. Quit It. 146.
Byars. Keeper of the Doves. 190.
Cabot. All-American Girl. 147.
. Haunted. 228.
._ Princess in Waiting. 353.
Cadnum. Leopard Sword. 191.
Caletti. Queen of Everything. 191.
Calmenson. Welcome, Baby! 147.
Camp of the Angel. Arrington. 390.
Campoy. Rosa Raposa. 100.
_ 
. Pfo Peep! 388.
Can You Guess My Name? Sierra. 211.
Canine Connection. Hearne. 315.
Cannibals: Starring Tiffany Spratt. Grant. 157.
Canning Season. Horvath. 451.
Cannon, A. Charlotte's Rose. 191.
.On the Go with Pirate Pete and Pirate
Joe. 8.
Cannon, J. Little Yau. 100.
Capital. Curlee. 232.
Captain Bob Takes Flight. Schotter. 462.
Capuzzo. Close to Shore. 394.
Carbone. Pack. 267.
Carney. Where Does a Tiger-Heron Spend the
Night? 9.
Carpenter. Lewis Carroll. 192.
Cart. Necessary Noise. 439.
Carter. Heaven's All-Star Jazz Band. 228.
Carus. Fire and Wings. 192.
Carvell. Who Will Tell My Brother? 51.
Casey at the Bat. Thayer. 253.
Castaways. Hausman. 449.
Cat Who Got Carried Away. Ahlberg. 389.
Cat Who Liked Potato Soup. Farish. 399.
Catalyst. Anderson. 141.
Catilda. Stadler. 291.
Cazet. Elvis the Rooster Almost Goes to Heaven.
354.
. Minnie and Moo: The Night before
Christmas. 148.
Celebrating a Quinceafiera. Hoyt-Goldsmith.
112.
Cerullo. Sea Turtles. 440.
Chabon. Summerland. 193.
Chachaji's Cup. Krishnaswami. 408.
Chaikin. Angels Sweep the Desert Floor. 9.
Chambers, A. Postcards from No Man's Land.
9.
Chambers, R. Rooftop Rocket Party. 354.
Chambers, V. Double Dutch. 148.
Chan. Foreign Field. 149.
Chance. Regan. 459.
Chandra. George Washington's Teeth. 229.
Charlotte's Rose. Cannon. 191.
Cheaney. True Prince. 149.
Cheat. Koss. 240.
Chen. Wandering Warrior. 307.
Cheng. Goldfish and Chrysanthemums. 308.
Chester. Young Adventurer's Guide to Everest.
10.
Chewing the Cud. King-Smith. 203.
Chicken Soup by Heart. Hershenhorn. 202.
Child X. Weatherly. 84.
Children of Native America Today. Dennis.
359.
JULY/AUGUST 2003 
* 473
Chill Wind. McDonald. 205.
Christensen. In My Grandmother's House. 355.
Christmas Tapestry. Polacco. 74.
Cindrich. In the Shadow of the Pali. 52.
City Chicken. Dorros. 233.
City of the Beasts. Allende. 225.
Clarabella's Teeth. Vrombaut. 335.
Clarke. Wolf on the Fold. 52.
Claws. Weaver. 335.
Clements. Week in the Woods. 193.
Close to Shore. Capuzzo. 394.
Cneut. Amazing Love Story of Mr. Morf. 267.
Coalition of Lions. Wein. 336.
Codell. Sahara Special. 308.
Cohen. Everything Is Different at Nonna's
House. 440.
Cohn, D. Dream Carver. 53.
Cohn, R. Steps. 229.
Colfer. Artemis Fowl: The Eternity Code. 440.
Collicott. Toestomper and the Bad Butterflies.
355.
Collier. Jericho Walls. 10.
Collins. Airborne. 394.
Color of Home. Hoffman. 60.
Comora. George Washington's Teeth. 229.
Company of Crows. Singer. 175.
Company of Fools. Ellis. 195.
Compestine. Story of Noodles. 230.
CON-fidence. Strasser. 252.
Condoleezza Rice. Wade. 335.
Conford. Annabel the Actress Starring in Hound
of the Barkervilles. 53.
Confucius. Freedman. 154.
Conly. Rudest Alien on Earth. 101.
Conniff. Rats! 150.
Cooke, K. Terrible Underpants. 356.
Cooke, T. Full, Full, Full of Love. 268.
Cool Cat, School Cat. Cox. 231.
Cool Drink of Water. Kerley. 24.
Cooper, H. Sandmare. 309.
Cooper, I. Jack. 230.
Cooper, M. Remembering Manzanar. 194.
Cop on the Beat. Schulman. 125.
Coraline. Gaiman. 106.
Corbet. Fifteen Love. 309.
Corbett. 12 Again. 54.
Corey. Milly and the Macy's Parade. 101.
. Players in Pigtails. 441.
Corner of the Universe. Martin. 243.
Corona. Little Book of Latin American Folk-
tales. 358.
Cotten. At the Edge of the Woods. 102.
Countdown to Kindergarten. McGhee. 69.
Courage. Waber. 254.
Courtesan's Daughter. Galloway. 155.
Cowley. Agapanthus Hum and the Angel Hoot.
268.
Cox. Cool Cat, School Cat. 231.
Craft. Sleeping Beauty. 194.
Creek. Holm. 450.
Crew. Mama's Babies. 11.
Crispin. Avi. 46.
Crossing Montana. Torres. 83.
Crossing the Panther's Path. Alder. 4.
Crossley-Holland. Arthur: At the Crossing-
Places. 231.
Crowe. Getting Away with Murder. 395.
Crowning Glory. Thomas. 82.
Crows! Pringle. 170.
Crum. House in the Meadow. 356.
.Spitting Image. 310.
Crutcher. King of the Mild Frontier. 357.
Cullen. Thirsty Baby. 310.
Cummings. Ananse and the Lizard. 195.
Curlee. Capital. 232.
Cushman. Rodzina. 269.
Cutler. Leap, Frog. 150.
Cuyler. Skeleton Hiccups. 11.
Daddy Says. Shange. 288.
Dahlia. McClintock. 69.
Daly. Once upon a Time. 311.
Damm. Ask Me. 269.
Dance of Sisters. Porter. 209.
Dancing in the Streets of Brooklyn. Lurie. 165.
Daniel's Pet. Ada. 140.
Danticat. Behind the Mountains. 232.
Danziger. United Tates of America. 12.
Dark Horse. Sedgwick. 421.
Dark Waters. MacPhail. 280.
Dating Hamlet. Fiedler. 198.
Davey's Blue-Eyed Frog. Easton. 397.
Davis. Jake Riley: Irreparably Damaged. 441.
Day in the Life of Murphy. Provensen. 419.
Days of Jubilee. McKissack. 322.
de Carrera. Little Book of Latin American Folk-
tales. 358.
de Lint. Waifs and Strays. 151.
De Rosamel. Drawing with Objects. 357.
Dead Girls Don't Write Letters. Giles. 274.
Deaf Child Crossing. Matlin. 116.
Deak. Period Pieces. 270.
Dearden. Little Book of Latin American Folk-
tales. 358.
Death and the Arrow. Priestley. 458.
Declaration of Independence. Fink. 55.
DeFelice. Real, True Dulcie Campbell. 150.
. Under the Same Sky. 358.
Degas and the Dance. Rubin. 210.
DeLaCroix. Hero of Third Grade. 102.
Demarest. Here Come Our Firefighters! 12.
Dennis. Children of Native America Today.
359.
dePaola. Adelita. 151.
.Things Will NEVER Be the Same. 270.
Derby. Two Fools and a Horse. 395.
Destination Unexpected. Gallo. 360.
474 
* THE BULLETIN
Deuker. High Heat. 396.
Dewey. Paisano, the Roadrunner. 12.
Diakit6. Magic Gourd. 271.
Dillon Dillon. Banks. 47.
Dillon. Rap A Tap Tap. 151.
Dirt. Tomecek. 127.
Dirty Deed. Stenhouse. 331.
Disappearing Act. Fleischman. 399.
Disher. Divine Wind. 13.
DiTerlizzi. Field Guide. 442.
.Seeing Stone. 442.
Divine Wind. Disher. 13.
Dodds. Where's Pup? 271.
Does a Cow Say Boo? Hindley. 60.
Doherty. Holly Starcross. 152.
Don't Let the Pigeon Drive the Bus! Willems.
378.
Donnelly. Humble Pie. 103.
__ 
.Northern Light. 443.
Dooling. Great Horse-less Carriage Race. 233.
Doomspell. McNish. 70.
Dork on the Run. Gorman. 17.
Dorros. City Chicken. 233.
Double Dutch. Chambers. 148.
Double Dutch. Draper. 54.
Double Fudge. Blume. 99.
Dowell. Where I'd Like to Be. 396.
Down a Sunny Dirt Road. Berenstain. 144.
Downs. Noisy Airplane Ride. 443.
Doyle, E. Stray Voltage. 195.
Doyle, M. Georgie. 103.
. Who Is Jesse Flood? 152.
Dozen Ducklings Lost and Found. Ziefert. 339.
Dr. Jenner and the Speckled Monster. Marrin.
204.
Dragon Machine. Ward. 426.
Draper. Double Dutch. 54.
. Battle of Jericho. 444.
Drawing with Objects. De Rosamel. 357.
Dream Bearer. Myers. 455.
Dream Carver. Cohn. 53.
Driving Daddy. Vestergaard. 334.
Drowning Anna. Mayfield. 166.
Dunk. Lubar. 165.
Dunlap. Louisa May & Mr. Thoreau's Flute.
103.
Dunrea. Gossie. 153.
. Gossie & Gertie. 153.
Dust. Slade. 291.
Dyer. Little Brown Bear Won't Go to School.
444.
Dyson. Home on the Moon. 397.
Dyssegaard. Mirabelle. 367.
.Molly Goes Shopping. 311.
Easton, P. Davey's Blue-Eyed Frog. 397.
Easton, R Real American. 13.
Egad Alligator! Ziefert. 38.
Egielski. Slim and Jim. 14.
Elinor and Violet. Murphy. 414.
Elizabeti's School. Stuve-Bodeen. 175.
Elliott. Hunter's Best Friend at School. 54.
Ellis. Company of Fools. 195.
Ellsworth. Shrouding Woman. 14.
Elvis the Rooster Almost Goes to Heaven. Cazet.
354.
Elya. Home at Last. 15.
. Oh No, Gotta Go! 444.
Emberley, E. Thanks, Mom. 398.
Emberley, R. My Animals. 104.
.My Clothes. 104.
.My Food. 104.
.My Toys. 104.
Encantado. Montgomery. 28.
Enduring Wisdom. Sneve. 330.
Epossumondas. Salley. 77.
Erdrich, Lise. Bears Make Rock Soup. 196.
Erdrich, Louise. Range Eternal. 153.
Erie Canal Pirates. Kimmel. 113.
Eriksson. Molly Goes Shopping. 311.
Ernst. Hannah Mae O'Hannigan's Wild West
Show. 445.
Escape from Botany Bay. Hausman. 276.
Esckilsen. Last Mall Rat. 398.
Eulo. Mixed-Up Doubles. 446.
Everything 
I Know about Monsters.
Lichtenheld. 66.
Everything Is Different at Nonna's House.
Cohen. 440.
Eye of the Wolf. Pennac. 284.
Fabulous Fluttering Tropical Butterflies. Patent.
327.
Face-to-Face with the Ladybug. Tracqui. 83.
Facklam. Lizards. 312.
Faerie Wars. Brennan. 352.
Faerie's Gift. Batt. 304.
Fairy Realm: The Charm Bracelet. Rodda. 286.
Falling into Place. Greene. 199.
Fame and Glory in Freedom, Georgia.
O'Connor. 283.
Familiar and Haunting. Pearce. 73.
Fanelli. Mythological Monsters of Ancient
Greece. 196.
Fantastic Creatures from Greek Myths. Posner.
417.
Far Beyond the Garden Gate. Brown. 146.
Farish. Cat Who Liked Potato Soup. 399.
Farley Farts. Miiller. 325.
Farmer. House of the Scorpion. 104.
Farris. My Brother Martin. 272.
Fat Kid Rules the World. Going. 402.
Feed. Anderson. 98.
Feiffer. By the Side of the Road. 15.
. House across the Street. 197.
Ferreira. Zulu Dog. 197.
Ferris. Once upon a Marigold. 234.
Festival of Bones. San Vicente. 124.
JULY/AUGUST 2003 
* 475
Fiedler. Dating Hamlet. 198.
Field Guide. DiTerlizzi. 442.
Fifteen Love. Corbet. 309.
Figueroa. Little Book of Latin American Folk-
tales. 358.
Finding Our Way. Saldafia. 330.
Fine. Jamie and Angus Stories. 55.
Fink. Declaration of Independence. 55.
Fire and Wings. Carus. 192.
Fire. Janisch. 239.
Fireboat. Kalman. 63.
Fireflies and Midnight. Singer. 377.
Firewing. Oppel. 327.
Fitzgerald, E. A-Tisket, A-Tasket. 272.
Fitzgerald, J. Vietnam War. 38.
Flake. Begging for Change. 446.
Fleischman. Disappearing Act. 399.
Fleming. Alphabet under Construction. 56.
Flieger. Pig Tale. 198.
Flight of the Fisherbird. Martin. 370.
Flight to Freedom. Veciana-Suarez. 253.
Flora's Surprise! Gliori. 274.
Florian. Bow Wow Meow Meow. 312.
Flower Girl. Furgang. 273.
For Freedom. Bradley. 438.
Foreign Field. Chan. 149.
Foreman. Wonder Goal! 399.
Fowles. Bachelor and the Bean. 312.
Fox. Jean Laffite and the Big 01' Whale. 359.
Fradin. Signers. 234.
Frampton. My Beastie Book of ABC. 16.
Franco. Mathematickles! 400.
Frank, E. Friction. 400.
Frank, H. Better Than Running at Night. 56.
Frank, L. Annoyance Bureau. 154.
Frank, M. Understanding September 11th. 16.
Fraustino. Soul Searching. 154.
Frazee. Roller Coaster. 401.
Frederick Douglass. Burchard. 266.
Fredericks. True Meaning of Cleavage. 273.
Freedman. Confucius. 154.
Freeman. Trouble with Babies. 105.
French. Hitler's Daughter. 447.
Freymann-Weyr. Kings Are Already Here. 313.
Friction. Frank. 400.
Friedman. Picture This. 360.
Friesen. Losing Forever. 106.
Frog Princess. Baker. 226.
From Head to Toe. Seuling. 172.
Frost. Keesha's House. 313.
Full Hand. Yezerski. 178.
Full, Full, Full of Love. Cooke. 268.
Funke. Thief Lord. 106.
Funky Junk. Schwarz. 360.
Funny Bones. Bany-Winters. 6.
Furgang. Flower Girl. 273.
Gaiman. Coraline. 106.
Galen. Moss. 168.
Gallo. Destination Unexpected. 360.
Galloway. Courtesan's Daughter. 155.
Gantos. What Would Joey Do? 107.
Garden. Meeting Melanie. 199.
Gaspard and Lisa's Rainy Day. Gutman. 314.
Gathering the Dew. Ho. 315.
Gay, K. Body Marks. 155.
Gay, M. Good Morning, Sam. 361.
Geography Club. Hartinger. 236.
George Upside Down. McCarthy. 321.
George Washington's Teeth. Chandra. 229.
George. Swimming Upstream. 156.
Georgie. Doyle. 103.
Gerstein. Sparrow Jack. 401.
Get Ready for Gabf! Montes. 413.
Get Well, Good Knight. Thomas. 176.
Getting Away with Murder. Crowe. 395.
Getting the Girl. Zusak. 467.
Ghost behind the Wall. Burgess. 227.
Ghosts of Rathburn Park. Snyder. 250.
Giddy-up! Let's Ride! McDonnell. 69.
Giff. Pictures of Hollis Woods. 156.
Giles. Dead Girls Don't Write Letters. 274.
Gilson. Stink Alley. 17.
Gina.Jamie.Father.Bear. Lyon. 165.
Ginger Finds a Home. Voake. 465.
Girl in a Cage. Yolen. 255.
Girl on the High-Diving Horse. High. 237.
Girl Wonder. Hopkinson. 239.
Girls under Pressure. Wilson. 86.
Glassman. Halloweena. 57.
Glick. One Shot. 402.
Gliori. Flora's Surprise! 274.
Glory. Lynn. 368.
Goble. Mystic Horse. 447.
Goblin Wood. Bell. 392.
God Went to Beauty School. Rylant. 461.
Gods and Goddesses from Greek Myths. Posner.
417.
Going. Fat Kid Rules the World. 402.
Goldfish and Chrysanthemums. Cheng. 308.
Good Morning, Sam. Gay. 361.
Good Night, Animals. Arro. 142.
Goodhart. Pudgy. 361.
Goodman, A. Singing the Dogstar Blues. 447.
Goodman, J. Paradise. 107.
Goodman, S. Nature Did It First! 362.
Goodnight, Baby Monster. Leuck. 65.
Gooney Bird Greene. Lowry. 66.
Goose's Story. Best. 6.
Gorman. Dork on the Run. 17.
Gossie. Dunrea. 153.
Gossie & Gertie. Dunrea. 153.
Graham. Jethro Byrd: Fairy Child. 57.
Grandad's Tree. Bennett. 305.
Grant. Cannibals: Starring Tiffany Spratt. 157.
Gravel Queen. Benduhn. 305.
Graves. Loretta: Ace Pinky Scout. 157.
476 
* THE BULLETIN
Gray, D. Together Apart. 108.
Gray, L. Timespinners. 314.
Gray, M. Ugly Princess and the Wise Fool. 158.
Great Ghost Rescue. Ibbotson. 113.
Great God Pan. Napoli. 456.
Great Horse-less Carriage Race. Dooling. 233.
Green Angel. Hoffman. 316.
Greenberg. Action Jackson. 108.
. Runaway Girl. 403.
Greene. Falling into Place. 199.
Greenfield. How They Got Over. 235.
Greenspun. Ariel and Emily. 275.
Greenstein. Ice-Cream Cones for Sale! 448.
Gregory. Shirley's Wonderful Baby. 199.
Grifalconi. Village That Vanished. 109.
Griffin, A. Hannah, Divided. 158.
. Overnight. 235.
Griffin, P. Music Thief. 200.
Grimes. Talkin' about Bessie. 200.
Grody's Not So Golden Rules. Rubel. 420.
Grunfeld. Vietnam War. 38.
Guest. Iris and Walter: The Sleepover. 58.
Gumbrella. Root. 171.
Gutman. Gaspard and Lisa's Rainy Day. 314.
. Lisa's Baby Sister. 314.
Guy Wire. Weeks. 214.
Haas. Shaper. 18.
Haddix. Among the Betrayed. 58.
Hahn. Hear the Wind Blow. 448.
Hairdo! Swain. 176.
Halliday. Shooting Monarchs. 362.
Halloween Countdown. Prelutsky. 31.
Halloween. Seinfeld. 78.
Halloweena. Glassman. 57.
Hamilton. Time Pieces. 159.
Hana's Suitcase. Levine. 279.
Hanley. Healer's Keep. 201.
Hannah, Divided. Griffin. 158.
Hannah Mae O'Hannigan's Wild West Show.
Ernst. 445.
Hannah's Garden. Snyder. 250.
Harel. Key to My Heart. 315.
Harness. Rabble Rousers. 235.
Harper. There Was a Bold Lady Who Wanted
a Star. 109.
Harrar. Not as Crazy as I Seem. 403.
Harris, Robert. Atalanta and the Arcadian Beast.
337.
__ 
.Girl in a Cage. 255.
Harris, Robie. Hello Benny! 110.
Harrison. Monster in Me. 404.
Harry on the Rocks. Meddaugh. 412.
Hartfield. Me and Uncle Romie. 201.
Hartinger. Geography Club. 236.
Hartett. What the Birds See. 275.
Hassett. Three Silly Girls Grubb. 110.
Hassinger. Book of Alfar. 58.
Haunted. Cabot. 228.
Hausman, Gerald. Castaways. 449.
.Escape from Botany Bay. 276.
Hautman. Sweetblood. 449.
Hautzig. Picture of Grandmother. 159.
Have a Hot Time, Hades! McMullan. 166.
Hawes. Waiting for Christopher. 18.
Hayden. Very Worst Thing. 450.
Healer's Keep. Hanley. 201.
Hear the Wind Blow. Hahn. 448.
Hearne. Canine Connection. 315.
Heaven's All-Star Jazz Band. Carter. 228.
Hegi. Trudi & Pia. 363.
Heiligman, Deborah. Babies. 59.
. Honeybees. 19.
Heir Apparent. Vande Velde. 177.
Hello Benny! Harris. 110.
Henson. Making the Run. 19.
Here Come Our Firefighters! Demarest. 12.
Here's What You Do When You Can't Find
Your Shoe. Perry. 285.
Hero of Third Grade. DeLaCroix. 102.
Hershenhorn. Chicken Soup by Heart. 202.
Hiaasen. Hoot. 111.
Hickman. Ravine. 19.
Hicks. Animal House and Iz. 404.
. I Smell Like Ham. 59.
Hidier. Born Confused. 237.
High Heat. Deuker. 396.
High. Girl on the High-Diving Horse. 237.
Hindley. Does a Cow Say Boo? 60.
Hirschfelder. Children of Native America To-
day. 359.
Hitler's Daughter. French. 447.
Ho. Gathering the Dew. 315.
Hobbie. Toot & Puddle: Top of the World. 60.
Hobbs, V. Sonny's War. 111.
Hobbs, W. Jackie's Wild Seattle. 363.
Hodges. Legend of Saint Christopher. 159.
Hoffman, A. Green Angel. 316.
Hoffman, M. Color of Home. 60.
. Stravaganza. 238.
iHola! Jalapefio. Sanger. 33.
Holding the Reins. Talbert. 333.
Holly Starcross. Doherty. 152.
Holm. Creek. 450.
Holt. Keeper of the Night. 405.
Holub. Why Do Rabbits Hop? 276.
Holwitz. Big Blue Spot. 317.
Home at Last. Elya. 15.
Home of the Braves. Klass. 162.
Home on the Moon. Dyson. 397.
Homemade Love. hooks. 238.
Homespun Sarah. Kay. 407.
Honey. Remote Man. 61.
Honeybees. Heiligman. 19.
hooks. Be Boy Buzz. 160.
. Homemade Love. 238.
JULY/AUGUST 2003 
* 477
Hooper. Amy. 160.
Hoot. Hiaasen. 111.
Hopkins. Pet for Me. 364.
Hopkinson. Girl Wonder. 239.
Horniman. Mahalia. 405.
Horvath. Canning Season. 451.
House across the Street. Feiffer. 197.
House Called Awful End. Ardagh. 141.
House in the Meadow. Crum. 356.
House of the Scorpion. Farmer. 104.
How Angel Peterson Got His Name. Paulsen.
247.
How Ben Franklin Stole the Lightning.
Schanzer. 287.
How Do Dinosaurs Get Well Soon? Yolen. 338.
How I Fell in Love & Learned to Shoot Free
Throws. Ripslinger. 419.
How the Elephant Got Its Trunk. Richards.
376.
How the Fisherman Tricked the Genie. Sunami.
81.
How They Got Over. Greenfield. 235.
How to Be a Kid. Tait. 464.
Howe. Tales from the House of Bunnicula: In-
vasion of the Mind Swappers from Asteroid
6! 61.
__ 
. Tales from the House of Bunnicula: It
Came from Beneath the Bed! 61.
Howitt. Spider and the Fly. 112.
Hoyt-Goldsmith. Celebrating a Quinceafiera.
112.
Hughes. Annie Rose Is My Little Sister. 317.
Huiing. Puss in Cowboy Boots. 62.
Humble Pie. Donnelly. 103.
Hunter's Best Friend at School. Elliott. 54.
Hunter. Warriors. 277.
Hunting of the Last Dragon. Jordan. 23.
Hurd. Moo Cow Kaboom. 451.
Hurst. Wrong One. 452.
I Am Not Esther. Beale. 142.
I, Freddy. Reiche. 459.
I Kissed the Baby! Murphy. 414.
I Pledge Allegiance. Martin. 68.
I Saw a Bullfrog. Stern. 331.
I Smell Like Ham. Hicks. 59.
I'm Not Invited? Bluthenthal. 306.
Ibbotson. Great Ghost Rescue. 113.
Ice-Cream Cones for Sale! Greenstein. 448.
If the Shoe Fits. Whipple. 85.
If the World Were a Village. Smith. 35.
If You Take a Mouse to School. Numeroff. 72.
If You're Happy and You Know It! Ormerod.
457.
Imagine a Night. Thomson. 464.
In My Grandmother's House. Christensen. 355.
In the Piney Woods. Schotter. 287.
In the Shadow of the Pali. Cindrich. 52.
In the Time of Picasso. Mason. 25.
In the Time of Warhol. Mason. 25.
Indian Shoes. Smith. 35.
Ingman. Bad News! I'm in Charge! 406.
Invisible Kingdoms. Schwartz. 249.
Iris and Walter: The Sleepover. Guest. 58.
Isadora. Not Just Tutus. 318.
It Only Looks Easy. Swallow. 332.
Izzy's Place. Kornblatt. 407.
Jack. Cooper. 230.
Jack and the Beanstalk. Lorenz. 114.
Jack and the Dreamsack. Anholt. 436.
Jackie's Wild Seattle. Hobbs. 363.
Jackson. Ballad of Valentine. 202.
Jake Riley: Irreparably Damaged. Davis. 441.
James. Little One Step. 318.
Jamie and Angus Stories. Fine. 55.
Janisch. Fire. 239.
Jarvis. Thorn Ogres of Hagwood. 161.
Jean Laffite and the Big 01' Whale. Fox. 359.
Jenkins. What Do You Do with a Tail Like This?
277.
Jericho Walls. Collier. 10.
Jethro Byrd: Fairy Child. Graham. 57.
Jiang. Magical Monkey King. 20.
Jirrbal. Barlow. 47.
John Coltrane's Giant Steps. Raschka. 32.
Johnny Mutton, He's So Him! Proimos. 375.
Johnson, A. Looking for Red. 20.
Johnson, D. Substitute Teacher Plans. 62.
Johnson, Kathleen. Parallel Universe of Liars.
161.
Johnson, Kelly. Look at the Baby. 203.
Johnson, L. Soul Moon Soup. 240.
Johnston, Tim. Never So Green. 162.
Johnston, Tony. That Summer. 21.
Jonell. Bravemole. 21.
. When Mommy Was Mad. 22.
Jones Family Express. Steptoe. 463.
Jones, D. Merlin Conspiracy. 364.
Jones, M. Pigs Rock! 406.
Jones, U. Witch's Children. 365.
Joosse. Stars in the Darkness. 22.
Jordan, Sandra. Action Jackson. 108.
. Runaway Girl. 403.
Jordan, Sherryl. Hunting of the Last Dragon.
23.
Journey of Oliver K. Woodman. Pattison. 415.
Just Jane. Lavender. 163.
Kaczman. Bird and His Worm. 162.
Kalman. Fireboat. 63.
Karr. Bone Dry. 63.
.7th Knot. 452.
Kay. Homespun Sarah. 407.
Keehn. Anna Sunday. 23.
Keeper of the Doves. Byars. 190.
Keeper of the Night. Holt. 405.
478 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Keeping You a Secret. Peters. 416.
Keesha's House. Frost. 313.
Keller. Sleeping Bunny. 277.
Kensuke's Kingdom. Morpurgo. 324.
Kerley. Cool Drink of Water. 24.
Key to My Heart. Harel. 315.
Khan. Ruler of the Courtyard. 365.
Kimmel. Erie Canal Pirates. 113.
Kindl. Lost in the Labyrinth. 114.
King of the Mild Frontier. Crutcher. 357.
King-Smith. Chewing the Cud. 203.
Kings Are Already Here. Freymann-Weyr. 313.
Kissing Kate. Myracle. 373.
Klass. Home of the Braves. 162.
Knick-Knack Paddywhack! Zelinsky. 256.
Koertge. Shakespeare Bats Cleanup. 453.
Koja. Buddha Boy. 407.
Kolar. Racer Dogs. 318.
Koller. Someday. 64.
Kornblatt. Izzy's Place. 407.
Koss. Cheat. 240.
Kraft. Lenny and Mel's Summer Vacation. 408.
Krishnaswami. Chachaji's Cup. 408.
Krosoczka. Bubble Bath Pirates! 278.
Kuskin. Moon, Have You Met My Mother?
366.
Lady. Burgess. 51.
Laird. Face-to-Face with the Ladybug. 83.
Landau. Osama bin Laden. 24.
Lang. Baby Elephant. 366.
.Baby Lion. 366.
Lasky. Lucille Camps In. 453.
_ .Porkenstein. 64.
.Voice of Her Own. 241.
Last Mall Rat. Esckilsen. 398.
Last Treasure. Anderson. 348.
Latsch. Thief Lord. 106.
Lavender. Just Jane. 163.
Lawlor. Magnificent Voyage. 241.
Lawrence. Lightkeeper's Daughter. 114.
Lawton. Auschwitz. 163.
Layton. Sunday Blues. 65.
Leap, Frog. Cutler. 150.
Lee, H. While We Were Out. 278.
Lee, S. Please, Baby, Please. 242.
Lee, T. Please, Baby, Please. 242.
Leedy. There's a Frog in My Throat! 319.
Legend of Saint Christopher. Hodges. 159.
Lenny and Mel's Summer Vacation. Kraft. 408.
Leopard Sword. Cadnum. 191.
Lester, H. Tackylocks and the Three Bears. 164.
Lester, J. Why Heaven Is Far Away. 164.
Leuck. Goodnight, Baby Monster. 65.
Levin. Shoddy Cove. 409.
Levine, G. Betsy Who Cried Wolf. 65.
Levine, K. Hana's Suitcase. 279.
Lewis and Clark and Me. Myers. 71.
Lewis Carroll. Carpenter. 192.
Lichtenheld. Everything I Know about Mon-
sters. 66.
.What Are You So Grumpy About? 319.
Life and Times of the Ant. Micucci. 372.
Lightkeeper's Daughter. Lawrence. 114.
LightLand. McCutchen. 244.
Lindaman. Read Anything Good Lately? 303.
Lindgren. Mirabelle. 367.
Lionclaw. Springer. 251.
Lippert. Mrs. Chicken and the Hungry Croco-
dile. 457.
Lipsyte. Warrior Angel. 242.
Lisa's Baby Sister. Gutman. 314.
Litchman. Period Pieces. 270.
Little Book of Latin American Folktales.
Dearden. 358.
Little Brown Bear Won't Go to School. Dyer.
444.
Little Monkey Says Good Night. Paul. 416.
Little One Step. James. 318.
Little School Bus. Roth. 33.
Little Yau. Cannon. 100.
Little. Willow and Twig. 279.
Lizards. Facklam. 312.
Ljungkvist. Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs.
454.
Locomotion. Woodson. 294.
Look at the Baby. Johnson. 203.
Looking for Red. Johnson. 20.
Lorbiecki. Louisa May & Mr. Thoreau's Flute.
103.
Lord of the Kill. Taylor. 212.
Lorenz. Jack and the Beanstalk. 114.
Loretta: Ace Pinky Scout. Graves. 157.
Losing Forever. Friesen. 106.
Lost in the Labyrinth. Kindl. 114.
Louisa May & Mr. Thoreau's Flute. Dunlap.
103.
Lourie. On the Trail of Lewis and Clark. 25.
Love. Puppeteer's Apprentice. 367.
Lowry. Gooney Bird Greene. 66.
. Silent Boy. 320.
Lubar. Dunk. 165.
. Wizards of the Game. 409.
Lucas. Brooks. 393.
Lucille Camps In. Lasky. 453.
Lum. Princesses Are Not Quitters! 410.
Lupton. Pirican Pic and Pirican Mor. 368.
Lurie. Dancing in the Streets of Brooklyn. 165.
Luthardt. Peep! 320.
Lynch. Who the Man. 204.
Lynn, J. Glory. 368.
Lynn, T. Snow. 369.
Lyon. GinaJamie.Father.Bear. 165.
Maata's Journal. Sullivan. 332.
Macaroni Boy. Ayres. 265.
JULY/AUGUST 2003 
* 479
MacDonald. Please, Malese! 67.
.Quentin Fenton Herter III. 25.
Mack Made Movies. Brown. 352.
Mack. Princess Penelope. 280.
Mackall. Off to Bethlehem! 67.
MacPhail. Dark Waters. 280.
Made You Look. Roberts. 460.
Magic Gourd. Diakitd. 271.
Magical Monkey King. Jiang. 20.
Magnificent Voyage. Lawlor. 241.
Mahalia. Horniman. 405.
Mahy. Alchemy. 321.
Maitland. Bookstore Valentine. 204.
Making of a Writer. Nixon. 29.
Making the Run. Henson. 19.
Malka. Pressler. 418.
Maloney. Bronto Eats Meat. 410.
Mama Played Baseball. Adler. 302.
Mama's Babies. Crew. 11.
Mama's Coming Home. Banks. 304.
Mammoth. O'Brien. 98.
Man on the Moon. Bartram. 142.
Mango-Shaped Space. Mass. 411.
Manneken Pis. Radunsky. 123.
Mannis. Queen's Progress. 411.
Maria von Trapp. Ransom. 31.
Marrin. Dr. Jenner and the Speckled Monster.
204.
Marsden. Other Side of Dawn. 68.
_ 
.Winter. 115.
Martens. Swan Lake. 127.
Martin, A. Corner of the Universe. 243.
Martin, B. I Pledge Allegiance. 68.
Martin, J. Water Gift and the Pig of the Pig.
369.
Martin, N. Flight of the Fisherbird. 370.
__ 
.Perfect Snow. 115.
Martin, R. World before This One. 243.
Martyn Pig. Brooks. 7.
Masini. Wedding Dress Mess. 370.
Mason, A. In the Time of Picasso. 25.
. In the Time of Warhol. 25.
Mason, S. Quigleys. 26.
Mass. Mango-Shaped Space. 411.
Mathematickles! Franco. 400.
Matlin. Deaf Child Crossing. 116.
Matthews. Barefoot Book of Knights. 26.
Maurer. Wright Sister. 371.
Mayfield. Drowning Anna. 166.
Mbuthia. My Sister's Wedding. 280.
McCarthy. George Upside Down. 321.
McCaughrean. One Bright Penny. 244.
McClintock. Dahlia. 69.
McClure. Tom Finger. 205.
McCutchen. LightLand. 244.
McDonald. Chill Wind. 205.
McDonnell. Giddy-up! Let's Ride! 69.
McDonough. Peaceful Protest. 245.
McGhee. Countdown to Kindergarten. 69.
McGinty. Ten Little Lambs. 27.
McKay. Was That Christmas? 116.
McKissack, F. Days of Jubilee. 322.
McKissack, P. Days of Jubilee. 322.
. Tippy Lemmey. 281.
McLean. Women of Adventure. 371.
McMullan. Have a Hot Time, Hades! 166.
McNamara. Too Many Valentines. 245.
McNeal. Zipped. 281.
McNish. Doomspell. 70.
Me and My Robot. West. 427.
Me and Uncle Romie. Hartfield. 201.
Mead. Year of No Rain. 454.
Meddaugh. Harry on the Rocks. 412.
Meeting Melanie. Garden. 199.
Meltzer. Ten Kings and the Worlds They Ruled.
27.
Merlin Conspiracy. Jones. 364.
Merry Christmas, Big Hungry Bear! Wood. 131.
Meyer. Bloody Jack. 167.
Micucci. Life and Times of the Ant. 372.
Midnight for Charlie Bone. Nimmo. 373.
Mightier Than the Sword. Yolen. 466.
Milgrim. See Pip Point. 322.
Milligan. Prince of Ireland and the Three Magic
Stallions. 323.
Millions to Measure. Schwartz. 330.
Mills. Alex Ryan, Stop That! 323.
Milly and the Macy's Parade. Corey. 101.
Milord. Willa the Wonderful. 412.
Minnie and Moo: The Night before Christmas.
Cazet. 148.
Minters. Princess Fishtail. 167.
Mirabelle. Lindgren. 367.
Mitchell. Nightingale. 97.
Mitten. Shawn Fanning. 28.
Mitton. Plum. 372.
Mixed-Up Doubles. Eulo. 446.
Mochizuki. Beacon Hill Boys. 246.
Model T. Weitzman. 130.
Moe McTooth. Spinelli. 423.
Mole and the Baby Bird. Newman. 120.
Molly Goes Shopping. Eriksson. 311.
Monkey for Sale. Stanley. 252.
Monster in Me. Harrison. 404.
Montes. Get Ready for Gabf! 413.
Montgomery, H. Voyage of The Arctic Tern.
70.
Montgomery, S. Encantado. 28.
Moo Cow Kaboom. Hurd. 451.
Moon, Have You Met My Mother? Kuskin.
366.
Moon. Witch Boy. 29.
Moore. Night before Christmas. 117.
Moranville. Over the River. 206.
480 
* THE BULLETIN
More Pies! Munsch. 207.
Morpurgo. Kensuke's Kingdom. 324.
Morris. Ballad of Sir Dinadan. 324.
Morris the Artist. Segal. 462.
Morrison. Book of Mean People. 206.
Moss, Marissa. Galen. 168.
Moss, Miriam. Scritch Scratch. 117.
Mount Olympus Basketball. O'Malley. 374.
Mouse, the Cat, and Grandmother's Hat.
Willard. 428.
Mrs. Biddlebox. Smith. 211.
Mrs. Chicken and the Hungry Crocodile.
Paye. 457.
Muhammad Ali. Shange. 173.
Miller. Farley Farts. 325.
Munsch. More Pies! 207.
. Zoom! 325.
Murdoch. Malka. 418.
Murphy, J. American Plague. 413.
Murphy, M. Alphabet Keeper. 282.
. I Kissed the Baby! 414.
Murphy, P. Elinor and Violet. 414.
Murray. Bottled Up. 455.
Music Thief. Griffin. 200.
Musical Beds. Bergman. 187.
Muth. Stone Soup. 282.
My Animals. Emberley. 104.
My Beastie Book of ABC. Frampton. 16.
My Brother Loved Snowflakes. Bahr. 142.
My Brother Martin. Farris. 272.
My Brothers' Flying Machine. Yolen. 379.
My Clothes. Emberley. 104.
My Daddy and Me. Spinelli. 423.
My Diary from Here to There. Pdrez. 121.
My Food. Emberley. 104.
My Name Is Yoon. Recorvits. 328.
My Sister's Wedding. Mbuthia. 280.
My Toys. Emberley. 104.
Myers, A. Tulsa Burning. 168.
Myers, L. Lewis and Clark and Me. 71.
Myers, W. Blues Journey. 415.
__ 
. Dream Bearer. 455.
Myracle. Kissing Kate. 373.
Mystic Horse. Goble. 447.
Mythological Monsters of Ancient Greece.
Fanelli. 196.
Naidoo. Out of Bounds. 246.
Namioka. Ocean Apart, a World Away. 71.
Napoli. Great God Pan. 456.
Nature Did It First! Goodman. 362.
Naylor, Phyllis Reynolds. Bernie Magruder &
the Bats in the Belfry. 326.
_ .Blizzard's Wake. 207.
.Please Do Feed the Bears. 72.
.Starting with Alice. 118.
Necessary Noise. Cart. 439.
Neimark. There Ain't Nobody That Can Sing
Like Me. 118.
Nelson. Ruby Electric. 456.
Never So Green. Johnston. 162.
New Improved Santa. Wolff. 131.
New Year Be Coming! Boling. 189.
New York's Bravest. Osborne. 30.
Newbery. Shell House. 119.
Newman, L. Runaway Dreidel! 119.
Newman, M. Mole and the Baby Bird. 120.
Nichols. Under the Moon & over the Sea. 225.
Night before Christmas. Moore. 117.
Nightingale. Andersen. 97.
Nightingale. Andersen. 98.
Nimmo. Midnight for Charlie Bone. 373.
Nine Animals and the Well. Rumford. 421.
Nifio's Mask. Winter. 294.
Nix. Abhorsen. 283.
Nixon. Making of a Writer. 29.
No Zombies Allowed. Novak. 30.
Noah's Ark. Bible. 188.
Noisy Airplane Ride. Downs. 443.
Nolen. Plantzilla. 120.
Northern Light. Donnelly. 443.
Not as Crazy as I Seem. Harrar. 403.
Not Just Tutus. Isadora. 318.
Novak. No Zombies Allowed. 30.
Numeroff. If You Take a Mouse to School. 72.
O'Brien. Mammoth. 98.
O'Connor. Fame and Glory in Freedom, Geor-
gia. 283.
O'Dell. Agnes Parker... Girl in Progress. 326.
O'Garden. Scrubbly-Bubbly Car Wash. 284.
O'Hair. Twin to Twin. 415.
O'Malley. Mount Olympus Basketball. 374.
Ocean Apart, a World Away. Namioka. 71.
Off to Bethlehem! Mackall. 67.
Oh No, Gotta Go! Elya. 444.
Okimoto. White Swan Express. 208.
Old. To Fly. 121.
Oliver Finds His Way. Root. 172.
Olivia Kidney. Potter. 417.
On Christmas Eve. Rosenberg. 76.
On the Go with Pirate Pete and Pirate Joe. Can-
non. 8.
On the Trail of Lewis and Clark. Lourie. 25.
Once upon a Marigold. Ferris. 234.
Once upon a Time. Daly. 311.
One and Seven. Rodari. 420.
One Bright Penny. McCaughrean. 244.
One Dark Night. Wheeler. 465.
One Hot Second. Young. 86.
One Is a Snail, Ten Is a Crab. Sayre. 461.
One Shot. Glick. 402.
Oppel. Firewing. 327.
Ordal. Princess Aasta. 208.
Orgel. Ask Me. 269.
Ormerod. If You're Happy and You Know It!
457.
Osama bin Laden. Landau. 24.
JULY/AUGUST 2003 
* 481
Osborn. Project UltraSwan. 169.
Osborne. New York's Bravest. 30.
. Tales from the Odyssey: The Land of
the Dead. 169.
.Tales from the Odyssey: The One-Eyed
Giant. 169.
Other Side of Dawn. Marsden. 68.
Our Gracie Aunt. Woodson. 37.
Out of Bounds. Naidoo. 246.
Outside In. Young. 37.
Over the River. Moranville. 206.
Overnight. Griffin. 235.
Pack. Carbone. 267.
Page. What Do You Do with a Tail Like This?
277.
Paint by Magic. Reiss. 32.
Paisano, the Roadrunner. Dewey. 12.
Palatini. Perfect Pet. 374.
Paradise. Goodman. 107.
Parallel Universe of Liars. Johnson. 161.
Parasite Pig. Sleator. 249.
Patent. Fabulous Fluttering Tropical Butterflies.
327.
Paterson. Same Stuff as Stars. 72.
Pattison. Journey of Oliver K. Woodman. 415.
Paul. Little Monkey Says Good Night. 416.
Paulsen. How Angel Peterson Got His Name.
247.
Paye. Mrs. Chicken and the Hungry Crocodile.
457.
Peaceful Protest. McDonough. 245.
Pearce. Familiar and Haunting. 73.
Peden. City of the Beasts. 225.
Pedro the Brave. Broadley. 226.
Peep! Luthardt. 320.
Pennac. Eye of the Wolf. 284.
PNrez. My Diary from Here to There. 121.
Perfect Harmony. Smith. 79.
Perfect Pet. Palatini. 374.
Perfect Snow. Martin. 115.
Period Pieces. Deak. 270.
Perry. Here's What You Do When You Can't
Find Your Shoe. 285.
Pet for Me. Hopkins. 364.
Peters. Keeping You a Secret. 416.
Philbrick. Revenge of the Whale. 122.
Picture Book of Lewis and Clark. Adler. 302.
Picture of Grandmother. Hautzig. 159.
Picture This. Friedman. 360.
Pictures for Miss Josie. Belton. 392.
Pictures of Hollis Woods. Giff. 156.
Pierce. Protector of the Small: Lady Knight. 73.
.Shatterglass. 328.
Pig Named Perrier. Spurr. 36.
Pig Tale. Flieger. 198.
Pigs Rock! Jones. 406.
Pinkney. Nightingale. 98.
.Noah's Ark. 188.
Pinocchio the Boy or Incognito in Collodi.
Smith. 127.
iPfo Peep! Ada. 388.
Pirate Jam. Brown. 352.
Pirican Pic and Pirican Mor. Lupton. 368.
Planet Janet. Sheldon. 289.
Plantzilla. Nolen. 120.
Players in Pigtails. Corey. 441.
Please Do Feed the Bears. Naylor. 72.
Please, Baby, Please. Lee. 242.
Please, Malese! MacDonald. 67.
Plum-Ucci. What Happened to Lani Garver.
122.
Plum. Mitton. 372.
Polacco. Christmas Tapestry. 74.
Pool Boy. Simmons. 422.
Popova. Tale of the Firebird. 127.
Porkenstein. Lasky. 64.
Porter. Dance of Sisters. 209.
Posner. Fantastic Creatures from Greek Myths.
417.
. Gods and Goddesses from Greek Myths.
417.
Postcards from No Man's Land. Chambers. 9.
Posthuma. Benny. 285.
Potch & Polly. Steig. 80.
Potter, E. Olivia Kidney. 417.
Potter, G. Year I Didn't Go to School. 74.
Prairie Whispers. Arrington. 349.
Pratchett. Wee Free Men. 458.
Prelutsky. Halloween Countdown. 31.
. Scranimals. 75.
Pressler. Malka. 418.
Preston. Remember the Lusitania! 418.
Priceman. Princess Picky. 75.
Priestley. Death and the Arrow. 458.
Primavera. Auntie Claus and the Key to Christ-
mas. 123.
Prince of Ireland and the Three Magic Stallions.
Milligan. 323.
Princess Aasta. Ordal. 208.
Princess Fishtail. Minters. 167.
Princess in Waiting. Cabot. 353.
Princess Mouse. Shepard. 290.
Princess Penelope. Mack. 280.
Princess Picky. Priceman. 75.
Princesses Are Not Quitters! Lum. 410.
Pringle. Crows! 170.
. Strange Animals, New to Science. 31.
Proimos. Johnny Mutton, He's So Him! 375.
Project UltraSwan. Osborn. 169.
Prose. After. 458.
Protector of the Small: Lady Knight. Pierce. 73.
Provensen. Day in the Life of Murphy. 419.
Pudgy. Goodhart. 361.
Pumpkin Day! Wallace. 84.
Puppeteer's Apprentice. Love. 367.
Puppy Mudge Takes a Bath. Rylant. 248.
482 
* THE BULLETIN
Puss in Cowboy Boots. Huling. 62.
Queen of Everything. Caletti. 191.
Queen's Progress. Mannis. 411.
Quentin Fenton Herter III. MacDonald. 25.
Quigleys. Mason. 26.
Quit It. Byalick. 146.
Quiver. Spinner. 251.
Rabbit and the Dragon King. San Souci. 248.
Rabble Rousers. Harness. 235.
Racer Dogs. Kolar. 318.
Radunsky. Manneken Pis. 123.
Rainbow Kite. Shyer. 174.
Raise the Roofl Suen. 253.
Range Eternal. Erdrich. 153.
Ransom. Maria von Trapp. 31.
Rap A Tap Tap. Dillon. 151.
Rapp. 33 Snowfish. 375.
Raschka. John Coltrane's Giant Steps. 32.
Rats! Conniff. 150.
Ravine. Hickman. 19.
Read Anything Good Lately? Allen. 303.
Real American. Easton. 13.
Real, True Dulcie Campbell. DeFelice. 150.
Recorvits. My Name Is Yoon. 328.
Rector. Tria and the Great Star Rescue. 32.
Reeder. Before the Creeks Ran Red. 286.
Reef. This Our Dark Country. 209.
Refugee Boy. Zephaniah. 87.
Regan. Chance. 459.
Reiche. I, Freddy. 459.
Reiss, K. Paint by Magic. 32.
Reiss, M. Santa Claustrophobia. 170.
Remember the Lusitania! Preston. 418.
Remembering Manzanar. Cooper. 194.
Remote Man. Honey. 61.
Revenge of the Whale. Philbrick. 122.
Richards. How the Elephant Got Its Trunk.
376.
Ripslinger. How I Fell in Love & Learned to
Shoot Free Throws. 419.
Ritter. Boy Who Saved Baseball. 460.
River Boy. Anderson. 264.
Robbins. Apples. 171.
Roberts, B. Rosie to the Rescue. 329.
Roberts, D. Made You Look. 460.
Robin's Room. Brown. 8
Rocklin. This Book Is Haunted. 75.
Rockwell. 100 School Days. 76.
Rodari. One and Seven. 420.
Rodda. Fairy Realm: The Charm Bracelet. 286.
Rodzina. Cushman. 269.
Rogasky. Smoke and Ashes. 124.
Roller Coaster. Frazee. 401.
Rooftop Rocket Party. Chambers. 354.
Rooster and the Fox. Ward. 255.
Root, B. Gumbrella. 171.
Root, P. Big Momma Makes the World. 247.
.Oliver Finds His Way. 172.
Rope Trick. Alexander. 186.
Rosa Raposa. Campoy. 100.
Rosenberg. 17. 248.
.On Christmas Eve. 76.
Rosie to the Rescue. Roberts. 329.
Roth. Little School Bus. 33.
Rouillard. Barnaby's Bunny. 329.
Rubel. Grody's Not So Golden Rules. 420.
Rubin. Degas and the Dance. 210.
Ruby Electric. Nelson. 456.
Ruby's Beauty Shop. Wells. 130.
Ruby's Wish. Bridges. 49.
Rudest Alien on Earth. Conly. 101.
Ruler of the Courtyard. Khan. 365.
Rumford. Nine Animals and the Well. 421.
Rumor. Thornhill. 213.
Runaway Dreidel! Newman. 119.
Runaway Girl. Greenberg. 403.
Rupp. Waterstone. 76.
Russo. Trouble with Baby. 376.
Ryan. When Marian Sang. 172.
Ryder. Big Bear Ball. 77.
Rylant. God Went to Beauty School. 461.
.Puppy Mudge Takes a Bath. 248.
Sahara Special. Codell. 308.
Saints. Sanderson. 287.
Saladin. Stanley. 212.
Saldafia. Finding Our Way. 330.
Salley. Epossumondas. 77.
Same Stuff as Stars. Paterson. 72.
Sammy Keyes and the Search for Snake Eyes.
Van Draanen. 36.
Sampson. I Pledge Allegiance. 68.
San Souci, D. Rabbit and the Dragon King. 248.
San Souci, R. Twins and the Bird of Darkness.
78.
San Vicente. Festival of Bones. 124.
Sanderson. Saints. 287.
Sandin. Good Night, Animals. 142.
Sandmare. Cooper. 309.
Sanger. iHola! Jalapefio. 33.
Santa Claustrophobia. Reiss. 170.
Sayre. One Is a Snail, Ten Is a Crab. 461.
.Secrets of Sounds. 210.
Scaredy Cats. Bottner. 393.
Schanzer. How Ben Franklin Stole the Light-
ning. 287.
Schertle. All You Need for a Snowman. 210.
. Teddy Bear, Teddy Bear. 421.
. Pfo Peep! 388.
Schotter. Captain Bob Takes Flight. 462.
. In the Piney Woods. 287.
Schulman. Cop on the Beat. 125.
Schwartz, A. What James Likes Best. 288.
Schwartz, D. Millions to Measure. 330.
Schwartz, H. Invisible Kingdoms. 249.
JULY/AUGUST 2003 
* 483
Schwarz, J. Ariel and Emily. 275.
Schwarz, R. Funky Junk. 360.
Scranimals. Prelutsky. 75.
Scritch Scratch. Moss. 117.
Scrubba Dub. Van Laan. 334.
Scrubbly-Bubbly Car Wash. O'Garden. 284.
Sea Turtles. Cerullo. 440.
Seal Island Seven. Bartlett. 48.
Second Summer of the Sisterhood. Brashares.
351.
Secret Heart. Almond. 140.
Secrets of Sounds. Sayre. 210.
Sedgwick. Dark Horse. 421.
See Pip Point. Milgrim. 322.
Seeing Stone. DiTerlizzi. 442.
Seeing Sugar. Brinson. 438.
Segal. Morris the Artist. 462.
Seinfeld. Halloween. 78.
Sense Pass King. Tchana. 213.
Seuling. From Head to Toe. 172.
Shadow Place. Tanzman. 81.
Shakespeare Bats Cleanup. Koertge. 453.
Shalant. When Pirates Came to Brooklyn. 173.
Shange. Daddy Says. 288.
. Muhammad Ali. 173.
Shannon. Tippy-Toe Chick, Go! 289.
Shaper. Haas. 18.
Shatterglass. Pierce. 328.
Shaw. Black-Eyed Suzie. 34.
Shawn Fanning. Mitten. 28.
Sheldon. Planet Janet. 289.
Shell House. Newbery. 119.
Shepard. Princess Mouse. 290.
Shirley's Wonderful Baby. Gregory. 199.
Shoddy Cove. Levin. 409.
Shooting Monarchs. Halliday. 362.
Shopaholic. Waite. 425.
Shreve. Trout and Me. 125.
Shrouding Woman. Ellsworth. 14.
Shyer. Rainbow Kite. 174.
Sidman. World according to Dog. 290.
Sierra. Can You Guess My Name? 211.
. Silly & Sillier. 174.
Signers. Fradin. 234.
Silent Boy. Lowry. 320.
Silent Movie. Avi. 303.
Silly & Sillier. Sierra. 174.
Silverman. When the Chickens Went On Strike.
463.
Simmons. Pool Boy. 422.
Sindbad's Secret. Zeman. 380.
Singer. Boo Hoo Boo-Boo. 34.
Company of Crows. 175.
. Fireflies and Midnight. 377.
Singing the Dogstar Blues. Goodman. 447.
Six Days in October. Blumenthal. 145.
Skeleton Hiccups. Cuyler. 11.
Slade. Dust. 291.
Sleator. Parasite Pig. 249.
Sleeping Beauty. Craft. 194.
Sleeping Bunny. Keller. 277.
Slim and Jim. Egielski. 14.
Sloan. Bury the Dead. 78.
Smith, Charles. Perfect Harmony. 79.
Smith, Cynthia. Indian Shoes. 35.
Smith, D. If the World Were a Village. 35.
Smith, H. Way a Door Closes. 377.
Smith, Lane. Pinocchio the Boy or Incognito
in Collodi. 127.
Smith, Linda. Mrs. Biddlebox. 211.
Smoke and Ashes. Rogasky. 124.
Sneve. Enduring Wisdom. 330.
Snow. Lynn. 369.
Snow. Stojic. 175.
Snow Bears. Waddell. 254.
Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs. Aiken. 186.
Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs.
Ljungkvist. 454.
Snyder, M. Hannah's Garden. 250.
Snyder, Z. Ghosts of Rathburn Park. 250.
So You Want to Be an Inventor? St. George.
79.
Someday. Koller. 64.
Song Shoots out of My Mouth. Adoff. 224.
Sonny's War. Hobbs. 111.
Sorcery & Cecelia. Wrede. 466.
Soul Moon Soup. Johnson. 240.
Soul Searching. Fraustino. 154.
Souperchicken. Auch. 391.
Sparrow Jack. Gerstein. 401.
Spider and the Fly. Howitt. 112.
Spinelli, E. Moe McTooth. 423.
Spinelli, J. My Daddy and Me. 423.
Spinner. Quiver. 251.
Spirin. Tale of the Firebird. 127.
Spitting Image. Crum. 310.
Springer. Lionclaw. 251.
Spurr. Pig Named Perrier. 36.
. Surfer Dog. 36.
St. George. So You Want to Be an Inventor?
79.
Stadler. Catilda. 291.
Stand Tall. Bauer. 48.
Stanley's Party. Bailey. 350.
Stanley, D. Saladin. 212.
Stanley, Flat Again! Brown. 307.
Stanley, S. Monkey for Sale. 252.
Stars in the Darkness. Joosse. 22.
Stars. Tomecek. 293.
Starting with Alice. Naylor. 118.
Stauffacher. Angel. 127.
Steig. Potch & Polly. 80.
.When Everybody Wore a Hat. 424.
Stenhouse. Dirty Deed. 331.
484 
* THE BULLETIN
Steps. Cohn. 229.
Steptoe. Jones Family Express. 463.
Stern. I Saw a Bullfrog. 331.
Stine. Beware! 80.
Stink Alley. Gilson. 17.
Stojic. Snow. 175.
Stone Soup. Muth. 282.
Stonecutter. Watts. 129.
Stories from the Bible. Bible. 6.
Storm Catchers. Bowler. 437.
Story of Noodles. Compestine. 230.
Strange Animals, New to Science. Pringle. 31.
Strasser. CON-fidence. 252.
. Thief of Dreams. 292.
Stravaganza. Hoffman. 238.
Stray Voltage. Doyle. 195.
Street. There's a Frog in My Throat! 319.
Stuve-Bodeen. Elizabeti's School. 175.
Substitute Teacher Plans. Johnson. 62.
Suen. Raise the Roof! 253.
Sullivan. Maata's Journal. 332.
Summerland. Chabon. 193.
Sumo Mouse. Wisniewski. 214.
Sunami. How the Fisherman Tricked the Ge-
nie. 81.
Sunday Blues. Layton. 65.
Surfer Dog. Spurr. 36.
Surviving the Applewhites. Tolan. 82.
Swain. Hairdo! 176.
Swallow. It Only Looks Easy. 332.
Swan Lake. Tchaikovsky. 127.
Sweetblood. Hautman. 449.
Swimming Upstream. George. 156.
Swinburne. Woods Scientist. 292.
Swords for Hire. Allen. 389.
Taback. This Is the House that Jack Built. 81.
Tackylocks and the Three Bears. Lester. 164.
Tadpole. White. 336.
Tait. How to Be a Kid. 464.
Talbert. Holding the Reins. 333.
Tale of the Firebird. Spirin. 127.
Tales from the House of Bunnicula: Invasion
of the Mind Swappers from Asteroid 6!
Howe. 61.
Tales from the House of Bunnicula: It Came
from Beneath the Bed! Howe. 61.
Tales from the Odyssey: The Land of the Dead.
Osborne. 169.
Tales from the Odyssey: The One-Eyed Giant.
Osborne. 169.
Talkin' about Bessie. Grimes. 200.
Tanaka. Fire. 239.
Tanzman. Shadow Place. 81.
Taylor. Lord of the Kill. 212.
Tchaikovsky. Swan Lake. 127.
Tchana. Sense Pass King. 213.
Teddy Bear, Teddy Bear. Scherdtle. 421.
Ten Kings and the Worlds They Ruled. Meltzer.
27.
Ten Little Lambs. McGinty. 27.
Tenement. Bial. 99.
Terrible Underpants. Cooke. 356.
Terrorism in America. Andryszewski. 5.
Thank You, Sarah. Anderson. 225.
Thanks, Mom. Emberley. 398.
That Summer. Johnston. 21.
That's Hockey. Bouchard. 145.
Thayer. Casey at the Bat. 253.
There Ain't Nobody That Can Sing Like Me.
Neimark. 118.
There Was a Bold Lady Who Wanted a Star.
Harper. 109.
There's a Frog in My Throat! Leedy. 319.
Thief Lord. Funke. 106.
Thief of Dreams. Strasser. 292.
Things Will NEVER Be the Same. dePaola.
270.
Thirsty Baby. Cullen. 310.
This Book Is Haunted. Rocklin. 75.
This Is the House that Jack Built. Taback. 81.
This Isn't about the Money. Warner. 177.
This Our Dark Country. Reef. 209.
Thomas, J. Crowning Glory. 82.
Thomas, S. Get Well, Good Knight. 176.
Thomson. Imagine a Night. 464.
Thorn Ogres of Hagwood. Jarvis. 161.
Thornhill. Rumor. 213.
Three Silly Girls Grubb. Hassett. 110.
Thumbelina. Andersen. 4.
Time Pieces. Hamilton. 159.
Timespinners. Gray. 314.
Timothy's Tales from Hilltop School. Wells. 85.
Tippy Lemmey. McKissack. 281.
Tippy-Toe Chick, Go! Shannon. 289.
Tithe. Black. 188.
To Fly. Old. 121.
To the Edge of the World. Torrey. 333.
To the Top. Venables. 425.
Toestomper and the Bad Butterflies. Collicott.
355.
Together Apart. Gray. 108.
Tolan. Surviving the Applewhites. 82.
Tom Finger. McClure. 205.
Tomecek, Steve. Dirt. 127.
Tomecek. Stars. 293.
Too Many Valentines. McNamara. 245.
Toot & Puddle: Top of the World. Hobbie. 60.
Torres. Crossing Montana. 83.
Torrey. To the Edge of the World. 333.
Tracqui. Face-to-Face with the Ladybug. 83.
Trading Places with Tank Talbott. Butler.
439.
Traitor. Yep. 295.
Tria and the Great Star Rescue. Rector. 32.
JULY/AUGUST 2003 
* 485
Troll King. Vornholt. 129.
Trouble with Babies. Freeman. 105.
Trouble with Baby. Russo. 376.
Trout and Me. Shreve. 125.
Trudi & Pia. Hegi. 363.
True Confessions of a Heartless Girl. Brooks.
266.
True Meaning of Cleavage. Fredericks. 273.
True Prince. Cheaney. 149.
Tulsa Burning. Myers. 168.
Twin to Twin. O'Hair. 415.
Twins and the Bird of Darkness. San Souci. 78.
Two Fools and a Horse. Derby. 395.
Tyler on Prime Time. Atinsky. 5.
Ug. Briggs. 190.
Ugly Princess and the Wise Fool. Gray. 158.
Uncle Andy's. Warhola. 426.
Under the Moon & over the Sea. Agard. 225.
Under the Same Sky. DeFelice. 358.
Understanding September 11th. Frank. 16.
United Tates of America. Danziger. 12.
Van Allsburg. Zathura. 127.
Van Draanen. Sammy Keyes and the Search for
Snake Eyes. 36.
Van Laan. Scrubba Dub. 334.
Van Leeuwen. Amazing Air Balloon. 424.
Vande Velde. Heir Apparent. 177.
._ Wizard at Work. 465.
Veciana-Suarez. Flight to Freedom. 253.
Venables. To the Top. 425.
Very Worst Thing. Hayden. 450.
Vestergaard. Driving Daddy. 334.
.Wake Up, Mama! 334.
Vietnam War. Young. 38.
Village That Vanished. Grifalconi. 109.
Visiting Day. Woodson. 178.
Voake. Ginger Finds a Home. 465.
Voice of Her Own. Lasky. 241.
Voigt. Bad Girls in Love. 84.
Vornholt. Troll King. 129.
Voyage of The Arctic Tern. Montgomery. 70.
Vrombaut. Clarabella's Teeth. 335.
Waber. Courage. 254.
Waddell. Snow Bears. 254.
Wade. Condoleezza Rice. 335.
Waifs and Strays. de Lint. 151.
Waite. Shopaholic. 425.
Waiting for Christopher. Hawes. 18.
Wake Up, Mama! Vestergaard. 334.
Wald. Little Book of Latin American Folktales.
358.
Wallace. Pumpkin Day! 84.
Walton. Bunnies on the Go. 293.
Wandering Warrior. Chen. 307.
Ward. Dragon Machine. 426.
__ . Rooster and the Fox. 255.
Warhola. Uncle Andy's. 426.
Waring. Alberto the Dancing Alligator. 129.
Warner. This Isn't about the Money. 177.
Warrior Angel. Lipsyte. 242.
Warriors. Hunter. 277.
Warriors of Alavna. Browne. 50.
Was That Christmas? McKay. 116.
Water Gift and the Pig of the Pig. Martin. 369.
Waterstone. Rupp. 76.
Watts. Stonecutter. 129.
Way a Door Closes. Smith. 377.
Weatherly. Child X. 84.
Weaver. Claws. 335.
Wedding Dress Mess. Masini. 370.
Wee Free Men. Pratchett. 458.
Week in the Woods. Clements. 193.
Weeks. Guy Wire. 214.
Wein. Coalition of Lions. 336.
Weiss. Big City Cool. 214.
Weitzman. Model T. 130.
Welcome, Baby! Calmenson. 147.
Wells. Ruby's Beauty Shop. 130.
. Timothy's Tales from Hilltop School.
85.
West. Me and My Robot. 427.
Weston. Act I, Act II, Act Normal. 427.
What Are You So Grumpy About? Lichtenheld.
319.
What Do You Do with a Tail Like This? Jenkins.
277.
What Happened to Lani Garver. Plum-Ucci.
122.
What James Likes Best. Schwartz. 288.
What the Birds See. Hartnett. 275.
What Would Joey Do? Gantos. 107.
Wheeler. One Dark Night. 465.
When Everybody Wore a Hat. Steig. 424.
When Mammoths Walked the Earth. Arnold.
98.
When Marcus Moore Moved In. Bond. 437.
When Marian Sang. Ryan. 172.
When Mommy Was Mad. Jonell. 22.
When Pirates Came to Brooklyn. Shalant. 173.
When the Chickens Went On Strike.
Silverman. 463.
Where Does a Tiger-Heron Spend the Night?
Carney. 9.
Where I'd Like to Be. Dowell. 396.
Where's Pup? Dodds. 271.
While We Were Out. Lee. 278.
Whipple. If the Shoe Fits. 85.
White Swan Express. Okimoto. 208.
White. Tadpole. 336.
Whittington. Body Marks. 155.
Who Is Jesse Flood? Doyle. 152.
Who the Man. Lynch. 204.
Who Will Tell My Brother? Carvell. 51.
Who's That Knocking on Christmas Eve? Brett.
49.
486 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Why Do Rabbits Hop? Holub. 276.
Why Heaven Is Far Away. Lester. 164.
Willa the Wonderful. Milord. 412.
Willard. Mouse, the Cat, and Grandmother's
Hat. 428.
Willems. Don't Let the Pigeon Drive the Bus!
378.
Willow and Twig. Little. 279.
Wilson, Jacqueline. Girls under Pressure. 86.
Wilson, John. And in the Morning. 337.
Wilson, K. Bear Wants More. 294.
Wilson, S. Big Day on the River. 428.
Winter, J. Nifio's Mask. 294.
Winter. Marsden. 115.
Winters. Abe Lincoln. 379.
Wisniewski. Sumo Mouse. 214.
Witch Boy. Moon. 29.
Witch's Children. Jones. 365.
Wizard at Work. Vande Velde. 465.
Wizards of the Game. Lubar. 409.
Wolf on the Fold. Clarke. 52.
Wolff. New Improved Santa. 131.
Women of Adventure. McLean. 371.
Wonder Goal! Foreman. 399.
Wood. Merry Christmas, Big Hungry Bear! 131.
Woods Scientist. Swinburne. 292.
Woodson, Jacqueline. Locomotion. 294.
_ . Our Gracie Aunt. 37.
.Visiting Day. 178.
World according to Dog. Sidman. 290.
World before This One. Martin. 243.
Wrede. Sorcery & Cecelia. 466.
Wright Sister. Maurer. 371.
Wrong One. Hurst. 452.
Year I Didn't Go to School. Potter. 74.
Year of No Rain. Mead. 454.
Year of the Hangman. Blackwood. 144.
Yep. Traitor. 295.
Yezerski. Full Hand. 178.
Yolen.,Atalanta and the Arcadian Beast. 337.
. Girl in a Cage. 255.
_ . How Do Dinosaurs Get Well Soon?
338.
. Mightier Than the Sword. 466.
.My Brothers' Flying Machine. 379.
Young Adventurer's Guide to Everest. Chester.
10.
Young, A. Belinda the Ballerina. 338.
Young, C. One Hot Second. 86.
Young, K. Outside In. 37.
Young, M. Vietnam War. 38.
Zathura. Van Allsburg. 127.
Zeises. Bringing Up the Bones. 215.
Zekauskas. Bronto Eats Meat. 410.
Zelinsky. Knick-Knack Paddywhack! 256.
Zeller. Little Book of Latin American Folktales.
358.
Zeman. Sindbad's Secret. 380.
Zephaniah. Refugee Boy. 87.
Ziefert. Dozen Ducklings Lost and Found. 339.
.Egad Alligator! 38.
Zipped. McNeal. 281.
Zoom! Munsch. 325.
Zulu Dog. Ferreira. 197.
Zusak. Getting the Girl. 467.
Zwerger. Stories from the Bible. 6.
SSwan Lake. 127.
M1LLIASUEN
1AMEASURE
David M. Schwartz
pictures by Steven Kellogg
S"Marvelosissimo the Mathematical
Magician returns, this time tackling
measurement, in this latest installment of
the winning 'millions' series. Schwartz presents
an enormous amount of information in an
impressively clear and concise manner. ..
-tow tall is 
The art is as fun to explore as it is functional ...
Dinomite? 
the Schwartz-Kellogg team has got it right again."
--Starred review / Kirkus Reviews
"- "Schwartz not only manages to impart a
good deal of basic information about linear, weight,
and volume measurements but also entertains the
reader. He receives ample support from illustrator
Kellogg, who contributes enough merry
madness to make learning fun."
-Starred review / ALA Booklist
Ages 5-12. * $16.99 Tr (0-688-12916-1)
, $17.89 Lb (0-06-623784-X)
.
does he drink?
Also available
HOW MUCH IS A MILLON?
$16.99 Tr (0-688-04049-7)
$17.89 Lb (0-688-04050-0)
$6.99 Pb (0-688-09933-5)
IF YOU MADE A MILION
$16.99 Tr (0-688-07017-5)
$17.89 Lb (0-688-07018-3)
Ufi 
o Ph 
-fiRlc1 
Ph
low fast can
-
Dinomlte
* »,0+A
of Anse Adams the~ art is.
Revered throughout the world for his majestic photographs of towering
mountains and incredible vistas, Ansel Adams led a rich life inspired by
nature. ANSEL ADAMS: AMERICA'S PHOTOGRAPHER, by Beverly
Gherman, takes young readers from the earthquake that broke his nose
to the valley that shaped his world, revealing the humorous, thoughtful,
and artistic man behind the legendary images.
* Orbus Pictus Nominee
(NCTE Committee)
* California Library
Association Beatty Award
Visit our Web site at www.lb-kids.com
LITTLE, BROWN AND COMPANY
Children' 
P.bl.hing
n Engaings 
Educating 
Enitertaining
An AOL Time Warner Book Group Company
* CBC: Notable Social Studies
Trade Book
* SCBWI Golden Kite Honor
for Nonfiction
Nonfiction Picture Book
10x 10
128 pages with black-and-white photographs
Ages 9-12 * Grades 4-7
ISBN: 0-316-82445-3
$19.95 (In Canada: $27.95)
I 
AWA R13 S;;;
0 525 -46923-0 * AGES 10-14 
$52299
"Cooper focuses on [Jack's] early life, from his birth to
his graduation from boarding school. A unique, highly
readable choice for biography collections."
-School Liray 
Journal
*"Readers of any age will appreciate the wealth of
information assembled. This sensitive, well-researched
biography will enhance any collection."
- Voice for Youth Advocates
::::"A revealing portrait of Kennedy's youth and
the forces tha shaped it."
'-- 
The H 
Boo 
M:ine
'Dutton 
Children's Books
.
A division of Pengui Young Readers Gr oup
:www.penguin.co 
...
UniMrsil
1325 So~
Champai
U.S.A.
AD~Ress
You may now access The Bulletin Online with an individualized username
and password.
The Bulletin Online is available only to print subscribers, and includes the
1998-2002 volume years plus the current issues as they are published.
The online version allows you to search the current issue or the entire
database by author, title, age or grade level.
To access The Bulletin Online:
I. Go to http://www.prairienet.org/ccb/
2. When accessing The Bulletin Online for the first time, use the sub-
scriber number that appears in the upper left-hand corner of the
mailing label on your print copy as both your username and password.
This subscriber number will usually be a four- or five-digit number but
may also be a five-character letter/number combination.
3. After logging in for the first time, you will be required to change your
password to something other than your username. This password is
case sensitive and should be one word only. Please store this new
password in a safe place. Your username (which is also your sub-
scriber number) will not change.
Remember, The Bulletin Online is not licensed for public use; only indi-
vidual print subscribers and institutional subscribers' staff are granted
access, so please do not share your access codes. We are working to
expand The Bulletin Online's capabilities and therefore create broader
electronic subscription options for individuals and institutions.
Non-subscribers can learn more about The Bulletin of the Center for
Children's Books at: http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb/
Please e-mail any feedback or questions to: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu.
:r; 
n
UniMrsir
1325 Sou
Champail
U.S.A.
AoDRess ~
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street 
PERIODICAS
Champaign, IL 61820 
POSTAGE
U.S.A. 
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
ADDRESS SERVICE REQUESTED
.,n·-;·-"~
~Or
~ALS
GNIL
;;i
~1.;-~i~ii·· 
siicl
.r" 
A
SI0008-90
IIIII
0008-9036(200307/08)56:11; 1 -T
,,^0fry 
l; 
. :IIIII II-llI I 
'
