I LLINOI S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
* 
U*
University of Illinois Press
d
I I
49
"Introductory historical fiction as it should be
-
exciting, real, and memorable."*
SCOTT RUSSELL SANDERS
bere Comes
the tMystery l/an
Illustrated in full color by Helen Cogancherry
"This is a warm look at the pioneer experience. In times of vast shopping
malls, it is good to remember how special a visit from the peddler must have
been. Sanders captures the family spirit in strong images and vivid descrip-
tions. Cogancherry's warm, autumn-gold, full- and double-spread paintings
glow as the characters take on a life of their own."-*School LibraryJournal
"A joyful evocation of a past when
any visit was a special occasion, and 
Also by Scott ussd Sander
steamboats were only a peddler's 
W 
WRMAS 
O
m 
at• 
• 
olr by
tale."-Kirkus Reviews 
Helen Coganchrrby
"lEmbodiesi the reality of the American
$15.95 RSBE/002-778145-3/Ages 5-10 
pioneer experience.--School Lbrary ournal
RSBE ndca(a sk-swn rein•rmed hardcovr aon. 
$14.95 RSBE/V02-778139-9/Ages 5-10
AUmIORA MEANS DAWN
BRADBURY PRESS 
u atd n fu color by 
Kasr
An Affiliate of Macmillan, Inc. 
*"Excellent beginning historical fiction."
866 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10022 
-Pointer, Kirku Rleviews
1$ 
3.95 
RSBFJO-02-77 
0
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
March 1994
Vol.47 No. 7
4
A LOOK INSIDE
213 THE BIG PICTURE
The Amazing Paper Cuttings ofHans Christian Andersen written by Beth
Wagner Brust
214 NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
216 * On the Road ofStars written by John Bierhorst; illus. by Judy Pedersen
217 * Smoky Night written by Eve Bunting; illus. by David Diaz
224 * Sophie in the Saddle written by Dick King-Smith; illus. by David
Parkins
227 * Unconditional Surrender: U. S. Grant and the Civil War by Albert
Marrin
241 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
243 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
STAFF
Betsy Hearne, Editor and Associate Professor, GSLIS (BH)
Roger Sutton, Executive Editor (RS)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Carol Fox, Reviewer (CF)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS ADVISORY BOARD
Leigh Estabrook, Dean, GSLIS, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Selma K. Richardson, Professor, GSLIS
Richard C. Anderson, Director, Center for the Study of Reading, UIUC
Jean Osborn, Associate Director, Center for the Study of Reading
P. David Pearson, Dean, College of Education, UIUC
Violet J. Harris, Associate Professor, College of Education
Nancy O'Brien, Education Subject Specialist, Library, UIUC
Peggy Miller, Associate Professor, Department of Speech Communication, UIUC
Ann D. Carlson, Assistant Professor, GSLIS, Rosary College
Janice Harrington, Head of Children's Services, Champaign Public Library
Elizabeth Huntoon, Director Systemwide Children's Services, Chicago Public Library
Janie Schomberg, Librarian, Leal Elementary School, Urbana, Illinois
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $35.00; individuals, $29.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Betsy Hearne, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 1512 N. Fremont St., #105,
Chicago, IL 60622
Second-class postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1994 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Hans Christian Andersen, from The Amazing Paper Cuttings ofHans Christian
Andersen ©1994 and used by permission of Ticknor & Fields.
MARCH 1994 
* 
213
THE BIG PICTURE
The Amazing Paper Cuttings of Hans Christian
Andersen
by Beth Wagner Brust
"When he could give us children pleasure," wrote Hans Christian Andersen's god-
daughter, "he never neglected the opportunity to do so. He presented his fairy
tales to us, took us to the theatre ... but what interested us most of all were the
figures he cut out, and which he often pasted into ... scrapbooks." That one of
the great storytellers of western culture expressed himself visually as well as verbally
will come as a surprise to many readers. Hans Christian Andersen's skillful paper
cuttings, which he made spontaneously without patterns or drawings, project the
same bittersweet elements as the fairy tales he wrote. Concentrating on this aspect
of his achievements, Brust's biography explores the development of Andersen's
skill during a childhood deprived of education or entertainment, through an adult-
hood that saw him replace his dreams of a theater career with home performances
of storytelling and paper cutting. In fact, many of his cuttings feature theaters,
along with clowns, dancers, masks, and his own leitmotif, the swan; some even
reflect the architecture he observed on his travels, the characters he met, and fi-
nally, near his death, images representing both sorrow and the central comfort of a
cross. Thus Brust manages to work in facts about her subject's life along with
commentary on his peculiar genius as she discusses examples showing the differ-
ence between traditional silhouettes and Andersen's free-style, lyrically innovative
art.
Defining the scope of her work so specifically allows the author to develop a
direction instead of stockpiling information. Quotes from eyewitnesses such as
Charles Dickens' son Henry, Baroness Bodild von Donner, and others whom
Andersen entertained as children, show how constantly and consistently the story-
teller exercised his scissors, which he always carried with him. Andersen's autobi-
ography informs Brust's perceptive synthesis, and numerous paper cuttings provide
telling illustration of his unique style. The examples here are intelligently selected
to demonstrate points in the text, which is formatted with a clean simplicity that
matches the writing. The dramatic contrast of delicate white tracery against black
backgrounds is echoed by a crisp typeface printed on a fine grade of paper with
spacious margins and leading.
The individualism of both the subject and the presentation makes this an excep-
tional biography reflecting the importance of selective detail in crafting books for
children. Andersen, who reveled in entertaining children, knew the importance of
selective detail himself, which made paper cutting as natural a medium for him as
214 
* THE BULLETIN
fairy tales, since both required a compressed treatment and spare aesthetic. Above
all, he wanted children to have fun, and Brust's biography will ensure them plea-
sure not only in the reading of it but also in the activity that will inevitably follow
her descriptions of his paper-cutting techniques. A sensible arrangement of bibli-
ography and source notes emphasizes the books that were most helpful for each
chapter. Some of these titles will aid a reader inspired to try paper cutting, while
others will help students researching Andersen's life (there's also an index). It's not
often we can so confidently suggest a resource for school reports, knowing that the
work will lead to something even more important-play.
Betsy Hearne, Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ANHOLT, CATHERINE 
Come Back, Jack!; written and illus. by Catherine and
Laurence Anholt. 
Candlewick, 1994 
[26p]
ISBN 1-56402-313-3 
$12.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
Intertextuality runs amok when a girl, who is supposed to be looking after her little
bookworm brother Jack, follows him into the book he's just crawled into and
meets ... Jill: "'Jack fell down-and now he's run away,' Jill said." The girl goes
off in search ofJack and finds the house that he built, the candlestick he so nimbly
jumped over, and Jack himself up in a castle in the clouds, "eating a Christmas pie.
She was just about to tell him to take out his thumb and eat politely, when the
whole castle began to shake. A great voice roared: 'FEE FI FO FUM, I'D REALLY
LIKE TO EAT SOMEONE!'" While there is a plot, with Jack and his sister
escaping from the giant, the real fun is in the nursery-rhyme havoc, here wreaked
at a less complicated level than in the Ahlbergs' The Jolly Postman or Scieszka and
Smith's The Stinky Cheese Man. While younger listeners might miss the wit, they'll
share the adventure, and the springtime-colored pen-and-watercolor illustrations
are breezy and affectionate. Endpapers include the original rhymes. RS
ARAUJO, FRANK P. 
Nekane, the Lamina & the Bear: A Tale ofthe Basque Pyrenees;
illus. by Xiao Jun Li. 
Rayve Productions, 1993 
32p
ISBN 1-877810-01-0 
$16.95 
R 4-6 yrs
Nekane's mother sends her off with a basket offish and olive oil for Uncle Kepa-
and a warning to beware of the lamita, "which loves olive oil and will try to get it
by taking some shape, living or not." Just as Flossie foils the Fox in McKissack's
southern tale (BCCB 9/86), this young Basque heroine tricks the lamifia by play-
ing on its own wiles. When it takes the shape of a fog, she lures it into the wind;
and when it takes the shape of a fox, dressed as Uncle Kepa, she baits it into the
pathway of an angry, hungry bear to whom she has promised that Uncle Kepa will
bring honey. Although Araujo has cited neither an oral nor a printed source, he
has rendered the folktale into a satisfying picture book text, rounded off with a
MARCH 1994 
* 215
glossary of Basque terms. Xiao Jun Li's watercolor paintings have a light, lilting
translucence that leaves plenty of room for the imagination. Storytellers looking
for strong female leads will like this one; Little Red Riding Hood could learn a
thing or two from Nekane. BH
BEAKE, LESLEY 
Song ofBe. 
Holt, 1993 
94 p
ISBN 0-8050-2905-2 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Be, a Bushman girl living in contemporary Namibia, is waiting to die from the
poison-tipped arrow with which she has intentionally scratched herself, and she
thinks back upon the sad events that brought her to such a decision. With her
mother, Be had left their village to go help her grandfather, an elderly retainer on
a farm owned by the kleinbaas, the white farmer. There Be became friends of a
sort with the farmer's wife, who lavishly patronized Be-and taught her to read-
as a way to stave off her own madness. The relationship, which ultimately drives
Be to despair, denies simplistic rendering of black/white, mistress/servant dichoto-
mies, and while the book is sometimes romantic about the traditional ways of Be's
tribe, it's always probing and honest about the ways people relate to each other.
The other characters-Be's mother and grandfather, the bitter kleinbaas who sees
what's happening to his beloved, fragile wife-are developed with equal complex-
ity, with only an idealistic and sexy young man who loves Be (and ultimately saves
her life) seeming to come from a different kind of story. Still, readers will want
something good to happen to Be, and so it does. RS
BELLVILLE, CHERYL WALSH 
Flying in a Hot Air Balloon; written and illus. with
photographs by Cheryl Walsh Bellville. 
Carolrhoda, 1993 
48p
ISBN 0-87614-750-3 
$14.96 
R Gr. 3-6
The author, a flight aficionado, tells of her first trip in a hot air balloon, detailing
the equipment and proceedings (as well as some history) en route; she follows this
up with an account of being the "chase crew" (ground followers) for another bal-
loon. The result is a vivid you-are-there account of a little-known sport, and kids
will relish the pageantry of the huge decorative balloons, the thrill of soaring over
farmlands, and the simplicity of the science that keeps the balloonist up instead of
down. The text is a graceful balance of the aesthetic and the practical (although it
never does say just how much a balloon costs or give safety specifications), and the
book may inspire science projects as well as armchair trips aloft. Photographs of
preparations for flight and of the view down from the gondola are clear and allur-
ing. Bold-faced technical terms appear again in a concluding glossary; there is also
an index and a diagram of balloon anatomy. DS
BIAL, RAYMOND 
Shaker Home; written and illus. with photographs by Raymond
Bial. 
Houghton, 1994 
[40p]
ISBN 0-395-64047-4 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Particularly suitable for Bial's series blending design with history (Frontier Home,
BCCB 10/93, Amish Home, 5/93), the Shakers have left a legacy of beauty and
practicality in their work and words. Bial describes both the theology and every-
day life of the Shaker colonies in America, explaining the importance of the meld-
ing of the two and the Shaker regret that only the crafts will remain (as one Shaker
put it, "I don't want to be remembered as a chair"). Although Bial mentions the
216 
* THE BULLETIN
Shakers still living in New England, the crisp photographs of homely elegance
were taken at a preserved Kentucky village, which increases the impression of the
Shakers belonging to a time past. The spare yet spacious pages, with pictures
austerely bordered in black, and ample white space keeping things airy, fit the
topic well. A list for further reading is included. DS
BIERHORST, JOHN, comp. 
On the Road ofStars: NativeAmerican Night Poems and
Sleep Charms; illus. by Judy Pedersen. 
Macmillan, 1994 
[32p]
ISBN 0-02-709735-8 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-7 yrs
"We who sing are the stars/ We sing with our light/ We are birds of fire/ We fly
through the sky/ Our light is starlight/ We sing on the road of spirits." Ranging
from lyrical images to soothing repetition, these Native American chants from a
variety of peoples have a depth disproportionate to their brevity. Read often enough,
they will come to children's minds in the unsettling moments between wakeful-
ness and sleep, creating a cozy nest of words: "The sleeping place/ which you and
I/ hollowed out/ will remain always,/ will remain always,/ will remain always,/ will
remain always." Try that Wintu song under the covers and then leave your toddler
to it. Preschoolers in daycare can listen to these at naptime, and primary graders
can take them in as part of their Native American study units. Pedersen's rhyth-
mic, densely textured, full-color illustrations will appeal to the same broad age
range, their warmth of hue and composition attracting younger picture book audi-
ences, while the slightly expressionistic style respects children who have outgrown
the need for strictly literal depictions. Bierhorst is, as usual, meticulous about
crediting and describing his sources, and his brief introduction has a simple elo-
quence of its own: "Native American traditionalists also know that night is a time
for healing, a time when plants grow, and a time for creative awakening-all of
which may take place during sleep." Frenetic parents may get hooked on this one
along with their overactive children. BH
BROWN, RICK 
What Rhymes With Snake?: A Word and Picture Flap Book; written
and illus. by Rick Brown. 
Tambourine, 1994 
16p
ISBN 0-688-12328-7 
$11.95 
R* 2-6yrs
As with all the best paper-engineered toy books, this one seems monumentally
simple-so why didn't somebody think of it sooner? Based on the old decoding
system of substituting one syllable for another that rhymes, this begins with a large
red hen. Lift the big flap and under her you'll see a pen. Lift the small flap above
her to find the p substituted for an h. Continue to hat (cat), goose (moose), etc., all
the way to rake (a double-fold-out snake). It's got the design harmony of Where's
Spot with a lively educational twist, proving that reading readiness doesn't have to
be boring. The artistic treatment is also simple but inventive. Figures are heavily
outlined and hued with depth, unlike many of the flat treatments that pass for
simple in toddler books, but are really just simple-minded or lazily conceived.
Offering a clue to what's underneath, Brown gives a twist to each picture-the
beak of the hen forms the nub of the pen, the edge of the hat forms the tail of the
cat-and they're color blended, as in the example of a brilliant gold star covering a
jazzy, fin-tailed old gold car. There's humorous imagination in these symmetrical,
rounded, old-fashioned shapes. The format is consistent but varied by occasional
switches from single to double spreads, one a splendid layout of ducks and trucks,
MARCH 1994 
* 217
another a dish covering a fish. The subjects are appealing to young children (the
frog and log will be a favorite) and the concept will be a runaway hit among adults
working with a diverse spectrum of kids, from toddlers at home to primary graders
practicing their reading skills. Along the way, they'll absorb the most important
lesson of all: learning is a game. BH
BRUST, BETH WAGNER 
The Amazing Paper Cuttings of Hans Christian
Andersen. Ticknor & Fields, 1994 
[80p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-395-66787-9 $15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 4-6
See this month's Big Picture, p. 213, for review.
BUNTING, EVE 
Smoky Night; illus. by David Diaz. 
Harcourt, 1994 
34 p
ISBN 0-15-269954-6 
$14.95 
R* 
K-3
Eve Bunting has a good track record for vitalizing what would be docudrama in
the hands of a lesser storyteller. Here the scenario is an inner-city riot that young
Daniel and his mother and his yellow cat Jasmine watch from their apartment
window. "It can happen when people get angry," explains Mama. "They want to
smash and destroy. They don't care anymore what's right and what's wrong."
Among the stores looted is Mrs. Kim's market, and when Daniel's building catches
fire in the middle of the night, both he and Mrs. Kim end up in the local church
shelter, worrying about whether their cats-archenemies in the past-have es-
caped the blaze. It's the authentic child's perspective that makes the tale so touch-
ing. What impresses Daniel in the midst of an adult-size crisis are the kind of
details that adults wouldn't notice ("I've never seen a bigger jar of mayo," he ob-
serves in the shelter) or wouldn't be honest about ("Mrs. Kim takes her big, fat,
mean old orange cat and holds him close"). It's these very observations that lead
Daniel to a truth about what caused the riot to begin with. Diaz has not been
afraid to take risks in illustrating the story with thickly textured paintings against a
background of torn-paper and found-object collage; the heavy outlines are a bit
reminiscent of John Steptoe's early work. Without becoming cluttered or gim-
micky, these pictures manage to capture a calamitous atmosphere that finally calms.
His choice of a stylized medium to express a frighteningly realistic situation will
allow young listeners to get the emotional impact without becoming overpowered
by it-just as the first-person narrative succeeds in doing a lot by not trying to do
too much. In fact, both author and artist have managed to portray a politically
charged event without pretension or preaching. BH
CALMENSON, STEPHANIE 
Marigold and Grandma on the Town; illus. by Mary
Chalmers. 
HarperCollins, 1994 
[64 p] 
(I Can Read Books)
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-020813-9 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-020812-0 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 1-3
Marigold, a fetching young bunny, is spending time with her grandmother, with
whom she has a series of quiet adventures. First they shop for a hat for Marigold
(her ears make fitting difficult, but clever Grandma solves that), then they outwit
the forceful wind that's keeping them from feeding the ducks; then they go for
lunch, where Marigold meets Grandma's friend and tests her grandparent's adora-
tion; and finally a slightly cranky Marigold nonetheless has a delightful time tak-
218 
* THE BULLETIN
ing pictures with Grandma. The intergenerational one-on-one makes the entire
day seem a treat, so that the events are individually mild but collectively impor-
tant. While the story occasionally cloys, Marigold has authentic fits of frustration
and worry which make the outing realistic as well as inviting to young readers.
Watercolor illustrations are Easter-bonnet gay, with round-edged, soft-eyed rab-
bits strolling in lapine luxury through the pages. DS
CALVERT, PATRICIA 
Bigger. 
Scribner's, 1994 
[144 p]
ISBN 0-684-19685-9 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
It's April 1865 and the Civil War is over. Twelve-year-old Tyler knows that most
men who are coming home are back or have sent word, but no word has come
from his father-Black Jack Bohannon left his Missouri home to join up with
General Jo Shelby of the Iron Cavalry Brigade of Missouri. Tyler is hearing talk
that Shelby's brigade has headed for Mexico to regroup rather than surrender to
the Yankees. Accompanied by Bigger, a strange dog who tags along with Tyler
and serves as the tale's thematic touchstone, Tyler decides to walk to Mexico to
find his father and bring him home. Thus begins a circular journey in which the
boy develops his understanding of the nature of war, slavery, his father's strengths
and weaknesses, and his own courage. He returns home wiser, sadder, and more
tolerant of the foibles of others, even his mama's-boy cousin, Clayton. No trium-
phant and heroic acts are performed here; Calvert's well-crafted story is one of a
boy who comes of age, coping with ironic twists and disappointment when his
idealistic visions of war and of his father are shattered by reality. CF
CARTER, PETER 
The Hunted. Farrar, 1994 
[32 0p]
ISBN 0-374-33520-6 $17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 8-12
This is the saga of an Italian soldier's retreat from Vichy France in 1943. It could
have been as easy as joining a truckload of his men over the mountains, but Corpo-
ral Salvani chooses to concern himself with the fate of a Jewish child who will
inevitably be killed by the approaching Nazis if he's not evacuated. With all the
elements of cracking good historical fiction, this is unfortunately overwritten, over-
drawn, and overdramatized. You can have a World War II adventure story, and
you can have Holocaust realism, but putting them together makes a reader feel
manipulated by formulaic violence; scenes of torture seem calculated to heighten
the excitement here, and the ending plays an overt game of cat-and-mouse with
our reactions. Subject matter aside, the reader is exposed to paragraph-long sen-
tences that are more pretentious than effective. Description is exaggerated to the
point of stereotype; we soon know the hero is good-hearted and the villain is un-
speakable, and we yearn to see the constant reiteration of their roles exchanged for
more subtly varied depth. It's too bad, because Carter really does have a sense of
storytelling. Underneath its verbiage and affected style, the novel has skillful pac-
ing, a vivid setting, and a core of characters about whom we learn to care a lot-
which is what makes the stylistic overkill so frustrating: "Wincing with pain, he
lurched away from the rock. 'Major!' he shouted. 'Fleur!' scraping scraped hands
and gashing gashed flesh as, spitting blood and cursing, he plunged through scrub
with thorns as fanged as barbed wire, until, raked and slashed, he found the car."
BH
MARCH 1994 
* 219
CONWAY, CELESTE 
Where Is Papa Now?; written and illus. by Celeste
Conway. 
Boyds Mills, 1994 
32p
ISBN 1-56397-130-5 
$14.95 
R 4-6 yrs
Anchored by a chorus that will hold young listeners with its rhythmic title ques-
tion, this story marks the seasonal passing of nearly two years during which young
Eliza's Papa takes his sailing ship around the world to trade for goods in Java,
China, and India. Each time Eliza asks where he is, her mother gives a litany of his
activities, which Eliza concludes with a wish that he hurry home safely. Finally,
after her sixth birthday, in the heart of winter, he does: "'Hurry, feet,' Eliza prayed,
running to her Papa's arms." What gives this its momentum is partly the swing of
the language and partly its detail-filled, cut-paper illustrations that feature more
action than the text does. Each double spread is like a toy-chest of patterns col-
lected into graphic scenarios, idyllic and cozily alluring. Although there's em-
phatic visual variety, the diverse elements blend well enough to form a pleasing
unity of composition. The pictures are saved from being too pretty by their solid-
ity of shape, while the story is saved from being too pretty by its direct naivete in
sharing a bedtime bit of history. BH
DAY, ALEXANDRA Frank and Ernest on the Road; written and illus. by Alexandra
Day. 
Scholastic, 1994 
4 0p
ISBN 0-590-45048-4 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Frank (the bear) and Ernest (the elephant) are back, this time to introduce kids to
the world of CB lingo as they take a trucking job. Small boxes on each page offer
a glossary for the slang as "Furry Face" and "Nose" get their flying orders, drive out
on the concrete slab, and follow the banana peel to their destination. There's not
much to the plot outside of the terminology, and the style is a little flat, but the
world of arcane argot and the open road is an inviting one. Day's cheerful, realistic
oil and watercolor paintings depict the casually dressed animal pair amid a land-
scape of pavement and trucks that should appeal to the automotive crowd (al-
though macho would-be truckers might prefer their characters in more realistic
human guise). Fans of the dynamic duo's previous adventures will appreciate this
exploration of a new linguistic frontier. Additional definitions appear on the end-
papers. DS
DEEM, JAMES M. 
How to Read Your Mother's Mind; Illus. by True
Kelley. 
Houghton, 1994 
[192p]
ISBN 0-395-62426-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-7
This entry in a series with some of the catchiest titles in the business (How to Catch
a Flying Saucer, etc.) is an anecdote-packed introduction to ESP: what it is, how
it's studied, and, best of all, how to find out if you have any talent for it. Deem
carefully distinguishes between various kinds of extrasensory perception such as
telepathy, clairvoyance, and precognition, and he's equally careful in cautioning
readers to be skeptical and scientific when analyzing an ESP account or conduct-
ing an experiment. Instructions, accompanied by illustrations that are both funny
and useful, are included for several ESP tests, from simple experiments involving a
deck of cards to more elaborate schemes that a group of friends could carry out
together. Two extended accounts of ESP--one from a man convinced he was on
the trail of Jack the Ripper and the other a summary of YA author Lois Duncan's
220 
* THE BULLETIN
attempts to identify her daughter's murderer-conclude the book and will leave
readers with lots to think about. True Kelley's drawings have a lively improvisa-
tional flair that opens up the format of the book; both subject and style will recom-
mend the title to reluctant readers. There's a reading list, a bibliography, and an
index. RS
FACKLAM, MARGERY 
The Big BugBook;illus. by Paul Facklam. 
Little, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-316-27389-9 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 3-6
"Nobody swats a wetapunga. It's too big." With its life-sized, realistic illustra-
tions of some seriously scary-looking insects, this book knows just how to seduce
kids into some equally serious nature study. Each double spread includes a brief
boxed essay on the insect in question, while the fine-lined paintings show the
insects against some fanciful backgrounds and props that not only add humor to
the proceedings, but also serve to enforce the sense of scale: dragonflies escort an
old-fashioned balsa-wood airplane; a walking stick climbs a Tinkertoy grid; Mada-
gascar Hissing Cockroaches crawl over a pile of alphabet blocks. Kids will enjoy
the "gross" facts (such as the tarantula hawk wasp laying its egg in the paralyzed
body of the tarantula, which will serve as food for the developing larva), but nei-
ther the text by Facklam mere nor paintings by Facklam fils are sensationalized,
and the information about feeding, reproduction, and behavior can be extrapo-
lated to more common insects. Give this one to kids who love bugs a well as to
those who are frightened by them: everyday bees and mosquitoes won't seem half
so threatening. RS
FARMER, NANCY 
The Ear, the Eye and theArm. Jackson/Orchard, 1994 
[320p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08679-8 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-06829-3 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 7-12
Pretty nervy these days, to set a science-fantasy novel in a Mad-Max-like Zimbabwe,
2194, particularly when the two main villainesses are a big black slavedriver named
the She Elephant and a dotty, white, postmodern colonialist named Mrs. Horsepool-
Worthingham, both splendidly drawn. Tendai, Rita, and little Kuda, the three
children of the General, are kidnapped by the She Elephant's minions when they
venture one day into the dangerous streets of Harare. The children's worried
parents consult an unorthodox, semi-bumbling, and anatomically mutated detective
trio (the Ear, Eye, and Arm of the title), and the chase is on, with the detectives
always just one step behind the kids as they fall into and out of the She Elephant's
clutches. The adventure is grand and whole-hearted, its heroics sometimes cut
down to size by the ironic tone into which the book occasionally dips. Farmer has
wisely considered what the passage of two centuries might bring, with her future
Zimbabwe a place of grimy street life, high-rise glamor, and a simultaneous vision
of apocalypse (in the toxic-wasted vlei that is the She Elephant's stronghold) and
fundamentalist paradise (in Resthaven, where the "old ways" are preserved, both
food-gathering and witch-baiting). There's a big and busy cast of characters, but
Farmer expertly maintains the pace as she cuts from kids to cops, hunter to hunted,
and home to away and back again. While the landscape is mostly bleak and the
atmosphere often ominous, in its fundamental suspense and appeal the book bears
an odd but satisfying resemblance to The Wizard ofOz--witches, scarecrows, and
all. RS
MARCH 1994 
* 221
FINLEY, MARY PEACE 
Soaring Eagle. 
Simon, 1993 
166p
ISBN 0-671-75598-6 
$14.00 
R Gr. 4-9
Who is Julio Montoya, the blond-haired, green-eyed boy living in Mexico in 1845?
He believes he is Mexican because the only family he has ever known has lived in
the Taos valley for two hundred years, but he wonders if there is some secret about
his birth. Julio's search for his identity begins when his absent father returns to
Taos and Julio goes with him on the dangerous trail to Bent's Fort. In sudden
succession Julio is confronted with his father's death from an Apache attack, a
snowstorm, a wolf attack, and finally snowblindness. He is found by Cheyenne
who nurse him back to health and accept him as one of their own. Julio questions
his earlier life and begins to adopt this new culture, even to earning the name of
Soaring Eagle and developing a close friendship with the chiefs son Dancing Feather.
While the writing is sometimes labored, the author shows deep understanding of
the history and geography of this region of the Southwest and intimate knowledge
of the Cheyenne culture. Julio is a believable character, and many scenes are filled
with tension. For all the acts of courage and the tests passed, Julio and the reader
are left at the end still wondering about his parentage and his past-hints of a
sequel, perhaps? CF
GAUTHIER, BERTRAND 
Zachary in Camping Out; ISBN 0-8368-1012-0; Zachary
in The Championship; ISBN 0-8368-1008-2; Zachary in I'm Zachary; ISBN 0-
8368-1007-4; Zachary in The Wawabongbong; ISBN 0-8368-1011-2; Zachary in
The Winner; ISBN 0-8368-1009-0. Each book: illus. by Daniel Sylvestre. 
Gareth
Stevens, 1993 
24p 
(Just Me and My Dad) 
$11.95 
R 
3-6 yrs
Zachary is the eponymous young hero of this series, translated from the French
and first published in Canada, that offers candid snapshots into the life of a single-
parent family: Zachary and his father. Of course, there's also Zachary's father's
girlfriend, her daughter, school friends, and the hockey team, all of which add up
to a lively cast of characters for Zach to play with, fight with, and otherwise deal
with. Each book has a discrete, simple plot and features an engaging synthesis of
Zach-narrated text and cartoon-ballooned dialogue, with manic and expressively
witty paintings that often seem to pop off the page. Zachary's a good kid and his
dad is a great guy; it's a pleasure to watch them work things out. RS
GILLETTE, LYNETT 
The Search for Seismosaurus; illus. by Mark Hallett and with
photographs. 
Dial, 1994 
[40p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1359-2 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1358-4 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
One hot day in 1979 while two friends were hiking on a mesa in New Mexico,
they discovered something in the sandstone that looked like bones . . . big bones
... maybe dinosaur bones. Six years later (well, in dinosaur time, that's a mere
minute) they find a paleontologist interested in uncovering the dinosaur. The
excavation crews come to the site with picks and shovels, magnetometers, comput-
erized radar equipment, sound-wave-detecting computers, drilling machines, and
film crews, and the long saga of discovery and disappointment begins. While the
story has tension and intrigue, there are more questions raised than answers given.
For example, the scientists use several pieces of expensive equipment to locate the
dinosaur underground, but they abandon the chosen area when core drilling un-
222 
* THE BULLETIN
covers nothing, even though their instruments indicate dinosaur bones below. By
chance they renew digging on the spot and find dinosaur bones. Why didn't they
believe their own instruments in the first place? Also, the scientists compare a
dinosaur bone cell to that of a cow and find it "was almost exactly the same as bone
from an ordinary cow." Why a cow? Why not an alligator or an ostrich or some
animal more closely related to our fossilized friend? Gillette tries to capture the
mystery and excitement of scientific discovery but she sometimes distorts the pic-
ture of how research works, with her story leaving the impression that scientists
stumble onto success more often than they plan for it. Onsite color photographs,
occasionally blurred, and sleek gouache paintings illustrate the text, which is in-
dexed. CF
GOLDENTYER, DEBRA 
Gangs. Raintree Steck-Vaughn, 1994 
80p 
illus. with
photographs 
(Teen Hot Line)
ISBN 0-8114-3527-X 
$14.94
GOLDENTYER, DEBRA 
Dropping Out of School 
Raintree Steck-Vaughn,
1994 
80p 
illus. with photographs 
(Teen Hot Line)
ISBN 0-8114-3526-1 
$14.94
WIJNBERG, ELLEN 
Parental Unemployment. 
Raintree Steck-Vaughn,
1994 
80p 
illus. with photographs 
(Teen Hot Line)
ISBN 0-8114-3525-3 
$14.94 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Each of these series entries uses a "Hot Line" conceit, where first-person interviews
and putative questions from teens are answered with a combination of informa-
tion and self-esteem building. Both Gangs and Dropping Out are addressed to
those thinking about indulging, and each book supposedly gives the facts so that
"you can make your own decision." Despite this apparent even-handedness, each
book has firmly made up its mind about what the right decisions will be: don't
join a gang; stay in school. Worthy messages, but the books are preachy and
repetitive. Parental Unemployment is also repetitive but much less directive in the
way it suggests practical and emotional strategies to handle the situation. The text
in each book has lots of headings and subheading; photos that are appealing if not
really useful, interviews, and occasional charts also give the series an approachable
format. Each book has a bibliography, directory of organizations and hotlines,
and an index. RS
GRANFIELD, LINDA 
Cowboy: An Album. 
Ticknor& Fields, 1994 
96p 
illus.
and with photographs
ISBN 0-395-68430-7 
$18.95 
R Gr. 4-7
Like Sandler's Cowboys, reviewed below, this is a heavily pictorial history of the
cowboy in North America. Sections include "The Historical Cowboy," "Roundup,"
"The Closing of the West," "Building the Cowboy Myth," and "Cowboys To-
day." The organization is good and the text generally clear, although there is the
occasional question: why invent letters from an imaginary cowboy to tell of life on
a cattle drive when fascinating real stories abound? Are the women referred to as
"prairie nymphs" in reality prostitutes? Unfortunately, many of the impressive
archival photographs are left uncaptioned, leaving one to wonder about location,
time, and relevance to text. (And the photograph included of Bill Pickett is the
one recently discovered by the Post Office to be his brother Ben.) Granfield, a
MARCH 1994 
* 223
Canadian, expands the picture by including some more northerly history (includ-
ing the fact that the Red River Valley of the song is in Canada), and the chapters
on media images of the West make an interesting contemporary counterpart to the
history. Albert Marrin's Cowboys, Indians, and Gunfighters (BCCB 9/93) is still
the best recent book on the West, but Cowboy does a nicely visual job of conveying
the experience, using the slightly haphazard "album" composition to advantage,
particularly in bridging the gap between cowboys then and cowboy dreams now.
An index and a bibliography are included. DS
HANSEN, JOYCE 
The Captive. Scholastic, 1994 
195p
ISBN 0-590-41625-1 
$13.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Kofi, the impetuous and impatient young son of an Ashanti chieftain, finds him-
self and his family in serious danger due to the treachery of his father's slave, Oppong.
After his father's murder and his own capture, Kofi's decisions lead him farther
and farther from home as he tries to keep the things his father gave him just before
he died. By mid-story Kofi is on an illegal slave ship bound for New England.
Fictional, but based upon the actual narrative of Gustavus Vassa, who was cap-
tured in Africa as a young boy and sold into slavery, this story chronicles Kofi's life
in Africa, his capture, his trip on the slaver, and his experience as a servant in a
Salem household in 1790. Kofi uses his princely role as the son of an Ashanti
chieftain to sustain him through the grief and hardship he faces in a new world of
whites and blacks when he is suddenly the slave and not the favored son. The
reader is moved by the inhumanity and the injustice, but not by the author's style,
which may be trying to convey Kofi's innocence and incredulity but often seems
stiff and explicative: "My head pounded like a thousand drums as I gazed around
at the clusters of chained men and women. A new feeling entered my soul. Ha-
tred. I sobbed and again pulled at the clamps on my ankles." The story lacks
subtlety and character development, but clearly contrasts the two worlds of the
narrator. Comparing this with James Berry's Ajeemah and His Son (BCCB 11/92)
could provide many avenues for discussion. CF
HOPKINS, LEE BENNETT, comp. 
Weather; illus. by Melanie Hall. 
Zolotow/
HarperCollins, 1994 
6 4p 
(I Can Read Books)
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021462-7 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021463-5 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 1-3
Aptly counterpointing J. Patrick Lewis' calendarial sequence July Is a Mad Mos-
quito, reviewed last month and also illustrated by Melanie Hall, Hopkins' begin-
ning-to-read collection of poems about the weather offers short selections for just
about any kind of day. Whether the forecast promises a springtime sun ("Your
arms feel as new as growing grass/ The first No-Sweater sun"-Beverly
McLoughland) or winter weather ("Snow is snowy when it's snowing,/ I'm sorry
it's slushy when it's going"-Ogden Nash), new readers can find a poem to match
the mood. A mix of the new and familiar, the verses will serve both those just
learning to read and those ready to move on to more complicated independent
reading; such is the layered nature of the form. 
Hall's pastels take things fairly
literally, solving the poems for you, but they provide a unified visual tone and are
adept at both cozy and frosty effects. RS
224 
* THE BULLETIN
HORENSTEIN, HENRY 
My Mom's a Vet; written and illus. with photographs by
Henry Horenstein. 
Candlewick, 1994 
[60p]
ISBN 1-56402-234-X 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Twelve-year-old Darcie narrates her experiences working as her mom's part-time
assistant. Mom is a veterinarian, and she travels miles in a day to treat cows,
horses, goats, pigs, and whatever else turns up. Darcie is sometimes nervous, but
she helps hold piglets for their shots, fetches equipment to x-ray a horse, and holds
the light as Mom performs surgery on a cow. With occasional exceptions, the
narration incorporates information naturally and sounds authentically pre-teen.
The extensive and varied photographs depict patients, vet, and young assistant
with equal appeal; all subjects remain unusually tidy, but nobody's a made glamor
queen. The squeamish are safe, since the calving pictured is fairly unbloody and
the surgery is never directly photographed (the curious, however, may feel cheated).
These are parental footsteps in which many offspring would dearly love to follow,
and young enthusiasts may find the book a good springboard to James Herriot's
adventures. DS
KING-SMITH, DICK 
Sophie in the Saddle; illus. by David Parkins. 
Candlewick,
1994 
[92p]
ISBN 1-56402-329-X 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-5
As readers of her previous adventures will know, Sophie is determined to be a
farmer, and in Sophie in the Saddle our six-year-old heroine comes closer to achieving
her goal. This year the family takes their vacation at a farm where Sophie finally
starts her equestrian career by riding-eventually with great success-the gentle
pony Bumblebee. The story is mostly a collection of small events (Sophie's falling
off Bumblebee, encountering old enemy Dawn at the seaside, getting a gift of
riding lessons), but Sophie's vigorous personality and relentless drive, as depicted
in King-Smith's matter-of-factly and earthily humorous writing, make her as en-
tertaining on vacation as she is at home. Big print and occasional cheerful and
sturdy line drawings keep the book, which could be read aloud to younger listen-
ers, friendly and accessible to independent readers. DS
LEEDY, LOREEN 
Fraction Action; written and illus. by Loreen Leedy. 
Holiday
House, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1109-5 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 1-3
Fractions have always been a nemesis for young students, perhaps because children
have difficulty with the abstractions of halves, quarters, and eighths and never
quite transfer them into real situations. As the book begins, chicly dressed Miss
Prime (a teaching hippo with clever ideas) and her able students (all young ani-
mals) are tackling fractions for the first time. The teacher uses the ubiquitous
overhead projector to draw geometric shapes divided into sections while she en-
courages the children to envision real objects divided into parts ("Maybe the cow
jumped over HALF a moon," muses the kitten. "I'm imagining a cookie broken
into three pieces," smiles the alligator child). The book itself is broken into five
sections, including introductions to parts of a whole and parts of a set, as well as
stories of life experiences using fractions. Each concept that's developed is kept
discrete and is amply illustrated. In a light and easy way, math questions related to
MARCH 1994 
* 225
the stories are included, with answers at the end of the book. Thickly pigmented
paintings loaded with sporty animal figures add to the humorous presentation,
which should make fractions not only more understandable, but more also fun for
young children. CF
LEVY, CONSTANCE 
The Tree Place and Other Poems; illus. by Robert
Sabuda. 
McElderry, 1994 
[4 8p]
ISBN 0-689-50599-X 
$12.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-6
Forty new poems by the author of I'm Going To PetA Worm Today (BCCB 2/92)
showcase her fresh capacity for attending nature and for rhyming naturally. Levy
keeps the tone light, with flashes of humor slipping through: "A little green inch-
worm/ dropped from a tree,/ and rode in my hair/ unknown to me,/ till I looked in
the mirror./ 'Aha!' I said, 'What is this green thing on my head?'// And the worm
must have wondered/ seeing me,/ 'What is this funny looking tree?'" She also
injects her description with narrative elements, so that young readers aren't stuck
wondering if the sunset is ever going to end: "An Orange-Lined Whelk" is a good
example of a story lyric that actually does incorporate the image of a sunset "caught
and kept and hidden well inside a twist of ocean shell," which the narrator holds in
her hand. The musical language assures successful reading aloud, while the sim-
plicity of images will ease readers through one poem after another. The format is
clean, with spare, softly textured black-and-white drawings decorating many of
the page spreads. BH
LEWIN, HUGH 
Jafta: The Homecoming; illus. by Lisa Kopper. 
Knopf,
1994 
26 p 
(Umbrella Books)
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-94722-1 
$9.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-84722-7 
$8.99 
R 
4-7 yrs
Like Rachel Isadora's At the Crossroads (BCCB 5/91), this is a story about a black
South African boy, Jafta (hero of several previous picture books, see Jafta-The
Town, BCCB 1/85), whose father will soon be coming home after a long time
away working in the mines. "He's been in the city, making money for us, working
down a deep hole in the ground, and he's left a big hole in our lives." As is also true
of At the Crossroads, there isn't much of a plot here, just the ruminations of a boy
thinking about all the events his father has missed and how much the boy misses
his father, but where Isadora compensated with expansive watercolor spreads, this
book achieves a more intimate feeling through simple, well-drawn two-color illus-
trations that poise the warm chocolate-brown of figures and landscape against the
smooth white page. While young listeners/lookers will need some real-world con-
text in order to understand the story, Jafta's longing is clearly realized and amply
rewarded: "Things are changing in our country and my father's coming home...
coming home . . . coming home . .. My father's come home." RS
LINDBERGH, ANNE 
Nick of Time. 
Little, 1994 
[20 4 p]
ISBN 0-316-52629-0 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
A freethinking New Hampshire boarding school in the Brook Farm tradition is
the setting for Lindbergh's latest time-travel fantasy. Jericho's father is the head-
master of Mending Wall School's eight students, but he insists upon being re-
226 
* THE BULLETIN
ferred to as the Fugleman, "because headmaster sounds like someone who's out to
control your mind, and principal means first in importance." Fugleman or not,
he's still oblivious to the time-warp Jericho and fellow student Alison discover that
allows them to travel one hundred years into the future, where Mending Wall has
been turned into a historical museum dedicated to preserving "typical" late-twen-
tieth century life. It's an engaging premise, and the time-travel mechanics are
handled with efficient finesse. What's less successful are Jericho's footnoted asides
commenting on the action, cheering readers on, or verisimilituding: "I just got an
elbow jab from Bunny, who has been reading over my shoulder." The device
seems meant to be casually deconstructive, reminding readers that they're reading,
but the effect is that of too many authorial nudges and winks, as if she doesn't trust
the story to stand on its own. The book is fun to read, though, and the fantasy
aspects are low-keyed enough to make the story appealing to those looking for a
slightly offbeat and basically lighthearted school story, as well as to genre fans. RS
MACDONALD, 
MARYANN 
Rosie and the Poor Rabbits; illus. by Melissa
Sweet. 
Atheneum, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-689-31832-4 
$13.9 
R 
4 -6 yrs
Sometimes the best intentions can collide, as rabbit-girl Rosie learns while follow-
ing her mother's suggestion that she donate some toys to less fortunate rabbit-
children. At first Rosie fills her charity bag with the toys she doesn't like (a hard
puzzle, a scratchy party dress, a sad book, and a doll "with staring eyes"). Then she
feels guilty, dumps them out, and instead packs up her beloved old stuffed bear,
her most comfortable sweatshirt, and her favorite tea party set. Mama gently ob-
jects, saying that the poor rabbits would better appreciate the hardly-used toys
instead. Rosie, after examining her conscience, decides she knows better, but dis-
cretion being the better part of childhood, she puts the favorites under the flashy
and everyone is happy. It's a fresh twist on an old theme, the didacticism easygo-
ing and ameliorated by Rosie's child-knows-best solution. Sweet's watercolor paint-
ings are, well, sweet, in the nicest sense of the word, lightly drawn and washed with
cozy light. RS
MARGOLIES, BARBARA A. 
Olbalbal: A Day in Maasailand; written and illus. with
photographs by Barbara A. Margolies. 
Four Winds, 1994 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-02-762284-3 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-5
Unlike the many children's travelogues that contrive a scenic journey, a schedule
of festivals, or some other artificially structured narrative, Margolies is refreshingly
content to wander around with her camera, gathering together images, observa-
tions, facts, and history to give a coherent picture of an "exotic" group's daily life.
She did a fine job with the Papua New Guineans (Warriors, Wigmen, and the
Crocodile People, BCCB 5/93); here she visits a Maasai tribe living on the Serengeti
Plains of Tanzania. There are glorious jewelry and decorations, but most of the
pictures show the ordinary details of house-building (a task done solely by women),
cattle-grazing (done by the boys), food preparation, and water-carrying, all in-
formed by a simple, sensible text that gives context for the activities and the history
along with future prospects of the nomadic Maasai. The layout is clean and the
captions are clear; the cover photo ofa Maasai girl elegantly draped with beads and
silver will readily provoke browsing. RS
MARCH 1994 
* 
227
MARRIN, ALBERT 
Unconditional Surrender: U. S. Grant and the Civil
War. Atheneum, 1994 
[208p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-689-31837-5 
$19.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 7-12
Although this book tells of the early and post-war life of Ulysses Grant, it's not a
biography so much as a Civil War chronicle that very successfully uses General
Grant as a focus. Especially after Ken Burns' Civil War PBS documentary, books
on the subject need to meet some mighty high standards, and Unconditional Sur-
render does. You won't find tales of Gettysburg or Bull Run here, because Grant
wasn't at those battles and was not yet in command of the army. What you will
find are lucid accounts of military strategies, both successful and unsuccessful, at
Shiloh and Petersburg; frightening visions of the force of Grant's subordinates
such as Sherman and Sheridan as they cut swathes of destruction across the South;
blood-soaked scenes of battle; and stirring-there's no other word for it-stories
of effort, inspiration, and camaraderie (such as Sheridan shouting to his loyal men
in the heat of battle, "God damn you, don't cheer me! If you love your country,
come up to the front!"). Using extensive eyewitness accounts, Marrin has distilled
copious research into a history of living men and women who are complete with
faults and contradictions (the racism of many of the Northern commanders, in-
cluding Grant, is made clear); Grant seems here to be a man splendid in wartime
and floundering in peace, except in his happy family life. An evocation as well as
a description of war, this also demonstrates how the quiet intimacy of the written
word can carry a power greater than faster media such as television or film. Read-
ers may find this book turning them into Civil War buffs or turning them onto
history, leading them to Barbara Tuchman and others. Period photographs ap-
pear throughout; extensive notes and an index are included. DS
MELTZER, MILTON 
Gold. The True Story of Why People Search for It, Mine It,
Trade It, Steal It, Mint It, Hoard It, Shape It, Wear It, Fight and Kill for
It. HarperCollins, 1993 
[168p] 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-022984-5 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-022983-7 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5 up
Gold! The word alone conjures up images of glamor, glory, and grandeur, but it
also has a sordid side. According to Meltzer, gold has both worth (durable proper-
ties within itself) and value (demand by people), both of which have made it a
sought-after metal for over 5,000 years. It is malleable, transportable, resistant to
corrosive and destructive forces, easily divided, and hard to counterfeit. It has
industrial and artistic uses as well as being the standard for monetary systems.
With notable command of specifics, Meltzer weaves the tale of gold from ancient
legends (there really was a King Midas) and ancient history (Alexander the Great
was the first to mint a gold coin that was used across national boundaries); through
the age of discovery (Columbus and Pizzaro were concerned with more than the
glory of God); to the gold rushes (Georgia had the first in our country in 1828)
and the history of mining techniques and processes across time and throughout
the world (cheap black labor, drawn from southern Africa, made possible the growth
of the immense mining industry there). The story of gold involves greed, subjuga-
tion, piracy, theft, hoarding, and destruction of land and peoples, and Meltzer's
social conscience leads him to concentrate on the seamy aspects of the quest for
228 
* THE BULLETIN
gold. His exceptional research and writing skills turn the deplorable facts into
engrossing history. Information is supported with source notes, and a bibliogra-
phy and index add to the usefulness of the book. CF
MORRIS, ANN 
700 Kids on Grandpa's Farm; illus. with photographs by Ken
Heyman. 
Dutton, 1994 
[32p]
ISBN 0-525-45162-5 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
This pleasant account of the work on a goat farm in New York State shows the
grandchildren of the farm owner enjoying their visits to the farm: picnicking with
Grandma and Grandpa, feeding the goats, and visiting the hay fields. Then the
chores of caring for and milking the goats are shown, followed by making cheese
and taking it to a farmers' market. It's clear that goat farming requires a lot of hard
work and coordination. The photographs are well designed, crisp, and coordi-
nated with the somewhat perfunctory text. The activities appear to be sequential
and logical in their presentation. Written for very young children, the book's
predictability is both its strength and its weakness. This will not set any records for
interest and excitement; on the other hand, there are not many books about goat
farms for young children. CF
NYE, NAOMI SHIHAB 
Sitti's Secrets; illus. by Nancy Carpenter. 
Four Winds,
1994 
[3 2 p]
ISBN 0-02-768460-1 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-7 yrs
Lyrically reflective of an Arab-American girl's journey to visit her Palestinian grand-
mother, Sitti, "on the other side of the earth," this describes activities both new to
the young narrator ("My grandmother ... pats the dough between her hands and
presses it out to bake on a flat black rock in the center of the oven") and common
to diverse cultures ("Their marbles were blue and green and spun through the dust
like planets. We didn't need words to play marbles"). There's more personality
than plot here, but the setting is unusual and the details vividly realized. Further
animating the situation are Carpenter's illustrations, fluid in portraying facial ex-
pressions and varied with some collage effects that contrast vividly with the sur-
rounding brushstrokes. Like the text, these pictures stretch to show both the distance
between cultures-with a desert landscape superimposed upon a line of flapping
sheets, for instance-and the closeness of people across cultures, symbolized by
the flight of an airplane above the flight of birds tattooed on Sitti's hands. It's a bit
anticlimactic in the end, when the narrator's letter to the president spells out a
message about peace, but the idea has already been so effectively communicated
through the cast of characters that listeners won't mind. BH
PATENT, DOROTHY HINSHAW 
Horses; illus. with photographs by William
Mufioz. 
Carolrhoda, 1994 
4 8p 
(Understanding Animals)
ISBN 0-87614-766-X 
$14.96 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Like the author's excellent Dogs: The WolfWithin (BCCB 7/93), this is an entry in
the Understanding Animals series. The book is divided into four sections-"Horses
and Wild Horses," "Horses in the Wild," "How Horses Communicate," and
"Horses in Today's World,"-in which Patent, in clear and simple language, de-
scribes the history, evolution, sociology, and behavior of the horse. The text does
MARCH 1994 
* 
229
an admirably succinct job in explaining the essential nature of horses and how they
differ from other species: "The attitudes of animals are shaped by their roles in the
wild. Dogs and cats are predators by nature.. .. Prey animals like horses, on the
other hand, need to be wary to survive." Photographs, attractive as well as infor-
mative, range from mustangs eking out their living on the plains to Przewalski's
horses hanging out in zoos and domestic horses at work or play. An equestrian
entry that respects the differentness of the species as well as its appeal, this is a
useful counterpart to junior breed manuals and fun-with-horses guides. DS
PEARCE, PHILIPPA 
Here Comes Tod!; illus. by Adriano Gon. 
Candlewick,
1994 
[96p]
ISBN 1-56402-328-1 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 4-7 yrs
Much in the same mold as Shirley Hughes' stories about Alfie, these are six neat
vignettes that take in the daily adventures of a little boy named Tod, who seems to
be around four. Tod has present-drama with his Granny, who sends him a too-
small sweater ("I'm not a baby anymore-I'm not!"), only to discover the present
is for his teddy; Tod is also frustrated-and inspired-when he thinks his mother
has found out the present he's making for her. Both the plot and the writing tip
back and forth between the startling and the coy. Best are the moments of rage, as
when Teddy berates his mother for saying she didn't see the surprise: "You're just
pretending not to know. But I know you know, and you know I know you know.
And it's all ruined!" The end of the same story, though, is smug: "... he said to
his granny, 'She's having an especially nice birthday, isn't she? And now you can
start reading to me, please.'" The implied viewpoint seems to shift between what
kids will recognize about themselves and what adults find charming about kids.
Still, the tone is cozy, the stories are short, and children and parents alike will find
enough here to enjoy for a bedtime story or two. RS
PECK, ROBERT NEWTON 
Soup Ahoy; illus. by Charles Robinson. 
Knopf,
1994 
[14 4 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-94978-X 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-84978-5 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Soup and Rob are back again, and this time their adventure has a nautical twist.
Addicted to Sinker O. Sailor's radio serial, they're determined to win the contest
that will net them each a sailor's cap and, possibly, a visit from Sinker O. Sailor
himself. They do win the visit, but the timid radio personality is unprepared for
the mayhem the boys, their homemade boat the Star of Samoa, their two worst
enemies, and a pair of excitable goats can wreak. Like Jean Shepherd but without
the substance, this is a tale of entertaining slapstick, colorful local characters, and
wild action; the absence of plausibility and the presence of predictability won't
keep diehard fans or other youngsters in search of a quick read from enjoying the
romp. DS
PFEFFER, SUSAN BETH 
Twice Taken. 
Delacorte, 1994 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-385-32033-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Brooke's life changes when she sees her picture on the television program Still
230 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Missingand calls its 800 number. She's no longer sixteen-year-old Brooke Eastman,
but fifteen-year-old Amy Donovan, kidnapped at the age of five by her father, and
the court decrees that she most go live with her mother and sever all ties with her
father. Amy/Brooke finds herself amid a family (mother, stepfather, half-sister,
and half-brother) she doesn't know, wanting to please her daughter-starved mother
but unable to become the five-year-old Amy that her mother really wants. Since
the discovery of the kidnapping is the beginning of the book, Pfeffer takes the
story beyond Mazer's Taking Terri Mueller or Ehrlich's Where It Stops, Nobody
Knows, focusing on the difficulty of the reunion; Amy is achingly polite and realis-
tically uncomfortable with her new/old family, especially when they malign the
father who raised her with love and diligence. The story has its contrivances and
loose ends, and some ofAmy's responses seem a little programmatic, but the melo-
drama is entertaining and taps into a common core of adolescent anger as Amy
deals with her fragmented family, sternly telling her demanding mother, "You
want to know why I don't love you? This is why." The emotions are raw and the
language gets rough, but the story combines the draw of sensational headlines with
an understanding of teenage struggles. DS
PHILLIPS,ANN 
A Haunted Year. 
Macmillan, 1994 
176p
ISBN 0-02-774605-4 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 5-8
Haunting is a matter of opinion: when Florence first calls up George with an old
photograph and a magic-circle ritual, she's pleased to have him as a playmate. She
lives with her aunts in quiet Edwardian London, and George is a lively companion
who teases her out for midnight games in the garden. George, however, seizes
control of the situation, and he exhausts Florence in town and at her country
cousins', where she's gone to recuperate from her "illness" (really George's keeping
her up at night); he also starts to claim Florence's cousin, Nellie, and when the two
girls return to town his demands grow until the girls and Florence's new step-
brother find a way to put the frightening ghost to rest. It's a familiar and compel-
ling saga: "When you start something, you don't realize you can't stop it; and
what's more, it will grow-it will get powerful." There are some logical lapses,
however, and the excitement isn't well-maintained, with the geographic to-ing
and fro-ing and the secondary plot strands of Florence's growing friendship with
Nellie and her acquisition of a new stepmother and stepbrother distracting from
rather than adding to the main plot. With its period setting and quiet power
dynamics, it's still a picturesque, atmospheric, and definitely menacing ghost story.
DS
QUATTLEBAUM, MARY Jackson Jones and the Puddle of Thorns; illus. by Melodye
Rosales. 
Delacorte, 1994 
113p
ISBN 0-385-31165-6 
$13.95 
R* Gr. 4-7
Jackson Jones wants a basketball so badly he can taste it, but for his tenth birthday
he instead receives a plot in the local community garden. Although dismayed,
resourceful Jackson figures he'll sell the flowers he grows for basketball money, but
he doesn't reckon on a fight with his best friend ("Look at that rosebush. A puddle
of thorns"), the taunting envy of the local bully ("Send me a rose, Bouquet Jones"),
the interference of some sassy little neighbors ("I'm-sorry-I-cut-your-stinking-flow-
ers-now-can-I-have-some-cake?"), or his own growing fondness for gardening.
MARCH 1994 
* 
231
Jackson's first-person, present-tense narration is staccato and street-stylish in an
easy-to-read way, and the kids' quick repartee is witty and funny. The cozy, ap-
parently multi-ethnic apartment building makes for a lively urban milieu, and the
characters residing therein, from methodical best friend Reuben to the garden-
loving mailman, are distinctive and dignified individuals (although the wildly pre-
cocious six-year-old is overdrawn to sit-com proportions). Black-and-white
illustrations, competent but without the zing of the text, appear occasionally. A
promising first novel, this is fresh, sweet, and vigorous-a real daisy. DS
RATTIGAN, JAMA KIM 
Truman 'sAunt Farm; illus. by G. Brian Karas. 
Houghton,
1994 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-65661-3 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Truman's thrilled when his Aunt Fran informs him he'll be receiving an ant farm
for his birthday, but somehow things get confused: "He didn't get ants. He got
aunts." And he gets a lot of aunts, who "brought their knitting and homemade
banana bread and gave Truman more than one hundred-something gift subscrip-
tions to children's magazines." Finally, the overwhelmed Truman gives the aunts
away to needy would-be nieces and nephews, and "his very own Aunt Fran" turns
up to fill the void with a picnic. Karas' sharp-nosed, dot-eyed characters liven up
the simple line-and-watercolor landscape, and the panoply of aunts are richly comic
as they cavort across the lawn blowing bubbles or stand in regimented order under
Truman's eagle eye. This is a one-joke book where the joke works (although
perhaps not with readers-aloud who pronounce "ant" and "aunt" differently); there
are some logical glitches but the high-spirited fun and gentle satire will satisfy
many a young aunt farmer. DS
REISS, KATHRYN 
Pale Phoenix. Harcourt, 1994 
[25 6 p]
Trade ed. ISBN 0-15-200030-5 
$10.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-15-200031-3 
$3.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-9
This isn't exactly a sequel to Reiss' Time Windows (BCCB 10/91), but it does
feature the same heroine, Miranda, who evidently has forgotten the scary events
that befell her family just a year or so before the scary events in this book take
place. Abby, a strange new girl at Miranda's school, is sullen and secretive, and
when, to Miranda's dismay, her parents decide to take the orphaned (she says)
Abby into their home, Miranda becomes increasingly convinced that Abby can
disappear. It turns out that Abby is a seventeenth-century girl condemned to
wander through time, forever thirteen, the age she was when a fire destroyed her
home and her spirit was saved by an Indian charm. Farfetched? Sure, but once
again Reiss proves herself a canny practitioner of the junior gothic, blending ele-
ments of romance and suspense with confident storytelling. Reiss puts real charac-
ters into her extravagant plot, and while genre demands are respected, there's no
feeling of formulaic cliche. Miranda is impulsive, likable, and convincing; Abby is
an equally credible tortured soul: "I've done it all, again and again. Parties, dates,
school, teenage stuff... I've worked on farms, in mills, in factories. I've had
friends killed in battle. I've traveled and moved a hundred times or more." Abby's
travails, along with Miranda's burgeoning romance with friend Dan, make for a
satisfyingly romantic read. RS
232 
* THE BULLETIN
REUTER, BJARNE 
The Boys from St. Petri; tr. by Anthea Bell. 
Dutton,
1994 
[192p]
ISBN 0-525-45121-8 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-9
In a distinct turn from his Buster novels (BCCB 1/92, etc.), Reuter here traces the
dark fate of Lars, determined to follow in his big brother Gunnar's footsteps as a
taunter and baiter of the Germans who have occupied their Denmark town.
Gunnar, entering his senior year in high school and eighteen months older than
Lars, has formed a secret organization of friends who take small potshots at the
enemy, stealing Nazi flags and deflating tires. When Lars and another new, younger
rebel, fierce little Otto, become involved, the mischief becomes more damaging
and far more dangerous. Otto has a gun, and gets another from the German
supply depot, and what had been almost a game becomes a conspiracy, as the boys'
actions threaten to impede the Nazi invasion of Norway. Though the telling is
rather clipped and telegraphic (how much translation affects the style is hard to
say), the basic material here is exciting. Reuter moves credibly from a boys' snug
clubhouse atmosphere through a taut transition into war-torn adulthood. Each
character is clearly delineated, especially the two brothers, whose relationship is
complicated by their love for the same girl. It's an involving book, and one that
shows how courage changed-and too often claimed-young lives. BH
RICHARD, FRANoOISE On Cat Mountain; ad. by Arthur A. Levine; illus. by Anne
Buguet. 
Putnam, 1994 
[32p]
ISBN 0-399-22608-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
5-8 yrs
The poor servant girl Sho has only one friend, a cat named Secret that her cruel
mistress first drives away and then orders Sho to find after hearing from a fortune-
teller that the creature may be worth something. Unfortunately, no one seeking
Cat Mountain has ever returned, but Sho's friend Secret saves her from the hun-
gry, human-eating cats that live there and even gives her a bag of gold to take
home. That, of course, lures Sho's mistress to Cat Mountain, where the greedy
woman comes to an abrupt and appropriate end. There's no note about this En-
glish adaptation of a French text that's presumably folkloric in origin, but it's set in
Japan and the collage paintings draw heavily on traditional Japanese art. Their
highly textured patterning, subtle coloration, and dramatic composition lend aes-
thetic impact to an eerie story that will pair perfectly with another picture book
recently adapted by Arthur A. Levine, The Boy Who Drew Cats (BCCB 2/94). BH
Ross, LILLIAN HAMMER 
Sarah, Also Known As Hannah; illus. by Helen
Cogancherry. 
Whitman, 1994 
[64p]
ISBN 0-8075-7237-3 
$11.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-6
With a natural and comfortably direct style, Lillian Ross has fictionalized the story
of her mother's immigration, all alone at the age of twelve, from an East European
shtetl in 1910. "We sat shiva," begins the first-person narrative, as Sarah recounts
her father's death and her mother's decision to send the older girls to live with
relatives in America while trying to raise the young boys herself. The relatives can
only afford to sponsor one girl, however, and Sarah's sixteen-year-old sister is eager
to go. Then, with the passport and ticket all ready, Mama decides she needs
MARCH 1994 
* 233
Hannah to help earn a living and sends frightened Sarah instead. Unlike many
generic docu-novels of the transatlantic voyage and processing on Ellis Island, this
one has the quirky details that render it authentically individual and slightly un-
predictable; we assume it's going to turn out all right, and it does, but along the
way there are small surprises that freshen the cast and action. Ross strikes a good
balance of dialogue and description, showing a flair for the selective scenes that
make a book easy for children who are still consolidating their reading skills but
need a good story to practice on. Black-and-white illustrations convey a sharp
sense of setting, and their unpretentious clarity supports capable writing that's
unusual in historical fiction at this age level. BH
RUSSELL, SHARMAN APT 
The Humpbacked Fluteplayer. Knopf, 1994 
[173p]
ISBN 0-679-82408-1 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
While on a field trip from their Phoenix school, twelve-year-old May and her
classmate, Evan, are transported to a time and place where the Arizona desert is
peopled by warring totemic tribes called the Javelinas, the Owls, the Sheep, the
Coyotes, the Packrats, and the Pumas. After fleeing from the enslaving Javelinas,
May and Evan, along with other escaped slave children, discover themselves at the
center of a war that requires the tribes to band together in order to destroy a new,
more powerful, more magical enemy. The fantasy world of the six tribes is well-
realized (there's no descriptive note, though many of the tribal motifs, including
the Humpbacked Fluteplayer, seem based on those of Native Americans), but the
war is somewhat confusing, especially since it's never really clear what's at stake.
Nor is there any obvious reason why the story had to include contemporary kids
(whose present-day lives and characters remain pretty vague) instead of simply
focusing on the people from the tribes. Nonetheless, for fantasy fans who want a
change of venue from medieval Europe, this offers a refreshing alternative. DS
SANDLER, MARTIN W. 
Cowboys. 
HarperCollins, 1994 
(A Library of Congress
Book) 
[91p] 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023319-2 
$20.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023318-4 
$19.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Cattle-driving cowboys rode the Chisholm and other trails from the 1860s to the
1890s until the range was fenced by farming pioneers and the railroad's expansion
made the cattle drive unnecessary. The life of the cowboy has been glorified and
vilified to such an extent that most of us don't have much concept of cowboys
other than TV images. Using photographs and pictures of the period from the
collections at the Library of Congress, Sandler tells about the life of a cowboy on
the range, at roundup, at cattle branding, on the trail, and on the town. The
photos give a strong sense of the reality of a cowboy's life: they show men tending
cattle on horseback or gathered around campfires or wagons to eat, shave, smoke,
and drink. Mostly young, mostly tough and determined-looking faces peer out
across the years in these pictures. Particularly effective is the juxtaposition of im-
ages of the gun-toting cowboy of stage and screen with the actual photos of cow-
boy life. Sandler, as he did in a less clearly defined volume, The Pioneers (reviewed
last month), tells his story in the present and future tenses. This artifice is occa-
sionally misleading ("The West is filled with cattle thieves who try to rob ranch
234 
* 
THE BULLETIN
owners of their animals") and distinctions get lost when he actually tells about the
cowboy today. The problem with the photos is that none of them is captioned.
Therefore, on the pages describing the James Gang and African-American cowboy
Bill Pickett we don't know if we are looking at these particular individuals or just
representatives of the occupation, time, and place. Authenticity may not be a
problem in this book, but documentation is. Lack of attention to the detail of
citing sources and identifying even approximations of time and place weakens an
attractive book with an important story to tell. CF
SAUERWEIN, LEIGH 
The Way Home; illus. by Miles Hyman. 
Farrar,
1994 
[128p]
ISBN 0-374-38247-6 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 8-12
In the aftermath of a 1989 Texas tornado, a boy discovers that the Lakota friend
he admires is really his father. In 1860, a pioneer woman is rescued from loneli-
ness-after burying her husband near their sod house-by a cowhand in even
greater need than she. In 1853, two slaves escape on a Mississippi steamboat by
pretending to be a "lady of the night" and her bodyguard. In 1876, a girl learns of
her ostracized aunt's life as a captive with a Cheyenne husband and their children,
who were all killed by soldiers in a raid. In 1904, a boy severely disabled by
cerebral palsy has a momentous meeting with Geronimo, who has been reduced to
selling buttons off his coat at each train stop and sewing on more for the next
crowd that gathers to gape at him. And finally, in 1992, the author describes a
collage of photographs picked randomly from her past, some of which refer to
incidents, objects, or characters that have appeared previously in the book. These
half-dozen short stories seem to revolve around persons who, for one reason or
other, haunt the fringes of a social majority. All but the last selection, which is
fragmented and even confusing in its relationship to the other tales, are effective
and affecting. Sauerwein's writing is clean and sometimes touched with elegance:
"... the trees bent low over the water, their leaves like lips against the cool stream,
kissing their own dark shadows"-a telling image, considering that the central
figure of the story is thought to be a prostitute but is in fact a loyal lover of the
"niggra" serving her. The action is subtly developed as each character finds a
spiritual, if not physical, way home; in both theme and impact, this is history
brought home as well. BH
SCHMIDT, JEREMY 
In the Village of the Elephants; illus. with photographs by Ted
Wood. 
Walker, 1994 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8227-2 
$16.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8226-4 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-6
"Elephants are ticklish. A mahout must always scrub firmly or his elephant gets
annoyed and growls." These and other items of elephant lore are common knowl-
edge among the hill tribe villagers of Abhayaranayam in southern India. They
grow up with elephants, work them all of their lives, and then retire with them.
This full-color photo-documentary follows young Bomman through a day's ac-
tivities, including bathtime and chores in the nearby forest, all accompanied by
informative and sometimes surprising asides. Once, a frightened baby trumpets
for its mother and "auntie," who both come thundering to the rescue just as they
would in the wild; on a sadder plane, one of the elephants has recently killed its
MARCH 1994 
* 
235
mahout during musth, an annual cycle that affects older male elephants with sud-
den unpredictable bursts of rage. Although there are some details of traditional
village life, the focus is on the animals, and it's a clear focus both photographically
and textually. The descriptions are straightforward and the pictures candid-
altogether a personable, if not personal, travelogue. BH
SEBESTYEN, OUIDA 
Out ofNowhere. 
Kroupa/Orchard, 1994 
[208p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08689-5 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-06839-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Harley, thirteen, gets dumped by his mother and her latest boyfriend at an Arizona
rest stop where he meets May, an old lady recently dumped by her bigamist hus-
band, and a pit bull dumped out of a car by a couple with apparently no more use
for him, either. It's a calculated set-up, all right, and if kids don't get the parallels,
they're often and sufficiently spelled out. Because the thematic structure is so
neat, the story never feels quite real, especially when the three "rejects" (Harley's
word) arrive at May's girlhood home only to find a picturesquely cantankerous old
man who, with the assistance of an impossibly angelic girl, won't move out. While
the softening between the various antagonists is predictable, the relationship be-
tween Harley and the dog, whom he names Ishmael, is both loving and spiky as
Harley, wrestling with his mother's desertion, refuses to risk having the dog de-
pend on him. But that too works out, and the book ends with the sighting of a
rainbow, a conclusion that will appeal to readers in the mood for cozy formula. RS
SUN, CHYNG FENG 
On a White Pebble Hill; illus. by Chihsien Chen. 
Houghton,
1994 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-68395-5 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-6 yrs
What looks like an energetic outburst of kids' fingerpainting under artistic control
illustrates this fantasy adventure of a little girl's journey around, well, the book
doesn't say until the last double-spread, but veterans of David Wiesner's June 29,
1999 (BCCB 11/93) may recognize the broccoli forest. It's a trip around the
dinner table: the salt becomes a white pebble hill; the soup, a snake-infested lake;
the huge, slippery mountain turns out to be roast chicken. The story is more
coherent than many other flight-of-fantasy picture books, and any kid who rear-
ranges his dinner to resemble a map will feel right at home. The drawing has a
childlike sketchiness, and the transformations (a corn car, for example) become
more evident upon rereading/looking, so the surprise of a first encounter can be
augmented on a second by the satisfaction of spot-the-tomato. RS
THOMAS, ROY EDWIN 
Come Go With Me: Old-Timer Stories from the Southern
Mountains; illus. by Laszlo Kubinyi. 
Farrar, 1994 
[22 4p]
ISBN 0-374-37089-3 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7 up
It's exciting to see children's literature functioning as a real repository for new-
found folklore, and this collection will serve a broad range of uses, from providing
anecdotal information for student research on the South, to offering funny samples
of family narrative to fill the cracks in a storytelling program. My favorite example
is the storekeeper whose customer is dissatisfied with the chicken he pulls from his
236 
* THE BULLETIN
ice barrel. Realizing it's the last one, he returns it, pretends to feel around for
another, and offers her the same chicken held in such a way as to exaggerate its
plumpness. "I believe I will take 'um both," she says, trapping the trickster in his
own trick. Preserving dialects without artificial drawl, Thomas has skillfully ed-
ited the taped interviews that served as a basis for these previously unpublished
narratives. Almost a hundred brief selections, of one to several pages each, include
bits of philosophizing, descriptions of living conditions "back then," jokes, and
succinct tales of family drama, friendship, or enmity. Browsing is probably the
best way to absorb the book, although the author has hit upon an organization
that's helpful without being forced: using quotes to head each section, he's con-
centrated on subjects such as maturation, motherhood, farming, hunting, food,
work, neighbors, courtship, religion, war, and traveling. A final section of notes
meticulously introduces each informant. The color cover is young-looking, but
Kubinyi's incisive pen-and-ink crosshatch drawings have an all-ages dignity. BH
VUONG, LYNETTE DYER 
Sky Legends of Vietnam; illus. by Vo-Dinh
Mai. 
HarperCollins, 1993 
103p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023001-0 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023000-2 
$14.00 
R Gr. 4-6
More culture-specific than Vuong's The Golden Carp and Other Tales from Viet-
nam (BCCB 11/93), which emphasized romantic folktales akin to European vari-
ants, this collection includes six stories of mythical proportion, including "Why
the Rooster Crows at Sunrise" and "How the Moon Became Ivory." The inter-
change between humans and supernatural beings inevitably lends suspense and
sometimes leads to tragedy, with Jade Emperor, ruler of the fairies, wielding ulti-
mate control. Other figures such as the Thunder Spirit, the Earth Spirit, and the
seven weavers who form the Pleiades comprise a vivid cast; one of the stories fea-
tures a character popularized by a Vietnamese song, "The Man in the Moon," for
which music and lyrics are appended. An introduction cites specific sources for all
the stories, and a pronunciation guide helps with the Vietnamese names. Occa-
sionally, the style slips into a jarring colloquialism ("Forget it," says one mortal to
his star wife), but on the whole Vuong's experience of living in Saigon and learn-
ing the language makes her an invaluable translator of Vietnamese tradition for
young western readers and for immigrants' children who want to stay in touch
with their heritage. The large typeface and understated black-and-white prints
give the book an approachable look for independent reading. BH
WALKER, Lou ANN 
Roy Lichtenstein: The Artist at Work; illus. with photographs
by Michael Abramson. 
Lodestar, 1994 
48p
ISBN 0-525-67435-7 
$15.99 
R Gr. 4-7
Roy Lichtenstein's art, with its clear images and popular roots, is highly kid-acces-
sible, and here is an appealing and user-friendly account of his work. Like Gardner's
Henry Moore (BCCB 4/93), this focuses on the artistic process more than the
artistic impact (although Walker does discuss Lichtenstein's critical stature) as the
text describes Lichtenstein placing masking tape on canvases, piecing together col-
lages, and organizing his studio; Walker's book tells kids what an artist-or at least
this artist-does all day. The photos of Lichtenstein in action are lively and imme-
diate as he peers at huge canvases and carefully spreads pigments (particularly in-
formative are some closeups of the artist's hands), and there are a few great
double-take images of the live artist working on-and seemingly standing in-his
MARCH 1994 
* 237
oversized Interiors. The artistic explanations are straightforward and the format
big-print and open in an easy, uncondescending way, while reproductions of
Lichtenstein's art fill the pages with color. There's a double-spread gallery of the
artist's important paintings and an extraneous artistic exercise at the end. DS
WALLNER, 
ALEXANDRA 
Betsy Ross; written and illus. by Alexandra
Wallner. 
Holiday House, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1071-4 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 2-4
The author's final note concedes that many of the stories about Betsy Ross' life
remain unsubstantiated, and that this picture-book biography has chosen to fol-
low a particular route. It's none the worse for that, as the simple but lively text tells
of Betsy's early Quaker life, her three marriages, her business, and her return to the
Quaker faith, in addition to the famous sewing of the flag. The net result is a story
not just of a picturesque historical footnote but of a businesswoman and citizen
who lived a part of the birth of the United States every day. Agreeable (if some-
times overliteral) flat-perspectived illustrations possess a seamstress-like tidiness as
they show Betsy walking with her colonial compatriots in the narrow Philadelphia
streets, working with rolls of fabric amid frisky cats, and encountering groups of
soldiers. More inviting than most young biographies, this is a good book for
taking Ms. Ross from a cameo role to a starring part and using her to explain early
American urban life. In addition to the final author's note, there is a diagram and
explanation of a nifty way to cut out a five-pointed star. DS
WATERS, JOHN F. 
Deep-Sea Vents: Living Worlds without Sun. 
Cobblehill,
1994 
[4 8p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-525-65145-4 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-8
"There's a hole, there's a hole, there's a hole ... " Well, there's apparently more
than one hole in the bottom of the sea, and Waters' book is a fluid account of how
the sea vents were hypothesized, looked for, and found-both what was found and
what was found out. Giant tube worms and eyeless shrimp are among the inhab-
itants surrounding "chimneys" that bring geothermal energy to the deep ocean
floor (and heat the water in excess of 6500), but what has been really challenging to
accepted scientific thought is the discovery that these creatures do not rely on
photosynthesis for food. The book is an admirable outline of the scientific method,
progressing from questions, through research, to further questions; and color pho-
tos of the research ships and submersibles, as well as those of the denizens of the
deep, add drama to discovery. RS
WIJNBERG, ELLEN 
Parental Unemployment.
See Goldentyer, p. 222, for review.
WILDS, KAZUMI INOSE 
Hajime in the North Woods; written and illus. by Kazumi
Inose Wilds. 
Arcade, 1994 
[32p]
ISBN 1-55970-240-0 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-6 yrs
Some of the delicate lushness of Japanese landscape painting informs this dreamy
tale of a baby's nighttime adventure in the Minnesota northwoods. Per Mary
238 
* THE BULLETIN
Poppins, the story proceeds from the premise that babies can talk to animals, while
"grown-ups lose our language and forget they knew us," says Big King Moose,
who, along with the raccoons and the foxes and Black Bear, has invited baby Hajime
to come and live in the woods. It's a tempting proposition for Hajime, but he
soon-and loudly-misses his mother, and the dismayed animals send the scream-
ing baby back home on the back of Gray Wolf. The art effectively contrasts the
almost airbrushed scenery of the woods with fine-lined precision in the animal
drawing; Hajime himself sometimes looks a bit too cartoonish, although it's a
welcomely matter-of-fact touch that he's a biracial baby, with an Asian mother
and Caucasian father. The woods are lovely, dark and deep; still, there's no place
like home. Snuggle up. RS
WILLIAMS, CAROL LYNCH 
Kelly andMe. Delacorte, 1993 
123p
ISBN 0-385-30897-3 
$13.95 
R Gr.5-7
Summer is filled with adventures for eleven-year-old Leah and her ten-year-old
sister Kelly: they steal away to the beach with their truant grandfather, Papa,
participate in exotic wart-removal ceremonies, drive downtown naked (except for
heavy winter coats), and watch horror movies with relatives. It's also a summer of
random accident and tragedy, as Papa loses his driver's license after a crash, his dog
is killed by a passing motorist, Leah almost shoots Papa when his scary game gets
out of hand, and, most shockingly, Kelly dies suddenly of an aneurysm at the close
of summer. Williams knits these episodes together with a strong and original
voice as Leah tells her story in conversational, southern-accented language; the
dialogue and family dynamics are authentic, humorous, and restrained. Readers
may not pick up the foreshadowings of darkness in the book and may find the
tragedies, particularly Kelly's death, quite startling, but the smooth and unsenti-
mental writing makes this a memorable account of one last special summer. DS
WILLIAMS, KAREN LYNN 
Tap-Tap; illus. by Catherine Stock. 
Clarion,
1994 
[34p]
ISBN 0-395-65617-6 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-7 yrs
Local color goes a long way in filling out a story, but it can't be the story, some-
thing Williams and Stock showed they understood in Galimoto (BCCB 4/90);
here the narrative is slighter, although not without engaging detail. "Now that
Sasifi was eight, Mama said she was big enough to help on market day," and while
Sasifi wishes they could ride to the marketplace in a tap-tap, one of the private
jitneys that roam the Haitian countryside, there isn't enough money, so Sasifi puts
a smaller version of Mama's basket of oranges upon her head and the two set out
on the long walk. Most of the book is devoted to the events of the day. Sasifi
reveals unexpected prowess at orange-selling, and when she decides to spend her
earnings on a tap-tap ride home for the two of them, readers will learn how the
buses got their name: "Tap-tap! The woman with the chickens hit the side of the
truck. The tap-tap stopped and the woman climbed down." Sasifi gets her own
chance to tap-tap when the wind blows her new hat off the bus, and readers will
probably be as pleased as she at her chance to bang out her request for the bus to
stop. Is it a story? Barely, but the simple structure has both conflict and wish-
fulfillment, and Stock's watercolors have a crisply defined tropical bounce, with
the gaudy colors of the tap-tap making it look like anychild's dream machine. RS
MARCH 1994 
* 
239
WOODSON, JACQUELINE 
I Hadn't Meant to Tell You This. 
Delacorte,
1994 
[11 2p]
ISBN 0-385-32031-0 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-9
Two girls: one black, one white; one comfortably middle-class, the other poor;
both motherless. Even as they acknowledge how unlikely it is, Marie and Lena do
become friends, although their bond is threatened when Lena tells Marie, who
doesn't want to hear it, that she is being sexually abused by her father. Explicitly
feminist in both theme and poetics, the book turns a lot of stereotypes around,
with Lena, the white girl, being the underprivileged outsider in a mostly black
town. Marie is popular, voted best-dressed, and her father is a university profes-
sor, but both father and daughter are still dislocated since Marie's mother walked
out, now in touch only via postcards sent with beautiful drawings and oblique
poems from foreign places. Marie wonders why her father never touches her.
Lena wants her (widowed) father never to touch her again: "just if he didn't look
at me. If he made believe I wasn't even in the world, that would be better." The
bleakness of Lena's life is unrelieved; when Marie loyally suggests that she'd like to
kill Lena's father, Lena replies, "Then what?," and the novel ends with Lena run-
ning away with her little sister Dion when their father starts to molest her as well.
While the structure is a little neat, this is probably the best book Woodson has yet
written. The girls' friendship is awkward, sometimes angry as Woodson acknowl-
edges that no one can be meaner than your best friend. All the emotions played
out here are rough-edged and ambivalent, as are the frank discussions about race.
The story, told through a series of recollected vignettes from Marie's point of view,
has an elegiac quality that gets to the heart of both girls' dilemmas in a way that a
more prescriptive problem novel could not, and the spare writing generally allows
events to speak for themselves. It's a book that has the courage to let things hang
in the air. RS
WRIGHT, BETTY REN 
The Ghost Comes Calling. Scholastic, 1994 
[128p]
ISBN 0-590-47353-0 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-6
Chad's initially excited when his father buys a weekend cabin on a nearby lake, but
his superior neighbor Jeannie tells him that the place is haunted, and "when you
stay there, you're going to shake and shudder all night long." And by golly, she's
right: the ghost of old Tim Tapper, shunned by the town after a truck accident
involving local children, stalks the place. Chad sees his face at the window, hears
his boat on the lake, and suffers ghostly ire upon examining old Tapper's truck in
the woods. Finally Chad comes up with an idea to restore Tapper's tarnished
reputation, and the mollified ghost departs happily. The book is a smooth and
easy read, and there's a nice prickly relationship between Chad and Jeannie, the
would-be know-it-all who's been demoted to sidekick (she says enviously, "You're
the only person I know who's actually seen a ghost. I've been to Disneyland and
I've had my ears pierced and I have a cousin who was in a movie, but I've never
seen a ghost, for pete's sake"). This is an unthreatening and very tidy ghost story,
a step up for those who enjoyed Wright's The Ghost ofPopcorn Hill (BCCB 6/93)
but who aren't quite ready for the fuller-blooded fear of The Dollhouse Murders.
DS
240 
* THE BULLETIN
YEP, LAURENCE 
The Ghost Fox; illus. by Jean and Mou-sien Tseng. 
Scholastic,
1994 
[70p]
ISBN 0-590-47204-6 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Clean writing and a suspenseful plot make this small novel, adapted from a tradi-
tional Chinese story, especially well suited for kids who are ready to exercise their
skills and interests on chapter books but who are not yet ready for longer fiction.
With practice born of his excellent folklore collection (see The Rainbow People,
BCCB 4/89), Yep keeps his style simple and respects the narrative elements enough
to keep them scary. While his father is away on a merchant ship, Little Lee must
fend off a ghost fox that threatens to steal his mother's soul: "Later that night, a
scrabbling sound woke Little Lee. It sounded as if an animal was outside their
house. It sounded as if claws were scraping the hard dirt outside." After the
creature breaks in, Little Lee's mother changes from sweet-tempered to terrible
and the townspeople blame Little Lee. It is only through his own wit and bravery
that he saves the situation, to the accolades of everyone. What more could young
heroes ask? The Tsengs' pen-and-ink drawings, too, are action-packed and have
been researched to reflect accurately the seventeenth-century period during which
the story was first collected. BH
ZHANG, SONG NAN 
A Little Tiger in the Chinese Night: An Autobiography in Art;
written and illus. by Song Nan Zhang. 
Tundra, 1993 
4 8p
ISBN 0-88776-320-0 
$19.95 
R 
Gr. 5-12
Literal, muralistic paintings illustrate this artist's simply told autobiography, span-
ning from early World War II through the Chinese communist revolution, the
Great Leap Forward, the Cultural Revolution, Tiananmen Square to the resettle-
ment of Song Nan's family in Canada. The details of hunger, forced labor, and
"political reeducation" are strongly but sparely told; while the examples are per-
sonal (the artist painting propaganda posters, for example), the book is also a con-
cise history of Mao's impact and legacy. Despite the anti-communist viewpoint of
the book, the art is proletarian-capably rendered, naturalistic, and resistant to
ambiguity-with a comic-book-like simplicity that, along with the sober, full-
paged text, will appeal to older kids who consider themselves way beyond the
picture-book stage. RS
MARCH 1994 
* 241
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
Ada, Alma Flor, Violet J. Harris, and Lee Bennett Hopkins. A Chorus ofCultures:
Developing Literacy Through Multicultural Poetry; illus. by Morissa Lipstein and
others. Hampton-Brown, 1993. 304p. ISBN 1-56334-325-8. $59.95
Ideally, every teacher makes her or his own anthology of favorite poems for year-
long classroom use, but in lieu of-or in addition to-that personalized prepara-
tion, here's a lively educational aid. It's almost like a scrapbook: after the generous
introduction offers suggestions about introducing and exercising poetry on an ac-
tive daily basis, the book launches into a diary of poems, songs, folklore, and infor-
mational tidbits related to the multicultural-calendar. 
The three compilers are
experienced educators who make a convincing case and lend strong support for
incorporating poetry into the curriculum. 
Users will need to follow up the brief
snippets for more in-depth development, but the bouncily illustrated, spiral-bound
book offers an informal springboard to other activities. BH
Copeland, Jeffrey S. Speaking of Poets: Interviews with Poets Who Write for Chil-
dren and Young Adults. NCTE, 1993. 128p. Paper ed. ISBN 0-8141-4622-8.
$12.95
More than a useful reference for kids gathering background on favorite poets, this
comprises intriguing interviews that reveal the differences in work, lifestyle, and
personality among sixteen popular poets: Arnold Adoff, Lilian Moore, Mel Glenn,
Aileen Fisher, Karla Kuskin, Jimmy Santiago Baca, Mary Ann Hoberman, Myra
Cohn Livingston, Valerie Worth, Lee Bennett Hopkins, X. J. Kennedy, Gary Soto,
Eloise Greenfield, Barbara Juster Esbensen, William Cole, and Eve Merriam. Most
have published anthologies as well as collections, and all have strong ideas about
what they read as well as what they write. A selective bibliography follows each
author's interview. BH
Henderson, Kathy. Market Guide for Young Writer's [sic]; Where and How to Sell
What You Write. Writer's Digest Books, 1993. Fourth edition. 288p. Paper ed.
ISBN 0-89879-606-7. $16.95
Despite the apostrophic glitch on the title page, this is a useful handbook for young
writers looking to publish their work. Part one offers practical advice on manu-
script preparation and submission and warns of deceptive contests and vanity presses;
part two features interviews with editors and adolescent writers (along with a brief
story by the then thirteen-year-old Stephen King); part three lists more than 150
magazines and writing contests that welcome submissions from young people.
Useful information and sensible suggestions, browsably arranged. RS
Pellowski, Anne, ed. A World of Children's Stories; illus. by Gloria Ortiz. Friend-
ship Press, 1993. 192p. Paper ed. ISBN 0-377-00259-3. $19.95.
Without trying to impose-or superimpose-a thematic organization on this col-
lection, Pellowski has simply put together 34 cracking good tales from East Asia,
242 
* 
THE BULLETIN
the Middle East, Africa, Europe, North and South America, and Oceania. There's
a wide variety of genres, including pourquoi, cumulative, riddle stories, and sev-
eral selections with rhymes, fingerplay or drawing games. Decorative line draw-
ings are unintrusive, and the notes give helpful background and specific sources. A
bargain resource for librarians, teachers, or parents-and it's easy to read for kids
on their own. BH
Treglown, Jeremy. Roald Dahl: A Biography. Farrar, 1994. [320p.] ISBN 0-
374-25130-4. $25.00. Reviewed from galleys
This extensively researched biography of Dahl paints him as magnetic and infuri-
ating, a man who could charm and offend with equal insouciance. Treglown
chronicles the writer's life from his youth in Cardiff through his wartime experi-
ences, family life, professional success, and personal tragedies; a substantial amount
of attention is paid not only to Dahl's writing but to his dealings with publishers
and editors in a way that makes the personalities and mechanics of publication
particularly vivid. This isn't for those who prefer their literary heroes unblem-
ished, but it's a readable and enlightening portrait of an important figure. An
index and photographs will be included in the bound book. DS
White, E. B. The Annotated Charlotte's Web; illus. by Garth Williams and with an
introduction and notes by Peter F. Neumeyer. HarperCollins, 1994. [320p.]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-24388-0; Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024387-2. $35.00. Re-
viewed from galleys.
Unlike similarly annotated children's titles in which hypertextual facts and anec-
dotes about the book and author border the main text, Neumeyer takes a homier
approach, with his annotations serving more as moments in a ruminative chat
between critic and reader. Neumeyer is occasionally pedantic ("Charlotte as
mother"), but more often appreciative ("We love Wilbur at this moment") and
helpful ("Yes, spiders do have muscles"). The original text and illustrations are
fully included; interesting appended material includes information on Garth Wil-
liams, correspondence between White and editor Ursula Nordstrom, and critical
response to the book. RS
*From ALSC/ALA come two new "Program Support Publications," Programming
for Children with SpecialNeeds (19p., ISBN 0-8389-5763-3) and Programmingfor
Introducing Adults to Children's Literature (16p., ISBN 0-8389-5763-3). 
Each
pamphlet is $7.00 and includes basic programming advice; Special Needs also has a
directory of organizations concerned with disabilities. *Children's literature spe-
cialists involved in issues of translation will be glad to know about Riitta Oittinen's
unusual study, IAm Me-I Am Other: On the Dialogics of Translatingfor Chil-
dren, a dissertation published by the Department of Translation Studies, Univer-
sity of Tampere, Finland. Oittinen explores the idea that translation goes far beyond
concepts of fidelity and equivalence to include "whole situations." Translators
"bring to the translation their cultural heritage, reading experience, and in the case
of children's books, their image of childhood and their own child image." *Also of
interest is a translation, along with the original Chinese text and background notes,
of the earliest version of the Chinese "Little Red Riding Hood," presented by Dr.
Giinter Lontzen in the December, 1993, issue of Merveilles & Contes, a journal
available from the University of Colorado in Boulder, Colorado.
MARCH 1994 
* 
243
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Africa: Margolies
African Americans-fiction:
Hansen; Woodson
Africa-fiction: Beake; Farmer
Archaeology: Gillette
Arithmetic: Leedy
Arizona-fiction: Russell
Art: Walker; Zhang
Aunts-stories: Rattigan
BEDTIME STORIES: Bierhorst;
Conway; Wilds
BIOGRAPHIES: Brust; Wallner;
Zhang
Brothers-fiction: Reuter
Careers: Horenstein
Cats-stories: Richard
Child abuse-fiction: Woodson
China: Zhang
China-folklore: Yep
City life-fiction: Quattlebaum
City life-stories: Bunting
Civil War: Marrin
Civil War-fiction: Calvert
CONCEPT BOOKS: Brown;
Leedy
Cowboys: Granfield; Sandler
Death-fiction: Williams, C.
Denmark-fiction: Reuter
Dinosaurs: Gillette
Dogs-fiction: Sebestyen
England-fiction: Phillips
Ethics and values: Bunting;
Goldentyer; Macdonald
EVERYDAY LIFE STORIES:
Pearce; Quattlebaum
Extrasensory perception: Deem
FANTASY: Lindbergh; Reiss;
Russell; Yep
Farm life: Morris
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Woodson
Fathers and daughters-stories:
Conway
Fathers and sons-fiction: Calvert
Fathers and sons-stories: Gauthier;
Lewin
Flight: Bellville
FOLKTALES AND
FAIRYTALES: Anholt; Araujo;
Richard; Thomas; Vuong
Food and eating-stories: Sun
Friends-fiction: Sebestyen;
Woodson
FUNNY STORIES: Peck
Gangs-fiction: Reuter
Gardens-fiction: Quattlebaum
GHOST STORIES: Phillips;
Wright
Grandfathers-fiction: Williams, C.
Grandmothers-stories:
Calmenson; Nye
Guidance: Goldentyer
Haiti-stories: Williams, K.
Handicrafts: Brust
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Calvert; Carter; Finley; Hansen;
244 
* THE BULLETIN
Phillips; Reuter; Ross;
Sauerwein
History, U.S.: Bial; Calvert;
Finley; Hansen; Marrin;
Sandler; Wallner
History: Meltzer
Horses: Patent
Horses-fiction: King-Smith
Immigrants-fiction: Ross
Insects: Facklam
Japan-folklore: Richard
Jews-fiction: Ross
Kidnapping-fiction: Pfeffer
Language arts: Brown; Day
Literature, children's: Brust
LOVE STORIES: Beake; Reiss
Mexico-fiction: Finley
Mothers and daughters:
Horenstein
Mothers and daughters-stories:
Williams, K.
Namibia-fiction: Beake
Native Americans-fiction: Finley;
Russell
Native Americans-poetry:
Bierhorst
Nature study: Facklam; Patent;
Waters
Oceanography: Waters
POETRY: Hopkins; Levy
Reading aloud: King-Smith; Levy;
Pearce; Thomas
Reading, beginning: Calmenson;
Hopkins
Reading, easy: King-Smith; Ross;
Wright; Yep
Reading, family: Bierhorst;
Brown; Bunting; Gauthier
Reading, reluctant: Deem;
Goldentyer; Pfeffer
Religious education: Bial
School-fiction: Lindbergh
Science fair: Bellville; Deem
SCIENCE FICTION: Farmer
SHORT STORIES: Sauerwein
Sisters-fiction: Williams, C.
Slavery-fiction: Hansen
Social problems: Goldentyer
Social studies: Margolies; Nye
South Africa-stories: Lewin
South, The-folklore: Thomas
Story hour: Anholt; Araujo;
Conway; Day; Gauthier; Lewin;
Macdonald; Rattigan; Richard;
Sun; Vuong; Wallner; Wilds;
Williams, K.
Summer-fiction: Williams, C.
Tanzania: Margolies
Time travel-fiction: Lindbergh;
Reiss; Russell
Trucks-fiction: Day
Veterinarians: Horenstein
Vietnam-folklore: Vuong
Weather-poetry: Hopkins
West, The: Granfield; Sandler
West, The-fiction: Finley;
Sauerwein
World War II-fiction: Carter;
Reuter
Zimbabwe-fiction: Farmer
I I
WILSON REFERENCE BOOKS
Booktalk!5
More Selections from The BooktalkerforAll Ages and Audiences
The latest volume in a series devoted to
booktalking, Booktalk! 5 collects over 320 live-
ly, ready-to-use talks originally published in
Joni Richards Bodart's newsletter The Book-
talker (a popular feature of Wilson Library
Bulletin from 1989 to 1992).
Everything You Need for Booktalking
Compiled by Dr. Bodart, whose work has
helped introduce thousands of children,
teenagers, and adults to the joys of reading,
Booktalk! 5 also contains articles on learning
how to booktalk, developing a personal style,
and involving students in booktalking projects.
An Essential Tool for Both Beginning and Experienced Booktalkers
Covering a wide variety of contemporary lit-
erature, Booktalk! 5 offers effective,
field-tested talks contributed by more than
80 librarians across the
continent. Ranging from
two to seven minutes in
length, the talks are suit-
ed for audiences in the
classroom, the library,
and the community, and
can also be adapted for
reader's advisory work.
With talks arranged alphabetically by
book title, Booktalk! 5 includes indexes by
title, age level, and sub-
ject, as well as a bibliog-
raphy by author. Book-
talk! 5 complements Bo-
dart's Booktalk! 4 (1992)
with another exciting,
timely collection of talks
and articles.
Other Titles by Joni Richards Bodart
Booktalk! 4 
Booktalk! 2
1992 305pp. ISBN 0-8242-0835-8 
1985 408pp. ISBN 0-8242-0716-5
LC 92-13556 
LC 85-14223
$32 U.S. and Canada, $36 other countries. 
$30 U.S. and Canada, $34 other countries.
"Anothergood collection from Bodart that 
'A just-ht guide to booktalking...A necessity
belongs on every librarian's personal reading 
for both novices and pros."
sheIf " 
-VOICE 
OF Yotrm ADVOCAS 
---SCHOOL LIBRARY JOURNAL
Booktalk! 3
1988 371pp. ISBN 0-8242-0764-5
LC 88-17284
$30 U.S. and Canada, $34 other countries.
"Booktalkers willfind an abundant variety of
styles to choosefrom... 
-BoOKu-r
Booktalking with Joni Bodart
1986 Videocassette 28 minutes
ISBN 0-8242-0741-6
Color/VHS/Hi-Fl, with Viewer's Guide
$89 U.S. and Canada, $99 other countries.
'It works! An important tool for anyone tying
to bring books and YAs togethe* Bravo!"
-VOICE 
OF Yotrm ArvOCATES
To Order Call Toll-Free 800-367-6770.
Outside of the U.S. and Canada call 718-588-8400. Fax 718-590-1617.
THE 
HWWILSON 
COM 
PANY 
Shari 
Since 
1898
5( 
n x 
tNi. 
.
Bronx, 
XN 
101. 2 
.,. -. 
-677
- School Library Journal stars
SAliki's
SMy Visitto the
Aquarium
Full-color pictures by Aliki
"Children and adults of various ages,
races, and physical abilities tour a
public aquarium to look at many of the
world's marine creatures. The language
is almost lyrical, and its lilting quality
imparts a feeling of journeying under-
water to discover fish, crustaceans,
mollusks, and more. Readers and
viewers will be equally entertained as...
the sense of motion is amplified in the
colorful pictures.... A story alive with
color and action."-SLJ
Ages 4-8. $15.00TR (0-06-021458-9); $14.89LB (0-06-021459-7)
For a free Aliki biographical brochure write:
M HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
S 
10 East 53rd Street, New York 10022
10
' 
School Library Journal star 
Kirkus Reviews pointer
Interweaving the history of the chair with a chronicle of its changing
technology and design, James Giblin embraces many cultures-
from ancient Greece and Rome, to Africa and the legendary Golden
Stool of the Ashanti, to
2nth-rcntuin America- 
/
as he illustrates
reflect the lives
people who us<
"Attractively ar
dantly illustratec
black-and-white
Giblin once agair
excels at makin<
history accessibl
enjoyable."-SL
A "fascinating
provocative win
into social histo
-Kirkus Reviews
Ages 8-12.
$15.00 TR
(0-06-021537-2)
$14.89 LB
(0-06-021538-0)
Among James Cross Giblin's other HarperCollins books
THE RIDDLE OF 
THE TRUTH ABOUT
THE ROSETTA STONE 
UNICORNS
Key to Ancient Egypt 
Drawings by Michael McDermott
Photographs, prints and drawings 
Full-color and black-&-white
1990 ALA Notable Children's Books 
photographs and prints
Ages 8-12. $15.00 TR (0-690-04797-5) 
1991 ALA Notable Children's Books
$14.89 LB (0-690-04799-1) 
Ages 8-12. $15.00 TR (0-06-022478-9)
Trophy paper ed. $5.95 (0-06-446137-8) 
$14.89 LB (0-06-022479-7)
LET THERE BE LIGHT
A Book About Windows
Full-color and black-&-white
photographs and prints
1988 ALA Notable Children's Books
Ages 8-12. $15.89 LB (0-690-04695-2)
For a free James Cross Giblin
biographical brochure write: 
1 HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York 10022
-'• 
Starred in The Horn Book
THE TUB GRANDFATHER
"By 
Pam Conrad
Full-color pictures by Richard Egielski
"The second domestic
adventure of the roti
shiny wooden dolls
first encountered in
The Tub People is
a romantic tale of
reconciliation. [Here]
the past comes upon
[the grandmother] in
the figure of a little
wooden man the Tul
People find under the
radiator. The sleepin!
gentleman is none
other than the Tub
G 
f-4.1
aJIn aiIUILI, 
appareJJ 
Ll y 
IvII
missing....Once again Richard Egielski's full-page
scenes offer marvelous perspectives... and the flat
wooden figures emanate subtleties of character
and feeling. The bold clarity of the pictures, paired
with the ingenuous narrative, makes the book
especially fine for story hours."-The Horn Book
A Laura 
eringer BooK
Ages 4-8. $15.00 TR (0-060228954); $14.89 LB (0-06-022896-2)
her full-color picture books by Pam Conrad and Richard Egielski
THE TUB PEOPLE
190O 
AI A Nntabke 
hIIUkmnl's Mnl
1990 Horn Book Fanfare Hon
A Laura Geringer Book
Ages 4-8. $15.00 TR (0-06-0228954); $14.89 L
THE LOST SAILOF
A Laura Geringer Book
Ages 4-8. $15.00 TR (0-06-00216
$14.89 LB (0-06-021696-4)
I0 HarperCollinsChildren
10 East 53rd Street, New York
(i
A new picture book by the Newbery Medal-
winning author of Julie of the Wolves
•6ea.^ '•1hecccz,
Jean Craighead George
Full-color pictures by Loretta Krupinski
"On the winter solstice, December 21, a woman writes to her
grandaughter about how the northern half of the earth grew
gradually colder after June 21 [thus affecting all natural life].
George's spare text and Krupinski's bright paintings explain
in concrete terms the difficult concepts of the changing
seasons and the solstices." 
-ALA Booklist
"The simplicity of George's writing belies the wealth of
information that the narrative contains. Whether marching
with Canada geese, howling with wolves on a hillside, or
making snow angels, the art places readers inside each
scene. From a versatile author and a talented illustrator, a
whole-language beauty." 
-School Library Journal
Ages 4-8. $15.00 TR (0-06-021139-3); $14.89 LB (0-06-021140-7)
For a free Jean Craighead George biographical brochure write:
i HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York 10022
!
&her
I 61J
k
"Just
rg fo whenever
sonies are read or tolddl*
~hNGICA~jFR 
M AL~
MANY LANDS
RETOLD BY Margaret Mayo
ILLUSTRATED BY Jane Ray
"A remarkably felicitous collection of 14 stories
from different traditions-Airab, Zulu, Scottish,
Dominican, Indian, Native American, Chinese, and
more... Riay skillfully adapts her entrancing decora-
tive style to the stories' rich diversity., .ranging?
with ease, from the courtly to the comic. Beautiful
and inviting." 
-*Kirkius Reviews (Pointer)
*"Mayo's lively vocab-
ulary, fine sense of
theater, and care-
fully chosen back-
ground details make
this collection a
winner. "-Publishers Weekly
(Starred)
"IA welcome addition
to folklore collections
..suited for reading
aloud and story-
telling.-The. Horn Book
Full color. Source notes.
All ages. 0-525-450 17 3.
SI 9 99
DUTTOkN
A Division of Penguin USA
Don Freeman's lost masterpiece
f is proud to present these
author-artist of Corduroy and
3w Junior Books
VWiBim Morrow ac C, lac.
of the Ameriks, New York. NY 10019
_:______~il__/__ 
i_: 
: 
_ 
_ 
_
I
University of Illinois Pr 
SCOND CLASS
1325 South Oak Street 
POSTAGE
Champaign, IL 61820 
PAID
U.S.A. 
CHAMPAIGN, IL
RmruN POSTAGE GARANTEED
Al Around
the Year
Holidays and
Celebrations in
American Life
Jack Santino
In Al Around tc Year, Jack
Sanino guides the reader
through a variety of holidays,
periods of festivity, and life
cycle rituals and celebrations.
Drawing from history, anthro-
pology, popular culture, and
folklore, Santino shows the
intricate relationships between
holidays and the roles of cele-
bratonsand rituals in people's
ives. He combinesscholarship,
field research, and personal
reminiscence in this wonder-
fully readable account Illus.
m i 
dAMtaWerA.rw 
la.MuibWU t* 
Cloth, $24.95
Order tdl fre 800/5454703
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street * Champaign, L 61820
