ILLINO
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois Press
W 
Er
4ý
-· 
ur;l 
L:·
~·" 
*"~i~- -·~
THE
BUvL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
April 1998
Vol. 51 No. 8
A LOOK INSIDE
271 THE BIG PICTURE
Go and Come Back by Joan Abelove
272 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
275 * Smack by Melvin Burgess
285 * Zelda and Ivy written and illus. by Laura McGee Kvasnosky
289 * Fire! by Joy Masoff; illus. with photographs by Jack Reznicki and
Barry D. Smith
291 * Strays Like Us by Richard Peck
295 * A Weave of Words ad. by Robert D. San Souci; illus. by Rauil Col6n
298 * ILove My Hair! by Natasha Anastasia Tarpley; illus. by E. B. Lewis
303 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
304 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin ofthe Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor (JMD)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Pat Mathews, Reviewer (PM)
CENTER STAFF
Shirley Chan
Linda Fenster
Kate McDowell
Jordan Martin
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $40.00; individuals, $35.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 51 E. Armory Ave., Champaign,
IL 61820-6601. E-mail: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu
Visit our homepage at http://edfu.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1998 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Elly Simmons from Go and Come Back, ©1998. Used by permission of
Jackson/DK Ink.
APRIL 1998 
* 271
THE BIG PICTURE
Go and Come Back
by Joan Abelove
"They both wore no beads, no nose rings, no lip plugs, no anklets. They didn't
pierce their noses or their lower lips. They didn't bind their ankles or flatten their
foreheads. They did nothing to make themselves beautiful." In addition to being
undecorated and devoid of the body fat required for true beauty, the two New
York anthropologists who are visiting Alicia's Peruvian jungle village, Poincushmana,
for a year's work on their dissertations have a lot of strange ideas, and many of the
Isabo people enjoy watching them make mistakes and ask stupid questions. But
there are tensions as well, especially revolving around the stinginess of the "old
white ladies." The villagers "save" by sharing everything they have and depending
on others to do the same, whereas the strangers "save" by withholding resources
the villagers want or need, from beads to rice. Moreover, Alicia and her people
accept primal facts of sex and death with a forbearance ("whatever it would be" is
a favorite expression) that unsettles the anthropologists.
Alicia's mother simply dismisses the foreigners ("Do not think of them as
people"). Yet Alicia slowly becomes involved in a kind of friendship with one of
them, Joanna, and determines to teach her manners (lying, for instance, to save
face with kinsmen), cleanliness (bathing twice a day in the river), generosity (figur-
ing out what people want before they ask), and a better understanding of life gen-
erally: "They knew so little and they asked so much." Slowly, the two women do
begin to learn, and they are certainly comparison gainers next to the government
officials who come to draft village men, or the missionaries who make fools of
themselves in only one night's stay.
Supporting the quotable lines and cinematic scenes in this first novel is a
substructure of solid elements. Alicia's narrative voice, which could have become
a gimmick of viewpoint reversal, relies instead on wit and consistency for ultimate
effect; her observations naturally suit the adolescent she is, and young adult readers
will recognize and empathize with her point of view. The characters are never
functionalized to make a statement, but are individualized for true empathetic
connection. 
The situational aspects of humor and tragedy are skillfully
counterpointed: on the one hand, we laugh at the dual perception of dental floss
as tooth cleaner and fishing line; on the other, we grieve with Alicia and Joanna as
they struggle with conflicting expressions of sadness over the death of a baby Alicia
has adopted. Alicia's lifeways make more sense than the Anglos', of course, since
this is her story, but the authorial tone never mistakes cultural adulation for re-
spect. This is not a noble savage story, nor is it a noble anthropologist story. In
clearly limited ways, it is a meeting that becomes an exchange, and the titular
expression for goodbye in Isabo--go and come back-assumes strong new meaning
272 
* THE BULLETIN
in application to precarious new trust. The ending rests gracefully on understated
symbolism as Alicia herself, in an unexpected airplane flight over her home, attests
to unexpected ways of viewing the world. We are not misled, however, into be-
lieving that New York and Poincushmana will ever encompass the same kinship
group.
Joan Abelove, who has a doctorate in cultural anthropology, asks many
provocative questions in this novel. Who is qualified to portray whom? What is
ignorance? When is it acceptable to laugh at others? And the reader must throw in
a query, too. Is it presumption to assume the voice of an ethnic other, even to
make fun of one's own culture? Too often American fiction for youth has por-
trayed other cultures from the outside, and clearly this author is not Isabo (which,
a note makes clear, is a fictionalized name for a real people; it also mentions that
the village may no longer exist). Yet she lived for two years in the setting of her
novel; she may not be an insider, but she knows enough to know what she doesn't
know. And, paradoxically, she has shed light on insiders by representing their
attention to what she does know-being an outsider to them. The viewing of the
norm through an outsider's eyes is a perennially appealing device that should draw
teens right in as well as give them some food for cultural thought. Reading this
novel is like feeling wind rush through a stuffy room. We are taken by surprise.
We breath deeper for the freshness of observing our own culture from the outside,
for seeing two characters so like and unlike ourselves begin to expand, and for
experiencing new possibilities of vision: "Maybe they were learning how to be.
Whatever reason it would be." Maybe we can, too. (Imprint information appears
below.)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ABELOVE, JAN 
Go and Come Back. Jackson/DK Ink, 1998 
[192p]
ISBN 0-7894-2476-2 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 8-12
See this month's Big Picture, p. 271, for review.
AHLBERG, ALLAN 
Monkey Do!; illus. by Andr6 Amstutz. 
Candlewick,
1998 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-7636-0466-6 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
"Sunny morning, bright and early,/ Things are stirring in the zoo./ Comes the
keeper with his key ring,/ Monkey see, Monkey do!" And monkey does indeed, as
there are plenty of monkey shenanigans in this picture-book offering wherein a
monkey mimic (looking like a brother of Curious George) escapes from the zoo
APRIL 1998 
* 
273
and cavorts through the town, delivering milk and the mail, visiting the Biggins
household, sneaking into a school classroom, assisting a fireman in a cat rescue,
and finally returning to the zoo. This seems a logical conclusion, but the monkey
business is not over yet. More zoo action follows: "Here's a brown bear with a
bun./ Here's a crocodile with ... nothing./ Monkey see ... Monkey run!" Now
it really feels like we're done, but are we? Nope: "Just one worn out little Mon-
key,/ Wants his mommy, wouldn't you?" Even though the story goes into over-
time, what keeps this litany of monkey madness ticking are light comic touches
throughout the illustrations. What five-year-old won't appreciate seeing the mon-
key peeking out from his position in a school toilet stall? Large and small water-
color vignettes depict the playful action in an array of soft tints while the big print
of the rhythmic text is easy on the eyes. Offer this to those little monkeys with a
fondness for the friend of the man in the yellow hat. PM
ALLEN, JUDY, comp. Anthology for the Earth. Candlewick, 1998 
[96p] 
illus.
ISBN 0-7636-0301-5 
$21.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-12
Speech writers and others in search of environmental snippets will appreciate this
lushly illustrated anthology of poetry and prose that illuminate the natural world.
Pythagoras, Kipling, Tolstoy, Gather, and Attenborough are just a few of the forty-
seven authors whose works anthologized here, complemented by the interpreta-
tions of thirty-one artists (such as Michael Foreman, Quentin Blake, and Peter
Sis). A selection from the Talmud is included, as well as Buddhist and Biblical
scriptures. The usefulness of this attractive volume is somewhat marred by selec-
tions done in calligraphy (e.g., "Watching the Bird"), which are slightly difficult to
read, but Allen has made the logistics of sifting through this tome easy enough
with indices of authors and illustrators as well as an appended biographies page,
which offers a mini-bio of each author. Young naturalists interested in further
research can pursue the full texts of the works as cited in the acknowledgments. As
a browser or even a reference tool, this ecologically minded literary cross-section
should inspire enthusiasts for the next Earth Day celebration and will make a use-
ful addition to your "green" collection. PM
BANKS, KATE Andlfthe Moon Could Talk; illus. by Georg Hallensleben. 
Foster/
Farrar, 1998 
[30p]
ISBN 0-374-30299-5 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
3-5 yrs
A little girl's preparations for bed are paralleled with the other nighttime scenes the
moon witnesses: nomads crouching beside camels in the sand, waves lapping against
the beach in a palm-tree'd marina, a lioness licking her drowsy cubs. Banks has a
good ear for both nighttime sounds and the slowing rhythms of bedtime ("Some-
one hums quietly. A clock ticks. A light flicks on"), but some of her word choices
are counterpurposive ("Twilight blazes a trail across the wall"); more problemati-
cally, it's not clear which scenes happen where (some of the external scenes could
be of the little girl's house and town, for instance), which undermines the pattern
of distance alternating with closeness. Hallensleben's thickly brushed, post-im-
pressionistic paintings involve blocky shapes of saturated circus colors all shaded
softly in the twilight, and he deftly balances the cozy indoor light against the moon-
punctuated darkness outside. Kids who like poetic bedtime visions (such as Jonathan
274 
* 
THE BULLETIN
London's The Owl Who Became the Moon, BCCB 2/93) may not mind the roam-
ing in the gloaming, and they'll appreciate the gentle wind-down. DS
BECHARD, MARGARET 
My Mom Married the Principal. Viking, 1998 
[14 4 p]
ISBN 0-670-87394-2 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-7
Thanks to the well-intentioned machinations of his best friend, Amanda, eighth-
grader Jonah Truman is finally "going out" with Katherine Chang, the girl of his
dreams. Disenchantment hits hard and fast, though-the once serious but now
clinging Katherine actually expects to be taken out on a date, and Jonah's love life
has to play out under the very nose of his new stepfather, the school principal Mr.
Decker. Of course the date's a disaster (a group outing to a laser-tag arena), Katherine
ditches Jonah for a faster guy, and Jonah lands the girl that nearly got away. The
story is hardly monumental, but the note-writing, boyfriend-swapping, parent-
schmoozing, and innuendo-dropping that bring Jonah to his ultimate bliss are
junior high to the core, and Bechard's ear for realistic yet snappy dialogue adds
sparkle. Preteens, especially high-low readers in search of a chuckle, will find breezy
entertainment in Jonah's saga. EB
BLOS, JOAN 
Bedtime!; illus. by Stephen Lambert. 
Simon, 1998 
[32p]
ISBN 0-689-81031-8 
$12.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
2-4 yrs
It's bedtime ("The clock said it. The darkness outside said it. And the grandma
said it"), but the little boy is opposed to the concept. He does concede that one of
his stuffed toys might be tired, so Grandma puts Bear to bed. Not long after that,
Tiger and then Clown hit the sack, and after a bedtime story from the grandma
segues the boy into his pajamas, he's in bed and soon asleep. This is a nicely
circumscribed bedtime scenario, and the enumerative qualities of the text, which
one might consider attritional rather than cumulative as the various critters go
down for the count, have a pleasingly lulling effect. Some of the text is a little
generically cozy; the chalk-pastel art, in subdued and twilit hues, leans even farther
in that direction (and the sunflowers outside the bedroom window occasionally
coalesce into a rather intimidating monster), but the little boy's casual sprawl and
sleepy submission to pajama placement have an engaging particularity. Small bed-
time-postponers will appreciate the staircase approach, and they'll insist on appro-
priating the boy's methodology for their own. DS
BORTZ, FRED Martian Fossils on Earth?: The Story ofMeteoriteALH84001. Mill-
brook, 1997 
72p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-7613-0270-0 
$21.40 
R 
Gr. 5-9
It's fascinating to consider how a dull little chunk of rock with an equally dull
moniker could generate such excitement, but the "fossil evidence" for Martian life
contained in this now world-famous meteorite has generated controversy of the
highest order. Bortz adroitly maintains the tantalizing possibility of extraterrestrial
life suggested by the rock's chemistry and structure, while subjecting the thrilling
claims to dispassionate scientific scrutiny. Although the pro and con arguments
are undeniably challenging, synthesizing physics, astronomy, biology, and chemistry,
Bortz leads his readers through scientific testing and analysis one brief, logical chapter
APRIL 1998 
* 
275
at a time and employs an assortment of color photos and charts to aid in explication
and comparison. 
Adults who have been thoroughly confused by media hype
concerning life on Mars might want to have a look at this balanced and readable
offering, too. EB
BRANLEY, FRANKLYN M. 
Floating in Space; illus. by True Kelley. 
HarperCollins,
1998 
[32p] 
(Let's-Read-and-Find-Out Science)
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-025433-5 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-025432-7 
$14.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-06-445142-9 
$4.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-9 yrs
In this new entry in the enduring Let's-Read-and-Find-Out Science series, it's the
turn of future astronauts to do some reading and finding out, as whimsical, car-
toonish watercolors accompany information about life on a space shuttle. Lots of
fun facts (when fixing the Hubble Space Telescope, "the astronauts could have
lifted the whole telescope, even though its weight on Earth is more than twelve
tons") and nifty labeled space stuff (e.g., a waste-collection system-yes, a toilet)
offer science in a lively, accessible way. This will be a useful source of information
for the younger student, so add it to your collection and offer those budding scien-
tists the opportunity to climb aboard. PM
BRUCHAC, JOSEPH 
The Arrow over the Door; illus. by James Watling. 
Dial,
1998 
89p
ISBN 0-8037-2078-5 
$15.99 
Ad Gr. 3-5
In this fictionalized account of a Quaker assembly's encounter with a band of
Indian scouts in service to King George's Loyalists, Bruchac alternates the view-
points of fourteen-year-old Samuel Russell and his Abenaki counterpart, Stands
Straight. Both youths question their family's positions on the war-Samuel, his
parents' unwavering pacifism, and Stands Straight, his uncle's willingness to attack
strangers whose hearts they cannot know. When the Abenaki party enters the
meeting house and finds the Quakers unarmed and calm, "listening to hear the
voice of Ktsi Nwasku, the Creator," they abandon their mission for the Redcoats
and adopt a policy of neutrality. Although the meeting itself, which Bruchac
documents in a lengthy endnote, is undeniably dramatic, getting there takes some
time; fully two-thirds of the novel is top-heavy with political issues, complex alli-
ances, and religious tenets, explained in strained dialogue for history-deficient
younger readers. Still, there's an uplifting payoff for the determined, as well as
some thought-provoking commentary by Bruchac on how tantalizing historic
sources can provide the inspiration for a longer work of historical fiction. EB
BURGESS, MELVIN 
Smack. 
Holt, 1998 
[288p]
ISBN 0-8050-5801-X 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 9-12
Published as Junk in England, this novel of young heroin addicts in Bristol has
been described as a junior Trainspotting (American readers may also detect resem-
blances to Panic in Needle Park). It begins with the story of fourteen-year-old Tar,
a runaway fleeing abusive parents, and his mercurial girlfriend Gemma, who joins
him more out of rebellion and restlessness than need. After a stint in a squat run
by benevolent anarchists, Tar and Gemma move in with the magnetic Lily and her
276 
* THE BULLETIN
boyfriend Rob, whose generous affection and unfettered ways are eyeopening to
the younger couple. So is their use of heroin, initially, but soon Tar and Gemma
are old hands at the drug, and the desperate search to acquire it (which leads the
girls to prostitution), interrupted by occasional attempts to cut down or quit (es-
pecially when Lily becomes pregnant), becomes the core of their days. Eventually,
Tar's prison-alternative of rehab and, finally, the teens' move towards adulthood
allow for the possibility-though far from the certainty-of a clean life. This kind
of story possesses an inherent sensationalism, which is part of its compulsion, but
Burgess steers clear of Go Ask Alice-style contrivances. There are few saints and no
pure sinners here; the narration, passed around from character to character with
each chapter, makes the appeal of the camaraderie and the adolescent glamour
clear and understandable while also implying the terrible deceptiveness of its glit-
ter. There's a certain inevitability to it all-it's hard to imagine what else might
have happened to these marginalized individuals-that makes the equivocal end-
ing even more shadowed. It's an open question whether anything this dramatic is
really effective as a preventative tract, but it makes for a gripping read about life
on-and falling off-the edge. A glossary of British slang is included. DS
BUTLER, CHARLES 
The Darkling. McElderry, 1998 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-689-81796-7 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Petra is fifteen, trying to keep her family together after her mother's death and her
father's subsequent job loss, when she encounters strange Mr. Century at Century
Hall. Mr. Century, older than his name by a year, takes a fancy to Petra and
begins giving her gifts, which makes Petra very uneasy indeed. Her reservations
prove prescient when, after his death, Mr. Century refuses to leave her alone, con-
fusing her with his long-dead love and invading first a shadowed image on her
bedroom ceiling and then, more chillingly, Petra's father. To complicate matters,
her father has recently started work again with the man who got him fired, the
man whom Petra, with good but secret reason, hates and fears. In this first novel,
Butler displays a rich wit and a sharp yet unhurried sense of atmosphere; the book's
detail and intelligence (Orpheus and Eurydice, for instance, leave their footprints
on the story) enhance the effects without overwhelming the plot. There's a horror
to the climax and a bitterness in the aftermath that carries the book's resonance
through to the end, and fans of Robert Westall and other uncompromising cre-
ators of dangerous ghosts will want to make this one of their literary haunts. DS
CARBONE, ELISA 
Starting School with an Enemy. 
Knopf, 1998 
[112p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-98639-1 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-88639-7 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-5
Sarah's move to Maryland is disastrous enough already, and then she finds that
she's unintentionally made an enemy, Eric ("And the only thing worse than start-
ing school as a stranger is starting school with an enemy"). Even her promising
new friend, Christina, can't keep fifth-grader Sarah from locking horns with sixth-
grader Eric, whose taste for payback is well-developed. It turns out that Sarah's is
as well, but she begins to realize that the joys of reprisal and escalation have a cost
(Christina is understandably annoyed that Sarah's repeated detentions limit their
time together); she therefore begins to steel herself for the more difficult battle
APRIL 1998 
* 277
with self-control as she determines to bring matters to an end by depriving Eric of
response. Carbone has a spirited voice and a realistic heroine in big-mouthed,
impulsive Sarah, and she achieves a balance between her light touch and her ac-
knowledgment of some hard truths that's reminiscent of Louis Sachar. The com-
edy and aptness of some of the offensives here (live grubs tucked into sandwiches,
squirt guns full of pee) will be charmingly repellent to many young readers, who
will fully understand the difficulty of Sarah's final resolve. This is eminently satis-
fying breezy middle-grades fare. DS
COBB, VICKI 
Don't Try This at Home!: Science Fun for Kids on the Go; by Vicki
Cobb and Kathy Darling; illus. by True Kelley. 
Morrow, 1998 
[128p]
ISBN 0-688-14856-5 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-8
Here's a grab bag of science tricks, experiments, and observations designed for a
variety of settings-schools, airplanes, orchards, restaurants, playgrounds, amuse-
ment parks-nearly anywhere but home. Most require very little time or equip-
ment; a rubber band and computer monitor at school, a jar of soap-bubble fluid
outside, a ball and a friend on a playlot merry-go-round, and a tuning fork bor-
rowed from the music teacher are typical supplies. Some activities call for special
conditions, such as subfreezing weather for soap-bubble experimentation, or apple-
ripening season for fruit photography; a few will raise eyebrows (try getting your
postage scale through the metal detector at the airport, or standing on a bathroom
scale on a high-speed elevator). "Doing the Deed " directions are easy, "Insider
Information" explanations are short and clear, and the variety of topics and urban
and rural settings should cast a wide appeal. How can grownups possibly object to
children's checking out the toilet water at the top of a highrise or playing with
drinking straws wrappers at a restaurant? It's all in the name of science. EB
DEMI 
The Dalai Lama: A Biography ofthe Tibetan Spiritual and Political Leader;
written and illus. by Demi. 
Holt, 1998 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8050-5443-X 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
A biography of the fourteenth Dalai Lama presents some difficult challenges for
the picture-book format, but Demi has taken on unfamiliar contexts before in the
form of Chingis Khan (BCCB 1/92), Buddha (BCCB 6/96), and other monolithic
subjects. Perhaps the way is less smooth here because her characteristic doll-like
figures fit strangely into realistic portrayals of historical characters and events of
modern history. Some of the spreads are very effective, including a war scene with
black brushstrokes exploding beside a stylized firestorm that circles a Buddhist
temple. However, children may need considerable interpretive background to
cope with the accompanying text: "The Communist Cultural Revolution swept
across the Chinese continent, which resulted in massive destruction and human
suffering." Some of the color contrasts are more intrusive than daring, and the
conventionalized rainbow following the introduction seems a cliched Western way
to express Tibetan spiritual radiance. On the other hand, by condensing the ac-
count and expanding the graphics, Demi has certainly produced an accessible in-
troduction to the life and times of the Dalai Lama for young children. Pair this
with Mordicai Gerstein's picture book on reincarnation, The Mountains of Tibet
(BCCB 1/88). BH
278 
* 
THE BULLETIN
DEWEY, JENNIFER OWINGS 
Poison Dart Frogs; written and illus. by Jennifer Owings
Dewey. 
Boyds Mills, 1998 
32p
ISBN 1-56397-655-2 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Eyecatching and lethal, poison dart frogs are intriguing amphibians indeed, and
Dewey offers a brief introduction to their life and habits. She describes the poison
and its efficacy as a defensive mechanism (mentioning interestingly that frogs in
captivity apparently don't develop the poisons); she also examines their life cycle
and their use by hunters to supply poison for darts. The text is capable and com-
pact, and it covers its froggy ground with clarity. The illustrations include com-
mon and scientific names for various species of poison dart frogs, and helpful
touches include a scale ruler measuring a few species and depictions of some of the
harder-to-picture living arrangements. Unfortunately, Dewey's soft colored-pen-
cil illustrations fail to convey the glowing and varied color of these frogs, so clearly
represented in the photographs in Martin's Frogs (BCCB 3/98), and a map would
have been helpful. Early frogophiles may not mind, however, as they'll be ab-
sorbed in the details about roasting frogs to collect their poisons and mother frogs
feeding unfertilized eggs to the hatching babies. The Martin book is more likely to
make amphibian converts, but this is a useful entry-level account. There is no
bibliography or index. DS
DUEY, KATHLEEN 
Earthquake; written by Kathleen Duey and Karen A.
Bale. 
Aladdin, 1998 
[160p] 
(Survival!)
Paper ISBN 0-689-81308-2 
$3.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
When the 1906 San Francisco earthquake sends the city into panic, Brendan
O'Connor is in the middle of his delivery route for a local bakery, and Dai Yue has
just run away from an argument with her guardian, an uncle who is brokering an
arranged marriage for her. Predictably, the disparate pair of orphans are thrown
together for survival; just as predictably they make it through with flying colors-
Brendan is promised a job on a major newspaper, and both the children are taken
in by an eccentric but kindly parrot-toting woman in a lavender dressing gown.
Before the happy ending, though, they teeter amid aftershocks, dodge falling build-
ings, rescue a trapped baby, rescue Dai Yue's uncle, lose Dai Yue's uncle, and are
apprehended as looters. This run-of-the-mill adventure plot is considerably en-
riched, however, by Duey and Bale's skill in conveying Dai Yue's deep-rooted
loathing and fear of Fon Kwei (white devils), which proves as great an obstacle to
the children's search for aid and shelter as the physical perils around them. Al-
though the ending is both improbable and hokey, the steady action, palpable ten-
sion, and irresistible series title should lure some enthusiastic followers. EB
FARRELL, MAME 
Bradley and the Billboard. Farrar, 1998 
[192p]
ISBN 0-374-30949-3 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-7
Thirteen-year-old Brad is a baseball junkie, junior hunk, and regular guy-except
for his living with four females (younger sister, mother, youthful aunt, and grand-
mother) and thereby being able to French braid, apply nail polish, and discrimi-
nate between types of pantyhose. He'd like to be a more manly man of the house,
APRIL 1998 
* 
279
so he's drawn to the opportunity to make some good money even though it means
he's "gonna have to do the sissiest thing in the world," modeling. Soon he discov-
ers he's got a talent for modeling and that he really, really enjoys the attention he
derives from it, but this leads to trouble in reconciling his old life and his new
stardom. Farrell's writing is occasionally awkward, but she has an appealingly
breezy tone and a good sense of the ramifications of the situation. Wisely eschew-
ing the overseriousness that marred David Klass' similarly themed Screen Test (BCCB
3/98), the book is lighthearted and humorous while nonetheless making it clear
that Brad could be successful in modeling and also that he's in way over his head
(this becomes apparent when he arrives home drunk from a party in Manhattan).
It's also clear that, despite the initial, slightly stereotypical frilliness of Brad's all-
female home, the women around here are no bad thing to take after. The original
plot and alluring subject will draw readers to this cheerful and entertaining analy-
sis of eighth-grade self-worth and gender issues. DS
GERSHATOR, PHILLIS 
Greetings, Sun; by Phillis and David Gershator; illus. by
Synthia Saint James. 
Jackson/DK Ink, 1998 
[32p]
ISBN 0-7894-2482-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
2-5 yrs
A pair of siblings are up with the sun to take on the day, greeting everything that
crosses their palm tree-lined path: "Greetings, sun. Greetings, breeze. Greetings,
toes. Greetings, knees .... Greetings, toast. Greetings, jelly. Greetings, butter.
Greetings, belly." From schooltime to suppertime to bedtime the greetings con-
tinue ("Greetings, moon. And now we're done . . . until it's time to greet the
sun"). An unsurprising though rhythmic text is well-matched by Saint James'
evocation of the oceanside-crisply defined areas of bold, matte colors, softened
by the friendly round shapes and warm brown skin tones of her figures. The
youngest listeners may be able to follow visual clues to chant along with the text;
older children would probably rather reach for that beloved standby Goodnight
Moon. EB
GIBBONS, GAIL 
Marshes 
Swamps; written and illus. by Gail Gibbons. 
Holiday
House, 1998 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1347-0 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Wetlands are a big issue these days, but a lot of kids probably aren't sure of what
exactly they are and if their favorite puddle qualifies. Gibbons helps clear the
muddy waters, describing the difference between marshes and swamps and subcat-
egories therein, such as freshwater vs. saltwater marshes and freshwater vs. man-
grove swamps; the book also depicts various denizens of each ecosystem and describes
the necessity of and the problems facing wetlands today. Unfortunately, it's not
clear if all these inhabitants live in every such wetland, some of the figures aren't
well distinguished (all the species of trees look alike, and the people are awkward
even by cartoon standards), and the text slips into the vapid ("Marshes and swamps
are wonderful places to explore ... They are home to many interesting creatures").
It's still a patient and low-key introduction to an important environmental topic,
however, and it'll give young eco-buffs a helpful start. A map showing the location
of some major North American wetlands and a page of wetlands miscellany are
included. DS
280 
* THE BULLETIN
GRANFIELD, LINDA 
Circus: AnAlbum. 
Kroupa/DK Ink, 1998 
96p 
illus. with
photographs
ISBN 0-7894-2453-3 
$19.95 
R Gr. 4-6
Over the centuries, across the continents, from center ring to back lot, through
competition and controversy, Granfield guides her readers on a tour of the big top
that takes in both the glamour and the grit. The first three chapters focus on the
development of the modern circus, highlighting the contributions of European
founders and the American showmanship of Barnum and the Ringlings; the last
four chapters examine contemporary circuses and the performers' lives in and out
of the spotlight. Granfield addresses controversies over animal welfare and side-
show "freaks" and even discusses how dated or even offensive literary circus classics
such as Toby Tyler may seem to modern readers. Even the layout and design have
a circusy ebullience, the text generously interspersed with black-and-white and
color photographs, drawings, and examples of circus posters and other art. The
real fun here, though, is in the wealth of did-you-know? s: the leotard was named
after a nineteenth-century trapeze artist, Tufts University athletes rub the jar of
Jumbo's ashes for good luck, it's bad luck to whistle or eat peanuts in the dressing
room. Try reading a few excerpts to get a group charged up for a field trip to the
circus. As if they'd need it! An index is included. EB
HARBER, FRANCES 
The Brothers'Promise; illus. by Thor Wickstrom. 
Whitman,
1998 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8075-0900-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys/ 
R 
5-8 yrs
Unlike the previous two picture-book versions of this Talmudic tale, adapted re-
cently by Neil Waldman (The Two Brothers: A Legend ofJerusalem, BCCB 10/97)
and earlier by Florence Freedman (Brothers: A Hebrew Legend, 12/85), this one
has a rollicking tone and is set in the pre-World War I shtetl culture of East Eu-
rope. Two brothers-charged by their expiring father to divide his land in half, to
work together, and to take care of each other-try to sneak food into each other's
houses at night during an extended drought. Each in turn is puzzled the next day
to find the same amount of food back in his own house and suspects an imp or
ghost of interference. It's not till they meet in the dark that the truth comes out,
"the angels in heaven weep tears of joy" at their loyalty, and the rains fall. The text
plays on Yiddish inflections and reflections: "But the dancing type Josefwas not.
He grew more like the beet; the best part was buried deep inside the ground."
Wickstrom's pictures are richly textured and deeply hued, with rounded lines of
motion and dynamically drafted figures. Sunlight, candlelight, and lightning bounce
off coppery-browns and blue-grays, creating visual transitions as smooth as the
verbal ones that revolve on turns of season. What goes around comes around, as
the saying goes, and this retelling deserves to make the rounds of many library
storytimes. BH
HARNESS, CHERYL 
Young Teddy Roosevelt; written and illus. by Cheryl
Harness. 
National Geographic, 1998 
[40p]
ISBN 0-7922-7094-0 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Readers probably won't consider forty-two as young, yet most will concede that
Theodore Roosevelt's sudden ascent to the Presidency at that age constitutes the
APRIL 1998 
* 281
most significant milestone in his life and, thus, an appropriate culmination for this
biography. Harness marks the highlights along the route to the White House:
Roosevelt's sickly childhood, his growing interest in natural science and "the strenu-
ous life," the loss of his first wife, his entry into politics, his remarriage and a rowdy
new family, his command of the Rough Riders, and his governorship. Each stage
receives only cursory treatment, however, with important episodes underexplained
and often choppily cobbled together. Garish cover art and cluttered layouts fre-
quently cross the line between visual excitement and visual assault. Still, Harness
does convey T.R.'s undeniable eccentricity and his passionate embrace of his many
enthusiasms; that may be enough to prod readers to find out more. EB
HARTNETT, SONYA 
Princes. Viking, 1998 
138p
ISBN 0-670-87821-9 
$14.99 
R Gr. 9 up
Ravel and Indigo are identical twins, now young men in their early twenties; since
the recent departure of their parents to parts unknown, they're alone in the huge
decaying house, living by candlelight, using only each other as reference points for
reality, and taking turns reading aloud to each other from books telling of old
oddities of violence, justice, and torment. The half-hearted efforts of Ravel, the
apparently subordinate twin, to open up this circumscribed existence are met with
resistance by Indigo-resistance that eventually proves to be much greater and
more dangerous than Ravel had realized. Those familiar with Hartnett's splen-
didly Faulknerian last book, Sleeping Dogs (BCCB 1/96), will find the visceral
grotesqueries here familiar, as rats overrun the house, the question of the twins'
parents' fate gets more immediate, and Ravel's physical condition declines at the
hands of his brother. The psychological menace is even more chilling, however,
and the book poses some interesting questions about the polarity of sanity and
insanity, and what it means if you've only got your mirror image and other self to
judge by. Teens intrigued by the films of David Lynch or David Cronenberg
(particularly the latter's twin-themed Dead Ringers) will find the book's tightly
controlled bizarreness and sense of inexorable entropy most enjoyable. DS
HASKINS, JAMES 
African Beginnings; by James Haskins and Kathleen Benson; il-
lus. by Floyd Cooper. 
Lothrop, 1998 
48p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-10257-3 
$17.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-10256-5 
$18.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
This is a handy if very sketchy overview of the great African kingdoms between
3800 B.C. and A.D. 1800. Sections on the kingdoms of Nubia, Egypt, Jenne-Jeno,
Ghana, Mao, Songhay, etc., briefly discuss trade, education, art, agriculture, and
other practices, including contributions of African cultures to the Western cul-
tures that were beginning to trade with, and, ultimately, to exploit them. The
illustrations are romanticized and nonspecific, the peoples and architecture seen
through a golden glow that adds little to the glancing glimpses of these great civi-
lizations. Sections on the spread of Islam, music and dance, slavery and coloniza-
tion, are notably brief. The chronology is a little hard to follow, since entries
discuss kingdoms as if they existed concurrently, but a timeline on Milestones in
African History may clarify matters; a bibliography and index are included. This
is not going to be the last word on this topic by any means, but it may work as an
introductory response to an oft-asked reference question or for readers not ready
for the McKissacks' The Royal Kingdoms of Ghana, Mali, and Songhay (BCCB 2/
94). JMD
282 
* THE BULLETIN
HERSHENHORN, ESTHER 
There Goes Lowell's Party; illus. by Jacqueline
Rogers. 
Holiday House, 1998 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8234-1313-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
It's Lowell's birthday, and all the clan from Crumm County to Slocum's Bluff are
expected for the big bash. However, things aren't looking good weatherwise: "Don't
you know, Lovey! Red skies mean rain." Naturally, Lowell's siblings chime in
with their own dire predictions as well: "'Yep,' piped Earl. 'Mama, hold those
cupcakes. Crumm Creek will flood. Not one Crumm will come."' The pile-up of
weather clues ("Low geese mean rain") doesn't dampen Lowell's confidence in his
relations' party-going perseverance: "I know Papa's side can keg-slide here." The
storm does set in and the relatives do come: log-riding, keg-sliding, and vine-
flying on a hilarious kind of "birthday ark" full of twin and triplet cousins, lots of
aunts and uncles, and gramps and grannies. With the combination of a youngun's
birthday party, plenty of fantastical family how-to, and a heapin' dose of folk wis-
dom, you get a pretty fine tale worth celebrating. Rogers' watercolor spreads,
humorously detailed, capture the downhome atmosphere of the Ozark setting and
the aplomb of its inhabitants. Children will recognize Lowell's birthday concerns,
appreciate the family dynamics, feel the tension as the storm approaches, be tickled
to learn some weather proverbs (appended), and eagerly join the final chorus:
"Happy Birthday, Lowell!" PM
HIGH, LINDA OATMAN 
Beekeepers; illus. by Doug Chayka. 
Boyds Mills,
1998 
32p
ISBN 1-56397-486-X 
$14.95 
Ad 
5-7 yrs
Honey-toned oil paintings feature a grandpa and his young granddaughter tend-
ing bees one spring morning; golden highlights and airy white space around the
text keep this gentle intergenerational adventure bright and sunny. The tender-
ness of the shared activity between grandfather and granddaughter is showcased
against the buzzing activity at the hives, and children will probably enjoy getting a
glimpse at the business of beekeeping, especially when the granddaughter must
bring down the swarm to a new hive for the very first time: "My heart flies into my
throat. Bringing down the bees has always been Grandpa's job." Though this is
obviously not meant to be a definitive offering on bees, the questions that arise
from the illustrations (what is that saw-like tool on page eight?) and the narrative
(what is the significance of "all the bricks standing on end"?) will go frustratingly
unanswered. An author's note or glossary would have been helpful. This may be
useful as a lightly sweetened buzz-in to Gail Gibbons The Honey Makers (BCCB 4/
97) or Joanna Cole's The Magic School Bus Inside a Beehive. PM
ISADORA, 
RACHEL 
A South African Night; written and illus. by Rachel
Isadora. 
Greenwillow, 1998 
[25p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-11390-7 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-11389-3 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
2-5 yrs
The concept that some animals are awake while people are asleep is a good one for
the bedtime bunch, and in this fairly same-and-tame entry, sleepyheads can go to
South Africa where "it is twilight in Johannesburg. Lights go on in the city. Stores
close for the night." The aforementioned animals are "more than two hundred
APRIL 1998 
* 283
miles away, in Kruger National Park." Visits to a black mamba, prowling lion-
esses, a leopard, a hippopotamus, and an elephant and her baby comprise the noc-
turnal tour till we arrive back in a Johannesburg market where "the people wake
up to a new day." Isadora's watercolors unfold across each double-page spread,
and though some capture the vastness of city or veldt, others seem careless in both
composition and technique. The black spidery plants flanking the black mamba
create a wonderful eeriness, but the watery background seems splotchy in places.
The awkwardly executed lionesses seem pasted, almost sticker-like, onto their shad-
owy background, and an odd-looking hippopotamus, head above water, seems to
be curiously lacking the rest of its body. These artistic flaws and the catalog-ish
tone of the text probably won't diminish a young audience's enthusiasm for wild
animals, but they'll get a bigger kick out ofRathmann's GoodNight, Gorilla (BCCB
5/94). PM
JACQUES, BRIAN 
The Long Patrol: A Tale ofRedwall. Philomel, 1998 
[368p]
ISBN 0-399-23165-X 
$21.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
In this tenth installment of the popular Redwall series, Jacques hasn't abandoned
his swashbuckling formula, and why should he when Redwallian lovers eagerly lap
up each saga with its requisite cast of heroes and scoundrels? Against his parent's
wishes, the young hare, Tammo, joins up with the heroic Long Patrol (of
Salamandastron, BCCB 7/93). Back in the scum department, Damug has become
Firstblade of all Rapscallions ("Barbarian-type vermin, too idle t'work, too stupid
t'build a decent home") and decides to savage landlubbers for a change, which
means trouble for Redwall Abbey, especially since the south wall of the Abbey has
collapsed leaving it open to Damug's creepy horde. Plenty of reconnaissance work
on both sides, Tammo and Midge's nerve-wracking infiltration of the enemy's
camp, and a calamitous underground excavation below the Abbey are just some of
the situations that will keep the flashlight under the covers lit way past bedtime.
Readers new to these epics will have to get used to what sometimes seems like a
maze of characters (and their dialects), but they will never be confused about who
to love and who to hate. Kudos go to the Redwall chefs for once again tantalizing
hungry readers with mouthwatering descriptions of woodland cuisine. And for
those who are champing at the bit for number eleven, the epilogue strongly hints
at just such a possibility. PM
JOHNSON, DINAH 
AllAround the Town: The Photographs ofRichard Samuel Rob-
erts; illus. with photographs by Richard Samuel Roberts. 
Holt, 1998 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-5456-1 
$15.95 
Ad 
4-8 yrs
With a simple text and an elegant layout, Johnson presents a selection of portraits
by African-American photographer Richard Samuel Roberts. In the early twenti-
eth century, "Mr. Richard Samuel Roberts took pictures all around the town" of
Columbia, South Carolina, capturing the people and events of the African-Ameri-
can community. Wedding couples, baseball teams, boxers, musicians, magicians,
and preachers gaze solemnly at the viewer, provoking speculation on their cap-
tured moments and, by extension, the rest of their lives. The reproduction of
Roberts' exquisite photos is quite good, and the design of the book as a whole,
with its subtle framing devices and muted sepia borders, lends itself to an absorb-
ing browse and possibly some animated discussion. The slight text is more specu-
284 
* THE BULLETIN
lative than factual, even when the facts are known, and more biographical infor-
mation up front about Roberts would have been helpful. Still, this would work as
an exploration into looking at historic photos, and interested adults can easily
make necessary connections between the past and present for younger viewers. An
author's note tells how Johnson became interested in Roberts' work and gives
adult titles for those seeking additional information about his life. JMD
JOHNSON, PAUL BRETT 
A Perfect Pork Stew; written and illus. by Paul Brett
Johnson. 
Orchard, 1998 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-33070-2 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-30070-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 5-7 yrs
Well, if Smith and Scieszka can make fun of the Three Little Pigs' giving the Wolf
a hard time, why can't Johnson take a few liberties with Baba Yaga's having a bad
day? And so he does, with a revolting sequence of events seasoned to the taste of
young listeners: "Oh, bat brains!" the witch exclaims, burning her breakfast critter
(something toasted on a spit by dragon fire) and spilling an entire vial of snake
venom. After her spectacles break (witches are notoriously weak-eyed), she makes
a series of trades with Ivan the Fool based on mistaking his load of dirt for a tasty
pig. Suffice it to say that Baba Yaga goes to bed that night with a stomachache
("She thought her belches smelled a bit like a damp dirt cellar") and Ivan goes
home with a succulent porker. It's all nonsense, as the author readily admits in his
introductory note ("a couple of stock characters from Russian lore ... a pinch of
tall tale, a bit of swapping motif, and a good dose of the sillies"). The colored-
pencil illustrations could use a little more tonal contrast, but they are suitably
repulsive, with the witch's large, warty blue nose featured as prominently as her
greenish tongue and two crooked teeth. Ivan plays the cartoon straight man while
just about everything else appears slightly askew. The text natters on a bit, but as
a picture-book entertainment and companion to traditional trickster lore like "Stone
Soup," A Perfect Pork Stew will go down well. Burp. BH
KINSEY-WARNOCK, NATALIE 
In the Language ofLoons. 
Cobblehill, 1998 
[112p]
ISBN 0-525-65237-X 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 6-8
Arlis can't win. He has no friends at school, his attempt to get in with the cool
guys led by habitual troublemaker Jackson results in shameful humiliation, his
lawyer father won't give him the time of day, and he's being sent to live with his
grandparents for the whole summer so his mother can keep to her bed in her third
effort to bring a pregnancy to term after two miscarriages. Arlis' summer turns out
to be better than anticipated as he and his grandfather camp, fish, and watch the
loons. With his grandfather's encouragement, Arlis starts to train to be a long-
distance runner, and when he returns to school he snags a place on the track team
alongside his nemesis, Jackson. The day Arlis wins his first meet, his father drives
him to his grandparents' so he can tell his grandfather in person; instead, Arlis
discovers his grandfather dead under a tree, an apparent heart-attack victim. This
slim little volume is overwhelmed by entirely too much plot, with only vague nods
toward a thin, underlying theme of personal responsibility and redemption to hold
it all together. Coincidences rush together to tie up plot threads with little reason
or logic, and the internal character changes that transform Arlis, his father, and his
APRIL 1998 
* 285
rival are so swift they seem like sleight of hand. Despite some touching moments,
this crowded rite-of-passage title lacks the internal cohesion necessary for satisfac-
tory development. JMD
KOERTGE, RON 
The Heart of the City. 
Orchard, 1998 
[144p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-33078-8 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-30078-1 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-7
Ten-year-old Joy is not happy when her artist father uproots the family to a new
house in inner-city Los Angeles. Soon, however, she's settling in, becoming close
friends with Neesha across the street, learning her way around the neighborhood,
and getting acquainted with the local characters. She soon discovers that not all
the local characters are benign when it becomes clear that a gang plans to take over
an empty house on the block, but the girls, aided eventually by the neighborhood,
transform the house into an eyecatching piece of message art and stave off the
incursion. The book's pointed cultural upbeatness isn't original (and neither are
some of the colorful cast), but Koertge makes the house-conversion project indi-
vidual and compelling enough to overcome most of those flaws. His depiction of
the friendship between white Joy and African-American Neesha includes some
believable prickly moments as well as a credible bonding against parental silliness
and drawbacks of other friends, and his wit (ranging from Joy's smartmouthed
exchanges with her parents to Neesha's attempting to teach Joy to "talk trash,"
much to the horror ofJoy's mother) keeps things from becoming preachy. Koertge
usually aims for an older audience, but many younger readers will appreciate his
wry and humorous take on the gravity of the world. DS
KVASNOSKY, LAURA MCGEE 
Zelda and Ivy; written and illus. by Laura McGee
Kvasnosky. 
Candlewick, 1998 
[42p]
ISBN 10-7636-0469-0 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 1-3
Red foxes Zelda and Ivy are sisters, and Zelda, the oldest, is very good at leading
Ivy into regrettable situations, with the best intentions, of course. This cheerily
illustrated picture book is divided into three easily mastered titled chapters that
will make beginning readers feel very grownup. In "Circus Act," Zelda announces
Ivy's tricks on the flying trapeze (the backyard swing), inspiring antics of increas-
ing difficulty; in "The Latest Style," she convinces Ivy to "doozy up" her tail with
paint, a haircut, and some glitter, but declines to have her own tail so altered; and
in the final chapter, "Fairy Dust," Zelda tells Ivy that crayon shavings are magical
dust that will grant wishes, only to feel compelled to grant Ivy's wish herself. The
gouache illustrations show the bushy-tailed Zelda and Ivy at play in the backyard,
"doozying up" in an old-fashioned living room, playing on a cozy front porch, and
sharing bunk beds in a sunlight-yellow room. The cotton-candy-colored illustra-
tions, whether full-page, half-page, or panels, are engagingly fresh and lively, with
handhewn-looking frames and cunning details that make them worth perusing
more than once. Zelda and Ivy are skillfully drafted with an energetic line that lifts
them above the frequent cutesiness of animal characters. The tightly written text
depicting the affectionate if somewhat unbalanced power relationship between the
siblings is bound to elicit groans and chuckles of recognition, and younger sisters
especially will enjoy reading it to their older siblings. JMD
286 
* THE BULLETIN
LEWIN, TED 
The Storytellers; written and illus. by Ted Lewin. 
Lothrop,
1998 
[3 4p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-15179-5 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-15178-7 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
, Ad 
5-8 yrs
Starting out like a descriptive travelogue, this narrative follows Abdul and his grand-
father through the vividly varied market stalls of Fez in Morocco, with observa-
tions on each of the craftspersons they pass. Not until they settle on a rug beside
the city gate do we discover that Grandfather is a traditional storyteller who re-
leases a white pigeon to bring down a "story from the sky." Unfortunately, we
hear only snatches of the tale that engrosses the gathered crowd and that would
probably be of most interest to young listeners. Despite some close perspectives
and intensely intimate hues, Lewin's panoramic paintings are curiously distant in
tone, emphasizing the outsider status of the audience. The details are carefully,
almost photographically observed; the patterns and play of light and dark are strik-
ing; and the warmly projected affection between the old man and the boy save
them from generic profile. Although the text stays in the realm of the descriptive,
this does indeed offer children a walk through streets they might never see other-
wise. BH
LINDBERGH, REEVE, ad. 
The Circle ofDays; illus. by Cathie Felstead. 
Candlewick,
1998 
[2 6p]
ISBN 0-7636-0357-0 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-8 yrs
Francis of Assisi's hymn of thanks to the Creator is granted glowing life in this
oversized picture book. The graceful words of this Italian saint ("Lord, we offer
thanks and praise/ For the Circle of our days") are illustrated in a mixed-media
melange of collage, gouache, and watercolor. Between the opening orange endpa-
pers covered with bright yellow suns and the closing dark blue endpapers dotted
with gently glowing moons, viewers are treated to beautifully composed, scenic
idylls. Double-paged spreads of countrysides and seascapes, whirling fireworks
and urban scenery are rendered with subtle power. The paper textures and drenched
palette combine to create a sumptuous visual narrative, whether in the large spreads
or the smaller pictures that underline and enrich them. This combination of po-
etic text and pleasing imagery will be a lovely and well-loved addition to any col-
lection of devotional materials. JMD
LONDON, JONATHAN 
Froggy's First Kiss; illus. by Frank Remkiewicz. 
Viking,
1998 
32p
ISBN 0-6760-87064-1 
$14.99 
R 4-7 yrs
Froggy is distracted by "the prettiest girl frog in the world," and a series of awk-
ward recess encounters ("Froggy was so busy gazing into her eyes . .. the ball hit
him in the head-bonk!-and knocked him down") and lunch rendezvous ("'I
have a goody for you, Froggy. Close your eyes.' And she gave him a cookie shaped
like a heart") seem to be leading up to a Valentine's Day card from Froggy to his
new sweetheart. When Frogilina tries to fast-forward the relationship by planting
a kiss on Froggy's face, the results are definitely age-appropriate ("'BLAAAAAAH!'
spluttered Froggy, looking more red in the face than green"). Brightly clashing
colors assist an expressive animal cast in extending the slapstick humor in this
APRIL 1998 
* 287
comical interpretation of the silly schoolboy/frog who comes to his senses: "And
he gave his mother the big heart with the I LOVE YOU." Potential valentine
recipients in your audience will appreciate this fifth installment about Froggy, and
they'll be shouting "be mine" after this readaloud-to the book, not to each other.
PM
LOYA, OLGA 
Momentos Magicos/Magic Moments; tr. by Carmen Lizardi-
Rivera. 
August House, 1998 
188p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-87483-497-X 
$11.95 
R 
Gr. 7-12
In this bilingual collection of traditional tales from Latin America, storyteller Loya
divides her retellings into four categories: Scary Stories, Tricksters, Strong Women,
and Myths. Each of the fifteen stories (presented first in English, followed by a
Spanish version) is introduced with a brief note explaining where Loya first en-
countered the tale; specific story notes with written sources and cultural variants
are given at the end of the book. Within each category, Loya presents these folk-
tales as if she is arranging a storytelling performance, starting out with an atten-
tion-grabbing dramatic tale, followed by a gentler, more introspective piece, then
usually a humorous entry, and finally a strong concluding tale. From the tragic
"La Llorona" from Mexico to the funny "Tia Miseria" from Puerto Rico to the sly
"Uncle Rabbit and Uncle Tiger" from Nicaragua, Loya's collection has something
for everyone. The style is distinctly conversational and the occasionally slow pace
is more than compensated for by the immediacy of the language and the variety of
the content. The stories cover a wide range of emotion and appeal, and they will
be exceedingly useful to readers aloud and storytellers, as well as to those readers
looking for an unusual cultural foray. JMD
LYON, GEORGE ELLA 
A Sign; illus. by Chris K. Soentpiet. 
Orchard, 1998 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-33073-7 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-30073-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
This autobiographical picture book follows the author as she considers a variety of
life choices, such as making neon signs like her neighbor's, becoming a tightrope
walker in the circus, or going to the moon as an astronaut. Instead, she grows up
to write books, trying to make words glow like neon, balancing words to create
stories, and sending them to the heart of the reader instead of on a rocket to the
moon. The similes are forced, but there is no denying the appeal of the detailed
child's-eye-view memories of a not-so-distant past. Soentpiet's watercolors lend
the text concrete form, and the near-photorealism of the illustrations suits the tone
of Lyon's reminiscences and gives the locale and its inhabitants a grainily nostalgic
veracity. The conclusion, in which Lyon tells the readers what she actually did
wind up doing when she grew up, may be a bit vague given the specificity of the
memories that came before; still, young readers will easily identify with the child's
changing desires for her future. JMD
McKAY, HILARY 
The Exiles in Love. 
McElderry, 1998 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-689-81752-5 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-9
Ruth, Naomi, Rachel, and Phoebe Conroy (from The Exiles, BCCB 11/82, and
The Exiles at Home, 1/95) are older but, fortunately, no closer to boring normality
288 
* THE BULLETIN
in this account of "the spring we all fell in love." Ruth, the eldest, is the worst
afflicted, smitten with an array of males from her bus driver to a classmate, but the
entire family falls head-over-heels with the charming young Philippe, a gracious
and amusing visitor from France ("Ironing I adore ... also to clean the bath, and
if Phoebe so kindly reads to me every night why may I not polish her shoes?").
When Big Grandma attempts to cure Ruth of the "family failing" by taking all
four sisters to visit France, the Exiles encounter hints of a mystery surrounding
Philippe's family and sow the seeds of the future destiny of one of the sisters. This
is more episodic than the previous titles, but plot really isn't the point in an Exiles
book, it's the girls' ebullient, idiosyncratic, and vividly funny struggles with the
vagaries of life. Here there's an additional treat: the beginning of each chapter
offers a paragraph of conversation which clearly takes place well after the events of
this book and which cumulate to reveal a most enjoyable glimpse of the future.
The Conroy clan are some of the most consistently engaging heroines currently
wreaking havoc in literature, and their friends will follow them into love and be-
yond. DS
MARKLE, SANDRA 
Super Cool Science: South Pole Stations Past, Present, and Fu-
ture; illus. with photographs by Sandra Markle and others. 
Walker, 1998 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8471-2 
$15.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8470-4 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
The Amundsen-Scott Antarctic base at the South Pole was first built in the '50s
and expanded and rebuilt in the '70s, and plans are underway for a third bout of
construction. Markle documents the logistical problems of the cold and snowy
location ("Despite lots of digging out, it was impossible to stop the first South Pole
Station from slowly being buried and crushed") and the increased hunger for re-
search that have led to the rebuildings and expansion; her use of photographs and
planning sketches (including a floor plan for the projected structure) from the
various incarnations will give readers a sense of the concrete reality of this unusual
architectural project, and there are some intriguing details about Antarctic life.
Sometimes the book leaves readers hanging, however (if the old residential quar-
ters "do not even have bathrooms," for instance, what do their residents do?),
some of the pictures don't make their point as clearly as the text seems to imply,
and an indication of scale would have been very helpful in many illustrations. The
focus is still well-maintained, the glimpse of science in daunting circumstances is
appealing, and the topic is a piquant one despite its chilly nature. A combination
glossary/index is included. DS
MARSDEN, JOHN 
A Killing Frost. Houghton, 1998 
[288p]
ISBN 0-395-83735-9 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Ellie and her troop of teenage friends have survived the invasion of Australia (To-
morrow When the War Began, BCCB 4/95) and have pulled off several attacks on
their unnamed enemy (The Dead ofNight, BCCB 11/97). Now, six months into
the war and no end in sight, they escalate their guerrilla maneuvers; with fertilizer,
fuel, a kitchen timer, a mob of sheep, and their usual guts and ingenuity, the band
blows up the enemy's naval installation at Cobbler's Bay. Enemy trackers pursue
APRIL 1998 
* 289
them relentlessly, and although the kids manage to evade them for awhile, they are
at last ambushed and incarcerated in a maximum security prison administered by
their nemesis, Major Harvey. Leaving Ellie and Lee's love life (which loomed large
in the previous novel) simmering on the back burner, Marsden redirects his atten-
tion to the tense, chilling, and seductively credible account of the teens' bone-
wearying struggle for survival and their alternating bursts of courage and despair.
Even though their ranks have been tragically thinned once more by the novel's
end, it's clear that Ellie's gang has more to contribute to Australia's liberation.
Fans of this powerful series will not look forward to an early armistice. EB
MASOFF, JOY 
Fire!; illus. with photographs by Jack Reznicki and Barry D.
Smith. 
Scholastic Reference, 1998 
48p
ISBN 0-590-97872-1 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Although a casual flip through the pages seems to promise little more than a clut-
tered assortment of info-bites, closer examination reveals a lively text and an or-
derly arrangement of material, which progresses from the physics of fire, to the
gear and garb of firefighters, to the broad range of firefighter missions, to the past
and future of firefighting. Each topic is developed in detail, and readers are fre-
quently challenged to imagine themselves in the firefighters' boots, experiencing
the force and pressure of an attack line hose, the heft and unwieldiness of the "jaws
of life" rescue tool, or the grueling strength and endurance tests required to "make
the team." Each spread is heavily illustrated with crisp color photos-except, of
course, those that capture the frightening darkness of smoke-filled space ("There is
nothing wrong with this picture. This is what a firefighter might see as he or she
nears the heart of the blaze"). Cover art featuring a firefighter silhouetted against
a wall of orange flame assures that this title will respond to a great many calls. EB
MOLLEL, TOLOLWA M. 
Dume's Roar; illus. by Kathy Blankley Roman. 
Stoddart,
1998 
[32p]
ISBN 0-7737-3003-6 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-8 yrs
This original tale inspired by folk traditions opens with the animals' meeting at the
foot of the baobab tree to choose their king. Dume, the lion, pretty much elects
himself by virtue of his powerful roar and then proceeds to abuse his power by
ordering his subjects around with no concern about their well-being. When hunt-
ers enter the forest, it is wise Kobe, the tortoise, who saves the day by tricking
Dume into an awe-inspiring, fear-inducing roar that chases them away. This is a
fairly well-presented little story, with appealing elements and opportunities for
audience participation, but the conclusion lacks both logic and punch. After be-
ing tricked by Kobe and the other animals into that earth-shattering roar, Dume
wants to reward them for their presumed help and promises to be a good, wise
king-but he has basically been depicted all along as a foolish windbag, so the
animals' satisfaction with this promise is a little hard to understand. Roman's
illustrations, while adequately reflecting the text, rely too often on the same com-
positional arrangement of animals across double-page spreads, resulting in a mo-
notony that is ultimately wearing. The animals are awkwardly drafted, although
their expressions sometimes contain a human slyness or other emotion that lends
them a welcome comic touch. Still, considering the enthusiasm with which young
children make animal noises, this may result in a roaringly loud storytime. JMD
290 
* THE BULLETIN
MORA, PAT 
This Big Sky; illus. by Steve Jenkins. 
Scholastic, 1998 
[32p]
ISBN 0-590-37120-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Rich imagery, best savored at a leisurely pace, evokes the terrain and denizens of
the American Southwest in these poems. The riddle-like "Mountain Silhouette"
limns the shape of the rugged horizon ("I know an Indian/ who never moves./ I
watch him sleep/ when snow covers/ his rock face"). With a tinge of melancholy,
"Tall Walking Woman" describes a woman making her way through the pueblo
("The sun stares/ down with two amber eyes/ on the woman, grandchildren/ near
her knees, who walks tall/ to the slow drum beat/ of her heart"). Some entries will
appeal to readers of more literal bent: "Horned Lizard" playfully turns the watcher
into the watched. Others, such as the deceptively simple "Noche" ("Mountains
black/ Canyons black/ Valleys black/ Rivers black/ Sky black") are better appreci-
ated with closed eyes and open imagination. Jenkins' cut- and torn-paper collages
impose their own visual poesy on the landscape, with meticulously detailed lizards,
roadrunners, ravens, and raccoons populating a stylized world of angular skies,
broken stormclouds, and shadow-blackened canyons. Readers-aloud will wel-
come the glossary of Spanish terms with pronunciations that is included. EB
MURPHY, JIM 
Gone A-Whaling: The Lure of the Sea and the Hunt for the Great
Whale. 
Clarion, 1998 
[208p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-395-69847-2 
$18.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
Murphy takes a fresh look at the "golden age" of whaling, focusing on several boys
who launched their whaling careers as cabin boys or common seamen. Readers
are initiated into sailing duties and lingo through the eyes and experiences of these
"greenies," and they learn of the particular rigors of whaling through the boys' oft-
quoted testimonies and Murphy's carefully selected gallery of contemporary photos
and artwork. The analysis of witnesses' probable biases, which Murphy applied so
effectively in The Great Fire (BCCB 5/95) is also evident here as he considers how
the boys' accounts reflect the prejudices and preconceptions endemic to the lowest
rung of ship life. However, his own bias frequently breaches as well, intruding
into the historic account as anthropomorphizing, or as self-righteous twentieth-
century hindsight ("If the whale [that stove in the Essex] could argue its case, it
would have insisted it was doing nothing more than defending itself and the rest of
the herd against attack"; "How could anyone drive a harpoon into a gentle creature
like this and not feel shame and guilt?"). In addition to the period art, text boxes
describing various species of whales visually counterbalance the main narrative.
Eighteenth and nineteenth-century shipboard life is vividly realized here, but readers
who want to consider the historic whaling industry on its own terms should weigh
this title against those of Carrick's Whaling Days (BCCB 7/93) and Gourley's
Hunting Neptune's Giants (1/96) as well. A bibliography, index, and excellent
glossary are included. EB
NAYLOR, PHYLLIS REYNOLDS 
AchinglyAlice. 
Karl/Atheneum, 1998 
[128p]
ISBN 0-689-80355-9 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
There are advances on the love front in this new Alice title: Alice realizes that
there's another boy she could like quite handily if Patrick weren't around, but her
APRIL 1998 
* 
291
relationship with Patrick leads to a bit of self-discovery (after a kiss, Alice "felt wet
and tingly, and began to realize I was definitely a sexual being, as Lester would call
it"). Her father's relationship with Alice's adored Miss Summers gets closer (Miss
Summers spends the night with the McKinleys on Christmas Eve) but not close
enough (she shares the bed with Alice-and she's also dating the vice principal in
addition to Alice's father). Naylor's use of the three friends-the worldly wise
Pamela, the naive and uptight Elizabeth, and the between-the-extremes Alice-is
unobtrusively effective in validating a whole range of response to blossoming sexu-
ality, and her depiction of romantic trials in the older generations makes it clear
that this isn't the easiest matter in the world for any age. The book also captures
the intensity of youthful female camaraderie ("We had to know everything there
was about being a woman," says Alice determinedly when the three attempt to
figure out Elizabeth's doctor-prescribed douche bag) while still remaining safely
and successfully funny about these matters of immense importance. Alice fans will
be grateful that, aching or not, Alice is everlastingly Alice. DS
PECK, RICHARD 
Strays Like Us. 
Dial, 1998 
[160p]
ISBN 0-8037-2291-5 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-9
When her drug-addict mother goes into the hospital, twelve-year-old Molly is
packed off to her great-aunt-by-marriage Fay. Despite a flashy beginning at her
new school (she decks the school thug in the girls' room), quiet, watchful Molly
feels an outsider to everything. She's on cordial terms with the boy next door,
himself a transplant, but senses that there's something going on with his family
that Great-Aunt Fay won't share with her; Molly's one brief friendship ends when
the girl's mother takes silent exception to Molly's blue-collar poverty; and she's
waiting longingly for her mother to take her home at Christmas. Peck examines
some of his favorite themes here-the frequent barrenness of apparent privilege,
the strength and importance of family bonds-and employs them in a sensitively
drawn chronicle of a girl who gradually discovers connections to the world. Molly's
understated narration is effective, allowing a variety of elements, ranging from a
neighbor's death from AIDS to arson at school to the surprise identity of Molly's
grandmother, to enrich the plot without taking it over. The dilemma of the out-
sider will strike a chord with most readers; Molly's gradual thawing into an insider
in her own life will provide them with a quiet message of nascent hope. DS
PHILBRICK, RODMAN 
Max the Mighty. 
Scholastic, 1998 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-590-18892-5 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Max, gargantuan young hero of Freak the Mighty (BCCB 1/94), is lonely after the
death of his friend Kevin. When a younger girl, Rachel (known as Worm, short
for bookworm), latches onto him, he resists at first but then is drawn in by her
boundless appetite for the imaginative life and by her obvious need. Max inter-
venes when Worm's abusive stepfather goes on a rampage and then, finding him-
self reported to the police as a kidnapper, takes off with Worm to Montana to find
her real father. The book turns picaresque with their cross-country outing that
involves a bus-driving hippie, a train-hopping hobo, and eventually a showdown
with the truth and their families in a Montana mining town. Max narrates in an
effective and individual voice, and the book keeps the pacing of the disparate ad-
292 
* THE BULLETIN
ventures smooth and quick. The colorfulness of the enterprise and characters is a
bit studied, as is the inevitable discovery of the fate of Worm's father (dead in a
mining accident years before), but the book, like Max, possesses a rueful and
rawboned sparkle that makes it engaging. The first book has reportedly been
made into a movie; those who enjoyed the story in either form will wish to join
Max on this new adventure. DS
PIERCE, TAMORA 
Circle ofMagic: Tris's Book. 
Scholastic, 1998 
[256p]
ISBN 0-590-55357-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-10
Pierce follows the first title in this series about the training of four young adult
mages (Sandry's Book, BCCB 11/97) with a walloping page-turner as marauding
pirates attack the defenseless-since-the-earthquake Winding Circle Temple. Tris,
the "weather-witch," is the center around which this tale revolves, as her explora-
tion of her powers provides the magic to destroy the pirates and their dastardly
mage-lord. While the plot has all the dashing derring-do fantasy readers yearn for,
with the added attraction of feats of daring and magic accomplished by sympa-
thetic young adult characters, it is the depiction of the relationships among the
four friends and their mentors that provides the emotional core that will hold
readers. Pierce has a nicely realized fantasy world going here, and the plot does not
sacrifice human relationships and ethical dilemmas for blood-and-guts sensation-
alism. The opening pages quickly build to a running momentum that will keep
the pages turning, and will make series readers impatient for the next installment.
JMD
PILKEY, DAV 
The Silly Gooses; written and illus. by Dav Pilkey. 
Blue Sky/Scho-
lastic, 1998 
[40p]
ISBN 0-590-94733-8 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 1-3
Mr. Goose has been warned by the "proper and serious" geese that, with his silly
hats and silly songs and generally silly behavior, he will never find a wife. Au
contraire. The banjo-strumming goose of his dreams falls out of a hot-air balloon
and into his life; taking one look at her feet, he says, "You have the most beautiful
eyes," and they're off to the altar. Their two triplets seem tragically to have been
born blind-happily, the dentist suggests they take the shells off their heads, and
the Gooses can all look forward to living sillily ever after. It's a long, long way
from the subtlety of Pilkey's The Paperboy (BCCB 3/96) to the, well, silliness of
this offering, and the titular birds are just poor relations to Allard's seriously silly
Stupids. The mixed-media illustrations use scrawled lines and punched-up colors
to cheerfully loud and unsubtle effect. The book is merely contrary rather than
truly absurd, but the broad humor, chapter format, and comic-book-type charac-
ters (akin to Daffy Duck in both appearance and deportment) may be powerful
incentives to youngsters who have just embarked on independent reading. EB
POMERANC, MARION HESS 
The American Wei; illus. by DyAnne DiSalvo-
Ryan. 
Whitman, 1998 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8075-0312-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Wei Fong and his parents are on their way to the courthouse to be sworn in as
APRIL 1998 
* 293
American citizens when Wei Fong loses-and then really loses-his first tooth.
The young boy is distraught-how will the Tooth Fairy visit him for the very first
time if he doesn't find his tooth? With the help of others on their way to the
naturalization ceremony, the tooth is found, joy is restored, everybody gets sworn
in, and "that afternoon, Wei's family and their friends feasted on dim sum and hot
dogs. Everything was just right." This is an introduction to naturalization that
works because it concentrates on character instead of process. Young listeners will
easily recognize Wei's dental crisis, and they will be happily engaged as they wit-
ness Wei's Pledge of Allegiance, after which "Wei opened the hand that had been
over his heart. He smiled at his tooth." The text is simple and funny, and the
scene in front of the courthouse, in which passersby of many nationalities join
together to locate the lost tooth, has a buoyant hilarity. DiSalvo-Ryan's gouache
and pencil illustrations are rendered with lots of red, white, and blue accents, a
generous scattering of stars, and a celebratory multi-ethnic bunch of characters.
Oh, and the ending ties up the real tension of the book-Wei does get his first visit
from the Tooth Fairy, complete with currency and flag (American, of course).
JMD
PRINGLE, LAURENCE 
One Room School; illus. by Barbara Garrison. 
Boyds Mills,
1998 
[3 2 p]
ISBN 1-56397-583-1 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
From the excitement of the occasional ride in the schoolteacher's Model A Ford to
scrap-iron drives to a blizzard that resulted in ten-foot-high snowbanks, the author
reminisces about the final year he spent in a one-room schoolhouse in 1944-45.
Unfortunately, the memories are a disjointed compilation instead of a cohesive
narrative, and while individual elements may interest some children, the overall
effect is one of nonspecific adult memories vaguely remembered. In an apparent
effort to be simple enough for younger children, the text is so general as to be
uninvolving ("Sometimes, I covered my ears to shut out the voices of the other
kids and Miss Shackelton. Sometimes, though, I enjoyed listening to lessons of
the other grades"). Garrison's collagraphs (a combination of collage and etchings)
are done in a subdued sepia palette and framed like photographs in an old-fash-
ioned album; while the process is intriguing, the resulting illustrations suffer from
an unfortunate sameness that renders many of them flatly uninteresting. Accord-
ing to a note, great attention has been paid to the historical details of clothing,
automobiles, etc., but that may not be enough to engage children in this well-
intentioned but lackluster slice of retrospection. JMD
RINALDI, ANN 
Mine Eyes Have Seen. 
Scholastic, 1998 
[288p]
ISBN 0-590-54318-0 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-10
In this compelling addition to several recent titles about abolitionist John Brown,
Rinaldi has skillfully woven the threads of fact and fiction into a textured historical
tapestry. The voice of Annie, Brown's teenage daughter, resonates with emotional
clarity and coherent observations as she narrates her account of life at the Kennedy
Farm and her supporting role in the assault at Harpers Ferry. Her strained rela-
tionship with her father, her harrowing experiences as lookout at the farm, and her
bittersweet, ill-fated romance with one of Brown's men (Dauphin Thompson)
294 
* THE BULLETIN
provide a strong focus. Well-paced prose reveals Annie's thoughts, which are
chronicled with the simple eloquence of the young ("You can be growed and still
be scared about things. I felt cheated somehow. Like being growed wasn't worth
all the effort that went into it") and tempered with striking honesty ("I was always
trying to put myself in a good light with Pa. Martha, now, she saw it different.
She saw me as taking sass from Pa to put myself in good with him"). Mounting
suspense charges the story with dramatic intensity as Annie attempts to keep the
goings-on at the farm a secret from the local busybody, Mrs. Huffmaster, as well as
grapple with her imagined part in the death (years earlier) of an infant sibling.
Readers unacquainted with John Brown will profit from the brief paragraphs (pre-
ceding each chapter), which elucidate Brown's past, and they are sure to find the
corroborating facts in the author's note as gripping as the book itself. Pair this
young woman's story with the account of the young man in Douglas Rees' Light-
ning Time (BCCB 1/98) to provide readers with a view of history that is not easily
forgotten. PM
ROSEN, MICHAEL J. 
The Dog Who Walked with God; illus. by Stan
Fellows. 
Candlewick, 1998 
[34p]
ISBN 0-7636-0470-4 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-4
This illustrated poetic creation myth is adapted from Kato Indian lore collected in
1906 and offers a fascinating comparison with the Old Testament story of Noah:
"Water, they say, was everywhere and land was not. Mountains were not. And
neither were there trees or grass or fish or deer or grizzlies or wolves. People, too,
had all been washed away, they say, along with all these animals of every kind.
Only water lived anywhere." Then comes the Great Traveler (the "God" of the
title) with his companion, the dog, to make the world good with growing things.
Even as an understated presence, the dog will add child appeal to a text rich with
oral rhythms. Fellows' watercolors open with ghostly sketches emerging from a
blue wash background and take on distinctive shape and hue as the earth and all
things living acquire form. The compositions are open and varied while the style
is more suggestive than definitive, leaving room for the story's sweeping implica-
tions. Give this one to children studying mythology or American Indian cultures,
or simply read it aloud at the beginning of an American history unit on the first
settlers. BH
RYLANT, CYNTHIA 
Poppleton Everyday; illus. by Mark Teague. 
Blue Sky/Scho-
lastic, 1998 
48p
ISBN 0-590-84845-3 
$14.95 
R Gr. 1-2
The portly pig's third set of easy reader adventures finds him variously star gazing,
furniture-shopping, and sailing. In "The Sky," mouse friend Hudson invites
Poppleton to admire the night sky, a problem for Poppleton: "The sky is so big
and deep, I get seasick... I wish I could look. But I can't." Hudson cleverly and
accommodatingly narrows the view with a peephole cut in a blanket. Then
Poppleton is definitely "NOT RELAXED!" as he's heaved and tossed and flipped
right out Fillmore the goat's little craft in "The Sailboat." In the strongest entry,
"The New Bed," Poppleton drives a saleslady to the edge as he replicates his bed-
time rituals (cracker, book, lamp, TV, early morning bluebirds) before commit-
ting to a purchase. Teague's watercolor pictures cheerily extend the tales (although
APRIL 1998 
* 295
the solution to Poppleton's stargazing problem as pictured simply won't work as
the text suggests) and poke only the gentlest fun at our Everypig. These brisk tales
are enticing confidence-builders for the chapter-book set and quickie readalouds
for even littler listeners. EB
RYMILL, LINDA R. 
Good Knight; illus. by G. Brian Karas. 
Holt, 1998 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8050-4129-X 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-6 yrs
Where Banks (see review above) is alluring and Blos (above also) is encouraging
when it comes to bedtime, Rymill is more pragmatic: her protagonist, in this
rhymed narrative, wants nothing whatsoever to do with bed. He's busy being a
chief, an admiral, a king, and these disruptions of bath and bedtime are an affront
to his dignity that he won't lightly accept ("Oh ple-ease no. Don't kiss me./ I'm
covering my head./ Don't say good night. I won't 'sleep tight.'/ It isn't time for
bed!"). The pencil lines in Karas' gouache and acrylic art are thicker than usual,
giving a particularly sturdy and vigorous feel to the childlike figures and our hero's
outraged face; the typeface, expanding for accent when needed, is similarly em-
phatic. While this may be funny to grownups for different reasons than to kids,
the energy here will entertain that multitude of youngsters who take day's end
personally, and its acknowledgment of absorbing tasks interrupted may help con-
sole them for the lost opportunities. This could serve as a useful segue book, a pre-
bedtime read for the kids who are fading around the edges but who just aren't tired
enough yet for stories of sleepy little bunnies. DS
SAN SouCI, ROBERT D., ad. 
A Weave of Words; illus. by Raul Col6n. 
Orchard,
1998 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-33053-2 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-30053-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 3-6
When the spoiled prince, Vachagan, meets Anait, the weaver's daughter, he meets
his love and his destiny. Anait refuses Vachagan's offer of marriage until such time
as he can read, write, and show her the work of his hands, and "at last he wove a
splendid carpet with roses twining around a golden tree filled with nightingales.
This he sent by messenger to Anait with a letter he wrote himself asking her to
become his wife." They marry and rule the kingdom together. When Vachagan is
captured by an evil three-headed dev (an ogre), he sends a message to Anait woven
into a remarkable carpet, and she comes to his aid: "Then Anait charged. One
powerful stroke of her sword sent the dev's left head flying all the way to Aleppo. A
second stroke sent the right head as far as Chin-ma-Chin. And with the third, the
middle head was spinning toward the top of Mount Ararat." This lively tale has
much to recommend it, not the least being the mixed-media illustrations of Rail
Col6n. Col6n's signature palette of rich golds and burnt oranges and the details
afforded by the combination ofwatercolors, etching, and litho-pencil are tonally
suited to this Armenian tale. Language and visuals mesh smoothly, resulting in a
spellbinding story with a wide range of appeal. The elements that comprise this
retelling-a concise yet evocative text, romantic liaisons and lush illustrations, an
evil villain, a clever king, a brave queen, and an exciting rescue-are a booktalk
just waiting to happen. Remember that section of picture books for older readers
you've been meaning to set up? Start here. A detailed source note is included.
JMD
296 
* 
THE BULLETIN
SHREVE, SUSAN 
Jonah, the Whale. 
Levine/Scholastic, 1998 
[128p]
ISBN 0-590-37133-9 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Jonah's the new kid in sixth grade and he doesn't like it much; he misses the city
and his mother's longterm boyfriend, whose departure is the reason for his mother's
move to Connecticut, and he's not having much luck making friends in his new
neighborhood. What really interests him are the glamorous celebrities in People
magazine, and he'd like very much to be among them, perhaps as an interviewer of
celebrities himself. Aided by Blister, a girl who's half-friend, half-encumbrance,
he works on making his dream a reality in the form of a local television show. This
is a bit slenderer than Shreve's usual work, and the book depends on an unlikely
sequence of tremendous good fortune (including two separate interviews with
Michael Jordan), but Shreve's understatement and restraint lend a solidity to the
kid-success story that such plots rarely possess. The book is pleasantly unpuritanical
in its implication that Jonah's tendency to tell tales is part of his ability to dream
that leads to his achievement, and the development of his relationship with Blister
from default to genuine friendship is subtly depicted. Booktalk this with Farrell's
Bradley and the Billboard, reviewed above, for two very different looks at kids with
cool careers. DS
SKOLSKY, MINDYWARSHAW 
Lovefrom Your Friend, Hannah. Jackson/DK Ink,
1998 
[25 6p] 
illus.
ISBN 0-7894-2492-4 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Hannah's relatives are convinced President Franklin Roosevelt can pull his coun-
trymen through any hard times, so Hannah writes to him, confident that he can
advise her on how to address such thorny problems as a best friend who's moved
and won't answer letters, and a hopelessly dull pen pal (who's a boy, at that).
FDR, amazingly, responds to her inquiry and soon numbers among Hannah's
many regular correspondents. Through her volley of letters with family, friends,
and White House residents and staff, readers are privy to her homely trials (an
aunt who compulsively knits unwanted gifts; a case of measles on a much-antici-
pated trip to visit her grandparents) and her many enthusiasms (the Dionne Quin-
tuplets, her grandfather's homemade egg creams). Unfortunately, many letters
become repetitious as Hannah recaps the same events for each recipient, and her
ingenuousness grows a bit cloying. This is an unsensationalized portrayal of life
during the Depression, though, and readers who have dipped into historical fic-
tion of that period will be relieved to find that many families weathered the storm
with an optimistic spirit and only slightly tightened belts. EB
SOLHEIM, JAMES 
It's Disgusting-and WeAte It!: True Food Facts from Around the
World--and Throughout History!; illus. by Eric Brace. 
Simon, 1998 
[37p]
ISBN 0-689-80675-2 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-6
This flavorful look at culinary culture is divided into three sections, the first dis-
cussing the global breadth of tastes, the second describing some startling dishes of
history, and the third revealing some of the colorful truths behind contemporary
American favorites. Each spread is an enticing gallimaufry of infosnacks, provid-
ing succinct descriptions including region and era of popularity, sly poems, and a
APRIL 1998 
* 297
buffet of tidbits about foods from worms to insects to rats to cheese (a firm dis-
claimer appears on the copyright page). There are a lot of interesting facts in here,
ranging from the amount of protein in a ton of roasted spiders to taste compari-
sons for unfamiliar foods (giant spiders from New Guinea apparently taste like
peanut butter, so be ready with the jelly). The overstuffed format is suitable to the
subject; the new-wavy cartoon critters in incandescent hues gambol across the pages
emitting wisecracks in speech balloons and pulling the spreads together. A list for
further reading and a more sophisticated source bibliography are included, as is a
detailed index. Don't miss the endpaper world maps locating all manner of hors-
d'oeuvres in their proper global place. DS
STANLEY, SANNA 
Monkey Sunday: A Story from a Congolese Village. 
Foster/Farrar,
1998 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-374-35018-3 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-7 yrs
Luzolo's father is set to preach for the first time at Matondo ("celebration of thanks-
giving") in this story from the author's childhood, set in the Congo. He is sure
that it is "impossible" for his little daughter to sit quietly ("Luzolo, can't you sit
still?"), especially if an animal is nearby, but Luzolo takes up the challenge while
animals parade under the palm-thatched shelter: a hen and six chicks, a pig and
her piglets, two goats, and a banana-eating monkey. Even when the menagerie
begins to wreak havoc by rummaging through the food, Luzolo mouths to her
mother, "I'm sitting still." Only after some monkey shenanigans ("The monkey
climbed up onto the bench and into her arms") and the final prayer ("Luzolo sat
very, very still. But not for long") does Luzolo celebrate. The text never really rises
above the serviceable; the deep palette looks slightly muddied and the drafting
seems intentionally awkward with its primitive shapes and lines, especially when
depicting the animals. Select Kikongo phrases are included in the text and may
need some practice before a readaloud, but these have real audience participation
possibilities that should increase the "sit still" quotient for a young audience. An
author's note provides background information on the region and the story's ori-
gins. PM
STEVENSON, JAMES 
Popcorn; written and illus. by James Stevenson. 
Greenwillow,
1998 
[6 4p]
ISBN 0-688-15261-9 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Like Sweet Corn (BCCB 3/95), this is a tidy little poetical volume, with each spread
featuring one or two of Stevenson's free-verse poems accented with his casual line-
and-watercolor art. The poems are mainly observations of the concrete, rather like
extended formless haiku, on topics such as a sudden scent of lilacs ("May Morn-
ing"), a messy truck ("Tom's Truck"), and the mystery of inanimate denizens of
the beach ("Driftwood"). The voice is friendly and confiding, and some of the
imagery and concepts are clever and fresh ("A skunk ran across the road./ ... I
could swear/ He was wearing/ A tuxedo"-"Romeo"). Often, however, the poems
meander prosily and the payoff is insufficient; the constantly changing typeface
seems gimmicky rather than atmospheric, and the poem titles, which are appended
to the page numbers like running heads, are easy to lose. These will be convenient
introductions for kids just embarking on post-picture-book poetry, but for a bet-
ter entree try Valerie Worth's Small Poems titles. DS
298 
* THE BULLETIN
STEVENSON, 
JAMES 
Sam 
the Zamboni Man; 
illus. 
by 
Harvey
Stevenson. 
Greenwillow, 1998 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-14485-3 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-14484-5 
$15.00 
Ad 
5-7 yrs
Young Matt has never seen a real live stadium hockey game, so when his grandfa-
ther invites him to the city and promises him a game, Matt is anxious to go. The
visit is more than he hoped-the hockey game is exciting, the players zooming, the
crowds cheering-but best of all is Grandpa Sam, the Zamboni Man. Grandpa
Sam drives the Zamboni during the breaks in the game, "melting and scraping and
smoothing the ice." On the last night of his visit, Matt gets to drive the Zamboni
himself, and covers the ice in the empty stadium with "circles and swirls and loops."
The story ends with a promise from Grandpa to teach Matt to ice skate. If you've
ever watched kids watch Zambonis, you know they find them fascinating, and
that may be enough to hold their attention in this surprisingly low-key tale. The
relationship between Matt and Sam is a loving one, and James Stevenson's text
(though oddly divided into four sections) has a cohesiveness that makes up for the
meandering pace. Harvey Stevenson does an effective job presenting the stadium
setting, especially when depicting the big white space that is the ice rink lit by
spotlights and empty of all but the Zamboni. The drafting of the human figures is
occasionally awkward, and the faces of Matt and Sam, especially in the concluding
pivotal scenes, could be a little more distinct, but all in all this is a pleasant if not
stellar debut from this father-and-son team. JMD
TARPLEY, NATASHA ANASTASIA 
I Love My Hair!; illus. by E. B. Lewis. 
Little,
1998 
26 p
ISBN 0-316-52275-9 
$14.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
In a story based on the author's youth, a little girl tells of growing up to appreciate
her hair. The loving relationship between child and hair-combing mother opens
the story that consists primarily of the African-American narrator's reflections on
how she feels about her hair, her hairstyles, and herself. This is not nearly as self-
indulgent as it sounds-Tarpley has a handy way of turning descriptions of trials
(long hours spent getting hair properly combed and oiled) and tribulations (being
teased about wearing an Afro to school) into triumphs ("I love my hair because it
is as thick as a forest, soft as cotton candy"). Lewis' watercolor illustrations depict
the attractive protagonist with energetic appeal, and while the compositions vary
in effectiveness, they manage to avoid the glamorized nostalgia trap. Tarpley in-
cludes an extensive note about how she felt about her own hair while growing up,
making this a family story of sorts, and while it does not have the vigor of Herron's
Nappy Hair (BCCB 2/97), it does have a clearly articulated intent. On the con-
cluding page our amiable narrator exclaims, "Today I'm wearing it in my favorite
style of all: two ponytails that stick out on either side of my head and flap in the air
like a pair of wings. One of these days I might just take off and fly!" Thanks to
Tarpley and Lewis, readers will believe her. JMD
TOMPERT, ANN 
Saint Patrick; illus. by Michael Garland. 
Boyds Mills,
1998 
32p
ISBN 1-56397-659-5 
$14.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
It is difficult to write the life story of an individual about whom, apart from leg-
end, so little is known, but Tompert's biography of Patrick is an admirable, utili-
APRIL 1998 
* 299
tarian effort. Tompert sticks to the few known facts of the patron saint of Ireland's
life: from his birth in Britain sometime around A.D. 385 to his death in A.D. 461,
the facts of Patrick's life are shrouded in mists of legend and suffering from a
dearth of documentation. Tompert bases her biography on Patrick's "Confes-
sion," a letter written near the end of his life (and on various interpretations of said
letter by unnamed scholars), and includes some quotes attributed to Patrick him-
self. The full- and double-page mixed-media illustrations are an odd and often
agitating juxtaposition of computer-generated art, painting, and collage resulting
in discordant photo-like textiles and gaudy coloration that jars with the text, which
is contained in frames of traditional, gold-leafed Celtic knots. Putting the lack of
visual cohesion aside, this might be a useful title for collections looking for a more
factual source than dePaola's unsourced combination of history and legend (Patrick,
BCCB 4/92) for information about this popular saint. An extensive author's note
describes Tompert's research. JMD
WADDELL, 
MARTIN 
Yum, 
Yum, 
Yummy; 
illus. by John Bendall-
Brunello. 
Candlewick, 1998 
[22p]
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7636-0477-1 
$9.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-7636-0479-8 
$3.29
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
2-4 yrs
"One day three little bears went off to the Honeybee Tree to get honey for Mummy,"
and do they get a surprise. The gluttonous (and lazy) Guzzley Bear waits until the
little bears have gathered pots of honey and then, with an enormous growl and a
"Yum, yum, yummy! The honey went into Guzzley's big tummy." Needless to
say, the traumatized little bears run home to Mummy Bear, who makes short work
of the bullying but cowardly Guzzley. Waddell's predictable but well-paced text is
set in a big, bold typeface that will attract beginning readers as well as the grown-
ups who forgot their reading glasses. Bendall-Brunello's nondescript pencil and
watercolor illustrations are simply composed and cartoonily drafted, with a cast of
characters that reflect the almost slapstick humor. Young listeners are going to get
a kick out of the moment when, with a loud "BOO!", Mummy leaps out from
behind the bushes at the unsuspecting Guzzley. Despite the familiarity of this
plot, these bears will make a quick and easy storytime addition-be prepared to
read their sweet story more than once. JMD
WARDLAW, LEE 
Bow-Wow Birthday; illus. by Arden Johnson-Petrov. 
Boyds
Mills, 1998 
[32p]
ISBN 1-56397-489-4 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-8 yrs
Grandpa's dog Rambler is one hundred dog-years old, and Maris is determined to
throw him a party. While Maris and her friends dress in their favorite doggy
clothes, wear dog-tags with their doggy names on them, and have a barking con-
test in the backyard, Rambler happily snoozes the day away. What makes this title
so doggone fun are the interactions among the children, each of whom possesses a
unique personality quirk, from Jacob the punster who keeps making "no bones
about it" when talking of the "dog-tired" Rambler; to Isaac who wants to be a
Tyrannosaurus Rex, not a dog; to Rosie, who is taking being a dog a little too
seriously and wants to bite everyone (unsurprisingly, she wins the barking con-
test); to Maris herself, the organizer of this canine celebration. The oversized full-
300 
* 
THE BULLETIN
and double-page pastel compositions are anything but delicate-Johnson-Petrov's
energetic, roll-and-tumble renderings vigorously reflect the kids' happy enthusi-
asm, from bone-shaped invitations to Rambler's quiet nap in Maris' closet.
Wardlaw's text is succinct and funny, and it could easily inspire a pet party pro-
gram of your own. JMD
WEATHERLY, MYRA 
Women Pirates: Eight Stories of Adventure. 
Morgan
Reynolds, 1998 
[112p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 1-883846-24-2 
$18.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-9
Girls are entitled to their share of bloodlust and derring-do, and Weatherly revels
in the dastardly deeds perpetrated for love and money by this "bold, brutal breed
of women." The accounts span nearly a millennium and range from the tantaliz-
ing legend of the Viking Alfhild to the better-documented exploits of Boston's
Rachel Wall and China's Cheng I Sao. Although Anne Bonny and Mary Read
may be familiar (especially to readers ofJane Yolen's The Ballad ofthe Pirate Queens,
BCCB 4/95), they look almost demure beside their more ruthless sisters at arms,
Maria Cobham (a coldhearted murderess with a range of deathly skills) and Cheng
I Sao (whose pirates mixed gunpowder with their wine and "ate the hearts of van-
quished foes"). Weatherly is too often blown off course by her own enthusiasm,
however, and her prose becomes tangled and clunky. A bibliography is included,
but no sources are given for the many quotes woven throughout the text. Still,
readers searching for a little terror on the high seas will probably want to make this
a port of call. EB
WELLS, ROSEMARY 
Read to Your Bunny; written and illus. by Rosemary
Wells. 
Scholastic, 1998 
[26p]
ISBN 0-590-30284-1 
$7.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Adult
A new title by Rosemary Wells usually sends librarians scurrying for their purchase
orders. But pause and reflect on this sermonette on the pleasures and benefits of
reading, which is attractively packaged for kids but clearly intended for adults:
"Read to your bunny often,/ It's twenty minutes of fun./ It's twenty minutes of
moonlight,/ And twenty minutes of sun." The watercolor rabbit readers-grownup
and child pairs sharing books in airplanes, beach chairs, rowboats, and bathtubs-
are as adorable as you could wish; each picture, if enlarged, could be an enticing
poster for a reading campaign. However, forty words of exhortation do not a
children's book make. Surely no one will dispute Wells' closing remark, "Reading
to your little ones is just like putting gold coins in the bank" (although the twenty-
minute prescription is probably overambitious for the very youngest listeners). It
might be wiser, though, to invest in fresh copies of Ruby and Max; once you've
finished Read to Your Bunny, you're still nineteen minutes short. EB
WRIGHT, BETTY REN 
The Ghost in Room 11; illus. byJacqueline Rogers. 
Holiday
House, 1998 
112p
ISBN 0-8234-1318-7 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Fourth-grader Matt is miserable at his new school, and his attempts to make a
name for himself get him a reputation for mendacity. This complicates things
when he sees the ghost of Edna Whipple, legendary teacher, who sternly enjoins
APRIL 1998 
* 301
him to "try hard, and then try harder." Matthew is galvanized into academic
action by Miss Whipple's threat (apparently used on past students, now teachers,
as well) that she will haunt him forever if his spelling doesn't improve, and he's at
least privately vindicated when ghostly manifestations rip down a misspelled sign
in the gym, causing the principal (another former Whipple disciple) to believe the
truth of Matt's story. Wright, one of the few ghost-story writers who produces
titles for readers this young, has a good instinct for appropriate limitations on
creepiness; Miss Whipple is ominous but her pedantry gives the book a silly streak
that leavens the atmosphere. The story's strung out a little, but there are amusing
bits of byplay that keep things moving in the slack times. Rogers' densely hatched
illustrations have a restrained darkness and engraving-like texture. Youngsters not
ready-or not allowed-to read Goosebumps will appreciate this nice safe dip
into ghostdom. DS
WYETH, SHARON DENNIS 
Once on This River. Knopf, 1997 
[14 4 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-98350-3 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-88350-9 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 4-6
In this historical novel, which endeavors to give readers a glimpse into the dangers
of being black in New York City in 1760, Monday and her mother, Leslie de
Groot, a midwife, travel to New York from their home in Madagascar in the hopes
of securing the release of Monday's Uncle Frederick, a free man, unlawfully en-
slaved. Their stay with their relatives, the D'Angolas, results in Monday's friend-
ship with her cousin, Viola, and an encounter with Sampson (who is in love with
Viola) and his mother, Dina, slaves of a wealthy Dutch family. Dina's past in-
cludes a secret-she is Monday's biological mother. (Dina gave Monday to her
midwife, Leslie, to save Monday from a life of bondage.) As eleven-year-old Mon-
day narrates, readers will be no doubt be drawn in by events, but most will soon be
suffering from symptoms of tie-up-the-plot "coincident-itis": when Leslie travels
to Kingston to intercede for her brother's release she finds lodging in a tavern.
Luckily, Leslie's cousin's husband runs the tavern and his chief customer is a jus-
tice of the peace (who knows the Attorney General, who has the power to release
Frederick) and he just happens to be in the tavern. Coincidences or no, one-
dimensional characterizations, wooden dialogue, and an unlikely plot aren't a lucky
combination. An author's note provides historical background. PM
WYNNE-JONES, TIM 
Stephen Fair. Kroupa/DK Ink, 1998 
[22 4 p]
ISBN 0-7894-2495-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Fifteen-year-old Stephen is plagued by bad dreams, and they seem to be the same
bad dreams that tormented his older brother, Marcus, when Marcus was himself
fifteen. After therapy revealed that Marcus' dreams were based on a hushed-up
incident in his childhood (the family fleeing from a burning village-cum-com-
mune), Marcus insisted their mother was holding something else back and he left
the family; her disproportionate fear (and increasing secretiveness) at Stephen's
dreams seems to prove Marcus right. Stephen's growing friendship with classmate
Virginia, a budding filmmaker with her own family problems, helps give shape to
his own family yearnings and guilt as he gets closer to the mysteries of the past--
and the present. Wynne-Jones is an impressive stylist, and his depiction of Stephen's
302 
* THE BULLETIN
family, friends, and thoughts are unforcedly deft; his language is fresh and indi-
vidual without being flashy, and teens will feel a part of Stephen's world and sym-
pathize with his struggle. Unfortunately, the plot resolution is melodramatic and
cheap (Stephen was an irresponsible couple's baby, and his mother abducted him
when their family fled the fire), an ungainly solution to the more complex and
subtle problems the novel has presented. Readers may, however, find the explora-
tions of the questions sufficiently compelling to overcome the rather pat final an-
swer. DS
YEP, LAURENCE 
The Imp That Ate My Homework; illus. by Benrei
Huang. 
HarperCollins, 1998 
[96p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027689-4 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027688-6 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Jim's grandfather is "the meanest man in Chinatown," and Jim dreads having to
interview him for a school essay. Sitting around the supper table watching the
Chinese news on TV, Jim is surprised to see his grandfather turn pale with fear
when an archaeologist in China opens up an ancient vase with the inscription "A
curse on anyone who opens this vase." Faster than you can say "The dog ate my
homework," an escaped imp shows up in Jim's room and eats his essay. The imp,
apparently an ancient enemy of Grandpop, is determined to use Jim to get to his
grandfather, who is apparently an ancient Chinese imp-fighter named Chung Kuei.
Jim gets into trouble with just about everyone he knows until he's finally desperate
enough to turn to his grandfather for help. When his grandfather tries to send him
out of danger, Jim won't go: "I wanted to run home. I wanted to hide, and yet I
couldn't let Grandpop face the imp all by himself. It wasn't bravery. I just knew
I couldn't desert Grandpop. I wanted to be on his team." Yep's depiction of the
conflict first-generation-American Jim ("native born, no brains") has with his old-
country grandfather is subtle, and Jim's running commentary on how he feels
about San Francisco's Chinatown, his description of the sweatshop where his mother
works sewing clothes, and his dislike of Chinese school where he is supposed to be
learning the language are palpable and realistic. The logic is a little stretched, the
humor never quite takes off, and the cultural references could have used a little
more context, but most young readers will probably just be caught up in the sheer
momentum of it all as young boy and old man ally to conquer the evil imp. JMD
APRIL 1998 
* 303
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
West, Mark, ed. Trust Your Children: Voices Against Censorship in Children's Lit-
erature. Second edition. Neal-Schuman, 1997. 235p. illus. with photographs.
Paper ed. ISBN 1-55570-251-1. $24.95.
It's approximately a decade since the publication of the first edition of Trust Your
Children, and the issue of censorship shows no signs of disappearing. Including
seven new interviews, this edition allows authors, publishers, librarians, teachers,
booksellers, and others who have encountered the censorship battle from the front
lines to tell of their experiences. West states up front that his book is "deliberately
one-sided," and there is a resultant flavor of preaching to the choir, but the per-
sonal narratives here make for absorbing reading, whether it's author Judy Blume
talking about self-censorship she's engaged in or librarian Elizabeth Briscoe-Wil-
son relating her battle against a pro-censorship principal in her school in Kansas.
The updating isn't entirely effective-there's very little on more recent censorship
targets and battles, and two of the three publishers included no longer possess the
affiliation the book states-but this deals with the subject on an individual level
that is thoughtful and compelling. Teens looking for resources on the topic will
appreciate this title as well. An index and bibliography are included. DS
Perrin, Noel. A Child's Delight. Dartmouth/New England, 1997. 161p. ISBN
0-87451-840-7. $19.95.
Author of a similar work about adult literature (A Reader's Delight) and husband of
the late children's author Anne Lindbergh, Noel Perrin offers thirty gentle essays
(about half previously appearing in newspapers) on children's books he feels should
be better known. Librarians will be familiar with the majority of the titles (ranging
from The Railway Children to HalfMagic to Watership Down), but many parents
and other adults may not be; Perrin demonstrates in his own informal research
that many college-age readers were unfamiliar with several included books. Perrin's
demotic style sometimes tips into the flat and amateurish but is often cozily chatty,
and his affection for his selections is palpable. His essays might well serve as
booktalks for adults looking for time-honored literature they have forgotten or
missed but would nonetheless like to share with their children; voracious younger
readers who enjoy personal print recommendations may also find it leading them
down enjoyable literary paths. A bibliography includes current publication status
and information about the titles discussed. DS
304 
* THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
ADVENTURE STORIES:
Jacques
Africa-stories: Stanley
Africa: Haskins
African Americans: Johnson
African Americans-fiction:
Koertge
African Americans-stories: Tarpley
American Indians-fiction: Bruchac
American Indians-folklore: Rosen
Animals-stories: Isadora; Mollel;
Stanley; Waddell
Anthropology-fiction: Abelove
Art and artists-fiction: Koertge
Art: Johnson
Asian Americans-fiction: Yep
Asian Americans-stories:
Pomeranc
Aunts-fiction: Peck
Bears-stories: Waddell
BEDTIME STORIES: Banks;
Blos; Isadora; Rymill
Bees-stories: High
BIOGRAPHIES: Demi; Harness;
Lyon; Tompert
Birds-stories: Pilkey
Birthdays-stories: Hershenhorn;
Wardlaw
Brothers-fiction: Hartnett
Brothers-stories: Harber
Bullies-stories: Waddell
Careers-fiction: Farrell; Shreve
Child abuse-fiction: Philbrick
Circuses: Granfield
Civics: Pomeranc
Commerce and industry: Murphy
Community helpers: Masoff
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Burgess
Dating-fiction: Bechard
Dogs-stories: Wardlaw
Dreams-fiction: Wynne-Jones
Drugs and drug addiction-fiction:
Burgess
Ecology: Allen; Gibbons
Environmental studies: Murphy
EPISTOLARY FICTION:
Skolsky
Ethics and values: Abelove;
Bruchac; Rinaldi
Families-fiction: Wynne-Jones
FANTASY: Jacques; Pierce
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Butler; Philbrick; Rinaldi
Fathers and sons-fiction: Kinsey-
Warnock
Firefighting: Masoff
Folklore-Armenia: San Souci
FOLKTALES AND
FAIRYTALES: Harber;
Johnson; Loya; Mollel; Rosen;
San Souci
Food and eating: Solheim
Foxes-stories: Kvasnosky
Friendship-fiction: Carbone;
Naylor; Philbrick; Shreve
Friendship-stories: London
Frogs-stories: London
Frogs: Dewey
FUNNY STORIES: Pilkey
Gangs-fiction: Koertge
GHOST STORIES: Butler;
Wright
APRIL 1998 
* 305
Grandfathers-fiction: Kinsey-
Warnock; Yep
Grandfathers-stories: High;
Lewin; Stevenson Sam
Grandmothers-stories: Blos
Health: Naylor
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Bruchac; Duey; Rinaldi;
Skolsky; Wyeth
History, U.S.: Harness; Johnson;
Pringle
History, world: Haskins
Immigrants-stories: Pomeranc
Jews-stories: Harber
Latin America: Loya
Letters and letter writing-fiction:
Skolsky
Love-fiction: McKay
Magic and magicians-fiction:
Pierce
Modeling-fiction: Farrell
Monkeys-stories: Ahlberg
Morocco-stories: Lewin
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Peck
Mothers and daughters-stories:
Tarpley
Mothers and sons-fiction: Farrell
MYSTERIES: Hartnett
Nature study: Allen; Dewey;
Gibbons
Peru-fiction: Abelove
Photography: Johnson
Pigs-fiction: Rylant
Pirates: Weatherly
POETRY: Mora; Stevenson
Popcorn
Prayers: Lindbergh
Presidents: Harness
Quakers-fiction: Bruchac
Reading aloud: Mora; Pilkey;
Rylant; San Souci; Stevenson
Popcorn; Yep
Reading, beginning: Branley;
Kvasnosky; Pilkey; Rylant
Reading, easy: Wright
Reading, reluctant: Solheim
Reading: Wells
Religious education: Demi; Lindbergh;
Tompert
RHYMING STORIES: Ahlberg
School-fiction: Bechard; Carbone; Wright
Schools: Pringle
Science experiments: Cobb
Science: Bortz; Cobb
Sisters-fiction: Kvasnosky; McKay
Slavery-fiction: Rinaldi; Wyeth
Space shuttle: Branley
Space: Bortz; Branley
Stepfathers-fiction: Bechard
Storytelling: Loya; San Souci
Storytelling-stories: Lewin
Storytime: Ahlberg; Blos; Gershator;
Harber; Hershenhorn; Johnson; Rymill;
Waddell; Wardlaw
SUPERNATURAL STORIES: Butler;
Loya
SURVIVAL STORIES: Duey; Marsden
Urban life-fiction: Koertge
Valentine's Day-stories: London
Voyages and travel-fiction: Philbrick
War-fiction: Marsden
Weather-stories: Hershenhorn
Whaling: Murphy
Witches-stories: Johnson
Women's studies: Weatherly
World cultures: Abelove
World War II: Pringle
Writers and writing-fiction: Wynne-Jones
Writers and writing: Lyon
jlava%.
L -- 21L _
"TALL is terrific...,
It's energized
and it's gutsy."
-Jonathan Kozol
academic expecta-
tions and setting
specific professional
standards TALL is
leading the way in
the teaching and 
L
the learning of
children's and young
adult literature.
"TALL is the Rolls Royce of the field."
- Joan F Smutny
National-Louis University
Uniquely organized, each issue brings you 16 inspiring,
practical, jargon-free articles guaranteed to enrich and
expand your professional practice.
For more information and a catalog
call 1-800-·337-6525 or write to:
Essmont Publishing, P.O. Box 186, Brandon, Vermont 05733
STONE
SOUP
Retold by
Heather Forest
(a featured
storyteller at
the American
Library
Association
annual
conference)
Illustrated
by Susan Gaber
(both are past winners
of the ABA Pick of
the List Award)
Other titles available from August House LittleFolk:
THE GIRL WHO WORE TOO MUCH
A Folktale from Thailand
Retold by Margaret Read MacDonald
with Thai text by Supaporn Vathanaprida
Illustrated by Yvonne Lebrun Davis
Hardback $15.95/ISBN 0-87483-503-8
THE DANCING TURTLE
A Folktalefrom Brazil
Retold by Pleasant DeSpain
Illustrated by David Boston
Hardback $15.95/ISBN 0-87483-502-X
I SCREAM, YOU SCREAM
A Feast of Food Rhymes
Selected as one of the New York
Public Library's 100 Best Children's Books 
V
for reading and sharing 
5
Lillian Morrison 
1 
I
Illustrated by Nancy Dunaway
Hardback $12.95/ISBN 0-87483-495-3
Hardback $15.95
ISBN 0-87483-498-8
AUGUST HOUSE
Littlepl
PO. Box 3223
ittle Rock, Arkansas 72203-3223
01-372-5450 * FAX 501-372-5579
order@augusthouse.com
1-800-284-8784
Teaching K8
The Professional IdeaBook for Teachers
\Te~~ chtflQ~K&
Every issue of Teaching K-8
provides informative articles on
the cutting edge of education.
You'll also find insightful
columns and thoughtful
reviews written by some of
today's leading educators.
Teaching K-8 is filled with
hundreds of unique ideas and
activities that help teachers
present new challenges to
their students, learn new
concepts and develop new
skills
Monthly columns include...
Children's Books
Teaching in the Library
The Parent Connection
Science, Math, Technology and more!
Plus, interviews with children's book authors and illustrators
ULI1 L 1111• 
tUL 
UIs LZ5• ValuadUI
resource for your library -
subscribe to Teaching K-8 today.
TeachtngK8
>x 54808, Boulder, CO 803224808
8-8793
* Outside U.S. add $5.00 postage per subscription.
I 
I
s .l
1998 ALA
NEWBERY HONOR BOOKS
190M 
pOUrnW 
-
- - -ALA
es 8-12. $14.95 
(0-06024913-7)
$14 S9. 
(0.06-024914-5)
JoannaCotBoo
^1996 AL 
-
Book.
Ages a up. 
14.95R (0-06-0275
S14.89B (0-0-02751 
0-3)
$ 6E (*6-007111
WINN 
1998 ALA
PuRA BELmE AWARD
Honorng the Latino wrter
whose work best portrays,
affims and celebrates
the Latino cultural 
1996
experience In a 
Nation1
work of literature 
Book Awn
for youth.
ard
SHarperCollinsCbildren'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York, NY 10022
W\inner
http://www.harperchildrens.com
University of linois Press
1325 South Oak Stret
Champaign, IL 61820
U.SA.
RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED
0008-9036(199804)51:8*;1 -4
W.
PERIODICALS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
The Bulletin of the Centerfor Children's Books
invites you to visit our home page at
http://edfu.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Regular features include:
* Bulletin Stars-what we starred this month
* Bulletin Dozen-a genre- or theme-based list of titles
* Quote of the Month
SBulletin Blue Ribbons 1990-1997
* the Baby Bulletin-a sample collection of recent reviews
Occasional features include:
* Rising Star-an examination of the work of a talented new author
or artist
* True Blue-reflections on a time-honored talent
* Dueling Reviews-a look at the discussion behind the scenes when a book
polarizes the editors
* And more... updated monthly!
*"-.
~· 
Id~ 
I: 
ri
I; -I
,, 
':yer
, 
I;
.jii 
+ 
i·9p·: 
31"
I-;- -
4*"' 
/
'
*' ,^ 
* 
"
