ILLINOI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
j, 
t; 
P,
S"In the first of a planned four-book series, Barker
imbues the traditional conventions of fantasy with a
whimsical Wonderland quality, providing a host of bizarre
characters, a fabulous landscape, and a coherent underlying
mythology. Teenage Candy [in] Minnesota begins a journey
toward her destiny when she dives into a mysterious sea
[and] is carried to Abarat, an unusual archipelago of
25 islands. ... The multilayered adventure story not only
embraces the lands of Oz, Wonderland, and Namia but
also offers a wink and a nod to Huxley's Brave New World.
More than 100 full-color paintings by Barker are
appropriately quirky, grotesque, and campy, effectively
capturing and expanding on the nuances of the tale."
L11BAiRKE
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
February 2003
Vol. 56 No. 6
4'
A LOOK INSIDE
223 THE BIG PICTURE
Under the Moon & over the Sea: A Collection of Caribbean Poems comp.
by John Agard and Grace Nichols; illus. by Christopher Corr, Sara
Fanelli, Cathie Felstead, et al.
224 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
225 * City of the Beasts by Isabel Allende
230 * Jack: The Early Years ofJohn F. Kennedy by Ilene Cooper
239 * The Fire: An Ethiopian Folk Tale ad. by Heinz Janisch; illus. by
Fabricio VandenBroeck
248 * Puppy Mudge Takes a Bath by Cynthia Rylant; illus. by Isidre Mones
257 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
258 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Publications Office of the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of
the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of Illinois Press,
1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS)
Janice M. Del Negro, Contributing Editor (JMD)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Christine Jenkins, Reviewer (CJ)
Fern Kory, Reviewer (FK)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
OFFICE STAFF
Jennifer DeBaillie
Natalie Hoyle
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $66.00; individuals, $50.00; students, $15.00. In countries other than the
United States, add $7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya
Company Ltd. Single copy rate: $5.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus
Reprint Co., Route 100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from ProQuest, 300
North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
All inquiries about subscriptions and advertising should go to University of Illinois Press, 1325 S.
Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903, 217-333-0950.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The
Bulletin ofthe Center fr Children's Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email:
bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2003 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration from Under the Moon & over the Sea: A Collection of Caribbean Poems. Illustra-
tions for See Full Moon, Hear Jumbie Story copyright ©2002 by Jane Ray. Reproduced by
permission of the publisher, Candlewick Press, Inc., Cambridge, MA, on behalf of Walker Books
Ltd., London.
FEBRUARY 2003 
* 223
THE BIG PICTURE
Under the Moon & over the Sea: A Collection of
Caribbean Poems
comp. by John Agard and Grace Nichols; illus. by Christopher Corr, Sara Fanelli,
Cathie Felstead, et al.
A good poetry anthology is like a banquet, offering a splendid array of savory
delights; the best of them balance familiar tastes with new sensations, exotic ingre-
dients and classic elements. Having already compiled one such lavish buffet in the
Caribbean-themed anthology A Caribbean Dozen: Poems from Caribbean Poets
(BCCB 12/94), Agard and Nichols now serve up a new repast of over fifty more
poems with an enticing Caribbean flavor.
These have a slightly older slant than the entries in the previous title
(though many individual poems will delight younger readers and listeners), and
they cover a broad and intriguing range in their five thematic sections. The first
poems deal with the sea, the defining edge of island life; there are playful lyrics
about its denizens, acknowledgments of its force, and ruminations on its place in
the changing fortunes of the islands as it brings fateful visitors from across the
ocean ("those terrible canoes/ were coming for me"-Pamela C. Mordecai, "Aximu's
Awakening"). The next section treats the supernatural, offering trickster poems,
creepy chants, tales ofjumbies, duppies, and ghosts, and responses to same ("Then
is when/ I does wish I didn't listen/ to no stupid jumbie story"-Grace Nichols, "I
Like to Stay Up"). The land itself serves as the inspiration for the third section,
with special attention to what it grows and what it knows ("and all I heard was
tongueless whispering/ as if some buried slave wanted to speak again"-Martin
Carter, "Listening to the Land"). The penultimate group of poems approaches the
poetic feast literally, glorifying in markets and baked goods and consumption ("She
warm meh about bellyache;/ but I cahn help it,/ I really love Johnnie bake"-John
Lyons, "I Love Johnnie Bake"). The final group explores the bittersweet reality of
island residents away from home, living abroad, "bringing your Caribbean eye/ to
another horizon" (John Agard, "Windrush Child").
Even within these themes, there's plenty of variety. Familiar names such
as James Berry, Valerie Bloom, and Faustin Charles (in addition to the compilers,
who sprinkle the mixture with their own fine poems) provide contributions, and
there are lively traditional entries and lyrics from lesser-known poets. There's a
pleasing diversity of tone and style throughout, with joyous sea shanties (Lynn
Joseph's "Pullin' Seine") and dark portents of upheaval (Maggie Harris' "El
Dorado"), shivery ghost poems (Faustin Charles' "Jumbie Man") and shivery po-
ems of distant cold climates (Valerie Bloom's "De"). Some poems push readers
towards thoughtful contemplation, and others invite them to roll with the rhythms
and rhymes; some poems evoke the islands in their imagery, while others also glory
in island intonations and dialect (all quite accessible to readers).
224 
* THE BULLETIN
It's therefore unusually effective to have each of the five sections illus-
trated by a different artist, an arrangement that risks inconsistency but here simply
adds to the diversity. While styles differ, there's an embrace of vigorous color and
strong shapes throughout that draws the sections together. There's also plenty of
character, with Jane Ray expanding from her more designerly pastorals to tackle
some very, very creepy haunts (here's your chance to booktalk poetry with the
pictures of a bleeding skeleton and a screeching vampirical ghost), Satoshi Kitamura
employing sharp edges and quivery black line in his droll portraits, and Sara Fanelli
adding cut-paper textures to her unfettered and dancing compositions.
Not only is this a delicious banquet, it's unusually successful at evoking a
certain place, a goal many anthologies strive for but few meet. There's a very clever
interweaving of the concrete and the emotional throughout the anthology that
conveys to readers not just what one would see in the Caribbean but what one
would relish, what one would regret, and what one would miss from far away.
Both poignant and jubilant, this is a luscious and satisfying collection. A com-
bined index of poets and first lines is appended. (Imprint information appears on
p. 225.)
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ADOFF, JAIME 
The Song Shoots out ofMy Mouth: A Celebration ofMusic; illus. by
Martin French. 
Dutton, 2002 
48p
ISBN 0-525-46949-4 
$17.99 
R* 
Gr. 6-10
Adoff takes cultural diversity to a new level in this dynamic collection of twenty-
four free-verse poems about music-every kind of music from gospel to marching
band to opera to rap to Mozart. The sweeping lines, bright, crisp colors, and
distinct frames of the facing-page illustrations complement the jazzy title font and
offer an energetic backbeat to the poems themselves, which are clearly laid out on
stark white. Adoff offers metaphors that are playful and original ("I start the day
with my music buffet:/ Morning fuel burns-cool jazz jams/ on buttered toast")
and puts a new spin on familiar ideas (as when he explores the "bi-racial melody"
of "88 keys"). Poems explore multiple perspectives on the experience of music,
including what it's like to be in the audience, preparing for the "Diva" ("We wait,
anticipate. Wonder from this side/ what it would be like to be her. To be up there
looking at us"), or listening to gospel ("My hurt runs away/ up to the second tier,
the second tear/ streaks down my cheek as her otherworldly voice sings"). Some
are funny ("Practice Makes 
?"), others passionate; all are full of energy.
"Backnotes" gloss some allusions in the poems and offer annotated listening sug-
gestions, making this a remarkably complete musical package. FK
FEBRUARY 2003 
* 
225
AGARD, JOHN, comp. 
Under the Moon e- over the Sea: A Collection of Caribbean
Poems; comp. by John Agard and Grace Nichols; illus. by Christopher Corr, Sara
Fanelli, Cathie Felstead, et al. 
Candlewick, 2003 
77p
ISBN 0-7636-1861-6 
$17.99 
R* Gr. 6-12
See this month's big Picture, p. 223, for review.
ALLENDE, ISABEL 
City ofthe Beasts; tr. by Margaret Sayers Peden. 
HarperCollins,
2002 
[4 16p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-050917-1 
$21.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-050918-X 
$19.99
Spanish ed. ISBN 0-06-051031-5 
$19.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-12
When his household is disrupted by his mother's cancer, fifteen-year-old Alex Cold
is shipped off to the care of his adventurous grandmother, who takes him along on
her writing assignment in South America. Their expedition is traveling up the
Amazon to find the mysterious Beast, a sasquatch-like creature, and also the elu-
sive local Indians. Along with the guide's young daughter, Nadia, Alex realizes
that there's another more sinister agenda lurking behind some of the expedition
and that the discovery of the Indians will enable the powermongers to exploit and
destroy the land. Alex and Nadia pledge to help the Indians, who spirit them away
and take them to the land of the Beasts, where they're aided by their totemic
animals in finding their own goals as well as a greater understanding of the impor-
tance of the ancient creatures. This is a long and sinuous story that effectively
draws readers into its own fantastical world. The evocation of the jungle and its
effects recalls Conrad, even down to human figures such as the "beautiful mulatto"
expedition doctor and the mystical Indians, and the deliberate pacing becomes
part of the story's drama. Allende's everyday reality is not as deftly drawn as her
magical realism, and the transitions between the two sometimes ripple her fluid
vision. There's both a scope and a significance in Alex and Nadia's quest, how-
ever, that will be appreciated by readers with fantastical tastes but earthbound
concerns. DS
ANDERSON, LAURIE HALSE 
Thank You, Sarah: The Woman Who Saved Thanks-
giving; illus. by Matt Faulkner. 
Simon, 2002 
40p
ISBN 0-689-84787-4 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Teacher, hatmaker, poet (well, she did-probably-write "Mary Had a Little
Lamb"), journalist, and general gadfly, Sarah Buell Hale revived the languishing
celebration of Thanksgiving and pressed for its national observation. A persistent
letter-writing campaign to a succession of presidents garnered Hale nothing but a
reputation for annoyance, but her idea finally found its time and champion in the
dark days of the Civil War when Abraham Lincoln evidently agreed that "a holi-
day couldn't stop the war, but it could help bring the country together." Ander-
son packs a lot of spunk into her folksy account, and Faulkner's mixed-media
scenes fondly caricature the bigwigs of the day and even the earnestness of Hale's
cause (an irate band of women storm the state house-motto: "Go away. We're
busy"-with an oversized quill pen for a battering ram). A plentiful "Feast of
Facts" rounds out the presentation with further information on Hale, the Civil
War, and tidbits about vintage Thanksgivings past. A list of sources is also in-
cluded. EB
226 
* THE BULLETIN
ATKINS, CATHERINE Alt Ed. Putnam, 2003 
[224p]
ISBN 0-399-23854-9 
$17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Susan Callaway, a motherless, overweight sophomore who could model as poster
child for low self-esteem, has been sentenced to a term of after-school encounter
sessions with five other school miscreants, who must attend or face expulsion. Susan's
been implicated in vandalizing the class bully's truck, and although she did not do
the deed, she wishes she had and gladly takes the fall. Predictably, the weekly
meetings help Susan make at least one true friend and come to terms with class-
mates she has heretofore resented, and all the participants come away, if not totally
redeemed, at least self aware. Atkins spins the standard hit parade of high-school
stereotypes-the slut, socialite, and fatso girls; the bully, queer, and too-normal-
to-be-here guys-and they all go programatically through their paces, construc-
tively releasing their hostilities and cashing out with pizza, letters of affirmation,
and more promising futures. Nonetheless, the gradual revelation of the misdeeds
that landed them in Alt Ed is cagily handled, and Susan's newfound strength to
confront her brother's nastiness and her father's emotional neglect is deeply satisfy-
ing. Readers who enjoy watching their peers cat-scratch from the safe distance of
fiction will want to pull up a chair. EB
BAKER, E. D. 
The Frog Princess. Bloomsbury, 2002 
214p
ISBN 1-58234-799-9 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Princess Emeralda is not the stuff of which fairy-tale heroines are made: she's
clumsy, her spells never come out right, and she has a laugh like a braying donkey.
That doesn't knock her out of the frog-kissing business, however, because despite
her faults she's a real princess. Her kiss should therefore change an enchanted frog
right back into the prince he once was-except, thanks to a magical charm-reversal
bracelet (a gift from her aunt, the witch), the spell bounces back and turns Emeralda
into a frog, too. So she and Prince Eadric (the still-enchanted frog) set out through
the woods to find the witch who cursed Eadric in the first place, to plead for her to
undo the spell. The two talking froggies are captured by wannabe witch Vannabe,
who plans on using their tongues and toes in an everlasting beauty spell. Baker's
fairy-tale fantasy is a lot like one of Princess Emeralda's early spells: she almost
makes it work. While the characterizations have their charms, the conflict just
isn't complex enough to carry the lengthy text, and there is little suspense. The
labored bluffness of the novel makes it clear up front that there will be a happy
ending, and while this can be said of many fairy-tale explorations, the successful
ones make the journey itself worthwhile. Still, the story has its humorous mo-
ments, the froggy cover will makes this title an easy sell, and fans of such fantasies
may be willing to give it a whirl before settling down with Napoli's Prince of the
Pond (BCCB 1/93) or Ferris' Once upon a Marigold, reviewed below. JMD
BROADLEY, LEO Pedro the Brave; illus. by Holly Swain. 
Tiger Tales, 2002 
[26p]
Trade ed. ISBN 1-58925-024-9 
$14.95
Paper ed. ISBN 1-58925-375-2 
$5.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-8 yrs
Propped-up wooden cactuses, stuffed animals, western gear, and a wolf mask set
the scene for the telling of a tale "that will make all your whiskers go curly:/ It's
about using your wits to keep wolves from the door,/ and why you should go to
FEBRUARY 2003 
* 227
bed early." The increasingly vibrant southwestern-style illustrations of the tale
proper show the solid, uncomplicated figures of Pedro and his upright sidekicks
(Dusty, a dog, and Ronnie the horse) threatened by an yellow-eyed, pointy-toothed
timber wolf with a "tongue that was dripping and red"; clever Pedro, however,
makes him a deal: "I'll jump in this pan with no fuss at all,/ if you'll just let me
cook my own sauce." After he tricks the wolf into tasting the sauce (which in-
cludes ingredients from Tabasco and dynamite dust to vindaloo paste), the wolf
decides to wander off in search of ice cream while Pedro and the gang suggest a
pre-bedtime singalong. Caregivers may be disappointed that the tale does not
follow through on its promise to make a case for prompt goodnights, but the
audience will giggle at the spicy denouement of this mild folkloric adventure. FK
BRYAN, ASHLEY, ad. 
Beautiful Blackbird; ad. and illus. by Ashley
Bryan. 
Atheneum, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-689-84731-9 
$16.95 
Ad 
5-9 yrs
Bryan tells the story of Blackbird, who, "a long, long time ago," was voted the
most beautiful of all the birds in Africa. The pallid Ringdove takes Blackbird aside
and asks, "Oh, Blackbird, Blackbird, coo-coo-roo, coo-ca-roo, would you color
me black so that I'll be black like you?" Blackbird explains that "color on the
outside is not what's on the inside," but he promises to brew some blackening in
his medicine gourd to "swing a ring" around Ringdove's neck to go along with his
name. Not surprisingly, when Ringdove is thus decorated the other birds want
decorations, too, and Blackbird uses his blackening potion to make them all happy.
The plot is somewhat slight and the momentum sometimes falters, but Bryan's
adaptation of this African tale (from the Ila people of Zambia, according to a
source note) makes good use of syncopated language that suffuses the proceedings
withjoie de vivre. Cut-paper collage birds of many colors flutter through the pages
against white and colored backgrounds; on some pages the hues seem washed out,
and even when the defining black is added the compositions are scattered, lacking
the driving rhythm of the text. The contrast between the black decorations and
the colored paper lends emphasis to the visuals and to the message, however, and
the new-construction-paper freshness of the medium will invite appreciation from
skillful young scissors-wielders. A clear message, replicable art techniques, and
storytelling possibilities make this a title rife with potential curricular connections.
JMD
BURGESS, MELVIN 
The Ghost behind the Wall. Holt, 2003 
[176p]
ISBN 0-8050-7149-0 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-7
David is "four foot nothing and twelve years old"; uninterested in the good kids
and taunted by the bad, he basically relishes fighting and mischief. When he's
suspended from school and stuck at home, he decides to explore his apartment
building through the now-unused air ducts that connect the units, and that explo-
ration gets considerably more interesting in the vent of elderly Mr. Alveston's apart-
ment, where he meets a ghost. The ghost proves a powerful attractant, drawing
David back into the ducts and even Mr. Alveston's apartment, but David begins to
be afraid when the ghost's ferocious rage causes damage even beyond the malicious
vandalism David enjoys. After justice catches up with David, he and Mr. Alveston
begin to form a bond, both of them determined to discover the identity of the
228 
* 
THE BULLETIN
ghost. Readers may guess fairly early on that the ghost is actually Mr. Alveston
himself, or at least the spirit of his youthful memories, but that doesn't detract
from the suspense of the main dilemma: how can David lay this troubling and
dangerous ghost to rest? Burgess puts an impressively hard edge on David, whose
destruction is itself pretty nasty; that edge, however, makes David's growing friend-
ship with Mr. Alveston and his reaction to the ghost's excesses all the more dra-
matic. Between the creepy setting, the mysterious ghost, and the offbeat
comradeship between David and Mr. Alveston, there's a lot of appeal in this acces-
sibly spooky story. DS
CABOT, MEG 
Haunted: A Tale ofthe Mediator. HarperCollins, 2003 
[25 6p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029472-8 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029471-X 
$16.89
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-12
Cabot's Mediator series moves from her Jenny Carroll pseudonym and paperback
status to her more famous name and hardback life with this fifth entry. In it,
sixteen-year-old Suze Simon (who has the gift of mediating between the troubled
dead and the living) is stunned to discover that the sexy new boy at school is none
other than Paul Slater, another young mediator who almost caused her death in
the otherworld; despite her understandable aversion, she finds herself physically
drawn to Paul and deeply curious about the information he claims to have about
her powers. Her increasing attraction to Paul complicates her already difficult
relationship with Jesse, who may view her only as a friend-and who is a ghost.
This doesn't have sufficient momentum to succeed as an independent title-the
Paul plot moves particularly slowly, his nastiness is so clear throughout that Suze's
attraction to him isn't particularly convincing, and her realization that he's trouble
is anticlimactic-and readers should start at the beginning of the series rather than
turning up here first because of the Cabot name. The mediator premise remains
engaging, however, adding a Buffyesque turn to the established pleasures of ghost
stories; Cabot's flip and fluffy tone adds enjoyment and keeps the scary side of the
supernatural largely at bay, so that readers can enjoy the seriously sexy overtones
and the supernatural power without worrying too much about nightmares. It's an
installment more than a drama in its own right, but fans won't want to miss the
developments therein. DS
CARTER, DON 
Heaven's All-Star Jazz Band; written and illus. by Don
Carter. 
Knopf, 2002 
34p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-91571-0 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-81571-6 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
The narrator describes his grandfather, who has gone to that heavenly Cotton
Club in the sky. In the Cotton Club of the hereafter, the angel-winged musicians
are such jazz luminaries as Charles Mingus, Miles Davis, Louis Armstrong, Sarah
Vaughan, Ella Fitzgerald, Billie Holiday, Charlie Parker, and John Coltrane, among
others. Grandpa ("He's got all their records./ Played 'em loud/ When Grandma
wasn't looking,/ Windows open,/ spaghetti cooking") initially hangs back, listen-
ing, but he finally he joins the band, unable to resist the music he loves: "Grandpa
Jack sings./ Grandpa Jack swings./ Bravo!/ Now he has wings." The sometimes-
forced rhymes lean a bit toward the catalogue-ish (each musician is introduced
with a line or two that barely evokes his or her musical styling), and the cast of
FEBRUARY 2003 
* 
229
luminaries will be unfamiliar to many in the audience, but Carter's upbeat tone
combines with his mixed-media illustrations to lift this title above musical grief
therapy. Thickly textured elements are three-dimensionally assembled in dramatic
tableaux, enriched by ripply backgrounds and gleeful scatterings of beads. Bewinged
musicians stand in front of silver microphones holding golden trumpets and other
shiny brass instruments; dancers, Grandpa Jack, and music makers float on clouds
solidly stuck to a blue plaster-like sky. The text is unsentimental and hopeful; the
narrator is a boy who uses memories and music to retain his connection to his
deceased and obviously loved grandfather, with nary a funereal thought, word, or
deed in sight. A concluding page provides brief biographical information about
each member of Heaven's All-Star Jazz Band. JMD
CHANDRA, DEBORAH 
George Washington's Teeth; by Deborah Chandra and
Madeleine Comora; illus. by Brock Cole. 
Farrar, 2003 
[40p]
ISBN 0-374-32534-0 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
He's first in war, first in peace, but dead last in oral hygiene. As General
Washington's military and political star rises, his teeth drop, and Chandra is right
there to mark each milestone in his career with the current count of his dwindling
dentition: "George crossed the icy Delaware/ With nine teeth in his mouth./ In
that cold and pitchy dark,/ Two more teeth came out!" When the penultimate
tooth falls, George resorts to his first set of dentures, embarking on what readers of
the end materials will recognize as a long and painful relationship with false teeth
of every ilk. Chandra's quirky take on the revered Founder's embarrassing medi-
cal dilemma is appealing in itself, but it's questionable whether young listeners will
understand the historical backdrop or catch the humor in Cole's gentle but deft
line-and-watercolor parodies of Washington's famed poses. An appended four-
page timeline of Washington's dental woes, which is geared to a much older audi-
ence, is easily as intriguing and entertaining as the main text, with ample quotes
from letters and diaries and with portrait reproductions that trace his progressive
facial disfigurement. A closing photo ofWashington's last set ofdentures-a cum-
bersome and painful-looking affair in gold and hippopotamus ivory-fairly en-
sures that viewers will brush and floss before bedtime tonight. EB
COHN, RACHEL 
The Steps. 
Simon, 2003 
[14 4p]
ISBN 0-689-84549-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-6
Annabel desperately misses her father, Jack, who lives with his wife in Australia
while Annabel dwells in New York, and she's intent that her trip to Australia will
give her a chance to retrieve him from his new family and take him back with her.
She's therefore immune to the eagerness of her new stepsiblings (especially same-
age Lucy) and the cuteness of her baby half-sister, and she does her best to make
that clear at every opportunity. Finally she's fed up with the whole situation,
especially when her mother calls to announce her impending marriage (which will
bring Annabel another set of steps and, in a few months, another half-sibling), and
she and Lucy (also fed up with being jerked around by grownups) take off for a
journey to Melbourne, Lucy's old home, where Annabel gets a bit of perspective
on her stepsister and the situation (as well as meeting Lucy's gorgeous ex-stepbrother,
Ben). While this doesn't have the polished impact of Cohn's Gingerbread (BCCB
230 
* 
THE BULLETIN
4/02), Annabel is believable as a bossy and oversophisticated seventh-grade New
Yorker who nonetheless desperately wants her daddy ("And I know we always have
to do activities because you don't want me to have Jack all to myself and steal him
back," she thinks fiercely at her stepmother). It's also realistic that Annabel remains
ready to slam Lucy even as she becomes grudgingly accustomed to and even
protective of her stepsister. Those looking for more atmospheric appeals will
appreciate Annabel's careless, breathy, but intense voice and her swoony (if relatively
demure) connection with "Ben, love god." This is at heart an old-fashioned
"adjustment to" story, but it's an easygoing and effective one, truthfully
demonstrating that such adjustments are harder and more complicated than adults
may acknowledge. DS
COMPESTINE, YING CHANG 
The Story of Noodles; illus. by YongSheng
Xuan. 
Holiday House, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1600-3 
$16.95 
R 
5-9 yrs
The three young Kang brothers (first met in Compestine's The Story ofChopsticks)
are cleaning up after a food fight ("'Ho, Pan,' Ting said. 'You have rice in your
hair.' 'Oh ho, Ting,' Pan answered. 'You have rice in your ears.' 'Oh ho ho, Ting
and Pan.' Khai laughed. 'You have rice in your toes'") when their mother enlists
their help making her prize-winning dumplings for the annual cooking contest.
Mama is distracted when the family pig escapes, and she leaves the boys to roll
dumplings. The ensuing action results in a broken table, fallen filling, and three
brothers looking for an idea to keep them out of trouble. Their idea is noodles
made from dumpling dough, along with special ways to eat them: rolled around
chopsticks is called "eating a drumstick," slurped up from the bowl is called "suck-
ing a worm," and biting the strips off with front teeth is called "cutting the grass."
With little time and no alternative, Mama takes the noodles to the cooking contest
and (after the boys demonstrate eating techniques) wins the emperor's best cook-
ing table. Cut-paper collage illustrations on white backgrounds with textured
paper borders are cleanly and elegantly displayed. Elements of traditional Chinese
cut-paper art are evident on background screens, textile decorations, and facial
details. The compositions vary from close-up interior settings during the cooking
scenes to broader, more open outdoor settings during the judging scenes. The
black outlines give a feeling of dimensionality similar to that evinced in stained
glass orpapelpicado. Compestine's almost tongue-in-cheek tale is a nearly unbeat-
able combination of slapstick humor, fast pace, and food. A simple noodle recipe
and an author's note about the historical origin of noodles is included. JMD
COOPER, ILENE Jack: The Early Years of John F. Kennedy. 
Dutton,
2003 
168p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-525-46923-0 
$21.99 
R 
Gr. 5-10
Cooper gives young readers a different slant on the Camelot president by focusing
on his youth, and it's certainly not a picture that bespeaks a presidential future. A
boy plagued by ill health in a family that prided itself on physical prowess, a sec-
ond son in a family that placed its considerable hopes on the first, an academic
scapegrace in a family that demanded scholarly achievement, young Jack carved
himself out a role as the jokester, whose biggest joke, especially eventually on him-
self, was to lobby himself into the "Most Likely to Succeed" award in his senior
high-school class. This is therefore a biography largely driven by irony of various
FEBRUARY 2003 
* 
231
kinds, and effectively so; Cooper goes beyond the facile "presidents were kids just
like you" anecdotes to make a revealing picture of a young person with tremen-
dous gifts and advantages and a real difficulty in harnessing them for fruitful ends,
a kid who could easily have starred in a YA novel. Though there's some narrative
and chronological jumping around, young Kennedy's growth is clear if not always
certain, and there's plenty of support from words of friends, relatives, and Kennedy's
own retrospective insight (there's also some authorial speculation, which is clearly
identified as such). Black-and-white photographs are scattered throughout, as are
reproductions of various youthful Kennedy missives (and school reports). Source
notes provide chapter-by-chapter sources (and an acknowledgment of the diver-
gent viewpoints prevalent in Kennedy biographies) but no page citations; a further
list of print, video, and internet resources is included, as is an index. DS
Cox, JUDY 
Cool Cat, School Cat; illus. by Blanche Sims. 
Holiday House,
2002 
84p
ISBN 0-8234-1714-X 
$15.95 
R Gr. 2-4
Gus is trying to be a good sport about his move to a new neighborhood and start at
a new school, but he's lonely for his friends and he misses his dog, Oscar (forbid-
den in the new apartment). His interest is therefore piqued when he encounters a
stray cat on the way to his first day at school, and, with the help of classmate and
building-mate Pamela, he eventually manages to capture the homeless kitty and
hide it-in the school itself. Gus' partnership and increasing comradeship with
strict and orderly Pamela ("She took a long time to make up her mind, but when
she did, she was sure bossy. But it was a good kind of bossy") isn't surprising, but
he himself is a believable kid, eternally disorganized but enterprising and well mean-
ing. Cox is deft, as usual, in her depiction of the kid-animal connection, and she's
got some matter-of-fact honesty about Gus' errors of judgment, some of which
genuinely endanger the cat Gus is trying hard to help. Sims' wiry and energetic
line drawings add character (their Lucy Van Pelt air for Pamela is particularly
appropriate) as well as comedy and accessibility. Gus' report on taking care of
stray cats, which contains some good advice in a digestible format, is appended.
DS
CROSSLEY-HOLLAND, KEVIN 
Arthur: At the Crossing-Places. Levine/Scholastic,
2002 
394p
ISBN 0-439-26598-3 $17.95 
R Gr. 6-9
In the year 1200, Arthur di Caldicot, bastard son of Sir William de Gortanore,
squire to Lord Stephen de Holt, and soon-to-be crusader for the Holy Land, lives
in two worlds. One is the real world of squires and knights wherein he struggles to
discover his origin and place, and the other is within a magical obsidian seeing
stone that allows him to observe the adventures of another Arthur, the legendary
king, and his Knights of the Round Table. This sequel picks up where the previ-
ous title in this planned trilogy (Arthur: The Seeing Stone, BCCB 2/02) left off:
young Arthur has assumed his place as Lord Stephen's squire and moved to the
castle at Holt. In addition to his everyday duties, he is coping with his attraction
to two young women, the knowledge that being his father's son means his future
may not be his to decide, and his longing to find his real mother. In the midst of
his personal joys and confusions, Arthur is drawn into the dramatic lives of the
denizens of Camelot through his observations in the seeing stone. In the first
232 
* THE BULLETIN
novel Arthur saw his life as paralleling that of the royal Arthur; in this sequel his
life still resembles that of the legendary king, but he begins to learn from the other
Arthur how to make decisions on his own. The scenes of Arthur the squire and
Arthur the king are smoothly interwoven, and the occasional longer chapter (there
are 101 very short chapters, mostly one to three pages) allows for a bit more expo-
sition as well as more satisfactory development of plot and character. Crossley-
Holland strikes an elegant balance between internal and external action; while
Arthur grows in moral character there is plenty of action to keep the pages turning,
from fires to murders to possible knighthood. At the beginning of the novel is a
key to characters both in and out of the seeing stone; a glossary is appended. JMD
CURLEE, LYNN 
Capital; written and illus. by Lynn Curlee. 
Atheneum,
2003 
48p
ISBN 0-689-84947-8 
$17.95 
R Gr. 4-8
The five federal structures that define the heart of Washington, D.C.-the Wash-
ington, Jefferson, and Lincoln Memorials, the White House and the Capitol-are
examined here for their architectural, historical, and symbolic significance. Though
the human portraits are stiff, Curlee explicates the structure of each edifice with
his customary aplomb and distills the essence of civic grandeur into streamlined
acrylic scenes that juxtapose solemn grays and icy whites against twilight and steel
blues. Welcome visual aids include maps, a cross-section of the Capitol dome that
exposes its framework and labels its parts, original proposals for the buildings, and
human figures that underscore the grandiose scales under consideration. The book
ventures beyond straight architecture, though, to set each structure into the larger
civic plan and to demonstrate how urban growth (a railroad crossed the Mall for
some years) altered L'Enfant's original vision of the city, and personal whims (Tho-
mas Jefferson, whose anonymous plan for the presidential mansion lost in compe-
tition, couldn't wait to do some remodeling once he took occupancy) confounded
architects' visions. While steering clear of political and aesthetic controversy, this
brings current Mall development up to date with the inclusion of the World War
II Memorial site. Readers who have only seen snapshots of the main D.C. land-
marks now have the opportunity to examine the x-rays. EB
DANTICAT, EDWIDGE 
Behind the Mountains. Orchard, 2003 
16 6 p 
(First
Person Fiction)
ISBN 0-439-37299-2 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
In the notebook given to her by her teacher, Celiane Esperance begins by record-
ing daily life in her mountain village in Haiti, then going on to describe a disas-
trous visit to Port-au-Prince (where Celiane and her mother are injured in a bombing
associated with the 2000 elections). In the second half of this novel, her existence
has changed: she's now writing about life in Brooklyn, where she, her mother, and
nineteen-year-old brother have joined her father (whose immigration status has
finally become regularized). 
More timely if not quite as engaging as Veciana-
Suarez's Flight to Freedom (the other inaugural volume of the First Person Fiction
series, reviewed below), this immigration diary has a flat tone despite Celiane's
colorful phraseology, and the characters don't really come to life until they hit
New York (where Celiane observes, "I kept thinking the same thing I did the first
time I went to Port-au-Prince... How can some people live in a small village...
with only lamps for illumination ... and others live ... where every street corner
FEBRUARY 2003 
* 233
has its own giant lamp? It made the world seem unbalanced somehow"). The
drama picks up with an understandable conflict between Celiane's father and the
grown son he still treats as a boy. Readers will also understand Celiane's difficul-
ties talking to her father ("I plan for so long about what to say to Papa, but put him
on the phone and what comes out, anyen, nothing"); by finding her voice, Celiane
helps effect a reconciliation between this long-estranged father and his son. The
authorial afterword ("My Personal Exodus") points out personal experiences on
which the novelist was able to draw in writing this accessible story that gives equal
time to "two kinds of migration": from the country to the city, and from there to
America. FK
DOOLING, MICHAEL 
The Great Horse-less Carriage Race; written and illus. by
Michael Dooling. 
Holiday House, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1640-2 
$16.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
As the starry-eyed dreamers and hard-nosed entrepreneurs of 1895 predicted and
promoted the ascent of the hand-built automobile, a heck of a lot of skepticism
needed to be overcome. A fifty-two-mile auto race across Chicago, sponsored by
the Chicago Herald Times, aimed to prove not only the machines' capabilities but
also the superior manufacturer: "Each man in the race knew that the winner had
a chance of mass-producing and selling his horse-less carriage to the public."
Dooling follows the competition, segueing from an introduction, portrayed in
monochromatic gray oils, into the color-tinged race itself; the frosty atmosphere
and participants' exertion are adroitly evoked in his portraits and landscapes. He
never lingers long enough over the breakdowns and baling-wire-and-a-prayer re-
pairs, though, to generate any genuine excitement over the freezing cold, ten-hour
ordeal, and it's sometimes difficult to differentiate the participants or discern a
hero. Still, the old-time vehicles have enough intrinsic interest to involve a sub-
stantial audience, and kids can always marvel at the days when motorists slogged
across Chicago at seven m.p.h.-and it wasn't even rush hour. EB
DORROS, ARTHUR 
City Chicken; illus. by Henry Cole. 
HarperCollins,
2003 
[34p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028483-8 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028482-X 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
Henry, short for Henrietta, lives snugly in a backyard coop in an urban area, where
she's the only chicken she knows. After hearing tales of the country from the cat
next door, Henry determines to visit this wondrous locale, taking a bus and then a
garbage truck after her flying skills fall short of the required standard. There the
ill-informed Henry mistakes a horse for a cow and a pig for a horse and encounters
a shedful of battery chickens, which convinces the peripatetic hen that her city
home is the place for her. While the text doesn't have the solid consistency of
Stoeke's similarly silly Minerva Louise stories, there's plenty of loopy humor, espe-
cially in Henry's unintentionally snappy comebacks ("'Don't mention it,' said the
pigeon. 'I already did,' said Henry") and general gift for misunderstanding. Cole's
cartoony illustrations are facile but funny, and they effectively play up the confu-
sion. Henry's imaginings of the countryside are comically chicken-centered (her
pictured cow is actually a huge chicken with milk squirting out of its head), and
size contrasts and technology (especially the egg conveyor belt, which winds through
234 
* 
THE BULLETIN
the spread like a Seussian nightmare) are exaggerated for maximum silliness. It's
one of life's mysteries why confused chickens are so funny, but they undeniably
are, and Henry is an amusing addition to the gallery of foolish fowl. DS
FERRIS, JEAN 
Once upon a Marigold. Harcourt, 2002 
266p
ISBN 0-15-216791-9 
$17.00 
R Gr. 6-10
Take one happily solitary troll with two affectionate dogs and a satisfying forest
salvage business. Combine with one runaway six-year-old boy, who's clad in a
velvet suit and who refuses to say where he lives. Add eleven years, a telescope,
carrier pigeons (for p-mail), and an unhappy princess and the result is Ferris' blithe
takeoff on fairy-tale traditions. When Ed (the troll) finds Christian (the boy), the
foundling makes one thing perfectly clear: "You can throw that stupid velvet suit
away. I'm never wearing it again." Christian grows up into a handsome, smart,
inventive guy, who falls for the sensitive and lonely Princess Marigold after they
become p-mail pen-pals. When Ed decides Christian needs to see more of the
world than the home-cave and forest, Christian crosses the river and secretly joins
the palace staff. It isn't long before the perceptive princess realizes who he is, and
the two fall deeply in love, interfering with Marigold's mother's plan to get her
daughter out of the way and seize power. The love story is sweetly realized, and the
palace intrigue is crossword-puzzle neat. Ferris successfully achieves the frothy
practicality necessary to make such takeoffs work. Her characters are archetypal
yet surprising, her plot underpins its decorative fairy-tale trappings with pie-in-
the-face humor, and her obvious spins on traditional action take last-minute hair-
pin turns into something else altogether. Just when the conclusion threatens to
disintegrate into treacle, she pops an unexpected ingredient into the mix. Give this
to fans of Gerald Morris' Arthurian takeoffs or even Pratchett lovers, along with
Ferris' concluding advice: "Carpe diem ever after." JMD
FRADIN, DENNIS BRINDELL 
The Signers: The Fifty-Six Stories behind the Declara-
tion ofIndependence; illus. by Michael McCurdy. 
Walker, 2002 
164p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8850-5 
$23.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8849-1 
$22.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-9
There should be plenty of nail-biting drama in a story of fifty-six men who, with a
pen stroke, signed themselves onto the Crown's Most Wanted list. Unfortunately,
apart from the standard quotes about hanging together or hanging separately, or
dancing at the end of a rope, there's not much drama here at all. Individual sketches
are organized by colony, with a bit of background on each colony's pre-Revolu-
tionary history, a map (actually, the same map in each entry, with the focus colony
highlighted), and a boxed inset of ready-reference data on each signer's date of
birth, age at signing and at death, and bare-bones domestic information. Each
brief entry reads like an encyclopedia article, with a slim amount of biographical
material and an examination of the signer's relative ardor (yes, there were some
wafflers) for backing a document that would surely lead to war. Human-interest
trivia to enliven the accounts ranges from the morbidly fascinating (George Wythe
was murdered by his great-nephew) to the hopelessly arcane (Ann Gerry was the
"last surviving wife of a signer to die"). Woodcut cameos and larger vignettes are
often awkward and distorted, but they provide needed breaks for readers consum-
ing the work whole. Keep this on hand as an aid to report writers, but don't count
on it to ignite enthusiasm for these provocateurs of Revolution. EB
FEBRUARY 2003 
* 
235
GREENFIELD, ELOISE 
How They Got Over: African Americans and the Call of the
Sea; illus. by Jan Spivey Gilchrist. 
Amistad/HarperCollins, 2003 
104p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028992-9 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028991-0 
$16.99 
R Gr. 4-6
Seven brief but insightful portraits feature African Americans, from colonial times
to present, who not only succumbed to the lure of the sea but turned it into a
vehicle for personal and/or racial advancement. Revolutionary Patriot, abolition-
ist, and entrepreneur James Forten and Arctic explorer Matthew Henson may al-
ready be familiar, but the stories of fleet owner and Colonization Society proponent
Paul Cuffe, scuba diver Shirley Lee, and Rear Admiral Evelyn Fields of the Na-
tional Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration are equally compelling. "Snap-
shots" that follow the body of the text draw some surprising connections between
well-known African Americans and the sea (Langston Hughes and Alex Haley
both held early jobs as ship "mess boys" ), and a closing "Montage" lists important
contributions by African-American seafarers. Although Greenfield focuses exclu-
sively on African-American figures, the theme of seamanship and the range of
specialized pursuits it can offer-from exploration, to sport, to military defense-
should have broad appeal among middle-grades readers. Black-and-white por-
traits head each chapter; an index and extensive bibliography are included. EB
GRIFFIN, ADELE 
Overnight. Putnam, 2003 
[160p]
ISBN 0-399-23782-8 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Eleven-year-old Gray is aware that she's only just barely a member of the cool
group, the Lucky Seven, and since her mother became ill with cancer she's been
more vulnerable than ever to the cruelties of Martha, the group's Machiavelli. On
a birthday sleepover, a lonely and excluded Gray wanders off alone to the kitchen,
where she encounters a strange woman; thinking the woman is a volunteer helping
her mother, Gray leaves with her, too late realizing that the interloper is a dis-
turbed individual who has no intention of taking Gray home. Meanwhile, the
sleepover scene is in an uproar, with Leticia, the challenger for Martha's leader-
ship, using the occasion to employ Martha's missteps against her and shore up her
own power base in the clique. Political jockeying in the classroom ranks isn't a
new topic, and characterizations here are somewhat programmatic; Gray's adven-
ture is more effective as a catalyst than as a narrative strand, and the ending leaves
readers hanging on all fronts. Griffin (author ofAmandine, BCCB 10/01) vividly
depicts the intensity of the power struggle, however. No holds are barred in exam-
ining the stakes, the methodologies, and the pleasures of control ("Martha enjoyed
the game of digging to the secret fears inside of people"), and the changing view-
points of the third-person narration (which moves between four different girls-
Gray, Martha, Leticia, and Leticia's soon-to-be loyal lieutenant) enhance the tension
as well as the insight. This doesn't have the nuance of Koss' The Girls (BCCB
5/00), but there's enough edge to the infighting to keep readers absorbed. DS
HARNESS, CHERYL 
Rabble Rousers: 20 Women Who Made a Difference; written
and illus. by Cheryl Harness. 
Dutton, 2003 
64p
ISBN 0-525-47035-2 $17.99 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
A score of winners, losers, and current contenders who've duked it out in political
and social arenas are introduced here in two-page spreads, beginning with a perti-
236 
* THE BULLETIN
nent quotation and illustrated with a watercolor cameo and bit of spot art. Each
entry has space only for a general outline and a few words of breathy adulation
(Ida Wells-Barnett "devoted the last thirty years of her life to making a dream
come true: the dream of Americans working side by side in equality and justice").
A bit evasive about the sexual abstinence of Ann Lee and the Shakers ("They would
live in 'virgin purity,' doing nothing that might make babies"), Harness seems
even more constrained on the topic of Margaret Sanger's birth-control crusade,
leaving the youngest readers to ponder what this fuss is about and the older, better
informed readers to speculate on what kind of information or aid could have been
available in the early years of Sanger's clinic. Other problems in coverage also
appear. The statement that alcohol manufacture and transportation was criminal-
ized in 1930 is either in error or in need of explanation, since the 18th Amend-
ment passed in 1919. And why was Dr. Mary Walker's Congressional Medal of
Honor revoked, and what happened when she refused to give it back? Sketchy as
the overview is, however, Harness does catapult some less widely lauded names-
populist orator Mary E. Lease, migrant-worker advocate Dolores Huerta, and cam-
paign-funding reformer Doris Haddock-into the ranks of customary
collective-biography figures such as Jane Addams, Sojourner Truth, and Eleanor
Roosevelt. That alone should give fans of the mouthy and uppity some fresh faces
to meet and causes to ponder. Thematic timelines, an index, and a woefully inad-
equate list for further reading are included. EB
HARTINGER, BRENT 
Geography Club. 
HarperTempest, 2003 
[24 0p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-001222-6 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-001221-8 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-12
Russel doesn't dare tell anyone else he's gay, and he's been doing a good job of
passing for a tolerably macho sophomore (he and his friends are "occasional visi-
tors to the border region of high school respectability") until he arranges a face-to-
face meeting with a gay chatroom partner and finds out it's his jock classmate,
Kevin Land. Driven more by a desire to share that gossip than by the confessional
impulse, Russel outs Kevin (and himself) to his best friend, Min, who confounds
him by confessing in turn that she's bisexual ("Was the whole school secretly gay
or what?"). The group of teens (which expands to include Min's girlfriend and a
friend of Kevin's) plans to meet as a support group, but one with a cunning dis-
guise, a disguise so boring that no one will ever want to join the group: the Geog-
raphy Club. While the plot is sometimes bundled together rather than carefully
woven, this is a lively and compelling story. There's heart-palpitating romance in
Russel's reciprocated attraction to Kevin and their budding relationship, and there's
plenty of humor in the witty writing and unexpected events (a bubbly junior into
geography blunders into the group, almost destroying it with her interest in its
ostensible purpose, but she ends up getting assimilated as the "token straight").
Hartinger is particularly strong in his insightful but funny depictions of Russel's
dilemma as double dates leave him saddled with a more-than-willing girl from
whom he must politely extricate himself. There's also a more serious side: the
group is haunted by the vision of the school outcast, who is, inevitably, rumored to
be gay, and when Min suggests the group invite him to join, the resultant fear of
outcast contagion calls into question the group's solidarity and supportiveness.
That makes the book less self-sparing and therefore somewhat more challenging
FEBRUARY 2003 
* 
237
than many other stories of outsiders, straight or gay, and readers who like their
humor with some thoughtful underpinnings will want to join the club. DS
HIDIER, TANUJA DESAI 
Born Confused. Scholastic, 2003 
4 13p
ISBN 0-439-35762-4 
$16.95 
R Gr. 9-12
The epic story of the "Indian Summer" of a New Jersey teenager begins on the last
day of her junior year. Seventeen-year-old Dimple Lala, whose clever, self-depre-
cating narration pulls the reader through an almost day-by-day accounting of this
eventful period, is one of two Indian-American students in her high school; she
sees herself as a "too curvy, clumsy, camera-clacking wallflower with nothing but
questions," in contrast to her confident, free-spirited best friend, Gwyn. Like
Dimple, the novel starts out all-American and becomes increasingly comfortable
with its Indian side, which Dimple eventually reclaims from Gwyn, whose single-
minded colonization of Dimple's ethnicity (and the suitable Indian boy meant for
Dimple) rocks Dimple's world. Her horizons expand as she discovers a lively
community of young people inventing what it means to be Indian and American
here and now ("These people were not my relatives and the chicas wore cool shoes.
I couldn't believe I'd thought the place would be full of aunties") and rejects-and
then falls for (and wins)-the suitable Indian boy. Finally, she comes to a more
clear-sighted appreciation of her friends and relations, understanding that "every-
one had a story. Everyone was making a story, all the time. And this was only the
beginning of mine." In between, Dimple and the reader meet enough memorable
characters to stock a volume of Dickens and misunderstandings enough to propel
a Jane Austen plot. Not every reader will be prepared to go the distance, but those
who get caught up in Dimple's story will be reflecting on hot thematic issues while
basking in the warmth of a love story generous enough to include the reader in its
glow. FK
HIGH, LINDA OATMAN 
The Girl on the High-Diving Horse; illus. by Ted
Lewin. 
Philomel, 2003 
40p
ISBN 0-399-23649-X 
$16.99 
R 
5-8 yrs
Ivy Cordelia is the daughter of a photographer who's making his living on the
boardwalk in Atlantic City, where Depression-era America forgets its troubles by
enjoying a panoply of circus acts and exhibits. To Ivy, the most fascinating perfor-
mance is the high-diving horses, ridden by daring young women as they leap from
the tall wooden tower into the tank below, and throughout the summer she makes
friends with the horses and their riders, hoping someday to ride a thrilling dive
herself. High, who interviewed one of the real-life horse divers for the book, gives
the boardwalk and the daring act their glamorous due. Even audiences afraid of
heights will thrill to the sheer privilege of Ivy's final dive off the tower, but Ivy's
equine adoration is believable at the mundane level ("I kiss the big horse on his
velvet-soft nose") as well. Though some of the portraits are a bit stiff, aficionados
will note approvingly Lewin's photograph-informed fidelity to the real horses in
the troupe, and he effectively captures the stunning drama of their downward
glides (though he's tastefully streamlined the undersides of the male horses). In
order to convey the flavor of the era, his note explains, he has opted to color-tint
black-and-white art in order to give the feel of linen postcards; unfortunately, the
result is less period than muddy and sour, diminishing the magic of the carnival
atmosphere. Despite the mixed effectiveness of the visuals, this is an enticing
238 
* 
THE BULLETIN
introduction to a rare equestrian dream, and kids hooked by this will enjoy mov-
ing on to the film Wild Hearts Can't Be Broken or, later on and better yet, Sonora
Carver's book A Girl and Five Brave Horses. DS
HOFFMAN, MARY 
Stravaganza: City ofMasks. 
Bloomsbury, 2002 
345p
ISBN 1-58234-791-3 
$17.95 
R 
Gr. 6-9
In contemporary London, sixteen-year-old Lucien is dying of cancer. His father's
gift of a found notebook turns the ailing Lucien into a Stravagante, a navigator
between worlds; the notebook acts as a talisman that transports the teenager to
Bellezza, an almost-twin city to Venice in a parallel world. In Bellezza, Lucien
becomes Luciano, and he is taken under the wing of Signor Rodolfo, leader of the
Stravaganti and a prominent natural philosopher (combination scientist/magician).
Lucien/Luciano's cancer is left behind in London, and he becomes a willing and
integral part of the intrigue surrounding the mysterious masked Duchessa, the
ruler of the city-state of Bellezza, which is under siege by the powerful Chimici
family. Hoffman (author of Amazing Grace, BCCB 9/92) has created a viable
alternative world with a Venice that is not quite Venice but that still retains all the
romance associated with exquisite masquerades and court politics. Nearly all the
characters' motivations are deftly delineated, from the longings of a wishful Lucien/
Luciano to the ambitions of a petty assassin; from the barracuda-like machinations
of the Duchessa to the comparable (but not nearly so successful) machinations of
her arch-rival, Rinaldo di Chimici. Though the climax is somewhat forced and a
few key characters are underdefined, Lucien/Luciano's dilemma is wholly con-
vincing (the author bolsters the premise of her novel with appended notes on her
fictional creations), and the atmosphere of the decadent, elegant city that worships
(among more mundane divinities) the sea is deftly evoked. Don't just give this to
fantasy fans; give it to fans of Tracy Barrett's Anna of Byzantium (BCCB 7/99),
and watch the eyes of would-be Machiavellis shine. JMD
HOOKS, BELL 
Homemade Love; illus. by Shane W. Evans. Jump at the Sun/Hy-
perion, 2002 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-7868-0643-5 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 3-6 yrs
In this picture-book love story, a little girl describes the "homemade love" that is
evident in her parents' pet names for her: "My mama/ calls me/ girlpie.// Her/
sweet/ sweet.// Daddy's/ honey bun/ chocolate/ dew drop." Since no one can be
perfect all the time ("'Cause there is no/ all/ the/ time/ right"), she also describes
those times when she does something wrong and falls out of favor, quickly assert-
ing, "But all the time/ any hurt can be healed./ All wrongs forgiven./ And all the/
world made// Peace again." Each spread shows a bright-eyed little girl moving
through her day, affectionately hugging her mother and father, turning cartwheels
in the flower garden, cuddling in bed with a row of stuffed animals. When the day
is over and bedtime comes, she goes to bed without any fears, with "memories/ of
arms/ that/ hold me// holding me still.// No need/ to fear the/ dark place./ 'Cause/
everywhere/ is// Home." hooks' affectionate ode to girlpies everywhere combines
a soft, reassuring cadence with snuggly language to make this an effortless readal-
oud. Evans' heavily brush-stroked paintings offer striking graphics softened by
blue-black hairdos, fringes of eyelash, and swirls of patterns, braids, and smiles.
The little girl's dress pattern is thematically linked to the action and changes from
FEBRUARY 2003 
* 239
page to page, from hearts to stars to airplanes, from frowny faces on one page to
smiley faces on another. Fuchsia text rolls across painted and unpainted back-
grounds, the compositions balanced between solid geometric shapes and deliber-
ately empty space, the palette balanced between warm and cool colors. This is a
cheery, comforting book about an affectionate child, her loving parents, and the
safety net they provide. JMD
HOPKINSON, DEBORAH 
Girl Wonder: A Baseball Story in Nine Innings; illus. by
Terry Widener. 
Schwartz/Atheneum, 2003 
[34p]
ISBN 0-689-83300-8 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 5-8 yrs
"Go home, missy," says the coach of the semipro Independents. "You're a girl-
and this is baseball." No way, though, is Alta Weiss going to be brushed off the
field that easily. This is the girl who, at the age of two, whacked a cat with a
corncob from clear across the barnyard, who could pitch to a hay bale for hours by
age six, and who, at seventeen, had "struck out every boy in town." Alta convinces
the Independents' manager that people will come see her just for the novelty of it
and, smelling money, he strikes the deal. And so, by 1907, Alta is the Girl Won-
der, "The girl who can throw. The girl who can play baseball." Hopkinson relates
this true story through a folksy, fictionalized narrative delivered by Alta herself.
Each segment, or inning, of her tale is introduced by a numbered baseball over a
pair of crossed bats, an unnecessary affectation given the brevity of each chapter,
but the pauses provide natural "breathers" for novice readers who'd like to take a
swing at the text by themselves. Viewers who have delighted in Widener's portray-
als of sports greats Lou Gehrig and Gertrude Ederle (Lou Gehrig: The Luckiest
Man, BCCB 4/97; America's Champion Swimmer, 4/00) will recognize his signa-
ture artwork: rounded, sculptural figures with powerful, supple limbs and whim-
sically exaggerated expressions. Hopkinson pitches to a slightly younger audience
than Jean L. S. Patrick in The Girl Who Struck Out Babe Ruth (BCCB 6/00), and
this title should be a great warm-up. A source note is included, and a photograph
of Weiss graces the jacket back. EB
JANISCH, HEINZ, ad. 
The Fire: An Ethiopian Folk Tale; tr. by Shelley Tanaka;
illus. by Fabricio VandenBroeck. 
Groundwood, 2002 
[24p]
ISBN 0-88899-450-8 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 6-9 yrs
A slave longing to be free goes to his master, saying, "I have been your slave for
such a long time. You have often promised me freedom. Tell me, what can I do to
be free at last?" Having no intention of freeing the slave, the master tells him to
spend the night on a snowy mountain: "If you can survive all night without clothes
or shelter, as naked as the rocks around you, then I will free you." Desperate for
freedom, the slave agrees; that night as he stands in freezing desolation, his friend
climbs a distant peak and there builds a fire. Throughout the night, the friend
tends the fire, and the slave watches from far away: "All night long he watched the
fire and felt its warmth, and the cold did not harm him." In the morning the
master unwillingly frees the slave: "'Go,' he said. The man who had survived the
long cold night was no longer a slave. He was now a free man. And so he went."
Austrian author Janisch has taken this well-known folktale and reduced it to its
simplest elements, and the result is tightly constructed and masterfully paced. The
240 
* THE BULLETIN
emotional resonance of the story is given added weight by the powerful acrylic
paintings on textured paper, which offer images of depth and authority. The
elongated figure of the protagonist, from the arch of his spine to the curl of his
fingers, evinces strength despite its attenuation, and the deft contrasts of light and
dark are arresting, especially in the final illustration of the freed protagonist walk-
ing toward an aurora of rising sun. This collaborative effort will make a dramatic
readaloud, and it can also be used with independent readers as a thoughtful discus-
sion-starter, especially paired with other versions such as Harold Courlander's in
his collection The Fire on the Mountain or Jane Kurtz's picture book Fire on the
Mountain (10/94). JMD
JOHNSON, LINDSAY LEE 
Soul Moon Soup. 
Front Street, 2002 
134p
ISBN 1-886910-87-1 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
This series of free-verse poems describes the life of Phoebe Rose, who has struggled
alongside her mother on the street and in shelters since the departure of her affec-
tionate but unreliable father. When Phoebe is eleven, her mother finally sends her
off to live with Gram at Full Moon Lake, where Phoebe's own mother was raised.
There the girl begins to grow roots, make friends, and learn a little about her own
family history; she still yearns for her mother, however, and expects her to return
for Phoebe's twelfth birthday. Phoebe's story is a poignant one, especially when
she's traveling with her mother, desperate for maternal affection, and worn down
by the life they lead. Johnson is also wise in the ways of family sagas and their
unfolding, so that Phoebe keeps thinking she knows the full story before she really
does, and she's never sure who to blame or whose side she's on. The story sacrifices
credibility for wishfulness, however, and the metaphors and symbolism become
too frequent and far too sentimental; the final resolution (Phoebe's growth allows
her to return to the city with her mother) is artistically convenient rather than
emotionally believable. Katherine Paterson's The Same Stuffas Stars (BCCB 10/02)
is a more absorbing and authentic treatment of a similar dilemma, but readers will
be glad to see this put-upon heroine finding her own strength. DS
Koss, AMY GOLDMAN 
The Cheat. Dial, 2003 
[14 4 p]
ISBN 0-8037-2794-1 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
When nerdy Jake attempts to impress glamorous and popular Sarah by giving her
the answers to a geography exam, he doesn't realize that he's setting in motion a
chain of events that's going to transform the entire eighth grade. Sarah gives the
answers to her friends Rob, Dan, and Katie (who can't bring herself to use them);
Sarah and the boys get caught, and though the boys immediately point the finger
at Sarah, she refuses to reveal her own source. The book isn't as crisp as Koss' The
Ashwater Experiment (BCCB 6/99); it's not clear what the moral upshot is, espe-
cially after Katie organizes a boycott to ensure Sarah's release from her dilemma
(which convinces Jake to come forward anyway). It raises some provocative ques-
tions, however, and it does so in an involving manner, with the multivocal narra-
tive (Katie, the four culprits, and Dan's quondam girlfriend, Ruby, all contribute)
giving the situation some interesting facets: Dan shifts the blame and shrugs off
the event, Rob is petrified of his abusive father's reaction, Sarah is trying to search
beyond her mother's projection and her father's detached amusement for her own
decision. The style is also effective, especially Sarah's willfully facile wordplay and
FEBRUARY 2003 
* 241
sometimes desperate flippancy ("It's amazing, really, how quickly I got used to
being the girl who gets called down by the principal"). This would certainly stimu-
late some lively discussion, and readers will enjoy the chance to hone their own
ethics. DS
LASKY, KATHRYN 
A Voice of Her Own: The Story ofPhillis Wheatley, Slave Poet;
illus. by Paul Lee. 
Candlewick, 2003 
[40p]
ISBN 0-7636-0252-3 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Young readers may already have encountered the name of Phillis Wheatley, prob-
ably the first African-American poet, and here they can learn a bit more about her
historic life and writing. Stolen from Africa as a slave and sold in Boston at about
seven years old, in 1761, Phillis was bought by Bostonians John and Susannah
Wheatley. Intrigued by the girl's quick mind, Mrs. Wheatley had her educated
(well beyond the standard of many women, enslaved or no, as Lasky aptly points
out), whereupon talented Phillis blossomed and began writing poetry. Publishing
her first poem when she was only fourteen, she continued to write, often in re-
sponse to the unfolding events of the Revolution (and its ironic implications for
the enslaved). The absence of source notes and the novelistic tone lend a fiction-
alized air to the proceedings, and some authorial comment might have been useful
in complicated situations (young readers may question how Susannah Wheatley
could consider Phillis to be her own daughter while owning her as property); the
narrative also raises interest in some matters without satisfying it (how did Wheatley's
first poem get published? What was her status in the Wheatley household after she
was given her freedom?). This is still a thoughtful overview of Wheatley's life and
significance, however, and Lasky is particularly good at drawing out the impor-
tance of the events of the Revolution, both thematically and actually (a significant
print run of the poet's book, published in Britain because American publishers
refused it, arrived only weeks before the blockade of Boston Harbor made such
importation impossible). Lee's earthtoned acrylics are somewhat flat, but they
portray their subject as dignified and composed, a sober figure even amid lively
company; cream-washed paper and subdued colors add to the period flavor, and
the drabness of Boston contrasts with the intense and fluid life of the African
scenes. This could add depth to shelves of literary biographies or give a personal
slant to exploration of the Revolution. DS
LAWLOR, LAURIE 
Magnificent Voyage: An American Adventurer on Captain James
Cook's FinalExpedition. Holiday House, 2002 
236p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8234-1575-9 
$22.95 
R Gr. 5-10
When Captain James Cook embarked in 1776 on his third and final voyage, he
carried secret orders to search for the elusive Northwest Passage. He was also truly,
if less obviously, encumbered with "cargo" from his previous voyages: a probable
case of roundworms that left him suffering from "fatigue, depression, loss of con-
centration and memory, and personality changes," and a reputation among the
Sandwich Islanders as a godlike being, "possibly the reincarnation of... Orono
Makua." On board the Resolution was American-born Royal Marine John Ledyard,
more a casual adventurer than committed military man, from whose perspective
(Ledyard scooped the official ship's history by publishing illegally abroad) Lawlor
largely devises her account of the ill-fated expedition and Cook's slaughter on
242 
* THE BULLETIN
Kealakekua. Lawlor keeps an objective eye on Ledyard, readily acknowledging the
biases in his view of the journey and frequently supplementing his observations
with those of Cook and other crew. The result is a gripping, deftly blended biog-
raphy of two intersecting lives and the impact the Resolution's mission had on the
indigenous peoples they encountered. There's as much sympathy here for the
ailing captain as censure of the havoc his expeditions wrought in terms of loss of
crew and venereal disease spread among the, ahem, hospitable islanders, and read-
ers who view the proceedings through Ledyard's eyes can reconstruct the paternal-
istic attitudes the Europeans (and even islander Omai, returning after a sophisticating
sojourn in Europe) toward the "savages." Maps and period illustration, many by
crew members, illuminate the text; substantial end materials include index, bibli-
ography, ships' companies, glossary, ship cross-section, timeline, and source notes.
EB
LEE, SPIKE 
Please, Baby, Please; written by Spike and Tonya Lewis Lee; illus. by
Kadir Nelson. 
Simon, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-689-83233-8 
$16.95 
R 2-4yrs
A small clockface ticks off the hours in this parental plea to an irrepressible toddler
to, well, stop acting like a toddler. The opening spread sets the tone: an exhausted
mother is flat on the floor, her baby girl bouncing on her tummy, the television on
but unwatched, a half-empty baby bottle on the floor. A fat plastic ring is held in
the gleeful toddler's hand, and another is hooked on the collapsed mother's big
toe. The clock says 3 A.M., and the text reads "Go back to bed,/ baby, please, baby,
please." The hours pass from spread to spread but the tone is the same, as mother
pleads while her toddler dumps cereal on her head, scribbles on the walls, eats sand
in the park, throws a temper tantrum, splashes in the tub, and generally indulges
in developmentally appropriate (or at least predictable) behavior. The chant-like
text, unified by variations on the "please, baby, please" refrain, is effective and
deceptively simple; the inexorable movement of the clock from early (very early)
morning to bedtime will move viewers from spread to spread, hour to hour. The
oil paintings depict a mischievously grinning, coyly flirty African-American little
girl with big, long-lashed brown eyes that flash constantly at the viewer. This is
not the same detailed drafting Nelson used in Nolen's BigJabe (BCCB 9/00), but
a larger, more graphically aggressive style. The toddler's proportions have a dis-
concerting way of changing from image to image, but the up-front perspective and
enamel-bright primary colors are attention-grabbing, even from far away. In the
end, the intensity of the palette (and the pleading) devolves into a softly lit, loving
bedtime moment. Parents will empathize with this toddler's tired folks; kids just
out of the toddler stage (or those with toddler sibs) will enjoy a slice of life and
humor at parental expense. JMD
LIPSYTE, ROBERT 
Warrior Angel. 
HarperCollins, 2003 
[192p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-000497-5 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-000496-7 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-10
At twenty years old, boxer Sonny Bear has hit the acme of his trade, and he is
positioned to continually defend his title of world heavyweight champ. He's fed
up and burned out, and, having snubbed most of the people who got him to the
top, he's now surrounded by money-grubbing managers, trainers, and hangers-on
FEBRUARY 2003 
* 243
(even a pseudo-shaman from his own Moscondaga people wants a piece of the
act). Help comes from an unlikely source-schizophrenic teenager Starkey, who
dubs himself "Warrior Angel" and responds to voices that urge him to drag Sonny's
career back from the brink. Lipsyte cannily teases the action along, taking his time
to reveal the nature of Starkey's mission, drawing the two together via separate
clandestine road trips and instilling in Sonny a combination of gratitude and dread
toward Starkey that keeps their relationship in constant tension. Starkey's psycho/
physical torment is nearly palpable as his supply of meds runs out and he's increas-
ingly vulnerable to his inner voices, fits of paranoia, and violent outbursts. Al-
though the conclusion, in which the young men turn out to be mutual saviors, is a
bit schmaltzy, Starkey teeters on the edge to the closing pages, and readers will be
rapt at ringside 'til the decision is called. EB
MARTIN, ANN M. 
A Corner ofthe Universe. Scholastic, 2002 
189p
ISBN 0-439-38880-5 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Eleven-year-old Hattie enjoys her secure life in her parents' boarding house with
boarders exotic (the beauteous Angel Valentine) and familiar (the elderly Miss
Hagerty), so it's a real shock to her circumscribed life when her parents inform her
about the existence of an uncle she's never known. Adam is in his early twenties,
afflicted with psychological and behavioral problems that have led Hattie's grand-
parents to place him in a special school, which is now closing. Despite (or perhaps
because of) his frenetic outbursts and lack of self-control, Hattie becomes friends
with her outcast uncle and widens her world still further by befriending a girl
working at the summer carnival in town. Hattie's voice is preternaturally adult at
times, and the proceedings are sometimes too obviously stage-managed (the open-
ing post-event flashback, which foreshadows the eventual tragedy, is particularly
superfluous), but this is nonetheless a tender and sympathetic story. Martin effec-
tively captures small-town life in 1960 and the dynamics of those operating within
it, especially Hattie's patrician grandparents, steeped in awareness of their societal
position and conflicted about their bewildering youngest son, and their daughter,
Hattie's mother, torn between submission to her parents and the desire to live her
own unconventional life. Hattie herself grows beyond her shy complacency, con-
vincingly finding in Adam a motivation for some preteen rebellion ("I want Adam
to have one wild, thrilling evening with no one around to tell him to use his party
manners") and learning to challenge some of the family ways she'd taken for granted.
This is a quiet and focused story of individual growth and family change in the
face of strain and loss. DS
MARTIN, RAFE 
The World before This One: A Novel Told in Legend; illus. by
Calvin Nicholls. 
Levine/Scholastic, 2002 
196p
ISBN 0-590-37976-3 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-9
Crow and his grandmother have lived in relative exile from the rest of their tribe
ever since the deaths of Crow's family from fever and mishap have made the two
survivors anathema to most of the People. After surviving a harsh winter, Crow is
finally old enough to hunt. His hunting leads him deep into the forest, where he
finds a "great, round, gray, moss-covered stone"; the stone startles Crow by speak-
ing to him in "a deep, calm, patient, old voice," telling Crow "Long-Ago Time"
stories, "tellings of things that happened long, long ago ... in the world before this
one." Crow becomes so enthralled by the stories that he returns the next day, and
244 
* THE BULLETIN
the next; he neglects his hunting, returning to his grandmother with ever-dwin-
dling numbers of birds. Eventually the members of the tribe come, hear the sto-
ries, and recognize their value. The Stone names Crow as the first storyteller, after
which he is given a place of honor in the tribe. The text is slow-moving, with the
repetitive nature of Crow's trips into the forest causing the pace to flag. That slow
pace and the absolute surety that all will be won over by the power of story under-
mine any suspense. The stories themselves, however (based on traditional stories
of the Seneca nation), are succinctly and cleanly retold. Paper sculptures cut and
combined in intricate layers and graceful lines emerge dramatically from constructed
frames in powerful, compressed compositions; though they sometimes lack en-
ergy, they add an air of solemnity. An author's note gives some historical back-
ground on the Seneca and the Iroquois Confederacy; written sources and a
description of the author's process are also included. JMD
MCCAUGHREAN, GERALDINE 
One Bright Penny; illus. by Paul Howard. 
Viking,
2002 
26p
ISBN 0-670-03588-2 
$15.99 
R 
5-9 yrs
Bill gets tired of hearing his father grouse that "children these days don't know the
value of money," and in a pique he says, "I bet I could fill the barn for one penny!"
Pa, of course, is quick to take him up on it, figuring to get out of giving Bill, his
brother, Bob, and their sister, Penny, any pocket money at all. The old farmer
challenges them: "If one of you can fill the barn for a penny, I'll give you the farm
and go live in the chicken coop, and that's a promise!" Bill and Bob fill the barn
with feathers and light respectively, but there is always some space left; Penny,
however, gets holds of a banjo, fills the barn with music, and thus wins the bet.
The retelling is somewhat self-consciously folksy, but it's got rustic vigor, and kids
will relish the young'un's outsmarting of the old'un. Howard's illustrations are
also a little kitchily countrified-lots of denim overalls, straw hats, and barn ani-
mals alongside the big-eyed, barefoot kids-and his pictured penny also unfortu-
nately bears all the characteristics of a dime, but the art has a downhome
comfortableness that emphasizes plain old imagination as much as trickery. Story
and illustrations rely heavily on the adult desire for that wholesome, good-old-
days feeling, but even the golden light of nostalgia can't keep a good story down,
and it's nice to have a version of this popular tale that's accessible to younger
listeners. No notes or sources are given. JMD
McCUTCHEN, H.L. LightLand. Orchard, 2002 
230p
ISBN 0-439-39565-8 $16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Lottie Cook and her best friend, Lewis Weaver, are eleven years old when Lottie's
father gives her the StoryBox, a place for Lottie to store the sweet details of her life.
The StoryBox is also the portal into LightLand, a magical place where the inhabit-
ants are under siege by the wicked NightKing, who gains his power by stealing
people's memories with the terrible Veil of Oblivion. Lottie and Lewis are the
destined saviors of LightLand, and through their bravery and willing efforts they
defeat the villain and restore peace. The premise-that individuals live in memory
and story-is an obvious one, and the theme evolves predictably; the mechanics of
the parallel world won't stand up to close scrutiny, and the adult characters suffer
overexplanation toward the end. The protagonists' characterizations carry the novel,
however, with Lottie a forceful personality (she stays mad at her father-and wears
FEBRUARY 2003 
* 
245
pajamas to class-for five years after he makes her go to school) and Lewis a quiet
but sharp individual who speaks only to Lottie (he finds that "nodding and shak-
ing your head can take you a long way in this life"). Descriptions are poetic, and
the pace steadily rises toward the revelatory confrontation between Lewis and the
NightKing, then rises again for the deciding climactic battle between Lottie and
that same villain. The lapses undercut the overall effect, but there is enough action
and emotion here to engage many fantasy readers. JMD
MCDONOUGH, YONA ZELDIS 
Peaceful Protest: The Life of Nelson Mandela; illus.
by Malcah Zeldis. 
Walker, 2002 
34p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8823-8 
$17.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8821-1 
$16.95 
R Gr. 4-6
McDonough smoothly covers the essential points in the anti-apartheid crusader's
life, from childhood as son of a Thembu chief, through early manhood as partner
in the nation's first black law firm and outspoken protester against discriminatory
racial practices, to his imprisonment, freedom, rise to South Africa's presidency,
and Nobel Peace Prize honor. Details of his early life emphasize his growing aware-
ness of discrimination as he moved beyond his rural roots, into the school system,
and on to "rough, confusing" life in Johannesburg. Although coverage of his do-
mestic life includes his father's plural marriages and Mandela's divorce from his
first wife, it curiously fails to mention his separation and divorce from his second
wife, Winnie, her political prominence and fall, or his third marriage. Zeldis'
signature artwork-highly stylized figures deployed in scenes with naive folk-art
perspective-is, perhaps, even better suited to Mandela's biography than to her
previous subjects such as Abraham Lincoln and Anne Frank, reflecting in its strong
palette the bold colors of the South African flag (although only the African Na-
tional Congress flag is represented within this title). A chronology, bibliography,
and pronunciation guide are included; a somewhat freeform endpaper map (which
misleadingly depicts the territory north of South Africa as ocean) helps readers
retrace his steps to national leadership. EB
McNAMARA, MARGARET 
Too Many Valentines; illus. by Mike Gordon. 
Aladdin,
2003 
32p 
(Ready-to-Read)
Library ed. ISBN 0-689-85538-9 
$11.89
Paper ed. ISBN 0-689-85537-0 
$3.99 
R 
Gr. 1-3
While the rest of Mrs. O'Connor's class prepares for Valentine's Day with glee,
Neil views the holiday with aesthetic horror: "Valentines are frilly! Valentines are
pink!" Come the day itself, Neil gets what he thought he wanted-no valen-
tines-and finds it disappointing indeed ("On the playground, all the children
looked at their valentines. Neil looked at the swings"). Fortunately, his wise
teacher ensures that Neil gets an unfrilly, unpink Valentine from the class so he
won't be left out, and everyone is happy in their own Valentine's way. The text in
this title, one of the first in this new series about the Robin Hill School, is stream-
lined but evocative, and it hits squarely at an issue that every youngster will recog-
nize: being left out. The anxiety is cushioned by the dilemma's being a consequence
of respect for Neil's own wishes, and Neil's ambivalence will be understandable to
youngsters as well. Cheerfully slapdash watercolors gain energy from squirrelly
lines and wiggly, high-voltage scrawls; the multicultural cast bounds through the
paper-littered classroom with barely controlled chaos in scenes that readers will
246 
* THE BULLETIN
recognize as authentic. Add this pithily satisfying entry to the growing genre of
entertaining Valentine-skeptic literature. DS
MocHIZUKI, KEN 
Beacon Hill Boys. 
Scholastic, 2002 
201p
ISBN 0-439-26749-8 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
It's 1972, and being Japanese American seems very un-hip to sixteen-year-old Dan
Inagaki: "It wasn't like us Asian guys made the cool music. We couldn't dance;
we didn't set the trends with threads. We couldn't say anything loud like 'I'm
black and I'm proud.'" Trying to please his parents by living up to the standard
for social assimilation and academic success set by his good-looking, athletic, pre-
med brother seems pretty hopeless, and at his school (one-third white, one-third
African American, one-third Asian), only the African Americans seem to have po-
litical clout. Searching for a stronger sense of identity, Dan takes an interest in his
family history, but he doesn't get much from his parents, who fear that he will use
their difficulties as an excuse to fail. He has slightly better luck at school, where-
in the minority-history class he agitated for-he learns for the first time about the
World War II internment of Japanese Americans; later, a sympathetic neighbor
tells him about his father's heroic (but still classified) war work. Mochizuki's first
novel has an obtrusive purposiveness absent from his picture books (Baseball Saved
Us, BCCB 5/93, and Passage to Freedom, BCCB 9/97), making this largely an
animated history lesson; the dialogue is sometimes unconvincing and Dan's narra-
tion is often unsubtle. It's nonetheless an unusual look at changing historical
viewpoints, and fans of '70s culture will enjoy the groovy atmosphere provided by
a background of period tunes (discography included), the whiffs of marijuana, and
the painfully accurate phraseology of the young math teacher who encourages Dan:
"What you're doing is really right on, and I want to rap with you." Subplots
involving Dan's love life (which is looking up) and the difficult home lives of his
friends add interest and breadth to this exploration of the cultural moment when
American "Orientals" became "Asian." FK
NAIDOO, 
BEVERLY 
Out of Bounds: 
Seven Stories of Conflict and
Hope. HarperCollins, 2003 
[192p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-050800-0 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-050799-3 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-8
From the chilling denouement of the first story (set in 1948), in which a white
child is unable to sustain her sympathy for a black child, to the tentatively hopeful
conclusion of the last one (set in 2000), in which physical and social boundaries
are breached, these historicized vignettes (one per decade) delineate some of the
"many different tests for the human spirit" South African children have passed
through. The practical and psychological consequences of apartheid are played
out from a variety of first and third-person perspectives, spanning racial classifica-
tions, gender, and age (from grade school to teenage): one white eleven-year-old
girl with politically active parents remembers, "When I was six, policemen snatched
Daddy away in the middle of the night"; a "colored" boy whose father has been
reclassified as "African" makes a tenth birthday wish as the family faces the possi-
bility that they will be forced apart. The writing is stark and clear; readers will, as
intended, find the minimally but effectively detailed situations and the ethical
dilemmas they pose more memorable than the characters. Naidoo, South African-
FEBRUARY 2003 
* 247
born author of The Other Side of Truth (BCCB 9/01), provides a brief historical
introduction and ends with a timeline providing supplementary historical context
for each story; Bishop Desmond Tutu adds an engaging foreword to this lucid and
involving history lesson. FK
PAULSEN, GARY 
How Angel Peterson Got His Name and Other Outrageous Tales of
Extreme Sports. 
Lamb, 2003 
[160p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90090-2 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-72949-9 
$12.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-9
Paulsen again mines his memory lode and extracts five hilarious tales from his
adolescence, revolving around ideas that seemed brilliant in conception but proved
seriously flawed in execution. At the time it certainly seemed reasonable that ski-
ing while tethered to the bumper of the town hot-rodder's muscle car could break
the world speed record, or that flying a World War II surplus target kite need not
require going personally airborne. Why shouldn't "one-speed fat-tired bikes with
a crowned-up, castrating brace bar" make the classic daredevil barrel jump? And
how could girls fail to be impressed with the machismo of a teenage boy who can
last sixty seconds in a pit with a wrestling sideshow bear? One strongly suspects
that the stories have gained considerable momentum, embellishment, and polish
in the retelling, but the swapping of strict veracity for topnotch yarn is a bargain of
a trade-off: "At the height of his arc the rope snapped tight at eighty miles an hour
and snaked him back under the snow, where for two heartbeats he looked for all
the world like a high-speed gopher." Every kid who's been the butt of parental
exasperation-"Where were you when they handed out the brains?"-will find
kindred spirits here. EB
ROOT, 
PHYLLIS 
Big Momma Makes the World; illus. by Helen
Oxenbury. 
Candlewick, 2003 
40p
ISBN 0-7636-1132-8 
$16.99 
R 
5-8 yrs
Root tells how Big Momma made the world in an original creation story with
distinct and obvious echoes of James Weldon Johnson's famous sermon, "The
Creation." Big Momma takes a look at the water that is everywhere, and she "saw
what needed to be done all right. So she rolled up her sleeves and went to it." The
creation of light and dark, the sky, the sun, moon and stars, the earth, etc., follows
day by day, and at the end of each of seven days Big Momma says, "That's good.
That's real good." Unlike Johnson's divine father figure, Big Momma is not alone;
she starts and ends with a baby on her hip, distracted from world-making by dia-
pering, burping, and cookie-making. Her speech is colloquial, and her needs are
simple and straightforward: she needs some grass to wriggle her toes in, so soon
there's "grass and trees and fruit all over the place, like somebody tipped over a
fruit stand." The text is derivative but still inviting, with a jolly profundity and
easygoing faith. Oxenbury's Big Momma is a queen of domestic creativity, a pony-
tailed peasant goddess with huge hands and feet; her monumental form is ma-
tronly, rounded, and powerful. At first goddess and baby float in a light-permeated
universe with unlimited horizons, the compositions spacious and absorbing. There's
a somewhat harsh gloss to the acrylics that makes these images less homey than the
artist's more familiar watercolors, and the addition of flora, fauna, and humankind
sometimes crowds the pages, but the compositions remain imaginative. There is a
248 
* THE BULLETIN
cheery autocracy to both the textual and visual representations of Big Momma
that will draw viewers into this fanciful offering. JMD
ROSENBERG, Liz 
17: A Novel in Prose Poems. 
Marcato/Cricket, 2002 
142p
ISBN 0-8126-4915-X 
$16.95 
Ad Gr. 7-10
Teenage poet Stephanie is coping with her own self-doubt, with her manic-
depressive mother, and with her burgeoning love affair with class golden boy, Denny
Pistil. Denny is coping with a few of his own problems, including confusion
about his sexual orientation and an alcoholic father. The overly passive Stephanie
spirals into a sexual relationship with Denny, into anorexic behavior, and into the
same sort of manic-depressive state that plagues her mother. The novel's
autobiographical tone is mitigated by the use of a third-person present-tense
narration, which serves to distance the author from the protagonist. Unfortunately,
that point of view also distances the reader from the action, most of which is
internal. Stephanie herself seems so detached from her own emotions that it's
difficult for the reader to connect with her, and her slow shift from girlfriend of
indecisive golden boy to possible new girlfriend of sensitive school jock isn't much
of a move. Still, the poetic style of the text does capture the depressive anxiety
intrinsic to the protagonist's character. Those readers struggling with their own
emotional changes may find Stephanie's descent into-and subsequent ascent
from-her own personal abyss compelling. JMD
RYLANT, CYNTHIA 
Puppy Mudge Takes a Bath; illus. by Isidre Mones. 
Simon,
2002 
26p 
(Ready-To-Read)
ISBN 0-689-83980-4 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. K-l
Simplify the text, magnify the images, and presto!... Rylant's popular Henry and
Mudge readers turn into pre-readers. The wordplay still manages to be funny,
repetitive, and sonorous: "This is Henry's puppy Mudge. Mudge loves mud.
Mud makes Mudge roll. And roll. And roll. Mudge is muddy. Mudge needs a
bath. There is the tub. Where is Mudge? Mudge is hiding. Mudge does not love
tubs." You get the picture, especially since this is a third of the text already (thirty-
eight out of 102 words). Meanwhile, Isidre Mones' illustrations "in the style of
Susie Stevenson" are just that: buoyant cartoons with the familiar black-ink-outlined
figures of an exuberant dog and boy tumbling across double-page spreads that are
inscribed with a line or two of prominent, easily decoded text. It would be nice to
see this economically packaged as four story/chapters to a book, but maybe
preschoolers will thrill to the idea of finishing an entire diminutive volume on
their own. Another option would be reading it aloud to a two- or three-year-old
moving from board books to the realm of brief but active story. Youngsters will
certainly sympathize with Henry and perhaps even more with Mudge, since young
canines and young humans often share an affinity for mud, along with an aversion
to baths. BH
SAN SoucI, DANIEL, ad. 
The Rabbit and the Dragon King: Based on a Korean Tale;
illus. by Eujin Kim Neilan. 
Boyds Mills, 2002 
[32p]
ISBN 1-56397-880-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-9 yrs
The Dragon King, who rules under the sea, is something of a hypochondriac;
when the court magician tells him that eating the heart of a rabbit will cure all his
FEBRUARY 2003 
* 249
ills, His Highness sends a turtle off to bring back a bunny. The turtle finds a bored
rabbit and lures her below with an offer to show her the wonders under the sea;
once she's underwater, the Dragon King offers her a string of pearls in exchange
for her heart, which she is to retrieve and give to the turtle. She gives the turtle a
persimmon instead, which he gives to the Dragon King, who eats it and has a
miraculous recovery. San Souci's retelling has a rolling momentum and an innate
humor that will catch readers and listeners from the very first page. Unfortu-
nately, there's some tonal uncertainty that confuses the issue and undermines the
ending; the book deemphasizes the trickster nature of the rabbit and the folly of
the Dragon King and thereby robs the story of its folkloric tension. Though the
page layouts are often staid and the palette of the illustrations garish, the drafting
is effective, and Neilan takes full advantage of the large compositions to swirl her
Dragon King dramatically across the pages. The pictures are large enough to be
viewed from a distance, which makes this useful for reading aloud in primary-
grade classrooms. San Souci includes a cultural note, but no specific sources are
given. JMD
SCHWARTZ, HOWARD, ad. 
Invisible Kingdoms: Jewish Tales ofAngels, Spirits, and
Demons; illus. by Stephen Fieser. 
HarperCollins, 2002 
68p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027856-0 
$18.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027855-2 
$16.99 
R 
Gr. 4-8
Schwartz, known for his adaptations of Jewish folktales and lore (Elijah's Violin
and Other Jewish Fairy Tales, BCCB 10/83, etc.), here offers nine tales of angels,
spirits and demons. The introduction gives a succinct definition of the unearthly
beings represented, as well as an accessible explanation of their role in Jewish cul-
tural and religious traditions. The book is divided into three sections-"The King-
dom ofAngels," "The Kingdom of Spirits," and "The Kingdom of Demons"-and
each section contains three traditional stories from a variety of historical periods
and geographic areas. Schwartz opens with a tale showing the importance of sto-
rytelling, even to the angelic host, followed by the tale of a clever rabbi who tames
the angel of death. Ghost tales, quest tales, and stories of lucky escapes from the
coils of evil follow, each with a full-page color illustration by Fieser. The portrait-
like images are deep hued with a fluidity of shape that adds grace to the stately
compositions. Overall, the stories maintain both a sense of humor and a strong
forward momentum, making them useful for reading aloud and storytelling. Each
story closes with a mention of its place and/or period of origin; appended notes
give specific written sources for each tale. JMD
SLEATOR, WILLIAM 
Parasite Pig. Dutton, 2002 
212p
ISBN 0-525-46918-4 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
It's been less than a year since Barney saved the planet by outwitting aliens at a
game of Interstellar Pig (BCCB 7/84), and now he's drawn into the contest once
again-abducted, actually, to planet J'koot along with coworker and possible love
interest Katie, who has been taken as leverage to force Barney into cooperating
with players bent on capturing The Piggy. Barney's challenge in this round is self-
preservation, and although he now understands the game, his wits are dimmed by
one Madame Gondii, a parasite who's nesting in a cyst within his brain and pump-
ing him full of hormones to make him compliant. Madame cares nothing for the
game, but she needs Barney to be cooked and devoured by the J'koot crabs so that
250 
* THE BULLETIN
she can lay her eggs within a proper crustacean host. While Sleator keeps readers
up to speed on the aliens' strategies and Barney's perils, Barney himself is generally
a step or two behind, and his continual now-I-get-what's-happening explanations
become tiresome indeed. Moreover, fans of the first title are already onto the
game, and with Barney's fate never seriously in question, there's little real tension.
Madame Gondii, on her single-minded mission to reproduce, and the J'koot crabs,
polite to a fault as they fatten their captives for the kill, are deftly drawn, though,
and if this outing lacks the novelty of the first, readers may still find the game is
worth the candle. EB
SNYDER, MIDORI 
Hannah's Garden. Viking, 2002 
247p
ISBN 0-670-03577-7 $16.99 
R 
Gr. 7-10
When Cassie's grandfather, fantastical-landscape painter Daniel Brittman, goes
into the hospital, seventeen-year-old Cassie gives up her prom and her first violin
recital to accompany her mother, Anne (and Anne's new boyfriend, Gunnar), on
the trip home to care for him. Cassie and her mother are shocked by the physical
condition of the reclusive artist and the shambles that has been made of his farm-
house and his wife's garden. Suddenly, Anne is acting more secretive than usual
and making noises about selling the farm, Gunnar is being protective and practi-
cal, and Cassie is seeing things that can't be real but are there anyway. It doesn't
take long for the canny teenager to discover the truth: the farm is the hotly con-
tested property in a battle between clans of fairy folk, the Green Clan, who hold
the land through negotiated bond and the Red Clan, who hold the land through
sacrificial blood. From a musical session in an Irish pub to a wild jamboree under
the moon, Snyder creates an utterly believable space between the human and fairy
worlds for her characters to inhabit. Vivid language solidly sculpts characters both
human and fey, and sensual descriptions of natural phenomena provide atmo-
spheric settings for the players. Musical motifs run throughout the novel, linking
the chapters together; the music that saves Cassie is the music that brought the
fairy folk to her attention in the first place and that finally, decisively, links her to
the land. This is a concrete evocation of a hybrid world composed of nature and
magic; Snyder's accomplishment lies in her ability to make readers believe they live
in that same world. JMD
SNYDER, ZILPHA KEATLEY 
The Ghosts ofRathburn Park. Delacorte, 2002 
182p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90064-3 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-32767-6 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Eleven-year-old Matt is adjusting to life in Timber City, a town rebuilt in its present
location after burning down in a terrible fire some generations ago. His explora-
tions (triggered by a community picnic and local gossip about eerie doings) bring
him to the ruins of an old church, where he meets Amelia Rathburn, an oddly
secretive girl dressed in old-fashioned clothes. Amelia has an uncanny knowledge
of the ins and outs of the local terrain, from booby traps in the church ruins to
secret ways into the Palace, the old Rathburn Mansion that is all that remains of
the pre-fire community. Matt visits Amelia when he can, copes with being the
youngest kid in his family, and tries to stay out of trouble. His small adventures
are sometimes aided by a mysterious white dog, a dog that may well be a ghost.
Snyder can't seem to settle on a primary plot-is the novel about Amelia and Matt
and their explorations in the wood? Or about the family tensions and problems
FEBRUARY 2003 
* 251
resulting from Matt's rebellious teenage brother and dramatic older sister? Or is it
a gentle ghost story about a devoted dog? Overall, the novel's pace suffers from the
lack of focus, but eerie settings and promising characters will keep pages turning,
and the occasional bit of melodrama spices up the action. The conclusion, in which
Matt gets a friend and a dog (that just might be a descendant of the ghost dog),
will satisfy readers looking for happy endings. JMD
SPINNER, STEPHANIE 
Quiver. Knopf, 2002 
177p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-91489-7 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-81489-2 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 7-10
The story of Atalanta has been interpreted in picture-book format (Climo's
Atalanta's Race, BCCB 6/95) and in numerous collections of myths retold for
youth; Spinner (author of Be First in the Universe, BCCB 2/00, etc.) now offers a
novel-length interpretation of the legendary runner's story. After being exposed
on a hillside by her father as an infant, Atalanta is saved by a she-bear sent by the
goddess Artemis, to whom the girl eventually dedicates her life, using her prowess
as a huntress and her own physical strength to defend her chastity. Atalanta's
estranged father, King lasus, now needs Atalanta to continue his royal line, and to
that end he brings her back to the palace with the express purpose of marrying her
off to get a grandchild. In an effort to save herself for the goddess, Atalanta swears
to marry only the man who beats her in a footrace; defeated challengers will pay
with their lives. Spinner has the protagonist tell her own story, giving first-person
insight into the character's feelings and motivations. Occasionally the divine asides
are a bit too self-conscious, but the gods' busybody interventions are mythologi-
cally authentic, and all in all the retelling is cogent and quick. The action is fast
and furious, from the opening hunt of the Calydonian boar to the concluding
transformation of Atalanta and her destined groom. Readers who enjoy an ex-
panded mythological tapestry will appreciate Spinner's rich embroidery. An author's
note about the historical basis for the novel and a brief background section about
the gods are included. JMD
SPRINGER, NANCY 
Lionclaw: A Tale ofRowan Hood. Philomel, 2002 
122p
ISBN 0-399-23716-X 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
Subtitle notwithstanding, this sequel to Rowan Hood: Outlaw Girl of Sherwood
Forest (BCCB 9/01) is more the tale of Lionel, gifted minstrel, disowned son of a
powerful lord, and member of the band led by Rowan Hood (Robin's daughter).
Sherwood Forest is overrun with bounty hunters when Lionel's father puts a price
on his wayward son's head, and even Robin and his Merry Men go into hiding.
Rowan won't leave the wood, however, and the smitten Lionel, in an effort to
draw danger away from her, sneaks off into the night. Following him, Rowan is
caught in a man-trap (a bear trap with nasty iron teeth), and self-proclaimed cow-
ard Lionel must come out of hiding to save his badly injured friend. Springer
relies too much on coincidence and convenience to fuel her plot, and the conclu-
sion is rather precious (Lionel plays the harp to draw the fairy folk so he can re-
quest that they heal Rowan; she gets well, not because of the fairies' intercession,
but because her own will to live returns when she hears Lionel's music). Charac-
terizations are slight and motivations slighter (lack of appropriately nurturing fa-
ther figures takes much of the blame for the adolescent protagonists' angst), and
the reduction of the hearty Rowan to a damsel in distress is irritating. Still, there's
252 
* THE BULLETIN
a sheer action-packed ease to this adventure that will sweep some readers away.
Give this to fans of the first book and to readers who need a hi-lo boost into
fantasy. JMD
STANLEY, SANNA 
Monkey for Sale; written and illus. by Sanna Stanley. 
Foster/
Farrar, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-374-35017-5 
$17.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
Luzolo and her friend Kiese are enjoying the bargaining and treasures of market
day when suddenly, over the market hubbub, they hear, "Monkey for sale!" Sure
enough, Mama Lusufu (a woman who "would sell anything she could get her
hands on, even a jungle animal") has a monkey; the two girls plead for the animal,
but Mama Lusufu won't give him up unless she gets a new water pot. Kiese's
mother makes water pots, and she wants an embroidery from Luzolo's mother;
Luzolo's mother wants some new tin cups from the cup salesman, who wants a
woven basket from the weaver, who wants some beans and rice. The two girls
engage in a chain of trades, bartering with all the relevant parties until finally they
manage to acquire a water pot and trade it for the monkey; they then release the
animal back into the jungle with the warning, "Next time, stay away from Mama
Lusufu!" The cumulative effect of the two girls' series of barters gives the story an
involving, escalating pace. The unusual techniques of etching and hand-painted
Chine coll (a collage technique used in intaglio printing) result in black line illus-
trations on textured paper, richly colored, detailed, and surprisingly graceful; dense
colored paper adds depth to the images, while splashes of blues and purples enliven
what could have been a dull palette. The folkloric structure of this tale makes it
especially suited for reading aloud, while the clearly evoked images of everyday
village life (based on the author's childhood in the Democratic Republic of Congo)
make it particularly useful for culturally inclusive collections and curricula. JMD
STRASSER, TODD 
CON-fidence. Holiday House, 2002 
154 p
ISBN 0-8234-1394-2 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
At lunch every day, Lauren sits with her sarcastic friend, Tara, but yearns to join
the table of the cool, popular girls-the "Don't-You-Wish-You-Were-Me" girls,
headed by her old friend, Krista Rice. New girl Celeste Van Warner somehow
manages to bridge that gap, becoming a fixture at the popular table but also a
friend of Lauren's; through her friendship with Celeste, Lauren finds her stock and
her confidence rising, especially when the two girls become elected as co-treasurers
for the class. Also rising, however, is her uneasiness when Celeste's stories begin
not to add up and when some serious issues arise with the class bank account. This
is a familiar plot (Peck's Princess Ashley is probably one of the better-known non-
murderous incarnations), and its scripting is fairly obvious-readers who aren't
alerted by Celeste's perpetual failure to find her wallet whenever something needs
to be paid for will see the oncoming wreck when she playfully practices writing
Lauren's signature. The tale retains some power despite its predictability, how-
ever, and Strasser's exploration of the terminally uncertain Lauren is thoughtful.
There's also sympathy in 
realistic treatment of Lauren's own social unkindnesses
(her missteps in 
rrelationship with Tara are particularly credible); the banish-
ment of parents to passing references and italicized chapter-openers is an effective
technique in conveying the peer-centeredness of kids. This isn't the most subtle
book about the intricacies of school social structures, but it's an easily digestible
read that gains resonance from its recognition of youthful insecurity. DS
FEBRUARY 2003 
* 
253
SUEN, ANASTASIA 
Raise the Roof.; illus. by Elwood H. Smith. 
Viking, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-670-89282-3 
$15.99 
R 2-5 yrs
With some aid from hired contractors and their helpful pooch, a husband and wife
build their own cozy home. Rhymed text explains the proceedings: "Make a
plan" (e.g. blueprints on a drawing board) and "Count the feet" (hire surveyors)
and "Clear the land on this street" (call in the bulldozer). Then the serious grunt
work begins: piping, foundation laying, framing, roofing, pipe threading, win-
dow installation, plastering and plumbing and painting. Throughout the venture,
the handy hound pitches right in to drive the concrete truck, balance the plaster on
his head, paint the wall the wrong color, and clean up with a shower under the
sprinkler. Everyone's pleased with the final product-so pleased, in fact, that the
dog puts a "For Rent" sign on his dog house and bunks down at the foot of his
contented owners' bed. Viewers who haven't had the pleasure of seeing their own
domicile under construction will get a peek at the mysteries behind the walls,
cobbled together by the wiry-limbed, sausage-nosed proprietors rendered in retro-
styled cartoons. If home repair or remodeling is in the family's future, this should
rally everyone's energy and optimism. EB
THAYER, ERNEST L. 
Casey at the Bat: A Ballad of the Republic Sung in the Year
1888; illus. by C. F. Payne. 
Simon, 2003 
[34p]
ISBN 0-689-85494-3 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-8
For readers with neither the time nor inclination for the total-immersion experi-
ence of Christopher Bing's acclaimed tribute to the Mudville Nine (BCCB 1/01),
Payne steps up to the plate with a straightforward winner of a rendition. Here the
mixed-media paintings capture the exaggerated verve of a tall tale, set within the
friendly confines of a nineteenth-century ballpark in Anywhere, America. Endpa-
per closeups of green-painted stadium seats invite viewers to settle in, and the
opening scenes, reminiscent of a punchy Norman Rockwell, set the mood of the
crowd and players-somber but not yet hopeless. Our first glimpse of Casey, jaw
locked and massive shoulders barely squeezed into the far corner of the dugout, is
an apt introduction to the arrogant contender. The full view comes as a comic
surprise; Casey balances his musclebound torso on narrow hips and spindly little
legs, and it's pictorially clear that his reputation has given him a swollen head.
Swagger turns to fury at the final, fatal swing, and a full-page headshot has the
squint-eyed Casey clenching his teeth and blowing steam out his ears: "Casey
wouldn't let that ball go by again." Of course, he does, and the dcnouement is a
rainy, potholed Mudville street with an abandoned baseball soaking forlornly in a
puddle. The closing note discloses the early disputes over authorship and Thayer's
magnanimous gift of royalty-free rights to the comedian who launched Casey to
fame. Play ball! EB
VECIANA-SUAREZ, ANA 
Flight to Freedom. Orchard, 2002 
213p 
(First Per-
son Fiction)
ISBN 0-439-38199-1 
$16.95 
R Gr. 6-10
One of the first novels in the multicultural First Person Fiction series about com-
ing to America, this thoughtfully detailed fictional diary follows the 1967 journey
of a thirteen-year-old girl, Yara Garcia, from Havana, Cuba to Miami, USA, where
254 
* THE BULLETIN
her family plans to stay only until Castro is deposed. By quoting her elders and
capturing her own responses to them and to her situation, Yara believably docu-
ments the family's gradual psychological evolution from middle-class respectabil-
ity to counterrevolutionary "worms" (gusana) in Cuba, and from exiled expatriates
to more settled immigrants in America. Carefully selected incidents illuminate life
under communist rule (rationing, retributive political correctness, and forced la-
bor in agricultural "camps") and in their new world, where each wages his or her
own "war of independence": Mami gets a job and learns to drive, middle-aged
Papi weekends with a makeshift militia with revolutionary aims, sixteen-year-old
Ileana sneaks off to see a boy, and Yara stretches cultural boundaries by pushing to
go on a trip with a friend. As she adjusts to her new home, Yara also begins to face
the paradox of bilingualism: "If I know both languages equally, in what language
will I think? How will I dream? How will I pray? Already I know the names for
certain things in English but not in Spanish. I've learned them in school and have
to ask Papi or Mami to translate the word into Spanish." The novel ends on the
fourth of July, but without fireworks: Papi is still saying, "Next year we'll be in
Cuba," but the trajectory of the book makes that doubtful even to readers unfamil-
iar with the historical reality. An authorial afterword ("My Personal Exodus")
adds further historical context and some personal history to this accessible but
richly textured fictional memoir. FK
WABER, BERNARD 
Courage; written and illus. by Bernard Waber. 
Lorraine/
Houghton, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-618-23855-7 
$12.00 
Ad 
4-8 yrs
Waber explores the title virtue through pithy, generally kid-accessible definitions
and freewheeling line and watercolor scenes of everyday trials, triumphantly over-
come. For "Courage is going to bed without a nightlight," a pair of anxious eyes
stare out from inky darkness. For "Courage is tasting the vegetable before making
a face," a round-headed, spiky-haired boy boldly shovels the greens into his gaping
maw. For "Courage is explaining the rip in your brand-new pants," two pairs of
legs pose side by side, one with the offending rent in its trousers, the other obvi-
ously maternal and topped by an accusatory finger. Several definitions are less
clear, though, and while some may merely require explanation (how acts of self
control such as "trying to cover up your mean, jealous side" or "suddenly remem-
bering a silly joke and trying not to giggle when everyone else is being especially
serious" are also forms of courage), some are overstretching the concept to cover
other virtues ("Courage is a scenic car trip and being stuck in the middle during
the best part") and to offer some misleading projections ("Courage is a blade of
grass breaking through the icy snow"). Most pictures concretely and directly un-
derscore the textual sense (a sandcastle wipe-out in one frame is followed by a
rebuilt structure in the next for "Courage is starting over"), but others may be
elusive to young viewers (how does the girl with the saxophone relate to "Courage
is holding on to your dream"?). Despite the variability of the entries, this title may
prove a valuable discussion starter, heavier on charm than on didacticism. EB
WADDELL, MARTIN 
Snow Bears; illus. by Sarah Fox-Davies. 
Candlewick,
2003 
26p
ISBN 0-7636-1906-X 
$14.99 
R 
2-5 yrs
When the three baby bears find themselves frosted with snow in their wintry
playtime, their mother dubs them "snow bears," and thus the game begins. Con-
FEBRUARY 2003 
* 255
fronted with these strange snow bears, Mummy Bear pretends to seek her own
babies as the kids gigglingly engage in some amusingly transparent deception: "I
haven't seen us," says one, and "We aren't here, Mummy Bear," another cun-
ningly prevaricates. Mummy enjoys a romp with the snow bears, and then when
they retire to the cabin for hot toast, they conveniently melt down into Mummy's
own baby bears. Waddell's affectionate text offers an idyllic frosty gambol, and
youngsters will appreciate the lulling repetition, the gentle trickery, and the small-
est baby bear's struggles to keep up with her elder siblings ("The smallest snow
bear couldn't throw very well. Her paws were as cold as her nose"). Fox-Davies'
carefully textured illustrations are a little sweet and staid, but they don't overcute
their slightly anthropomorphized bears; the snowy landscapes are full of blue, win-
try shadows that sharpen the contrast with the snug cabin's yellow hearthlight, and
the big fuzzy bruins are inherently cozy, like big downy coats, even when they're
covered in snow. If you're looking for a fireplace-side read after a day of sledding
and snow-angels, this is just your cup of hot cocoa. DS
WARD, HELEN, ad. 
The Rooster and the Fox; ad. and illus. by Helen
Ward. 
Millbrook, 2002 
40p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7613-2920-X 
$24.90
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7613-1846-1 $16.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Chanticleer the rooster, "herald of the morning, pride of the farmyard," is a boast-
ful sort, and why not? He is "so handsome, so proud, so loved by all." The proud
cock is especially admired by Mr. Fox, "reddish, doggish, and hungry for his sup-
per." Mr. Fox flatters Chanticleer into dropping his guard and baring his throat,
which the fox quickly seizes in his jaws. Despite the farmyard alarm, the fox
succeeds in fleeing with the rooster to the woods. The chase, however, gives Chan-
ticleer time to plan, and he turns the tables on the fox, who also proves susceptible
to appeals to vanity. Ward (reteller of The Hare and the Tortoise, 6/99) here takes
a crack at Chaucer's "The Nun's Priest's Tale." While Cooney's classic Chanticleer
and the Fox retells more of Chaucer, Ward's rendition benefits from a more suc-
cinct plot, clean prose, crisp pace, and pictures large enough to be seen by group.
The line-and-watercolor illustrations are notable for their vibrant color and vigor-
ous compositions; sweeping spreads show a rather neat barnyard populated by
sumptuously feathered fowl and assorted domesticated beasts. Compare this new
version with Cooney's for some interesting discussion of changes in printing tech-
nology as well as graphic design. A note discusses various sources for this tale, and
keys to the included fowl, swine, cattle, etc. are appended. JMD
YOLEN, JANE 
Girl in a Cage; by Jane Yolen and Robert J. Harris. 
Philomel,
2002 
23 4 p
ISBN 0-399-23627-9 
$18.99 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Yolen and Harris previously dipped into historical Scotland in The Queen's Own
Fool (BCCB 7/00), a tale of Mary, Queen of Scots; now they turn to an even more
turbulent time in Scottish history. Marjorie is the twelve-year-old daughter of
Robert the Bruce, thrilled at her beloved father's coronation as King of Scotland
and ignorant of its real implications. Soon she learns: she and her family must flee
the armies of Edward Longshanks, King of England, who claims Scotland as his,
and to this end they roam the countryside in search of allies and succor while
attempting to evade not only the English but also Scots with divergent loyalties.
256 
* THE BULLETIN
Finally, however, their flight ends in capture, and Marjorie becomes the prisoner
of King Edward, who isolates her in a cage for public viewing and abuse; it's from
there that she tells her story. It's a compelling one, with the realities of the ex-
hausting evasion of pursuit particularly well conveyed, and Marjorie's imprison-
ment (a historical fact) is a situation that commands attention. The book heightens
the tension with repeated faceoffs between the captured Marjorie and the ill but
determined King of England, and it adds both warmth and pathos with her occa-
sional forbidden contact with some local village children and with the monk who
brings her food and water. There's also interest in Marjorie's evolution from a
rather spoiled and willful little miss to a young woman of dignity and responsibil-
ity in a terrible situation, who along the way has learned to appreciate the virtues of
her cool but steely and protective stepmother. This has rousing adventure and
tense psychological drama, all wrapped in rich tartan atmosphere. DS
ZELINSKY, PAUL O., ad. 
Knick-Knack Paddywhack!: A Moving Parts Book; ad.
and illus. by Paul O. Zelinsky. 
Dutton, 2002 
16p
ISBN 0-525-46908-7 
$18.99 
Ad 
2-5 yrs
There's a whole lotta knick knack going on, as not one but ten old men do their
traditional paddywhacking thing on thumb and shoe and spine in this elaborate
pop-up confection. Zelinsky gets the official credit, supplying watercolor scenes
of a curly-headed kid who seems mildly startled by the antics of the tiny men who
flutter around him throughout his ordinary round of activities, "rolling home" via
various transports from roller skates to a wheelchair. The real "Wow!" though
goes to paper engineer Andrew Baron, credited in fine print on the back cover,
who devised the book's nifty moves. Flaps and tabs and wheels propel the action,
driving a bone rather alarmingly into the dog's mouth while simultaneously rush-
ing an old man along on his bicycle, or launching another geezer in diminishing
frames across the sky. Unfortunately, the initial pleasure gives way to disappoint-
ment: the manipulatives are often awkwardly positioned and, in the copy in-
spected for review, quite resistant to movement (if you're going to sing along, sing
very slowly), so it's adult reader rather than child who necessarily gets all the fun of
making the book go. Zelinsky's pictures provide plenty of opportunity to show
off the paper pyrotechnics, but considered for composition alone, they're over-
crowded and jarring, making it difficult for the littlest viewers to readily pick out
the play underway. Still, the fun is in watching the familiar tune (melody and
chords on back cover) spring to life, so laissez this old man rouler. EB
FEBRUARY 2003 
* 
257
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
ELLEMAN, BARBARA 
Virginia Lee Burton: A Life in Art. Houghton, 2002
136p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-618-00342-8 
$20.00
Virginia Lee Burton (1909-1968) was a gifted illustrator, writer, and graphic artist
whose limited body of work (a total of sixteen titles) includes several twentieth
century classics-Mike Mulligan and His Steam Shovel (1939), The Little House
(1942), and Katy and the Big Snow (1943)-and who is well worth this kind of
focused attention. The text, however, is somewhat disappointing; it would be nice
if the book didn't just tell readers that Burton possessed a lively wit, a love of life,
and "an effervescence that enlivened all she touched" but instead provided ex-
amples of that wit, love and effervescence. Happily, the text is overshadowed by
the attractiveness of the book itself. From the page layout to the typography to the
endpapers, this visually rich volume exemplifies fine book design. The plentiful
illustrations depict the broad scope of Burton's talent, which included book illus-
tration, wood-carving, and fabric design. Photos of Burton include informal snap-
shots alone and with family as well as the more formal poses of Burton at her desk
or in her studio that accompanied the inevitable human interest news stories about
Burton as a woman who successfully combined her personal and professional work
as wife, mother, and professional artist/illustrator during the 1940s, '50s, and '60s.
While this doesn't provide much fresh insight into Burton's work, it does offer a
compact and attractive overview of her impressive contribution to children's lit-
erature. CJ
L'ENFANT, JULIE 
The Gdg Family: German-Bohemian Artists in America. 
Afton
Historical Society Press, 2002 
200p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 1-890434-50-7 
$35.00
Wanda Gaig (1893-1946) is chiefly renowned for her path-breaking children's pic-
ture books, notably Millions of Cats (1928). However, her extensive body of work
also included prints, drawings, and paintings, as well as cover art and illustrations
in New Masses, The Liberator, and other politically progressive and avant-garde
magazines. Although Gag has been the focus of other books, The Gdg Family is the
first to combine plentiful illustrations with a biographical study of Wanda and her
father and her sister, both artists in their own right. This attractive volume in-
cludes many examples of the three artists' work, plus archival photos, letters, and
excerpts from Wanda Gig's voluminous diaries, which provide a detailed portrait
of her as an artist, book designer, and feminist in New York City during the 1920s.
L'Enfant has ably utilized primary sources to create a detailed and well-documented
picture of the Gg family in the context of their times and German-Bohemian
aesthetic traditions. Eighteen pages of detailed source notes, bibliography, and
index accompany the text. The Gdg Family is an important addition to research
collections of children's literature, and admirers ofWanda Gig's work will find it
an accessible and visually engaging source of information. CJ
258 
* THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
ADVENTURE: Crossley-Holland;
High; Springer; Yolen
Africa-folklore: Bryan
African Americans: Greenfield;
Lasky
African Americans-stories: hooks;
Lee
Architecture: Curlee
Asian Americans-fiction: Mochizuki
Australia-fiction: Cohn
Babies-stories: Lee
Baseball-poetry: Thayer
Baseball-stories: Hopkinson
Bears-stories: Waddell
BEDTIME STORIES: hooks
BIOGRAPHIES: Chandra; Cooper;
Lasky; Lawlor; McDonough
Birds-folklore: Bryan
Boxing-fiction: Lipsyte
Brothers-stories: Compestine
Building-stories: Suen
Caribbean-poetry: Agard
Cats-fiction: Cox
Chickens-stories: Dorros; Ward
Creation-stories: Root
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Burgess
Cultural exploration-fiction: Hidier
Death and dying-stories: Carter
Depression-fiction: Rosenberg
Depression, the-stories: High
Dogs-fiction: Rylant; Snyder, Z.
Ecology-fiction: Allende
Ethics and values: Harness;
Hartinger; Koss; McDonough;
Naidoo; Strasser; Veciana-Suarez;
Waber
Explorers and exploring: Lawlor
Families-fiction: Hidier
FANTASY: Allende; Baker; Cabot;
Crossley-Holland; Ferris;
Hoffman; McCutchen; Sleator;
Snyder, M.; Springer
Farms-stories: McCaughrean
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Cohn; Danticat
Fathers and daughters-stories:
McCaughrean
FOLKTALES AND FAIRY TALES:
Bryan; Janisch; Martin, R.;
McCaughrean; San Souci;
Schwartz; Ward
Folktales and fairy tales-fiction:
Ferris
Food and eating-stories: Broadley;
Compestine
Friends and friendship-fiction: Cox;
Griffin; Koss; Martin, A.; Strasser
Games-fiction: Sleator
Gays and lesbians-fiction: Hartinger
Ghosts-fiction: Burgess; Cabot;
Snyder, Z.
Girls-stories: hooks
Government: Curlee; Fradin
Grandfathers-fiction: Snyder, M.
Grandfathers-stories: Carter
Grandmothers-fiction: Allende;
Johnson, L.
Haiti-fiction: Danticat
Heaven-stories: Carter
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Hoffman; Martin, A.; Mochizuki;
Veciana-Suarez
History, European: Yolen
History, U.S.: Anderson, L.;
Chandra; Cooper; Curlee;
FEBRUARY 2003 
* 259
Dooling; Fradin; Greenfield;
Harness; Lasky
History, world: Lawlor; Naidoo
Holidays-fiction: Anderson, L.
Homelessness-fiction: Johnson, L.
Horses-stories: High
Houses-stories: Suen
HUMOR: Dorros; Paulsen
Identity-fiction: Mochizuki
Illness-fiction: Griffin
Immigration-fiction: Danticat;
Veciana-Suarez
Indian Americans-fiction: Hidier
Inventors and inventing-stories:
Compestine
Italy-fiction: Hoffman
Judaism-fiction: Schwartz
Kidnapping-fiction: Griffin
Knights and chivalry-fiction:
Crossley-Holland
Korea-folklore: San Souci
Literature, American: Lasky
Magic-fiction: Baker
Medieval life-fiction: Crossley-
Holland; Springer; Yolen
Mental illness-fiction: Lipsyte;
Martin, A.; Rosenberg
Minstrels-fiction: Springer
Monkeys-stories: Stanley
Mothers-stories: Waddell
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Johnson, L.; Snyder, M.
Music and musicians-fiction:
Snyder, M.
Music and musicians-poetry: Adoff
Music and musicians-stories:
Carter; McCaughrean
Mythology, classical: Spinner
Native Americans-fiction: Allende;
Lipsyte; Martin, R.
Outlaws-fiction: Springer
Pigs-fiction: Sleator
Play-stories: Waddell
POETRY: Adoff; Agard
POP-UP BOOKS: Zelinsky
Presidents: Chandra; Cooper
Princesses-fiction: Baker; Ferris;
Yolen
Rabbits-folklore: San Souci
Races: Dooling
Races-fiction: Spinner
Racism: McDonough
Racism-fiction: Naidoo
Reading aloud: Adoff; Agard; Cox;
Paulsen; Rylant; Thayer
Reading, beginning: McNamara;
Rylant
Reading, easy: Cox
Reading, reluctant: Adoff; Burgess;
Paulsen
Religious education: Root; Schwartz
Renaissance, the-fiction: Hoffman
Revolutionary War: Fradin
RHYMING STORIES: Broadley;
Chandra; Thayer; Zelinsky
Romance-fiction: Cabot; Ferris;
Hartinger; Rosenberg
School-fiction: Atkins; Hartinger;
Koss; McNamara; Strasser; Yolen
Self-esteem-fiction: Atkins
Ships and sailing: Greenfield
SHORT STORIES: Naidoo
Slaves and slavery: Lasky
Slaves and slavery-stories: Janisch
South Africa: McDonough; Naidoo
South America-fiction: Allende
SPORTS STORIES: Hopkinson;
Lipsyte
Stepfamilies-fiction: Cohn
Storytelling-fiction: Martin, R.;
McCutchen
Storytelling: Schwartz
Storytime: Broadley; Dorros; hooks;
Root; Stanley; Suen; Waber;
Waddell; Ward
Supernatural-fiction: Cabot
Thanksgiving: Anderson, L.
TODDLER BOOKS: Lee
Trades-stories: Stanley
Transportation: Dooling; Greenfield
Uncles-fiction: Martin, A.
Urban life: Curlee
Valentine's Day: McNamara
Voyages and travel-fiction: Allende
Voyages and travel-stories: Dorros
Voyages and travel: Dooling;
Greenfield; Lawlor
Winter-stories: Waddell
Wolves-stories: Broadley
Women's studies: Harness;
Hopkinson; Spinner
Writers and writing: Lasky
Teachi 
K
Keep Up
with the
Latest in
Teaching!
Teaching K-8 is filled with hundreds of unique ideas
and activities that help teachers present new challenges to their
students, learn new concepts and develop new skills.
Monthly articles include:
Children's Books * Teaching in the Library * Plus...
The Parent Connection * Interviews with Children's Book Authors
and Illustrators * Science * Technology and MORE!
If you decide to subscribe,
you'll get one full year
(7 more issues) for just
$12.50. That's 47% off the
regular rate of $23.97 per
year. If you decide not to
subscribe, just return the
Invoice marked "cancel"
and owe nothing.
Don't miss this valuable resource for your library!
I
i
ripples with clarity and
sweetness and an underlying
evolution of spirit."
-Kirkus Reviews
Viking Children's Books
Division of Penguin Putnam Books for Young Readers
www.penguinputnam.com
Universi
1325 So
Champs
U.S.A.
ADDRESS
You may now access The Bulletin Online with an individualized username
and password.
The Bulletin Online is available only to print subscribers, and includes the
1998-2002 volume years plus the current issues as they are published.
The online version allows you to search the current issue or the entire
database by author, title, age or grade level.
To access The Bulletin Online:
1. Go to http://www.prairienet.orglccbl
2. When accessing The Bulletin Online for the first time, use the sub-
scriber number that appears in the upper left-hand corner of the
mailing label on your print copy as both your username and pass-
word. This subscriber number will usually be a four- or five-digit
number but may also be a five-character letter/number combination.
3. After logging in for the first time, you will be required to change your
password to something other than your username. This password is
case sensitive and should be one word only. Please store this new
password in a safe place. Your username (which is also your sub-
scriber number) will not change.
Remember, The Bulletin Online is not licensed for public use; only
individual print subscribers and institutional subscribers' staff are granted
access, so please do not share your access codes. We are working to
expand The Bulletin Online's capabilities and therefore create broader
electronic subscription options for individuals and institutions.
Non-subscribers can learn more about The Bulletin of the Center for
Children's Books at: http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb/
Please e-mail any feedback or questions to: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu.
2:1611
Universit·
1325 Sou
Champail
U.S.A.
ADDRESS ,'
University fI
1325 SoUt 
a
ChampaigI
U.S.A.
ADDREssSS~r
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street 
PERIODICAL
Champaign, IL 61820 
PSTAGE
U.S.A.
CHAMPAIGN, IL
ADDRESS SERVICE REQUESTED
inois
"~c" 
· n~-~-
-II· 
:-I
iPress
PERIODIWUS
:et
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAIL1PAIGN, 
IL
UESTED
~: 
i -·;~
2:1611 
:i
"
wus
IGNIL
:·~ :a--W 
;cF·'
85~; 
~
0008-9036(200302)56:6; 1 -E
