ILL I N
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
4,i
4
-A
IF YOU GIvE
AP G
A PANCAK.
BY Laura Numeroff
ILLUSTRATED BY
no 
Felicia Bond
"This delightful story continues the playfulness found in If You
Give a Mouse a Cookie and If You Give a Moose a Muffin. Here,
a little girl is the patient hostess to a demanding piglet, whose
myriad requests lead them from the kitchen table to the bathtub
to the backyard. Bond has once again created [full-color art]
that expresses the text perfectly. The humor and quick pace of
Numeroff's engaging narrative make this book an excellent choice
for reading aloud. A sure-fire crowd-pleaser."
-School Library Journal
"Expect many requests for this one, from parents, teachers,
and children." -ALA Booklist
Ages 3-7. $14.95TR (0-06-026686-4); $14.89LB (0-06-026687-2)
A Laura Geringer Book
Also by Laura Numeroff and Felicia Bond
IF YOU GIVE A MOUSE A COOKIE 
IF YOU GIVE A MOOSE A MUFFIN
Ages 3-7. $14.95TR (0-06-024586-7) 
Ages 3-7. $14.95TR (0-06-024405-4)
$14.89LB (0-06-024587-5) 
$14.89LB (0-06-024406-2)
$21.95BigBK (0-06-443409-5) 
$21.95BigBK (0-06-443366-8)
A Laura Geringer Book
iHarperCollinsChildren 
'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York, NY 10022
http://www.harperchildrens.com
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
October 1998
Vol. 52 No. 2
A LOOK INSIDE
49 
THE BIG PICTURE
Walter Wick's Optical Tricks written and illus. with photographs by
Walter Wick
50 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
51 
* Off the Road by Nina Bawden
56 
* Honk! by Pamela Duncan Edwards; illus. by Henry Cole
59 
* The Roman Twins written and illus. by Roy Gerrard
65 
* No Pretty Pictures: A Child of War by Anita Lobel
71 
* Count Karlstein by Philip Pullman; illus. by Diana Bryan
77 
* If You Come Softly by Jacqueline Woodson
79 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
80 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin ofthe Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor (MD)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
CENTER STAFF
Melanie Kimball
Kate McDowell
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $40.00; individuals, $35.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 51 E. Armory Ave., Champaign,
IL 61820-6601. E-mail: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu
Visit our homepage at http://edfu.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1998 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Walter Wick from Walter Wick's Optical Tricks ©1998. Used by permission of
Scholastic Inc.
OCTOBER 1998 
* 49
THE BIG PICTURE
Walter Wick's Optical Tricks
written and illus. with photographs by Walter Wick
It's somewhat of a stretch to consider this a Halloween book, but what else can one
do with a book of tricks that are themselves wonderful treats?
We've all seen those books of optical illusions, with pages of two faces that
might really be a vase, the pile of blocks that protrudes or recedes, the Escheresque
widgets, and other visual brain-teasers that demonstrate just how conceptual vi-
sion really is. Wick leaves these drawn images in the literary dust by doing the
apparently impossible: making these figures real and capturing them in photo-
graphs. Nor is this photographic trickery in the sense of gluing together or com-
puter-enhancing photographs to make images that weren't present at the actual
photography session; these are actually a series of cleverly designed arrangements
where angle and concept have been skillfully employed to turn the genuine into
the fantastical.
Our cover picture is one of the best examples. Wick includes a clue in the
image, which our cropping makes even stealthier, and then provides a double-page
explanatory photograph on the following spread that gets described in more detail
in the back of the book. What you're looking at is really a view through glass of the
square archway at the top that halfway down becomes a reflection in the glass of
three columns that are actually on the opposite side of the glass from the archway.
Deft craftsmanship not only made the materials atmospherically classical but also
arranged them at precisely the right intervals and shaped them in precisely the
right dimensions to blend together seamlessly, aided by the wonderful powers of
light.
Some of the book's teasers are simpler: the title page letters are raised in relief if
you look at them right side up and are cutouts in the white paper background if
you turn them upside down. Some are only simple once you grasp an essential
truth (or perhaps an essential lie?) of the visual image: "Mirror Magic" entices
viewers to count the objects in the photograph, which are scattered around a mir-
ror; it's easy, however, to overlook the fact that the objects appearing in the reflec-
tion may be hidden from view on the other side and vice versa, so that one mistakenly
thinks that the red checker in the mirror is merely the reflection of the red checker
visible outside of it (careful placement of larger objects and cropping of the image
has hidden the checkers' "mates"). Escher fans will be delighted and startled to see
that Wick has apparently built an Escher-designed pavilion, which triangularly
turns back on itself from a second story it couldn't possibly get to (cunning design
of the "second story" has led viewers' brains to believe it's on top of the archway in
front rather than behind it).
50 
* THE BULLETIN
A "More Fun with Illusions" section in back gives a little more explanation
about the making of the images; as the "About This Book" afterword suggests,
however, even knowing how an image is done may not be sufficient to allow one's
brain to see the reality and not the illusion (interestingly enough, the smaller im-
ages in the explanatory section can make some of the perceptual corrections easier).
Wick states that the goal of these photographs is to "challenge readers to compare
true perceptions (the objects as they really exist) with false perceptions (the illu-
sions) as a way to cultivate visual logic skills and to sharpen powers of observa-
tion." This they undoubtedly do, helped by some simple but pointed questions
that focus readers' attention on the signs of visual gamesmanship. Readers may be
further encouraged, however, to contemplate the fallibility of visual perception in
general, and to consider that "seeing is believing" may well be true without being
a good idea. It might be particularly effective to remind readers that Wick didn't
have to put in his helpful visual giveaways and that he could probably have made
his illusions pert near visually perfect, leaving us completely fooled.
This has some obvious implications for science and for art classes but is such an
exercise in sheer wonderment that it would be a shame to restrict it to the merely
curricular. Bored with the thin deception of your basic Halloween mask, boys and
girls? Work out these deceptions, and face the fact that your eyes lie to your brain.
Boo. (Imprint information appears on p. 77.)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ADLER, C. S. NotJust a Summer Crush. Clarion, 1998 
[128p]
ISBN 0-395-88532-9 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Hana, twelve, is the baby of her family, and she's tired of being squelched, trivialized,
and ignored. On a summer beach vacation with her family, she's startled and
thrilled to encounter her adored sixth-grade teacher, Mr. Crane, who is taking a
week's rental to think about his teaching career after a problematic first year. Young
Mr. Crane treats Hana with the respect and interest she desires, but he fails to
realize the intensity of his young friend's attachment, an attachment that excites
comment and, finally, some changes in Hana's own family. Teacher crushes are a
major aspect of many girls' maturation process, and Adler brings the dynamics to
life understandingly here. It's clear that Hana's feelings are excessive but they're
also not misplaced-fresh-out-of-college Mr. Crane has an unsophisticated vul-
nerability and general niceness that makes his appeal understandable. The book is
insightful about the negative elements as well, such as Hana's mother's growing if
baseless wariness about the relationship and Hana's sister's merciless teasing about
Hana's affections. The family's eventual across-the-board realization that their
OCTOBER 1998 
* 51
little baby is becoming a young woman is a bit too rosy to be realistic, but it
provides both a satisfying ending and a reminder that such longings are, indeed,
simply a part of growing up. Girls yearning for a meaningful glance over the math
papers from that special Mr. Whoever will understand Hana completely. DS
AHLBERG, ALLAN 
Mockingbird; illus. by Paul Howard. 
Candlewick,
1998 
[24p]
ISBN 0-7636-0439-9 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 2-5 yrs
Ahlberg's variation on a familiar theme turns that beloved old nursery song "Hush,
Little Baby" into a newly realized birthday lullaby. A cheerful family happily en-
deavors to celebrate Baby's first birthday, buying mockingbird, tree swing, pedal
truck, and a dog named Rover. Ahlberg describes Mama's actions after she brings
Baby in out of the rain: "She'll wipe your face and dry your hair/ sit you up in your
own highchair,/ tie your bib and for goodness' sake-/ Papa's gone and baked
you ... a birthday cake." Howard's setting for this re-lyricking is a turn-of-the-
century domestic scene complete with big-wheeled prams, ruffled parasols, red-
velvet flocked wallpaper, and an expressive, smiling family reminiscent of Helen
Oxenbury's jolliest characters. Start warming up your voice for a singalong story-
time that's sure to leave everyone humming. JMD
BAWDEN, NINA 
Off the Road. Clarion, 1998 
[192p]
ISBN 0-395-91321-7 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
It's the year 2040, and eleven-year-old Tom is traveling with his parents to take his
grandfather to the Memory Theme Park; Gandy, however, makes a dangerous
escape at a rest stop, slipping past the wall that keeps civilized citizens safe from the
Wild Wood and going out into the threatening unknown. Tom follows his be-
loved grandfather to relatives he never knew he had and discovers a world com-
pletely different from the one in which he'd grown up. Here, trees (which he'd
been taught were animate and vicious) grow randomly, meat is routinely eaten,
people have brothers and sisters (population restriction has made those words vul-
gar and unfit for polite company in Tom's milieu), and old people are respected
rather than disposed of at the end of their useful life (the fate that Gandy was
escaping). He also learns the shocking fact that the Wall that he thought was
designed to keep all this wildness and lawlessness out was actually created to keep
him and his ilk in; despite his growing affection for his newfound family and their
strange existence, Tom begins to wonder where his place and his duty really lie.
Bawden's a better writer than many who have tackled the genre of futuristic dysto-
pia, and Tom is a fully realized character, with tendencies towards petulance and
uncertainty that make his eventual strength all the more admirable. The contrast-
ing utopia is more explicit here than in many dystopias, and the book offers some
strong implications about contemporary society as well, which will make many
young readers thoughtful indeed. Though this book is livelier and less heavy-
handed than Lowry's The Giver (BCCB 4/93), its morality is rather less consistent;
readers may not be entirely sure of the parameters of the good life even when they
finish the novel. Still, they'll be sure to think about the question nonetheless, and
they'll enjoy the story that prompts it. DS
52 
* THE BULLETIN
BEDARD, MICHAEL 
Sitting Ducks; written and illus. by Michael Bedard. 
Putnam,
1998 
40p
ISBN 0-399-22847-0 
$15.99 
R 5-8 yrs
A minor industrial mishap at the Colossal Duck Factory changes the course of
interspecies relations between the employee alligators and their hapless products/
victims, the ducks. An egg slips off the conveyor belt; its dazed occupant is discov-
ered and stuffed into the lunchbox of a line-worker alligator, who intends to fatten
it for a feast. A friendship develops between the two, though, and after the duck
strays into a trap at the Decoy Diner, his new buddy confesses that the alligators
have been raising duck meat (in a secret village called Ducktown, no less) all along.
The duck now rallies his feathered comrades, works them out relentlessly at the
duck gym, and teaches them to fly south, where they can live in peace. Bedard's
wry romp would play in Ducktown as a sci-fi nightmare-part Wallace and Gromit,
part Metropolis. From the opening scene of innocent eggs passing through the
jaws of a steel incubator and emerging as catatonic ducks in a row, to the Edward
Hopper-esque midnight diner where no one can be trusted, Bedard packs his slick,
shadowy scenes with references probably better appreciated by reader-aloud than
by listener but cleverly balances humor and suspense within his text to amuse both.
Older siblings with a taste for Claymation or familiarity with Bedard's poster art
might get caught sneaking this one off the picture book shelf. EB
BODKIN, ODDS, ad. 
The Crane Wife; illus. by Gennady Spirin. 
Gulliver/Har-
court, 1998 
32p
ISBN 0-15-201407-1 
$16.00 
R* Gr. 3-6
Bodkin's retelling of this well-known Japanese folktale has a vibrancy often miss-
ing from modern versions of traditional tales. Sail-maker Osamu wishes "for a
wife to comfort his lonely hours at the loom," and his wish is granted when Yukiko,
a young woman seeking shelter from a storm, knocks on his door. They fall in
love, and Yukiko becomes Osamu's wife, leaving only when he breaks a promise
and discovers her secret-she is the injured crane he once nursed and sheltered.
Spirin's watercolor and gouache paintings draw on images from medieval Japan to
evoke the magical setting of this tragic tale of love found and lost. The elegantly
detailed single and double-page spreads hearken back to the compositions of tradi-
tional Japanese screen paintings, from the trees curving over the edges of the land-
scapes, to the graceful feathering of the crane, to the architectural elements airily
floating in the harmonious compositions. The palette is rich in bronze and gold,
making the ethereal touches of white clouds, feathers, and blue sky even more
luminously effective. Pair this with Molly Bang's The Paper Crane (BCCB 3/86)
for a fascinating comparison of art and story. JMD
BROWNE, ANTHONY 
Voices in the Park; written and illus. by Anthony
Browne. 
DK Ink, 1998 
[32p]
ISBN 0-7894-2522-X 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Two parents and two children-Browne-ian gorillas, all---each relate their outing
to the park. A mother in high-heeled boots and pearls unleashes pedigree Labra-
dor Victoria, who promptly takes up with "some scruffy mongrel"; worse yet, son
Charles makes the acquaintance of "a very rough-looking child." Mother promptly
rounds up her charges and takes them home. An overall-clad, out-of-work father
OCTOBER 1998 
* 
53
is so focused on the want ads that his only view of the afternoon is one of envying
his dog's energy and appreciating the chatter of daughter Smudge, the "rough-
looking child" of the first narration. Smudge and Charles see their chance en-
counters through the eyes of timid friendship, with the boy hoping to see Smudge
again, and the girl pitying Charles' obvious sadness at going home with his stern
mother. There is little plot to the melancholy text-no tension and, therefore, no
resolution. The interest of the disparate points of view lies in the contrast and in
Browne's accompanying pictures, in which the park surrealistically takes on the
mood of each narrative. Mother's park is a formal affair, and the trees appear to
howl with boredom at her idea of a day out; by contrast, the father's park is a
gloomy place, where the tree trunks form a shadowy, forbidding forest. Visual
references to Magritte, da Vinci, Munch, and van Dyck may sail over little heads,
but tucked-away images of King Kong and Mary Poppins probably won't. Chil-
dren accustomed to dissecting Browne's complex, mutating imagery will follow
along, and they may find the Rashomon take provocative of discussion. EB
CALMENSON, STEPHANIE, ad. 
The Teeny Tiny Teacher: A Teeny Tiny Ghost Story;
illus. by Denis Roche. 
Scholastic, 1998 
32p
ISBN 0-590-37123-1 
$15.95 
R 4-7 yrs
As the subtitle indicates, this is the old tale with some teeny tiny alterations. The
teeny tiny teacher brings back a teeny tiny bone for a teeny tiny science lesson,
only to find that a teeny tiny ghost is haunting the teeny tiny classroom, at least
until it gets its bone back at the teeny tiny end. While Calmenson's retelling of
this cumulative tale goes on a teeny tiny bit too long, Roche's gouache illustrations
of the miniature environment have the bright attractiveness of a well-decorated
schoolroom bulletin board. From the blue schoolhouse with its yellow pencil
posts and red spiral notebook roof, to the red recreation center with the checker-
board rooftop, to the use of scrabble tiles for flagstones and dominoes for school
desks, the minuscule world is cleverly evoked. Young listeners who enjoy the
original tale (see Robins, reviewed below) will get a kick out of this academic
variant. JMD
COHEN, MIRIAM 
Down in the Subway; illus. by Melanie Hope Greenberg. 
DK
Ink, 1998 
32p
ISBN 0-7894-2510-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-5 yrs
Whirling around the pole on the hot subway train, Oscar peeks at the Island Lady,
who proceeds to pull out of her bag, one by one, "cool blue breezes, green seas,
callaloo, and soursop soup, Calypso Man, steel band, little lizards, and Island town."
Before Oscar's stop at the One Hundred Twenty-fifth Street station, everybody
on the train is doing the jump-up, and though Oscar never again finds the Island
Lady's train, he sings Calypso Man's tune so often that his baby brother learns it as
well (a slightly anticlimactic ending, but never mind). Especially for city kids who
venture often on the subway, this is a rhythmic romp sure to tap into imaginative
flights of urban fancy. The paintings rely on bright Caribbean colors, with shapes
defined in deeper shades to avoid black outline; this results in a lollipop effect that
adds to the playfulness of the whole scenario. Flat in perspective and texture, the
art is highly patterned and full of motion, just like the subway train "racketing
along the track, shaking with all that fine music and dancing." BH
54 
* THE BULLETIN
COMAN, CAROLYN 
Bee andJacky. Front Street, 1998 
[128p]
ISBN 1-886910-33-2 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 9 up
Bee, thirteen, follows the lead of her unruly seventeen-year-old brother Jacky in
opting out of a family trip, leaving the two teenagers alone together in the house.
The two used to be inseparable, for hours acting out Vietnam dramas of injury and
rescue based on their recuperating father's wartime experience; in their weekend
together both siblings grasp for an echo of that closeness but can find only the
sexual component, the physical arousal that was always a part of the game but that
they at the time refused to acknowledge. Coman's intriguing combination of
detachment and emotional sensitivity works even better here than it did in What
Jamie Saw (BCCB 12/95), as it suits Bee's dreamy adolescent intensity. The
vignettish aspect of this slender book removes it from most traditional young-
adult lit conventions: this isn't a problem novel wherein Bee and Jacky eventually
get therapy for the damage of an incestuous relationship, because they don't-
Jacky leaves to join the military and Bee finally reaches out to her father, whose
wounding, in what seems to be an allusion to the sins of the fathers, was the cata-
lyst and underpinning for her relationship with Jacky. The intensity of Bee's reac-
tion comes out in ways that may puzzle some readers (her surrealistic hallucinations
about the fates of her and Jacky's bodies are depicted as literal truth), and those
looking for a neat point won't find one here. They will, however, find a spare yet
intimate encounter with a teen at the critical moment when things move beyond
the way they used to be. DS
CREBBIN, JUNE 
Cows in the Kitchen; illus. by Katharine McEwen. 
Candlewick,
1998 
28p
ISBN 0-7636-0645-6 
$15.99 
R 2-5 yrs
While Ahlberg's Mockingbird (reviewed above) has the gentle persuasion of a fa-
vorite lullaby, Crebbin's singalong offering is of a more rollicking bent. From
"cows in the kitchen, moo moo moo," to "ducks in the dishes, quack quack quack,"
to "pigs in the pantry, oink oink oink" et al., the livestock are having a heyday
waking up Tom Farmer and wreaking general pastoral havoc. McEwen's water-
color and pencil illustrations in an eye-popping, primary color palette bounce across
double-page spreads in cheerfully crowded compositions that will reach even those
listeners in storytime's back row. If simply read aloud, the repetitive text would be
somewhat slight, but sung to the tune of "Skip to My Lou," this is one noisily
successful nonsense song (despite the absence of musical notation). Turn your
storytime into a hoedown with this bouncy offering. JMD
CREECH, SHARON 
Bloomability. 
HarperCollins, 1998 
[288p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-026994-4 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-026993-6 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Dinnie's haphazard and disordered family is finally strained to the breaking point
by her older sister's new baby, so Dinnie's off to live with her aunt and uncle in
Switzerland, where her uncle is headmaster at an American school. Dinnie misses
her family (she keeps attempting to put a sign that reads "Kidnapped" in Italian in
her window, but linguistic malapropism repeatedly leads her astray) and she's ini-
tially unsure of what to make of it all, but then Dinnie hasn't really ever been sure
OCTOBER 1998 
* 
55
what to make of anything because it's never lasted long enough. Eventually, she
does begin to settle in and even revel in the diversity, the camaraderie, and the
sheer possibility that she begins to see in the school and finally in her life. Creech
is deft in her portrayal of a girl's beginning to move from watching the world go by
(Dinnie describes herself as existing in a bubble that keeps her inside) to being a
part of that world, and her blend of the homespun and exotic makes for a heady
mix. Her knowledge of boarding-school dynamics stands her in good stead (and
should make quite a few readers long for enrollment), and her gentle and humor-
ous narrative has an authentic ring in its examination of a young adolescent's view
of intercultural understanding, language struggles ("If you thought very hard about
what you were really saying you'd feel like a dolt"), and personal awakening. There
are a few heavy-handed bits and an overforeshadowed avalanche, but Dinnie's
enduring individuality and self-discovery of that individuality are the book's main
points anyway; that's more than enough to satisfy. DS
CUETARA, MITTIE 
The Crazy Crawler Crane and Other Very Short Truck Stories;
written and illus. by Mittie Cuetara. 
Dutton, 1998 
[32p]
ISBN 0-525-45951-0 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-6 yrs
Rollicking little four-line verses and four-frame cartoon strips cleverly catch the
essence of some of the most alluring vehicles on the road. "A tough metal shell... /
strong personnel ... / Kids think it's swell,/ except for the smell." Yep, that's a
garbage truck, alright. Further on, a motorist on a cell phone rear ends a delivery
truck: "Yak yak!/ Ouch, smack!/ Bad luck!/ Tow truck." Bright watercolor car-
toons thickly outlined in black pack the heft and zip to match the automotive
theme; layout is simple and clean, with large frames extending across each double
spread and an ink sketch of the featured vehicle in the upper right corner. The
multi-ethnic cast (which considerately includes women at the wheel of the big rig
and aloft in the cherry picker) is cheery and expressive, with a round-eyed exuber-
ance reminiscent of Jules Feiffer characters. This fresh, funny take should send
tykes scuttling off to retrieve their abandoned trucks from the bottom of the toy
chest, and newly minted readers will also appreciate the clever yet simple word-
play. EB
CUTLER, JANE 
The Song of the Molimo. 
Farrar, 1998 
[192p]
ISBN 0-374-37141-5 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Twelve-year-old Harry Jones, visiting relatives in St. Louis during the 1904 World's
Fair, had planned on skipping the educational exhibits in favor of the more sensa-
tional sights along "the Pike." When his older cousin Frederick, an underling in
the employ of Anthropology Exhibit chief Dr. McDougal, is put in charge of the
five Pygmies brought in for display, Harry finds himself more often in the role of
caretaker than of carefree tourist. Ota Benga and his Pygmy comrades consider
themselves guests at the Fair, and therefore they tend to set their own hours, to
wander off to see the sights, and to comply with the exhibitors' plans in only the
most offhand way. Their actions not only create logistical nightmares for Frederick
and Harry but fuel the misunderstanding and mistrust of the host community,
which is predisposed to regard the Pygmy "specimens" as subhuman. Cutler loosely
bases her story on real participants at the Fair, and she leads readers to some inter-
56 
* THE BULLETIN
esting questions both about confronting the unknown and the reliability of"scien-
tific evidence." She overplays her hand, however, by portraying McDougal more
as a pompous bigot than a culture-bound representative of his era. Characters in
minor walk-on roles, such as photographer Jessie Tarbox Beals, lend little to the
plot, and even protagonist Harry fails to claim much interest in his own right.
Cutler supplies an afterword on the life of Ota Benga and a selected bibliography,
which may spur readers to explore the Fair and its human "exhibits" on their own.
EB
DAVIS, AUBREY, ad. 
The Enormous Potato; illus. by Dusan Petricic. 
Kids Can,
1998 
32p
ISBN 1-55074-386-4 
$14.95 
R 3-6 yrs
The traditional Russian folktale of the great big enormous turnip is a storytime
staple for preschool and primary graders, and there are more than several versions
available. Move a few books over and make room on the shelf for this one, because
it has a happily tellable text and some dandy visuals that are going to re-energize
this tale for both teller and listeners. The second collaboration between storyteller
Davis and illustrator Petricic (the first was Bone Button Borscht, BCCB 11/97) has
both energy and style. A farmer has an eye, but "it wasn't like your eye or my eye.
It was a potato eye. The farmer planted it. And it grew into a potato." The round,
spectacled farmer waits patiently as the potato grows bigger and bigger, and when
it was "the biggest potato in the world," he tries to pull it up. It's stuck, and, as the
cumulative story goes, his wife, daughter, dog, and cat hurry to help him. When
the little mouse adds his little strength, the potato finally comes up, and the whole
community turns out for potato, butter, and salt, until "the potato was gone. And
now the story is gone, too." Davis' happy combination of rhythm, repetition, and
audience participation possibilities makes this a retelling worth repeating. Charac-
ters dressed in blue, red, and pink are set off by the sunshine yellow background as
they cluster around the green shoots of the potato and the huge (and growing
huger) mound of brown earth that conceals the spud. The expressive characters
(even in the somewhat generic crowd scenes) and the double-page compositions
lend themselves easily to group reading aloud. Tired of turnips? Try potatoes.
They're sure to be a (s)mash hit. JMD
EDWARDS, PAMELA DUNCAN 
Honk!; illus. by Henry Cole. 
Hyperion,
1998 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2384-4 
$15.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0435-1 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-7 yrs
Mimi the swan has been obsessed with the ballet ever since she peeked through the
Paris Opera House window and saw a performance. She has been rehearsing ballet
moves ever since, driving all her avian buddies out of their feathery minds. When
she observes rehearsals for Swan Lake she's convinced the ballerinas are imitating
her, and she determines to get into the theater to watch. The opera-house man-
ager thwarts her at every turn ("NO BIRDS ALLOWED IN THE OPERA
HOUSE!"), until finally Mimi follows a ballerina through the stage door and right
onto the stage, where she is (unsurprisingly) a wild success. The text (punctuated
with Mimi's "Honk!"s) is deadpan funny, and it is supported by Cole's color satu-
rated, double-page illustrations. Shifting perspectives, surprising compositions,
and ludicrous but effective expressions combine to make this humorous interpre-
OCTOBER 1998 
* 
57
tation of terpsichorean ambition a visual treat. This would make a good readaloud
for primary graders, and the layout and font are such that you could easily give it to
beginning readers looking for some light, clever fare. JMD
EWING, LYNNE 
Party Girl. Knopf, 1998 
[12 8p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-99285-5 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-89285-0 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 8-10
Kata and Ana are making a headlong rush through adolescence, hanging with
Pocho's gang, dabbling in petty crime, lipping off to old ladies on the bus, dancing
in club competitions, and weighing whether pregnancy and welfare might be a
price worth paying to "face out, quit the gang life." Ana, though, has no time to
lay plans-a drive-by shooter takes her life as she and Kata return home through
rival territory after a competition. Kata sets off on a mission of vengeance, but she
is forced to question all she believes when she learns that her best friend was preg-
nant with a rival gang member's child. No, this isn't Romeo and Juliet, or even
West Side Story, since Ewing introduces this heady plot element and then fails to
follow through. This is simply Kata's inconsistent voice and forced idiom ("The
field was a vacant lot down by the LA. River where we kicked it with our homeys
and drank forties and tequila") knotting a tangle of subplots ranging from Kata's
murderous trip onto rival turf, to her dying mother's struggle with alcoholism and
promiscuity, to Ana's younger sister's recruitment into the gang, to Pocho's sorry
childhood. Gang girls may deserve their literary hour in the sun, but this convo-
luted yarn just seems like a suburbanite's lightweight tour of the Wild Side. EB
FERRIS,JEAN 
Love Among the Walnuts. 
Harcourt, 1998 
[240p]
ISBN 0-15-201590-6 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Wealthy financier Horatio Alger Huntington-Ackerman meets the destined love
of his life, actress Mousey Malone. The two marry, build a secluded house in the
country next door to Walnut Manor (a sanitarium for wealthy "loonies"), have a
son, Alexander (aka Sandy), and retreat almost entirely from the world. The only
contact the eccentric family has with the outside is in the form of Horatio's two
younger brothers, Bart and Bernie, who come to dinner once a month to stew over
why they don't have Horatio's money. When B&B try to kill the whole family
(including the butler, Bentley, and his wife, Flossie) they only succeed in putting
Horatio, Mousey, and Flossie into comas. The rest of the action follows Sandy
and Bentley, who, with the help ofSunnie, a newly registered nurse, and the "loony"
residents of Walnut Manor, try to find a coma cure while protecting "the sleepers"
from the further homicidal machinations of B&B. There is never any doubt that
all will end well, and when the end is a foregone conclusion, style is the only reason
for reading. Ferris does occasionally hit her mark, but this is an odd combination
of screwball and romantic movie comedy (the new owners of an adjoining parcel
of land are the Blandingses, building their dream house, no doubt) that never
reaches the frothiness necessary for successful farce. This has few elements to at-
tract young adult readers-the characters and their concerns are not ones they are
likely to identify with, and the plot is far too slow in developing any noticeable
momentum. Rent Arsenicand OldLace, Harvey, or the above mentioned Blandings
on video instead. JMD
58 
* 
THE BULLETIN
FIEDLER,LISA 
Lucky Me. 
Clarion, 1998 
[160p]
ISBN 0-395-89131-0 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 6-9
C.C. (from Curtis Piperfield's Biggest Fan, BCCB 10/95) pretty much has it made;
she's over her crush on Curtis, she's going out with gorgeous and gentlemanly
Patrick O'Connell, and her lifelong friend, Cluck, has apparently gotten over his
crush on her and is happy with her best-friend-from-school, Grace. Nothing is
ever as simple as it appears, however: Grace betrays C.C. by going out for
cheerleading (C.C., though popular, is more interested in poetry than pompoms),
C.C.'s enjoyment of the physical side of her relationship with Patrick is testing her
fourteen-year-old Catholic soul, and Cluck's affection for C.C. may have remained
stronger than she realizes. Fiedler's circumscribed Catholic-school world is a bit
yesteryearish, but C.C.'s struggle with her blossoming sexuality ("Sexually speak-
ing, I am an underachiever") and her sorting through the ethics of friendship and
romance are depicted with grace and wit. The book manages the difficult task of
keeping its attractive and well-liked heroine both enviable and sympathetic, and it
includes some particularly poignant but never heavy-handed acknowledgments of
the change C.C.'s maturation brings in her relationship with her worried father ("I
can't even begin to explain what it feels like to have both your father and the boy
who was once your best friend but is now your potential official boyfriend viewing
your date bra for the first time. Viewing your date bra for the first time simulta-
neously"). This is a classy and starry-eyed romantic comedy that will particularly
gratify readers of the first book, who probably were happy for the mature outcome
there but will be happier that C.C. ends up here with her inevitable destiny. DS
FIELD, EDWARD Magic Words; illus. by Stefano Vitale. 
Gulliver/Harcourt,
1998 
[32p]
ISBN 0-15-201498-5 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-7
Beautifully designed and illustrated with photographs of oil-painted stones and
wood set against a background of crystalline white snow, these nine narrative po-
ems are based on Inuit myths collected by Knud Rasmussen in his 1920s Arctic
travels from Greenland to Alaska. Field delivers the stories in a clean, clear style
devoid of poetic pyrotechnics, as in this poem about a wise man cutting open the
belly of "The Giant Bear" after being swallowed alive: "Everyone lived on bear
meat for a long time./ That's the way it goes:/ Monster one minute, food the
next." Although there is no background or source note so stating, Vitale's illustra-
tions apparently draw on traditional motifs and stylistic imagery of Inuit art, inte-
grated with his own surrealistic interpretation, all translated in organic materials.
The contrast of dark objects on snowy ground is arresting, and the figures them-
selves dominate starkly disciplined compositions. Field, on the other hand, has set
the scene with an extensive note regarding the source and inspiration of his poems,
stating that he has "tried to recapture Inuit voices in poems in our own language."
His fidelity to Inuit culture is unclear, as there are no specific citations to the tales
upon which individual poems are based, but his work here is effective both as
poetry and as narrative. Present this with John Bierhorst's The Dancing Fox: Arc-
tic Folktales (BCCB 7/97) and Normandin's Echoes of the Elders: The Stories and
Paintings of ChiefLelooska (12/97) for a stimulating array of northern American
Indian lore. BH
OCTOBER 1998 
* 
59
FOWLER, SusI GREGG 
Albertina the Practically Perfect; illus. by Jim
Fowler. 
Greenwillow, 1998 
[80p]
ISBN 0-688-15829-3 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Molly doesn't want to move across town and leave her grandparents, neighbors,
and tree house behind, but parents are the ultimate irresistible force and off the
family goes. Her first neighborhood encounter is with bossy and threatening Vio-
let, but soon she meets nice Albertina and starts to settle in. The two girls become
best friends, sharing projects (a new tree house) and secrets (Molly's afraid of the
dark so she sleeps with a nightlight), until it looks like Albertina has betrayed
Molly's secret to the dreaded Violet. This is light and undemanding early chapter-
book fare, and the move-and-new-friend saga, though familiar, is sturdily executed.
The title's a bit too correct, however, in that Albertina is often too good to be true,
and young readers aren't likely to see her blabbing to Violet (which she does be-
cause Violet too is afraid of the dark and is interested in a nightlight) as entitled to
a confidentiality waiver regardless ofAlbertina's humanitarian motives; nor does
Molly's eventual rapprochement with Violet ring as true as it does inevitable. This
isn't quite up to the level of Barbara Joosse's Wild Willie easy readers (see Ghost
Trap, BCCB 7/98) about much the same situation, but it's got enough entertain-
ing familial and peer-group dynamics to keep the interest of many youngsters.
Two-color illustrations (in blue colored-pencil and black ink) are particularly deftly
employed, with cheerful spot art freckling the pages. DS
FRENCH, VIVIAN 
Oliver's Fruit Salad; illus. by Alison Bartlett. 
Orchard,
1998 
28p
ISBN 0-531-30087-0 
$14.95 
R 
3-6yrs
Oliver insists that no grape juice can match the grapes Gran grows at her house, no
canned pears can hold a candle to Grandpa's pears, and no jam can reach the
standard of Grandpa's "wonderful cherries and strawberries and plums." Worn
down by the little boy's harangue, Mom takes Oliver for a stroll down the grocery
store produce aisle and interests him in a few items that even his green-thumbed
Grandpa can't grow. When they return home with their bounty, though, Oliver
refuses to partake: "No, thank you. I just helped Grandpa. I didn't eat any of the
fruit. I don't like fruit." Just as Mom reaches maximum exasperation, the grand-
parents arrive with a perfect suggestion-make fruit salad: "'Where's mine?' asked
Oliver. 'You don't like fruit,' said Mom. 'I like fruit salad,' said Oliver, and he
had three helpings." Readers may see the irony in Oliver's abrupt turnabout, but
listeners will readily accept the clarity of his logic. A friendly, round-headed cast
with pin-dot blue eyes and broad smiles introduce the tasty possibilities of fresh
fruit without ever dropping the vaguest hint of (shh!) nutrition, and the luscious,
sunshiny palette of Bartlett's acrylic paintings will set the taste buds tingling. How
about this juicy selection just before snack time? EB
GERRARD, ROY 
The Roman Twins; written and illus. by Roy Gerrard. 
Farrar,
1998 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-374-36339-0 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Maximus and his sister, Vanilla, are unhappy slaves to the Pompius family of im-
perial Rome. When Slobbus Pompius acquires a fiery horse, Polydox, the animal
60 
* THE BULLETIN
bonds with the slaves and not with their master; in order to save Poly from Slobbus'
revenge, the twins steal off with him and hide with friends. Determined to find
funds with which to compensate their hosts, the two enter Polydox in the Emperor's
chariot race and triumph over the opposition, but then the Emperor must decide
whether to punish the runaway slaves or reward the "plucky children who had
triumphed in the race." If you know the work of the late Roy Gerrard, you know
what you're getting here: energetic tetrameter couplets slyly work in details of
Roman life as well as jokes about the characters while compactly foreshortened
dramatispersonae people the watercolor illustrations. Though the plot has a some-
what superfluous final act (surely winning a chariot race suffices without a defense
against a Goth invasion?), the story is an entertaining and original one, and Gerrard's
evocation of the setting is both droll and atmospheric (Latin platitudes, such as
"Labor vincit omnia" and "Cave canem," plaster architecture and vehicles), if a bit
primmer than the real thing. This rollicking offbeat adventure with its kid heroes
and dopey toga'ed grownups will entertain those youngsters not yet ready for I,
Claudius. DS
GERSHATOR, PHYLLIS, ad. 
Zzzng! Zzzng! Zzzngk A Yoruba Tale; illus. by Theresa
Smith. 
Orchard, 1998 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08873-1 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-09523-1 
$15.95 
R 4-8 yrs
Enamored of Ear, Mosquito wants to get married, but Ear rebuffs her without
hesitation, saying, "Mosquito, go look for someone else to marry. You don't please
me. You're so small and weak, you won't last in this world at all." Mosquito is sad
but persistent-she proposes marriage to Arm and Leg in quick succession, and
each time she is rejected. Angered and disappointed, Mosquito vows to make her
presence known, and she does, by stinging Arm and Leg and buzzing in Ear
"'ZZZNG-ZZZNG' all the time, even when Ear was trying to sleep." Gershator's
economical but engaging text has repetitive refrains and opportunities for group
participation galore; Smith's pastel and crayon illustrations, with their saturated
colors and uncluttered compositions, suit the readaloud, showabout nature of the
tale. The uncrowded pages with their large typeface and white borders make this a
suitable title to offer beginning readers looking for something a little more chal-
lenging in content but still undaunting in format. Use this in combination with
Verna Aardema's Why Mosquitoes Buzz in People's Ears (BCCB 11/75) and Gayle
Ross' The Legend of the Windigo (11/96) for a stinging good storytime. Zzzng!
Zzzng! JMD
HAAS, JESSIE 
Beware and Stogie; written and illus. by Jessie Haas. 
Greenwillow,
1998 
[80p]
ISBN 0-688-15605-3 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-5
Haas fans will remember Lily's horse, Beware, but they won't know Stogie, the
unruly black Morgan who's refused to come anywhere near humans since he was
unloaded in the pasture two years ago. When a storm-felled tree takes down the
pasture fence, some of the horses and cows get out, and Lily (whose Beware stayed
quietly in her pasture) and her family go after them; then, when comparatively
inexperienced Lily finds the unmanageable Stogie caught in a tree branch, she
needs to figure out how to get him back without endangering herself or breaking
OCTOBER 1998 
* 
61
the safety promises she made to her grandfather. There's a bit more contrivance in
this story than in the other Beware adventures, but Haas keeps things equestrianly
realistic nonetheless. Lily's hesitation about dealing with Stogie is appropriate and
understandable, and it's clear that his mellowing at the end isn't anthropomorphic
gratitude for being rescued but just exhaustion and behavior readjustment. The
simple you-are-there factuality of the Beware books, as they give detailed accounts
of various common horse-owning experiences, is what gives them their appeal to
the horse-deprived, and series fans will recognize the authenticity of the horse-
escape drama. Haas' own line drawings, filled with energy and affectionate eques-
trian knowledge, head each chapter. DS
HALL, KATY 
Creepy Riddles; written by Katy Hall and Lisa Eisenberg; illus. by S.
D. Schindler. 
Dial, 1998 
48p 
(Dial Easy-to-Read)
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1685-0 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1684-2 
$13.99 
R 
Gr. 1-4
The inhabitants of these riddles may be ghastly, but these horror-movie wannabes
are bound to elicit howls of laughter from new readers looking for a hair-raising
good time. Okay, so some of them are groaners ("What do you call a room full of
ghosts? A bunch of boo-boos!") and some of them have been molding for a while
("What do witches like to eat for dessert? Ice scream!") but that won't stop your
new and nearly-new readers from grabbing this one right off the shelf. Schindler's
line and watercolor characterizations of the creatures that nightmares are made of
have a gleeful gruesomeness emphasized by disconcertingly normal environments.
The combination of happily horrible riddles with some frighteningly funny illus-
trations is going to make your little body, er, book snatchers leap right up for this
one. Have a creepy riddle contest of your own and see what your spirited little
darlings can conjure up. JMD
HERZIG, ALISON CRAGIN 
Bronco Busters; illus. by Kimberly Bulcken
Root. 
Putnam, 1998 
[32p]
ISBN 0-399-22917-5 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
5-8 yrs
"Once upon a time there were three big bad bronco busters," the story starts, and
"in the whole wide West, they boasted, there wasn't a bronco they couldn't bust."
When they drive up in their purple pickup to break the little black bronco, they
immediately dismiss the little cowboy perched on the corral rails and go to work.
Their efforts leave them with a score of Bronco-3, Bronc Busters-0, however, as
the pony sequentially dumps them all in the dirt. Meanwhile, the little cowboy on
the railing spends his nights gentling the little horse, and, after the busters give up,
he calmly saddles the pony up and takes him out for a ride. This has a pleasingly
effective blend of the tall-taling (with the purple-pickup-driving bronco busters
Slim, Jim, and Grimsley) and the quietly lyrical (with the little cowboy's whis-
pered promises to the pony of "high blue mountains" and "tickling grass on the
prairie"), and the story of the special friendship between a young person and an
.animal exerts its age-old appeal. Root's illustrations cleverly saddle the bronc-
busters with a raft of gimmicks and flashy fripperies, which contrast with the simple
lines of the black horse, the mountains, and the little cowpoke who knows how to
wait; her cunning frames mimic hand-tooled leather, but their detailed intricacy is
balanced against softer scenes of the horse and the countryside. An engaging jun-
62 
* 
THE BULLETIN
ior horse story and tale of the underestimated little guy coming out on top, this
will enchant many a lapsitting buckaroo. DS
HUCK, CHARLOTTE 
A Creepy Countdown; illus. byJos. A. Smith. 
Greenwillow,
1998 
24p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-15461-1 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-15460-3 
$15.00 
R 3-7 yrs
Counting up from "one tall scarecrow standing on a hill" to "three jack-o'-lanterns
glowing in the night" to "eight yowling cats filling all with dread" to "ten tiny mice
feeling very brave who squeaked BOO TO YOU!", Huck's rhyming Halloween
enumeration then counts down from the ten laughing mice to the lone scarecrow
on the hill, laying all the spooks to rest. Black ink on scratchboard art is high-
lighted with the occasional color accent as the expertly drafted denizens of this
Halloween treat engage in a wide variety of seasonally appropriate activities. Each
spread is a framed illustration of the numbered inhabitants set against a back-
ground of stark tree limbs against a night sky, with the occasional grinning or
scowling mask hanging from the branches. These spooky images make the most
of Huck's text, and your trick-or treaters will make the most of this title, whether
counting up or counting down. JMD
INGOLD, JEANETTE 
Pictures, 1918. Harcourt, 1998 
[16 0p]
ISBN 0-15-201809-3 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
The war overseas is of less immediate interest to high school senior Asia McKinna
than events closer to home in 1918-a string of arsons which begins on her own
homestead, her grandmother's mood swings and forgetfulness, a friendship with
Nick Grissom that has suddenly taken a warmer turn, and the flattering but dan-
gerous attentions of Nick's tempestuous, "Kraut"-hating cousin Boy Blackwell.
Change has come so quickly and dramatically that Asia longs to preserve memories
of the people and places that form her life; she therefore saves and works and
finagles money to purchase a Kodak Autographic camera, and she convinces the
local photographer to take her on as an apprentice. As her skill at framing and
capturing her subjects grows, so too does her insight into the foibles and secrets of
those dearest to her. Asia's determination to master her craft is credible and touch-
ing, and her romance with Nick is fraught with enough clumsy missteps and ten-
derness to set readers sighing with sympathy and approbation. The arson subplot,
which provides a riveting opener for the novel, is so cunningly intertwined with
the themes of family loyalty and war that revelation of the culprit comes not as the
cool disclosure of a mystery story but rather as the poignant climax to a family
drama. EB
KELLER, LAURIE 
The Scrambled States of America; written and illus. by Laurie
Keller. 
Holt, 1998 
[40p]
ISBN 0-8050-5802-8 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Familiarity has bred contempt among the United States; each state is bored with
its neighbors, so Kansas and Nebraska host a get-together for the rest of the union-
a party so successful that many of the states move next to their new friends and
thus reconfigure the map. Trouble follows, as lactose-intolerant California refuses
OCTOBER 1998 
* 63
Wisconsin's proffered cheese, Florida can't take the cold in Minnesota's old spot,
and the states occupying California's site are "bothered by an annoying rumbling
sound that kept them up all night." The states move back home, and the nation is
again at peace. Two concluding double spreads of smiling state cartoons with
capital, area, and population facts suggest a pedagogical mission for this title; how-
ever, endpaper maps feature sketchy political borders, and maps within the text are
either too faint or too cutesified with state facial features and printed asides to be of
much use in identification. Mixed-media pictures are chaotic, and the fine-print
banter among the states is random ("You have minty fresh breath," says Nevada to
Mississippi; "I like scary movies," says Illinois to Montana). Adult readers of a
more practical bent will be relieved to end this trip to the State of Confusion, but
kids tired of bland books about the fifty states may get a chuckle or two from this
nonsensical tour. EB
KING, ELIZABETH 
Quinceanera: Celebrating Fifteen; written and illus. with pho-
tographs by Elizabeth King. 
Dutton, 1998 
[40p]
ISBN 0-525-45638-4 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
The traditional celebration ofa Latina's fifteenth birthday, her quinceaiera, is given
serviceable documentary treatment in this photoessay. King relates the prepara-
tions and festivities for two girls: Cindy Chivez, of Salvadoran descent, and Suzi
Prieto, of Mexican descent. Color photos (thinly framed in pink and arranged like
photos in an album) of the girls, their families, and their celebrations enliven a
utilitarian text, which describes the family and community traditions and religious
rituals associated with reaching the age of fifteen, when the girls go from being
children to young women. The distinction between the customs of the Salva-
doran and Mexican cultures is one that needs to be made more emphatically (the
only apparent difference here is the color of the girls' dresses). Descriptions of the
party plans jump back and forth, resulting in a sometimes confusing lack of conti-
nuity. The layout of the book is unexceptional: the tiny, somewhat ornate font is
difficult to read, the varying sizes of the photographs have little to do with the
importance of the events being depicted, and borders of roses in pale pink silhou-
ettes clutter already busy pages. Still, the joy with which both families approach
this milestone in their daughters' lives is communicated through King's photo-
graphic images, and the heady excitement of the event is evident in the smiles of
both celebrants. This is a surprisingly underrepresented tradition, and it is heart-
ening to see some notice being paid to an important female rite of passage. One
page of historical background is included with no source notes or suggestions for
further reading. JMD
LESTER, ALISON 
The Quicksand Pony. 
Houghton, 1998 
[160p]
ISBN 0-395-93749-3 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-7
Ten-year-old Biddy is thrilled to be getting the chance to go out on muster (the
Australian equivalent of roundup) this year, and she and her pony Bella are ready
for the challenge. She's also intrigued by something her best friend, Irene, men-
tions to her-that Irene's young aunt, who disappeared with her baby several years
ago, might actually still be living wild out on the headland near where Biddy will
be hunting down cattle. In fact, Joe, the baby, is now a boy near Biddy's age, and
since the death of his mother he has watched the activity of the rangers and ranch-
64 
* 
THE BULLETIN
ers with fascination and longing; when Bella is trapped in quicksand and must be
left to get herself free or drown, it's Joe who rescues her, which leads him to con-
tact with Biddy and reclamation by his extended family. Lester treats this saga
with an appealing rough romanticism: the atmospheric details of Biddy working
alongside her parents on the muster are evocative and enticing (Aussie-isms and
strong language haven't been altered for the U.S. version), and the story ofJoe and
his mother's eccentric and isolated life has some Paulsenesque charm. The threads
don't immediately weave together smoothly, but the elements remain absorbing
throughout. There's a Wonderful World ofDisney quality of adventure here that
U.S. readers don't get to see much anymore and may well miss; those longing for
high times in a less philosophically overladen frontier will appreciate this Austra-
lian offering. DS
LEVIN, BETTY 
Look Back, Moss. 
Greenwillow, 1998 
[160p]
ISBN 0-688-15696-7 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-7
Anyone who's ever lost and found or adopted a stray knows that dogs have stories
worth telling, and Levin's sequel to Away To Me, Moss (BCCB 12/94) tells one-
not from the dog's viewpoint but from the viewpoint of the boy who "finds" him.
Jody is an overweight loser whose mother is involved in an extremist animal rights
group that regularly "liberates" dogs from overheated cars and now plots to liber-
ate sheep from a trial in which border collies appear to run the sheep ragged. The
plan backfires, and border collie Moss is terribly mauled by coyotes who also kill
some of the released sheep. Finding him unconscious, Jody and his mother "res-
cue" him by taking him away and not telling his owners. The rest is a boy-dog love
story that changes Jody's life. While the setup seems somewhat contrived, partly
because of the simplistic characters of Jody's aunt and his mother's boyfriend, the
novel gathers momentum with the subtler portrayal ofJody's relationship with his
distant father, his sensitive stepmother, his mother-increasingly troubled by the
extreme measures of her group and her son's enforced involvement in it-and
most important, the dog that Jody knows must somehow be returned to its owner
and its work. There are interesting issues raised here about conflicts between legal
rights and ethical values, and the ending is skillfully provocative in the way Jody
effects justice without further revealing his mother's part in breaking the law. BH
LITTKE, IAEL 
Haunted Sister. Holt, 1998 
217p
ISBN 0-8050-5729-3 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Janine's heart stops in the hospital after her car accident, but when she goes down
the ritual tunnel to the white light that is the afterlife, her dead relatives and ac-
quaintances tell her it's not time and send her back. The problem is that Lenore,
Janine's twin sister who died twelve years ago when the girls were four years old,
hitches a ride with her sister and comes back to life with her, sharing Janine's body.
Janine is frightened and angry as Lenore gains more power, making Janine do
daring and wrong things (Janine had previously joked that she was Lenore when-
ever she succumbed to bad impulses), things that Janine perhaps finds secretly
exciting; Lenore also hints at Janine's culpability in the accident that killed her.
This is a terrific creepy premise, and Littke handles it with style ("It was raining
the night I died," the book begins). Some faithful old gothic elements are put to
good use here: the bad girl inside the good girl, the doctor whose rationality
prevents her from seeing the event in anything but psychological terms, the fore-
OCTOBER 1998 
* 
65
shadowing of the conceptual twist underlying the mystery (the surviving four-
year-old twin was actually Lenore, at first mistaken for and then insisting on being
her dead "good girl" sister). Unfortunately, the book squanders its accumulated
tension in a baffling, too-easy ending that seems retroactively to support the doctor's
position and therefore take the chill out of the events and turn them into overhyped
psychodrama. Readers will still relish the odd twist on sibling rivalry and past
guilts affecting the present, however, and perhaps they'll just want to write their
own endings. DS
LITTLE, JEAN 
Emma's Magic Winter; illus. by Jennifer Plecas. 
HarperCollins,
1998 
[6 4p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-025390-8 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-025389-4 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 1-3
Shy Emma hates reading aloud in front of class, and she is not at all sure of how to
make friends with the new girl next door, Sally, even with the help of one of
Mom's pies. With the encouragement of her father ("'Go for it, Emma,' Dad said.
'You can't be shy with a pie'") and her imagination, Emma manages to make a new
friend, two if you count Sally's little brother. Emma's anxiety about reading in
public is similarly conquered with the help of her "Magic Boots" and some gentle
encouragement from Sally. Plecas' energetic illustrations have a simplicity of style
that suits the warmhearted nature of Little's tale. Rendered with simple ink de-
tails, the character's expressions are agreeably emotive and their body language
exuberant. The combination of Plecas' clean, unmuddy colors and Little's spare
but rich text results in a compact story about growing friendship that is going to
make a lot of just-learning-to-read readers very happy. JMD
LOBEL, ANITA 
No Pretty Pictures: A Child of War. 
Greenwillow,
1998 
193p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-688-15935-4 
$16.00 
R* 
Gr. 5-12
What distinguishes this Holocaust memoir from many others that have been pub-
lished recently is the author's scrupulous honesty to her perceptions as a child: the
puzzlement over her father's disappearance from their lives following the Ger-
mans' march into Krak6w, her anger at her mother for disrupting the safe hiding
place their Polish Catholic maid had found for her and her brother in a small
village, her loathing of the Jewishness that caused people to despise and persecute
them, her revulsion from the "dirty, squabbling Hungarians and Romanians" in
the concentration camp, and her love affair with the Swedes who restored her to
health after the war. She's also clear about the aftereffects of her disrupted child-
hood: "To this day I am suspicious when reasonable everyday life proceeds at a
sleepy pace. Then I find myself stirring up an artificial crisis, a tempest in a tea-
pot." Lobel projects herself not as a hero nor even a victim, but a determined,
sometimes irascible survivor. The episodes are cohesively structured despite the
fragmented nature of experiences that pulled her abruptly from one situation to
another. That Lobel can turn so effectively from brilliant picture-book art to
tightly styled nonfiction shows a rare gift for storytelling across forms. The writ-
ing is clean, almost stark, and the tone straightforward enough for a broad age
range, including high school students who are slow or reluctant readers as well as
older elementary and junior-high students unready for the horrific details of more
graphic accounts. BH
66 
* THE BULLETIN
McCULLY, EMILY ARNOLD 
An Outlaw Thanksgiving; written and illus. by Emily
Arnold McCully. 
Dial, 1998 
40p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-2198-6 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-2197-8 
$15.99 
R 
5-8 yrs
Young listeners may not immediately resonate to the name "Butch Cassidy," but
our young protagonist Clara certainly does. She's seen his face on a "Wanted"
poster in the train depot, and she knows that he's admired for his nerve and charm
as least as much as he's feared. As she and Mama railroad West to meet Papa in
California, a snowstorm stops the train dead in its tracks, and the passengers must
scamper to find accommodations before they freeze. A well-meaning fellow trav-
eler escorts the ladies to friends at Brown's Hole, Utah, where they are welcomed
at a Thanksgiving feast attended by none other than Cassidy himself and his out-
law colleagues ("Clara must keep [Mama] from finding out they'd been led to a
den of thieves.... She'd faint dead away if she knew"). McCully makes the most
of the western terrain, whether sandy and barren, golden with wheat, or shrouded
in snow, and she portrays Clara as just the fiery-haired, freckled little spitfire that
could relish a t&te-i-t&te with a criminal. Gunslinger fans in the audience may be
a bit disappointed by how tame an event this based-in-fact dinner turns out to be,
but children looking for an alternative to another literary dinner at Grandma's
should belly right up for the feast. An appended note gives some background and
documents McCully's research. EB
MARSDEN, JOHN 
Checkers. 
Houghton, 1998 
[128p]
ISBN 0-395-85754-6 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
The teenage daughter of financier Murray Warner recounts in her journal how the
political scandal which embroiled her father compromised her sanity and confined
her in a mental hospital. As she intertwines the threads of two apparently dispar-
ate stories-how she acquired her beloved mutt Checkers, and how elements of
the scandal were inexorably dragged to light by the press-it becomes obvious that
the dog somehow propelled the affair from the sordid to the tragic. Clues are
dropped with mechanical precision, and most readers won't be too surprised to
discover how Checkers' pedigree is pivotal to the political demise of the Premier
and the ruin of Murray, who retaliates by stabbing the dog to death. The mon-
etary machinations which land Murray and his colleagues in steaming hot water
are realistically convoluted, and readers face a considerable challenge to sift them
from among the narrator's random observations of her fellow hospital patients.
Unfortunately, the labor required may not be worth the explanatory payoff for
some readers, who might be better off with similarly themed titles such as Patricia
Calvert's Glennis, Before andAfter (BCCB 10/96) or Marcia Byalick's It's a Matter
of Trust (1/96). EB
MAYNARD, BILL 
Rock River. Putnam, 1998 
[112p]
ISBN 0-399-23224-9 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Ever since Luke's reckless older brother, Robert, drowned in the river, the twelve-
year-old has questioned whether his own cautious ways are due to an overprotec-
tive mother, good sense, or simple lack of courage. During summer vacation he
and his friend Milo, like Robert a daredevil, accept a bet from two girls to catch the
OCTOBER 1998 
* 
67
biggest bass before school starts. When an ill-conceived plan to raft down the
flood-swollen river to a prime fishing spot strands Milo on a rock in midstream,
Luke proves to himself that he unquestionably has what it takes to triumph over a
crisis. Luke's father, impressed by his son's clearheadedness in an emergency, fi-
nally admonishes his wife to get her own fears under control ("He can't spend his
whole life trying not to be Robert"). Maynard casts a clear message about the
difference between fortitude and foolishness, but snappy dialogue, some goofy
antics, and loving attention to fishing minutiae insure that middle-school readers
will take the bait. EB
MENICK, STEPHEN 
The Muffin Child. Philomel, 1998 
[224p]
ISBN 0-399-23303-2 
$17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Although Tanya knows her parents were swept off a bridge by rising flood waters,
she is unable to accept the fact they are dead. Resisting efforts by her neighbors to
provide her a home, the eleven-year-old insists on staying alone in her farmhouse,
caring for her cow Milenka, and supporting herself by baking and selling muffins.
Soon the neighbor women grow jealous of her culinary skill, the men grow covet-
ous of her untended fields and orchards, and Tanya is regarded as an aberration-
"solitary, gifted, and dangerous." Despite her seeming independence, Tanya is
still very much a child learning the ropes of adult life; when a neighbor child goes
missing and Tanya is suspected in his disappearance, she blames a band of gypsies
in the area and thus touches off a night of violence in which she nearly loses her
own life. In Menick's hands the early twentieth-century Balkan setting assumes a
folkloric aspect, menacing and otherworldly, and his heroine seems a near mythic
figure, tossed by forces beyond her control. However, the substance behind the
atmosphere is difficult to divine, and whether all this sturm und drang amounts to
ancestral lore (it seems Tanya's story is a bit of family history told by a mother to
her daughter), a cautionary tale, or a quasi-political treatise on indigenous Balkan
hostilities remains unclear. Still, there's a mesmerizing eeriness to this affair that
will probably keep readers focused on Tanya's immediate travails. EB
MIKAELSEN, BEN 
Petey. 
Hyperion, 1998 
[256p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2376-3 
$16.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0426-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Despite a grim diagnosis by a reputable specialist in the early 1920s ("Any
rehabilitative efforts would be futile"), the Corbins attempt to care for their deformed
and unresponsive son Petey for two years before acknowledging defeat and placing
him into the Warm Springs Insane Asylum permanently. There Petey lies through
decades of benign neglect, infrequently punctuated by the insightful ministrations
of a few transitory caregivers who glimpse his hidden intelligence and laboriously
raise him to plateaus of awareness and limited communication. The first half of
Mikaelsen's lengthy novel is a poignant, unsensationalized account of the care of a
misdiagnosed cerebral-palsy victim caught in a state health system that lacked the
medical proficiency, trained staff, and funding to help him achieve his considerable
potential. With the entrance of eighth-grader Trevor Ladd into the septuagenarian
Petey's life, however, the story takes an abrupt nose dive into the mouthy-kid-
with-a-heart-of-gold genre. Trevor, neglected by his cold, workaholic parents,
68 
* THE BULLETIN
saves Petey from a snowball-pelting by some junior-high toughs and quickly attaches
himself to the old man. With the ready blessings of the staff at Petey's new nursing
home, Trevor wheels Petey on fishing trips, introduces him to the wonders of K-
Mart, reunites him with an old roommate and a former caregiver, raises money for
a new wheelchair, and ultimately teaches his parents the meaning of life ("You've
made us see that caring should be everybody's business.... It's time to be a family
again"). Mikaelsen's awkward writing isn't up to reconciling the depiction of
Petey's pre-Trevor years with the patronizing sentimentality into which the novel
devolves. Perhaps it's best to simply close the book at Chapter 15, with the assurance
that things get a little better for Petey and he dies a happy man. EB
MILLS, CLAUDIA 
Standing Up to Mr. O. 
Farrar, 1998 
[17 6 p]
ISBN 0-374-34721-2 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Maggie thinks the world of her charismatic biology teacher, Mr. O'Neill, and she's
dreading the moment she might fail him by falling apart when it comes time to kill
and dissect a worm. In fact she does more than that-despite the pragmatic argu-
ments of her lab partner, she decides that dissection is wrong and that she can't
dissect the worm, the follow-up assignment of the fish, or the frog. She turns to
vegetarianism and even flirts with veganism; she also devotes her opinion piece for
English class and for the accompanying essay contest to the subject; and she finds
that her commitment is distancing her from her best friend but also gaining her a
similarly inclined male admirer. As she did in Dinah Forever (BCCB 11/95), Mills
does an excellent job of blending serious philosophical contemplation with middle-
grades realities; just because Maggie's going about her ethical explorations (her lab
partner's periodic revelations about unconsidered inconsistencies in her position
trigger humorous but legitimate tizzies) as the twelve-year-old she is doesn't mean
they count less. The book adds intriguing layers with the essay contest, where
Maggie's excellent essay clearly missed its prize because of Mr. O's objection to its
subject, with Maggie's growing understanding of her best friend, who doesn't have
Maggie's moral courage, with Maggie's relationship with apparent kindred spirit
Jake (who's involved mainly to cause trouble) and with lab-partner Matt, who's no
ethical slouch himself (he chases down the essay-contest judges to ask why Maggie
didn't win). Kids are indeed struggling not just with domestic strife but with some
abstract concepts of morality at Maggie's age, and this is a book that respects that
struggle while understanding that its rigor isn't always as easy as it seems. Readers
will both enjoy the book's social side and appreciate the treatment of Maggie's
conscience. DS
MORGENSTERN, SUSIE 
Secret Letters from 0 to 10; tr. by Gill Rosner. 
Viking,
1998 
[208p]
ISBN 0-670-88007-8 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Ernest has lived a life of quiet and bland order with his grandmother ("Each day
was an infallible repetition of the last"); she never leaves the apartment, they dine
primarily on soup, and home life is untroubled by telephones, televisions, or other
distractions. Then new schoolmate Victoria gallops into Ernest's life and sends it
topsy-turvy. She loves Ernest and he can't help responding: he loves her and her
thirteen brothers, whom Ernest gets to know; he loves her warmhearted affection,
OCTOBER 1998 
* 69
which includes Ernest right from the start; and he loves her her casual spontaneity,
which leads him on what he considers undreamed-of adventures ranging from
traveling beyond his street to dining out to smuggling a baby (Victoria's only younger
brother) into school. More weightily, her influence leads him to make some changes
in his and his grandmother's lives, including reestablishment of contact with his
long-lost father. This is the first book of Morgenstern's (she's a major French
writer for children) to be translated into English, and the touches of quotidian
French life add a particular charm here. The breezy and matter-of-fact tone is at
its best in depicting the relationship between Ernest and Victoria, and Ernest's
gradual emergence into a fuller existence makes for an enjoyable tale. The finding
of his long-lost father is less effective, however, depending as it does on coinci-
dence and good fortune to a degree that interferes with even the loose reality the
rest of the novel creates. The simple and straightforward yet unpatronizing tone
and the engaging friendship, however, may be enough to satisfy readers looking
for a different take on middle-grades drama. DS
O'NEILL, ALEXIS 
Loud Emily; illus. by Nancy Carpenter. 
Simon, 1998 
32p
ISBN 0-689-81078-4 
$16.00 
R 4-7 yrs
It certainly isn't Emily's fault that her voice "rattled the brasses" and "shimmied
the crystals." When her parents' and tutor's admonishments to speak more quietly
cannot undo an act of nature, they arrange to send her away to Miss Meekmeister's
School for Soft-Spoken Girls. Emily, however, answers a dockside advertisement
("Loud Help Needed Now") and signs on with Captain Baroo, who can rely on
her bellowed "LUFF HER UP BEFORE WE'RE STOVE" to carry through the
strongest gale. Carpenter fashions her crackled spreads and vignettes into a whim-
sical, affectionate parody of early nineteenth-century folk art. Emily is a wide-
mouthed but demure little miss, whose golden banana curls anticipate Shirley
Temple by a century; her elders are appropriately prissy (mob-capped mother plies
her needle with embroidered pillows tied over her ears) or salty (weather-beaten
Captain Baroo scowls into the wind as it carries off his top hat and nearly makes
away with Emily as well). O'Neill drifts from good-natured exaggeration into
wild improbability as Emily summons a pod of whales to save the ship from run-
ning aground, but children captivated by Emily's vocal prowess may not be much
bothered. Carpenter and O'Neill cap the adventure with end notes on nineteenth-
century whaling and painting. EB
PECK, RICHARD 
A Long Wayfrom Chicago: A Novel in Stories. Dial, 1998 
14 8p
ISBN 0-8037-2290-7 
$15.99 
R* Gr. 5-8
For the seven summers between 1929 and 1935, Joey Dowdel and his younger
sister Mary Alice are packed off for a week's visit with Grandma Dowdel, but if
you think this sounds like another old-timey summer adventure tale, think again.
The focus here is on the amazing and intimidating Grandma Dowdel, a curmudg-
eonly widow who regularly musters her deadpan wit to keep her neighbors in their
place. Narrator Joey relates a telling incident from each summer, beginning in
1929 when Grandma plugs a corpse with her double-barreled Winchester (a Peck
tale which appeared in Harry Mazer's anthology Twelve Shots, BCCB 10/97). In
1930, Grandma gets even with some pranksters whose antics have gone too far;
1933 finds her conspiring with her grandchildren and a legendary ghost to aid
eloping lovers; in 1934 she plays fast and loose with Abe Lincoln lore to keep the
70 * THE BULLETIN
town's snooty banker from foreclosing on a neighbor's house. Individual tales
offer definite readaloud possibilities, and any one of them could provide booktalking
bait. Peck does a superb job, however, of tracing the tacit understanding and quiet
affection that gradually grows between the children and the outwardly dour grande
dame, and much would be lost by removing a story from its larger context. When
Joey's troop train speeds through Grandma's town, carrying him off to war in
1942, "she stood at her door, large as life, larger ... waving big at all the cars,
hoping I'd see." And that's just how readers will want to remember her. EB
PETERSEN, P. J. 
My Worst Friend; illus. by Meredith Johnson. 
Dutton,
1998 
[80p]
ISBN 0-525-46028-4 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 2-4
Jenny has known Sara since preschool, and that's also how long they've been en-
emies. Sara is sneaky, destructive, and competitive in the extreme ("So it was fun
to see her when she wasn't the best. She'd get red in the face and give me dirty
looks"), and she and Jenny are repeatedly thrown together because of their moth-
ers' close friendship. When Sara undergoes treatment for a brain tumor, Jenny is
conflicted between her legitimate dislike and her desire to avoid being hurtful to
someone who is suffering, until she begins to see that she might be most helpful by
treating Sara as she usually does no matter how abrasively that may be. Petersen is
deft at conveying the elaborateness of Sara's nastiness and the warring of Jenny's
accumulated resentment with her newfound pity. It's not entirely clear how the
book stands on Sara's character, however; though she's still nasty after her surgery
it seems to be for different reasons than before, and her apparent respect for Jenny
seems to be a sign of sentimental softening that the book otherwise eschews. The
endless friction will be immediately recognizable to young readers, however (though
they may not catch some of the subtle suggestions that Sara and Jenny are in fact
rather alike), and they'll wonder what they themselves would do in such a situa-
tion. The black-and-white drawings have a rumpled informality that helps keep
things on the light side. DS
PRINCE, MAGGIE 
The House on Hound Hill. Houghton, 1998 
[256p]
ISBN 0-395-90702-0 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Emily is morose and unsettled in her new house, where she, her brother, and her
mother have moved after her parents' divorce. She's even more unsettled by the
strange noises she hears and the odd young man looking for his cat whom she
keeps encountering, first outside the house and then, more frighteningly, in it.
Soon Emily realizes that what she's seeing is the past, in the time of London's
seventeenth-century plague epidemic when her street was filled with the dead,
dying, and desperate. Local residents who also see bits of earlier times include
Emily in their group, hoping to understand more of the situation and to ascertain
if the current local cases of the plague are actually a result of contamination from
visits to the pestilential past. Prince sets her story up stylishly, with Emily's dislo-
cation from her present established long before her slippage into history; the book's
well-evoked atmosphere, both of the tense present and the devastating realities of
the historical epidemic (though purists may query Prince's acceptance of the plaguey
significance of "Ring around the Roses") give the creepiness real impact. Fans of
OCTOBER 1998 
* 
71
the genre may be surprised by the untraditional and rather open-ended conclusion
(contemporary antibiotics are apparently going to alter history without causing
any problems, and it looks like the time-hopping will continue), but they'll relish
the idea of a historical menace supernaturally freed from its temporal bounds. DS
PULLMAN, PHILIP 
Count Karlstein; illus. by Diana Bryan. 
Knopf, 1998 
243p
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-99255-3 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-89255-9 
$17.00 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Count Karlstein made a pact with Zamiel, the Demon Huntsman, and the time
has come to pay the price. Being a malevolent sort, Karlstein has decided to save
his own skin by offering the Demon Huntsman the souls of his wards, his or-
phaned nieces Charlotte and Lucy. The girls are not without allies, however-
Hildi, a maidservant in the castle, knows Karlstein's plan and is determined to foil
it. With the help of her brother Peter, a con artist named Dr. Cadaverezzi, and the
girls' former teacher, Miss Davenport, Hildi vanquishes the count in a rousing
conclusion that gives the orphaned sisters a home, reunites Miss Davenport with
her long-lost love, and sees Karlstein come to a gruesome and well-deserved end.
Pullman's adventure-laden tale (first published in Britain in 1982) is set in a small
village with vague Aiken-ish overtones in nineteenth-century Switzerland. The
characters are Dickensianly developed, with the names giving insight to their indi-
vidual personalities (Charlotte writes passionately romantic prose, and the girls'
tutor, a slimy fellow, is named Snivelwurst). The action alternates between slap-
stick and suspense and includes midnight escapes from forbidding castles, a des-
perate hike over an ice covered mountain, the unmasking of the real Count
Karlstein, and, of course, weddings-two of them. Pullman's language and imag-
ery has an effectively melodramatic punch, and he knows how to plot, bless him.
Bryan's sophisticated silhouettes, stylistically reminiscent of shadow puppets and
paper cuttings, are strategically scattered throughout the book. This is the perfect
book to give to those readers not quite ready for the intense complexities of The
Golden Compass (BCCB 4/96) or The Ruby in the Smoke (5/87). JMD
QUARLES, HEATHER 
A Door Near Here. Delacorte, 1998 
[208p]
ISBN 0-385-32595-9 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Fifteen-year-old Katherine is functioning as the parent to her fourteen-year-old
brother, Douglas, thirteen-year-old sister Tracey, and eight-year-old sister Alisa
since their mother's job loss and alcoholic isolation in the upstairs bedroom. The
older kids are determined not to involve their distant father, who is absorbed in his
new family and who refuses to include Alisa, not his child, in visits and would
certainly never offer her a home. As the financial situation gets tighter, signs of the
kids' plight become more obvious to their schools; when one of her teachers is
driven by concern to check into the family situation, Katherine goes too far in
protecting her family and makes a false insinuation of child abuse against him in
an anonymous letter. Quarles is good at evoking the tension and claustrophobia
of the situation; the kids' penny-pinching, list-making, and desperate measures
(illegally driving the car to the supermarket at two in the morning) make for com-
pelling reading but aren't preternaturally crafty (it doesn't seem to have occurred
to any of the obsessively smoking older siblings that they can't really afford to
spend money on cigarettes, for instance). Alisa's quest for Narnia, which she ap-
72 
* THE BULLETIN
parently finds but turns away from in order to stay with her family, doesn't blend
well with the rest of the story, and the concerned teacher is overly saintly; nor is the
kids' father's sudden turnaround at the end of the book particularly believable.
Katherine's hard-edged and driven narration will draw teens, however, especially
those fans of gritty robinsonnades such as Voigt's The Homecoming. DS
ROBINS, ARTHUR, ad. 
The Teeny Tiny Woman: A Traditional Tale; ad. and illus
by Arthur Robins. 
Candlewick, 1998 
[24p]
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7636-0444-5 $10.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-7636-0452-6 $3.29
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-6 yrs
There are at least two well-known picture-book versions of this repetitive old tale,
so why in the world would we need another one? Well, it's the illustrations, silly-
or, if you will, the silly illustrations. The text (Robins wisely doesn't fool with its
cumulative success) of this folktale favorite still has handy readaloud and participa-
tion possibilities, and in Robins' newly rendered version, the pictures have a cer-
tain Halloween spookiness missing from the Galdone and the dePaola illustrated
editions. Robins' cheerfully smiling teeny tiny protagonist leaves her "House on
Haunted Hill"-looking abode (an impression contributed to by the cheerful bunch
of bats winging around it on the cover and title page) for a stroll in a moonlit
graveyard, where she comes upon the ubiquitous bone, which she places in her
nightstand. When the bone's rightful owner comes to claim it, viewers are treated
to little green fingers coming round the door and one bright eye shining in the
dark, which expands on subsequent spreads into two eyes, then two eyes and a
grin, and finally to the whole of the little green goblin-like creature as he runs from
the teeny tiny woman's final, ear-blasting shout of "TAKE IT!" The watercolor
and pen and ink illustrations, reminiscent of Quentin Blake in their scrawled line,
are rendered in a positively perky palette that includes hot pink, orange, and yel-
low, a palette that further de-scarifies the tale, making it most appropriate for the
younger storytime set that think they want to hear something frightening. JMD
RucKMAN, IV 
In Care ofCassie Tucker. Delacorte, 1998 
[160p]
ISBN 0-385-32514-2 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-7
During the last months of 1899, Cassie's family undergoes a more profound change
than any promised by the newfangled gadgetry of the turning century: cousin
Evan moves in with them after his own parents die of cholera. Serious accommo-
dations must be made on both sides to successfully graft agnostic, free-spirited
Evan onto this opposite limb of the Tucker family tree. He introduces eleven-
year-old Cassie to the pleasures of swimming the river in her bloomers; he fear-
lessly leads older boys in a horse-breaking adventure, which leaves his older cousin
Ted in a coma; he refuses to pray at his minister Uncle Isaac's church. But he's
also a levelheaded young man and a hard worker who appreciates the new home
offered to him, and at every turn he is met halfway by equally levelheaded uncle,
aunt, and cousins who have plenty of love for one more child in the house. The
unrelenting schedule of chores, the changeable and frequently wicked climate, and
the interdependence among neighbors in the Nebraska farming community are
vividly detailed, and Ruckman provides historic notes expanding on epidemics,
blizzards, Populist politics, Levi's blue jeans, and a host of other allusions within
OCTOBER 1998 
* 73
her text. Readers counting down to the millennium may want to inventory those
family events which, like Cassie's, will probably prove more momentous than a
flip of the calendar page. EB
SCHENKER, DONA 
The Secret Circle. Knopf, 1998 
[17 6p]
Library ed ISBN 0-679-98989-7 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-88989-2 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Jamie's confidante has always been her adult neighbor, Pearlie Wu Graves, and
now that Pearlie has died Jamie feels alone and adrift in sixth grade at her insular
new private school. She thinks perhaps she could be friends with her classmate
Zoe, but getting to know Zoe better leads her into the tradition of the secret circle,
which requires applicants to perform a series of initiation tasks before finally being
admitted. Jamie likes the idea of belonging to a group, despite its being led by the
scary Kai, but she has to make a decision when the initiation requires her to risk
something dear to Pearlie Wu's grieving husband, whom Jamie has just begun to
befriend. This doesn't have quite the intensity one might expect from the girls'
school/secret society initiation plot, and none of the character dynamics-Kai's
essential insecurity, Jamie's eventual repudiation of the circle, lonely Mr. Graves'
crusty attempts to reach out to his neighbors-are particularly surprising. Schenker
takes a fresh approach to the ending, however (Jamie performs the initiation with-
out trouble or harm and then rejects the inclusion she's won), and she sharply
observes school culture, the relationships between the girls, and Kai's subtle and
not-so-subtle exercises of power. Readers looking for something a little edgier
than the traditional school story might well find worthwhile-and consoling-
this story of a girl who decides to find her satisfaction away from the group. DS
SEYMOUR, TRES 
The Revelation ofSaint Bruce. 
Orchard, 1998 
[128p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-33109-1 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-30109-5 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-10
The five friends-Bruce, Jack, Carrie, Theresa, and Ellis-are inseparable. High
school seniors, they band together against the boredom of jocks and organized
athletics, finally persuading a teacher to sponsor them in a study hall so they can
avoid going to pep rallies. When narrator Bruce is out sick and the sponsoring
teacher is replaced by an ineffective sub, the four remaining students celebrate by
drinking a bottle of Jack Daniels. They reveal their little party to Bruce when he
returns to school, making him an unwilling co-conspirator; Bruce, when asked by
the suspicious sponsoring teacher, reveals the party in his turn. The teacher re-
ports the incident and the students involved are suspended. Bruce is ostracized,
first by other students then by his four friends after their return to school. Eventu-
ally, a rapprochement is reached, and Bruce is tentatively forgiven by all but one of
the four. Little by little, Seymour carefully delineates the personalities of Bruce
and his friends and shows the inevitability of their actions along with their slowly
emerging characters. The dynamic among the five friends is a telling one, each
balancing his or her personality against the others, each jockeying gently and not
so gently for a stronger or at least better-balanced position. Realistically if sadly,
the adults-both loving and not so loving parents are seen through the eyes of
their children, and teachers are unflatteringly revealed through their actions and
74 * THE BULLETIN
conversations-have little effect on the teenagers' actions. Bruce narrates his own
story in an intelligent, querying voice searching for his own truth, and while the
concluding reunion may be overly optimistic, Bruce's search for a moral absolute
is still worth following. JMD
STAMMERS, 
KAY 
Princess Diana: A True Fairy Tale. 
HarperCollins,
1998 
32p 
illus. and with photographs
ISBN 0-06-107119-6 
$12.95 
NR 
5-8 yrs
If the title's already raised your eyebrows, you may just want to leave them there.
Starting out "Once upon a time, in the green countryside of England, lived a little
girl named Lady Diana," this goes on to provide a stylized and gappy chronicle of
the late Princess of Wales' life. Its highlights, of course, are her courtship ("Now
she had become a sweet and charming young woman, with a carefree laugh and
sparkling eyes-a woman fit to be a princess") and her lavish wedding ("When
Diana stepped out of the carriage, the crowds gasped. She looked just like a fairy
princess"), but it's willing to hint at a highlight to come ("Then one day she met a
man named Dodi Fayed. ... 
At last, Diana was truly happy again") until, of
course, the tragic finale ("The whole world cried"). There are inherent problems
in trying to achieve both biography, especially of a life so fraught with ups and
downs, and fairy tale, and the result is syrupy and evasive. It's downright chilling
to hear fairy-tale values applied to real people (the book mentions approvingly that
"Diana was now very famous and very rich," and describes the eligible Dodi as
"dark and handsome, and very rich"), and some of the generality necessary to fairy
tale ("She was so kind and so beautiful that everyone loved her") is demonstrably
untrue as biography. The format has a girlish scrapbook look; big ragged-right
print, with a decorated initial on every page (with some lamentably forced imagery
and unsubtle colors), appears under a small photograph; the pigments on some of
the pictures are odd and suggest colorized black-and-white. Even ardent young
princess fans will be somewhat bemused about what to make of it all-is this the
fairy-tale life to covet or the sad story to be wept over?-and they and the subject
deserve better. DS
STANLEY, JERRY 
Frontier Merchants: Lionel and Barron Jacobs and the Jewish Pio-
neers Who Settled the West. 
Crown, 1998 
[128p] 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-517-80020-9 
$20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-80019-5 
$19.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
In 1867, brothers Lionel and Barron Jacobs, sons of a successful California mer-
chant, headed east with a modest stock of merchandise to "the center of a giant
frying pan where the desert heat was trapped by surrounding mountains"-Tuc-
son, soon to become capital of the Arizona Territory. There, at their father Mark's
behest, they established a small store and, with their clean shirts and polished shoes
and obvious commitment to the future of the region, earned the loyal patronage of
the local hoi polloi and built their business from little more than a frontier supply
post, to a center for small loans, investment, and covert banking, and finally to the
city's premier bank. Frontier economics are explained with admirable concision,
never overpowering.the human-interest stories of the brothers' relationship with
their advice-filled papa, gregarious Lionel's womanizing and brawling, stoical
Barron's discreet visits to the red-light district and affair with a Mexican woman,
OCTOBER 1998 
* 75
and their common entrepreneurial flair. Readers will glean insight into the
historian's process as well, as Stanley incorporates excerpts from documents con-
sulted (from ledgers to love letters) and indicates how he has interpreted them.
There's enough dust and rattlers and gambling here to entice serious fans of West-
ern lore and enough solid history to light the eyes of the social-studies teacher, too.
A bibliographic essay is included, and period photos and an index will accompany
the bound volume. EB
VAIL, RACHEL 
The Friendship Ring: If You Only Knew. 
Scholastic, 1998 
226p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-590-03370-0 
$14.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-590-37451-6 
$4.99 
R* 
Gr. 5-8
The Friendship Ring: Please, Please, Please. Scholastic, 1998 
259p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-590-00327-5 
$14.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-590-37452-4 
$4.99 
R* 
Gr. 5-8
Rachel Vail (author of Wonder, BCCB 9/91, etc.) is back and once again ripping
the lid off of seventh-grade secrets in this new fiction series (a third book is planned
for later in the fall). If You Only Knew tells, from narrator Zoe's point of view, of
the beginning of seventh grade and its shifting friendships; much to her delight,
she's on the edge of becoming best friends with CJ. Please Please Please, narrated
by CJ, picks up just after If You Only Knew ends; it describes CJ's ambivalence
about replacing her old best friend, Morgan, with Zoe, and also her ambivalence
towards her immersion into ballet. Please is empathetic and sharply observed,
filled with the accuracy about neoadolescence that marked Vail's other books (CJ,
for instance, yells at her mother in genuine frustration "Don't you trust me?" while
attempting to put over a lie). It's Zoe's If however, that really gets to the obses-
sive, overheated heart of junior-high experience; Zoe is the outwardly easygoing
youngest child in a volatile family, going along to get along while her anguished
insecurities assess the possibility of intended slight in every single interaction. Less
adult-mediated than even Judy Blume, Vail's saga of shifting alliances, dirty tricks,
seventh-grade meanness veiled as honesty, and passionate desperation rings eerily
true; the clubby-looking books (of a diary-esque trim size and plumpness) and
invitation to e-mail the author will draw in just the kind of readers who will appre-
ciate the world within. Expect much quizzing on the arrival date of the third
book, which will tell Morgan's point of view. DS
VANDE VELDE, VIVAN 
Ghost ofa HangedMan. Cavendish, 1998 
95p
ISBN 0-7614-5015-7 
$14.95 
R* Gr. 4-8
There was no question that Jake Barnette was a murdering outlaw, and there was
no question that he was guilty as sin, so his being condemned to hang was not a
surprise. In his final statement to the court Barnette swore he'd come back for
vengeance on those responsible and their families, too, which is one of the reasons
that Benjamin, the story's narrator, and his younger sister, Annabelle, are forbid-
den by their sheriff father from attending the hanging. A freak flood saturates the
town cemetery and forces buried coffins-including Jake Barnette's-above ground,
and the accidents that take the lives of those responsible for the hanging of the
outlaw begin. Vande Velde has combined elements of classic ghost tales with a
Wild West setting in this absorbing and often chilling story of revenge, justice,
and the power of love. The colorful characters are made solid with a few choice
76 
* THE BULLETIN
words describing their physical traits or psychological temperament ("Charity
Pickett-perhaps the most badly misnamed girl in the whole town, with the pos-
sible exception of her older sister, Patience"), and the dialogue among the children
(focusing with ghoulish glee upon the spooky happenings) has an easy immediacy.
Vande Velde has a knack for creepy understatement that effectively delivers unex-
pected chills, and the climax, in which brother and sister, with the help of their
deceased mother, defeat the murderous-even-in-death outlaw, brings the book to
its shuddery, satisfying conclusion. This is a strongly focused narrative with ap-
peal for middle-grade ghost-story lovers and hi-lo readers in search of something
more rewarding than predictable genre horror. JMD
WALDMAN, NEIL 
Masada; written and illus. by Neil Waldman. 
Morrow,
1998 
64p
ISBN 0-688-14481-0 
$16.00 
R Gr. 5-9
Waldman tells the story of the nearly impregnable fortress at Masada, just outside
Jerusalem, built by the mad king, Herod, occupied by the Zealots, and taken by an
undefeatable Roman Army. In the course of recounting the history of the legend-
ary fortress, Waldman relates some of the history of the Jewish search for a home-
land, touching on the Diaspora and the founding of the new Israel. It is the story
of the occupation of Masada by the Jews rebelling against Roman persecution and
the ruthless taking of the fortress by the Roman legions, however, that is the focus
of this title. In thrillingly dramatic and admiring prose with strong nationalistic
undertones, Waldman tells of the ferociously battling Jews who would rather com-
mit suicide than surrender to the conquering Romans and of the inspirational
value of the old story to new generations. Final chapters discuss the discovery of
the ruins of the fortress, the archeological exploration of the site, and its impor-
tance to the Jewish people. The layout and design of the book is most elegant,
from its framed monochrome acrylic and India ink illustrations to its sepia capitals
and crisp white pages. Although Waldman bases his book on Josephus Flavius'
account of the fortress' history, the author is careful to point out in his afterword
the conflicting theories about Masada's history. Maps, a timeline, a glossary, in-
dex, bibliography, and art notes are included. JMD
WALDRON, JAN L. 
John Pig's Halloween; illus. by David McPhail. 
Dutton,
1998 
32p
ISBN 0-525-45941-3 
$15.99 
R 4-7 yrs
John Pig decides to stay home from trick-or-treating one Halloween for fear of
running into things that go bump in the night, and he gets some unexpected
visitors. A witch with culinary propensities shows up on his doorstep, and, faster
than you can say hocus pocus, she has John roasting pumpkin seeds, baking pies,
and partying with vampires, werewolves, and other assorted spectral f(r)iends. When
the party's over, the spooky guests depart, but not before promising to return next
Halloween. John, his night fears permanently vanquished, goes happily to bed,
"with visions of goblins and ghosts in his head./ In the dark he slept soundly, no
longer afraid/ And dreamed of the many new friends he had made." This is the
second holiday outing for Waldron and McPhail, and it's even better than their
first (Angel Pigand the Hidden Christmas, BCCB 12/97). Waldron's rhyming text
is unforced, funny, and bouncy, and McPhail illustrates the Halloween hijinks
with a positively cozy assortment of ghosts and ghoulies. John Pig is an expressive
OCTOBER 1998 
* 
77
little porker with wistful eyes, and he inhabits a Halloween house full of enough
shadowy corners and grinning pumpkins to suit even the most picky Halloween
aficionado. This is one treat without any trick. JMD
WICK, WALTER 
Walter Wick's Optical Tricks; written and illus. by Walter
Wick. 
Cartwheel/Scholastic, 1998 
[48p]
ISBN 0-590-22227-9 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 4 up
See this month's Big Picture, p. 49, for review.
WOODSON, JACQUELINE 
If You Come Softly. 
Putnam, 1998 
[192p]
ISBN 0-399-23112-9 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Woodson offers readers a poetically conceived novel of young love, permeated
with complications of family dynamics, racism, and violence. African-American
Miah (short for Jeremiah) is the only son of a successful filmmaker father and
novelist mother, recently divorced. Jewish American Ellie (short for Elisha) is the
youngest daughter of a conventionally successful doctor and an unfulfilled mother
(who twice sought fulfillment by leaving her husband and children). The two
fifteen-year-olds meet at Percy Academy, a toney private school, and, in the most
classic and satisfying way, fall in love at first sight. Their contentment with each
other is tested by everyone who has an opinion about interracial romance-friends,
family, strangers-and their relationship is brought to a premature and tragically
senseless conclusion when Miah, mistaken for a fleeing fugitive, is shot and killed.
Woodson unerringly limns the delicate intensity and passionate innocence of first
love, alternating between Ellie's first-person account and the omniscient narration
of Miah's internal and external circumstances. The two points of view effectively
communicate the loneliness of the two sensitive teenagers and their breathless de-
light in discovering one another. Characterization is solid and well-developed as
both parents and friends focus into reality through the eyes of Miah and Ellie.
Their conversations ever so gently open up issues of racism, self-awareness, and
moral consciousness, even as the action inexorably draws the reader to the con-
cluding heartbreak. Miah's end is foreshadowed by a brief prelude, so it is not
blithely inserted for shock value but organically woven into the complete picture
from the opening pages, coloring the growing closeness between Miah and Ellie
with throat-catching inevitability. That Miah's death is the result of mistaken
identity rooted in racism so inherent as to be almost invisible makes it doubly
tragic. JMD
YOLEN, JANE 
Snow, Snow: Winter Poems for Children; illus. with photographs by
Jason Stemple. 
Wordsong/Boyds Mills, 1998 
[32p]
ISBN 1-56397-721-4 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Inspired by her son's crisp, frosty photography, Yolen has produced fourteen crisp,
frosty poems. They're a sparkling collection, deft but clear, on various aspects of
the wintry world: snowmobiles, footprints in snow, icy branches, snowcapped
mountains, drifts, cold-running streams. She employs an elegant playfulness
("Winter's flag/ has all white bars,/ No stars.// Cold Glory") that lifts the verses
78 
* THE BULLETIN
above the merely observant, and the book's blend of simplicity and sophistication
makes it suitable for reading aloud to younger listeners as well. The photographs
make great use of both contrast and subtlety, showing all the myriad hues snow
can offer as well as setting them against red-jacketed skiers and cerulean blue sky
(the final image's promise of spring is almost shocking in its drenched blue). The
design employs the photographs to maximum advantage, using shadowy black-
and-white versions of the same scene as backdrop to many of the vivid images and
decorating even the page numbers with a peephole into the winter worlds. Use
this to take the chill off of the chill of winter, to prime kids for an outdoor excur-
sion with an eye to writing their own verses, or to cool 'em off on a hot day at the
other end of the year. DS
YOUNGER, BARBARA 
Purple Mountain Majesties: The Story ofKatharine Lee Bates
and "America the Beautiful"; illus. by Stacey Schuett. 
Dutton, 1998 
40p
ISBN 0-525-45653-8 
$15.99 
R Gr. 3-6
This picture-book biography of Katherine Lee Bates, author of "America the Beau-
tiful," has much to recommend it, from its concise but engagingly informative text
to its single and double-page spreads illustrating the panorama of Bates' America.
Younger's congenial, chatty prose tells the story of Bates' life within the context of
her time, touching on her upbringing, her education at Wellesley (one of the few
colleges for women at that time), her travels throughout the United States, her
teaching career, and even her visit to the World's Columbian Exposition. Through-
out her life Bates wrote-stories, poetry, a journal-and after an inspirational visit
to Pike's Peak she penned what she was later to call her "hymn," the poem that
became the song "America the Beautiful." Through robust landscapes both urban
and pastoral, depicted in hearty hues and balanced compositions, Schuett's acryl-
ics reflect the zeitgeist of the world Bates inhabited. More concrete facts about
Bates' life (a timeline, or a paragraph at least providing her death date) would
surely be appreciated by report writers, and it is odd that a book about the writing
of a song does not include musical notation (the lyrics are relegated to the back
cover). Still, this is a fresh look at a woman who made a place for herself in, as well
as an unforgettable contribution to, American society and history. Younger quotes
extensively from Bates' letters and other writings, but no sources are given. JMD
OCTOBER 1998 
* 79
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
Cecil, Nancy Lee. Families in Children's Literature: A Resource Guide, Grades 4-8.
Teacher Ideas Press, 1998. Paper ed. ISBN 1-56308-313-2. $18.50. 148p.
In thematic sections (Diverse Family Groups, Heritage and Traditions, Relation-
ships within Families, and Conflicts within Families), Cecil annotates a variety of
books and provides suggestions for further discussions and activities. Topics range
from stepfamilies to adoption (the latter rather loosely interpreted here), intergen-
erational relationships to family adversity; books included have a wide age-range
and approach, with descriptions that include information about the ethnic heri-
tage of the characters, the relevant family context, genre, and the grade level. Cecil's
creative approach to thematic exploration will make her book suggestions particu-
larly useful. An appendix lists titles by ethnic background, genre, grade level, and
theme. DS
Fuhler, Carol J. Discovering Geography of North America with Books Kids Love;
illus. byAudra Loyal. Fulcrum, 1998. Paper ed. ISBN 1-55591-954-5. $16.95.
220p.
After some introductory overview, the book offers ten sections focusing on different
regions of the U.S. plus a section apiece on Canada and Mexico, those countries
with whom we share a border. Fuhler focuses on thematic approaches (including
location, place, movement, and human/environmental interactions) and includes
specific lesson plans with objectives, activities, materials, and additional titles.
Though the writing is sometimes awkward, the close regional focus and detailed
suggestions will be helpful to many seeking more integration of literature titles
into the curriculum. Appendices of teacher resources (including departments of
tourism, software, and professional reading, though no websites), chapter books
(annotated and grouped by region), and project ideas are included, as is an index.
DS
80 
* 
THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
ADVENTURE STORIES: Haas;
Lester
African Americans-fiction: Little,
Woodson
ANIMAL STORIES: Bedard;
Crebbin
Art: Wick
Aunts and uncles-fiction: Creech
Australia-fiction: Lester
Ballet-stories: Edwards
BIOGRAPHIES: Lobel; Stam-
mers; Younger
Brothers and sisters-fiction:
Coman; Quarles; Vande Velde
Brothers-fiction: Maynard
Commerce: Stanley
COUNTING BOOKS: Huck
Cowboys-stories: Herzig
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Ingold; Marsden; Vande Velde
Crime and criminals-stories:
McCully
Dancers and dancing-stories:
Edwards; Vail Please
Death and dying-fiction: Littke;
Schenker
Dogs-fiction: Levin; Marsden
Ethics and values: Bawden;
Cutler; Levin; Mills; Schenker;
Seymour; Woodson
Families-fiction: Adler; Coman;
Ferris; Quarles; Ruckman
FANTASY: Prince; Pullman
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Marsden
Fathers and daughters-stories:
Browne
Fathers and sons-fiction:
Morgenstern
Fear-fiction: Maynard
Fishing-fiction: Maynard
FOLKTALES AND
FAIRYTALES: Bodkin;
Calmenson; Davis; Field;
Gershator; Robins
Food and eating-fiction: Menick
Food and eating-stories: Davis;
French
Friendship-fiction: Ewing;
Fowler; Little; Maynard;
Morgenstern; Petersen;
Schenker; Seymour; Vail
Friendship-stories: Bedard;
Browne
FUNNY STORIES: Bedard;
Ferris; Fiedler; Gerrard; Keller
Gangs-fiction: Ewing
Geography: Keller
GHOST STORIES: Vande Velde
Grandfathers-fiction: Bawden
Grandmothers-fiction: Ingold;
Morgenstern; Peck
Gypsies-fiction: Menick; Vande
Velde
Halloween: Huck; Waldron
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Cutler; Ingold; McCully;
Menick; Peck; Ruckman
History, U.S.: Stanley
History, world: Lobel; Waldman
Holocaust: Lobel
Horses-fiction: Haas; Lester
Horses-stories: Herzig
Illness-fiction: Petersen; Prince
OCTOBER 1998 
* 
81
Incest-fiction: Coman
Israel-history: Waldman
Japan-folklore: Bodkin
Judaism-history: Waldman
Language arts: Yolen
Latinos: King
Latinos-fiction: Ewing
LOVE STORIES: Bodkin;
Fiedler; Ingold
Mosquitoes-stories: Gershator
Mothers and sons-fiction: Levin
Mothers and sons-stories: Browne;
French
MYSTERIES: Littke
Optical illusions: Wick
Orphans-fiction: Menick;
Pullman; Ruckman
Physical disabilities-fiction:
Mikaelsen
POETRY: Field; Yolen
Princesses: Stammers
PUZZLE BOOKS: Wick
Racism-fiction: Cutler; Woodson
Reading aloud: Bodkin; Field;
Peck; Yolen
Reading, beginning: Cuetara;
Little
Reading, easy: Fowler; Haas; Hall
Reading, reluctant: Ewing
Religious education: Waldman
RHYMING STORIES: Crebbin;
Waldron
RIDDLES: Hall
Rome-stories: Gerrard
School-fiction: Creech; Fiedler;
Mills; Schenker; Seymour; Vail
School-stories: Calmenson
SCIENCE FICTION: Bawden
Sexual abuse-fiction: Coman
Ships-stories: O'Neill
Sisters-fiction: Littke
Snow-poetry: Yolen
SONGS: Ahlberg; Crebbin
Storytelling: Bodkin; Davis; Gershator;
Robins
Storytime: Ahlberg; Calmenson; Crebbin;
Cuetara; Davis; French; Gershator;
Herzig; Huck; Robins; Waldron
Swans-stories: Edwards
Teachers-fiction: Adler; Mills
Teachers-stories: Calmenson
Time travel-fiction: Prince
Trains-stories: Cohen
Trucks-stories: Cuetara
Twins-fiction: Littke
Twins-stories: Gerrard
Urban life-stories: Cohen
Vegetables-stories: Davis
Voyages and travel-stories: O'Neill
West, the: Stanley
West, the-fiction: Vande Velde
West, the-stories: Herzig; McCully
Women's studies: King; Stammers;
Younger
World War II: Lobel
TALL is terrific
... it's energized
and it's gutsy.
Jonathan Kozol, authoro/Illiterate
America and Savage Inequalities.
TALLr is rmthe Ro
Ro 
th 
il
* m
s * 
-J9s' 
M^UH^ ~ 
41 
-
1
****""'
:"
:::'
1
IeAW7L5 t uof 
rc 
fI icm.
Joan F. Smutny, National-Louis University
The most empowering,
practical, and effective
professional development
resource in the field of
children's and young adult
literature.
rut iiu[e Iunuormanon
and a catalog:
* call 1-800-337-6525
* e-mail at essmont@aol.com
* or write:
Essmont Publishing,
PO. Box 186,
Brandon, Vermont 05733
Visit our Web Site at:
www.essmont.com
2
compiled by Shona McKel
A pnotograpnic, step-by-step guide to zy tralitional ana
contemporary fingerplays and rhymes for adults to share with babies
and toddlers. With additional charming watercolor-and-ink
illustrations accompanying these short verses, this collection will
delight and entertain preschoolers." -School Library Journal
Illustrations by Priscilla Lamont.
Photographs.
PreK
'8'6 
ISBN:0 07894 2861 X. St2.9)5 
lIR( INITC'PC
.. .. 
,3 
-
" 
IV I.JIY 01 1 3
by Caroline Bingham
"In signature DK style-oversize, with plenty of pictures in
color....Each two-page spread opens to one of the monster machines,
which seems to be jumping off the page. It is surrounded by smaller
photos and nuggets of information. Even though this is aimed at young
kids, older students will probably be sneaking a peek, too." -Booklist
Photographs. Glossary.
Grades PreK-1
ISBN: 0-7894-2796-6, $14.95
I
by Louise Pritchard
"...the world of the pony comes alive in this detail-filled volume.
The author provides succinct, accurate information about the various
breeds, their physical characteristics, history, and behavior.... Excellent
full-color photographs illuminate the text.... informative and fun to
read....A must-purchase." -School Library Journal
Photographs. Glossary, index, useful addresses.
Grades 3-7
ISBN: 0-7894-2810-5, $15.95
bvy 
Ian Smvth
"Brief chapters offer instruction on different aspects of the game mostly
through captioned photographs. The inclusion of as many girls as boys in the
illustrations is noteworthy Smyth provides solid, basic information in an
attractive format." -School Library Journal
Diagrams, photographs. Glossary, index, useful addresses.
Foreword by Eduardo Perez.
Grades 4-6
I 
ISBN: 0-7894-2825-3, $15.95
DK Publishing, Inc., 95 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016
http://www.dk.com
Available from your regular 
supplier, or call 
1-888-DIAL-DKP.
P1 L
.
40I
Recommended
p
,A Jý
PONY
bv 
lan 
Smv•b
Other titles available from August House LittleFolk:
THE GIRL WHO WORE TOO MUCH
A Folktale from Thailand
Retold by Margaret Read MacDonald
with Thai text by Supaporn Vathanaprida
Illustrated by Yvonne Lebrun Davis
Hardback $15.95/ISBN 0-87483-503-8
THE DANCING TURTLE
A Folktalefrom Brazil
Retold by Pleasant DeSpain
Illustrated by David Boston
Hardback $15.95/ISBN 0-87483-502-X
I SCREAM, YOU SCREAM
A Feast of Food Rhymes
Selected as one of the New York
Public library's 100 Best Children's Book
for reading and sharing
Lillian Morrison
Illustrated by Nancy Dunaway
Hardback S12.95/ISBN 0-87483-495-3
L
5
Hardback $15.95
ISBN 0-87483-498-8
LUGUST HOUSE
LittlejOlk
PO. Box 3223
ittle Rock, Arkansas 72203-3223
01-372-5450 * FAX 501-372-5579
order@augusthouse.com
1-800-284-8784
Hardback $12.95/ISBN 0-87483-495-3
* "Readers will enjoy this adventure."*
THE SQUIRE'S TALE
by Gerald Morris
rians will find a great
comic and breath-
rests for booktalks."
I Library Journal,
review*
s] 
Arthurian road
vill have readers
dering why there
nt more books like
s one and hoping
iat Morris will do
t again." -The
Bulletin, Big
Picture feature
"Well-drawn
racters, excellent,
e, detailed descrip-
ions oi mculevali in, 
anu 
a duy wit put a new
spin on this engaging tale of the characters and events of King
Arthur's time, both familiar and new." -Booklist
"There are plenty of sword fights and flashes of sorcery to delight
readers, while the plot moves at a swift clip .... An author's note
discusses the sources for the novel, providing plenty of additional
territory for budding Arthurians to explore." -Kirkus 
Reviews
0-395-86959-5 
Houghton Mifflin
Ages 10-14 
222 Berkeley Street
$15.00 
Boston, MA 02116
"Crews' watercolors will transpot 
readers toth
Incandescen fairgrons, proviing 
E 
a: visuarl tast of
carnival nig~ltlfe." -Rulle n of ~BtheCner for Chlde~ 
Ran
"His prose is spare and energtic pofec for nintlatin
oscoers; 
to the dynamic pleasres of th fair--
the food, the games the rie. 
ScolLbar ora
"Children w1ll want 
to make repetat 
sts to ths
sefcntie world"F -ALA Bookhst
Age~s 4 up. 24 pp. TR $15.OO/-68-i48-O I.E$1.9/O68-144-
lk1 
BreenwOIlo 
Boo 
A division of Wia 
Morro & Ca.. In
S "Destined to be a favorite resource"'*
TEN QUEENS
PORTRAITS OF WOMEN OF POWER
By Milton Meltzer * Illus. by Bethanne Andersen
IEsther, Cleoatra, Elizabeth I, and Catherine the Great are
among the remarkable rulers whose lives and achievements
light up this fascinating panorama.
* "Meltzer has a storyteller's flair 
*"A stirring presentation,
that brings these queens to life.... 
worthy of its subject."
Colorful expressionistic paintings 
-Booklist (Starred Review)
enrich the pags-ShoLku
Preface, notes, bibliography, index.
Full-color. 0-525-45643-0.
Ages 12 up. $25.00. 
---
DUTTON
A division of Penguin Putnam
Books for Young Readers
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.S.A.
RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED
0008-9036(199810)52:2*;1 -K
PERIODICALS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
The Bulletin ofthe Centerfor Children's Books
invites you to visit our home page at
http://edfu.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Regular features include:
* Bulletin Stars-what we starred this month
* Bulletin Dozen-a genre- or theme-based list of titles
* Quote of the Month
* Bulletin Blue Ribbons 1990-1997
* the Baby Bulletin-a sample collection of recent reviews
Occasional features include:
* Rising Star-an examination of the work of a talented new author
or artist
* True Blue-reflections on a time-honored talent
* Dueling Reviews-a look at the discussion behind the scenes when a book
polarizes the editors
* And more ... updated monthly!
11Ill 
I lI
1·I-·;· =- 
·
-
·-··
-- ·
-·--~ 
-
i i~
rj
"""" 
· I· 
·
I·- 
_;gi-i:1
D 
·- '
4 *
! fl
8~ 
I
i"Y~,i
IIIIII
