T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by The Johns Hopkins University Press
June 2012
Vol. 65   No. 10
 
To order
Call 800.548.1784 or 410.516.6987; fax 410.516.3866;  
e-mail: jrnlcirc@press.jhu.edu; or visit us online at  
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
Published by  
Th e Johns hopkins University press
essential.
Deborah stevenson, Editor
UniversiTy of illinois aT Urbana-Champaign
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books provides 
concise summaries and critical evaluations of current 
children’s books. This invaluable resource assists 
readers with questions regarding the ever-evolving 
children’s literature field. Reviews give an in-depth 
look at a selected book’s content, reading level, 
strengths and weaknesses, and quality of the format, 
as well as suggestions for curricular use. 
Published monthly (except August). Volume 65 (2012). 
ISSN 0008-9036; E-ISSN 1558-6766.
the Bulletin of the Center  
for Children’s Books
annUal individUal sUbsCripTions
$55.00 (print); $58.00 (online)
annUal insTiTUTional sUbsCripTions
$95.00 (print); $100.00 (online); 
$133.00 (print & online)
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
June 2012
Vol. 65 No. 10
493  the BIg PICture
 
  Forget-Me-Nots: Poems to Learn by Heart by Mary Ann Hoberman; illus. 
by Michael Emberley
496  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
497 •  Wanted by Heidi Ayarbe
500 •  Black Heart by Holly Black
504 •  Ruby Redfort: Look into My Eyes by Lauren Child
535 •  Brothers at Bat: The True Story of a Amazing All-Brother Baseball Team by 
Audrey Vernick; illus. by Steven Salerno
536 •  Code Name Verity by Elizabeth Wein
539  Professional ConneCtions
540  subjeCt and use index
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R Recommended.
Ad Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR Not recommended.
SpC Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the  
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor (KQG)
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Claire Gross, Reviewer (CG)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
Hope Morrison, Reviewer (HM)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Melissa Funfsinn, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print or electronic $93.00; combined print & electronic $130.00; multiple in-
stitutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, $55.00; students, 
$20.00. In countries other than the United States, add $16.50 per subscription for postage; subscrib-
ers in Canada and Mexico add $11.99. Single copy rate: $10.00. Volumes available in microfilm from 
ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche 
from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be 
made payable to The Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Divi-
sion, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 
410-516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/
journals/advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2012 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image from Forget-Me-Nots: Poems to Learn by Heart ©2012 by Michael Emberley and used by 
permission of Little, Brown and Company.
June 2012 • 495
the BIg PICture
Forget-Me-Nots: Poems to Learn by Heart
compiled by Mary Ann Hoberman; illustrated by Michael Emberley
Poetic recitation got a bad rap for a while there, associated as it was with regurgita-
tion of material rather than creative learning. Kids, who can memorize thousands 
of riddles and belt out rude rhymes at the slightest encouragement (or discourage-
ment), know better, of course: memorization can provide a window into words that 
merely reading them doesn’t, it offers a special kind of ownership, and it’s often a 
whole lot of fun. Fortunately, Hoberman is here to champion memorization’s revival.
Already a superstar for her readaloud works (You Read to Me, I’ll Read 
to You: Very Short Fables to Read Aloud, BCCB 1/11, etc.), she here features what 
you might call speakalouds. Approximately 120 poems from over eighty poets 
are divided into eleven sections, some thematic (“Beautiful Beasts,” “Strange and 
Mysterious”) and some categorized by form (“The Long of It”) or origin (“Poems 
from Storybooks”). Poets featured range from the contemporary (Hoberman herself, 
Nikki Grimes, Douglas Florian) to the longterm anthology veterans (Langston 
Hughes, William Carlos Williams, Elizabeth Coatsworth, Emily Dickinson); the 
poems range from the free verse to the crisply metrical. Got kids uncertain about 
memorization? The four-liners, limericks, and haiku of the opening section, “The 
Short of It,” will be right in their wheelhouse. Got some showoffs who like to go 
for length? Show them the final section’s ballads from the likes of Kipling, Milne, 
and Lear. A table of contents lays out the goods in advance, while an index of first 
lines helps searchers their treasures.
Memorization isn’t just an offhand suggestion for the collection, either. 
The verses are clearly chosen and arranged with considerable care and attention to 
the goal (the test runs are probably still echoing through the Hoberman household 
and leaving its compiler with earwormish fragments of failed entries), and the op-
portunity to tackle increasing challenges and explore the clearly demarcated sections 
evokes the allure of working your way through gaming levels. The book provides 
encouragement and guidance in a thoughtful introduction and a closing spread of 
suggestions that gives some tips on methodology and draws attention to components 
of sound and imagery within verse, a focus that not only helps memorization but 
also the appreciation of the poet’s craft. The volume could see additional duty as a 
readaloud treasury or readalone delight, since it’s a pretty delicious assortment in 
general; ultimately, though, it’s best suited to its noble purpose, and it will provide 
an ideal spur for memorization and recitation in any setting. The inclusion of some 
venerable classics provides additional appeal for multigenerational sharing and, 
perhaps, joint recitation; the varying levels of the poetry also ensure accessibility 
496 • The BulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
for kids over a range of ages, making the volume a winner for family, camp, or 
other non-graded situations.
Emberley’s art is an unassuming wonder, a playful masterclass in using 
the page to support and extend the verse visuals. Watercolor lined with pencil and 
touched with pastel, the illustrations perform their job with assurance, taste, and 
humor, subtly linking spreads across the gutter and framing verse in negative or 
even positive space. For instance, the first anthological spread is a clever perpendical, 
subtly framing the verses with a focused vertical downpour on the side (which falls 
on a mournful, umbrella-wielding auk) and an oceanic horizon line on the bottom 
(the auk bobs in a tiny boat). The subsequent spreads plaster poems on the broad 
backs of animals, illuminate them in the diagonal lightspill from a flashlight, or 
curve around them with snowy footprints. Small jokes, visual stories, and sneaky 
allusions to the poems add to the visual entertainment, insuring that kids will want 
to return to the book even when they’ve tucked the poems into memory. 
“I like to think of the process of learning a poem by heart as a game, with 
the memorized poem as the prize,” says Hoberman. Now we can all be winners. 
(See p. 513 for publication information.)
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
adderson, Caroline Jasper John Dooley: Star of the Week; illus. by Ben Clan-
ton. Kids Can, 2012 127p
ISBN 978-1-55453-578-1 $16.95  
Ad Gr. 2-3
Jasper has been waiting all year for his turn to be his class’ Star of the Week, a 
five-day series of special honors that includes Show and Tell, Family Tree, Science 
Experiment, Share My Talent, and Special Snack. Unfortunately, the class is less 
than impressed with Jasper’s lint collection (dryer and belly button), and he loses 
the spotlight to his best friend, Ori, who announces during Show and Tell that his 
new baby sister has arrived. On Family Tree day, Jasper expands his family with a 
sibling, Earl, made from wood, but because he is so busy working on Earl, Jasper 
forgets all about Science Experiment day. He gets back on track with Share My 
Talent day, though, and ends on a strong note with a plateful of star-shaped “J” 
cookies for Snack Day. Haplessly comedic Jasper is an exuberant if quirky kid 
who’s fortunate to have an extremely loving and understanding set of parents. The 
episodic plot is overstretched at times, but there is plenty of humor to be had as 
Jasper talks his way into and out of all kinds of shenanigans with varying degrees of 
June 2012 • 497
success. Clanton’s pencil sketches, appearing in the occasional half-page vignette, are 
combinations of cartoonishly simple lines and soft shading. Although some readers 
may find Jasper’s quirkiness more showoffy than endearing, those who identify with 
his creative approach to problem-solving will find this a welcome new addition to 
early chapter books.  HM
adderson, Caroline Middle of Nowhere. Groundwood, 2012 214p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-55498-131-1 $16.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-55498-132-8 $9.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-55498-202-8 $9.95  
Ad Gr. 4-6
When Curtis was six, his mom left him; though she later came back, it looks like 
she may have taken off once again, leaving Curtis, now eleven, with his five-year-old 
brother, Artie, to take care of. He begins doing odd jobs for Mrs. Burt, the grumpy 
old woman across the street, and as Curtis tries to hold things together and evade 
foster care, Mrs. Burt takes a particular shine to Artie. When Curtis finally tells her 
the truth, Mrs. Burt suggests a crazy plan: she will take Curtis and Artie up to her 
old lake cabin and the three of them will rough it together. Curtis, afraid his mom 
will return to find them gone but more afraid of the foster-care system, with which 
he’s had some bad experience, reluctantly agrees, and the three set up housekeeping 
at the dilapidated cabin—until Mrs. Burt suffers a stroke. Brisk pacing and absorb-
ing three-dimensional characters (Mrs. Burt, for example, is gradually revealed to 
be still suffering the loss of her young son who drowned in the lake many years 
ago) help smooth out some of the book’s improbabilities, such as Curtis’s blasé ac-
ceptance when he learns that Mrs. Burt knew all along that his mom was actually 
in a coma in the hospital. Moments of humor (usually provided by Artie or Mrs. 
Burt) add some welcome levity to an otherwise serious story: “‘I pronounce you Sir 
Mrs. Burt,’ Artie said, laying the greasy hotdog on her shoulder. ‘Imagine that,’ she 
said. ‘Knighted by a wiener.’” Readers who love stories about kids living on their 
own will likely forgive the shortcomings and just enjoy the ride.  JH
ayarbe, Heidi Wanted. Balzer + Bray, 2012 [400p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-199388-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-211465-5 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
It’s hard being a Mexican-American teen in rural Nevada, but Michal has a unique 
coping strategy: she leverages her math talents into a bookie operation, taking bets 
but never placing them, remaining adjacent to but never too involved with the high 
school’s diverse social strata that frequent her mobile establishment. After witness-
ing a freshman beaten into critical condition by an anti-immigrant gang, enduring 
increasingly racist rhetoric from her classmates, and watching her undocumented 
longtime friend Mocho (whose mother dies from a preventable illness) slip into 
disaffection and gang life, she embarks on a mission to even the score. She and 
Josh, the first boy to get past her guard, will steal some money from the immoral 
rich (including Josh’s dad), multiply it by gambling, and use it to cover victims’ 
medical and funeral bills and cushion the coffers of local social service organizations. 
Michal is a mass of intriguing contradictions—prickly but lonely, steel-nerved but 
terrified—and her longing for justice in a patently unjust world will speak to many 
teen readers. Ayarbe plays on this sympathy to get readers completely on board with 
498 • The BulleTin
Michal’s choices while subtly morphing genres from aspirational Robin Hood caper 
to cautionary tale as Michal takes more and more risks and her situation spirals 
shockingly out of control. Probing hot-button issues of racism, vigilantism, justice, 
and penance, Ayarbe brings the political home with a vivid setting and a complex, 
clever, and ultimately tragic heroine.  CG
barnaby, HannaH Wonder Show. Houghton, 2012 271p
ISBN 978-0-547-59980-9 $16.99  
R Gr. 6-9
When the Great Depression visits every member of Portia’s loud, boisterous family 
with either death or despair, Portia finds herself at the McGreavey Home for Way-
ward Girls, under the care of the creepy and abusive Mister. Portia initially resigns 
herself to the drafty halls of the Home, until the accidental death of her only friend 
sends her fleeing from Mister and chasing the one thing that resembles her concept 
of family: a loud, boisterous traveling circus that includes a handful of storytellers 
and freaks. A few well-told lies secure Portia a position in the caravan, but with 
Mister in hot pursuit, Portia knows she will have to face up to her past if she is to 
have any sort of future. An elegant, lyrical style marks Barnaby’s satisfying debut 
novel about fate, family, and identity. From the damp, forgotten dorm rooms of the 
Home to the hot, dusty trail of the circus route, the settings are strikingly evocative, 
brought to life with vivid imagery and lush prose. Broken but resilient, Portia is a 
sympathetic heroine whose simple, unadorned need for love and acceptance will be 
immediately recognizable to any young reader, particularly as she begins to realize 
that the feeling of love does not always translate to the act of care. While most of 
the third-person narration is focalized through Portia, the perspective occasionally 
shifts to those in the circus around her, offering up such a devastating portrayal 
of fellow lost souls that the somewhat sentimental ending nonetheless feels richly 
deserved. An author’s note discusses the historical figures that served as inspiration 
for several of the sideshow people and will most likely elicit further interest in the 
wondrous world of the traveling circus.  KQG
bauer, Marion dane Little Dog, Lost; illus. by Jennifer A. Bell. Atheneum, 
2012 [240p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3423-3 $14.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3425-7 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 3-5
Buddy is a “little black dog with brown paws,” who used to be owned by a boy but is 
now on her own. Mark is a lonesome boy who lacks a dad (“It wasn’t that he missed 
his father. How can you miss someone you’ve never met?”), and who desperately 
wants a dog. Charles LaRue is a lonely elderly recluse, once caretaker of and now 
owner of a big old house in the middle of town. These three strands are interwoven 
in this free-verse novel, as Mark strives to convince his mayor mother that he needs 
a dog and the town needs a dog park, Buddy searches for her missing boy (but 
eventually decides Mark is a suitable replacement), and Charles LaRue comes out 
of his shell to be the granter of Mark’s dog-park wish. The short phrases of Bauer’s 
nimble and precise unrhymed verse keep the book moving along at a steady pace, 
and the narratives come together fairly seamlessly. Bauer is particularly adroit at 
conveying the heartache of the three main characters (“So many lives/ filled/ with 
longing./ It’s what stories--/ all our stories--/are made of./ And what is longing/ made 
June 2012 • 499
of/ except hope?”) and at cutting right to the heart of many matters (“Grown-ups 
used money/ as an excuse/ for anything/ they didn’t want to do”). Canine fans will 
flock to this one, of course; pair it with Ibbotson’s One Dog and His Boy (BCCB 
4/12) for a dynamic duo of boy and dog books. Final illustrations not seen.  JH
bellstorf, arne Baby’s in Black: Astrid Kirchherr, Stuart Sutcliffe, and The Beatles; 
tr. from the German by Michael Waaler; written and illus. by Arne Bellstorf. First 
Second/Roaring Brook, 2012 198p
ISBN 978-1-59643-771-5 $24.99  
R Gr. 8-12 
Rock ’n’ roll retrophiles are aware, of course, that Beatles lore traces back to perfor-
mances in scuzzy, smoke-filled Hamburg clubs, with a pre-Ringo configuration of 
members that included a recruited bassist, Stuart Sutcliffe. In this imported Ger-
man graphic novel, Bellstorf focuses on the romance between Sutcliffe and rising 
star photographer Astrid Kirchherr, who would form an enduring friendship with 
the band and act as its early stylist and documentarian. Astrid is introduced to the 
band by ex-boyfriend Klaus and is immediately smitten with Sutcliffe. Stu, whose 
passion is painting rather than guitar, enjoys the gigs and the camaraderie, but as 
his relationship with Astrid deepens, he owns up to his musical limitations and 
lands a coveted scholarship to study with artist Eduardo Paolozzi in Hamburg. Stu 
and Astrid become engaged, the Beatles reshuffle personnel and land respectable 
contracts, Astrid plants ideas for a new “look” with signature suits, hairstyle, and 
dramatic black and white photographs, and everything looks rosy. The single dark 
cloud is Stu’s persistent headaches and weakness, and within a year he’s dead from 
a probable aneurysm. The Beatles’ story forms a backdrop to the compelling tale 
of Astrid and Stu, and although readers will doubtless enjoy glimpses of “the lads” 
(distinguishable mainly by noses, eyebrows, and John’s snarky attitude), it’s doomed 
young love that carries the day. The march of tidily boxed black ink and pencil 
pictures, most of which feature characters in conversation, is relieved by unframed 
reveries of the lovers wandering in the woods to a soundtrack of Beatles lyrics, 
foreshadowing their coming loss. Bellstorf will connect with a wide readership, 
from photography buffs to romance readers to classic rockers.  EB
benoit, CHarles Fall from Grace. HarperTeen, 2012 304p
ISBN 978-0-06-194707-0 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Sawyer simply drifts in the wake of plans his parents and his girlfriend made for 
him. He goes to the job his dad got for him, participates in the service work and 
extracurriculars his parents have chosen, and socializes only with his girlfriend and 
her friends. His parents have even picked his college, finished his applications for 
him, and chosen his profession—insurance actuary. His protests to all of this are 
weak and ineffectual. It’s no surprise, then, that when he meets Grace, a girl from 
the wrong side of town who’s looking for some illicit and perhaps illegal fun, he’s 
more than ready to be pulled into her orbit. Grace likes to plan capers, making 
the simple complicated. He helps her steal some notes from a team rival in Model 
United Nations, she helps him cheat on a test, and then things get serious, as she 
decides that she wants to become a famous art thief. He objects, weakly as usual, 
but eventually helps her pull off a couple of heists until they get caught, and he finds 
out some disturbing secrets about Grace. While many readers will gravitate toward 
500 • The BulleTin
the caper quality of the plot that sometimes borders on slapstick, the real hook 
here is the careful depiction of Sawyer’s character. A conscientious, kind-hearted, 
ordinary guy, he’s completely overwhelmed by the more forceful natures of those 
around him; even when he feels the freedom that comes from breaking the law 
with Grace, attentive readers will conclude that her manipulation of him is more 
of the same that he’s getting from everyone else. A quiet despair thus emerges as a 
subtle undertone that dominates the book, and it remains unrelieved in the end in 
this story that could be viewed as a portrait of Walter Mitty as a young man.  KC
berk, josH Guy Langman, Crime Scene Procrastinator. Knopf, 2012 229p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-95701-7 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-85701-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89775-7 $10.99  
R Gr. 7-10
Guy Langman, a chronically lazy high school junior, is even less inclined than usual 
to muster any motivation or ambition since the recent death of his father, a larger-
than-life septuagenarian with a colorful past. Guy’s best friend, Anoop, cajoles him 
into joining a new forensics club at school, with the promise of meeting girls, but 
the only hottie is swiftly claimed by Anoop himself, leaving Guy with less than 
tempting social prospects among the small band of science geeks. Guy does, however, 
display a surprising aptitude for delicately lifting fingerprints, and his propensity 
toward wandering attention actually leads him occasionally to notice clues other 
students miss. The theft of some valuable coins from the attic, the suspicious death 
of a rival student at a forensic competition, and the discovery that the deceased Mr. 
Langman had a grown son he never discussed all converge into a mystery that Guy 
and his clubmates feel they are in a better position to investigate than the police. 
The teen-sleuthing plot plays out pretty much as expected, with reality turning 
out to be far less dramatic than the kids anticipated. Guy himself, however, is a 
standout character—a wittily drawn bundle of annoying social immaturity, with a 
cringeworthy sense of humor pretty well limited to sexual and scatological topics, 
and a few flashes of self awareness that assure readers (and his psychologist, Dr. 
Waters) that he’ll probably pull through this rough patch just fine.  EB
blaCk, Holly Black Heart. McElderry, 2012 296p (Curse Workers)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-0346-8 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-0348-2 $9.99  
R Gr. 9-12
As a transformation worker, the most rare and thus most valuable type of curse 
worker, seventeen-year-old Cassel Sharpe is sought after by both the mob, who 
would use his powers to conveniently dispose of their enemies, and the FBI, who 
would . . . well, do the same. A childhood among thieves has left Cassel with an 
impressive set of conning skills and ambiguous morals, but now he’s ready to go 
on the straight and narrow path, if only he could find where that is. The feds are 
asking him to do some pretty suspiciously nasty things; the mob boss is holding 
his mother hostage and threatening to kill his only remaining brother; and Lila, the 
girl of his dreams and the daughter of aforementioned mob boss, is having a hard 
time forgiving him for past grievances, which include transforming her into a cat 
for several years. In this most recent addition to Black’s standout Curse Workers 
series (White Cat, BCCB 9/10, Red Glove, BCCB 8/11), Cassel’s clipped, sardonic 
narration is just as darkly funny as in the previous installments, but here he plays 
June 2012 • 501
the role of the tragic hero with an ominous sense of resignation as he heads out to 
“do the right thing.” Fortunately, a few unpredictable plot twists and some creative 
thinking on Cassel’s part allow the right thing to coincide with Cassel finally find-
ing a bit of peace, so readers who have watched him suffer through a gauntlet of 
bad situations will be pleasantly surprised by the happy but apt conclusion. Black 
continues to place her characters in that gray area between right and wrong, going 
so far as to humanize several undeniable villains, including Cassel’s sociopathic older 
brother. To be sure, knowledge of the first two books is absolutely crucial to the 
enjoyment of this one but fans of the series will be thrilled by this richly developed 
tale, no cursing needed.  KQG
bluMentHal, karen Steve Jobs: The Man Who Thought Different. Feiwel, 
2012 309p illus. with photographs
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-250-01557-0 $16.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-250-01445-0 $8.99  
R Gr. 6-10
Since Steve Jobs readily admitted to putting his dedication to work before every 
other aspect of his life, it’s fair that Blumenthal meet him on his own terms in this 
biography that focuses more on career than personal life. Framing the material ac-
cording to life stages Jobs identified in a 2005 commencement address at Stanford, 
Blumenthal looks first at his early life as a period of amassing seemingly random 
knowledge and experiences—from mechanics to Eastern philosophy—leading to 
the acquaintances, friendships, and skills that would develop into a overarching 
interest in bringing personal computing to the masses. The second phase brought 
Jobs to the height of influence within Apple and then, due mainly to volatile per-
sonality conflicts that adversely affected product development, saw him stripped 
of leadership and driven to a lucrative alliance with Pixar (which, readers may be 
surprised to learn, actually accounted for most of his wealth). The final episode 
marks Jobs’ return to Apple and a period of astonishing achievement with the iPod, 
iPhone, and iPad, and his confrontation with mortality as he privately managed 
(and often mismanaged) pancreatic cancer. Many readers will so closely identify 
man and products that some prominent corporate issues will be noticeable for their 
absence in a biography, e.g., off-shore manufacturing and charges of exploitation of 
foreign factory workers. Most, however, will be content with this illumination of 
Jobs’ personality quirks, and marvel at how a guy who pitched an early collaboration 
with his dirty bare feet propped on a client’s desk could rise to business megastar. 
Only in America? Notes, index, and glossary are included.  EB
boswortH, jennifer Struck. Farrar, 2012 [384p]
ISBN 978-0-374-37283-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 9-12
Lightning has struck Mia—literally—and not once, not twice, but hundreds of 
times. Now, in the aftermath of a simultaneous lightning strike and earthquake that 
devastated Los Angeles, her strange history is drawing some unwanted attention. 
Two warring cults—the Followers, whose leader correctly predicted the disaster, 
and the Seekers, who subscribe to a Romany seer’s apocalyptic vision—share a 
certainty that the end times are nigh and Mia is integral to how they will play out. 
Mia’s mostly concerned with keeping her family safe in the midst of extreme food 
and medicine shortages, but she’s sucked into the Seekers’ circle as she learns more 
502 • The BulleTin
about her lightning-related powers. Mia is a gutsy but otherwise sketchily developed 
character, and her romance with Jeremy, the familiar protective but inscrutable 
cutie who knows more than he’s telling, feels more obligatory than, well, electric. 
In addition, the mix of science and mysticism has a tendency to get muddled. Still, 
the complex backstory will appeal to those who like their speculative fiction arcane 
and intricate, and the eerie ghost-town backdrop of a downtown L.A. in ruins is 
compelling. Dystopian romance (dystomance?) fans may therefore get what they 
came for here.  CG
burns, t. r. Merits of Mischief: The Bad Apple. Aladdin, 2012 337p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4029-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4031-9 $9.99  
R Gr. 5-8
Twelve-year-old Seamus isn’t a bad kid; he just has a marked talent for doing things 
that turn out badly. It all begins in the cafeteria, when Seamus, trying to do his 
bit to break up a fight, throws an apple into the melee. The apple hits a substitute 
teacher with such force that she dies, and Seamus is forced to attend a boarding 
school for troubled kids to avoid juvenile detention. The school isn’t what it ap-
pears, however. Rather than being a school where miscreants are shaped up with 
military-style discipline, it’s a training ground for troublemakers, where the teach-
ers are delighted to welcome Seamus as their very first murderer. He manages to 
keep this shameful secret from the other kids, but try as he might to avoid trouble, 
Seamus has an accidental genius for making it. Soon he is among the elite of the 
freshman class, taking down teachers and ending up in one predicament after an-
other, much to the delight of the headmistress. The notion of a school where bad 
behavior is rewarded, clever high-tech gadgets to stimulate pranking are for sale 
at the school store, and the creative torture of adults is the main curriculum will 
have an irresistible appeal for middle-school readers. Seamus is a compelling guide, 
with his hapless knack for finding trouble wherever he goes, even though he does 
everything he can to avoid it and suffers guilt for his misdeeds. Hints at backsto-
ries behind the adults’ quirks provide enough mystery to provoke speculation and 
engagement, and a possible romance for Seamus as well as a curious email set the 
stage for an inevitable sequel. Give this to exasperated tweens who have had their 
own unfortunate troubles following school rules and need a humorous escape to a 
world where their tribe ends up on top.  KC
Cass, kiera The Selection. HarperTeen, 2012 [336p]
ISBN 978-0-06-205993-2 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
M Gr. 7-10
Thirty-five girls are randomly selected to compete for Prince Maxon’s hand in mar-
riage and the opportunity to become Queen of Illéa, a dystopian society founded 
on a strict caste system. As one of the selected, seventeen-year-old America has the 
chance to elevate her family from the struggling poverty of level Five to the royal 
luxury of a One; she has no real interest in winning the competition, however, as 
her heart belongs to her childhood sweetheart, Aspen (a lowly level Six). Pressure 
from her family, a falling out with Aspen, and the fact that the prince turns out 
to be both good looking and charming make her reconsider her options as she 
stays in the palace with the other contestants. A slight, predictable plot and super-
ficial characterizations straight from central casting give little depth to this series 
June 2012 • 503
opener. Vague references to rebel forces and unrest in the country’s provinces add 
a bit of tension, but the focus remains firmly on America’s relationships with the 
two male leads, who offer so little in regards to either romance or wit that readers 
will surely question America’s insistent interest in them. America herself is likable 
primarily for her sweetness, but her handwringing over her romantic prospects and 
her reluctance to even question the selection process make her seem more insipid 
than genuine. Thankfully, the author avoids the backstabbing and catfights that 
one might expect from such a Bachelor-like premise, but the other contestants are 
afforded little more than a single defining characteristic. Readers looking for love 
in a hopeless place will be better served by Lauren Oliver’s Delirium (BCCB 2/11) 
and Scott Westerfeld’s Uglies trilogy (BCCB 2/05).  KQG
CastelluCCi, CeCil The Year of the Beasts; illus. by Nate Powell. Roaring Brook, 
2012 [192p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-686-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
The summer that Tessa is fifteen and her sister Lulu is thirteen, a wedge comes 
between them for the first time. Tessa is all shyness and awkward angles, while Lulu, 
the pretty one, comes into her own and starts dating the boy Tessa had been crushing 
on. Tessa retreats into a secret summer romance with Jasper, the reclusive, ostracized 
boy next door, but her feelings for him are a confusing muddle of attraction, fascina-
tion, and embarrassment. The detached, mysterious prose narrative of the sisters’ 
emotional unmooring is intercut with graphic-novel-style interludes featuring a 
teenage Medusa who attends high school in a community where many teens have 
been transformed into mythical creatures, and all fear her power to turn them to 
stone. The authors gradually reveal the graphic world to be a narrative manifesta-
tion of Tessa’s dissociative reaction when tragedy invades the summer. The telling 
is innovative, balancing magic and reality in a way that is amplified by the use of 
dual narratives and the haunting imagery shared between them. Unfortunately, the 
story itself feels rather sketched, with Tessa’s grieving process in particular strangely 
abbreviated and the short chapters recounting events but not always conveying 
the emotional weight of each scene; the characters outside of Tessa, even Lulu, are 
flat, inviting little reader investment. Nevertheless, the metaphor of a girl-turned-
monster struggling to find a way back to humanity is powerful, giving a mythical 
dimension to Tessa’s feelings of alienation and, later, crushing guilt, and readers 
may find the puzzle of fitting the two parallel tales together to be satisfying.  CG
CHaMbers, aidan Dying to Know You. Amulet/Abrams, 2012 275p
ISBN 978-1-4197-0165-8 $16.95  
R Gr. 9-12
An aging novelist is shaken from his comfortable melancholy by a knock on his 
door. It’s Karl, a seventeen-year-old guy who has fallen in love with a girl who 
insists that he write to her, but dyslexic Karl is more of a doer than a talker; he’s 
therefore turning to the novelist, his girlfriend’s favorite writer, for help. On his 
part, the novelist senses that Karl’s appeal for help might be just what he needs 
to pull him out of the crippling writer’s block that has gripped him since the loss 
of his wife. The choice of the novelist as narrator is undeniably self-indulgent on 
Chambers’ part, but it is also a wise one, providing a convincing narrative reason 
for his tendency to lapse into textbook discussions of Karl’s dyslexia, as well as his 
504 • The BulleTin
meditations on the differences and similarities between aging and youth, fact and 
fiction, words and actions. His avuncular perspective turns out to be just what Karl 
needs, tempered as it is with an understanding of depression, grief, and difficulties 
with finding the right words. Chambers writes here in a straightforward style that, 
while rich in local color, is free of obscure symbolism and metaphor. His musings 
on Karl’s character are thus accessible to and respectful of people who are more 
like Karl—deep thinkers who work out their ideas by what they do, rather than 
by using a lot of words. A heavy reliance on short lines of dialogue keeps the pace 
moving, making this a good choice for use with reluctant readers.  KC
CHild, lauren Ruby Redfort: Look into My Eyes. Candlewick, 2012 387p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-5120-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-5636-2 $16.99  
R Gr. 5-8
Fans of Child’s Clarice Bean series will know that Clarice and her friends are de-
voted to the fictional Ruby Redfort detective series; now Ruby has an outing of 
her own. Ruby is a code-cracking prodigy who decides at the age of two that she 
wants to be a detective. At seven, she turns down an offer to go to Harvard, but 
now, in junior high, she gets her first chance to do some real investigative work, 
when a priceless statue and a shipment of gold are scheduled to arrive in her town 
at the same time, and she is called upon to help prevent their theft. This follows 
all of the classic caper fiction protocols, with fancy gadgets, preposterous villains, 
a super-secret detective agency, codes to crack (with website help), and outlandish 
plots around both the thefts and revenge on meddling kids. Ruby’s specialty is 
cryptanalysis, but of course she can’t resist getting into the action herself, taking 
her entirely necessary sidekick, Clancy Crew, with her. She is everything you want 
a pint-sized detective to be: smart, resourceful, and brave with a clever wisecrack 
ever at the ready. Mystery fans who have outgrown Clarice Bean will nonetheless 
join her in her admiration of this mashup of Nancy Drew and Encyclopedia Brown 
with twists and quirks that are all Ruby’s own.  KC
Clanton, ben Vote for Me!; written and illus. by Ben Clanton. Kids Can, 
2012 40p
ISBN 978-1-55453-822-5 $18.95  
Ad 5-8 yrs
This tongue-in-cheek parody features two political candidates, a donkey and an 
elephant, bragging about their individual strengths, complimenting the voters, mak-
ing promises they don’t intend to keep, name-calling, and engaging in a shouting 
battle (complete with literal mudslinging). In the end, the two calm down, admit 
that they didn’t mean all the terrible things they said to each other, and anxiously 
await the results of the election. When the final count reveals that the Independent 
Mouse is the winner, the donkey and elephant start once again digging in to one 
another (“Actually, I was the BEST CHOICE.” “Nuh-uh!” “Yuh-huh!” “Nuh-uh!” 
“Yuh-huh infinity!”) while Mouse drives off jubilantly beneath a sprinkling of ticker 
tape. This is more extended joke than developed story, and the humor, especially 
the election result, caters mainly to adults. Some young listeners, however will 
simply appreciate the hilarity of an elephant/donkey argument, especially one that 
becomes a mud fight. Clanton (who also illustrated Adderson’s Jasper John Dooley, 
reviewed above) works in mixed media (“pencil, watercolor, copy paper, elephant 
poop paper and digital magic”) and takes the partisan humor further by using only 
June 2012 • 505
red and blue colors against the loose sketchy lines of donkey and elephant, with 
red as the background for the elephant and blue for the donkey, of course; the text, 
all in speech bubbles, is helpfully differentiated by font as well. The facial expres-
sions are particularly hilarious, especially as each of the candidates delves further 
and further into a state of complete and utter rage. While not nearly as kid-centric 
as Willems’ Elephant and Piggie books, this may appeal to a similar crowd.  HM
Coat, janik Hippopposites; tr. from the French; written and illus. by Janik 
Coat. Appleseed/Abrams, 2012 34p
ISBN 978-1-4197-0151-1 $14.95  
R 3-6 yrs
Hippo, who looks for all the world like he’s been assembled from two overlapping, 
strategically notched slabs of plastic and a pair of pinhead eyes, strikes a series of 
deadpan poses that demonstrate pairs of opposites. “Small” finds a diminutive 
version of him standing beside a high rise, and returned to full “large” size on the 
facing page, with a barely noticeable gray feather at his feet. “Light” has him in a 
pristine white helium balloon aloft in a clear blue sky, and “heavy” blowing bubbles 
underwater in an equally clear blue sea. Die-cuts facilitate the contrast between 
“full” (all black) and “empty” (white cut-out layered onto a white background), 
and “soft”/“rough” (shaped filled with strokeable fake fur and burlap). In one clever 
existential play on Hippo’s essence as pure design, we view him first in his custom-
ary pose—“front”—and then disappearing into a fine vertical line—“side.” The 
stark simplicity of the compositions make this an ideal concept book for toddlers, 
but children who have reached the dizzying sophistication of kindergarten will 
appreciate the imaginative iterations of words they have probably mastered.  EB
Coury, tina niCHols Hanging Off Jefferson’s Nose: Growing Up on Mount Rush-
more; illus. by Sally Wern Comport. Dial, 2012 32p
ISBN 978-0-8037-3731-0 $16.99  
R Gr. 3-5
The story of the monumental South Dakota sculpture of Washington, Jefferson, 
Lincoln, and T. Roosevelt generally ends with a brief allusion to the fact that its 
creator, Gutzon Borglum, died before its completion, which was then carried out 
by his son. Coury turns her attention to the story of Gutzon Borglum’s son Lin-
coln, tracing the interest in sculpture he developed at his father’s side, his practical 
experience at the monument site, and his willingness to put his own educational 
and professional prospects on hold to join in his father’s dream. Interspersed with 
Lincoln’s biography is enough description of the sculpting process—which involved 
lots of blasting, windstorms, and general vertiginous peril—to satisfy youngsters 
whose interests run more to the engineering side of the venture. Comport’s acrylic 
and pastel artwork, based on digitized original drawings, mirror Coury’s careful 
balance between Lincoln’s personal story and the actual execution of the epic un-
dertaking. Children who enjoyed Lynn Curlee’s Rushmore (BCCB 3/99) will want 
to complete the story with a closer look at the man who completed the monument. 
A selected bibliography is appended.  EB
506 • The BulleTin
Craze, Galaxy The Last Princess. Poppy/Little, 2012 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-18548-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-20282-4 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
In a not-too-distant-future England, the House of Windsor is under attack from 
Cornelius Holister, a scientific genius who claims to be a descendent of the Tudors. 
At the same time, the country is falling apart, as food and resources have become 
deadly scarce in the years since a series of brutal natural disasters crushed the 
world’s infrastructure. After Holister, who killed the queen years ago, manages to 
assassinate the king and kidnap Princess Mary (the heir) and chronically ill Prince 
Jamie, Princess Eliza is left alone and hunted, desperate to rescue her siblings. 
She infiltrates the Tudor Army, survives its hardcore training regimen, flees with 
proof in hand of Holister’s true intentions—his celebrated plan to feed Britain’s 
population depends on first reducing it by forty percent—and raises an army to 
fight the Tudors and crown Mary queen. The sizable cast of supporting characters, 
from Eliza’s loyal family servants to her army compatriots, is solidly developed 
and provides smooth entry into the political and emotional dynamics of the story, 
and a sweet romance arrives in the form of a Tudor soldier who’s got Eliza’s back 
despite having a pretty damaging secret identity himself. Some readers may ques-
tion why self-determination is never presented as a viable option for England’s 
oppressed population—instead, the book assumes a zero-sum choice between 
benevolent royalty and psychotic royalty—but Eliza grows into a credible leader 
as she comes to terms with the shortcomings of her father’s reign and resolves to 
pursue a more equitable future. Action-adventure takes precedence over thematic 
depth, anyway, and there is plenty of action, with daring rescue capers, good old-
fashioned battles, secret-identity mishaps, and thrilling near-escapes set against an 
English dystopian landscape. Genre fans will appreciate this old-school take on a 
futuristic predicament.  CG
Cronin, doreen The Legend of Diamond Lil: A J. J. Tully Mystery; illus by Kevin 
Cornell. Balzer + Bray, 2012 126p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-177996-1 $14.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-209933-4 $8.99  
R Gr. 2-4
J. J., the retired search-and-rescue dog turned sleuth (from The Trouble with 
Chickens, BCCB 3/11) is back, this time facing down a possum that appears to be 
threatening the chickens he guards. A mysterious Samoyed, Lillian, offers to help 
with the problem, but in the end, it’s Moosh, the mama hen, who faces off with the 
possum (who just wants her baby back after it somehow ended up in the chicken 
coop). When it becomes clear that Lillian has been in cahoots with the possum all 
along, Vince the Funnel (the ill-tempered, cone-wearing inside dog who knows 
the scoop on everything) finally spills the beans on Lillian: she’s Diamond Lil, a 
runaway show dog. While readers unfamiliar with the first book may need to work 
a little to grasp the setup, those willing to plunge in will quickly gain their footing 
as the book’s central mystery unfolds. The gradual revelation of information about 
the possum and Lillian is skillfully handled, and sharp readers will pick up on the 
well-placed clues a few beats ahead of the canine sleuth. J. J., the chickens, and Vince 
are all entertaining characters, and the slightly hard-boiled tone of J. J.’s narration 
(“Vince and I weren’t friends, but we had an understanding. We understood that 
June 2012 • 507
we didn’t like each other”) is appealing as well. The scene in which brave Moosh 
confronts the possum is particularly dramatic, and Lillian’s eventual adoption by 
the people next door is a satisfying conclusion. Cornell’s frequent monochromatic 
illustrations help bolster younger readers and add humor to the text. There aren’t 
many solid mystery series for this age group; this helps fill that gap and may appeal 
to fans of Howe’s Bunnicula series as well.  JH
deCker, tiMotHy The Punk Ethic; written and illus. by Timothy Decker. Name-
los, 2012 186p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-60898-120-5 $18.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-60898-121-2 $9.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60898-122-9 $8.95  
R Gr. 7-10
Martin’s a one-man hardcore rock band with a practiced disaffection that, as a 
sophomore, he’s not actually cynical enough to pull off. When his English teacher 
reads his essay on landmines and challenges him to actually do something to change 
the problems he sees in the world, Martin is inspired. Unfortunately, every world-
changing plot he can think of—including organizing a benefit concert, which is what 
he settles on doing—requires resources he doesn’t have, not least of which is cash. 
As Martin corrals a misfit bunch of mostly terrible bands, he also tries to figure out 
his hot-and-cold relationship with his old friend Holly, a punky artist with hidden 
issues. Martin’s sharply, smartly funny in a way that’s completely in harmony with 
his relative immaturity and deadpan, long-suffering personality, and readers will 
get a kick out of his small moments of humorous pushback against the monotony 
of school and the fake-antagonistic exchanges with his best friend Jeff that stretch 
the bounds of good taste. Short chapters divide the story into day-by-day doses, 
each one introduced with a full-page pen-and-ink illustration that captures the 
mood of the day. This is feel-good fare with an edge; it will inspire kids to change 
the world, starting with what they can realistically do from their own small corner 
of it, while reassuring them that they can still be sarcastic screw-ups while they do 
it. Hand it to kids with an interest in DIY rock bands, social justice, or their own 
above-it-all personality.  CG
dorMer, frank w. The Obstinate Pen; written and illus. by Frank W. Dor-
mer. Holt, 2012 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-9295-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 5-8 yrs
When Uncle Flood tries to write “The following story is all true” with his new pen, 
it is uncooperative: “But the pen did not write that sentence. What the pen wrote 
is this: You have a BIG nose.” After frustrated Uncle Flood throws the pen out 
the window, it is picked up by a policeman who needs to write a ticket. When the 
policeman attempts to do so, the pen instead commands that he kiss the lady he’s 
attempting to ticket; after he makes good on that order and tosses the pen away, 
it is found by a rich woman who is amused by its saucy sentences and eventually 
keeps it on display under glass in her home. The pen then does “what any prisoner 
would do. It broke out.” Young Horace, nephew to Uncle Flood, finds the newly 
freed pen and attempts to use it to draw: “And the pen . . . let him.” While it’s not 
clear why only Horace is allowed to use the pen, the pen’s impudent proclamations 
will tickle the funny bones of youngsters who themselves find it difficult to be 
508 • The BulleTin
mannerly, and they will admire the utensil’s forceful and independent will. The pen 
even takes charge of the book’s cover, with pieces of paper proclaiming “Go kiss a 
monkey” and “I need more paper” appearing on the front and a “pen-written” bio 
of the author on the back stating that “Frank Dormer has the weirdest art I have 
ever seen. It looks like cat tails dragged in ink.” The illustrations (which look like 
pen and ink—naturally—and watercolor) in attractive muted tones are slightly 
reminiscent of the work of Quentin Blake, and the gleefully exuberant figures and 
compositions match the cheeky tone of the text. This will be a surefire readaloud 
selection and a natural partner to Ahlberg’s The Pencil (BCCB 9/08) or Watts’ 
Chester (BCCB 11/07); those brave enough to handle the onslaught of insults may 
enjoy handing out pens and paper afterwards.  JH
doyle, roddy A Greyhound of a Girl. Amulet/Abrams, 2012 [208p]
ISBN 978-1-4197-0618-9 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
Mary’s normal twelve-year-old life of complaints about school and overnoisy broth-
ers is currently shadowed by the severe illness of her beloved grandmother, whom 
she and her mother regularly visit in the hospital. On the way home from school, 
Mary encounters a woman, Tansey, who seems to know Mary’s family and who 
sends a message to Mary’s grandmother. When Mary brings her mother, Scarlett, 
to meet the lady, Scarlett recognizes Tansey as her own grandmother, who died long 
ago and who has appeared now to bring comfort to her daughter, Mary’s grand-
mother, in the face of death. Irish author Doyle takes this highly spiritual plot and 
turns it into an affectionate, humorous, and deeply poignant look at families, loss, 
and life trajectories, complete with a wacky yet ultimately touching jaunt for all 
four characters to the family’s old country cottage. He’s a particularly deft hand at 
dialogue, with Mary pure contemporary preteen in her predilection for the words 
“like” and “stupid,” but she’s also believably a sparky girl, not always herself sure of 
the difference between honesty and backtalk, with considerable resemblance to her 
grandmother. Interlaced chapters give viewpoints in flashback of Mary’s mother, 
grandmother, and Tansey herself; while it can take a little work at times to parse 
out the generational identities, the series of voices provides additional dimension 
to this portrait of multigenerational relationships and influences. Ghost though 
Tansey may technically be, this isn’t remotely a spooky story; instead, it depicts a 
kind of post-mortem presence we’d all hope for from our loved ones, where love 
and a sense of humor survive even death. The intergenerational theme makes this 
perfect for mother-daughter book clubs, or for any reader drawn to reflect on how 
many people it took to make us the way we are.  DS
eCton, eMily Project Jackalope. Chronicle, 2012 256p
ISBN 978-1-4521-0155-2 $15.99  
R Gr. 4-6
When Professor Twitchett’s latest experiment shows up in Jeremy’s bedroom, any 
semblance of normalcy in the junior high student’s life is pretty much destroyed, 
shredded by the razor-sharp antlers attached to the fluffy, twitchy-nosed bunny that 
has now taken up residence in Jeremy’s hamper. The jackalope, a mythical creature 
apparently made not so mythical by the good doctor’s recent efforts to create an 
animal hybrid, is now being pursued by shadowy government operatives who plan 
to exploit the animal’s crazed killer instincts for their own purposes. Twitchett, 
June 2012 • 509
Jeremy’s eccentric neighbor, is nowhere to be found, so Jeremy enlists the help of 
Agatha, his smarty-pants classmate, and soon the two are on the lam with Jack 
in tow, running from the men in black and raiding hotel minibars to keep their 
boozehound of a new friend (whiskey is the jackalope’s sustenance of choice) sated. 
A rollicking exercise in absurdity, this delightfully funny caper will find an audience 
among fans of Adam Rex and M. T Anderson. Jeremy’s wry, often bemused narra-
tion strikes a nice balance with the more physical elements of humor in the book 
(including a vomiting giraffe), and the madcap nature of his predicament keeps the 
pace snappy and the tone light. Agatha provides a feisty, stubbornly determined 
foil to Jeremy’s just-go-with-it attitude, and although poor Jack spends most of 
his time crammed into a Dora the Explorer suitcase, his various appearances are 
almost always guffaw-worthy and his boozy rendition of “Happy Trails” is not to 
be missed. The jackalope may be known as a fearsome creature, but here the only 
thing that’s killer is its comedic timing.  KQG
fukuda, andrew The Hunt. St. Martin’s Griffin, 2012 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-250-00514-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-250-00856-5 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 9-12
The last thing Gene wants is to win the lottery for the Hunt, in which people 
(a.k.a. vampires) will compete with each other while hunting the last remaining 
“hepers” (a.k.a. humans). Since Gene is secretly a heper, his life depends on passing 
as a vampire. When he and his fellow lottery contestants, including longtime crush 
Ashley June, are locked up in a training compound, he must seek help from the 
captive humans he’s charged to hunt in order to escape detection; an escape plot is 
the logical next step, but it will be near-impossible to pull off. Fukuda imbues the 
vampires with a vividly alien physicality (including a wrist-scratching social tic, 
blank expressions, and elbow-centric sex) that takes them well beyond the familiar 
supernatural romance fare. Gene’s regimen for controlling potentially revealing 
bodily functions (like sweat and hair growth) is so dependent on equipment no 
longer available to him, and vampires’ senses so strong, that readers will question 
the plot contrivances that allow him to stay hidden for so long. Readers accustomed 
to speculative worlds will also note that many logistical questions raised within the 
plot, such as the exact rules of vampire physiology (which seem contradictory at 
times), go unanswered. Still, the flipped nature of the setup—humans in hiding 
while vampires rule the world—is appealing in both its ever-lurking peril and its 
neat subversion of vampire tropes; the pure weirdness of the world will garner 
ardent fans and confused detractors alike and make the book memorable despite 
its flaws.  CG
funke, Cornelia Ghost Knight; tr. from the German by Oliver Latsch; illus. by 
Andrea Offerman. Little, 2012 [352p]
ISBN 978-0-316-05614-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
Eleven-year-old Jon Whitcroft is doing everything he can to sabotage his mother’s 
new relationship, but his efforts only have the disastrous result of motivating his 
mother to pack Jon off to boarding school in Salisbury. Almost as soon as he gets 
there, he is plagued by a passel of ghosts who are determined to do him in, as he 
510 • The BulleTin
is the last in the line of Hartgills, a family against whom the head ghost has sworn 
eternal revenge. A strange but beautiful girl named Ella convinces Jon to call for 
the assistance of a ghost knight, William Longspee, who has vowed to help any-
one in need in order to atone for his violent deeds while on living. Ella and Jon’s 
adventures include several harrowing episodes that bond them and even lead Jon 
to a new appreciation of his mother’s new boyfriend, who turns out to be Ella’s 
uncle as well as a handy man to have around a haunted graveyard. The tone of the 
book is more bright-eyed than menacing; the dangers are real enough, but readers 
will be more engaged with Jon and his by-turns grumpy, insecure, and impatient 
moods and mutterings than with any ghosts. Set on the grounds of the Salisbury 
Cathedral School and peopled with actual historical figures, this will likely hold 
special interest for budding Anglophiles, but it will appeal to any kids who grew 
up, as Jon did, fantasizing about the exploits of gallant knights who settled their 
disputes with the sword.  KC
Gennari, jennifer My Mixed-Up Berry Blue Summer. Houghton, 2012 [128p]
ISBN 978-0-547-57739-5 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 4-6
Twelve-year-old June Farrell has been okay with the fact that her mom, MJ, is gay, 
but now that MJ’s partner Eva has moved in and MJ and Eva plan to marry (thanks 
to Vermont’s recently passed civil union law), June has gone into a slight tailspin. 
Not only does Eva’s no-nonsense, take-charge personality rub June the wrong way, 
but the growing backlash against the civil union law is starting to hit close to home 
as well, as various members of June’s small community protest the law and boycott 
MJ’s dockside business. The local fair’s pie contest provides June with an oppor-
tunity to shine, however, and her triumph there—along with her realization that 
there are many folks who will step up for the law and for her family—give her the 
confidence and strength that she needs. Many of the characters are simplistic and 
one-note, and the plot is more purposive than powerful. Nonetheless, this title is 
a much-needed addition to the world of LGBT literature for young readers, given 
the relative scarcity of pre-YA novels about kids dealing with gay parents. June’s 
preteen voice is credible and her concerns are sensitively expressed (“That was when 
a line had been drawn. You were either for gay people or against them. Mom and 
Eva and I had looked like the players nobody wanted on their team”); kids of all 
stripes will relate to her feelings of being an outcast. This will obviously be useful 
to kids with gay parents, but plenty of kids from straight divorced families may 
also relate to June’s unease with Eva and with her mom’s pending marriage.  JH
Griffin, betHany Masque of the Red Death. Greenwillow, 2012 [336p]
ISBN 978-0-06-210779-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Surrounded by the decay of her plague-riddled city, Araby Worth would like nothing 
more than to join the thousands of others who have succumbed to the contagion 
and die. As the only surviving offspring of her scientist father, the inventor of 
the masks that are now being used by the wealthy to ward off the illness, Araby 
remains very much alive, however, putting in appearances and trying to bury the 
guilt of outliving her twin brother with booze and drugs. When a young aristocrat 
approaches her with plans of rebellion, Araby realizes that her access to her father’s 
June 2012 • 511
research might allow her the chance to wrest power from the city’s sadistic ruler 
and bring the mask’s salvation to the lower classes and in particular, Will, a boy 
with whom she has reluctantly begun to fall in love. Nothing and no one, however, 
is quite what they appear to be in Griffin’s evocative debut, and the many plot 
twists and surprising revelations make this a compelling read. Araby’s narration is 
initially and appropriately self-centered, entirely focused on her grief and disillu-
sionment; as she increasingly engages with the outside world, readers get a clearer 
idea of the devastation wrought by the plague and the amoral society left in its 
wake. The combination of the physical ruin of Araby’s surroundings and Araby’s 
self-destructive existence touches the book with a despair that’s both intimate and 
overwhelming. Her transformation from boozy depressive to conscientious rebel 
makes Araby sympathetic and admirable, while her romances with Will and Elliot, 
the aforementioned aristocrat, are suitably fraught and steamy. The ending provides 
more action than answers, but series-accustomed fans of steampunk, romance, and 
dystopias will be happy to wait for second and concluding volume.  KQG
Haas, jessie Bramble and Maggie: Horse Meets Girl; illus. by Alison Friend. Can-
dlewick, 2012 52p
ISBN 978-0-7636-4955-5 $14.99  
R Gr. 2-4
“Bramble gave riding lessons.” Or at least the veteran lesson horse does until she 
gets so bored with the endless circles in the arena that she starts to engage in some 
passive resistance, lying down instead of walking forward or pushing over the jump 
with her nose instead of leaping over it. Bramble is also picky about possible new 
owners, but eager young Maggie seems to be the perfect choice. Once Bramble 
has scoped out her new digs—and convinced Maggie to sleep outside her stall to 
keep her company at night—she’s clearly going to be happy in her indulgent new 
home. This easy reader in four chapters doesn’t have quite the snap of Haas’ other 
horse books (such as Runaway Radish, BCCB 7/01), winding down rather than 
solidly ending, but it still displays the author’s characteristic and wittily expressed 
understanding of horses (“Bramble could jump if she wanted to. She did not 
want to very often”) and the girls who love them. The bulging dot eyes and broad 
gestures in the gouache illustrations give it a cartoony feel, but there’s plenty of 
horsey reality in Bramble’s expressive body language, and compositions, both spot 
art and larger scenes, know to keep the focus firmly on girl and horse. This will 
suit readers of Bang-Campbell’s Little Rat Rides (BCCB 4/04) looking for a little 
more barn duty and keep them sated until they’re ready for Radish or Haas’ Beware 
the Mare (BCCB 7/93).  DS
Hartland, jessie Bon Appétit!: The Delicious Life of Julia Child; written and illus. 
by Jessie Hartland. Schwartz & Wade, 2012 [48p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96944-7 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86944-0 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 6-9
The centenary of Julia Child’s birth is bringing out celebrations of the noted cook-
book writer’s life, such as Reich’s picture book (reviewed below) and this quirky 
graphic-novel-styled biography. Hartland faithfully follows Child’s life, outlining 
her war service and her relationship with her husband, then focusing in detail on 
her encounter with French cookery and the long process of creating her seminal 
512 • The BulleTin
cookbook, then depicting her emergence as a surprising television star. The story 
is particularly effective at evoking Child’s sometimes peripatetic life (page footers 
identify each new locale), her gusto for exploring food and cooking wherever she 
went, and the painstaking and complex process of translating French cookery into 
an American bestseller. The draftmanship evinces a childlike visual style, but the 
simplicity is deceptive—the dense and sometimes chaotic design of the pages and 
handwritten text in both cursive and print takes sophistication and patience to 
navigate, since the book lacks the clear panel boundaries of most graphic novels and 
requires readers to often sort out the directional order of the text for themselves. The 
pell-mell mix of text, captions, and art and insouciant disregard for geometry may 
appeal to kids who cut their teeth on Maira Kalman, though, and the overpacked 
pages, with whimsical gouache figures in childlike style of unabashed awkwardness, 
recall the work of Bruce Ingman (Ahlberg’s The Runaway Dinner, BCCB 9/06). Julia 
Child is a fascinating slice of history from quite a few angles, and readers interested 
in food and cooking may not be the only ones who find this story of her culture-
changing life intriguing. A recipe (from the author, oddly, not Julia Child), a brief 
note about visitable sites, and a partial bibliography are appended.  DS
Hartnett, sonya Sadie and Ratz; illus. by Ann James. Candlewick, 2012 60p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-5315-6 $14.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-5990-5 $14.99 
 Ad Gr. 2-3
Young Hannah lives with her parents and her four-year-old brother, Baby Boy; 
another prominent part of her life is her two hands, which she has named Sadie 
and Ratz (“Sadie is the boss. She is the same size as Ratz, but she is meaner”), and 
which wreak havoc when Hannah is upset. When Baby Boy discovers that he can 
blame his mischief on Sadie and Ratz, Hannah struggles to figure out what to do: 
“Maybe the only way to stop Baby Boy from blaming Sadie and Ratz for everything 
was to tame them, and make them nice. No! I couldn’t do it. It would break Sadie 
and Ratz’s hearts.” Eventually everybody figures out what Baby Boy’s been up to, 
and they also realize that Sadie and Ratz now have Baby Boy’s hands as partners in 
crime: “Baby Boy said their names were Colin and Scraps.” This is a quirky and 
intriguing child’s-eye view of naughtiness, and Hannah’s method of relegating 
blame to her personified hands will strike some kids as brilliant. Adults (and kids 
on the receiving end of such aggression), however, may not be so keen to let the kids 
off the hook for their more hurtful actions (Baby Boy, for example, is apparently 
responsible for Hannah’s pet insect’s losing one of his legs). It’s also unsatisfying 
that the book ends without Baby Boy’s getting called out for his false accusations 
of his sister or for his mayhem. The loose smudginess and skillful drafting of James’ 
numerous charcoal illustrations effectively convey the characters’ varied emotions. 
Despite its flaws, this could be a useful tool for helping young children deal with 
aggression or explore the complications of sibling dynamics.  JH
Harvey, alyxandra Stolen Away. Walker, 2012 [288p]
ISBN 978-0-8027-2189-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
Life in their sleepy small town is about to get a whole lot more interesting for best 
friends Eloise and Jo when two brooding hotties from the faerie realm show up on 
a steamy summer night. As the unknowing niece of the current Fey queen, Eloise 
June 2012 • 513
is the primary target for the faeries. Lucas has been sent to protect her from attacks 
from the king, who, among other nefarious purposes, plans to kidnap her to lure 
back his estranged wife, while Eldric, the king’s handsome son, is in the mortal 
realm on reconnaissance duty. Both boys fail rather spectacularly at their tasks, as 
Eldric falls in love with Jo and Lucas allows Eloise to be kidnapped; the ensuing 
rescue mission is thus fraught with drama, chase scenes, and lusty sighs. With Jo’s 
love for all things British and Eloise’s penchant for red lipstick, the girls are con-
veniently quirky, which is apparently why Eldric and Lucas fall instantaneously 
in love with them. The reader, however, is likely to have a hard time telling the 
two apart, as their voices, which alternate narration, both carry the same snarky 
attempts at cleverness, attempts that are undermined by Jo’s stereotypical flightiness 
as the boy-crazed best friend and Eloise’s general blandness. While it lacks character 
development, however, the story is ripe with evocative imagery that easily builds a 
worlds touched by magic, and the tightly plotted action moves readers along from 
one narrow escape to the next at a brisk pace. Holly Black’s Tithe (BCCB 1/03) and 
Melissa Marr’s Wicked Lovely (BCCB 7/07) are still the go-to books for avid fans 
of the wee folk, but this may keep those looking for slightly less gloomy iteration 
of Faerie sufficiently entertained.  KQG
Herbstein, Manu Brave Music of a Distant Drum. Red Deer, 2012 179p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-88995-470-0 $12.95  
R Gr. 10 up
Ama is an aging African slave living and working on an eighteenth-century Brazilian 
sugar plantation; her son left the plantation years ago to be raised as a Christian 
and now takes down the life story of the mother he barely remembers. Ama’s tale 
is a tragic one: she was kidnapped from her African village, repeatedly raped, im-
prisoned, and eventually sold into slavery and shipped across the Atlantic, with any 
respite from horror and abuse along the way proving only temporary. The narrative 
shifts seamlessly and with perfect timing between Ama’s story and interjections by 
her son, Zacharias, and Josef, another slave. Ama’s story is brutally fascinating in its 
own right, and for the most part the framing story serves to add depth and context. 
Much of Zacharias’ narrative is dedicated to criticizing his mother’s pagan ways, 
insisting that her story has nothing to do with him, and consistently protecting and 
defending his mistress; his sudden shift to broader understanding is abrupt, but the 
different understandings add tension. Ultimately, this is a complex and carefully 
developed examination of the transatlantic slave trade as seen through the lens of 
one woman’s experience, and young people who may not have considered slavery’s 
impact on the New World outside of North America will have their eyes opened. 
A detailed character list precedes the story, and a glossary is appended.  HM
HoberMan, Mary ann, comp. Forget-Me-Nots: Poems to Learn by Heart; illus. by 
Michael Emberley. Tingley/Little, 2012 144p
ISBN 978-0-316-12947-3 $19.99  
R* Gr. 2-5
See this month’s Big Picture review, p. 495.
Huser, Glen The Runaway. Tradewind, 2012 147p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-896580-21-0 $12.95  
Ad Gr. 5-8
It’s 1923, and fifteen-year-old Leroy “Doodlebug” Barnstable and his disabled 
mother have become dependent on the support and hospitality of a maternal rela-
514 • The BulleTin
tive. Aunt Alvina supports the pair warmly, but her grown sons see Doodlebug 
as a source of free labor and, convincing him that his family owes them a debt he 
must work off, they exploit him at every opportunity. When Doodlebug discovers 
the truth—that the cousins are banking money that’s actually his—he runs off, 
“borrowing” a horse and swiping a portion of the cash he deems to be rightly his 
own. With the cousins in hot pursuit, Doodlebug is sheltered by the members of 
a traveling Chautauqua show, where the young man’s drawing skills are promptly 
put to lucrative use. Doodlebug is certainly grateful for the refuge, but he’s even 
more taken with the niece of the owner, a sweet-natured but flirty teen who handles 
the Chautauqua children’s tent while tugging the heartstrings of Doodlebug and 
the college men who roustabout over their summer vacation. Of course, the evil 
cousins track Doodlebug down, and of course, justice prevails, so there’s a basic 
moral satisfaction at seeing the underdog triumph as deserved. However, the threat 
of Doodlebug falling back into his cousins’ clutches is never quite imminent enough 
to generate much excitement, and the details of the Chautauqua circuit don’t really 
hold the kind of drama or glamour to keep the pages flying until the inevitable 
showdown. Still, readers who relish Depression era period pieces such as Curtis’s 
Bud, Not Buddy (BCCB 11/99) will enjoy the ambience.  EB
jenkins, steve The Beetle Book; written and illus. by Steve Jenkins. Houghton, 
2012 32p
ISBN 978-0-547-68084-2 $16.99  
R Gr. 3-6
Skins, prepare to crawl: Jenkins has brought his skills to one of the most fascinating 
yet disturbing categories of animal, the beetle. Measured small print briefly explains 
important beetle facts (what makes a beetle a beetle, how they defend themselves, 
how they get around, how big they are) while each spread offers a gallery of beetles 
with informative captions. Beetles are a splendid subject for Jenkins’ intricate cut-
paper art, and he makes the most of their delicate extra-terrestrial-esque weirdness, 
from closeups of the oversized fernlike antenna on the feather-horn beetle to the 
fearsome jaws of the six-spotted green tiger beetle. As usual for Jenkins, there’s 
keen attention to scale, with spreads either representing the beetles life size or of-
fering a thumbnail silhouetted lineup of that page’s stars in actual size to anchor 
the full-color explorations. The sheer beauty of beetledom is on display as much 
as its utter alienness (to humans, anyway), and the elaborate engineering of these 
highly successful and complex organisms will elicit deserved admiration as well as 
a few squirms. The combination of sophisticated look and highly visual approach 
makes this accessible to a wide audience, and this is one that’ll certainly be picked 
up immediately if left strategically on a library table. End matter lists each beetle 
featured along with its scientific name and habitat.  DS
jensen, dana A Meal of the Stars: Poems Up and Down; illus. by Tricia 
Tusa. Houghton, 2012 28p
ISBN 978-0-547-39007-9 $16.99  
R Gr. 2-4
As the subtitle indicates, some of these free-verse poems read conventionally, top 
to bottom, but others are designed to read bottom to top. Each poem is a single 
sentence, with no punctuation or capitalization and only one word per line. The 
subject matter corresponds with the format, so that the poem about a giraffe’s 
enormous height, for instance, starts down low and goes way up high (“with/ a/ 
June 2012 • 515
neck/ as/ long/ as/ that/ I/ wonder/ if/ the/ giraffe/ could/ make/ a/ meal/ of/ the/ 
stars”). Some entries suggest fantasy (a poem about a rocket ship faces a picture of 
a child playing imaginatively in a cardboard box), while others are simply poetic 
takes on real events (looking out on a carnival from the top of a Ferris wheel, for 
example). The imagery is precise and accessible, with touches of both whimsy 
and realism. One might say the same about the line and watercolor illustrations, 
which often catch characters mid-act, adding vibrant life to the visuals. Layout is, 
understandably, tall and narrow; ample white backgrounds add to the airy feel, 
especially in spreads where a monochromatic vignette faces the full-color illustra-
tion. The poems will invite veterans of Florian’s and Janeczko’s inventive layouts 
and they would also make interesting readalouds; you’ll want to practice a time or 
two with this one to ascertain which direction the poems are headed, and listeners 
will love poring over the light-infused pictures when storytime is through.  HM
kaGawa, julie The Immortal Rules. Harlequin Teen, 2012 [496p] (Blood 
of Eden)
ISBN 978-0-373-21051-0 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Nearly sixty years after the Red Lung disease wiped out most of humanity, vampires 
rule the world, penning the majority of the remaining humans into cities and using 
them as convenient food sources. As an Unregistered human living in the fringes 
of the city, seventeen-year-old Allie Sekemoto has thus far avoided being used as a 
“blood bag,” but a brutal attack by Rabids (mindless, zombie-like beings) leaves her 
close to death and she reluctantly accepts the help of a passing vampire, allowing 
him to transform her into the very thing she hates the most. Since her creator is a 
rogue vampire, Allie is forced to flee the city, escaping into the unchecked wilder-
ness beyond, where she finds herself inexplicably attached to and then protecting 
a small band of humans on their way to the safe haven of Eden, even as she tries 
to resist her natural instinct to hunt them. With vampires, zombie-like creatures, a 
dystopian setting, and one kick-butt heroine, Kagawa mines a checklist of current 
YA trends to create a compulsively readable and surprisingly unpredictable series 
opener. Quite a bit of ground is covered here as Allie transforms from a just-barely-
making-it human to powerful vampire to morally compromised savior, and her 
narration is accordingly desperate, arrogant, and ultimately hopeful. The education 
under her creator is a particularly clever device by which readers learn much of the 
backstory to this world, but Allie’s travels outside the city indicate there is still quite 
a bit she does not know, giving the entire realm an enticingly cryptic feel. Throw in 
a bit of forbidden romance with an eternally optimistic and endearingly mortal boy 
and you’ve got yourself this summer’s must-have supernatural beach read.  KQG
kibuisHi, kazu, ed. Explorer: The Mystery Boxes; written and illus. by Jason Caffoe, 
Emily Carroll, Kazu Kbuishi, et al. Amulet/Abrams, 2012 128p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4197-0010-1 $19.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4197-0009-5 $10.95  
R Gr. 5-8
Each of the seven graphic short stories (from a total of eight authors) in this col-
lection centers on the mysterious contents of a box. One box contains a sinister 
wax doll, another attracts the attention of several wizards, two contain mischievous 
entities, one provides a link to a beloved father who has been killed in battle, one is 
516 • The BulleTin
an alien spaceship, and one, of course, is full of treasure. Each poses a problem for 
the characters who find it, and those problems range from the creepy to the zany to 
the ethically and socially conscious in their eventual solutions. Full-color artwork 
introduces readers to a range of graphic styles: the spooky story of the wax doll 
who starts to take over the life of the girl who found her is characterized by dark, 
monochromatic colors and stark interiors, whereas the more zany plot of an alien 
in over his head on an assignment is energized by bright, complementary colors, 
chaotic compositions, and exaggerated body eccentricities. Readers new to graphic 
narrative will find this collection inspirational for their own creative forays, and it 
carries rich curricular possibilities for teaching the form as well; meanwhile, veteran 
comics readers, who may recognize contributor names such as Raina Telgemeier 
and Kibuishi himself, will appreciate the range of styles and entertaining narratives 
made possible by the thematic connection of a mysterious box.  KC
kindl, PatriCe Keeping the Castle. Viking, 2012 [224p]
ISBN 978-0-670-01438-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-12
Beauty is seventeen-year-old Althea’s greatest asset, and she knows that she must 
use it to secure not only her future but also that of her impoverished genteel fam-
ily, their crumbling, beloved castle, and the household staff. Given the scarcity of 
promising marital candidates in their rustic northern county, it’s no surprise that 
Althea and her two unpleasant stepsisters are delighted when the new young Lord 
Boring brings a small party with him when he takes his seat at nearby Gudgeon 
Park. Althea immediately captures the fancy of His Lordship, and their growing 
bond is only spoiled by the constant presence of his opinionated cousin, Mr. 
Fredericks, with whom Althea repeatedly spars. Kindl puts her literary heart on 
her sleeve for all to see here: this is no parody, but an Austen revival written from 
love and knowledge by an author whose precise formality of diction has tied her 
to earlier eras all along. The author is clearly sensitive to differences between then 
and now that sometimes puzzle modern readers of period material, and narrator 
Althea helpfully but unobtrusively foregrounds aspects of her situation that would 
have been tacitly understood in Austen’s day. Fans of costume dramas and novels of 
manners will recognize touches of other influences (Downton Abbey, for instance, 
and even Miss Manners) as well as clear Austen homages (the book employs an 
inverted version of the Emma device about confusing admiration for a painting’s 
subject with admiration for the painter). Those deft and playful technical achieve-
ments are all in service of a very satisfying story that allows Althea to get what she 
really wants and not just what she thinks she wants, while along the way showing 
her deeper strengths and an appealing wit. This is a perfect stepping stone to Austen 
for readers afraid of classics, and it will also delight lovers of Cooper’s A Brief History 
of Montmaray (BCCB 11/09) as well as Austen fans themselves.  DS
lowry, aMy, ad. Fox Tails: Four Fables from Aesop; ad. and illus. by Amy Low-
ry. Holiday House, 2012 32p
ISBN 978-0-8234-2400-9 $16.95  
Ad 6-9 yrs
As the Aesop-acquainted may have noticed, the fox is a familiar player in the fables, 
and Lowry here strings four tales together to create a single sequentially fabular 
outing for her fox protagonist. The fox starts out in search of food and finds grapes 
June 2012 • 517
he cannot quite reach and thus scorns; he sweet-talks a crow out of the cheese she’s 
carrying; after he falls into a well, he tricks a goat into jumping in so that he can 
clamber out on his back; then he gets a comeuppance at the stork’s house as the 
crow and goat witness his defeat. The splicing together of the tales doesn’t really 
improve anything; the approach takes away the tight shape of the individual fables, 
especially since the morals are relegated to end matter. The foxy focus, though, 
gives the fox an interesting centrality akin to other tricksters (an illustration shows 
a book of Anansi tales sitting on Fox’s bookshelves to emphasize the point), and 
the style of the retellings is effective in its simple directness. The art, too, is spare 
(and somewhat pale), the gouache figures trimly outlined in pencil and inhabiting 
a wide-open countryside with smooth green hills. Lowry adds interest with occa-
sional very subtle touches of patterning (in the well’s brickwork, in the tall hedges) 
and extra animals, such as the mice that unabashedly wander through fox’s home; 
youngsters will also be amused by the pictures on the stork’s wall that proudly 
capture his delivery of babies. This could be an interesting entry in a folklore unit, 
especially if you’re focusing on tricksters.  DS
lynCH, CHris Kill Switch. Simon, 2012 169p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4169-2702-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3640-4 $9.99  
R Gr. 9-12
Daniel Cameron has always been close with his grandfather, and now that Da is slip-
ping downhill with dementia, Daniel is even more fiercely protective and determined 
to spend his last summer before college getting in all the quality time together they 
can. Memory lapses and odd non sequiturs that could once be ignored or laughed 
off take a dark and sinister turn when a couple of Da’s old colleagues from his days 
in government “agribusiness” turn up and strongly suggest that Da cease talking 
about past work, and Da’s rambling claims seem to have some actual veracity. At a 
classic auto show, Da identifies one particular vehicle as his own, which “they” had 
taken away as too high profile for his cryptic line of work. Da confidently hotwires 
it, takes it for a spin, crashes it in a cemetery, and lands on the radar of the police, 
but before he can be brought in for psychiatric evaluation, Daniel spirits him out 
of town and the chase is on. Family and shadowy colleagues alike are on their tail as 
they hide out with a stoner cousin at a remote college campus on spring break. Da 
seems peculiarly lucid when he cautions Daniel about their need for total secrecy 
and challenges his grandson to recognize his own “kill switch,” the readiness to 
taken violent or even lethal action when their pursuers finally—inevitably—catch 
up. The pacing and urgency of the plot steadily accelerate as Daniel and readers 
move from worrying whether Da’s stories are real, to weighing how many of the 
details are reliable, to simply strategizing how to keep the old man—obviously 
a loose cannon with a violent past—safe from assassins bent on silencing him. 
Lynch’s masterly balance of life-or-death road trip and tender grandfather/grandson 
relationship makes this an unusual, first-rate thriller.  EB
Marsden, Carolyn The White Zone. Carolrhoda, 2012 182p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7613-7383-4 $17.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7613-8724-4 $13.95  
R Gr. 4-7
This contemporary novel explores the complex and changing relationship between 
two Iraqi cousins: Nouri, a Shiite who just lost his beloved uncle at the hands of 
518 • The BulleTin
a Sunni car bomber, and Talib, whose father is Shiite and mother is Sunni. As 
violence increases in their Baghdad neighborhood, so does Nouri’s rage towards 
his cousin for being half-Sunni, a rage that ultimately climaxes in Nouri sneaking 
out at night and launching a rock through Talib’s bedroom window. Talib’s family 
escapes the growing violence against Sunnis to Mutanabbi Street, a neutral zone 
close to his father’s work, but even Mutanabbi Street proves unsafe as a car bomb-
ing results in his father getting injured and the family’s book stall being destroyed. 
There is no real ending to Nouri and Talib’s story, just as there is no foreseeable end 
to the Sunni/Shiite conflict, but the two boys do work out an awkward truce. The 
novel itself concludes with a description of an actual event: in January 2008, snow 
fell on Baghdad and, as the white flakes fell from the sky, the city fell silent—no 
gunfire, no mortar shells, just the enveloping white. Marsden’s knack for getting 
deeply into a culture and creating realistic, believable characters proves effective 
once again; this is an accessible and engaging window into a specific time and place 
that will have current relevance to many young readers and units of study. Nouri 
and Talib alternate narration, with Talib’s voice the more powerful, particularly as 
he explores his own previously devout religious feelings and questions which side 
of the conflict Allah is on. Descriptions are evocative, and juxtapositions between 
everyday realities and the violence effectively hint at the senselessness of the conflict. 
A brief author’s note and glossary are included.  HM
Marriott, zoë Shadows on the Moon. Candlewick, 2012 [464p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-5344-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-5993-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-12
No sooner is Suzume’s father murdered in front of her (on false charges of treason 
against the Moon Prince) than her mother weds his best friend, Lord Terayama, 
and spirits Suzume away to a new life of luxury. Suzume’s aptitude for shadow-
weaving—the ability to create illusions by manipulating light and shadow—al-
lows her to hide her discontent and suspicion, but when she overhears Terayama’s 
confession of complicity in her father’s death, she realizes her own life is in danger 
and she must shed her old identity to remain alive. First as a kitchen drudge in 
Terayama’s household, then as a courtesan attempting to win the position of the 
Moon Prince’s Shadow Bride (an official, high-status mistress with the power to 
ask a royal boon), she pursues a vendetta against Terayama and her own traitorous 
mother. Marriott plays with the motifs of the Cinderella story in fresh new ways, 
recasting the classic fairy tale as revenge quest in a pseudo–ancient Japan, and 
her powerful exploration of familial betrayals and the personal cost of vengeance 
dovetails seamlessly with the more familiar fairy-tale themes of love, belonging, 
and multiple identities. The book also has a swoonworthy romantic hero in kind, 
perceptive Otieno (the youngest member of a diplomatic party from the African 
nation of Athazie), who recognizes Suzume in all of her guises and offers her hap-
piness if only she can let go of her guilt and bitterness. The atmospheric writing, 
compelling secondary characters (including a transgender woman who becomes 
Suzume’s surrogate older sister), and emotional complexity of this adaptation give 
it broad appeal and make it a standout addition to the perennially appealing field 
of fairy-tale novelizations.  CG
June 2012 • 519
Mass, wendy Beauty and the Beast: The Only One Who Didn’t Run Away. Scho-
lastic, 2012 [288p] (Twice Upon a Time)
Trade ed. iSBn 978-0-545-31018-5 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-44314-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
 Ad Gr. 4-7
Despite her name, Beauty is more plain than stunning, but she’s not terribly con-
cerned with her looks anyway. More important to her is being a dutiful support 
to her father and sister, who are depending on Beauty’s resourcefulness even more 
after the family home has burned down, leaving them destitute. Prince Riley is 
similarly unconcerned with appearances, instead pursuing his scientific interests 
by conducting various experiments in the lone west tower of his parent’s castle. 
After a witch curses Riley into a beastly form to prevent his further meddling with 
the elements, Riley and Beauty are brought together by a meandering plotline and 
afforded the expected happy ending that features them married, the curse lifted, 
and the witch defeated. The third in Mass’ Twice Upon a Time series, the story is 
obviously a retelling, so its ultimate predictability isn’t necessarily a flaw, but the 
various tangential subplots, involving an oddly truncated quest and an invisible 
royal family, serve more as pointless diversions than compelling additions. By plac-
ing the onus of the curse on a randomly spiteful witch, Mass removes the initial 
faux pas that makes the Beast’s character and transformation so compelling; this 
does, however, allow both protagonists to be engagingly likable, and the alternat-
ing perspectives from both Beauty and the Beast provide readers with a complete 
picture of the two put-upon heroes. Secondary characters are equally charming, 
and the happy ending leaves one story thread enticingly unresolved, perhaps laying 
groundwork for another installment. Fans of the original tale might be disappointed 
by some of the revisions, but hopeless romantics will find plenty of fodder for their 
own fairy tales here.  KQG
Moranville, sHarelle byars The Hop; illus. by Niki Daly. Disney Hyperion, 
2012 276p
ISBN 978-1-4231-3736-8 $16.99  
R Gr. 4-6
Taylor is an Iowa girl determined to protect a nearby natural area from developers. 
Tad, a young toad who lives there, is destined to save the toads of Toadville-by-
Tumbledown, and he must therefore find “the Queen of the Hop” and kiss her in 
order to save their home from the ravages of the Rumbler (the heavy machinery 
sent to tear up the land). Taylor, meanwhile, reluctantly accompanies her parents to 
their annual rock-and-roll extravaganza in Reno; Tad also makes his way to Reno; 
and there the two stories finally cross paths. Savvy readers will soon figure out that 
it’s Taylor whom Tad must kiss, and Moranville carefully crafts her story, narrated 
in alternating chapters by Tad and Taylor, to reach that critical point, resulting 
in a kiss that makes Tad human just long enough to give Taylor information that 
allows her to save the land. While Taylor’s side of the story is the more compel-
ling of the two narratives, Tad’s toad’s-eye view of the world is also fascinating in 
its own right. The combination is a refreshing and ultimately successful blend of 
animal fantasy and realistic fiction, and fans of either genre will find something 
to please them here. Taylor, who feels more at home with her grandmother than 
520 • The BulleTin
with her overscheduled parents, is a sympathetic character to whom many middle 
graders will relate, and Moranville’s ecological message will be eagerly received by 
nature-loving kids, especially fans of Gleitzman’s Toad Rage (BCCB 6/04). Final 
illustrations not seen.  JH
Munro, roxie Busy Builders; written and illus. by Roxie Munro. Cavendish, 
2012 40p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7614-6105-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7614-6106-7 $17.99  
Ad Gr. 2-4
Eight insects and one arachnid are showcased here for their interesting approaches 
to domestic architecture. The honeybee community in its waxen hive will be most 
familiar, but the red harvester ants in their underground burrows, organ-pipe mud 
daubers in their tubes, pine processionary caterpillars in their solar-heated silk nests, 
and paper hornet hives of wood slivers and spit are equally intriguing. Munro’s 
chosen format sends a perplexing mixed message regarding the intended audience, 
though. Each creature is introduced in a detailed, colored-ink image that extends 
across an oversized double spread with a simple header: “This is a Honeybee. Where 
does it live?” The subsequent spread offers a close-up (also oversized) that seems 
to carry over the visual appeal to a preschool/primary-aged crowd. The paragraph 
of accompanying text, however, is quite a bit more sophisticated in both concepts 
and vocabulary, evident in text such as “Patrol ants are stationed at the entrance, 
while other ants go out to forage for food. One harvester ant nest reportedly ex-
tended fifteen feet (4.6 m) below the ground and contained 436 chambers.” Newly 
independent readers who have already developed an interest in critters that buzz, 
crawl, and creep may have sufficient background to handle the terminology with 
minimal assistance, but younger listeners may need definitions and explanations 
along the way from an adult reader. A brief glossary and an even briefer list of 
further resources are included.  EB
Myers, walter dean All the Right Stuff. Amistad/HarperCollins, 2012 213p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-196087-1 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-211428-0 $9.99  
R Gr. 7-12
Paul’s father has just died, and Paul is uncertain how to feel about that, given that 
his father, a sometime jail resident and drug addict, never lived with him and his 
mother. He’d rather just slide through the summer without thinking about such 
serious things, but Elijah, the elderly man who runs the soup kitchen where Paul 
has started to work, has strong opinions about how the world should operate, and 
he starts right in teaching Paul about the social contract. Using streetwise examples 
and probing questions, he guides Paul through a course in political philosophy, 
while Paul struggles to figure out how it applies to his circumstances and those of 
the people in his neighborhood, especially a man named Sly, who operates outside 
the law because he believes that the social contract is a conspiracy to keep certain 
people on top and others at the bottom. There is nothing subtle or coy about the 
didacticism here, but by putting the philosophical positions in the mouths of 
characters and demonstrating their outcomes through various life decisions and 
their consequences, Myers manages to maintain a readable pace and high interest 
level for this Socratic dialogue. Elijah’s humane and compassionate stance toward 
people ensures that his position effectively counters any sense of an abstract ideal-
June 2012 • 521
ism regarding the concept of the social contract. Instead, an expansive definition 
and at least three opposing positions on the subject are presented reasonably and 
forcefully, and Paul’s final judgment finds a nuanced middle ground that teens 
will be able to access for their own life circumstances, making this a must-read for 
social studies curricula.  KC
nix, GartH A Confusion of Princes. Harper/HarperCollins, 2012 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-009694-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-221356-3 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
As a Prince of the Empire, Khemri has been given every advantage, including physi-
cal and psychic augmentations that have left him with superhuman abilities and 
near-immortality. After sixteen years of this luxurious life, he is formally elevated 
into the Empire and bonds with the Imperial Mind, only to discover that there 
are millions of similarly advantaged Princes out there and most of them spend 
their time trying to assassinate one another. Complicating matters further is the 
mysterious mission for which the Imperial Mind has specifically selected Khemri, 
a mission that eventually sees him stripped of his powers and flung to the far 
reaches of the Empire. There he fights off pirates, rogue spaceships, and the agents 
of one particularly murderous Prince all in an effort to prove himself worthy of 
being Emperor—a promotion he unfortunately may not even want after falling 
in love with a human. Effectively developed and packed equally with action and 
gadgetry, this ambitious space opera will find an audience among fans of Firefly 
and Battlestar Galactica. Reminiscing as an adult, Khemri offers a narrative voice 
that is both appealingly personable and appropriately self-mocking when called for; 
the resulting tone provides a nice access point for sci-fi novices and tempers some 
of the more jargon-laden passages that describe the world. And what a world it is: 
psychic technology that links everyone’s minds into one giant server and organi-
cally grown spacesuits that actively respond to the wearer’s needs are just a few of 
the imaginative creations that populate Nix’s intergalactic realm. The relationships 
between Khemri and various secondary characters are somewhat underdeveloped, 
but readers will be too awed by both Khemri and his Empire to care.  KQG
norris, elizabetH Unraveling. Balzer + Bray/HarperCollins, 2012 [464p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-210373-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-210375-8 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
When Janelle Tenner is hit by truck that seems to come out of nowhere, she dies. 
Miraculously, she’s revived, and she’s left with a memory of Ben, a boy that she 
barely knows, bringing her back to life and healing her injuries before he rides off 
on his bike. Snooping around the office of her father, an FBI agent, to find out 
about what might have happened to her, she finds that he is working on a case 
involving several unidentifiable people, including the driver of the car that hit her, 
who appear to have died of severe radiation burns. She also finds a set of numbers 
that turn out to be a countdown of some sort. She and her best friend, Alex, do 
their own research and begin to suspect that the countdown is toward the release 
of a deadly viral agent; meanwhile, she presses Ben for answers and finds that he 
and his friends are intimately involved in the radiation deaths as well as what will 
522 • The BulleTin
be the complete destruction of the world if they can’t stop it in time. This com-
pulsively readable thriller is an ingeniously well-plotted blend of crime drama, 
science fiction, family story, and first love. The book makes it work that Janelle 
is a tough-minded pragmatist who’s nonetheless willing to accept the impossible, 
while her vulnerability in relationships makes her genuinely likable. The simple 
fact that she continues to go to school even though the world is likely to end in 
less than two weeks suffuses the story with a compelling Buffy-like realism. Indeed, 
there’s an underlying similarity to Buffy in this title that bridges all sorts of genre 
gaps to create an action/adventure/romance/drama with smartly drawn characters 
guaranteed to have wide appeal.  KC
nortHroP, MiCHael Plunked. Scholastic, 2012 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-29714-1 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-39307-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-7
Jack Mogens has worked darn hard for his starting position in left field on his Little 
League team. Defense is his first love, but he’s a competent slugger as well—that is, 
unless the pitch comes inside. Jack hopes he can mask his skittishness, but before 
the season is underway, he gets smacked with a beanball on a wild pitch and is 
hauled off the field to the hospital. He’s okay, but a mean-spirited kid on his own 
team catches on to Jack’s anxiety and purposely hits him in the ribs on an inside 
pitch at practice. Now Jack’s positively paralyzed at the plate, and the coach suggests 
he “take a rest.” Depressed at losing his slot as a starter, humiliated at the prospect 
of riding the pine even for a game, and nervous that he’ll never overcome his fear, 
Jack concocts an elaborate ruse to convince his parents he’s slightly injured (not too 
badly—just too badly to play right away), at least until he can figure out whether 
he can or even wants to get back in the game. Northrop keeps a tight focus on 
Jack’s dilemma, and any kid with the good sense to be apprehensive of a rock-hard 
missile, launched by an amateur with uncertain intentions and imperfect control, 
will be quick to empathize. Likewise, the courageous and determined practice 
rounds Jack undertakes just to cope with his problem are realistic. No miracles 
here—just a compassionately told story of a kid whose desire to play masters his 
understandable impulse to quit.  EB
Patterson, rebeCCa My No, No, No Day!; written and illus. by Rebecca Pat-
terson. Viking, 2012 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-670-01405-7 $16.99  
R 4-6 yrs
“Yesterday I woke up and Bob was crawling around my room licking my jewelry . . . 
So I shouted, Get out of my room! And that was the start of my no, no, no day,” 
says young Bella. Thus begins a bad day, in which Bella revolts against her breakfast 
egg, angrily kicks off her shoes, protests being confined to a shopping cart (with 
baby brother Bob), refuses to play nicely at her playdate, pitches a fit at ballet class, 
and so on until her increasingly bad temper ends in a total meltdown at bedtime. 
As her patient mother tells her goodnight, Bella makes a confession, “Today was a 
very bad day, Mommy. Sorry.” Her mother reassures her that everyone has those 
days and that “perhaps you will be more cheerful tomorrow! And . . . I WAS! I 
WAS! I was cheerful . . . ALL DAY LONG!” Young children (especially those with 
oft-admired adorable baby siblings) will appreciate Patterson’s vivid storytelling, 
June 2012 • 523
sympathize with Bella and her many woes, and find relief and reassurance in the 
message that bad days don’t last forever. The lively and detailed art features muted 
and pastel tones, against which stocky brunette Bella in her red dress and shoes 
stands out. Patterson is particularly deft at portraying Bella’s emotional state through 
her dramatic posture as she throws out her hands in defiance, clenches her fists in 
frustration, or prostrates herself on the ground in a fit, all while her eyes squint 
grumpily and her mouth is perpetually open in vehement verbal protest. Cute 
baby Bob is clearly bewildered by his sister’s emotional state, while Bella’s put-upon 
mother exhibits the kind of weary, grim-lipped endurance that will be familiar to 
many parents. This might be a good one to tuck away for a similarly dreadful day 
or to use as discussion about bad days for those too little for Viorst’s Alexander and 
the Terrible Horrible No Good Very Bad Day (BCCB 12/72).  JH
PeaCoCk, katHleen Hemlock. Tegen/HarperCollins, 2012 [416p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-204865-3 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-204867-7 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
In the twelve years since the existence of Lupine Syndrome was revealed the world, 
efforts to contain it (by stripping werewolves of all rights and forcing them to live 
in rehabilitation camps) haven’t kept pace with its rampant spread. But the real 
trouble comes from the human monsters the crisis draws forth: a popular vigilante 
group known as the Trackers terrorize any suspected “fleabag lovers” as they work 
to expose and institutionalize (or worse) all werewolves. When Mac loses her best 
friend, Amy, to a werewolf attack, Amy’s self-destructive boyfriend Jason invites the 
Trackers to investigate. Mac, who’s seen the horror the Trackers can wreak, decides 
that if she can identify the murderer herself, the Trackers will move on, but her 
amateur efforts reveal her best-friend-turned-romantic-interest Kyle as one of the 
infected. The atmosphere of neighbor-against-neighbor paranoia is a familiar but 
effective backdrop to this supernatural murder mystery that hinges on metaphoric 
as much as literal inhumanity, and Peacock does an excellent job of developing a 
large supporting cast of characters who are at once sympathetic and suspect. Mac 
herself is a likable, capable protagonist, a self-sufficient girl from the wrong side of 
the tracks with a painful past, and her occasional self-deprecating meta-commentary 
(“It was official: My life belonged on the CW”) allows the book to capitalize on 
the perennial appeal of the supernatural love triangle without falling prey to its 
clichés. With a well-constructed mystery, brisk plotting, sharp social commentary, 
and relationship drama in spades, this debut novel joins Waters’ Generation Dead 
(BCCB 6/08) and Westerfeld’s Peeps (BCCB 9/05) in pushing the literary boundar-
ies of a popular but ever-expandable genre.  CG
PennyPaCker, sara Summer of the Gypsy Moths. Balzer + Bray/ HarperCollins, 
2012 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-196420-6 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-211451-8 $8.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 4-6
Since her mom left her again, eleven-year-old Stella has been taken in by her elderly 
great aunt, Louise, who manages vacation cottages on Cape Cod. Louise has also 
taken in a foster child, a girl Stella’s age named Angel, to keep Stella company; 
524 • The BulleTin
unfortunately, the two don’t get along. When Louise unexpectedly dies at home, 
Stella and Angel, determined to avoid relocation, follow a daring strategy: they bury 
Louise in the garden, tell people that Louise is sick and laid up with a broken ankle, 
and do all the cottage caretaking themselves. Together, the girls manage to keep the 
ruse going for quite a while until Stella, having convinced her mom to come back 
to her, finally decides the time has come to tell the truth. There is a fair amount 
of contrivance to both the plot and the characters here; it’s pretty unbelievable, for 
example, that not one adult sees through the girls’ lies about Louise. Still, many 
kids will be sucked in by the details of the girls’ survival on their own as they deal 
with Louise’s corpse, forage food left by the cottagers, and tackle adult work. Stella 
is a sympathetic character; her longing for predictability and order from a mother 
who can’t provide that and Stella’s consequent self-blame are believable and affect-
ing: “My mother hadn’t abandoned me. I just hadn’t gotten in the car before she 
left that last time. I should have seen she was getting ready to veer off, and gotten 
in the car.” Pack this for a summer vacation read (or readaloud), or hand it to fans 
of “kids on their own” books like Rose’s May B. (BCCB 2/12).  JH
Peterfreund, diana For Darkness Shows the Stars. Balzer + Bray, 2012 [416p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-200614-1 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-211437-2 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
In a futuristic Britain, genetic enhancement gone too far has produced a rigid 
new feudalist society. The childlike Reduced are a labor force with no civil rights, 
beholden to the unscathed, landed Luddites, who have forsaken technology 
wholesale. Now that the Reduced are having children with the same cognitive 
faculties as the Luddites but none of the rights, these Post-Reductionists threaten 
the social order. At the center of this upheaval is Elliot, a Luddite aristocrat who 
is fiercely protective of her father’s subjects, and Kai, the Post-Reductionist who 
was Elliot’s childhood sweetheart, now an esteemed ship’s captain. The account 
of their fraught reunion is intercut with letters they wrote during their youthful 
friendship, which fill in the blanks in their rocky history and help introduce the 
main philosophical debates dividing Luddite-ruled society. Meanwhile, there’s 
some inheritance drama, a prodigal cousin with seedy secrets, and a whole lot of 
biotech intrigue that should spark some lively debates on the danger and promise 
of science. Peterfreund (author of Rampant, BCCB 10/09) creatively draws on, of 
all unexpected things, Austen’s Persuasion both in the plot—socially inferior lost 
love returns with success, fortune, and something of a grudge—and in a romance 
navigated through politely innocuous social exchanges secretly loaded with longing. 
The genres of mannered romance and post-apocalyptic drama work surprisingly 
well together, with the focus on interpersonal microdrama allowing Peterfreund 
to engage in detailed world-building without having to pause the plot. Add in the 
perennial appeal of an upstairs/downstairs love story, and you have an easy sell 
to fans of Oliver’s Delirium (BCCB 2/11) and Revis’ Across the Universe (BCCB 
1/11) alike.  CG
Peters, julie anne It’s Our Prom (So Deal With It). Tingley/Little, 2012 342p
ISBN 978-0-316-13158-2 $17.99  
R Gr. 9-12
We’ve seen plenty of examples of exclusive, unwelcoming proms and the struggles 
against them (for example, George’s The Difference Between You and Me, BCCB 
June 2012 • 525
5/12). Now Peters asks what might happen with a supportive administration who, 
instead of silencing a student who wants a more inclusive, affordable, LGBT-
friendly prom, adds her to the planning committee. Brash, judgmental Azure is 
that student, and she adds her best friends Luke (a bi guy whose other extracur-
ricular commitments include directing a school musical based on his coming-out 
story) and Radhika (the object of both Luke’s and Azure’s undying crushes). Prom 
planning itself is no picnic: not only are there interpersonal dramas galore among 
the three friends and between old and new prom committee members, but the 
practical challenges to enacting the kind of prom they envision turn out to be an 
administrative nightmare. Peters manages to wring tension and excitement out 
of some objectively pretty mundane (and thus refreshingly realistic) roadblocks, 
and her characters are well rounded. Even those who exist primarily as foils, such 
as Luke’s neglectful custodial older brother, get hints of greater complexity, and 
Azure in particular has some significant flaws that are balanced by her earnestness. 
A frothy, socially conscious prom dramedy full of incident, this is a highly readable 
tale with a little something for everyone.  CG
Peterson, lois The Paper House. Orca, 2012 [128p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4598-0051-9 $7.95
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
Ten-year-old Safiyah digs through the Kibera garbage dump on the outskirts of 
Nairobi, Kenya, searching for magazines that she can use to seal the cracks in the 
shack she shares with her grandmother, Cucu. At the dump, Safiyah gets into a 
scuffle with a boy named Chindi, who, she later learns, is the cousin of Blade, local 
bad boy and gang leader. Chindi and Blade turn into valuable allies for Safiyah, 
helping her get Cucu, who has been coughing up blood to the free medical clinic. 
After Cucu has healed and they have returned home, Safiyah sets about using the 
leftover magazine pages to create complex mosaic collages on the exterior walls 
of their home, collages that begin to draw attention and create opportunities for 
Safiyah. Despite the dingy setting and omnipresence of poverty in Safiyah’s story, 
this is not a sad tale; it is rather an uplifting story of a girl with pure and unselfish 
motives learning to trust others and being rewarded for her talent. Not that it glosses 
over the darker side: Safiyah’s struggle is realistically portrayed, and her feelings of 
desperation and shame thoughtfully depicted. This is a solid and accessible offering 
for young readers eager to experience life in someone else’s shoes. An author’s note 
with facts about life in the Kenyan slums is included.  HM 
Pyle, kevin C. Take What You Can Carry; written and illus. by Kevin C. 
Pyle. Holt, 2012 174p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-8050-8286-9 $12.99  
R Gr. 6-9
Readers who have seen images of Japanese internment camps will recognize the 
setting in the opening sequence of Pyle’s latest graphic novel; those who don’t will 
be brought quickly up to speed as the wordless story of a Japanese-American teen in 
World War II converges with a parallel story of a Caucasian teen, Kyle, who’s slid-
ing from mischief toward serious trouble in 1978 Chicago. Sepia-toned watercolor 
and ragged-outline edges of bleeding black ink mark the internment-camp tale, 
which follows the litany of indignities suffered by the teen’s family (later revealed 
to be surnamed Himitsu) as Executive Order 9066 effects the arrest of the father, 
526 • The BulleTin
the forced sale of house and furnishings, removal of mother, sister, and brother to 
a relocation camp at a racetrack, and finally to the camp at Manzanar. More con-
ventional Western comic art in simple black line and blue wash tails Kyle Logan, 
a new kid in a new development, who latches on to a crew of boys that brings out 
the worst in him, and soon he’s moved from sulkily avoiding work with his dad to 
vandalism and shoplifting. The boys’ last heist of candy from a convenience store 
lands them in the slammer for a couple of hours; Kyle must do community service 
for the shop owner, Mr. Himitsu, whose initial sternness eventually melts, and he 
confides in Kyle his own episodes of theft at Manzanar and the mentoring of an 
elderly woodcarver who gave him an outlet for his anger. The feel-good ending, 
which skirts dangerously close to sentimentality, is more than compensated for by 
the deftly paced device of alternating tales and the arresting effectiveness of the 
contrasting art styles. Notes that coordinate with passages of text supply background 
on the internment camps and the concept of gaman, “enduring the seemingly 
unbearable with patience and dignity.”  EB
ransoM, CandaCe Iva Honeysuckle Discovers the World; illus. by Heather 
Ross. Disney Hyperion, 2012 154p
ISBN 978-1-4231-3173-1 $14.99  
Ad Gr. 3-4
Iva Honeysuckle’s life ambition is to be a “discoverer,” and when she comes across a 
hand-penned map in one of her great-grandfather’s National Geographic magazines 
that hints at a buried treasure in her part of Virginia, she decides to spend the sum-
mer after her third-grade year looking for it. Unfortunately for Iva, Heaven, her 
bossy, omnipresent, “almost-the-exact-same-age double first cousin” (two sisters mar-
ried two brothers) is always getting in the way of her plans. When Iva’s one friend, 
an older lady named Miz Compton, starts reaching out to Heaven, it is more than 
Iva can bear. By midsummer she finds herself friendless and no closer to finding 
the treasure, so she invites Heaven to help her dig under the local dump where she 
is certain the treasure must be. Iva’s strides towards having adventures and making 
discoveries carry the plot of the novel, but it is the relationship between the two 
girls that carries the emotional weight. Unfortunately, that story’s development is 
rather slim, and while the animosity between the two is effectively presented, the 
transition to working together seems more convenient than authentic. A handful 
of entertaining side characters from around town adds humor to Iva’s tale, but 
Iva’s family members are largely caricatures (the constantly costumed, irrepressible 
younger sister; the unimpressed, self-absorbed teenaged sister). Readers drawn to 
independent-minded girls with lots of self-assurance may nonetheless find Iva an 
affable companion for summer reading. Final art not seen.  HM
reiCH, susanna Minette’s Feast: The Delicious Story of Julia Child and Her Cat; 
illus. by Amy Bates. Abrams, 2012 40p
ISBN 978-1-4197-0177-1 $16.95  
Ad 5-8 yrs
When Paul and Julia Child, the latter not yet a famous cookbook author and tele-
vision personality, move to Paris, the happy couple needs only one thing to make 
their household complete: a cat. They adopt the lovely Minette, who attends with 
mild interest to her mistress’ cooking education and explorations but still prefers 
chomping on a tasty mouse or bird. This is an atmospheric tale of the Parisian life 
of the legendary gourmet, with cozy details of shopping in the marketplace and 
June 2012 • 527
cooking in the French kitchen (“She baked and blanched, blended and boiled, 
drained and dried, dusted and fried”). The story, however, is less successful than 
the style: the book seems uncertain as to whether the cat or the cook is more 
important, and each thread suffers at the expense of the other (since the cat is 
portrayed as not caring much about the cooking, the fact that the book mostly 
discusses how it impacts Minette means there’s little payoff). The illustrations are 
rendered in watercolor and pencil, but there’s a grainy sheen to the figures that at 
times suggests the pastels of Degas; smudgy modeling, rendering the faces stylishly 
indistinct, and subdued post-war hues provide an attractive period flavor but keep 
the events at an emotional distance. While those too young for Jessie Hartland’s 
biography Bon Appétit!, reviewed above, may find this an interesting taste of the 
icon’s life, the book’s strongest appeal lies in its depiction of a cool grownup life, 
awash in independence, cookery, true love, and adorable cat and in a glamorous 
foreign location. An afterword gives more details about Child’s life, and endnotes, 
a source bibliography, and a glossary are appended.  DS
ritter, joHn H. Fenway Fever! Philomel, 2012 [224p]
ISBN 978-0-399-24665-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 4-7
Ritter pays sentimental tribute to Fenway Park’s one-hundredth anniversary in this 
feel-so-good-it-hurts story of Freddy “Stats” Pagano, an undersized twelve-year-
old who suffers from a nerve disorder that affects his heart. Stats has been a proud 
citizen of Red Sox Nation all his life; his father owns a hot dog stand outside the 
ballpark, frequented by players, owners, and fans alike. Unable to play league ball 
like his talented older brother Mark, Stats has carved out his own niche with his 
uncanny recall of all the relevant Sox numbers. And this year the numbers aren’t 
good. It’s early in the season, but it’s obvious that a run of bad luck is plaguing the 
team and a new curse is hobbling their chances to make headway in their division, 
much less take another World Series. Starting pitcher Billee Orbitt senses it’s not 
the team but the energy flow of Fenway itself that is out of balance, and he enlists 
Stats to help him set the park’s chi to rights. By the time the massively overwritten 
plot draws to a close, Stats has floated above Fenway on a batch of helium balloons, 
his heart condition has been mysteriously corrected, his dad’s debts have been paid 
and hot-dog stand saved, Mark has won a slot on a national all-star team, hawks 
have been protected, a new chili dog bun has been invented, Billee pitches a perfect 
game, and, oh yeah, the Sox trash the Yankees. Sweet. So sweet, in fact, that readers 
might want to pick up a side of insulin with that red hot. Young Bostonians (who 
are, admittedly, entitled to their year of celebration) will find plenty to fist pump 
about, and baseball fans who are not swept up in the centennial fervor will still 
enjoy meeting hot-dog maven Papa Pogano and his supportive sons.  EB
roCklin, joanne The Five Lives of Our Cat Zook; illus. by Robyn Ng. Amulet/
Abrams, 2012 218p
ISBN 978-1-4197-0192-4 $16.95  
R Gr. 4-6
Zook has eight extra toes, a chewed-off ear, black gums, and terrible breath, all 
traits that make the scraggly old cat utterly lovable to ten-year-old Oona and her 
younger brother, Freddy. Unfortunately, Zook also now has kidney failure, so he 
is spending most of his time at the vet, while Oona tries to console Freddy with 
528 • The BulleTin
made-up stories about Zook’s past lives (of the nine lives afforded to cats, Zook 
has only used up five, according to Oona). An avid whopper-teller, much like 
her late father, Oona finds that although her stories cheer up Freddy, they’re cold 
comfort for Oona herself, particularly as her reality gets more complicated: her 
mom has started seeing someone new, a few of Oona’s previous white lies turn out 
to be not so harmless, and poor Zook recovers only to take a turn for the worse. 
Rocklin (One Day and One Amazing Morning on Orange Street, BCCB 4/11) has 
a knack for making emotionally complex situations accessible to younger readers. 
Here, Oona’s narration rings with authenticity as she tries to negotiate her grief 
for her father, her worry for her cat, and her mother’s new relationship all with a 
perceptivity that is credible but never precocious. The diversity among the second-
ary players makes for a nice multicultural element, as does the inclusion of several 
folktales that serve as inspiration for Oona’s various iterations of Zook’s past lives. 
A bittersweet ending, realistic without melodrama, reinforces the idea that life, 
like the best kind of whopper, can be both happy and sad and often has plenty of 
“to be continueds.”  KQG
roGers, GreGory The Hero of Little Street; written and illus. by Gregory Rog-
ers. Porter/Roaring Brook, 2012 34p
ISBN 978-1-59643-729-6 $17.99  
R Gr. 2-4
The Boy, of The Boy, The Bear, The Baron, The Bard (BCCB 12/04), and Midsum-
mer Knight (BCCB 9/07) fame, still can’t resist an errant soccer ball, so when one 
appears in the London square he’s meandering through, he kicks it into a fountain, 
and he is soon set upon by the ball’s angry owners. His escape from their clutches 
takes him into a museum, where his mischievous antics get him in trouble once 
again. A small terrier leaps out of a painting and he follows him back into another 
one, this time landing in seventeenth-century Holland. Here he finds both allies 
and enemies, and after a mad chase through the city and another narrow escape, 
he climbs back through a painting into present-day London, where his bullies 
get their comeuppance. The chase itself has to carry more of the plot than in the 
Boy’s previous intricately plotted adventures, but his merry dashes provide scope 
for introducing readers to the colorful cityscape of Delft and its inhabitants going 
about the kinds of everyday business that inspired the Dutch masters to whom 
this book pays homage. Younger readers will find the wordless story easy to work 
through, and they will certainly be carried along by the predicament and cheer the 
Boy’s clever escape from his tormentors. Rogers’ deft management of perspective 
and movement, his clever visual jokes and intertextual allusions, and his careful 
compositions demonstrate once again his masterful storytelling in the wordless 
genre.  KC
roMan, dave Teen Boat!; illus. by John Green. Clarion, 2012 [144p]
ISBN 978-0-547-63669-6 $14.99  
Ad Gr. 7-9
Teen Boat is, as you might guess, a teen boy who happens to have the ability to 
turn into a small yacht; therefore his dealings with the typical social dramas of 
high school, like getting that cute girl’s attention or avoiding the school bully, are 
complicated by his sometimes inconvenient transformations (like during a driving 
test) and the ensuing chaos, maritime or otherwise. The short chapters here are 
episodic in nature, focusing on one silly situation after another (Teen Boat hosts an 
June 2012 • 529
illegal casino party on himself in one and falls in love with a gondola in another) 
with a few thematic continuations to link each story. If you’re looking for nuance, 
look elsewhere; the title of this web comic turned graphic novel pretty much sum-
marizes the whole book, and although there’s a bit of cleverly self-deprecating wit 
that pokes fun at comic-book tropes, the humor here mainly consists of nautical 
puns or sophomoric jokes (and sometimes both, like the innuendo-filled bit about 
wet dreams). Most of T.B.’s antics therefore become somewhat stale by the slim 
book’s close, but middle-schoolers will probably have a fine time surreptitiously 
giggling over this in a corner nonetheless. Green’s cartoony illustrations feature the 
exaggerated, dot-eyed figures popular amongst Nickelodeon animated series; final 
color illustrations have not been seen.  KQG
rueda, Claudia Huff & Puff; written and illus. by Claudia Rueda. Abrams 
Appleseed, 2012 32p
ISBN 978-1-4197-0170-2 $12.95  
Ad 3-5 yrs
Rueda presents a slight twist on the three pigs story, as the viewer becomes the 
wolf, trying to blow down the pigs’ houses by blowing through a series of die-cut 
holes in the pages, while the pigs—here apparently quite inclined to the culinary 
arts—look on in dismay as their houses fall down around them while they are in 
the midst of cooking. When we come to the brick house, however, the viewer has 
to huff and puff twice, the first time trying (unsuccessfully) to blow down the 
brick house, and the second time to blow out (successfully) the candles on a cake 
held by the three smiling pigs in the brick house. Rueda’s minimal text is crisp and 
simply patterned: “First pig building a house. First pig inside the house. One wolf 
huffing and puffing. Huff & Puff. First pig is not happy,” thus distilling the story 
down to its most basic folkloric elements. This works effectively until the final plot 
turn: Why would the pigs bake a cake for someone who has been knocking down 
their houses? This lapse in logic will likely bother some justice-minded kids; others 
will simply enjoy the interactivity of this riff on a familiar tale. Rueda’s pen and 
ink and watercolor illustrations have a similarly minimalist vibe, with thin, black 
scratchy lines outlining and accenting the pale tints of pinks, browns, golds, and 
blues of the pigs and their homes, all of which is placed against lots of clean white 
space. The pages on which the reader is exhorted to “huff & puff” are matched 
to the corresponding house; the page for blowing down the brick house looks like 
bricks, for example, while the words “Huff & Puff” appear in block letters above 
and below the die cut “blowhole.” If you can overlook the puzzling ending, this 
is an artfully done book that may have a variety of school and library uses.  JH 
ruiz zafón, Carlos The Watcher in the Shadows; tr. from the Spanish by Lucia 
Graves. Little, 2012 [230p]
ISBN 978-0-316-04476-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 6-8
In the summer of 1937, fourteen-year-old Irene Sauvelle and her family leave their 
tiny apartment in Paris for a new life in the French coastal town of Blue Bay, where 
Irene’s mother will serve as the housekeeper to Lazarus Jann, a wealthy recluse and 
toymaker. Filled with half-worked inventions and fascinating automatons, the 
old man’s mansion is a terrifying place, but fortunately, the rest of the village is 
welcoming, and Irene and her younger brother Dorian soon find themselves fit-
530 • The BulleTin
ting in quite well. Things change when a young girl is found murdered at the edge 
of the mansion’s grounds, Dorian starts seeing shadowy figures in the forest, and 
Irene discovers an old journal that indicates that Lazarus is anything but the kindly 
hermit he has claims to be. Ruiz Zafón (The Midnight Palace, BCCB 5/11) is a 
master of atmosphere, and he makes his setting a central character by having the 
villain operate primarily amidst the murky corners of the crumbling old house and 
the dark recesses of an overgrown forest. His characterization stumbles at points, 
though, especially in regards to the motivations and actions of Lazarus. Although 
it eventually becomes clear that the murderer is a doppelganger and not the old 
toymaker, Lazarus’ ignorance and failure to act seem incongruent with his efforts 
to initially protect the Sauvelles. Readers looking for an appropriately chilling ghost 
story, however, may happily overlook these flaws as they lose themselves upon the 
windswept cliffs of Blue Bay.  KQG
salM, artHur Anyway*; written and illus. by Arthur Salm. Simon, 
2012 [192p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2930-7 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2932-1 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
“I’m Max. A good kid. Except for the time I decided I didn’t want to be a good kid 
anymore.” That time is the summer after Max’s seventh grade, when Max and his 
parents attend a family camp and he decides to reinvent himself as a cooler, older 
guy. “Mad Max,” complete with headband, joins a group of other kids there and 
enjoys the novel taste of daring and independence—until his new friends turn out 
to be more trouble than even Mad Max is seeking. With its comic, self-aware tone 
(accented with reams of footnotes, hence the titular asterisk) and marginal spot 
art, Max’s narration will be familiar to readers of the Wimpy Kid series, while his 
experience of camp as a life-changing opportunity recalls Chris Lynch’s Extreme 
Elvin (BCCB 2/99). The book conveys with keen perception the revelations that 
persona can be a choice and that people tend to take us as we offer ourselves; it’s 
also sympathetically realistic about the need to calibrate that choice a little in the 
face of its consequences (Max ends up as an accessory to some pretty jerky behavior, 
which he regrets). Despite his brief foray into jerkhood, Max is incontrovertibly 
not just a funny guy but a good guy, a fact that his friends—including the girls he’s 
starting to notice—certainly appreciate. The affable yet thoughtful treatment of 
shifting adolescent identity will ring true with kids thinking about changing their 
own reps, and it’ll gratify readers that the nice guy definitely doesn’t finish last.  DS
sCott, elaine Buried Alive!: How 33 Miners Survived 69 Days Deep Under the 
Chilean Desert. Clarion, 2012 80p illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-547-70778-5 $17.99  
R Gr. 4-7
Scott revisits the ripped-from-the-headlines news story of the 2010 Chilean San 
José Mine accident, covered for older readers in Marc Aronson’s excellent Trapped! 
(BCCB 9/11). A little lighter on technical details, and a little heavier on personal 
tales, this well-organized treatment hits just the right tone for middle-grade readers, 
both those aware of and those oblivious to the world news coverage as the drama 
originally unfolded. Scott opens with a look at the history of dangerous mining 
practices in the region and the mining culture that unites families of workers over 
June 2012 • 531
generations. She then quickly turns to the cave-in itself and, in brief chapters, de-
scribes how the men organized themselves for survival within a refuge area of the 
mine, while experts above ground tried to ascertain whether the miners were alive 
and families gathered for prayer and support. A simplified but effective discussion 
of the three drilling systems that operated to free the miners follows, enhanced 
with plenty of color photographs that highlight the courageous show of optimism 
among the miners, the roller-coaster of emotions among their families, and the 
heavy equipment and specially designed evacuation gear that would eventually free 
the men. An afterword discusses the legal battles facing the San José Mine operators 
and the Chilean government inspectors (a photograph of suit-and-tied owners at 
an investigative hearing contrasts effectively with the grimy heroes who rose from 
the mine), and touches on the varied fortunes of the rescuees, now that the initial 
financial support has dried up and the news cycle has moved on. A glossary, notes, 
resources for further research, and index are included.  EB
sCott, elizabetH Miracle. Simon Pulse, 2012 [224p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-1706-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-1708-3 $9.99  
R Gr. 7-10
Megan awakens to find the world around her on fire. Not knowing where she is or 
how she got there, but somehow knowing that she mustn’t look back, she stumbles 
forward through the woods. Awakening again, she finds herself in a hospital, being 
heralded by all as a miracle for having been the sole survivor of a plane crash. As 
the weeks progress, she is treated like glass by her parents, her teachers, and her 
friends, but she feels disoriented and unreal, and she gradually becomes more and 
more depressed. The only person who seems to understand that something might 
be seriously wrong is Margaret, a grumpy old lady from her church who served 
in Vietnam, and whose life partner, Rose, had suffered from post-traumatic stress 
following the war. Indeed, though PTSD is never mentioned in the book, Megan’s 
responses are a detailed map of that disorder as she suffers nightmares, sleepless-
ness, depression, emotional numbness, an inability to connect with former friends, 
fractured memories, and hallucinations of the people who were with her in the 
crash. While her parents go overboard trying to pretend that she is perfectly fine, 
she finds solace in spending time with Margaret and with Joe, the beautiful bad 
boy next door who has his own traumatic memories to cope with. Although the 
circumstances of Megan’s trauma are narrow and specific, the implications of the 
psychological aftermath have broad applicability; the carefully drawn portrait of her 
symptoms effectively demonstrates the emotional toll that traumatic situations exact 
on survivors and the need for a response that goes beyond labels like “miracle.”  KC
sHelton, dave A Boy and a Bear in a Boat; written and illus. by Dave Shel-
ton. Fickling/Random House, 2012 294p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75249-7 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75249-7 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98475-4 $10.99  
R Gr. 3-4
An unnamed boy (who looks in the illustrations like a middle-grader) gets aboard 
a rowboat captained by a large bear; his intent is merely to cross the water (“Just 
over to the other side, please”) but “unforeseeable anomalies in the currents” put 
the pair off course and turn a rudimentary crossing into a seafaring adventure. 
532 • The BulleTin
While the boy finds some parts of the journey boring, others are almost too excit-
ing, as the two face hunger, storms, a sea monster, a mysterious abandoned ship, 
and the loss and recovery of their small boat. In between these moments of danger, 
however, the book possesses a quiet, contemplative tone as the boy struggles with 
his boredom, his impatience to arrive at his destination, his frustration with the 
sometimes simple-minded bear, and his fear that they are hopelessly lost (which 
the bear insists is not true). There’s an appealing sense of mystery here that will get 
kids asking questions (Where did the boy come from? Where was he trying to go? 
Will the boy and bear ever reach land?). Readers who need quick, concrete resolu-
tions for these questions and plots in general will do better elsewhere, but patient 
readers with a taste for the unusual will enjoy this seafaring sojourn. The big bear 
is an amiable if sometimes maddening fellow, and his interactions with the boy are 
by turns humorous and thoughtful. Cartoonist Shelton’s frequent monochromatic 
(and occasional color) illustrations are often keenly expressive as he depicts, for 
example, the dot-eyed bear’s intense concentration while attempting to tie a fishing 
fly or the boy’s mutinous misery as he slumps in the boat during a storm. Although 
young readers will easily tackle this on their own, it would also make a splendid 
class or family readaloud.  JH
siMon, annette Robot Zombie Frankenstein!; written and illus. by Annette 
Simon. Candlewick, 2012 [34p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-5124-4 $16.99  
Ad 5-8 yrs
Two robots meet and then engage in a game of one-upmanship, as they face off 
under an cumulative array of goofy horror guises. When the larger robot exits and 
reappears as a “Robot ZOMBIE!” (complete with head wound, dripping blood, 
and fallen-off hand), for example, the smaller robot exclaims, “Yikes. Robot reboot” 
and goes off to fetch a “Robot zombie Frankenstein!” costume. This continues until 
a standoff occurs when both robots dress as “Robot zombie Frankenstein pirate 
super hero-in-disguise outer space invader CHEF!” However, while one wields a 
pie, the other brandishes a fork, and a truce is achieved as they discard their cos-
tumes and bond over pastry: “Robot . . . buddies? Mmm . . . affirmative.” Simon’s 
digitally created illustrations utilize various geometric shapes in electric colors to 
create the robots and their regalia; an opening spread displays many of the shapes 
used throughout the book, labeled with the shape names, while the closing spread 
shows the same display of shapes, this time labeled as the various robot parts they 
depicted, such as “robot face” for a yellow square and “pie-ready mouth” for a large 
black circle. The story itself is bit limp, and the flat constructions are occasionally 
so cluttered that an audience may have trouble making sense of them. The con-
cept is an entertaining one, though, and the geometric nature of the illustrative 
components make this a possibly useful companion to a math or art lesson. Kids 
(particularly boys) will respond to the robots, zombies, etc., to the “Oh yeah? Top 
this!” tone, and to the inviting possibility of designing their own similar robot il-
lustrations using geometric shapes.  JH
skryPuCH, MarsHa forCHuk Last Airlift: A Vietnamese Orphan’s Rescue from 
War. Pajama Press, 2012 110p illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-9869495-4-8 $17.95  
R Gr. 3-5
Among the children aboard the last Canadian evacuation flight at the 1975 fall of 
June 2012 • 533
Saigon was eight-year-old Son Thi Anh Tuyet, a girl crippled by polio and scarred 
by war, who found herself abruptly herded from her orphanage into a van with 
babies hastily packed into boxes, whisked away to an airfield, and loaded into a 
Hercules cargo plane. So sheltered had she been inside the orphanage that Tuyet 
did not recognize an airplane, but accustomed to unquestioning obedience, she 
promptly pitched in to help care for the squalling babies. Little by little she began 
to realize that the flight would eventually take her far away where there was no 
war, and where fortunate children were placed with families. Her adoption into 
the Morris family of Toronto initially proved to Tuyet as much an occasion for 
anxiety as joy. While she appreciated the welcoming warmth of her new parents 
and siblings, the utter strangeness of her surroundings and her fear of failure and 
rejection complicated her period of adjustment. Underwear, elevators, stars, cold air, 
salad dressing, a lawn, a toothbrush, and a dad all lay beyond her frame of reference, 
but determination, patience, and affection soon carried the day. Skrypuch, who 
originally intended Tuyet’s experience to take the form of a novel, opted instead 
for a nonfiction presentation as interviews helped Tuyet reclaim many of her early 
memories and participate in retelling her own story. This biographical approach 
helps to humanize a war that, for most readers, may seem like ancient history, and 
the tight focus on the airlift and Tuyet’s first days with the Morrises reminds readers 
that they are sharing the experiences of an agemate. Black and white photographs 
from the airlift are included, as well as an index and a brief list of resources for 
further reading and viewing.  EB
sMitH, jennifer e. The Storm Makers; illus. by Brett Helquist. Little, 2012 375p
ISBN 978-0-316-17958-4 $16.99  
R Gr. 5-8
Since moving to a small farm, twelve-year-old twins Ruby and Simon have started 
to grow apart, so Ruby doesn’t immediately tell Simon about the mysterious man, 
Otis, who has been hanging around. When a strange illness besets Simon at the 
same time as a destructive freak storm occurs, Otis explains to Ruby that Simon is 
a Storm Maker, a person with special abilities to direct and perhaps even control the 
weather. Though formerly using their abilities to temper the weather, some Storm 
Makers have found a new leader in Rupert, who wants to punish people for their 
careless treatment of the planet. The group is now actually amplifying the effects 
of weather, causing stronger hurricanes and deadlier avalanches, and even planning 
a devastating wildfire. Can Simon stop Rupert from destroying much of North 
America? Ruby and Simon have the timeless quality of close siblings who are just 
starting to feel the tension of separation when they are called to work together. 
Ruby’s emerging and reluctant envy of her brother provides grounding for their 
decisions and evokes empathy, while Simon is at first understandably puffed up by 
his new powers until he realizes their difficulty and the fearful weight of respon-
sibility they confer. The idea of ordinary kids finding out they have extraordinary 
powers has time-honored appeal, and this sturdy, well-plotted fantasy successfully 
combines contemporary concerns with old-fashioned charm in a way that should 
please readers of Law’s Savvy (BCCB 9/08).  KC
534 • The BulleTin
sonnenbliCk, jordan Curveball: The Year I Lost My Grip. Scholastic, 
2012 285p
ISBN 978-0-545-32069-6 $17.99  
R Gr. 6-9
Peter Friedman’s freshman year is off to a bad start when his neglected, abused 
pitching arm agonizingly quits on him for good and he’s forced to flounder about 
for a new interest in life. His grandfather, a retired professional photographer, sud-
denly hands over all his costly equipment; this could be a good thing, except that 
the generosity is probably precipitated by Grampa’s realization that Alzheimer’s is 
making an irreversible incursion into his life. Peter, who has always enjoyed tag-
ging along on Grampa’s photo shoots, puts the equipment to use in an advanced 
photography class at school, where he meets Angelika, another freshman, who 
complements his technical skills with a strong sense of composition and design. 
They make a great working team, but Peter hopes they’ll make a romantic team 
as well; Angelika is more than ready to reciprocate, but Peter can’t quite catch her 
encouraging signals at the right moment to clinch the deal. Sonnenblick offers a 
niche market plot that’s far more rare than it should be—a rom-com for guys. The 
dramatic obstacles along Peter and Angelika’s road to romance amount more to 
potholes than roadblocks, but the everyday miscues and bumbling conversations 
that threaten to keep them from becoming more than “just friends” are all the 
more engrossing for their mundane realism. The subplot of Grampa’s degenera-
tion—and the family’s reluctance to confront it honestly—adds gravitas to Peter’s 
adolescent travails. Middle-schoolers will applaud Peter’s effort to carve out a life 
without baseball and to earn the affection of a girl as good and clever as he discov-
ers himself to be.  EB
strauss, linda leoPold The Elijah Door: A Passover Tale; illus. by Alexi 
Natchev. Holiday House, 2012 30p
ISBN 978-0-8234-1911-1 $16.95  
R 6-9 yrs
Set long ago in a part of Eastern Europe “that was sometimes Poland and sometimes 
Russia,” this original folk-like tale details the feud between the Lippas and their 
neighbors, the Galinskys, which has gone so far as to inspire the Galinskys to cut 
a new side door so they wouldn’t have to see the Lippas on their way out. Rachel 
Galinsky and David Lippa, however, have fallen in love, and they turn to the rabbi 
to help them reconcile their families. Following the wise man’s plan, Rachel and 
David manage to get their families together at the same Passover table by inviting 
so many guests to each home that the tables extend out the front and side doors 
and meet in the yard. When it is time to open the door to greet Elijah, as tradi-
tion requires, David opens the Galinskys’ long-unused front door to welcome the 
Prophet. The narrative has an easy, folksy tone, and the story develops effectively, 
with characters, plot, setting, and resolution working in perfect balance. There are 
touches of humor throughout, particularly in the rabbi’s scheming, but the tale 
ends with a sense of peace and joy as the two families celebrate the Seder together. 
Natchev’s linoleum-block prints are inspired by traditional Eastern European folk 
art; the black-lined prints are then hand colored with watercolors, infusing the 
prints with pastel light and color. The large page size makes for good viewing of 
the prints in a crowd, but there are also plenty of fine details to discover upon close 
examination. An artist’s note is included.  HM
June 2012 • 535
swain, GwenytH Hope and Tears: Ellis Island Voices. Calkins Creek/Boyds Mills, 
2012 115p illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-1-59078-765-6 $17.95  
R Gr. 5-8
This remarkable volume offers thirty-one fictionalized voices based upon actual 
lives touched, in some way, by Ellis Island during the heyday of immigration. Or-
ganized into six chapters, the book is most notable for the extraordinary breadth 
of experiences and points of view presented, from immigrants to detainees, from 
cooks to carpenters, from photographers to curators. In addition to a wide diversity 
of perspectives, the voices themselves are presented in a variety of formats; some 
speak in prose monologues, others in poems, and some are written as “miniplays” 
complete with stage directions. Each chapter begins with a factual essay that sets 
up the narratives to follow, so that, for example, the essay that mentions that exca-
vated dirt from the tunnels of the New York subway system was used to build the 
island up is followed by a poem written from the perspective of a subway worker 
(himself an immigrant) wondering where the dirt goes. There is an abundance of 
fascinating history included in the volume, and reproductions of primary source 
materials and photographs are sprinkled throughout. While some voices are more 
successfully composed than others, taken as a whole this is a fascinating experiment 
in imagining the backstories of individuals mentioned in historical sources, and 
the curricular potential is considerable. Source notes, an extensive bibliography, 
and suggestions for learning activities are included.  HM
verniCk, audrey Brothers at Bat: The True Story of an Amazing All-Brother Baseball 
Team; illus. by Steven Salerno. Clarion, 2012 40p
ISBN 978-0-547-38557-0 $16.99  
R* 6-9 yrs
“The Acerras had so many kids that they slept two to a bed and sat three across in 
their outdoor bathroom.” What sounds like the opening line of a nursery tale was 
simply a way of life for the New Jersey family of twelve boys, four girls, and a dog 
named Pitch. As the stream of brothers steadily accrued in the Accera household, by 
1938 there were always enough guys around (sorry, girls couldn’t play back then) to 
make a full baseball team, with a few left over. If you believe Vernick, who believes 
the Acerras she interviewed, “there was no jealousy, no rivalry, no fighting. As the 
younger brothers grew up, the older ones shared playing time.” The team played 
around the East Coast, impressing crowds with their skill as well as their novelty; 
they stuck together through the loss of one brother’s eye, through enlistments 
in World War II, through marriages and heart troubles and a new generation of 
Accerras on the scene, playing their last game in 1952. Vernick’s wry and rousing 
narration is perfectly matched by Salerno’s mixed-media pictures, which sport a 
Little Golden Book style that joyfully evokes the period and reminds young listeners 
that some of the most impossible sounding tall tales are the honest truth. Vernick’s 
closing note includes a black and white photograph of the twelve-man team and 
talks informally about her chance encounter with an Acerra descendent and her 
pleasure in getting to know two of the original brothers. The author observes that 
there were twenty-nine all-brother teams by the 1940s, but as far as the picture-
book shelves go, this Acerra story must certainly be one of a kind.  EB
536 • The BulleTin
wein, elizabetH Code Name Verity. Hyperion, 2012 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4231-5219-4 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4231-5325-2 $16.99  
R* Gr. 9-12
The book opens on a simple premise: Verity is a captured British spy handing what 
information she has of the Allied war effort over to her Gestapo captors, and the 
novel constitutes her written confession of all the events that brought her to this 
crossroads. Verity is a born storyteller, and she interweaves this confession with 
memories of her best friend, Maddie, the pilot who dropped her into Nazi-occupied 
France and who may not have survived landing the plane. Wein imbues the focused 
perspective with incredible richness (Verity’s allusions to torture and the horrors 
of her confinement, along with jagged tonal shifts, allow her desperation to bleed 
through her matter-of-fact narration) and layers of implication: Is Verity escaping 
into happier memories? Using her final testament to pay tribute to her friend’s 
truncated life? Toying with her captors to draw out the dim possibility of rescue? 
Or is there more encoded in this last missive than readers can glean? This innova-
tive spy tale flips the standard progression of the rescue novel to brilliant effect, 
beginning with a heroine whose doom seems inevitable and then ratcheting up 
the tension to almost unbearable levels through the sparing introduction of hope. 
When the focalization shifts midway through the novel, Wein starts to masterfully, 
inexorably fit the puzzle pieces into a harrowing whole that invites readers to re-
examine all that came before even as it keeps them frantically turning the pages for 
the next revelation. Verity and Maddie are believable and utterly compelling in their 
strengths and fears and motivations, and their commitment to each other in the 
face of extreme peril will speak to a broad spectrum of readers. Verity’s obsession 
with getting her story in writing and her references to the many other stories that 
intersect hers (the other prisoners, the Jewish girl whose name graces the flute music 
used as paper for part of Verity’s confession) are powerful invitations to consider 
all the untold stories, all the voices silenced in war, all the heroics that unfolded in 
the absence of surviving witnesses. This is a dense novel built to be savored, with a 
vivid friendship at its core and courage and heartbreak infused into every struggle. 
An author’s note explains the historical research, and a bibliography offers sugges-
tions for further reading on the Women’s Auxiliary Air Force, France during the 
German occupation, and Allied female spies in World War II.  CG
willeMs, Mo The Duckling Gets a Cookie!?; written and illus. by Mo Wil-
lems. Hyperion, 2012 34p
ISBN 978-1-4231-5128-9 $15.99  
R 4-7 yrs
Who could deny a sweet little duckling anything? Certainly not the universe, which 
readily gives the duckling a cookie (descending from the top of the page) when 
she asks politely. This incenses the pigeon, of course, who has a history of being 
denied pretty much everything he’s ever asked for—to drive a bus, to stay up late, 
one more story, to name but a few of his prior requests. This time, though, the 
duckling, who has a history of her own of sharing with the pigeon, happily gives 
him her cookie; she doesn’t like cookies with nuts, but the pigeon doesn’t need to 
know that, and the duckling gets props for being kind-hearted and generous. This 
sly turn of events offers a gratifying if slightly cynical lesson in playground politics; 
giving up something you don’t particularly like anyway can garner more goodwill 
than you intended, as long as you don’t brag about it. The pigeon runs delightfully 
June 2012 • 537
true to form, masterfully working the complaint soliloquy genre in both word and 
expression, even to the point of mustering up tears for dramatic effect. His litany of 
woe conjures vast and varied curricular potential, from readers theater to creative 
writing to comparative-literature lessons with books that touch on similar topics 
and themes. Just remember, if you give a duckling a cookie, be sure to have a few 
extra on hand to prevent ruffled feathers.  KC
wolf, jennifer sHaw Breaking Beautiful. Walker, 2012 [368p]
ISBN 978-0-8027-2352-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
It was Blake that she shared her summers with when she visited her grandmother 
in her Pacific Coast town, and Blake with whom she shared her first kiss, but when 
he’s away one summer, Allie is romantically blindsided by the wealthy, charismatic 
Trip. When she and her family move to town permanently, she and Trip become 
the small town’s golden couple, but appearances are deceiving, as Trip is abusive. 
Allie’s fear and Trip’s elaborate apologies keep them together, despite Allie’s dis-
abled brother Andrew’s pleas for her to stop seeing him, until the night when he 
proposes and she says no. Unfortunately, she doesn’t remember any of that night, 
which ends with her in the hospital and Trip dead in an implausible car accident. 
Now the town is suspicious of her, especially when she and Blake begin seeing each 
other too soon after Trip’s death. Allie herself doesn’t know what to think, as the 
snippets of memory and dream that return to her don’t make sense; something is 
missing, and it turns out that she is not the only one who’s been keeping secrets. 
The murder mystery unfolds as only one of several compelling plot threads, includ-
ing the usual school-popularity drama made more serious by the abuse scenario; 
there’s a sweet romance for Andrew, who finds a girl online who sees beyond his 
cerebral palsy to his full humanity, and a growing relationship between Blake and 
Allie that proves restorative for both of them after their battered pasts. The fickle 
loyalties and deceitful cover-ups of small-town life are credibly drawn as well, 
especially as Allie’s mother is pulled from her romantic ideas of the place she grew 
up in to face its current realities. Carefully drawn characters and a well-crafted plot 
make this a natural choice for fans of Abby McDonald’s works and Alex Flinn’s 
realistic fiction.  KC
wylie, saraH All These Lives. Ferguson/Farrar, 2012 [256p]
ISBN 978-0-374-30208-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 7-10
At school, Dani is the brash slacker teen, bullying the odd classmate and looking 
for parties; at home, though, the family revolves around Dani’s tough-minded 
fraternal twin, Jena, who’s been fighting leukemia for several years and now looks 
toward the possibility of a marrow transplant. Dani has grown up with the belief 
that she and her mother, who’ve survived a car wreck together, have charmed 
lives--nine lives, in fact. Now Dani, convinced that using up some of those lives 
will transfer them to Jena, begins to take every opportunity to kill herself, com-
ing close enough to success to inspire her to keep going. That premise, mostly an 
excuse for Dani to seek an outlet for her fear and sadness, is a focal device that’s 
developed quietly and slowly under the main story, Dani’s reaction to her beloved 
sister’s crisis and its effect on the family, in a portrait that poignantly demonstrates 
538 • The BulleTin
that survivor guilt can begin well before death. Dani is a fascinating character, 
ostentatiously dislikable at times with her peers (“I never like people like me,” she 
confesses), but at home hypervigilant about her sister’s every breath and perceptive 
about her family’s frailties. Jena’s a secondary player, but she’s vivid as well, with 
her alpha personality shining through the ravages of her illness. Dani’s strange and 
unexpectedly evolving relationship with Jack, a nerdy classmate who’s initially her 
bullying target but who sees her more clearly than she realizes, is a stroke of grace 
for a girl who secretly doesn’t believe she’s entitled to any. Dani is both believably 
difficult and touchingly sympathetic, and fans of compelling family dramas will be 
glad that she’s finally choosing to live her own life rather than giving it away.  DS
June 2012 • 539
ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons: resourCes for teAChers And LIBrArIAns
blakeMore, CatHerine Mixed Heritage: Your Source for Children and Teens about 
Persons and Families of Mixed Racial, Ethnic, and/or Religious Heritage. Adams-
Pomeroy Press, 2012 812p
ISBN 978-0-9661009-9-0 $98.00
As the title indicates, this extensive bibliography provides brief annotations for over 
1,000 children’s and YA books featuring characters of mixed racial, ethnic, and/or 
religious heritage. As defined by the author, a person of mixed heritage carries the 
bloodlines of parents from different cultures and heritages (i.e., someone who has 
both Italian and Japanese ancestors), as opposed to a person of dual heritage, who 
has one ancestral culture but lives in a country other than his ancestral origin (i.e., 
an Italian-American). After the book looks briefly at nonfiction titles on the topic of 
mixed heritage, the ensuing chapters organize books (both fiction and nonfiction) by 
specific heritage according to nationality and religion while the final chapters deal 
with special issues that come up in books about adoption and/or mixed heritage 
relationships. Each annotation includes a recommended age level, bibliographic 
information, and in most cases, information on the heritage being covered. Four 
indexes are provided (title, author/editor, person, and subject) for easy access.  KQG 
salisbury, Martin Children’s Picturebooks: The Art of Visual Storytelling; by Mar-
tin Salisbury with Morag Styles. Laurence King Publishing, 2012 192p illus. 
with photographs
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-85669-738-5 $35.00 
Salisbury, an illustrator and professor at Anglia Ruskin University, and Styles, a 
professor of children’s literature at Cambridge University, offer an international look 
at illustrated children’s books, both as an art form and a commercial product. Seven 
chapters cover a broad array of topics related to the field, including a brief history 
of significant eras in children’s book publishing, the creative and editorial process, 
and the role of picture books in early and emergent literacy. Interviews feature 
children’s picture-book illustrators from all over the globe, including prominent 
names from Europe, South Korea, and the U.S. Professional and student case studies 
extrapolate further on concepts introduced by the authors, particularly specific print 
processes and technologies. An index and recommendations for further reading 
are also provided.  KQG 
540  •  The BulleTin
Abandonment–fiction: Adderson 
Middle
Abuse–fiction: Wolf
Adoption: Skrypuch
Adventure: Barnaby; Benoit; 
Black; Child; ecton; Funke; Har-
vey; Kagawa; Lynch; nix; norris
Africa–fiction: Peterson
African Americans–fiction: Myers
Anger–fiction: Hartnett
Animals–fiction: ecton; Moranville
Animals–folklore: Lowry
Anxiety–fiction: northrop
Art and artists: Coury
Art and artists–fiction: Peterson; 
rogers
Art and artists–stories: dormer
Baseball: vernick
Baseball–fiction: northrop; ritter
Bears–fiction: Shelton
Behavior–stories: Patterson
BiogrAPHieS: Blumenthal; 
Coury; Hartland
Birds–stories: Willems
BoArd BooKS: Coat
Brothers: vernick
Brothers–fiction: Adderson Middle
Brothers and sisters–fiction: Hart-
nett; rocklin; Smith; Wolf
Brothers and sisters–stories: Pat-
terson 
Business: Blumenthal
Camps and camping–fiction: Salm
Cats–fiction: rocklin
Cats–stories: reich
Circuses–fiction: Barnaby
Computers: Blumenthal
ConCePt BooKS: Coat
Concerts–fiction: decker
Contests–fiction: Cass
Contests–stories: Simon
Cousins–fiction: Marsden; ransom
Crime and criminals–fiction: Ayarbe; 
Benoit; Berk; Black; Burns; 
Child; Marriott; norris; ruiz 
Zafón
Cults–fiction: Bosworth
Current events: Scott
death–fiction: doyle; norris; rock-
lin; Wylie
depression, the–fiction: Barnaby
disasters: Scott
disasters–fiction: Bosworth; Scott, 
elizabeth
dogs–fiction: Bauer; Cronin
dystopias–fiction: Bosworth; griffin
ecology–fiction: Moranville
elections–stories: Clanton
england–fiction: Craze
Ethics and values: Black; gennari; 
griffin; Myers; Peacock; Salm
FABLeS: Lowry
Fairies–fiction: Harvey
Faith–fiction: Marsden
Families–fiction: Benoit; Funke; 
Huser; ransom; rocklin; Wylie
Families–stories: Strauss
FAntASy: Black; Cass; ecton; Fu-
kuda; Funke; Harvey; Kagaawa; 
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. in the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
June 2012  •  541
Marriott; Mass; Moranville; nix; 
Peacock ; Smith
Fathers–fiction: ritter
FoLK-LiKe tALeS: Strauss
FoLKtALeS And FAiry tALeS: 
Mass; rueda
Folktales and fairy tales–stories: 
Marriott
Food and eating: Hartland
Food and eating–stories: reich; 
rueda
Foster children–fiction: Pennypacker
Friends–fiction: Peters; Wein
Future–fiction: Craze; Peterfreund
gays and lesbians–fiction: gennari; 
Peters
ghosts–fiction: doyle; ruiz Zafón
grandmothers–fiction: doyle
grandparents–fiction: Lynch; Son-
nenblick
grAPHiC noveLS: Bellstorf; 
Castellucci; Kibuishi; Pyle; roman
grief–fiction: Berk
HiStoriCAL FiCtion: Herb-
stein; Huser; Kindl; Swain; Wein
History, U.S.: Coury; Pyle; Swain
Horses–fiction: Haas
HuMor: Adderson Jasper; Berk; 
Burns; Clanton; Cronin; dormer; 
doyle; ecton; Patterson; roman; 
Salm; Simon; Willems
identity–fiction: Salm
illness–fiction: ritter; Wylie
immigration–fiction: Swain
insects: Jenkins; Munro
internment camps–fiction: Pyle
iraq–fiction: Marsden
Japan–fiction: Marriott
Japanese Americans–fiction: Pyle
Jealousy–stories: Willems
Jews–stories: Strauss
Kenya–fiction: Peterson
Language arts: Hoberman; Jensen
Latinos–fiction: Ayarbe
Literature, English: Kindl; Peter-
freund
Mining: Scott
Monuments: Coury
Mothers–fiction: doyle; Herbstein
Music and musicians: Bellstorf
Music and musicians–fiction: decker
MySterieS: Berk; Child; Cronin; 
Peacock; Wolf
Nature study: Jenkins; Munro
opposites: Coat
orphans: Skrypuch
Passover–stories: Strauss
Pets–fiction: Bauer; Haas
Photography–fiction: Sonnenblick
Pigs–stories: rueda
Poetry: Hoberman; Jensen
Politics–stories: Clanton
Poverty–fiction: Peterson
Prom–fiction: Peters
racism–fiction: Ayarbe
Readers theater: Swain
Reading aloud: Adderson Jasper; 
Jensen; Pennypacker
Reading, easy: Bauer; Cronin; Haas; 
Hartnett; Jensen; ransom
Reading, family: Hoberman
Reading, reluctant: Jenkins
relationships–fiction: Castellucci; 
Chambers; decker; griffin; Peters; 
Scott, elizabeth; Wolf
robots–stories: Simon
romance–fiction: Bellstorf; Bos-
worth; Cass; Harvey; Kindl; 
Mass; Peterfreund; Sonnenblick
royalty–fiction: Cass; Craze
runaways–fiction: Barnaby; Huser
School–fiction: Adderson Jasper; 
Burns; Funke
SCienCe FiCtion: nix; norris; 
Peterfreund
Secrets–fiction: Fukuda; Lynch; 
Pennypacker; Wolf
Sharing–stories: Willems
Ships and sailing–fiction: roman; 
Shelton
SHort StorieS: Kibuishi
Sisters–fiction: Castellucci; Wylie
Slavery–fiction: Herbstein
Social studies: gennari; Myers
Spies and espionage–fiction: Wein
Sports: vernick
Sports–fiction: northrop; ritter
Stepparents–fiction: gennari
542  •  The BulleTin
Storytelling–fiction: Barnaby
Summer–fiction: Salm
SuPernAturAL StorieS: ruiz 
Zafón
SurvivAL StorieS: Pennypacker
Survival–fiction: Scott, elizabeth
SuSPenSe: Lynch
tantrums–stories: Willems
toads–fiction: Moranville
treasures–fiction: ransom
twins–fiction: Smith; Wylie
vampires–fiction: Fukuda; Kagawa; 
Peacock
verSe noveLS: Bauer
vietnam War: Skrypuch
voyages and travel–fiction: Shelton
War–fiction: Craze; Marsden
Weather–fiction: Smith
WordLeSS BooKS: rogers
World cultures: Marsden
World War ii–fiction: Wein
Writers and writing: Hartland
Writers and writing–fiction: Chambers
Writers and writing–stories: dormer
2715 N. Charles Street • Baltimore, MD 21218 • 1.800.548.1784 • 410.516.6987 • www.press.jhu.edu/journals
The Bulletin of the  
Center for Children’s Books
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
Provides concise summaries and critical evaluations 
of current children’s books.
Published monthly (except August)
issn: 0008-9036 / e-issn: 1558-6766
Children’s literature*
R. H. W. Dillard, Editor-in-Chief 
Julie Pfeiffer and Michelle Ann Abate, Editors
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published annually
issn: 0092-8208 / e-issn: 1543-3374
Children’s literature 
assoCiation Quarterly*
Katharine Capshaw Smith, Editor
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published quarterly
issn: 0885-0429 / e-issn: 1553-1201
The lion and the uniCorn
A Critical Journal of Children’s Literature
David L. Russell, Karin E. Westman,  
and Naomi J. Wood, Editors
An international theme- and genre-centered  
journal committed to a serious, ongoing discussion  
of literature for children.
Published three times a year
issn: 0147-2593 / e-issn: 1080-6563
*Please direct inquiries and orders to the ChLA:  
www.childlitassn.org.
The Johns Hopkins University Press Journals in 
ChiLDreN’S LiterAture
T
he Johns Hopkins University Press wants to be more than 
just your publisher—we want to be your partner. 
JHUP will help you cultivate the most original ideas and 
research; we’ve been publishing scholarly journals since . 
T e Johns Hopkins University Press publishes in a variety of ﬁ elds 
including history, the classics, philosophy, medicine, science, technology, 
literature, psychology, cultural studies, and many others. 
We take care of the business of publishing and association 
management so that you can focus on developing engaging content, 
conferences, and conversations. 
Join the JHUP family, and allow us to add value to your journal, 
increase its usage, and help you ﬁ nd and keep subscriber-members. 
For more information on the journals program at Hopkins, 
visit our website: http://press.jhu.edu/journals
T H E JOHNS HOPKINS UNIVERSITY PRESS
A PUBLISHER 
WHO CARES.
 
