Ho
I L LI N 
I S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
xRi 
iElk 
Si 
;
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
r 
-- 
x 
-
Illustrated Dy unris L. uemarest
S"From the elegantly addled brain of the author
who brought us not only Wicked but haunted hairdos
and stupid cupids, come eight deeply and profoundly silly
stories.... Children will be screaming with laughter, no
matter if they get it or not, and adults will be convulsed."
1 0-06-56417-2 $15.99 ($23.99)
Lab -06-056418-0 $16.8 ($25.89)
CD 0-06-073590-2 $17.95 ($25.50)
Ages: 8-12 Grade 3-7
www.gregorymagire.com
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
April 2005
Vol. 58 No. 8
A LOOK INSIDE
323 
THE BIG PICTURE
Photo by Brady: A Picture of the Civil War by Jennifer Armstrong
324 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
325 
* Whales on Stilts by M. T. Anderson; illus. by Kurt Cyrus
329 * A Boy and His Bunny by Sean Bryan; illus. by Tom Murphy
330 * Red Hot Salsa: Bilingual Poems on Being Young and Latino in the United
States comp. by Lori Marie Carlson
341 
* Pagan's Scribe by Catherine Jinks
360 * The Last Universe by William Sleator
364 PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
365 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
I
1 
_ 
_
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except
August by the Publications Office of the Graduate School of Library and Information Science
(GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of
Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison
Hope Morrison, Assistant Editor (HM)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Timnah Card, Reviewer (TC)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Krista Hutley, Reviewer (KH)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
OFFICE STAFF
Krista Hutley
Maggie Hommel
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $75.00; multiple institutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each
additional; individuals, $50.00; students, $15.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $7.50. Volumes available in microfilm from ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann
Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box
1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to the University of
Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new address.
Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, University of
Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
All inquiries about subscriptions and advertising should go to University of Illinois Press, 1325 S.
Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903, 217-333-0950; toll free 866-244-0626.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The
Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email:
bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2005 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration from Photo by Brady: A Picture of the Civil War ©2005. Used by permission of
Atheneum Books for Young Readers.
APRIL 2005 
* 323
THE BIG PICTURE
Photo by Brady: A Picture of the Civil War
by Jennifer Armstrong
We all know exactly what the Civil War looked like, don't we? Thanks to the
photographs of Mathew Brady and his one-time partner Alexander Gardner, we
know the stoic, staring faces of the soldiers, the high collar and sunken cheeks of
Lincoln before his election, the dignity of white-haired Lee with hat in hand after
the war, the wounded on stretchers, the "contraband" in flight, the corpses in
trenches. But just how candid are these pictures? What images are missing, and
why? And if we still feel an emotional jolt across nearly a century and a half, what
did these photos mean to the torn country itself? In this thought-provoking work,
Armstrong explores the body of photographs that are generally-and often too
loosely-attributed to Brady and discusses how they influenced the war and fixed
it in popular imagination.
Opening sections introduce Brady, the artist and businessman, and clarify
the technical limitations of mid-nineteenth-century photography that directly bear
upon the documentation of the war. Already a renowned portrait photographer,
Brady worked within a studio tradition that not only allowed but demanded care-
ful staging of the subject, manipulation of light, and addition of appropriate props-
a tradition that he would carry onto the battlefield. He would also maintain the
distinction between artist and technician, setting up the poses himself and relegat-
ing the actual camera work to an operator. Never quite the businessman his part-
ner Alexander Gardner would be, Brady nonetheless recognized that the coming
hostilities would promote a steady trade in cartes de visite as soldiers clamored for
parting mementos and in battle-scene photos for newspaper lithographs. The
crankiness of glass-plate photography, with its requirements of cumbersome equip-
ment, still subjects, ample light, long exposures, and a ready source of fresh water,
would, despite Brady's artistry and commercial acumen, impose serious constraints
on which images he and his operators could actually collect in the field.
With this background established, Armstrong turns to a chronological
tour of the battlegrounds and, with the aid of a dense gallery of meticulously cap-
tioned Brady (and later Gardner) Studio photos, she deftly traces the interplay
between the war and its documentation. The Union Army welcomed whatever
images they could obtain for reconnaissance purposes, soldiers with access to illus-
trated papers gained some sense of military developments on other fronts, and
civilians were shocked by the reality of the carnage that letters from the combat-
ants could only suggest: "Pictures of this sort-the blood still fresh and the bodies
still warm (or so it seemed to the shuddering visitors)-had never been shown to
the public." At least as intriguing as the extant photos are those images conspicu-
ous by their absence. There is no photo from the first battle of Bull Run, Armstrong
324 
* THE BULLETIN
points out, because Brady's wagon was upended by retreating Union soldiers. There
is no picture of Lincoln delivering his address at Gettysburg, because his brief
speech was over before photographers could set up their cameras. There are no
action scenes, no night scenes, no winter scenes, no indoor scenes, and often no
scenes from areas with murky water. There are, however, plenty of photos of the
dead, the most cooperative of subjects, who docilely pose under the wide blue sky
and silently accept whichever label-"Reb" or "Yank"-the photographer assigns.
Armstrong confines her attention to the Civil War, but she leaves readers
well prepared to examine critically the still and video images from contemporary
conflicts by pursuing those questions already applied to Brady's work: How can-
did are these pictures? What images are missing, and why? As her imaginative
sidebar scenarios of "The Photograph Not Taken" suggest, the pictorial view of
war is always incomplete and subtly fashioned by the photographer's skill, intent,
and luck. This insight should serve young adults well as they aspire to be better
historians, better photographers, and better citizens. (Imprint information ap-
pears on p. 326.)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ABRAHAMS, PETER 
Down the Rabbit Hole: An Echo Falls Mystery. 
Geringer/
HarperCollins, 2005 
[384p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-073702-6 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-073701-8 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 6-9
Just after her thirteenth birthday, Ingrid gets lost in the bad part of town, where
the local crazy, Cracked-Up Katie, offers to call a cab for her. Inside Katie's house,
Ingrid hears footsteps upstairs. The next day, Katie is found strangled, and Ingrid's
relentless curiosity (and her need for her red soccer cleats, which she left in Katie's
house) draws Ingrid deep into a maze of clues and false leads to the identity of the
woman's murderer. The solving of the crime affords the reader a satisfyingly fast-
paced mystery of appropriate difficulty, an enjoyably pervasive sense of danger,
and several exhilaratingly close brushes with death for the protagonist, but it is the
narrative voice, loaded with Ingrid's acerbic comments and early teen angst, that
makes this a standout novel. (When presented with the possibility of a braces
adjustment, Ingrid reflects, "Adjustment meant tightening. Tightening didn't hurt
much while it was happening, but every turn of the screw made a squeaky sound
that seemed to come from right inside Ingrid's head, and reminded her of the
Shackleton IMAX movie ... that scene where ice floes slowly crush the ship to
death.") Her involvement in the community production of Alice in Wonderland
gives the novel its name and furnishes Ingrid with both scope for emotional devel-
opment and a forum within which to make the contacts that lead to the clues that
help her solve the mystery. The private problems of Ingrid's family and friends
APRIL 2005 
* 
325
allow her to demonstrate her powers of analysis (which sometimes lead her astray),
thus fleshing out her character beyond the standard sleuth stereotype into an ap-
pealingly whole person with fears, dreams, and even a romantic interest in the
form of Joey, the son of police chief Strade. The no-nonsense tone of the well-
written prose, the multifaceted characters, the hint of romance, and the subtly
structured mystery open the potential fan base to include just about everyone. TC
ALLAN, NICHOLAS 
Where Willy Went...; written and illus. by Nicholas
Allan. 
Knopf, 2005 
[3 2p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-93030-2 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-83030-8 $15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Willy (apparently named for a nearby feature) is a sperm, dwelling inside one Mr.
Browne (he and the other sperm "all lived in Mr. Browne at the same address").
Though he's not much of a mathematician (and he undergoes some taunting for
that in sperm school), he's quite a talented swimmer, and he practices constantly
in hopes of winning The Great Swimming Race and its prize, the egg inside Mrs.
Browne. Come the day of the race, Willy manages to outswim his neighbors and
makes it first to the egg, and the result is a little embryo who grows into a girl
named Edna, like Willy poor in math but talented at swimming. Allan has never
shrunk from mining humor from attractively taboo subjects (as in his toilet trag-
edy The Thing that Ate Aunt Julia, BCCB 2/91), and the gleeful irreverence of
Willy's saga will gratify youngsters who are factually familiar with reproductive
details but still keenly aware of their absurdity. Those a litde hazy about the pro-
cess, however, are going to be thoroughly confused at various junctures where
reproductive reality takes a back seat to joke execution, and by the failure to men-
tion that all this activity takes place at a microscopic level. The phraseology may
occasionally mislead all audiences (when the fetus "grew bigger than Mrs. Browne's
tummy," it sounds like an Alien-esque eruption is occurring), and the dogmatic
will query the occasionally strained logic (the book rhetorically asks where little
Willy has gone, but his swimming competitors disappear without the slightest
acknowledgment; Edna's comparatively superb swimming ability implies the other
children started out life in some different, non-natatorial process). Aside from a
truly bizarre diagram that seems to suggest Mrs. Browne possesses a peninsula and
estuary, the line-and-watercolor illustrations interpret biology with modest and
obvious helpings of distortion and generous helpings of comedy, though some
images let opportunities slip by (especially in the one foldout spread, which folds
out exactly contrary to expectation). Ultimately, this is really too slight to work as
an independently humorous narrative, but it could provide some tension-relieving
giggles or an amusing "spot the misrepresentation" quiz in a guided discussion of
reproduction. DS
ANDERSON, M. T. 
Whales on Stilts; illus. by Kurt Cyrus. 
Harcourt,
2005 
[19 2p]
ISBN 0-15-205340-9 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-6
What would you do if you visited your dad's job and found out that he works for
a mad scientist bent on taking over the world with an army of whales on stilts
wearing laser beams? Ten-year-old Lily is in that precarious position, but luckily,
326 
* THE BULLETIN
she has help. Not from her dad, of course; he wholly buys that he works for "a
midsize company devoted to expanding cetacean pedestrian opportunities," over-
looking the fact that his boss, Larry, has blue, rubbery hands, wears a bag over his
head, and pours brine on himself. No, Lily has two friends who star in their own
books-Jasper Dash, in his Boy Technonaut series, and Katie Mulligan, in her
Horror Hollow series-and only they have the guts to face off against an invasion
of fully armed whales. However, this book seems to belong to Lily alone-is she
good enough to be the heroine, even with her friends backing her up? Anderson's
zany new entry has layer upon layer of heroic kids, clueless adults, and thinly dis-
guised villains, topped off with an aggressively chummy narrator whose offhand
digressions provide many of the funniest moments (such as the way he survived the
Manatee Offensive one terrible summer). Like the narrator, this book has a sense
of humor about itself, and it isn't shy about showing off its conventions: ways to
withhold information, build or dissolve tension, annoy the people at Harcourt,
and advertise more books are all laid bare for laughter. A sprinkling of full-page
sketches throughout the text provides visuals for the mechanics of the whale opera-
tion. This will be a favorite of those willing to smirk at series conventions or any
reader who's ready to giggle through a book. KH
ARMSTRONG, JENNIFER 
Photo by Brady: A Picture of the Civil War. Atheneum,
2005 
[160p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-689-85785-3 
$18.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 6-10
See this month's Big Picture, p. 323, for review.
BAKER, KEITH 
Lucky Days with Mr. and Mrs. Green; written and illus. by Keith
Baker. 
Harcourt, 2005 
72p
ISBN 0-15-216500-2 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 1-3
The irrepressible alligator duo from Meet Mr. and Mrs. Green and More Mr. and
Mrs. Green (BCCB 3/04) returns in another series of three chapter-length stories,
these relating the loss and discovery of Mrs. Green's pearls, Mr. Green's successful
guessing of the number of gumballs in a jar, and Mrs. Green's helping Mr. Green
to overcome his inability to sing in a talent show. The brief sentences of short
phrases, arranged in small chunks with ragged-right edges, shift focus between Mr.
and Mrs. Green, giving each protagonist occasion to demonstrate his or her per-
sonality. Though the thrust of the opening story gets a bit lost amid Mr. Green's
multiple random searches for the pearls and that narrative excitement is never fully
recaptured throughout the book, these mild-mannered stories retain the enthusias-
tic embracing of all things enjoyable that made the first two Green books engag-
ing. 
The illustrations follow the style established in the preceding
volumes-action-based visual vignettes of vivid acrylics in emerald, ruby, and am-
ethyst interspersed with double-page spreads of the more exciting bits. Fans of the
Greens will take pleasure in reading this latest installment. TC
BAPTISTE, TRACEY 
Angel's Grace. Wiseman/Simon, 2005 
165p
ISBN 0-689-86773-5 
$15.95 
M 
Gr. 4-8
Thirteen-year-old Grace, with her red hair and her quiet ways, has always felt out
of sync with the rest of her family. Sullen and grumpy, she resents having to spend
APRIL 2005 
* 327
the summer in Trinidad with her grandmother. When her exuberant Aunty Jackie
brings over a photograph album of their parents' old friends, Grace's attention is
drawn to a picture of a man with a birthmark exactly like her own. Unfortunately,
Jackie can't remember who he is, and his face is smudged beyond recognition in
the picture. Grace is convinced that he must be her real father, and she sets out on
a quest to find him. Help comes from the neighbor boy, Raj, with whom she
achieves almost instant intimacy as they discuss the difficulties of families. While
the firmness of Grace's conviction that her paternity is suspect has a shaky and
under-realized foundation, it turns out that her suspicions are on target; blood and
birthmarks will out, and her mother has a lot of explaining to do at the end of the
summer. Though the idea is intriguing and there's some satisfaction in Grace's
uncovering of family history, Baptiste's pacing is uneven as she spends overmuch
time detailing things like the mundane interchange of the children's first meeting
with their parents' friends while leaving out whole conversations that must have
taken place for Raj to know what he does about Grace's situation. Characters drift
in and out of island dialect, making it difficult to consistently imagine their dis-
tinct voices. Between the improbable ideas that summer on an island paradise is
less appealing than in steamy Brooklyn, that a faded picture immediately triggers
suspicions about one's paternity, and that specifically placed birthmarks, a taste for
soursop ice cream, and a tendency to doodle in the margins of letters are convinc-
ing markers of kinship, only those readers most determined to suspend disbelief
and most tolerant of soap-opera contrivance will manage sympathy for Grace's
dilemma. KC
BELLE, JENNIFER Animal Stackers; illus. by David McPhail. 
Hyperion,
2005 
40p
ISBN 0-7878-1834-4 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Twenty-six acrostics built around an alphabetical list of the names of animals fill
the pages of this picture book, in which "zebra" becomes "Zoo is closing./ Every-
body come see!/ Baby is getting/ Ready for bed./ A horse in striped pajamas."
While the poetry itself is unskilled-the images are often strained, the poems ap-
parently written to fit snugly into their animal-name backbones rather than to
inspire with their artistic unity-the technique used to create the poems will fire
readers' imagination, potentially resulting in much wordplay and literary experi-
mentation on their part. Line-and-watercolor illustrations in muted reds, blues,
and yellows depict children of many races enjoying the fantastical adventures with
the animals suggested by the corresponding poems. The children's large, trusting
eyes and stocky frames and the mellow roundedness of the animals' bodies (achieved
through hatched, scribbled, and striated shadowing) conjure an atmosphere of
innocence, while the period clothing heightens the air of old-fashioned whole-
someness. Unfortunately, the extremely youthful tone of the illustrations clashes
somewhat with the text's creativity-sparking potential, resulting in confusion as to
the intended audience; while young viewers may enjoy the affectionate nature of
the pictures but miss the cleverness of the writer's technique, readers-alone who
may be attracted to the inventiveness displayed in the text may well be put off by
the nursery-rhyme tenor of the illustrations. Still, these disparate qualities may be
valued by their own corps of appreciative readers and viewers if the book is used to
spark original poetic projects based on the poetic premise. TC
328 
* THE BULLETIN
BENNETT, 
KELLY 
Not Norman: A Goldfish Story; illus. by Noah Z.
Jones. 
Candlewick, 2005 
32p
ISBN 0-7636-2384-9 
$15.99 
R 
5-7 yrs
Our unfortunate narrator had hoped for a pet for his birthday, but instead of the
cuddly or playful mammal-type companion he'd envisioned, he receives Norman
the goldfish ("All Norman does is swim around and around and around and around
and around and around and around and around"). He takes Norman to school
for show and tell, thinking that a good sales pitch will get a classmate interested in
Norman or that he can take Norman back to the store after school, but Norman's
quietly staunch companionship throughout an eventful day eventually wins his
boy's heart. The narrator's plaintive voice ("No one will want a sorry-looking fish
in a gunky bowl") will be a familiar echo of many youngsters' disappointed re-
sponses to unwanted gifts, and there's enough rueful humor in his response to the
predicament to keep it light (though viewers will be glad that loyal Norman re-
ceives his due). Jones' computer-generated illustrations follow the text's lead in
gently enhancing Norman's expressiveness without expanding beyond the percep-
tions of an affectionate owner; though perspectives are flat, sharp dark/light con-
trasts add compositional interest to the smooth planes of color, and Norman's
orange figure inside his bowl of azure water stands out cheerily against the more
sober tones of the school. A few viewers may find their own piscine pets sadly
deficient by comparison with Norman, but most will warm to the idea of a quiet
companion's subtler advantages. DS
BERTRAND, LYNNE 
Granite Baby; illus. by Kevin Hawkes. 
Kroupa/Farrar,
2005 
[40p]
ISBN 0-374-32761-0 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Five giant sisters open a quarry on Umbagog Lake in New Hampshire, where one
of the sisters, to show her skill, carves "a real live baby" out of pink granite. True
to tall-tale form, the sisters perform all kinds of over-the-top feats to quiet the
now-screaming baby. Finally, a pint-sized backwoods girl with plenty of little
siblings takes the child in her arms, feeds him a bottle, and cuddles him to sleep.
Realizing their mistakes, the sisters are able to care for their baby when he wakes at
sundown, using their extraordinary strength and their skills with river water, wood,
string, and stone to fill the child's small-scale needs. Folksy prose gives the tale an
air of homegrown authenticity, and local details tossed into the narration boost
that sense of legitimacy: "Folks in Vermont were starting to investigate whether
they could move their whole state over to the other side of Maine just to get some
quiet, not to mention some desirable Atlantic coastline in the bargain." In Hawkes'
luxuriant painted landscapes, the huge sisters and tiny everypeople appear equally
at home on green rolling hills, clear blue rivers, and craggy gray outcroppings.
Exaggerated grins and frowns on the sisters and images of children and animals in
mid-leap give an impression of movement and increase the forward push of the
story. Beguilingly, the narration pauses for a two-page spread of pastoral serenity
while the baby sleeps. A refreshingly original tale, this yarn will enthrall storytime
audiences as well as youngsters wanting one more book before bed. Endpapers
provide maps of the New Hampshire area. TC
APRIL 2005 
* 329
BOWER, TAMARA 
How the Amazon Queen Fought the Prince ofEgypt; written and
illus. by Tamara Bower. 
Atheneum, 2005 
40p
ISBN 0-689-84434-4 
$16.95 
R Gr. 3-6
Serpot, queen of the "Land of Women" near present-day Syria, is challenged to
battle by Egyptian prince Pedikhons, backed by his Assyrian allies. Her Amazons
fight their attackers to a draw, and when Serpot and Pedikhons meet the next day
to settle matters once and for all, each confesses admiration for the other's valor.
Bonded by "the great love that entered" into them, they joined forces to conquer
India. The brief story, seamlessly refashioned from a fragmented papyrus scroll, is
at once stately and energetic. Although the clipped narration rings with ancient
formality, the warriors' trash talk ages remarkably well: "You will be to me as an
insect in the mouth of a bird. I will smash your face into your neck." According
to closing notes, the tale itself derives from the Greco-Roman Story-Cycle of King
Petubast, probably compiled for Ptolemy II, and comprises both history (Pedikhons
was a kinsman of the Egyptian Petubast) and mythology (Amazons, at least as
described by the ancient Greeks, cannot be verified). Bower's pastiche of Egyptian
and Assyrian iconography pays apt tribute to these tangled roots. Although the
stiffly posed figures will be instantly recognizable to viewers as a familiar style from
"over there, back then," an explanation of symbols with specific page references
sifts Egyptian from Assyrian motifs and presents some key pictorial elements that
the audience can later apply to other ancient artifacts from the region. Indeed,
Bower's entire five-page addendum, with explanations of hieratic and demotic
scripts and of the highlighted text lines that are translated into hieroglyphs and
back into original syntax, will for many readers be even more engrossing than the
battle. EB
BRYAN, SEAN 
A Boy and His Bunny; illus. by Tom Murphy. 
Arcade, 2005 
32p
ISBN 1-55970-725-9 
$14.99 
R* 
2-4 yrs
Morning brings a surprise to a towheaded boy who wakes up with an unusual
piece of headgear: a rabbit. Once you've got a bunny on your head, it pretty much
dominates your day, and in the protagonist's case it does so in gentle rhyme, as he
names the bunny Fred and gets out of bed. When his mother expresses concern,
he points out that the rabbit-topped life allows for plenty of latitude, since French
can be said, armies can be led, and you could drive a moped (which is actually
drawn as a motorscooter, but never mind) with a bunny on your head. His mother
eventually takes the point but finds a new challenge when the boy's sister turns up
sporting an alligator. The idea is uncomplicated to the point of being elemental,
but the polished craft of the benign rhyming epidemic makes this an inviting tale
of innocent silliness. Murphy's illustrations similarly eschew complexity: strong
black lines evince a controlled ebullience and gaiety, anchoring a palette essentially
limited to robin's-egg blue and butter yellow. Much is made out of little visually
as well, though, with variations in perspective and shifts from reality (well, osten-
sible reality) to hypothetical activities adding variety to the strange yet strangely
mundane situation of the hare-brained boy. Early fans of Seuss will find similar if
quieter pleasures in this book's close-coupled rhyme and happy-go-lucky surreal-
ism. DS
330 
* THE BULLETIN
CARLING, AMELIA LAU 
Sawdust Carpets; written and illus. by Amelia Lau
Carling. 
Groundwood, 2005 
[32p]
ISBN 0-88899-625-X 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Every Holy Week in Antigua, Guatemala, throngs of devotees carry life-sized stat-
ues through the streets of the city, telling the story of Christ's death and resurrec-
tion. The people ofAntigua welcome them by creating elaborately designed colored
sawdust carpets that lie in the paths of the procession. Based on the author's own
experiences growing up in a Chinese household in Guatemala, this story is told
from the point of view of a young Chinese girl observing the ritual for the first
time. The night before the procession, Don Ortiz teaches the girl how the designs
are created in the dusty streets on Thursday in preparation for the next day's event.
Despite his efforts to prepare her, she is horrified to see the designs actually de-
stroyed under the footsteps of the cucuruchos (procession participants) until Don
Ortiz takes her aside and explains that the impermanence of the carpets mimics
the cycle of life and death. This little-known ritual of sawdust-carpet-making
provides an intriguing topic for a picture book; telling the tale from a Chinese
perspective and including occasional comparisons between Christian and Chinese
ritual practices furthers the multicultural interest of the story. Unfortunately, the
art doesn't really convey the allure of the colorful carpets: the washed-out water-
color, pastel, and colored pencil illustrations lack the visual authority to fully round
out the tale, and the drafting of figures is, for the most part, stiff and lifeless. Still,
young listeners are likely to enjoy the concept, and they may even want to try their
hands at creating sawdust carpets after the first read. A prologue, describing the
events of Holy Week and the author's own experiences in Guatemala, and a glos-
sary of religious and Spanish terms are included. HM
CARLSON, LORI 
MARIE, comp. 
Red Hot Salsa: Bilingual Poems on Being Young
and Latino in the United States. Holt, 2005 
[14 4p]
ISBN 0-8050-7616-6 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7 up
It's been ten years since the publication of Carlson's landmark Cool Salsa (BCCB
9/94), and now she returns to the bilingual and multicultural world for more rich
poetic material. Nearly forty poems, some first published here, are divided into
five sections-"Language, Identity," "Neighborhoods," "Amor," "Family Moments,
Memories," and "Victory"; with one (unexplained) exception, the English version
of a poem precedes the Spanish, regardless of which is the original, while a few
Spanglish poems particularly dependent on the interplay of languages appear only
in their original form. Authors vary in prominence but the standard of poetry
generally remains high, with standouts such as Jos6 Antonio Burciaga's cunningly
executed "Bilingual Love Poem," which draws simultaneously on the meanings of
key words in Spanish and in English, and Carlos Aguasaco's "New in New York,"
a robust celebration of his grandmother's embrace of her new urban home. Rel-
evant themes and an attractive variety of tones, which provides something for fans
of the funny as well as aficionados of the pensive, provide additional appeal to a
collection ripe for sharing in various curricular and dramatic ways or simply read-
ing privately. A glossary and biographical notes on the poets are included. DS
APRIL 2005 
* 331
CHACONAS, 
DORI 
Cork & Fuzz; illus. by Lisa McCue. 
Viking,
2005 
32p 
(Viking Easy-to-Read)
ISBN 0-670-03602-1 
$13.99 
Ad 
Gr. 1-3
Cork, a muskrat, meets Fuzz, an opossum (though he is always a "possum" in the
text), and the two try to establish a friendship in spite of their differences. Every-
thing Cork wants to do seems strange to Fuzz, and vice versa, until they discover
their common interest in collecting rocks. Secure in the knowledge of their shared
hobby, the pair sets out for Cork's pond to check out his stash of stones. The line-
and-watercolor illustrations head straight for soft and cuddly, giving the animals
heavily textured fur, shy smiles, and wide eyes; even their wormlike tails seem
almost touchable as the duo plays in the sunshine. For the most part, the story is
told in very short sentences that rarely break across a line. While this brevity will
appeal to many beginning readers, the splitting reflects the choppiness of the nar-
rative style-scenes often lack continuity as dialogue and action jump from one
topic to another. Still, readers may find that the invitingly cozy illustrations pro-
vide enough connection to make the story clear and enjoyable. TC
CHENG, ANDREA 
The Lace Dowry. 
Front Street, 2005 
[1 2 0p]
ISBN 1-932425-20-9 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-7
Juli is surprised and angry to learn that her domineering mother has been saving
for years to purchase a lace tablecloth for her dowry; no one in Budapest has dow-
ries in 1933, and marriage is far from the mind of twelve-year-old Juli. Nonethe-
less, she and her mother travel to Halas, renowned for its lace, to commission the
elaborate piece, returning every two months to make a payment and check in on
the progress. Over the course of the months, Juli befriends the lacemaker's daugh-
ter, a girl her age named Roza, and she is subsequently made aware of the physical
detriment caused the lacemakers by their prolonged close work in dim lighting.
The central conflict here is that of the relationship of Juli and her mother; their
mutual stubbornness precludes their seeing each other's point of view, with Juli
perceiving her mother as demanding and uppity, and her mother perceiving her as
thankless and unaware. Juli's insistence that the dowry tablecloth is causing Roza's
mother to go blind (and her subsequent stealing from her mother to purchase a
jeweler's glass for Roza's family) elevates the tension to a new if quickly resolved
level. A somewhat overly tidy ending erases all personality conflicts as Juli's mother's
obstinacy is excused as wanting what is best for Juli and all past transgressions are
forgiven. The story ofJuli and Roza is more effectively developed, with themes of
country girl/city girl guiding their queries and interests. Stories of overbearing
mothers and determined teens are resolutely present, regardless of time and place,
and young readers willing to forgive the convenient conclusion will enjoy the uni-
versality of the theme. An author's note, linking the story to the author's own
Hungarian heritage, is included. HM
CLARKE, JUDITH 
Kalpana's Dream. 
Front Street, 2005 
[16 8p]
ISBN 1-932425-22-5 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 7-10
Peculiar Ms. Dallimore has asked her 7B students to write an essay responding to
the question "Who Am I?"; the assignment functions to reveal a wealth of unobvious
332 
* THE BULLETIN
connections to the reader as the teens learn about themselves and, unknowingly,
one another. As Neema struggles to begin the essay, her great-grandmother Kalpana
arrives from India, determined in her old age to become better acquainted with her
twelve-year-old great-granddaughter in Australia. Kalpana has recurring dreams
of flying; she's therefore intrigued with eighth-grader Gull Oliver, who flies down
the street on his skateboard every night while Kalpana watches, smiling from the
window. Neema is also fascinated with Gull: she can't remember how she knows
the dark-eyed boy on the skateboard, nor can she stop thinking of him (when what
she, along with her classmates, really needs to be doing is writing that essay). Guided
by the framework of the assignment and the carefully crafted development of each
character, the multiple plot threads and points of view encased in this penetrating
tale of self-awakening come together to great effect. A dash of magical realism
gently supports the cadre of voices and imbues the tale with a thoughtful humor.
This quietly powerful tale explores the individual significance of each personal
narrative and the many unforeseen ways in which lives touch one another; it is the
kind of story that leaves the reader silently begging for it not to grow predictable,
and it doesn't. Clarke effectively gets in to the heads of an ensemble of characters,
some repeatedly, others for a sole section, and gently weaves their lives together
into a cohesive tale of dreams realized and self-understanding achieved. HM
COOPER, SUSAN 
The Magician's Boy; illus. by Serena Riglietti. 
McElderry,
2005 
101p
ISBN 0-689-87622-X 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Though the Boy longs to learn magic, his master, the Magician, always refuses. It
seems all the Boy is good for is bathing the Magician's six white rabbits (for the
rabbit-out-of-a-hat trick), weeding the garden, and washing the dishes. On per-
formance days, the Magician allows the Boy to work the puppets for the "Saint
George and the Dragon" show-until the day the Saint George puppet goes miss-
ing and the Magician (magically, of course) sends the Boy deep into the Land of
Story to find the fabled knight. After plunging through the events of folktale after
folktale, the Boy discovers that the secret to finding Saint George is also the key to
his own acceptance for tutelage by his master. The Boy's diffident everyman tem-
perament and the Sunday-saunter tempo of the narrative may leave some readers
unmoved. Nevertheless, Cooper's playful prose amuses, and the Boy's eventual
victory over his own fear ensures a comfortable ending. Black-and-white illustra-
tions (originally executed in line, watercolor, and colored pencil) demonstrate a
remarkable level of kinetic energy, placing some dynamic image in the foreground
and using sinuous trails of diagonally arranged objects to pull the viewer's gaze
backward into the drawing. With chapters short enough to tempt hesitant inde-
pendent readers, a nonthreatening large-print format, and tongue-in-cheek tex-
tual references to many a familiar folktale, this personable offering could serve as a
sheltered stepping-stone between the more challenging picture books and longer
works. TC
COWLEY, JOY 
Chameleon, Chameleon; illus. with photographs by Nic
Bishop. 
Scholastic, 2005 
[32p]
ISBN 0-439-66653-8 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 1-3
The Blue Ribbon-winning duo of Cowley and Bishop (see Red-Eyed Tree Frog,
APRIL 2005 
* 333
BCCB 3/99) returns to their format of gleaming photographs and brief lines of
text to chronicle the slow progress of a chameleon from one tree to another in
search of food. The sentences are vigorous phrases ("What's this?/ A scorpion!/
Watch out, chameleon!/ The scorpion's stinger/ is poisonous") presented in large
font for easy reading; they occasionally trail across multiple pages, matching the
action of the photographs and forming a narrative that develops the primary cha-
meleon into a sympathetic character. In luminous stills that capture the journey
moment by moment, two startlingly hideous geckos, a garish tree frog, a tiny cha-
meleon, and a hostile scorpion disturb the main character's equanimity as his tele-
scopic eyes swivel to evaluate all potential threats. The reptilian traveler is shown
in postures that point up the drama of his expedition (his refined tiptoeing past a
scorpion is choice), creating by their visual continuity a sense of movement usually
found in film. An impressive series of photos show the chameleon using its pow-
erful tongue to snatch a caterpillar off a distant branch, then chewing and gulping
its prey before being menaced by a defensive female chameleon. Youthful nature
buffs will be entranced by the vivid photography, enticed into reading by the at-
tractive brevity of the energetic text, and intrigued by the surprising facts about
chameleons and the photographer's methodology related in the informational pages
at the end of the book. TC
CREW, 
GARY 
Pig on the Titanic: A True Story; illus. by Bruce
Whatley. 
HarperCollins, 2005 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-052306-9 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-052305-0 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
5-8 yrs
A stuffed bear has weighed in with his survivor's tale (Spedden's Polar, the Titanic
Bear, BCCB 12/94), so who's to deny a mechanical pig equal access to the Titanic
spotlight? Passenger Edith Rosenbaum brought along her porcine music box on
the doomed voyage, and when she was reluctantly evacuated to a lifeboat, she
called upon "Maxixe" to lighten frightened children's spirits with a singalong:
"'Maxixe, you are so brave,' my mistress said as she sat on the safe, dry deck [of the
rescue vessel]. 'Yes! Yes!' the children cried. 'Maxixe, you are a hero!'" Unfortu-
nately, while Polar proved an engaging focal point for a dramatic account, the
story here is thin indeed, and Rosenbaum's background is never sufficiently ex-
plored to generate much interest on its own. Whatley's waxy cast moves stiffly
through the evacuation, and the melodramatic expressions and footlight-like illu-
mination feel more like tableaux than epic disaster. Even with the author's note to
flesh out a few details, this is an addition to the Titanic chronicles that depends on
the appetite for such stories but never really satisfies it. EB
CRUMPACKER, 
BUNNY 
Alexander's Pretending Day; illus. by Dan
Andreasen. 
Dutton, 2005 
32p
ISBN 0-525-46936-2 
$15.99 
Ad 
3-5 yrs
In the tradition of The Runaway Bunny and Mama, Do You Love Me?, a son en-
gages his mother in a game of imaginary challenges to test the limits of her re-
sponses. What if he became a mouse, for instance, or a monster, or a dinosaur? In
each case, the mother deflects the aggressive potential of his advances with offers of
food, love, or understanding. If he roared like an angry lion, for instance, she
wouldn't roar back, but instead would ask "very politely if you'd like to have your
334 
* 
THE BULLETIN
ears scratched or your tummy tickled." She'd invite the monster in and serve it its
favorite sandwich, or, upon finding out that the dinosaur was the grouchy rather
than the friendly sort, simply wait for it to leave. Rather than rising to meet his
challenge, then, her mild-mannered responses tend to drain the energy from her
son's imaginative power plays; her features have a wan, yellowed blandness that
supports this aspect of her character while contrasting sharply with the squatty
assertiveness of her son. His Campbell-soup-kid cuteness undermines his ability
to be as scary as he wants to be, though, so the result is a steady saccharine drip
rather than the dynamic give and take of similar offerings. However, Alexander's
imagination is impressively fertile and inspiring, and the assurances of maternal
consistency will no doubt be comforting for the very young. KC
DEWAN, TED 
Bing Go Picnic; ISBN 0-385-75056-0; Bing Make Music; ISBN 0-
385-75057-9. 
Each book: written and illus. by Ted Dewan. 
Fickling,
2005 
24p 
$5.99 
Ad 
1-3 yrs
These compact board books feature perpetually moving Bing, a black bunny with
enormous eyes and dapper checked overalls, and his faithful sidekick, Flop, a cara-
mel-colored rag doll who may also be a bunny of some sort, interacting with a
number of themed and labeled objects as they prepare their play for the day, whether
it be going on a picnic or making music. Besides the name-the-object format, each
book introduces the youngest listeners to the elements of story structure by featur-
ing a lengthy dose of cumulative rising action, some foreshadowing, and a simple
conflict with a quick resolution. The picnic, for instance, is rained out, and Bing
breaks "poor music box" with a too-enthusiastic bash on its head, but a change of
venue and some felicitously applied tape quickly restore joy. The retro styling of
the art is attractive, featuring a sophisticated palette of olive, brick, and pumpkin as
the characters do their Bing Thing on black backgrounds or stylized puddles of
color with swooshy shapes reminiscent of 1960s light shows. Unfortunately, the
compositions are often frenetic and overbusy, scattering the visual focus and drown-
ing out the simple text. Still, the small format and engaging stories make these just
right for slip-in-the-purse-and-go-anywhere diversions. KC
FALCONE, L. M. 
Walking with the Dead. Kids Can, 2005 
196p
Trade ed. ISBN 1-55337-708-7 
$16.95
Paper ed. ISBN 1-55337-709-5 
$6.95 
R 
Gr. 4-7
With a bully named Slug demanding a five-dollar donation each week and his own
widowed father struggling to resuscitate the family business-a substandard mu-
seum of freakish curiosities-twelve-year-old Alex has enough to worry him. When
his father's most recent purchase, a 2,000-year-old corpse, revivifies in his base-
ment and chases Alex and his cousin Freddie all over town, mumbling, "Se
parakalo"-Greek for "please"-their troubles multiply exponentially. Soon the
two boys are stumbling through the Underworld of the ancient Greeks, where they
learn that the basement corpse needs their help to win a second chance at eternal
bliss. Amid much arguing and panicking, the duo avoids mythical monsters, tri-
umphs over the malevolent tricks of Charon and Hades, then emerges in Greece
during the corpse's lifetime to foil the plot of a secret society of assassins. The
rollicking pace of the plot pulls the reader right into the thick of the story, while
the informal tone of Alex's self-deprecating narrative voice makes his ordeals cred-
ible. The complicated plot is deftly handled, dollops of exposition and brief other-
APRIL 2005 
* 335
worldly encounters laying the groundwork for every story twist without diminish-
ing the effect of the ending. Even minor characters receive an adroitly applied
dose of personality-snarkily deceitful Hades particularly shines. Graduates from
the easy reader adventures of the Time Warp Trio will greet Alex as an everykid
after their own hearts. TC
FARLEY, TERI 
Seven Tears into the Sea. 
Simon Pulse, 2005 
[308p]
Paper ed. ISBN 0-689-86442-6 
$6.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Frightened but determined, seventeen-year-old Gwen returns from San Francisco
to Mirage Point, the beach where she became the focus of town gossip when she
was ten. That's when a sleepwalking incident at the water's edge ended in a mys-
tical encounter with a naked young man and brought Gwen under the searching
gaze of the police and the local psychologist. Now Gwen's grandmother has bro-
ken her leg, so she's asked that Gwen help out at her inn on the Point. Thus
commences again the ancient courtship cycle of selkie man and human woman as
the beautiful youth from Gwen's past returns to woo her as his mate. Set in a
northern California town whose social traditions revolve around New Age phi-
losophy, the story of Gwen's modern experience with a creature of legend seems
utterly natural, her own urban training in self-protection and skepticism provid-
ing a balance that encourages the reader's own suspension of disbelief. Alluring
descriptions of seaside beauties further entrance the reader, while Gwen's own
fascination with Jesse, the handsome and dangerously passionate man from the
deep, heightens the intensity of the reader's investment. The recurring theme of
Gwen's desire to achieve a perfect dive into a hazardous sea unifies the story and
foreshadows Gwen's evolution into a self-determined young adult. Readers who
grew up with Mollie Hunter's A Stranger Came Ashore (BCCB 1/76) or Berlie
Doherty's Daughter of the Sea (BCCB 12/97) will welcome an outing with des-
tiny-touched Gwen and her ocean-going boyfriend. TC
FARRELL, JEANETTE 
Invisible Allies: Microbes that Shape Our Lives. 
Farrar,
2005 
[17 6p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-374-33608-3 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 7-12
In this companion to her excellent Invisible Enemies (BCCB 6/98), Farrell pro-
vides a counterpoint to the horror stories of microbial destruction with this discus-
sion of the necessity and even enjoyable benefits of microbial activity. The first
half of the book addresses the culinary contribution of microbes, offering chapters
on cheese, bread, and chocolate as tasty testimony to the utility of various micro-
scopic critters. The book then goes on to discuss the human body's resident mi-
crobes ("90 percent of the cells in and on our body," the book notes, "belong to
microbes," making us a minority in our own skins) and their role in human exist-
ence, and the crucial work of microbes in breaking down organic substances, par-
ticularly human waste. This doesn't have the same automatic disaster appeal as a
book about diseases, but there's certainly enough grossness to capture any plague-
lover's interest, and it's part and parcel of a valuable point often lost in our "ew,
germs" world: we can't beat all the microbes, and we're often better off for joining
them. Farrell brings an engaged and thoughtful approach to her subject, support-
ing her broad exploration with specific examples (her own tour through a sewage
336 
* 
THE BULLETIN
plant, where she is "somewhat distracted by an irrational fear of falling in," is a
highlight), setting the details of food and internal fauna against a context of history
and larger biological understanding. Though a few readers may swear off bread,
yogurt, and chocolate for life, most will find the food examples irresistibly con-
vincing in supporting the book's overall message that microbes aren't all the foes
they're sometimes made out to be. For those who wish to make this point at
home, instructions for making yogurt and growing your own sourdough starter
appear in the relevant sections. While the subject matter will particularly draw the
scientific or green-minded, there's enough sheer fascination in Farrell's account of
the teeming microscopic world to attract general-interest gawkers, who may find
more interest in science than they had expected. Black-and-white photographs
and reproductions of historical images give visibility, sometimes dramatic, to the
invisible forces; a glossary, endnotes and a bibliography are appended, and the
bound book will include an index. DS
GILLET, MARIE-ANNE 
Standing Up; illus. by Isabelle Gilboux. 
Kane/Miller,
2005 
32p
ISBN 1-929132-71-9 
$14.95 
R 2-4 yrs
This Belgian import's young narrator is initially contented to use his potty from a
conservative seated position, but then one day he sees the famous Manneke Pis
fountain in Brussels and conceives an ambition to "pee like a big boy." Easier said
than done, however, and our boy struggles to develop some aim, in the process
dampening clothes, shoes, bathroom neighbors; there's also the matter of appro-
priateness, as our boy lets fly in public and on a poor unsuspecting snail. Finally,
though, he masters the skill and stands proudly beside his father. Though young
viewers may not immediately get the concluding connection between standing
urination and the ability to avoid lines (and most American kids won't have heard
of the Manneke Pis), the general notion of increasing urinary independence is sure
to attract toilet tyros and the humor makes this welcomely accessible. Illustrations
sport suitably fluid lines, though they rely on colored pencil rather than watercolor
for touches of vivid pigment. The spare layouts pose text and narrator against airy
white backgrounds, the better to focus on the actions; the cartoony approxima-
tion, the emphasis on profile and rear views, and the penis' realistic tendency to
peep modestly out from our hero's hands make the views more suggestive than
implicit for viewers not already in the anatomical know, but those possessed of the
equipment will fully understand the proceedings and the dilemma. Kids will sym-
pathize with the narrator's wayward waterworks even as they giggle, and the book's
general lack of self-consciousness may help ease adults as well as kids into discus-
sions of bathroom practice. DS
GONZALEZ, JULIE 
Wings. 
Delacorte, 2005 
[176p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90253-0 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73227-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-12
Two brothers, lan and Ben, take turns narrating brief chapters chronicling Ben's
birth and growth up to age seventeen, when he sprouts dragon wings and flies
away to an unknown utopia. The change itself is occasionally foreshadowed
throughout the book, as Ben's constant efforts to fly (in spite of his lack of wings)
endanger his life and strain his relationships. Though the brothers' alternating
APRIL 2005 
* 337
voices are identical, their perspectives effectively reflect the tension between Ben's
inner certainty that he will someday have wings and the widely held opinion of
those who love him that he is delusional. These friends and family reveal their
own desires and fears throughout the book, illustrating the conflict Ben sees be-
tween the corrupt world of ground-dwellers in which he lives and the airborne
utopia to which he instinctively knows he belongs. Their artist mother's loss and
reclamation of the delight she feels when painting underscores the cost Ben feels
when threatened with losing his ambition for flight. In spite of a rushed climax
and syrupy (but also brief) denouement, Ben's battle to claim his rightful destiny
will send readers' imaginations soaring. TC
GREENE, STEPHANIE 
Queen Sophie Hartley. Clarion, 2005 
[144p]
ISBN 0-618-49461-8 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-5
"The day Nora and Sophie's ballet teacher, Mrs. Ogilvy, told their mother after
the recital that Nora should continue her lessons, but 'I wouldn't waste any more
money on Sophie,' was not a good day in the Hartley household." Now Sophie
can add ballet to the list of things she's bad at-cursive, toothbrushing, and horse-
back riding-that's tucked in the back of her underwear drawer. When she con-
fesses to her mother that there is simply nothing she is good at, her mother responds
that she is good at being kind; Sophie takes this to heart and soon finds that being
kind is not always the easiest thing to be, especially when she has to garden for the
curmudgeonly Dr. Holt and eat lunch with snobby vegetarian Heather. The de-
lightfully messy family dynamic and tightly composed subplots of the story are
perfectly matched by the characterization of Sophie, an alternately self-assured/
despairing nine-year-old who secretly longs for a tiara and tires of being picked on
by her family (when that happens, she starts to cry-she is good at crying, and also
good at stopping crying, as noted on the flip side of her list). Greene, author of the
Owen Foote books (Owen Foote, Mighty Scientist, BCCB 10/04, and others), has
successfully introduced her newest protagonist to young readers-here's hoping
there is more of Queen Sophie to come. HM
GRUBER, MICHAEL 
The Witch's Boy. 
HarperTempest, 2005 
[38 4p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-076165-2 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-076164-4 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
As an infant, Lump is left in the woods to be raised by the forest's resident wise
woman. Though she takes in the hideously ugly little boy and arranges for his care
(nursing from a she-bear, tutelage from a captive demon), the woman knows little
of mothering. As a result of her well-meaning ineptitude, Lump grows into a
selfish, careless young man who cooperates with friends and family when it pleases
him and, when it doesn't, thoughtlessly betrays his nearest and dearest to their
enemies. When he is finally brought to face the harsh reality of his own character,
his penitence is rewarded with a chance to redress some of his wrongs and find
happiness in the companionship of those who love him. The tale of Lump's many
grievous errors is told in an artistic and stately style, with an objective yet compas-
sionate tone that creates a weight of sympathetic regret within the reader. As
Lump begins to build his life anew, the tranquil narrative style allows the reader's
regret to transmute into relief and gladness without descending into excess senti-
338 
* THE BULLETIN
mentality. Within the story, traditional fairy tales are told as both history and
local folktale, with a revisionist version always receiving the most credible treat-
ment-a practice which both prepares the reader for Lump's starring role in the
Rumpelstiltskin story three-fourths of the way through the book and also encour-
ages the reader to look beyond that superficial connection to see the deeper signifi-
cance of the journey as a whole. Readers turned on to the possibilities of folktale
revision by contact with Vande Velde's The Rumpelstiltskin Problem (BCCB 2/01)
or Schmidt's Straw into Gold (BCCB 9/01) will appreciate Lump's eventual vic-
tory over the deficiencies of his upbringing and character. TC
HARPER, JAMIE 
Me Too!; written and illus. byjamie Harper. 
Little, 2005 
32p
ISBN 0-316-60552-2 
$15.99 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Little sibs can be a pain, especially when they insist on copying everything their
older sibs do. Grace can't stand the way her little sister, Lucy, shadows her, even
though her parents insist it is because Lucy admires Grace and wants to be just like
her. Cut to swim class, where Grace begins to realize that as Lucy is to her, she is
to her swim coach. When Grace further realizes that her swim coach handles her
pupil's emulation much more gracefully than Grace has been handling Lucy's,
Grace changes her approach to her little sister. The shift between Lucy's pestering
and Grace's eye-opening swim class causes an abrupt and unmarked break in the
narrative that will leave some listeners foundering in their understanding of the
story's trajectory, so Harper's wispy and insubstantial watercolors play an essential
role in making sense of the story by filling in the gaps in narration. Sometimes,
though, the illustrations are as apt to confuse as they are to clarify-the figures are
undifferentiated and the main characters undistinguished, making it difficult to
pick the important players and actions out of the cluttered compositions; they also
bury the offending titular refrain in a whisper-thin inked font that significantly
damps down its potential for annoyance as it just doesn't seem loud or whiny
enough. Dogged listeners will figure it out, however, and they may even get the
message that we all look up to somebody, and that one way to deal with abject
admiration is to gently honor its good intentions. KC
HICKS, BARBARA JEAN JitterbugJam; illus. byAlexis Deacon. 
Farrar, 2005 
32p
ISBN 0-374-33685-7 
$16.00 
R* 
4-8 yrs
Bobo is a monster with a problem. Curled up in his red jammies, snuggling his
Godzilla doll, he can't sleep because there's a nasty old boy under his bed. His
mom doesn't believe him and his big brother, Buster, calls him a fraidy-cat, but
Boo-Dad, his monster grampa, knows just what he's talking about. Boo-Dad tells
his own story of being frightened by a human and gives Bobo the secret to getting
rid of them. When Bobo tries it, however, he discovers that the boy is playing hide
and seek with his own big brother. This adds another layer to Bobo's sorrow, since
Buster never plays with him like that. In a move reminiscent of other classic
monster-under-the-bed stories (Koller's No Such Thing, BCCB 3/97), Bobo makes
a bold decision to try to befriend the boy in hopes of finding a playmate. Deacon
is a dab hand at crafting appealing monsters and moving them through an emo-
tional repertoire from scared to curious to sneaky to sad to hopeful. His illustra-
tions combine with Hicks' mild yet distinct monster dialect to create a fully realized
world where everything is opposite expectations yet utterly familiar. Monsters
sleep in the daytime, for instance, yet there are the typical bedtime fears and hassles,
APRIL 2005 
* 339
and when they get scared, their blood runs hot instead of cold. The intertext of a
hundred years of picture-book illustration-from Tenniel and Rackham through
rich doses of Sendak to contemporary graphic novels-positively haunts this of-
fering; the art follows a different yet interconnected logic on each page, and each
spread has a richness that invites lingering and alternately elicits gentle giggles, the
occasional "eeuw," some wistful nostalgia, or openhearted empathy. With plenty
of scope for the storyteller's vocal talent and with illustrations to savor, this is a
book to fall into over and over again. KC
HILL, STUART 
The Cry ofthe cemark. Chicken House/Scholastic, 2005 
[49 6p]
ISBN 0-439-68626-1 
$19.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Soon after the fourteenth birthday of Princess Thirrin Freer Strong-in-the-Arm
Lindenshield, heir to the throne of the Icemark, the immense forces of the vassal-
hungry Polypontus Empire march on Thirrin's tiny northern country. Through
expert strategy, Thirrin's father manages to slow the invasion long enough for his
daughter to accompany the common people of the Icemark to safe haven with
their allies-but only by forfeiting the lives of the best warriors in the army and the
king himself. Thirrin herself is no shrinking violet: accompanied by a fifteen-
year-old warlock, she recruits allies from among her nation's former enemies to
fight the nearly unstoppable tide of southern soldiers; together, humans, were-
wolves, vampires, and giant, sentient snow leopards battle the invaders to win
freedom for their individual peoples. Thirrin is an abrasive yet magnetic heroine;
raised to lead a kingdom, she bullies and orders about even her friends and family,
all the while hiding her fears of her own inadequacy so that her people will not lose
confidence in her leadership. Others besides Thirrin grow to meet the challenges
confronting them; the adventures of the young warlock, as well as those of a scien-
tifically minded scholar, a henpecked but devoted husband and warrior, and the
leader of the snow leopards provide readers with multiple perspectives on the cour-
age and resilience needed in times of war. Laden with vigorous battle scenes,
mystical encounters, and humorous domestic exchanges, Thirrin's vibrant story
will be pounced upon and eagerly consumed by readers enthralled with Collins'
Gregor the Overlander (BCCB 1/04) or even Corder's Lionboy (BCCB 4/04). TC
HOPKINS, LEE BENNErr 
Days to Celebrate: A Full Year ofPoetry, People, Holidays,
History, Fascinating Facts, and More; written and comp. by Lee Bennett Hopkins;
illus. by Stephen Alcorn. 
Greenwillow, 2005 
[112p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-000766-4 
$18.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-000765-6 
$17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Hopkins lends his talents as a compiler to this calendar-themed collection of po-
ems, quotes, trivia, and date tidbits. Each month's section opens with a month-at-
a-glance spread studded with notations of notable birthdays and other notable-or
strange-occurrences: 
roving occasions, such as holidays dependent on days of
the week rather than dates, are explained outside the calendar grid; information
about the month's name and associated elements (flower, birthstone, zodiac sign)
appear in a separate box, and a quote from a birthday boy or girl and a weather
record set in that month fill in the bottom margins. Eight subsequent pages fea-
ture an array of month-relevant selections: poems from authors born in that month
340 
* THE BULLETIN
(and brief biographies of same), and verses appropriate for relevant holidays or
celebrants. With twelve months' worth of this kind of material, there's a wealth of
curricular possibilities available for various occasions, some reliable stalwarts (Hal-
loween) and others less often celebrated (the anniversary of the first patent of a
pencil with attached eraser, not heretofore treated as a barn-burner of a holiday).
The poetry itself runs the gamut from sophisticated lyrics by major figures of the
past to cheerful kid-aimed contemporary verse; it's rather a motley crew qualita-
tively, with quite a few entries running toward the jingly or earnestly heavy-handed.
Alcorn's line-and-watercolor art is strongly graphic, with regularized hatching pro-
viding texture and combining with the evenly pigmented planes of translucent
color to suggest block prints. The result is a collection of visuals that resemble,
appropriately enough, the graphics of calendar art, though they're sometimes cool
and detached instead of pulling viewers into the poetry. While this isn't likely to
invite a full readthrough, there are plenty of browsing and unit-enhancing possi-
bilities that should give fresh methods of and sometimes even causes for celebra-
tion. Indices of poetic titles, first lines, and authors are included. DS
IVERSEN, JEREMY 
21. 
Simon Pulse, 2005 
26 1p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-689-87623-8 
$6.99 
M 
Gr. 9-12
Starting with a shot from a flask in his last class of the day, Bret follows his fraternity's
twenty-first birthday tradition by consuming twenty-one units of alcohol over the
course of the evening. As the night wears on, Bret's alcohol haze intensifies, and he
reflects on the twenty-one years that turned him from his high-powered mommy's
"little focus group," to impossibly intelligent but geeky bully-target, to gel-haired
Undercover Spring Break star, to Fraternity Man of the Year. The random cuts
are facilitated by transitions where the last line of one scene is picked up by the first
line in the flashback and vice versa; the technique works only intermittently, how-
ever, as some connections are picked up successfully through the use of repeated
phrases, while some are obscurely stretched into reflected actions accessible only
by considerable readerly labor. Bits of Bret's humanity break through, but they
are quickly repressed as he falls into effortless line with his fraternity-boy per-
sona-pressing the most grammatically flexible four-letter word in the English
language into the service of perpetuating the sexually violent vocabulary of the
John-Belushi-inspired fraternity mook, supporting the traditions of the fraternity
even when they turn violent and stupid, and covering his existential angst with one
more shot. The ending leaves the readers as hopelessly fuzzed as Bret himself: Did
the fraternity president slip something into his twenty-first shot? Did he simply
pass out from alcohol poisoning? Will he survive and take the fall for the ugly
incident that threatens the fraternity's charter? Will he survive at all? Unfortu-
nately, the extent of the sympathy generated by Bret's character will ultimately
boil down to this: like Bret, readers will most likely want the time they spent at
this fraternity party back again. KC
IVES, DAVID 
Scrib. 
HarperCollins, 2005 
188p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-059842-5 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-059841-7 
$15.99 
R Gr. 6-9
Mild-mannered William Stanley Christmas flees the lavender and picket fences of
his mother's St. Louis home and sets off to seek his fortune in the Wild West of
the 1860s. The fourteen-year-old sets up as an itinerant letter-writer, adopting the
name Scrib and riding a circuit that takes him from farm to homestead to "wickiup,"
APRIL 2005 
* 341
passing letters between lovers, separated family members, and even between Pierre
Trakki, a "Paiute Injun," and Abraham Lincoln. Scrib's "imagenative spelling and
grammer" and his consistently mispronounced words and malapropisms don't stop
him from having a successful career, until he is savagely beaten by someone who
warns him to change his profession. Mystified but convinced by his broken ribs,
Scrib decides to take up a life of"Senshal Intoxication" by engaging the services of
one Suzi Generous, "the town's quick answer to the long question of love," but
that too goes sour for the young man. He knows he must face his enemy, and he
does, despite running afoul of a corrupt judicial system supporting a town bent on
entertainment at any cost (after insulting the local tabloid reporter who visits him
in prison with "a leopard-skin notebook complete with claws," for instance, Scrib
worries that his trial might not get a good review, but that his hanging will get an
A++). The plot moves along at a good clip throughout, accelerating through a
seemingly desperate climax to a satisfying conclusion as the villain comes to a bad
end. Ives' great gift for linguistic twisting, the odd detail, and comic characteriza-
tion sparkles as Scrib ponders where life is taking him; Scrib's laconic drawl relates
the "melodrayma" of his predicament with a deft Mark-Twain-like understate-
ment, and the secondary characters are as divertingly "various" as Scrib feels people
to be in general. Scrib's own unprejudiced heart makes him a hero worth cheering
for; give this to readers who like their adventures salted through with quirky wit,
subtle ironies, and canny homespun wisdom. KC
JANECZKO, PAUL B., comp. 
A Kick in the Head: An Everyday Guide to Poetic
Forms; illus. by Chris Raschka. 
Candlewick, 2005 
[6 4p]
ISBN 0-7636-0662-6 
$17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-7
The title and format are a clear echo of the author and illustrator's A Poke in the I
(BCCB 6/01), but this is a slightly different venture; instead of exploring one
genre of poetry, like the previous volume, this one provides a guide to nearly thirty
aspects or kinds of poetic form. Each poetic term is illustrated by a poem or two;
small spidery print explains the term directly, and Raschka often provides subtle
visual hints in his decorations (which sometimes mirror the syllabic pattern of the
featured form); a closing section explains each form more fully. Spacious balanced
layouts show the poems and Raschka's mixed-media art to good advantage, the
latter often adding a sense of eccentric personification to poet and/or subject. The
explanations occasionally fall short or go astray (the caption description of the
aubade misleadingly says, under a strictly formed and rhymed example, that it's a
poem "without formal structure or rhyme," and the fuller explanation of the bal-
lad incorrectly states that the rhyming lines have only two beats); a few of the
sample poems lack polish and one ("The Paper Trail") isn't actually the kind of
poem it's meant to exemplify, as Janeczko himself acknowledges. Otherwise,
though, this is an attractively packaged entry bubbling with usefulness; budding
young poets will enjoy experimenting with the possibilities offered, and it could
bring much-needed liveliness to poetry curricula. DS
JINKS, CATHERINE 
Pagan's Scribe. Candlewick, 2005 
359p
ISBN 0-7636-2022-X 
$16.99 
R 
Gr. 7-10
In the fourth and final novel of the Pagan series, Pagan Kidrouk, once the irre-
pressible squire to Lord Roland Roucy de Bram, is now a priest well into his thir-
ties. The Pope has ordered that the nest of heretics flourishing in the Languedoc
342 
* THE BULLETIN
region be cleared out, and Archdeacon Pagan summons all his theological back-
ground and oratorical skill (as demonstrated in Pagan's Vows, BCCB 11/04) to
avert a crusade that must inevitably turn into a bloodbath. He fails, and retreating
to the last best hope of refuge at Carcassonne, he directs the defense of the castle.
Roland, still dedicated to peaceful monastic life, aids the wounded while Roland's
elder brother and Pagan's nemesis, Raymond, proves to be a snarly but loyal source
of support. Jinks devotees, particularly those who devoured the first three volumes
in rapid succession, will be startled to find that Pagan's customary role of narrator
has been usurped by a newcomer, his own secretary Isadore, a hyper-devout teen-
ager who vacillates between outrage at Pagan's worldliness and gratitude for his
kindness. Fortunately, Isadore's voice is strong enough to carry the series to con-
clusion, and his feelings toward Pagan-exasperation, admiration, devotion-fit-
tingly mirror Pagan's regard for his former master, Roland. Amid the wisecracking
and head-cracking that richly satisfy action/adventure fans is another fully credible
portrait of brutal medieval spiritual and secular turf wars, and the rare opportunity
to witness a beloved character grow into adulthood is a privilege indeed. EB
KING-SMITH, DICK 
The Golden Goose; illus. by Ann Kronheimer. 
Knopf,
2005 
115p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-92984-3 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-82984-9 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Farmer Skint, Mrs. Skint, and their two children have horrible luck, so horrible
that they've had to sell most of their livestock and consider selling the farm. All
they have left are their two geese, Misery and Sorrow, and Sorrow's latest clutch of
eggs. When one of the eggs turns gold and hatches a golden gosling, the Skints'
luck changes-not only does Farmer Skint win the lottery and a long-shot bet on
a horse race, but his farm-management skills suddenly improve to the point where
he is able to manage the family's newfound wealth. Best of all, whenever he pets
little Joy, who has become a housetrained pet goose, he feels like singing. The
potentially unwelcome attention of a neighboring world-class naturalist (Sir David
Otterbury) provides a dash of tension, since the Skints don't want to become fa-
mous for their goose, but in the end Sir David's interest proves benign. This
hopeful story, in which nearly all the characters display unswerving loyalty to each
other and all turns out best for everyone, is told in an intimate style, full of little
details that bring the Skints' farming experience to life-Joy's poop, for example,
preserved in her indoor litter box, is just as golden as she is. The black-and-white
illustrations reflect the benevolent bent of the story-the characters' open, honest
faces are lit by quiet smiles (even the pigs), their physical stances both unassuming
and trusting. As in the majority of King-Smith's lively animal books, the warm
tone of the prose and the overall optimism of the tale make this an easily accessible
book for readers not yet ready for longer or more complicated stories. TC
KRULL, KATHLEEN 
Houdini: World's Greatest Mystery Man and Escape King; illus.
by Eric Velasquez. 
Walker, 2005 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8954-4 
$17.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8953-6 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-5
A flashy impresario with an imposing handlebar mustache leans into the title page
and tips his hat in greeting: "Welcome! Enter! Prepare to be dazzled!" The
curtain parts for the opening spread, in which "The Milk Can Escape" of 1908
APRIL 2005 
* 343
unfolds in four panels ("Just over two minutes. Behold our Houdini, wet, breath-
less-but alive!"). Then Krull's narrative voice takes over, leading readers through
the biographical particulars of Erik Weiss' rise from son of Hungarian Jewish im-
migrants, through poverty and self-education in the illusionary arts, to the house-
hold name for life-imperiling entertainment. The master of ceremonies breaks in
from time to time, introducing Houdini's favorite stunts with showmanlike verve
and hype. Between text and concluding notes, Krull presents a well-balanced look
at the master's life, touching on his sadly childless marriage, his obsession with
researching and improving his craft, and some of the tricks (those that are known,
at least) he used to make his escapes. Velasquez's scenes, though cleverly staged,
aren't quite as crisply delineated as one might like, and an actual photo would have
been welcome. An appended bibliography, which includes several children's and
child-friendly sources, can easily bridge those gaps for interested readers. Defi-
nitely encourage kids to try this (book) at home. EB
LAWRENCE, AIN 
The Convicts. Delacorte, 2005 
[22 4p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90109-7 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73087-X 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
With his father cast into debtor's prison by a menacing blackmailer, his mother
deranged since the drowning death of his sister, and himself fallen into the com-
pany of a resurrection man (a dealer in corpses) and a gang of juvenile pickpockets,
leading to his arrest for a theft he did not commit, Tom Tin has suffered just about
as much woe as any young hero can undergo in the opening seventy-five pages of
a novel. Worse, however, is to come: Tom's death sentence is commuted to
transportation, and he's consigned to a convict hulk rotting at the dock until a
load of prisoners has been mustered for the journey Down Under. He and pa-
thetic but loyal little Midgely laboriously scrape their way through the worm-eaten
hull, dodging all the while the sadistic attentions of a fellow prisoner, only to be
captured and returned to the ship upon their escape. Midgely's eyes are gouged
out with a sewing needle, Tom's in despair, and when the pair is finally transferred
onto the vessel that will take them south, their persecutors are shipped out with
them. Fairer skies lie ahead: the captain is none other than Tom's father (not in
jail) who thought his son was dead (obviously not), and adventure waits over the
horizon. At least we hope it does, because if there's no sequel coming to tie up
loose ends and justify the fairy-tale ending, this heap of literary tribulations would
seem pretty pointless. Nonetheless, Lawrence once again proves an able guide
through the darkest corners of historical England (The Wreckers, BCCB 6/98, The
Smugglers, BCCB 7/99, etc.), and such delightfully grim particulars as the
gravedigger's three-legged horse (he ate the fourth leg), the crucifix nail Tom uses
to make his escape, and the gnomish miscreants who make the hulk a living hell
should keep readers in thrall-and fully expecting another installment. EB
LESTER, JULIUS 
Let's Talk about Race; illus. by Karen Barbour. 
Amistad/Harp-
erCollins, 2005 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028598-2 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028596-6 
$15.99 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Lester's warm, avuncular voice and Barbour's stylishly sleek, tropical-hued, mask-
like cast lead listeners through a discussion of racial identity, encouraging children
to view race as one of many elements in their larger personal stories. The audience
344 
* THE BULLETIN
is urged to imagine how the world would look going about its business without
skin (a concept bound to elicit some tension-breaking chuckles), and then returns
to his "story" theme: "I am so, so, so many things besides my race. To know my
story, you have to put together everything I am.... Beneath the skin we all look
alike." Right there is some fudging of facts, since we don't all look alike under the
skin, and in his effort to demonstrate that race should not become anyone's domi-
nant point of reference, Lester never confronts the fact that, all too often, it is-an
unavoidable reality with which children regularly grapple. While acknowledging
incidents of empty boasting and verbal harassment, he offers only a simplified
motivation: "Why would some people say their race is better than another? Be-
cause they feel bad about themselves. Because they are afraid." The line between
hurtful bullying and ethnic pride is one worth exploring in greater depth, though,
and sidestepping the nuance is a notable omission, especially in an educational
milieu that promotes multicultural celebration. This may not be the ultimate
weapon in the war against racism, but it may nevertheless deliver a potent opening
salvo. EB
LEVIN, VADIM 
Silly Horse; tr. from the Russian by Tanya Wolfson and Tatiana
Zunshine; illus. by Evgeny Antonenkov. 
Pumpkin House, 2005 
32p
ISBN 0-9646010-1-X 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
These fourteen silly poems were first published in Russian in 1969, in a style,
according to flap copy, that was meant to evoke British humorous poetry. The
English translations certainly display some traditional elements of light verse for
young people: quick-moving rhythms, formal rhyme schemes, a number of ani-
mal characters, and a plentiful helping of absurd happenings. Such characteristics
are appealing, and in a few of the verses they combine to make a satisfying poetic
whole, as in "A Sad Song about a Sweet Baby Elephant I Don't Have," which
engagingly plays its mournful theme against a background of diverting folly. More
often, though, the rhythms bobble somewhat or the ideas lack the pithy delivery
that light verse requires, resulting in a collection that fails to rise to the standard of
readily available material from Prelutsky or Florian. The illustrations offer pleas-
ing absurdity in their characterization of the events, with cozy round curves soft-
ening the eeriness of the distortion; the pencil-stroke texturings, however, tend to
overwhelm the art, muddying the palette and reducing images to smudgy indis-
tinctness. This might be most intriguingly employed as a cross-cultural look at
silliness in combination with the British nonsense it echoes and the historical non-
sense of Christian Morgenstern (as in the Lisbeth Zwerger-illustrated Lullabies,
Lyrics and Gallows Songs, BCCB 9/95). DS
LICHTENHELD, TOM 
Everything lKnow about Cars: A Collection ofMade-up Facts,
Educated Guesses, and Silly Pictures about Cars, Trucks, and Other Zoomy Things;
written and illus. by Tom Lichtenheld. 
Simon, 2005 
40p
ISBN 0-689-84382-8 
$16.95 
R Gr. 3-6
Tom Lichtenheld knows as little about cars as he does about pirates and monsters
(Everything I Know about Pirates, BCCB 4/00, Everything I Know about Monsters,
BCCB 10/02), but, happily, he doesn't let that stop him from exploring the me-
chanical marvels. Attributing the desire to invent the car to the fact that "since the
beginning of time, people have liked the idea of going fast while sitting on their
butts," he cites failed attempts by cavemen, ancient Egyptians, and Vikings to get
APRIL2005 
* 345
rolling. The car was actually invented, then, by two horses with obvious self-
serving motivations. Lichtenheld follows his fanciful history with a look at mod-
ern cars inside and out, an outline of the duties of a backseat passenger (which
include testing the power windows and devising various ways to help brothers and
sisters stay alert), and an exploration of the strange and wonderful relationship
between dogs and cars. He also looks at fast cars, earthmovers, and kid-friendly
concept cars, spinning out all the puns and jokes necessary to spark kids into de-
signing their own wheels. Though utterly fanciful, his musings are not without
insight; he's obviously taken more than his share of road trips, in both the front
and back seats, and he cannily observes that "hot rods make your hair big!" and
that no actual soup is involved in the making of a souped-up car. His zany, text-
rich illustrations will be familiar to his fans, who know to look carefully for silly
little details that add to the hilarity. Once again, Lichtenheld has created a nutty,
good-humored text with no educational or socially redeeming value-may his tribe
increase. KC
LINDGREN, ASTRID 
The Red Bird; tr. by Patricia Crampton; illus. by Marit
Tornqvist. 
Levine/Scholastic, 2005 
[48p]
ISBN 0-439-62796-6 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
In this newly translated version of Lindgren's Sunnandng (a story first written in
1959, this format published in 2003 in Sweden), brother Matthew and sister Anna
are taken in by a cruel farmer, with whom they endure a drab and joyless existence.
On the way home from school one day, Matthew and Anna are led by a red bird to
Sunnymead, a warm, sunny meadow where children eternally play. There, the
Mother of all children feeds them tasty food and bids them to "come again soon!"
on their departure. The children return each day after school; on the last day of
lessons, faced with the prospect of spending an entire summer in the farmer's barn,
Matthew and Anna deliberately close the door that "can never be opened again" in
the stone wall between Sunnymead and their old home. Oil illustrations in cold
and gray-touched earth tones underscore the dreariness of the children's life with
the farmer, making a vivid contrast with the light-filled paintings of Sunnymead,
drenched in green and gold and touched with scarlet. Blustery strokes of thin
eggshell and blue fill the wintertime pages with wind and snow, and the sticklike
legs and arms of the children point up their vulnerability in such weather. While
the children's plight inspires sympathy, this has the distance of a fable without the
impact or brevity. The text makes no attempt to give Matthew and Anna any
personality, and Anna's repeated refrains of complaint add a touch of annoyance
as well as structure. The old-fashioned style (terms such as "shan't," "hither and
thither," and "paupers" pepper the translation) and the uneventful sentimentality
of the story may draw some lovers of Frances Hodgson Burnett's old-fashioned
warmth, but this will mainly find its welcome among Lindgren's many serious
admirers. TC
Lo, GINNIE MahjongAll Day Long; illus. by Beth Lo. 
Walker, 2005 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8942-0 
$17.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8941-2 
$16.95 
R 4-7 yrs
From early morning until late at night, a younger brother and older sister hear the
clicking of mahjong tiles as their mother, father, aunt, and uncle face off at a card
346 
* THE BULLETIN
table. Told in compact sentences set against deep red pages, this biographically
inspired tale (the author and illustrator are sisters) whimsically reflects the way
kids perceive grownup activities. The illustrations, rendered in line and water-
color and contained in elliptical frames opposite the text, tell the true story: the
children run about on the periphery of the mahjong game, playing games of their
own and occasionally intruding on the mahjong space for a quick lesson or a cup
of tea. By story's end, the brother and sister of the earlier pages have children of
their own, and the grandfather takes the youngest on his knee to teach him the
game of mahjong. A sprinkling of Chinese calligraphy is included on each page of
text; while the earliest characters are transliterated for English-speaking audiences
(so that young audiences can try out the Chinese expressions), the majority are
simply translated, leaving the pronunciation shrouded in mystery. The same char-
acters are often echoed in the illustrations as word bubbles, so the given expres-
sions match the approximate moment of the story (e.g., "Tasty!" is offered when
the family nibbles on watermelon seeds, "Shake" is used for the dice-rolling illus-
tration). While there is not much of a plot to guide this tale, every kid that has
been subjected to the kiddie table while the adults do their thing will understand
the circumstances of the story's protagonists. A note about mahjong and a bibli-
ography of instructional books are included. HM
LONDON, JONATHAN 
Do Your ABC's, Little Brown Bear; illus. by Margie
Moore. 
Dutton, 2005 
32p
ISBN 0-525-47360-2 
$15.99 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
At Papa Brown Bear's suggestion, Little Brown Bear's day of play in the meadow
becomes a lesson in learning the alphabet. Not surprisingly, the little bear first
finds an apple and a ball, but as the day progresses, a mix of actions and objects
makes the game a tad less predictable. He and his dad have a grass fight for g, for
instance, and plunge their paws and toes into an icy stream when they get to i,
though the cliches return with a xylophone (oddly, the only toy in Little Brown
Bear's room). The progress through the entire alphabet, with embellishments,
makes for an exhausting day and a rather attenuated story, complete with conve-
nient weather changes (one minute they are swimming, and two letters later huddled
under an umbrella in a sudden downpour), so that readers-aloud will likely be in
sympathy with Papa when he hurries Little Brown Bear to bed with an admonish-
ment to "Zip it!" The sweet watercolor bears seem to owe their trapezoidal heads
and chunky angular shapes to Rosemary Wells and their fuzzy graphite textures to
Jane Dyer as they frolic their way through compositions clean enough to draw
attention to the one or two objects on each page that correspond with the letter
but aren't included in the text. Though the book isn't terribly original, the playful
relationship between father and son is cozily realized, and the format will encour-
age those new to the alphabet to seek out their own ways to play the game. KC
LOWRY, Lois 
Gooney Bird and the Room Mother; illus. by Middy
Thomas. 
Lorraine/Houghton, 2005 
[80p]
ISBN 0-618-53230-7 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-5
Gooney Bird (of Gooney Bird Greene, BCCB 10/02) is back, and she's as fashion-
ably outfitted, full of big words, and determined to be at the center of everything
as ever. A month has passed since her previous appearance, and her second-grade
APRIL 2005 
* 347
class is now all aflutter with preparations for the Thanksgiving performance. There
is a problem, however; not one parent has come forward to volunteer as room
mother, and with no room mother, there will be no cupcakes for the Thanksgiving
party. Good thing Gooney Bird is around to set things right: after slipping off to
the school office to make a mysterious phone call, she reports back that someone
has agreed to be room mother on the condition that she remain "incognito" ('With
the identity disguised or hidden, "a classmate helpfully reads aloud from her dictio-
nary after Gooney Bird's report). Gooney Bird's confidence and gregarious nature
give the story loads of appeal; what is perhaps even more endearing is the way that
Gooney Bird's teacher and classmates embrace her irrepressible nature and, in fact,
encourage her wild stories and extroverted ways. The short chapters are tightly
written, with plenty of big words defined throughout as the second graders pull
out their dictionaries to interpret Gooney Bird's expansive vocabulary, and, as in
the first book, the stories that Gooney Bird narrates for her classmates are captured
in a larger font. Lowry's latest entry celebrates the enthusiasm and vitality of an
exceptional kid, and readers and listeners alike will clamor for more. Final illustra-
tions not seen. HM
MACHADO, ANA MARIA 
From Another World; tr. from the Portuguese by Luisa
Baeta; illus. by Ldcia Brandao. 
Groundwood, 2005 
[128p]
ISBN 0-88899-597-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-7
Late one night at their parents' inn, Mariano and his friends Leo, Elisa, and Tere
come face to face with a ghost. The spirit is one Rosario, a young girl who died in
that very building, immolated with the rest of the ranchowner's slaves when the
master torched the building in fury over the abolition of slavery. Her tale prompts
the friends to record her history (hence Mariano's authoring of this story) and
research the fate of her brother, who was sent on an errand just before the tragedy
and so survived it. In this import by Brazilian author Machado, winner of the
Hans Christian Andersen Award, Mariano's narration reads credibly as a twelve-
year-old's writing, especially since he second-guesses himself in print and refers to
the help he's receiving from bookish Elisa (the fact that Mariano himself doesn't
like to read may endear him to some extent to unenthusiastic readers). A series of
deftly drawn spooky encounters between the children and Rosario's spirit world
helps build narrative tension, while the tragic details of Rosario's short life prompt
reader sympathy and indignation, encouraged by the shocked reactions of Mariano
and his friends. Thick brushstrokes and heavy outlines highlight the organic curves
and emphatic angles of the textured illustrations, keeping the book's look sophis-
ticated but accessible. Though it's sometimes a little talky, this is a finely written
mystery/ghost story that's also an unusual exploration of the aftereffects of slavery
within a multiethnic society, readable on its own merits but also ripe for use within
classrooms and reading clubs. An author's note gives the history of slavery and its
abolition in Brazil. TC
MARTINO, ALFRED 
Pinned. Harcourt, 2005 
[320p]
ISBN 0-15-205355-7 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 9-12
Ivan Korske is the senior star wrestler on an underfunded team of losers, coached
by a teacher who values sportsmanship over individual prowess; Bobby Zane is the
348 
* THE BULLETIN
senior star in a school wild for wrestling, coached by an ex-champion. Ivan's road
to New Jersey finals is potholed with pressure from his immigrant father to attend
college close to home, with grief for his recently deceased mother, and with his
own hot-headedness, which gets him temporarily thrown off the team. Bobby
nearly derails his own dreams of state glory by letting his concentration falter, by
starving himself to the point of illness to make weight, and by fretting over his
relationship with his girlfriend, Carmelina, who fears she's pregnant. As these
alternating stories unfold it is crystal clear that Ivan and Bobby will face off for the
championship, but here the journey is far more riveting than the destination, and
the meaty page count underscores the punishing grind of their preparation. Read-
ers troubled by open-ended novels will find Martino's closing line-"And the state
championship match at 129 pounds began ... "-positively torturous, and some
may even suspect that the author himself couldn't quite live with the consequences
of choosing the winner-or, more to the point, the loser. But here, as in life,
someone's going to find himself flat on the mat, and the chill of the repercussions
should keep teens shivering long after the back cover slaps shut. EB
McNiSH, CLIFF 
The Silver Child. Carolrhoda, 2005 
186 p
ISBN 1-57505-825-1 
$15.95 
R Gr. 5-8
No child would go to Coldharbour by choice; the wasteland of fallen-down shacks
and garbage heaps is home only to those who have no place else to go. Rich boy
Thomas, however, has been living there for a month without knowing why. Then
he meets Emily and Freda, identical twins who move like insects; Walter, whose
giant proportions give him superhuman strength; and Helen, who can read minds.
As he hears about their recent transformations, he discovers his own new strange-
ness-his beauty, the ability to sustain and heal others. Together, they know that
their gifts are for fighting an enemy they can only hear, as a distant, hungry roar,
but not see. Then they meet Milo, whose painful and disfiguring alterations shock
them all, especially when they discover Thomas' beauty is the only thing keeping
Milo alive until his new body is complete. As Milo's parasitic relationship with
Thomas takes its toll, the ever-weakening Thomas must decide what he believes
about Milo's metamorphosis-and whether it's worth his life. McNish takes the
familiar story of children versus evil into new territory, creating a set of characters
who are undergoing transformations that are as arresting as they are uncomfort-
able to witness. Milo's agonizing evolution is especially vivid, creating tension so
thick that readers will hurry to find out what he becomes, and why. Thomas'
reactions to Milo---disgust, fear, anger, hatred-are all credible, as is Helen's flight
and eventual reconciliation. Overall, though, the characters' narrations are too
adult and too melodramatic, with an overabundance of exclamation points and
overdone descriptions; the first-person chapters alternating between Thomas and
Helen are distinguished by circumstance, not voice. However, the intriguing
premise, the dramatic sense of horror, and the unanswered questions will nonethe-
less ensure that readers return for the next in the series. KH
MEAD, ALICE 
Swimming to America. Farrar, 2005 
[16 0p]
ISBN 0-374-38047-3 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 6-8
Eighth grader Linda Berati doesn't know how she got to the United States from
her birth country of Albania when she was small, but she's sure it was done ille-
APRIL 2005 
* 349
gaily. Her mother's wariness of the police, as well as the dark memories of terror
and escape that occasionally surface in her own dreams, tell Linda both more and
less than she wants to know. Her friend Ram6n, a legal immigrant from Cuba, has
troubles of his own: his older brother, Miguel, is a drug dealer whose thefts from
and trespasses upon other dealers have drawn two armed thugs to deal with him.
Linda's disjointed story switches unexpectedly between the two plot threads, which
reluctantly merge to force the action ahead at points of climax. Some interesting
exploration of thirteen-year-old angst is diluted with much superficial dialogue
and a couple of conversations with Linda's mother, who is unexpectedly ready to
tell Linda the whole story of her immigration-in large paragraphs of dialogue,
full of descriptive passages, which slow the book's progress toward the climax. The
climax itself so easily resolves all three primary conflicts (the climax crisis itself,
Miguel's drug dealing, and Linda's inner conflict over her nationality) that it can-
not be believed. Of all the characters, Linda's shallow used-to-be girlfriends-
occasional visitors in Linda's new world of teen torment-are the most clearly
drawn; everyone else is painted with a muddy brush that leaves the reader squint-
ing to see who these people are intended to be. Better treatments of the immigra-
tion theme include Cofer's CallMe Maria (BCCB 11/04) and Son's Finding My
Hat (BCCB 3/04). TC
MELLING, O. R. 
The Hunter's Moon. 
Amulet, 2005 *[260p]
ISBN 0-8109-5857-0 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Sixteen-year-old cousins and best friends Gwen (Canadian) and Findabhair (Irish)
set off to jaunt around Ireland together, but a series of a'cidents and whimsical
choices leads them straight into a trap laid for them by Finvarra, the King of Fae-
rie. Findabhair is abducted by Finvarra, who intends her for the ritual sacrifice to
the Great Worm, "Crom Cruac, the Hunter," who otherwise will consume the
land of Faerie. Gwen is left to race all over the green isle, hoping to ambush the
fairies and liberate her cousin. Luckily, she is aided at every hand by fairy folk and
trustworthy mortal redheads (who have a natural affinity for the fairies). With the
help of her friends, Gwen organizes a Company of Seven to rescue Findabhair and
challenge the right of the Great Worm to receive a sacrifice. Descriptions of lush
scenery, intriguing customs, and mouthwatering local eats entice the reader to
participate fully in Gwen's adventure, in spite of the author's often trite phrasing
("Her soul fluttered like a bird in its cage, yearning to be free"). This quest story
takes place amid a haphazard mixture of Christian and Celtic myth, freely stretched
to fit the needs of the plot; the book climaxes in overblown prose and a disappoint-
ingly tidy ending, in which everybody gets her or his heart's desire with minimal
actual sacrifice. Nevertheless, the opportunity to immerse oneself in a sensation-
loaded celebration of Ireland and Faerie will be a powerful draw for many readers.
A glossary of Irish words, an author's note on the Irish language, and a map are
included. TC
MORGAN, NICOA 
Chicken Friend. Candlewick, 2005 
148p
ISBN 0-7636-2735-6 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
Becca's nutty parents have finally snapped: they have taken the children out of
school in London and moved to a big house in the country where Mom can pur-
sue her inventions and Dad his writing while they homeschool Becca and her twin
350 
* THE BULLETIN
brothers. Eleven-year-old Becca misses her old chums, but when some seriously
cool-looking girls pass by her house, she decides to make friends with them. Trouble
is, they are a little on the wildish, proto-Goth side, and boring Becca has to decide
how much she is willing to change herself in order to be sufficiently cool to war-
rant their attention. The prospect of a parent-free birthday party seems to be the
perfect way to prove her commitment to cool, but things quickly get out of hand.
Becca's voice is authentic, especially in its painful self-consciousness, and the book
generates some effective suspense about the secrets Becca's keeping from the reader
until the very end. Unfortunately, the first-person narration is often repetitive,
and the tension created is let down by the unimpressive payoff. The portrayal of
Becca's mother as a loony, distracted inventor is sufficiently over the top to suggest
some generic confusion on Morgan's part: readers may wonder whether to take
this as a rather serious problem novel about cliques and consequences or a zany
family comedy. Though it doesn't fully succeed in either vein, there is a redemp-
tive moment when one of the ultra-cool girls apologizes for her part in the party
disaster and seems to genuinely like the unpretentious Becca, proving once again
that being oneself is always the best policy, even when you believe that that self
lacks distinction. KC
MosES, SHELIA P. I, Dred Scott. A Fictional Slave Narrative Based on the Life and
LegalPrecedent ofDredScott; illus. by Bonnie Christensen. 
McElderry, 2005 
96p
ISBN 0-689-85975-9 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Using a first-person narration in Southern black dialect, Moses gives voice to a
man who, having never learned to read or write, left no record of his own regard-
ing the nation-altering legislation that bears his name. Born into slavery under a
kind yet financially unsuccessful master, Peter Blow, thirty-two-year-old Scott was
sold to pay off Blow's debt. As the personal attendant of his new master, John
Emerson, Scott traveled to Illinois and the Wisconsin Territory. Because these
were free states, Scott's residence there meant that he was by law a free man, but
neither was he aware of his rights nor was Emerson's widow willing to concede
them without the lengthy court battle that ended in the Dred Scott decision. When
Emerson's wife remarried, her abolitionist husband was embarrassed by his wife's
"property" and returned Scott to the Blow family, who granted him and his family
their freedom. Scott's description of his daily life will be a bit too sketchy for
readers who like more everyday details in their historical fiction; while Scott tells
how he feels about the big things, like being bought, sold, and hired out, he is less
forthcoming about the kinds of work he actually does, and the settings are nothing
but names of places, rather than atmospheric descriptions. This account of the
complicated ups and downs of the ten-year court case becomes a bit dry and hard
to sort out; Moses does, however, manage to preserve the emotionally intimate
perspective she has established earlier in the book. Because it is told through Scott's
limited understanding, though, readers will need to go elsewhere to find the full
text of the Scott v. Sanford decision; an explanatory note, a chronology, and a
bibliography are included to assist further research. What Moses does manages to
do is to effectively portray the human face that mattered most in this affair, and
her account will offer a lively accompaniment to the official textbook versions of
the events. Dramatic black-and-white illustrations introduce each chapter. KC
APRIL 2005 * 351
MUTH, JON J Zen Shorts; written and illus. by Jon J Muth. 
Scholastic,
2005 
[4 0p]
ISBN 0-439-33911-1 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Addy, Michael, and Karl meet Stillwater the giant panda when he enters their yard
to retrieve his breeze-blown umbrella. In their subsequent one-on-one visits to
Stillwater's house, the siblings enjoy short stories from the Zen and Taoist prac-
tices told by Stillwater. Though the children's interaction with Stillwater insti-
gates the telling of each story, these tales connect only tenuously with the frame
narrative, and their primary purpose seems more to provide food for thought than
to offer resolution to the problems presented in the frame story. Indeed, as ex-
plained in an author's note, these shorts are traditionally used to guide meditation
rather than to entertain. In keeping with the intention of the text, the line-and-
watercolor illustrations display a meditative balance of color and smoothness of
movement-figures in motion appear to float in the lemon and azure air, even as
their bodies retain a decided weight. Images of climbing and bouncing figures
emphasize that ethereality, which, when combined with the delicately expressive
human and panda forms, positions the visual effect of the illustrations halfway
between realism and surrealism. The art for the internal short stories is given in
dramatic black ink sketches, the strikingly energetic elements silhouetted against
white or white and a single pastel. In spite of the quality of the illustrations,
peaceful reflection is not an easy sell to picture-book aficionados, so the contem-
plative text limits the youthful audience to those who have strong interests in this
aspect of Asian culture or those with impressive powers of concentration. A note
explains more about Zen and Muth's specific inspirations. TC
NELSON, 
MARILYN 
A Wreath for Emmett Till; illus. by Philippe
Lardy. 
Houghton, 2005 
48p
ISBN 0-618-39752-3 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 9 up
2005 marks the fiftieth anniversary of the death of Emmett Till, the young Afri-
can-American teenager lynched in Mississippi for supposedly whistling at a white
woman. Nelson offers here a poetic memorial in the form of a heroic crown of
sonnets, an elaborate interlinked series of fifteen poems. It's a fantastic technical
feat, but it's also a moving elegy indeed, and Nelson's introductory note in fact
explains that she found the intricacies of the form a useful way of dealing with the
pain of the event ("You were a wormhole history passed through,/ transformed by
the memory of your victimhood"). Individual poems, interlaced by first and last
lines, treat the event, Emmett himself, his mother, his murderers, the racism of the
nation, and the legacy of the crime, adding resonance to the sonnets with allusions
to literature ranging from Shakespeare to Whitman to Paul Lawrence Dunbar.
Nelson's penetrating eloquence ensures that the lyricism marries and draws strength
from the structure rather than simply serving it, and the dramatic directness of the
address would make these poems powerful indeed for recitation or readers' the-
ater. The use of such strong and co-dominant art is a questionable move, since it
tends to dampen the mental echoes of the verse, but Lardy has carefully tuned his
visuals to the rhythm of the sonnet sequence, intertwined his vision with the text's
elaborate structure (as he explains in a note), and generally emphasized graphic
352 
* THE BULLETIN
and mood rather than narrative in his paintings, making them effective compan-
ions if not enhancements. There will doubtless be many observances of this sad
anniversary, and Nelson's sonnet sequence could play a compelling and artistic
part in memorials and discussions of aftermath. End matter includes a note on
Emmett Till's story, notes on the individual sonnets, a note on the art, and a list of
references. DS
O'DEuL, KATHLEEN 
Agnes Parker ... Happy Camper?; illus. by Charise Mericle
Harper. 
Dial, 2005 
[160p]
ISBN 0-8037-2962-6 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-7
Four glorious summer weeks away at science camp with your best friend. What
could go wrong? For going-into-seventh-grader Agnes Parker (Agnes Parker Girl
in Progress, BCCB 4/03), just about everything. First, her dearest pal Prejean
meets an old friend, Natalie, and she is assigned to the Fawns cabin with Natalie,
not Agnes. Agnes, banished to the Mallards cabin where ritual quacking is the
order of the day, bunks up with Nyssa, a prickly soul who is determined not to
make friends: "I am extremely, extremely honest .... You will probably end up
hating me." Moreover, Prejean's recent growth spurt has turned her into a junior-
high Jamaican goddess, leaving Agnes to rue her own pale, flat-chested state and
obsess over reliable rumors that Prejean has been engaging in midnight revels with
the boys' camp. As intercabin rivalries escalate and bad blood boils between Agnes
and Prejean, Nyssa turns out to be an okay kind ofgal, who helps Agnes shake off
a bit of her crippling niceness. The rumors about Prejean are, happily, only half
true, and when Agnes learns that an ugly incident of racism prompted Prejean to
put an unusual spin on spin the bottle, she realizes that, although their hometown
community values Prejean, not everyone in the ruder outside world treats her so
respectfully. Middle graders who have breezed through Rachel Vail's Friendship
Ring series but aren't quite ready to try on Ann Brashares' Traveling Pants should
find the Agnes Parker books a perfect fit. EB
O'MALLEY, KEVIN 
Captain Raptor and the Moon Mystery; illus. by Patrick
O'Brien. 
Walker, 2005 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8936-6 
$17.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8935-8 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-5
The evolved dinosaurs populating the planet Jurassica witness a mysterious light
streak through the sky and land on Eon, one of their moons. The President sends
Captain Raptor and his crew to check it out, but they must face several obstacles
before the source of the unidentified flying object can be found: an alien crew
(gasp--humans!) with a damaged ship. Will Captain Raptor help the aliens or
destroy them? O'Malley's old-time space opera has commonalities with classics
like Star Trek and Buck Rogers: the daring captain, the interstellar travel, the
interspecies conflict, and the bold rescue are all there. The characteristically cheesy
dialogue and melodramatic scenarios are gleefully embraced (the refrain "Could
this be the end of Captain Raptor?" echoes throughout many scenes), and even
youngsters who aren't decided B-movie fans will likely recognize the affectionate
parody. The turnabout, with dinosaurs as protagonists and humans as aliens, adds
APRIL 2005 
* 353
novelty to the classic elements. O'Brien's stylized realism makes for some pretty
convincing dinosaurs in space gear, and the comic-book-style paneling is easy to
follow, with text that shows up nicely against the cool shades of steel blue, hazy
orange, rich brown, and smoky purple that make up the backgrounds. Dinosaurs
in space will lead to giggles for young readers, and the message about interspecies
cooperation is one that young adventurers headed for unexplored territory would
do well to take to heart. KH
PATTERSON, JAMES 
Maximum Ride: TheAngelExperiment. Little, 2005 
[4 48p]
ISBN 0-316-15556-X 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-10
Fourteen-year-old Max and her makeshift family-Fang, Iggy, Nudge, the Gasman,
and Angel-are no ordinary children; they're only 98% human. The other 2% is
the result of experiments at the School, where they were genetically altered to have
wings capable of flight, as well as other physical and mental abilities. After escap-
ing four years ago with the help of a repentant scientist, Jeb, whom they consid-
ered their "father" before he disappeared, the six children live safely in the
mountains-or so they think. Then Angel is kidnapped, and Max and the others
fly out on a rescue mission only to find that there's more going on than some
pointlessly evil experiments. Jeb is alive and working with their enemies, but he
claims that everything has been a harmless test, designed to prepare Max for her
destiny of saving the world. Though they escape with Angel to New York, Max
soon finds out that the test-if it is a test-isn't over. Is Jeb telling the truth, or is
this just another experiment? Patterson's first offering for young adults has plenty
for adventure fans; between the teeth-grinding suspense, energetic fight scenes,
and chilling genetic experiments, readers will develop an attachment to Max's group
as they struggle to find their identity outside the dehumanizing atmosphere of the
School. The bond among the characters is based on love, respect, and a shared
sense of protectiveness; Max is a tough-talking, capable leader, but her vulnerabil-
ity is what makes her real. Though the kids' new powers seem awfully narratively
convenient and the language is sometimes hackneyed, the novelty of kids with
wings never wears thin. The immediacy of Max's voice and the intriguing nature
of her predicament will ensure that readers will swoop in for the sequel. KH
PATTISON, 
DARCY 
Searching for Oliver K. Woodman; illus. by Joe
Cepeda. 
Harcourt, 2005 
[56p]
ISBN 0-15-205184-8 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-9 yrs
The Journey of Oliver K Woodman (BCCB 6/03) focused on the travels of the
eponymous figure (a jointed and carved wooden man) from Raymond Johnson in
South Carolina to his niece, Tameka Schwartz, in California. Now Oliver has
gone missing, and Tameka seeks the help of Paige Hall, a reporter at Uncle
Raymond's local newspaper, in finding him. Paige writes an article requesting
help and, with Uncle Raymond's assistance, sends another wooden figure, Ms.
Imogene Poplar, P.I., after Oliver. Reports of Oliver sightings and Imogene's
travels pour in from across the country, until finally Woodman and Poplar meet in
Alaska and a new friend in Barrow assures that they make it to Tameka's house in
California-for the wedding of Paige the reporter and Uncle Raymond. There's
354 
* THE BULLETIN
charm (if not a great deal of surprise) in the romance subplot, which unfolds in
small hints and details in the illustrations and Paige's letters, and the notion of the
wandering woodfolk has an appeal similar to tales of roaming gnomes. This isn't
as successful as Mr. Woodman's first outing, however: while the complications
add elements beyond a simple redo, they also scatter the focus, and the adventures
have gotten more contrived, losing the could-really-happen allure of the last trip.
Cepeda's oil-over-acrylic illustrations sport a luscious palette of glowingly intense
hues, lavenders nudging oranges and aquas flirting with rusts. There's a quiet
dignity in the firm solidity of Oliver and Imogene, while the human characters
have a wide-eyed and animated enthusiasm for just about everything they encoun-
ter. While this doesn't really stand on its own, fans of Oliver's first peregrination
will probably wish to join Ms. Imogene in chasing after him. The closing endpa-
per maps Oliver's and Imogene's route. DS
RINALDI, ANN 
The Color ofFire. Jump at the Sun/Hyperion, 2005 
[208p]
ISBN 0-7868-0938-8 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-8
When fourteen-year-old Phoebe, slave of the powerful and kind Master Philipse,
gets entangled in rumors of a Negro plot to burn down New York City, she finds
her loyalties split more ways than she can handle. Most of all she is concerned for
the safety and well-being of her friend and fellow house slave, Cuffee, who is a key
suspect in a string of recent arson attacks. Devotions are called into question as
suspects are freed for listing names of others involved; those unwilling to confess
or condemn others are burned at the stake. Ultimately, Phoebe must face the
difficult question of how far she is willing to go to protect a friend and, in the end,
herself. Like many of Rinaldi's books, the story is based on a little-known histori-
cal moment; while Phoebe's character is fictional, a similar incident in 1741 New
York City serves as the basis of the novel's plotline. Unfortunately, the story reads
very much like an overdressed singular moment; the patchy plot sketches out the
details of the incident without offering much information, and a weak ending
wherein Phoebe accidentally rats out the teacher she worked the entire novel to
protect does little to save the story. A few intriguing side characters (including a
gentle witch doctor from the islands), the occasional plot twist, and a touch of
magic do help carry the tale, and Phoebe's voice will likely appeal to fans of first-
person historical fiction such as the Dear America books. An author's note and
bibliography are included. HM
ROBERTS, KRISTI 
My 13th Season. 
Holt, 2005 
154 p
ISBN 0-8050-7495-3 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Too much has changed too fast for Fran Cullers. Following her mother's death,
she and her despondent father have moved in with Aunt Beth, and the baseball
team in her new town is disgusted with the idea of a girl for a teammate. The boys,
with full approval of the coach, try to drive Fran away by enforcing a mandatory-
jock-strap rule, and Fran fires back by complying (she ties her ponytail with it),
but now she's out to get even. Her plan for revenge-to purposely drop plays and
cost her team a string of wins-is misguided to say the least; not only does she lose
the friendship of one longtime pal, but she also incurs the censure of a dear family
friend, a minor-league coach who has always been her booster: "There's nothing
wrong with your game. But I was wrong about your heart-you're no champion."
APRIL 2005 
* 355
Although Fran's predicament will resonate with young girls for whom Title IX has
yet to work trickle-down miracles, Roberts veers unsteadily between authentic ten-
sion and baseball cliche. A showdown between Fran and the coach, in which he
angrily strafes her with a string of punishing pitches, is truly harrowing, but the
bases-loaded-underdog-make-good, Dad's-gonna-be-all-right ending is too facile
to be truly satisfying. Still, this clips along with a tight plot and plenty of dialogue,
and readers should easily squeeze it in between homework and batting practice.
EB
ROSEN, MICHAEL 
MichaelRosen's SadBook; illus. by Quentin Blake. 
Candlewick,
2005 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-7636-2597-3 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 6-9 yrs
In this unusual book, well-known author Rosen speaks directly to a child audience
about the emotion of sadness. He talks about the emotion's inevitability, how
sometimes specific things make him sad (thinking about his dead son) and some-
times there's no particular cause ("Sometimes I'm sad and I don't know why").
He then discusses some things that he does as a consequence of his sadness ("Some-
times because I'm sad I do bad things. I can't tell you what they are") and some of
his ways of dealing with sadness, such as finding a way to have a good time or
writing about being sad. Though the end trails off somewhat and there's the occa-
sional lag in pacing, this addresses a significant emotional phenomenon with a
moving combination of sincerity and simplicity, and it is a reassuring change to
see an adult inviting readers into his own experience rather than focusing solely on
children's emotions. Rosen writes of his personal griefs without condescension,
but his phraseology is generally accessible to young readers; his acknowledgment
that sadness is not always avoidable or reasonable is a welcome one, making this
book a useful complement to works that address specific griefs, and his discussion
of getting through the blues is pragmatic without being disruptively perky. Blake's
familiar line-and-watercolor style displays its usual scrawly informality, but here it
conveys rumpled bleakness, and some of the images are genuinely melancholy in
their somber gray tones; in the final spread, however, the warm light from the
glowing candle actually ends up contrasting harshly with the leaden shadows, turning
what seems to be intended as a balanced view suggestive of hope out of darkness
into a cruelly desolate image. That finish may unsettle adults hoping for a more
obviously upbeat conclusion, but the authentic and respectful treatment of sad-
ness may well reassure youngsters looking for a little help in dealing with the blues.
DS
ROTH, MATTHUE 
Never Mind the Goldbergs. 
Push/Scholastic, 2005 
[240p]
ISBN 0-439-69188-5 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 9-12
Hava Aaronson, a seventeen-year-old punk Orthodox Jew living in New York,
lands a primo summer job when she's invited to Hollywood to act in the first
season of comedy series The Goldbergs. Set up to be like "The Cosby Show, only
with Jewish people instead of Negroes," the show provides Hava with a chance to
get away from the judging eyes of her friends and family in the Orthodox commu-
nity and find out who she is when she's on her own. However, with days full of
filming banal TV comedy amid navigating behind-the-scenes drama, and nights
356 
* 
THE BULLETIN
full of loneliness and longing for community, Hava finds Hollywood more of a
wakeup call than a call to party. Realizing that being on her own means that she
can do whatever she wants, even ignore the restrictions of her Orthodox life, she
finds she is even more determined to stay true to her beliefs. Roth's rambling,
episodic plotting and self-absorbed exposition extends into the usual Hollywood
drama, creating a long, distracted journey to what could have been a more mean-
ingful destination. Nonetheless, wannabe stars will hang on the details of Hava's
induction into TV life, while realists will appreciate that Hollywood's grittiness is
never fully hidden by its glamour. Hava's rebellious, doubting, and disaffected
voice lends itself well to her hard-fought spiritual journey, transforming detailed
information on Jewish Orthodoxy into a story appealing to any teenager strug-
gling with faith. KH
RUBIN, SUSAN GOLDMAN 
The Flag with Fifty-Six Stars: A Gif from the Survivors
ofMauthausen; illus. by Bill Farnsworth. 
Holiday House, 2005 
[40p]
ISBN 0-8234-1653-4 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
The story of Nazi concentration camp Mauthausen is recalled here through an
aggregate of historical data, personal recollections, and full-page paintings. Built
to house the slave labor that would mine granite in the nearby Austrian quarries,
Mauthausen held more than two hundred thousand prisoners (only half of whom
survived) before its liberation by an American-led platoon in May of 1945. In the
days leading up to the liberation, a group of brave prisoners, excitedly awaiting the
approaching Allied troops, pieced together an American flag that, instead of the
forty-eight stars customary of the time, had fifty-six--one row too many. The
jubilation of the prisoners welcoming their liberators is poignantly remembered in
the many firsthand accounts collected by the author in her extensive research,
which included both published memoirs and interviews. There is, however, more
information presented than even a longer picture book can handle, resulting in a
convoluted, overly detailed mix of uninspired narrative ("With one bowl of watery
soup to eat each day, it would not be easy") and listings of names and dates. While
little-known stories can work effectively to teach about larger historical events, as
in the story of the Torah scroll in Lehman-Wilzig's Keeping the Promise (BCCB
4/04), Rubin's text lacks the focused emphasis on the flag that might have served
to effectively anchor the tale. Farnsworth's grimly shadowed oil paintings and
haunting portraits of the hollow-eyed prisoners speak more clearly than the text to
the insufferable and demeaning existence of Mauthausen's prisoners. Though stu-
dents may struggle to follow the details on their own, this could, in the context of
a study of the Holocaust, provide some new information on this infamous camp.
The story of the liberation itself is undeniably moving, and even readers somewhat
lost amid the details will be touched by the personal stories. An afterword, refer-
ences, and an index are included. HM
RYLANT, CYNTHIA 
Boris. Harcourt, 2005 
[80p]
ISBN 0-15-205412-X 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 10 up
At first glance, this is a collection of poetry told from the point of view of a thought-
ful, somewhat lonely woman and addressed to a recently adopted stray cat called
Boris. In fact, this is a meaningful exploration of how one woman, in speculating
APRIL 2005 
* 357
on how her cat might see the world, comes to understand it, and the feline, on a
new level. The poems each focus on a small event or observation-wanting to be
home during inclement weather, contemplating a move from house-with-yard to
condominium, spinning Boris around on the hardwood floor-and they are con-
sistently successful in introducing and completing each focal concept. Rylant has
effectively told the reader everything and nothing about the narrator: very little
background information or personal description is given, and yet, in reading the
nineteen poems in this finely tuned collection, the reader comes away with a sense
of understanding of the woman's personal struggles with isolation and her per-
sonal joys in her chosen companions (three dogs and two cats) and in the greater
world around her. There is a sense of growth implicit in the narrator's journal-like
expositions ("And do you think, Boris,/ how terribly beautiful/ it all is,/ this world
that/ lives in a frenzy all day/ then drops/ limp/ like a new baby/ into the deep sleep
of night?"), as well as a parental affection demonstrated toward the kitty's antics
("Boris, you weren't supposed to/ beat up an old cat"). This isn't about being a pet
owner so much as it is about one individual exploring life, relationships, and the
passing of years, and adults are likely to get as much, if not more, out of the reflec-
tions than teenaged readers. HM
SACHS, MARILYN 
Lost in America. 
Brodie/Roaring Brook, 2005 
[160p]
ISBN 1-59643-040-0 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Fourteen-year-old Nicole was sleeping over at a friend's home that evening in
1943 when the Gestapo abducted her parents and younger sister. For three years
she waits for them to return, holding on to hope as other concentration-camp
survivors return to her French village and speak of the atrocities they experienced.
When, finally, word comes that her entire family died in the camps, Nicole sets off
for America, leaving behind the France of her memory. Based largely on the life of
a longtime friend of the author (and begun in Sachs' earlier novel A Pocket Full of
Seeds, BCCB 3/74), the story bridges two worlds: the war-torn French country-
side, where Jews live in silent fear, and the glowing lights of New York City in the
late 1940s, where Nicole, then a young woman, learns about such delights as ba-
nana splits and double dates, gets a job working for Air France, and eventually
moves out of her harsh relatives' apartment and into a shared basement studio
with a friend. The story is effective in both contexts; Nicole is a quiet, affable girl
who experiences both pain and joy deeply, and her emotional and actual encoun-
ters move the story along at a steady pace. There is an innocence in the story's
tone, reminiscent of teen novels of a different era, that works to great effect in
capturing the excitement of being a young adult in post-World War II America.
An author's note, detailing Sachs' relationship to the inspiration for the story, is
included. HM
SCHACHNER, JUDY 
Skippyjon Jones in the Doghouse; written and illus. by Judy
Schachner. 
Dutton, 2005 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-525-47297-5 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 5-8 yrs
Mischievous Siamese kitten Skippyjon Jones returns, still convinced that he is a
Chihuahua in disguise. After his identity crisis is expressed in his own elaborate
crayon drawings "up and down and all around the newly painted hallway," Mama
358 
* 
THE BULLETIN
JunebugJones sends him to his room for a time-out, recommending that he "think
Siamese!" Instead, the kitten enters into an elaborate make-believe adventure in
which he saves a tribe of Chihuahuas, including "his old amigos, Los
Chimichangos," from an evil gobbling head known as a Bobble-ito who has taken
over "la casaperrito "(the doghouse). Though it's somewhat lengthy and organiza-
tionally random, the story is highly charged and swiftly paced, told in rhythmic
prose crammed with internal and end rhymes that shift from a narrative to a sing-
song to a chanting beat, incorporating several small poems and some captivating
songs full of nonsense and Spanish words that beg to be chanted aloud (or sung)
by a group. In the illustrations, the fuzzy feline with the outsized round head,
enormous pointed ears, and wide blue eyes romps over spreads in acrylics and ink,
slipping through swirls and cascades of shadowed aqua and teal. Reminders of
Skippyjon's Chihuahua fixation dog his progress through the book-from a note
to Mama on the title page verso ("der Mama/ i am a chiwawa/ i am a chiwawa/ yo
soy chiwawal te kiero") to the piles of stuffed doggy dolls in his closet. Charis-
matic, melodramatic, and acrobatic, Skippyjon Jones will bounce right off the
page and into the listener's imagination. TC
SCOTT, KIERAN 
I Was a Non-Blonde Cheerleader. Putnam, 2005 
[256 p]
ISBN 0-399-24279-1 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-10
A transplanted Jersey girl determined to make a go of it in her new Florida high
school, Annisa immediately runs afoul of a number of the school's cheerleaders.
When two spots open on the squad, she tries out anyway, and she becomes the
only brunette on the highly competitive team. Though the girls work hard, they
lack solidarity until Annisa suggests a revival of the dormant tradition of the prank
war with their rivals. As the pranks escalate, so does the general craziness ofAnnisa's
life; on top of practice, studying, and negotiating several sticky relationships, she is
still the goat of the predictably predatory insiders on the squad. As she did in The
VClub (written pseudonymously as Kate Brian, BCCB 6/05), Scott creates a fully
realized high-school setting in which to place her ensemble cast. Though Annisa
remains firmly at the center of the narrative, the other characters develop beyond
easy stereotypes into people with backstories and complex emotional repertoires.
Sure, most of the cheerleaders are vicious and proprietary, but they have turf to
protect, and Annisa is resolutely unwilling to remain an outsider if straight talk
and honest confrontation will give her a way in. Most importantly, though, Scott
succeeds in taking cheerleading seriously as a sport that requires athletic excellence
and intense teamwork. As these athletes realize that spirit and cooperation isn't
something that can be faked as easily as blonde hair, they allow breaches in their
emotional defenses that simultaneously make them vulnerable to each other and
unbeatable as a squad. The plot is dense and satisfying, and Annisa emerges as an
all-around winner-she manages to keep her anti-cheerleading friend, get those
pesky vandalism charges dropped, attract a dreamy guy, pass math, and go to
nationals-what more could a girl want? KC
SHEARER, ALEX 
Sea Legs. 
Simon, 2005 
[320p]
ISBN 0-689-87143-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Narrator Eric and his twin brother, Clive (younger by five minutes, he'll have you
APRIL 2005 * 359
know), miss their father so desperately when he's off on his job as steward aboard
a luxury liner that they decide this cruise they will stow away and discover for
themselves the attraction of the sea. It's surprisingly easy: setting up the excuse
with Grandma, slipping aboard on the coattails of a distracted family, finding
accommodation in the bowels of the vessel, gorging on the food and fun, and
observing Dad while avoiding his notice. Things get a bit more complicated when
the social-climbing mother of a schoolmate imposes on them for an introduction
to their "captain" father, but that's nothing the devious pair can't handle. Just as
Dad does discover them and hits the cabin roof, they become embroiled in foiling
a pirates' raid, which turns them from miscreants into heroes. This sounds like the
itinerary for a lively cruise, but Eric's babbling account overloads the ship with
repetitions and meandering asides, and what should be a breezy sail even for reluc-
tant readers sometimes languishes in the doldrums. Nonetheless, readers who can
abide their mightily garrulous host may want to sign up for activities on the prom-
enade deck. EB
SHULMAN, LISA, ad. 
The Matzo Ball Boy; illus. by Rosanne Litzinger. 
Dutton,
2005 
32p
ISBN 0-525-47169-3 
$15.99 
R 
5-8 yrs
Poor bubbe. Her own children have grown up and moved far away, and there is no
one to share her Passover meal with her ("Not that she was complaining, but she
couldn't help feeling a little lonely"). She makes a boy out of matzo ball dough to
keep her company--but when she lifts the lid off her soup, the matzo ball boy
("Boy-shmoy. I'm the matzo ball man, bubbe, and I'm off to see the world") takes
off running down the village road. This "Gingerbread Boy" variant features an
abundance of Yiddish phrases, a real sense of community chaos, and, as in its
parallel tale, a sassy protagonist with a permanent grin. The expected ending (a
poor man and his wife invite the little matzo ball boy into their home, and "All we
know is that the poor man and his hungry wife had a delicious meal of matzo ball
soup that night") provides a wholly satisfying conclusion to this slyly humorous
tale of outrunning and outwitting. Visually, the matzo ball boy isn't more than
two balls of dough stuck one on top of the other with a face painted onto the
smaller; still, there is a remarkable range of expression in his blue-line mouth and
dot eyes. The thick folk-art paintings fill out this wholesome tale, and the stylized
geometry of the shapes used throughout (the matzo ball boy's body, the villagers'
triangular faces) adds further visual interest. The echoing refrain of the matzo ball
boy screams storytime appeal, and the potential for repeated holiday reading is
similarly promising. The author's note, which details the significance and menu
of the Passover celebration, cites no source for the folktale variant; a glossary of
Yiddish phraseology is included. HM
SINGER, MARILYN 
Monday on the Mississippi; illus. by Fran6 Lessac. 
Holt,
2005 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-7208-X 
$16.95 
R Gr. 2-4
Singer, a master of temporal and spatial perspectives (On the Same Day in March,
BCCB 3/00), conducts her audience on a lyrical week-long journey down the
Mississippi River. She tarries here and there to point out historical landmarks and
natural curiosities: Hannibal, MO, where "ten boys from every state along the
Mississippi/ race to paint Tom Sawyer's fence and win a prize"; Reelfoot Lake, KY,
360 
* THE BULLETIN
where an earthquake once reversed the course of the river for three days; Memphis,
TN, where girls perch along the bank "listening for Martin Luther, B. B., Elvis ... /
They want to sit and hear the river that rings/ with the voices of Kings." Lessac
captures the changing riverscape in a naive folk-art style that speaks of days past
and a zippy palette that's decidedly today. Barges, tugs, and sternwheelers seem to
tumble rather than glide downstream in defiance of gravity, creating a visually
vigorous counterpoint to the more leisurely text. A concluding note expands in-
formation on several of Singer's ports of call, but it's relaxed sightseeing rather
than report-writing that's on the agenda for this particular week. Readers who
enjoy dipping their toes in Big Muddy may want to tag along next with Peter
Lourie in his Mississippi River (BCCB 10/00). EB
SLEATOR, WILLIAM 
The Last Universe. Amulet, 2005 
[176p]
ISBN 0-8109-5858-9 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-9
Fourteen-year-old Susan wheels her older brother Gary into the family's wild,
sprawling garden every day, even though she hates it, because otherwise she feels
guilty about her own health. Oddly, the garden is changing: paths don't lead
where they're supposed to, and strange tropical plants appear. To Susan's dismay,
Gary is fascinated with the garden's unpredictability, especially when they find the
hedge maze at the heart of the garden that, after their first hesitant steps inside,
seems to make Gary better. At the same time, however, other things change with
each trip-their parents, their friends, their home-and not always positively.
Knowing the garden's history (it was created by a quantum physicist, their great-
uncle), Gary pins down the changes they witness to quantum mechanics-the
unpredictable behavior of the tiniest level of matter being acted out on a larger
scale. In the maze, every action causes bifurcations in the universe, creating infi-
nite parallel worlds, and in some of these worlds, Gary is healthy. Though Susan
is afraid that they'll irreversibly change things for the worse, how can she deny the
chance to save her brother's life? Sleator's science-fiction story is both gripping
and thought-provoking, and the ending (fittingly unpredictable) is masterfully
disquieting. Though Gary and the other characters seem to exist merely as means
to an end, Susan is realistic as the passive-aggressive sister who both loves and hates
her brother for his illness. How such a tricky science like quantum mechanics
plays out in the garden remains unclear despite being overexplained in passages of
textbookish dialogue; a better solution would have been to let the action reveal the
meaningful facets naturally. Still, readers drawn in by the science or the sibling
drama will be intrigued by the possibilities of this other secret garden. KH
SPINNER, STEPHANIE 
Quicksilver. Knopf, 2005 
[240p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-92638-0 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-82638-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-12
As one of thousands of Zeus' illegitimate children, Hermes knows he is lucky to be
included in the heavenly host residing on Olympus, and he attributes his favorable
position to his quick wit and his ability to jolly his immortal father out of a blue
funk or a red rage. However, the gods' continual disregard for the well-being of
the mortals whose lives they manipulate begins to irk this easygoing celestial cou-
rier, and as the Trojan War increases his responsibilities as Head Psychopomp
APRl 2005 
* 361
(guide for the dead), his disillusionment grows. Hermes gradually distances him-
self from the political machinations of the gods, finding peace and happiness with
his pet, Pegasus, and his new girlfriend, the nymph Calypso. Spinner, author of
the stately Quiver (BCCB 2/03)-a reworking of the Atalanta legend-structures
this novel in episodes following the narrative outlines given in Greek myth. Told
in first person, Hermes' story is saturated with a supercool, looking-out-for-Num-
ber-One attitude that cloaks an incessant seeking for approval from Zeus. Off-
hand comments and the occasional outright resolution mark his progress from a
popularity hound to a thoughtful, emotionally independent young man-a tran-
sition that will garner approval and recognition from many teenaged readers. The
hip but not hypertrendy tone of the narration as well as the bite-sized stories af-
forded by the episodic structure will further entice junior-high and high-school
aged readers to try Hermes' winged sandals on for size. TC
SPIRIN, GENNADY 
Martha; written and illus. by Gennady Spirin. 
Philomel,
2005 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-399-23980-4 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-8 yrs
When Gennady's young son, Ilya, and wife, Raya, bring home an injured crow, all
three family members do their best to help the animal mend. The vet tells them,
"Put it to sleep. A crow with a broken wing cannot live long in the wild. And if
you keep it, you will have it a lifetime!" Little Ilya therefore won't allow the vet
near the crow that he believes "will get better and then fly." The three Spirins head
for home with their patient, hereafter known as Martha, tucked into a basket,
where they feed and care for her until she is able to soar back to her life in the wild.
The distinct characters of Ilya, Raya, and Gennady develop as the humans protect
and care for the bird-Ilya by verbally defending Martha's right to live, Raya by
feeding her and tending her wounds, and Gennady by patiently allowing the re-
covering Martha to invade his work space. As Martha takes her first hesitant hops
toward health, she grows from a stricken, terrified animal to a self-sufficient, cheerful
comrade ready to face the world on her own. In the watercolors, deep blues, warm
ochres, and cream tones tint the pages, the lush palette creating islands of dynamic
warmth against a white backdrop. Delight, fear, curiosity, bravery, and elation
shape the facial expressions and physical stances of the characters; Martha is a
touching image of tentative, trusting companionship. The poignant illustrations,
paired with the gentle, conversational tone of the text, create a multilayered view-
ing and reading experience that can be enjoyed time after time. Pair this book
with Schaefer's Arrowhawk (BCCB 7/04) for a tender storytime on animal rescue.
TC
STINE, CATHERINE 
Refugees. 
Delacorte, 2005 
277p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90216-6 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73179-5 
$15.95 
M 
Gr. 7-10
Resentful of her foster mother Louise's lack of affection, sixteen-year-old Dawn
takes off for New York City with a friend and arrives just in time for the World
Trade Center attack. In Afghanistan, fifteen-year-old Johar loses every older rela-
tive directly or indirectly through military conflicts, and he flees with his young
cousin from the Taliban across the border to a refugee camp in Pakistan. While
Dawn moves from one romantically-seedy-but-safe haven to another and purges
362 
* THE BULLETIN
her angst by playing the flute for relatives of the Twin Towers victims, Johar ends
up working as a translator for Dawn's stepmother (a Red Cross doctor, who isn't
such a bad sort after all) and forming an email friendship with Dawn, as she works
up the nerve to admit her whereabouts to Louise. Stine supplies political back-
ground through occasional bursts of intense conversation, and she creakily nudges
her players into position for the big finish in which Louise divorces her husband
(the real family bad guy), Johar wins a standoff with his drug-addicted, Taliban-
loyal brother, Dawn inspires her current journalist roommate to take her along
overseas on an assignment to interview Louise, mother and daughter reunite with
newfound sensitivity to each other's needs, and 2001 closes in a veritable love fest.
According to the emails which open the novel, Dawn will be joining Johar in 2005
to teach music at the school he has opened in Afghanistan, and given the host of
improbabilities that have already transpired, why not? This feels more like a mul-
ticultural soap opera than an exploration of international affairs, but the Septem-
ber 11th focus is likely to draw a readership nonetheless. EB
TYLER, MICHAEL 
The Skin You Live In; illus. by David Lee Csicsko. 
Chicago
Children's Museum, 2005 
[32p]
ISBN 0-9759580-0-3 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-8 yrs
bell hooks offers airy verse (Skin Again, BCCB 12/04) and Julius Lester delivers a
friendly monologue (Let's Talk about Race, reviewed above), and now Tyler joins
in with a perky jingle on the same themes-self-esteem and racial tolerance. He
exhorts listeners to appreciate the virtues of "the skin you're all day in;/ the skin
that you play in;/ the skin that you snuggle up,/ cuddle up,/ lay in...." Yes, Tyler
stands accused of sacrificing grammar for the sake of a rhyme, and he certainly
rambles on long after the point has been made, with his pounding rhythm threat-
ening to drown out his message: "It's not dumb skin or smart skin,/ or keep us
apart skin;/ or weak skin or strong skin,/ I'm right and you're wrong skin." How-
ever, the discussion of skin's varied hues is one luscious metaphor-"Your pump-
kin pie slice skin,/ your caramel corn nice skin;/ your toffee wrapped,/ ginger
snapped,/ cinnamon spice skin!"-and Csicsko's flat, matte geometric figures sport
every nuance of shading from palest peach to richest cocoa and beam with confi-
dence from their Marimekko-styled cartoon world. Easy vocabulary and bouncy
rhythm may encourage independent readers to have a go at the text on their own.
EB
VAN MAARSEN, JACQUELINE 
A Friend CalledAnne: One Girl's Story of War, Peace,
and a Unique Friendship with Anne Frank; ad. by Carol Ann Lee. 
Viking,
2005 
[176p]
ISBN 0-670-05958-7 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-7
Before there was Anne Frank, international diarist, there was simply Anne, a lively
teenaged girl who thought every boy was in love with her and who was devoted
most of all to her best friend, Jacqueline. When the Frank family goes into hiding
in the summer of 1942, a neighbor tells Jacqueline they escaped to Switzerland; it
isn't until Anne's father knocks on the Van Maarsens' door three years later that
she learns of the family's two years in hiding and her beloved friend's death in
Bergen-Belsen. Author of several works on Anne Frank, Carol Ann Lee draws her
APRIL 2005 
* 363
adaptation from Van Maarsen's adult memoir; Lee also interviewed Van Maarsen
to record her memories and impressions of the volatile years of German occupa-
tion in the Netherlands and, especially, of her friendship with Anne. Jacqueline's
perspective provides a fresh angle for further acquaintance with a historical figure
known by schoolchildren worldwide; her fond memories of ping-pong and ice-
cream parlors work to great effect in establishing the happy and normal existence
of Anne's life in Amsterdam. The same solid contextualization that works in the
opening chapters to situate the girls' existence in the Nazi-occupied city continues
through the recalling of the publishing ofAnne's diary, the eventual acclaim it was
to receive, and Van Maarsen's present-day role as a speaker on the Holocaust.
While the book's overall impact is more served by its factual grounding than by
the somewhat detached narrative voice, young readers interested in learning more
about Anne Frank and in gaining an alternative teenage perspective on the Holo-
caust will definitely want to get to know Jacqueline through the supplementary
accounts recorded here. HM
WOOLFE, ANGELA 
Avril Crump and Her Amazing Clones. 
Orchard,
2005 
[224p]
ISBN 0-439-65130-1 
$9.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-7
Fifteen years ago, Dr. Blut shocked the world with his unauthorized foray into
human cloning at Leviticus Laboratories and his mysterious disappearance from
the authorities. Now Leviticus is about to open its doors to the public again, but
Dr. Blut is still out there somewhere, waiting for a new opportunity. Enter Avril
Crump, a tubby, bald, ineffective but well-meaning scientist at Leviticus. When
she accidentally stumbles upon Blut's old Replication Chamber, she lets loose three
clones-an almost normal human girl, a talking dog, and a unusual-looking man
in an eighteenth-century uniform-who are quickly kidnapped by Blut. To him,
they are reminders of his early, failed attempts to create a race of super beings, but
to Avril, they could become the only friends she's ever had-if she can stop Blut
from destroying them. Science lovers will be disappointed by the book's failure to
explore the details of Blut's experiments, and the story oversimplifies its ethical
discussion, boiling complicated notions down to a simple treatment on the evils of
playing God and the responsibility of scientists to use their power for good. Avril
and the clones' imperfections are more comic than tragic, leading to some funny
scenes in their interactions with others, but ultimately, this is a book about a lonely,
frequently bullied woman finding the strength to stand up for herself and her
friends. As such it may appeal to young readers who know what it's like to be
picked on and who will be glad to see Avril triumph in the end. KH
364 
* THE BULLETIN
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
ZARIAN, BETH BARTLESON 
Around the World with HistoricalFiction and Folktales:
Highly Recommended and Award-Winning Books, Grades K-8. 
Scarecrow,
2004 
39 4 p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-8108-4816-3 
$42.00
This highly navigable bibliography offers nearly eight hundred titles of historical
fiction and folklore organized topically by region and era. Entries range in publi-
cation date from the earliest decades of the twentieth century to the present. To
be included, the books "must have won awards or been highly recommended by
professional journals"; an annotated guide to the awards cited is included in an
appendix. Within the first two sections of the text (American History and World
History), titles are subdivided chronologically (e.g., American Revolution: 1775
to 1783) while in the myths and folktales section, citations are organized by coun-
try/region of origin. All three sections are further divided by grade level, making
this a fast and easy reference to use for correlating fiction with state learning stan-
dards and district curriculums. The citations themselves include publication in-
formation (current as of 2003), a brief summary based upon published reviews,
and any awards/honors the book has received. The citations also note when
audiobooks or movie versions are available. Anyone interested in using fiction and
folklore to broaden student understanding of history and culture will find this an
extremely useful and user-friendly guide. An author/title and subject index are
included. HM
BLOWING OUR OwN HORN DEPARTMENT:
Looking Glasses and Neverlands: Lacan, Desire, and Subjectivity in Children's Litera-
ture (University of Iowa Press), by Bulletin reviewer and Illinois State University
professor Karen Coats, has been honored as an Outstanding Academic Title by the
American Library Association's Choice magazine.
*<s^
APRIL 2005 
* 365
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Actors and acting-fiction: Roth
ADVENTURE: Abrahams;
Anderson; Bower; Falcone; Hill;
Jinks; Lawrence; McNish;
Patterson; Shearer
African Americans-fiction: Moses;
Rinaldi
African Americans-poetry: Nelson
Alcohol abuse-fiction: Iversen
ALPHABET BOOKS: London
Animals: Belle; Cowley
Animals-fiction: Baker; Chaconas
Art and artists-stories: Carling
Babies-stories: Bertrand
Baseball-fiction: Roberts
BEDTIME STORIES: Hicks
BIOGRAPHIES: Krull; Van
Maarsen
Biology: Farrell
Birds-fiction: King-Smith
Birds-stories: Spirin
BOARD BOOKS: Dewan
Brazil-fiction: Machado
Brothers and sisters-fiction:
Lindgren; Sleator
Brothers-fiction: Gonzalez; Shearer
Campers and camping-fiction:
O'Dell
Cars: Lichtenheld
Cats-poetry: Rylant
Cats-stories: Schachner
Cheerleading-fiction: Scott
Civil War: Armstrong
Cloning-fiction: Woolfe
College-fiction: Iversen
Counseling: Rosen
Cousins-fiction: Melling
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Abrahams; Mead
Current events-fiction: Stine
Dinosaurs-fiction: O'Malley
Disaster-fiction: Stine
Disasters-stories: Crew
Emotions: Rosen
EPISTOLARY FICTION: Pattison
Ethics and values: Cheng; Greene;
Gruber; Lester; Martino;
McNish; Morgan; Muth; Roth;
Tyler; Woolfe
Faith-fiction: Roth
Families-fiction: Baptiste; Clarke;
Greene
Families-stories: Lo
FANTASY: Anderson; Farley;
Gonzalez; Gruber; Hill; Melling
Farm life-fiction: King-Smith
Fathers-fiction: Baptiste; Shearer;
Spinner
Fathers-stories: London
Flying-fiction: Gonzalez
FOLKTALES AND FAIRY TALES:
Cooper; Gruber; Shulman
Food and eating-stories: Dewan;
Shulman
Friendship-fiction: Chaconas; Mead;
Morgan; O'Dell; Patterson; Van
Maarsen
Games-stories: Lo
Gardens-fiction: Sleator
Geography: Singer
GHOST STORIES: Machado
Giants-stories: Bertrand
Gifts-stories: Bennett
Grandfathers-stories: Hicks
366 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Grandmothers-fiction: Clarke
Grief: Rosen
Growing up-fiction: Iversen
Health: Allan; Farrell
HISTORICAL FICTION: Cheng;
Ives; Jinks; Lawrence; Moses;
Rinaldi; Sachs
History, U.S.: Armstrong; Nelson
History, world: Bower; Rubin
Holidays: Hopkins; Shulman
Holidays-stories: Carling
Holocaust: Rubin
Holocaust-fiction: Sachs
HUMOR: Abrahams; Allan;
Anderson; Baker; Bryan; Falcone;
Gillet; Ives; Levin; Lichtenheld;
Lowry; O'Malley; Schachner
Identity: Lester; Tyler
Identity-fiction: Clarke; Mead
Identity-stories: Schachner
Imagination-stories: Crumpacker
Immigrants-fiction: Mead; Sachs
Ireland-fiction: Melling
Jews: Rubin; Van Maarsen
Jews-fiction: Roth; Sachs
Kidnapping-fiction: Melling
Kindness-stories: Harper
Language arts: Belle; Janeczko
Latinos-poetry: Carlson
Letter writing-stories: Pattison
Literature, world: Levin
Magic and magicians: Krull
Medieval life-fiction: Jinks
Monsters-stories: Hicks
Mothers-fiction: Cheng
Mothers-stories: Crumpacker
Music-stories: Dewan
MYSTERIES: Abrahams
MYTHOLOGY, CLASSICAL:
Falcone; Spinner
Nature study: Cowley
Orphans-fiction: Lindgren
Parents-fiction: Morgan
Passover: Shulman
Patience-stories: Harper
Pets-stories: Bennett
Photography: Armstrong; Cowley
Physical education: Martino;
Roberts; Scott
Physics: Sleator
Play-stories: London
POETRY: Belle; Carlson; Hopkins;
Janeczko; Levin; Rylant
Rabbits-stories: Bryan
Race: Lester; Tyler
Readers' theater: Nelson
Reading aloud: Anderson; Carlson;
Greene; Lowry; Nelson
Reading, easy: Baker; Chaconas;
Cooper; Cowley; King-Smith;
Lowry; Tyler
Reading, reluctant: Anderson;
Lichtenheld; O'Malley; Scott
Rivers-poetry: Singer
ROMANCE: Farley
Runaways-fiction: Stine
School-fiction: Clarke; Lowry;
Scott
SCIENCE FICTION: McNish;
Patterson; Sleator; Woolfe
Science: Farrell
Seals-fiction: Farley
Secrets-fiction: Baptiste
Sex education: Allan
Sexism-fiction: Roberts
Ships and sailing-fiction: Shearer
Sisters-stories: Harper
Slavery-fiction: Machado; Moses;
Rinaldi
Space travel-fiction: O'Malley
SPORTS STORIES: Martino;
Roberts
Stepparents-fiction: Stine
Storytelling-stories: Muth
Storytime: Bertrand; Bryan;
Crumpacker; Shulman
Television-fiction: Roth
TODDLER BOOKS: Bryan;
Dewan
Toddlers-stories: Gillet
Toilet training-stories: Gillet
Toys-stories: Crew
Trials-fiction: Moses
Voyages and travel-fiction: Cooper;
Lawrence; Shearer
Voyages and travel-poetry: Singer
Voyages and travel-stories: Pattison
War-fiction: Bower; Hill
West, the-fiction: Ives
Work-fiction: Cheng
World War II: Van Maarsen
World War II-fiction: Sachs
SPICY HOT COLORS
BI eiIVY UAI^
Iu Srl i
LIBRARIANS, REVIEWI
AND KIDS AGREE
"Learning a foreign language
has never been so much fun as
in this bouncing introduction to
names of nine colors in Spanish
Snappy, imagefilled verses brin
life some of the hues and trodit
of Latino Culture."
-School 
library Journal
"This zingy color primer takes i
inspiration from "the spicy hot i
[that] sizzle on a Saturday nigl
throughout Latin America."
-,Alclih- 
Wn6n.,/
"Spicy Indeed. This boldly designed book is
a welcome treat after the more sedate books
that introduce children to colors. A Brilliant
feast of color that will entice children as it
helps them learn a few Spanish words."
-Booklist
"Shahan's phrases encourage the reader's &
listener's paratiipation by snapping, whaking,
or toppinng ag...Barrg6n's work echo the
exhuberance ofthe verse."
-Kirkus 
Reviews
Sherry Shahan
Illustrated by Paula Barragdn
ISBN 
0-87483-741-3
$16.95
Sewn hardback binding
8.5"x11"
24 pages; 
all full color
AUGUST
H USE
www.augusthouse.com
August House is the Storytelling Source.
AUGUST 
HOUSE 
/ PO. BOX 
3223 / LITTLE 
ROCK, 
AR 72203 / 201 EAST 
MARKHAM 
72201 / 1-800-284-8784 / FAX 
501-372-5579
i LIUIU(N(~ Ir~NI
FREE
TRIlb liSSIiF
w(
of an award-winning
publication!
Visit
www.TeachingK-8.com
Click on 
~
FREE TRIAL ISSUE
Teaching K"'8 is 
filled with hundreds of unique ideas
and activities that help teachers present new challenges
to their students, learn new concepts and develop new skills.
To receive your
FREE TRIAL ISSUE visit
-
www.TeachingK-8.com
Teaching K-8 Magazine
40 Richards Avenue * Norwalk, CT 06854
Vni~Flai
1325 Sol
Chunp?
U.S~A.
111110008-9036(200504)58
Z1
0008-9036(200504)58:8; 1 -Z
rl 
i 
1
i i- 
;
;r 
-r" 
*;:
~i~·1·I
Uniwrity of Illinois Pre 
PERIODICALS
1325 South Oak Street 
POSAGE
Champaign, IL 61820 
PAID
USA 
SCHAMPAIGN, 
IL
ADDRESS SEVICE REQUESTED
3"$
Js
N, U,
