H
ILL I NI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
t1
Two by Newbery Medalist
Jean Craighead George
"These informative, good-natured guides to pet behavior
emphasize the importance of learning the ways pets
communicate emotions through their actions, facial
expressions, and body positions.The full range of emotions
that animals feel and express are explored and skillfully
described. Careful attention to the information provided
in these books will prevent scratches and bites [incurred]
when misinterpreting or ignoring animal signals."
-The 
Horn Book
W- "The artwork features amiable cartoon animal characters
interacting with silhouetted photos of the author, an ideal
visual complement to the personal, jovial tone of the
narrative. These informative volumes belong on the shelf
of anyone who lives with a dog or cat."
-Starred 
review /Publishers Weekly
HOW TO TALK TO YOUR CAT Full-color pictures by Paul Meisel
(0-06-027968-0) Tr, (0-06-027969-9) Lb
HOW TO TALK TO YOUR DOG Full-color pictures by Sue Truesdell
(0-06-027092-6) Tr, (0-06-027093-4) Lb
Each: Ages 6-9, $9.95Tr, $9.89Lb
i HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019 * www.harperchildrens.com
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
May 2000
Vol. 53 No. 9
A LOOK INSIDE
303 THE BIG PICTURE
Battle Dress by Amy Efaw
304 NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
308 *Digging for Bird-Dinosaurs: An Expedition to Madagascar written and
illus. with photographs by Nic Bishop
308 * Throwing Smoke by Bruce Brooks
323 * Pharaoh's Daughter: A Novel ofAncient Egypt by Julius Lester
325 * Wish You Were Here (And I Wasn't): A Book ofPoems for Globe Trotters
written and illus. by Colin McNaughton
337 * Henny-Penny ad. and illus. by Jane Wattenberg
344 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
345 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
1~
~id
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Centerfor Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL
61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor (JMD)
Deborah Stevenson, Associate Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison
Elaine A. Bearden, Reviewer (EAB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Fern Kory, Reviewer (FK)
Kate McDowell, Reviewer (KM)
CENTER STAFF
Anita Beaman
Jeannette Hulick
Melanie Kimball
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $60.00; individuals, $50.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $5.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from Bell & Howell, 300 North Zeeb
Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson Associates,
P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to the
University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 51 E. Armory Ave., Champaign,
IL 61820-6601. E-mail: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2000 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Laurence Tamaccio from Battle Dress ©2000. Used by permission of
HarperCollins Children's Books.
MAY 2000 
* 
303
THE BIG PICTURE
Battle Dress
by Amy Efaw
There is nothing new about YA protagonists marching off to war. From Gary
Paulsen's Civil War Yankee (Soldier's Heart, BCCB 9/98) to Walter Dean Myers'
Vietnam troopers (Fallen Angels, 4/88), soldiers have sprung fully formed from
their author's imagination onto the printed page. Little attention has been paid,
though, to what makes a soldier-the motivation, skills, and training that prepare
a civilian to take up arms against an enemy. Efaw examines this transition in a
powerful tale of a seventeen-year-old's battle with Beast, the summer of West Point
training in which academy appointees are either weeded out or toughened into
soldiers ready to join the August class of plebes.
Andrea "Andi" Davis has grown up in a sort of domestic war zone, but her
belligerent home life hasn't prepared her for this; new cadets no sooner exit the
opening convocation than the ruthless indoctrination begins: "YOU HAVE FOUR
RESPONSES, AND FOUR RESPONSES ONLY: 'YES, SIR'; 'NO, SIR'; 'NO
EXCUSE, SIR'; AND 'SIR, I DO NOT UNDERSTAND.... DO YOU PEA-
BRAINED, SCUM-SUCKING, LOW-LIFE GRUB BALLS UNDERSTAND?"
Disoriented and depressed at first by relentless hazing and verbal abuse from a
hierarchy of squad, platoon, and company upperclass leaders, Andi suspects she is
as worthless as her shrewish mother has led her to believe. Success on the track
team restores some of her confidence, however, and as she steadily masters a series
of complex military skills she begins to focus on the purpose behind the barked
orders, mindless drills, and demand for rigorous self-control. Squad Leader Daily
tersely observes, "It's about killing people." As demanding field exercises bond
Andi and her squad into a cooperative unit, the cadets come to realize that it's also
about completing a combat mission and surviving it, feats no soldier can accom-
plish alone.
Efaw (herself a West Point graduate) creates a supporting cast that could so,
so easily devolve into heroic warrior wannabes, predictable academy washouts, and
bullying tyrants; thankfully, each character is a distinctive amalgam of flaws, foibles,
and moral grit, at once fresh and credible. Andi's roommate Gabrielle is whiny
and boy-obsessed, but she displays remarkable emotional fortitude and physical
stamina under pressure; new cadet Hickman indelicately (and, in the book's de-
piction, not unfairly) expresses doubts about the capabilities of women cadets in
general but knows enough to rely on his female squad members' proven judgment
and skills. Cadet Daily ("Just think of me as your Daily nightmare") is humorless
and harsh, but unyielding in his determination to turn all his squad members into
successes; Platoon Sergeant Black, who bellows marching cadences in "a voice that
should have been captured on a CD somewhere, breaking hearts," is a master of
motivation who knows just how to push his charges to their physical limits.
304 
* THE BULLETIN
Vividly realized though the cadets may be, it is Beast itself that emerges as
Andi's true costar and nemesis-the White Whale she will, if not vanquish, at least
subdue. Cadet Daily growls, "I'm going to spend the next six weeks tearing you
down, inch by painful inch, until you don't even remember you were anybody.
Then you'll spend the next four years building yourselves up to becoming some-
one again. But not the person you were." Many teen readers currently basking in
an educational milieu that promotes self esteem and looking forward to collegiate
freedom on the horizon will marvel here at peers who freely submit to dehuman-
ization, rigid discipline, and suffocating supervision in service of their country.
Andi's capably depicted transformation from an insecure adolescent into a knowl-
edgeable and fit soldier, unhesitatingly obedient to the code of military conduct,
may prove more disturbing to some readers than the edgiest sex, rebellion, and
family dysfunction offerings of YA literature. (Imprint information appears on p.
315.)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ALTMAN, 
LINDA JACOBS 
Death: An Introduction to Medical-Ethical
Dilemmas. Enslow, 2000 
112p 
illus. with photographs 
(Issues in Focus)
ISBN 0-7660-1246-8 
$19.95 
R Gr. 6-10
Three opening chapters, forming the heart ofAltman's discussion and rendered in
layman's language that might well be appreciated by many an adult reader, present
a host of issues ranging from changing definitions of death, to identifying trans-
plant recipients; from equitable access to managed health care, to varying forms of
euthanasia. The concluding trio of chapters digress somewhat from the "dilemma"
premise to offer an overview of how different cultures regard mortality and after-
life and how they ritualize death, topics more extensively handled in Penny Colman's
Corpses, Coffins, and Crypts (BCCB 2/98). Although explication of each selected
topic is clear and even-handed, "hot" topics such as abortion (viability of the fetus;
life or well-being of the mother) and human genome mapping (patent holders as
gatekeepers to lifesaving research and treatment) are notably absent. Nevertheless,
Altman supplies her teen readers with the concise medical definitions and precise
vocabulary necessary to participate in a nuanced discussion of medical ethics, and
she offers a respectful, even compassionate, iteration of opposing positions on many
end-of-life issues. Chapter notes, a glossary, a list for further reading, and an index
are included. EB
MAY 2000 
* 
305
APPELT, KATHI 
Kissing Tennessee and Other Stories from the Stardust
Dance. 
Harcourt, 2000 
[128p]
ISBN 0-15-202249-X 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
The Stardust Dance is the gala event of the year at Dogwood Junior High, and
Appelt follows eight eighth-graders to the sparkle-and-glitter transformed high-
school cafeteria for the big night. Eight short stories run the thematic gamut,
simple tales of first love vying with more serious themes. Characters have complex
inner lives: Russ grieves silently after the accidental death of his girlfriend, Annie
("Just a Kiss, Annie P."); Cub struggles with his longing for his best friend, Travis
("Starbears"); Becca, locked in a tiny bathroom cubicle, reels from a date rape
("The Right Word"). The writing style is engaging, whether the story is being
narrated in first or third person, and the language is succinct yet expressive. Al-
though the trials and tribulations of the characters are somewhat programmatic,
the author never takes them lightly, and there is an earnest undertone that colors
her plots. While that undertone indicates a deserved respect for the reading audi-
ence, it also makes the stories tonally similar; these students are a generic cross-
section of personalities, with little specificity to differentiate between them. Still,
this will be an easy booktalk, and young adolescents looking for a story with which
they can identify may very well find it here. JMD
AXTELL, DAVID 
We're Going on a Lion Hunt; written and illus. by David
Axtell. 
Holt, 2000 
26p
ISBN 0-8050-6159-2 
$15.95 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Beginning with the chant, "We're going on a lion hunt./ We're going to catch a
big one," two young girls set out from their home (complete with snacks and
stuffed rabbit) to approach the requisite challenges of grass, lake, swamp, and cave.
"Swish, swash... Splish, splash... Squish, squash... tiptoe, tiptoe," the girls find
a way through the obstacles to the lion's den. Evidently waking the lion with their
flashlight, they rush back to the safety of their home, only to announce they will
try again tomorrow: "We're all tired now./ Tired and sleepy./ Better catch a lion
tomorrow instead!" Axtell's oils have the dappled texture of Paul Morin's work,
and they create an appealingly fresh backdrop for this revision of the old chant,
invitingly depicting the grassy savannah and its denizens. Confusion abounds,
however: are these African girls setting out into lion country or sisters engaging in
imaginative play depicted as real? Why do they flee when they find the lion they
seek (and apparently have sought and found before)? Participatory opportunities,
pleasing repetition, and the new take on this old tale may nonetheless keep young-
sters involved despite the puzzle presented. Buy this book to share with large
groups where the excitement generated by the audience will make it worth adding
to the collection. EAB
BALLARD, ROBIN 
Tonight and Tomorrow; written and illus. by Robin
Ballard. 
Greenwillow, 2000 
[24p]
ISBN 0-688-16790-X 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
2-4 yrs
A little boy confidently discusses the now of nighttime (tonight) and the promise
of morning (tomorrow): "Next to my night-light there is a window. At night it's
full of shadows, but tomorrow I will open the curtains and see what the day is
306 
* THE BULLETIN
like." This uneventful tale consists of the boy's descriptive comments on the cur-
rent state of things and his plans for the near future. The rock-solid normalcy of
the boy's list-making is visually reinforced by the soft pastel palette and comfort-
able rounded shapes of boy, mother, and teddy bear. Line-and-watercolor illustra-
tions lean towards the bland; uncluttered compositions feature simplified human
figures in somnolent colors. The narrator's confidence in the order of things is
evident in the closing lines: "Now I close my eyes. The sooner I go to sleep, the
sooner tomorrow will be here! Good night." Despite the book's cataloguish text
and quiet illustrations, its protagonist's certainty may infuse listeners with the same
certitude. JMD
BARTHOLOMEW, LOIS THOMPSON 
The White Dove. 
Houghton, 2000 
200p
ISBN 0-618-00464-5 
$15.00 
M 
Gr. 6-8
Tasha is the daughter of a dead king; before his death, her father had abdicated the
throne and chosen a successor, Marko, to lead his people to democratic self-rule.
Royal pretender Com overthrows Marko and establishes a dictatorship, imprison-
ing Tasha, Marko's young sister Reina, and anyone else still loyal to the old king
and the new democracy. With the help of Ari, a mysterious stranger, Tasha and
Reina escape captivity and begin the dangerous journey to rejoin Marko. Along
the way they acquire a fourth companion, Gil, young servant to the compound
cook. The four travelers head for safety, narrowly avoiding capture several times.
The novel ends with indications that the revolution has begun and democracy is
only a civil war away. Bartholomew creates a believable if generic fantasy world;
the pace of the novel is kept relatively swift by a series of escape and chase se-
quences. Unfortunately, the characterizations lack subtlety (Tasha is unremittingly
noble and true; Gil exists to babysit Reina and he is expediently done away with
when that function is completed), and convenient coincidence takes the place of
exposition (Ari is the deceased king's long-lost brother and thus Tasha's uncle; Gil
is his long-lost son and thus Tasha's cousin). There is no humor, and the suspense-
ful plot staggers under the political weight. Reroute fantasy readers through
Alexander's Westmark instead. JMD
BAUER, CAT 
Harley Like a Person. Winslow, 2000 
[24 8p]
Trade ed. ISBN 1-890817-48-1 
$16.95
Paper ed. ISBN 1-890817-49-X 
$6.95
E-book ed. ISBN 1-890817-34-1 
$6.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 9-12
Harley is a high-school freshman struggling against the random discipline of her
parents, who are inclined towards yelling and threats. When she finds a harlequin
in the upstairs storage space with a note that says it is for her from her "Papa," she
is stunned to realize that it is not written in the handwriting of Roger Columba,
the father that she knows. Her best friend Carla shows little sympathy, assuming
that Harley's discovery is no more than the projection of her wish for better par-
ents. As evidence about her obscured parentage mounts, Harley drifts into a rela-
tionship with Evan, a boy that Carla derisively (but truthfully) calls a "druggie."
Bauer accurately depicts a straining relationship between two girls who were best
friends in grade school and have now begun to drift apart, as they periodically
ditch each other in favor of lunches and walks home with potential boyfriends.
Harley's voice is true to teenage experience, scattered intensely in many directions
at once, and the book captures the essence of teenage identity-seeking in the depic-
MAY 2000 
* 307
tion of Harley's participation in many seemingly contradictory spheres, where she
is simultaneously a star art student, an afterschool helper to an elderly woman, a
druggie's girlfriend who is beginning to experiment with drugs herself, and a girl
whose grades and family life are falling apart. Harley eventually discovers the
identity of her biological father, which is complicated by the fact that this same
man is known to have fathered her now ex-best friend Carla. Despite the seeming
melodrama of this coincidence, Bauer handles the crisis with aplomb, painting a
very real picture of a family who should have come forward with the truth before
Harley discovered it alone. Bauer has created a vivid portrait of a teenage girl
whose life is fraught with well-meaning deception; young-adult readers will sym-
pathize with Harley's struggle. KM
BAUSUM, ANN 
Dragon Bones and Dinosaur Eggs: A Photobiography of Explorer
Roy Chapman Andrews. 
National Geographic, 2000 
64p 
illus. with photo-
graphs
ISBN 0-7922-7123-8 
$17.95 
R* Gr. 4-8
Reputed to be the model for Indiana Jones, Andrews bounded through enough
adventures in his multifaceted career as scholar, explorer, and author to keep pace
with his fictional counterpart, staring down bandits, braving sandstorms and ty-
phoons, and, yes, even dodging poisonous snakes. Best known for its discoveries
ofProtoceratops, Oviraptor, and a cache of well-preserved dinosaur eggs, Andrews'
Mongolian expedition (1922-1930) also demonstrated his prowess as an innova-
tor in the field of paleontology, assembling a group of specialists who could pool
expertise in the field, and arranging a remarkable system of modern (for the pe-
riod) and traditional transport for outbound supplies and homeward-bound fos-
sils. Bausum's account reads smoothly, and a layout dense with captioned sepia
photographs and quotes from Andrews provides plenty of oases for readers as they
follow him through the desert. The appended chronology, index, and resource
guide will be a boon to report writers, but armchair adventurers and dino-philes
won't want to wait for an assignment to join this expedition. EB
BIAL, RAYMOND 
A Handful of Dirt; by Raymond Bial; with photographs by
Raymond Bial, et al. 
Walker, 2000 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8699-5 
$17.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8698-7 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-6
Bial handily captures the interconnectedness of life, from prairie dogs to the tiniest
bacteria, in this close up look at the importance-and beauty-of soil. Beginning
with what can be found in a handful of dirt, the author discusses the cycle of
growth and decomposition that ultimately produces soil rich enough to supply
food for microscopic organisms, earthworms, and people. Full and partial page
color photographs feature microscopic looks at praying mantis, aphids, and nema-
todes (tiny worms that feed on bacteria) as well as larger images of moles, mush-
rooms, and compost heaps, giving readers a close-up look at seldom seen (or
imagined) soil-supported life forms. The occasional confusing sentence structure
may briefly halt readers, but on the whole Bial makes the origins of soil quite
absorbing. An introduction explains the author's personal attachment to the soil:
his grandfather was a gardener, and Bial inherited his love for the land along with
his garden tools. A brief index and a list for further reading is included. JMD
308 
* THE BULLETIN
BISHOP, NIC 
Digging for Bird-Dinosaurs: An Expedition to Madagascar; written
and illus. with photographs by Nic Bishop. 
Houghton, 2000 
4 8p
ISBN 0-395-96056-8 
$16.00 
R Gr. 4-8
Bishop documents the archeological expedition of paleontologist Cathy Forster to
discover clues to the evolution of birds. Opening with a background chapter on
Forster, the book sets the stage for an examination of the progress of the expedi-
tion with an articulate explanation of various theories of bird-and-dinosaur evolu-
tion. Bishop moves quickly to the real meat of the book: a close-up, almost
hands-on look at the excitement of discovering fragile fossils and the (necessary)
tedium of excavating them. Color photographs of the different stages of the expe-
dition show Forster and her team crouched among limestone and shale forma-
tions, delicately picking away at possible fossil sites with awls, and brushing sand
and dirt away with brooms and brushes. Capturing the painstaking dedication of
the team members, the pictures act as testament to the scientists' obvious, focused
devotion in spite of physical discomfort and a limited diet (rice and beans, lots of
rice and beans). The local population is not ignored; the author spends quite a bit
of film and words on explaining the history of archeological digs in Madagascar,
the hospitality of their local hosts, and the need for a village school. (An address is
given for the charity set up by an expedition member to build the school and fund
a teacher.) While documenting the dig, the text explains how fossils are formed,
discusses the clues scientists hope to discover through digs like this one, and tells
how fossils are transported from dig site to museum laboratories. Luckily the book
doesn't stop there, but follows through with an explanation of what the unidenti-
fied fossils actually turned out to be and what impact they might have on future
evolutionary studies. A map, a list of books for further reading, an index, and a
diagram linking Velociraptors, Rahonavis, and pigeons are included. JMD
BROOKS, BRUCE 
Throwing Smoke. 
Geringer/HarperCollins, 2000 
[14 4 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028320-3 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028972-4 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-8
Last year the Breadhurst Newts completed their debut season with a pristine record,
unsullied by a single win. This year they're convinced they have nowhere to go but
up. They're wrong. An off-season's worth of workouts has paid off in meager
athletic improvement that barely nudges the numbers forward on the scoreboard
in their opening games. Whiz-pitcher, unofficial manager, and booster supreme-
has a desperate plan, though. Sneaking off in the dark of night to the print shop
where he works part time, Whiz composes and presses a baseball card of a dream
pitcher, "Ace Jones," with the talent to burn opponents off the field. At the very
next practice, Ace appears in the flesh and the team is on a roll. Now Whiz realizes
they could also use a power hitter; he prints another card and, voila, Diane Fuller
is on the team. As unworldly players pack the team and stalwart regulars take to
the bench, the Newts realize that the fun is gone and Whiz must find a way to
retire the creatures he has evoked. Baseball and fantasy strike a successful partner-
ship in this witty tale. The Newts' wry, self-deprecating repartee is a delightful
foil to the sinister characterizations of those joyless "miracles" that roll off Whiz's
press, and just beneath the keep-fun-in-the-game message is a sly parable on the
awesome power of the printed word. Pitch this one at your next booktalk and
watch your fans run it home. EB
MAY 2000 
* 309
BROOKS, MARTHA 
Being with Henry. 
Kroupa/DK Ink, 2000 
[224 p]
ISBN 0-7894-2588-2 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Laker has been on his own with his childlike mother for so long that it's hard for
him to adjust to her new husband, Rick; friction at home increases until finally the
sixteen-year-old boy finds himself kicked out of the house and onto a bus to Bemidji.
There he hooks up with eighty-two-year-old Henry who, seeing in Laker a way to
annoy his bossy, overprotective daughter and maybe to assuage his own loneliness,
gives the boy a room. Laker's relationship with Henry's daughter, with Henry's
beautiful granddaughter, Charlene, and even with Henry is sometimes tense, but
Laker gradually carves out a place for himself and acquires some perspective on his
family rift-and, on a trip with Henry and Charlene, finds some startling truths
about his family history. Brooks walks a finely drawn line in depicting Laker's
dilemma: while life has been unjust to him, he's also rigid and unforgiving. The
book reveals these characteristics in a sympathetic larger context, thereby allowing
readers to understand Laker's feelings but also to forgive his family before he him-
self can. The coincidence that results in Laker's rediscovery of a tragedy from his
childhood (his birth father's abuse of his mother and his mother's subsequent
placement of Laker with a friend for several months) is unfortunately heavy-handed,
and it's not really worth the plot point-Laker's gradual settling and healing are
sufficient unto themselves to make this a thoughtful and understanding novel of
impending adulthood. DS
BUDIANSKY, STEPHEN 
The World According to Horses: How They Run, See, and
Think. 
Holt, 2000 
101p illus. and with photographs
ISBN 0-8050-6054-5 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Young readers not ready for Budiansky's adult book The Nature of Horses will be
intrigued by this insight into the history and behavior of the ever-popular equine.
Brief chapters treat topics ranging from herd relationships ("Horse Society") to
training ("Horse Smarts") to physical mechanics ("Designing the Ultimate Run-
ning Machine"). The book is clear and straightforward throughout, providing
diagrams as well as photographs and offering some usefully non-anthropocentric
views of evolution and behavior that will enrich many horsey youngsters' under-
standing; particularly useful is each chapter's subsection on "How Do We Know?",
which outlines the research that has led to these conclusions. There are a few
glitches (when making claims for the importance of pitch in sound communica-
tion, the book conveniently ignores the high-pitched and challenging squeal, and
some of the diagrams are problematic), and it's too bad Budiansky didn't include
a more extensive bibliography so that the research mentioned in the text could be
properly cited, but there's a blend of scientific methodology and general animal
appreciation here that makes this an engaging approach. This would make a ter-
rific complement to Hope Ryden's more individual behavioral observations in
Wild Horses I Have Known (BCCB 4/99). DS
BYNUM, JANIE 
Otis; written and illus. by Janie Bynum. 
Harcourt, 2000 
36p
ISBN 0-15-202153-1 
$14.00 
R 5-8yrs
Otis may be a pig, but he's not, you know, a pig: he doesn't like to play in the
swamp or the wallow with his porcine brothers and sisters, and he's skeptical about
his parents' assurances that he will someday like the mud ("No matter how hard he
310 
* THE BULLETIN
tried, he just couldn't stand the stuff'). One day Otis meets a frog with a prob-
lem-Little Frog's ball is lost in the mud wallow. Since both Frog and Pig are
uncharacteristically averse to the mud, they work together on a ball-retrieval plan
that keeps everyone out of the slop, and an enduring friendship results. This is a
simple and unassuming story, but there are some quietly unusual touches (Otis'
parents' well-meaning prediction doesn't prove true) and pleasantly confounded
expectations (there's no big mud wallow that induces a change of heart). Bynum's
watercolors, in their springtime palette, depict Otis as a plump and pettable porker,
whose cheerful demeanor marks him as fastidious rather than prissy; in addition to
his personable froggy companion (who sports a fetching pair of shorts), there's a
chirping red bird adding interest by poking his beak into the action on various
spreads. While this may not have the broad appeal of the big ol' mess it could have
provided, the preternaturally clean deserve stories too, and they'll appreciate Otis'
support for their cause. DS
CABRERA, JANE, ad. 
Over in theMeadow; ad. and illus. by Jane Cabrera. 
Holiday
House, 2000 
26p
ISBN 0-8234-1490-6 
$16.95 
R 2-4 yrs
Based on the perennially popular preschool song by the same name, this picture
book shows ten creature mothers leading their countable babies in activities appro-
priate to each species, from jumping (frogs) to buzzing (bees). Cabrera's thick
brushstrokes create inviting background textures, and, despite a slight google-eyed
sameness, her cozily cartoonish animal families contrast appealingly with their set-
ting. The book reinforces the baby count for each spread by situating bold black
numerals in one corner. Two final spreads reiterate all the creatures and their
habitats in a single panorama and then depict the babies on a white background
next to their appropriate numerals. Although the rest of the book begs for group
sharing, the diminutive baby animals and fine details of the final spreads will be
best shared one-on-one. Destined for animal storytimes everywhere, this title de-
serves a prominent place in the menagerie of preschool counting books. KM
CLARKE, JUDITH 
Night Train. Holt, 2000 
[176p]
ISBN 0-8050-6151-7 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-12
This tragic story begins with an account of the funeral of eighteen-year-old Luke
Leman; it's seen first from the point of view of his youngest sister, Naomi, who
doesn't understand what's happened, and then by his teenage sister, Molly, who
understands the what but not the why. The rest of the book follows Luke through
the days before his death as he's dogged by failure: he's been kicked out of two
schools and is failing out of his third, the deputy principal is holding disciplinary
action over his head, and he's such a disappointment to his family that his father
hasn't spoken to him for months. Luke begins to worry that he's losing touch with
reality and going genuinely crazy-why, for instance, does no one else hear the
train that rolls through his Australian town at 2 A.M.? Clarke stacks the deck so
thoroughly against Luke that the credibility strains at the edges (the villainy and
cluelessness of the adults is particularly forced), but the point here is the emotional
authenticity of Luke's experience, which the book delivers in spades with Luke's
palpable despair ("You got the feeling you couldn't do it and the feeling became
part of you, as if that was how you were"). In addition to the opening that reveals
MAY 2000 
* 311
Luke's end there are some foreshadowings that suggest tragedy is Luke's fated des-
tiny, and readers will find bitter satisfaction in the ironic comeuppance for an
uncaring world that Luke's death provides. The gratification here is ultimately an
expansion of "I'll be dead and you'll be sorry," but the drama is substantially and
movingly played out; Luke will be recognizable to many teens. DS
COHEN, DANIEL 
The Impeachment of William Jefferson Clinton. 
Twenty-First
Century Books, 2000 
112p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-7613-1711-2 
$23.90 
R Gr. 6-10
For the younger members of this title's intended audience, the impeachment may
mean little more than a half-remembered household conversation, and for older
readers, a collection of disjointed news items. Here Cohen brings order to the
maelstrom of names and images from "one of the strangest, tawdriest, most tem-
pestuous, and most depressing political years" in American history. Opening (as
did the Lewinsky scandal) with the "Drudge Report," Cohen backtracks slightly to
deal with Clinton's "Slick Willie" reputation and related character issues, and then
steams full speed ahead with the Linda Tripp sting operation, media disclosures,
political attacks and counterattacks, impeachment proceedings, and the legacy of
the entire affair. The large cast may appear somewhat daunting (an annotated
roster of dramatis personae would have added a nice touch), and Cohen's fiery
language ("battle line," "hatred," "plum job," "drove... opponents into a frenzy")
certainly suggests that dispassionate objectivity takes a back seat to lively narration.
However, the chronology of events is smoothly presented, and issues of national
importance which became part of the public debate (the definition of impeachable
"high crimes," discretion among the media, powers of the Special Prosecutor, ex-
ecutive privilege, etc.) are clearly explained. Skittish adults will be relieved to note
that the infamous blue dress makes only a discreet appearance, the cigar is never
mentioned, and sexual misconduct is cast in the most tepid terms. Kids who want
to follow the paper trail to more explicit detail can refer to the appended bibliogra-
phy. An index, chronology, notes, and photos are also included. EB
COOPER, ILENE 
Absolutely Lucy; illus. by Amanda Harvey. 
Golden Books,
2000 
76p 
(Road to Reading Chapter Books)
Library ed. ISBN 0-307-46502-0 
$10.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-307-26502-1 
$3.99 
R Gr. 1-3
Eight-year-old Bobby "had been shy as long as he could remember"; though fairly
self-sufficient (he genuinely enjoys drawing and reading by himself), he eventually
realizes that he would like to make friends with the new kids across the street but
doesn't know how. Lucy is the dog who leads (actually, pulls) Bobby into two
unexpected friendships in the course of one eventful summer, giving him the expe-
rience he needs to make the first move. The circumstances under which Bobby
begins his gradual emergence from his shell are depicted with humor (a young
cousin who overheard the grownups talking about Lucy-a beagle-informs a
startled Bobby that he is getting an eagle for his birthday) and realism ("Lucy may
have been the best dog in the world, but she wasn't the easiest dog to live with").
Cartoonish black and white illustrations-one per chapter-lend gentle support
to the text's well-paced descriptions of Bobby's adventures. This respectful atten-
tion given to their peer's difficulties and progress will be much appreciated by
newly and almost independent readers. FK
312 
* THE BULLETIN
CURLEE, LYNN 
Liberty; written and illus. by Lynn Curlee. 
Atheneum,
2000 
48p
ISBN 0-689-82823-3 
$18.00 
R 
Gr. 3-8
Curlee retraces the false starts, engineering feats, and logistical challenges that dogged
the Statue of Liberty from her conception at a French dinner party in 1865, through
two decades of fund raising and construction, to her unveiling (amid suffragist
protests) and ongoing conservation and repair. The many techniques that con-
tributed to the sculpture are concisely explained: sculptor Auguste Bartholdi's
repousse method of copper working, the multistep enlargement of the maquette
(model) to its final size, Gustave Eiffel's "curtain wall" solution to the support
armature. "Mother of Exiles," raising her torch over the mouth of the Hudson
River, is just the subject to follow Rushmore (BCCB 3/99) in Curlee's unique
pictorial style. The signature brushwork of his acrylic paintings, smooth as the
icing on a petit four, and the cool shades of gray and blue that dominate his palette
are well-suited to the austere grandeur of the monumental sculpture, while his
streamlined forms and simplified charts clearly convey traditional and innovative
engineering details involved in construction. Trivia fans will delight in the Speci-
fications list (copper thickness, 1/8 of an inch; Liberty's fingernails, 13 x 10 inches),
and report writers in search of further illumination can consult the brief bibliogra-
phy and timeline. This is a more in-depth study than the Maestros' simpler The
Story ofthe Statue ofLiberty (BCCB 4/86), and collections and patrons will benefit
from the additional detail. EB
DAVID, LAWRENCE 
The Land of Hungry Armadillos; illus. by Freidrique
Bertrand. 
Doubleday, 2000 
[32p]
ISBN 0-385-32698-X 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Gus and his sister, Wendy, have a typical sibling relationship-Wendy takes the
good crayons, Gus won't share paper, and it all ends in shouting and tears ("I'll
never be a good brother to that baby!" Gus sneers). An angry Gus draws an imagi-
nary monster, the Zub, to whom he trades his sister in exchange for crayons and
paper. Guilt then overwhelms the boy and he travels to the Zub's land of hungry
armadillos, whom Wendy is employed to feed; by trading himself for Wendy, Gus
performs a selfless act that brings both kids home safely. The initial battle is more
interestingly written than the arbitrarily plotted fantasy and the sentimental rap-
prochement, but the selling-the-sib idea will have real resonance for many young-
sters. Bertrand's art employs deliberately childlike drafting reminiscent of Brian
Karas, with open-mouthed dot-eyed characters prowling through the pages on
spindly legs; an effective and resentful orange pervades the fantasy scenes, and the
Zub is amorphous enough to be spooky yet concrete enough to be real (though
more might have been made of the armadillos themselves). The story isn't up to
the art here, but this is still an inventive take on good old-fashioned sibling rivalry.
DS
DELACRE, LULU 
Salsa Stories; written and illus. by Lulu Delacre. 
Scholastic,
2000 
105p
ISBN 0-590-63118-7 $15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Carmen Teresa is celebrating New Year's Day with family and friends when she
receives a journal as a gift. Everyone in the family has ideas about what she should
MAY 2000 
* 313
write, but Abuelito says, "Stories-ahh, icuentos!"and invites Flor, the housekeeper,
to tell a story of her youth in Guatemala; Abuelito follows with a story of his own
childhood in Cuba. As the day passes in meals and conversation, the other adults
contribute tales of their childhood experiences in their Latino homelands: Argen-
tina, Peru, Puerto Rico, Mexico, etc. Each tale is a "slice of life," reflecting the
teller's culture in memories that include favorite foods, festivals, and mischief-
making. Carmen Teresa resolves to collect the recipes for all the foods mentioned
by her storytelling elders and put them in the journal, entitled Carmen Teresa's
Book of Fantastic Family Recipes (included). Full-page linocuts reflecting the ac-
tion are scattered throughout; strong, smooth curves divide the compositions into
a balanced dance of white and black space. (Smaller linocut decorations are in-
cluded in the recipe section.) Delacre bases her book on family history but never
achieves the storytelling ease of an informal kitchen-table telling of childhood
memories; the tales are well-meaning but stilted and messagy, and the contrivance
of the plot is ultimately too obvious. Still, this can easily be adapted to classroom
use and could act as a catalyst to any number of group projects, including students'
collection of their own family stories. The book includes a glossary of Spanish
words and phrases and a selection of recipes. JMD
DEMAS, CORINNE 
The Disappearing Island; illus. by Ted Lewin. 
Simon,
2000 
32p
ISBN 0-689-80539-X 
$16.00 
R 
5-9 yrs
Carrie's grandmother has planned a special trip for the girl's ninth birthday-a
motorboat ride out into Cape Cod Bay to visit Billingsgate Island, a deserted is-
land town that's now little more than a sand bar that "rises" from the sea at low
tide. As they picnic and gather shells and race along the beach, Grandma tells
Carrie a little about the history of the community and the structures washed away
over years of relentless erosion ("What I love about a place like this is that it re-
minds us that nature can still have its way once in awhile"). Strips of pale, gleam-
ing sand, sun-speckled sea, and massive coal dark fragments of doomed building
foundation stretch out lazily under a cloudless robin's-egg-blue sky, while Carrie's
musing about bygone days on the island are rendered in golden hues familiar to
sunbathers soaking up sun rays on their closed eyelids. Although science teachers
will want to integrate this tale into a unit on tides and erosion, this portrayal of a
loving, vibrant, muscular (and, blessedly, not condescendingly portrayed as cute
or feisty) grandmother, who knows how to keep her reminisces brief and to the
point, could also be a prime selection for Grandparents Day celebrations. An
author's note recaps the history of Billingsgate Island and suggests that lost Atlantis
may have met a similar fate. EB
DE VICQ DE CUMPTICH, ROBERTO 
Bembo's Zoo: An Animal ABC Book; written
and illus. by Roberto de Vicq de Cumptich. 
Holt, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-6382-X 
$17.95 
R Gr. 3-7
This is another in the category of books using the alphabet as a pivot for visual play
(like Pelletier's The Graphic Alphabet, BCCB 12/96, or Johnson's Alphabet City,
11/95) rather than as teaching device: the Bembo of the title is actually Bembo the
font, and the zoo is a collection of creatures created solely by letters in that font
(the A, for instance, constitutes the antelope's head, an upside-down e its ears and
horn). The rules aren't hugely strict, allowing for rotation, inversion, and repeti-
314 
* THE BULLETIN
tion, upper case and lower case, convenient overlap, font-familial variation, and
added dots for eyes. The results, though, are intricate and impressive (the serif use
is especially clever): the ibis' feathery adornment of Bs sprouts out of a sinewy
double-S body perched on multiple-I legs and feet, a net of interlocking Ws cre-
ates some dandy owl wings, and the quail's topknot feather is capably suggested by
the tail of the Q. (The book playfully admits the difficulty of X, simply following
the W of Wolf with a rearrangement and reversed black-and-white midsection
entitled "X-ray Wolf".) Bold design is the word throughout, with vibrant orange
and Kelly green bouncing off each other while black and cream balance out the
battle; the stylized architecture of the curving lines is intriguingly reminiscent of
Northwest Coast Indian art. The execution sometimes falls a bit short in verisi-
militude (some animals, such as the koala, wouldn't be recognizable without their
captions), and some of the background designs tip the spreads into the over-flashy,
but this is a collection of graphic excitement that'll inspire some creative emula-
tion. DS
DITERLIZZI, TONY Jimmy Zangwow's Out-of-This-World Moon Pie Adventure;
written and illus. by Tony DiTerlizzi. 
Simon, 2000 
40p
ISBN 0-689-82215-4 
$16.00 
Ad 
5-9 yrs
Two classic themes of children's literature-snack foods and space travel-come
together in this visually arresting tale of one boy's quest for a Moon Pie M and a
glass of milk. After his mother resists the magic of his "pleeaase," Jimmy takes off
in his souped-up soapbox jalopy to wake the slumbering moon and ask him for
one. Jimmy's trials aren't over after the obliging man in the moon gives him one
thousand Moon Pies ("Gadzooks! A whole year's supply!"), however; while Jimmy
is scooping up his beverage from the Milky Way, he encounters the monstrous
Grimble Grinder and consequently crashes on Mars. There he shares his Moon
Pies with nine-hundred ninety-nine mechanistic Mars-men on wheels and, finally,
gives the very last one to the ravenous Grimble Grinder to stop his stomach from
growling. The only problem that remains is how to get home in time for dinner,
but Jimmy's new friends find a way (the solution involves Moon Pie wrappers and
a really big burp) and the hungry spaceboy finally gets his just desserts. Though
the text of this somewhat lanky story has a lot of aural allure, it is the showy gouache,
watercolor, and colored pencil visuals of this fantasy adventure that really bring it
home. Their soft-focus photorealism lends a serene rightness to DiTerlizzi's man
in the moon and complements the understated nostalgia for the baby-boomer child-
hood evoked by the milk bottles and other details in the uncluttered compositions.
Some of the rambling text may be left on the plate, but hungry readers will gobble
up the pie-in-the-sky illustrations. FK
DUFFY, TRENT 
Turning Point Inventions: The Clock; illus. by Toby Welles and
with photographs. 
Atheneum, 2000 
80p
ISBN 0-689-82814-4 
$17.95 
R 
Gr. 5-9
In five chronologically organized, largely nontechnical chapters, Duffy explores
the invention and perfection of timepieces and how they both reflect and influence
civilization's ever-growing concern with time. Non-Western cultural contribu-
tions to timekeeping are addressed, and plenty of color photographs of original
clocks and reproductions demonstrate visually how the elegant simplicity of the
sundial gave way to the complexity of later models such as the monumentally sized
MAY 2000 
* 
315
eleventh-century Chinese Heavenly Clockwork and John Harrison's seaworthy
chronometer. Readers interested primarily in the sociological and historical as-
pects of telling time will not be daunted by an overload of technical detail within
the text, but tinkerers who would prefer to dissect the clock's innards will profit
from Welles' foldout charts of the gears and escapements of various movements.
This accessible and thorough treatment should be welcomed by students in search
of an unusual topic for the ubiquitous "invention report." An index and list for
further reading are included. EB
EFAW, AMY 
Battle Dress. HarperCollins, 2000 
[240p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028411-0 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027943-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-10
See this month's Big Picture, p. 303, for review.
ERNST, LISA CAMPBELL 
Goldilocks Returns; written and illus. by Lisa Campbell
Ernst. 
Simon, 2000 
34p
ISBN 0-689-82537-4 
$16.00 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
Years after "all that dreadful trouble with the bears," Goldilocks is a reformed
character, remorseful about her past and devoted to protecting people from un-
wanted intruders. In an attempt at reparation, she performs some improvements
on the bears' cottage, putting locks on their door, stocking up their cabinets with
health food, and redecorating their interiors with throw pillows and fringe. Un-
fortunately, Goldi's catharsis is the bears' nightmare-until a young blonde girl
with a promising air of mischief approaches the cottage seemingly bent on a spot
of familiar home-wrecking. This doesn't have the coherent imagination of Ernst's
revisionist Little Red Riding Hood (BCCB 10/95); the story dithers around word-
ily, providing no character to root for, and the art's undifferentiated tones of lav-
ender and beige make the sometimes cluttered compositions slightly monotonous.
Ernst's round figures have an endearingly toylike gemiitlichkeit, however, and
youngsters may still find the out-of-folktale experience a diverting one. DS
FLEISCHMAN, PAUL 
Cannibal in the Mirror; illus. with photographs by John
Whalen. 
Twenty-First Century, 2000 
6 4p
ISBN 0-7613-0968-3 
$23.90 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Excerpts from the writings of missionaries, explorers, and early anthropologists
who viewed other cultures through the condescending eyes of "superior" (i.e.
Western) civilization are divided here by topic: youth, courtship and marriage,
family and society, recreation, appearance, beliefs, and old age and death. Each
brief passage is accompanied by a color photo on the opposing page, offering a
contemporary scene that seems to reflect the writer's meaning, applied to a decid-
edly mainstream American here-and-now. Some of the juxtapositions are uncan-
nily on target. A 1979 observer of Arnhem Land in Australia notes, "Many of the
blood feuds of the past were the result of a mark of disrespect towards a clan's
designs or the theft of a pattern"; Whalen offers a photo of a gang tag cross-out on
the slats of a chain link fence in San Diego. Not all entries, though, are equally apt
or clever. The scene of video arcade play doesn't equate with a "heathen boy's"
hunting practice, which directly prepared him for a life task, nor does the aged
gentleman in a wheelchair outside a Lubbock nursing home fairly compare with
316 
* THE BULLETIN
his Hottentot counterparts who were abandoned in the desert "in a little hut pre-
pared for the purpose." Photos are crisp and serviceable, but almost exclusively-
and unnecessarily-reflective of white-middle class American culture. Still this
gallery of pie eaters, mudwrestlers, bungee jumpers, debutantes, and frat boys is
guaranteed to spark lively discussion as these modern tribes bear the burden of
comparison with cultures once considered more primitive than their own. EB
FRANK, E.R. Life Is Funny. 
DK Ink, 2000 
[272p]
ISBN 0-7894-2634-X 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 9-12
Eleven teenagers tell their own individual stories over the course of seven years.
It's difficult to tease out the connections here; there are a lot of characters, and they
all have their own messy, complicated lives. The players are young adults in the
grip of what they cannot control-violence, lust, grief, love, poverty, despair-
and their battle for autonomy is both harrowing and tender. The interwoven
voices are distinct (although sometimes the undifferentiated "I" narration is con-
fusing), each one carrying its own burden. Muslim Sonia strains to remain devout
in permissive America; golden boy Drew's clean-cut facade hides a brutal father
and a battered mother. Grace escapes her compulsive, controlling mother by tak-
ing advantage of her own beauty, and Eric escapes and enriches his life with sketches
that may well be his salvation. Philosophical Gingerbread falls hard for the formi-
dable Keisha, and the account of their romantic, enduring, and highly charged
sexual relationship is related with adolescent heat. The stories are told from varied
cultural perspectives, the narrators informally addressing the reader directly. The
language is poetic street, which suits the fierce tenderness of much of this novel.
Throughout each tale runs a thread of hope that ties the characters' lives and all the
lives they touch into one intricate, cohesive design. JMD
GAMMELL, STEPHEN 
Twigboy; written and illus. by Stephen Gammell. 
Silver
Whistle/Harcourt, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-15-202137-X 
$16.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Lucky Twigboy: he's saved from a terrible fate at the claws of the Snackerpinchers
of Weedland when a rock tumbles on through the marauding insects. In turn,
Twigboy saves the rock from drowning when it plummets into the swamp, where-
upon Rockwell and Twigboy become friends. They then enjoy a visit to Twigboy's
house and an adventurous escape from a rainstorm on the wings of a Quailskeeter;
finally they decide to return to Weedland to "show those bugs who's boss!" Plotwise,
this moves from Gammellianly offbeat to just plain out of rhythm; the individual
events don't have much focus, the friendship doesn't develop, and the ending
(wherein the two embark on their invasion ofWeedland) will leave audiences won-
dering if they missed part of the book. Youngsters may, however, find the semi-
surreal disjointedness familiar from various televised clay animatronics (Twigboy
would fit well into an episode of Gumby), and there's a certain deadpan humor to
the enterprise that might tickle some kids. The mixed-media art gives the cheer-
fully phallic Twigboy an engaging presence; with his less open mien, the spud-like
Rockwell is harder to know. Gammell's other creatures offer fantastical interest as
well (Twigboy's gnarled old Granma and Grandpa provide Twigboy with a fine
family tree), and his free-flowing pastel-smudged landscapes have an otherworldly
MAY 2000 
* 317
natural drama. If you're looking for a little matter-of-fact weirdness, this has more
than you can shake a stick at. DS
GODWIN, LAURA 
Barnyard Prayers; illus. by Brian Selznick. 
Hyperion,
2000 
[3 2p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2302-X 
$15.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0355-X 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Eighteen poems provide nighttime prayers for the farmer and a succession of ani-
mals, some official farm residents (the cow, the sheep, the pig) and some not (the
gnat, the fox, the sparrow). While a few of the poems aren't much more than
filler, Godwin has a nice line in inventive phrasing ("I am just a woolly sheep/
Please help me count myself to sleep"-"The Sheep's Prayer") and gently lilting
rhyme that avoids the sing-songy trap while pacing steadily towards bedtime. The
illustrations put a story to the collection: a young boy in a city apartment plays
with his farm toys (and his real cat) before bed, that farm world then becomes a
reality in which the pajama-clad boy romps, and finally the boy falls asleep in his
bed with his farm toys scattered about him. Unfortunately, the colors (and not
just of the toys) are exaggerated and garish, and the draftsmanship is often stiff and
clumsy, considerably reducing the animals' natural appeal. This is still a cozy and
inviting collection, however, that should lull young farmers into hitting the hay.
DS
GOLD, ALISON LESLIE 
A Special Fate: Chiune Sugihara: Hero of the
Holocaust. Scholastic, 2000 
[160p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-590-39525-4 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Chiune Sugihara was the Japanese ambassador to Lithuania during World War II.
His tenure might have been unremarkable, save for one thing: his compassion for
Jewish refugees fleeing the Nazis. With the encouragement of his wife and chil-
dren, and against the express orders of the Japanese government, Sugihara wrote
thousands of visas allowing Jewish refugees to exit Europe. Gold gives a sensible
overview of Sugihara's life before he entered diplomatic service, then concentrates
on the time he spent in Lithuania, his recognition of the desperate plight of the
Jews, and his decision to help as many as he could. For background and context,
the author tells the stories of two refugee children, Masha Bernstein and Solly
Ganor, following them through the war and describing Sugihara's influence on
their fates. Sugihara often questioned whether or not his actions had any positive
results; his question was answered in 1968, when he was contacted by the Israeli
Embassy and subsequently reunited with some of those who had survived because
of his willingness to act ("It is estimated that Consul Sugihara issued 6,000 Japa-
nese transit visas. An estimated 40,000 descendants of his visa recipients, now
known as 'Sugihara Survivors,' are alive because of his extraordinary courage").
The book suffers from careless editing, but the inherent drama comes through
regardless. Interviews with Bernstein and Ganor, as well as with Yukiko Sugihara,
Chiune's widow, lend an immediacy to this account; specific notes and references
are not included. Mochizuki's picture book Passage to Freedom: The Sugihara
Story (BCCB 9/97) introduced younger readers to Sugihara; older readers will
appreciate this more in-depth look. JMD
318 
* 
THE BULLETIN
GOODMAN, JOAN ELIZABETH 
Peregrine. Houghton, 2000 
[24 0p]
ISBN 0-395-97729-0 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Readers of Goodman's The Winter Hare (BCCB 2/97), set amid the civil war in
twelfth-century England, will recall the protagonist Will Belet's friendship with
lively Edith. Now fifteen, and a rich widow, Lady Edith determines to escape the
suit of a man she loathes by setting out on a pilgrimage to the holy lands. Already
traveling with an entourage (and meeting up with her brother the monk), she also
takes on a mysterious Welsh girl, Rhiannon, who seeks succor but refuses to yield
her independence. Traveling through places she'd only dreamed about-Paris,
Provence, Rome, the Holy Land--opens up Edith's view of the world, but it also-
especially when aided by the nudgings of insightful Rhiannon-encourages her to
face the losses and possibilities in her own life. There's a rich pageantry of travel-
ogue here that young medievalists will relish; Goodman (who, in her note, cheer-
fully admits to a bit of ahistoricism) peoples the pages with historical figures such
as Eleanor of Aquitaine and Margery Kempe. Unfortunately, the journey narra-
tive sometimes trudges along aimlessly, merely bridging from event to event, and
the romanticism thins rather than enhances the atmosphere (Rhiannon, for in-
stance, is a clich6d Celtic princess, whose fey wisdom isn't enough to make her a
full character) and sits oddly with some of the text's didacticism. Nor is the cli-
mactic revelation of the source of Edith's internal hauntings (her grief for her dead
child) particularly satisfying or well prepared. This has got all the attractions of
the Society for Creative Anachronism, however, and those to whom palfreys and
troubadours spell a good time will want to ride with Edith. DS
GREENE, ELLN, ad. 
The Little Golden Lamb; illus. by Rosanne Litzinger. 
Clarion,
2000 
32p
ISBN 0-395-71526-1 
$15.00 
R 
4-8 yrs
A Hungarian version of the familiar tale of "The Golden Goose" features a flute-
playing shepherd boy and a lamb with golden fleece. The lamb causes everyone
who touches it or one another to stick together, and before long the animal has a
country chorus line following after the boy. A princess (who hasn't laughed in
years) sees the "merry procession" out her window and laughs, which "made the
little lamb so glad that it shook everything and everyone off its back." Greene
knows the value of a strong storytelling voice, and, while the text is somewhat
wordy, it is rhythmic enough for reading or telling to groups. Litzinger's watercol-
ors have a simple grace; the pastel palette is transparent and airy, and the prepon-
derance of soft, circular shapes gives the compositions a sense of cozy familiarity.
The parade of dancers and repetitive language add opportunities for some lively
storytime antics. JMD
GREENSTEIN, ELAINE 
Dreaming: A Countdown to Sleep; written and illus. by Elaine
Greenstein. 
Levine/Scholastic, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-439-06302-7 
$15.95 
Ad 
2-4 yrs
The count starts with "Ten silent houses, everyone sleeping" and moves through
scenic details of the nighttime landscape (airborne leaves, shining stars, lilies in the
pond, etc.) until finally we run out of numbers and the moon shines down on a
child drifting off to sleep. The items in the countdown seem randomly selected,
with little connection to each other or to the sleeping child; nor is there any kind
MAY 2000 
* 
319
of rhyme or cumulation to pull the text together. The visuals are much more
successful: white text shines out of midnight-blue pages, with the relevant nu-
meral formed by a constellation of colored stars, opposite luminous night scenes.
The gouache on monoprint technique gives a homey and well-scrubbed texture
(occasionally reminiscent of scratchboard) to the resonant palette. Additional ap-
peal comes from each spread's foreshadowing of the next page's countees, so that
the illustration for "Four wet peaches, ripe on stems" also displays the three red
foxes who will star in the next spread. The aimlessness of the countdown keeps
this from being a serious challenge to Molly Bang's classic Ten, Nine, Eight and
other stellar bedtime books, but your sleepyheads may still be drawn to this dreamy
nighttime world. DS
HAHN, MARY DOWNING 
Promises to the Dead. Clarion, 2000 
202p
ISBN 0-395-96394-X 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Dying runaway slave Lydia secures at knifepoint the promise of a twelve-year-old
white boy, narrator Jesse Sherman, to take her son Perry to Baltimore where, she is
certain, his aunt Polly Baxter (sister to slave owner Peregrine Baxter, who fathered
Perry) will honor her recently deceased brother's verbal agreement to free Lydia
and Perry upon his death. Perry's family tree becomes even more gnarled as the
boys take to the road and dodge slave catcher Abednego Botfield (who turns out to
be Perry's maternal grandfather), meet and then abandon Aunt Polly (who won't
have anything to do with Perry after all), and finally discover Perry's maternal
grandmother and aunt (also runaway slaves). Perry at last is comfortably launched
with a welcoming set of relatives onto the road to freedom, and Jesse can return
home to his own testy, eccentric Uncle Philemon and Philemon's slave cook Delia
(who, incidentally, is Lydia's aunt). Contrivances and lucky breaks shadow the
boys from Baltimore into Confederate Virginia at the outset of the Civil War, and
although Jesse relates their adventures in an engaging, down-homey voice, Perry
remains largely withdrawn and unknowable throughout. An afterword comments
on Maryland's status as a Union state with Confederate sympathizers and on the
Baltimore anti-federalist riot of 1861. EB
HARTWICK, HARRY 
Hurry!; ad. and illus. by Emily Arnold McCully. 
Browndeer/
Harcourt, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-15-201579-5 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
It's an idyllic day in middle America, 1916, when ten-year-old Tom Elson en-
counters an extraordinary creature at the blacksmith shop. The unusual and re-
putedly vocal farivox peers out at Tom from his crate, and "suddenly he wanted
the farivox very much." Exhorted by the farivox to hurry, Tom runs to acquire the
ten dollars the farivox's owner demands for purchase, but when he returns to the
blacksmith shop farivox and owner have gone, never to be seen again. This doesn't
quite hit its mark as parable or as story: the connection (made in the opening and
closing) between the farivox and human-obliterated species such as the passenger
pigeon is tenuous, and the parallel works oddly in the plot (is human possessive
longing supposed to be the solution, and are we supposed to buy endangered spe-
cies?); the story about something that didn't quite happen doesn't muster up enough
impact to compensate for the action missed. McCully's adaptation of Hartwick's
text (originally published in 1971) is smooth, though, and the notion of the un-
usual animal is enticing. The sun-dappled watercolors show a dreamy Music Man
320 
* THE BULLETIN
early America, with the shapes given a slightly pebbly texture by the dabbly brush-
strokes. If there's anything that'll get kids involved in retrospective yearning, it's
vanished species, so this may strike a chord with youngsters prepped for the larger
context. DS
HEIDBREDER, ROBERT 
I Wished for a Unicorn; illus. by Kady McDonald
Denton. 
Kids Can, 2000 
32p
ISBN 1-55074-543-3 
$14.95 
R 
3-7 yrs
"I wished for a unicorn./ I wished so hard/ That I found a unicorn/ In my back-
yard." Well, actually, the text makes it pretty clear that what this little girl has
found is a dog with a cowlick ("He didn't have a mane./ His tail wagged around./
He chomped on a bone/ Dug up from the ground"), but she seems perfectly satis-
fied to accept this scruffy substitute. Together they venture out of the bare urban
backyard depicted in the creamy gouache illustrations into a magical wood colored
by the child's imagination, across a moat, and into a castle, where they continue
their rhymed adventures until naptime. Although the dreamy Sendakian grin of
the child is appropriate to this tribute to imagination, the unlikely plume of hair
that serves for a horn on the amorphous and sketchily drawn "unicorn" is discon-
certing, the rhythm and rhyme sometimes feel a little forced, and the text is tad
overlong. However, lookers on will enjoy the peripheral actions and facial expres-
sions in some of the engaging illustrations depicting these adventures, and they
may be inspired to make the best of the limitations of their own menagerie. FK
HORT, LENNY, ad. 
The Seals on the Bus; illus. by G. Brian Karas. 
Holt,
2000 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-5952-0 
$15.95 
R 
3-5 yrs
It's not that this bus doesn't have the traditional wheels; they're just not the main
point of this particular outing of the venerable jingle. Notable instead are the
riders: seals (which go "ERRP, ERRP, ERRP"), geese ("HONK, HONK,
HONK"), monkeys ("EEEEH, EEEEH, EEEEH"), and so on; the driver is a tiger
("ROAR, ROAR, ROAR"). Also on the bus is a human family, parents and two
kids apparently traveling to the big party advertised on a signpost, who respond to
their busmates with delight (the kids) and alarm (the parents). The tacked-on
story (travel to the party) is pretty slight, appearing largely in the illustrations, but
there are a multitude of entertaining sound effects just begging to be made by a
roomful of mouthy little animals. Karas' mixed-media art isn't as suited to big
groups as the text, but it's got some diverting details and enjoyable chaos as the
animals cavort about the bus. Fanciful use of newspaper (as buildings and as,
reasonably enough, newspaper) and solid swaths of construction paper add texture
to the energetic illustrations. The voyage of a lifetime this isn't, but it's a loud and
happy road trip. DS
HUBBELL, PATRICIA 
Bouncing Time; illus. by Melissa Sweet. 
HarperCollins,
2000 
[26p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-17377-2 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-17376-4 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
1-3 yrs
Hubbell's sprightly text begins a toddler's energetic day by asking, "How will you
bounce/ today, baby?/ Bounce! Bounce! Bounce!/ Will you bounce/ like a grass-
MAY 2000 
* 
321
hopper,/ cricket, or frog?/ Or a hoppity toad/ on his log in the bog?" After bounc-
ing inside ("Will you bounce like your clown/ doing tricks on his mat?/ Like your
bouncy-bounce puppy?/ Like your pouncy-pounce cat?"), parent and child take to
the zoo, where (surprise!) the animals are bouncing, too: "Hippo will bounce./
Elephant, too./ Oh, the whole zoo will bounce/ when they see bouncing you!"
The simple text is somewhat repetitive, and the final evening scenes lose momen-
tum, but there's still energy aplenty here. Sweet's acrylics employ textury brush-
strokes and informal rough edges to anchor the planes of circus color, providing a
ballast to the sunny art. Useful books for toddler storytimes are difficult to find,
and your bouncing bouncing bouncing toddlers will be thrilled to bounce along
with this one. EAB
ISAACS, ANNE 
Torn Thread. Scholastic, 2000 
188p
ISBN 0-590-60363-9 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Sisters Eva and Rachel Buchbinder are prisoners in a Nazi labor camp in Czecho-
slovakia during World War II in this adapted-from-life fictional memoir. (Isaacs
received much of this story from her mother-in-law, who is apparently the model
for the fictionalized Eva.) Eva's descriptions of the constant struggle for survival,
the choices made in order to, in her father's words, "keep Rachel and you alive one
more hour," are a harrowing list of soul-stealing inhumanities. Amidst the struggle
to withstand the grinding monotony of extensive work days, physical and spiritual
hardships, and brutal treatment by the Nazis, the two adolescent girls cling to one
another, to their faith, and to the hope of reunion with their father and family.
Eva's credibility is reinforced by minute details: smells, textures, and physical
particulars culled from what seems like memory. Isaacs successfully captures both
the boredom and horror of the labor camp, as well as the increased suffering that is
the lot of the vanquished. The author eschews epic drama: small choices, small
escapes, small moments make up this accessible survival story. An abrupt epilogue
tells what happened after the sisters were released from the camp, and a final note
gives information on the real Eva Buchbinder. JMD
JOHNSON, DAVE, ed. 
Movin': Teen Poets Take Voice; illus. by Chris
Raschka. 
Orchard, 2000 
52p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-30258-X 
$15.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-531-07171-5 
$6.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Teen poets who weren't intrigued by the recent angst-driven collection of poems
by their peers, Watson's The Pain Tree (BCCB 4/00), may be interested in this
similar but more upbeat collection of works by young writers. Johnson has as-
sembled poetry from young adults involved with New York Public Library's Po-
etry-in-the-Branches project, and the poems range widely in subject, from thoughts
about relationships to meditations on lost childhood. The range of writing quality
is not as great, with many of the poems in the collection exhibiting predictably
amateurish execution. The bold lines in Raschka's black-and-white spot art occa-
sionally clash with the serious tone of the poetry, as when he accompanies the
short poem called "Simplicity" ("If home is where love is/ and love is where trust
is/ I guess I'm homeless") with a drawing of a house-shape filled with a radiating
heart. The arrangement of poems occasionally detracts from their impact, as when
one of the darkest poems in the collection, "Comfort," about a miscarriage, is
immediately followed with the title poem, "Movin'," a bouncy poem about "fly-
322 
* THE BULLETIN
ing outta here." Despite these shortcomings, young adult readers interested in
seeing their lives reflected in print may find worthy mirrors in the subject matter
covered here. KM
JOHNSON, PAUL BRETT 
Bearhide and Crow; written and illus. by Paul Brett
Johnson. 
Holiday House, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1470-1 
$16.95 
R 7-10yrs
Amos Dyer can't pass up a trade; "if it wasn't a button for a bucket lid it was a hat
for a horseshoe," and one day it is his wife's blue-ribbon gourd for Sam Hankins'
("Anything he got from the likes of Sam Hankins wouldn't be worth chicken
teeth") fleabitten bearhide. An escalating series of incidents-mistaken identity,
overheard larceny, and just plain good swapping-leads Amos to a sack of gold
and Sam to sleepless nights under his regained bearhide. Oft-encountered folktale
elements and bits of Appalachian lore combine in this humorous tale. The human
figures are sometimes awkwardly drafted, but the pencil and acrylic illustrations
have a casual style that suits the swapping silliness. Although the colors are occa-
sionally muddily blended, the pointillist brushstrokes, reminiscent of Neil Waldman
(especially in the skyscapes), give a soft sense of diffused light to the compositions.
All in all, this is a good-natured tale of tables turned and wicked ways avenged that
will find a secure place on the readaloud or storytelling shelf. JMD
KEHRET, PEG 
Don't TellAnyone. 
Dutton, 2000 
[144p]
ISBN 0-525-46388-7 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 5-8
Megan is concerned for the feral cats she's been feeding when a sign appears an-
nouncing the forthcoming construction of apartment buildings on the vacant site
the cats inhabit. She unwisely tells her worries to Shane Turner, who is the brother-
in-law of the construction company's owner, and whose plans to steal money from
the construction business and disappear in the company's hot air balloon will be
foiled if Megan can succeed in postponing the construction to find homes for the
cats. The point-of-view alternates between Megan and Shane until Kehret inter-
jects a third perspective, that of a teenage girl named Lacey who is involved in a
deadly hit-and-run accident which occurs by the vacant lot while Megan is feeding
the cats. Megan doesn't know the identity of the driver, so when she finds a
threatening note telling her "If you want the cats to live, don't tell anyone," she
takes it to mean that she should stay quiet about the accident, when in fact the
note is from Shane, warning her to stay quiet about the cats. The writing nearly
bursts at the seams with plot twists and shifts of perspective, but Kehret draws
Megan as a sympathetic heroine through her dedication to saving the cats. Unfor-
tunately, Megan's personality flattens into action figure as the drama boils over;
Shane kidnaps her in the balloon, but she avoids his attempt to murder her, steals
his getaway car, informs the authorities, and finds good homes for all the cats.
There's far too much going on in this slim volume, and the impossibly neat, up-
beat finale recasts the dramatic events in a cartoonish light. Readers looking for a
suspenseful tale that successfully weaves together multiple viewpoints (including
an appealing heroine's) would be better off picking up a copy of Cooney's Flight
#116 is Down (BCCB 2/92). KM
MAY 2000 
* 323
KITAMURA, SATOSHI 
Me and My Cat?; written and illus. by Satoshi
Kitamura. 
Farrar, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-374-34906-1 
$16.00 
R 5-8 yrs
The young narrator wakes up to find that he has switched personalities with his
cat: "I rushed to the bathroom and looked at myself in the mirror. Leonardo, my
cat, was staring back at me. But it wasn't him inside. It was me-Nicholas!"
Everyone reacts differently to Nicholas-the-cat than they do to Nicholas-the-boy,
but Nick copes fairly well with the challenges of feline life. Leonardo-the-boy's
behavior after his return from school indicates that Leo is not coping quite as well,
but that's okay because it results in cartoon panels of a boy behaving like a cat that
are sure to elicit snorts of laughter from young viewers. Kitamura's text is deadpan
funny, and his line-and-watercolor illustrations reflect the offbeat, understated hu-
mor. The varying sizes of the framed illustrations add interest to the overall book
design, and a slightly skewed sense of perspective results in an energetic line that
adds an edgy spark of life to the proceedings. Adult readers will appreciate the
Renaissance influence in both the characters' names and the paintings hanging on
the walls, and young listeners with a taste for the disconcerting will find their
appetites sated here. JMD
KURTZ, JANE 
Faraway Home; illus. by E. B. Lewis. 
Gulliver/Harcourt,
2000 
32p
ISBN 0-15-200036-4 
$16.00 
R 4-8 yrs
When Desta hears that her father is going home to visit his emayay, her grand-
mother, she doesn't want him to go ("Ethiopia is so far away"). He tries to bring
his homeland closer to her by describing his boyhood there, which Desta finds
strange compared to her everyday life. Haunting watercolor illustrations make it
easier for the viewer than it is for Desta to imagine the Ethiopia her father tries to
evoke, where one sees "the green-gray mountains" and where "thousands of fla-
mingos flap in a pink cloud." Desta tries, but instead of "the lonely sound of
cowbells in the hills," she "hears the wind chime hanging from the front porch."
Delicately realistic spot art effectively isolates images that often provide a counter-
point to facing-page illustrations, as when Desta's shoes are lined up under the text
to balance the picture of her father walking barefoot, chewing on a stick of purple
sugarcane. Desta's physical attempt to get in touch with her father's experience by
walking home from school sans shoes will probably make sense to young listeners
who are unmoved by the more abstract message of the story: "He will come back.
Until he does, she can hold his stories in her heart." Though Desta's turnaround
at the end of the story is less realistic than her previous worries and resistance, the
steps she takes to reconcile the faraway and the familiar are worth following. FK
LESTER, JULIUS 
Pharaoh's Daughter: A Novel ofAncient Egypt. Silver Whistle/
Harcourt, 2000 
182p
ISBN 0-15-201826-3 
$17.00 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Lester pushes the Biblical envelope with this fictionalized account of the story of
Almah, devoted sister of Mosis, who finds her calling as priestess in dedication to
the Egyptian gods. Almah witnesses the pharaoh's daughter Meryetamun's find-
ing of the baby Mosis in the reeds, where he has been hidden from the soldiers
324 
* THE BULLETIN
slaughtering Hebrew babies. Meryetamun takes the baby to the palace, accompa-
nied by Almah and her mother. At the court of the pharaoh, Almah embraces
Egyptian ways, dedicating herself fervently to the Egyptian gods. Almah narrates
Part One, flashing back to her arrival at the palace to help care for Mosis, her being
adopted by the pharaoh because of her resemblance to his beloved dead queen,
and her recognition of her calling as an Egyptian priestess. Part Two is narrated by
Mosis, who relates his upbringing in the palace, his confusion about his place in
life, and his desperate flight after killing an Egyptian. Lester's two main characters
are seeking their spiritual path, but they are not the only ones; secondary charac-
ters seek their way as well, making this not just an imaginative piece of historical
fiction but an intriguing look at the human need for spirituality. Almah is com-
plex and fully realized, her personality jelling at her recognition that she is more
Egyptian than Hebrew; Mosis' character is harder to grasp, as he is nebulous even
to himself. Historical information blends unobtrusively with the action, and Lester
includes an introduction, an author's note, and a bibliography. More than the
story of the babe in the bulrushes, this is the story of two disparate individuals on
a personal quest for the divine. In the end Almah knows her path; Mosis must still
find his. JMD
LEVINE, GAIL CARSON 
The Wish. 
HarperCollins, 2000 
[208p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027901-X 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027900-1 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Eighth-grader Wilma has but one consuming desire-to be popular. She wishes
not just to replace a couple of friends lost through normal attrition of a school
career, but to bask in the hands-down popularity of the privileged set at Claverford
Middle School. A magical old lady on a downtown train grants her wish, and
Wilma suddenly finds herself the center of everyone's adoration, but only within
the school community and only until graduation, three weeks away. Her days of
sleepover- and boyfriend-filled joy are continually tinged with anxiety: how will
people treat her when the magic wears off? Levine offers no clear path out of these
tangled woods, nor folkloric moral to tidy up the ending. Wilma's new friends, of
both the worthy and the shallow ilk, don't exactly dump her, but they keep her at
an uncomfortable arm's length; although Wilma does retain the affection of beau
Jared (whose brother has ably educated him regarding the Rules of Kissing), his
constancy doesn't entirely compensate for her fall from social grace. Levine seems
to break the rules of two genres-Wilma doesn't live as happily ever after as fairy
tales promise, nor does she learn a lesson in relationships that school stories gener-
ally deliver. Readers may be amused by her plight, but they'll probably close the
book scratching their heads. EB
MCDONALD, MEGAN 
Judy Moody; illus. by Peter Reynolds. 
Candlewick,
2000 
160p
ISBN 0-7636-0685-5 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Third-grader Judy Moody lives up to her name in this beginning chapter book.
Judy is moody about the first day of school after summer vacation, moody about
being in a different class with a different teacher, and moody about her autobio-
graphical "Me collage" assignment (she doesn't have anything to put in the "THE
WORST THING THAT EVER HAPPENED TO ME" space). Ably assisted by
MAY 2000 
* 325
best friend Rocky, "pest friend" Frank, and younger brother Stinky, Judy navi-
gates the moody muddy waters of third grade with a fair amount of grace. The
humor is third-grade funny (the establishment of the TP Club requires an initia-
tion that will have readers howling) and Judy, despite (or because of) her many
moods, is a character with sass and style. Each chapter is amiably illustrated with
black-and-white mixed-media (pen and ink, tea, watercolor) full-page and spot art
that extends the friendly feeling of the humorous text. The catchy cutout cover
and overall book design (large fonts, wide leading, generous borders) will appeal to
young readers, and adults will welcome Judy to the readaloud shelf. JMD
MCNAUGHTON, COLIN 
Wish You Were Here (And I Wasn't): A Book ofPoems for
Globe Trotters; written and illus. by Colin McNaughton. 
Candlewick, 2000 
61p
ISBN 0-7636-0271-X $16.99 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Some four dozen poems treat matters ranging from letters home ("The Postcard")
to modes of travel ("I Don't Believe in Aeroplanes") to traveling pitfalls ("I Feel
Sick") and even to some non-travel topics ("Yet Another Poem to Send to Your
Worst Enemy"). McNaughton, one of the most reliably entertaining contempo-
rary poets for kids (Making Friends with Frankenstein, BCCB 4/94, etc.), aims
these verses squarely at the juvenile funnybone with rollicking rhythms, entertain-
ing riffs on known quantities ("Row, Row, Row Your Bath"), clever bits of bath-
room humor (the hero of "Lemmy Was a Pilot" relieves himself over Tennessee),
and opportunities for poetic torture ("Are We Nearly There Yet?" splays the old
refrain out over a vertical double spread that instructs readers to "start reading this
poem right at the beginning of a journey and just carry on and on and on and
on ... "). Characters cavort through the pages in thumbnail vignettes, free-spir-
ited (and, in one case, butt naked) and untrammeled by their travelers' travails; the
soft palette of the watercolors and pencil-smudgy ink line keeps the pop-eyed
monsters amusing rather than scary, and lively speech balloons add still more in-
formality. Eminently suited for shared private snickering or an irreverent public
recitation, these verses will bridge the gap between off-color playground chants
and glossily respectable poetry. DS
MOLLEL, TOLOLWA M., ad. 
Subira Subira; illus. by Linda Saport. 
Clarion,
2000 
32p
ISBN 0-395-91809-X 
$15.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
Set in modern-day Tanzania, this is a version of the traditional tale commonly
known as "The Lion's Whisker." Since their mother died, Tatu is supposed to
take care of her younger brother Maulidi before and after school, but the grieving
and angry Maulidi is less than cooperative. Tatu seeks assistance from MaMzuka,
"a mysterious spirit woman," who tells her that in order to help her brother, Tatu
must pluck three whiskers from a sleeping lion and bring them to MaMzuka.
After overcoming fear and impatience, Tatu gets the whiskers, only to be told that
she can help her brother the same way she got the whiskers-slowly, and with
patience. Mollel has made this tale accessible to youthful listeners with a contem-
porary setting and more child-centered orientation. The storytelling is precise,
dramatic, and direct, with just enough backstory to make the characters' motiva-
tions understandable. Saport's pastels are reminiscent of Ed Young's in their use
of highlights to add precision and of John Steptoe in the drafting; her palette is a
rich one, with burnt oranges, pinks, and golds set against or accented by deep
326 
* THE BULLETIN
greens and blues. Text blocks and images balance in compositions that retain a
dramatic sense of mystery; the wise MaMzuka and the yellow-eyed lion are par-
ticularly eerie. Readers-aloud and storytellers will appreciate Mollel's fresh take on
this oft-interpreted tale. Lyrics (in Swahili) and music for the song that Tatu sings
the lion are included, as is a brief glossary. JMD
MORRIS, GERALD 
The Savage Damsel and the Dwarf Houghton, 2000 
213p
ISBN 0-395-97126-8 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 6-10
With this new addition to his novel-length retellings ofArthurian lore (The Squire's
Tale, BCCB 7/98, and The Squire, His Knight, and His Lady, 3/99), Morris turns
his eye (and his pen) to the Lady Lynet, sister of the beauteous Lady Lyonesse who
is besieged at Castle Perle by the lovesick (and apparently psychopathic) Knight of
the Red Lands. Beauty is about all Lyonesse has going for her, and it is Lynet who
is sick at heart about the foolish young men who come to rescue her sister only to
meet their deaths at the hands of the Red Knight. She determines to go to Camelot
and return with a champion to save Lyonesse and prevent additional bloodshed.
Her way to Camelot is smoothed by her encounter with a dwarf named Roger,
who guides her to Arthur's castle, where Lynet is given an unlikely champion, the
so-called Kitchen Knight, Beaumains. Lynet, Roger, and Beaumains head for Castle
Perle, encountering rogue knights, enchantresses, and dangers earthbound and
supernatural. Lynet saves Lyonesse (and any additional knights with a death wish),
restores Roger (who is enchanted) to his true form, and discovers the whereabouts
of the long-lost Lancelot. Oh, and she finds true love, too. The action-packed
pace is punctuated by humor delivered in asides and twists on formal court lan-
guage. Lynet is a capable, tenacious heroine with a sense of the absurd that serves
her (and the reader) very well, even when she thinks she's in love with the pomp-
ous Beaumains. Morris' tongue-in-cheek treatment of a genre for which he feels
obvious affection results in a rare action-fantasy title that crosses age and gender
lines. JMD
NAYLOR, PHYLLIS REYNOLDS 
The Grooming of Alice. 
Karl/Atheneum,
2000 
[22 4p]
ISBN 0-689-82633-8 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
In the summer before high school, Alice continues to thrive. Changing times and
the summer poolside inspire her and friends Pamela and Elizabeth to get particu-
larly interested in appearance, so she's fascinated with her brother Lester's new
girlfriend, Eva, who's a cosmetics saleswoman with never a molecule out of place.
On the emotional front, Alice's adolescence twitches uneasily when she hides a
runaway Pamela in her room and lies to her father about it, leading to a classic
parent-teenager row about trust and obligations; she's also concerned about her
beloved sixth-grade teacher Mrs. Plotkin, who turns up in the hospital where Alice
is a volunteer. The Alice books are becoming a little more obviously steered, and
this is particularly true here: Elizabeth's flirtation with anorexia, the recognition
that Lester's beautiful girlfriend is kind of a superficial pain, and the trio of friends'
attendance at a health and beauty seminar for young women are fairly pointedly
included, and the plot sometimes takes a back seat to the points. Naylor still has a
zesty writing style, however, and the personalities of the three friends remain dis-
tinct and credible as well as being usefully representative; it's also exciting to see
MAY 2000 
* 327
old reliable Alice on the verge of some serious adolescent fireworks, both on the
parental front and on the boyfriend front. (There's also news about her father's
romance with Miss Summers.) Alice has got a lot of reading friends, and they
won't want to miss this new chapter of her life. DS
OPPEL, KENNETH 
Sunwing. 
Simon, 2000 
[272p]
ISBN 0-689-82674-5 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Natural history combines with fantasy in this depiction of inherently different
communities united against a common evil. Shade is a young bat on a quest to
find his father and discover the truth behind the prophetic promise of a goddess,
and his journey unites bats, owls, and other winged creatures despite long-stand-
ing animosity. This sequel to Silverwing (BCCB 2/98) follows Shade and his
friends on a wild flight to false fulfillment of the promise, capture, escape, separa-
tion, danger, and reunion. Oppel's fantasy world is thoroughly engrossing, in-
fused with a sense of night and darkness as a place of safety. Good is embodied in
Shade and his companions; evil is embodied in the horrific visage of Goth, the
cannibal bat. The swift pace, dramatic language, and suspenseful plot will capture
and hold readers from the opening pages; individual characterizations are slim but
viable. Redwall fans and those readers enamored of animal fantasy will find Shade's
exploits both riveting and satisfying. Don't overlook this when searching for a
sophisticated classroom or bedtime readaloud. JMD
PETERS, LISA WESTBERG 
Cold Little Duck, Duck, Duck; illus. by Sam
Williams. 
Greenwillow, 2000 
[32p]
ISBN 0-688-16178-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
1-4yrs
Little Duck shows up a little too early and finds her pond is "stiff and white// And
her feet froze to the ice stuck stuck stuck." She imagines the coming of spring ("She
tucked her head into her feathers to think think think// Of spring and warmer
weather// Of bubbly streams and glassy puddles drink drink drink") and voila!
spring (and a flock of ducks for company) arrives. What carries this unlikely premise
is Peters' playful way with language: rhythm, repetition, some rhyme, and the
echo of action words and descriptions outside the main text combine to make
Little Duck's rush to spring perfectly understandable. Williams' pencil and water-
color art is a cross between Oxenbury and Tafuri, but softer, featuring simple
shapes and compositions and slightly anthropomorphized animals with endearing
expressions. Though the text size is grossly disproportionate to the size of the
illustrations, this is a cheery readaloud sure to be appreciated by a bunch of toddler
storytimers as well as that lap-sitting baby. JMD
PILKEY, DAV 
Ricky Ricotta's Giant Robot; illus. by Martin Ontiveros. 
Blue Sky/
Scholastic, 2000 
[112p]
ISBN 0-590-30719-3 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Ricky Ricotta is a mouse who lives in the mouse metropolis of Squeakyville where,
as a glasses-wearing short kid, he's the target of bullies. His life changes, however,
when he supports the refusal of the monster robot to follow the orders of Dr.
Stinky McNasty and destroy Squeakyville ("Ricky aimed a kickball at the evil doc-
328 
* THE BULLETIN
tor. Ricky kicked as hard as he could"), whereupon the robot becomes Ricky's
new pet/friend, dwelling in his family's garage and defending Ricky from assault.
Dr. McNasty is not thwarted, however, and the robot must go against a giant
lizard in a battle for Squeakyville. This doesn't have the tongue-in-cheek loopiness
of Captain Underpants but instead offers a simple cartoon plot broken up into
digestible chapters. Unfortunately, the plot's a bit too minimal for the length and
the language isn't particularly interesting, so the slender story is prolonged beyond
effective life. Ontiveros' comic-book draftsmanship is vigorous and sturdy, but it
lacks the character and verve of Pilkey's own art. This is lighter on text than the
good Captain's outings, but it's also less bang for the buck; still, baby sci-fi fans
might be reassured by the simplicity, robots, and action here. DS
PINKNEY, 
BRIAN 
Cosmo and the Robot; written and illus. by Brian
Pinkney. 
Greenwillow, 2000 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-15941-9 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-15940-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Cosmo lives on Mars with his bossy older sister, Jewel, their parents, and Rex, a
gentle robot. "One day Rex bumped his head and started acting like a monster...
so Cosmo's father hauled Rex to the asteroid dump." Deprived of Rex ("his best
friend"), Cosmo is at the mercy of overbearing Jewel, but when the siblings run
into trouble seeking rocks for an alpha-proton experiment, it is Cosmo's talent for
inventiveness that comes to the rescue. An African-American family of scientists
colonizing Mars is a unique premise for a picture book, and Pinkney nearly pulls it
off with his matter-of-fact, declarative simplicity. The sibling conflict between
Cosmo and Jewel will strike chords of recognition in similar dyads, and the list of
attachments to Cosmo's Solar System Utility Belt will warm the hearts of utilitar-
ian youngsters. The dialogue is stilted, however, and the final solution to the
conflict between Cosmo and the now-monstrous Rex is less than credible (Cosmo
scares Rex off a ledge with a dinosaur hand shadow). While the human fingers are
disproportionate, Pinkney takes visual advantage of the Martian terrain. Mixed-
media illustrations (scratchboard, Luma dyes, and acrylic paints) of spacecraft,
robots, vehicles, and space suits are sure to inspire space-struck emulators. JMD
PORTE, BARBARA ANN 
If You Ever Get Lost: The Adventures ofJulia and Evan;
illus. by Nancy Carpenter. 
Greenwillow, 2000 
[80p]
ISBN 0-688-16947-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Julia is kindergartner Evan's older sister (there's also baby Clarissa, but she's too
little for headliner status), and the siblings figure largely in one another's lives. It's
Julia who takes charge of the situation when she and Evan are lost in the audience
for their father's marathon, it's Julia who teaches Evan to ride her bicycle in the
park (though she unfortunately neglects to impart the instructions for braking),
but it's Evan who provides a description of the men who steal snakes and supplies
from the pet store. These and six other small adventures provide the short chap-
ters for this gently written family story. Unfortunately, things are a bit too gentle,
lacking the rhythm and effectiveness of Porte's Harry books while rising slightly in
difficulty; this means the book may work best as a sequential family readaloud,
especially if an elder sibling with Julia-status graduates to doing the reading.
MAY 2000 
* 
329
Carpenter's homey black-and-white sketches, with their cozy and realistic disar-
ray, add additional warmth to the book. DS
PRICEMAN, MARJORIE, ad. 
Froggie Went A-Courting; ad. and illus. by Marjorie
Priceman. 
Little, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-316-71227-2 
$13.95 
R 4-6 yrs
The frog's matrimonial prospects have long been a topic of rhyme, but in this
version the song's got some New York attitude, with Froggie riding a taxicab to the
Upper West Side and the wedding party taking place on top of the Statue of Lib-
erty. The adaptation offers drama and tension as well as pageantry: Auntie Rat
doesn't want her niece to marry an amphibian and hopes to stop the wedding, but
she comes to a bad end when a feline guest snaps her up at the reception ("Though
Cat ate rat, there's no denial/ Aunt Rat at last made someone smile"). The rhythms
are sometimes uneven and the syntax labored, but the uptown concept is whimsi-
cal. Priceman's cut-paper and gouache art is more successful, its carnivalesque
palette particularly well-suited to the fanciful verse. The book makes full use of
the large double spreads to squeeze in fisheye views of the city and wall-to-wall
wedding festivities (though there's occasionally a disheveled flavor to the composi-
tions); we may not know Frog or Mouse as well as we'd like, but they're an attrac-
tive couple, seemingly (despite the late Aunt Rat's reservations) well-matched and
happy on their Parisian honeymoon. While this doesn't have the same zing as its
original, it's a cheerful nuptial celebration. DS
RENNISON, LOUISE 
Angus, Thongs and Full-Frontal Snogging: Confessions ofGeor-
gia Nicolson. HarperCollins, 2000 
[25 6p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028871-X 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028814-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 7-12
Brash, heedless, and extremely-sometimes even intentionally-funny, Georgia is
sort of a British version of Naylor's Alice absent mature authorial guidance. In this
time-dated first-person narration (clearly nothing so formal as a diary or any other
written communication), Georgia tells of her daily existence at home (where she's
got an unhousetrained but affectionate younger sister and parents unworthy of
their blossoming daughter), at school (where education is the enemy and uniforms
the blight of her life), and in between (where there's a Sex God working at the
greengrocer's and a boy down the street who's interested in Georgia). With high-
spirited and exhausting intensity Georgia flings herself from one crisis to another,
helplessly authentic and helplessly humorous in her escapades: there's her em-
ployment of the services of a professional kisser whom she drifts into dating, a
relationship helpfully severed by a friend who informs Mr. Kisser that Georgia's a
lesbian; there's her breach with that friend who's embarking on romance with the
Sex God's brother and who can't be forgiven for succeeding with a family member
when Georgia fails. Also authentic is Georgia's brutally dismissive tone towards
adults, imbued with casual youthful cruelty in discussion of appearance and man-
ners. While some adolescents aren't going to be able to find adolescence as funny
as the book makes it, the transatlantic separation will assist readers who need a bit
of distance between themselves and Georgia. The U.S. edition has wisely tucked a
glossary in the back rather than attempting to take the inherent Britishness out of
the book; this means that some references will go over readers' heads, but they'll be
having too much fun to care. DS
330 
* 
THE BULLETIN
RITTER, JOHN H. 
Over the Wall. 
Philomel, 2000 
[320p]
ISBN 0-399-23489-6 
$17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Thirteen-year-old Tyler Waltern doesn't know half of the reasons for his dad's
withdrawn behavior, but he understands that Mr. Waltern blames himself for his
daughter's death, and that guilt has turned him from a landscaper into a "tree-
trimming ghost of a father ... a walking weed-whacker." 
Tyler takes refuge for
the summer with relatives in New York, where he intends to play league baseball
and catch the eye of a scout. His frustrations often explode into rage on the field,
however, and he's tossed from games and finally from the league itself. With the
help of Coach Trioli, a Vietnam veteran with some baggage of his own, and Tyler's
suddenly luscious cousin Breena, Tyler explores family mysteries and finds a non-
violent expression for his strong sense of injustice. When the focus is on the angry
young man who will do anything to win, the tale moves in a blaze; the taming of
Tyler storyline, though, plays out in lengthy digressions padded with layers of
family angst (from pushy, banal Uncle Phil to Dad's anti-war protesting) and
weighty social issues (from Vietnam veteran suicides to the persistence of Civil
War fervor) that stall the momentum. Readers who enjoyed Ritter's rookie novel
Choosing Up Sides (BCCB 6/98) can trust him to deliver exciting on-field action,
but they may otherwise be a bit disappointed at his second trip to the plate. EB
ROBINET, HARRIETTE GILLEM 
Walking to the Bus-Rider Blues. 
Karl/Atheneum,
2000 
[160p]
ISBN 0-689-83191-9 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Twelve-year-old Alfa works at a grocery store for rent money so that he and his
sister Zinnia won't be taken away from their great-grandmother, Mama Merryfield,
who loves them deeply despite her failing memory. Mama Merryfield works clean-
ing houses, but now that she and all the other black citizens of Montgomery,
Alabama are boycotting the bus system, she has begun to have trouble finding her
way as she walks home from her jobs. Troubles mount when some of Alfa's hard-
earned rent money disappears; after Alfa, Zinnia, and Mama Merryfield take a
housecleaning job to make up the difference, the owner of the house accuses them
of stealing. Alfa works with Zinnia to unravel the truth behind the missing rent
money and the accusation of theft, and Robinet shows the two children growing
wiser as they dodge the everyday bullets of institutional racism on their quest for
the truth. The book deftly conveys the disturbing facts ofAfrican-American life in
1950s Montgomery, such as colored drinking fountains, dangerous white boys
who wait to beat up Alfa and steal his pay, the racist assumptions of most white
people, including Alfa's boss, and the incipient influence of Dr. Martin Luther
King, Jr. Robinet does a capable job of capturing the pulse of everyday survival
amidst profound historical change, portraying Alfa as an engaging and thoughtful
hero, and readers will be swept up in both his personal and historical struggles.
KM
SAUNDERS, SUSAN 
Lucky Lady. 
HarperCollins, 2000 
[14 4p]
ISBN 0-380-97784-2 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 4-6
Twelve-year-old Jamie isn't thrilled about spending the summer with her cranky
MAY 2000 
* 
331
Texan grandfather while her mother takes off to Southeast Asia on a writing as-
signment. She finds herself more invested-literally-when on a casual trip to an
auction she puts down all the money she has on an unbroken and badly behaved
filly in the hopes that she can be trained and saved from the meat market. While
Jamie's grandfather is initially dismissive of Lucky Lady, as Jamie names the filly,
he eventually draws on his old training techniques (which will be familiar to con-
temporary fans of Monty Roberts and Buck Brannaman) to gentle her. Saunders
gives the old horse story some effective individuality and energy, providing some
atmospheric regional touches and a near-palpable shimmer of heat. Even that new
life, however, can't rescue the book from its melodrama when Jamie's mother goes
missing in a flood in Vietnam just before Jamie and her friend Arnoldo get caught
in a brushfire (which Jamie, having turned her ankle while running, must flee by
riding Lucky bareback). 
Some readers won't mind the Disneyesque
overeventfulness, however, and they'll get a kick out of seeing Jamie and her filly
gallop off into the sunset. DS
SCHAEFER, LOLA M. 
This Is the Sunflower; illus. by Donald Crews. 
Greenwillow,
2000 
[2 4p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-16414-5 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-16413-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-6 yrs
Using the cumulative cadence of "The House that Jack Built," Schaefer describes
the life cycle of the sunflower ("This is the sunflower,/ tall and bright,/ that stands
in my garden/ day and night"). From blossom to seeds to birds that scatter those
seeds, the growing of the seeds to "a patch of sunflowers,/ tall and bright" that
"stands in my garden/ day and night" is gently portrayed. Crews' watercolors
provide a visual accompaniment that enlivens the predictable but effective text
with strong graphics and uncluttered compositions featuring the enormous sun-
flower blossom and the natural forces that effect it. The compositions exhibit a
welcome variety (some simply featuring the sunflower center stage, others showing
a rainbow-flock of flying birds), and the unblended colors are crisply satisfying.
Spring programs and summer storytimes will benefit from this newly sprouted
title; the final double-page spread of the sunflower patch will inspire young gar-
deners to start digging around for something to plant. A key to the sunflower-
seed-eating birds is included. JMD
SHIPTON, PAUL 
The Mighty Skink. 
HarperCollins, 2000 
[192p]
ISBN 0-688-17420-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Kaz is a curious monkey amidst more docile monkeys, most of them content to
live within The Fence and be grateful to the humans for putting them there. The
arrival of Skink, the first monkey in a generation to have ever been outside The
Fence, inspires Kaz to ask questions about the world beyond. Shipton's portrayal
of the fear and excitement Kaz feels as he begins to imagine an undomesticated
existence is compelling. Unfortunately, after a climactic escape scene, the story
loses focus. Kaz, his friend Chim, and Skink end up outside the confines of the
animal park, wandering around in a human city while Skink waxes vitriolic about
the human world they're exploring. After Skink's initial dramatic entrance and
inspiring leadership, his heroic voice turns whiny as he insults a helpful dog they
332 
* THE BULLETIN
encounter for being duped by her human captors. The ending (Kaz is relieved at
his eventual recapture and ready to rejoin the society he left inside the fence) may
disappoint some readers, but they'll still be intrigued by questions posed along the
way about the relationships between humans and other species. KM
SIERRA, JUDY, ad. 
The Beautiful Butterfly: A Folktalefrom Spain; illus. by Victoria
Chess. 
Clarion, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-395-90015-8 
$15.00 
R 
4-8 yrs
A beautiful butterfly has a number of suitors, but none of them sing sweetly enough
to win her until mouse sings his gentle song. Mouse goes to the pond to fetch
water for soup, but, alas, he falls in and a fish eats him. The butterfly mourns, and
her friends-the dove, tree, pond, and queen-mourn with her. The king joins
the mourning, saying "to show how sad I am, I will take off my robe and run
around in my royal underwear." Needless to say, at the sight of the king running
around in his royal underwear "everyone had to laugh in spite of their sorrow.
Even the fish chuckled, glu, glu, glu. He opened his mouth and gave a loud guf-
faw, and out tumbled little mouse, good as new." Sierra's capable retelling of this
traditional Spanish folktale is based on numerous variants (a detailed note is in-
cluded) from various parts of the world. Chess' illustrations (in gouache and sepia
ink) have a lighthearted air, the full- and nearly full-page paintings reflecting the
humor and action of this lively tale (the critters' expressive faces are particularly
diverting). This is a winner for storytime programming and classroom readalouds,
and curriculum tie-ins are easier than falling in a pond. JMD
SLANGERUP, ERIKJON 
Dirt Boy; illus. byJohn Manders. 
Whitman, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-8075-4424-8 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
An attention-getting opening line ("Fister Farnello loved dirt") begins the saga of
Fister, the "smelly-stinky-mucky-gritty-grimy-grubby-little-dirt-boy." Fister flees
his "clean-and-mean mother" for the woods, where he meets the giant Dirt Man,
who hasn't taken a bath in a thousand years. It is kismet. Fister, aka Dirt Boy,
remains in the woods with his giant buddy, getting dirtier and grimier each day
until finally mushrooms grow between his toes and even he finds himself revolt-
ing. Dirt Man, on the other hand, thinks Dirt Boy smells delicious and, throwing
friendship to the wind, tries to eat him for lunch. Fister flees once again, but this
time to the safety of his mother, who immediately scrubs him clean. Slangerup's
tale will have instant credibility with young listeners, who will recognize in Fister a
kindred spirit. The narrative is readaloud ready, and storytimers are going to
chuckle with unbelieving delight. Manders' mixed-media illustrations depict Fister
as the happy epitome of a neatnik's nightmare grinning blissfully from underneath
layers of mud; the Dirt Man is a rounded hill of a man covered in mossy grass, and
Mother Farnello is all sharp edges and starch. The pictures are large enough to use
with a group; just don't read this one aloud on a day when there are mud puddles.
JMD
SMITH, CHARLES R., JR. 
Tall Tales: SixAmazing Basketball Dreams; written and
illus. by Charles R. Smith, Jr. 
Dutton, 2000 
40p
ISBN 0-525-46172-8 
$16.99 
R Gr. 4-9
Smith's six very short stories treat subjects ranging from a prodigious young hoops
player who wows her male compatriots in a pickup game, a mysterious guy with a
MAY 2000 
* 333
terrific jump shot and a secret-he's blind, and a girl who finds a pair of magic
shoes that finally enable her to earn her ball-playing brothers' respect. While a few
of the stories are lightweight wish-fulfillment (especially, unfortunately, the girls'),
the author has a good ear for resonant courtside anecdote: the "Funky Stuff' riff
on smelly game clothes ("I had some shoes that smelled so bad, when I tried to
burn them, the flames kept jumping out of the way") is effortlessly funny and
pithy, and "The Main Event" is a glorious tale of a virtuoso who outclasses a trash-
talking opponent. Vivid visuals are the order of the day here, with words bounc-
ing through a variety of sizes and a gallery of colors, graphic decorations setting off
slices of text blocks, and game-action photographs bounding and faking their way
through the book. The result is loud and sometimes distracting, but the pictured
characters, black and white, male and female, put a diverse face on the game.
Between its glossy allure and a multitude of possible uses (including various flavors
of readaloud by kids or adults), this one's going to stay in play. DS
SMITH, FRANK DABBA 
My Secret Camera: Life in the Lodz Ghetto; illus. with
photographs by Mendel Grossman. 
Gulliver/Harcourt, 2000 
40p
ISBN 0-15-202306-2 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Grossman's secretly taken photographs of the Jewish ghetto in the Polish city of
Lodz offer some of the most eloquent and immediate testimony to life under Nazi
rule. Just under twenty of them are reproduced here, displaying images ranging
from a laughing group of young people, six-pointed stars glaring from their cloth-
ing, to groups of the dispossessed hovering uneasily near their bundled belongings,
to a young boy staring out at the camera with a look simultaneously penetrating
and bewildered. Unfortunately, the text doesn't really provide the context or sup-
port that would benefit the selection. The narration, written by Smith in Grossman's
fictionalized voice, gives some background information ("I have a darkroom be-
cause my official job involves printing photographs of Jewish workers for their
identification cards") but also engages in emotional exhortation ("When will our
slavery end?") that undercuts the straightforward impact of the pictures, seeming
to feel a need to urge them on that occasionally results in bathos rather than pa-
thos. Nor is it clear how much of the text is speculative (since Grossman did not
survive the war) and how much is historically verified (are the names of those
pictured invented or correct?), or whether the variations in the photographs' sharp-
ness are the result of manipulation (the final image particularly looks to be a smaller
section enlarged) or the strictures under which Grossman worked. Ultimately,
this is an elegantly produced but insufficiently substantial volume that opens the
window into the ghetto but will require some outside assistance in explaining the
scenes. There are no references, but a note on the photography is included. DS
STRICKLAND, BRAD 
When Mack Came Back. 
Dial, 2000 
[112p]
ISBN 0-8037-2498-5 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-6
The returning Mack of the title is a dog, a pointer cross who'd belonged to Ben
Painter. Ben's off fighting in World War II, so when Mack turns up back at the
Painter house, ten-year-old Maury, Ben's brother, takes him as his own. Mack's a
comfort to Maury, who's worried about his brother and struggling with his place
in the family (he's displaying academic gifts instead of the farming aptitude his
father would like to see); when a telegram arrives reporting that Ben is missing in
334 
* THE BULLETIN
action, Maury needs Mack more than ever. While there's an old-fashioned air to
the plot, Strickland keeps the cliches restrained and makes this into an affecting
dog-and-boy story, with the family drama well integrated with the canine plot
points. The book realistically depicts the rural Georgian community, and Maury's
narration has an easy country flavor ("The hind end of a mule never is pretty, but
after an hour of plowing, you don't want to look at another one ever again") that
generally eschews mannered folksiness. This will appeal to readers who enjoyed
Shiloh and to fans of accessible dog stories who will appreciate the unintimidating
pared-down dynamics here; it might also be worth unleashing as a readaloud. DS
SWOPE, SAM 
Gotta Go! Gotta Go!; illus. by Sue Riddle. 
Farrar, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-374-32757-2 
$12.00 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
A "teeny-tiny creepy-crawly bug" hatches from an egg with only one thought in
mind: "I don't know much, but I know what I know. I gotta go! I gotta go! I
gotta go to Mexico!" She eats leaves, sheds her skin, and refuses to be deterred by
nay-sayers (grasshopper, ant) who tell her she'll never make it. Finally she sleeps
and metamorphoses into a monarch butterfly. She flies to Mexico to join other
monarchs in hibernating until spring; then she flies home to lay eggs, and the cycle
begins again. The book is sometimes perplexing (if "her journey was long and
hard and full of dangers" why does it pass so quickly and with such a benign
appearance?), and the natural history is problematically flexible (the butterfly cheer-
fully converses with its natural predator, a bird, and the substitution of the word
"bug" for caterpillar is certain to cause confusion among the younger set). The
illustrations give a winning personality to the little "bug" and to the butterfly she
becomes, however, and the small trim size suits the uncluttered illustrations, most
of which feature the participants against a plain white page in a limited palette.
The text runs on somewhat, but teachers will appreciate the curriculum connec-
tion, and preschoolers and kindergartners may get a lift from this easy introduc-
tion to the monarch's life cycle. JMD
TAMAR, ERmKA 
The Midnight Train Home. Knopf, 2000 
[208p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-90159-0 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-80159-6 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Deirdre O'Rourke watches helplessly as her three-year-old brother is carried off by
an affectionate Pennsylvanian couple who have come to view the Children's Aid
Society children from the orphan train. In Greenville, Kansas, Deirdre finds her-
self just as suddenly scooped up by Reverend Gansworthy, while her older brother
Sean is whisked along the rails to points unknown. Although the Gansworthy
manse is filled with comforts beyond anything Deirdre knew back in New York, it
is clear that the reverend and his wife have taken the child in as an act of self-
promotion to impress the congregation with their righteousness. Their cool indif-
ference and the cruel teasing of classmates convinces Deirdre that life on the run
couldn't be worse, and upon learning that Sean is happily situated near Austin,
Texas, she takes off with a passing vaudeville troupe making a circuit toward
Galveston. The twelve-year-old discovers the power of her singing to capture an
audience, and by the time she's reunited with Sean, she knows that the stage is
where she really belongs. Both Tamar's orphan train and star-is-born story lines
are fashioned with stock characters and plot elements; even readers who cannot
MAY 2000 
* 335
precisely identify the pervasive cliches will suspect that such lines as "We'll always
be family, won't we? You, me, and Jimmy" and "Here, behind the footlights, right
here, she had found her home at last" have passed through other fictional lips than
these. Nonetheless, readers who crave the smell of the greasepaint will be happy to
follow Deirdre on the road. EB
TAVARES, MATT Zachary's Ball; written and illus. by Matt Tavares. 
Candlewick,
2000 
32 p
ISBN 0-7636-0730-4 
$15.99 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
A rogue wind wafts a high pop-up right into the waiting hands of Zachary's father,
and the boy now owns the best souvenir he could ever want from his first trip to
Fenway Park. The ball's magic-or perhaps Zachary's imagination-seems to
transport him onto the field, where he's hero of his dreamlike scenarios. In time
Zachary misplaces the ball, and although his enthusiasm for the Red Sox never
wavers, fantasies of glory naturally abate. Now a young man, he lingers outside
Fenway and a ball flies over the wall into his hands. Is it the same ball from that
first outing with his father? He passes the gift on to another young fan and prom-
ises her, "They're all magic." Tavares strives, somewhat successfully, for a dream-
like quality in his grainy black and gray pencil illustrations, dense with detail and
bathed in shadow. His young Sox fans, however, are too frequently frozen into
awkward expressions of wide-eyed, wide-mouthed astonishment that suggest melo-
dramatic posture more than delight. Flat narration and an over-abrupt transition
from Zachary's boyhood to manhood deflate the suspense, and listeners who would
happily embrace the sentimental plot are unlikely to be moved by the magic. EB
THIMMESH, CATHERINE 
Girls Think ofEverything: Stories ofIngenious Inventions
by Women; illus. by Melissa Sweet. 
Houghton, 2000 
57p
ISBN 0-395-93744-2 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Endpaper timelines offer scores of inventions by women over the centuries, but
Thimmesh winnows them down to ten women and two contemporary girls to
show how focused determination and/or serendipity led to products now widely
used. Each entry sports two or three pages of breezy text, attractive full-page col-
lages which incorporate the inventor's original plans or notes, and watercolor spot
art. Several of the inventions have been overplayed in other sources-particularly
Betty Nesmith Graham's Liquid Paper, Ruth Wakefield's Toll House cookies,
and Mary Anderson's windshield wipers-and chatty scene-setting introductions
collectively consume space that might have been better spent on additional inven-
tors (Ethlie Vare's Mothers ofInvention covers a larger number with similar acces-
sibility). Source notes indicate, however, that Thimmesh gathered much of her
material through interviews with the inventors themselves, affording readers an
up-close and personal peek at the creative process. Suggestions for further reading
and addresses of inventors organizations are included. EB
THOMPSON, COLIN 
Unknown; illus. by Anna Pignataro. 
Walker, 2000 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8731-2 
$16.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8730-4 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
"Unknown" is the status of origin and hence the moniker of a fuzzy little dog in an
animal shelter. She's too scared to join in the barking cacophony, and she's over-
shadowed by ferocious-seeming Grown-Too-Large next door, so the pet-hunting
336 
* THE BULLETIN
people overlook her in favor of other dogs. One night there's a fierce thunder-
storm with a lightning strike that sets the area afire; Grown-Too-Large panics, but
Unknown digs her way out and alerts the shelter caretaker, after which her heroine
status makes her desired by many prospective owners. Thompson creates a cred-
ible dog's-eye-view of shelter life ("The noise was deafening. Twenty dogs were
shouting at the tops of their voices. Me me me me choose me") and the possibili-
ties beyond, but there's a matter-of-factness in his tone that keeps things from
getting overly sentimental, even with the happy ending that finds a cozy home for
Grown-Too-Large as well as Unknown (though it would be nice to see the home
where Unknown actually ends up). Pignataro's illustrations have an intriguingly
delicate scruffiness in their line, with clouds of watercolor pigment and a slight
shimmer that recalls Robert Andrew Parker; the dogs aren't primped for the occa-
sion but remain endearingly rough and ready, and Unknown herself is a terrieresque
furball perfectly sized for yearning youngsters' laps. It's refreshing to see shelter
critters get their due; combine this with a readaloud from Kehret's Shelter Dogs
(BCCB 4/99), or use it to energize a critter-care unit. DS
VAN DUSEN, CHRIS 
Down to the Sea with Mr. Magee; written and illus. by Chris
Van Dusen. 
Chronicle, 2000 
30p
ISBN 0-8118-2499-3 
$13.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Mr. Magee and his little dog Dee head out for a day on the ocean, until their boat
becomes the plaything of a young whale. They ride a geyser from the whale's
blowhole up into the air, where a sudden breeze lands them in the top of a tree.
Fortunately, other whales see this tragedy and create a gigantic splash that dis-
lodges them from the tree, and Mr. Magee and Dee head home for a comforting
supper. Van Dusen's art combines a slick '50s retro look with a palette of intense
colors, and it makes deft use of unusual perspectives, such as a spread where the
boat is seen from a bird's-eye view and the outline of the approaching whale is seen
in the water below and around the boat. The text is written entirely in rhyme, and
despite occasional scansion glitches, the overall anapestic meter waltzes the tale
along in rhythmic waves. Unfortunately, the language of the text is overly com-
plex for the age-level appeal of the story, so that children old enough to read along
may be disappointed by the simplicity of the adventure. Nevertheless, the gallop-
ing text will certainly have appeal as a readaloud, and the vertiginous viewpoints
and charged colors of the art may encourage some readers to drop anchor. KM
WARNER, SALLY 
Totally Confidential HarperCollins, 2000 
[160p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028262-2 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028261-4 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-7
Mary McQuinn Todd, known as Quinney, is all of twelve years old, but she's the
organized one in her impulsive family: her younger twin brothers are a chaotic
force, and her artistic and romantic parents rely on Quinney for practical matters.
Pragmatism drives her to a bold venture in an effort to secure some extra capital:
she advertises her services as a "professional listener," taking on clients ranging
from a woman considering divorce to a lonely six-year-old, letting them pour out
their hearts to her, and advising them. Things get complicated when she hears of
impending trouble for a daring friend through one of her clients, but her increas-
ingly prickly relationship with that friend means that not only is there a crisis of
MAY 2000 
* 
337
conscience (her clients' words are to be kept "totally confidential") but also of
friendship. The writing here steers staunchly down the middle of the road, and
the plot has a lavish helping of unlikeliness, but Warner has set up an appealing
situation with some unusual aspects. The book offers a credible depiction of the
small town where most everybody works two jobs to get by (making Quinney's
youthful entrepreneurial inclination understandable), and there's a refreshingly
non-adulatory take on parental romanticism-Quinney's parents' mutual absorp-
tion is cutting their daughter out of the familial loop. Plot threads about Quinney's
difficulties with her changing friends and her crush on a new guy in town are
capably integrated, and the result is an enjoyable if not brilliant read with some
original touches. DS
WATTENBERG, 
JANE, 
ad. 
Henny-Penny; ad. 
and 
illus. 
by Jane
Wattenberg. 
Scholastic, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-439-07817-2 
$15.95 
R 
3-7yrs
Question: So why in the world would you need another copy of the story about
that silly hen and the falling sky? Answer: Because Wattenberg has taken this
faithful old chestnut and refurbished it with outrageously designed compositions,
digitally manipulated photographs, and a graphically enhanced text that is going
to make this a completely new experience for both readers aloud and listeners. If
you don't get the hint from the bright blue and orange cover (featuring a nearly
neon photo-image of the panicked racer, Henny-Penny), the opening spread lets
you know this is no ordinary retelling. Against a gray and threatening sky stands
the silhouette of a tree with glowing orange acorns; in the near distance is
Stonehenge, and in the foreground is the incandescent Henny-Penny, seemingly
just micromillimeters away from being struck by lightning: "STORMY SKIES
and whirling winds flip-flapped around the barnyard. Henny-Penny scratched
about for a tasty bite to eat, when ... WHACK! An acorn smacked Henny-Penny
right on top of her fine red comb. 'CHICKABUNGA!' squawked Henny-Penny
in alarm. 'THE SKY IS FALLING!'" The exclamations of the various fowl H-P
picks up on her way to tell the king are a lesson in hilarity, and the characteriza-
tions of the various featured feathered friends have a sly and intentional humor.
Foxy-Loxy is almost admirable in his gluttony, and Henny-Penny is sincere if
dumb. Visual jokes and puns supply a running subtext that will make this a popu-
lar browsing book as well as a storytime hit. The final illustration of Henny-Penny
sitting on top of a HUGE egg in front of an iridescent red barn against a surreally
blue sky will linger in the mind's eye long after the book is closed. JMD
WEATHERFORD, CAROLE BOSTON 
The Sound that Jazz Makes; illus. by Eric
Velasquez. 
Walker, 2000 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8721-5 
$17.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8720-7 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 2-4
In rhyming four-line stanzas, Weatherford's picture-book text sketches the history
of jazz from its roots in African music through slavery times, minstrel shows, and
finally to the jazz era and beyond. The title and the repeated refrain of "This is" at
the beginning of each stanza are reminiscent of the nursery rhyme "The House
that Jack Built," and the directed rhythm as well as the brevity of the text seems to
invite reading aloud. Unfortunately, the attempt to convey a tremendous amount
338 
* THE BULLETIN
of history in this limited format results in a jingly superficiality that jars discor-
dantly against weighty topics such as the slave trade, and it's ironic that the impro-
visational spontaneity of jazz gets described in such a stilted form. Six of thirty-two
pages are devoted to information about jazz music specifically, the rest dealing
with the more general history of music and African Americans. Adult guidance
will be necessary for children to understand much of the text, such as who Satchmo,
Duke, and Lady are, as well as references to other musical styles such as the Delta
blues and ragtime. Illustrations depict lively if cliched scenes of music-making,
but the figures are stiffly drafted which, coupled with the quick shifts in historical
time frames, lends an air of museum diorama to the tableaux. Readers seeking
even a little information will want something more substantive than this. KM
WEEKS, SARAH 
Guy Time. 
Geringer/HarperCollins, 2000 
[17 6p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-0283661 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028365-3 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-6
Guy Strang, hero of Regular Guy (BCCB 7/99), is back, and his life is very compli-
cated. His parents are divorcing, his mother is dating, his best friend Buzz has
threatened to dump him if he dates a girl, and Autumn Hockney (of the flippable
hair) just asked him to the movies. What's a Guy to do? Well, this guy tells his
mother how he feels, goes to the movies with Autumn, and still keeps his best
friend. Weeks has a strong but sympathetic grip on the angst of adolescent boys,
and her depiction of basic good guy Guy just trying to keep up with the rapidly
changing events of his life is ruefully funny. The dialogue is nicely pitched, nei-
ther too jokey nor too sincere; the locker-and-lunchroom dynamics have that un-
dercurrent of barely restrained anarchy common to school hallways between classes.
Weeks surrounds her hero with the classic challenges of a young adult problem
novel--divorced parents, school conflicts, difficult friendships-and then permits
him to resolve them with the passage of time, a change of attitude, a sense of
humor, and a sigh of relief. Readers will be cheered by Guy's rocky but successful
journey through his personal rites of passage. JMD
WHELAN, GLORIA 
Homeless Bird. HarperCollins, 2000 
[208p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028452-8 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028454-4 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
The daughter of a poor Indian family, Koly finds herself married to a sickly boy
whose parents merely want Koly's dowry to fund a healing trip to the holy Ganges
river. The Ganges fails to cure the boy, however, and Koly finds herselfa thirteen-
year-old widow at the mercy of her in-laws. Though she grows close to her sister-
in-law and appreciates the kindness of her father-in-law, who teaches her to read,
her mother-in-law works Koly night and day with no respite or praise, taking
Koly's widow's pension for the family's benefit. Finally, Koly is dumped in the
widow's city ofVrindivan, where after struggles and homelessness she finds a place
in a charitable "widow's house." From there she gets a chance at self-determina-
tion, eventually finding good employment as a result of her gift with artistic em-
broidery, and begins to see that there may be a future for her after all. Whelan
paints an effective and non-traveloguish picture of contemporary village life, where
computers are just beginning to change people's lives yet illiteracy is still common.
MAY 2000 
* 339
Though the book is an open challenge to some traditions, it also makes it clear that
they can work for some people (Koly's sister-in-law ends up comfortably and hap-
pily married), and Koly is not an American heroine thrust into a different world
but a sympathetic blend of frustration and hope, willing to play her cultural part
yet desiring not to lose all joy in her life thereby. While the happy ending here
makes this a different kind of book than Staples' Shabanu, this is a similarly com-
pelling portrait of a young girl's passing into a different kind of womanhood than
she expected and that most readers know. DS
WHIPPO, WALT 
Little White Duck; illus. by Joan Paley. 
Little, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-316-03227-1 
$13.95 
R 
1-4yrs
This children's song marks its fiftieth anniversary this year, and Paley provides
collage illustrations to entice a new generation to sing (quack, buzz, etc.) along. A
little brown mouse draws open the stage curtain on the music and lyrics, and the
performers-duck, frog, bug, and snake-enter from the wings. Mouse strums a
guitar while the cut-paper players respectively do what they "oughter" in the marble-
ized tissue water, floating and swimming and tickling and, most importantly, gulping
the little black bug down whole. Lest younger and more sensitive viewers take the
bug's demise and the "Boo Hoo Hoo" ending too seriously, all the actors reappear
for a final bow while the animal audience shouts "Bravo." Shapes are large and
simple, and although the green of the frog and the lily pad frequently blend right
into the blue-green pond, varied paper textures provide enough contrast to keep
them from getting lost. If Mom and Dad aren't musically inclined to a singalong,
ask Grandma or Grandpa. Bet they'll remember. EB
WHITESEL, CHERYL AYLWARD 
Rebel: A Tibetan Odyssey. 
HarperCollins,
2000 
[208p]
ISBN 0-688-16735-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Thunder's curiosity about the world outside his Tibetan village has always made
his family anxious, but his forbidden contact with a foreign trader affords his jeal-
ous Second Aku (uncle) the opportunity to have the boy sent away from home to
become a monk at Tharpa Dok, where Thunder's older uncle holds a position of
prestige. Entering the compound as a kitchen boy during First Aku's absence,
Thunder meets with hostility from most of his peers but manages to befriend, after
a fashion, a lame boy known as Seventh Hand who is generally ridiculed. First
Aku's return actually makes Thunder's life more difficult, though, as his elevated
position alienates Seventh Hand and infuriates a bullying monastery soldier. Thun-
der is eventually assigned to be companion to the little boy who will be the next
lama, and their misadventure with a band of foreign explorers causes Thunder to
reexamine his view of outsiders and his future as a monk. Whitesel relegates most
background information about the period (early 1900s) and Tibetan relations with
the outside world to an endnote (a glossary is also included), and readers will find
little within the narrative to place events into a larger context. The emotional
potential of intra-family rivalries and Thunder's own conflicted feelings toward
becoming a monk are weakly developed, making the tone of the text more cool
and dispassionate than turbulent events would seem to dictate. Still, Whitesel
takes her audience into a community largely unvisited in children's literature, which
curious readers may want to explore. EB
340 
* THE BULLETIN
WILLIAMS, CAROL LYNCH Christmas in Heaven. Putnam, 2000 [176p]
ISBN 0-399-23436-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
Twelve-year-old Honey, resident of the tiny town of Heaven, Florida, is thrilled
when another family swells the ranks of Heaven. The new family is headed by
actress Miriam Season, who's trying to remove her older daughter, Easter (already
a veteran of the Betty Ford clinic), from the dangers of life in the fast lane. Her
younger daughter, Christmas, forges a friendship with Honey and Honey's warm
and welcoming family, especially Honey's grandfather, a charismatic television
preacher. Honey's brother, Willie-Bill, has a less benign connection with the Sea-
son family in his worship of the rebellious Easter, and he begins to defy his family
in order to be with her-with tragic results. Williams (author of Kelly and Me,
BCCB 3/94, etc.) endows her story with a Cynthia Rylant flavor in the bittersweet
small-town occurrences and the horror that shatters quiet lives. The characteriza-
tions, especially of the showbiz Season family, aren't particularly original, but the
kids are painted with tenderness and thought (and it's also nice to see a successful
religious figure of genuine faith and kindness). The gentle, almost meandering
style of Honey's narration gives the story its real savor as she measures the changes-
some gradual, some sudden-undergone by those close to her; fans of thoughtful
family drama will want to follow along. DS
WILLIAMS, LAURA E. 
The Executioner's Daughter. Holt, 2000 
[14 4 p]
ISBN 0-8050-6234-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Lily has never been concerned with the particulars of her father Will's calling-
torturer and executioner for Lord Dunsworth; she simply accepts without ques-
tion that the condemned are sinners whose presence must be purged from the
community. She cannot, however, fail to recognize the effect that trips to the
castle have on her parents. Her father drowns the day's horrors in ale while her
mother Allyce, who serves as his assistant, sinks into depression and drops hints
about her own shadowy past, in which she "cheated the hangman." When Lily's
mother dies of fever, Lily is expected to assume her place in the family business,
and her first encounter with the scaffold leaves her determined to flee her fate at all
costs. Williams titillates her readers with flashes of the ghastly hardware of Will's
trade and a gruesome beheading, but the sheer predictability of plot and the ill-
concealed "secret" ofAllyce's past effectively quell the shudders. Moreover, the
abrupt ending that promises Lily a rosy future as a herbalist and healer is an un-
convincing bit of wishful thinking, given the lack of fictional detail on how this
new career is launched and the historic probabilities for an adolescent girl's inde-
pendence in 1450. Still, middle-schoolers with a taste for medieval matters may
appreciate Williams' attempt to humanize the man in the black leather mask and
empathize with his outcast family. EB
WILLIAMS, LORI AURELIA 
When Kambia Elaine Flew in from Neptune. 
Simon,
2000 
246p
ISBN 0-689-82468-8 
$17.00 
Ad 
Gr. 9 up
Twelve-year-old Shayla is a budding writer, living with her mother and her older
sister, Tia, in a down-and-out section of Houston. Tia's general rebelliousness
MAY 2000 
* 341
and emerging womanhood lead her into constant battles with her mother; Shayla
is devastated when, after one particularly bad argument about Tia's association
with a man nearly ten years her senior, Tia leaves home and disappears from con-
tact. At the same time, Shayla is becoming more involved with Kambia, a strange
new girl in the neighborhood, whose home life is dark and threatening (her mother
is apparently engaging in prostitution) and who relates bizarre and elaborate fanta-
sies as truth. Kambia's fantastical narratives begin to hint at some terrible realities
about the abuse she's undergoing (her mother's clients are turning to Kambia);
finally, Shayla needs Tia to forsake her secret hiding place in order to save her
friend. Williams depends strongly on metaphor and simile (as does Shayla in her
writer's journal), and her characters often speak in colloquially proverbial locu-
tions; this slows the story down considerably, emphasizing the writing over the
written-about and giving the book an adult flavor. Sometimes, however, the turns
of phrase are quite wittily apt ("Doo-witty's cornbread wasn't quite done in the
middle" sums up Tia's slow-thinking boyfriend); even more effective are the com-
plex relationships between people in this neighborhood, where everyone's strug-
gling to get by, where argument can turn to respect, and where strong
African-American women are the driving force in the community. There's also
enough hope out of hardship to gratify readers who persist, and they'll appreciate
the unexpected beauties of Shayla's world. DS
WILLIS, PATRICIA 
The Barn Burner. 
Clarion, 2000 
[208p]
ISBN 0-395-98409-2 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Ross Cooper, on the lam after a family fight, finds himself in the wrong place at
the wrong time-inside a barn which has just been torched by an arsonist. Both
the fleeing firebug and the barn's owner have seen him, and Ross realizes that
suspicion for the crime is bound to come his way. Luckily he runs into Mary
Warfield, who not only believes his tale but agrees to shelter him in exchange for
some domestic help while her husband is away. Luck, in fact, never leaves Ross's
shadow throughout his entire improbable stay; not only does the boy secure the
patronage of saintly Mary, but he manages through an Algeresque good deed to
land one of the few jobs in the area during the Depression, and through other
good deeds and fine manners to befriend several of Mary's relatives and neighbors,
all of whom readily believe in his innocence. It comes as no surprise when the
criminal is identified (with a heavy measure of heroics), Ross realizes that his own
parents probably still love him, and he hits the road for home with Mary's assur-
ance, "But you'll always have a home here" to warm him along the way. Original
it's not, but the many red herrings and clues to the barn burner's identity strewn
throughout the plot might ignite enough reader interest to keep the pages turning.
EB
WINKLER, DAVID 
Scotty and the Gypsy Bandit. Farrar, 2000 
198p
ISBN 0-374-36420-6 $16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
It's the spring of 1959, and Scotty's father has decided that he and his son should
build an elaborate treehouse in order to spend more time together. Scotty is less
than enthusiastic until his mother tells him that his father is dying of a brain tu-
mor; the illness progresses to such a point that Dad can do no more than create
342 
* 
THE BULLETIN
blueprints for the treehouse, and it goes unbuilt. In the aftermath of his father's
death Scotty decides to complete the project. He enlists the aid of his very strange
schoolmate and next-door neighbor, McStew (aka the Gypsy Bandit), only to find
that McStew has an ulterior motive: he's planning on living in the completed
treehouse. The gradual revelation that McStew's home life is less than ideal is
unsurprising. The arrest of his mother for the murder of his abusive father causes
McStew's flight from the police, and Scotty's complicity in his escape adds to the
ethical dilemma. Narrator Scotty often speaks with hindsight of the "had I but
known" variety that interferes with the novel's flow, the adult voice intruding on
the narrative. While the elements of an exciting, even sensational tale are here,
they never quite coalesce; earnest subplots clutter the main storyline and a senti-
mental conclusion strains credulity. Still, Scotty is a trusty witness to McStew's
drama, and McStew is bound to elicit readers' sympathy. Those readers with a
taste for historical fiction with modern sensibilities can start here. JMD
WOODSON, JACQUELINE 
Miracle's Boys. 
Putnam, 2000 
[144p]
ISBN 0-399-23113-7 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-9
The "Miracle" of the title is Milagro, mother of three sons trying to cope with their
fear and despair after her sudden death from diabetes leaves them orphaned.
Lafayette, the youngest, struggles with his grief at not only the passing of his mother
but the loss of his middle brother, Charlie, who comes home from Rahway (deten-
tion center for boys) closed and hardened. Ty'ree, the oldest, is determined that
the three brothers will stay together, and he gives up his chance for a college schol-
arship to make sure it happens. The brokenhearted Lafayette tells their story, and
his crying need for affection and stability is the screen against which his insights
play out. Charlie has walled himself off in a desperate bid for self-protection that
only gets him into trouble; Ty'ree's sorrow and rage at his inability to reach Charlie
is touchingly conveyed. Woodson plays it very cose-most of the action takes
place in the small apartment and out on the front stoop, and there are few devel-
oped characters besides the brothers. The tone is intimate, as is the point of view,
and the reader observes the action through the eyes of the sensitive Lafayette. The
bitter Charlie's far from foregone redemption is slow in coming, which makes it all
the more believable. Hope is a good thing, and Woodson hands it to her readers
like a gift at the conclusion of this emotionally cathartic, gracefully constructed
family story. JMD
ZIEFERT, HARRIET M. 
Pushkin Minds the Bundle; illus. by Donald
Saaf. Schwartz/Atheneum, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-689-83216-8 
$16.00 
R 4-7 yrs
Pushkin (of Pushkin Meets the Bundle, BCCB 5/98), the dog who suffered from
dethronement when his owners brought home a baby ("They call him Pierre, but
I think of him as 'the bundle'"), hereby returns. As the "big boy," Pushkin fre-
quently has the task of minding the baby ("Can't she see that I do mind him? I
mind him a lot!") when the family goes on vacation, from the car ride to settling in
to going berry picking. During the berry outing, Pierre wanders off, and it takes
Pushkin's doggy efforts to find his not-always-beloved charge. As in the previous
tide, the book hits a skillful balance between Pushkin as dog and Pushkin as older
sibling. The text leans particularly towards the latter, giving eloquent voice to
MAY 2000 
* 343
Pushkin's resentment-and to his occasional grudging affection ("After awhile, I
crawl into the red bed with the bundle. We keep each other warm"). Saafs gouache
art is contained in rough squares and vignettes floating in white space; the layers of
saturated pigment provide a richness and intensity, while the softly rounded yet
casual lines of the drafting make red-jacketed Pushkin an appealingly expressive
doggy brother. This might be viewed as the story behind Alexandra Day's Carl
fantasies, and kids adjusting to their families' own new bundles will appreciate
having Pushkin on their side. DS
rz
344 
* THE BULLETIN
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
de Vos, Gail. New Talesfor Old: Folktales as Literary Fiction for Young Adults; by
Gail de Vos and Anna E. Altmann. Libraries Unlimited, 1999. Paper ed. ISBN 1-
56308-447-3; $35.00. 408p
de Vos and Altmann have put together a compendium of information on classic
Western European folktales in their many guises. Chapter One is a cogent, acces-
sible explanation of folktales as oral narrative, the art and interpretation of folk-
tales, the audience for folktales, and folktales in postmodern times. Chapters Two
through Nine deal with familiar, individual folktales (Cinderella, The Frog King,
Hansel and Gretel, Little Red Riding Hood, Rapunzel, Rumpelstiltskin, Sleeping
Beauty, and Snow White) and their history, including an explanation of tale types
and motifs, text comparisons of printed editions, an overview of critical interpreta-
tions of the tales by such scholars as Maria Tatar and Jack Zipes, and annotated
lists of related novels, short stories, films, poetry, opera, picture books, Internet
resources, and suggested classroom projects. Bibliographic information for each
version of the stories mentioned is provided, and author, illustrator, motif, and
tale-type indices are appended. Each chapter has a fairly lengthy bibliography;
some also include chapter-specific notes. This is a rich, well-organized look at an
increasingly popular genre that will open new possibilities for both programming
and reader-advisory services to young adults. JMD
Story-Huffman, Ru. Caldecott on the Net: Reading & InternetActivities. Alleyside,
1999. Paper ed. ISBN 1-57950-020-X; $16.95. 93p.
Eighteen "LearningQuests," each focusing on a different Caldecott-winning title,
will send youngsters roaring down the information superhighway. Each exercise
focuses on a particular topic in or relevant to the book (the circus for Mirette on the
High Wire, colors for White Snow, Bright Snow, photography for Snowflake Bentley),
pointing kids to websites in order to complete five activities; another dozen or so
websites are included as further resources for educators, and a selection of books to
expand the assignment finishes up each LearningQuest. While the relationship
between the book and the ensuing activities is sometimes tenuous and the annota-
tions are limply written, the assignments are richly designed; though more net
than Caldecott, it's some great net. Story-Huffman sends kids to visual sites, text-
driven sites, and audio sites (annotations note where plug-ins are required), and
her very useful guide to website evaluation will give users a boost in assessing new
sites as they come along. The book deftly bridges the gap between print and web
by providing the LearningQuests on the publisher's website, saving professionals
from the arduous transcription of complex two-line URLs. Appendices list all the
Caldecott medalists, provide additional electronic and print resources, and offer
templates (one including the HTML coding) for the LearningQuests to enable the
ambitious to create their own. DS
MAY 2000 
* 345
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Adoption-stories: Thompson
ADVENTURE STORIES:
Bausum; Morris; Tamar
Africa-stories: Mollel
African Americans: Weatherford
African Americans-fiction: Robinet;
Williams, Lori; Woodson
African Americans-stories: Kurtz;
Pinkney
ALPHABET BOOKS: de Vicq de
Cumptich
Animals-fiction: Oppel
Animals-stories: Cabrera; Godwin;
Hartwick; Hort; Hubbell; Sierra;
Wattenberg; Whippo
Anthropology: Fleischman
Art and artists: Curlee; de Vicq de
Cumptich
Babies-stories: Hubbell
Babysitting-stories: Ziefert
Baseball-fiction: Brooks, B.; Ritter
Baseball-stories: Tavares
Basketball-fiction: Smith, C.
Bats-fiction: Oppel
Bears-stories: Ernst
BEDTIME STORIES: Ballard;
Godwin; Greenstein
Bible-fiction: Lester
BIOGRAPHIES: Bausum; Gold
Brothers and sisters-fiction: Clarke;
Lester; Robinet; Tamar
Brothers and sisters-stories: David;
Mollel; Pinkney; Porte
Brothers-fiction: Strickland;
Woodson
Bullies-fiction: Pilkey
Butterflies-stories: Swope
Cats-fiction: Kehret
Cats-stories: Kitamura
Child abuse-fiction: Williams, Lori
Clocks: Duffy
CONCEPT BOOKS: Cabrera; de
Vicq de Cumptich; Greenstein
COUNTING BOOKS: Cabrera;
Greenstein
Cousins-fiction: Ritter
Crime and criminals-fiction: Frank;
Kehret; Williams, Lori; Willis;
Woodson
Death and dying: Altman
Death and dying-fiction: Clarke;
Ritter; Williams, Laura; Woodson
Dinosaurs: Bausum; Bishop
Divorce-fiction: Weeks
Dogs-fiction: Cooper; Strickland
Dogs-stories: Heidbreder; Thomp-
son; Van Dusen; Ziefert
Drug abuse-fiction: Bauer
Ducks-stories: Peters
Earth science: Bial
Ecology: Hartwick
Ethics and values: Altman; Efaw;
Lester; Naylor; Ritter; Robinet;
Whelan; Whitesel; Willis
Evolution: Bishop
Explorers and exploring: Bausum
Explorers and exploring-stories:
Axtell
Families-fiction: Brooks, M.
Families-stories: Ziefert
FANTASY: Bartholomew; Brooks,
B.; Levine; Morris; Oppel; Shipton
Farm life-stories: Godwin
Fathers and daughters-fiction: Bauer;
Naylor; Williams, Laura
Fathers and daughters-stories: Kurtz
346 
* THE BULLETIN
Fathers and sons-fiction: Ritter
Fathers and sons-stories: Tavares
Flowers-stories: Schaefer
FOLKTALES AND FAIRYTALES:
Ernst; Greene; Johnson, P.;
Mollel; Sierra; Wattenberg
Food and eating-fiction: Delacre
Food and eating-stories: DiTerlizzi
Friendship-fiction: Bauer; Warner;
Weeks; Williams, Lori; Winkler
Friendship-stories: Bynum;
Gammell
Gardening-stories: Schaefer
Grandfathers-fiction: Saunders;
Williams, C.
Grandmothers-fiction: Robinet
Grandmothers-stories: Demas
HISTORICAL FICTION: Hahn;
Hartwick; Isaacs; Lester; Robinet;
Smith, F.; Strickland; Tamar;
Williams, Laura; Willis; Winkler
History, U.S.: Cohen; Curlee;
Thimmesh; Weatherford
History, world: Cohen; Fleischman
Holocaust, the: Gold
Holocaust, the-fiction: Isaacs;
Smith, F.
Horses: Budiansky
Horses-fiction: Saunders
HUMOR: Rennison
Hungary-folklore: Greene
Identity-stories: Kitamura
India-fiction: Whelan
Inventors and inventions: Duffy;
Thimmesh
Kidnapping-fiction: Kehret
Knights and chivalry-fiction:
Goodman; Morris
Latinos-fiction: Delacre
Marriage-fiction: Whelan
Metamorphosis-stories: Swope
Middle Ages-fiction: Goodman;
Williams, Laura
Military life-fiction: Efaw
Monkeys-fiction: Shipton
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Williams, Lori
Mothers and sons-fiction: Woodson
Mothers and sons-stories: Slangerup
Music and musicians: Weatherford
MYSTERIES: Kehret
Nature study: Bial; Budiansky; Demas;
Schaefer; Swope
Paleontology: Bausum; Bishop
Pigs-stories: Bynum
POETRY: Godwin; Johnson, D.;
McNaughton
PRAYERS: Godwin
Presidents, U.S.: Cohen
Racism-fiction: Robinet
Reading aloud: Brooks, B.;
McNaughton; Mollel; Oppel; Smith,
C.; Strickland
Reading, beginning: Cooper
Reading, easy: Porte
Reading, reluctant: Fleischman;
McNaughton; Smith, C.
RHYMING STORIES: Cabrera;
Heidbreder; Hubbell; Priceman
Robots-fiction: Pilkey
Robots-stories: Pinkney
School-fiction: Appelt; Efaw; Levine;
McDonald; Weeks
SCIENCE FICTION: Pilkey
SHORT STORIES: Appelt; Smith, C.
Shyness-fiction: Cooper
Sisters-fiction: Isaacs; Williams, Lori
Sisters-stories: Axtell
Slavery-fiction: Hahn
Soil: Bial
SONGS: Whippo
Space-stories: DiTerlizzi
Spain-folklore: Sierra
Storytelling: Greene; Johnson, P.;
Mollel; Sierra; Wattenberg
Storytime: Axtell; Bynum; Cabrera;
Greene; Hort; Hubbell; Peters;
Priceman; Schaefer; Sierra;
Slangerup; Wattenberg; Whippo
Tibet-fiction: Whitesel
Time: Duffy
Uncles-fiction: Whitesel
Unicorns-stories: Heidbreder
Voyages and travel-fiction: Goodman
Voyages and travel-stories: Hort;
Kurtz; Van Dusen
War-fiction: Bartholomew
Weddings-stories: Priceman
Women's studies: Thimmesh
World War II: Gold
World War II-fiction: Isaacs; Smith,
F.; Strickland
1- School Library Journal stars
:' 
"A compelling account of the life of [Malcolm X]. The succinct,
straightforward text is suitable in content and tone for younger
children, while the picture-book format provides accessibility for
older reluctant readers as well. Jenkins's dark, expressive paintings
convey Malcolm's inner turmoil and spiritual growth, providing a
perfect blend of well-written text and well-executed [full-color]
illustrations. A first purchase for any library."
-- Starred review / School Library Journal
"A powerful introduction to Malcolm X and his times."
-Highlighted 
review / ALA Booklist
Ages 5-8. $15.95Tr (0-06-027707-6); $15.89Lb (0-06-027708-4)
Also by Walter Dean Myers
first recipient of the Michael L. Printz Award
for excellence in literature for young adults
MONSTER
Illustrations by Christopher Myers
2000 Coretta Scott King Author Honor Book
$15.95Tr (0-06-028077-8); $15.89Lb (0-06-028078-6)
F HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019 * www.harperchildrens.com
Teaching 8
The Professional Magazine 
for Teachers
Iooei 
ii 
iTeachitnri•r;
-,Fp 
uij
with the
latest in
Teaching!
Teaching K-8 is filled with hundreds of unique ideas and
activities that help teachers present new challenges to their
students, learn new concepts and develop new skills.
Monthly articles include:
Carol Otis Hurst on...
* Children's Books * Teaching in the Library
Plus... * The Parent Connection * Interviews with
children's book authors and illustrators * Science
* Technology and more!
)on't miss this valuable
resource for your library -
subscribe today.
Call 800-678-8793 or visit
our website at
www.TeachingK-8.com
Choosing
Books for
r 
;IAVRnu 
M
THIRD
EDITION
A former
Parents' Choice Award Winner
in:
inning
ne
e.html
W**L
I 
flAfe~,, Unnvw~,n 
~iith
I 
Ute(M 
I Iwit 
Lt 
I
UNIERITYOFI 
OS 
P
0008-9036(200005)53:9; 1-E
AA
__
-I
Reisendupated
.eý-
