ILL I N 
I S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
.* 
". 
-*" 
.
' 
. , -*"-', 
-'" '
s., 
_m;,d 
;-
3~ "~In the first picture book that the Caldecott Honor artist
has both. written and illustrated, a wvitty green narrator
describes [h~is] dramatic transformation from idol
in Egypt to a captive curiosityr in Napoleon's France.
A singular voice and impeccable visual pacing make
this character's story one of the most memorable of
the year."- Sta~rred review & a Best B00 k '99 / Publshers Weekly
* "A Nile crocodile is suddenly set upon by 'bozos with
funnIy hats,' who at the behest of Napoleon cart him off
to a Parisian fountain for public display. Soon he is the
'~Toast of the Tulleries,' but [then] he hears that he's
slated to become a pie ... Crocodile tells his tale in a
disinlgenuous tone; the illustrations [are] grand."
--Pointer review / Kirkus Reviews
All ages. $15.95Tr 
(0-06-205168-7); $15.89Lb 
(0-06-205199-7)
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
February 2000
Vol. 53 No. 6
A LOOK INSIDE
199 
THE BIG PICTURE
Jade Green: A Ghost Story by Phyllis Reynolds Naylor
201 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
203 * The Book ofthe Lion by Michael Cadnum
204 * Gloria's Way by Ann Cameron; illus. by Lis Toft
209 * Queen Esther, the Morning Star ad. and illus. by Mordicai Gerstein
210 * It's So Amazing!: A Book about Eggs, Sperm, Birth, Babies, and Families
by Robie H. Harris; illus. by Michael Emberley
227 * What's in a Name by Ellen Wittlinger
228 * Sindbad: From the Tales of the Thousand and One Nights ad. and illus.
by Ludmila Zeman
229 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
231 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Centerfor Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL
61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor (JMD)
Deborah Stevenson, Associate Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison
Elaine A. Bearden, Reviewer (EAB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Janice N. Harrington, Reviewer (JNH)
Fern Kory, Reviewer (FK)
CENTER STAFF
Melanie Kimball
Jeannette Hulick
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $60.00; individuals, $50.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $5.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from Bell & Howell, 300 North Zeeb
Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson Associates,
P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to the
University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 51 E. Armory Ave., Champaign,
IL 61820-6601. E-mail: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2000 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Mark Elliott fromJade Green: A Ghost Story ©2000. Used by permission of
Atheneum Books for Young Readers.
FEBRUARY 2000 
* 
199
THE BIG PICTURE
Jade Green: A Ghost Story
by Phyllis Reynolds Naylor
Before young adult fiction established itself as a genre, gothic romance novels were
a reading staple of adolescent girls. The plots were, to put it kindly, predictable: a
young woman (preferably an orphan) with no visible means of support arrives to
stay in an old mansion (family or otherwise, depending on whether she is poor
relation or governess) far from wherever it is she comes from, hoping that, at last,
she has found sanctuary. Ah, but it is not to be, for the elegant/faded/respectable
facade of the manor hides a terrible secret/scandal/family curse, and it is only after
the beautiful-and-brave heroine hair-raisingly escapes from potentially tragic acci-
dents, develops suspicions about the dark and brooding lord/worthy stableman/
bastard son of the manor, witnesses the unexplainable, and discovers the truth that
it (the secret/scandal/family curse) is laid to rest. Along the way the heroine finds
true love and the promise of a smoldering (and respectable, since she marries im-
mediately) sex life. Which brings us to this month's Big Picture.
Orphan Judith Sparrow comes to the town of Whispers, South Carolina,
knowing little of the uncle who has agreed to give her a home. What she does
know is that the color green is strictly prohibited in her uncle's house, but Judith
cannot bear to part with a silk frame in the forbidden color that holds a photo-
graph of her late mother. She smuggles it into her room and hides it in the bottom
of her trunk, inside her closet.
Life at her Uncle Geoffrey's is more than she dared hope-the house is
fine, her uncle kind, and the cook, Mrs. Hastings, warm and welcoming. Judith
gets a job at a local milliner's shop trimming hats, and she meets the handsome
miller's son Zeke Carey, who shows a good deal of interest in her. At the milliner's
shop Judith hears about Jade Green, a young woman taken in by Judith's uncle
some years before. Tragically, Jade killed herself under mysterious circumstances
(she chopped off her own hand with a meat cleaver and bled to death) and Uncle
Geoffrey and Mrs. Hastings still mourn her loss. This lurid tale explains the pro-
hibition of green, Jade's favorite color, in the Sparrow household. But gnawing
guilt (for having secreted the forbidden color in her trunk) and unexplained inci-
dents (noises in the closet, photographs that change images) prey on Judith's mind,
and begin to make her doubt her own sanity.
Welcome to young adult southern gothic, aka "Hush, Hush, Sweet
Judith." Naylor knows her genre and plays it for every histrionic note. Judith's
mother died in a madhouse and Judith fears the same fate; her older, dissipated
cousin Charles has "rooms in town" so he can dally with "ladies of the night"; and
there is rising tension regarding the disposition of the Sparrow family fortune now
that there is another possible heir (Judith). But these comparatively mundane
problems pale beside the supernatural goings-on. That green frame Judith brought
200 
* THE BULLETIN
into the house has awakened the ghost of Jade, or rather, it has awakened her
severed hand: "I gasped in horror, and my breath stopped. For there on my rug
lay a hand, a human hand. A girl's right hand, detached from arm and body ...
I could only stare at the ghastly spectacle-the limp, white fingers, the delicate
wrist, and then, the jagged stump on which dried blood was visible, the broken
connection of bone and muscle and skin. .. ." Jade's hand skitters around the
mansion, playing the piano, juggling cleavers, locking doors, and generally terror-
izing Judith until the night of a furious hurricane, when the vengeful hand saves
Judith from the lecherous advances of cousin Charles, who, it is revealed, mur-
dered Jade when she refused to submit to his lustful appetites.
Judith tells her own story in the prim-but-passionate style of an old fash-
ioned romance heroine ("By the time Zeke broke in, would I be ravished, losing
not only my honor but possibly my life?"), and there is a subtle tongue-in-cheek
flavor to the prose. It is clear Naylor can find her way blindfolded through the
turns of this just slightly decadent, barely risque plot, and she does so with glee and
a great deal of authorial control. Her restraint is admirable, for just when you
think she's going over the top, she draws back and instead offers a wholesome
picnic by the sea and a first kiss "as delicious as any tea cake."
Staying true to gothic form, the small cast of characters are developed
just enough to keep them from being flat without slowing down the trajectory of
the swiftly building plot. Naylor gets some heart-thumping shock value out of the
genuinely creepy appearance of the detached hand, leading up to its debut with
scratching sounds in the night, movement caught out of the corner of the eye,
something that brushes the face in the dark, and other hints that things aren't
quite right. The author uses her late nineteenth-century south-by-the-sea setting
to good advantage, combining a foreshadowed hurricane with the final confronta-
tion between murdering cad and (ghost hand of) murdered maiden in a roaring
blast ofwind, rain, and vengeance that is positively operatic. Judith flees the rising
flood with Zeke on "the last wagon to leave Whispers" with one final nightmare
image for the road: "I turned in my seat, my eyes riveted upon the hand. Down it
came, lower, then lower still, until it reached the swirling water and disappeared.
Forever."
No problematic inexplicable adolescent angst here. This is unapologetic,
craftily constructed romantic melodrama, complete with hurricanes, stolen kisses,
bloodstained steps, and echoes of Mr. Fox. I hope Naylor had as much fun writing
it as young adults are going to have reading it. (Imprint information appears on p.
217.)
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor
.
:¾
FEBRUARY 2000 
* 
201
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ADOFF, ARNOLD 
Touch the Poem; illus. by Lisa Desimini. 
Blue Sky/Scholastic,
2000 
[32p]
ISBN 0-590-47970-9 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-5
Seventeen poems-free verse and shaped-explore and celebrate the sense of touch.
Most center on common childhood experiences, from a luxurious soak in a hot
bath ("Water 
Surrounding My Forehead/ Water 
Making A Liquid Crown/
Water Covering Into My Ears") to the sated discomfort of a post-Thanksgiving
feast ("I Always End Up On The Floor: My Belly/ Too Full To Stay In Front Of
The Game,/ My Belly/ Too Full To Turn Onto My Back"). Desimini's photos
and mixed-media collages don't quite achieve the sparkle and whimsy of Love
Letters (BCCB 3/97). Double spreads that take advantage of long horizontal pages
to exaggerate the composition are most successful (a girl submerged in bubbles like
a foamy mummy in a sarcophagus; a girl supine under the dining table with a
steaming pie balanced on her belly), but most are less imaginative than Desimini
fans have come to expect. Despite these shortcomings, though, any reprise Adoff-
Desimini collaboration is most welcome, and readers should greet the verses with
a nod of recognition. EB
ANTLE, NANCY 
Playing Solitaire. Dial, 2000 
[112p]
ISBN 0-8037-2406-3 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Ellie is adjusting to new life at her grandfather's after a sequence of family tragedies
has left her figuratively-and literally-battered. She wants to make a new start
("Nobody'll be feeling sorry for me 'cause my daddy was a mean drunk or 'cause
Mama died of brain cancer"), but her father's final act of violence can't be hidden:
it resulted in her losing three fingers on her left hand. She thinks she might be
settling in nonetheless, finding a friend and acquiring a dog, but it soon looks like
her father (running from the law) is seeking to reestablish contact; armed with her
grandfather's gun, Ellie is determined that any contact her father has with her will
be his last. Antle sometimes lays things on too thickly (the intervention of Ellie's
mentally unstable grandmother at the last minute is contrived, for instance, and
the recalled scenes of Ellie playing cards with her father lose some impact to their
gothic tendencies), but this is a dark and intense story. It's also a change of pace
from more psychologically ambivalent treatments of the subject: Ellie's father is at
best despicable and pitiable rather than evil, and readers may, in fact, be a little
sorry that Ellie doesn't actually blow her old man away. The tension mounts
effectively as Ellie attempts to ascertain just how close her father is while keeping
the information from the adults, and the suspense will involve readers to the end
of the concise narrative. The brevity and dramatic subject will commend this to
reluctant readers as well as those just looking for the satisfying triumph of a girl
who's had it rough. DS
202 
* THE BULLETIN
BOGACKI, TOMEK My First Garden; written and illus. by Tomek Bogacki. 
Foster/
Farrar, 2000 
[34p]
ISBN 0-374-32518-9 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
The narrator recalls his childhood home, situated in a densely built-up town filled
with winding streets. The courtyard of the house proves unsuitable for satisfactory
childhood playtimes, so the boy is thrilled with the alteration of his world wrought
by the acquisition of a bicycle. On his bike, he explores the town and the sur-
rounding area, eventually finding a garden; this inspires him to revive the garden
in his courtyard, which changes its spirit completely. This is a gentle and retro-
spective narrative that meanders much as the narrator meanders through the streets;
it takes awhile to get to the titular garden, and its importance as a connection to the
narrator's own son detracts from its importance as a plot element. The reds and
greens of Bogacki's village are slightly muted, and the feathery brushstrokes keep
the faces indistinct and emphasize tones and patterns instead, lending a dreamy
distance to the artwork. There's a Peter Sis-like flavor to the resultant mood,
enhanced by some illustrative compositions that contain additional text explaining
or narrating the thumbnail images. Most audiences will find more impact in
Stewart's The Gardener (BCCB 10/97), but some youngsters may enjoy Bogacki's
ethereal and thoughtful approach. DS
BRUCHAC, JOSEPH 
Pushing Up the Sky: Seven Native American Playsfor Children;
illus. by Teresa Flavin. 
Dial, 2000 
94p
ISBN 0-8037-2168-4 
$17.99 
Ad 
Gr. 2-5
Seven tales from as many American Indian traditions are recast here as simple-to-
produce plays: "Gluskabe and Old Man Winter" dramatizes how Gluskabe (cul-
ture hero of the Abenaki) brought warm weather back to his people; "The Cannibal
Monster" tells of the origin of mosquitoes among the Tlingit peoples; the Snohomish
tale of the origin of the stars is related in "Pushing Up the Sky"; the Zuni, Chey-
enne, Ojibway, and Cherokee traditions are also represented. Despite a tendency
towards monotonous pageant-speak, the plays should lend themselves easily to
classroom performances. Bruchac includes suggestions for props, scenery, cos-
tumes, and production; stage directions are interspersed throughout the clearly
formatted scripts. A brief note on the culture of origin (Abenaki, Zuni, Ojibway,
etc.) for each story/play is given at the beginning of each chapter, and permission
for performance and photocopying for nonprofit school or home productions is
given on the copyright page. Simply composed full-page gouache paintings ac-
company each play, along with black-and-white pen and ink drawings. The im-
pact of the often bland illustrations is uneven, but they do give some sense of
possible staging and costume design. A bibliography is included. JMD
BUCHHOLZ, QUINT 
The Collector ofMoments; written and illus. by Quint Buchholz;
tr. from the German by Peter F. Neumeyer. 
Farrar, 1999 
48p
ISBN 0-374-31520-5 
$18.00 
Ad Gr. 4-7
The young narrator is affectionately known as "The Professor" by Max the artist,
who rents the room upstairs in the summers. The boy is fascinated with Max's life,
studio, and art, reveling in Max's companionship and wild tales without ever get-
ting a chance to see the pictures Max makes ("He had leaned a long row of pic-
tures, back side facing out, against the walls of the studio"). One day Max departs,
FEBRUARY 2000 
* 
203
leaving the pictures and accompanying notes for viewing in his absence; the boy
finds further inspiration for his beloved violin music in the art but puts his music
aside when Max chooses not to return. The text gets in its own way and impedes
the lyrical story; though the language possesses a suitable quiet stillness, the text is
just too wordy, interfering with the imaginative flow of the concept. The real
story unfolds in the illustrations: Buchholz employs constricted sepia-toned im-
ages to depict the boy's view of reality, then switches to oversized color artwork for
the gallery of Max's paintings. There's a silence and surrealism to those works that
evoke Van Allsburg (particularly in the pencilly textures of the flat surfaces) and
Magritte (in both the incongruous components and the orthodoxy and seriousness
of the execution), and the world of imaginative moments takes flight on its own-
until the last picture, where the Professor's real life appears in one of Max's wide-
skied illustrations, bringing that world to the boy for life. The plot is less interesting
than that world, but kids who've enjoyed Sfs' older picture books or Rylant's artis-
tic vignettes may find their aesthetic and speculative impulses gratified here. DS
BUTTS, ELLEN R. 
Eugenie Clark: Adventures of a Shark Scientist; by Ellen R.
Butts and Joyce R. Schwartz. 
Linnet, 2000 
[107p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-208-02440-9 
$19.50
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Swimmin' with the sharks may not be everyone's idea of a good time, but plenty of
readers will be intrigued by a story of the woman who has expanded scientific
knowledge and popular understanding of this much-maligned fish. The authors
trace her life from her earliest interest in fish (spawned during the many hours
spent at the public aquarium in lieu of a more formal child-care arrangement) to
her many professional endeavors as a diver, researcher, and professor. Readers will
appreciate the novelty of a woman pioneering a male-dominated field, but a some-
what rushed text pushes her from one professional undertaking to the next with
only the most cursory segues; the ups and downs of her adult personal life are so
thinly covered that one chapter finds her surrounded by a close and loving family,
while the next inexplicably has her children moving in with their father following
a divorce. Information concerning the remarkable strides in diving technology
that occurred over the course of Clark's career is left until the final chapter, so
readers are not clearly shown how these advances impacted (even enabled) her
ichthyological research. Coverage of Clark's work is far more detailed here than in
Ann McGovern's easy reader Shark Lady, however, and readers ready to step up to
a more involved account might want to take a dip. 
Photographs, source notes, a
glossary, a bibliography, and an index are included. EB
CADNUM, MICHAEL 
The Book ofthe Lion. 
Viking, 2000 
[156p]
ISBN 0-670-88386-7 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 8-12
Seventeen-year-old Edmund barely escapes the fate of his master the moneyer,
whose hand is severed and spiked to his anvil for cheating the king's exchequer.
Taken into service as a squire to Sir Nigel, bound for the Holy Land on King
Richard's Crusade, Edmund realizes that near-certain death at the hands of the
"infidel" is preferable to certain death at the hands of his powerful countrymen.
His account of his journey East, filled with marvels unseen by a young man who
has heretofore never left his village, is a remarkable traveler's tale replete with con-
204 
* THE BULLETIN
vincing details of the sights (beautiful and grim), sounds (clamorous), smells (rank),
and feel (oppressively hot) of the bloody pilgrimage. Although Cadnum never
sensationalizes, the carnage intrinsic to any truthful discussion of the "holy" war
comes through vividly, and readers expecting an enlightened view of the Muslim
cause reflecting a twentieth-century perspective will not find it in Edmund's de-
vout and obedient loyalty to his master and Richard's mission. Still, Edmund
displays a strong sense of honor, and according to his interpretation of fair play at
arms, Saladin's forces are often the object of his respect, if not his love. A conclud-
ing author's note comments on the Crusaders' world view and helps put fictional-
ized events and opinions into historical perspective. EB
CAMERON, ANN 
Gloria's Way; illus. by Lis Toft. 
Foster/Farrar, 2000 
[112p]
ISBN 0-374-32670-3 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Those familiar with Cameron's chronicles of Huey (The Stories Huey Tells, BCCB
12/95, etc.) and Julian (The Stories Julian Tells, 1/82, etc.) have already met Gloria,
Julian's best friend; here she gets a book all her own. She's having her ups and
downs: trouble befalls the beautiful valentine she lovingly crafts for her mother,
she's working out the kinks in a new friendship with Latisha, she's dying to know
if Julian likes her better than he does Latisha, and she's grappling with that dread
arithmetical monster, fractions. This has the cozy solidity of the other books about
these characters, and the picture of the pack of kids roaming the friendly neighbor-
hood together is an appealing one. The depiction of such a pack's social dynamics
is accurate, with both the casual interplay and occasional downside of groupthink
(Gloria, Julian, and Huey dump an inedible pie on Latisha's steps) honestly yet
sympathetically represented. Toft's black and white illustrations portray the kids
sweetly but not saccharinely, with suitable warmth and affection. DS
CARBONE, ELISA 
Sarah and the Naked Truth. Knopf, 2000 
[144p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-90264-3 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-80264-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Sarah (of Starting School with an Enemy, BCCB 4/98) is happy to have a new
friend in the neighborhood when Olivia moves to Maryland from Trinidad, but
she and her other pal Christina are puzzled by the occasional enigma in Olivia's
behavior. Sarah's own lively behavior is consistent, but her appearance has
changed-a bubblegum accident required a hair-shearing-which has led to her
being taken for a boy on a local basketball team. Then Christina has her own
problem when a teacher with a "great costume she bought in Mexico" wants Salva-
dorean Christina to represent Mexico in a social-studies pageant about heritage.
There's a didactic wash over the tying together of these threads under the "be true
to yourself" banner, as Olivia comes clean about having a prosthetic leg, Sarah
owns up to the coach about her gender (staving offa weekend in a bunkhouse with
the boys), and Christina works out a way to represent her true origins in the pag-
eant. The liveliness that sparked the earlier book is evident here as well, however,
especially in the depiction of Sarah's high-spirited basketball action and the events
related to Olivia's prosthesis (there's a funny and iconoclastic scene where the girls
search for Olivia's leg after its unexpected independent departure from an amuse-
ment-park ride). The title will inevitably draw kids in, and even though the na-
kedness is of the philosophical kind they'll appreciate Carbone's light touch. DS
FEBRUARY 2000 
* 
205
CLINE-RANSOME, LESA 
Satchel Paige; illus. by James Ransome. 
Simon,
2000 
34p
ISBN 0-689-81151-9 
$16.00 
R Gr. 2-4
The tone of this picture-book biography of Satchel Paige is set from the opening
lines: "Some say Leroy Paige was born six foot three and a half inches tall, 180
pounds, wearing a size fourteen shoe. Not a bit of truth to it. And some argue that
when Mrs. Lula Paige first held her precious Leroy in her arms, she noticed his
right fist was tightly curled around a baseball. Pure fiction." Cline-Ransome can
afford to debunk baseball myth here, because baseball truth is even more impres-
sive. Leroy "Satchel" Paige was a gifted baseball player in the Negro Leagues, and
when the color barriers finally came down in 1948, he was the first black pitcher to
be drafted into the major leagues. Paige's resentment of not being allowed to play
in the majors and his difficulty adjusting when he finally did play in the big league
get some attention, but this biography concentrates on Paige's early life, the cir-
cumstances that shaped him, the showmanship that psyched him, and the right
arm that made him a legend. Ransome's oil paintings have a robust outdoor feel
to them that is reinforced by the strong browns, greens, and blues of stands, field,
and sky. On nearly every action spread, Satchel Paige is the center of attention, his
posture declaring his authority. Baseball fans and beginning readers fond of biog-
raphies will cover all the bases with this one. A bibliography is included. JMD
COLMAN, PENNY 
Girls: A History of Growing Up Female in America. Scholastic
Reference, 2000 
192p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-590-37129-0 
$18.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
In ten heavily illustrated chapters, Colman attempts to encapsulate the experience
of girlhood among all North American cultures from Asian emigration across the
hypothetical Aleutian land bridge to the present. The result is a textual album of
chronologically arranged, highly personal views and events rather than a cohesive
essay on their broader meaning. Many voices-notable and obscure-are aired,
and Colman occasionally achieves a thought-provoking juxtaposition of testimony.
Two women, for example, recall the mixed messages regarding gender roles they
received in the 1960s: "My mother wanted me to be an ultra-femme; my father
seemed to expect that I would excel at seemingly masculine activities like school
and business"; "I understood that for a boy to plead for a baby doll was daring and
original, while for a girl to do so would be old-fashioned and unimaginative." Few
voices are heard in such detail, however, and concepts worthy of deeper examina-
tion (such as the invention of "the idea of being a teenager") are passed over in the
rush to reach the next historic epoch. Although some readers will doubtless enjoy
meandering along these diverse paths to womanhood, those seriously interested in
exploring the topic would do better to start with Catherine Gourley's Good Girl
Work (BCCB 7/99). An index and bibliography are included. EB
COREY, SHANA 
You Forgot Your Skirt, Amelia Bloomer!: A Very Improper Story;
illus. by Chesley McLaren. 
Scholastic, 2000 
[34p]
ISBN 0-439-07819-9 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
"Amelia Bloomer was NOT a proper lady. In fact, Amelia Bloomer thought proper
ladies were silly." With this attention-grabbing but hyperbolized opening, Corey
launches into a beginner biography of the woman who briefly rocked the nine-
206 
* 
THE BULLETIN
teenth-century American fashion world with her liberating, eccentric pantaloon-
styled garb. Although the text offers the bare facts on Bloomer's magazine, The
Lily, and on her concern for women's rights issues, the curlicue type and swirling
confections of period gowns (each worthy of topping an overdecorated cake) may
lead young readers to entirely miss the point that Bloomer considered all this fuss
a bad thing. The final spreads attempt to demonstrate the lasting influence of
Bloomer's freethinking designs, but the samples of tight, trendy clothing from the
1960s, '80s, and '90s represent only the daring side of fashion, not Bloomer's goals
of comfort, convenience, and health. Still, an author's note supplies much of the
contextual data missing from the text, and readers just slightly too young for Rhoda
Blumberg's picture book biography, Bloomers! (BCCB 9/93) might want to try
this on for size. EB
Cox, JUDY 
Mean, Mean Maureen Green; illus. by Cynthia Fisher. 
Holiday
House, 1999 
[80p]
ISBN 0-8234-1502-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-4
Lilley is no wimp-the third-grader's family nickname is "Tiger"-but she's hav-
ing trouble with fears these days nonetheless. Mean Maureen Green, a bullying
fourth-grader, rides Lilley's school bus this year, and Lilley's athletic dad is still
trying to convince Lilley to get over a past accident and learn to ride a bike. Her
new friend Adam stuns Lilley with his cavalier disregard of the threat Maureen
represents ("To Lilley's horror, he stood up, holding out his sandwich. 'Hey,
Maureen! Chopped beetles! Want a bite?'"), but even his encouragement can't
get her rolling on two wheels. This is a chipper middle-grades story with a sympa-
thetic heroine, and Cox doesn't honey up her slightly astringent tone by making
Maureen out to be merely misunderstood (Lilley does, however, manage to put
her menace into context when she sees Maureen with chicken pox). The friend-
ship with Adam is breezily but accurately depicted (the friends get mad and don't
speak for a few days, then pick up where they left off), and Lilley's anxiety about
disappointing her dad and becoming a cowardly person is credible and under-
standable. Cox is carving herself a niche in the step-up-from-beginning-readers
genre, and this is a solid and effective entry. Final illustrations not seen. DS
CUYLER, MARGERY 
100th Day Worries; illus. by Arthur Howard. 
Simon,
2000 
[32p]
ISBN 0-689-82979-5 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
"Jessica was a worrier," beset with worries about everything from the loss of a first
tooth to missing the school bus. Her new worry is a school assignment that re-
quires her to bring in a collection of 100 things to commemorate the 100th day of
first grade; she dismisses ice cubes as too melty, marshmallows as too sticky, tooth-
picks as too pointy, and she simply can't figure out what to bring. Finally she
brings in an eclectic collection donated by her family at the last minute, which the
teacher assesses as "100 bits of love." Though there's more than a touch ofschmaltz
to the finish (and it's only clear from the students' responses that the assignment is
supposed to be 100 of the same thing), Cuyler has an unflashily effective style and
an ear for easy dialogue that keeps this story smoothly rolling. Howard's art evinces
the energetically scrawled lines of Betsy Lewin, and the different perspectives and
FEBRUARY 2000 
* 207
compositions (for example, Jessica and the dog peer over the edge of the table
Kilroy-style at the assembled objects) ensure that the simple visuals remain inter-
esting. Warm, uncomplicated, and believable, this is a happy school story for
young audiences. DS
DUNCAN, LOIS 
I Walk at Night; illus. by Steve Johnson and Lou Fancher. 
Viking,
2000 
32p
ISBN 0-670-87513-9 
$15.99 
R 4-7 yrs
A black-and-white cat pads softly through both pages and poetry in this picture
book about the nocturnal yearnings of a domesticated feline. Duncan's evocative
verse has a rhythmic meter that lends itself to dramatic reading aloud: "I lap from
china bowls./ I clean off dishes.// I like the taste of cream./ But while I drink I
dream/ Of birds and fishes." The comparison of purring pet with jungle cat is
made with subtlety and humor, and it is enhanced by the oil illustrations of Johnson
and Fancher. The paintings rely on the contrast between cobalt shadows and
subtle light sources for emphasis, and the night-blue palette gives an air of mystery
to the wanderings of the midnight cat. Cats often give the impression of having a
secret life; Duncan shows us what it is. JMD
FARBER, ERICA 
Circle of Three: Tales of the Nine Charms; by Erica Farber and
John Sansevere. 
Delacorte, 2000 
[224 p]
ISBN 0-385-32613-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
Walker Crane is on a field trip with his class when he reaches for what he thinks is
a coin in the museum fountain. The coin is actually a magical charm, and it is the
mechanism by which Walker is drawn into the parallel kingdom of Sunnebeam.
In Sunnebeam, young Niko watches in horror as his foster father and other loved
ones are murdered by the dreaded Dragon warriors; Aurora, a young Gypsy girl,
becomes tangled in court intrigues when the Empress herself begs her for help.
Thus begins the fulfillment of a prophecy predicting a deciding battle between the
forces of Dark and Light. Both magic and fate are strong influences on the novel's
action, and there is plenty of action: escapes across the desert, flight from a preter-
naturally gifted human tracker, and numerous close calls with death and destruc-
tion. The insertion of modern terminology (the Dragons carry flamethrowers,
and a burning Gypsy village smells of napalm) is jarring in what is otherwise a
fairly well-realized if somewhat generic fantasy world. Characterization takes sec-
ond place to plot here, as most of this first volume of a projected trilogy concen-
trates on introducing the players and getting them into position for the next book.
The conclusion to this promising if uneven first episode finds Aurora the psychic
Gypsy girl captured by the tracker, and Walker and Niko united in escape to an
unknown destination. Fantasy fans will want to keep an eye open for the next
installment. JMD
FEARNLEY, JAN 
Mr. Wolfs Pancakes; written and illus. by Jan Fearnley. 
Little
Tiger, 2000 
[32p]
ISBN 1-888444-76-2 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Mr. Wolf wants to make some pancakes, but being merely an unskilled wolf he's
having some trouble, needing help in reading, writing, counting, and even cook-
208 
* THE BULLETIN
ing. He seeks assistance from his neighbors (Chicken Little, the Gingerbread Man,
Little Red Riding Hood, and so forth) but they're astonishingly rude, completely
refusing to comply in any way. He struggles through, however, and manages to
make quite a pile of pancakes, whose delicious scent wafts its way through the
neighborhood, enticing the unhelpful locals. The audience will expect rapproche-
ment all around and a homily about sharing when Mr. Wolf lets his greedy neigh-
bors in, and they'll be delighted with the unexpected result: pushed beyond
endurance, "Mr. Wolf gobbled them up. SNIPPETY! SNAPPETY! That was the
end of his unhelpful neighbors!" The surprise turn is riotously enacted, because
there's nothing in the text or the illustrations, aside from the notable unpleasant-
ness of the neighbors, to tip off the final conspicuous consumption. Adults startled
by the book's failure to reach the expected moral should note that the implications
here have definite real-world validity as well. The line-and-watercolor art offers
entertaining details (our hero reads from the Wolf It Down Recipe Book, and the
village is rife with folkloric jokes such as Simple Simon's Pie & Cake Emporium),
and the demeanors of the self-centered neighbors (the resentful Gingerbread Man
is particularly droll as he scowls from his candy house) are amusing without giving
things away. Pair this with Scieszka's The True Story of the Three Little Pigs by A.
Wolf(BCCB 9/89) for a pro-wolf session or with Jolley's Grunter: A Pig with an
Attitude (BCCB 6/99) for an improper readaloud, or make "SNIPPETY!
SNAPPETY!" into a byword for encouraging help from the assembled, especially
at a holiday meal. DS
FREDEEN, CHARLES 
Nellie Bly: Daredevil Reporter. Lerner, 2000 
112p 
illus.
with photographs 
(Lerner Biographies)
ISBN 0-8225-4956-5 
$25.26 
R Gr. 6-10
Although even the driest catalog of events in the life of the intrepid stunt reporter
could be intrinsically interesting, Fredeen offers a zesty account of Bly's exploits
and a thoughtful evaluation of her restless personality, which impelled her not
only to investigative reporting triumphs, but also to brusque job resignations, a
hasty marriage, an ill-advised love affair, and bankruptcy. Without belittling her
accomplishments, Fredeen sets his subject's journalistic derring-do (bluffing her
way into male dominated jobs, checking herself into an insane asylum, breaking
the travel records of Verne's fictional Phileas Fogg, etc.) into the context of an age
of even less ethical reporting standards and notes observations of her critical con-
temporaries. (A rival newspaperman remarked of her round-the-world trek, "[The
World could] have sent a canvas-covered sugar-cured ham with a tag tied to it
spinning around the globe.") Black-and-white period photos, source notes, and
an index will serve report writers well, but this will also be a good selection for
recreational readers with a taste for biography. EB
GAEDDERT, LOUANN 
Friends and Enemies. 
Karl/Atheneum, 2000 
[192p]
ISBN 0-689-82822-5 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
William Spencer, son of the town's new Methodist minister, is off to a bad start at
his new high school. Class bully Clive Van Dyne has it in for him, and only the
intervention of another freshman, Mennonite Jim Reimer, saves him from a seri-
ous beating. Jim and William's friendship deepens and they begin to spend much
of their free time together until Pearl Harbor intrudes on their lives, dragging the
FEBRUARY 2000 
* 
209
thorny issues of war and pacifism into the open in their community and driving an
ideological wedge between the boys. William throws himself into local war ef-
forts, while Jim and his Mennonite neighbors retreat ever further onto the social
fringe; a crisis finally erupts when William suspects Jim of vandalizing his model
fighter aircraft and joins Clive and his gang in brutalizing his erstwhile friend.
Gaeddert raises a host of complicated questions regarding patriotism, civil defense,
and conscientious objection and, to her credit, offers no simplistic answers. She
does too frequently, however, interject a forced tone into the adolescents' exami-
nation of these issues: "'You can't let fighters take over whole countries because no
one will oppose them.' 'You're right. But still, I think it may be more courageous
not to fight in this case than to fight.'" Still, there's enough dramatic edge here to
balance the forays into preachiness, and readers who delight in a good moral di-
lemma will have a satisfying tussle with this one. EB
GERSTEIN, MORDICAI, ad. 
Queen Esther, the Morning Star; ad. and illus. by
Mordicai Gerstein. 
Simon, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-689-81372-4 
$16.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
The biblical tale of how Esther, Jewish Queen of Persia, saved her people from the
genocidal whim of wicked prime minister Haman is the origin of the Jewish holi-
day celebration of Purim. This dramatic tale has received picture-book treatment
before, by Diane Wolkstein (Esther's Story, BCCB 2/92) and by Rita Golden Gelman
(Queen Esther Saves Her People, BCCB 3/98) in stately retellings that emphasize
the iconization of Esther as heroine. Gerstein's version of Esther's triumph has a
celebratory lightness in both words and pictures that begins with the author's open-
ing note explaining his family's Purim traditions: "As children, we went to the
temple dressed as characters from the story, and whenever Haman's name was
mentioned ... we booed and whirled our noisemakers. . .. And of course we
stuffed ourselves with the pastries called 'hamantashen.'... I liked the prune kind
best." The gouache illustrations resemble mosaics or stained glass with their simple
shapes and window-like frames; the banner-like compositions reflect and enhance
the unfolding narrative. Pastel colors in subtle tones of desert sand and sunset
skies have a translucent quality that adds to the impression of clarity. The charac-
ters are bigger-than-life caricatures: the king is round, fat, and good-naturedly
despotic; Esther is fresh-faced and open; and Haman is green-skinned and pointy
(like the Oz movie witch). The seriousness of the content is offset by the jocular
tone, which seems to anticipate the celebration, and Gerstein's conclusion extends
the feeling of being in on the secret: "And all that remains of Haman is his name,
as part of the word hamantashen, a delicious pastry shaped like his hat. And for
that, we may thank him." And for this retelling, we can thank Mr. Gerstein. JMD
GIBLIN, JAMES CROSS 
The Amazing Life of Benjamin Franklin; illus. by Michael
Dooling. 
Scholastic, 2000 
[48p]
ISBN 0-590-48534-2 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-5
As he did in his picture-book biography of Thomas Jefferson (BCCB 10/94), Giblin
strikes a happy balance in covering the personal and public lives of one of our
nation's founders. Here readers will find standard information on Franklin the
printer/publisher, inventor/experimenter, statesman/diplomat, family man, and
probable cad. Emphasizing Franklin's rocky relationship with his son William,
210 
* THE BULLETIN
governor of New Jersey and staunch loyalist, Giblin ably demonstrates how mess-
ily the political and emotional facets of the subject's life intertwine. Although the
narration is not quite as smooth as in the author's previous work, several addenda
on Franklin's inventions and adages, surviving historic sites, and notes on research
for the text and illustrations expand the scope of the coverage. Dooling has shifted
here from the dramatic full-page scenes he employed for Jefferson's milieu to a
mixed bag of paintings, sketches, and vignettes of Franklin's life executed with
varying degrees of polish. A detailed index will help researchers navigate smoothly
through the double-columned text. EB
GLOVER, SAVION 
Savion: My Life in Tap; by Savion Glover and Bruce
Weber. 
Morrow, 2000 
[80p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-688-15629-0 
$19.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
This is a somewhat rambling but still intriguing autobiography of Savion Glover's
discovery of and dedication to his art, tap dancing. Dancer/choreographer Glover
is an impressive figure; only twenty-six years old, he has revitalized the art of tap
through his own dancing and through his choreography for Bring in Da Noise,
Bring in Da Funk on Broadway. Glover tells his own story, for the most part, with
the occasional editorial comment (presumably by coauthor Weber); quotes from
Glover's mentors, mother, and friends are interspersed throughout. The inconsis-
tency in voice is a bit confusing, and that confusion is reinforced by the design of
the volume, which uses retro sixties-style collage-o-graphics: different typefaces,
photographic cutouts, and a somewhat haphazard layout that impedes continuity.
Added to the black-and-white mix is the dominant and sometimes jarring red used
for emphasis. Still, this is an autobiographical portrait that depicts an artist with
both a deep respect for tradition (Glover gives enormous credit to his tap mentors)
and a desire for innovative creativity. Despite the occasional misstep, the dance
card of this title is certain to be full. JMD
HARRIS, ROBIE H. It's So Amazing!: A Book about Eggs, Sperm, Birth, Babies, and
Families; illus. by Michael Emberley. 
Candlewick, 1999 
81p
ISBN 0-7636-0051-2 
$21.99 
R 
7-12 yrs
The team that produced the excellent It's Perfectly Normal (BCCB 10/94) has re-
turned with a book for younger kids. Those familiar with the previous title will
recognize the brash bird and squeamish bee who comment on proceedings, the
comic-strip panels featuring cheerfully personified ova and sperm, the calm and
straightforward discussion, and the matter-of-factly frank illustrations. While love
(of all kinds), families (of all kinds), and culture (of all kinds) are discussed here,
the emphasis is on explaining the physical mysteries of growth and reproduction.
The book does a capable job of presenting some really quite complicated facts in
ways that offer information suitable for different levels of investigation: the ana-
tomical examination is handily divided into what's inside and what's outside, for
instance, and each sex's section finishes with a helpfully basic enumeration: "In all,
from front to back, there are three openings between a female's legs.... In all,
from front to back, there are two openings between a male's legs ... " While the
previous book invited browsing this one essentially requires it, as there's too much
information for single-sitting absorption here, and kids will need adult assistance
and sharing to profit fully from the text (though it might be a good idea to leave
FEBRUARY 2000 
* 
211
the book around for some at-their-own-pace exploration after the initial introduc-
tion). That's a characteristic, however, rather than a flaw: the breezy tone, acces-
sible approach, and breadth of material makes this a useful volume for young
questioners, and the book's assistance in exploring important questions by reading
and by prompted discussion with an adult will be significant and valuable. DS
HENRY, CHAD 
DogBreath Victorious. Holiday House, 1999 
188p
ISBN 0-8234-1458-2 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Tim is the leader of an alternative rock band called DogBreath. He is in love with
Suzie, who makes "barfing motions" in his direction, his band can't get gigs, his
father just died, his mother is unemployed, and money is a serious issue. A battle
of the grunge bands offers the hope of a $2000 windfall, so Tim's band acquires a
girl singer (Phoebe Fortier, a "very geeky blond girl with blue plastic cat glasses")
and goes for it, despite daunting odds. The revelation that the members of rival
band The Angry Housewives consist of Tim's mother and her friends pushes cred-
ibility, but it is still amusing (and their song lyrics are the best in the book). Some-
where in this self-conscious novel there is a funny story trying to get out, but
Henry never quite chisels away enough superfluity to get to it. Tim's first-person
narration tries too hard for humor, and the strain undercuts any real pathos or wit.
While Tim, Ziggy (Tim's friend and DogBreath drummer), and Phoebe show
promise as dynamic triad, the characterizations reflect a sniggering slyness (Ziggy
takes metal shop because he thinks it's about heavy metal bands), almost as if the
author is writing for adults reading about those crazy teens. Tim's mother and Dr.
Killboy Powerhead (his Zen guitar instructor) are promising cameos, but other
characters are flatly representational. Henry shows the grunge band scene as a col-
lection of freaks and weirdos, which may appeal to the non-grungies but still makes
the author a tourist and not a native of this young adult strange land. JMD
HOWARD, ELIZABETH FITZGERALD 
Virgie Goes to School with Us Boys; illus. by E.
B. Lewis. 
Simon, 2000 
[26p]
ISBN 0-689-80076-2 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-5
Howard is one of the originators of the family story as picture book, and here she
bases her tale on a slender thread of her family's history. In the post-Civil War
South, young Virgie wants desperately to go to school with her older brothers. Big
brother C.C., who narrates the story, starts to come around ("They opened a school
for black people after Mr. Lincoln declared us free like we ought to be. And I was
beginning to wonder, What about Virgie? She was free too. Couldn't she go to
school with us boys?") and finally, Mama and Papa give their permission and Virgie
goes to school. Howard avoids preachiness by wisely sticking with the family
action: the brothers' voiced reluctance to their younger sister accompanying them,
the long walk to school, Virgie's mishaps (she almost steps in poison ivy, and she
does fall in the creek) and victories (she starts them singing in the dark woods, and
their fear of "Raw Head and Bloody Bones" fades away). Virgie's joy in being able
to go to school is cleanly and simply depicted: "'So many books!' she said. She
touched one softly with her hand. 'Someday I'll read all these books!' Already
Virgie was seeming bigger." Lewis' watercolor landscapes are a combination of red
clay and greenery, his indoor settings plain-furnished and lit with natural light.
The book itself is a journey, the images moving from the front yard of the family
212 
* THE BULLETIN
home, across the stream, through the woods, to the front yard of the school: "Big.
Red brick. Long high windows and a wide-open door. Our very own school."
Howard includes a note on her research into her family and history, along with a
photograph of the historical Virgie's brothers. JMD
ICHORD, LORETTA FRANCES 
Toothworms & Spider Juice: An Illustrated History of
Dentistry. Millbrook, 2000 
96p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-7613-1465-2 
$22.40 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
Readers who enjoy wincing over bygone miseries from the darker ages of medicine
will want to take a peek at the many dental oddities covered in this volume. From
toothache prevention ("pick your teeth with the nail of the middle toe of an owl")
to mouthwash ("The first urine of the morning was used ... from ancient times
through the eighteenth century"), from the earliest toothbrushes and dental flosses
to the perfection of false teeth, Ichord's array of trivia is compendious indeed.
Unfortunately, the prose is a trifle clunky ("Here are some commonly known tooth
facts that the ancients didn't know about"), and the organization of material within
chapters is often little more than lists of miscellanea. An addendum in paragraph
form directs the way to some of her more enticing information, but sources of
specific superstitions and tooth lore are uncredited. An index and helpful glossary
of dental terms are provided, though, and a number of well-selected (but some-
times grainy) photos and period illustrations are included. EB
JOCELYN, MARTHE 
Earthly Astonishments. Dutton, 2000 
[176p]
ISBN 0-525-46263-5 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
As soon as it becomes clear that Josephine is unlikely to grow past her twenty-
seven inches, her parents feel that all she will be good for is to make money as a
curiosity, and when her shine wears off as a local novelty, they sell her into service
at a girls' academy. Several years of hardship take their toll, and at the advice of a
single kindly student, Josephine sets off on her own in New York City, where she
is lured into Mr. R. J. Walters' Museum of Earthly Astonishments, one of the
many "freak shows" competing with P. T. Barnum's landmark establishment. Little
Jo-Jo, as she is renamed, at first thrives on the attention of an adoring public and
basks in the familial warmth of her new friends, albino Charley and his mother.
She soon learns, though, that everyone who has a monetary stake in her fame will
stop at nothing to secure her labors, and she must reexamine what her future will
hold if public display becomes her entire career. Jocelyn has neatly styled a mov-
ing tale, made of equal parts historical fiction, social commentary, and old-fash-
ioned orphan melodrama. Little Jo-Jo and Charley accept their states with both
dignity and humor but blankly refuse to accept actual mistreatment of any sort at
the hands of their employer. The novel's conclusion, in which they sail off toward
a presumably better (though ill-defined) life in Europe seems clumsily tacked on,
and readers who have cheered Little Jo-Jo's strength and determination may feel
that they too have been left at sea. An author's note on Little Jo-Jo's late-nine-
teenth-century milieu is included. EB
KESSLER, CRISTINA 
No Condition Is Permanent. Philomel, 2000 
183p
ISBN 0-399-23486-1 
$17.99 
R Gr. 7-12
Jodie is appalled to discover that she and her mother are moving to Sierra Leone so
FEBRUARY 2000 
* 
213
that her mother can do research. The country itself is not initially reassuring; the
teenager is overwhelmed by the heat, language, absence of technology, and sheer
difference in the small village where she lives (the same village where her mother
had performed her Peace Corps service years ago). Eventually Jodie begins to find
a place for herself, becoming close friends with a local girl her age, Khadi, but their
closeness means that Jodie is hurt as well as curious when Khadi excludes her from
a secret ritual. It turns out the ritual involves female circumcision, which Jodie's
mother had come to help stamp out; Jodie cannot muster up the restraint of her
mother, however, and breaks all the cultural rules by attempting to interfere with
Khadi's undergoing of the rite of passage. Jodie's narration of life in a very foreign
situation paints an evocative picture of her village world, and the fish-out-of-water
story retains its usual charm. The circumcision topic is an unusual one, and the
book brings the issue home effectively (though it sends out some conflicting mes-
sages about its view of the village and intercultural judgments and relations). Though
this doesn't have the freshness or smooth writing of Abelove's Go and Come Back
(BCCB 4/98), it's an effective account of a teen grappling with difference and
maturation, and the prices that both may exact. Though most of the Krio words
and phrases sprinkled throughout the text are clear from context, a glossary is
included. DS
KURTZ, JANE 
River Friendly, River Wild; illus. by Neil Brennan. 
Simon,
2000 
[4 0p]
ISBN 0-689-82049-6 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-5
Kurtz draws from her own experience in the 1997 flood of Grand Forks, North
Dakota for these free-verse poems portraying a family's travails as the Red River
overflows its banks. A girl narrator describes the peaceful river in and around
which she and her friends play ("loving the wet, muddy smell of the summer river"),
the blizzard and subsequent melt-off which lead to the flooding, and the frantic
community efforts to sandbag the banks ("One, lift, two, swing, three, catch, four,
toss"). Although other picture books have dealt with the mechanics and inconve-
niences of flooding, Kurtz accurately captures the spirit of denial that permeates a
community on the brink of disaster ("'Let's pack one bag,' Mom says finally./ 'Just
one bag./ Just in case'") and the filth and danger that follow in its wake ("The
newspaper says:/ Beware the river water./ It's contaminated with chemicals,/ And
be careful going back into your house./ The steps could be crumbled./ The floors
could be buckled"). Though formally composed, Brennan's oil glazed scenes are
less a literal rendering of the devastated area than a hazy, dreamlike snapshot of a
memory. This will make a powerful readaloud accompaniment to Mary Calhoun's
Flood (BCCB 4/97) or simply an evocative look at recovery from personal loss. EB
LEMIEUX, ANNE C. All the Answers. 
Avon Camelot, 2000 
[160p]
ISBN 0-380-97771-0 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-9
All of a sudden, Jason's got problems. He's aware that the answer he came up with
for dealing with those he faces in Algebra-using his lunch money to buy home-
work from a classmate-is unlikely to ease tensions either at home, where Dad is
venting his frustration with his fat-free diet and his new boss, or at school, where
Jason's peace of mind is disturbed both by the glamorous female half of a set of
214 
* THE BULLETIN
fraternal twins (the boss's kids) and the domineering male half. The ethical ques-
tions posed by this thoughtful and carefully plotted novel are spelled out too thor-
oughly and answered too explicitly throughout (the novel ends with a letter from
Jason to his math teacher in which he thanks her for "teaching me something even
more important than algebra"). These precociously articulate young characters do
offer useful analyses of the junior-high social scene (one describes the twins as
tropical fish competing for aquarium territory), and Jason's narration is full of
smart-aleck humor, on-target introspection ("I steam myself good for a half hour,
wishing shame, pain, humiliating degradation were water-soluble"), and descrip-
tions ("My dresser's overflowing, as if my clothes tried to make a break from the
drawers but were slain during the escape attempt") that are bound to engage the
sympathies of readers with similarly untidy lives. FK
LEWIS, CATHERINE 
Postcards to Father Abraham. Atheneum, 2000 
[288p]
ISBN 0-689-82852-7 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Meghan's a daughter of the heartland, growing up in Abraham Lincoln's home
town of Springfield, Illinois, but it's hardly an idyllic middle-America existence:
her brother has returned from his Vietnam tour haunted and changed, she's been
kicked out of her private boarding school, and she's just lost a leg to cancer. Dis-
tant from her banker father after her mother's death, she can't bring herself to
share her feelings with him or even with her best friend in Colorado, who still
thinks of Meghan as the athletic and triumphant runner she was. Absent the help
of living people, Meghan turns to the figure of Lincoln, to whom she writes post-
cards detailing her struggle and grief and with whom she feels a connection that
she refuses the rest of the world. The multitude of plot threads heighten the drama
but detract from the focus, with Meghan's life so eventful that the independent
pains become difficult to absorb; the Lincoln device never really integrates into the
rest of the book. Lewis writes with bold risky strokes that sometimes have great
style and impact, however; Meghan's long-simmering bitterness is palpable, and
her cutting anger (and tendency to offer physical violence to the inanimate and
emotional violence to humans) pulses through the novel. The author also gives a
provocative picture ofa homefronter's awakening to the realities of Vietnam (though
some of the period references will be obscure to young readers) as Meghan sees the
war through the eyes-and the fate--of her brother. Though the book is over-
loaded, it's an emotionally charged picture of an era and a situation, and teens will
empathize with Meghan's pain. DS
LILLEGARD, DEE 
Wake Up House! 
Rooms Full of Poems; illus. by Don
Carter. Knopf, 2000 
[26p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-98351-1 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-88351-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 3-6 yrs
The clean, bright acrylics of the eye-opening sculptural illustrations in this collec-
tion of short poems celebrate the cheery white-picket-fence world to which this
house wakes up. Individual poems-from one to three per page-accompany
textured three-dimensional representations of each room, reminding readers that
"a cool floor/ waits to greet/ two sleepy feet" in the bathroom and describing stairs
as the "spiny back/ of a stegosaur,/ stretching itself/ from floor to floor." While
FEBRUARY 2000 
* 
215
not all poems are equally lucid, the casual rhyme schemes of these brief poetic
flights keep them sufficiently grounded. Readers will appreciate the unusual per-
spectives of the illustrations and of poems that suggest corners "are the reason/
walls meet,/ and rooms consider themselves/ complete," and they might easily be
inspired to fill another room-the library or a classroom-with their poetic in-
sights into its motives. FK
MCCLAREN, CLEMENCE 
Waitingfor Odysseus. Atheneum, 2000 
[160p)
ISBN 0-689-82875-6 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
McClaren retells the story of Odysseus' wanderings through the eyes of the women
who love him: his wife, Penelope; the sorceress Circe; the goddess Athena; and his
old nurse, Eurycleia. Divided into four parts, the novel opens with Penelope's
description of her first meeting with Odysseus, when he comes to court her beau-
tiful cousin Helen (soon to be of Troy); their physical attraction and eventual
marriage; the birth of their son; and the departure of Odysseus for the Trojan War.
Circe picks up the narrative, using Odysseus' stay on her island as an excuse for his
telling her of his adventures in the war; Athena then explains her machinations to
bring Odysseus safely home. Eurycleia brings the tale to an end with her descrip-
tion of Odysseus' return to Penelope and his vengeance on the suitors who have
harassed her. This is certainly an interesting take on classic mythology, and there
is little doubt that some (read: female) readers will find this approach more ap-
pealing than the blood-and-thunder approach of other retellings. There is an odd
dissonance here, though: the women to whom McClaren gives voice are totally
focused on Odysseus, who is the center of their universe and this book. Awkward
construction and jarring anachronisms (Eurycleia telling other servants to "snap to
it" and "look alive," Circe describing Odysseus as being "driven by a male ego even
more monumental than most") mar an already contrived text. Characterizations
are one-dimensional and lack humor; there is a deadly earnestness of tone that
makes this difficult to read, and the narrators' voices are indistinct-they exist
simply to relate Odysseus' travails. Still, this is romantic in a reductive sort of way,
and the hints of sexual combustibility will be enough to draw in readers. JMD
McKISSACK, PATRICIA C. 
The Honest-to-Goodness Truth; illus. by Giselle
Potter. 
Schwartz/Atheneum, 2000 
[34p]
ISBN 0-689-82668-0 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Libby gets caught in a lie ("She was surprised at how easy the lie slid out of her
mouth, like it was greased with warm butter") by her mother and decides "from
now on, only the truth." Libby finds, however, that people don't always appreci-
ate the truth, especially when it hurts their feelings, embarrasses them, or gets
them in trouble. By the time Libby's finished telling the truth to all her class-
mates, she's walking home alone. She just can't figure it out, until Virginia Wash-
ington insults 01' Boss, Libby's horse, and "now Libby thought back on her own
truth-telling, and Mama's words suddenly became crystal clear." McKissack has
composed a story-lesson that is absolutely painless, and listeners will easily discern
the clues about "honest-to-goodness" truth the hapless Libby doesn't begin to see.
Potter's mixed-media illustrations are rendered in a palette that combines spring
greenery and yellow light, giving a sense of airiness to this otherwise very grounded
216 
* THE BULLETIN
reflection of McKissack's text. White borders further leaven the depictions of the
gardens, classrooms, and schoolyards in which the characters interact. The crisp
ease of Potter's style complements McKissack's equally fresh text, resulting in an
examination of truth-telling that is truly cogent. Honest-to goodness. JMD
MITCHELL, ADRIAN 
Nobody Rides the Unicorn; illus. by Stephen Lambert. 
Levine/
Scholastic, 2000 
[32p]
ISBN 0-439-11204-4 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
A king, convinced he is in danger of being poisoned, seeks to capture a unicorn in
order to make a talismanic goblet, fork, knife, and spoon from its horn. The king
orders Zoe, the beggar girl ("she was nobody's child"), into the woods to sing
softly and sweetly as bait for the unicorn. When the unicorn comes to Zoe, he is
captured by the king's soldiers. "Now Zoe was very angry, for she had been used
to trick the unicorn and make him a prisoner. And she knew that was wrong."
The clever girl frees the unicorn, but her actions are discovered and she is banished
from the kingdom. Her wanderings lead her to the secret valley of the unicorns,
where her search for a place to belong finally ends. Mitchell's tale is sweetly told,
and Lambert's graceful pastel illustrations bestow an otherworldly glamor on the
text. Subtle touches of modernity (a car on a distant highway, the exhaust from an
airplane in the sky) place this kingdom in the present more than the past, while
touches of whimsy (roaming peacocks, garden mazes, topiary animals) make the
magical appearance of the unicorn solidly believable. The unicorns themselves,
shimmering gently against their dark valley, will leave readers and viewers with an
image both dreamlike and comforting. JMD
MORRISON, TONI 
The Big Box; by Toni Morrison with Slade Morrison; illus. by
Giselle Potter. Jump at the Sun/Hyperion, 1999 
42p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2364-X 
$20.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0416-5 
$19.99 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
In this rhyming tale, Patty, Mickey, and Liza Sue are a trial to their elders because
"they just can't handle their freedom" and as a result they are shut up inside a big
box that has a door with "three big locks" that "only opens one way." The chil-
dren defend their actions ("Even sparrows scream/ And rabbits hop/ And beavers
chew trees when they need 'em") claiming they are only the natural activities of
active children, but into the box (sort of a designer prison) they go. Slade Morrison,
son of Pulitzer prize winner Toni Morrison, "devised" this lengthy story when he
was nine years old and let his mother "impose" the rhyme. While the story shows
some imagination and philosophical precociousness, it has little internal logic, pace,
or closure, and the rhyme scheme is labored. This title achieves grace through the
watercolor illustrations of Giselle Potter, whose light-handed visual interpretation
offsets the heavy contrivance of the text. Patty, Mickey, and Liza Sue are depicted
as spirited children surrounded by adults with pinched sour faces (the kind that
would give the class clown Ritalin instead of an opportunity to shine). Clean,
unmuddy colors give a sense of walls infused with light, and off-kilter perspectives
and askew horizons reflect the innocent energy of the well-meaning if messagey
text. This is an interesting product that will have definite appeal for adults but an
uncertain appeal for children. JMD
FEBRUARY 2000 
* 217
MYERS, WALTER DEAN 
The Blues ofFlats Brown; illus. by Nina Laden. 
Holiday
House, 2000 
[30p]
ISBN 0-8234-1480-9 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
"This here's the story of Flats Brown, the blues playingest dog you ever heard of. If
you ain't never heard of Flats, that's okay, because he probably never heard of you,
neither." Thus opens Myers' tale of Flats Brown, a junkyard dog with the blues in
his bones. When junkyard owner (and dog owner) A. J. Grubbs sets Flats and his
friend Caleb to fighting for sport, the two dogs decide to hit the highway. Flats'
journey to musical stardom is interrupted more than once by the persistent A. J.
Grubbs, who is determined to get his dog back. The final confrontation comes in
a New York City blues club, where Flats wins his freedom by playing "The Gritty
Grubbs Blues" and, improbably, moving his former owner to tears. The chases
and escapes have some suspense, but the sequence of events is lengthy and repeti-
tive, losing most of its momentum along the way. Laden's pastel compositions
have a precise line and a dark palette that contributes to a sense of depth. Canine
characters are expressively anthropomorphized (including the occasional effective
cower), but the human characters are awkwardly drafted and imaginatively pro-
portioned. Lyrics and musical notation for "The New York City Blues" are in-
cluded for budding blues guitar players. JMD
NAYLOR, PHYLLIS REYNOLDS 
Jade Green: A Ghost Story. 
Atheneum,
2000 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-689-82005-4 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
See this month's Big Picture, p. 199, for review.
NEWSOME, EFFIE LEE 
Wonders: The Best Children's Poems ofEffie Lee Newsome;
comp. by Rudine Sims Bishop; illus. by Lois Mailou Jones. 
Wordsong/Boyds
Mills, 1999 
40p
Trade ed. ISBN 1-56397-788-5 
$14.95
Paper ed. ISBN 1-56397-825-3 
$8.95 
R 
3-6 yrs
Twenty-four poems by Mary Effie Lee Newsome, a pioneering African-American
poet and columnist for the Brownies'Book, are included in this collection. Origi-
nally published in Newsome's Gladiola Garden and The Crisis, the poems cover
common childhood experiences and fit into four categories: "Wondering," "Two
Legs, Four Legs, Six Legs, Eight," "Flowers and Trees," and "Weather and Sky."
Most of the poems are brief, one-stanza, rhymed verses, some of which deserve
rebirth as storytime fingerplays: "The firefly/ Goes flashing by,/ A lemon-golden
spark,/ A dancing Rhinestone in the sky,/ A jewel in the dark." The selection
reflects a Victorian gentility, but the humor, the simplicity, and the occasional
allusions to traditional nursery rhymes will catch the ear of today's children: "Old
Commodore Quiver/ Went down to the river,/ Old Commodore Quiver of Gaul./
He sailed from the shore,/ But what he went for/ He hadn't a notion at all,/ No, he
hadn't one notion at all." Black-and-white illustrations from Gladiola Garden by
Lois Mailou Jones and one by Effie Lee Newsome are interspersed throughout the
book; most are visual vignettes highlighting the poems. Two small eye-catching
pictures portraying a spider's web and a tangled, wooded landscape especially show-
case Jones' art with sharp contrasts, rich. patterning, and flowing lines. As a con-
218 
* THE BULLETIN
temporary title, this book has its flaws (the quality of the poems and illustrations is
sometimes uneven), but Bishop makes the historical significance of both artists'
work quite clear in an excellent introduction. Well-proportioned expanses of nega-
tive and positive space, sharp contrasts, and balanced compositions combine with
the poetry to make this volume a satisfying example of early African-American
children's literature. JNH
NIXON, JOAN LOWERY Ann's Story: 1747. Delacorte, 2000 
[144p] 
(Colonial
Williamsburg®: Young Americans)
ISBN 0-385-32673-4 
$9.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 4-7
In this gift-shoppe historical fiction, the first of a series, four visitors to Colonial
Williamsburg, the living history museum, are introduced to Ann McKenzie, a
"headstrong" pre-Revolutionary gal with the self-consciously anachronistic dream
of becoming a doctor like her father or, failing that, a midwife like the widow Mrs.
Blaikley. This introduction is made through the good offices of Mrs. Otts, a
historical interpreter/vendor who sells eighteenth-century hats and caps to four
representative modern children-Lori, Keisha, Chip, and Stewart-before telling
them about the scrapes Ann is led into by her "high-spirited Scottish blood," start-
ing with the day she snuck out in her shift to watch the fire at the Capitol building.
Unfortunately, Mrs. Otts is not the only character whose dialogue sounds scripted,
and the plot of the story she tells is thickened by details of colonial dress and
customs that are not smoothly incorporated into the story. Kids who are studying
colonial times may appreciate the lack of ambiguity about what is "historical" here
and what is "fiction" (though not all will have the stamina to make it through all
five forewords and afterwords) and will benefit from the book's inclusivity, but
even diehard history fans nurtured by the American Girls will perceive that this is
essentially an extended advertisement for a visit to Colonial Williamsburg. The
virtual tour includes a stop for souvenirs and a map with ticket booths, restaurants,
and other conveniences clearly marked. FK
O'BRIEN, MARY BARMEYER 
Toward the Setting Sun: Pioneer Girls Traveling the
Overland Trails. TwoDot, 1999 
94p 
illus. with photographs
Paper ed. ISBN 1-56044-841-5 
$8.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
O'Brien recasts testimonies from diaries, letters, and memoirs of child pioneers
into nine true adventure tales that cover a variety of experiences-from being left
orphaned to being taken captive-along the trail. The stories of Virginia Reed, of
Donner Party fame, and Laura Ingalls can easily be found in more complete detail
elsewhere, but the experiences of less renowned travelers are equally noteworthy.
Lucy Ann Henderson loses a beloved little sister to an accidental overdose of
laudanum; Mary Perry marries at thirteen, most probably to escape from her abu-
sive stepfather; Catherine Sager, orphaned along the trail, witnesses the massacre
of siblings and her new guardians by a Cayuse band. O'Brien interjects a fair
amount of supposition into her tellings, and her frequent references to probable
campfires and baby-tending and wildflower gathering along the way (not to men-
tion the flowery tributes to the pioneer spirit that wrap up each account) lend an
air of sameness to the accounts. Still, the tales are both sufficiently brief and com-
pelling for good readalouds, and history teachers might consider including one or
two in a Western migration unit. EB
FEBRUARY 2000 
* 219
OKIMOTO, JEAN DAVIES 
ToJayKae: Life Stinx. Tor, 1999 
186p
ISBN 0-312-86732-8 
$18.95 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Jason (of ason's Women) is already shaken by the death of a beloved elderly friend
and the departure of the girl of his dreams. His father's sudden remarriage means
a new stepmother and a handsome sports-star stepbrother sharing Jason's home,
and his father's pressure on Jason to get a job, rearrange his life to suit his new
family, and emulate his popular stepbrother is more than the teen can handle. His
search for a confidante leads him to the Internet, where he connects with a girl
named Allison; when Allison requests he send a picture of himself, Jason panics
and provides an image of his gorgeous stepbrother. This is a clever balance of
thoughtful and lighthearted: Jason's misery is quite genuine and his father au-
thentically overdemanding, but Okimoto steers clear of any pity party by keeping
the writing lively and Jason's character suffused with sufficient goodness to guar-
antee hope. She also avoids predictable outcomes, leaving Jason dumped by his
cybergal when he comes clean (the book's depiction ofchatroom chat is absolutely
on target) and making his stepbrother a genuinely good guy who proves to be a
useful ally. There's also a gentle exploration of spirituality in Jason's connection to
the late Bertha Jane and his new employment at a church, which leads him to
consider more abstract aspects of his existence. Altogether, it's a diverting account
of a teen pulling out of grief and learning to succeed on his own terms. DS
OLALEYE, ISAAC O. In the Rainfield: Who is the Greatest?; illus. by Ann
Grifalconi. 
Blue Sky/Scholastic, 2000 
[32p]
ISBN 0-590-48363-3 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Fire, Wind, and Rain argue over who is greatest and a contest ensues. Wind's wild
gusts show he is indeed powerful, but Fire rages out of control, devouring every-
thing; "Wind blew, fuufuuu, trying to snuff out Fire. But that made Fire bigger
and stronger!" Then Rain steps in ("Rain! Rain! Rain! Singing Rain, wini-wini,
wini-wini, everywhere!"), and her gentle drops smother Fire and defeat him. This
Nigerian folktale (identified as such in the jacket copy; no specific sources are
given) has a spirited rhythm that suits the force of the three elemental characters.
Olaleye's text is a vibrant combination of action and dialogue that guarantees this
story will get a lot of play as a classroom or library readaloud. Grifalconi's collage
illustrations combine cutout photographic images with swirling patterns of paint
to create that long ago Rainfield in chaotic compositions seething with color and
motion. Fire, Rain, and Wind are giants powerfully envisioned: Rain rests upon
the back of a leopard, Wind ransacks the sky, Fire exults in destruction. The
double-page illustration of the violet-hued Rain smilingly bestowing her cooling
bounty onto the fire-ravaged field is a compelling one. The vitality of the retelling
itself coupled with the remarkably fluid mixed-media illustrations results in an
intriguing pairing of story and art. JMD
PLUMMER, LOUISE 
A Dance for Three. Delacorte, 2000 
[208p]
ISBN 0-385-32511-8 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Since her father's death, Hannah has been the adult in the family, taking care of
her fragile agoraphobic mother. When Hannah discovers she's pregnant, her mother
draws away ("She doesn't ask, What can I do? ... 
She says she can't remember
220 
* THE BULLETIN
how to fix breakfast or anything else for that matter. The implication is clear: she
can't take care of me either"), and the boyfriend in whom Hannah had placed her
trust hits her, dumps her, and denies paternity. This pushes Hannah over the edge
and sends her into the psychiatric ward, where she, her friends and family, and the
family of her unborn child come to terms with the situation. Plummer gives pieces
of the narration to Hannah's friend Trilby and to Roman, brother of Hannah's
boyfriend, Milo; while Trilby's brief viewpoint doesn't add much to the story,
Roman's insight into his family's workings (and his regret, unique in his family,
that they're separating themselves forever from this baby when Hannah puts it up
for adoption) enriches the picture of Milo but also emphasizes the point that this
kind of decision affects many people. While there's a programmatic touch to
Hannah's work with her therapist, there are some frustrating and absorbing family
dynamics laid bare and some intriguing new developments in relationships (the
old lady who's been Hannah's neighborhood nemesis proves to be a staunch friend).
While somewhat more overdetermined than Doherty's Dear Nobody (BCCB 1/
93), this is similarly a sensitive look at a girl grappling with a still-common di-
lemma. DS
PULLMAN, PHILIP 
I Was a Rat!; illus. by Kevin Hawkes. 
Knopf, 2000 
[192p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-90176-0 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-80176-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-7
Roger, an eight-year-old boy, shows up at the door of Joan (a laundress) and Bob
(a cobbler) and, despite his claim to once have been a rat, is taken in by the child-
less couple. A visit from the Royal Philosopher sets off a chain reaction that leads
Roger to a brief freak show career as "Rat Boy," near-arrest with a band of young
thieves, a return to the sewer (where he unsuccessfully tries to turn back into a rat),
imprisonment by royal scientists, and a sentence of death for being a monstrous
rodent pest, despite the best efforts of Bob and Joan to save him. Last minute
intercession by the new Princess Aurelia (who used to be Mary Jane, who fed
Roger scraps of cheese when he was Rattie the rat, and who is now stuck being a
princess just as Roger is stuck being a boy due to a fairy godmother and an irrevers-
ible wish) saves Roger and returns him to the loving arms of Bob and Joan. Pull-
man pulls off a funny and touching tale of an unwanted child (formerly rodent)
buffeted by the fates and coming home to safe harbor; along the way he takes some
scathingly funny pot shots at the royal family, the media (the text is interrupted by
pages from The Scourge, the local rag cum newspaper), and opportunists of every
stripe. This is a Dickensian plot distilled to a Babbittish pace; characters are well-
drawn (the freak show owners are particularly unsavory), and the fairy-tale setting
has a pungent reality that gives it more grit than gauze. The closing sentence
("The world outside was a difficult place, but toasted cheese and love and crafts-
manship would do to keep them safe") brings satisfactory closure to an imagina-
tive and original fractured fairy tale. Reviewed from an unillustrated galley. JMD
RAPPAPORT, DOREEN Dirt on Their Skirts: The Story of the Young Women Who
Won the World Championship; by Doreen Rappaport and Lyndall Callan; illus. by
E. B. Lewis. 
Dial, 2000 
34p
ISBN 0-8037-2042-4 
$16.99 
Ad 6-9 yrs
It's 1946, and returning veterans have not yet fully reclaimed professional baseball
FEBRUARY 2000 
* 
221
as a male domain. The women's baseball league that flourished during wartime is
wrapping up the season with the playoff between the Racine Belles and the Rock-
ford Peaches. In the stands Margaret and her family cheer for the home team, the
Belles, and hope that Sophie Kurys, "The Flint Flash," will help break the 0-0 tie
in overtime. Although Rappaport ostensibly replays the game through the eyes of
fictional young fan Margaret (who proudly compares her own scraped and scabby
knees to those of her idols), the text amounts to little more than a sports-page
recap of the plays, peppered with fan dialogue. Lewis' watercolor paintings add
some dimension, offering viewers a glimpse into a time when spectators wore coats
and ties, dresses and heels to the dusty ballparks, and the muscular athletes in their
flapping skirts slid painfully into home on exposed knees and thighs. Dyed-in-
the-wool sports fans will appreciate the appended stats page, and history buffs the
concluding note on how World War II influenced the development (and the de-
mise) of the women's league. Endpapers feature photos of the Belles and Peaches
in their heyday. EB
ROBERTS, WILLO DAVIS 
Hostage. Atheneum, 2000 
[14 4 p]
ISBN 0-689-81669-3 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Kaci's mom has been crusading for a bigger house in a safer neighborhood-
preferably in the upscale Lofty Cedars subdivision-and after the house across the
street is burglarized, she gets her way. Furniture moving, appliance deliveries, and
myriad relocation concerns proceed apace, and in the middle of the hubbub Kaci
dashes home (with proper permission) from school at lunch hour to retrieve her
allergy medicine. Assuming nobody is home, she is startled to hear voices and
realizes that her new "safe" house is being burglarized; the thieves discover her and
take her hostage, along with an elderly neighbor who has heretofore been an
inquisitive nuisance to the newcomers. There's a long stretch between Roberts'
set-up and the real action, and although Kaci's situation plays out with considerable
tension, her past-tense narration leaves no doubt that she will get out of this alive.
Kaci's partner in peril moves briskly from one stereotype to another, first as nosy
neighbor, then as feisty-but-cute little old lady. There are enough thrills here to
justify a quick read, but for hostage terror it can't match classics such as Robert
Cormier's After the First Death or Lois Duncan's Ransom. EB
SHREVE, SUSAN 
Goodbye, Amanda the Good. Knopf, 2000 
[144p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-99241-3 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-89241-9 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-7
Adolescence hits Amanda Bates all of a sudden when she enters seventh grade
("She felt like she'd taken a leap off of the high diving board... But the water kept
moving farther and farther away from her as she flew-arms flailing, legs kicking
out of control-downward through the cold air"), and she doesn't feel like the
diligent student and devoted daughter she used to be. Hair dye, black clothes, and
new cigarette-smoking friends give her a different persona (she considers changing
her name to "Cheetah"), and she's on the verge of joining the Club headed by the
knowledgeable and sophisticated Fern. One of the things Fern seems to know
about is Slade, the boy with a bad reputation who's starting to show Amanda some
not unwelcome attention-but is Fern's information really knowledge or just fic-
222 
* THE BULLETIN
tion born ofjealousy? There's a slightly patronizing aspect to the picture ofAmanda's
rebellion that's unusual for Shreve, and the return to the old Amanda is conve-
niently swift. Amanda's feeling of placelessness is articulately explored, however,
and Fern is a classic bad-influence friend. The book also makes clever use of Slade,
whose bad-boy image isn't a reflection of the glamorous rebellion Fern and her
friends aspire to but rather an offshoot of unhappy family times that he'd like to
leave behind; in Amanda's warm family and inherently straitlaced nature under
the tentatively applied veneer, he sees a stability to which he warms. Youngsters
on the verge of rebellion may find this illuminating, and kids grown past the ad-
ventures of Joshua T. Bates (Joshua T. Bates in Trouble Again, BCCB 2/98, etc.)
will want to see how his sister fares here. DS
SMITH, MAGGIE 
Dear Daisy, Get Well Soon; written and illus. by Maggie
Smith. 
Crown, 2000 
[32p]
ISBN 0-517-80072-1 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
3-7 yrs
One day, Peter carts his stuffed animals over to Daisy's house only to find that she
has chicken pox and can't come out to play. Over the course of the next five days,
Peter sends her first (by means of a full-sized version of his toy elephant) one get-
well card, followed by two bunches of flowers (each carried by a zebra), three
coloring books (via three hippos), etc. The strong patterning of this understated
toy fantasy's text complements its lessons about sequencing and counting. The
watercolor illustrations, however, are undistinguished and disappointingly bland;
the sweet rainbow of colors and the idyllic emphasis on cute flowers, birds, and
butterflies are even more idealized than the model boy-girl friendship. Young
viewers may nonetheless find plenty to engage their minds and eyes, and adults
can, like Daisy's mother, stay in the background in case they're needed. FK
SNYDER, ZILPHA KEATLEY 
Gib and the Gray Ghost. Delacorte, 2000 
[256p]
ISBN 0-385-32609-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Gib Rides Home (BCCB 2/98) ended with Gib, an orphan in 1909 Nebraska,
returning to the orphanage from his "farmout" family; in this book he's back with
the Thorntons after Mr. Thornton, who insisted on Gib's return to the orphan-
age, has died. Gib's happy to be back on the ranch, working with the horses (and
especially the Thoroughbred Black Silk), and he's glad to get a chance to go to a
real school, but he's still beset by doubts and problems: is he a family member or
a farmout orphan to be kicked loose at eighteen? Will he ever learn how to get
around his two bullying classmates? What's to become of the gray horse who turns
up in the blizzard, a victim of abuse, that Gib gentles? Snyder seems torn between
the exigencies of real life (this story is based on her father's upbringing) and the
romance of horse and orphan stories, and the two approaches don't always mesh
smoothly; the characterization is often cursory, relying on the first book, and the
drama tends to be episodic, undercutting the impact of any one plot thread by
veering between them. The book has the solid old-fashioned appeal of the first
tide, however, with Gib a likable orphan deserving of the home for which he
yearns. The picture of early twentieth-century ranch life, with telephones and cars
intermingling with carts and old frontier dynasties, is vividly conveyed and infi-
FEBRUARY 2000 
* 223
nitely attractive to young Western fans. Readers who formed a friendship with
Gib in the previous volume will want to ride along. DS
SPINNER, STEPHANIE 
Be First in the Universe; by Stephanie Spinner and Terry
Bisson. 
Delacorte, 2000 
[14 4p]
ISBN 0-385-32687-4 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-7
Twins Tessa and Tod are staying with their grandparents Lou and Lulu ("the
world's oldest living hippies") while their own parents are on an extended business
trip. On a visit to the new Middle Valley mall, the twins find Gemini Jack's U
Rent All and discover nonstick baking pans ("one hundred percent friction free")
and an electronic pet (FM, short for Fib-Muncher) that eats fibs. Jack is from the
planet Gemini, where everyone is a twin, and he needs DNA samples from evil
twins to butch up the genetic code on his planet before it succumbs to galactic
interlopers; while Tessa and Tod don't fit the bill, the Gneiss twins (brother and
sister, christened Never and Notso by Tessa) do. The premise is wild, but the
execution is slick: Tessa and Tod engage in some hijinks (tiny time travels, invis-
ibility, and end-runs around the nasty Gneisses) that make the pace of this sci-fi
froth bubble right along. Humor is the point, and the team of Spinner (familiar
from her equally appealing collaborations with Jonathan Etra, Aliens for Breakfast,
BCCB 12/88, and Aliens for Dinner, 3/91) and Bisson make that point with lik-
able characters, a modicum of suspense, and a link between the Gneiss twins and
Vlad the Impaler that will make readers snort in disbelieving delight. In short, this
is savvy (if simple) sci-fi that will cross gender lines, especially as a readaloud.
JMD
STEWART, DAWN LESLEY 
Harriet's Horrible Hair Day; illus. by Michael P.
White. 
Peachtree, 2000 
[34p]
ISBN 1-56145-165-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Poor Harriet's carefully contained curls are revolting-that is, revolting against
their restraints: "Sproing! A curl popped out of Harriet's nice, neat braid." Her
brother and sister come to the rescue with inventive solutions (yanking on the
curls with fishing line, weighting the curls down with rocks and water balloons,
putting a colander on her head and tying kitchen implements to the curls), but
each remedy only leads to still more curls popping out. Finally Harriet retires to
bed in defeat, only to wake up in the morning with a startling success: a head full
of "nice, neat curls." Though the story doesn't bear overmuch scrutiny (the curls
shouldn't be surprising unless Harriet has had her braid since birth), the elaborate,
messy, and absurd attempts at repair are entertaining, as is the dialogue of the sibs
(who are clearly enjoying their experimentation) as they put Harriet through their
tender ministrations. White's art has an evenness of shading that suggests com-
puter involvement, and there's an exaggerated line and busy overpopulation that
suggest non-narrative graphic art; the result is a little on the glitzy side, but the
videogame palette (Harriet's crimson corkscrews pop off the page next to her lilac
shirt and the sherbet-green lawn) has an electric energy that will appeal to viewers.
The anthropomorphized dog and cat cavort divertingly through the proceedings;
though the siblings appear not to notice them, kids in the audience will get a kick
224 
* THE BULLETIN
out of their antics. If you're looking to take the knots out of a bad hair day, try
this. DS
STURGES, PHILEMON, ad. 
The Little Red Hen (Makes a Pizza); illus. by Amy
Walrod. 
Dutton, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-525-45953-7 
$15.99 
R 4-8 yrs
In a fractured version of this culinary tale, a never-flustered little Red Hen takes
things in stride when dog, cat, and duck refuse to help her make pizza. Her re-
peated shopping trips are an opportunity to buy more stuff: "So the Little Red
Hen went to the delicatessen. She bought some mozzarella, pepperoni, and olives;
some mushrooms, onions, and garlic; a can of eight small anchovies; and... some
other stuff. But no pickled eggplant." Of course, the oven-baked pizza is rather
large, so when Little Red asks her friends who will help her eat it, they all respond,
"I will!" In appreciation, dog, cat, and duck clean up the kitchen while Little Red
Hen enjoys a good book about dream vacations. The writing doesn't always have
the easy rhythms of traditional versions, but the conversational tone makes this
suitable for a readaloud. Multitextured cut-paper illustrations in muted colors
contain kid-appealing details-the can of worms in Little Red's pantry, the dollar
bill marked "moo-la"-that highlight the story's offbeat humor, evincing a loopy
contemporary flair that makes this book a show-and-tell delight. While the lesson
of the original tale is lost, modern readers will appreciate Little Red taking respon-
sibility for her own meal-planning and the understated message that it's okay not
to help cook as long as you help clean up. JNH
TAYLOR, WILLIAM 
Jerome. Alyson, 1999 
95p
Papered. ISBN 1-55583-512-0 
$9.95 
Ad 
Gr. 9-12
There's been a tragic self-inflicted shooting, and Jerome is dead; Marco, his best
friend, writes to Katie, Jerome's girlfriend, trying to get a handle on the situation.
What unfolds through letters, faxes, emails, and chat sessions is the story of impor-
tant, long-kept secrets and the toll of casual prejudice. Marco is shocked to learn
that Katie is a lesbian who had never been Jerome's sexual partner but was instead
his close friend, and that Jerome was one of the few who knew of Katie's sexual
orientation until she left New Zealand for the United States (she's a foreign ex-
change student) and came out. It's obvious from the beginning that the other big
secret is that Jerome was gay as well and that he and Katie kept each other's trust
because he never dared share the truth with Marco; what's neither predictable nor
credible is Marco's own switch from homophobe to acknowledged homosexual
when he realizes the import of his love for Jerome. New Zealander Taylor (author
of works as diverse as The Blue Lawn and Agnes the Sheep, BCCB 3/91) writes a
fairly didactic story throughout, and there's a revamped Tennessee Williams flavor
to the plot that's both old-fashioned and contrived. The emotions run strong and
intense, however, and that's where the book's at its best. The story effectively
makes the point that the thoughtless jeers of schoolmates are vicious and often
wrong; it also emphasizes the more original fact that such prejudice has unrealized
collateral damage, since the lines between "them" and "us" are not just imaginary
but hastily and illogically drawn. Readers drawn by the angst of Nancy Garden's
The Year They Burned the Books (BCCB 9/99) may find similar reward here. DS
FEBRUARY 2000 
* 225
THOMAS, SHELLEY MOORE 
Good Night, Good Knight; illus. by Jennifer
Plecas. 
Dutton, 2000 
48p
ISBN 0-525-46326-7 $13.99 
R 
Gr. K-2
Hearing a loud roar on his night watch, the ever-vigilant Good Knight mounts his
steed and rushes off ("Clippety-clop. Clippety-clop") to investigate. A dragon in
jammies is in distress-can't sleep without a drink of water. Too kind-hearted to
refuse, Good Knight complies, tucks him in, and returns to the castle. A roar from
another dragon summons him for a bedtime story ("I don't believe this"); a third
for a beddy-bye song. The fourth roar nearly depletes his patience when the mon-
ster trio collectively demands a kiss ("This is going too far"). "But he was a good
knight. So he bent and kissed each scaly little cheek." As soon as dragon roars
have been lulled into dragon snores, he's back to the castle ("Clippety-clop.
Clippety-clop") for his own well-earned snooze. Our hero's hearty "Away"s and
exasperated asides provide plenty of opportunity for novice readers to try out their
most expressive voices, while Plecas' sweetly ugly, bug-eyed little monsters and
gallant but drooping knight supply visual drollery to match the text. Plenty of
repetition reinforces the easy-reader vocabulary, so youngsters who have just be-
gun tilting with the printed word can charge right through this tale. EB
THOMPSON, LAUREN, ad. 
Love One Another: The Story ofEaster; illus. by Eliza-
beth Uyehara. 
Scholastic, 2000 
[32p]
ISBN 0-590-31380-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
6-lOyrs
Drawing from all four Evangelists, Thompson retells events from the life of Jesus
from his public role as preacher and teacher through the aftermath of his death and
the continuing mission of his disciples. Paraphrasing is simple and reverent, and
although episodes are somewhat blended, it is generally easy to trace each to its
original Gospel source. Thompson deftly nudges the disciples into the forefront
of the action, moving beyond Mark's bare-bones account of their retreat following
the Crucifixion to supply a motivation for their distress: "They were deep in
mourning, weeping with grief and remorse. For they knew they had deserted
Jesus, and then he had died." Uyehara's oil paintings shift subtly from the blues
and purples of the Passion to the fiery golds and reds of Pentecost; broad, muscular
forms outlined in black ably suggest the bedrock strength the disciples muster to
"joyously... set out to bring Jesus' teachings to everyone." EB
TREMBATH, DON 
Lefty Carmichael Has a Fit. Orca, 2000 
[215p]
ISBN 1-55143-166-1 
$6.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Lefty's "fit" is actually an epileptic seizure, which means that his fairly normal
fifteen-year-old existence undergoes some serious changes. Mostly everybody's
afraid: he's afraid of seizures and afraid his almost-girlfriend is afraid to be alone
with him, his mother is afraid something terrible will happen to him, and his
friend Rueben is afraid that Lefty's reassessment of his activities means their friend-
ship is at an end. It's no surprise that these fears are laid to rest in the course of the
novel, and Lefty's narration is so talky that the novel's pacing is slow despite its
nervous energy. What's bracing about the book, however, is Trembath's quirky
portrayal of Lefty ("I'm the first right-handed person named Lefty in the world")
226 
* THE BULLETIN
and his close-knit hardscrabble neighborhood wherein Lefty is unusual for having
a dad who's stuck around and where terrible troubles survived make for terrific
and hilarious storytelling. Lefty's negotiation through the adjustment process is
realistic too, with his initial overcaution giving way to carelessness with his medi-
cation; there is also some believable meanness from his classmates about his dis-
ease. While this doesn't have quite the zip of Trembath's A Fly Named Alfred
(BCCB 10/97), it's got a zest unusual for problem novels that should appeal to
fans of Trembath and Brian Doyle. DS
VENOKUR, Ross 
The Cookie Company. 
Delacorte, 2000 
[144p]
ISBN 0-385-32680-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-7
Alex Grindlay is thirteen years old, and he's the unluckiest kid in the world. He
has an acute case of "hoodooitis" and, convinced it's incurable, he has resigned
himself to his fate and takes no action to effect his own life. Enter Sal, the strange
little messenger from The Cookie Company (fortune cookie, that is) with a present
for Alex: his immediate future, cookie by cookie. Cracking open the fortune
cookies sends Alex on a journey to parallel worlds, wherein it becomes necessary
for Alex to reassess his passivity, take (vigorous) action more than once, and, just
incidentally, save his father and the earth from being taken over by the megaloma-
niac talk show host, Cypress Vine. The action veers into the clumsily farcical here
and there, and the overall plot requires a suspension of disbelief that it doesn't
quite merit; still, Alex is an engaging character. His deep sadness over his father's
neglect and his recognition of the emptiness left by the death of his mother makes
Alex sympathetic, while his sense of the ridiculous and his crush on classmate
Sarah Sachs ("No one had ever made braided pigtails look so good") makes him
genuinely likable. The message is a tad obvious and the vanquishing of Cypress
Vine too easy, but the final image of Alex opening his last fortune cookie is an
encouraging one: "He pulled out the fortune cookie to see what it had to say. But
there was nothing written on it. He flipped it over. There was nothing there,
either. It was blank, completely blank. He smiled and reached for a pen." JMD
WERLIN, NANCY 
Locked Inside. 
Delacorte, 2000 
[240p]
ISBN 0-385-32700-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 7-10
Marnie Skyedottir is the daughter of Skye, worldwide celebrity whose death left
Marnie wealthy and alone. Enrolled at a rigorous boarding school, Marnie is
unfriendly both to academics and classmates, preferring to spend her time online
gaming with her friendly nemesis, the Elf. School troubles are abruptly put in the
background when a teacher's special interest takes a sinister turn: Ms. Slaight,
under the delusion that she too is a daughter of Skye, kidnaps Marnie and holds
her prisoner in an effort at getting their sisterhood recognized; the Elf comes to the
rescue and ends up imprisoned with Marnie, and the two must come to real-life
terms with each other as well as attempting escape. This doesn't have the coiled
intensity ofWerlin's The Killer's Cousin (BCCB 9/98), where readers first saw the
Elf, real name Frank; Marnie's saga is more glossy melodrama than either effective
thriller or psychological exploration (Marnie is "locked inside" spiritually as well as
literally), and the revelations about her mother's past add distraction rather than
intensity. There's entertaining adventure aplenty, however, and Elf is a stellar if
FEBRUARY 2000 
* 227
unlikely knight in shining armor, whose technologically assisted devotion to Marnie
is postmodern romance at its finest. Caroline Cooney fans will find this a divert-
ing escapade. DS
WHITCHER, SUSAN 
The Fool Reversed. Farrar, 2000 
[192p]
ISBN 0-374-32446-8 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 9-12
Anna is fifteen, drifting through adolescence in the shadow of her friend Pauline
until she meets Thorn, a thirty-year-old poet who sees her as the magnetic one.
She and Thorn begin a clandestine romance, wherein she is deeply flattered by the
older man's attention to her artistry (she's a budding poet) and herself, but she
begins to be disturbed by Thorn's hunger to find newness through her own first
experiences ("He would never be satisfied by what she freely gave. He would seek
for yet one more layer of reticence in her that he could rip away. So she was always
freshly exposed and raw. She was always new for him"). These experiences in-
clude not only her literary and sexual explorations with Thorn, but also, at Thorn's
instigation, sex with his editor; if Thorn has his way, as he generally does, they will
include sex with Pauline as well. Anna is bolstered by her friendship with Dylan,
a boy she meets in the park, but she's blind to the fact that Dylan's professed crush
on another girl is really a yearning for Anna herself; Dylan seeks to protect Anna
from Thorn but has his own secrets to defend. Possessing all the fervid postmodern
romance of Francesca Lia Block though with a more accessible style, the book is
dead-on in its depiction of Anna's troubled relationship with Thorn and his com-
plicated need for and use of her. It's also superb at portraying Anna's crystalline
but detached view of her interaction with her mother and the distance between
them; not only does Anna's mother see just the tip of Anna's iceberg, she doesn't
even realize that there's an underwater component. The relationship with Dylan
doesn't have quite the same creepy resonance, but it's fraught with its own inter-
esting twists and turns; even the most jaded of readers will find their final pairing
a relief. DS
WITTLINGER, ELLEN 
What's in a Name. Simon, 2000 
[160p]
ISBN 0-689-82551-X 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Some people-mostly rich Johnny-come-latelys concerned about image-in the
town of Scrub Harbor want to change its name to Folly Bay, and some people-
mostly the blue-collar families that have lived there for generations-don't. This
division spills into the high school, where the daughter of the strongest proponent
of the name change gets her fellow students involved in the issue, though not
always in ways she'd anticipated. Wittlinger follows the high school students on
the day of the vote, allowing ten teens each to narrate in turn; we hear from in kids,
out kids (literally, in the case of one boy who chooses this moment to come out of
the closet via a poem in the literary magazine), kids of various races and origins
(Brazilian Ricardo embarks on a romance with the prickly best friend of his host
family's daughter; African-American Folly-ite Nelson seeks love with Shaquanda,
who is bussed in from Boston and highly amused by the whole tempest in a subur-
ban teapot). What's particularly effective here is Wittlinger's balance between
external and internal views of her characters; she doesn't fall into the trap of treat-
ing one assessment as right and another as wrong but rather enriches the character-
228 
* THE BULLETIN
ization by making officious Gretchen tired of being her mother's puppet, mousy
Nadia annoyed enough to ride roughshod over new boy Adam, and unsubtle jock
Quincy a supporter of his brother, O'Neill, after the revelation that O'Neill is gay.
The mosaic of voices and viewpoints is noteworthy for its quiet emphasis on the
interaction of individuals and the importance and dynamism of the resultant ge-
stalt. This one will make readers think differently about their own classmates, and
it could, under a daring teacher, provide an inspiration for some similar writing
with a local perspective. DS
ZEMAN, LUDMILA, ad. 
Sindbad: From the Tales of the Thousand and One Nights;
adapted and illus. by Ludmila Zeman. 
Tundra, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-88776-460-6 
$17.95 
R 
Gr. 3-6
An opening vignette introduces clever queen Shahrazad and the 1,001 nights, pav-
ing the way for this lively abbreviation of the adventurous story of Sindbad the
sailor ("This is one of the tales that enchanted the king as it may enchant you").
An older, wiser, and richer Sindbad tells his story of voyages, shipwrecks, and
encounters with mythical beasts to a poor porter. Zeman's retelling concentrates
on action, and her effective storytelling is enriched by her ornately detailed paint-
ings. The compositions incorporate stylistic elements from Persian carpets and
miniatures; full-page illustrations with elaborate borders have rich, beaten-gold
backgrounds, sparked with turquoise blue and ruby red for details and highlights.
The fantastical city and seascapes are delicately and gracefully rendered, in a style
reminiscent of Dulac, though more robust and energetic. Meticulous drafting and
expressive characterization add vigor to the controlled compositions. Zeman's
Sindbad ends his tale a bit abruptly, long before his seventh voyage, but his final
words to the listening porter-"But I must rest, now, my friend. Come back
tomorrow and I will tell you what I endured on my next voyage"-proffer an
invitation not to be refused. Dust off those copies of The Arabian Nights; this'll
make you need them. A concluding author's note gives some background on the
origin of the tale, and the concluding illustration, that of a wise Shahrazad on the
back of a magical horse, brings the book full circle. JMD
._ .•,EIC 
._l.
FEBRUARY 2000 
* 229
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
Creeden, Sharon, ad. In Full Bloom: Tales of Women in Their Prime. August
House, 1999. ISBN 0-87483-576-3. $21.95. 192p. Reviewed from galleys.
Creeden pairs thirty folktales featuring female protagonists (and catalysts) with
thirty anecdotes about famous American women. This combination of folktale
and history is a dynamic one (Creeden previously used this format in her Fair Is
Fair: WorldFolktales ofJustice). The approach lends a convincing authority to the
author's contention that folktales, spoken and written, still have relevance for
modern listeners and readers. The thirty tales are evenly divided between "Roses"
("traditional women") and "Not Roses" ("untraditional women"); individual tales
are introduced under thematic headings ("Healing Our Sick," "Giving Birth in
Old Age," "Seeking Justice," "Seeking Revenge," "Leaving Abuse Behind," "Sa-
voring Life," etc.) and accompanied by a proverb or quotation. Each folktale is
followed by a brief biography of a woman such as Wilma Pearl Mankiller, Rose
Fitzgerald Kennedy, Mary McLeod Bethune, Mae West, Tina Turner, Alice B.
Toklas, Marie Laveau, Sadie and Bessie Delany, and others. Creeden's retellings
of the traditional tales are spare and crisp, and the biographical vignettes, while
somewhat dry, are solidly serviceable. The notes are extensive, and include back-
ground information, sources, and references. Teachers and librarians looking for
substantial stories about compassionate, wise, and daring women to use with middle
graders and young adults will want to plant this one where they can reach it. JMD
Cullum, Carolyn N. The Storytime Sourcebook: A Compendium of Ideas and Re-
sources for Storytellers. 2nd ed. Neal-Schuman, 1999. Paper ed. ISBN 1-55570-
360-7. $45.00. 469p.
The 1990 edition of this title was a boon to literature-based programming; this
updated and expanded edition is additional evidence of the author's professional
experience and expertise. The purpose of this new edition is clearly stated: "The
Storytime Sourcebook is designed to help librarians, teachers, parents and other
caregivers locate the appropriate idea (craft, fingerplay, story, song, etc.) for pro-
grams or lessons from the vast number of wonderful books usually available in
libraries." The sample programs (aimed at children from three to seven years old)
cover 146 themes and 2,200 picture books. Themes encompass anything from
animals to gender roles, dinosaurs to pirates, holidays to self-reliance. The first
edition's filmstrip and 16mm film selections have been replaced with videotape
recommendations; sources for cassettes and/or CDs for suggested songs are also
provided. Some of the picture-book suggestions would result in tediously long
storytimes, but the lists for each theme contain enough titles to allow flexibility.
Crafts and physical activities are briefly but clearly explained and their sources
given. Text and instructions for the fingerplays are, unfortunately, not included;
only titles and sources are provided. Themes are linked to a "Topical Calendar"
230 
* THE BULLETIN
placed at the beginning of the book; appendices include guides to book publishers,
video distributors, videocassettes (with running times), and music cassette and
CD distributors. An extensive bibliography (useful for collection development as
well as program planning) and indices to picture-book titles, authors, activities,
and song titles close this (nearly) comprehensive storytime resource. JMD
Hamilton, Martha. How & Why Stories: World Tales Kids Can Read & Tell;by
Martha Hamilton and Mitch Weiss; illus. by Carol Lyon. August House, 1999.
Library ed. ISBN 0-87483-562-3; $21.95. Paper ed. ISBN 0-87483-561-5; $12.95.
96p.
Hamilton and Weiss have been teaching children (and adults) to tell stories for
over twenty years. Their previous titles (Children Tell Stories and Stories in My
Pocket) have proven to be practical resources for teaching the rudiments of story
structure, storytelling techniques, and story research. Their latest effort is more
loosely structured but just as effective. Twenty-five pourquoi tales ("stories that
explain why an animal, plant, or natural object looks or acts the way it does") from
a variety of cultures are retold in friendly, conversational language. Each story is
followed by two sections: "About the Story," which gives the scientific explana-
tion for the phenomena featured in the tale, and "Tips for Telling," which gives
suggestions for gestures, voice changes, and body language. The authors' informal
approach results in a down-to-earth collection of stories that can easily be used
with younger listeners or by younger readers. This sensible resource closes with
"General Tips for Telling Stories," suggestions for "Activities" (making up origi-
nal pourquoi tales, searching out local how and why stories, learning the scientific
explanations for how and why stories through an accompanying bibliography),
and "Story Sources," (notes on the origin and variants of included tales). Black-
and-white line drawings appear throughout. JMD
MacDonald, Margaret Read. Earth Care: World Folktales to Talk About. Linnet,
1999. Library ed. ISBN 0-208-02416-6; $26.50. Paper ed. 0-208-02426-3;
$17.50. 162p.
MacDonald has gathered an assortment of forty-one folktales and poems clustered
around the central theme of caring for the Earth; the stories and poems are divided
into thirteen categories ("Caring for Our Land," "All Things Are Connected,"
"The Folly of Human Greed," "Pollution Returns to the Polluter," etc.) that branch
off from the central theme. The majority of the tales have been retold and format-
ted by MacDonald for easier storytelling, and her ability to distill a story to its
essence is in strong evidence here. Spare but not stilted language typifies the
compiler's retellings as well as those tales reprinted from other sources. Included
works range from poem to anecdote to fable (MacDonald even includes theme-
related proverbs), which adds flexibility, and the broad theme can easily be ex-
tended across curriculum lines. The collection features stories from a wide range
of cultures (England, Liberia, Brazil, Thailand, China, Portugal, Iran, etc.) and
detailed source notes are appended. MacDonald includes several useful addenda:
"Tale Collections with Ecological Themes: A Short Bibliography," an annotated
list of "More Ecological Tales to Tell or Read Aloud," and "Proverb Sources."
The final note gives permission for the oral retelling of these stories to live audi-
ences. JMD
FEBRUARY 2000 
* 
231
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Adoption-fiction: Plummer
ADVENTURE STORIES: Pull-
man; Zeman
Africa-fiction: Kessler
Africa-folklore: Olaleye
African Americans: Cline-Ransome;
Glover
African Americans-fiction:
Cameron; Howard
African Americans-poetry:
Newsome
American Indians-folklore: Bruchac
American Indians-plays: Bruchac
Art: Adoff
Art and artists-fiction: Buchholz
Baseball: Cline-Ransome
Baseball-stories: Rappaport
Basketball-fiction: Carbone
BEDTIME STORIES: Thomas
BIBLE STORIES: Gerstein;
Thompson
BIOGRAPHIES: Butts; Cline-
Ransome; Corey; Fredeen;
Giblin; Glover; Harris
Brothers and sisters-fiction:
Howard; Lewis; Spinner
Brothers and sisters-stories: Stewart
Bullies-fiction: Cox; Gaeddert
Cats-poetry: Duncan
Child abuse-fiction: Antle; Jocelyn
Child labor-fiction: Jocelyn
Children's literature: Newsome
CONCEPT BOOKS: Smith
COUNTING BOOKS: Smith
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Naylor; Roberts; Werlin
Crusades-fiction: Cadnum
Dancers and dancing: Glover
Death and dying-fiction: Okimoto
Dentistry: Ichord
Disabilities-fiction: Carbone;
Jocelyn; Lewis; Trembath
Disasters-poetry: Kurtz
Discipline-stories: Morrison
Dogs-fiction: Myers
Dragons-fiction: Thomas
Ethics and values: Gaeddert;
Kessler; Lemieux; McKissack;
Morrison; Shreve; Wittlinger
Families-fiction: Howard
Families-stories: Cuyler
FANTASY: Farber; Pullman;
Venokur
Fashion: Corey
Fathers and daughters-fiction: Antle
Fathers and sons-fiction: Okimoto;
Venokur
Fears-fiction: Cox
Fears-stories: Cuyler
Floods-poetry: Kurtz
FOLKTALES AND FAIRYTALES:
Fearnley; Olaleye; Sturges
Food and eating-stories: Fearnley;
Sturges
Friendship-fiction: Cameron;
Carbone; Gaeddert; Henry;
Shreve; Taylor
FUNNY STORIES: Fearnley;
Lemieux; Stewart
Gardens-fiction: Bogacki
GHOST STORIES: Naylor
Grandparents-fiction: Antle
Gypsies-fiction: Farber
232 
* THE BULLETIN
Hair-stories: Stewart
Health: Harris; Ichord
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Cadnum; Gaeddert; Howard;
Jocelyn; Lewis; Nixon; Snyder
History, U.S.: Colman; Giblin;
Nixon; O'Brien
History, world: Ichord
Holidays: Thompson
Homosexuality-fiction: Taylor
Horses-fiction: Snyder
Human sexuality: Harris
Illness-fiction: Lewis
Journalism: Fredeen
Kidnapping-fiction: Roberts;
Werlin
Knights-fiction: Thomas
Labor: Colman
LOVE STORIES: Werlin
Marine life: Butts
Medieval life-fiction: Cadnum
Mental illness-fiction: Plummer
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Kessler; Plummer; Whitcher
Mothers and daughters-stories:
McKissack
Mothers and sons-fiction: Henry;
Trembath
Music and musicians-fiction:
Henry; Myers
MYSTERIES: Werlin
MYTHS AND LEGENDS:
McClaren
Nigeria-folklore: Olaleye
Orphans-fiction: Naylor; Pullman;
Snyder
Parents-stories: Morrison
Philosophy-fiction: Venokur
Physical education: Harris
PLAYS: Bruchac
POETRY: Adoff; Duncan; Kurtz;
Lillegard; Newsome
Pregnancy-fiction: Plummer
Reading aloud: Kurtz; Lillegard;
O'Brien; Pullman; Thomas
Reading, beginning: Thomas
Reading, easy: Cameron; Cox
Reading, reluctant: Adoff; Antle;
Cline-Ransome; Glover; Roberts;
Spinner
Religious education: Gerstein;
Thompson
School-fiction: Carbone; Howard;
Lemieux; Shreve; Wittlinger
School-stories: Cuyler; McKissack
SCIENCE FICTION: Spinner
Sex education: Harris
Sexual abuse-fiction: Whitcher
Sexuality-fiction: Whitcher
SHORT STORIES: O'Brien
South, the-fiction: Naylor
SPORTS STORIES: Rappaport
Stepbrothers-fiction: Okimoto
Storytelling: Gerstein; Olaleye
Storytelling-fiction: Zeman
Storytime: Duncan; Fearnley;
Lillegard; Mitchell; Newsome;
Sturges
Suicide-fiction: Taylor
Twins-fiction: Lemieux; Spinner
Uncles-fiction: Naylor
Unicorns-stories: Mitchell
Vietnam War-fiction: Lewis
Voyages and travel-fiction:
Cadnum; Farber; McClaren;
Zeman
War-fiction: Cadnum
West, the: O'Brien
West, the-fiction: Snyder
Wolves-stories: Fearnley
Women's studies: Butts; Colman;
Corey; Fredeen; Gerstein;
O'Brien; Rappaport
World War II-fiction: Gaeddert
World War II-stories: Rappaport
A New York Times Best Illustrated Book of 1999
-~~ 
~ *--.„ 
i '
'"''" - lte 
_ 
..,. „-> 
**/-'
Winter El
poems and full-color paintings by
Douglas Florian
* "Winter-lovers and winter-haters alike will find poems
that strike chords, in a collection that is perfect for
reading alone by the fire or as part of snug storytimes.
Florian's naif illustrations are excellent accompaniment
to his twenty-eight poems on the snowy season."
-Pointer 
review / Kirkus Reviews
' "Whether as a readaloud or a readalone, this is a
snowball youngsters won't mind being hit with."
-Starred 
review / The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
"Easy rhythms and an invitingly open page design
distinguish this collection of short verses on
wintry subiects. Colored-pencil and
watercolor pictures grace each
selection, frosty or cozy as the
words demand."
-The Horn Book
Ages 5 up * 48 pp. * Tr $16.00 (0-688-16458-7)
j 
Greenwillow Books An imprint of HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019 * www.williammorrow.com
IF L.vvp
with the
latest in
Teaching!
Teaching K-8 is filled with hundreds of unique ideas and
activities that help teachers present new challenges to their
students, learn new concepts and develop new skills.
Monthly articles include:
Carol Otis Hurst on...
* Children's Books * Teaching in the Library
Plus... * The Parent Connection * Interviews with
children's book authors and illustrators * Science
* Technology and more!
Don't miss this valuable
resource for your library -
subscribe today.
Call 800-678-8793 or visit
our website at
www.TeachingK-8.com
I
SPECIAL OFFER: n*
One-year subscription
ly 
77*
d 
$ 10 poý' ge
(8'issues) only
_Oot" 
$10 postage
outside U5 odd
0
C." _7
Cover price $4 50
; ~"n~-i3··~------ ---__~_~
r 
~""' 
""'
Koon 
n 
leachfnrli
A~~R
w 
_Vww 
1w1
tcfuL Tcales
Grandpa's Soup
The Tale of the
Heaven Tree
Written by Mary Joslin
Illustrated by Meilo So
"Lyrical prose provides a portrait of
paradise, and [Joslin's] deftly deliv-
ered message is likely to inspire
young readers. But it is So's energet-
ically patterned watercolors that
instantly command attention."
-
Publishers Weekly *starred review
Publishers Weekly Best Religious
Children's Books for 1999
"Brilliant watercolors ... are
festooned with words that climb
and soar and slither on the pages."
-
Booklist
Grandpa's Soup
Written by Eiko Kadono
llustrated by Satomi Ichikawa
"This endearing book features a
multiethnic cast, and the message,
too, transcends cultures."
-
Publishers Weekly
"Gentle lessons on coping with
grief." 
-
Booklist
Picture Book
Hardcover 
ISBN 0-8028-5195-9 - $16.00
At your bookstore,
or call 800-253-7521
Fax: 616-459-6540
E-mail: sales@eerdmans.com
Picture Book
Hardcover * ISBN 0-8028-5190-8 - $16.00
S E 
crdmnO 
BAook 
A 
for Young eader
255 IEFFERSON AVE S.E./GRAND RAPIDS, MICHItIGAN 49503
An 
No
~sa_·k I~at&
·6~R_
to our 1999
Blue Ribbon Books!
0-689-82134-4
$16.95/ $24.95 Canadian
Simon & Schuster
Books for Young Readers
0-689-82664-8
$16.00/ $23.50 Canadian
Atheneum Books
for Young Readers
0-689-82175-1
$16.00/ $23.50 Canadian
Margaret K. McElderry Books
0-689-82876-4
$16.00/ $23.50 Canadian
Jean Karl/Atheneum
Books for Young Readers
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.S.A.
RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED
0008-9036(200002)53:6;1-Q
4 
·:-;~
PERIODICALS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
is online!
It is our great pleasure to announce that, beginning with the
1999-2000 volume year, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's
Books will be available to our print subscribers as a searchable
online database. Print subscribers will be able to browse the
latest issue online, look through issues from the 1998-99 volume
year, and search for reviews by title, author, and reading level.
The staff of The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
cordially invites you to browse through the September 1998
sample issue at:
http://www.prairienet.org/cgi-bin/ccb/bulletin.cgi
The Bulletin of the Center for Children' Books
The Best of Tradition and Technology
III
"" ;;
;,·;·r
