T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by The Johns Hopkins University Press
December 2006
Vol. 60   No. 4
A Look InsIde
T  h  e   B  u  l  l  e  T  i  n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
December 2006
Vol. 60   No. 4
161  The Big PicTure
 
 The Snow Globe Family  by Jane O’Connor; illus. by S. D. Schindler
162  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
162  • Once upon a Banana  by Jennifer Armstrong; illus. by David Small
169  • Frozen Billy  by Anne Fine
170  • Freedom Walkers:  The Story of the Montgomery Bus Boycott  by Russell  
 
 Freedman
174  • The Pinhoe Egg:  A Chrestomanci Book  by Diana Wynne Jones
185  • Wintersmith  by Terry Pratchett
195  ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons
196  suBjeCt And use Index
160  •  The BulleTin
Explanation of codE symbols usEd with rEviEws
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
 
 
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only.  Recommended for the   
 
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
rEviEwing staff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Hope Morrison, Reviewer (HM)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Cindy Welch, Reviewer (CW)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
officE staff
Katrina Bromann
Melissa Zilic
subscription ratEs 
1 year, institutions, print or electronic $80.00; combined print & electronic $112.00; multiple in-
stitutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, $50.00; students, 
$15.00. In countries other than the United States, add $13.20 per subscription for postage; subscrib-
ers in Canada and Mexico add $9.35. Single copy rate: $9.00. Volumes available in microfilm from 
ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche 
from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be 
made payable to The Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Divi-
sion, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 
410-516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/jour-
nals/advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.uiuc.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2006 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image by S. D. Schindler from The Snow Globe Family  ©2006.  Used by permission of G. P. 
Putnam’s Sons.
DecemBer 2006 • 161
the BIg PICture
The Snow Globe Family
by Jane O’Connor; illustrated by S. D. Schindler
Much like the snowfalls of winter, the books of winter initially elicit eager an-
ticipation of wintry pleasures, which quickly turns to disappointment and the 
need to shovel piles of excess out of the way; fortunately, there are those sparkling 
examples of both that make the world seem new again. Such a book is The Snow 
Globe Family.
While the official residents of the big house on the hill are a cheerful 
nineteenth-century family, the stars of this book are the second family in resi-
dence: the attractive period snow globe on the mantle houses “a very little family,” 
comprising, like the big family, a set of parents, a boy and a girl, and a baby. The 
snow-globe family loves snow, and Papa often regales his brood with stories of 
massive snowstorms past; unfortunately, only the baby in the big family knows the 
little family is there, so their hopes for a “great big snowstorm” remain unfulfilled. 
Finally, though, the baby manages to get her hands on the snow globe, giving the 
little family the blizzard of their dreams in which to frolic, as the rest of the big 
family plays amid the snowfall outside of their house. 
The concept is ingenious in several directions. Kids will understand the 
yearning for a good snowfall by both the big and the little families, and they’ll 
relish the comic parallel between the two as they both wait for outside events 
to bring them the weather of their dreams. There’s also the irresistible notion of 
animate toys, especially those living in a miniaturized version of our own world, a 
comparison here evoked with delicious particulars (“They are having dessert too, 
only their cups are so small, each one holds no more than half a drop of tea”; “They 
. . . tramp through the snow, leaving footprints smaller than the sprinkles on an 
ice cream cone”). The book doesn’t rest on those laurels, however, but instead adds 
considerable flourish to those already inviting prospects. The mirroring between the 
two families plays up the miniaturization pleasures, with a faceoff between the little 
snow-globe baby and the big regular-person baby the impetus for the snow globe’s 
shaking; the snow-globe family’s robust enjoyment of their home’s tempestuous 
qualities means that they’re thrilled to hang from the chandelier as their house is 
tossed about (the image of proper little Papa getting tipped out of his bath will be 
a sure winner with young audiences). 
Artist Schindler has already tackled wintry period art with great suc-
cess (in Johnston’s The Ghost of Nicholas Greebe, BCCB 10/96), and his precise, 
engraving-like lines are always well suited to early Americana. Though he doesn’t 
lose sight of his season or time, he’s here appropriately more cheery than spooky; 
the palette of his watercolor and gouache colors has its cool and wintry touches, 
with lavender shadows predominating in the gaslit interiors and twilight outdoor 
162 • The BulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
scenes, but there’s a lively complement in the rich gold tones of furniture and wall 
color and the festive deep jewel tones of the little family’s indoor and outdoor garb. 
It’s particularly nice that the big family is no stiff and stuffy Victorian stereotype 
but rather a clan as possessed of joie de vivre and evident enjoyment as the snow-
globers, albeit in their own more decorous way. The artist cunningly and quietly 
ties the families together with his end visions of the two sleeping households, with 
the big family viewed through the exterior windows as if they too were miniature 
folk viewed by oversized outsiders—which, in terms of the book and its viewers, 
they of course are.
The book teasingly closes on a winking suggestion of impending action: 
the text suggests that the next big snowstorm “might come very soon” as illustrations 
show the family cat perched on the mantle and fixing on a mouse just the other 
side of the snow globe. In the meantime, however, all is peace as everybody settles 
down for the night after their snowy exertions. The bedtime conclusion for both 
families points this for use as an imaginative bedtime story, perfect for a snowy 
night where a youngster can look out the window at the frosty world just waiting 
for exploration the next day, but don’t limit its use—this snowy gem sparkles in 
any setting. (See review, p. 184, for publication information.)
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
ArmsTrong, Jennifer Once upon a Banana; illus. by David Small. Simon, 
2006 44p
iSBn 0-689-84251-1 $16.95   
R* 5-8 yrs
This cleverly crafted picture book follows a domino-fall sequence of mishaps around 
a city block. It all starts when a performer’s monkey bolts, grabbing a banana from 
a produce stand and carelessly discarding the peel; a dismounted motorcyclist slips 
on the peel and bounces off the bottom of a painter’s ladder, the painter plummets 
into a passing shopping cart and caroms off a barber pole, the barber pole falls and 
pulls leashes out of the dog-walker’s hands. Subsequent events involve a speeding 
biker, an unattended skateboard, gray-suited officials from City Hall, an eager baby 
in a loose buggy, and a stinky dump truck, which accumulate in a crescendo of 
chaos that resolves into a happy confluence of tied-up ends (everybody is reunited 
with their charges, pets, and vehicles) and banana-eating participants. This is a 
mesmerizing mosaic of effervescent disaster, and David Small has managed to treat 
it as visual nonsense, ensuring that the absurdity operates within an understandable 
if upendable structure (a helpful map tracing the route of the ripples of disaster 
appears on the closing endpaper). His smoky, elastic lines have a circus-worthy 
flexibility with a touch of sardonic humor, and he tucks in extra jokes at several 
junctures (the signposters, for instance, are Laurel and Hardy). Though this initially 
looks to be a wordless book, careful perusal reveals that each page contains a sign 
prominently posted, and the signs come in couplets (“4-Way Stop // Barber Shop”), 
an element that adds pleasure for kids just embarking on reading without being vital 
DecemBer 2006 • 163
to understanding the glorious chain of unraveling. Viewers need to make sure to 
start from the beginning, since the story opens on the front endpapers, but they’ll 
relish the pandemonium and enjoy hunting through the pages to explore all the 
signs of impending and previous wrecks.  DS
ArringTon, Aileen Paper Heart. Front Street, 2006 [116p]
ISBN 1-932425-61-6 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
“Because of her bad heart, Nadia did not play at recess”; in fact, the sixth-grader 
doesn’t get to do much of anything, restricted as she is by her worried mother from 
socializing with other kids, being outside in the cold, or engaging in just about 
any physical activity. An increasingly restless Nadia begins to rebel, trying out for 
the class play (her mother gets wind of the plan and tells the teacher not to cast 
her) and making friends with a tough classmate, but when friction between her 
and her mother leads to an emergency-room visit, Nadia discovers that what she 
has always believed about her condition may not be true. Arrington creates an 
intriguing plot that has a touch of mystery and suspense, hinting periodically at 
the truth—that Nadia has no real heart disease, just a non-threatening murmur, 
and her mother has overreacted to it ever since the heart-related death of Nadia’s 
father. This isn’t a TV-movie tale of Munchausen’s by proxy, however, so much as 
a story that renders the eternal battle between parental desire for protectiveness 
and a child’s desire for liberty in particularly urgent terms. It’s especially believable 
and poignant that Nadia has absorbed her mother’s conviction, taking every flush 
of disappointment or speeding heartbeat of anger as an episode of illness. Though 
things wrap up a bit speedily at the end, the concept remains intriguing and the 
telling intense, so readers will easily sympathize with Nadia’s plight even as they 
begin to wonder about their own parental restrictions.  DS
BAnerJee, AnJAli Looking for Bapu. Lamb, 2006 [160p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90894-6 $17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-74657-1 $15.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-7
Ever since Bapu, his grandfather, came from India to live with eight-year-old Anu 
and his parents several years earlier, Bapu and Anu have been inseparable. It’s there-
fore a terrible shock to Anu when Bapu suffers a massive stroke and consequently 
passes away. When a vision of Bapu appears to Anu, the boy refuses to believe that 
Bapu is truly gone. He tries a variety of tactics to contact his grandfather—setting 
up a Vishnu shrine in the woods and making offerings, deciding to become a sadhu 
in hopes of gaining a “direct channel” to his grandfather “in the spirit world,” 
consulting a magician at the nearby Mystery Museum—but in the end it is in a 
quiet moment with his father that he ultimately accepts that Bapu is gone and is 
not coming back. With his complex inner struggle, Anu isn’t entirely believable 
as an eight-year-old, and the exploration of his dilemma has a sophistication that 
may put it beyond much of the book’s audience. Anu’s confusion and longing for 
resolution are sympathetically depicted, though, and the story is intriguingly laced 
with traces of Hindu mysticism, often presented from the skewed perspective of 
Anu, who himself is grappling to understand the very notion he is describing. Those 
willing to overlook the book’s abstract tendencies may therefore warm to this gentle, 
occasionally humorous tale of a boy determined not to lose a loved one.  HM
164 • The BulleTin
chAmBers, AidAn This Is All: The Pillow Book of Cordelia Kenn. Amulet/Abrams, 
2006 808p
ISBN 0-8109-7060-0 $19.95   
Ad Gr. 10-12
How might one take the measure of a middle-class British girl’s emotional, spiritual, 
sexual, and intellectual coming of age? With over 800 pages and a full two and 
three-eighths inches of horizontal shelf space, possibly. Cordelia Kenn, nineteen 
and expecting her first child, attempts to take her own measure, combining a 
retrospective narrative with excerpts from pillow books that contain her actual 
thoughts and responses from the time to which she now looks back. Bookish 
and introverted, Cordelia analyzes and intellectualizes everything from breasts to 
periods to relationships; the result is a peculiarly arid philosophical treatise of first 
love—a book chock-a-block full of sex that is not sexy, of passion that does not 
inspire, of introspection that leaves the reader on the outside. Though Chambers 
gets his feminine perspective right, his character is no Everyteen; she is too self-
possessed, too comfortable with her embodiment, and too sure of her opinions 
to leave a hint of vulnerability on which readers might build a solid empathy. To 
someone who only likes classical music and highbrow literature, who stages her 
first sex in an ancient church complete with flowers, fruit, and a sex sermon, and 
who enjoys naked, full-body massages with her best female friend without a hint 
of immature self-consciousness, readers who don’t get the wonder of these things 
are likely to be dismissed as naff chavs and they’ll know it; one wonders especially 
how Cordelia could possibly be anything other than disappointed in her daughter, 
who is supposed to, by the time she is sixteen and reading this, be either as worldly 
wise and erudite as her mother or as physically, intellectually, and artistically perfect 
as her father. Even Cordelia’s mentor Julie (whom Chambers fans will remember 
from Now I Know, BCCB 6/88), is too good to be likable, and her meditations 
on meditation go on a bit long as lessons in personal esoterics. Although this will 
undoubtedly attract readers who are as intellectually inclined as Cordelia herself, 
it would seem that Chambers has simply overwritten himself here, in more ways 
than one.  KC
child, lAuren Snow Is My Favorite and My Best; written and illus. by Lauren 
Child. Dial, 2006 [32p]
ISBN 0-8037-3174-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-6 yrs
The always hyperbolic Lola is thrilled at the prospect of the snow predicted by the 
weatherman. When it comes, she and Charlie and friends Marv, Lotta, and Sizzles 
have a picture-perfect day, which only intensifies Lola’s disappointment when the 
snow disappears. When she wishes she had snow all the time, big brother Charlie 
once again shows his wisdom and patience by helping her see, with impeccable kid 
logic and an easily understood object lesson, why that might not be such a good 
thing. Ever managing to temper Lola’s enthusiasms without squashing her spirit, 
Charlie remains a great kid and an exemplary elder brother. The collage illustrations, 
taken from the animated cartoon version of this story, are up to Child’s consistently 
high wit, warmth, and quality, with her characteristic visual and thematic flights 
into perspective-shifting fantasy. Snow might be Lola’s favorite and her best, but 
Charlie is undeniably her unsung hero.  KC
DecemBer 2006 • 165
cooney, cAroline B. A Friend at Midnight. Delacorte, 2006 [160p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90345-6 $17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73326-7 $15.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-12
Fifteen-year-old Lily, stuck at home minding her toddler half-brother, Nathaniel, 
while her mother and stepfather take her older sister to college, is suddenly faced 
with a dilemma she’s not sure she can handle: her eight-year-old brother, Michael, 
calls griefstricken from the airport, because the father with whom he was sup-
posed to be living has returned him as a disappointment. First, Lily has to repair 
the immediate situation, passing herself off as her older sister, wielding a shadily 
acquired credit card, and flying herself and Nathaniel from LaGuardia to Baltimore 
to pick up Michael and bring him back. Her second task is even harder: to abide 
by Michael’s request and keep their father’s monstrously cruel action a secret, 
which she knows is the only way to protect Michael from becoming the object of 
school and neighborhood pity and a pawn in their mother’s rants against her ex. 
Cooney’s understanding of the complexity of human dynamics and the myriad 
ways we can destroy or bolster one another makes this novel sharply believable as 
well as poignant: Michael’s father’s action is well chosen for its brutal plausibility, 
and Lily’s clearly not wrong in rejecting the “always tell a trusted adult” dogma and 
in her understanding of the ways an eight-year-old can be crippled by eager adult 
help. The book takes an interesting tack in Lily’s fierce rejection of God, deftly 
keeping her theological concerns concretely grounded and interweaving her deep 
disappointment in her heavenly Father with her bitter anger at the earthly one. 
While there’s a little contrivance in the plotting, Lily’s an appealingly heroic figure 
even as she’s a realistic teen, and readers will admire her strength.  DS 
cummings, mAry Three Names of Me; illus. by Lin Wang. Whitman, 
2006 40p
ISBN 0-8075-7903-3 $15.95   
R 6-9 yrs
“Ada Lorane Bennett. That is my name,” says the narrator, adding, “But it is not 
the first name I’ve had.” She goes on to explain that she doesn’t know her first 
name, which was given to her when she was a baby in China, but she knows her 
second name, which was given to her when she was placed in a Chinese orphanage. 
She received her third name, Ada (ai da means “love arrived” in Chinese), from 
“the two people who came to China to be my mom and dad” and with whom she 
now lives in America. The text is thoughtful but unworried as Ada describes the 
different elements of her history, explaining in accessible terms her connections to 
China and to America and her parental and cultural influences from both places; 
the tender yet matter-of-fact acknowledgment of Ada’s pre-American past and 
influences makes this a particularly useful title that will be a helpful antidote to 
the many adoption books that duck the birth-parent question. While the book’s 
format suggests a readalone, the prose style and full-bleed illustrations on every 
spread point this more toward a readaloud, and it would make a cozy entrée into a 
one-on-one discussion. Illustrations combine still (occasionally stiff) photorealistic 
figures and softly textured, tranquil background landscapes that echo the calmness 
of the text and emphasize the warmth of Ada’s home. The book encourages active 
response in a concluding section about scrapbooking and journaling that features 
Ada’s scrapbook; while the section seems a little bit like filler with its length and 
random tidbits, the concept is a legitimate one. Youngsters looking for a window 
166 • The BulleTin
onto the international adoption experience or for a perspective on their own cross-
cultural pasts will find this a reassuring exploration.  DS
eATon, mAxwell iii The Adventures of Max and Pinky: Best Buds; written and 
illus. by Maxwell Eaton III. Knopf, 2006 [32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-93803-6 $14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-83803-1 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* 4-7 yrs
This breezy story of friendship focuses on the little boy Max and his pig comrade, 
Pinky, who are longtime pals (“Always have been. Always will be”). They’re buddies 
through camping and fishing (though Pinky’s mostly after marshmallows, regardless 
of the official activity), through pursuing their own pastimes, and through sharing 
their regular Adventure Day on Saturdays. One Saturday Pinky doesn’t show up, 
so Max hunts around for his friend and finally correctly guesses that Pinky became 
so absorbed in a marshmallow feast that he lost track of time. The book is offbeat, 
irreverent, and affectionate, contrasting the pared-down simplicity of the main 
text with cheerful dialogue in the speech balloons and the sturdy simplicity of the 
flat-planed, digitally colored art with the eccentric actions they depict. Wry and 
imaginative humor fills the pages, whether it be in Max’s puppet dialogues (“Knock 
knock,” says one puppet; “I don’t get it,” says the other), his worries about Pinky’s 
absence (he fears his friend has been “carried away by bunnies”), or the fact that 
a polar bear’s rear end reminds Max of his buddy’s marshmallow passion. Smart 
yet silly and accessible, this stands out in a sea of bland picture-book stories about 
friends; kids will giggle their way through this introduction and look forward to 
the pair’s next outing.  DS
ehrenhAfT, dAniel The After Life. Razorbill, 2006 [272p]
Paper ed. ISBN 1-59514-080-8 $8.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Will Shepherd has not exactly been close to his wealthy father, who left Will’s mother 
shortly after Will’s birth, and he’s only just met Kyle and Liz, his seventeen-year-
old younger half-siblings, whose school Will has recently started attending. He’s 
nonetheless shocked when his father dies of a heart attack (doubtless encouraged by 
Shepherd Senior’s recreational drug use), so he turns up in Miami, relying as usual 
on regular infusions of drugs and alcohol, for his father’s funeral. Mr. Shepherd 
wills Kyle and Liz each twenty million but Will a paltry two mil, dependent on 
Will’s driving his father’s old Volvo back from Miami to New York (Mr. Shepherd 
had always sneered at Will’s inability to drive). Convinced that Will plans to try 
for a bigger share, Kyle insists that he and Liz fulfill the driving duties and that 
the trio take the long ride together, but the experience isn’t what any of them ex-
pect. Ehrenhaft writes with a cool, heedless humor and a matter-of-fact absurdity, 
making this an enjoyably edgy narrative that mines comedy even from its dark-
est elements. The strongest portraits are those of Kyle, a “web-based crook” and 
wheeler-dealer convinced everybody’s working an angle, and Will, trying to keep his 
life from tanking entirely as he struggles to come to terms with the death, possibly 
by suicide, of his beloved uncle; Liz is less credible, especially in her attraction to 
Will’s shambling character, but the plot gets a lot of entertainment value out of the 
romantic sparks between the half-sibs (an overexplanatory wrapup conveniently 
explains that Will and Liz aren’t actually blood kin, thus greenlighting their relation-
DecemBer 2006 • 167
ship). The youthfully jaundiced satire on material ranging from preppies (the kids’ 
school is the motherlode) to hippies (Shepherd Senior was a wannabe) combines 
with genuinely emotional undercurrents to make this an offbeat but compelling 
literary road trip.  DS
elkeles, simone How to Ruin a Summer Vacation. Flux/Llewellyn, 
2006 [240p]
Paper ed. ISBN 0-7387-0961-1 $8.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
Amy Nelson’s relationship with her father, Ron, has been pretty much confined to 
birthday visits, and that’s just fine with her; she blames him entirely for failing to 
marry her mother after the college fling that produced Amy sixteen years ago. Now, 
however, Ron abruptly announces his intention to take her to Israel to meet the 
paternal side of the family—particularly his critically ill mother—and Mom is all too 
ready to send her packing. Seething with resentment and determined to make Ron’s 
life a misery, Amy arrives in the family’s gated and guarded moshav community with 
enough spoiled-American-brat mannerisms to set the family’s teeth on edge, and it 
doesn’t help that they’ve just learned about her existence. Cousin Osnat (“O’snot” 
to Amy) can fully match her in bad attitude, though, and almost immediately the 
two are rivals, critical of everything about each other from breast size to work ethic. 
Add to the mix buff, soulful, infuriating Avi, who may or may not be the object of 
O’snot’s affections and who quickly becomes a major presence on Amy’s romance 
radar. Characters are overdrawn, and the outcome of Amy’s summer—she bonds 
with Ron, bonds with her motherland, bonds with her Jewish heritage, bonds with 
her cousin, and most definitely bonds with Avi—is completely predictable. There’s 
enough amusement to be had, however, in watching Amy bounce from one cultural 
mishap to another (e.g., competitive sheep shearing with O’snot; igniting a bar 
brawl at the local disco) to make this a breezy read.  EB
ellis, deBorAh I Am a Taxi. Groundwood/House of Anansi, 2006 205p (The 
Cocalero Novels)
ISBN 0-88899-735-3 $16.95   
R Gr. 5-8
Canadian author Ellis travels the world to seek out stories of children surviving 
through extreme circumstances (The Heaven Shop, BCCB 1/05); this time she takes 
us to Bolivia to tell the fictionalized story of Diego, who lives with his mother and 
sister in a tiny cell in San Sebastián Women’s Prison, his father living nearby in the 
men’s side of the prison. His parents have been falsely accused of drug smuggling, 
and they are serving their time in a prison system utterly unlike anything in the 
States. Diego helps support his family by being a taxi—running errands in the 
city for the women confined in the self-governing, self-supporting facility. When 
he accidentally runs afoul of prison rules and must give up his taxi work, he opts 
to go with his friend Mando on what is supposed to be a two-week work detail in 
the mountains. He soon learns that the boys are to do the scut work of the cocaine 
industry, stomping the coca leaves and then muddling them with chemicals in a 
large pit until they produce the residue that becomes coca paste. He also realizes 
that the men have no intention of either paying the boys or taking them back to 
the city, so he makes a desperate escape. Ellis makes a strong and informative case 
for protecting and honoring coca as an important medicinal and cash crop for 
the Bolivian farmers while strongly condemning the cocaine trade; as usual, her 
168 • The BulleTin
case is made with compelling characters and riveting action rather than through 
didactic intrusions. Bookish, responsible, and resourceful, Diego is an extremely 
likable character, and readers will immediately warm to him and become invested 
in his fate. Meanwhile, they will learn a lot about the inhumane practices and 
consequences of turning a gift from the gods into a curse for humans. An author’s 
note follows the text.  KC
ellis, sArAh Odd Man Out. Groundwood/House of Anansi, 2006 162p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-88899-702-7 $16.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-88899-703-5 $6.95   
R Gr. 5-8
While his mother and her new husband travel to Hawaii on their honeymoon, 
twelve-year-old Kip stays with his grandmother and a lively mob of girl cousins 
in the old family house on the island. Though Kip grows accustomed to and even 
fond of his madcap cousins, he’s more intrigued by the opportunities the island and 
house afford him to connect with his late father, so he’s thrilled when he realizes 
that the black notebook he finds hidden in his room, a gripping spy story detailing 
“Operation Mitochondria,” is his dad’s teenaged work. When he finally shares the 
story with his grandmother, however, he discovers that it’s the key to a family secret, 
one that changes his view of his father. Ellis creates with splendid and inviting detail 
a chaotic houseful of happy relatives who treat the old house as a big toy because of 
its forthcoming demolition. It’s realistic that thoughtful Kip would enjoy a break 
from the action now and then, and that he’d be fascinated with the elaborately 
created world of his father’s. The fact that Kip’s father’s story wasn’t fiction but a 
documentation of his paranoid delusions about a world against him is a startling 
if not entirely unexpected revelation; while the import of that realization is a bit 
oddly truncated (we never really hear if Kip has a chance of inheriting the disease), 
it’s really more important as a piece of the puzzle about Kip’s much-missed dad and 
a step on the road to accepting the strengths of the family he has now. Ultimately, 
this is a determinedly individual and warmly affectionate family story about a boy 
who finds strength in new understanding of both the present and the past.  DS 
fArmer, nAncy Clever Ali; illus. by Gail de Marcken. Orchard/Scholastic, 
2006 40p
ISBN 0-439-37014-0 $17.99   
R Gr. 3-6
Ali’s father keeps pigeons for the cruel Sultan of Cairo. When Ali is seven, he begins 
to go to work with his father, and he learns of the Sultan’s oubliette, an underground 
prison cell, with its dread demon lurking at the bottom. Ali is set to work training 
a pigeon, but he spoils it against his father’s advice, and when it comes time to test 
the bird, it gets away and wreaks havoc in the Sultan’s palace, scattering the Sultan’s 
precious cherries all over his room. The Sultan then threatens to toss Ali’s father 
down the oubliette unless Ali can produce 600 cherries in three days time. Ali’s 
clever plan is based on a true story of an Egyptian Sultan who desired cherries from 
the far-off mountains of Syria, and Farmer’s embellishments fit seamlessly into the 
best traditions of Arabic storytelling. Adopting an oral storyteller’s style, she uses 
subtle refrains and repetitions to keep listeners and readers focused. de Marcken’s 
illustrations are at once representational, symbolic, and atmospheric, as she incor-
porates traditional Arabic patterns and calligraphy into her bright and energetic 
watercolors. Brief author’s and illustrator’s notes provide background information 
on the origins and significances of the story and the art. This makes a luminous 
contribution to the growing body of Middle Eastern literature for children.  KC 
DecemBer 2006 • 169
fine, Anne Frozen Billy; illus. by Georgina McBain. Farrar, 2006 175p
ISBN 0-374-32481-6 $16.00   
R Gr. 4-6
With Father in Australia seeking their fortune and Mother temporarily holed up in 
jail, Edwardian siblings Clarrie and Will are left in the care of Uncle Len, a music-
hall performer who has a modestly successful ventriloquist act with his wooden 
dummy, Frozen Billy. Len is well-meaning enough, but with his propensity to drink 
up the grocery money, he’s not the ideal guardian. In an effort to boost Uncle Len’s 
darker moods and the household income, Will joins the act as a sort of Frozen Billy 
twin. The audience loves it, the theater owner places them at the top of the bill, 
but Clarrie is increasingly disturbed to note how Will himself seems to be taking 
on the mannerisms and blank-eyed personality of a dummy, and a nastily disposed 
one at that. It’s up to her to save the day, which she does via an elaborately orches-
trated scheme to work up her own act featuring Frozen Billy’s “sister” Still Lucy, to 
coordinate her mother’s release from jail with the departure of an Australia-bound 
ship, and to hustle all four family members and two child-sized wooden dummies 
on board with just one ticket. Fine crafts a not-too-serious melodrama and laces its 
stock improbabilities with some genuine creepiness; children prone to the shivers 
around glassy-eyed dolls should feel the chill from Frozen Billy and Will’s increas-
ingly intense patter and volatile exchanges, as well as from McBain’s scratchy ink 
drawings that make fresh-faced Frozen Billy into the stuff of nightmares. A happy 
ending takes the edge off, but jittery readers may want to tuck the book into a 
drawer rather than leave it out on the nightstand.  EB
freedmAn, russell The Adventures of Marco Polo; illus. by Bagram Ibatoulline 
and with photographs. Levine/Scholastic, 2006 63p 
ISBN 0-439-52394-X $17.99   
R Gr. 4-8
Certainly an adventurer, perhaps a Chinese official, possibly a colorful prevaricator, 
Marco Polo is probably a name recognized by most children as the world’s best-
known traveler. Freedman retraces the highlights of Marco, father Niccolò, and uncle 
Maffeo’s thirteenth-century merchant venture to the kingdom of Kublai Khan and 
back to their home town of Venice. The workmanlike text is considerably enlivened 
by substantial quotes from Marco; descriptions of Kublai Khan and his court, the 
wondrous city of Quinsai (Hangzhou) with its remarkably modern-sounding civic 
pleasures, and Indian pearl divers and pirates are particularly intriguing. The pro-
vocative issue of Marco Polo’s veracity is examined mostly in a concluding chapter 
rather than incorporated into the main text (à la Schlitz’s more successful com-
mentary on the dissembling Schliemann in The Hero Schliemann, BCCB 10/06); 
Freedman himself takes no firm position on the issue, but he outlines the scholarly 
debate and offers reasons why critical information may have been omitted by Polo 
and his prisonmate scribe. Reproductions of illustrations from various copies of The 
Description of the World and other European and Middle Eastern medieval sources 
are supplemented by Ibatoulline’s full-page paintings, which “reflect the different 
cultures Marco Polo encountered on his historic journey.” A handsome Ibatoulline 
map of the Polos’ travels is also included, though it unfortunately offers no modern 
equivalents for the thirteenth-century place names included. This is an attractive, if 
somewhat cursory, introduction that may inspire readers to check out one of several 
of the suggested English translations. Notes summarize sources and viewpoints on 
the adventurer’s story and describe the history of the included art.  EB 
170 • The BulleTin
freedmAn, russell Freedom Walkers: The Story of the Montgomery Bus 
Boycott. Holiday House, 2006 112p illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8234-2031-0 $18.95   
R* Gr. 5-8
Before the everyday civil-rights heroes of Ann Bausum’s Freedom Riders boarded 
the buses (BCCB 4/06), citizens of Montgomery, Alabama, wore down their shoe 
leather in a courageous protest against abuse of their personal dignity and con-
stitutional rights. Freedman recovers the facts behind what has now become an 
iconic, nearly mythologized, event, digging back several years before Rosa Parks’ 
acclaimed bus ride to acknowledge two other women, black college professor Jo 
Ann Robinson and teen schoolgirl Claudette Colvin, whose previous resistance to 
segregation laws on public transit set the stage for the massive protest to follow. 
Likewise, he takes readers back to the days when the Rev. Martin Luther King, Jr. 
was hardly a local, much less a national, name and discusses how Parks and King 
(rather than Robinson and Colvin) displayed exactly the ideal personality traits 
and were in exactly the right time and place to become the rallying figures behind 
a carefully strategized boycott. Freedman’s text moves at the speed of fiction, and 
he seamlessly interjects just the necessary tidbits of background to contextualize 
events without interrupting the pace of a well-told tale. Cover art and layout are 
decidedly less than attention grabbing, but generous inclusion of black-and-white 
photos, careful quote sourcing, bibliography with children’s books noted, and 
index will make this a draw for both report writers and readers who appreciate 
lively historical writing.  EB 
frosT, helen The Braid. Foster/Farrar, 2006 95p
ISBN 0-374-30962-0 $16.00   
R Gr. 6-10
When the mid-nineteenth-century Highland Clearances force a Scottish family 
out of their island home, oldest sister Sarah slips away to join her grandmother on 
a smaller nearby island rather than cross the Atlantic, while the rest of the family 
departs for Canada, hoping to find family and a living in Cape Breton. The terrible 
crossing takes the lives of Sarah’s father and two of the younger children, leaving only 
Mother, fourteen-year-old Jeannie, and the baby William to face the privations when 
they arrive to discover Cape Breton struck by scarcity. Back in Scotland, Sarah falls 
in love with Murdo Campbell, but he’s forcibly shipped off to Canada before they 
can marry, leaving her pregnant and unsure of her future. The braid of the title refers 
to the interwoven hair of Sarah and Jeannie, a piece of which each sister holds and 
treasures. That braid is explored further in the poetic structure of this verse novel, 
which creates its own innovative verse form: Sarah and Jeannie alternate narration, 
in unrhymed lines syllabically based on the speaker’s age; each poem subtly relates to 
the verses around it through shared opening and closing words, while praise poems 
between the girls’ accounts also interweave. Though complicated to describe, the 
forms are unobtrusive in the reading, quietly underpinning the narrative poems; 
Frost is a master at making language fit unforced into meter, so the narrative poems 
read easily, with a prosy spontaneity but a pulsing rhythm underneath (the more 
abstract brief praise poems will likely be skipped by readers looking for story rather 
than lyricism). Between its broken-token variant and melodramatic elements, the 
story tilts toward the sentimental, but that’s helpful in creating a compelling story 
that will see poetry-shy readers through; they’ll also be intrigued by the parallel 
lives of the two sisters and the results of their different life paths. Notes explain the 
poetic form and a bit about island life, language, and history.  DS
DecemBer 2006 • 171
giles, gAil What Happened to Cass McBride? Little, 2006 211p
ISBN 0-316-16638-3 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 7-12
In this tripartite narrative, Kyle Kirby is being interrogated by the cops, the police 
are trying to find teen queen Cass McBride, and Cass is contemplating her dilemma: 
she’s been placed in a crate and buried underground by Kyle, who has left her with 
a walkie-talkie through which he can taunt her. It soon becomes clear that Kyle is 
punishing Cass for the death by suicide of his younger brother, David, who hanged 
himself after finding a disparaging note about him from Cass, who had turned 
him down for a date; Cass, who’s acquired master wheeler-dealer skills from her 
manipulative father, maneuvers Kyle into realizing that it wasn’t Cass but the evil 
and dismissive Mrs. Kirby who pushed David to suicide, but will that be enough 
to save her before her oxygen runs out? This is an arresting premise, recalling Lois 
Duncan with its suspense and readability (short chapters, with point of view dif-
ferentiated by typeface and title, make this particularly inviting to reluctant readers), 
and there’s an interesting exploration of the character of Cass, a girl who’s genuinely 
taking stock of her unquestioned drive to get ahead at all costs even as it’s helping 
her survive. The writing is uneven, though, with the police sections particularly 
flat and stilted; Mrs. Kirby is a psychologically simplistic villain and Kyle fairly 
predictable, while Cass’ iron will is so much in the forefront throughout the book 
that her post-release breakdown and reformation seem out of character. This will 
nonetheless be an easy booktalk, and fans of the author’s Shattering Glass (BCCB 
5/02) will likely forgive the deficits here to enjoy the psychological thrills.  DS
gold, rozAnne Kids Cook 1-2-3: Recipes for Young Chefs Using Only 3 Ingredients; 
illus. by Sara Pinto. Bloomsbury, 2006 144p
ISBN 1-58234-735-2 $17.95   
R Gr. 4-8
Gold, author of the three-ingredient cookbook for adults Recipes 1-2-3, has returned 
to this formula to create a cookbook for young readers. It’s an inspired formula for 
young starter cooks, since it means recipes are automatically much less daunting 
than usual to read as well as to prepare, and the chances of mastery are increased 
with the minimization of steps wherein something could go wrong. There’s still 
plenty of creativity offered here, with well over a hundred recipes from appetizers 
to snacks, main dishes to desserts. The three-ingredient concept is wisely employed 
as a guideline rather than a strict rule, so seasonings and water don’t count, and 
variations and additions are freely suggested so that kids who’ve mastered the basic 
recipe can find ways to expand from a comfortable starting place; storebought 
shortcuts are key to many recipes and the flavors are wildly unsubtle, but that’s a 
fair trade for the combination of breadth and accessibility offered here. The range 
of difficulty levels ensures that even the most timid young kitchen-user can find 
a way to enhance his or her kitchen skills, while those who tackle egg separation 
and plate garnish with aplomb will find tasty ideas as well. It’s a little strange that a 
cookbook blithely convinced of readers’ possession of ice-cream makers and stand 
mixers resolutely refuses to acknowledge the microwave, and there are a few oddi-
ties and glitches (the Chocolate-Banana Terrine recipe neglects to instruct cooks 
to peel and slice the bananas, and there’s no indication of how to judge doneness 
in the Roast Chicken, for instance), as well as a tendency for the illustrations to 
stick to the tastefully decorative when the informative would have been welcome. 
However, the concept remains a winner, and kids who’ve been defeated by glossy 
overproduced catalogues of food styling will be relieved to find a text that will really 
make them feel at home on the range. An index is included.  DS
172 • The BulleTin
hAle, mAriAn Dark Water Rising. Holt, 2006 233p illus. with photo-
graphs
ISBN 0-8050-7585-2 $16.95   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Uncle Nate talks Papa into moving the family to Texas with the promise of col-
lege and med school for all of the boys, but Seth has other ideas. He wants to be 
a carpenter like his dad, and Galveston in 1900 is the perfect place to prove his 
abilities, as it is “the booming city of the new twentieth century.” Seth only has a 
week to prove his mettle, however, before a storm of Biblical proportions, the fa-
mous Galveston Flood of 1900, lays waste to the city. As he and his coworker Josiah 
struggle to get to Seth’s home, they watch helplessly as people are pulled under the 
water rushing through the streets. While they ride out the storm with many other 
families in a well-built home near the shore, Galveston is ravaged beyond repair, 
with an ultimate death toll of over 6,000 souls. To Seth’s horror, Josiah is taken from 
the streets and pressed into a work crew charged with loading bloated bodies onto 
barges for sea burials. Upon his return, though, the two work together to rebuild 
and repair their homes, which ultimately proves to Seth’s father that Seth will make 
a worthy partner in his carpentry business. Drawing on documents from the time 
and on stories of survivors, Hale paints a vivid, suspenseful picture of the horror 
of living through the flood and its aftermath. Unfortunately, the book insists on 
including a love interest that is superfluous and overly romanticized, and its treat-
ment of the black characters, Josiah and his grandfather, burdens the book with 
an agenda that seems tacked on and heavy-handed; they are treated with at best 
paternal benevolence and at worst outright discrimination, while they maintain at 
all times an almost mystical wisdom, goodness, and insight. Despite these flaws, 
the book manages to give the disaster with terrifying immediacy, and that may suf-
fice for young fans of historical dramas. An extensive author’s note with historical 
photographs follows the text.  KC
hill, susAn Ruby’s Perfect Day; illus. by Margie Moore. HarperCollins, 
2006 [32p] (I Can Read Books)
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-008983-0 $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-008982-2 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 2-4
Ruby, a fetching little raccoon, decides that today would be a “perfect day” for a 
big breakfast, then a game of checkers, and then for a roll down the hill; unfor-
tunately, she’s hoping to do each of those things with one of her friends, but each 
time the friend is “too busy” to join her, leaving Ruby engaging in these pastimes 
on her own. Come the end of the day, though, Ruby realizes that she still had a 
good time, and she’s further pleased to enjoy the solitary pleasures of working in 
her garden on what turns out to be a “perfect day for being all by myself!” There 
aren’t many books for young readers that reassure youngsters about the worth of 
independent pursuits, so it’s refreshing to see this easy reader take on the subject. 
The text confuses its message, though, by initially pointing out the drawbacks of 
her solitary activities, so Ruby’s later reconsideration may seem a surprising U-turn 
to readers, who may also worry that Ruby will never get to play with her friends. 
Moore’s line-and-watercolor illustrations depict Ruby as a naturally sunny character 
who’s genuinely enjoying herself, which helps quash concerns about her merely 
putting on a brave face, and she and her duck, fox, and bunny friends are invit-
ing (if unlikely) playmates. Measured pace and helpful repetition will encourage 
DecemBer 2006 • 173
uncertain readers, and many will appreciate the recognition that a day spent doing 
your own thing can be “a perfect day.”  DS
hughes, cArol Dirty Magic. Random House, 2006 [432p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-93187-2 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-83187-8 $17.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
Ten-year-old Joe has said the thing that most siblings think to themselves at some 
point in their lives: he wishes that his pesky younger sister, Hannah, would die. 
When it seems that Hannah has fallen seriously ill, he therefore accepts it as his 
responsibility to rescue her from the alternative world, a purgatory for dying chil-
dren, where it appears she has been sent. Joe is lucky to find two allies in Katherine, 
still a child herself but assigned great responsibility as a “fetcher” of the newly 
arrived kids, and Spider, a rough but trustworthy guide whose services of leading 
children through this parallel world have had little use since he was blinded. Joe 
finds himself narrowly escaping death at every turn, forming close bonds with the 
feisty Katherine and mysterious Spider, and discovering his own leadership skills 
and bravery as he undertakes a rescue mission and aids in an attempt to overturn 
the immoral government. Hughes establishes a breathless pace, propelling the reader 
through the novel in a way that meshes with Joe’s sudden drop into this dramati-
cally different world. In addition, the panoply of villains is made up of machines 
and humans that are as complex and well developed as the heroic, beleaguered 
protagonists. This gritty adventure is sufficiently compelling that the occasional plot 
contrivance can be overlooked: it matters little that the children’s appearance in this 
alternative world is fuzzily explained when the description of the enormous metal 
dragon ultimately used to save them is so astonishing. A creepy otherworld filled 
with secret-burdened dying children, likable protagonists, and fascinating villains: 
what more could adventure and fantasy fans want? Maps are included.  AS
huser, glen Skinnybones and the Wrinkle Queen. Groundwood/House of 
Anansi, 2006 232p
ISBN 0-88899-732-9 $16.95   
R Gr. 7-10
Disaffected Tamara has been bounced into yet another foster home, but this time 
she is really going to try to follow her case worker’s advice and be more positive. 
She still skips school to get her real education, though, spending as much time as 
she can watching fashion programs to prep for a modeling career. When a school 
service assignment teams her up with Miss Barclay, a cigarillo-smoking, brandy-
sneaking elderly woman in a nursing home, they soon figure out that they can use 
each other to get what they want—Miss Barclay will pay for a weeklong model-
ing workshop in Vancouver if Tamara will drive her to Seattle for Wagner’s Ring 
Cycle. Knowing that their respective caretakers will never approve, the two pull 
a Thelma and Louise and almost get away with it. Like Fleischman’s Mind’s Eye 
(BCCB 10/99), the novel sets up a likely/unlikely pair, both painfully aware of 
what they want and the limitations that keep them from it. Unlike Fleischman’s 
pair, however, Miss Barclay and Tamara are equally matched for short tempers and 
grumpiness, and Miss Barclay turns out to be more unruly than Tamara. Chapters 
alternate first-person perspectives so readers get a chance to hear all that goes unsaid 
between the two and to see the generational and economic gaps in taste and values 
without any outside or heavy-handed arbitration. Both characters emerge as strongly 
174 • The BulleTin
sympathetic rebels; readers will applaud their outlaw partnership and be glad that 
Tamara, at least, receives forgiveness and a fresh start.  KC 
Jennings, richArd w. Stink City. Lorraine/Houghton, 2006 [192p]
ISBN 0-618-55248-0 $16.00
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
“Stink City” is the aptly named catfish bait that’s the moneymaking staple of the 
Carlsen family; despite the fact that Stink City’s manufacture leaves the Carlsens all 
blanketed in “the worst smell on earth,” fourteen-year-old narrator Leigh Ann is the 
staunch friend of young Cade, the heir to the Stink City fortune. Unfortunately, 
Cade has lately developed concerns that catfish fishing is inhumane, becoming 
involved with an organization (really just one crazy lady with nice letterhead and 
merchandising) devoted to eradicating fishing. Concerned for her guileless friend, 
Leigh Ann picks up on his unintentional revelations, realizes he plans a big action 
at the Springfield Catfish Derby, and determines to attend the event in order to 
prevent Cade from getting himself into serious trouble. Jennings’ laid-back, ec-
centric humor is much in evidence here, whether he’s pulling in real-life luminaries 
(smell scientists Richard Axel and Linda Buck appear), satirizing various attitudes 
(police stops of Catfish Derby entrants are sardonically described indeed), or just 
observing life’s rich oddity; his taste for quirky and thoughtful musings, here 
mostly on issues of smell, add a charming peculiarity. This is also a highly acces-
sible narrative, with lots of smell-based comedy and accessible short, divertingly 
titled chapters, and fans of offbeat humor and understated comedy will definitely 
be drawn to this bait.  DS
Jones, diAnA wynne The Pinhoe Egg: A Chrestomanci Book. Greenwillow, 
2006 515p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-113125-3 $18.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-113124-5 $17.99   
R* Gr. 5-8
Cat and Marianne, both powerful enchanters who are still growing into their abili-
ties, join forces to stop a local war between the Pinhoes and the Farleighs, two witch 
families that have existed in an uneasy truce for centuries. Cat, who is in line to be 
the next Chrestomanci, the regulator of local magical use, finds himself instantly 
connected with Marianne, whose extraordinary magic has been undervalued in the 
large Pinhoe family, when the two bond over a found egg and the eventual griffin 
hatchling. Swirling around the protagonists’ cozy new friendship are increasingly 
dire curses thrown between the two feuding families. What Cat and Marianne 
find as they filter through the layers of animosity, however, will shake up the whole 
region forever: distrust, fear, and superstition led these families into making bad 
choices about themselves (and hundreds of other magical creatures who have been 
entrapped for generations), and this current feud is actually based on little more 
than centuries-old misconceptions. Jones offers a remarkably varied and well-
developed cast; even the minor characters (such as Gammer Pinhoe’s irascible cat 
that walks through walls) are given enough personality and detail to move them 
beyond fantasy clichés. This novel works equally well for established fans of the 
series who want to absorb more of the dashing and brilliant Chrestomanci (from 
The Lives of Christopher Chant, BCCB 3/88, et al.) before he cedes his position to 
the next generation, or for new readers, who will connect with Cat and Marianne 
as bold, affable, and riveting characters. Both groups will likely find the addition 
DecemBer 2006 • 175
of a baby griffin and hundreds of newly released and mysterious magical folk to be 
intriguing elements for future novels.  AS
Jones, TrAci l. Standing against the Wind. Farrar, 2006 184p
ISBN 0-374-37174-1 $16.00   
Ad Gr. 4-7
Patrice is bitter, scared, and cold now that her mother has claimed her from her 
grandmother and forced her to move from warm, rural Georgia to windy, alienat-
ing Chicago. What’s worse is that her mother gets sent to jail shortly after moving 
her, leaving her to live with her aunt, for whom Patrice must handle chores and 
childcare. Bullied by a group of local boys for her timidity and her outrageously 
puffy hair, Patrice wants nothing more than to win a scholarship to Dogwood 
Academy, the most prestigious African-American boarding school in the country. 
Her scholarly ability and reserved ways catch the eye of Monty, the leader of the 
bullying boys, and he offers her friendship and protection in exchange for her 
tutoring his brother. Their relationship grows warmer and Monty sets his sights 
for academic glory as well. Despite Jones’ workmanlike, unimaginative, and often 
repetitive prose, Patrice and Monty emerge as likable kids; readers can plug into 
their story at multiple levels, relating to Patrice’s desire to escape bullying and 
overwork and applauding Monty’s gentle heroism. The main conflict—Patrice’s 
difficulties in getting her mother to sign a permission form for her scholarship—is 
a bit overblown considering that she doesn’t even ask for advice, let alone help, 
from the reliable adults in her life who seem willing to give it. Her passivity and 
bad choices in this situation don’t seem in step with the kind of student who would 
stand out among hundreds of applicants to actually win the scholarship, but readers 
who love a fairy-tale ending complete with a handsome prince and a ticket out of 
the projects probably won’t mind.  KC 
key, wATT Alabama Moon. Farrar, 2006 294p
ISBN 0-374-30184-0 $16.00   
Ad Gr. 4-8
For as long as he can remember, Moon has lived deep in the woods with Pap, de-
pending on the land to provide for their needs and maintaining a deep disdain for 
the government. When Pap dies, ten-year-old Moon figures he can continue to live 
on his own, but the state disagrees. After initially thwarting attempts by authori-
ties to pick him up, Moon runs afoul of a renegade constable with an axe to grind 
against “militia” folk. Moon ends up in a boy’s home but soon escapes and goes 
on the lam with two boys; when one of his comrades sickens, Moon is forced out 
into the open. Moon’s guileless approach to life makes him an appealing character, 
especially when his vulnerability surfaces; he can handle just about any circumstance 
except the loneliness that threatens to overwhelm him. His adventures, however, are 
more readable than believable: his survivalist skills and woodsmanship are a mixed 
bag of reasonably credible and downright impossible feats—for instance, there isn’t 
always water at the bottom of hills, as he asserts, and even the most determined 
hunter couldn’t bring down a full-sized doe with an arrowhead of bone and a shaft 
of cattails shot from a bowstring of shoelace. The obsessed but inept constable 
smells strongly of Dukes of Hazzard and the big-city lawyer is a mite convenient, 
but readers will be glad that Moon finds a home at last, no matter how it comes 
about. For boys who dream of unfettered life in the great outdoors and aren’t too 
fussy about reality testing, Moon’s a bona fide hero.  KC 
176 • The BulleTin
krull, kAThleen Sigmund Freud; illus. by Boris Kulikov. Viking, 
2006 144p (Giants of Science)
ISBN 0-670-05892-0 $15.99   
R Gr. 5-8
For the third entry in her successful Giants of Science series, Krull challenges read-
ers’ definition of science itself by focusing on a doctor who shunned medicine, 
a scientist who relied on purely anecdotal evidence, an experimenter who never 
devised a reproducible experiment. As she traces a career marked by stunningly 
bold insights into the subconscious mind and equally stunning humbug (the ef-
ficacy of cocaine; the importance of the nose to overall health and well-being), 
Krull again proves herself to be a master at explicating complex principles for 
a young audience, in this case hysteria, Oedipus and Electra complexes, sibling 
rivalry, and penis envy. Even more importantly, she smoothly interjects comments 
on which of his ideas and contributions have endured, which have been roundly 
discredited, and which are still open to debate. And for readers who regularly turn 
to Krull for the gossipy dirt on the high and mighty, there’s plentiful observation 
of his chauvinistic attitudes toward women, his contentious relationship with the 
new crop of psychoanalysts he took pains to train, and his almost laughable efforts 
to get to the bottom of his own hang-ups. Kulikov is again in top form with droll 
drawings of Freud diving into a watery brain, simultaneously sitting in the doctor’s 
chair and lying on the patient’s couch as he performs his own analysis, probing a 
gigantic nostril with his erstwhile friend Wilhelm Fliess. An index is included, and 
bibliographies make special note of books and websites directed toward children. 
Just hope your Internet filter lets them through.  EB
lAwrence, iAin Gemini Summer. Delacorte, 2006 [224p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90111-9 $17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73089-6 $15.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
Danny River is a pretty happy little kid with attentive parents and a space-travel-
obsessed older brother, Beau, who actually likes him; most of his troubles are of 
a garden variety—the mentally disabled kid (nicknamed “Dopey”) up the road is 
a bully, and Danny really wants a dog. His relatively calm life takes a precipitous 
turn, though, as the Vietnam War escalates and his father starts to dig out a bomb 
shelter. While the boys are playing by the pit, Beau falls in and is fatally impaled 
on a shaft of rebar, an accident in which Dopey may or may not be implicated. 
Just as the grieving family hits its emotional nadir, a dog trots into Danny’s life. 
Hoping to boost Danny’s spirits, the Rivers allow this dog to stay, and soon the 
dog’s peculiar behavior convinces Danny that this is Beau, reincarnated as affec-
tionate mutt Rocket. Indeed, Rocket seems to be so uncannily attuned to each 
family member’s emotional needs and habits that Danny cannot understand why 
his parents don’t accept what is so obvious to him. When Rocket bites Dopey in 
a scuffle, authorities come to take the dog and destroy it, but Rocket escapes and 
he and Danny hit the road to try to find help from a most unlikely source. As he 
did in Lord of the Nutcracker Men (BCCB 10/01) and B for Buster (BCCB 9/04), 
Lawrence skillfully dances on the tightrope between realism and fantasy, creating 
in Rocket a fully realized character that is convincingly human and unmistakably 
doggy, and baffling readers as to exactly who is in their right mind here—Danny or 
the Rivers. Dog-story lovers, mystery fans, and thriller devotees should be equally 
satisfied, and that takes in just about everyone, doesn’t it?  EB 
DecemBer 2006 • 177
lee, cArol Ann Anne Frank and the Children of the Holocaust. Viking, 
2006 [256p]
ISBN 0-670-06107-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 6-10
Lee’s latest exploration of the Holocaust (A Friend Called Anne, BCCB 4/05) uses 
the familiar tale of Anne Frank as a frame to tell other stories of young Holocaust 
victims (“In September 1939 . . . there were more than one and a half million 
Jewish children living in countries occupied, or soon to be occupied, by Hitler’s 
armies. By 1945, when the war ended, over a million of those children . . . were 
no longer alive”). Drawing on a range of primary and secondary source material, 
Lee recalls the whereabouts of the Frank family during the war years, occasionally 
interrupting the narrative to offer a related story of another family or child with 
a similar or related experience. While the events in the annex are more referenced 
than recalled, the description of the Franks’ experience after their deportation 
is presented here with horrific detail. The inclusion of other children’s accounts 
adds depth to the narrative and universalizes many of the truths recalled in Anne’s 
tale. There’s ultimately little new material here, though, whether in Anne’s tale or 
about the Holocaust experience in general, and the limited formatting makes it 
difficult to use the text as a source of study—there are no headings, sidebars, or 
breaks to divide up the narrative, and only occasional photographs. This might 
nevertheless function as an independent read for students deeply engaged in the 
topic or just looking to expand beyond Anne Frank, and it would also juxtapose 
nicely with Bartoletti’s Hitler Youth: Growing Up in Hitler’s Shadow (BCCB 6/05), 
which considers the role of children on the Nazi side of the spectrum. Endnotes 
and a bibliography is included.  HM
leuck, lAurA Santa Claws; illus. by Gris Grimly. Chronicle, 2006 28p
ISBN 0-8118-4992-9 $16.95   
Ad Gr. 2-4
The filthy socks hang by the hearth, the blistertoe drips over the doorway, bones 
adorn the front entry, and carolers warble “Wreck the Halls”—in short, everything’s 
in tip-top shape for Christmas in Monster Town. Mack and Zack, who’ve been 
good all year (is that any way for monsters to behave?), hustle down their decrepit 
staircase on Christmas morning to find Santa Claws’ fly-encrusted cookies all eaten 
and all the delights they wished for heaped under the dead tree. And that’s that: a 
lot of scene setting, no particular plot, and a moral for the wrap-up: “So do what 
little monsters should—/ try your hardest to be good,/ and you will find that if you 
do . . ./ Santa Claws may visit you!” Leuck, who’s made an authorial specialty of 
the creepies (One Witch, BCCB 10/03), doesn’t make as much as one might hope 
from her send-up of night-before-Christmas tales; indeed, if one applies monster 
logic, Mack and Zack haven’t done anything remotely nasty enough to merit a visit 
by the gift-giving horror on his dragon-drawn sleigh. However, Grimly’s ash-toned 
watercolor-and-ink illustrations carry the effort for holly- and tinsel-weary kiddies, 
from the Saturday Evening Post cover-art parody to ramshackle Monster Town’s cast 
of comically misshapen, gaping-mouthed, google-eyed frights. Santa Claws himself, 
with his devil ears and blue-lipped grin, is just the swarthy, bulbous imp that most 
kids won’t want to meet in a dark alley but will be more than pleased to meet in a 
picture book. With Halloween and Christmas now neck-and-neck competitors in 
home-decor wars and shopping malls extending the holiday season ever backward 
into fall, the literary conflation of these two kid-gratifying holidays was bound to 
178 • The BulleTin
happen sooner or later, and this Leuck/Grimly offering is a bit like a peppermint 
candy cane in a trick-or-treat sack.  EB
lygA, BArry The Astonishing Adventures of Fanboy & Goth Girl. Houghton, 
2006 311p
ISBN 0-618-72392-7 $16.95   
Ad Gr. 7-9
Fifteen-year-old Fanboy knows that he is an outsider: he is ignored or bullied at 
school, he feels misunderstood at home by his pregnant mother and her husband, 
whom Fanboy calls the “step-fascist,” and he is increasingly certain that his chances 
for a girlfriend are nil. Fanboy finds comfort in the graphic novel that he is creat-
ing, channeling his frustrations and artistic talent into finishing Schemata with 
the goal of using the anticipated success of the book to leave his mostly miserable 
life behind. Complicating his focused plan, however, is “goth girl,” Kyra, who sees 
Fanboy being bullied and decides to become his friend. Kyra won’t be ignored: she 
demands that Fanboy share his graphic novel with her and, though Fanboy doesn’t 
see this, she is clearly using their newfound relationship to avoid dealing with her 
own problems. The first-person narration is at least partially effective: although 
readers will see that Fanboy’s elaborate dreams are impossible, they will also likely 
sympathize with the fervor with which he applies himself to them. Unfortunately, 
this Fanboy-centric narrative means that intriguing questions about Kyra’s behaviors 
go unanswered because Fanboy doesn’t think to ask them. In addition, the adven-
tures are decidedly unastonishing as the characters strictly adhere to all-too-familiar 
stereotypes (of course the goth girl is a deeply troubled cutter and the comic-book 
geek has unrealistic expectations about the bodies of real women). Indeed, the 
most interesting and complex character in the novel is Fanboy’s stepfather, whose 
awareness that his wife “married down” is poignant, and whose patience with the 
years of unfriendliness from his stepson is never rewarded. In spite of the issues, 
readers will likely become emotionally involved with Fanboy and Kyra; they will 
be relieved to discover that both will emerge from high school scathed, but with 
brighter lives ahead.  AS
mAccullough, cArolyn Drawing the Ocean. Brodie/Roaring Brook, 
2006 [160p]
ISBN 1-59643-092-3 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Sadie hopes that her new high school will give her a chance to “not be that weird girl 
anymore who was seen talking to herself sometimes and who was way too into art.” 
She seems to be making a go of it, befriending the sleek and cool Lila and beginning 
to date hunky football player Travis. Underneath, though, she’s still shaken over the 
death four years ago of her twin brother, Ollie, whose ghost appears to her (that’s 
who she’s talking to when she seems to be talking to herself); she’s therefore drawn 
to Ryan, the school’s irreverent outcast, who seems to see the world more deeply 
than the rest of her classmates. Sadie’s strictured home life, with parents who won’t 
allow her to even take Driver’s Ed or touch a car until she’s eighteen (Ollie was hit 
by a car), is sympathetically and believably depicted, and her sometimes uneasy 
friendship with the popular girls is developed with nuance; Lila in particular is a 
complex and interesting character. Unfortunately, the book never manages to make 
Ryan’s appeal palpable to the reader: he’s a smug and condescending poseur more 
than someone who’s thoughtfully marching to his own drummer, and the scenes 
DecemBer 2006 • 179
between him and Sadie are largely empty of chemistry. It’s therefore outclassed 
by superior recent adjustment-to-loss books, but the smooth writing and ghostly 
premise may nonetheless keep readers involved.  DS
mAcdonAld, mArgAreT reAd, ad. Go to Sleep, Gecko!: A Balinese Folktale; illus. 
by Geraldo Valério. LittleFolk/August House, 2006 [32p]
ISBN 0-87483-780-4 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-8 yrs
Gecko has a problem: every night, when it is time to go to sleep, fireflies gather 
round his house, “blinking their lights on and off . . . on and off,” and keeping 
him awake. He takes his problem to the village boss, an elephant, who spends the 
next few days getting to the root of the issue. Ultimately, Elephant deduces that 
the fireflies blink so that travelers can spot the buffalo poop in the road, the buffalo 
poops to fill the holes made by the rain, and the rain falls to make puddles for the 
mosquitoes, the very mosquitoes that Gecko depends upon for food: “‘Gecko,’ said 
Elephant. ‘This world is all connected. Some things you just have to put up with. 
Now go home and go to sleep.’” This simple tale of the interconnectedness of all 
things is perfectly pitched to its audience—Gecko’s needs are simple, namely sleep 
and food, and his frustration over the lack of the former is quickly eradicated when 
faced with the possibility of not having the latter. Valério’s fanciful acrylic paint-
ings employ a palette of bold blues, greens, and yellows, and thought bubbles are 
used to great effect in illustrating possibilities (the buffalo’s bubble shows a small 
creature falling in a hole, the rain’s bubble shows a hungry gecko) making for great 
talking points with a young audience. While expressions are simply rendered, the 
animals’ faces convey a great deal of emotion (the elephant’s narrow eyes speak 
volumes as to how he feels about being woken up at midnight by the returning 
gecko). With its sprinkling of sound effects, unusual cast of characters, and gentle 
patterning, this is a comical yet thoughtful bedtime read. A thorough source note 
is included.  HM
mAck, TrAcy The Fall of the Amazing Zalindas: Sherlock Holmes and the Baker 
Street Irregulars Casebook No. 1; by Tracy Mack and Michael Citrin; illus. by Greg 
Ruth. Orchard/Scholastic, 2006 259p
ISBN 0-439-82836-8 $16.99   
R Gr. 4-7
Dr. Watson evidently did not chronicle all of Sherlock Holmes’ cases, because here 
is one he missed. When an entire family high-wire act plunges to its death before 
a horrified audience, Holmes is summoned to ferret out the truth where Inspector 
Lestrade is, of course, unable to discover it. But even the master of disguise can’t 
get into the nooks and crannies of circus and dockside life that street urchins can, 
so he employs the youthful Baker Street Irregulars, under the direction of Wig-
gins and newcomer Ozzie, to sniff out the gossip. The crime is even more heinous 
than it first appears: Professor Moriarty (pre-Reichenbach Falls, evidently) himself 
is not only behind the murder, but also inveigled into the theft of a royal treasure 
dating back to Charles II. Holmes spinoffs inevitably remind one of the pleasure 
of the originals—the delightful economy of clues and the riveting interplay of the 
master and his well-meaning sidekick—and the forced interjection of a full cast of 
extra characters and a drawn-out plot is bound to be disappointing in comparison. 
Most young readers will be unburdened by firsthand familiarity with Conan Doyle, 
though, and they can simply enjoy the resourcefulness of the scruffy Irregulars 
180 • The BulleTin
and their foggy, gaslit milieu. A host of black-and-white illustrations, an easily 
deciphered hidden code, and a load of enticing end matter ranging from a slang 
dictionary, Cockney rhyming schemes, and an excerpt from “The Adventure of 
the Blue Carbuncle” are surefire kid-pleasers.  EB 
mAllory, kenneTh Diving to a Deep-Sea Volcano. Houghton, 2006 60p il-
lus. with photographs (Scientists in the Field)
ISBN 0-618-33205-7 $17.00   
Ad Gr. 4-8
The focus of this entry in the Scientists in the Field series is Rich Lutz, a marine 
biologist specializing in the study of mollusks. A 1979 dive aboard the submersible 
Alvin piqued his interest in a colony of clams that forms near hydrothermal vents, 
growing about three hundred times faster than their typical deep-sea clam cousins. 
A second series of dives from 1991 through 1999 allowed Lutz and other scientists 
to observe the destruction and rebirth of an entire ecosystem around a hydrothermal 
vent known as Nine North, off the western coast of Central America. A volcanic 
eruption at the sea floor, which Lutz witnessed firsthand, apparently obliterated all 
life in the immediate vicinity, but in spewing forth dense clouds of hydrogen sulfide 
on which deep sea bacteria thrive, the very act of destruction provides the basis 
for the reemergence of new colonies that develop in predictable order: microbes, 
Jericho tubeworms, Riftia tubeworms, and finally clams and mussels. Consistent 
with other entries in the series, Diving includes information not only about the 
field study itself but also about the technology that enables it; this entry is unusual, 
however, in giving relatively little attention to Lutz’s background, so readers who 
envision themselves in a similar career learn little about what might prepare them. 
Moreover, this title follows a research project concluded the better part of a decade 
ago and devotes a considerable amount of space to the Alvin’s already well-docu-
mented work in the 1970s; apart from organizing the making of an IMAX movie 
aboard Alvin in 2001, no mention is made of Lutz’s current undertakings. It’s still 
an inviting look at a science career far away from white coats and labs, though, and 
kids may find the raptures of the deep sufficient to keep them absorbed. The layout 
teems with engrossing color photos, and end matter comprises a useful glossary, 
index, and suggestions for further print and online reading.  EB
mAnnis, celesTe dAvidson Julia Morgan Built a Castle; illus. by Miles 
Hyman. Viking, 2006 40p
ISBN 0-670-05964-1 $17.99   
Ad Gr. 2-4
This picture-book biography of architect Julia Morgan chronicles Morgan’s youth 
and study in California and abroad and then focuses mainly, as the title would sug-
gest, on her creation of William Randolph Hearst’s famous castle at San Simeon. 
There are some holes in the story (it’s explained that workers were housed in a 
dormitory but never mentioned where Morgan stayed on site; Morgan’s fee is only 
mentioned in a concluding note, and there’s no explanation of its current value), 
but it’s a straightforward account of a quietly pioneering life (Morgan was the first 
woman to receive a certificate in architecture from France’s École de Beaux Arts and 
the first female licensed architect in California). Mannis balances out the Hearst-
centric narrative a bit by pointing out that Morgan worked on other projects, some 
of them described in the author’s note, through the twenty-eight years of the castle’s 
construction. Hyman’s illustrations all seem lit by sunsets, an effect that may be 
intended to convey period flavor but that results in a garish and repetitive peach 
DecemBer 2006 • 181
tone, and the smooth waxen character of faces and figures makes them stiff and 
distant; the views of Hearst Castle, however, are touched with real grandeur. Readers 
interested in building but not yet ready for Wadsworth’s Julia Morgan: Architect of 
Dreams (BCCB 12/90) may find this a useful literary first step.  DS 
mATThews, l. s. A Dog for Life. Delacorte, 2006 [144p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90381-2 $16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73366-6 $14.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7
John is shocked when his brother, Tom, turns out to be seriously ill (the unnamed 
disease would seem to be some sort of cancer) and must undergo treatment. What’s 
even more shocking to both John and Tom, however, is their mother’s news that 
their beloved dog, Mouse, is an infection hazard, and since there’s no one to house 
her just for Tom’s year of treatment, she’s to be sent off to the pound. The brothers 
decide that John and Mouse will secretly travel to the boys’ uncle’s house, at the 
other end of England, in the hopes that Uncle David will take Mouse until Tom 
is well enough to have her back; John’s trip, however, leads him into some surpris-
ing adventures that bring more than the brothers had expected. Matthews adds 
a twist to this already compelling story by giving Mouse the power of telepathic 
communication with John and Tom; the book handles that component with quiet 
matter-of-factness, allowing it to enhance the narrative and to give a traveling John 
someone to bounce his thoughts off of. The result is a travel story with a difference, 
and it makes subtle points about the importance of both human and animal family, 
emphasizing connections made along the way and at the story’s conclusion. John 
is an intensely sympathetic protagonist, whose involvement with lives along the 
way is both believable and benevolent, and his casual, confiding narration has an 
authentic ring. While this is a little off the beaten path for dog-story fans, they’ll 
understand the bond between Mouse and her masters and agree that such a loyal 
companion is worth the crossing of a country.  DS
mccormick, PATriciA Sold. Hyperion, 2006 263p
ISBN 0-7868-5171-6 $15.99   
R* Gr. 9-12
Although thirteen-year-old Lakshmi leads a hard and tenuous life in her poor Ne-
pali village, she still finds pleasure in the beauty of her surroundings and the love 
of her mother. She wishes to go to the city to work as a maid so that she can send 
money home to help her mother and brother, but her stepfather’s gambling habit 
sets her on a different path: he sells her for 800 rupees. Still thinking she is to be a 
maid, Lakshmi is confused when it begins to dawn on her that she has been sold 
once again, this time for 10,000 rupees, to a brothel in Calcutta. Lakshmi’s night-
mare begins with her being beaten and starved for refusing to cooperate, and then 
drugged while she is taken by multiple men. Resigned to her fate, she resolves to 
keep close track of her income so that she will know when she has paid off her debt 
to Mumtaz, the cruel mistress of the brothel. She soon learns, however, that Mumtaz 
has no intention of honoring that bargain, and that she must take her chances on 
a strange American who pays for her services but only wants to ask her questions 
and offer her freedom. The brief chapter-like vignettes of detached sentences are 
richly resonant with images by turns luminous, haunting, and horrifying, and 
within them Lakshmi’s story unfolds with grim immediacy. Amidst the harrowing 
circumstances, Lakshmi experiences small acts of kindness from the other girls, their 
182 • The BulleTin
children, and the kind boy who delivers their tea; these moments of grace serve 
more than anything to bring her situation into ghastly relief. Readers can’t help but 
be moved by Lakshmi’s fate; she gives a powerful and heartbreakingly lyrical voice 
to the hope, the hopelessness, and most of all, the humanity of the victims of the 
sex slave trade. A brief but informative author’s note follows the text.  KC
mcgowAn, AnThony Hellbent. Simon Pulse, 2006 257p
Paper ed. ISBN 1-4169-0814-5 $8.99   
R Gr. 9-12
Being run over by an ice-cream truck is not the sort of interesting death that six-
teen-year-old Conor wanted for himself, but at least he can attest that his death 
was cool. Conor is further surprised to find that what he considered an average 
number of lies, thefts, bullying, and lewd acts proves enough to land him in Hell. 
Hell is not the generic morass of fire and pain that Conor expected: he is assigned 
his own tormentor, shown to a personalized cell (overflowing with boring books 
and a radio that incessantly plays educational programs), and informed that physi-
cal torture has actually been toned down in recent centuries because it distracts 
from other agonies. Not content to be tortured by boredom for literally all eternity, 
Conor hatches an unlikely plan to switch places with someone else in Hell whose 
personalized plan includes busty women, videogames, and rock music. Of course, 
the old cliché about things seeming too good to be true may be even more appli-
cable in Hell, and happy endings following lucky breaks are rather unlikely given 
the circumstances Conor is in. McGowan teeters between horrifyingly disgusting 
and outrageously humorous in his creation of a Hell where the meals consist of 
nicely arranged excrement or viscous paste, the tortures are impressively varied, 
and the inhabitants, both humans and demons, are all abhorrent. The result is a 
novel that is decidedly not for the faint of heart or weak of stomach, but readers 
who endure (or enjoy) the grossout details will be well rewarded with a complex 
and clever adventure spiked with effective horror details and religious exploration. 
Long after the revulsion has faded, readers will likely remember the intriguing no-
tion of a personalized Hell, the creepy, ambiguous ending, and Conor himself, a 
deeply flawed but ultimately sympathetic character.  AS
myers, AnnA Confessions from the Principal’s Chair. Walker, 2006 [192p]
ISBN 0-8027-9560-9 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-8
Robin Miller (known as Bird) loves being one of the popular “Six Pack” girls in 
eighth grade, but when her mother discovers that the group has been viciously 
bullying an unpopular girl, she promptly takes Bird out of school and relocates 
the family to a little Oklahoma town. A sulky Bird, clad defiantly in an old-lady 
suit from the local store, turns up at her new school on her own and finds herself 
mistaken for another Robin Miller: the brand-new principal. Bird realizes that this 
opportunity is short-lived—the real new principal is arriving in two days—and 
decides to make the most of it, hauling in a television to watch soaps in her office 
(she’s joined by the coach), getting advice from the psychic hotline, and scoping out 
a tasty eighth-grade boy. The flaws in the story are not so much the contrivance, 
which is a given, but the didacticism and its implausibility: Bird’s sudden switch 
to sympathy for the bullied girl at her new school is unlikely, and it’s not remotely 
credible that Bird’s classwide water-balloon fight would fix the situation. There’s 
enough fun in the tale to keep readers occupied, though, and they’ll be amused 
DecemBer 2006 • 183
by Bird’s slipping grasp on her portrayal of adulthood (“You are not the boss of 
me!” she blurts at her strong-minded secretary) and her indulgence in the perks 
of the situation. Kids drawn by the title may get impatient wading through the 
pre-principal events, but they’ll likely get a good laugh out of Robin’s usurpation 
of authority.  DS
newBery, lindA Set in Stone. Fickling/Random House, 2006 [368p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-75103-6 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-75102-8 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 9-12
Fourwinds boasts the grace and charm of du Maurier’s Manderley—and the 
tortured inhabitants as well, as young artist Samuel Godwin discovers when he 
accepts a position as tutor to Ernest Farrow’s teenage daughters. The elder, Juliana, 
is demure almost to the point of shyness, a sharp contrast to younger, outgoing 
Marianne, who incidentally suffers from bouts of sleepwalking and outbursts of 
terrified concern over a carving of the West Wind that is missing from one side of 
the house. Governess Charlotte Agnew seems to know more than she’s telling, but 
as the story unwinds through the alternating narration of Charlotte and Samuel, 
it’s clear that she’s just piecing together the mystery as well, and occasionally getting 
it entirely wrong. Newbery charges ahead hurling red herrings, surefooted on this 
well-trodden Gothic turf, and she nearly pulls off a cinema-worthy tale that, back 
in the day, would have likely involved Leslie Howard or Ray Milland. Instead, she 
crashes to a close with an overload of elements drawn from one too many identifi-
able sources: a fortunetelling scene (Jane Eyre, with a passing mention of a character 
named Brocklehurst, no less); evidence dredged from a pond (Sherlock Holmes); 
revelation of incest, followed by the marriage of the artist to the governess (Angels 
and Insects); bastard child farmed out to avoid family embarrassment (take your 
pick). Thrilling ultimately gives way to trite and tawdry, but if readers are able to 
live with the destination, they might enjoy the twists and turns of the ride.  EB 
noyes, deBorAh One Kingdom: Our Lives with Animals; illus. with photographs 
by Deborah Noyes. Houghton, 2006 128p
ISBN 0-618-49914-8 $18.00   
R Gr. 7 up
Noyes, a sometime zookeeper, takes a philosophical look at humanity’s historical 
and current relations with other species in the animal kingdom, noting that “one 
habit of our human nature is to seek and find in other species, always and instead, 
ourselves.” The first half of the book looks at times past, surveying human habits 
ranging from worship and folkloric valorization to deliberate extinction and legal 
execution; the second half explores contemporary topics such as scientific research 
into animal abilities and the eternally changing role of zoos. This is a thoughtful 
and conceptual book about natural history, clearly identifying its literary context 
by drawing on touchstones such as Loren Eiseley and Temple Grandin. Its probing, 
contemplative approach has a maturity that will appeal to serious young readers, 
who will find this a thought-provoking introduction to a rich field of cultural 
consideration. Elegant formatting draws on period-art overlays, boxed features, and 
imagistic black-and-white photographs for an artistic and sophisticated look; there 
are unfortunately no notes, but there is a bibliography (oddly, alphabetized by title 
and bereft of information beyond author and title) and an index.  DS
184 • The BulleTin
o’connor, JAne The Snow Globe Family; illus. by S. D. Schindler. Putnam, 
2006 [40p]
ISBN 0-399-24242-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-8 yrs
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 161, for review.
offill, Jenny 17 Things I’m Not Allowed to Do Anymore; illus. by Nancy 
Carpenter. Schwartz & Wade, 2006 [32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-93596-7 $17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-83596-2 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-8 yrs
The narrator is full of ideas (“I had an idea to staple my brother’s hair to his pil-
low”), but they’re poorly received (“I am not allowed to use the stapler anymore”). 
She continues her creative discovery of rules her behavior brings into existence, 
especially when it comes to beavers (“I had an idea to tell the class I personally 
owned a hundred beavers. I’m not allowed to say that I own beavers anymore”), 
until finally at the end of the day she tenders an apology to her harassed mother 
(“I had an idea to say the opposite of what I mean to trick everyone”). This is a 
long list rather than a story, but there’s humor in the eccentric specifics and in 
the focused literality of her proscriptions (“I am not allowed to set Joey Whipple 
on fire anymore”), and adults will certainly recognize the persistent legalism of a 
boundary-pushing kid. Bristly, energetic linework gets texture from digitally placed 
elements of color and collage for a rich and quirky series of visuals; the protagonist 
is a vivid and expressive presence as she strides through her world in constant if 
mischievous interaction with her surroundings. Young audiences who warm to the 
antics of Lauren Child’s Lola (But Excuse Me That Is My Book, BCCB 4/06, et al.) 
will appreciate the humor even as they cull ideas for their own mischief.  DS
Pfeffer, susAn BeTh Life as We Knew It. Harcourt, 2006 337p
ISBN 0-15-205826-5 $17.00   
R Gr. 6-9
Miranda’s ordinary life is disrupted, along with the lives of literally everyone else in 
the world, when an unexpectedly dense meteor hits the moon. Immediately, entire 
countries are lost to tsunamis, quickly followed by volcanic eruptions, rampant 
disease, and starvation that cause the deaths of millions more. On a much smaller 
scale, Miranda, her two brothers, and mother are just trying to survive the winter 
in their own small home. The slow unfolding of events, told in diary entries that 
vary in length and intensity, creates a riveting and deeply frightening account of 
the individual experience of a worldwide catastrophe. Although Miranda writes at 
length about new horrors and unexpected consequences of the meteor, she is also 
remarkably realistic as she also journals her avoidance of homework and her medita-
tions on kissing boys. The story is effectively constructed: the personal connection 
with Miranda and her conscious acceptance of the fact that few humans can mourn 
for tragedy every second keeps the unceasing tribulations of the larger world from 
becoming overwhelming to the reader. It is certainly to the author’s credit that this 
post-convenience, dangerous world actually sounds inviting on occasion and often 
raises intriguing questions: readers will inevitably imagine their own responses to 
such a global event and may even envy Miranda’s uncomplicated appreciation of 
her simpler but more joyful life.  AS
DecemBer 2006 • 185
PrATcheTT, Terry Wintersmith. HarperCollins, 2006 [272p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-089032-0 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-089031-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 6-8
Witch-in-training Tiffany returns and finds herself in new trouble in this sequel 
to The Wee Free Men and A Hat Full of Sky (BCCB 7/03, 5/04). Although thirteen 
is a bit young for such romantic problems, Tiffany has attracted the interest of the 
elemental spirit of Winter and he will apparently stop at nothing, including icing 
over the world and creating billions of Tiffany-shaped snowflakes, to gain her love. 
Luckily, the impetuous and bold Nac Mac Feegles, or wee free men, are always 
ready to help Tiffany, as are the brilliant full witches who are Tiffany’s mentors. 
Unfortunately, the mostly unwelcome advances of Winter (secretly Tiffany revels 
in being adored and idolized) are not the only problems that Tiffany faces; when 
her favored mentor dies, there’s drama in the witch community as decisions about 
the ownership of the witch’s cottage are disputed. Pratchett is gifted in his ability to 
create distinct, varied characters that span a remarkable range of sizes, personalities, 
and even species: the Nac Mac Feegles are distinguishable from one another even 
in their uniform machismo, the witches are each a unique variation of irascible, 
and even Winter, an elemental, has a vulnerability that evokes sympathy. In ad-
dition, liberal doses of humor and adventure (heroic quests abound in this novel) 
balance well with the occasional somber events. As to the heroine herself, Tiffany 
at nine and eleven was charming and affable, but at thirteen she is blossoming 
into her own personality and strengths, and she is a literary force with which to be 
reckoned: in a fantasy market full of tough girl heroines Tiffany easily stands out 
as one worth notice.  AS
QuATTleBAum, mAry, ad. Sparks Fly High: The Legend of Dancing Point; illus. by 
Leonid Gore. Kroupa/Farrar, 2006 40p
ISBN 0-374-34452-3 $16.00   
R Gr. 3-5
A spectacular dancer since babyhood, Colonel Lightfoot is the toast of colonial 
Virginia with his elegant steps, and the proud man is pityingly insulting about those 
with lesser ability on the dance floor. He’s also annoyed that part of his valuable land 
has become “a sad and soggy point,” and when he finds that its deterioration is due 
to the devil’s habitation there, the two agree to a dancing contest for its possession. 
Both are powerful dancers, but the colonel begins to see his own sin of pride in the 
devil and realizes that he can use that pride for his own ends, taunting the devil 
into greater and greater displays until finally Old Nick collapses in exhaustion a 
second before the danced-out Virginian. It’s interesting to see what, according to 
the adapter’s note, is a genuine piece of regional American folklore tied to a specific 
person, while its kinship to other tales of competition with the devil will provoke 
recognition and discussion. The pace of the telling lags in spots, but it’s nonetheless 
a lively terpsichorean tale. Gore’s smoky oil pastels are attractively atmospheric, 
depicting the devil as Colonel Lightfoot’s equal as a dapper dandy, though in a 
darker and more sinister style. This would partner well with Wooldridge’s Wicked 
Jack (BCCB 12/95) or other tricking-the-devil tales, and it might be an interesting 
way to start a discussion about local lore.  DS
186 • The BulleTin
rAnsom, cAndice Finding Day’s Bottom. Carolrhoda, 2006 176p
ISBN 1-57505-933-9 $15.95   
R Gr. 4-7
Jane-Ery is her daddy’s darling, and his death at the sawmill makes the natural beauty 
that surrounds her seem meaningless and empty. Grandpap comes to live with her 
and her mother, and while this seems to help Mama smile, Jane-Ery’s smiles are 
harder to coax. She resents the hard work she has to do, and she misses the rambles 
she and her father used to take through the woods around the Appalachian home. 
When Grandpap tells her about a place of endless delight called Day’s Bottom, 
she wills herself to believe that it’s not one of his stories and convinces herself that 
she will find her daddy there. Ultimately, though, she has to face the fact that her 
daddy is really gone and that the glimpses she gets of him in the fog are her own 
doing. Readers will get a strong sense of everyday life and dialogue in the Blue 
Ridge Mountains of Virginia in the 1950s; the lush descriptions of nature make 
it seem a character in its own right, and Grandpap’s homespun sayings and stories 
are warm and delightful. The sweetness leans to sentimentality at times, especially 
at the ending, but readers will sympathize with Jane-Ery’s longing for her much-
missed daddy.  KC
rAven, mArgoT Theis Night Boat to Freedom; illus. by E. B. Lewis. Kroupa/
Farrar, 2006 40p
ISBN 0-374-31266-4 $16.00   
R 6-10 yrs
Drawing from two testimonies from the WPA’s Slave Narrative Collection, Raven 
fashions the slightly fictionalized tale of Christmas John, a slave boy who works on 
a Kentucky plantation immediately across the Ohio River from the relative safety 
of the Northern states. Urged on by Granny Judith, the elderly slave woman who 
raised him, Christmas John begins to ferry runaways by rowboat to a lighthouse, 
where they are spirited away by abolitionists. He never thinks seriously about grasp-
ing at freedom for himself, though, until it becomes clear he is under suspicion by 
his owner and that getting caught is imminent. Now Granny Judith urges him to 
run, but the fleet-footed boy won’t go unless he can haul his slow-moving “granny” 
with him. The narrative trajectory is simple and the runaways’ success is joyfully 
triumphant, but perhaps the most moving aspect of the work is Lewis’s watercolor 
paintings, which skillfully manipulate light and shadow to create two parallel 
worlds—the daytime face of a hard-laboring woman bent over her dye kettles and 
the nighttime exploits of the brave boy who sees little more than the outline of the 
runaways in his charge. Pair this with Nelson’s Almost to Freedom (BCCB 3/04) for 
a picture-book presentation of the perils of the Underground Railroad.  EB
reef, cATherine E. E. Cummings: A Poet’s Life. Clarion, 2006 [160p] illus. 
with photographs
ISBN 0-618-56849-2 $21.00
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 5-9
With his overt rejection of rules that kids have only recently mastered, Cummings 
is a popular poet with young readers, but often they don’t get beyond his structural 
innovation to the life of the man behind it. Reef’s thoughtful biography does a 
splendid job of showing Cummings as far more than the man who eschewed or-
thodox punctuation, following him from a largely happy childhood with loving 
and encouraging parents to his academic studies, experiences in World War I, and 
domestic trials including two divorces and a complicated relationship with his 
DecemBer 2006 • 187
only daughter. The book makes clear that Cummings wasn’t an isolated eccentric 
jotting down poetry but rather someone working within a changing artistic tradi-
tion, in demand for his paintings and plays as well as verse, and acquainted with 
figures ranging from Ezra Pound to Hart Crane. Careful research and judicious 
quoting allows Cummings to speak for himself and his contemporaries to speak 
upon him, making his character more vivid to readers; the result is an engaging 
look behind the typography at one of the twentieth century’s most familiar poets. 
Black-and-white photographs and reproductions of Cummings’ visual works ap-
pear throughout, while extensive back matter includes endnotes, a bibliography, a 
glossary of literary terms, and a list of Cummings’ publications; the bound book 
will include an index.  DS
reisz, krisToPher Tripping to Somewhere. Simon Pulse, 2006 [384p]
Paper ed. ISBN 1-4169-4000-6 $6.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
Gilly and Sam are best friends who are desperate to see more of the world than their 
high-school lives allow, so Gilly, in love with Sam and happy to follow her lead, 
agrees to Sam’s suggestion to run away and find the fabled Witches’ Carnival. After 
stealing $53,000 from Gilly’s father (he is a crooked cop with a stash of money), 
the two girls embark on a journey that will lead them through mescaline-induced 
hallucinations, renegotiations of their uncomfortable “friends with benefits” rela-
tionship, and ultimately a jaunt across the world (using illegal passports) in search 
of the elusive Carnival. Although it seems like Sam has always been the braver 
and more powerful of the two, it is actually Gilly who is wanted by the Witches’ 
Carnival, and she alone must decide whether to pursue a beautiful and exciting 
future or sacrifice it all to save Sam and send her in Gilly’s place. The blending of 
fantasy elements (soothsayers, magic, and witches abound) with the realistic lim-
its of everyday life is creatively and effectively achieved through the protagonists’ 
willingness to believe in a world that is ever more mysterious and complicated. 
Unfortunately, this quest towards enlightenment via drugs, sex, and a never-ending 
road trip feels timeworn, and it also serves to trap Sam and Gilly into seemingly 
predestined choices that will keep them journeying instead of returning home while 
they still can: readers will know immediately that neither of these girls will take 
the safer option at any juncture. In addition, frequent philosophical debates slow 
the breakneck pace that makes the girls’ adventures compelling. Regardless, Gilly, 
insecure lesbian just coming into her own strengths, and Sam, troubled teen adept 
at hiding her issues beneath bluster and flirtation, stand in well as a youthful and 
modern counterparts to Thelma and Louise or Kerouac’s Sal and Dean.  AS
rockwell, Anne Why Are the Ice Caps Melting?: The Dangers of Global Warming; 
illus. by Paul Meisel. Collins/HarperCollins, 2006 [40p] (Let’s-Read-and-
Find-Out Science)
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-054669-7 $15.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-06-054671-9 $4.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 2-3
If it’s difficult to make the perils of a few degree rise in overall climatic temperature 
an immediate issue for adults, consider how less concerned primary-schoolers faced 
with tee-ball practice and forgotten lunchboxes are likely to be. Rockwell does an 
acceptable job, however, of describing the way everyday activities such as car driv-
188 • The BulleTin
ing, aerosol spraying, and long stretches of TV and computer use are linked to such 
global threats as regional flooding, desert expansion, and animal endangerment. 
After a lucid explanation of “greenhouse effect” and factors that exacerbate it, she 
explains how even a slight ensuing rise in temperature can lead to profound results. 
Finally, discussion centers on what we collectively do wrong, and how we can in-
dividually do much better. There’s a brief acknowledgement that not all scientists 
believe human environmental abuse is the main cause of the problem (there have, 
after all, been naturally occurring climate fluctuations), but there’s a definite call 
here to take this matter seriously. Not all terms are adequately defined—“radiated 
heat,” “ice shelf,” and “industrialized nations,” to cite a few—and the term “ice caps” 
never arises after its title introduction. Likewise, Meisel’s perky line-and-watercolor 
pictures occasionally confound more than they clarify: a pair of children playing 
around a pier note the rise in water level, with no indication that myriad factors 
could be responsible for such a localized phenomenon, and a trio of scientists at 
work look more like a farmer checking his crop, a mom checking her email, and an 
Inuit raiding an outdoor refrigerator. It’s probable that this title will see heavy use 
in a classroom setting, though, and with some knowledgeable adult intervention it 
could be a successful introduction or reinforcement of a complex topic.  EB
rooT, Phyllis Looking for a Moose; illus. by Randy Cecil. Candlewick, 
2006 32p
ISBN 0-7636-2005-X $15.99   
R* 3-6 yrs
“Have you ever seen a moose—/ a long-leggy moose—/ a branchy-antler,/ din-
ner-diving,/ bulgy-nose moose?” The narrator hasn’t, and neither has her gang of 
friends, so they decide it’s time for moose-spotting, looking through woods, swamp, 
bushes, and hillside for a view of the mysterious moose. The rhyming text revels in 
tongue-tickling descriptive phrases (“the treesy-breezy, tilty-stilty, wobbly-knobbly 
woods”) and resounding sound effects (“squeech squooch!/ squeech squooch!” go 
the children through the swamp) that will make this a readaloud tour de force. Oil 
illustrations evince carefully controlled brushstrokes whose evenness suggests hatch-
ing in their textures, while the multiracial cast of kids (and their canine companion) 
are comically compact against the broader landscape. The real joke, however, will 
be evident to sharp-eyed viewers, who will note the hoofed legs of moose in the 
woods, their furry backs protruding from the swamp, and their antlers peeking out 
from the bushes even as the protagonists stomp past their quarry; audiences will 
nonetheless join with the inept moose-hunters in rejoicing when moose en masse 
finally parade out for clear viewing. This will be a repeat favorite for a readaloud, 
especially when veteran listeners can chant along as they gleefully point out the 
moose hiding under the protagonists’ noses.  DS
ruBin, susAn goldmAn Andy Warhol: Pop Art Painter. Abrams, 2006 48p il-
lus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8109-5477-X $18.95   
R  Gr. 4-7
This visually appealing Warhol biography focuses on the artist’s youth in Pittsburgh 
with his beloved mother and his early development and career in New York; compact 
descriptions of his life and art are enhanced by quotes from Rubin’s interviews with 
Warhol’s friends and relatives as well as extensive literary research. Unfortunately, 
the account mysteriously stops in the early 1960s, relegating the details of his last 
nearly quarter century to a timeline (which is oddly stretched over nine pages 
DecemBer 2006 • 189
that could have been better used to describe Warhol’s film career, shooting, and 
other later experiences), but the compact text contains a considerable amount of 
information. Design is dramatic, with background colors on each spread keyed to 
reproduced images of Warhol’s work; possibly even more dramatic are the images 
of Warhol himself, especially a Sandy Skoglund-like view of the artist in his foil-
covered studio in The Factory. This isn’t going to knock Greenberg and Jordan’s 
Andy Warhol: Prince of Pop (BCCB 12/04) off its perch as the touchstone Warhol 
work for young people and readers will need to consult that for information on 
his dramatic later years, but this is a visually arresting introduction that will entice 
readers into understanding a bit more about this icon of the era. The book concludes 
with a glossary, endnotes, an extensive list of resources, a brief author’s note, and 
a list of some museums displaying Warhol’s work.  DS
runyon, BrenT  Maybe. Knopf, 2006 196p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-93543-6 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-83543-1 $16.95   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Brian feels lost and bitter as he enters his new high school in Virginia Beach. His 
family has moved just before his junior year, taking with them the pain of losing 
Brian’s older brother, Sean, in a car accident. Brian’s first-person narration walks 
readers through the adjustments of his first year in a new school, where he tries very 
hard to get laid and make friends who won’t embarrass him. His unspent grief has 
him spinning his wheels, though, and his everyday life takes on a Holden Caul-
field-esque form of tedium, disaffection, and naïve self-reflection. He grows to hate 
the girl he’s dating, and he slowly realizes that his friend Dan is a slut where girls 
are concerned; it’s not until he finally has sex with Dan’s jilted ex that he is able to 
open up about what happened to his brother. There isn’t much action to carry the 
story here, and Brian never really emerges as more than a marginally sympathetic 
character; much of his narrative is given over to the dully obsessive ravings of a 
rather boring, very horny guy who’s not above random gropes when he can get 
them. His passivity and general avoidance of all things emotionally difficult plays 
credibly as a grief narrative, however, especially since most of his memories of Sean, 
who had rage issues and used to beat him up a lot, are not happy ones. Readers who 
enjoy exploring the character development of ordinary guys put through difficult 
emotional paces may therefore appreciate Brian’s story.  KC 
sAnchez, Alex Getting It. Simon, 2006 210p
ISBN 1-4169-0896-X $16.95   
Ad Gr. 9-12
Carlos is desperate for his beautiful crush to notice him, but his shy, awkward 
attempts and raucous, obnoxious friends are doing little for his chances. While 
idly watching Queer Eye for the Straight Guy, however, Carlos is certain he has 
stumbled upon the solution and he asks Sal, an out gay guy at school, to take him 
on as an improvement project. Sal agrees only after Carlos promises to help with 
the formation of a school Gay-Straight Alliance, and the makeover commences. 
The changes (both physical and emotional) seem to be paying off when his crush 
invites him over for a “hook-up,” but Carlos now realizes that he doesn’t want to 
be the secret make-out partner for a homophobic girl, even if she is gorgeous. The 
various transformations (all of Carlos’ friends but one are changed for the better 
as well) are realistically slow, and the resistances of the characters provide much of 
the humor. Unfortunately, this group of fifteen-year-old friends is so unlikable for 
190 • The BulleTin
the first third of the novel that some of the celebration at their emotional growth 
may be dulled by memories of their earlier exploits. In addition, the various female 
characters tend to be stereotypically reduced to either good or bad girls with little 
character development. In spite of the issues, readers will still cheer the success of 
the Gay-Straight Alliance as proof that teens can be the catalysts toward tolerance 
and acceptance over hatred and fear.  AS
sAn souci, roBerT d., ad. Sister Tricksters: Rollicking Tales of Clever Females; illus. 
by Daniel San Souci. LittleFolk/August House, 2006 [70p]
ISBN 0-87483-791-X $19.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-6
While the exploits of Anansi the Spider, Br’er Rabbit, and Coyote may be familiar 
from the many noteworthy collections of trickster tales published for young people, 
the female tricksters have had far less prominence in the literature. This outstanding 
collection by the brothers San Souci seeks to right that wrong by means of eight 
trickster tales of a more feminine persuasion from the American South. Adapted 
from a turn-of-the-century collection gathered by Anne Virginia Culbertson, these 
tales recall the wit and wisdom of Molly Cottontail, Miz Grasshopper, and Miz 
Duck, among others. While the stories stand independent of one another, they are 
all related in that the characters live in the same community, so the exploits of one 
tale carry over as revenge (or, as is often the case, attempted revenge) in the next. 
More often than not, the female tricksters are depicted as superior thinkers (“That 
seems to be the special gift of the ladies, to get their own way with their brains 
instead of their fists. Compared to these quick-wits, menfolk often seem kind of 
clumsy and lumbersome”); the womenfolk also seem to work more in cahoots with 
one another, so that when Miz Goose tricks Mistah Bear into sitting on a pile of 
pumpkins to hatch a family, she is quick to run off and tell Miz Molly Cottontail 
about the trick she played (who then hurries over to laugh at Bear herself). The eight 
selections are consistently remarkable, and the rhythmic dialect and finely tuned 
language of the stories beg for a rollicking readaloud. Each tale is accompanied 
by a single vibrantly rendered painting by Daniel San Souci; the paintings, which 
depict an expressive and at times mischievous cast of characters in a moment of 
action from the upcoming story, would function well to inspire plot predictions 
from the audience. A solid introduction grounds trickster tales in a historical and 
social context. This fine collection is certain to receive widespread kudos and a long 
and noteworthy life on shelves and in story programs.  HM
schumAcher, Julie The Book of One Hundred Truths. Delacorte, 
2006 182p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90311-1 $17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73290-2 $15.95   
R Gr. 5-8
As twelve-year-old Theodora prepares to board the plane for her annual trip to her 
grandparents’ home on the Jersey shore, her mother hands her a blank notebook. 
“You can write anything you want in here, as long as every single thing you write is 
true,” she tells her daughter, responding to Thea’s recent tendency to intentionally 
tell lies, a practice Thea’s narration hints is linked to her desire to avoid thinking 
about a frightening reality in her past. At her grandparents’, Thea is expected to 
watch her seven-year-old cousin, Jocelyn, who is obsessed with secrets and certain 
that their aunts are up to something. Thea soon finds herself ensnared in Jocelyn’s 
DecemBer 2006 • 191
spy tactics, all the while trying to keep her own secrets and to figure out what is 
meant by truth, as she every day adds “truths” to the list in her notebook. Thea is 
a thoughtful and realistic protagonist, and the alternating tension and affection 
that builds between her and Jocelyn is carefully drafted. The book gains suspense 
from the explanation of Thea’s and her aunts’ secrets, and the issues of secrets and 
lies will resonate with young readers. This is a compelling novel, with just the right 
dose of quiet reflection, self-discovery, and mystery.  HM
shAfer, Audrey The Mailbox. Delacorte, 2006 178p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90361-8  $17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73344-5 $15.95   
Ad Gr. 6-9
When Gabe finds his uncle Vernon dead, he’s afraid to tell anyone; Vernon has 
been the sixth-grader’s guardian for the last three years, and Gabe fears that he’ll 
be sent back into foster care, forsaking the stability he’s finally found. As Gabe 
struggles to keep things together at home and school and to keep his secret from 
coming out, he finds he has a mysterious benefactor, who removes Vernon’s body, 
gives Gabe a dog for company, and leaves him supportive notes in the mailbox, 
all the while refusing to meet him face to face. Anxious little Gabe, young for his 
years, is depicted with touching authenticity, and his reaction to his uncle’s death 
is credibly played out. It’s also believable that the situation allows Gabe to reflect 
on his unstated affection for his uncle, a crusty, untutored Vietnam vet who grew 
roughly fond of the boy thrust into his charge, and the suspense about the identity 
of the person leaving Gabe notes adds interest. There’s an adult overlay to much 
of the story, though, between the largely unexplained literary references (Of Mice 
and Men, Call of the Wild) and the backstory about Vernon and his troopmates’ 
Vietnam experience, which needs a fair amount of historical knowledge for real 
understanding; the resolution to the situation tips into predictability and con-
venience, with a kind teacher taking to Gabe and adopting him. What remains 
nonetheless memorable, is the picture of Gabe, hoping that Vernon knew how 
much Gabe loved him and trying to keep life with Vernon from disappearing; it’s 
a survival story in emotional as well as physical terms, and readers will sympathize 
with Gabe in his predicament.  DS
shusTermAn, neAl Everlost. Simon, 2006 313p
ISBN 0-689-87237-2 $16.95   
R Gr. 7-9
Even though Nick and his friend’s sister Allie are passengers in the same car, they 
barely know each other until they both die in a car crash. After nine months of 
“sleeping,” the two awaken to find that they are caught in a parallel world called 
Everlost, a limbo for lost child and teen souls. As “Greensouls,” new inhabitants, 
Allie and Nick bond quickly as they struggle to adjust to Everlost and the seemingly 
inexorable reality of spending eternity there. Everlost is well developed as a creepy 
world where constant movement is necessary (except when one is standing in a “dead 
spot,” a location where someone died) to avoid sinking to the Earth’s core, where 
infinite numbers of fortune cookies decide the fates, and where there are terrible 
ways to make ghosts suffer and an eternity in which to do it. Inhabiting Everlost 
are equally intriguing, complex characters who avoid easy categorization as good 
or evil: saviors are revealed to be self-serving at the cost of hundreds of souls, and 
villainous exteriors are stripped away to expose vulnerabilities that emphasize the 
overwhelming difficulties of surviving in limbo. Shusterman elegantly reveals the 
192 • The BulleTin
complexities of his parallel world through the initial bewilderment and eventual 
assimilation of Nick and Allie, who learn to exist, and rebel, within and against the 
borders of Everlost. Clearly, the novel offers intriguing possibilities for religious and 
philosophical debate around Heaven, Hell, and Purgatory; it is to the author’s credit 
that it is also a funny, irreverent, and memorable adventure. And for those who are 
wondering, fortune cookies in limbo always tell meaningful truths.  AS
sommerdorf, normA Red River Girl. Holiday House, 2006 [216p]
ISBN 0-8234-1903-7 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
Thirteen-year-old Josette Dupre, the daughter of a French voyageur father and an 
Ojibwe mother, has dreams of going to Montreal and continuing her education, 
an ambitious goal for any girl in 1846 but especially for one who is métis, or mixed 
blood. Since the death of her mother, Josette has become the leader of the family, 
and she resents her father’s habit of making major decisions without consulting her, 
especially because his decisions result in uprooting the family from their village and 
bringing them first to the Ojibwe relatives for the wild rice harvest, then on a buf-
falo hunt, and finally, on a months-long wagon train expedition headed south for 
the newly born St. Paul, Minnesota. Written in journal format, this historical novel 
follows Josette’s personal responses to the events going on around her, effectively 
describing the conditions of the journey, the countless colorful characters (some 
based on real historical figures) that come in and out of the scene, the tragedies 
and comedies of life on the road, and the experience of living in a just-developing 
urban settlement. Sommerdorf’s novel offers both the excitement of the adventures 
the Dupres have on the journey and a fascinating historical glimpse of how a city 
begins. Josette’s story will appeal especially to fans of historical fiction, but her chatty, 
breezy narrative is so engaging that it may draw even those who ordinarily resist 
period tales. An afterword with historical data and a glossary of French, Dakota, 
and Ojibwe words is included.  HM
sTolArz, lAurie fAriA Bleed. Hyperion, 2006 225p
ISBN 0-7868-3854-X $15.99   
Ad Gr. 10-12
This series of ten interconnected short stories centers on various kinds of blood—the 
actual blood of losing your virginity, the blood that oozes from cutting yourself 
with a safety pin and forcing others to cut you as well, the blood that remains on 
the rock a boy uses to kill his girlfriend. Then there is the lipstick that looks like 
blood on a waitress who’s looking for love but will settle for sex and on a boy who 
bullies a girl until she finds out his little cross-dressing secret, and the crimson auras 
that surround people that a psychic girl wants to be close to. Between the anger, the 
danger, and the perversions that motivate the various characters, the stories focus 
on at least ten ways of being dysfunctional. Though there are some mild traces 
of humor along the way, the prevailing mood is one of edgy dissatisfaction and 
profound emotional pain, making the romantic nature of the final story, where 
the girl gets the guy who’s been dating her best friend who’s been cheating on him 
anyway, out of place in its cheeriness. While the characters are developed with some 
degree of complexity, most are either shallow or mean-spirited, making it difficult 
to establish an emotional connection beyond that of disinterested pity or disdain. 
The situations they create, however, are provocative, and they cover quite a lot of 
DecemBer 2006 • 193
the traditional topics—sex, eating disorders, cutting, flirting with danger, parental 
abuse, bullying, revenge, etc.—that make YA lit juicy.  KC
vAn AllsBurg, chris Probuditi!; written and illus. by Chris Van Allsburg. Hough-
ton, 2006 32p
ISBN 0-618-75502-0 $18.95   
R Gr. 3-5
Calvin mostly views his little sister, Trudy, as a useful subject for practical jokes, so 
when he receives two tickets to a magic show for his birthday, he gives the second 
one not to his sister but to his friend Rodney. Inspired by the show, Calvin and 
Rodney hypnotize Trudy into believing she’s a puppy, but when schlepping Trudy the 
dog around gets old, they’re horrified to realize that they can’t recall the magician’s 
special word to undo the hypnosis (“PROBUDITI!”). This sounds at first like a 
revisitation of Van Allsburg’s Jumanji (BCCB 9/81) plot, but there’s a twist here: 
when Trudy’s finally awakened from her dogdom (by the brute force of a bucket 
of water), a sly comment from her reveals that she’s been putting the boys on the 
whole time, thus outpranking the pranksters. Some kids may not immediately grasp 
the import of her words, while others will have their suspicions raised well before 
she tips the audience off, since her puppyhood is not only deliciously over the top, 
it’s getting her constant attention and tasty ice cream from her usually indifferent 
older brother. Milk chocolate tones, appropriate to the African-American sibling 
pair, predominate in Van Allsburg’s nearly monochromatic illustrations; as usual in 
his work, spreads are rooted in geometry (there’s hardly a picture without a welter 
of strong directional elements or a modest grid or tessellation) and energized by 
perspective, with most views tacitly supporting the undersibling by peering up at 
a towering world just as she does. There’s enough of a spooky edge to the hypnotic 
proceedings to make the plot moody and intriguing even before the final twist, and 
younger sibs in particular will relish this clever familial trickster tale.  DS
wAllAce, kAren The Unrivalled Spangles. Atheneum, 2006 219p
ISBN 1-4169-1503-6 $16.95   
Ad Gr. 6-9
There’s big trouble under the Big Top when the younger equestrienne sister, Lucy 
Spangle, wants to push the act to chilling extremes and older sister Ellen wants to 
bail out of the biz altogether. Romance complicates the issue, with Lucy carrying 
on a clandestine amour with the son of a rival circus owner and Ellen courted by 
a lovestruck young man of the upper crust. A broken mirror has the superstitious 
circus set bracing for the worst, and indeed it comes with a vengeance. Reckless Lucy 
is killed attempting a somersaulting feat, Papa Spangle is near crazed with grief, El-
len begins to shift loyalties to Lucy’s ex-boyfriend, and all manner of heartache and 
fiery explosion (literally) ensues. This melodrama set in nineteenth-century Britain 
variously rushes and lurches toward the conclusion that has Ellen abandoning her 
old dreams of becoming a teacher and recommitting, instead, to circus life at the 
side of her new true love. When Wallace hits her stride, pages fly; when insignificant 
characters and subplots intervene, the action stumbles. Willful Lucy, half possessed 
by her need for adulation, is the star of the show, and when she exits around the 
halfway mark her presence is sorely missed. Between the bellicose Mr. Spangle and 
the anticipation about Ellen’s choice, though, there’s still plenty of histrionics to 
keep potboiler fans in their seats through the final act.  EB 
194 • The BulleTin
wulf, lindA Press The Night of the Burning: Devorah’s Story. Farrar, 
2006 210p
ISBN 0-374-36419-2 $16.00   
R Gr. 5-8
Devorah and her younger sister, Nechama, have lost their uncle to war, their parents 
to hunger, overwork, and disease, and their remaining aunt to a Cossack sword in 
a bloody pogrom. Nonetheless, they are luckier than most Jewish orphans during 
the brutal post World War I years in Poland, because they have been selected to 
accompany philanthropist Isaac Ochberg to an orphanage in South Africa where 
some two hundred displaced children will find shelter. Nechama, who is both more 
adventurous and prone to cope with trauma through denial, embraces the opportu-
nity, while Devorah, grieving and suspicious, hovers over her little sister protectively 
and can scarcely allow herself to accept, much less enjoy, the opportunities for safe 
harbor, ample food, and a good education that the move has afforded them. When 
pretty, lively Nechama is adopted by a well-to-do family, Devorah sinks deeper into 
anger and resentment, and even her own adoption by a kind, if somewhat eccentric, 
older couple is a blessing it will take her years to appreciate. Devorah’s narration 
alternates between flashbacks to life in the sisters’ Polish village of Domachevo and 
their later experiences as orphans, and both tales are equally touching and engross-
ing; her observations of the way black South Africans are accorded underclass status 
within their own country leads to provocative comparisons with her own sudden 
class reversal as a member of a relatively privileged white community. Concluding 
notes comment on the real Lehrman sisters and Ochberg, on whom the story is 
based, and a glossary of Hebrew and Yiddish words is included.  EB 
zArin, cynThiA Saints among the Animals; illus. by Leonid Gore. Jackson/Ath-
eneum, 2006 88p
ISBN 0-689-85031-X $17.95   
R Gr. 4-8
For those who equate sainthood with a stuffy sort of piety, Zarin brings a breath of 
fresh air by retelling ten legends of holy—and very humane—men and women noted 
for their affinity to animals. As anyone up on hagiography will predict, Francis of 
Assisi and his encounter with the wolf at Gubbio is included, as is prickly Jerome’s 
Androcles-like détente with the lion that would guard his flocks and eventually 
keep his company. Lesser known but just as beguiling are stories of Hilda, who 
drove out the snakes from her convent grounds (St. Patrick evidently doesn’t have 
the monopoly on that feat); Brendan, who with his fellow seafaring monks made 
camp on the back of a whale; Medard, who enjoyed the outspread wings of an 
eagle as his umbrella in rainstorms. Zarin weaves playfulness and wonder into her 
silky smooth prose, and Gore graces each entry with a full-page black-and-white 
rendering that recalls, but never directly mimics, medieval religious artwork. An 
introductory note lists the sources Zarin consulted for her tales, and appended 
bibliographies give very brief sketches of what little can be ascertained about these 
figures, most of whom lived in the first millennium. Any chapter or two would 
make a delightful readaloud, and the entire work will be welcomed by storytellers 
expanding their repertoires.  EB
DecemBer 2006 • 195
ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons
geBel, doris J., ed. Crossing Boundaries with Children’s Books. Scarecrow, 
2006 431p illus. and with photographs
Paper ed. ISBN 0-8108-5203-9 $40.00
This bibliography, a companion volume to the previous USBBY-sponsored titles 
Children’s Books from Other Countries and The World through Children’s Books, 
is rich in recommendations for augmenting existing collections or creating an 
international collection of children’s materials. More than ninety countries are 
represented by entries that include several sentences of annotation along with 
basic bibliographic information and suggested audience, information on authors, 
illustrators and translators, and awards. Individual entries cover books published 
between 2000 and 2004, for ages newborn through fourteen, and they are arranged 
first by geographic region and then within each region alphabetized by author, with 
indices that provide access via author, illustrator, translator, book title, or subject 
(e.g. birthdays, coming-of-age stories, shipwrecks). Books by non-U.S. authors are 
assigned to countries by the author’s nationality with a cross-reference, if neces-
sary, in the region of the story’s setting. A trio of essays by two publishers and a 
scholar opens the book, offering insight into various international book fairs, issues 
related to choosing and publishing books originally published in other countries 
or in languages other than English, and noting the impatience of many American 
readers with translated materials. Gebel also includes eight short author features, 
four essays written by illustrators, and a listing, at the end of each geographic 
section, of additional information—awards, organizations, websites, publishers 
and sources of translated books. This is a fairly extensive resource for building or 
enhancing a collection with international flair, something that will have increasing 
importance as libraries’ clientele continue to diversify and interest in international 
material expands.  CW
herz, sArAh k. From Hinton to Hamlet: Building Bridges between Young Adult 
Literature and the Classics; by Sarah K. Herz and Donald R. Gallo. 2nd ed. Green-
wood, 2005 256p
ISBN 0-313-32452-2 $39.95
This invaluable curricular guide returns in a revised and expanded addition that 
doubles its size. New material includes a fat chapter on thematic, archetypal, and 
author-focused approaches; case studies of school and public libraries and their 
approach to teen reading; additional titles and approaches in the chapter suggest-
ing ways to expand curricular applications to areas beyond the English classroom, 
ranging from history to counseling to physical education. End matter includes 
lists of works cited and secondary materials in print and other media, plus an 
index.  DS
196  •  The BulleTin
Accidents–stories: Armstrong
Adoption–fiction: Cummings
Adventure: Key
African Americans: Freedman 
Freedom
African Americans–fiction: Hale; 
Jones, t.; van Allsburg
African Americans–stories: raven
Afterlife–fiction: Shusterman
Animals: noyes
Animals–stories: Macdonald; root
AntHologieS: Stolarz
Architecture: Mannis
Art: rubin
Art and artists: rubin
Art and artists–fiction: lyga; Mac-
Cullough
Asian Americans–fiction: Cummings
BedtiMe StorieS: Macdonald; 
o’Connor
Behavior–stories: offill
BiogrApHieS: Freedman Adven-
tures; Krull; Mannis; reef; rubin
Bolivia–fiction: ellis, d.
Brothers–fiction: lawrence; Mat-
thews; runyon
Brothers and sisters–fiction: eh-
renhaft; Fine; Hughes; Mac-
Cullough; van Allsburg
Brothers and sisters–stories: Child
Christmas: leuck
Circuses–fiction: Wallace
Civil rights movement: Freedman 
Freedom
Cliques–fiction: Myers
CooKBooKS: gold
Cousins–fiction: Schumacher
Crime and criminals–fiction: giles; 
Mack
Current events: McCormick; 
rockwell
dancers and dancing–fiction: 
Quattlebaum
death–fiction: Banerjee; ehren-
haft; lawrence; MacCullough; 
Mcgowan; ransom; runyon; 
Shafer; Shusterman
devil, the–fiction: Quattlebaum
disasters–fiction: Hale; pfeffer
dogs–fiction: lawrence; Matthews
drugs–fiction: ellis, d.
Environmental studies: rockwell
Ethics and values: Cooney; Jen-
nings; McCormick; Mcgowan; 
noyes; pfeffer; Shusterman
Faith–fiction: Banerjee; Cooney
Families–fiction: Cooney; elkeles; 
ellis, S.
FAntASy: Hughes; Jones, d.; 
pratchett; reisz
Fathers–fiction: Cooney; ehrenhaft; 
elkeles; ellis, S.; ransom
Fish–fiction: Jennings
FolK-liKe tAleS: Farmer
FolKtAleS And FAiry tAleS: 
Quattlebaum; San Souci
Food and eating: gold
Foster care–fiction: Huser
Friends–fiction: Arrington; Huser; 
Jennings; lyga; reisz
Friends–stories: eaton
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in All-CApS 
refer to genres and appeals. in the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
DecemBer 2006  •  197
gays and lesbians–fiction: reisz; 
Sanchez
Geography: Freedman Adventures
gotHiC FiCtion: newbery
grandfathers–fiction: Banerjee
grandmothers–fiction: ellis, S.
grandparents–fiction: ransom
growing up–fiction: Chambers
Hell–fiction: Mcgowan
HiStoriCAl FiCtion: Farmer; 
Fine; Frost; Hale; newbery; ran-
som; Sommerdorf; Wallace; Wulf
History, U.S.: Freedman Freedom
History, world: Freedman Adven-
tures
Holocaust: lee
HoW-to BooKS: gold
HuMor: Armstrong; eaton; Jen-
nings; Myers; offill; pratchett; 
root; Sanchez
illness–fiction: Arrington; Hughes; 
Matthews
immigrants–fiction: Frost; Som-
merdorf
immigration–fiction: Wulf
independence–fiction: Hill
indians–fiction: Banerjee
Jews: lee
Jews–fiction: elkeles; Wulf
Literature, American: reef
Literature, English: Mack
Magic and magicians–fiction: Jones, 
d.; van Allsburg
Marine biology: Mallory
Middle east–fiction: Farmer
Monsters–fiction: leuck
Mothers–fiction: Arrington
MySterieS: Mack; newbery
native Americans–fiction: Sommer-
dorf
orphans–fiction: Key; Shafer; Wulf
poetry: Frost
poverty–fiction: Jones, t.
pregnancy–fiction: Chambers
prisons and prisoners–fiction: ellis, 
d.
prostitution–fiction: McCormick
psychology: Krull
puppets–fiction: Fine
Reading aloud: San Souci; Zarin
Reading, easy: Cummings; Hill
Reading, reluctant: giles
relationships–fiction: Jones, t.; 
MacCullough; Sanchez; Wallace
Religious instruction: Zarin
rHyMing StorieS: leuck; root
Saints: Zarin
SCAry StorieS: Fine
School–fiction: Jones, t.; Myers; 
Sommerdorf
Science: Krull; Mallory; rockwell
Secrets–fiction: ellis, S.; Schumacher
Sex–fiction: Chambers
SHort StorieS: Stolarz
Sisters–fiction: Frost; newbery; Wal-
lace; Wulf
Slavery–fiction: McCormick
Slavery–stories: raven
Snow–stories: Child, o’Connor
Spies and spying–fiction: Schum-
acher
Storytime: Child; eaton; Macdon-
ald; root
Summer–fiction: elkeles
SurvivAl StorieS: Key; pfeffer; 
Shafer
SuSpenSe: giles
toys–stories: o’Connor
tricksters–fiction: San Souci
truth–fiction: Schumacher
uncles–fiction: Shafer
underground railroad–stories: 
raven
voyages and travel: Freedman Ad-
ventures
voyages and travel–fiction: ehren-
haft; elkeles; Huser; Matthews; 
reisz
voyages and travel–stories: Arm-
strong
Winter–stories: o’Connor
Witches–fiction: pratchett
Women’s studies: Mannis; McCor-
mick; San Souci
WordleSS BooKS: Armstrong
World cultures: ellis, d.; McCor-
mick
World War ii: lee
Writers and writing: reef
Writers and writing–fiction: lyga
