T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by The Johns Hopkins University Press
October 2007
Vol. 61   No. 2
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
October 2007
Vol. 61 No. 2
69  the BIg PICture
 
 The Wall:  Growing Up behind the Iron Curtain  written and illus. by Peter Sís
70  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
72  • The Absolutely True Diary of a Part-Time Indian  by Sherman Alexie;  
 
 illus. by Ellen Forney
79  • Elijah of Buxton  by Christopher Paul Curtis
89  • The Wicked Big Toddlah  written and illus. by Kevin Henkes
109  • Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows  by J. K. Rowling; illus. by Mary  
 
 GrandPré
110  • When Is a Planet Not a Planet:  The Story of Pluto?  by Elaine Scott
119  ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons
120  suBjeCt And use Index
68 • The BulleTin
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
 
 
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the  
 
 
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison
Katrina Bromann, Reviewer (KB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Hope Morrison, Reviewer (HM)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Cindy Welch, Reviewer (CW)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Katrina Bromann
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print or electronic $80.00; combined print & electronic $112.00; multiple in-
stitutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, $50.00; students, 
$15.00. In countries other than the United States, add $13.20 per subscription for postage; subscrib-
ers in Canada and Mexico add $9.35. Single copy rate: $9.00. Volumes available in microfilm from 
ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche 
from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be 
made payable to The Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Divi-
sion, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 
410-516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/jour-
nals/advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.uiuc.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2007 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image by Peter Sís from The Wall:  Growing Up behind the Iron Curtain ©2007.  Used by 
permission of Frances Foster Books/Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
OcTOBer 2007 • 69
the BIg PICture
The Wall: Growing Up behind the Iron Curtain
written and illus. by Peter Sís
Thirty sentences, give or take the odd ellipsis, form the armature upon which 
Sís recontructs his early growth as an artist, and a few dozen journal entries add 
a lean layer of flesh to the tale. The real substance of this inventively fashioned 
autobiography, however, lies in the images—some tidily sequential, others boldly 
sprawling double bleeds—that trace Sís’ creative journey from a toddler compelled 
to doodle to a young professional compelled to leave his native Czechoslovakia in 
the early 1980s for liberty in the West. And if readers just happen to find themselves 
inadvertently expanding their knowledge of the Cold War, that makes their own 
literary journey all the richer. 
Baby Peter, paper and pencil in hand and head turned to an impossible 
rotation, glances over his shoulder in the opening scene to fix his audience with sky-
blue eyes of astonishing clarity and near magnetic force (the text reads, “As long as 
he could remember, he had loved to draw”). Boxing in the baby are three additional 
lines of fine-print text defining the Iron Curtain, the Cold War, and Communism, 
the intangible entities that will form a restrictive perimeter around his life over  
the coming thirty-some years. In the following pages, a series of small scenes  
finely textured in black ink introduce us to a happy little kid who’s free to draw 
anything he likes in his own home, safe in the care of his obviously loving parents. 
A splash of Communist red infiltrates each frame, though, usually in the guise 
of a flag or a ubiquitous star, and by the time Sís leaves the nest and has to draw 
“what he is told to at school,” flashes of red have made their way into Young Pio-
neers neckerchiefs, hammer and sickle paintings on the classroom easels, missiles  
sprouting from a map of Cuba, bloodstains pocking the dying John Kennedy 
slumped in his Dallas limo. There’s no escaping the pervasive influence of global 
political drama, and in this “time of brainwashing,” an enormous red cloud bearing 
a host of Russian leaders tails the young boy as he walks down Prague’s cobbled 
streets. 
The first of three sets of journal entries closes out this segment, presenting 
Sís’ own youthful take on events (“The Soviet Union launched a rocket carrying 
a little dog named Laika into space. I wonder how the dog is going to land?”), 
and offering clues to readers on the content of several of the scenes they had just 
witnessed. A turn of the page brings an unexpected smattering of fresh hues as 
Sís begins to question the party line and, under the relatively liberal leadership 
of Alexander Dubcek, the Prague Spring of 1968 explodes with the music of the 
Beatles, Elvis, and the Rolling Stones. Now the preponderantly black-and-white 
images are sprinkled with colorful bits of Sís’ own work—roiling in the air above 
70 • The BulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
the apartment building, painted on a drum set, fastened to the wall—and a tiny 
monochromatic Sís cavorts through a fantasy panorama of players and symbols 
of the contemporary popular arts. Again a set of journal entries adds Sís’ personal 
commentary, and another page turn ushers in the grim crackdown of Soviet oc-
cupation as tanks roll into Prague and Sís’ world reverts to black, white, and red. 
Slowly, pockets of livelier color reemerge, evoking the rebellious spirit of muralists 
who wage a battle of wits and paint with the government, and in Sís’ paintings, 
which are attracting official censure.  In the concluding segment, Sís dreams of 
escape, clutching his pictures under his arm as he bicycles through an imaginary 
landscape of wild plans to cross the Iron Curtain and finally taking flight across 
the Wall on the wings of his own artwork.
Snippets of italicized commentary run along the sides of most pages, 
providing historical context in a timely and unobtrusive fashion (“June 17, 1969. 
The Prague [Beach Boys]  concert takes place in Lucerna Hall.  Police with dogs 
wait nearby”), and an afterword recaps thhe benchmarks of Sís’ early years and of-
fers a bit more detail on how he came to reside in the United States. Nonetheless, 
it is Sís’ visual rendering that will both engross and haunt his audience—from 
the cutaways of clandestine activity behind walls that dutifully fly the red flag, to 
the pig-faced policemen and government spies that lurk throughout the scenes in 
an insidious, high-stakes game of Where’s Waldo? Student writers and artists who 
have butted heads with fidgety administrators—or any kids who are awakening to 
their First Amendment rights—can look right here for inspiration. (See p. 111 for 
publication information.)
 
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer
AbAdzis, Nick Laika; written and illus. by Nick Abadzis. First Second/Roaring 
Brook, 2007 205p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-59643-101-0 $17.95   
Ad Gr. 6-10
Immediately following the collective international gasp that greeted Sputnik I in 
1957, Premier Khrushchev gave Sergei Korolev and his design team approximately 
one month to outdo their triumph just in time for the fortieth anniversary of the 
Russian Revolution. Sputnik II would send a live passenger into orbit, but due 
to time constraints, the designers were unable to devise a reentry system, and the 
canine cosmonaut was doomed to die in space. Here Abadzis reconstructs the plan-
ning, politicking, and flight, following activities of the dog handler, the trainer, 
the chief designer, and the dog who came to be called Laika (barker). At its best, 
and particularly when contextualizing the ambitions of the Russian space program 
that dropped the temperature on the Cold War, this exemplifies how imaginatively 
and engagingly the graphic-novel format can deliver information. However, in 
his well-intentioned effort to support team member Oleg Gazenko’s conclusion 
OcTOBer 2007 • 71
that “we did not learn enough from the mission to justify the death of the dog,” 
Abadzis spins a hanky-wringer of a backstory for Laika, tracing an imagined life of 
neglect, abuse, and dashed hopes that would make the stray dog anxious to please 
its trainers and willing to undergo any discomfort in experimentation to gain their 
approbation, and thus elevates the callousness of the program to villainous treachery. 
Ultimately this authorial decision is as unnecessary as it is emotionally manipulative, 
since almost any reader with a beating heart will sympathize with Laika merely by 
observing her training ordeal, the affection of her handlers, and her sad destiny. 
Space enthusiasts will nonetheless appreciate how much of the drama unfolds not 
only in dialogue bubbles but in the meticulous visual detail within wordless frames 
that captures the complex emotional responses of human participants pressured to 
sacrifice a dog they’ve come to treasure. A bibliography leads readers to up-to-date 
materials for further research.  EB
Agee, JoN Nothing; written and illus. by Jon Agee. Hyperion, 2007 
32p
ISBN 978-0-7868-3694-9 $16.99   
R 5-8 yrs
When the richest lady in town walks into Otis’ empty antique shop, he tells her he 
has nothing to sell; clearly a woman burning to buy, she determinedly purchases his 
nothing for three hundred dollars, and so a craze begins. Everybody’s selling noth-
ing (“I have nothing imported!” brags enterprising Sam in the neighboring shop) 
and everybody wants nothing, getting rid of all their something to make room for 
their new nothing. This initially looks like good news for Otis, who easily restocks 
his bare shop, but then he’s stuck with everything when everybody wants noth-
ing—or do they? This is a crafty little piece that uses its entertaining word game to 
make some tacit “Emperor’s New Clothes” comments on self-delusion, economics, 
the thirst for novelty, and shopping for shopping’s sake. While the story has a few 
loose threads, the humor of inversion and the implicit satire will intrigue as well as 
amuse kids. Agee’s illustrations, with their softly grainy yet straight and orderly lines, 
employ a muted palette of gray-touched hues dominated by white space, a color 
scheme suitable for the mid-century-seeming marketplace that draws the frenzied 
nothing-hounds. What will audiences want to hear again? Nothing!  DS
AlexANder, lloyd The Golden Dream of Carlo Chuchio. Holt, 2007 
306p
ISBN 978-0-8050-8333-0 $18.95   
R* Gr. 7-9
Carlo, an inveterate dreamer, is lucky: an extraordinary coincidence finds him 
stumbling onto a treasure map at the same time that his uncle unceremoniously 
kicks him out of his home. Armed with a little money and boundless visions of 
riches, Carlo sets off down the Road of Golden Dreams with a motley crew of op-
portunistic employees who soon become close friends and allies. Although he does 
indeed find the location of the much-longed-for gold, several twists and obstacles 
have changed him for the better, and his shallow goal of showing up his uncle is 
replaced with wiser and more nuanced dreams of finding a place to call home and 
honoring the necessary sacrifices (both large and small) that accompany friendships 
and romances. Whether youthfully flippant or wryly reflective, Carlo’s narration of 
his adventures (replete with sarcastic remarks and self-disparaging insights) keeps 
the pace snappy and the tone relatively light-hearted, even when the characters 
find themselves in life-threatening situations. His particular brand of sardonic wit 
and his knack for attracting odd companions, combined with elements that will 
be familiar to fans of the author (Carlo grows up on Magenta, an island in close 
72 • The BulleTin
proximity to the setting in The Rope Trick, BCCB 1/03), form a perfect blend of 
revisited elements and fresh characters for readers seeking one more memorable 
novel by the late author. The ability to find love and true contentment in a world 
as complex and unfriendly as the one in which Carlo lives is a feat; the remarkable 
talent that can convey this quest in a way that is genuine, moving, and enthralling 
is in full effect here in this posthumously published novel.  AS
Alexie, shermAN The Absolutely True Diary of a Part-Time Indian; illus. by Ellen 
Forney. Little, 2007 [256p]
ISBN 978-0-316-01368-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 7-10
“Who has the most hope?” Junior, a Spokane Indian, asks his parents. “White 
people” is their instantaneous and simultaneous reply, confirming for Junior what 
he already knew: if he is to have any hope of fulfilling his dreams, he has to leave 
the rez. Braving the fierce anger of his best friend, Rowdy, Junior attends a white 
high school twenty-two miles from his home, where he falls in love, makes a few 
friends, and becomes a basketball legend. His triumph is always more bitter than 
sweet, though, as a boy caught between two conflicting worlds of loyalty and 
responsibility. His sense of humor and his cartooning become his salvation as he 
bears the loneliness of trying to escape the life of poverty and/or alcoholism that 
he sees as inevitable for Indians who stay on the reservation. Meanwhile he shares 
the perpetual grief of his community as they bury more people in a year than his 
white friends have lost in their whole lives; his pain reaches a peak when he loses 
his sister, who made her own escape from the rez by marrying a guy she met at a 
casino and moving to Montana, only to get drunk and die without waking up in a 
trailer fire. Through these experiences, though, he begins to get a sense of who he 
is and where he belongs, of which affiliations he can afford to keep and which he 
must walk away from; most poignant is the gift of identity that Rowdy gives him 
as he too comes to terms with what Junior must do to survive. The grief in this 
narrative is enough to leave a reader gasping, with both the humor and the hope 
always deepened by sadness and the ever-present niggling of undeserved and im-
potent guilt. Nevertheless, what emerges most strongly is Junior’s uncompromising 
determination to press on while leaving nothing important behind.  KC
bAker, bArbArA One Saturday Evening; illus. by Kate Duke. Dutton, 
2007 [48p]
ISBN 978-0-525-47103-5 $13.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 1-2
The bear family of One Saturday Morning is back with a series of nighttime rituals 
and routines in this gentle, family-themed easy reader. Each chapter focuses on a 
member of the family and the way he or she spends Saturday evening: Mama gets 
Baby Jack bathed, then treats herself to a bubble bath; Lily, the eldest sibling, insists 
on taking a bath by herself for the first time; Rose raises havoc in the bath with 
sister Daisy and then throughout the house; Daisy puts her baby doll to sleep just 
like Mama puts Jack to sleep; Jack climbs out of his crib; and Papa, after reading 
to all four cubs, pours himself some cocoa and reads a good book to himself. The 
overall result is the depiction of a serene, loving family full of individual person-
alities and mutual devotion. There is a pleasing diversity of activity presented in 
their evening rituals so that, although nothing particularly exciting happens, there 
OcTOBer 2007 • 73
is variety and interest. Duke’s watercolor illustrations mirror the familial joy inher-
ent in the text while offering lots of visual support for novice readers. She makes 
especially good use of props in distinguishing the siblings: Lily wears glasses, for 
instance, while Daisy always has her baby doll with her. Though written for early 
readers, this could also be readily shared by families spending their own Saturday 
evenings together.  HM
bAuer, mArioN dANe The Secret of the Painted House; illus. by Leonid 
Gore. Stepping Stone/Random House, 2007 97p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-94079-8 $14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-84079-1 $11.99   
Ad Gr. 2-4
Intrigued by an old, deserted playhouse deep in the forest near her new house, 
Emily learns that the house belonged to a little girl named Pin a long time ago, 
and that Pin died tragically in a house fire. The paintings on the wall, depicting 
the forest around the playhouse, were created by Pin’s mother, an artist, who left 
shortly before Pin’s death. A fascinated Emily breaks into the playhouse; she then 
hears someone calling her name, and, before she knows it, she has crossed over into 
the painted walls and joins up with the mysterious Pin at a picnic in the painted 
forest. When Emily’s little brother gets subsequently tricked into crossing over as 
well, the two siblings must find a way to get out before they are stuck forever. This 
slightly scary tale offers a well-measured amount of creepiness for the intended tran-
sitional-reader audience, but it foregoes plausibility for convenience: just as Emily 
is sitting on the porch pondering the painted house for the first time, the neighbor 
obligingly shows up to introduce herself and gives Emily all the information she 
has been seeking; just as Pin explains that she is waiting for her long-lost mother, 
Emily spots a woman wandering through the forest, and mother and daughter are 
reunited soon afterwards. The instant gratification of plot details limits the genre 
pleasures, as there is little time for clue gathering or piecing together parts of the 
big picture. Still, early readers will delight in the pleasantly eerie Pin, who inspires 
a fair amount of both trust and fear, and they will readily identify with Emily’s 
unwavering curiosity. Gore’s blurred monochromatic watercolor illustrations reflect 
the muted distinction between reality and fantasy. Offer this to early chapter book 
readers seeking something spooky . . . but not too spooky.  HM
beAN, JoNAthAN At Night; written and illus. by Jonathan Bean. Farrar, 
2007 32p
ISBN 978-0-374-30446-1 $15.00   
R 4-7 yrs
A little girl restlessly tosses and turns, unable to sleep, until she’s finally tempted 
by a breeze wafting through her window. Following it, she takes her bedding up 
to the roof, where she enjoys the panorama of the city beneath her and the cool 
night air around her, and she finally manages to fall asleep. The text has a quietly 
lulling cadence, often breaking up its sentences over several pages, that is highly 
suitable to a nighttime read, and youngsters will readily understand the allure of the 
protagonist’s special sleeping place. Quiet details in the homey line-and-watercolor 
art fill in plot and atmosphere; though the illustrations depict a somewhat cooler 
temperature inside than might be expected (the girl is bundled up in long sleeves 
under a fluffy comforter), the wonderment of the city roofscape is given full due, 
and nervous adults will be pleased to see that watchful Mom secretly keeps an eye 
on her relocating daughter. Use this with Stewart’s The Gardener (BCCB 10/97) 
74 • The BulleTin
for a look at surprising city views, or just to usher in sleep on a breezy summer 
night.  DS
bishop, Nic Spiders; written and illus. with photographs by Nic Bishop. Scho-
lastic, 2007 [48p]
ISBN 978-0-439-87756-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-4
Renowned nature photographer and illustrator of Sy Montgomery’s The Tarantula 
Scientist (BCCB 4/04), Bishop now offers an overview focused on spiders and 
spiders alone. Text describes spider characteristics and diet, spider behavior and 
reproduction in compact and pithy prose, but the gallery of vivid, closeup spider 
photographs almost renders the text superfluous. Each spread features a large im-
age, sometimes full page, sometimes three-quarter spread, sometimes full-spread 
with text nestling in a less-busy corner of the picture, with page color carefully 
corresponding to a key color in the photograph; pictured spiders are varied in 
species (yes, fans, the black widow and the tarantula each make an appearance). 
The foldout spread in the middle depicts a stop-motion-style view of a jumping 
spider making its leap, but kids will already be sucked in by closeups of fangs and 
writhing masses of spider babies; this is one self-selling book. A concluding note 
describes Bishop’s sometimes exacting photographic techniques, and an index and 
glossary are included.  DS
blume, Judy Soupy Saturdays with the Pain & the Great One; illus. by James 
Stevenson. Delacorte, 2007 108p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90324-0 $16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73305-2 $12.99   
Ad Gr. 2-4
Legendary siblings from Blume’s The Pain and the Great One (BCCB 11/84), 
first-grader Jake (the Pain) and third-grader Abigail (the Great One) are back in 
seven new stories highlighting the joys and frustrations of sibling relations. The 
chapters, which alternate narration between Jake and Abigail, feature their day-to-
day trials and tribulations: buying new shoes, learning to ride a bike, playing in 
a soccer league, having a sleepover party. The character development is solid and 
entertaining; readers learn about each of the kids from both siblings’ points of view, 
which results in a rich portrayal of motivation and a fair dose of humor. The story 
plots themselves are generally less exciting than the character studies within them, 
however, and the chapters sometimes tail off disappointingly rather than satisfac-
torily concluding. Stevenson’s lively black-and-white watercolors add a touch of 
rumpled whimsy, and the simple line compositions are rich with energy. The short 
chapters can also work as standalone stories or a sequential readaloud, while those 
just tackling chapter books will find this a good choice.  HM
borgo, lAcy FiNN Big Mama’s Baby; illus. by Nancy Cote. Boyds Mills, 
2007 [32p]
ISBN 978-1-59078-187-6 $15.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-9 yrs
As the song almost says, “Mammas, don’t let your babies grow up to be cows, 
boy.” Big Mama can attest to that wisdom: she’s a Texan grandmother, and Baby 
is the Black Angus calf she’s raised since his early youth. Big Mama’s affection-
OcTOBer 2007 • 75
ate spoiling—including letting Baby sleep inside on the front porch when he’s 
lonely—arouses some comment from her cattle-country cohorts, and as the calf 
grows larger, even she begins to realize that a full-grown bull is going to be one 
problematic house pet. While formatting and style make the story best suited to 
a readaloud, the text could have used some trimming for maximum effectiveness; 
nonetheless, the unforced country style and believable specifics give the story a droll, 
rawboned charm. Cote’s acrylic paintings somewhat recall Michelle Edwards’ work 
in the human figures, while giving the wide-open spaces of Texas their due; Baby 
himself is a big ol’ bovine Mama’s boy, face blissful as he’s wallowing in attention 
from his surrogate dam. Toss this into the mix when you’re doing pet stories, and 
watch kids rethink the comparatively modest trials of kitty care.  DS
brANde, robiN Evolution, Me, & Other Freaks of Nature. Knopf, 
2007 [272p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-94349-2 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-84349-5 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 6-9
It all started when Mena Reece wrote an apologetic letter to a bullied classmate 
that admitted his targeting had been a church-approved plan, an effort to thwart 
his perceived homosexuality. That letter gave the boy’s family grounds for a law-
suit, and now Mena suffers bitterness and harassment from her former friends 
and disappointment from her strict church-going parents. She discovers a new 
ally—and maybe more—in her handsome, funny lab partner, Casey, and when 
her church mounts an effort to get intelligent design taught in her science class, 
she finds herself not only questioning church teachings but becoming actively 
involved on the other side. Mena’s voice is believable in its blend of wistfulness, 
hurt, and determination, and the plot element of a lawsuit’s dividing a community 
is an unusual and dramatic one. Unfortunately, the book falls back on stereotype 
in its characterization, lionizing Casey’s freethinking family and reductively villain-
izing the church faithful, a cheat that turns the intellectual dispute into a stacked 
popularity contest rather than a genuine exploration of human views. It’s also more 
dramatically convenient than situationally believable that it takes Mena’s mother 
so long to clarify her stand on Mena’s action. There’s still plenty of food for timely 
thought here, though, and readers will ruefully sympathize with the protagonist’s 
vividly conveyed predicament.  DS
broAch, elise When Dinosaurs Came with Everything; illus. by David 
Small. Atheneum, 2007 40p
ISBN 978-0-689-86922-8 $16.99   
R* 6-9 yrs
“My mom goes on boring errands,” complains our young narrator, “and I have to 
go with her.” Today, though, there’s a special promotion that makes the errands 
anything but boring: free dinosaurs. First, a dozen doughnuts at the bakery come 
with a triceratops (“Oh, don’t worry, he’ll follow you,” says the bakery lady. “They 
always do”); then a visit to the doctor’s office results in a stegosaurus; then the barber’s 
haircut comes with a pterosaur. After taking them home, the narrator throws himself 
into dinosaur care and finds them delightful pets, and even his mother appreciates 
their contribution to the household. The text is lengthy, but the concept and Broach’s 
deliciously straightforward prose will keep dinosaur fans rapt; the book treats the 
remarkable phenomenon as unusual but plausible, as if the giveaway critters were 
76 • The BulleTin
kittens or puppies (“Dinosaurs are a lot of work,” warns Mom), spinning out the 
details of such a scenario for maximum comedy while adding situation-specific 
witticisms (when Mom sees the triceratops, “She looked him up and down. That 
took awhile”). Small’s line-and-watercolor illustrations walk the same humor line, 
caricaturing the very ordinariness of the shop and office personnel and the other 
dinosaur recipients (the girl with the tyrannosaurus rudely sticks her tongue out 
at the narrator), focusing on the geometry of streets and interior rooms and then 
gleefully bursting the grids with cheerful looming dinosaurs. Enticing, useful, and 
wish-fulfilling, this has “firm favorite” written all over it, especially if you invite 
the audience to bring their own, presumably toy, dinosaurs.  DS
cAbot, meg Jinx. HarperTeen, 2007 262p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-083765-5 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-083764-8 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 7-9
Given her nickname the day she was born, Jinx, now sixteen and temporarily living 
with relatives in New York, has a brief hope of creating a new personality that isn’t 
so nameworthily awkward or accident-prone. Unfortunately, Jinx’s jealous cousin, 
Tory, only offers one avenue for Jinx’s reinvention: joining Tory’s coven, which 
Tory formed after becoming smitten with a family rumor about a witchly heritage. 
She is therefore infuriated to discover that Jinx is actually the one with the powers, 
though Tory’s everyday gift for cruelty seems to be quite a worthy match for Jinx’s 
timid sorcery. Even while trying to keep her cousin from hurting those around her 
(Tory seems hell-bent on achieving greatness through destroying others), Jinx still 
has ample time to obsess over the gorgeous boy next door, settle in at a new school, 
and pursue her many talents. In fact, although Jinx is wry and clever and her com-
ing into her own as a powerful and responsible witch is realistically arduous, in her 
pursuit of all things non-magical, this book falls into formulaic plots and rehashed 
character roles (dutiful gorgeous boyfriend, scheming shrewish girls, and oblivious 
but harmless parents abound). The obvious reciprocal interest of her crush in spite 
of Jinx’s certainty that he loves another (which will be spotted by readers no later 
than the second chapter) is endlessly debated, rejected, and revised at the cost of 
other, more intriguing mysteries. In the end, however, this will be an enjoyable 
combination of romantic comedy and magic for readers looking for an accessible 
heroine and a true happy ending.  AS 
cAple, kAthy Duck & Company; written and illus. by Kathy Caple. Holiday 
House, 2007 32p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-8234-1993-7 $14.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-8234-2125-1 $4.95   
R Gr. 1-2
Written in five easy chapters, this early reader tells of the everyday occurrences at 
the Duck & Company bookshop, where Duck and Rat have been working “for as 
long as anyone could remember.” In the first chapter, customer Cat seeks a cook-
book about preparing rat while Rat hides under the desk in fear. In the second, a 
mother hen, pushing a pram full of eggs, comes seeking something exciting to pass 
the time while waiting for her chicks to hatch. A badger seeking a funny book is 
the topic of the third chapter, while the fourth tells of story hour at the bookshop. 
In the final chapter, Duck and Rat open a new shipment of books to find the latest 
installment in the Cliff-Hanger series, and both show up the next day completely 
exhausted as a result of having stayed up all night reading. The humor of the stories 
OcTOBer 2007 • 77
lies in the quirky customers and the creative ways in which Duck and Rat meet 
their needs; Cat, for example, leaves with a cookbook about eating carrots, having 
been convinced that carrots will make his fur shine. There is a definite nod to the 
joys of reading here: for instance, when Duck leads Mother Hen to the children’s 
section, she explains that she is actually looking for something that she herself 
will enjoy, and she purchases Terror Tales to Make Your Feathers Pop Out. There 
are tons of visual clues embedded in the ink and gouache illustrations to help 
burgeoning readers work their way through the text, and a multitude of vignettes, 
partial-page panels, and lively spot art illustrations keep page layout exciting and 
reading unintimidating. Bookstore-working animals offer a creative angle for a 
story, and young readers will appreciate both the humor and the diversity of the 
five included tales.  HM
cAssidy, ANNe Looking for JJ. Harcourt, 2007 [336p]
ISBN 978-0-15-206190-6 $17.00
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-12
Our protagonist has a new identity, Alice Tully; Alice is a young woman who lives 
with kindly Rosie, embarks with tremulous excitement on a relationship with at-
tractive, attentive Frankie, and looks forward to starting at the university in the fall. 
Back before she was Alice, however, she was Jennifer Jones, who killed a schoolmate 
when she was only ten and who spent six years in prison. Now the increasing press 
storm about JJ’s release means that Alice’s cover story is in danger, and she may 
lose the future she has striven to create in the face of her terrible past. The premise 
of this British import is an absorbing one, and Cassidy believably depicts Alice’s 
current possibilities as normal but oh-so-desirable for a girl longing for an average 
existence; the book also credibly paints JJ’s victim as a blend of friend and persecu-
tor. Unfortunately, the stories of the past, revealed in flashbacks, and present aren’t 
well integrated, so readers don’t really see how the Jennifer Jones of then becomes 
the presumably nonviolent Alice Tully of now, and both stories are cluttered and 
slow-moving, which undercuts their impact. Gail Giles’ Right Behind You (BCCB 
9/07) is therefore much more successful both in explanation and in storytelling, 
but readers who find the concept irresistible may persevere with Alice, and they’ll 
certainly support her desire to escape the albatross of her past.  DS
clemeNts, ANdrew No Talking; illus. by Mark Elliot. Simon, 2007 146p
ISBN 978-1-4169-0983-5 $15.99   
R Gr. 3-5
After reading about Gandhi for his report on India, loudmouth Dave Packer is 
intrigued by the idea of bringing order to his mind with avoidance of speech. What 
begins as a personal experiment evolves rapidly into a fifth-grade-wide competition 
between the boys and girls to see which group will be more successful in maintaining 
silence. While Dave heads up the boys’ team, gabby Lynsey heads up the girls, and 
the rivalry between the two team captains adds further interest to the tale. School-
wide phenomena are right up Clements’ alley, and this treatment is particularly 
clever and widely appealing in presenting so many different points of view on the 
social experiment at hand: Dave and Lynsey, while sworn enemies, are portrayed 
more thoughtfully as “two smart kids enjoying an idea”; Mrs. Hiatt, the principal, 
responds to the silence with a panicked sense that she has lost control despite the 
fact that she is getting exactly what she so often had longed for; Mr. Burton, the 
language arts teacher, revels in the implications of the contest and turns his classroom 
78 • The BulleTin
into a language lab where he sets up various experiments to test the kids’ responses. 
The narrative moves along quickly, with flashes backward and forwards providing 
necessary context for situations as they arise. This is a smart novel that playfully 
explores an original and unusual topic: the way language, communication, and 
silence all function for and against community.  HM
cooper, heleN Delicious!; written and illus. by Helen Cooper. Farrar, 
2007 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-374-31756-0 $16.00
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 4-7 yrs
In this follow-up to Pumpkin Soup, a duck and a squirrel and a cat, cabinmates 
in “the old white cabin,” are tremendous aficionados of pumpkin soup, but when 
their patch doesn’t provide a ripe specimen, they’re forced to find an alternative. 
An afternoon of fishing results in a tasty fish soup pleasing to two out of the three, 
but the duck turns up his beak at the broth, as he does when they try mushroom 
soup and beet soup. Finally the cat tries to fool the duck with a blended creation 
of carrots, corn, tomatoes, and yellow zucchini; the initially eager duck catches 
onto the truth but decides this is “the best soup I ever tasted.” The plot is predict-
able, but the text is nicely rhythmic, and kids will quickly catch on to the parental 
roles of Cat and Squirrel and to the place of the duck as picky child eater. Softly 
textured paintings include witty detail, but they sometimes tip into cheesy greeting-
card cuteness (especially with the baby duckling), and there’s often just too much 
distraction with the secondary illustrative story of bugs siphoning off the rejected 
soup. Picky eaters—or sibs thereof—may still greet Duck’s frustratingly fine tastes 
with rueful recognition.  DS
crAwley, dAve Dog Poems; illus. by Tamara Petrosino. Wordsong/Boyds Mills, 
2007 [32p]
ISBN 978-1-59078-454-9 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 3-5
Two dozen doggy verses treat canine subjects such as domestication (“Wolf Dog”), 
expression (“Telling a Tail”), mishaps (“Wrong Kitty” and “Oops”), and breed iden-
tity (“Basset,” “No Beautiful Bulldogs,” “The Labrador Loves Liquid”). Though 
Crawley relies a bit much on jingly anapestic meter, the verses possess an abundance 
of kid-friendly humor enhanced by true and knowledgeable appreciation of their 
subject (“Snowball,” for instance, describes the way Dalmatian puppies start out 
snow white and then gradually acquire their spots). Unfortunately, the poems are 
undercut by stodgy design and by line-and-watercolor illustrations that have the 
slick, samey cheer of advertising graphics rather than any depth of character. Readers 
will therefore be much better off with MacLachlan’s deliciously doggy Once I Ate 
a Pie (BCCB 6/06), but there’s flavor enough in the verse here to give Fido fans a 
little literary something to chew on.  DS 
crutcher, chris Deadline. Greenwillow, 2007 [320p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-085090-6 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-085089-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Ben Wolf is going into his senior year with a secret: he only has a year to live. Be-
cause he’s eighteen, he has the right to refuse treatment for his undisclosed blood 
OcTOBer 2007 • 79
disease (the galley back cover labels it leukemia, but the text itself is scant on medi-
cal details), and he has the right to keep his diagnosis to himself. With nothing 
left to lose, the short, 123-pound senior gives up cross-country for gridiron glory, 
becoming a minor legend with his fearless hitting, lightning speed, and uncanny 
accuracy at pulling down his quarterback brother’s long passes. He also makes a 
successful play for his longtime crush, Dallas Suzuki, who has secrets of her own, 
and determines to bring the cause of Malcolm X to his twenty-first century, all-
white town in Idaho. As his year progresses, he begins to feel the pressure to tell 
the people he loves the truth, especially after the town drunk, whose reform Ben 
has taken on as another endgame project, commits suicide after revealing to Ben 
his grim past, and a fellow teammate is killed in a car crash. Ben’s story plays out 
the perennially fascinating what-would-you-do-if-you-only-had-a-year-to-live 
game amid the page-turning melodrama fans have come to expect from Crutcher’s 
universe of damaged people. Ben’s mother, for instance, has severe bipolar disorder, 
and all of the people closest to Ben have either suffered or perpetuated sexual abuse 
and/or tragically lost loved ones. Ben’s misfortune thus fits right in, but his cocky 
self-possession in the face of his illness strains credibility; he never once gets angry 
or depressed, and his perspective (and a lot of his word choices) calls to mind an 
older man imagining what it might be like to know that your senior year of high 
school would be your last. Emotional mitt-handedness aside, though, this will find 
a ready audience; think of it as Lurlene McDaniel with sports, coachly pep talks, 
and occasional potty humor.  KC 
curtis, christopher pAul Elijah of Buxton. Scholastic, 2007 [352p]
ISBN 978-0-439-02344-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
Eleven-year-old Elijah Freeman is the first free-born child in Buxton, Canada, a 
community formed by Reverend William King in 1849 as a refuge for any slaves 
that could manage to make it there. The community has a strict set of rules and 
expectations, but that doesn’t stop the occasional snake from slithering his way 
in amongst the hard-working folk. The trouble is that naïve, good-hearted Elijah 
doesn’t recognize a snake when he walks on two legs: taken in by a con artist who 
calls himself the Preacher, Elijah narrowly escapes being sold to a traveling circus, 
though he really doesn’t seem to ever grasp his peril. When the Preacher steals all 
the money that another man has saved to buy his family out of slavery and crosses 
the border, Elijah feels obligated to go after him, since it was he who said that 
the Preacher could be trusted. Things go from bad to worse on his journey, and 
Elijah learns the hard way that the stories the escaped slaves tell are grounded in 
more horror than he can possibly imagine. Curtis’ storytelling style shines here; 
he establishes Elijah’s character through energetic first-person narration and fixes 
him in readers’ hearts through comic, sometimes even slapstick episodes. Only 
then does he open up the serious, at times horrific side of the story. Elijah spends 
a lot of time trying to figure out the ways of grown folk; in particular he tries to 
learn how to lie like a grownup, since that seems to him the way they get things 
done. This story does the best that children’s historical fiction about tragic times 
can do—it paints an unflinchingly honest picture of the past, while providing a 
glimmer of empowerment and hope through an engaging and resourceful hero. An 
author’s note with more information about the story and the Buxton settlement 
follows the text.  KC
80 • The BulleTin
dA costA, deborAh Hanukkah Moon; illus. by Gosia Mosz. Kar-Ben, 
2007 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-58013-244-2 $17.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-58013-245-9 $7.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-8 yrs
Little Isobel is to spend the first nights of Hanukkah with Aunt Louisa, whom she 
scarcely knows, and she’s especially unsure if Louisa, newly arrived from Mexico, 
will even know how to celebrate the holiday properly. The familiar hanukkiah, 
or menorah (here decorated with myriad birds), and a dreidel-shaped piñata are 
comforting sights, and Aunt Louisa seems to follow the familiar rites, but she graces 
them with a Latin twist. When Isobel sings the dreidel song, Aunt Louisa sings 
along in Spanish; there is a daily gift exchange and a special dinner and blessing 
shared with friends. The highlight for Isobel, though, is her introduction to Rosh 
Hadesh, the observance of the new moon that marks the beginning of a new lunar 
month and celebrates the ancient Israelite women’s refusal to help cast a golden 
idol during their wanderings in the desert. The aunt/niece visit is pretty much a 
disposable plot; what’s useful is the introduction of several rituals and terms from 
the Sephardic tradition. That’s a valuable contribution to the canon of holiday 
literature, and the focus on the feminist aspect of the new moon celebration is a 
welcome one. Mosz’s mixed-media pictures, in which Isobel’s dream vision and 
Exodus imagery settle gracefully into scenes of contemporary observances, feature 
a cast of doe-eyed, stylized characters golden as Hanukkah lights against the deep 
purple of moonless night. A glossary of holiday terms and a pronunciation guide 
for Spanish words (alas, no pronunciations for the general glossary and no defini-
tions for the Spanish terms) are appended.  EB 
dowNhAm, JeNNy Before I Die. Fickling, 2007 [320p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75158-2 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75155-1 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-12
When Tessa says, “I wish I had a boyfriend,” she may be expressing the desire of 
the typical sixteen-year-old girl, but she’s far from typical: she’s dying of leukemia. 
With the help of her rebellious friend, Zoey, she’s hoping to get through a list of 
achievements, ranging from committing a crime to becoming famous, before her 
life is over, but it’s really love, including fulfilling sex, that she yearns to experi-
ence. Fate kindly delivers in the form of her next-door neighbor, Adam, who has 
little in his life beyond the tending of his depressed mother; as Tessa’s body finds 
it increasingly difficult to fight her cancer, she finds satisfaction and consolation in 
her physical and emotional relationship with Adam. British author Downham has 
created a fully fledged and satisfying contemporary tearjerker: there’s enough grit in 
the details to give the plot traction, but underneath the veneer of modern realism 
is an old-fashioned lush and tragic romance. Characters are effectively depicted, 
from Zoey, the wild child suddenly matured by her pregnancy, to energetic little 
Cal, Tessa’s younger brother; Tessa’s parents, responsible Dad and flaky Mum, are 
particularly well drawn, with their varying reactions to her decline and the reopened 
relationship that her illness brings the separated couple (“I wanted them to get back 
together,” says a slightly disappointed Tessa on seeing their flirtation, “but . . . I 
thought they’d be deeper than this”). The underlying question of “What would 
OcTOBer 2007 • 81
you do if you knew you were dying?” (also found in Crutcher’s Deadline, reviewed 
above) adds philosophical interest, and readers will enjoy contemplating it while 
contentedly sniffling their way through the pages.  DS
eAstoN, kelly White Magic: Spells to Hold You. Lamb, 2007 193p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-93769-9 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-83769-2 $15.99   
R Gr. 7-10
When Chrissie is uprooted from her beloved Vermont and moved to L.A. for her 
mother’s upcoming second marriage, she expects to remain friendless and unhappy 
forever. Fortunately, she’s wrong; she soon becomes part of a white-magic coven 
with confident Yvonne, whose father took her away from her gypsy mother, and 
lovesick Karen, who is always falling for the wrong guy. The trio of fifteen-year-olds 
bond over boys and homemade spells, until Karen realizes that her crush (Jimmy) is 
interested in Yvonne and feelings of betrayal and anger at her former best friend lead 
Karen down a destructive path. In this novel smoothly adapted from the author’s 
stage play, the girls themselves tell their story of friendship and trust (between par-
ent and child as well as between friends), alternating narration in chapters often 
introduced by poetry or Yvonne’s unique spells. Jimmy, Karen’s crush, also has a 
few chapters of his own that create a brief and violent male trajectory through this 
female territory of the heart. Minor plotlines such as Yvonne’s reluctant reunion 
with her mother and Chrissie’s attempts to get into a prestigious poetry camp in 
Vermont successfully deepen reader understanding of the characters without getting 
in the way of the rest of the story. Friendship rather than witchcraft is the magic 
that holds this junior Ya-Ya sisterhood together as they come to terms with their 
individual realities—mothers aren’t everything you want them to be, boys don’t 
always love you back, and friends never give up on each other.  CW
egAN, tim Dodsworth in New York; written and illus. by Tim Egan. Houghton, 
2007 48p
ISBN 978-0-618-77708-2 $15.00   
R Gr. 2-3
“Dodsworth wanted adventure,” and he’s going to get it, but first he wants breakfast. 
At his favorite breakfast spot of Hodges’ café, he must dodge Hodges’ crazy duck; 
when he heads to New York, he finds to his annoyance that Hodges’ duck has come 
along with him. Once they hit the city, the duck takes off, and Dodsworth, knowing 
Hodges will be worrying, travels Manhattan in his effort to find the elusive avian, 
in the process seeing the city from top to bottom. This easy reader revisits Egan’s 
familiarly weird picture-book world, with its behatted talking animals (Dodsworth is 
something ratlike while Hodges is an elephant) looking like four-legged mid-century 
(or perhaps earlier, given the protagonist’s Depression-era namesake) bourgeoisie, 
and gives it a focused if divertingly odd plot. The troublemaking duck (“The duck 
flew behind the counter. He started throwing pancakes at Dodsworth”) is an amus-
ing character in his own right as well as an effective travel-inducing device, and 
the matter-of-fact, compact sentences gain readability as well as humor from their 
simplicity. Tidily bordered blocks of illustration emphasize earth tones anchored 
by city gray in their depiction of an unusually orderly New York; the duck pops 
up in the background of many views, encouraging readers to keep looking beyond 
the text for reward. Fans of Egan’s picture books and beginning readers who are 
looking for something off the beaten path, albeit in New York, will wish to join 
Dodsworth in following that duck.  DS
82 • The BulleTin
emberley, ed Bye-Bye, Big Bad Bullybug!; written and illus. by Ed Emberley. LB 
Kids/Little, 2007 28p
ISBN 978-0-316-01762-6 $10.99   
Ad 3-5 yrs
Through the dark purple clouds in the deep blue sky comes the sound of “putt, putt, 
putt, putt,” and three little glowing yellow bugs suspect what’s coming—Big Bad 
Bullybug in his spaceship. Inspired perhaps by Red Riding Hood’s lupine nemesis, 
the BBB begins announcing his menacing physical traits and how he intends to 
terrorize victims: “I have sharp white teeth for biting itty bitty baby bugs.” The 
baby bugs make a brave attempt at repartee (“Hey, it’s not nice to pinch!”) until 
their protector finally arrives in the guise of a Big Foot gym shoe from the Sniker 
Snaker Sneaker Company, which wreaks vengeance of Biblical proportions with 
a decisive “Skwoosh!” This is hardly a message that will launch this title onto the 
preschool teacher’s list of anti-bullying reading matter, but that doesn’t seem to be 
the intent. The fun is in the paper engineering that allows a new bit of the BBB to 
show through die-cut apertures with each turn of the page, until he appears in all 
his three-eyed, six-armed, purple-spotted glory, and even better, lets the page turner 
participate in his demise by flipping the blue shoe onto the trembling bully. Some 
of the pleasure is diminished by the illogical ending that sees the BBB returned to 
his spaceship and making his escape, even after he has been quite obviously wiped 
out by Big Foot. Moreover, the deep colors of the background are a bit muddy 
and unappealing, and the font too skinny to suggest the threat behind the voice. 
Still, little kids with bully issues of their own will enjoy seeing some of their darker 
wishes vicariously come true.  EB
FArmer, NANcy The Land of the Silver Apples. Jackson/Atheneum, 
2007 [512p]
ISBN 978-1-4169-0735-0 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
This sequel to The Sea of Trolls (BCCB 11/04) finds Jack, who spent much of 
the previous novel kidnapped by Vikings and weighted with a nearly impossible 
quest, now safe at home and a couple of years older but still struggling with family 
and personal issues. He enjoys his challenging work as a bard-in-training, but his 
relationships with his father and spoiled younger sister, Lucy, are both at all-time 
lows, and after a terrible row, Jack leaves home. Even relative peace is not Jack’s for 
long, as he soon must embark on a pilgrimage to save Lucy from a madness that 
has suddenly come upon her. Thorgil, Jack’s berserker friend, makes a welcome 
reappearance, eagerly greeting every twist in the quest as they uncover myriad 
problems that all need remedies (they encounter hobgoblins, evil kings, and elves, 
all of whom are integral to restoring order and healing Lucy). Rounding out the 
known protagonists are new characters like Pega, a gorgeously talented singer and 
mysteriously powerful slave who hails from Jack’s village, and revelatory new infor-
mation about old characters (Lucy is actually an elf changeling, which explains her 
complete self-involvement) that keep the action fresh and unpredictable and leave 
plenty of open-ended plots to be resolved in the third and final volume. Rich and 
intriguing details add to the already well-developed world in which Jack is slowly 
coming of age. Although new readers may need to refer to the appendix and list of 
characters frequently, this lyrical and elegantly written sequel works well as a stand-
alone novel. Existing fans, however, will reap additional benefit from knowing the 
OcTOBer 2007 • 83
emotional backgrounds of the protagonists. Either way, the remaining volume of 
the trilogy will be eagerly anticipated.  AS
FleischmAN, sid The Entertainer and the Dybbuk. Greenwillow, 
2007 [160p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-134446-6 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-134445-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 6-9
World War II veteran Freddie T. Birch never got around to returning to the U.S.A.; 
he’s been tramping across Europe with his hand-carved wooden dummy, trying to 
perfect his act and catch a big break. Returning to his room one night he finds in 
his closet a gaunt teenager, Avrom Amos Poliakov, who was murdered in the Holo-
caust. He’s now a dybbuk, a spirit with unfinished business, who needs to inhabit 
a body to take revenge on his killer, and Freddie’s body should do nicely. Freddie, 
of course, has reasonable objections: he’s in no way prepared to do anyone in, no 
matter how compelling the reason. Avrom takes up residence anyhow, becoming 
the voice that Freddie could never quite manage to “throw” and bringing acclaim 
to his ventriloquist’s act. As Avrom threatens, cajoles, and kvetches Freddie into 
helping him track his prey and ready himself for the coming showdown, Freddie is 
torn between sympathy for the young victim, gratitude for his theatrical assistance, 
and resentment over the crimp Avrom is putting in his love life. But Avrom has a 
plan, and once Freddie has played his part, he will sit back and enjoy the climax in 
which Avrom brings Colonel Gerhard Junker-Strupp to justice without ever lifting a 
finger—wooden or human—against him. It takes some elasticity of imagination to 
believe that Freddie’s audiences, still reeling from the recent war, find the dybbuk’s 
onstage stories of Nazi atrocity so entertaining, and even the more light-hearted 
lines from Freddie’s schtick often fall flat. Nonetheless, this dark parable hurtles 
toward the culminating moment of vengeance, transforming the reluctant two-bit 
showman into a righteous mensch, proud at last “to play the mouthpiece. To bear 
witness.” Despite its flaws, this gritty exploration of a survivor’s impulse toward 
revenge is an unusual addition to the canon of Holocaust fiction.  EB
FlemiNg, cANdAce The Fabled Fourth Graders of Aesop Elementary School. Schwartz 
& Wade, 2007 186p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-93672-2 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-83672-5 $15.99   
Ad Gr. 3-6
Principal Struggles is, well, struggling to find a new fourth-grade teacher at Aesop 
Elementary School; it seems the reputation of the incoming fourth-grade class has 
discouraged applicants. Fortunately, the bizarre Mr. Jupiter turns up just in time, 
and, while his credentials may not seem to bear much relation to teaching (he 
previously worked as a dog groomer, an orchestra conductor, and a finder of the 
lost city of Atlantis), he is willing to take on the job. Each subsequent chapter is a 
contemporary fable, complete with moral, about Mr. Jupiter’s fourth-grade class. 
Once readers figure out the gimmick, they will enjoy trying to guess the moral of 
each story, as such familiar lessons as “Slow and steady wins the race” and “Neces-
sity is the mother of invention” are intermingled with lesser-known teachings (a 
particularly pointed chapter shows the students spending the entire month of March 
taking standardized tests and features the moral “Time is often wasted on things of 
little consequence”). Unfortunately, the intent to match the stories to the morals 
84 • The BulleTin
often takes front seat to the development of the stories themselves, so that many 
chapters are didactic rather than entertaining. There is an odd mix of realism and 
fantasy, and the characterizations of the students often strain credibility to conform 
to the point of the chapter. Still, modern-day fables are often entertaining, and 
Fleming’s creative effort deserves attention and possibly a creative-writing lesson 
wherein students attempt to write their own school fables.  HM
FliNN, Alex Beastly. HarperTeen, 2007 [320p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-087417-9 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-087416-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 6-9
Kyle is a jerk—a very good-looking, rich jerk, which is, of course, the worst kind. He 
comes by it honestly: his father is a network news personality with a deep disdain for 
ugly people and an indifferent attitude toward his son. When Kyle uses his charm 
and good looks to humiliate (or so he thinks) a mysterious girl at a school dance, 
he finds himself transformed into a hideous beast, and he begins a two-year road 
to redemption. His father sequesters him in a lavish townhouse with a maid and 
a blind tutor, and from this posh prison he must somehow find a girl to love and 
be loved by in return in order to break the spell. Flinn stays so close to traditional 
“Beauty and the Beast” tales that her version becomes almost disappointing in its 
predictability, and the characterizations are similarly mundane. With a nod toward 
her contemporary setting, however, she does introduce the internet as Kyle tries 
unsuccessfully to find a girl on Myspace and joins an online chat group peopled by, 
among others, a mermaid who wants to become human and a frog who’s looking 
for a princess to kiss (and has some trouble typing with his webbed feet), all talking 
about their feelings. These chats, however, are not integrated into the plot, nor is 
the origin of the group ever satisfactorily explained; readers must just accept it as 
part of the current of real magic that runs unseen through New York City. There 
is something insightful, if a bit sad, in his Beauty being the codependent daughter 
of a drug addict; after all, how else, in this day and age, would you find a girl who 
would willingly return to a father who had traded her for his own freedom? Though 
there are superior revisionings of the tale, readers may still be intrigued to see the 
beast find love in the contemporary world.  KC 
FrANkliN, emily The Other Half of Me. Delacorte, 2007 [256p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90449-0 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73445-5 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
The Fitzgerald family believes in teamwork, especially athletic teamwork, a focus 
that leaves uncoordinated, artistic sixteen-year-old Jenny feeling like an outsider 
amid her lithe and capable parents and younger siblings. Secretly, she’s convinced 
that this difference stems from genetics, since she’s the result of anonymous sperm 
donation and thus only biologically the half-sister to her bouncy brother and 
sisters. When her crush and budding new boyfriend, Tate, points her to a website 
that connects possible relatives through donation, she’s thrilled to find a half-sister, 
Alexa. Alexa’s spontaneous visit to the Fitzgeralds brings as much turmoil as joy, 
however, with Jenny soon finding that genetic connection isn’t enough to preclude 
differences and friction. Characterization tends to be more convenient than credible 
(especially in Jenny’s perfect boyfriend), and the book depends on both hackneyed 
OcTOBer 2007 • 85
misunderstanding and retroactive recasting of events in order to further the plot 
and its resolution. Beneath those problems, though, lies an interesting treatment 
not only of identity (the book doesn’t offer Alexa as a solution, but it acknowledges 
the connection she and Jenny share) but also of the limitations of adults’ purported 
candor (Jenny astutely notes that “there’s a difference between being honest about 
the details of my conception . . . and being open to the possibility that there are 
larger ramifications at work”). Kids who feel like outsiders in their own family for 
whatever reason will likely relate to Jenny and her yearning for acceptance.  DS
gArdNer, lyN Into the Woods; illus. by Mini Grey. Fickling, 2007 [448p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75516-2 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75115-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
This British import introduces readers to the daughters of Rapunzel and her hus-
band, Reggie, a couple too deeply in love with each other to notice the particular 
gifts of their two girls, Aurora and Storm. When Zella gives birth to her third 
daughter, she finds the experience too exhausting and so she expires, but first she 
gives a musical pipe to Storm, with the admonition to guard it well and protect her 
sisters. Shortly thereafter, a grief-consumed Reggie takes off, reminding Aurora to be 
careful on her sixteenth birthday, lest she prick her finger as per the prophecy and 
fall into an endless sleep. The almost orphaned girls soon find themselves in more 
immediate peril, as the evil Dr. DeWilde, who has been called in with his pack of 
wolves to take care of a rat problem in a nearby town, tries to get Storm’s pipe. The 
girls find themselves trapped in a gingerbread house and being fattened by drugged 
food; Aurora and Storm manage to shake off the enchantment, but their baby sister 
is taken away, and the girls must get her back. The fairy-tale references and motifs 
fly fast and thick throughout this chase-and-rescue tale, but clever usage makes them 
feel fresh, and they’re fully integrated into an original narrative that is suspenseful, 
fast-paced, and amusing. Mini Grey’s broad-lined illustrations punch up story 
details and add humor. Readers mourning the end of the Lemony Snicket series 
will find pleasure here, especially since the baby, Any, bears a strong resemblance 
to Snicket’s Sunny. Since this book takes its knowing humor into a more original 
and warmly funny place, it may have even broader readerly appeal.  KC 
gAuthier, gAil A Girl, a Boy, and a Monster Cat; illus. by Joe Cepeda. Putnam, 
2007 85p
ISBN 978-0-399-24689-0 $14.99   
Ad Gr. 2-4
Three days a week, Brandon is stuck at the house of his bossy classmate Hannah 
Dufrane for several hours after school. Unfortunately for Brandon, Hannah rejects 
his beloved television in favor of acting out wildly imaginative scenarios: the wild 
turkeys that live out back are dinosaurs, the neighbor’s yippy Chihuahua Bucky is 
a wolf, Buttercup the cat is a monster feline who will eat all the plants of the world 
if not stopped. As if being the sole member of the “Hannah Club” isn’t annoying 
enough, Brandon feels like the cat generally gets better parts to play in the adventures 
than he does (when, on one occasion, it seems he was cast in a fairly exciting role, 
he asks Hannah to repeat the directions, noting “I wanted to make sure I had that 
right, because I hardly ever get a part that good”). Despite his moaning, Brandon 
often finds himself enjoying the playacting; Hannah is, after all, an indomitable 
storyteller with a great imagination. There is little cohesive development or central 
86 • The BulleTin
conflict in this short novel; the chapters are presented more as episodes in the nar-
rative progression of the experience of going to Hannah’s house after school, and 
while some readers may appreciate the short, funny scenarios, others may find the 
absence of structure compromises the novel. The pacing is also somewhat uneven, 
with some stories losing their comedic effect as they drag on for several chapters. 
More than anything, Gauthier’s novel is conceptually inspiring, and it may motivate 
more than one reader to click off that remote and head into the endless possibilities 
of imaginative play. Cepeda’s cartoonish illustrations offer additional high spirits, 
catching the two kids in the middle of many a good adventure.  HM 
goiNg, k. l. The Garden of Eve. Harcourt, 2007 [240p]
ISBN 978-0-15-205986-6 $17.00
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-6
Evie’s father is deep in mourning for his recently deceased wife, so he moves his ten-
year-old daughter and himself from their Michigan home to a farm in upstate New 
York, where he will attempt to revive an orchard so unproductive that the townsfolk 
consider it to be cursed. Evie, lonely from loss and her father’s distracted neglect, 
finds two friends—Alex, who hangs around the adjacent graveyard and introduces 
himself as the boy who was buried on the day of their arrival, and Maggie, a store-
keeper whose brother once owned the orchard and was suspected of killing their 
missing older sister, Eve. With friends like Evie’s and plotlines like these, readers 
might expect a chilling middle-grades ghost story. Unfortunately, Going overplays 
her hand by stirring in another arc that involves magic seeds that grow magic trees 
that take seekers to a magic land where they might meet their dead relatives, and 
suddenly things are no longer spooky at all, just vaguely Meaningful. Still, a cleverly 
deployed twist concerning Alex’s true identity finally delivers some shivers of the 
psychological rather than preternatural variety, and children who prefer mystery 
over menace may want to join Evie on her otherworldly explorations.  EB
goNyeA, mArk Another Book about Design: Complicated Doesn’t Make It Bad; 
written and illus. by Mark Gonyea. Holt, 2007 160p
ISBN 978-0-8050-7576-2 $19.95   
Ad Gr. 3-6
Gonyea follows his first book about design (simply entitled A Book about Design, 
BCCB 6/05) with this second exploration of basic design concepts, here focusing on 
important ideas such as positive and negative space, foregrounds and backgrounds, 
and the handling of multiple design elements. The book works best visually, with 
its focused, high-contrast graphics often appearing in clever sequences that change 
only one element from spread to spread, thus demonstrating the effect of each 
individual component. Unfortunately, the text often explains poorly, even right 
from the first page’s assertion, “Just because it looks complicated doesn’t mean it 
is,” which is quite a different concept from the subtitle; the book also misapplies 
terms such as “shape” and “amount,” and some spreads make confusing assertions 
(the illustration would suggest that “circles are high” is a precept about where one 
is allowed to place them rather than a statement about their effect). This therefore 
isn’t as successful as Molly Bang’s Picture This, but young readers may still find it 
a helpful illumination on a subject that’s rarely discussed.  DS
OcTOBer 2007 • 87
greeN, tim Football Genius. HarperCollins, 2007 244p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-112272-9 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-112270-5 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 4-6
Despite being the most able quarterback on the Tigers, twelve-year-old Troy isn’t 
getting any playing time—Coach Renfro sees to it that his own son, Jamie, has a 
lock on that position. Trying to rile his rival, Troy swipes a team football from the 
backyard of his sports hero, Atlanta Falcons linebacker Seth Halloway. Jamie feigns 
indifference and mocks the losing Falcons, but Troy’s social capital may be on the 
upswing nonetheless: his single mom has just landed a job in PR with the Falcons. 
However, the first time Troy wields his all-access pass he’s in trouble; gifted with 
a savant-like ability to identify patterns in offensive plays, Troy tries to catch the 
attention of the coaching staff and save the game, but he only succeeds in getting 
himself thrown out and jeopardizing Mom’s job. After several disappointing attempts 
to prove his talent, Troy convinces the team’s owner to give him a try, saves the 
Falcons’ season, hooks Halloway up with Mom, lands himself a $10,000 per game 
slot as ball boy (signaling plays from the sideline), and of course dishes the Renfros 
their richly deserved comeuppance. This exercise in predictable wish-fulfillment runs 
on a little longer than necessary, and Troy’s de rigueur sidekicks and wise counselor 
grandfather add little overall. The premise of Troy’s prescience is appealing, though, 
and the effortless commingling of real players with fictional characters (Falcon 
Michael Vick’s high-profile dogfighting scandal is doubtless a distraction Green 
could not have anticipated) should keep middle-graders engrossed.  EB
gregory, NAN Pink; illus. by Luc Melanson. Groundwood/House of Anansi, 
2007 32p
ISBN 978-0-88899-781-4 $17.95   
R* 6-9 yrs
“Vivi is dizzy with wanting pink,” the kind of pink that marks the clothes—and, 
Vivi imagines, the lives—of a trio of popular classmates. “Wild with wanting,” 
Vivi yearns for the thoroughly pink bride doll in the window of the toy store and 
desperately saves up hard-earned pennies for its purchase, considering it to be her 
ticket to the in-group as well as an infinitely desirable item in its own right; her 
excited sharing with the popular trio, however, results in the doll’s being purchased 
literally out from under Vivi’s nose. There have been a variety of books lately about 
young girls’ love of the pink and fancy (O’Connor’s Fancy Nancy, BCCB 2/06, etc.), 
but this one is unusual both in its deft and fluid prose and in its acknowledgment 
of the underlying meaning of the fuchsia fantasy, with Vivi clearly longing for a rich 
and frilly existence that her family simply can’t afford. Nor is there an unbelievable 
solution to the problem; instead, Vivi’s father shares his own longing for fancies 
(a truck driver, he’d love to put bright colored lights all over his truck) and, after 
his daughter dances to his harmonica playing, notes that “wanting makes good 
music.” Melanson’s digitally created art suggests acrylics in its flexible opacity and 
Christine Davenier’s work in its elongated figures and offbeat color combinations. 
The illustrations faithfully display Vivi’s colorful desires as truly desirable, but 
they’re consoling in their frequent visual reminders that there is, in fact, “plenty of 
pink for everyone.” This offers youngsters a thoughtful context for their dreams of 
possibilities beyond their grasp, and their sympathy for Vivi may help them stretch 
to understanding her finding of a non-pink satisfaction.  DS
88 • The BulleTin
hAle, shANNoN Book of a Thousand Days; illus. by James Noel Smith. Blooms-
bury, 2007 [320p]
ISBN 978-1-59990-051-3 $17.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-9
Dashti, a poor, orphaned peasant girl with healing powers, is offered a choice on 
her first day as maid to Lady Saren: she can return to her life as a peasant, or she 
can agree to accompany Lady Saren on a seven-year imprisonment in a tower. 
Dazzled by the opportunity to serve one of the fabled Ancestors, Dashti chooses 
the tower, and the two women are walled up and left to their fate. Lady Saren’s 
crimes include refusing to marry the vicious and foul Lord Khasar and making a 
clandestine engagement with Khan Tegus instead. Both men visit the tower, but 
Lady Saren refuses to speak to them, ordering Dashti to impersonate her. Dashti 
is mystified, but her conversations with Khan Tegus become too enticing to give 
up, and she ends up falling in love with her mistress’ khan. After two years, the 
women manage to find a way out only to discover that Lord Khasar has laid waste 
to Lady Saren’s city, and he is advancing on Khan Tegus’. Ever enterprising and 
determined despite the inexplicable passivity of her mistress, Dashti manages to get 
them into Khan Tegus’ house as servants and eventually, through a blend of meek 
obedience and fatalistic courage, finds a way to defeat Lord Khasar and attain her 
heart’s desire. Hale handily revises the Grimm brothers’ “Maid Maleen” to create 
her own compelling story of a hard-working girl who gets what she deserves. The 
narrative is told through Dashti’s illustrated journals, where her naïve virtue is im-
mediately apparent and her wit, warmth, and good sense continue to charm readers 
as her story becomes more harrowing and suspenseful. Lord Khasar is revealed to 
be the stuff of nightmares, but Khan Tegus is straight out of a young girl’s dreams, 
so readers will be drawn to the romance as well as the adventure.  KC 
hAutmAN, pete, ed. Full House: 10 Stories about Poker. Putnam, 
2007 [176p]
ISBN 978-0-399-24528-2 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 8-10
With Hautman running the game and ten YA-lit contributors seated at the table, 
readers will justifiably expect a standard of sophistication and edginess to match 
Hautman’s gripping Denn Doyle poker saga (All-In, BCCB 9/07, etc.). What they 
get are ten entertaining but relatively mild tales that approach the game from a 
variety of angles. Plots range from Adam Stemple’s insufficiently scary yarn about a 
player who breaks up a cursed game in a haunted castle and ends up with the devil 
on his tail, to Bill Fitzhugh’s study in revenge against a player who had date-raped 
a friend of his opponents, to Will Weaver’s story of an online poker scammer who 
cheats his own grandmother to stay in the game. Several stories feature female 
protagonists, but, disappointingly, none play for the pure pleasure or thrill of it; 
Mary Logue’s heroine in particular seems oddly out of place in this collection when 
her crisis is simply deciding whether to play a royal flush against a boy she likes. 
Still, the theme should be a draw in itself, and the short-story format will have 
considerable appeal for time-strapped teens. A glossary of terms and ranking of 
poker hands are included.  EB
OcTOBer 2007 • 89
hAwkes, keviN The Wicked Big Toddlah; written and illus. by Kevin 
Hawkes. Knopf, 2007 36p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-92427-9 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-82427-2 $16.99   
R 3-6 yrs
After a gigantic baby is born to normal-sized parents in a Maine fishing village, his 
big sister chronicles his first year. The humor lies in the text’s straightfaced treatment 
of a normal rambunctious infancy contrasted with the illustrations’ depiction of the 
outrageously outsized kid’s antics. Touched with Maine dialect (“That’s a wicked 
big toddlah ya got theyah,” declares Uncle Bert), Hawkes’ understated narrative is 
effectively juxtaposed with the exaggerated art: “Uncle Bert and I even let him have 
ice cream,” for instance, pairs with the image of a child twice the size of the barn 
tossing the entire “Good Humah” truck into his mouth. There’s not a whole lot of 
plot, but there sure is a lot of fun, especially in exploring the many details of the 
tall-tale-ish illustrations (such as the fact that Toddie sleeps not with a teddy bear 
but with a live black bear in his fist or in the depiction of community members 
donning hazmat suits and bringing in a crane to change Toddie’s diaper). This has 
plenty of potential for group sharing: you could try reading it without showing 
the pictures or, alternatively, showing the pictures without reading the story, and 
ask young listeners to describe the absent element. Down Easters and outlanders 
alike will agree that Toddie is “finest kind.”  HM 
holm, JeNNiFer l. Middle School Is Worse Than Meatloaf: A Year Told through 
Stuff; illus. by Elicia Castaldi. Seo/Atheneum, 2007 124p
ISBN 978-0-689-85281-7 $12.99   
R Gr. 4-7
To-do lists, bank statements, class schedules, receipts, bills—this is the stuff of the 
days of our lives. Certainly, they tell us a lot about what is important to a year in the 
life of Ginny Davis, seventh-grader. As Ginny prepares to start her year, she makes 
back-to-school shopping lists and to-do lists, all of which are amended either by 
her or her mother as reality fails to match up with plans. Through the papers she 
collects and the occasional poems and letters that she writes, readers follow Ginny’s 
life as her mother remarries, her brother makes his mark on the police blotter and 
gets sent to military school, she has various beauty mishaps, she attends her first 
dance, etc. The papers are reproduced on the page, giving the book a scrapbook-style 
appearance, and most look completely convincing (Ginny’s handwriting on tests is 
a bit tidy for seventh grade, and she never seems to need to scratch out mistakes, 
only genuine revisions). There are clever, humorous little mysteries that repay care-
ful reading, as when advice columns clipped from magazines connect to receipts 
for recommended items that then connect to plumber’s bills, hairdresser’s itemized 
services, and even doctor’s prescriptions to repair the damage. Holm manages to craft 
a genuine plot and character arc from the bits and pieces, as Ginny makes mistakes, 
learns from them, and mourns and adjusts to changes in her family. Readers will 
be inspired to keep their own stuff to see what stories emerge.  KC 
holt, kimberly willis Piper Reed, Navy Brat; illus. by Christine Davenier. Holt, 
2007 146p
ISBN 978-0-8050-8197-8 $14.95   
R Gr. 2-5
Spunky, sarcastic fourth-grader Piper Reed is a service kid, and she has already 
lived in San Diego, Texas, Guam, Mississippi, and New Hampshire. Now her 
90 • The BulleTin
father’s assignment to a base in Pensacola, Florida, means the family must move 
again. Like her two sisters (melodramatic Tori, older sister, and Sam the prodigy, 
younger sister), Piper has mixed feelings about this move: the family has never 
before moved in the middle of a school year, and she is sad to leave her group of 
friends, the Gypsy Club, and Kip, the German shepherd who lives next door. In 
Piper, Holt introduces a likable new series protagonist; Piper is full of energy and 
ideas that serve to both help and hamper her as she gets settled into her new life 
in Florida. This first entry focuses on the cross-country move and the family’s first 
days in their new, much smaller townhouse, concluding by seeing Piper and her 
siblings through their start at a new school. The relationships among the three 
siblings are believably portrayed, with the girls complaining about one another and 
yet, in a pinch, supporting one another. Davenier’s energetic monochromatic line-
and-watercolor illustrations have a lively, informal fluidity well suited to the bouncy 
characters. Expect this to circulate well among middle-graders with a penchant for 
entertaining, witty protagonists.  HM
humphreys, chris Vendetta. Knopf, 2007 [336p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-93293-9 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-83293-2 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-9
In this sequel to The Fetch (BCCB 10/06), Sky is on his own, searching for a way 
to defeat his treacherous grandfather whose spirit has taken up residence in the 
body of Sky’s favorite cousin. To aid in his quest, Sky heads to his ancestral home, 
Corsica, where he hopes to learn secrets about how to control and call at will his 
fetch, or incorporeal self. Much of this novel sets up action for the last volume in 
the trilogy, with Sky learning both how to kill and heal while also seeking to resolve 
a horrific centuries-old vendetta involving his family. He uses the best of what he 
learns to save his cousin, though his grandfather is still at large and he’s priming 
for an epic battle. Sky, pitiably cursed with terrible familial role models and little 
guidance, is determined, clever, and preternaturally wise. Unfortunately, the earlier 
novel’s gripping side stories wherein he embodied his ancestors are mostly replaced 
here by languidly paced musings on family responsibility and fated behaviors. In 
addition, the time Sky spends in Corsica sorting out old fights is frustratingly long, 
and readers impatient to see him exorcise his grandfather and rescue his cousin will 
not find relief until mere pages from the end. There are far too many unanswered 
questions from the earlier novel for this to work as a standalone, but existing fans 
may find Humphrey’s consistent and effective balance of horror, historical fiction, 
and fantasy sufficiently compelling to balance the shortcomings. An author’s note 
helps curious readers sort out the true elements of the Corsican history.  AS 
JohNsoN, mAureeN Girl at Sea. HarperTeen, 2007 323p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-054145-3 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-054144-6 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Clio is dismayed to learn that instead of spending her summer trying to nab her 
first kiss from the cute guy who works at the art store, she’s going to Italy with her 
father on some sort of mystery cruise. Even a sumptuous yacht can be a prison, 
apparently, when you’re seventeen, you have no choice, and your dad assigns you 
the job of cook. She’s even crankier when she discovers that the archeologist with 
whom her dad has staged the trip is his new girlfriend. Stuck on board with her 
OcTOBer 2007 • 91
father, his new girlfriend, the girlfriend’s very beautiful daughter, Elsa, an old 
friend of her father’s, and an arrogant college-aged research assistant named Aidan 
(read: potential love interest), she decides to be a brat rather than make the best of 
things. To draw out the suspense on what is ultimately a light summer romance 
novel, Johnson has Clio’s dad cloak the voyage in mystery; Clio has to spy, rant, 
rave, escape, and have a near-death experience with jellyfish before they tell her 
that they are trying to find the Marguerite stone, a possibly mythic translation 
key named for an archeologist’s daughter and thought to be even older than the 
Rosetta Stone. Since it’s doubtful that Clio has contact with potentially jealous 
and larcenous archeologists, this secrecy seems a bit overblown. Occasionally, bits 
of Marguerite’s life story are tossed in to explain and foreshadow events when it 
is expedient to do so; as they are not well integrated into the contemporary story, 
however, it seems that an opportunity for thematic complexity was missed here. 
Instead, the romance plot and Clio’s character arc remain predictable and rather 
ho-hum. The search and recovery plot is more successful; the exotic locale and the 
enticing pull of sunken treasure make for salt-sprayed beach reading even if you’re 
far from shore. Lots of action keeps the pages turning, and Clio does land that first 
kiss, which is what most readers came for anyway.  KC
JohNstoN, toNy Bone by Bone by Bone. Brodie/Roaring Brook, 2007 [192p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-113-3 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
David likes Malcolm the very first time the two boys see each other, in 1951 when 
they’re both nine; here, he thinks, is a boy with courage, imagination, and “vin-
egar,” all of the things David feels are sadly lacking in himself. Even when David’s 
Klansman father forbids their interracial friendship, David and Malcolm are drawn 
together, until finally his father lays down his “Nigger Rule”: Malcolm and David 
can play outside all they want, but if Malcolm ever sets foot in the house, he will 
be shot. The boys are thus free to pursue their Twain-like idyll of secret pacts, cave 
explorations, and sly attempts to get a peek at the infamous taxidermized arm of 
a Confederate soldier while they do chores for his great-granddaughter. Racial 
tensions escalate, however, until the fateful day when David’s father makes good 
on his promise and sacrifices his son’s love on the altar of his despicable principles. 
Johnston’s polished prose wafts gently through the steamy environs of a hot Ten-
nessee summer in the 1950s, taking readers along on the boys’ adventures and 
throwing the ugliness of David’s father’s attitudes into sharp relief; her turn of 
phrase is exquisite and her descriptions positively tactile. She refuses, moreover, to 
make David’s father a two-dimensional villain; as often as he is harsh and bullying 
with both his son and his own mother and grandmother, who share his home, he 
is gentle and loving, quick to comfort his son through the little trials of growing 
up. In search of someone he can admire without ambiguity, however, David finds 
a person worthy of admiration in his uncle, who has left the South and his family 
largely, David suspects, because he can’t abide their ideology of hatred. The pain 
of such hate wraps itself delicately around the sweetness of the two boys, making 
for a truly moving story.  KC 
92 • The BulleTin
Judge, litA One Thousand Tracings: Healing the Wounds of World War II; written 
and illus. by Lita Judge. Hyperion, 2007 36p
ISBN 978-1-4231-0008-9 $15.99   
R Gr. 3-5
Based upon a true family story, this account in brief, lyrical vignettes describes an 
American family’s post-World War II humanitarian work of sending shoes to needy 
families overseas by matching donated shoes to paper foot-tracings sent by families 
in need. Employing the viewpoint of Judge’s mother, then a child, the passages 
themselves are simple, but they reflect the impact that the relief effort had on the 
young girl; her tone is childlike but aware, and she is most personally affected by 
the project when the family receives letters from children like her (a subplot focuses 
on her pen-pal relationship with a little girl named Eliza). Illustrations include 
both full-page watercolor portraits and photographs of artifacts (foot tracings, let-
ters, photos) and period realia (a bar of soap, a ball of yarn). The combination of 
artistic formats is initially a bit jarring, but each helps to tell the story in its own 
way. Though this is reminiscent of Fleming’s Boxes for Katje (BCCB 10/03), it’s 
interesting that this story focuses on succor for Germans, America’s erstwhile enemy, 
and it’s even more interesting that the book never mentions the former opposition 
(particularly poignant when one of the German kids runs around calling himself 
“Merikaner”) and treats the German experience as representative of Europe’s in 
general. Overall, this tale of a single relief effort speaks to the impact of even the 
smallest act of kindness in times of hardship; in all, more than three thousand pairs 
of shoes were sent to families in need of footwear. Share this with young listeners 
as a point of inspiration for performing small deeds for those in need. A detailed 
author’s note is included.  HM 
kiNg-smith, dick Hairy Hezekiah; illus. by Nick Bruel. Roaring Brook, 
2007 [96p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-318-2 $12.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-4
Life is pretty lonely for Hezekiah, who is the only Bactrian (that is, two-humped) 
camel living in his rural British zoo, so he sneaks out one night to make friends 
with the other animals and eventually finds himself on the loose in the British 
countryside. After asking the local cows for advice on a safe, open place, Hezekiah 
heads to a nearby safari park, owned by the Earl of Basin who, it so happens, has 
longed for a Bactrian camel since a memorable experience in his youth of riding 
Hezekiah’s predecessor at the zoo. The Earl takes such a shining to Hezekiah that 
he arranges to bring another camel—a female that he names Hephzibah (after the 
biblical Hezekiah’s wife)—to the park, and the two live happily ever after. King-
Smith knows how to tell an animal story, and Hezekiah is a solid character: he is 
an extremely likable camel, , if a bit ornery, and his quest for companionship is a 
believable one. King-Smith offers generous helpings of point-of-view humor, as the 
reader observes the world through Hezekiah’s eyes (including a particularly amus-
ing encounter with a public toilet). Bruel’s tidy and exaggerated line drawings add 
additional humor to the pages; the animals that Hezekiah meets in his adventures 
are particularly well drafted, each reflecting a bit of the text’s characterization. The 
short chapters, underlying humor, and amusing caricatures of the animal kingdom 
make this a strong choice either for readaloud audiences or newly independent 
readers.  HM
OcTOBer 2007 • 93
Knock, Knock!; written and illus. by Sophie Blackall, Henry Cole, and Tomie 
dePaola, et al. Dial, 2007 [34p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3152-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-8 yrs
With its short, fixed format and silly pun-chline, the knock-knock joke looms 
large in the repertoire of upstart comedians. This collection, a follow-up to the 
groan-intensive Why Did the Chicken Cross the Road? (BCCB 11/06), has plenty of 
appeal both for kids who are just learning their jokecraft and kids who’ve heard ’em 
all, as fourteen children’s book illustrators take on a gag apiece, with an opening 
page setting up the “Knock, knock!” and a page turn revealing the “Who’s there?” 
They start out easy and predictable, like Tomie dePaola’s classic “Gorilla”; “Gorilla 
who?”; “Gorill-a’ my dreams I love you!”, which opens with an interior view that 
reveals only the caller’s bowler hat in the door’s fanlight and the resident’s pink 
hair-bow peeping out over the top of the back of the armchair, then exposes the 
simian nature of the lovers on the verso illustration. The ante is upped slightly with 
the likes of Brett Helquist’s “Ima”; “Ima who?”; “Ima gonna huff, Ima gonna puff, 
and Ima gonna BLOW this house down,” which reenacts the climax of the Three 
Little Pigs. Even knock-knock connoisseurs may be surprised with Chris Raschka’s 
“Verdi”; “Verdi who?”; “Verdi Vild Tings Are” and his joyful watercolor homage to 
the Sendak classic. As each contributor (including luminaries such as Yumi Heo, 
David Small, Saxton Freymann, and Boris Kulikov) sticks to his or her signature 
style, this title can do double duty as a crash course in artist style identification. 
The closing spread presents a stylized thumbnail portrait of each gagster, a short 
list of children’s books s/he’s illustrated, and a final thought on who they’d like to 
see knocking at the door.  EB 
koNigsburg, e. l. The Mysterious Edge of the Heroic World. Seo/Atheneum, 
2007 [240p]
ISBN 978-1-4169-4972-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 6-9
In The Outcasts of 19 Schuyler Place (BCCB 3/04), readers met characters including 
attorney Loretta Bevilaqua and artist Jake Kaplan; now it’s twenty years on from 
the events in that book, and the protagonist here is their son, sixth-grader Amedeo 
Kaplan. He and his now-divorced mother have just moved to Florida, and he’s 
immediately struck by his colorful neighbor, Mrs. Zenger, an ex-opera singer and 
society belle. Soon he’s working with his schoolmate William Wilcox, who helps 
out with his mother’s estate-sale business, in cataloging Mrs. Zenger’s possessions 
for sale before she moves to a retirement community. While working through her 
belongings, Amedeo happens on a work of art that has a secret past, a past that 
involves Amedeo’s godfather, Mrs. Zenger’s husband, and the Holocaust. Konigsburg 
brings to the subject her usual high style and gift for vivid description; the book 
deftly manages to feel lavish without being verbally complicated in its description 
of Mrs. Zenger’s house and in its handling of its various, eventually interconnected 
narrative threads. Unfortunately, a pace that starts decorously, with appropriate 
languor for anything taking place in an un-airconditioned Florida house, grinds 
into talky stasis, and Amedeo never really elicits the sort of emotional attachment 
that might sustain readers through such a slowdown; consequently, the news of the 
art’s tragic provenance lacks impact. The artistic and human puzzles still possess a 
94 • The BulleTin
cool, cerebral appeal, though, and readers who enjoyed the intellectual pleasures 
of Balliett’s Chasing Vermeer (BCCB 7/04) will likely be intrigued by Amedeo’s 
discovery.  DS
krull, kAthleeN Marie Curie; illus. by Boris Kulikov. Viking, 
2007 [128p] (Giants of Science)
ISBN 978-0-670-05894-5 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
Two-time Nobel Prize winner Marie Curie, who with husband Pierre isolated the 
elements radium and polonium and, for better or worse, jump-started the atomic 
age, is the latest subject in the Giants of Science series. The intensely private and 
emotionally distant Curie seems to have subdued, if not entirely cowed, some of 
Krull’s customary biographical élan, for although the tone of the presentation is 
chatty and the pacing brisk, the author’s catty commentary and eye for absurdity 
are not as evident as in earlier volumes. And it’s certainly not that Curie provides 
no scuttlebutt-worthy peculiarities—Carla McClafferty’s recent Something Out of 
Nothing (BCCB 5/06) highlighted plenty of personal detail, and Krull herself has 
some pointed remarks on widow Curie’s fling with fellow scientist Paul Langevin. 
Krull does gain ground, though, in her careful description of the actual work that 
the Curies were doing in their ill-heated shed, laboriously reducing thousands of 
pounds of donated pitchblende to extract and purify minute amounts of radioactive 
matter. She also gives a touching account of the Curies’ unusual romance, conducted 
literally in the glow of their deadly obsession. While this may not have quite the 
sparkle of Isaac Newton (BCCB 5/06), Krull still has a knack for demonstrating 
that even the most brilliant minds put their lab coats on one sleeve at a time, and 
with her inclusion of print and internet resources (with children’s material noted) 
and index, report writers and biography fans should be equally satisfied.  EB
lester, heleN The Sheep in Wolf’s Clothing; illus. by Lynn Munsinger. Lorraine/
Houghton, 2007 32p
ISBN 978-0-618-86844-5 $16.00   
Ad Gr. 2-4
Ewetopia the sheep constantly seeks the attention of others by dressing in outra-
geous outfits, but it never works; none of the other sheep even notice. When she 
is invited to a costume ball, she decides that this is her big chance to dazzle them 
all; after trying on fifty-eight outfits, she finally settles on a wolf costume. Things 
get a bit hairy, however, when a real wolf dressed as a sheep arrives at the ball and 
thinks that Ewetopia is his mother. Fortunately, Ewetopia catches on to what is 
happening and tricks the wolf into leaving by laying into him with a list of ma-
ternal demands (take a bath, do your homework, clean your room) that send the 
wolf into a tantrum and, eventually, away from the f ê te. There is a lot of humor 
inherent in the conversation between a wolf and sheep each dressed as the other, 
and the victory of the faux-motherly ewe will amuse youngsters. The story rambles 
somewhat, however, and the wordplay is sometimes forced, slowing the story down 
rather than adding wit. Munsinger’s festive watercolors are charged with energy, 
and they take clever advantage of the opportunity presented by the costume party 
(the Elvis sheep is particularly amusing). Though this doesn’t have the snappy verve 
of Lester’s Tacky the Penguin books, young readers may still appreciate the jocular 
turning of food-chain tables.  HM
OcTOBer 2007 • 95
levitiN, soNiA Strange Relations. Knopf, 2007 299p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-93751-4 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-83751-7 $15.99   
R Gr. 7-10
It is Marne’s idea to spend the summer with Aunt Chaya and her family in Hawaii; 
after all, her mother will be working hard in Paris, and her parents don’t want her 
to stay home alone when her father pulls night shifts at the hospital. Her mother 
warns her that Chaya is intense, but it isn’t until Marne finds herself in the midst 
of an observant Chasidic family that she realizes how foreign their lives are from 
anything she knows. Uncle Yitz, a rabbi, and Aunt Chaya are Lubavitchers com-
mitted to bringing Yiddishkeit, but they are strong believers in privacy who work 
hard not to embarrass or impose their way of life on Marne. Their five kids are not 
so careful, though, and Marne often feels out of place and defensive as she senses 
their disapproval for her inadvertent transgression of their many rules. Though 
religious discourse does become pretty thick as the novel progresses, the portrayal 
of this observant Jewish family and the community that clusters around them is 
judiciously handled, warts and all. Levitin takes pains to indicate that Chaya has 
always been extreme no matter what her passion, making her radical orthodoxy 
part of her personality type, and Yitz and she even argue about how her intensity 
trespasses other people’s, namely Marne’s, rightful boundaries. Marne is portrayed 
as skeptical and respectful, but she slowly comes to appreciate the rhythms and 
traditions of their faith as she begins to work through her own unresolved grief 
over the loss of her little sister five years earlier and the temptations thrown at her 
by her wild best friend. The house of a rabbi, it turns out, is a good place to ask 
the big questions, to sort out who you want to be and what you believe. Readers 
asking their own questions or living in religious families themselves will welcome 
the balance of perspectives.  KC 
lewiN, ted At Gleason’s Gym; written and illus. by Ted Lewin. Porter/Roaring 
Brook, 2007 40p
ISBN 978-1-59643-231-4 $17.95   
Ad 5-8 yrs
Lewin takes his audience on a tour of the famous Brooklyn gym where such boxing 
luminaries as Muhammad Ali and Jake La Motta trained, and where hopefuls of 
all ages continue to hone their skills. This is a full sensory experience, as viewers 
not only watch the action from ringside, but they are enveloped in the shock of 
punches, the reek of sweat, and the constant din of tapping jumpropes, thudding 
gloves on focus pads, and clanging bells signaling rounds. Among Gleason’s diverse 
clientele is Sugar Boy Younan, a nine-year-old practicing for the state championship, 
whom listeners follow as he observes the technique of his elders and spars with his 
pro boxer father. To witness the relatively calm training session between senior and 
junior Younans, one would scarcely guess that sports journalists have criticized the 
father for his overly aggressive training approach, or that the pair had reportedly 
been barred from Gleason’s on several occasions for disturbing the other fighters 
with their behavior; this is therefore a problematically rosy and warts-removed 
picture for what’s ostensibly a documentary look. Lewin’s signature watercolor 
style, notable for its impeccable detail and photorealistic character rendering, is 
unusually bold and gritty here, splashed with reds and superheated pinks, slashed 
with hand lettered “bams” and “smacks” and “bzzzzzs,” and peppered with rough 
black-and-white sketches of fighters working on their moves. Newcomers to the 
96 • The BulleTin
sport may appreciate the appended glossary, but they will probably find that most 
unfamiliar terms can be readily deciphered by examining the illustrations. Although 
the text leaves Sugar Boy at Gleason’s, the penultimate page shows him girt in his 
prize belt and raising his taped hand in a “Number One” victory salute—the 2006 
bantamweight National Silver Gloves champion. Those familiar with the backstory, 
though, will realize that Lewin is introducing youngsters to the blood, sweat, and 
tears of boxing—minus the tears and blood.  EB
liNdeNbAum, piJA Mini Mia and Her Darling Uncle; written and illus. by 
Pija Lindenbaum; tr. by Elisabeth Kallick Dyssegaard. R & S Books/Farrar, 
2007 [34p]
ISBN 978-91-29-66734-9 $16.00
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-8 yrs
Tommy is the ideal uncle for Ella, known as “Mini Mia” for her love of soccer 
star Mia Hamm; he understands that a dead snake in a jar is a great present, and 
he dyes her hair a different color every day, if she wants. Now, though, her idyllic 
visit to Uncle Tommy is spoiled by his tagalong friend, Fergus, who infests all her 
activities with Tommy despite her clever sabotages, from pouring sugar all over his 
shoes to dropping the toilet paper into the full sink before he uses the bathroom. 
The story never explicitly identifies Fergus as Tommy’s boyfriend, but it’s not really 
necessary, since any interloping other is fair game for jealousy and the implica-
tion is clear to the initiated. It won’t surprise anybody that Ella eventually comes 
around (Fergus turns out to be rather a good soccer player), but Ella is so funnily 
and resolutely resentful with her dirty tricks and snarky sulking (“I don’t see Fergus 
anywhere. Perhaps he died or stepped on a nail”) that audiences will simply revel 
in the anatomical examination of a nose seriously out of joint. Lindenbaum’s lively, 
busy watercolors are touched with rosy hues, both in the people (the passing bare 
bottom in the ladies’ locker room is a pinkly plump wonder) and in the scenery, 
with Tommy’s apartment and the soccer field of Ella’s rapprochement with Fergus 
both bathed in warm light. With its echo of other jealousy stories such as Look’s 
Uncle Peter’s Amazing Chinese Wedding (BCCB 1/06), this Swedish import is a 
reminder that dethronement anxiety is a global phenomenon, but that new addi-
tions sometimes turn out to be enrichments.  DS
lipsyte, robert Yellow Flag. HarperTeen, 2007 [240p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-055708-9 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-055707-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-10
Four generations of Hildebrand men have been in auto racing, and it takes real 
strength of character to buck the family expectation of total dedication to the oval 
track. High-school junior Kyle enjoys racing, but he’s really set his sights on a musi-
cal career, and with elder brother Kris already ensconced in the driver’s seat, Kyle 
just might get his way with minimal family censure. Kris, however, suffers a serious 
concussion just as the Hildebrand team has landed a major corporate sponsorship 
that will boost them to the NASCAR Cup level, and Kyle is called upon to take 
an age waiver and substitute for Kris, just to “keep his seat warm.” Kyle, with a 
more cautious and thoughtful driving style than Kris, is clearly as talented at the 
wheel as he is at the trumpet, and with family and brass quartet pulling him in two 
different directions, he has big decisions to make. Lipsyte supplies the requisite 
OcTOBer 2007 • 97
racing action, letting readers experience the split-second strategizing that fans in 
the stands aren’t likely to note, but he also elevates the business end of racing to 
an equal level of tension and concern. Toss in a pair of rival beauties for Kyle’s af-
fection (who refer to each other and themselves with darkly comical depredation 
as the “pit bunny” and the “horn ho”), and the coming-of-age fantasy is complete: 
no matter which route Kyle chooses as he circles his possibilities under the yellow 
caution flag, the boy can’t lose.  EB
lorey, deAN Nightmare Academy. HarperCollins, 2007 [320p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-134043-7 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-134042-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-7
Thirteen-year-old Charlie feels like he is a prisoner in his own home, even though 
his parents mean well in trying to protect him and others from his odd tendency 
to have nightmares that spawn real monsters. After his recent tangle with a Class 
Three Netherstalker (an enormous spider), the Nightmare Academy steps in with 
an offer to help Charlie control his extraordinary gifts. At first, Charlie is excited 
to leave his home and learn about this other world where myriad monsters (rang-
ing from mostly harmless Gremlins to truly fearsome Class Five beasts) are barely 
kept at bay by the tireless efforts of Banishers and Nethermancers. Unfortunately, 
Charlie’s exceedingly rare talents do not go unnoticed by the Named monsters 
(who constantly seek to take over the world), and after his parents are kidnapped, 
Charlie’s early thrill at his new life is replaced by a dread of the risk that will now 
accompany him forever. With the rip-roaring monster slayings, the central role of 
fear as a way to spark magic, and a boy who is exceptional even within an unusual 
population because of a powerful gift, this novel is Men in Black meets Monsters, 
Inc. meets Harry Potter, and readers will appreciate the book’s cinematic vividness. 
However, the formulaic plot, derivative characters, and garish violence offers little 
to fantasy or horror fans ready to move beyond series fiction. Sometimes, though, 
a straightforward thrill ride is all a kid’s looking for, and the book’s fast pacing and 
memorable grossout details will fill the bill.  AS
lygA, bArry Boy Toy. Houghton, 2007 410p
ISBN 978-0-618-72393-5 $16.95   
Ad Gr. 9-12
It’s senior year, and Josh is waiting to hear about college acceptance and athletic-
scholarship offers (he’s a crackerjack designated hitter in baseball) when he hears 
disturbing news: Eve Sherman, the teacher who seduced him when he was only 
twelve, has been released from prison. Thrown into turmoil, he falls into a renewed 
friendship and perhaps more with Rachel, whom he has avoided for years (it was 
his inappropriately adult moves on her that led to the discovery of his long affair 
with his teacher), and finds himself facing emotions about the experience that he 
has long denied. The book makes it clear that this experience was hardly the early 
initiation of lighthearted salacious jokes. Josh’s narration demonstrates that instead 
the affair wound his feelings of guilt, loss, and shame so tightly around romantic and 
physical relationships that he’s put dating aside, and his story makes a credible case 
for the emotional burden of the trial and public reaction to the event being even 
more traumatic than the initial experience. The story unfolds with such slowness, 
however, that it robs events of their drama by tiring readers out before they arrive at 
pivotal moments; Josh himself, with his perfect grades and prodigious sports talent, 
98 • The BulleTin
is too idealized to be entirely credible, and the ups and downs of his relationship 
with Rachel sometimes become simply confusing. Nonetheless, readers drawn by 
the provocative subject matter may likely find themselves thinking more seriously 
about the truth behind the ribald humor.  DS
mAhy, mArgAret Maddigan’s Fantasia. McElderry, 2007 [512p]
ISBN 978-1-4169-1812-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
The bottom of Garland’s world drops out when her father is killed by a band of 
Road Rats. Her mother convinces the remaining members of their circus troupe, 
Maddigan’s Fantasia, that they must complete the task they have been contracted 
for—to travel to a distant city and bring back a new solar converter for the city of So-
lis before that city’s power grid fails. Unfortunately, the post-apocalyptic landscapes 
through which they must travel are fraught with hazard; not only are the travelers 
in danger from traveling bands of outlaws and suspicious townsfolk, but the very 
land under their feet is constantly shifting, making navigation risky and difficult. 
More peril arrives with two boys and their baby sister, who have traveled back in 
time in an attempt to change the future, and who are being pursued by two sinister 
men. Toward the end of their journey, the elder boy starts behaving erratically as he 
becomes possessed by the figure from the future that they are attempting to thwart. 
The plotline is fairly straightforward—the circus meets with some fresh menace at 
every stop, and the boys narrowly escape being captured—and Mahy’s sure hand 
at crafting multi-dimensional heroines and her usual elegant prose are certainly 
in evidence. Her alternate world lacks a centering principle, though; the nature of 
the future evil is unclear, and the fact that each town is menaced by some isolated 
greed or internal discontent makes the plot feel random, its parts disconnected 
and incoherent. Technology is a random blend of the real and the fanciful, again 
without a discernible principle that sets limits or establishes a recognizable logic, 
leaving both science fiction and fantasy fans cold. Readers looking for an intrepid, 
complex heroine, however, may enjoy their travels with Garland.  KC 
mAss, weNdy Heaven Looks a Lot Like the Mall. Little, 2007 251p
ISBN 978-0-316-05851-3 $16.99   
R Gr. 7-10
The heavenly mall is where Tessa, a high-school junior, finds herself when a head 
injury leaves her on the brink of death. As her body lies in the hospital in an in-
duced coma, Tessa’s spirit relives formative moments in her history, each centered 
on an item purchased from her local mall (Tessa’s parents work there, and she’s 
grown up as a “mall brat”). The journey reveals Tessa to have been deceptive and 
vengeful, just the sort of person who would inspire the vicious dodgeball throw 
that crashed her into the gym floor, causing her current injury, but it also portrays 
her as desperate and self-loathing, exactly the kind of girl who would believe she 
deserved to be hit by such a missile. While the underlying idea of this free-verse 
novel isn’t new (Tessa herself makes reference to “A Christmas Carol”), it takes the 
notion into some fascinating and complicated places. Even in her own narration, 
Tessa is legitimately unlikable, but the book earns sympathy for her (her mother 
really is pretty tough going) without relieving her of responsibility for her own 
behavior. It’s about time the mall got its real due in the literature of people who 
grew up in it, and Mass makes it an effective recurring motif as well as a believably 
central location in Tessa’s life. With its smoothly spun, achingly personal story, this 
will appeal to mall rats and mall haters alike.  DS
OcTOBer 2007 • 99
mAzer, ANNe Sister Magic: The Trouble with Violet; illus. by Bill Brown. Scho-
lastic, 2007 [112p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-439-87246-1 $3.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 2-3
The first in an anticipated series, this novel for early readers introduces sisters Mabel 
and Violet. Eight-year-old Mabel is organized, responsible, and presentable, and she’s 
constantly irritated by five-year-old Violet, who is pretty much just the opposite. 
As the story begins, the girls receive a package from their uncle Vartan, a relative 
who occasionally sends gifts but whom they have never met. Around the same 
time, strange things begin to happen in their family: shoelaces untie themselves, 
wallets show up in freezers, Violet claims to be hearing voices. Soon Uncle Vartan 
himself manages a visit, disconcerting the girls’ mother and departing suddenly (he 
disappears into midair, in fact); when Mabel finds out that Vartan “has magic,” she 
quickly surmises that Violet may have it, too. Mazer, familiar from her series The 
Amazing Days of Abby Hayes, lays the groundwork for a new series here, making 
clear that its central conflict lies in the fact that messy little Violet has magical powers 
and sensible Mabel has to deal with it. That’s an idea with undeniable sympathetic 
appeal, and the reading is accessible here as well. The buildup is extremely slow, 
however, and many readers, anticipating from the title a story of magical sisters, 
may abandon it long before this revelation in the final pages; Mom’s confession 
that Vartan’s magical abilities are why he’s been kept away from his nieces is neither 
surprising nor exciting. The idea of a rambunctious younger sibling with the ability 
to use magic against her serious older sib is an intriguing one, though; let’s hope 
the second book gets off to a brisker start. Final illustrations not seen.  HM 
mAzer, NormA Fox Ten Ways to Make My Sister Disappear. Levine/Scholastic, 
2007 [160p]
ISBN 978-0-439-83983-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 3-5
Ten-year-old Sprig is at dagger points with her twelve-year-old sister, Dakota; 
although they used to be close, as of late Dakota has pushed her little sister out 
of her life and taken to publicly humiliating Sprig. Add to this frustration Sprig’s 
overwhelming sadness and fear as Dad takes off for a six-week work assignment in 
Afghanistan, where he’ll be building schools in Kabul, and you’ve got one emotion-
ally saddled little girl. The short chapters of this middle-grades novel effectively 
develop the characters, emphasizing the day-to-day events of Sprig’s world and 
the way her relationship with Dakota is changing (Sprig’s resentment of Dakota’s 
older-kid power is vividly depicted). The episodes are varyingly successful, how-
ever, and the love/hate relationship between the two sibs occasionally goes beyond 
realistically variable to broadly inconsistent; the role-reversal at the end, wherein 
Sprig gives Dakota advice on making up with her best friend (“Don’t just keep your 
feelings to yourself. Other people can’t always tell what you’re feeling, especially 
if you don’t talk to them”), may be an empowering idea but its execution bogs 
down in didacticism. Struggling sibling relations are common territory for the late 
elementary/early middle-school set, however, and while this may not be the most 
graceful presentation, it will certainly be familiar.  HM
100 • The BulleTin
mccArthy, meghAN City Hawk: The Story of Pale Male; written and illus. by 
Meghan McCarthy. Wiseman/Simon, 2007 36p
ISBN 978-1-4169-3359-5 $15.99   
Ad Gr. 2-4
This is the second book (the first was Jeanette Winter’s The Tale of Pale Male, BCCB 
3/07) about the red-tailed hawk who has made his nest atop a posh Manhattan 
apartment building opposite Central Park. Where Winter’s focus was on Pale Male 
himself, McCarthy sees the bird as the center of an urban drama, and she chronicles 
the activities of the birdwatchers who excitedly observed Pale Male’s comings and 
goings. This is an enjoyable story about wildlife in the city, but it deviates fairly 
significantly from the actual events of Pale Male’s life. Readers will likely come 
away with mistaken impressions about Pale Male’s mates (Lola was not the first) 
and offspring (eggs from a previous mating successfully hatched as well), and it’s 
odd that a story so human-centered eschews discussion of the contention over the 
building’s treatment of the birds, a meaty topic left to a dense two-page author’s 
note. McCarthy’s cartoonish acrylic illustrations offer an appealingly toylike New 
York, with a multicultural cast of residents who all, including the hawks, peer out at 
the city through bulging eyes; subtle shifts in predominant color help advance the 
sense of story progression, and the hawk’s-eye views of the city provide perspectival 
interest. In addition to the author’s note, some background on Central Park and 
an extensive bibliography are included.  DS
mcmillAN, bruce How the Ladies Stopped the Wind; illus. by Gunnella. Lor-
raine/Houghton, 2007 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-618-77330-5 $16.00
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 5-8 yrs
In this second collaboration between McMillan and Gunnella (first partnered in 
The Problem with Chickens, BCCB 1/06), the ladies of a small Icelandic village at-
tempt to diminish the effect of the island’s terrific wind. Unfortunately, when they 
plant a windbreak of trees, sheep eat every sapling. When the ladies plant more 
trees, they put up a fence to protect the ones in the village, leaving the ones in the 
countryside to the protection of the cows. Inevitably, the sheep manage to eat all 
the countryside trees (the cows lose interest), but the fence keeps them away from 
the village trees; to this day, the story claims, there are no trees in the Icelandic 
countryside, but there are trees in the villages “to stop the wind.” There is a lot 
of appeal in the portrayal of a solid group of mothers and daughters (along with 
their chickens, who provide the fertilizer) working together to solve a municipal 
problem. The story suffers, however, from a rambling plot and convoluted logic: 
it is unclear how the sheep managed to get away from the cows for a day to eat the 
countryside trees, for example, and the function of the fence is somewhat fuzzy, 
as the ladies put it up and then plant trees on both sides of it. Gunnella’s rich and 
fanciful oil paintings feature a corpulent cast of Icelandic village women with full, 
round faces and patterned aprons over shapeless frocks. The striking pastoral village 
scenes offer buildings, livestock, and an array of community activities as a folksy, 
slightly overcrowded backdrop. Pair this original tale with other pourquoi tales for 
a storytime that explores why things are the way they are.  HM
OcTOBer 2007 • 101
mercer, sieNNA Switched. HarperTrophy, 2007 202p (My Sister the 
Vampire)
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-06-087113-0 $5.99   
Ad Gr. 4-6
Goth girl Ivy and perky pink-clad Olivia would seem to be polar opposites, but 
when Olivia arrives as the new girl in Ivy’s eighth-grade class, the two girls find 
each other strangely interesting. Soon the girls realize the shocking truth: they are 
identical twins. Of course, the first trick to try is changing identities, but there is 
an important difference between them that Olivia does not yet know and that Ivy 
eventually shares: Ivy was born a vampire, as were many in this town. Not only does 
Olivia take the news well, but she jumps in to help coordinate the biggest vampire 
annual party, all the while secretly hoping for some way to turn vamp and be more 
like her twin.  The bouncy, snappy pace, realistic dialogue, and enjoyable premise 
almost compensate for the formulaic, underdeveloped plot. Unfortunately, there 
are too many holes: why are the girls so unconcerned with finding out more about 
their birth parents? Why don’t they tell their adoptive parents about the other? And 
how, if vampirism seems tied to genetics, could identical twins not share the same 
fate? In addition, the hoary gimmickry of wildly different sisters switching places 
to fool friends and crushes simply cannot be made fresh again, even if one twin is 
a vampire. However, this frothy quick read, with numerous sequels on the horizon, 
fills a vampire-fiction void in middle-grade series, and it may spawn a trend of 
labeling oneself vamp or bunny, depending on one’s taste for blood.  AS
mitchell, stepheN, ad. Genies, Meanies, and Magic Rings: Three Tales from The 
Arabian Nights; illus. by Tom Pohrt. Walker, 2007 181p
ISBN 978-0-8027-9639-4 $16.95   
Ad Gr. 4-7
This anthology offers three selections from The Arabian Nights (“Ali Baba and the 
Forty Thieves,” “Abu Keer and Abu Seer,” and “Aladdin and the Magic Lamp”) 
for chapter-book readers. Readers will likely come to the book familiar with Ali 
Baba and the thieves’ hidden treasure and with Aladdin’s wish-granting experiences, 
while the complicated friendship between the good Abu Seer and the deceitful Abu 
Keer will probably be new to them. All three entries provide fairly close retellings 
of the classic stories, and the plotting of the originals carries these tales. Mitchell 
expressly intends to tell the stories “in the English of today,” but unfortunately the 
prose is flat, evincing neither historical richness nor contemporary liveliness. The 
dialogue is particularly choppy, and it often recalls comic-book speech bubbles (“Of 
course! The sorcerer is the one who’s behind all this!” Aladdin exclaims). Pohrt’s 
textured pen-and-ink drawings are scattered throughout the text, offering decorative 
vignettes and compact views of scenes and characters. While this may not be the 
most rewarding retelling of this classic work, the approachability of the text might 
be just the thing for attracting new readers. A note offers historical background on 
The Arabian Nights as well as insight into Mitchell’s changes.  HM
moore, perry Hero. Hyperion, 2007 428p
ISBN 978-1-4231-0195-6 $16.99   
R Gr. 9-12
Growing up under the shadow of troubled superhero parents (his father is disgraced 
after a supposed rescue failure, and his mother is stuck in her own power of invis-
ibility) has made Thom all the more determined to be a success. After being spotted 
using his power (he has the gift of healing himself and others) and receiving an 
102 • The BulleTin
invitation to apply to the League, Thom jumps at the chance to join and to develop 
his strengths. All candidates are sorted into teams, and Thom finds lifelong friends 
in his group of misfits: Typhoid Larry, prescient Ruth, who is decades older than any 
other aspiring heroes, and the radioactive and fiery Scarlett. The newly formed team 
is quickly put to the test when Justice, one of the most powerful out of hundreds 
of superheroes, turns against the League and tries to destroy the world. Though the 
finale is somewhat overblown even by superhero standards, that excess is balanced 
nicely by the story’s gripping plot twists and well-developed characters. In addition, 
Moore effectively tucks in Thom’s sexuality (he is gay, and he is relatively content 
with this fact) throughout the story rather than making it the focus of the novel, 
essentially normalizing this element as no more or less important in his life than his 
basketball prowess, his complicated parents, or his healing powers. With the sharp 
humor, lightning pace, and knowing inside references that also mark high-quality 
comics, this novel will translate perfectly for the comic-book crowd.  AS
moriArty, JAclyN The Spell Book of Listen Taylor (And the Secrets of the Family 
Zing). Levine/Scholastic, 2007 [496p]
ISBN 978-0-439-84678-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9 up
Amid the clutter of boxes that fills the little house where Listen Taylor and her 
father have moved in with Marbie Zing, her dad’s girlfriend, Listen finds a strange 
book. It’s a bossy little thing, with instructions for spells that must be completed 
in a certain order at a certain time, and stern warnings against turning pages pre-
maturely. Meanwhile, she’s getting to know the entire Zing family: they meet once 
a week for dinner, and then the adults disappear into the shed to discuss the Zing 
Family Secret, which somehow involves lots of high-tech surveillance equipment 
and some breaking and entering. Interwoven with Listen’s story are plot threads 
that involve Marbie’s sister, Fancy, Fancy’s daughter, Cassie, and Cassie’s second-
grade teacher, Cath Murphy, along with various tales of the pioneers of balloon 
travel. Thus the plot is a postmodern panoply more familiar to readers of adult 
fiction, as will be many of the themes. Cath is having an affair with a married 
man, for instance; Marbie is cheating on Listen’s father; and Fancy imagines that 
her husband is having an affair and contemplates the possibility of one herself. 
Despite their predilection for adultery, the adult characters are quite likable; they 
have childlike fears of rejection and hurt, as well as strong desires to please and be 
pleased. Meanwhile, things are going quite savagely for Listen in junior high; her 
friends have cast her off and she can’t seem to make new ones, a situation that she 
assiduously hides from her father and Marbie, and she can’t see, though readers 
can, that her spells are working. Because the individual stories are so diverting, 
the mystery subsides in importance until the climax, where all is explained, if not 
exactly resolved, in true postmodern form. More a complex adult family drama 
tinged with magic realism than a traditional young adult novel, this will appeal to 
sophisticated readers with an offbeat sense of humor.  KC
moser, lisA Squirrel’s World; illus. by Valeri Gorbachev. Candlewick, 
2007 [48p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-2929-8 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 1-2
This animal-themed easy reader features the interactions between hyperactive 
Squirrel and his forest neighbors Mouse, Turtle, and Rabbit. In the first chapter, 
OcTOBer 2007 • 103
Squirrel somewhat overzealously helps Mouse gather food for the winter (apples 
crash down onto poor little Mouse as Squirrel jumps on the tree branch); in the 
second, high-voltage Squirrel plays games with the sleepy, immobile Turtle. In the 
third chapter, Squirrel offers assistance to Rabbit, who is attempting to get a lily 
pad from the lake before it rains. In the final chapter, Squirrel runs about saying 
good night to all of his friends introduced in the previous chapters. To say that 
Squirrel has a lot of energy is putting it lightly; he evinces a believable squirrel-like 
frenzy with his constant motion and leaning towards repetition (“Oh boy, oh boy, 
oh boy! . . . I am going to whack, whack, whack that leaf!”). While the three patient 
friends provide Squirrel with affectionate foils. Gorbachev’s loosely hatched linework 
provides appealing informal texture to the forest clan, and his illustrations offer 
plenty of decoding clues for novices. Though a real-life encounter with Squirrel 
would doubtless be exhausting (and reading his adventures aloud will require the 
mustering of considerable energy to do him justice), early independent readers 
will revel in the abundant repetition and will certainly have “Oh boy” mastered 
by book’s end.  HM
Nix, gArth One Beastly Beast (Two Aliens, Three Inventors, Four Fantastic Tales); 
illus. by Brian Biggs. Eos/HarperCollins, 2007 158p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-084320-5 $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-084319-9 $15.99   
R Gr. 3-5
In this humorous and adventurous anthology (three stories previously published 
in Australia, and one apparently original to this collection, all subdivided into 
chapters for even easier reading), the opening story “Blackbread the Pirate” sets 
the tone for the whole collection: rodent pirates scurry out of manholes in search 
of DVDs to steal for use as earrings and prime trading supplies. The other three 
stories are similarly built on a mix of absurdity and magic with hints of realism 
thrown in, usually in the form of children who find themselves in rather abnormal 
situations but respond quite reasonably. For example, the heroine of “Serena and 
the Sea Serpent” is really just seeking some peace from her fifteen siblings, even if 
achieving it means being turned into a penguinmaid by a sea serpent (thankfully, 
a vegetarian). Each of the stories features a well-developed twist or plot curve that 
even devoted fantasy fans may not see coming (although the reliance on absent or 
distracted parents to move the plot along is a bit timeworn), and the overall result 
is a clever, fresh, and snappy collection for the middle-grades set. Biggs’ comedic, 
graphically polished black-and-white illustrations break up the text nicely, mostly 
highlighting elements of the stories worth revisiting (the description of a baby 
popping out of a banana skin in “Bill the Inventor” is made even funnier and more 
memorable with the paired illustration of Bill, already in glasses, reaching out of 
his fruity womb). Only the staunchest realistic-fiction devotees will be able to resist 
this uncomplicated yet intelligent set of stories; otherwise, this collection will be 
an easy sell across a variety of reading interests.  AS
Noyes, deborAh, ed. The Restless Dead: Ten Original Stories of the 
Supernatural. Candlewick, 2007 254p
ISBN 978-0-7636-2906-9 $16.99   
R Gr. 7-9
In this companion collection to Gothic!: Ten Original Dark Tales (BCCB 11/04), 
the murky worlds of the long dead, undead, and reluctantly dead are explored in 
ten original stories. An impressive array of fantasy and horror authors offer various 
104 • The BulleTin
takes on the deceased, from M. T. Anderson’s thoughtful, almost melancholy “The 
Gray Boy’s Work,” about a Civil War deserter haunted by his past, to Annette Curtis 
Klause’s hard-edged, modern urban tale about a girl who enacts revenge for her 
blood-drained sister by becoming a vampire killer. Primarily, however, the focus is 
on the ghosts themselves, who seem to either hang around as comfort to those left 
behind or as punishment for a wronged death. A decidedly pensive, even languid 
tone pervades most of this collection; readers who appreciate depth, ambiguity, and 
characters who dwell somewhere between good and evil will be richly rewarded. 
Brief author biographies explain the impetus for each story, often adding haunting 
details that supplement rather than simply represent each tale: Nancy Etchemendy’s 
“Honey in the Wound,” about a boy whose parents won’t let him die, becomes 
creepier after reading how her simple zombie story transformed into something 
more complex after the Terry Schiavo case. This anthology may keep readers awake 
at night, not from fear but rather a contemplation of intersections and overlaps 
among the living and dead.  AS 
peAcock, shANe Eye of the Crow: The Boy Sherlock Holmes, His First Case. Tun-
dra, 2007 [260p]
ISBN 978-0-88776-850-7 $19.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-9
A young woman is brutally murdered in a dark back street of Whitechapel; a young 
Arab is discovered with the bloody murder weapon; and thirteen-year-old Sherlock 
Holmes, who was seen speaking with the alleged killer as he was hauled into jail, 
is suspected to be his accomplice. Thus the Great Detective’s first case finds him 
fighting not only for justice but for his own life as well by attempting to reconstruct 
the crime through the eyes of its only witnesses—the crows who now race Holmes 
in seeking out the shiny objects jettisoned by slayer and victim during the deadly 
encounter. Although imaginative reconstruction of Holmes childhood has been 
the subject of literary and cinematic endeavors, Peacock’s take ranks among the 
most successful. Sherlock is very much a work in progress, showing the capacity for 
keen observation and razor-sharp reasoning readers expect, but he’s still hobbled 
by a youthful groundswell of emotion that threatens to cloud his judgment in his 
debut investigation, a character “flaw” that personal tragedy will sadly cure. No 
previous familiarity with Conan Doyle’s stories is needed to enjoy this tale, but 
those who already know Holmes will appreciate allusions to coming attractions that 
flash through the boy’s experience: a newspaper seller with a twisted lip, a hellish 
hound, a dog that fails to bark in the night, a youthful Lestrade following in the 
footsteps of his father, a group of men who share a quirky physical characteristic, 
a series of suspect households that must be eliminated to isolate a critical clue, and 
most poignantly, Sherlock’s near love interest named Irene. One can only hope for 
plenty more crime in this young man’s literary future.  EB
phillips, suzANNe Chloe Doe. Little, 2007 188p
ISBN 978-0-316-01413-7 $16.99   
R Gr. 10-12
Underage and arrested for prostitution, Chloe finds herself at the Madeleine Parker 
Hospital for “self-afflicting personalities,” a place where she is supposed to be able 
to find help and turn herself around. At first, she is resistant, refusing to follow 
the rules or open up to the psychologist in their one-on-one sessions or in group. 
As she sorts out her memories, however, especially those of her mother who chose 
OcTOBer 2007 • 105
an abusive man over her own children, she comes to terms with the raw hand she 
has been dealt and chooses to move beyond it to a better life. Chloe’s narration is 
hauntingly effective; her story is a hard one, as she recalls her love for her tough-
minded yet too vulnerable sister, her mother’s drift into despair, and the shattering 
episode that propelled her out of her home and onto the street, but her language 
is punctuated by evocative, lyrical images that are by turns hard-edged and hope-
ful. Though Anglo, she adopts Spanish as a language to hide behind, to evoke and 
yet somehow soften her existence as a puta. This plasticity in her character makes 
her eventual recovery credible; she is slowly able to find a new name for herself, a 
name that privately inspires and challenges her even as it effectively hides her past 
from the world. Readers will be drawn to her tragic story and be heartened by her 
ability to work her way through tough circumstances.  KC
pixley, mArcellA Freak. Kroupa/Farrar, 2007 [144p]
ISBN 978-0-374-32453-7 $16.00
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 7-10
Seventh-grader Miriam still loves poetry, and writing in her journal, and the oc-
casional game of Star Trek with her stuffed animals; she’s hurt that her older sister, 
Deborah, has just blossomed into a beautiful butterfly and left their shared pastimes 
and outsider status behind in favor of popularity and boys. When Artie Fisher, the 
son of old family friends, comes to stay with the family to finish out his senior year, 
Miriam is resmitten with her childhood crush and determined the two are soulmates. 
Though Artie is clearly fond of intense little preteen Miriam, it is, understandably, 
gorgeous high-school-mate Deborah with whom he starts a relationship, a direc-
tion that leaves Miriam more excluded than ever. Pixley writes with well-crafted 
intensity of a girl in an agony of perplexed exclusion, whose vicious social ostracism 
at school is dreamily recast by her parents as admirable independence that earns her 
the respect of her peers. Characterization is generally acute, especially in Artie, a 
genuinely nice guy not quite possessed of sufficient moral fiber to buck peer opinion 
head on when his schoolmates turn Miriam into the butt of their jokes. The book 
quietly allows Miriam greater strength than that, and readers will be intrigued by 
her eventual ability to make a new way for herself.  DS
porter, trAcey Billy Creekmore. Cotler/HarperCollins, 2007 305p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-077571-1 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-077570-4 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 5-8
With his mother deceased and his father gone, Billy Creekmore spends his first ten 
years in an orphanage, dreaming that one day his father will quit his wandering 
and come get him. His more immediate concern, though, is to avoid the fate of 
other orphan boys who are apprenticed out to the local glassworks, only to end up 
maimed or worse. Just when Billy is chosen to start that “career,” though, an uncle 
turns up to claim him and take him to a West Virginia coal mining town. Billy 
thrives under the care of his newfound relatives, but involvement in unionizing 
efforts turns tragic and sends Billy on the lam. Next stop is the circus and a reunion 
with an old friend from the orphanage. There, a serendipitous run-in with his father 
should signal the end of Billy’s troubles, but Dad turns out to be a low-life rascal, 
and a sadder-but-wiser Billy returns to the circus and new dreams of a career as a 
stunt rider. The details of the perils of the mining industry, the battle over union-
izing mine workers, and even the business end of turn-of-the-century circuses are 
106 • The BulleTin
vivid and historically authentic, and Billy’s narration handily crafts his personal 
trials and achievements into vivid historical anecdotes. The Dickensian aspect of 
the orphan story, with its lightning changes of fortune and profligate intervention 
of Luck, sits uncomfortably beside the realistic history, though; consequently, Billy 
himself is never entirely convincing as either a protagonist of historical fiction or 
Victorian fancy. He is, nonetheless, an engaging narrator, and his rapidly shifting 
experiences make fast-paced reading.  EB
price, chArlie Lizard People. Brodie/Roaring Brook, 2007 [192p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-190-4 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
When Ben’s mother goes off her meds, she freaks out, convinced that the Lizard 
People have infiltrated the population and seek to break into her house. Ben, 
exhausted from trying to wrangle his mother and complete his junior year, finds 
understanding comradeship with Marco, whom he meets in the hospital waiting 
room and who proves to be another teen with a mentally ill mother. In between 
Ben’s struggles with his mother, he visits Marco, listening with fascination, fear, 
and bewilderment to Marco’s story of traveling to the year 4000 and a world that 
incorporates many of Ben’s mother’s delusions as reality. But how does Marco know 
these things about Ben and his mother, and is it possible that Ben’s mother isn’t 
crazy—or that Ben is? The story of Ben’s battle is compellingly told, with poignancy 
coming from the help he’s given (a sharp neighbor keeps tabs on Mom’s drug-dealer 
boyfriend’s comings and goings, the no-nonsense social worker knows her job) as 
well as from its severe limitations. The Marco story is less successful, though: the 
accounts lack the interest of Ben’s own story and slow down the pacing, and the 
awkward and unlikely coda from the year 2027 provokes more questions than it 
answers, undercutting the story’s own strengths with its hint that Marco’s tales 
were true. This therefore isn’t as solidly provocative on the alternative approach to 
mental illness as Fuqua’s King of the Pygmies (BCCB 1/06), but it’s still an unusual 
and emotional read about a difficult situation.  DS
prose, FrANciNe Bullyville. HarperTeen, 2007 [272p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-057498-7 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-057497-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
9/11 changes Bart’s life, robbing him of his father (who had, unbeknownst to 
those outside the family, left Bart’s mother six months previously) and almost of 
his mother as well (fortunately, she stayed home that day rather than leave a sick 
Bart alone). In the aftermath, Bart reluctantly accepts a full scholarship at the lo-
cal boarding school, Bailywell, known familiarly as “Bullyville,” because it’s one 
of the few things that’s aroused his mother’s post-tragedy interest. Soon thirteen-
year-old Bart finds the school’s nickname well earned and his abuse at the hands 
of an upperclassman intolerable, but will the school’s response be as painful as the 
problem? Prose (author of After, BCCB 7/03) has crafted a skillful portrait of a 
boy as much affected by his mother’s grief as his own, and Bart’s mother-pleasing 
priorities are situationally credible. While the plot moves don’t cohere as effectively 
as they might on the express level, the thematic underpinning keeps them linked 
as Bart finds himself sharing a bereavement with his primary tormentor (which, 
realistically, provides a flashpoint rather than an occasion for bonding). Ultimately, 
OcTOBer 2007 • 107
it’s the voice of narrator Bart, questing, troubled, and utterly alone, that makes this 
story memorable, and readers will relate to his solitary struggle.  DS
resAu, lAurA Red Glass. Delacorte, 2007 [288p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90464-3 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73466-0 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Sixteen years old and afraid of everything from germs to traveling to natural disasters, 
Sophie must ward off panic attacks as she embarks on a road trip from Arizona 
to Mexico along with her foster brother Pablo, her aunt Dika, Dika’s boyfriend, 
Mr. Lorenzo, and Mr. Lorenzo’s son, Ángel. Pablo is the reason for the expedition; 
one year ago, a perilous desert crossing into the United States claimed the lives 
of seven Mexicans, including his parents, and only five-year-old Pablo, carrying 
Sophie’s stepfather’s business card in his pocket, survived. Now they’ve located his 
extended family in Mexico, and they’re traveling to his village so he can decide in 
which home he wants to stay. The cross-country journey is significant for the other 
passengers as well: Ángel risks his life to find his mother’s jewels, and maybe even 
his mother, in war-ravaged Guatemala, and Sophie, pushing her limits, risks her 
life to come to his rescue. Resau, who capably treats the topic of self-discovery in 
her first novel, What the Moon Saw (BCCB 2/07), continues along similar lines 
here, with poignant descriptions of illegal border crossings and guerrilla warfare 
providing a substantive background for the foreground story of coming into one’s 
own and joining the larger organism that is one’s family. The book is strengthened 
by a core of storytelling and intertextuality (Ángel tells personal narratives in the 
car, Sophie reads aloud from Pablo Neruda and E. E. Cummings, and each of the 
seven parts is prefaced by a passage from The Little Prince) and suspense (which 
family will Pablo choose? how will Sophie overcome her fears?). An unexpectedly 
empowering moment that has Sophie laughing in the face of a filthy washroom is 
truly liberating and uplifting, and her new fearlessness should prove bolstering for 
readers who on their way to discovering their own inner chispa, or spark.  KB
rex, AdAm Pssst!; written and illus. by Adam Rex. Harcourt, 2007 36p
ISBN 978-0-15-205817-3 $16.00   
R Gr. 2-4
A girl’s ordinary trip to the zoo gets complicated when she hears a stray whisper 
of “Pssst!” from the gorilla, who’s trying to get her attention so that he can ask her 
for a new tire for his swing. The next “Pssst!” comes from the javelina, who wants 
a trash can; then the bats want flashlights (not for themselves, but for the hippo 
sharing their cave), the penguins want some nice colorful paint to brighten up their 
monochromatic world, the upside-down-hanging sloths want bicycle helmets, and 
so on. The little girl heroically delivers, but when she takes off for an outing at the 
circus, a “Pssst!” from the elephant suggests the cycle’s going to start all over again. 
This is more a series of humorous vignettes than a well-turned story, but those 
vignettes are pretty darned funny: there’s a comic-book flavor throughout, with 
the exchanges between zoo visitor and animal unfolding in six-panel sequences 
punctuated with wry dialogue in speech balloons. Thick, modeled oil figures, such 
as that of our protagonist, contrast with the provisional-seeming line drawings of 
backgrounds and secondary elements, a differentiation that enhances the “walking 
through a fantasy” feeling. Viewers will find it worthwhile to comb through those 
backgrounds for random jokes in both image (the rhinoceros roams the zoo grounds 
108 • The BulleTin
in a rhinoceros-sized hamster ball) and text (the camels live in the “Camel-lot,” 
with one of those ubiquitous zoo directional signs offering a choice between “1 
hump” “or 2”). This will be an amusing fictional zoo visit for those kids now well 
past Rathmann’s Good Night, Gorilla (BCCB 5/94).  DS
riverA, rAquel, ad. Arctic Adventures: Tales from the Lives of Inuit Artists; illus. 
by Jirina Marton. Groundwood/House of Anansi, 2007 [48p]
ISBN 978-0-88899-714-2 $18.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 3-5
During her research on Inuit artists, living and deceased, Rivera collected these 
four stories: Pudlo Pudlat recalls his nephew’s being stuck on an ice floe as it floated 
out to the ocean; Jessie Oonark tells of Talelayu, the goddess of the sea; Kenojuak 
Ashevak describes the life of an Inuit woman; and Lazarusie Ishulutak recollects 
his encounter with a polar bear. Most of the stories were gleaned from other writ-
ten works rather than through oral transmission, which may account for the lack 
of involvement and generally flat language. Though less successful as standalone 
stories, the four accounts do present a wealth of information on Inuit culture, both 
past and present (several of the tales offer detailed information on the gathering of 
food and the making of clothes, while others reference the impact of moderniza-
tion on the Inuit people), recalling the ins and outs of daily life and the roles and 
expectations of various members of the community. The entries could therefore 
provide young readers with an unusual window into an often-overlooked culture. 
Each story is followed by biographical information about the artist who first shared 
the tale, including a photograph and a reproduction of one of the artist’s works. 
Marton’s pastel artwork ranges from landscapes illustrating stretches of ice and sky 
to portraiture of the various characters in the stories; like the stories themselves, 
the art is inconsistent, with some compositions seeming stiff and overdrafted while 
others evocatively capture the imagery of the arctic context. A note, glossary, map, 
and list of further reading are included.  HM
root, phyllis Aunt Nancy and the Bothersome Visitors; illus. by David 
Parkins. Candlewick, 2007 58p
ISBN 978-0-7636-3074-4 $16.99   
R Gr. 2-4
Resourceful and wise Aunt Nancy has a streak of unfortunate visitors drop by 
her home in this collection of four short stories. The first two stories, previously 
published individually as picture books (Aunt Nancy and Old Man Trouble, BCCB 
3/96 and Aunt Nancy and Cousin Lazybones, BCCB 12/98), feature, respectively, 
antagonists Old Man Trouble and Cousin Lazybones; the two new tales introduce 
Old Woeful and Mister Death. True to her folkloric heritage, Aunt Nancy is a 
superb trickster, and in each of these entertaining tales, her victory is cleverly ex-
ecuted. The vivid dialogue rings with the homespun dialect of the rural setting, and 
early readers will enjoy reading the stories out loud as much as they do reading to 
themselves. Each of the four stories is preceded by a richly detailed oil and acrylic 
composition of Aunt Nancy and the featured visitor, and black ink illustrations, 
evocative of paper silhouette cutouts, are sprinkled throughout the chapters. The 
ink illustrations, though simple, are abundant in detail and expression, and the 
simplicity of design perfectly suits the humor of the stories. This will be successful 
both as a readaloud and as an early chapter book for independent readers; let’s hope 
there are more Aunt Nancy stories to come.  HM
OcTOBer 2007 • 109
rowliNg, J. k. Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows; illus. by Mary GrandPré. 
Levine/Scholastic, 2007 759p
ISBN 978-0-545-01022-1 $34.99   
R Gr. 5-10
It is with something “like a little bereavement” that readers will turn the last page 
of the Harry Potter series. Although Rowling follows the formula that has become 
familiar in the plots of the later books—an opening scene that reveals the current 
state of Voldemort’s evil plans, a farewell to Privet Drive, a sojourn at the Burrow, 
minor skirmishes, tracking down clues amidst interpersonal drama and Harry’s 
longing for love, and finally, a battle royale, followed by an explanation of events 
from Dumbledore’s point of view—everything about this book has grown up. 
Farewells are final, a wedding replaces a Quidditch match for spectacle and those 
small but important revelations that happen when wizards gather in a crowd, and 
the lessons that Harry, Ron, and Hermione have to learn take on real consequences. 
Hermione’s book-learning, in particular, proves itself battle-ready on more than one 
occasion as her proficiency in spells gives legs to her quick thinking, and the discov-
ery of the Deathly Hallows gives Harry a genuinely challenging, morally complex 
problem to work through. As with the previous books, infelicitous stylistic choices 
and overlong expository passages are forgiven in favor of meticulous plotting and 
flawless characterization; one need only picture McGonagall leading an army of 
animated school desks into battle to know that Rowling understands her characters 
deeply and perfectly.  Gone are the laugh-out-loud scenes (well, except for the one 
just cited); these have been replaced by hair’s-breadth escapes and tense moments 
that are ready for their cinematic closeups. Rowling’s careful articulation of motive 
and action ensures that readers match characters terror for terror, grief for grief. Of 
all the intense feelings the book will call forth in its readers, cheated isn’t one; it’s 
impossible not to feel satisfied when Molly Weasley turns from worrier to warrior, 
when Neville earns the sword of Gryffindor, or when Narcissa (Narcissa!) trades 
all that she has ever been for the love of her malicious son. In the end, Rowling’s 
vision doesn’t share the apocalyptic grandeur of Tolkien’s, or Lewis’, or Pullman’s; 
rather, she remains a novelist rather than a writer of epic, a chronicler of people 
rather than of straight-up heroes and villains. Her epilogue reminds readers more 
than anything else that we don’t work to save the world in order to rule it, or to 
leave it, or even, necessarily, to change it; we save the world in order to live in it, 
and to relish the peaceful, unassuming joys of friendship, families, and, on occa-
sion, a really good book.  KC
russo, mArisAbiNA A Portrait of Pia. Harcourt, 2007 221p
ISBN 978-0-15-205577-6 $17.00   
R Gr. 5-8
“Dear Mr. Venturini, You may not remember me, but I’m your daughter.” So be-
gins the first attempt of twelve-year-old Pia to contact the father who disappeared 
from her life before she was old enough to remember. Eventually, Pia does manage 
to compose a letter and send it, unbeknownst to her mother, from her New York 
apartment to her father in Italy. As Pia awaits a response, readers learn other details 
of her life: that her twenty-year-old brother Mario was recently diagnosed with 
schizophrenia, that her mom has a new boyfriend, and that her best-friendship 
with Anita seems to be fading fast. Her papà’s eventual response means that Pia 
and her mother are off to spend spring break in Italy, where Pia hopes to change 
“completely, utterly, dramatically,” and where she learns some important secrets 
110 • The BulleTin
about her family history; the story gains additional strength when it follows Pia 
back to New York where she slowly but solidly sorts through the gamut of unex-
pected information recently thrust upon her. Pia is a strong protagonist, and Russo 
capably documents her growth through the various episodes in her life. While the 
schizophrenic-brother subplot occasionally feels extraneous to the central story, it 
provides yet another way in which Pia demonstrates her growing competence and 
confidence in the face of challenges; readers will applaud her success in demonstrat-
ing forgiveness and moving forward.  HM
scott, elAiNe When Is a Planet Not a Planet?: The Story of Pluto. Clarion, 
2007 [44p] illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-618-89832-9 $17.00
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-6
The 2006 kerfuffle over stripping Pluto of its planetary status has left librarians 
scrambling to revise their collections. Enter Scott, with a child-accessible (and 
frankly, adult-accessible as well) explanation of exactly why the trouble-making 
Planet Definition Committee of the International Astronomical Union ripped the 
rug out from under everyone’s favorite planet-naming mnemonic devices. It turns 
out they had some pretty good reasons (not the least of which is that no scientific 
definition had really been established): “The IAU decided that a celestial body is 
a planet if it: 1. orbits the sun; 2. is round, or nearly round, because its gravity has 
pulled it into shape; 3. is big enough and has enough gravity to ‘clear the neighbor-
hood’ around its orbit.” Sorry, Pluto, but since you can’t elbow other bodies out 
of your orbit, you only get to be a “dwarf planet.” Kids who feel saddened or even 
resentful at the demotion can take heart from Scott’s account of another body, Ce-
res, that suffered the same fate in the nineteenth century, and from her prediction 
that the current definition may be tweaked in the future as our understanding of 
space expands. Although introductory chapters can assist readers in understand-
ing how planets have been regarded throughout Western history, impatient kids 
and science teachers can fast-forward to the main part of the book that focuses on 
Pluto itself without loss of vital information. Color photos and diagrams are both 
attractive and informative, and slightly oversized font makes the subject seem less 
daunting. An index and list of kid-level resources are included, as is a glossary that 
most unfortunately relies on the outdated definition of planet that this title seeks 
to correct.  EB
selFors, suzANNe To Catch a Mermaid; illus. by Catia Chien. Little, 
2007 246p
ISBN 978-0-316-01816-6 $14.99   
R Gr. 5-9
Twelve-year-old Boom Broom is determined to achieve glory as the Kick the Ball 
Against the Wall (KBAW) Champion of Fairweather Elementary. Focusing on 
the tournament, he can almost forget about how his family, grieving after Boom’s 
mother was sucked up in the only tornado to ever hit Fairweather Island, is falling 
apart, bills are piling up, and food is scarce. A shopping trip to the reject seafood 
bucket at the fish market yields something far more indigestible than a cheap 
dinner: Boom unknowingly brings home a merbaby in his backpack, and with 
money-making schemes percolating in his mind, he allows his infatuated younger 
sister, Mertyle, to keep it. Unfortunately, the merbaby is no Little Mermaid: the 
slimy, sharp-toothed terror wreaks havoc by granting Mertyle’s impulsive wishes 
OcTOBer 2007 • 111
and infecting her with Ick—which will be fatal if Boom can’t lift the curse. While 
Selfors allows Boom a few ponderous insights into the nature of power, love, and 
loss, the book never loses its sense of ludicrous adventure. The magic is wonder-
fully, classically unpredictable (Mertyle’s wish to be warm results in a bathroom 
jungle), the giggles are plentiful (Mertyle fakes being sick with brain farts), and the 
analogies are kid-friendly (letting out a secret is like going to the bathroom after a 
long movie). Smudgy black-and-white illustrations provide an enticing snapshot 
of the comedy to come and preface short, cliffhanger chapters that make this a 
good candidate for sharing in installments aloud or alone before bedtime, or for 
breezing through in the daylight hours. Readers will commiserate, chuckle, and 
cheer as Boom navigates his own series of unfortunate events, and the one good 
kick by Boom that shores up his family and saves the day will have readers flexing 
their own kicking foot.  KB
shANAhAN, lisA The Sweet, Terrible, Glorious Year I Truly, Completely Lost 
It. Delacorte, 2007 297p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90505-3 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73516-2 $15.99   
R Gr. 7-10
“Chucking a birkett” is Stone family slang for displaying a big emotional outburst, a 
recurring pastime of Gemma’s mother and Gemma’s sister, Debbie, who is preparing 
for her upcoming wedding. Gemma herself, like her father, tends to play her cards 
close to her chest, so it’s out of character for her to audition for a role in the school 
play, The Tempest. She’s cast as Miranda, which makes her, unfortunately, the onstage 
daughter of the hunky upperclassman actor she yearns for, and it also throws her 
into frequent proximity with Raven De Head, of the legendary troublemaking and 
layabout De Head family, with whom she begins an uneasy friendship that Raven 
clearly wishes were more. Australian author Shanahan has a nice line in humorous 
satire and oddity (Debbie’s prospective in-laws are military-mad eccentrics), but 
she’s also sympathetic to her characters even as she’s depicting their weaknesses. 
Gemma is openly struggling with what is essentially classism and realizing that she’s 
been viewing Raven through her own prejudice, but Raven’s house is indeed a scary 
place to be at times. The scene where Gemma loses it and chucks a birkett of her 
own (at Debbie’s wedding, no less) isn’t quite as effective as the rest of the book, 
but Gemma’s wound herself so tightly at this point that readers will be relieved to 
see her finally let go, and they’ll be glad that it means she’s rising above her limita-
tions to be her best self.  DS
sís, peter The Wall: Growing Up behind the Iron Curtain; written and illus. by 
Peter Sís. Foster/Farrar, 2007 [50p]
ISBN 978-0-374-34701-7 $18.00
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 5-10
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 69.
siy, AlexANdrA Sneeze!; written and illus. with photographs by Alexandra Siy and 
illus. with photomicrographs by Dennis Kunkel. Charlesbridge, 2007 45p
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-57091-653-3 $16.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-57091-654-0 $6.95   
R Gr. 3-5
Nine irritated noses spring into explosive action in this introduction to the science 
of sneezing. Siy sets up each sneeze with a black-and-white photograph of the victim 
112 • The BulleTin
(or is it more properly the perpetrator?) and a description of the culprit: e.g., the 
girl sniffing fresh hay in the stable has an allergy to pollen; the child reading in 
a cushiony armchair is surrounded by dust mites and their fecal pellets; the boys 
pillow fighting are tickled by the jagged barbs on goose down. On the page facing 
each description is a Kunkel electron micrograph of the irritant, dyed to appear at 
its luridly glamorous best against a glossy black background, and nearly guaranteed 
to provoke strong reader reaction to the suggestion that stuff such as this makes 
its way up the schnozz. After examining the possible irritants, both physical and 
chemical, Siy turns to the interplay of nervous and muscular systems that work 
in tandem to produce the actual sneeze, and then wraps up with several pages of 
fascinating back matter on sneeze miscellanea, Edison’s early film of a staged sneeze, 
information on the micrographs and their coloration, a glossary, and an annotated 
list of kid-friendly related resources on the Web.  EB
spiNelli, eileeN Where I Live; illus. by Matt Phelan. Dial, 2007 110p
ISBN 978-0-8037-3122-6 $16.99   
R Gr. 2-4
In a series of free-verse poems, narrator Diana tells readers that she loves her yellow 
house, adores her best friend, Rose, likes to write poetry, and appreciates astronomy, 
and that she has also just found out that her family is moving six hours away to live 
with her grandfather. When moving day finally arrives, Diana says her “mad-sad 
good-byes”—to her room “with the midnight blue walls,” her house with white shut-
ters, to the maple tree she helped plant, and, hardest of all, to Rose. The story ends 
happily; after attending a writing workshop in the city, Diana begins to explore her 
new neighborhood for ideas for poems, and she meets a new friend, Sam Peter Ling, 
who knows as much about astronomy as Diana does. Diana’s emotional response 
to the process is authentic and sincere; beyond the usual fear of going to a new 
place, she deeply explores how she feels about leaving the old, a place with which 
she truly identifies. The poems themselves are simple and evocative (the shortest, 
entitled “The Worst News of All,” reads “We are/ going/ to move”), with compact 
phrases lending a lyrical progression to Diana’s thoughts and feelings. The secondary 
characters are well developed, especially Diana’s younger sister Twink who, though 
lacking the emotional maturity of her older sister, is nonetheless thoughtful and 
loving. Phelan’s pencil illustrations, sprinkled heavily among the poems, capture 
the emotional weight of the different verses, echoing minute details and moments 
from the poems. Spinelli’s story offers an impetus for descriptive writing about a 
place that is important to young readers, and the genuine presentation of working 
through emotions will resonate with many.  HM
st. JohN, lAureN The White Giraffe; illus. by David Dean. Dial/Walden Media, 
2007 186p
ISBN 978-0-8037-3211-7 $16.99   
R Gr. 5-8
When Martine’s parents tragically die in a house fire, the eleven-year-old is whisked 
away from her English home and sent to live with a grandmother she did not know 
existed on a South African wildlife reserve called Sawubona. Immediately upon 
her arrival, Martine grows curious about the looming secrets surrounding her 
grandmother, the reserve, and a mystical white giraffe that is occasionally spotted 
loping through the open plains of the land. This lyrical novel follows Martine as 
she discovers and befriends the white giraffe, struggles to protect him from the 
constant threat of poachers, finds her own gift for healing, and learns of a prophecy 
OcTOBer 2007 • 113
made about her fate long before she ever knew of her family’s ties to Sawubona. 
In her first book for young readers, St. John, who herself grew up in Zimbabwe, 
has woven an intricately detailed context for Martine’s personal journey of self-
discovery. While the opening pages, detailing the fire and loss of her parents, may 
suggest a problem novel, Martine’s story is far less about her plight as an orphan 
than it is about her dealing with and moving forward despite the consequences of 
the tragedy, and the African bush provides a fascinating backdrop for this progres-
sion. Readers will find themselves enjoyably questioning whether particular story 
elements are fact or fantasy, and the broad use of genre elements—mystery, fantasy, 
adventure, realism—contribute to a tale chock full of audience appeal. Dean’s inky 
spot art introduces each chapter with miniature compositions, each encompassing a 
range of bold and acute brushstrokes, featuring details of the chapter to come. An 
author’s note provides more information on the setting and the author’s personal 
ties to the tale.  HM
stewArt, pAul  Muddle Earth; illus. by Chris Riddell. Delacorte, 
2007 [432p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90335-6 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73316-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7
In this British import from the co-authors of the Edge Chronicles (Beyond the Deep 
Woods, BCCB 9/04, etc.), high fantasy is tossed out in favor of the silliest and most 
sardonic representation of Middle Earth ever. In fact, the setting is actually Muddle 
Earth, where all of the good wizards are being held captive by the evil Dr. Cuddles, 
and the only remaining wizard, Randalf the Wise, knows only half a spell and is 
beleaguered by a sarcastic budgie sidekick who takes any opportunity to remind him 
of his faults. Enter Joe, an average boy, and his faithful dog, Henry, whom Randalf 
mistakenly summons to be their warrior hero. Once they get boy sorted from dog, 
there is much for a warrior hero to do: calm the ogre who is acting out because 
of his grief over his missing snuggly-wuggly, rescue a kidnapped queen, and, of 
course, defeat the nefarious Dr. Cuddles of Giggle Glade. Much of the fun comes 
from the seemingly random and absolutely unpredictable plot where silverware 
suddenly becomes sentient and ends up playing a key role in the adventure, and 
no one is really surprised when Brenda, a statuesque Viking warrior, appears from 
nowhere, ready to aid Joe in anything that doesn’t involve elves (her one phobia). 
Interspersed black-and-white illustrations, as cheerfully exaggerated as the rest of 
the story, add to the goofy humor. In case it all gets a bit confusing, a character list 
and intricate map (lest someone mistake the trail to the castle through the Perfumed 
Bog for the one through the Musty Mountains) will explain everything. This much 
ridiculousness is sure to displease fantasy fans who prefer their elves dignified and 
their wizards brilliant, but even they might acknowledge that this could serve as an 
accessible and completely nonthreatening introduction to the genre.  AS
storAce, pAtriciA Sugar Cane: A Caribbean Rapunzel; illus. by Raúl Colón. Jump 
at the Sun/Hyperion, 2007 48p
ISBN 978-0-7868-0791-8 $16.99   
R Gr. 2-4
This fluidly retold version of Rapunzel set in the Caribbean Islands offers a storyline 
true to the traditional tale but with the anticipated cultural alterations: the pregnant 
mother craves sugar cane, the baby is taken by a master sorceress called Madame Fate, 
114 • The BulleTin
she is locked in a tower on a beach, and the prince is a musician who hears Sugar 
Cane’s singing from the boat where he lazily floats, strumming his guitar. This is, 
however, a standout adaptation, both lush and lyrical; the characters, setting, and 
details of the story are fleshed out in rich detail. There are some engaging variations 
on the traditional tale, most notably Madame Fate’s use of spirit teachers, brought 
back from the dead, to instruct the child, which allows Sugar Cane to study guitar 
with a five-hundred-year-old Spanish gypsy, storytelling with an African griot, 
and math with an Arabian philosopher. The length of the text, which makes the 
book somewhat more congenial as a readalone than a readaloud, allows Storace to 
develop in detail many of the elements, such as the love story, that often are merely 
mentioned. Colón’s light-filled compositions emphasize the sunshine, shadows, and 
sensory elements of the island setting; the textured paper adds dimensionality to 
the softly grainy images, additionally decorated with combed striations, and the 
portraits are skillful and evocative. There is unfortunately no note, but this will be 
an excellent addition to the folktale section of any library, bringing as it does both 
multicultural interest and good storytelling.  HM
tAylor, seAN When a Monster Is Born; illus. by Nick Sharratt. Roaring Brook, 
2007 32p
ISBN 978-1-59643-254-3 $16.95   
R 4-7 yrs
Based on a Brazilian folk poem, this silly monster romp imported from Britain 
presents a flow chart of possibilities for the life cycle of a monster. Each event 
spawns two possible outcomes, one a dead end, and one a catalyst for two more 
possibilities. For instance, if you take a monster to school, he might just sit quietly, 
or he might eat the principal. “If it SITS QUIETLY, that’s that. But if it eats the 
PRINCIPAL, there are two possibilities . . . ” and so forth. The possibilities are 
preposterous and not always predictable, making for plenty of opportunities for 
raucous storytelling interaction. The friendly-looking chartreuse monster with the 
fuchsia facial protrusions and mismatched eyes has a groovy texture up close, but 
the compositions are simple enough and the colors bold enough to carry across 
the room in a readaloud. Older listeners can be encouraged to make up their own 
poems following the formula as a storytime follow up, while younger listeners can 
just give in to guaranteed giggles.  KC
tomliNsoN, heAther The Swan Maiden. Holt, 2007 292p
ISBN 978-0-8050-8275-3 $17.95   
Ad Gr. 6-8
Although sixteen-year-old Doucette wishes she could fly and learn magic like her 
swan maiden sisters, she also knows the impossibility of doing so without the 
requisite swan skin. After finding her hidden skin and realizing her parents have 
lied to her for her whole life, she rebels, leaving behind her chastelaine training 
and flying to her sorceress aunt to try and catch up to her advanced sisters. There 
Doucette is torn between duty to her parents, a passion for flying and transforma-
tion, and her love of a commoner man. The elegant and sweeping descriptions of 
the medieval French countryside dotted with wild herbs and hunky shepherds create 
a memorable setting in which Doucette decides her fate. Unfortunately, Doucette 
herself, indecisive, hesitant, and driven too much by jealousy of her older sisters, 
is not quite as remarkable as her environs; Doucette’s many challenges spread the 
plot too thin, and no path except the one to love is fully developed. Even so, as a 
romance with a true “happily ever after” ending and a bit of magic thrown in, this 
OcTOBer 2007 • 115
novel is sure to appeal to readers looking for a longer (if only loosely associated) 
version of the Swan Maiden fairy tale.  AS
vrettos, AdrieNNe mAriA Sight. McElderry, 2007 [272p]
ISBN 978-1-4169-0657-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 7-10
The murder of a boy in kindergarten has cemented the relationships of the victim’s 
classmates over the years; now juniors in high school, they still share their memories 
of the day he didn’t arrive at school and their lingering fear that his murderer, who 
was never caught, may someday return. One girl, Dylan, knows more than she’s 
telling; she has the ability to see dead children, including her own friend from 
kindergarten, to experience their final moments, and to help the police locate their 
small, violated bodies. When a new girl, Cate, comes to town, Dylan confides her 
grisly secret, happy to finally be able to share it with someone she thinks is safely 
an outsider. Unfortunately, her judgment doesn’t equal her psychic ability, as she 
misses the truth that is right in front of her. Vrettos has created a creepy scenario 
with a taut plot and a gripping climax, which in itself makes for a compelling read. 
More impressively, though, she has crafted a believable setting and characters that 
are so clearly committed to each other, so witty and likable with their insider jokes 
and deep friendships, that Cate’s desperation to be one of them and to share their 
memories is as palpable as it is strangely offputting. The fact that their secluded 
mountain community is being invaded by wealthy interlopers who seek to turn 
it into a Telluride-like retreat further enhances the teens’ sense of solidarity and 
emphasizes their conviction that they are under threat from outsiders. A tragic 
scenario ripped from the headlines forms a riveting surface to an underlying story 
of secrecy, exposure, and the strength of lasting friendship.  KC 
wild, kAte Fight Game. Chicken House, 2007 279p
ISBN 978-0-439-87175-4 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 6-10
Freedom Smith, a fifteen-year-old gypsy with a reputation as a fearsome street fighter, 
seems to be on everyone’s radar, from the bigots out to provoke him to the police who 
mistrust the travelers. But two men—Darcus Knight, a desiccated old villain who’s 
the latest owner of a vicious fighting ring that’s been operating for centuries; and 
Wren, an operative of Phoenix, a top secret group of crime fighters who investigate 
“the incredible and the unbelievable”—take a particular, potentially lethal interest 
in Freedom. Both men know that Freedom carries the rare “Hercules gene” from a 
distant ancestor; Knight wants to harness it to improve the breed of his fighters, and 
Wren wants Freedom to infiltrate and help shut down Knight’s illicit organization. 
Blackmailed by Wren into joining “the game,” Freedom is aided in his end of the 
investigation by lovely (and, needless to say, plucky) Java Sparrow, who is searching 
for her karate-champion brother; together they uncover the dastardly machinations 
of Knight and the unspeakable horrors of his underground community of fighters 
and bred-to-fight boys who have been brainwashed and chemically enhanced to 
provide entertainment for hypocritical pillars of society with a bloodthirsty bent. 
British author Wild paints a convincing and sympathetic portrait of the travelers 
and their efforts to live peacefully with their skeptical neighbors, but her effort at 
realism takes a drubbing from the more fantastical elements of the X-Files-styled 
plot line. However, with Freedom’s background now established, a coming sequel in 
which he will have formally joined up with Wren and Phoenix is likely to gravitate 
toward the outré, promising a lively dust-up with other forces of evil.  EB
116 • The BulleTin
wilkowski, sue The Bad Luck Chair; illus. by CB Decker. Dutton, 
2007 124p
ISBN 978-0-525-47794-5 $15.99   
R Gr. 3-5
Addy is horrified when she arrives at her fourth-grade classroom one morning to 
discover that her own desk chair has been replaced with the infamous Brookside 
Elementary Bad Luck Chair, which brings bad luck to all who sit in it (a math 
brain failed a key test in it, it caused a dance prodigy to break her toe, and so on). 
When classmate Katie, younger sister to a previous chair victim, approaches Addy 
about a possible way to reverse the curse, Addy is initially wary, but she’s but soon 
deeply engaged in figuring out the cryptic solution. Wilkowski has created an 
effective genre-crossing middle-grades chapter book; there’s humor, friendship, 
and realism all mixed together with the fantasy angle of the curse reversal (which 
involves sitting on the chair on the top of the playground slide on a specific date 
while twenty-one students surround you in a circle, turn a prescribed number of 
times, and scream). A few points in the plotting that require some suspension of 
belief (most notably, how Katie’s brother came up with his complex solution and 
why Addy is the only one who can reverse the curse), but most readers will be will-
ing to suspend away in the name of outrageous fun. The book also adds food for 
thought in the development of Addy, who starts out as a shy, quiet girl and grows 
more confident through her problem-solving. Spot art is sprinkled throughout the 
text (including a rather menacing depiction of the chair itself at each chapter’s head) 
with occasional full-page compositions depicting highlights from the story. This 
will attract many late elementary readers, but it would also provide considerable 
entertainment as a classroom readaloud.  HM
wilsoN, JAcqueliNe Candyfloss; illus. by Nick Sharratt. Brodie/Roaring Brook, 
2007 [352p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-241-3 $14.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-7
“Candyfloss” is a nickname for Flora, commonly known as Floss, who bucks ma-
ternal pressure and stays behind in England with her father when her mother and 
stepfather move to Australia for half a year. Though kind and affectionate, Floss’ 
father is an impoverished café owner whose living arrangements are quite different 
from Floss’ middle-class existence at her mother and stepfather’s; the strain begins to 
tell on Floss’ friendship with snobby Rhiannon, and it’s further exacerbated when 
Floss makes overtures of friendship to studious outcast Susan. Wilson, Britain’s con-
temporary answer to Judy Blume, displays her usual knack for believably inhabiting 
a preteen: Floss’ heedless, anxious voice is authentic, and her worries—about loyalty 
to one parent over another, about losing the good graces of a magnetic friend—will 
speak to many young readers. The book is talky and slow, though, and it gains 
appeal but loses credibility by turning events into modest wish-fulfillment, with 
Floss’ tolerant teacher openly favoring Floss over Rhiannon, Susan forgiving Floss 
whenever Floss needs it, and an eventual romantic possibility for Floss’ dad solving 
all the problems. Kids drawn by the voice may not make it all the way through 
the lengthy tome, but they’ll sympathize with Floss and find her a useful proxy 
for their own anxiety and indignation. A panel sequencing Sharratt’s tidy, stylized 
cartooning opens each chapter and foreshadows the action within.  DS
OcTOBer 2007 • 117
wiNter, JoNAh The Secret World of Hildegard; illus. by Jeanette Winter. Levine/
Scholastic, 2007 [64p]
ISBN 978-0-439-50739-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 7-10 yrs
Medieval mystics being pretty much absent from the realm of children’s literature, 
a picture-book presentation of the life of twelfth-century German abbess Hildegard 
of Bingen could certainly provide a useful counterpoint to contemporary tales of 
kings, princesses, and dragon-slayers. Indeed, there is innate child-appeal in much 
about Hildegard’s story—her childhood spent in seclusion with an anchoress teacher, 
her visions, her influence over royalty and pope, her prodigious talents in the fields 
of music and natural history. Winter sprinkles his text with plenty of phrases such 
as “and, lo” and “it came to pass,” taking the tone of an evangelist rather than a 
biographer. But awe and reverence are unlikely to grip a young audience, who may 
well wish for more about the subject’s accomplishments and less about her dreams, 
particularly when Winter offers no interpretation for such passages as “And lo, she 
beheld a woman of great size, as large as a city, all clad in gold and surrounded by 
angels, and she shone with the color of a purple hyacinth. . . .”  Jeanette Winter’s 
paintings, framed in shapes that recall arched windows and church architecture, are 
at once fanciful and peaceful, as befits this holy woman, and the restrained layout 
that limits the amount of text in each double-page spread makes the somewhat 
esoteric subject matter approachable. An author’s note with supplemental informa-
tion and a brief bibliography are included.  EB
wolF, JoAN m. Someone Named Eva. Clarion, 2007 200p
ISBN 978-0-618-53579-8 $16.00   
R Gr. 4-7
In May of 1942, Nazi soldiers invaded the small village of Lidice, Czechoslovakia; 
some residents were immediately killed, some were sent to work camps, and select 
children were entered into the Lebensborn program, wherein non-Jewish, non-
German children with Aryan features were taken from their families, put through 
rigorous training, and then repatriated as German children. Wolf’s historically 
based novel follows the story of Milada, an eleven-year-old native of Lidice, and 
her terrifying experience of being separated from her family, forced to study Ger-
man language and Nazi principles, and finally placed with a high-ranking Nazi 
official’s family as their new daughter. Though the experience is quite different, 
the story delivers an impact similar to Holocaust literature; the focus here is not 
on the oppressed but the chosen, and yet it proves just as frightening a use of the 
Nazi war machine. Milada (renamed “Eva” during her training) is treated very 
well—she is provided with excellent food, new clothing, fresh air—and yet the 
psychological impact of her experience results in a riveting tale. Milada is a sym-
pathetic protagonist, and the book carefully conveys her insights and her struggle 
with identity. The plot also delivers plenty of twists and turns, and readers will find 
themselves trying to figure out what is happening to Milada right along with her; 
they’ll welcome the happy ending, wherein Milada is reunited with her mother 
after the war. An informative author’s note provides additional information about 
the Lebensborn program.  HM
118 • The BulleTin
zeviN, gAbrielle Memoirs of a Teenage Amnesiac. Farrar, 2007 271p
ISBN 978-0-374-34946-2 $17.00   
Ad Gr. 9-12
A fall down the school’s front steps results in a serious head injury for Naomi with a 
dramatic consequence: she loses her memory of the four years she’s experienced since 
she turned twelve. Estranged from the girl she used to be, who was an enthusiastic 
yearbook co-editor and the girlfriend of an amiable but shallow tennis jock, Naomi 
finds herself drawn to moody and troubled James, who is also vexed by his past. 
The amnesia premise is appealing, and Zevin is a smooth and subtle stylist, creating 
particularly interesting characters here in Naomi’s best friend and loyal co-editor, 
Will, and in Naomi’s not-as-vapid-as-he-seems boyfriend. Ultimately, though, the 
amnesia falls by the wayside and the story starts to ramble, with Naomi’s ostensibly 
hot romance with James more talky than emotionally compelling (especially in 
contrast to her complicated, affectionate relationship with Will), a weakness that 
makes Naomi’s tendency to treat other people as functionaries to enable her and 
James’ togetherness particularly unsympathetic. The memory-loss plot is therefore 
less effective than it is in Weatherly’s Kat Got Your Tongue (BCCB 7/07), but readers 
may still be intrigued by the notion of viewing one’s life freshly.  DS
OcTOBer 2007 • 119
ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons: resourCes for teAChers And LIBrArIAns
schAll, lucy Booktalks and Beyond:  Promoting Great Genre Reads to Teens. Li-
braries Unlimited, 2007 276p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-59158-466-7 $40.00
Following the organizational structure of her Teen Genre Connections (BCCB 
9/06), Schall divides this booktalking volume into seven chapters: issues, contem-
porary, adventure/survival, mystery/suspense, fantasy/science fiction/paranormal, 
history, and multiple cultures.  In a brief introduction, the author highlights the 
ways in which booktalking can assist with titles that may need pushing, and she 
offers several suggestions about the mechanics of booktalking.  What follows are 
three- to four-page segments on individual book titles (both fiction and nonfic-
tion), each segment including a summary, key themes, readaloud quotes, a brief 
booktalk, learning opportunities, and related works.  While most of the booktalks 
themselves are effective and snappy, occasionally the learning opportunities and 
related works may occasionally be a stretch for teens or librarians.  However, Schall 
is both creative and enthusiastic throughout (and her literary leaps may inspire 
librarians to make less predictable read-alike choices themselves), and she offers 
nascent booktalkers all of the tools they will need to become more confident.  This 
volume picks up where Booktalks and More: Motivating Teens to Read left off and 
focuses on newer books published between 2001 and 2006.  Although the format 
is similar and there are occasional overlaps in suggested activities or read-alikes, the 
ease of accessing the more recent titles warrants either replacing or supplementing 
the earlier reference guide.  AS
120  •  The BulleTin
Actors and acting–fiction:  Gauthier; 
Shanahan
Adoption–fiction:  Wolf
Adventure:  Alexander; Farmer; 
Mahy; Moore; Porter
Africa–fiction:  St. John
African Americans–fiction:  Curtis; 
Johnston
Afterlife–fiction:  Mass
Animals–fiction:  Baker; Caple; 
King-Smith; Lester; Moser; rex; 
St. John
Animals–stories:  Borgo; Cooper; 
McMillan
AnthoLoGieS:  hautman; 
noyes
Art:  Gonyea; Knock, Knock
Art and artists–fiction:  Konigsburg
Astronomy:  Scott
Athletes:  Lewin
Athletes–fiction:  Crutcher; Green
Auto racing–fiction:  Lipsyte
Babies–stories:  hawkes
BedtiMe BooKS:  Bean
BioGrAPhieS:  Krull; Sís; Winter
Biology:  Bishop
Birds:  McCarthy
Blacks–fiction:  Storace
Books and reading–fiction:  Caple
Boxing:  Lewin
Brain injury–fiction:  Zevin
Brothers and sisters–fiction:  Blume; 
Farmer
Bullies–fiction:  Pixley; Prose
Bullies–stories:  emberley
Caribbean–folklore:  Storace
Circuses–fiction:  Mahy
Contests–fiction:  Clements
Cows–stories:  Borgo
Crime and criminals–fiction:  Cas-
sidy; Curtis; Lyga; Peacock; vret-
tos; Wild
death–fiction:  Crutcher; down-
ham; Going; noyes; Prose; St. 
John
dinosaurs–stories:  Broach
dogs–fiction:  Abadzis
dogs–poetry:  Crawley
ePiStoLAry FiCtion:  holm
eSP–fiction:  vrettos
Ethics and values:  Abadzis; Brande; 
downham; Flinn; Judge; Konigs-
burg; Mass; Sís; Zevin
FABLeS:  Fleming
Faith:  Winter
Faith–fiction:  Brande; Levitin
Families–fiction:  Alexie; Baker; 
Cabot; Franklin; holm; hum-
phreys; Levitin; Lipsyte; Moriarty; 
Phillips; Prose; resau; russo; 
Shanahan
Families–stories:  Gregory; Linden-
baum
FAntASy:  Alexander; Cabot; 
Farmer; Flinn; Gardner; hale; 
humphreys; Lorey; Moore; nix; 
noyes; rowling; Selfors; Stewart; 
tomlinson; Wild
Fathers–fiction:  Going; Wilson
Feuds–fiction:  humphreys
FoLKLiKe tALeS:  McMillan; 
root
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. in the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
OcTOBer 2007  •  121
FoLKtALeS And FAiry tALeS:  
Flinn; Gardner; Mitchell; Storace; 
tomlinson
Food and eating–stories:  Cooper
Football–fiction:  Green
Friends–fiction:  Brande; easton; 
Johnston; Mazer, n.; Moser; 
rowling; vrettos; Wilson
Gambling–fiction:  hautman
Games–fiction:  hautman
Gays and lesbians–fiction:  Konigs-
burg; Moore
GhoSt StorieS:  Bauer
Gifts:  Judge
GrAPhiC noveLS:  Abadzis
Guilt–fiction:  Lyga
Gypsies–fiction:  Wild
hanukkah–stories:  da Costa
Health:  Siy
heroes–fiction:  Moore
hiStoriCAL FiCtion:  Abadzis; 
Curtis; Fleischman; Johnston; 
Porter; Wolf
History, world:  Judge; Sís
Holidays:  da Costa
holocaust–fiction:  Fleischman; 
Konigsburg
horror:  Lorey; noyes
huMor:  Agee; Broach; Caple; 
egan; Gauthier; hawkes; holm; 
King-Smith; Knock, Knock; Les-
ter; Mercer; Moriarty; nix; rex; 
root; Selfors; Stewart; taylor
identity–fiction:  Alexie; Cassidy; 
Franklin
insects–stories:  emberley
Jealousy–stories:  Lindenbaum
Jews–fiction:  Fleischman; Levitin
Jews–stories:  da Costa
Language–fiction:  Clements
Language arts:  Agee; Clements; 
Fleming
Latinos–fiction:  resau
Literature, English:  Peacock
Love–fiction:  downham
Magic–fiction:  Cabot; easton; 
humphreys; Mazer, A.
Mental illness–fiction:  Price; russo
Mermaids–fiction:  Selfors
Mexico–fiction:  resau
Monsters–fiction:  Lorey
Monsters–stories:  taylor
Mothers–fiction:  Price
Moving–fiction:  holt; Spinelli
MySterieS:  Johnson; Konigs-
burg; Peacock
native Americans–fiction:  Alexie
Nature study:  Bishop; McCarthy
orphans–fiction:  Porter; St. John
Parties–fiction:  Lester
Pets–stories:  Broach
Poetry:  Crawley; Spinelli
Prejudice–fiction:  Shanahan
Prostitution–fiction:  Phillips
Quests–fiction:  Farmer; Stewart
racism–fiction:  Johnston
Reading aloud:  Blume; Crawley; 
King-Smith; Mitchell; root; 
Spinelli; Storace; Wilkowski
Reading, easy:  Baker; Bauer; 
Blume; Caple; egan; Gauthier; 
holt; King-Smith; Knock, Knock; 
Lester; Mazer, A.; Mazer, n.; 
Moser; root
Reading, reluctant:  Bishop; rex
relationships–fiction:  Brande; 
downham; Flinn; Franklin; John-
son; Lyga; Zevin
Religious education:  Winter
riddLe BooKS:  Knock, Knock
romance–fiction:  Flinn; hale
royalty–fiction:  hale
SAtire:  Stewart
School–fiction:  Alexie; Clements; 
Fleming; Prose; rowling; Shana-
han; Wilkowski; Wilson
School–stories:  Gregory
Science:  Krull; Scott; Siy
SCienCe FiCtion:  Mahy
Secrets–fiction:  Cassidy; Crutcher; 
Moriarty; russo; vrettos
Short StorieS:  hautman; nix; 
noyes
Sisters–fiction:  Gardner; Mazer, 
A.; Mazer, n.; Mercer; Pixley; 
tomlinson
Slavery–fiction:  Curtis
Space travel–fiction:  Abadzis
Spiders:  Bishop
122  •  The BulleTin
urban life:  McCarthy
urban life–stories:  Bean
vampires–fiction:  Mercer
voyages and travel–fiction:  Alex-
ander; egan; Farmer; Johnson; 
Mahy; resau; russo
Weather–stories:  McMillan
Women’s studies:  Krull; Winter
World War ii:  Judge
World War ii–fiction: Fleischman; 
Wolf
Writers and writing–fiction:  Pixley
SPortS StorieS:  Crutcher; 
Green; Lewin; Lipsyte
Storytelling–fiction:  Moriarty
Storytime:  taylor
SuPernAturAL StorieS:  Go-
ing
tALL tALeS:  hawkes
teachers–fiction:  Lyga
therapy–fiction:  Phillips
time travel–fiction:  Price
treasure–fiction:  Alexander
twins–fiction:  Mercer
uncles–stories:  Lindenbaum
