I LLINO
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
Books make great gifts, but Dick-
ing the perfect books for your
favorite youngsters can be daunt-
ing. Let the expert staff of The
Bulletin of the Center for Children's
Books help you navigate the book-
store wilderness full of shiny new children's
books.
Updated and expanded from last year's edi-
tion, the Guide Book to Gift Books contains
annotations for over 225 of the best books
for giving (and receiving) and is available as a
downloadable PDF file that you can print out
and use for every holiday, birthday, or other
gift-giving occasion on your calendar this
year.
Listed books have all been recommended in
full Bulletin reviews from the last three years
and are verified as currently in print. Entries
are divided into age groups and include au-
thor, title, publisher, and the current list price.
To purchase, go to:
www.lis.uiuc.edu/giftbooks/
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
July/August 2004
Vol. 57 No. 11
A LOOK INSIDE
451 
THE BIG PICTURE
ChiefSunrise, John McGraw, and Me by Timothy Tocher
452 NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
452 * Thura's Diary: My Life in Wartime Iraq by Thura Al-Windawi; tr. by
Robin Bray
463 * Who Am I Without Him?: Short Stories about Girls and the Boys in Their
Lives by Sharon G. Flake
463 * Sidewalk Circus by Paul Fleischman; illus. by Kevin Hawkes
475 * Remember: The Journey to School Integration by Toni Morrison
489 * The Pigeon Finds a Hot Dog! written and illus. by Mo Willems
491 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
493 
ANNUAL AUTHOR AND TITLE INDEX
___
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except
August by the Publications Office of the Graduate School of Library and Information Science
(GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of
Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Timnah Card, Reviewer (TC)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Janice M. Del Negro, Reviewer (JMD)
Krista Hutley, Reviewer (KH)
Hope Morrison, Reviewer (HM)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
OFFICE STAFF
Molly Dolan
Krista Hutley
Hope Morrison
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $75.00; multiple institutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each
additional; individuals, $50.00; students, $15.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $7.50. Volumes available in microfilm from ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann
Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box
1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to the University of
Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new address.
Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, University of
Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
All inquiries about subscriptions and advertising should go to University of Illinois Press, 1325 S.
Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903, 217-333-0950; toll free 866-244-0626.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The
Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email:
bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2004 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Greg Copeland from ChiefSunrise, John McGraw, and Me ©2004. Used by
permission of Cricket Books.
JULY/AUGUST 2004 
* 451
THE BIG PICTURE
Chief Sunrise, John McGraw, and Me
by Timothy Tocher
Every teacher knows these students, and every librarian knows these patrons-the
kids who won't touch a novel unless it involves nine guys whacking and whipping
a hardball around a diamond. Fortunately, it's no great challenge to find worthy
titles to recommend, from Carl Deuker's tense contemporary morality tales (most
recently, High Heat, BCCB 6/03) to John Ritter's ought-to-be-classic historical
fiction Choosing Up Sides (6/98). Now add to the roster this fast-paced fictional
road trip with the 1919 New York Giants, perfectly pitched to summer readers
who fill their downtime from playing baseball with . . . reading baseball.
Tacitly acknowledging that middle-graders don't allow authors much
warm-up time, Tocher hurls readers right into the action. Fifteen-year-old Hank
Cobb, as he's chosen to call himself, is fed up hopping freight trains with his good-
for-nothing father, and in one life-altering moment, he seizes his chance for free-
dom and lets his old man drop from the side of a boxcar. Within minutes of that
irrevocable act Hank finds himself in the company of another rail rider, who calls
himself Chief Sunrise, "the greatest Indian to ever step on a baseball diamond,
pitching immortal in the making." Hank shares Chiefs passion for the game and,
his wariness overcome by curiosity and lack of better options, he willingly joins
Chief on his multi-state odyssey to track down Giants manager John McGraw and
hustle a slot in the lineup. Catching up with the team isn't easy, and Hank and
Chief keep body and soul together unloading trucks, running a con with a travel-
ing fair, cleaning stadium seats and working as a bouncer in the stands, until the
big break comes and Chief finds himself on the mound. He is, as predicted, a
triumph, but his reluctance to provide personal background for prying reporters
puts McGraw on alert. It takes naive Hank longer than the savvy manager to learn
that Chief is actually a black man passing as a Seminole, and by then Chief has
again changed his identity and gone off to join the newly formed Negro National
League.
Tocher creates two intriguingly ambiguous characters-a boy who doesn't
know his real name and a man who won't reveal his-and masterfully positions
them in a post-World War I America (the book includes a historical note) where
everything from the broad social order to the narrower field of sportsmanship
smacks of flimflam. As Hank patiently waits his turn for the sports section, he
leafs through newspaper stories of returning veterans who find their jobs gone and
of black citizens for whom the global battle for democracy has been rendered ludi-
crous by home-grown bigotry. In major-league baseball, public heroes privately
mistrust their managers and parlay their salary gripes into thrown games, and re-
porters fill the holes in players' vitae with any story they think will sell. Farther
452 
* THE BULLETIN
down the baseball food chain, all-girl teams like the Bloomers (with whom Hank
puts in a hilarious game as shortstop, until the pitcher loses his temper and his wig
in a small town match-up) are none too persnickety about the gender of their
ringers. And any reader who's ever swung at a change-up will appreciate Tocher's
take on the feints endemic to the game itself-the bogus signals, the stolen bases,
the stalls for time, the pitches with unfathomable trajectories. Tocher never loses
sight of the line between amusing roguery and pernicious deceit, though. Hank's
stint with the Bloomers and Chiefs shameless fleecing of shooting-gallery patrons
at a backwater carnival are broadly drawn with a wink and a grin, but there's
nothing laughable here about the racism that forces Chief to hide his identity in
order to bring his prodigious ability into a proper arena, or about Hank's father's
efforts (from his new quarters at Sing Sing) to blackmail Chief into fixing a game.
Unlikely buddies are a dime a dozen in the world of fiction, but Hank
and Chiefs story, which begins in a shadowy boxcar and ends with an uncertain
future, gains freshness and credibility from Tocher's restrained delineation of friend-
ship. In the end, readers know little more about Chief than when they first met-
save for his name (which now scarcely seems to matter), his indisputable talent, his
own rules of integrity, and his concern for Hank, which, though clearly genuine, is
realistically limited by his professional ambitions. Chief cannot haul Hank along
with him on the road to success, but he does leave him on the shoulder, facing the
right direction. That, and a season's worth of memories, is more than enough.
(Imprint information appears on p. 487.) 
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
AL-WINDAWI, THURA 
Thura's Diary: My Life in Wartime Iraq; tr. by Robin
Bray. 
Viking, 2004 
13 1p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-670-05886-6 
$15.99 
R Gr. 5-9
Thura should have been enjoying her college days preparing for a pharmacy career;
instead the nineteen-year-old was saying goodbye to friends and relatives as they
stocked their houses and made evacuation plans on the eve of the March 2003
U.S.-led invasion of Iraq. Daily activities and personal reactions over the ensuing
year are logged in a diary that, although it may have been started as a private
record, clearly transformed into a document intended for Western dissemination:
"In my culture, sacrificing a lamb in the name of God is a tradition after some-
thing good has happened to a family." Despite a few similarly pointed editorial
lapses, Thura's thoughts seem genuine and spontaneous. Although her British-
educated father owed his career to the Baathist Party, Thura has little love of Saddam
Hussein and even less for her looting countrymen. She is understandably ambiva-
lent on the subject of foreign "liberators" who seem unwilling to hand power back
to the Iraqi people. Readers are not required to sort out a political position on the
Iraqi conflict, though, to empathize with a middle-class girl's sudden descent into
JULY/AUGUST 2004 
* 
453
a maelstrom of house-shaking explosions, medical concerns within her family, and
evacuation to a country region where her family's liberal attitudes must tempo-
rarily conform to more traditional lifeways. Rationed water, intermittent electric-
ity, gasoline shortages, lack of refrigeration, long periods of housebound
confinement, and constant worry for the extended family-this is the reality of
Thura's war that will make comfortable Americans readers sit up and take notice.
EB
APPELT, KATHI 
My Father's Summers: A Daughter's Memoir. Holt,
2004 
197p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8050-7362-0 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Through emotionally charged prose poems, Appelt offers vignettes of her life as a
teen in the late '60s, most centered around the experience of missing her father,
first when he goes to the Persian Gulf to work on an oil rig, and then when he
returns home only to leave again, this time for another woman. She and her sisters
live with their mother but spend summers with their father's new family, thus
having front-row seats as they watch their father sink into alcoholic unhappiness
with his new wife, and their mother find joy and fulfillment with a capaciously
loving new husband. Most of the memories consist of one paragraph, though
some are as short as one line offered as an afterthought, and some go over two
pages. What plotting may be found is staged through the alternation between life
now and life "before," with text interspersed with black-and-white photographs of
Appelt's father, mother, and sisters in various stages of their lives together and
apart; the result is a personal family album of snapshots that focus on the emotions
underlying the events. From the select evidence that readers are given through the
terse narrative form, it would seem that Appelt's father's intermittent presence was
the defining element of all the lives he touched, powerfully dominating their choice
of hobbies, their daily routines, their core values, and their entire emotional land-
scape. Appelt's prose poetry contains some finely drawn moments, but it is in-
flected throughout with a tone of adult nostalgia that, while obviously meaningful
and therapeutic for those involved, is less engaging for those outside the family
circle. Nonetheless, this memoir may resonate with readers for whom missing
someone has become a permanent condition. KC
BALLIETT, BLUE 
Chasing Vermeer; illus. by Brett Helquist. 
Scholastic,
2004 
[2 7 2 p]
ISBN 0-439-37294-1 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 6-9
Petra and Calder had been nothing more than neighbors and sixth-grade class-
mates, but something-their shared intellectual curiosity? the designs of a super-
natural power?-brings them together as they realize they're in the middle of a
mystery. First, they're concerned about their teacher's strange behavior; then they're
intrigued by a frosty old lady who's discarded a fascinating book at the local book-
store; finally, a famous Vermeer painting, A Lady Writing, is kidnapped for a very
strange ransom-an investigation of the legitimacy of Vermeer's canon-and the
kids believe they're the ones to solve the crime. That's just the surface of a book
that couples the puzzle-loving intricacy of The Westing Game (BCCB 9/78) with
the museum-mystery compulsion (and youthful independence) of From the Mixed-
Up Files of Mrs. Basil E. Frankweiler (BCCB 2/68). Diehard puzzle solvers will
454 
* 
THE BULLETIN
appreciate the inclusion of letters in code (referred to but not decoded) and the
insertion of keys to the mystery in Helquist's humorous yet edgy black-and-white
illustrations, but those less driven to solve conundrums can ignore those entice-
ments and still follow the intricate yet energetic plot just fine. Nor is it just a
mystery: the kids find themselves examining the very notions of causality, coinci-
dence, and fate (the book they find is a title by Charles Fort, guru of strange-
coincidence philosophy), and patterns of meaning turn up so often that it seems
clear there's a some kind of extraordinary effect driving Petra's and Calder's inves-
tigation (the Lady Writing seems to be a force to be reckoned with independent of
her painting, as she drives much of the action herself). Traditional red herrings
and dead ends add classic pleasures to this less-than-traditional story, allowing for
plenty of reading pleasure by mystery fans, budding philosophers, or just those
drawn by the artistic or the unusual. DS
BARASCH, LYNNE 
Knockin 'on Wood: Starring Peg Leg Bates; written and illus. by
Lynne Barasch. 
Lee & Low, 2004 
32p
ISBN 1-58430-170-8 
$16.95 
R Gr. 2-4
Clayton Bates was born in South Carolina in 1907, the apple of his sharecropper
mother's eye and an irrepressible tap dancer from early youth. At twelve, he took
a job in the local mill as an alternative to the field work he hated, but a tragic work
accident resulted in the amputation of his left leg. The determined young man
refused to abandon his dancing, however, and with the help of an uncle who made
him a special prosthesis suitable for tap dancing, he embarked on a remarkable,
successful, and extremely long career. The streamlined text leaves some questions
unanswered, and the absence of any historical or biographical notes or source cita-
tions is, unfortunately, a major stumble in an otherwise smooth routine. Aside
from that, however, this is a compact and enlightening biography of an unusual
figure. The easygoing text quietly provides historical context enough to under-
stand Bates' world, simply explaining components from sharecropping to segrega-
tion to theatrical history (Bates' dancing took him from black theater to vaudeville
in "blackface" to performances before royalty and on television). Barasch's line-
and-watercolor art has an unforced fluidity that recalls Elisha Cooper's work; Bates
is a natty and amiable figure, whose airborne exuberance conveys his love of his art
form. This will provide a useful dance counterpoint to all those pink ballet books,
and it's also a lively and capable tribute to an American original. DS
BEAUMONT, KAREN 
ILike Myself; illus. by David Catrow. 
Harcourt, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-15-202013-6 
$16.00 
R 3-6 yrs
Self-esteem is a dish best served with a healthy dose of humor, which is what we get
in this energetic portrait of a little girl with wild curly locks who is altogether
pleased with herself. Beaumont and Catrow work as a seamless team here, with
Catrow's exuberant illustrations introducing humor at first not found in Beaumont's
occasionally bland rhyming text. For instance, when the little girl claims to like
herself inside and out, Catrow surprises us with a comic x-ray of her and her dog.
When the text takes its own silly turn, the art keeps up with consistently bright,
uncluttered compositions that fiddle with perspective and comically distort the
bodies of the girl and her bemused pup. While each turn of the page offers a
illustrative surprise that will provoke a laugh, the visual punchlines are clean, clearly
developed, and quick, so as not to impede the progressive flow of a readaloud; it
JULY/AUGUST 2004 
* 455
takes just as long to read each picture as it does to read the text that accompanies it.
The result is that rare thing: an exhortation that elicits enjoyment even as it makes
its point. KC
BOYCE, FRANK COTTRELL 
Millions. HarperCollins, 2004 
[272p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-073331-4 $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-073330-6 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 6-10
Damian is an overly thoughtful fourth-grader with an abiding interest in virtue
and in saints, who occasionally return the favor by manifesting themselves to him
(he asks them hopefully if they've run across his late mother). He's an unlikely
candidate for riches, but that's what he gets when a sports bag filled with thou-
sands of pounds (£229,370, to be exact) comes flying off a train and into his
private railside refuge. Damian's pragmatic big brother, Anthony (who blithely
extracts numerous perks from adults by strategically blurting "Our mum's dead"),
realizes that this is not only an opportunity but a challenge, since the European
Monetary Union means that these banknotes have to be spent or exchanged for
Euro in the next three weeks, because they then become valueless. This is a stun-
ningly original plot that takes the old "If I had to spend a fortune" notion and
spins it into rich, suspenseful, and humorous examination of ethics and economy,
value and values. The economic aspect is percipient as well as exciting: since the
boys have only large bills, they create rampant inflation at school by buying every-
thing at exorbitant prices from their classmates, who then become giddy with their
cash power ("Money was a craze, like yakky yo-yos or Beyblades"); the brothers
often gain more enjoyment from playing with the money itself (cash jenga is a big
hit) than with their purchases (after an expensive toy turns out to be disappoint-
ingly shoddy, Anthony declaims, "The world is crap ... We could have anything
in it but everything in it is crap"). The sinister reminder of the crooks who are
chasing after their misplaced money adds a dark urgency to the plot, but really it's
Damian's earnest, matter-of-fact narration that sets the tone. Boyce's unerring
craftsmanship allows Damian's yearning for saintly virtue to be humorous (Damian
cheerfully greets his companionable saints with their names and dates) even as it's
moving, especially in its clear expression of his otherwise stifled grief; the author
also clearly sides with Damian's view of reality, graciously vouchsafing the rest of
the cast a glimpse of a saint as well. The concept is immediately booktalkable and
the telling is riveting; a book of such wealth-of any kind-is valuable indeed.
DS
BRAMHALL, WILLIAM 
Hepcat; written and illus. by William Bramhall. 
Philomel,
2004 
32p
ISBN 0-399-23896-4 
$15.99 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Hepcat faces an empty auditorium before his sold-out jazz concert and realizes his
"vibes have vanished"; there is no music left in him. Beetles (actually beetle Beatles)
under the stage floorboard urge him to "take a sad song and make it better," so he
blows through the city (sometimes quite literally) and discovers music all around
him in the urban soundscape. He's aided by a number of fellow musicians whom,
unfortunately, most young viewers and probably many of their twenty- or thirty-
something parents won't recognize, from the hysterically caricatured Little Rich-
ard h la frog, thumping a grand piano for an appreciative audience of cattails, to
456 * THE BULLETIN
Chuck Berry hightailing it over a traffic jam in a blaze of pink tail fins and a
"Mabellene" [sic] license plate. A paunchy Elvis may be easier to spot, warming
his hands over an oil-drum fire while two blue hound dogs wail by his side, but the
yellow submarine floating by the proscenium will take some explaining for the
primary-grade set. Scratchy, hatchy lines and restrained sweeps of a dominant
monochrome watercolor across each scene are surely energetic, but the text is largely
a pastiche of forced Maynard G. Krebs jargon: "Just cruise the scene, man"; "Well,
I'll be a ding-dong daddy-o!" Let the adults have their chuckle over the illustra-
tions, then jazz up story hour with some Chris Raschka (John Coltrane's Giant
Steps, BCCB 9/02), or even Rachel Isadora's classic Ben's Trumpet. EB
BRISSON, PAT 
Beach Is to Fun: A Book of Relationships; illus. by Sachiko
Yoshikawa. 
Holt, 2004 
36p
ISBN 0-8050-7315-9 
$16.95 
R 
4-10 yrs
School's still in session at the opening of this book, but the classroom calendar is
set on June and kids' sights are set on a trip to the seaside: "School is to work/ as
beach is to fun." Apart from a few digressions, ensuing scenes feature summer
activities of a damp variety-rowing boats, splashing in pools, chasing crabs, raft-
ing, fishing, and dreaming about the beach long after the sun goes down. Each
scene is a backdrop for couplet-styled observations about relationships: "Gull is to
sky/ as shell is to sand./ Child is to family/ as finger is to hand." There are a couple
of debatable entries ("Red is to green/ as stop is to go") and one decided dud
("Toss is to catch/ as fast is to slow"), but the majority are on point and they can
even be delivered by an adult reader to invite the appropriate rhymed response.
Acrylic and pastel pictures, textured with scraps of print and rendered in fruity
sorbet colors, showcase a cast of spindly limbed moppets with wide set eyes and
heads as round as beach balls. Few teachers will 'fess up to teaching to a standard-
ized test, but if one should want to give students a little boost on the analogies
section, well... 
EB
BROWN, JACKIE 
Little Cricket. Hyperion, 2004 
252p
ISBN 0-7868-1852-2 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
The able-bodied Hmong men of Kia Vang's Laotian village have been forced to
join the North Vietnamese army; Kia's father, who seemed to have escaped the
raid, is now dead, and her grandfather, who aided the Americans against the North
Vietnamese, knows it's time to evacuate the village and head for the refugee camps
where, with any luck, they will be sent on to resettle in the United States. The
Vangs are indeed luckier than most, since their emigration is approved, but a bu-
reaucratic mix-up sends Grandfather, Kia, and her brother Xigi on ahead while
mother and grandmother await reprocessing. The journey from village to camp is
harrowing enough, with rivers to be crossed and bribes to be paid, but life in the
States is no bed of roses. Electric lights, supermarkets, heavily cosmetic'd neigh-
bors, well-meaning but aggressive church sponsors, and a daunting new language
to learn pose enormous obstacles, but the greatest challenges of all may be
grandfather's growing despondence and Xigi's quest for the American good life
that draws him away from his tiny remnant of family. The trials of resettlement
can easily carry the Vangs' story on their own, but Brown too often leaves details
underdeveloped, while exploring a related subplot involving a neighbor boy and
his pet monkey and dwelling on lessons to be learned on the value of perseverance
JULY/AUGUST 2004 * 457
and family ties. Curricular tie-ins to both the Vietnam War and immigration may
give this a broad audience, though, and turn the problem of belaboring the obvi-
ous into a mild virtue for challenged readers. EB
BROWNE, N. M. 
Basilisk. Bloomsbury, 2004 
320p
ISBN 1-58234-876-6 
$17.95 
M 
Gr. 7-12
Start with a religious reformation that forces a city-state's aristocracy literally un-
derground and keeps the rest of the population subjugated by a Stalinesque re-
gime, add a trio of dream dragons that sparks death-inducing terror in the rebel
rabble, and you have the foundation of that most elusive of creations, the original
fantasy novel. Unfortunately, a well-constructed novel requires more than imagi-
natively conceived underpinnings. Sophisticated prose and competent character
development entice the reader to the midpoint of this tale, which then sinks rap-
idly into a morass of awkward language, authorial contrivance, and predictable
revelation, wasting all the dramatic tension carefully built throughout the first half
of the story. The reader is robbed of even a sympathetic heroine or hero, since the
female primary character becomes a drugged dupe of the sadistic head torturer and
her male counterpart first ditches her in a fit of adolescent jealousy and then takes
a secondary role in her rescue. (He does manage to suck up the credit for the
derring-do after the girl's actual defender dies.) Only the dream dragons remain to
enchant the reader, and all alone they can't lift this three-hundred-page novel off
the ground. Even fantasy buffs eager for new reading material will be better off
waiting for the next hot new thing. TC
BURGESS, MELVIN 
Doing It. Holt, 2004 
32 6 p
ISBN 0-8050-7565-8 $15.95 
Ad Gr. 9-12
In his earlier book (Smack, BCCB 4/98), British author Burgess treated drugs, and
now he's on to sex (presumably rock and roll is coming next). Dino is in only
intermittently requited love and lust with Jackie, the classiest girl in school; Jonathon
is increasingly sexually attracted to his longtime friend, Deborah, but he's afraid of
the social repercussions of being involved with the school fat girl; Ben has fulfilled
every schoolboy's fantasy by becoming the secret boytoy of an attractive young
teacher, and he's finding it's not always the ecstasy he'd imagined. The book is
true to the physiologically focused viewpoint of young men and also to their flail-
ing efforts to make sense of sex's place in the world; it's also believable that the lure
and entanglements of sex lead the protagonists to behave with considerable cru-
elty. The sex is generally realistic as well; there's lots of nonconsummatory (if
exciting) grappling and ineptitude as well as actual intercourse, and there's little in
the way of euphemistic hearts and flowers to confuse the physical issue (though
some American readers may be misled by some of the British colloquialisms). The
experiences are somewhat programmatically representative, however, including
Dino's discovery of his mother's adultery (and therefore the fact that she's a sexual
being) and Jonathon's fears of penile cancer; nor do the plots aside from Dino's
relationship with Jackie ever really grow, change, or believably resolve. The girls'
viewpoints are less successfully evoked, and the world of universal heterosexuality
and sexual willingness is a bit unlikely (the rarity of condom use is, unfortunately,
more believable). None of this is going to keep this title from circulating like mad,
both illicitly and licitly, as soon as its contents are known, and those who read all
the pages will benefit from a broad and insightful perspective. DS
458 
* THE BULLETIN
CABOT, MEG 
Teen Idol. HarperCollins, 2004 
[30 4p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-009617-9 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-009616-0 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-10
Jenny Greenley knows her role in her midwestern high school: she's the mayon-
naise, as one friend says, the lubricant that keeps everybody else going together
smoothly; she's also the good girl next door, trusted by teachers and welcomed by
parents (unbeknownst to all but the editor of the school paper, she's also its pseud-
onymous and revered advice columnist). When movie star Luke Striker decides to
go undercover at her school in preparation for a role, it's naturally Jenny that the
administration takes into confidence and asks to squire the young man around.
Cabot's romance fans may expect a literally star-crossed romance, but this story
actually takes a more interesting tack: Jenny's the only one not besotted with Luke
(whose identity is discovered fairly quickly), which allows them to become friends
(don't worry, there's another boy with Jenny's name all over him right from the
start). The book also cleverly parlays Luke's outsider viewpoint into activism as he
exhorts Jenny to throw her social weight around to make some genuine changes
(ending the persecution of an unpopular girl, for instance, and resolving a cruel
prank on a teacher). Some of the elements strain credibility even within this fan-
ciful plot (Jenny's discovery that she actually likes the unpopular girl comes out of
nowhere), and the tone lacks the heady effervescence of The Princess Diaries (BCCB
12/00); on the other hand, Jenny's not a bubbly-champagne sort of girl. In addi-
tion to its enticing movie-star glamour and high-school power politics, the book
makes an important point: social roles aren't immutable. Young readers may not
truly believe that, but it may at least give them hope for the future. DS
CONNOR, LESLIE 
Miss Bridie Chose a Shovel; illus. by Mary Azarian. 
Houghton,
2004 
32p
ISBN 0-618-30564-5 
$16.00 
R 6-9 yrs
"She could have picked a chiming clock or a porcelain figurine, but Miss Bridie
chose a shovel back in 1856." Whether this was preference or prescience on Miss
Bridie's part is up to the audience, but it was a wise decision to make on the eve of
her emigration to the United States. The shovel would serve her well to supple-
ment her income as a shop clerk with flower sales from her backyard garden; to
clear the ice on the skating rink where she would meet her husband-to-be; to
perform myriad chores around their farm; in time, to plant a tree and flowers
around her husband's grave; to keep frozen ponds clear and her farm prosperous
for her grandchildren. Although listeners never know exactly where Miss Bridie
comes from (Ireland is strongly suggested) or why she left her family on their
apparently thriving farm to journey alone across the Pond, they will certainly see
that immigration and settlement required lots of manual labor and that nineteenth
century women would have to do more than churn butter and darn socks. Azarian's
woodcuts of homey agrarian scenes, in which the featured shovel is never far from
its owner's side, can practically tell the story without aid of text, and Miss Bridie's
transition from slim, iron-willed girl to thick-waisted, iron-haired matron is subtle
to the point of spread-to-spread imperceptibility. Use this to spark a discussion on
the one thing you could never live without. EB
JULY/AUGUST 2004 
* 
459
CRAATS, RENNAY 
RoaldDahl. Weigl,2004 
32p 
(My Favorite Writer) 
illus.
with photographs
ISBN 1-59036-029-X 
$24.25 
Ad 
Gr. 2-5
HOOK, JASON 
Roald Dahl: The Storyteller. Raintree, 2004 
48p 
(Famous
Lives) 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-7398-6626-5 
$18.99 
R Gr. 3-5
Dahl's riveting two-part autobiography, Boy and Going Solo, is a hard act to fol-
low, but since many of the author's fiction fans aren't quite up for the longer work
(or suspect there may be a thing or two Dahl has left out or embellished for literary
effect), there's a place for standard biographies as well. Craats offers a bare-bones
account for the My Favorite Writer series, and readers who want the fascinating
bits will find an unforgivable amount of the page count squandered on such tan-
gential matters as "The Publishing Process," pedestrian recaps of Dahl top sellers,
"Writing a Biography Review" (a euphemism for a book report), and "Fan Infor-
mation" (Craats' advice: "just type 'Roald Dahl' into a search engine such as
Google or Yahoo"). Hook has the luxury of about a dozen extra pages and makes
the most of them in an engagingly written, detail-packed presentation. Family
tragedies, Dahl's divorce, and book controversy are all handled with tact and can-
dor, and Hook is particularly adept at tracing-sans overly creative speculation-
how Dahl's life influenced recurrent themes in his novels. Each title includes an
index, glossary, and a sizable gallery of color and black-and-white photographs,
but Hook also appends a date chart and a comprehensive list of Dahl's full length
works. While either title is accessible to fans of Dahl's quirky novels, Hook's entry
should be the hands-down favorite. EB
DE HAAN, LINDA 
King &King &rFamily; written and illus. by Linda de Haan and
Stern Nijland. 
Tricycle, 2004 
32p
ISBN 1-58246-113-9 
$14.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
After their happy union in King andKing (BCCB 7/02), King Bertie and King Lee
take off for a honeymoon in the jungle; they (and the royal cat, who has accompa-
nied them) are entranced with all the animal families they see, but Bertie remains
a little nervous about the strange surroundings, convinced that someone is follow-
ing them. It looks like he was right, since upon their return, their luggage reveals
a stowaway jungle girl; fortunately, the familially inclined kings are thrilled, adopting
the happy little girl as their very own. Lee and Bertie are still two of the most
companionable kings around, and their high-spirited journey is thick with jungle
atmosphere. Unfortunately, this doesn't have the tight pacing and effective focus
of the previous text: the jungle adventures are rambling narratively as well as
geographically, and the acquisition of their daughter lacks the groundedness of the
previous book or its folkloric cousins (why, for instance, did she want to leave the
jungle, and what has she left behind there?). The illustrations are similarly scat-
tered, with the collage-and-paint illustrations allowing color to overpower compo-
sition; this disorganization makes it hard to detect the advance hints of the little
girl's existence (and those hints don't explain her actions, they simply reveal them).
The jungle world is a vivid and event-filled place, however, and the array of ani-
mals are entertaining to hunt, at least illustratively. This doesn't have sufficient
impact to stand alone, but King and King fans who want to know what happened
after happily ever after may want to travel along. DS
460 
* 
THE BULLETIN
DESSEN, SARAH 
The Truth about Forever. Viking, 2004 
374p
ISBN 0-670-03639-0 $16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Macy responds to the death of her father by erecting a fine-just-fine shield over all
of the aspects of her life that she can control-she finds a perfect boyfriend (rigid,
uptight, utterly devoid of emotion but really smart and focused), gets the perfect
job (taking over for the uptight boyfriend at the library information desk while
he's off at Brain Camp) and becomes the perfect daughter (in her room by eight
studying her SAT prep guide every night). Such an effort is destined to fail, obvi-
ously, and as her attempts at perfection begin to show signs of strain, she finds
herself attracted to the disorganized, frenetic world of the Wish catering company,
a small group of amiable neighbors and relatives (with an enigmatic hottie thrown
in, of course) who embrace chaos not as a problem that needs to be controlled and
overcome but as a productive philosophy of life. Dessen's strength is her ability to
fully realize a character's inner and outer worlds; Macy's grief is palpable, and her
slow thaw is believably rendered. However, the metaphors that accompany her
transformation are contrived and obvious, the romance that nearly misses is noth-
ing new to this genre, and the coincidental nature of the conclusion (where a gift
that her father bought her before he died shows up just when she is wanting a sign,
and just happens to be a sculpture made by the very boy she is wondering about) is
beyond credible. In fact, the final scene where the new boyfriend repeats Macy's
father's last words to her, but in a happier context, is so buttoned-down and laced-
up Freudian that it could be considered therapeutic discourse on grief-work rather
than plotting. Johnson's Key to the Golden Firebird, reviewed below, is a more
satisfying book about mourning one's father, but those who are already Dessen
fans will no doubt want to pick this up. KC
DOWELL, FRANCES O'ROARK 
The Secret Language of Girls. Atheneum,
2004 
24 7p
ISBN 0-689-84421-2 
$15.95 
R Gr. 5-7
Marylin and Kate have been best friends since nursery school. Now Marylin wants
to be mature and popular, but Kate doesn't understand the desire or the behavior
that goes along with it. From Kate's point of view, her used-to-be friend has
developed a split personality: there is the outer Marylin, who ditches Kate when
necessary to follow the crowd, and the inner Marylin, who tries to protect Kate
from the malicious machinations of the in-group and secretly crushes on a boy her
popular friends despise. Sometimes it seems to both Marylin and Kate that their
friendship can't survive the pressures of a social structure neither fully understands.
Both voices in this dual-perspective novel are distinct and natural; though the
trials and traumas of friendship are well-worn ground, the dexterity and compas-
sion with which this version is written and the fact that the girls do find believable,
brave ways to step out of their externally defined roles make it a literary journey
worth taking. TC
DOWSON, NICK 
Tigress; illus. by Jane Chapman. 
Candlewick, 2004 
26p
ISBN 0-7636-2325-3 
$15.99 
R 4-7 yrs
The plotline is simple: a mother tiger sets out into the jungle to find a new den for
her two infant cubs ("Changing dens helps to fool predators, such as leopards and
wild dogs, that may kill the cubs"). The cubs grow up, she teaches them to hunt,
and they all part ways under the purple shades of twilight. What is especially
JULY/AUGUST 2004 
* 461
notable about Dowson's story is the carefully crafted language; the narrative recalls
a free-verse poem, each block of text reflecting on the movements of the beasts in
lines rich with metaphor ("Like fire, the roaring tigress leaps and falls in a crush of
teeth and muscle"; "Their bright white ear spots wink like magic eyes"). The text
itself is set against paisleyed swatches of warm yellows, corals, and pale blues, and
factual information relevant to the narrative moment is offset in italics on each
spread in the style familiar from Nicola Davies' Big Blue Whale (BCCB 10/97) and
other such entries. The storyline follows the development of the cubs, who grow
from cuddly newborns ("like fat furry cushions") to handsome predators on their
first kill. Chapman's thickly textured brushstrokes offer heightened emphasis on
details and effectively pair with the narrative in capturing the tiger family's move-
ments and interactions. The tigers are the highlight of each spread, their striped
orange coats framed by the strong colors of their jungle home, and the scenes
showcasing the tigers in motion (see especially the hunting and swimming spreads)
are particularly successful. Kids who already love tigers are going to love this book,
but many others will be attracted to this gently informative tale of a mother's care.
An author's note and index are included, but no source notes are provided. HM
DuPRAu, JEANNE 
The People ofSparks. 
Random House, 2004 
[352p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-92824-3 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-82824-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Twelve-year-olds Doon and Lina flee the dying underground city of Ember fol-
lowed by more than four hundred of the city's inhabitants. Once aboveground
the refugees are reluctantly taken in for six months by the citizens of Sparks, a
small agrarian community. The people of Sparks attempt to teach the newcomers
basic subsistence skills, but time is short, and the Emberites are not used to the
hard physical labor required to wrench a living from the earth. Resources and
tempers grow short, and tensions between the two groups increase until it seems as
if the violence that nearly destroyed the people of the world will destroy the small
remnant still remaining. In this sequel to The City ofEmber (BCCB 9/03), DuPrau
illustrates large ideas with small images: the escalation of violence is shown by the
smashing of tomatoes against a wall, the wages of parsimony by a locker of food
strewn with dirt, the generosity of strangers by a packet of seeds sown for the good
of all. Chapters alternate between the adventures of Lina and Doon, Lina staying
in the home of the town doctor with her younger sister and her guardian, Mrs.
Murdo, and Doon living in the ruined remains of the Pioneer Hotel with the
other people of Ember. The uncertainty of the future is exploited by Tick, a
young man from Ember with a lust for power and excitement, and further exacer-
bated by the officials of Sparks, who want only to protect what they have labored
so long to achieve. This is a tighter tale than its predecessor, and the themes
explored will provide much fuel for discussion. Readers willing to venture into the
adventurous terrain of a world grown from ruin should start their journey here.
JMD
EARLS, NICK 
48 Shades ofBrown. 
Graphia/Houghton, 2004 
27 4p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-618-45295-8 
$6.99 
R 
Gr. 7-12
With his parents away in Geneva for a year, sixteen-year-old Dan has elected to
remain back in Australia and spend that year living with his cool young university-
462 
* 
THE BULLETIN
student aunt, Jacq, and her housemate, Naomi. The result isn't the window into
women and adulthood Dan's school friend thinks: Dan discovers with embarrass-
ment just how dependent he's been on parental routine and caretaking ("I can only
assume I was brought into this household because they needed someone to cover
the calculus, since otherwise I don't present with a life of great accomplishment"),
how uncomfortable he can be with the ramshackle condition of your basic rented
student house, and how obsessed he is with the sex life of Naomi, whose room is
next to his. It doesn't take him long before he realizes he's completely fallen for
Naomi, but it's a surprise to him when, after a raucous student party (where Dan
hopes to take his mind off Naomi by finding a girl and gets vomited on for his
pains), he discovers that Jacq has fallen for her too. Readers will immediately
recognize the pivotal nature of a teen year spent out from under parents, but Earls
cleverly complicates the experience with his believable depiction of how it accentu-
ates Dan's naivete even as it broadens his horizons. Dan himself is realistically
perceptive but also believably blinkered: he knows that the gap between him and
Naomi is more than just chronological (she's only two years older), but he doesn't
grasp that the gap between him and the kind of man she'd want isn't as great as it
seems. Dan's narration is wry and understatedly funny throughout as he comes
face to face with the stretching but still extant limits of his maturation ("I haven't
even had any chances not to take yet"). He does indeed grow (especially in his
relationship with Jacq), but this is a creative departure from the classic
Bildungsroman in its articulate portrayal of a young man who's starting to realize
how much more there is to adulthood than he'd realized or is ready for. DS
EASTON, KELLY 
Walking on Air. 
McElderry, 2004 
233p
ISBN 0-689-84875-7 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-9
Since she was four, June has been doing tricks on a tightrope to entertain what
audiences her traveling preacher father can gather during the Depression. Barely
able to collect enough money to support himself and his family (because, for both
Pa and his listeners, "it's easier to feel the spirit on a full stomach"), Pa turns from
straightforward evangelism to something that resembles extortion (and exploita-
tion of June's developing body), and he is sentenced to five months in jail. During
this time, June and her mother get a glimpse of what it would be like to have a real
home, with June going to a proper school and making friends. Also during this
time, June begins to get a strange feeling about Rhett, the man who travels with
their little group and does the odd jobs. Rhett has always been a mystery to June,
having taken a vow of silence for some unknown past sin, but he is unfailingly
kind. When the family ends up in a Hooverville and June's mother is taken to a
convent hospital, June takes the opportunity to liberate herself from her father's
ambitions and places herself in an orphanage. Here her suspicions about Rhett are
confirmed (he's her real father), and she is ushered into an entirely new life. The
ethereal flights of fancy that punctuate June's first-person narration have the curi-
ous effect of deflating her as a character. She is so intent on making meaning of the
events in her life through Biblical narrative and the occasional folktale that she
seems disengaged from actually living and feeling them, thus leaving her character
disaffected and distant. Though she is determined not to realize her father's dream
for her to be a preacher, she has an otherworldly quality that prevents pathos from
developing between her and the reader. However, the message of forgiveness and
tolerance of imperfect people is strong and tenderly realized, the mystery of Rhett
JULY/AUGUST 2004 
* 
463
provides an adequate narrative hook to keep pages turning, and the ultimately
liberating ending rewards June's, and the reader's, faith. KC
FLAKE, SHARON G. 
Who Am I Without Him?: Short Stories about Girls and the
Boys in Their Lives. 
Jump at the Sun/Hyperion, 2004 
168p
ISBN 0-7868-0693-1 
$15.99 
R Gr. 7-12
" [G]irls just get stuck on stupid when they fall for boys," remarks Brandon during
a discussion in his provocatively titled "Boy Stuff' class. Indeed, they seem to, and
this collection of short stories explores how in a number of ways. When a girl
decides that she'll put up with her boyfriend's infidelity rather than confront and
possibly lose him, when a pregnant girl unwittingly puts her life on the line in
exchange for the gifts of a mentally handicapped boy, when a group of girls decides
to risk everything to break out of the confining rules of their church family to go
on a man hunt, when a girl is willing to break a friend's heart to go after that
friend's thug boyfriend, they learn to bear the painful consequences of stupid.
They also negotiate knowingly what they are willing to accept against their own
interests and where they are willing to take their stands when it comes to relation-
ships. There are no fairy tales here, and few happy endings, but there is ample
exploration and questioning of the ways in which girls' (and grown women's, for
that matter) sense of who they are gets entangled with who they are for the boys in
their lives. The conclusions they come to are often heart-wrenching and always
powerful. Flake is breaking new and necessary ground here, creating compelling,
vibrant voices of black girls for black girls, with no implicit or explicit address to
outsider culture. As a result, nonblack readers will have to learn to read these
powerful stories over the shoulders of their black peers-in other words, the same
way black teens have always had to read white mainstream romances over the
shoulders of their intended audience. It's a feat long overdue, and Flake just keeps
doing it better and better. KC
FLEISCHMAN, PAUL 
Sidewalk Circus; illus. by Kevin Hawkes. 
Candlewick,
2004 
32p
ISBN 0-7636-1107-7 
$15.99 
R* 4-9 yrs
It's amazing how eloquent Fleischman can be as "author" of a nearly wordless
picture book. With Kevin Hawkes doing the visual honors, the author/illustrator
team joins a little girl sitting on a bus-stop bench as she watches her quiet commer-
cial street turn into a circus. A gray-haired, overalled gent drags a cart of posters
and banners advertising the coming of Garibaldi's Circus, and as each ad is hoisted
or pasted into place, nearby pedestrians and workers take on the roles of featured
performers. The idea may not be particularly subtle, but the execution is remark-
able, calling on viewers to compare the poses of tightrope walker "The Great
Tebaldi" with a workman balanced on an steel beam, "Goliath the Strongman"
with the transformed shadow of a young man hauling a side of beef into the butcher
shop, the "daring sword swallowers" with the dentist probing a patient's mouth in
an office window above the street. Audience oohs and aahs may be muted here,
but the brightly clad little girl's reactions say it all as she expressively registers each
feat from her oval inset, surrounded by cluelss graytone adults. Eventually a bus
carries off the first load of commuters, but a stripe-shirted boy arrives and notices
a squirrel on a wire taking on the role of "The Great Tebaldi," and Act Two is
underway. Hawkes manipulates shadows and tucks away details so cannily in his
464 
* THE BULLETIN
fuzzy-edged acrylic scenes that viewers will have plenty to discover or revisit on
second and third "readings." The Fleischman/Hawkes collaboration is a fruitful
one, and we can only hope they take their show on the road again. EB
FREEDMAN, RUSSELL 
The Voice that Challenged a Nation: Marian Anderson and
the Struggle for Equal Rights. 
Clarion, 2004 
[128p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-618-15976-2 
$18.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Freedman offers the story of a movement encapsulated in the biography of an
extraordinary African-American woman. Born poor, Anderson grew up with her
sisters in a strong family led by her indomitable mother. Her extraordinary voice
was discovered at an early age, and her joy in singing led her to church and com-
munity events, where "the baby contralto" would earn "twenty-five or even fifty
cents" for singing a song. Anderson's early discipline and determination saw her
through years of hard work performing and honing her craft. When she was a
teenager she made singing appearances for five dollars apiece, and she turned most
of the money over to her mother and sisters. The Union Baptist Church (where
Anderson sang in the choir) and the black community where she grew up sup-
ported her throughout her career: by raising money to buy her first evening gown,
to send her to high school, and to pay for the singing lessons that would ultimately
catapult her into the international limelight. While Anderson's joy of singing
occupies center stage, her growth as a performer is set against the backdrop of
invasive Jim Crow laws and the growing Civil Rights Movement. The climax of
this biography-and possibly of Anderson's life-is her performance at the Lin-
coln Memorial in 1939, after she was banned from Constitution Hall by the Daugh-
ters of the American Revolution. Freedman tells the story of this extraordinary
woman in vivid language enlivened by quotes from Anderson herself. Black-and-
white photographs throughout give a sense of the changing times in which Ander-
son lived and gently remind readers that it was not so long ago. This will satisfy
those readers whose curiosity was piqued by Ryan's picture book biography When
Marian Sang (BCCB 12/02). Chapter notes, a discography, and a selected bibli-
ography are included; the bound book will contain an index. JMD
GANDOLFI, SILVANA 
Aldabra, or The Tortoise Who Loved Shakespeare; tr. by Lynne
Sharon Schwartz. 
Levine/Scholastic, 2004 
151p
ISBN 0-439-49741-8 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Aldabra isn't a tortoise, it's an island in the Indian Ocean, the only place where the
Geochelone gigantea (a type of giant tortoise) lives in the wild. Naturally, when
Elisa's Nonna Eia turns herself into a Geochelone gigantea in order to extend her
lifespan (the tortoises can live two hundred years), Aldabra is the logical place for
the newly transmogrified granny to go, but ten-year-old Elisa doesn't want to send
her grandmother so far away. The seasonal floods of their native Venice and a visit
from a reptile-obsessed cyberstalker serve both to convince Elisa to send the tor-
toise to Aldabra and to reconcile Nonna Eia with her long-estranged daughter,
Elisa's mother. The relationships between the characters are well developed, and
the physical details of Elisa's life in Venice and her grandmother's transformation
convince the reader that such a fantastical event in an otherwise realistic novel is
indeed plausible. However, the Shakespeare plot (Nonna helps Elisa rehearse her
part) never really takes off, and the slow pace of Nonna Eia's change limits narra-
JULY/AUGUST 2004 
* 465
tive tension, even combined with the shadowy threat of her incarceration in a rest
home for senile seniors. Elisa's online interaction with the stalker begins to heighten
the tension, but the tension dissipates very quickly when her stalker is permanently
scared off by a mere few eldritch screams in a dark warehouse. Nonetheless, the
point-by-point particulars ofNonna Eia's reptilian renewal will carry most readers
through to the happy ending. TC
GOOBIE, BETH 
Flux. 
Orca, 2004 
[256p]
ISBN 1-55143-314-1 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 8-12
Two years ago, twelve-year-old Nellie and her mother fled the Interior, a caste-
based society run with clockwork regularity, for the freedom of the Outbacks.
Eight months later, her mother disappeared, taken, Nellie believes, by the Interior
Police. Nellie's ability to alter her molecular state to enter parallel realities (called
levels) where she can steal, hide, or escape is her best defense, especially now that
the Skulls, a dangerous group of boys led by the weasely Deller, have taken an
unhealthy interest in her. Nellie is sure her talent is a gift from her spiritual mother,
the Goddess Ivana, but vague memories of Interior laboratories sometimes con-
fuse her worldview. She remembers little about the Interior, nor does she want
to-until a humiliating head-shaving incident with the Skulls reveal four large,
thick scars on her scalp. Unable to deny such evidence and confronted with the
knowledge that children from the Outbacks, including Deller's brother, are disap-
pearing, Nellie begins traveling the levels, looking for answers in layer after layer of
secrets. This is the first in a series, so answers are still distant, though Goobie's
slow unveiling of her intricate web, bringing it into focus thread by thread, makes
them appear tantalizingly close for both reader and protagonist. The deeply de-
tailed world Nellie lives in and the magical/molecular way she travels among the
levels can be frustrating to decipher, and some readers may need more guideposts
than the book provides along the way. Those who are patient enough to ride out
the confusions, however, will be more than carried away by the action and drama
of the story. The author's real strength lies in her intriguing and realistic charac-
ters. Full of pathos and intensity, Nellie and Deller start out very different from
how they end up, and their individual and relational growth is hard and honestly
won. Recommend this to readers accustomed to complex fantasy and willing to
let their racing heartbeats move them through the things they don't quite grasp.
KH
GORDON, DAVID 
The Ugly Truckling; written and illus. by David
Gordon. 
Geringer/HarperCollins, 2004 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-054601-8 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-054600-X 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-7 yrs
This odd retelling ofAndersen's The Ugly Duckling features a cast of sibling flatbed
trucks and the little yellow plane that is the runt of the vehicular litter. Teased
about her lack of proper wheels, bed, and chrome, the ugly truckling despairs: "So
late one night, when the sky was black and starless, the ugly truckling sped away."
She meets a tractor, a cow, and a windmill, and she questions each one as to her
real identity. "I have a feeling that you will know exactly who you are very soon,"
says the windmill. Sure enough, the ugly truckling sees her own reflection in a
466 
* THE BULLETIN
pond, hears the roar of airplane engines over her head, and realizes that "She wasn't
an ugly truckling after all. She was a beautiful airplane. And so she flew away with
the other airplanes .. . into a sky full of stars." The tale of truckling (planeling?)
redemption is set "way out west," under wide sky and purple mountains, on what
appears to be an isolated ranch. The spare landscape is an ideal backdrop for the
shiny mama truck and her candy-colored trucklings; the proportions of both geo-
graphic elements and adult personifications dwarf the comparatively tiny offspring.
Gordon's text is readaloud simple, the unadorned language direct and unsenti-
mental. The illustrations have the same simple directness: Gordon avoids cutesiness
with large geometric shapes in carefully constructed, balanced compositions that
take advantage of every possible perspective. 
Bizarre though his motorized re-
imagining may sound, it has genuine charm. The ugly truckling nods to her ori-
gins with her duckling-yellow color (although a note would have been handy) and
her sad-eyed appeal cannot be denied. This is certain to attract those listeners too
young (or too rowdy) for Andersen's bucolic parable, and those seeking a tellable
truck tale for more mechanically inclined storytimers will find it here. JMD
GRANT, VICKI 
The Puppet Wrangler. Orca, 2004 
[17 4p]
Paper ed. ISBN 1-55143-304-4 
$7.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr.5-7
Twelve-year-old Telly is accustomed to the outrageous antics of her older sister,
Bess, but she's stunned when Bess' latest prank unfairly results in Telly's being sent
away for the summer to stay with her aunt Kathleen in Toronto. Kathleen is a
tightly wound television producer who handles a schmaltzy children's show that
prominently features puppets, so Telly busies herself with work as a puppet wran-
gler, preparing the puppets for their work and generally going unnoticed. She,
however, notices that Bitsie, the star puppet of the show, is actually alive, cheer-
fully sabotaging lines he hates with "mechanical" malfunctions and longing for a
life beyond the soundstage; Bitsie becomes Telly's best friend in Toronto, but a
live attention-seeking puppet can be a difficult friend to keep up with-and to
explain. Grant's voice for Telly, the overlooked little sister all at sea in big-city
television (she sarcastically refers to herself as "Kathleen's little deaf-mute niece") is
funny, especially in the occasional pointed and explanatory footnotes ("You'd think
if they could put a man on the moon, someone would be able to invent latex that
wasn't so full of itself," she says with exasperation about Bitsie), and it's also cred-
ible. Her growing interest in the process of the show's production is well depicted,
as is the prickly but developing relationship with her aunt. The Bitsie plot actually
sits somewhat uneasily on the solidly told real-life story, especially when Bitsie and
Telly take a madcap road trip that leaves them temporarily in the clutches of a
deranged puppeteer. A live puppet is an engaging premise, however, and it's well
executed here, with Bitsie an effective blend of annoying and entertaining. This
will be an easy booktalk, and kids who sometimes feel like adults are pulling their
strings will relish the idea of a puppet pal with a mind of his own. DS
HALL, BRUCE EDWARD 
Henry and the Kite Dragon; illus. by William
Low. 
Philomel, 2004 
40p
ISBN 0-399-23727-5 
$15.99 
R 5-9 yrs
Eight year old Henry Chu lives in New York's Chinatown in the 1920s. Grandfa-
ther Chin is his undisputed hero; the old man fashions fabulous kites from every-
JULY/AUGUST 2004 
* 467
day junk, launches them from the rooftop, and even chases pigeons with his soar-
ing, swooping masterpieces. When Tony Guglione and his gang of Italian toughs
throw stones to bring down the kites, Henry and his friends ignore Grandfather
Chin's admonitions to ignore the boys and keep the peace. They confront Tony
and his pals on Tony's turf-the park-and, after a hearty round of ethnic insults,
discover that the Italian kids are homing-pigeon keepers and that Grandfather's
supposedly harmless kite has been disorienting the birds. Hall reels out his tale
effectively, steadily mustering support for the put-upon Chinese boys, blindsiding
listeners with Tony's side of the story, and then wrapping it up with credible d6tente
rather than melodramatic friendship: "From that day on, the Chinese kids fly
kites in the mornings. The Italian kids fly their birds in the afternoons." Low's
kites are joyous explosions of saturated color above the sober tenements and brown-
clad city kids, but a close-up of the dragon kite in pursuit of a fleeing pigeon
impels young viewers to imagine how a benign image in one culture could appear
quite menacing in another. Adults promoting cultural diversity or anti-bullying
causes will find an articulate, engaging voice here; kids will simply grab hold of a
darn good story. EB
HASELEY, DENNIS 
Trick of the Eye. 
Dial, 2004 
199p
ISBN 0-8037-2856-5 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Richard's life is very quiet and orderly; he lives only with his mother, the etiquette
advisor, and takes his education from a visiting tutor. Signs of disorder begin to
appear in his existence with a news story, mysteriously clipped out by his mother,
about a strange happening in an art gallery; Richard's memory of his own experi-
ences with art then begins to stir, and his renewed attention to a picture on the
wall reveals his ability to converse and interact with its inhabitants. He's troubled
by the indications that they have witnessed some terrible event in the room where
they were once hung, so he determines to pursue the mystery. Venturing out to
the art gallery featured in the article, which has been the location of several subse-
quent thefts, he realizes that his landscape was painted by the same artist as the
stolen canvases; travel to the museum allows him to enter more paintings and
makes him realize that this artist was in fact a copier of various masterworks-and
that the copies often contain faces that look remarkably like that of Richard's
mother. This is an intricate and complex story made even more sophisticated by
Haseley's crafty paying out of information and deliberate disconnection of the
reader as well as Richard. The narrative rarely refers to the protagonist by his
name and only well along mentions his age, and the setting would seem to be
Edwardian London (the paintings Richard sees in the unnamed museum were in
fact in the National Gallery at that time), but the atmosphere is suffused with
Richard's own obscured viewpoint. The communication with the paintings is
intriguingly depicted, from their alarm at Richard's capacity for motion to their
interpainting dialogue in the museum (they proudly introduce themselves by their
era and school). The measured pace and the recondite storytelling will daunt
many readers, and the final revelation (the painter was the lover-and murderer-
of Richard's real mother, and the woman raising him is actually his aunt, the painter's
wife) compresses its elaborate scenario into an overly small space, which dampens
the effect and makes the shift in mood startlingly abrupt. Balliett's Chasing Vermeer,
reviewed above, is a more successful novel about an artistic enigma, but this is
nonetheless an original work with a tense and spooky atmosphere that may well
entrance readers who relish a puzzle. DS
468 
* THE BULLETIN
HAWASS, ZAHI 
Curse of the Pharaohs: My Adventures with Mummies. 
National
Geographic, 2004 
144p 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-7922-6665-X 
$29.90
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7922-6963-2 
$19.95 
R Gr. 4-8
Who's better qualified to give the final word on the mummy's curse than Hawass,
the head of Egypt's Supreme Council of Antiquities? Acknowledging that curses
do appear on several Egyptian tombs (although, notably, not those of royalty), he
convincingly demonstrates that the success of grave robbers over millennia and his
and other archaeologists' thriving careers cast doubt on the curses' efficacy, to say
the least. So, where's the adventure without the danger? Everywhere, as his own
grippingly related experiences attest. Hawass regales readers with tales of getting
stuck headfirst, with a camera strapped to his back, in a newly opened tomb, of
suffering a heart attack after the discovery of a burial at Giza (here he credits the
deceased, Inty-Shedu, with saving his life), of entering sealed rooms rife with "an-
cient germs, which we cannot see but which have nonetheless survived for all that
time." He is also an enthusiastic apologist for his profession and stresses the ethi-
cal archaeologist's respect for human remains, reliance on non- and minimally
invasive study of mummies, and even some of the conscience-wrenching compro-
mises he has personally made to conserve fragile finds while allowing public access.
Hordes of dramatic color photographs, generously sized and spaced text, and nar-
ration fine-tuned for a middle-grade audience do full justice to this magnetic sub-
ject. End matter includes throwaway material on mummy making and becoming
an archaeologist, as well as the more useful glossary, index, and list of important
divinities. Let those who fail to acquire a second copy face the wrath of impatient
patrons. EB
HELLDORFER, M. C. 
Got to Dance; illus. by Hiroe Nakata. 
Doubleday,
2004 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90865-2 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-32628-9 
$15.95 
R 3-6 yrs
A little girl's got to banish the "summertime blues," so she gets the terpsichorean
urge and dances her way through the day, starting with a dance in the morning
while Grandpa flips the pancakes, proceeding to a barefoot dance on the baking
summer concrete outside, a penguin dance in the hose spray, a bird-dance at the
zoo, pre-nap and post-nap dances, and so on until brother and Momma return at
end of day. The logic of the setup isn't entirely clear, but it's pretty much tacked-
on anyway-this is just an excuse for a bouncy, day-long paean to dancing, and it's
an energetic one indeed. The lilting short lines infuse the text with vigor, and the
summertime specifics keep the poetic soundtrack grounded in audience experi-
ence. Nakata's watercolors are the real conveyors of dancing joy: light-filled com-
positions gleefully pirouette through various viewpoints, here tilting down the
street, there soaring above the zoo, now peering through the legs on the bus. The
palette is a bit more springy than summery, offering some respite from the heat
right there, and there's a gaiety to the shimmering world that makes dancing an
understandable response (and the summertime blues seem far, far away indeed).
Our protagonist has all the bounce of a captive youngster in summer, and she
clearly has no patience for keeping both feet firmly on the ground-she's hopping,
soaring, skipping in almost every image. If you can read not just aloud but loud,
this would be a lively shake-'em-up verse to get preschoolers bouncing around the
JULY/AUGUST 2004 
* 469
room, or just a helpful suggestion or crankiness remedy when another droopy kid
starts suffering the summertime blues. DS
HENDERSON, AILEEN KILGORE 
Hard Times for Jake Smith. 
Milkweed,
2004 
192p
Trade ed. ISBN 1-57131-648-5 
$16.95
Paper ed. ISBN 1-57131-649-3 
$6.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
MaryJake Wildsmith is saddened when her dad sells their milk cow, their brood
sow, and their chickens, and she's angry when he sells her dog, but she knows that
times are hard for her sharecropper father, especially since the Depression began.
She has no idea that she is to be left as well, Hansel and Gretel fashion, as her
parents take off for a new life out West. Her anger fights with her obedience, and
she rebels in an odd fashion; instead of doing as her parents said and presenting
herself at the large house in the center of the next town with a package from her
mother, she takes a path into the forest and dyes her white blonde hair with some
water from a walnut stump. When Miz Bennett, the first person she meets, mis-
takes her for a boy, her disguise is complete, and she finds a comfortable home
with the kindly widow. A traveling female evangelist who knows who she is threatens
her serenity, but Miss Celestine becomes an ally rather than an enemy, helping
MaryJake reunite with her brothers who have also been left behind, and to dis-
cover a family she never knew she had. This is a surprisingly moving, gentle story
of redemption in hard times, and what it takes to make and break a family. While
a story premised on parental abandonment could easily lapse into indictment,
Henderson eschews the caricatures of Appalachian poverty, instead creating char-
acters that are flawed but doing the best that they can, who work to take care of
their land and to use what gifts and resources they have to realize dreams of re-
newal for themselves and others. An author's note references general circumstances
and the author's personal experiences during the Depression. KC
HITE, SID 
The King of Slippery Falls. Scholastic, 2004 
2 17p
ISBN 0-439-34257-0 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Hite sets this tale of a boy's search for identity along the shores of an aptly named
river, the Little Lost, in Idaho. Lewis Hinton is a little lost, having learned from
his parents that he was given to them as a baby by a woman with a foreign accent.
Meanwhile, Lewis has embarked on a quest to catch an enormous fish, which he is
convinced lurks in a pool that is only visible when the wind manages to separate
the curtain of Slippery Falls for an instant. When Lewis learns that his mother's
name was J. A. Poisson, his quest for the fish becomes downright metaphysical.
The practical side of his search for his heritage sends the town into an uproar when
they learn, through the amazing resources of Lewis' friend and advisor, eighty-
eight-year-old Maple Baderhoovenlisterah, that a woman by the name of Jeanne
Antoinette Poisson was King Louis XV's consort. This makes Lewis the closest
thing to royalty, and thus a tourist attraction, that his town has ever seen. Despite
some appealing and tasty bait, Hite never manages to land the big one here: plot-
ting depends too much on unexplored coincidences (such as strangely matching
rare blood types between Lewis and Maple) and red herrings (mostly in the ro-
mance department), and the ending is unsatisfyingly vague rather than provoca-
tively open, which seems to be what Hite was attempting. However, Hite once
again manages to put some magic in his realism, and there's enough quirky charm
470 
* 
THE BULLETIN
to the characters and their circumstances (not to mention a very large, very grateful
fish) to reel some readers in. KC
HOCHAIN, SERGE 
Building Liberty: A Statue Is Born; written and illus. by Serge
Hochain; tr. by Camilla Bozzoli. 
National Geographic, 2004 
46p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7922-6969-1 
$25.90
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7922-6765-6 
$16.95 
M 
Gr. 3-5
Were it not for the four fictional boys depicted here, Lady Liberty may have had
an even more arduous climb to her pedestal on Bedloe's Island. Leo is an appren-
tice at Gaget, Gauthier and Company, the workshop that brings Bartholdi's cre-
ation to life. Lucky for the humble but well-connected lad (and for Hochain's
readers), Leo meets Bartholdi and Eiffel and gets to do (and demonstrate) a bit of
coppersmithing on the side. Then it's up to shiphand Francois to help inventory
and load the disassembled pieces aboard the Isire for the voyage to the United
States. There may not have been a pedestal on which Liberty could perch if Afri-
can-American newsboy Ben hadn't drummed up donations for the installation.
Finally Irish immigrant Angus rivets the iron framework that holds the job to-
gether. Although strained dialogue packs some requisite bit of data ("Pour? It
won't be poured! It's going to be made of thin leaves of copper. We'll hammer the
leaves onto wood molds made from the plaster sculpture"), most of the engineer-
ing arcana appears in an addendum. Moreover, poorly integrated fictional ele-
ments deflect readers' attention from the main event. Alice and Kent Ross attempted
a similar fictionalized informational approach in The Copper Lady (BCCB 7/97),
and here the addition of three extra characters seems to quadruple the messiness.
Readers may be initially attracted by the multiple illustrations and brief text of the
comic book styled spreads, but kids who really want to follow Liberty's royal progress
to New York will be far better satisfied with Curlee's Liberty (BCCB 5/00). EB
HOOK, JASON 
RoaldDahl: The Storyteller
See review under Craats, p. 459.
JENKINS, EMILY 
Daffodil; illus. by Tomek Bogacki. 
Foster/Farrar, 2004 
26 p
ISBN 0-374-31676-7 
$16.00 
R 
3-6 yrs
Daffodil and her two sisters, Rose and Violet, look so much alike that people
(except for the sisters themselves) have trouble telling them apart. Their mother
likes to set them apart at parties, so they have fancy party dresses: Rose's is a
fetching pink number, Violet's is a lacy purple creation, but Daffodil's is a revolt-
ing yellow "that reminded Daffodil of pee," and wearing it at parties is torture.
One day Daffodil flatly refuses to put the thing on, causing her sisters to reveal that
they hate their dresses, too; the problem is happily solved by the girls' wearing
whatever they want and letting the identity chips fall where they may, and in fact
they get brand new outfits and all "felt very lucky ducky indeed." The conclusion
is a tad anticlimactic, but even kids who aren't triplets will immediately recognize
the ordeal of being trapped in loathsome parent-pleasing clothing. Jenkins' writ-
ing maintains the same child-focused clarity it evinced in Five Creatures (BCCB
2/01), and the text moves easily from measured exposition to chantable repeated
phrases (" ... very extremely hugely much"). Bogacki's illustrations play geomet-
ric shapes-round faces, triangular hair (no, really, it works), and the flattened
views of background items-against the soft, smudgy textures in the planes of
JULY/AUGUST 2004 
* 471
colors, making compositions strong-lined yet cozy. The slightly grayed colors of
most elements allow the party dresses to stand out (and whatever their wearers
think, there will doubtless be audience members who long for all three frocks), and
Bogacki faithfully provides the text-indicated hints for differentiating the sisters.
The adventurous could use this to prompt a clothes-I-hate show and tell, but the
neatly addressed issues of clothing and identity might also make this a provocative
partner to "The Emperor's New Clothes." DS
JOHNSON, MAUREEN 
The Key to the Golden Firebird. HarperCollins,
2004 
297p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-054139-3 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-054138-5 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 7-10
May's life changes when her outgoing father suddenly suffers a fatal heart attack
(sitting in his beloved golden Firebird): her mother throws herself into work to
ensure the family's financial security; her older sister, Brooks, leaves athletics for a
life of drunken irresponsibility; her younger sister, Palmer, retreats into a televi-
sion-watching shell, keeping her episodes of anxiety secret; reliable May does her
best to keep life progressing normally, including reconsidering her long-platonic
relationship with her neighbor Pete, in the face of a family frozen by grief. Johnson
depicts the bereaved family with knowledge and sympathy; the underlying wit
serves to emphasize the girls' resilience and the ultimate hopefulness of the story,
but there's full realization of the fragmentation families undergo in such a situa-
tion. The narration's willingness to shift focus from May's viewpoint to that of
Palmer and Brooks aids that point; it's clear that each girl is largely ignorant of
what's going on in her sisters' heads. The book is particularly articulate about the
unfinished feeling of grief ("Sometimes I feel like I've been waiting for someone to
tell me when I can be normal again," says May), and the girls' conclusion to the
process-they commandeer their father's car to his favorite ball park, where they
unlawfully dump his ashes on the pitcher's mound-is an effective resolution as
well as a triumph of determined and lawless teamwork. With all the understand-
ing of but a very different tone from Kimberly Willis Holt's Keeper of the Night
(BCCB 6/03), this is an honest yet highly reassuring account of surviving loss. DS
JUBY, SUSAN 
Miss Smithers. 
HarperTempest, 2004 
32 4p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-051547-3 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-051546-5 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Alice McLeod (from Alice, I Think, BCCB 9/03) has just turned sixteen, and she
might be drifting a bit closer to the mainstream these days: she's got not only an
actual female friend but an actual boyfriend, and now a family friend has pulled
her in as a contestant in the beauty pageant of her little town of Smithers, British
Columbia. Her role as Miss Rod and Gun Club (so named for her sponsor) gives
her a chance to observe her fellow pageanteers and make pungent if not considered
observations in her unpublished and externally unread zine. The accidental pub-
lication of her zine catapults her into strange defensive popularity with her fellow
contestants and an odd unexpected friendship with a popular girl, but even her
exploration of a Christian youth group dedicated to virginity and sporting the
WWJD bracelets to prove it ("God's only son on my wrist! How is a person
supposed to function under this kind of pressure?") isn't enough to turn her inter-
est from the possibilities of sex with her boyfriend (whether he wants it or not).
472 * THE BULLETIN
Alice's narration is the same blend of wide-eyed and sardonic as in the first book,
evincing her curiosity about the world and her sensationally premature certainty
about aspects of it; it's understandable that her gleefully fierce commentary causes
other teens to treat this slightly loopy outsider with somewhat more respect, de-
spite--or perhaps because of-the fact that it's ungrounded, opinionated, and
totally self-centered. Juby manages to make Alice's periodic pithiness ("Even their
laughter sounded as if it had bad grammar," says Alice about a pack of tough girls)
seem like the natural luck of a well-read teen rather than the result of adult sophis-
tication, so Alice's chronicle stays humorous throughout (the portraits of her fam-
ily, their labor issues, and her fellow Smithers-ites are particularly risible) without
losing its teen legitimacy. Like the first book, this has all the quirky charm of a
long conversation with a strange but very enjoyable friend. DS
KIMMEL, ERIC A., ad. Don Quixote and the Windmills; illus. by Leonard Everett
Fisher. 
Farrar, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-374-31825-5 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
In a compact picture-book format, this title introduces young readers to one of the
most famous episodes in world literature. Beginning with a brief explanation of
Sefior Quexada's mania for chivalric tales, Kimmel includes details of Quexada's
transformation into Don Quixote de la Mancha and the assembly of his equipage,
which includes some rather villainous armor, a nag cum steed, Sancho the trusty
squire, and a fair lady in whose name he will go forth. The infamous battle with
the windmills takes up most of the book, followed by Quixote's vow to pursue the
knight errant life. The exposition is somewhat cursory, and Kimmel treats his
subject with the high seriousness of Quixote himself, including a straightfaced
warning that old stories of knights, dragons, and whatnot have the power to in-
duce insanity in their readers; it will thus be up to the reader to introduce the dose
of irony proper to the tale. 
Fisher's illustrations help in this regard: Quixote's
gangly figure contrasts sharply with the stolidity of Sancho, and the windmill scenes
are comic without being overdone. Heavily laden with dark grays and browns, the
art makes effective use of contrast in color as well as form by including swathes of
striking teal, luminous greens, the odd splash of red, and the carnivalesque red-
and-yellow striped pantaloons sported by Quixote. Thick black outlines make the
figures pop off the white pages, heightening the larger than life aspect of the tale.
A brief author's note with details regarding Cervantes is included. This retelling
won't send kids scurrying off to read Cervantes, but those taken with knightly
deeds (and not yet ready for the ironic epics of Gerald Morris) may find a taste for
this streamlined adventure. KC
LANG, AUBREY 
Baby Ground Squirrel; illus. with photographs by Wayne
Lynch. 
Fitzhenry & Whiteside, 2004 
36p 
(Nature Babies)
Trade ed. ISBN 1-55041-797-5 
$11.95
Paper ed. ISBN 1-55041-799-1 
$5.95 
R Gr. 2-4
Baby Owl; illus. with photographs by Wayne Lynch. 
Fitzhenry & Whiteside,
2004 
36p 
(Nature Babies)
Trade ed. ISBN 1-55041-796-7 
$11.95
Paper ed. ISBN 1-55041-798-3 
$5.95 
R 
Gr. 2-4
These two entries in the Nature Babies series sparkle with clear, informative pic-
tures reinforced by lively texts that invite repeated reading. The ground squirrel
JULY/AUGUST 2004 
* 473
book opens with a vivid set of photos of a rather unsightly hibernating male squir-
rel (the squirrel's teeth are so yellow, his pawpads so pink, and his nails so very
shiny) and the repellent yet fascinating fact that "you could even roll him on the
ground like a furry bowling ball." The rest of the volume rewards the persistent
reader with lots of sharp, quick shots of the fully awake, black-eyed little critters
nursing their babies, frolicking in the grass, and performing some sort of medita-
tive yoga (all right, she's scratching for fleas). The owls' surprisingly snowy in-
fancy yields much more impressive views of great horned owlets hunting for food,
leaving the nest, and facing down a curious mule deer. In both texts, the side-by-
side layout and close sequencing of the small shots, corners cropped to resemble
old-timey filmstrip frames, simulate visual movement and increase the narrative
power of the author's commentary. That commentary achieves a level of grace in
storytelling which has little to do with unusual wording or syncopated rhythm and
everything to do with a tightly constructed story cycle based in the life stages of the
animal and told in an irresistibly confidential tone. Even the introductory note
explaining how the photos and research were accomplished is an invitation to a
world of arcane knowledge populated by a select few. (Perspicacious readers may
still wonder how the illustrator photographed baby ground squirrels inside their
burrow while he crouched in a tent that was presumably pitched aboveground.) A
"Did You Know?" page of answers to all but that cardinal question follows the
text, along with an index and a brief biography of the author and illustrator. TC
LUCIANI, BRIGITTE 
Those Messy Hempels; tr. by J. Alison James; illus. by Vanessa
Hie. 
Neugebauer/North-South, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-7358-1909-2 
$15.95 
R 4-6 yrs
Compared to the messiness of some houses, that of the Hempels is far from criti-
cal. However, it is sufficiently advanced to warrant a brisk tidying-up, instigated
by the discovery that the whisk needed to whip up a cake has been misplaced. The
search for the errant whisk begins a whirlwind tour in which every room and the
garden gets thrown into array. The Hempels find the whisk, concoct and eat the
cake, and in the process make another mess. "And did they mind about the mess?
NO!" The engagingly repetitive phrasing and joyfully subversive ending of this
sequential story are ably partnered with illustrations in layered, grained paint in
country blue, green, and red in a flattened, asymmetrical style that imitates the
effect of cut-paper collage and underscores the Hempel family's taste for disorder
even in rooms newly tidied. The wire whisk lives in effigy on the back cover, its
dough-laden, heart-shaped wires reinforcing the theme that domestic rapture need
not be preceded by household order. Be prepared for much page-flipping as your
listeners match the family's belongings, recklessly strewn across one two-page lay-
out, with the items primly arranged on the next spread. Preschoolers, older chil-
dren, and adults alike will enjoy this seek-and-find story; the generous use of negative
space makes this a prime choice for group storytime as well as private reading. TC
MACY, SUE 
Swifter, Higher, Stronger: A Photographic History of the Summer
Olympics. 
National Geographic, 2004 
96p 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-7922-6980-2 
$28.90
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7922-6667-6 
$18.95 
R 
Gr. 4-8
"Photographic History" is perhaps a less accurate descriptor than "photo album
with essays." Macy offers five thematic chapters on the modern rebirth of the
474 
* THE BULLETIN
Olympic games, the inclusion of women, record-setting athletes, controversies,
and "unlikely heroes" and illustrates them with a trove of action shots reaching
back to the 1896 Athens games. There are no real surprises here, with highlighted
athletes predictably comprising the likes of Wilma Rudolph, Mark Spitz, Nadia
Comaneci, Babe Didrikson, and controversies surrounding gender testing, politi-
cal boycotts, and of course, the terrorist attack at the 1972 Munich games. It is,
perhaps, telling that Macy can muster a mere four full pages of text celebrating
moments of notable altruism and sportsmanship, while controversies consume twice
as much ink. Extensive end materials, however, make this a browser and trivia-
maven delight, with statistics and information on the twenty-nine Olympiads
through 2008, oldest and youngest record setters, newsworthy moments of each
Olympiad, research notes and resources, an index, and even a "Summer Olympics
IQ" quiz on the jacket flap. Look to Dyan Blacklock's Olympia (BCCB 12/01) for
historical background, and Susan Bachrach's The Nazi Olympics (3/00) for the last
word on the dark side of the games, but have a copy of Macy's book on hand as the
2004 events hit the airwaves. EB
MAGRS, PAUL 
The Good, the Bat, and the Ugly; illus. by Alan Snow. Atheneum,
2004 
247p
ISBN 0-689-87019-1 
$15.95 
R Gr. 6-8
Television-show puppets have always been slightly eccentric, but Tolstoy the Long-
Eared Bat, a glove-puppet star of Britain's TV yesteryear, carries that tradition
farther than most. Brought to life via his puppeteer's pact with the devil, Tolstoy
rose to moderate fame before his vituperative personality poisoned the working
relationship between him and his owner, one Frank Lurcher. Twenty years later,
Frank's son, Jason, has set Tolstoy free to slash and murder as many famous pup-
pets as bat and boy can find-mostly while Jason is sleepwalking, so the boy spends
the majority of the novel wondering who could be that psychotic serial puppet
killer who has sent the nation into fits of paranoid hysteria. Jason's voice is consis-
tent and enjoyable, and his narration loads each page with British slang and pubes-
cent angst, lending humanity, depth, and a critical eye to the darkly outlandish
plot. The novel's underlying criticism of today's fame-focused culture provides
further intensity. Most readers will guess right off that Tolstoy (and Jason) are
indeed the malefactors behind the massacre, but the freakish freneticism of the
story-expedited at the end by a shower of diabolically bad puns-will carry each
reader right through to the finish, where Tolstoy faces the murdered souls of his
fluffy victims and Jason's dad, Frank, pays the price of his original bargain (wrapped
in a length of sausages, he gets dragged screaming into Hell). The you-had-it-
coming ending makes this an exceedingly moral tale, but one so suffused with
comedic excess that young persons will read and reread it before passing it along to
their friends. TC
MOLK, LAUREL 
When You Were Just a Heartbeat; written and illus. by Laurel
Molk. 
Little, 2004 
[32p]
ISBN 0-316-57980-7 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
3-5 yrs
The seasonally changing elements of the natural world provide the indications for
a baby's in-utero growth in this lyrical look at a family's baby-waiting time. The
baby's heartbeat first appears in the snowy days of winter; spring brings ducks,
JULY/AUGUST 2004 
* 475
salamanders, and the growth of the baby's fingers and toes; the baby's movements
coincide with the birth of the new lambs; when the baby is "too big to roll over,"
the pumpkins are similarly ripe. This is more poetic than many such "before you
were born" books, so much so that it's much more likely to please adults than
youngsters; the specifics about the baby's development are overpowered by the
evocations of the external world (most kids will want to hear more about them-
selves and less about "the irises . .. standing straight and tall-a purple parade"),
and the references to the growing baby tip into the precious. The art is visually
exquisite-tender watercolors in limpid earth tones and edged with limber lines
have an almost Japanese fluidity, and the controlled focus on a single element in
each spread allows the spare layout and cool white space to make a graphic impact.
The actual baby is even less in evidence in the art, however (there's only one baby
image, which appears twice, in the book), so kids will again have to content them-
selves with a largely metaphoric presence. It's mainly adults who will adore the
quiet, reverent poetry of the text and the elegant simplicity of the art; while it
could be used with kids by grownups who are more comfortable with artistic rather
than literal descriptions of development, most young listeners will squirm long-
ingly towards Lund's lively Tell Me My Story, Mama (BCCB 4/04). DS
MOORE, HEIDI 
Animal Groups: A Mob of Meerkats. 
Heinemann,
2004 
32p 
(InfoSearch) 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 1-4034-4694-6 
$16.95
Paper ed. ISBN 1-4034-5418-3 
$6.95 
R Gr. 2-5
SPILSBURY, RICHARD 
Animal Groups: A School of Dolphins. 
Heinemann,
2004 
32p 
(InfoSearch) 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 1-4034-4692-X 
$16.95
Paper ed. ISBN 1-4034-5420-5 
$6.95 
R Gr. 2-5
These two titles in this accessible nonfiction series are loaded with large color pho-
tos labeled with brief text blurbs. The data is fleshed out in compact paragraphs
using mostly simple words (more difficult words are bolded and later defined in a
glossary). The chapters are headed with questions which control the answers given
in the text: "What Is a Dolphin School?" and "Do Dolphins Fight?" are represen-
tative. Answers to these questions range from the predictable to the startling; for
example, while dolphins' use of clicks in echolocation is well-known, their ma-
nipulation of their melon's shape to aim the clicks will have imaginative readers
wrinkling their own foreheads in mimicry. Shots ofmeerkats bolt upright on their
hind legs, paws folded delicately across extended bellies, beg to be recreated by
human families, perhaps for holiday pictures. The glossy images and satisfyingly
thorough examination of favorite species, as well as the reference addenda in each
volume, destine these books for multiple checkouts. A page-long list of facts on
each species includes a map of the species habitat range, followed by the glossary,
index, and list of additional titles. TC
MORRISON, TONI 
Remember: TheJourney to School Integration. Houghton, 2004
[80p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-618-39740-X 
$18.00 
R Gr. 2-6
In this album of crisply reproduced sepia-toned photographs, Morrison revisits
the days of substandard segregated schools for black children, the volatile
confrontations and quiet successes of school integration, and subsequent civil rights
476 
* THE BULLETIN
activities that extended the demand for equal access beyond schools to all public
businesses and facilities. Morrison provides captions intended to reconstruct "the
thoughts and feelings of some of the people in the photographs chosen to help tell
this story." Many captions play on the obvious-a host of children outside a
Texas school that refused their admission appear beside "No, no, they said. You
can't come in here." The best are truly provocative, though, as when Morrison
interjects a caption between contrasting pictures and explodes its meaning with
possibilities. An integrated bunch of youngsters dashes, smiling, out the school
door, and a crew of white teens attempts to tip a black driver's car, while the
caption intones, "Great! Now we can have some fun!" Black and white girls stare
at each other across the aisle, and it is possible that either can be pondering, "I
think she likes me, but how can I tell?" At this anniversary year of Brown v. Board,
many authors weigh in with commemorative and instructive works, but Morrison's
choice of photographic history invites viewers into an experience more visceral
than anecdotal memories. Thumbnail reproductions of each featured photo, along
with its specific historical setting, are appended for children who want more
information, but this evocative gallery roars louder than words. EB
NAPOLI, DONNA Jo 
Gracie: The Pixie ofthe Puddle. Dutton, 2004 
[160p]
ISBN 0-525-47264-9 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-6
This third entry in the De Fawg Pin series (The Prince of the Pond, BCCB 1/93;
Jimmy, the Pickpocket ofthe Palace, 6/95) focuses on Gracie, a young frog teetering
on the edge of infatuation with Jimmy, a rather exceptional froggy fellow. Jimmy
is unusual because he is the son of a human prince (once an enchanted frog) and a
frog mother, and he is in the throes of an identity crisis of monumental propor-
tions: should he go with his now-human father and embrace his human-ness, or
stay in the pond and enjoy his happy but brief life as a frog? Character develop-
ment leans rather heavily on the previous two books, so much so that Jimmy's
dilemma lacks drama. Narrator Gracie, however, has a froggily eloquent voice
that is almost enough to give both sides of the argument: her gradual transforma-
tion into a thinking amphibian's dream frog is both believable and laudable, and
her slow fall into true love has the pathos of any unrequited passion. Readaloud-
friendly chapters and accessible humor make this a solid classroom-library addi-
tion. The action is wet and wild, and while the wit may not be up to that of the
first book, the happy ending (for some characters, at least) will leave the series' fans
satisfied. JMD
OLDER, JULES 
Pig; illus. by Lyn Severance. 
Charlesbridge, 2004 
32p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-88106-109-3 
$16.95
Paper ed. ISBN 1-88106-110-7 
$6.95 
R Gr. 2-4
Following upon the hooves of his Cow (BCCB 2/98), Older now offers a lively
introduction to the patient pig. Numbered sections provide basic pig demograph-
ics, information about pig breeds, some important pig terminology, details about
pig diet, etc., including a high-spirited and followable guideline on drawing pigs
(front view and side view). Sections range from one page to several spreads, offer-
ing just enough information to whet readers' appetite for more knowledge (and
perhaps ham), and the humorous, happy-go-porky approach will keep browsers as
contented as a pig in mud. Severance's line-and-watercolor (Dr. Martin's inks,
JULY/AUGUST 2004 
* 477
specifically, for that extra piggy pinkness) illustrations give her pigs a broad ami-
ability even in their sparely lined simplicity; that simplicity helps keep the busily
designed spreads, filled with insets, headings, captions, enlarged words and num-
bers, from being overwhelming. Basically, this is an inviting porky buffet, offering
an overview of facts that may vary in their nutritional significance but are always
tasty. DS
OPPEL, KENNETH 
Airborn. Eos/HarperCollins, 2004 
[36 8p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-053181-9 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-053180-0 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 7-12
In an adventure novel set in an alternate early twentieth-century world reminis-
cent of those created by Jules Verne and Edgar Rice Burroughs, cabin-boy Matt
Cruse earns a living on the zeppelin Aurora, a world-class luxury liner. One year
ago on this ship, Matt swung from a crane mid-flight to rescue a dying man from
a sinking air balloon. On this voyage, the dead man's granddaughter, Miss Kate
de Vries, has booked passage in order to discover if the outsized, winged cats de-
scribed in her grandfather's airship logs are more than the delusions of a man on
the brink of death by dehydration. Through pirate attack, shipwreck on an un-
charted island, and imprisonment, Matt and Kate collaborate in an often uneasy
partnership to find proof of the cloud cats' existence. From start to finish, the
pacing is brisk, the physical details are specific and persuasive, the characterization
is consistent yet dynamic, and the interweaving of the plot threads is meticulous
but discreet. The tension created by danger at diverse levels gradually increases
reader interest already piqued by the possible discovery of an awe-inspiring new
species. The deaths of certain zeppelin crew members heighten that interest, as
does the romantic tension between working-class Matt and upper-class Kate. On
a deeper plane, Matt's narrative explores the uncertainties and obstacles inherent
in the struggle to know one's place in the world. A thoroughly satisfying tale, this
novel takes a standard premise from the early days of novelistic adventuring and
reinvents it as a new literary achievement. TC
PAIATINI, MARGIE 
Moo Who?; illus. by Keith Graves. 
Tegen/HarperCollins,
2004 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-000106-2 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-000105-4 
$15.99 
R* 
3-7 yrs
Hilda Mae Heifer, hit right in the noggin by a "hard and high-flying cow pie," has
lost her moo; when she comes to after the dreadfully unfortunate accident, with "a
lump on her forehead so high you could play ringtoss," she doesn't know who she
is or what she's supposed to say. Fortunately, the other barnyard animals-a goose,
a chick, a pig, and a cat-are available to help set her straight. While the premise
may seem familiar, the hilarious treatment of Hilda's predicament and her aloof
and eager countenance lend this tale a huge helping of humor. The toothy-grinned
Hilda, a bright red Elvis pompadour rising above her enormous muzzle, tries out
each of her companions' distinctive sounds, only to be corrected and redirected
towards the moo, which eventually starts to feel "awfully familiar." The other
animals dissuade Hilda from her wrongful association with a grocery list of charac-
teristics, thereby implicitly presenting young listeners with information on barn-
yard classification (Hilda is sure she would have remembered laying an egg, and
478 
* 
THE BULLETIN
finds the idea of coughing up a fur ball "particularly distasteful"), and the comfort-
able tone of the narrative perfectly suits the hilarity of the tale. The animals are
highly differentiated in manner, with the goose offering a gangster-esque aggres-
sion ("Are you honking at me?") and the pig speaking with proper delicacy ("Par-
don me, madam ... but did you just oink at me?"), and the interaction between
Hilda and the others is vastly entertaining. Graves' lively illustrations use thick
pigments to create animals ofClaymationesque dimensionality and flexibility, and
the extensive visual humor provides lots of opportunity for illustrative perusal.
The chosen palette provides a vibrant splash to this funny farm, and Hilda's open-
jawed, down-the-throat expressions speak volumes of her irrepressible nature. This
overenthusiastic if daft bovine is certain to become a beloved storytime star, and
young listeners will happily inappropriately honk, peep, oink and meow along
with our confused protagonist. HM
PARATORE, COLEEN MURTAGH 
How Prudence Proovit Proved the Truth about Fairy
Tales; illus. by Tamara Petrosino. 
Simon, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-689-86274-1 
$15.95 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
Prudence Proovit is the formerly home-schooled daughter of a couple of realists
("Declaring nursery rhymes for ninnies and fairy tales for fools, the professors
filled Prudence with facts: Tests at teatime. Dictionaries at dinner"), and she's
consequently no believer in fairy tales. She's excited by the prospect of attending
school, until she gets a postcard from her new teacher ("Miss Beatrix Bliss, F.G.")
that says "Hope you like Fairy Tales!" Prudence devotes much of her academic
energy to disproving the truth of fairy tales, but after each fairy-tale skirmish she
gets a postcard signed with the initials of a classic fairy-tale character. The night
before her class's final Costume Ball Breakfast, Prudence realizes her refusal to
believe has alienated her only friend and hurt her teacher's feelings, and she cries
herself to sleep: "I wish I could ... I wish I could... I wish I could BELIEVE!" In
the morning there's another postcard from her teacher, who explains that the "F.
G." after her name is for "Fairy Godmother." Arriving at school, Prudence is
challenged by her classmates to prove that fairy tales are real, and she does so, with
mail (her postcards) postmarked "Fairy Tale Forest." Mixed-media (brush and
ink, colored pencils, and watercolors) illustrations have a retro-cartoonish flair in
Prudence, while the other characters have the sleek geometric look popular in
contemporary Power Puff Girl cartoons. While the images are slickly enjoyable,
the text unfortunately eschews narrative logic in favor offeel-goodisms about wishing
and believing that just fail to hit the mark. Those seeking a more satisfying tale of
the power of belief should look atJethro Byrd: Fairy Child (BCCB 10/02). JMD
PINKWATER, DANIEL 
Lookingfor Bobowicz: A Hoboken Chicken Story; illus. by Jill
Pinkwater. 
HarperCollins, 2004 
200p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-053555-5 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-053554-7 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Not only does Ivan Itch have to put up with moving from a modern house with a
yard in a nice, suburban neighborhood to a 120-year-old city-gritty building in
Hoboken, once he gets there his bicycle is immediately stolen. Okay, so it's not a
great bike-it's for a little girl, decorated with pink hearts and flowers, and it
wobbles--but it's the principle of the thing. Tracking down the thief, however,
poses problems; neighboring kids Loretta and Bruno speculate that it's Hoboken's
phantom, who "lurks in the shadows" and has been stealing bikes and other things
JULY/AUGUST 2004 
* 
479
for a while. While clue hunting, the three stumble across The Hoboken Chicken
Emergency (BCCB 6/77), preserved as newspaper articles in a scrapbook; there-
fore, Ivan decides to search for Arthur Bobowicz and his giant chicken Henrietta
as well. The searches converge as it is revealed, in a Scooby-Doo-like unmasking
of the phantom, that Henrietta has gone bad again, this time turning to petty
larceny. Pinkwater's offbeat humor and sly satire are in evidence, especially in his
adults, all of whom seem to be foggily absorbed in their own odd realities; Ivan's
father, a N.J.-native who speaks in outdated British slang, and Ivan's mother, who
cheerily allows Ivan to "start conversations with alcoholic homeless men in the
park," calling it an "urban experience," are prime examples. The characterizations
and events are too cartoonish to offer much story, leading to a shallow silliness
that, like a handful of candy, goes down easy but wears off quickly. Still, every kid
loves candy, and the laughable moments, deadpan asides, and quirky characters
running rampant through Hoboken like a 266-pound chicken will be enough for
most readers. KH
POTTER, GISELLE 
Chloe's Birthday...and Me; written and illus. by Giselle
Potter. 
Schwartz/Atheneum, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-689-86230-X 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Following on the heels of her previous autobiographical picture book, The Year I
Didn 't Go to School (BCCB 10/03), Potter here tells of her little sister Chloe's fifth
birthday. While their parents concentrate on making the birthday one to remem-
ber-with perfume named after the birthday girl, a chocolate cake, and a trip to
the beach-older sister Giselle covets the celebration with passionate intensity.
Potter's narration is perfectly tuned to the nuances of sibling jealousy: "Chloe was
too little to even care that it was her birthday, and my birthday was my favorite day
of the year-much better than Christmas or Halloween because all the attention is
just for you." Through perfume shopping, present making, and cake acquisition,
Giselle battles her envy, until, at the beach, she just caves in: "What if I hid
Chloe's perfume in the sand, and she could try to find it? That would be a fun
game, and there was only a teeny chance it would get lost." The inevitable hap-
pens, but luck is on Chloe's (and Giselle's) side, and the present is recovered.
Mixed-media (pencil, ink, gouache, gesso, and watercolor) illustrations provide
the sunny backdrop for this birthday tale. Signage in French provides clues to the
story's location, and the text offers tiny cultural cues ("At the beach there were
little striped tents to change in and some other families wearing much smaller
bathing suits than we were"). The emotive, gracefully leggy characters almost
dance across the pages, their slightly askew proportions only adding to the visual
glee. The text is a readaloud balance of suspense and emotion that never loses
touch with the child's world view, making this is an effective tale of sibling love
and rivalry that is certain to ignite tales of birthday candles past. JMD
RACHEL, T. COLE, ed. 
Bend, Don't Shatter: Poets on the Beginning ofDesire; ed.
by T. Cole Rachel and Rita D. Costello. 
Soft Skull, 2004 
[120p]
Paper ed. ISBN 1-932360-17-4 
$11.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 9 up
Rachel and Costello collect roughly five dozen poems about sexuality, especially
gay and lesbian sexuality, in youth, and they start out with a welcomely reassuring
message to young audiences in their editor's note: "Don't worry too much. You're
480 
* THE BULLETIN
going to be just fine." The poems that follow, some previously published, offer
different viewpoints of that period of passage through to "just fine": Jason
Schneiderman offers a tender apology to the last girl he tried to make it work with
in "Last Ditch"; Rene Arroyo recalls having a "heart broken by the wrong beauty"
when watching Miss America in "Longing"; Amanda R. Evans looks at the pro-
gression from uncertain inclination to knowing attraction in "Something More
Obvious." Some of the most successful poems for youth in the collection go be-
yond personal experience to general philosophy or exhortation: Timothy Anderson's
"I Think You Got Me Confused" repudiates the metrosexual stereotype, talking
about a contented conservative, small-town Western life and reminding readers
that "There's more/ Than one queer truth"; Horehound Stillpoint commands the
angry, abused, and disaffected to "Form a Band, Goddamit." Some of the poems
are less successful, unfortunately, shooting over the heads of young readers with
daunting linguistic density or failing to translate the confessional aspect into effec-
tive poetry; it's too bad that there's no biographies of the poets, since readers might
be impelled to seek out more material by contributors they particularly appreciate
(there's no index, either). Pickers and choosers will still find plenty of perceptive,
eye-opening, and bolstering material here, whether to read privately, share with
friends, or declaim from the rooftops. DS
RAND, GLORIA 
Mary Was a Little Lamb; illus. by Ted Rand. 
Holt, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-6816-3 
$16.95 
R 
4-7 yrs
No, you didn't misread the titular verb: this story's protagonist is a lamb named
Mary. Born on an old ownerless farm and abandoned by her mother, Mary is
adopted by Mrs. Paradise, who tends the little lamb until she's big enough to graze
for her living. Once outside, Mary enjoys escaping from her pen to play with the
neighbor children and dogs and to greet the passengers arriving on the island's
commuter boat. Unfortunately, she's also a bit of a nuisance at the island's school-
house, so Mrs. Paradise realizes it's time for Mary to find a permanent home; when
a return to her flock fails (Mary follows Mrs. Paradise rather than staying with her
own kind), Mary's offered a happy home in the mainland's petting zoo, where her
friends from the island love to visit her. The mild-mannered story is somewhat
short on tension, but the riffs on the song are amusing (the lamb does indeed make
the students laugh to see her at school, in addition to marking up the school floor
with her hooves and smudging the window glass with her nose), and the fact that
there's a true story behind the tale (an author's note describes the events in more
detail) will tickle audiences further. Though the draftsmanship on the human
faces tends toward the bland and stiff, the landscapes are idyllic, with their sweeps
of saturated cobalt ocean and purple mountainous horizons. Mary herself is a
cloudy bundle of fuzz, her often-open mouth testifying to the din of her frequent
baa-ing. The book bleats out for use in tandem with the famous song, but even
without it, audiences will be drawn to the picture of an idyllic island life with
friendly lambs gamboling through the school-so make sure the class pet stays
put. DS
RAPPAPORT, DOREEN 
Free at Last!: Stories and Songs of Emancipation; illus. by
Shane W. Evans. 
Candlewick, 2004 
64p
ISBN 0-7636-1440-8 
$19.99 
R 
Gr. 4-8
Rappaport offers the second entry in a trilogy begun with No More!: Stories and
Songs ofSlave Resistance (BCCB 4/02), smoothing the somewhat choppy format of
JULY/AUGUST 2004 
* 481
her previous title as she traces black experience from the initial promise of the
Emancipation Proclamation, through the dashed hopes of the Jim Crow period,
up to the mandated end of school segregation following Brown v. Board in 1954.
Certainly the compression of civil rights abuses and activism into fewer than sixty
pages of text gives rise to generalizations, and broad postbellum societal traumas
are often glossed over, e.g., a sharecropping system that exploited tenant farmers
regardless of race and suffrage laws that discriminated by gender as well as race.
Nonetheless, Rappaport's carefully selected poetry and songs are variously seeth-
ing, gritty, sardonic, and uplifting. Featured biographical episodes include major
figures such as Ida B. Wells, Booker T. Washington, and Jackie Robinson, as well
as Harriet Postle, who defended her husband from the Ku Klux Klan, exoduster
John Solomon Lewis, who defiantly insisted on his family's right to migrate, and
Dr. Kenneth Clark, whose psychological tests establishing a bias toward white-
tinted dolls offered "proof that segregation made black children believe that they
were inferior to whites." Shane Evans again contributes muscular portraiture and
monumental composition; useful end matter comprises an index, list of resources,
and a timeline of pertinent dates. EB
REISS, KATHRYN 
Sweet Miss Honeywell's Revenge: A Ghost Story. 
Harcourt,
2004 
[4 4 8 p]
ISBN 0-15-216574-6 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Zibby had set her heart on rollerblades for her twelfth birthday, but she finds
herself unexpectedly spending her birthday money on a compelling antique doll-
house. The present soon proves to be a curse, however, when the dollhouse and its
doll inhabitants, especially the stern-faced lady in the gray dress, show themselves
capable of strange effects, ranging from reappearing whole after any kind of de-
struction to causing real-life events to mimic bad things that happen to the dolls.
Interwoven flashbacks demonstrate how the dollhouse years ago became the focus
of a young girl named Primrose, who was harried and persecuted by her governess,
Miss Honeywell, until a practical joke gone awry left the governess dead and haunt-
ing Primrose. Now Miss Honeywell wants a new girl to torment, and Zibby and
her friends have to find a way to thwart her increasing power. The scary-dollhouse
trope is always an intriguing one, and there's no shortage on the stakes here, with
the ghost's actions going beyond poltergeist mischief to attempted murder; there's
also appeal in sorting out the strands of the mystery, especially as it becomes clear
that some contemporary adults have a longer history with the dollhouse than Zibby
had realized. The writing isn't up to the plot elements, however; there's little
characterization beyond the predictable, the plodding pace squanders much of the
spooky mood and makes it a long 400 pages indeed, and the exploration of Zibby's
issues about her mother's remarriage and her new stepsiblings is programmatic
and unconvincing. Nonetheless, the combination of a magical dollhouse and an
evil ghostly governess offers an enjoyably sinister read. DS
SAN SoucI, ROBERT D. 
Double-Dare to Be Scared: Another Thirteen Chilling
Tales; illus. by David Ouimet. 
Cricket, 2004 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-8126-2716-4 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-8
A follow-up to Dare to Be Scared: Thirteen Stories to Chill and Thrill (BCCB
9/03), this collection also includes thirteen original spooky stories for middle-school-
482 
* 
THE BULLETIN
ers ready for something more sophisticated than Stine. San Souci bases most of his
stories on urban legends and folktale motifs, making sure that his protagonists are
the same age and have the same proclivities as his intended reading audience. The
tales themselves have the informality of stories that middle-schoolers tell each other
of spooky happenings and domestic hauntings. From haunted movie studios
("Grey") to haunted houses ("Rosalie"), from vengeful scarecrows ("Daddy Boogey")
to vengeful grandmothers ("Class Cootie"), the book provides readers with exactly
what they expect from a scary story: a classic set-up and a surprise (but creepy)
ending. The most successful tales avoid the obvious thrill and instead provoke
that back-of-the-neck hair-raise that will come back to haunt readers at the most
inopportune, middle-of-the-night, alone-in-the-dark times. Reviewed from an
unillustrated galley. JMD
SCHAEFER, LOLA M. Arrowhawk; illus. by Gabi Swiatkowska. 
Holt, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-6371-4 
$16.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
A red-tailed hawk shot by a poacher survives for weeks with the arrow embedded
in his side before being captured and cared for by a raptor biologist. When
Arrowhawk is well, he is released into the wild, flying "straight as an arrow," as the
text describes. Achieving a rare balance of compassion and objectivity, the text
relates this true story in third person, recounting the hazards and victories of the
injured raptor's struggle for survival without lapsing into condescending or maud-
lin language. The hawk itself is referred to as "Hawk" until it is named "Arrowhawk"
upon release by the biologist, a fitting reference to an inordinate challenge over-
come. Dynamic acrylic renderings in shades of rust and chestnut draw the viewer
close to the hawk throughout the story, gliding over peaceful farms, swooping
down moonlit roads, and angling into a tangle of branches from which Hawk
struggles to fly free. The ochre palette highlights the raptor's central role and casts
over the page the fierce light of Hawk's calculating eye. Throughout the illustra-
tions, as in the text, Hawk's wild and defiant persona dominates, neither softened
nor anthropomorphized. The result is a tale of courage and compassion, made
compelling by its narrow focus. A photograph of the real Arrowhawk, an author's
note relating the true story of Arrowhawk's injury and recovery, and a full page of
background information on birds of prey are included. TC
SCHMIDT, GARY D. 
Lizzie Bright and the Buckminster Boy. 
Clarion,
2004 
[224p]
ISBN 0-618-43929-3 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-9
The town fathers of Phippsburg, Maine, 1912, fully believe they've landed a trea-
sure in their new well-off, politically connected Congregational minister. Who
better to help them remove the black squatters on nearby Malaga Island so they
can attract tourism in the wake of a dying shipbuilding trade? Prosperity is, after
all, their God-given right. Reverend Buckminster's teenage son Turner, though, is
promptly shunned by the local boys and befriended by a Malaga girl, Lizzie, upset-
ting the balance of relationships between island and shore. Turner's odd friend-
ship with an elderly curmudgeon, who leaves Turner her house at her death, ignites
a tragedy when he offers the house to Lizzie and her displaced friends, and the
town finds a legal, but ultimately lethal, way to drive off their unwanted black
neighbors. Schmidt fictionalizes a true event in early twentieth-century Maine
JULY/AUGUST 2004 
* 
483
history, fleshing out the already tense episode with vividly realized characters, fully
credible father-son strains, a subtly drawn friendship, and small acts of subversion
that make the apparently drowsy small town seethe with interest. Readers who
empathized with John Ritter's preacher kid in Choosing Up Sides (BCCB 6/98)
will want to make Turner's acquaintance, too. EB
SHETH, KASHMIRA 
Blue Jasmine. Hyperion, 2004 
[192p]
ISBN 0-7868-1855-7 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Seema's father has just landed a position working as a microbiologist in Iowa City;
as the family prepares to leave their home in Vishanagar, India, to relocate to the
Midwest, twelve-year-old Seema struggles with the dissolution of the extended
family and, especially, the thought of leaving her cousin Raju. Just before depart-
ing, Seema is unexpectedly befriended by Mukta, the poorest girl in her class, who
had always been at the center of all teasing but who proves to be "thoughtful and
friendly." When her grandmother in India becomes sick the following summer,
Seema's family returns for a visit, an experience that helps her realize the extent of
her change and the joy of having homes on both sides of the ocean. This first
novel follows Seema's family to their new home and provides a wealth of compara-
tive information on how life in Iowa differs from that in India-from the long
aisles of frozen food at the grocery store to the bitter fact of wind chill. While the
premise of juxtaposing two unlike cultures through middle-school eyes is an ap-
pealing (if unoriginal) one, Sheth's adolescent characters demonstrate a sense of
self-awareness and introspection that seems far beyond their years and thus chal-
lenges the credibility of the story. The contrasting of Carrie, the mean girl in
Seema's class, with Mukta, the good and kind classmate of yore, results in Seema's
ultimate realization that she treated Mukta as badly as Carrie treats her, a triangu-
lar plot device that somewhat conveniently demonstrates character development.
Still, the story is intriguing for its insider/outsider perspective and some early ado-
lescents may identify with Seema's point of view. A glossary of terms and expres-
sions is included. HM
SHREVE, SUSAN 
Under the Watsons'Porch. Knopf, 2004 
[208p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-92630-5 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-82630-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-7
Ellie Tremont is smart, funny, and brave, and she tells lies. Exciting lies. Protec-
tive lies. Her friendship with the new boy next door--one Tommy Bowers, juve-
nile delinquent, fostered until age nine and then adopted-becomes of supreme
importance as Tommy provides danger and much-needed companionship while
Ellie's close-knit family pressures her to stay away from a potential troublemaker.
Tommy lies, too; he lies about his age (fourteen) so twelve-year-old Ellie will feel
comfortable with him, he lies to his adoptive mother so she won't discover he's
given her diamond necklace to Ellie, and he lies to the neighborhood kids so they'll
be his friends. He also shoplifts and sneaks Ellie into an R-rated movie showing
"gang violence, sex scenes, and frontal nudity." Tommy's lies are engagingly well
meant; for a bad boy, he's awfully kind to Ellie. Ellie's use of present tense makes
the rare temporal shifts confusing, but the hour-by-hour account of her budding
friendship/romance with Tommy keeps those shifts to a minimum and gives the
484 
* THE BULLETIN
climax depth. A rushed denouement may be overlooked by readers glad to see that
Tommy is eventually included in Ellie's family life. The author's mastery of the
adolescent voice glints in the finely tuned language, and Ellie's tug-of-war with her
mother over truth, lies, and summer camp provides a superb foil for Tommy's
conflicting desires both to have and to be free of the ties of family. Provocative and
understated, the saga of Ellie's summer vacation will find a receptive audience
among preadolescents and the adults involved in their lives. TC
SONES, SONYA 
One of Those Hideous Books Where the Mother Dies. Simon,
2004 
2 68p
ISBN 0-689-85820-5 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Ruby Milliken's world turns upside down after her mother dies, sending her across
the country to live with the father she's never known and leaving behind her best
friend and boyfriend, as well as her mother's sister. Once in California, fifteen-
year-old Ruby is suddenly thrust into the expensive lane, since her father, an Os-
car-winning actor, sends her to a toney school and showers her with gifts, while
signally failing at explaining his prior absence from her life. The story is largely
slick and unbelievable: not only is Ruby's father an international celebrity, he's
been secretly adoring her from a distance her whole life, staying away because
Ruby's mother loved him too much to bear seeing him after their marriage ended
(when he finally realized he was gay); it's particularly incredible that the formerly
furious Ruby spares not an iota of irritation for the maternal stand that left her
without a father for years. It's nonetheless an undemanding melodrama with lively
touches of L.A. glamour (Ruby's father lives next door to Cameron Diaz); the
subplot of Ruby's yearning for her distant friends becomes a predictable but enjoy-
able soap opera when her best friend and boyfriend find romance with each other.
The free-verse poems that constitute the narrative are prosaic but they're also di-
rect and brief, no more than a couple of pages apiece, making this a format that
will invite reluctant readers. This is a far cry, depth-wise, from Valerie Hobbs'
similarly themed Tender (BCCB 10/01), but it's a quick-paced saga-ette that should
particularly appeal to readers who've retained the "these aren't my parents" fantasy
through middle school, DS
SPERRING, MARK 
Wanda's First Day; illus. by Kate and Liz Pope. 
Chicken
House/Scholastic, 2004 
[32p]
ISBN 0-439-62773-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 4-6 yrs
On her first day at school, Wanda the witch accidentally winds up in a class for
perky flower fairies. In spite of the fact that all Wanda's attempts to fit in end in
disaster, the flower fairies befriend the little enchantress. Against the frothy back-
drop of the delicate fairy class and the lacily scribbled city they live in, the illustra-
tions of Wanda's witchy preferences-rat's-tail yogurt and octopus
sandwiches-explode with relish over the page (and over her fairy friends, too).
While these disasters bring Wanda's otherness swiftly home to the viewers, that
otherness only underscores the generosity of the fairy teacher's gentle insistence
that Wanda is "definitely at the right school, and we shall all look forward to
seeing you tomorrow." The adroit inclusion of a witchy class with one jolly fairy
student (glimpsed out Wanda's school window) explains Wanda's presence and
affirms that, though the witch may be in the wrong class by some people's values,
JULY/AUGUST 2004 
* 485
under the standard of friendship everyone can belong. Pages of sugary sweetness
untempered by rising action may overdose some listeners, and the ending lacks
punch-expect to see parents and teachers flipping through the endpapers, look-
ing for the rest of the story. Nonetheless, the book is loaded with delicately untidy
pink-predominant details sure to beguile young fairy aficionados, and parents seek-
ing an unthreatening introduction to formal education for their children will wel-
come the story's uncomplicated cheer. TC
SPILSBURY, RICHARD 
Animal Groups: A School ofDolphins.
See review under Moore, p. 475.
STEIG, JEANNE 
Tales from Gizzard's Grill; illus. by Sandy Turner. 
Cotler/Harp-
erCollins, 2004 
[80p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-000960-8 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-000959-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-6
A slightly offbeat version of the old West comes to life in Steig's three verse tales of
events in Fiasco town. In the first story, "The Lonesome Cowboy," the Sheriff
finds herself a surprising ally in the pursuit of an equally surprising horse thief; in
the second, "Miss Lou-Lou," the daughter of an itinerant medicine peddler dis-
covers her mother's legacy and a supply of water for the town; the final story, "The
Duel," describes a face-off--or, more accurately, a feet-off-between a challeng-
ing stranger and town matriarch over who's got the smelliest pedal extremities.
The crisp verse never overstays its welcome, and the perky ballad meter keeps the
stories clipping along. The gentle tweaking of Western tropes and the relish of
sagebrush-flavored phraseology ("Now you can dine on biscuits,/ Or you can dine
on lead./ For I'm comin' in to feed you now," roars the sheriff to the holed-up
thief) will make for a rootin' tootin' read, and the stench vs. stench duel in particu-
lar offers some delicious opportunities for expressive reading aloud ("Point blank
their feet were aimin'/ right at each other's nose,/ and they yowled and gasped and
each turned green/ And blue, and puce, and rose"). Turner's spidery-lined illus-
trations don't quite suit the robust verse narrative, but the precise yet deranged
draftsmanship emphasizes the quirkiness of Steig's literary vision; their sophisti-
cated flair and dusty palette ensures that readers drawn by the accessible format
won't feel illustrated down to. Youngsters looking to move beyond Stanley's Sav-
ing Sweetness (BCCB 11/96), or those who relished Timberlake's The Dirty Cow-
boy (BCCB 9/03), may want to mosey on by. DS
STRASSER, TODD 
Can't Get Therefrom Here. 
Simon, 2004 
198p
ISBN 0-689-84169-8 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 8-12
Maybe's been on the streets of New York since last summer; along the way she's
met other street kids-OG, 2Moro, Tears, Rainbow, Maggot, Jewel-and to-
gether they're "sort of like a family, or maybe a tribe. An asphalt tribe that roamed
the streets searching for food and shelter." This powerful narrative of the lives of
homeless urban teens explores the day-to-day survival tactics of a group oft forgot-
ten, invisible to mainstream society and in most cases cared for by no one. Strasser
carefully builds each character's story, laced with abuse, drugs, prostitution, and
AIDS, then deconstructs the tribe through a series of deaths, disappearances, hos-
486 
* THE BULLETIN
pitalizations, and, in a few cases, cautious reunions with family members. The
overwhelming sense of them-versus-us that overshadows each encounter with the
mainstream drives home the reality of the context, where pedestrians stiffen on
approach and mothers tell their children to ignore the panhandlers at the grocery
store. Maybe's voice narrates the events, her repulsion of the rules and regulations
of the working world mixed in with a sense of desperation and longing. More
than anything she needs someone to care about and someone to care for her, a
need temporarily fulfilled within the circle of friends. "Maggot always said living
on the street was a choice," she reflects. "But it wasn't. It was when you ran out of
choices." The story ends on a hopeful note as Maybe begins to realize that she may
have more choices that she had allowed per the (somewhat didactically inserted)
guidance of a compassionate librarian who helps reunite Tears with her grandpar-
ents in West Virginia. This is an insightful and thought-provoking examination
of otherness, one that challenges readers to consider their own situations as well as
to remember the situation of those out in the cold. HM
SWOPE, SAM 
Jack and the Seven Deadly Giants; illus. by Carll Cneut. 
Farrar,
2004 
100p
ISBN 0-374-33670-9 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Poor Jack can't catch a break. A chronic crier, he has been abandoned on doorstep
after doorstep, unloved and unwanted, until he's finally kicked out of church for
asking the preacher what he means by the seven deadly sins. Shortly thereafter, the
town is menaced by seven deadly giants bearing names like Sloth, Roth, and
Avaritch; the preacher naturally blames Jack, and Jack takes it on the lam. Kind-
ness to a fellow traveler nets him a single wish, but instead of the mother he longs
for, a cow appears instead. Oh, well, such is Jack's luck. Through a combination
of shrewdness and luck, Jack meets and defeats one giant for every deadly sin (lust
cleverly G-rated into a two-headed giant named the Wild Tickler) until at last he
meets the Green Queen, who just happens to hold the key to his own happiness.
Cneut's illustrations juxtapose false perspectives with representational figures to
reinforce the fabulist qualities of this jaunty tale (in fact, the giant afflicted with
pride is a victim of a false perspective, as are most of the others, making the visual
metaphors all the more appropriate). Swope's narration is straightforward, ener-
getic, and just quirky enough to complement but not overpower the fairy-tale
plot. While not stunningly original, this is a more than respectable example of a
time-honored genre, sure to please those with a penchant for the extended folk
narrative. KC
TAYLOR, G. P. 
Shadowmancer. Putnam, 2004 
275p
ISBN 0-399-24256-2 
$16.99 
M 
Gr. 9-12
Obadiah Demurral, the vicar of Thorpe (a town on the coast of Yorkshire), has
turned his back on God and embraced the power of darkness; his obsession with
acquiring power has led him to compromise his soul through theft, murder, tor-
ture, and black magic. Demurral has acquired a golden cherub from a sacred
African temple, one of two Keruvim, powerful and ancient religious artifacts that
will help the vicar rule the world. The Keruvim is sought by Raphah, an African
disciple of Riathamus (from the Latin for "king of kings"), who is determined to
foil Demurral and return the Keruvim to its rightful place. Raphah is aided in his
quest by Thomas and Kate, two local youngsters drawn unwittingly into the fray.
JULY/AUGUST 2004 
* 487
The trio are chased, captured, and tormented by various creatures of the theologi-
cal night, but the preternaturally lucky Thomas, Kate, and Raphah acquire an
unlikely ally in a converted highwayman, and they are further aided by timely
visits from a soul-seeking shepherd and sword-bearing archangel. Characteriza-
tions are slight as shadows, with little to provide a metaphorical hook for readers to
hang their emotional hats on. Demurral is an over-wrought, operatic villain given
to B-movie outbursts of maniacal rage, and the allegorical function of the remain-
ing primary characters is overly distancing. The writing is dense and purposive,
and while the Biblical wordplay may be clever, it is too obscure. Heavy-handed
theological references slow the narrative pace, and the plotting (even with a literary
faith that believes in miracles) is overly convenient. Despite obvious comparisons
to Pullman's His Dark Materials trilogy, this title lacks both the suspense and the
action that characterized that series, so readers will be better off sticking with Lyra.
JMD
THOMAS, JOYCE CAROL, ad. 
What's the Hurry, Fox? And Other Animal Stories;
illus. by Bryan Collier. 
HarperCollins, 2004 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-000644-7 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-000643-9 $15.99 
R 
5-8 yrs
Thomas takes a selection of tales collected by Zora Neale Hurston and makes
them accessible to a new generation. In an opening note, the adapter discusses her
history with these tales, explaining that her adaptations are "custom-made for a
child's eye and ear and shaped just so for a child's gentle bursts of laughter." Tales
include "Why the Dog Hates the Cat," "Why Flies Get the First Taste," and the
title story, among others. The brevity of these nine tales (from several paragraphs
to two pages), along with their understated humor, gives them an anecdotal, con-
versational quality, and makes them ideal for quick classroom and other readal-
ouds. While the draftsmanship in Collier's mixed-media illustrations is sometimes
a little stiff, most of the art has an unusual combination of the real and the surreal
that infuses the barnyard and country scenes with an uncanny energy. The source
note gives the teller of each tale as noted by Hurston. JMD
TOCHER, TIMOTHY 
Chief Sunrise, John McGraw, and Me. 
Cricket,
2004 
[160p]
ISBN 0-8126-2711-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 5-8
See this month's Big Picture, p. 451, for review.
TUNNELL, MICHAEL O. 
Wishing Moon. 
Dutton, 2004 
[272p]
ISBN 0-525-47193-6 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Ever wonder what happened to Aladdin's magic lamp? According to this novel,
soon after Aladdin's marriage, his pampered princess hurls the lamp out the win-
dow at a beggar girl's head. When the beggar Aminah regains consciousness, she
discovers that the battered lamp carries within it the powerful jinni who raised
Aladdin's fortunes. The story that follows is an exploration of the choices and
consequences inherent in the use of wish-fulfilling magic, as Aminah does what
few jinn-masters think of and wishes for power to help others trapped in the net of
488 
* THE BULLETIN
poverty. The vindictive attempts of Aladdin's wife, Princess Badr al Budur, to
recover the lamp, intercut with scenes from Aminah's personal development, spike
the narrative tension and join cleanly with Aminah's story at the climax. The
language is modern and often funny; Aminah may live three thousand years ago,
but her personality and the relationships she develops with others are pure twenty-
first century. Occasionally this modernity pierces the reader's bubble of belief,
though, and another type of bubble-piercing occurs as the lamp gets handed around
to new owners, supposedly terminating all magic performed for the previous own-
ers, yet the previous magics somehow cheerfully persist. Aminah's growing surro-
gate-family relations with her cook, her servant, her jinni, and her boyfriend put a
sweet spin on Aminah's recovery from poverty and neglect, but her emotional
evolution is treated with slightly overplayed feeling without supporting details.
However, the narrative thrust of a foray into the modern style of social justice gives
this fairy tale the spice of originality. Speaking of fairy tales-ever wonder how
Cinderella's fairy godmother got started? Let me tell you about a girl with a lamp ...
TC
VALENTINE, JAMES 
JumpMan: Rule #1: Don't Touch Anything. 
Simon,
2004 
268p
ISBN 0-689-86872-3 
$14.95 
R Gr. 6-9
Asking Gen out on a date is the hardest thing thirteen-year-old Jules has ever had
to do, but he bravely screws up his courage and asks her to a movie. Meanwhile, in
the future, Theodore has just won a contest to be the first to test the newest model,
the TimeMaster JumpMan Pro, in a line of portable time-travel devices made by
TimeMaster Corporation. The JumpMan is supposedly programmed to take
Theodore to a never-before-seen location in time; unfortunately, it malfunctions
and he lands smack in the middle of Jules' big moment instead. Even worse,
though he is supposed to be invisible, Theodore finds out that everyone can see
him, a clear breach of the cardinal rule of TimeJumping. Stuck in boring "Mil 3,"
Theodore needs Jules and Gen to help him fit in (which, with his strobing disco-
light hair, odd slang, and talkative clothing, is no easy feat) until he can figure out
how to get home. Valentine's light, effortless, and highly humorous prose makes
the brain-twisting ruminations on Time captivating instead of painful; the details
of Theodore's future world and how we got there, as well the revelations he sparks
in Jules and Gen about the present world, are both entertaining and thought-
provoking. In between these thinking moments, there's plenty of TimeJumping
action, verbal comedy, and deadpan observations (particularly from Jules) to ap-
peal to both the intellectual and the in-for-a-good-time readers. The cliffhanger
ending ensures that readers will jump eagerly into the next book to see what hap-
pens now that Theodore's home. KH
WETTER, BRUCE 
The Boy with a Lampshade on His Head. Atheneum,
2004 
[304p]
ISBN 0-689-85032-8 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Stanley Krakow has an extremely active imagination, and he lives there most of the
time. In his own mind, he's supremely talented, and he is usually being trailed by
an ESPN crew on the lookout for the next time he breaks a record for something
like holding his breath or kicking rocks. In reality, he is painfully shy, with shades
JULY/AUGUST 2004 
* 489
of social anxiety disorder emerging whenever he is asked to speak or read in public.
He has friends, through their initiative rather than his, but he really bonds with his
uncle, who has abandoned reality altogether and is living as Alan Ladd in a nearby
hospital. When Stanley and his neighbor realize that their pretend superhero powers
cannot save a new girl from her very real abusive situation, he seeks help from
Uncle Alan, who takes this chance to become the strong, fascinating hero he has
always wanted to be. This is an engaging premise, and many readers will relate to
a protagonist caught in the gap between the life of the mind and external reality.
Unfortunately, the only real action takes place in the final twenty-five pages of the
book. The first 275 pages feature minor episodes that serve mostly to develop
Stanley's character, and as he is a shy boy with recurrent fantasies, lots of the
material is repetitive and only eventful inside Stanley's own mind. Shy guys will
identify with Stanley's character and his complex fantasy life, though, and they
will find his ultimate real-life triumph all the more satisfying. KC
WHEELER, LISA 
Bubble Gum, Bubble Gum; illus. by Laura Huliska-
Beith. 
Tingley/Little, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-316-98894-4 
$15.95 
R 3-6 yrs
Bubble gum sticking to the road does not count highly among the joys of summer,
but this tale, which resembles a summer version of the folktale "The Mitten," just
might. A happily bounding toad is the first critter to land in the pool of sticky
pink, followed by a "bad mood . .. tough dude shrew," a "gummy goose," a
"bumbled-up bee," and an "old, weathered-GUM-FEATHERED!-crow!"
Things take a serious turn when a truck comes barreling toward them, but the
resourceful group begins to chew and chew until their trap becomes their deliver-
ance as they float upward on a huge pink bubble. This attracts the attention of a
mean old bear, but these guys have learned from their predicament and know just
what to do, and the whole sticky saga starts over again. Textured, summer-hued
acrylics punctuated with bits of collage papers more than adequately capture the
chaos of the ridiculous dilemma, and the antic animal caricatures provide a good
deal of energy to the text. The real star, however, is the language play; storytime
leaders' tongues will get a workout as they twist their way around the quatrains
that detail each animal's response to getting stuck. There's lots of delicious inter-
nal rhyme, alliteration, and nonsense words that are sure to elicit giggles and imi-
tations, so do spit out the gum before you attempt a readaloud. KC
WILLEMS, Mo 
The Pigeon Finds a Hot Dog!; written and illus. by Mo
Willems. 
Hyperion, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-7868-1869-7 
$12.99 
R* 
5-8 yrs
Undaunted by his failure to drive a bus, Willems' obstreperous one-eyed pigeon is
back, this time seeking his bliss through the gastronomic pleasures of a found hot
dog. Alas, along comes a diminutive duckling ("scooty, scoot, scoot!") determined
to get his piece of the dog. Duckling's seemingly innocent chatter ("I've never had
a hot dog before..... What do they taste like? ... Would you say that it tastes like
chicken?") and guileless expression nearly undo our high-strung hero as he begins
to realize that he's being duped by the little duck into giving up his booty. Return-
ing to a formula can be tricky, especially when the expectations are set as high as
the pigeon's debut (Don't Let the Pigeon Drive the Bus!, BCCB 5/03), which gar-
nered a Caldecott Honor. This chapter of the pigeon agon is visually similar to the
490 
* THE BULLETIN
former, and also echoes its predecessor in yielding up delightfully unexpected cur-
ricular possibilities for older students (such as college freshmen, among others) by
illustrating the various methods of rhetorical appeal. It's a departure from prece-
dent, however, that the pigeon's hopes are not completely thwarted here, and the
ending is more or less satisfying depending on how you prefer your justice served:
some listeners will likely warm to the messages of sharing and compromise, while
others may miss the high tragedy of utterly disappointed dreams. Either way, the
duckling is adorable. KC
YOUNG, ED, ad. 
The Sons of the Dragon King: A Chinese Legend; ad. and illus. by
Ed Young. 
Atheneum, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-689-85184-7 
$16.95 
R Gr. 3-6
No parent wants to hear rumors of the children's misbehavior, and the Chinese
Dragon King is no exception. Reports pour in regarding the troubling or eccentric
behavior of his nine far-flung sons, and the father dons a disguise to witness the
acts himself. Bei-She wastes his day in competitions of strength, Chi Wen stares
off the rooftop, Pu-Lao incessantly bellows. The Dragon King is rightly con-
cerned, but he discerns a potential advantage to each behavior and suggests that his
sons use their proclivities for the good of the kingdom. Thus, Bei-She bears the
weight of the columns of important buildings, Chi Wen stands sentinel against
dangers, Pu-Lao lends his extraordinary volume to music and assures that the sound
of instruments "will be loud and true." 
Each of nine episodes is prefaced with a
discreet calligraphic representation of the son's name in the upper left corner, graced
with a free-wheeling black ink rendering of the son's unfettered antics, and con-
cluded with a boxed inset with the son's symbol and a caption regarding its use. A
loosely woven oyster-toned textile forms the textured backdrop, and Young adds
variety to his dominant blacks and reds with restrained ventures into blue and
green for the symbols and inset borders. Readers drawn to Chungliang Al Huang's
The Chinese Book ofAnimal Powers (BCCB 12/99) will want to pursue this el-
egantly presented legend as well. An author's note explains the tale further, but
there is no source note. EB
JULY/AUGUST 2004 
* 491
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Adoption-fiction: Shreve
Adoption-stories: de Haan
ADVENTURE: Boyce; Browne;
Goobie; Kimmel; Magrs; Oppel;
Valentine
African Americans: Barasch;
Freedman; Morrison; Rappaport
African Americans-fiction: Flake;
Tocher
Agriculture: Older
Animals: Dowson; Lang; Moore;
Older
Animals-stories: de Haan; Palatini;
Rand; Thomas
ANTHOLOGIES: Rappaport; San
Souci; Thomas
Archaeology: Hawass
Art and artists-fiction: Balliett;
Haseley
Aunts-fiction: Earls; Grant
Automobiles-stories: Gordon
Babies-stories: Molk
Baseball-fiction: Tocher
Beauty pageants-fiction: Juby
BIOGRAPHIES: Appelt; Barasch;
Craats; Freedman; Hook
Biology: Dowson
Birds-stories: Schaefer
Birthdays-stories: Potter
Books and reading-fiction: Kimmel
Books and reading-stories: Paratore
China-folklore: Young
Chinese Americans-stories: Hall
Civil rights movement: Morrison
Cleaning-stories: Luciani
Clothing-stories: Jenkins Daffodil
Cowboys-fiction: Steig
Cows-stories: Palatini
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Balliett; Haseley; Pinkwater
Cultural studies: Sheth
Current events: Al-Windawi;
Strasser
Dancers and dancing: Barasch
Dancers and dancing-stories:
Helldorfer
Death-fiction: Johnson
Depression, the-fiction: Easton;
Henderson
Disabilities: Barasch
Dolls-fiction: Reiss
Dragons-fiction: Browne; Young
Ecology: Schaefer
Egypt: Hawass
Emotions-stories: Helldorfer
Ethics and values: Boyce; Cabot;
DuPrau; Hall; Magrs; Schmidt;
Shreve; Strasser; Swope; Taylor
FABLES: Swope
Faith-fiction: Easton; Taylor
Families-fiction: Hite
Families-stories: Luciani
FANTASY: Browne; DuPrau;
Gandolfi; Goobie; Napoli;
Oppel; Reiss; Taylor; Valentine
Farm life: Older
Fathers-fiction: Appelt; Dessen;
Easton; Sones; Young
Fish-fiction: Hite
FOLKTALES AND FAIRY TALES:
Gordon; Paratore; Swope;
Thomas; Tunnell; Young
Food and eating-stories: Willems
Friends-fiction: Dowell; Shreve
Frogs-fiction: Napoli
Future-fiction: Valentine
Gays and lesbians-fiction: Earls
492 
* THE BULLETIN
Gays and lesbians-poetry: Rachel
Giants-fiction: Swope
Grandfathers-stories: Hall
Grandmothers-fiction: Gandolfi
Grief-fiction: Dessen; Sones
Growing up-fiction: Earls
Health: Burgess
HISTORICAL FICTION: Appelt;
Brown; Connor; Easton;
Henderson; Schmidt; Tocher
History, U.S.: Hochain; Morrison;
Rappaport
Homelessness-fiction: Strasser
HUMOR: Beaumont; Juby; Magrs;
Palatini; Pinkwater; Steig;
Wheeler; Willems
Identity-fiction: Hite
Identity-stories: Gordon
Imagination-fiction: Wetter
Imagination-stories: Paratore
Immigrants-fiction: Brown; Sheth
Immigrants-stories: Connor
India-fiction: Sheth
Jealousy-stories: Potter
JOURNALS: Al-Windawi
Language arts: Brisson
Lies-fiction: Shreve
Literature, children's: Craats; Hook
Literature, world: Kimmel
Magic-fiction: Tunnell
Money-fiction: Boyce
Movies-fiction: Cabot
Mummies: Hawass
Music and musicians: Freedman
Music and musicians-stories:
Bramhall
MYSTERIES: Balliett; Boyce; Hite;
Pinkwater
Nature study: Dowson; Lang;
Moore; Schaefer
Photography: Morrison
Physical education: Macy
Pigs: Older
POETRY: Rachel; Sones; Steig
Pregnancy-stories: Molk
Puppets-fiction: Grant; Magrs
Racism: Morrison
Racism-fiction: Schmidt
Reading aloud: Gordon; Napoli;
Steig; Young
Reading, reluctant: Burgess; San
Souci; Sones
Relationships-fiction: Earls; Flake
RHYMING STORIES: Steig;
Wheeler
Romance-fiction: Cabot; Oppel
Saints-fiction: Boyce
SCARY STORIES: San Souci
School: Morrison
School-fiction: Cabot; Dowell;
Sperring
Secrets-fiction: Goobie
Self-esteem-stories: Beaumont
Sex-fiction: Burgess
Sexuality-poetry: Rachel
Sheep-stories: Rand
SHORT STORIES: Flake; San
Souci
Sisters-fiction: Johnson
Sisters-stories: Jenkins; Potter
SONGS: Rappaport
Sports: Macy
SPORTS STORIES: Tocher
Storytelling: Thomas
Storytime: Beaumont; Hall;
Helldorfer; Jenkins Daffodil;
Jenkins My; Luciani; Palatini;
Rand; Wheeler; Willems
Summer-stories: Helldorfer
SUPERNATURAL STORIES:
Haseley; Reiss
SURVIVAL STORIES: DuPrau;
Strasser
Television-fiction: Grant
Time travel-fiction: Valentine
Tools-stories: Connor
Turtles-fiction: Gandolfi
Uncles-fiction: Wetter
Urban life-fiction: Strasser
Vietnam War-fiction: Brown
Voyages and travel-fiction:
Henderson; Kimmel; Oppel
Voyages and travel-stories: de Haan
War: Al-Windawi
Wealth-fiction: Boyce
West, the-fiction: Steig
Witches-stories: Sperring
Women's studies: Connor; Flake
WORDLESS BOOKS: Fleischman
World cultures: Al-Windawi
Writers and writing: Craats; Hook
JULY/AUGUST 2004 
* 493
THE
B ULLET
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
AUTHOR/TITLE INDEX, VOLUME 57
SEPTEMBER, 2003-JULY/AUGUST, 2004
12 Days of Christmas. Hills. 107.
13. Howe. 193.
48 Shades of Brown. Earls. 461.
9 of 1. Chin. 184.
95 Pounds of Hope. Gavalda. 104.
Acceleration. McNamee. 116.
Actual Size. Jenkins. 376.
Adams. Dog. 347.
Adoff. Names Will Never Hurt Me. 312.
Aesop's Fables. Aesop. 138.
Aesop. Aesop's Fables. 138.
After the Last Dog Died. Bredeson. 94.
Afterlife. Soto. 77.
Agee. Z Goes Home. 48.
Agell. Welcome Home or Someplace Like It.
178.
Ah, Music! Aliki. 5.
Aha! Romanek. 389.
Aiken. Midwinter Nightingale. 4.
Airborn. Oppel. 477.
Al Capone Does My Shirts. Choldenko. 265.
Al-Windawi. Thura's Diary. 452.
Albert. Less than Perfect. 138.
Alda. Morning Glory Monday. 92.
Aldabra. Gandolfi. 464.
Aleutian Sparrow. Hesse. 153.
Alice, I Think. Juby. 19.
Alien in a Bottle. Mackel. 338.
Aliki. Ah, Music! 5.
All You Need for a Beach. Schertle. 436.
Allen. George Washington, Spymaster. 313.
Almond. Fire-Eaters. 360.
Almost Forever. Testa. 79.
Almost to Freedom. Nelson. 290.
Alphin. Picture Perfect. 49.
Alter. Francine's Day. 49.
Amaryllis. Crist-Evans. 187.
Ambrose. This Vast Land. 179.
American Boy. Brown. 143.
Ancient Voices. Hovey. 374.
Andersen. Thumbelina. 139.
Anderson, M. Strange Mr. Satie. 5.
Anderson, W. Prairie Girl. 313.
Animal Groups: How Animals Live Together.
Kaner. 332.
Animal Groups: 'A Mob of Meerkats. Moore.
475.
Animal Groups: 
A School of Dolphins.
Spilsbury. 475.
Animal Hedge. Fleischman. 102.
Animals Asleep. Collard. 321.
Ann and Seamus. Major. 286.
Annie Was Warned. Krosoczka. 21.
Antarctic Ice. Mastro. 115.
Antonio on the Other Side of the World, Get-
ting Smaller. Doyle. 148.
Anything for You. Wallace. 442.
Appelt. Bubba and Beau Meet the Relatives.
314.
. My Father's Summers. 453.
Apples and How They Grow. Driscoll. 149.
Archambault. Boom Chicka Rock. 361.
Archers, Alchemists, and 98 Other Medieval
Jobs You Might Have Loved or Loathed.
Galloway. 273.
Ardagh. Fall of Fergal. 406.
Arenstam. Mayflower 1620. 203.
Arnold. Uluru. 139.
Aronson. Witch-Hunt. 140.
Arrowhawk. Schaefer. 482.
Art against the Odds. Rubin. 436.
Ashby. Sea Gift. 222.
Asher. On Her Way. 314.
Ashman. Essential Worldwide Monster Guide.
6.
At the Sign of the Sugared Plum. Hooper. 63.
IN
494 
* THE BULLETIN
Atomic Ace (He's Just My Dad). Weigel. 301.
Attack of the Killer Video Book. Shulman. 437.
Attack of the Mutant Underwear. Birdseye. 181.
Augarde. Various. 361.
Aunt Lucy Went to Buy a Hat. Low. 285.
Autumnblings. Florian. 13.
Avi. Mayor of Central Park. 140.
. Never Mind! 362.
Aylesworth. Goldilocks and the Three Bears.
141.
Baby Blue. Kwasney. 334.
Baby Business. Cuetara. 9.
Baby Goes Beep. O'Connell. 73.
Baby Ground Squirrel. Lang. 472.
Baby on Board. Gray. 328.
Baby Owl. Lang. 472.
Baby Radar. Nye. 201.
Bad Bears in the City. Pinkwater. 291.
Bad Boys. Palatini. 119.
Bagels from Benny. Davis. 188.
Baker, J. Home. 363.
Baker, K. More Mr. and Mrs. Green. 258.
Balliett. Chasing Vermeer. 453.
Bang. My Light. 258.
Bang-Campbell. Little Rat Rides. 315.
Banks. Cat Who Walked across France. 259.
_ 
. Walk Softly Rachel. 50.
Bannerman. Story of Little Black Sambo. 223.
Barasch. Knockin' on Wood. 454.
Barnard. Dangerous Planet. 93.
Barrett. Cold in Summer. 6.
Bartimaeus Trilogy: The Amulet of Samarkand.
Stroud. 298.
Bartoletti. Flag Maker. 363.
Barton. Bear Says North. 50.
Basilisk. Browne. 457.
Bass. Sign of the Qin. 363.
Bateson. Rain May and Captain Daniel. 7.
Battle-Lavert. Papa's Mark. 259.
Bauer. Double-Digit Club. 315.
.Snow. 179.
Baya, Baya, Lulla-by-a. McDonald. 116.
Beach Day! Lakin. 425.
Beach Is to Fun. Brisson. 456.
Beach Patrol. O'Brien. 431.
Beames. Night Cat. 141.
Bear Says North. Barton. 50.
Beast. Myers. 199.
Beat Goes On. Minchin. 384.
Beatrix. Winter. 39.
Beaumont. Duck, Duck, Goose! (A Coyote's on
the Loose!). 316.
. I Like Myself 454.
Beauty, Her Basket. Belton. 260.
Bedford. Copy Crocs. 364.
Behind You. Woodson. 398.
Bell, A. Dreaming in Black & White. 19.
SInkheart. 272.
. Princess Knight. 272.
Bell, L. Story of Coca-Cola. 180.
Belton. Beauty, Her Basket. 260.
Ben Franklin's Almanac. Fleming. 12.
Bend, Don't Shatter. Rachel. 479.
Beneduce. Moses. 260.
Bennett. Heart Divided. 364.
Benton. Franny K. Stein, Mad Scientist. 142.
Berger. Real Vikings. 180.
Berry. Nest Full of Stars. 261.
Best. When Catherine the Great and I Were
Eight! 51.
Best Book of Bikes. Pinchuk. 28.
Best Kind of Baby. Laing. 21.
Bicycle Madness. Kurtz. 113.
Big Brown Bear's Up and Down Day. McPhail.
71.
Big Fat Paycheck. Lawrence. 380.
Big Friends. Cuyler. 323.
Big Trip. Gorbachev. 231.
Big-Enough Ann. Flowers. 151.
Bilkins. Beach Patrol. 431.
Birdland. Mack. 114.
Birdseye. Attack of the Mutant Underwear. 181.
Birney. World According to Humphrey. 316.
Birthday Doll. Cutler. 368.
Bittersweet. Lamm. 238.
Blacklock. Roman Army. 365.
Blackwater Ben. Durbin. 189.
Blizzard. Wright. 130.
Block. Wasteland. 93.
Blood Gold. Cadnum. 410.
Blood-Hungry Spleen. Wolf. 82.
Bloor. Story Time. 316.
Blue Fingers. Whitesel. 352.
Blue Jasmine. Sheth. 483.
Blue Mirror. Koja. 282.
Blue Wolf. Creedon. 186.
Blumberg. York's Adventures with Lewis and
Clark. 261.
Blumenthal. Ice Palace. 142.
Blushing. Janeczko. 234.
Board. Bridget and the Moose Brothers. 335.
Boelts. When It's the Last Day of School. 407.
Boling. January 1905. 407.
Bone. Song of an Innocent Bystander. 407.
Book of Rock Stars. Krull. 196.
Boom Chicka Rock. Archambault. 361.
Borden. Sea Clocks. 365.
. Touching the Sky. 94.
Boris's Glasses. Cohen. 54.
Bortolotti. Panda Rescue. 262.
. Tiger Rescue. 262.
Bottle Houses. Slaymaker. 392.
Bottner. Pish and Posh. 223.
.Wallace's Lists. 408.
JULY/AUGUST 2004 
* 495
Bowler. Firmament. 317.
Boxes for Katje. Fleming. 58.
Boy Meets Boy. Levithan. 23.
Boy O'Boy. Doyle. 270.
Boy on Fairfield Street. Krull. 284.
Boy Who Couldn't Die. Sleator. 349.
Boy Who Looked Like Lincoln. Reiss. 204.
Boy with a Lampshade on His Head. Wetter.
488.
Boyce. Millions. 455.
Bradby. Some Friend. 318.
Brainboy and the DeathMaster. Seidler. 244.
Bramhall. Hepcat. 455.
Bray, L. Great and Terrible Beauty. 366.
Bray, R. Thura's Diary. 452.
Breakout. Fleischman. 58.
Breath. Napoli. 72.
Bredeson. After the Last Dog Died. 94.
Bredsdorff. Crow-Girl. 408.
Brenner. One Small Place in a Tree. 409.
Brewer. You Must Be Joking! 181.
Brian's Hunt. Paulsen. 242.
Brian. V Club. 409.
Bridget and the Moose Brothers. Lindenbaum.
335.
Brisson. Beach Is to Fun. 456.
Britton. Treekeepers. 51.
Brooks. Kissing the Rain. 224.
Broome. Drusilla the Lucky Duck. 143.
. Judas Donkey. 182.
Brown, D. American Boy. 143.
Brown, J. Little Cricket. 456.
Browne. Basilisk. 457.
Bruchac, James. Turtle's Race with Beaver. 182.
Bruchac, Joseph. Hidden Roots. 262.
Bruchac, Joseph. Pocahontas. 224.
Bruchac, Joseph. Turtle's Race with Beaver. 182.
Bruchac, Joseph. Warriors. 52.
Brugman. Walking Naked. 318.
Brundibar. Kushner. 155.
Bryant. Trial. 319.
Bubba and Beau Meet the Relatives. Appelt.
314.
Bubble Gum, Bubble Gum. Wheeler. 489.
Buehner. Superdog. 263.
Building Liberty. Hochain. 470.
Bujor. Prophecy of the Stones. 367.
Burgess. Doing It. 457.
Bunting. Presence. 95.
Burnham. Royally Jacked. 263.
Buster. Fleming. 59.
Butcher. Spy High: Mission One. 410.
Byng. Molly Moon's Incredible Book of Hyp-
notism. 7.
Byrd. Leonardo. 144.
Cabbage Soup Solution. Oiler. 241.
Cabot. Teen Idol. 458.
Cadnum. Daughter of the Wind. 144.
.Ship of Fire. 95.
Caletti. Honey, Baby, Sweetheart. 411.
Calhoun. White Midnight. 264.
Cameron. Colibrf. 52.
Campbell. Sometimes My Mommy Gets An-
gry. 53.
Cann. Hard Cash. 145.
. Shacked Up. 264.
Cannon. Let the Good Times Roll with Pirate
Pete and Pirate Joe. 224.
Can't Get There from Here. Strasser. 485.
Captain's Purr. Floyd. 103.
Carr. Elf of Union Square. 319.
Cart. Rush Hour: A Journal of Contemporary
Voices. Volume 1: Sin. 411.
Case of the Cat with the Missing Ear. Emerson.
56.
Casting the Gods Adrift. McCaughrean. 71.
Cat Who Walked across France. Banks. 259.
Catie & Josephine. Fuqua. 60.
Cave. You've Got Dragons. 96.
Cazet. Minnie & Moo and the Seven Wonders
of the World. 145.
Cerullo. Life under Ice. 8.
Chace. Heart's Delight. 240.
Charlie Bone and the Time Twister. Nimmo.
161.
Charlip. Little Old Big Beard and Big Young
Little Beard. 183.
Chasing Vermeer. Balliett. 453.
Cheng. Key Collection. 8.
Chibbaro. Redemption. 412.
Chief Sunrise, John McGraw, and Me. Tocher.
487.
Chig and the Second Spread. Swain. 246.
Child. Utterly Me, Clarice Bean. 96.
.Who's Afraid of the Big Bad Book? 183.
Chin. 9 of 1. 184.
Chloe's Birthday...and Me. Potter. 479.
Choldenko. Al Capone Does My Shirts. 265.
Christelow. Vote! 53.
Christensen. Daring Nellie Bly. 97.
Christopher Mouse. Wise. 396.
Chu Ju's House. Whelan. 394.
Cinderella's Dress. Willard. 168.
Circle of Cats. de Lint. 10.
Circle Unbroken. Raven. 293.
City of Ember. DuPrau. 11.
Clare and Francis. Visconti. 299.
Cleary. Rainbow Soup. 320.
Clements. Report Card. 412.
Clemesha. Dig! 443.
Climbing Everest. Salkeld. 32.
Climbing the Rainbow. Hulme. 331.
Cline-Ransome. Major Taylor. 265.
Clovermead. Randall. 434.
496 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Cluck O'Clock. Gray. 419.
Coast Mappers. Morrison. 343.
Cobb. I Face the Wind. 9.
Coburn. Prep. 184.
Cock-a-Doodle Moooo! DuQuette. 324.
Cohen. Boris's Glasses. 54.
Cohn. Pop Princess. 320.
Cold in Summer. Barrett. 6.
Cold Tom. Prue. 122.
Coleman. On the Run. 413.
Colfer. Wish List. 146.
Colibrf. Cameron. 52.
Collard. Animals Asleep. 321.
Collins, P. Fattening Hut. 146.
Collins, S. Gregor the Overlander. 185.
Colman. Furlong. 327.
Coming to America. Wolf. 82.
Confessions of a Not It Girl. Kantor. 332.
Connor. Miss Bridie Chose a Shovel. 458.
Contents under Pressure. Zeises. 398.
Cook. Martin MacGregor's Snowman. 185.
Cool Moonlight. Johnson. 65.
Cooley. Ostrich Eye. 266.
Cooper. Magic Thinks Big. 321.
Copper. Lisle. 336.
Copy Crocs. Bedford. 364.
Corder. Lionboy. 322.
Corrigan. Splintering. 322.
Costello. Bend, Don't Shatter. 479.
Count on Us. Nathan. 345.
Coverdale. Prophecy of the Stones. 367.
Coville. Moongobble and Me: The Dragon of
Doom. 266.
Cowboys & Longhorns. Stanley. 245.
Cowley. Wishing of Biddy Malone. 225.
Cox. Go to Sleep, Groundhog! 186.
Coy. Two Old Potatoes and Me. 54.
Craats. Roald Dahl. 459.
Crazy Hair Day. Saltzberg. 164.
Creation. McDermott. 115.
Creech. Granny Torrelli Makes Soup. 55.
. Heartbeat. 267.
Creedon. Blue Wolf. 186.
Crews. Neighborhood Mother Goose. 267.
Crist-Evans. Amaryllis. 187.
Crocker. Tale of the Swamp Rat. 147.
Cronin. Diary of a Worm. 55.
. Duck for President. 367.
Crow-Girl. Bredsdorff. 408.
Crowley. Feast of Fools. 225.
Crummel. Plaidypus Lost. 438.
Crying Rocks. Lisle. 157.
Cuba 15. Osa. 27.
Cuetara. Baby Business. 9.
Cullen. Little Scraggly Hair. 226.
Cummings. Saving Grace. 10.
Curse of the Pharaohs. Hawass. 468.
Curtis. I Took the Moon for a Walk. 323.
Cutler. Birthday Doll. 368.
Cuyler. Big Friends. 323.
D'Adamo. Iqbal. 187.
Daddy Mountain. Feiffer. 369.
Daffodil. Jenkins. 470.
Dangerous Planet. Barnard. 93.
Danko. Sidekicks. 56.
. Sidekicks: Operation Squish! 226.
Dante's Daughter. Heuston. 278.
Dare to Be Scared. San Souci. 33.
Daring Nellie Bly. Christensen. 97.
Darrow. Painters of Lexieville. 188.
Datlow. Swan Sister. 97.
Daughter of the Wind. Cadnum. 144.
Davies. Surprising Sharks. 227.
Davis, A. Bagels from Benny. 188.
Davis, J. Open Your Eyes. 147.
Day the Babies Crawled Away. Rathmann. 164.
De Angelis. Motion Pictures. 368.
de Haan. King & King & Family. 459.
de Lint. Circle of Cats. 10.
de Paola. Pascual and the Kitchen Angels. 268.
DeFelice. Old Granny and the Bean Thief. 98.
Delacre. Rafi and Rosi. 268.
Demi. Greatest Power. 413.
. Legend of Saint Nicholas. 98.
. Muhammad. 56.
Dent. LBD. 98.
Desimini. Policeman Lou and Policewoman
Sue. 10.
Dessen. Truth about Forever. 460.
DeVilliers. How My Private, Personal Journal
Became a Bestseller. 414.
Diary of a Wombat. French. 103.
Diary of a Worm. Cronin. 55.
DiCamillo. Tale of Despereaux. 99.
Dickinson. Inside Grandad. 269.
. Tears of the Salamander. 148.
Diffily. Jurassic Shark. 269.
Dig! Zimmerman. 443.
Dinah! Nishimura. 345.
Dinosailors. Lund. 197.
Dinosaur Mummies. Halls. 61.
Dirt Eaters. Foon. 229.
Dirty Cowboy. Timberlake. 37.
Divide. Kay. 154.
Dixon. Big-Enough Anna. 151.
Dog. Pennac. 347.
Doing It. Burgess. 457.
Dolphin Talk. Pfeffer. 202.
Don Quixote and the Windmills. Kimmel. 472.
Don't Cramp My Style. Fraustino. 370.
Don't Forget to Come Back. Harris. 330.
Don't Forget Winona. Peterson. 432.
Donuthead. Stauffacher. 207.
Doors. Munro. 429.
JULY/AUGUST 2004 
* 497
Double-Digit Club. Bauer. 315.
Double-Dare to Be Scared. San Souci. 481.
Double Helix. Werlin. 249.
Dowell. Secret Language of Girls. 460.
Downard. Little Red Hen. 369.
Downer. Hatching Magic. 11.
Dowson. Tigress. 460.
Doyle, B. Boy O'Boy. 270.
Doyle, M. Antonio on the Other Side of the
World, Getting Smaller. 148.
Drat That Fat Cat! Thomson. 209.
Dreaming in Black & White. Jung. 19.
Driscoll. Apples and How They Grow. 149.
Drummond. Flyers. 99.
Drusilla the Lucky Duck. Broome. 143.
Duck, Duck, Goose! (A Coyote's on the Loose!).
Beaumont. 316.
Duck for President. Cronin. 367.
Dunkle. Hollow Kingdom. 227.
Dunrea. Ollie. 100.
. Ollie the Stomper. 100.
DuPrau. City of Ember. 11.
. People of Sparks. 461.
DuQuette. Cock-a-Doodle Moooo! 324.
Durbin. Blackwater Ben. 189.
Duvall. How Rabbit Lost His Tail. 189.
Dyer. Fish in Room 11. 414.
Eager. Fox. 417.
Earls. 48 Shades of Brown. 461.
Earth, My Butt, and Other Big Round Things.
Mackler. 69.
Earthly Knight. McNaughton. 382.
East. Pattou. 73.
Easter Egg Disaster. Ruelle. 243.
Easton. Walking on Air. 462.
Echlin. Inanna. 228.
Edwards. Good Night, Copycub. 270.
Egan. Serious Farm. 149.
Elena's Serenade. Geeslin. 274.
Eleven. Myracle. 290.
Elf of Union Square. Carr. 319.
Ellington Was Not a Street. Shange. 295.
Elliott. Evangeline Mudd and the Golden-
Haired Apes of the Ikkinasti Jungle. 271.
Ellis. Salmon Forest. 167.
. Several Lives of Orphan Jack. 150.
Ely. Looking after Louis. 324.
Emerson. Case of the Cat with the Missing Ear.
56.
Emma's Strange Pet. Little. 68.
Emmett. Someone Bigger. 415.
Empire State Building. Mann. 239.
Encore, Grace! Hoffman. 191.
English. Hot Day on Abbott Avenue. 415.
Eragon. Paolini. 163.
Erdrich. Sacagawea. 100.
Erika's Story. Vander Zee. 298.
Escape from Memory. Haddix. 105.
Escaping Tornado Season. Williams. 301.
Essential Worldwide Monster Guide. Ashman.
6.
Eugene's Story. Scrimger. 244.
Evangeline Mudd and the Golden-Haired Apes
of the Ikkinasti Jungle. Elliott. 271.
Evetts-Secker. Little Red Riding Hood. 324.
Exiled. Karr. 378.
Facing the Lion. Lekuton. 114.
Fagan. Fortress of Kaspar Snit. 416.
Failing. Lasso Lou and Cowboy McCoy. 57.
Fairy in the Dairy. Nolan. 241.
Falcone. Mysterious Mummer. 101.
Falconer. Olivia... and the Missing Toy. 150.
Falconmaster. La Fevers. 156.
Fall of Fergal. Ardagh. 406.
Fattening Hut. Collins. 146.
Faultline. Tashjian. 78.
Fearnley. Watch Out! 325.
Feast of Fools. Crowley. 225.
Feiffer. Daddy Mountain. 369.
Felix and the Worrier. Wells. 129.
Fenner. Snowed In with Grandmother Silk. 101.
Feverbird's Claw. Kurtz. 379.
Fight On! Fradin. 13.
Figley. Schoolchildren's Blizzard. 370.
Finding My Hat. Son. 296.
Fine. True Story of Christmas. 58.
Fine St. Patrick's Day. Wojciechowski. 302.
Finney. I, Jack. 325.
Fire-Eaters. Almond. 360.
Firebirds. November. 201.
Firekeeper's Son. Park. 346.
Firmament. Bowler. 317.
First Part Last. Johnson. 18.
Fish in Room 11. Dyer. 414.
Fisher, C. Oracle Betrayed. 416.
Fisher, L. Gods and Goddesses of Ancient
China. 102.
Fishing Day. Pinkney. 202.
Fitch and Chip: New Pig in Town. Wheeler.
168.
Flag Maker. Bartoletti. 363.
Flake. Who Am I Without Him? 463.
Fleischman, Paul. Animal Hedge. 102.
. Breakout. 58.
. Sidewalk Circus. 463.
Fleming, C. Ben Franklin's Almanac. 12.
. Boxes for Katje. 58.
. Gator Gumbo. 325.
Fleming, D. Buster. 59.
Flinn. Nothing to Lose. 271.
Flip Side. Matthews. 70.
Flip. Lubar. 68.
Flood. It's Test Day, Tiger Turcotte. 326.
. Secret Holes. 12.
498 
* THE BULLETIN
Florian. Autumnblings. 13.
Flowers. Big-Enough Anna. 151.
Floyd. Captain's Purr. 103.
Flux. Goobie. 465.
Flyers. Drummond. 99.
Fogelin. Sister Spider Knows All. 228.
Foon. Dirt Eaters. 229.
Fortress of Kaspar Snit. Fagan. 416.
Fox. Eager. 417.
Fradin, D. Fight On! 13.
. Nicolaus Copernicus. 326.
Fradin, J. Fight On! 13.
Frame. Yesterday I Had the Blues. 151.
France. From Me to You. 229.
Francine's Day. Alter. 49.
Frank & Izzy Set Sail. Kvasnosky. 333.
Franklin. Grape Thief. 14.
Franny K. Stein, Mad Scientist. Benton. 142.
Fraustino. Don't Cramp My Style. 370.
Freaky Green Eyes. Oates. 117.
Free at Last! Rappaport. 480.
Freedman. In Defense of Liberty. 59.
. Voice that Challenged a Nation. 464.
Freedom Roads. Hansen. 16.
Freeman. Who Is Stealing the Twelve Days of
Christmas? 190.
French, J. Diary of a Wombat. 103.
French, S. Where in the World. 230.
Frisch. Story of Nike. 190.
Fritz, A. Praying at the Sweetwater Motel. 104.
Fritz, J. Lost Colony of Roanoke. 417.
From Me to You. France. 229.
Full Moon Barnyard Dance. Schaefer. 165.
Full Tilt. Shusterman. 35.
Funke. Inkheart. 272.
. Princess Knight. 272.
Fuqua. Catie & Josephine. 60.
Furlong. Colman. 327.
Fusco. Tending to Grace. 370.
Gaiman. Wolves in the Walls. 14.
Galloway. Archers, Alchemists, and 98 Other
Medieval Jobs You Might Have Loved or
Loathed. 273.
Gandolfi. Aldabra. 464.
Gantos. Jack Adrift. 60.
Gardner. Inventing Elliot. 273.
Gator Gumbo. Fleming. 325.
Gauthier. Saving the Planet & Stuff. 15.
Gavalda. 95 Pounds of Hope. 104.
Gay, Marie-Louise. Good Night Sam. 15.
Gay, Michel. Zee Is Not Scared. 327.
Geeslin. Elena's Serenade. 274.
George Washington, Spymaster. Allen. 313.
Geras. Sleeping Beauty. 418.
. Time for Ballet. 371.
Gerstein. Man Who Walked between the Tow-
ers. 152.
Ghost Girl. Ray. 122.
Giant Steps. Loredo. 239.
Gideon. Map that Breathed. 230.
Giff. Maggie's Door. 230.
Gift Moves. Lyon. 428.
Gilbert. Legacy of Gloria Russell. 274.
Gilbert & Sullivan Set Me Free. Karr. 20.
Gilgamesh the Hero. McCaughrean. 198.
Girl with a Baby. Olsen. 385.
Glass. Wondrous Whirligig. 105.
Gleitzman. Toad Rage. 418.
Glenn. Keeping Up With Roo. 371.
Globalize It! January. 235.
Go! Go! Maria! Harris. 62.
Go-Go Baby! Orgill. 346.
Go to Sleep, Groundhog! Cox. 186.
Go Track a Yak! Johnston. 18.
Gobble, Gobble, Slip, Slop. So. 350.
God and His Creations. Williams. 395.
God Bless the Child. Holiday. 233.
Goddesses. Muten. 160.
Godless. Hautman. 421.
Gods and Goddesses of Ancient China. Fisher.
102.
Goldie and the Three Bears. Stanley. 126.
Goldilocks and the Three Bears. Aylesworth.
141.
Goobie. Flux. 465.
Good, the Bat, and the Ugly. Magrs. 474.
Good Day's Fishing. Prosek. 292.
Good Night, Copycub. Edwards. 270.
Good Night for Freedom. Morrow. 289.
Good Night Sam. Gay. 15.
Goodman. Truth about Poop. 418.
Goose Girl. Hale. 106.
Gorbachev. Big Trip. 231.
Gordon. Ugly Truckling. 465.
Gospel Cinderella. Thomas. 439.
Gossip Times Three. Koss. 20.
Got to Dance. Helldorfer. 468.
Gottesfeld. Heart Divided. 364.
Gottfried. Homeland Security versus Constitu-
tional Rights. 190.
Grace. Mayflower 1620. 203.
Gracie. Napoli. 476.
Graham. Tales from the Waterhole. 372.
Grandma Elephant's in Charge. Jenkins. 65.
Granfield. I Remember Korea. 231.
Granny Torrelli Makes Soup. Creech. 55.
Grant. Puppet Wrangler. 466.
Grape Thief. Franklin. 14.
Grass Angel. Schumacher. 294.
Gravedigger's Cottage. Lynch. 427.
Graves Family. Polacco. 121.
Gray. Baby on Board. 328.
.Cluck O'Clock. 419.
Graydon. Made You Look. 232.
JULY/AUGUST 2004 
* 
499
Great and Terrible Beauty. Bray. 366.
Greatest Power. Demi. 413.
Green Dog. Staples. 126.
Greenberg. Romare Bearden. 61.
Greene. I've Already Forgotten Your Name,
Philip Hall. 419.
Gregor the Overlander. Collins. 185.
Gross Universe. Szpirglas. 392.
Guest. Iris and Walter and Cousin Howie. 232.
Guiberson. Rain, Rain, Rain Forest. 420.
Guitar Girl. Manning. 338.
Gunning. Shelter in Our Car. 328.
Gus and Grandpa Go Fishing. Mills. 72.
Haas. Scamper and the Horse Show. 329.
Haber. Heroic Adventures of Hercules
Amsterdam. 105.
Hachiko. Turner. 441.
Haddix. Escape from Memory. 105.
.Say What? 329.
Halam. Taylor Five. 275.
Hale. Goose Girl. 106.
Half and Half. Namioka. 26.
Halibut Jackson. Lucas. 337.
Halkin. Run, Boy, Run. 162.
Hall. Henry and the Kite Dragon. 466.
Halliday. Predicktions. 152.
Halls. Dinosaur Mummies. 61.
Hampton. September 11, 2001. 191.
Hansen. Freedom Roads. 16.
Haptie. Otto and the Flying Twins. 420.
Hard Cash. Cann. 145.
Hard Labor. McKissack. 287.
Hard Time. Thompson. 208.
Hard Times for Jake Smith. Henderson. 469.
Hard-Times Jar. Smothers. 36.
Harlem Stomp! Hill. 330.
Harlow. Shadows on the Sea. 106.
Harris. Don't Forget to Come Back. 330.
. Go! Go! Maria! 62.
.I Am NOT Going to School Today. 16.
Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix.
Rowling. 31.
Hartinger. Last Chance Texaco. 275.
Haseley. Trick of the Eye. 467.
Hassett. Mouse in the House. 276.
Hat Full of Sky. Pratchett. 388.
Hatching Magic. Downer. 11.
Haunting of Swain's Fancy. Seabrooke. 34.
Hautman. Godless. 421.
Hawass. Curse of the Pharaohs. 468.
Hazel Green. Hirsch. 63.
Heart Divided. Bennett. 364.
Heart's Delight. Nilsson. 240.
Heartbeat. Creech. 267.
Hebson. Robots Everywhere. 277.
Helen Keller. MacLeod. 381.
Helldorfer. Got to Dance. 468.
Helquist. Roger, the Jolly Pirate. 372.
Henderson. Hard Times for Jake Smith. 469.
Henkes. Kitten's First Full Moon. 277.
. Olive's Ocean. 17.
Henry and the Kite Dragon. Hall. 466.
Henry Bear's Christmas. McPhail. 117.
Hepcat. Bramhall. 455.
Herman. One Winter's Night. 62.
Hermes. Summer Secrets. 421.
Hero Dogs. Jackson. 64.
Heroic Adventures of Hercules Amsterdam.
Haber. 105.
Herzog. God Bless the Child. 233.
Hesse. Aleutian Sparrow. 153.
. Stone Lamp. 107.
Heuston. Dante's Daughter. 278.
Hey, Pancakes! Weston. 80.
Hidden Alphabet. Seeger. 124.
Hidden Roots. Bruchac. 262.
High. Sister Slam and the Poetic Motormouth
Road Trip. 422.
Hill. Harlem Stomp! 330.
Hills. 12 Days of Christmas. 107.
Hirsch. Hazel Green. 63.
Hite. King of Slippery Falls. 469.
Hobbs. Leaving Protection. 373.
Hoberman. You Read to Me, I'll Read to You.
373.
Hochain. Building Liberty. 470.
Hoffman, M. Encore, Grace! 191.
Hoffman, N. Stir of Bones. 192.
Holding at Third. Zinnen. 251.
Holiday. God Bless the Child. 233.
Hollow Kingdom. Dunkle. 227.
Home. Baker. 363.
Home for Navidad. Ziefert. 212.
Homeland Security versus Constitutional
Rights. Gottfried. 190.
Honey, Baby, Sweetheart. Caletti. 411.
Hoobler. In Darkness, Death. 278.
.We Are Americans. 192.
Hook. Roald Dahl. 459.
Hoop Queens. Smith. 35.
Hooper. At the Sign of the Sugared Plum. 63.
Hopkinson. Packet of Seeds. 331.
. Shutting Out the Sky. 193.
Horace the Horrible. Koller. 154.
Hornik. Zoo School. 374.
Hot City. Joosse. 424.
Hot Day on Abbott Avenue. English. 415.
Hot Hot Hot. Layton. 426.
House of Windjammer. Richardson. 29.
House on Falling Star Hill. Molloy. 342.
Hovey. Ancient Voices. 374.
How I Became a Pirate. Long. 197.
How I Found the Strong. McMullan. 341.
500 
* THE BULLETIN
How My Private, Personal Journal Became a
Bestseller. DeVilliers. 414.
How Prudence Proovit Proved the Truth About
Fairy Tales. Paratore. 478.
How Rabbit Lost His Tail. Duvall. 189.
How Sweet It Is (and Was). Swain. 207.
How to Cross a Pond. Singer. 76.
Howe. 13. 193.
Howler. Rosen. 390.
Hulme. Climbing the Rainbow. 331.
Hunchback. Wright. 442.
Hunger Moon. Lamstein. 425.
Hurst. Killing in Plymouth Colony. 194.
Huser. Stitches. 233.
I Am NOT Going to School Today. Harris. 16.
I Dream of Trains. Johnson. 108.
I Face the Wind. Cobb. 9.
I, Jack. Finney. 325.
I Like Myself! Beaumont. 454.
I Remember Korea. Granfield. 231.
I Took the Moon for a Walk. Curtis. 323.
I'm Mighty! McMullan. 160.
I've Already Forgotten Your Name, Philip Hall.
Greene. 419.
I've Seen the Promised Land. Myers. 384.
Ibbotson. Not Just a Witch. 17.
Ice Palace. Blumenthal. 142.
Ichikawa. La La Rose. 279.
If I Were a Lion. Weeks. 248.
If You Want to See a Caribou. Root. 389.
Impudent Rooster. Rascol. 434.
In Darkness, Death. Hoobler. 278.
In Defense of Liberty. Freedman. 59.
Inanna. Echlin. 228.
Ingold. Mountain Solo. 194.
Ingwersen. Crow-Girl. 408.
Inkheart. Funke. 272.
Inside Grandad. Dickinson. 269.
Inside Out. Trueman. 37.
Inside the Alamo. Murphy. 25.
Inventing Elliot. Gardner. 273.
Iqbal. D'Adamo. 187.
Iris and Walter and Cousin Howie. Guest. 232.
Island of Hope. Sandler. 390.
It's a Miracle! Spinner. 166.
It's Test Day, Tiger Turcotte. Flood. 326.
Jack Adrift. Gantos. 60.
Jack and the Seven Deadly Giants. Swope. 486.
Jackson, D. Hero Dogs. 64.
Jackson, R. Meet Me in St. Louis. 375.
Jacques. Ribbajack. 422.
Jake, Reinvented. Korman. 112.
James. Those Messy Hempels. 473.
Jane. Spring Is Here. 234.
Janeczko, Paul B. Blushing. 234.
.Top Secret. 375.
.Worlds Afire. 279.
January 1905. Boling. 407.
January. Globalize It! 235.
Jeepers Creepers. Leuck. 22.
Jenkins, A. Out of Order. 64.
Jenkins, E. Daffodil. 470.
Jenkins, M. Grandma Elephant's in Charge. 65.
Jenkins, S. Actual Size. 376.
Jennings, P. Wolving Time. 235.
Jennings, R. Mystery in Mt. Mole. 108.
Jess and the Stinky Cowboys. Smith. 295.
Jingle Boy. Scott. 123.
Jinkins. Pinky Dinky Doo: Where Are My
Shoes? 423.
Jinks. Pagan in Exile. 26.
. Pagan's Crusade. 236.
Jocelyn. Mable Riley. 280.
Joe-Joe's First Flight. Tarpley. 36.
Johann Gutenberg and the Amazing Printing
Press. Koscielniak. 66.
Johnson, A. Cool Moonlight. 65.
. First Part Last. 18.
. I Dream of Trains. 108.
.Just Like Josh Gibson. 280.
. Violet's Music. 236.
Johnson, K. Target. 109.
Johnson, M. Key to the Golden Firebird. 471.
Johnson, P. Little Bunny Foo Foo. 281.
Johnston. Go Track a Yak! 18.
. Kenya Christmas. 109.
. Mummy's Mother. 195.
Johnstone. Ultimate Bubble Book. 426.
Jones, D. Unexpected Magic. 423.
Jones, M. Little Genie: Double Trouble. 281.
Jones, M. Little Genie: Make a Wish! 281.
Jones, P. Things Change. 376.
Joosse. Hot City. 424.
Juby. Alice, I Think. 19.
. Miss Smithers. 471.
Judas Donkey. Broome. 182.
JumpMan: Rule #1: Don't Touch Anything.
Valentine. 488.
Jung. Dreaming in Black & White. 19.
Jurassic Shark. Diffily. 269.
Just Like Josh Gibson. Johnson. 280.
Kaaberbol. Shamer's Daughter. 377.
Kadohata. Kira-Kira. 195.
Kaner. Animal Groups: How Animals Live To-
gether. 332.
Kantor. Confessions of a Not It Girl. 332.
Karr. Exiled. 378.
__ 
. Gilbert & Sullivan Set Me Free. 20.
Kay. Divide. 154.
Keeping the Promise. Lehman-Wilzig. 335.
Keeping Up With Roo. Glenn. 371.
Keller. What a Hat! 110.
Kemp. Mayflower 1620. 203.
Kenya Christmas. Johnston. 109.
JULY/AUGUST 2004 
* 501
Kerr. Snakes Don't Miss Their Mothers. 110.
Kessler. Tail of Emily Windsnap. 378.
Key Collection. Cheng. 8.
Key to the Golden Firebird. Johnson. 471.
Killing in Plymouth Colony. Hurst. 194.
Kimmel, Elizabeth. Lily B., on the Brink of
Cool. 237.
Kimmel, Eric. Don Quixote and the Windmills.
472.
._ Wonders and Miracles. 282.
Kimmel, H. Orville. 111.
King. Milli, Jack, and the Dancing Cat. 333.
King & King & Family. de Haan. 459.
King of Slippery Falls. Hite. 469.
King-Smith. Nine Lives of Aristotle. 111.
Kira-Kira. Kadohata. 195.
Kissing the Rain. Brooks. 224.
Kitten's First Full Moon. Henkes. 277.
Knockin' on Wood. Barasch. 454.
Koja. Blue Mirror. 282.
Koller. Horace the Horrible. 154.
Konigsburg. Outcasts of 19 Schuyler Place. 283.
Korman. Jake, Reinvented. 112.
Koscielniak. Johann Gutenberg and the Amaz-
ing Printing Press. 66.
Kositsky. Thought of High Windows. 378.
Koss. Gossip Times Three. 20.
Kraft. Theodore Roosevelt. 21.
Krisher. Uncommon Faith. 283.
Krishnaswami. Monsoon. 196.
.Naming Maya. 424.
Krog. Attack of the Killer Video Book. 437.
Krosoczka. Annie Was Warned. 21.
Kruglik. Pish and Posh. 223.
. Wallace's Lists. 408.
Krull. Book of Rock Stars. 196.
. Boy on Fairfield Street. 284.
_ M Is for Music. 112.
.Night the Martians Landed. 66.
. Pot o' Gold. 237.
Kurtz. Bicycle Madness. 113.
. Feverbird's Claw. 379.
. Memories of Sun. 284.
Kurzweil. Leon and the Spitting Image. 155.
Kushner. Brundibar. 155.
Kvasnosky. Frank & Izzy Set Sail. 333.
Kwasney. Baby Blue. 334.
La Fevers. Falconmaster. 156.
La La Rose. Ichikawa. 279.
Laguna. Too Loud Lily. 379.
Laing. Best Kind of Baby. 21.
Lakin. Beach Day! 425.
Lamm. Bittersweet. 238.
Lamstein. Hunger Moon. 425.
Landry. Snow Ghosts. 113.
Lang. Baby Ground Squirrel. 472.
. Baby Owl. 472.
Lasky. Love That Baby! 285.
Lasso Lou and Cowboy McCoy. Failing. 57.
Last Burp of Mac McGerp. Smallcomb. 245.
Last Chance Texaco. Hartinger. 275.
Lauber. Who Came First? 22.
Lawlor. School at Crooked Creek. 334.
Lawrence. Big Fat Paycheck. 380.
Layton. Hot Hot Hot. 426.
LBD. Dent. 98.
Leap Day. Mass. 240.
Leaving Protection. Hobbs. 373.
Lee. True Blue. 114.
Leedy. Look at My Book. 380.
Legacy of Gloria Russell. Gilbert. 274.
Legend of Buddy Bush. Moses. 344.
Legend of Saint Nicholas. Demi. 98.
Lehman-Wilzig. Keeping the Promise. 335.
Lekuton. Facing the Lion. 114.
Leon and the Spitting Image. Kurzweil. 155.
Leonardo. Byrd. 144.
Leonori. Iqbal. 187.
Less than Perfect. Albert. 138.
Lester, H. Something Might Happen. 67.
Lester, J. Shining. 156.
Let the Good Times Roll with Pirate Pete and
Pirate Joe. Cannon. 224.
Letters from Wolfie. Sherlock. 436.
Leuck. Jeepers Creepers. 22.
. One Witch. 67.
Levine. Ultimate Bubble Book. 426.
Levithan. Boy Meets Boy. 23.
Lewin. Lost City. 23.
Liberty Street. Ransom. 292.
Library of Alexandria. Trumble. 209.
Life under Ice. Cerullo. 8.
Lila Bloom. Stadler. 438.
Lily B., on the Brink of Cool. Kimmel. 237.
Lily's Ghosts. Ruby. 31.
Linda Brown, You Are Not Alone. Thomas.
208.
Lindenbaum. Bridget and the Moose Brothers.
335.
Lionboy. Corder. 322.
Lisle, J. Crying Rocks. 157.
Lisle, R. Copper. 336.
Little Bunny Foo Foo. Johnson. 281.
Little Cricket. Brown. 456.
Little Genie: Double Trouble. Jones. 281.
Little Genie: Make a Wish! Jones. 281.
Little Lit: It Was a Dark and Silly Night.
Spiegelman. 77.
Little Old Big Beard and Big Young Little Beard.
Charlip. 183.
Little Pierre. San Souci. 123.
Little Rat Rides. Bang-Campbell. 315.
Little Red Hen. Downard. 369.
Little Red Riding Hood. Evetts-Secker. 324.
502 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Little Scraggly Hair. Cullen. 226.
Little Story about a Big Turnip. Zunshine. 444.
Little. Emma's Strange Pet. 68.
Lizzie Bright and the Buckminster Boy.
Schmidt. 482.
Long Time Ago Today. Warner. 39.
Long. How I Became a Pirate. 197.
Look at My Book. Leedy. 380.
Look. Ruby Lu, Brave and True. 336.
Looking after Louis. Ely. 324.
Looking for Bobowicz. Pinkwater. 478.
Loomis. Scuba Bunnies. 238.
Loredo. Giant Steps. 239.
Losing Is Not an Option. Wallace. 79.
Lost City. Lewin. 23.
Lost Colony of Roanoke. Fritz. 417.
Love That Baby! Lasky. 285.
Low. Aunt Lucy Went to Buy a Hat. 285.
Lowry. Messenger. 427.
Luba. Tryszynska-Frederick. 210.
Lubar. Flip. 68.
Lubka. Pupniks. 69.
Lucas. Halibut Jackson. 337.
Luciani. Those Messy Hempels. 473.
Luna. Peters. 387.
Lund. Dinosailors. 197.
. Tell Me My Story, Mama. 337.
Lupton. Riddle Me This! 158.
Lynch. Gravedigger's Cottage. 427.
Lyon. Gift Moves. 428.
M Is for Music. Krull. 112.
Mable Riley. Jocelyn. 280.
Macaulay. Mosque. 197.
Mack. Birdland. 114.
Mackel. Alien in a Bottle. 338.
Mackler. Earth, My Butt, and Other Big Round
Things. 69.
MacLean. Mary Margaret and the Perfect Pet
Plan. 428.
MacLellan. Run from the Nun! 198.
MacLeod. Helen Keller. 381.
Macy. Swifter, Higher, Stronger. 473.
Made You Look. Graydon. 232.
Maggie's Door. Giff. 230.
Magic Thinks Big. Cooper. 321.
Magrs. Good, the Bat, and the Ugly. 474.
Major. Ann and Seamus. 286.
Major Taylor. Cline-Ransome. 265.
Mama Had to Work on Christmas. Marsden.
158.
Man Who Walked between the Towers.
Gerstein. 152.
Mann. Empire State Building. 239.
Manning. Guitar Girl. 338.
Map that Breathed. Gideon. 230.
Markle. Outside and Inside Big Cats. 23.
Marsden. Mama Had to Work on Christmas.
158.
. Silk Umbrellas. 286.
Martin MacGregor's Snowman. Cook. 185.
Martin. On Sand Island. 70.
Marx. Touching the Sky. 94.
Mary Margaret and the Perfect Pet Plan.
MacLean. 428.
Mary Smith. U'Ren. 38.
Mary Was a Little Lamb. Rand. 480.
Mason, S. Quigleys at Large. 159.
Mason, T. Sidekicks. 56.
_ . Sidekicks: Operation Squish! 226.
Mass. Leap Day. 240.
Mastro. Antarctic Ice. 115.
Matthews. Flip Side. 70.
Mauner. Zoe Sophia's Scrapbook. 24.
May Belle and the Ogre. Roberts. 29.
Mayflower 1620. Plimoth Plantation. 203.
Mayor of Central Park. Avi. 140.
McAllister. Tortoise and the Hare. 339.
McCann. Luba. 210.
McCaughrean. Casting the Gods Adrift. 71.
. Gilgamesh the Hero. 198.
. Stop the Train! 24.
McCord. Pictures in the Dark. 381.
McDermott. Creation. 115.
McDonald. Baya, Baya, Lulla-by-a. 116.
. Sisters Club. 159.
McEwan. Willy the Scrub. 339.
McGhee. Snap. 287.
McGill. Sure as Sunrise. 340.
McGowan. Freedom Roads. 16.
McKissack, F. Hard Labor. 287.
McKissack, P. Hard Labor. 287.
McKissack, R. Try Your Best. 340.
McMullan, K. I'm Mighty! 160.
McMullan, M. How I Found the Strong. 341.
McNamee. Acceleration. 116.
McNaughton. Earthly Knight. 382.
McPhail. Big Brown Bear's Up and Down Day.
71.
. Henry Bear's Christmas. 117.
Meacham. Mid-Semester Night's Dream. 382.
Meet Me in St. Louis. Jackson. 375.
Memories of Sun. Kurtz. 284.
Meow Means Mischief. Nagda. 199.
Messenger. Lowry. 427.
Mid-Semester Night's Dream. Meacham. 382.
Midwinter Nightingale. Aiken. 4.
Mighty Jackie. Moss. 289.
Mikaelsen. Tree Girl. 383.
Milkweed. Spinelli. 125.
Milli, Jack, and the Dancing Cat. King. 333.
Millicent Min, Girl Genius. Yee. 130.
Millions. Boyce. 455.
Mills. Gus and Grandpa Go Fishing. 72.
JULY/AUGUST 2004 
* 503
. Perfectly Chelsea. 383.
Minchin. Beat Goes On. 384.
Minn and Jake. Wong. 83.
Minnie & Moo and the Seven Wonders of the
World. Cazet. 145.
Miss Bridie Chose a Shovel. Connor. 458.
Miss Smithers. Juby. 471.
Mister Monday. Nix. 200.
Mitton, J. Once Upon a Starry Night. 288.
Mitton, T. Tale of Tales. 341.
Molloy. House on Falling Star Hill. 342.
Molly Moon's Incredible Book of Hypnotism.
Byng. 7.
Molk. When You Were Just a Heartbeat. 474.
Monsoon. Krishnaswami. 196.
Montgomery. Tarantula Scientist. 342.
Montmorency. Updale. 351.
Moo Who? Palatini. 477.
Moongobble and Me: The Dragon of Doom.
Coville. 266.
Moore. Animal Groups: A Mob of Meerkats.
475.
More Mr. and Mrs. Green. Baker. 258.
Moriarty. Year of Secret Assignments. 343.
Morning Glory Monday. Alda. 92.
Morris. Princess, the Crone, and the Dung-Cart
Knight. 288.
Morrison, S. Who's Got Game? Poppy or the
Snake? 344.
Morrison, Taylor. Coast Mappers. 343.
Morrison, Toni. Remember. 475.
. Who's Got Game? Poppy or the Snake?
344.
Morrow. Good Night for Freedom. 289.
Mortal Engines. Reeve. 293.
Moses. Beneduce. 260.
Moses. Legend of Buddy Bush. 344.
Mosque. Macaulay. 197.
Moss. Mighty Jackie. 289.
Motion Pictures. De Angelis. 368.
Mouly. Little Lit: It Was a Dark and Silly Night.
77.
Mountain Solo. Ingold. 194.
Mouse in the House. Hassett. 276.
Muhammad. Demi. 56.
Mummy's Mother. Johnston. 195.
Mung-Mung. Park. 242.
Munro. Doors. 429.
Murphy. Inside the Alamo. 25.
Murray. Slightly True Story of Cedar B. Hartley
(Who Planned to Live an Unusual Life). 25.
Music for Alice. Say. 349.
Mutin. Goddesses. 160.
My Contract with Henry. Vaupel. 38.
My Cup Runneth Over. Whytock. 129.
My Father's Summers. Appelt. 453.
My House Is Singing. Rosenthal. 390.
My Light. Bang. 258.
My Road Trip to the Pretty Girl Capital of the
World. Yansky. 169.
Myers. Beast. 199.
. I've Seen the Promised Land. 384.
. Shooter. 429.
. Time to Love. 26.
Myracle. Eleven. 290.
. ttyl. 430.
Myrtle. Pearson. 386.
Mysterious Mummer. Falcone. 101.
Mystery in Mt. Mole. Jennings. 108.
Nagda. Meow Means Mischief. 199.
Naked without a Hat. Willis. 396.
Names Will Never Hurt Me. Adoff. 312.
Naming Maya. Krishnaswami. 424.
Namioka. Half and Half. 26.
Napoli. Breath. 72.
. Gracie. 476.
. North. 430.
Nathan. Count on Us. 345.
Neighborhood Mother Goose. Crews. 267.
Nelson, S. Star People. 160.
Nelson, V. Almost to Freedom. 290.
Nest Full of Stars. Berry. 261.
Never Mind! Avi. 362.
Newbery. Sisterland. 431.
Nicolaus Copernicus. Fradin. 326.
Night Cat. Beames. 141.
Night the Martians Landed. Krull. 66.
Nightmare. Nixon. 117.
Nijland. King & King & Family. 459.
Nilsson. Heart's Delight. 240.
Nimmo. Charlie Bone and the Time Twister.
161.
Nine Lives of Aristotle. King-Smith. 111.
Nishimura. Dinah! 345.
Nix. Mister Monday. 200.
Nixon. Nightmare. 117.
No Laughter Here. Williams-Garcia. 212.
Noisy Way to Bed. Whybrow. 394.
Nolan, H. When We Were Saints. 161.
Nolan, L. Fairy in the Dairy. 241.
Nolen. Thunder Rose. 200.
North. Napoli. 430.
Not Just a Witch. Ibbotson. 17.
Not Quite a Stranger. Rodowsky. 75.
Nothing to Lose. Flinn. 271.
November. Firebirds. 201.
Nunnally. Ring of the Slave Prince. 294.
Nye. Baby Radar. 201.
O Come, All Ye Faithful. Wade. 128.
O'Brien. Beach Patrol. 431.
O'Connell. Baby Goes Beep. 73.
O'Malley. Straight to the Pole. 162.
Oates. Freaky Green Eyes. 117.
Oh, Look! Polacco. 291.
504 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Old Granny and the Bean Thief. DeFelice. 98.
Older. Pig. 476.
Olive's Ocean. Henkes. 17.
Olivia... and the Missing Toy. Falconer. 150.
Oiler. Cabbage Soup Solution. 241.
Ollie. Dunrea. 100.
Ollie the Stomper. Dunrea. 100.
Olsen. Girl with a Baby. 385.
On Her Way. Asher. 314.
On Sand Island. Martin. 70.
On the Run. Coleman. 413.
Once Upon a Starry Night. Mitton. 288.
One Night. Wild. 395.
One Nighttime Sea. Rose. 75.
One of Those Hideous Books Where the
Mother Dies. Sones. 484.
One Small Place in a Tree. Brenner. 409.
One Winter's Night. Herman. 62.
One Witch. Leuck. 67.
Open Your Eyes. Davis. 147.
Oppel. Airborn. 477.
Oracle Betrayed. Fisher. 416.
Orange Trees of Versailles. Pietri. 388.
Orenstein. Unseen Companion. 118.
Orgill. Go-Go Baby! 346.
Orlev. Run, Boy, Run. 162.
Orville. Kimmel. 111.
Osa. Cuba 15. 27.
Ostrich Eye. Cooley. 266.
Otis. Killing in Plymouth Colony. 194.
Otto and the Flying Twins. Haptie. 420.
Out of Order. Jenkins. 64.
Outcasts of 19 Schuyler Place. Konigsburg. 283.
Outside and Inside Big Cats. Markle. 23.
Packet of Seeds. Hopkinson. 331.
Pagan in Exile. Jinks. 26.
Pagan's Crusade. Jinks. 236.
Painters of Lexieville. Darrow. 188.
Pak. Sumi's First Day of School Ever. 27.
Palatini. Bad Boys. 119.
. Moo Who? 477.
. Stinky Smelly Feet. 432.
Panda Rescue. Bortolotti. 262.
Paolini. Eragon. 163.
Papa's Mark. Battle-Lavert. 259.
Paratore. How Prudence Proovit Proved the
Truth About Fairy Tales. 478.
Park. Firekeeper's Son. 346.
. Mung-Mung. 242.
Pascual and the Kitchen Angels. de Paola. 268.
Patent. Right Dog for the Job. 385.
Pattou. East. 73.
Paulsen. Brian's Hunt. 242.
__ 
. Shelf Life. 28.
Pearson, S. Squeal and Squawk. 386.
Pearson, T. Myrtle. 386.
Peck. River between Us. 119.
Pennac. Dog. 347.
People of Sparks. DuPrau. 461.
Perfect Thanksgiving. Spinelli. 125.
Perfectly Chelsea. Mills. 383.
Perils of Peppermints. Wallace. 211.
Perkins. Snow Music. 164.
Peters. Luna. 387.
Peterson. Don't Forget Winona. 432.
Pfeffer. Dolphin Talk. 202.
.Shortest Day. 120.
Wiggling Worms at Work. 243.
Philbrick. Young Man and the Sea. 291.
Picture of Morty & Ray. Pinkwater. 74.
Picture Perfect. Alphin. 49.
Pictures in the Dark. McCord. 381.
Pierce, M. Waters Luminous & Deep. 387.
Pierce, T. Trickster's Choice. 120.
Pietri. Orange Trees of Versailles. 388.
Pig. Older. 476.
Pigeon Finds a Hot Dog! Willems. 489.
Pinchuk. Best Book of Bikes. 28.
Pinkney. Fishing Day. 202.
Pinkwater. Bad Bears in the Big City. 291.
. Looking for Bobowicz. 478.
. Picture of Morty & Ray. 74.
Pinky Dinky Doo: Where Are My Shoes?
Jinkins. 423.
Pirates! Rees. 203.
Pish and Posh. Bottner. 223.
Plaidypus Lost. Stevens. 438.
Please Don't Kill the Freshman. Trope. 127.
Plimoth Plantation. Mayflower 1620. 203.
Plum-Ucci. She. 121.
Pocahontas. Bruchac. 224.
Polacco. Graves Family. 121.
. Oh, Look! 291.
Policeman Lou and Policewoman Sue.
Desimini. 10.
Polikoff. Why Does the Coquf Sing? 433.
Pop Princess. Cohn. 320.
Portnoy. Where Do People Go When They Die?
347.
Pot o' Gold. Krull. 237.
Potter. Chloe's Birthday...and Me. 479.
Prairie Girl. Anderson. 313.
Pratchett. Hat Full of Sky. 388.
Praying at the Sweetwater Motel. Fritz. 104.
Predicktions. Halliday. 152.
Prep. Coburn. 184.
Presence. Bunting. 95.
Pride of African Tales. Washington. 352.
Princess Knight. Funke. 272.
Princess, the Crone, and the Dung-Cart Knight.
Morris. 288.
Printer. Uhlberg. 128.
Promises to Keep. Robinson. 348.
Prophecy of the Stones. Bujor. 367.
JULY/AUGUST 2004 
* 
505
Prosek. Good Day's Fishing. 292.
Prue. Cold Tom. 122.
Pumpkinhead. Rohmann. 30.
Pupniks. Lubka. 69.
Puppet Wrangler. Grant. 466.
Qualey. Too Big a Storm. 433.
Question Song. Zemach. 84.
Quigleys at Large. Mason. 159.
Rachel. Bend, Don't Shatter. 479.
Rafi and Rosi. Delacre. 268.
Rain May and Captain Daniel. Bateson. 7.
Rain, Rain, Rain Forest. Guiberson. 420.
Rainbow High. Sanchez. 206.
Rainbow Soup. Cleary. 320.
Raising the Griffin. Wyatt. 250.
Rand. Mary Was a Little Lamb. 480.
Randall. Clovermead. 434.
Randle. Slumming. 28.
Ransom. Liberty Street. 292.
Rappaport. Free at Last! 480.
Rapunzel. Roberts. 74.
Rascol. Impudent Rooster. 434.
Rathmann. Day the Babies Crawled Away. 164.
Raven. Circle Unbroken. 293.
Ray. Ghost Girl. 122.
Real Vikings. Berger. 180.
Rebel. Roberts. 30.
Redemption. Chibbaro. 412.
Rees, C. Pirates! 203.
Rees, D. Vampire High. 122.
Reeve. Mortal Engines. 293.
Reiss, K. Sweet Miss Honeywell's Revenge. 481.
Reiss, M. Boy Who Looked Like Lincoln. 204.
Remember. Morrison. 475.
Report Card. Clements. 412.
Restless. Wallace. 79.
Return of Calico Bright. Winkler. 81.
Reuter. Ring of the Slave Prince. 294.
Revealers. Wilhelm. 81.
Ribbajack. Jacques. 422.
Richardson. House of Windjammer. 29.
Riddle Me This! Lupton. 158.
Right Dog for the Job. Patent. 385.
Ring of the Slave Prince. Reuter. 294.
Rising Tide. Thesman. 127.
River between Us. Peck. 119.
Road to There. Ross. 204.
Roald Dahl. Craats. 459.
Roald Dahl. Hook. 459.
Roanoke. Yolen. 40.
Roberts, B. May Belle and the Ogre. 29.
Roberts, L. Rapunzel. 74.
Roberts, W. Rebel. 30.
Robinson. Promises to Keep. 348.
Robots Everywhere. Hebson. 277.
Rodman. Yankee Girl. 435.
Rodowsky. Not Quite a Stranger. 75.
Roger, the Jolly Pirate. Helquist. 372.
Rohmann. Pumpkinhead. 30.
Roman Army. Blacklock. 365.
Romanek. Aha! 389.
Romare Bearden. Greenberg. 61.
Root. If You Want to See a Caribou. 389.
Rose. One Nighttime Sea. 75.
Rosen. Howler. 390.
SShakespeare's Romeo and Juliet. 348.
Rosenthal. My House Is Singing. 390.
Rosie Stories. Voigt. 210.
Ross. Road to There. 204.
Rottman. Shadow of a Doubt. 205.
Rowling. Harry Potter and the Order of the
Phoenix. 31.
Royally Jacked. Burnham. 263.
Rubin. Art against the Odds. 436.
. Searching for Anne Frank. 205.
Ruby. Lily's Ghosts. 31.
Ruby Lu, Brave and True. Look. 336.
Ruelle. Easter Egg Disaster. 243.
Run from the Nun! MacLellan. 198.
Run, Boy, Run. Orlev. 162.
Rush Hour: A Journal of Contemporary Voices.
Volume 1: Sin. Cart. 411.
Sacagawea. Erdrich. 100.
Safe-Keeper's Secret. Shinn. 437.
Said. Varjak Paw. 32.
Salkeld. Climbing Everest. 32.
Salmon Forest. Suzuki. 167.
Saltzberg. Crazy Hair Day. 164.
San Souci. Dare to Be Scared. 33.
. Double-Dare to Be Scared. 481.
. Little Pierre. 123.
Sanchez. Rainbow High. 206.
Sandin. Boris's Glasses. 54.
Sandler. Island of Hope. 390.
Sauerwein. Song for Eloise. 206.
Saving Grace. Cummings. 10.
Saving the Planet & Stuff. Gauthier. 15.
Say. Music for Alice. 349.
Say What? Haddix. 329.
Scamper and the Horse Show. Haas. 329.
Schaefer, C. Full Moon Barnyard Dance. 165.
Schaefer, L. Arrowhawk. 482.
Schertle. All You Need for a Beach. 436.
_ 
. Skeleton in the Closet. 33.
Schmidt. Lizzie Bright and the Buckminster
Boy. 482.
School at Crooked Creek. Lawlor. 334.
Schoolchildren's Blizzard. Figley. 370.
Schreiber. Teenage Mermaid. 34.
.Vampire Kisses. 76.
Schumacher. Grass Angel. 294.
Schwartz. Aldabra. 464.
Scott. Jingle Boy. 123.
Scrimger. Eugene's Story. 244.
506 
* THE BULLETIN
Scuba Bunnies. Loomis. 238.
Sea Clocks. Borden. 365.
Sea Gift. Ashby. 222.
Seabrooke. Haunting of Swain's Fancy. 34.
Searching for Anne Frank. Rubin. 205.
Secret Holes. Flood. 12.
Secret Language of Girls. Dowell. 460.
See You Down the Road. Whitney. 250.
Seeger. Hidden Alphabet. 124.
Segal. Why Mole Shouted. 391.
Seidler. Brainboy and the DeathMaster. 244.
September 11, 2001. Hampton. 191.
Serious Farm. Egan. 149.
Several Lives of Orphan Jack. Ellis. 150.
Shacked Up. Cann. 264.
Shadow of a Doubt. Rottman. 205.
Shadowmancer. Taylor. 486.
Shadows on the Sea. Harlow. 106.
Shakespeare's Romeo and Juliet. Rosen. 348.
Shamer's Daughter. Kaaberbol. 377.
Shange. Ellington Was Not a Street. 295.
She. Plum-Ucci. 121.
Shea. Tangled Threads. 165.
Shelf Life. Paulsen. 28.
Shelter in Our Car. Gunning. 328.
Sherlock. Letters from Wolfie. 436.
Sheth. Blue Jasmine. 483.
Shining. Lester. 156.
Shinn. Safe-Keeper's Secret. 437.
Ship of Fire. Cadnum. 95.
Shooter. Myers. 429.
Shortest Day. Pfeffer. 120.
Shredderman: Secret Identity. Van Draanen.
352.
Shreve. Under the Watsons' Porch. 483.
Shulman. Attack of the Killer Video Book. 437.
Shusterman. Full Tilt. 35.
Shutting Out the Sky. Hopkinson. 193.
Sidewalk Circus. Fleischman. 463.
Sidekicks. Danko. 56.
Sidekicks: Operation Squish! Danko. 226.
Sign of the Qin. Bass. 363.
Silk Umbrellas. Marsden. 286.
Singer. How to Cross a Pond. 76.
Sfs. Tree of Life. 166.
Sister Slam and the Poetic Motormouth Road
Trip. High. 422.
Sister Spider Knows All. Fogelin. 228.
Sisterland. Newbery. 431.
Sisters Club. McDonald. 159.
Skeleton in the Closet. Schertle. 33.
Slaymaker. Bottle Houses. 392.
Sleator. Boy Who Couldn't Die. 349.
Sleeping Beauty. Geras. 418.
Slightly True Story of Cedar B. Hartley. Murray.
25.
Slumming. Randle. 28.
Small Bad Wolf. Taylor. 393.
Small World of Binky Braverman. Wells. 167.
Smallcomb. Last Burp of Mac McGerp. 245.
Smalley. Zoe Sophia's Scrapbook. 24.
Smith, A. Turkey Monster Thanksgiving. 124.
Smith, C. Hoop Queens. 35.
Smith, J. Jess and the Stinky Cowboys. 295.
Smothers. Hard-Times Jar. 36.
Snakes Don't Miss Their Mothers. Kerr. 110.
Snap. McGhee. 287.
Snow. Bauer. 179.
Snow Ghosts. Landry. 113.
Snow Music. Perkins. 164.
Snowed In with Grandmother Silk. Fenner. 101.
Snyder. Unseen. 350.
So. Gobble, Gobble, Slip, Slop. 350.
Some Friend. Bradby. 318.
Someone Bigger. Emmett. 415.
Something Might Happen. Lester. 67.
Something to Tell the Grandcows. Spinelli. 296.
Sometimes My Mommy Gets Angry. Campbell.
53.
Son. Finding My Hat. 296.
Sonata #1 for Riley Red. Stone. 297.
Sones. One of Those Hideous Books Where the
Mother Dies. 484.
Song for Ba. Yee. 443.
Song for Eloise. Sauerwein. 206.
Song of an Innocent Bystander. Bone. 407.
Sons of the Dragon King. Young. 490.
Soto. Afterlife. 77.
Sperring. Wanda's First Day. 484.
Spiegelman. Little Lit: It Was a Dark and Silly
Night. 77.
Spilsbury. Animal Groups: A School of Dol-
phins. 475.
Spinelli. Perfect Thanksgiving. 125.
.Something to Tell the Grandcows. 296.
Spinelli, J. Milkweed. 125.
Spinner. It's a Miracle! 166.
Spirit Line. Thurlo. 440.
Splintering. Corrigan. 322.
Spring Is Here. Jane. 234.
Spy High: Mission One. Butcher. 410.
Squeal and Squawk. Pearson. 386.
Stadler. Lila Bloom. 438.
Stahler. Truesight. 351.
Stanley, D. Goldie and the Three Bears. 126.
Stanley, J. Cowboys & Longhorns. 245.
Staples. Green Dog. 126.
Star People. Nelson. 160.
Stauffacher. Donuthead. 207.
Steig. Tales from Gizzard's Grill. 485.
Stemple. Roanoke. 40.
Stevens. Plaidypus Lost. 438.
Stewig. Whuppity Stoorie. 297.
Stinky Smelly Feet. Palatini. 432.
JULY/AUGUST 2004 
* 507
Stir of Bones. Hoffman. 192.
Stitches. Huser. 233.
Stone. Sonata #1 for Riley Red. 297.
Stone Lamp. Hesse. 107.
Stop the Train! McCaughrean. 24.
Story of Coca-Cola. Bell. 180.
Story of Little Black Sambo. Bannerman. 223.
Story of Nike. Frisch. 190.
Story Time. Bloor. 316.
Straight to the Pole. O'Malley. 162.
Strange Mr. Satie. Anderson. 5.
Strasser. Can't Get There from Here. 485.
Stroud. Bartimaeus Trilogy: The Amulet of
Samarkand. 298.
Sumi's First Day of School Ever. Pak. 27.
Summer Secrets. Hermes. 421.
Sun Mother Wakes the World. Wolkstein. 397.
Sunbird. Wein. 393.
Superdog. Buehner. 263.
Sure as Sunrise. McGill. 340.
Surprising Sharks. Davies. 227.
Suzuki. Salmon Forest. 167.
Swain, G. Chig and the Second Spread. 246.
Swain, R. How Sweet It Is (and Was). 207.
Swan Sister. Datlow. 97.
Swanson. Turn It Loose. 439.
Swear to Howdy. Van Draanen. 248.
Sweeney. Waiting for June. 246.
Sweet Miss Honeywell's Revenge. Reiss. 481.
Swifter, Higher, Stronger. Macy. 473.
Swope. Jack and the Seven Deadly Giants. 486.
Sword of the Rightful King. Yolen. 41.
Szpirglas. Gross Universe. 392.
Tadjo. Talking Drums. 247.
Tail of Emily Windsnap. Kessler. 378.
Tale of Despereaux. DiCamillo. 99.
Tale of Tales. Mitton. 341.
Tale of the Swamp Rat. Crocker. 147.
Tales from Gizzard's Grill. Steig. 485.
Talking Drums. Tadjo. 247.
Tamar. Venus and the Comets. 78.
Tangled Threads. Shea. 165.
Tarantula Scientist. Montgomery. 342.
Target. Johnson. 109.
Tarpley. Joe-Joe's First Flight. 36.
Tashjian. Faultline. 78.
Taylor Five. Halam. 275.
Taylor, G. Shadowmancer. 486.
Taylor, S. Small Bad Wolf. 393.
Tears of the Salamander. Dickinson. 148.
Teen Idol. Cabot. 458.
Teenage Mermaid. Schreiber. 34.
Tekavec. What's That Awful Smell? 247.
Tell Me My Story, Mama. Lund. 337.
Temerson. Orange Trees of Versailles. 388.
Ten Little Mummies. Yates. 83.
Tending to Grace. Fusco. 370.
Testa. Almost Forever. 79.
Theodore Roosevelt. Kraft. 21.
Thesman. Rising Tide. 127.
Things Change. Jones. 376.
This Vast Land. Ambrose. 179.
Thomas. Gospel Cinderella. 439.
. Linda Brown, You Are Not Alone. 208.
. What's the Hurry, Fox? 487.
Thompson. Hard Time. 208.
Thomson. Drat That Fat Cat! 209.
Those Messy Hempels. Luciani. 473.
Thought of High Windows. Kositsky. 378.
Thumbelina. Andersen. 139.
Thunder Rose. Nolen. 200.
Thura's Diary. Al-Windawi. 452.
Thurlo. Spirit Line. 440.
Tiger Rescue. Bortolotti. 262.
Tigress. Dowson. 460.
Timberlake. Dirty Cowboy. 37.
Time for Ballet. Geras. 371.
Time to Love. Myers. 26.
Time to Pee! Willems. 169.
Tiny's Big Adventure. Waddell. 442.
Toad Rage. Gleitzman. 418.
Tocher. Chief Sunrise, John McGraw, and Me.
487.
Tom Cat. Woods. 397.
Too Big a Storm. Qualey. 433.
Too Loud Lily. Laguna. 379.
Top Secret. Janeczko. 375.
Torrey. Voyage of Ice. 440.
Tortoise and the Hare. McAllister. 339.
Touching the Sky. Borden. 94.
Tree Girl. Mikaelsen. 383.
Tree of Life. Sfs. 166.
Treekeepers. Britton. 51.
Trial. Bryant. 319.
Trick of the Eye. Haseley. 467.
Trickster's Choice. Pierce. 120.
Trope. Please Don't Kill the Freshman. 127.
True Blue. Lee. 114.
True Story of Christmas. Fine. 58.
Trueman. Inside Out. 37.
Truesight. Stahler. 351.
Trumble. Library of Alexandria. 209.
Truth about Forever. Dessen. 460.
Truth about Poop. Goodman. 418.
Try Your Best. McKissack. 340.
Tryszynska-Frederick. Luba. 210.
ttyl. Myracle. 430.
Tunnell. Wishing Moon. 487.
Turkey Monster Thanksgiving. Smith. 124.
Turn It Loose. Swanson. 439.
Turner. Hachiko. 441.
Turtle's Race with Beaver. Bruchac. 182.
Two Old Potatoes and Me. Coy. 54.
U'Ren. Mary Smith. 38.
508 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Ugly Truckling. Gordon. 465.
Uhlberg. Printer. 128.
Ultimate Bubble Book. Levine. 426.
Uluru. Arnold. 139.
Uncommon Faith. Krisher. 283.
Under the Watsons' Porch. Shreve. 483.Tales
from the Waterhole. Graham. 372.
Unexpected Magic. Jones. 423.
Unseen. Snyder. 350.
Unseen Companion. Orenstein. 118.
Updale. Montmorency. 351.
Utterly Me, Clarice Bean. Child. 96.
V Club. Brian. 409.
Vail. Never Mind! 362.
Valentine. JumpMan: Rule #1: Don't Touch
Anything. 488.
Vampire High. Rees. 122.
Vampire Kisses. Schreiber. 76.
Van Draanen. Shredderman: Secret Identity.
352.
. Swear to Howdy. 248.
Vande Velde. Witch's Wishes. 210.
Vander Zee. Erika's Story. 298.
Various. Augarde. 361.
Varjak Paw. Said. 32.
Vaupel. My Contract with Henry. 38.
Venus and the Comets. Tamar. 78.
Viola. Facing the Lion. 114.
Violet's Music. Johnson. 236.
Visconti. Clare and Francis. 299.
Voice that Challenged a Nation. Freedman. 464.
Voices of Ancient Egypt. Winters. 169.
Voigt. Rosie Stories. 210.
Vote! Christelow. 53.
Voyage of Ice. Torrey. 440.
Waddell. Tiny's Big Adventure. 442.
Wade. O Come, All Ye Faithful. 128.
Wadsworth. Words West. 211.
Waiting for June. Sweeney. 246.
Waldman. We Asked for Nothing. 300.
Walk Softly Rachel. Banks. 50.
Walking Naked. Brugman. 318.
Walking on Air. Easton. 462.
Wallace's Lists. Bottner. 408.
Wallace, B. Perils of Peppermints. 211.
Wallace, J. Anything for You. 442.
Wallace, K. Wendy. 300.
Wallace, R. Losing Is Not an Option. 79.
. Restless. 79.
Wanda's First Day. Sperring. 484.
Warner. Long Time Ago Today. 39.
Warriors. Bruchac. 52.
Washington. Pride of African Tales. 352.
Wasteland. Block. 93.
Watch Out! Fearnley. 325.
Waters Luminous & Deep. Pierce. 387.
Watts. Wild Ride to Heaven. 80.
We Are Americans. Hoobler. 192.
We Asked for Nothing. Waldman. 300.
Weeks. If I Were a Lion. 248.
Weigel. Atomic Ace (He's Just My Dad). 301.
Wein. Sunbird. 393.
Welcome Home or Someplace Like It. Agell.
178.
Wells. Felix and the Worrier. 129.
.Small World of Binky Braverman. 167.
Wendy. Wallace. 300.
Werlin. Double Helix. 249.
Weston. Hey, Pancakes! 80.
Wetter. Boy with a Lampshade on His Head.
488.
What a Hat! Keller. 110.
What's That Awful Smell? Tekavec. 247.
What's the Hurry, Fox? Thomas. 487.
Wheeler. Bubble Gum, Bubble Gum. 489.
.Fitch and Chip: New Pig in Town. 168.
Whelan. Chu Ju's House. 394.
When Catherine the Great and I Were Eight!
Best. 51.
When It's the Last Day of School. Boelts. 407.
When We Were Saints. Nolan. 161.
When You Were Just a Heartbeat. Molk. 474.
Where Do People Go When They Die? Portnoy.
347.
Where in the World. French. 230.
White Midnight. Calhoun. 264.
Whitesel. Blue Fingers. 352.
Whitney. See You Down the Road. 250.
Who Am I Without Him? Flake. 463.
Who Came First? Lauber. 22.
Who Is Stealing the Twelve Days of Christmas?
Freeman. 190.
Who's Afraid of the Big Bad Book? Child. 183.
Who's Got Game? Morrison. 344.
Whuppity Stoorie. Stewig. 297.
Why Does the Coquf Sing? Polikoff. 433.
Why Mole Shouted. Segal. 391.
Whybrow. Noisy Way to Bed. 394.
Whytock. My Cup Runneth Over. 129.
Wiggling Worms at Work. Pfeffer. 243.
Wild Ride to Heaven. Watts. 80.
Wild. One Night. 395.
Wilhelm. Revealers. 81.
Willard. Cinderella's Dress. 168.
Willems. Pigeon Finds a Hot Dog! 489.
. Time to Pee! 169.
Williams, J. Escaping Tornado Season. 301.
Williams, M. God and His Creations. 395.
Williams-Garcia. No Laughter Here. 212.
Willis. Naked without a Hat. 396.
Willy the Scrub. McEwan. 339.
Windling. Swan Sister. 97.
Winkler. Return of Calico Bright. 81.
Winter. Beatrix. 39.
JULY/AUGUST 2004 
* 
509
Winters. Voices of Ancient Egypt. 169.
Wise. Christopher Mouse. 396.
Wish List. Colfer. 146.
Wishing Moon. Tunnell. 487.
Wishing of Biddy Malone. Cowley. 225.
Witch's Wishes. Vande Velde. 210.
Witch-Hunt. Aronson. 140.
Wittlinger. Zigzag. 40.
Wojciechowski. Fine St. Patrick's Day. 302.
Wolf, A. Blood-Hungry Spleen. 82.
Wolf, B. Coming to America. 82.
Wolkstein. Sun Mother Wakes the World. 397.
Wolves in the Walls. Gaiman. 14.
Wolving Time. Jennings. 235.
Wonders and Miracles. Kimmel. 282.
Wondrous Whirligig. Glass. 105.
Wong. Minn and Jake. 83.
Woods. Tom Cat. 397.
Woodson. Behind You. 398.
Words West. Wadsworth. 211.
World According to Humphrey. Birney. 316.
Worlds Afire. Janeczko. 279.
Wright, B. Blizzard. 130.
Wright, R. Hunchback. 442.
Wu. Antarctic Ice. 115.
Wyatt. Raising the Griffin. 250.
Yankee Girl. Rodman. 435.
Yansky. My Road Trip to the Pretty Girl Capi-
tal of the World. 169.
Yates. Ten Little Mummies. 83.
Year of Secret Assignments. Moriarty. 343.
Yee, L. Millicent Min, Girl Genius. 130.
Yee, P. Song for Ba. 443.
Yesterday I Had the Blues. Frame. 151.
Yolen. Roanoke. 40.
. Sword of the Rightful King. 41.
York's Adventures with Lewis and Clark.
Blumberg. 261.
You Must Be Joking! Brewer. 181.
You Read to Me, I'll Read to You. Hoberman.
373.
You've Got Dragons. Cave. 96.
Young. Sons of the Dragon King. 490.
Young Man and the Sea. Philbrick. 291.
Z Goes Home. Agee. 48.
Zee Is Not Scared. Gay. 327.
Zeises. Contents under Pressure. 398.
Zemach. Question Song. 84.
Ziefert. Home for Navidad. 212.
Zigzag. Wittlinger. 40.
Zimmerman. Dig! 443.
Zinnen. Holding at Third. 251.
Zoe Sophia's Scrapbook. Mauner. 24.
Zoo School. Hornik. 374.
Zunshine. Little Story about a Big Turnip. 444.
FREE
TRIAL ISSUE
of an award-winning
publication!
Visit
www.TeachingK-8.com
Click on
FREE TRIAL ISSUE
II I
ý TH
PRFSIONA
and activities that help teachers present new challenges
to their students, learn new concepts and develop new skills.
OF EDUCATIONAL
j 
FR
rTe
40 Rich
ACHO
To receive your
EE TRIAL ISSUE visit
ww.TeachingK-8.com
aching K-8 Magazine
lards Avenue * Norwalk, CT 06854
IGAME
"+x 
i 
vri
Written by Geraldine McCaughrean * Illustrated by David Parkins
"Superb... 
This fabulous introduction to the epic tradition deserves a wide
readership." 
-School Library Journal (starred review)
"n excellent book to test young readers and spark discussion about heroism,
honor, and derring-do." 
-The Bloomsbury Review
"This tale ... is rendered with simplicity and power..... Parkins' muscular
images ... are a fine foil for the text, which begs to be read aloud."
-Booklist
"learly a telling for our time, but one that honors its source."
-The Horn Book
"A robust, exciting rendition of the world's oldest written epic..... The most
riveting retelling yet of this ancient, ageless tale."
-Kirkus Reviews (starred review)
lor & black-and-white
tions throughout
and up
)-8028-5262-9
es
ver
ler, call 800-253-7521
*erdmans.com
SEERDMANS BOOKS
for Young Reades
Grand Rapids/C.mbridge
f Wm. B. Eerdman Publishing Co.
Dicoe
By Jackie Brown 
·
Hbk:0-7868 1852-2: :
$2~5.99 * Ag~C·~es 
2*Jne2
A Hon:g 
grl finds new hope in 8 nerw
land after leengcm:~ 
theNorth Vietnamese
·army for 
a 
n~ew lfe in America. 
!Set in.
Laos and Minnesota: 
in the~ i~io, this :
Is a powrfuL firs novel fro a
promising writer. --;
Dazzling*
ense, absorbing,
rninously written."
us Reiews, stardred review
-and noteworthy."
Book Magazine, starred review
hoping that Wein
·: 
I 
~
University of Illinois Press 
PERIODICALS
1325 South Oak Street 
POSTAGE
Champaign, IL 61820 
PAID
U.S.A. 
CHAMPAIGN, IL
ADDRESS SERVICE REQUESTED
Universil
1325 So~
Champai
U.S.A.
AnnKEss
cJ~~~;~B~
QLS 
sis
;NIL
i
i
I
You may now access The Bulletin Online with an individualized username
and password.
The Bulletin Online is available only to print subscribers, and includes the
1998-2003 volume years plus the current issues as they are published.
The online version allows you to search the current issue or the entire
database by author, title, age or grade level.
To access The Bulletin Online:
1. Go to http://www.prairienet.orglccbl
2. When accessing The Bulletin Online for the first time, use the sub-
scriber number that appears in the upper left-hand corner of the
mailing label on your print copy as both your username and pass-
word. This subscriber number will usually be a four- or five-digit
number but may also be a five-character letter/number combination.
3. After logging in for the first time, you will be required to change your
password to something other than your username. This password is
case sensitive and should be one word only. Please store this new
password in a safe place. Your username (which is also your sub-
scriber number) will not change.
Remember, The Bulletin Online is not licensed for public use; only indi-
vidual print subscribers and institutional subscribers' staff are granted
access, so please do not share your access codes. We are working to
expand The Bulletin Online's capabilities and therefore create broader
electronic subscription options for individuals and institutions.
Non-subscribers can learn more about The Bulletin of the Center for
Children's Books at: http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb/
Please e-mail any feedback or questions to: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu.
il111111lllll 
1111 
[1111
0008-9036(200407/08)57:11;1-N
CA. -·$:'^*^ 
i ^'.
;J~·
I~·~ 
;J~·
I~
