I LL I NOI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
01-' 
-y n
at 
;i 
.I~i 
;;-i·i· 
,
a
r,i
"A handsome puzzle book that also enhances
appreciation for our quirky mother tongue."*
JUD ITH VIORST
The Alphabet from Z to A
(With Much Confusion on the Way)
Illustrated in full color by Richard Hull
* "Refreshingly, Viorst offers
anything but a basic introduc-
tion to phonetics....Rather, her
verse is a pleasing blend of play-
fulness and sophistication....
[Hull's] detailed, often fantastical
pictures cleverly incorporate the
items mentioned in Viorst's
rhymes -
as well as a devilish
number of other objects that begin
with the spotlighted letter. It all
makes for good (and vocabulary-
building) phun."
-Starred, Publishers Weekly
"Intriguing."
-School Library Journal
'qThe well-known humorist uses
a reverse alphabet to explore,
and rail about, the idiosyncra-
ces of English ('Y' is for YEW
and for YOUJ But it isn't for
USING), touching on the vagaries
of homonyms and spelling, slip-
ping in rhymes...and engaging in
other wordplay."
-*Kirkus Reviews
"Kids will be charmed to see
someone acknowledge the appar-
ent idiocy of the language they're
grappling with." -Booklist
$14.95 SBE/0-689-31768-9
Ages 7-10
SBE indicates a reinforced hardcover edition.
Atheneum
An imprint of the Simon & Schuster Children's Publishing Division
A Paramount Communications Company
--
THE
BUvL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
June 1994
Vol. 47 No. 10
A LOOK INSIDE
311 THE BIG PICTURE
Tucker Pfeffercorn written and illus. by Barry Moser
312 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
317 * Flour Babies by Anne Fine
319 * Around the World in a Hundred Years written by Jean Fritz;
illus. by Anthony Bacon Venti
320 * Iktomi and the Buzzard written and illus. by Paul Goble
327 * Missing Sisters by Gregory Maguire
334 * Marvin Redpost: Alone in His Teacher's House written by Louis Sachar;
illus. by Barbara Sullivan
341 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
342 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
STAFF
Betsy Hearne, Editor and Associate Professor, GSLIS (BH)
Roger Sutton, Executive Editor (RS)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS ADVISORY BOARD
Leigh Estabrook, Dean, GSLIS, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Selma K. Richardson, Professor, GSLIS
Richard C. Anderson, Director, Center for the Study of Reading, UIUC
Jean Osborn, Associate Director, Center for the Study of Reading
P. David Pearson, Dean, College of Education, UIUC
Violet J. Harris, Associate Professor, College of Education
Nancy O'Brien, Education Subject Specialist, Library, UIUC
Peggy Miller, Associate Professor, Department of Speech Communication, UIUC
Ann D. Carlson, Assistant Professor, GSLIS, Rosary College
Janice Harrington, Head of Children's Services, Champaign Public Library
Elizabeth Huntoon, Director Systemwide Children's Services, Chicago Public Library
Janie Schomberg, Librarian, Leal Elementary School, Urbana, Illinois
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $35.00; individuals, $29.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Betsy Hearne, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 1512 N. Fremont St., #105,
Chicago, IL 60622
Second-class postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1994 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Barry Moser, from Tucker Pfeffercorn © 1994 and used by permission of Little,
Brown and Company.
JUNE 1994 * 311
THE BIG PICTURE
Tucker Pfeffercorn
written and illus. by Barry Moser
With that ominous little man on the cover, this probably isn't a Bulletin for
someone's bedtime reading. The same goes for Barry Moser's spooky revisioning
of Rumpelstiltskin, here known as Tucker Pfeffercorn, the name sought by the
desperate Bessie Grace, who, sans palace helpers, all on her own, discovers the
name of the hateful imp in order to save her young daughter, Claretta.
And it wasn't her stupid boasting father who got her into the mess, ei-
ther. Bessie, a comely young widow, is the victim of a story spun by company
store porch-sitter Jefferson Tadlock, who decides to spice up his yarn about a woman
who can spin cotton into gold by giving her the name of that "little ol' widow
woman up on the hill," Bessie Grace. Unfortunately, local land baron Hezakiah
Sweatt is listening in and locks Bessie into his shed along with a half bale of cotton:
"Ifn ya want yore baby back, ya best get to work, cause if'n that there cotton ain't
gold by mornin' . . . why, I'd just hate to think what might happen to yore sweet
little ol' baby. Southern humorist Florence King would call Sweatt a "bad good
ole boy," and Moser's portrait, complete with mean squint, mean mouth, and big
ol' belly, sets us firmly down in mountain-gothic country. You wouldn't want to
mess with this sucker.
Nor with his evil, tiny twin. Bessie Grace's cotton-spinning savior first
appears hanging from the rafters of the shed-all we see of him are his pointy little
feet while Bessie Grace looks from below. He doesn't ask for any payment the first
night-"'I don't want nothin,' he said in a sweet voice. 'Not now, no-how'"-but
when on the third night Bessie Grace desperately promises him anything, he says
"Ya got a deal," only returning for payment after Sweatt has mysteriously disap-
peared and Bessie Grace escapes-with the gold-and gives what-for to Sweatt's
thugs. Safely home with her baby, Bessie Grace is reading her Bible when the little
man reappears: "Ya said anything, an' the anything I want is her!"
"Rumpelstiltskin" is a pretty scary story to begin with; what's gained by
its transplantation into local legend? "Inside many of us/ is a small old man/ who
wants to get out," writes Anne Sexton in her version of the tale, and both Sexton
and Moser know the power of story brought (down) home. The Appalachia he
evokes is not real, exactly; it's a literary backwoods rooted in the popular American
imagination. Bessie Grace is an angel from a country song, complete with grit and
resourcefulness; Hezakiah Sweatt and the little man himself are Carson McCullers
grotesques. By putting a European folktale into an American context, old roots in
new soil, Moser surprises our expectations-that's not supposed to happen here--
so we see the story and the setting each in a new light, whether it's the hard-baking
glare on the faces of Sweatt's henchmen or the white-hot glow of the emerging
gold as Tucker Pfeffercorn spins it from the wheel. An excess of portraits often
312 
* 
THE BULLETIN
makes a picture book static, but Moser has here succeeded in making each (and the
illustrations are almost exclusively portraits) work as narrative art, from the cover
watercolor of Bessie Grace and Claretta in a tender embrace while the shadow of
Tucker lurks behind, to the upside down, eye-popping rage of Tucker when Bessie
Grace names his name. In a mischievous turn that makes manifest the intense
fusing of text and art throughout the book, Moser mirrors Tucker's furious found-
out stamping on the ceiling with a corresponding upside-down reversal of his words:
,JiA P101• I!Ap 9qj 
ijeX PIOl I!Ap ~qLj,,
Just as folktales proceed from archetypes-the trickster, the fool, the prin-
cess-stories come from characters. And while it would have been easy for Moser
to employ "characters"-hillbilly jim-cracker-dandies-he gives us instead real
strength and terror, sometimes in combination. Tucker Pfeffercorn is wicked for
sure, but in the picture mentioned above of the gold-spinning, there's an aura of
sacred flame that gives his demonic features nobility, and reminds us that his magic
is indeed marvelous. And Bessie Grace is nobody's fool. After she takes care of
Tucker, she takes care of herself: "She gave a good bit of the gold to her church,
but most of it she kept. A few months later, she and Claretta moved to Cincinnati,
where they lived happily ever after." Let's wish them the best, but people probably
tell stories there, too, when they find them hanging from the rafters or standing
beside the crib. And as Jefferson Tadlock learned, stories can cause trouble. Sleep
tight.
Roger Sutton, Executive Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
BABBITT, NATALIE 
Bub, or The Very Best Thing; written and illus. by Natalie
Babbitt. 
di Capua/HarperCollins, 1994 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-205045-1 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-205044-3 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-7 yrs
After an argument about what's "the one and only very best thing" for their tod-
dler, the King goes off to look for the answer in his books and the Queen walks the
Prince through the castle asking whomever she meets. It's a regular parade, with
the old family dog following them around and snatching a favorite toy dinosaur
whenever he can. Of course, everyone has a different prescription for "the one and
only very best thing," from sunshine to songs; but, when the cook's daughter sug-
gests asking the Prince himself, he repeats the only word he's spoken since the
beginning of the story, "Bub," an echo of his mother's endearment to his father,
"my love." The parents remain puzzled, but "the Cook's Daughter said to the
Cook, 'The Prince was right, Mama. Love is the very best thing.'" It's a fine book
for new parents, whose point of view it reflects entirely, but children themselves
may fidget a bit at the Socratic abstractness of it all. Babbitt's studied watercolor
scenes feature almost photorealistically literal characters and show limited varia-
JUNE 1994 * 
313
tion of value, so that the contrasting hues sometimes appear flat despite carefully
defined perspective and modelling. White muzzle notwithstanding, the dog is the
liveliest element here-and, at the stage of a picture-book audience's develop-
ment, the most likely suspect for the true meaning of the Prince's one and only
word. BH
BIANCHI, ROBERT STEVEN 
The Nubians: People of the Ancient Nile. Millbrook,
1994 
6 4p 
illus. with photographs 
(Beyond Museum Walls)
ISBN 1-56294-356-1 
$15.90 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
An introduction to the African people who challenged Egyptian power and con-
trolled major trade routes for centuries, this is efficient, if distant, in summarizing
the economic and cultural achievements of Nubians from around 8000 B.C. to
A.D. 350. The emphasis is first on the Kerma Culture, later on the Nubian-
dominated Twenty-fifth Dynasty of Egypt, and finally on the vastly successful
kingdom of Meroe-overrun at last by nomads after the Ethiopian Axumites took
control of the trade routes. Full-color and black-and-white photographs give samples
of art from various periods, a map helps readers follow the political vicissitudes of
changing dynasties, a chronology features important dates, and a list of museums
(and one book) directs readers to places where they can get further information.
The material is indexed and will be helpful to students reporting on African his-
tory, although the impersonal tone will probably limit their involvement to
factfinding. BH
BOMANS, GODFRIED 
Eric in the Land of Insects; tr. from the Dutch by Regina
Louise Kornblith; illus. by Mark Richardson. 
Houghton, 1994 
197p
ISBN 0-395-65231-6 
$14.95 
M 
Gr. 4-7
In this wry insect allegory first published in the Netherlands in 1945, Eric shrinks,
then jumps into an insect-laden painting, whereupon he discovers the all-too-hu-
man foibles of the beasts within: snobbish wasps, honey-hoarding butterflies, war-
mongering ants. While the novel is amusing in an arch kind of way, most of the
jokes fly right over Eric's head ("They all think they're hot stuff, but in the end,
they're all for the worms," says the worm), and young readers may catch only the
breeze as well. It's not an adult book, exactly, but its reliance on a naive narrator to
prove the errors of the adult world makes it a book about adult concerns, rather
tediously limned through Eric's lengthy conversations with the different insects.
Unlike Mary Pope Osborne's witty Spider Kane bug-fantasies, BCCB 6/93 and 5/
92, this book is pretty plotless, and the closing revelation that it was all a dream-
or was it?-is feeble. RS
BOND, NANCY 
Truth to Tell. McElderry, 1994 
[33 6p]
ISBN 0-689-50601-5 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Alice, fourteen, isn't at all pleased with her mother Christine's decision to pull up
their Cambridge (England) stakes and move to New Zealand, where Christine has
secured a job helping a reclusive old woman write the history of her family home,
Florestan. Alice's ne'er-do-well stepfather, Len, is to follow when his summer job
is finished. Florestan, as Alice and Christine discover upon their arrival, is far past
its former glory, and its owner, Miss Fairchild, isn't even there yet, having been
detained by illness while on a trip to Borneo. This long novel, set in 1958, takes
314 
* 
THE BULLETIN
quite a while to get going; in fact, what turns out to be the central crisis of the
story-could Len be Alice's real father?-does not appear until the twenty-first
chapter. Until that point, what we have are several interesting situations: the
thorny relationship between Alice and her mother, Alice's adjustment to a new
home and school, Miss Fairchild's imperious demands and secret disappointment.
These three women form an intriguing triangle, with Christine being especially
compelling, but there's little sense of movement, either thematically or in terms of
the plot, until Len appears in chapter fourteen. What the novel demonstrates, if
not generates, is an intense concern with relationships, with what people say to
each other while trying to find their places in the world. RS
BRENNER, BARBARA 
IfYou Were Therein 1776. Bradbury, 1994 
[144 p] 
illus.
with photographs
ISBN 0-02-712322-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Toss aside the American Revolution textbook unit and try this out instead. All the
usual quiz fodder is present-the Founders, the Continental Congresses, the Dec-
laration of Independence, the opening battles. But Brenner's briskly paced social
history connects landmark events with the everyday life of the colonists and en-
courages readers to imagine themselves into children's roles of the period (frontier
daughter, planter's son, Indian captive, Patriot spy). Although chapter headings
such as "The Way They Looked," "The Cities," "Religion," "At Play" suggest topi-
cal organization, each theme is introduced at a logically chosen point along the
year's time line. Discussion of food, for example, appears early to coincide with
pre-war shortages caused by British blockades. Discussion of religion is deferred
until after the chapter on the Declaration, so that Brenner can explore varieties of
religious response to independence and the "deliberately chosen language" of the
document itself. Plentiful period illustrations, closely coordinated with the text,
include more scenes of everyday life than stolid portraits. Some vocabulary may
require further definition-hogshead, pemmican, grinders-and a separate chap-
ter on the Tory experience would have been a nice addition. Annotated notes,
bibliography (children's materials not explicitly identified), and index are included.
An attractive and useful companion to the author's If You Were There in 1492
(BCCB 10/91). EB
BYARS, BETSY 
The Golly Sisters RideAgain; illus. by Sue Truesdell. 
HarperCollins,
1994 
6 4 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021564-X 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021563-1 
$14.00 
R 
Gr. 1-3
This is the third time the Golly Sisters have hit the trail (BCCB 10/90, 11/86).
They've learned how to make the horse stop and go, but their traveling show still
runs amok sometimes, as in the first story here about Rose's self-fulfilling proph-
ecy: "There is a goat in the audience, and a goat in the audience means bad luck."
A talking rock-shades of Anansi-takes advantage of the sisters' childlike com-
petitiveness, which erupts again in a fight over who's going to star in a one-princess
drama. These two, who sing their way through storms and holidays alike, will
continue to leave struggling young readers with their tongues in their cheeks for all
the right reasons. Just as Stevenson's illustrations do for Rylant's Henry and Mudge
books, Truesdell's antic watercolors go a long way in sustaining the humor that
anchors Byars' easy-to-read series. BH
JUNE 1994 * 
315
CALMENSON, STEPHANIE 
Rosie: A Visiting Dog's Story; illus with photographs by
Justin Sutcliffe. 
Clarion, 1994 
48p
ISBN 0-395-65477-7 
$15.95 
R Gr. 2-4
Visiting dogs visit various environments to "cheer up people who are sad, sick, or
lonely," and Stephanie Calmenson's dog Rosie follows this particular canine call-
ing. We first see Rosie as a very fuzzy baby, then as a student of basic obedience at
puppy kindergarten; when she's two, she attends visiting-dog school and learns the
job's necessary skills, commands, and patience. Finally our author and Rosie, now
a certified visiting dog, grace a children's hospital, where Rosie chases balls, enjoys
a grooming, and naps with the patients, and they then visit a nursing home where
Rosie provides cheer and companionship to the residents. The topic is engaging,
the text is clear and simple, and a final note gives a little more bio on Rosie and
information on visiting dogs (although it should say somewhere other than the
book flap the range of locations visiting dogs may visit). The page design is spa-
cious, the photographs are sharp and well-composed, and their subject is quite
fetching: Rosie may be a purebred Tibetan terrier, but she has enough generic
shaggy-dog appeal that one can immediately understand her effectiveness in her
career. Pair this with Patent, below, for a look at some unusual working dogs. DS
COMPTON, JOANNE, ad. 
Ashpet: An Appalachian Tale; illus. by Kenn
Compton. 
Holiday House, 1994 
40p
ISBN 0-8234-1106-0 
$15.95 
R 4-7 yrs
As a source note states, this Appalachian Cinderella (or more properly, Aschenputtel)
variant is taken from Richard Chase's Grandfather Tales, omitting some of Chase's
elaborations-as well as the somewhat crucial point that Ashpet is rendered unrec-
ognizable by the red dress and all-important slippers that "Granny" (in Chase she's
a witch) conjures for the scruffy servant girl. "Who does she think she is?" sniffs
mean-sister Myrtle after the doctor's handsome son (in Chase, a king) takes her
picnic basket to share with Ashpet, but neither text nor pictures will clue young
listeners into the fact that the question is not entirely rhetorical. Still, the basic
outline of the tale is clear enough and the frisky dialogue ("I declare! It's time for
me to get on home!") adds zip to the familiar story. Compton's line-and-water-
color illustrations set amiably doltish cartooned figures against a gentle landscape;
particularly funny is the sequence of the Dudley Do-Rightish doctor's son trying
the red shoe out upon Ethel, Myrtle, and finally Ashpet (who's been shoved under
the washtub by Widow Hooper). The caricatures are zesty even while they miss
the romantic underpinnings of the tale; like the Comptons' Jack the Giant Chaser
(BCCB 6/93), the book has a gleeful air of all-American fun. RS
CRAMER, ALEXANDER 
A Night in Moonbeam County. 
Scribner's, 1994 
[208p]
ISBN 0-684-19704-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Moonbeam County is where teenage Chas and his cocky friend Raul, traveling
from Chicago to Miami, wind up when they jump off a freight train to avoid the
railroad detectives who are sure to "crack heads when they catch folks riding free,"
according to a fellow hobo. If this seems vintage Depression fiction, it's deceptive.
As Chas mulls over the moon, he lets us know that "the astronauts had landed on
it before he'd even been born." What we do suspect long before Chas and Raul
catch on is that the circle of storytellers they find camped out in the dark are really
316 
* THE BULLETIN
ghosts spinning life-and-death tales that haunt the local countryside. The ten
stories are engrossing, which is why the framework seems so intrusive: after each
tale-one a time-travel back to the Civil War, another an Orpheus-like journey
(gender reversed) to the afterlife, a third about a demonic game of cards-the
reader is hauled back to an artificial dialogue calculated to set up the next tale. The
stories themselves are redolent of spooky southern legend, but in the novel as a
whole, the main characters' development is limited to a functional role of listening
and then discovering by daylight where the storytellers were buried long ago, with
a surprise grave for the two boys themselves in a previous incarnation. It's too bad
this couldn't have been just a down-home collection of short stories, but kids
drawn to the supernatural may very well tolerate the context for the sake of the
texts. Adult storytellers, too, will want to latch onto some of these for middle-
grade and junior high audiences. BH
CUSHMAN, KAREN 
Catherine, CalledBirdy. Clarion, 1994 
[192p]
ISBN 0-395-68186-3 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
High-spirited and high-born Catherine is thirteen, living in Lincolnshire in 1290,
and this is the diary she promised her brother, Edward the monk, that she would
keep. Her entries deal with various things, including her hated household duties
("Spinning. Tangled" is the entire entry for September the 16th), her wonderings
about her future ("Mayhap I could be a hermit. I wonder what they do"), and her
father's attempts to marry her off ("My father does not see it my way and seeks to
improve our position through my marriage bed"). Throughout, her voice is that
of a lively and adventurous adolescent, earthy and funny, questioning and obser-
vant. The details of medieval life are immediate and evocative, with Catherine
sharing a bed with her old nurse, her mother having miscarriage after miscarriage,
and the death of a seventeen-year-old acquaintance (he sustains a serious wound in
a rowdy feast-day game and dies of gangrene, in Catherine's house, a few days
later) casually mentioned, more notable for the drinking at his funeral than for
loss. Cushman hedges her bet a little by making Catherine conveniently modern
and rebellious in much of her outlook, but she writes with vigor and craft of a life
most young people won't have contemplated but will find fascinating here. An
author's note provides a brief summary of medieval living and includes sugges-
tions, both fiction and nonfiction, for further reading. DS
DANZIGER, PAULA 
Amber Brown Is Not a Crayon; illus. by Tony Ross. 
Putnam,
1994 
80p
ISBN 0-399-22509-9 
$12.95 
R 
Gr. 2-3
Third-grader Amber Brown and her best friend Justin have always done every-
thing together (even schoolwork-"I'll do the pasting. You do the cursive"), but
now Justin's moving, and neither one of them knows what to do about it. This is
a standard moving-away plot, but Danziger's brisk and empathetic writing brings
her the same kind of intuitive connection with kids she's made in books for older
readers, such as The CatAte My Gymsuit (BCCB 4/75). Amber's narration reveals
a slightly jaundiced eye ("When I grow up and remember third grade, I'm going to
immediately try to forget it"), but her pain at losing Justin slips through the wise-
cracks ("I keep waiting for him to mention the very important thing that his new
school and neighborhood doesn't have-ME"). Brief paragraphs, short sentences,
JUNE 1994 * 317
and a steady focus make this a fine big sister to picture books such as Waber's Ira
Says Goodbye (BCCB 10/88) or Sheila White Samton'sJenny'sJourney (6/91). RS
DAVOLLS, LINDA 
Tano de Binti: Two Chimpanzees Return to the Wild; illus. by
Andy DaVolls. 
Clarion, 1994 
26p
ISBN 0-395-68701-2 
$14.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Shipped from the London Zoo in 1975 as part of the Gambian Chimpanzee Re-
habilitation Project, two chimp siblings undergo a step-by-step adjustment after
their release in the African forest. An older female shows them how to find food
and shelter, and by the time this foster mother has a new baby, the two young
chimps are able to survive on their own and become part of a family. The simple
nature narrative is well paced to its picture-book format, with a personable tone
and natural ease of style. Even more distinguished is the spacious pastel art, drafted
with fluid grace against earthtone backgrounds. The animals are expressive with-
out becoming cute, their dignity reflected in adeptly varied postures of explora-
tion, social dynamics, foraging, and nesting. For an audience of young listeners,
it's not easy to find information that's both appealing and responsible. Adults can
explain the introductory note on programs for conserving endangered species, but
it's the story and pictures here that will win attention to the cause. Try this on
Curious George fans who are reac'y for real-life primates. BH
DEFELICE, CYNTHIA 
Lostman's River. Macmillan, 1994 
[160p]
ISBN 0-02-726466-1 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
His father escaping a bum murder rap, thirteen-year-old Tyler and his family have
moved from New York City to the western edge of the Everglades, which, in 1906,
are wild and remote, their primitive beauty endangered by "plumers," poachers
who prey on the native birds for their feathers. Tyler knows to stay away from the
gun-toting plumers, but he's eager to guide a "naturalist" from up north who
claims to be interested in collecting "specimens of flora and fauna" for research
and museum display. To Tyler's horror, Mr. Strawbridge is no better than the
plumers, indiscriminately shooting the herons and egrets and flamingos Tyler leads
him to in a hidden rookery. And when Strawbridge himself is killed by plumers,
Tyler is left on his own in the maze of mangrove-covered cays. While the ethical
themes that inform the story plumb no great depths, with StrawL ridge serving as a
straw man, the storytelling is smooth and convincing, blending landscape and
action in a satisfying whole. The story line after Tyler finds his way home, and his
father goes to the sheriff in Key West and then decides to take the family back to
New York and give himself up, seems summarized, lacking the intensity of detail
the author brings to the Everglades setting. Throughout, though, Tyler's narra-
tion is truly felt and easy to follow, and readers who usually avoid historical fiction
will find themselves pulled right in. RS
FINE, ANNE 
Flour Babies. Little, 1994 
178p
ISBN 0-316-28319-3 
$14.95 
R Gr. 6-9
Room 8 is a class filled with rowdies and academic losers, and they're not very
happy when their assigned project for the Science Fair requires each boy to look
after a six-pound bag of flour as if it were a child and to write a journal about the
experience. Simon Martin, the most troublesome of the hapless and hopeless class,
318 
* THE BULLETIN
grows attached to his flour baby and begins to ruminate on children and the re-
sponsibilities-and duration-of parenthood generally ("If instead of going off to
the hospital to have a baby all those years ago, his mother had stabbed someone to
death with a bread knife, she'd be out of jail by now") and on his own father's
abandonment when Simon was only six weeks of age. The flour-babies conceit
(see also Eve Bunting's Our Sixth Grade Sugar Babies, BCCB 11/90) takes a lively
turn here with Fine's broadly drawn comic portrayal of the putative teen parents,
who go along with the experiment only because they believe they'll be permitted
to kick 100+ pounds of bagged flour into smithereens as a finale. Simon's yearn-
ing for and gradual understanding of his departed father (as well as his increased
appreciation of his patient mother) is credible and touching, and his endearingly
goofy character makes him an appealing focus. Fans of Fine's other fine work
(Alias Madame Doubtfire, My War with Goggle-Eyes, etc.) will relish this zesty com-
edy. DS
FLETCHER, RALPH 
IAm Wings: Poems about Love. 
Bradbury, 1994 
4 8p
ISBN 0-02-735395-8 
$12.95 
R 
Gr. 7-12
The cover picture of a boy looking over his shoulder towards a girl (caught in an
incongruously Mae-West pose) will clue guys into the fact that this is a collection
asking for-and meriting-their attention. While few of Fletcher's thirty-one
brief poems specify genders, mostly relying on an I-thou address that could go
either or any which way, they have an unflowery simplicity of sentiment that young
men new to the game of love will appreciate: "In the movie dark/ I explore it-
notch by knuckle by/ smooth flat land:/ the new world/ that is your hand." That's
"The New World," from the first half of the collection, called "Falling In." Part
two, "Falling Out," conveys the rueful side of the same story: "It was like nothing/
I'd seen at the movies.// You never sat me down/ with a husk in your voice.// It
happened BANG: like you/ just changed channels." While the poems aren't as
sophisticated as Betsy Hearne's Love Lines or Ruth Gordon's anthology Under All
Silences (BCCB 10/87), they're smoothly constructed and fully ardent, perfect for
private musing or intimate sharing. RS
FRANKLIN, KRISTINE L. 
The Shepherd Boy; illus. by Jill Kastner. 
Atheneum,
1994 
32p
ISBN 0-689-31809-X 
$14.95
Spanish ed. El nio pastorISBN 0-689-31918-5 
$14.95 
R 
5-7 yrs
Available in both English and Spanish editions, this describes a southwestern Na-
vajo boy who cares for his father's sheep during summers when school is out.
Earth-toned paintings depict Ben's herding routine with two dogs helping to drive
the sheep across mesa and canyon to "the place where green grass grows" and back
again. Suspense builds when Ben must set out once more to find a lost lamb
among crumbling cave dwellings decorated with pictograms. Both the author and
the artist let natural drama dominate without intrusive artificial story elements or
graphic clutter. Except for a faux-Indian design element that looks like computer
art superimposing a border between illustrations and text, simplicity carries the
day, along with strong arid landscapes and a child's sturdy independence in nego-
tiating them. Youngest listeners will identify both with Ben's competence and
with his return "home to his hogan: a good place to be when Coyote barks and the
night birds scream." BH
JUNE 1994 * 319
FRITZ, JEAN Around the World in a Hundred Years: From Henry the Navigator to
Magellan; illus. by Anthony Bacon Venti. 
Putnam, 1994 
128p
ISBN 0-399-22527-7 
$17.95 
R 
Gr. 5-7
At a younger level than Harold Faber's Discoverers ofAmerica (BCCB 5/92) but
covering some of the same explorers from a more global perspective, this begins
with a brief overview of early mapmakers' concepts of the world and Prince Henry
the Navigator's determination to pioneer a passage along the west coast of Africa.
In the course of covering Diaz, Columbus, da Gama, Cabral, Cabot, Vespucci,
Ponce de Le6n, Balboa, and Magellan, Fritz perforce acknowledges that "once
European curiosity was unleashed on the world, so was their cruelty, arrogance,
and greed." As usual, the author relishes her primary-source details ("Their fresh
water had 'gone sick,' as the sailors said, and the only way they could bear the smell
was to hold their noses as they drank"), and her signature quips about famous
historical figures get plenty of exercise, although the material dictates the more
serious end in her stylistic spectrum. She's honest about heroes such as Balboa,
who tried to play fair with what he found, being punished while more fanatical
conquerors were rewarded in proportion to the profits they produced from their
voyages ("Columbus, driven to distraction by the need for gold, introduced a bru-
tal kind of slavery to this part of the world. Future explorers followed his example,
often inflicting unspeakable cruelties ... "). Consequently, some of the black and
white drawings, competent but comical, seem a bit out of joint with the informa-
tion, but in general the book offers researching students a good starting point
toward understanding Europeans' motivations and actions during the key century
of their pioneer voyaging. Footnotes include anecdotal explanations but don't cite
sources for information in the text. A bibliography and index are included. BH
FRYDENBORG, KAY 
They Dreamed of Horses: Careers for Horse Lovers; illus. with
photographs by Tanya Wood. 
Walker, 1994 
104 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8284-1 
$16.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8283-3 
$15.95 
R* 
Gr. 5-9
This book, addressed to that "certain kind of person who seems to be born loving
horses," and who "knows that someday she will find a way to be with horses,"
examines the career of thirteen equine-oriented professionals, each in a different
field. Youngsters who were thinking their horsey career options were limited to
jockey or veterinarian will be pleased to see the array here: equine artist, polo
coach, mounted police officer, mobile tack shop owner, therapeutic riding worker,
and more. The emphasis is female, and all the professionals are women, discussing
the training, duties, income, and pleasures of their respective jobs. Frydenborg
writes smoothly, incorporates interview information naturally, and asks the right
questions, so that the difficulties of starting up a business and the occasional drudgery
of work come through, but it's also clear that these women consider their jobs
worth the trouble. Most important is the author's understanding of and empathy
for young women hoping to make a living with the animals they love. A final
chapter, "What Else Is There To Do?", not only lists other possibilities but also
encourages readers to design their own careers. The blend of practical advice and
narrative appeal makes this book unusually successful, and it will provide concrete
assistance for horse-loving kids stronger on yearning than planning. One or two
black-and-white photographs appear with each chapter, and a couple of diagrams
(points of the horse and points of a saddle) are included; a glossary and a wonder-
fully complete list of sources "For More Information" are appended. DS
320 
* 
THE BULLETIN
GAUCH, PATRICIA LEE 
Noah; illus. by Jonathan Green. 
Philomel, 1994 
32 p
ISBN 0-399-22548-X 
$14.95
PAPARONE, PAM, ad. 
Who Built theArk?: Based on an African-American Spiritual;
ad. and illus. by Pam Paparone. 
Simon, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-671-87129-3 $15.00 
R 
4-6 yrs
Both these retellings, Paparone's based on a spiritual, and Gauch's "drawn from
the roots of African culture," feature black Noahs as well as significant variations
on the biblical events. Paparone's story takes place in the context of an African-
American church service, and the two-by-two becomes a counting song (with music
supplied on the endpapers): "In come the animals three by three: two big cats and
a bumblebee." "Two by two!" is the reiterated call that Gauch's Noah makes to
the embarking animals, but the Flood goes on for longer than usual: "For one
hundred days and fifty days more, it rained and rained, rained and rained." These
clearly aren't ur-text editions, but when it comes to Noah, there's always room for
one more story in most collections, and both versions are supported by strong art.
Paparone's acrylic paintings are precisely lined and deeply colored in a manner
reminiscent ofFulvio Testa's work; the "nine by nine" cattle feature several breeds,
alike only in their exotic elegance. Green's paintings, while occasionally crowded,
are loudly, exuberantly colored, with a multi-hued human family enflocked by
birds of every feather and beasts of every spot and stripe, joyfully rewarded in the
end with a rich green land. RS
GOBLE, PAUL, ad. 
Iktomi and the Buzzard: A Plains Indian Story; ad. and illus. by
Paul Goble. 
Jackson/Orchard, 1994 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08662-3 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-06812-9 
$14.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Like Goble's previous Iktomi stories (Iktomi and the Ducks, BCCB 12/90, etc.),
this portrays the antic trickster with energetic graphics and intertextual commen-
tary inviting audience participation ("I bet the kids want to make this rude sign").
The humor is sly, starting with a title spread where the artist makes fun of himself,
his subject, and his society: "Don't read this book. That white guy, Paul Goble, is
stealing my stories and making money off of them." One of the first adaptors of
Native American folklore to give full and careful sources for his picture books,
Goble paradoxically roots his playful disrespect in longstanding respect. Such
confidence is important to the inherently irreverent tone of Iktomi, who in this
episode sets out for the Eagle Dance, only to be stopped by a stream of water and
then transported by a buzzard that dumps him midflight for his impudence. Iktomi
falls headfirst into a hollow log, gets stuck, and persuades two passing girls to chop
him out. The end is a bit anticlimactic and too obvious a setup: "Can anyone
guess what Ikto will get up to next?" Still, this series, which retains its innovative
freshness with visual surprises sharpening Goble's signature stylization, has by now
have won a faithful following and can keep listeners guessing just what Ikto will
get up to next. BH
GREENE, JACQUELINE DEMBAR 
One Foot Ashore. 
Walker, 1994 
196p
ISBN 0-8027-8281-7 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
A historical novel set in the seventeenth century follows the fortunes of Maria Ben
Lazar, sister of the heroine in Greene's previous Out of Many Waters (BCCB 1/
89). The two girls-members of a Jewish family forced to convert-were sepa-
JUNE 1994 
* 321
rated after escaping from Catholic monks in Brazil, to which they had been kid-
napped from Portugal by agents of the Inquisition. While Isobel eventually landed
in New Amsterdam, Maria stows aboard a ship to Amsterdam and finds shelter
with the painter Rembrandt until she can locate her parents. The ocean voyage is
especially involving because of Maria's resourcefulness in hiding and befriending a
baby rat, which she watches being born and feeds when the mother fails to return
from foraging for food. Her stay in Rembrandt's household is also convincingly
portrayed despite a simplistically villainous servant girl. The book's ending is di-
rected too neatly, however, as everything conspires to Maria's benefit, including
the discovery of her parents in Amsterdam and of Isobel's safe haven in New
Amsterdam, where the family plans to immigrate. Young readers probably won't
mind the predictability, accompanied as it is by storytelling that's enriched but not
diverted by period detail. BH
HAMILTON, MORSE 
Yellow Blue Bus Means I Love You. 
Greenwillow,
1994 
180p
ISBN 0-688-12800-9 
$14.00 
R 
Gr. 9-12
A New England boarding school, Aviary Prep, is the setting for this sophisticated
romance that charts the bumpy course of love between Timur, a mostly American-
ized Russian emigre, and Phoebe: "She was in two of his classes-Sex and Human
Values, and English .... She always sat with one arm over the back of the empty
seat next to her, breathing loudly as if pissed or bored." Both are semi-misfits,
Tim for his intellectualism, and Phoebe for being an all-around handful-sexually
aggressive, smart, assertive, and troubled. Phoebe's self-absorbed parents are cli-
ched typecasting, but otherwise the characterization, and the writing throughout,
is fully imagined. The third-person narrative is putatively (and unnecessarily)
Tim's journal, which is given as the reason for dubbing the characters with the
names of birds (Tim's roommate Freddy Goatsucker, teacher Ms. Snipe-Dow-
itcher); it's annoying. The love affair, though, is ever-intense and sexy, with even
its turbulent demise passionate in its heartbreak. RS
HESSE, KAREN 
Phoenix Rising. Holt, 1994 
[208p]
ISBN 0-8050-3108-1 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
Nyle, who helps run her grandmother's Vermont sheep farm, still has painful
memories of her mother's and grandfather's deaths and father's desertion. In fact,
she has experienced too many losses in her own life to welcome ailing refugees
from a nearby nuclear power plant disaster that has just devastated the countryside
and killed an untold number of citizens. Yet when Gran takes in young Ezra and
his mother, Nyle's drawn to the boy, who is weakened from radiation poisoning
and struggling with the sudden destruction of everything he's loved. It's a credit to
Hesse that she concentrates on character dynamics instead of exploiting situational
dramatics. The love between teenaged Nyle and Ezra is delicately developed, as is
the prickly friendship between Nyle and a girlfriend who's a dwarf. In fact, the
generally complex scenes and personalities render unnecessary the occasional over-
statements ("It scared me, thinking about a world polluted by radiation"), repeti-
tions ("people always leaving"), and political reflections ("If people really understood
how big this was, how far it went, how deep, something would be done. Now. To
change things. So this could never happen again"). The story speaks for itself, as
"Ezra and his mother huddled together, alone in the dark country of his illness."
322 
* 
THE BULLETIN
The friends, family, and loyal dogs that personalize this tragedy will move kids to
their own thoughts about social action. BH
HITE, SID 
It's Nothing to a Mountain. Holt, 1994 
214 p
ISBN 0-8050-2769-6 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
It's 1969, and Lisette, fourteen, and Riley, twelve, are grieving over the sudden
death of their parents in a car accident, while their loving grandparents are trying
to help them adjust. What helps Lisette is the wearing of her mother's gold locket,
which she regards as a talisman, a protection by a guardian angel sent by her par-
ents; Riley is soon distracted by and absorbed with Thorpe, a local boy eking out a
living in the woods after his mother was imprisoned. Hite is an imaginative writer,
and he conjures up the picturesque Virginia mountains well, but the sensibility
here is adult and the emphasis is on philosophy rather than plot; the constant
piling up of images ("The zeitgeist was wearing flowers in her hair") and the fre-
quent pondering of eternal verities make the book-well, ponderous. The story of
Thorpe, living on his wits, and Riley, trying to solve Thorpe's dilemma, is involv-
ing, and the sweetly sentimental tale of Lisette trying to track down her guardian
angel with the aid of an elderly neighbor may please dreamier readers. DS
HOUSTON, GLORIA 
Mountain Valor; illus. by Thomas B. Allen. 
Philomel,
1994 
239p
ISBN 0-399-22519-6 
$14.95 
M 
Gr. 5-8
Ten-year-old Valor, named after her father's medal for bravery on the frontier,
cowers in a closet while her pregnant mother is attacked by a red-bearded Yankee
soldier in 1861. By the end of the Civil War, Valor is fifteen and has proved her
courage by helping her cousin and two ex-slaves run their Appalachian farm, frus-
trating bounty hunters, fending off soldiers or renegades who raid the countryside
for supplies, killing a bear, and retrieving the family's livestock by dosing an entire
company of men with sleeping-herb tea. This is an extremely busy plot, with
characters that are-as Houston explains in a concluding note-symbolic. While
her picture books (My Great Aunt Arizona, BCCB 4/92; The Year of the Perfect
Christmas Tree, 10/88) realize situations with focused detail, the novel seems domi-
nated by purposive intent, including narrative that's awkwardly loaded with infor-
mation: "'Who be your papa?' said the voice like a soft song in Valor's ears, asking
the important question which members of the Appalachian culture used to estab-
lish a stranger's place in one of the area's families or as an outsider." There's also a
great deal of repetition in describing characters who are one-dimensional to begin
with. A local wisewoman is constantly asserted to be kind, the red-bearded raider
always referred to as being the man who hurt Valor's family, the ex-slave Savannah
too often exclaiming "Lordy, Lordy"; and over and over we hear of Valor's ambi-
tion to be "a sister to the wind." While the action and touch of romance at the end
will appeal to young readers, the heavy-handed writing results in over-programmed
historical fiction. BH
HOWLAND, NAOMI 
ABCDrive! A Car Trip Alphabet; written and illus. by Naomi
Howland. 
Clarion, 1994 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-66414-4 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
3-5 yrs
Softly rumpled colored-pencil and acrylic pictures cruise through the alphabet
JUNE 1994 
* 323
from ambulance to zoom as a young mother, child, and dog take a leisurely recre-
ational drive through San Francisco and the Bay area. There's no story beyond the
sightseeing, but the various vehicles (bus, cement mixer, dump truck) and objects
(keys, red light, yield sign) have a high toddler recognition quotient, and each of
the amiably detailed double spreads link the letters, as with the ice cream truck
supplying treats to the soldiers in the jeep. While the pictures are too busy for
littler kids to pick out the object to be identified, and there's not enough going on
to hold older kids entranced with automotive doings, it's an appropriate accessory
for a car trip, where kids can I-Spy in alphabetical order. RS
JOHNSON, SCOTT 
Overnight Sensation. Atheneum, 1994 
[2 2 4 p]
ISBN 0-689-31831-6 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-12
After a summer away, Kerry Dunbar is new and improved-slimmed down, trendily
coiffed-and she has been welcomed into the popular senior crowd. Despite her
previous commitment to good grades and social change, Kerry is dazzled by the
attention and revels in her new insider status, taking to partying, drinking, having
sex, and participating in vandalism, which gets out of hand when her crowd drunk-
enly trashes and then accidentally burns down the garage of Kerry's former best
friend. The group keeps silent, and Kerry bears her guilt through a school year of
changes, self-doubt, and maturation. The underlying message of the dangers of
pandering to popular appeal isn't subtle, but Kerry's story is complex and honest,
with relevant plot threads about her irresponsible father and her too-restrained
mother. In addition to weakness and guilt, Kerry's narration displays a believable
blindness as she periodically advises other people to do the right thing in other
circumstances but holds silently to her uneasy secret without seeming to see a
conflict. Reminiscent of Richard Peck's Princess Ashley (BCCB 6/87), this is a
dark and involving story of peer dynamics. DS
JONES, K. MAURICE 
Say It Loud: The Story of Rap Music. 
Millbrook,
1994 
128p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 1-56294-386-3 
$19.90 
R Gr. 7-12
With a cover design that's sophisticated if slightly indecipherable, this history and
overview of rap music taps into the appeal of its subject to bring fans to a broader
consideration about how popular-culture phenomena gestate, get born, and change.
Jones finds cultural and musical roots for rap in the West African griots, in slavery
and the black church, in jazz and poetry, and in James Brown. Its expression is
just as myriad, with party rap, political rap, PG rap, white rap, gangster rap each
having a place in the hip-hop world, and each explored by Jones: "Whereas Shante
was a razor-tongued girl from the projects, Queen Latifah was rap's female cultural
ambassador." Jones is stronger on social commentary and controversy than on
literary analysis, but he quotes lots of lyrics ("The Constitution says we all got a
right to speak,/ Say what we want, Tip, your argument is weak"-Ice-T's rap to
Tipper Gore) that will give neophytes a quiet place to start. Confirmed fans will
appreciate the respect, fair but not adulatory, shown to their heroes and they'll
love the two color-photo inserts of rap "ancestors" and current stars. A glossary
defines patois and a discography lists selected recordings; there are also a reading
list and an index. RS
324 
* THE BULLETIN
JOSEPH, LYNN 
The Mermaid's Twin Sister: More Stories from Trinidad; illus. by
Donna Perrone. 
Clarion, 1994 
63p
ISBN 0-395-64365-1 
$13.95 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Amber, who inherited Tantie's storytelling beads in A Wave in Her Pocket (BCCB
7/91), hears five more tales derived from the folkloric figures of Trinidad, includ-
ing the mischievous duennes, sad La Diablesse, and scary Obeahs--and then tells
one of her own that scares her cousin into good behavior. Caribbean island cel-
ebrations center the stories, which assume the supernatural as part of the natural
and grow as a lesson from social contexts; the title story, for instance, features a
visitor who describes her sister's transformation into a mythical sea creature after
defying a prohibition against swimming in the ocean on Easter Sunday, something
Amber has been tempted to do. Although pronounced, the dialect seems consis-
tent and the story frame unintrusive on the stories themselves. Energetic black-
and-white drawings reflect cheerful activities in a lively setting, and the afterword
gives some background on the uninhibited mix of Trinidadian ethnic traditions.
BH
KIMMEL, ERIC A., ad. 
Anansi and the Talking Melon; illus. by Janet
Stevens. 
Holiday House, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1104-4 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
While Elephant naps after a hard morning's work in his melon patch, Anansi picks
his way into a melon with a sharp thorn and gorges himself on the juicy fruit.
Now he is fat, trapped, and bored. What is there to do but trick his neighbors?
When Elephant returns to pick the melon, Anansi talks to him from inside. Con-
vinced he has discovered a rare treasure, a talking melon, Elephant sets off to show
it to the king. Of course, other animals are duped along the way, and Anansi
thoroughly embarrasses the king by accusing him of being stupid enough to talk to
a melon. The king angrily hurls the talking melon, it bursts, and Anansi gets away
scot-free. But is the tale really over? The artful arachnid now calls down to El-
ephant from his new hiding place in a bunch of bananas, "We bananas should
have warned you. Talking melons are nothing but trouble." Kimmel rolls the
action along with the rollicking cadence of a well-told joke, and Stevens' expressive
animals are delightfully dopey. Source notes and/or suggestions of other Anansi
stories would have been welcome, because this tale will surely whet the reader's
appetite for more (see also Kimmel and Stevens' Anansi and the Moss-CoveredRock,
BCCB 10/88). EB
KUSKIN, KAuA 
Paul; illus. by Milton Avery. 
HarperCollins, 1994 
4 8p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023573-X 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023568-3 
$16.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
This is a book that was a long time in the making, as a prefatory note explains:
Milton Avery did the illustrations in 1946, for a book that never got published and
whose text has been lost, and the Avery family finally asked Karla Kuskin to write
a new text to accompany them. To partner Avery's fanciful art, Kuskin has written
a fanciful story about Paul, who makes up a new song and wants to sing it to his
magic grandmother, who's traveling out West. A flying pig offers to take both the
letter and Paul out West, but the pig drops the letter en route, so Paul hunts for it
and his grandmother, asking assistance of the caterpillar, policeperson, wind, sing-
ing cat, and wolves he encounters along the way (all of whom are friends of his
JUNE 1994 
* 
325
grandmother). This is a tale of gossamer-light fancy, really too light to sustain a
story of this length, and the plot has no conflict or cumulation, merely Paul's
progression towards his grandmother's. Kuskin has a nice turn of phrase, how-
ever, particularly in Paul's periodic verses of his song, where scansion and rhyme
make for pleasurable reading aloud. Avery's art appears on seven double-spread
pages and one final full-page picture, with occasional elements lifted from the
double spreads to decorate the text pages. These are vistas of fantasy and bold
color, more concerned with the splendor of pigment and space than the detail of
line; the wondrous characters are sunny and unthreatening. In fact, a more suc-
cessful tale might result from letting the story-packed paintings wordlessly narrate
themselves, or from asking young viewers to tell their own version. DS
LANKFORD, MARY D. 
Quinceanera: A Latina'sJourney to Womanhood; illus. with
photographs by Jesse Herrera. 
Millbrook, 1994 
48p
ISBN 1-56294-363-4 
$14.40 
R 
Gr. 4-6
As with the rituals displayed in Monty Roessel's Kinaalda (BCCB 1/94), the Catho-
lic Latina quinceafera is a celebration of emergent womanhood, one that, accord-
ing to Lankford's introduction, has its roots in ancient Aztec traditions that were
syncretized with the beliefs of the conquering Spaniards. As with confirmation, a
girl renews her religious commitment; as with a wedding, she gets to walk down
the church aisle in a fancy white dress and with a host of attendants. Through the
lens of one girl's quinceafera, Lankford conveys both the significance ("when she
heard her mother's words of confidence in her as she approached womanhood,
Martha embraced her mother") and the fun ("last but certainly not least, Martha
decided what she and her attendants would wear"), and Jesse Herrera's color and
black-and-white photos, if somewhat fuzzily reproduced, have a friendly snapshot
quality. While in format and difficulty the book is at a younger level than for
those actually preparing for their own quinceaferas, younger girls looking forward
to the big day will enjoy it. A reading list and an index are appended. RS
LEUCK, LAURA 
Sun Is Falling, Night Is Calling; illus. by Ora Eitan. 
Simon,
1994 
26 p
ISBN 0-671-86940-X 
$15.00 
R 
2-4 yrs
A sweetly simple bedtime verse ("Dusk's around us,/ night is near./ Mama says,/
'Come snuggle here'") is illustrated with stylishly retro-but also sweet and simple-
gouache paintings of a rabbit-child getting tucked in for the night. The matte
colors of the pictures steadily deepen from warm salmons and sky-blues to cool
greens and navy while Mama in her red skirt and white apron snuggles up, reads a
story, sings a song and cozies baby rabbit into bed. The drawing is fine through-
out, and the picture of Mama standing against a green wall and blue window
makes a color-palette bow to Goodnight, Moon, with which this book shares, if not
the same kind of inventiveness, then at least a similarly drowsy security. RS
LICHTVELD, NONI, ad. 
I Lost My Arrow in a Kankan Tree; ad. and illus. by Noni
Lichtveld. 
Lothrop, 1994 
30p
ISBN 0-688-12748-7 
$15.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
Don't throw away the dust jacket. It offers the only source information for this
Surinamese cumulative tale which Lichtveld learned from her aunt and which, she
explains, was often rold in a "contest to see who could recite Jak6no's whole jour-
326 
* THE BULLETIN
ney the fastest." Jak6no, the oldest of eleven children, leaves his forest home to
find a job in town to help support his family. On his first day out he shoots a
pigeon roosting in a giant kankan tree, but loses his only arrow. Undaunted by
this inconvenience, Jak6no soon meets people with troubles greater than his own-
a starving carpenter, an old man with uncooperative cows, a stone-broke king who
rules a country so poor that "even the trash cans are empty!" At each encounter the
boy tells the ever-lengthening tale of his adventures and makes a trade that will
prove advantageous down the road. When at last Jak6no presents the king with a
bag of gold, he is rewarded with farm land for his family and returns home a hero.
In addition to Jak6no's journey story, which is the backbone of the tale, repetitive
conversations and catchy phrasing ("Hey, Cowman, say, Cowman, what will you
give me?") make this an inviting read-along. While most of the text is unattrac-
tively boxed in translucent overlays in the page corners, all the colors of the crayon
box flow through the lively, fantastical scenes in which perspective has been thrown
to the wind. And the visual fun continues to the endpapers, which celebrate the
family's prosperity-citified clothes, a sewing machine, and a lean-to complete
with chamber pot! EB
LINDBERGH, REEVE 
If I'd Known Then What I Know Now; illus. by Kimberly
Bulcken Root. 
Viking, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-670-85351-8 
$13.99 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Marketing moguls have evidently aimed this one at Father's Day shoppers, belly-
banding it with the slogan "For Your Favorite Do-It-Yourself Dad." As the terri-
fied title page cat flees the scene of hammer and bent nails, a ten-thumbed father
can't be far behind. His teenage son delivers a rhymed chronicle of Dad's bum-
bling attempts to build their house and farm. Each verse reveals one year's accom-
plishment-leaking roof, faulty plumbing ("When my mom takes a bath and lets
it drain/ The soap bubbles go right down the lane"), disastrous electrical wiring,
etc.-and concludes with Dad's cheerful assessment that the results would have
been better "if I'd known then what I know now!" The theme will surely strike a
sympathetic chord in many households, but the joke wears thin and the verses lose
some bounce along the way. Root's gloriously detailed line and watercolor scenes
carry the show. The bathtub perches atop a jungle gym of piping, the bedroom
door is wallpapered shut, and melancholy cows straddle the hayloft beams while
Mom and Dad, posed a la American Gothic, observe the chaos through the barn
door. Muted shades of brown, gold, and blue are appropriate to the stoic family
that endures each addition to their domestic comfort with expressions of affection-
ate resignation. In the final two-page spread, Dad is enthroned amid his handi-
work, while long-suffering neighbors, livestock, and family pay him the feel-good
tribute, "But we still wouldn't want any dad but you,/ If we'd known then what
we know now." Have a good chuckle and pass Mom the hammer. EB
LIONNI, LEO 
An Extraordinary Egg; written and illus. by Leo Lionni. 
Knopf,
1994 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-95840-1 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-85840-7 
$15.00 
R 
3-6 yrs
Jessica the frog is the latest addition to Lionni's gallery of pint-sized visionaries and
adventurers. The eccentric in a frog trio on Pebble Island, Jessica is "always some-
where else." Naturally it is she who brings home a remarkable trophy from a day's
JUNE 1994 
* 327
exploration-a beautiful object, "round like the full moon on a midsummer's night."
Marilyn arrogantly states, "It's an egg. A chicken egg." Deferring to Marilyn's
reputation for superior wisdom, Jessica and August agree that the creature who
breaks out of the shell is indeed a chicken, although viewers will plainly see it is an
alligator. Jessica and the hatchling become inseparable friends until "little chicken"
is reunited with her mother. Jessica reports to the frogs that mother chicken called
her baby "my sweet little alligator," and the three friends can't control their laugh-
ter. Lionni's signature artwork-cool blue and gray palette, streamlined and bright-
eyed animals-is comfortably familiar to old fans. And the broad humor of the
simple fable should delight any child who enjoys being in on a joke. EB
MCKINLEY, ROBIN 
A Knot in the Grain and Other Stories. Greenwillow,
1994 
192p
ISBN 0-688-09201-2 
$14.00 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Three of the five stories here-"The Healer," "The Stagman," and "Touk's
House"-have been previously published in Terri Windling's Ace fantasy collec-
tions. Along with a fourth tale, "Buttercups," they'll attract readers familiar with
the kingdom of Damar (from The Hero and the Crown and The Blue Sword) where
they are set. Each features McKinley's signature blend of the magical and the
mundane in the shape of heroines who begin with a mark against them (typically,
one is mute, another orphaned) and end triumphant, with a true love as well. It's
an appealing formula that McKinley fosters smoothly and imaginatively. Of the
two new stories, "Buttercups" is the most successful, about the relationship be-
tween a poor but pretty young woman and an older farmer whose suspicion of
magic (and love) nearly blights their marriage. The title story, set in a contempo-
rary rural house to which the protagonist has reluctantly moved with her parents
for her last two years in high school, has a less clearly defined fantasy element,
which limits the realization of both plot and characters. However, fans will settle
happily into the book as a whole; it's romantic enough to gratify those between-
stage kids who yearn-but fear they're too old-for a favorite fairy tale. BH
MAGUIRE, GREGORY 
Missing Sisters. McElderry, 1994 
[160p]
ISBN 0-689-50590-6 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 5-8
Alice Colossus, twelve years old and living in a Catholic orphanage, achieves an
ambiguous kind of celebrity for her performance as Eliza Doolittle in a school
production of My Fair Lady. while she sings and acts creditably, Alice's speech
impediment means that she only performs the part up until Eliza's transformation
from flower girl to Lady; classmate Naomi then takes over. The nuns say it's
because My Fair Lady is "such a long show." When the two girls reprise their roles
at summer camp, Alice is shocked to hear her performance bring forth from the
audience cheers and applause-for someone named "Miami." It turns out, cred-
ibly and suspensefully, that Alice has a twin sister who was adopted and who now
is part of a family in nearby Albany. When the two girls meet-in a strong, scary
scene-their lives are changed forever. As Vivien Alcock did in her similarly themed
The Cuckoo Sister (BCCB 4/86), Maguire uses a melodramatic, even banal, premise
to structure an involving story about people finding themselves in each other.
Alice and Miami are equally fierce and stubborn, and their insistence that they
belong together has a magnetic force. The adults that surround the girls-Miami's
328 
* THE BULLETIN
parents, Alice's nuns-are as complicated as their charges, with the possible excep-
tion of Alice's beloved Sister Vincent de Paul, who dispenses all the wisdom of
Harriet the Spy's Ole Golly but has none of her rough edges. Still, she is a com-
forting presence, and the subtle characterization of the nuns in general reveals both
their kindness and their unthinking heedlessness. The 1968 setting is lightly con-
veyed ("The three Sister Franks like a team of Green Berets all leaped up and
began to run back to the chapel") and the storytelling is sure and steady. RS
MANITONQUAT (MEDICINE STORY), ad. 
The Children of the Morning Light:
Wampanoag Tales; illus. by Mary F. Arquette. 
Macmillan, 1994 
72p
ISBN 0-02-765905-4 
$16.95 
R* 
Gr. 3-6
Despite his stated concern that the oral tradition will freeze in print, Manitonquat's
style here is fluid and full of the kind of language that keeps storytelling alive. Part
of what's so refreshing about these creation myths is the informal humor that
keeps surprising us around every corner. Like Julius Lester's Brer Rabbit stories,
these are told with a voice that's never ponderously reverential. 
Because
Manitonquat is Native American-and steeped in the tradition of his people-he
doesn't have to worry about achieving a politically correct tone. After Matahdou
the troublemaker creates sharks, his helpful twin brother asks the porpoises to help
humans whose fish weirs (and fishermen!) are getting chewed up. At first the
porpoises hesitate. "You don't want to mess around with that fish. It doesn't
listen to anybody. It's just plain mean .... Have you seen the teeth on that guy?
We don't have any weapons like that; besides, we're nonviolent." What they do
have is brains and a sense of fun ("Just party animals, that's what we are"), which
they finally use to play the shark into distant waters. It's that very spirit of play
that buoys up these eleven stories; as wise as they are, they never get heavyhanded,
and kids will love listening to them read aloud or told in new words as storytellers
make the book a source for their own re-creations. The acrylic paintings, while
not as adroit as the tales, make a pleasant visual accompaniment for independent
readers. BH
MAYO, GRETCHEN WILL, ad. 
Big Trouble for Tricky Rabbit!; ad. and illus. by
Gretchen Will Mayo. 
Walker, 1994 
[48p] 
(Native American Trickster Tales)
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8276-0 
$13.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8275-2 
$12.95
Here Comes Tricky Rabbit! ad. and illus. by Gretchen Will Mayo. 
Walker,
1994 
[4 8p] 
(Native American Trickster Tales)
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8274-4 
$13.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8273-6 
$12.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-4
Like Mayo's earlier books on Coyote (BCCB 5/93), these two easy readers about
Rabbit feature five stories each, more smoothly styled this time around, and un-
usually well documented as to sources and cultural context. Some of the same lore
has found its way into collections such as Gayle Ross' How Rabbit Tricked Otter
and Other Cherokee Trickster Stories (reviewed below), but this will be more acces-
sible to younger children. Storytellers will recognize a number of motifs in com-
mon with those ofAfrican-American Brer Rabbit tales, including a tar-baby variant,
and with African tales such as a tug-of-war like the one Hare sets up between
Elephant and Hippopotamus-here Tie-snake and Man Eater-who both think
JUNE 1994 
* 
329
they are pulling against Rabbit. Mayo's smooth acrylic paintings are well modu-
lated and variously shaped for a lively page layout, as animals play tag with the text.
If the short sentences sometimes suffer from textbook cadence, at other times the
repetition is calculated to build suspense ("Bobcat waited outside. Rabbit waited
inside") or humor ("'Ha ha!' Rabbit laughed. . . . The hole is too small for you,
Bobcat.' 'Ha ha!' Bobcat laughed. ... But now you are trapped"). In general, the
selections are amusing and the compression capable; acknowledgments, notes, and
an afterword are included in each book. BH
MEAD, ALICE 
Crossing the Starlight Bridge. Bradbury, 1994 
122p
ISBN 0-02-765950-X 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Rayanne has lived her entire nine years on the Maine island where her people, the
Penobscot, have always lived. After her unemployed father leaves, however, she
and her mother have to cross the "starlight bridge" to the mainland coast, where
they can live with Rayanne's grandmother. Shy Rayanne is deeply miserable at
first, but she begins to blossom under the eye of a sympathetic teacher and demon-
strates an artistic talent that wins her mainland friends. Mead deftly establishes a
child's point of view with simple and unpretentious language. Rayanne's Penobscot
heritage is a natural part of her life and of the story, with Grandma telling a few
pourquoi tales and, less pleasantly, some mainlanders resenting the Penobscot pos-
session of previously private land. Rayanne's attitude towards her sad father, who
must leave his home to find work and finds a new wife as well, veers realistically
between longing and resentment. This is a gentle and understanding story of a
young girl's adjustment to change, and young readers who may sometimes feel
outpaced by smart-mouthed middle-grades stories will particularly welcome it.
DS
MOSER, BARRY 
Tucker Pfeffercorn: An Old Story Retold; written and illus. by
Barry Moser. 
Little, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-316-58542-4 
$15.95 
R* 
6-9 yrs
See this month's Big Picture, p. 311, for review.
MULLER, GERDA 
Around the Oak; written and illus. by Gerda Muller. 
Dutton,
1994 
40p
ISBN 0-525-45239-7 
$14.99 
R 
5-9 yrs
Illustrated with crisply delicate, less romantic but just as sturdy, paintings that
recall Barbara Cooney's work, Muller's four-seasonal portrait of a forest tree and
its environs frames some facts of nature study within a likably unobtrusive fic-
tional context. Nick lives with his father, a forest ranger; each season his cousins
come to visit, and all revel around an honored old tree they discovered in a clear-
ing. They chart the progress of its leaves, observe its inhabitants and neighbors
and visitors, and, in summer, celebrate its birthday as determined by measuring its
trunk: "'I know!' said Caroline. 'Uncle Hank told me. You measure around the
trunk of the tree. Ours is one hundred and twenty inches. It takes about two and
a half years for an oak to grow an inch. That's three hundred years.'" As with
Nathaniel Tripp and Juan Wijngaard's Thunderstorm! (BCCB 4/94), the paint-
ings provide the atmosphere along with the information, offering detailed render-
ing when necessary, and providing a landscape of the moonlight dip of a raccoon
family, for example, to show us why these kids love this tree. It's seductive science,
330 
* THE BULLETIN
and appended all-facts spreads of several topics ("Plants that Caroline Found in
the Clearing," "Animals Found in the Forest") add to field-trip value. RS
NEUMANN, PETER J. 
Playing a Virginia Moon. 
Houghton, 1994 
[24 0p]
ISBN 0-395-66562-0 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 8-10
In his last year of high school, cross-country runner Chet is determined to break
the local record held by the legendary Johnny Fiske, but he's worried about the
appearance of Johnny's younger brother Jimmy, who has suddenly returned from
military school and seems to have inherited his dead brother's talent. The training
and racing scenes in this first novel, set in the 1970s, are tough and suspenseful,
with each race (scorecards provided) shifting the balance of competition between
Chet and Jimmy, among others who include Chet's best friend, smartmouthed
Bernie. Less successful are Chet's interior monologues as he thinks about his Civil
War term paper during his morning runs; while we seem meant to find parallels
between Chet's (racing) strategies and General Lee's, Chet's analytical musings are
deft but not very interesting, dragging the otherwise efficient pacing. Chet's wise
coach, "the Vee," is Central Casting ("the rawboned face told you he was a scrap-
per, but there was a spring to his step that hinted at a buoyancy"); Chet's sort-of
girlfriend is more promisingly original, but, like Chet, we don't see enough of her
(we also don't see anything of his parents, of whom glancing mention is first made
in chapter twenty-four). What works best is the running, and the book has the
plethora of technical detail more usually found in books about team sports. While
it's not as good a novel as Voigt's The Runner, Neumann's is a better sports book,
and cross-country loners will appreciate the attention. RS
ORGEL, DORIS, ad. 
Ariadne, Awake!; illus. by Barry Moser. 
Viking, 1994 
74 p
ISBN 0-670-85158-2 $15.99 
R 
Gr. 5-9
Orgel's version of the Theseus myth is related by Ariadne and begins-after a brief
prologue describing Pasiphae's passion for a sacred bull, and the Minotaur that's
born as a result-with Ariadne's early memory of trying to find and comfort her
bestial half-brother in the Labyrinth. She's almost killed in the process and is
punished by her tyrannical father, so when Theseus appears and wakes her own
passion, she determines to save his life in defiance of her King Minos. Her appeal
to Daedalus for help, the golden thread he gives her, Theseus' killing the Minotaur,
and their escape from the guards all lead to Theseus' abandoning Ariadne on the
Isle of Naxos, where she's saved by a satyr and wedded to Dionysus. Like Nancy
Willard's Beauty and the Beast, also illustrated by Barry Moser (BCCB 11/92), this
is a tale that's been fictionalized far beyond its usual length but not quite to the full
development of a novel. Gracefully written and cannily illustrated with vivid por-
traits (though Minos looks more like a Viking raider than a king of Crete) or
scenes playing on unexpected perspectives, the book will especially appeal to read-
ers who think they've outgrown picture-book editions of myth but aren't ready for
dense historical fiction such as H. M. Hoover's The Dawn Palace: The Story of
Medea (BCCB 6/88). BH
PATENT, DOROTHY HINSHAW 
Hugger to the Rescue; illus. with photographs by
William Mufioz. 
Cobblehill, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-525-65161-6 
$13.99 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Well, not just Hugger-also Panda, Chelsie, and Hydra, who are all Newfound-
JUNE 1994 * 331
land dogs and all members (or in Hydra the puppy's case, prospective members) of
Black Paws Search, Rescue, & Avalanche Dogs, in Montana. The book talks
about the natural rescue instincts of the water-loving Newfoundland and shows
the dogs training for their task of finding lost or trapped humans in water, snow,
or wilderness (Patent avoids mentioning the common occurrence of finding dead
bodies). The drama of the canine mission is brought home by the photographs,
which show Newfs rappelling across ravines, dangling from helicopters, and bound-
ing through the snow; even the puppies-and there are some great Newf puppy
pictures-have an appealing bearlike quality that makes them awesome and cud-
dly at the same time. Dog-loving kids will revel in this, of course, but it might also
make a lively and thought-provoking addition to a "people that keep us safe" unit
on community service. DS
PEARSON, KIT 
The Lights Go On Again. 
Viking, 1994 
201p
ISBN 0-670-84919-7 
$13.99 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Anticipating return to their native England from Toronto as the end of the war
nears, evacuees Gavin, ten, and Norah, fifteen, are shocked when a telegram an-
nounces that their parents were killed by a bomb. This Canadian novel, final
volume of a trilogy that includes The Sky Is Falling (BCCB 6/90) and Looking at
the Moon (6/92) is somewhat picturesque in its shading of such dramatic scenes;
there's a bit of the theatrical-effectively so-in dialogue such as "This is Dad's
writing. The last letter from them before they died. Do you want me to read it to
you?" Nora is intense, and stubborn in her insistence that she and Gavin return as
soon as possible to their grandfather. Gavin, cosseted by the majestic "Aunt"
Florence since he was five years old, and having made good friends in school,
wants to stay. The children's grandfather, aided by Gavin's recovered memories of
toddlerhood, straightens everybody out. Characterization is square-footed but sat-
isfying; while Gavin-who here takes the center stage from his sister-changes
from child to man and gets his first kiss in a rather formulaic sequence, his sensitiv-
ity, even priggishness, is (even if the cover doesn't think so) blessedly unlit by
sentimental hallowing. RS
RANSOM, CANDACE F. 
Jimmy Crack Corn; illus. by Shelly O. Haas. 
Carolrhoda,
1994 
72p
ISBN 0-87614-786-4 
$14.21 
M 
Gr. 3-5
Although the Great Depression provides fertile possibilities for exciting historical
fiction, this volume signals "curriculum tie-in." Jimmy Watkins and his preter-
naturally cheerful, down-on-his-luck father abruptly decide to join the 1932 veter-
ans' Bonus Army marchers to Washington, D. C. (Historical background of this
expedition is provided in textbook-sized chunks of dialogue. "When were you
there [in Europe], Pa?" "A long time ago, Jimmy. The war lasted from 1914 to
1918. America didn't get into it until 1917. But we did our part.") At Camp
Marks, Jimmy helps Pa build a pleasant shanty out of readily available rubble,
befriends a nice old man, earns some money singing a sprightly rendition of the
title song, and finally helps subdue a frantic mob by playing his harmonica as they
are charged by bayonet-wielding mounted soldiers. 
The Watkinses return home
without their bonus money, but with the knowledge that "every man in Camp
Marks had tried his darnedest. .... 
They all faced hard times with bravery and
good spirits." An afterword explains that a second Bonus Army march in 1933
netted the veterans some Civilian Conservation Corps jobs and in 1936 the bo-
332 
* THE BULLETIN
nuses were distributed early, but no indication is given of how the Watkins family
weathered the economic storm. Dreamy, double-exposured pastel watercolors jar
against the sober Depression theme. Factual information from the story could be
used to reinforce or extend a history unit on the Depression, but the light-hearted
treatment of the marchers' hardship provides a skewed view of this event. EB
RASCAL 
Oregon's Journey; illus. by Louis Joos. 
BridgeWater, 1994 
[34 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8167-3305-8 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
SpR 
6-9 yrs
The narrator, a dwarf circus clown, determines to free a performing bear he's met
in Pittsburgh, so after their "final performance," they walk into the night and-by
bus, foot, train, and occasional car rides-journey together to the snowy north-
west mountains. The hero is a taciturn man whose loneliness comes out in flashes,
as when he hopes to "meet Snow White" in the forest, or explains to a trucker why
he continues to wear white makeup and a red nose: "Because they've become a
part of me. ... It isn't easy being a dwarf." ("Nor is it easy to be a black man,"
answers the trucker, in an exchange that reveals the adult subtext for this picture
book.) The paintings are brilliantly hued and spontaneously composed with sweep-
ing movement. Both the art and the fate of the bear will absorb children's atten-
tion, though what they'll think about the mystical ending-"I walked into the
white morning, light at heart, and happy"-is anybody's guess; they may or may
not figure out that the red ball in the snow is the dwarfs false nose, and that
metaphorically, both bear and dwarf have cast off society's false guises. Encourag-
ing kids to discard trappings of civilization they have yet to acquire also seems
pretty paradoxical. Between the existential tone of the text and the expressionistic
tone of the art, this may be one of those picture books needing special introduc-
tion to kids older than the usual preschool/primary grades audience. BH
REMKIEWICZ, FRANK 
The Bone Stranger; written and illus. by Frank
Remkiewicz. 
Lothrop, 1994 
32 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-12042-3 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-12041-5 
$15.00 
R 
6-9 yrs
Return with us now to the thrilling days of yesteryear, when dogs inhabited the
prairie and the center of the "wild and woolly west" was a little dog-run delicates-
sen called Boney's. Boney and his loyal assistant Wolfgang happily serve the break-
fast and the lunch crowds (jumping rope out back for exercise between times),
until one day the Raccoon Brothers hijack a box of bones destined for the orphan-
age. Boney, enamored of the young widow who runs the orphanage, rides off in
masked disguise, subdues the Raccoon Brothers with hard salamis, ties them up
with jump ropes, and returns to town in time to regain his ordinary identity and
make breakfast for the morning customers. Boney's white horse, Sauerkraut ("Smell
kinda funny, but go good with hot dogs," says Wolfgang), and his faithful Ger-
man-Indian companion may remind astute young listeners of another western
legend. Remkiewicz pickles melodramatic westerns nicely, seasoning his takeoff
with wit, affection, and dashes of absurdity (the jump-rope rhymes printed in the
illustrations are readaloud musts); his map of Dusty Little Town has an archetypical
rightness to it even as it includes geographical landmarks such as Where the Buf-
falo Roam. His casually drafted art offers earth-toned prairie colors in unshaded
acrylics, with pleasing details such as the line of hand-holding orphans (including
JUNE 1994 * 333
a diapered puppy at the end) and the distraught and operatically posing widow.
As with good fractured fairy tales, this story depends on myth known through
osmosis, whether personally encountered or not, so youngsters will probably find
it funny even if they don't always know why. DS
RIDE, SALLY 
The Third Planet: Exploring the Earth from Space; written by Sally
Ride and Tam O'Shaughnessy. 
Crown, 1994 
48p 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-517-59362-9 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-59361-0 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Exploring is the key word in the title, as the former astronaut conducts a Cook's
tour of Earth from several hundred miles up and explains how and why surface
information is collected by remote sensing instruments aboard satellites and space
shuttles. Although not divided into chapters, the text is organized into five dis-
tinct sections: the advantages and methods of exploring Earth from so far above its
surface, and traits and phenomena of the atmosphere, water, land, and biosphere,
respectively. The combination of informal tone, concise explanation, and spec-
tacular color photography is most appealing. Eyecatching photos of a hurricane
over the Indian Ocean, Alaskan glaciers fanning into the sea, and the eruption of
Mount Pinatubo will attract browsers, but browsing isn't enough. Clues to inter-
preting these images are included within the text, not in the photo captions, and
composite and false color images in particular may be misleading if viewed with-
out reading the explanation. A brief index will help students with reports, but this
volume will also appeal to budding Earth scientists who enjoy poring over and
interpreting the aerial images. Watch out for an inaccurate definition of a delta as
an area "where fresh water mixes with salt water." Otherwise, enjoy the ride and
admire the view. EB
Ross, GAYLE, ad. 
How Rabbit Tricked Otter and Other Cherokee Trickster Stories;
illus. by Murv Jacob. 
HarperCollins, 1994 
[80p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021286-1 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021285-3 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-6
A noted Native American storyteller who has made videos and personal appear-
ances, Ross here presents fifteen tales introduced by a map of southeastern Indian
groups and a foreword by the principal chief of the Cherokee Nation. Her writing
style is as confident as her oral delivery, with a no-frills simplicity that foregrounds
the animal characters in a broad range of shenanigans. Both adults and children
will recognize relatives of African American stories here in "Rabbit and the Tar
Wolf," "Rabbit Races with Turtle," "Rabbit Steals from Fox," and others. Some
of the pourquoi tales, such as "Flint Visits Rabbit," will make particularly appro-
priate accompaniments to an elementary-school study of tribal traditions. Murv
Jacob's deep-hued paintings, framed in designs of each picture's dominant color,
make sharp use of white highlights on contrasting forest shades. Although the
compositions are sober, there's straightfaced humor in the animals' expressions
and postures, and the drafting is excellent. There's no note on sources, either
personal or printed, so we don't know from whom these were passed on, but the
collection itself will prove a valuable resource despite its anonymous past. Easy-to-
read versions of "Rabbit and the Tar Wolf," as well as several other tales here, are
also available in Gretchen Will Mayo's books, reviewed above. BH
334 
* 
THE BULLETIN
RUMBAUT, HENDLE 
Dove Dream. Houghton, 1994 
119p
ISBN 0-395-68393-9 
$13.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
At thirteen, Eleanor feels herself on the brink of womanhood, but her frequently
invalid mother and alcoholic father aren't giving her much assistance. She's thrilled,
therefore, to spend the summer of 1963 with her father's sister Anna, a twice-
divorced waitress who calls Eleanor "Dove" and who takes seriously the girl's de-
sire for maturity. Through Anna, Dove learns about her father's Chickasaw heritage
and her mother's sad childhood; she also learns about fast cars, handsome young
men, sex (from overhearing the sounds of Anna and her boyfriend making love),
and menstruation. The writing is smooth, subtle, and understanding, and the joy
of female bonding readily apparent. The plot turns sometimes hamper the themes,
however, with Dove's going off on a vision quest (which she admits is an irregular
and non-Chickasaw practice and she doesn't really know what to do) an unneces-
sary device and her final menarche an anticlimactic and overly physiological ex-
pression of the intricate emotional process the book otherwise treats with depth.
It's still a good summer-of-growth story, however, filled with respect for the power
of womanhood and the possibilities of life. DS
SACHAR, Louis 
Marvin Redpost: Alone in His Teacher's House; illus. by Barbara
Sullivan. 
Random House, 1994 
83p 
(First Stepping Stone Books)
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-91949-X 
$9.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-6769-81949-5 
$2.99 
R* 
Gr. 2-4
Marvin Redpost, ur-third grader, seems to be a magnet for trouble: he's been
kidnapped at birth (BCCB 10/92) and undeservedly picked on (BCCB 2/93) and
now he's got serious trouble with his teacher. It starts out as good luck: Mrs.
North hires Marvin to dog-sit for her beloved old Waldo while she is out of town,
but despite Marvin's scrupulous care (including getting the vet's advice on how to
tempt the reluctant dog to eat) Waldo dies. "Oh, man," says his friend Nick, "you
are the unluckiest kid in the whole world." When Mrs. North comes back, of
course, she reassures Marvin that it wasn't his fault, she appreciates his caring for
Waldo, and she's paying him for a full week's dogsitting and taking him to lunch.
Sachar displays his usual knack for conveying the full misery of kid-dom in a few
well-chosen and humorous words; Marvin's tactful and polite note to Mrs. North
("Dear Mrs. North, If you are looking around for Waldo, don't. You won't find
him. He's not in your house. And he's not outside. Well, he's dead. I hope you
had a nice time on your trip. Yours truly, Marvin Redpost") is both woebegone
and funny. His attempts to do the right thing by everyone and stave off the evil
fates that always seem to threaten him make him not just a protagonist but a real
hero, one that kids can both empathize with and admire. The title and the cover
(Marvin peering with trepidation out of a closet filled with teacher's clothing) will
lure the most reluctant readers, who will be as glad to make Marvin's acquaintance
as his old fans will be to greet a new adventure. Shaded pencil drawings, cheerful
and with a touch of caricature, appear throughout. DS
SERVICE, PAMELA F. 
Phantom Victory. 
Scribners, 1994 
[128p]
ISBN 0-684-19441-4 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-6
Terri's family has lived on South Bass Island in Lake Erie for years, and she's used
to-if not excited about-the influx of summer tourists; Brian's a tourist, coming
JUNE 1994 * 
335
to the island for the first time, although at the turn of the century his family used
to spend summers at the island's posh resort hotel, the Victory. The Victory has
long since burned down, and Terri is working on an excavation project that the
islanders hope may mean renovation of the glorious and revenue-earning struc-
ture. She meets Brian when he discovers a diary-written, it turns out, by his
great-aunt-that's being used to guide the archaeologists. Terri and Brian dis-
cover that his great-aunt was in love with her great uncle, and the two lovers, both
long dead, had playfully hidden a valuable necklace that had never been found; the
man funding the dig, Mr. Stephenson, is doing so to cover up his hunt for the
jewelry. The kids follow Great-Aunt Charlotte's and Great-Uncle Joe's clues, aided
occasionally by their ghosts and threatened periodically by Mr. Stephenson, and
they find the necklace which will fund a rebuilding of the Victory. This is not a
sophisticated mystery, but it's a lot of fun, with the kids following the rhymed
clues (Service notes in an epilogue that the locations-except for the cave that
actually holds the necklace-and the history of the island are all true), outsmarting
the adults, and saving the day while becoming friends along the way. The occa-
sional presence of the friendly but still eerie ghosts, who follow the hunt with
spectral interest, adds atmosphere to an already entertaining plot. A good summer
mystery for young Nancy Drews and Hardy Boys. DS
SMUCKER, ANNA EGAN 
Outside the Window; illus. by Stacey Schuett. 
Knopf,
1994 
26 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-94023-5 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-84023-0 
$15.00 
R 
3-5 yrs
Five baby birds will not settle down for the night without their evening ritual.
Mother Bird must answer all their questions concerning the strange activities of
the little boy they see beneath their tree branch by day and through the nearby
window at night. As Mother Bird explains the boy's quite ordinary behavior, each
fledgling visualizes the explanation in bird terms. When Mother says, "He doesn't
eat the sand pie. He likes juicier things than that," the little bird imagines the boy
preparing to bite into a plump, wiggly worm. "He is climbing into his bed now"
evokes an image of the boy snuggled into a leafy nest. Meanwhile, on the other
side of the window, the boy is going through his own nightly ritual of story, prayers,
and goodnight kiss. The little birds abandon their struggle to stay awake when
they are assured the boy is finally asleep too. Rich, vibrant tones of twilight blue
and green set a bedtime mood, and the boy's bird book and poster, which attest to
his reciprocal curiosity, are nice touches. However, why the baby birds under-
stand "brush," "book," and "prayers" but not "teeth" remains a mystery of the
animal world. A pleasant tuck-me-in. EB
STEIN, R. CONRAD 
The Mexican Revolution 1910-1920. New Discovery,
1994 
[14 4 p] 
illus. with photographs 
(Timestop Books)
ISBN 0-02-786950-4 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-12
"If I am to die tomorrow/ Let them kill me today," quotes Stein from a song
popular with the early Zapatistas, and it was that sense of desperation that drove
"the costliest war ever fought on the American continent, dwarfing even the great
Civil War" in the U.S. During the decade of the Mexican Revolution, "as many as
two million Mexicans-one in every eight of the population-had died either in
336 
* THE BULLETIN
battle or from the disease and famine brought about by warfare." Yet most of the
war's impact was too localized to affect the rest of the world or even Mexico's
neighboring countries, and the complexities of changing leadership, military alli-
ances, and political compromises have obscured the struggle for many U.S. stu-
dents. This fact, along with the importance of the Mexican Revolution to current
Mexican affairs and to the large immigrant population in the U.S., makes Stein's
book an important resource. He's done a clean overview: the narrative is carefully
organized, the style is neat, and the balance of background and detail is consistent.
He lets the inherent drama of the stories anchor his presentation, which, although
it's not footnoted, is supplemented with a chronology, biographical sketches of
important characters, and a list of books for further reading. With black-and-
white historical photographs and an index. BH
THESMAN, JEAN 
CattailMoon. Houghton, 1994 
197p
ISBN 0-395-67409-3 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Challenging piano study and the close friendships of other serious high school
musicians dictate that Julia remain with her mother and stepfather in Seattle, but
Mom's relentless pressure to remake her into a social butterfly drives Julia off to
Moon Valley to live with her father and grandmother. Julia soon admits that the
domestic peace of the Moon Valley household has forced her to compromise her
dreams of a professional music career, for which self-study and the local high school
choir cannot prepare her. As her dissatisfaction and indecision crest, Julia begins
to see the figure of a young woman in white who wanders the cattail marsh behind
Grandmother's house. This vision, she discovers, is shared by Luke Sutherland. A
romantic, enigmatic boy whose sudden smile makes Julia "think that the sun has
come out," Luke seems to know the vision's history but refuses to discuss it, so
Julia singlemindedly delves into the history of Christine, the local ghost, who shares
her own love of classical music. At this point, the contrivances of ghost-hunting
story and love story threaten to overpower the coming-of-age theme that Thesman
had so artfully introduced and lovingly developed. But after the Puccini-singing
spirit's somewhat convoluted past comes to light, Julia takes a lesson from her
unhappy story, returning to Seattle and forcing aside her deepening love for Luke.
Ghost-story aficionados may find Christine a bit tepid, while love-story enthusi-
asts will regret Julia's decision. But those independent-minded young women
who dream of transforming their ambitions into reality may find a kindred spirit.
EB
TREVOR, WILLIAM 
Juliet's Story. 
Simon, 1994 
105p
ISBN 0-671-87442-X 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Trevor's first novel for children flails around a bit getting started but flies before
it's over. The premise is rather complex for the scope of development: when
Juliet's storytelling friend Paddy Old dies, she goes into a depression that alienates
her from her family (there's a baby on the way) and best friend. It's only when
Grandmamma takes her on a trip from her Irish home to France, spinning tales
along the way, that Juliet begins to find her own stories and let go her grief. Be-
sides the tales within a tale, there's a lot going on here. In the beginning we don't
get quite enough of Paddy to feel Juliet's loss, and we get rather too obvious a
contrast between story-loving Juliet and her television-loving friend Kitty Ann
("Star Trek's on now," she says as the gravediggers reach for their shovels).
JUNE 1994 * 337
Grandmamma, on the other hand, is a subtly realized character despite her mean-
dering stories, and Juliet's days on the French seacoast have the colored clarity of A
Room with a View. The scene where Juliet engineers a swap between five toy fish
and the trout waiting to be eaten in their hotel restaurant tank is memorably funny
("Better to make a joke than a living," says the toymaker). Thus Trevor becomes
a perfect example of his own premise: where the messages about stories fail, the
story well told succeeds. BH
TURNER, GLENNETTE TILLEY 
Running for Our Lives; illus. by Samuel
Byrd. 
Holiday House, 1994 
198p
ISBN 0-8234-1121-4 
$15.95 
M 
Gr. 4-6
Luther, Carrie, and their family decide to escape from Missouri slavery in the late
fall of 1855, and when the brother and sister become separated from their parents
(after a dangerous night crossing of the Mississippi River), they continue the long
journey to Canada on their own. It's an exciting, if fact-filled, adventure, as the
two children travel along the Underground Railroad, hiding in false-bottom wag-
ons, meeting Frederick Douglass and Allan Pinkerton, and eventually happening
on an aunt, hitherto unknown to the children, who had escaped from Virginia and
now offers the children a place to live while they look for their parents in Canada.
Quite a bit of information about slavery and history is awkwardly worked into the
story ("Speaking of Chicago, do you know who Chicago's first permanent settler
was?") and the definitions of unfamiliar words such as "towpath" and "trousseau,"
are artificially handed out in dialogue. The dropping of"g's" in both dialogue and
in Luther's narration is consistent but odd-looking and distracting, as it's pretty
much the sole deviation from standard grammar or spelling found throughout the
book. What will pull kids in is the perilous journey taken by Luther and Carrie,
whose sibling camaraderie and squabbling make an appealing focus for the history,
but the writing has a textbookish tone that impedes the flow of the story. RS
WESTCOTT, NADINE BERNARD, comp. 
Never Take a Pig to Lunch and Other Poems
about the Fun ofEating; comp and illus. by Nadine Bernard Westcott. 
Kroupa/
Orchard, 1994 
64 p
ISBN 0-531-06834-X 
$18.95 
R 
6-9 yrs
This humorous anthology separates its menu into four courses: poems about eat-
ing silly things, poems about eating foods we like, poems about eating too much,
and poems about manners at the table. Silly things range from broccoli to school
lunch, eels to slugs ("Swallow a slug/ By its tail or its snout/ Feel it slide down/ Feel
it climb out," by David Greenberg). 
"Foods we like" include the sweet (Jack
Prelutsky's "Fudge") and the savory (X. J. Kennedy's "Spaghetti! Spaghetti!").
Writers as diverse as Miss Piggy ("Never eat more than you can lift"-really an
aphorism rather than a poem, but who cares?) and John Ciardi ("Betty Bopper,"
who tragically attempts to pop seven pounds of popcorn in her popper) address
the spectre of overeating. And Arnold Adoff's free verse lament "I Am Learning,"
in which a child struggles with chopsticks, accompanies other poems on polite
eating, such as Richard Armour's immortal "The Catsup Bottle" ("Shake and shake/
The catsup bottle/ None will come/ And then a lot'll"). There's a smorgasbord-
like variety here, with poems varying in length, form (a few pithy prose entries
sneak in as well, in fact), and age (good old Anonymous provides a few welcome
standards, including, with wonderful appropriateness, a section of"There Was an
338 
* THE BULLETIN
Old Lady Who Swallowed a Fly"). Aside from the poets mentioned above, reli-
able contributors such as Ogden Nash and Florence Parry Heide spice up the stew.
Occasional technical glitches-"How to Eat Like a Child" is wrongly credited to
Nora Ephron instead of Delia Ephron, and Ogden Nash's "Celery" is slightly
misquoted-don't mar the fun. Line-and-watercolor pictures show a sharp-edged
and cartoonish multicultural (and multi-species) cast cavorting through pages of
interestingly varied compositions and upbeat jellybean colors. This is popcorn-
easy reading for first and second graders, and if you serve up a slice at a readaloud
they'll laugh till the milk comes out their noses. DS
WEXLER, JEROME 
Queen Anne's Lace; written and illus. with photographs by Jerome
Wexler. 
Whitman, 1994 
32 p
ISBN 0-8075-6710-8 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Whether city or country dwellers, most of us are familiar with this hardy wild-
flower, and Wexler uses it to explain some basic facts of plant life as well as discuss-
ing its specific characteristics. The text describes the plant's similarity to the common
carrot (photos show a root-to-root, leaf-to-leaf, and flower-to-flower comparison),
its separate components (pictured nestled in a human hand or measured with a
ruler for scale), and its reproductive process (we see seeds, looking like insects,
clinging to cloth as they would to the fur of an animal that would carry them far
from the mother plant to grow). As always, Wexler's tone is bright and casual; he's
happy to admit when no one knows the answer and he's forthcoming with nifty
science experiments ("Make a bet that you can make a dead object move without
touching it!"). The page composition is restrained, with white space accented by a
slender-lined green frame surrounding one or two compact but easily understand-
able photos. This is an intriguingly photographed introduction to basic botany.
DS
WHITELEY, OPAL 
Only Opal: The Diary of a Young Girl; ad. by Jane Boulton;
illus. by Barbara Cooney. 
Philomel, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-399-21990-0 
$14.95 
R 
6-9 yrs
As a note at the end of the book explains, the text for this book is adapted from
Opal Whiteley's diary; Opal was born in about 1900 and wrote her diary when she
was five and six years old and went to live with a new family after her parents died.
She does extensive chores-churning butter, bringing in wood, and sweeping floors
for "the mama where I live," but she finds time to enjoy the Oregon countryside,
go to school, chat with neighbors, and think of her dead parents. She also has a
penchant for animals and for naming things: she's named her pet mouse Felix
Mendelssohn, her dog Brave Horatius, her crow Lars Porsena, and her favorite tree
Michael Raphael, to mention a few. The CIP summary calls Jane Boulton's text a
"lyrical adaptation" of Opal's diary, so it's not clear exactly how much is verbatim;
the text here is arranged in free-verse paragraphs on the page, and it's simple and
emotional but with a literary sophistication and occasional romantic floweriness
not commonly found in contemporary American six-year-olds ("Grownups do
not know the language of shadows"). Cooney's acrylic and colored-pencil art suits
the gentle but serious tone of the text, as barefooted Opal, dwarfed by trees, walks
through forest paths in a double-spread landscape or sits quietly with one or an-
other of her pets in a small islanded image drifting in white space under the text
(Cooney's particularly good with the doe-eyed calf). The book offers an interest-
JUNE 1994 * 
339
ing viewpoint and slice of life, and Opal's eventual departure for a mill town gives
effective, if sad, closure to the story. DS
WILD, MARGARET 
Toby; illus. by Noela Young. 
Ticknor & Fields, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-395-67024-1 
$13.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
"Our dog Toby is fourteen. That's pretty old for a dog." Right away we know
what's coming, but it comes with an effective first-person narrative and sensitively
composed watercolor paintings, so be prepared for a moving death scene. Toby
originally belonged to the narrator's twelve-year-old sister, Sara, and Mom has to
explain that part of Sara's rejection of her pet is pain at his aging-he's "a little
blind and a little deaf, and he often makes such bad smells that everyone shouts
and leaps for the window." He's also sick, and when a decision for euthanasia
finally comes, it's Sara whom the narrator finds staying up with Toby the last night
before the vet puts him to sleep. The problem is that no one will be able to get
through this without bawling, which dims the effectiveness of a readaloud even as
it proves the effectiveness of the book. In the realm of canine-centered biblio-
therapy, it's right up there with Hans Wilhelm's I'llAlways Love You (BCCB 1/
86), with more intensely realistic, sometimes poignantly tender pictures. 
Kids
drawn to the handsome golden retriever portrayed on the cover will benefit from a
comforting hand to hold by the last page. BH
WILLIS, JEANNE 
In Search of the Giant; illus. by Ruth Brown. 
Dutton,
1994 
26p
ISBN 0-525-45242-7 
$13.99 
M 
5-8 yrs
An unseen narrator recalls the day his older sister took him into the woods to look
for a giant. Carried away by their imaginations, they interpreted ordinary natural
phenomena to be signs of a giant's presence. They fled the woods in fear; but
looking back from the forest edge, the woods no longer looked frightening. The
narrator concludes, "The less we see, the more giant our imaginations grow." This
theme of self-fulfilling expectations has promise, but uneven coordination between
text and illustration flaws its development. The handsomely painted woods are
detailed with gnarls and burls and tangles that suggest the lair of some netherwordly
creature, but in most scenes they are too sun-dappled to be ominous. The chil-
dren purport to be awed or frightened by things they are not in a position to see.
As they look into the treetops, they claim, "Then we found another clue"-a tangled
vine of giant's hair on a stump. The sentence "I noticed the fox kits, unafraid,
gnawing on the giant's fingertips," is represented by the boy far in the background
and the kit curled under the opposite side of a fallen tree trunk. Even the menac-
ing "giant yawn," scarlet toadstools in the gaping knothole of a gnarled tree, is
angled away from the children, whose expressions register delighted surprise rather
than fear. And if that sturdy tree was indeed the giant, why did the forest floor
shake "as he rose to stand before us" on the following page? Attractive, but confus-
ing and therefore ultimately dissatisfying. EB
WILSON, NANCY HOPE 
The Reason for Janey. Macmillan, 1994 
[176p]
ISBN 0-02-793127-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-7
Philura Higley Mason, known as Philly, is a pragmatic sixth-grader who's deter-
mined to know the reason for everything. At school, this characteristic drove her
340 
* 
THE BULLETIN
to win last year's science fair, and at home she tries to figure out her family. New
to the family is Janey, a recently de-institutionalized, mentally retarded woman
who's living with Philly, her brother, and her divorced mother while she learns the
life skills necessary to function independently, and Philly thinks "there's got to be
a reason why somebody I never knew till four months ago fits into my family
better than Dad ever did." Janey's father rejected her; Philly's father lives in disor-
ganization and bitterness and supplies Philly with pizza, tension, and a case of the
hives on her monthly visits to him. Eventually Philly discovers the real "reason for
Janey," a family secret about a mentally retarded aunt; she also begins to under-
stand what she can expect from her father, who may not provide emotionally for
her in the way she would like but does truly love her. This is a good solid family
story, with the likable but never completely understandable character of Janey
woven as naturally into the narrative as she is into Philly's family. The author is
somewhat over-obliging in providing Philly's life with reasons for everything, making
the plot a little too tidy, but it's still a satisfying read about an appealing and gutsy
girl. DS
YEOMAN, JOHN, ad. 
The Singing Tortoise and Other Animal Folktales; illus. by
Quentin Blake. 
Tambourine, 1994 
96 p
ISBN 0-688-13366-5 
$18.00 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Eleven stories from almost as many traditions get handsome treatment here, with
Yeoman providing dexterous adaptations and Blake providing jaunty pen-and-
wash illustrations. Unfortunately, nobody has provided source notes (" The Impu-
dent Little Bird flew in from Spain" just doesn't qualify), so all we know are the
countries from which these came, named in an afterword and marked by red Xs on
a blank world map that will leave most kids mystified. The stories themselves are
a mix of familiar (the Zuni "Turkey Girl") and less commonly anthologized (the
Hindi "Ranee and the Cobra"), and Yeoman has, to his credit, never happified
endings of the more poignant selections such as Ghana's "Singing Tortoise," where
a man is beheaded for breaking a promise. A brisk style gives proper folkloric
distance on such incidents, and Blake's sly, adroitly drawn caricatures of human
and animal alike lighten any weighty moral lessons that happen to attend or even
generate these ancient tales. Despite the lack of citations, this is a volume that
children will find attractive and easy to read independently. BH
JUNE 1994 
* 
341
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
Natov, Roni. Leon Garfield. Twayne, 1994. 144 p. (Twayne's English Authors
Series) ISBN 0-8057-7042-9. $22.95.
The intelligence of this book derives both from its subject-one of children's
literature's wittiest writers-and from its treatment, Natov's insightful and articu-
lately argued analysis. After a lively interview reprinted from The Lion and the
Unicorn, she approaches Garfield's work in two ways: thematically, with special
emphasis on the child protagonist's search for a father and salvation from social
injustice; and formally, with an exploration of the elements of comedy, history,
and folklore that emerge in Garfield's fiction. This is an author who's frequently
been compared to Dickens. He's prolific and complex enough to make this one of
the most challenging volumes of Twayne's series, and Natov has done full justice
to his range and depth. Fans of Smith, The Golden Shadow, The Confidence Man,
The Wedding Ghost, and other titles of Garfield's fifty-plus, will enjoy rediscover-
ing them; readers who haven't sampled much of his output will be tempted by
pungent quotes and sharp discussion to do so. Chronology, notes, bibliography,
index, and a few reproductions of black-and-white art work by Maitland, Keep-
ing, and Wegner are included. BH
Peck, Richard. Love and Death at the Mall: Teaching and Writing for the Literate
Young. Delacorte, 1994. [17 6p] ISBN 0-385-31173-7. $16.95. Reviewed from
galleys.
If any writer could be said to enjoy a sense of oxymoronically stern nostalgia, it's
Richard Peck, who here plays easily from memoirist to moralist as he rambles
around the country of the young, first as a teacher, then as a novelist, always secure
in his own midwestern roots: "Because she [Peck's mother] intoxicated me with
words, I entered grade school with a vocabulary I can't find in the letters ninth-
graders send to me now." His observations on teaching are acute, witty, and proved
out with anecdotes delivered with the flair and economy of a born storyteller, as
evidenced by his recollection about the time he assigned The Member of the Wed-
ding to a seventh grade class: "With too much gusto I ordered a class set and
handed out the copies one fatal Friday. On the following Monday they'd all been
returned to a pile on my desk. A spokeswoman for the class said, briefly, 'We
won't be reading a book about a crazy girl.'" Writing about his own books, Peck
explores the question of where-he-gets-his-ideas (which for authors, is one of two
"perennially popular questions because they don't require the reading of a line we
ever wrote") with honesty and crisp professionalism, and indulges in no mystifica-
tion about his craft (on Remembering the Good Times: "I tried the novel from
Kate's viewpoint. She's an articulate problem-solver, but readers are too likely to
trivialize a story told by a girl about a boy as a romance"). As in his popular books
for young people, Peck in this book for adults writes cleanly, clearly, and ever
quotably. RS
342 
* 
THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Adoption-fiction: Maguire
Adoption: Whiteley
Africa-folklore: Kimmel
Africa-history: Bianchi
African Americans-fiction: Turner
African Americans: Jones
ALPHABET BOOKS: Howland
Aunts-fiction: Rumbaut
Bears-stories: Rascal
BEDTIME STORIES: Leuck;
Smucker
BIBLE STORIES: Gauch;
Paparone
Birds-stories: Smucker
Boarding schools-fiction:
Hamilton
Brothers and sisters-stories: Wild;
Willis
Canada-fiction: Pearson
Careers: Frydenborg
Caribbean Islands-fiction: Joseph
Catholics-fiction: Maguire
Catholics: Lankford
Child care-fiction: Fine
Chimpanzees: DaVolls
Civil War-fiction: Houston
Cliques-fiction: Johnson
Clowns-stories: Rascal
CONCEPT BOOKS: Howland
Death-fiction: Hesse; Hite
Death-stories: Wild
Death: Whiteley
Depression, the-fiction: Ransome
Disasters-fiction: Hesse
Divorce-fiction: Wilson
Dogs-fiction: Sachar
Dogs-stories: Remkiewicz; Wild
Dogs: Calmenson; Patent
England-fiction: Cushman
Everglades-fiction: DeFelice
Explorers: Fritz
FANTASY: Bomans; McKinley
Farm life-fiction: Hesse
Fathers and sons-fiction: Ransome
Fathers-stories: Lindbergh
FOLKTALES AND
FAIRYTALES: Compton;
Goble; Joseph; Kimmel;
Lichtveld; Manitonquat; Mayo;
Moser; Orgel; Ross; Yeoman
Food and eating-poetry: Westcott
France-fiction: Trevor
Friends-fiction: Danziger
Frogs-stories: Lionni
FUNNY STORIES: Fine
Geography: Fritz; Ride
GHOST STORIES: Thesman
Grandmothers-fiction: Trevor
Grandmothers-stories: Kuskin
Growing up-fiction: Rumbaut
Growing up: Lankford
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Cushman; DeFelice; Greene;
Hite; Houston; Maguire;
Pearson; Ransome; Turner
History, African: Bianchi
History, Mexican: Stein
History, U.S.: Brenner; Ransome;
Turner; Whiteley
History, world: Fritz
JUNE 1994 * 343
Horses: Frydenborg
Housebuilding-stories: Lindbergh
Insects-fiction: Bomans
Ireland-fiction: Trevor
Islands-fiction: Service
Jews-fiction: Greene
Journeys-stories: Kuskin;
Lichtveld
Lake Erie-fiction: Service
LOVE STORIES: Hamilton;
Hesse; Neumann; Thesman
Love-poetry: Fletcher
Maine-fiction: Mead
Mental retardation-fiction:
Wilson
Mexican Americans: Lankford
Mexico-history: Stein
Middle Ages-fiction: Cushman
Moving-fiction: Danziger; Mead
Music: Jones
MYSTERY STORIES: Service
MYTHOLOGY: Orgel
Native Americans-fiction: Mead;
Rumbaut
Native Americans-folklore: Goble;
Manitonquat; Mayo; Ross
Nature study: DaVolls; Muller;
Wexler; Willis
New Zealand-fiction: Bond
Parents and children-fiction:
Bond
Parents and children-stories:
Babbitt
Physical disabilities-fiction:
Maguire
Pioneer life: Whiteley
POETRY: Fletcher; Westcott
Rabbits-fiction: Mayo
Rabbits-stories: Leuck
Ranch life-stories: Franklin
Reading aloud: Cramer;
Manitonquat; Ross; Westcott
Reading, easy: Byars; Danziger;
Mead; Sachar; Yeoman
Reading, reluctant: Fletcher
Running-fiction: Neumann
Safety education: Patent
SCARY STORIES: Cramer
School-fiction: Fine
SHORT STORIES: McKinley
Sisters-fiction: Byars; Maguire
Slavery-fiction: Turner
South, the-fiction: Cramer
South, the-stories: Moser
Southwest, the: Franklin
Space travel: Ride
Spiders-stories: Kimmel
SPORTS STORIES: Neumann
Story hour: Babbitt; Compton;
Franklin; Gauch; Goble;
Kimmel; Leuck; Lichtveld;
Lindbergh; Lionni; Moser;
Paparone; Rascal; Remkiewicz;
Smucker; Westcott
Surinam-folklore: Lichtveld
Teachers-fiction: Sachar
Trees-stories: Muller
U.S.-folklore: Compton
Virginia-fiction: Hite; Neumann
War: Stein
West, the-fiction: Byars
West, the-stories: Remkiewicz
World War II-fiction: Pearson
In our April issue's list of awards, we accidentally omitted Owen, by Kevin Henkes
(Greenwillow) from the roll of Caldecott Honor Books. Our apologies and be-
lated congratulations.
Th 
Unicor-n
A 
C 
r 
e
Em
This special issue on Nancy Drew draws on papers
presented at last year's Nancy Drew Conference at the
University of Iowa. The conference brought over five
hundred scholars, publishers, editors, and ghost writers
together to examine the Nancy Drew phenomenon, honor
the original author, and recognize the importance of these
books to generations of women.
Selected contents of the Nancy Drew Special Issue:
The Secrets of Nancy Drew: Having Their Cake and
Eating It Too * Nancy Drew-A Moder Elsie Dinsmore
* Lady and the Tramps: The Cultural Work of Gypsies in
Nancy Drew and Her Foremothers * Translating Nancy
Drew from Fiction to Film * The Crack in the Old
Canon: Culture and Commerce in Children's Books * The
Outline of a Ghost * Nancy, a.k.a. Kitty, Susanne, Alice in
Norway and Other European Countries * Nancy Drew
and Her Passage to India * Interview with Mildred Wirt
Benson * Bad Books in Series: Nancy Drew in the Public
Library * Reading Nancy Drew: The Survey
Prepayment is required. Annual subscriptions:
$19.00, individuals; $36.00, institutions. Foreign postage:
$2.50, Canada & Mexico; $3.80, outside North America.
Single-issue price: $10.00, individuals; $20.00, institutions.
Payment must be drawn on a U.S. bank in U.S. dollars or made
by international money order. MD residents add 5% sales tax.
For orders shipped to Canada add 7% GST (#124004946).
Send orders to: The Johns Hopkins University Press,
PO Box 19966, Baltimore, MD 21211.
' 
Call TOLL-FREE 1-800-548-1784,
Mon.-Fri., 8:00-5:00 ET for VISA or MasterCard orders.
Or FAX your order anytime: (410) 516-6968.
I(CE I
-I uw:I 
IUily WI ILLe I sLUIoy
that examines the role of inner
rage in a troubled family....
-Kirkus
Ages 12 up.
$15.00TR (0-06-023340-0)
$14.89LB (0-06-023341-9)
Chris Lynch's fi
SHADOW B
A 1994 ALA Be
for Young Ac
A 1994 ALA Recomr
for Reluctant Young /
Ages 12 up. $14.00TR ((
$13.89LB (0-06-0:
rst novel
OXER
st Book
lults
nended Book
Adult Readers
)-06-023027-4)
23028-2)
i HarperColinsChildren'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York 10022
"Hooper, a member of Major League Baseball's Hall of
Fame, played for the Red Sox and the White Sox in a career
that spanned from 1909 to 1920. Zingg warmly portrays
one of pro ball's early college men .... This is a good choice
for sports shelves." -
LibraryJournal
A volume in the series Sport and Society
Illus. $29.95
Order toll free 800/545-4703
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street * Champaign, IL 61820
U
.
m&ole Collection.
d Papers University
Sat Chicago Library.
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^____^^_^^_1
University of Illinois Press 
SECOND CASS
1325 South Oak Street 
POSTAGE
Champaign, IL 61820 
PAID
U.S.A. 
CHAMPAIGN, IL
RErTvN POSTAGE GUAmANrED
*********************
3 - D I GI T  606
ROGER SUTTON 
11
3638 NORTH PINE GROVE
CHICAGO IL 60613
j
"A richly annotated edition
resuscitates a fading Ameri-
can classic. Because Hallwas's
pithy introduction adds both
perspective and gossipy de-
tail, YAs will enjoy learning
about the individual strug-
gles of the 244 characters
who speak from the cem-
etery on 'the hill.' Second-
ary teachers will find this
a useful tool for preparing
character sketches, thanks
to the lively specific anno-
tations naming names." -
School Library Journal
"This edition is no doubt the
finest offering of Spoon River
Anthologyto date and should
be in all academic and pub-
lic libraries." -
Library
Journal
Illus. Cloth, $29.95;
Paper, $14.95
CV 
01' 
,troýc
I
~3~ 
CcC·CaC·C~I~T~QY
oh t t o 11 / I ( f 800, 1 V 1703
VNI\ FRS1 I Y 01' ILLINOIS FRLSS - 132-5) 1,outh Oak 1,trctýt - Chainpaign, it 60,20
I 
-- 
-
