T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by The Johns Hopkins University Press
December 2007
Vol. 61   No. 4
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
December 2007
Vol. 61 No. 4
165  the BIg PICture
 
 Those Shoes by Maribeth Boelts; illus. by Noah Z. Jones
166  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
177  • Town Boy written and illus. by Lat
177  • Powers by Ursula Le Guin
181  • Red Butterfly:  How a Princess Smuggled the Secret of Silk out of China  
 
 by Deborah Noyes; illus. by Sophie Blackall
183  • The Penalty by Walter Dean Myers
184  • grl2grl  by Julie Anne Peters
195  ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons
196  suBjeCt And use Index
164 • The BulleTin
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
 
 
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the  
 
 
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Katrina Bromann, Reviewer (KB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Katrina Bromann, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print or electronic $85.00; combined print & electronic $119.00; multiple in-
stitutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, $53.00; students, 
$15.00. In countries other than the United States, add $14.30 per subscription for postage; subscrib-
ers in Canada and Mexico add $9.90. Single copy rate: $9.00. Volumes available in microfilm from 
ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche 
from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be 
made payable to The Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Divi-
sion, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 
410-516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/jour-
nals/advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.uiuc.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2007 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image by Noah Z. Jones from Those Shoes ©2007. Used by permission of Candlewick Press.
DecemBer 2007 • 165
the BIg PICture
Those Shoes
by Maribeth Boelts; illustrated by Noah Z. Jones
Money and stuff. For all but the most ascetic among us, they are never far from 
mind, and the inner imps and angels that respectively urge “Acquisition!” and 
“Restraint!” whisper also into the ears of the very young. In this witty, wise picture 
book Boelts presents a kid’s-eye view of a consumer fad that rages through school 
at gale force and the students who are left twisting in the wind. 
A huge, fiery orange billboard featuring an expensively shod basketball 
star screams its message, “Buy These Shoes,” and the kids in Jeremy’s school enthu-
siastically respond. As each day goes by, another student turns up in the coveted 
kicks (“Black high-tops. Two white stripes”), and soon only Jeremy and Antonio 
are mired in sartorial embarrassment. Grandma is unmoved by Jeremy’s gimme 
crusade (“There’s no room for ‘want’ around here—just need”), and she points out 
that new snow boots fall into the need category this season. But Jeremy does, in 
fact, need new shoes: his old sneaks fall apart on the playground and Mr. Alfrey, 
the counselor, supplies him with a temporary pair from a box of castoffs. The abject 
dorkiness of these blue, velcroed, cartoon-emblazoned sneakers drives Jeremy to 
desperation, and even Grandma recognizes the need to take him shopping. The 
price tag on the striped high-tops sends them both into sticker shock, but they 
track down a pair in a resale shop, and Jeremy plunks down his own money for 
them despite the fact that they’re way too small. He can’t take the pain, though, and 
soon he’s back again to wearing the despised “Mr. Alfrey shoes.” When it finally 
dawns on Jeremy that classmate Antonio’s taped-together shoes are even more 
humiliating than his own—and that Antonio’s feet are smaller—he generously 
gives Antonio the high-tops. Then a turn in the weather finally puts an end to the 
whole footwear drama, as a snowfall sends all the kids scrambling for their boots, 
and Jeremy is right in style after all.
Boelts knows a thing or two about grade-school sumptuary laws, and her 
deft observations of show-off technique are right on the mark. Brandon T. boasts 
that he can now outrun Jeremy, and kids who have succumbed to shoe seduction 
are painfully litanized: “Antonio and I count how many times Nate goes to the 
bathroom—seven times in one day, just so he can walk up and down the hall real 
slow.” Boelts also knows a thing or two about grandmothers: Jeremy’s grandma, who 
appears to be his guardian, is clearly trying to instill in him some fiscal responsibil-
ity, and she mutters the de rigueur “How kind of Mr. Alfrey” when Jeremy comes 
home in the blue shoes that sport an animal “from a cartoon I don’t think any kid 
ever watched.” But she also knows there’s a limit to how much chagrin a kid can 
suffer, and her “little bit of money set aside” will never be directed to anything 
other than her grandson’s comfort.
166 • The BulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
Jones mixed-media, digitally assembled pictures cleverly capture how 
thoroughly the shoe craze permeates every aspect of Jeremy’s life. The ad that 
fires desire covers a brick wall, dwarfing posters for race cars and jugglers and jazz, 
dwarfing Jeremy himself, sprawling across the double-page spread and bleeding off 
the edges of the recto. Jeremy incorporates Those Shoes into his yearning doodles, 
wherein they warm the tootsies of monsters and superheroes and feature in ethereal 
settings. Those Shoes creep into his homework, and even his spelling list seems to 
mock him: South America, Hawaii, Ohio, England, San Francisco. It is also il-
lustration rather than text that establishes a neutral economic context in which the 
tale plays out. The urban streets and school are free equally of glitter and of grime; 
children of all ethnic backgrounds are clad in the expected array of pants and caps 
and shirts and hoodies, allowing viewers to focus on that single, salient variable, 
Those Shoes. Jeremy (African American) resides in a modest, tidy apartment that 
hints of creature comforts—his dinosaur collection, his adequately stocked closet, 
Grandma’s closely crammed bookcase. Even Antonio (Caucasian), the child who 
truly is needy, is only conspicuous in his taped sneakers. 
By refusing to connect craving to either income or ethnicity, Boelts and 
Jones create a work with broad appeal. Jonesin’ can and does smite everyone, and 
any kid who’s been the last one on the block to procure the latest must-have—what-
ever its monetary value— will feel the sting of Jeremy’s predicament. Fortunately, 
there’s also comfort here in the gentle message that fads fade, as well as a cautionary 
observation that a compelling ad, coupled with an infusion of peer pressure, can 
turn the consumer into the consumed. (See p. 167 for publication information.)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer
Armstrong, AlAn Raleigh’s Page; illus. by Tim Jessell. Random House, 
2007 328p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-93319-6 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-83319-9 $16.99   
R Gr. 5-8
John Saintleger, a prosperous farmer in Devon, calls in a longstanding favor to place 
his youngest son, Andrew, as a page in the household of Walter Raleigh. Despite a 
bit of homesickness, Andrew flourishes at Durham House, assisting Monsieur Pena 
with tending the exotic plants looted from enemy ships and reveling in discussion 
of plans for exploration and possible settlement in the New World. Raleigh tests 
the boy’s diplomacy on small local matters, and, having proved his discretion and 
loyalty, Andrew is entrusted (together with his ex-schoolmaster) with a much more 
dangerous undercover mission in France to procure a map of Spanish fortifications 
in the West Indies. Finally, Andrew gets his dearest wish when he’s sent on the 1585 
expedition to Virginia, where lost provisions and Captain Ralph Lane’s single-
minded pursuit of gold embroil them in conflict with the Native Americans and 
DecemBer 2007 • 167
ultimately send them scurrying back to England. While the illustrations are bland 
and there are touches of romanticism in the viewpoint, none of this gets in the way 
of a solid adventure story with exciting factual roots. With Armstrong’s concluding 
notes on history and research sources, readers should enjoy this fictionalized account 
of the courtly cabals behind the scenes of American exploration.  EB
BAusum, Ann Muckrakers: How Ida Tarbell, Upton Sinclair, and Lincoln Steffens 
Helped Expose Scandal, Inspire Reform, and Invent Investigative Journalism. National 
Geographic, 2007 112p illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-4263-0138-4 $32.90
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4263-0137-7 $21.95   
Ad Gr. 5-9
Although the journalistic exposé can certainly trace its heritage back into the nine-
teenth century, it was during the Progressive Era in the early twentieth century that 
investigative reporting began to flourish. Bausum highlights the work of Lincoln 
Steffens and Ida Tarbell as they respectively took on municipal and corporate cor-
ruption; McClure’s Magazine, which provided the forum for their efforts; and the 
independent writing of Upton Sinclair, whose famous pro-socialist screed The Jungle 
helped clean up the meat-packing industry. She also examines the problematic 
relationship between President Theodore Roosevelt and the journalists he eventu-
ally disparaged as “muckraking” extremists, even though they shared similar reform 
agendas. Bausum offers a clear, economically presented overview of key tensions in 
the rapidly urbanizing nation and concludes with a chapter on the cyclical reemer-
gence of investigative journalism. What’s missing, though, is any description of 
the investigation process itself, a lamentable absence in light of the likely appeal of 
such a description (readers who aspire to bylines and Pulitzers would undoubtedly 
appreciate learning some trade secrets) and the fact that that’s how these journalists 
achieved their reputations. The volume itself is exceptionally attractive, with well-
chosen sepia photographs, tidy layout, generous leading, and useful backmatter 
comprising a timeline, bibliography, index, and citation notes.  EB
Boelts, mAriBeth Before You Were Mine; illus. by David Walker. Putnam, 
2007 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-399-24526-8 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-7 yrs
The age-old story of a boy and a dog takes a contemplative turn here as a youngster 
wonders about the life that his pup, adopted as a stray from a shelter, lived before 
he joined the boy’s family. Second-person (second-dog?) narration addresses the 
dog directly (“Did you have another name . . . before you were mine?”), adding 
intimacy to the text, and the repetition of the title phrase provides structure. The 
scenarios for the dog’s prior existence and stray status are credible even as they’re 
gently imbued with emotion; a particularly deft touch is the narrator’s mention 
of the family’s previous canine bereavement (“Before you were mine, we had an 
old dog, as worn-out and friendly as she could be . . . ”). Softly daubed paints in 
gently rumpled shapes and round-edged frames cushion the pathos of the story, 
while the yellow flop-eared mutt, his tail always poised to wag, has a cuddly charm 
that’s part of his canine nature rather than any artistic personification. At its core 
a rescue drama, this will tug all the more effectively at audience heartstrings for 
its understated approach and plausible detail. The author concludes with a note 
advocating adoption of pets.  DS
168 • The BulleTin
Boelts, mAriBeth Those Shoes; illus. by Noah Z. Jones. Candlewick, 
2007 32p
ISBN 978-0-7636-2499-6 $15.99   
R* 5-9 yrs
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 165, for review.
Brown, Don The Train Jumper. Brodie/Roaring Brook, 2007 122p
ISBN 978-1-59643-218-5 $17.95   
R Gr. 5-8
It’s the Great Depression; Dad has lost his life, Mom has lost her job, and older 
Collier brother Little Bill has lost his sobriety. Shocked and ashamed at having 
injured their mother in a drunken fit, Little Bill takes off for the CCC camp in 
Colorado, and fourteen-year-old narrator “Collie” Collier takes to the rails to bring 
his brother home and mend what’s left of the family. Two fellow hoboes keep him 
alive on the peripatetic trip west—Scarecrow, an older man who serves as both his 
mentor and his exploiter, and Ike, a black drifter his own age, who weathers the 
double curse of poverty and prejudice. As readers will expect, the travelers meet 
their share of “sharps” and railroad bulls, corrupt lawmen and preachers, and an 
encouraging number of sympathetic folk from every walk of life, and adventures and 
perils swoop by at express speed. Collie’s experiences are so involving that reaching 
his destination and finding his brother a reformed man is a bit of a disappointment, 
but nonetheless the short chapters, generous dialogue, and relentless action make 
this a terrific choice for middle-schoolers who favor a quick pick.  EB
Bush, JennA Ana’s Story: A Journey of Hope; illus. with photographs by Mia 
Baxter. HarperCollins, 2007 290p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-137910-9 $19.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-137908-6 $18.99   
M Gr. 7-12
This fact-based story chronicles the life of Ana, a girl growing up in an unnamed 
Latin American country. Born with HIV/AIDS, Ana early loses first her mother 
and then her father to the disease; life with her grandmother means sexual abuse 
from her grandmother’s boyfriend and beatings when teenaged Ana turns rebel-
lious. Soon Ana finds herself in a juvenile detention center, and from there she’s 
transferred to a home for people with HIV or AIDS, where she embarks on a ro-
mance with fellow resident Berto—until her pregnancy means she must leave the 
facility. It’s a well-meaning work, and the emphases on safe sex and responsibility 
get considerable purchase from Ana’s circumstances. Despite the account’s basis in 
real life, however, Ana never really achieves dimensionality, instead appearing as 
little more than a cipher to whom things happen, and her story wanders along with 
little shape or momentum. Though the writing is often accessible in its simplicity, 
the style is flat, and the book veers from puzzling vagueness about Ana’s sexual 
abuse to disproportionately sophisticated vocabulary in its frequent interpolated 
lectures. Extensive end matter advises readers on ways to get support for issues 
ranging from HIV/AIDS to sexual abuse to bullying and concludes with a set of 
discussion questions to wring the last “object lesson” drops from the volume. Color 
photographs appear throughout, offering fragmented images that run the gamut 
from evocative to mannered and adding visual interest to the pages.  DS
DecemBer 2007 • 169
CAmeron, Peter Someday This Pain Will Be Useful to You. Foster/Farrar, 
2007 229p
ISBN 978-0-374-30989-3 $16.00   
Ad Gr. 9-12
Eighteen-year-old James is caught in the throes of indecision about the direction 
he wants to go with his life. He doesn’t like people his own age, so he figures the 
last thing he wants to do is go to college and be surrounded by them. Everywhere 
he looks, he sees more reasons to give in to existential sadness. He retreats to his 
grandmother’s house in search of substance and surfs the internet for real estate in 
the Midwest, thinking that a Craftsman-style bungalow will somehow meet his 
need for authenticity and a quiet life. He knows he’s gay but resents his parents’ 
questioning him before he has decided to tell them, just as he resents his sister for 
capitulating so readily to a reasonably happy life compromised by normality and 
crass materialism. His edgy dissatisfaction is ably rendered in material metaphors, 
such as his longing for china cups and saucers in a paper cup and sippy lid world, 
and his ambivalence over the solitude of the victims of 9/11 who weren’t missed for 
several weeks; he thinks he craves that kind of presence and solitude, but he can’t 
imagine being happy either way. James’ narration tends to be arid and distanced, 
and his navel-gazing musings make the book rather talky and slow-moving. His 
desire for something real and out of reach calls to mind Holden Caulfield, of course, 
except that Holden doesn’t recognize himself the way that James seems to, and thus 
has a charm and appeal that James lacks. James’ earnest emotional tenor will need 
to catch readers before they exit the teen-angst fields of rye (and before they enter 
those of wry), but those experiencing the heady rush of that first gloom of youth 
will find in him an articulate philosophical guide.  KC
Cross, shAunA Derby Girl. Holt, 2007 234p
ISBN 978-0-8050-8023-0 $16.95   
R Gr. 8-10
Sixteen-year-old Bliss is burdened with a name she hates, stuck in a small Texas 
town that stifles her originality, and saddled with a pageant-obsessed mother who is 
determined that she carry on the familial tradition of being named Miss Bluebonnet. 
Bliss, however, is all grunge and snark, favoring safety-pinned clothing over gowns 
and tiaras. Her absolute and immediate obsession with roller derby after she and 
a friend sneak off to the mecca that is Austin, Texas, is understandable: suddenly, 
Bliss is surrounded by tough girls who support her individuality and champion 
her strength, and she is exhilarated by the newfound freedom. However, Bliss is 
years younger than the other women on the team, and she soon discovers that she 
is too immature and inexperienced to handle some of the physical and emotional 
complications that emerge out of her first serious relationship and the unraveling 
of her myriad deceptions. Luckily for her, her beauty-queen mom can forgive a girl 
in crisis, even if it means letting go of the dream that her daughter will also win 
a crown. Although the premise of a girl trapped in a nowhere town with parents 
who don’t understand her is familiar, well-trodden territory in YA lit, the addition 
of roller-derby culture adds a fresh, edgy spin. Roller derby, a sport dominated by 
women with monikers like Malice in Wonderland or Babe Ruthless who crash into 
one other with incredible athleticism and absolute fearlessness, is conveyed with 
sexy, enthusiastic energy that injects the whole novel with a warm and authentic 
vibe. Of course, Bliss would find herself in this subculture that is everything her 
life isn’t, even if she learns as much from her mistakes as her successes. And, fortu-
170 • The BulleTin
nately for readers who find the sport equally irresistible, roller derby seems to be 
back with a vengeance.  AS
DePAlmA, mAry newell The Nutcracker Doll; written and illus. by Mary Newell 
DePalma. Levine/Scholastic, 2007 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-439-80242-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 4-6 yrs
Young ballerina Kepley has been bitten by the Nutcracker bug, and she’s thrilled 
when she makes it through auditions and receives a role as a doll. She goes through 
practice and costume measurement, and finally it’s glory time as she participates 
in twelve performances of the ballet, leaving her more in love with it than ever. 
The text is fairly literal and there’s not much dramatic tension or trajectory, but 
the story faithfully covers the elements of primary interest to wannabe Sugar Plum 
Fairies, who will relish details about giggly in-jokes and princessy costumes. The 
bland featurelessness of the human figures dilutes the glamour of the setting in 
the watercolor illustrations, but the scenes are clear and accessible, touched like 
the text with small details (girls playing hand-clap games or stretching a limb as 
they wait) that will suggest verisimilitude to yearning young viewers. Though 
the stylistic plainness won’t be much of a lure, this is a practical introduction for 
those youngsters whose imaginations are fired less by ornament than by believable 
prospects.  DS
DePAolA, tomie Front Porch Tales & North Country Whoppers; written and illus. 
by Tomie dePaola. Putnam, 2007 51p
ISBN 978-0-399-24754-5 $17.99   
Ad Gr. 3-6
Venerable local lore, a few expanded jokes, and a couple of original tales pay affec-
tionate tribute to New Englanders’ storied conversational style (terse), hospitality 
(aloof), and opinions (intractable). Four chapters that round the seasons offer a tale 
or two apiece, spun in local idiom (there’s an appended glossary to help untangle 
“heyahs” from “theyahs”), and separated by four comic-book-style interludes that 
feature a tourist whose direct questions are met with comically unhelpful responses. 
The tourist gags are fairly funny, as are two of the stories, one treating “mud season” 
mail delivery and the other a wildly uneventful evening of visiting at a neighbor’s 
house. Many, though, fail to achieve the elevation demanded by most tall-tale 
fans, landing in mildness rather than giggleworthy extremes. Nonetheless, dePaola 
makes the most of the deadpan features of his stolid cast, and his varied palette 
captures the hues of a region that enjoys four distinct seasons, even if “Summah” 
does arrive on Tuesday and depart on Thursday. Kids of a dramatic bent will enjoy 
taking the exaggerated North Country accent out for a run—including those who 
are already native speakahs.  EB
DiCAmillo, KAte Great Joy; illus. by Bagram Ibatoulline. Candlewick, 
2007 32p
ISBN 978-0-7636-2920-5 $16.99   
Ad 5-8 yrs
As Frances looks out her apartment window, she’s fascinated by the organ grinder 
and his monkey, who entertain passers-by for coins in a cup, but she’s also concerned 
that they don’t appear to have anywhere to go once the city collectively retires for 
the evening. She pesters her mother to help them out, but her mother isn’t about 
DecemBer 2007 • 171
to bring strangers into the house; besides, she’s trying to get Frances into a proper 
angel costume for the upcoming Christmas play at church. On the big night, 
Frances gives the organ grinder a hurried invitation to the festivities as her mother 
hustles her down the street. When she takes her place on stage, she freezes on her 
single line, but the sight of the organ grinder coming through the door brings 
it right back with “Behold! . . . I bring you tidings of great joy!” and the closing 
full-bleed spread depicts the congregation in a bustling church hall and the organ 
grinder and his monkey enjoying the seasonal hospitality. Ibatoulline’s softly glow-
ing gouache paintings set the story in the 1940s, and a photograph of a handsome 
man in uniform that claims pride of place in the apartment hints that mother has 
good reason to feel protective of her little girl and their somewhat lonely domestic 
space. Ultimately, listeners won’t take too much comfort from the warm reception 
after the play; coffee and good cheer don’t obviously translate into a solution to 
the man’s homelessness, and both story and art tip into sentimentality. Youngsters 
may, however, look with a bit more compassion on the needy who rattle their paper 
cups toward holiday shoppers close to home.  EB 
FienBerg, AnnA Number 8. Walker, 2007 279p
ISBN 978-0-8027-9660-8 $16.95   
R Gr. 7-10
Jackson’s response to the instability he has felt since the death of his father has been 
to develop an obsessive fascination with numbers. He needs his number challenges 
more than ever when he and his mother move to the suburbs after she sees too 
much at the casino where she was a singer; while she prattles on about the benefits 
of a new life, he has to face a new school with a nasty bully. Fortunately, he also 
quickly makes friends with an Iraqi refugee and a cute girl who’s fascinated with 
Jackson’s mother’s singing career, and while the bully continues to be a problem, 
he’s really enjoying having his first-ever girlfriend and best friend. Things turn 
sinister, however, when his mother’s past catches up with her, and Jackson has 
to overcome his fears in order to save his girl and the bully from serious danger. 
While many readers will sign on for the mystery here, the real action lies in the 
development of the friendships. Using alternating narration between Jackson and 
his girlfriend, Esmerelda, Fienberg puts flesh to types and, like her fellow Australian 
Melina Marchetta (Saving Francesca, BCCB 10/04), shows how teens can learn 
from one another if they are willing to let down their guard. Especially successful 
is the portrayal of Asim, the Iraqi refugee, whose plight makes him self-aware and 
sensitive to Jackson’s fragility about issues of home. The fact that each character 
has an idiosyncratic passion that somehow helps them understand the others adds 
dimension to an already effective suspense plot, giving this the potential for wide 
reader appeal.  KC 
ForssBerg, mAnne Sex for Guys; tr. from the Swedish by Maria Lundin. Ground-
wood/House of Anansi, 2007 142p (Groundwork Guides)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-88899-770-8 $15.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-978-88899-771-5 $9.95   
R Gr. 7-12
Imagine having a really cool older brother who spoke your language, took your fears 
seriously, and could answer all of your questions about sex with the straight facts 
rather than locker-room hearsay and moralistic dogma. Imagine, too, that he cares 
about getting the emotions of sex right as well as the mechanics. Imagine that he’s 
been through the questioning portion of the show and has emerged straight but not 
172 • The BulleTin
at all homophobic, and that he understands that sex isn’t all about penetration. This 
is the wise but hip voice that shepherds guys (and girls interested in understanding 
guys’ perspectives and questions about sex as well as their own) on a magical tour 
of the mysteries of sexuality. Aided by snippets from interviews of guys and girls 
of various ages, Swedish author Forssberg isn’t by any means an objective guide; 
instead he’s got lots of strong opinions about machismo, pornography, and learn-
ing as you go that seem, in his discussion, like the only sensible options. He gives 
rather short shrift to guys who are macho by nature not nurture, and he comes off 
a bit breezy about the sometimes devastating emotional aftermath of a breakup, 
but his candid and thorough treatment of not just sex but all that goes with it 
will prove invaluable to guys bombarded with less sensitive and comprehensive 
media messages. From understanding your own instrument to learning the ins and 
outs of hers, from taking things in your own hands to finding pleasures beyond 
intercourse, from learning to be sensitive to unlearning the absurd lessons of porn, 
this is a witty, sane treatment of the things that drive guys crazy—a must-read for 
teens with questions, which covers just about the whole demographic. Better buy 
multiple copies.  KC 
gorDon, DAviD Smitten; written and illus. by David Gordon. Atheneum, 
2007 36p
ISBN 978-1-4169-2440-1 $15.99   
Ad 5-7 yrs
A pink mitten (left hand) and a blue sock (either side) form an alliance when the 
two strays meet each other on the sidewalk. The two go forth to search for their 
partners together, undergoing adventures such as a turn in the laundromat machines 
(Sock shrinks in the dryer, but he’s stretched out again by a pair of playful dogs) and 
a plummet into the subway (Mitten unravels, but a clever Sock knits her back up). 
Finally they realize they’re a perfect partnership already, and “from then on they  
were . . . smitten.” The story is somewhat conceptually strained and loosely knitted, 
but amusing clothing jokes (“I’m used to being walked on,” says Sock cheerfully) 
and the dorky portmanteau-pun conclusion will likely tickle young listeners. Digital 
art gains texture from gentle cloudiness in its planes of color, against which the 
bright pink of Mitten and the perky baby blue of Sock stand out vividly. Cute but 
lightweight overall, this might still make an intriguing complement to Vail’s Righty 
and Lefty (reviewed below) or other stories of oddball pairings.  DS
hADDix, mArgAret Peterson Uprising. Simon, 2007 346p
ISBN 978-1-4169-1171-5 $16.99   
R Gr. 7-10
The Triangle Shirtwaist Factory strike of 1911 and the subsequent fire are recre-
ated here through the fictional experiences of three young women of very different 
backgrounds—Russian Jewish immigrant Yetta, a peppery idealist out to change the 
world; Italian immigrant Bella, cheated by her landlord but convinced that America 
is the place of dreams; and Jane, restless daughter of an iron-fisted businessman. A 
framing story, in which a Triangle fire survivor is interviewed by the daughter of a 
company owner years after the tragedy, alerts readers immediately that two of the 
three protagonists are doomed, and that foreknowledge effectively draws readers 
into deeper empathy with the trio as their situations converge and they form their 
unlikely friendship. The protagonists’ varying perspectives allow readers not just 
to witness but also to evaluate the wide range of agendas that temporarily made 
competing immigrant groups, suffragists, labor activists, and the privileged “mink 
DecemBer 2007 • 173
brigade” such strange bedfellows. The lengthy author note and partial list of sources 
attest to the fact that Haddix takes her historical research seriously. Disaster-story 
devotees will, of course, be drawn to the fire like moths to—well, you know, but 
they may also carry away an appreciation of women’s role in the early days of 
organized labor.  EB 
hAtKoFF, JuliAnA Knut: How One Little Polar Bear Captivated the World; by Juliana 
Hatkoff, Isabella Hatkoff, Craig Hatkoff, et al. Scholastic, 2007 [36p] illus. 
with photographs
ISBN 978-0-545-04716-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 2-4
Having chronicled the friendship of Owen and Mzee (in Owen & Mzee: The True 
Story of a Remarkable Friendship, BCCB 5/06, and Owen & Mzee: The Language 
of Friendship, 2/07), the Hatkoffs turn here to another high-profile young animal, 
the German polar bear cub Knut. The text describes the birth of the little guy, the 
devoted care by his zookeeper, Thomas Dörflein, and the world attention the bear-
let has received. Though there’s some effort to link the account to concern about 
global warming, this is mostly just a cute story about a cute baby animal; there are 
a number of gaps in the account (why did Dörflein have to take on Knut’s care by 
himself? How big is Knut? Will the zoo keep him when he gets older?), but Knut’s 
star power will keep viewers engaged. Pictures are, of course, the main point in 
such a homage to adorability; though the photos are unfortunately impaired by 
random and confusing captions, the photogenic cub is a camera darling, sure to 
make kids ooh, ahh, and yearn to cuddle. End matter includes more information 
on polar bears.  DS
henDerson, J. A. Bunker 10. Harcourt, 2007 253p
ISBN 978-0-15-206240-8 $17.00   
R Gr. 7-9 
Because of the intense security surrounding the Pinewood Military Installation, 
outsiders were not privy to the events leading to a catastrophic explosion that killed 
hundreds of soldiers and seven genius children. In this gripping, 24-esque novel, 
readers are taken, minute by minute, through the children’s horrifying discovery of 
genetic mutation experiments gone awry, the ensuing shutdown of safety measures at 
the compound, and their ultimate collusion in their own destruction in order to save 
the world against their suddenly evil and all-powerful genetically mutated friend, 
the formerly retiring May-Rose. In an absorbing subplot that blends high-octane 
adventure with gaming technology, one rogue attempt to save the children comes 
in the form of individuals who are certain they are role-playing in a virtual-reality 
scenario that involves being sent back in time to reverse the chain of annihilation. 
In other hands, the complex mix of science fiction, gaming, and action could result 
in a novel that is all flash, but Henderson ably balances intriguing plot twists and 
hauntingly well-developed characters with gripping pace and dramatic showdowns. 
Although the inexorable path toward doom will keep readers rapidly turning pages, 
the ethical issues of time travel, genetic modification, and the weight of extraordinary 
intelligence will likely linger long after the kids’ final day is over.  AS 
174 • The BulleTin
hoDgKins, FrAn The Whale Scientists: Solving the Mystery of Whale 
Strandings. Houghton, 2007 64p illus. with photographs (Scientists in 
the Field)
ISBN 978-0-618-55673-1 $18.00   
Ad Gr. 5-9
The phenomenon of whale stranding, a whale or group of whales getting helplessly 
stuck on the dry beach, is a puzzling and distressing one, and scientists have been 
attempting to ascertain its cause for some time. Hodgkins mentions theories such 
as disruption in whale hearing from human-made noise and from sonar, colder 
weather resulting in the whales’ pursuit of food into shallower waters, injury, or 
illness; the book then goes on to describe study of the beached whales, dead and 
alive, that provides additional clues about the stranding phenomenon. Between the 
endangerment of many species of whales and the poignancy of their strandings, 
this is an engaging topic, and the various possibilities are intriguing. However, 
there’s little attention to the titular whale scientists, with many of the theories 
never linked to any named scientist, and none of the focus on individual career 
trajectory that has marked the best titles in the series; even more oddly, the book 
doesn’t even talk about whale strandings for the first twenty pages, instead giving 
a history of whales and whaling. Even when the book does focus on strandings, 
there’s insufficient background and factual overview (readers who want to know 
how many strandings generally occur per year, how long they’ve been going on, 
and if the number is rising will have to search elsewhere for answers), and the 
explanations are often disjointed and unclear. There’s still some interesting food 
for thought here, so young biologists and ecologists may find this spurs them to 
deeper research waters. Photographs scattered throughout keep the look inviting; 
a list of sources, glossary, and index are appended.  DS
hornBy, niCK Slam. Putnam, 2007 309p
ISBN 978-0-399-25048-4 $19.99   
R Gr. 7-10
Things are looking good for fifteen-year-old Sam: his divorced parents have ceased 
major hostilities, his school is going reasonably well, and he’s found a beautiful 
girlfriend, Alicia. It’s that last benefit that’s going to turn sour on him: just after 
they break up, Alicia informs him she’s pregnant. That’s a particular sore spot for 
Sam’s mother, who became pregnant with him when she was only fifteen and who 
had been determined her son wouldn’t repeat her mistakes, and Alicia’s parents are 
unhappy that their middle-class daughter is seemingly being dragged down by her 
working-class boyfriend. As always, skateboard freak Sam turns for guidance to 
his idol, Tony Hawk, whose poster adorns Sam’s wall and whose autobiography, 
fragments of which pop up in Sam’s head like runic wisdom, informs Sam’s ac-
tions; now Tony’s poster periodically catapults Sam into the future to see what his 
currently unimaginable life as a dad looks like. British author Hornby captures 
with sympathy and acute perception the viewpoint of a kid whose life has just 
turned upside down. He steeps Sam’s tale in reality rather than cautionary horror: 
Sam actually becomes pretty good at the dad thing, and, as his mother’s example 
makes clear, becoming a parent is a life-altering but not life-ending experience. 
Sam’s voice is believable—he’s got a good heart but an understandable degree of 
selfishness and confusion—and other characterizations are also well crafted, with 
both sets of parents credible and intriguing blends of strengths and weaknesses. 
This offers an interesting contrast to Angela Johnson’s similarly themed The First 
Part Last (BCCB 9/03), and teenaged readers wondering about the big “what if?” 
will find considerable fodder for reflection here.  DS
DecemBer 2007 • 175
Johnson, D. B. Four Legs Bad, Two Legs Good!; written and illus. by D. B. 
Johnson. Houghton, 2007 32p
ISBN 978-0-618-80909-7 $16.00    
M 5-7 yrs
In this elaboration on George Orwell’s Animal Farm, Farmer Orvie, an anthro-
pomorphic pig, does nothing but prop up a ramshackle barn wall while the other 
animals do the plowing, planting, and hauling. And even that’s not enough for 
him—he insists that the animals take on more tasks, such as swatting the flies on his 
nose and scratching his ears. The mostly docile animals comply because they have 
accepted Orvie’s rule, “Four Legs Bad, Two Legs Good,” and have taken Orvie’s 
boots as a sign that he is a two-legger. Duck, as a genuine two-legger, demands 
her turn to be the farmer, but Orvie pooh-poohs her until she drains the pond, 
causing general mayhem; all of the animals must then work together to heft Orvie 
out of the mucky pond bottom, where he is stuck by his rubber boots. Johnson 
here seems to have forgotten a cardinal rule of successful allusive stories: they must 
make sense on their own, without overt reference to their source material. Absent an 
adequate explanation or a prior knowledge of the original to illuminate why Orvie, 
a four-legged creature, insists on the superiority of two-legged creatures and why 
the other animals accept this, the conflict is as muddy as the bland and repetitive 
digital art. The actions of Duck are likewise unaccountable, and the final resolu-
tion, where the animals work together and celebrate the triumph of eighteen legs 
(and two wings), comes off as trite and contrived, rather than boldly revolutionary. 
If very young children must be introduced to an Orwellian vision of society, they 
would be better off with—but wait, must they?  KC
Johnson, DinAh Hair Dance!; illus. with photographs by Kelly Johnson. Holt, 
2007 32p
ISBN 978-0-8050-6523-7 $16.95   
Ad 4-7 yrs
Joyous photographic images of brown girls with luminous smiles pull viewers 
into this celebration of “sassy short,” “bouncy long,” braided, puffed, natural, and 
dreadlocked hair. Set against boldly colored backgrounds with a crosshatched, 
linen-like texture, the photos capture moments of impish delight. The rhyming 
text is less successful; the scanning often skips, clichés abound, and the images are 
sometimes forced into a rhyme that doesn’t make sense without the photo layout, 
so this really is little more than a well-meaning photogallery. Despite its thinness, 
it’s got plenty of readaloud bounce, and the photos are delicious enough on their 
own to carry the message of justifiable pride in an asset girls are too often ambiva-
lent about.  KC
JuBy, susAn Another Kind of Cowboy. HarperTeen, 2007 [352p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-076518-7 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-076517-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-12
Horse-loving Alex has a natural talent and diligence that’s led him to excel in 
the local Western horse shows, but he really wants to learn dressage riding; Cleo 
is a pampered daughter of rich California movie people, sent to an equitation-
themed Canadian boarding school as a punishment for her misdeeds. As students 
of hinterlands dressagemasters Fergus and Ivan, Alex and Cleo develop a strange 
and rocky friendship that ends up benefiting them both: Cleo bolsters Alex as 
he becomes more certain in his identity as a gay teen and a dressage rider (both 
176 • The BulleTin
facts unknown to his macho father), and Alex provides stability for Cleo as she 
naïvely falls into step with a substance-abusing, future-destroying crowd at school. 
A horse story with a contemporary twist, this effectively evokes the equestrian 
milieu and its snobberies, hierarchies, and inclinations as well as the heartaches 
and joys of dealing with huge, unpredictable, and athletic animals. Third-person 
narration details Alex’s experiences in chapters that alternate with Cleo’s narration 
of her own story, yet Alex is the more richly developed character, wry yet hopeful, 
determined yet unsure. Juby’s signature wit (“Alex didn’t exactly deny who he was. 
He just tried to ignore it in the hopes that it might die of oxygen deprivation”) 
is particularly evident in Alex’s chapters, and there’s plenty of fodder for it both 
in the posh world of equestrian sports and in Alex’s wacked-out family, bizarre in 
triumph as well as trouble. Cleo is somewhat predictable both in her shallowness 
and her awakening to greater responsibility, but she’s a useful functionary in Alex’s 
growth, and readers will be glad to see the pair heading as friends toward a future 
they deserve and choose.  DS
KrensKy, stePhen Comic Book Century: The History of American Comic 
Books. Twenty-First Century Books, 2007 112p illus. with photo-
graphs (People’s History)
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-8225-6654-0 $30.60   
R Gr. 5-9
The past century of American comic-book history is effectively distilled into a com-
pact package in this trim and engaging volume. Although each section is necessarily 
short, Krensky captures the key moments of the evolution and transformations 
of comic books from the 1930s on, dividing the history into momentous events 
rather than by decade (the exploration of underground and independent comics, for 
example, covers the 1960s and 1970s and includes nods to feminist comic artists, 
edgy comix experimentation, and the shifts within mainstream comic-book culture). 
If the final tone is a bit pessimistic about the future of the comic-book market, 
Krensky supports his position well as he evaluates the impact films, television, and 
the rapidly growing influence of graphic novels on the field will likely have. All is 
not lost, though, as the author also embraces the obvious overlaps between GNs 
and comics, the explosion of internet comic books, and the ways in which kids are 
still drawn to the relatively inexpensive format. Frequent full-color comic-book 
representations and black-and-white photographs (featuring only white males as 
comic-book readers, unfortunately), flashy sidebars, and a striking blue background 
combine well with the accessible text, making this resulting work visually appealing 
as well as highly entertaining. In addition, the generous end matter is well chosen 
for the audience: a timeline nicely sums up the key events touched on throughout 
the work, brief biographies of notable figures will likely inspire further exploration, 
and a selected bibliography and annotated list of further reading (websites and print 
materials) will offer readers plenty of new avenues for research. An index and source 
notes enhance the use of this history as a reference item. Even readers who come to 
this for a single fact or section will stay for the whole compelling history.  AS
lAnAgAn, mArgo Red Spikes. Knopf, 2007 167p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-94577-9 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-84320-4 $16.99   
R Gr. 9-12
Lanagan solidifies her reputation as mistress of the strange in this provocative col-
lection of ten short stories with markedly different flavors, settings, and themes. 
DecemBer 2007 • 177
As in her previous collection, Black Juice (BCCB 3/05), she creates richly imagined 
characters whose lives and circumstances are lived as much beyond these pages as 
in them, requiring readers to engage in active and creative gap-filling. These stories 
provide even more of a challenge in this regard than the former set, however, as 
several of them emerge from nonhuman perspectives that are richly contextualized 
but unsignaled; the narrator of one story, for instance, is a young female member 
of a langur monkey clan whose leader is dying, and another is a guardian spirit 
uneasily occupying the body of a pet budgerigar. Standout pieces include a deeply 
spooky encounter with a Wee Willie Winkie figure that would give Tim Burton 
nightmares, and a stunning tale about a group of kids in limbo charged with escort-
ing souls misplaced between heaven and hell by clerical errors. The stark originality 
of these tales may be offputting for readers with mainstream tastes, but for those 
eager to give their imaginations a strenuous workout, each of these stories pumps 
serious iron.  KC 
lAt Town Boy; written and illus. by Lat. First Second/Roaring Brook, 
2007 192p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-59643-331-1 $16.95   
R Gr. 7-12
At the end of Kampung Boy (BCCB 1/07), Lat’s memoir of his early years in the 
Malaysian tin-mining country, our ten-year-old protagonist had just headed off 
to boarding school in town. This narrative of his secondary-school years describes 
his teenagerhood in the town of Ipoh, where his family moved shortly after their 
son started school there. In school, Mat, as he’s known here, becomes close friends 
with music-loving Frankie, and the two kids variously pelt or saunter, depending 
on which side of their growth spurt they’re on, about the teeming town, sometimes 
accompanied by “the boys,” other back-row sitters in Mat’s beloved art class. The 
text describes a recognizable adolescence of hanging out with friends, longing after 
a beautiful girl, and surviving dorky school experiences, all set here against the 
background of the tumultuous ’60s that most affects the protagonist through the 
waves of exciting music coming his way; amusing episodes range from the predict-
able response when the art teacher tells the class that naked women are art to the 
boys’ outing at a dance hall (interest in the opposite sex is an authentic leitmotif). 
It’s the art, however, that makes it art: the frenetic town scenes present a hundred 
different human dramas in every spread, and the figures radiate personality, with 
wannabe high-school cool oozing from the boys as they slouch bow-legged in pairs 
and packs through the streets (Mat’s growth spurt gives his body new verticality, 
but his hair remains as determinedly horizontal as a stepped-on bird’s nest, making 
him easy to pick out in group views). This will be an obvious winner for fans of 
the first title, but the graphic-style narrative of adolescence will also entice those 
readers who enjoyed Schrag’s Stuck in the Middle (BCCB 9/07).  DS
le guin, ursulA K. Powers. Harcourt, 2007 502p
ISBN 978-0-15-205770-1 $17.00   
R Gr. 7-10 
In this companion novel to the author’s Gifts (BCCB 10/04) and Voices (BCCB 
11/06), the richly developed Western Shore is explored anew through the first-
person narration of a brilliant but oppressed slave, Gavir. Although the pace is 
as languid as Gavir is complacent in the early chapters, the murder of his sister 
sparks a rapidly unfolding series of events that leads Gavir stumbling away from 
all he has ever known and towards a home from which he was stolen years before. 
178 • The BulleTin
He is seeking not only to lose the painful memories of his sister but also to gain 
understanding of his psychic ability to see into the future, a trait he has heard his 
people have. Of course, personal growth and freedom come at a heavy price, and 
for much of the novel, Gavir meanders, emotionally and physically lost, through 
groups of people who are friends and foes (sometimes simultaneously). His ultimate 
peace is satisfyingly hard won, and it is realistically tinged with the mix of fragility 
and tenacity that marks memorable characters who have undergone tribulations 
and emerged scathed but undefeated. Le Guin’s storytelling prowess transforms 
small moments into beautiful, poignantly narrated events, perfect given Gavir’s 
own fleeting instants of true happiness and his determination to avoid focusing 
on the large-scale horrors around him. Although the three novels draw from the 
same haunting alternative world, this third outing could work equally well as a 
standalone story. Fantasy readers seeking an intricate and thoughtful examination 
of a life that is as much endured as enjoyed will find Gavir to be unforgettable and 
his gorgeous but dangerous surroundings engaging. Two maps aid in tracking the 
protagonist’s long journey.  AS 
lennon, JoAn Questors. McElderry, 2007 359p
ISBN 978-1-4169-3658-9 $16.99   
R Gr. 5-7 
Three children from three very different worlds are brought together as the only 
hope against a cataclysmic disruption in the space-time continuum—what could 
possibly go wrong? First, the children’s call to heroism mistakenly came ten years 
early, so they are considered still too young and inexperienced to save the universe. 
Second, not only are the bad guys working against them, but it seems as though 
someone on the inside is also conspiring to thwart their success. Third, no one even 
knows the three objects (one from each world) that will fulfill the children’s quest. 
Nevertheless, Madlen, Bryn, and Cam staunchly set off, certain they will know 
the talismans when they see them, and face zombies, war-hungry soldiers, dragons, 
and kidnappers as they journey. Although there is little tension about the ultimate 
success of the kids, the gripping and creative villains they encounter (Fred and his 
conjured darker personality Master Erick, for example, who must be rejoined via 
harmonic disruption) provide ample excitement. In fact, the kids themselves, sturdy, 
brave, and nearly interchangeable, are foregrounded by the elaborately distinct 
worlds, the remarkable behind the scenes efforts to keep the universe in balance, 
and the bizarre quest items themselves. Fantasy fans who are drawn to the genre 
for the captivating and memorable settings will be enthralled by the complex plot 
set in this strange and multilayered world. And so much the better that kids get to 
be the ones to save the day after the foibles, short-sightedness, and greed of adults 
wreak havoc on the entire universe.  AS 
mArK, JAn The Museum Book: A Guide to Strange and Wonderful Collections; illus. 
by Richard Holland. Candlewick, 2007 54p
ISBN 978-0-7636-3370-7 $18.99   
M Gr. 4-7
This British import by the late Jan Mark takes readers on a rambling tour of museum 
history, loosely tracing the way individual collections of curiosities transformed 
over the ages into carefully curated collections for public display. In this poorly 
organized account, though, the notion of development is almost lost among random 
observations on the mythological roots of the term “museum,” on collectors such 
as Elias Ashmole and Peter the Great, and on the wide range of objects that can be 
found in museums. It’s no surprise that the focus is largely on British collections 
DecemBer 2007 • 179
(American readers won’t get even a whiff of how P. T. Barnum or the Smithsonian 
Institute fit into all this), but it is remarkable that none of this discussion coalesces 
into a definition of the modern museum and its generally accepted missions of 
collection, conservation, research, and education. In fact, Mark muddies the water 
by tossing in quirky but ill-justified examples of museums: “The Chrysler Building 
in New York is a masterpiece of Art Deco style. The jail in Goderich, Ontario, is 
a museum because of its strange design, called a panopticon.” Design is elegant 
and art is attractive, but the mixed-media collages are more whimsical than infor-
mative—one particularly unfortunate spread features museum photographs and 
elevations without offering names or locations. An index and a hit-or-miss glossary 
are included, but the shallowness of coverage limits this to browsers rather than 
report writers. Kids packing their steamer trunks for the Grand Tour may enjoy 
a peek at the delights across the Atlantic, but most will be better served by a trip 
to a local museum or historical society or a look at Thomson’s The Nine-Ton Cat: 
Behind the Scenes at an Art Museum (BCCB 4/97).  EB
mCCourt, FrAnK Angela and the Baby Jesus; illus. by Raúl Colón. Wiseman/
Simon, 2007 [32p]
ISBN 978-1-4169-3789-0 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
M 6-10 yrs
Six-year-old Angela worries that the baby in the Nativity scene at the church in 
her Irish town must be cold with nothing but a strip of cloth painted on his body, 
evidently more for modesty than for warmth. She sneaks the figure out of the empty 
church, hustles home to tuck it in bed, and almost manages to smuggle it up to 
her room without being seen. Her brother Pat, however, blows the whistle on her, 
and Mammy marches them back to the church with explanations and apologies. 
A policeman is there to deal with a possible theft, and after Pat is briefly frightened 
that Angela might be arrested, the baby is returned to the manger, where “he smiled 
the way he always did and held out his arms to the world.” Although there’s no 
claim that this tale is fact-based, adults familiar with Angela’s Ashes will certainly 
leap to the conclusion that the narrator’s “my mother, Angela” is a character they 
already know. And indeed, the entire tale has the ring of a family story that would 
be told to friends in a few sentences but is here strung out into text-heavy picture-
book length. Children won’t give a hoot about Angela’s literary lineage, but they’ll 
probably object to the statue’s failure to break when Angela pitches it twice over 
the garden wall, and they’ll register confusion regarding older brother Pat, who 
is “like a baby himself and often said foolish things.” Colón’s cast is bathed in an 
appropriately golden Christmas glow, but they collectively appear about as waxy 
and self-consciously posed as the Nativity figure. Pat’s climactic outburst, “I love 
the Baby Jesus and I love my little sister,” can rival Tiny Tim at his maudlin best, 
and adult McCourt fans who enjoy a good cry at the holiday season will do better 
sharing this with their book club than with their children.  EB
mCKissACK, PAtriCiA C. The All-I’ll-Ever-Want Christmas Doll; illus. by Jerry 
Pinkney. Schwartz & Wade, 2007 36p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-93759-0 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-83759-3 $16.99   
R 5-8 yrs
Sisters Eddy Bernice, Nella, and little Dessa know better, with their family caught 
in the pressures of the Depression, than to hope for any Christmas luxury other 
than fresh newspaper on the walls to block out the winter winds. A girl can dream, 
180 • The BulleTin
however, so Nella posts a letter to Santy asking for a genuine, store-bought Baby 
Betty doll of her very own. To everyone’s surprise, Daddy delivers, and the girls 
immediately begin fighting over their doll. Nella claims her rights as the one who 
didn’t lose hope, and her sisters go outside to play while Nella experiences the bliss 
of new-babydoll mothering. Before long, blinking Betty grows boring, and Nella 
realizes that playing with her real-live sisters is far more gratifying than pretending 
to play with even the most beautiful doll. Though there is nothing particularly 
original here, thematically speaking, the tale is charmingly told, and Pinkney’s il-
lustrations add vibrancy and warmth. The characters swirl in constant motion in 
predominately sepia- and golden-toned watercolors, with homey dresses and other 
textiles picked out in more electric shades of blue, turquoise, and red. McKissack 
is careful not to belabor her message, but rather she portrays with simple grace a 
lesson everyone learns at some point, while providing a glimpse of warm family 
life during a difficult period.  KC 
moloney, JAmes Trapped; illus. by Shaun Tan. Stone Arch, 2007 80p (Shade 
Books)
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-59889-863-7 $16.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-59889-919-1 $5.95   
R Gr. 5-9
tAn, shAun The Haunted Playground; written and illus. by Shaun Tan. Stone 
Arch, 2007 80p (Shade Books)
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-59889-860-6 $16.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-59889-916-0 $5.95   
R Gr. 5-9
Publisher Stone Arch has a particular focus on hi-lo fiction in a range of genres and 
formats, and some of their strongest entries are imports, as with these two titles in 
their fantasy line from Australian authors James Moloney (Black Taxi, BCCB 5/05) 
and Shaun Tan. Moloney’s Trapped tells of skateboarder David, determined to skate 
in a local storm drain but finding there more than he bargained for. The Haunted 
Playground  stars Gavin, whose nocturnal metal-detecting hobby leads him to a 
playground populated with weirdly out-of-date kids who are unnervingly eager to 
ensure he stays and plays with them. The retitling of both books results in giving 
away more plot than is advisable, and readers can happily forego the discussion 
questions and writing prompts in the end matter; behind those packaging issues, 
however, lie two compact, nicely spooky, easily readable ghost stories with genuine 
individuality. Tan’s moody, intense black-and-white art confers sophistication upon 
the books, suggesting edgy magazine stories rather than stodgy nutritional reading. 
All the more useful for their appeal to readers of various levels of literary expertise, 
these will give reluctant readers a good shot at experiencing some genuine pleasure 
in decoding text.  DS
morA, PAt Yum! ¡Mmmm! ¡Qué Rico!: Americas’ Sproutings; illus. by Rafael 
López. Lee & Low, 2007 32p
ISBN 978-1-58430-271-1 $16.95   
R Gr. 3-5
Veteran poet Mora celebrates fourteen foods, alphabetically progressing from 
blueberries to vanilla, native to this hemisphere. Each foodstuff receives a haiku of 
tribute counterpointed by a sidebar of informative text; aside from prickly pear, 
they’re all likely to be at least conceptually familiar noshes to most kids, but their 
histories and industrial uses may hold a few surprises. Haiku seems a strange form 
DecemBer 2007 • 181
for an American-centered collection, but Mora works the vivid imagery in lyrics 
that are pretty lip-smacking in their own sonorous right (the tomato “squirts seedy, 
juicy splatter”), making them tasty candidates for reading aloud. The intensity of 
López’s acrylic illustrations is so unvaried as to make compositions unfocused, 
but the tactile element of the wood surface of the art and the crisp edges of the 
illustrative elements help balance the boldness of the hues and result in a pleasing 
culinary vision. While curricular connections are plentiful, some kids will just enjoy 
nibbling their way through the collection, snack in hand to quell the inevitable 
pangs of appetite.  DS
nAnJi, shenAAz, comp. and ad. Indian Tales: A Barefoot Collection; illus. by 
Christopher Corr. Barefoot Books, 2007 [96p]
ISBN 978-1-84686-083-6 $19.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 7-10 yrs
Eight Indian folktales, each from a different region of India, are combined with an 
introduction to Indian culture in this collection by Nanji. Each story is preceded 
by a spread that includes highlights of the particular region’s geography, culture, 
and, sometimes, history, as well as a list of facts that supposedly (but don’t always) 
correlate to the region and/or following story. The stories themselves are well cho-
sen and varied; evil stepmothers, wise girls, heroes, and fools rub shoulders with 
Indian demons and gods in tales of love, trickery, and generosity. Unfortunately, 
Nanji’s retellings are somewhat lackluster, and she occasionally falls back on cliché 
in describing her characters (for example, Hanuman, the monkey god, is described 
as having “a mischievous twinkle in his eye”). A problematic deficit is the lack of 
source notes for the tales themselves, though copious sources (mostly websites) are 
listed for the cultural information at the book’s end. Corr’s vibrant gouache, folk-
art-style paintings pulsate with hot pink, orange, red, yellow, and turquoise and 
surround each page of text, occasionally bursting forth into full-page illustrations. 
The intense use of color and pattern will certainly prompt readers to pore over 
the pictures, but the scattered, highly detailed compositions sometimes lack the 
focus to keep the images from feeling cluttered. Given the dearth of collections of 
Indian folktales in children’s literature, this book, despite its flaws, will still be a 
useful title to parents, teachers, librarians, and storytellers who wish to share these 
stories with young audiences.  JH
noyes, DeBorAh Red Butterfly: How a Princess Smuggled the Secret of Silk out of 
China; illus. by Sophie Blackall. Candlewick, 2007 32p
ISBN 978-0-7636-2400-2 $16.99   
R* Gr. 4-7
Lyrical, imagistic prose tells the story of a young Chinese princess who prepares to 
leave the bustling riches of her father’s palace and marry “the king of far Khotan.” 
Wrapped in red silk, its making a national secret, the princess bids goodbye to the 
surroundings she loves, fearing that her new home will be a desolate and desert 
place. When she leaves, she secretly breaks the national law and brings with her in 
her elaborate hair a small colony of silkworms and mulberry seeds to grow the leaves 
upon which the worms thrive. The delicate descriptive text is so effective at creating 
the world of the princess that the silk-smuggling becomes secondary to the reason 
for it; this isn’t the account of the spread of a manufacturing technique but a story 
of a girl preparing to leave home for the unknown. Blackall’s tidy, emphatic drafts-
manship suits the story, giving her figures presence and impact that contrasts nicely 
182 • The BulleTin
with the mistier and more stylized landscape and background elements. Inventive 
compositions (a taste for overhead views adds perspective) and strong design ensure 
fluid, balanced, and dramatic layouts; images are punctuated with scarlet and black 
and softened with leafy greens, a palette that, like the style, pays homage to historic 
Chinese art. Give this to fans of Bodkin’s elegant The Crane Wife (BCCB 10/98) 
or Ho’s poetry collection Maples in the Mist (BCCB 9/96), who will admire the 
controlled intensity of Noyes’ style. A final note offers further information about 
silk and the legends surrounding its discovery and dissemination.  DS
oPie, ionA, comp. Mother Goose’s Little Treasures; illus. by Rosemary Wells. Can-
dlewick, 2007 56p
ISBN 978-0-7636-3655-5 $17.99    
R 2-4 yrs
Quintessential gatekeeper of the world of nursery rhymes, Opie returns with a 
new collection of twenty-two compact rhymes. The selections are unusual, ranging 
from comparatively recent jump-rope rhymes (“Going to Kentucky”) to centuries-
old carols (“The Moon Shines Bright”) to an authored popular song of the 1920s 
(“Chick Chick Chick Chick”) in keeping with her observations about the breadth 
of youthful usage. It’s too bad there are no notes to explain these varied sources (the 
introduction in fact misleadingly states “No one knows who wrote these snatches 
of song,” when at least one has author and copyright date easily identifiable) and 
to annotate some changes from their usual appearance (who changed the song 
“When Cockle Shells” to the non-scanning “When the Cockle Shells”?), and musical 
notation would have been helpful in several cases, but the verses are a quirky and 
recitable crew sure to involve a young audience. Working in a shimmering palette 
of watercolors and relying often on delicate brushstroke patterns for texture, Wells 
creates a world of running human and animal characters (blue-haired Mrs. Whirly 
is also an actor in “Little Old Dog Sits under a Chair,” for instance) who parade in 
together with “Here Comes Solomon” and reconvene happily in the concluding 
“Before It Gets Dark.” To some verses she adds her own stories, for others she opts 
to focus on characters or elements rather than plot, but the result is both attractive 
and filled with character. Fans of Opie’s previous nursery titles will want to add this 
one and broaden their horizons.  DS
PArK, linDA sue Click; by Linda Sue Park, David Almond, Eoin Colfer, et 
al. Levine/Scholastic, 2007 218p
ISBN 978-0-439-41138-7 $16.99   
R Gr. 7-10
Linda Sue Park provides the springboard for this “jump” story by introducing Mag-
gie, a young girl grieving the death of her famous photographer grandfather, who has 
left her a puzzle to solve for her inheritance. Her brother is less consumed by grief 
than guilt, joined by a feeling of betrayal as he learns that he has been adopted. His 
first impulse, then, is to sell the signed pictures of famous people that his grandfather 
has left him so that he can use the money to run away, until he finds the old box 
camera in the basement, and, with it, his avocation. From this beginning, David 
Almond, Eoin Colfer, Deborah Ellis, Nick Hornby, Roddy Doyle, Tim Wynne-
Jones, Ruth Ozeki, and Margo Lanagan in turn take up the thread of the narrative, 
each producing a segment that further fleshes out the characters’ lives and destinies. 
Many of the chapters center on the backstories behind the pictures alluded to in 
Park’s introductory piece, but others introduce new possibilities that are then ably 
picked up and alluded to or finished off by other authors. Gregory Maguire does an 
DecemBer 2007 • 183
elegant job of bringing the entire story of Maggie and her grandfather’s legacy full 
circle in his concluding chapter, reinforcing the effect of a unified narrative rather 
than a series of vignettes. The thematic insistence on the way each photographically 
captured moment opens onto a story of the interconnectedness of experience is 
further reinforced by the form itself, since each author’s brief installment intercon-
nects at some point with the narrative as a whole. Certain of the chapters have 
more metaphoric resonance than others, but all of them feature a high-interest plot 
line with an explanation or clue to some part of Maggie’s puzzle or to her brother’s 
development. This therefore works as both a novel and a curricularly useful model 
of effective collaborative writing.  KC 
PArr, toDD We Belong Together: A Book about Adoption and Families; written and 
illus. by Todd Parr. Tingley/Little, 2007 32p
ISBN 978-0-316-01668-1 $15.99   
R 2-5 yrs
“We belong together because . . . you needed a home/ and I had one to share.” So 
begins this simple paean to adopted families, which goes from modest explana-
tion (“You needed someone to kiss your boo-boos/ and we had kisses to give”) to 
celebration (“Now we can all hold hands”). Though the text is a little sing-songy in 
its repetition, the basic nature of the stated needs brings them closer to the truth of 
the relationship than in many books about adoption, and they’re concrete enough to 
be understandable to young children. Parr’s trademark vigorous graphics, unshaded 
black-lined colors in a rainbow of hues on every page, unthreateningly support 
the text, offering a variety of families with parents single and partnered, couples 
same sex, complementary sex, and unascertainable sex, while the multiplicity of 
colors—including blue and purple—in the faces ensures inclusivity. This will be a 
boon to adults seeking literary support in addressing the topic, and there’s plenty 
of room for readers-aloud to spin the pattern off into their own particular favorite 
family elements.  DS
Peet, mAl The Penalty. Candlewick, 2007 262p
ISBN 978-0-7636-3399-8 $16.99   
R Gr. 9-12
Paul Faustino, sports writer for La Nación, the major paper of a fictional South 
American country, is currently on leave to write a book about his last investigative 
venture (Keeper, BCCB 9/05), but he’s tantalized by a breaking story on the disap-
pearance of “El Brujito,” an eighteen-year-old soccer phenom who went missing 
after making a game-losing play. The writer assigned to the story turns up afloat 
in the harbor with a knife in his heart—a knife with a hilt carved in the image of 
the justice spirit Maco—and Paul decides he’d rather leave town than pursue the 
case and face a similar fate. Ultimately, though, he has no choice; he’s abducted 
by one of his sources, local tour guide Edson Bakula, who knows exactly where 
the missing player is and needs a writer of national repute to bring the incredible 
story—a mix of centuries-old spiritualism and modern police corruption—into 
the court of public opinion. Alternating with the contemporary tale are chapters 
that trace the enslavement of a young African man, Achache, and his rise to power 
as a pai (shaman) among the slaves on an upriver plantation, the site at which El 
Brujito is being held in psychological (or spiritual?) bondage. The stories converge 
in a deadly encounter between rescuers and captors, and ancient religious practices 
generally thought to be superstitions unleash forces of the past that alter the pres-
ent. Peet deftly works the interplay of the supernatural and the mundane, and he 
184 • The BulleTin
manipulates his fictional setting to full advantage. The narrative tone recalls hard-
boiled newsroom dramas of the 1940s, with the aggressive, chain-smoking, fedora’d 
reporter transmuted here into a reluctant, chain-smoking skeptic in way over his 
head. Readers sniffing out soccer action have come to the wrong place; this is an 
intoxicating mystery story, straight up with an occult twist.  EB
Peters, Julie Anne grl2grl. Tingley/Little, 2007 151p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-316-01343-7 $11.99   
R Gr. 9-12
In this collection of ten original stories, Peters chronicles an array of girls navigat-
ing their sexual identities. Vulnerability pervades the collection, as a young lesbian 
tries to muster up the courage to attend her first GSA meeting in “Can’t Stop the 
Feeling,” or a daily flirtation via eye contact finally pushes a girl to approach her 
crush in “Feelings.” Although most of the entries end on positive or at least cau-
tiously optimistic notes, there are two searing, devastating stories that highlight the 
full range of experiences towards self-identity: “Boi” tracks the grueling, inevitable 
discovery of a transgender teen’s secret by a gang of local tough boys, and the nar-
rator of “Stone Cold Butch” struggles to protect herself emotionally from sexual 
abuse by closing off from her own body. The resulting collection, a powerful mix 
of raw experiences, endearing coming-out moments, and arresting sensuality, is 
impressively balanced. Peters is gifted at evoking authentic teen voices, and even 
in these short stories, ten distinct and memorable girls emerge, all joined in a 
common pursuit of self even in their widely varying paths. Although the title may 
be a clear indicator of potential audience, teens across the GLBTQ spectrum will 
likely find that at least some of these stories speak directly to their own lives and 
easily transcend the assumed girl-only perspective.  AS
Plummer, louise Finding Daddy. Delacorte, 2007 [176p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90113-0 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73092-1 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
It’s not just that Mira has no memory of her father, who left when she was small, 
it’s her mother’s and grandmother’s nearly unbreachable silence on the subject 
that makes her yearnings for him so sharp. With the help of her boyfriend, Dylan, 
Mira finally manages to contact her distant father, who has been longing to know 
the whereabouts of his daughter, and the two plan to meet up later that week 
when he has a layover at her local airport. In the meantime, Mira’s family is be-
ing menaced—their dog is viciously and deliberately killed, and a shadowy figure 
keeps trying to break into the house—and Mira cannot help but wonder if there’s 
a connection between her newfound father and the threat to her family. There’s 
always good fearful fun to be had from the mistaken-invitation motif, and it’s an 
interesting change here that it’s not a boyfriend but a father who’s been optimisti-
cally misjudged. Plummer ups the ante here considerably by adding some genuinely 
shocking violence (including the murder of a likable major character as well as the 
killing of the dog), which is an effectively startling contrast to the cozy world of 
the book’s opening. There’s little subtlety or psychological nuance, however, and 
characterization and action are mostly plot-convenient: Mira’s father is pretty much 
a comic-book psycho, and the book never interrupts Mira’s self-blaming for the trag-
edy to point out that her mother, who failed to warn her high-school-aged daughter 
that her father had lethal tendencies, carries considerably more responsibility than 
DecemBer 2007 • 185
Mira does. Still, this has more than enough edge, and readers who like their horror 
to have a serious emotional component may find this provocative.  DS
riChArDs, Justin The Chaos Code. Bloomsbury, 2007 388p
ISBN 978-1-59990-124-4 $17.95   
Ad Gr. 7-9
Matt is understandably feeling unwanted: his mother is shipping him off to spend 
the holidays with his father, and when he arrives (hours later off yet another train), 
he finds his father’s house deserted. Before he can muster up too much self-pity, the 
fifteen-year-old discovers ominous signs that his father may have been kidnapped 
or could be in danger, and he finds himself quickly embroiled in a complicated 
mystery. The item for which everyone seems to be searching is an ancient code; 
the use of this item in the wrong hands could doom the world. Fortunately, Matt 
is not alone in his hunt: his father left him cryptic clues as to potential allies, one 
of whom he soon finds himself romantically attracted to, in spite of her apparent 
immortality and the inevitable complications that will bring to any relationship. 
Matt, as often befuddled and slow to respond as he is brilliant and witty, is an 
amiable and well-developed protagonist. Unfortunately, he is lost in the sea of 
villains and heroes that surround him, few of whom are explored in enough depth 
to make them distinct or memorable. Although the globetrotting, swashbuckling 
pursuit of treasure is nicely paced, it is also confusingly complex, especially when 
paired with Matt’s parent issues (his mother appears at a rather inconvenient mo-
ment, somehow also entangled in this mystery), a connection to Atlantis, and, 
of course, the immortal (or at least very long-lived) family for whom Matt’s aunt 
works. Nonetheless, teens still searching for Da Vinci Code readalikes will be right 
at home with this concoction, as will readers who can’t get enough of codes and 
puzzles.  AS
rogAn, s. Jones The Daring Adventures of Penhaligon Brush; illus. by Christian 
Slade. Knopf, 2007 230p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-94344-7 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-84344-0 $15.99   
Ad Gr. 4-7
Penhaligon Brush is a refined fox with a taste for adventure beyond his small-town 
life as an apothecary. An urgent summons from his adopted badger brother sets him 
off on more adventure than he bargained for; when he travels to see his brother, 
he finds that his town is under siege and his brother has been imprisoned by a 
nasty cat named Sir Derek, who is using his wealthy aunt’s illness to his advantage. 
Penhaligon teams up with the recovered but dissembling Lady Ferball, his escaped 
brother, and a host of crafty creatures to defeat Sir Derek’s nefarious plot and 
restore peace and harmony to their town. The animal characters have a restrained 
charm that leans toward sweetsy but mostly manages to pull back in time. The plot 
twists move somewhat predictably to put our heroes at advantage, with the usual 
problems of arrogance and double-dealing with the mercenaries causing the final 
defeat of the villain. There’s a fair bit of compensation, though, in the romping 
pace, clean plotting, and age-appealing action. Christian Slade’s illustrations feature 
Disney-worthy animal caricatures in elaborate costume performing swashbuckling 
feats of arms and cross-dressing; what humor there is in the story is found in the 
pictures. The text, on the other hand, plays it straight and light, so readers who 
don’t yet have the stamina for the Redwall saga may enjoy this fast-paced, heroic 
animal tale.  KC
186 • The BulleTin
sAlter, helen Does Snogging Count as Exercise? Simon Pulse, 2007 [256p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4169-3801-9 $5.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-9
Poor Holly. She’s fourteen with no romantic experience whatsoever, and it shows 
(“I shouldn’t have been allowed to deal with boys unaided, without a guide or a 
textbook”). She’s also got a crush on her best friend’s older brother, Luke; what’s 
more, said best friend, Poppy, seems to be drifting into a friendship with glamorous, 
manipulative Claudia, while Holly’s athletic family thinks that bookish Holly could 
improve her outlook if she’d just suit up and join the family games. Enlivened by 
lists (“Things Boys Are Useless At”), a periodically redesigned “Who-Likes-Who 
Chart,” and a practical understanding of the necessity of texting to get through 
the teenage day, Holly’s narration ripples with humor from start to finish as she 
negotiates the pitfalls of school, family, and peer relationships. Though it has some 
of the appeal and British charm of Rennison’s Angus, Thongs and Full-Frontal Snog-
ging (BCCB 5/00), this novel is ultimately kinder to its characters, who resist the 
rom-com temptation to be two-dimensional (even the dastardly Claudia has other 
facets that keep her from being simply Holly’s antagonist) and who undergo a little 
growth as well as obtaining snogging opportunities. Holly’s youthfulness for her 
age will make her sympathetic to younger readers, who will be as pleased as she is 
with her eventual kiss with Luke. This is satisfying entry-level chick lit with hope 
and wisdom as well as froth.  DS
sAntore, ChArles The Silk Princess; written and illus. by Charles Santore. Ran-
dom House, 2007 [40p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-93664-7 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-83664-0 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 6-9 yrs
Inspired by the legend of a Chinese princess’ discovery of silk, Santore spins a tale 
of young princess Hsi-Ling Chi, overlooked by her emperor father in favor of her 
brothers. Fascinated by the unspooling of a cocoon of silk, the girl plans to unwind 
it to the end, her mother holding the start; the length takes her outside of the 
palace, through fantastical adventures, and to a mysterious old weaver, who shares 
with her the secret of weaving silk. Upon her return and the successful creation of 
the lovely fabric into a new imperial robe, the emperor finally delights in his clever 
daughter. That’s a pretty little plot for a piece of mocklore, but it’s cluttered up with 
long and rambling text (which appears in perplexingly small and spidery print); 
the princess’ relationship with her father is too perfunctorily treated to work as a 
sustained emotional draw, and the clear implication that she dreamed the majority 
of her adventures undermines the legendary quality. Illustrations are more success-
ful: backgrounds in parchment tones add antique flavor to foregrounded figures in 
precise and elegant draftsmanship, in scenes rich with the gnarled trees and floral 
motifs familiar from historic Chinese art. Aesthetes may find the art compensates 
for the text’s flaws, and this could make a useful partner with Noyes’ Red Butterfly 
(reviewed above) for two creative looks at strong-minded imperial daughters and the 
dissemination of this strange and wonderful substance. An author’s note describes 
the legend and his adaptations.  DS
DecemBer 2007 • 187
sChertle, AliCe Very Hairy Bear; illus. by Matt Phelan. Harcourt, 
2007 32p
ISBN 978-0-15-216568-0 $16.00   
R 4-7 yrs
Hairy from head to toe (except for his bare bear nose), a plump brown bear cheer-
fully eats his way through the woods as he prepares for winter. Though his flowing 
fur may get wet (from salmon fishing) and sticky (during a raid on a honey tree) 
and his nose may suffer bee stings and turn blue (after a romp in a blueberry 
patch), this bear doesn’t care. However, when winter comes and the bear settles 
down for slumber, his naked nose feels the cold keenly; luckily, his big shaggy paws 
provide plenty of insulation. The pace of Schertle’s poetic text complements her 
topic with a gently lumbering rhythm (“Each summer, he’s a sticky, licky honey 
hunter, with his bear nose deep in the hollow of a bee tree”) that slows as winter 
approaches (“When fish sink to sleep deep in the pond, wrapped in their silver 
scales”). Phelan’s soft pencil and pastel drawings on creamy paper are accented with 
bolder, sketchy outlines that emphasize the bear’s shaggy hair. The bear himself is 
more teddy than grizzly, a genial, big-bottomed fellow who revels in his gluttony 
(he luxuriates in the berry patch with a blueberry stuck on each claw). Pair this 
with Cooper’s Bear Dreams or Fleming’s Time to Sleep (BCCB 12/97) for a cozy 
ursine storytime.  JH
sChlitz, lAurA Amy, ad. The Bearskinner: A Tale of the Brothers Grimm; illus. by 
Max Grafe. Candlewick, 2007 [36p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-2730-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-6
This lesser-known Grimms’ tale (best known from the Pyle/Hyman version, Bear-
skin, BCCB 11/97) follows a soldier who makes a deal with the devil: he’ll have 
all the riches he needs for seven years, but he must forego hygiene and wear the 
increasingly revolting hide of a bear for the duration; if he succeeds, he retains the 
riches, and if he fails, he forfeits his soul. Schlitz makes some changes from the 
Grimms’ version, some more explicable than others (the neat if nasty twist of the 
devil ending up ahead even though he doesn’t get Bearskin’s soul is particularly 
missed), resulting in a version that explores psychological purification in the face 
of social rejection. That’s an intriguing theme and she’s a deft storyteller, so the 
result is a ponderable but never ponderous fable. Mixed media in murky, smoky 
earthtones convey a dim and dangerous world, wherein the devil’s cool green coat 
is only a modest contrast and even the final triumphant scenes are merely gentled 
rather than lightened. Young readers will find plenty to discuss here, especially if they 
have a chance to contrast to Pyle’s retelling or a version closer to Grimm.  DS
sChmiDt, C. A. Useful Fools. Dutton, 2007 262p
ISBN 978-0-525-47814-0 $18.99   
R Gr. 7-10
Rosa’s father, a doctor, and Alonso’s mother, a village activist, run a clinic in a rural 
area of Peru. Their efforts at improving the health of the poor run afoul of the Sen-
deristas, members of the Communist Shining Path who regard such welfare work as 
counterrevolutionary. Alonso’s mother is murdered, and the lives of Alonso’s family 
members rapidly spin out of control, with his father becoming increasingly drunken 
and violent, one younger sister retreating into a silent shell, and the other siblings 
suffering from neglect. The heaviest burden falls on Alonso, though, who bears 
188 • The BulleTin
the full force of his father’s grief and whose romance with Rosa is broken off when 
her father abandons the clinic. Longtime friend Rodolfo seems to be Alonso’s only 
source of support, and through a couple of well-timed acts of kindness, Rodolfo 
manages to recruit Alonso into the very organization that murdered his mother. 
Schmidt spins a gripping tale based on events in 1980s Peru, and although she 
evinces no sympathy for the Senderistas and their terrorist tactics, she does explore 
their cold, calculated logic that would require that humanitarian workers, or “use-
ful fools,” be eliminated in order to advance the inevitable bloody revolution to 
liberate the poor. Alonso ultimately turns his back on the movement and returns 
to his village, where Rosa has taken charge of his siblings during a general strike, 
but there is no deliriously happy ending for the pair. The best life can offer is that 
Rosa will be safe with her well-to-do family while Alonso and his family find refuge 
in Spain. Young adults who read the author’s closing note on ravages of the Shining 
Path will be more than satisfied that the teens’ fate is no worse.  EB 
sCrimger, riChArD Into the Ravine. Tundra, 2007 260p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-88776-822-4 $9.95   
R Gr. 6-9
After a storm knocks down some poplars near their fort, three thirteen-year-old 
boys, Jules, Chris, and Cory, decide there is only one thing to be done: build a raft 
and float down the creek behind their house into the river. Along the way, they meet 
with a host of quirky adventures, finally ending up in a tricky situation involving 
a boa constrictor, some smuggled emeralds, and a South American gangster. Each 
adventure can be read for its metaphoric significance in the passage from childhood 
to adulthood, but it’s hard to bother with that when the situations themselves are 
so full of rich comedy. Jules is an incisive and witty narrator, playing with words 
and fantasies as he manages to tell the story of their raft adventure in the style of a 
tall tale. Woven into the mythic adventure are subtle commentaries on the state of 
contemporary life in a Canadian suburb, with the huge disparities between the very 
rich and very poor, the persistent problems of race, and the tension between wild 
spaces and urban development and detritus. Scrimger is a master at writing boy; 
without overt signaling, he pinpoints the anxieties, strengths, preoccupations, and 
weirdnesses that belong particularly to the kind of creature who floats down the river 
with his friends on a hot summer day, gets his first kiss, and becomes a hero, all on 
his way to becoming, if not a man, then at least an older and wiser boy.  KC
seeger, lAurA vACCAro First the Egg; written and illus. by Laura Vaccaro 
Seeger. Porter/Roaring Brook, 2007 28p
ISBN 978-1-59643-272-7 $14.95   
R 3-7 yrs
If you’re looking for the definitive answer to the chicken/egg conundrum, Seeger 
won’t help. She will, however, lead readers and viewers on an inventive exploration 
of how a picture book is hatched. Die-cut openings on the verso of each spread 
highlight a creature in its early stage of development—“first the egg,” “first the 
tadpole”—while a page turn show its growth and ultimate maturation—“then the 
chicken”; “then the frog.” This is no flip-and-find nature book, though: a page 
filled with letters twists the venture in a new direction with “First the word, then 
the story.” A dab of paint turns into a artist’s palette (“First the paint”) and then a 
painting that features all the preceding flora and fauna (“then the picture”). A final 
page turn transforms the chicken in the painting back to, you guessed it, an egg. 
This deceptively simple presentation is well suited to a range of kid ages and stages. 
DecemBer 2007 • 189
The youngest will be content to follow the cut-out shapes that morph into familiar 
entities; the more sophisticated can apply the well-worn chicken/egg riddle to the 
seed/flower, caterpillar/butterfly, tadpole/frog pairings; and the most perceptive will 
appreciate the authorial and artistic manipulation that turns disparate components 
into a final opus. Moreover, everyone can admire how Seeger’s heavily applied paints 
retain their luminous clarity, even when brushed into plaster-like textures.  EB
shAnnon, george, ad. Rabbit’s Gift: A Fable from China; illus. by Laura 
Dronzek. Harcourt, 2007 32p
ISBN 978-0-15-206073-2 $16.00   
R 2-4 yrs
When another snowfall is poised to fall on the already blanketed countryside, 
Rabbit digs up a couple of turnips to fill his larder. Once he’s home and nibbling, 
he begins to worry that his friend Donkey won’t be so fortunate, and he drops off 
the second turnip by her door. When Donkey, prepped with a potato, returns, she 
passes the turnip on to her neighbor Goat, who gives it to Deer, who thinks that 
she should take it to . . . Rabbit again. This is a gentle tale, personably told; the 
universal warmth and fondness means there’s not much tension, but wee listeners 
may be genuinely surprised by the circular turnip journey, and they’ll appreciate 
the convivial turnip-sharing of the end. Dronzek’s acrylics echo the softness of 
the tale with cushiony mounds of snow and sweetly rounded animals; decorative 
borders that begin with the Chinese character for each new animal detract from the 
visual simplicity, but the recurring figure of the little yellow bird gives youngsters 
additional hunt-and-point pleasure. The straightforwardness of the message and 
the warmth of its delivery will make this a storytime natural any time of the year. 
A note explains the folktale’s general history but gives no specific source.  DS
smith, tArA BrAy Betwixt. Little, 2007 488p
ISBN 978-0-316-06033-2 $17.99   
R Gr. 9-12
Life has never been quite normal for Morgan, Ondine, and Nix: Morgan sleepwalks 
and often wakes to find gory evidence of her nightly hunts, Ondine’s artwork comes 
to life, and Nix sees halos of light that surround people who will soon be dying. 
However, when they attend a rave, they find out just how abnormal they really are: 
all three are changelings, fairies or fay using human hosts to ready themselves for 
higher spheres of existence. Now that the teens have been enlightened about their 
status, they are further informed that they only have a year or so to gather all of the 
knowledge needed so that they are ready for their shift to a different realm. Ondine 
responds by running away, seeking solace in her normal and loving family, while 
Nix and Morgan both try to harness their gifts, though they face life-threatening 
obstacles to their successes. Although the open-ended conclusion may leave some 
readers dissatisfied, the complexity and necessary ambiguity are well established 
throughout the novel, and the ending does justice to the three tortured teens for 
whom life has never had simple, or often even obtainable, answers. Careful char-
acter development in the early chapters is effective in forming distinct identities 
for Morgan, Ondine, and Nix; this helps to solidify the protagonists as central, 
even when the plot begins spinning in various (all intricate) directions. Fantasy 
and horror buffs alike will find this disturbing world of unknowing human hosts, 
dark villains, and wandering fay seeking a way to enlightenment intriguing and 
hauntingly memorable.  AS
190 • The BulleTin
sPinelli, eileen Callie Cat, Ice Skater; illus. by Anne Kennedy. Whitman, 
2007 32p
ISBN 978-0-8075-1042-1 $16.95   
Ad 5-8 yrs
“Callie loved ice skating. She loved it more than chocolate cake. . . . Even more 
than going to the mall.” That’s some serious love, so it’s understandable that Callie’s 
friends are excited for Callie’s prospects when a local ice rink holds a skating contest. 
With the encouragement of her parents and friends, Callie enters the contest and 
performs beautifully, only to be bested by another skater. Once home and out from 
under her friends’ sympathy, she heads to the skating pond and rediscovers the joy 
in skating that she’d missed while prepping for the competition, understanding now 
that her pleasure “came not from winning, but doing.” The sure hand of purpose 
guides the narrative firmly and overprettified stylistic touches further tip the balance 
of Callie’s preference, but the careful crafting and gentle repetition give the story 
an effective shape. Line-and-watercolor illustrations rely on gentle pastel hues and 
furry smiling critters, which have a greeting-card appeal but not much substance or 
strength of design. This may nonetheless be a useful and engaging counterattraction 
to stories of glittery competitive glory on or off the ice.  DS
stolArz, lAurie FAriA Project 17. Hyperion, 2007 [256p]
ISBN 978-0-7868-3856-1 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 6-8
The intimidating and gothic Danvers State Hospital, the rumored birthplace of 
the lobotomy, is about to be torn down, but not before Derik secures his future in 
filmmaking by shooting his first documentary there. He plans to gather six teens 
from various social strata in his high school and bring them together for an overnight 
visit to the crumbling facility as he films their reactions. True ghostly encounters 
and all-too-worldly teen pranks ensue, leaving one of the teens with PTSD and a 
creepy doll hidden away in her closet and all of them changed in some way by the 
experience. Interspersed with the chapters narrated by different teens are entries 
from a journal found at the asylum that traces one young woman’s eerily speedy 
slip from relative sanity to absolute paranoia and/or terror for her life once she is 
admitted to Danvers. Unfortunately, the teens currently sharing her ghost’s space 
are not nearly as memorable, instead being sketched out primarily as teen “types” 
ranging from the punk outsider to the diva drama student to Derik himself, a boy 
with little opportunities but big dreams. In addition, the fakeout cliffhangers that 
end the chapters, recalling the Goosebumps series, dull the potential true chills that 
the location alone could evoke. In spite of these flaws, the creative format (similar 
events are interpreted in remarkably different ways depending on the chapter nar-
rator) and lightning pace will offer horror-movie buffs a satisfying, if not quite 
memorable, night at a location that will likely chill any reader.  AS
sullivAn, george Helen Keller: Her Life in Pictures. Scholastic, 2007 80p il-
lus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-439-91815-2 $17.99   
Ad Gr. 4-6
“Helen Keller never saw her own face in a mirror. Yet how she looked was important 
to her.” The numerous black-and-white photographs that Sullivan presents in his 
photo-biography of Keller certainly attest to the truth of his opening statement. 
Nearly all depict a well-groomed and carefully presented Keller, in poses and set-
DecemBer 2007 • 191
tings that undoubtedly were meant to satisfy the hunger of an adoring public. As a 
result, however, the photos collected here give little indication of the struggle and 
frustration that Keller experienced and that Sullivan himself occasionally alludes 
to in his text, and there’s little exploration of the difference between the decorous 
photographed façade and the vibrant woman. The photographs themselves cover 
a wide range of ages in Keller’s lifetime, and they are clear, attractive, and gener-
ally large enough for group viewing. Sullivan’s accompanying text is compact and 
straightforward, but a lack of explanatory detail is occasionally frustrating (how 
did Annie Sullivan “change [Keller] into a manageable child”? How did Keller 
know that her voice was unclear while lecturing?). A few key events of Keller’s life 
are completely left out as well, such as her unintentional youthful plagiarism, her 
brief romantic affair with Peter Fagan (which is listed, with no further explana-
tion, only in the book’s chronology), and her career of political activism. Still, this 
is a browsable and appealing volume and readers who do require or desire more 
information will appreciate the book’s end matter useful, with its bibliography, 
suggestions for further reading, and list of related organizations. An introduction 
that briefly summarizes Keller’s life and place in history, a chronology, an index, 
and photo credits are also provided.  JH
tAn, shAun The Haunted Playground; written and illus. by Shaun Tan.
See review under Moloney, p. 180.
vAil, rAChel Righty and Lefty: A Tale of Two Feet; illus. by Matthew 
Cordell. Scholastic, 2007 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-439-03629-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* 4-7 yrs
Righty and Lefty are, as the subtitle indicates, two feet; they “don’t always get 
along so well, but they are stuck with each other because they are two feet on one 
person.” An average day requires them to negotiate their different temperaments 
(Righty likes to be moving, Lefty likes to hang in bed) and different tastes (Righty 
likes every shoe, while Lefty only likes galoshes), but they also enjoy playing 
together (though each foot has won its share of foot races, the finish “is always 
close”), and ultimately they’re a team (“It is no fun to be Righty without Lefty”). 
It’s a wonderfully weird story, filled with hilarious detail and deadpan humor, that 
clearly draws on sibling relationships for its model (“It’s always fun until someone 
gets hurt,” intones the narration after Righty chases Lefty into a door). Cordell’s 
easygoing line-and-watercolor illustrations, vignettes floating amid white space, 
avoid contrived personification, simply keeping the feet so sustainedly in focus that 
they gain character through sheer persistence (Lefty, by the way, is the one with the 
band-aid). Giggling audiences won’t be able to resist responding by putting their 
own best feet forward.  DS
vAnDe velDe, viviAn Remembering Raquel. Harcourt, 2007 [160p]
ISBN 978-0-15-205976-7 $16.00
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
No one in Raquel Falcone’s high school really took any notice of her until she stepped 
off a curb and was killed by an SUV. Even her teacher seemed to need to wait until 
everyone in the class was seated, so that she knew which desk was actually empty, 
192 • The BulleTin
to tell them about her death. Classmates, friends, relatives, and witnesses to the ac-
cident each get one or more short chapters to chronicle their reactions to her death; 
what emerges is a credible, moving portrait of a community facing a tragedy that 
affects each person to a different degree. The perspectives are disturbingly honest 
in their ultimate self-centeredness; for instance, one girl’s first reaction is resent-
ment that, because of Raquel’s death, she will now receive the mantle of class fat 
girl. This character ultimately becomes sympathetic, though, as she connects with 
Raquel’s best friend at the funeral and begins to fill the space Raquel left in more 
ways than one. Vande Velde is careful not to oversentimentalize any of the reactions, 
but that doesn’t stop Raquel’s father’s and her grandmother’s chapters from being 
devastatingly moving. There is nothing about Raquel and her mourners that isn’t 
absolutely ordinary, a fact that will render their perspectives on her life and death 
thought-provoking and profound for similarly ordinary readers.  KC 
wAllACe, riCh One Good Punch. Knopf, 2007 114p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-91352-5 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-81352-8 $15.99   
R Gr. 9-12
Michael Kerrigan knows what he needs to do to break free of life in Scranton, 
Pennsylvania—land a track scholarship for college, use his part-time job at the 
Scranton Observer (writing obituaries) to leverage his way into journalism, and 
generally avoid the senior-year antics that too often drag his teammates down. 
All his efforts unravel, though, over the course of a week when a random drug 
sweep turns up four joints in his locker, placed there by one-time grade school 
pal Joey Onager, who stashes books in Michael’s locker between classes. Everyone 
advises Michael to simply tell the truth and rely on his clean record to convince 
the administration and police of his innocence, but he’s reluctant to turn Joey in. 
For good reason—he had asked Joey to get him the joints in time for a weekend 
date with his maybe girlfriend, Shelly. He stubbornly resists telling the one small 
lie that will transfer all the blame to Joey, but the truth costs him his track career, 
his job, and his high-school diploma, and it may doom him to the future he most 
fears—becoming an unemployed loser in Scranton, PA. Wallace uses his limited 
page count effectively, cagily delaying the revelation that Michael isn’t quite the 
innocent victim we first think him to be and crafting for Michael a narrative voice 
that reflects his obituary-writing style. The grave consequences that result from 
what appears to be a relatively minor misstep are chillingly convincing. Teens in 
the mood for a short but provocative title will realize a deliciously troubling payoff 
for a modest investment of reading time.  EB
wheeler, lisA Jazz Baby; illus. by R. Gregory Christie. Harcourt, 
2007 32p
ISBN 978-0-15-202522-9 $16.00   
R 1-3 yrs
“Brother’s hands tap./ Sister’s hands snap./ Itty-bitty Baby’s hands CLAP-CLAP-
CLAP!” So starts the musical number in this lively household where everybody 
(even cousins and neighbors) joins in, singing and dancing through the piece. 
Eventually the tempo shifts to a more soothing number, the baby’s back in his bed, 
and he finally “sleeps deep, deep, deep. OH, YEAH!” Little listeners will groove to 
the rhythm, rhyme, and repetition and the irresistible opportunities for frenzied 
bouncing and wiggling that the text affords; though it runs on a little long, thus 
probably exhausting any adult who tries to dance along, the length does allow for 
DecemBer 2007 • 193
the possibility of actually tiring a toddler out enough for an actual rest stop at the 
end. The visuals are touched with retro elements, from their matte pages to the fact 
that Dad starts all this off by slapping some vinyl on the turntable, but the gleeful 
expanding party has timeless appeal. Christie’s gouache paintings offer a fetching 
cast of partiers, whose curving limbs contrast with the solid city geometry behind 
them, though buildings and people alike are clad in bright Fiestaware hues. The 
playfulness and musicality will entice readers-aloud as well as wide-eyed listeners, 
with grandparents and even cool older siblings likely to find this a delicious way to 
wear a youngster out, especially if it’s accompanied by some hot jazz.  DS
wiles, DeBorAh The Aurora County All-Stars. Harcourt, 2007 242p
ISBN 978-0-15-206068-8 $16.00   
R Gr. 5-8
The annual baseball game between the Raleigh Redbugs and the Aurora County 
All-Stars absolutely must take place at four o’clock on the Fourth of July, and it’s 
equally imperative that the Aurora County Birthday Pageant take place at precisely 
the same time. Every kid in town under the age of fourteen has been signed up (by 
“the Mamas”) for the pageant, but rebellion is in the air as team captain House 
Jackson faces off with pageant director Frances—make that “Finesse”—Schotz, just 
back from a year at a toney prep school and packing a fake French accent and a flair 
for histrionics. A solution comes ultimately, if somewhat obliquely, from beyond 
the grave, as revelations regarding recently deceased recluse and Walt Whitman 
aficionado Norwood Boyd provide the inspiration for the two groups to collabo-
rate in a theatrical production, the like of which has never been mounted between 
innings. Eccentricity is almost endemic to literary towns in the Deep South, and 
the level of quirkiness among the townsfolk of Mabel and Halleluiah, Mississippi 
comes dangerously close to cloying. However, Wiles tosses in enough grit—House’s 
scraps with his friend Cleebo, some nasty rumors about the late Mr. Boyd—to give 
the story traction. This is Wiles’ third visit to Aurora County (Love, Ruby Lavender, 
BCCB 9/01; Each Little Bird That Sings, BCCB 2/05); while several characters will 
be familiar to initiates, this title stands solidly on its own, and it’s likely that many 
newcomers will want to read their way backward in the trilogy.  EB
wolF, AllAn Zane’s Trace. Candlewick, 2007 193p
ISBN 978-0-7636-2858-1 $16.99   
R Gr. 7-12
Zane’s first seventeen years have been anything but easy. He suffers from epilepsy, 
his father left his family years ago and died before he and his son could sort things 
out, his schizophrenic mother finally gets a suicide attempt right, and his verbally 
abusive grandfather suffers a stroke which leaves him no less mean, but certainly 
more needy. Zane copes by writing and drawing incessantly on his walls with a 
Sharpie, but when he rubs his grandfather out of his map of Zane-atopia and 
awakens to find the old man dead in his chair, he feels a little too close to Harold 
with his purple crayon. Racked with guilt, he decides the only thing to do is to 
light out for Zanesville, Ohio in his father’s 1969 Barracuda to kill himself on his 
mother’s grave with the family heirloom Revolutionary War pistol. His trip turns 
into a pilgrimage of personal discovery, as he is visited by apparitions from the three 
threads of his family, including a feisty white frontier heroine and her illegitimate 
daughter, an escaped slave who passed for white to make his way to freedom, a 
vengeful Wyandot Indian, and a younger version of his own mother, who helps 
him see that his strength and freedom can be claimed through his circumstances, 
194 • The BulleTin
not by trying to escape them. Embedded in the setting of the Old National Road, 
Zane’s Trace, and the world’s only Y-bridge are the metaphors that elevate this teen 
drama into a national odyssey. Zane has been born out of the pain of America’s 
fraught history, and his brittleness is the trace of unresolved, unforgiven tensions. 
Wolf’s poetry, for this is mainly a verse novel with some prose segments, is nimble 
and allusive, with a keen sense of timing and an elegant attention to emotional 
nuance. With the suspense of the high-interest plot, this will be an easy sell to both 
male and female readers, making its literary genius a sneaky little added bonus. 
Author’s note and resources are included.  KC
DecemBer 2007 • 195
ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons: resourCes for teAChers And LIBrArIAns
recenTly receiveD:
stAhl, J. D., ed. Crosscurrents of Children’s Literature; ed. by J. D. Stahl, Tina 
L. Hanlon, and Elizabeth Keyser. Oxford 2006 1035p illus. with photo-
graphs
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-19-513493-3 $72.95
This single-volume textbook of children’s literature combines critical essays and 
selected texts and excerpts for a broad examination of the literature through his-
tory, including authors from Ovid to Yolen, Anonymous to Erdrich. Chapters 
are conceived as dichotomies, so realism and fantasy, oral and written work, 
education and entertainment, and words and pictures (the latter appearing only 
occasionally, unfortunately, even in conjunction with picture-book texts) provide 
thematic poles for exploration. A selected bibliography, a timeline, and an index 
are included.  DS
CoBB, JAne What’ll I Do with the Baby-O?: Nursery Rhymes, Songs, and Stories for 
Babies; illus. by Kathryn Shoemaker. Black Sheep Press, 2007 252p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-978-0-9698666-1-9 $39.95
This comprehensive guide to storytimes for ages two and under includes helpful 
material ranging from collections of rhymes to recommendations for books and 
music to suggestions on dealing with both parent and child attendees.  DS
ziPes, JACK Fairy Tales and the Art of Subversion. 2nd ed. Routledge, 
2006 254p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-415-97669-5 $95.00
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-415-97670-1 $25.95
ziPes, JACK When Dreams Come True: Fairy Tales and Their Tradition. 2nd 
ed. Routledge, 2007 322p illus. with photographs
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-415-98006-2 $95.00
Much has happened since the first editions of both these titles, Fairy Tales first ap-
pearing in 1983 and When Dreams Come True in 1999. Renowned scholar Zipes 
has therefore returned to these well-known works and given them both an overhaul 
and additional material (two chapters in the first book plus an updated bibliography, 
and four essays in the second). The former is one of the key works of fairy-tale 
scholarship in our time, and the latter contains essays from a variety of titles to 
which readers might not have independent access, so their updates are likely to 
prove worthwhile to those interested in folktales and folktale-based fiction.  DS
196  •  The BulleTin
Abuse–fiction: Bush
Accidents–fiction: Vande Velde
Adoption–stories: Parr
AdVenture: Armstrong; Len-
non; richards; rogan; Scrimger
African Americans–poetry: Johnson, 
dinah
African Americans–stories: Boelts 
Shoes; McKissack; Wheeler
AIdS–fiction: Bush
Animals: Hatkoff; Hodgkins
Animals–fiction: rogan
Animals–stories: Johnson, d. B.; 
Schertle; Shannon
Art: Krensky
Athletes–fiction: Peet
Ballet–stories: dePalma
Baseball–fiction: Wiles
Bears–stories: Schertle
BIogrAPHIeS: Lat; Sullivan
Brothers and sisters–fiction: Park
Brothers and sisters–stories: Mc-
Court
Bullies–fiction: Fienberg
China–fiction: noyes
China–stories: Santore
Christmas: dePalma
Christmas–stories: diCamillo; Mc-
Court; McKissack
Clothing–fiction: noyes
Clothing–stories: Boelts Shoes; gor-
don; noyes; Santore
Competition–stories: Spinelli
ConCePt BooKS: Seeger
Creative writing: Park
Crime and criminals–fiction: Fien-
berg; rogan
dance–stories: dePalma
death–fiction: Vande Velde
depression, the–fiction: Brown
depression, the–stories: McKissack
disabilities: Sullivan
disasters–fiction: Haddix
dogs–stories: Boelts Before
ecology: Hodgkins
eSP–fiction: Le guin
Ethics and values: Boelts Shoes; 
Forssberg; Henderson; Johnson, 
d.B.; Schlitz; Spinelli; Wallace
Fairies–fiction: Smith
Families–fiction: Cameron; Hornby; 
Plummer
Families–stories: McKissack; Parr; 
Wolf
FAntASy: Lanagan; Le guin; Len-
non
Fathers–fiction: Plummer
Films and filming–fiction: Stolarz
FoLK-LIKe tALeS: Santore
FoLKtALeS And FAIry tALeS: 
nanji; Schlitz; Shannon
Food and eating: Mora
Friends–fiction: Fienberg; Juby; 
Salter
Friends–stories: gordon; Shannon; 
Vail
games–fiction: Henderson
gays and lesbians–fiction: Cameron; 
Juby; Peters
gHoSt StorIeS: Moloney; 
Stolarz; tan 
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
novemBer 2007  •  197
grAPHIC noVeLS: Lat
grief–fiction: Vande Velde
Hair: Johnson, dinah
Health: Forssberg
HIStorICAL FICtIon: Arm-
strong; Brown; diCamillo; Had-
dix; noyes; Schmidt
History, English: Armstrong
History, U.S.: Bausum; Haddix
History, world: Lat
Horror: Plummer; Stolarz
Horses–fiction: Juby
HuMor: dePaola; gordon; Lat; 
Salter; Scrimger; Vail; Wiles
Ice skating–stories: Spinelli
Identity–fiction: Smith
India–folklore: nanji
Journalism: Bausum
Kidnapping–fiction: Peet
Labor movement–fiction: Haddix
Language arts: Krensky
Latinos–fiction: Bush; Peet
Literature, English: Johnson, d. B.
Literature, world: Krensky
Marine biology: Hodgkins
Mothers–fiction: Cross
Museums: Mark
Music and musicians–stories: 
Wheeler
MySterIeS: richards
nurSery rHyMeS: opie
orphans–fiction: Wolf
Pets–stories: Boelts Before
Photography–fiction: Park
Poetry: Mora
Pregnancy–fiction: Bush; Hornby
Princesses–fiction: noyes
Princesses–stories: Santore
Puzzles–fiction: Park; richards
Quests–fiction: Lennon
Reading aloud: Hatkoff; Mora; 
noyes
Reading, reluctant: Moloney; tan
relationships–fiction: Hornby
rHyMIng StorIeS: Johnson, 
dinah
romance–fiction: Salter
School–fiction: Vande Velde
Science: Hodgkins
SCIenCe FICtIon: Henderson
Secrets–fiction: Plummer
Sex and sexuality: Forssberg
Sex and sexuality–fiction: Peters
SHort StorIeS: dePaola; Lana-
gan; Peters
South America–fiction: Schmidt
Spies and spying–fiction: Armstrong
SPortS StorIeS: Cross; Wallace
Storytelling: nanji
Storytime: opie; Schertle; Shannon
SuPernAturAL StorIeS: Peet; 
richards; Smith
SuSPenSe: Henderson; Moloney; 
Plummer; tan
therapy–fiction: Cameron
time travel–fiction: Hornby
toddLer BooKS: opie; 
Wheeler
toys–stories: McKissack
VerSe noVeLS: Wolf
Violence–fiction: Schmidt
Voyages and travel–fiction: Brown; 
Le guin; Scrimger; Wolf
Winter–stories: Shannon
