T h e
B u l l e t i n
of the Center for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
School of Information Sciences
by Johns Hopkins University Press
July/August 2022
Vol. 75   No. 11
75 
YEARS
o
f
 
d
e
d
i
c
a
t
i
o
n
 
t
o
 
y
o
u
t
h
 
l
i
t
e
r
a
t
u
r
e
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
TO ORDER
CALL: 800.548.1784 or 410.516.6987   FAX: 410.516.3866
E-mail: jrnlcirc@jh.edu 
or visit us online at
Kate Quealy-Gainer / Editor 
University of illinois at Urbana-Champaign
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s 
Books provides concise summaries and 
critical evaluations of current children’s 
books. This invaluable resource assists 
readers with questions regarding the ever-
evolving children’s literature field. Reviews 
give an in-depth look at a selected book’s 
content, reading level, strengths and 
weaknesses, and quality of the format, as 
well as suggestions for curricular use.
Published 11 times per year monthly except 
August. 
Volume 75 (2022). 
P-ISSN: 0008-9036; E-ISSN: 1558-6766.
Annual Individual 
Subscriptions
$55.00 (print); 
$65.00 (online)
Annual Institutional 
Subscriptions
$125.00 (print);
$140.00 (online); 
$175.00 (print & online)
International postage fees apply.
FOUNTAIN OF YOUTH
The BulleTin of The CenTer
for Children’s Books
A Look Inside
T h e B u l l e t i n
of the Center for Children’s Books 
July/August 2022
Vol. 75 No. 11
343  The Big Picture
 
 The Circles in the Sky written and illus. by Karl James Mountford
344  New Books for Children and Young People
 
 Reviewed titles include
347 •  The Puppy Bus written and illus. by Drew Brockington
354 •  American Murderer: The Parasite That Haunted the South by Gail Jarrow
359 •  The Undead Truth of Us by Britney S. Lewis
367 •  This Place Is Still Beautiful by Xixi Tian
370 •  I’m a Unicorn written and illus. by Helen Yoon
372  Subject and Use Index
375  Annual Author and Title Index
Explanation of code symbols used with reviews
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
 Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or 
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
© 2022 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois School of Information Sciences by Johns Hopkins University Press, 
2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, MD 21218-4363, USA. Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, 
MD 21233-9651, and at additional mailing ofﬁces. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The 
Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363.
Reviewing Staff
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Editor (KQG)
Quinita Balderson, Reviewer (QB)
Natalie Berglind, Reviewer (NB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Kara Forde, Reviewer (KF)
Fiona Hartley-Kroeger, Reviewer (FHK)
Wesley Jacques, Reviewer (WJ)
Alaine Martaus, Reviewer (AM)
Adam McConville, Reviewer (AMM)
Danica Ronquillo, Reviewer (DR)
Sarah Sahn, Reviewer (SS)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Amanda Toledo, Reviewer (ART)
Aaren Tucker, Reviewer (AT)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
Office Staff
Anna Wiegand, Editorial Assistant
Subscription rates
For up-to-date pricing information, please visit the journal webpage at: http://www.press.jhu.edu/
journals/subscribe. Subscription checks should be made payable to Johns Hopkins University Press. 
All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new address.
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 
2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 410-
516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/journals/
advertising. Or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Kate Quealy-Gainer, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.ischool.illinois.edu
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Karl James Mountford from The Circles in the Sky © 2022 and reproduced by 
permission of the publisher, Candlewick Press, Somerville, MA on behalf of Walker Books, London.
July/August 2022 • 343
The Big Picture
The Circles in the Sky
By Karl James Mountford
Few of us are lucky to escape childhood without some sort of loss, be it the death of 
a beloved pet or the passing of a close relative. Yet children’s literature about griev-
ing tends to move quickly to the anger and sadness that follows a loss, rather than 
linger over the initial, raw confusion many younger readers experience in their first 
encounter with death. In its most immediate, day-to-day sense, what does death 
really mean? Where did the lost loved one actually go? Karl James Mountford’s The 
Circles in the Sky eschews practical certainty and spiritual platitudes for a scene of 
frustrated doubt between Moth and Fox, as both navigate their emotions in the 
wake of a bird’s death. 
When the birds outside Fox’s den sing an unfamiliar tune (“It was neither 
happy nor sad . . . it was different”), Fox follows the flock as they take off across 
a hilly forest landscape, landing in a circle around something Fox can’t yet see. 
They eventually scatter, and he finds an inert bird that doesn’t respond to any of 
his attempts to get it to move. Moth flutters over, explaining that Bird can’t move 
because “Bird’s not here anymore in the way you and I are.” Fox is understand-
ably confused; Bird is, of course, there, on the ground. So Moth attempts another 
explanation, telling Fox that the connection between the moon and the sun means 
that even though the sun disappears when the moon arrives, the moon remembers 
her by the reflection of her light on him. 
It’s a lovely, if convoluted, metaphor about death and remembrance, and 
the book could easily part with such a calming image, but Fox isn’t having it. It’s 
here that Mountford leans into a child’s confusion about death, with Fox howling, 
“YOU’RE STILL NOT MAKING SENSE. STOP TALKING ABOUT MOONS 
AND SUNS. JUST TELL ME THE TRUTH. IF BIRD IS NOT HERE, WHERE 
IS BIRD?” Moth, for her part, admits with honesty that she was trying to soften 
the sad news that Bird has died and that death is simply hard to discuss. The two 
sit for a time with their grief, acknowledging that the only concrete reality is that 
Bird has passed and will only exist now as a memory.
The stylized illustrations capture this exploration of the tangible and 
intangible with a graceful beauty, balancing movement and energy against a back-
ground of stillness. The forest is anchored by sturdy geometry, with ramrod straight 
trees and angular hills rich in color. These shapes contrast effectively with Fox’s 
sleek, fluid body, the blackbirds’ twisty flight, and Moth’s soft curves, all rendered 
in shades of gray and black. Visual details emphasize the dance between life and 
death: fossils of running animals and the skeletons of two embracing humans can 
344 • The Bulletin
New Books for Children and Young People
AgyemAng, elizAbeth Fibbed; written and illus. by Elizabeth Agyemang. Ra-
zorbill, 2022 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593204887 $22.99
Paper ed. ISBN 9780593204900 $14.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593352342 $8.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
Twelve-year-old Nana tells the truth—but since she sometimes notices things others 
don’t (circus squirrels stole her history teacher’s toupee, for example), she’s often 
accused of lying. Her parents are increasingly frustrated with her seeming deceit, so 
they ship her off to her grandmother in Ghana to get her away from trouble. Nana 
is already overwhelmed by the new country and its customs when she encounters 
the mythical trickster spider Ananse. As Nana learns about Ananse’s magic sur-
rounding the village’s forest, she also learns of greedy contractors who are tearing 
down the forest to take the magic away. With the help of her cousin Tiwaa, new 
friend Akwesi, and Ananse himself, Nana must expose the contractors’ deeds, or 
the forest and the magic will be gone for good. This debut graphic novel illustrates 
a first-generation child’s challenges of navigating family dynamics and friendships 
while also finding the power of her voice and establishing her agency. Lush warm 
colors and patterns enhance the beauty of Ghana’s natural landscapes and outdoor 
market. While the captions and text in the speech bubbles can feel repetitive 
be seen underground as Fox leaps through the pages, moving past the ruins of an 
old house and old stumps surrounded by flourishing flora and fauna. 
Mountford lets those visuals speak for themselves, allowing his readers to 
feel the weight of Fox’s emotions and subtly placing Bird’s death in the context of 
all living things. He wisely avoids Moth’s tactic of overexplaining but makes clear 
that Moth’s approach is as much to comfort herself as it is to reassure Fox. Taken as 
a whole, this is a poignant, aspirational model of reckoning with death’s immediate 
permanence as well as its unknowability.
—Kate Quealy-Gainer, Editor
July/August 2022 • 345
and busy, they also immerse young readers in Ghanaian traditions, folklore, and 
language. End matter offers resources on African folklore scholars and publishers, 
plus an author’s note.  DR
Aitken, mArgAret Old Friends; illus. by Lenny Wen. Feiwel, 2022 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781250801388 $18.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R* 5-8 yrs
Marjorie loves gardening, knitting, and baking, but her beloved Granny is no 
longer here to share those activities and help with garden pests, tangled knitting, 
and sunken scones. Other kids her age don’t get nearly excited about Marjorie’s 
interests, so when she sees a sign for the community center’s Senior Citizen Friends 
Group, she wonders if she might find a new friend there—the advertised gardening 
and crafting seem right up her alley, though she might sidestep the promised danc-
ing. The pesky receptionist tries to steer her to the kids club, so Marjorie sneaks 
in wearing “cardigan camouflage,” with flour whitening her hair, glasses perched 
on her nose, and a spritz of lavender perfume. As “Undercover Granny,” Marjorie 
receives a warm welcome from the seniors, who share new knitting skills, gardening 
tips, and recipes until it’s time to cha-cha-cha. Dancing turns out to be such fun 
that Marjorie doesn’t notice her disguise has slipped until it’s too late. Her new 
friends stop her getaway attempt with assurances that she’s welcome, and they let 
her in on a secret: “On the outside we may look old, but on the inside, we still 
feel like kids. Just like you.” Wen’s illustrations bring joyful energy to Aitken’s text, 
rendering the multiracial members of the Senior Citizen Friends Group in bright 
pencil and watercolor textures, and the playful scenes are full of motion and color. 
Auburn-haired and rosy-cheeked, Marjorie will likely be relatable to introverted 
kids who might feel like they have more in common with the adults around them 
than their playmates, and while Marjorie’s grief underlays the story, her memories 
of Granny are full of warmth and joy. This celebration of intergenerational friend-
ship is ultimately a comforting tale, like a cozy knit cardigan or a warm berry crisp, 
perfect for a lapsit or a Grandparents’ Day read-aloud.  SS
Allen, kAri The Boy Who Loved Maps; illus. by G. Brian Karas. Schwartz, 
2022 [44p]
Library ed. ISBN 9781984852311 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 9781984852304 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781984852328 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 4-7 yrs
A young boy, nicknamed the Mapmaker, hangs out alone in his tree house studio, 
creating maps large and small, urban and rural, inspired by places real and literary. 
Now, however, a young girl arrives with a fanciful commission: “I’d like a map of 
the perfect place. A place that’s toes-in-the-sand, wrapped-up-in-a-towel warm.” 
The Mapmaker sketches an inviting island map, but the girl needs it fine-tuned 
to include treasure hiding and finding spots. His next map doesn’t quite make the 
cut either, since it needs to be “a place where I can zip like a dragonfly. . . . Where 
sunshine finds me, even if I’m not outside.” The growing, perplexing list of demands 
can only be clearly delineated by a trek together through their town, where the 
bakery and library, paths and playground provide all the right details. By the time 
the two new friends arrive at the girl’s home, the Mapmaker is ready to produce the 
346 • The Bulletin
perfect map. Allen’s text supplies a dreamy, gentle riddle for listeners, inviting them 
to guess at the girl’s perfect place, while Karas’ gouache and pencil offer a down-
to-earth counterpoint that addresses the kids more fascinated by the Mapmaker’s 
technical skill than the specifics of the plot. End matter includes brief discussion 
of maps, a glossary of map terms, practical tips for mapping a neighborhood, and 
activities for guided discussion and map interpretation.  EB
bAjAj, VArshA Thirst. Paulsen/Penguin, 2022 [192p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593354391 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593354407 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
In Mumbai, where water scarcity and inequity are interwoven facts of life, twelve-
year-old Minni shares a small but loving home with her older brother, mother, and 
father. When her brother accidentally becomes a witness to criminal activities of the 
ruthless water mafia, however, he’s quickly sent out of the city for his safety. Minni’s 
mother soon falls ill and must leave home as well, and Minni is understandably 
overwhelmed with how quickly her life has changed and how many new respon-
sibilities fall onto her plate. She takes on procuring and boiling the limited water 
available each morning while also clumsily covering for her mother as a servant to 
a wealthy family in the nearby highrises, and an educational opportunity must also 
be put on hold. These are real and clear hardships, but Minni’s thoughtful narration 
and occasional poetry also depict a family and community working tirelessly to 
support one another and instill hope in an environment that’s especially hard on 
women and children. Inspired problem-solving and help from a charming cast of 
characters get Minni to a happy ending that, if not wholly believable (the timely 
arrest of a water thief is especially hard to swallow), is easy to root for and celebrate. 
An author’s note draws attention to the realities of the water crisis in India.  WJ
benwAy, robin A Year to the Day. HarperTeen, 2022 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780062854438 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780062854452 $12.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 7-12
Exactly one year ago, sixteen-year-old Leo lost her beloved older sister Nina in 
a car crash that Leo and Nina’s boyfriend East both survived, but of which Leo 
has no memory. Now, as narrative time unfolds in reverse from the present to the 
night of the tragedy, heart-wrenching snapshots offer glimpses into Leo’s emotional 
recovery as she suffers, copes, and ultimately begins to heal. Readers also meet the 
people mourning alongside her and those grappling with ways to support her, 
including her equally shattered mother, inconsolable East, and compassionate new 
friend Madison. Still, the novel keeps a tight focus on Leo herself, allowing her to 
be relatable in both her growth and grief, while the third-person voice keeps the 
deepest heartbreak at a distance. The unique storytelling structure builds tension 
by slowly revealing small details of Leo’s past year, placing in sharp relief the one 
big thing she cannot recount. East, then, emerges as Leo’s most potent foil, since 
he remembers what she does not, including a truth revealed in the shattering final 
chapters, one that might be foreseeable but is an emotional gut punch nonetheless. 
Give this to empathetic readers who are ready for an emotional journey less about 
closure than understanding.  AM
July/August 2022 • 347
brockington, Drew Puppy Bus; written and illus. by Drew Brocking-
ton. Abrams, 2022 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781419751912 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781647007010 $15.54
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 3-6 yrs
“Who’s got two thumbs and is ready for the first day at a new school?” Our glum 
narrator mumbles, “Not me,” as he boards the bus with a trepidatious smile back 
at mom and dad, who are currently sorting through a mess of moving boxes. He’s 
so caught up in his nerves that he doesn’t see his seatmates are much furrier and 
tail-wagging than most kids, until one of them gives him a big fat lick and he real-
izes he’s on the wrong bus and off to puppy school. Everything about the school 
is different: subjects include rolling over, math involves adding woofs, lunch is 
disgusting, and the bathroom (a fire hydrant) is confusing. Kiddo just wants to get 
home, but then the dog from the bus and some other four-legged classmates coax 
him to everyone’s favorite activity at school, recess, and all is well. The message is 
fairly transparent, but it’s comforting nonetheless, and the doggy element makes 
it especially entertaining. The digital art has a crayon-like graininess and is packed 
with delightful visual details—Digging Club is a highly promoted afterschool ac-
tivity while the food pyramid in the cafeteria is just a series of stacked bones. The 
energetic canine characters are in constant movement as they wag their tails and leap 
through the pages, initially contrasting against our slouching, coiled up protagonist. 
No worries, though, he eventually brightens up and joins the pack, coming home 
to mom and dad with an exuberant first-day report. Recently relocated kids will 
appreciate the support and humor here, and any kid will giggle at the final page, 
with the narrator mistakenly hopping on the kitty bus.  KQG
cAllenDer, kAcen Moonflower. Scholastic, 2022 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781338636598 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781338636628 $17.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
Moon has never felt tethered to the regular world, plagued by a deep sadness they 
can’t identify. Nightly journeys out of their body take them to the spirit realms, and 
Moon knows that these places hold the key to permanent freedom from Earth and 
their struggles. But Moon must save the realms after they make a selfish choice that 
upsets the balance of the worlds. Moon’s single mother, meanwhile, is understand-
ably alarmed that her only child said they don’t belong on Earth before ceasing to 
speak for months, and she desperately hopes therapy will help Moon. To Moon, 
the spirit realm is truly where they belong, away from an everyday life filled with 
racism, hate, and tediousness: “There isn’t any point in hiding from the truth when 
I see it everywhere. Black people like me, arrested and killed because of the color of 
their skin. Transgender and nonbinary people told we don’t exist.” Callender offers 
an elegant, mysterious story of a child who uses healing skills learned on the spirit 
side to anchor them to their waking life, though nothing is lost if the story is instead 
read as a psychological, metaphorical journey. There’s no magical, instant fix, but 
Moon ultimately decides to stick around, and that is certainly a notable start.  AS 
348 • The Bulletin
chen, ginA Violet Made of Thorns. Delacorte, 2022 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593427538 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593427552 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R* Gr. 9-12
Plucked from poverty after she foresaw and prevented the death of Prince Cyrus, 
Violet is the Seer of the kingdom of Auveny. Now, however, the Fates want the 
life owed to them back, as Violet prophecies that Cyrus will die by the end of 
summer or else she’ll be the one to “burn.” With her raging hate toward Cyrus 
inconveniently turning to attraction, Violet has to decide if she’ll save herself (like 
she always does) or the irritating prince. The people’s hopes hang on the last Seer’s 
prophecy that Cyrus and his future bride can save or condemn them, so the logical 
thing for Violet to do would be to step back—if she didn’t crave power so much. 
The driving force behind this story is Violet herself, a cynical, practical narrator 
who doesn’t believe in love and is quite certain everyone is as self-serving as she 
is. Equally prickly Cyrus suits her well both narratively and romantically; the two 
share kisses that read like fight scenes, and their chemistry leaps off the page with 
its intensity. Chen’s world is imbued with classic fairy tale elements that add to the 
atmosphere, from a rotting Fairywood to midnight magic to a masquerade ball, 
but she brings a fresh modernity to the story, with commentary on celebrity and 
imperialism that is both thoughtful and entertaining. An epic showdown at the 
end of the novel and a number of plot twists point toward an promising sequel in 
this planned duology.  NB
chokshi, roshAni Three Kisses, One Midnight; by Roshani Chokshi, Evelyn Skye, 
and Sandhya Menon. Wednesday/St. Martin’s, 2022 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781250797230 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781250797247 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys 
 Ad Gr. 7-12
In the town of Moon Ridge, the quadricentennial Halloween is a special night, when 
the Lady of Moon Ridge (actually a star) descends from the sky to help young lovers 
find their way. Witchy Onny brews a love potion to share with her perfect star-sign 
match, but her annoying lab partner keeps getting in the way. Shy Ash has a crush 
on the girl next door, but he will have to overcome his anxieties to win her heart. 
Practical True, meanwhile, is afraid of getting hurt again; can she embrace her true 
self and open her heart to find love with someone new? These three novellas are 
united by a shared setting and characters but lack the cohesion needed to live up 
to the label of “novel.” Early plot points are abandoned completely, mostly out of 
narrative convenience, and each story has a noticeably different tone: Onny’s story 
is full of cozy fall magic; Ash’s is a sweet, realistic romance; and True’s leans into 
the thrills of Halloween horror. However, the tone difference could be a feature 
rather than a bug, and the stories eventually unite around a theme of letting go 
of the past and accepting what life has to offer, making this a uniquely structured 
treat for romance readers.  AT
July/August 2022 • 349
chow, Derrick Ravenous Things. Disney Hyperion, 2022 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781368077637 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781368078498 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 4-7
Reggie Wong desperately wants his family to return to the way it was before his 
father died, but instead he must step into the parental role to look after his eccentric 
mother who barely leaves her room. Reggie used to admire his mom’s fondness of 
magic and her imaginative nature, but when she attempts to convince him that 
the children in their apartment building suddenly seem not like themselves and 
are possibly not human, his frustration with her only grows. Her suspicions prove 
to be correct, however, when Reggie meets the Conductor, who is equipped with 
a flute and impossible promises to fulfill Reggie’s deepest desires. He soon lures 
Reggie, two unlikely friends, and every kid in town who has ever experienced loss 
right into a perilous trap. Chow draws on the more sinister aspects of the Pied Piper 
source material to make a true villain in the Conductor, and an increasingly speedy 
pace maximizes tension. The book moves beyond thrills and chills, however, as it 
explores loss, focusing on how grief can be both painfully specific and universally 
shared, for better or for worse. There’s a lot of appeal in the action as well as the 
emotion here, and this would also easily make a useful addition to a unit of folklore 
retellings and themes.  QB
conklin, melAnie A Perfect Mistake. Little, 2022 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780316668583 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780316668606 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 5-7
A sudden growth spurt over the summer sets Max Greenberg’s height at five-ten at 
the start of sixth grade, and his towering size often precludes people from seeing 
him as the vulnerable, eleven-year-old gamer he really is. He’s further isolated after 
an incident with Max and some other boys leaves one of his best friends, Will, 
unconscious in the hospital and another, Joey, giving him the cold shoulder. Max 
doesn’t remember the details of what actually happened, only running home out of 
fear and guilt early on. As an emotionally intelligent preteen and a neurodivergent 
narrator with ADHD, Max offers a compelling perspective on the whodunit, es-
pecially when readers see him grappling with his own potential culpability. Piecing 
together the events of that traumatic night pairs Max up with Sam, a smart-as-a-
whip classmate and daughter of a local baker who isn’t quite a replacement for the 
friendships he’s lost but who reminds both Max and readers how valuable connec-
tions are. Conklin (Every Missing Piece, BCCB 5/20) writes with keen sensitivity 
and leaves readers with the reassurance that growth and adaptation aren’t something 
any of us has to do alone.  WJ
cook, hArry Felix Silver, Teaspoons, & Witches. Duet/Interlude, 2022 [300p]
Paper ed. ISBN 9781951954147 $12.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781951954154 $6.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 8-10
Felix is heading off to live with his grandmother for a while as his parents negoti-
ate their divorce, but he doesn’t mind. Grandma Aggie and her elderly but hip 
350 • The Bulletin
friends rock, the town is imbued with magic, and Aero likes him back. It’s also a 
great excuse for Felix to practice his own burgeoning magic, though when he and 
his friends decide to solve a disturbing mystery of missing teens, they rely less on 
the tutelage of their elders and decide to primarily go it alone. A few red herrings 
later, it becomes clear who is actually responsible for the disappearances (no reader 
is likely to be fooled by the attempt to pin the crime on the fantastic Grandma 
Aggie), and if not stopped, the villains plan to do even worse. The romance and 
mystery get equal focus here, and Cook handles both well—Felix and Aero are 
far from perfect while also showing both real promise and heat, and there is some 
genuine spookiness woven into the plot from dark magic being used for nefarious 
purposes. A few characters cross the line from merely quirky to distractingly twee, 
but most of the book’s flaws are eclipsed by the heroic quest, trusted magic staples, 
and budding true love.  AS
DAVAult, kAy Star Knights; written and illus. by Kay Davault. Random House 
Graphic, 2022 [240p]
Library ed. ISBN 9780593303665 $23.99
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593303658 $20.99
Paper ed. ISBN 9780593303641 $12.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593303672 $8.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 4-7
Tad the frog loves the legends of the Star Knights—animals who gained magic power 
and humanoid bodies after catching some falling stars—but his fellow birds and 
mammals only associate him, a Mud Dweller, with the evil Marsh Witch. When 
a new rain of stars and the benevolent Star King fall from space nearby, Tad is in 
the right place at the right moment to scoop up a star for himself and defend the 
King after other animals and allies, now corrupted by the stars, turn against him. 
This zippy and vivid graphic novel offers a familiar tale, but Tad is so amiable, so 
delightfully earnest in his pursuit of justice, adventure, and heroism that one can’t 
help but get drawn into every misstep or obstacle he faces as if it could truly be 
his last. His slow progression to become an advocate of the downtrodden (starting 
with himself) does all the right things: it is inspiring, moving, and, it must be said, 
downright ribbeting. Animation-ready illustrations play with panel size to indicate 
importance of a given moment, but the true element of note is the splashy, unte-
thered use of color to cue emotion and action. Offer this to fans of Eric Colossal’s 
equally plucky adventurer Rutabaga: The Adventure Chef (BCCB 5/15).  AS 
DugAn, jennifer Coven; illus. by Kit Seaton. Putnam, 2022 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593112168 $24.99
Paper ed. ISBN 9780593112182 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593325506 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad Gr. 8-10
Emsy is content to just be a surfer with a fabulous girlfriend in sunny California, 
but she can’t escape her witchy heritage. When members of her parents’ former 
coven are murdered, she is abruptly uprooted to New York so they can rejoin and 
help. It’s not a warm welcome: many in the coven blame Emsy’s parents for the 
death of the family that took over leadership after Emsy’s mom abdicated her role. 
Now Emsy has to deal with the stress of that complicated dynamic, negotiate a 
July/August 2022 • 351
new high school, get her witchy powers up to snuff, and—most pressing—stop a 
killer who seems to have her parents in their sights. The short length of this graphic 
novel leaves side characters underdeveloped, and several plot points are announced 
rather than explored, so readers will have to make a number of jumps to keep up 
with the pace. The illustrations, done in atmospheric shades with vivid highlights, 
help fill in some of those blanks as body language carries most of the emotional 
weight of the story. A deliberate reader or one who doesn’t mind a repeat read will 
be most successful with this paranormal story featuring a witchy girl who is only 
just realizing how incredibly powerful she can be.  AS
ferneyhough, lizA Nana, Nenek & Nina; written and illus. by Liza Ferney-
hough. Dial, 2022 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593353943 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593353950 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R* 3-7 yrs
Nina’s grandmothers live far away from her San Francisco home—Nana is in Britain 
while Nenek lives in Malaysia—so their granddaughter must pack different things 
to visit either one. In side-by-side depictions, readers get to see Nina’s parallel ex-
periences in Britain and Malaysia as she revels in grandmotherly attention, playing 
games, shopping, eating, and tucking into bed. This graceful, meticulously detailed 
picture book is a loving ode to two cultures, as the symmetry of the spreads con-
veys the similarities of each destination while accentuating their different cultural 
activities and aesthetics. The colorful watercolor and quill-dip pen illustrations, 
rendered on tea-stained paper, create a sepia-toned nostalgic effect that augments 
the warmth of the grandmothers’ bonds with Nina. The clever parallels also extend 
to the simple text, as most scenes use the same sentence construction or include 
expressions from each grandmother’s language, with occasional statements that 
capture both scenes reaching across the divided page. Young readers will want to 
circle back to pore over the precise renderings of each place’s characteristics and to 
relive the day with Nana, Nenek, and Nina.  KF
foley, jessie Ann Breda’s Island. Quill Tree/HarperCollins, 2022 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780063207721 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780063207752 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
After Breda Moriarity’s latest episode of petty theft, her mother Maura ships her 
off for the summer to Granda’s farm on Ireland’s Dingle Peninsula—an unexpected 
choice, given that a pregnant teenaged Maura fled to Chicago years ago to escape 
Granda’s anger and disappointment. Granda’s not especially warm to Breda, either, 
but the farm is beautiful, and Breda surprises herself as well as her grandfather with 
her affinity to and skill with the livestock. Granda also reveals an unexpected role in 
the small community as a seanchaí, the valued transmitter of traditional lore who 
can hold a pub—and a granddaughter—beguiled. However, his declaration that 
any relationship with the local Fahey family is forbidden runs afoul of Breda’s need 
to make some friends, and when she joins that clan for Gaelic football matches, 
the Faheys shed light on closely guarded Moriarity family secrets. The plot outline 
may be a familiar one, but the specific revelations contextualize middle schooler 
Breda’s immediate trials within her family’s history, particularly Maura’s struggle 
352 • The Bulletin
to make an American life as an undocumented small business owner and Granda’s 
distressing, emotionally-crippling childhood. There’s more than a touch of the 
seanchaí in Foley’s own silky prose, and readers who witness the Moriarity family’s 
rapprochement will recognize that it may not promise a fairy tale ending, but it 
does deliver the right ending.  EB
getten, kereen If You Read This. Delacorte, 2022 [176p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593174005 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593174012 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
Three years have passed since Brie’s mother’s death, and Brie is still struggling with 
not only her grief but also the growing chasm between her and her father. Her 
twelfth birthday offers them a chance to reconnect when it’s revealed that her mother, 
who loved to take Brie on small adventures, left Brie a series of letters that will 
supposedly lead to a secret, special place, and the first instruction is to get Papa to 
take her to grandfather’s house. Papa makes the arrangements but, to Brie’s pained 
disappointment, sends her off with other friends and family. Hurt, dejected, and 
reckless, Brie keeps trying to follow her mother’s clues but ends up putting a dear 
family member in danger. As in her previous novel, When Life Gives You Mangos 
(BCCB 11/20), Getten backgrounds her story with a joyful, authentic Caribbean 
setting that pulls from the beauty of the environment and the solid connections 
between Brie’s family and her community. Wrestling with fading memories of her 
mother and her growing frustration with Papa, Brie is a sympathetic heroine, finally 
reaching a point where she angrily rebuffs others’ expectations—especially regard-
ing her acceptance of her father’s behavior. That realism is somewhat undercut by 
the swift turnaround in Papa’s actions and a revelation that seems distinctly out 
of character for him. Still, it makes for a deservedly happy ending for Brie, and 
readers will be glad to see her finding the place her mother left to her and forging 
a path forward.  KQG
gillmAn, melAnie Other Ever Afters; written and illus. by Melanie Gill-
man. Random House Graphic, 2022 [240p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593303191 $24.99
Paper ed. ISBN 9780593303184 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593303214 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 8-10
What if happily ever after meant something entirely different than the prince rescu-
ing the helpless gal and them soaking in domestic bliss forever? In this trim graphic 
novel, Gillman explores some dramatically different takes on happiness in seven 
stories. Love isn’t always the primary goal as these women explore social justice, 
embrace their core selves, and fight for the chance to shape their future; when love 
is found, it honors both partners (assumptions of heteronormativity are quickly out 
the window) and is a rich addition to their lives. There is a clear respect for clever 
women who can, for example, convince a ruler that sharing his resources fairly is 
the way to her heart, or use intelligence to fulfill a giant’s tasks and discover she 
isn’t meant to be a meal. Careful, joyfully colored pencil art adds to the collection, 
with each story having different shadings but sharing flourishes and details that 
play on fairy tale motifs. Gillman isn’t the first to reconsider fairy tale norms, of 
July/August 2022 • 353
course, but these inspiring, brief stories will especially resonate with readers who 
have always felt underrepresented or absent entirely in fairy tales, romance novels, 
or even their own lives.  AS
hill, jonAthAn Tales of a Seventh-Grade Lizard Boy; written and illus. by Jonathan 
Hill. Walker US/Candlewick, 2022 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781536216462 $24.99
Paper ed. ISBN 9781536216509 $14.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781536228830 $14.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
Tommy knows that his lizard(ish) community could not survive deep inside the 
Earth any longer, but he also really, really hates middle school and wonders if a 
slow death from too few resources would have actually been better than the human 
world, where he must disguise himself to fit in. He eventually makes a friend in 
Dung Tran, an immigrant from Vietnam who is much more comfortable in his 
exiled status at school than Tommy (or his true name, Booger Lizk’t), and Dung’s 
support and encouragement is eventually enough to push him into exploring some 
life-changing truths of his own. This clever and subtly deep graphic novel explores 
immigrant identity via lizard beings in a respectful and thoughtful way; the lizard 
identity is never played as a joke or cheap comparison, offering readers a chance 
to view outsider status through the lens of something that challenges all ideas of 
casual tolerance. In the end matter, Hill describes his Vietnamese American family 
and the cultural elements he drew from (including a detailed description of why 
he chose to have Dung speak stilted English in spite of that often being used as a 
harmful stereotype), but those elements are also clearly embedded in the text. Vivid 
colors, wry humor, and playful ignoring of traditional panel structure lighten the 
heaviest moments, firmly focusing this story on working toward better things.  AS
isAbelle, s. The Witchery. Scholastic, 2022 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781338758962 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781338758979 $18.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Every year during the Haunting Season, magic Wolves attack the people of Haels-
ford, Florida. This year, the town’s protection is in the hands of the Mesmortes 
Coven Academy, where Thalia, Iris, and Jailah—three Black witches known as the 
“Red Three”—enlist a newer witch, a white girl named Logan, in a scheme to end 
the Hauntings once and for all. It won’t be an easy task and the girls aren’t doing 
themselves any favors: Iris tethers (a lifetime bond) to “mundane” (non-magical) 
rich boy Mathew, Thalia lashes out against her dark past, Jailah places ambition 
over their plan, and Logan fails to master her magic. Things are further complicated 
by Mathew and his best friend, the seemingly unkillable mundane Trent, and a 
resurrection spell gone very wrong. Isabelle skillfully juggles six points of view, 
covering Thalia, Iris, Jailah, Logan, Mathew, and Trent, and the perspectives never 
feel like too much; each character has a complex history, differing relationships to 
magic, and conflicting goals, which both enhance the plot and keep the characters 
distinct. The story also offers multiple access points for a diverse audience, from a 
queernormative, Black-centric cast to the fantastical academy setting, while constant 
cliffhangers will keep readers anticipating the next return to their favorite characters. 
354 • The Bulletin
Thankfully, this page-turner ends on a loose enough note that could lead to at least 
one more chance to visit this witchy gang.  NB
jArrow, gAil American Murderer: The Parasite That Haunted the South. Calkin’s 
Creek, 2022 [160p] (Medical Fiascoes) illus. with photographs
Trade ed. ISBN 9781684378159 $24.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781635928297 $14.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 5-9
Something pernicious had infiltrated the Southern states. “At first the person suffered 
few ill effects,” but once the villain took hold, “the person was transformed into a 
dull-witted, frail individual with a blank stare and shuffling gait.” Uncharitable and 
unsympathetic observers were quick to label the victims as stupid or lazy, but the 
culprit was eventually revealed to be Necator americanus, a parasite whose larvae 
burrowed through skin and made a peripatetic trip to the intestines, where it grew 
to adulthood, nourishing itself on its host’s blood and breeding new generations. Jar-
row follows the story of American researcher Charles Wardell Stiles, who identified 
the parasitic worm, puzzled out its life cycle, and became closely involved in public 
health crusades to eradicate it throughout the South, where warm weather, sandy 
soil, poor sanitation, and a tradition of shoelessness (for reasons of both poverty 
and comfort) made many rural citizens hapless victims. As always, Jarrow’s cover-
age of the biological mystery is well-organized and deftly explained, and she also 
skillfully handles the social context of a condition that largely affected marginalized 
populations. Readers who wish to delve deeper into the topic are assisted by a glos-
sary, bibliography and website list, source notes, timeline, index, and author’s note 
on research. Colorized enlargements of Necator americanus are absolute nightmare 
fodder that will have readers lacing their shoes on extra tight.  EB
johAnnes, shelli r. Theo TheSaurus and the Perfect Pet; illus. by Mike Mo-
ran. Viking, 2022 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593464328 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593464335 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 3-6 yrs
With a grin full of braces and a step full of pep, Theo TheSaurus of Theo TheSaurus: 
The Dinosaur Who Loved Big Words is back. He’s desperate for a new pet and done 
lots of research, but nothing seems like a good fit (“Plesiosaur? Too wet!”). Theo 
eventually settles on a baby saber-toothed tiger he names Fang, who fits Theo’s 
research criteria for a good companion but ultimately comes with some unpre-
dictable behaviors, like running away and causing mischief (“mischievous means 
troublesome,” the Defino-Dino informs viewers from a bubble on the page). The 
best thing to do is to train Fang, but Fang doesn’t respond to Theo’s effusive com-
mands: “Remain” instead of stay, “Seat oneself” instead of sit. Just when he’s about 
to give up, Theo attempts to use Fang’s language, growling or hissing to indicate 
unwanted behaviors, and to Theo’s pleasure, Fang acquiesces, meaning Theo gets 
the pet of his dreams after all. The playful art features disproportionate dino heads 
on tiny dino bodies that are sure to garner giggles, and the candy-colored animals 
bring pops of color to the predominantly green-and-brown Mesozoic backdrop. 
While Theo’s adventure relies on a dash of absurdity, his understanding of Fang has 
obvious parallel lessons to real pet households where viewers may have frustrations 
July/August 2022 • 355
communicating behaviors to their own furry companions. Though not every syn-
onym is equally useful, kids who want reminders of Defino-Dino’s speech bubbles 
on pages with big words have a reference list in the back.  NB
kAylor, serenA Long Story Short. Wednesday/St. Martin’s, 2022 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781250818416 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781250818423 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-12
After graduating high school early, sixteen-year-old Beatrice has been accepted 
into Oxford, but her dreams of walking through those hallowed halls are thwarted 
by her parents, who feel that homeschooled Beatrice is too sheltered to cope with 
the many changes of moving to a new country. They reach a compromise when 
Beatrice agrees to attend a summer Shakespeare camp: if she can stay at the camp 
for the whole summer and complete her parents’ checklist of “normal teenager 
experiences,” she’ll be allowed to attend Oxford in the fall. To her horror, the list 
includes things like “make a friend” and “hug three people,” but Beatrice is deter-
mined that nothing will stand in the way of her college aspirations, not even Nik, 
the handsome but infuriating British son of the camp’s owners. Sharp, witty, and 
determined Beatrice is a painfully awkward but relatable narrator and her story is 
a smorgasbord of wish-fulfillment fantasies for every wallflower wanting to come 
out of their shell. The Darcy-and-Elizabeth tension between Beatrice and Nik is 
an evergreen romance trope that readers will enjoy, even though some of the more 
dramatic romantic turns feel unearned. While side characters lean toward stereo-
typical and Beatrice’s final performance strains credulity, the book has the breezy 
charm of a Netflix romcom and will be a hit with readers who loved The Kissing 
Booth or To All the Boys I’ve Loved Before adaptations.  AT
khAn, m. t. Nura and the Immortal Palace. 
Jimmy Patterson/Little, 
2022 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780759557956 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780759557932 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 6-8
Twelve-year-old Nura works in a mine, risking her life daily to search for mica 
while always on the lookout for a rumored treasure said to be hidden within its 
depths, hoping that she’ll find something to help her impoverished family. When 
she accidentally stumbles upon a magical world of jinn, she thinks this could be 
her gateway to happiness and wealth as she is welcomed and pampered. Unfortu-
nately, it is quickly revealed that this world is anything but idyllic and that human 
children are being tricked and collected to serve as invisible workers to maintain 
the jinn’s opulent world. Nura has three days to figure out an escape before she 
loses all memories of her home in Pakistan and is stuck on the other side of the 
portal forever. Nura is exasperatingly impulsive, but that’s an advantage here as cir-
cumstances shift unpredictably, and her dedication to her family is admirable. The 
standout worldbuilding strikes an impressive balance between realism and fantasy, 
presenting the harrowing experiences of child labor while also joyfully describing 
a lavish jinn resort with all manner of curious and memorable details in a way that 
does not diminish the impact of the former. Khan takes a light hand to the social 
commentary, inviting readers to consider the connections between the capitalistic 
356 • The Bulletin
structure of our global economy and the jinn world, but she brings reality fully 
into focus in her sobering author’s note, providing facts and statistics about the 
conditions that perpetuate global child labor.  AS
kilcoyne, elizAbeth Wake the Bones. Wednesday/St. Martin’s, 2022 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781250790828 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781250790835 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad Gr. 9-12
After a failed stint at college in Cincinnati, nineteen-year-old Laurel returns to 
her family farm in Kentucky, content to work the land her family has owned for 
generations. Unfortunately, any return to the comforts of home is sent wildly askew 
by a series of increasingly disturbing events: she and her friends find a mutilated 
deer corpse that is seemingly sprouting flora, a hideous bone monster pursues her 
through the forest, her dead mother visits her in her dreams, and finally and most 
dramatically, an emphatically creepy guy waylays her in the woods and promises to 
“gnaw the bones of you until they splinter and break” before she manages to escape 
him. Taken together, it’s all pretty horrifying, but the fear is muted by a languid 
pace and a fuzzy focus, moving between the very real drama of Laurel’s tangles with 
the literal devil to a less interesting subplot involving her best friend Isaac and his 
wrestling with his sexuality in a small, insulated town. Still, Kilcoyne’s fresh, vivid 
prose punctuates the less suspenseful emotional turmoil with moments of true terror, 
dripping in blood and gore and filled with unexpected plot turns that underscore a 
feeling of panicked disorientation. The devil is an absolutely spine-chilling villain, 
much in the tradition of Barraclough’s monstrous Long Lankin (Long Lankin, BCCB 
9/12), a creature without pity and with far too much power. Fans of horror willing 
to stay through the more subdued moments will be thoroughly satisfied.  KQG
kirk, DAniel The Big Slide; written and illus. Daniel Kirk. Paulsen/Penguin, 
2022 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780399169380 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780698173019 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 4-7 yrs
As the weather warms and his friends flock to the playground, Little Pup wishes 
he was brave enough to go on the big playground slide like the other children, but 
his fear overwhelms him. After many failed attempts, his mother suggests he slide 
down the concrete rail along their apartment building’s stairs to practice. When 
school begins in the fall, Little Pup meets Little Duck, who asks Little Pup to slide 
down with him, and the two find they are brave enough together to face their 
fear. The shifting viewpoints and angled composition, along with straightforward 
text (“He stood at the top of the slide . . . and he did not feel very brave at all”), 
convey the realistic disorientation of grappling with a fear that others have seemed 
to easily overcome. Kirk’s simple color palette, composition, and seasonal-styled 
backgrounds illustrate the time it takes little Little Pup to reach his goal, focusing 
on his kid-relatable emotional journey and the gentle encouragement from friends 
and family. Like Cornwall’s Jabari Jumps (BCCB 7/17), this empowering picture 
book teaches little ones that it’s okay to seek support and to take on challenges at 
their own pace.  DR
July/August 2022 • 357
kleyn, tim Set Sail for Pancakes!; written and illus. by Tim Kleyn. Viking, 
2022 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593404294 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593404300 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 3-6 yrs
Margot and Grandpa’s tummies are both grumbly for pancakes, but there’s no milk 
or eggs in the fridge, and the flour sack is empty. They live on an island, so they must 
pack up the Beluga Blue and set sail for pancakes—first to Chicken Island for eggs, 
then to Cow Island for milk, and finally to Flour Mill Island, where they arrive just 
as the sky is getting as grumbly as their tummies. Grandpa battens down the hatches 
while Margot gets the flour, and they drop anchor to wait out the storm. When the 
weather clears, they find themselves at Banana Tree Island, giving them a perfect 
addition to their pancake recipe. Kleyn’s text and digital illustrations make for a 
gentle, silly romp that showcases the love between grandfather and granddaughter. 
Margot and Grandpa are huggably soft figures in a saturated cartoon landscape, 
with dark brown skin and simply-drawn features that remain cheery throughout 
the island-hopping grocery run and scary storm. Make this a bedtime story or a 
Saturday morning read-aloud—either way, be prepared to satisfy grumbly tummies 
with banana pancakes for breakfast. Fortunately, Margot and Grandpa’s recipe is 
included at the end.  SS
lA sAlA, ryAn The Honeys. Scholastic, 2022 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781338745313 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781338745320 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
In their more generous, honest moments, Mars can admit that their twin sister 
Caroline was under unbearable pressure to live up to their parents’ expectations in 
the months before she brutally attacked and tried to kill Mars. Caroline died during 
the attack, leaving Mars bereft and baffled, so they decide to go to the one place 
Caroline spent solo, a summer camp that Mars hasn’t attended for years. There, they 
experience both the warm feelings of inclusion a place like this can provide as well 
as the toxic masculinity that bristled against their identity as gender fluid when they 
were there as a child. The Honeys, a group of girls who were Caroline’s inner circle 
and who are known for their beekeeping and exclusivity, welcome Mars, providing 
a safe space to share memories and hold grief even while they were clearly involved 
with Caroline’s downward spiral. Prodigious numbers of bees, an isolated summer 
camp, and a secret cult—there are certainly ample elements for a twisty horror novel 
here, and La Sala (Reverie, BCCB 12/19) delivers the chills with gusto (honey as 
a medium that can nourish or entrap, sometimes both, is particularly effective). 
Mars stumbles with as much grace as possible through shocking grief and betrayal 
toward a new understanding of their sister and how much she sacrificed to keep 
Mars safe. The bleak fact that Caroline’s desperate actions were ultimately useless 
(and perhaps even a catalyst to steer Mars into the literal and metaphorical hive) is 
far more disturbing than any of the traditional horror elements.  AS
358 • The Bulletin
lAke, nick Lily and the Night Creatures; illus. by Emily Gravett. Simon, 
2022 [240p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781534494619 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781534494633 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys 
 R Gr. 4-6
Lily does not want a new baby sibling, and she quite likes her cozy little life with her 
parents, even with her serious health issues. Nevertheless, babies come anyway, and 
when her parents leave for the hospital, Lily is sent to stay with her grandmother. 
When she realizes she’s left behind a beloved toy, she embarks on what will become 
a terrifying and exhilarating adventure that helps put her life into proper perspec-
tive: after all, a new baby is nowhere near as scary as the soulless replicas that look 
like her parents and have taken up residence in her home. Luckily, Lily does not 
have to face them alone as she has new animal friends, both wise and sardonic, 
that provide exactly what she needs to save her home. There’s a strong hint of the 
deliciously creepy Coraline by Neil Gaiman (BCCB 11/02) in the mother-thing 
and father-thing, but Lily is her own girl, all prickles and anxiety and the kind of 
weary that can be particular to the chronically ill. Her animal assistants each offer 
something unique—from an indomitable mouse whose confidence far outweighs 
their size to a sly and mostly quiet snake that nevertheless plays a startling role after 
the parent creatures have been removed and Lily makes her way to the hospital. 
Thoughtful illustrations mirror the text, breaking up longer chapters and providing 
visual cues to just how harrowing this night is for Lily. Realistic fiction fans will 
find that Lily’s growth and her relationships with herself and her family outweigh 
the scary stuff while horror fans will still relish the danger and spookiness.  AS
lAwrence, iAin Fire on Headless Mountain. Ferguson/Holiday House, 
2022 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780823446544 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780823452934 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad Gr. 5-8
Eleven-year-old Virgil Pepper and his two older siblings are traveling along the 
“Boneyard” road in the family’s old campervan, winding through a mountain range 
to scatter their mother’s ashes at Little Lost Lake. When the van dies and a raging for-
est fire encroaches, however, the Peppers must survive as the heat steadily rises. The 
siblings almost immediately become separated, and Virgil draws upon the lessons 
from his late mother, a no-nonsense woman of science, who impressively instilled 
in him skills ranging from adhoc water filtration to how to eat bugs for survival. 
An omniscient narrator presents the survival challenges the kids face individually, 
including injuries, mountain lions, and stranger danger, while naturalistic accounts 
of the fire as a havoc-wreaking beast heighten the tension. Virgil is the focus of this 
richly imaginative survival adventure, but flashbacks to his mother’s and a wacky 
uncle’s teachings hint at dysfunctional family dynamics but are underexplored. The 
same can be said of the siblings’ obvious need to mourn outside of a life-or-death 
scenario, and the conclusion offers little to believe they’ll be afforded such oppor-
tunity in the future. Still, the unrelenting drama of their immediate peril makes 
for a nail-biting read, sure to satisfy fans of Paulsen’s Hatchet.  WJ
July/August 2022 • 359
lewis, britney s. The Undead Truth of Us. Disney Hyperion, 2022 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781368075831 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781368075909 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Sophomore Zharie and her mother were always close, especially with their shared 
interest in the West Coast swing, despite often being the only brown girls on the 
dance floor. She feels deeply alone after her mother’s death, questioning everything—
especially why no one noticed her mom had morphed into a zombie at the end. 
In fact, Zharie sees the undead everywhere now, and she doesn’t know if it’s a viral 
outbreak of some sort that only she could put an end to, a side effect of playing 
that one Cranberries song on repeat so much, or the immense trauma of losing her 
mom. When a cute boy moves into the apartment above where she’s living with her 
emotionally distant aunt, Zharie notices that only half of him seems to be a decay-
ing corpse, but not all the time, and so (she thinks) he’s a perfect opportunity to 
investigate this peculiar zombie apocalypse. Zharie narrates this mindfully haunting 
story with a sharp attention to sensory details like color and texture, which makes 
shifts from life to undead and back again even more visceral. Being close to a boy 
with soft lips and a disarming smile, for example, can very quickly turn into being 
in proximity to death, gore and a pungent stench. Zharie powers through to learn 
that zombies are less a threat and more a symbol of heartbreak, but unfortunately 
there’s more pain to come as she uncovers the circumstances surrounding her 
mother’s last days. Readers beware: this book may kill you.  WJ
mAclAchlAn, PAtriciA My Life Begins!; written and illus. by Patricia MacLach-
lan. Tegen/HarperCollins, 2022 [128p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780063116016 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780063116023 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 2-4
As an only child, nine-year-old Jacob is content if a bit lonely; unfortunately, his 
recent request for a dog is denied, seeing as the family is about to welcome triplets. 
He takes it in stride, jokingly referring to his new siblings as his litter of puppies, 
and when his teacher gives students free rein over their research project, Jacob picks 
Char, Kath, Liz, and the adjustment of his family to them as his topic of choice. 
Readers then get to follow the little ones from their first gurgles to their first steps, 
with gentle and nurturing Jacob as their guide. There’s a fair amount of romanti-
cism here as the babies are easily soothed, the grown-ups are rarely frazzled, and 
Jacob himself experiences little in the way of jealousy or resentment, but it’s an 
aspirational picture that could certainly make for a gentle family readaloud. Chap-
ters are breezily episodic, with small points of drama along the way, and black and 
white illustrations bring a timeless charm. Light on action but heavy on sweetness, 
this serves as a pleasant reminder that each arrival in life marks the beginning of 
something new and potentially wonderful.  KQG
360 • The Bulletin
mArA, sunyA The Darkening. Clarion, 2022 [400p] (The Darkening)
Trade ed. ISBN 9780358561989 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780358494911 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad Gr. 8-12 
The daughter of failed revolutionaries, Vesper Vale lives in hiding with her Pa in the 
outermost ring of a city surrounded by an ever-encroaching Storm. It’s the only life 
Vesper knows until she makes a brave but foolish mistake that leads to her father’s 
capture. To save Pa, Vesper needs to get close to prince Dalca, the leader of the city’s 
supposed protectors, known as the Wardana. Vesper befriends Izamal, a Wardana 
and fifth-ringer like herself, who helps her infiltrate Dalca’s inner circle. The prince 
is more than he seems, however, and Vesper must decide if she can bring herself to 
trust him with her secrets—and her heart—if it means saving the entire city from 
the Storm. Like Jodi Meadows’ Nightrender (BCCB 01/22), Mara’s absorbing story 
paints a picture of an isolated realm surrounded by malevolent forces, and Vesper’s 
narration is lovely and austere: “I feel thin, like a globe of blown glass; a fragile 
bit of shine stretched over a hollow center.” Unfortunately, the excellent world-
building and beautiful prose are marred by uneven characterization and pacing. 
Seemingly significant plot points are rushed over, such as Vesper’s introduction to 
the prince’s inner circle, while other less relevant scenes, such as Pa fighting for his 
life in a public trial, are unnecessarily drawn out. Vesper inexplicably moves from 
altruistic to single-mindedly focused on her own agenda, and her romance with 
Dalca feels forced. Although flawed, this strongly imaginative debut may appeal to 
fans of Sabaa Tahir’s An Ember in the Ashes (BCCB 06/15) and though this story 
is complete, Mara leaves the door open for a sequel.  AT
mAyPer, monicA Night on the Sand; illus. by Jaime Kim. Clarion, 2022 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781328884183 $17.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 4-6 yrs
In the opening pages of this poignant picture book, the home of two young broth-
ers is destroyed by “a howl, a dark whirl of wind and power.” Unable to find their 
parents in the wreckage, the siblings head to the beach to find safety, with only a 
thin blanket in hand and a single, small orange for food. They spend the night on 
the shore, waking up to find they are not the only ones who sought safety there, 
and the small group comes together to share water and food, with the little brother 
contributing his orange to the effort. Eventually, they spot a boat, which comes to 
rescue them and take them to another, unknown, shore. This is a rosier picture of 
the refugee experience than offered by Cooper’s Saving the Butterfly (BCCB 6/22), 
but the focus on community and sharing of resources brings a different lens to the 
story, emphasizing a group mentality of communal survival, not just the processing 
of the individual trauma. The narration by the little brother is simple and direct, 
laying out the points of his immediate experience without lingering too much 
on their emotional impact. Kim’s illustrations are similarly unadorned, with the 
dot-eyed, shaggy-haired sibs staying close to each other and a palette that shifts 
from the grays of what’s left of their home to the orange and gold tones welcoming 
the morning. There’s no clear identifying element that calls up a specific time or 
place, and an author’s note explains Mayper’s desire to highlight the experience, 
not necessarily an event. Considering the massive refugee crises due to war and 
climate change, this makes a worthy and needed addition to similar books taking 
on the same issue.  KQG 
July/August 2022 • 361
mccArthy, cory Hope Is an Arrow: The Story of Lebanese American Poet Kahlil 
Gibran; illus. by Ekua Holmes and with photographs. Candlewick, 2022 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781536200324 $18.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad 6-10 yrs
In this picture book biography of early twentieth-century painter and poet Gibran, 
McCarthy grounds spiritual and mystical explorations in the story of an introverted 
immigrant boy, who moved with his mother and siblings from Lebanon to Boston’s 
South End when his father was jailed for political reasons back home. Painting was 
Gibran’s first talent to flourish, and by his late teens he had artwork published, 
but he eventually expanded his artistic talent to poetry, tapping into his relation-
ships with his family and to his native country. By the time of his death in 1931 
he had become one of Lebanon’s best-known sons. McCarthy’s text can reach a 
primary grade audience with supplemental adult assistance (there is, for example, 
no explanation of the struggles of Maronite and Druze religious communities in 
Lebanon), but despite specifics on Gibran’s early years and well-selected and placed 
quotations from his poetry, the content and popularity of his work are underex-
plored. Older readers who read the text in tandem with McCarthy’s excellent end 
matter annotations will derive a much fuller picture of character and motivation. 
Holmes’s vibrant collages, replete with Middle Eastern patterns and motifs, easily 
span these levels of readership, with scenes literal enough for primary-graders and 
sophisticated enough for middle-graders. A brief bibliography is included.  EB
miller, rhett The Baby-Changing Station; illus. by Dan Santat. Little, 
2022 [48p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780316459327 $17.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 5-7 yrs
Ten-year-old James has always considered himself a nice kid, but that was until 
his screaming mess of a newborn brother Joe showed up. James has the usual list 
of new sibling complaints: the baby smells bad, drools everywhere, screams loudly 
and seemingly without reason, and generally steals all the attention. When the 
family goes out for pizza one night and his exhausted parents ask James to take Joe 
to the bathroom and change him, James finds a surprising solution to his current 
misery. The changing station poses a magical offer—exchange your baby sib for 
a cool new toy, and everyone’s memories of the new kid are erased and you’re left 
with an awesome, less fussy plaything. The toys, however, seem to only be designed 
to be enjoyed by more than one person—and what’s the point of two night-vision 
goggles, two guitars, or a massive chemistry set if there’s no one to play with? It’s 
a simple solution with plenty of holes (sharing with a sibling doesn’t always go 
down well), but it’s a clever take on the familiar challenge of an expanding family. 
Rhyming text adds playfulness while the changes in perspective and composition 
bring movement and verve. Exaggerated expressions clearly convey big emotions 
in play here, from the parents’ wide-eyed, almost frantic, loving gaze, to James’ 
grim-lipped frustration, to baby Joe’s red-faced concentration right before he needs 
to be changed. The story’s initial snark is softened by the conclusion, but this still 
makes a charming addition to the heavy shelves of new sibling books.  KQG
362 • The Bulletin
mountforD, kArl jAmes The Circles in the Sky; written and illus. by Karl James 
Mountford. Candlewick Studio, 2022 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781536224986  
$18.99
Reviewed from digital galleys 
R* 4-8 yrs
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 343, for review.
ocker, j.w. The Black Slide. HarperCollins, 2022 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780062990556 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780062990570 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 7-9
Griffin has an awful feeling about the black slide that suddenly appears in his school’s 
playground, but when a relentless bully promises to leave him alone if he is the 
first to go down it, Griffin weighs the misery of the known against the fear of the 
unknown and chooses the slide. His experience is traumatic and leaves him with a 
broken arm, but at least he emerges. His best friend and fifth-grade peers aren’t so 
lucky, however, as they’re drawn to the slide against their will and never come out. 
Griffin tosses aside his better judgment and follows them, but this time he lands 
in a gruesome, harsh world where creatures seek immortality by experimenting on 
different beings. His peers are locked in cages, tortured in the hopes their duress can 
be useful to the aptly named Merciless. Griffin teams up with his best friend and 
the aforementioned bully to escape, but the horrors of this world do not end with 
the Merciless, and success will require unimaginable pain, sacrifice, and endurance. 
Ocker pushes the boundaries of middle grade horror, and the extreme and vividly 
described violence, torture, and casual cruelties make this novel a likelier fit for an 
audience older than its fifth-grade protagonists. However, Griffin is well-developed 
and slowly comes into his own role as necessary hero, with vulnerability that adds 
some welcome depth to the horror framework.  AS
PArker, nAtAlie c. The Devouring Wolf. Razorbill, 2022 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593203958 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593203965 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
Riley has been waiting for years for her transformation into a werewolf and it is 
finally time—everyone in her pack transforms by the time they turn twelve. Dis-
appointingly, however, her birthday comes and goes with no howls and no romps 
in the night because Riley and four other kids never turn. While the adults spin 
their wheels trying to figure out why, the five kids decide to look for answers on 
their own, harnessing their new telepathic abilities to discover that the legendary 
Devouring Wolf is taking the wolf souls of other kids as yummy little snacks to 
gain power. The different identities, life experiences, and approaches to emergencies 
of the diverse pack members are all needed to defeat the Devouring Wolf, who is 
on a vengeful hunt after breaking out of a magical stone prison. Inspired by high 
expectations from one of her moms, Riley wants so badly to be a leader that she’s 
not always able to accept that even a pack alpha may need help or support. While 
her struggles to figure out when to lead and when to follow anchor the emotional 
focus, this is truly a study in how the five kids all use what is unique about each of 
them to save wolf-kind. Final illustrations not seen.  AS
July/August 2022 • 363
Pérez, celiA c. Tumble. Kokila, 2022 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593325179 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593325193 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
In Adela’s corner of New Mexico, lucha libre is a big deal, and she bonds with her 
stepfather, Alex, over the spectator sport. When Alex and Mom bring up the wel-
come possibility of Alex formally adopting Adelita, it also opens the door for the 
seventh grader to press for answers about her biological father, who has for years 
remained an off-limits topic of discussion. After ransacking Mom’s room for clues 
and searching both online and through the local historical society, Adela discov-
ers her father is a member of the Bravo family of noted regional luchadors. With 
that skeleton now out of the closet, Mom agrees her daughter may as well meet 
him and see for herself why Mom and Manny parted ways soon after her birth. A 
surprisingly warm welcome from the Bravo clan and the novelty of involvement in 
lucha history and tradition delights Adela, but her father is too busy angling for a 
comeback to be the reliable parent Adela fantasized. A subplot involving a school 
production of The Nutcracker that annually features a creative twist (this year, a 
planned wrestling match between the Nutcracker and the Mouse King) adds shape 
to the domestic drama. While treating Adela’s experience with patience and respect, 
Pérez (Strange Birds, BCCB 10/19) considers the impact of the reunion on adult 
members of both families, as Adela does not have exclusive claim to the joy, regret, 
and uncertainty that this new family configuration brings.  EB
Pizzoli, greg Pizza!: A Slice of History; written and illus. by Greg Pizzoli. Vi-
king, 2022 [56p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780425291078 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780425291092 $11.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 4-8 yrs
Pizzoli offers up a startling stat: “In the United States of America, we eat 350 slices 
of pizza every second.” The factoid doesn’t come with specific verification, but it’s 
safe to say that, yes, we do eat a boatload of pizza, and yes, his target picture book 
audience scarfs down their fair share. Inquiring young minds surely ponder the 
origins of the gastronomic social leveler, and this title brings them up to speed on 
murky legendary origins (maybe ancient Greek flatbread, maybe Persian military 
fare cooked on a shield), sturdier historic lore (Raffaele Esposito, who charmed 
Queen Margherita of Naples with a pizza named for her), and a plausible contender 
for the introduction of pizza to the USA (Genarro Lombardi of, where else, New 
York). From there it’s a sprint of expanding popularity and culinary innovation 
through the twentieth century, culminating in the range of stateside and interna-
tional interpretations that will have listeners arguing over whether such exotica even 
counts as pizza. Pizzoli’s four-color print illustrations—in Italian-themed red, white, 
and green, complemented with swaths of doughy yellow—sport the wry humor 
his fans have come to recognize. Esposito rides horseback, rushing to-go boxes of 
pies to the royal court, while the Grim Reaper tempts a victim with a tomato once 
thought to be poisonous. Finally, as the perfect leftover to save for another day, 
Pizzoli concludes with a simple recipe for making toaster oven pizzas with English 
muffins. Pizza for breakfast. Of course!  EB
364 • The Bulletin
Poblocki, DAn Tales to Keep You Up at Night; illus. by Marie Bergeron. Penguin 
Workshop, 2022 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593387474 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593387481 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
It’s been a year since Grandmother disappeared, and now, with the presumption 
of her death, it’s time to clear out the house. Amelia still hopes for her return and 
seethes as her Mom and Mama balance their mourning with doing what needs to 
be done. She grabs a years-overdue library book from the attic and takes refuge at 
the local library, settling in for the delightful shivers the title seems to promise and 
getting more than she bargained for. The collected tales intertwine with both each 
other and Amelia’s life, weaving Grandmother’s probable demise with generations 
of community history and lore and pointing toward Amelia’s immediate peril. The 
use of a framing story is a common enough device, and here it enables Poblocki’s 
philosophical forays into the insidious power of gossip and the ability of story to 
shift meaning according to its listener. Kids who just want to mine this anthol-
ogy for the scary gems can follow the bordered pages of the library book (set in 
old-fashioned type-face) to be rewarded with yarns that range from merely creepy 
(witch’s curse in “Moll’s Well”), to pretty unsettling (a prank gone fatally wrong in 
“Screamers”), to truly sleep-disturbing (live burial in “Nite Crawlers”). Booktalk 
this to summer readers begging for early Halloween treats.  EB
rose, cAroline stArr Miraculous. Putnam, 2022 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781984813152 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781984813169 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad Gr. 4-6
After Dr. Kingsbury’s cure-all tonic saved Jack’s baby sister, the thirteen-year-old 
joined the doc’s traveling tour, helping an older boy set up flyers and bring in custom-
ers in new towns, the latest of which is insular Oakdale, Ohio, in 1887. Someone 
in town recognizes Dr. Kingsbury, however, and it turns out he’s not exactly who he 
claims to be—and the tonic might not be what it says on the label, either. Shifting 
perspectives offer insight into the various townspeople and their ailments, but the 
book ultimately doesn’t delve deep enough into anyone’s personality or backstory 
to garner much interest or sympathy. The mystery of what the tonic really does and 
the true identity of Dr. Kingsbury feels aimless and meandering, lacking consistent 
tension or riveting clues. Still, readers who enjoy immersive historical settings will 
appreciate the atmosphere Rose captures if they can overlook the book’s shaky 
foundations. An author’s note about real-life nineteenth century traveling quack 
doctors is included.  NB
sAVAge, stePhen Moonlight; written and illus. by Stephen Savage. Porter/
Holiday House, 2022 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780823450848 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780823453054 $11.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 3-5 yrs
This gentle berceuse initially teases with soothing prose and intriguing visual mis-
direction. What is it that “streaks through the forest then slips—tumbling over a 
July/August 2022 • 365
waterfall, swirling down a river . . . ”? It could be the antlered deer leaping among 
the trees in one scene, but there’s no indication of the animal near the waterfall on 
the next page. Then the mysterious entity is described as “drifting on a steamship’s 
wake.” Maybe it’s the dolphins cavorting at the stern? The clues accumulate, and 
viewers eventually discern—at their own pace—that this thing that also “hides 
behind a cloud” is the moonlight, making the sea sparkle just as it had illuminated 
previous scenes. Best of all, it sets aglow the bedroom of the child who watches it 
from a cozy bed, reassured that even when moonlight goes away, it will be back 
the next night. Linocuts in blues, teals, and greens merge the Earth, sea, and sky 
into a dreamy continuum, and the child washed in the moonlight is a tenderly 
rounded, stuffy-cuddling shape onto which young viewers can project their own 
lunar fascination. Sleep-resistant listeners may want to talk about places where the 
moonlight shines at that very minute, but a reprise of Savage’s lyrical text should 
do the lulling trick.  EB
sicuro, Aimée If You Find a Leaf; written and illus. by Aimée Sicuro. Random 
House Studio, 2022 [40p]
Library ed. ISBN 9780593306604 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593306598 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593306611 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 3-7 yrs
After a walk through the crisp autumn woods, a young child gazes through the 
window at a tree’s dwindling leaves and begins to dream of all the things a leaf 
could embody––a hat, a hammock, or maybe a Halloween disguise. The fantasies 
become grander, and other imagined kids appear, riding wheeled leaf vehicles to 
go apple picking, marching in a leafy parade, and gathering around a pointy maple 
leaf-shaped bonfire. When winter calls, the foliage fun must pause until the season’s 
change brings nascent buds. Endpapers show a photographic catalog of colorful 
leaves, and Sicuro’s mixed media illustrations transform them into an immersive 
experience in creativity. The loose, expressive charcoal and watercolor scenes on 
a bright white background are perfectly collaged with real photographs of fallen 
leaves, which add a three-dimensional feel. The conceptual illustrations skillfully 
play with scale, as the Japanese elm leaf becomes a tall, imposing sail for a boat in a 
tumultuous sea, and a ginkgo leaf becomes a kid-sized trumpet. Although the text’s 
cadence and rhyme scheme stumble at points, the choice to voice the story in the 
second person (“If you find a leaf, it could be your muse”) makes this story dynamic 
and inviting. Appended do-it-yourself instructions for how to preserve freshly 
fallen leaves in a glycerin bath offer inspiration for a crafty seasonal storytime.  KF
smith, sADé Granny’s Kitchen; illus. by Ken Daley. Feiwel, 2022 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781250806338 $18.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 5-8 yrs
On the “beautiful island of Jamaica, where the sun is always shining and the weather 
is sweet,” Shelly-Ann works up a hunger playing outside—hunger that fresh fruits, 
vegetables, and Granny’s excellent cooking skills can always satisfy. Now, though, 
when she asks Granny for something to eat, Granny has a new answer: “GYAL, 
YOU BETTA CAN COOK!” Shelly-Ann is willing to learn and follows Granny’s 
recipes as she recites them from memory or reads from well-worn cards, but the 
366 • The Bulletin
results are always disappointing, even with Granny’s reassurance. The morning 
Granny stays in bed and leaves a discouraged Shelly-Ann to her own devices, the 
girl gives it all one more try and presents Granny with a breakfast tray of dishes that 
win her enthusiastic approval. This is, of course, the climax listeners will anticipate, 
but it’s the denouement that delivers the honesty, giggles, and punch as a proud 
Shelly-Ann runs an assessment of her accomplishment: “The dumplins were not 
burned . . . well, maybe a little. . . . The saltfish was not too salty . . . nothing a 
little pepper couldn’t fix.” Daley’s digital illustrations, in eye-popping hues of juicy 
fruit and turquoise sea, convey the easy give-and-take of the close-knit pair, with 
snazzy-spectacled Granny patiently cheerleading her determined but frustrated 
granddaughter through some rough culinary challenges. Shelly-Ann’s four recipes 
are included for foodie families to try together, and a page of fun facts on Jamaica 
are a bonus for armchair travelers.  EB
stirling, DAnie Crumbs; written and illus. by Danie Stirling. Clarion, 
2022 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780358467793 $24.99
Paper ed. ISBN 9780358467816 $17.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Compared to other seers who can see into the future, Ray can only see things 
exactly as they are, a unique skill that might help her become the youngest Grand 
Council of Sorcerers member and fulfill her mother’s expectations. When Ray 
wants to escape that pressure and her strict internship, she visits a bakery that sells 
goods with unusual powers that can help make dreams come true. There, she meets 
Laurie, a selfless barista who dreams of becoming a professional musician. As they 
slowly fall in love with each other, they begin a long-distance relationship only to 
realize chasing love and dreams can be messy. Ray is conflicted about being part 
of the Council if it means losing Laurie, and they both try to make things work 
only to lose sight of what they want for themselves and for each other. Stirling’s 
WEBTOON makes the transition to print easily, with whimsical elements to 
visualize communication through enchanted mobile devices and a structure that 
creates lively movement peeking out of the panels. The warm and twilight color 
palettes of this graphic novel, along with transparent thought bubbles, effectively 
reflect Ray and Laurie overcoming their feelings of isolation and inadequacy. The 
diverse cast adds to the worldbuilding, but this is rightly focused on Ray and 
Laurie, offering a compassionate look at the couple’s burnout and its contributing 
factors, particularly their tendency to feel responsible for everyone else’s feelings 
and neglect their own. Ultimately, though, this is a sweet love story, and readers 
will want to get cozy and grab a hot tea to go with this delicious slice of romance 
as the two leads find their way to each other.  DR
stohl, mArgAret A Secret Princess; by Margaret Stohl and Melissa de la 
Cruz. Putnam, 2022 [400p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781984812049 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781984812056 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr 7-10
Fifteen-year-old Mary Lennox from India attends the Select Seminary for Young 
Ladies and Gentlemen, a boarding school in Manchester, England, where children 
July/August 2022 • 367
are under the reign of the strict headmistress Minerva Minchin. Adventurous and 
full of wit, Mary is not afraid to speak her mind as she witnesses the injustices at 
the school, especially Minchin’s cruel treatment towards Mary’s first ever friend Sara 
Crewe, known as a bright little princess from the Philippines. Minchin takes away all 
of Sara’s possessions and forces her to become a servant to pay for her school debt, 
while Mary’s troublemaking earns her a transfer to America where her uncle lives. 
Not willing to be separated, Mary, Sara, and Cedric Errol, a disabled and mysteri-
ous boy who they befriended at the school, run away to Paris but end up getting 
sidetracked to discover a secret garden that will change their lives forever. This is a 
charming mash-up of Frances Hodgson Burnett’s beloved classics A Secret Garden, 
A Little Princess, and Little Lord Fauntleroy, and all three protagonists benefit from 
one another’s differences. The lavish descriptions of wealthy countryside landscapes 
and estates contrast with the accurately dreary portrayal of the 1860s, which doesn’t 
shy away from the realities of wartime poverty and child labor. Emotionally-driven 
dialogue, repetition, and sophisticated language will keep readers, especially fans of 
Burnett’s work, turning pages to see just how these distinct characters can define 
their futures.  DR
thieDe, emily This Vicious Grace. Wednesday/St. Martin’s, 2022 [448p] (The 
Last Finestra)
Trade ed. ISBN 9781250794055 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781250794062 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
On the island of Saverio, eighteen-year-old Alessa is the Finestra, an amplifier for 
elemental magic users known as Fontes. The Finestra’s role is to fight off the apoca-
lyptic event Divorando by pairing up with a Fonte—and Alessa is failing that duty, 
badly, because she’s accidentally killed the last three Fontes that paired with her. 
When a street preacher gains a foothold among the elite and begins insisting that 
Alessa is actually an agent of the malevolent god Crollo, Alessa soon finds herself 
hunted by assassins and hires Dante, a handsome, broody bodyguard with a dark 
past, as she continues to master her powers in time to save the world. Fascinating 
worldbuilding draws on Italian influences to build the long history of cyclical 
Divorando events; this first novel just scrapes the surface of Alessa’s world, setting 
up its sequel to fill in juicy gaps in the lore. Each chapter starts with an inscription 
of a saying in Italian that cleverly foreshadows upcoming events, and readers with 
knowledge of the language (or a good online translator) may enjoy gleaning more 
information about Saverio by looking up words and sayings. Romance fans will also 
appreciate Alessa’s relationship with Dante, as it moves from friendship to romance 
with clever banter and swoony tension. Though the book wraps up its main plot, it 
leaves just enough loose ends that readers will be eager for the sequel.  NB
tiAn, XiXi This Place Is Still Beautiful. Balzer + Bray, 2022 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780063086029 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780063086043 $12.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R* Gr. 9-12
Raised by a single Chinese immigrant mother in a Midwestern town, seventeen-
year-old Annalie and nineteen-year-old Margaret have a strained sister relationship, 
with assertive Margaret often clashing with reserved Annalie. When their garage is 
368 • The Bulletin
vandalized with a racial slur, Margaret leaves behind her summer internship in New 
York City to report the hate crime publicly, but Annalie and their mother want to 
be private and not attract attention. Annalie’s hoping to have a relaxing summer 
with popular jock Thom, and she’s furious that Margaret is now investigating on 
her own when authorities won’t help in this predominantly white town. Things 
only get more complicated when Annalie finds out who is behind the vandalism 
and is uncertain if she should tell Margaret, knowing that it will personally im-
pact the sisters and the community. Chapters alternate between past and present 
experiences, and authentic dialogue expresses the complexities of family dynamics, 
sisterhood, and biracial identities. The perspectives from the media and the diverse 
cast of characters illustrate the ramifications of preconceptions as well as the pos-
sibilities of coming together to deal with racism and bigotry. Both sisters navigate 
first love and dating people from different cultures, and Margaret’s relationship 
with ex-boyfriend Rajiv offers a particularly fresh example, as they move toward a 
distinct cultural understanding. Tian’s debut explores our vulnerabilities in the face 
of change and how we find redemption for our past mistakes by making wiser—if 
more difficult—choices to move forward.  DR
torres, jennifer Lola Out Loud: Inspired by the Childhood of Activist Dolores 
Huerta; illus. by Sara Palacios. Little, 2022 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780316530125 $18.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 4-7 yrs
At Mama’s Hotel Delano, all guests are greeted with “welcome-home warmth and 
a gleaming brass key,” even if they’re short on cash and can only secure their rooms 
with a handshake and a promise. Young daughter Lola tries to mind her Mama and 
pull her weight at the hotel, and despite being easily distracted by conversations 
with guests, Lola has been learning her mother’s most important lesson: “When 
you see a problem, fix it. Don’t pretend it isn’t there.” So when she sees a mother 
and daughter turned off a streetcar for lack of fare money, a gregarious Lola rounds 
hotel residents into the street and welcomes the pair into their home—an act of 
generosity and equity that foreshadows the “Sí, se puede” attitude that would 
guide adult Dolores Huerta in activism on behalf of exploited farm workers. Tor-
res’ imagined episode is neatly attuned to a primary-grade audience ready to probe 
occasions in which bad behavior might actually be very good behavior, and Pala-
cios helps keep the enterprise swept clean of preachiness with witty mixed media 
depictions of rambunctious Lola and her long-suffering mother. An author’s note, 
well-adapted for reading directly to an upper primary grades audience, supplies 
biographical background on Huerta’s early years and the founding of the United 
Farm Workers union.  EB
wenXuAn, cAo Dragonfly Eyes; tr. from the Chinese by Helen Wang. Candle-
wick, 2022 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781536200188 $19.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781536209990 $19.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad Gr. 6-9
Growing up, Ah Mei heard countless romantic stories of her Nainai’s life with 
Yeye, Ah Mei’s Chinese grandfather who fell in love with Nainai in the port city of 
Marseilles before they returned to China to assume responsibility for his family’s 
July/August 2022 • 369
silk company. Ah Mei, as the favorite grandchild, has lived with Nainai and Yeye 
for her whole childhood in Shanghai, where her subtle Western resemblance to her 
beautiful French grandmother has often garnered stares. Over the years, Ah Mei 
witnesses the family’s fortune turn as the political tides of the city begin to drasti-
cally change, and eventually Nainai is falsely suspected of operating as a foreign 
spy. This Chinese import is a melancholic, multigenerational novel spanning 1920s 
France to the 1960s Cultural Revolution in China, employing a distant third-person 
narration characterized by figurative language and detailed descriptions of the set-
ting and the family’s quotidian life. Lacking a focused plot, the story is primarily 
guided by a series of symbolic objects that distinguish the episodic chapters, and 
the symbol of the dragonfly eyes, two multilayered colorful glass beads gifted to 
Nainai for her wedding, nods to Ah Mei’s and Nainai’s exotic appearance as well 
as their hope for protection against evil. No real context for the historical setting 
is given, so young readers may need some assistance with interpreting the political 
forces behind the family’s persecution, but the underrepresented subject makes this 
story a worthwhile addition to historical fiction shelves.  KF
wolf, AllAn The Blanket Where Violet Sits; illus. by Lauren Tobia. Candlewick, 
2022 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780763696658 $17.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 3-6 yrs
In the northwest corner of the United States, Violet sits on a picnic blanket with 
her parents, enjoying her sandwich and snacks and waiting for the show to begin. 
The sky darkens, and a telescope becomes their ticket to a starry light show that 
introduces Violet to the mind-boggling expanse of the universe. Wolf’s cumulative 
verse, which begins with cozy informality, turns statelier as thoughts of orbiting 
planets segue to consideration of our galaxy, clouds of galaxies, and the implication 
of possible limitlessness we can’t quite comprehend. Tobia’s digitally finished pencil 
illustrations also begin with tiny, predictable steps, moving from the park to the city 
to the sky, but then shifting between space and family like a telescope readjusting 
its focus. The brown-skinned family—Violet and her parents bundled against the 
chill—exudes warmth and an easy affection that suggests outings like this are the 
norm rather than the exception. “Here’s the known universe, past comprehension,/ 
billions of light years in every direction/ and billions of galaxies out in the black./ 
There might be a Violet out there, looking back.” Perhaps. But for now Violet is 
content in her own universe of three.  EB
woolfe, AngelA The Wills and the Won’ts; illus. by Roland Garrigue. Viking, 
2022 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593352588 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593352595 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad 4-7 yrs
A Will and a Won’t—turnip-shaped critters with spindly arms and legs—live atop 
the same hill and can’t agree on anything. “They squabbled and quarrelled, did 
nothing but fight / If one said, ‘It’s day,’ said the other, ‘It’s night.’” The only solu-
tion is to build a wall between their houses, which grows so high as they compete 
to build faster than the other Wills and Won’ts get involved. Soon everyone is 
walled in, and no one can remember why they started building up walls in the 
370 • The Bulletin
first place. When “a hopeful young May” from outside pulls out a loose brick, she 
meets a Won’t who thinks they might be a “Could.” Just like the walls went up, 
brick by brick they come down as more Wills and Won’ts gather to help and start 
to see their children as “‘Possibles,’ ‘Might-bes,’ and ‘Maybes.’” Garrigue’s acrylic 
and digital paintings effectively visualize the divide between the Wills and the 
Won’ts in a muted palette of blue-green, pink, and gray, while the walls with their 
graffiti proclaiming “Won’ts are the danger!” “Get out!” and “Warning! Wills are 
devils!” might spur age-appropriate conversations about conflict and prejudice. 
Unfortunately, the message tips toward didactic, and the lack of subtlety dulls some 
of the more whimsical elements. Still, the catchy, rhythmic rhyming of Woolfe’s 
text makes this an easy storytime pick, particularly if paired with Agee’s The Wall 
in the Middle of The Book (BCCB 11/18), and invites young listeners to consider 
the problematic real-world walls we keep building.  SS
yoon, helen I’m a Unicorn; written and illus. by Helen Yoon. Candlewick, 
2022 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781536219760 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781536229202 $17.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R* 3-6 yrs
With a gleeful, matter-of-fact smile, our one-horned protagonist—clearly a calf 
with a single horn—informs us that they are a unicorn. They meet the main crite-
ria, obviously, but the little one’s confidence takes a hit when doing some research. 
Unicorns apparently poop rainbows, which, despite the variety of veggies and fruits 
the calf partakes in, is a feat they can’t quite yet manage; unicorns’ manes “flow like 
silk,” while the puny tuft upon the calf’s head decidedly does not; and unicorns’ 
tears turn into lollipops, while those of our now despairing narrator remain stub-
bornly colorless. When the calf encounters real unicorns, the ashamed wannabe 
apologizes for claiming their magnificence, only to be reassured by the unicorns 
that a one-horned calf does, indeed, fit the requirements. The blasé confidence of 
the horned horses is especially amusing in contrast to the narrator’s increasingly 
frantic self-doubt, and their “all are welcome” message is delivered with a dry, 
no-nonsense tone that implicitly points to the silliness of some labels. Yoon’s art 
is simple but effective, with the wide-eyed calf and their heavily tabbed research 
book set against clean white backgrounds, and when the unicorns finally make their 
appearance, they bring a riot of color and glitter. Pair this with Young’s A Unicorn 
Named Sparkle or Hale’s Itty-Bitty Kitty-Corn (BCCB 3/21) as a reminder that you 
don’t need sparkles to be fabulous (though rainbow poop does help).  KQG
zAhler, DiAne Goblin Market. Holiday House, 2022 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780823450817 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780823452927 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 5-7
Shy, synaesthetic Lizzie and her bright, artistic elder sister Minka are as close as sisters 
can be—or so Lizzie thinks, until one day Minka comes home from the market 
enraptured with a handsome seller of marvelous fruits and soon falls strangely ill. 
To save her sister, Lizzie ventures beyond her own narrow comfort zone and learns 
of the zduszes (goblins), who steal away humans by promising their victims all 
they dream of—or leave them to die of longing. Lizzie’s synaesthesia enables her 
July/August 2022 • 371
to see colors along with sounds she hears and it proves useful for telling the differ-
ence between humans and shape-changing zduszes (goblins’ voices have no color) 
as she finds a way to bring Minka back from the market and all its tempations. 
Zahler creates a historical-feeling world that combines Polish folklore and homey 
(if idealized) depictions of rural life with elements drawn from Christina Rossetti’s 
lush, unsettling poem that shares the book’s title. The sisters’ relationship anchors 
the plot and resonates with emotion; Lizzie’s hurt at not having realized that Minka 
wants more from life than she’s shared is quietly heartbreaking. Happily, Lizzie and 
Minka learn that although sisterly love can’t fulfill all dreams and aspirations, it can 
expand to include them.  FHK
Corrections:
In our May review of Lisa Robinson’s The Sweetest Scoop, we misgendered illustrator 
Stacy Innerst, who uses he/him pronouns. 
372 • The Bulletin
Accidents—fiction: Benway
ADHD—fiction: Conklin
Antarctica—fiction: Ames
Apocalypse—fiction: Thiede
Art and artists: McCarthy
Astronomy: Wolf
Australia—fiction: Marr
Babies—fiction: MacLachlan
Babies—stories: Miller
Balloons—stories: Kaufman
BEDTIME STORIES: Savage
BIOGRAPHIES: McCarthy
Biracial people—fiction: Tian
Black people—fiction: Callendar; 
Getten; Isabelle
Boarding schools—fiction: Stohl
Brothers—fiction: Mayper
Camps and camping—fiction: Griffin; 
Kaylor
Cancer—fiction: Malinenko
Child labor—fiction: Khan
Chinese Americans—fiction: Tian
Chinese people—fiction: Marr; 
Wenxuan
Communication—fiction: Johannes; 
Kaylor
Communication—stories: Allen; 
Mountford
Competition—stories: Drago
Crafts: Sicuro
Current events: Mayper; Woolfe
Curses—fiction: Griffin
Dance and dancers—fiction: Lewis
Death—stories: Mountford
Depression—fiction: Callendar
Devils—fiction: Kilcoyne
Dinosaurs—fiction: Johannes
Doctors: Jarrow
Doctors—fiction: Rose
Dogs—stories: Brockington; Kirk
Emotions—stories: Mountford
Ethics and values: Torres; Woolfe
Families—fiction: Bajaj; Foley;  
Poblocki; Wenxuan
FANTASY: Berwah; Chen; Cook; 
Gillman; Khan; Mara; Thiede
Fear—stories: Kirk; Woolfe
Fires—fiction: Lawrence
Florida—fiction: Isabelle
FOLKLIKE TALES: Chow; Zahler
Food and eating: Pizzoli
Food and eating—fiction: Stirling
Food and eating—stories: Drago; 
Kilpatrick; Kleyn; Smith
Forests—fiction: Conklin; Lawrence
Foxes—stories: Mountford
Friends—fiction: Parker; Stohl
Friends—stories: Aitken; Allen; 
Kaufman
Frogs—fiction: Davault
Garbage—fiction: Hargis
Ghosts—stories: Kaufman
Goblins—fiction: Zahler
Grandmothers—stories: Ferneyhough
Grandparents—fiction: Cook; Foley
Grandparents—stories: Aitken; Kleyn; 
Smith
GRAPHIC NOVELS: Davault;  
Dugan; Gillman; Hill; Stirling
Grief—fiction: Benway; Chow; 
Getten; Lewis
Grief—stories: Aitken; Mountford
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
July/August 2022 • 373
Halloween—fiction: Chokshi
Hate crimes—fiction: Tian
HISTORICAL FICTION: Rose; 
Wenxuan
History, Chinese: Wenxuan
History, U.S.: Jarrow
History, world: Pizzoli; La Sala;  
Malinenko; Ocker; Poblocki
Hotels—stories: Torres
Houses—fiction: Lake; Malinenko
HUMOR: Aitken; Brockington;  
Hargis; Johannes; Kilpatrick; 
Miller; Yoon
Identity—fiction: Hill
Identity—stories: Yoon
Illness: Jarrow
Illness—fiction: Lake; Malinenko
Imaginary creatures—fiction:  
Callender
Imagination—stories: Sicuro
Immigrants—fiction: Hill; Marr
India—fiction: Bajaj
Ireland—fiction: Foley
Jamaica—stories: Smith
Kentucky—fiction: Kilcoyne
Knights—fiction: Davault
Latinx people—fiction: Pérez; Torres
Lebanese people: McCarthy
Legends—fiction: Parker
LGBTQIA people—fiction: Gillman; 
Isabelle
Light—stories: Savage
Literature, English: Stohl
Magic—fiction: Chen; Cook; Dugan; 
Isabelle; Lake; Stirling; Thiede
Magic—stories: Drago
Malaysia—stories: Ferneyhough
Maps—stories: Allen
Medicine—fiction: Rose
Mental illness—fiction: Callender
Missing persons—fiction: Poblocki
Monsters—fiction: Ocker
Monsters—stories: Kilpatrick
Moon—stories: Mountford; Savage
Mothers—fiction: Kilcoyne; Lewis
Murder—fiction: Dugan
MYSTERIES: Conklin; Cook
New Mexico—fiction: Pérez
Nonbinary people—fiction:  
Callendar; La Sala
Pakistani people—fiction: Khan
Pancakes—stories: Kleyn
Parasites: Jarrow
Parents—fiction: Getten; Lake; Pérez
Pets—fiction: Johannes
Pizza: Pizzoli
Play—stories: Kirk
Poets and poetry: McCarthy
Racing—fiction: Berwah
Racism—fiction: Tian
Reading, aloud: MacLachlan
Reading, easy: Hargis
Refugees—fiction: Mayper
Resistance movements—fiction: Mara
ROMANCE: Griffin; Kaylor; Stirling; 
Thiede
Romance—fiction: Chen; Lewis; 
Mara; Stohl
School—fiction: Bajaj; Ocker;  
Conklin
School—stories: Brockington; Sicuro
Secrets—fiction: Foley; Rose
Ships and sailing—stories: Kleyn
SHORT STORIES: Chokshi;  
Gillman; Poblocki
Siblings—fiction: La Sala; Lawrence; 
MacLachlan
Siblings—stories: Miller
Sisters—fiction: Benway; Marr; Tian; 
Zahler
Social class—fiction: Berwah; Chen
Space—fiction: Wolf
Space travel—fiction: Davault
Stars—fiction: Chokshi
Stars—stories: Wolf
Storms—fiction: Mara
Storytime: Kaufman; Kilpatrick; 
Sicuro; Woolfe
Supernatural beings—fiction: Ames; 
Hill; Khan 
SUPERNATURAL STORIES:  
Isabelle; Parker
SURVIVAL STORIES: Lawrence
SUSPENSE: Lake
THRILLER: Chow
Toronto—fiction: Chow
374 • The Bulletin
Trains—fiction: Chow
Unicorns—stories: Yoon
United Kingdom—stories:  
Ferneyhough
Voyages and travel—fiction: Getten
Voyages and travel—stories: Ferney-
hough
Water—fiction: Bajaj
Werewolves—fiction: Parker
Witches—fiction: Chokshi; Dugan; 
Griffin; Isabelle
Witches—stories: Drago
Wrestling—fiction: Pérez
Zombies—fiction: Lewis
July/August 2022 • 375
T h e B u l l e t i n
 
of the Center for Children’s Books
author/title index, volume 75
september, 2021—july/august, 2022
1619 Project. Hannah-Jones. 95.
Abbott. Pig and Horse and the Something 
Scary. 146.
Ablaze with Color. Harvey. 154.
Acorn Was a Little Wild. Arena. 183.
Across a Field of Starlight. Delliquanti. 
150.
Adam. Lark and the Wild Hunt. 314.
Adams. Batter Royale. 278.
African Town. Latham. 129.
AfterMath. Isler. 16.
Agyemang. Fibbed. 344.
Ahmed. Hollow Fires. 279.
Ahokoivu. Oksi. 84
Ain’t Burned All the Bright. Reynolds. 163.
Aitken. Old Friends. 345.
Al Galidi. Three Princes of Serendip. 85.
Albert. Our Crooked Hearts. 315.
Aldridge. Legend of Brightblade. 182.
Alexander, C. Think-Ups. 116.
Alexander, K. Vacancy. 85.
Alfageeh. Squire. 181.
Alice Austen Lived Here. Gino. 287.
All My Rage. Tahir. 231.
All That’s Left in the World. Brown. 184.
All the Best Liars. Kahaney. 219.
Allen. Boy Who Loved Maps. 345.
Alley & Rex. Ross. 30.
Almond. Brand New Boy. 279.
Alone Out Here. Redgate. 198.
Amann. Smile. 242.
Amos McGee Misses the Bus. Stead. 108.
Amos. Cookies & Milk. 280.
Anatomy. Schwartz. 137.
And J.J. Slept. Garbutt. 249.
Anderson, J. Riley’s Ghost. 116.
Anderson, L. Scout’s Honor. 243.
Annie’s Cat is Sad. Smith. 332.
Answers in the Pages. Levithan. 324.
Any Sign of Life. Carson. 50.
Appert. Blob. 5.
Applebaum. Lifeling. 183.
Applegate. Willodeen. 5.
Aquanaut. Santat. 201.
Arden Grey. Stoeve. 262.
Arena. Acorn Was a Little Wild. 183.
Armstrong. Scout Is Not a Band Kid. 280.
Arnold. Just Harriet. 117.
Aronson, K. Poo-Dunit? 315.
Aronson, M. Four Streets and a Square. 86.
Arrow to the Moon. Pan. 295.
Arroyo. Blackwater. 316.
Art Is Everywhere. Mack. 20.
At the End of Everything. Nijkamp. 132.
Audrey L & Audrey W. Higgins. 59.
Augusta Savage. Nelson. 161.
Aviva vs. the Dybbuk. Lowe. 158.
Awake. DeRoma. 53.
Aydin. Run. 63.
Baby-Changing Station. Miller. 361.
Bacon. Imaginary. 46.
Bad Girls Never Say Die. Mathieu. 65.
Bahrampour. Monsters in the Fog. 316.
Bajaj. Thirst. 346.
Baker’s Guide to Robber Pie. Sangster. 201.
Bakewell. We Are the Song. 212.
Balcárcel. Shine on. 213.
Ballad of Dinah Caldwell. Brauning. 88.
376 • The Bulletin
Baptist. Swag Is in the Socks. 86.
Barefoot Dreams of Petra Luna. Dobbs. 9.
Barker. Waking Romeo. 117.
Barnes. Queen of Kindergarten. 281.
Barnett. First Cat in Space Ate Pizza. 243.
_____Great Zapfino. 184.
_____John’s Turn. 213.
_____What Is Love? 46.
Barnhill. Ogress and the Orphans. 147.
Barthelmess. Everything Within and In 
Between. 87.
Barton. Zia Erases the World. 281.
Bascomb. Race of the Century. 214.
Baskin. Consider the Octopus. 244.
Bathe the Cat. McGinty. 67.
Batpig. Harrell. 59.
Batter Royale. Adams. 278.
Bearplane! Underwood. 304.
Beatryce Prophecy. DiCamillo. 9.
Beaty. Blood and Moonlight. 316.
Becker, E. Forrestborn. 6.
Becker, H. Himawari House. 45.
Before We Disappear. Hutchinson. 15.
Benway. Year to the Day. 346.
Best Bed for Me. Cornwall. 285.
Between the Lighthouse and You. Lee. 19.
Biedrzycki. Invasion of the Unicorns. 47.
Big Bath House. Maclear. 64.
Big Reveal. Larsen. 98.
Big Slide. Kirk. 356.
Big Truck, Little Island. Van Dusen. 264.
Biggs. My Hero. 244.
Bilan. Tamarind and the Star of Ishta. 282.
Bingham. Soul Food Sunday. 4.
Bird. Second Chance of Benjamin Water-
falls. 245.
Bishara. Vial of Tears. 47.
Bitter. Emezi. 187.
Black Girls Left Standing. Goodman. 321.
Black Slide. Ocker. 362.
Black Was the Ink. Coles. 53.
Blackall. Negative Cat. 48.
Blackwater. Arroyo. 316.
Blackwood. Within These Wicked Walls. 
48.
Blaine for the Win. Couch. 247.
Blanket Where Violet Sits. Wolf. 369.
Blob. Appert. 5.
Blood and Moonlight. Beaty. 316.
Bondestam. My Life at the Bottom. 282.
Bone Spindle. Vedder. 168.
Book of Living Secrets. Roux. 199.
Book of Rules. Gehrlein. 57.
Born Behind Bars. Venkatraman. 36.
Born Hungry. Prud’homme. 163.
Bovalino. Not Good for Maidens. 245.
Bowen. Skin of the Sea. 87.
Bowles. Witch Owl Parliament. 49.
Boy Who Loved Maps. Allen. 345.
Brains! McAnulty. 23.
Brand New Boy. Almond. 279.
Brandt. Monsters in the Mist. 214.
Brauning. Ballad of Dinah Caldwell. 88.
Brave Every Day. Ludwig. 325.
Bravely. Stiefvater. 262.
Breathe and Count Back from Ten.  
Sylvester. 304.
Breda’s Island Foley. 351.
Brew-Hammond. Blue. 145.
Brian the Dancing Lion. Tinn-Disbury. 
205.
Briar Girls. Wells. 75.
Briarheart. Lackey. 62.
Bright Ruined Things. Cohoe. 52.
Bright. Slug in Love. 118.
Bright Star. Morales. 24.
Brockenbrough. Into the Bloodred Woods. 
88.
Brockington. Puppy Bus. 347.
Bronzed Beasts. Chokshi. 49.
Brown, Echo. Chosen One. 147.
Brown, Erik J. All That’s Left in the World. 
184.
Brown, I. Girl in the Lake. 118.
Brown, M. Milk and Juice. 89.
Brown, R. Psalm of Storms and Silence. 89.
Browne. Vinyl Moon. 148.
Bryant, E. One True Loves. 119.
Bryant, M. Ready or Not! 185.
Burn Down. Rise Up. Tirado. 263.
Burton. Medusa. 119.
Caba. Churro the Magician. 120.
Cajoleas. Gussy. 120.
Callender. Moonflower. 347.
Callers. Thomas. 233.
Calvin. Ford. 115.
Campbell. Something Good. 7.
Capin. I Am Margaret Moore. 50.
July/August 2022 • 377
Capybara is Friends with Everyone. Frost. 
189.
Carnesi. There’s a Lion in the Forest! 148.
Carson. Any Sign of Life. 50.
Carter. Fifty-Four Things Wrong with 
Gwendolyn Rogers. 51.
Carzoo. Lou. 317.
Cashore. Graceling. 90.
Castaldo. When the World Runs Dry. 121.
Castellanos. Isla to Island. 185.
Castles in Their Bones. Sebastian. 165.
Castrovilla. Seeking Freedom. 121.
Cat Dog. Fox. 56.
Catch the Light. Sweeney. 73.
Cate. Dragon Used to Live Here. 283.
Cenko. Viking in Love. 90.
Cervantes. Flirting with Fate. 215.
Chandler Legacies. Nazemian. 197.
Charaipotra. Rumor Game. 216.
Chari. Karthik Delivers. 283.
Chase. Keeping It Real. 52.
Chee. Thousand Steps into Night. 215.
Cheer Up. Frasier. 11.
Chen, E. I Am Golden. 149.
Chen, G. Violet Made of Thorns. 348.
Cher Ami. Potter. 296.
Chokshi. Bronzed Beasts. 49.
_____Three Kisses. 348.
Chosen One. Brown. 147.
Chow. Ravenous Things. 349.
Churro the Magician. Caba. 120.
Ciccarelli. Edgewood. 122.
Circles in the Sky. Mountford. 343.
City Beautiful. Polydoros. 135.
Clackity. Senf. 331.
Clark. Lock-Eater. 122.
Clarke. When We Say Black Lives Matter. 
52.
Clayton. Marvellers. 284.
_____Rumor Game. 216.
Clementine. Walden. 305.
Clipstone. Lakesedge. 7.
Close-up on War. Farrell. 125.
Code Name. Smith. 203.
Code Name Badass. Demetrios. 8.
Cohen, E. Lost Ryū. 317.
Cohen, J. My Fine Fellow. 149.
Cohen, M. Shadow Grave. 284.
Cohoe. Bright Ruined Things. 52.
Cold the Night. Long. 130.
Cold. Tamaki. 138.
Coldest Touch. Sterling. 138.
Coles. Black Was the Ink. 53.
Collier. Just Right Jillian. 186.
Color of Dragons. Salvatore. 71.
Comb of Wishes. Stringfellow. 166.
Coming Up Short. Morrison. 328.
Compestine. Morning Sun in Wuhan. 246.
Conklin. Perfect Mistake. 349.
Consider the Octopus. Baskin. 244.
Cook. Felix Silver. 349.
Cookies & Milk. Amos. 280.
Cooper. Saving the Butterfly. 318.
Cornwall. Best Bed for Me. 285.
Corpse Queen. Herrman. 14.
Cottingham. My Dearest Darkest. 246.
Couch. Blaine for the Win. 247.
Counterclockwise Heart. Farrey. 125.
Coven. Dugan. 350.
Crazy Horse and Custer. Nelson. 25.
Crumbs. Stirling. 366.
Crute. Hornswoggled! 91.
Cuevas. Does My Body Offend You? 285.
Culley. Name She Gave Me. 318.
Curato. Where is Bina Bear? 150.
Currie. What Lives in the Woods. 8.
Dark and Starless Forest. Hollowell. 15.
Darkening. Mara. 360.
Daughter of the Deep. Riordan. 103.
Daughters of a Dead Empire. O’Neil. 162.
Davault. Star Knights. 350.
Davies. Snowflake. 91.
Day for Sandcastles. Lawson. 221.
Dead End Girls. Heard. 289.
Death & Sparkles. Justus. 16.
Defiant. Hudson. 60.
Defy the Night. Kemmerer. 17.
Delliquanti. Across a Field of Starlight. 
150.
Demetrios. Code Name Badass. 8.
DeRoma. Awake. 53.
Detective Mole. Pintonato. 101.
deVos. Go Hunt Me. 319.
Devouring Wolf. Parker. 362.
DiCamillo. Beatryce Prophecy. 9.
Dinosaur Named Ruth. Lyon. 63.
DiPucchio. Oona and the Shark. 123.
Dobbs. Barefoot Dreams of Petra Luna. 9.
378 • The Bulletin
Does My Body Offend You? Cuevas. 285.
Doig. Girl and the Glim. 334.
Doleski. Gabe in the After. 277.
Don’t Eat Bees. Petty. 227.
Don’t Worry. Stein. 302.
Donut. Gehl. 287.
Dow. Kindred. 151.
Doyle. Twin Crowns. 247.
Dragon Bones. Marsh. 99.
Dragon Used to Live Here. Cate. 283.
Dragonfly Eyes. Wenxuan. 368.
Dragoon. Heartless Prince. 92.
Dreams Lie Beneath. Ross. 104.
Dreamweavers. Schmidt. 31.
Drifters. Emerson. 286.
Drowned Woods. Lloyd-Jones. 324.
Drowning Summer. Herman. 251.
Duet for Home. Glaser. 288.
Dugan. Coven. 350.
Dunbar. Promise of Lost Things. 319.
Durfey-Lavoie. Just Roll with It. 54.
Durham. Shadow Prince. 10.
Dust & Grim. Wendig. 109.
Dutton. M is for Monster. 320.
Each of Us a Universe. Ferruolo. 152.
Eady. Nigel and the Moon. 151.
Eagar. Patron Thief of Bread. 248.
Eagle. Pear Affair. 216.
Earle. When the Sky Falls. 248.
Echoes and Empires. Rhodes. 136.
Echoes of Grace. McCall. 325.
Eddie Whatever. Ruby. 104.
Edge of In Between. Savaryn. 202.
Edgewood. Ciccarelli. 122.
Egan. Sneaks. 123.
Einsteins of Vista Point. Guterson. 250.
Ejaita. Olu & Greta. 92.
Ellen Outside the Lines. Sass. 230.
Elliott. Louisa June and the Nazis in the 
Waves. 186.
Emerson. Drifters. 286.
Emezi. Bitter. 187.
Engle. Rima’s Rebellion. 124.
_____Song of Frutas. 10.
Eriksen. With Great Power. 55.
Esbaum. Jack Knight’s Brave Flight. 187.
Everett. How to Live Without You. 286
Every Bird a Prince. Reese. 227.
Every Dog in the Neighborhood. Stead. 
301.
Everything Within and In Between.  
Barthelmess. 87.
Extasia. Legrand. 156.
Extra Ezra Makes an Extra-Special Friend. 
LaReau. 221.
Face for Picasso. Henley. 219.
Faceless. Lasky. 62.
Fadugba. Upper World. 124.
Fagan. Mirrorwood. 188.
Fahmy. Huda F Are You? 55.
Fajardo. Miss Quinces. 217.
Family of Liars. Lockhart. 292.
Far Wilder Magic. Saft. 200.
Farrell. Close-up on War. 125.
Farrey. Counterclockwise Heart. 125.
Faruqi, R. Golden Girl. 152.
Faruqi, S. Yusuf Azeem Is Not a Hero. 11.
Fay. Very True Legend of the Mongolian 
Death Worms. 92.
Felix Silver. Cook. 349.
Ferguson. Summer of Bitter and Sweet. 
320.
Ferneyhough. Nana, Nenek & Nina. 351.
Ferruolo. Each of Us a Universe. 152.
Ferry. No Nibbling! 153.
Ferryman. McFall. 66.
Fibbed. Agyemang. 344.
Fifty-Four Things Wrong with Gwendolyn 
Rogers. Carter. 51.
Finding Jupiter. Rowe. 330.
Fire Becomes Her. Thor. 167.
Fire on Headless Mountain. Lawrence. 358.
First Cat in Space Ate Pizza. Barnett. 243.
First Notes of Spring. Kulekjian. 193.
Firsts & Lasts. Schubert. 230.
Fisher. Velvet Fox. 93.
Fleming. Murder Among Friends. 217.
Flirting with Fate. Cervantes. 215.
Fluffy McWhiskers Cuteness Explosion. 
Martin. 64.
Fly. Thurman. 167.
Foley. Breda’s Island. 351.
Ford, B. Uncle John’s City Garden. 321.
Ford, JR. Calvin. 115.
Forest. Zyla and Kai. 313.
Forler. Rodney Was a Tortoise. 188.
Forman. Frankie & Bug. 56.
Forrestborn. Becker. 6.
Forsythe. Mina. 126.
Foulkes. Rules for Vampires. 126.
July/August 2022 • 379
Four Streets and a Square. Aronson. 86.
Fox. Cat Dog. 56.
Foxfield. Good Girls Die First. 93.
Fraistat. What We Harvest. 249.
Frances in the Country. Scanlon. 331.
Frankie & Bug. Forman. 56.
Frasier. Cheer Up. 11.
Freaks. Riley. 228.
Friends are Friends, Forever. Liu. 83.
From Dust. Podos. 162.
Frost. Capybara is Friends with Everyone. 
189.
Fung. Living with Viola. 57.
Gabe in the After. Doleski. 277.
Gallant. Schwab. 231.
Game of Strength and Storm. Menard. 
327.
Garber. Once Upon a Broken Heart. 12.
Garbutt. And J.J. Slept. 249.
Garrett. Kicks. 218.
Gauld. Little Wooden Robot and the Log 
Princess. 12.
Gehl. Donut. 287.
Gehrlein. Book of Rules. 57.
Genius under the Table. Yelchin. 76.
Getten. If You Read This. 352.
Ghosts of Rose Hill. Romero. 229.
Gibberish. Vo. 206.
Gideon Green in Black and White. Henry. 
290.
Gilded. Meyer. 68.
Gillman. Other Ever Afters. 352.
Gino. Alice Austen Lived Here. 287.
Girl and the Glim. Swift. 334.
Girl in the Lake. Brown. 118.
Girl Who Fell Beneath the Sea. Oh. 197.
Gizmos, Gadgets, and Guitars. Mahin. 22.
Gladden. When the Schools Shut Down. 
127.
Gladys the Magic Chicken. Rubin. 70.
Glaser. Duet for Home. 288.
Glock. Passport. 58.
Go Hunt Me. deVos. 319.
Goblin Market. Zahler. 370.
Goedjen. No Beauties or Monsters. 94.
Golden Girl. Faruqi. 152.
Golden Hour. Smith. 107.
Gone Dark. Panitch. 295.
Gong. Our Violent Ends. 58.
Good Girls Die First. Foxfield. 93.
Goodman. Black Girls Left Standing. 321.
Graceling. Cashore. 90.
Graham. Maxine. 94.
Granny’s Kitchen. Smith. 365.
Great Zapfino. Barnett. 184.
Greatest Thing. Searle. 138.
Greenfield. Woman All Spies Fear. 13.
Grimrose Girls. Pohl. 70.
Growing Pangs. Ormsbee. 226.
Gussy. Cajoleas. 120.
Guterson. Einsteins of Vista Point. 250.
Gwenn. Nightmare in Savannah. 95.
Haddix. School for Whatnots. 218.
Hahn. Pineapple Princess. 250.
Hamer. Kapaemahu. 336.
Hancox. Welcome to St. Hell. 288.
Hannah-Jones. 1619 Project. 95.
Hannigan. Nellie vs. Elizabeth. 153.
Harrell. Batpig. 59.
Hartl. Lost Girl. 13.
Hartman. Signs of Survival. 96.
Harvey. Ablaze with Color. 154.
Haslbauer. My Mother’s Delightful Deaths. 
96.
Haughton. Maybe . . . . 14.
Haydu. Lawless Spaces. 154.
Healer and Witch. Werlin. 234.
Heard. Dead End Girls. 289.
Heartbreak Symphony. Kemp. 253.
Heartless Prince. Dragoon. 92.
Heath. Reckless Kind. 127.
Hell Followed with Us. White. 306.
Hemingway. Pigeon & Cat. 322.
Henkes. Little Houses. 289.
Henley. Face for Picasso. 219.
Henning. It’s All in How You Fall. 290.
Henry. Gideon Green in Black and White. 
290.
Herman. Drowning Summer. 251.
Herrick. Tiltersmith. 189.
Herrman. Corpse Queen. 14.
Hideaway. Smy. 72.
Higginbotham. You Ruined It. 190.
Higgins. Audrey L & Audrey W. 59.
Hill. Tales of a Seventh-Grade Lizard Boy. 
353.
Himawari House. Becker. 45.
Hollow Fires. Ahmed. 279.
Hollowell. Dark and Starless Forest. 15.
Honeys. La Sala. 357.
380 • The Bulletin
Hope at Sea. Miyares. 69.
Hope Is an Arrow. McCarthy. 361.
Hopkinson. Story of a Story. 97.
Hornswoggled! Crute. 91.
Hotel Magnifique. Taylor. 232.
How Old Is Mr. Tortoise? Petty. 296.
How to Hug a Pufferfish. Peterson. 226.
How to Live Without You. Everett. 286.
How to Make a Mountain. Huntington. 
252.
How to Train Your Dad. Paulsen. 27.
Howard the Average Gecko. Meddour. 327.
Howden. Tunnel. 190.
Howl. Hutchinson. 191.
Huda F Are You? Fahmy. 55.
Hudson. Defiant. 60.
Huerta. Lost Dreamer. 251.
Hunsinger. My Parents Won’t Stop Talking! 
155.
Hunters of the Lost City. Wallace. 234.
Huntington. How to Make a Mountain. 
252.
Hurricanes of Weakerville. Rylander. 331.
Hussain. Today I’m Strong. 291.
Hutchings. Your Birthday Was the Best! 
191.
Hutchinson. Before We Disappear. 15.
____Howl. 191.
I Am Golden. Chen. 149.
I Am Margaret Moore. Capin. 50.
I Am Not Starfire. Tamaki. 34.
I Am the Ghost in Your House. Romasco-
Moore. 261.
I Eat Poop. Pett. 28.
I Must Betray You. Sepetys. 165.
I’m a Unicorn. Yoon. 370.
I’m Terrified of Bath Time. Rich. 260.
Ibañez. Together We Burn. 252.
Ice Cream Face. Sheffield. 332.
Ice House. Sherwood. 106.
If You Find a Leaf. Sicuro. 365.
If You Read This. Getten. 352.
If You Want to Knit Some Mittens. Salas. 
70.
Imaginary. Bacon. 46.
Impossible Destiny of Cutie Grackle. Stout. 
303.
In Our Garden. Miller. 196.
In the Key of Us. Lockington. 255.
Inside Cat. Wenzel. 75.
Insiders. Oshiro. 26.
Into the Bloodred Woods. Brockenbrough. 
88.
Invasion of the Unicorns. Biedrzycki. 47.
Ironhead. van Rijckeghem. 205.
Isabelle. Witchery. 353.
Isla to Island. Castellanos. 185.
Isler. AfterMath. 16.
It Will End Like This. Leigh. 129.
It’s the End of the World and I’m in My 
Bathing Suit. Reynolds. 228.
It’s All in How You Fall. Henning. 290.
Ivery. Problem with the Other Side. 61.
Jack Knight’s Brave Flight. Esbaum. 187.
Jackson. Survive the Dome. 192.
Jade Fire Gold. Tan. 108.
Jarrow. Murderer. 354.
Jasinska. Midnight Girls. 97.
Jennifer Chan Is Not Alone. Keller. 253.
Johannes. Theo TheSaurus and the Perfect 
Pet. 354.
John’s Turn. Barnett. 213.
Jones, A. Queen of Junk Island. 252.
Jones, D. Living Ghosts and Mischievous 
Monsters. 60.
Jones, K. Why We Fly. 61.
June. Out of the Blue. 322.
Junkwraith. Richey. 102.
Just a Girl. Levi. 222.
Just Harriet. Arnold. 117.
Just Right Jillian. Collier. 186.
Just Roll with It. Durfey-Lavoie. 54.
Just Your Local Bisexual Disaster.  
Mosqueda. 294.
Justus. Death & Sparkles. 16.
Kahaney. All the Best Liars. 219.
Kaleidoscope. Selznick. 32.
Kamins. Moth Girl. 192.
Kapaemahu. Wong-Kalu. 336.
Karthik Delivers. Chari. 283.
Kat Hats. Pinkwater. 135.
Katzenjammer. Zappia. 307.
Kaya Girl. Wolo. 335.
Kaylor. Long Story Short. 355.
Keane. Treasure Box. 128.
Keep Your Head Up. Neil. 25.
Keeper. McCall. 130.
Keeping It Real. Chase. 52.
July/August 2022 • 381
Keller. Jennifer Chan Is Not Alone. 253.
Kelly. Those Kids from Fawn Creek. 193.
Kemmerer. Defy the Night. 17.
Kemp. Heartbreak Symphony. 253.
Key. Twelfth. 291.
Khan, M. T. Nura and the Immortal 
Palace. 355.
Khan. Room for Everyone. 17.
Khor. Legend of Auntie Po. 18.
Khorram. Kiss & Tell. 241.
Kick Push. Morrison. 196.
Kicks. Garrett. 218.
Kilcoyne. Wake the Bones. 356.
Kim, J. Ready for the Spotlight! 98.
Kim, S. Star Fishing. 155.
Kind of Spark. McNicoll. 68.
Kindred. Dow. 151.
Kirk. Big Slide. 356.
Kiss & Tell. Khorram. 241.
Kleyn. Set Sail for Pancakes! 357.
Kolomycka. Tiny Fox and Great Boar. 156.
Kooser. Marshmallow Clouds. 220.
Korman. Operation Do-Over. 128.
Kulekjian. First Notes of Spring. 193.
Kulper. Murder for the Modern Girl. 292.
Kutub. Loophole. 323.
La Sala. Honeys. 357.
Lacey. Pet Potato. 323.
Lackey. Briarheart. 62.
Lady Icarus. Noyes. 225.
Laird. Surprise. 300.
Lake. Lily and the Night Creatures. 358
Lakelore. McLemore. 195.
LaPensée. Rabbit Chase. 220.
LaReau. Extra Ezra Makes an Extra-Special 
Friend. 221.
Lark and the Wild Hunt. Adam. 314.
Larsen. Big Reveal. 98.
Lasky. Faceless. 62.
Last Beautiful Girl. Laurin. 18.
Latham. African Town. 129.
Laure. Remember Me. 194.
Laurin. Last Beautiful Girl. 18.
Lawless Spaces. Haydu. 154.
Lawrence. Fire on Headless Mountain. 358.
Lawson. Day for Sandcastles. 221.
League of Liars. Scholte. 164.
Leave It to Plum! Phelan. 329.
Lebert. Sign of the Eight. 254.
Lee. Between the Lighthouse and You. 19.
Legend of Auntie Po. Khor. 18.
Legend of Brightblade. Aldridge. 182.
Legend of Gravity. Palmer. 133.
Legend of Iron Purl. Nyeu. 258.
Legrand. Extasia. 156.
Leigh. It Will End Like This. 129.
Len. Only a Monster. 157.
Lesbiana’s Guide to Catholic School. Reyes. 
297.
Let The Monster Out. Lucas. 293.
Let’s Make a Cake! Madan. 21.
Levi. Just a Girl. 222.
Levithan. Answers in the Pages. 324.
_____Take Me With You When You Go. 
19.
Lewis, B. Undead Truth of Us. 359.
Lewis, E. Color of Dragons. 71.
Lewis, L. Run. 63.
Lifeling. Applebaum. 183.
Lily and the Night Creatures. Lake. 358.
Lily Leads the Way. Preus. 259.
Lim. Mommy’s Hometown. 222.
Lin. Magic Steeped in Poison. 194.
Lippincott. She Gets the Girl. 254.
Little Badger. Snake Falls to Earth. 20.
Little Houses. Henkes. 289.
Little Thieves. Owen. 69.
Little Wooden Robot and the Log Princess. 
Gauld. 12.
Liu, D. Friends are Friends, Forever. 83.
Liu, M. Wingbearer. 195.
Living Ghosts and Mischievous Monsters. 
Jones. 60.
Living with Viola. Fung. 57.
Lloyd-Jones. Drowned Woods. 324.
_____Unseen Magic. 157.
Lock-Eater. Clark. 122.
Locke. This Rebel Heart. 223.
Lockhart. Family of Liars. 292.
Lockington. In the Key of Us. 255.
Lola Out Loud. Torres. 368.
Long Story Short. Kaylor. 355.
Long. Cold the Night. 130.
Longest Letsgoboy. Wilder. 38.
Lost Dreamer. Huerta. 251.
Lost Girl. Hartl. 13.
Lost Language. Mills. 24.
Lost Ryū. Cohen. 317.
382 • The Bulletin
Lou. Carzoo. 317.
Louisa June and the Nazis in the Waves. 
Elliott. 186.
Lowe. Aviva vs. the Dybbuk. 158.
Lucas. Let The Monster Out. 293.
Lucier. Year of the Reaper. 99.
Ludwig. Brave Every Day. 325.
Lukens. So This Is Ever After. 223.
Lyon. Dinosaur Named Ruth. 63.
M is for Monster. Dutton. 320.
Mack. Art Is Everywhere. 20.
MacLachlan. My Life Begins! 359.
Maclear. Big Bath House. 64.
Madan. Let’s Make Cake! 21.
_____We Love Bubbles! 21.
Mae Makes a Way. Rhuday-Perkovich. 298.
Mafi. This Woven Kingdom. 158.
Magic Steeped in Poison. Lin. 194.
Magoon. Revolution in Our Time. 22.
Mahin. Gizmos, Gadgets, and Guitars. 22.
Man o’ War. McCarthy. 326.
Mara. Darkening. 360.
Mardi Gras Almost Didn’t Come This Year. 
Price. 198.
Margot Mertz Takes It Down. McCrossen. 
66.
Marks. Soft Place to Land. 23.
Marquardt. Does My Body Offend You? 
285.
Marsh. Dragon Bones. 99.
Marshmallow Clouds. Kooser. 220.
Martin. Fluffy McWhiskers Cuteness 
Explosion. 64.
Marvellers. Clayton. 284.
Marwan. Where Butterflies Fill the Sky. 
211.
Matheson. Shelter. 65.
Mathieu. Bad Girls Never Say Die. 65.
Maxine. Graham. 94.
Maybe . . . . Haughton. 14.
Mayper. Night on the Sand. 360.
Mbalia. Tristan Strong Keeps Punching. 
100.
McAnulty. Brains! 23.
McCall. Echoes of Grace. 325.
_____Keeper. 130.
McCarthy, C. Hope Is an Arrow. 361.
_____Man o’ War. 326.
McCoola. Slip. 326.
McCrina. Silent Unseen. 224.
McCrossen. Margot Mertz Takes It Down. 
66.
McCully. Taking Off. 159.
McFall. Ferryman. 66.
McGinty. A. Bathe the Cat. 67.
McGinty. S. Rainbow in the Dark. 67.
McGrath. Pugs Cause Traffic Jams. 326.
McLemore. Lakelore. 195.
McNicoll. Kind of Spark. 68.
McWethy. Margot Mertz Takes It Down. 
66.
McWilliams. Mirror Girls. 159.
Meadows. Nightrender. 160.
Meddour. Howard the Average Gecko. 327.
_____Tisha and the Blossoms. 256.
Medema. Message Not Found. 224.
Medusa. Burton. 119.
Melleby. Science of Being Angry. 293.
Menard. Game of Strength and Storm. 
327.
Menon. Three Kisses. 349.
Message Not Found. Medema. 224.
Meyer. Gilded. 68.
Mi Casa Is My Home. Sala. 31.
Midnight Girls. Jasinska. 97.
Mighty Red Riding Hood. West. 306.
Milk and Juice. Brown. 89.
Miller, D. Strangeville School Is Totally 
Normal. 160.
Miller, P. In Our Garden. 196.
Miller, R. Baby-Changing Station. 361.
Millions of Maxes. Wolitzer. 169.
Mills. Lost Language. 24.
Milo and Marcos at the End of the World. 
Snipes. 301.
Mina. Forsythe. 126.
Miraculous. Rose. 364.
Mirror Girls. McWilliams. 159.
Mirrorwood. Fagan. 188.
Miss Quinces. Fajardo. 217.
Mitchell. Out There. 328.
Miyares. Hope at Sea. 69.
Mommy’s Hometown. Lim. 222.
Monsters in the Fog. Bahrampour. 316.
Monsters in the Mist. Brandt. 214.
Moonflower. Callender. 347.
Moonlight. Savage. 364.
Moore. Teeny Houdini. 131.
July/August 2022 • 383
Morales. Bright Star. 24.
Moreno. Youngest Sister. 294.
Morning Sun in Wuhan. Compestine. 246.
Morris. Out on a Limb. 161.
Morrison, F. Kick Push. 196.
Morrison, L. Coming Up Short. 328.
Mosqueda. Just Your Local Bisexual Disas-
ter. 294.
Moss. Woman Who Split the Atom. 256.
Most Dazzling Girl in Berlin. Wilson. 265.
Moth Girl. Kamins. 192.
Mountford. Circles in the Sky. 343.
Murder Among Friends. Fleming. 217.
Murder for the Modern Girl. Kulper. 292.
Murderer. Jarrow. 354.
Murray. Orphans of the Tide. 131.
Mwilelo. Each of Us a Universe. 152.
My Dearest Darkest. Cottingham. 246.
My Fine Fellow. Cohen. 149.
My Hero. Biggs. 244.
My Life at the Bottom. Bondestam. 282.
My Life Begins! MacLachlan. 359.
My Mother’s Delightful Deaths. Haslbauer. 
96.
My Parents Won’t Stop Talking! Hunsinger. 
155.
My Pet Goldfish. Rayner. 101.
Name She Gave Me. Culley. 318.
Nana, Nenek & Nina. Ferneyhough. 351.
Nannestad. We Are Wolves. 257.
Nano. Wade. 37.
Nazemian. Chandler Legacies. 197
Negative Cat. Blackall. 48.
Neil. Keep Your Head Up. 25.
Nellie vs. Elizabeth. Hannigan. 153.
Nelson, M. Augusta Savage. 161.
Nelson, S. Crazy Horse and Custer. 25.
New from Here. Yang. 236.
Nigel and the Moon. Eady. 151.
Night on the Sand. Mayper. 360.
Nightmare in Savannah. Gwenn. 95.
Nightrender. Meadows. 160.
Nijkamp. At the End of Everything. 132.
Nina. Todd. 35.
Niven. Take Me With You When You Go. 
19.
Nix. Terciel and Elinor. 100.
No Beauties or Monsters. Goedjen. 94.
Northwind. Paulsen. 134.
Not Good for Maidens. Bovalino. 245.
Noyes. Lady Icarus. 225.
Nura and the Immortal Palace. Khan. 355.
Nye. Turtle of Michigan. 258.
Nyeu. Legend of Iron Purl. 258.
O’Neil. Daughters of a Dead Empire. 162.
Ocker. Black Slide. 362.
Off-Limits. Yoon. 38.
Ogress and the Orphans. Barnhill. 147.
Oh. Girl Who Fell Beneath the Sea. 197.
Oksi. Ahokoivu. 84.
Old Friends. Aitken. 345.
Olu & Greta. Ejaita. 92.
Once Upon a Broken Heart. Garber. 12.
One Smart Sheep. Schmidt. 106.
One True Loves. Bryant. 119.
Only a Monster. Len. 157.
Onomé. Twice as Perfect. 329.
Oona and the Shark. DiPucchio. 123.
Operation Do-Over. Korman. 128.
Ormsbee. Growing Pangs. 226.
Orphans of the Tide. Murray. 131.
Ortega. Witchlings. 258.
Oshiro. Insiders. 26.
Osmo Unknown and the Eightpenny 
Woods. Valente. 264.
Otheguy. Sofía Acosta Makes a Scene. 132.
Other Ever Afters. Gillman. 352.
Other Merlin. Schneider. 32.
Our Crooked Hearts. Albert. 315.
Our Violent Ends. Gong. 58.
Out of the Blue. June. 322.
Out of the Shadows. Robinson. 136.
Out on a Limb. Morris. 161.
Out There. Mitchell. 328.
Outlaws Scarlett and Browne. Stroud. 33.
Overground Railroad. Taylor. 166.
Owen. Little Thieves. 69.
Palacio. Pony. 26.
Palmer. Legend of Gravity. 133.
Pan. Arrow to the Moon. 295.
Panin. Stalking Shadows. 27.
Panitch. Gone Dark. 295.
_____Two Wrong Halves of Ruby Taylor. 
133.
Paradise on Fire. Rhodes. 29.
Parker. Devouring Wolf. 362.
Passport. Glock. 58.
Patrick. Spectacular Suit. 134.
384 • The Bulletin
Patron Thief of Bread. Eagar. 248.
Paulsen. How to Train Your Dad. 27.
_____Northwind. 134.
Peanut Gets Fed Up. Wulfekotte. 265.
Pear Affair. Eagle. 216.
Pérez. Tumble. 363.
Perfect Mistake. Conklin. 349.
Pet Potato. Lacey. 323.
Peterson, E. How to Hug a Pufferfish. 226.
Peterson, J. Being Mary Bennet. 197.
Pett. I Eat Poop. 28.
Petty. Don’t Eat Bees. 227.
_____How Old Is Mr. Tortoise? 296.
Phelan. Leave It to Plum! 329.
_____Sheep, the Rooster, and the Duck. 
227.
_____Sweater Weather. 28.
Pig and Horse and the Something Scary. 
Abbott. 146.
Pigeon & Cat. Hemingway. 322.
Pineapple Princess. Hahn. 250.
Pinkwater. Kat Hats. 135.
Pintonato. Detective Mole. 101.
Pizza! Pizzoli. 363.
Pizzoli, G. Pizza! 363.
Pizzoli, T. When the Schools Shut Down. 
127.
Places We’ve Never Been. West. 334.
Poblocki. Tales to Keep You Up at Night. 
364.
Podos. From Dust. 162.
Pohl. Grimrose Girls. 70.
Polisner. Consider the Octopus. 244.
Polydoros. City Beautiful. 135.
Pony. Palacio. 26.
Poo-Dunit? Aronson. 315.
Potter. Cher Ami. 296.
Practical Demonology. Rees. 297
Preus. Lily Leads the Way. 259.
Price. Mardi Gras Almost Didn’t Come 
This Year. 198.
Primal Animals. Rubin. 299.
Problem with the Other Side. Ivery. 61.
Promise of Lost Things. Dunbar. 319.
Prud’homme. Born Hungry. 163.
Psalm of Storms and Silence. Brown. 89.
Pug Who Wanted to Be a Unicorn. Swift. 
34.
Pugs Cause Traffic Jams. McGrath. 326.
Punky Aloha. Tuiasoa. 233.
Puppy Bus. Brockington. 347.
Queen of Junk Island. Jones. 252.
Queen of Kindergarten. Barnes. 281.
Queer Ducks. Schrefer. 300.
Rabbit Chase. LaPensée. 220.
Race of the Century. Bascomb. 214.
Rainbow in the Dark. McGinty. 67.
Ravenous Things. Chow. 349.
Rayner. My Pet Goldfish. 101.
Ready for the Spotlight! Kim. 98.
Ready or Not! Bryant. 185.
Reckless Kind. Heath. 127.
Red Scare. Walsh. 264.
Redgate. Alone Out Here. 198.
Redlocks and the Three Bears. Rueda. 104.
Redwine. Rise of the Vicious Princess. 330.
Rees. Practical Demonology. 297
Reese. Every Bird a Prince. 227.
Reidy. Sylvie. 259.
Remember Me Gone. Stokes. 204.
Remember Me. Laure. 194.
Revolution in Our Time. Magoon. 22.
Reyes. Lesbiana’s Guide to Catholic School. 
297.
Reynolds, Jason. Ain’t Burned All the 
Bright. 163.
_____Stuntboy. 102.
Reynolds, Justin. It’s the End of the World 
and I’m in My Bathing Suit. 228.
Rhodes, J. Paradise on Fire. 29.
Rhodes, M. Echoes and Empires. 136.
Rhuday-Perkovich. Mae Makes a Way. 298.
Rich. I’m Terrified of Bath Time. 260.
Richey. Junkwraith. 102.
Riley. Freaks. 228.
Riley’s Ghost. Anderson. 116.
Rima’s Rebellion. Engle. 124.
Riordan. Daughter of the Deep. 103.
Rise of the Vicious Princess. Redwine. 330.
Rivera. We Light Up the Sky. 29.
Roberts. Rose Named Peace. 260.
Robinson, F. Out of the Shadows. 136.
Robinson, L. Sweetest Scoop. 298.
Robson. Sea Knows My Name. 299.
Rodney Was a Tortoise. Forler. 188.
Roeder. Stack. 199.
Romasco-Moore. I Am the Ghost in Your 
House. 261.
July/August 2022 • 385
Romero. Ghosts of Rose Hill. 229.
Room for Everyone. Khan. 17.
Rose Named Peace. Roberts. 260.
Rose. Miraculous. 364.
Rosenberg. Scribbles, Sorrows, and Russet 
Leather Boots. 103.
Ross, J. Alley & Rex. 30.
Ross, R. Dreams Lie Beneath. 104.
Roux. Book of Living Secrets. 199.
Rowe. Finding Jupiter. 330.
Roxy. Shusterman. 71.
Rubin, A. Gladys the Magic Chicken. 70.
Rubin, J. Primal Animals. 299.
Ruby and the Itsy-Bitsy Icky Bug. Wortche. 
337.
Ruby. Eddie Whatever. 104.
Rueda. Redlocks and the Three Bears. 104.
Rules for Vampires. Foulkes. 126.
Rumor Game. Clayton. 216.
Run. Lewis. 63.
Rush of Wings. Weymouth. 76.
Russo, B. Sloth Sleeps Over. 229.
Russo, M. Why Is Everybody Yelling? 30.
Ryan. Solimar. 164.
Rylander. Hurricanes of Weakerville. 331.
Safi. Travelers Along the Way. 200.
Saft. Far Wilder Magic. 200.
Sala. Mi Casa Is My Home. 31.
Salas. If You Want to Knit Some Mittens. 
70.
Salvatore. Color of Dragons. 71.
Sanchez. With Lots of Love. 137.
Sangster. Baker’s Guide to Robber Pie. 201.
Santat. Aquanaut. 201.
Sass. Ellen Outside the Lines. 230.
Savage. Moonlight. 364.
Savaryn. Edge of In Between. Viking. 202.
Saving the Butterfly. Cooper. 318.
Scanlon. Frances in the Country. 331.
Schachner. Stretchy and Beanie. 105.
Schmidt, G.Z. Dreamweavers. 31.
Schmidt, Gary. One Smart Sheep. 106.
Schneider. Other Merlin. 32.
Scholte. League of Liars. 164.
School for Whatnots. Haddix. 218.
Schrefer. Queer Ducks. 300.
Schubert. Firsts & Lasts. 230.
Schwab. Gallant. 231.
Schwartz. Anatomy. 137.
Science of Being Angry. Melleby. 293.
Scout Is Not a Band Kid. Armstrong. 280.
Scout’s Honor. Anderson. 243.
Scribbles, Sorrows, and Russet Leather 
Boots. Rosenberg. 103.
Sea Knows My Name. Robson. 299.
Searle. Greatest Thing. 138.
Sebastian. Castles in Their Bones. 165.
Second Chance of Benjamin Waterfalls. 
Bird. 245.
Second Sleep. Stanley. 107.
Secret Princess. Stohl. 366.
Seeking Freedom. Castrovilla. 121.
Segal. Why We Flay. 61.
Selznick. Kaleidoscope. 32.
Senf. Clackity. 331.
Sepetys. I Must Betray You. 165.
Set Sail for Pancakes! Kleyn. 357.
Shadow Grave. Cohen. 284.
Shadow Prince. Durham. 10.
Shammas. Squire. 181.
She Gets the Girl. Lippincott. 254.
Sheep, the Rooster, and the Duck. Phelan. 
227.
Sheffield. Ice Cream Face. 332.
Sheinkin. Fallout. 33.
Shelter. Matheson. 65.
Sherwood. Ice House. 106.
Shine on. Balcárcel. 213.
Shusterman. Roxy. 71.
Sicuro. If You Find a Leaf. 365.
Sign of the Eight. Lebert. 254.
Signs of Survival. Hartman. 96.
Silent Unseen. McCrina. 224.
Sir Ladybug. Tabor. 204.
Skandar and the Unicorn Thief. Steadman. 
302.
Skin of the Sea. Bowen. 87.
Skinner. Storm. 202.
Skye. Three Kisses. 349.
Slip. McCoola. 326.
Sloth Sleeps Over. Russo. 229.
Slug in Love. Bright. 118.
Small Town Pride. Stamper. 333.
Smile. Amann. 242.
Smith, A. Code Name. 203.
Smith, C. Song for Jimi. 72.
Smith, H. Annie’s Cat is Sad. 332.
Smith, N. Golden Hour. 107.
386 • The Bulletin
Smith, S. Granny’s Kitchen. 365.
Smith, Z. Surprise. 300.
Smy. Hideaway. 72.
Snake Falls to Earth. Little Badger. 20.
Sneaks. Egan. 123.
Snipes. Milo and Marcos at the End of the 
World. 301.
Snowflake. Davies. 91.
Snowy Owl Scientist. Wilson. 235.
So This Is Ever After. Lukens. 223.
Sofía Acosta Makes a Scene. Otheguy. 132.
Soft Place to Land. Marks. 23.
Solimar. Ryan. 164.
Some Questions About Trees. Yuly. 236.
Something Good. Campbell. 7.
Sometimes Cake. Wyatt. 139.
Song for Jimi. Smith. 72.
Song of Frutas. Engle. 10.
Soul Food Sunday. Bingham. 4.
Spectacular Suit. Patrick. 134.
Squad. Tokuda-Hall. 35.
Squire. Shammas. 181.
Stack. Roeder. 199.
Stalking Shadows. Panin. 27.
Stamper. Small Town Pride. 333.
Standish. Yonder. 261.
Stanley. Second Sleep. 107.
Star Child. Zoboi. 170.
Star Fishing. Kim. 155.
Star Knights. Davault. 350.
Starling. Strychacz. 73.
Stead. Amos McGee Misses the Bus. 108.
_____Every Dog in the Neighborhood. 
301.
Steadman. Skandar and the Unicorn Thief. 
302.
Stein. Don’t Worry. 302.
Sterling. Coldest Touch. 138.
Stevens. We Were Kings. 203.
Stickney. One Smart Sheep. 106.
Stiefvater. Bravely. 262.
Stirling. Crumbs. 366.
Stoeve. Arden Grey. 262.
Stohl. Secret Princess. 366.
Stokes. Remember Me Gone. 204.
Storm. Skinner. 202.
Story of a Story. Hopkinson. 97.
Storyteller. Williams. 168.
Stout. Impossible Destiny of Cutie Grackle. 
303.
Strangeville School Is Totally Normal. 
Miller. 160.
Stretchy and Beanie. Schachner. 105.
Stringfellow. Comb of Wishes. 166.
Stroud. Outlaws Scarlett and Browne. 33.
Strychacz. Starling. 73.
Stuck. Swender. 74.
Stuntboy. Reynolds. 102.
Summer of Bitter and Sweet. Ferguson. 
320.
Summer of June. Sumner. 333.
Sumner. Summer of June. 333.
Sunday Pancakes. Tatsukawa. 263.
Surprise. Smith. 300.
Survive the Dome. Jackson. 192.
Sutanto. Theo Tan and the Fox Spirit. 303.
Swag Is in the Socks. Baptist. 86.
Swan Lake. Terciero. 232.
Sweater Weather. Phelan. 28.
Sweeney. Catch the Light. 73.
Sweetest Scoop. Robinson. 298.
Swender. Stuck. 74.
Swift, B. Pug Who Wanted to Be a  
Unicorn. 34.
Swift, I. Girl and the Glim. 334.
Sylvester. Breathe and Count Back from 
Ten. 304.
Sylvie. Reidy. 259.
Szabo. We All Fall Down. 304.
Tabor. Sir Ladybug. 204.
Tahir. All My Rage. 231.
Take Me With You When You Go.  
Levithan. 19.
Taking Off. McCully. 159.
Tales of a Seventh-Grade Lizard Boy. Hill. 
353.
Tales to Keep You Up at Night. Poblocki. 
364.
Tamaki. Cold. 138.
_____I Am Not Starfire. 34.
Tamarind and the Star of Ishta. Bilan. 282.
Tan. Jade Fire Gold. 108.
Tatsukawa. Sunday Pancakes. 263.
Taylor, C. Overground Railroad. 166.
Taylor, E. Hotel Magnifique. 232.
Teeny Houdini. Moore. 131.
Temperature of Me and You. Zepka. 140.
Terciel and Elinor. Nix. 100.
Terciero. Swan Lake. 232.
Thao. You’ve Reached Sam. 108.
July/August 2022 • 387
Theo Tan and the Fox Spirit. Sutanto. 303.
Theo TheSaurus and the Perfect Pet. 
Johannes. 354.
There’s a Lion in the Forest! Carnesi. 148.
Thiede. This Vicious Grace. 367.
Think-Ups. Alexander. 116.
Thirst. Bajaj. 346.
This Place Is Still Beautiful. Tian. 367.
This Rebel Heart. Locke. 223.
This Vicious Grace. Thiede. 367.
This Woven Kingdom. Mafi. 158.
Thomas. Callers. 233.
Thor. Fire Becomes Her. 167.
Those Kids from Fawn Creek. Kelly. 193.
Thousand Steps into Night. Chee. 215.
Three Kisses. Chokshi. 348.
Three Princes of Serendip. Al Galidi. 85.
Thurman. Fly. 167.
Tian. This Place Is Still Beautiful. 367.
Tidesong. Xu. 109.
Tiltersmith. Herrick. 189.
Tinn-Disbury. Brian the Dancing Lion. 
205.
Tiny Fox and Great Boar. Kolomycka. 156.
Tirado. Burn Down. Rise Up. 263.
Tisha and the Blossoms. Meddour. 256.
Today I’m Strong. Hussain. 291.
Todd. Nina. 35.
Together We Burn. Ibañez. 252.
Tokuda-Hall. Squad. 35.
Torres. Lola Out Loud. 368.
Travelers Along the Way. Safi. 200.
Treasure Box. Keane. 128.
Tristan Strong Keeps Punching. Mbalia. 
100.
Tuiasoa. Punky Aloha. 233.
Tumble. Pérez. 363.
Tunnel. Howden. 190.
Turtle of Michigan. Nye. 258.
Twelfth. Key. 291.
Twice as Perfect. Onomé. 329.
Twin Crowns. Doyle. 247.
Two Wrong Halves of Ruby Taylor. Pa-
nitch. 133.
Uncle John’s City Garden. Ford. 321.
Undead Truth of Us. Lewis. 359.
Underwood. Bearplane! 304.
Unseen Magic. Lloyd-Jones. 157.
Upper World. Fadugba. 124.
Vacancy. Alexander. 85.
Valente. Osmo Unknown and the  
Eightpenny Woods. 264.
Van Dusen. Big Truck, Little Island. 264.
van Rijckeghem. Ironhead. 205.
Vedder. Bone Spindle. 168.
Velvet Fox. Fisher. 93.
Venkatraman. Born Behind Bars. 36.
Very True Legend of the Mongolian Death 
Worms. Fay. 92.
Vial of Tears. Bishara. 47.
Viking in Love. Cenko. 90.
Vinyl Moon. Browne. 148.
Violent Season. Walters. 74.
Violet Made of Thorns. Chen. 348.
Vitalis. Wolf’s Curse. 36.
Vo. Gibberish. 206.
Wade. Nano. 37.
Wake the Bones. Kilcoyne. 356.
Waking Romeo. Barker. 117.
Walden. Clementine. 305.
Wallace. Hunters of the Lost City. 234.
Walsh. Red Scare. 264.
Walters. Violent Season. 74.
Wanek. Marshmallow Clouds. 220.
Waters. Africa Town. 129.
Watson. 1619 Project. 95.
We All Fall Down. Szabo. 304.
We Are the Song. Bakewell. 212.
We Are Wolves. Nannestad. 257.
We Love Bubbles! Madan. 21.
We Light Up the Sky. Rivera. 29.
We Were Kings. Stevens. 203.
Weber, A. Wind & the Clover. 334.
Weber, K. Twin Crowns. 247.
Welcome Chair. Wells. 37.
Welcome to St. Hell. Hancox. 288.
Well. Wyatt. 235.
Wells, Rebecca. Briar Girls. 75.
Wells, Rosemary. Welcome Chair. 37.
Wendig. Dust & Grim. 109.
Wenxuan. Dragonfly Eyes. 368.
Wenzel. Inside Cat. 75.
Werlin. Healer and Witch. 234.
West, K. Places We’ve Never Been. 334.
West, W. Mighty Red Riding Hood. 306.
Weymouth. Rush of Wings. 76.
What Is Love? Barnett. 46.
What Lives in the Woods. Currie. 8.
388 • The Bulletin
What We Harvest. Fraistat. 249.
When the Schools Shut Down. Gladden. 
127.
When the Sky Falls. Earle. 248.
When the World Runs Dry. Castaldo. 121.
When We Say Black Lives Matter. Clarke. 
52.
When Winter Robeson Came. Woods. 139.
Where Butterflies Fill the Sky. Marwan. 
211.
Where is Bina Bear? Curato. 150.
White, A. Hell Followed with Us. 306.
White, K. Wretched Waterpark. 335.
Why Is Everybody Yelling? Russo. 30.
Why We Fly. Jones, K. 61.
Wilder. Longest Letsgoboy. 38.
Williams. Storyteller. 168.
Willodeen. Applegate. 5.
Wills and the Won’ts. Woolfe. 369.
Wilson, J. Kapaemahu. 336.
Wilson, K. Most Dazzling Girl in Berlin. 
265.
Wilson, M. Snowy Owl Scientist. 235.
Wind & the Clover. Weber. 334.
Wingbearer. Liu. 195.
Winnie Zeng Unleashes a Legend. Zhao. 
266.
Witch Owl Parliament. Bowles. 49.
Witchery. Isabelle. 353.
Witchlings. Ortega. 258.
With Great Power. Eriksen. 55.
With Lots of Love. Sanchez. 137.
Within These Wicked Walls. Blackwood. 
48.
Wolf. Blanket Where Violet Sits. 369.
Wolf’s Curse. Vitalis. 36.
Wolitzer. Millions of Maxes. 169.
Wolo. Kaya Girl. 335.
Woman All Spies Fear. Greenfield. 13.
Woman Who Split the Atom. Moss. 256.
Wong-Kalu. Kapaemahu. 336.
Woods. When Winter Robeson Came. 139.
Woodson. World Belonged to Us. 306.
_____Year We Learned to Fly. 169.
Woolfe. Wills and the Won’ts. 369.
World Belonged to Us. Woodson. 306.
Worser. Ziegler. 206.
Wortche. Ruby and the Itsy-Bitsy Icky Bug. 
337.
Wretched Waterpark. White. 335.
Wulfekotte. Peanut Gets Fed Up. 265.
Wyatt, E. Sometimes Cake. 139.
Wyatt, J. Well. 235.
Xu. Tidesong. 109.
Yage. Playing with Lanterns. 110.
Yang. New from Here. 236.
Year of the Reaper. Lucier. 9.
Year to the Day. Benway. 346.
Year We Learned to Fly. Woodson. 169.
Yelchin. Genius under the Table. 76.
Yonder. Standish. 261.
Yoon. I’m a Unicorn. 370.
_____Off-Limits. 38.
You Ruined It. Higginbotham. 190.
You’ve Reached Sam. Thao. 108.
Youngest Sister. Moreno. 294.
Your Birthday Was the Best! Hutchings. 
191.
Yuly. Some Questions About Trees. 236.
Yusuf Azeem Is Not a Hero. Faruqi. 11.
Zahler. Goblin Market. 370.
Zappia. Katzenjammer. 307.
Zepka. Temperature of Me and You. 140.
Zhao. Winnie Zeng Unleashes a Legend. 
266.
Zia Erases the World. Barton. 281.
Ziegler. Worser. 206.
Zoboi. Star Child. 170.
Zyla and Kai. Forest. 313.
