I L LINO
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
Graduate School of Library and Information Scienc
University of Illinois Press
4 
*
' 
4*''
S"An
interesting,
richly blended
IVIAZAI f iNtI) I
By Virginia Kroll
Illustrated in full color by Nancy Carpenter
"A young African-American girl living in urban America feels a
kinship with the East African people, the Masai, whom she is
studying in school. Linda ponders her life and makes compar-
isons to theirs, pointing out similarities and differences...Each
full double-page spread becomes a pleasure in itself One world
flows naturally and artfully into the next...One can easily see that
whie the Masai live differently than Americans do, children are
children no matter where they grow up."-* Scool Libry Journal
"The sensitively observed art adroitly merging the two worlds
in each scene, captures both with robust enthusiasm."
-Kirkus Reviews
r"Beguiling...rings proud and positive."
-Starred, 
Publihers Weekly
An American Bookseller Pick of the Lists
$13.95 RSBE/0-02-751165-0/Ages 4-7
RSBE indicate a sde-sewn reinforced hadcover edition.
* FOUR WINDS PRESS
An imprint of the Macmillan C 
's 
Book Group * 866 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10022
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
December 1992
Vol. 46 No. 4
A LOOK INSIDE
103 THE BIG PICTURE
The Beasts ofBethlehem by X. J. Kennedy,
illustrated by Michael McCurdy
104 NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
106 
* What Hearts by Bruce Brooks
116 
* Peace on Earth by Bijou Le Tord
117 * The Dark-Thirty by Patricia McKissack; illus. by Brian Pinkney
126 
* Voyage to the Bunny Planet by Rosemary Wells
129 
* The Pigman and Me by Paul Zindel
130 PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
132 SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
_ __
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Centerfor Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 54 East Gregory Drive,
Champaign, IL 61820.
STAFF
Betsy Hearne, Editor and Associate Professor, GSLIS (BH)
Roger Sutton, Executive Editor (RS)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Kathryn Jennings, Reviewer (KJ)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS ADVISORY BOARD
Leigh Estabrook, Dean, GSLIS, U. of II. at Urbana-Champaign
Selma K. Richardson, Professor, GSLIS
Richard C. Anderson, Director, Center for the Study of Reading
P. David Pearson, Dean, College of Education
Violet J. Harris, Assistant Professor, College of Education
Peggy Miller, Associate Professor, Dept. of Speech Communication
Ann D. Carlson, Assistant Professor, GSLIS, Rosary College
Carol Fox, Youth Services Consultant, Illinois State Library
Janice Harrington, Head of Children's Services, Champaign Public Library
Elizabeth Huntoon, Director Systemwide Children's Services, Chicago Public Library
Janie Schomberg, Librarian, Leal Elementary School, Urbana
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $35.00; individuals, $29.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $3.00. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 54 E. Gregory Drive, Champaign, IL 61820.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 54 E. Gregory Drive, Champaign, IL 61820.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Betsy Hearne, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 1512 N. Fremont St., #105,
Chicago, IL 60622
Second-class postage paid at Champaign, Illinois, and additional mailing offices
© 1992 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
This publication is printed on acid-free paper
Cover illustration by Michael McCurdy, from The Beasts of Bethlehem, © 1992 by Michael
McCurdy and used by permission of Margaret K. McElderry Books.
DECEMBER 1992 
* 
103
THE BIG PICTURE
The Beasts of Bethlehem
by X. J. Kennedy, illustrated by Michael McCurdy
In The Beasts ofBethlehem, X. J. Kennedy has crowned his rich career with nine-
teen new poems portraying animals gathered around the baby Jesus in a stable.
Unlike the nonsense verse with which Kennedy has played so often and easily-in
Brats, for example (BCCB 7/86)-these are intensely lyrical, however brief (they
range from two lines to several verses), and they display an engaging tonal variety.
Some, like "Cow," are solitary meditations of wonder: "He came to conquer death/
And yet His hands are small./ To warm Him in his stall,/ I breathe my clover
breath." 
Others are paired into a kind of dialogue, as in the sequenced "Bat"
("And so, obedient, I rouse/ To hunt mosquitoes in the mows") and "Mosquito"
("Who but a blind bat swaddled in his wings/ Could dream that I might bite the
King of Kings?"). Even rodents get their due with the plea, "Let man and mouse
be reconciled."
Devout without becoming sentimental, dignified without getting stuffy,
grave without turning pretentious, these have the traditional musicality of carols.
They also have that mysterious quality that charges a work with appeal to a broad
age range, including children who may not find Carmen Bernos de Gasztold's
beautiful Prayersfrom theArk, reviewed in this issue, quite so accessible. Kennedy
is not afraid to be sacred in a secular world; yet there's a pagan edge to his animal
voices. They defy, they fight, they survive. They sound like people we all know:
"A human babe is born divine?/ Well, what concern is that of mine?" says the
worm.
Echoing Kennedy's sonorous poetry is McCurdy's rhythmically lined,
full-color art, a verso portrait of each animal per recto poem. Dominated by dark
colors, the pictures are lit by sudden contrasts of white, gold, or red. Like the
words, these scratchboard and colored pencil illustrations dignify the animals with-
out betraying their instincts; the hawk, wings outspread, pauses midflight "in this
place of peace" but warns, "Tomorrow, old plump hen, watch your chicks." Mov-
ing picturesquely from a sheep with "wool in clumps like moss" to the worm that
chews "through the deep midnight of the ground," Kennedy and McCurdy have
created a Christmas celebration that will perhaps transport children, for a few
moments, from frantic anticipation to a quieter realm.
Betsy Hearne, Editor
104 
* THE BULLETIN
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
AASENG, NATHAN 
Navajo Code Talkers. Walker, 1992 
114p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8183-7 
$15.85
Trade ed ISBN 0-8027-8182-9 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 5-9
With a real-guy focus that's a refreshing respite from the ecological wonder-tales
that constitute many children's books about Native Americans, the versatile Aaseng
here recounts the brave exploits of the "code talkers," Navajo Marines who, through
their unique and complicated language, developed and employed an unbreakable
code for WWII's Pacific Theater. The book includes details of the code-making
and -sending with the soldier-stories of the Navajos, and the discrimination they
faced from other Marines, who, uninformed of the secret code network, could be
deeply suspicious of the Asian-looking Navajos among them speaking an incom-
prehensible tongue into the radio. The military history is exciting and easy to
follow; the discussion of the Navajo codes (as well as codes used by the Japanese) is
cogent and intriguing: The bombs delivered from these airplanes resembled the
eggs delivered from birds, so the code word for bombs was a-ye-shi, which meant
eggs. A good choice for an offbeat "war book," this would also make an unusual
complement for both history and language arts classes. Historical photos of the
code-talkers in action are included. RS
AMENTA, CHARLES A. III 
Russell Is Extra Special: A Book About Autism for
Children. Magination Press, 1992 
32 p 
illus. with photographs
Trade ed. ISBN 0-945354-43-6 $6.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-945354-44-4 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 2-4
In simple, direct writing and family-style photographs that are respectful of both
his subject and his readers, Dr. Amenta relates the daily routine of his autistic
nine-year-old son, Russell. He is honest about the problems Russell can cause:
"He smears ointment on the wall. He eats the toothpaste. He breaks Gregory's
and Benjamin's toys." Gregory and Benjamin are Russell's younger brothers, and
while Russell can be difficult to live with (there's a haunting photo of the younger
boys sitting with friends in the living room while Russell stands off by himself in
the hall) he can also be affectionate (there's an adorable photo of the three boys in
the bathtub together). The author/father explains how little is known about au-
tism, bringing a sobering personal perspective to the medical research: "Some-
times Russell covers his eyes, pulls at his eyelids, or looks away. Maybe the lights
DECEMBER 1992 
* 
105
seem too bright to him. Maybe he does not want to see the people around him."
Unlike many books about the disabled that emphasis how much like "us" they are,
this one is forthright about how different Russell is, different, but nonetheless
deserving of protection and love. RS
ANDERSON, WILLIAM 
Laura Ingalls Wilder: A Biography. HarperCollins,
1992 
24 0p 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-020114-2 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-020113-4 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Although there have been other biographies of Wilder, this newest one will
strengthen a good collection. The author has combined historical research with
the stories from the Little House books into a readable narrative. Only the first half
of the book recounts the familiar stories of Wilder's children's books; the rest
describes her adult life. After losing their first farm early in their marriage, the
Wilders settled in the Missouri Ozarks, where Laura was well-known for her com-
munity work, chickens, and gingerbread. In the sleeping porch of the big farm-
house that she designed and Almanzo built, an elderly Laura wrote her books in
pencil on nickel tablets. A shorter biography by Giff(BCCB 9/87) was written for
young readers enjoying Wilder's work as readalouds for the first time; Anderson's
history will satisfy the reader who has savored the Laura books independently.
The book design has an old-fashioned air that will appeal to Wilder fans; sixteen
pages of photographs are also included. KJ
BANNATYNE-CUGNET, Jo 
A Prairie Alphabet; illus. by Yvette Moore. 
Tundra,
1992 
32p
ISBN 0-88776-292-1 
$19.95 
Ad 
Gr. 1-3
Meticulously lined, slightly stiff paintings that occasionally veer toward the
photorealistic illustrate a Canadian alphabet book that takes its theme from con-
temporary rural life: "We auction our Aberdeen Angus at Agribition." (Addition-
ally, other A-named objects in the picture are named in an Appendix.) The concept
is a little advanced for those actually in need of an alphabet book, not that such
sophistication has stopped anyone in these days of the bookstore market. Too, the
captions often get contrived and prosy: "The quarter horses stand quietly by the
quonset." As a picture of Canadian farm life, however, this is a terrific introduc-
tion, especially in its acknowledgment of contemporary inroads, with toolboxes
and tractors right alongside Uncle pulling up and down on the udder to get milk
from a cow. Each painting offers lots to look at and for; along with the find-the-
letter list at the back are notes that amplifies on the objects and concepts found on
each page. RS
BERNOS DE GASZTOLD, CARMEN 
Prayers from the Ark; tr. from the French by
Rumer Godden; illus. by Barry Moser. 
Viking, 1992 
32p
ISBN 0-670-84496-9 
$16.00 
R Gr. 3-5
Written by a French poet who entered a Benedictine abbey after World War II,
these thirteen prayers reflect the varied natures of the beasts who speak, even unto
Noah, who displays a discouragement typical of the human animal ("All this water
makes my heart sink"). At best, the verses are compressed and witty, as the vain
cock crows, "I am Your servant,/ only... do not forget, Lord,/ I make the sun
106 
* 
THE BULLETIN
rise." Occasionally, the lines lose their lyricism in translation ("With this ridicu-
lous face,/ grimaces seem asked for!"), or outdistance the juvenile audience for
which the book is marketed (as when the mountain goat scorns sheep that "chew
the cud of their insipid routine"). In these cases, Moser's animal portraits more
than compensate, with the monkey's yellow stare and the goat's yellow glare saying
as much as the words and broadening the age appeal from young to old. Two
paintings, the worried dog and the put-upon pig, rank with the best Moser has
done. BH
BRETT, JAN 
Trouble with Trolls; written and illus. by Jan Brett. 
Putnam,
1992 
32p
ISBN 0-399-22336-3 $14.95 
Ad 
5-7 yrs
Into her usual woodsy, wintry setting, Brett has introduced pointy-haired troll
figures, cousins to the plastic troll dolls children currently collect. These trolls are
determined to kidnap a young girl's dog, but as each one tries, the blond heroine
tricks the silly creature into trading the dog back in exchange for an article of her
clothing. At the end of her chilly strip-tease, she reaches the top of Mount Baldy
wearing only red-and-white striped long johns and a pair of skis. When all five
trolls gang up on her at once, the girl convinces them not only to give back her
clothes, but also to hand over the dog right before she "flies" down the mountain
on her skis. The ornate illustrations are in two sections--each busy two-page
spread depicts the action on the surface of the mountain, and a small lower border
shows a cut-away of the trolls' very cute underground home. Why the trolls want
the dog instead of a tasty little girl is not explained-perhaps the clue is the picture
of a dog on the trolls' wall. Children will enjoy the trolls' stupidity and the story's
folkloric predictability. KJ
BROOKS, BRUCE 
What Hearts. Geringer/HarperCollins, 1992 
194p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021132-6 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021131-8 
$14.00 
R 
Gr. 7 up
Asa has finished first grade, just, when his parents divorce: his end-of-school hand-
fuls of an all-A's report card, a special book, and his own-grown bunch of red
radishes go unnoticed when he comes home to his mother and a waiting taxicab.
The four stories in this sequence glimpse Asa at four points-maybe crucial, maybe
typical-in his life between the end of first-grade and the middle of seventh, when
he and his mother move on yet again. Asa is a familiar Brooks character: nervous,
eager, and way too smart, he finds a technique to master every painful turn, rising
to occasions he should never have been invited to in the first place. His new
stepfather, Dave, sets him a manly test on a seaside rollercoaster and then turns
away; Asa screams with desolation, and later that night goes back and rides it over
and over again. A dramatic baseball game is described (with the virtuosic language
of The Moves Make the Man), but it is all part of Asa's elaborate imaginings: in-
stead of showing up for team try-outs, Asa, along with Dave, has had to take his
mother to the hospital after a suicide attempt. Each crisis is dissected, analyzed,
appropriated and anesthetized by Asa, who tries to conquer all with his bristling
intellect. Because the book is as much about the way Asa interprets people and
events as it is about the situations themselves, the stories sometimes feel too neat;
what keeps them off-balance is our recognition of how desperate the neatening is:
"He was good. He could put on a show." Other characters-Dave, Asa's mother,
DECEMBER 1992 
* 
107
a hapless friend-are portrayed with a snap and a sense of humor that leavens Asa's
intense seriousness. The narrative strategies are subtle, and it's difficult to say how
many young readers will see beyond Asa the dazzler to Asa the scared, but there is
a poignancy in every clipped line and rejoinder here that should show them. RS
BRUSCA, MARIA CRISTINA 
The Blacksmith and the Devils, ad. by Maria Cristina
Brusca and Tona Wilson; illus. by Maria Cristina Brusca. 
Holt, 1992 
4 0p
ISBN 0-8050-1954-5 
$15.95
Spanish edition El Herrero y El Diablo; ISBN 0-8050-2411-5 
R 
5-8 yrs
A tale type that shows up in many cultures is here recreated from an Argentine
version and illustrated with scenes set in the pampas. The old blacksmith Juan
Pobreza goodheartedly shoes the mule of a penniless gaucho, who turns out to be
San Pedro and who bestows three wishes of Juan Pobreza's choice: to make visi-
tors stick to his chair, to make them stay up in a tree, and to keep them captive in
his tobacco pouch. Then Juan Pobreza sells his soul to the devil for twenty years of
youth and plenty, renews the contract twice by trapping the devil, and ends a long
and high-style life by haunting the pampas, since neither heaven nor hell will have
him. The watercolor paintings are even more tongue-in-cheek than the story,
with angular figures and sly, tricksterish expressions reminiscent of Dirk Zimmer's
(Mean Jake and the Devils, etc.), all set into innocently pastel hues. BH
BYARS, BETSY 
Coast to Coast. Delacorte, 1992 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-385-30787-X 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
Like her grandmother, thirteen-year-old Birch is a poet, but her grandmother has
died and her depressed grandfather is on the verge of selling his beloved 1940 J-3
Cub airplane. Then Birch maneuvers him into one last trip, a secret mission
across the United States with Birch as co-pilot and their dog Ace as mascot. This
picaresque novel relies, for its takeoff, on the suspense of a getaway undetected by
Birch's mother, who's tied up with a garage sale, and after that, on the growing
relationship between Birch and Pop, with a little byway when Birch finds a boy
friend on one of the frequent occasions when their twelve-gallon gas tank runs dry.
Kids with a yen to fly will enjoy the engine talk, and those without a yen to fly will
acquire one as Birch learns to pilot the plane. It's an episodic trip, but one worth
taking. BH
CARLE, ERIC 
Draw Me a Star, written and illus. by Eric Carle. 
Philomel,
1992 
32p
ISBN 0-399-21877-7 
$15.95 
R 4-7 yrs
When the artist as a child draws a star, the star tells him to draw a sun, the sun tells
him to draw a tree, the tree tells him to draw a man and woman, and so on until
the night asks him to draw a star again and hold on to it as they fly through the sky.
At each stage, the artist appears older, so this is a fable about passage through life
and its fullness of possibilities. Children won't get the full impact of that message,
but they'll like the cumulative effects of the tale, the creation of a world through
paints, and Carle's collages flaring with rainbow hues. They'll also like drawing
the stars, which change subtly from five-pointers to eight-pointers, with instruc-
tions on making the lines and a note from Carle about his German grandmother,
who taught him to draw stars while chanting a nonsense rhyme. BH
108 
* 
THE BULLETIN
COLE, JOANNA 
The Magic School Bus on the Ocean Floor; illus. by Bruce
Degen. 
Scholastic, 1992 
[4 8p]
ISBN 0-590-41430-5 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-4
Ms. Frizzle's class thinks they're going to the ocean, but given what they've been
through in the past they should have known better. The magic school bus takes
them off the shore, along the continental shelf, and down the slope to the ocean
floor, with Ms. Frizzle and the margins spouting off an informative stream of facts
about fish, ocean currents, hot-water vents, and coral reefs. As with previous trips
(The Magic School Bus Lost in the Solar System, BCCB 10/90, etc.), there's lots
going on and lots to look at, but Ms. Frizzle keeps reasonable order; and is her
dino-dress pattern on the last spread a portent of trips to come? RS
COONEY, CAROLINE B. 
Operation: Homefront. Bantam, 1992 
211p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-553-29685-X 
$3.99 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Rosalys Herrick is a kindergarten teacher, a wife, and a mother of three (fifteen-
year-old Laura, fourteen-year-old Langan, and four-year-old Nicholas); she's also
a soldier in the National Guard, and when Iraq invades Kuwait her unit is called
up for active duty and then sent to Saudi Arabia. The family, deprived of their
domestic commander, falls apart, and the portrayals of the kids are memorable:
Laura, who "inherited all the unpleasant tasks in the family," is globally pacific but
locally hostile (although secretly thrilled at her new importance at school); Langan,
a weedy kid in a tough school, wishes he could have the same chance to "kick ass"
as his mother; Nicholas corrects his siblings on aircraft ID and calmly asks during
ground war "Is Mommy dead now?" (Although the story ends before her return
home, Mommy seems to have made it through safely.) This is a very contempo-
rary slant on life at the homefront, with television the focus of the household and
the family suffering social isolation (they're the only ones they know with a relative
in the war). Although the topical Gulf War references already seem a little dated,
the underlying story of a family's struggling to cope with traumas small and large
will be vivid and understandable to readers. DS
DAVIS, TERRY 
IfRock and Roll Were a Machine. Delacorte, 1992 
[224p]
ISBN 0-385-30762-4 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 9-12
"If rock and roll were a machine, it would be a motorcycle," thinks seventeen-year-
old Bert Bowden, entranced with a Harley-Davidson up for sale in a local bike
shop. He takes the plunge and buys the Harley, much to his parents' dismay, and
finds that almost as important to him as the bike is his growing relationship with
Scotty Shepard, the owner of the shop. Scotty mentors Bert in motorcycles and
manhood, and soon Bert finds himself working at the bike shop, writing for the
school newspaper (at the suggestion of a supportive English teacher), and playing
competitive racquetball (which leads to a showdown game with a former teacher
who had humiliated Bert). Davis has a slick but telling style ("She is every gaping
light socket into which Bert ever desired to place his tongue" describes a metalhead's
sexy girlfriend), laden with topical references but successful in evoking a certain
guy-world of motorcycles, masturbation, and sports prowess. The shift from mo-
torcycles to racquetball, however, weakens the plot severely, the play-by-play sports
details slow the pace, and Bert's supposed brilliance as a writer would be more
DECEMBER 1992 
* 
109
convincing if hinted at rather than raved over at length. Bert's a touching boy-
man in his yearning for camaraderie and capability, though, and there are plenty
of machine- and sports-minded young readers who will enjoy a book that has
those components along with a little depth. DS
DAY, ALEXANDRA 
Carl's Masquerade. Farrar, 1992 
32p
ISBN 0-374-31094-7 
$11.95 
R 
4 -7 yrs
"We're going to a masquerade party, Carl. Take good care of the baby." And,
disguised as themselves but taken for Beauty and the Beast, Rottweiler Carl and
the baby go to the party as well. This is fifth in Carl's popular adventures, and
more fun then the last two, which seemed more like coffee table albums of pretty
pictures then they did books for young children. This one has the great advantage
of the masquerade setting, which allows Day free reign for her deliberately outre,
painterly style and whimsical turn of imagination. The costumes are lavish and
often surreal, nowhere more so than in the scene where Carl and the baby meet a
couple of masqueraders dressed as Carl and the baby. In an anxious moment, the
duo have to hide themselves from the baby's parents and use two other partygoers
as camouflage. There's a hint, as often in this series, that the parents may know
precisely what goes on when they leave Carl in charge, but the tension of having
both couples at the same party provides a nice frisson. RS
DE BRIBEUF, FATHER JEAN 
The Huron Carol; illus. by Frances Tyrrell. 
Dutton,
1992 
32p
ISBN 0-525-44909-4 
$15.00 
R 
5-9 yrs
Composed by a French missionary to the Huron Indians in the mid-seventeenth
century, this carol retells the story of the Nativity in terms that were meant to be
familiar to the Huron: "Within a lodge of broken bark/ the tender Babe was
found,/ A ragged robe of rabbit skin/ enwrapped His beauty 'round ... ." The
shepherds become hunters; the Wise Men are chiefs of other Indian nations, bringing
gifts of "fox and beaver pelt." Full-page, fine-lined paintings framed in elaborate
cobalt borders face each page of the text; all of the human figures (and the angel
choir) are Indian. With an intricate but modest style reminiscent of medieval
illumination, the paintings echo the carol's tone of quiet contemplation. The
melody line, in a minor key, is appended with the French and Huron words, as is
a rather studious note seemingly written as much to ward off accusations of cul-
tural imperialism as it is to provide background on the carol and the Hurons. RS
DILLON, BARBARA 
My Stepfather Shrank!, illus. by Paul Casale. 
HarperCollins,
1992 
118p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021581-X 
$12.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021574-7 
$13.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Although Mallory doesn't like her stepfather, Woody, she doesn't mean for him to
shrink when she offers him one of Mrs. Peebles' homemade candies. It's a good
thing Mom is away for the weekend, giving Mallory and Woody some time to
undo the catastrophe. All it really takes is a hard-to-get meeting with Mr. Peebles,
a bumbling inventor whose shrinking and growing solutions really work. The
predictable result is a closer bond between Mallory and Woody. Except for the
shrinking incident, Dillon's story doesn't have any unexpected twists, following
the formula of magic in everyday life familiar from Mary Rodgers' books and
110 
* 
THE BULLETIN
recent movies such as Honey, I Blew Up the Kid. Still, it's a formula that works,
and Dillon has appealingly blended her ingredients. KJ
EHLERT, Lois 
Moon Rope: A Peruvian Folktale/Un laso a la luna: Una leyenda
peruana; written and illus. by Lois Ehlert; tr. into Spanish by Amy
Prince. 
Harcourt, 1992 
34 p
ISBN 0-15-255343-6 
$14.95 
R 
2-5 yrs
Large, stylized figures against neon backgrounds almost overwhelm this simplified
adaptation of a Peruvian folktale, which is presented in a dual English-Spanish text
that is sometimes choppy ("Fox growled; he was mad"). The fable recounts the
efforts of a fox to reach the moon by braiding a rope and persuading the birds to
hook it on the crescent so he and Mole can climb up. Mole falls off, lands on a
bird, and tunnels into the earth; Fox can still be seen staring down at him from the
moon. The book is best at a distance, where the compositions appear more dra-
matic than blinding (Fox is silver, Mole is gold); in fact, this will be welcomed by
teachers and librarians in need of material for young story-hour groups, especially
those with dual-language children attending. BH
FLEMING, DENISE 
Lunch, written and illus. by Denise Fleming. 
Holt, 1992 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-1636-8 
$14.95 
Ad 
1-3 yrs
"Mouse was very hungry. He was so hungry, he ate a crisp white turnip, tasty
orange carrots, sweet yellow corn, tender green peas, tart blue berries, sour purple
grapes, shiny red apples, and juicy pink watermelon, crunchy black seeds and all.
Then, he took a nap until dinnertime." That's it, folks, though the double-spread
collages do provide a drama missing from the text, strategically depicting the foods
so that readers are left guessing, by visual hints, what Mouse eats on the next page.
Hungry Mouse is no Hungry Caterpillar, but the book's simple compositions and
sharp color contrasts will make it fun to share with groups, where adults can give
the mouse's activities storytelling inflection and toddlers can identify colors (many
of which stain the mouse's fur with satisfying messiness). BH
FLORAN, DOUGLAS 
A Chef written and illus. by Douglas Florian. 
Greenwillow,
1992 
32p 
(How We Work)
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-11109-2 
$13.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-11108-4 
$14.00 
R 
Gr. 1-3
This latest entry in Florian's How We Work series depicts the busy dawn-to-dusk
day of a chef. This particular chef runs a restaurant, and her day is filled with
shopping, checking food deliveries, planning menus, and supervising her assis-
tants, as well as preparing the food. Neat, thickly-lined orangey watercolors depict
specifics, such as an eight-panel examination of the preparation of deep-dish blue-
berry pie, as well as more general restaurant scenes. Florian includes a brief over-
view of the various places chefs might work (schools, hospitals, hotels, the military,
catered parties) and has a final page devoted to description of the kitchen utensils
pictured throughout the book. This is an easy-to-understand look at a profession
that has more to it than many kids realize, and the appetizing details make it a tasty
entry in a work unit. DS
DECEMBER 1992 
* 
111
FRITZ, JEAN, et al. 
The World in 1492; illus. by Stefano Vitale and with
photographs. 
Holt, 1992 
168p
ISBN 0-8050-1674-0 
$19.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-9
Cultural comparison is a great idea, especially in puncturing the Eurocentrism of
so many accounts describing Columbus' "discovery" of America. Moreover, this
ambitious survey of fifteenth-century history has an impeccable lineup of writers,
though they are too often reduced to generalizations in summarizing vast sweeps
of culture, social structure, and geographical situation. Fritz on Europe, Katherine
Paterson on Asia, Fredrick and Patricia McKissack on Africa, Margaret Mahy on
Australia and Oceania, and Highwater on the Americas all do their best, but the
individuality of person and event that makes history so interesting gets sacrificed
to broad scope. While the writing is better than textbook quality, the information
does sometimes verge on listmaking ("As for agriculture, Indians first domesti-
cated chickens, rice, sugarcane, and cotton") and becomes simplistically thin ("Fish-
ermen made boats, mended their nets, and told stories on the peaceful banks of
Lake Chad, Lake Victoria, and Lake Tanganyika"). The exception is the last sec-
tion, where Highwater gets selective about the peoples he covers (South and Cen-
tral American empires, mound builders and Plains Indians to the exclusion of
Pacific and northern groups), with emphasis on lifestyles rather than names and
dates. The maps, photographs, and reproductions of art work from each culture
are well-formatted. As a reference to complement the encyclopedia, this is a sound
investment for reports; but as each of these writers knows, the most memorable
story is the one most deeply developed. BH
GEE, MAURICE 
The Fire-Raiser. Houghton, 1992 
[150p]
ISBN 0-395-62428-2 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 7-10
"In Dargie's Livery Stable the fires leaped and the horses screamed." While today
we might call him a pyromaniac, the citizens of a small New Zealand town in 1915
are looking for the "fire-raiser," and while four teens are convinced they know who
he is, no one will believe them. That's a classic appeal, all by itself, and Gee's
considerable storytelling powers turn alluring premise into absorbing narrative.
The teens are a disputatious quartet: Phil, the tough, suspicious kid; Noel, the
good kid not above a little troublemaking; Irene, the perfect teacher's pet; and
Kitty, Noel's sister and good friend to Irene (who reveals a likeably rebellious streak
when scratched). The fire-raiser is an Anthony Perkins wacko, and wait till you
meet his mother: "No more fires. Or I'll let them put you in prison. You won't
like that. It's dark in there." RS
GERAS, ADtLE 
Watching the Roses. 
Harcourt, 1992 
192p
ISBN 0-15-294816-3 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 7-12
The Tower Room (BCCB 5/92), Geras' first book in a projected trilogy about three
school friends, told the story of Megan, the Rapunzel figure; Watching the Roses is
the tale of Alice, a modern Sleeping Beauty. At Alice's festive eighteenth birthday
party, she was raped by a man she had long feared, and she lies virtually comatose
with shock and grief in her family's castle-like house hoping desperately for some
news of Jean-Luc, the young man she truly loves. This story is more focused and
112 
* THE BULLETIN
resonant than the previous entry in the trilogy, with the fairy-tale elements making
a firmer framework for the narrative, which is in turn a more interesting gloss on
the original fairytale. The pace rambles like the roses rampant in the story, and
there's not much action, but the atmosphere, both physical and emotional, is worth
the time: the story is redolent with sexuality, fragility, and innocence, and it's
overgrown with roses as Alice catalogs the habits and symbolism of the untended
flora of the grounds. The lush prose combines with a thoughtful thematic treat-
ment in this unusual romance. DS
GOBLE, PAUL 
Love Flute, written and illus. by Paul Goble. 
Bradbury, 1992 
32p
ISBN 0-02-736261-2 
$14.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Ostensibly the story of a shy young man who goes on a vision quest to win the
woman of his choice, this really seems more a vehicle to describe the origins and
tradition of the courting flute among the Plains Indians. Most pages of text fea-
ture a black-and-white drawing of flutes from various museums and face a full-
color illustration in the artist's signature style of flat, heavily outlined figures against
layered backgrounds. The patterns are pleasing, if sometimes crowded, and the
facts meticulously researched, with notes and references of anthropological inter-
est. This has a flat ending and won't appeal as broadly as some of Goble's other
retellings, but it will fit neatly into Native American units as informational narra-
tive. BH
GREESON, JANET 
An American Army of Two; illus. by Patricia Rose
Mulvihill. 
Carolrhoda, 1992 
4 8p
Library ed. ISBN 0-87614-664-7 
$10.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-87614-547-0 
$5.95 
Ad Gr. 1-3
Despite some occasional stiffness in both pictures and text, this easy-reader pre-
sents a fresh and feminist glimpse of an unusual event during the War of 1812.
Sisters Rebecca, twenty, and Abigail, sixteen, are worried when yet another British
warship approaches Scituate Harbor. The Massachusetts Home Guard is away,
and previous supply raids by the British have depleted the town's food. While the
British rowboats come into shore, the two sisters hide in the trees and, very softly,
play "Yankee Doodle" on a fife and drum, tricking the soldiers into thinking the
Home Guard is coming. It's a true and tricky story, and a good addition to a genre
that usually relies on the here-and-now or the never-was for its subjects. While the
figure drawing is awkward in the full-color illustrations, Mulvihill achieves some
stormy, dramatic special effects in her seascapes. Historical notes are included. RS
HART, PHILIP S. 
Flying Free: America's First Black Aviators. 
Lerner,
1992 
64p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8225-1598-9 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Courage, glamor, danger, early death-this book has it all, with simplicity and
dignity besides. Hart traces the history of African Americans in aviation, focusing
particularly on pioneers Bessie Coleman (who died in a crash at age 33), William
J. Powell, James Herman Banning (the author's uncle, dead in a crash at age 32),
and Hubert Faunderoy Julian; he also has a chapter each on the Chicago flyers of
the 1930s, the Tuskegee Airmen of World War II, and a post-war survey of blacks
in aviation. The liveliest parts of the book are the occasional anecdotes and quotes
DECEMBER 1992 
* 
113
from flyers themselves (flyer Cornelius Coffey on Hubert Julian's hiring by Haile
Selassie: "Hubert Julian messed up in Ethiopia. If you remember, he wrecked the
only airplane that they had"). The excitement and exhaustion of barnstorming,
pulling in paying audiences of all colors, and landing in fields and staying with
kind strangers are well-depicted, but Hart (a professor of sociology) is particularly
good at conveying the social importance of these aviators. It's clear that they
received help as well as scorn and rejection from white aviators, but it's also evi-
dent that they operated with assistance and backing from the black community of
the time, including sponsorship by black businesses and newspapers, and that they
formed communities, airclubs, and networks of their own that were almost more
important than their individual feats. Photographs are plentiful, but of varying
degrees of relevance and quality (one presumes because of scarcity and age of archi-
val material); the best ones show faces clearly made for destiny, such as Hubert
Julian meeting with reporters after returning from his ill-fated Ethiopian assign-
ment. The format of the book is as unthreatening as the subject is appealing; a
brief bibliography is appended, if would-be flyboys and girls want to pursue the
topic further. DS
HARVEY, DEAN 
The Secret Elephant of Harlan Kooter; illus. by Mark
Richardson. 
Houghton, 1992 
130p
ISBN 0-395-62523-8 
$13.95 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Poor, hardworking Harlan is a loyal and dutiful son who took a paper route to
help his waitress mother with expenses, but he's the smallest boy in school and
bears the brunt of constant teasing. His life changes completely, however, when
he discovers an elephant hiding in his garage. Hannibal the elephant has fled the
circus, and Harlan tries to hide him, while finding that Hannibal makes a useful
vehicle for delivering papers and that he can be a loyal friend when bullies tease
Harlan. Hannibal finally gets caught, but he redeems his reputation by rescuing
people from their rooftops during Hurricane Roscoe, thereby earning his freedom
(the town officials arrange for his passage back to Africa). The traditional belea-
guered-victim-as-hero story and bullies-turning-friends ending are familiar, but so
what-it's an ingenuously silly story, just this side of farce. Scratchy hatch and
crosshatch line drawings, with an informal loopiness comparable to the best parts
of the story, decorate many of the pages. Forlorn yet plucky Harlan and his talk-
ing pachyderm pal (the elephant's conversational ability, by the way, is taken for
granted by all characters), combined with a slightly exotic Florida setting, will
please many readers, even some who thought they were too old for such folly. DS
HARVEY, JAYNE 
Great-Uncle Dracula; illus. by Abby Carter. 
Random House,
1992 
80p 
(Stepping Stone Books)
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-92448-5 
$6.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-679-82448-0 
$2.50 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
With chapter titles such as "Show and Smell" and "The Meanest Girl in
Transylvania," this easy-reader has built-in appeal. After their parents' (apparently
amicable) divorce Emily and her little brother have moved with dad to his Uncle
Dracula's house in Transylvania, and all of Emily's new schoolmates are some
variation of ghost, werewolf, vampire, or witch. Wanda takes the prize in the last
category, and, while she tries to make school tough for Emily, everything works
out fine. Dumb but fun, the story has little inherent logic or motivation, but the
114 
* 
THE BULLETIN
plenitude of gross and pratfall humor, combined with the everyday theme of new-
girl-at-school, makes this an obvious choice for new and reluctant readers. Car-
toon illustrations punctuate the prose. RS
HEATH, AMY 
Sofie's Role; illus. by Sheila Hamanaka. 
Four Winds, 1992 
32p
ISBN 0-02-743505-9 
$14.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
The punning title refers to Sofie's pre-Christmas work in her family's bakery, where
she helps set up the display case with goodies, takes phone orders, and, finally,
assists a customer at the front counter. The litany of treats familiar and exotic-
sounding ("We filled the cases with kuchen and tortes, with gingerbread houses
and gingerbread sleighs. We heaped golden trays with dominosteine and six-pointed
cinnamon stars") is alluring, and Sofie's gradual growth of confidence, culminat-
ing in her waiting on a schoolmate, makes for a tasty thematic frosting. The oil
illustrations, vividly playing up the contrast between the chilly winter outside and
the cozy, steamy bakery, look good enough to eat, with gingerbread architecture
that's sure to have the picturebook audience exclaiming in envy. Mark Shasha's
Night of the Moonjellies (BCCB 10/92) also tells of a young child working in the
family's food business; Sofie's pastries and holiday setting, however, give her the
edge, and her young readers will be as happy as kids in a-well, a bakery. There's
a recipe on each endpaper-one for marzipan and one for cinnamon stars-both
too complicated for lone kids, but they'd make a nice postreading project or nibble.
DS
HENKES, KEVIN 
Words ofStone. 
Greenwillow, 1992 
152p
ISBN 0-688-11356-7 
$13.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Ever since his mother's death, Blaze, now ten, has held his life together with relics
( his key collection) and rituals (creating a new imaginary protector each June) that
allow him some control over his terrors. "Fire. Large dogs. Wasps. The dark."
And even scarier memories, such as his mother's death and the ferris wheel acci-
dent that scarred his legs. Joselle, who hears Blaze's story from her grandmother, is
fascinated with the thought of someone unhappier than she is, and decides to
"complicate" his life, arranging, for example, some stones on a hillside in the shape
of Blaze's mother's name. They're a pair of knotty, interesting kids; unfortu-
nately, they're trapped in an overcomplicated novel. Too many motifs, a point of
view that alternates between Blaze and Joselle, and explanatory passages that tell
rather than show make the book static. The character study is minute and percep-
tive; although the adults are idealized, the relationship between the children is
intense and revealing-but none of it has quite been worked into a story. RS
HUNTER, LATOYA The Diary of Latoya Hunter: My First Year in Junior
High. Crown, 1992 [128p]
ISBN 0-517-58511-1 $16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
"My life can be pretty boring sometimes but what can I say? I'm twelve." "Real"
diaries can be hot stuff, witness the YA classic Go Ask Alice, and it's too bad that the
events of Hunter's young life are interesting in direct proportion to those events of
Alice's life which were real. There's no doubt that this is genuine seventh-grade
stuff; the problem is that it's seventh-grade stuff without a plot. Latoya, a Jamai-
can-American girl who lives in the Bronx, was asked by the publisher to keep a
DECEMBER 1992 
* 
115
diary of her seventh-grade year. She is clearly brighter than average, has a sense of
humor about herself, and seems to have enjoyed keeping the diary (although re-
vealing no indication that she intends to keep writing after the contracted date).
Most of the diary is ordinary: school, friends, a little romance, a sister's baby and
a brother's wedding. As in Anne Frank's diary, the most intensely rendered scenes
here are the battles between Latoya and her mother: "She sits on top of my every
nerve." Grittier details include a vicious fight at Latoya's school and a murder
across the street from her house, but the diary lacks both the narrative shaping and
the depth of perception that would give these events greater impact. Real diaries
aren't meant to be read, but while this made-to-order version is superficial, it's
lightly written and filled with the quotidian dramas that family fiction readers
enjoy. RS
KENNEDY, X. J. 
The Beasts ofBethlehem; illus. by Michael McCurdy. 
McElderry,
1992 
4 8p
ISBN 0-689-50561-2 
$13.95 
R* 
Gr. 3-5
See this month's Big Picture, p. 103.
KING-SMITH, DICK 
Alphabeasts; illus. by Quentin Blake. 
Macmillan, 1992 
61p
ISBN 0-02-750720-3 
$14.95 
R Gr. 2-6
One's heart sinks ever so slightly at the portentous ecological message in the intro-
ductory verses here ("So now's the time to use our powers/ To save the creatures of
the world-/ The world that's theirs as much as ours"), but nonsense soon takes
over, with a generous injection of sharp wit. Familiar words acquire new angles
("The porcupines gnaw trees at night,/ Whose bark is worsened by their bite"),
unfamiliar words send readers scuttling to the dictionary ("Decorticating Porcu-
pines"), and the fun of it all will grab even kids who've signed off poetry: "To the
sound of a string of hysterical moans,/ Like a lunatic's laugh, it is said,/ The horrid
HYENA will crack up your bones/ (But he only does this if you're dead)." King-
Smith's rhyming irreverence includes hilarious observations on civets, dugongs,
and other creatures, all arranged in alphabetical order for the tidily minded, all
watercolored with Quentin Blake's typically comical abandon. Author and artist
must have enjoyed this book, and kids will follow suit. BH
KOHL, HERBERT 
From Archetype to Zeitgeist: Powerful Ideas for Powerful
Thinking. Little, 1992 
246p 
illus.
ISBN 0-316-50138-7 
$19.95 
R 
Gr. 9 up
This book is proof that we are a contentious and wordy-but interesting-species.
Kohl defines and describes important contemporary terms and concepts in eleven
different disciplines (including, for instance, The Arts, Literature, Philosophy, Logic
and Reasoning, Critical Thinking, and Political Science). The terminological dis-
cussions are encyclopedic in nature, addressing not only usage, but who coined the
term, how it has changed, and how it may be used outside the discipline as well as
inside. The book is impressive in its breadth and conciseness, and the explana-
tions are clear (examples, however, tend to be less helpful). It's not free from point
of view (under "genetic diversity" is the statement "Care must be taken to preserve
genetic diversity at the peril of creating disaster for all life forms, humans included"),
but it makes a relatively successful effort to relate an opinion as such and to state
116 
* THE BULLETIN
whose it is. This isn't for reading but for reference, and it's perfect to send a kid off
to college with. There might also be the browsing reader who discovers that the
idle thought drifting through his/her head during a boring class is, in fact, a named
philosophical concept. Amateurish line drawings appear intermittently-and mostly
pointlessly-in the margins; a bibliography and index are included. DS
LE TORD, BIJOU, comp. ed. 
Peace on Earth: A Book ofPrayers from Around the
World; comp. and illus. by Bijou Le Tord. 
Doubleday, 1992 
80p
ISBN 0-385-30692-X 
$18.00 
R 
5-10 yrs
Le Tord's soft, sweet, line-and-watercolor paintings illustrate this international
collection of prayers and devotional poetry. The nearly sixty pieces reflect a mul-
titude of cultural sources, but the only ones that refer to a specific deity are from
the Judeo-Christian tradition. Sharing some overlap in selections with Sandol
Stoddard's book reviewed below, Le Tord's book is more spaciously and effec-
tively designed, and also more clearly intended for a younger audience. The selec-
tions are simple, quiet and reverent; Le Tord even includes a prayer of her own:
"Puppies/ and kittens,/ O Lord/ I pray for them/ to grow/ bigger than/ they are
now." The arrangement is appropriately child centered (Children, Animals, Praises
and Thanks, Night and Moon) and, on balance, this book will probably find a
wider juvenile audience than Stoddard's rather austere compilation. Title, author,
and first line indexes are appended. RS
LEE, DENNIS 
The Ice Cream Store; illus. by David McPhail. 
Scholastic,
1992 
[6 4 p]
ISBN 0-590-45861-2 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
A jolly and generous collection by the author of Alligator Pie (BCCB 3/76) and
other award-winning poetry, this has natural bounce at its best-which is most of
the book-and forced rhymes at its worst. "The Mouse That Lives on the Moon"
has the lyrical freshness of Shel Silverstein verses; "Mary Ellen Montague" rings of
A. A. Milne; "Bappy Earthday!" is a clever tongue-twister; "Ding, Dong" and "Snick,
Snack" qualify as bona fide nursery rhymes; and "Chillybones" will get many a
toddler into the bathtub and through the washing process ("Rub them, and scrub
them,/ And warm up their sillybones!"). "A Wonderful Trip in a Rocketship," on
the other hand, never gets off the ground ("See how the world spins round and
round,/ Like since the world began"). McPhail's watercolors, too, are variable,
from the wit of a Mad Hatter figure presenting money to a giant swine in "The
Lottery Dream of Miss Patricia Pig," to the cute cliche of a feathered Native Ameri-
can child scratching a tiger's head in the ecological plea, "Wild!" On the whole,
though, the poet and artist make a lively team, especially in narrative picture/
poems such as "Hammy, the Escape Hamster"; read aloud, this will capture the
wiggliest class or individual. BH
LINDENBAUM, PIJA 
Boodil My Dog, written and illus. by Pija Lindenbaum, retold
by Gabrielle Charbonnet. 
Holt, 1992 
48p
ISBN 0-8050-2444-1 
$14.95 
R* 
5-8 yrs
"Boodil is a bullterrier. She's the best dog in the whole world. Her brilliant mind
is always at work. Her guard is never down." This observation may not seem
funny until you see the champion of the above description, eyes closed, sagging
DECEMBER 1992 
* 
117
limply off what Dad used to consider his chair. Then the first-person narrative,
belied by a series of straightfaced, heavily outlined canine portraits, becomes very
funny indeed. Some pet books are too cute, and many assume an adult perspec-
tive; this one avoids both pitfalls by assuming a capacity for child's-eye irony on
the part of young viewers, who will relish the difference between the reality of
Boodil and the adulation her owner bestows on her. The artist has a talent for
spacious simplicity activated by a few bold lines. Boodil's expressions as she ob-
serves a rain puddle that must be crossed on the way home from the park ("she's
not fond of wet paws"), refuses to budge in face of urgent orders ("she has nerves of
steel"), or cowers under the couch ("I bet only Boodil's amazing superdog self-
control keeps her from ripping the vacuum to pieces") are all the wittier for a
context of spare shapes and minimal color. BH
McKISSACK, PATRICIA C. 
The Dark-Thirty: Southern Tales of the Supernatural
illus. by Brian Pinkney. 
Knopf, 1992 
12 2 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-91863-9 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-81863-4 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 5-9
The author's brief introduction bills this as "a collection of original stories rooted
in African American history and the oral storytelling tradition"; what she doesn't
mention is that, after the first two slave tales, the remaining eight have a contem-
porary, urban-legend tone that makes them all the spookier for being more imme-
diate. In terms of development, this is more fiction than folklore, and kids looking
for short stories that are fast-moving and easy to read will find the ghosts a bonus.
"The Woman in the Snow" about a haunted bus route, "The Conjure Brother"
about a girl's misguided wish, "Boo Mama" about a mother and child taken by
Sasquatch, or "The Gingi" about an evil Yoruban spirit's possession of a house
could all happen any minute (especially after dark). Every once in a while,
McKissack's style starts skimming the surface of both action and characters, but
she knows how to tell a good story and isn't afraid to dramatize scary details, on
the one hand, or throw in some history, on the other. Every story gets a context-
setting introduction, and Brian Pinkney's black-and-white scratchboard illustra-
tions serve to heighten the suspense without overdramatizing it. A chilling chaser
for Lyons' Rawhead, Bloody Bones (BCCB 2/92). BH
MONSELL, MARY ELISE 
Toohy and Wood; illus. by Leslie Tryon. 
Atheneum,
1992 
72p
ISBN 0-689-31721-2 
$12.95 
M 
Gr. 3-5
Toohy is a fence lizard driven from his home by a violent storm that has killed his
dear friend, Pearl (a motherly violin-playing dove). He finds a place to live with
Wood, a turtle who runs a bait shop, and with the aid of his new friend comes to
terms with his loss. This is unfortunately not the heir to The Wind in the Willows
that it seems to aspire to be; the anthropomorphism, despite a few cute moments
in the bait shop, is belabored, making the whimsy saccharine (Wood is inspired by
the moon to write verse: "'I feel a poem coming on,' he told his round friend")
and the emotional and pedagogic lessons baldly didactic (Toohy learn, to love
again-and to read). The illustrations, controlled line drawings rich with textural
variations ranging from the lightest stipple to heavy cross-hatch, have a depth,
particularly in the outdoor scenes, that the text lacks. Despite the clear sincerity of
the book, this well-trodden ground has been better covered elsewhere. DS
118 
* THE BULLETIN
MORRIS, ANN 
Tools; Library ed. ISBN 0-688-10171-2; Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-
10170-4. 
Houses and Homes; Library ed. ISBN 0-688-10169-0; Trade ed. ISBN
0-688-10168-2.
Each book: illus. with photographs by Ken Heyman. 
Lothrop, 1992 
32p
Library ed. $13.93, Trade ed. $14.00 
R 
Gr. K-2
Morris and Heyman have employed an appealing approach to make what could
have been humdrum textbook-style material into an eyecatching and thought-
provoking look at human habits. In each book a simple and clear text outlines
aspects of the subject, such as the uses and types of tools and the building materials
of houses. The illustrative photographs (with picture-by-picture locale and de-
scription listed in the back of the books) are from hither and yon, ranging from
Russia to Haiti to Italy and to the U.S. Tools encompasses the obvious, such as
hammers, as well as implements, such as drinking straws and knitting needles, that
young readers may never have considered to be tools; Houses includes Indian house-
boats, Buckingham Palace, Portuguese apartment buildings, and an Inuit one-
man tent. The extent of human ingenuity and practicality is impressive, and the
tool-users and house-dwellers, be they relaxing grandmas, serious barbers, thoughtful
abacus-users, or frolicking small fry, all seem to be leading rich and interesting
lives. This is a bright and vivid pair sure to be useful in social studies units, and it
may give kids a new slant on their own homes and habits. In addition to the
descriptive index, a map of the photographic locations is included in each book.
DS
NAKAWATARI, HARUTAKA 
The Sea andI; written and illus. by Harutaka Nakawatari;
tr. by Susan Matsui. 
Farrar, 1992 
32p
ISBN 0-374-36428-1 
$15.00 
R 
4-8 yrs
Land- and seascape are almost everything in this picture book from Japan, which
recounts a small boy's waiting for his fisherman father to come home from the sea.
The long, low design of the book allows for some expansive double-spreads of the
sun rising over the island shore, the waves roiling onto the beach, the cool concrete
of the breakwater and jetty solid against the restless green of the water. In a shift
reminiscent ofYoshida's Young Lions (BCCB 3/89), a surprise vertical spread shows
the white lighthouse perched near the edge of a dizzying cliff, where the boy watches
the horizon for a sign of his father: "Is he all right?" While the boy's waiting and
exploring the shore do not exactly make for a story, they do supply an emotional
suspense concluded with the arrival of the fishing boat on shore during a magnifi-
cent sunset. RS
NICHOLS, JANET 
Women Music Makers: An Introduction to Women
Composers. Walker, 1992 
22 4 p 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8169-1 
$19.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8168-3 
$18.95 
R 
Gr. 6 up
Short biographies of ten women composers are listed in order chronologically,
from Barbara Strozzi (1619-64?) to Laurie Anderson (1947- 
). Although their
stories span more than three centuries, the lives of these women have much in
common-most of them made a living teaching music and all of them struggled
with prejudice against women composers. Nichols writes clearly, pulling together
biographical, historical, and musical facts into a smooth narrative. She writes equally
DECEMBER 1992 
* 
119
well on the diverse subjects of Clara Schumann's difficult life with her mentally ill
husband, Robert; Amy Beach's work to support women orchestra players against
attitudes like Sir Thomas Beecham's ("If the ladies are ill-favored the men do not
want to play with them, and if they are well-favored they can't"); and polyphony
versus homophony-a two-paragraph description that is so simple and clear, it
should be included in all music theory books. The book is appended with an
annotated list of twenty-four more composers, a bibliography, a discography, and
a glossary of terms. Black-and-white pictures, photographic and otherwise, illus-
trate the biographies. KJ
NYE, NAOMI SHIHAB, comp. ed. 
This Same Sky: A Collection ofPoems from around
the World. Macmillan, 1992 
[208p] 
illus.
ISBN 0-02-768440-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 7-12
An unusually rich collection of 161 poems from poets born outside the United
States, this includes famous poets such as Octavio Paz, Jean Joubert, and Yehuda
Amichai, who may be familiar to U. S. readers; more importantly, it contains
many writers who have not gained a foothold here or who are not well established
anywhere except in their verse. From Asia, Africa, South America, Canada, Eu-
rope, and Australia, Nye has collected and selected translations for poems that, for
the most part, have a direct voice with little technical guile and much to say. Some
of the selections are more about childhood than of it: "I would have been many
things when I grew up./ Today in old chests I search for pieces of bygone time/
Childhood is the only lasting flower" (Ram6n Diaz Eterovic, from Chile). Most,
however, are both: "I used to drop my pocket money/ into the rain grates by the
road/ taking them for piggy-banks-/ that's why it's the sea/ that owes me most"
(Sunay Akin, from Turkey). Quite a few are funny: "There is much promise/ in
the circumstance/ that so many people have heads," writes Miroslav Holub of
Czechoslovakia. The text is arranged into organic sections on Words and Silences,
Dreams and Dreamers, Families, This Earth and Sky in Which We Live, Losses,
and Human Mysteries, with illustrations at the beginning of each and a brief editor's
note introducing the whole. Notes on contributors, a map pinpointing countries
of origin, a brief suggestion of anthologies for further reading, and indexes to poets
and their countries are appended. BH
OAKLEY, GRAHAM 
The Church Mice and the Ring; written and illus. by Graham
Oakley. 
Atheneum, 1992 
32p
ISBN 0-689-31790-5 
$14.95 
R 
5-9 yrs
You sort of hate to suggest it, but you do wonder what Disney would do with
Graham Oakley's church mice, for if any mice could resist cutesying, these are
they. Cynical, conniving, and forever unrepentant, they even get thrown in jail in
this latest series entry, for breaking, entering, and looting a jewelry store. All in a
good cause, of course-the break-in is part of an extremely complicated plot to get
an abandoned dog together with the little girl who loves him: "They agreed that if
Percy stayed in the vestry, they'd all starve, and though while personally not one of
them minded starving in the least, no one could bear to stand by and see a friend
starve." Sure. Oakley's precise and very British line-and-watercolor illustrations
tell a good two-thirds of the story, so stay alert and look sharp. RS
120 
* THE BULLETIN
O'SHAUGHNESSY, ELLEN 
Somebody Called Me a Retard Today ... and My Heart
Felt Sad; illus. by David Garner. 
Walker, 1992 
24p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8197-7 
$14.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8196-9 
$13.95 
M 
4-7 yrs
Long of title but short on plot, this tells of a girl who is called "retard" (by a
schoolmate, presumably) and who cries and is comforted by her father's reassur-
ances that she has friends, responsibilities, and feelings. Title, text, and the simple,
emblematic watercolor illustrations all have a bibliotherapeutic air that may im-
pede the message-nobody likes a lecture, and most kids would rather hear either
straight facts or a story, preferably one about a picked-on outsider who fights back
and wins (unlike this book, which advises them to "walk away nicely"). Without
adult introduction, young listeners won't know that the girl in the book actually is
meant to be mentally retarded; to most kids, "retard," is a term applied without
discrimination. RS
PFEFFER, SUSAN BETH 
Twin Troubles; illus. by Abby Carter. 
Holt,
1992 
55p 
(Redfeather Books)
ISBN 0-8050-2146-9 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Crista and Betsy are eight-year-old twins, but right now it seems like Crista has all
the bad luck: "I wasn't paying attention in arithmetic and I didn't have enough
money for my book and the kittens only do cute stuff when I'm not around and I
didn't remember to do my homework and I had a toothache and Misty hates me."
Crista's litany of woes (each chapter states the griefwithin, such as "School Trouble,"
"Supper Trouble," and "Store Trouble") covers most of the plot, which is addi-
tionally complicated by the fact that Betsy, in her desire to demonstrate twinly
sympathy, keeps unintentionally competing with Crista's troubles by listing her
own. Carter's soft pencil illustrations are slyly distorted, with a fish-eye lens effect
that underlines Crista's helplessness while keeping it distanced enough to be amus-
ing. This is sort ofViorst's Alexanderin duplicate, but it's told with understanding
and humor and an evocation of real despair that will strike a chord of recognition
in grade-school readers. DS
RADUNSKY, EUGENIA AND VLADIMIR 
Square, Triangle, Round, Skinny; written and
illus. by Eugenia and Vladimir Radunsky. 
Holt, 1992 
24p
ISBN 0-8050-2205-8 
$19.95 
Ad 
2-4 yrs
Although this boxed set of four differently shaped, title-page-less, brad-bound tod-
dler books will give nightmares to both technical service and circulation depart-
ments, it could be lots of fun for library story hours. Each book fans out to show
simple but stylish drawings of objects that resemble the shape of the page. Tri-
angle, for example, includes the letter A, a clotheshanger, road sign, nose, and sail.
Square is occasionally iffy: few newspapers or suitcases are square, but on the
whole, the set portrays objects that most young children will readily identify as
being the shape claimed. The drawing has a downtown tone matched by bold
fields of color; occasional collage effects add texture. Pointy corners and a tempt-
ing thwackability might keep these out of the hands of the littlest, but the pages are
sturdy coated paper, and the set also includes a cool poster that would look good in
your office. RS
DECEMBER 1992 
* 
121
RASCHKA, CHRIS 
Charlie Parker Played Be Bop; written and illus. by Chris
Raschka. 
Jackson/Orchard, 1992 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08599-6 
$13.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05999-5 
$13.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Adults who love Charlie Parker will love this book; children may be more puzzled.
The charcoal and watercolor art will intrigue them right away because it's jazzy
and funny, with offbeat perspectives and unexpected motifs that mostly involve
feet. The text is as roomy and rhythmic as the pictures; in fact, it just misses being
a nonsense rhyme. And there's the rub. Nonsense rhymes, at some level and in
some strange way, make sense, and this seems to simply natter on, with various
features and creatures introduced and then dropped: "Alphabet, alphabet, alpha-
bet, alph,/ Chickadee, chickadee, chickadee, chick/ Overshoes, overshoes, over-
shoes, o,/ Reeti-footi, reeti-footi, reeti-footi, ree." Set in lots of varied typefaces,
the words do prance right along, and if they're read aloud with spirited style, kids
probably will go along for the beat. BH
RINGGOLD, FAITH 
Aunt Harriet's UndergroundRailroad; written and illus. by Faith
Ringgold. 
Crown, 1992 
[32 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-517-58768-8 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-58767-X 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 1-3
Very much an outgrowth of Ringgold's Tar Beach (BCCB 3/91), this starts on a
note that may be puzzling to children not familiar with the first book: "One day,
my baby brother Be Be and I were flying among the stars ... " when they see a train
with crowds of people boarding. Be Be slips on, but Cassie is left behind while the
conductor tells her about slavery and guides her from a plantation to freedom in
Canada. Whereas Ringgold's fantasy is daring, the informational tone here weighs
it down, and what happens to Cassie also happens to the book: as description
burdens dialogue ("Hello, Cassie. I am Harriet Tubman. People call me Aunt
Harriet because I take care of them. During slavery, I carried hundreds of men,
women, and children to freedom on the Underground Railroad, and never lost a
passenger"), the story falls down. On the other hand, the art is sustained at a high
level of drama, with bold-hued, painterly effects telling a story that could almost
be wordless. Cassie's ascent to freedom in the blue skies over an equally blue
Niagara Falls becomes transcendent as translated by Ringgold's sweeping
brushstrokes. Certainly worthwhile as a companion volume, this will also find its
way to an older audience, especially among primary-grades children exploring Af-
rican American history. BH
ROSEN, MICHAEL, ed. 
South and North, East and West: The Oxfam Book of
Children's Stories. Candlewick, 1992 
96 p 
illus.
ISBN 1-56402-117-3 
$19.95 
R Gr. 3-5
A generous collection of 25 stories from countries where Oxfam has developed
self-help projects in response to famine or other disasters, these are illustrated by
different artists in a format spacious enough to fit diverse styles comfortably to-
gether. Although some selections represent familiar old tale types-"The Man
Who Gave People Things To Look After," from Cyprus, for instance, or "The
Strongest Person in the World" from Korea-many are unusual and haunting
122 
* THE BULLETIN
("The Little Green Frog" from the Dominican Republic, "Good Morning" from
Bangladesh). All the tellings are fresh and colloquial, and the tonal range varies
from short and funny ("The Painter and the Judge" from China) to scary (ghost
stories from Jamaica, Malta, Vietnam, and England). The illustrators include Nicola
Bayley, John Burningham, Michael Foreman, Helen Oxenbury, and other favor-
ites, all working at the their artistic best. Notes about the contributors and the
organization conclude the book, royalties for which will benefit Oxfam. More
than a good cause, however, the anthology will serve as a resource for storytellers
seeking to expand on a standard European repertoire, as a read-aloud for preschool
children, and as a browsing item for independent readers. BH
SACHS, ELIZABETH-ANN 
Kiss Me, Janie Tannenbaum. Atheneum, 1992 
134 p
ISBN 0-689-31664-X 
$13.95 
R 
Gr. 5-7
Janie Tannenbaum, heroine of I Love You, Janie Tannenbaum and Just Like Al-
ways, returns here in a nautical adventure. Leaving her trusted would-be boyfriend
Harold behind, she and her family and her best friend Courtney take a whale-
watching trip off the Northeast coast. Janie takes to whale-watching with ceta-
cean-sized enthusiasm, standing on deck at all hours and in all weather, eager for
every bit of information she can get. This absorption gains her the admiration of
the captain's teenage son, but events and true comradeship conspire to save Janie's
first kiss for loyal landlubber Harold. The marine biology is incorporated fairly
naturally into the narration and its profusion is logical in light ofJanie's obsession;
the whole whale-watching trip is depicted with a realism (cramped cabins, seasick-
ness) that make it seem all the greater an adventure. The low-key (despite the
efforts of boy-hungry Courtney) possibilities of romance are piquant, but it's also
refreshing to read about a junior high girl who's not all that interested in flirtation.
Janie remains a sturdy and engaging protagonist, and new readers as well as old
fans should enjoy her seagoing story. DS
SHEFELMAN, JANICE 
A Peddler's Dream; illus. by Tom Shefelman. 
Houghton,
1992 
32 p
ISBN 0-395-60904-6 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
This is the story of the failures and successes of an immigrant in America. At the
turn of the century, Solomon Joseph Azar travels from Lebanon to New York
state, where he sets up business as a peddler. After he gets robbed on a dark road,
Solomon finds new friends who help him get started in the dry goods business,
travels back home to claim his waiting bride, and prospers, even after a fire de-
stroys his first store. The typical picture book audience may not appreciate this
version of the American dream as much as independent readers exploring their
ethnic roots. Detailed ink and watercolor illustrations are as tonally sophisticated
as the biographical narrative. The panoramic scenes are lively, but the close-up
figures seem studied and are sometimes awkwardly drawn. Although the format
seems young for the story, this is a compelling description of a family's successful
immigration. KJ
SOTO, GARY 
Pacific Crossing. Harcourt, 1992 
[14 4 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-15-259187-7 
$15.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-15-259188-5 
$6.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
DECEMBER 1992 
* 
123
Somewhat fortuitously, Lincoln and Tony, introduced in Taking Sides (BCCB
11/91), find themselves winging across the ocean to Japan, courtesy of a summer
student exchange program. This isn't so much a novel as it is a series of episodes
that lightheartedly explore the culture clash between Lincoln's Mexican-American
heritage and the customs of his Japanese host family. "Mitsuo tilted his head
curiously and asked, 'What is "tortilla"? And that other word-"freeholies"?"'
Mitsuo is the son in Lincoln's Japanese family, and Soto effectively uses the friend-
ship between the two fourteen-year-olds to explore cultural currencies (the author
seems only intermittently to remember that Tony, Lincoln's best friend, is also
staying in the same town). Like Lincoln, most readers will discover here a Japan
different from samurai (or electronic Tokyo) stereotypes: Mitsuo's family lives in
a small farming town and dresses in Western clothes; Lincoln's sensei (martial arts
teacher) is a woman. Attempts at action, such as a Keystone Cops chase through
Tokyo, are sketchy and silly; the book works best in the small moments of family
banter. Lincoln and Mitsuo hope for a reunion in San Francisco, a situation that
would make a pleasing sequel. RS
STANLEY, DIANE 
BardofAvon: The Story of William Shakespeare; written by Diane
Stanley and Peter Vennema; illus. by Diane Stanley. 
Morrow, 1992 
4 8p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-09109-1 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-09108-3 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Stanley and Vennema, co-creators of picture-book biographies of Good Queen Bess
(BCCB 10/90) and Shaka, King of the Zulus (BCCB 11/88), here take on-and
quite successfully-the Immortal Bard. The authors makes a clear distinction
between the little actually known about William Shakespeare's life and their specu-
lation based on general knowledge of the Elizabethan era ("We don't know what
play they performed. Perhaps they did Ralph Roister Doister, a funny play with
characters named Matthew Merrygreek and Margery Mumblecrust") as it traces
the actor-playwright's life from country childhood through London dramatic life,
then back to his final rural days. While biography is sometimes sweepingly impli-
cated as a force in Shakespeare's writing (about his last plays, the authors say "There
is a gentle quality about them, and a love of the countryside, which suggests that
William Shakespeare had found peace in the village of his childhood"), the discus-
sion of the place of his individual works and drama in general is succinct, under-
standable, and peppered with interesting facts-kids will enjoy hearing about the
theft of an entire theatre and the playwright's famous bequest of the second-best
bed to his wife. Illustrations run to earth tones and a slightly flat, stylized look that
gives them a period flavor; they offer a good idea of theatre life, although it looks
un-Elizabethanly clean and tidy (it's also difficult to discern in group scenes which
man, if any, is Shakespeare). A highly readable and informative postscript about
spelling and language is included, as is a bibliography. DS
STEVENS, BRYNA 
Frank Thompson: Her Civil War Story. 
Macmillan,
1992 
14 4 p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-02-788185-7 
$13.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-10
Born in Canada in 1841, Emma Edmonds, determined to avoid an arranged mar-
riage, ran away from home, eventually disguising herself as "Frank Thompson,
itinerant Bible salesman. Emma's longing for adventure also led her to join up
with the Union Army during the Civil War, still disguised as Frank, a masquerade
124 
* THE BULLETIN
she successfully carried off through her entire wartime stint as nurse, soldier, and
spy. It's a great, valorous story, filled with feminist lessons for our time, but the
real character of Emma/Frank is somewhat difficult to glean from this biography.
For one thing, the author includes a lot of military history about the battles in
which Frank participated, and it's both too much and not enough: in one inci-
dent, Frank is spying in the Union state of Kentucky when she is drafted by a local
official to serve in the Confederate Army. This is entirely probable, but the author
needs to explain the confused state of affairs in Kentucky at that time. Another
problem is the author's second-guessing of Edmonds' own autobiography, par-
ticularly when it comes to finding Emma a boyfriend: "Emma was hiding her true
emotions; when she said she found their new friendship 'very pleasant,' she was no
doubt downplaying her feelings of love for the lieutenant." In the next chapter,
the same lieutenant is unequivocally Emma's "sweetheart," although the author
offers no evidence for any relationship beyond friendship. Edmonds' story can
survive the innuendo, however, and it brings an intriguing voice and new perspec-
tive to Civil War study. A bibliography, index, and some period prints and photo-
graphs are included. RS
STODDARD, SANDOL, comp. ed. 
Prayers, Praises, and Thanksgivings; illus. by Rachel
Isadora. 
Dial, 1992 
152p
ISBN 0-8037-0421-6 
$18.50 
Ad 
Gr. 3 up
While Rachel Isadora's watercolors offer some intensely hued visions of God's
creation, this collection of prayers, poems, and spirituals is text-heavy, with easily
three times the number of pieces in Bijou Le Tord's collection reviewed above.
The arrangement into three parts (Beginnings, Reaching Out, The Great Journey)
is explained, rather metaphysically, in a prefatory note; but most kids will sort it
out as Easy, Medium, and Difficult. Like Le Tord's, Stoddard's collection is
multicultural, but with only those poems from the Judeo-Christian religion nam-
ing a specific deity. Neither book will find a ready audience of independent read-
ers, but parents, storytellers, and Sunday school teachers should be able to find
many times and places for a judicious introduction to individual prayers. Stoddard's
book has a first-line index. RS
SWITZER, ELLEN 
Anyplace but Here: Young, Alone, and Homeless: What to
Do. Atheneum, 1992 
161p
ISBN 0-689-31694-1 
$13.95 
R 
Gr. 6-12
In this survey of runaway teens and children Switzer demonstrates a consistent
advocacy for the rights and interests of young people, both those on the run and
those still trying to get a handle on their problems at home. Beginning with her
own attempt at running away from home when she was fifteen, Switzer states that
young people who run away do so for very good reasons: "no kid leaves home and
stays in the streets for longer than a few days without feeling that anything that the
uncertain future holds is better than the impossible present." She cites such rea-
sons as child abuse and other family problems; more important, she shows that
running away only presents more problems of its own. Interviews with several
runaway teens who have turned to stealing, prostitution, and panhandling to sur-
vive are sobering and never melodramatic; portraits of kids who have formed street
"families" of their own show them to be at once admirable and foolhardy. Switzer's
adept blend of personal stories and social commentary is given added value in the
DECEMBER 1992 
* 
125
second part of the book, which offers specific advice (and hotline numbers) about
handling various problems and crises, and suggests ways in which family trouble
can be worked out without running away. RS
TOLAN, STEPHANIE S. 
The Witch ofMaple Park. Morrow, 1992
ISBN 0-688-10581-5 
$14.00 
154p 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Sometimes Casey has to admit that her friend Mackenzie's premonitions are right,
but Casey isn't convinced that the old lady they keep seeing in the park is a witch
until the girls hear a blood-curdling scream coming from her apartment. The girls
rely on Mackenzie's psychic powers to locate their little friend Barnaby when he
disappears-and she "sees" him with the witch. Several subplots disrupt the sus-
pense of the main theme: Mackenzie's concern for her mother's catering business,
Casey's algebra troubles, and her crush on the wrong boy. As a result, the overall
story is more ordinary than the title or cover art would suggest, but Tolan's skills
keep all the diverse story elements together, including verification of Mackenzie's
psychic powers. A semi-scary story with a happy ending. KJ
TURNER, ANN 
Katie's Trunk; illus. by Ronald Himler. 
Macmillan, 1992 
32p
ISBN 0-02-789512-2 
$13.95 
R* 
6-9 yrs
According to the jacket flap, this story is based on an incident that happened to an
ancestor of the author's during the Revolutionary War. Katie is the lively young
daughter of a Tory family, confused and frightened by the hostility of her inde-
pendence-seeking neighbors ("Already we had lost friends, neighbors, families we
had played with on the green and helped with building their new barns"). When
the Patriots come pillaging, Katie hides from them in her mother's wedding trunk,
where she would surely have suffocated were it nr c for the intervention of one
supposed enemy. This is an unusual look at a cor iplicated time, and kids will be
startled to see "us," the virtuous founders of America, as the bad guys. The spare
and evocative prose has an elegant simplic:ty that reads well aloud or alone, and
Himler's earth-toned watercolors are softly historical without being sentimental.
The story has resonance even for those to whom the history is unfamiliar, and it
personalizes the past and hints at the complexities of rebellion and dissent in a way
that should provoke thought and discussion among young listeners. DS
VAIL, RACHEL 
Do-Over. Jackson/Orchard, 1992 
14 3p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08610-0 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05460-8 
$14.95 
R* 
Gr. 5-8
Whitman Levy, who had a cameo role in Vail's terrific first novel Wonder (BCCB
9/91), seems always to be looking for a "do-over," a second chance, whether it's a
disputed basketball point, a confrontation with his unhappy parents, or a conver-
sation with a girl. Whit is going through a whole slew of eighth-grade troubles,
including the offer of his first Drink: "Just Say No, I thought. Or Just Do It.
Which? Don't think. Either just say no or just do it, but either way, don't think
about it." He Just Does It, and soon after has his first French kiss, which is greeted
with less than enthusiasm by girlfriend Sheila: "It was like a live fish in my mouth!
Ew!" Vail catches all the sharp edges as well as all the blunt talk of junior high life;
unlike Betsy Byars' Bingo Brown, Whit never seems filtered through the percep-
tions of a wiser adult. Vail's as nervy as Judy Blume, tossing off references to
adolescent "stiffies," confronting junior-high racism, and facing the realities of
126 
* 
THE BULLETIN
divorce, including Whit's father's affair with one of Whit's teachers. When asked
by his concerned dad if there is "anything he can do," Whit replies with anguished
aplomb, "You can stop screwing the drama teacher, for one." But Vail is funnier
than Blume, and more moving, partly because of her natural ear for teenaged talk
and partly because she never, ever preaches. This is the real thing. RS
VANDE VELDE, VIVIAN 
Dragon's Bait Yolen/Harcourt, 1992 
131p
ISBN 0-15-200726-1 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 7-10
In an other-worldly novel, Alys, the tin-smith's daughter, is accused of practicing
witchcraft by a heartless neighbor. In punishment, Alys is left tied to a hill to be a
dragon's dinner, but she is able to free herself before the dragon arrives. When he
does turn up, he isn't even hungry, but he is interested in her story and offers to
help with her revenge on the people who accused her. Alys wonders at his motiva-
tion when he keeps transforming from a dragon into a handsome (and naked)
young man. A few key places in the plot are unlikely-the neighbor accuses Alys
so he can get extra storage space in her father's shop, Alys first reveals herself to the
dragon in the hope of being eaten even though she has just escaped, Alys is horri-
fied when the dragon kills one of her accusers and still she accepts his invitation to
live with him. It is the eeriness of the tale that holds it together, the feeling that
every character is evil and Alys must simply learn how to fit in. This story of
developing sexuality and regretful revenge will attract moody adolescents. KJ
WATKINS, YOKO KAWASHIMA 
Tales from the Bamboo Grove; illus. by Jean and
Mou-sien Tseng. 
Bradbury, 1992 
53p
ISBN 0-02-792525-0 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 3-5
The author of So Far from the Bamboo Grove (BCCB 6/86) relates six Japanese
folktales she heard as a child, all of them bearing strong moral messages via themes
of magic and transformation. Indeed, the introduction includes a valuable de-
scription of the circumstances that led various family members to select and pass
on the stories. The shadows of World War II, for instance, remind Father of "The
Grandmother Who Became an Island," about a woman who seeks peace after her
grandson is lost to battling warriors. Despite occasional expressions that seem to
break tone with the general style ("Wow!" and "Goody, Goody!"), the stories re-
tain dark threads that are often snipped out of collections for children and that
make these all the more genuine. The girl who wishes for eternal beauty gets it-
as a dragon; the kind farmer loses his beloved Fox Wife; a number of creatures
gang up on mean Monkey to teach him a lesson. The Tsengs' delicate watercolor
illustrations enhance an easy-to-read text that is spaciously formated, rendering
this accessible to independent readers as well as to storytellers. BH
WELLS, ROSEMARY 
First Tomato; ISBN 0-8037-1175-1; Moss Pillows, ISBN 0-
8037-1177-8; The Island Light, ISBN 0-8037-1178-6; written and illus. by Rose-
mary Wells. 
Each book: Dial, 1992 
$12.89 
32p 
(A Voyage to the Bunny
Planet) 
Boxed set: ISBN 0-8037-1174-3 
$13.00 
R* 
3-6 yrs
Available in two formats, a small boxed set and a larger library edition series for
more convenient shelving and sharing, these make good use of a magic-friend plot
formula. Each rabbit-child protagonist has a terrible day (told in prose) that trips
DECEMBER 1992 
* 
127
off a poetic fantasy escape: "Far beyond the moon and stars,/ Twenty light-years
south of Mars,/ Spins the gentle Bunny Planet/ And the Bunny Queen is Janet."
Claire, waiting for a bus in the snow, retreats to a blissful garden and picks the
perfect tomato for her mother; Felix, a victim of the flu and what he considers
parental neglect, finds perfect happiness with his father in a cozy lighthouse; Rob-
ert, bullied by four obnoxious cousins, gets an idyllic forest all to himself. "Deep
in a pocket of emerald moss/ I lie where the leaves fall free./ My pillow is soft as
milkweed/ And as green as a tropical sea." Wells' poetry has a melodic ring remi-
niscent of Nancy Willard's, and her watercolors show characteristic whimsical piz-
zazz. Kids will want to hear these over and over to pick out a favorite; adults will
find the experience lulling, but don't miss the sly historical note under each copy-
right statement. BH
WELLS, RUTH 
A to Zen; illus. by Yoshi. 
Picture Book Studio, 1992 
[26 p]
ISBN 0-88708-175-4 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 1-3
Only seemingly titled "This book begins on the other side" (that's actually an
invitation to turn the book over), A to Zen is a Japanese-style run through the
English alphabet. Like Bannatyne-Cugnet's Prairie Alphabet reviewed above, this
is a book where genre and content don't quite match up: most children learning
their a-b-c's won't be helped by explanations of aikido, bunraku, and chanoyu. For
older children, however, the information will be interesting, and the book has an
enlightening balance of the traditional (kimono, origami), the contemporary
(pachinko, wokuman), and the sobering (Hiroshima). Yoshi's paintings have the
inky exactness of traditional Japanese woodcuts, but they are apparently batiks,
with some color bleeding that gives the pictures a soft effect. As is also true of
Prairie Alphabet, the design, illustration, and information presented here are so-
phisticated enough that older kids won't dismiss it as a baby book; both books are
attractive, tidbit introductions to other ways of living. RS
WOOD, TED 
A Boy Becomes a Man at Wounded Knee; written by Ted Wood with
Wanbli Numpa Afraid of Hawk; illus. with photographs by Ted Wood. 
Walker,
1992 
4 8p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8175-6 
$16.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8174-8 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
For four years, Wanbli Numpa Afraid of Hawk has wanted to join his father for
the 150-mile memorial horseback procession to Wounded Knee; now that he is
eight he will be allowed to ride. This year's Big Foot Memorial Ride is particularly
special: it is the centennial of the Wounded Knee massacre, and the last time the
ride will occur. Told, not always convincingly, from Wanbli Numpa's point of
view, the book is a bit too self-consciously reverential, with repeated references to
Wanbli Numpa "becoming a man" and an earnest tone that conveys more infor-
mation than personality. Still, the ride is a solemn, significant commemoration
that is due all the dignity this book gives to it, and the facts about the massacre of
the Lakota (Sioux) people at Wounded Knee and their subsequent impoverish-
ment are worth retelling. Color photos are too small to capture the drama of
Wanbli Numpa's ride, but they will give readers an idea of the cold Dakotan land-
scape; the juxtaposition of horses, tepees, and nylon snowsuits reinforces both con-
temporary and mythic aspects of the journey. RS
128 
* THE BULLETIN
WOODRUFF, ELVIRA 
Dear Napoleon, I Know You're Dead, But.. .; illus. by Noah
and Jess Woodruff. 
Holiday House, 1992 
220p
ISBN 0-8234-0962-7 
$13.95 
R Gr. 4-6
When Marty Belucci's fourth-grade class is assigned to write letters to famous
people, the only people Marty wants to write to-Napoleon, Vincent Van Gogh-
are dead. Marty's beloved Gramps, newly resident in a nursing home, tells the boy
that a special postal service operates out of the home, and that it can deliver mail to
and from the past; Marty's letters from Napoleon, Abraham Lincoln, Thomas
Edison, and Vincent Van Gogh seem to bear this out, as well as provide a comfort-
ing connection with the past and with his grandfather when the old man dies.
Woodruff pulls off the unlikely premise surprisingly well, and the letters to and
from Marty are convincing and touching (although the translation question is
completely ignored). There are a few missteps, such as a slapstick pet chase through
the nursing home and caricatures of administrators; yet overall the institution is
depicted sympathetically but not rosily, with Marty and readers gradually adjust-
ing to an initially strange and upsetting place. The strong points are the depiction
of Marty's relationship with Gramps and the character of Marty himself, a likeable
and funny boy (there's a hilarious scene where Marty spins an elaborate fantasy
about the raisins from his cereal-"They were a family of acrobatic raisins, he
decided, and he began to stack them up, one on top of another, for their famous
family pyramid trick"). The light touches and fanciful twist makes this an appeal-
ing story of a child's adjusting to loss. DS
WOODSON, JACQUELINE 
AMaizon at Blue Hill. Delacorte, 1992 
[14 4 p]
ISBN 0-385-30796-9 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-7
Last Summer with Maizon (BCCB 10/90) ended with Maizon calling her best
friend Margaret to tell her that she was leaving boarding school after only one
term; this sequel tells the story of what happened to Maizon to make her so desper-
ately want to come home. Maizon told Margaret that the other girls hated her; the
real situation is more complicated. One of only five black girls at Blue Hill, Maizon
doesn't know where to fit in. Is it with the clique ofCharli, Marie, and Sheila, the
three black girls older than Maizon, who stick together and who encourage Maizon
to avoid the company of white students? Maizon meets some friendly white stu-
dents, like Sandy, her roommate; she also meets others whose racism is barely
hidden. While this is more of a situation-exploration than a story, Maizon's lone-
liness is palpable and realistically complex in its causes and manifestations. And
just as Blue Hill seems, overall, like a nice place, it also seems clear that it is not the
place for Maizon. More sharply written than its predecessor, this novel contains
some acute characterizations, most thoroughly in Maizon, but also in the almost
cameo-like appearances of the other students. RS
WORTH, VALERIE 
At Christmastime, illus. by Antonio Frasconi. 
DiCapua/
HarperCollins, 1992 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-205020-6 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-205019-2 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Worth's cycle of twenty-nine poems begins with anticipation of the holiday in
"Early December" and journeys through the highs and lows of the season until
"Spring" brings a reminder: 
"By the muddy path/ Glints a single/ Crumpled
DECEMBER 1992 
* 
129
strand/ Of Christmas tinsel." Tinsel is, in fact, almost a motif of the collection,
entwined with other sharp images of hue and texture that evoke a decorative tradi-
tion and that are often buoyed by unexpected internal rhyme. Frasconi's full-color
double-spread woodcuts support Worth's words with bright graphics incorporated
into an artfully designed format. Through lyrical descriptions anchored in solid
shapes of illustration, both author and artist are telling a story here, one that adults
will want to savor slowly with children in a family or small-group setting. BH
ZINDEL, PAUL 
The Pigman and Me. 
Zolotow/HarperCollins, 1992 
16 8p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-020858-9 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-020857-0 
$14.00 
R* 
Gr. 7-12
Those who consider The Pigman a touchstone of young adult literature but who
find some of Zindel's later works glib may approach this memoir with trepidation.
Don't worry; it's the freshest writing he's done for a long time. In fact, the Pigman
here-and the relationship between him and the author as adolescent-is devel-
oped with a depth not always accorded their fictional counterparts. Zindel's mother
is a neurotic peripatetic wanderer who moves with her two children into a cock-
roach-infested house with a divorcee named Connie Vivona, Connie's young twins,
and, on weekends, Connie's visiting old-country parents, who cook fabulous Ital-
ian dishes for the whole household. Nonno Frankie is the prototype of the Pigman,
and this account of Paul and Nonno Frankie's relationship, which includes a neigh-
borhood girl like Lorraine in The Pigman, has a less dramatic ending than betrayal
but a more authentically sad one-the common tragedy of separation. Zindel fans
will find motifs from many of Zindel's stories, along with his characteristically
bizarre perspective, but here we see that they come from a specific personal situa-
tion rather than a generic teenage condition. From food to feelings, this is a viv-
idly detailed account that will tap into its audience with accessible humor via Nonno
Frankie, a font of wisdom and recipes: "In every fat book, there's a little thin book
trying to get out!" he counsels Paul, who is struggling with school work, and later,
"a closed mouth gathers no feet!" That kind of advice could sustain a kid through
anything, and the kid here had reason to need it. BH
130 
* THE BULLETIN
J
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
Reading for Parents, Teachers, and Librarians:
Booklist Associate Editor Stephanie Zvirin has compiled a helpful new selection
and readers' advisory guide, The Best Years of Their Lives: A Resource Guide for
Teenagers in Crisis (ALA, 1992). With chapter titles such as "School Daze, "Fam-
ily Matters," "Death: Romance and Reality," and "Sex Stuff," Zvirin includes
reviews and complete bibliographic citations for some two-hundred recommended
YA titles, primarily nonfiction, but with some relevant fiction as well. Addition-
ally, there is a selective filmography compiled by Ellen Mandel. Zvirin's reviews
are crisp and intelligent; interviews with health and social issues writers Jill Krementz,
Eda LeShan and Janet Bode add interest; the format and writing are clear enough
that teens will be able to use this book on their own. (12 2p, paper ed. ISBN 0-
9389-0586-2, $18.00.) RS
Growing Up with Music: A Guide to the Best Recorded Music for Children by Laurie
Sale is an enthusiastic catalog of musical cassettes and CDs produced expressly for
children. With hundreds of recordings listed, the main chapters include lullabies,
baby and toddler music, recordings for preschoolers, and recordings for children
ages four through ten; briefer sections cover holiday music, classical music, and
recordings in French and Spanish. Sale's writing is slightly gushy (with the over-
use of "delightful" becoming particularly annoying) and she likes almost every-
thing; at the same time, her knowledge of the field seems encyclopedic, and the
book covers a whole raft of artists, from children's music stars such as Raffi and
Rosenshontz to those much less well-known. Recordings in each chapter are listed
alphabetically by artist; an index would have been helpful. (256 p, paper ed. ISBN
0-380-76211-0, $10.00, reviewed from galleys.) RS
Violet J. Harris (a member of the Center for Children's Books Advisory Commit-
tee) has edited Teaching Multicultural Literature in Grades K-8 (Christopher-Gor-
don, 1992). Joel Taxel and Rudine Sims Bishop contribute chapters on the politics
and selection of multicultural literature for children; Harris, Donnarae MacCann,
Sonia Nieto and others contribute chapters on particular cultures as depicted in
children's books, including African Americans, Asian Pacific Americans, Native
Americans, Puerto Ricans, Mexican Americans and Caribbeans. Each chapter
balances selection considerations, literary history, and recommended titles; argu-
ments are passionate and well-made. (29 6 p, ISBN 0-926842-13-7, $31.95.) RS
The Children's Literature Center of the Library of Congress has issued its latest
edition of Books for Children, an annotated pamphlet of recommended children's
DECEMBER 1992 
* 
131
and YA books from 1991. Order from the Superintendent of Documents, U.S.
Government Printing Office, Dept. 39-LC, Washington, D.C. 20402. The cost
is $1.00 (check or money order); the stock number is 030-001-00138-5.
The Children's Book Council is offering a useful brochure called "Writing
Children's Books," basic advice for neophyte children's writers on how to find out
about children's books, submit manuscripts to publishers, etc. The cost of the
brochure is $1.00 plus SASE; write to the Children's Book Council, 568 Broad-
way, New York, NY 10012.
From the journals ...
Butler, Francelia. "The Trashing of Children's Literature," Ms., September/Octo-
ber, 1992.
Camper, Cathryn. "The Secret Shelf: Subversive Literature for Young Artists,"
School Library Journal September, 1992.
Hearne, Betsy. "Patterns of Sound, Sight, and Story: From Literature to Lit-
eracy," The Lion and the Unicorn, June, 1992.
Hernandez-Delgado, Julio L. "Pura Teresa Belpre, Storyteller and Pioneer Puerto
Rican Librarian," Library Quarterly, October, 1992.
Huck, Charlotte. "Developing Lifetime Readers," (1992 May Hill Arbuthnot
Lecture), Journal of Youth Services in Libraries, Summer, 1992.
Kuivasmiki, Riitta. "Finnish Children's Literature," Signal, May, 1992.
Raymo, Chet. "Dr. Seuss and Dr. Einstein: Children's Books and Scientific Imagi-
nation," Horn Book, September/October, 1992.
Sutton, Roger. "What Mean We, White Man?," Voice of YouthAdvocates, August,
1992.
'3
132 
* THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this new index, which
will appear in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-
CAPS refer to genres and appeals. In no way meant to be a cataloging aid, this
rather idiosyncratic index is instead intended to lead readers to those books re-
viewed that could fill a particular gap in a collection; to help teachers and librarians
find books that might be useful in various school or recreational settings; and to
help in those requests for a "love story" or a "scary story." In the case of subject
headings, the subhead "stories" refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fic-
tion," to those books intended for independent reading.
African Americans-fiction:
McKissack; Woodson
African Americans-stories:
Ringgold
African Americans: Hart; Hunter
ALPHABET BOOKS:
Bannatyne-Cugnet; Wells
Animals-poetry: King-Smith;
Kennedy
Argentina-folktales: Brusca
Artists-stories: Carle
Autism: Amenta
Aviation: Hart
Aviation-fiction: Byars
BEDTIME STORIES: Wells
Boarding schools-fiction:
Woodson
Canada: Banatyne-Cugnet
Careers: Florian
CHRISTMAS CAROLS: De
Brabeuf
CHRISTMAS STORIES: Heath
Christmas-poetry: Kennedy;
Worth
Civil War: Stevens
Codes and ciphers: Aaseng
Columbus Day: Fritz
CONCEPT BOOKS: Radunsky
Crime and criminals-fiction: Gee
Death-fiction: Henkes
DIARIES: Hunter
Dogs-stories: Day; Lindenbaum
Dragons-fiction: Vande Velde
Drama: Stanley
Ecology: Cole
Elephants-fiction: Harvey, D
Emotional problems-fiction:
Geras
FAIRYTALES AND
FOLKTALES: Brusca; Ehlert;
Rosen; Watkins
FAMILY STORIES: Pfeffer; Sachs
FANTASY: Dillon; Harvey, D.;
Monsell; Vande Velde; Woo-
druff
Fathers and sons-stories:
Nakawatari
Food and eating: Fleming; Florian
Food and eating-stories: Heath
Friends-fiction: Henkes; Tolan
FUNNY STORIES: Dillon;
Harvey, D.; Harvey, J.; Pfeffer
Grandparents-fiction: Byars;
Woodruff
Gulf War-fiction: Cooney
History, U, S.: Turner; Aaseng;
Stevens; Wood; Greeson;
Ringgold
History, World: Fritz
Homelessness: Switzer
Houses: Morris
Immigrants-stories: Shefelman
Japan: Wells
Japan-fiction: Soto
Japan-folklore: Watkins
Japan-stories: Nakawatari
Jazz-stories: Raschka
Latinos-fiction: Soto
DECEMBER 1992 
* 
133
Letter-writing-fiction: Woodruff
Literature, Children's: Anderson;
Zindel
Literature, English: Stanley
Mental retardation-stories:
O'Shaughnessy
Mice-stories: Fleming; Oakley
Mothers and sons: Zindel
Mothers and sons-fiction: Brooks
Motorcycles-fiction
Music: Nichols
Native Americans: Aaseng; De
Brebeuf; Wood
Native Americans-stories: Goble
New Zealand-fiction: Gee
Noah's Ark-poetry: Bernos de
Gasztold
Oceanography: Cole; Sachs
Parties-stories: Day
Peru-folklore: Ehlert
POETRY: Bernos de Gasztold;
Kennedy; King-Smith; Le Tord;
Lee; Nye; Stoddard; Worth
PRAYERS: LeTord; Stoddard
Prejudice-fiction: Woodson
Pyromania-stories: Gee
Racquetball-fiction
Rape-fiction: Geras
Reading aloud: Rosen; Watkins
Reading, easy: Pfeffer; Dillon;
Greeson; Harvey, J.
Reading, reluctant: Cooney;
McKissack; Soto; Vail
REFERENCE BOOKS: Kohl
Religious education: Bernos de
Gasztold; De Brebeuf; Le Tord
Revolutionary War-stories:
Turner
Runaways: Switzer
Rural life: Anderson; Bannatyne-
Cugnet
SCARY STORIES: McKissack
SCHOOL STORIES: Vail;
Woodson
School: Hunter
Seaside life-stories: Nakawatari
Shakespeare, William: Stanley
Social issues: Switzer
Soldiers-fiction: Cooney
Stepparents-fiction: Brooks;
Dillon
Story hour: Brett; Brusca; Carle;
Ehlert; Fleming; Lindenbaum;
Oakley; Radunsky; Wells
Teachers-stories: Cole
Tools: Morris
Trolls-stories: Brett
Tubman, Harriet-stories:
Ringgold
Twins-fiction: Pfeffer
Underground Railroad-stories:
Ringgold
Vampires-fiction: Harvey, J.
War of 1812: Greeson
Whale-watching-fiction: Sachs
Wilder, Laura Ingalls: Anderson
Witches-fiction: Tolan
Women's studies: Nichols;
Stevens
Work-stories: Heath
World War II: Aaseng
134 
* THE BULLETIN
STATEMENT OF OWNERSHIP, MANAGEMENT AND CIRCULATION
OF THE BULLETIN OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS (ISSN
0008-9036), as required by 39 U.S. Code 3685.
THE BULLETIN OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS is pub-
lished eleven times a year (monthly except August); annual subscription price is
$35.00 (domestic), $40.00 (foreign).
The owner and publisher is the University of Illinois Press acting for the Graduate
School of Library and Information Science at the University of Illinois, a non-
profit organization. Office of publication is located at 54 E. Gregory Dr., Cham-
paign, II61820. The managing editor is Roger Sutton, The Bulletin of the Center
for Children's Books, 1512 N. Fremont, Chicago, II 60622. There are no stock-
holders, bondholders, mortgages, or other security holders.
The purpose, function, and nonprofit status of this organization and the ex-
empt status for Federal income tax purposes have not changed during the preced-
ing 12 months.
Average number of copies printed per issue (net press run) during the preced-
ing twelve months: 7318; number for single issue nearest filing date: 7318. Av-
erage number of copies of each issue distributed by mail to paid subscribers during
preceding twelve months: 5048; number for single issue nearest to filing date:
5048. Average number of copies distributed for free per issue during preceding 12
months: 93; number for single issue nearest to filing date: 93. Average number of
copies of each issue not distributed (office use, unaccounted, spoiled after print-
ing) during preceding 12 months: 2177; number for single issue nearest to filing
date: 2177.
I certify that the statements made by me above are correct and complete.
Carole S. Appel
Journals Manager, University of Illinois Press
October 1, 1992
Note: Because of a change in publishers, these circulation figures are based upon
one month's (September, 1992) statistics and do not reflect the average yearly
subscription levels of The Bulletin.
Starred in The Bulletin
ii
CUrAytFo. 
ipfw 
llO 
* 
v1 v- 
inVt7viy./, 
*iLx.U, I.w4J 
vuu~v 
u
Publisher's price only and in no way refects the price at which available from any other source.
Michael di Capua Books * HarperCollins Publishers
10 East 53rd Street, New York 10022
[
WHY THE SKY IS I
A Nigerian Folktale
Retold by Mary-Joan Gerson
Pictures by Carla Golembe
"People used to be able to reach up and take a piece of the nearby
sky to eat; but when they became wasteful, the angry sky moved
upward, out of reach.... Exciting, brightly colored illustrations
bring new life to this Nigerian pourquoi tale." -Horn Book
"Using Nigerian folk motifs, Golembe's simple, theatrical
illustrations combine monotype prints and collages in brilliant
colors.... With its playfulness and drama, this is a fine book for
story hour, especially in an ecology program:' -ALA Booklist
Ages 4-8. (15.45) $15.95 0-316-30852-8
Joy Street Books * LITTLE, BROWN
moi nDin D oinoM 
omo momo
"A single mother prepares for her new job, while her youngest
child fears that Mom will forget her while at work. Young-
sters will easily identify with this deftly handled common
situation:' -Booklist
"The collaboration of this illustrator and author has resulted
in a wonderful story.... Double-page oil paintings capture
the warmth, love, and caring in this family." -*SLJ
"Wholly believable as a story of separation anxiety handled
with understanding and patience." -BCCB
Full color. Ages 4-8. Tr. 0-8037-1127-1. $14.00
Lib. 0-8037-1129-8. $13.89
Dial Books for Young Readers
A Division of Penguin USA
The further adventures of DOCTOR DE SOTO,
William Steig's Newbery Honor Winner
Doctor De Soto
Goes To Africa
Story and full-color pictures by
WILLIAM STEIG
I"Devoted 
fans will give
their eyeteeth for another
story about the selfless,
diminutive dentist."
I -The Horn Book
'It's all here: the exuberant,
Steigian
phrases that
somersault
off the tongue,
the nimble
humor, the
unflinching drama
... The vibrant,
colorful illus-
trations exude a
freshness and
pizzazz that will leave
readers wondering
where the next
world-class
toothache will strike."
.- Publishers Weekly 
n
"Steig's fresh, humorous
turns of phrase, his amiable
characterizations, and his
gentle colors are as beguil-
ing and ingenuous as ever."
--Kirkus Reviews
Ages 3 up.
$15.00* TR (0-06 205002-8),
$14.89t LB (0 06 205003 6)
Pubtisher 
s pnces only and in no way reflect the
prices at which anaitable from any ot her scarce
Go Big Red!
The Story of a Nebraska
Football Player
George R. Mills
Foreword by Randy Roberts
Mills makes it clear that a "student athlete"
in a major football program is inevitably
much more of an athlete than a student.
After team meetings and hours of prac-
ticing drills and lifting weights, there is
precious little time or energy left for
academics. Mills's career illustrates that
there is far more drudgery than glory
in big-time college football.
"Anyone who's been disgusted by the
recent revelations concerning college
sports and its abuses may want to read
Mills's story. It's an eloquent statement
of sport's value as an environment
for learning about-and sometimes ex-
panding-one's limitations." -
Wes
Lukowsky, ALA Booklist
"This is a good choice for libraries
serving athletes and their parents."
-
Library Journal
Illus. Cloth, $19.95
Order tollfree 800/545-4703from
University of Illinois Press
54 E. Gregory Drive * Champaign, IL 61820
AII 
r 
r 
d· 
US
9UUtStanG1ng
BARD OF AVON
The Story of
William Shakespeare
DIANE STANLEY AND PETER VENNEMA
ILLUSTRATED BY DIANE STANLEY
"The authors of several handsomely illustrated historical
biogaphies take on an unusually demandin subject
with intelligence, scrupulous regard for the historical
record, and a wise eye to the interests of their audience."
-*Kirkus Reviews (pointer)
*"Accessible to a wide age range, this is a fine intro-
duction for anyone begmning to read Shakespeare."
-ALA Booklist (starred review)
*"A compact, informative biography... [with] stunning,
intricate period paintings." 
-Publishers Weekly
(starred review)
Ages 7 up 48 pp. TR $15.00/0-688-09108-3; LE $14.93/0-688-09109-1
Morrow Tuniror RBkB 
A
A division of William Morrow & Co., Inc. 
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019
iL 
L 
dt1
Judith Vigna's latest book tackles racial prejudice:
Black Like Kyra, White Like Me
I
Uni 
y of Illinois Press 
SECOND CLus
54 Eas Gregory Drive 
POSTAGE
Champaign, IL 61820 
PAID
U.S.. 
CHAMAIGN, IL
RrTURN POSTAGE GUARANTED
Ages 7-11 * ISBN 0-8075-07784 * $13.95
"With the same direct delicacy that characterized her story Nobody
Wants a Nuclear War, Vigna develops an explosive social situation: a
neighborhood's racist response to the young narrator's best friend,
Kyra Kirk, who is black and moves in next door with her
family....Unframed watercolor illustrations are light enough to bal-
ance the heavy theme without opting for any cute effects, and the
ending is both natural and hopeful..Just as natural and hopeful
would be the inclusion of this book in primary-grade discussion
groups: tomorrow's neighborhood starts in the classroom."
-The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
Author Judith Vigna has written about many difficult and contem-
pory subjects Her book, Nobody Wants a Nuclea War, won the
1986 Jane Addams Peace Award. Some of her other titles nclude
I Wish Daddy Didn't Drink So Much, My Bg Sister Takes Drus,
and Saying Goodbye to Daddy.
Albert Whitman & Company
6340 Oakton Street * Morton Grove, llinois 60053
