I LLI NO
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
028.05
CH
54:4
Dec 2000
DEC 0 8 205Q
I
I
I
THE
B UL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
December 2000
Vol. 54 No. 4
A LOOK INSIDE
133 THE BIG PICTURE
Iris and Walter by Elissa Haden Guest; illus. by Christine Davenier
134 NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
134 * Aesop's Fables ad. and illus. by Jerry Pinkney
138 * Many Stones by Carolyn Coman
145 * The Girl Who Spun Gold ad. by Virginia Hamilton; illus. by Leo and
Diane Dillon
147 * How the Whale Became and Other Stories by Ted Hughes; illus. by Jackie
Morris
154 * Building Big written and illus. by David Macaulay
169 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
170 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin ofthe Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL
61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor (MD)
Deborah Stevenson, Associate Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elaine A. Bearden, Reviewer (EAB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Fern Kory, Reviewer (FK)
Kate McDowell, Reviewer (KM)
CENTER STAFF
Jeannette Hulick
Melanie Kimball
Jennifer VanWinkle
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $60.00; individuals, $50.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $5.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from Bell & Howell, 300 North Zeeb
Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson Associates,
P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to the
University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Centerfor Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
All inquiries about subscriptions and advertising should go to University of Illinois Press, 1325 S.
Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903, 217-333-0950.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin
ofthe Centerfor Children's Books, 51 E. Armory Ave., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. E-mail:
bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2000 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Christine Davenier from Iris and Walter ©2000. Used by permission of
Gulliver/Harcourt, Inc.
DECEMBER 2000 
* 
133
THE BIG PICTURE
Iris and Walter
by Elissa Haden Guest; illus. by Christine Davenier
Easy-reading chapter books are a critical cog in a functional library collection for
youth as well as in the reading process itself. Children poised on the brink of
becoming more sophisticated readers, of making the transition from sight words
to more complicated decoding, can read these books independently and thus gain
both a sense of accomplishment and confidence in their own abilities. While this
can be a difficult genre in which to excel, children's literature has been gifted with
some stellar offerings, quite often featuring a pair of endearing friends. Now join-
ing the ranks that include Arnold Lobel's groundbreaking duo, Frog and Toad,
and Cynthia Rylant's inseparable twosome, Henry and Mudge, is Guest's new
dynamic dyad: Iris and Walter.
Iris' family has moved from the big city to the country and Iris doesn't
like it one bit. Her mother tells her "Cheer up, my Iris," run around, do a cart-
wheel in the grass. "But Iris did not want to run around. Iris did not want to do
a cartwheel in the grass." Her father says "Cheer up, my Iris," play monkeys,
swing from the tall trees. "But Iris did not want to play monkeys. Iris did not
want to swing from the tall trees." A walk with an understanding grandpa ("Iris
hoped he would not say 'Cheer up'") leads to the discovery of a huge tree. Iris
climbs up, finds a treehouse, and meets Walter: "'Hey, Grandpa, there's a kid up
here named Walter!' yelled Iris. 'How wonderful,' said Grandpa. And it was."
Guest (Over the Moon, BCCB 3/86, and The Handsome Man, 3/8 1) woos
a different audience here than in her previous young adult titles; with this four-
chapter easy reader she proves her sense of empathy doesn't begin with junior
high. The author has a sense of what is important not only to her characters but to
their peers, the readers. Uprooted from all she knows, Iris is suffering, and her
suffering is concrete and specific: she misses her noisy street, "playing baseball
after supper until it was too dark to see the ball," and "the tango music from
apartment 3B." Her parents are delighted to leave the city for the country, but Iris
is bereft not only of the home she loves but of anyone to understand her bereave-
ment. Her solitary grief is first mitigated by her sympathetic grandfather, then
eliminated by the cheerful and hospitable Walter, who knows what country life
has to offer and is happy to share.
Davenier's colored-ink illustrations provide an easeful setting for Guest's
prose; a primary palette (with the addition of countryside green) washed against
white pages infuses the images with light. The painting style has a loose informal-
ity emphasized by free-flowing lines and dabs of color that effortlessly bring both
city and country scenes to affectionate life. The effect is one of robust, sun-dappled
cheerfulness, similar to but more vigorous than Edward Ardizzone. Precise visual
characterizations are achieved with simple facial expressions and telling body lan-
guage, from the forlorn Iris (first seen sitting despondently on her city porch steps,
134 
* THE BULLETIN
goldfish bowl in lap), to her overalled parents, to her be-sweatered grandfather.
Walter is open-faced, top-hatted, and friendly, the perfect country elixir for Iris'
displaced city soul.
Guest's talent for easy-reader repartee results in effervescent dialogue that
fizzes with understated humor. The author recognizes that less is more, and she
keeps the plot simple and the payoff believable. Walter helps Iris over the moving
hump, and the story ends in an emotionally satisfying way: "Still Iris dreamed of
the big city . .. but Iris was not sad . . . for in the country there were red-tailed
hawks and starry skies" and "a new friend ... Walter." Guest's elegantly simple,
emotionally resonant entry in the beginner chapter book genre promises that Iris
and Walter will join Frog and Toad and Henry and Mudge in a prominent place
on the easy-reading shelves. (Imprint information appears on p. 145.)
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
AESOP Aesop's Fables; ad. and illus. by Jerry Pinkney. 
SeaStar, 2000 
[96p]
ISBN 1-58717-000-0 
$19.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-9 yrs
Pinkney has adapted sixty-one ofAesop's fables (including "Belling the Cat," "The
Crow and the Pitcher," "The Fox and the Grapes," "The North Wind and the
Sun," "The Hare and the Tortoise," "The Grasshopper and the Ants") and illus-
trated them in luminous watercolor and pencil. His adaptations of the fables are
concise and clear, the moral in italics at each conclusion. The visual humor helps
the fables do what they have always done: they teach, and very well, too, opening
avenues for discussion, one-on-one or in groups. The wholly impressive cast of
animal characters connive and moralize their way through this family-friendly vol-
ume; the human figures are sometimes awkwardly drafted, but their faces are mo-
bile and expressive. Small square spot art, panels, and full and half-page paintings
gleam from shiny white pages with generous borders. This is very traditional
children's bookmaking, in concept and design as well as content: the popular
topic, accessible illustrations, and oversized format result in a patron-pleaser of a
title that will be welcomed by libraries and home collections. JMD
AESOP 
TheAnt and the Grasshopper; ad. and illus. by Amy Lowry Poole. 
Holiday
House, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1477-9 
$16.95 
R 
4-8 yrs
This graceful retelling of Aesop's fable of the provident ant and the less provident
grasshopper is set "in the old Summer Palace at the edge of the Emperor's court-
DECEMBER 2000 
* 
135
yard." The adaptor/illustrator thereby adds a historical and geographical setting as
well as a human dimension to the story: on many of the double-page spreads a
young boy observes the insects; on another we join the grasshopper in going to see
"the Empress and her ladies as they prepare for midsummer's eve." The simple,
rhythmic text ("They carried their loads grain by grain, one by one, back and
forth, all day long") is enriched by the strong figures, muted colors, and subtle
details of each double-page spread. Ink and gouache illustrations on rice paper
both literally and figuratively provide another layer; not only do they depict above-
ground action, they also delineate outlines of the animals that live beneath the soil
in which the ants toil. The harshness of the ending of the story-when "the grass-
hopper huddled beneath the palace eaves and rubbed his hands together in a mourn-
ful chirp, wishing he had heeded the ant's advice"-is softened by the artist's
foregrounding of a basket of delicacies left by the young boy for the grasshopper,
perhaps in appreciation for the music he has provided all summer long. Similarly,
this beautifully balanced and multilayered revision of the well-known fable will
provide children with food for thought through each retelling. A brief endnote
contains information about the setting of the story as well as the genesis of this
version of it. FK
ANAYA, RUDOLFO 
Roadrunner's Dance; illus. by David Diaz. 
Hyperion,
2000 
32p
ISBN 0-7868-0254-5 
$15.99 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Snake slithers to the middle of the road, bares his fangs and says "I am king of the
road.... No one may use the road without my permission," thereby intimidating
the local human traffic. The people's elders go to the Sacred Mountain and ask
Desert Woman for help; her solution is to give Snake a rattle so others will be
warned when he is near. Snake, however, uses his gift to intimidate the animals;
the animals appeal to Desert Woman, and together they construct a "guardian of
the road," the roadrunner. Roadrunner makes short work of Rattlesnake, result-
ing in the snake's renouncing the title of "king of the road" and promising not to
frighten the people who use it. The text is bland despite potential for suspense,
and the stern moralizing of Roadrunner ("And the likes of Rattlesnake had better
watch out, because I'll make sure the roads stay safe") sounds more like the end of
a Mighty Mouse cartoon than a how-and-why tale. A blossoming desert is back-
drop to the violet-skinned, phantasmagoric Rattlesnake, and auras of light sur-
round people, animals, and objects, making them appear incandescent. Spot art
on the text pages repeats colors and geometric motifs from the full-page illustra-
tions, and monochrome patterns cast dark gold shadows on the paler gold page.
Roadrunner, however, is less successful, a shadowy black wash of a bird that stains
the illustrations in jarring contrast to the glowing backdrop. The folkloric struc-
ture of this original tale is apparent, and Anaya's author's note explains his fascina-
tion with creation stories. JMD
BROOKS, NIGEL 
Country Mouse Cottage: How We Lived One Hundred Years Ago;
written and illus. by Nigel Brooks and Abigail Horner. 
Walker, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-8027-8752-5 
$15.95 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Edward Country Mouse opens his scrapbook to a page filled with photographic
memories and invites readers to see how he and his British farm family lived in
1900. Each double spread offers vignettes and a few lines of text describing the
136 
* THE BULLETIN
house and grounds and highlights of a day's activities: from potting shed to laun-
dry room, and from morning chores to weekly bath time. Watercolor pictures in
soft antique hues, rendered on backgrounds the shade of tea-stained linen, feature
a cast of exceptionally attractive rodents going about their tasks in a romantically
inviting world of tidy little garden plots (which improbably provide "enough food
for us all, and more to go into storage for winter"), immaculate pinafores, and
dainty china teapots. Many accoutrements of house and farm are depicted but
unexplained; children may ponder the uses of cold frames and cloches and abstruse
gardening tools, or the cheerful chamber pot tucked under the bed. Still, those
who revel in the charms of a well-appointed dollhouse will delight in exploring the
delicate details of Edward C. M.'s milieu. EB
BROWN, MARGARET WISE A ChildIs Born; illus. by Floyd Cooper. 
Jump at the
Sun/Hyperion, 2000 
[24p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2564-2 
$17.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0673-7 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
A previously unpublished manuscript by Margaret Wise Brown relates the story of
the Nativity. The direct exhortation of shepherds, kings, and sundry to come and
celebrate the child's birth is both inviting and compelling: "0, come,/ country
shepherds/ O follow the light// And welcome the baby/ This blessed night// Come,
wise men,/ to worship/ O come to the barn// The sweetest of babies is here safe
and warm." The domesticity of the verse gives this celebrated birthday story an
intimacy often missing from more reverent but distanced retellings, and the rare
scansion wobble fails to detract from the overall impression of wholesome joy. A
subtle glow infuses the pictures with light and adds a dramatic tension to the stan-
dard nativity scenes. Adult figures are sometimes clumsily drafted, their faces poorly
articulated and hard to read; the birthday boy himself, however, is a round dump-
ling of a baby with cinnamon skin, soft cheeks, and a sparkle in his eye. Full-page
illustrations are framed in gold and set on buff paper; the accompanying chili-
colored text is oversized and rather blandly arranged on undecorated pages. The
infant Jesus and his parents are depicted as brown-skinned, the shepherds as Cau-
casian, and the wise men as a multicultural mix (one black, one Asian, one white).
This is a departure from the usual golden-haired babe and band of blond angels,
but the departure is only skin-deep. Brown tells this story with a simple reverence
that is classically traditional; Cooper's illustrations are a smoothly eloquent accom-
paniment. JMD
BROWN, RUTH 
Holly; written and illus. by Ruth Brown. 
Holt, 2000 
26p
ISBN 0-8050-6500-8 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-3
Abandoned as a kitten, Holly was found and adopted into the narrator's home;
there she became part of the family, settling in, having kittens of her own, and
becoming a fixture on the narrator's drawing board. That's pretty much it for
plot-this is a kitty portrait rather than a story. Cat aficionados will, however,
connect with the realistic and graceful cat poses and expressions (such as Holly
climbing the curtains, front legs splayed with claws caught in the lace and tail and
back arched in S shapes), and Holly's big-eyed furball stage of kittenhood will
make many youngsters melt on the spot. The cozily cluttered house is illuminated
with warm light that brings out the rich textures of carpets, couches, and curtains
DECEMBER 2000 
* 
137
in Holly's domain. The illustrations are slightly blurred and edges softened, creat-
ing a sentimentalized portrait of Holly's place in the household, but the familiarity
and authenticity of the homely specifics will please readers. Cat lovers of all ages
will recognize the luxuriant affection of this beloved black cat, and some children
will recognize their own feline companions in Holly. KM
CABOT, MEG 
The Princess Diaries. HarperCollins, 2000 
238p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029210-5 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-380-97848-2 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 5-9
Mia's life is already a total teen nightmare-she's obsessed with gorgeous Josh
Richter, she's failing freshman algebra, and her mother has started dating Mr.
Gianini, teacher of the dread algebra course. At first Mia doesn't realize that the
news that her father can't have more children is going to put those other tribula-
tions in the shade, but then she's finally apprised of the truth: her father is the
ruler of Genovia, and since he won't have other children, Mia is the heir apparent
to the throne. While Genovia is a tiny country (Cabot makes it sort of second
Monaco), a princess is a princess, and Mia's now chauffeured to her Manhattan
school and afflicted with "princess lessons" from her stern French-speaking grand-
mother. The stress is bad enough when she's struggling with the matter in secret
(she finally snaps at her bossy best friend and a rift ensues), but soon she's a news
item, and she's lost in a sea of publicity, jealousy, and sycophancy. The plot has
holes big enough to drive a royal carriage through (even with her parents never
married and her father living abroad, it's completely implausible that she didn't
know her father was a prince), and Mia's breathless narration can get somewhat
samey. Her limited view is part of the humor, however, and it gives the book a
certain sympathetic appeal, as if a Judy Blume protagonist had found herself a
Grimaldi ("So then my dad said I couldn't go to a new school just because I'd been
outed as being a princess"); there's also some Clueless wit to the garrulous voice.
Cabot's decision to make Mia a reluctant rather than a gleeful princess makes the
situation an effective comic predicament, but there's also genuine sympathy for
Mia's dilemma, with some believable portrayals of her peers and of her own conse-
quent growth. Overall, it's got all the bubbly and frivolous pleasure of imported
champagne, and readers will drink it in. DS
CALHOUN, DI 
Aria ofthe Sea. 
Winslow, 2000 
[262p]
ISBN 1-890-817-25-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
After much hardship, thirteen-year-old Cerinthe Gale finally becomes one of the
students at the royal school of dance. She pushes away memories of her seaside
home, her skill as a healer, and the recent death of her mother and focuses on
fulfilling her-and her mother's--dream that she graduate from the school and
join the Royal Ballet. Peasant Cerinthe's ongoing rivalry with aristocratic Elliana,
also a gifted dancer, finally results in a spite-filled contest to see who can turn the
largest number of fouettes on an extremely dangerous but legendary portion of the
academy roof. Elliana falls, and Cerinthe puts aside her fears of failure and uses
her healer's knowledge to save Elliana's life. The song of the Sea Maiden, denied
Cerinthe as long as she denied her talent for healing, returns when she finally
chooses the path of a healer. Transparent hints about Cerinthe's indirect respon-
sibility for her mother's death and about the goddess who removes her favor from
138 
* 
THE BULLETIN
those that deny her gifts point a very clear path to the rooftop duel and Cerinthe's
resulting epiphany. Problematically, that epiphany means choosing a path that
lacks the glamor of the dancer's life in the spotlight, and since the author spends
little time on the allure of life as a healer, it seems a poor, abruptly chosen second.
Characterizations are limited, even within the dancing school model, although the
relationship between Elliana and Cerinthe has moments of complexity. The ri-
valry between the two girls is the engine of this plot, but in the end that rivalry isn't
enough to push this title to a satisfactory finish. JMD
CASANOVA, MARY 
Curse ofa Winter Moon. 
Hyperion, 2000 
137p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2475-1 
$16.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0547-1 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Marius' mother's dying injunction to her son was to take care of his little brother,
Jean-Pierre. Six years later, twelve-year-old Marius resents being a babysitter when
he should be readying for an apprenticeship, but Jean-Pierre needs more guardian-
ship than ever: his Christmas Eve birth marks him, in this sixteenth-century French
village, as a loup garou, a werewolf, and the increasing suspicion and fear of the
townspeople may lead to violence. Though there are lurking wolves and tension
aplenty, this isn't a werewolf story but rather a religious oppression and supersti-
tion story: being different is dangerous here, with Marius' father eventually seized
and executed by the church as a heretic for reading holy texts on his own and
Marius dedicating his life to the abbot as a church lutenist in exchange for his
brother's being spared. Despite additional (and sometimes clumsy) plot compli-
cations, the pacing isn't very tight and there's little sense of arc, just sequence;
Casanova also paints her characters with a broad brush, making Marius' family
saintly while offering little to redeem the church and villagers. The persecution of
the heretics and the issues of belief that surround it are thought-provoking sub-
jects, however, and readers looking to branch out from current censorship sagas
might want to take a look at repression that puts banned books in some bloody
historical context. DS
COMAN, CAROLYN 
Many Stones. 
Front Street, 2000 
[160p]
ISBN 1-886910-55-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-12
Berry and her divorced parents are still reeling from the death of Berry's sister,
Laura, murdered in South Africa where she was working in a community school.
Already disappointing her father by failing to be Laura's replacement (Laura was a
swimming champ and Berry's just quit the high-school swim team), Berry's dread-
ing the trip with her father to South Africa, where a monument to Laura is to be
dedicated. The trip exposes some raw nerves on both sides, with father-daughter
tourist outings steeped in irony and both travelers finding echoes of their experi-
ence in the country's attempts at reconciliation after its violent past. The charac-
terizations of the people are effective in both vignette (especially the obliviously
bigoted hotel hostess engaged in flirtation with Berry's father) and further explora-
tion (Berry's father is both a thoughtless, self-absorbed man who nearly comes on
to Laura's friend at Laura's funeral and a genuinely grief-stricken parent). Even
more effective, however, is the characterization of the evolving relationship be-
tween Berry and her father: Coman etches with telling clarity Berry's stormy am-
bivalence, delicately and deliberately picking out the authentic adolescent
DECEMBER 2000 
* 
139
hypervigilance where Berry is acutely aware of her power to hurt him, watching
the moments tick by when she could offer reparations yet unable to bring herself
to do so. The book then skillfully adds the extra dimension of bereavement, wherein
Berry is silently furious that her shocked family rarely even mentions Laura while
finding it almost unbearable when strangers discuss her. The South African aspect
effectively functions both as a parallel and an interwoven thread, with the lesson of
survival brought home with rare impact. The final resolution is disappointingly
sudden and convenient, but the hard journey of personal, familial, and cultural
recovery is compellingly depicted. DS
CREECH, SHARON 
Fishing in the Air; illus. by Chris Raschka. 
Cotler/Harper-
Collins, 2000 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028112-X 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028111-1 
$15.95 
M 
5-8 yrs
A young boy and his father embark on a fishing trip and catch something beyond
mere fish. Dad's gift for simile allows the boy to see the world in a new way ("And
the trees which had been trees became, in an instant, tall green soldiers standing at
attention"); the boy casts his line, which sports a feather that catches the air, and
hears of his father's childhood and his father's fishing trips with his own father, so
the two return with a gift of shared past. The fishing trip is an appealing idea, but
the text is too ethereal for the audience, emphasizing retrospective adult pleasures
over concrete child enjoyment. Raschka's art foregoes its usual clean, informal
simplicity for seething masses of artistic elements that surround the text and ob-
scure the characters; ill-suited to the lyrical spaciousness of the language, the illus-
trations are jittery rather than energetic, and the multiplicity of color daubs tend
to look collectively muddy. The father-son outing is an alluring idea, but this
presentation lacks the thrill of a genuine excursion; look instead to Coy's Night
Driving (BCCB 12/96). DS
CRISP, MARTY 
My Dog, Cat; illus. by True Kelley. 
Holiday House, 2000 
[6 4p]
ISBN 0-8234-1537-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-5
Fourth-grader Abbott Williamson the Third wants three things: a new name,
more height, and a dog ("A big strong, black dog named Killer. Maybe a rott-
weiler or a Doberman pinscher. It didn't really matter, as long as the dog was huge
and fierce and had teeth the size of piano keys"). He already has something he
doesn't want-a nemesis, Pete Street, who's ready every day to down the dessert
from Abbie's lunch. Abbie is hopeful his plight will soon change, because his Aunt
Laura will be showing up shortly at his house with her new dog, which he will be
in charge of for six weeks. But when Catullus the Great arrives, Abbie is thor-
oughly disappointed to discover that Catullus is actually a tiny Yorkie, who goes
by "Cat." Predictably, Abbie is eventually surprised by Cat's fierceness (and his
own) and takes the little pooch to his heart when the fierce Yorkie runs Pete off.
Crisp's humorous delivery raises this above the normal fare for just-out-of-begin-
ning-chapter-book readers. An informative afterword gives resources and sugges-
tions for selecting a dog, as well as underlining the importance of that selection.
Kids will be drawn into this schoolyard scene and stay for the comedic-and ach-
ingly familiar-David and Goliath tale. Cheerfully scruffy line drawings accom-
pany the text. EAB
140 
* THE BULLETIN
CROSBIE, MICHAE J. 
Arches to Zigzags: An Architecture ABC; illus. with photo-
graphs by Steve and Kit Rosenthal. 
Abrams, 2000 
41p
ISBN 0-8109-4218-6 
$18.95 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
This catalogue of architectural and building design features starts with A (arches)
and highlights one feature for each letter all the way through to Z (zigzags). Each
page or double-page spread shows a letter (both capital and lowercase) with a pho-
tograph of an architectural feature that starts with that letter, accompanied by a
four-line rhyme. The text gives some descriptive information, involving the viewer
by asking simple questions, as on the spread that begins "E is for Eave," which is
accompanied by the rhyme "Look under a roof/ For eaves broad and plain./ Can
eaves give you shelter/ From the sun and the rain?" The verse is somewhat forced,
and in some instances the text is more confusing than illuminating, such as the
abbreviated description of how neon lights ("N is for Neon") work that will need
further adult explanation. The concept of architecture may also need adult clarifi-
cation, since some of the elements included are not strictly architectural, as in "R is
for Ruin" or "Y is for Yard." However, the strength of the book rests in the crisp
photographs of houses, buildings, architectural details, and building environs,
against a backdrop of clear blue skies. Various layouts show some photographs
framed in white and others bleeding to the edges, and the layouts improve the
visual appeal of these already sparkling and sharp images. The architectural ap-
proach to the alphabet is unusual, and most libraries will want to build this one
into the collection. KM
CROWTHER, ROBERT 
Robert Crowther'sAmazing Pop- Up House oflnventions; writ-
ten and illus. by Robert Crowther. 
Candlewick, 2000 
12p
ISBN 0-7636-0810-6 
$14.99 
R Gr. 3-6
Five very lived-in, none too tidy rooms-kitchen, living room, bedroom, bath-
room, garage-pop up for readers to examine in exhaustive detail, as each offers
dozens of cabinets and cubby holes and rugs and appliances to open, lift, and pull,
revealing a niblet of information on the invention or provenance of a common
household item. Window shade down: "First roller shades, early 1760s"; window
shade up: "Before the Romans invented glass windows, c.400 B.C., they used
oiled cloth or thin sheets of marble to let in light." Sliding the shower door dis-
closes not only an embarrassed bather but also comments on sponges, showers,
and the earliest known bathtub. Enormous amounts of time could be spent veri-
fying the multitudes of invention claims purported here, and great effort arguing
the much-debated genesis of baseball, the television, and the earliest electric light
bulb. But that, of course, is hardly the point. There's a cool "Didja know?"
around every corner, and children who favor lightly grazing through a book rather
than reading it will think they've died and gone to heaven. EB
CUSHMAN, KAREN 
Matilda Bone. Clarion, 2000 
167p
ISBN 0-395-88156-0 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Fourteen-year-old Matilda has been raised at the manor since the death of her
parents, and she's been a responsive pupil under the guidance of Father Leufredus.
Her rigid upbringing hasn't prepared her for life as an apprentice to Red Peg the
Bonesetter in Bone and Blood Alley, where she's shocked by the commonness of
the people she works with and serves and by the disdain for the orthodoxy she's
been taught to revere. Eventually, however, she finds a respect for the community
DECEMBER 2000 
* 
141
and the homely arts of medieval medicine practiced by Peg and her friend Doctor
Margery. Having worked this ground before, Cushman has a sure hand with the
details of her early English world; the visceral aspects of low-tech town living and
the bustle of urban life are well represented here. The book's view of medieval life
stacks the deck a bit in its depiction of tensions between science/theology and
common knowledge, with its affection for the Bone and Blood Alley denizens
resulting in a somewhat rosy portrayal; it's also not clear why pious Matilda wasn't
put straight into a convent or how she ended up destined without being trained for
her job with Peg. It's a warm and energetic vision nonetheless, with humorous
touches even in Matilda's dialogues with her trusty saints ("The trouble with saints,"
Matilda thinks, "was that you never could tell just what they would say") and a
stageful of colorful characters. Readers who've appreciated Cushman's medieval
visions will want to travel back with her again here. DS
DEWAN, TED 
Crispin: The Pig Who Had it All; written and illus. by Ted
Dewan. 
Doubleday, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-385-32540-1 
$15.95 
R 4-9 yrs
Crispin Tamworth is a wealthy young pig who, frankly, lives like a pig, surrounded
by the wreckage of a series of expensive toys that he's always managed to destroy
soon after their Christmas presentation. One Christmas an enormous box arrives
with a tag that reads, "Master Crispin, in this box you will find the only thing you
do not have. It's the very best thing in the whole wide world." Though Crispin is
initially blind to the merits of an empty box, neighbor kids (a rabbit named Nick
and a raccoon called Penny) involve him in imaginative empty-box play, expand-
ing to include Crispin's broken toys. Still not clear on the concept, Crispin fears
that his newfound friends will desert him after the material goods depart (the
junk's discarded when his room is cleaned), but he finally gets the point and hap-
pily joins the gang in an empty refrigerator box. Dewan uses gentle lines to con-
trast Crispin's delicately expressive porcine visage with the hard plastic colors of
his broken toys and the glowing plastic backdrop of Christmas decorations. The
piglet's growing numbers of friends possess expressive faces that contrast with the
almost electric palette depicting the wildly enthusiastic energy of playing Space
Base amid broken toys and on empty boxes. Dewan lets the message stay implicit
in the story, choosing instead to allow the joyful events that transform Crispin's
lonely world of toys into a world of companionship speak for themselves. KM
DONALDSON, JOAN 
A Pebble anda Pen. Holiday House, 2000 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-8234-1500-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Eighth-grade graduate Mattie Harris finds that her considerable education still
leaves her with few life options; her family expects that she will marry a widowed
farmer and tend his children. With the help of her sympathetic older brother,
Mattie sneaks away to the academy of Platt Rogers Spencer, known as "the father
of American penmanship," where she hopes to learn enough to become a profes-
sional copyist in the business world. Spencer encourages her dream, his family
welcomes her, flawed but tender-hearted fellow student Phineas Stewart earns her
affection, and all seems right with the 1853 world until she is called home to
attend her ailing mother and her story jolts to an unresolved halt. In a well-inten-
tioned effort to portray the Spencers as a kind, dose, God-fearing family, Donaldson
142 
* THE BULLETIN
overplays her hand. Spencer's recovery from alcoholism is melodramatically (and,
one suspects, wishfully) accomplished through a single moral resolution: "I ...
drew a circle around my farm and promised that drink would never be allowed on
my land." His family, likewise, fairly reeks of harmony and righteousness: "'I'm
sorry, Mama. I'll try harder not to tease the boys.' 'And please forgive me, my
child ... I'm sorry that I lost my temper and spoke in such a rash manner.'" Still,
readers raised to tap a keyboard rather than grip a pen may find this peek at ortho-
graphic arcana mildly intriguing. A concluding note provides information on
Spencer and his Jericho Log Cabin Seminary. EB
ECLARE, MELANIE 
A Handful of Sunshine; written and illus. by Melanie
Eclare. 
Ragged Bears, 2000 
26p
ISBN 1-929927-14-2 
$16.95 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
This oversized picture book tells the story of one child's foray into cultivating a
sunflower. Dressed in sprightly stripes, Wellington boots, and short orange knick-
ers, our heroine, Tilda, "loves growing sunflowers. These are the seeds she bought
with her pocket money." The young gardener then prepares the soil, plants, wa-
ters, and waits. Vivid color photography is sometimes framed by extensive white
space, other times spilling over two pages and bleeding off the edges of the page.
More specific growing instructions accompanied by pictures wrap up the book.
Eclare's organization is linear, but it lacks the step-by-step marriage of text and
pictures necessary to communicate the components of gardening. In several pic-
tures it is difficult to see the exact step being described, as the images look similar
to illustrations of other parts of the process, and the photographs are sometimes
stagey and repetitive. Large print and airy background make the text visually ap-
pealing, but it too often tells what the pictures should show but don't. Still, this
title may inspire budding outdoor enthusiasts drawn by the vision of full-grown
sunflowers towering over the grownups. EAB
ELSDALE, BOB 
Mac Side Up; written and illus. by Bob Elsdale. 
Dutton,
2000 
32p
ISBN 0-525-46467-0 
$15.99 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
If you've seen the net lore about the perpetual motion machine constructed from
a cat and a piece of buttered toast connected back to back, both of which always
land with feet/buttered side down (and therefore hover in midair perpetually when
coupled), then you know the premise of this tale of feline physics. With the help
of ferret sidekick Dusty, Mac the cat concocts a test to discover whether, when
strapped to a piece of toast with buttered side up and dropped, he will still land on
his feet. With a crane, Mac's crash helmet, and a stack of mattresses, the two
creatures put the theory to the test. Despite attempted toast thievery by a seagull,
Mac and the toast remain strapped together, and Mac's amazing feet-landing ca-
pabilities overcome the landing propensity of the buttered side of the toast, win-
ning Mac a medal in the process. Although the premise has questionable child
appeal and the plot is paper-thin, the computer-generated photocollage illustra-
tions will have young viewers riveted. Elsdale makes a commendable choice on the
final page by breaking down the process, displaying one of the photocollages, a
scene showing Mac surfing across the breakfast table on a slice of buttered toast,
alongside all the original photographs that were pieced together to create the final
image. Mac is a personable feline, and the sharp photography, striking collages,
DECEMBER 2000 
* 143
and varied layouts create an imaginative world in which feline physics experiments
are right at home. Notwithstanding the puzzling plot, young readers may be drawn
to the slick pages, saturated background colors, and, most importantly, the de-
tailed images of this imaginary yet realistic world. KM
EMBERLEY, REBECCA 
My Colors/ Mis colores; 0-316-23347-1; My Numbers/ Mis
numeros; 0-316-23350-1; My Opposites/Mis opuestos; 0-316-23345-5; My Shapes/
Mis formas; 0-316-23355-2. 
Each book: written and illus. by Rebecca
Emberley. 
Little, 2000 
18p 
$5.95 
R* 
2-6 yrs
Emberley combines elementary concepts and language lessons in these four heavy-
duty board books. My Colors/Mis colores opens with an intense red page display-
ing the words "red" and "rojo" in black letters; the accompanying page is white,
featuring a huge red apple, and inside the apple are the words "apple" and "la
manzana." Each color gets its own spread, with the color and the object in the
corresponding illustration identified in both English and Spanish. My Numbers!
Mis numeros shows the huge number next to its numerical equivalent in objects
("5 five cinco" is accompanied by a picture of "five carrots cinco zanahorias"; "7
seven siete" is accompanied by "seven stars siete estrellas," etc.) My Shapes/ Mis
formas features the geometric shape on one page and the corresponding example
on the accompanying page (a big blue "square el cuadro" is accompanied by a blue
square "house la casa"; a big orange "circle el circulo" appears opposite an orange
"balloon elglobo"). My Opposites/Mis opuestos expertly communicates a difficult
concept (the visuals are easily comprehended: a dragonfly hovers "over sobre" a
mushroom while a spider dangles "under bajo"). Emberley's colored-paper collage
art is crisp and clean, the compositions spare and unfussy. This is an effective set
of concept books admirably executed; multiple copies are a must. JMD
FLORIAN, 
DOUGLAS 
A Pig Is Big; written and illus. by Douglas
Florian. 
Greenwillow, 2000 
2 4p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-17126-5 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-17125-7 
$15.95 
R* 
3-7 yrs
Nimble and imaginative verse describes the bigness of various items ("A pig is big/
A pig is fat./ A pig is bigger than my hat") and then goes on to inquire about larger
objects still ("What's bigger than a pig?// A cow./ It's bigger than a boar or sow./
It's bigger yesterday and now"), moving from cow to car to truck to street to
neighborhood to city to planet to universe. Is it a concept book? Well, the sub-
jects don't operate under consistent restrictions or have any logical reason for com-
parison, but the book vividly and amusingly explores perspective, with the absurdity
of the comparisons adding a lightness to the dizzying magnitude of the contrast.
The art lets the fancy take flight: each subject gets a double spread (usually with a
cameo appearance by or some sign of the previous subjects) that expands the view
further in the service of that eventual "universe" comparison. In an interesting
twist, the initial pig looms largest on the page, a smiling hammy face peering out at
the reader, but all the animal populace has charm: a bear-run tow-truck tows the
old flivver driven by the cow and pig, and various critters peer out the windows in
the neighborhood. There's a fragile touch to some of the art's draftsmanship that
up-close suggests naivete or tentativeness, but across a full spread gives the impres-
sion of a rain-washed shimmer in the pale strokes of color across the urban land-
scape; paper folds and brush sweeps similarly add a luminosity and texture to the
144 
* THE BULLETIN
deep blue universe-that brings things full circle on the final page with a bright-
eyed piggy constellation. Kids too young for Banyai's Zoom (BCCB 2/95) will
enjoy the mind-expansion of this offbeat take on orders of magnitude. DS
FRADIN, DENNIS BRINDELL 
Boundfor the North Star: True Stories of Fugitive
Slaves. Clarion, 2000 
20 6p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-395-97017-2 
$20.00 
R Gr. 5-10
Readers who have already been introduced to the plight of fugitive slaves are no
doubt familiar with dramatic images of Henry "Box" Brown, shipped to freedom
in a packing crate; Eliza Harris, fleeing with her baby over pack ice on the Ohio
River; and Harriet Tubman, "encouraging" faint-hearted runaways with a loaded
revolver. Here Fradin revisits their escapes and recounts equally riveting lesser-
known tales as well. Of particular note are the spontaneous rescue by citizens of
Oberlin and Wellington, Ohio, of John Price, a fugitive held captive by bounty
hunters in a local hotel; the trial of John Anderson, an ex-slave residing in Canada,
who faced extradition to Missouri for killing a white man during his escape; and
Peter Still's decades-long struggle to purchase freedom for himself and his family.
Schemes plotted and executed in secrecy clearly resist documentation, and Fradin
occasionally resorts to unsubstantiated speculation: "On his trip through Indiana,
John may have stayed with the couple Levi and Katie Coffin, who helped so many
runaway slaves that Levi was nicknamed the President of the Underground Rail-
road." Nonetheless, by juxtaposing stories of unfathomable patience and endur-
ance with those of nail-biting action, Fradin expands readers' understanding of the
myriad strategies and risks that led to freedom. Black-and-white illustrations, a
bibliography, and an index are included. EB
GETZ, DAVID 
Purple Death: The Mysterious Flu of 1918; illus. by Peter McCarty
and with photographs. 
Holt, 2000 
86p
ISBN 0-8050-5751-X 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Getz, author of other early science treatments, turns his attention to epidemiology,
examining the influenza virus that scourged the globe in 1918-1919. He begins
with a focus on the epidemic itself, especially its U.S. effects, describing the illness
("Delirious from lack of oxygen, these young men rolled and thrashed about on
their beds and cots, moaning, mumbling, and spitting up blood"), its effects on
daily life ("Police, fire, and sanitation departments lost too many workers to be
effective"), and its toll on the population ("In October alone the flu killed more
people than HIV did in its first ten years"). The book then goes on to examine the
evolution of the investigation, including expeditions in the 1950s and 1990s that
searched the frozen bodies of victims for answers; it also addresses "what if it hap-
pens now?" questions by looking at the swine flu scare and current public health
capabilities. This doesn't have quite the tightness and satisfaction of Getz' similar
books: some issues might be clearer if grouped topically rather than chronologi-
cally, some questions are never explicitly answered (where does the term "purple
death" come from? What fatalities are estimated should such a flu strain occur in
the contemporary U.S.?), and some of the medical investigations haven't had enough
results yet to provide a sense of closure. There's some excellent introduction to
microbes and epidemiology here, though (there's a particularly clear explanation
of how viruses work to subvert host cells into fellow virus-makers), and the medical
detective work remains absorbing. Kids intrigued by the sensational details will
DECEMBER 2000 
* 
145
stay for the information. McCarty's smoky pencil art is distant but atmospheric,
and period photographs provide sharp contrast and specific images. DS
GRINDLEY, 
SALLY 
A 
New 
Room for William; illus. 
by Carol
Thompson. 
Candlewick, 2000 
26p
ISBN 0-7636-1196-4 
$15.99 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
William's "old room had posters on the walls and shelves crammed with toys," but
his new room is "bare except for his bed and a pile of boxes"; understandably, he's
less than thrilled with the change. When shopping for new-room wallpaper ("I
want the same paper I had in my old room"), William finds some irresistible dino-
saur paper, and his new room becomes more promising; a friendly dinosaur-loving
boy next door proves to be a satisfactory playmate, and the new home starts look-
ing pretty bearable after all. Though the specifics here are personable and believ-
able, there's a lot of wishful optimism to William's adjustment (his cheerful
adaptation to leaving his own jungle gym behind at the old house and playing on
his new neighbor's seems particularly overhopeful), and the additional plot di-
mension of this apparently being a post-divorce move is both superfluous and
overly obliquely addressed. Thompson's art blends brush-textured paint and col-
lage bits in a mixed media that suggests John Burningham, though there's also a
sunny solidity to the lines depicting William's slightly pudgy face and a richer
array of colors. While there are better moving and divorce books, this has a cozy
comfort that some youngsters-and parents-will find reassuring. DS
GUEST, ELISSA HADEN 
Iris and Walter; illus. by Christine Davenier. 
Gulliver/
Harcourt, 2000 
44p
ISBN 0-15-202122-1 
$14.00 
R* Gr. 1-3
See this month's Big Picture, p. 133, for review.
HAMILTON, VIRGINIA, ad. 
The Girl Who Spun Gold; illus. by Leo and Diane
Dillon. 
Blue Sky/Scholastic, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-590-47378-6 
$16.95 
R 6-9 yrs
Joining the ranks of Tom Tit Tot and Rumpelstiltskin is Lit'mahn Bittyun, a
West Indian mischief maker. When Quashiba's mother tells a terrible fib that
wins her daughter a king for a husband but puts her in deadly peril, Lit'mahn, a
malignant, magical little man with a wooden leg and long tail, promises help. He
tells Quashiba, however, that "if you can't guess my name by the final night and
the last chance, then I will make you tiny just like me. I will carry you off to live in
my shade!" The author abandons the difficult dialect of her written source in favor
of what she calls in a note "a simpler colloquial style" that "is a truer reflection of a
lilting West Indian speech pattern." Be that as it may, Hamilton's lively retelling
has an ease of language that will draw in listeners. The Dillons' acrylic on acetate
illustrations are impressively (and appropriately) adorned with gilt and gold leaf
which adds to the magical quality of the decorative tiles, fabric bolts, and royal
costumes. The text is on the verso, the black capital letter of the first word set in a
gold-leaf box; the paintings, consistently placed on the recto, are framed in gold.
The human characters of this tale are uniformly, blandly beautiful, but Lit'mahn is
a malevolent imp with a satanic grin, charcoal skin, yellow eyes, and pointy teeth,
and he makes a pretty creepy addition to other variant villains. The perspectives
vary little, which contributes to a static sameness in the compositions, but the
146 
* THE BULLETIN
scenes featuring Lit'mahn have energetic swirly lines and complex patterns of color.
Despite the gilt and gold edges, the illustrations are a bit flat, but Hamilton's
language adds enough sparkle to make this tale shine. JMD
HAYES, SARAH 
Lucy Anna and the Finders; written and illus. by Sarah
Hayes. 
Candlewick, 2000 
30p
ISBN 0-7636-1200-6 
$15.99 
R 4-7 yrs
When Lucy Anna's little red horse is found by the Finders (who presumably live
by the rule of "finders keepers"), Lucy Anna ventures out into the great wood to
bring him back home. She finds the Finders and, using objects she collected on
her trek through the forest, tricks them into playing games with her instead of
eating her up. Finally, clever Lucy Anna lures the Finders into a game of hide and
seek and then leaves them hiding in the wood as she rides off to safety on the little
red horse. Despite their threatening to consume the heroine ("We're hungry.
We're going to eat you up"), the rotund Finders, with their green striped hides and
puffy tufts atop their heads, are more clumsy than menacing. The illustrations
combine jewel-tone inks in saturated colors with bold black outlines to create a
vivid imaginary environment of forest and Finders. Lucy Anna herself is slightly
blank-faced, but young viewers are more likely to focus on the elephantine toes,
protruding muzzles, and floppy ears of the imposing Finders. Readers and viewers
are invited to become finders themselves with the series of household objects (tea-
pots, toasters, clocks, etc.) shown floating across the title page spread, quietly reit-
erated throughout Lucy Anna's journey in the forest. Youngsters on their way to
Sendak's classic Where the Wild ThingsAre may enjoy a detour through this dream-
like quest. KM
HEIDE, 
FLORENCE PARRY 
Some Things Are Scary; illus. by Jules
Feiffer. 
Candlewick, 2000 
33p
ISBN 0-7636-1222-7 
$15.99 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
The title pretty much covers the subject: the text here is an enumeration of a
multitude of various scary things kids have to put up with. Some of the fears are of
the sustained kind ("Getting a shot is scary"), and some are of the sudden shock
variety ("Holding on to someone's hand that isn't your mother's when you thought
it was is scary"); some are concrete ("Having your best friend move away is scary")
and some are more speculative ("Thinking about a big bird with big teeth who
might swoop down and carry you away is scary"). Heide has a good instinct for
genuine child fears throughout an array of situations, and her range of tone within
the theme, with fears ranging from funny to poignant, is impressive. The repeti-
tive sentence structure becomes tedious after thirty-two appearances, however, and
the final entries feel forced without actually succeeding as a conclusion. The art
helps give some shape to the text, with Feiffer's bold, snarly scrawls embodying
anxiety, but he also uses some bold sweeps of color across the pages that mitigate
the tension. The primary-grades-printing look of the font suits the art and adds a
sympathetic, childlike touch; the layout imposes a helpful rhythm by separating
the various examples from the "is scary" refrain, giving listeners a chance to absorb
the threat and distance it. Though a start-to-finish readaloud might be rather
wearing, kids will appreciate the thought and may wish to nominate scary entries
of their own. DS
DECEMBER 2000 
* 
147
HOBAN, TANA 
Cubes, Cones, Cylinders, & Spheres; written and illus. with photo-
graphs by Tana Hoban. 
Greenwillow, 2000 
24 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-15326-7 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-15325-9 
$15.95 
R 3-6 yrs
In the latest addition to the Hoban canon of concept books, readily identifiable
three-dimensional shapes take the spotlight, and again the most commonplace
and even homely items become photogenic superstars before Hoban's lens. The
majority of spreads feature a single shape-cylindrical rolls of carpeting at a load-
ing dock, the perfect sphere of a soap bubble suspended before a little tyke's eyes,
the conical hat of a trick-or-treating witch. More challenging views await viewers
who've mastered the basics-a streetlight in which round bulbs are encased in
clear glass orbs perched atop cylindrical mountings, and a castle with cylinder
shaped towers and cone shaped roofs. Librarians serving a preschool population
had better get their purchase orders ready; this is another must-have. EB
HOBBIE, HOLLY 
Toot & Puddle: Puddle's ABC; written and illus. by Holly
Hobbie. 
Little, 2000 
4 8p
ISBN 0-316-36593-9 
$14.95 
Ad 3-6 yrs
Helpful Puddle discovers Otto the turtle fishing peacefully by the side of the river,
minding his own business, right next to a "No Fishing" sign. Puddle therefore
decides to teach Otto to read, and obliging Otto good-naturedly submits to Puddle's
rather haphazard approach to reading readiness. Puddle proceeds to paint the
letters of the alphabet (upper and lower case) accompanied by an alphabetically-
appropriate picture and a brief description of each: "Aa Ant alone with apple"
features a big red apple with a small black ant on the summit, gazing out into the
distance; "Rr Red rooster reading" shows a rooster with a lapful of chicks, reading
with an enthusiastic expression. Not all the illustrations are equally successful ("Ss
Someone's sleeping," with a silhouette of trees against dark blue sky, is a trifle
vague), but most of them have a jolly directness that suits the congenial demeanors
of the players. Each letter is accompanied by a chortle-inducing picture ("Zz Zoom-
ing zucchini," anyone?) and the frame (of Puddle's teaching Otto the alphabet)
has a reassuring message: this isn't so hard. The frame story peters out toward the
end, however, and the conclusion is a little soft (has Otto learned to read? Why
does Toot suddenly turn up? Does Otto spell "puddle" just so they can all go
jump in one?). Still, the final illustration of the three friends leaping into the local
swimming hole is pretty satisfying, and kids and grownups who have taken Toot
and Puddle et al. to their hearts will appreciate this learning experience. JMD
HUGHES, TED How the Whale Became and Other Stories; illus. by Jackie
Morris. 
Orchard, 2000 
94p
ISBN 0-531-30303-9 
$25.00 
R 
Gr. 4-7
The late poet's pourquoi tales, originally published in 1963, reappear in an el-
egantly designed and newly illustrated volume. Eleven stories cover topics ranging
from "Why the Owl Behaves as It Does" (after tricking all the other birds, it's only
safe from their harassment at night), "How the Fox Came to Be Where It Is" (he
lost a competition with the sheepdog for the in-house guarding spot), and "How
the Whale Became" (it grew in the ground as a plant until it became so big it had
to be rolled into the sea). Hughes doesn't have Kipling's gift for streamlined folk-
148 
* 
THE BULLETIN
loric structure, and his explanations are a bit convoluted, but there's a sinewy grace
to his writing that compensates. His vision of "becoming," the procedure by
which animals diversified ("The ones that wanted to become lions practiced at
being lions-and by and by, sure enough, they began to turn into lions"), makes
for a useful running theme as animals get different results from the process (Hy-
ena, for instance, diverts from being a Wild-Dog-Becomer to a Leopard wannabe
and gets stuck halfway). The book's tall, narrow shape gives it a statuesque dig-
nity, and the layout takes full advantage of the shape. In addition to an illustrated
frontpiece, each story has an imaginative collection of visuals laced through it in
spot art large and small, soft-edged vignettes, and full-page portraits. Morris' wa-
tercolors give the animals a fluid dignity, and the nearly translucent greens and
browns of the landscapes shimmer with fresco-esque mottling. This is a polished
addition to the written-lore category. DS
JIMENEZ, FRANCISCO 
The Christmas Gift/El regalo de Navidad; illus. by Claire B.
Cotts. 
Houghton, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-395-92869-9 
$15.00 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
Jiminez draws on personal experience (and a version of this piece previously pub-
lished in The Circuit: Stories from the Life ofa Migrant Child) to tell this story (in
English and Spanish) of a migrant family's meager but affirming Christmas. Nar-
rator Panchito is worried when he overhears his father tell a young man and his
very pregnant wife that he cannot afford to purchase their small treasure, an em-
broidered handkerchief. If, as Papa says, "we're broke too," that means Panchito
won't get the Christmas gift of his dreams: a red ball. On Christmas morning he
and his brothers are sadly disappointed by inexpensive presents of hard candy:
"Trying to search for words to tell Mamai how he felt, Panchito looked up at her.
Her eyes were full of tears. Papi, who was standing next to her, lifted a corner of
the mattress and pulled out from underneath the white embroidered handker-
chief." Inspired by his father's gift to his mother, "Panchito took a deep breath,
then opened his bag of candy. He reached in and gave a candy first to Mama and
then to Papa. He hugged them both and said 'Gracias.'" Cotts' acrylics have
massive impact, the figures larger than life, strong-featured, and expressive. There
is a folkloric grace to the uncluttered, naive compositions, and the juxtapositions
of linear patterns of fields and tents against the natural roundness of fertile hills
results in crisply controlled images. The interior scenes are warmed by directed
light that pulls the figures out of shadow and bathes them in a golden glow that
enriches the poor surroundings. That a son achieves a certain maturity and recog-
nizes the sacrifices of his parents is a story worth telling, but despite a worthy
message and earthily solid images, the story ends abruptly, leaving the reader with
a sense of business unfinished. The author's note (in which Jiminez describes his
memory of this particular Christmas) alleviates that feeling somewhat, however,
and the potent details of this family's life will hold listeners until the bittersweet
end. JMD
JOHNSON, EMILY RHOADS 
Write Me If You Dare! Front Street, 2000 
195p
ISBN 0-8126-2944-2 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Signs and rituals have ruled Maddie Pruitt's life ever since she sighted a falling star
and her mother died the next day. Now she creates rituals to keep her family safe,
like tapping and counting the jars of honey arranged on her family's stand at the
DECEMBER 2000 
* 
149
local farmer's market. When she hears a three-month-old blue-eyed baby say her
name and then finds a blue balloon with an attached message daring her to write
back to the sender, she is sure it is a sign, and she begins correspondence with the
mysterious writer. Johnson lures the reader through her text with cliff-hanging
chapters, building the tension with Maddie's suspicion that she is corresponding
with a ghost. Multiple plot elements are woven together (Maddie's doting and
dating dad, a new friend, apiary information, a master puppeteer), creating a com-
plexity ghost stories often lack but simultaneously raising the bar for denouement.
Unfortunately, the conclusion isn't equal to the buildup, with overneat end-tying
and Maddy's abrupt acceptance of her father's remarriage both implausible. The
emotions are genuine, however, and readers will appreciate spunky young Maddie.
EAB
JONES, DIANA WYNNE 
Year ofthe Griffin. Greenwillow, 2000 
2 6 7p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029158-3 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-17898-7 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 7-10
In this sequel to Dark LordofDerkholm (BCCB 11/98), Jones focuses on Elda, the
griffin daughter of the great Wizard Derk, and her studies at the Wizards' Univer-
sity. It doesn't take long for Elda to find a circle of friends, and it doesn't take long
before the friends' origins begin to create plot complications worthy of sensational
melodrama: Felim is being sought by trained assassins, Olga's pirate father is in
hot pursuit (of her and the treasure she stole), Claudia is harassed by a magical
jinx, Ruskin is working on borrowed magic, and Lukin can't conjure without cre-
ating craters big enough to lose an elephant. The author subtly sends up en-
trenched academia with a sly wink while she provides a funny and sometimes
anxiety-inducing ride to her novel's denouement, which involves a trip to the moon
(almost), a new curriculum for the Wizards' U, a couple of burgeoning love sto-
ries, and enough derring-doing to satisfy most readers. Teens into universe-build-
ing (or just virtual exploring) will happily immerse themselves in the author's fully
imagined environment. JMD
JORDAN, DELORIS 
Salt in His Shoes: MichaelJordan in Pursuit of a Dream; by
Deloris Jordan and with Roslyn M. Jordan; illus. by Kadir Nelson. 
Simon,
2000 
32p
ISBN 0-689-83371-7 
$16.95 
R 
5-9 yrs
"Michael loved to play basketball." Every Saturday he goes to the park with his
older brothers, and, if someone hasn't shown up, he gets to play on his brothers'
team. Mark, the tallest boy on the court, makes it his personal project to ensure
that Michael doesn't even get close to the basket. Discouraged, Michael asks his
mother, "Mama, how can I grow taller?" His mother recommends salt in his shoes
and prayer, and even though the boy can't figure out how the salt's going to help,
he takes his mother's advice. Michael doesn't just depend on salt and prayers,
though; he constantly practices playing basketball. When he finally goes back to
the park, even though he isn't any taller, his determination and newly honed skills
help his team to victory. "After that day, Mama stopped putting salt in Michael's
shoes, but Michael did not stop being patient, and working hard, and praying. So
that must be what made Michael grow to be a six-foot-six-inch basketball star."
This success story is a purposeful tale advocating hard work and faith in order to
achieve one's dreams. The message could have no better vehicle than the story of
150 
* THE BULLETIN
Michael Jordan's early years, as told by his mother and sister. The oil paintings
have an inherent liveliness reinforced by scenes of both playground basketball and
domestic action. Expressive faces and hands make eloquent visual statements in
compressed compositions that reinforce the sense of pending excitement. Nelson
(Nolen's BigJabe, BCCB 9/00; Allen's Dancing in the Wings, BCCB 11/00) has a
powerful vision, and his evocative drafting combines with the well-intentioned
text to make this a picture-book winner. JMD
KESSLER, CRISTINA 
My Great-Grandmother's Gourd; illus. by Walter Lyon
Krudop. 
Orchard, 2000 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-33284-5 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-30284-9 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
When her village in Sudan finally acquires a water pump, Fatima, like the rest of
her community, rejoices. She's impatient with her grandmother, who persists in
following the old tradition and preparing the family's baobab tree ("great-
grandmother's gourd") to store the summer rain, but family loyalty turns her into
her grandmother's assistant when the neighbors begin to jeer at the stubborn old
lady. When the dry season comes and the pump breaks from overuse, Fatima's
grandmother's prescience proves the saving of the village, and in future years trees
are routinely prepared as an adjunct source of water. The tale (based, according to
the author's note, on a real event) is talky and predictable, with a tendency towards
cliched simile, but the message is valid and the delivery avoids preachiness. Krudop's
oils use long painterly strokes, giving the sky and the sun-baked earth a radiant
shimmer; faces are indistinct, however, making the characters monumental rather
than sympathetic or individual. This might nonetheless serve as a window into a
different way of life, and it could certainly provoke some thoughtful discussion
about progress. DS
KIMMEL, ERIC A., ad. The Runaway Tortilla; illus. by Randy Cecil. 
Winslow,
2000 
[3 4p]
ISBN 1-890817-18-X 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
Tia Lupe and Tio Jose own "ElPapagayo Feliz, The Happy Parrot. Cowboys came
from near and far to eat there" because the couple "made the best enchiladas,
burritos, tacos, and fajitas in all of Texas." The cowboys warn Tfa Lupe that her
tortillas are so light, "some day they'll up and run away!" One self-proclaimed
"too beautiful to eat" tortilla does just that, leaping from the griddle and rolling
out the door. The tortilla escapes all pursuers (horned toads, jackrabbits, bold
buckaroos), shouting at them most rudely, until she encounters that traditional
trickster Sefior Coyote, who has both an appetite and a smooth line. Coyote
snappily snaps up the tortilla with clever ruse and sharp teeth, grinning from nose
to ear, "so all that's left is the song" of the runaway tortilla: "Run as fast as fast can
be. You won't get a bite of me. Doesn't matter what you do. I'll be far ahead of
you!" While Kimmel's adaptation (there's no note stating if this is adapted from
any particular cultural variant) of this familiar tale of racing pastry and/or baked
goods is predictably cumulative, the setting and vocabulary are unusual enough to
make this well worth reading or telling aloud. Listeners will hoot at the disagree-
able personality of the tortilla, who shouts insults (and the recurring refrain) from
DECEMBER 2000 
* 
151
a red-lipsticked mouth. Cecil's oils are painted with almost too light a touch, the
features of the characters and the backgrounds at first seeming in danger of fading
into one another. The dark gold mesas over the light-gold sand stand against a
pale blue sky, the colors and contrasts subdued up close; at a distance the images
are more distinct, and a viewing audience will be able to appreciate the easily seen
geometric figures, blocks of color, and other details in the sizable illustrations.
The story's broad humor is broadly interpreted by Cecil, and the view down Sefior
Coyote's gullet as the gullible tortilla provides him with his lunch is sure to elicit
gasps and guffaws from the storytime crowd. JMD
KVASNOSKY, LAURA MCGEE 
Zelda and Ivy One Christmas; written and illus. by
Laura McGee Kvasnosky. 
Candlewick, 2000 
46p
ISBN 0-7636-1000-3 
$15.99 
R Gr. 1-3
The return of fox sisters Zelda and Ivy (Zelda and Ivy, BCCB 4/98; Zelda and Ivy
and the Boy Next Door, 6/99) is cause for celebration-and cooking. In Chapter
One the sisters are baking gingerbread cookies with neighbor Mrs. Brownlie when
she asks, "What do you hope Santa will bring?" Ivy is certain of her heart's desire:
"A Princess Mimi doll... with the pink tutu and all the ballet accessories." Zelda
wants a "dreamy velvet gown... perfect for a Christmas Ball." Chapter Two finds
Zelda in the garden, gazing into a shiny gold ornament, predicting the future-at
least until she smells Mrs. Brownlie's apple pie. In Chapter Three the girls get
bathrobes from their parents and the desired doll and dress from the Christmas
Elf, aka Mrs. Brownlie. Zelda and Ivy's recognition of Mrs. Brownlie's unchosen
solitude (her husband has recently passed away) and their compassionate attempt
to mediate that solitude are believably depicted. Gouache illustrations cozily framed
in red, blue, and green feature the sisters, temporarily in a state of holiday-induced
truce, contentedly anticipating Christmas. An overstuffed yellow armchair with a
pattern of blue flowers, leaves of green holly, red-and-white striped stockings at
the hearth, and the burnt orange of the fox sisters' fur contribute to the homely
atmosphere with comfortable colors in a welcoming domestic landscape. These
three Christmas episodes make low-key but satisfying chapters in this easy reader,
and this title will make a cordial third to shelve alongside the sisters' first two
outings. JMD
LADEN, NINA 
Roberto the Insect Architect; written and illus. by Nina
Laden. 
Chronicle, 2000 
34 p
ISBN 0-8118-2465-9 
$15.95 
R 6-9yrs
Like most termites, Roberto "melted over maple and pined for pine . . . But
Roberto didn't eat his food. He played with it... daydreaming about becoming
a famous architect." Smooth, brown, and appealingly bug-eyed Roberto follows
his dream to the big city, taking a room in "a flea-bag hotel run by a nervous tick"
and unsuccessfully seeking encouragement from architects like Hank Floyd Mite
and Fleas Van Der Rohe. Fueled by a defiant belief in his own unproven talents,
and newly aware of the need for affordable insect housing, Roberto designs and
builds a model neighborhood for down and out arthropods, an unselfish act that
brings him and his work the public notice of which he'd always dreamed. The
wood veneers used in appropriately piecemeal collage and gouache illustrations
give Roberto's dreams structure and texture, while pictures snipped from catalogs
and magazines furnish and set the scene with an eclectic retro flair. Unfortunately,
152 
* THE BULLETIN
much of the text is built around puns and architectural allusions, most aimed at
grownups rather than youngsters. Nonetheless, there's undeniable appeal in a
story that ultimately glorifies playing with one's food, and there's also a worthy
implication that creative problem-solving often goes "against the grain." Let them
chew on that for a while. FK
LANIER, SHANNON 
Jefferson's Children: The Story of One American Family; writ-
ten by Shannon Lanier and Jane Feldman; illus. with photographs by Jane Feldman
et al. 
Random House, 2000 
14 4p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-90597-9 $21.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-80597-4 
$19.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6 up
DNA testing has clearly linked descendants of Thomas Jefferson's slave Sally
Hemings with the Jefferson family, and although not all individuals are satisfied
that an indisputable connection to the third president has been established, de-
scendants of Hemings and Jefferson now find themselves drawn into a very public
debate that encompasses not only their relationship but the very meaning of fam-
ily and the standards of historical "proof." Lanier, a Hemings descendant, inter-
views a host of members from both branches of the Jefferson family tree (wife
Martha, mistress Sally) and uncovers nearly as many reactions to their newfound
extended family as there are members. Several, including Lanier himself, remark
on the less than cordial reception of Hemings descendants by members of the
Monticello Society ("One woman who looked at my outstretched hand and actu-
ally shuddered"), but such members are not among those interviewed. As a result,
it is difficult for readers far removed from the family debate to evaluate whether
hopeful predictions of a united family are widely shared or wishful thinking. Peri-
patetic organization and limited background notes pose further obstacles for those
less intimately familiar with relevant lore and lab results than Lanier and his rela-
tives. Wading through extensive genealogy is an undeniable challenge, but readers
who do must be affected by the thought-provoking views of dozens of ordinary
persons who awoke to find they have several hundred new, biracial relatives. EB
LASS, BONNIE, ad. 
Who Took the Cookies from the Cookie Jar?; ad. by Bonnie Lass
and Philemon Sturges; illus. by Ashley Wolff. Tingley/Little, 2000 
29p
ISBN 0-316-82016-4 
$14.95 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
A curious young skunk sets off to discover who amongst his desert neighbors could
have taken the cookies from his recently full cookie jar in this picture book based
on the popular chanting game. Gussied up in his bandanna and cowboy hat,
Skunk moseys along a trail of cookie crumbs that goes by the homes of various
animals, all of whom deny taking the cookies in rhyming (and sometimes forced)
text. When Squirrel is accused, for example, he replies, "Who, me?/ Couldn't be!/
I munch/ Nuts for lunch." Skunk is accompanied on his trek by a silent lizard
companion who eventually points the way to the guilty culprits: a group of ants,
who are enjoying the cookies on a checkered picnic blanket. When they're discov-
ered, they quickly offer to share, and all the animals from Skunk's neighborhood
join in the cookie feasting. The illustrations feature cluttered but neighborly com-
positions with a backdrop of big skies and mesas fading in the distance; though
Wolffs bright-eyed critters are cheery, their expressions occasionally teeter towards
stilted and the colors are loud and jostling. Nonetheless, their enthusiasm may be
echoed by storytime participants as they eagerly join in with the repeated pattern
DECEMBER 2000 
* 153
of the chant "Who took the cookies from the cookie jar?" Words and music for
the chant are included in the front of the book. KM
LAUBER, PATRICIA 
Purrfectly Purrfect: Life at the Acatemy; illus. by Betsy
Lewin. 
HarperCollins, 2000 
80p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029209-1 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-17299-7 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
"The Acatemy is a school for cats." So opens this beginning chapter book chock-
full of feline humor, in which a group of cats learn subjects such as Cats in Nature
(catnip, tiger lily, etc.) and Cats in Geography (Catskill Mountains; Kitty Hawk).
Interspersed amongst school reports on a variety of subjects from the approxi-
mately ten cat students of the Acatemy is the story of a kitten named Dudley, the
stay-at-home younger sibling of two other pupils, whose simplistic catlike ways
(when asked to leave the school, Dudley rubs his head on the principal and purrs)
offer a comic contrast to the Acatemy's other, more sophisticated feline enrollees.
Lewin's black-and-white cats are comically drawn, with expressive lines in thick
ink that create solid but active kitties. Although the cat jokes and puns are amus-
ing, the plot is light and characterizations weak; school reports from each member
of the cat student body slow the pace significantly, and young readers may find
that the jokes wear thin over the length of the novel. However, cat lovers of all
ages will find plenty of cat puns to sink their teeth into, and for some beginning
readers of chapter books, these goofy jokes will be the cat's meow. KM
LINDBERGH, REEVE, comp. 
In Every Tiny Grain ofSand: A Child's Book ofPrayers
and Praise; illus. by Christine Davenier, Bob Graham, Anita Jeram, et
al. 
Candlewick, 2000 
77p
ISBN 0-7636-0176-4 
$21.99 
R 4-12 yrs
Seventy-seven prayers and inspirational verses are divided into four sections: "For
the Day," illustrated by Bob Graham; "For the Home," illustrated by Elisa Kleven;
"For the Earth," illustrated by Christine Davenier; and "For the Night," illus-
trated by Anita Jeram. The primarily celebratory selections vary in length from
one line to one page, and they represent a wide range of religions and cultures.
Each illustrator's strengths are in evidence here: Graham's watercolors are full of
motion and energy, from natural forces to frolicking children; Kleven's watercolor
and collage illustrations are merrily crowded with images of loving families and
welcoming homes; Davenier's watercolors depict children awash in nature's beauty;
and Jeram's acrylics (deviating from the child-centered focus of the previous sec-
tions) feature a night bright with stars, moon, and exotic animals. As in Bijou
LeTord's similarly themed collection, Peace on Earth (BCCB 12/92), the selec-
tions speak eloquently to the spirituality present in the common, everyday world,
and both children and adults will appreciate this uncommon collection. JMD
The Lord's Prayer; illus. by Tim Ladwig. 
Eerdmans, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-8028-5180-0 
$17.00 
Ad 
5-9 yrs
Ladwig illustrates the traditional Christian prayer with a pictorial narrative that
tells the story of a father and daughter doing a good deed for an elderly neighbor.
The text of the prayer is only obliquely related to the action: father and daughter
mend the old woman's porch, paint her fence, and clean up the backyard; in the
midst of the chores the girl finds the woman's lost gold medal. After some consid-
154 
* THE BULLETIN
eration, she returns the medal to its owner, who puts it on a chain and gives it to
her. The watercolors depict a somewhat old-fashioned, unrealistically clean urban
street scene with red brick buildings and the occasional spray of graffiti. Ladwig
sometimes takes the bird's-eye (God's eye?) view complete with fluttering doves,
and his unusual perspectives make the images compositionally interesting. A glam-
orous palette suffuses the dawn-pink sky, the copper-brown skin of father and
daughter, and the sun-stained city streets, adding to the idealized environment.
Though the visual narrative is strong, correlations to the text are fairly random;
still, adults looking for material for Christian religious instruction will make good
use of this title. JMD
MACAUIAY, DAVID 
Building Big; written and illus. by David Macaulay. 
Lorraine/
Houghton, 2000 
192p
ISBN 0-395-96331-1 
$30.00 
SpR Gr. 9 up
This companion to the PBS television series of the same name offers readers an
even closer examination of the featured subjects of bridges, tunnels, dams, domes,
and skyscrapers. Each section offers an implicitly chronological analysis as it fo-
cuses on several significant examples of that particular kind of structure (ranging
from four representatives for dams to ten for skyscrapers). As Macaulay says in his
preface, the book differs from the series in eschewing big-picture sociohistorical
material and focusing "entirely on the connections between the main planning
and design problems that had to be solved and the solutions that were eventually
built"; this means that this is essentially an engineering text, dense with technical
details that will be dizzying for the uninitiated (the one-page glossary in back just
scratches the surface) but riveting for the fans. The book offers flashes of wit (the
Channel Tunnel was a consequence of the French and the British being united by
"a mutual dislike of seasickness") and pithy observations about the difficulties ("As
every dam engineer knows, water also has one job, and that is to get past anything
in its way") as well as details about some surprising but necessary project logistics
(the British tunnel boring machines were mostly buried below the Chunnel in
holes they dug themselves in order to avoid the expense of removal). Diagrams
and illustrations are often illuminating (Macaulay's dome convention under the
Superdome is particularly amusing and informative) but they sometimes fall short
(the image of the Tay Bridge disaster doesn't really explain much, it's not clarified
that the Akashi Kaikyo bridge is superimposed on an image of the Golden Gate
Bridge, and more frequent scale indications would be helpful). Readers of a less
technical bent may find the engineering intensity daunting and will be better off
with the video version, but those looking for a nuts and bolts approach will find
this more fun than an Erector set. DS
MAHY, MARGARET 
24 Hours. Hamilton/McElderry, 2000 
200p
ISBN 0-689-83884-0 
$17.00 
R Gr. 8-10
Aspiring actor Ellis wants so very much to have a life. He's looking forward to
university and being on his own, in the meantime trying to come to terms with the
suicide of his best friend. During summer vacation, Ellis runs into Jackie, an old
acquaintance, and suddenly finds himself playing the part of hero in his own unex-
pectedly eventful life. Mahy sets up a colorful cast, beginning with the blithely
opportunistic Jackie, who uses Ellis without a qualm. Following bad-boy Jackie is
a trio of sisters recovering from an unspeakable tragedy: fatalistic Ursa, who stud-
DECEMBER 2000 
* 
155
ies for the bar; motherly Leona, who trains as an undertaker; and precocious Fox,
the youngest at eleven years old, who gazes deep into a crystal ball and makes
obscure pronouncements regarding the future. These characters inhabit a world
far from Ellis' sheltered suburban one, living in poverty in an old motel called
"Land of Smiles." Ellis deliberately and with forethought takes each step away
from the mainstream: he drives Jackie to crash a party, he takes Ursa and Leona
home to the motel, and he participates in an all-night party that leaves him with a
buzz cut and a hangover. Circumstances turn Ellis into a thinking hero whose
choices grow from unselfconscious moments of insight. One of Mahy's strengths
is her complex characterizations; even ignorantly dangerous Christo, bully of Ellis'
youth and his current nemesis, merits sympathy. The delicacy of the emotional
relationships among the characters combines with the sheer nerve of the escalating
plot and makes it plausible. By turns funny, horrifying, devastating, and true, this
is Ellis' initiation into the rituals of the world and the whimsicality of destiny.
JMD
MANNING, MICK 
What a Viking!; written and illus. by Mick Manning and Brita
Granstr6m. 
R & S Books, 2000 
34p
ISBN 91-29-64883-1 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 2-5
In this Swedish import, Bjbrn regales a pair of wide-eyed children with the stories
behind his many scars, earned during his hell-raising days as a Viking. Enamored
of the dragon-headed ship that sailed into Birka harbor, Bjorn left his herring on
the dock and ran off to a life of adventure ("I grew taller, stronger, and uglier every
year. ... I loved the smell of the sea and the wind on my hairy young face"). In
Bj6rn's memory, he's been battered over the years by a beautiful serving wench in
Byzantium, a duelist in Dublin, cutthroats in England, and a misfired arrow ("stuck
in my hairy backside") at a jolly midsummer festival, all part and parcel of the
rollicking life of a Viking. Closing endpapers reveal the tamer truth behind Bjorn's
bashes and bruises, but from his tall-tale telling, the children (and Manning's au-
dience) scrape up a considerable amount of information about Viking life, territo-
ries within their area of operation, and archaeological evidence that sheds light on
their travels and activities. Line-and-watercolor cartoon illustrations are appropri-
ately earthy and rowdy, and if readers haven't caught on to the fact that there's
some serious data tucked into the tale, the concluding glossary should tip them off.
EB
MCDONOUGH, 
YONA 
ZELDIS 
The Dollhouse Magic; illus. by Diane
Palmisciano. 
Holt, 2000 
83p
ISBN 0-8050-6464-8 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Sisters Jane and Lila, in second and fourth grades respectively, are trying to be
good sports about their cramped new home, where they moved after their father
lost his bank job in the Depression. One thing that helps is Miss Amanda
Whitcomb's dollhouse, displayed prominently on a turntable in Miss Amanda
Whitcomb's window, where the girls sigh over the dollhouse's elaborate detail and
imagined dramas. They're therefore thrilled when the elderly Miss Whitcomb
strikes up a friendship with them, allowing the girls to visit, eat cookies, and play
with the dollhouse themselves (even their father gets into the act, repairing some of
the old furniture). The dollhouse is enticingly described, and Miss Whitcomb is
an endearing, if stock, earthly fairy godmother. The plot never really develops into
156 
* THE BULLETIN
much, however, so Miss Whitcomb has died and left the girls the dollhouse before
we really have much chance for vicarious play, and there's strain in the suggestion
that the new girl in her house is somehow a legacy of Miss Whitcomb; nor is there
much tension to balance out the sweetness and occasional note of condescension.
Black and white art has a discordantly bouncy and contemporary look, but it adds
an energy that the old-fashioned text sometimes lacks. Despite the weak spots,
this paints a picture that young dollhouse fans will probably be unable to resist,
and they'll yearn for a neighborhood dollhouse of their own. DS
MURPHY, JIM 
Pick r Shovel Poet: The Journeys of Pascal DAngelo. 
Clarion,
2000 
162p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-395-77610-4 
$20.00 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Murphy's biography of Italian immigrant poet Pascal D'Angelo parallels the story
of Italian immigration and immigrant life in the United States. D'Angelo left his
northern Italian village with his father in 1910 and sailed to America. Once pro-
cessed through Ellis Island, D'Angelo and his father worked as laborers for the
railroad companies, in coal mines, on highway projects, etc. Murphy segues from
the specifics ofD'Angelo's personal history to generalities about the lives of Italian
immigrants in the early years of the twentieth century. The faces of the immi-
grants, among them D'Angelo, peer out from black-and-white period photographs
with a curious intensity; images of urban streets, factories, and railroad yards em-
phasize the industrial grime. D'Angelo battled bigotry, labored in dangerous con-
ditions, and lived in near squalor, yet he managed to learn English using newspapers,
the public library, and a secondhand dictionary. Searching for a means of expres-
sion, he began writing poetry, quitting his job to devote himself to writing full-
time; in 1922 he won a prestigious poetry prize. In 1924 D'Angelo wrote Son of
Italy: The Autobiography ofPascal D Angelo, upon which much of this biography
is based. Murphy synthesizes the personal with the universal, making D'Angelo's
life stand for not only the sum of his experiences but for the sum of the experiences
of his fellow immigrants. D'Angelo's autobiography, his poetry, and other pri-
mary source material is quoted directly; an extensive list of resources (organized by
chapter) is also included. JMD
MYERS, 
CHRISTOPHER 
Wings; written and illus. by Christopher
Myers. 
Scholastic, 2000 
40p
ISBN 0-590-03377-8 
$16.95 
R 
6-9 yrs
Ikarus Jackson can fly. He swoops above the rooftops and buzzes the gawking
passersby, who label him "strange." The narrator of this allegory about being your
true self doesn't think he's strange; she thinks he's wonderful ("Ikarus Jackson, the
fly boy, came to my school last Thursday. His long, strong, proud wings followed
wherever he went"). To say Ikarus attracts attention is putting it mildly. Students
laugh at Ikarus' "useless" wings, even when they see him fly ("nobody likes a show-
off'). The narrator, however, is familiar with the judgmental stares of her class-
mates, and she sympathizes with Ikarus' loneliness. She tells him "what someone
should have long ago: 'Your flying is beautiful.'" Myers' ingenuous story may be
a bit purposive, but his collage illustrations are powerful and affecting. Ikarus, a
lanky black silhouette with white wings that spread like growing things, captures
the eye in every spread; photographic images are taken out of their original context
and functionally reimagined in Myers' intriguing compositions. The palette is
DECEMBER 2000 
* 
157
intense whether hot or cold, and the characters themselves are an eerie amalgam of
photographic and textural images. Predictability aside, this is a message worth
repeating, and Myers' artistic presentation makes this a book worth having. JMD
NORRIS, LESLIE 
Albert and the Angels; illus. by Mordicai Gerstein. 
Farrar,
2000 
48p
ISBN 0-374-30192-1 
$16.00 
R Gr. 2-4
When Albert's mother was eight years old, her grandmother gave her "a gold me-
dallion on a delicate gold chain"; the medallion was her favorite Christmas present
ever, but one day "it just vanished." Albert (encouraged by his smartmouthed
talking dachshund, Lucille) tries to earn the money to replace the medallion, but
all he can afford is a cheap facsimile, which he loses on his way home. Braving a
snowstorm to search for the gift, Albert and Lucille meet a redheaded angel who
takes them to the "Found Property" warehouse, where the lost medallion is recov-
ered-not the cheap facsimile, but the original medallion given to Albert's mother
so many Christmases ago. Norris' sweetly sentimental story is leavened by the
dryly funny repartee between Lucille and Albert and by the down-to-earth pro-
gression of their Christmas quest. Norris never tells too much but instead lets
Albert and Lucille (and the angels) reveal themselves through conversation and
action. Gerstein's paintings have a cheery practicality that reflects the text's mat-
ter-of-fact tone. Visual characterizations skirt cute by a wide margin and aim for
believable, from the dungaree-clad Albert to his lean and lanky parents to the
squat Lucille. The heavenly denizens who assist Albert are ruddy-faced, practical
folk, sans haloes and wings, with only sensible advice to offer. The indoor setting
features a comfortably worn kitchen and living room; the outdoors is a wintry,
semi-urban street scene filled with holiday shoppers and decorations. This is more
illustrated book than picture book, and there are several spreads containing only
dense blocks of text. Ambitious second-grade readers will be able to handle Albert's
story on their own, but this is definitely a book meant to be shared beneath the tree
lights. JMD
NUMEROFF, LAURA 
If You Take a Mouse to the Movies; illus. by Felicia
Bond. 
Geringer/HarperCollins, 2000 
[34p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027868-4 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-02787-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 3-6 yrs
Already famous for his gustatory tangent (IfYou Give a Mouse a Cookie), Numeroffs
peripatetic mouse returns. The mouse's circuitous actions are inspired this time
by a trip to the movie theater with his friend (the boy from Cookie), a trip that
inspires a request for popcorn. Imaginative leaps and positive actions carry mouse
and his agreeable companion from strings of popcorn to Christmas trees, snow-
men, carols, ornaments, back to popcorn and the movies. While the bridges be-
tween a few of the seasonal activities or items may be a bit of a stretch, Numeroff
capably negotiates each one. The understated humor is reinforced by the cumula-
tive effect of the events themselves, which have a progressively more exaggerated,
tall tale-ish aspect as the litany lengthens. The little mouse retains his scruffy but
soulful charm, right down to his seasonally appropriate underwear; the Christmas
tree is crowded with enough gold stars, glittery snowflakes, and frosted ginger-
bread men to justify the mouse's enthusiasm. Bond had a light touch with these
158 
* THE BULLETIN
compositions, avoiding overcrowding and busyness. Old fans of this mouse will
gladly exchange cookies for candy canes in this holiday sequel. JMD
O'CONNELL, REBECCA 
Myrtle of Willendorf Front Street, 2000 
116p
ISBN 1-886910-52-9 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 9-12
Myrtle is a freshman in college struggling to come to terms with her art, her room-
mate, Jada, and her body, not necessarily in that order. In her self-examination,
Myrtle reminisces about high school, about her only friend, Margie (now estranged),
and the goddess that Margie tried so hard to have her embrace as a symbol of her
own worth. Myrtle creates a small furor when she enters a drawing ofJada's lover
as a satyr in rut (title: Satyrsfaction) to a local art show. Responses trigger an
emotional meltdown, and, in a moment worthy of Brock Cole's Celine (BCCB
12/89), Myrtle paints her body blue with woad and does a self-and-goddess-glori-
fying self-portrait, which she hands in to replace the first drawing. She declares
her embrace of the goddess and herself not just with the drawing but with the
postcard she finally sends to Margie, reestablishing contact. There are some very
interesting plot shoots here but none of them are ever given a chance to blossom.
Myrtle has a wry voice, an intelligent mind, and an eye for truth, which makes it
difficult to believe she is unaware of her own self-sabotage via classic food binges.
Aside from Myrtle, characterizations are shallow: Jada is a one-dimensional twit,
and Goat, her boyfriend, is a charming but apparently clueless stud-muffin. This
is short fiction that has intriguing coming-of-age elements; still, there just isn't
enough here to make a novel. Articulate, sympathetic fat girls like Myrtle are few
and far between; she deserves more opportunity to be heard than she's given in this
extended short story. JMD
OLSON, MARY AnAlligatorAteMy Brother; illus. by Tammie Lyon. 
Boyds Mills,
2000 
[32p]
ISBN 1-56397-803-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
4-8 yrs
What if you found an alligator in the playroom . .. and then you saw him chase
and, finally, catch and devour your little brother? You'd tell your family, right?
But what if they didn't believe you? Well, you'd have to handle it yourself, as
young Paul does in this unconvincingly light-hearted family survival drama. Even
this cheerful, bright green cartoony predator is likely to give children pause when
they see him hot on the trail of a preschooler "running as fast as he could, one step
ahead of the alligator" who is swallowing his teddy bear. Garish colors and un-
imaginative, inelegant drafting give this the look of a comic strip. Wordless double-
spread watercolors-like the one that shows little Jimmy's legs disappearing down
the alligator's throat-further emphasize the more dramatic events of the story,
and whether child readers relate to the panic-stricken youngster or his frustrated
older brother, they are likely to find the bland smiles and conspiratorial winks of
Paul's clueless parents discomfiting. Though the last page of the book shows the
siblings cuddled up with the alligator (now wearing spectacles and reading a book
that looks an awful lot like this book), there is nothing in the story that prepares
the reader for this comforting development; in fact, only the page before Paul was
racing out of the house to rescue his bossy and unbelieving sister. So unless you're
prepared to provide a more successfully comic tone or a more believable resolution
to the tensions evoked by this book, you might want to give this problematic gator
DECEMBER 2000 
* 
159
a miss and instead spend reading time visiting with dependable old Lyle or
Marcellino's charming historical croc in I, Crocodile (BCCB 1/00). FK
PARK, BARBARA 
The Graduation of Jake Moon. 
Schwartz/Atheneum,
2000 
115p
ISBN 0-689-83912-X 
$15.00 
R Gr. 4-7
Jake's grandfather, Skelly, was diagnosed with Alzheimer's when Jake was in third
grade; now that Jake's fourteen, there's a whole history of deprivations and embar-
rassments Jake's suffered on account of Skelly's illness. He's bitter about the loss
of after-school options (when the other kids are playing football he's taking care of
his grandfather, since his mother can barely afford professional care during school
hours, let alone after), and he regrets the loss of friends who've simply found Skelly's
weirdness too much to handle, but he also feels guilty about his resentment of and
his behavior towards his beloved grandfather. This isn't a new topic in literature
for young people (see Bauer's An Early Frost and Willner-Pardo's Figuring Out
Frances, both BCCB 2/99), but Park gives Jake's emotional maelstrom a particu-
larly authentic voice (after standing by while his friends taunt the confused old
man, not knowing he's Jake's grandfather, Jake thinks, "I could only imagine how
proud Ma would have been to know I had seen the whole thing and done nothing
to help"). The genuine hardship and alteration of a family undergoing this kind of
strain is made crystal clear, but Park also gives readers sufficient retrospective char-
acterization to make them mourn Skelly's alteration along with Jake. Far beyond
a disease-of-the-week drama, this will strike a chord with any reader who's ever
been caught between frustration and love. DS
RASH, ANDY 
The Robots Are Coming and Other Poems; written and illus. by Andy
Rash. 
Levine/Scholastic, 2000 
34 p
ISBN 0-439-06306-X 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Sixteen poems bring enticingly horrific motifs such as voodoo, androids, x-ray
vision, and mummies to youngsters eager for some creature-feature verse. Entries
vary in form and length, but they're all fairly brief and bouncily rhyming. Some
poems give the alluring themes their due: the machine-gun rhythm and brain-
twisting effect of "Devil" ("In H-E-double hockey stick/ the D-E-V-I-hockey stick/
just C-A-double hockey sticked me on his special phone ... ") will have kids
attempting to outpace each other in chant contests. More often, however, the
conceits are crammed awkwardly into the verse, leaving scansion unclear and the
ends of poems trailing off rather than tying the ideas up into a nice creepy package.
The ink-and-gouache art derives texture and depth from the dark fibrous paper,
and the compositions have an atmospheric strength and clarity. Rash's visual idiom
is right in step with various Cartoon Network luminaries (and there's even a South
Park air to the kids building the abominable snowman), so the cast looks both hip
and homey. This doesn't have the lyrical precision of Prelutsky and Sfs' mon-
strous pairings, but it may offer youngsters an amiable poetic frisson. DS
REISS, MIKE 
How Murray Saved Christmas; illus. by David Catrow. 
Price Stern
Sloan, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-8431-7610-5 
$10.99 
R 
7-10 yrs
Murray Kleiner, owner of Murray K's Holiday Diner, finds himself subbing for
Santa after Edison the Elf inadvertently knocks the Kringle cold. At first Murray
160 
* 
THE BULLETIN
is a reluctant replacement, but an encounter with a doubtful six-year-old boy causes
Murray to rise to the occasion, taking the boy out into the snow to show him the
proof of Santa Claus' existence: "That's Santa's sleigh sitting there in the snow!/
There's the toys! And the reindeer whose names I don't know!/ Oh, Santa is real,
kid. It's wrestling that's fake." After Edison and Murray finish delivering gifts to
good girls and boys, the big-hearted Murray insists on bringing toys to the bad
girls and boys, "and people said Christmas was never so pleasant,/ As that year
when all of the world got a present." Catrow is at the top of his neon-maniacal
form, playing hot pink and chartreuse off the traditional Christmas red and green.
Santa's gravity-defying reindeer are all legs, grins, and antlers, and Edison the Elf is
a demented little figure with bulging eyes and pointy ears that echo his pointy hair.
Catrow fills his compositions with visual jokes (Santa's dirty socks are under the
bed; the denizens of Murray's Holiday Diner include the Easter Bunny, Cupid,
George Washington, and the Thanksgiving Turkey; an airborne reindeer warily
eyes a weather satellite) and the juxtaposition of the rotund Murray against various
surreal backdrops wreaks havoc with traditional Christmas imagery. Reiss' rhym-
ing text has a rhythmic regularity that contributes to the merry mayhem ("They
made their first stop, Eddie fearing the worst./ Murray fell down the chimney and
landed tush-first"). Murray is way out ofsync with the holiday, but he eventually
catches on and plays his role with enthusiasm. Readers-aloud seeking a nontradi-
tional Christmas spoof need seek no further-Reiss and Catrow have provided a
holiday humdinger. JMD
ROSE, DEBORAH LEE 
Into the A, B, Sea: An Ocean Alphabet; illus. by Steve
Jenkins. 
Scholastic, 2000 
40p
ISBN 0-439-09696-0 
$15.95 
R 6-9 yrs
You all know the drill: rhymed text describes various denizens of the deep from
Anemones to Zooplankton while the art depicts said denizens cavorting in and
about their briny habitat. Though there's the usual contrivance (Isn't I for Insects
rather broad? Do all these creatures really inhabit the same part of the ocean?), the
verse here is nice and tight, using its short line to good advantage (" . . . where
Anemones sting/ and Barnacles cling/ where Crabs crawl in/ and Dolphins spin").
Jenkins' cut-paper collage is an appetizing seafood platter in its own right; he ex-
tracts an astonishing variety of textures from the medium, with frothy white spray
contrasting with the dolphins' sleek, aerodynamic forms, and he plays effectively
and creatively with oceanic hues (the penguins' iceberg appears lavender through
the smoke-gray sea). The alphabet format offers more authorial convenience than
topic cohesion, but this is a serviceable execution that provides an excuse for an
elegant gallery of sea creatures. Appended notes explain more about the featured
organisms. DS
RYAN, PAM Mu0oz 
Esperanza Rising. Scholastic, 2000 
262p
ISBN 0-439-12041-1 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Esperanza's life as the cherished only daughter of a rich Mexican rancher changes
abruptly when her father is killed and her land-hungry uncles begin to pressure her
widowed mother. They flee to the U.S., accompanied by their loyal housekeeper,
Hortensia, and her son, Miguel. California in 1930 has little to offer penniless
Mexican immigrants but hard agricultural labor, and the four settle in a work
camp. Esperanza's pragmatic mother turns to field work while Esperanza struggles
DECEMBER 2000 
* 161
with an unpleasant learning curve, realizing that she at thirteen lacks the most
basic practical skills that her eight-year-old campmate Isabel takes for granted.
Things get worse: strikes loom, pressing the workers to take sides; Esperanza's
mother falls ill, forcing Esperanza to become lapatrona of the family; and Esperanza's
dear friend Miguel disappears with the money she's saved. Based on Ryan's
grandmother's experiences, this is an unusual story that steers clear of some ro-
mantic pitfalls. Though the piquant riches-to-rags element will draw readers, there's
no authorial condescension towards Esperanza's campesino fellow workers, and
Esperanza's gradual shedding of her own prejudices towards them is perceptively
delineated. The discussion of the strike isn't one-sided, though the book does
support Esperanza's decision to keep working, and there's some edifying informa-
tion about the heterogeneousness of the Latino population in the workforce and
their forced repatriation and even migration (some U.S. citizens were sent to Mexico
as well). Wide-eyed but thoughtful Esperanza makes an attractive agent for these
discussions, and her inevitable pairing with Miguel (who took her saved money in
order to bring her beloved grandmother from Mexico to join the family) provides
both a touch of romance and an illustration of what Esperanza has gained by
coming north. DS
SAN Souc, ROBERT D., ad. 
Little GoldStar: A Spanish American Cinderella Tale;
illus. by Sergio Martinez. 
HarperCollins, 2000 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-14781-X 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-14780-1 
$15.95 
R 
6-9 yrs
Teresa regrets her father's marriage to a "haughty woman" and the acquisition of
"her vain daughters" as stepsisters; she fears her stepmother's anger when, washing
a fleece in the river, she loses it to the current. A woman in blue (the Blessed
Mother) promises to retrieve the fleece and sends Teresa to tend a baby (Jesus) and
old man (Joseph) in a mountain shack. Teresa sings lullabies to the baby, grooms
the old man, and sweeps the shack; in reward she is given a snow-white fleece and
a gold star on her forehead. Teresa's stepmother sends her own daughters to wash
fleece at the river in hopes of their gaining a gold star; they each encounter the
woman in blue, but, being irreverent and unhelpful, they each return with a pen-
ance (horns and donkey ears) instead of a reward. This popular cuento combines
traditional elements from European versions of Cinderella with elements reflect-
ing the Catholic faith of Spanish-American residents of the American Southwest
(Teresa is first observed by her future husband, handsome landowner Don Miguel,
lighting candles in the church, and he is impressed by her piety as well as her
beauty). Martinez' watercolors depict homes with Spanish architectural influ-
ences in an arid, southwest desert landscape; his characters have lively, expressive
faces and evocative body language (especially the grimly comic stepmother and her
petulant daughters). This is effective fairy-tale magic transported to new terrain.
Source notes are included. JMD
SAY, ALLEN 
The Sign Painter; written and illus. by Allen Say. 
Lorraine/Hough-
ton, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-395-97974-9 
$17.00 
Ad 
Gr. 6 up
The opening image is a street scene straight out of Edward Hopper-red build-
ings, green trim, dark storefronts--and on the street is a young man who just got
off the early bus. He enters a sign shop and is hired by the veteran sign painter to
162 
* THE BULLETIN
assist in painting a dozen billboards featuring a woman's face and the word
"ArrowStar." The two men, young and old, travel into the desert, painting bill-
board after billboard in the back end of nowhere. A pink convertible bearing the
ArrowStar woman roars away from towers the men see on the horizon, towers that
turn out to be an immense roller coaster looming over the mesas. The story is a
mood piece that, while competently related, is distant and opaque. The art is a
quiet homage to Hopper, Rockwell, Magritte, and O'Keeffe that effectively evokes
and holds the emotional moods of the landscape. There is a majestic surrealism to
the desert scenes that, combined with the shiny graphics of the sign painter's truck
and the immensity of the roller coaster, results in an alien landscape all the more
intriguing because it is so familiar. Readers attracted by the art may not be put off
by the nearly incomprehensible narrative; hand this to young adults searching for
symbolism. JMD
SHANNON, 
DAVID 
The Rain Came Down; written and illus. by David
Shannon. 
Blue Sky/Scholastic, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-439-05021-9 
$15.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
When the rain comes down, it sets off a chain of vexation: it makes the chickens
squawk, which makes the cat yowl, which makes the dog bark, which makes people
yell, which makes a police officer stop his car in traffic to investigate, and so on
until there's a fine damp neighborhood furor. When the sun comes out ("The air
smelled fresh and sweet. Everything shimmered, and a rainbow stretched across
the rooftops"), moods brighten, and people turn to chatting, extending helping
hands, and picnicking (in the company of the chickens, cat, and dog that started it
all). Shannon's figures are a bit less spiky here than in No, David (BCCB 9/98),
but they've got much of the same waxen apple-cheeked shine and toylike solidity
(he's particularly good with gaping mouths); the silver splinters of rain don't dampen
the enthusiasm of the vibrant colors. Though the chaos is diverting, the plot
doesn't quite muster up the necessary drizzle-fighting energy: neither the windup
nor the recoil are organized and focused enough to make the cumulative chain
into effective narrative, and the story's not zany enough to pull off its unlikelier
elements (the woman on the way to the airport deciding to stop and have her hair
done, for instance). Still, there's pleasure enough in the disorder and resolution
that some youngsters may find this enjoyable come rain or come shine. DS
SIDDALS, 
MARY 
MCKENNA 
I'll Play With You; illus. by David
Wisniewski. 
Clarion, 2000 
28p
ISBN 0-395-90373-4 
$14.00 
Ad 
2-5 yrs
In a series of vignettes, each of a multiracial cast of children gets a chance to inter-
act with nature, with the phrase "I'll play with you" beginning their respective
addresses to the sun, wind, clouds, rain, stars, and moon. The kids actively engage
with natural phenomena, as when one boy says to the stars: "You twinkle, and I'll
try to count you," or when a girl addresses the wind, saying: "I'll come running,
and you whoosh right through me." Despite the action and repetition, the text is
a bit wispy and the rhythms lack buoyancy. Wisniewski's hallmark paper-collage
technique is by contrast almost too solid at times, with faces sometimes wooden;
the crisp lines and bold contrast of the slick sky blue and kelly green backgrounds
effectively complement the children, however, whose skin is created with softly
textured paper in a variety of tones. The trim size is attractively small, and, al-
DECEMBER 2000 
* 
163
though the story is slight, the vivid collages may inspire young listeners to enjoy
some of their own running, splashing, and jumping in the great outdoors. KM
SIERRA, JUDY, ad. 
The Gift of the Crocodile: A Cinderella Story; illus. by Reynold
Ruffins. 
Simon, 2000 
40p
ISBN 0-689-82188-3 
$17.00 
R 6-9 yrs
Damura lives happily in the Spice Islands with her mother, who teaches her how
"to kindle a fire, to tend and harvest rice plants, and to dance the graceful dances of
their ancestors." After her mother's death, Damura persuades her father to marry
the neighbor woman who has given her a homemade doll. The familiar elements-
stepmother, prince, ball, lost slipper-accumulate, but added to these well-known
motifs are funny scenes of negotiation between a helpful crocodile and the brave
heroine. Damura approaches the crocodile with great respect and wins her regard.
In return, "Grandmother Crocodile" develops a very strong affection for her "grand-
daughter" Damura, so much so that the crocodile demands, "Spit her out right
now!" of the unfortunate "river-child" that dared eat GC's "precious grandchild."
Ruffins' acrylics are lush and tropically fantastical; his human figures are elegantly
spare, and his palette is replete with melting shades of orchid and tiger lily. Damura
is a gracefully evocative, slender figure that draws the eye, but Grandmother Croco-
dile is magnificent, concurrently threatening and delightful. Huge and sinuous,
with red glowing eyes and terrifying jaws, she both commands respect and invites
affection. Sierra's storytelling and Ruffins' images combine for a light-hearted,
almost frothy take on this sometimes somberly told tale. An excellent source note
discusses the cross-cultural popularity of this rags-to-riches story. JMD
STANLEY, GEORGE E. 
The Clue of the Left-Handed Envelope; illus. by Sal
Murdocca. 
Aladdin, 2000 
[80p] 
(Ready-for-Chapters)
Paper ed. ISBN 0-689-82194-8 
$3.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Third grader Noelle Trocoderro is surprised on her first day of school by her former-
spy teacher, Mr. Merlin, who has an interesting slant on education: "We're going
to solve a lot of mysteries this year." Classmate Amber Lee provides the first puzzle
of the semester, asking for help tracking down the secret admirer who wrote her a
note. In attacking the enigma, Mr. Merlin introduces the class to a host of tricks
and tools of the spy trade (secret codes, deductive reasoning), and he also arranges
a visit from Dr. Smiley, staff at a police lab. Together, Noelle and her friend Todd
join forces to solve the mystery before rival Amber Lee. Stanley's writing fails to
rise above the serviceable, relying on contrived plot construction to move the story
forward. Nonetheless, the short paragraphs and chapters, large type, and the idea
of a spy-turned-schoolteacher will appeal to beginner chapter-book readers. Re-
viewed from an unillustrated galley. EAB
STARK, LYNETTE 
Escape from Heart. Harcourt, 2000 
2 12 p
ISBN 0-15-202385-2 
$17.00 
M 
Gr. 6-9
When Hezekiel Whittenstone took leadership of the tiny Mennonite colony Heart,
joy and neighborliness fled. An abusive tyrant within his own family and a mega-
lomaniac in the community, he is neither liked nor respected but he manages to
hold onto his position through fear, manipulation, and as soon becomes clear,
outright crime. His misdeeds inch ever closer to narrator Sarah Ruth, though,
164 * THE BULLETIN
when her Aunt Lila (Hezekiel's wife) abandons her family and runs away after a
vicious beating, her boyfriend runs away after a vicious beating, her teacher is
driven off colony property at gunpoint, and her parents seem irrevocably rent over
colony loyalties. Villain Whittenstone is overdrawn, to say the least-a gun-happy
sadist, philanderer, embezzler, and arsonist. His congregation, though, isn't much
more sympathetic, as they vacillate between sheeplike passivity and backstabbing
and gossip of the nastiest sort. Given Hezekiel's iron-fisted control, fugitives make
their escape with incredible ease and promptly land living-wage menial work and
comfy shelter on the "outside." Although Stark pays lip-service to the fact that not
all Mennonite communities are as dysfunctional as this one, no true contrast is
offered, and readers unfamiliar with the sect will more likely be impressed by the
histrionics and ugliness of this fictional colony than by a more realistic rendering
of the complex Mennonite world. EB
STONE, PHOEBE 
All the Blue Moons at the Wallace Hotel. Little, 2000 
198p
ISBN 0-316-81645-0 
$15.95 
Ad Gr. 5-8
Eleven-year-old Fiona narrates an involving but finally overcrowded story that
details daily life in and around her gothic home-a dilapidated mansion on the
edge of town full of enormous empty rooms and abandoned statues-and drops
hints along the way about the "incident" that four years ago led to the death of her
father. Fiona's mother, a sculptor, is a hazy figure who has withdrawn from her
work, her children, and society, giving Fiona much of the responsibility for Wallace,
her headstrong younger sister. The narrator's peripheral vision encompasses other
characters in town-most dramatically a woman dying of leukemia and the refu-
gee Cuban dance teacher-while its backward vision often extends further than its
early 1960s time setting. Child characters include Kip: neighbor, future hotelier,
and a friend indeed when Fiona needs help finding Wallace after she runs away
from school in a blizzard, a wake-up call for Fiona's disaffected mother. When
burst pipes caused by the same storm ruin the dance teacher's studio, the venue of
the Christmas recital that Fiona longs to participate in, the show is moved to her
barn of a house with mom's blessing. The story ends with Fiona's private dreams
for a future as a dancer rekindled and her reconciliation with the past well begun,
and, in an excess of closure, the novel hints at a romance for Fiona's mom, an
artistic career for Wallace, and a trip to the Biltmore for Kip. Though the truth
about Fiona's father's death is oddly pointless in a book full of moody symbolism,
many readers will be drawn on by the mystery and in the process find themselves
drawn to the novel's unselfconsciously plucky heroine. FK
STURGES, PHILEMON 
Sacred Places; illus. by Giles Laroche. 
Putnam, 2000 
4 0p
ISBN 0-399-23317-2 
$16.99 
R Gr. 4-7
In a followup to their impressive Bridges Are to Cross (BCCB 12/98), Sturges and
Laroche tackle spirituality and architecture by examining places in North America,
Europe, Asia, and Africa sacred in one-or more-of five large religions (an intro-
ductory overview gives background for Christianity, Judaism, Islam, Buddhism,
and Hinduism). Simple text in large font links the visual visits ("Some are hard to
reach" introduces the Abbey Church of Mont Saint-Michel, on an island in France,
and the Church ofAgios Ioannis Theologos in the Cliffs, in Greece, while "Others
are just down the street" captions the Temple Mickve Israel, smack-dab in the
middle of a Savannah, Georgia neighborhood). Longer, more detailed text in
DECEMBER 2000 
* 
165
smaller print offers specific information about each site (including date of con-
struction) and its religious significance. While some of the descriptions are con-
fusing (which is the "arched niche" in the Selimye Mosque that indicates the
direction of Mecca? Where's the lotus petal that Buddha sits on in the Sokkuram
Grotto Shrine?), Sturges' approach is respectful and impartial, and the selection of
sites offers some thought-provoking diversity (though the religious focus could
have been even broader). Laroche's "paper relief" creations here don't have the
tensile delicacy of his bridges, and the colors sometimes overbalance the illustrative
architecture, but the intricate paper construction of everything from Chartres to
the River Ganges is impressive and visually absorbing. Even with its flaws, this
would make for an intriguingly concrete introduction to world faiths, or a spiritual
introduction to architecture. DS
THOMAS, JOYCE CAROL 
The Bowlegged Rooster and Other Tales that Signify; illus.
by Holly Berry. 
Cotler/HarperCollins, 2000 
104p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-025378-9 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-025377-0 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
According to Thomas, "signifying" is when the animals stand up and speak their
minds, and they're speaking their minds left and right in this short collection. Five
stories set in a Possum Neck, Mississippi barnyard feature a cast of talking animals
that, by their day-to-day interactions, examples, and stories, provide an education
for newly hatched Baby Rooster. In the course of these sometimes humorous
tales, Baby Rooster attends a funeral, witnesses a wedding ("jumping the broom"),
and experiences his first Christmas. The stories themselves are low-key and homo-
geneous, containing plenty of obvious lessons (including singsong rhymes that
reiterate the moral) but lacking the conflict necessary to spark lasting interest.
Thomas' grounding in traditional lore is obvious; she draws extensively from Afri-
can-American folklore and talking animal tale-types. Unfortunately these folksy
tales have no center to hold them, the treacly plots lack the dynamic tension of
traditional tales, and the too-obvious morals make the stories more pedantic than
whimsical. Berry's black-and-white illustrations depict a perky bunch of feathered
(and unfeathered) friends, whose expressive demeanors add some needed energy
to the proceedings. Despite the self-conscious moralizing, the stories may still
work as Sunday-school readalouds or as character-building bedtime prose. JMD
VOIGT, CYNTHIA 
It's Not Easy Being Bad. Schwartz/Atheneum, 2000 
241p
ISBN 0-689-82473-4 
$16.00 
R* Gr. 5-8
Run for your lives-Mikey and Margalo (of Bad Girls, BCCB 4/96, and Bad,
Badder, Baddest, BCCB 12/97) are in seventh grade. Aware that junior high is
different, the girls plan their positions in a new social structure ("I'm talking about
friends," says Mikey, "we're in seventh grade, friends are people you go to the mall
with. Not people you like. They're people who when other people see you with
them everybody thinks that you're an okay person"). Though Mikey's as deaf to
social nuance as Margalo is skilled in it, the girls manage to carve out a place for
themselves, punish a few enemies, start down the road to entrepreneurship (Mikey's
a stellar cookie-baker intent on making a fortune), and in general attain their goal
("... it's not really being popular I want," says Margalo for both of them. "I just
want not to be unpopular"). Our heroines remain utterly absorbing, and Voigt
explains their relationship in greater detail in this volume, allowing readers more
166 
* THE BULLETIN
understanding not just of Mikey, who doesn't see choices, but also of Margalo,
who chooses Mikey over more traditionally desirable options. This has some of
the same insightful appeal of Vail's The Friendship Ring novels, also about sev-
enth-grade relationships, but there's some ironic complementarity: this is the cool
and calculating counterpart to Vail's hothouse approach, Margalo's acute aware-
ness is accurate whereas the Vail girls' perceptions are all over the map, and many
readers who resemble the self-conscious narrators of The Friendship Ring will
believe themselves to resemble the perceptive and powerful protagonists here.
Perception like this is contagious, however, and readers may well start considering
their own relationships and milieux in a more active light. Good for them, and
heaven help the adults. DS
WILLIAMS-GARCIA, RITA 
Catching the Wild Waiyuuzee; illus. by Mike
Reed. 
Simon, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-689-82601-X 
$16.00 
Ad 4-7 yrs
The Wild Waiyuuzee flees from Shemama the Catcher, hiding in the mango groves,
rolling to an iguana cave, and leaping onto a tortoise to avoid Shemama who's
going to spray and oil that Waiyuuzee's head, comb out her hair, and make "plait-
a-plait and string-a-bead each one." While the untamed imagery is sometimes a
bit strained, Williams-Garcia (author of Like Sisters on the Homefront, BCCB 9/
95) has an evocative line in picture-book patois ("'No owie owie me?' asked the
Wild Waiyuuzee") and a knack for elastic rhythms that keep the text bouncing
along. The intimate mother-daughter play (and the quiet acknowledgment of the
discomforts of the hair ritual) is realistic, despite the fantastical imagery, as well as
reassuring. Though the layout accents the readaloud with text placement and with
lively colors and fonts for the sonorous exclamations ("Bang-o-bok! Bang-o-bok!"),
the art unfortunately fails to support the text. Reed's Photoshop-crafted illustra-
tions overemphasize a Disneyesque cast of jungle fauna, which distracts viewers
from the central drama; some interesting pastel-like textures don't provide relief
from the unremittingly loud palette or focus in the jumbled compositions; the
little African-American girl that the Waiyuuzee finally proves to be has a nicely
modeled face but a rather cartoonish look overall. While Nappy Hair (BCCB 2/
97) and Happy to Be Nappy (BCCB 1/2000) have addressed some hair philosophy,
not many books address the practical side of the equation; despite the illustrative
flaws here, youngsters may relish the leavening of fun this provides for hair-care
tedium. DS
WOJCIECHOWSKI, SUSAN 
Beany and the Dreaded Wedding; illus. by Susanna
Natti. 
Candlewick, 2000 
128p
ISBN 0-7636-0924-2 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Beany, of Beany (not Beanhead) and the Magic Crystal (BCCB 7/97), returns in
what's supposed to be a special showing: her cousin Amy wants her to be flower
girl and ring bearer at Amy's wedding. Beany adores Amy, but she's skittish about
the limelight and worried about her ability to carry out assigned duties ("I was
using up all my brain thinking about everything that could go wrong"), and it
doesn't help that her know-it-all friend Carol Ann has much to say on the subject
of flower girls. Worried yet doughty little Beany remains a sympathetic heroine,
and Wojciechowski draws her simply and clearly without reducing her to a cutout.
Chapters contain mini-adventures of their own, such as Beany's search for a splen-
DECEMBER 2000 
* 
167
did wedding gift or her revels with her flower-girl dress, that provide en-route
rewards for hard-working readers (and episodes suitable for independent readal-
ouds). Natti's illustrations evince sturdy lines, but there's a certain insouciance in
their informality that suits freckled little Beany to a T. This offers a useful coun-
terpoint to giddier flower-girl sagas. DS
WooDS, MICHAEL 
Ancient Warfare: From Clubs to Catapults; by Michael Woods
and 
Mary 
B. 
Woods. 
Runestone, 
2000 
96p 
illus. 
with
photographs 
(Ancient Technology)
ISBN 0-8225-2999-8 
$25.26 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Woods whisks his readers through this introduction to ancient weaponry and strat-
egy, tossing together questionable generalizations ("Egyptian rulers wanted even
more land, so they invaded nearby countries"), misleading information (the
Neolithic "stone walls" and "high watchtower" ofJericho not only predate Joshua,
but quite possibly served no military function at all), and such genuinely fascinat-
ing topics as Archimedes' Claw, which plucked ships out of the water, and the
ergonomic design of Roman soldiers' footwear. "Ancient" is defined here as "emer-
gence of the first humans to ... A.D. 476," but Woods stretches it to include later
Chinese, Mesoamerican, and Indian cultures. Color stock photographs are plenti-
ful but they are not equally illuminating-a bust of Thutmose III is less intrinsi-
cally informative than the scene of a Mayan raiding party; a replica of a Greek
trireme is more clearly reproduced than the shadowy replica of a Roman
manuballista. Still, the somewhat haphazard coverage probably won't discourage
readers scanning for gruesome factoids, and report writers may cull some profit-
able leads. A glossary and index are included. EB
YACCARINO, DAN 
First Day on a Strange New Planet; written and illus. by Dan
Yaccarino. 
Hyperion, 2000 
33p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2499-9 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0578-1 
$14.99 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
This new series covers the exploits of a pair of exchange students: Johnny Smith
(dubbed "Blast Off Boy") travels to the planet Meep, where he'll stay with the
Glorp family and attend Galactic Grammar School; Blorp Glorp is on Earth stay-
ing with Johnny's family and attending Davis Elementary. Though Blorp is in-
curring the irritation of a few authority figures, he's enjoying his first day at school
(he makes a potion in science that renders him huge, and he heals the class ham-
ster). Blast Off Boy is having more difficulty ("In advanced molecular biology
class, he realized the zipper on his space suit was down"), but he thinks he may
have found a friend in the two-headed Buzz and Bo who save Blast Off Boy from
being eaten by the lunch special. The premise has obvious allure, since new schools
make everybody feel pretty extraplanetary, and there are some diverting alien an-
tics in both locations. There's not a lot of shape to the narrative, however; it's
more a series of mild episodes (with no chapters delineating them), and the alien
aspects are merely randomly goofy, with little thought behind them. Yaccarino's
shiny, chunky figures are particularly well suited to the unearthly beings and nifty
space gear, and there's an amusing appropriateness to his retro style for this sweetly
old-fashioned view of space. This doesn't have the sparkle it might, but young-
sters may nonetheless find it an enjoyable armchair excursion into space. DS
168 
* THE BULLETIN
YEP, LAURENCE 
Dream Soul. 
HarperCollins, 2000 
24 5p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028390-4 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028389-0 
$15.95 
R Gr. 5-8
In the winter of 1927, fifteen-year-old Joan, oldest child of immigrant Chinese
parents, begins to chafe at the restrictions of her traditional upbringing. Joan
shoulders responsibility for her younger siblings and worries about her father's
health, even as she resents her ability to cope and her parents' need for her to do so.
The arrival of the wealthy James Barrington and his daughter, Victoria, further
increases Joan's discontent with her own relationship with her father (Barrington
apparently indulges his daughter's every whim) and exacerbates Joan's running
feud with the rich and socially elite Ann. Fortunately, Joan has both a good head
on her shoulders and good powers of observation, and it isn't long before she
perceives the cracks in the seemingly ideal Barrington facade. Her discovery that
the actually penniless Barrington is a con man of sorts, aided and abetted by his
daughter, throws her relationship with her own unfailingly honest father into stark
relief. In this sequel to The Starfisher (BCCB 3/91), Yep captures the complex
relationships of family members trying to balance between two cultures, the elders
seeking to maintain the customs of their homeland and the youngsters trying to
assimilate. Joan has a thoughtful narrative voice that, while sometimes straying
into the too discerningly adult, is still a quietly compelling one as she tries to be
both a good American student and a dutiful Chinese daughter. Her embrace of
her Chinese heritage is illustrated by her attempt to retrieve her sick father's soul,
which she believes is wandering lost in the snow-filled streets; her friends, not
entirely understanding, support her in her search. Yep states that this novel is
based on incidents from his own family history; that inside intimacy, combined
with Yep's own craft, gives this title a core of truth that will resonate with readers.
JMD
CLARIFICATION AND ABASEMENT DEPARTMENT:
The publisher informs us that the attribution for the Walter Scott quote in Nancy
Garden's Holly's Secret, reviewed in the September Bulletin, has been corrected in
the bound book.
In our October review of Eric A. Kimmel's Gershon's Monster: A Story for the
Jewish New Year, we incorrectly referred to Rosh Hashanah as the Day of Atone-
ment rather than the New Year.
The Bulletin regrets the errors.
DECEMBER 2000 
* 
169
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
Pierce, Kathryn Mitchell, ed. Adventuring with Books: A Booklistfor Pre-K-Grade
6; 12th ed. NCTE, 2000. Paper ed. ISBN 0-8141-0077-5; $32.95. 605p.
This perennial useful resource returns, offering annotated bibliographies in twenty
different categories (some thematic, like "Struggle and Survival," some cultural,
like "Native American Voices," and some generic, like "Picture Books"). While
the entries are variable (unavoidable in such a large group project), the range in
both theme and material is impressive and helpful. Clear rationales for inclusion
are provided in each section, and books recommended from personal experience
(with quotes from children often included) are differentiated from books included
via print recommendations; creative approaches to classroom incorporation of titles
are particularly energizing. Author, title, and subject indices are included. DS
McElmeel, Sharron L. 100 Most Popular Picture Book Authors and Illustrators:
Biographical Sketches and Bibliographies. Libraries Unlimited, 2000. ISBN 1-
563080647-6; $49.00. 579p. (Popular Authors) illus. with photographs.
While "most popular" is probably an oversimplification (as the introduction im-
plicitly acknowledges in discussing the selection process, which involved both pro-
fessional and child input), there's no doubt that these authors and illustrators are
popular and significant, whether we're talking Beatrix Potter or Jon Scieszka. Each
entry (a few of which sneak in an extra author or illustrator for husband/wife
pairings) contains biographical information, a selected bibliography (sometimes
annotated), and sources ranging from articles to websites to videos where readers
might find more information. While the writing is sometimes choppy, the intro-
ductions are cordial and informative, and the breadth and browsability increase its
utility to growing and grown researchers. Genre and title/author indices are in-
cluded. DS
Schon, Isabel. Recommended Books in Spanish for Children and YoungAdults, 1996
through 1999. Scarecrow, 2000. ISBN 0-8108-3840-0; $45.00. 362p.
Isabel Schon comes through again in this annotated bibliography of nearly 1000
books in Spanish for young readers of all ages. Sections include reference and
series titles as well as nonfiction and fiction (each broken down additionally into
more specific subsections); books come from all over the globe, with some trans-
lated into Spanish (and not just from English) and some written in the language.
In addition to detailed publication information, the book includes an English trans-
lation for each title to aid book searchers; an additionally helpful gift is the appen-
dix listing dealers of books in Spanish (including URLs for those with a web
presence), which should simplify ordering immensely. There are also author and
title indices and an extensive subject index. DS
170 
* THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
African Americans: Fradin
African Americans-stories: Brown,
M.; Lord's; Myers; Williams-
Garcia
Alcoholism-fiction: Donaldson
Aliens-fiction: Yaccarino
Alligators-stories: Olson
ALPHABET BOOKS: Crosbie;
Hobbie; Rose
Alzheimer's disease-fiction: Park
Angels-fiction: Norris
Animals-fiction: Thomas
Animals-stories: Lass
Architecture: Crosbie; Macaulay;
Sturges
Architecture-stories: Laden
Art: Elsdale
Art and artists-fiction: O'Connell;
Say
Asian Americans-fiction: Say; Yep
Basketball-stories: Jordan
BIOGRAPHIES: Fradin; Jordan;
Murphy
Brothers-fiction: Casanova
Brothers-stories: Jordan
Brothers and sisters-fiction: Yep
Brothers and sisters-stories: Olson
Bullies-fiction: Crisp
Cats-fiction: Brown, R.; Lauber
Cats-stories: Elsdale
Chinese Americans-fiction: Yep
Christianity-folklore: San Souci
Christmas-fiction: Kvasnosky;
Norris
Christmas-stories: Brown, M.;
Jiminez; Numeroff; Reiss
CONCEPT BOOKS: Crosbie;
Emberley; Florian; Hoban;
Hobbie; Rose
Country life-fiction: Guest
Crime and criminals-fiction: Mahy;
Stanley; Stark
Dancers and dancing-fiction:
Calhoun
Death and dying-fiction: Coman
Depression, the-fiction:
McDonough
Diseases: Getz
Divorce-stories: Grindley
Dogs-fiction: Crisp
Dollhouses-fiction: McDonough
Drought-stories: Kessler
Eating disorders-fiction: O'Connell
Emotions: Heide
Engineering: Macaulay
Ethics and values: Cabot; Calhoun;
Casanova; Coman; Jordan;
Lanier; Lord's; Mahy; Myers;
Stark
FABLES: Aesop Aesop's; Aesop Ant
Families-fiction: Stone; Yep
FANTASY: Calhoun; Jones; Myers
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Coman; Johnson; McDonough;
Yep
Fathers and daughters-stories:
Lord's
Fathers and sons-stories: Creech
Fears: Heide
Fishing-stories: Creech
Flying-stories: Myers
DECEMBER 2000 
* 
171
FOLKTALES AND FAIRYTALES:
Aesop Aesop's; Aesop Ant;
Hamilton; Hughes; Kimmel; San
Souci; Sierra
Food and eating-stories: Kimmel;
Lass
France-fiction: Casanova
Friendship-fiction: Guest; Jones;
Mahy; O'Connell; Voigt
Friendship-stories: Dewan
FUNNY STORIES: Lauber; Reiss
Gardening: Eclare
Genealogy: Lanier
Grandfathers-fiction: Park
Grandmothers-stories: Kessler
Health: Getz
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Casanova; Cushman; Donaldson;
Ryan; Stone; Yep
History, U.S.: Fradin; Lanier;
Murphy
History, world: Brooks; Crowther;
Getz; Woods
Illness-fiction: Park
Immigration: Murphy
Immigration-fiction: Ryan
Insects-stories: Laden
Inventors and inventions: Crowther
Italian Americans: Murphy
Latinos-fiction: Ryan
SLatinos-folklore: San Souci
-. Latinos-stories: Jimenez
Letters-fiction: Johnson
Magic-fiction: Jones
Marine life: Rose
Medicine: Getz
Medicine-fiction: Cushman
Mice-stories: Brooks; Numeroff
Middle Ages-fiction: Cushman
Monsters-poetry: Rash
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Cabot; Ryan; Stone
Mothers and daughters-stories:
Williams-Garcia
Mothers and sons-fiction: Norris;
Park
Mothers and sons-stories: Grindley;
Jordan
Moving-fiction: Guest
Moving-stories: Grindley
MYSTERIES: Stanley
Neighbors-fiction: Kvasnosky;
McDonough
Neighbors-stories: Grindley
Pets-fiction: Brown, R.
Playing-stories: Siddals
POETRY: Rash
PRAYERS: Lindbergh; Lord's
Presents-fiction: Norris
Princesses-fiction: Cabot
Racism: Lanier
Reading aloud: Brown, R.; Hayes;
Hughes; Kvasnosky; Lindbergh;
Rash; Thomas
Reading, easy: Guest; Kvasnosky;
Stanley; Yaccarino
Reading, reluctant: Aesop Aesop's;
Getz
Religion-fiction: Casanova; Stark
Religious instruction: Lindbergh;
Lord's; Sturges
RHYMING STORIES: Lass
Sailors-stories: Manning
School-fiction: Cabot; Crisp; Jones;
Lauber; Voigt; Yaccarino
School-stories: Myers
Shapes: Hoban
Sisters-fiction: Kvasnosky; Stone
Size: Florian
Slavery: Fradin
Snakes-stories: Anaya
South Africa-fiction: Coman
Space-fiction: Yaccarino
Storytelling: Aesop Aesop's; Aesop
Ant; Anaya; Hamilton; Hughes;
Kimmel; Manning; San Souci;
Sierra
Storytime: Aesop Ant; Dewan;
Eclare; Kimmel; Lass; Numeroff;
Shannon; Williams-Garcia
Sudan-stories: Kessler
Superstitions-fiction: Casanova
Toys-stories: Dewan; Hayes
Vikings-stories: Manning
Voyages and travel-fiction: Say
War and warfare: Woods
Weather-stories: Shannon
Weddings-fiction: Wojciechowski
West Indies-folklore: Hamilton
Wizards-fiction: Jones
Writers and writing: Murphy
172 
* THE BULLETIN
STATEMENT OF OWNERSHIP, MANAGEMENT AND CIRCULATION OF THE
BULLETIN OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS (ISSN 0008-9036), as
required by 39 U.S. Code 3685.
THE BULLETIN OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS is published eleven
times a year (monthly except August); annual subscription price is $60.00 (institutional,
domestic), $67.00 (institutional, foreign), $50.00 (individual, domestic), $57.00 (individual,
foreign).
The owner and publisher is the Center for Children's Books of the Graduate School of
Library and Information Science at the University of Illinois, a nonprofit organization.
Office of publication is located at 51 E. Armory Ave., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. The
managing editor is Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 51
E. Armory Ave., Champaign, IL 61820. There are no stockholders, bondholders, mort-
gages, or other security holders.
The purpose, function, and nonprofit status of this organization and the exempt status
for Federal income tax purposes have not changed during the preceding 12 months.
Average number of copies printed per issue (net press run) during the preceding twelve
months: 4392; number for single issue nearest filing date: 4540. Average number of copies
of each issue distributed by mail to paid subscribers during preceding twelve months: 3576;
number for single issue nearest to filing date: 3772. Average number of copies distributed
for free per issue during preceding 12 months: 53; number for single issue nearest to filing
date: 56. Average number of total copies distributed during preceding 12 months: 3630;
number for single issue nearest to filing date: 3828. Average number of copies of each issue
not distributed (office use, unaccounted, spoiled after printing) during preceding 12 months:
762; number for single issue nearest to filing date: 712.
I certify that the statements made by me above are correct and complete.
Marlo Welshons
Director of Publications
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
October 13, 2000
Keep up
with the
latest in
Teaching!
1eahi-usRl
-
Teaching K-8 is filled with hundreds of unique ideas and
activities that help teachers present new challenges to their
students, learn new concepts and develop new skills.
Monthly articles include:
Carol Otis Hurst on...
* Children's Books * Teaching in the Library
Plus... * The Parent Connection * Interviews with
children's book authors and illustrators * Science
* Technology and more!
Don't miss this valuable
resource for your library -
subscribe today.
Call 800-678-8793 or visit
our website at
www.TeachingK-8.com
w
19
F 
SPECIAL oFFE
_5 , n 
, ti,
one-year subscrip
(8 issues) OnlY $19
0
,Outside Us add $10 Post"'
cover price $4 50
Ii
S"Young Jonathan Capewell wants to be a detective like the heroes
of the dime novels he loves. He unexpectedly gets the opportunity
while accompanying his traveling photographer Grandpa across Maine,
when a photo shoot of river logging reveals some suspicious activity.
Ie 
cameria 
oesnii L ie, UUL prapI 
s a mysLteious sucuiier UoeF
The well-crafted, engaging mystery, set in the 1890s, neatly fra
a story of character growth and development. [Told in] Levin
lively, descriptive prose ... [her] multi-layered story and its
appealing protagonist notably illuminate the value and
rewards of 'seeing' through the camera's lens, as well as
the human eye and heart." -Starred 
review / ALA Booklist
"Intriguing and satisfying to the end." -Kirkus Reviews
Ages 10 up. $15.95 Tr 0-688-17862-6
INGenilwBos' 
oI
I
j 
,- 
-
.
.. 
-
Doug Cushman's
mysteries include
AUNT EATER
LOVES A MYSTERY
An I Can Read BookT
Ages 4-8.
$15.89 Lb 0-06-021327-2
$3.95 Pb 0-06-444126-1
THE MYSTERY
OF KING KARFU
from the Casebook of
Seymour Sleuth
Ages 4-8.
V• 95F Ph 0-06-445.03-2
Pia Toya
A Goshute Indian Legend
Retold and Illustrated by the Children and Teachers
of Ibapah Elementary School
Beautifully illustrated by the children of the tribe, this retelling
of a Goshute Indian legend will delight and inform old and young
alike. The children's celebration of their culture, as evidenced in
this book, prompted Utah Governor Michael Leavitt to declare
November American Indian History Month.
Proceedsfrom the sale of the book will benefit a cultural education
foundation established in the name of the Confederated Tribes
of the Goshute.
Cloth $11.95
Eno 
T 
E UN I ERSIY OFVM,ýPRES
I A Teeny Tiny Baby is now
a very wide-awake toddle
Some Babies
by Amy Schwartz
"The infant star of
Schwartz's A Teer
has reached toddl
knowing how to ,
what he wants....
both the sippy-cuj
adults reading to 1
zR
ce
I 
-
-- 
-
1
W~- Kirkus Reviews and
Publishers Weekly star
LittL
Duck, Duck, Uuck
by Lisa Westberg Peters
Full-color pictures by Sam Williams
~ 
"Returning to her pond, the world's cutest duck discovers that
winter has not yet relinquished its frigid hold.With her little feet stuck
to the ice, the frosty fowl endeavors to hasten the arrival of spring by
thinking warm thoughts. Soft watercolors capturing the splendor of
spring [and] sprightly, rhyming verses featured in oversized lettering...
a rollicking read-aloud experience. Sweet, sweet, sweet."
-Starred 
review/Kirkus Reviews
Wt- "This visually sumptuous testimony to patience and the power
of positive thinking ... [is] just the right introduction to the change
of the seasons." -Starred 
review/Publishers Weekly
"A beautiful book for sharing with toddlers."-School Library Journal
"A surefire hit."-Kids' Pick of the Lists
.95 Tr (0-688-16178-2); $15.89 Lb (0-688-16179-0)
0 Greenwillow Books
An imprint of HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
1350 Avenue of the Americas, NewYork, NY 10019
www.harperchildrens.com
I 
-_'1 
I--
0
u
'-~c·
::
i;
$F4~1KYESP Lii R
$RifB 
E
If- 
AI 
E1.R-
on tour w
n Chambe
e tale..."-
are well develop
nother level ofi
'e young thespia
d review)
ren's Books
n Books for
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.S.A.
RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED
S0008-9036
I II
0008-9036(200012)54:4; 1 -Q
A
PERIODICALS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
is Online!
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books is now
available to our print subscribers as a searchable online
database. Print subscribers are now able to browse the latest
issue online, look through archived issues beginning with
the 1998 volume year, and search for reviews by title,
author, and reading level. A sample issue of the online
Bulletin is available at:
http://www.prairienet.org/cgi-bin/ccb/bulletin.cgi
The staff of The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
cordially invites you to browse through the online version.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
The Best of Tradition and Technology
u;i6 ;-
~~ 
~iii 
-; 
·i-
n.; 
:^d
