ILLINO
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
I
;i 
i
·;.
.r
P.ZI -.- :.
.i~i
A New York Times Book Review Best Illustrated Book of 1998
Written and Illustrated in full-color by
RICHARD 
EGIELSKI
1987 Caldecott Medalist
S It's a pickle! It's a cheese doodle!
/",ý 
No, it's Jazper-the amazing
young green oug wno nas
ned how to transform himself by
>oks on tricks and magic owned
ird moths. But when the moths
hat Jazper is making his fame
ne with their secrets, they come
ter him with a vengeance...
re's a distinct charm in Jazper's
nsformations (he converts into
e doodle, a sour pickle, a blue
) and in the dramatic battle that
bles a game of rock-paper-
cissors writ large. Kids
appreciative of the special
effects will get a buzz from this."
^ 1.1.- l^ 
__ .
__ t -- /-*I- l-l -- '- 
-
1 -
-DwUIdIIn 
U J the Cente jur 
LChl(dren Bo 
DU
"Egielski's energetic, drolly imaginative pictures are filled with details that
delight the eye and tickle the rib." -ALA Booklist
"Sure to appeal to youngsters growing up on surreal dollops of Dr. Seuss,
William Joyce, William Steig, and earlier Egielski."
-School Library Journal
Ages 3-7. $14.95 TR 0-06-027817-X $14.89 LB 0-06-027999-0
Other full-color picture books by Richard Eglelski
THE GINGERBREAD BOY 
BUZ
$14.95 TR 0-06-026030-0 
$14.95 TR 0-06-023566-7
$14.89 LB 0-06-023567-5
Laura Geringer 
Book$5.95 
PB 0-06-443479-6 (available 2/99)
Laura Geringer Books
A HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York, NY 10022 
http://www.harperchildrens.com
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
February 1999
Vol. 52 No. 6
A LOOK INSIDE
193 THE BIG PICTURE
The Trolls by Polly Horvath
194 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
207 * What a Truly Cool World by Julius Lester; illus. by Joe Cepeda
208 * Extreme Elvin by Chris Lynch
209 * Terror of the Spanish Main: Sir Henry Morgan and His Buccaneers by
Albert Marrin
209 * Emergency!by Joy Masoff
210 * Black Cat written and illus. by Christopher Myers
218 * Raising Sweetness by Diane Stanley; illus. by G. Brian Karas
223 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
225 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
I 
~- ~~-~--
~---
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor (JMD)
Deborah Stevenson, Associate Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elaine A. Bearden, Reviewer (EAB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
CENTER STAFF
Melanie Kimball
Kate McDowell
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $40.00; individuals, $35.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 51 E. Armory Ave., Champaign,
IL 61820-6601. E-mail: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu
Visit our homepage at http://edfu.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1999 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Wendy Anderson Halperin from The Trolls ©1999. Used by permission of
Farrar, Straus & Giroux Books for Young Readers.
FEBRUARY 1999 
* 
193
THE BIG PICTURE
The Trolls
by Polly Horvath; illus. by Wendy Anderson Halperin
Humor is a funny thing, ha-ha. Children's literature offers it in many different
flavors: the rollicking, slapstick humor ofAnne Fine, the verbal and slightly dotty
humor of Hilary McKay, the raw-edged humor of Jack Gantos. Horvath herself
has demonstrated a solid humorous gift in her previous books, whether it be the
realistic family comedy of No More Cornflakes (BCCB 10/90) or the frenetic but
effective silliness of When the Circus Came to Town (12/96). And now The Trolls
offers memorable characters, fizzy narrative, and scenes worthy of a roll on the
floor, but also an underlying emotional trajectory that makes the strongest comedy
part of a larger and more complex picture.
Horvath starts with a tried-and-true catalyst, a classic eccentric aunt: Aunt Sally,
Dad's distant Canadian sister, swoops down to child-sit Melissa, Amanda, and Pee
Wee Anderson for a week while Mom and Dad are out of the country. Aunt Sally
champions put-upon youngest brother Pee Wee, shares dramatic tidbits about life
in exotic Canada, and tells tales of the wild events of her childhood and notable
characters in the family all hitherto unknown to her charges. We hear about Great-
Uncle Louis, "who came for two weeks and stayed for six years" and who had an
obsession with the consumption of green vegetables; the murder of Mrs. Gunderson,
the beagle next door, who was sacrificed to her owner's desire to get a new puppy;
"Maud who shot eighty cougars," whose enthusiasm for adding to the number
seems to blind her to the species of her targets; and the trolls, who "answer to the
blackest evil in our hearts," who carry off the rejects left on the beach, and to
whom Aunt Sally left the kids' father when he was just Robbie, the resented baby
brother.
Horvath's helplessly hilarious relation of Aunt Sally's interaction with the chil-
dren at first puts the inset stories into the shade, but Sally's narration is unstop-
pable, with digressions and stories flying out at warp speed. Gradually the sagas
(and occasionally the sagas within the sagas) take on a rhythm and depth of their
own, conveying effervescent humor but also the dark that makes laughter neces-
sary: the family rifts of childhood that don't go away (Aunt Sally's relationship
with her brother has never been the same, and Great-Uncle Louis left never to
return), the tragedies (Great-Aunt Hattie's husband and daughter died in a fire,
Uncle Edward and Aunt Marianne drowned on their honeymoon), the unalter-
able changes ("And when I pass our old clapboard house that I loved so much,"
says Aunt Sally, "I am a stranger"). The result is a book hard to slot but, with its
refusal to restrict itself to the light-comedy side of the street and its pell-mell plunge
into heightened family history, sharply involving to read. Like Aunt Sally's Canada
194 
* THE BULLETIN
and like family history itself, it is not an evenly mixed melting pot but a mosaic,
with some pieces solid glittery humor, other pieces the various hues of daily life,
and a few pieces flat black tragedy, all contributing vital components to the overall
design. The book also subtly makes clear that Aunt Sally manages a piece of atone-
ment by altering the next generation's design: she gently but successfully extri-
cates baby brother Pee Wee, son of the baby brother she lost to the trolls ("We
never did get Robbie back... We all drifted apart"), from the clutches of the trolls
to which his sisters are, all unawares, leaving him.
It would be enough that The Trolls is very funny. It is splendid that it is more
than merely enough. (Imprint information appears on p. 205.)
Deborah Stevenson, Associate Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
AGEE, JON 
Sit on a Potato Pan, Otis!: More Palindromes; written and illus. by
John Agee. 
Farrar, 1999 
[80p]
ISBN 0-374-31808-5 
$14.41
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-6
Those familiar with Agee's other palindromic collections, Go Hang a Salami! I'm
a Lasagna Hog! (BCCB 10/92) and So Many Dynamos! (1/95), will know the drill:
each page or spread treats a palindromic comment, motto, or caption, using scribbly
black-and-white art to bring the verbally reversible concept to visual life. So yes,
this is more of the same, but when the same is fine entertainment it's hard to
quibble. The book hits some hilarious heights (as two cowboys peer at a Wild
West wanted poster depicting a big feline who kidnapped the deputy sheriff, one
says to the other "Darn ocelots stole Conrad"; a dissatisfied child stuck with her
mother's interminable readaloud says to her brother, "Ma's story rots, Sam") and
also riffs on some classic palindromes (a man crawling through the desert finds a
crate of bottled water and proclaims, "Naive was I ere I saw Evian"; in what is
presumably the way of expansion and progress, the old Panamanian collection of
man, plan, and canal gets expanded to include a cat, a bar, a cap, a mall, a ball, a
map, a car, and a bat). If you've got plenty of young patrons who enjoy the invert-
ible aphorisms, you'll want to add this third member of the trio. DS
ALLISON, ANTHONY, ed. 
Hear These Voices: Youth at the Edge ofthe Millennium;
ed. and illus. with photographs by Anthony Allison. 
Dutton, 1999 
169p
ISBN 0-525-45353-9 
$22.99 
R 
Gr. 7-12
In interviews from eight different locales around the globe, approximately a dozen
young voices relate experiences of struggling, fairly successfully, with major ob-
stacles to survival and a stable life. Half of the interviewees are American, ranging
from an HIV-positive San Franciscan, formerly homeless, who works as an AIDS
activist, to an American Indian teen in South Dakota who's finding that a strong
FEBRUARY 1999 
* 
195
great-grandmother and a mentoring program help him beat the odds of poor school
performance and substance-abusing parents. Other subjects include a fourteen-
year-old country girl who was sold to a Bangkok brothel and a pair of Belfast
Catholics who have participated in a youth-group trip with Protestant counter-
parts. The obstacles are formidable and success often a realistically relative judg-
ment, which, combined with the fairly literal transcriptions, makes the accounts
sound particularly authentic; the problems these young people face are both di-
verse and common, with parental abandonment and drugs a recurrent and clearly
international theme. The sleek and elegant format is smoother than some of the
book's contents-it's not clear who the opening "Note to the Reader" is from,
some interviews fail to explain necessary background and references, and, since
those interviews that offer some indications of chronology suggest that they're five
or so years in the past, the book begs for "where are they now" reports on all
interviewees, not just the young man who has since died. While the kids most in
need of these examples are probably least likely to get their hands on the book, the
point of the universality of the struggle and the possibility of hope in the face of
despair-worthy events will have meaning for many young readers. Black-and-
white photographs, some merely documentary and some memorable portraits,
appear throughout. DS
ANHOLT, LAURENCE 
Stone Girl, Bone Girl: The Story ofMary Anning; illus. by
Sheila Moxley. 
Orchard, 1999 
26p
ISBN 0-531-30148-6 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 2-4
When Mary Anning was twelve years old she discovered an ichthyosaur skeleton
in the cliff face of Lyme Regis, her childhood home. This picture-book biography
briefly but capably tells the early life story of the fossil-hunting Mary in involving,
accessible prose. The account opens dramatically with Mary's recovery from being
hit by lightning when she was just a baby. Her close relationship with her father,
Pepper, was the mainstay of her life, and his death was a great loss. Anholt softens
the blow of Pepper's death by providing Mary with the solace of a stray puppy,
found wandering near her father's grave; the dog leads Mary to the skeleton in the
clay cliffs, making Mary a national heroine and turning early nineteenth-century
Lyme Regis into a fossil hunters' paradise, which it remains today. Moxley's illus-
trations are stylistically naive; the palette is seaside-appropriate blues and greens
for the outdoor scenes, and indoor scenes are warmed with touches of gold and
orange. The whitewashed cottages sit precariously on the page, tilting toward the
sea, and the benignly smiling village characters roam the pages in a rainbow array
of dresses and bonnets. The compositional balance between text and illustrations
is satisfyingly maintained throughout, the clean, slightly oversized typeface set in
white blocks tucked in between color-intense illustrations. A historical note about
Mary Anning concludes the title. JMD
ARMSTRONG, JENNIFER 
Shipwreck at the Bottom of the World: The True Story of
the Endurance Expedition. 
Crown, 1998 
[120p] 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-517-80014-4 
$19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-80013-6 
$18.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-9
Michael McCurdy recently essayed a treatment of the Endurance's experiences for
younger readers (BCCB 9/97), and now, in time for the upcoming exhibit at the
American Museum of Natural History, Armstrong tells the tale for somewhat older
196 
* THE BULLETIN
ones (as does Kimmel, reviewed below). The saga of Shackleton's expedition is
one of the greatest in the annals of polar exploration: after their ship was crushed
in pack ice, the men survived on the naked ice, sailed 600 miles in open boats, and
then split up, most remaining on a tiny rock island while Shackleton and four
others sailed on another 800 miles to a Norwegian whaling station for rescue.
Armstrong effectively cuts to the chase, generally leaving discussions of politics and
internecine tensions (and the other side of the exploration, the men who had landed
in Antarctica to lay depots for Shackleton's crossing) to more sophisticated books,
and the result is a rugged adventure story all the more compelling for being true.
The author uses her sources well for provision of evocative details, such as the
impact, a year after getting stuck in the ice and four months after abandoning the
ship, of the discovery of a twig and the homesickness engendered by the smell of its
burning. Nor does she shrink from harder truths about the fate of the ship's sled
dogs and cat mascot, but the overwhelming impression is of the skill and luck that
enabled Shackleton to bring all his men back alive. Liberal employment of the
expedition photographer's pictures, including some of the most famous Antarctic
images as well as portraits of the leading players, adds to the immediacy; also pro-
vided are maps and, niftily enough, the original plans of the Endurance, including
deck-by-deck floor plans. Fans of Hatchet and other survival stories should get a
chilly thrill from this authentic story of triumph against tremendous odds. There
are no endnotes, but a bibliography is provided, as is an index. DS
BOTTNER, BARBARA 
Marsha Makes Me Sick; illus. by Denise Brunkus. 
Golden,
1998 
48p 
(Road to Reading)
Paper ed. ISBN 0-307-26302-9 
$3.99 
R Gr. 1-3
COXE, MOLLY Hot Dog; written and illus. by Molly Coxe. 
Golden,
1998 
32p 
(Road to Reading)
Paper ed. ISBN 0-307-326101-8 
$3.99 
R 
Gr. K-2
In this series of readers, Golden Books offers titles by a variety of authors known
and unknown at five different reading levels; here are two of the most successful so
far. Hot Dog tells, in three-word sentences in bouncy simple rhyme, of an over-
heated dachshund's frustrated search for a break ("Dog is hot. Mom is not. Go
play, Dog") until finally the girl in the pool takes pity on him whereupon he be-
comes a-wait for it-"chilly dog." There's a Thacher Hurd-like vigor to Coxe's
scrawled lines and cartoon-edged faces, and Dog's aggrieved eyebrows are nearly as
notable as his hanging pink tongue (which is complete with motion lines from the
pup's panting). In the more advanced Marsha Makes Me Sick, older sister Lulu
fumes as baby Marsha as usual steals all the attention, this time by coming down
with chicken pox ("Lulu did not like Marsha today. Lulu did not like Marsha any
day"). The lot of the sibling left out of the drama is entertainingly and realistically
depicted, and Brunkus' line-and-watercolor art adds just enough formality to the
draftsmanship to keep things crisp even as they become chaotic. Easy but never
dumb, these will help convince struggling readers that decoding can be worth the
trouble. DS
CASELEY, JUDITH 
Losing Louisa. Foster/Farrar, 1999 
[240p]
ISBN 0-374-34665-8 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-9
Lacey is trying to pull her world back together following her parents' divorce, but
the world isn't cooperating: her mother has moved from a sarcastic phase into a
FEBRUARY 1999 
* 
197
dating phase, wherein Lacey becomes the parent figure to her nervous mom; the
boy Lacey has a crush on seems only intermittently appreciative; and restrained,
practical older sister Rosie is having sex in the basement with her boyfriend. Rosie
in fact becomes pregnant, with Lacey initially her only confidante through drugstore-
bought tests and clinic visits, until finally the family discovers the secret and Rosie's
decision must be made in the full glare of family knowledge. Caseley draws an
incisive portrait of a family that's clearly not hitting on all cylinders, though they
somehow manage to get through their days, and there's no attempt to hide the
pools of post-divorce bitterness. There are a few touches of contrivance-the way
in which the girls' mother finds out the truth, and Lacey's discovery that her incipient
boyfriend is adopted-but Rosie's gradual decision to place the baby (whom the
girls plan to call Louisa) in an open adoption suits the logic of the story and the
sense of the characters. While there are plenty of "uh-oh" pregnancy stories, this
one is better than most at putting the event within a larger family context and
making it clear that even when parents are not at their best they can still love their
children very much. DS
CERULLO, MARY M. 
Dolphins: What They Can Teach Us; illus. with photographs
by Jeffrey L. Rotman. 
Dutton, 1999 
42p
ISBN 0-525-65263-9 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Dolphins are a winning proposition. They are engaging sea mammals with close
ties to humans; they are the stuff of story and legend; they make fine photographic
subjects; and they are pretty remarkable when studied in their natural or man-
made habitats. This title focuses on dolphins and their interactions with human
beings, and what that interaction has meant to both species. The color photographs
are excellent, the layout is clean, and the facts about dolphins are intriguing. The
text suffers from a too-diffuse focus, however, jumping from example to example
and spending little in-depth time on any one area. Dolphins used in physical and
psychological therapy, dolphins as fish-herders for fishermen, dolphin behavior,
dolphin communication, dolphin family life, dolphins in danger-all are topics
touched upon briefly in prose that is interesting but dry and strangely incomplete.
The explanation of echolocation, for example, would be clearer with a diagram;
the text mentions that dolphin ear holes no longer open to the surface, but it
doesn't say when and if they once did or posit any reason why they no longer do.
Different varieties of dolphins are mentioned without accompanying illustration,
and there are no maps. This doesn't have the narrative flow of Cerullo's more-
focused The Octopus: Phantom ofthe Sea (BCCB 2/97), but it will add some color
to the dolphin section nonetheless. A glossary, short bibliography, and index are
included. JMD
CHANDRA, DEBORAH 
A Is for Amos; illus. by Keiko Narahashi. 
Farrar,
1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-374-30001-1 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
Amos is a big pinto rocking horse who comes alive-at least in a child's mind-
and takes his young mistress on an alphabetic journey through fields, over fences,
until they're caught in the rain and return on home to the fantasy barn and, at last,
the playroom where he is a rocking horse once more. It's an engaging fantasy, and
the rhythmic meter makes it eminently suitable, if you can balance book, child,
and bouncing knee, for a hobbledyhorse chant. The verses' reliance on near-rhymes
198 
* THE BULLETIN
and variable scansion might distract listeners, however, and some of the phraseol-
ogy (kids "kick their heels" instead of "kicking up their heels," for instance) is a
little strained. Narahashi's watercolor art grounds the fantasy in a pleasing solidity
but never loses the feeling of idyllic revelry. Except for the heroine, the figures are
all toys come alive, and the critters have an exuberance and casual approximation
that marks them as fantasy-enhanced. Kids yearning for their own pony peregri-
nations will want to rock along. DS
Cox, JUDY 
Third Grade Pet; illus. by Cynthia Fisher. 
Holiday House, 1998
9 3p
ISBN 0-8234-1379-9 
$15.95 
R Gr. 2-4
Rosemary is initially revolted when the class chooses a rat as the class pet, and it's
worse when she's chosen as one of the rat's first in-class caretakers ("Rat keeper.
For a whole week. It was like a nightmare come true"). Perky little Cheese man-
ages to endear himself to her, however, and by the time Brian, her fellow rat keeper,
returns to school, Rosemary is fiercely protective-so protective that she ratnaps
Cheese to her house for the weekend rather than leaving him in Brian's pick-him-
up-by-the-tail clutches. Cox is clearly no stranger to rats herself: her detailed
description of Rosemary's first skittish encounters with Cheese captures the won-
der of an animal's frightening strangeness gradually becoming an appealing famil-
iarity, and her writing has a clarity and an energetic freshness that keeps the rodential
hijinks (Cheese romps through Rosemary's unprepared home, her little brother
hot on his heels, and makes an unscheduled visit to the orthodontist) realistic
rather than corny and contrived. Cynthia Fisher's black-and-white watercolors
add character as well as decoration-the people are lively individuals capable of
holding their own against cheeky Cheese. Its welcome freedom from preachiness,
its sound insight into grade-school psychology, and its furry appeal should keep
young readers happily scampering through the pages. Helpful rat-care tips satisfy-
ingly round out the volume. DS
COXE, MOLLY 
Hot Dog
See review under Bottner, p. 196.
DAVID, LAWRENCE 
Beetle Boy: Inspired by Franz Kafka's "The Metamorphosis"
illus. by Delphine Durand. 
Doubleday, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-385-32549-5 
$15.95 
Ad 
5-7 yrs
"Gregory Sampson woke one morning to discover that he had become a giant
beetle." This Kafkaesque situation is indeed reminiscent of "The Metamorpho-
sis," but primary graders who haven't been exposed to the concept of existential
dilemma may wonder just exactly why Gregory becomes a beetle, why nobody but
his friend Michael notices, and why he changes back to a human. Otherwise, this
is an entertaining picture book, with a funny fanged Carabusproblematicus strug-
gling to get into his school clothes (six legs for four openings presents more than an
existential dilemma), to avoid stepping on his buggy new relatives at the bus stop,
and to keep from offending his best friend the soccer goalie by scoring with his
antenna. The spiky and skewed illustrations have a postmodern cartoon quality
that extends a one-gag text to its fullest possibilities, with odd angles, thickly tex-
tured paint in dominant shades of brown and blue-green, and figures spread across
a slightly disembodied flat space. Then, when Michael discovers Gregory's iden-
FEBRUARY 1999 
* 
199
tity in a reference book about insects and announces it in excited tones, there's that
classic line: "'Shhh,' said the librarian." Parallel this with The Shrinking ofTreehorn
for an exercise in plot comparison. BH
DIATKIT, 
BABA WAGUI, ad. 
The Hatseller and the Monkeys: A West African Folk-
tale; ad. and illus. by Baba Wague Diakit6. 
Scholastic, 1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-590-96069-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-7 yrs
Those of you who use Slobodkina's Caps For Sale as a storytime staple are going to
love Diakite's energetic retelling of this West African folktale. "BaMusa the hatseller
was a joyful man. He traveled from town to town selling hats, which he piled on
top of his head," and when he hears about a big festival, he sets out to sell more
hats than he ever has before. When he wakes after a nap under a mango tree to
find all of his hats gone, his empty stomach keeps him from thinking straight. His
discovery that his hats have been purloined by a treeful of mischievous monkeys
doesn't help, but when the monkeys (playing "monkey see, monkey do") throw
mangoes at BaMusa, he has enough sense to sit down in the shade and eat them.
His full stomach helps him realize what to do, and when he throws his own hat on
the ground, the monkeys follow suit. BaMusa picks up his hats and reaches the
festival just in time. Diakit6's paint-on-tile illustrations are a bit crowded, with a
slightly muddy palette, but the white lines around the figures lighten the composi-
tions. Black-and-white borders of monkeys with curly tails, grins, and mischie-
vous expressions add to the overall joyous lunacy of the images. Full-page
illustrations alternate with text pages decorated with small black-and-white and
colored motifs from the larger painting. BaMusa is a handsome fellow dressed in
festival garb, and the monkeys are the personification of monkey mischief as they
wear BaMusa's hats and hang from their tails in the mango-laden tree howling,
"Hoo, hoo-hoo! Hoo, hoo-hoo!" Diakite gives an extensive note about how he
first heard this tale from his uncle after a visit from a Fulani milk-seller; he also
gives several sources for written variants from other cultures. JMD
DUFFEY, BETSY Alien for Rent. 
Delacorte, 1999 
[80p]
ISBN 0-385-32572-X 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
At Lexie's suggestion, she and her friend J.P. answer a glowing green ad on the
school bulletin board: "Alien for rent... two gugentocks per hour ... meet at the
third tree on the ground of play." When they arrive at the tree on the playground,
nothing (or nobody) responds to their call, "Earthling calling alien," except for
Bruce, the fifth-grade bully sporting purple-striped hair, a gold earring, and a shirt
that proclaims "Be Afraid." Bruce is routed by some very weird phenomena, where-
upon Lexie and J.P. find the little alien in Lexie's lunchbox snacking away on her
gugentocks (Twinkies). Unfortunately, Bork the alien has paid for the Twinkies
by responding to requests in J.P. and Lexie's conversation; the result-Bruce's
becoming a giant baby--needs to be undone and fast. Bork is an appealingly pet-
like alien, and Duffey's dialogue is snappy and believable. The book deteriorates
somewhat after Bruce's transformation, however, with the events getting piled-on
and frenetic and the resolution (the kids pass the action off as part of a "Just Say
No to Drugs" presentation, to the congratulations of the principal) strained. None-
theless, newly independent readers will appreciate this lighthearted tale of wishes,
aliens, and bully-gets-his-due. EAB
200 
* THE BULLETIN
FLEMING, CANDACE 
When Agnes Caws; illus. by Giselle Potter. Schwartz/Ath-
eneum, 1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-689-81471-2 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-7 yrs
In this gleefully unapologetic melodramatic farce, Agnes, the daughter of well-
known ornithologist Dr. Octavia Peregrine, discovers a unique talent for birdcalling
("All went atwitter over the little girl"). When the World Bird Society sends Dr.
Peregrine and Agnes on a search for the rare and elusive pink-headed duck, villain-
ous hunter Colonel Pittsnap follows, watches, and waits. This he has to do for
some time, since no one knows what the pink-headed duck sounds like ("Then I
better get quacking," says Agnes) until our intrepid young heroine literally stumbles
over it by accident. "Ouch-ow! Ouch-ow! Oh drat!" "Ouch-ow! Ouch-ow!
Clack! Clack!' replies the duck, winging swiftly to the site. The colonel nets it and
Agnes pursues him, only to be cornered herself. With Agnes and the duck both
trapped, Pittsnap, obviously ignorant of the old folk adage to beware of what you
wish for, demands that she call some birds for his collection. So she calls them-
all of them. The sound effects and the final visuals make this a very satisfying
picture book to read aloud, while Potter's prim, narrow-eyed figures offer a tidy
satire on Victorian explorers. The watercolor backgrounds all have a maplike ap-
pearance, with objects and images clustered rather haphazardly across them, yet
there's a compositional cohesion well supported by modulated earthtones. This is
a cacophonously funny adventure. BH
GARDNER, ROBERT 
What's So Super about the Supernatural? Twenty-First Cen-
tury Books, 1998 
80p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-7613-3228-6 $20.40 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Covering phenomena ranging from crop circles to dowsing to table-tipping, Gardner
examines the story behind apparently supernatural events and belief therein. After
discussing the why-nots and wherefore-it-can'ts, the book then offers up some do-
it-yourself activities that give youngsters their chance to test their ESP within some
reasonably strict guidelines and demonstrate how easy it is to reproduce super-
natural effects with only worldly efforts. Though the author's approach is clearly
that of a skeptic, his descriptions occasionally pull their skeptical punches or fail to
support their explanations, so that the ironic result is that readers are required to
take the debunking on faith to a certain extent; he also is slightly misleading and
out of date on some of his accounts and facts (James Randi's standing offer to
anyone proving to have supernatural powers has risen from the $10,000 Gardner
mentions to $1 million). Still, it provides a useful counterbalance to books with
less interest in evidentiary rigor, and the accessible writing and the possibility of
experiments may lure reluctant readers dismissive of softer-edged fare. Diagrams
and black-and-white photos provide visual referents; a bibliography and an index
are included. DS
GERSTEIN, MORDICAI, ad. 
Noah and the Great Flood; ad. and illus. by Mordicai
Gerstein. 
Simon, 1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-689-81371-6 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-8 yrs
Gerstein's redheaded Noah is a man of great heart, who spends 120 years pleading
with the residents of earth to change their ways before God destroys them with a
FEBRUARY 1999 
* 
201
great flood. The flood comes, and Noah regretfully loads up and leaves the sinners
to their terrible fate. Gerstein's tale of Noah borrows from myth and midrash to
create a Biblical world populated by fantastic creatures and giants. Noah carries
mythological animals such as the og, the rayeem, and the urshanas onto the ark
(although Gerstein never explains their post-flood disappearance), and he and his
wife and sons care for both legendary and everyday beasts through the course of
the voyage. The illustrations, in a variety of frames and formats including full-
page, small frames, and double-page, are all glowingly colored, from the round
smiling face of a flame-haired Noah to the rainbow arching over a newly born
earth. Gerstein's gift for retelling Bible stories is evident here-his combination of
fresh language and innocent images gives a cheerful reverence to this familiar tale.
JMD
GIBLIN, JAMES CROSS 
The Mystery of the Mammoth Bones: And How It Was
Solved. HarperCollins, 1999 
[128p] 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027494-8 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027493-X 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Although artist/scientist Charles Willson Peale has recently received biographical
treatment (The Ingenious Mr. Peale by Janet Wilson, BCCB 6/96), Giblin zooms
in on Peale's work at age sixty, when he and his son Rembrandt followed a series of
leads to unearth "mammoth" bones from ancient sinkholes in New York state.
The tale of discovery, reconstruction, and reception by the scientific community is
well told, enhanced by details of the challenges associated with locating remains,
bargaining with site owners, arranging dangerous excavations, and weathering a
disappointing foreign tour. Likewise, the evidence which led other scientists to
rename Peale's find a "mastodon" rather than a "mammoth" is clearly explained.
Additional information on Peale's career and on the disappearance of mammoths
and mastodons (which, it seems, could have been incorporated into the main text)
is somewhat awkwardly supplied in lengthy addenda; report writers who like to
shop for all their data in the same place will nonetheless appreciate the inclusion.
Black-and-white illustrations, including some of Peale's sketches and paintings,
illuminate the text, and an index and source notes are provided. EB
GLOVACH, LINDA 
Beauty Queen. 
di Capua/HarperCollins, 1998 
169p
ISBN 0-06-205161-X 
$14.95 
M 
Gr. 9-12
Nineteen-year-old Sam-Samantha-is at loose ends after her high-school boy-
friend dumps her for a rich older woman; her mother's an alcoholic pill-popper,
her mother's live-in boyfriend is a creep with designs on Sam, and she's not find-
ing much satisfaction in her job at Chicken & Ribs. She takes her diabetic cat,
Dinah (one of the Alice in Wonderland references presumibly meant to link the
title to Go Ask Alice), and moves out, getting a job at a topless dance club and
almost immediately discovering the wonders of heroin. The slide downwards from
there is predictable, though Sam's sexual downfall is limited to falling for a crooked
cop whom she believes to be her true love, until her fatal end. The flaws that have
beset previous tomes on this topic, from Go Ask Alice to Shelley Stoehr's Weird on
the Outside (BCCB 3/95), are rife here: Sam is so perfunctorily drawn from the
beginning, with her breathy diary entries (she seems to have been rather a sheltered
nineteen-year-old despite her rough life), that it's a shock to hear a final eulogy to
202 
* THE BULLETIN
her "loving, generous spirit" when such distinct character traits have by no means
been in evidence, and the book seems less concerned with plausibility than with
ensuring she meets with disaster. Burgess' Smack (BCCB 4/98) at least made the
sadness and spiritual impoverishment of those kids' lives with or without drugs its
own point; here Sam is such a cipher, made to be sacrificed, that her literarily
convenient passing leaves no more sense of loss than her tawdry life. Readers who
relish a walk down tragedy lane may get a kick out of the vicarious slumming, but
it's no more a cautionary tale or imaginative exploration of character than Reefer
Madness. DS
GOLLUB, MATrHEW 
Cool Melons-Turn to Frogs!: The Life and Poems of Issa;
written and tr. by Matthew Gollub; illus. by Kazuko G. Stone. 
Lee & Low,
1998 
[40p]
ISBN 1-880000-71-7 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
As Spivak's Grass Sandals (BCCB 7/97) gave some insight into the life and haiku
of Basho, this volume treats another great figure in haiku history, Issa. The book
gives an overview of the poet's life, accenting the biography with relevant haiku
(the verses also appear in Japanese calligraphy on the border of the page). The
biography is clearly and simply phrased, its spareness effective in recounting the
life of a man famous for verses of simplicity and its introduction straightforward
and appealing ("He is known to people of all ages in Japan, and now he is known
to you"). The translated haiku are variably successful, with some compact and
imagistic but some rather pedestrian. The illustrations don't always complement
the poems visually or conceptually ("The rare beauty/ of green bamboo shoots/
sprouting here and there" captions a verdant scene where the bamboo's green blots
out the horizon), and the figures (human and animal) tend towards the stilted;
there's an accuracy in the botany and a droll precision in the cool melons, how-
ever, that liven the spreads. This isn't as absorbing as Spivak's book, but the two
would nonetheless make interesting partners in a discussion of style and poetic
history. Detailed notes about the translations, haiku, and Issa are included. DS
GREENE, CAROL 
Sunflower Island; illus. by Leonard Jenkins. 
HarperCollins,
1999 
[3 2p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027327-5 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027326-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
The Sunflower, a yellow side-wheeler paddleboat, is snagged by an underwater tree
that "reached up from the river bottom. ... In rushed the river to pull her down,
but other snags caught her and held her fast. There perched the Sunflower like a
big, bright bird, half in, and half out of the water." Young Polly witnesses the
rescue of passengers and goods, and, living by the river, she witnesses the river-
change that the currents cause to the Sunflower. Sand and silt are deposited on the
wrecked vessel, turning it into a small island complete with willows and cotton-
woods, birds and animals. Polly grows old by the river and tells the story of the
wreck of the Sunflower and the growth of Sunflower Island to her daughter, and
then to her granddaughter, and finally, when the river floods and washes away the
island and releases the "bleached old bones" of the Sunflower, to her great-grand-
daughter in the circle of their loving and extended African-American family. Jenkins'
mixed-media illustrations are a delicate reflection of Greene's evocative text, and
FEBRUARY 1999 
* 203
the views of the river have a simple grace and power. The contrast between light
and shadow is enhanced by a dramatic and rich palette of deep blues and mauves.
It isn't often that a picture book can convey a sense of the passage of time, personal
family history, and the evolution of a river in thirty-two pages. Greene deserves
clear sailing weather for this multilayered account. JMD
GREGORY, VALISKA 
A Valentine for Norman Noggs; illus. by Marsha
Winborn. 
HarperCollins, 1999 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027657-6 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027656-8 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Norman the hamster is in love with the new girl in his class, Wilhelmina: "Norman
loved the way Wilhelmina's eyes fluttered like butterflies. He loved the lace on her
dress and the buttons on her shiny black shoes." But he has rivals for the lovely
Wilhelmina's affections-Robert and Arthur, two tough-guy hamsters who are
determined to keep Norman from delivering his homemade valentine to the ob-
ject of his affection. Sure enough, the two bullies deprive Norman of not one but
two valentines he made for dainty Wilhelmina, but they are stopped in their tracks
when Wilhelmina herself comes barreling to Norman's rescue. The two exchange
valentines (the resourceful Norman has a third valentine pinned to his shirt sleeve)
and romantic history is made. There's a kitschy, old-fashioned look to this little
confection, complete with candy hearts and homemade valentines; a little red heart
character with legs and personality dances through the pages and adds energy by
entertainingly reacting to the action. Gregory's text is frothy without being senti-
mental and romantic while still being funny. Norman and Wilhelmina deserve
each other in the nicest possible way. JMD
GRINDLEY, SALLY, ad. 
Bible Stories for the Young; illus. by Jan Barger. 
Little
Tiger, 1998 
95p
ISBN 1-888444-42-8 
$16.95 
R 
3-6 yrs
Grindley has selected some standard favorites from the Old and New Testaments
for this readaloud compilation of Bible stories. The stories of Noah and the Ark,
David and Goliath, Jonah and the Whale, the Good Samaritan, the Prodigal Son,
and the Last Supper, among others, are retold in a smooth, simple style that will
appeal to readers aloud and their preschool listeners. While Grindley's retellings
lose some of the majesty of the Biblical language, she adds a cozy friendliness that
young children will find inviting. Barger's watercolors, done in a clean, unblended
palette with dot-eyed, smiling characters (both animal and human), are reminis-
cent ofAnne Rockwell and Helen Oxenbury in their gentle humor. The design of
the book is open, with generous amounts of white space, and the text blocks are
broken up into manageable increments by judicious selectiotns of spot art. Grindley's
selections are unsurprising, but this is a solid collection that will help fill the great
demand for Bible stories for the younger set. JMD
GUIBERSON, BRENDA Z. 
Mummy Mysteries: Tales from North America. 
Holt,
1998 
74p 
illus. with photographs 
(Redfeather Books)
ISBN 0-8050-5369-7 
$15.95 
R Gr. 3-5
For readers whose fascination with Egyptian mummies is beginning to wear thin,
Guiberson presents some homegrown mummies that may have escaped their at-
204 
* THE BULLETIN
tention. The mummified corpse of an ancient Alaskan bison, dubbed Blue Babe,
bears wounds that prove lions once roamed the northern regions; amber beads
adorning the nose of an Aleut mummy suggest a migration path along the Aleutian
Islands from Asia to North America; the frozen remains of stoker John Torrington
indicate lead poisoning as the probable cause for the Franklin Expedition's demise.
Guiberson also turns her attention to the limitations of studying mummies (Anasazi
mummies have less to say about the culture's disappearance than packrat middens
do), "medicinal" uses of ground mummies in the past, and tracing the identity of a
mummified outlaw discovered in a Long Beach, California fun house. Illustra-
tions in the Aleut chapter do not coordinate well with the text, the bibliography
haphazardly mingles children's works with adult references, and "The Final Mummy
Mysteries" quiz that concludes the book is misleadingly simplified and its answers
unexplained. Still, the text is smooth and engaging, and the volume could pave the
way to Patricia Lauber's more challenging Tales Mummies Tell (BCCB 7/85). EB
HOPKINS, LEE BENNETT, comp. Sports! Sports! Sports!: A Poetry Collection; illus. by
Brian Floca. HarperCollins, 1999 [48p] (I Can Read Books)
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027801-3 $14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027800-5 $14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 1-3
Twenty poems-an even score, you might say-entice novice-reader sports fans to
consider the thrills and quieter satisfactions of their favorite games. Many of the
offerings display laudable grace within the bounds of controlled vocabulary: Nikki
Grimes' track athlete boasts, "When the whistle blows/ I am ready and set/ and no
one can tell me/ I am too anything/ or less than enough." The swimmer in Myra
Cohn Livingston's "O Beautiful Here" sighs, "O beautiful here, water/ Bubbles in
clear foam,/ Warming to the sun at top,/ Shivery to the bone." In contrast, how-
ever, more prosaic entries such as Lillian Fisher's "Play Ball!" sound downright
clunky: "First base, second,/ third-I'm home free!/ Hurrah for my team!/ Hurrah
for me!" 
With the exception of the shadowy gray tones of the empty gym that
accompanies Tony Johnston's "After the Game," Floca's line and watercolor pic-
tures are unremittingly chipper, often failing to catch the nuances of the illumi-
nated verse. For example, Floca supplies simplistic visual humor for Grimes' "Any
Excuse Will Do," landing a basketball in a planter to highlight the line "I can't
quite see the hoop," and ignoring the more evocative passage "Summer basket-
ball-/drops of sweat blur my sight." Although this collection may not represent
the dream team of sports poems, there are enough stars to make it a pretty enter-
taining game. EB
HOPKINSON, DEBORAH 
A Band ofAngels: A Story Inspired by the Jubilee Singers;
illus. by Radl Col6n. 
Schwartz/Atheneum, 1999 
[40p]
ISBN 0-689-81062-8 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-5
Based on the life of Ella Sheppard Moore and the founding of the Jubilee Singers
of Fisk University, this title follows a fictionalized Ella from slavery to freedom,
from scrubbing floors to singing to raise money for Fisk, the first university founded
for freed slaves. The story of the Jubilee Singers is a moving one-a group of
former slaves desperately try to raise money to keep their school open by singing
popular tunes of the day but fail dismally. Only when they began to sing the pow-
FEBRUARY 1999 
* 205
erfully poetic spirituals from their own past do they find success. Ella is the one
who moves them to it with her unplanned rendition of "Many Thousand Gone":
"But Ella's voice seemed to lift them up with her. And as their voices joined hers,
like streams flowing into a deep river, they could feel everyone in the hall leaning
forward to listen." Col6n's watercolor and colored pencil illustrations are ren-
dered in an earth-toned palette suffused with a warm golden light that suits this
inspirational tale. The players are handsomely and expressively characterized, and
the endpapers feature mini-portraits of the real Jubilee Singers, with birth dates
and places and a modicum of known history. An author's note clearly separates
fact from fiction at the conclusion of the text. JMD
HORVATH, POLLY 
The Trolls; illus. by Wendy Anderson Halperin. 
Farrar,
1999 
[144p]
ISBN 0-364-37787-1 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 5-8
See this month's Big Picture, p. 193, for review.
KIMMEL, ELIZABETH CODY 
Ice Story: Shackleton's Lost Expedition. 
Clarion,
1999 
[128p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-395-91524-4 
$18.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-9
Whether it's just fate or the Shackleton exhibit due to open in New York, we're
currently being gifted with books about the 1914 Endurance expedition (see
Armstrong, above). 
Kimmel's book is similarly a solid enterprise detailing the
adventures of the exploring party who abandoned their ice-trapped ship, sailed
600 miles in Antarctic seas to an inhospitable and uninhabited island, and gained
rescue only when Shackleton and companions took a further 800-mile journey
and fought politics and war shortages to get a rescue ship. This title is even more
thickly packed with photographs than Armstrong's, and it focuses more on
Shackleton himself, fleshing out his biography with details about his career and his
personal life. The book is more inclined to gloss over interpersonal strife, how-
ever, and a little less familiar with the facts (a caption of the famous ghostly Endur-
ance photograph seems puzzlingly unfamiliar with the circumstances of the picture's
taking). If Antarctic fever sets in severely enough you'll want both titles anyway,
and the possible compare-and-contrast exercise might well be an intriguing ap-
proach to historiography. A bibliography and index are included. DS
KNIGHT, MARGARET 
Fashion Through the Ages: From Overcoats to Petticoats; illus.
by Kim Dalziel. 
Viking, 1998 
24 p
ISBN 0-670-86521-4 $19.99 
R 
Gr. 4-8
A dozen double spreads with foldout flaps of text cover the history of apparel in
Europe and Anglo-America from the Roman Empire through the 1960s. In the
equivalent of two pages of text for each fashion era, Knight reviews the political
and economic events, as well as the availability and creation of fabrics, that af-
fected attire. Central to each spread is the well-to-do, fashion-plate family of the
period, with father, mother, and two children garbed in layers of heavy paper stock
"clothing" that can be lifted in flaps to reveal the garments (or lack thereof) under-
neath. Borders of captioned vignettes detail hairstyles, footwear, and accessories
that the well-dressed upper crust would have sported. Textual explanations of the
206 
* THE BULLETIN
clothing items and their transformation over time tend to be a bit involved and
dry, and occasionally a juicy tidbit fails to merit an accompanying picture. Incon-
sistencies in the text (information on children's fashions is absent from one spread
but reappears in the next) and numerous Briticisms may cause mild confusion in
readers. Still, this is a succinct sartorial overview, the peek-a-boo flap book feature
is a nifty and apt pedagogical device, and readers who have long since packed in
their paper dolls can indulge again here with impunity. EB
LAIRD, ELIZABETH 
Secret Friends. Putnam, 1999 
[80p]
ISBN 0-399-23334-2 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
On the first day of school, Lucy lands Rafaella, whose ears stick out, with the
cursed nickname "Earwig." The sobriquet is taken up with glee, especially by the
super-cool popular girls, one of whom Lucy would dearly love to be, and Rafaella
is an outcast at school. After school, however, Lucy and Rafaella form a friend-
ship, with restrained English Lucy drawn to the quiet warmth of Rafaella's "for-
eign" family. Lucy's public denial of their private friendship finally comes to an
end, but only in the face of a tragedy that leaves Lucy guilt-ridden as well as grief-
stricken. Laird has the casual schoolyard cruelty and arbitrariness of school alli-
ances down well, and Lucy's blinkered yet evolving viewpoint is authentic. The
book tips its hand, however, with the heavy cautionary lesson of the plot when
Rafaella dies under anesthesia after going in for cosmetic surgery on her ears; the
result is the childish "I'll be dead and you'll be sorry" ethic turned didactic, and it's
undercut by the easy exoneration at the end. The combination of dramatic event
and accessible, quiet writing is one that will probably appeal to young readers;
those looking for a less contrived treatment of the topic, however, should stick to
Sachar's Marvin Redpost: Why Pick on Me? (BCCB 2/93) or Judy Blume's Blubber.
DS
LAMM, C. DREW 
The Prog Frince: A Mixed-Up Tale; illus. by Barbara
McClintock. 
Orchard, 1999 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-33135-0 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-30135-4 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
On her way to buy a muffin at the bakery, Jane puts her hand in her pocket and
finds a frog wearing her dime as a hat. Irritably, she tells the storytelling frog she
doesn't listen to stories, and still more irritably she listens as he tells her the story of
the frog prince-sort of. The pre-frog prince is in love with Jaylee, a servant girl,
and his father the king is not pleased; hence, the "anti-love potion" that turns the
prince into a frog-a storytelling frog, as it turns out, who, by telling his own story
to Jane, causes her to miss him, thereby breaking the spell and remembering her
true identity as the loving Jaylee: "'I thought the princess had to kiss the frog,' said
Jaylee. 'You're not a princess,'" says the former frog. "' 
You had to miss me.' 'Mag-
nificent,' said Jaylee. 'I'd rather kiss you now, when you're not so green.' So she
did.... and happily ever after." McClintock's watercolor and ink illustrations just
miss capturing the nature of this fairy tale redux-the visual images are a tad more
precious than the text, which has a subtle, offbeat charm. Characterization is
strong throughout, however, with the frog a terrific trickster-type personality who
cajoles the initially unwilling Jane/Jaylee into a winsome happy ending. JMD
FEBRUARY 1999 
* 
207
LEOPOLD, NIKI CLARK 
Once I Was ... ; illus. by Woodleigh Marx
Hubbard. 
Putnam, 1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-399-23105-6 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
3-5 yrs
A collection of before and after phrases-"Once I was the alphabet, now I am a
book"; "Once I couldn't feed myself, now I love to cook"-make up this series of
musings on growing up and into new skills and responsibilities. Hubbard's color-
saturated graphics burst off the pages, the glowing yellow sky, intense cobalt sea,
and red backgrounds easily drawing in the viewer. Unfortunately, Leopold's befores
and afters lose their logical continuity with some unreined forays into poetic li-
cense. After setting up the pattern of the text, she abandons it in imagery that will
provoke incredulity in the very literal audience at which this title is aimed. Under-
standing that the smaller is supposed to be giving way to the more complete or
larger, phrases like "Once I was a penny, now I am the sun" and "Once I was a
napkin, now I am a kite" strain for unsuccessful whimsicality, and the uneasy
balance between real events and imagined ones interrupts the logical flow of the
text. If you are looking for passage books, try Jonas' When You Were a Baby, or
even McPhail's Pig Pig Grows Up. JMD
LESTER, JULIUS 
What a Truly Cool World; illus. by Joe Cepeda. 
Scholastic,
1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-590-86468-8 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Lester's story of creation features a God who, when he finished making the world,
"felt as bright and sunny as love. He had never made a world before, and, if he said
so himself (and he did), he thought he had done a very good job." That's before
Shaniqua, "the angel in charge of everyone's business," comes in and tells him his
creation is, well, boring. (Right about now readers-aloud will begin to realize that
this might not be quite the way they remember this story from childhood.) God's
secretary, Bruce, calls him names like "Mighty Maker," "Terrific Titan," and "Fear-
less Fixer," and it is Bruce who does the fetching and carrying when God is in a
creative mood. Suffice it to say that between God, Shaniqua, and Bruce, the world
gets grass, flowers, and butterflies and becomes truly cool. Cepeda's oil paintings
are saturated with color, each page a different background hue; the characters are
dressed in flamboyant fashions, from God's green sandals to Shaniqua's purple
robe and red shoes to Bruce's yellow wings, and the tropical-punch palette is both
soothing and exhilarating as the heavenly denizens float around a paradise that
looks like a small town celebrating a national holiday. The text bounces along
with exuberant glee and practically shouts itself off the pages. Lester's note relates
this story to an earlier retelling of Zora Neale Hurston's "How God Made the
Butterflies" but says that this version is both a departure from and tribute to a
storytelling tradition he embraces. This is going to liven up the Bible stories shelf
and make daring religion teachers very happy. JMD
LEVY, JANICE 
Totally Uncool; illus. by Chris Monroe. 
Carolrhoda, 1999 
[32p]
ISBN 1-57505-306-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
6-9 yrs
The individual denigrated as "totally uncool" is Dad's new girlfriend, whom he
calls "Sweet Potato" ("I don't call her anything," the narrator asserts darkly). Dad's
208 
* THE BULLETIN
Sweet Potato has quite a pile of alien and alarming traits ("Her kitchen floor is too
shiny. Mostly everything she eats is green"), which seem likely to sabotage any
possibility of a relationship with Dad's daughter. Eventually, however, the narra-
tor begins to admit that Sweet Potato-okay, Elizabeth-has her merits ("At school
plays, Dad's new girlfriend claps the loudest.... She doesn't call my stuff 'junk.'
Or touch it without asking first"). While this will probably have more initial
appeal for parental girlfriends than for the kids dealing with them, the voice here
has a tellingly kidlike ring and the relationship with the not-quite-stepparent, rarely
seen in picture books, is authentically ambivalent (there's also a sense that short-
comings in Dad's previous girlfriends have contributed to the narrator's apprecia-
tion of Elizabeth's qualities). The art matches the voice-childlike but savvy, the
new-wavy figures peer at one another with gimlet eyes and stroll about on pipestem
legs, but the solid oil pigments and sturdy, self-assured colors imply that Elizabeth
isn't fading away anytime soon. Getting used to the new person in a parent's life is
a chore indeed; this may help youngsters put it in perspective. DS
LYNCH, CHRIS 
Extreme Elvin. 
HarperCollins, 1999 
[24 0p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028210-X 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028040-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Elvin, star of Slot Machine (BCCB 10/95), is now starting high school, where
some challenges (dealing with predatory large guys who want to pound him to
mush or sinister cool guys who seem to find him amusing) are old foes and some
(dealing with girls at scheduled dances with the sister school) are new complica-
tions. Elvin's friends, Frankie and Mike, somehow remain untainted by Elvin's
geekdom, but Frankie is desperately trying to push Elvin towards a higher social
stratum-and a different girl-than Elvin hopes for. Elvin is mystified to find
that, by some bizarre high-school alchemy, his brief encounter with one girl (which,
in an escalating circle of pranks and lies, leaves him rumored to have acquired VD
from her), his yearning for another (the cheeky Barbara, scarily like Elvin's smart-
mouthed mother), and his fast mouth have gotten him a sort of offhanded esteem
with the School Big Guns. The ending is a bit abrupt and the high-school Hunter
S. Thompson style nearly overwhelms with glibness at times, but Elvin's narration
is funny, charged, and authentically angst-ridden. Barbara's appeal is also clear
and understandable, as is her wisdom in eventually stepping back from Elvin the
Unready's over-intense pursuit. Fans of the first book will want to see Elvin in his
school milieu, where as usual he's often a loser but always a survivor. DS
MCCULLY, EMILY ARNOLD 
Mouse Practice; written and illus. by Emily Arnold
McCully. 
Levine/Scholastic, 1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-590-68220-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Monk, a little mite of a mouse, gets his coveted chance to play ball with the big
guys-and he flubs it on the field. Suffering the ultimate humiliation ("They
weren't angry. It was worse than that. They felt sorry for him"), he heads home to
his sympathetic but athletically inept parents, who encourage him to practice his
baseball skills while they rehearse with their musician friends. Once Monk catches
the rhythm of the game, he's invincible; at his next opportunity to strut his stuff
on the diamond, "No one could get a hit off Monk. He pitched the whole game.
FEBRUARY 1999 
* 
209
The big kids had a new ace." Although the problem of keeping up with the older
crowd will undoubtedly ring true for most listeners, the connection between the
adults' music and the child's success is tenuous; in fact, it is never entirely clear
whether Monk's weeks of practice or his parents' musical accompaniment on the
ball field account for his triumph. Still, sports-themed picture books generally
score with young audiences, and McCully's warm and expressive mice, cavorting
in their sun-dappled rodent suburbia, are an amiable bunch to hang out with. EB
MARRIN, ALBERT 
Terror of the Spanish Main: Sir Henry Morgan and His
Buccaneers. Dutton, 1999 
24 1p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-525-45942-1 
$19.99 
R Gr. 6-12
The brief and ruthless career of the infamous seventeenth-century privateer comes
vividly to life in this carefully crafted history of cutthroat international rivalry in
the Caribbean region, where by common political assent there was "no peace be-
yond the Line." Little is known of Morgan's early years, and fully a hundred pages
pass before readers reach his documented exploits. They are unlikely to bemoan
the pacing, however, as Marrin lays out the wretched social conditions that drove
men to sea and the maritime policies that often caused them to jump ship; the
origins of buccaneers as ship purveyors in Hispaniola; Spanish raids that impelled
the buccaneers to revenge and ultimately sent them back to sea as quasi-legal raid-
ers under the British flag. Morgan then emerges in the text much as he did on the
Caribbean scene-a seaman skilled in military arts, ready to make his fortune from
the misfortunes of Spanish colonists. Marrin's obvious passion for military his-
tory, evidenced in his fine Civil War histories (UnconditionalSurrender and Virginia's
General, BCCB 3/94 and 1/95), is in full play, with edge-of-the-seat depictions of
the horrifying siege of Puerto Bello, Morgan's brilliant escape from Lake Maracaibo,
and the fiery sack of Old Panama. This is no romanticization of a swashbuckling
hero, though; Marrin makes it clear that Morgan was every inch the self-interested
and often cruel product of cruel times. Photos and historical illustrations, an in-
dex and bibliography, and exemplary notes are included. EB
MASOFF,JOY 
Emergency! 
Scholastic, 1999 
[48p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-590-97898-5 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-6
Masoffs just back from the Fire! (BCCB 4/98), and she's roaring off to another
disaster, this time exploring the heroics of the many teams that bring urgent medi-
cal aid to victims of sudden accident and illness. Again, flashy but genuinely infor-
mative spreads are cogently organized. "Help Is on the Way" follows the EMTs
and paramedics who arrive by ambulance, plane, helicopter, motorcycle (and even
by rappelling gear) to offer aid and transport; "Help Is Here" probes the emer-
gency rooms, operating rooms, intensive care units, and retnote medical sites where
lives are saved and sometimes lost; "Medicine Past and Future" sets modern emer-
gency care into historical perspective. Equipping and training of medical person-
nel is addressed, and the comments of practitioners regarding their emotionally
straining and draining careers are at once wrenching and inspiring. Crisp color
photos, helpful cross-indexing within the text, and an index guide the audience
smoothly through the frantic scenes. Next time a white-jacketed TV hero orders
up "a Chem 7 for a train wreck," readers will know just what's on the way. EB
210 
* THE BULLETIN
METZGER, LOIS 
Missing Girls. Viking, 1999 
[208p]
ISBN 0-670-87777-8 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 4-7
After her mother's death, Carrie's having understandable problems adjusting to
life without her absentee father and with her often embarrassing immigrant grand-
mother. Three friendships rise, though, on the junior high horizon-with the
close-knit June and Regina, and with lovely, guarded Mona, whose skill at lucid
dreaming fascinates them all. The quartet meets to swap dreams, dabbling in
amateur interpretation and indulging in self-absorbed analysis (possibly a reflec-
tion of the self-actualizing 1967 milieu), until stories that are clearly more lie than
dream split them apart. Carrie's nonetheless hooked-on her promising attempts
at maintaining consciousness within her dreams, and on Mona's seemingly perfect
family, with whom she stays as often as possible-until a blow-up with Mona's
mother concerning Mona's dementia-afflicted grandmother shows Carrie how lov-
ing her own household really is. Action consists largely of switching scenes of
conversations, punctuated by Metzger's over-explanations of Carrie's thoughts and
reactions. The lucid dreaming theme becomes so convoluted that Carrie's big
moment of self-revelation becomes laughably abstruse: "And at that moment Carrie
knew why she'd gotten interested in dreams, in being awake inside dreams. ...
Carrie had to know she was awake while asleep, so she could know she was awake
while awake." Readers who revel in psychological conundrums may want to take a
crack at this, but most others can give these girls a miss. EB
MOLLEL, TOLOLWA M. 
Song Bird; illus. by Rosanne Litzinger. 
Clarion,
1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-82908-9 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
All the cattle belonging to Mariamu's people have disappeared without a trace,
and the villagers have no milk. Mariamu discovers a small songbird that in ex-
change for a promise gives all her people milk, and the people cage the bird to
make sure their milk supply never runs out. When the sympathetic Mariamu frees
the bird, it rewards her by helping her retrieve the lost cattle from Makucha, the
monster who has stolen them. Mollel's storytelling voice, assisted by rhythmic
Swahili refrains and Tanzanian songs, rolls beautifully through this narrative.
Litzinger's watercolor and pencil illustrations are rendered in a palette that lends
an airy lightness to the compositions, even the ones featuring the dreadful Makucha
as the central focus. Full and double-page spreads have their own momentum,
many balanced to the right and drawing the viewer from page to page. An exten-
sive author's note gives Mollel's cultural sources for his retelling, with an explana-
tion of his use of the Swahili language and the words made up for such sounds as
swallowing ("gulum") and empty gourds rolling ("birim"). Musical notation is
given for the songs, and a short glossary and pronunciation guide translates the
Swahili refrains. JMD
MYERS, CHRISTOPHER 
Black Cat; written and illus. by Christopher
Myers. 
Scholastic, 1999 
[40p]
ISBN 0-590-03375-1 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
All ages
Christopher Myers creates powerful collage art in this tribute to the urban lifestyle
FEBRUARY 1999 
* 
211
of a black street cat as it prowls around neon- and sunlit thoroughfares. From the
title page, with its film noir-ish play of street and traffic lights, to the unforgiving
glare of daylight on graffitied bricks and playground asphalt in interior spreads,
Myers captures the allure and intensity of big-city streets. His poem to the feline
wanderer has a repeating refrain ("Black cat, black cat, we want to know/ where's
your home, where do you go?") that unifies the mixed-media images comprising
this walk on the wild side. The illustrations-a combination of photographs,
collage, gouache, and ink-follow the slinky black cat with the slanting yellow-
green eyes from street to alley, subway tracks to rooftop, basketball hoop to chain-
link fence, in balanced compositions that use light, shadow, and black bars with
colored text to concretize memorable poetic images. The resulting illustrations are
an uncanny combination of gritty reality and urban fantasy. The focused and
vivid free verse proves that Myers has control over poetic as well as visual imagery,
and young readers will also appreciate the chantable couplets: "Black cat, black
cat,/ is there a place of your own?/ we want to know,/ where's your home?// black
cat answers ... / anywhere I roam." Cool. JMD
MYERS, WALTER DEAN 
At Her Majesty's Request: An African Princess in Victorian
England. Scholastic, 1999 
[160p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-590-48669-1 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-8
A young woman who has been known as little more than a curious historical foot-
note now receives merited attention, thanks to Myers' extensive research. The life
of Sarah Forbes Bonetta, as she would come to be called, boasts the elements of a
compelling fairy tale. The tiny Egbado princess witnessed the slaughter of her
family at the hands of the ferocious King Gezo of Dahome and was marked for
ritual sacrifice, only to be saved at the last possible moment by British abolitionist
naval officer, Captain Forbes. Raised by a succession of families and enjoying the
financial patronage and official attentions of Queen Victoria, the child grew to
womanhood in privileged circumstances. But mingling with royalty ultimately
insured neither robust health nor a love match, and Sarah's destiny was a marriage
of convenience, followed by death from tuberculosis at a relatively early age. Myers
necessarily engages in some interpolation to connect the evidential dots in Sarah's
recorded history, and he occasionally supplies a bit of padding to spin out her tale
(a passage from Mayhew's London Labour and the London Poor is inserted to con-
trast Sarah's circumstances with those of many Victorian orphans). Still, Myers
addresses his source limitations frankly, and interprets the impact of Sarah's am-
biguous social status on her prospects with admirable clarity and directness. This
view of the respect and affection accorded by the nineteenth-century British elite
to a young African woman will greatly enrich both Black Studies and European
history collections. A bibliography is included; black-and-white reproductions of
period images appear throughout. EB
NETHERY, MARY 
Mary Veronica's Egg; illus. by Paul Yalowitz. 
Orchard,
1999 
[3 2p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-33134-2 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-30134-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Mary Veronica finds what seems to be a mysterious abandoned egg by the pond,
so she takes it home to hatch it in hope of winning the Most Unusual Pet prize at
212 
* THE BULLETIN
the pet fair. She doesn't get much help: older sister Mary Louise says the egg is
rotten, younger sister Mary Margaret is convinced it's a dinosaur in the making
and wants the egg herself, the science teacher wants it to be an experiment (and
nearly causes it to get cooked). Mary Veronica perseveres, however, and enters the
pet fair in hopes that the egg will hatch out in time to take the prize. Nethery has
a cheerful and easygoing writing style, and her depiction of Mary Veronica's lov-
ing attentions ("She washed what she thought might be the top of its head. 'I'm
sorry you lost your mommy,' she said") is engagingly specific. The ending, wherein
the duck that hatches out (just after the awarding of prizes) attaches immediately
to foster mom Mary Veronica and is therefore the best prize of all, is a bit senti-
mental and anticlimactic, but youngsters who long for an Anything of their own
will grasp the significance of the reward. Yalowitz's colored-pencil art depends on
even-toned sandy surfaces of slightly misty colors, but the strong borders and sharp
lines and dots that make up the characters' minimal features keep things from
being blowing-away nebulous. This might make a particularly entertaining read-
aloud if you've got older classes doing egg babies or flour babies, but you'll have to
make sure the audience doesn't then engage in wholesale egg plundering from
their own nearby ponds-or from their home refrigerators. DS
NICKLE, JOHN 
The Ant Bully; written and illus. by John Nickle. 
Scholastic,
1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-590-39591-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-8 yrs
Nickle recounts the familiar scenario of a small child's being picked on by a bully,
but this time with a twist: the victim turns bully as he then picks on ants. The
ants, though, have other plans for Lucas, shrinking him to ant-size and putting
him on trial. Found guilty, he is sentenced to serve the colony and the Queen.
Lucas works diligently, and his efforts don't go unnoticed: the Queen offers Lucas
freedom in exchange for a jellied candy available in Lucas' parents' house. After
making friends with the two ants accompanying him on the foray to retrieve the
candy, he is struck silent by their accusation that he treated the ants just as poorly
as the bully treated him. When Lucas re-enters the world human-size, the ants
give the bully his due in a satisfying ending. Nickle's prose is sometimes unneces-
sarily sparse, and it jumps abruptly from one action to another. The vibrant oil
paintings are polished, however, creating a three-dimensional look not unlike
Disney's Toy Story (and the bad guy here has the same name as the film's villain).
Angled pictures and changing perspectives add visual tension to this fantastical
story, where the smallest serve up the just deserts. EAB
PEYTON, K. M. 
Snowfall. Houghton, 1998 
[352p]
ISBN 0-395-89598-7 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Beautiful sixteen-year-old Charlotte is desperate to get away from her grandfather's
vicarage, desperate to get away from an arranged marriage with a cold-handed
curate, and desperate for something, anything, to happen to keep her from a dis-
mally dull if secure future. Her older brother conspires to take her mountain
climbing in Switzerland with some friends from Oxford, including the very wealthy
Milo. In developments that would have shocked the Victorian society in which
they take place, one of the climbers dies, and the wealthy Milo takes in grieving
FEBRUARY 1999 
* 213
widow Clara and gives the other members of the climbing party jobs as servants in
his newly acquired, dilapidated, but conveniently located manor house. Milo is
having a scandalous affair with a married woman old enough to be his mother, but
that doesn't keep Charlotte from falling in love with him. With breathtaking
rapidity, the dominoes begin to topple-Milo's mistress dies in a hunting acci-
dent, Clara sings for the Prince of Wales and her future is made, Milo falls in love
with Charlotte and then is handily killed in an avalanche, clearing the way for Mar
(chum of Milo), who loved her truly all along. There is a tremendous amount of
plot here, and most of it is unlikely. Still, incidents are engagingly strung together,
and the characters, while definitely types, have enough charm to keep them inter-
esting, making this a satisfactory if labyrinthine read for those looking for a histori-
cal romance with more romance than history. JMD
PROPP, VERA 
When the Soldiers Were Gone. 
Putnam, 1999 
[112p]
ISBN 0-399-23325-3 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Henk is shocked when a strange couple who claim to be his parents come to the
Dutch farm that has been the only home he remembers; when they call him Ben-
jamin, take him away to the city, and introduce him to a baby whom they call his
brother but who is really his cousin because the baby's real parents have been killed
in a concentration camp; when they enroll him in a school where a bully calls him
"dirty Jew" despite the fact that his father reassures him the Nazi soldiers who used
to hunt him are gone. The author has succeeded in revealing the gradual stages of
Henk's recovering his memory of earlier days, especially in scenes where an object
or sound triggers off alarm. However, some of the conversations seem expository:
"Your father explained to you last week that the soldiers we were all afraid of were
called Nazis. Do you remember?" "Yes ... He told me that Germany's ruler was
a bad man and he wanted to rule Holland, too." "His name was Adolf Hitler, and
he also wanted to get rid of all the Jewish people in Germany and Holland. .. ."
The development is thin, and there's no sense of how Benjamin's parents have
managed to renovate their home, serve Sabbath meals with silver candlesticks, and
otherwise recover so completely from years of hiding in destitution. This is in
many ways an easy introduction to the Holocaust, perhaps too easy. Both parents
and child-the only characters we connect with-have survived, and adjustment
is just around the corner. On the other hand, Benjamin's sense of dislocation and
yearning for his foster parents is well realized, and U.S. children today are likely to
understand separation anxiety more keenly than wartime trauma. BH
QUALEY, MARSHA 
Close to a Killer. Delacorte, 1999 
[22 4p]
ISBN 0-385-32597-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Former suburban girl Barrie is giving her new life a try, staying with her mother in
the city while her father and stepmother spend a year in Paris. The complication
is that Barrie's mom is an ex-convict, running her beauty parlor with the aid of ex-
convict friends, and there have recently been two murders of people with a con-
nection to the salon. Further developments suggest that the salon itself is a target
of revenge, and Barrie begins to suspect acquaintances in her orbit as well as draw-
ing closer to her mother in the face of danger. The book wavers uncomfortably
between thriller and emotional exploration and ends up shorting both genres; the
214 
* THE BULLETIN
secondary characters, including the red herrings and the murderer, aren't well-
differentiated, and some of the plot points are never sufficiently explained. The
details of the salon milieu and the shades of the prison past are imaginative and
compelling, however, and the writing has an effective flow. Ethical questions about
the taking of a life are interestingly if overbriefly contemplated, and the eventual
fate of the murderer will wow readers with its diabolical flair. Joan Lowery Nixon
fans looking for something with a little more depth and social conscience may well
snap this one up. DS
REEDER, CAROLYN 
Captain Kate. 
Avon Camelot, 1999 
[192p]
ISBN 0-380-97628-5 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Twelve-year-old Kate's mother has remarried a year after Kate's father's death,
providing Kate with an unwanted stepfather (now fighting in the Civil War), step-
sister, stepbrother, and step-baby-on-the-way. Kate is in a grief-riddled fury that
she takes out on everyone around her, being malicious to her twelve-year-old step-
brother, Seth, and downright mean to her nine-year-old stepsister, Julia. She is
further chagrined to learn that her mother must have bedrest until the new baby is
born, which effectively cancels the family's moneymaking coal trips from
Cumberland, Maryland to Georgetown on the C&O Canal. Kate comes up with
a mad scheme to take the family canalboat downriver with only Seth as crew, in a
trip that ends up punctuated by an accumulation of nasty spats. She and Seth
manage to reach Georgetown with their barge of coal, and their return home is
triumphant. Kate undergoes a miraculous change of heart, her understanding
stepfather (home wounded from the war) takes his place as canalboat captain, and
the whole family happily plans to spend the canal season transporting coal. Reeder
often tells more than she shows, and the dictionary-style explanations of locks and
canalboating are a bit intrusive. As a character, Kate is strictly one-note, and her
sudden transformation at the end of the novel is predictable but not credible.
Readers interested in canalboat history may want to sail along; others will just
breeze on by. JMD
RICE, DOROTHY MARIE 
The Seventeenth Child by Dorothy Marie Rice and Lucille
Mabel Walthall Payne. 
Linnet, 1998 
[100p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-208-02414-X 
$19.50
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-10
Like Leon's Story (BCCB 12/97), this is a simply narrated recollection of growing
up poor and black in the rural south. Co-author Payne, known as Mabel, is "the
seventeenth child from four marriages: the knee baby," born in 1929 to a Virginia
sharecropping family and subject to the hardest years of the Depression. Her
parents, however, are strong in mind and body, her extended relatives and com-
munity are supportive, and her intelligence is sharp. The tone is remarkably even-
handed: descriptions of racial injustices coexist with accounts of interracial acts of
kindness and of whites even more deeply impoverished than the Walthall family.
There emerges a sense of intimacy especially among women, though the ultimate
power dynamic is clear in incidents such as a white teacher's refusal to give Mabel
her seventh-grade certificate--despite Mabel's nine months of babysitting for her
in exchange for tutoring-without getting a sugar stamp ration, which Mabel de-
fiantly gives to her own sister instead. The account is lively with down-home
FEBRUARY 1999 
* 215
incidents; the voice is warm, sometimes funny, and never self-pitying; the past
assumes an immediacy that will convey far more than the textbook history im-
posed on most students. Black-and-white period photos illustrate the book, which
joins a growing trove of valuable family narratives for the young reader. BH
RINALDI, ANN 
My Heart Is on the Ground: The Diary of Nannie Little Rose, A
Sioux Girl. Scholastic, 1999 
[208p] 
(Dear America)
ISBN 0-590-14922-9 
$10.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Rinaldi joins the roster of contributors to this popular series with the journal of a
twelve-year-old girl who has been sent with her brother to the Carlisle Indian
Industrial School in Pennsylvania in 1879. Although Nannie Little Rose's consid-
erable grasp of English gives her some educational advantage over other newcom-
ers, who communicate in broken English, it does not mitigate the shocks of a
forced name change, separation from her brother Whiteshield, chopped off hair
and "citizen's clothes," and anxiety for her family back on the plains. But while
Little Rose adapts and prospers, committing herself to caring for a dear but deli-
cate friend, Whiteshield resists, bringing punishment upon himself and possible
shame to his family. Rinaldi weaves into her tale a real-life mystery concerning the
unexplained death of a child (Little Rose's friend) at the Carlisle School, and the
reports of her premature burial and subsequent haunting of the premises. On a
less sensational note, she also incorporates the strains upon the Sioux back home,
who have not entirely accepted the fact that their way of life has irrevocably changed.
The honorable intentions and the deplorable paternalism of the staff are equitably
balanced, and there is enough ambiguity in Little Rose's future to set readers pon-
dering whether assimilation into white culture was successful or even desirable for
this generation of American Indians. Photos and historical background on the
Carlisle School are included. EB
ROCKWELL, LIZZY 
Good Enough to Eat: A Kid's Guide to Food and Nutrition;
written and illus. by Lizzy Rockwell. 
HarperCollins, 1999 
[32p]
Library ed. 0-06-027435-2 
$14.89
Trade ed. 0-06-027434-4 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-8 yrs
Six components of balanced nutrition-carbohydrates, protein, fat, water, vita-
mins, and minerals-are introduced and explained in kid-friendly terms, with run-
ning commentary by a multicultural cast of children who wholeheartedly embrace
the notion that healthy eating is the way to go. When the text states, "Starchy
foods give long-lasting energy. Sweet foods give quick boosts of energy. The
energy from sweet foods is used up very quickly," a chipper little girl informs her
friend via speech balloon, "If you ate candy for breakfast, soon you would feel tired
and hungry. A breakfast of whole grain cereal would keep you going 'til lunch."
Rockwell does a particularly creditable job in presenting the relative amounts of
nutrients required for good health-it's hard to get too much water, but it's all too
easy to overload on sodium. The watercolor and colored pencil pictures, in a
cheerful but bland retro style, are not especially appetizing, but the textual infor-
mation is definitely wholesome; a section of easy-to-prepare recipes (with nutri-
tional information supplied) encourages listeners to put their new found knowledge
to the taste-uh, test. EB
216 
* 
THE BULLETIN
RYLANT, CYNTHIA 
Bless Us All: A Child's Yearbook ofBlessings; written and illus.
by Cynthia Rylant. 
Simon, 1998 
[32p]
ISBN 0-689-82370-3 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
2-6 yrs
Simple prayers linked to the months of the year comprise this collection of brief
child-appealing verses. Each spread features a devotional verse on the left-hand
page with a full-page illustration of a seasonally appropriate scene on the right.
The acrylic paintings, done in a deliberately naive style, are framed with a variety
of quilt-like fabric squares that crowd the somewhat slapdash compositions. While
reading the lullingly rhythmic eight-line verses one after another tends to be mo-
notonous, taken singly they have a certain childlike whimsy, as evinced by the
verse for March: "Bless the whoosh/ that takes our hats,/ Bless the dogs/ and kitty
cats,/ Bless the crocus/ and the trees/ Bless the birds/ and God bless me!" The
studied simplicity of the blessings doesn't wear well, and Rylant leans heavily on
the ABAB rhyme scheme and the assumption that her readers have pets (dogs and
cats figure prominently in the verses). Still, these short blessings will be a boon to
those seeking nondenominational prayers to use with young children. JMD
SALISBURY, GRAHAM 
Jungle Dogs. 
Delacorte, 1998 
[160p]
ISBN 0-385-32187-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Boy Regis is tired of older brother Damon coming to his rescue, but he doesn't
know how to stop it. Damon thinks Boy can't take care of himself and calls him
"sissyboy," but Boy is a capable, thinking kid who has a lot more sense than his
older, gang-member brother. Tension between Boy and classmate Gabriel causes
a confrontation between Damon and Crowboy, Gabriel's older brother, and seri-
ous violence is avoided only when Damon and Boy's father steps in and takes
charge. The jungle dogs of the title are, in a subtle parallel to the gang members, a
pack of wild dogs that terrify Boy; the novel's adults keep denying the existence of
the dogs, but Boy (and the reader) knows that they are real. With precise descrip-
tion and intelligent dialogue, Salisbury expertly delineates the tension between
Damon and his father, with Boy witnessing his father's struggle to reach the older
son who has drifted so far away. The lush Hawaii setting adds a physical dimen-
sion that strongly colors the action as Boy faces both canine and human packs with
tenacity and nerve that will hearten young readers confronting their own demons.
Hard-to-reach junior high readers will latch on to this one. JMD
SEYMOUR, TRES 
Our Neighbor is a Strange, Strange Man; illus. by Walter Lyon
Krudop. 
Orchard, 1999 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-33107-5 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-30107-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
This salute to Melville Murrell, the creator of "the very first human-powered air-
plane to take flight" is a fanciful tribute to eccentric genius. 
The refrain "Our
neighbor, Mr. Murrell, is a strange, strange man" recurs throughout the conversa-
tional narrative that follows Murrell through his life until the day his glider-like
contraption actually gets off the ground. The tone of the story is like nothing so
much as a community anecdote everyone in town knows: "They say he used to
jump off the old stone wall flapping cabbage leaves to FLY, for goodness' sake,
FEBRUARY 1999 
* 217
when he was a boy." The illustrations are nearly as amusing as the spare but witty
text. Full-page and double-page spreads with framed text-boxes have an old-fash-
ioned formality that makes the character of Murrell and the "land sakes"-style
voice doubly amusing. Krudop's rich-hued, color saturated acrylics feature an
Ichabod Crane-like Murrell in a severe black suit and derby poring over his notes,
drawing diagrams, and getting ready for the big event: "He's built a weird con-
traption made of wood and pulleys, bolts and strings to FLY, for goodness' sake....
And he expects the clacking, whumping, whizzing thing to go! Our neighbor is a
strange, strange-OH! ... It FLIES! For goodness' sake." A diagram of Murrell's
"aerial navigator" is included, and a brief author's note gives historical context.
JMD
SILVERMAN, ERICA Raisel's Riddle; illus. by Susan Gaber. 
Farrar, 1999 
[34 p]
ISBN 0-374-36168-1 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 6-lOyrs
Cinderella takes on a cerebral spin in this original fairy tale set in a preindustrial
Jewish community in Poland. Raisel has been well educated by Zaydeh, her rabbi
grandfather; loathe to accept charity after his death, she travels to the city in search
of work and lands a job as scrub girl in the kitchen of a well-to-do rabbi. The cook
works her mercilessly and laughs at Raisel's notion of attending the costumed fes-
tivities at Purim. But a kind deed to an old woman garners Raisel three wishes,
and she makes a grand entrance at the party (dressed as Queen Esther) and wins
the favor of the rabbi's son, leaving him with a riddle to ponder as she flees at
midnight. The motif of proving one's worth through an erudite riddle is at once
elegant and apt, and lovers who "lived and learned happily ever after" make a
refreshing change from the typically vacuous princes and ash maidens of more
pedestrian lore. Gaber's softly stippled spreads evoke a quiet seriousness appropri-
ate to this thoughtful retelling. A brief note on Esther and the Purim feast is
included. EB
SIMON, FRANCESCA 
Calling All Toddlers; illus. by Susan Winter. 
Orchard,
1999 
33p
ISBN 0-531-30120-6 
$15.95 
R 2-4yrs
Get ready to do the toddler-time boogie, because this bubbly little picture book is
going to inspire a lot of activity from the babies of lapsit storytime age. This
energetic collection of action verse and readable rhymes is illustrated in sweet if
somewhat bland watercolors depicting a menage of characterful toddlers engaged
in toddler-type activities, such as finding missing shoes, explaining favorite colors,
and having temper tantrums. The entries include seek-and-find games like "Hunt
the Circle," and many of the rhythmic verses are a blueprint for acting-out fun.
Little ones will delight in activities and rhymes aimed just at them, and parents
looking for some storytime inspiration will certainly find it here. JMD
SOBEL, ILEENE SMITH, ad. 
Moses and theAngels; illus. by Mark Podwal. 
Delacorte,
1998 
6 4p
ISBN 0-385-32612-2 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Drawn from Jewish folklore, midrash, and the five books of Moses, these ten sto-
ries remind us that the Hebrews' journey from Egyptian bondage to the promised
land was indeed an epic, including many features in common with Greek, Scandi-
218 
* THE BULLETIN
navian, Far Eastern, and other sagas of cultural foundation. Although there is but
one God and one hero, many good and evil angels act as deus ex machina forces
who interfere and intercede with humans in a mode as energetic and capricious as
that of some Olympians. Beginning with the Angel of Dreams, who shows Pha-
raoh "a huge balancing scale with all the pyramids of Egypt on one side and only a
baby goat, a kid, on the other," this wends from baby Moses' rescue to the an-
nouncement of his death by the Angel Semalion. Given the complexity of cast and
scope of action, it is well that Sobel has an uncluttered and graceful style: "Since
Creation, when they were made, this was the first time the angels did not sing."
Podwal follows suit by projecting monumental, often mystical, episodes with sym-
bolic images resembling naive fingerpaints outlined in crayon; his whispery pastel
palette stands out effectively against the elegant layout. Many of the legendary
details here may need some cultural context, but the basic structure is biblical. Elie
Wiesel gives a brief, adulatory introduction, and Sobel ends the book with a list of
sources that includes Wiesel's Messengers of God. BH
STANLEY, DIANE 
Raising Sweetness; illus. by G. Brian Karas. 
Putnam,
1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-399-23225-7 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
5-8 yrs
The sheriff, who pursued runaway orphan Sweetness and then adopted her and
her seven orphanagemates in Saving Sweetness (BCCB 11/96), is housekeeping
happily with his brood ("Every dang day I sweep their little beds and hang their
clothes out on the line to get clean!") when their peaceful domesticity is upset by
the arrival of a letter. Unfortunately, neither the sheriff nor any of the orphans can
read, but Sweetness acquires enough book-larnin' (school is taught by the rotten
former mistress of the orphanage, Mrs. Sump, so Sweetness just peeks through the
window to absorb her alphabet) to untangle the mystery of the letter and write one
in response, which brings the sheriffs long-lost love back to Possum Trot for mar-
riage and for taking over Mrs. Sump's place as schoolmarm. What makes the story
so successful is not just its exaggeratedly rawboned style ("Well, Noah's flood coulda
dried up afore we got through that there applebet") but that it's really a noodlehead
tale: the affectionate father is, unbeknownst to himself, an avatar of domestic
chaos, who gives Sweetness a soap wrapper for writing paper and then exclaims,
"I'll be dogged if the soap didn't work much better after that, too!" (After each of
his housekeeping "triumphs," a hopeful child inquires, "Pa, you ever think about
gettin' married?") Karas' mixed-media illustrations capture the parodic edge of
the orphan saga (the bow atop Sweetness' little head is ever-perky) as well as the
physical comedy of the alarmingly creative housekeeping (the sheriffs fianc&e and
three little ex-orphans peer down with nausea at the fish skeleton in their catfish
chili). Kids will take to this "like a hog to persimmons." DS
STEIG, JEANNE, ad. 
A Handful ofBeans; illus. by William Steig. 
di Capua/Har-
perCollins, 1998 
142p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-205163-6 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-205162-8 
$17.95 
R 5-8 yrs
Six familiar fairy tales-"Rumpelstiltskin," "Beauty and the Beast," "Hansel and
Gretel," "Little Red Riding Hood," "The Frog Prince," and "Jack and the
Beanstalk"-are retold in a sprightly, energetic style. Jeanne Steig has a knack for
FEBRUARY 1999 
* 
219
slipping humor into simple language (when the bragging father tells the greedy
king in "Rumpelstiltskin" his daughter can spin straw into gold, the king's re-
sponse is "Why, the sweet thing! She sounds enchanting .... Bring her around
tomorrow at dawn. I'll give her a little test") and providing silly rhymes as wel-
come refrains and pithy conclusions. The tales themselves hold no surprises and
are quite comfortable-any dark corners left in the retellings are chased away by
the cheery watercolors of William Steig, whose Beast looks like nothing so much
as an overgrown mutt, whose wolf is cousin to the fox from The Amazing Bone,
and whose giant is just a greedy eater who naps a lot. Even the princess, caught
cold in the act of throwing that poor frog prince against the pink-diamond wallpa-
per, is only cartoonily violent. This is literally a sturdy little collection (only six
inches tall) with tales in commendably abbreviated lengths that both parents and
children will welcome. JMD
STENMARK, VICTORIA 
The Singing Chick; illus. by Randy Cecil. 
Holt,
1999 [32p]
ISBN 0-8050-5255-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-7 yrs
Newly hatched and enamored with the beauty of the world around him, the little
chick can't help singing, "The sky is so blue!/ The sun is so yellow!/ The trees are
so green!/ And I'm a happy fellow!"-That is, until he abruptly becomes a fox's
lunch. The fox soon discovers his own irrepressible urge to burst into song and
irritates a wolf into gobbling him up. Wolf's vocalizations offend a bear, who eats
him as well, with the predictable result. But when the suddenly joyous bear tumbles
into a tree, all the animals pop out; they make friends, and the chick is soon re-
united with his mother, the singing hen. The reassuring denouement extends,
perhaps, a spread or two longer than necessary, but listeners should still be giggling
enough from the antics of the smitten songsters to pay much heed. Cecil's cast of
simply shaped and outlined animals is amiably dopey, and their wide-eyed horror
at finding themselves doomed to cheerfulness makes a direct hit on the funny
bone. This story could prove a rollicking complement to Jack Kent's The Fat Cat
(BCCB 9/71). EB
STRASSER, TODD 
How I Spent My Last Night on Earth. Simon, 1998 
16 9p
ISBN 0-689-81113-6 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 7-10
An Internet newsflash says a comet is going to hit the earth and the world is going
to end by dawn, and the students at Time Zone High are spending their possible
last hours in pursuit of possible bliss. Legs (Allegra) Hanover is in pursuit of her
own bliss-Andros Bliss, that is, the leather-jacketed, motorcycle riding man of
her dreams, and she winds up being spontaneous beyond even her most wild imag-
inings. Legs is an articulate, literate heroine with a sense of humor and a healthy
helping of common sense, and her narration of the comet-induced chaos is by
turns dryly droll and frantically driven. From the opening scenes in the school
parking lot (where Legs realizes things are different because the usual cliques aren't
cliquing) to the closing scene in the high-school hallway, when she walks toward
Andros (still the man of her dreams), the pace is as frantic as an Internet virus
rumor. This is Armageddon-lite, and just the thing to chase away the winter
blues. JMD
220 
* 
THE BULLETIN
SUZANNE, JAMIE 
Get Real. Bantam, 1999 
[14 4 p] 
(Sweet Valley Jr. High)
Paper ed. ISBN 0-553-48603-9 $.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Francine Pascal has now backtracked from Sweet Valley High and SVU to address
Jessica and Elizabeth's junior-high days. The drama here is that redistricting means
that Jessica and Elizabeth are off to start afresh at Sweet Valley Junior High while
their old friends stay at Sweet Valley Middle School. The narration is taken in
turn by each twin and by two of Elizabeth's new school friends, revealing that
Jessica has been so accustomed to possessing popularity as a right that she may not
know how to become popular, which she dearly desires, and that Elizabeth is actu-
ally finding some unexpected social possibilities at the new venue. The book has
enough insight into the realities of junior-high social structure to offset its contriv-
ances (particularly the tragic past of one of Elizabeth's new friends) and perfunc-
tory writing, resulting in an enjoyable and even somewhat sympathetic account of
Jessica's desperation at her plight. There's also a general avoidance of preachiness,
so that readers looking for an easy, straightforward glad-you're-not-there tale of a
new school will find this capably fills the bill. DS
SWANN, BRIAN 
The House with No Door: African Riddle-Poems; illus. by Ashley
Bryan. 
Browndeer/Harcourt, 1998 
[32p]
ISBN 0-15-200805-5 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-5
In fourteen brief verses, Swann offers an encore to his recasting of American In-
dian riddles in Touching the Distance (BCCB 6/98). There is, perhaps, a bit less
poesy here than in the previous title: "I stepped on it./ It stepped on me" (shadow),
"I make long journeys/ flat on my back" (canoe). The teasers, however, remain
entertainingly puzzling, and they again often leave the door ajar for more than one
solution. Bryan's complex tempera and gouache paintings fairly quiver with rain-
bow color, but there's little difference in intensity from spread to spread. Compo-
sition does, however, ably support the welcome ambiguity of the verses, hinting at
a second, or even third, possible solution to each riddle. The original answer to
"The spots are leaving./ They are going into hiding" may have been "leopard," but
viewers can make a good case for the giraffe, deer, snake, or fowl that head for the
brush. If this doesn't quite reach the bar set by Touching the Distance, it should
still please the puzzlers in any young audience. EB
WHITMORE, ARVELLA 
Trapped between the Lash and the Gun: A Boy's
Journey. Dial, 1999 
[192p]
ISBN 0-8037-2384-9 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Jordan Scott, the Cobra gang's newest recruit, is about to purchase a requisite gun
with money from a family heirloom he has stolen and intends to pawn; the ticking
of his grandfather's precious watch, however, hurls him onto a plantation in a past
era, where he meets Uriah Henning, a ten-year-old slave who will become his
great-great-great-great grandpa. Without traveling papers or proof of freeman
status, Jordan is naturally considered a runaway slave, and his efforts to return to
his contemporaries are hindered at every turn by his new "duties" in the cotton
fields and his maneuverings to spirit Uriah away via the Underground Railroad,
thus assuring the family lineage is uncompromised. Jordan's travails as a field
FEBRUARY 1999 
* 221
hand, and later as chattel in a slave market, provide a gripping twist on traditional
time-travel themes, and although there is little doubt he will return safely to famil-
iar turf, his homecoming is not without cost, as the Cobras beat him mercilessly
for abandoning the gang. Whitmore, however, drums her message-gang involve-
ment is its own kind of slavery-with a heavy hand, and the conclusion, with its
popcorn and checkers and grandfatherly advice, is unnecessarily preachy. Still, the
sulky youth's brush with a cruel past may lead readers to rethink their definitions
of hardship and injustice. EB
WILLIAMS, CAROL LYNCH 
My Angelica. 
Delacorte, 1999 
[14 4 p]
ISBN 0-385-32622-X 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Sage and George are sophomores who've known each other since second grade,
and they've been friends ever since-and George has also harbored secret love for
the beauteous Sage. Sage's fire burns in a different direction, however, that of
writing romance fiction-and, unbeknownst to her, she's absolutely, pervasively
awful at it. Williams alternates between Sage's narration, which includes hefty
chunks of her opus about the wonderful Angelica; George's narration, which in-
cludes his squirming away from hurting his beloved Sage by telling her the truth
about her prose in the face of a writing contest; and unsigned poems of love, which
readers will early on guess are by George about Sage. With its lighthearted farcicality
and undertone of genuine warmth, this is somewhat reminiscent of Lisa Fiedler's
Curtis Piperfield's Biggest Fan (BCCB 10/95). Williams deftly makes the book as
romantic in its own way as Sage's stories, with George's tenderness towards perky
Sage meltingly endearing. The book also creates some memorable bad writing; it's
awful in a way that's consonant with Sage's energetic character and that will be
evident to young readers, but there's also a suggestion that a wiser Sage may well
go on to write better and that her enthusiasm is a good thing. Between the enter-
taining and original obstacle to true love and the pleasures of seeing nice-guy George
finish first and Sage win the man of her dreams, this is a satisfying romantic con-
fection. DS
WORCESTER, DON 
Cowboy with a Camera: Erwin E. Smith, Cowboy Photogra-
pher; illus. with photographs by Erwin E. Smith. Amon Carter Museum,
1998 
48p
ISBN 0-88360-091-9 
$18.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Erwin Smith used his camera to capture the ways of the cowboy in the early part of
the century just as it was disappearing forever. The book speaks in Smith's fiction-
alized voice, giving details about cowboys, trail life, cattle, and horses while sepia-
toned photographs provide indelible images of life on some legendary spreads.
The pictures unfortunately aren't used to their best advantage-they'd benefit
from greater size and less complicated background formats (the watercolor frames
are attractive but distracting, and they interfere with the captions' readability) and
diagrams and sidebars aren't worth the space they steal from the pictures, but the
images of cowboys dancing with one another, the choking dust surrounding the
drag riders, and savvy cowponies cutting cattle bring the West to the fore in a way
words can only hint at. And these words too have their drawbacks, though they do
convey quite a bit of information: in his effort to make clear the substantial con-
tribution of Tejano and black cowboys, Worcester makes some confusing state-
222 
* 
THE BULLETIN
ments ("At one time there were at least four thousand black cowboys in Texas, and
I'm sure there were"); dates and explanations often don't come when they'd be
useful; and the use of Smith's persona as narrator is somewhat disorienting. The
result is an impaired but evocative picture of cowboy life that would partner effec-
tively with lighter cowboy texts such as Cody's The Cowboy's Handbook (BCCB 3/
96). A glossary is appended. DS
YAMANE, LINDA, ad. 
The Snake That Lived in the Santa Cruz Mountains and Other
Ohlone Stories; ad. and illus. by Linda Yamane. 
Oyate, 1998 
40p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-9625175-6-9 $10.00 
R Gr. 4-6
A valuable resource for American Indian cultural studies, this introduces the Ohlone
people of Monterey, California, with background on three storytellers who were
recorded by John Harrington in the 1930s. The seven stories that follow vary
from pourquoi tales (" Trura-the Thunders") to descriptions of customary lore
("How They Used to Make It Rain at San Juan"). These tales follow narrative
conventions quite different from European folklore, though some motifs will seem
familiar-"How Shelp Made the Acorn Soup" (which also appears in Spanish)
bears an uncanny resemblance to Jesus' loaves and fishes. The tales represent an
authentically diverse viewpoint, as in "The Man Who Was Swallowed by a Whale":
"The Carmel Indian people used to tell the story of a man who was swallowed by
a whale down near Los Angeles or Santa Barbara or somewhere. By the time the
whale got to the Monterey area, it was feeling sick and coughed the man out on a
stretch of sandy beach at Point Lobos. And do you know that when the man was
first swallowed, he was dark? But when he came out of the whale, he was white! It
was ever since then that there began to be white people." Capable pen-and-ink
sketches, photos of the storytellers and author, pronunciation aids, and a map of
Ohlone language groups (unfortunately with no geographic labels) complete the
attractively designed paperback. BH
ZEMSER, AMY BRONWEN 
Beyond the Mango Tree. 
Greenwillow, 1998 
16 6 p
ISBN 0-688-16005-0 
$15.00 
R Gr. 5-8
This autobiographical novel begins in the pounding rain with the eleven-year-old
narrator tied to a tree by her diabetic mother, who is a victim of rages, periodic
memory loss, and a possessiveness that keeps Sarina prisoner in their yard. Sarina's
family has recently moved from Boston to Liberia, where Sarina's father spends
weeks working in the bush and counting on Sarina to take care of her mother, who
hates living in Africa. When a Liberian boy, Boima, cuts Sarina loose from the tree
and befriends her, she finds temporary happiness and freedom; the forces of her
mother's illness, her father's neglect, Boima's poverty, and Sarina's own desperate
loneliness nonetheless drive events toward tragedy. The novel is spare, even stark,
with the power of early memories; each episode is like an intense memory re-
played. Though some of these scenes could have been more smoothly connected
or extensively developed, they nonetheless will remain embedded in readers' con-
sciousness. The book is deeply moving and unsparing of its protagonist as she
discovers an aspect of herself that is disturbingly reflective of her mother's behavior
S 
hi•A 
i•ihrr'.o-- 
--
ll 
, .
.
1- 
R1H
an 
t 
en 
tres 
to 
c 
an
g
e.
FEBRUARY 1999 
* 223
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
MacRae, Cathi Dunn. Presenting YoungAdult Fantasy Fiction. Twayne, 1998.
(Twayne's United States Author's Series). 466p. illus. with photographs. ISBN
0-8057-8220-6. $28.00
MacRae, young adult librarian and editor of VOYA, has compiled a hefty refer-
ence tool for accessing modern fantasy aimed at young adults. The first chapter
discusses a definition of fantasy, using quotes from reviewers, writers, and readers.
The remaining six chapters focus on particular types of fantasy: Alternate Worlds,
Magical Realism, Myth, Legends, Magic Bestiary, and Time Fantasy. Each chap-
ter expounds on the particular type of fantasy, discusses its history, gives examples
of important works in the genre, features an in-depth look at a particular popular
and/or critically acclaimed author, and includes bibliographies and extensive lists
for recommended reading. The chapter-specific notes and references will be a
boon to those researching this topic as they include complete citations to both
monographs and journal articles. The appendix contains a selection of fantasy
fiction awards and lists of recommended fantasy titles; selections from ALA's Best
Fantasy Books for Young Adults, 1970-1997; copies of the surveys and question-
naires used in MacRae's study; and an extensive index. MacRae is obviously en-
amored of her subject and its writers; her enthusiasm is contagious, and her research
outstandingly useful. It is a bit optimistic to hope that this densely packed title is
one YAs will use on their own, as MacRae states in her introduction, but it is a title
that librarians, especially those who are not by nature fantasy fans, can and should
use to connect young adult readers with their genre of choice. JMD
Fiore, Carole D. Running Summer Library Reading Programs. Neal-Schuman,
1998. (How-To-Do-It Manuals for Librarians) Paper ed. ISBN 1-5557- 312-7.
$39.95
How-to books on various aspects of library programming for youth proliferate,
and while many are concrete guides to when and how, they are sometimes short on
the why. Carole Fiore, library programming specialist with the State Library of
Florida, has done two important things with this title-she comprehensively ad-
dresses an important area of library programming for youth by pulling together
pertinent information from a wide variety of resources under one cover, and she
tells readers the "why" of summer reading programs, backed up by some dandy
quotes from studies of the impact of summer reading on the reading scores of
young participants. In the process, she sets up a model for literature-based pro-
grams of all types, not just summer reading programs. An introduction discusses
the origin and history of library summer reading programs, followed by five chap-
ters dealing with summer reading specifics: The Literacy/Learning Value of Sum-
mer Library Reading (which includes a discussion of goals and objectives, research
supporting the impact of summer reading programs on reading skills of attendees,
224 
* THE BULLETIN
suggestions for writing grant proposals); Serving the Community of Users and
Non-Users (serving the whole community, including non-reading children, young
adults, and the differently abled, through the summer reading program); Organiz-
ing Your Program (the planning and execution of summer reading programs, in-
cluding selecting a theme, scheduling, promoting, and dealing with media); Sample
Programs (brief descriptions of programs including art activities, book discussion
groups, contests, film and video programs, celebrations, read-to-me programs, sto-
rytelling, etc.); and Evaluating Your Success (various types of information gather-
ing such as sample questionnaires, interviews, focus groups, observation, and
surveys). Sample timelines, form letters, charts, logs, etc. featured throughout will
simplify the planning process; all chapters include notes, bibliographies, and perti-
nent websites. The appendix contains a list, organized alphabetically by state, of
statewide summer reading program themes since 1990; there is also an index. The
emphasis here is on making the summer reading program as inclusive as possible,
and doing everything necessary to make the program a positive library experience
for all participants. Fiore brings years of practical experience and a can-do attitude
to this manual that will re-inspire old hands and make new librarians confident
that they can achieve summer reading program greatness. JMD
FEBRUARY 1999 
* 225
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
ADVENTURE STORIES:
Armstrong; Kimmel
Africa-fiction: Zemser
Africa-folklore: Diakite; Mollel;
Swann
African Americans: Rice
African Americans-fiction:
Hopkinson; Whitmore
African Americans-stories: Greene
Africans: Myers, W.
Aliens-fiction: Duffey
ALPHABET BOOKS:' Chandra
American Indians-fiction: Rinaldi
American Indians-folklore:
Yamane
Angels-stories: Lester
Animals-stories: Stenmark
Antarctic: Armstrong; Kimmel
Ants-stories: Nickle
Archaeology: Giblin; Guiberson
Aunts-fiction: Horvath
Aviation: Seymour
Baseball-stories: McCully
BIBLE STORIES: Gerstein;
Grindley; Lester; Sobel
BIOGRAPHIES: Allison; Anholt;
Gollub; Marrin; Myers, W.;
Rice; Seymour
Birds-stories: Fleming
Books and reading-stories: Stanley
Brothers and sisters-fiction:
Horvath; Reeder
Brothers-fiction: Salisbury
Bullies-fiction: Duffey; Lynch
Bullies-stories: Nickle
Cats-poetry: Myers, C.
Civics: Masoff
Community helpers: Masoff
Contests-stories: Nethery
Cowboys: Worcester
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Qualey; Salisbury
Dogs-fiction: Coxe
Dolphins: Cerullo
Dreams-fiction: Metzger
Drug addiction-fiction: Glovach
Eggs-stories: Nethery
Ethics and values: Caseley; Laird
Explorers and exploring:
Armstrong; Kimmel
Explorers and exploring-stories:
Fleming
Extrasensory perception: Gardner
Families-stories: Levy; Stanley
FANTASY: David; Duffey
Fashion: Knight
Fathers and sons-fiction: Salisbury
FOLKTALES AND
FAIRYTALES: Diakite; Lamm;
Mollel; Silverman; Steig;
Yamane
Food and eating: Rockwell
Friendship-fiction: Laird; Lynch;
Metzger; Zemser
Frogs-stories: Lamm
FUNNY STORIES: Horvath;
Stanley; Strasser; Williams
Gangs-fiction: Salisbury
Growing up-stories: Leopold
Health: Masoff
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Hopkinson; Metzger; Peyton;
Propp; Reeder; Rinaldi
History, U. S.: Worcester
History, world: Knight; Marrin;
Myers, W.
226 
* THE BULLETIN
Holocaust-fiction: Propp
Illness-fiction: Bottner
Insects-stories: David
Inventors and inventions:
Seymour
Japan-poetry: Gollub
Jews-stories: Silverman
Judaism: Sobel
Language arts: Agee
Literature, world: Gollub
LOVE STORIES: Strasser;
Williams
Mental illness-fiction: Zemser
Mice-stories: McCully
Monkeys-stories: Diakite
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Caseley; Qualey; Zemser
Mothers and daughters-stories:
Fleming
Mummies: Guiberson
Music and musicians-fiction:
Hopkinson
MYSTERIES: Qualey
NURSERY RHYMES: Simon
Nutrition: Rockwell
Oceanography: Cerullo
Paleontology: Anholt; Giblin
Pets-fiction: Cox
Pets-stories: Nethery
Photography: Worcester
Pirates: Marrin
POETRY: Gollub; Hopkins;
Myers, C.
PRAYERS: Rylant
Pregnancy-fiction: Caseley
Reading aloud: Cox; Hopkins;
Myers, C.; Yamane
Reading, beginning: Bottner;
Coxe
Reading, easy: Cox; Guiberson
Reading, reluctant: Agee; Glovach;
Guiberson
Religious education: Grindley; Lester;
Rylant; Sobel
RHYMING STORIES: Coxe
Riddles-stories: Silverman
RIDDLES: Swann
Rivers-stories: Greene
ROMANCE: Peyton
School-fiction: Cox; Duffey; Laird;
Lynch; Rinaldi; Suzanne
School-stories: Gregory
Science experiments: Gardner
Science: Gardner
Ships and sailing-stories: Greene
Sisters-fiction: Bottner; Caseley; Suzanne
Slavery-fiction: Whitmore
Social studies: Allison
Sports-poetry: Hopkins
Sports-stories: McCully
Steamboats-stories: Greene
Storytelling: Diakite; Gerstein; Grindley;
Lester; Mollel; Silverman; Steig;
Stenmark; Yamane
Storytelling-fiction: Horvath
Storytime: Simon; Stenmark
Time travel-fiction: Whitmore
Urban life: Myers, C.
Valentine's Day-stories: Gregory
Voyages and travel: Armstrong; Kimmel;
Marrin
Voyages and travel-fiction: Reeder
West, the: Worcester
West, the-stories: Stanley
Women's studies: Anholt; Myers, W.
World cultures: Allison
World War II: Propp
Writers and writing-fiction: Williams
ar·
4~E~O ~
K'
Retold and illustrated by STEVEN KELLOGG
"The bright, fantastical artwork is a treasure trove of details
and imaginative adventures.... With humor and affection,
Kellogg gives a nice, updated spin-and new purpose-to
a well-known classic folk song, to make the often-dreaded
bedtime a fun time for kids."-ALA Booklist
"Kellogg...is a master at combining real-life events with
the imaginary.... A sing-out-loud bedtime romp."
i
-Scnool Library Journal
Ages 2 up * 48 pp. * TR $16.00/0-688-14944-8
Morrow Junior Books * A division of W
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 1001
Teachtng rK8
The Professional IdeaBook for Teachers
tjcihlnd(&\
Every issue of Teaching K-8
provides informative articles on
the cutting edge of education.
You'll also find insightful
columns and thoughtful
reviews written by some of
today's leading educators.
Teaching K-8 is filled with
hundreds of unique ideas and
activities that help teachers
present new challenges to
their students, learn new
concepts and develop new
skills.
Monthly columns include...
Children's Books
Teaching in the Library
The Parent Connection
Science, Math, Technology and more!
Plus, interviews with children's book authors and illustrators
'1 ^ 
* • 
_ 
-
1-1
uon miss out on tis valuaole
resource for your library -
subscribe to Teaching K-8 today.
TeachtngK8
x 54808, Boulder, CO 80322-4808
-8793
* Outside U.S. add $5.00 postage per subscription.
I 
I
SSchool Library Journal and Publishers Weekly star
I Was a Teenage Fairy
by vattcesca cL-ia Ofock
3lock weaves a modem-day YA
fairy tale that features an actual
fairy. Picture Tinker Bell, but
rankier, and with 'the sex drive
a family of large rabbits.' Mab
appears when invoked by lonely
ar-old Barbie, whose mother is
ng her into a modeling career.
Barbie is molested by a
grapher, the petulant fairy takes
as mother, sister, friend-even
ipist. The story then jumps ahead
ie years, when Barbie meets
Griffin .... The story's mix of
realism and fantasy is intoxicating,
like drinking flower nectar served
poolside by Malibu Ken."
-The Hor Book
"With the help of the drop-dead honest, outrageously camp Mab,
Barbie plunges into adolescence toward the Holy Grail of autonomy.
Block's vision is so honest, her understanding of human frailty so
compassionate, her prose so inventive and electric that-like Mab-
the book takes glorious flight."
-Starred 
review / School Library Journal
Joanna Cotler Books
Ages 12 up * $14.95 TR 0-06-027747-5 * $14.89 LB 0-06-027748-3
Recent or forthcoming editions of Francesca Lia Block's novels
DANGEROUS ANGELS 
WEETZIE BAT
The 5 Weetzie Bat Books 
10th Anniversary Edition
Ages 12 up 
A Charlotte Zolotow Book
$12.00 PB 0-06-440697-0 
April 1999 Ages 12 up
$14.95 TR 0-06-020534-2
$7.95 PB 0-06-447068-7
- HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York, NY 10022 . www.harperchildrens.com
SNOWFLAKE BENTLEY
written byJacqueline Briggs Martin
illustrated by Mary Azarian
* "There will be so many
uses for this book - not
the least of which is sim-
ply handing it to a child
and letting his or her
imagination soar like
Bentley's." -Booklist,
starred review
* "It's hard to know
what strikes creative fire
into someone's heart; it's even harder to explain it in a way
young children can understand, but Martin does a fine job
of it in this picture-book biography of Wilson Bentley.
- The Bulletin, starred review
Ages 4-8 * ISBN 0-395-86162-4 * $16.00
CAT UP A TREE
byJohn and Ann Hassett
* "As much fun for the
reader as the listener."
-Booklist, starred review
* "This is a pettable
and furry little adven-
ture that should make
lapsitters as happy as
kittens with a ball of
yarn." -The Bulletin,
starred review
"Funny and whimsical and engaging .... This is a book to
read and reread." -The New York Times Book Review
Ages 3-8 * ISBN 0-395-884152 * $15.00
A Walter Lorraine ( 
Book
Houghton Mifflin * Boston, Massachusetts
"A fascinating biography"--Kirkus
RESTLESS SPIRIT
The Life and Work of Dorothea Lange
By Elizabeth Partridge
"As a young girl the author knew Lange and was, through her photog-
rapher father, connected with the intimate circle of Lange's family and
friends. She uses personal memories; her subject's own written words
in diaries, interviews, and letters....to show the talent and the complex
personality of this extraordinary woman....This well-constructed,
sympathetic biography deserves many readers and is a must for every
library." 
-School 
Library Journal (Starred Review)
*"Lange's 
stirring black-and-white photographs, more than 60 of
them, exquisitely reproduced, provide the drama in this biography
of the famous camera artist....The beautiful, spacious design of
this photo-essay....invites you to come back and look at her work."
-Booklist (Starred Review)
Duotone photos. Ages 10 up
0-670-87888-X. $19.99
VIKING
A Member of Penguin Putnam Books for Young Readers
www.penguinputnam.com
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.S.A.
RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED
I0008-9036(
0008-9036(199902)52:6*;1-8
PERIODICALS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
invites you to visit our home page at
http://edfu.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Regular features include:
* Bulletin Stars-what we starred this month
* Bulletin Dozen-a genre- or theme-based list of titles
* Quote of the Month
* Bulletin Blue Ribbons 1990-1997
* the Baby Bulletin-a sample collection of recent reviews
Occasional features include:
* Rising Star-an examination of the work of a talented new author
or artist
* True Blue-reflections on a time-honored talent
* Dueling Reviews-a look at the discussion behind the scenes when a book
polarizes the editors
* And more ... updated monthly!
: :
·;
