IL 
I 
NOI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
i~d~fN
ri~ 
1f
~:
n·i
* "A memorable contribution."*
The 
Rf YING for aVISION
WALTER WANGERIN, JR.
r "This complex and absorbing novel of good and evil, sacrifice and
redemption, paints a picture of Lakota culture while illuminating
universal truths .... 
Wangerin's use of language is smooth and com-
pelling, complementing the narrative's structure, which resembles an
intricate weaving."
-- Starred, School Library Journal
* "Wangerin powerfully conveys the spiritual beliefs and traditions of
the Lakota as he unfolds this stirring adventure."
-
Starred, Publishers Weekly*
"Memorable characters abound.... This is a particularly strong addition
to historical fictiop and Native American fiction and legend collections."
-
Booklist
Ages 12 up 
0-671-79911-8 /$16.00
SIMON & SCHUSTER BOOKS FOR YOUNG READERS
An imprint of Simon & Schuster Children's Publishing Division
866 Third Avenue * New York, NY 10022
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
March 1995
Vol. 48 No. 7
A LOOK INSIDE
225 THE BIG PICTURE
Nights of the Pufflings written and illustrated with photographs by Bruce
McMillan
226 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
226 * Street Music: City Poems written by Arnold Adoff; illus. by Karen
Barbour
233 * Daisy-HeadMayzie written and illustrated by Dr. Seuss
234 * The Eagle Kite by Paula Fox
241 
* Othello: A Novel by Julius Lester
245 * Good Driving, Amelia Bedelia written by Herman Parish;
illustrated by Lynn Sweat
255 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
256 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin ofthe Centerfor Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
STAFF
Roger Sutton, Editor (RS)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Susan Dove Lempke, Reviewer (SDL)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Heather McCammond-Watts, Editorial Assistant
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS ADVISORY BOARD
Leigh Estabrook, Dean, GSLIS, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Selma K. Richardson, Professor, GSLIS
Christine Jenkins, Assistant Professor, GSLIS
Richard C. Anderson, Director, Center for the Study of Reading, UIUC
Jean Osborn, Associate Director, Center for the Study of Reading
P. David Pearson, Dean, College of Education, UIUC
Violet J. Harris, Associate Professor, College of Education
Nancy O'Brien, Education Subject Specialist, Library, UIUC
Peggy Miller, Associate Professor, Department of Speech Communication, UIUC
Ann D. Carlson, Associate Professor, GSLIS, Rosary College
Janice Harrington, Head of Children's Services, Champaign Public Library
Elizabeth Huntoon, Director Systemwide Children's Services, Chicago Public Library
Janie Schomberg, Librarian, Leal Elementary School, Urbana, Illinois
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $35.00; individuals, $29.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Roger Sutton, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 1512 N. Fremont St., #105,
Chicago, IL 60622
Second-class postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1995 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Bruce McMillan, from Nights ofthe Pufflings ©1995 and used by permission
of Houghton Mifflin Company.
MARCH 1995 
* 225
THE BIG PICTURE
Nights of the Pufflings
written and illustrated with photographs by Bruce McMillan
On a small island 200 miles south of the Arctic Circle, Icelandic children play an
important role in helping young puffins, or pufflings, survive their entry into the
world. In Nights of the Pufflings, Bruce McMillan keeps his focus on the puffins,
but gives us the human perspective through a little girl, Halla, and her friend
Arnar Ingi as they watch the puffins and "wait and dream of the nights of the
pufflings yet to come." Beginning in April, the puffins land on Heimaey and
other nearby uninhabited islands to mate and to hatch their eggs, one per pair.
They prepare their underground burrows, the same ones each year, and then tend
the chicks through the summer. The children never see the chicks, which remain
hidden beyond human reach in the burrows, but they watch the parents bringing
back fish as often as ten times a day.
Finally, in August, the pufflings emerge to fly to the sea for the winter, and
Halla and the other children of Heimaey begin their nighttime adventure of find-
ing the babies who may have become confused by the village lights, and who have
landed in the streets, where they may be hurt by cats, dogs, or cars. For two weeks
the children "rescue thousands ofpufflings" at night. They sleep late the next day,
then head down to the beach with their cardboard boxes of pufflings, launching
the babies out over the sea to safety.
Any book about puffins, with their colorful faces and generally comical appear-
ance, is likely to have a certain charm. Not many photographers, however, have
the technical and artistic skills of McMillan at his finest. Though he cannot show
the newborn puffins, he makes up for it with shots of the adults with beaks clamped
tightly on the catch of day, and he perfectly captures a puffin swooping in for a
landing. The island scenery gives him crisp hues in the sky, grassy cliffs, snowy
mountains, and sparkling seas. The Icelandic gene pool provides platinum blond,
pink-cheeked, blue-eyed schoolchildren (no adults are shown), wearing their thick
multicolored sweaters on August nights. Even the nighttime pictures are vivid and
dramatic, and they give us our first close-up shots of the pufflings.
For a photographer, McMillan can sure write a picture-book text, gaining our
interest in the puffins with tidbits about their lives while foreshadowing the myste-
rious "nights of the pufflings" still to come. He works in a few Icelandic words
with their pronunciations (Halla, for instance, is pronounced HATTL - lah), and
carefully avoids any pitfalls of anthropomorphizing the birds or making the kids
into cutie-pies or superchildren. McMillan doesn't burden the text with too much
information, but he fills in, on the verso of the title page, when, where, and how
the pictures were taken, and he concludes with a page of puffin facts and a brief
bibliography of (mostly) adult books.
226 
* THE BULLETIN
With the keen awareness most schoolchildren have these days of the deteriorat-
ing condition of the earth, Nights ofthe Pufflings has a uniquely satisfying twist for
its grade school audience: because of the manmade lights, the puffins are put into
danger, but the village children take responsibility for undoing the damage. No
environmental preaching is done-the story simply speaks for itself. The fact that
the island children have a fabulous time doing their job gives the book a special
thrill. (See imprint information on page 243.)
Susan Dove Lempke, Reviewer
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ADLER, C. S. 
Youn Hee and Me. 
Harcourt, 1995 
[192p]
Trade ed. ISBN 0-15-200073-9 
$11.00
Paper ed. ISBN 0-15-200376-2 
$5.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-7
Eleven-year-old Caitin loves her five-year-old brother, Simon, who came from
Korea to join her family three years ago. When it turns out Simon has a birth sister
Caidin's age still in a Korean orphanage, Caitlin insists that Youn Hee is part of
the family too; when Youn Hee arrives, however, it's clear that making a family is
not as simple as Caitlin envisions. Adler has created some of her most memorable
characters here in determined, prickly Youn Hee and devil-may-care, impetuous
Caitin. Without ever calling up cheap clich6s of grateful adoptees, the book cred-
ibly depicts Youn Hee's gradual adjustment to America, to being different from
everybody else, and to her new family; there's also a suggestion that Youn Hee's
disapproval of American ways is sometimes justified. Caitin's narration quietly
but effectively addresses questions of racism and the matter of her divorced and
distant dad as well as telling the central story in lively and readable style. Adler has
a flair for these vivid and slightly unusual family stories; new readers as well as fans
of her Split Sisters (BCCB 4/86), etc., should appreciate this one. DS
ADOFF, ARNOLD 
Street Music: City Poems; illus. by Karen Barbour.
HarperCollins, 1995 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021523-2 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021522-4 
$16.00 
R Gr. 3-7
Renowned poet Adoff here offers fourteen poems about everyday city life. In verse
sometimes prosy ("After I've been sleeping, I wake up because/ the covers are on
the floor. The apartment is dark and quiet"-"Late at Night"), sometimes
cummings-esque ("T h e / swee/ wee/ sweeper truck/ sprays water/ do wn the /
g u t t e r s"-"The Streets Are So Hot"), he offers glimpses of waking to garbage
trucks, playing in the spray from a fire hydrant, watching crowds of people from a
bus window or in the park. He includes chillier aspects of the city scene, such as
MARCH 1995 
* 227
frightening fires ("Always Engines") and pigeons pecking at empty crack vials ("On
the Way to Breakfast Sunday"), as well as joyous street music ("Music Moves Us
Along the Street") and diversely appetizing street fair fare ("On Our Avenue of the
World"). Barbour's acrylic paintings use strong colors such as rich yellow, avo-
cado green, or dusky blue as background and base color, upon which she creates
naively drawn but intricately detailed tableaux of rows of windows, lines of cars,
and clusters of people. While the art is sometimes too distant and restrained for
the poems, offering a polite busyness and a delicate disorder where the text sug-
gests an explosion of life, the darker hues keep the illustrations from excessive
sunniness and the varied compositions keep them visually interesting. Non-city
kids will find the life evoked rich and often tantalizing; city kids may find this
poetic take makes them look at their world differently. DS
BAKER, JEANNIE 
The Story of Rosy Dock; written and illus. by Jeannie
Baker. 
Greenwillow, 1995 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-11493-8 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-11491-1 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 6-9 yrs
Intricately constructed collage paintings illustrate this gentle ecological lesson about
rosy dock, an imported garden plant that has become a tenacious inhabitant of the
Australian desert. Although the brief text makes some confusing shifts between
past and present tenses, the natural cycle it describes is clear enough: the wind
picked up the red seedpods of the rosy dock plant, scattered the seeds across the
desert, and, after lying dormant in the sand, the seeds are germinated by the occa-
sional rainstorms and the plant spreads further. Despite an afterword that warns
of the danger of introducing non-native plants and animals, the rosy dock is not
shown to have had any unfortunate consequences and kids will be likely to take
the book as a Miss Rumphius-like story about spreading beauty in the wilderness.
That beauty was already there is made abundantly clear in the pictures. With their
organic materials and stunning dioramic effects, the collage landscapes never as-
sume the distant, glassy look of photographed realia, and viewers will find some-
thing new-a branch that is actually a snake, birds that look like leaves-each time
they look. RS
BANK, LYNNE REID 
Broken Bridge. Morrow, 1995 
[3 3 6p]
ISBN 0-688-13595-1 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Lesley, the fourteen-year-old heroine of One More River(BCCB 8/73) is now forty,
still living in the Kibbutz Kfar Orde with her husband and two teenaged children.
Her daughter Nili has been visiting London with her cousin Glen (son of Lesley's
older brother Noah), and when the cousins fly back to Israel and attempt to walk
to a relative's house in Jerusalem, Glen is murdered by Palestinian terrorists, an act
that not only sends the kibbutz and family reeling but one that also has a tie to
Lesley's past. The book is prefaced by a family tree, and you're going to need it;
Banks' effort to recap the events of the first book as well as those of the intervening
twenty-five years is not entirely successful, and it sometimes seems as if there's a
book in the middle that's missing. Too, there is a large cast of characters and the
narrative viewpoint ranges wide, so that while the complex repercussions of the
murder are fully and often subtly explored, the book lacks a strong emotional
228 
* THE BULLETIN
focus. Best is the portrait of Nili, who refuses to confirm the identity of the Pales-
tinian the police have arrested; less convincing is the fact that the man in question
is the boy Lesley befriended in the first book. RS
BEGAY, SHONTO 
Navajo: Visions and Voices Across the Mesa; written and illus. by
Shonto Begay. 
Scholastic, 1995 
[48p]
ISBN 0-590-46153-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
A gallery of paintings (scrupulously annotated as to medium and original size) by
Navajo artist Begay show a range of the painter's styles from a richly textured,
earthy pointillism to romanticized portraiture. While the paintings capture a vari-
ety of moods, the poems they illustrate are repetitive and too long, lacking the
concentration of language and metaphor that would make them seem less like
prose arranged in lines of uneven length: "Navajo power plant and the powerful
healing plant,/ they share the same plateau./ One gives us strength and wisdom
here and now-/ one gives power to strangers somewhere over the horizon." While
kids will enjoy looking at the pictures and reading the autobiographical anecdotes
sprinkled throughout the book, the soft-centered and long-winded preaching might
best be left to adults. RS
BIAL, RAYMOND 
The Underground Railroad; written and illus. with photographs
by Raymond Bial. 
Houghton, 1995 
[48p]
ISBN 0-395-69937-1 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-7
How does one visually document a topic which was by necessity shrouded in se-
crecy? Bial retraces the slaves' lifeline to Canada through a series of pristine photo-
graphs of artifacts, landscapes, and "station" buildings that the runaways actually
encountered along their escape route. A false-bottomed grain wagon, a hand-dug
tunnel glowing in amber lantern light, and the signal lamp beckoning from the
upper window of the John Rankin house are potent images that invite the reader
into an empathetic relationship with the escapees. Although the text covers ground
often trodden by other works on this popular subject, Bial's shots of places and
things which now appear tidy and innocent conjure spirits of desperate freedom-
seekers as handily as do more detailed narratives. A chronology of American anti-
slavery activity and a list for further reading are appended. EB
BOELTS, MARIBETH 
Summer's End; illus. by Ellen Kandoian. 
Houghton,
1995 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-395-70559-2 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-7 yrs
For seven-year-old Jill, a tomboyish redhead in a sad mood, the melancholy feeling
of leaving behind the pleasures of summer slowly shifts over to the excitement of
starting a new grade of school. The end of summer means "no more fun. I feel like
a balloon with a slow leak," and looking at her scratchy new clothes and shopping
for school supplies do not cheer her. However, on the day before school starts, she
plays hard but by noon "there is nothing left to do"; that night she remembers
some of the fun she had last year in school. Children's books don't always portray
the vexations of childhood so accurately, and Boelts and Kandoian skillfully show
the ambivalence children may feel about school. The soft watercolor pictures,
MARCH 1995 
* 229
while not exactly old-fashioned, make few concessions to the '90s, with a bicycle
helmet the one thing showing that the book is not set in the '50s or '60s. Pleas-
antly nostalgic, this makes a good, if mild, choice for children Jill's age and for
younger children just thinking about school. SDL
BRIGGS, RAYMOND 
The Bear; written and illus. by Raymond Briggs. 
Random
House, 1994 
40p
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-96944-6 
$20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-86944-1 
$20.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
This book is appropriately overly tall, ursine-sized, in fact; it tells the story of a
little girl who is surprised one night by the entry into her room of a mammoth but
gentle polar bear. Her parents don't believe her new companion is real but they
humor her, and Tilly fiercely mothers the bear, feeding him, bathing him, and
cleaning up after him ("Oh, you BEAST! You've weed on the floor!"). The dia-
logue is cheeky and fun, but the real point of the book is the artwork. Briggs plays
the oversized page like an instrument, breaking it up into small panels or sections
to tighten the action up and then stretching out appropriately when the bear takes
over the scene. The bear himself is a softly lumbering creation in colored pencil,
whose feathery furry lines seem to speak a quiet narration of their own. While the
adult interpretation is likely to be that Tilly imagines her bear, Briggs offers enough
suggestion to the contrary to keep kids from generally feeling patronized (although
the last panels, where the bear returns to the wild and stands longingly on a cliff
before meeting another bear, may baffle some young viewers). A lot of youngsters
would go through Tilly's labors in order to experience the cozy safety of the bear
hugs Tilly gets in the lap of her seemingly dangerous but actually loving protector;
this literary version of that hug will warm youngsters too. DS
BUNTING, EVE 
Spying on Miss Miiller. Clarion, 1995 
[180p]
ISBN 0-395-69172-9 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 5-8
"She's not a teacher anymore," says a classmate of narrator Jessie, "She's a Ger-
man." Like the other students, Jessie had admired Miss Muller, the German-
language teacher and dorm supervisor at Jessie's Belfast boarding school, but the
war has changed their feelings, especially since Miss Miller has been spotted leav-
ing her room at night and going up onto the roof. When the Germans bomb
Belfast, Jessie and her friends become more convinced than ever that Miss Muller
is a spy, but their attempt to catch her out becomes complicated when taciturn
Greta, a Jewish refugee, insists on joining the plot. "Will you kill her?" asks Greta
eagerly, and seeks to see her wish come true. Suspenseful and romantic, this is a
strong combination of boarding-school story and spy-hunting theme, with the
details of 1940s British girls' life worked smoothly into the plot-one of the fun-
nier moments comes during an air-raid when the boy- and girl-boarders at the
school chaotically meet in the cellar. "I will not have this!" screams the headmis-
tress. "This is a serious, life-changing experience." Recollects Jessie, "It surely was.
Us and the boys," and ponders her first kiss. While Miss Muller does have a secret,
it has nothing to do with spying for her fatherland; nevertheless, the girls' con-
spiracy to find her out has sad repercussions that leave them wiser. The subject is
serious and the treatment is cozy but honest, with Miss Muller a figure of Jessie's
ambivalent empathy: "Those awful maids spreading the story that Miss Miller's
father was a Nazi. As if everyone wasn't against her enough, me included." RS
230 
* THE BULLETIN
BURNS, MARILYN 
The Greedy Triangle; illus. by Gordon Silveria. 
Scholastic,
1995 
[33p] 
(Marilyn Bums Brainy Day Books)
ISBN 0-590-48991-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
4-8 yrs
A triangle enjoys its many jobs "holding up roofs, supporting bridges, making
music in a symphony orchestra, catching the wind for sailboats," and so on, espe-
cially liking to slip into the angles made when people put their hands on their hips,
where it overhears news to pass along to its friends, who are also shapes. Eventu-
ally becoming bored, it goes to a shapeshifter and turns into a quadrilateral with a
range of new jobs, such as being a baseball diamond or a computer screen. Over
and over the shape adds a side until it has so many sides it is almost a circle, and it
finally decides to go back to being a triangle. Though children may be amused by
searching for the new shape in its new chores, the story is remarkable only for its
flimsiness. The shape supposedly is individualized by having character traits, be-
ing "greedy" for one, but it exists simultaneously in a number of places, and appar-
ently causes no problems by abruptly changing shape, which surely will make
children wonder what happened to all of the things that were triangle-shaped after
the triangle became a quadrilateral. Notes on using the math concepts with chil-
dren give some useful suggestions for activities, but in no way make up for the
absence of logic. The airbrushed acrylic paintings are pleasantly, if gaudily,
cartoonish, but they're crowded and confusing. The concept of adding sides to
make new shapes could make a worthwhile picture book, but however many sides
this one has, it still falls flat. SDL
CASE, DIANNE 
92 Queens Road. Farrar, 1995 
164 p
ISBN 0-374-35518-5 
$16.00 
Ad Gr. 5-7
Six-year-old Kathy is happy with her lively extended family in 1960s South Africa,
but she gradually realizes that she's faced with some unfair limitations: she's le-
gally "Coloured" and so not entitled to the rights of whites, and she's also illegiti-
mate. Increasing political turmoil has family repercussions, as Kathy's light-skinned
uncle has himself and his family declared "white" and becomes reluctant to ac-
knowledge his relatives; Delores, married to Kathy's other uncle, suffers a miscar-
riage as a result of a complicated, racially fraught bus incident, and she and her
husband decide that emigration to Canada is their only hope of a free life. Case
incorporates rather too much in this narrative, so there's little overall focus to the
book, and most of the cast is never really characterized, so the end result is a stream
of names and small events that doesn't really allow readers to differentiate or em-
pathize. Nonetheless, it's an intimate portrait of a family fighting its personal
battles in the shadow of a larger political war, and Case creates an effective sense of
place in her Afrikaans-sprinkled account of Kathy's daily life and ethnically diverse
neighborhood. While the book lacks the teen heroine that the book jacket and
flap copy imply, kids who are willing to overlook the youth of the protagonist may
find Kathy's narration an interesting bridge to another kind of life. DS
COLES, ROBERT 
The Story of Ruby Bridges; illus. by George Ford. 
Scholastic,
1995 
[32p]
ISBN 0-590-43967-7 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
In 1960, at the age of six, first-grader Ruby Bridges became the first African-Ameri-
MARCH 1995 
* 231
can child to attend William Frantz Elementary School. According to this picture-
book biography, all of the other (white) students were kept home in protest, but
each day Ruby soldiered on into the school, jeered by mobs and protected by gun-
toting federal marshals. One day her teacher observes Ruby talking to the mob on
the way in, but then Ruby explains to her that she wasn't talking, she was praying:
"Please, God, try to forgive those people... Just like You did those folks a long
time ago/ When they said those terrible things about You." While much of the
text consists of quoted material, there's no hint of where it's quoted from. The
story ends with Ruby's prayer, which gives the book the flavor of a parable; while
Ruby herself has a saintly, Shirley-Temple-ish air, many kids will admire her cour-
age and faith. Despite an overreliance on pink tones and beatific poses, Ford's
full-page paintings emphasize the warmth of Ruby's family and the heroine's own
sturdiness; the pictures of the shouting bigots are softened in color and by distance
so as not to be too frightening to younger viewers. RS
COVINGTON, DENNIS 
Lasso the Moon. 
Delacorte, 1995 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-385-32101-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Until she meets Fernando, teenager April Hunter has little patience with the illegal
Latino immigrants her father doctors at home, but the thin young gardener from
El Salvador commands first her attention and later her love, even as immigrant
authorities close in on him. Besides being a love story and a picture of a rite of
passage to broader social awareness, this is also the story of a daughter adjusting to
her alcoholic father's recovery; having grown up with turmoil, April must now
accept Dr. Hunter's newfound stability and allow herself to depend on him rather
than being the child in charge. It's a packed plot, and it's occasionally overlaid
with information-masked as dialogue-about Central and North American po-
litical dynamics. There's also a surprise twist at the end that seems excessive, but
these flaws are balanced by a well-paced plot and consistently intense scenes be-
tween the protagonist and a number of well-realized secondary characters: her
father, her newfound love, her archenemy at the stable where she grooms horses,
the classmate she comes closest to calling a friend, and her father's potential new
romantic interest. This is more purposive and less brilliantly eccentric than
Covington's first novel, Lizard (BCCB 4/91), but it has a distinctive voice of its
own and will have strong appeal to young adult readers. BH
DAHL, FELICITY 
Roald Dahl's Revolting Recipes; comp. by Felicity Dahl and Josie
Fison; illus. by Quentin Blake and with photographs by Jan Baldwin. 
Viking,
1994 
6 lp
ISBN 0-670-85836-6 
$15.99 
R Gr. 4-7
Fans of Roald Dahl will recognize the names of many of these revolting-and not-
so-revolting-recipes, such as Snozzcumbers (from The BFG), Mr. Twit's Beard
Food (from The Twits), and Lickable Wallpaper (from Charlie and the Chocolate
Factory). Felicity Dahl and Josie Fison have breathed life, presentation, and edibil-
ity into these recipes, and kids will hunger for Strawberry-Flavored Chocolate-
Coated Fudge, Wormy Spaghetti, and Bird Pie (with its forest of bird legs sticking
out of the top crust). While some of the recipes can be rather challenging (some of
the measurements remain in the British system of ounces rather than being trans-
lated into the American cups, deep-frying is required for a few recipes, and some of
232 
* THE BULLETIN
the artistic demands-"Draw a frog measuring about 5 x 5 inches"-may be be-
yond youngsters), there are varying degrees of difficulty, and kids will, with adult
help, be able to satisfy themselves with their heroes' favorite potions and munchies.
Zingy line-and-watercolor illustrations by Quentin Blake allow the Dahlian per-
sonae to interact with photographs of the completed recipes. The kids who ate up
Lucy Monroe's Creepy Cuisine (BCCB 10/93) will find that this also pleases their
palates, and Dahl fans will want to whip up the famous delicacies tout de suite. DS
DAY, NANCY RAINES, ad. 
The Lion's Whiskers: An Ethiopian Folktale; illus. by
Ann Grifalconi. 
Scholastic, 1995 
[32p]
ISBN 0-590-45803-5 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 5-8 yrs
Fanaye, an Ethiopian woman, offers her new stepson the tenderest meat, fixes his
clothes, and tells him stories, but she is met only with rejection: "Don't try to act
like my mother!" Greatly saddened, she visits the medicine man for a magic po-
tion, and though she fears she will be killed, she decides to get the three lion
whiskers he tells her she will need. Taming the lion very gradually, she finally gets
the whiskers, but when she returns to the medicine man he throws them on the
fire and tells her, "Approach your stepson as you did the lion, and you will win his
love." Taking this advice, she begins treating her stepson with seeming indiffer-
ence, and "day by day, as he saw that Fanaye made no move toward him, Abebe
inched toward her. When she said nothing to him, he began to speak to her." The
story tenderly concludes with Fanaye telling-upon request-a story about the
time she "befriended a wild lion." In opening notes, the author says the story has
been told for hundreds of years (giving no specific sources), but it has great imme-
diacy and freshness for contemporary children as well. Grifalconi's striking illus-
trations are constructed from textured papers, photographs, cloth and other materials
to great three-dimensional effect. This provides an excellent counterpoint to tales
of wicked stepmothers, with its African setting providing additional interest. SDL
DEAN, JULIA 
A Year on Monhegan Island; written and illus. with photographs by
Julia Dean. 
Ticknor, 1995 
[4 8p]
ISBN 0-395-66476-4 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-6
Island life has its own peculiar attractions that make it a romantic subject for books;
Julia Dean's photoessay on Monhegan Island off the coast of Maine is one of the
more warmly evocative of the genre. Seventy-five people lived year-round on
Monhegan in 1990, the year Dean photographed the island, but the summer popu-
lation balloons to 600 (and more come on daytrips); residents of the island speak
here of the winter isolation, the labor of lobster fishing, the pains and pleasures of
being one of only six children in the school, and the good and bad sides of the
summer expansion. Homey mundane details nestle comfortably with history both
distant and recent ("When [the underwater phone cable] broke in 1981, the is-
landers were without telephone service for two years"). The author/photographer's
affection for island life comes through not only in the text but in the luminous
pictures of clapboard houses amid sea spray and in the memorable images of island
people working at battery-powered computers or standing amid towers of lobster
traps. Despite the preponderance of adults in text and pictures, the book's blend
of romance and reality makes this an enticing prospect for young isle-ophiles, who
will enjoy this informative and picturesque armchair voyage. DS
MARCH 1995 
* 233
DENENBERG, BARRY 
Voices from Vietnam. 
Scholastic, 1995 
251p
ISBN 0-590-44267-8 
$16.95 
R Gr. 7-10
"This book is not about the politics and history of the Vietnam War. It is about
what it was like to be in Vietnam." Contrary to his opening remarks, Denenberg
does deliver a cogent historical overview of the conflict from its roots in the mid-
1940s through the fall of Saigon. Much of the text is devoted to first-hand obser-
vations by infantrymen, nurses, generals, journalists, and North and South
Vietnamese military and civilians. Here Denenberg is at his best, cannily weaving
his own commentary and explanations through quotations that are long enough to
develop a theme, yet short enough to keep the narration clipping along. In those
chapters in which the dominant voice is that of the author (most notably, coverage
of the 1968 Democratic convention riots) the infusion of other viewpoints is missed.
The lack of index and maps, together with a glossary of inadequate scope, limits
the volume's usefulness for report writers, but readers interested in retracing the
course of the conflict rather than dissecting its parts will find this work both dis-
turbing and illuminating. EB
DEXTER, CATHERINE 
Alien Game. 
Morrow, 1995 
[208p]
ISBN 0-688-11332-X 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Zoe knows something is funny about the glamorous new girl, Christina-and not
just because she so uncannily resembles the magazine model Zoe had been admir-
ing the night before Christina shows up for school, nor just because Christina's
claim to have attended the school in third grade is not borne out by class photos.
Christina also has this alarming habit of turning into a swarm of little lights, and
what had been an annual school ritual keepaway game becomes a horror when it
becomes apparent that Christina is playing for keeps: she taps you on the shoulder
and you're hers. Yikes. This is a pretty scary story, made all the more so by its
ordinary daylit schoolyard setting. Zoe, her friend Norton, and a teacher with a
mysterious tragedy in his past are the only ones who are onto Christina's "game,"
and together they force a showdown-at night, in a spooky deserted school-that
is somewhat contrived in its set-up but satisfying in its resolution. Attractive cover
art of Zoe and Christina makes for an easy booktalk: "This girl thinks that girl is
an alien." RS
DR. SEUSS 
Daisy-HeadMayzie; written and illus. by Dr. Seuss. 
Random House,
1995 
48p
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-96712-5 
$15.99
Trade ISBN 0-679-86712-0 
$15.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Flap copy states that the good doctor wrote this story in the 1960s and it was
found posthumously among his papers. Certainly the story of Mayzie McGrew,
who is startled one day in school when a daisy grows out of the top of her head, has
the galloping rhythm and rollicking rhyme that Dr. Seuss was so good at and
others so often feebly imitated. Soon various adults realize that Mayzie and her
floral topping could be a feather in their own caps, so a politician, a doctor, and a
movie agent sow their own plans around her; Mayzie, however, soon tires of fame
and embraces love (with a little guidance from the petals of the daisy), whereupon
the daisy disappears. The plot weakens considerably at its resolution, finishing the
story with more fuzz than fizz and making the classic Seuss didacticism seem rather
234 
* THE BULLETIN
forced, but the silliness of the situation is enjoyable enough to carry the story off
nonetheless. 
More problematic are the illustrations, "inspired by Dr. Seuss's
sketches": the colors are garish and the lines unimaginative and cartoonish (the
book is in fact released simultaneously with an animated TV version), so that the
cast has none of the raffish charm usually found in a Seuss book, looking more like
TheJetsons than, say, the Whos. Kids who see the cartoon will probably clamor
for the book and they'll enjoy it as a lively readaloud; its best use, however, would
be in serving as a bridge to classic--dare one say genuine?-works of the master.
DS
EVANS, LEZLIE 
Rain Song; illus. by Cynthia Jabar. 
Houghton, 1995 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-69865-0 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-6 yrs
"Distant rumblings" mark the beginning of a thunderstorm moving in on a
summer's day, as two little girls play in a backyard pool. One face shows excite-
ment, the other apprehension as the "sun is fading/ dark clouds waiting/ trees are
sighing/ birds are lying/ low in nests in wait of rain." Once the mother has hustled
them inside, they watch out the windows, and the anxious child cheers up when
the more exuberant girl bangs on the bottom of her sand pail, echoing the "big
boom bashing!" After the thunder dies down, they pull on their yellow slickers
and red galoshes and head out for some puddle fun: "How we love the song of
rain!" Evans' rhythm never falters, and her word choice only occasionally strains,
as in "wind is tiring/ beat expiring." Both story and pictures reflect the simple joys
of a change in the weather. Jabar's watercolor and pencil illustrations, while show-
ing a somewhat idealized setting, with a single house on an enormous lot complete
with flowers, birds, worms, frogs, and a dog house, have a nicely light-hearted feel.
SDL
Fox, PAULA 
The Eagle Kite. Jackson/Orchard, 1995 
[14 4p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08742-5 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-06892-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
When Liam's mother Katherine tells him that his father Philip contracted AIDS
from a blood transfusion, Liam knows she's lying. He knows from his school sex
ed classes that such a risk has become near-impossible, but he also suddenly re-
members, "clearer every moment like a photograph negative in a developing tank,"
the time three years ago when he saw his father secretly embrace a young man on
the beach near the family's summer cottage. Now Philip has moved back to that
cottage, leaving Liam and Katherine in New York with many secrets between them.
This is a tough portrait of a family in crisis, each member struggling between love
and the betrayals of that love, lying to themselves and each other about what is
really going on. But while Fox must be commended for avoiding didacticism or
sentimentality, she seems reluctant to tackle either her subject or story head on,
substituting metaphor for emotional engagement. Too much is outlined or off-
stage, with past events and memories rendered in a pluperfect tense that has a
distancing effect ("During the year he'd been away, Liam had had no desire to see
him at all"). The best scenes are those where Liam visits Philip at the cottage and
confronts him ("You killed our family") only to be answered in equable manner
("Nobody is killed except me"). Even here, though, the conversations often turn
fuzzy and ponderous about time and light-years, and readers are likely to get lost in
MARCH 1995 
* 
235
the ambiguities. When Liam asks, in a conversation that had, we think, been
about Philip's now-dead lover Geoff, "Can you say how it was? What it was?,"
we're not sure what he's asking; when Philip answers, "It breaks over you like a
huge wave. You go under. Some people swim out of the wave. I couldn't," we
don't know what to think. What is "it"? Love? Betrayal? Homosexuality? The
book gets better and clearer in its last third. Philip's death scene is written with
compassion and a restraint that never turns into remove; here Fox reveals her gift
for showing, in brief and simple language, the ways people discover each other and
themselves. RS
FRANKLIN, KRISTINE L. 
Eclipse. 
Candlewick, 1995 
[160p]
ISBN 1-56402-544-6 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-7
Sixth-grader Trina knows that things are a litde rough in her family at the mo-
ment, with her mother running a day-care center at home in order to make ends
meet since her father's job injury left him unable to work. She realizes, however,
that things are more serious than she thought when her father's increasing morose-
ness and flashes of temper escalate at the news of her mother's long-awaited preg-
nancy. Trina finds herself increasingly cut off from both her parents as her father's
depression increases, leading to hospitalization that only helps for a short time
and, finally, to a suicide attempt. Trina's narration of a difficult year is touching
and truthful; with the exception of the title metaphor, which gets sentimentally
described on the book's final page, there's a rugged honesty to her account which
admits that things are rarely easily solved. Counterbalancing the distress of Trina's
situation is the warmth of her friends and neighbors, who are clearly the only
comfort for Trina and her mother in this very bad year. Tougher than but just as
readable as Cannon's Amazing Gracie (BCCB 10/91), on the same subject, this
will speak to many kids who feel, for one reason or another, buffeted by adult
frailties beyond their control. DS
GANERI, ANITA 
I Remember Bosnia; ISBN 0-8114-5607-2; IRemember Palestine;
ISBN 0-8114-5610-2. 
Each book: Raintree Steck-Vaughn, 1995 
32p 
(Why
We Left) 
illus. with photographs 
$13.98 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Each of these series entries purports to be the first-person account of a young
refugee, but aside from an opening introduction ("My name is Samira, and I am a
Muslim from Bosnia"; "My name is Ahmad, and I am Palestinian") and a posed
portrait photograph, these are impersonal accounts that juxtapose information about
history, culture, and customs with rigorously "balanced" explanations of the con-
temporary problems in Bosnia and Israel and the Occupied Territories. It does
seem odd that Samira gives such an even-handed survey of the war in her country;
she defines "ethnic cleansing" as when "one group of people tries to force all other
groups from the land," but neglects to state that it is the Muslims who are being
"cleansed" (i.e., killed) by the Serbs. Ahmad's story more convincingly puts forth
a particular side of the conflict, while at the same time fairly representing the
Israeli position as well. Although shifts between double spreads about customs
and spreads about war are sometimes disconcerting, the books are easy to read and
filled with stock color photos that, if not always carefully placed or labeled, give an
easy first glimpse into some complex problems. Each book has a map, "fact file,"
and an index. RS
236 
* THE BULLETIN
GARZA, HEDDA 
Latinas: Hispanic Women in the United States. Watts,
1994 
192p 
(The Hispanic Experience in the Americas) 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-531-11186-5 
$14.84 
Ad 
Gr. 8-12
This overview of Latino history from Spanish colonization through the present
focuses on women's political and economic oppression and highlights the work of
Latina activists such as Lucy Parsons and Luisa Moreno. Arguments frequently
lapse into opinion which Garza fails to substantiate: "Some Latinas contract AIDS
through drug abuse, but many (perhaps most) are infected by husbands or sexual
partners who (as with most men) control the women's sex lives." Garza rides a
turbulent stream of consciousness from one issue to the next, making the most
tenuous of segues between the 1911 overthrow of Porfirio Diaz and the 1848
Seneca Falls caucus, or between the "zoot suit" riots and a 1943 film about "a
typical Russian family that looked and behaved exactly like white American fami-
lies." When so much YA nonfiction is blandly textbookish, however, Garza's im-
passioned essay is a change of pace, and while it does not provide broad or balanced
coverage, it will be of interest to libraries with extensive holdings in Latino and
women's studies. EB
GRIFALCONI, ANN 
Not Home. 
Little, 1995 
[138p]
ISBN 0-316-32905-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 4-7
Tommy, the narrator, and his little brother Dicky are upset to hear that their
widowed mother has to enter the hospital for an operation; they're even more
distressed when they're taken to "the strange, big, clanging place they called 'The
Home'" to live until she gets out. Tommy gradually sorts out bullies, loners, and
companions among the boys he's barracked with, and he struggles to maintain
both the cool he needs to survive and his relationship with Dicky. Few children's
books address short-term stays in care, and Grifalconi credibly depicts Tommy's
fear, loneliness, and gradual adjustment (as well as his relief at returning to his
mother). Tommy's narration is rather forced, however, simultaneously sprinkled
with boyish exclamation points but using an outsider's notation of colloquial speech
("Don't b'lieve nothin' you hear 'round here from the Man"), and his perceptions
are occasionally purposively adult; although sincere, the plot dips into sentimen-
tality, especially in its portrayal of loner Jimmy, whom Tommy finally befriends
but who dies of TB. Tommy is a tough but warm and thoughtful hero, however,
and kids who might find Paula Fox's Monkey Island (BCCB 10/91) too subtle or
too scary will appreciate Grifalconi's story of his and Dicky's survival under diffi-
cult circumstances. DS
HAAS, JESSIE 
A Bluefor Beware; illus. byJos. A. Smith. 
Greenwillow, 1995 
64p
ISBN 0-688-13678-8 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-5
Okay, so the title gives the ending away: Lily and Beware (from Beware the Mare,
BCCB 7/93) do win a blue ribbon at the horse show, but that's not entirely the
point. Lily, accompanied by her mother and her grandfather, attends the annual
Junior Horse Show, where last year Lily took turns with her friend Mandy riding
an old pony. This year Mandy has a glossy new horse and Lily has Beware, and
friendship may fall victim to rivalry as the two girls compete in a variety of classes,
each hoping to prove herself and her horse the best. This is a more attainable
MARCH 1995 
* 237
dream for horsey readers than many fictional accounts of Derby wins and Grand
Prix triumphs: Lily is flustered by other riders, has some bad riding and some
good, and eventually has a realistic day of one blue ribbon, one third-place finish,
one fourth, and several also-rans, while enjoying herself and being very proud of
her horse. Haas is a knowledgeable equestrienne and keeps the present-tense nar-
ration authentic and redolent of the stable and show-ring; Lily's family occasion-
ally seems too good to be true, but they're warm and cheerful literary company.
There isn't much out there for early readers with the pony passion; Beware's ad-
ventures will be greeted with unbridled enthusiasm. Reviewed from an unillustrated
galley. DS
HENKES, KEVIN 
Protecting Marie. Greenwillow, 1995 
[208p]
ISBN 0-688-13958-2 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Fanny feels that the one thing that she's been destined for in her twelve years is to
own a dog. She hada puppy, Nellie, but her artist father found it a distraction so
Nellie was given away, and her father has gotten tenser and tenser lately as his
painting has gone less well. After a brief pre-Christmas defection her father re-
turns with a full-grown dog named Dinner. Dinner is all Fanny has ever dreamed,
and she revels in her newfound playmate; she also makes Dinner her confidante
for her fears about her father, who seems unable to give something to Fanny with-
out later taking it away (the Marie of the title is Fanny's homemade paper doll,
which Fanny's father spent years trying to throw out). Fanny's greatest fear is that
Dinner's presence will eventually disturb her father's painting and that this dog,
too, will be sent from Fanny's life. While Henkes has a lyrical style, his viewpoint
is adult and his stately paced narration is overcontemplative ("It occurred to Fanny
that children, as they grow older, probably forget how awful it is to experience that
powerlessness; if they didn't, they would never have children of their own"). The
dogginess of Dinner is well-evoked, but her linkage with Fanny's uncertainty about
her father is less successful. The most enduring aspects of the book are the subtle
portraits of the complex and likeable characters, especially Fanny's intense but
loving father and Fanny herself; the hook's greatest charm lies in the unfortunately
undeveloped subplot of Fanny's incipient romance with a neighbor boy who hap-
pens to be an expert knitter. DS
HILL, ELIZABETH STARR 
Curtain Going Up. 
Viking, 1995 
[160p]
ISBN 0-670-85919-2 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Fitzi, heroine of Broadway Chances (BCCB 6/92), etc., is back, and she's got a solo
dance in the Broadway musical Crowd Scene, in which her parents and grandfather
also appear. She's also got a crush on the young lead, Mark Hiller, and the book's
story blends Fitzi's sort-of-romance with Mark together with a familiar backstage
story of show-biz life. The theater story is well-trodden but readable territory,
with a few unlikely touches (such as the whole family appearing in the same musi-
cal) but a nicely soapy atmosphere (Fitzi's aging and sometimes unwell grandfa-
ther has his heart set on receiving a Tony award). Fitzi's veering between young
stage professional and lovesick teen, however, is more interestingly depicted (Fitzi's
strained conversations with her love interest are particularly authentic), and Mark's
ambiguity about his social life--does he go out with Fitzi for publicity purposes?
238 
* THE BULLETIN
Does he really like her? Can he tell the difference?-is a creative and credible
touch. Series fans will eat this up, other youngsters can pick up Fitzi's saga here
without feeling left out, and all readers will be pleased that our Broadway baby is
clearly destined for more footlights and more sequels. DS
HINOJOSA, MARIA 
Crews: GangMembers Talk to Maria Hinojosa; illus. with pho-
tographs by German Perez. 
Harcourt, 1995 
168p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-15-292873-1 
$17.00
Paper ed. ISBN 0-15-200283-9 
$9.00 
R 
Gr. 5-12
Maria Hinojosa's interest in gangs (or "crews," as they call themselves) was sparked
by her reporting on National Public Radio about the young tourist from Utah
who in 1990 was stabbed to death on a subway platform in New York City.
Hinojosa went to Queens to talk about the incident with some of the killer's ac-
quaintances and came back with the voices compiled here, the stories of crew mem-
bers who deal drugs, "tag" walls with graffiti signatures, and help and betray each
other in a society that seems to offer them little hope. "So why should I feel safe
around you guys?" asks Hinojosa of Shank, who has just been telling her about the
"release" he gets from beating up a "vic," or victim. It's a fair question, and while
the reporter seems to come away from her story unscathed, the anecdotes about
casual muggings are hair-raising in their blunt honesty: "You need the money for
the weekend, that's all." There's a lack of affect in these young voices that's fright-
ening and, heard cumulatively, a little boring; whether Shank or Coki or Tre or
Cindy is speaking, it all begins to run together, a numbing litany of neglect, pov-
erty and violence. While the book, trendily designed with anonymizing portraits
of the subjects, doesn't offer any answers, it does ask many good questions. RS
HOBAN, TANA 
Colors Everywhere; illus. with photographs by Tana
Hoban. 
Greenwillow, 1995 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-12763-0 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-12762-2 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
2-6 yrs
Bold black borders set off Hoban's wordless extravaganza of color photos which
range from a picture of bright yellow baby ducks to a rainbow-hued umbrella,
with a variety of child-pleasing photos (finger puppets, a dog, candy) coming in
between. Each picture, one to a page, is accompanied by a graph that reproduces
the colors to be found in the photo, representing their proportions with bands of
varying width, so that a photo of a car is partnered with a large oblong of red for
the body and a smaller one of yellow-orange for the parking lights and license
plate. While Hoban sometimes omits in the graph some of the colors that can be
found in the picture (for example, the car photo shows a white car behind the red
one), and occasionally the shades or proportions seem off, the graphs are an engag-
ing extension of the book's basic concept that will hold the attention of older
children as well as those still at the point-and-name stage. RS
HORT, LENNY, ad. 
The Goatherd and the Shepherdess: A Talefrom Ancient Greece;
illus. by Lloyd Bloom. 
Dial, 1995 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1353-3 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1352-5 
$15.99 
Ad Gr. 3-5
Chloe, a young shepherdess found as a baby suckling from a ewe, and Daphnis, a
MARCH 1995 
* 239
goatherd fed as a baby by a goat, live on a pastoral island. Their friend Dorcon,
who tends cows, also vies with Daphnis for Chloe's love. Dorcon finds he can't
win Chloe from Daphnis by playing his pipes, and dressing as a wolf and trying to
carry her off backfires when her sheepdogs attack the "wolf." Pirates come to the
island, kill Dorcon, take his cows, and carry off Daphnis to be a slave, but Chloe
manages to rescue him by taking Dorcon's dying suggestion of blowing the cattle
call on his pipes. In keeping with its pastoral roots, the story takes place com-
pletely outdoors and concludes that Daphnis and Chloe "could have had no hap-
pier fate than that which had brought them together as children of the pasture."
Hort retells the story (though from where he got it there is no clue) with a nice
light touch, but Bloom's acrylic pictures feel very heavy in comparison. People
(awkwardly posed), animals, and landscape alike have great solidity, and there is a
flat whitish cast on everything, which is presumably intended to be blazing sun-
shine. With so few picture book versions of Greek tales, this may be a worthwhile
purchase for libraries. SDL
HURWITZ, JOHANNA 
Ozzie on His Own. 
Morrow, 1995 
[128p]
ISBN 0-688-13742-3 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-4
Ozzie (of Roz and Ozzie, BCCB 5/92) is on his own since his friend and niece,
Roz, and her parents have gone to London, leaving his summer looking bleak and
empty. Things perk up when he begins converting a neighbor's unused chicken
coop into a clubhouse and then finds some new neighborhood kids, with whom
he forms The Chicken Coop Club. Summer turns dark again, however, when
Ozzie's father suffers a heart attack and is admitted to the hospital, and Ozzie fears
that his father will die. Hurwitz is one of our most reliable writers about daily kid-
life: Ozzie is credible and appealing whether his pants are publicly falling down (a
numismatist, he overloaded his pockets with pennies) or he's contemplating the
injustice of the hospital's attitude towards his pet mouse ("How could the nurse
scold him and say that his mouse was going to bring germs into the hospital and at
the same time the hospital was giving out medicines that made people sick instead
of better?"), and the book handles the serious issues and the funny moments with
the same calm tenderness. DS
INTRATER, ROBERTA GROBEL 
Two Eyes, a Nose, anda Mouth; written and illus. by
Roberta Grobel Intrater. 
Scholastic, 1995 
[32p] 
(Cartwheel Books)
ISBN 0-590-48247-5 
$12.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 2-6 yrs
For once children will not be reprimanded for staring at someone, as Intrater has
given them an entire picture book full of fascinating faces to study. The simple
text is paired with large, tightly framed close-up photographs of a multicultural
gallery of faces: "Two eyes, a nose, and a mouth,/ they're the first things that we
see/ on millions and millions of faces,/ from Tibet to Tennessee." Highlighting
four very different faces, for example, she shows a variety of noses, saying "Noses
can be short and wide,/ or turn out long and bumpy,/ Some are small and curve
up ... / and some are kind of lumpy." She compares eyes, eyebrows (with some
particularly extravagant examples), and lips, too. A double-page spread with 128
one-inch portraits follows to illustrate the point that changing these features makes
it so "no one looks just like you," and another spread with 128 pictures of the same
240 
* THE BULLETIN
person shows "how dull the world would be" if we all looked alike. She concludes
with a spread of thirty-two portraits of people of varying ethnicities and ages and
on the last page invites children to paste their own picture in a space surrounded
by other pictures, though libraries might have preferred a less permanent sugges-
tion. A true celebration of humanity, this will be a certain purchase for many
libraries, families, and schools. SDL
JANECZKO, PAUL B. 
Poetry from A toZ: A Guidefor Young Writers; illus. by Cathy
Bobak. 
Bradbury, 1994 
132p
ISBN 0-02-747672-3 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
A more likely subtitle might be "Fun for Young Writers," because there's a jigsaw
puzzle aspect to this book despite its organizational scheme. The alphabetical
arrangement makes for pretty haphazard thematic juxtapositions, which is evi-
dently the author's intent, "to help you see that you can write poems about nearly
any subject." Thus A is introduced by a poem called "Autumn Beat," followed by
instructions for writing an acrostic poem, along with two examples of acrostic
poems ("Autumn Beat" is not one). Some of the themes are explicit, others less
obvious: D for dreams in "I Picked a Dream Out of My Head," for instance, as
opposed to "The Animals Are Leaving" for E (extinction) and "Harvey" for F
(friendship). Janeczko's sixty-one examples are accessible (from Gwendolyn Brooks
to John Ciardi and William Jay Smith), his direct address to the reader is easy and
informal (even sometimes glib), and his enthusiasm is catching; modest but lively
line drawings dot the text. If the format's a little jumpy, juvenile TV addicts will
probably get all the more out of it. BH
KRASKE, ROBERT 
The Voyager's Stone: The Adventures ofa Message-Carrying Bottle
Adrift on the Ocean Sea; illus. by Brian Floca. 
Jackson/Orchard, 1995 
[96p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08740-9 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-06890-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
In a Paddle-to-the-Sea kind of natural-history narrative, a message in a bottle trav-
els around the world on the ocean currents, beginning in the Caribbean and very
eventually finding a recipient, an Aborigine girl living on Australia's north coast.
While never personified, the bottle encounters much on its journey: tremendous
storms, the icebergs of both the Arctic and Antarctic, furious battles between sea
predators and prey. There's plenty of information about the ocean world here,
and readers for whom such facts are the adventure probably won't mind the fic-
tional trappings. Others may become impatient, because despite some vivid writ-
ing about killer sharks and waves, the pedagogical intent bogs down the story,
which, like its hero, isn't going anywhere in particular. Nevertheless, excerpts read
aloud will provide an unusual complement to various science units; illustrator Floca's
plentiful maps will keep readers firmly afloat and his cross-hatched pen illustra-
tions add drama. RS
LEEDY, LOREEN 
Who's Who in My Family?; written and illus. by Loreen
Leedy. 
Holiday House, 1995 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1151-6 
$15.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
As in The Edible Pyramid(BCCB 2/95), Leedy sets out to fill a niche and clarify a
subject rarely covered in children's picture books. This time she focuses on the
MARCH 1995 
* 
241
family tree, showing an assorted group of animal schoolchildren making their own
family trees. The first child, a cat wearing a jumper and her hair in a ponytail,
takes over half of the book with her description of the members of her completely
conventional family, which goes back to her "mother's mother's mother!" She
mentions the members by name, telling something about them to personalize the
tree ("Nanna and Pop-pop took me to the fair") and pad the text. One page is
spent on adoption, with no family tree in sight, and the subjects of stepparents and
stepsiblings and half-siblings each get a few pages. Leedy finishes with a partial
explanation of the difference between first cousins, second cousins, and first cous-
ins once removed, and gives a final page of definitions. Her approach, while clear
and streamlined, might have been improved by discussing generations and by giv-
ing directions for making family trees. Muddy colors and a peculiar mish-mash of
woodland motifs detract from the presentation, but this could still be useful in
many collections. SDL
LEGGE, DAVID 
Bamboozled; written and illus. by David Legge. 
Scholastic,
1995 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-590-47989-X 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
6-9 yrs
A young girl narrates, in a simple and ironically naive text, her visit to her grandpa's
house, where "something seemed odd." Actually, lots of things are odd: a giraffe
peers around the front door, a necktie hangs out of Grandpa's mailbox, a floor
lamp grows out of a plant pot... Granddaughter sits down to tea with Grandpa,
they play cards, and they potter about the house and yard as she tries to put her
finger on the peculiarity; meanwhile garden gnomes ride ducks across the hall,
evergreens are planted in real beds, the television is actually an aquarium, and a
jack-in-the-box leaps out of the washer. The shaggy-dog joke is that Grandpa has
on mismatched socks, making it seem like everything else is completely normal for
this happy pair. The illustrations, of course, are the crucial aspect of this book,
and Legge has achieved an interesting range of effect. Stylistically the pictures are
cheerful and realistic watercolors, tastefully bland until the viewer starts unpacking
the visual jokes; the art is sunnier than that of Van Allsburg, Browne, or Wiesner,
but those who enjoy those artists will find range enough in the ideas here to appre-
ciate this book too. Legge's jokes range from the obvious (Grandpa feeding the cat
turns out to be Grandpa feeding spaghetti and meatballs to a tiger named Fluffy)
to the wryly referential (Rodin's Thinker ponders over "2+2=4") to the subtle (the
deadbolt on the front door is on the same side as the hinges), so kids-and adults-
can look at this book several times without exhausting the game within. The
mysterious British aspects (such as the prevalence of garden gnomes) will merely
add to the intrigue for American readers, and the final joke, though slight, will
likely be a hit with younger members of the audience. Pair this with Banyai's
Zoom, reviewed last month, to get kids really looking at pictures. DS
LESTER, JULIUS 
Othello: A Novel. 
Scholastic, 1995 
[160p]
ISBN 0-590-41967-6 
$12.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 9-12
The story of Othello, with its themes of love transcending barriers, evil preying on
the weaknesses of good, and bitter jealousy resulting in the destruction of love, is
an emotionally charged theatrical experience; here Julius Lester has turned it into
242 
* THE BULLETIN
a novel, exercising a director's prerogative in making changes and emphasizing
particular interpretations in his production. Not only Othello but also lago and
Emilia (here Emily) are black, having been seized from Africa together, and the
story is now set in sixteenth-century England, with Othello's patron, the Venetian
duke, become the English king. The pacing here is slow, and some innovations of
the book-such as the remembered love affair between the king and Desdemona's
late mother and the use of a different typeface to indicate paraphrase of Shakespeare's
original lines-are distracting rather than enriching. Lester's language, however,
is often effectively reminiscent of Shakespeare in its stateliness and extended meta-
phors. His investigation of Othello's race-based outsider status is the most suc-
cessful part of the book; Othello here is in some ways reminiscent of Shylock,
whose societal usefulness cruelly fails to translate into social acceptability. The
love story between Othello and Desdemona is also more fully and sensuously ex-
plored than it is in the play, which will increase the book's appeal. Kids may not
appreciate Lester's rendition on their own, but the book is an enlightening read
which would make for provocative discussion material, particularly in conjunction
with a viewing of the play (or, for more intrepid readers, a comparison with Farrukh
Dhondy's Black Swan, BCCB 9/93); make sure teens read Lester's clear-eyed and
intelligent introduction explaining his "reconceptualization" of the play. DS
LLLLIE, PATRICIA 
Floppy Teddy Bear; illus. by Karen Lee Baker. 
Greenwillow,
1995 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-688-12570-0 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 3-6 yrs
Families know how tough it can be when one child gets a gift that the other chil-
dren would dearly love, but though that's the set-up in this picture book, patience
and understanding help two sisters through the crisis. In a playfully rhythmic text,
big sister raves about her new toy: "Me, I love my floppy teddy bear,/ Me, I love
my floppy teddy bear,/ Curly brown fur and two black eyes,/ A squishy-squashy
belly and a red bow tie,/ Me, I love my floppy teddy bear." Her little sister, who
looks about two, also falls for the bear and runs gleefully off with it, subjecting it to
lunch, playtime with the dog, and a drenching in the sink, but each time her big
sister takes the opportunity to practice her mothering skills, cleaning up her bear
and loving it some more. Her tolerance has its limits, though: "She may be my
sister, but I don't care,/ She cannot, cannot, cannot, cannot have my floppy teddy
bear!" The next day, Mama and big sister go shopping, and by story's end the
sisters both have teddy bears. The kind-heartedness suffusing the story makes it a
cozy one with a satisfying close; the text, however, is sometimes difficult to read
aloud successfully, as its rhythm stumbles occasionally, as in the string of "cannot(s)"
above. Baker's watercolors match the mood, with expressive faces and body lan-
guage for the girls. With their perpetually wide eyes and red noses, they look a
little odd, but loving and lovable. SDL
MACGILL-CALLAHAN, SHEILA 
When Solomon Was King; illus. by Stephen T.
Johnson. 
Dial, 1995 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1590-0 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1589-7 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
In this original tale from Biblical sources, young Solomon is sent to hunt for food
by his father King David. While on the hunt, Solomon prevents one of the hunt-
MARCH 1995 
* 
243
ers from killing a wounded lioness ("It offends the king's honor to slay a helpless
beast"), and he stays with her over the Sabbath, cleaning her wound and helping
lower her fever so that she is able to feed her two cubs. After many years, Solomon
becomes king and receives the gift of talking with animals, but gradually becomes
arrogant about his gift. A meeting with an eagle, the lioness, and her angry now-
grown cubs helps restore his perspective. MacGill-Callahan tells the story compe-
tently but without excitement; her tone is dignified, but a bit flat. Johnson's
paintings are more successful: his lion cubs are touchingly babyish, and his adult
lions splendidly powerful (as is the adult Solomon, although his younger self looks
too mature). Johnson achieves a wide variety of textures in his watercolor and
pastel paintings, and the contrast between the richly furnished palace and the wide
spaces outdoors are particularly striking. SDL
McMILLAN, BRUCE 
Nights of the Pufflings; written and illus. with photographs
by Bruce McMillan. 
Houghton, 1995 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-70810-9 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
4-10yrs
See this month's Big Picture, p. 225.
MANLEY, JOAN B. 
She Flew No Flags. Houghton, 1995 
[272p]
ISBN 0-395-71130-4 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-8
Janet and her family, medical missionaries, are leaving India in 1944 via an un-
named, unmarked troopship that they hope will bring them to safe harbor in Los
Angeles. Rules, warnings, and alarm bells are constant, and while the ship evades
Japanese attack, it still must weather the fierce ocean storms-as well as equally
turbulent human emotions. There are plenty of secrets aboard, particularly per-
sonified in a young Eurasian boy, Lee, and in the mysterious, beautiful Mrs. Dob-
son, who, were this an old Bette Davis movie, would most certainly be rumored to
be an "adventuress." Based upon the author's somewhat more prosaic history (she
voyaged under similar circumstances, but rather uneventfully) this is an involving
tale of escape and shipboard intrigue, more glamorous than most World War II
historical fiction, with the kind of false-identity melodrama we associate with Philip
Pullman's Victorian tales such as The Ruby in the Smoke (BCCB 5/87). We won't
give anything away-you will enjoy this as much as will the kids-and while the
book doesn't have the psychological levels of Porter's Ship of Fools, it does have
narrative pull and, in ten-year-old Janet, an authentic witness to wartime adven-
ture. RS
MILLER, CAMERON 
Woodlore; written and illus. by Cameron Miller and Domin-
ique Falla. 
Ticknor, 1995 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-72034-6 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-5
Plain and honest verses describe the craft of woodworking and each wood for each
use: "Blackwood and box are/ hard and dense/ To make sweet woodwind/ instru-
ments." This will be news to kids who think wood is, well, wood, and appended
notes further elucidate why particu;ar woods are best for particular purposes. Al-
though this may seem a somewhat specialized topic for a picture book, it's in fact
the pictures that will provoke interest. Each homely scene, most set in the eigh-
244 
* THE BULLETIN
teenth and nineteenth centuries, shows woodworkers at their painstaking tasks,
enclosed by inventive wood frames that use the wood described on that page. In
some cases, picture and frame merge, so that a bas-relief yellow pine rocking horse
is both part of the picture and framing the picture. Similarly, a Shaker chair neatly
perches on its wall pegs next to a view into a Shaker workshop. The variety of
grains and shades relieves the basic brown, and the trompe l'oeil effects will keep
kids looking. RS
MILLER, SARA SWAN 
Three Stories You Can Read to Your Dog; illus. by True
Kelley. 
Houghton, 1995 
[48p]
ISBN 0-395-69938-X 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 1-3
Beginning readers need to read aloud to somebody, and there's no reason why the
family Fido can't be up to the task, but best, as this book suggests, to "pet your dog
while you read." Illustrated with goofy, undeniably doggy line-and-watercolor
pictures, the three stories here involve bones both real and imagined, burglars (also
imagined), a break through the door to freedom, cars, recalcitrant squirrels, and
sleep, lots of sleep. In fact, each of the stories ends with a nap, which is certainly
true to dogdom but tends to give the tales somewhat soporific conclusions. The
text has an direct address from child to dog ("One day you were taking a nap.
There was nothing else to do") that is intimate and slyly observant of dog mores,
but the reading-aloud is a little choppy ("You dug a hole. You put the bone in it.
Then you covered it up.") This reviewer's canine audience couldn't sit still for it,
but out there are surely dogs-and, more to the point, kids-who will. RS
MIYAMOTO, TADAO 
Papa and Me; written and illus. by Tadao Miyamoto; tr.
from the Japanese by Kathy Raskob. 
Carolrhoda, 1994 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-87614-843-7 
$14.21 
R 4-7 yrs
A small bear and his father spend the afternoon fishing and talking. When the
little bear poses the question, "Papa, how do you know you're my father?" the
father recalls their shared experiences. He remembers washing his new cub, run-
ning away from some angry bees, and looking up at the stars when the roof of their
house blew off. Finally conceding that "maybe you were too little to remember,"
the father suggests that his son work on storing up special memories "of times we
share that you can keep forever." The son immediately decides to store up the
story of this fishing afternoon, when he catches a huge fish and his father catches a
tiny one. The tender story is nicely balanced by the scratchy, unsentimental pic-
tures done in green, gray, black and brown. Endearing, expressive faces, huge
paws and claws, and plain gray clothes give the bears an everyday quality that will
help children relate to the story more than fancier fellows might, and the book
may encourage them to actively collect memories of their own. SDL
MOLLEL, TOLOWA M. 
Big Boy; illus. by E. B. Lewis. 
Clarion, 1995 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-67403-4 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
The setting may be contemporary Tanzania, but the problem is universal-Oli
aches to do everything his older brother Mbuchu does. When a magical bird,
Tunukia-zawadi, grants his dearest wish, Oli finds that being a big-big-boy
MARCH 1995 
* 
245
who towers over his neighbors has as many drawbacks as joys. Although he tromps
around the countryside boasting of his exploits in a lively, cumulative chant (ap-
pealingly punctuated for the read-along crowd by tuntun drumbeats), Oli realizes
that stubbing his toe on a boulder and setting off a tidal wave isn't what he bar-
gained for, and he happily awakens to find it was all a dream. Or was it? An eerily
ordinary and realistic Oli hulks through Lewis's watercolor landscape-at first
proudly dominating his surroundings, later crammed uncomfortably within the
edges of the double-page spread-a powerful yet awkward image that reinforces
the tale's rich combination of humor and tension. An author's note on the "pro-
digious child" motif in African folklore and a glossary of Kiswahili terms and pro-
nunciations are included. EB
PARISH, HERMAN 
Good Driving, Amelia Bedelia; illus. by Lynn Sweat.
Greenwillow, 1995 
[40p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-13359-2 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-13358-4 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 5-8 yrs
Herman Parish has revived his late aunt's endearing heroine, Amelia Bedelia, al-
though her format has now changed from chapter book to long picture book.
Here Amelia receives a refresher course in driving from her employer, Mr. Rogers,
who in turn receives a refresher course in Amelia's infuriating literal-mindedness
("'Steer straight ahead,' said Mr. Rogers. 'No,' said Amelia Bedelia. 'The steer is
behind us'"). Herman Parish is a worthy successor to Peggy Parish: his Amelia
Bedelia possesses the unflappable cheer, helpful spirit, and child-endearing trouble
with homophones of the original, while Mr. Rogers is a thoroughly satisfying butt
of Amelia's unintentional humor. Lynn Sweat's pen-and-watercolor art offers its
usual poker-faced simplicity; the pared-down lines of Amelia, looking like a Pil-
grim gone amok in her dippy flowered bonnet and sober uniform, are the funnier
for their polite restraint. While it's a relief to hear, at the end of the book, that Ms.
Bedelia's automotive ventures are at an end, it's a pleasure to welcome her back
into circulation. DS
PILKEY, DAV 
The Moonglow Roll-O-Rama; written and illus. by Dav
Pilkey. Jackson/Orchard, 1995 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08726-3 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-06876-5 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 4-6 yrs
There's some sumptuously expansive painting for this story-in-verse about where
the animals go at night. Furred and feathered alike leave their houses and zoos to
rollerskate in the moonlight until "the magic sweeps all of them/ Over the sky,/ To
moonglow enchanted/ Where animals fly." It's a pretty fancy, and an even prettier
moon, shifting from blue to ivory to yellow to a mysterious pink as it lights the
festivities and dances the animals into the sky. The versifying, however, has little
such beguiling mystery, with verses that sound more than they mean ("There's
magic in moonlight-/ The creatures detect it./ It finds them each night/ For they
merely expect it") and sacrifice grammar for scansion ("They say it gets darkest/
Just before dawn,/ The clouds rolling in/ And the moonlight is gone"). The paint-
ing demonstrates a fetching talent; the words need work. RS
246 
* THE BULLETIN
QUINLAN, SUSAN E. 
The Case of the Mummified Pigs and Other Mysteries in Na-
ture; illus. by Jennifer Owings Dewey. 
Boyds Mills, 1995 
128p
ISBN 1-878093-82-7 
$15.95 
R Gr. 3-7
When yellow-tailed cedar waxwings suddenly appear with orange tail feathers, or
when pine trees growing under optimum conditions refuse to thrive, scientists
begin trying to solve real-life nature mysteries. Quinlan outlines fourteen of these
puzzlers, giving them snappy names such as "The Riddle of the Green Tree Is-
lands," and clearly explains the steps scientists take to rule out the different possi-
bilities until they find the right one. In many cases, the solutions involve tiny
changes, such as when blue butterflies began disappearing in England because the
grass in the meadows grew higher when the rabbit population died, thereby at-
tracting a different kind of ant than the ones which previously had nurtured but-
terfly eggs. In each situation, Quinlan points out the interconnections in nature
which can set off these chain reactions when one link is altered, and she uses sev-
eral examples where the unexpected is true, such as when a predator is actually
responsible for the survival of its prey as a species. She introduces the book by
talking about the "land organism," but the definition is completely unclear, and
she causes further confusion when she defines "ecology" as the "study of the land
organism." Dewey's pencil drawings add charm and information, but reproduc-
tion quality varies, as some pictures are blurry. The sometimes dry subject of
ecology is never dull here, and the short chapter format makes it a good choice for
readers who like books in smaller bites. SDL
RANDLE, KRISTEN D. 
The Only Alien on the Planet. Scholastic, 1995 
[272p]
ISBN 0-590-46309-8 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-10
Ginny is fascinated by Smitty Tibbs, a bright senior classmate who lives in a state
of profound self-imposed silence and withdrawal. Caulder, Ginny's outgoing neigh-
bor, easily enlists her help in his bumbling but well-intentioned efforts to reach
"the Alien," whom he has long considered his friend; together they make some
progress in guiding Smitty's first tentative steps into a wider social circle. But
when Ginny makes an impetuous move on Smitty, he is so deeply shaken that he
finally acknowledges his need for professional help to face his demons-the result
of physical and psychological abuse by his older brother. In the hands of a less
capable storyteller, Smitty may have miraculously emerged from his reclusive state;
instead he recovers by fits and starts, aided by his psychiatrist, his awkward and
impatient friends, and his parents, who must overcome their own delusions con-
cerning the older son to save the younger. The credibility of the account goes far
toward anchoring the breathless tone of the novel and the heroine's tendency to
over-analyze. This intelligently, if sentimentally, handled tale should appeal to
readers who bask in the heat of a good emotional crisis. EB
RAY, KAREN 
Sleep Song; illus. by Rhonda Mitchell. Jackson/Orchard,
1995 [32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08728-X 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-06878-1 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
1-3 yrs
Gentle rhymes and luminous watercolors show a toddler's playful nighttime ritual,
beginning with "Sing song sing song/ listen to the sun yawn." Playtime comes
MARCH 1995 
* 
247
first, with the baby bouncing a ball, then running and jumping, before being
swooped up for a bath. The gleeful baby takes off and hides under a table ("Scrunch
low scrunch low/ listen to the search grow") but the truant doesn't stop beaming
even when captured, washed, rocked, and put in bed. Many of the couplets seem
conceptually forced, as in "Toothbrush toothbrush/ listen to the spout gush" (isn't
it the water that gushes?), the previous "search" that "grow(s)," or "listen to the
clothes fly," since flying doesn't make noise, though flapping would. Mitchell's
paintings exude the sense of love which the parents feel for their baby, and she
catches the mischievous spirit of a toddler very well. Most of the pictures focus
tightly on the baby (who could be either a boy or girl) and the final picture of the
angelically sleeping child seems almost too calculated to draw "Awwws" from par-
ents. SDL
REED, DON C. 
The Kraken. 
Boyds Mills, 1995 
217p
ISBN 1-56397-216-6 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Twelve-year-old Tom Piccot belongs to a sturdy Newfoundland fishing family,
and when Tom's father is blinded and the only merchant who buys the area's
yearly catch starts cheating the fisherfolk, Tom must work hard to keep his family
from starvation. Reed is good at evoking the ways and atmosphere of an isolated
place in a distant time: the picture of fishing life in 1872 Newfoundland, with the
smallest and weakest often not making it through the winter and the distant mer-
chant controlling everyone's lives, is vivid (even the Newfoundland dialect, al-
though erratically employed, helps set the scene). The plot here, however, is
formulaic and the evil rich people caricatures; it's also disappointing that the kraken,
the giant squid featured so tantalizingly on the cover and in the title, makes only
two brief appearances in the book, neither of which offer the Melville-ish sea-
battle that one might expect. It's still pleasant to follow the adventures of Tom
and his trusty dog Murphy (a Newfoundland, of course) as they try to outwit the
bad guys, save their family, and win Tom his fair maiden. A note on the factual
basis of the book (which admits that many historical events were substantially
rearranged and which also leaves many questions unanswered) and a bibliography
are included. DS
RITTER, LAWRENCE S. 
Leagues Apart: The Men and Times of the Negro Baseball
Leagues; illus. by Richard Merkin. 
Morrow, 1995 
[40p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-13317-7 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-13316-9 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
6-9 yrs
It seems an unfortunate fact of primary grade life that the age at which kids de-
mand "real" baseball books is somewhat lower than the age level of most available
non-fiction material. Therefore these brief vignettes, which flip along with the
hype of baseball card copy, will be welcome in most collections. More noteworthy
for their flavor than their depth, the portraits feature both the greats who crossed
over to the major leagues after 1947 and others whose careers were spent primarily
in the Negro Leagues ("[Outfielder Oscar Charleston] was often called the black
Ty Cobb, but many thought Ty Cobb should really be called the white Oscar
Charleston.") Ritter carefully tempers tales of feats on the field with the harsher
realities of segregation: "It is tempting to ... glamorize the Negro League experi-
ence. . . .
But these talented men were not in the Negro Leagues by choice."
248 
* THE BULLETIN
Bright, grainy oil-pastel caricatures depict the players in an appealing variety of
formal poses and "action shots," again reminiscent of collectors' cards. Team this
with Golenbock's Teammates (BCCB 4/90) for a challenging double-header. EB
ROUNDS, GLEN 
Sod Houses on the Great Plains; written and illus. by Glen
Rounds. 
Holiday House, 1995 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1162-1 
$15.95 
Ad 4-7 yrs
In a workmanlike exposition geared to the picture-book set, Rounds describes the
construction, advantages, and disadvantages of prairie "soddies." While he does
not offer any information or angle that couldn't be found in an encyclopedia ar-
ticle, the plainspoken text works well with the droll, earthy chalk-and-ink pictures
("Uninvited wildlife was another housekeeping problem"-a snake crashes through
the roof onto the table), and illustrations capture the vast prairie baked by the sun
or scoured by rain and fire. Listeners may ponder where the wood for ridgepoles
came from on Rounds' barren plains, and question how these settlers made a liv-
ing, since no crops appear in the landscape. This work will nonetheless make a
useful storytime supplement to other tales of the West. EB
SACHAR, Louis 
Wayside School Gets a Little Stranger; illus. by Joel
Schick. 
Morrow, 1995 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-688-13694-X 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-6
Wayside School is back in session, and Mrs. Jewls' class is happy to be in their old
school again, where everything is logically illogical. After some highly educational
adventures with poetry, pet day, and hypnosis, the students are chagrined to dis-
cover that Mrs. Jewls is going on maternity leave. Their substitutes include Mr.
Gorf, who steals all their voices (Miss Mush, the cafeteria cook, detects him and
fells him with a strategically placed pepper pie); sweet Mrs. Drazil, who secretly
harbors a dark need to punish unruly students; and finally Miss Nogard, whose
gentle demeanor hides a wounded and bitter heart-until Wayside shows her a
better way. Each chapter makes for a neatly self-contained story suitable for book-
talking or reading aloud, and both discretely and cumulatively they display Sachar's
easygoing and unpatronizingly chummy charm. Where many such books (such as
Pinkwater's Mr. Fred, BCCB 1/95) seem to be improvised, the absurdities of
Wayside are crisp and funny, possessing a sense of unity: the staircases where those
going up must stay to the right and those going down to the left are replaced by
elevators, with the blue one for riding up and the red one down, the pet show is a
lyrical expansion of Abbott and Costello's "Who's on First?" routine, and Miss
Zarves, who teaches on the cow-infested nineteenth floor, finally gets the respect
she deserves. Smart, funny, and widely appealing, this will please old fans and
make new Wayside converts. Reviewed from an unillustrated galley. DS
SANDLER, MARTIN W. Immigrants. HarperCollins, 1995 
92p 
(Library of
Congress Books)
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024508-5 
$20.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024507-7 
$19.95 
Ad Gr. 4-7
The latest in a series drawn from material in the collections of the Library of Con-
gress (see also Cowboys, BCCB 3/94 and Pioneers, 2/94), Immigrants focuses upon
European immigrants who passed through Ellis Island in the late nineteenth and
MARCH 1995 
* 249
early twentieth centuries. This is a smaller scope than the title might suggest-can
you really discuss immigrant railroad workers, for instance, without mentioning
the Chinese?-but the book is nonetheless a competent survey of a particular
epoch and experience. 
The brief text, while mentioning hardships immigrants
faced, has an uplifting tone that becomes a bit relentless, and it's unfortunate that
the photos are unlabeled (and uncredited), flattening the individuals and situa-
tions portrayed; still, the variety of period photographs and brief quotes from im-
migrants make for an open and browsable design that gives faces to common-folk
history. There's no source list or suggested reading, but an index is included. RS
SCHERTLE, ALICE 
Maisie; illus. by Lydia Dabcovich. 
Lothrop, 1995 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-09311-6 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-09310-8 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Maisie's life, from her beginnings in a makeshift crib in a dresser drawer to her old
age surrounded by family, reveals certain values which remain consistent. Maisie
spends her childhood running after chickens, playing by the creek, and sharing
"her lunch with blue jays and ants, while bumblebees rumbled in the wildflowers
and the hot sun dried her clothes." Even after she marries and moves to a new
house, "she planted flowers in back to bring the bees. She planted a sycamore tree
in front to bring the birds," and she teaches her four children that letting the wild
creatures "fly away free" is "the best part." Maisie's children reward her by return-
ing home with tokens of the places they have been, and with their own children,
and then with Maisie's great-grandchildren. Dabcovich's paintings vibrate with
soft but intense color, and she does a particularly fine job in recreating period
detail from Maisie's ninety-plus years of life and in showing the aging faces and
bodies of Maisie and her husband. Though the book is rather quiet for some
tastes, lovers of Cooney's Miss Rumphius will find in Maisie, who is based on the
author's memories of her mother, another person they wish they knew themselves.
SDL
SEYMOUR, TRES 
The Smash-Up Crash-Up Derby; illus. by S. D. Schindler.
Jackson/Orchard, 1995 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08731-X 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-06881-1 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-8 yrs
A freckled blond boy rhapsodizes about the pleasures of the Demolition Derby at
the fair. Although his family goes on some rides and they toss a few darts, the real
reason they came is to see those old cars lining up: "The fun about the derby is the
WHACK and SCREECH and/ WHUMP and HISS and/ THUMP and POP
and BANG/ Until there's only one car left that runs." While the cars are smashing
and crashing, the boy imagines the cars as dinosaurs and also imagines himself at
the wheel of a "Mean Machine." The family roots for the yellow station wagon
and there's a very good reason they're overjoyed when its driver wins the derby-
it's Dad. Schindler's gouache paintings are so vivid they almost have sound effects
themselves, and the fair comes to life with its eccentric characters (such as the
glaring man in the dart booth with darts puncturing his hat and teddy bear) and
clouds of steam and smoke in the derby ring. Awkward phrasing occasionally
mars the writing, which sometimes rhymes but sometimes doesn't, but few picture
books match the excitement generated by this action-packed story. SDL
250 
* THE BULLETIN
SHEA, PEGI DEITZ 
The Whispering Cloth: A Refugee's Story; illus. by Anita Riggio
and You Yang. 
Boyds Mills, 1995 
32p
ISBN 1-56397-134-8 
$14.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Mai is just learning how to embroider the intricate storytellingpa 'ndau cloths that
Hmong women sell to visiting traders; Grandma hopes that Mai's blossoming skill
will earn them the money needed to leave their refugee camp in Thailand and join
cousins in America. Anxious to produce a pa 'ndau of her own design, Mai first
thinks she has no story to tell in her pictures until Grandma encourages her to
stitch her memories into the cloth-a masterpiece that recounts Mai's parents'
murder, her flight across the Mekong with Grandma, their life in the camp, and
her vision of a future in America. Watercolor and gouache paintings, many bor-
dered in pa 'ndau motifs, illustrate Mai's present life in camp, while three double-
page photos of her story cloth accompany italicized text relating her past and her
hopes. A glossary with pronunciations and background notes on the Hmong people
in the Ban Vinai camp introduce this sensitively crafted tale. Pair it with Eve
Bunting's How Many Days to America for a broader look at the plight of refugees.
EB
SIERRA, JUDY, comp. 
Quests & Spells: Fairy Tales from the European Oral
Tradition. Bob Kaminski Media Arts, 1994 
186p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-9636089-2-4 
$12.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Leaning toward the more complex and romantic examples of European lore, Si-
erra has adapted eighteen Slavic, Italian, Scandinavian, and Irish fairy tales in a
collection that could prove either a resource for storytellers or pleasure reading for
young fantasy buffs. With an emphasis on questing heroes and heroines (includ-
ing several variants of the Dragon-Slayer and Search for the Lost Husband tale
types) and on the magic that helps or hinders them, the stories range from the
familiar "Tatterhood" of Norway to Sierra's own translation of a French tale, "The
King of the Crows." Her retellings are polished and her notes both informative
and perceptive. Illustrated only with miniature reproductions of early woodcuts
that adorn each initial letter of a story, this spaciously formatted paperback is de-
signed to cross the same age barriers as the fairy tales themselves. BH
SMITH, MAGGIE 
Counting Our Way to Maine; written and illus. by Maggie
Smith. 
Kroupa/Orchard, 1995 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08734-4 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-06884-6 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-6 yrs
In this cheery counting exercise which forges all the way to twenty rather than
wimping out at the usual ten or twelve, Smith demonstrates that she knows a thing
or two about family vacations. Exactly what landmarks and activities are most
memorable? Well, from a kid's viewpoint, how about sighting five belching black
smokestacks, discovering ten fat slugs on the cottage steps, or counting eighteen
mosquito bites on an itchy round belly. Densely detailed line-and-watercolor scenes
are busy, but not fussy; items to be counted are cleverly hidden in plain sight,
challenging viewers to untangle the twelve piled lobster pots, or pick out the six-
teen blueberry pies in various states of preparation and consumption. And the
fun's not over until the audience retraces the journey on the endpaper motifs,
MARCH 1995 
* 251
testing their memories to recall what they counted at each stop along the way.
This one's sure to elicit a "Read it again." EB
STANEK, Lou WILLETT 
Thinking Like a Writer. Random House, 1994 
108p
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-96217-4 
$9.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-679-86217-X 
$5.99 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Speaking directly to potential young writers, Stanek offers advice on developing
characters and plots while avoiding some common pitfalls. She suggests that they
buy a pocket-sized notebook before reading further, then gives clues to the many
everyday observations and thoughts they could record: "What you see, taste, touch,
hear, smell and feel should go in the notebook. It's material." She demystifies
literary techniques such as similes, oxymorons, and irony (though some of her
examples are weak, as in calling "My dog is a dope" a metaphor), as well as explain-
ing some grammar rules. After each section, Stanek presents plenty of tempting
exercises for practice: "You open your closet door and find in there someone or
something that scares you to death. Describe it." The book's second half covers
writing fiction, spending the most time on character development, with some rep-
etition of material covered earlier; her plotting techniques all rely on first creating
characters, then coming up with conflicts for them. She devotes too little space to
fictional genres such as historical or science fiction. Though the author cites ex-
amples from modern children's literature, she does not include a suggested reading
list of either fiction or additional books on writing, which would have been very
useful. Still, by maintaining a chatty, respectful, encouraging tone, Stanek instills
confidence in her readers and gives them enough concrete ideas to work with that
they can start writing right away. SDL
STEVENS, DIANE 
Liza's Blue Moon. 
Greenwillow, 1995 
[1 92 p]
ISBN 0-688-13542-0 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 5-8
Twelve-year-old Liza struggles through a year fraught with event and difficult real-
izations: she catches her charming and unreliable father having sex with a neigh-
bor, she's wrongly accused of cheating by a beloved teacher, she's afraid her best
friend is drifting away from her, and she's increasingly jealous of her perfect younger
sister. Stevens weaves these diverse events into a poignant but plainspoken narra-
tive, with Liza's voice authentic as she tells of her discoveries ("I looked through
the skylight next door and saw Ms. Weller's breasts. Then I saw Dad, and I stopped
watching for meteors") and her ruminations ("I wanted to tell someone how I felt.
But no one had even read my paper. No one knew how important it was"). The
characters are flawed and convincing, especially Liza's tense, driven mother and
loving but dishonorable father. The book is particularly gifted in the way it de-
picts a significant event, such as the cheating episode, without making it the sole
point of the book (in fact, Liza tells only her sort-of-boyfriend about her teacher's
accusation, and she avoids involving her parents by writing a replacement sell-out
paper); this makes the tragic, subtly foreshadowed end of the book all the more
shocking, but keeps it from completely unbalancing a narrative that is shaped
more by the rhythms of Liza's life than by the drama of a particular problem.
There aren't many books that combine this kind of perspicacity with this level of
accessibility--kids ripe for a good story about the vagaries of friendship, families,
and school will find this a cut above the usual offerings. DS
252 
* 
THE BULLETIN
STEVENSON, JAMES 
Sweet Corn: Poems; written and illus. by James
Stevenson. 
Greenwillow, 1995 
[6 4 p]
ISBN 0-688-12647-2 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Twenty-eight poems, most only a handful of lines long, focus on the homey and
the ordinary-ice cream trucks and lemonade stands, ladders and bicycles. Although
quite different in tone from the deadpan humor of Stevenson's picture books these
brief, descriptive pieces are accessible to the author's usual clientele. Several poems
feature novelty type fonts: "Photo Album" uses gradually fading print to advantage,
while the hollow lettering of "Roadside Stand" and the painted stenciling of
"Recollection" seem unrelated to the subject matter. Some pleasing images
emerge-a ferryboat in the dark, "Showing the stars/ What light can be"; fishermen
leaning over the bridge rails, "Maybe they're flying their kites/ Upside down." But
the bulk of the collection is too gently prosaic to generate and sustain much interest,
and Stevenson's customary interplay of droll cartooning and text is much missed,
as his line-and-watercolor sketches function only as thematic markers. EB
STOEHR, SHELLEY 
Weird on the Outside. Delacorte, 1995 
[224 p]
ISBN 0-385-32090-6 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 9-12
When rebellious fifteen-year-old Tracey gets kicked out of school, her professor
father has had enough and is relieved to see his daughter head off to stay with her
mother for awhile. Tracey soon tires of her ditzy hairdresser mother, however, and
decides to take off for New York to make it on her own. She ends up staying in a
seedy hotel and working as a topless dancer, getting to know the stripper scene and
finding herself more and more a part of a hard and dangerous world. While this is
more focused than Stoehr's previous book, Crosses (BCCB 11/91), and the world
she evokes here has a certain power, this book has some of the same problems: the
writing lacks the depth that would make Tracey's situation believable, and the
characters are stock and flat. Tracey herself is more interesting for where she is
than who she is; while she grows more accustomed to the manipulation, the men,
and the drugs, she seems hard and superficial from the very beginning, so that
there's litde pathos in her descent (and there's little suggestion that there is a more
complex Tracey underneath the carapace). On the other hand, it's quite readable,
and kids will relish the danger of Tracey's razor's-edge existence and thrill to the
earthy dialogue ("Stupid prick of a jealous boyfriend. He's happy to stick his puny
dick in her and buy drugs with her money, but then he fucks her up so she can't
earn it"). But in contrast to a book such as Lynch's Gypsy Davey (BCCB 11/94),
where squalor and hopelessness are depicted with multi-dimensional understand-
ing, Weird on the Outside makes a fringe existence seem simultaneously forbidden
and appealing, the ultimate made-for-cable rebellion fantasy. DS
TOMLINSON, THERESA 
The Forestwife. Orchard, 1995 
[17 6p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08750-6 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-09450-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
When Mary de Holt's uncle commands Mary to enter into an arranged marriage
with "an elderly widower, who had rotten black stumps of teeth and smelled of
sour ale and saddle grease," she rebels and runs away to live in the forest. Soon she
MARCH 1995 
* 253
is joined by her beloved old nurse, Agnes, and a few other strays-a pregnant local
girl, a bevy of nuns-who find that the cruel economy and class structure of twelfth-
century England have left them without any other place to go. Agnes becomes the
Forestwife, a position of healer and wise woman handed down over the genera-
tions, and she renames Mary "Marian"; Marian feels herself challenged by but
drawn to Agnes' son, Robert, who, with his fellow outcasts, fights against the op-
pressive landowners who crush the poor. Readers won't find the traditional Robin
Hood and Maid Marian romance here, as Tomlinson's story focuses on the com-
munity of women and their relationship with nature; Marian, in fact, acknowl-
edges that her destiny as Forestwife prevents her from marrying Robert. Tomlinson
has romanticized the story in a different way: the idealized portrait of the nature-
connected women, although attractive, is sentimental and more New Age than
Middle Ages, the characters are flat and uncomplicatedly good or evil (and there's
not a bad woman among them), and the plot owes much to melodrama (especially
the revelation of the identity of Marian's mother). This is slighter than Furlong's
Wise Child or Robin McKinley's female-centered heroics, but it's still an atmo-
spheric read about a durable heroine. DS
WAUGH, SYLVIA 
Mennyms in the Wilderness. 
Greenwillow, 1995 
[25 6p]
ISBN 0-688-13820-9 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
The magically alive family of rag dolls introduced in The Mennyms (BCCB 5/94)
have returned, and now they're faced with a new quandary: their house is sched-
uled for demolition in order to make way for a new highway. On the side of the
angels-er, rag dolls-here are the ghost of Kate Penshaw, the old lady who first
sewed the Mennyms, and her living great-great-nephew Albert Pond, whom Kate's
ghost charges with responsibility for the Mennyms, since the family can't of course
perform the public duties necessary to stave off a town-planning disaster. The
wilderness of the title is actually the north of England, where the Mennyms hole
up in Albert's drafty ancestral home while the fight to save their street goes on in
town; the family is miserable out in the middle of nowhere and misses their old
home terribly, and each family member undergoes his or her own particular trials
until the battle is won and they finally return to their beloved Brocklehurst Grove
house. The plot is rather more scattered than in the original book, with threads
such as Soobie's kidnaping, Pilbeam's and Albert's incipient but doomed romance,
Kate's ghost, and even the intrusion of Albert himself all worthy of more time than
they get here. The family, however, remains as unsentimentally endearing as ever,
and Waugh retains her gift for engaging particularity and warm humor, allowing
the characters to grow credibly without stretching the fantasy beyond acceptable
bounds. The first book is definitely the place to start, but kids who enjoyed it will
want to follow the clan on this new adventure. DS
WHITE, ELLEN EMERSON 
The Road Home. Scholastic, 1995 
[4 6 4p]
ISBN 0-590-46737-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7 up
Rebecca Phillips (introduced in a paperback series by White writing as "Zack
Emerson") may have shaped up into a crack triage nurse, but she takes no satisfac-
tion in her hard-won expertise; the ceaseless stream of mangled soldiers into OR
and her own gnawing guilt over having killed an enemy boy have convinced her
254 
* THE BULLETIN
that enlistment for Vietnam duty was the most ill-considered act of her life. When
her tour ends she returns to acquaintances who deplore her involvement in the
war, parents who treat her like fragile glassware, and fellow veterans with no advice
to offer. She embarks on an odyssey to seek out her almost-lover Michael, who
lost a leg and was discharged months before, and who now feels emotionally un-
able to resume their relationship. Rebecca's joltingly abrupt transition from hos-
pital chaos to genteel stateside comfort is deftly captured, and the novel's bitter,
wisecracking tone provides the right accompaniment for Rebecca's disillusionment.
While the relative ease with which the lovers rekindle the spark of their in-country
fling ultimately betrays the believable portrait of two damaged vets which White
has so painstakingly painted, teen readers will forgive this tonal shift and applaud
the happy-if unearned-ending. EB
WILLIS, TERRI 
St. Lawrence River and Seaway. 
Raintree Steck-Vaughn,
1995 
6 4p 
(Wonders of the World)
ISBN 0-8114-6370-2 
$16.98 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
This is a competent and comprehensive history of the St. Lawrence Seaway, begin-
ning with the geological changes that created the St. Lawrence River, navigating
through early settlement and exploration to the great system of locks and canals
begun in the nineteenth century, and continuing through the present. Technical
explanations are thorough and clear, and while the text has that all-too-familiar
series-book drone and design, the information therein could lend itself to a
confluence of curricular settings, bringing science, history and geography together
for a focus upon a great North American achievement. Photos are plentiful; there
are a reading list and detailed index. RS
WOLF, BERNARD 
Homeless; written and illus. with photographs by Bernard
Wolf. Orchard, 1995 
4 8p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08736-0 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-06886-2 
$16.95 
R Gr. 3-5
Third-grader Mikey chronicles the experiences of his family in the "public shelter
system for the homeless"-particularly their current residence in New York's Henry
Street Settlement's rent-free, temporary apartments. Public assistance checks, food
stamps, subsidized lunches, and Medicaid are normal referents in Mikey's world,
and his anxiety over what will become of his family when their time at the settle-
ment is up (a question left unresolved at the conclusion of the text) is quietly
harrowing. Crisp color photos of the threadbare but "squeaky clean" apartment,
long lines at the check-cashing office, and expectant young faces at the charity
Christmas party will speak as eloquently as the narration does to an audience of
kids more fortunate than Mikey. Wolf's focus on a two-parent family of indeter-
minate racial background effectively defuses any tendency to stereotype welfare
recipients. EB
190
MARCH 1995 
* 
255
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
Colborn, Candy. What Do Children Read Next: A Reader's Guide to Fiction for
Children. Gale, 1994. 1135p. ISBN 0-8103-8886-3. $49.95.
Spencer, Pam. What Do YoungAdults Read Next: A Reader's Guide to Fiction for
YoungAdults. Gale, 1994. 816p. ISBN 0-8103-8887-1. $49.95.
These big guides to books for children and young adults are designed to be useful
to young readers themselves as well as to the librarians and teachers who serve
them. Children includes almost 2000 annotations, arranged alphabetically by
author, for fiction for children in grades one through eight; YoungAdults includes
almost 1500 annotations, with the additional limitation of only including books
published in 1988-1992. Each annotation includes basic bibliographic informa-
tion, suggested age range, subject(s) and genre, names and descriptions of major
characters, time period, locale(s), plot summary, citations of selected reviews, awards
received, "Other books by the author," and "Other books you might like." Phew-
that's a lot, and most of the information is also accessible from the ten indexes that
complete each guide. Although the information is copious, it is not complete. In
Children, especially, the citations of awards are scattershot and, in both guides,
references to other books by the same author are only partial bibliographies (while
the preface to Children suggests that the question "What has Maurice Sendak writ-
ten recently?" can be answered via the Author Index, the only Sendak book found
there is Higglety, Pigglety Pop.). The "other books you might like" suggestions can
be tenuous-would a fan of Paula Fox's One-Eyed Cat really pick Bill Wallace's
Snot Stew as further reading? The "other books" suggestions in Young Adults will
refer readers back to tides published in years other than 1988-1992; still, it seems
a little pointless to devote a full annotation to a paperback shocker such as Richie
Cusick's Vampire, and not give one to, say, Robert Cormier's The Chocolate War.
Although both guides feature lots of good books and will enable librarians and
others some unusual access points to many of those books (only main annotations
are fully indexed) their value as reference tools is less well-defined. RS
Khorana, Meena. Africa in Literature for Children and Young Adults: An Anno-
tated Bibliography of English-Language Books. Greenwood, 1994. (Bibliographies
and Indexes in World Literature) 313p. ISBN 0-313-25488-5. $59.95.
Khorana begins this bibliography with a substantial introduction, tracing the his-
tory of Africa in children's books and analyzing how stereotypes of the past have in
many cases given way to new cliches rather than new understanding. The annota-
tions are broken up into six geographic sections: General Books (covering the
continent as a whole), North Africa, West Africa, East Africa, Central Africa, and
Southern Africa; within each geographic section the entries are separated by genre
(Fiction, Poetry, Informational Books, etc.) and then listed alphabetically by au-
thor. Annotations offer summaries and occasional evaluations, generally positive,
of the books, listing author, title, series title, publisher, length, and grade level. A
list of distributors, author, title, illustrator, and subject indexes, and an extensive
bibliography for further research are included. DS
256 
* THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Adoption-fiction: Adler
African Americans: Bial; Coles;
Ritter
AIDS-fiction: Fox
Animals-poetry: Pilkey
Art and artists-fiction: Henkes
Art: Baker; Miller, C.
Asian Americans-fiction: Adler
Babies-stories: Ray
Baseball: Ritter
Bears-stories: Briggs
BEDTIME STORIES: Miyamoto;
Ray
Bible-stories: MacGill-Callahan
Birds: McMillan
Boarding schools-fiction: Bunting
Brothers-fiction: Grifalconi
Cars-stories: Seymour
Cities-poetry: Adoff
City life: Hinojosa
Civil Rights Movement: Coles
Clubs-fiction: Hurwitz
Colors: Hoban
CONCEPT BOOKS: Burns;
Hoban; Intrater; Leedy; Smith
COUNTING BOOKS: Smith
Creative writing: Janeczko; Stanek
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Banks; Hinojosa
Current events: Banks; Ganeri
Death-fiction: Fox; Stevens
Dogs-fiction: Henkes; Miller, S.
Dolls-fiction: Waugh
Ecology: Baker; McMillan
Emotional problems-fiction:
Franklin; Randle; Stoehr
Ethiopia-folklore: Day
EVERYDAY LIFE STORIES:
Hurwitz
Family life-fiction: Adler; Stevens
Family life-stories: Schertle
FANTASY: Waugh
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Franklin; Henkes; Stevens
Fathers and sons-fiction: Fox
Fathers and sons-stories:
Miyamoto; Seymour
FOLKTALES AND
FAIRYTALES: Day; Hort;
Sierra
Food and eating: Dahl
Foster care-fiction: Grifalconi
FUNNY STORIES: Sachar
Gangs: Hinojosa
Genealogy: Leedy
Geography: Kraske; Willis
Giants-stories: Mollel
Grandfathers-stories: Legge
Grandmothers-stories: Schertle;
Shea
Greece-folklore: Hort
Guidance: Hinojosa
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Bunting; Case; Lester; Manley;
Reed; Tomlinson; White
History, Canada: Willis
History, U.S.: Bial; Ritter;
Rounds; Sandier; Willis
History: Miller, C.
Homelessness: Wolf
Homosexuality-fiction: Fox
Horses-fiction: Haas
Iceland: McMillan
Illness-fiction: Hurwitz
MARCH 1995 
* 257
Immigration: Sandier
Island life: Dean
Israel-fiction: Banks
Jews-fiction: Banks
Language arts: Parish
Laos-stories: Shea
Latinos-fiction: Covington
Latinos: Garza
Lions-stories: MacGill-Callahan
Literature, English: Lester
LOVE STORIES: Bunting;
Covington; Hill; Lester; White
Maine: Dean
Mathematics: Burns; Hoban
Middle Ages-fiction: Tomlinson
Native Americans-poetry: Begay
Nature study: Baker; McMillan;
Quinlan
Newfoundland-fiction: Reed
Northern Ireland-fiction: Bunting
Nurses-fiction: White
Oceanography: Kraske
Physical education: Ritter
Pioneer life: Rounds
POETRY: Adoff; Begay; Dr.
Seuss; Evans; Janeczko; Miller,
C.; Pilkey; Ray; Stevenson
Prejudice-fiction: Case; Lester
Reading aloud: Adoff; Kraske;
Sachar
Reading, beginning: Miller, S.;
Parish
Reading, family: Boelts; Intrater;
Leedy; Miyamoto; Schertle;
Smith
Reading, reluctant: Dahl; Dexter;
Hinojosa; Sachar; Stoehr
Refugees-stories: Shea
Runaways-fiction: Stoehr
SCARY STORIES: Dexter
School-fiction: Dexter; Sachar
School-stories: Boelts
SCIENCE FICTION: Dexter
Science: Kraske; Quinlan; Willis
Sisters-fiction: Stevens
Sisters-stories: Lillie
South Africa-fiction: Case
St. Lawrence Seaway: Willis
Stepfamilies-stories: Day
Story hour: Baker; Boelts; Briggs;
Day; Dr. Seuss; Evans; Hort;
Lillie; MacGill-Callahan;
Miyamoto; Mollel; Parish;
Seymour; Smith
Summer-stories: Boelts
Tanzania-stories: Mollel
Theater-fiction: Hill
Thunderstorms-stories: Evans
Toys-stories: Lillie
Underground Railroad: Bial
Vacations-stories: Smith
Vietnam War-fiction: White
Vietnam War: Denenberg
Voyages and travels-fiction:
Manley
War: Ganeri
Weather: Evans
West, the: Rounds
Women's studies: Garza
Woodworking: Miller, C.
Work-fiction: Hill; Reed; Stoehr
World War II-fiction: Bunting;
Manley
O)~IJ
I
Robert
Lipsyte's
Michael
Jordan
A Life Above
the Rim
Photographs
Ages 10-14. $14.89LB (0-06-024235-3); $3.95PB (0-06-446156-4)
JOE LU
A Char
Ages 10-
$3.95PB
Three more Robert Lipsyte biographies
)UIS 
ARNOLD SCHWARZENEGGER
mp for All America 
Hercules in America
14. $14.89LB (0-06-023410-5) 
Ages 10-14. $14.00 (0-06-023002-9)
(0-06-446155-6) 
$13.89LB (0-06-023003-7)
$3.95PB (0-06-446142-4)
JIM THORPE
20th-Century Jock
Ages 10-14. $14.00 (0-06-022988-8); $13.89LB (0-06-022989-6)
$3.95PB (0-06-446141-6)
t HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York 10022
Spark the imaginations of all children with...
The Poetry Break:
An Annotated Anthology with Ideas for
Introducing Children to Poet
By Caroline Feller Bauer
A winning resource guaranteed to bring
children and poetry together, The Poetry
Break provides just the right mix of moti-
vational teaching ideas, entertainment,
and poetry. Librarians, teachers, parents,
and other adults working with children
will welcome the multitude of fascinating,
ready-made ideas for familiarizing chil-
dren with poetry on a daily basis.
Make Poetry a Natural, Daily Part of
a Child's Life
Part One of The Poetry Break presents
methods and activities to make poetry
part of a child's life at home, at school, or
in the library. This section includes:
-
What a poetry break is
* Audiences and venues
* Methods of presentation
" Poetry activities.
'p
Inspire Young Minds With Hundreds
of Poems from Around the World
Part Two of The Poetry Break is a collec-
tion of over 200 poems from such noted
authors as Eloise Greenfield, Arnold
Lobel, Eve Merriam, Jack Prelutsky, and
Shel Silverstein. This section explains
how to mix poetry with activities such as
acting, writing, art, and music. Each poem
is accompanied by tips and ideas for effec-
tive presentation and titles of books relat-
ed to the poem's theme.
Also included is a generous bibliography
of poetry collections and anthologies, as
well as indexes of poems by subject, title,
and author.
To Order Call Toll-Free 800-367-6770.
Outside of the U.S. and Canada call 718-588-8400. Fax 718-590-1617.
VISA, MasterCard, and American Express accepted (telephone orders only).
THE H.W. WILSON COMPANY Sharing Knowledge Since 1898
I WI DlS• 
N 
REFl EIREN C 
llliE 
11 0] 
l0 
K,,
"A striking book that raises arguments about
King and the movements he sprang from."
- Julian Bond
"An excellent book that will do more to keep
Martin Luther King and his 'dream' alive in
a different era than would more fulsome
tributes." - American Historical Review
"Well-researched, clearly written, and well-
balanced." - New York Times Book Review
A volume in the series Blacks in the New World, edited by August Meier and John H. Bracey
Paper, $11.95
order toll-free 800/545-4703
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS PRESS * 1325 South Oak Street * Champaign. IL 61820
The Death
and Life of
Malcolm X
SECOND EDITION
PETER L. 
GOLDMAN
"Mr. Goldman's narrative subtly and
skillfully illumines Malcolm's career. ...
Mr. Goldman's book, the first full-scale
life of Malcolm X, remains an indis-
pensable biography of the enigmatic
leader." - Michael Eric Dyson,New York
Times Book Review
A volume in the series Blacks in the New VWrld
Paper, $12.95
rder toll free 800/545-4703 
-c-
I 
Unv rst 
ofIln 
i.r 
s 
12 
o 
t 
a S 
tre 
S 
Ch 
mpi 
,I 
12
O
-
W
Lookingfor Award-Winning Booktalks?
Take a look at...
Prize-Winning Booktalks for All Ages and Au
Booktalking the Award Winners is a new series of be
talks about prize-winning children's and young adu
literature. This first volume contains 250 talks on
titles honored in 1992-1993, including Caldecott,
Newbery and Notable Book Award winners, Best
Books for Reluctant Readers, and recipients of the
King, Batchelder, Hugo, and Poe Awards-in all,
26 awards are represented.
Indispensable for Both Beginning and
Experienced Booktalkers
Prepared by librarians and reading specialists and
edited by Joni Richards Bodart, creator of the popu
Booktalk! series, Booktalking the Award Winners is designed to
help introduce young people to outstanding new titles and motivate them to discover
the pleasures of reading.
Titles in the 1992-1993 Volume Include:
*Ajeemah and His Son *Cherokee Bat and the Goat Guys *Dinotopia *Extremely
Weird Endangered Species *Gojiro *Haymeadow *I Saw Esau *Jim Ugly *Letters
from Rifka *Lil Sis and Uncle Willie *The Man from the Other Side *Missing May
*Morning Girl * Neighborhood Odes *The Planet of Junior Brown *The Stinky
Cheese Man and Other Fairly Stupid Tales *Taxi Cat and Huey *Women of the Silk.
To Order Call Toll-Free 800-367-6770.
Outside of the U.S. and Canada call 718-588-8400. Fax 718-590-1617.
VISA, MasterCard, and American Express accepted (telephone orders only).
STHE H.W. WILSON COMPANY Sharing Knowledge Since 1898
NN,' II1, SO)la Nm R-F I? 
E NCI 
E I 
IK 
S
Ciooa, Lulcp, 
avuac as 
JU 
11Jum111111 
uIcU 
La 
I 
n 
an 
n 
u 
iitoi1 aMio4 il fuItu 
I
S 
~trPooPhiUPo unmn fairl mhark nn a -nlio t fnr tho natiro of ifrth
Afso by WiliamJ. Brooke
A TELLING OF THE TALES: FIVE STORIES
Pictures by Richard Egielski * A 1991 ALA Notable Children's Book
Ages 8-12. $13.00TR (0-06-020688-8); $12.89LB (0-06-020689-6)
$5.95PB (0-06-440467-6)
UNTOLD TALES
Ages 10 up. $15.00TR (0-06-020271-8); $14.89LB (0-06-020272-6)
$5.95PB (0-06-440483-8)
iu rast :)ra 3treet.
rK IL
A School Library Journal Best Book of 1994
ZEKE PIPPIN
M
G
rited
leep-
iica
s
urith
his loving family. "A splendid story, simultaneously playful
and profound."-Best Books of 1994, School Library Journal
"This deeply funny picture book immediately joins the ranks
of Steig classics." P Starred, Publishers Weekly
"Another hit by the master... Steig's hand has lost none
of its cunning" -The Horn Book
"Zeke's music leads readers into a delightfully zany plot...
No one paints quite like Steig-even inanimate objects exude
personality and life." 
Starred, School Library Journal
"Steig's golden touch shines on" * Pointer, Kirkus Reviews
Ages 3 up. $15.00TR (0-06-205076-1); $14.89LB (0.06-205077-X)
Michael di Capua Books * HarperCollins Publishers
_-i
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.SA.
REtrRN POSTAGE GUAANTED
So Big
Edna Ferber
Introduction by Maria Mootry
Reprint of the novel that won the
Pulitzer Prize. A compelling story
of love and struggle, ambition and
fate, set in turn-of-the-century
Chicago and environs. A classic of
American literature by the author
of Show Boat.
A Prairie State Book
Paper, $12.95
order to-free 800/545403
SECOND CLASS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
-~d~· 
.
~;"
A^ 
,
;41
IIIIII~-LU~--- 
CI~ 
II
i
I
C:Woo
