U IIt
ILLINOI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
January 2002
Vol. 55 No. 5
'3
A LOOK INSIDE
163 THE BIG PICTURE
Martin's Big Words: The Lift ofDr. Martin Luther King, Jr. by Doreen
Rappaport; illus. by Bryan Collier
164 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
175 * Breaking Through by Francisco Jiminez
180 * Fly! written and illus. by Christopher Myers
182 * The Master Swordsman & The Magic Doorway: Two Legends frm
Ancient China ad. and illus. by Alice Provensen
188 * Finding H.F. by Julia Watts
189 * Company's Going by Arthur Yorinks; illus. by David Small
190 
BULLETIN BLUE RIBBONS 2001
192 SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Centerfor Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Publications Office of the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of
the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of Illinois Press,
1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS)
Janice M. Del Negro, Contributing Editor (JMD)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Jeannette M. Hulick (JMH)
Fern Kory, Reviewer (FK)
Kate McDowell, Reviewer (KM)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
OFFICE STAFF
Sabrina Austin
Jennifer DeBaillie
Natalie Hoyle
Jeannette Hulick
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $66.00; individuals, $50.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $5.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road,
Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson Associates, P.O.
Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to the University of
Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new address.
Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin ofthe Center for Children's Books, University of
Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
All inquiries about subscriptions and advertising should go to University of Illinois Press, 1325 S.
Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903, 217-333-0950.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The
Bulletin ofthe Center for Children's Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email:
bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2002 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Bryan Collier from Martin's Big Words: The Life ofDr. Martin Luther King, Jr.
©2001. Used by permission of Jump at the Sun/Hyperion Books for Children.
JANUARY 2002 
* 
163
THE BIG PICTURE
Martin's Big Words: The Life ofDr. Martin Luther
King, Jr.
by Doreen Rappaport; illus. by Bryan Collier
January 15th. King's Birthday. School's off-an honor only conferred upon the
memory of our country's most distinguished movers, shakers, and shapers. While
middle- and high-schoolers can appreciate Dr. King's groundbreaking strategies
and accomplishments, primary graders are likely to conflate his national holiday
with Veterans' Day, Labor Day, Presidents' Day-days that seem to invoke adult
solemnity but overlook kid-pleasing rituals involving food and gifts. Unlocking
for action-hungry youngsters the significance of a life based on peace, fortitude,
and self-control is an undeniable challenge, but Rappaport and Collier have found
the key, and it's "big."
"Big" is one of the earliest deposits in a child's word bank. It's infused
with awe. It's what adults are and kids want to be. It's everything kids sense to be
important, but it's difficult or impossible to articulate. It's a blessedly easy word to
read. Rappaport uses the concept to forge an empathic connection between King
and her audience, introducing him as a little guy who grasped the power of the
hymns, Bible readings, and preaching of his minister father and predicted with
fumbling and startling insight, "When I grow up, I'm going to get big words, too."
Throughout this title everything about King's words is, figuratively and literally,
big. Each spare box of text offers a few lines of biographical detail or historical
background, simply and cogently stated for very young listeners, and concludes
with an impassioned King quote dominating the page in oversized type: "White
ministers told [the marchers] to stop. Mayors and governors and police chiefs and
judges ordered them to stop... .'Wait! For years I have heard the word
"Wait!" We have waited more than three hundred and forty years
for our rights"'; "Some black Americans wanted to fight back with their fists.
Martin convinced them not to.... 'Love is the key to the problems of the
world.'"
With King's words looming larger than life, Collier supplies the concrete
visual imagery to connect potent ideas with an unintimidating, flesh-and-blood
man. A life-sized portrait of King, wide-mouthed and crinkly-eyed in a hearty
laugh, greets children from the wordless cover. Warm-toned, symbol-rich collage
(Collier discusses several of his visual metaphors in an opening note) portrays King
in a range of emotions-a little boy tense with resentment upon discovering a
"Whites Only" drinking fountain, a gentle minister leaning intimately over the
pulpit toward his congregation, a mournful victim kneeling before the flames of
his burning home, a thundering orator with an outstretched arm signifying the
breadth of his famous "dream." Recurring images of United States flags and stained-
164 
* THE BULLETIN
glass windows convey, perhaps more succinctly than words, the political and spiri-
tual energies that powered King's life.
A child-oriented bibliography of books and websites, source notes for
quotations, and a list of important dates in King's life hint that even the very
young might be required to approach Dr. King as a research subject. This title
fairly demands to be read aloud, though, as a bravura solo performance, in tandem
voices for narrative and quotations, or perhaps even in chorus. This is powerful
stuff, big stuff, and children privileged to share Martin's Big Words with class-
mates or family will begin to understand that January 15th isn't just another day
off. (Imprint information appears on p. 183.)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ANDERSON, M. T. 
Handel, Who Knew What He Liked; illus. by Kevin
Hawkes. 
Candlewick, 2001 
40p
ISBN 0-7636-1046-1 
$16.99 
R Gr. 4-7
Anderson (author of Thirsty, BCCB 4/97, and Burger Wuss, 9/99) turns his irrev-
erent prose here to the life of eighteenth-century composer George Frideric Handel.
Starting with Handel's youthful aptitude for music (which greatly chagrined his
father), the book goes on to describe his studies in Germany and Italy, his trium-
phant years in England, his fall from popularity, and his successful shift to the
oratorio form (typified by the Messiah). Anderson spices this account with eccen-
tric details from Handel's life (such as his duel with a good friend over the con-
ducting of an orchestra) and an amusingly deadpan style ("The characters would
sing arias in Italian, some of the most beautiful music ever heard onstage. Then
they would stab each other"). Though there are a few odd omissions from the
chronicle (Handel's blindness is mentioned only in the appended timeline) and
the factual tidbits in sidebars sometimes seem a bit tacked on, this is a stylish and
entertaining beginner biography that gives readers plenty of reason to be interested
in its subject. Hawkes' smoky acrylics sometimes make an excessively dark back-
ground for the text, but the textured earth tones effectively evoke the rich candlelit
ambience of the eighteenth-century stage. This will be an obvious and welcome
addition to music units and biography shelves. A chronology, a discography, and
suggestions for further reading are appended. DS
BADOE, ADWOA, ad. 
The Pot of Wisdom: Ananse Stories; illus. by Baba Wague
Diakit6. Groundwood/Douglas & McIntyre, 2001 
[64p]
ISBN 0-88899-429-X 
$18.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-9 yrs
Ghanaian author Badoe here retells ten tales of Ananse, the West African trickster
figure. Stories include a version of the tar-baby story, a tale involving secrets be-
I
JANUARY 2002 
* 
165
tween husband and wife, and several entries wherein an embarrassed Ananse suf-
fers when his tricks backfire on him. The retellings (each two to three pages long)
are a little stiff, and they may need some adapting to make them successful readal-
ouds, but there's an interesting breadth here. A full-page illustration on
polychromed and glazed earthenware tiles opens each story; black-and-white spot-
art caricatures of Ananse decorate page numbers and act as borders to the full-page
images. The designerly clarity and artistic energy enhance the impact of the text,
and libraries will want to use this to expand their collection of trickster stories.
JMD
BARNES, 
EMMA Jessica Haggerthwaite: Witch Dispatcher; illus. by Tim
Archbold. 
Walker, 2001 
[168p]
ISBN 0-8027-8794-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Jessica and her younger brother, Nat, are speechless at their mother's announce-
ment regarding her new scheme to bring the family much needed income ("I'm
going to be a professional witch! Mellandra Haggerthwaite, Professional Witch!
Doesn't that sound good?"). Subsequent discord in the home, including an argu-
ment about whether magic or mulch grows better tomatoes, prompts Jessica's gar-
dener father to move out. In desperation, Jessica embraces her own new profession:
she declares herself a "witch dispatcher" and resolves to undermine her embarrass-
ing mother at any given opportunity. Jessica's schemes backfire, however, since
instead of hampering her mother's new business she brings Mrs. Haggerthwaite
positive publicity and paying customers. After a series of mildly amusing mishaps
(including a science project that proves the efficacy of both magic and mulch), all
ends well: Mr. Haggerthwaite moves back home, Mrs. Haggerthwaite promises to
consult the family on any future job plans, and Jessica retires as a witch dispatcher.
Though a lighthearted and speedy read, this travels on such an even keel that it
never feels as if it's going anywhere: tension is lacking (there's never any doubt
that the story will end well), and characterizations, while sometimes funny, are
mostly bland. Nonetheless, this is a nonthreatening and cheerful story with an
enjoyably fanciful touch. Archbold's black-and-white line drawings feature a scruffy
but endearing cast of characters and provide some of the zing missing from the
text. JMD
BATTEN, MARY 
Anthropologist: Scientist of the People; illus. with photographs by
A. Magdalena Hurtado and Kim Hill. 
Houghton, 2001 
64p
ISBN 0-618-08368-5 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Magdalena Hurtado, an anthropologist studying the Ache people of the Paraguayan
forest, is the focus for Batten's photoessay introduction to this field of social sci-
ence and the experiences (and issues) of field work in anthropology. Batten skill-
fully integrates methodology--narrowing questions, formulating hypotheses,
collecting data through formal techniques such as "focal follow" and "scan sam-
pling"-with powerful human-interest angles involving Hurtado's initial nonver-
bal attempts at communication with the Ache, her often stumbling acculturation
into Ache life, and her frequent stays among the Ache in the company of her
anthropologist husband and their two daughters. Although the potential impact
of anthropological study on its subjects is raised, Batten clearly advances Hurtado's
166 
* THE BULLETIN
justification for the enterprise: "For those who argue that anthropologists should
leave hunter-gatherers in a pristine environment, Magdalena points out that the
moment contact is made [prior to the anthropologists' arrival], there is no longer
any pristine environment. When hunter-gatherers make contact, they become
part of an international community." Older readers may want to take up the
debate, while younger readers can simply ponder a profession that requires its prac-
titioners to dine on insect larvae and armadillo. EB
BOLDEN, TONYA 
Rock ofAges: A Tribute to the Black Church; illus. by R. Gregory
Christie. 
Knopf, 2001 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-99485-8 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-89485-3 
$16.95 
Ad 
7-10 yrs
Bolden, author of And Not Afraid to Dare: The Stories of Ten African-American
Women (BCCB 6/98), offers a prose-poem in praise of the black church in America,
threading references to African-American achievements, hymns, and historical fig-
ures throughout her rhythmic text: "When she was invisible... her roofnightsky,/
her flooring Godgrown pastures walled by woods ... / quiet streams did steal away
to her/ preachments and soul-toned singing/ for the grit to go on, the might to
keep the faith/ and hold tight to Blessed Assurance that/ Liberation was in holy
order ... 
/ with Gabriel and Nancy Prosser, Nat Turner, Denmark, Harriet,
Frederick, and Sojourner among her sons and daughters." The text is somewhat
catalogish and the subject overly abstract for much of its audience, but the personi-
fication of the church makes the images intimate and immediate. Christie's paint-
ings depict a world on edge, the architecture gone askew in buildings tipping off
hillsides and city streets. Churchgoers with elongated limbs and faith-contorted
features (sometimes more awkward than stylized) fill pages overflowing with the
presence and power of the church and her congregations. Bolden includes histori-
cal notes to provide some context for her literary imagery and an author's note
telling of her connection to the black church. JMD
BUTCHER, KRISTIN 
The Gramma War. 
Orca, 2001 
[160p]
Paper ed. ISBN 1-55143-183-1 
$6.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Eleven-year-old Annie is suffering from a life in upheaval: her beloved teacher has
taken leave for health reasons and her father is working twelve hours a day on
account of a recent promotion, but the worst change is the arrival ofAnnie's grand-
mother, who's come to live in Annie's room while Annie bunks in with snooty
older sister Claire (and Annie's beloved gerbils are fostered by her friend Joel).
Gramma proves to be unhappy and demanding, requiring constant attention and
offering little warmth or gratitude in recompense; eventually, Annie's father begins
to consider moving his mother to a nursing home rather than further burden his
exhausted wife and tense daughters. There's a fair amount of contrivance here,
both in the plot (there's no consideration of possibilities between family care and
the nursing home, and Gramma dies conveniently before the switch to the nursing
home) and in the subplot (Annie's interest in history converts to an interest in
family history, which allows her to connect with her grandmother). The familial
plight is an all-too-common one in life and a fairly rare one in literature for young
people, however, and Butcher doesn't sugarcoat the strain of taking in an elderly
family member; the book also acknowledges the complexity of the situation, with
JANUARY 2002 
* 
167
Annie's sister ferociously devoted to the grandmother whom she's adored, Annie
confused by an old lady she barely knows, and parents unhappy with all the avail-
able options. Kids close to their grandparents may want to read this and feel lucky.
DS
Cox, CLINTON 
Houdini: Master ofIllusion. Scholastic, 2001 
[208p] 
illus.
with photographs
ISBN 0-590-94960-8 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-10
While today's younger readers may be more familiar with David Copperfield than
Harry Houdini, this biography will give them a sense of the history of the craft of
magic and illusion. Cox presents Houdini in the context of his time, describing
how his subject's early poverty, family life, and close connection to his mother
influenced his ambitions and choices. A man of strong passions, Houdini was
loyal to his friends, devoted to his wife and mother, and brutal towards those he
believed betrayed him; he also strove to meet his own impossible standards and to
attain the success that forever eluded his father. In his later years, he became first
a devotee and then an enemy of Spiritualism, exposing those who claimed contact
with the spirit world. While the text occasionally verges on a list-like chronology
of events, Cox compresses a tremendous amount of living into the narrative. His
take on Houdini, while unsentimental and unsparing of the man's weaknesses,
still shows a tremendous admiration for his stamina, determination, and courage.
Black-and-white photos provide period atmosphere; a brief bibliography is in-
cluded. JMD
Cox, JUDY 
Butterfly Buddies; illus. by Blanche Sims. 
Holiday House, 2001 
86p
ISBN 0-8234-1654-2 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Third grade has taken a scary turn for Robin, since her friend Ashley has moved
away and her old teacher has taken maternity leave ("No best friend, and a new
teacher to worry about"). Things look promising when cool new girl Zoey joins
the class and cool Miss Wing arrives to teach, but Robin's afraid that neither of
them like her, since she keeps doing things wrong. This is fairly predictably pre-
scriptive, but it's also a solid school story that taps into real grade-school anxieties
(readers will ache in sympathy for both Zoey and Robin when Robin accidentally
pantses Zoey in front of the whole class) and annoyances (Robin is perpetually
beset by obstreperous classmate Hippo) with Clearyesque authenticity. The sub-
plot about the class's caterpillar-to-butterfly science project blends unobtrusively
into the main plot, providing a focus for the school story rather than a distraction
from it. A generous helping of Sims' bristly and informal line drawings provides a
visual invitation to uncertain readers, and an afterword on caring for butterflies is
included. DS
CURRIE, STEPHEN 
Thar She Blows: American Whaling in the Nineteenth
Century. Lerner, 2001 
96p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8225-0646-7 
$25.26 
R Gr. 5-8
Now largely vilified for its ecological abuses, whaling was once, of course, a re-
spectable trade that promised-and quite often delivered-upward mobility and a
comfortable income until its practitioners killed their own cash cow through over-
harvesting. This evenhanded introduction evaluates the trade squarely within a
168 
* THE BULLETIN
nineteenth-century context, where the rigors, loneliness, and perils of maritime
life were entailed by the insatiable demand for commodities only the whale could
provide. Currie is somewhat selective in his introduction and employment of
whaling terminology (the glamorous "Nantucket sleigh ride," for instance, is de-
fined and described, while the workaday "flensing," which one might say gets at
the meat of the issue, never appears). He turns a blind eye to sailors' sexual activ-
ity, even as it relates to discussions of shore leave and the practice of shipboard
medicine, and his sketchy coverage of black whalers requires McKissacks' Black
Hands, White Sails (BCCB 11/99) as supplement. The information is neatly pack-
aged for middle-school consumption, though, with brief chapters, plenty of pe-
riod photos and engravings, and a list for further reading that zeros right in on
those books readily available for interested readers at this grade level. Hand this to
kids looking for a unique report topic and wish them "greasy luck." EB
DALY, NIKI 
What's Cooking, Jamela?; written and illus. by Niki Daly. 
Farrar,
2001 
31p
ISBN 0-374-35602-5 
$16.00 
R 4-7 yrs
Jamela (from]amela's Dress, BCCB 6/99) is back, and this time she's helping Mama
and Gogo (grandmother) plan Christmas dinner. The menu calls for rice, marogo
stew, and roast chicken, and Jamela gets to pick out the chicken they will fatten up
for the feast. She names it Christmas, and those familiar with children's holiday
stories will see the subsequent developments developing from a mile away. Jamela
enjoys the usual Christmas revels (class plays, holiday crafts, etc.) and grows fonder
and fonder of Christmas, the Christmas dinner. She is very aware that her mother
and grandmother are planning to cook the chicken, but she is also one smart
cookie-when told to go see how the stew is coming (so her mother can get the
chicken into the pot), Jamela takes Christmas with her, but Christmas escapes,
resulting in a riotous chase through downtown, into the ladies' hair salon, and,
finally, to capture under a basket. Eventually a fine Christmas dinner is had by
Jamela and her family, but there is no chicken on the menu, because Mama has
given her to Jamela as a Christmas present. Daly gives this hackneyed old plot
some new dressing, and the result is a joyful literary banquet. His storytelling is
quick and funny, with enough tension to keep the plot from being dull; his water-
colors quiver with vibrant earth tones energized with yellow, and holiday glee radi-
ates from the faces of his characters. Put this alongside Cowley's Gracias: The
Thanksgiving Turkey (BCCB 11/96) to spice up your holiday shelves. A glossary
of Xhosa, Afrikaans, and other African words used in the text is included. JMD
DEBEAR, KIRSTEN 
Be Quiet, Marina!; illus. with photographs by Laura
Dwight. 
Star Bright, 2001 
32p
ISBN 1-887734-79-1 
$16.95 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
Marina and Moira have a lot in common-they're both four years old, they both
like to dance, play ball, and dress up, and they both go to the same school-but
they haven't always been happy playmates. Marina is loud, bossy, and bouncy
where Moira is quiet, and Marina's screeching used to scare Moira away from her
schoolmate. Moira's anti-screaming request seems to have worked-most of the
time-and the two girls (helped by their teacher and by Moira's new willingness to
shout, "Be quiet, Marina!") now play together successfully. The text sometimes
slips from simplicity into chirpiness, and the layout- thinly bordered black-and-
JANUARY 2002 
* 
169
white photographs set against pale colors or balanced by text in smeary colored
boxes-is stodgy and old-fashioned. It's a straightforward and well-focused story,
however, dealing with a situation familiar to many youngsters. The pictures reveal
that quiet Moira has Down syndrome (never mentioned in the main text), and
alert viewers may also detect the physical difficulties that accompany Marina's
cerebral palsy; more importantly, the pair are photogenic as all get out and natural
to boot. The unaffected and unstated featuring of kids with disabilities makes this
book refreshing and useful both for general audiences and special education groups.
An explanatory note and list of resources in several countries are appended. DS
DENENBERG, BARRY 
All Shook Up: The Life and Death ofElvis Presley. 
Scholastic,
2001 
176p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-439-09504-2 
$16.95 
M 
Gr. 7-10
This biography attempts to bring the life and influences of the King of Rock 'n'
Roll to light for contemporary youngsters. Denenberg's determination to find the
personal Presley is clear, and he provides a fair summary of the singer's early life-
his relationships with his mother, his ne'er-do-well dad, and his warring selves
(rebellious individualist vs. Southern gentleman) are clearly delineated. Unfortu-
nately, the book seems to assume previous knowledge on the part of readers, never
really conveying the impact that led John Lennon to say, "Before Elvis, there was
nothing." While the author does discuss some of Elvis' musical influences, his
exploration of Presley's African-American predecessors and models is cursory and
shallow. He writes in a chatty, opinionated, informal tone that unfortunately falls
flat: the prose is choppy, full of short sentences and incomplete thoughts, and the
breathy, E!-expose style often understates rather than underscores the seriousness
of the star's private and public situation. Ultimately, this is an incomplete portrait
that provides little indication of what made Elvis Presley great, thereby failing to
convey the tragedy of both his life and death. Chapters open with song lyrics of
varying degrees of relevance from a variety of musicians, and black-and-white pho-
tographs appear throughout; a chronology of events, a bibliography, a videography,
a discography, and a filmography are included. JMD
DICKINSON, PETER 
The Ropemaker. 
Delacorte, 2001 
376p
ISBN 0-385-72921-9 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Tilja is heartbroken when she discovers she cannot hear the cedars whisper; her
lack of ability means that the beloved family farm will pass to her younger sister,
Anja, and Tilja will have to seek her fortune elsewhere. Before this can happen,
however, Tilja and her grandmother discover that the magic that made the cedars
whisper, that kept the valley safe from marauders for generations, is dying. Tilja
and her grandmother join forces with Tahl and his grandfather (who can hear
voices in bodies of water) and set out on a quest to find Faheel, the sorcerer who
can renew the ancient protective magic. Their quest takes them from the safety of
the valley to a dangerous journey through the Empire, a land ruled by a wicked
emperor/sorcerer who intimidates his people through brute force and brute magic.
Dickinson creates a solidly complex and believable world, wherein magic is part of
the available but finite natural resources and it is strictly controlled by the emperor
(at least as much as he is able). The history and mythology set up at the beginning
of the novel provide a background of great depth against which the action is played.
Tilja's dilemma is clearly presented, and the solution is foreshadowed by the sto-
170 
* 
THE BULLETIN
ries of the past told by her grandmother. Unfortunately, despite the quest plot
there is little tension and the momentum drags, especially in the final half of the
book. The setting is colorful, but the characterizations are a bit pat and the action
sometimes seems merely convenient. Still, fantasy lovers who appreciate a well-
constructed universe may admire Dickinson's artistry. JMD
DUEY, KATHLEEN 
The Unicorn's Secret: Moonsilver; illus. by Omar
Rayyan. 
Aladdin, 2001 
[80p] 
(Ready-for-Chapters Books)
Paper ed. ISBN 0-689-84269-4 
$3.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-4
Heart Avamir has no memory of her life before old Simon found her wrapped in a
blanket covered with embroidered unicorns, and she has been the greedy man's
servant ever since, doing his chores and taking any odd job to earn a penny. One
evening she discovers an old mare, skinny and wretched, forehead badly scarred, at
the edge of a field. Simon tells her to fatten it for the knackers, but Heart feeds the
mare out of love. Helped by healer Ruth Oakes, Heart cares for the mare, who
soon gives birth to a disfigured foal. Forced by circumstances to flee with her
charges, Heart takes to the woods. The first volume of this projected quartet
leaves Heart with new discoveries: the foal is actually a unicorn, and mare, foal
and girl are all in terrible danger. Duey constructs a gentle fantasy, using motifs
and archetypes even the youngest fantasy readers will recognize: a semi-medieval
setting, a worthy foundling, an evil lord, a gentle healer. She then steps easily into
a beloved genre-the story of a girl and her horse (or, in this case, a girl and her
unicorn). The subject alone will draw young readers, and the cliffhanger ending
will certainly hold them. Though the black-and-white illustrations are somewhat
dark and grainy, there's a Rackhamesque old-world flavor to them that's well suited
to the story. JMD
ELOTT, L. M. 
Under a War-Torn Sky. 
Hyperion, 2001 
284p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2485-9 
$16.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0755-5 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Inspired by her father's experiences in World War II, Elliott tells the story of
nineteen-year-old Henry Forester, pilot in the U.S Air Force. Shot down over
enemy territory, Henry finds himself in Alsace, where an elderly schoolteacher
risks his life to take Henry to a Swiss hospital. On the way to an internment camp
for Allied soldiers (Switzerland was neutral, and so any soldiers found within her
borders were interned for the duration of the war), Henry escapes and begins to
make his way back to England with the help of the underground. His journey is
rife with adventure: he is betrayed to and taken prisoner by the Nazis, he escapes
to join the resistance fighters, he is recaptured by the retreating Germans, and he's
freed due to the conscience of an old German soldier. Ultimately Henry arrives
home on Thanksgiving Day, to the great joy of his mom, his dad, and his girl. The
elements of this complex plot are not always gracefully handled, and the exposition
is sometimes clumsy. The action scenes keep the pages turning, though, and Henry's
travels across war-torn Europe have a momentum that gives the novel a cinematic
quality. Some introspection regarding the meaning of life, the horrors of war, and
the longing for home adds emotional substrata to the action that keep this from
being a gung-ho war story. 
Henry's internal dialogues with his father are an
JANUARY 2002 
* 
171
effective means of keeping the homefront present, even though the reader never
goes there until the predictable but satisfying end. JMD
FLOWERS, PAM 
Alone across the Arctic: One Woman's Epic Journey by Dog Team;
by Pam Flowers with Ann Dixon; illus. with photographs by Pam Flowers. 
Alaska
Northwest, 2001 
[120p]
Trade ed. ISBN 0-88240-547-0 
$22.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-88240-539-X 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-12
In 1993-94, Flowers went on the adventure of her lifetime, traveling the 2500
miles of the North American arctic coast by dogsled, following in the footsteps of
a 1923 expedition that included one of the first female Arctic explorers. This
chronicle of her trip cuts right to the chase, as it were, describing her day-by-day
travails as she dealt with obstacles ranging from wayward dogs to the odd bear,
bitter cold to freakishly warm weather. The book's flat, matter-of-fact style is
somewhat dry, but it's a bracing counterpoint to the more emotion-laden narra-
tions of Gary Paulsen. The dogs are foremost here, with much of the story's drama
coming from canine action ranging from the disappearance of the reliable leader
dog, Douggie (who fortunately is eventually recovered), to the blossoming of young
Anna into Douggie's equal and successor. Flowers' dedication to her team and
willingness to learn from them ("When a team goes on strike, it's time for their
leader to take a cold, hard look in the mirror") consistently inform her account, as
does her gratitude to the people in the small Arctic villages who provided her with
generous assistance and hospitality throughout her trip. The pace is swift, and the
pages are broken up with sidebars (offering deeper focus into technical details) and
photographs (unfortunately too small to convey the landscape's grandeur, but suf-
ficient to give faces to the dogs) that help make the layout inviting. Fans of out-
door adventure will find this a satisfying armchair jaunt. A map of the expedition
opens the proceedings; end matter includes Flowers' supply list, a glossary, and an
index. DS
GARLAND, SHERRY In the Shadow oftheAlamo. 
Gulliver/Harcourt, 2001 
282p
ISBN 0-15-201744-5 
$17.00 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Lorenzo Bonifacio, a tall and sturdy fifteen-year-old mestizo farmer, is pulled from
the fields by recruiters raiding villages for cannon fodder for Santa Anna's cam-
paign in Texas. Esteban Esquivel, son of a well-to-do hacienda owner, is enlisting
with an eye toward rapid promotion, and upon his false testimony that Lorenzo is
of legal age for conscription, the two young men are signed into the ranks. Many
villagers join the northward march as camp followers, among them goatherd
Catalina, whose crush on Lorenzo is a constant source of embarrassment for him.
There are also perils more dangerous than unwelcome love, as the punishing trek
takes its toll on the soldiers through weariness, hunger, and exposure to the ele-
ments. By the time the troops face the tiny rebel force at San Antonio, Santa
Anna's competence and even his sanity are called into question by his highest-
ranking generals and his lowliest foot soldiers. The bloody routs at the Alamo and
Goliad undermine any remaining respect for Santa Anna, who gives no quarter
even to the unarmed enemy and sacrifices an unconscionable number of his own
men in ill-timed attacks. Garland clutters her story with some underdeveloped
172 
* THE BULLETIN
plot lines: Lorenzo pokes around to find his missing father among the ranks, while
a sergeant falls for Lorenzo's aunt and virtuous Catalina nearly falls from grace
with an abusive officer. In these cases, though, underdevelopment is a blessing, as
it allows Garland to concentrate on the march and the battles, which rousingly
and convincingly constitute the main event. Readers who followed the rebel camp
in Wisler's All for Texas (BCCB 7/00) can now consider the view from the other
end of the rifle barrel. EB
GOBLE, PAUL, ad. 
Storm Maker's Tipi; ad. and illus. by Paul Goble. 
Jackson/
Atheneum, 2001 
34p
ISBN 0-689-84137-X 
$18.00 
R 6-9yrs
In the beginning, the Great Spirit told his helper, Napi, to look after the needs of
Man and Woman. Napi knew Man and Woman would need shelter from Storm
Maker in winter; inspired by the shape of the cottonwood leaf, he taught them
how to make a tipi and to pitch it "so that the first rays of the rising sun will shine
through the door to warm your hearts." This introductory segment concludes
with detailed instructions on how to mount a real tipi. The text then segues into
the story of Sacred Otter, a hunter caught in a storm while out buffalo hunting. In
a dream, Sacred Otter visits the tipi of Storm Maker, who tells him how to deco-
rate/paint his tipi in order to keep its occupants safe from rough weather. The
ensuing instructions on how to make a toy-paper tipi smack of cheery rainy-day
craft tips, lessening the impact of the reteller's otherwise careful work. Nonethe-
less, Goble's succinct but never dry text is as capable as always. His illustrations
depict sweeping vistas of dizzying scope, whether it be a plain teeming with buffalo
or the forbidding backdrop of the mountains under a leaden sky. In contrast, the
neatly stylized scenes of humans fill the pages with pattern, accenting the big-sky
hues with frequent injections of red. This is an effective retelling of a tale un-
known to most youngsters and absent from most libraries. A concise source note
is included. JMD
GOODMAN, JOAN ELIZABETH 
Despite All Obstacles: La Salle and the Conquest of
the Mississippi; illus. by Tom McNeely. 
Mikaya, 2001 
47p 
(Great Explor-
ers)
ISBN 1-931414-01-7 
$19.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
At home both in the opulent attire of French nobility and in the tanned hides of
wilderness explorers, Sieur de La Salle pursued his single-minded goal of opening
up the Mississippi basin for European (well, French) colonization at court, in ca-
noes, at Native American tribal gatherings, anywhere he could raise funds or strike
alliances to achieve his ends. That Louis XIV undervalued his accomplishment ("I
am persuaded that the Sieur de La Salle's discovery is quite useless") and France
later sold off their treasure trove are poignant ironies that Goodman is quick to
develop as she traces La Salle's travels from the first tenuous probe of the river
system, to his jubilant claim at the river's mouth, to his tragic death at the hands of
his own men. This isn't quite up to the mark of the author's A Long and Uncertain
Journey: The 27,000-Mile Voyage of Vasco Da Gama (BCCB 12/01): there's often
a breathless, adulatory tone to the text ("La Salle's plan was the desperate scheme
of a desperate man .... This was his last chance to establish a fort on the Missis-
sippi and to rise from the ashes"), and many of the grimmer (and thus kid-pleas-
ing) details of his abortive final expedition rate little more than a mention. Still,
there's enough inherent drama to carry the day, and while the illustrations have
JANUARY 2002 
* 
173
the bland predictability of waxworks, they've also got color and sweep enough to
keep the pages turning. Maps, inset quotes from contemporary accounts, and an
index are included. EB
GREENFELD, HOWARD 
After the Holocaust. Greenwillow, 2001 
14 6p 
illus.
with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029420-5 
$18.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-17752-2 
$18.95 
Ad Gr. 6-9
Greenfeld, author of The Hidden Children (BCCB 1/94), here turns his eye to the
lives of Holocaust survivors post-World War II. Using personal interviews col-
lected over a period of two years, the book lays out the pre-World War II lives of
eight Jewish children from a range of cultures (Poland, Romania, Germany, Latvia,
etc.) and follows them from their incarceration by the Nazis to their liberation,
and then some. Greenfeld states in his prologue that his intent is to show that the
hardships suffered by these individuals did not end with the conclusion of the war
but continued as they desperately tried to achieve some sort of normalcy in lives
forever torn asunder. It is nearly impossible to tell stories of the Holocaust and
aftermath without the stories themselves overwhelming thoughts of form and style,
and the horror of the events and the scope of the tragedy makes these stories in-
nately compelling. The difficulty is that overall the storytelling is disjointed, since
the life stories of the featured individuals appear choppily in brief segments of
interviews, making the narrative sometimes difficult to follow; the bureaucratic
snafus that added insult to grievous injury are not the stuff of riveting prose. Still,
this is useful material for emphasizing the continued life and struggle of survivors
and the absence of any simple resolution to their problems. Black-and-white pho-
tographs and historical sidebars punctuate the text; a bibliography and an index
are included. JMD
HAMPTON, WILBORN 
Meltdown: A Race against Nuclear Disaster at Three Mile
Island: A Reporter's Story. 
Candlewick, 2001 
104p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-7636-0715-0 
$19.99 
R Gr 5-10
Hampton, author of Kennedy Assassinated!: The World Mourns: A Reporter's Story
(BCCB 10/97) turns out to have been the reporter-on-the-spot for another big
story, that of the U.S.'s biggest nuclear disaster. Starting with a brief overview of
the pre-1979 nuclear age, he then switches to his personal experience of being
suddenly plunged into a confusing and ominous story of nuclear physics, human
error, and public confusion when "this Three Mile Island thing" started looking
like a serious matter. He manages to convey the relevant information on the acci-
dent while also conveying his professional and sometimes personal bewilderment
as the reporters struggled to understand what the scientists were struggling to un-
ravel. This doesn't have quite the stature of Hampton's Kennedy experience-the
personal touches are sometimes a bit more obtrusive, and there are a few questions
left unanswered (though there's a section on Chernobyl, there's little discussion of
the aftermath at Three Mile Island-have twenty years revealed any medical im-
pact, for instance?)-but it's a vivid narrative nonetheless. Its interest goes beyond
the technical to the social and political, as it's a revealing chronicle of people in
various positions attempting to respond to a situation they know they don't fully
understand, and there's suspense aplenty to keep kids turning the pages. A glos-
sary, list of resources, and index are included. DS
174 
* 
THE BULLETIN
HOBAN, RUSSELL 
Jim's Lion; illus. by Ian Andrew. 
Candlewick, 2001 
34 p
ISBN 0-7636-1175-1 
$15.99 
M 
5-8 yrs
Jim is sick in the hospital, afraid of the operation that might make him well, be-
cause "if the doctors put me to sleep they might send me somewhere that I can't get
back from." Bami, the nurse, tells him he has a secret finder animal who can
"bring you back from wherever the doctors send you" and gives him a special
"don't-run stone" to help him face his fear. In his dreams, the sick boy encounters
a lion, who gives him the strength to undergo the surgery and thereby make it
home for Christmas to his loving parents. Hoban writes with a grave specificity
that gives the text a respectful rather than saccharine tone, but it's not enough to
lift the book out of the well-meaning murk. The text is long and wordy, the ready-
made cross-cultural mysticism (Bami comes from Africa and "had tribal scars on
her cheeks") has more convenience than sense, and some important questions are
left unanswered (did the operation actually make Jim better? For that matter, what
was wrong with him?). The illustrations unfortunately lavish the story with all the
sentimentality Hoban resists: Jim is a frail blue-eyed angel with a trembling lower
lip, and the gauzy pencil-touched pastels give a dreamy haze to all scenes, imagined
and actual alike, that softens and prettifies Jim's fear. Ultimately, the acknowledg-
ment of a child's real and understandable fear is bogged down in the trappings, and
fearful youngsters will be better off with a bracing dose of Hoban's inimitable
Frances. DS
HOOPER, MEREDITH 
Who Built the Pyramid?; illus. by Robin Heighway-
Bury. 
Candlewick, 2001 
40p
ISBN 0-7636-0786-X 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Everybody had something to do with Senwosret's pyramid, so everybody is claim-
ing responsibility, from the pharaoh's chief minister to the skilled and unskilled
laborers to Senwosret's son and successor, who saw his father interred in the struc-
ture; appropriately enough, the last word goes to Sasobek, the tomb robber ("I
don't care who built the pyramid. ... I knew how to get in"). This catalogue of
contribution is a rather offbeat approach to pyramid construction that will make
kids consider construction differently, and it has an effective narrative rhythm.
The book then shifts to a more straightforward nonfiction text, detailing the build-
ing of the pyramids in multicolumned pages; this peters out abruptly and beckons
to quite a different audience than the first part of the book, but the information,
diagrams, and contemporary photographs make a lively overview. While the mixed
approach is a bit confusing, kids will revel in the picture-book pleasures of the first
part, with its strongly lined stylized drawings in the sun-drenched colors of ancient
frescos, and enjoy poring over the fine print of the second section. You might also
try Part One as a readaloud hook, leaving listeners to discover the nonfiction ma-
terial and relevant additional texts on their own. An index is provided. DS
HOWE, JAMES 
The Misfits. Atheneum, 2001 
274p
ISBN 0-689-83955-3 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Twelve-year-old Bobby isn't what you'd call popular, having endured insults for
years on account of his weight, but he's cose to his three friends-bossy, idealistic
Addie, campy Joe, and tough Skeezie-with whom he meets periodically "to dis-
cuss important issues and to eat ice cream." Addie's important issue of late is the
school system's restrictions of her rights, especially with the upcoming student
JANUARY 2002 
* 
175
election; she therefore decides to challenge those restrictions by putting together a
third-party ticket, with Bobby as treasurer. The effort only really takes off, how-
ever, when the group finds their identity and their platform; they're the No-Name
party, and they're campaigning against the hurtful names they and other kids have
endured over the years. Howe touches on some interesting issues here, especially
in his underlying emphasis on understanding other people ("This business of re-
ally knowing people, deep down, including your own self, it is not something you
can learn in school or from a book"), which expresses itself particularly in the
subplots about Bobby's relationship with his father and with his boss at work.
Unfortunately, Bobby's narration is sometimes slow going, and there's a lot of
contrivance to the book, from the crudely functional characterizations to the popu-
larity of the No-Name Party's campaign to the extraordinarily convenient way the
kids' relationships work out (the girl Bobby likes reciprocates, the boy Joe likes
comes out and reciprocates, and even prickly Addie is happy with the boy who
likes her). Still, this is a topic that's near to many kids' hearts, and they may be
bolstered by the possibility of resolution. DS
ISADORA, RACHEL 
Bring on That Beat; written and illus. by Rachel
Isadora. 
Putnam, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-399-23232-X 
$14.99 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Before late-night TV hawked jazz-master boxed sets and library shelves drooped
with the weight of current jazz picture books, Isadora pretty much claimed the
children's jazz-book field for her own with the elegant Caldecott honoree Ben's
Trumpet. Here again viewers are transported to the gritty urban milieu of the
1930s, where jazz spills hot and cool from club doors onto moon-shadowed side-
walks, and neighborhood children imbibe the rhythm. Rather than the specific
focus of Ben's Trumpet, however, Isadora turns now to a picture of a milieu, find-
ing children engaged in plotless groovin' under spotlights and lamplights, on stages
and on fantasy keyboards along with various jazz luminaries, while the text thrums
pedestrian couplets ("Trumpet a song,/ Groove the night long"; "Bring on the
beat,/ Watch her two feet"). Smeary black-and-white oils evince a certain noctur-
nal glamour and suppressed excitement, but the jarring Klee-like techno-hued
amoeboids that float across the backgrounds are merely distracting rather than
evocative of music. The concluding admonition-"When you rap and you rhyme,/
Remember that time-/ When cats played the beat,/ It was jazz on the street"-
unfortunately patronizes even as it offers a connection to contemporary youth.
Instead, pass the Trumpet or join Burleigh in Lookingfor Bird in the Big City
(BCCB 7/01). EB
JIMfNEZ, FRANCISCO 
Breaking Through. Houghton, 2001 
200p
ISBN 0-618-01173-0 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 6-10
The author of The Circuit continues his autobiographical journey with this aptly
titled work. Jiminez, second eldest son in a family of Mexican migrant workers,
opens with a heartbreaking scene recalling the day he and his older brother Roberto
were pulled from school by immigration officials. Unwilling to break up the fam-
ily, his father (who had entered the United States legally), his mother, and his four
siblings (born in the United States and thus citizens) go to Nogales, Mexico, and
apply for the visas that will allow them to return to the United States. The papers
come through, but money is so tight the rest of the family stays in Mexico while
176 
* THE BULLETIN
high-schoolers Roberto and Francisco return to earn enough money to bring the
whole family back to the United States. Jimenez views his life with a clear, unsen-
timental eye, but that doesn't detract from the emotional impact of the many
poignant incidents he recalls. Life isn't all darkness, though: struggles with school
work are leavened by learning to dance; backbreaking work in the fields is light-
ened by rotten-strawberry fights; encounters with racism are balanced by generous
teachers and employers who point him toward college and scholarships and show
him how he can break through and change his life. The writing is simple and
evocative, and the storytelling is effectively succinct without abbreviating or
overmanipulating events. A short afterword by the author explains whatever li-
cense he has taken with his own life; black-and-white photos are included. JMD
JOHNSON, ANGELA 
Running Back to Ludie; illus. byAngelo. 
Orchard, 2001 
4 8p
ISBN 0-439-29316-2 
$15.95 
Ad Gr. 5-10
In a series of accessible free-verse poems, a young African-American girl describes
growing up in the absence of her mother, Ludie (aka Elaine), and her anticipation
of their upcoming reunion. Reflections on her motherlessness-and the awk-
wardness of being re-mothered-dominate the speaker's "silent heart life." This
poignant narrative thread pulls the reader from the speaker's earliest memories of
"the way/ the sidewalk looked when/ I was being pushed/ over/ it/ quickly" in a
stroller, to her reaction to being perceived as "Elaine's daughter" by her mother's
friends, to "the days after Ludie"; in between are poems about family, friends, and
neighborhood. Not all readers will be able to fill in the narrative blanks between
these poetic snapshots of the speaker's thoughts and feelings, however, and the
poems are sometimes flat and prosy. While the situation has intriguingly idiosyn-
cratic aspects (Ludie, for example, lives in a cabin in the woods), neither setting
nor character is evoked through sensory detail, so the reader's experience remains
largely intellectualized and vicarious. Still, there is ample material here for readers
willing to read between the lines and look below the surface. Angelo's strongly
literal black-and-white illustrations miss a chance to impart some nuance to the
book, but by bringing the narrator into visual focus they enhance the impact of her
words. FK
JOHNSTON, TONY Alien &' Possum: Friends No Matter What; illus. by Tony
DiTerlizzi. 
Simon, 2001 
48p
ISBN 0-689-83835-2 
$15.00 
R Gr. 1-3
The friendship between two good buddies is a mainstay of the easy-reader genre,
from George and Martha to Iris and Walter. Though not quite up to the gold
standard of Marshall's or Guest's creations, Johnston's friendly Possum and fish-
out-of-water Alien are endearing nonetheless in this set of three stories. The stories
(which describe the pair's initial meeting and developing friendship, the nocturnal
raiding of a trash can for snacks, and the reading of a bedtime story) are somewhat
slight, but the duo's dialogue ("'Trash is something delicious,' said Possum. 'Like
high voltage?' asked Alien") and Alien's quirky actions (it assaults a trash can that
fails to respond to its greeting and eats Possum's bedtime book) are clever and
humorous. DiTerlizzi's warm illustrations (executed in colored pencil and water-
color) have a soft-edged substance and depth not often seen in easy-reader art. His
Possum is a pink-nosed and pointy-toothed little critter (who alternately sports a
bowler derby and a blue-and-white striped nightshirt) with personality to spare,
JANUARY 2002 
* 
177
while Alien is an inquisitive tentacle-eyed creature in a hook-handed, red and gold
spacesuit that has seen better days. Large type, generously spaced lines of text,
simple language, and easily understood situations provide enough structure for
primary-grade readers to tackle this with ease. JMH
LAMM, C. DREW 
Pirates; illus. by Stacey Schuett. 
Hyperion, 2001 
33p
ISBN 0-7868-0392-4 
$15.99 
R 5-8yrs
Older sister Ellery knows a great alone-on-a-rainy-night read when she sees one,
and she regales younger brother Max with the spookiest bits from a pirate book she
borrowed from the library. Max attempts to diffuse his mounting fears with in-
nocuous asides and suppositions, but Ellery simply counters with dark explana-
tions of her own: "'He buries his treasure in .. .' 'Treasure chests,' guessed Max.
'Coffins,' said Ellery." Even dauntless Ellery is eventually undone by her own wild
imaginings; as she cringes in terror of the flashes and rumbles and clatters of their
parentless house in the stormy dark, Max gets the last laugh by grabbing her arm
with a pirate's hook-well, an umbrella handle, anyway. Schuett cleverly blends
home and fantasized pirate milieu into a seamless whole of shadowy mud browns
and indigos and teals, and the pirates themselves are as deliciously evil as the sib-
lings are bug-eyed innocent. Just as Gay's Stella (Stella, Star of the Sea, BCCB 5/
99) gently initiates her skeptical little brother into the intimidating world of big
kid-dom, Ellery introduces Max to the delights of self-induced shivers, and Max
surely and satisfyingly lands on his feet. EB
LEVINSON, MARILYN 
Rufus and Magic Run Amok. 
Cavendish, 2001 
[96p]
ISBN 0-7614-5102-1 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Rufus doesn't want to be a witch like his mother, grandmother, and aunt, but it
doesn't look as if he has much choice, since he can already cast the three basic
spells (mind-reading, propelling, and scrying) without even trying. Desperate to
deny the destiny that marks him as different from his classmates, he keeps his
powers secret from his parents; as he lacks important knowledge about controlling
his abilities, his magic starts spilling out and overwhelming his good sense, result-
ing in incidents involving the school bully, athletic team tryouts, and a runaway
baseball. Helped by his father (and a cautionary tale about an uncle with similar
powers whose magic ruined his life), Rufus finally comes to terms with his abili-
ties. Levinson's easy intro to boy-wizardry isn't going to knock Harry off the top
shelf, but her book has an easy flow that will attract less sophisticated readers.
Characterization is shallow, the plot is a typical school story with a little Bewitched
and a lot of messages about difference thrown in, and the feel-good conclusion-
and sequel potential-is never in doubt. Put this predictable but useful transi-
tional title where reluctant readers can reach it. JMD
LEWIN, TED 
Big Jimmy's Kum Kau Chinese Take Out; written and illus. by Ted
Lewin. 
HarperCollins, 2001 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-16027-1 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-16026-3 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-8 yrs
Behind each familiar white flap-topped carton there's a whole team of personnel
bustling for hours to deliver, clean, chop, boil, steam, fry, package, and ring up an
178 
* THE BULLETIN
extensive menu of exotic delicacies, and here a young narrator helping at his father's
carry-out restaurant calls the plays. The audience hears the sizzling meats and the
ringing phones, watches the vegetables tossing and flipping in the woks, senses the
orderly frenzy of chefs in a constant blur of motion to fill a small order for the
"pinky parlor" lady next door and mammoth orders for a birthday party and the
entire fire department of Company 119. The little boy does his bit, too, folding
menus, stuffing plastic utensils and fortune cookies in to-go bags, calling out or-
ders for the regulars, and at the day's end he finally enjoys his favorite take-out
meal-"PIZZA!" It's a great punch line and it should be the snappy ending, but
Lewin unfortunately deflates it with a gratuitous scene of a man-presumably
Lewin himself-chowing down on Kum Kau fare: "I like pizza but my favorite
dish is Buddha's Delight." If kids are understandably indifferent to the author's
culinary preferences, they're bound to be engaged by his photorealistic depiction
of the colorful world of knives and noise and flame just behind the counter. Make
mine "L21, Chicken w. Garlic Sauce." EB
MACY, SUE 
Bull's-Eye: A Photobiography ofAnnie Oakley. 
National Geographic,
2001 
64p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-7922-7008-8 
$17.95 
R Gr. 4-8
Although Macy does her darndest and largely succeeds in separating Oakley's life
from Oakley's legend, it's only too easy to see how "Little Sure Shot" was fairly
destined to become a media darling whose image must necessarily continue to
loom larger than life. Even a blunt outline of Oakley's life seems the stuff of fairy
tales-childhood years away from her family, abusive guardians, the nurturing of
a prodigious talent, a showbiz romance and til-death-do-them-part marriage to
the handsome Frank Butler, a long and stellar career, the philanthropic impulses
of a true heroine. Macy does a fine job of ferreting out as much solid information
as can be gleaned from extant masses of press hype and Oakley's own biographical
commentary that seems so obviously directed to her adoring fans; even available
photographs, which grace every spread of this volume, are largely publicity re-
leases. Still, readers glimpse another side of this fantasy life, in which newspaper
misprints result in lawsuits, and injuries and old age take their inevitable toll. An
author's note tackles discrepancies in Oakley source material and the ways a re-
searcher can attempt to resolve them. A chronology, index, and list of sources are
appended. EB
MANUSHKIN, FRAN, ad. 
Daughters of Fire: Heroines of the Bible; illus. by Uri
Shulevitz. 
Silver Whistle/Harcourt, 2001 
76p
ISBN 0-15-201869-7 
$20.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
In ten entries Manushkin tells the stories of more than a dozen women of the
Hebrew Bible, beginning with Eve and concluding with Esther. Each chapter
opens with a quote, biblical or literary, that refers in some way to the theme of its
tale. The retellings are, for the most part, traditional, although Manushkin does,
in the spirit of midrash, insert some of her own interpretations of biblical events.
While the writing is not particularly stylish, the stories themselves are cleanly con-
structed and the text lends itself to reading aloud. The media in Shulevitz' illustra-
tions appears mixed indeed, with blurry and indistinct forms oddly juxtaposed
with sharp black lines and accents. The characters' faces are awkwardly drafted,
their expressions often disappointingly inarticulate; the landscape is a generic Bible
JANUARY 2002 
* 
179
land (a few cypress trees, a lot of yellow desert and rocky hillsides). Still, the
attractive design (spot art, decorated initial letters, glossy white pages) will invite
perusal by readers. The afterword provides a list of traditions and holidays estab-
lished by the women; a brief bibliography is included. JMD
MARTIN, BILL JR. 
The Little Squeegy Bug; by Bill Martin Jr. and Michael Sampson;
illus. by Patrick Corrigan. 
Winslow, 2001 
32p
ISBN 1-890817-90-2 
$16.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
After an encounter with an impressive bumblebee, a little squeegy bug goes in
search of wings so he can be a bumblebee, too. After saving the little squeegy bug
from a storm, a kind old caterpillar named Creepy takes LSB to visit Haunchy the
Spider, who "lives in a castle of webs at the end of the cattail leaf." Haunchy spins
the little squeegy bug a pair of silver wings, then reaches into the sky, pulls down a
star, and hangs it on the bug's tail, telling him, "With your light you can help
people. You can light the way through the night for everyone in the world. You
shall be called Squeegy the Firefly, the Lamplighter of the Sky." The story itself, a
revised edition of Martin's first story (written over fifty years ago), is a homage to
old-fashioned didacticism-the journey itself is without tension, and the conclu-
sion is more convenient than logical. Corrigan's computer-enhanced illustrations
make this one bright and shiny (if not necessarily involving) package, however,
and the airbrushed style and lavish use of spot lamination enhance the slickness of
the graphics. The visual polish and the art's geometric playfulness may be enough
to attract if not hold young viewers. JMD
MARTIN, RAFE, ad. 
The Shark God; illus. by David Shannon. 
Levine/Scholas-
tic, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-590-39500-9$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
A brother and sister, unable to obtain adult assistance, by themselves free a shark
tangled in ropes. On the way home, they touch the forbidden drum belonging to
their king and, despite the pleas of their desperate parents, they are sentenced to
death. The parents plead for assistance from the fearsome (and hungry) Shark
God, who helpfully causes a great flood that allows the children to escape; guided
by an enormous shark, they rejoin their parents for a journey to a faraway island
with a just king. Shannon's illustrations feature rounded human figures and a
monumental air appropriate to this dramatic tale. The palette is hot, the ocean is
an ever-present force, and the shark images (especially the awe-inducing Shark
God) are both chilling and seductive. It's hard to go wrong with a good shark
story, and there's excitement aplenty here. Unfortunately, the tale's logic isn't
always clear: why do the children want to help the shark, a natural enemy, in the
first place? Does the shark king know about the children's saving of the shark, or
is he moved only by the injustice of their sentence? Still, the story and images are
sensational enough that even restless listeners will be drawn into the adventure.
JMD
Moss, MARIss 
Brave Harriet: The First Woman to Fly the English Channek illus.
by C. F. Payne. 
Silver Whistle/Harcourt, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-15-202380-1 
$16.00 
R 5-9 yrs
In this imagined narrative, early twentieth century pilot Harriet Quimby tells of
her love-at-first-sight affair with aviation and her daring flight from England to
180 
* 
THE BULLETIN
France, guided only by a compass, intuition, and intense determination to be the
first woman to complete the journey. Opening pages focus on Quimby's mastery
of the "rattletrap, gum-and-spit contraption" and on her defiance of social norms
to earn the license and backing to become a professional aviatrix. Her channel
crossing is, of course, the signal event here, and although the journey is relatively
brief, it packs its share of adventure: "The plane was tilting sharply, and the steep
pitch caused the engine to misfire. The motor began to sputter. There was no
time to think, only time to act." Obviously her mission ends in success, but the
triumph she hoped for never materialized, because "it was April 16, 1912, and for
that day-and for days afterward-there was other news that eclipsed mine." In
the penultimate spread, a newsboy hawks the London Times whose headline blares
"TITANIC DISASTER." Whether the often dreamy tone of this fictionalized
Quimby accurately reflects the pilot's real expression is impossible to ascertain
from the appended notes, and with the narrow focus on Quimby's Channel flight,
exciting details of her barnstorming career and tragic death never emerge. The
mixed-media art is sometimes too earthbound, but there's enough dramatic use of
sweeping perspective and swooping aircraft to evoke sympathy for Quimby's fasci-
nation with the air. Children who'd prefer wings to feet will delight in the story,
and teachers planning a unit on flight can encourage comparisons with Bldriot's
crossing in Provensen's The Glorious Flight. EB
MYERS, CHRISTOPHER 
Fly!; written and illus. by Christopher Myers. 
Jump at
the Sun/Hyperion, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-7868-0652-4 
$15.99 
R Gr. 3-5
Jawanza isn't allowed to play out on the street, so he spends most of his free time
looking out the window of his family's upper-floor apartment, watching the clouds
of pigeons that soar through the city sky. When he hollers "What do you mean,
you know-nothing birds?" out his window, "a voice like grits and gravy rains through
the window and all over my case. 'Maybe you ain't supposed to know, because
you too loud and too young, and you ain't listening.'" A slightly sheepish Jawanza
ventures up to the roof and meets old Roderick Jackson Montgomery the Three,
keeper of the pigeons. Mr. Three introduces Jawanza to his birds and explains that
he and his birds "don't have to flap our lips to communicate." Instead, the man
and the birds dance together on the rooftop: "Mr. Montgomery the Three throws
his wings open wide as the city, wide as the sky. He is flying, swooping, soaring.
He and the birds are talking, communicating in their own language." Here and
there the text is more pedestrian than poetic, but overall the body of Myers' plot is
as gracefully loose-limbed as his elongated images of Jawanza and Mr. Montgom-
ery, and the dialogue between the young boy and the old man flows with an ease
that makes it both believable and magical. The occasional awkward drafting of the
boy's figure can be jarring and the compositions of birds and sky become repeti-
tive, but the vision is a compelling one: against dark cobalt window frames and
walls, the young narrator glows in his yellow shirt, red pants, and gold skin; the
birds, their wings extended, swim against a blue and green watery sky; the El-
Greco-like extensions of the old man's arms and legs punctuate the rooftop hori-
zon like a human exclamation point. Instead of dwelling in cold urban grays and
concrete browns, the sunny Caribbean palette (enlivened by scarlet stairways, wine-
colored doorways, even crimson and gold endpapers) adds to the overall impres-
sion of an urban world burning with passion and color. Myers does love his city,
and he makes sure viewers know why. JMD
JANUARY 2002 
* 
181
NATHAN, AMY 
Yankee Doodle Gals: Women Pilots of World War II. 
National
Geographic, 2001 
89p illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-7922-8216-7 
$21.00 
R Gr. 5-8
While bureaucratic resistance limited the existence of the women's flight unit to
two years (and they weren't officially part of the military even then), the flying
women of World War II made an indelible impression on those who worked with
them. Nathan chronicles the program from its early days as two separate endeav-
ors (one under the control of famous pilot Jackie Cochran and another under
Nancy Love) through its integration into the WASP squadron, which provided
pilots for ferrying aircraft, flying targets for the training of ground troops, and test-
flying damaged aircraft for readiness to return to duty, among other services. Draw-
ing on a multitude of interviews as well as research in public and private print
materials, the author effectively conveys both the glee of the program's many suc-
cesses ("Here I was a girl of 22 given a million-dollar airplane and told, 'Go fly!'")
and the sadness of the tragedies made all the more poignant by the women's non-
military status, which meant no military honors, pensions, or assistance with fu-
neral expenses. The book also covers a multitude of details ranging from the
occasional struggle to convince air-traffic control that the female voice on the ra-
dio was indeed coming from the big military aircraft to the issue of racial inclusion
(though a few Asian-American women and an American Indian woman were
WASPs, no African-American woman was ever admitted to the program). Though
the double-columned format is occasionally confusing, lively sidebars and fleets of
photographs give readers plenty to look at while they're navigating their way. A
chronology, a list of resources, and an index are included. DS
NOGUCHI, RICK 
Flowers from Mariko; by Rick Noguchi and Deneen Jenks; illus.
by Michelle Reiko Kumata. 
Lee & Low, 2001 
32p
ISBN 1-58430-032-9 
$16.95 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
After three long years in an internment camp, Mariko and her Japanese-American
family are finally free to leave and reconstruct their lives back home in California.
With her father's gardening business in ruins (their landlord sold Mariko's father's
gardening truck and then left town), they move into a trailer park that's not all
that much different from Camp. While her increasingly despondent father struggles
to find a way to financial solvency, Mariko attempts to lift his spirits by seeding a
small plot of the flowers he grew in Camp during the war. Noguchi's narration is
somewhat drawn out and bland, and the family's renewed fortunes proceed with a
steady pace more often found in picture books than in life; Kumata's rigid figures,
heavily outlined in black, are poised like paper dolls against the spare backdrops of
Camp and trailer park. Mariko's tale lacks the child-engaging focus of Mochizuki's
Baseball Saved Us (BCCB 5/93), but it supplements that view of the Japanese-
American experience with a broader range of detail concerning the challenges of
postwar resettlement. A concluding note explains the U.S. "relocation" policy of
World War II and the Civil Liberties Act of 1988 that acknowledged Constitu-
tional violations and "included an official apology." EB
NOLAN, HAN 
Born Blue. Harcourt, 2001 
277p
ISBN 0-15-201916-2 
$17.00 
R Gr. 9-12
Caucasian foster child Janie (abandoned by her drug-addict mother) finds her
only solace in the kindness of her social worker, Doris, and the friendship of fellow
182 
* THE BULLETIN
foster child, Harmon (both of whom are African American) and in the music she
hears on Harmon's tapes of famous female R&B singers. As a result, Janie devel-
ops an alternative identity as an African American, renaming herself Leshaya, adopt-
ing a black dialect, and dreaming of making it as a blues singer herself. Throughout
a childhood and adolescence fraught with dramatic events (which include being
traded by her mother for heroin and bearing an illegitimate child of her own),
Leshaya clings to her musical aspirations, eventually finding some success with the
recording of a hit song. 
Unfortunately, she habitually destroys all positive per-
sonal relationships before they can really take root and finally, in desperation, she
returns to her mother (now dying of AIDS), grudgingly helping to care for her
while the two gradually achieve a degree of reconciliation. After her mother's
death, Leshaya sets off to reclaim her own daughter but ultimately realizes that her
child will be better off where Leshaya originally left her, with Harmon's warm and
well-off family. As in many stories of budding young performers, Leshaya's articu-
lation of her passion for singing is sometimes clich6d and her quick musical success
seems unlikely; the numerous tragedies that befall Leshaya, however, effectively
reflect the kind of hard living expressed in the blues music she loves. The relentless
bridge-burning and unusual racial twist make this riveting reading, but it's Nolan's
characterization of Leshaya (with her desperate desire for love, her ultimate rejec-
tion of anyone who tries to help her, and her palpable, just-below-the-surface pain)
and of the complicated adults in her life that make this story genuinely moving.
JMH
PROVENSEN, ALICE, ad. 
The Master Swordsman & The Magic Doorway: Two Leg-
endsfrom Ancient China; ad. and illus. by Alice Provensen. 
Simon, 2001 
[40p]
ISBN 0-689-83232-X 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-10 yrs
Perennial stalwart Provensen here turns to ancient China, presenting two brief
tales in this slender volume. In "The Master Swordsman," Little Chu longs to
master the art of swordsmanship in order to protect his poor village from bandits.
His apprenticeship with Master Li, "the greatest teacher of the sword in all of
China," consists largely of trying to dodge the missiles pitched in his direction; the
day finally comes when Little Chu dodges the sword of his teacher, and Master Li
tells Chu that he is so fast he will never need to draw his sword: "No enemy can
touch you. Use the sword to chop cabbage." In "The Magic Doorway," artist Mu
Chi paints a magnificent mural at the emperor's command. Determined that only
he should possess such marvelous work, the emperor plans to execute the artist as
soon as the painting is finished, but Mu Chi saves himself with his own artistry,
walking to freedom through a door in his painting. Provensen's writing style is
dignified yet humorous. The first tale is especially funny, as the various objects
thrown at the hapless Little Chu call out words of advice, like "Look sharp!" and
"Be alert!"; it could make a slapsticky and comical flannelboard story. "The Magic
Painting" is more subtle, with its appreciation of both art and trickery, and it will
appeal to slightly older groups. Provensen's oil on vellum illustrations have a scroll-
like detail and linearity with stylistic sensitivity to the stories. For the first, the
paint is thinned to near translucency, and multiple framed panels emphasize the
story's rhythm; for the second, the approach is a little more formal, the colors
richer, the drafting more sophisticated. Although the subtitle calls these stories
"Two Legends from Ancient China," there are no source notes, and they're de-
scribed as original stories in the CIP information. Either way, both tales dearly
JANUARY 2002 
* 
183
have strong thematic roots in traditional and literary lore (much like Lafcadio
Hearn's Japanese stories), and they'll lend themselves very well to telling or read-
ing aloud. JMD
QUATTLEBAUM, MARY 
Grover G. Graham and Me. 
Delacorte, 2001 
179p
ISBN 0-385-32277-1 
$14.95 
R Gr. 4-7
Eleven-year-old Ben Watson is going through the obligatory settling-in motions at
his eighth foster home (his social worker assures him that this is a temporary stop
on the road to a more permanent placement), but he knows his days of becoming
attached are over ("If you care in the system, you're a goner"). He hadn't, how-
ever, bargained for the friendly Torgle parents and his fellow foster kids: seven-
year-old twins Kate and Jango, yearning for their father's return, and especially
one-year-old Grover, who takes a serious (and reciprocated) shine to Ben. Ben's so
protective of Grover, in fact, that when the baby returns to the custody of his
teenage mother, a desperate Ben grabs the kid ("Someone had to look out for
Grover") and hops a bus out of town. While there are some predictable touches
(this isn't the first prickly foster kid we've seen finally find a home), the relation-
ship between Ben and Grover, on whom Ben very clearly projects his anxieties and
his pain about his own inadequate mother, is warm, humorous, and illuminating.
Ben's narration is staunch yet vulnerable as he realizes his own capabilities and
softens up, first towards the other kids and then towards the adults; secondary and
tertiary characters, ranging from Grover's imperfect but determined mother to
Ben's sunny, sharper-than-she-seems social worker, are particularly vividly drawn.
The happy ending may be inevitable, but it's no more than Ben deserves, and
readers will be glad to see him settled. DS
RAPPAPORT, DOREEN 
Martin's Big Words: The Life ofDr. Martin Luther King, Jr.;
illus. by Bryan Collier. 
Jump at the Sun/Hyperion, 2001 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2591-X 
$16.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0714-8 
$15.99 
R* 
5-8 yrs
See this month's Big Picture, p. 163, for review.
REDMOND, IAN 
The Elephant Book. 
Candlewick, 2001 
[4 8p] 
illus. with
photographs
ISBN 0-7636-1634-6 
$17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
The text of this picture book (updated from the 1991 edition) offers fact-hungry
readers lucid descriptions of elephantine sociology and physiology (did you know
there are 100,000 muscles in an elephant's trunk?) alongside emotional appeals to
join the anti-poaching "Elefriends" in protecting the pachyderms, whose "close-
knit and caring" family life is "similar to our own." Unfortunately, the tugs at
heart- and purse-strings clash both conceptually and visually with the informative
tidbits; the dizzying array of intruded quotations (often from celebrities unlikely
to be familiar to young readers) and the overdesigned layout make it difficult to
keep to the narrative and to identify organizational features like chapter headings
on the more overcrowded pages. The photographs (many taken by the author)
tend to majestic vistas and sobering images, but they also include some revealing
closeups, like those in the chapter on "Tail, Skin, and Feet." In spite of the dis-
tracting packaging, thoughtfully focused chapters make this a potentially useful
184 
* THE BULLETIN
resource for researchers of fact-driven reports (though material here is unsourced),
while the wealth of opinions expressed in the foreword and sidebars will assist
those creating position-based arguments. An index is included. FK
RIGGS, STEPHANIE 
Never Sell YourselfShort; illus. with photographs by Bill
Youmans. 
Whitman, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-8075-5563-0 
$15.95 
Ad 
7-10 yrs
Josh, an eighth-grade boy with achondroplasia (short stature or dwarfism), tells his
own story in this purposive photoessay. Josh talks about adjustments he makes to
accomplish daily tasks (pulling down a special rack for his clothes, for example, or
wearing a CPAP mask to sleep) and answers those questions that kids most want
answered (How do you buy clothes? What do you do when you want something
off a top shelf?). This isn't quite up to the standard of Kuklin's Thinking Big: The
Story ofa Young Dwarf(BCCB 5/86): the text is obviously messagey and some-
times stiff, and some of the photographs are on the bland side. Overall, however,
this is an easily understood introduction to a common but rarely considered con-
dition, and the practical narrative has an upbeat, positive tone that reinforces the
smiling images shown in the photographs. A note about dwarfism and contact
information for the Little People of America are included. JMD
ROBERTS, LYNN, ad. 
Cinderella: An Art Deco Love Story; illus. by David
Roberts. 
Abrams, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-8109-4168-6 
$16.95 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
The popular tale of Cinderella has been collected, retold, spoofed, and revised
countless times. The point of this reimagining of the popular tale is not the story
so much as the illustrations, since author Lynn Roberts rushes through the fairy
godmother's arrival and Cinderella's transformation and does little else to place
this retelling in its titular era or to make it memorable. It's illustrator David Rob-
erts who sets the story in the 1930s, which enables him to incorporate Art Deco
designs into the fashions and furnishings. This is much tamer than Roberto
Innocenti's similar period reimagining, but fans of Art Deco may enjoy poring
over the pages to identify fads and fashions of the day (stained glass windows,
chinoiserie, drop-waist dresses, bobbed hair, statuary, etc.) and to find humorous
touches (a hung-over, green-faced stepsister at the breakfast table the morning
after the ball, runs in the stockings of the sister trying on the glass slipper). Retell-
ings of popular folktales can always find a place on large library shelves; you might
wish to add this one to your Cinderella display for an unusual visual take. JMD
ROSENFELD, DINA 
Get Well Soon: A Bikur Cholim Story; illus. by Rina
Lyampe. 
Hachai, 2001 
30p
ISBN 1-929628-05-6 
$9.95 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
Eli is ready and willing to do the mitzva of Bikur Cholim and visit the sick, but
that turns out to be harder than it seems. His mother won't let him visit his friend
Tzvi ("I wouldn't want you to catch his germs"), he's not allowed into the hospital
to visit Mrs. Frankel, and the recuperating rabbi has already filled his quota of
visitors for the day; Eli finds phone visiting, sending along a picture to the hospi-
tal, and sharing a piece of his father's mitzva pretty unsatisfying despite their tech-
nical fulfillment of the charge. Fortunately for him if unfortunately for her, Eli's
JANUARY 2002 
* 
185
sister Mindy has a headache that Eli's frustrated bangings are worsening, and Eli
realizes he can do Bikur Cholim right in his own home by sitting next to a napping
Mindy. While this is a book written for an insider audience (you'll have to look
elsewhere for detailed information on the mitzva of Bikur Cholim), the general
concept will be clear to youngsters of all faiths and backgrounds. The language of
the story is simple but effective, largely because Eli's desire and frustration are so
straightforwardly and concretely conveyed; the close focus on Eli's determined
good intentions allows the book to convey its message without resorting to tedious
preaching. The illustrations aren't up to the text, however; while Eli is a boy of
realistic bounce and additional visual details enhance the depiction of his Bikur
Cholim for Mindy (he's eating the fruit he brought for her), the draftsmanship is
stiff and idealized, and the colors relentlessly loud. Nonetheless, this is a soft-
spoken and unaffected little tale, ready to pair with Rael's similarly themed What
Zeesie Saw on Delancey Street (BCCB 12/96) and suited for religious schools of all
stripes and any other venue where there's a call to discuss good deeds. DS
SEEGER, PETE, ad. 
IHada Rooster: A Traditional Folk Song; illus. by Laura Vaccaro
Seeger. 
Viking, 2001 
26p
ISBN 0-670-03521-1 
$17.99 
R 4-6yrs
Pete Seeger's adaptation of the traditional cumulative folksong gets imaginative
bookmaking treatment at the hands of his stepniece, Laura Vaccaro Seeger, who
was herself inspired by an idea of the late Ruth Crawford Seeger, Pete's stepmother
and Laura's grandmother-in-law. That's a lot of American-music history to bear
(the accompanying CD adds in Peggy and Mike Seeger to boot), but youngsters
uninterested in the august connections will still find plenty to enjoy here. The
song doesn't have much of a story, but the increasing collection of animals feeding
off "the green berry tree" retains its traditional allure, and audience participation
on the beastly noises is requisite. The cumulative structure is ingeniously inter-
preted in progressively shorter spiral-bound pages, each of which adds a new line
and an updated picture to the ever-increasing litany of animals. The illustrations
use thick oils on cutout figures in a naive folk-art style; the lustrous dark colors and
deliberate stiffness suggest painting on wood, while the shining golden tree (in
which the menagerie ends up drolly perched) balances out the deeper pigments
(kids will also enjoy hunting for the literally unsung character of the mouse, who
scampers through every spread). The art unfortunately limits displays to smaller
groups or one-to-one sharing, but youngsters will get a kick out of turning the
cleverly formatted pages as well as singing along. A note from Pete Seeger and
musical notation is included. DS
SPIEGELMAN, ART, ed. Little Lit: Strange Stories for Strange Kids; ed. by Art
Spiegelman and Franooise Mouly. 
RAW Junior/Cotler/HarperCollins,
2001 
64p 
illus.
ISBN 0-06-028626-1 
$19.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-8
This comic book writ large offers fifteen entries ranging from several-page narra-
tives to seek-and-find puzzles to joke pages. There's quite a range in the talent
represented, too: Maurice Sendak offers a double-spread narrative about a vora-
cious baby ("Cereal Baby Keller"), Ian Falconer teams up with David Sedaris for a
tale of an ogre suffering from prettiness ("Pretty Ugly"), and comic artist Jacques
de Loustal joins writer Paul Auster for the fanciful tale of "The Day I Disap-
186 
* THE BULLETIN
peared." The paneled format and variety of styles make this terrifically appealing
from the visual standpoint; the crisp design (down to some very informative and
entertaining endpapers, giving some ludicrous yet useful tips on cartooning, by
Kaz) pulls the disparate artistic styles together, and several artists make good use of
the oversized pages and opportunity for subtler effects. The narratives are quite
uneven, however, both in audience and in effectiveness; many seem to be merely
tacking story onto the visuals or fluttering hastily through the plot so as not to
exceed the allotted space (and while it's nice that the book acknowledges the work
of Crockett Johnson, his old "Barnaby" strip is out of place here). Still, this will be
an alluring browse, and most kids will find something that tickles or intrigues
them within these pages. DS
STENHOUSE, TED 
Across the Steel River. Kids Can, 2001 
222p
ISBN 1-55074-891-2 
$16.95 
R Gr. 5-8
Narrator Will Samson and Arthur, a Siksika (Blackfoot) Indian, have always been
best friends, but they have reached a stage in their adolescence at which, their
fellow Alberta townsfolk predict, all such interracial friendships inevitably end.
Yellowfly, the Siksika's local World War II hero, is brutally beaten and left for
dead, and the white police force is not exactly on fire to apprehend the culprits. In
a strip of no-man's-land separating the town and the reservation, Will stumbles
upon a clue. Arthur, forced to attend a residential Indian school, is unable to help
Will investigate, but to prove his friendship Will carries on alone, pinning the
deed at last on some of the town's most influential citizens. Although Stenhouse
spins the whodunit with considerable skill, the splintering relationship between
the two friends is even more compelling. Will cannot understand Arthur's new
militant pride in his heritage, and he's truly hurt when Arthur snubs him around
his Indian friends. Arthur, while grateful for Will's efforts on Yellowfly's behalf,
has begun to realize and even accept that the steel river of railroad tracks that
divides the town will ultimately drive them into separate worlds as well. The 1952
Canadian milieu doesn't seem all that long ago and far away, and the boys' tested
loyalties will resonate with any reader who's felt a friendship hit the rocks. EB
SWANSON, DIANE 
Nibbling on Einstein's Brain: The Good, the Bad, & the Bogus in
Science; illus. by Warren Clark. Annick, 2001 
104p
Trade ed. ISBN 1-55037-687-X $24.95
Paper ed. ISBN 1-55037-686-1 
$14.95 
R Gr. 5-9
Swanson breezily tackles the daunting concept of critical thinking, starting with
some background about science good and bad, then going on to explore basic ways
of interrogating scientific claims in various locations, assessing media accounts of
science and other matters, and understanding and limiting human tendencies to-
wards bias and misperception in evaluation. This is considerably more fun than it
sounds, as the book is salted with anecdotes about real and make-believe incidents,
peppered with quizzes, checklists, and quotes, and spiced with a lively (if at times
oversimplified, with some standard terms surprisingly absent) style. It's also an
extremely useful introduction to a subject that is rarely broached effectively, if at
all, for pre-adult readers and that has implications for consumer studies, politics,
sociology, Internet literacy, and other realms aside from science. The dichromatic
design (in green and black) is somewhat dark and stodgy, but there's a pell-mell
JANUARY 2002 
* 
187
cheerfulness to the layout and to the popeyed figures roaming the pages that in-
vites browsing. Credulity is too tough to die this easily, but this title will at least
give some kids the equipment to put up a decent fight against it. A glossary, a
good list of web and print resources, and an index are included. DS
TASHJIAN, JANET 
The Gospelaccording to Larry. 
Holt, 2001 
227p 
illus. with
photographs
ISBN 0-8050-6378-1 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Tashjian (author of Tru Confessions, BCCB 1/98) frames this narrative as a genu-
ine manuscript, penned by seventeen-year-old philosopher Josh Swensen, whose
virtual alter-ego, Larry, became a pop-culture sensation. Josh describes his cre-
ation of Larry, Larry's website, and Larry's Thoreau-esque philosophy and chronicles
the ensuing brouhaha when Larry becomes a media darling (resulting in "Larryfest")
and then turns out to be merely the invention of Josh. The media feeding frenzy
proves more than Josh can handle, and he commits "pseudocide" in order to es-
cape the mess that is completely out of his control. Throughout, Josh comments
on media, advertising, commercialism, and the lack of spiritual values in a world
gone mad, but he also discusses his crush on best friend Beth, his stepfather's vapid
new girlfriend, his grief over the death of his activist mother, and his burning
determination to change the world for the better. Despite occasional preachy
moments, the pace is quick and the tone is disarming, almost enough to preclude
sticky questions about convenient but implausible plot turns. Josh tells his story
in journalistic fits and starts, incorporating images of his belongings and footnotes
to his own text that reinforce the self-published air of the text. The charm of the
nalve, freethinking rebel may attract readers, even though those same readers might
wonder how Josh/Larry will ever find his way back into the world from his self-
imposed isolation. JMD
VAN DRAANEN, WENDELIN 
Flipped. Knopf, 2001 
212p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-91174-X 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-81174-5 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Ever since second grade, Bryce has found his neighbor Juli to be bumptious, pushy,
annoying, and weird: she hangs out in the top of an old sycamore tree, she's
keeping a flock of chickens, the result of a science-fair project, in her family's
disheveled yard, and she's embarrassingly besotted with Bryce. From her point of
view (presented alternately with Bryce's), Juli has been convinced that her effect
on Bryce is positive and that he cherishes the eggs she gives his family every week
(which he in fact throws away); now in eighth grade, however, she's beginning to
wonder if he's worth it all or if he's merely a pretty face with little behind it-just
as Bryce begins to realize that Juli is something quite special. The unrequited-love
problem is fairly familiar and the writing is occasionally corny, but there's an inter-
esting thematic slant here in the exploration of misguided attachments both youthful
and mature. With the aid of his grandfather, Bryce is beginning to see the limita-
tions of his handsome but shallow father (limitations clearly becoming apparent to
his mother as well); he's teetering on the brink of becoming something more sub-
stantial than his old man just as Juli comes down from the clouds and realizes that
he's been pretty short of substantial up till now. There's therefore an edge to the
boy-girl drama that gives an unusual depth to the narrative, but the story remains
188 
* THE BULLETIN
both accessible and concrete. This isn't likely to change the course of any reader's
true love for just a pretty face, but it may at least provoke contemplation of the
possibility. DS
WATTS, JULIA 
Finding H.F. Alyson, 2001 
16 5p
Papered. ISBN 1-55583-622-4 
$12.95 
R Gr. 7-12
H. F., short for Heavenly Faith, was "pushed out between the legs of a frustrated
15-year-old girl who took one look at me and turned tail and ran the first chance
she got"; now fifteen herself, she's struggling with life not only as an illegitimate
kid but also as a likely lesbian in her tiny Kentucky town, where "people can sniff
out difference-and it's a smell they hate." After falling head-over-heels for new
girl Wendy, she's devastated when Wendy withdraws, and there's an additional
blow when H. F. discovers that her grandmother has been secretly in contact with
H. F.'s mother. The fed-up girl coaxes her friend Bo, also struggling with being
gay in their intolerant small town, into a road trip to Florida to see H. F.'s mother,
a road trip that's also their first experience with life outside of rural Kentucky.
Watts gives her protagonist a winning and distinctive voice-funny yet wide-eyed
and questioning, she's dealing realistically with issues of class (Wendy is a privi-
leged daughter of a professor) as well as family loyalty and sexual identity. The
view of small-town life and its denizens is penetrating but tinged with affection
(the portrait of H. F.'s beloved Memaw, craft maven and Baptist temperance ad-
vocate, is tender and authentic). While the visit with H. F.'s mother is predictably
dreadful, the road trip is a delight, with H. F. and Bo queer innocents abroad
broadening their horizons ("Now finding out that there's such a thing as a church
for gay people...well, it's awful to say, but it feels like I just found out that the Ku
Klux Klan started accepting black members and working for racial equality") and
seeing new possibilities for their own futures. Readers journeying with H. F. will
be traveling in good company. DS
WOOLDRIDGE, CONNIE NORDHIELM, ad. 
The Legend of Strap Buckner: A Texas
Tale; illus. by Andrew Glass. 
Holiday House, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1536-8 
$16.95 
R Gr. 3-5
Wooldridge reaches into Texas folklore and comes up with Strap Buckner, "a man
of genius," whose genius "was to knock folks down." Despite this rather discon-
certing habit, Buckner is a sweetheart, who always nurses back to health those
wounded by the exercise of his genius. After a while people get tired of being
knocked down and either lock their doors against him or, in the case of one town,
pick up the entire settlement and move it while he sleeps. Buckner finally undoes
himself when he challenges the Devil, who "saw pride in Strap's eyes and heard the
echo of it in his boast. There's nothing that weakens a man who's facing the Devil
more than pride, and nobody knows that more than the Devil himself." Like
Buckner himself, Wooldridge's language is playful and exaggerated, making this
tale suitable for telling and reading aloud as well as reading alone. The accompa-
nying mixed-media illustrations (in watercolor crayons, Caran D'Arche, and pen-
cil with turpenoid on bristol board) enhance the stretched-beyond-belief feeling,
making Strap a swaggering redhead with a twinkle the size of Texas in his eye. The
backgrounds are spare and sketchy, but it is the characters in this tale that carry the
day, and most of that carrying is done by the boasting, blustering, big-framed and
big-hearted Buckner. An author's note gives some background on the historical
JANUARY 2002 
* 
189
Strap Buckner, placing him beside "such colorful Texas characters as Brit Bailey
and Roy Bean." A brief bibliography is included. JMD
YORINKS, ARTHUR 
Company's Going; illus. by David Small. 
Hyperion,
2001 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2363-3 
$16.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0415-7 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 2-4
In this sequel to Company's Coming, the aliens that visited Moe and Shirley are
returning home. They're so besotted with Shirley's meatballs, however, that they're
determined that Shirley should cater their sister's wedding; to this end, they chauf-
feur Moe and Shirley back to Nextoo (next to Uranus). While the earthling pair
are unfortunately initially mistaken for invading Martians and zapped by a ner-
vous uncle's ray gun, eventually they recover in time to pull off a fancy feast.
Though the book loses steam at the end, the text's blend of affectionate homeli-
ness and silliness is effective: Moe and Shirley are so relentlessly earthbound that
they're funny right from the spaceship's liftoff, and the echoes of real-life family
dialogue ("It's not good to blast off on an empty stomach") are endearing as well as
amusing. Small's art treats the situation as domestic comedy, giving the alien
world the same homespun charm as Shirley and Moe's milieu (get-well and "Sorry
We Shot You" cards greet the couple when they awaken); the humble line-and-
watercolor images emphasize warmth rather than special effects, making Moe and
Shirley into a visiting aunt and uncle complete with squashy goodbye hug for their
little alien nephews. Youngsters more inclined towards E.T. than Buck Rogers
will be ready to take off with this. DS
ZEINERT, KAREN 
Those Extraordinary Women of World War I. 
Millbrook,
2001 
96p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-7613-1913-1 
$27.40 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Zeinert continues her series on women's involvement in war efforts with this vol-
ume focusing on the Great War. Decades of women's-suffrage advocacy were
drawing toward a climax as hostilities escalated in Europe, and Zeinert emphasizes
the broader connections between women's entry into the work force and periph-
eral military roles, and the postwar passage of the Nineteenth Amendment. There's
nothing particularly novel here in content or viewpoint, but the topical organiza-
tion is tidy, the prose is engaging, and highlighted firsthand testimonies are thought-
fully selected for both inherent interest and balance of experiences. American
women's activities dominate the volume, but just enough references are made to
European participants to remind readers that the United States held no monopoly
on patriotism or heroism. World War I literature generally seems a poor cousin to
that of World War II and the Civil War, and this solid offering will be a real boon
to history report writers. Period photos, bibliographies, notes, and an index are
included. EB
190 
* THE BULLETIN
BULLETIN BLUE RIBBONS 2001
Ah, Blue Ribbons time again. What you don't see is the consideration, pleading,
advocacy, rigor, and passion of the collective process that, after weeks of delibera-
tion, produce this list. What you do see is a list of books that have withstood the
process, proving themselves resistant to the passing of time, the honing of critical
faculties, and the diversity of opinion among our meeting members. These are
tough books. We hope you enjoy them; we certainly have.
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
PICTURE BOOKS:
Ahlberg, Allan. TheAdventures ofBert; illus. by Raymond Briggs. Farrar. 2-5 yrs.
(September)
Burleigh, Robert. Lookin'for Bird in the Big City; illus. by Marek Los. Silver
Whistle/Harcourt. 5-8 yrs. (July/August)
Cooper, Elisha. Dance!; written and illus. by Elisha Cooper. Greenwillow. Gr. 3-
5. (September)
Fraustino, Lisa Rowe. The Hickory Chair; illus. by Benny Andrews. Levine/Scho-
lastic. 4-8 yrs. (March)
Graham, Bob. "Let's Get a Pup!" Said Kate; written and illus. by Bob Graham.
Candlewick. 5-8 yrs. (September)
High, Linda Oatman. Under New York; illus. by Robert Rayevsky. Holiday House.
5-8 yrs. (April)
Jenkins, Emily. Five Creatures; illus. by Tomek Bogacki. Foster/Farrar. 4-7 yrs.
(February)
Loomis, Christine. Astro Bunnies; illus. by Ora Eitan. Putnam. 3-6 yrs. (Febru-
ary)
Maggi, Marfa Elena, ad. The Great Canoe: A Kariia Legend; tr. from the Spanish
by Elisa Amado; illus. by Gloria Calder6n. Groundwood/Douglas & McIntyre.
5-8 yrs. (December)
Steen, Sandra. Car Wash; by Sandra and Susan Steen; illus. by G. Brian Karas.
Putnam. 3-7 yrs. (January)
Taylor, Alastair. Swollobog; written and illus. by Alastair Taylor. Houghton. 5-
8 yrs. (April)
Wells, Rosemary. Felix Feels Better; written and illus. by Rosemary Wells. Can-
dlewick. 3-5 yrs. (June)
Willey, Margaret, ad. Clever Beatrice: An Upper Peninsula Conte; illus. by Heather
Solomon. Atheneum. 4-8 yrs. (October)
JANUARY 2002 
* 
191
FICTION:
Colfer, Eoin. Artemis Fowl. Talk Miramax/Hyperion. Gr. 5-8. (July/August)
Haas, Jesse. Runaway Radish; illus. by Margot Apple. Greenwillow. Gr. 2-4.
(July/August)
Ibbotson, Eva. Dial-a-Ghost; illus. by Kevin Hawkes. Dutton. Gr. 4-6. (Septem-
ber)
Jenkins, A. M. Damage. HarperCollins. Gr. 9-12. (July/August)
Naidoo, Beverley. The Other Side of Truth. HarperCollins. Gr. 7-12. (Septem-
ber)
Salisbury, Graham. Lord ofthe Deep. Delacorte. Gr. 5-8. (July/August)
Schmidt, Gary D. Straw into Gold. Clarion. Gr. 6-9. (September)
Taylor, Mildred. The Land. Fogelman/Putnam. Gr. 7 up. (October)
Vande Velde, Vivian. The Rumpelstiltskin Problem. Houghton, 2000. Gr. 5-8.
(February)
Wilson, Jacqueline. Vicky Angel. Delacorte. Gr. 4-8. (October)
Wolff, Virginia Euwer. True Believer. Atheneum. Gr. 7-12. (May)
Wulffson, Don. SoldierX. Viking. Gr. 7-10. (March)
NONFICTION:
Bober, Natalie S. Countdown to Independence: A Revolution of Ideas in England
and Her American Colonies: 1760-1776. Atheneum. Gr. 9-12. (March)
Cunningham, Julia. The Stable Rat and Other Christmas Poems; illus. by Anita
Lobel. Greenwillow. Gr. 3-6. (November)
Florian, Douglas. Lizards, Frogs, andPolliwogs; written and illus. by Douglas Florian.
Harcourt. Gr. 3-6. (April)
Fradin, Dennis Brindell My Family Shall Be Free!: The Life ofPeter Still. Harper-
Collins. Gr. 5-9. (May)
Greenberg, Jan. Vincent Van Gogh: Portrait of an Artist; by Jan Greenberg and
Sandra Jordan. Delacorte. Gr. 7-12. (June)
Janeczko, Paul B., comp. A Poke in the I: A Collection of Concrete Poems; illus. by
Chris Raschka. Candlewick. Gr. 4-7. (June)
Kurlansky, Mark. The Cod's Tale; illus. by S. D. Schindler. Putnam. Gr. 3-6.
(October)
Martin, Jacqueline Briggs. The Lamp, the Ice, and the Boat Called Fish: Based on
a True Story; illus. by Beth Krommes. Houghton. Gr. 3-5. (February)
Nelson, Marilyn. Carver: A Life in Poems. Front Street. Gr. 7 up. (September)
Rappaport, Doreen. Martin's Big Words: The Life of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.;
illus. by Bryan Collier. Hyperion. 5-8 yrs. (January 2002)
iH-=sI
192 
* THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
ADVENTURE: Elliott; Flowers
Africa-folklore: Badoe
Africa-stories: Daly
African Americans: Bolden;
Rappaport
African Americans-fiction: Myers;
Nolan
African Americans-poetry: Johnson
Aliens-fiction: Johnston; Yorinks
American Indians-fiction:
Stenhouse
American Indians-folklore: Goble
Animals-songs: Seeger
Anthropology: Batten
Aviation: Moss; Nathan
BIBLE STORIES: Manushkin
BIOGRAPHIES: Anderson; Cox,
C.; Denenberg; Goodman;
Greenfeld; Jimenez; Macy; Moss;
Rappaport
Birds-fiction: Myers
Books and reading-stories: Lamm
Brothers and sisters-stories: Lamm
China-folklore: Provensen
China-stories: Provensen
Chinese Americans-stories: Lewin
Christmas-stories: Daly
Civil rights: Rappaport
COMICS: Spiegelman
Conservation: Redmond
Construction: Hooper
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Stenhouse
Critical thinking: Swanson
Disabilities: DeBear; Riggs
Disasters: Hampton
Dogs: Flowers
Dwarfism: Riggs
Ecology: Redmond
Egypt, ancient: Hooper
Elections-fiction: Howe
Elephants: Redmond
Ethics and values: Batten; Butcher;
Rappaport; Tashjian
Explorers and exploring: Goodman
Families-fiction: Butcher;
Quattlebaum
FANTASY: Dickinson; Duey
Fear-stories: Hoban; Lamm
FOLKTALES AND FAIRY TALES:
Badoe; Goble; Martin;
Provensen; Roberts; Wooldridge
Food and eating-stories: Daly;
Lewin
Foster care-fiction: Nolan;
Quattlebaum
Friendship: DeBear
Friendship-fiction: Cox, J.; Howe;
Johnston; Stenhouse
FUNNY STORIES: Wooldridge;
Yorinks
Gays and lesbians-fiction: Watts
Grandmothers-fiction: Butcher;
Watts
Hawaii-folklore: Martin
HISTORICAL FICTION: Elliott;
Garland; Noguchi
History, U.S.: Currie; Hampton;
Macy; Nathan; Noguchi
History, world: Goodman;
Greenfeld; Zeinert
Holidays: Rappaport
Holocaust, the: Greenfeld
Horses-fiction: Duey
JANUARY 2002 
* 
193
Hospitals-stories: Hoban
Identity-fiction: Nolan; Tashjian
Illness-stories: Hoban; Rosenfeld
Insects-stories: Martin, Jr.
Internet-fiction: Tashjian
Japanese Americans-stories:
Noguchi
Jazz-poetry: Isadora
Judaism-stories: Rosenfeld
Latinos: Jimenez
Magic and magicians: Cox, C.
Magic and magicians-fiction:
Barnes; Dickinson; Levinson
Mexico-fiction: Garland
Migrant workers: Jimtnez
Mothers-fiction: Barnes; Nolan;
Quattlebaum; Watts
Mothers-poetry: Johnson
Music and musicians: Anderson;
Denenberg
Music and musicians-fiction: Nolan
Music and musicians-poetry:
Isadora
MYSTERIES: Stenhouse
Nature study: Redmond
Nuclear energy: Hampton
Opossums-fiction: Johnston
Paraguay: Batten
Pirates-stories: Lamm
POETRY: Bolden; Isadora; Johnson
Racism: Rappaport
Racism-fiction: Stenhouse
Reading aloud: Hooper;
Manushkin; Wooldridge; Yorinks
Reading, easy: Cox, J.; Duey;
Johnston
Reading, reluctant: Duey;
Levinson; Spiegelman
Relationships: Van Draanen; Watts
Religious education: Bolden;
Rosenfeld; Manushkin
Restaurants-stories: Lewin
RHYMING BOOKS: Isadora
ROMANCE: Van Draanen
School-fiction: Cox, J.; Howe
Science: Batten; Swanson
Sharks-folklore: Martin
Ships and sailing: Currie
SHORT STORIES: Spiegelman
SONGS: Seeger
Storytelling: Badoe; Provensen;
Wooldridge
TALL TALES: Wooldridge
Texas-folklore: Wooldridge
Transportation: Moss
Unicorns-fiction: Duey
Urban life-fiction: Myers
Voyages and travel: Flowers;
Goodman
Voyages and travel-fiction: Watts
War: Greenfeld
West, the: Macy
Whaling: Currie
Witches-fiction: Barnes; Levinson
Women's studies: Manushkin;
Moss; Nathan; Zeinert
World War I: Zeinert
World War II: Greenfeld; Nathan
World War II-fiction: Elliott
A Newo York Times
Best Illustrated Book
performance by
-Starred review/
Publishers
""'U,-y
~jl "In 18 poems, grisly enough to delight the taste for the macabre
in any child, Prelutsky takes the Awful Ogre through his awful day ..
[where] everything that is grotesque is Ogre's idea of grand. As depicted
gleefully by Prelutsky and Zelinsky, this ogre is a huge, lovable innocent
who is unaware of any offense he might give. A bad day has never
been a better romp." 
-Starred review / Kirkus Reviews
~'*- 
"Children are sure to memorize Prelutsky's inventive verse and
will avidly search the illustrations for their hidden jokes. Consider
purchasing an extra copy--just in case Awful Ogre is checked out
for an awfully long time." -Starred review / School Library Journal
Ages 6 up. $15.95 Tr (0-688-07778-1); $15.89 Lb (0-688-07779-X)
~aGreenwillow Books An imprint of HarperCollinsPublishers
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019 www.harperchildrens.com
Eighteen-year-old Ahvren hopes to end his service as a warrior
conquering beings on other planets if he can discover who is
behind a rumored plot to assassinate the emperor.
" 
"This is well-written, thought-provoking, and exciting science
fiction. It's got cool weapons and weird aliens, but it's also got
some meat to it. Fans of 'Star Trek' will find it just to their taste."
-Starred 
review / School Library Journal
S"A dynamic combination of science fiction, thriller, and mystery that
will draw readers from the start. One of the best youth science fiction
tales to come along in many years." 
-Starred 
review / ALA Booklist
Ages 12 up. $16.95 Tr (0-06-029513-9); $16.89 Lb (0-06-029514-7)
" HarperCollinsChildren 'sBooks
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019 www.harperchildrens.com
-Aff· 
,
; 
_1_ 
·^(_~_
I 
A 
Pulshr 
Wekl 
Bes 
Chlre' 
Boo 
2001
,•Edi:fw 
n 
...
L:-.:a 
-
I
,uiijyI..IIim 
sicii 
...
informational .. .f u n."
-Publishers Weekly, starred review
"The goofy paintings will appeal to the age group that is
also fascinated by inventions of things like potato chips
and chewing gum." 
-Kirkus Reviews
"Children who are interested in the origins of things will
enjoy this whimsical look at how piggy banks, doughnuts,
eyeglasses, high-heeled shoes, chewing gum, and more
were created." 
-School Library Journal
Little, Brown and Company 
Ages 4-8 $14.95 (14.70) 0-316-34725-6
4 
Little, Brown and Company 
Ages 4-8 $14.95 (14.70) 0-316-34725-6
"A sensitive
treatment of a young man
struggling against a strong and
frightening tide."
-Starred 
review / The Bulletin
LU Li• 
lt: 
UIIL L1CIL IL UUllllllat1IC 
1113 CV 
Uly 
LIUUU~IILL. LIVIIIY
everything-good looks, athletic ability, a beautiful girlfriend, a great
mom-simply doesn't seem enough to live for. Jenkins uses an
intriguing second-person point of view to depict Austin's
detachment . . .[in her] unflinching, powerful depiction of
depression." 
-Starred 
review / ALA Booklist
W- "[With] dialogue that perfectly captures present-day teen speech
patterns, a skilled rendering of small-town life, and the sometimes
brutal world of high school football . . . [this is] a brave, truthful,
stylistically stunning young adult novel."
-Starred 
review / School Library Journal
Ages 12 up. $15.95 Tr (0-06-029099-4); $15.89 Lb (0-06-029100-1)
* HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019 * www.harperchildrens.com
I 
JMSON' 
BUIE 
TRASR 
SEIE 
I
I 
FOR READERS 
8 TO 
ADULT 
I
Desperately Seeking
Silver (and Gold)-
August House!
RIED TREASURES OF NEW ENGLAND:
gends of Hidden Riches, Forgotten War
lots, and Lost Treasure Ships
iperback $11.95 0-87483-485-6
ELECTED 
AS OUTSTANDING BY 
PARENT COUNCIL
"...thoroughly researched...written in a lively, narrative style."
-School 
library Journal
41o 
* 
0 
oa 
* 
agog go 
O 
OO** 
**
S
BURIED 
TREASURES 
OF 
BURIED 
TREASURES 
OF CALIFORNIA
THE ATLANTIC 
COAST: 
Legends of Sunken 
Paperback 
$10.95 0-87483-406-6
Pirate Ireasures, 
Mysterious aches, and
Jinxed Ships-from Maine to Florida
Poperback 
511.95 0-87483-484-8
SELECTED 
AS OUTSTANDING 
BY 
PARENT 
COUNCIL
"-„-... \d I I.rr.-.!:.. :---l 
, ,- 
-
S ...u weuallll U Iuiiullfiy 
asc 
IUIIIIUoIUII...LUIIlIn 
UIIU
easy to read...text that can easily be understood 
by
anyone 
from ages ten or twelve through 
adult...'-KLIATT
BURIED 
TREASURES 
OF
THE 
MID-ATLANTIC 
STATES:
Legends of Island Treasure, Jewelry
Caches, and Secret Tunnels
Poperback 
$11.95 0-87483-531-1
SELECTED 
AS OUTSTANDING 
BY PARENT 
COUNCIL
BURIED 
TREASURES 
OF THE 
GREAT 
PLAINS 
BURIED 
TREASURES 
OF THE 
OZARKS: Legends of Lost
Paperback 
$11.95 0-87483-486-4 
Gold, Hidden Silver, and Forgotten Caches
"...will 
provide 
the armchair 
adventurer, 
the amateur treasure 
hunter, 
or 
Paperback 
$11.95 0-87483-106-7
the student 
researching 
pirate/treasure lore hours 
of reading 
pleasure.
Highly 
recommended.'-KIATT 
BURIED 
TREASURES 
OF THE 
PACIFIC 
NORTHWEST: 
Secret
Indian Mines, Lost Outlaw Hoards, and Stolen
BURIED 
TREASURES 
OF THE 
ROCKY 
MOUNTAIN 
WEST: 
Payroll Coins
Legends of Lost Mines, Train Robbery Gold, Caves of 
Paperback 
$11.95 0-87483-438-4
Forgotten Riches, and Indians' Buried Silver
Paperback 
$10.00 0-87483-272-1 
BURIED 
TREASURES 
OF THE 
SOUTH: 
Legends of Lost,
"A good 
choice 
for reluctant 
readers."-KIIATT 
Buried, and Forgotten Treasures-from Tidewater
Virginia and Coastal Carolina to Cajun Louisiana
BURIED 
TREASURES 
OF THE 
AMERICAN 
SOUTHWEST: Paperback 
$10.95 0-87483-286-1
Legends of Lost Mines, Hidden Payrolls and Spanish Gold
Paperback 
$9.95 0-87483-082-6
BURIED 
TREASURES 
OF THE 
APPALACHIANS: 
A 
T
Legends of Homested Caches, ndian Mines and Loot
from Cvil War Raids 
A 
u
Paperback 
$10.95 
087483-126-1
BURIED 
TREASURES 
OF TEXAS:
Legends 
of Outlaw Loot, Pirate Hoards, 
Buried 
Mines,
Ingots in Lakes, and Santa 
Amn's Pack-Train 
Gold
Paperback 
$10.95 087483-1784
www. augusthouse. com
P.O. 
Box 
3223 / Little Rock, AR 
72203 / 201 East 
Markham 72201 / 501-372-5450 / FAX 
501-372-5579
*"This lovely volume will...
charm readers and inspire he..
Azarian's hand-painted woodcut prints provide evocative,
haunting nature scenes for Pollock's eloquent poems in
honor of each month's full moon. Each new spread reveals
a spectacular nighttime vista:'
-Publishers Weekly (starred review)
'Azarian's images are beautifully rendered, with an underlying
strength to the patterns of flower, cornstalk, ripple, and leaf."
-Kirkus Reviews
"This delicate collection of poems offers a beautifully
illustrated look at a year's worth of full moons."
-School Library Journal
Little, Brown and Company 
Ages 4-8 $15.95 (15.70) 0-316-71317-1
Patricia MacLachlan
Caleb's Story
-c "Newbery Medalist MacLachlan continues the story of
the Witting family, with the believable characters readers
have come to know and love from Sarah, Plain and Tall
(1985) and its sequel, Skylark (1994).... Readers will
savor this new addition to the chronicle of a delightful
family." 
-Starred 
review / Kirkus Reviews
"This is an excellent work of historical fiction, a satisfying
sequel, and an inspiring tale about love and forgiveness."
-School 
Library Journal
Ages 8-10. $14.95 Tr (0-06-023605-1); $14.89 Lb (0-06-023606-X)
$12.00 (0-694-52596-0) Audio Cassette (unabridged)
-
Also in Patricia MacLachlan's Sarah, Plain and Tall saga -
Sarah, Plain and Tall
Ages 8-10. $14.95 Tr (0-06-024101-2); $14.89 Lb (0-06-024102-0);
$4.95 Pb (0-06-440205-3) A Charlotte Zolotow Book
o 
Skylark
Ages 8-10. $14.95 Tr (0-06-023328-1); $4.95 Pb (0-06-440622-9)
$12.00 (0-694-52595-2) Audio Cassette (unabridged)
$25.00 (0-694-52602-9) Unabridged Audio CD Collection
of the 3 saga novels
A 
Joanna Coder Books An imprint of HarperCollinsPublishers
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019 * www.harperchildrens.com
~nts' 
hoiceAward
F: C*L 
dhen
Deborah
,ebck hs re-
iird ediition of
p-up
make by impec-
wit its rac: 
u wtt ~pros, is
- Hornt Bo-k Mgzn
* 14 ilutrain
Vt OPjLL 
I 
S RS
wwwpre; 
s S~llinoiQed
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.S.A.
RETURN SERVICE REQUESTED
You may now access The Bulletin Online with an individualized username
and password.
The Bulletin Online is available only to print subscribers, and includes the
1998-2000 volume years plus the current issues as they are published.
The online version allows you to search the current issue or the entire
database by author, title, age, or grade level.
To access The Bulletin Online:
I. Go to http://www.prairienet.org/ccb/
4$hF
2. You will be asked for a username and password, both of which are set
as the four- or five-digit number printed in the upper left-hand corner
of the mailing label on your print copy. When entering, do not
include the letter at the end of this number sequence.
3. The first time you log in, you will be required to change your pass-
word to something other than your username.
Remember, The Bulletin Online is not licensed for public use; only
individual print subscribers and institutional subscribers' staff are granted
access, so please do not share your access codes. We are working to
expand The Bulletin Online's capabilities and therefore create broader
electronic subscription options for individuals and institutions. Look for
details later this year.
Non-subscribers can learn more about The Bulletin of the Center for
Children's Books at our homepage: http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb/
Please e-mail any feedback or questions to: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu.
0008-9036(200201)55:5;1-M
PERIODICALS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
; 
·
