T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by The Johns Hopkins University Press
June 2008
Vol. 61   No. 10
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
June 2008
Vol. 61 No. 10
413  the BIg PICture
 
 Keeping the Night Watch  by Hope Anita Smith; illus. by E. B. Lewis
414  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
425  • The Dangerous Alphabet  by Neil Gaiman; illus. by Gris Grimly
432  • Fartiste  by Kathleen Krull and Paul Brewer; illus. by Boris Kulikov
440  • Pizza, Pigs, and Poetry:  How to Write a Poem  by Jack Prelutsky
444  • Lucky  by Rachel Vail
447  • The Dragon’s Child:  A Story of Angel Island  by Laurence Yep and Dr.  
 
    Kathleen S. Yep
449  ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons
450  suBjeCt And use Index
412 • The BulleTin
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
 
 
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the  
 
 
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Katrina Bromann, Reviewer (KB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Cindy Welch, Reviewer (CW)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Katrina Bromann, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print or electronic $85.00; combined print & electronic $119.00; multiple in-
stitutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, $53.00; students, 
$15.00. In countries other than the United States, add $14.30 per subscription for postage; subscrib-
ers in Canada and Mexico add $9.90. Single copy rate: $9.00. Volumes available in microfilm from 
ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche 
from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be 
made payable to The Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Divi-
sion, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 
410-516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/jour-
nals/advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.uiuc.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2008 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image by E. B. Lewis from Keeping the Night Watch ©2008.  Used by permission of Henry 
Holt and Company.
June 2008 • 413
the BIg PICture
Keeping the Night Watch
by Hope Anita Smith; illustrated by E. B. Lewis
“This is a mess,” says thirteen-year-old C. J., as he cleans up after a family dinner 
strained with the politeness of too much left unsaid—too many hurts, too many 
hopes—to which his patient and watchful grandmother responds, “No, this is a 
family.”
C. J.’s family wasn’t always a mess, but when his daddy lost his job and 
walked out in The Way a Door Closes (BCCB 5/03), C. J. learned through bitter 
experience that his father wasn’t the sure thing C. J. had always depended on 
him to be. C. J. stepped into the shoes of a man that year, and now that Daddy 
is back, the boy isn’t quite sure where he fits in their reunited family. The rest of 
the family—Momma, Grandmomma, and younger siblings Byron and Zuri—all 
seem to have forgiven their father for his desertion; they welcome him back with 
smiles, pick-up games of basketball, and bedtime stories, but underneath their ac-
ceptance, C. J. senses their unspoken fears and magnifies them with his anger. The 
unanswered questions about why Daddy left their happy family have left lingering 
distrust that is evident in Momma’s “painted-on smile,” C. J.’s anger, and Zuri’s 
anxious clinging. Zuri, in fact, is pivotal to helping C. J. and the rest of the family 
vocalize their pain, first through her play-acting, then through sleeping at the door 
so that her daddy can’t leave in the night, and finally through an acrostic poem 
based on the alphabet that functions as a direct plea for her family to start talking 
to each other. By that time, however, C. J.’s heart has already been softened by a 
budding romance of his own that makes him feel tender and forgiving toward the 
difficulties inherent in emotional matters. 
Smith tells a story ragged in its truth but ultimately suffused with hope 
and forgiveness. Deployed in a range of poetic styles, her metaphors make emo-
tions concrete and visible, opening up curricular possibilities for the study of 
figurative language, symbolism, and poetic form. “Seven Ways of Looking at My 
Father,” for instance, explores seven expanded metaphors that express C. J.’s frus-
tration over his father’s tenuous and uncertain place in his life. “Maya’s Sonnet” 
opens up that rather lofty form of poetry in a way that is accessible and relevant 
to young readers’ own experience in its simplicity and everyday language. These 
and other poems make traditional forms of poetry available to nascent literary 
critics and writers, but Smith brings even more to the curricular banquet as her 
work provides an effective introduction to many of the characteristics that recur 
in African-American literature. Rhythmic, evocative language with rich dramatic 
overtones characterize C. J.’s reflections on his situation, Grandmomma, Daddy, 
and Momma rely on aphorisms and proverbs to move C. J. in the directions they 
414 • The BulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
wish, and his friend Preacher has earned his name by his sermonic evocations of 
black church rhetoric. The final poem brings together the culturally embedded 
values of intergenerational family ties, dance, and faith that often characterize the 
celebration of black family life. 
Lewis’ achingly sensitive watercolors play no small part in conveying 
Smith’s tone and message throughout the book. Alternating between tight realism 
and illustrated metaphors, the illustrations capture both outward challenges and 
inner states of mind as they show an angry boy nose to nose with a father who can’t 
back down, or that same boy bearing the weight of a wheelbarrow full of question 
marks. The draftsmanship is subdued and quiet, with tonal resonances played out 
as much in perspective as in subject matter. Taken together, the poems and their 
illustrations will encourage multimodal response; here is a lovely melding of acces-
sible beauty, hard truth, and aesthetic inspiration for young readers and budding 
writers. (See p. 443 for publication information.)
Karen Coats, Reviewer
AbrAhAms, Peter Up All Night: A Short Story Collection; by Peter Abrahams, Libba 
Bray, David Levithan, et al. Geringer/HarperCollins, 2008  228p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-137077-9 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-137076-2 $16.99   
R Gr. 7-10
Six long short stories, one of them in a graphic format, explore the way the world 
changes in the middle of the night. Emotions become raw, honesty breaks through 
carefully tended façades, grief is magnified, and secrets are exposed. Subjects include 
the loss of a father in Iraq, an out-all-night concert excursion, a breaking down of 
polite barriers between strangers, a girl escaping potential abuse at the hands of 
her stepfather, the death of a beloved pet and with it the loss of something more 
poignant, and a monkey trying to discover the mysterious secrets of his origin. It 
won’t be hard for avid YA readers to link up most of the stories with their authors, 
as the topics are well-traveled ground for Libba Bray, David Levithan, and Patricia 
McCormick; relative newcomers Peter Abrahams, Sarah Weeks, and Gene Luen 
Yang begin to etch out a recognizable textual identity here as well. While none 
of the stories stands out as exceptional, they are all conceptually solid and well-
crafted as they touch on recognizable emotional quandaries for the somniatically 
challenged. Author’s notes with pictures are a nicely intimate touch, and Laura 
Geringer’s introduction provides context, citing classic stories that have provided 
creepy nocturnal reading through the years.  KC
June 2008 • 415
Adlington, l. J. Cherry Heaven. Greenwillow, 2008 458p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-143181-4 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-143180-7 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 8-10
One would think that a place called Cherry Heaven might offer exactly the tranquil-
ity and ideal lifestyle that war refugees would need. Unfortunately, in this companion 
novel to Adlington’s futuristic The Diary of Pelly D (BCCB 5/05), sisters Kat and 
Tanka J discover that, even without bombs, starvation, and wreckage, quiet wars 
and injustices happen everywhere. The rosy, altruistic image of a massive local water 
plant hides life-threatening conditions for the workers, the lovely cherry grove, 
after which the town is named, was itself the site of a brutal class-inspired murder, 
and everyone, even in a small town, hides secrets that they don’t want outsiders 
to learn. Interspersed with the sisters’ crusade to right the wrongs around them 
are spare, urgent chapters narrated by Luka, a factory escapee who is slowly trying 
to find her way, both figuratively and literally, back to something that feels like 
home. The tersely told, diary-style narration of the young factory worker buzzes 
with energy and mystery; readers will be deeply engaged with and sympathetic to 
her story even as her traumatic past and thirst for vengeance leads her down in-
creasingly dark paths. The sisters, however, are too perfect as foils for one another 
(the flashy one vs. the quiet thinker, the party girl vs. the wallflower who gets the 
ideal guy), in predictable casting that would feel more authentic in chick lit than 
this grimly dystopic futuristic world. In addition, the setting itself remains a bit 
underdeveloped despite the novel’s length, and such intriguing details as the pres-
ence of gills on all characters remains largely unexplored and unexplained. Even 
while SF buffs may find the world itself lacking, readers who generally appreciate 
independent girls unafraid to make their own justice will likely find these three 
protagonists, especially the unsettling and fascinating Luka, enough to keep them 
engaged to the end.  AS
bAker, e. d. Wings. Bloomsbury, 2008 307p
ISBN 978-1-59990-193-0 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 6-8
High school student Tamisin Warner, she of the golden hair and slightly pointed 
ears, first notices strange half-animal half-human creatures in her town on Hal-
loween night, and soon she’s seeing them all the time. There is a strange new boy at 
school, too, but the boy, Jak, is easier on the eyes, and Tamisin finds herself drawn 
to him in spite of his odd ways: for example, to his picnic he brings raw rather 
than cooked eggs and lays the goods out on a shower curtain rather than a blanket. 
Soon Tamisin’s shadow creatures prove to be goblins, and when they try to kidnap 
her, Jak’s rescue attempt causes both rescuer and near-victim to tumble through 
a hidden gate into the land of the fey, where Tamisin discovers that Jak is kin to 
her would-be kidnappers and she is the lost daughter of fairy queen Titania. The 
goblins want home rule and view Tamisin as a bargaining chip, but Jak sides with 
those who would keep the young girl safe, and only a final confrontation, medi-
ated by the princess herself, brings about a fragile truce. Baker offers up engaging 
characters and interesting situations, and Tamisin’s discovery of her true fairy self has 
a certain wish-fulfilling satisfaction for readers with secret longings for fey family. 
Unfortunately, the author treats these appealing elements with a heavy hand, telling 
readers what she wants them to know rather than letting the information emerge 
as the story unfolds, and experienced fantasy fans may tire of the constant adult 
mediation. Novice genre readers may be more willing to fall in with this authorial 
416 • The BulleTin
style, though, and fans of the fey who like a light dollop of romance will likely be 
willing to go along for the ride.  CW
bArker, m. P. A Difficult Boy. Holiday House, 2008 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-8234-2086-5 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-9
Ethan Root’s father has a strong work ethic but little education, and his poor man-
agement abilities have put him in serious debt to storeowner Mr. Lyman, who has 
generously agreed to take nine-year-old Ethan on as a farm and shop apprentice to 
work off what Root owes. Though distraught at leaving his family, Ethan believes 
he is in good hands with Mr. Lyman, who keeps his workers well fed and seems to 
take a kind, personal interest in Ethan’s well-being. Lyman’s treatment of an older 
teen, Daniel, who works on his farm, alerts Ethan that his employer is not all he 
pretends to be; not only is Daniel regularly disparaged for his Irish ethnicity, he is 
frequently “disciplined” with a harshness that borders on the sadistic. It takes a lot 
for Ethan to befriend the older boy, but they finally bond over their mutual love for 
one of Lyman’s prize horses. Daniel takes increasingly greater risks to spend time 
riding Ivy, and when Lyman catches on, the punishments become brutal, pushing 
Daniel to the point where he and Ethan finally break into Lyman’s desk, find papers 
that expose his business duplicities, and unleash a torrent of disclosures regarding 
the boss’s criminal meddling in Daniel’s inheritance and Mr. Root’s bookkeeping, 
and his fleecing of sundry neighbors. The climactic revelations are a tad histri-
onic and staged, but the characters are ably drawn, particularly the stoic, quietly 
resentful Daniel and the two-faced, tyrannical Lyman. Barker vividly conjures 
the ease with which a small-town bigwig could take advantage of his ill-educated 
customers in early 1800s, as well as the virulent anti-Irish sentiment that tainted 
the social perspective of upstanding blue bloods. This debut novel should appeal 
to historical-fiction fans and to orphan-story buffs who enjoy nothing more than 
a good sniffle.  EB
blAckwood, gAry The Great Race: The Amazing Round-the-World Auto Race of 
1908. Abrams, 2008 141p illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-8109-9489-8 $19.95   
R Gr. 5-8
With the auto industry only a couple of decades old, it would take some convincing 
to nudge the horse-and-buggy set into investment in a horseless mode of transit. It 
was therefore in the interest of automakers and auto enthusiasts to promote their 
vehicles, and newspaper moguls hungry for sales were more than willing to join the 
hype for a New York to Paris race that would showcase a variety of international 
automobiles. Blackwood fires the starting pistol with a teaser scene featuring one of 
the 1908 contestants standing night guard against Manchurian outlaws, backtracks 
to information about the contest terms, entrant vehicles, and their crews, and then 
settles into a ripping account of the race itself, toggling briskly between the French, 
German, Italian, and American teams. With a course that paid little attention to 
climate and less to terrain, just about anything that could go wrong did. Bad luck 
for the racers, but good fortune for readers, who can revel in seriocomic setbacks 
such as overenthusiastic fans (young women waylaid the Italian team, demanding 
kisses), lack of automotive lubricants (Vaseline, beef fat, and sewing-machine oil 
were called into service), missing fenders (a ship’s crew cut up the leather to resole 
their sandals), and arrest for driving with a broken taillight (destroyed by a flock of 
June 2008 • 417
pigeons). Black-and-white photographs help readers envision the brutal conditions 
of the 1908 race; concluding pages discuss a May 2008 rally planned to retrace 
the original route, with both reproductions of the original cars and alternative fuel 
models running in separate divisions. A robust bibliography, several websites, an 
index, and source notes will support research paper writers, but any tweenager 
itching to hit the road will want to pop the hood on this Blackwood.  EB
block, FrAncescA liA Blood Roses. Cotler/HarperCollins, 2008 [144p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-076385-5 $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-076384-8 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
This sultry collection of nine short stories (all but one making their debut here) 
covers topics that will be immediately familiar to Block fans: passion, mystery, and 
romance, all delivered with unusual twists. Although each story stands alone, there 
are overlapping characters and settings that loosely bind the collection, allowing 
readers both firsthand insight into story protagonists and snapshots of the way others 
perceive the characters when they pop up elsewhere. For example, in “Giant,” the 
tortured Rachel Sorrow contemplates her sudden transformation into a metaphorical 
and/or physical giantess, even while she thinks of two of her best friends, Elodie 
and Sasha, who face their own demons in “Skin Art,” a complex story involving 
the indelible marks made by first love, and “My Mother the Vampire,” a haunting 
exploration into the ways in which many women seek to cheat the aging process. It 
is impossible to tell what is meant to be truth or dissemblance, imagination or reality 
in these stories, and this shaky positioning is the result of careful crafting: the hearts 
of much of Block’s writing resides between the lines. Her intense, lyrical writing 
style transforms these familiar YA motifs into individual stories that are riveting 
and memorable, and into an overall collection that invites rereading to explore the 
overlaps between protagonists and locations mentioned. While romance readers 
will certainly be an enthusiastic audience, the focus on changelings, otherworldly 
creatures, and fantastic possibilities make this volume an easy recommendation to 
fantasy fans as well.  AS
bowler, tim Frozen Fire. Philomel, 2008 [336p]
ISBN 978-0-399-25053-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
It starts with a phone call when Dusty’s home alone; she’s completely freaked out 
by the boy on the other end of the line, who claims to be committing suicide and 
who coincidentally drops names—like that of her brother, Josh, who disappeared 
two years ago—meaningful in Dusty’s life. When she tries to find the mysterious 
boy, she encounters a frightening trio of guys intent on chasing him down, who are 
now convinced she’s his ally. As her contact with the boy increases, she learns that 
he’s a suspect in a local rape, and even the authorities begin to suspect that she’s 
shielding him; Dusty, though, remains skeptical of the claims and mesmerized by 
his supernatural presence, convinced that he knows something about her beloved 
Josh. English author Bowler has a nice touch with his spooky motifs here, with 
ghostly phone calls and frosty face outlines at the window effective for raising those 
back-of-the-neck hairs. Dusty is an unusual heroine, a bellicose teen inclined toward 
feuds and the alienation of her friends, and her father’s vacillation between needi-
ness and anger is credible and draining. The book talks away much of its tension, 
418 • The BulleTin
however, so the ghostly effects lose impact; there’s also considerable contrivance in 
the police’s easy acceptance of the boy’s impossible characteristics and in the random 
involvement of a family of Gypsies. Nonetheless, fans of offbeat ghost stories may 
be drawn to this dramatic tale of different kinds of haunting.  DS
brAdbury, JenniFer Shift. Atheneum, 2008 [256p]
ISBN 978-1-4169-4732-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
The summer after high-school graduation, Chris and his best friend, Win, took 
a rambling bicycle trip from their West Virginia home westward, with Seattle the 
goal. Now Chris is trying to settle in at college, but that process is disrupted by the 
appearance of an FBI investigator, Agent Ward, trying to ascertain the whereabouts 
of Win, who ducked out on Chris just before they arrived at the West Coast. As 
Chris’ memory of the trip unfolds in counterpoint to the present inquiry, it becomes 
clear that Win’s powerful and vindictive father is intent on finding out what hap-
pened to his son, that he thinks Chris may have harmed Win, and that Win had 
plenty of good reason to want to get away from his father. Bradbury effectively 
casts foreshadowing over Chris’ account of the trip, makes it clear that Win was the 
kind of jackassy friend who takes a lot of forgiving, and also portrays the journey as 
the kind of glorious, frustrating, life-changing experience that the boys had hoped 
and that readers will yearningly imagine. The contemporary cat-and-mouse game 
with Ward adds suspense, especially as Chris himself attempts to solve the mystery 
and to evade the long arm of Chris’ father. Readers will come for the thrill of the 
open road and stay for an authentic picture of a friendship between two young 
men about to tackle adulthood in very different ways.  DS
brothers, meAgAn Debbie Harry Sings in French. Holt, 2008 [240p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-8080-3 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Even if Johnny is headed down a dangerous path of drunkenness and partying, his 
mother’s solution of shipping him off to his uncle feels more like rejection than 
love to the sixteen-year-old. Once in his new home, however, he finds what feels 
like unconditional acceptance in his new girlfriend, who accepts his quirks, in his 
laidback uncle, and in his affectionate relationship with his younger cousin (whose 
precocious nature and witty commentary make her essentially Phoebe to Johnny’s 
Holden Caulfield). Under their care, Johnny can finally explore the additional 
layer of his love for Debbie Harry: a desire to actually become her in some way. 
Dressing and performing as her in a drag show tap into this deep-seated urge, and 
the fact that he can do it with the support of his loved ones allows him to safely 
examine his own sexuality (he is nearly certain he is straight) and his interpreta-
tions of gender. Although Johnny’s family and girlfriend may be a bit idealized in 
their unblinking adoration of him, this straightforward background is necessary 
so that the protagonist can tackle a range of fairly sophisticated gay and transgen-
der concerns and issues within a trim novel. A quick pace, realistic dialogue, and 
a well-integrated subplot involving the power of carving out one’s own musical 
identity would actually make this an easy recommendation for reluctant readers 
in general in addition to the expected GLBTQ audience. Johnny’s well-deserved 
happy ending after a grueling childhood and a dark adolescence will be cheered 
whether or not readers personally identify with his choices.  AS
June 2008 • 419
bruchAc, JosePh March toward the Thunder. Dial, 2008 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3188-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-9
It was probably the respect associated with the uniform, rather than the salary or 
even the sign-on bonus, that convinced Louis Nolette to succumb to the enticements 
of the Union recruiter and join the Irish Brigade in the Civil War, even though few 
could lay less claim to Irish heritage than the Abenaki teen relocated to the U.S. 
from Canada. Regardless of motivations he doesn’t completely understand himself, 
Louis is now slogging through Northern Virginia in a deadly game of hurry up and 
wait, alternating frustrating periods of suspended hostilities with fierce engagement 
with General Lee’s forces. Bruchac reconstructs the Fighting 69th’s battles in the 
closing year of the Civil War through the experience of the fictional underage teen, 
loosely based on Bruchac’s own great-grandfather. Although accounts of individual 
battles are riveting, it is Louis’s relationship with his messmates that shapes the novel. 
No one quite knows how to categorize the bronzed soldier in their section (“You a 
mulatter or a Injun?”), and the confusion and good-natured teasing rankle Louis; 
he manages to recognize, though, that this is an ungainly first encounter for all of 
them, and the extreme demands of war quickly bond the young men with unshak-
able loyalty. Bruchac interjects a substantial amount of orchestrated serendipity 
with historical figures, but on the whole, the blend of military history and human 
interest will keep readers thoroughly involved in Louis’s drama.  EB
cAmPbell, bebe moore I Get So Hungry; illus. by Amy Bates. Putnam, 
2008 32p
ISBN 978-0-399-24311-0 $16.99   
R 6-9 yrs
Nikki is excited to meet her new teacher, Mrs. Patterson, on the first day of school. 
She’s a big woman, and the overweight Nikki soon sees in her a kindred spirit, as 
Mrs. Patterson sneaks a cookie from her purse during reading time. Nikki, too, 
sneaks food out of her backpack during the day, mostly to make herself feel better 
when the boys in her class tease her, and it isn’t long before people are saying that 
“Nikki Thicky is Fatty Patty’s pet.” One day, Mrs. Patterson doesn’t show up for 
work, and Nikki infers from whispered conversations that whatever is keeping her 
out of school has to do with her weight. Finding little support from her mom for 
a change in diet patterns, Nikki joins a slightly slimmed-down Mrs. Patterson in 
her morning walk around the schoolyard when the teacher returns to school. Mom 
is finally convinced to get moving herself when she sees the changes in Mrs. Pat-
terson at a teacher’s conference. The story is fairly programmatic, but it’s broadly 
thoughtful and it addresses a pressing problem with understanding. Moore’s text 
explores both the emotional and practical reasons for Nikki’s destructive eating 
habits; as a child, she is at the mercy of what her mother is willing to buy and 
familial notions of body norms, but the problem is exacerbated by Nikki using 
food to calm her down when she is angry and lift her spirits when she is sad. The 
illustrations are occasionally metaphoric, with Nikki eating the mean boy or sur-
rounded by a swirl of junk food, resulting in a nice counterpoint to the realistic 
text; the figures themselves, in generously textured watercolors, are all attractive 
and appealing in their various states of emotion. While there is nothing subtle 
about the message, the text is empowering and even inspiring for children dealing 
with similar issues.  KC
420 • The BulleTin
cAveney, PhiliP Sebastian Darke: Prince of Fools. Delacorte, 2008 [352p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90465-0 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73467-7 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-9
This British import features an inept jester who has inherited his father’s pointy cap 
but none of his skill, a wisecracking buffalope, a waist-high soldier who has dauntless 
courage, and an intrepid, though spoiled, princess who finds her true self through 
adversity. What more could a quest novel require? Other than the quest, of course, 
which the aforementioned jester and aspiring comedian Sebastian, seventeen and 
needing to earn his way in the world, promptly undertakes. His simple desire to 
work in a nearby kingdom turns into an epic pursuit to save the princess from the 
treacherous king, leading to kidnappings, murder plots, and battles with fierce, filthy, 
and loathsome creatures (and even less hygienic brigands), all requiring every bit 
of bravado and cleverness Sebastian and his loyal allies can muster. This rollicking 
adventure includes an ideal mix of medieval setting, sardonic humor, absurd situa-
tions, and memorable if not complex characters. Even if King Septimus lacks depth, 
for example, his unmitigated evil is a crisp contrast to the earnest, if sometimes 
bumbling, good-hearted efforts of Sebastian and his buffalope, Max. Medieval fans 
looking for a breezy and amusing perspective to balance the often weighty tales of 
knights, quests, and honor will find this an entirely enjoyable outing, and they will 
be pleased about the promised sequel wherein Sebastian and Max, having saved 
their first princess, will surely be ready for more adventure.  AS
cox, Judy Puppy Power; illus. by Steve Björkman. Holiday House, 
2008 91p
ISBN 978-0-8234-2073-5 $15.95   
Ad Gr. 2-4
Third-grader Fran is what might kindly be termed “lively”—she’s loud and bossy 
and determined to have her joke and her way, regardless of the consequences to 
others. She’s trying to be good, both in order to keep her eligibility for a part in the 
third-grade play and in order to keep her exuberant Newfoundland puppy, whose 
boisterous behavior is increasingly a problem for her parents. Obedience training 
helps her with her puppy, but when Fran gets labeled a bully by her kindergarten 
“reading buddy,” can she learn to restrain herself too? Though the puppy’s antics 
will entertain young readers, the dog story doesn’t really blend with the rest of the 
plot, and the casualness with which the family apparently embarked upon dog 
ownership militates against the message of responsibility about training the dog. 
The story of Fran’s dawning awareness of the price of her behavior, however, is 
fresh and perceptive, with sympathy for Fran as well as for her victims and a pleas-
ing absence of pathologizing a pretty common behavior. While her conversion is 
unrealistically sudden, the notion that one can be a bully without intending to 
may be eye-opening to tough-minded youngsters who will relate to Fran’s insistence 
that “she had to stick up for herself” and who may find new perspective in the 
consequences for such a stand. The illustrations, high-speed scrawls, suit Fran’s 
tempestuous personality and add comedy as well as accessibility to the open, read-
able pages. Despite its flaws, this will engage many young readers (and perhaps 
group readees), who will likely know a Fran and may begin to realize that we all 
have the capacity to hurt without meaning. An appended note discusses the lessons 
of puppy kindergarten.  DS
June 2008 • 421
cuFFe-Perez, mAry Skylar; illus. by Renata Liwska. Philomel, 2008 [144p]
ISBN 0-978-399-24543-5 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 3-5
Unlike the wild geese that fly over his home, Skylar (a Canada goose who got lost 
in an ice storm on his first and only migration) and his three companions are “pond 
geese,” who live a cushy but uneventful life in a manmade pond surrounded by 
whimsical garden statuary. When a one-eyed heron (mistakenly dubbed “the Who-
on” by one of the geese) accidentally ends up at their pond, the pompous Skylar 
decides to make good on his claims as a former wild goose and lead the Who-on, 
along with his fellow pond geese, to a key point along the annual migration route. 
The inexperienced geese face several setbacks along the way, including the shoot-
ing death of Weedle, the youngest goose, but ultimately decide to join the ranks 
of wild geese flying southward rather than return to their safer but less satisfying 
pond. An old woman who records the number of geese that pass her house on their 
migration provides a frame at beginning and end of this realistic animal fantasy, 
adding a human element that may draw in readers who have felt similarly enchanted 
by the calls of wild geese. The description of the geese’s journey is intriguing and 
entertaining, and pertinent factual information is woven in without too much 
shoehorning. However, the characterizations are uneven (and none of the geese are 
really that likable), and the dialogue is often clichéd or overly dramatic (“I thought 
I had flown beyond my fears, but here they are again”). There is genuine drama in 
Weedle’s death, but its occurrence within the last ten pages of the book turns the 
conclusion into a somewhat shocking experience at odds with the emotional tenor 
of the rest of the book. Though it’s difficult to identify which goose is which in the 
occasional black-and-white drawings, the illustrations are attractive in their gently 
textured shadings. Despite the book’s flaws, migrating geese have a magnetic pull 
on some folks, and readers who share Skylar’s journey may eye those geese in the 
mall’s retention pond a bit differently after this.  JH
cumbie, PAtriciA Where People Like Us Live. Geringer/HarperCollins, 
2008 [224p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-137598-9 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-137597-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
When Libby’s peripatetic family lands in Racine, Wisconsin, Libby finds a friend 
in a fellow fourteen-year-old, Angie. Libby’s father is soon out of work at his new 
factory job as a result of a wildcat strike, Libby’s parents are fighting, and Libby in-
creasingly finds refuge in Angie’s knowledgeable companionship. One day, however, 
Libby’s feeling that there’s something strange in Angie’s relationship with her step-
father, Kevin, is shockingly confirmed by the sexual abuse she sees through Angie’s 
window, and Libby knows that she has to help Angie even if it means destroying 
the friendship. There’s a vignettish flavor to this novel, since Libby’s family seems 
poised to continue on its troubled and nomadic ways while the encounter changes 
Angie’s life entirely; that and its unexplained period setting (it would seem to oc-
cur about twenty years ago) give it a slightly untethered and inconclusive feel, and 
Libby is less a character in her own right than simply a responder to the situation. 
The book is bracingly straightforward about Angie’s experience, though, even al-
lowing her to justifiably miss her abuser (“He was the only grownup who acted as 
422 • The BulleTin
if he cared about her future”) and painting her as a young girl who deserves better 
but not a tragic and wounded heroine. Though Woodson’s I Hadn’t Meant to Tell 
You This (BCCB 3/94) is a superior story on this theme, many kids will recognize 
the strain of a friendship that involves an unkeepable secret, and they’ll relate to 
Libby’s quandary.  DS
cusick, richie tAnkersley Walk of the Spirits. Speak/Penguin, 
2008 [336p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-14-241050-9 $8.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-9
After losing their home and possessions in a hurricane, high-schooler Miranda 
and her mother are forced to move to her mom’s childhood home in St. Yvette, 
Louisiana. Miranda quickly discovers that this new location causes her to have what 
she at first believes to be hallucinations but soon realizes are visions of dead people 
whom she must help. The ability to see the shades skips every other generation, 
so only she and her eccentric grandfather share the trait, but before Miranda can 
consult her grandfather to learn what to do about the ghostly young Nathan who 
keeps visiting her, the old man dies. That leaves Miranda with a gorgeous Cajun 
teen, Etienne, who knows all about “the other side,” and a handful of new school 
friends who are all willing allies, even if mostly clueless about how to actually help. 
The teasing unraveling of the Civil War–era tale of mystery, espionage, and betrayal 
that has kept Nathan tied to this town in search of his true love and eternal peace 
is intriguing and well paced. Unfortunately, the motley crew of Southern stereo-
types that make up Miranda and her gang (sweet-talking belle and swamp running 
Cajun boy of few words, for example) never really jump off the page, making the 
modern-day stories of love and friendship far less compelling than the historical 
one. Even though the contrived Southern charm is a bit thick at times, the twists 
and turns of Nathan’s ill-fated life may keep romance readers engaged and guessing 
right up until the climax.  AS
donAldson, JuliA The Fish Who Cried Wolf; illus. by Axel Scheffler. Levine/
Scholastic, 2008 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-439-92825-0 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-8 yrs
Despite the title, this isn’t so much a piscine revision of Aesop’s well-known fable as 
a reexamination (in verse) of what surprising things can happen to good storytellers. 
Tiddler is a wee little fishy who “isn’t much to look at, with his plain gray scales,” 
but he’s got a powerful imagination, and every day he arrives late for school with a 
fabulous story to tell about the reasons for his delay (he was tricked by a mermaid 
or held captive by a squid). When reality catches up with his stories and he’s first 
caught in a fisherman’s net and then lost far from home, he finds deep-sea denizens 
retelling his stories and he uses them to track his way back. It’s the robust meter 
and adroit use of language and structure that really make this story go swimmingly. 
Donaldson’s deft use of pattern keeps the narrative-length poem lively by breaking 
it up and allowing listeners to anticipate repetitions, as in the exchanges in school 
and the responses to Tiddler’s stories (Little Johnny Dory always takes a shine to 
Tiddler’s stories and retells them himself, which is how they spread through the 
ocean in the first place). Scheffler’s finny critters (and occasional humans) evince 
pop-eyed personality that suggests a more benign branch of Victoria Chess’ illus-
June 2008 • 423
trative family. The art draws on the expected deep blues and greens for the watery 
world, but there’s plenty of contrast in golden sand and gaudy fish, and layout 
that varies from broad spreads to spot art enhances the rhythmic pleasures of the 
story. While this would contrast effectively with more traditional versions of “The 
Boy Who Cried Wolf,” it will also be tasty bait in a unit about storytelling or just 
a lively, bubbly readaloud.  DS
donAldson, JuliA Tyrannosaurus Drip; illus. by David Roberts. Feiwel, 
2008 32p
ISBN 978-0-312-37747-2 $16.95   
R 6-9 yrs
“In a prehistoric swamp” dwells a herd of duckbill dinosaurs, peaceful souls who 
enjoy their damp habitat and vegetarian diet; on a neighboring hill live two Tyran-
nosauruses, fond of hunting, war, and duckbill dinosaur as tasty meals; fortunately, 
their inability to swim has limited their ravaging of the duckbill population. When 
a duckbill egg accidentally ends up in the Tyrannosaurus clutch and then hatches 
out, the unpredatory little baby is meanly dubbed “Tyrannosaurus Drip” by its 
carnivorous sibs. The little adoptee soon finds his own people, however, and serves 
as key strategist when the Tyrannosauruses try to attack the duckbill population. 
Though the logic stretches at times and the morality is somewhat muddy (it’s a 
little unfair to villainize a naturally carnivorous species for being carnivorous), the 
verse narrative thunders along merrily in its modified ballad meter. The craftsman-
ship of the language is deliciously ridiculous and metrically ingenious (it’s quite 
an achievement to deftly thread “Compsognathus” into a line), and there’s a core 
of truth in the worldview wherein things are more interested in cross-species eat-
ing than cross-species nurturing. Fantastical art extends the pleasure further, with 
Roberts’ line-and-watercolor illustrations evincing a graphic sensibility in the thin, 
regular line, exaggeration of scale (the Tyrannosauruses dwarf their own tiny feet as 
well as their surroundings), and clean yet lush backgrounds that include believably 
prehistoric vegetation and a thorough dusting of the remains of previous Tyran-
nosaurus meals. This is a world away from the adopted-animal tales of Chen’s Guji 
Guji (BCCB 9/04) or even “The Ugly Duckling,” but kids will appreciate the 
combination of bloodthirsty dinosaurocity and a victorious little guy.  DS
Fern, trAcey e. Buffalo Music; illus. by Lauren Castillo. Clarion, 
2008 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-618-72341-6 $16.00
Reviewed from galleys   
R 6-9 yrs
“When I first settled here,” says legendary Texan Molly Goodnight, narrator of 
this story, “I lived to the music of the buffalo.” When buffalo hunting becomes big 
business, however, the buffalo are essentially eliminated within the span of a few 
years. Since Molly’s known for her “soft spot for critters,” she becomes the logical 
recipient whenever cowhands happen on orphaned buffalo calves, and soon she’s got 
a 100-head-strong herd. She’s therefore ready to help when Yellowstone National 
Park seeks to reestablish its buffalo population, sending off a quartet of buffalo for 
seed stock in the park to rebuild what she thinks of as the “national herd.” Evocative 
writing makes this much more than a fact-based slice of ecological history: Fern 
deftly establishes the atmosphere of wild Texas, its transformation into something 
quite different, and the stubborn and independent character of her protagonist 
through Molly’s narration, and the narrative style has rawboned individuality but 
424 • The BulleTin
never descends into sentimental country charm. Mixed-media illustrations employ 
abundant use of black line that moves easily between lively scribble and crayon-like 
graininess, while muted colors implicitly suggest historical distance as well as tough, 
windswept country; faces are personable, in an Emily Arnold McCully sort of way, 
but the broad landscape is everpresent behind the foregrounded humans. Use this 
to liven up a discussion of pioneer days, to provide a look at early conservation 
efforts, or as an animal story with a difference; consider combining it with some 
of the bison sounds available on the ’net for audio aids to the story. A thorough 
author’s note discusses the historical basis for this account and suggests additional 
reading possibilities in print and online.  DS
Friesner, esther Nobody’s Prize. Random House, 2008 [320p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-97531-8 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-87531-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-9
In this sequel to Nobody’s Princess (BCCB 7/07), the young Helen of Sparta, as yet 
unaware of her developing beauty, continues on her daredevil path to self-discovery 
and adventure. Helen is all but fearless, assuming that one of her many advantages 
(her family’s wealth and status, her adoring best friend, or her own powers of per-
suasion) will come through for her, and this arrogance both gets her into trouble 
and helps untangle her from inevitable scrapes. Helen’s penchant for both finding 
and wrangling her way out of trouble becomes integral when her male disguise 
on a ship bound in search of the Golden Fleece doesn’t hold up as she hoped (a 
hope that seemed overly optimistic, given the fact that her brothers were fellow 
passengers), but she is able to prove her value, thus guaranteeing further exploits. 
Although readers might benefit from having already become familiar with the large 
cast of characters surrounding Helen from the earlier volume, she herself is lively 
and well developed enough and her thrilling new journey distinct enough that this 
easily works as a stand-alone novel as well. Friesner’s protagonist, high-spirited, 
impetuous, and youthful, seems a far cry from the Homeric Helen known best 
as being an unwilling tool in a massive power play. Her Helen is still enough in 
control of her own destiny that she can envision many futures for herself, most of 
which do not include being a passive wife. This fresh take on a familiar woman, 
interwoven with legendary creatures and stories, will intrigue both mythology 
fans and those readers who can’t get enough of tough girl heroines, regardless of 
setting or genre.  AS
Frost, helen Diamond Willow. Foster/Farrar, 2008 111p
ISBN 978-0-374-31776-8 $16.00   
R* Gr. 6-9
Twelve-year-old Willow lives in a small town in central Alaska, and she is content 
to fade into the background mostly unnoticed at school and at home, so long as 
she can run her dogs. When her carelessness results in an accident that threatens 
her family’s lead dog, Roxy, with permanent blindness, it looks like Roxy may 
be put down; horrified, guilt-ridden, and resentful about being excluded from 
the decision, Willow decides she has to take Roxy to her grandparents’ house, a 
two-hour sled ride that turns dangerous when a storm hits and obscures the trail. 
Her action gets her noticed all right, but instead of the anger she fears, her family 
responds with revelations that put her feelings into contexts she never dreamed of. 
Taking her cue from a botanical phenomenon that occurs in the northern climates 
June 2008 • 425
in which her story is set, Frost invents an ingenious poetic form for her story that 
is both stable and fluid; like the diamond willow branches that she is imitating, the 
diamond shapes of her poems vary. In the middle of each, she boldfaces selected 
words, which together constitute a phrase that reveals a deeper and more concise 
truth hidden within the flow of words that make up the diamond shape. Just as the 
dark heart of the diamonds in nature reveals the scar of a branch that has fallen off, 
these phrases often indicate a deeply felt loss or powerful but unspoken emotion. 
Interspersed with these poems are prose passages from the perspective of Willow’s 
late ancestors and relatives, whose spirits now inhabit animals that watch over the 
girl as she ventures into the fraught territory between childhood and adolescence. 
Frost has spun metaphoric gold out of an evocative natural landscape, and she knows 
just how to craft it into an elegant and moving story of a young girl’s deepening 
understanding of the relationships she shares with those around her.  KC
gAimAn, neil The Dangerous Alphabet; illus. by Gris Grimly. HarperCollins, 
2008 [30p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-078334-1 $18.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-078333-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-6
This isn’t the first time the alphabet has been used to nefarious ends, but it may well 
be the most creepily entertaining to date. In this “practical ghost story in thirteen 
ingenious but potentially disturbing rhyming couplets,” two children and their 
enormous-eyed gazelle slip past their distracted father and enter an underground 
world of slimy, misshapen creatures plying their trade in trashy treasure and human 
captives under the sign of the Jolly Roger. The girl is quickly kidnapped, leaving 
her intrepid companions to soldier on in her wake, facing ever more demented 
and maniacal goons until they finally capture her back at the letter X and return, 
with innocently wide smiles, to their oblivious father. Richly detailed watercolors 
in muted shades along a spectrum from sepia to salmon make Edward Gorey’s work 
seem bereft of ghoulish imagination by comparison; the sewer-dwelling fiends with 
their spidery outlines are the stuff of fetid nightmares, even tinged as they are with 
an antic humor as they enjoy their rancid debauchery. A metafictional visit from 
the author provides no comforting presence; he appears as an ancient dead tree 
covered with a flowing white beard and sporting a pink, aggressive nose, large, vacant 
eyes, and hands chained to his work. The meter gallops along, and it’s probably 
no accident that the form echoes Gorey’s alphabetical Gashlycrumb Tinies; the few 
calculated missteps—a single letter out of place, a phrase that doesn’t correspond 
to its letter—serve to heighten the overall creepiness by slipping the comforting 
control of the form. Together, Gaiman and Grimly put the ghast in ghastly here; 
kids will want to read this one in the cold light of day, preferably with some friends 
alongside to share the shivers.  KC 
george, mAdeleine Looks. Viking, 2008 [240p]
ISBN 978-0-670-06167-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
The two girls would seem to be insurmountably different: upperclassman Meghan, 
morbidly obese, slides her way silently through high school hoping to remain invis-
ible; new freshman Aimee is a bitter and angry anorexic, using writing to express 
her torment. Initially it’s Meghan who’s intrigued by Aimee, following the younger 
426 • The BulleTin
girl at what she thinks is a safe distance and trying to warn her when Cara, the liter-
ary magazine editor, seemingly takes Aimee under her wing. When Cara uses and 
betrays Aimee, passing off a poem of Aimee’s as her own in order to win a contest, 
Aimee seeks out Meghan as an ally in a plan to wreak revenge upon Cara. George 
writes in taut, descriptive present-tense prose that imbues even the mundane with 
intensity. The third-person narration is a little closer to Aimee than Meghan, but 
the book offers both outsider and internal views of each girl, and other characters 
are also well crafted—Cara may be a little overconvenient in her complete villainy, 
but she’s such a marvel of masterful deception that it’s fascinating if not entirely 
convincing. The utter emotional brutality of the girls’ vengeance is shocking, but 
it’s also believable as a precipitate for a surprising friendship. Those intrigued by 
Pixley’s Freak (BCCB 10/07) will appreciate this mordant yet poignant exploration 
of outsiderhood.  DS
grAnt, michAel Gone. HarperTeen, 2008 [576p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-144877-5 $18.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-144876-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-9
In the middle of one weekday afternoon, as children sit drowsing or fidgeting 
in classrooms, every resident of Perdido Beach over the age of fourteen simply 
vanishes. Thirteen-year-old Sam, brainy Astrid, and a few of their friends struggle 
to create normalcy for those left behind in a town where bullies threaten, chaos 
looms, and a contingent of private-school kids (also under fourteen) led by a bad 
seed named Caine (later revealed to be Sam’s half-brother) have arrived planning 
to take control of the townies. Both sides soon realize that they are all being held 
within an impermeable barrier some twenty miles in diameter whose center is the 
nuclear power plant located just outside of town. Meanwhile, across the desert, 
deep within a gold mine, a malevolent presence has begun transforming plants 
and animals into twisted versions of themselves. The well-paced plot is strongly 
reminiscent of Golding’s Lord of the Flies in that much of this apocalyptic adventure 
centers on the power struggle between the kids, in this case supernaturally talented 
brothers Sam and Caine and their respective followers. The author also capably 
develops minor characters: Astrid, Sam’s love interest, who is responsible for her 
four-year-old autistic and also paranormally gifted younger brother; a thirteen-year-
old McDonald’s restaurant manager; and a brutal Caine sidekick whom teens will 
love to hate. Older teens may recognize Grant’s name from his association with 
his wife, K. A. Applegate, on the Animorphs series, and fans will be pleased to see 
similar transformations and special abilities showcased here.  CW
hAlAm, Ann Snakehead. Lamb, 2008 [276p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-94108-5 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-84108-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-9 
In this British import, an exploration of the Greek legends surrounding Perseus and 
Andromeda, familiar themes of fated love, destiny, and adolescent independence 
are explored through ancient myth. Perseus, son of Zeus and a mortal woman, has 
always keenly felt his isolation and difference from most people while also suspect-
ing he is meant for greatness. He and his adopted hometown are abruptly shaken 
out of their political lethargy (they have long chafed under the capricious and 
June 2008 • 427
cruel rule of King Polydectes) with the arrival of Andromeda (a gorgeous would-be 
sacrifice who escaped her fate), whose arrival sets in place a series of events that, 
whether controlled by the gods or simply chance, must be played out if anyone 
is to have a chance of happiness, peace, or in the case of Perseus and Andromeda, 
true love. Although the usual misunderstandings, stubborn refusals to adapt, and 
minor romance tiffs make this a fairly typical early relationship, there is a gravity 
conferred by the seemingly unavoidable death of one or both of the protagonists 
that adds a timeless elegance and meaning to an otherwise familiar love story (the 
author’s “added jokes about the present day” blend quietly into the ancient story). 
Halam plays this poignancy to good effect, interspersing dramatic action scenes 
with quiet, subtle moments of connection between Perseus and Andromeda where 
they mourn the unlikelihood of a shared future even while reveling in their current 
bliss. The sizable and mostly superficially explored cast of characters (both gods 
and mortals), frequently changing settings, and generally snappy pace allow the 
themes of true love and the irresistibility of fate to dominate lesser issues, an ap-
propriate perspective for a myth. Numerous supplemental aids (lists of characters 
and location descriptions, a map, and an extensive author’s note) offer readers a 
solid background for this retelling.  AS
hAwes, louise Black Pearls: A Faerie Strand; illus. by Rebecca Guay. Houghton, 
2008 [224p]
ISBN 978-0-618-74797-9 $16.00
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 8-10
This collection of retold fairy tales explores the darkest corners of many familiar 
and previously comforting (or at least so in the versions most commonly known) 
stories. Readers will recognize the forlorn Hansel and Gretel in “Mother Love,” 
though they will not anticipate the shocking twists of the story that leave only one 
of the siblings still alive at the end. They will also spot the spoiled human narrator 
of “Evelyn’s Song” as the future golden harp belonging to the giant that Jack bests 
as soon as she is transformed into the instrument by a curse, though the skewed 
perspective that favors the relatively harmless giant over the demanding, petty Jack 
is a new take. The overall collection is sultry, dangerous, and edgy, and the striking 
cover and wide-ranging stories will easily draw in readers who may have thought 
they’d left behind folk and fairy tales years before. Unfortunately, there is a same-
ness to the unrelenting grim circumstances faced by the characters that dulls the 
emotional impact when read as a whole. In addition, the stories often veer into 
meandering philosophy about the mutable natures of good and evil, a recurring 
theme that slows the action and frequently detracts from the dramatic tension of 
the original tales. Taken individually, however, these transformed stories could be 
especially powerful for curricular use when paired with a tamer version in a language 
arts unit or as a prompt for creative writing exercises. Final art not seen.  AS
heneghAn, Judith The Magician’s Apprentice. Holiday House, 
2008 [168p]
ISBN 978-0-8234-2150-3 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-6
Jago can no longer stomach the abuse he suffers at the hands of Uncle Callow, a 
boorish, clumsy itinerant stage magician who squanders their meager earnings on 
gin, and the boy has picked up enough sleight-of-hand technique to run his own 
428 • The BulleTin
show. Witnessing a late-night graveyard encounter between a young man and 
woman, however, soon draws Jago into a mystery that seems to involve an embezzled 
fortune, plighted lovers, a hidden treasure—and certainly results in the murder of 
Callow. Jago musters up a few conjuring tricks as he dogs serving girl Anna and 
her kindhearted mistress, hoping to keep the ladies safe from the nefarious Mr. 
Armbruster, but for the most part his prestidigitation is in disappointingly short 
supply. Readers find instead a fairly tepid whodunnit that wraps up on a ship to 
Brazil, with stowaway Jago befriending a helpful child, Cecily (who’s learned a thing 
or two about deception from her light-fingered mother), and ultimately revealing 
the perps and victims in a storm-smacked dining-room scene more suggestive of 
Agatha Christie than magic movies such as The Prestige. Although seasoned mystery 
fans will recognize the drill in this British import, readers just testing the genre’s 
waters should find enough misdirection and deceit in these nineteenth-century 
shenanigans to keep them guessing.  EB 
holubitsky, kAtherine Tweaked. Orca, 2008 [176p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-55143-851-1 $9.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
It’s seventeen-year-old Chase, older brother of narrator Gordie, who’s the tweaked 
methhead of the title, and after having been a methamphetamine user for two 
years, Chase has just landed a man in the hospital with a serious head injury, so 
his crimes have expanded to include aggravated assault. Gordie’s parents can only 
focus on their troubled son and his current dilemmas of bail and upcoming trial, 
but Gordie watches in anguish as Chase’s random and dangerous actions destroy 
the family of his assault victim (who eventually dies) as well as his own. While the 
story has a bit of the predictable trajectory of a good old problem novel, Holubitsky 
offers a painfully authentic exploration of a family locked into a disaster and making 
things worse by their attempts to control the uncontrollable. It’s laceratingly clear 
that Gordie has been largely tossed to the side as his parents focus their energies on 
Chase, even though Gordie has also been paying for his brother’s crimes from the 
get-go. The book models various reactions to the situation, with Gordie’s mother 
a desperate enabler who keeps slipping money to her bail-jumping son, and even 
Gordie, who is clear-eyed about Chase’s incapacity for change, gets sucked into 
giving Chase money to pay off his violence-threatening dealers (Chase predictably 
uses the money to get high instead). A somber counterpart to Nic Sheff’s auto-
biographical Tweak (BCCB 1/08), this poignantly demonstrates the fact that the 
addict’s agony is only the beginning.  DS
horowitz, dAve Twenty-Six Princesses; written and illus. by Dave Horowitz. Put-
nam, 2008 32p
ISBN 978-0-399-24607-4 $15.99   
Ad 5-8 yrs
A multicultural gaggle of youthful princesses, one for each letter of the alphabet 
(“Princess Alice. First to the palace”), make their way to a frog-inhabited kingdom in 
this goofy rhyming abecedary. Though some of the alphabetic princesses are decent 
enough, others are rather rude (giggling Princess Nell, rhymes with “smell,” has a 
“Toot!” word balloon emanating from her lower anatomy), or gleefully naughty 
(Princess Unice scrawls anarchic massages on the castle walls). This is a list rather 
than an effective story, and the rhymes falter in places (“Princess Olga. Dancing the 
polka”). Nonetheless, the silly word-and-picture interplay has appeal, as does the 
June 2008 • 429
meeting of stately castle and obstreperous young princesses. The nearly full-page 
cut-paper collages are bright and humorous, and Horowitz’s button-nosed and oc-
casionally buck-toothed princesses are delightfully devoid of sophisticated glitter 
and glam. The frequently put-upon froggies (most nattily dressed in court clothing) 
have a pop-eyed, big-mouthed look that at times is reminiscent of Kermit or Arnold 
Lobel’s Frog. While this isn’t a top-flight princess tale, primary graders (and their 
adults) will find plenty to entertain them here, including a recurring bit in which 
various princesses try to get kissy-kissy (Ewww!) with one of the frogs.  JH
hull, nAncy l. On Rough Seas. Clarion, 2008 261p
ISBN 978-0-618-89743-8 $16.00   
Ad Gr. 5-8
Life at sea is the only goal for fourteen-year-old Alec Curtis, keen to help the 
war effort and devoid of interest in eventually taking over his father’s business as 
innkeeper of the Shaftbury at Dover. However, after Alec took his younger cousin 
out on a forbidden fishing jaunt in the English Channel and lost him in a storm, 
Mr. Curtis is doing everything in his power to keep Alec on a short leash. Captain 
Cairns, who runs the Britannia up and down the English coast doing a bit of trad-
ing and fishing, seems to sense Alec’s need to face both his dreams and his guilt and 
offers him a job as galley boy during his daytime trips. An even more important 
run is in store, though, when Churchill calls for a fleet of volunteer “little ships” 
to evacuate British troops driven by the Nazis to the French coast at Dunkirk and 
Alec stows away on the Britannia despite the captain’s orders. The core story of 
Alec’s ill-fated fishing trip and its life-altering repercussions is convincing and well 
told, with palpable tension between angry, protective father and guilty, determined 
son. That the temporary billeting of soldiers at the Shaftbury would shape Alec’s 
seafaring goals into a plan of action is likewise credible. This well-focused plot is 
encumbered, though, with distracting subplots involving the arrival of a Jewish 
girl, sent to England by her parents for refuge, who aids Alec in investigating shad-
owy goings on at “the Castle” atop the cliffs, and the beyond-the-grave voice of 
an adult friend who periodically urges Alec to follow his instincts. Alec’s decision 
to defer his nautical dreams and refocus his attention to family and inn comes as 
a startling turn, particularly in light of his achievements on board the Britannia 
and a rapprochement with his father. Nonetheless, readers satisfied with the tale 
of a feisty teen and an epic wartime rescue mission may want to embark on Hull’s 
literary maiden voyage.  EB
Jenkins, emily Skunkdog; illus. by Pierre Pratt. Foster/Farrar, 2008 32p
ISBN 978-0-374-37009-1 $16.95   
R 5-7 yrs
You’d think the one thing you could count on a dog for is a sense of smell, but 
you’d be out of luck with Dumpling. She’s a smart dog, but her sniffer just doesn’t 
work, and as a result she has no dog friends (“Without a sense of smell, she couldn’t 
relate”), which makes her rather lonely. When she and her human family move out 
to the country, Dumpling enjoys the perks of rural life, but her people aren’t so 
pleased when Dumpling finally seems to be finding a critter friend—a skunk. The 
plot wanders somewhat, but Jenkins nonetheless spins the tale nicely, with stylish 
touches of drollery in both specifics and phraseology enlivening the story. Opaque 
painterly strokes of color and amiably exaggerated draftsmanship make the illustra-
tions a friendly, slightly odd world. Pratt’s dogs are a little anatomically dubious at 
times, but Dumpling is endearingly weird in general, with a huge white snout, little 
430 • The BulleTin
dot eyes, and a barrel-shaped body; she’s a fairly poker-faced canine as a rule, so it’s 
particularly funny when her ears and tail suddenly telegraph emotion. It’s hard to 
resist a good stinkage story, and kids will be wrinkling up their noses even as they 
embark on tales of their pets’—or their own—smelly misdeeds.  DS
Jocelyn, mArthe Ready for Summer; ISBN 978-0-88776-860-6; Ready for 
Winter; ISBN 978-0-88776-848-4. Each book: written and illus. by Marthe 
Jocelyn Tundra, 2008 16p $8.99   
R 2-4 yrs
A quartet of board books (Ready for Spring and Ready for Autumn, not reviewed 
here, complete the set) offer sartorial hints for little ones who prefer to dress them-
selves. Each suggests articles of seasonally appropriate attire: “Take off pajamas and 
choose . . . ” shorts, hat, sandals, etc. for hot weather; or long underwear, tights, 
fuzzy socks, etc. for cold. Items are catalogued scrapbook style, with clothing cre-
ated out of cut paper on textured backgrounds trimmed with bits of ribbon and 
fabric embellishments—in dominant blues for winter and sunny sherbet hues for 
summer. Female audiences might be more entranced with this wardrobe, since 
only a few pieces of attire are unisex and only one specifically male, and there’s a 
general girliness to the clothing styles and their frothy presentation. The light- and 
dark-skinned duo featured in each title could reasonably be reckoned as a boy and 
girl, or two girls; even when they romp through the sprinkler au naturel, their poses 
maintain the ambiguity, so kids of both sexes will feel visually included. Children 
from Southern climes may regard snowsuits and turtlenecks as exotica, and kids 
who enjoy four identifiable seasons will relish recognizing and naming familiar 
items tucked away in closets and drawers.  EB 
kennett, dAvid Pharaoh: Life and Afterlife of a God; written and illus. by David 
Kennett. Walker, 2008 48p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-8027-9568-7 $19.85
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-8027-9567-0 $18.95   
Ad Gr. 4-7
In this lavishly illustrated offering, the life of New Kingdom pharaoh Ramesses II is 
a vehicle for exploring the god/man status of a living monarch, his responsibilities 
to the Egyptians who depend upon him as intercessor between Earth and the gods, 
and the journey into the afterlife which will, hopefully, culminate in his status as 
fully divine. Kennett abridges information on mummification and burial that is so 
often and ably covered in children’s “mummy books,” focusing instead on aspects 
of pharaonic rule that receive less attention—the role of viziers, the hierarchy of 
priests, the pharaoh’s symbolic and practical involvement in agriculture, trade, 
and war. The splashy full-spread paintings and overlapping vignettes, however, 
lack captions and, all too frequently, adequate textual explanation, and the text 
itself tends to lurch haphazardly among topics. Still, the tidily presented journey of 
Ramesses’ father, Seti I, through his afterlife trials should keep readers engrossed, 
as will scenes of temple construction and details of military organization. Maps 
displaying select sites, a glossary, and an index are included; no source notes have 
been provided.  EB 
kerby, monA Owney: The Mail-Pouch Pooch; illus. by Lynne Barasch. Foster/
Farrar, 2008 [36p]
ISBN 978-0-374-35685-9 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-4
In the late nineteenth century, a post office in Albany, New York had an unusual 
June 2008 • 431
staff member: Owney, a stray mutt who’d made the post office his base. Kerby 
documents Owney’s legendary postal partisanship and taste for travel, describing 
his tendency to board mail trains to heaven knows where and come back with tags 
from the mail depots that he’d visited; he was finally gifted by the employees with 
a global sea voyage, from which he returned as a celebrity on an even greater scale. 
The book effectively weaves this little piece of history into a satisfying narrative, 
and Owney is a charismatic canine protagonist, an enviably free spirit who leads 
a romantically rambling life. Line-and-watercolor illustrations have an offhanded 
scruffiness suited to Owney’s appearance and character; though the colors are a little 
pallid, there’s a pleasing airy openness to the depiction of the pooch’s rambles. This 
is a versatile little doggy number: it could also serve as a readaloud, it would pair 
invitingly with books on other famous canines such as Hachiko (Turner’s Hachiko, 
BCCB 6/04) or Balto, or it could serve as an offbeat springboard to explorations 
of travel or even the postal system, perhaps in partnership with Tunnell’s quirky 
Mailing May (BCCB 10/97). Kerby provides an extensive author’s note that dis-
cusses her research and explains how she mediated between discrepancies; a few 
photographs of Owney and a bibliography of resources, most of them nineteenth-
century newspaper articles, are included.  DS
kogler, JenniFer Anne The Otherworldlies. Eos/HarperCollins, 
2008 [400p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-073960-7 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-073959-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
M Gr. 5-7
Twelve-year-old Fern McAllister, bullied at school by both students and teachers 
because of her odd appearance and behavior, is stunned one day when one minute 
she’s sitting in the classroom and the next she’s face down on a sandy beach that’s 
miles away. Fern’s newly discovered ability to teleport is the first of several surprises 
that come her way in quick succession: she was adopted, her birth mother was 
actually a vampire, and she is one of only eleven children who have the ability to 
stop plans being put in place by a blood-drinking vamp named Vlad. Most Other-
worldlies (the new term for vampires) want to coexist peacefully with humans and 
have overcome their need to drain veins—hence their desire to distance themselves 
from the term “vampire” and all the baggage attached to it. Vlad, on the other 
hand, wants a return to vampiric roots, and he is intent on getting his hands on 
the mythical Omphalos Stone, which will enable him to overpower his enemies 
and control the world. Kogler offers up an original take on vampires, making them 
descendents of the Greek gods, with their various abilities stemming from their 
particular connections: Fern, who pulls her strength from water, is classified as a 
Poseidon. Unfortunately, the writing fails to fulfill the promise of the concept; the 
prose is stilted and overliteral, and there seems to be more interest in setting up 
the world than in having things happen within it. Dialogue and descriptions are 
often awkward or simply odd, and the disjointed sentences make the proceedings 
confusing. There are disruptions usually within the same paragraph, where a follow-
ing sentence contradicts something that came immediately before it. The original 
concept and the wish-fulfillment of the outsider with secret powers may nonetheless 
draw young fantasy fans, but they’ll be better off with Rees’ well-crafted Vampire 
High (BCCB 11/03) or Riordan’s Lightning Thief (BCCB 10/05).  CW
432 • The BulleTin
kostick, conor Saga. Viking, 2008 [368p]
ISBN 978-0-670-06280-5 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
In this sequel to Epic (BCCB 4/07), the bounds of reality are pushed further as 
the video game players featured in the previous volume here take a backseat to 
the characters themselves. Saga is a complex yet flawed follow-up game to Epic, 
and gaming expert Erik and his friends, residents of New Earth, aren’t sure what 
to make of its addictive qualities. However, most of the novel takes place in Saga 
itself, a world that is merely the setting of the game while still feeling entirely real 
to its inhabitants. The Dark Queen, seeking enslavement of those in the game and 
without, has a short list of individuals who stand in her way, including Ghost, an 
anarchist fifteen-year-old airboarder who can’t remember her own past, Cindella, 
the VR character that Erik has chosen for Saga, and the queen’s own assistant, with 
whose help she has ruled for centuries. This adventurous, intriguing, and entirely 
unsettling novel delivers an impeccable balance of philosophical debate about the 
limits of realness while still delivering enough chase scenes, battles, and twisty plot 
shifts to keep even the most action-driven SF fan engaged. In addition, Kostick hones 
in on key memorable characters, providing readers with an emotional connection 
in this dystopic and mechanical setting: Ghost, Cindella (and the New Earthian 
Erik), and even the sure to be despised Dark Queen are all intricately developed, 
and they all face extraordinary challenges that push them far out of their comfort 
zones and into remarkable new growth. Knowledge of the first volume might aid 
in understanding Erik’s motivations, but the new setting and fully realized plot 
guarantees that readers will have no trouble enjoying this as a stand-alone volume, 
and they will likely be tempted to explore Saga’s VR roots in Epic.  AS
krull, kAthleen Fartiste; by Kathleen Krull and Paul Brewer; illus. by Boris 
Kulikov. Simon, 2008 36p
ISBN 978-1-4169-2828-7 $16.99   
R Gr. 3-6
Fame sometimes comes in mysterious ways, as it did to Joseph Pujol, the nine-
teenth-century Frenchman known professionally as “Le Petomane,” who made 
a stage career of sonorous fart effects and impressions. Noted biographer Krull, 
aided by her husband, Paul Brewer, chronicles this legendary artist’s rise to fame 
in bouncy anapestical couplets, starting from Pujol’s youthful discovery of his 
startling voluntary intestinal control, through his development of his talent for 
entertainment in the army, to his becoming a well-paid headliner on a par with 
Sarah Bernhardt at Paris’ Moulin Rouge. The rhyme seems an odd stylistic choice 
for a piece of history that’s plenty gripping in prose, and the scansion is sometimes 
strained and uneven; fortunately, the story itself is pretty hard to resist, and the 
text does an impressive job of covering the high points of the windmeister’s career 
(the flap copy labels it a “mostly true story,” but that seems to be a disclaimer for 
accepting established legend along with established fact). Kulikov’s mixed-media 
art is comically far-fetched in its exaggerated draftsmanship, but the rich colors 
and palpable texturing via hatching and dappling makes the Moulin Rouge a weird 
yet historically believable space. The performative farts are imaginatively captured 
in visual clouds, occasionally creatively shaped or inhabited (musical notes dance 
amid the musical emissions, for instance) the better to convey their special merits. 
While the text could be read aloud, let’s face it—odds of your getting through it 
June 2008 • 433
unmolested by sound effects aren’t good, so either embrace the approach by pass-
ing out balloons or kazoos for punctuation or just introduce possible readers to 
the concept and let them snicker, etc., over it noisily on their own. An extensive 
explanatory note is appended, as is a brief source list.  DS
kvAsnosky, lAurA mcgee Really Truly Bingo; written and illus. by Laura McGee 
Kvasnosky. Candlewick, 2008 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-3210-6 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-7 yrs
It’s really Mom’s fault, since she told Bea to use her imagination, that Bea imagines 
up a big furry dog named Bingo who has one goal on his mind: “Let’s do something 
we’re not supposed to do.” Bea and Bingo dig a big hole in the melon patch and 
make it into a fort buttressed by the household pillows, concoct forbidden snacks, 
and breach the rules by playing in the sprinkler. Mom finally realizes that Bea has 
been up to serious mischief and blows her top, but fortunately Bingo encouraged 
Bea to make a lovely daisy chain, the gift of which mollifies Mom. The story is 
essentially episodic, lacking much narrative tension, but the pleasures of misbehav-
ior will certainly appeal to youngsters, and Bea’s matter-of-fact approach to both 
the imaginary dog and the real mayhem has a certain ironic humor. Illustrations 
are executed in gouache resist, and the splotchy black lines and textured layers of 
color add depth and interest to the rich sweetness of the bright landscapes, while 
occasional line art complements the color spreads. Though this doesn’t have the 
punch of the author’s Zelda and Ivy titles (BCCB 4/98, et al.), it’s useful to have a 
fairly gentle tale of malfeasance, and kids will appreciate the sly fact that the mess 
can be considered Mom’s own fault.  DS
lewis, richArd The Demon Queen. Simon, 2008 [240p]
ISBN 978-1-4169-3589-6 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
Jesse is finally settling into what feels like home with a new foster family when the 
world around him begins to unravel in strange and terrifying ways. Suddenly, his 
quiet town is littered with sacrificed birds, illness befalls anyone who even looks at 
the new neighbors’ Balinese mask, and evil is everywhere, especially in the over-
whelming malevolence of Rangda, a Balinese spirit coming to power through the 
neighbors’ teen daughter. At first, Jesse does not know the critical role he is to play 
in stopping the rampant destruction Rangda would release, and even after he knows 
his destiny, he is far from certain that he, a quiet and unassuming kid, can be heroic. 
The fact that Jesse doesn’t immediately see himself as an ideal savior adds effective 
drama to the story: his internal struggle hinders his progress as much as the evil 
spirits, which may or may not really exist. There is poignancy in Jesse’s inability to 
just find a quiet, loving place to settle (he even loses the affection of his new parents 
when required to sacrifice their beloved bird in a ritual); this desperation makes 
him a compelling and sympathetic protagonist. Unfortunately, this kid endures so 
many trials that this same sympathy is dulled under the unrelenting horror of his 
life (the epilogue features him stuck in a detainee camp, evil still pursuing him). In 
addition, the overwrought dialogue, underexplained “foreign” rituals, and somewhat 
absurd climax wherein true love conquers all evil might pass muster for a quick 
summer read but do not stand up to the fairly sophisticated political commentary 
434 • The BulleTin
that accompanies them. Even so, horror fans looking for some depth along with 
their gore and voodoo may still find this a satisfying read.  AS
lucke, deb The Boy Who Wouldn’t Swim; written and illus. by Deb Lucke. Clar-
ion, 2008 [36p]
ISBN 978-0-618-91484-5 $16.00
Reviewed from galleys   
R 6-9 yrs
“It was so hot that summer that the whole town practically lived in the pool”—the 
whole town, that is, except for young Eric Dooley, who’s afraid of the water and 
who sits, overheated and grouchy, by the edge of the pool. Sulking as his younger 
sister, Jessica, becomes increasingly accomplished, he decides to take the time-
honored tack of spoiling things for everyone else, calling out alarms on spit in the 
pool, sharks in the pool, baby pee in the pool, etc. Finally, humiliation proves a 
sufficiently motivating force to get him into the water, where he proves as stubborn 
about getting out as he once was about not getting in. Though the text is a little 
lengthy, the story is funnily told, with an anecdotal flair and some entertaining 
turns of phrase (“There wasn’t a person in Clermont County who didn’t have prune 
toes”), and the sibling-rivalry engine is authentic indeed. The gouache illustrations 
deftly capture the surreally intense blue of a swimming pool and the surreally 
bizarre get-ups of the people within it, with special emphasis on flowered bathing 
caps and pointy period eyewear; the art makes particularly effective use of pool 
ripples and pale, color-drained concrete wherein the darkest elements are the bits 
of shadow underneath deck chairs and people. This is an older, bolder approach 
to wariness of water than Wells’ Edward in Deep Water (BCCB 11/95), and even 
kids who swim like fish will giggle at the humor and sympathize with the pain of 
being relegated to the baby pool.  DS
lyon, AnnAbel All-Season Edie. Orca, 2008 [192p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-55143-713-2 $8.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7
Canadian author Lyon traces a year in the life of Edie Jasmine Snow, starting with 
the eleven-year-old’s first summer vacation without her thirteen-year-old sister, 
Dexter; as the seasons pass, Edie fights with Dexter, suffers through being sick at 
Christmas, fights with Dexter, mourns the loss of her elderly grandfather, achieves 
a certain détente with Dexter’s best friend, Mean Megan, and finally busts Dexter 
to their parents for getting drunk at a party. What could be a blandly quotidian 
chronicle is made into an astonishingly fresh and immediate account by Edie’s wry, 
offhand, and utterly believable narration, studded with inter-sister interaction of 
documentary-level authenticity. Lyon weaves the more conventionally significant 
events into the literary fabric so that they’re as unaccented as they are in life, but 
there’s still plenty of narrative pull and tension in Edie’s gradual move from sis-
ter-shadowed obsession toward independent personhood. Edie is a sympathetic 
protagonist and Dexter really is tough on her (Edie’s actually locked into a pool 
cabana to keep her out of the older girls’ hair at the fateful drunken party), but 
readers will also be able to understand the feelings of Dexter, beset by a pesty little 
sister who’s beginning to challenge big sis on her own territory (Edie’s successful 
venture into Dexter’s supreme realm of dance is a pivotal moment). This has the 
classic flavor of Ramona and Beezus, as if they had hit middle school and met 
the new millennium, and readers with their own sibling dramas will find rueful 
sympathy for both sibs.  DS
June 2008 • 435
mArr, melissA Ink Exchange. HarperTeen, 2008 325p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-121469-1 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-121468-4 $16.99   
R Gr. 9-12
After her mother’s death, her father’s emotional withdrawal, and a rape at the hands 
of her drug-dealer brother’s friends, high-school student Leslie seeks to change her 
incredibly bad luck, and she’s convinced that good fortune lies in her first tattoo: 
“inky black eyes . . . within a black-and-gray knotwork surrounded by wings like 
coalescing shadows, and in the middle was a chaos star.” Unbeknownst to Leslie, 
the design and the tainted ink that imprints it on her back bind her inextricably to 
Irial, king of the dark faery court, who uses the tat as a link to feed on the sweetly 
unruly human emotions he draws through his human conduit. The ink works 
both ways, however, with Irial himself changing, becoming more concerned about 
Leslie’s welfare and more reluctant to involve her in the violence needed to generate 
what sustains him and his followers. At the same time, Niall, formerly of the dark 
court but now loyal to the summer king and queen, has fallen hard for Leslie and 
is determined to save her from Irial, despite rules preventing him from revealing 
himself and his past fully to her. Marr has created a magical, semi-erotic companion 
to her first novel, Wicked Lovely (BCCB 7/07); beginning with the first book will 
definitely help avoid confusion about the fey courtiers and their respective histories 
and allegiances, but the lushly created world will appeal to novices as well. Readers 
will be drawn in by Marr’s darkly poetic imagery and language, her vivid portrayal 
of the art of tattooing, and her shadowy love triangle. This is indeed a delicious, 
smoky delight.  CW
mcghee, Alison Bye-Bye, Crib; illus. by Ross MacDonald. Wiseman/Simon, 
2008 32p
ISBN 978-1-4169-1621-5 $16.99   
R 2-4 yrs
“I’m a big boy now,” states this young narrator, “You know what that means. No 
bottle. No diaper. And lots of muscles.” Despite his newly gained “big boy” status, 
the lad is wary of his next toddler challenge—moving to a big bed. Although the 
boy initially imagines the interloper bed to be monster-like in demeanor, his parents 
remain firm; when the boy protests that the bed might eat him alive they simply 
respond, “Be brave.” However, with the help of his faithful Red Blankie (“Red 
Blankie, you first”), Big Pillow, and stuffed sidekick, Baby Kitty, he musters the 
courage to make the switch successfully: “Here’s what Baby Kitty and I say: Muscle 
cats and muscle boys sleep in big beds. Like this one.” The contrast between the 
’50s retro look (both in style and in color choice) of MacDonald’s thickly outlined 
pencil crayon and watercolor illustrations and the imaginative and modern-sound-
ing text accents the gentle humor of the story, and words and pictures are well 
matched in their simplicity and warmth. Though the “monster bed” concept (and 
accompanying illustration) may send the truly fearful right over the brink, the more 
stout of heart will find this an engaging, amusing, and ultimately reassuring look 
at a major childhood milestone.  JH
mcnicoll, sylviA Last Chance for Paris. Fitzhenry & Whiteside, 
2008 204p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-55455-061-6 $11.95   
Ad Gr. 6-9
Zanna can’t believe the turn her summer has taken: instead of spending it in Paris 
with her mother, she has to visit her geomorphologist father and her twin brother, 
436 • The BulleTin
who lives with Dad, in Last Chance Pass, Alberta. Her mother claims that the for-
bidden strawberry tattoo on Zanna’s ankle was the rebellious straw that broke the 
camel’s back and sentenced her to the wilderness, but Zanna suspects that Mom 
is just tired of having a teenaged daughter; after all, she already ditched Zanna’s 
twin when they were ten, and now she’s left them both in the hands of their father. 
Zanna is flooded with ambivalences: she’s glad to be back with her brother, but she 
feels shut out from his relationship with their dad; the wounded puppy, longingly 
named “Paris” by Zanna, that they find under their cabin is cute, but his appetite 
offends her vegetarian sensibilities; the scenery here is beautiful, but it isn’t Paris; 
she misses her boyfriend, but she finds herself drawn to Tyler, the son of the ranger 
in Last Chance. When Tyler convinces her that the puppy is in fact a wolf cub, 
she agrees to take the animal to a reserve, only to have to retrieve him when her 
brother goes missing and she hopes for the cub’s tracking assistance. The narrative 
is involving and the story is swiftly paced, while interesting subplots enhance the 
main story. Unfortunately, the writing is often clumsy and the characterization 
is more than a little clichéd, while Zanna’s immediate and inexplicable dislike of 
Tyler is the stuff of bad romance novels, as is her predictable turnaround by the 
time Tyler has had enough of her. However, the glossing over of detail makes for 
speedy reading through an exciting mountain rescue, and fans of Will Hobbs may 
enjoy this outdoorsy offering.  KC 
meldrum, christinA Madapple. Knopf, 2008 [416p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-95176-3 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-85176-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
This complex and multilayered novel explores religion, family, morality, and obli-
gation through the observant but naïve perspective of Aslaug as a child, then teen, 
and finally as a defendant on trial for murder. After having grown up in an isolated 
home in contemporary rural Maine under the abusive and restrictive tutelage of 
her Danish immigrant mother, Aslaug knows almost nothing of the larger world 
when her mother dies; indeed, she does not even know her own origins, and now 
she’s hearing assertions ranging from her being the product of a virgin birth to 
her being the child of an incestuous relationship between her grandfather and her 
young mother. Although she is able to find an aunt and cousins who take her in, 
this discovery provides scant normalcy for the barely coping Aslaug, who soon 
finds herself pregnant, embroiled in a new virgin birth conspiracy, and literally 
imprisoned so as not to endanger the good name of her aunt the preacher or her 
Pentecostal church. Interspersed with this gripping and unsettling coming-of-age 
story are court transcripts and interviews from witnesses for the defense and pros-
ecution (Aslaug is suspected of having played a role first in her mother’s death, 
then years later that of her aunt and a cousin) that provide key background details 
and inject sturdy doses of reality into the otherworldly mix of herbology, religious 
iconography, supernaturalism, and incestuous family dynamics that make up the 
rest of Aslaug’s life. Languorous passages wherein Aslaug sifts through the morass of 
her past balance effectively with the clipped, measured pace of the murder mystery 
playing out in court, which serves as both secondary plot and palate cleanser for 
the intricate and tangled secrets that lead Aslaug toward self-enlightenment. Mel-
drum admirably avoids the potentially easy shock value of the parenting scandals 
by adding enough complexity and ambiguity to keep readers firmly sympathetic 
June 2008 • 437
to the protagonist, even as she seems to be caught in illusions as much of her own 
making as impressed upon her.  AS
mitchArd, JAcquelyn All We Know of Heaven. HarperTeen, 2008 [320p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-134579-1 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-134578-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Best friends Bridget and Maureen are inseparable and virtually identical, both 
petite blonde cheerleaders known to everyone in their Minnesota town. When 
Maureen’s car smashes into a tree, only one of the two survives, leaving Bridget’s 
parents frantically tending their comatose daughter while Maureen’s parents 
mourn. Soon, though, identification reveals that the survivor is not Bridget, who 
was actually driving her friend’s car, but Maureen; now both sets of parents and 
Danny, Bridget’s boyfriend, must readjust to the truth, while Maureen herself must 
undergo an agonizing period of recovery and redefinition of her new self, with brain 
injury and without Bridget. The opening mistaken-identity hook, loosely based 
on a real-life event, is an arresting one, and the effects of such a tragic sequence are 
believably explored, even including classmates who use the occasion to grab for 
the limelight and people who just can’t go through a second mourning when the 
first one proves mistaken. Maureen’s struggle back from the accident is consider-
ably more credible than the usual “Sleeping Beauty” awakening that literature 
bestows upon coma victims, and it’s clear that her capacities have been unalterably 
changed by the injury. The story loses intensity in a hurry once the identities are 
resolved, however, and turns into a slow-moving disability romance about Bridget’s 
ex becoming Maureen’s true love. Characterization is wafer-thin and names copi-
ous, so confusion is likely, and too many plot elements are left loose (the financial 
burden that was going to be a challenge for Bridget’s rich parents is apparently no 
problem to Maureen’s family of modest means) or tied up with quick convenience 
(Maureen and Danny’s difficulties). Readers with a taste for melodramatic love 
stories, however, may still enjoy the reality-touched theatrics.  DS
monroe, chris Monkey with a Tool Belt; written and illus. by Chris 
Monroe. Carolrhoda, 2008 36p
ISBN 978-0-8225-7631-0 $16.95   
R Gr. 2-4
Despite his somewhat frou-frou name, Chico Bon Bon is the most tool-savvy 
monkey around. He has quite a collection of helpful gadgets, from wrenches (mon-
key, turkey, and donkey) to hammers (claw, tack, pajama, banana, and clam) and 
everything in between, all of which he keeps in his spiffy tool belt that he wears 
everywhere, even to bed. When the mechanically minded monkey is captured and 
taken to the circus by a nefarious organ-grinder, his tools come in mighty handy, and 
clever Chico manages to simultaneously escape from his wooden crate and inflict 
revenge upon his foe, thanks to, among other things, a file, a utility-knife/lemon-
squeezer/flashlight/banana-peeler, a bit of spackle, and a rubber mallet. This is a 
delightfully odd and enjoyable story, and while the offbeat plot is a bit thin, the silly 
gizmos and endearingly confident and industrious Chico easily compensate for that 
shortcoming. There’s a bit of Daniel Pinkwater in Monroe’s drolly matter-of-fact 
narration of ridiculous events (“He builds a go-kart for Go-Go to transport the 
skunks”) and young readers will get a kick out of her comical and detailed line-and-
watercolor illustrations (humidifier-using kids, for example, may recognize Chico’s 
438 • The BulleTin
frog-shaped model). Wide-eyed and widow’s-peaked, Chico is a very likable little 
guy, vaguely spider-monkey-ish in appearance, and his attachment to his tool belt 
is clearly evident (he all but pats it lovingly as he tells it goodnight). Some of the 
tiny captions and illustrative details may be missed in a large group readaloud, but 
this would be an ideal readalone for fans of weird picture-book humor; just be sure 
to have the tool kit (or belt) ready and waiting for subsequent simian-tics.  JH
morden, simon The Lost Art. Fickling/Random House, 2008 [528p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75148-3 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75147-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9 up
Twelve books containing knowledge of forbidden technology are at large in a post-
apocalyptic world, and those seeking them possess a variety of agendas. Brother Va 
seeks to return the heretical books to the stewardship of the Patriarch of Moscow; 
Benzamir Mahmood has crossed time and space to forestall future totalitarianism 
by destroying the volumes; and Mahmood’s former brothers-in-arms, seeking 
planetary control, want the books in order to recover a lost library. All of them 
resort to violence, murder, and artifice in order to pursue their ends, but only one 
can emerge victorious in this epic quest. Morden has packed quite a lot of story 
into this novel, but his uneven pacing may lose readers before they are caught by 
narrative tensions that build more quickly in later parts of the book, and he parcels 
out clues to the nature of each faction and their purpose too stingily to sustain 
attention and connection across the chapters. The novel is helped by interesting sub-
plots involving romance and friendship and by well-rounded characters that evoke 
interest and even sympathy at times. In addition, the author stimulates thought 
about the technology we often take for granted, and the way that technology may 
be consuming us rather than the other way around. Proficient science-fiction and 
fantasy readers will likely recognize Morden’s authorial plan and may stick around 
during the slower parts to see it through to an enjoyable end.  CW
morse, scott Magic Pickle; written and illus. by Scott Morse. Graphix/Scho-
lastic, 2008 [112p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-439-87995-8 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-4
A half-century ago, the brilliant scientist Doctor Formaldehyde enlivened a whole 
bushel of veggies. Unfortunately, most of the produce “went bad,” but humanity 
is lucky there is an exception in the pickle, known officially as Weapon Kosher, 
who has been thawed from a fifty-year sleep to thwart the newly wakened crop’s 
evil plans. This is all news to Jo Jo, a typical preteen girl who’s startled to find that 
a superhero pickle happens to live under her bedroom in a lair that rivals anything 
Batman ever created. She is all too happy to help, though, especially when saving the 
world gives her an opportunity to launch an evil cabbage at an equally reprehensible 
school bully. This trim graphic novel wastes little time in exposition, with the author 
diving right into the action as the bumpy, briny hero bursts through Jo Jo’s floor 
on the second page. The appended bonus materials also offer solid entertainment: 
a brief additional story is a wry and quirky exploration into how one’s physical 
characteristics shape identity, and guidelines on how to draw produce (narrated with 
snarky asides directed to the reader) blend actual tips with absurd humor. The rich 
colors, hovering comfortably this side of gaudy, capture both the vibrancy of pro-
June 2008 • 439
duce and the familiar bright hues of comics in general; the illustrations themselves 
mostly reflect rather than supplement the text, though Morse’s ability to capture 
a scowl or triumphant expression on a mouthless, noseless, costumed pickle is an 
admirable feat. Fans of Franny K. Stein will appreciate the mad-scientist bent and 
silly humor, while young GN buffs will love having a new superhero in the mix; 
both groups will eagerly anticipate the promised sequels.  AS
osterlund, Anne Aurelia. Speak/Penguin, 2008 [256p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-14-240579-6 $8.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Aurelia is the crown princess of the feudal region of Tyralt, but while the citizens 
of Tyralt anxiously await the ascendance to the throne of their favorite, someone is 
trying to ensure that doesn’t happen. Aurelia’s father secretly sends for his former 
royal spy, now living on the frontier with his family, to investigate two failed at-
tempts on his daughter’s life, but the man refuses to re-enter court life. The spy’s 
son Robert, however, remembers Aurelia as his childhood friend and perhaps 
something more, and he agrees to take over his father’s position. Robert tracks 
down clues that lead him in disturbing directions, and he finally defies the king’s 
injunction against telling Aurelia her life is in danger and plots a dangerous gambit 
using her as bait to catch her assassin. This cleverly conceived mystery/romance is 
elegantly written, with a beautifully realized setting of a medieval city twined by a 
river and fortified by a stone wall. Aurelia is rather forward thinking for a feudal 
princess, but her democratic leanings make her as likable to readers as she is to her 
subjects. Robert, too, reveals enough uncertainty and conflicted ambition to make 
him not only accessible but endearing. Their inevitable romance is played without 
the encumbrance of heaving bosoms or frustrating suspense; rather, their grounded 
sensibilities are evenly matched for a slow but sure development of tender feeling, 
and suspense is saved for a well-played climax of life and death on half-wild stal-
lions. Readers who love that intersection of period drama, romance, and mystery 
will be most satisfied with this offering.  KC
Plum-ucci, cArol Streams of Babel. Harcourt, 2008 [432p]
ISBN 978-0-15-216556-7 $17.00
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Cora Holman’s mother was the first to die, but since she was a known morphine 
addict, nobody paid much mind to the symptoms accompanying her death. Even 
the death of her neighbor, the mother of high-school classmate Owen and his 
paramedic-in-training brother Scott, didn’t cause too much concern, since she was 
a workaholic with a probable lowered immunity. But when Cora, Owen, Scott, and 
Rain, another teen on their block, all exhibit the same flu-like symptoms, medical 
authorities begin to pay attention. So does Rain’s father, an agent for the newly 
formed U.S. Intelligence Coalition; it has only been a few months since terrorists 
destroyed the Twin Towers, and the nation is alert to the possibility of further at-
tacks. USIC has, in fact, been monitoring chatter among members of a terrorist 
cell, and one of the most reliable suppliers of information is Shahzad Hamdani, a 
multilingual Pakistani teen who tracks their online correspondence at his and his 
uncle’s internet cafe. USIC coaxes Shahzad to join their operation stateside, but 
when they learn that he is underage, they sever official ties. He knows, however, 
that the cell is planning a bioterror attack on a water supply, and he continues the 
440 • The BulleTin
investigation on his own, eventually joined by Tyler Ping, a loose-cannon classmate 
with a personal agenda to pursue. Plum-Ucci constructs a thriller that feels destined 
for the silver screen, with quick cuts between scenes and an ensemble cast for whom 
an audience can actually give a rip. Though the ending is somewhat contrived, 
there’s no tidily packaged promise of happily-ever-after for the stricken teens (or 
for Shahzad or Tyler, either, who have also been infected with a toxin during a 
showdown with the bad guys), and the fully credible implication that the water 
supply is vulnerable should give YAs at least a few restless nights.  EB
Prelutsky, JAck Pizza, Pigs, and Poetry: How to Write a Poem. Greenwillow, 
2008 192p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-143449-5 $16.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-06-143448-8 $5.99   
R* Gr. 4-6
“In this book,” Prelutsky explains in his introduction, “I’m letting you peek into 
my mind and see how I use my imagination to turn ideas into poems.” And that’s 
exactly what he does here, alternating highly readable anecdotes about his childhood, 
his life, and his writing with poems that relate to—or came out of—the storied 
events. His easygoing, chatty writing is perfectly pitched for stories of sibling may-
hem, parental frustration, and kid encounters. More importantly, he’s impressively 
specific in giving advice about that most difficult of processes, finding ideas, and 
proffering helpful and clear ways to develop those ideas into poems. It’s refreshing 
to see an approach that centers on engineering and puzzle-solving techniques (advice 
includes turning an idea around, making lists, or asking a reporter’s questions about 
a notion to get more subject matter, and thesauruses and rhyming dictionaries are 
recommended) rather than inner feelings or aesthetic impulses; kids will particularly 
appreciate his repeated reminders that truth is utterly unnecessary in the process 
(and if they’re wise, they’ll remember that as they read his stories, too). Kids will 
eagerly explore the included writing tips, which can easily be turned into language 
arts exercises (for groups as well as individuals), and they’ll relish seeing behind 
the scenes of Prelutsky’s labors. Sidebars explain the occasional term, none of them 
particularly technical, and they’re repeated in a closing glossary; an index to the 
included poems (most, perhaps all, previously published) is appended.  DS
PullmAn, PhiliP Once Upon a Time in the North; illus. by John Lawrence. Fick-
ling/Knopf, 2008 104p
ISBN 978-0-375-84510-9 $12.99   
R Gr. 7-10
Throughout His Dark Materials, the fiercely loyal friendship between Lee Scoresby 
and the armored bear Iorek Burnison hints at a moment in which their brotherhood 
was born; this is the story of that moment. Scoresby blows into a northern port 
city caught in the throes of corruption as a mining company seeks to challenge the 
power of a legitimate civic authority. The mining company has their champion, a 
disgraced former senator who is running for mayor on a platform to get rid of the 
bears that hang about the town, and, with Lee’s arrival, the company now has their 
scourge. When Lee decides that the politician is up to no good, he intervenes in 
a standoff between the mining company and a ship captain whose cargo they are 
holding; Iorek joins him against their common enemy, and, in the ensuing gun 
battle, their friendship is sealed. Scoresby is in his element here, with a showdown 
and gunfight that would have been at home in any spaghetti Western if it hadn’t 
been for the presence of Iorek. Indeed, fans might want a bit more Iorek; he only 
June 2008 • 441
shows up in the pivotal moment to tip the scales and ensure Lee’s victory, but the 
nature of their relationship, as well as Lee and his daemon Hester’s taste for danger-
ous justice, is well established in this quick novella. Occasional artwork in elegant 
wood engraving lends atmosphere to this already contextualized tale; appended 
newspaper articles, pages from aeronautical books, a bill of lading, and letters from 
Lyra add to the context. Also included is an inventive board game called Peril of 
the Pole so that aeronaut wannabes can get their polar adventure on.  KC
rodmAn, mAry Ann Jimmy’s Stars. Farrar, 2008 [272p]
ISBN 978-0-374-33703-2 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
Of the three McKelvey siblings, it’s always been Jimmy and youngest sister Ellie 
who were close; now eleven-year-old Ellie must watch as Jimmy, in 1943 all grown 
up, enlists in the Army to do his bit to stop Hitler in his tracks. She heeds his in-
struction to keep the Christmas tree in their Pittsburgh home up and waiting for 
him to return from what he’s certain will be a very short war, but time drags on, 
Christmas comes and goes, and Ellie regards Jimmy’s absence as a sort of promise 
betrayed. The arrival of her noisy, youthful aunt Toots, her mother’s employment in 
the war industry, her own growing responsibility for home chores, and the bragging 
of classmate Victoria about her own brothers’ heroism all take their toll on Ellie. 
When a dreaded telegram arrives informing them of Jimmy’s death, Ellie remains 
in denial, convincing herself that his case, like that of a neighbor’s soldier son, is 
simply one of mistaken identity that will eventually be corrected. A frank letter from 
one of Jimmy’s Army buddies, whose life he saved, finally snaps her into reality, and 
witnessing the sad and sometimes violent behavior of Victoria’s brother—discharged 
with “battle fatigue”—even suggests to her that there may be hardships greater to 
bear than a quick, heroic death. Rodman’s careful attention to Ellie and Jimmy’s 
pre-enlistment domestic rituals and to their upbeat, encouraging correspondence 
establishes the tight, affectionate bond between brother and sister; no sentimental-
ization is required to touch readers with the gravity of Ellie’s loss.  EB 
rosenthAl, Amy krouse It’s Not Fair!; illus. by Tom Lichtenheld. HarperCol-
lins, 2008 [38p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-115258-0 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-115257-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-7 yrs
Inequity is one of the great scourges of childhood, and this rhyming lament allows 
a multicultural cast of kids to give voice to their pain when life hands out unequal 
portions. Speakers challenge injustices with the good old-fashioned “why?” method 
(“Why does she get brand-new shoes?/ Why does my team always lose?”), each 
sequence rounding up with a resounding cry of “It’s not fair.” The book expands 
to explore the universality of this kind of resentment, depicting babies in a hospital 
nursery wailing about injustice, inanimate objects piqued about the better fortune 
of others, and animals and planets sad about the privileges they aren’t lucky enough 
to enjoy. Though the end (complaining about the fact that books must conclude) is 
a little forced, the complaints are recognizable and understandable, and the implicit, 
humorously conveyed message that everybody envies something is a useful approach 
to an ultimately unsolvable problem in an unfair world. Lichtenheld’s art emphasizes 
simplicity and sturdiness in his stumpy, big-headed figures with thick, crayony lines, 
442 • The BulleTin
and the illustrations do yeoman work in conveying the heartbreak of trials such as 
“They said they would but didn’t wait” (one girl running to catch up with the trio 
that’s started walking away without her), “Why don’t you yell at her?” (aggrieved 
kid with a bat addressing angry mom in front of house with broken window, while 
girl with a mitt tries to pretend she’s not there), and other cris de coeur. Endpapers 
provide additional entertainment with a satiric legal document seeking redress for 
an unfairly divided cookie. This will be a natural in storytime, with kids chiming 
in gleefully on the refrain, and it will also serve as a usefully comic way to defuse 
the situation when hurt feelings about unfairness begin to simmer.  DS
schertle, Alice Little Blue Truck; illus. by Jill McElmurry. Harcourt, 
2008 32p
ISBN 978-0-15-205661-2 $16.00   
R 3-6 yrs
“Horn went ‘Beep!’/ Engine purred./ Friendliest sounds/ you ever heard.” So enters a 
little blue truck into an amiable rural landscape populated with an array of livestock, 
each of whom greets the passing little truck, who beeps a cheerful response. A big 
ol’ dump truck is less friendly, however, roaring down the country lane focused 
only on his goal, until he’s caught in a mud puddle and needs the assistance of 
the Little Blue Truck and all the animals he initially ignored to get him out again. 
The manifestation of the message is somewhat questionable, since it’s not like a 
little blue truck is any more congenial to the natural world than a dump truck, 
but there’s validity in the underlying idea that we’ll all need each other so it’s a bad 
idea to start off with a cold shoulder. The compact rhyming lines have an appeal-
ing laconic folksiness, and the various barnyard and automotive utterances add to 
the story’s performance value. The gouache illustrations have a retro flavor, with a 
friendly, stylized technique and earthy palette that slightly suggests the Provensens; 
delicate details of careful patterning in texture and leaves never interfere with the 
feeling of rural simplicity, and alert viewers will notice the progression of the day 
from pinky-skied dawn through leaden gray rain to beaming blue skies at the happy 
finale. Kids who enjoyed the cumulation, filth, and barnyard elements of Plourde’s 
Pigs in the Mud in the Middle of the Rud (BCCB 2/97) will enjoy the perky service 
of the Little Blue Truck.  DS
shields, chArles J. I Am Scout: The Biography of Harper Lee. Holt, 
2008 [272p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-8334-7 $18.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
The forthright, plainspoken Nelle Harper Lee was staggered by the success of her 
first novel, To Kill a Mockingbird, so much so that she eventually began to retreat 
from all media attention and requests for interviews, preferring a quiet life lived 
between her childhood home in Monroeville, Alabama, and her modest apartment 
in New York City. Despite the daunting task of writing about a person who refuses 
interviews, Shields does a masterful job of painting a vivid portrait of her life and 
the contexts for her writing in this adaptation of his adult biography Mockingbird, 
employing lively prose and offering entertaining anecdotes of Lee’s childhood in a 
Southern town in the 1930s, her college days when she chose writing over law, and 
the importance of her literary circle of friends in New York. The first two chapters 
are as much about her childhood neighbor Truman Capote as they are about Lee 
herself, and Shields continues to trace the vicissitudes of their relationship until 
Capote’s death, spending a lot of time documenting the way she helped him research 
June 2008 • 443
and edit In Cold Blood, only to have him virtually discount her efforts. At various 
points in her life, Lee emerges as a rough-and-tumble girl who staunchly defended 
those weaker than herself, a strong woman who defied conventional gender mores 
in a time and place where they mattered enormously, a loving daughter who man-
aged to immortalize her father through the character of Atticus Finch, and a loyal 
friend who was willing to support Capote’s more fragile ego rather than assert her 
own. Readers will come away with the sense not only that they know the writer of 
the popular novel, but also that she is someone they would quite like, despite her 
often gruff handling of press and autograph hounds. Endnotes, an index, and an 
extensive bibliography are included.  KC  
smith, hoPe AnitA Keeping the Night Watch; illus. by E. B. Lewis. Holt, 
2008 74p
ISBN 978-0-8050-7202-0 $18.95   
R* Gr. 5-8
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 413, for review.
sPinelli, Jerry Smiles to Go. Cotler/HarperCollins, 2008 248p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-028134-2 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-028133-5 $16.99   
R Gr. 5-8
Will Tuppence has a reputation for being sensible, but deep down he suffers from 
more fears and depressive thoughts than Charlie Brown himself. He’s jealous of 
his best friend, BT, who is the only kid to ever skateboard down Dead Man’s Hill; 
he longs to kiss his other best friend Mi-Su, even if BT did get there first; and he 
is beleaguered and put upon by his annoying little pest of a sister, Tabby. Most 
troubling, however, is that ever since he found out that protons decay, he’s been 
weathering the storms of a full-blown existential crisis. What’s to become of him, 
of any of us, if what was once thought to be eternal isn’t? As Will turns more and 
more inward to puzzle over the fate of the universe and work out elaborate plans to 
turn up the heat on his relationship with Mi-Su, Tabby cranks up her own efforts 
to get his attention. When she finally pushes things too far and ends up in a serious 
accident, Will has to come to terms with the fact that he has misread her clumsy 
attempts to secure his love. Tabby’s accident seems a heavy-handed device to get a 
boy to come out of his solipsism and appreciate a younger sibling (who is indeed in 
need of a serious reining in), but Spinelli, as usual, plays the events like a seasoned 
conductor, orchestrating everything from minor details to full-blown plot points 
into a unified theme—this time that the beauty of life lies in risking relationships 
in all their messiness and fragility, rather than trying to wrap everything up into 
a permanent and immutable package. Readers who have traveled in the Spinelli 
universe will find the constellations of characters and concerns familiar; while there 
is no explicit intertextual connection, these people, with their complicated and in-
dulgent love for one another and their life-embracing resilience, feel very much like 
distant cousins of those in Stargirl (BCCB 9/00) and Crash (BCCB 5/96).  KC 
tougAs, chris Art’s Supplies; written and illus. by Chris Tougas. Orca, 
2008 [32p]
ISBN 978-1-55143-920-4 $19.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 5-7 yrs
Judging by the handprints on the door, footprints on the floor, and blotches on the 
attire, Art’s art clearly has gotten out of hand. What else can a quick-thinking kid 
444 • The BulleTin
do but blame his supplies? “The paper started it by inviting everyone to a party at 
her pad,” and as pages of cornball art-related punning will attest, Art’s supplies are 
a hearty partying bunch indeed. Wild scribbling crayons “think outside the box”; 
the markers “FELT great”; ink “left a lasting impression”; and the scissors “were 
cutting jokes all night.” A couple of gags are pitched more to the adult reader than 
child listener: a purple marker boasts that he’s been “dry now for quite a while . . . 
and it feels great!” while the scissors riddles, “What’s the one thing an artist can’t 
draw? . . . A good wage!” But the audience is unlikely to miss the brown felt-tip 
standing in a mucky puddle while his pals taunt, “Someone’s got the runs!” In the 
illustrations, the a & c materials have been anthropomorphized into googly-eyed 
extroverts who crack open or tip their caps and lids to display their choppers, and 
Art himself is a broad-faced, head-to-toe smudge, beaming with unapologetic pride 
at the relatively sedate rainbow picture that has resulted from the mayhem. This 
isn’t the title to turn to for either tightly spun plot or wise musings on the creative 
process. It’s merely an observation that, when kids do art (apology to Marshall 
McLuhan), the medium is the mess.  EB
vAil, rAchel Lucky. HarperTeen, 2008 233p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-089044-5 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-089043-8 $16.99   
R* Gr. 6-9
Middle-school graduation is approaching, and despite the fact there are some differ-
ences of opinion among the hostesses, Phoebe’s excited about the huge graduation 
party that she’s planning with her friends. When her mother loses her lucrative job 
in high-powered finance, however, the comfortably moneyed world of Phoebe and 
her two older sisters takes an alarming turn. Already uneasy about the snobbery of 
her best friend, Kirstyn, and the shifting planes of insider- and outsiderdom within 
her clique, Phoebe stubbornly refuses to share the news with her friends and tries 
to figure out a way to kill the party she can no longer afford to host without dent-
ing her social status. What could be a superficial tale about a girl whose tragedy is 
having to pass up a $400 dress becomes, under the skilled hands of Rachel Vail, a 
highly readable, thoughtfully nuanced account of a fourteen-year-old just beginning 
to realize how lucky she has really been. The book has clear sympathy for Phoebe’s 
position—she really is worried about her mother, and Kirstyn really does dismiss 
people summarily for lesser crimes—but it doesn’t let her off the hook, either: not 
only does her dad very appropriately take her to task for her questionable priori-
ties in a family crisis, it turns out that Phoebe has been underestimating Kirstyn, 
who has silently been a better friend to Phoebe than Phoebe has been to her. We’ve 
had more dramatic sagas of the sudden fall from wealth, but this is superior for its 
realism, its moderation (Phoebe isn’t a snobby princess, just a young person who 
can’t quite grasp that what she’s accustomed to isn’t the norm any more), and its 
understated complexity of characters and relationships. Readers will drink up the 
drama and impatiently await the planned followup titles.  DS
vAn etten, dAvid Likely Story. Knopf, 2008 [240p] (Likely Story)
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-94676-9 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-84676-2 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-10
Though the daughter of a famous soap-opera actress, Mallory is contemptuous of 
the genre, finding its artifice laughable. When she blogs about her desire to create 
a soap that would reflect the real lives of teens, her mother’s industry connections 
June 2008 • 445
decide that’s a fabulous idea, and soon Mallory is wrapped in the creation of Likely 
Story, a daytime drama focused on high-schoolers. Making the soap soon proves as 
dramatic as the storyline, however, since Mallory is determined to get her best friend 
a starring role, she’s fallen head over heels for the gorgeous leading man, and the 
studio is filling the cast with more and more adults—including Mallory’s mother. 
Mallory’s planned story is pretty obviously no more groundbreaking or realistic than 
the panoply of teen television dramas of the last decade, but her snide observations 
about the genre of daytime soaps are genuinely funny, and Van Etten (a pseudonym 
for David Levithan and two writing colleagues, one an actual writer of soap opera) 
neatly balances the exaggerated world of Hollywood with the standard high-school 
strains of friendship angst and boy woes. Particularly amusing elements include 
the creeping of her real-life drama into her script, with her characters commenting 
on her dilemmas, while readers will also sympathize with Mallory’s frustration as 
her project is increasingly altered from her original vision. The opening title of a 
planned series, this has a veneer of reality and behind-the-scenes detail to add some 
tang to the sweet soapiness, and readers who enjoy the mix will look forward to 
the progression of the story in future volumes.  DS
vincent, zu The Lucky Place. Front Street, 2008 230p
ISBN 978-1-932425-70-3 $17.95   
R Gr. 6-9
Despite the fact that her father, Sikes, has a habit of getting drunk and leaving 
her in public places, three-year-old Cassie makes the rash vow that she will always 
love him more than Ellis, her mother’s second husband and her new daddy. The 
problem is that Ellis is a really good man, and he loves his stepchildren, Cassie and 
her older brother Jamie, every bit as much as his birth children, who still live with 
his first wife. As Cassie transfers her affections to Ellis, she is plagued with guilt, 
especially when Sikes occasionally breezes into their lives, asking her to remember 
her promise. When Cassie is twelve, Ellis develops cancer, and Cassie is sure that it’s 
her fault for not keeping her vow; shame weaves its way through her sorrow as Ellis 
fights his losing battle. The 1960s setting lends subtle credibility to the attitudes of 
the characters: beer is a cure for morning sickness, smoking is something everyone 
does, radiation therapy is new, and Cassie’s mom is betting on miracle cures not yet 
available. The point of view of a three-year-old is hard to capture, but Vincent does 
a credible job of casting Cassie’s immature thinking in concrete metaphors that leave 
residual traces of belief as she grows up. What is perhaps most heartbreaking is the 
moment when Ellis expresses his anguish over his disease and confides in her his 
fears about leaving his family in the hands of a woman not emotionally equipped to 
bear his loss: “She’ll just drink,” he says, “after.” Sadly, he’s probably right, but he’s 
managed to help Cassie develop a strong enough sense of self—one that includes 
a healthy dose of forgiveness for herself and others—to stand up for both herself 
and her brothers. The final chapter offers overly hermetic closure, but the path to 
Cassie’s epiphany is moving and multilayered, offering a touching portrayal of a 
daughter’s love for a worthy, if far from perfect, father.  KC  
voAke, steve Daisy Dawson Is on Her Way!; illus. by Jessica Meserve. Candle-
wick, 2008 98p
ISBN 978-0-7636-3740-8 $14.99   
Ad Gr. 2-4
Frequently late to school because she stops to chat with all the animals she meets 
on her way, grade-schooler Daisy Dawson is something of a dreamer. Still, even she 
is surprised when she magically receives the gift of understanding animal speech. 
446 • The BulleTin
Her newfound power gives her both great joy (she finds out the true names of 
some of the animal regulars on her school route) and occasional problems (while 
shushing an exuberant ant, her principal thinks she’s speaking to him). When her 
bloodhound pal, Boom, is dognapped by the new dogcatcher in town, her animal 
allies assist her in a daring rescue attempt. Daisy is a pleasant heroine, and many 
kids will likely relate to her dreamy dawdling and the trouble it causes her; and 
the animal characters are often quite entertaining, especially a pair of cheese-loving 
gerbils and Cyril, a squirrel who fancies himself a “highly trained squirrel operative.” 
Unfortunately, the animals are occasionally a little too over-the-top in their sarcasm 
or wisdom; more problematically, neither Daisy nor the other human beings in 
the story are developed enough for real substance. On nearly every page, casual, 
black-and-white pencil and ink drawings, in long sturdy strokes that resemble 
marker, help flesh out the barer bones of the story and provide helpful support for 
younger readers; young Daisy is depicted as a diminutive, tousle-headed lass, and 
the animals are simply but animatedly drawn. Despite the book’s flaws, this is a 
sunny little story, and animal-loving youngsters may enjoy reading it on their own 
or having it read aloud to them.  JH
wAters, dAniel Generation Dead. Hyperion, 2008 [400p]
ISBN 978-1-4231-0921-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
As if high school weren’t already enough of a bummer, a growing population of 
American teens now has to face it as the newly risen dead. It is unclear why they 
are reanimating, but it is obvious many of the living find it too creepy, annoying, or 
unnatural to share their lives with the undead. Goth girl Phoebe has never gone with 
the mainstream opinion, however, and she not only welcomes interaction with the 
“differently biotic,” she even has a massive crush on their unofficial leader, Tommy. 
Even love has to take a back seat to more pressing concerns though, as growing 
tensions between the dead and living build to a climax that impacts both groups 
and leaves their numbers smaller but unfortunately not much wiser. This clever 
and witty novel explores discrimination with the added twist of zombie endeavors, 
making it a welcomely satiric new take on the “can’t we all just get along” premise 
found in much of YA lit focused on race, class, or sexuality. In addition, there is 
snarky humor in the juxtaposition of Goth culture and the lifestyles of the actual 
undead, and an impressive amount of emotional depth in the tortured love lives 
of Phoebe, her crush Tommy, and the boy who has always loved her, the alive but 
taken-for-granted Adam. Though a few extraneous subplots are left unresolved, 
these gaps are easily forgivable given the complex protagonists, subtly effective social 
commentary, and memorable revisioning of a familiar plot.  AS
wilkins, kim Ghost Ship; illus. by D. M. Cornish. Random House, 
2008 [96p] (The Sunken Kingdom)
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-94806-0 $11.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-375-84806-3 $5.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 3-5
Royal siblings Asa and Rollo are running for their lives: their parents were killed 
the year before, and the Emperor Flood, the likely engine behind their assassina-
tion, has been making attempts to kill the prince and princess as well, with only 
their quick thinking standing between them and their doom. After revelations 
June 2008 • 447
that their infant sister may also still be alive and that Asa and Rollo have been 
granted heretofore unrevealed magical powers, the two intrepid sibs decide that 
journeying off on an invisible ship to reunite what family they have left is better 
than languishing in hiding, and they embark with relish. The delicate and nicely 
varied black-and-white illustrations pair well with the swift pace to attract both 
adventure fans and reluctant readers, who will likely get sucked in quickly. How-
ever, the three siblings’ characterizations (each with wildly divergent and essential 
skills that are exactly what is needed in a given pinch) are blandly reminiscent of 
Snicket’s protagonists, right down to the infant sibling with an unusual talent. In 
addition, the awkward dialogue between the children and key adults (as opposed to 
the natural flow between Asa and Rollo) seems more an opportunity to shoehorn 
in background details than an authentic component of the story. In spite of the 
weaknesses, this trim Australian import compensates by packing in shapeshifting, 
monsters, a daring rescue, and a new trio of staunch orphans to add to the juvenile 
fiction mix, and youngsters looking for a speedy, royal, magical, and unintimidating 
reading adventure will likely skim over the flaws.  AS
wynne-Jones, tim Rex Zero, King of Nothing. Kroupa/Farrar, 2008 217p
ISBN 978-0-374-36259-1 $16.95   
R Gr. 4-7
Rex “Zero” Norton-Norton is, as evinced in Rex Zero and the End of the World 
(BCCB 4/07), a master at logically organizing his curiosities and anxieties. In this 
outing, he’s consumed with his father’s cranky, sullen behavior, his sister Annie’s 
snooping in Dad’s study, the collective survival of his sixth-grade class now that 
draconian sub Miss Garr has arrived, and the well-being of Natasha Lavender, a 
beautiful neighborhood woman who, he suspects, is being abused by her husband. 
Rex musters his mates to tackle the problems of Miss Garr (a bogus love letter 
might divert her attention away from classroom cruelty) and Natasha (who does 
need assistance in chasing her husband off), but he’s on his own with Dad, who 
has been keeping a secret or two regarding his service in World War II. Once again, 
Wynne-Jones handily balances the humorous quirkiness of his hero with truly 
troublesome undercurrents of adult concerns that disturb his peace. While other 
middle-grade authors frequently reveal benign explanations for dark mysteries, 
Wynne-Jones respects kid instinct for recognizing trouble when they see it—Garr, 
Lavender, and even Dad have real issues that Rex and his gang can variously fix or 
suffer, but certainly not ignore. Only a few cultural references and Dad’s military 
history mark the 1960s setting; most readers will simply regard Rex as a contem-
porary and his escapades as timeless.  EB
yeP, lAurence The Dragon’s Child: A Story of Angel Island; by Laurence Yep and 
Dr. Kathleen S. Yep. HarperCollins, 2008 133p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-027693-5 $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-027692-8 $15.99   
R Gr. 4-6
The arrival of Yep Gim Lew’s father fills the ten-year-old with anticipation and 
dread; as a “guest of the Golden Mountain,” Father often goes years between 
brief visits to his Chinese village, where he reasserts his role as head of the family, 
impresses the villagers with his success, and brings another son back with him to 
America. Gim Lew, whose stuttering is always cause for criticism, is distressed to 
learn that Father intends to take him to America on the return journey, and that he 
will be required to pass an intensive round of questioning by American authorities 
448 • The BulleTin
in order to prove his identity and be admitted to the country. Awe of his father 
and fear of the exam only exacerbate Gim Lew’s stuttering; as he drills his answers 
under Father’s shipboard tutelage, the boy is certain that he will be responsible for 
denial of entry and that his family back home will starve without the immigrants’ 
earnings sent from overseas. Readers familiar with Lee’s Landed (BCCB 5/06) will 
recognize the anti-Chinese bigotry that inspired the Angel Island examination 
system at the beginning of the twentieth century, and they’ll empathize with Gim 
Lew’s justifiable fear. Yep’s novel-length treatment of the subject gives him wider 
opportunity to examine the feelings of Gim Lew’s father as well, who must admit 
with some shame to his son that he’s only a houseboy in America, and it’s only the 
value of American currency that makes him appear to be a man of importance back 
in China. This bildungsroman, based closely on the experiences of Yep’s father and 
augmented with his niece’s research on Angel Island detainees, succeeds both as 
a suspenseful immigration story and a touching exploration of a boy’s struggle to 
reorder a world in which his father is no longer omnipotent.  EB
zimmer, trAcie vAughn 42 Miles; illus. by Elaine Clayton. Clarion, 
2008 [80p]
ISBN 978-0-618-61867-5 $16.00
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
The forty-two miles that separate JoEllen’s mother’s house from her father’s house 
also divide JoEllen into a city girl named Ellen, with friends Annie and Tamika, and 
a country girl named Joey, who hangs out in the orchard with her cousin Hayden. In 
each place, she has bits of herself that she loves and bits that she could do without, 
but what she is mostly tired of is trying to maintain the split to make each parent 
happy and comfortable. An assignment to write an autobiography, the finding of 
a memory box that proved her parents really were together and happy once, an 
encounter with a bully, and her thirteenth birthday converge to force a new JoEl-
len to surface out of her two halves. JoEllen’s empowerment seems so sudden and 
all-inclusive as to require a full orchestral soundtrack, but it’s definitely the kind of 
change puberty inspires in some girls, and many readers will thus empathize with 
her assertion of a unified but still multifaceted self. The real star here, however, 
is the form: JoEllen’s split identity and her transformation emerge in image-rich, 
thoughtful, and often arresting poems that convey the separate lives she leads and 
the pain that causes, and in collage art that aptly portrays her patched-together 
sense of who she is. JoEllen’s poetry paints a moving, triumphant portrait of the 
vicissitudes of contemporary coming of age.  KC 
June 2008 • 449
ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons: resourCes for teAChers And LIBrArIAns
RecenTly Received:
bArr, cAtherine Best Books for Children: Supplement to the Eighth Edition; by 
Catherine Barr and John T. Gillespie. Libraries Unlimited, 2008 445p
ISBN 978-1-59158-574-9 $40.00
This sizable volume annotates titles published in the two years since the eighth 
edition of this comprehensive resource.  DS
berenstAin, mike Child’s Play: The Berenstain Baby Boom, 1946-1964, Cartoon 
Art of Stan and Jan Berenstain. Abrams, 2008 176p illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-8109-7260-5 $35.00
Son of the noted author-illustrators, Berenstain collects his parents’ published 
work in earlier books and magazines, including regular cartoon appearances in 
McCall’s and Collier’s.
FreemAn, Judy Once Upon a Time: Using Storytelling, Creative Drama, and Reader’s 
Theater with Children in Grades PreK-6. Libraries Unlimited, 2008 277p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-59158-663-0 $35.00
eBook ed. 978-0-313-09568-9 $38.50
Veteran author Freeman provides extensive booklists and annotated bibliographies 
for sources in addition to her programming suggestions.  DS
nel, PhiliP The Annotated Cat: Under the Hats of Seuss and His Cats. Random 
House, 2007 190p illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-93369-1 $34.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-83369-4 $30.00
Seuss scholar Nel provides extensive material on Seuss in general as well as copious 
annotations of versions, meanings, etc. of the finely wrought lines of The Cat in 
the Hat and The Cat in the Hat Comes Back.  DS
sAlisbury, mArtin Play Pen: New Children’s Book Illustration. Chronicle, 
2007 160p illus. with photographs
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-85669-524-4 $40.00
Though this British import offers an admittedly “highly subjective selection” in 
this gallery of new illustrators’ work, the three dozen illustrators featured here, 
most of whom are little known or unknown to American audiences, provide some 
interesting examples of new and international directions in illustration for young 
readers.  DS
450  •  The BulleTin
Abuse–fiction: Cumbie
Accidents–fiction: Mitchard; Spinelli
Actors and acting–fiction: Van Etten
Adoption–fiction: Kogler
AdVEnturE: Caveney; Friesner; 
Heneghan; Pullman; Wilkins
African Americans–fiction: Smith
African Americans–stories: Campbell
AlPHAbEt booKS: Gaiman; 
Horowitz
Animals–fiction: Cuffe-Perez; Mon-
roe; Voake
Animals–stories: Fern; Schertle
Appearance–fiction: George
Appearance–stories: Campbell
Apprentices–fiction: barker
Art and artists–stories: tougas
bEdtiME StoriES: McGhee
bioGrAPHiES: Shields
birds–fiction: Cuffe-Perez
boArd booKS: Jocelyn
books and reading–fiction: Morden
brothers–fiction: Grant; Holubitsky
brothers and sisters–fiction: bowler; 
Mcnicoll; rodman; Spinelli; 
Wilkins
brothers and sisters–stories: lucke
bullies–fiction: Cox; Grant
Cars and trucks–stories: Schertle
Chinese Americans–fiction: Yep
Civil War–fiction: bruchac
Clothing–stories: Jocelyn
Computers–fiction: Kostick
Crime and criminals–fiction: 
Heneghan; Holubitsky; Plum-ucci
death–fiction: lyon
dinosaurs–stories: donaldson Tyran-
nosaurus
disabilities–fiction: Mitchard
divorce–fiction: Zimmer
dogs: Kerby
dogs–fiction: Cox; Frost
dogs–stories: Jenkins; Kvasnosky
drug abuse–fiction: Holubitsky
Eating disorders–fiction: George
Ecology: Fern
Egypt: Kennett
Ethics and values: Adlington; Cox; 
Grant; Vail
Fairies–fiction: baker; Marr
Families–fiction: Holubitsky; 
Meldrum; rodman; Smith; Vail; 
Vincent; Wynne-Jones
FAntASY: baker; block; Caveney; 
Halam; Hawes; Kogler; Kostick; 
lewis; Marr; Morden; Pullman; 
Voake; Waters; Wilkins
Fathers–fiction: bradbury; Hull; 
Mcnicoll; Smith; Yep
Fear–fiction: Spinelli
Fear–stories: lucke
Fish–stories: donaldson Fish
FolKtAlES And FAirY tAlES: 
Hawes
Food and eating–fiction: Morse
Foster children–fiction: lewis
Friends–fiction: bradbury; Cumbie; 
George; Pullman; Vail; Van Etten
Friends–stories: Jenkins
Future–fiction: Adlington
Games–fiction: Kostick
GHoSt StoriES: Cusick
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in All-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. in the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
June 2008  •  451
GrAPHiC noVElS: Morse
Growing up–fiction: lyon; Zimmer
Health: Campbell
HiStoriCAl FiCtion: barker; 
bruchac; Cumbie; Friesner; 
Heneghan; Hull; rodman; Vin-
cent; Yep
History, classical: Kennett
History, U.S.: Fern; Yep
History, world: blackwood
Horror: Gaiman
HuMor: Caveney; donaldson 
Fish; donaldson Tyrannosaurus; 
Horowitz; Krull; Monroe; Morse; 
rosenthal; tougas; Waters; 
Wynne-Jones
identity–fiction: brothers
illness–fiction: Plum-ucci
imagination–stories: Kvasnosky
immigration–fiction: Yep
Language arts: Prelutsky; Smith; 
tougas
Literature, American: Shields
Magicians–fiction: Heneghan
Misbehavior–stories: Kvasnosky
Money–fiction: Vail
Monkeys–fiction: Monroe
Mummies: Kennett
Music and musicians–fiction: broth-
ers
MYStEriES: bowler; bradbury; 
Cusick; Meldrum; osterlund
Mythology, classical: Friesner; 
Halam; Kogler
native Americans–fiction: bruchac; 
Frost
night–fiction: Abrahams
outdoor life–fiction: Mcnicoll
Performers–fiction: Krull
Pioneer life–stories: Fern
PoEtrY: Frost; Prelutsky; Smith; 
Zimmer
Prejudice–fiction: barker; Waters
Princesses–fiction: osterlund
Princesses–stories: Horowitz
Quests–fiction: Caveney; Morden
races–fiction: blackwood
Reading aloud: Cox; Gaiman; 
Kerby; Voake; Zimmer
Reading, easy: Cox; Monroe; 
Morse; Voake
Reading, reluctant: Wilkins
relationships–fiction: baker; Waters
rHYMinG StoriES: donaldson 
Fish; donaldson Tyrannosaurus; 
Gaiman; Horowitz; Krull; rosen-
thal; Schertle
romance–fiction: Cusick; Halam; 
Mitchard; osterlund; Van Etten
rural life–stories: Schertle
School–fiction: George
SCiEnCE FiCtion: Adlington; 
Grant
Self-esteem–stories: Campbell
Ships and sailing–fiction: Hull
SHort StoriES: Abrahams; 
block; Hawes
Sisters–fiction: Adlington; lyon
Spies and spying–fiction: osterlund; 
Plum-ucci
Stepfathers–fiction: Vincent
Storytelling–stories: donaldson Fish
Summer–stories: lucke
SuPErnAturAl StoriES: 
bowler; lewis
SuSPEnSE: Plum-ucci
Swimming–stories: lucke
television–fiction: Van Etten
terrorism–fiction: Plum-ucci
toddler books: Jocelyn; McGhee
transportation: blackwood
transvestism–fiction: brothers
trials–fiction: Meldrum
uncles–fiction: brothers
Vampires–fiction: Kogler
VErSE noVElS: Frost; Zimmer
Voyages and travel–fiction: black-
wood; bradbury
Wolves–fiction: Mcnicoll
Women’s studies: Friesner
Work–fiction: barker
World War ii–fiction: Hull; rod-
man
Writers and writing: Prelutsky; 
Shields
Writers and writing–fiction: George; 
Van Etten
Zombies–fiction: Waters
