ILLIN 
I S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
...
ft /  
"S? 
~" 
_
- -  ~ 
,
.»" 
Lij» 
'*' 1^ 
.
,< '* 
rqd '.. 
^ '*'.**"" 
^ 
'
":1? .. ^f"'"^ 
^ 
* 
.
.iS 
.ft^ ..'"^'.
i
* * 
' 
^" 
. *
i
ALA Booklist star 
Kirkus Reviews pointer
0ý Is% i n"" e n ?,
by CHARLOTTE ZOLOTOW
Full-color pictures by KATHRYN JACOBI
Ben finds his own reassuring aiiswers to his qtiestions
"Who was I before I was born'ý ... 
where will I be when I
as lie looks out at thv black, black night and feels a part of the
litige trembling universe.
"This remarkable book takes oil questions that occur to
many childreii with gentle reassurance and acceptimce. In
the same way that the text atichors larger issties to a child',;
ITHISill(j. 111CAVS ItIllijilOUS j)ailltil1gSj SCCUre the lilliverse-
Sized ihig picture'lo a boý-'s snug bedroom." -- Kirktis Retyielvs
"Zolotow has all cxtraordimiry ability
to articulate for young children
their deepest yearniligs ill the
'williplest words." -Booklist
Age% 5 tip.
S14,95TH (0-06-027351-8)
S 14.89 LB (0-06-027352-6
Imong Charlotte Zololow's
mallY pit-ture books
WHF.N THE WIND STOPS
F1111-colof piclim's bu
Stephaim Vitale
Ag("' 4-8.
S14.95 FR (0-06-025425-4)
S 14.89 1,13 ý 0-00-025420-2)
'ý195 PR 0-06-443472-9)
o J 
j
THE
BUvL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
September 1997
Vol. 51 No. 1
A LOOK INSIDE
3 
THE BIG PICTURE
The Tulip Touch by Anne Fine
4 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
4 
* Staying Cool by Nancy Antle; illus. by E. B. Lewis
10 
* Life on Mars by David Getz; illus. by Peter McCarty and with
photographs
20 
* Saving Shiloh by Phyllis Reynolds Naylor
23 
* Young Larry; At the Hotel Larry by Daniel Pinkwater; illus. by Jill
Pinkwater
24 
* The Tiger's Eye, the Bird's Fist: A Beginner's Guide to the MartialArts by
Louise Rafkin; illus. by Leslie McGrath and with photographs
33
35
EDITORIAL
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
1L
Ir
!6~·~ 1:-
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Centerfor Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
STAFF
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor (JMD)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Pat Mathews, Reviewer (PM)
Pam McCuen, Reviewer (PMc)
CENTER STAFF
Shirley Chan
Jennifer Sherwood DeBaillie
Linda Fenster
Kate McDowell
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $40.00; individuals, $35.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 51 E. Armory Ave., Champaign,
IL 61820-6601. E-mail: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu
Visit our homepage at http://edfu.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1997 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Linda Warner, from The Tulip Touch ©1997 and used by permission of Little,
Brown and Company.
SEPTEMBER 1997 
* 
3
THE BIG PICTURE
The Tulip Touch
by Anne Fine
Natalie is thrilled to live in the grand Palace Hotel, and she instantly acquires a
friend in Tulip, the neighbor across the fields. Tulip's family life is grim, so she
spends a great deal of time with Natalie; despite-or perhaps because-of Tulip's
tendency towards lying, manipulation, and incipient criminal behavior (which
result in Natalie's parents' sporadic attempts to disengage their daughter from the
friendship), Natalie is obsessed with her. Finally Tulip's behavior is too much
even for Natalie, and she undertakes the difficult task of breaking from Tulip,
discovering that dangerous reprisal waits just around the corner.
Horror novels can't beat the right kind of realistic fiction: this book is
energized with guilt and risk, anger and frustration, alert to subtleties yet written
with age-appropriate clarity. Tulip is magnetic and explosive, a stick of dynamite
playing with matches, whose compulsive appeal is understandable (she's endlessly
creative both in games and conversation-the "Tulip touch" is Natalie's father's
term for the extra fillip to her lies that makes them seem credible). As she grows
older, her mayhem increases in believable and frightening ways: she escalates from
setting fires in trash bins to burning down sheds, and she repeatedly visits a be-
reaved family asking if their drowned daughter can come for a walk. Natalie's
checking of dates and times to ensure the impossibility of Tulip's involvement in
local murders seems absolutely reasonable. And while the withdrawal of Natalie's
friendship makes her angrier, there's little indication that such friendship would
have redeemed her from her increasingly destructive existence.
Problematic friendships are common enough, in their way, but Fine
doesn't let any of the causes or effects go unnoticed, and she's inspired and brutally
fair in her depiction of the adults' ambivalence and contradictory impulses. Natalie's
parents are good parents (and they've indulged or tolerated Tulip, particularly at
hotel Christmases, for years), but Natalie is absolutely correct about their flaws.
Her mother is more concerned with Natalie's younger brother Julius than with
Natalie (a fact that Natalie exploits when her mother begins to undermine Natalie's
resolve to separate from Tulip); both parents are torn between wanting the danger-
ous influence away from Natalie and hoping that their daughter will continue to
be friends with Tulip so that they don't feel irresponsible about setting the poor
unfortunate adrift.
Nina Bawden's Humbug (BCCB 11/92) is one of the best of recent books
depicting a child whose troublemaking goes beyond mere mischief to willful, de-
structive, and possibly unstoppable malice. Fine approaches the topic differently,
however. The source of Tulip's problem is very clearly her home life, and the
book, without bogging down in psychology or hammering the point home relent-
4 
* THE BULLETIN
lessly, offers some harrowing glimpses of Tulip's family through her echoing of
what she's heard there (she croons to a temporarily pilfered rabbit, "Who's a smart
bunny? Who's going to be a good girl? Who's Tulip's special one? She's not
going to make a fuss, is she? Oh, no. She isn't going to do that. Because she
enjoys it really, doesn't she? And if she starts struggling, she'll get hur't). Yet
what's to be done about it remains another question-Natalie's father doesn't
seem unjustified in his description of the limits and scope of social services, and
neither he nor the book are prepared to exonerate Tulip of all responsibility for her
own actions. "You want to know if Tulip's crazy, or bad?" Natalie's mother asks
an inquiring policeman, and we're not sure of the answer by now, but it's too late
for it to make a difference. Either way she's someone from whom Natalie must
escape, and in doing so must, in her own self-defense, betray years of friendship.
Readers will find it fitting that Natalie wins her freedom from Tulip only
by using the skills Tulip has taught her; Tulip is, as always, better at these games
than Natalie, however, so it's savagely truthful that Tulip has the final incendiary
word. The book is penetrating about how people are with each other, in big and
small ways, and the consequences of every interaction. While many children's
books underestimate the intensity of youthful friendship and the seriousness of its
repercussions, this one goes right to the heart of the matter. (Imprint information
appears on p. 10.)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ACKERMAN, DIANE 
Bats: Shadows in the Night; illus. with photographs by Merlin
Tuttle. 
Crown, 1997 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-517-70920-1 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-709198 
$17.00 
R 
Gr. 3-6
According to bat expert Merlin Tuttle, bats are "really shy and winsome creatures
who have just had bad press." A glance at the plethora of stunning color photo-
graphs in this nonfiction offering may leave some readers in doubt, but Ackerman
and the real bat-man (Tuttle is a leading authority on bats) are a convincing pair.
Their journey to famous bat haunts such as Bracken Cave near San Antonio, Big
Bend National Park, and Bat Conservation International (all in Texas) shapes the
book's well-researched narrative, and their subsequent adventures serve up an en-
thralling body of facts ("Flying foxes don't echolocate, so they are as vulnerable as
birds are to window-bumping"). Sidebars featuring info-segments about Bat Es-
sentials, Safety, Baby Bats, Echolocation, Feeding, and Bats in Winter provide
easy access to chiroptera facts. In addition, several pages of bat "portraits" (look-
ing eerily like yearbook photos of the Bat senior class) will nicely support a success-
SEPTEMBER 1997 * 5
ful read-aloud effort. Team this with Laurence Pringle's Batman (BCCB 5/91)
for an unusual alternative to the typical Halloween fare. PM
ADLER, C. S. Her Blue Straw Hat. Harcourt, 1997 
[112p]
ISBN 0-15-201466-7 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Rachel has been an only child for twelve years, and she has only recently begun to
appreciate the addition of a stepfather into her and her mother's closely knit world.
That world is turned upside down, however, when Tina, her stepfather's distant
daughter, not only turns up for the summer (with her mother's new boyfriend's
son, Carlos, in embarrassed tow) but also ferrets out the fact that Rachel's mother
is pregnant. Prickly, hard-bitten Tina is difficult to like, and she and Rachel are
both concerned about their relationship with Tina's father and their places in their
respective families. The set-up here is a bit overlabored, and the ending peters out
anticlimactically (Tina and Carlos simply go away). Rachel's understated but strong
affection for her stepfather is delicately drawn, however, and her quiet comrade-
ship (with hints of romance) with Carlos is effective and believable. This is a
sensitive if flawed portrayal of a girl's dealing with her ever-changing family. DS
ALBOROUGH, JEZ 
Watch Out! Big Bro's Coming!; written and illus. by Jez
Alborough. 
Candlewick, 1997 
26p
ISBN 0-7636-0130-6 
$16.99 
Ad 
3-5 yrs
"Help!... He's coming!" A little white mouse warns a frog, who warns a parrot,
who warns a chimpanzee, who warns an elephant that Big Bro, who is rough and
tough, and, as "everyone knows," very big, is coming. The fear grows as the tale
travels, until we see the animals cowering in terror in the corner of the page, their
eyes hidden behind their hands, as Big Bro monopolizes the spread (all we can see
of him, from our ant's-eye view, is one enormous white haunch attached to a foot
with terrible claws). Turn the page and we're in on the joke-Big Bro is mouse's
big brother, and hugeness is in the eye of the beholder. But Big Bro is rough and
tough, and with one big "BOO!" he has all the other animals falling backwards in
alarm. "I told you he was big," the mouse calls back over his shoulder as Big Bro
pulls him off home. The lively candy-colored illustrations are a little slick, but
they bring out the humor in this playful if not terribly original tale. Young chil-
dren will enjoy the joke, even as they sympathize with the little mouse. PMc
ANTLE, NANCY 
Staying Cool illus. by E. B. Lewis. 
Dial, 1997 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1877-2 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-1876-4 
$14.99 
R Gr. 3-6
At his grandfather's gym, Curtis is in training for the Golden Gloves amateur
boxing tournament, trying to "stay cool" and in control of himself in the ring. He
is determined to enter the tournament and win, both for himself and his grandfa-
ther, a former middleweight almost-champ. Antle follows Curtis through his ac-
tivities in the boxing gym as he observes other fighters, teaches a new kid how to
jump rope properly, and spars with his friend and fellow boxer, Trevor. Lewis'
watercolors capture the atmosphere of a city gym in a sand and gray palette, with
the bright clothing of the main characters adding the only vibrancy to an other-
wise muted scene. Characters' faces are expressive, the lines of their bodies hinting
at vigorous action. Antle imparts quite a bit of information about boxing in her
6 
* THE BULLETIN
cleanly written text, but it is the warm relationship between Curtis and his grand-
father that forms the elegant heart of the story, as the man and boy bond through
mutual respect and admiration. JMD
ARMSTRONG, ROBB 
Drew and the Homeboy Question; written and illus. by Robb
Armstrong. 
HarperCollins, 1997 
74p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027527-8 
$13.89
Paper ed. ISBN 0-06-442047-7 
$3.95 
R Gr. 3-6
When there's an accidental shooting at the local junior high, Drew's parents de-
cide that sixth-grader Drew is headed to private school next year. For Drew, this is
a nightmare: he'll be the only African-American kid at the Deerwood School for
Boys, and his old friends are already shunning him and taunting him about "turn-
ing white." Armstrong skillfully controls his authorial voice, dealing honestly with
a weighty subject but maintaining a brisk and energetic tone reminiscent of Louis
Sachar. The book wraps things up too easily at the end, but it's otherwise deftly
concise, especially in its depiction of Drew's family (mouthy younger sister Jessie,
calm older brother Kyle, and concerned parents). Art by the author (a professional
cartoonist) has a comic-strip flair unusual in chapter books, adding to the book's
appeal for reluctant readers, who will gravitate to the book's final comic-book scenes.
DS
ARNOLD, KATYA, ad. Duck, Duck, Goose?; ad. and illus. by KatyaArnold. 
Holiday
House, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1296-2 
$15.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
In this gaudy picture-book offering inspired by the Russian animated film Who Is
This Bird?, Goose is dealing with an extreme case of body-part envy: "She was
jealous of other kinds of birds, except for ducks. They looked too much like geese
to interest her." So she finagles a neck from Swan, a beak from Pelican, legs from
Stork, wings from Crow, a red comb and "cock-a-doodle-doo" from Rooster, and
a tail from Peacock ("'I am a goose-a-doodle-doo!' crowed Goose. 'I am the best'").
Actually, she's a pretty absurd-looking bird. Unpleasantly clashing acrylic hues of
fuchsia, red, orange, gold, blue, and green, outlined in rough black strokes, con-
trast with the bright white of the geese, as they and the other avian-types comically
wobble through the story against a sunny yellow background. It doesn't take long
for Goose to realize that being "beautiful" has a price, and when Fox makes a grab
for her, it is her homely geese cousins who come to rescue. Told in a simple but
lively fashion, this is predictable folktale fun where the bad guy gets his and the
once foolish heroine is now "smarter, kinder, and happier and still prettier than a
duck." How the ducks feel about that is another story. PM
BELTON, SANDRA 
Ernestine &Amanda: Summer Camp, Ready or Not! Simon,
1997 
168p
ISBN 0-689-80846-1 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 4-6
In this sequel to Ernestine & Amanda (BCCB 1/97), the two title characters are
attending summer camp, but not the same one. Amanda heads off to the upscale,
integrated (though nearly all white) Camp Castle, and Ernestine prepares for the
less toney, all-black Camp Hilltop. Both girls are sent by parents who have an
agenda: Amanda's parents are separating, and Ernestine's parents are trying to
adjust to her father's losing his job. Belton uses the same narrative framework as in
SEPTEMBER 1997 
* 7
the first E&A book, with each girl narrating alternating chapters set in the con-
secutive weeks prior to, during, and just after camp. While not as cohesive as in
the first book (wherein both girls were commenting on the same experiences), the
alternating points of view are still intriguing, as are the girls' reactions to two simi-
lar but distinctly different summer sojourns. Ernestine makes friends with an
older camper, learns to swim, and becomes conscious of a few things about her
still-segregated hometown she was unaware of before. Interacting with her first
large group of white people, Amanda has her first real experience with individual
and institutional racism, polite-style. Belton reveals the social issues of the day
through the reactions of her characters, and Amanda and Ernestine are always of
primary interest. This is a solid, meaty sequel to a promising series debut. JMD
BYARS, 
BETSY 
Ant Plays Bear; illus. by Mark Simont. 
Viking,
1997 
[32p] 
(Viking Easy-to-Read)
ISBN 0-670-86776-4 
$11.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 1-3
Ant's older brother narrates four new beginning-reader stories (see My BrotherAnt,
BCCB 2/96). First Ant wants to play bear with his brother-until the realism
makes things a bit too scary. Next he decides to be a dog, embarrassing his brother
when a friend comes over. Then Ant is determined that something is tapping on
the bedroom window while the boys are trying to sleep, and finally he shares his
ambitions for adulthood with his brother. Byars keeps things funny and apt: big
brother's exasperated "Now this is the last time I'm saying this. Good night, Ant!"
will ring quite a few bells among sibling readers, and Ant's plans for his future ("I
am going to be a man. And after I get to be a man, then maybe I will be a fireman,
or a farmer, or a doctor, or a teacher") are authentically phrased and sufficiently
conceptually junior to the readers' level that they will understand the humor.
Simont's watercolors give the dynamic duo the proper amount of charisma com-
bined with everyday rumples and scowls. Aside from the fact that it's nice to get
first chapter books with genuine style, the Ant stories allow the beginning reader,
who often feels at the bottom of a very tall ladder, somebody to feel superior to-
a rather clever advantage. DS
CASELEY, JUDITH 
Dorothy's Darkest Days. 
Greenwillow, 1997 
117p
ISBN 0-688-13422-X 
$15.00 
R Gr. 3-5
Readers will be familiar with the Kane family from other Caseley books (Chloe in
the Know, BCCB 4/93; Hurricane Harry, 11/91; Starring Dorothy Kane, 5/92);
focusing on Dorothy again, this book follows her everyday grade-school life through
six chapters. Most of the events are small-she feels displaced by the new baby,
she dogsits for the Irish setter next door, she partners up with overbearing, lime-
light-hogging Andrea for a school report-but then Andrea is killed in an acci-
dent, and Dorothy has to deal both with her feelings about death and her guilt at
her dislike of her late classmate. Caseley does a good job of fitting the tragedy into
Dorothy's quotidian grade-school existence; the book doesn't feel obligated to make
Andrea's death into its main point and thereby stays truer to its protagonist's
worldview than many books on the subject. Also authentic are the family dynam-
ics and dialogue, with three kids, the new baby, and a pair of hard-working parents
making for a lively and at times overstretched household. The discrete chapters
don't pull together into an overall narrative as well as they might, but readers will
be happy to take things one chapter at a time. DS
8 
* 
THE BULLETIN
COOPER, EusHA 
Country Fair; written and illus. by Elisha Cooper. 
Greenwillow,
1997 [4 0p]
ISBN 0-688-15531-6 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
5-8 yrs
"Canvas tents rise from the ground like wind-filled sails. Workers swing from
ropes, tie knots, and hang upside down. One man loses his balance and tumbles
into a pile of hay." Lickety-split, empty fields are converted into fairgrounds, and
sheep, pigs, judges, prize pumpkins, and fried dough vendors hold court. Cooper's
spare watercolor images, reminiscent of James Stevenson's minimalist renderings,
dance across clean white pages and are variously boxed, looped, and laced by hand-
lettered text. Among the fair's attractions are an oxen pull ("Heaving and strain-
ing, lowing and puffing, they're urged on by shouts of'Haw!' and 'Whoop!'"), a
Great Duck Race ("The duck who wins ... is the only one who goes the right
way"), and loggers' events ("A man balances a board on his head, then a canoe,
then a nervous woman named Nan"). Children who have sampled the delights of
their own state or county fairs can pick out their favorite events, and those who
haven't can start hounding their parents to gas up the car. EB
COOPER, HELEN 
The Boy Who Wouldn't Go to Bed; written and illus. by Helen
Cooper. 
Dial, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-8037-2253-2 
$13.99 
R 3-6 yrs
When his mother says it's time for bed, a little boy shouts "NO! .. I'm going to
stay up all night!" Chugging away in his toy fire engine, the boy encounters an
enormous tiger, a regiment of toy soldiers, a train, a band of musicians, and the
crescent moon, and they are all too sleepy to play with him. The boy is finally
retrieved by his mother, who hugs him as he yawns and who puts him to bed.
Cooper's watercolors handily move between the pedestrian reality of the boy's
home hallway to the fantastical roadway of his bedtime journey: the toy soldiers
march up a hill to a turreted castle; the train cars convey characters from familiar
folk and fairy tales; and the boy's walk with his mother to Sleepytown takes place
against a background of bedtime accoutrements, including an enormous tooth-
brush and toothpaste, a giant hairbrush, and stars hanging from the night blue sky
on lengths of string. The palette moves from bright summery golds to sunset reds
and oranges to twilight blues as the boy is safely tucked into bed. The rhythmic
text makes this a readaloud dream, and youngsters will enjoy the boy's indepen-
dent stance even as they appreciate the cozy and comforting conclusion. JMD
COOPER, ILENE 
I'll See You in My Dreams. Viking, 1997 
[144p]
ISBN 0-670-86322-X 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
High-school sophomore Karen Genovese's recurring dreams of an attractive mys-
tery man shouldn't be much cause for alarm, except that her dreams are often
predictive of future events, and their current object has just transferred into her
school. Mark Kennedy, who is something of a social chameleon due to his family's
many household moves, gravitates immediately to a popular crowd but is strangely
drawn to the wallflowery Karen. No wonder-he's been dreaming about her, too.
Warily admitting the growing intensity and nightmarish quality of their phan-
tasms, the pair slowly realize that Mark's little brother Brian is in danger of meet-
ing the same fate Karen's dreams had presaged for her father years ago-death in
SEPTEMBER 1997 
* 9
an auto accident with a drunken driver at the wheel. Cooper metes out clues with
a crafty stinginess that should keep readers eagerly flipping the pages, as anxious to
see if Karen and Mark become "an item" as to solve their mystery; a double twist
keeps the culprit's identity securely under wraps until the last possible second.
Still, it takes a powerful suspension of disbelief to accept this oversized package of
nocturnal portents, and skeptics may wish this engaging couple would just wake
up and get on with falling in love. EB
CORENTIN, PHILIPPE 
Papa!; written and illus. by Philippe Corentin. 
Chronicle,
1997 
26p
ISBN 0-8118-1640-0 
$13.95 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
When a little boy and a little monster awake in the night to discover they share the
same bed, each cries out for "Papa!" Human and preternatural papas patiently
explain to their offspring that there's no such thing as monsters, but slumber is
restored only after the youngsters tacitly agree to co-hibernate-the monster with
his arm around a stuffed toy, and the boy with his arm around the monster. If this
sounds remarkably like Jackie French Koller's No Such Thing (BCCB 3/97), that's
because . . . well... it is. This text could serve as an underdeveloped oudine for
Koller's plot (with Daddy as the dupe here rather than Mommy), but the joke is
the same. Wide-eyed monsters, a baggy-suited human papa, and petrified tykes
rendered in watercolor and charcoal are a hoot, though, and that hair-raising mo-
ment of recognition in which the little ones scare the living nightlights out of each
other is guaranteed to get some laughs. This may be a poorer relative of No Such
Thing, but it's still a deserving one. EB
DINES, CAROL 
Talk to Me: Stories and a Novella. 
Delacorte, 1997 
223p
ISBN 0-385-32271-2 
$15.95 
R* Gr. 7-12
This collection runs from "Pillow Talk" (story number one) to "Locker-Room
Talk" (the final novella), on its way treating a broad range of adolescent experi-
ence. Parents are particularly significant throughout the seven entries. "Listening
to My Father's Silence" and "Lezboy," the two best stories, both tell of teenagers
juggling their needs and those of their parents; in the first, the narrator hurts his
father by leaving for a job during his mother's sickness; in the second, a boy intoxi-
cated with his Parisian experience is afraid to shatter it by allowing it to include his
lesbian parents. Dines' voice is somewhat reminiscent of Martha Brooks (Travel-
ing on into the Light, BCCB 12/94) with its graceful compression, but Dines is
more accessible, funny, and vigorous. Her young narrators tell of life poised on
the boundaries between anger and love, family and self, safety and truth; readers
practicing a similar balancing act will welcome the compassionate insight of these
stories. DS
EGAN, TIM 
Burnt Toast on Davenport Street; written and illus. by Tim
Egan. 
Houghton, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-395-79618-0 
$14.95 
R 6-9 yrs
Arthur and Stella are a portly, bourgeois wedded pair of dogs, whose placid exist-
ence on Davenport Street is marred only by the troublemaking crocodiles hanging
out at the corner. When Arthur spares the life of a talking fly, he disdains its claim
to be magic and makes three frivolous wishes. Next thing he knows, his toaster has
turned into a squirrel, the rude crocodiles have been changed into toasters (the fly
10 
* THE BULLETIN
got a little confused about the wishes), and he and Stella have been transported to
a tropical island amid elaborately costumed and exceedingly celebratory natives.
Finally the magic words "Burnt toast on Davenport Street" bring the couple home,
but even with their new toaster (a former crocodile) Arthur still manages to burn
the toast. The story's logic has that random aspect so familiar from dreams, but
the plot remains under control. There are some adult tones to the narrative, but a
lot of the wryness is accessible and amusing to kids, especially if read aloud with
enjoyment. The line and watercolor art is poker-faced and respectful, with re-
strained hues dominating the canine pair's tasteful home and the tropical island
busier in composition but with a certain staid gravity nonetheless. It's an offbeat
take on the old consequences-of-wishes theme, and many youngsters will enjoy
the change of pace. DS
FINE, ANNE 
The Tulip Touch. 
Little, 1997 
[160p]
ISBN 0-316-28325-8 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 5-8
See this month's Big Picture, p. 3, for review.
GAVIN, JAMILA, ad. 
Children Just Like Me: Our Favorite Stories; illus. by Amanda
Hall and with photographs by Barnabas Kindersley. 
DK, 1997 
48p
ISBN 0-7894-1486-4 
$14.95 
Ad 
6-10 yrs
In this companion volume to Children Just Like Me (BCCB 2/96), folktales from
ten locations on the globe are glossily arranged with loads of browsable stuff. An
introductory layout presents photographs of the featured children with a mini-bio,
story teaser, and pointer to map location for each. The tales, each complete on
two double-page spreads, share space with sidebars which show the particular child,
as well as miscellaneous photographs captioned with corresponding geographical
and cultural tidbits of the relevant country. For instance, in the Mexican story,
"The Corn Maidens," facts about corn, prayer sticks, a clay flute, and a tray of
corn seeds with a roller for grinding the seeds embellish the tale. Story illustrations
contribute visual interest with a brilliant palette full of energetic and attractive
detailing although the art and the photography often compete for attention, re-
sulting in overbusy compositions. The real weak link here is the story retellings.
Their rich diversity is marred by same and tame versions that are too neatly tied up
with "happily-ever-after" endings, and no source notes are appended. However,
used as a launching pad to the originals, this multicultural hodgepodge may be
useful, and this smorgasbord-style format is often a kid-pleaser. PM
GETZ, DAVID 
Life on Mars; illus. by Peter McCarty and with photographs. 
Holt,
1997 
74p 
(Redfeather Books)
ISBN 0-8050-3708-X 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Following up on his Floating Home (BCCB 5/97), which sent a kid into outer
space, Getz now shoots a youngster off to Mars. In between the second-person
accounts oflong-term space travel and Martian conditions ("You weighed 80 pounds
back home. You will weigh 30 pounds on Mars"), the book devotes chapters to
the history of Mars and Martian research, the prospect of terraforming, and the
recent discoveries indicating past life on the red planet. The book avoids the
common nonfiction pitfalls of burying readers in a litany of facts or leaving them
sated with format but starving for knowledge. It's excellent at providing informa-
SEPTEMBER 1997 
* 
11
tion clearly and conveying its implications in accessible terms; even the astronomi-
cally uninclined will understand the problems of months without gravity or ad-
justment to the Earth for those who've spent their life on Mars. Readers just
starting into topical orbit and the starstruck but bookshy will gravitate towards
this one. 
While recent television events have raised the visual ante considerably,
and the black-and-white photographs are on the stodgy side, McCarty's softly
textured art is appropriately spacey. A refreshingly current bibliography (includ-
ing many recent articles as well as books) is included. DS
GOTTFRIED, 
TED 
James Baldwin: 
Voice From Harlem. Watts,
1997 
112p 
illus. with photographs 
(Impact Biographies)
ISBN 0-531-11318-3 
$22.70 
R 
Gr. 9-12
Using writings about Baldwin and his work as well as Baldwin's own words,
Gottfried has fashioned a window to a turbulent time in American history in addi-
tion to an intriguing biography. Gottfried follows Baldwin from his childhood in
Harlem to his discovery of the artistic community in New York's Greenwich Vil-
lage, to his expatriate life in Paris and to his return to the United States and his
involvement in the Civil Rights movement. Baldwin's search for his artistic voice,
his recognition and acceptance of his homosexuality, and his realization of his
responsibility to his people and his country are at the core of this involving piece of
nonfiction. Gottfried gives a picture of an artist struggling to express himself in a
less than hospitable environment, clearly showing Baldwin's growth from an ide-
alistic if somewhat callow youth to a renowned author of power and authority.
This biography carefully blends Baldwin's life with the volatile political events that
surrounded it, and the result is an intriguing synthesis. Black-and-white photo-
graphs, a list of Baldwin's writings, chapter by chapter source notes, and an index
are included. JMD
GRIFFIN, ADELE 
Split Just Right. 
Hyperion, 1997 
16 0p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2288-0 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0347-9 
$13.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
After her mother lies to her about losing her job, teenager Danny Finzheimer
suspects that some other stories her flamboyant drama-teacher mother has been
telling her aren't exactly true either. Distracted by her mother's secrecy, Danny
absentmindedly sends her long-gone, never-seen father her entry to a writing con-
test instead of the letter she meant for him, and it results in his showing up on their
doorstep. As contrived as this plot device sounds, it doesn't result in a rosy re-
union. Danny has problems with being a poor kid in a rich school (she gets free
tuition because Mom works there), wonders about her unknown father, writes
short stories and enters literary contests, misses friend and neighbor Elliot who
died of AIDS, has a crisis when her date backs out of the Spring Fling, worries
about the family finances, and finally comes to terms with everything. The con-
versational immediacy of Danny's first-person narration is involving, but there is
too much going on here, and it all ties up a little too slickly into a package that's a
little too neat. While this doesn't have the emotional resonance of Griffin's first
book, The Rainy Season (BCCB 2/97), it does have a more relaxed, humorous
tone, and Danny's interpersonal relationships have a natural, easy flow. The drama
club and community theater touches have a built-in charm, so the junior-high set
may still find Danny's trials and their (relatively) easy solutions appealing. YA
readers seeking a richer read on a similar theme should try Margaret Mahy's Cata-
logue of the Universe (BCCB 3/86). JMD
12 
* THE BULLETIN
HAAS, IRENE 
A Summertime Song; written and illus. by Irene Haas. 
McElderry,
1997 
32p
ISBN 0-689-50549-3 
$16.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Young Lucy receives a party invitation and a magic hat from a visiting frog, and
when she goes outside, the hat enables her to shrink to the size of a leaf. She then
takes a baby-bird-driven taxi to the party, en route picking up a milliner mouse, an
inchworm in search of cake, and an abandoned old doll; they evade the beak of the
hungry owl and arrive safely at the party whereupon they offer their felicitations to
the birthday boy-the very same owl. Oversized squarish pages, creamy paper
with elegant use of framing margins and spot art, and text placed in centered verse
paragraphs combine for an elegant designerly impression. Unfortunately, there's
more showcase than show: the conceit is cloyingly whimsical, the plotting arbi-
trary, and the text's vacillation between poetry and prose unsettling. The water-
color illustrations display what could be a fascinating Lilliputian world, teeming
with insects, closeups of vegetation, and discarded objects. Unfortunately the sub-
dued and brown-tinged palette, while appropriate for night views, muddies the
events depicted and makes it hard to distinguish the dramatis personae, and com-
positions tend to diffuse rather than focus attention, exacerbating the problem and
diminishing the interest. Junior insectophiles should go see Microcosmos, and young
listeners with a taste for fantastical poetry will fare better with Nancy Willard's
contributions; this is more for adult fans of the Flower Fairies. DS
HISCOCK, BRUCE 
The Big Rivers: The Missouri, the Mississippi, and the Ohio; writ-
ten and illus. by Bruce Hiscock. 
Atheneum, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-689-80871-2 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Here is the perfect step-up from Mary Calhoun's Flood (BCCB 4/97). Calhoun
emphasized the tribulations of a fictional family along the Mississippi River during
the 1993 floods, and now Hiscock supplies an admirably lucid explanation of how
the confluence of three mighty rivers conspired with a plain ol' nasty streak of
weather to produce devastation in the Midwestern states. With virtually seamless
concision, Hiscock integrates typical activities and efforts of residents along the
three rivers as the "rain machine stalled over Iowa, Missouri, and neighboring
states, drenching some places with two to five inches of rain each day," levees
collapsed along the upper Mississippi and Missouri, and the Ohio experienced a
dry spell which, mercifully, militated against even greater damage. Watercolor
pictures not only offer glimpses of human heroics and helplessness through the
flood, but also cross-sections, maps, and other graphical representations of the
rising rivers' relation to the terrain through which they flow. Middle-school sci-
ence students who have wrestled with the water cycle and still "don't get it" might
want to slap the textbook shut and take a peek at this picture-book presentation
instead. EB
HODGES, MARGARET 
The True Tale ofJohnnyAppleseed; illus. by Kimberly Bulcken
Root. 
Holiday House, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1282-2 
$15.95 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
This Johnny Appleseed bears but little resemblance to Steven Kellogg's rollicking
tall tale hero or to Laurie Lawlor's more savvy entrepreneur (The Real Johnny
AppleseecaBCCB 11/95). Hodges' sentimentalized take on the American legend
borders on devout, portraying Appleseed as an eccentric but universally-loved do-
SEPTEMBER 1997 
* 
13
gooder: "[The Indians] saw that he was unlike other white men on the frontier.
He was wise, and ready to help anyone in need"; "Children loved him. He would
bring them simple gifts." The heavy, dark type jars against the softer watercolor
and colored-pencil pictures, creating a somewhat disjointed visual presentation.
Any of the tall-tale humor of the Appleseed legend is to be found in the illustra-
tions, which gently hyperbolize baby Johnny as he catches falling apples in his
hammock and, later, as he bounds several feet above the snow in his hastily woven
beech snowshoes. The outline of Chapman's travels is accurate, and an author's
note supplies historical background on Westward migration in the early republic.
Pair this title with Kellogg's hyperkinetic Johnny Appleseed (BCCB 11/88) and
launch a discussion on how legends are made. EB
HOOPER, MEREDITH 
A Cow, a Bee, a Cookie, and Me; illus. by Alison
Bartlett. 
Kingfisher, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-7534-5067-4 
$14.95 
R 4-7 yrs
Grandma is going to bake honey cookies with her young grandson, Ben. "What
do we need?" asks Ben. Reminiscent of Priceman's How to Make an Apple Pie and
See the World (BCCB 2/94), the book takes young readers to visit a cow in the field
(for the milk which "is shaken up and down until it turns into smooth yellow
butter"), a sugar-cane field, a beehive, a hen house, and so on, in response to Ben's
repeated question, until we have "exactly what we need." Rainbow hues brighten
double-page spreads with text cavorting around buzzing bees, fields of wheat, and
pecking hens and often landing at the left quarter of the page so we can view the
cooks measuring, adding, beating, and baking the ingredients until the honey cookies
come out of the oven and meet with Ben's approval. This is an affectionate step-
by-step look beyond the grocery store and the pantry at a shared activity to which
kids will relate. The recipe is included. Team this with Priceman's book or Pan-
cakes, Pancakes by Eric Carle (BCCB 4/71), and don't forget to preheat the oven.
PM
HOPKINS, LEE BENNETT 
Marvelous Math: A Book of Poems; illus. by Karen
Barbour. 
Simon, 1997 
[32p]
ISBN 0-689-80658-2 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-5
In a dozen + 4 short poems culled from over forty years worth of collections,
mathphobes and -philes each get their moment in the spotlight. In an excerpt
from Near the Window Tree Karla Kuskin laments, "And four and six and nine
times nine/ Make me want to cry and whine," while Madeleine Comora observes
with quiet awe in "Pythagoras," "All things are numbers./ The universe/ counted
and measured/ even or odd,/ forms rhythmic patterns/ of emotion and harmony/
like the beating/ wings/ of birds." There's a little bit of wonderment here, as Mary
O'Neill urges readers to consider a mathless world with "No zero, no birthdays,/
No way to subtract/ All of the guesswork/ Surrounding the fact," and some out-
right silliness, too, in Beverly McLoughland's "SOS": "Sammy's head is pound-
ing-/ Sammy's in pain-/ A long division's got/ Stuck in his brain." These
numerical musings and adventures are set in Barbour's candy-colored, quasi-tropi-
cal gouache dreamscape. Purple fish teem around a sinking Sammy while tiny,
boldly outlined plumbers and doctors and locksmiths swarm his head in an at-
tempt to dislodge the offending long division; curly blue waves roll improbably
onto the beach from a placid green sea as J. Thomas Sparough's beachcomber
14 
* THE BULLETIN
ponders, "Forever rhythm/ where I stand/ now estimated/ in grains of sand." A
delight for independent readers, this anthology will also be a boon to teachers
attempting to integrate math across the curriculum. EB
HOPKINSON, DEBORAH 
Birdie's Lighthouse; illus. by Kimberly Bulcken
Root. 
Schwartz/Atheneum, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-689-81052-0 
$15.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
It is 1855, and ten-year-old Bertha "Birdie" Holland and her family move to Turtle
Island off the coast of Maine, where her father is to be lighthouse keeper. Birdie
describes the excitement and sadness of moving and her growing fondness for the
solitude of the island and the lighthouse itself. She becomes her father's helper,
trimming the lantern wicks, refilling them with oil, and polishing the reflectors.
When her father falls ill, it is up to Birdie to keep the lanterns shining. Birdie
effectively tells her own story through journal-style entries in this picture-book
survival story, and the tale of the young girl bravely facing the dark night and
stormy sea will rivet young listeners. Root's watercolor-and-ink illustrations have
an almost historic feel to them in their depiction of the details of a livelihood
formed by and dependent on the sea. The deep blues of sea and sky are inter-
spersed with the glow of lantern and lighthouse light, while the combination of
thumbnail and full-page illustrations add a salty flavor to the text and suit the
unusually tall and thin format. An author's note states that Birdie's story was
inspired by "many true-life lighthouse heroines." They would be proud to have
Birdie as their spokeswoman. JMD
ISADORA, RACHEL 
Young Mozart; written and illus. by Rachel Isadora. 
Viking,
1997 
32p
ISBN 0-670-87120-6 
$14.99 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
This account of the famous composer focuses primarily on his youth, describing in
simple language his early affinity for music and his prodigious pan-European suc-
cess, then going on to chronicle his marriage, the high points of his adult career,
and his early death. The book manages to convey the unusualness ofyoung Mozart's
talent and life, but there's an odd sense of placelessness (Isadora never mentions
where Mozart lives, merely where he performs) and a disappointing lack of energy.
The watercolor illustrations tend to be pale and blurry and the figures awkward
and indistinct, further distancing an already chronologically remote figure, but the
broad cityscapes and rich court scenes provide atmosphere. This is a competent if
uninspiring early biography, but it might achieve a more interesting effect if paired
with that fictional account of another European prodigy, Mirette on the High Wire
(BCCB 10/92). DS
JAFFE, NINA 
A Voicefor the People: The Life and Work ofHarold Courlander. Holt,
1997 
177p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8050-3444-7 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Just as folklore has a crossover audience of children and adults, pioneering folklor-
ists such as Harold Courlander and John Bierhorst have crossed over by publishing
the finest products of their research for children as well as adults. And Jaffe, in her
turn, has brought to this juvenile biography of Courlander the integrity of pri-
mary-source research usually accorded to adult nonfiction only. She supplements
a clear narrative with quotes drawn from interviews with Courlander, with pas-
sages and stories from his publications, and with photographs of his family, friends,
SEPTEMBER 1997 
* 
15
informants, and books. Her bibliographic notes include meticulous citations and
the addresses for institutions where his work is archived, as well as lists of his life
events, books and articles, and recordings. All of this, along with the first-class
index, will guide students pursuing various trails of information: Courlander worked
with Haitians, Cubans, several African groups, East Indians, southern African
Americans, and southwestern American Indians. Best of all, Courlander and Jaffe
have shared a gift for fine storytelling that enables Jaffe to shape Courlander's life
story into an eminently readable text-one that is supported by a spacious, unob-
trusively decorative page design. BH
JANULEWICZ, MIKE 
Yikes!: Your Body, Up Close! Simon, 1997 
[32p] 
illus.
with photographs
ISBN 0-689-81520-4 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Rules of the review demand an age level be assigned here, but anyone with a pen-
chant for the more macabre aspects of biology will be riveted by the huge, stom-
ach-churning photos of the stuff that makes us us. Each double spread includes a
teasing lead ("A dog's dinner? . .. 
Is it a spooky bat cave?"), a dollop of wise-
cracking but scientifically sound text tucked under a fold-out flap ("Most blood is
made in the thighs, skull, ribs, spine, and breastbone. No doubt the best bones for
making soup-if you're a cannibal"), and a mind-boggling enlargement of fea-
tured cells, tissues, and organs, not to mention a smattering of parasitic critters
that use the human body as a bed and breakfast. Any science teacher who holds
this up in class obviously has the group's undivided attention; but with its bones,
blood, flaking skin, tooth decay, and head lice, let's not ignore its possibilities for
a shuddery Halloween read. EB
JOYCE, WILLIAM 
Buddy: Based on the True Story of Gertrude Lintz; written and
illus. by William Joyce. 
Geringer/HarperCollins, 1997 
48p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027661-4 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027660-6 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Gertrude Lintz led an interesting life, and between the lines of Joyce's somewhat
fictionalized biography (timed to coincide with the recently released movie Buddy),
readers may pick up a few indications to that effect. The story concentrates on
Lintz's acquisition of Buddy, an African gorilla, his upbringing at her estate, and
his final home in a Philadelphia Zoo. Joyce anthropomorphizes Buddy, interpret-
ing his feelings through a human emotional filter. The text is wordy and some-
what clumsy, focusing so much on the acquisition and development of Buddy that
it is difficult to get a handle on Lintz's personality or driving motivation. Joyce's
illustrations, in a burnt ochre monochrome, may be enough to carry the day with
his devotees, and the story may well appeal to cinematic Buddy fans. This is a slick
package very nicely produced, with art on nearly every double-page spread to break
up the large blocks of text. JMD
KNIGHT, DAWN 
Mischief, MadMary, and Me; illus. by Jared Taylor
Williams. 
Greenwillow, 1997 
95p
ISBN 0-688-14865-4 
$15.00 
R Gr. 4-6
In the bitter cold Minnesota winter, fourth-grader Brit longs for spring and for a
dog of her own. Spying on an eccentric neighbor lady known to all the local kids
16 
* THE BULLETIN
as Mad Mary, Brit, and her friend Oly come across a big brown bear of a dog, and
Brit loses her heart immediately. She knows that Mary is feeding the stray dog,
but that doesn't stop her from adopting (co-opting?) the animal the first chance
she gets. From the opening paragraph describing peering through Mad Mary's
hedge, Knight invites the reader into Brit's world, with a voice that has a real
handle on the dreams and desires of a nine-year-old girl. The dynamics of a loving
family are effectively portrayed, as Brit matter-of-factly copes with the worries of a
sick younger sister, a roof that needs replacing, and a family budget that needs an
infusion. As the wintry landscape slowly succumbs to spring, Brit slowly suc-
cumbs to the realization that her dream of owning a dog can only be fulfilled with
the assistance and friendship of (the not so) Mad Mary. In this "girl and her dog"
story, a basically good kid manages to do the right thing without a preachy subtext
or overtly moralistic conclusion, and the result is as satisfying as a big brown dog
keeping your feet warm. JMD
KROLL, VIRGINIA 
Butterfly Boy; illus. by Gerardo Suzin. 
Boyds Mills, 1997 
32p
ISBN 1-56397-371-5 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Abuelo has been in a wheelchair since an unspecified illness, but Emilio wheels
him outside every warm day. The boy reads to his grandfather, and they watch the
butterflies together. Neither Emilio's Mama or Papa believe that Abuelo listens
to, understands, and even communicates with Emilio, but he does. It is Emilio
who finds the book that identifies the butterflies, and it is Emilio who convinces
his parents that his grandfather is still aware and conscious of what is going on
around him. Bright, saturated colors and Peter Max-ish compositions and ele-
ments (floating butterflies, flowers, hearts, etc.) are the hallmark of these illustra-
tions. The graphics are very poster-like, but the use of watercolors, acrylics, and
salt give the paintings a rougher, more interesting textural depth than the smooth,
almost glossy finish acrylic paintings sometimes have. Kroll's text is touching but
crisp as she skillfully balances on the line between sweet and saccharine. Emilio
wears his heart out in the open, if not literally on his sleeve. In fact, this whole
sentimental story is wearing its heart out in the open, as the boy and his grandfa-
ther connect to each other and then to the rest of the world over a group of red
admirals, the brown, red and white butterflies that sun themselves on the white
garage door. JMD
KURTIS-KLEINMAN, EILEEN 
When Aunt Lena Did the Rhumba; illus. by Diane
Greenseid. 
Hyperion, 1997 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2067-5 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0082-8 
$14.95 
R Gr. 2-4
Musical-matinee-mad Aunt Lena takes a tumble in the kitchen ("In the middle of
a showstopping number, Aunt Lena slipped on a piece of cooked cabbage and
landed, THUMP, right on her big rump") and winds up missing her next theatri-
cal outing. Sophie, her niece, convinces Grandma, Uncle Solly and Uncle Dutch
to put on a show in what can only be called Lena's boudoir, and the result is a
happy panoply of show biz schmaltz and flashy color illustrations. Greenseid's
acrylic paintings are loud and wonderful, just like Aunt Lena, with their nearly
neon glory of purple bed curtains, teal carpeting, and bright yellow and blue-
squared kitchen linoleum. The text smoothly presents young Sophie's point of
view and reveals her loving (and cornily talented) family members. Aunt Lena
SEPTEMBER 1997 
* 
17
recovers, and, in her own inimitable style, rewards Sophie's generosity with a "Get
your patent leather pumps and pink pocketbook, honey-have I got a surprise for
you!" trip to a Broadway musical. This book is certainly going to appeal to the
kids and adults who have an Aunt Lena-but it's going to appeal to the ones who
only wish they did as well. JMD
LEWIN, BETSY 
What's the Matter, Habibi?; written and illus. by Betsy
Lewin. 
Clarion, 1997 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-85816-X 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
A camel named Habibi decides he can't go on without a fez, and thus ensues a
lively chase through the local bazaar, where Habibi trades his owner's slippers for a
new chapeau and then dashes dashingly through the marketplace showing it off.
Habibi's hapless owner Ahmed finally finds his camel back where he belongs-
giving camel rides to tourist kids, red fez rakishly balanced on his head. Lewin's
watercolors, while less sophisticated than James Stevenson's, have that same kind
of appeal with their utilization of white space and strong dark outlines that give
movement and character. This has the pace of a good readaloud, as Habibi trots
through the bazaar, "the black tassel jouncing merrily atop his fez." "Inspired by a
camel driver and his camel . . . met on a recent trip to Egypt," Lewin's story is
slight and predictable, but the slapstick humor has appeal and the lovable Habibi
certainly has personality. JMD
LONDON, JONATHAN 
Puddles; illus. by G. Brian Karas. 
Viking, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-670-87218-0 
$14.99 
R 3-6 yrs
A brother and sister share the delightful scariness of a nighttime thunder and light-
ning storm and awaken to a rainwashed world of-what else?-puddles. The duo
cheerfully puddle jump, mud splash, and slog through wet grass, then dry off,
warm up, and do it all over again. London's poem is a rhythmic readaloud with
splashy sound effects and many invitations to be declamatory, dramatic, and par-
ticipatory. The illustrations are more nalve and cartoony than Karas' earlier work;
large figures and objects fill compositions well suited to group viewing. The big
double-page spreads show bright greenery dotted with yellow butterflies, white
daisies, and blue-sky-reflecting puddles as the slickered children joyously "drip in
the doorway shouting, 'We're home!' 'You're wet!' Mama howls." The duo's de-
light is reflected in their cheerfully dramatic countenances. Karas outlines each
image in soft black, suggesting a coloring book filled in by a very careful and
artistically assured child. This will be a storytime favorite in any weather. JMD
LOREDO, ELIZABETH 
Boogie Bones; illus. by Kevin Hawkes. 
Putnam,
1997 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-399-22763-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-8 yrs
In Mount Stilly cemetery, Boogie Bones is the best dancer ever born ... errrr,
died ... whatever. When the lively skeleton community finds a flyer announcing
a dance contest, Boogie Bones longs to strut his stuff. Dressed in an old cap and
tuxedo, he goes to the Town Hall, where he does indeed impress all and sundry
with his spindle-shanked choreography. When he gets too excited during "Jump-
18 
* THE BULLETIN
ing at the Woodside," his cover is blown and his good time is over-that is, until
a little girl named Maggie Brown announces, "I'm not afraid of any old bones!"
and she and Boogie win the dance contest with "the best lindy hop the crowd had
ever seen." A bizarre and weird premise? Sure, but still a rollickingly fun one as
Hawkes' humorously macabre illustrations show a remarkably unspooky bunch of
skeletons amusing themselves in the graveyard (observed by a carefully hidden
Maggie), the disguised Boogie dancing up a storm at the Town Hall, and a gleeful
Maggie with "her braids ... a blur and her skirt spread like a blossom" during her
dance with the bony, lindy-hopping Boogie. Loredo's jolly sense of the madness
of it all combines with Hawkes' cheerfully haunting paintings to make this a dandy,
danceable readaloud. JMD
McCLUNG, ROBERT M. 
Last of the Wild: Vanished and Vanishing Giants of the
Animal World; illus. by Bob Hines and Robert M. McClung. 
Linnet,
1997 [280p]
ISBN 0-208-02452-2 
$27.50
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-9
Following a prelude that covers the history of the world from glacial retreat to the
present in under ten pages, McClung discusses the endangerment or extinction of
some of the largest animals on earth's major land masses, island groups, and oceans.
The focus here is on the role of humans-Western humans, in particular-in the
animals' disappearance (McClung acknowledges but largely downplays the tangled
issue of developing nations' rights to manage their own territorial environs), and a
naive reader could be led to believe that nothing ever goes extinct except through
human predation. Some of the African information is already dated-Zaire has
been renamed, and the total ban on ivory trade has been lifted in several nations.
Plentiful black-and-white illustrations are stodgy and serviceable, reminiscent of
stuffed specimens in museum displays rather than animals in the wild. Given the
broad scope of the survey, however, this title should be an inviting first stop for
report topic hunters, who will find well organized and indexed encyclopedic infor-
mation on a host of lesser known species (how about the Philippine monkey-
eating eagle or the elephant bird of Madagascar?), custom-made for "scooping"
classmates and impressing the teacher. Final illustrations and index not seen. EB
McCURDY, MICHAEL 
Trapped by the Ice!: Shackleton's AmazingAntarctic Adven-
ture; written and illus. by Michael McCurdy. 
Walker, 1997 
[4 1p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8439-9 
$17.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8438-0 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-7
Ernest Shackleton's third Antarctic trip has progressed from legend to historical
footnote in less than a hundred years (it began in 1914 just after the outbreak of
World War I). McCurdy tells the story of Shackleton and his team aboard the
Endurance, which was trapped in the Antarctic pack ice, carried away from the
land towards the open sea, and then crushed between floes. The group then had to
make their way off the ice and to two islands-first the uninhabited, closer El-
ephant Island where most of the expedition landed and then the second, South
Georgia, where after an unprecedented cross-island trek Shackleton contacted the
whaling station to arrange for rescue of his men. It's an exhilarating story, which
McCurdy has understandably pared down considerably for compression's sake.
SEPTEMBER 1997 
* 
19
Unfortunately, some of the more necessary and atmospheric details have been pared
out as well: kids will want to know just how cold it was (no estimates of tempera-
tures appear), how many miles the various legs of the adventure were (the only
measure given is for the sail to South Georgia, and that's confusingly mentioned),
and how things frozen in a sheet of solid ice can move away from shore (the ab-
sence of any mention of the dogs is also notable, though perhaps more under-
standable in light of their fate). McCurdy has eschewed his usual woodcuts in
favor of paints here; the lavender and green undertones of sky, ice, and sea recall
Edward Wilson's Antarctic watercolors, but figures are stiff and awkward and the
scenes and people dubiously tidy. It's still one of the great true adventure stories,
however, and this will be an effective entry to it for many youngsters. An after-
word explains what happened to the main figures in the saga; a bibliography and
index are included. DS
MEYER, CAROLYN Jubilee Journey. Gulliver/Harcourt, 1997 
[256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 0-15-201377-6 
$12.00
Paper ed. ISBN 0-15-201591-4 
$6.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
In this sequel to White Lilacs (BCCB 1/94), Rose Lee Jefferson's granddaughter
and biracial great-grandchildren accept her invitation to visit over the Juneteenth
holiday, which also happens to be the seventy-fifth anniversary of the Dillon, Texas
black community's forced move from Freedomtown to The Flats. As the family
becomes reacquainted, granddaughter Susan faces up to the unpleasant memories
surrounding her mother's death, the grandchildren learn that their integrated and
enlightened Connecticut community doesn't set any national standards for racial
harmony, and Rose Lee realizes that her repository of paintings and memories of
Freedomtown is a treasure to be shared rather than hoarded. This novel deals
largely in personalities, not plot, and lacks the dramatic tension of its predecessor,
but ample references and introductory genealogies will reacquaint readers with the
Jeffersons and the Bells, and they can compare and assess whether Jim Crow lin-
gers in Dillon as a living presence or a troublesome ghost. Newcomers will require
a proper introduction through White Lilacs. EB
MOCHIZUKI, KEN 
Passage to Freedom: The Sugihara Story; illus. by Dom Lee. 
Lee
& Low, 1997 
[34 p]
ISBN 1-880000-49-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 3-6
Hiroki Sugihara was five years old in 1940, when his father, Chiune Sugihara,
served as Japanese consul to Lithuania. One morning, the family awakes to find
hundreds of Jewish refugees from Poland standing at the consulate gates. In a
family decision, Chiune Sugihara defies an order from the Japanese government
and issues visas to the hundreds of Jews fleeing from the Nazi advance. Narrated
by the five-year-old Hiroki, this is a powerful personal story based on the adult
Hiroki's own words, and told in an informed voice cognizant of the historical
context of his family history. Oil paint and colored pencil over images scratched
in encaustic wax have a softly etched quality that gives the sepia-toned, photo-
graph-like compositions a somberly realistic yet consistently interesting array of
textures. The gently mottled illustrations have several textural layers, avoiding the
smooth glossiness of pencil drawings while retaining realistic evidence of the me-
20 
* THE BULLETIN
dium. The monochromatic palette includes only a few colorful details: the pale
pink of Hiroki's cheek; the faded inks of the visas' blue and purple stamps. This is
a successful rendering of complex historical and moral issues into a form that younger
readers can understand and appreciate. An afterword from Hiroki Sugihara con-
cludes the text. JMD
MOORE, ROBIN 
Hercules; illus. by Alexa Rutherford. 
Simon, 1997 
75p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-689-81228-0 
$15.00
Paper ed. ISBN 0-689-81229-9 
$3.99 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Translating Hercules from Greek mythology into easy reader requires chutzpah-
the story isn't exactly laden with family values, and the oversimplification of the
myth results in some notable omissions. Moore never explains, for instance, why
Hera pursues Hercules with such vengeance (her husband Zeus begat the hero
during one of his famous dalliances with a mortal); nor do we learn that Hercules
killed, among many others, his first wife and their children, and in one night slept
with fifty of a king's daughters, each of whom bore a son or two thereby populat-
ing Sardinia. What we do get here are the action-packed battles with threatening
creatures: the snakes attacking his cradle, the lion(s), the Hydra, the various La-
bors. Indeed, the gods' antics are presented as historical fact which, even with the
sex deleted, admittedly makes for livelier reading than Dick and Jane despite the
undistinguished writing style. Black-and-white drawings, though exaggerated in
facial expression, adhere literally to the action. BH
NAYLOR, PHYLLIS REYNOLDS 
Saving Shiloh. 
Atheneum, 1997 
[14 4 p]
ISBN 0-689-81460-7 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-8
The concluding volume of Naylor's Shiloh trilogy finds Marty, to his own sur-
prise, in the role of Judd Travers' defender. As Judd recovers from the physical
trauma of a truck accident, he appears to be recovering from some emotional trau-
mas as well as he attempts to redefine himself in the community. Unfortunately,
not everyone is willing to believe that Judd is really turning over a new leaf, and,
after an unsolved murder and a rash of petty thievery, community suspicion falls
on Judd. Marty awakens to the realization that rumor and gossip can cause serious
damage, and in spite of himself-and the apparent evidence-he champions his
old nemesis. As in the previous volumes, characterization is complex; moral di-
lemmas unfold with an ethical clarity that is unlike real life but still dramatically
effective. Marty's thought processes have matured, his language is more formal
(when he remembers, that is), and his conclusions, while well-thought out, appear
to be his and not the author's. Judd, too, has changed, trying to fumble his way
into a place in the community with a little help from Marty and others, as those
not so quick to judge extend themselves in an appropriately neighborly fashion.
The telling details that added heart to the first two novels are present here: the
family dynamic that gave the first installments a sense of liveliness is still present;
David and Marty are still friends; and Judd, reformed though he may be, is still
unpredictable and scary. The conclusion in which Judd saves Shiloh from a river
in flood may be a bit pat, but it is satisfyingly, emotionally right. Judd has been
moving toward this moment for a long time, and readers will be grateful when he
finally gets there. JMD
SEPTEMBER 1997 
* 
21
NODELMAN, PERRY 
A Completely Different Place. Simon, 1997 
192p
ISBN 0-689-80836-4 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Johnny Nesbit wakes up one morning to find himself inside a bottle held by class-
mate Cheryl Zennor. It seems Cheryl has been willingly transported to the land of
the Strangers (the fairy folk) where she happily keeps house for her "Master" and
takes care of the other children he has secreted away. At the heart of this sequel to
The Same Place but Different (BCCB 7/95) is an adventure story, with Johnny
finally convincing Cheryl of their need to rescue the kidnapped children and to
escape. Johnny is still a likable character, but the tension and suspense that pro-
pelled the first book is missing from the second, resulting in a story that lacks the
cohesion necessary to sustain its own momentum. Characterization is a bit thin,
and some plot elements are dependent upon knowledge of the first book or are
offhandedly explained. Still, it's an enjoyable spin through the "otherworld," and
fans of the first book will probably tolerate the ambiguities fairly well. JMD
NOLL, SALLY 
Surprise!; written and illus. by Sally Noll. 
Greenwillow,
1997 
[2 6p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-15171-X 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-15170-1 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 2-5 yrs
Beginning with "One small Rose," this birthday counting book adds up to a satis-
fying rhyming readaloud. The birthday girl (the aforementioned Rose) unwraps
her gift amidst "four shiny ribbons ... seven bright colors... ten happy fingers" to
discover "one small kitten with a soft, wet nose. One small kitten for one small
Rose." Concerned adults will be looking for air holes, but toddlers and preschool-
ers will be happy with Noll's canny recreation of birthday-gift-unwrapping sus-
pense. In bold graphics and saturated colors, Noll's cartoony illustrations depict
shiny ribbons, fancy paper, and family glee in a very kid-pleasing fashion, even if
the big-cheeked dollface art is a tad sweetsy. The kitten (with any luck an in-
formed gift from prepared parents) is the gratifying climax to a blissfully celebra-
tory event. Noll's slight text is toddler-pleasing simple, and this should find a cozy
niche in lapsit storytimes. JMD
O'BRIEN, CLAIRE 
Sam's Sneaker Search; illus. by Charles Fuge. 
Simon,
1997 
32p
ISBN 0-689-80169-6 
$10.95 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
Sam, stuffed penguin clutched to her chest, is on a quest to find her missing sneaker
so she can finish dressing for school. Under the bed is a lion and a bunch of dust
mice, in the closet is a family of bats watching the moths dance (the lindy, appar-
ently), and in the bathroom is a huge python squeezing the toothpaste tube. Well,
you get the picture-and so will readers, because Fuge's color illustrations are
what makes this predictable cumulative tale worth reading. The animals have
distinct personalities, and the pictures are full of the sort of details kids like to
point out: the lion under the bed parallels the stuffed lion on top of the bed and
the drawn lion adorning the wall; the octopus in the bathroom is seated discreetly
on the potty with one arm wrapped around the commode, one holding a sailboat,
one holding a plunger and one trying to wrest Sam's penguin from her determined
grip; and the hen in the kitchen is chasing her chicks in and around a variety of
22 
* THE BULLETIN
colorful jars and pots. The drafting of Sam herself is stiff and awkward, but the
animals' expressiveness more than makes up for it. Fuge effectively stages his cari-
catured animal characters to make the most of their activities, making this a strong
storytime contender. JMD
ORGILL, ROXANE 
IfI Only Hada Horn: Young Louis Armstrong; illus. by Leonard
Jenkins. 
Houghton, 1997 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-75919-6 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-7 yrs
SCHROEDER, ALAN 
Satchmo's Blues; illus. by Floyd Cooper. 
Doubleday,
1997 
32p
ISBN 0-385-32046-9 
$15.95 
Ad 
5-7 yrs
These two picture-book biographies are remarkably different not only in tone and
graphic interpretation but also in their stories of Satchmo's first encounter with a
horn. In her introductory note, Orgill explains that Armstrong was inventive
about the facts of his life and gives the sources for her version, while Schroeder
terms his text a "fictional re-creation" and suggests two titles without indicating if
he drew his version from them. Orgill's text is brief, rhythmically readable (com-
plete with a poetic refrain), and innovatively illustrated; Jenkins' jazzy paintings
teem with collage effects, unexpected color contrasts, and musical movement.
Schroeder's text carries a heavy freight of words, and Cooper's monochromatic
images-some haunting, some moody-have depth but may not offer young lis-
teners enough visual detail to support the longer readaloud. Most striking are the
contrasting values represented by the different accounts: Orgill shows young Louis
getting arrested, not unusual for a poor young African-American in the streets of
New Orleans around 1900, and learning how to play the horn in the Colored
Waifs' Home. Schroeder has him saving up his pennies toward a pawnshop cornet
by reselling old market produce-and then giving up enough for his sister's birth-
day dinner, only to be rewarded with the final silver dollar for his generosity. (Mama
cooks jambalaya with shrimp, crab, and thick slices of spicy Cajun sausage in
Schroeder's book; Mayann cooks fish-head stew with beans, rice, and fish heads in
Orgill's.) It's interesting that Orgill's book, which is less literal in both text and
illustration, seems more realistic than Schroeder's, but an audience of elementary-
school listeners could have a terrific time comparing them after a session of Satchmo's
music. BH
PAGE, DEBRA 
Orcas Around Me: My Alaskan Summer; illus. by Leslie W.
Bowman. 
Whitman, 1997 
40p
ISBN 0-8075-6137-1 
$15.95 
R 
6-10yrs
Page recasts her experiences as a commercial salmon fisher in the words of eight-
year-old Taiga (Page's son's real name), who spends the school year in Fairbanks
and his summers trolling for salmon on his parents' boats. A significant amount of
information about marine animals and the fishing industry is woven throughout
Taiga's narration, but his choice of family stories and details of life afloat in the
coastal waters provide plenty of action to engage primary grade listeners. A hooked
porpoise thrashes in panic, hindering Dad's attempts to help it, until their old dog
Akimu leans over the side of the boat and calms it with "a strange sound, almost
like singing. Dad had never heard a dog make a sound like that before." Wearing
a life jacket is vitally important, as Taiga discovers when he falls off the boat, and
SEPTEMBER 1997 
* 
23
"Mom says she didn't know if I'd come up under her boat, under the dock, get
crushed between them, or sink to the bottom." Despite some awkward drafting,
Bowman's watercolors convey the austere beauty of Alaska's southwestern coast
and suggest how the vast land- and seascapes dwarf the sturdy fishing craft. An
appended wildlife glossary provides additional data on fish and mammals Taiga
mentions in his narration. EB
PATENT, DOROTHY HINSHAW 
Back to the Wild; illus. with photographs by Will-
iam Mufioz. 
Gulliver Green/Harcourt, 1997 
70p
ISBN 0-15-200280-4 
$18.00 
R 
Gr. 3-7
Examining the reintroduction of captive-bred endangered species into the wild,
Patent discusses the issue generally and focuses specifically on reintroduction pro-
grams for the red wolf, the black-footed ferret, the golden lion tamarin, and several
species of lemur. She deftly interweaves personal experience, relevant details, and
consideration of larger influences and repercussions into a clear and understand-
able account of such efforts (particularly welcome is the mention of monetary
expense including specific figures, which many books on ecological topics avoid).
Mufioz makes good animal photography look easy: his images clarify technical
details of the text as well as personalizing the species in question, and young read-
ers will find the intimate closeups on bright-eyed subjects irresistible. Useful for a
younger audience than Nicholas Nirgiotis' capable No More Dodos (BCCB 2/97),
this will give some shape to zoo visits and provide concerned youngsters with some
specific referents. An index is included. DS
PINKWATER, DANIEL 
Young Larry; ISBN 0-76145004-1; At the Hotel Larry; ISBN
0-7614-5005-X. 
Each book: illus. by Jill Pinkwater. 
Marshall Cavendish,
1997 
[3 2p] 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Young Larry is a polar bear growing up in the north with his mother and his
brother, Roy. Of course, youth must end, and "the day finally came when Larry
and Roy's mother called them to her, and hit each of them in the head. 'Get lost,'
she said. 'Go and fend for yourselves.'" The bear-boys figure they know how to
fend ("more or less"), but Larry floats south on an ice floe and ends up in Bayonne,
New Jersey. He's in search of a job that will pay him his favored food, muffins, but
ursine employment is problematic until he saves wealthy hotelier Mr. Frobisher
from drowning and thus earns himself a job and a home for life. In At the Hotel
Larry, Mr. Frobisher's young daughter happily describes the pleasures of having an
on-site bear (he works as the lifeguard at the pool, which bears a sign "Make sure
the bear likes you before using the pool"). When Larry and his young friend visit
the zoo one day, Larry is delighted to find his brother Roy in the polar-bear enclo-
sure, and he's happy to be able to fete Roy and his friends with a party at Hotel
Larry. This is classic Pinkwater, with the cheerful absurdity and kid-appealing
concepts he's famous for, plus the compression that his stories sometimes lack.
Larry is amiable and straightforward ("I am sure any bear who has eaten a person
has a very good reason"), an Algeresque hero whose rewards are only his fair due.
The concept of a bear-staffed hotel is sure to tickle young readers, who will find
Motel 6 sadly lacking in comparison. Jill Pinkwater's art has an upbeat sturdiness,
with its emphasis on color and scraggly line, that is most appropriate to the stories.
Though the text's length makes it more suitable for reading alone, eager younger
siblings might also enjoy hearing this from their literate older brethren. DS
24 
* THE BULLETIN
RAFKIN, LOUISE 
The Tiger's Eye, the Bird's Fist: A Beginner's Guide to the Martial
Arts; illus. by Leslie McGrath and with photographs. 
Little, 1997 
133p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-316-73464-0 
$12.95 
R Gr. 4-10
Martial arts books are phenomenally popular in libraries, and having enough of
them on the shelves is always a challenge. Finding books on this subject for youth
that offer more than a few diagrams of stances is also a challenge, and Rafkin meets
it with this browsing compendium of philosophy, story, and history. Rafkin dis-
cusses the origin and history of martial arts, martial arts practices around the world,
the rudiments of training today, and the selection of a personally suitable form of
martial arts training. Throughout the book, the history and philosophy of martial
arts from karate to tae kwon do to kendo are interspersed with stories of ancient
masters and modern champions both male and female. Rafkin's style is accessible
and informative, and the text will appeal to reluctant readers as well as martial arts
aficionados. The attractive layout and design includes black-and-white photo-
graphs, line drawings, and text boxes (sometimes surrounded with red borders)
containing interesting, informative tidbits. A bibliography, a list of books for
further reading, a short list of martial arts associations in the United States, and an
index are included. JMD
RODDIE, SHEN 
ToesAre to Tickle; illus. by Kady MacDonald Denton. 
Tricycle,
1997 
20p
ISBN 1-883672-49-X 
$13.95 
R 
1-3 yrs
A day in the life of two toddlers, an older sister and her younger brother, provide
the backdrop for this concept book. This is pretty to look at, with a cheerful,
sunny-hued palette of watercolor and pen, featuring a cartoonish Oxenburyesque
family and their pets in kid-friendly situations as the children get dressed (and
undressed), visit the park ("A see-saw is for feeling funny in the tummy"), play
("Blankets are for making tents"), eat ("Jell-O is for wobbling"), and go to bed
("Mommy is for one more cuddle"). Although some of the textual patterns seem
a little awkward ("Boxes are to see what's in them"), there is enough visual humor
to gently enamor most young lapsitters: the bare little backside of the boy at his
bath, the children making faces in the mirror, the boy emptying the contents of
Mommy's purse. Roddie and Denton have provided youngsters with a happy
concoction of fun and warm childhood scenes. This isn't a bad way for the little
loves in your life to end the day. PM
ROSA-CASANOVA, SYLVIA 
Mama Provi and the Pot ofRice. 
Atheneum, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-689-31932-0 
$16.00 
R 
4-7 yrs
Mama Provi prepares some arroz con polio for her granddaughter Lucy after Lucy
comes down with the chicken pox and cannot make her usual Friday visit. On her
way from her first floor apartment to Lucy's eighth floor apartment with her poul-
try treat, Mama Provi passes the doors of her neighbors. The cooking aromas that
waft from under each door triggers a culinary trade-off-white bread from Mrs.
Landers, frijoles negros from Sefior Rivera, fresh green salad from Mrs. Bazzini,
collard greens from Mrs. Johnson, etc.-that results in Mama Provi arriving at the
top floor with a foods-from-around-the-world feast that cheers the chicken-pox-
ridden (but apparently unstoppable) Lucy right up. Kids will catch on to the
pattern of this cumulative story quickly, but that won't limit their enjoyment of it
as cozy Mama Provi bustles about her kitchen, huffs up the stairs with her pot of
SEPTEMBER 1997 
* 25
chicken and rice, and trades happily with her neighbors. Roth's watercolors have
a light, airy feeling not usually found in picture books about urban apartment
dwellers, and his tipsy perspectives lend a whimsy to the compositions that con-
tributes to their effectiveness and appeal. This is going to make those looking for
a culturally inclusive readaloud very happy. JMD
SANTELLA, ANDREW 
The Battle oftheAlamo. 
Children's Press, 1997 
32p 
illus.
with photographs 
(Cornerstones of Freedom)
ISBN 0-516-20293-6 
$18.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
SULLIVAN, GEORGE 
Alamo! Scholastic, 1997 
96p 
illus. with photographs
Paper ed. ISBN 0-590-50313-8 
$5.99 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Santella's entry in the popular American history series offers a barebones but lucid
outline of the events leading up to the battle and the Mexican capture of the mis-
sion compound, concluding with a mere two-paragraph summary of the Texans'
subsequent rout of Santa Anna. Due undoubtedly to the space constraints of its
series format, the account focuses on the major players-William Travis, Jim Bowie,
and Davy Crockett-and portrays the trio as, if not exactly noble, at least self-
sacrificing freedom fighters. Sullivan's longer work is more nuanced, alerting readers
to the opposing views of the battle and site held by various cultural groups (Mexi-
cans, Tejanos, American Indians) and to the diverse opinions among the defend-
ers' contemporaries regarding Texas independence and the wisdom of attempting
to defend the makeshift fortress. Tensions arising from the split leadership of
Travis and Bowie, the roles of lesser-known soldiers and civilians, and the inad-
equate communication and support from other Texas outposts are also consid-
ered. Students looking for a quick read will be drawn by the brevity and attractive
layout of Santella's work, but history buffs (and report writers chasing an "A")
willing to tackle the double-columned text and stodgy black-and-white illustra-
tions will be rewarded with Sullivan's more thorough, but equally readable, narra-
tive. EB
SCHNUR, STEVEN 
Autumn: AnAlphabetAcrostic; illus. by Leslie Evans. 
Clarion,
1997 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-77043-2 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 2-5
Chill, frost, a respite of warmth, and a blast of cold-fall gives way to winter by fits
and starts as Schnur's acrostics trace the close of the year. The best entries lyrically
convey seasonal images: "In the north/ Cones of/ Ice/ Cling/ Like whiskers to the/
Eaves" and "On sky-dark/ Wings this hunter needs no/ Light to find its prey."
Alphabetical demands do strain the text, however, as "U" takes fanciful leave of its
homier companions-"Up beyond the/ Night sky, an/ Indigo darkness like/ Vel-
vet/ Embraces the farthest/ Reaches of the mind,/ Sun, moon, stars./ Everything."
Although the ever-problematic "X"-"Xylem" in this case-is cleverly incorpo-
rated, non-botanists will probably need to consult a dictionary. Hand-tinted lino-
leum cuts in an array of bold autumnal hues offer pleasing, literal interpretations
of the verse, but the monotonous perspective, which provides the same point of
view for every subject, offers little spatial depth. Wordplay fanciers will probably
dismiss these shortcomings, though, and admire Schnur's verbal craftsmanship.
EB
26 
* 
THE BULLETIN
SCHROEDER, ALAN 
Satchmo's Blues.
See review under Orgill, p. 22.
SHANNON, GEORGE 
True Lies: 18 Tales for You to Judge; illus. by John
O'Brien. 
Greenwillow, 1997 
64p
ISBN 0-688-14483-7 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
In eighteen short traditional tales, Shannon presents characters that are experts at
manipulating the truth. As in his Stories to Solve series, these brief tales from many
cultures (in which the protagonist has somehow lied and not lied at the same time)
are presented as riddles to answer or mysteries to solve, with the solution given
following the tale. Illustrated with squiggly pen-and-ink drawings, this is a good
browsing book and should have appeal for a broad audience. The setup isn't
always fair (a key piece of information is withheld in story #14), and the short
stories are more fragment than folktale, but they are pithy and unvarnished and
will intrigue the same kids who decimate shelves of riddle and joke books. Shannon's
detailed source notes are a good starting point for those interested in seeking out
additional variants. JMD
SHELDON, DYAN 
The Boy ofMy Dreams. Candlewick, 1997 
208p
ISBN 0-7636-0004-0 
$16.99 
R Gr. 6-9
Michelle-almost always called Mike-is determined to find her Romeo, her Him,
the boy who's her soulmate for life. And she does: Bill is older and gorgeous, and
they have tons in common (they both like Cel-Ray soda and they go to the same
dentist), and she goes to basketball games with him (even though she doesn't like
basketball) and out for pizza (sausage, even though she's a vegetarian, but Bill
forgets). The book is skin-crawlingly accurate about the absorption, self-
centeredness, and simple tedium of teen love: Mike is Bill's doormat, chucking
her friends aside for even the smallest dab of attention from Bill but getting an-
noyed with them when they don't want to hear her prattle on about him endlessly.
Readers will spot early on that Bill isn't the most wonderful guy in the world and
that he's wrong for Mike, who would be far more suited to her platonic friend
Bobby Bone, who clearly adores her. Though this is more a book about compet-
ing romantic ideologies than ideology vs. realism, Sheldon avoids predictability by
having Mike realize Bone's suitability too late-he has already become an item
with their mutual close friend Hope. The writing keeps things energetic even
when Mike's convictions get flabby, and readers will be happy to see Mike getting
a second crack at a soulmate at the book's end. DS
SHEPARD, AARON, ad. 
Master Maid: A Tale of Norway; illus. by Pauline
Ellison. 
Dial, 1997 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1822-5 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1821-7 
$14.99 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
"Father, I'm going out into the world, where I can do things as I like," says young
Leif, who is as stubborn as he is good-looking. Warned against working for the
Troll, Leif sets out to do just that in this shortened version of the traditional Nor-
wegian tale. Luckily for Leif, the clever and lovely Master Maid takes a fancy to
him and tells him how to complete each of the tasks the Troll sets for him. On the
fourth day, when the Troll asks Master Maid to cook Leif in the stew, she outwits
the Troll and the lovers escape together. The young couple marry soon after (Shep-
SEPTEMBER 1997 
* 
27
herd leaves out the last third of the traditional story, in which Master Maid must
win back her forgetful beau) and, in a twist on the old tale, the once-stubborn Leif
promises to obey his bride, "and he did-which is why they lived happily ever
after." The full-page watercolor paintings, framed in mustard-colored borders,
attempt to place the story in medieval Norway: copper pots hang on the walls of
the Troll's cottage; thick wooden dishes line the shelves; Leif helps Master Maid
clean lingonberries while they flirt with each other. Unfortunately, the fairy from
the hills is much too gauzy, the stylized landscape too tame, and the figures stiff
and oddly proportioned. Nevertheless, this is a strong tale with good readaloud
and storytelling possibilities. Source notes are included. PMc
SHOWERS, PAUL 
Sleep Is for Everyone; illus. by Wendy Watson. 
HarperCollins,
1997 
[32p] 
(Let's-Read-and-Find-Out Science)
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-025393-2 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-025392-4 
$14.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-06-445141-0 
$4.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 3-6 yrs
In this latest offering in the Let's-Read-and-Find-Out series, young sleepyheads
and insomniacs alike can learn about the importance and value of sleep (as Mom
has been saying all along). Animal sleep habits introduce the concept to young-
sters ("When a horse goes to sleep, its eyelids go down. When a chicken goes to
sleep, its eyelids go up ... when you go to sleep, which way do your eyelids go?").
Facts about infants, toddlers, schoolkids, grown-ups, and their respective sleep
needs are presented in a blend of simple text and cut-paper shapes punctuated by
starry night scenes and bright dayscapes sprinkled with the sleepy and the wide-
awake. A sleep experiment, which produced grumpy scientists with grumpy, tired
faces ("The scientists grew cross and mean. They got mad at their friends") is sure
to provoke some lively discussions among kids on how long they could stay awake.
Although such newly acquired knowledge may not change young listeners' natural
aversion to naps and bedtimes, this first dose of science might serve to tuck a few
little ones in for the night. PM
SPEED, TOBY 
Whoosh! Went the Wish; illus. by Barry Root. 
Putnam, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-399-23000-9 
$15.95 
R 4-8 yrs
Henry loves his little house at the foot of the mountain. It has "four windows,
from which he could see the whole world." The only thing missing from Henry's
life is companionship and, more than anything else, he wishes for a cat. Mean-
while, in the big city, a wishing fairy has had it with urban life and moves to the
mountain, where she sees Henry's sincere, shiny wish floating by. After several
failures to communicate (Henry's wishes keep losing the "cat" part with some
amusing results), the fairy loses her patience with the whole process: "Old hill,"
she muttered, "find yourself another fairy. I wish Henry had his house back. And
I wish I were his cat." All ends happily as Henry gets his wish and the fairy gets
some well-deserved rest. This wish-fulfillment tale belongs in a storytime along
with Millions of Cats and Barney Bipple's Magic Dandelions. Speed's straightfor-
ward style keeps the magical elements under control and lends an air of realism to
the whole fantasy. The comical tale is given added impetus by Root's gouache and
watercolor illustrations that depict bucolic hillside and urban traffic with the same
appealing aplomb. Henry is a flannel-shirted, suspendered old gentleman just
28 
* THE BULLETIN
longing for a feline; the fairy, with her feather boa and star-tipped wand, floats
above the landscape (urban or rural) just hoping for a sensible wish. When Henry
and the fairy finally get together, it's a match made in picture-book heaven. JMD
SPIEGELMAN, ART 
Open Me ... 
I'm a Dog!; written and illus. by Art
Spiegelman. 
Cotler/HarperCollins, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-06-027320-8 
$14.95 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
A puppy-sized hardback complete with leash attached to its spine, this book insists
that it's a dog under a wizard's curse. It points out that it can wag its tail (a tail
pups-sorry, pops up) and bark (Bow-wow! streams across a spread), then it tells
how it passed through the hands of various magical owners, survived various curses,
and ended up in its current form. The book/dog is quite persuasive about the
advantages of this kind of pet ("I don't have fleas and I never bite"), and it even
offers a fuzzy dog-shape to pet ("I love sitting in your lap"). The story starts to
roam when it goes into flashback country, so the best part is the encountering of
the concept and the changes rung on it. The chunky line-and-watercolor art shows
an appealingly generic orange puppy; flashback scenes segue into thicker acrylics,
which are less effective and busier on the page but are livened up with the occa-
sional photograph. It would be too mean to hand this book to dog-yearning young-
sters and tell them to make do, but the original approach and dorky humor will
make many kids eager to get their paws on it. DS
SPINELLI, EILEEN 
Lizzie Logan Gets Married. Simon, 1997 
91p
ISBN 0-689-81066-0 
$15.00 
R Gr. 3-5
Heather's first day in third grade doesn't start out very well-she wakes up with a
wart on her thumb and runs frantically to her mother, who doesn't seem to appre-
ciate the seriousness of the situation. Never mind-Heather always has her friend
Lizzie to fall back on. Lizzie's response is gratifying: she diagnoses Heather with
"toaditus" and applies her homemade cure of "tame toadstools" (mushrooms).
But Lizzie has other things on her mind: her mother is marrying Sam, and Lizzie
has a wedding to plan. Irrepressible and loving, Lizzie teaches Heather the "wed-
ding walk," decorates a football helmet to protect the chiropterophobic Heather
from bats, and generally keeps things lively. Spinelli's breezy humor belies the skill
with which she presents the two girls, their friendship, and their concerns. In this
sequel to Lizzie Logan Wears Purple Sunglasses, the dialogue is unforced and funny,
the adults are present and caring, and the plot situations have the smack of real life
about them. If your Cleary lovers haven't discovered Heather and Lizzie, they are
in for a treat. JMD
STEVENSON, 
HARVEY 
Big, Scary Wolff written and illus. by Harvey
Stevenson. 
Clarion, 1997 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-74213-7 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
The bedtime bogies strike again. This time, little Rose can't sleep because she is
certain that a long-eared, sharp-toothed wolf is lingering in her room. Viewers
will quickly recognize that the shadow she mistakes for a wolf is cast by a hat on
her toybox and that the sound of the wolf salivating over his tasty meal is actually
a faucet dripping in the bathroom. Rose flees to her parents' room, and Papa turns
SEPTEMBER 1997 
* 29
on the child psychology to convince her that a wolf wouldn't like it very well at
their house ("In his warm, furry coat, he'd want to be outside playing with his
friends"). Adopting this logic, Rose agrees he'd probably get his claws caught in
the carpeting, and he wouldn't enjoy "getting his hair washed or having it brushed
to get all the tangles out." The lurid combination of teal, rose, and purple acrylics
suits Rose's imaginary terrors, but the color pattern scarcely tames as she succumbs
to peaceful slumber. The expressive wolf steals the show, from his menacing crouch
in the shadow of the toybox to his wide-eyed amazement at finding his hair set in
pigtails. This pop-psychology approach to bedtime fears lacks the bite of Jackie
French Koller's No Such Thing (BCCB 3/97), but it's a good weapon in any parent's
arsenal to combat the midnight jitters. EB
SULLIVAN, GEORGE Alamo!
See review under Santella, p. 25.
VAN LAAN, NANCY, ad. 
Shingebiss: An Ojibwe Legend; illus. by Betsy
Bowen. 
Houghton, 1997 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-82745-0 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-4
Shingebiss, the merganser duck, defies Winter Maker and refuses to be miserable
during the cold, icy months of the year. With his sharp beak he pulls up reeds at
the edge of the frozen lake, dives into the water, and gets himself some fish to fill
his stomach, making the freezing winter days bearable. Winter Maker tries every-
thing to thwart the little duck but to no avail, and in a showdown in the heated
warmth of Shingebiss' lodge, it is the mighty Winter Maker who must relent and
flee to the restoring cold outdoors. This is a thoughtfully designed, well-written
retelling; Van Laan's text, though formal and somewhat stately, communicates the
irreverent joy of Shingebiss as he happily overcomes winter's cold. Bowen's
woodblock prints have a richness of detail and depth of color unusual in this me-
dium, as the little green duck battles the blue-faced, abominable-snowman-like
Winter Maker. Some of the text blocks are framed with a colored outline, topped
by the moon in phases and with the logs that burn on Shingebiss' fire providing a
connecting visual motif on the bottom. The single and double-page spreads alter-
nate between woodcuts on rich background colors of purple and orange and wood-
cuts on white, and Bowen's mastery of her white space makes this book's design
remarkably effective. Van Laan includes a glossary of Ojibwe terms (spelled pho-
netically) used in the text and a list of sources consulted. JMD
VAN STEENWYK, ELIZABETH 
My Name Is York; illus. by Bill Farnsworth. 
Rising
Moon, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-87358-650-6 
$14.95 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
It's unlikely that the typical picture-book audience is up on the Lewis and Clark
Expedition, and this title, which focuses on one of its lesser known participants,
William Clark's slave York, won't do much to fill them in. The fictionalized
protagonist recounts only a few of the journey's highlights-a sojourn among the
Mandans, the birth of Sacajawea's baby, a rescue from a rushing river-frequently
interjecting his own dream of freedom which, as listeners learn from a concluding
note, is never granted. Younger children are likely to become impatient with the
30 
* THE BULLETIN
general dearth of action and with York's mannered formality ("The wilderness
increases in determined fierceness along the shores. It hides the owners of curious
eyes. Yet, we know someone is there, following our journey closely on silent feet").
Farnsworth's earth-toned oil paintings freeze the expedition members and their
Indian hosts into heroic, rigid poses that elevate them to legendary stature while
draining them of their humanity. While this entry may not significantly enhance
the history curriculum, it does, however, remind listeners that it took more than
historically noted expedition leaders to expand and explore our country's frontiers.
EB
WADSWORTH, GINGER 
Laura Ingalls Wilder: Storyteller of the Prairie. Lerner,
1997 
128p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8225-4950-6 
$17.21 
R Gr. 4-6
Little House fans will welcome this new biography about one of children's literature's
most beloved heroines, Laura Ingalls Wilder. An abundance of black-and-white
photographs as well as many of the trademark illustrations by Garth Williams
grace a straightforward text which begins with the lives of Laura's parents, follows
Wilder until her death in 1957 at age ninety, and concludes with her daughter
Rose's death in 1968. Wilder enthusiasts will recognize many of the experiences
which she culled from her life to share in her books, and they will enjoy some new
ones as well. More thorough glimpses into her adult life with her husband, Manley
(Almanzo), and daughter Rose, and into her late-in-life career as a children's au-
thor, serve up a satisfying finale to her celebrated series. Especially fun for the
reader are the photographs, which turn Laura into a flesh-and-blood person every
bit as much as her stories do. Twelve readable chapters, the addresses of the Little
Houses, a map titled "Laura's Tracks," sources, a bibliography, and an index make
this a fine contribution to any biography collection. PM
WARNER, SALLY 
Ellie and the Bunheads. Knopf, 1997 
150p
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-98229-9 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-88229-4 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Ellie (friend of Case, whose story appears in Dog Years, BCCB 5/95) is a bunhead-
a baby ballerina. She's been taking classes since she was five (she's now twelve), she
doesn't know what life would be like without it, and she's keenly aware of the
upcoming auditions for the local youth dance company. She's also, however, be-
ginning to be aware of how much she's living out her mother's dreams through
dancing and what kind of toll the ballet can take on a young girl's life, and she
starts to question whether this familiar, taken-for-granted thing is really what she
wants. This isn't the first book on the subject (another recent example is Martha
Southgate's Another Way to Dance, BCCB 1/97), but it's knowing and sympa-
thetic about terpsichorean desire and its cost. Even thoughtful Ellie has a hard
time seeing just how Draconian the strictures can be and just how hard she is on
herself as a result (excerpts from her diary tell matter-of-factly of her dislike of her
body and her plans for further self-denial), but the book eschews melodrama in
favor of a realistic appraisal of possibilities-Ellie continues to dance, a talented
older girl drops out to have some fun in high school, Ellie's troubled classmate
puts off her audition on the advice of her therapist. This will give young fans a
clearer idea of what Isadora's Lili at Ballet (BCCB 4/93) is getting herself into. DS
SEPTEMBER 1997 
* 31
WILSON, LORI LEE 
The Salem Witch Trials. Lerner, 1997 
[112p] 
(How
History Is Invented)
ISBN 0-8225-4889-5 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-10
Unlike Marilynne K. Roach, who offered her own interpretation of the title trials
in In the Days of the Salem Witchcraft Trials (BCCB 6/96), Wilson surveys the
trends in historical interpretation that evolved from contemporary times to the
present. Following some opening observations on the history of witchcraft and a
fairly well-balanced and dispassionate account of the trials themselves, Wilson tackles
the historical accounts, which, she argues, were variously influenced by self-doubt
and guilt among contemporaries, and later by Rationalism, Spiritualism, Psychol-
ogy, and Feminism. Potent and provocative arguments abound for serious history
students, but they are too often tangled together with such digressions as the image
of Miz Gulch in The Wizard of Oz, discussion of Arthur Miller's The Crucible
(which, despite the parallels between Salem and McCarthyism, hardly qualifies as
historiography), and the present day challenge to the citizens of Danvers (once,
Salem Village) to tolerate the Wiccan witches who now settle in their community.
Nonetheless, students with a defined fascination for this dark chapter in colonial
history will want to add this to their reading list. EB
WISLER, G. CLIFTON 
Mustang Flats. Lodestar, 1997 
116p
ISBN 0-525-67544-2 
$14.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
The few crops and stock left by Confederate foragers on Alby Draper's Texas farm
have been claimed by a vicious hail storm. When Alby's Pa limps home from
Tennessee on one leg, with a teenage soldier not much older than Alby and a
serious case of depression, he sees only Alby's failure to keep the farm in trim.
Although serious themes of soldiers' demobilization after the Civil War and the
struggle to recreate a family permeate the novel, the brunt of the action revolves
around a thin save-the-farm-from-the-taxman tale, in which family and friends
pull together to capture and gentle mustangs for sale to federal soldiers at a Texas
outpost. Among the time-worn devices are Pa's nemesis, a feral Arabian known as
Demon ("He's pure mercury on hooves, that horse"), Pa's miraculous recovery of
self-esteem as he faces down Demon ("Maybe all Demon's been waiting for is a
broken-down old soldier like me"), and the revelation that Pa's young companion
is a deserter, not a hero. Still, younger readers unacquainted with this trusty old
plot will gladly saddle up for a quick, brisk ride. EB
WOLKSTEIN, DIANE, ad. 
Bouki Dances the Kokioko: A Comical Tale from Haiti;
illus. by Jesse Sweetwater. 
Gulliver/Harcourt, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-15-200034-8 
$15.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
The dance-loving king of Haiti invents a new dance, the Kokioko, and offers five
thousand gourdes to anyone who can guess the steps. Many dancers vie for the
prize, but none succeed, until one night Malice, the king's gardener, witnesses his
king dancing the Kokioko in the moonlight. Greedy Malice teaches his old friend
Bouki the dance so he can win the gold, all the while planning to trick him out of
the riches. The "fat and awkward" Bouki has a hard time mastering the steps of
the Kokioko, but finally he is ready to appear before the king ("When it was Bouki's
turn, he went in alone and danced for the king. It was a very fat dancer who
32 
* THE BULLETIN
danced the Kokioko, but it was the Kokioko!"). Bouki wins the sack of gold, but
on his way home, he is tricked out of his coins by Malice, who sings the little song,
"If you have no sense, put your sack on the ground and dance. ... " Well, Bouki
has no sense, Malice has no scruples, and clever Malice wins the day in this rueful
tale. Sweetwater's illustrations have remarkable clarity, and their vibrant colors
and vigorous compositions dance across the verdant landscape. Tropical pinks,
reds, yellows, and greens pop off the pages as king, dancers, Bouki, and Malice
complete their dance of foolishness and greed. Wolkstein's text is a masterpiece of
humorous understatement as her characters roam through a landscape reminiscent
of Fran6 Lessac's. Source notes and a glossary are included. JMD
YOUNG, RONDER THOMAS 
Moving Mama to Town. 
Orchard, 1997 
219p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-33025-7 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-30025-0 
$17.95 
R Gr. 5-8
Thirteen-year-old Freddy James experiences a tough rite of passage when the char-
ismatic father he has hero-worshipped, Big Kenny, leaves the family with no re-
sources on a Georgia farm back in 1947. As the boy moves his mother and
nine-year-old brother into town and supports them with full-time work, he and
readers both discover the dark side of Big Kenny's past and personality. It's a
gradual and skillfully presented revelation, like much of the other characterization
in the book and like the protagonist's own emerging self-identity. If Freddy James
acts a little too virtuous at times (and if his mother's death at the end seems a heavy
load for this already packed novel to carry), Young's development of the situation
is believable, her observations of small-town interaction are acute, and Freddy
James-in his downhome, upright way-is a smooth narrator with an unpreten-
tious sense of humor. BH
ZUBROWSKI, BERNIE 
Soda Science: Designing and Testing Soft Drinks; illus. by
Roy Doty. 
Morrow, 1997 
96p 
(Boston Children's Museum Activity Books)
ISBN 0-688-13917-5 
$14.93 
R Gr. 3-6
Kitchen science is a perennially appealing topic, and soda pop is a universally ap-
pealing kiddie tipple; blend them together in this crystal-clear and smoothly read-
able book of experiments, and you have a winning concoction indeed. The chapters
demonstrate methods for extracting flavors and colors from fruits and vegetables,
concentrating their aromas, and retarding spoilage; the reader observes suspended
and dissolved pigments, compares flavor strengths, tests the efficacy of various
preservatives, and even builds a still to extract essences. Next comes the fizz, gen-
erated in turn by yeast, baking soda, and baking powder. Finally reader turns
entrepreneur, designing a palatable pop, devising and administering a tasters' sur-
vey, refining the product, and comparing the home brew to commercial products.
All experiments and processes call for readily available materials-quarter-inch
plastic tubing should be the most challenging item to procure-and are promi-
nently labeled when they demand adult supervision or extra caution. This is bound
to be a mover when science fair time rolls around; better have an extra copy or two.
EB
SEPTEMBER 1997 * 33
EDITORIAL
We spend a great deal of time at the Bulletin trying to find the balance
between aesthetic and critical evaluation of literature for youth and the practical
considerations of collection development in school and public libraries. Since this
is the beginning of our new volume year, I would like to take this opportunity to
explain how we at the Bulletin view our evaluative designations.
A starred book (R*) is one that is considered to be of outstanding literary
merit by the majority of our reviewing committee; these titles are recommended
for purchase by school and public libraries without reservation. A recommended
book (R) is one that is considered an excellent choice for any library collection and
is also recommended for purchase. An additional book (Ad) is a little harder to
define-it may have some strong points, it may have minor flaws, it may simply be
unremarkable in content or format-but it is still considered useful for some school
and public library collections. The review should make clear those weaknesses in
the title that have made it an Ad instead of an unequivocal R. A marginal designa-
tion (M) means the book may be marginally useful in public or school library
collections, but it has serious flaws; an M should not be considered a recommen-
dation for purchase. An NR designation needs little explanation-a title that
receives this designation is so flawed in approach or content that it is not recom-
mended for purchase. SpC and SpR are seldom-used designations that recom-
mend a book for purchase for specialized subject collections (SpC) or special readers
(SpR). We tend to think there's room in public and school library collections for
just about everything, so SpC doesn't get used very often, but it's there for the
unique or unusual title; we also have a tendency to think all readers are special, but
the SpR designation recommends a title for purchase for a specific if limited audi-
ence.
We go back and forth between what we call "low Rs" and "high Ads,"
trying to find the balance between critical evaluation and practical collection de-
velopment. I would like to formally state that those using the Bulletin as a collec-
tion development tool should read all the reviews, even the Ads, carefully. I had a
very scary moment at a conference when a librarian told me she never read the
reviews, just pulled out the Rs and stars and ordered those. This is a surefire way
to miss titles that may have an important place on your shelves or to buy books
that are not necessary for a specific collection. An "R" book may have minor flaws
but be strong overall; an "Ad" book is a title recommended for purchase in spite of
specific problems. The review should point out concrete flaws, as well as mention-
ing reasons (unique subject matter, etc.) why the book would be a useful addition
to a library collection. Our aim is to make sure all our reviews contain enough
information about the quality and content of a title so that readers can make up
their own professional minds about whether or not to purchase it.
34 * THE BULLETIN
As stated in my debut editorial (BCCB 9/96), one of the major strengths
of this journal is its reviewing process. Reviewers meet several times monthly; all
books reviewed are seen by all the reviewers, and everyone has a chance to com-
ment-on books, on reviews, on clarity. The results of these discussions, we hope,
are balanced, considered, thoughtful reviews, reflecting not only the judgment of
the individual reviewer but the input of the entire reviewing and editorial staff. I
should point out that as of this volume year's first issue, non-staff members of the
Bulletin Reviewing Committee are all librarians, bringing that professional back-
ground and practical experience to the evaluation process.
The Bulletin receives approximately 5,000 new books yearly and we re-
view less than one-fifth of the titles submitted. The guidelines for deciding what
gets reviewed and what doesn't are fluid and adaptable, and we diligently examine
every book we receive, considering every title in light of its individual merits. Gen-
erally, we review more fiction than nonfiction, giving special attention to new
authors, small-press titles, and young adult materials. We tend to be quite choosy
about picture books for preschoolers, and have a highly critical eye regarding re-
tellings of folktales, fairy tales, myths, and legends. We look closely at beginning
and easy readers, both fiction and non-fiction, because our subscribers tell us there
is a dearth of good ones; we keep developmental levels in mind when examining
board books for toddlers because feedback indicates that these have become an
important part of early childhood collections. We tend not to review all the titles
in a series, although we often review the opening titles in a new series, a particu-
larly good (or bad) title in an established series, or a series title with unusual subject
matter that would be useful for school and public library collections. We review
books for professional collections on the history and criticism of literature for youth,
literature-based programming, storytelling, and anything else we think school and
public librarians will find valuable in their daily work. And since every title sub-
mitted for review must be evaluated on its individual merit, we reserve the right to
make exceptions to any of the above general criteria.
We passed several milestones in the past year: we extensively revamped
our website and continue to update it monthly and improve it as often as possible;
we published an annotated Guide Book to Gift Books for adults interested in buy-
ing well-written, kid-pleasing books for children; we had so many submissions to
our first storytelling review publication, The Bulletin Storytelling Review, Volume I,
that our publication date had to be pushed back from Spring 1997 to Fall 1997
(see our website at http://edfu.lis.uiuc.edu/pubofflbccb/story.html for ordering
information); we are holding an Allerton Conference in October, 1997 called "Story:
From Fireplace to Cyberspace" (write us or see our website at http://
edfu.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb/97allerton.html for information); and we moved our
offices from one location to another over the winter holidays. It's been quite a
year. We're looking forward to the next one.
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor
SEPTEMBER 1997 
* 
35
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
ADVENTURE STORIES:
McCurdy
African Americans: Gottfried
African Americans-fiction: Antle;
Armstrong; Belton; Meyer
Alaska-stories: Page
American Indians: Van Laan
Animals-stories: Alborough; Egan;
Haas; O'Brien; Van Laan
Antarctica: McCurdy
Astronomy: Getz
Aunts-stories: Kurtis-Kleinman
Ballet-fiction: Warner
Bats: Ackerman
Bears-fiction: Pinkwater
BEDTIME STORIES: Cooper,
H.; Corentin; Stevenson
BIOGRAPHIES: Gottfried;
Hodges; Isadora; Jaffe; Joyce;
Mochizuki; Orgill; Wadsworth
Biology: Janulewicz; Showers
Birds-stories: Arnold
Birthdays-stories: Noll
Boxing-fiction: Antle
Brothers and sisters-stories:
Roddie
Brothers-fiction: Byars
Brothers-stories: Alborough
Butterflies-stories: Kroll
Camels-stories: Lewin
Camps and camping-fiction:
Belton
Cats-stories: Speed
Child abuse-fiction: Fine
Children's literature: Wadsworth
Civil War-fiction: Wisler
CONCEPT BOOKS: Noll;
Schnur
Counting: Noll
Dancers-fiction: Warner
Dancing-stories: Kurtis-Kleinman;
Loredo
Death and dying-fiction: Caseley
Dogs-fiction: Knight; Naylor
Dogs-stories: Egan; Spiegelman
Dreams-fiction: Cooper, I.
Extrasensory perception-fiction:
Cooper, I.
Ecology: McClung
Environmental studies: McClung;
Patent
Ethics and values: Armstrong;
Belton; Dines; Orgill
Explorers and exploring:
McCurdy; Van Steenwyk
Fairies-stories: Speed
Fairs-stories: Cooper
Families-fiction: Caseley
FANTASY: Nodelman
Fathers and daughters-stories:
Stevenson
Fathers and sons-stories: Corentin
Fishing-stories: Page
Floods: Hiscock
FOLKTALES AND
FAIRYTALES: Arnold; Gavin;
Shannon; Shepard; Van Laan;
Wolkstein
Food and eating-stories: Hooper;
Rosa-Casanova; Zubrowski
Friendship-fiction: Fine; Spinelli
FUNNY STORIES: Pinkwater
Geography: Hiscock
36 
* THE BULLETIN
Gorillas: Joyce
Grandfathers-stories: Kroll
Grandmothers-stories: Hooper;
Rosa-Casanova
Haiti-folklore: Wolkstein
HISTORICAL FICTION: Wisler;
Young
History, U.S.: Hodges; Santella;
Van Steenwyk; Wilson
History, world: McCurdy
Holocaust-stories: Mochizuki
Homosexuality-fiction: Dines
Horses-fiction: Wisler
Hotels-fiction: Pinkwater
Lighthouses-stories: Hopkinson
Literature, American: Gottfried
Literature, world: Jaffe
LOVE STORIES: Sheldon
Martial arts: Rafkin
Mathematics: Hopkins
Monsters-stories: Corentin
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Griffin; Meyer
Mothers and sons-fiction: Young
Mothers and sons-stories: Cooper,
H.
Music and musicians: Isadora;
Orgill
Mythology: Moore
Nature study: Ackerman; Patent
Norway-folklore: Shepard
Ocean-stories: Hopkinson
Physical education: Rafkin
POETRY: Hopkins
Puzzles: Shannon
Rain-stories: London
Reading aloud: Caseley;
Mochizuki; Moore; Pinkwater;
Shannon; Van Laan
Reading, beginning: Hopkins
Reading, reluctant: Armstrong;
Getz; Janulewicz; Pinkwater
RHYMING STORIES: Haas; O'Brien
Rivers: Hiscock
Romance-fiction: Cooper, I.; Sheldon
Russia-folklore: Arnold
School-fiction: Armstrong
Science: Zubrowski
Seasons: Schnur
SHORT STORIES: Dines
Skeletons-stories: Loredo
SPORTS STORIES: Antle
Stepfamilies-fiction: Adler
Stepfathers-fiction: Adler
Storytelling: Shannon; Shepard; Van
Laan; Wolkstein
Storytime: Alborough; London; O'Brien;
Rosa-Casanova
Summer-fiction: Adler; Belton
Texas-history: Santella
Weather-stories: London
Wildlife: Patent
Winter-stories: Van Laan
Wishes-stories: Egan; Speed
Witchcraft: Wilson
Wolves-stories: Stevenson
Women's studies: Hopkinson; Shepard
World War II: Mochizuki
SEEDFOLKS
Pov1 FeScktrkMn
"A vacant lot in Cleveland is transformed
into a garden when residents plant seeds to
fulfill personal needs. From the Korean girl
who first plants lima beans in memory of a
father she never knew . . . to the Haitian
cab driver who plants lettuce to sell
+ 
t+ 
t, 
th- 
4h 
t 
i4
Lo IrC...rLCu.UIIL, 
ULI 1 
LI IIILCI 1 VocILtA-
telling their stories are like seeds that when
sown 
produce a beautiful 
multicolored
harvest. The vacant lot could be in any city as
the message of diversity, people, and sensi-
bility is universal, and beautifully cultivated by an author
who has a green thumb with words."-SLJ
Pictures by Judy Pedersen
Ages 10 up.
$13.95 TR (0-06-027471-9)
$13.89 LB (0-06-027472-7)
Joanna Cotler Books
Among Paul Fleischman's HarperCollins books
BULL RUN 
JOYFUL NOISE
Pictures by David Frampton 
Poems for Two Voices
Ages 10 up. 
1989 Newbery Medal Winner
$14.95 TR (0-06-021446-5) 
Pictures by Eric Beddows
$14.89 LB (0-06-021447-3) 
Ages 10 up. $14.95 TR (0-06-021852-5)
$4.95 PB (0-06-440588-5) 
$14.89 LB (0-06-021853-3)
A Laura Geringer Book 
$3.95 PB (0-06-446093-2)
A Charlotte Zolotow Book
t HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks 10 East 53rd Street, New York, NY 10022
and contemporary. With her usual light touch, Kerr shows how
hard it is to take the road less traveled." -ALA Booklist
"Kerr's newest stands up to the best of her oeuvre."
-Publishers Weekly
Ages 12 up. $15.95 TR 0-06-027529-4; $15.89 LB 0-06-027530-8
ri 
------
10*i e
ravel to a small Mexican village and join
Tito, the pasteboard bandit, as he shares
exciting adventures with Juanito, a Mexican
boy, and Kenny, a boy visiting from New York. The
boys' growing friendship, Kenny's introduction to a
culture unlike his own, and Tito's witty reflections
on being a toy will be recognized instantly by any-
one young or old who has ever made a friend or
imagined that a toy might be real.
Originally written in 1935 and only recently
rediscovered, The Pasteboard Bandit grew out of
several trips Langste
Mexico during his 1
96 pp.; 12 color & 20 bi
8 x 10; for ages 8-12
0-19-511476-0,
jacketed hardcover,
$16.95
Available at your local bo
Oxford Univel
198 Madison Ave. * New
Visit our web site at: wwy
~Bandi
IllstItedby 
egg tule
g 
I8
Teaching
The Professional IdeaBook for Teachers
= 
Every issue of Teaching K-8
--
rr 
provides informative articles on
Techi r 
O 
the cutting edge of education.
You'll also find insightful
columns and thoughtful
reviews written by some of
today's leading educators.
Teaching K-8 is filled with
hundreds of unique ideas and
activities that help teachers
present new challenges to
their students, learn new
concepts and develop new
skills.
Monthly columns include...
Children's Books
Teaching in the Library
The Parent Connection
Science, Math, Technology and more!
Plus, interviews with children's book authors and illustrators
lrln't 
mince rf"Lt on 
thic 
vr llnihl-
resource for your library -
subscribe to Teaching K-8 today.
TeachngK8
ix 54808, Boulder, CO 803224808
-8793
*Outside U.S. add $5.00 postage per subscription.
iI
-goving Mama
to Town
by Ronder Thomas Young
* "Big Kenny has left his Georgia
home without explanation, but he has
left a deep impression on his son Fred....
Now 13, Fred decides to move his mama
and younger brother into town so he can
get a job.... The writing, though beauti-
ful, is never intrusive, and [Fred] is a
strong-hearted, endearing character in
this touching story of a boy who takes
his choices in life most seriously."
-
Booklist, starred review
"A fine novel, informed by its protago-
nist's clear sense of right and wrong."
-
Kirkus Review
"Young relates her story with a natural-
ness and humor that brings alive the
rural southern community in 1947."
-
The Hor Book
An American Bookseller
"Pick of the Lists"
Ages 8-13
$17.95 TR 0-531-30025-0
$18.99 RLB 0-531-33025-7
Orchard Books
A Grolier Company
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.S.A.
RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED
PERIODICALS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
iterary Seminar
8
me...
rwentieth Century
Join:
Judy Blume * Joseph Bruchac
e Brunhoff Bruce Coville
irginia Hamilton Richard Jackson
Keyser * E. L. Konigsburg
en Ross Lipson 
Perry Nodelman
Jerry Pinkney * Rosemary Wells
r * Nancy Willard * Jane Yolen
ters' Workshops
mtan 
r Chilren and onng Adniu
nuary 5-8, 1998
with
Joseph Bruchac * Bruce Coville
'inkney * Nancy Willard
n, call: Key West Literary Seminar
B8-293-9291
keywest@seacoast.com
iW5 
gg
0008-9036(199709)51:1*;1-L
S'r.*
:  
y 
-,,: 
-^.
"" * -J^ 
* 
* . o'"*.^'^ 
K '. 
,- *
' 
% 
*'','' 
-y 
.^ 
< 
^ 
* 
; 
{
..... LJ ii 
I  
ii 
•- 
P-?i 
• 
' 
% 
%• • 
;i 
• i
i~j~q~Lg~i 
o
rrli~~iNs. 
r
