IL LINOI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
nraauatc 3nooi or Liorary ana inrormaton acicnce
University of Illinois Press
^ 
-g| 
'' 
* 
,,At
:· 
'^ 
**'-
):r 
:: 1"55~
-An.E~ ou tstand 
I 
i 
nU 
I. 
gu .
piec 
o~ 
f 
art. 
I1
Arthur 
Sword
THD 
E
retold 
and 
illustrated 
by
R 
B ERTT 
S AB U DA
S"Noted author/illustator Sabuda recreates the glory of the legend
of Excalibur with startingly powerful stained glass illustrations.
Detailed swirls of liquid color-regal blues and purples, deep greens,
and fiery amber-saturate each lead-veined image.
-Starred, Publishers Weekfy
"Sabuda's stunning illustrations . .. make [this] an extraordinary
effort." 
-School Library joumal*
S"Sabuda captures Arthur as a child hero, a fact that readers will
find especially satisfying." 
-Pointer, Kirkus Reviews
0-689-31987-8 / $16.00 / Ages 6-9
ATHENEUM BOOKS FOR YOUNG READERS
An imprint of Simon & Schuster Children's Publishing Division
1230 Avenue of the Americas * New York, NY 10020
I : 
·.·II 
I 
·
I 
i·
- ·; 
·
I
i
I 1 
·
;· ;
: 
.
·
·
j
··
"·
·i
; · ·
-.
: 
.·.
:
;·
·
r i :
Ii : ·
·
i
I
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
March 1996
Vol. 49 No. 7
A LOOK INSIDE
217 THE BIG PICTURE
Monday's Troll written by Jack Prelutsky; illustrated by Peter Sis
218 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
219 * Granny the Pag by Nina Bawden
220 * When Dinosaurs Die: A Guide to Understanding Death written and
illustrated by Laurie Krasny Brown and Marc Brown
225 * Dateline: Troy written by Paul Fleischman and illustrated by Gwen
Frankfeldt and Glenn Morrow
235 * The Bobbin Girl written and illustrated by Emily Arnold McCully
246 * The Mennyms Under Siege written by Sylvia Waugh
248 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
249 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
STAFF
Roger Sutton, Editor (RS)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Tara L. Rivera, Editorial Assistant
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS ADVISORY BOARD
Leigh Estabrook, Dean, GSLIS, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Selma K. Richardson, Professor Emeritus, GSLIS
Christine Jenkins, Assistant Professor, GSLIS
Richard C. Anderson, Director, Center for the Study of Reading, UIUC
Jean Osborn, Associate Director, Center for the Study of Reading
Violet J. Harris, Associate Professor, College of Education
Nancy O'Brien, Education Subject Specialist, Library, UIUC
Peggy Miller, Associate Professor, Department of Speech Communication, UIUC
Ann D. Carlson, Associate Professor, GSLIS, Rosary College
Janice Harrington, Head of Children's Services, Champaign Public Library
Elizabeth Huntoon, Director Systemwide Children's Services, Chicago Public Library
Janie Schomberg, Librarian, Leal Elementary School, Urbana, Illinois
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $40.00; individuals, $35.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Roger Sutton, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, Children's Research Center, 51
Gerty Drive, Champaign, IL 61820
Second-class postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1996 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Peter Sis, from Monday's Troll ©1996 and used by permission of Greenwillow
Books.
MARCH 1996 
* 217
THE BIG PICTURE
Monday's Troll
written by Jack Prelutsky; illustrated by Peter Sis
There's just something about monsters that brings out the best in children's poets.
Not that Prelutsky, with an admirable oeuvre ranging from The Random House
Book of Poetryfor Children (BCCB 11/83) to The New Kid on the Block (10/84),
has much of a worst, but this pithy collection of paeans to otherworldly grotesques
has an elegant blend of verbal sophistication, galloping rhythms, and appealing
subjects. The subjects here are actually fairly traditional: there are several wizards,
a group of goblins, a witch or two, an assortment of ogres, one tiny troll, and "A
Solitary Yeti." Some of the poems are stories ("I Told the Wizard to His Face"),
some are introductions ("I'm Only an Apprentice Witch"), and some, often the
best, are quick vignettes of a situation or a quandary ("Invisible Wizard's Regret").
What makes these poems stand out is Prelutsky's technical mastery. He uses
short metered lines throughout, keeping the pace up, but varies the rhythm from
poem to poem. (It's also a pleasure to read verse by a poet who understands that
scansion isn't the possibility of reading the meter right but the impossibility of
getting it wrong.) He gives his words their full sonorous due, often relying on
some deliciously alliterative clusters, as in "Mother Ogre's Lullaby," when Mom
tells her baby to "slumber, sweet savage impossible pest." 
Like the topics, the
vocabulary edges into the challenging: Prelutsky isn't afraid to use polysyllables
for their entertainment value as well as their meaning; in fact, part of the joke of "I
Told the Wizard to His Face" is that when the bombastic narrator
escalated my harangue,
And blared triumphantly,
'Your prestidigitation
Simply can't bamboozle me!'
the wizard transmutes him with a simple "Piffpoff." Sometimes, however, the touches
of poetic phraseology accent the plainer speech and stylishly round out a rhetorical
corner ("Monday's troll is mean and rotten/ Tuesday's troll is misbegotten"-
"Monday's Troll"). And "Monday's Troll" isn't the only work reminiscent of
another: "I Thought I Spotted Bigfoot" is a grand story of a monster encounter in
the tradition of Silverstein's "The Slithergadee."
Sis' art takes the familiar themes into a new and more shadowy landscape. The
illustrations are oil and gouache, but they rely on scratched white lines and darker
hatchings which give them an etched quality, and the spidery tracery often weaves
its web over paper pressed with its own ridges and patterns. The result is a delicate
and layered surrealism that parallels the maturity of the verse and that, paradoxi-
cally, makes the creepy images more hauntingly realistic than do the sturdy water-
color cartoons in which monsters usually appear. These are creatures that might
appear in unnerving dreams, and their eyes-well, occasionally their single eye-
218 
* THE BULLETIN
peer out at the reader with a seeming relish of their power, whether it be the ogre
family happily watering the plants grown in the devoured knight's armor or the
ancient witch celebrating her 30,303rd birthday. Details also provide pleasure:
note the huge hand creeping into the picture of "Mother Ogre's Lullaby" (Daddy,
perhaps?) and the black cat about to cross the path of a startled Bigfoot. Spreads
also have oaken-hued borders with patterned rims and thematically relevant deco-
ration which are sometimes drawn (hatching goblins encircle "We're Seven Grubby
Goblins," for instance) and sometimes stamped (the armored knight on his charger
gallops through the borders around the "Ogrebrag" telling of his fate), giving the
book an enticingly kabbalistic appearance.
Overall, the merit of this volume lies in its demonstration of the worth of crafts-
manship. Prelutsky and Sis are thankfully not content to coast along on their nice,
juicy, monstrous topic, but instead continually invest every idea, every phrase,
every image with a serious and creative attention that enhances rather than de-
tracting from the entertainment quotient. Whether as a toothsome readaloud or a
beastly good readalone, this converts its creators' work into audience play.
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
AASENG, NATHAN 
The O. J. Simpson Trial: What It Shows Us about Our Legal
System. 
Walker, 1996 
[120p] 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8405-4 
$16.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8404-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
C'mon, you knew it was coming. Along with providing a useful summary of the
twists and turns of the Simpson trial, Aaseng gives readers a running commentary
of how the trial events exemplify various concepts and procedures of criminal law
and jury trials, including search warrants, the fifth amendment's protection against
self-incrimination, access of the news media to trial coverage, jury selection, and
the stages of a trial itself. There's no sensationalizing and little editorializing (what
you think Aaseng thinks of the jury's decision probably depends most upon what
you already thought yourself), which in other circumstances might seem dull but
here is a welcome corrective. A glossary of legal terms and an index are appended;
the book will be illustrated with black-and-white photographs. RS
p
MARCH 1996 
* 219
ANDERSON, JOAN 
Batboy: An Inside Look at Spring Training; illus. with photo-
graphs by Matthew Cavanaugh. 
Lodestar, 1996 
4 8 p
ISBN 0-525-67511-6 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 3-5
This engaging photoessay follows San Francisco Giants batboy Kenny Garibaldi
through a typical fourteen-hour workday at spring training camp, providing read-
ers with a peek into the mysteries of locker room and dugout as well as a look at
less glamorous aspects of this coveted job. To earn his twenty-five dollars per
diem, thirteen-year-old Kenny takes on pre-game chores from laundry sorting to
gum unwrapping, later runs equipment around the field, and finally folds up chairs
and clears towels from the dugout. Lest envious readers think that buddying up
with the boys of summer is adequate compensation, Anderson points out that
batboys lose their positions for soliciting autographs, and Kenny himself observes,
"I never talk to the players unless they speak to me." Diverse information ranging
from landing the job to catering to players' superstitions and whims is neatly inter-
jected throughout the descriptive narration. Plentiful color shots take viewers into
the sweaty inner sanctums where heroes and wannabes work, wait, and worry.
With the exception of a dugout spread that fails to depict "eyes blackened to pre-
vent glare . . . a thirty gallon container of Gatorade . . . and the team's three
doctors," uncaptioned photos coordinate closely with the text. A glossary provides
the wrap-up. EB
BAWDEN, NINA 
Granny the Pag. Clarion, 1996 
[192p]
ISBN 0-395-77604-X 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-7
Cat calls her grandmother "The Pag" in affectionate remembrance of a childhood
tantrum in which she misspelled a sign meant to read Granny is a Pig. The two
have lived together since Cat was small, dumped in the Pag's lap by Cat's parents,
itinerant actors. Now Cat is old enough to be useful and her parents, settled into
a popular TV soap opera, want her back; Cat doesn't want to go. Granny-the-Pag,
a psychiatrist who smokes and rides a motorcycle, is in the respectable tradition of
tough old birds who foster roughly yet wisely and readers will certainly be drawn
to her side, hoping that the family drama is resolved in Cat's favor. (Cat's parents,
mother particularly, are shallow and shallowly drawn, so it isn't entirely a fair
fight.) There's a certain amount of formula in the plot and in a subplot about a
boy who bullies Cat at school, but Cat's telling of the story reflects a warm but
honest picture of buffeted childhood and loving protection. Fans ofVoigt's Gran
Tillerman, McKay's Big Grandma or Montgomery's venerable Marilla Cuthbert
will enjoy making the Pag's acquaintance. RS
BOHLMEIJER, ARNO 
Something Very Sorry; written and tr. by Arno
Bohlmeijer. 
Houghton, 1996 
[17 6 p]
ISBN 0-395-74679-5 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-6
Two weeks before Christmas, the family car goes off the road: Rosemyn, the nine-
year-old narrator, is hospitalized with abrasions and a seriously broken arm; her
little sister, Phoebe, is unconscious, suffering from brain trauma; Dad has a multi-
tude of internal injuries; and Mum lies in a different hospital, injured beyond
recovery and living only on machines. The story of the family's physical and
220 
* THE BULLETIN
emotional adjustment to the situation is told in simple and affecting language (the
author did his own translating from the Dutch), as Phoebe regains consciousness,
Dad recuperates, Rosemyn struggles with her poorly healing arm, and they all cope
with the distant decline and death of Mum. The portrayal of both the pain and the
mundane tedium of three weeks of hospitalization and adjustment (the narration
is demarcated by days) is low-key, completely unsensationalized, and free of artifi-
cial narrative closure; while there are some gentle suggestions of spiritual consola-
tion, it's clear that the family will be dealing with this experience for years after the
book ends. A realistic contrast to glitzy soaps about family disasters, this offers
readers a touching and authentic human drama. DS
BROWN, LAURIE KRASNY 
When Dinosaurs Die: A Guide to Understanding Death;
written and illus. by Laurie Krasny Brown and Marc Brown. 
Little, 1996 
[32 p]
ISBN 0-316-10917-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. K-4
As they did with Dinosaurs Divorce (BCCB 2/87), the Browns here take a difficult
subject for youngsters and explain it gently but clearly. The text explains the inevi-
tability of death, various reasons for death (including old age, sickness, accident,
and suicide), and the difference between death and sleep; it then goes on to exam-
ine feelings about death and ways, both individual and cultural, of dealing with the
loss of loved ones. The book is particularly good at linking specifics, both in the
panel-cartoon scenes and in the textual suggestions, to generalities, and it also cov-
ers the basic ground while leaving openings for further discussion on the subject.
The dinosaurs are humanoid enough to keep all the scenes recognizable, but they're
green and scaly enough to stave off the dusty flavor ofbibliotherapy, and the simple
watercolor illustrations help to make some scary situations more approachable.
Quiet, respectful, and unthreatening, this will probably become a primary-grades
standard on the subject. DS
BUNTING, EVE 
Train to Somewhere; illus. by Ronald Himler. 
Clarion,
1996 
[3 2 p]
ISBN 0-395-71325-0 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
6-9 yrs
Marianne's mother left her at St. Christopher's Orphanage in New York with the
promise, "'I'm going West to make a new life for us.... Then I'll come for you.'"
Now, several years later, the plain-faced child is westbound on an orphan train in
1877, anxious that she find her mother before someone else claims her and yet
secretly hurt that no one is interested. At the last station, in Somewhere, Iowa, an
elderly couple shyly presents her with a toy locomotive, an indication that they had
hoped to adopt a boy; recognizing their kindness and resigning herself to her
mother's disappearance, Marianne offers then her most prized possession, the feather
she plucked from her mother's hair. Bunting lays on the sentiment with a liberal
hand, but it's an affecting story, and details of the journey do much to mitigate the
slightly dolorous tone. Stretched blankets provide privacy aboard the train, each
town greets the train with its own community rite, and if some of the adoptive
parents seem less than amiable, Bunting playfully hints that not all the children
will prove to be as charming as they feign to be. Himler's warm, hazy watercolor
and gouache paintings focus on the poignancy of initial meetings, with orphans
courting or avoiding the attention of prospective parents, and adults regarding the
MARCH 1996 
* 221
children as hired hands or lovable sons and daughters. A brief introduction about
the orphan trains is included. EB
CASELEY, 
JUDITH 
Slumber Party!; written and 
illus. 
by Judith
Caseley. 
Greenwillow, 1996 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-14016-5 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-14015-7 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Zoe is looking forward to celebrating her birthday with a slumber party, and all
seems to be going well-Melissa, Stephanie, Sami, and Jessica are all able to come,
and restaurant pizza and rock painting meet with general satisfaction. Bedtime,
however, gets rockier than the art project, when first everybody wants their sleep-
ing bag next to the birthday girl's and then everybody finds the dark and the
strange noise scary and "mostly Zoe heard the words, 'I want to go home.' So Zoe
started crying the loudest of all." Mama points out that the noise is the refrigerator
and she dispells the dark with funny stories until finally everybody goes to sleep,
and the next day the slumber party is termed a success. We've seen problematic-
sleepover stories before (Bernard Waber's Ira Sleeps Over, BCCB 2/73), but Caseley
has a nicely confiding tone and a delicate sense of detail that makes this story both
ring particularly true and offer particular reassurance. Her illustrations, which
depend on clean lines and sturdy hues, keep the book upbeat without underesti-
mating the dark night fears. Kids a little-but not much-more ready for over-
nights than Rosemary Wells' Edward (BCCB 11/95) will find this an appealing
treatment of a subject close, but not quite close enough, to home. DS
CLIFFORD, ETH 
Family for Sale. 
Houghton, 1996 
[112p]
ISBN 0-395-73571-8 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 3-5
Here's a story line with promise: Mom goes away on a cruise, leaving a houseful of
five squabbling siblings, aged eight through seventeen, to manage for themselves.
Oldest sister Tillie is nominally in charge and Grandpa is nearby as needed, but
when Tillie serves up salad for dinner the others rebel at her tyranny and decide to
take turns being boss-for-a-day. The skeletal plot is devoid of the juicy details of
their various managerial failures; the children merely gather at the table each evening
to complain about the dinner choice and to whine about each other. Grandpa
mediates with an occasional observation ("Being boss isn't easy.. .. It's a respon-
sible job. And one that requires you to be fair and just"). When Mr. Fixit the
handyman shows up with some timely words about family appreciation-"I was
brought up in an orphanage . .. Even my name isn't my real name"-they all
resolve to get along just fine in the future. For a sharper, snappier family read,
direct the middle-graders to writers such as Colleen O'Shaughnessy McKenna and
Johanna Hurwitz. EB
CODY, TOD 
The Cowboy's Handbook: How to Become a Hero of the Wild
West. 
Cobblehill, 1996 
[29p] 
illus. and with photographs
ISBN 0-525-65210-8 
$12.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-6
There have been several overviews of cowboying in the last few years (Granfield's
Cowboy: An Album and Sandler's Cowboys, both BCCB 3/94), but this one, fol-
222 
* THE BULLETIN
lowing the same format as Lincoln's The Pirate's Handbook (BCCB 10/95), is the
niftiest. Sections focus on particular aspects ofcowboying ("Cowboy Gear," "Ani-
mals," "Law and Order"), and offer nuggets of information interspersed with "how-
to" panels ranging from making a potato brand to whipping up a bowl of chuck to
practicing roping skills at home. The composition is open and enticing, with
photographs, old prints, and illustrations appearing as needed. The author (who,
to boot, purportedly descends from Buffalo Bill) has a good awareness of his sub-
ject, a practical approach to many western myths, and a lively, humorous, and
compact writing style. This is vocational guidance that young buckaroos can re-
ally sink their spurs into. DS
COLE, JOANNA 
Riding Silver Star. Morrow, 1996 
[4 8p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-13896-9 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-13895-0 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Young Abby is the narrator of this fictionalized photo-story about that age-old
pairing, a girl and her horse. "Abby" (really Aubrey Cohen) shows and explains
how she gets "Star" (really Brie) ready for riding, how she rides for her teacher in
lessons and out on the trail for fun, and how she uses what she's learned while
competing in a show. The text is clear and simple, describing the basic action
without feeling obliged to give an A to Z of pony care. The photographs are the
real draw here, though: Abby's steed is a delectable grey Arab, and the young
equestrienne's pastoral romps will invite envy from many young viewers. Practical
readers will appreciate the emphasis on standard safety precautions (nobody rides
without a helmet here) and the inclusion of a riding don't or two, although some
may also notice Star's uncommented-upon change in bridle, a few flipped images,
and the nametag of Aubrey Cohen instead of Abby displayed on Star's tack. This
is for much the same audience as Sutton's Pony for Keeps (BCCB 6/91), and des-
perate horse dreamers who relished that literary wish-fulfillment will gallop through
this as well. DS
COLLIER, MARY Jo 
The King's Giraffe; written by Mary Jo and Peter Collier; illus.
by Stiphane Poulin. 
Simon, 1996 
[40p]
ISBN 0-689-80679-5 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
6-10 yrs
In 1826 Egyptian pasha Mehemet Ali needs to reciprocate the wondrous gift of a
printing press sent to him by his friend King Charles of France. Stable boy Abdul
suggests that the pasha's prized giraffe would be the ideal choice, and the pasha
promptly dispatches boy and animal to Paris. Details of the giraffe's progress from
Marseilles, where he is formally welcomed by the mayor, through Aix-en-Provence,
where he nibbles his way down the tree-lined avenue, to his final destination,
where he is met by the dumbstruck regent, are nothing short of delightful. This
story was previously related in Nancy Milton's breezier The Giraffe That Walked to
Paris (BCCB 3/92); the Colliers, who are more interested in the human side of the
sage, capture the enthusiasm of the citizenry, manifested in giraffelike high-col-
lared court clothing, long and thin poetry, culinary experiments, and renamed
streets. Unfortunately there is no note here, as there is in the Milton, to verify
what the jacket flap terms a "true story of adventure," and listeners may wonder
why pasha and stable boy converse so informally, how the giraffe fit into the cramped
MARCH 1996 
* 
223
sailing vessel, and how the Marseilles mayor conversed with Abdul, who spoke no
French. Richly detailed oils, in hues reminiscent of seventeenth-century Dutch
paintings, depict slightly truncated and caricatured figures and a serenely dignified
giraffe; their humor and sophistication should engage even listeners beyond pic-
ture-book age. EB
DEEM, JAMES M. 
The Very Real Ghost Book of Christina Rose. 
Houghton,
1996 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-395-76128-X 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Christina, the narrator, is ten, still mourning her mother who died in a plane crash
seven years ago, and she and her brother Danny are upset when her father moves
them across the country, far away from all memories, to North Klondike, Califor-
nia. It seems, however, that either a ghost inhabits their new house or their mother's
ghost has followed them, because supernatural activities are dogging their days;
together with a neighbor boy, his psychic mother, and the ghost-hunting professor
next door, they decide to get to the root of the problem. Deem, fresh from his
experimental narrative The 3 NBs of ulian Drew (BCCB 12/94), plays around
with the format here a bit as well: other people's ghost stories are interpolated
through the text, footnotes explain various references, and the book is authenti-
cated in the front by a statement from the book's own professor (the book, in fact,
seems to be a fictional counterpart to Deem's How to Finda Ghost, BCCB 11/88).
While some of the gimmicks work better than others, and the tone is sometimes
overly mannered, Deem ultimately offers not only several good ghost stories in
addition to the base plot but also a subtle treatment of the human desire for ghosts
("When I investigate a possible haunting," Professor Barrymore says, "I always
devote more time to determining why the so-called haunted person wants to see a
ghost than I do to whether a ghost actually exists"). The result is a quirky, often
touching, and entertaining read suitable for ghost fans jaded by their usual haunts.
DS
DIXON, CHUCK 
Batman: TheJoker'sApprentice; illus. by John Calmette and Todd
Winter. 
Little, 1996 
[32p]
ISBN 0-316-17798-9 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
6-9 yrs
SIMONSON, LOUISE 
IHate Superman!; illus. by Kevin and Kathy Altieri. 
Little,
1996 
[3 2 p]
ISBN 0-316-17806-3 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
6-9 yrs
At first, these slick productions look as if they might be entertaining picture-book
knockoffs, or even parodies, of their super-subjects; alas, they're instead dreary
sermonettes about how it's wrong to be bad. Young Jeffrey thinks the Joker is
"cool" but after an evening as the criminal's assistant, he learns his lesson ("I know
what you are like now. My mom and dad were right about you after all") and gets
a ride home in the Batmobile. I Hate Superman! is more of a psychological treat-
ment: James tips his hero Superman to a holdup in a local grocery store, not
realizing that one of the thugs is his big brother. When Superman catches Mike
and takes him to prison, James, in an orgy of self-hatred, spraypaints "I HATE
SUPERMAN" all over Metropolis until the big blue guy sets him straight ("Super-
224 
* THE BULLETIN
man gathered him into his arms and held him until James' sobs quieted"). The art
is professional but sedate (although Batman looks suitably noir-ish). These are
action heroes in actionless stories; while the comic-book appearance may lure kids
in, young fans may be disappointed at this deceptive use of their idols. RS
DOHERTY, BERLIE 
The Snake-Stone. 
Orchard, 1996 
[17 6 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08862-6 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-09512-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
James is a young English diving whiz, who, under his father's coaching, seems
likely to make it to county and perhaps even national and international champion-
ships. He's beginning to question this sure future, however, and he's also begin-
ning to question his past: an adopted child, he determines to penetrate the mysteries
of his origins, armed only with the bits of an envelope, the spiraled stone, and the
baby clothes with which he was found. Punctuated with occasional flashbacks to
James' biological mother's thoughts at his birth, this is a romantic and unlikely
story: James finds his birth mother (his father was a handsome young gypsy) with
unrealistic ease, and the saga of his birth is old-fashioned melodrama. There is
enough following of clues to keep things interesting, however, and although the
book falters in its realism it's an engagingly spun yarn. DS
DYER, JANE, comp. 
Animal Crackers: A Delectable Collection of Pictures, Poems,
andLullabiesfor the Very Young; comp. and illus. by Jane Dyer. 
Little, 1996 
64 p
ISBN 0-316-19766-1 
$17.95 
R 
1-3 yrs
A generous helping of standards ("Baa Baa Black Sheep," "Little Jack Horner") is
seasoned with the occasional surprise (George MacDonald's "Where Did You Come
From, Baby Dear?" or Nancy Willard's "The Wise Cow Enjoys a Cloud") in this
collection of verses and verbal whatnots. The book is divided into seven brief
sections, including stalwarts such as "Animals, Animals," "Nursery Rhymes," and
"Lullaby and Good Night." A little more attribution would have been helpful
("African Lullaby" isn't much of a source note), and some verses, such as the jump-
rope rhyme "Teddy Bear, Teddy Bear," have particular uses that could have been
informatively included. More eclectic than either Kay Chorao's The Baby's Good
Morning Book (BCCB 10/86) or Mother Goose collections such as the Opies' (10/
88), this is a nice starter volume of simple and engaging poems that adults and tots
will both enjoy sharing. The illustrations, watercolors on oversized pages, are gentle
and old-fashioned without becoming sweetly bland: the "Hey Diddle Diddle"
page, for instance, offers a determined Scottie as the laughing little dog and a dish
and spoon that are quite obviously Going Places in the moonlight. DS
FERRIS, JEAN 
All That Glitters. 
Farrar, 1996 
[192p]
ISBN 0-374-30204-9 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
After his mother's remarriage, Brian is staying for six weeks with his father on a
remote Florida key. Brian, sixteen, is as uneasy around his father, with whom he
has never spent this much time, as his father is around him, but he finds the islands
offer some compensations in the form of a local archaeologist's dive for sunken
treasure and in the form of Tia, an attractive, if temperamental, local girl. Brian's
friendship with prickly and defensive Tia, who is struggling with her own issues
MARCH 1996 
* 225
about race (she's African-American) as well as fatherhood (her father is long gone,
but her mother's boyfriend fills the role), is sensitively depicted; it's an intriguing
friendship that's not quite a romance and the more challenging for pushing but
not crossing that line. The father-son plot is pretty predictable, though, with
rapprochement induced by a shared night in a hurricane at sea, and the hunt for
gold, while exciting, is also formulaic. Ferris is a good solid writer, however, and
readers lured by the thought of buried treasure will enjoy the saga of Brian's sum-
mer. DS
FLEISCHMAN, PAUL 
Dateline: Troy; illus. by Gwen Frankfeldt and Glenn
Morrow. 
Candlewick, 1996 
80p
ISBN 1-56402-469-5 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Like the author's Bull Run (BCCB 4/93), this is a stylized novel dependent on a
technical device for its development. Where the Civil War book featured brief
glimpses of battle from many different characters' points of view, Fleischman here
describes the Trojan War in single-page episodes facing newspaper collages from
twentieth-century events that echo the ancient Greek stories and make them seem
more relevant than ever to contemporary life. We learn right away that King
Priam and Ronald Reagan shared a belief in astrological warnings, for instance,
and that Paris was just another abandoned baby ("Newborn Found in Dumpster"),
that beauty contests can be taken too seriously by goddesses as well as humans, and
that every phase of World Wars I and II, and of conflicts in Korea, Vietnam, the
Middle East, and Eastern Europe has a precursor of misery and treachery as bad as
or worse than modern mechanized conflicts. "After ten years of fighting, both lay
in their own lifeblood, Greek king and Trojan princess. Who could tell the victor
from the vanquished?" Even Odysseus must forego the triumphant ending he
found in the Aeneid for the version Fleischman employs, Homer's tragic story of
Odysseus' death at the hands of his own son. Fleischman's precision of language
reflects the stately perspective of a Homeric story but also, ironically, the distance
of modern news reporting styles, which makes the parallels of content even more
uncanny. A thought-provoking book, classically austere in design, with a partner-
ship of text and illustration unusual in young adult fiction. BH
FRANKLIN, KRISTINE L., ed. 
Out of the Dump: Writings and Photographs by Chil-
dren from Guatemala; ed. by Kristine L. Franklin and Nancy McGirr; tr. from the
Spanish by Kristine L. Franklin. 
Lothrop, 1996 
[56 p] 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-13924-8 
$18.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-13923-X 
$19.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-7
This compilation of writings and photographs by young people who live in a "smol-
dering garbage dump in the center of Guatemala City" has more interest than
most such collections of children's art, primarily because the kids involved were
taught photography and writing by the book's compilers, so that the words and
images contained here reflect conscious crafting rather than simply allowing "spon-
taneity" to carry the day. There is, of course, also the fascination of the horrific
setting: while more information about "the dump" should have been included in
the brief scene-setting note, the children's photos and words matter-of-factly relate
the poverty of slapped-together shacks, alcohol abuse, pet and feral dogs, and
mounds of refuse ("One day a neighbor lady found a strangled girl in a box and
226 
* 
THE BULLETIN
when the tractor scooped up the box it made the lady so sad that she put the little
girl where the tractor couldn't get her again"). As well, there are records of family
moments (such as Junior Ramos' photo and poem about the time he tried to scare
his stepdad with a plastic tarantula), celebration ("When a girl turns fifteen, it's a
happy time"), and occult ritual, such as Gladiz Jimenez's photo and reminiscence
of the jar in which someone had placed a picture of her father with the word
"DIE" written on the back. The black-and-white photos exhibit both sensitivity
and skill; the poems and paragraphs successfully convey people and moments. RS
FREEMAN, SUZANNE 
The Cuckoo's Child. Greenwillow, 1996 
[25 6 p]
ISBN 0-688-14290-7 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 6-9
"I wanted, more than anything," says Mia, the narrator, tired of living in Beirut,
"to walk to school in an American town where I looked like everybody else." Her
wish comes true partially and bitterly: her parents disappear while on a sailing trip
and she, along with her two older half-sisters (who soon depart for their father's
home in Boston), are sent to little lonia, Tennessee, to live with her mother's
sister. Small-town America in 1962, however, is not tolerant of outsiders, and Mia
finds fitting in difficult despite her longing to conform to every white-bread norm
tossed her way. She dislikes her aunt's married boyfriend, she's stuck with the
losers group in bible camp, and most of all she misses her parents terribly, demon-
strating her anger and uncertainty by stealing and meanness. This is the flip side
of Marilynne Robinson's adult novel Housekeeping, the tone and focus are similar,
but this young girl longs to find a home in the face of all life's changes. Mia's
narration is natural and subtle, but the story treats all its characters sympathetically
and fully: Mia's aunt, Kit, beginning to lift some of the limitations she's put on
her own life, is particularly resonant. Mia's yearning for her parents (whose disap-
pearance remains open-ended, since there's a suggestion that they defected to the
Eastern Bloc), mixed as it is with memories of her resentment of their taking her so
far away and leaving her, is believably ambivalent, and her gradual but never smooth
settling-in realistic. Small-town stories set thirty years ago seem to be in vogue at
the moment, but here's one with heart as well as memory on its side. DS
GEISERT, ARTHUR 
Roman Numerals I to MM/Numerabilia Romana uno ad duo
mila: Liber de difficillimo computando numerum; written and illus. by Arthur
Geisert. 
Lorraine/Houghton, 1996 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-74519-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 2-5
The piglets are back, meeting a number concept challenge even trickier than their
alphabet tree house (see Pigs from A to Z, BCCB 2/87) with equal success. As
MMMMDCCCLXIV pigs cavort through barnyard and junkyard, gardens and
mud wallows, readers must count X sandbags, XIV gopher holes, VL pigs, etc.
amid intricately designed scenes. It's a tough hidden-picture book, with items
often quite cleverly concealed in plain sight, and children may even need to con-
sult an adult or a dictionary to determine what they're looking for-anchor hooks,
urns, boiler bolts. Geisert explains how the numerals line up left to right, adding
to or subtracting from each other as they go; however, to maximize the challenge,
he never directly defines the number each numeral represents. "If you don't know
what the numerals listed are, count the objects in the picture to find out." Thus
MARCH 1996 
* 227
readers are drawn into a digital dialogue: Have I really found all the pennants?
Check the Roman numeral. What does XVIII mean? Count the bottles. Clever
line drawings, tinted in muted tones and featuring mind-boggling permutations
of porcine poses, are enhanced by such thoughtful design elements as lower case
Roman numeral pagination, Latin parallel- and subtitles, and a numerical recap of
the book's contents. A treat from initium tofinis. EB
GREENE, STEPHANIE 
Owen Foote, Second Grade Strongman; illus. by Dee deRosa.
Clarion, 1996 
[96p]
ISBN 0-395-72098-2 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 2-3
Height-and-weight-chart day is rapidly approaching and Owen, "small for his age,"
is terrified. So is his best friend Joseph: "Being fat is a pain in the neck." Last year
the school nurse Mrs. Jackson humiliated Owen by loudly calling him a pipsqueak
in front of his entire first-grade class and "this year everyone else would be bigger
than ever. He'd look even smaller." Fans of Janice Lee Smith's Adam Joshua
(BCCB 2/92, etc.) will find a similar hero in Owen, who achieves his magnifi-
cence by standing up to Mrs. Jackson for announcing that Joseph needs to get
more exercise: "Mrs. Jackson, don't you think you should keep your voice down a
little?" It's a great moment, if somewhat facilely resolved later, when Mrs. Jackson
at long last admits to needing a hearing aid. Although most second-graders won't
be quite up to the reading level of this chapter book (and the title will put off many
third-graders), a readaloud will speak to anyone who feels too little, too big, or too
whatever. One-per-chapter illustrations chart Owen's progress while the story
charts his growth. RS
HAAS, JESSE 
Be Well, Beware; illus. byJos. A. Smith. 
Greenwillow, 1996 
[72p]
ISBN 0-688-14545-0 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-5
Lily's beloved Beware (from Beware the Mare, 7/93, and A Blue for Beware, 3/95)
is sick, and Lily is sick with worry. The vet helps as much as she can, but Beware
may need surgery-surgery Lily's family probably can't afford. Haas knows her
horse world inside and out, and her informed details-the frustration when two
good vets say two different things, the strain of watching a sick animal through the
night, the amused and substantial relief at seeing a pile of healthy horse poop-
give the book a rich realism. Beware, with her passion for cough drops and her
insistence on being scratched in certain places, is a memorable character without
being anthropomorphized, and devoted but realistic Lily is a figure worthy of
empathy. The little bay mare surely has her fans by now, and they'll want to see
her through her bad times as well as her good. DS
HAAS, JESSIE 
Clean House; illus. by Yossi Abolafia. 
Greenwillow, 1996 
[56p]
ISBN 0-688-14079-3 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Here's something that admits the little-acknowledged truth about house work:
why bother? Tess and her mother are in a tizzy cleaning house in anticipation of a
visit from much-loved Aunt Alice and Cousin Kate. But the more they clean, the
messier it gets: after bagging all the clothing donations for the Red Cross, for
228 
* 
THE BULLETIN
example, Tess is convinced they have mistakenly given away one of her sneakers, so
they empty all the bags onto the floor only to discover that the dog has contentedly
munched the sneaker into a sandal. Sum total for cleaning accomplished? "'I put
one of my sneakers away,' said Tess." At great length and after many disasters the
house looks perfect-and boring. Thank goodness the relatives come to cheerfully
help mess things up once again. Deceptively tidy line drawings illustrate the may-
hem and the affectionate camaraderie of mother and daughter. Cognizant of both
parent and child demands, this easy chapter book would make a fine
intergenerational read-together. RS
HALL, ELIZABETH 
Child ofthe Wolves. 
Houghton, 1996 
[17 6 p]
ISBN 0-395-76502-1 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 5-7
Granite is an Alaskan-born sled-dog, bred for racing, but the puppy escapes when
being taken to a new home and heads for the wilderness. Lacking survival skills, he
injures himself and is in danger of becoming prey when a wolf bitch, mourning her
stolen puppies, adopts him into her pack. Granite struggles to adjust to wolfish
rules and etiquette but remains the lowest member of the pack even as an adult,
until he performs an act of heroism to save his foster mother from certain death.
Granite is, as most animals are, a sympathetic protagonist, and the details of wolf
and dog behavior (and the problems the differences cause) give this account a
certain resonance. The plot, however, is hackneyed and sentimental, and while an
introductory note describes changing attitudes towards canid behavior and the
author's sources for wolf information, it is doubtful that any sources encouraged
the rank anthropomorphism of statements such as "Granite thought that his mother
was beautiful" and "When Granite wondered if his mother had new babies, he felt
cold and lost." Kids who can't get enough of dog tales will appreciate Granite's
story, but the discerning will stick with Julie of the Wolves. DS
HATRICK, GLORIA 
Masks. 
Kroupa/Orchard, 1996 
[128p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08864-2 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-09514-2 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
It's devastating to Pete when his older brother, Will, suddenly suffers from the
paralytic illness of Guillain-Barre syndrome. The brothers have always been close,
and it seems to Pete as if he's the only one who understands Will now that he can
no longer talk, and the only one with hope for Will's recovery. In order to advance
that recovery, Pete brings in some of his father's animal masks; placing a mask over
Will's face allows Will to become mentally, if not physically, that animal for a brief
time, absorbing its strength and wholeness. As Will's condition worsens, Pete
grows more desperate, until finally he discovers that the bond between two broth-
ers is strong enough to cheat death. This is an ambitious story but it doesn't quite
work; the mask motif never really meshes with the rest of the story, and it interferes
with rather than emphasizing the brotherly connection. There's not much charac-
terization, either, and the dialogue seems forced. The disability drama still en-
gages, however, particularly as it's the kid who's the hero while the adults watch
helplessly; kids who know they know better too will appreciate Pete's and Will's
triumph. DS
MARCH 1996 
* 229
HEARNE, BETSY 
Eliza's Dog; illus. by Erica Thurston. 
McElderry, 1996 
[160p]
ISBN 0-689-80704-X 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Gr. 3-5
[Books written by Bulletin staff are given a descriptive annotation rather than re-
view and code rating.] Two years of begging finally pay off when Eliza gets the
dog of her dreams while her family is on vacation in Ireland. But how will she get
the dog home to Chicago? And what will having a dog of her own really be like?
RS
HEIDE, FLORENCE PARRY 
Oh, Grow Up!: Poems to Help You Survive Parents, Chores,
School and Other Afflictions; written by Florence Parry Heide and Roxanne Heide
Pierce; illus. by Nadine Bernard Westcott. 
Kroupa/Orchard, 1996 
[3 2 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08771-9 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-09471-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-5
The Heides take on a host of childhood annoyances, trials, and miseries from
bullies and brats to cafeteria cuisine, allowances and hand-me-downs to the dread
principal's office. While not uniformly hilarious, most poems nonetheless elicit
empathetic chuckles or groans. It's kid-2; parents-0 in "Doubles" ("'I need my
allowance, Mom,'/ I say./ 'I really need it bad!'/ 'All right,' says Mom, 'then here
it is.'/ And now I'll go ask Dad.") "Dinner at a Fancy Restaurant," in which a
young diner deflates a pompous waiter with his order "I weesh La Peanut Butter,"
may strike a chord among readers not to the manor born, and "Grounded" ("I said
a bad word and I'm grounded./ I just wanted to hear how it sounded") has univer-
sal appeal. Westcott's manic, crayon-bright watercolor illustrations, which enliv-
ened Never Take a Pig to Lunch (BCCB 6/94), do equal service here, defining a
comic venue with dialogue and thought bubbles in "The Interrogation," or just
pumping up the flatter entries. The visual fun will scoop in some primary readers
leery of weightier verse. EB
HOYT-GOLDSMITH, DIANE 
Migrant Worker: A Boy from the Rio Grande Valley;
illus. with photographs by Lawrence Migdale. 
Holiday House, 1996 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8234-1225-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
As in their Cherokee Summer (BCCB 4/93) and Pueblo Boy (4/91), the author and
photographer focus upon a young member of a minority community, enlarging
the biographical account with contextualizing information about the larger pic-
ture. For most of the year, Ricardo ("Ricky") lives with his mother and older
siblings in Rio Grande City, Texas, while his father does roadwork in Chicago,
sending money back to support the family. Ricky describes his neighborhood and
school, with particular attention to his inspiring school principal. When school is
out for the summer, though, the whole family (joined by Dad) travels the migrant
farm worker routes, going north to "help with the cotton crop." While a map
shows general migrant patterns, and photos show Ricky picking melons, the book
unfortunately favors the general over the specific, making the "I" of the narrative
somewhat superfluous. The book is a little livelier when Ricky talks about his life
at home, and while there is some generic uplift ("With an education, anything is
possible"), Ricky's voice is friendly and informative. Sidebars include facts about
230 
* THE BULLETIN
child labor laws, the United Farmworkers Union, and Cesar Chavez, as well as
some mini-portraits of other migrant children; a glossary and index are appended.
RS
HUNT, JONATHAN 
Leifs Saga: A Viking Tale; written and illus. by Jonathan
Hunt. 
Simon, 1996 
[4 0p]
ISBN 0-689-80492-X 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Asgrim pauses from work on his knbrr (boat) to tell his daughter Sigrid the story of
Leif, a fellow Greenlander who had dared to sail further than any of his country-
men, discovering the westward lands ofHelluland, Markland, and Vinland. Among
the treasures Leif brought home was the sturdy lumber which, sold to Asgrim in
hard times, became the hull of the new kn6rr. The story-within-a-slim-story seems
an unnecessary contrivance, and Hunt's comprehensive endnote actually offers
more information about Norse explorations and settlement than does the fiction-
alized text. Report writers who can contend with the note's close-set type can
learn here about Norwegian seafaring, historical background on Leif, and specula-
tion as to the actual sites of Leifs landings. Bright line-and-watercolor paintings
feature a cast of perpetually grinning Norsemen who often bear an uncanny re-
semblance to Pippi Longstocking. Bordered insets are captioned with runes that
can be decoded with the aid of an appendedfuthork (alphabet). A bibliography of
books and articles for adult reading is included. EB
HURWITZ, JOHANNA 
Even Stephen; illus. by Michael Dooling. 
Morrow,
1996 
[112p]
ISBN 0-688-14197-8 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
Sunny, fourteen, adores her big brother Stephen, who is brilliant, kind, talented,
athletic, and popular. Her relative ordinariness is somewhat of a disappointment
to her, but she finds that her strength and understanding is what Stephen needs
when he encounters real failure for the first time in his life, when his emergency
CPR administered to his beloved basketball coach fails to prevent the man's death.
Hurwitz is writing about older kids than she usually does, but her easy style and
sympathetic characterization are evident here as well. While Stephen's recovery is
fairly predictable, the book's continued respect for him is pleasantly novel: he
really is a fine young man, and he doesn't need to be revealed as less than that for
Sunny to increase her appreciation for her own merits. Illustrations not seen. DS
JACQUES, BRIAN 
Outcast of Redwall; illus. by Allan Curless. 
Philomel,
1996 
[360p]
ISBN 0-399-22914-0 
$19.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
"Eulaliaaaaaaa!" That's the battlecry in the latest Redwall installment as the noble
badger Sunflash the Mace seeks to vanquish his sworn enemy Sixclaw the ferret
and restore himself to the ancestral stronghold of Salamandastron (see BCCB 7/
93). Here again is the pulpy mix that has garnered so many faithful readers: pas-
toral scenes sprinkled with babytalk ("Rotten uckypaw stinky ole foxes") cheek by
savaged jowl with lots of violence ("Fordpetal, the young female hare with the
fluttering eyelashes, went down with a scream, the spear sticking out of her back").
MARCH 1996 * 231
The book is predictable and too long, but that doesn't seem to have stopped series
fans before. Although somebody ought to write an article about the currents of
fascism that flow uneasily-or too easily-through this series, it will suffice here to
say that Sunflash is the most epic of heroes and his journey most perilous; Sixclaw
is deliciously, terribly true to his verminous kind and meets a suitable fate. RS
JOHNSON, PAUL BRETT 
Lost; written by Paul Brett Johnson and Celeste Lewis;
illus. by Paul Brett Johnson. 
Jackson/Orchard, 1996 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08851-0 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-09501-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
A little girl has lost her dog, Flag, in the desert. While she and her father look for
him-putting up signs, searching a canyon, talking with an old desert prospec-
tor-we see what they don't: Flag looking for shelter and food and protecting
himself from perils such as snakes, coyotes, and javelinas. His travails are on the
left-hand pages in thickly textured full-color paintings while the girl and her father's
search is depicted on the right in simpler pencil drawings. Flag gets thinner and
thinner while his mistress gets sadder and sadder, but while we're happy for their
reunion after almost a month (the old prospector finds and rescues the dog) we
don't quite believe it: too much for too long has gone on, and it's difficult to see
why the dog isn't dead. To end the story that way, however, would truly be an
exercise in story-hour sadism, so the happy ending is probably the better choice
even while it remains a case of the end not really following the means. RS
KEHRET, PEG 
Earthquake Terror. Cobblehill, 1996 
[14 4 p]
ISBN 0-525-65226-4 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
When Jonathan and Abby's mother injures her ankle while the family is on a
camping trip, Jonathan is told to take good care of his sister (six years old and
disabled) while his parents go to get help. This could be entertaining trouble
enough, but then an earthquake strikes and the two kids-and one dog-are on
their own. Predictable but exciting, the story puts the siblings in unrelenting but
not unrealistic peril (that is, given the contrivance of the set-up), and while Kehret
is not always the freshest of writers ("With his heart in his throat, Jonathan crept
away . . . ") her focus on the action is tight and involving. RS
KING-SMITH, DICK 
Mr. Potter's Pet; illus. by Mark Teague. 
Hyperion,
1996 
[12 8 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2146-9 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0174-3 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Mild-mannered Mr. Potter has lived a quiet and orderly life, dutifully looking
after his parents, until they are both carried off by food poisoning on his fiftieth
birthday. Mr. Potter then breaks out of his pattern and purchases a pet, an out-
spoken and extremely rude mynah bird he names Everest. Everest and Mr. Potter
begin to form a bond, and the bird takes Mr. Potter in hand, finding him a house-
keeper and furthering his romance when the new employee proves to be Mr. P's
childhood crush. This is typical King-Smith, with a comfortably familiar story
enlivened by cheerful and breezy writing; Everest is an unashamedly anthropo-
232 
* 
THE BULLETIN
morphized bird and all the more diverting for it. Light entertainment with a touch
of the fantastical, this will give novice readers a pleasant alternative to everyday-life
fare. Mark Teague's line drawings are comedic but restrained, adding to the amuse-
ment without overpowering the text. DS
KROEGER, MARY KAY 
Paperboy; written by Mary Kay Kroeger and Louise Borden;
illus. by Ted Lewin. 
Clarion, 1996 
[34p]
ISBN 0-395-64482-8 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
"1927 was a great year to sell newspapers," and Willie Brinkman is proud to shout
"Extra! Extra! Read all about it!" for the Cincinnati Times-Star and bring home
his pay for his family. Willie is especially excited because the great Dempsey-
Tunney fight is coming up, and he wants to be the one proclaiming the victory of
his hero: "Jack Dempsey was a workingman's hero, and the streets Willie walked
were workingman's streets." Alas-Dempsey loses, but Willie learns a lesson about
pride and fortitude. The story is earnest and a little didactic; the recreation of the
fight-which Lewin pictures in black-and-white behind the full-color watercolors
of Willie's world-is not very clear, although the authors in a note explain the
controversial seconds that cost Dempsey the title. Lewin's Cincinnati is a well-
scrubbed nostalgic vision with characters that are theatrically posed with often
cliched expressions. Still, unlike Pilkey's The Paperboy, reviewed below, there is a
story here, and listeners may empathize with the news of victory snatched and
more modest victories won. RS
KROLL, VIRGINIA 
Shelter Folks; illus. by Jan Naimo Jones. 
Eerdmans, 1995 
4 0p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8028-5106-1 
$14.00 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
When the paycheck won't stretch to pay the rent anymore, Joelle, her brother Eli,
and their mother have to move into a shelter. Although it's tough squeezing into
one room "a little bigger than our living room at the apartment," Joelle finds that
in other ways the shelter is a communitarian paradise. Neighbors offer cookies
and friendship, they visit each others rooms and get together for meals ... "At the
shelter, it seemed more and more like we were one big family." Although Kroll
sensitively depicts the shame a child might feel at living in a shelter (Joelle tries to
hide where she lives from the other kids at school), she is unrealistically sunny in
portraying shelter life; indeed, after all the "shelter folks" show up to see Joelle in
the school play, we get the feeling that she's better off than ever. (The pencil
illustrations, too, earnest but stiff, show a happy place.) For a less cheerful treat-
ment of the topic see Jacqueline Wilson's funny but tough Elsa, Star ofthe Shelter
(BCCB 2/96). RS
KUKLIN, SUSAN 
Fireworks: The Science, the Art, and the Magic; written and illus.
with photographs by Susan Kuklin. 
Hyperion, 1996 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2082-9 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0102-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Except for a few nervous dogs, almost everybody likes fireworks, and Susan Kuklin
gives eager audiences a chance to know incendiary displays a bit better. Focusing
on the Grucci family, the "First Family of Fireworks," the book gives a basic expla-
nation of the making, storing, exploding, and choreographing of fireworks, in-
MARCH 1996 
* 
233
cluding some description of the different varieties and how they are achieved. The
text is not as strong as it might be: readers who don't know what actually makes
fireworks flammable won't learn it here, the technical discussions tend to be daunt-
ingly dense, and it can be difficult to discern just what part of the text a photo-
graph is illustrating. The real glory here lies in the photographs: Kuklin shows
pyrotechnics at their most splendiferous and varied, with gold-and-blue spiders,
silver tourbillions, and the Grucci trademark, split golden comets, streaking through
the dark skies and lighting up Shea Stadium below or enhanced by the glittering
skyline behind them-in fact, real-life fireworks may be rather disappointing by
comparison. Readers may not get all the information they'd like here, but for
sheer oohs and ahs per page, this is a firecracker. DS
LANGSEN, RICHARD C. 
When Someone in the Family Drinks Too Much; illus. by
Nicole Rubel. 
Dial, 1996 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1687-7 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1686-9 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
6-8 yrs
Like Carol Carrick's Banana Beer (BCCB 4/95) and Niki Daly's My Dad (BCCB
6/95), this is unabashed bibliotherapy designed for children living with an alco-
holic parent. Where those books tell a story about a child learning to handle his
parent's illness, this one is more of a handbook: sections include What Is an
Alcoholic, Confusing Things that Can Happen, How a Family Is Hurt by Alco-
holism, and Things You Can Do to Feel Better. Definitions of terms such as
"enabler" and "denial" will need adult expansion, but on the whole the text does a
good job of keeping to a child-centered perception of the problem. Changes in
voice can be confusing, with the text shifting between an omniscient, factual nar-
ration ("When someone in a family is sick with alcoholism, things that go on can
be hard to understand") and the voices of various fictional children ("Sometimes
my mother pretends that she doesn't have this illness called alcoholism"); again,
adults will have to help with transitions. Illustrator Rubel brightens the pages and
the treatment with droll cartoons of alcoholic bears and their families, and, unfor-
tunately, she can't seem to help being funny, as in the pictures of a mama bear
merrily chug-a-lugging the vino or vomiting into the toilet. The children who
won't find these pictures funny are, of course, exactly those to whom the book
intends to speak. RS
LAUTURE, DENIZ 
R Running the Road to ABC; illus. by Reynold Ruffins. 
Simon,
1996 
[32p]
ISBN 0-689-80507-1 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-7 yrs
"The boys are Dyesel, Milsen, Preneyis. The girls are Loud, Kousou, Toutoun.
Boys and girls are schoolchildren. They go up and down steep hills six days each
week, forty weeks each year, for seven years of their short lives." The scenario will
strike young American listeners as unusual, and librarians will need to preserve the
jacket of this picture book because nowhere else, except in the CIP subject head-
ings, is the setting (Haiti) identified. After a breakfast that might include plantain,
yucca, herring, Congo beans, or perhaps millet, the children run barefoot from
predawn to daybreak: "Up and down/ Every day/ Morning moon/ Evening star/
Morning star/ Evening moon." Meanwhile, we see the sights they pass by on their
234 
* 
THE BULLETIN
way to "the great and beautiful books on the Road to A B C." It's a poetically
repetitive text, rhythmic enough to compensate for a plotless text with an urgent
pace. Momentum builds as the children race toward school, although it's too bad
that the immediate identification of the characters as schoolchildren eliminates the
possibility of suspense. Their eagerness to get to their destination will perhaps
inspire some discussion even among kindergarten and primary-grade audiences,
who might enjoy acting this out with a teacher chanting the text. Ruffins' acrylic
paintings are equally cadenced, starting out a nighttime blue and lightening as the
sun comes up. His intense hues, organically stylized compositions, and forward-
leaning, angular figures add an energetic motion of their own to the lyrically off-
beat words. BH
LAWSON, JULIE 
Danger Game. 
Little, 1996 
[224 p]
ISBN 0-316-51728-3 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M Gr. 7-10
Unable to control her pyromaniacal urgings, Chelsea, sixteen, is shipped off by her
selfish, self-centered mother to her father in Hawaii. She hasn't seen her father in
seven years, but just as they're getting to know each other again, a car accident puts
him in a coma. Chelsea, whose mother is traipsing through Indonesia with her
loathsome boyfriend Simon, then goes to stay with her cousins on Vancouver
Island, where she finally comes to terms with the secret that fuels her need to play
with fire. This revelation is heavily foreshadowed (and given away in the CIP) but
only spelled out after much melodramatic goings-on, including Chelsea's fires, an
encounter with the Hawaiian goddess Pele, a dangerous storm, and a distracting
subplot about the problems of Chelsea's cousin's boyfriend. Readers might enjoy
the soap opera, but the psychologizing is pat, the writing often trite, and an over-
reliance on flashbacks and references to offstage events confusing. RS
LEINER, KATHERINE 
First Children: Growing Up in the White House; illus. by
Katie Keller and with photographs. 
Tambourine, 1996 
[160p]
ISBN 0-688-13341-X 
$20.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Lots of children have spent formative years in the White House: Leiner includes
presidents' children and grandchildren as well as longterm visitors and offspring of
staff. She tightens her focus by including only seventeen of the first families and
restricting herself to examining a particular aspect of or episode in the life of each
child, such as Letitia Tyler's view of her father's remarriage, Frank Johnson's wait
to hear the senate verdict on his father's impeachment, and Caroline Kennedy's
exclusive school within the White House. It's an approach different from the
usual survey (such as Blue and Naden's less spirited The White House Kids, BCCB
9/95), but the result is often disjointed and frustrating: we become invested in one
person and then get cut off from him or her without feeling any sense of closure
(often accounts don't even discuss the rest of that subject's tenure in the White
House, let alone what happened to him or her afterwards). Although some of the
stories are poignant and memorable and some of the details amusing, sometimes
the relevance of an anecdote isn't clear (why do we need to know that Julie Nixon
had a black eye at Eisenhower's second inauguration, and why raise the question of
where she got it if you're not going to explain?). Scratchboard paintings, some-
times endearingly homely but sometimes simply awkward, open each chapter and
paintings and photographs appear throughout. A detailed afterword gives a thumb-
MARCH 1996 * 235
nail sketch of the lives of all the children included in the book; an appendix detail-
ing "The Presidents' Children" lists the issue of all the U.S. Presidents; a selected
bibliography offers sources; there is no index. DS
LEVY, MARILYN 
Runfor Your Life. 
Houghton, 1996 
[224p]
ISBN 0-395-74520-9 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 6-9
Kisha's life is better than some of the other girls' in the Walt Whitman projects in
Oakland. She's got her dad-one of the few adult males in the projects--even if
he is an unemployed alcoholic. Her best friend Natonia lives with her grand-
mother and her drug-dealing uncles, who, it turns out, are sexually abusing Natonia.
Alisha's mother is a crackhead. Tureena's boyfriend sells dope. Despite the fact
that none of them show any athletic interest or ability whatsoever, what these girls
(all African American) apparently need is a track team. Handsome Darren, the
new social worker in the community center, turns them into an enthusiastic run-
ning club that fails utterly in its first meet but triumphs in its second: "Our team
had taken first, second, and third place. Not only that, we had broken the national
record for the 800-meter race." This is unlikely. Kisha is a spunky, appealing
narrator, and you really are glad that everything works out so incredibly well for
her, but she's just about the only believable thing about this novel. Although
Natonia has a haunting presence her problems are facilely resolved, and the other
girls serve only as didactic stereotypes. The one white girl on the team, Jennifer,
pops into the story only when she's needed to make a preachy point, and Darren is
a prince with a vaguely disreputable past that he has valiantly overcome. The
running device is transparently contrived, serving as a vehicle for the girls' self-
esteem but lacking any specifics that would inform the story with some realism.
Levy does some subtle things with Kisha and her troubled family, but they're lost
in the soapy if entertaining drama. RS
McCULLY, EMILY ARNOLD 
The Bobbin Girl; written and illus. by Emily Arnold
McCully. 
Dial, 1996 
[34p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1828-4 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1827-6 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-5
In the textile mills of 1830s Lowell, Massachusetts even quite young girls find
employment, and for fifteen minutes each hour from 5:30 am until 7:00 pm, ten-
year-old Rebecca removes filled bobbins from the factory's spinning frames and
replaces them with empty ones. Proud to help her mother make ends meet, Rebecca
delights in the friendship of the older mill girls and women who work beside her
and lodge in her mother's boarding house. Rebecca admires their dedicated at-
tempts at self-improvement and drinks in their discussions of women's role in the
factory system. It comes as no surprise when, following the injury of a friend in a
mill accident, some of the women plan a walk-out and Rebecca's mother entrusts
her with the responsibility to decide for herself whether to join them or to save her
own job. This fictionalized account, based on the experiences of a real bobbin girl
during the 1836 "turn out," offers a smooth and accessible introduction to some
basic labor economics, as well as a fascinating entree into an early women's labor
action. McCully's glowing watercolors vividly capture the camaraderie of the
women and their varying reactions to the forced choice between unemployment
or exploitation. Viewers are frequently drawn into the scenes, rubbing shoulders
236 
* THE BULLETIN
with the women around the dinner table, at the heels of an angered mill manager,
and right among the cluster of shawled and bonneted women turning out of the
factory. Social-studies teachers will welcome the picture book format, suitable for
classroom use with a post-picture book crowd. An historical note is appended. EB
MAHY, MARGARET 
Tingleberries, Tuckertubs and Telephones; illus. by Robert
Staermose. 
Viking, 1996 
96 p
ISBN 0-670-86331-9 
$12.99 
R 
Gr. 3-5
It's hard work to make a book seem as dashed-offas this one, but Mahy in madcap
mode (overdrive, really) is just as cunning and careful as she is in her serious fic-
tion. Saracen Hobday lives on an island with his "dear old granny," who happens
to be a retired ace detective and who, it turns out, can't wait to get on the trail
again when an old nemesis, the pirate Grudge-Gallows, escapes from prison. There's
more-a lot more-before the final showdown where Granny, Saracen, and a
fetching boat captain cum telephone operator, defeat the villain, and Mahy handles
the goofy twists of the plot with style and tongue-in-cheek grace. Brief chapters
(with zippy titles such as "Ha! Ha! Ha!") lend themselves to reading aloud (al-
though Staermose's jaunty ink cartoons shouldn't be missed-and is that Mahy
posing as Granny?), and Saracen learns a truth that may resonate for many: "Did
you know you can be shy and brave at the same time?" RS
MARGOLIN, MALCOLM, ed. 
Native Ways: California Indian Stories and Memories;
ed. by Malcolm Margolin and Yolanda Montijo. 
Heyday, 1995 
127p 
illus.
with photographs
Paper ed. ISBN 0-930588-73-8 
$7.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Describing traditions, stories, and folkways of various West Coast Indian groups,
this offers a browsable collage of information. The strength of the book is its
inclusion of contemporary Indian communities as well as history, and its blend of
voices. The weakness is a tendency toward fragmentation and occasional repeti-
tion within fragments: a page about messengers, for instance, introduces a story
with "Jeff Jones, a Nomlaki man, recalls how it was," while on the very next page,
a section on trading begins, "Here is how Jeff Jones, a Nomlaki man, remembered
the traders of his village." The basic organization, however, is sound and includes
maturation, cultural variation, relationship with the environment, skills and arts,
spiritual beliefs, and adaptations to modern society. A map clarifies tribal territo-
ries, and photographs (both historical and current) together with occasional draw-
ings illustrate the book, which concludes with a listing of "California Indian
Resources" as well as a careful list of citations for stories, interviews, and pictures.
Certainly of regional interest, this will also appeal more generally in the same way
that Plains Indians or the East Coast Iroquois confederation might offer a focus for
study. BH
MILLER, MARGARET 
Now I'm Big; written and illus. with photographs by Marga-
ret Miller. 
Greenwillow, 1996 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-14078-5 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-14077-7 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-6 yrs
Photographer Miller takes a longitudinal approach here, contrasting sweet pic-
tures of babies doing baby things ("When I was a baby I had a favorite stuffed
MARCH 1996 
* 
237
animal and I played with blocks") with photos of the now-older child engaged in
more mature pursuits ("Now I'm big! I take care of a real dog and I'm still playing
with blocks, but it's different"). Although it's not clear if the babies and the chil-
dren are actually the same people, they look as if they are (meaning that the book
was several years in preparation), and the cast of six (three boys, three girls, varying
ethnicities) are appealing subjects. Preschoolers will enjoy this assurance of their
inevitable superiority to their younger selves and appreciate the visual evidence
that there is indeed a thing called growing up. RS
NERLOVE, MIRIAM 
Flowers on the Wall; written and illus. by Miriam
Nerlove. 
McElderry, 1996 
[32p]
ISBN 0-689-50614-7 $16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
"It was winter in Warsaw, Poland, 1938. In a small basement apartment deep
inside the Jewish section of the city, Rachel lay beneath layers of blankets." An
adult acquainted with World War II stories knows that this one probably won't
turn out well, and to Nerlove's credit, it does not. As critic Hazel Rochman says,
the Holocaust has no happy ending. What the story does do is involve us in
selected daily scenes of hardship that reveal Rachel's family life and talents-she
paints flowers on the wall all winter because she has no shoes to go outside. In
1942 the family is deported to Treblinka. "Rachel's dreams, along with those of
thousands of other Warsaw Jews, faded like the flowers on her apartment walls.
And then they were gone forever." Gentle in tone but realistic in content, this is
illustrated with softly textured paintings that are similar, in their graphic effects, to
the textual balance. Muted browns and grays are brightened by occasional warm
hues, just as Rachel's dreary days are sometimes brightened by gifts from her fam-
ily, opportunities to play or study, and her own creative art work. There's enough
distance here to ease the sad outcome for young listeners and enough closeness to
make them remember the Rachels of the world. Inspired by Roman Vishniac's
photographs of the Warsaw Ghetto (and by one photograph in particular of a little
girl), this a subtle portrait-more authentic than Wild's Let the Celebrations Begin
(BCCB 9/94) and more typical than Oppenheim's The Lily Cupboard (3/92)-
and one that suggests there is no age limitation to telling a truth. BH
PAXTON, TOM 
The Story of the Tooth Fairy; illus. by Robert Sauber. 
Morrow,
1996 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-12988-9 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-12987-0 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
4-6 yrs
Unlike Paxton's brisk poetic retellings of Aesop's fables (BCCB 11/88), this is a
sentimental and tired tale of the origin of the tooth fairy. It seems that sometime
around the turn of the century a little girl named Emily meets a whimsical fairy
named Glynnis. When Glynnis reports the encounter to the Fairy Queen, the
good fairy instructs her to obtain a token from Emily that "only a mortal could
give." Thus and so. The lush, fairydust sprinkled watercolor-and-gouache illus-
tration match the story in both mood and cliche-as the characters "exclaim with
delight" and "smile with happiness," so do the pictures. For a tale with more child
resonance and appeal, try Kaye's The Real Tooth Fairy (BCCB 10/90); for one
with a little more bite, go for Collington's eccentric The Tooth Fairy (11/95). RS
238 
* 
THE BULLETIN
PETTIT, JAYNE 
A Time to Fight Back: 
True Stories of Wartime
Resistance. 
Houghton, 1996 
[17 6 p]
ISBN 0-395-76504-8 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 5-8
As the number of World War II stories, histories, and memoirs increases in litera-
ture for young people, so does the quality vary. The eight children described here
were all victims of cruel wartime injustice, and their stories have the inherent grip
of survival against odds. The focus of the book, however, is only vaguely on activi-
ties of resistance, which seems to be loosely interpreted, especially in the cases of
Bessie Shea, who kept a wartime diary in Scotland; Alistaire Home, who was evacu-
ated from London to the U.S. during the Blitz; and Jeanne Wakatsuki, who was
relocated with her family and other Japanese Americans to Manzanar. Nechama
Bawnik's story is one of hiding, Elie Wiesel's of spiritual tenacity, and Karla Poewe's
of endurance. The two remaining children do, in fact, take part in the "Resis-
tance" referred to in the introduction, one carrying messages in Belgium and one
rescuing a downed British airman in France. Readers with little historical back-
ground will find themselves besieged with tritely phrased generalizations: Hitler is
introduced as "an embittered little Austrian," Belgium "found itself overrun" by
German troops, America "found itself at war with Germany and Japan." There
are also some actual points of confusion-when it's hard to follow the vicissitudes
of a refugee family traveling between East and West Berlin, for instance, or when
it's implied that a German schoolteacher beats children because he saw his own
wife and daughter killed. Some passages beg for further explanation: one is left to
wonder whether Alistaire realized his dream of joining the RAF after graduating
from high school (he turned down a Harvard scholarship because "his country
needed him"); or, for that matter, why Charlotte Corday was guillotined for her
part in the French Revolution. This is a well-intentioned book that shows signs of
diligent research on an important subject, but too much is covered superficially
and better writing prevails in books such as Meltzer's Rescue (BCCB 6/88). BH
PEVSNER, STELLA 
Would My Fortune Cookie Lie? Clarion, 1996 
[192p]
ISBN 0-395-73082-1 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Alexis is getting ready to enter eighth grade, but she's not ready for moving out of
Chicago, as her mother wants to do. Alexis's little brother, Tyler, is thrilled with
the idea of moving because it means he can get a dog, but Alexis is afraid that a
relocation not only means leaving behind her best friend Suzy, but also means that
her parents are getting divorced. Things become even more complicated when the
mysterious young stranger who's been following Alexis and Suzy proves to be Alexis'
father's son from an earlier marriage, a son of whose existence Alexis' whole family
has been unaware. This is a somewhat romanticized portrayal of the prodigal child
returned (for more realism, see Sarah Ellis' Out of the Blue, BCCB 4/95), but
Pevsner does a good job of using the solid realism of Alexis' parents' difficulties
and Alexis' authentically quotidian friendship with Suzy to underpin the more
melodramatic plot twists. The realistic characterization of Alexis' loving but driven
mother and the book's tender treatment of Tyler's friendship with Suzy's soap-
opera-watching grandmother further enriches the story, which will appeal to young
readers who like a low-suds soap themselves. DS
MARCH 1996 
* 239
PILKEY, DAV 
The Paperboy; written and illus. by Dav Pilkey. 
Jackson/Orchard,
1996 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08856-1 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-09506-1 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-7 yrs
A young African-American boy gets ready for his paper route, makes his deliveries
(followed closely by his dog), and gets back to bed just as the rest of the world is
waking. This is a slender concept rather than a story; while not enough happens to
interest those of actual paper-delivery age, the hushed moonlit setting as conveyed
in the illustrations has a mystical allure. Pilkey paints a night at once ordinary and
enchanted, with the strong, safe beam of the paperboy's bicycle headlight a beacon
among mysteries of dark-green hills and shifting shades of sky. The tone is quiet-
in fact, while this book closes with the arrival of dawn, it might find a more com-
fortable place at bedtime. RS
POLLACK, RACHEL 
The Journey Out: A Guide for and about Lesbian, Gay, and
Bisexual Teens; by Rachel Pollack and Cheryl Schwartz. 
Viking, 1995 
14 8p
ISBN 0-670-85845-5 
$14.99 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Refreshingly, the authors address the readers of this book directly as teens who
identify as gay, lesbian, or bisexual-a nice change from the assumptions of het-
erosexuality usually present in teen self-help books. The book begins with two
chapters on sexual identity and self-discovery ("Who Am I?" and "The Journey to
Self-Acceptance") followed by advice on coming out to family and friends ("I Think
I Have Something to Tell You"), followed by advice on dating and relationships
("Could This Be Love?"), followed by chapters on definitions, health issues, ste-
reotypes, religion, and history. The progression from self-acceptance to coming
out to romantic involvement portrayed here is not every g/l/b teen's experience
(many become sexually involved long before they acknowledge their sexual orien-
tation), and the authors' assumptions about the lives of the book's readers make it
less useful than it could be. The tone is supportive but didactic, and readers may
tire of the relentlessly chatty advice, well-intentioned and well-thought-out as it
may be. The thirty-page list of resources is extensive, including a state-by-state
directory of social service agencies and telephone helplines, and a selective anno-
tated bibliography of biographies, nonfiction, and fiction. CHRISTINE JENKINS
PRELUTSKY, JACK 
Monday's Troll; illus. by Peter Sis. 
Greenwillow, 1996 
[4 0p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-14373-3 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 00-688-09644-1 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 3-6
See this month's Big Picture, p. 217, for review.
REEF, CATHERINE 
John Steinbeck. Clarion, 1996 
[16 3p] 
illus. with photo-
graphs
ISBN 0-395-71278-5 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Having recently biographized one of the most American of poets (Walt Whitman,
BCCB 7/95), Reef now turns her hand to a chronicle of another very American
writer, Nobel prize-winner John Steinbeck. The book traces Steinbeck's life from
240 
* 
THE BULLETIN
his childhood in California, to his burgeoning writing career and his passion for
social justice, to his worldwide recognition. Reef does an excellent job of synthe-
sizing Steinbeck's work, his private life, and his politics and philosophy, and the
picture that emerges is a vivid one of a determined and idealistic young man; she
also allows the text to pose some thoughtful questions about his last years, where
his former idealism seemed at odds with his lack of sympathy towards '60s social
causes. Steinbeck is an important figure both as a writer and as a social documen-
tarian, and this is a smoothly written and accessible biography. Black-and-white
pictures (some, such as the one of Betty Furness in front of a refrigerator, of doubt-
ful relevance), are included, as is an index; there are no notes, but a bibliography is
provided. DS
ROOT, PHYLLIS 
Aunt Nancy and Old Man Trouble; illus. by David
Parkins. 
Candlewick, 1996 
[26p]
ISBN 1-56402-347-8 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-7 yrs
Aunt Nancy is a cozy old body, but "she knows a thing or two herself"; when Old
Man Trouble comes to visit, she doesn't panic. She's nice as pie to him, offering
whatever hospitality she can and pretending that all his little mischiefs (causing the
fire to go out, breaking the water glass) are actually strokes of good fortune, until
finally, after she tricks him into restoring her dried spring, he leaves satisfied that
he has caused her trouble worthy of his name. The story is apparently Root's
creation and Aunt Nancy, according to flap copy, the author's invention as well,
rather than being the Anansi-descendant Aunt Nancy of folktale fame; nonethe-
less, the tale has a pleasingly folkloric rhythm and downhome style reminiscent of
Wooldridge's adaptation of Wicked Jack (BCCB 12/95). The interesting slant
here is that the troublemaker doesn't know he got beat, which might disappoint
young listeners wishing for a more obvious comeuppance but adds a certain politesse
to the proceedings. Parkin's sharp-beaked, sharktoothed, top-hatted Mr. Trouble
(fittingly portrayed in oils) is suavely menacing, where Aunt Nancy is rounder and
more restrained; monochrome silhouettes offer an edgy contrast to the thickness
and warmth of the color paintings. The victory of the underestimated is a popular
plot, and here's a kid-pleasing version with some bite to it. DS
SCHRENK, HANS-JORG 
Arabian Horses; illus. with photographs by Tomis
Micek. 
Gareth Stevens, 1995 
4 8p 
(Magnificent Horses of the World)
ISBN 0-8368-1367-7 
$14.95 
M 
Gr. 3-5
Lipizzaner Horses; illus. with photographs by Tomas Micek and Elizsabeth
Kellner. 
Gareth Stevens, 1995 
48p 
(Magnificent Horses of the World)
ISBN 0-3868-1371-5 
$14.95 
M 
Gr. 3-5
It's a promising idea-a European-generated series of oversized books on horse
breeds (including some breeds, such as Friesians and Icelandics, rarely discussed in
the U.S.) featuring eyecatching, Vavra-esque photography. The texts throughout,
however, are riddled with errors and confusion. The books have gone through a
German and a British edition before this, which perhaps accounts for the textual
disorder: the Roman type that appears on a few pages of each book offers generally
accurate, if dubiously translated ("Arabian thoroughbred," for instance, is an oxy-
moron) historical information; the italic captions are poorly written, uninforma-
tive, and frequently completely mistaken, and they dominate the books. The breed
descriptions are unhelpful, romanticized, and virtually interchangeable (all the breeds
MARCH 1996 
* 
241
are spirited and gentle with silky tails), and the photo captions wildly misinformed
(a picture of a mottle-faced, Roman-nosed young Lipizzan is described as showing
the Arabian influence on the breed's face); the text "Lipizzaners, as show horses,
possess the grace and strength to perform highly intricate movements" attaches to
a Lipizzan lying down, and a line in the Arabian book states firmly that "the gallop
is the natural pace of these horses"). End matter includes a flawed and poorly
written glossary (both bay and chestnut are defined as "reddish brown in color"
and manes as "the long hair around the necks of horses"), a short bibliography and
index, and a rather eccentric choice of addresses to write to (why the Horse Coun-
cil of British Columbia and not the American Horse Council?). There's some
great poster material here (except for the photos that lose their drama in the gut-
ter), but informed readers will be irritated and novices misled and perplexed by
these titles. DS
SEVERANCE, JOHN B. 
Winston Churchill: Soldier, Statesman, Artist. Clarion,
1996 
[14 4 p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-395-69853-7 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Churchill's life encompassed three wars and some significant peacetime episodes
and accomplishments, and Severance compresses a great deal of information into
this biography of the man who is one of the major historical personages of our
century. The book examines Churchill's political career and military decisions in
detail, including a multitude of quotes from Churchill's daughter, Churchill's wife's
letters, and Churchill himself to add immediacy to the account. The writing tends
to be flat and choppy, however, explanation is often lacking or unclear (readers
unfamiliar with the Dardanelles disaster, for instance, won't learn what it actually
involved), and the book is sometimes overoptimistic in its assumption that young
readers will understand Churchill's witticisms. A selection of Churchillian epi-
grams, a bibliography, and an index (from which Churchill's Nobel Prize is inex-
plicably omitted) are included; black-and-white photos appear throughout. DS
SEYMOUR, TRES 
The Gulls of the Edmund Fitzgerald; written and illus. by Tres
Seymour. 
Jackson/Orchard, 1996 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08859-6 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-09509-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-7 yrs
As a little boy prepares to wade along the shore of Lake Superior, a flock of gulls
regale him with a litany of some of the ships the hungry lake has claimed, includ-
ing the famed Edmund Fitzgerald. They warn him off with the eerie admonish-
ment, "Gitche Gumee has a hunger, child, and there's always room for more."
The alarmist birds dive away and the boy is seen returning to the shore with his
nightgown-clad mother, but whether for supervision or to tell her about the talk-
ing gulls is unclear. The audience learns little of the wreck itself and the work
seems directed more toward promoting seashore safety than examining a marine
disaster. Cut-paper collages, with papers layered or folded to cast shadows and
bordered in blue where the gulls relate the disaster, employ grainy black-and-white
photos of the ships laid over icy green and steel gray waters and sky. A scene in
which the audience shares the viewpoint of the child, who sees "faces [of dead crew
members] in the foamy waters," is pleasingly creepy, but the story seems to gener-
ate its menace to no particular point. EB
242 
* 
THE BULLETIN
SIERRA, JUDY 
Good Night, Dinosaurs; illus. by Victoria Chess. 
Clarion,
1996 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-395-65016-X 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
The reptilian natives are restless tonight, but Sierra is trying to calm them down
with a bit of lullaby poetry: "Good night, dinosaurs./ Sleep tight, dinosaurs./
Good night/ dinosaurs/ good night." Species by species, the diplodocus, pteranadon,
tyrannosaurus, compsognathus, and triceratops are lulled to sleep in their own
little way in their own little corner of the mesozoic world. It's a cute idea, but it
doesn't get much farther than that: the poem's meter shifts around too often to
get the rhythm going, the alliteration starts excitingly but then fades, and some of
the near-rhymes are more successful than others; nor does there seem to be much
more to the story than a list, albeit a creative one, of slumbering dinosaurs. Victoria
Chess's art is softer here than usual; while the images are less intense, they have a
certain lumpy and prehistoric appeal. It's ultimately less successful than Wilson's
otherworldly Good Zap, Little Grog (BCCB 12/95), but small dinosaur aficiona-
dos may find this just the thing to send them off to dreams of primeval ooze as they
clutch their toy apatosauruses. DS
SIERRA, JUDY, ad. 
Wiley and the Hairy Man; illus. by Brian Pinkney. 
Lodestar,
1996 
32p
ISBN 0-525-67477-2 
$15.99 
R 
5-8 yrs
Based on an African-American story collected for the Federal Writers' Project in
Alabama, this tale has a wealth of tellings-including artist Molly Bang's begin-
ning-to-read version and Virginia Hamilton's adaptation illustrated by Leo and
Diane Dillon in The People Could Fly-as well as oral interpretations by noted
storytellers such as Jackie Torrance and Judy Sierra herself. It's a spooky story
however it's told, and that's its prime attraction. Wiley is being stalked by the
same wicked creature that carried off his daddy, but with the help of his mama,
who's a powerful conjure woman in her own right (and smart, to boot), Wiley
tricks the Hairy Man three times and drives him howling into the swamp. While
colors and lines sometimes compete with each other for attention, Brian Pinkney's
oil paintings on scratchboard are definitely the scariest yet. Where Bang's and the
Dillons' were highly stylized, this Hairy Man is awfully human except, of course,
for his cow hoofs. His red eyes, pointy teeth, and wild hair add considerable
tension to the brooding swirls that characterize Pinkney's compositions. The ee-
rie-green swamp scenes and generous amount of text per page suggest an older
picture-book audience that will eat this up at Halloween or just any old time there's
a place for ghosts, goblins, and things that go bump in the night. BH
SIMONSON, LOUISE 
I Hate Superman!
See review under Dixon, p. 223.
SISULU, ELINOR BATEZAT 
The Day Gogo Went to Vote; illus. by Sharon
Wilson. 
Little, 1996 
[32p]
ISBN 0-316-70267-6 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
It is 1994 South Africa, and with the country preparing for its first universal elec-
MARCH 1996 
* 
243
tions, Thembi's great-grandmother Gogo is determined not to be left out. Thembi
and her family are surprised that Gogo ("grandmother"), who hasn't left her home
in years, is planning to go out and vote, but Gogo explains, "You want me to die
not having voted?" Neighbors arrange a ride, and with Thembi along for moral
support, Gogo casts a ballot in the election that makes Nelson Mandela president
of the nation. This is more celebratory anecdote than story, but provides fertile
and friendly ground for expansion and discussion. Wilson's bold, rich well-drafted
pastels capture the events and family members with a flexible style and impression-
istic textures, accenting the spreads with the bright blue dresses Gogo and Thembi
wear for the great day. RS
SLEATOR, WILLIAM 
The Night the Heads Came. 
Dutton, 1996 
[172p]
ISBN 0-525-45463-2 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Sleator doesn't waste any time here, beginning his story with an alien abduction
right in the first few pages. Leo and his friend Tim are taken from a midnight road
into a grimy spacecraft by repulsive creatures and examined, and then Leo alone is
released, all memory of the event wiped from his brain. Of course, no one believes
him when he says he doesn't know where Tim is; when the mysterious hypnotist
Dr. Viridian causes him to recover his memories (or so Leo thinks) his credibility
is nil. Until Tim-taller and older-and the aliens return . . . There are a lot of
attention-grabbing things going on in this novel, but it exhibits little of the origi-
nality of such Sleator classics as Interstellar Pig. The abduction scenarios come
straight from the tabloids, the hypnotist ("You are getting sleepy. Your eyelids are
getting heavy; soon you will be-") is a horror movie cliche, the less than imagina-
tively named "Acme Chemical Company" is part of the scene, and the book ends
with a chilling but narratively unjustified nod to The Invasion ofthe Bodysnatchers.
This borrowing makes a certain amount of sense given the book's interesting premise
that the aliens conceal their presence by making people remember (via hypnosis)
the visitors as sci-fi cliches, but it's not clear that Sleator himself is employing the
same cliches with equal finesse. RS
STANLEY, DIANE 
Elena. Hyperion, 1996 
[56 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2211-2 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0256-1 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 4-7
Stanley reimagines events from the family history of her mother's friend, ficti-
tiously renamed Elena here, who fled from Mexico to California during the Mexi-
can Civil War. Despite the tale's complicated and personal pedigree, there is much
here to intrigue young readers-military occupation, threat of abduction by the
rebel army, deathbed prophecies fulfilled. However, readers must wade through a
prelude of details about Elena's early life before they hit the drama. Although
these details are intended to establish Elena's strength of character, her childhood
pursuit of education and teenage defiance of her father are never directly linked to
the decisions she makes as a widow to remove her children from their war-ravaged
country. Subject matter which should appeal to a middle-school audience is deliv-
ered in clipped sentences and simplified vocabulary more appropriate to younger
readers. Historical notes and an introduction to the "real" Elena's family are in-
cluded. EB
244 
* 
THE BULLETIN
SYKES, JULIE 
This and That; illus. by Tanya Linch. 
Farrar, 1996 
[24 p]
ISBN 0-374-37492-9 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
2-5 yrs
Cat's making the rounds to all her farmyard neighbors, borrowing a bit of straw
from Pig, some feathers from Hen, ribbon from Donkey's bonnet, and even Horse's
stable. The animals are obliging but curious (as is the reader); Cat replies crypti-
cally to their queries that she needs the items for "this and that." When the ani-
mals silently track her to the stable they discover her secret-twin kittens nestled
in a ribbon-bedecked bed of straw, feathers, etc. "'What are they called?' . . . 'I
can't decide. What do you think?'" and listeners will probably predict the animals'
reply. Collages of torn and painted paper with uncolored edges outlining each
shape cheerily document Cat's quest, and if the newborns look less young than
they ought, they're clearly delighted to join the group. EB
TEMPLE, FRANCES 
The Beduins' Gazelle. Jackson/Orchard, 1996 
[160p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08869-3 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-09519-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Like its longer (and more complex) companion volume The Ramsay Scallop (BCCB
4/94), this is a medieval romance, but the setting is a Middle Eastern desert rather
than a European pilgrimage. Loving cousins who have been betrothed since birth,
Halima and Atiyah are twice separated: first, by an ambitious uncle who sum-
mons Atiyah from a nomadic life to study in Fez; and second, by a rival sheikh
who claims Halima for himself when her camel is separated from her tribe's cara-
van during a sand storm. The tenuous connection to the previous book is Etienne,
a friend of Thomas and Elenor who is determined to learn Arabic and who travels
with Atiyah from the university in Fez to the camp where Halima is rescued. There
is some sentimentality and a few raggedy spots in the portrayal of a complex cul-
ture centuries removed (although Western readers might not know what a
moussem-a fair for horse trading and camel racing-is, would an Arab prince
really need to ask?), and the rival sheikh's sudden change of heart strains credulity;
but Temple's storytelling diminishes these problems to minor status. It's a lively
plot, with playful poetic passages attributed to Bedouin customs of versifying and
at least one tale-within-a-tale that will ring familiar with those who have "Clever
Grethel" in their repertoire. BH
TESTA, MARIA 
Someplace to Go; illus. by Karen Ritz. 
Whitman, 1996 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8075-7524-0 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
Unlike the home-away-from-home ambience of the shelter depicted in Virginia
Kroll's Shelter Folks, reviewed above, the shelter where Davey and his family stay
each night is not far from the mean streets, has bars on the windows, and you have
to wait in line to check in each evening at eight, when the shelter opens. (This is
after waiting in line for dinner at the soup kitchen.) Although this picture book is
more generic situation than story, it is free from illusions but not without hope-
Davey does make it through the day and finds out that his older brother does
indeed get the job he had applied for. Ritz's watercolor pictures are appropriately
somber, and unlike the shelter residents of the Kroll book, those here actually look
in need of a place to stay. RS
MARCH 1996 
* 245
THESMAN, JEAN 
The Ornament Tree. 
Houghton, 1996 
[2 4 0p]
ISBN 0-395-74278-1 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Orphaned at age fourteen, Bonnie Shaster moves to Seattle to join the household
of her maternal relatives. Cousin Audra, her daughter Sally, and sister-in-law Winnie
are models of early-twentieth-century progressive women-well-educated, liberal,
and warm-hearted to boot-but their generosity and lack of domestic manage-
ment skills have brought on hard times and forced them to take in boarders. At
Bonnie's arrival they have just begun to realize that espousing women's social and
political self-reliance doesn't make then handy in the kitchen. Somewhat predict-
able household dramas and comedies play out against larger historic events such as
World War I demobilization and the general strike of 1919. Lovers of orphan-
finds-a-home tales will excuse the occasional cliche ("The train rattled west into
the flaming sunset. . . . Never go back, never go back, the train wheels said") and
warm to Bonnie's new family and to her budding romance with a blind young
veteran. EB
TORRES, DANIEL 
Tom; written and illus. by Daniel Torres; tr. by Julie Simmons-
Lynch. 
Viking, 1996 
56 p
ISBN 0-670-86665-2 
$15.99 
M 
5-8 yrs
This big, splashy picture book is about a big, friendly dinosaur who decides to go
on a cruise on his floating island and ends up in New York harbor: "He saw a
gigantic woman holding up a very large flashlight." While Tom ensconces himself
on the Chrysler Building and tries in various ways to make himself useful, no one
pays him any attention until a little boy befriends him and introduces him to his
father, "a very important art critic." After seeing the daubs that Tom's feet have
left around the city, the critic decides that Tom "could be the next Pigasso or Andy
Warthog," and a celebrity is born. The retro ink and watercolor paintings are
sweepingly conceived and glamorous if all too much of the same tenor; the small,
formulaic story is overwhelmed. Kids will like big Tom, but the book has too
much of an eye on an adult audience. RS
WARE, CHERYL 
Sea Monkey Summer. 
Jackson/Orchard, 1996 
[14 4 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08868-5 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-09518-5 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Through her letters to the Imperial Magic Sea Monkey Company, the circulation
director of the local newspaper, her best friend Sally away at camp, and even Dear
Abby, Venola Mae Cutright records the ups and downs of her eleventh summer.
Nothing too terrible happens (even though those darned sea monkeys never do
turn into anything much more than little specks), although an armed robbery of
the Sunday church service adds some excitement; what's fun here is Venola Mae's
breathless take on small events, such as acquiring warts (and losing them) and
being named-twice-Paper Carrier of the Month: "P.S. Thank you for the
second certificate. Now I have one for each end of my bed, which is good because
sometimes I sleep with my head at the foot, so now I'll see a certificate either way."
Although the tone and approach rely a little too much on Venola Mae's naivete,
the style is lively and the epistolary format an easy reach for readers scared by more
substantial paragraphs. Give it to those kids having trouble getting through the
spring. RS
246 
* 
THE BULLETIN
WASSERSTEIN, 
WENDY 
Pamela's First Musical; illus. by Andrew
Jackness. 
Hyperion, 1996 
40p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2063-2 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0078-X 
$16.95 
M 
6-9 yrs
A birthday treat, a loving aunt, the bright lights of Broadway-sounds like quite
an outing, but the curtain opens on the cutesiness too often employed by noted
writers who should have stuck with what they were good at: "I-wish-I-wish-I-wish
I get to see my aunt Louise. My aunt Louise is a perfectly perfect person. We
always have a most splendiferous time." Wasserstein is a justifiably celebrated
playwright, but that skill doesn't necessarily carry over into a children's book. What
isn't precious here is either big (the musical they attend is an extravaganza the likes
of which is more suited to the Hippodrome than the Great White Way) or pointed
at adults (a marquee reads "Kathleen Battle-Weary: Woman in Denial," and the
acidulous critic John Simon is quoted on another marquee saying "I Loved It!").
The watercolor paintings (including caricatures of some Broadway habitues) are
more effervescent than the lengthy, hard-worked text, and while kids might wish
for an aunt like glamorous Louise, they would probably prefer one who did not
preface almost every remark with "Oooooooh, dahling." RS
WATERS, KATE 
Tapenum's Day: A Wampanoag Indian Boy in Pilgrim Times;
illus. with photographs by Russ Kendall. 
Scholastic, 1996 
[40p]
ISBN 0-590-20237-5 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-4
As Samuel Eaton prepares for adulthood from behind and beyond the Pilgrims'
stockade (Samuel Eaton's Day, BCCB 11/93), a Wampanoag adolescent hunts,
fishes, and learns tribal lore from his elders in this third attractive photoessay on
children's life in 1620s Massachusetts (see also Sarah Morton's Day, BCCB 1/90).
Pristine photos, many close-ups of skills and crafts, document daily life in a sum-
mer encampment. A substantive storyline enhances the examination of customs-
Tapenum has been passed over for initiation into thepniesog (warrior counselors),
and he doesn't understand why. Through his lapses in commitment to training
throughout the day, though, readers will understand that he is still acquiring the
strength, skill, and wisdom he needs. Just as Samuel in the earlier volume makes
only casual contact with his Wampanoag neighbors, Tapenum expresses only passing
interest in the activities of the European "coat-men." Cogent endnotes explain
annual Wampanoag migrations, the Indian homesite at Plimoth Plantation, and
pniesog initiation; a map of known tribal settlement is included. EB
WAUGH, SYLVIA 
The Mennyms Under Siege. 
Greenwillow, 1996 
[224 p]
ISBN 0-688-14372-5 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
The Mennyms, rag-dolls come to life in an old English house, are well on their
way to becoming classic series protagonists with this third book (see also BCCB 3/
95 and 5/94). The family dynamics have changed somewhat after their last adven-
ture, where the normally reclusive dolls were forced to depend on human help and
relocate temporarily to the country, and they're changing some more. The younger
Mennyms increasingly long for activity in the outside world, but the family patri-
arch, Sir Magnus, is opposed to this; he is so alarmed when these outside activities
seem to spark interest from outsiders that he attempts to wall the family off en-
MARCH 1996 
* 247
tirely, which leads to frustration and, ultimately, disaster. Waugh walks an inter-
esting tightrope in this book, examining through the supposedly ageless and im-
mortal rag dolls issues of the importance of change and growth, and the forced
isolation brings out some intriguing pricklinesses in the family. Her employment
of a shocking and apparently irrevocable change emphasizes the darkness that's
touched these books and separates the series from the tameness of the usual toy
fantasy; that plot move, however, is not particularly effectively handled and leaves
some obvious questions without necessary answers. 
At this point, however,
Mennymites are along for the whole ride, and this book will take them in some
provocative new directions. DS
WILD, MARGARET 
OldPig; illus. by Ron Brooks. 
Dial, 1996 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8037-1917-5 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
5-7 yrs
Old Pig and Granddaughter have lived together happily for a long time. The first
double spread details their everyday activities; the second introduces an ominous
note when Old Pig does not get up for breakfast as usual. During the rest of the
book, Old Pig prepares to die, returning her books to the library (and not borrow-
ing any more), closing her bank account, paying her bills, giving the unspent money
to Granddaughter, and taking a last slow walk to look and listen and smell and
taste everything. Finally, Granddaughter climbs into bed-"and for the very last
time Old Pig and Granddaughter held each other tight until morning." This
seems more creepy than comforting. The pastel hues cast a golden glow over this
gentle farewell to life and love, but the process does seem to be somewhat drawn
out and sentimentalized compared to, say, Tomie dePaola's equally heartfelt but
more crisply balanced Nana Upstairs andNana Downstairs (BCCB 10/73) or Aliki's
The Two of Them (9/80). BH
WILLIAMS, MARCIA, ad. 
King Arthur and the Knights of the Round Table; ad. and
illus. by Marcia Williams. 
Candlewick, 1996 
26p
ISBN 1-56402-802-X 
$17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 2-6
Readers familiar with Williams' comic-strip treatment of other classic subjects
(Greek myths, BCCB 11/92, and Robin Hood, 5/95) will recognize the format
here: oversized pages with panel cartoons in various sizes, straightforward narra-
tive appearing in captions underneath and humorous dialogue spoken by the char-
acters within. This version distills and selects from the variety of Arthurian tales
extant: there's no Mordred and no actual indiscretion between Lancelot and
Guinevere, but there's the sword in the stone, the round table, and a whole lot of
grail quest. The last is somewhat problematic, as its mystical point doesn't trans-
late well to this format and the recounting seems a bit hasty (we never know, for
instance, what happened to Lancelot in the end); the compositions also tip too
often from the lively into the confusing. It's still an amiable and breezily told
introduction to a durable legend, with adventure, broad comedy, and atmosphere
aplenty (there are some particularly rousing dragons); kids just beginning to quest
for Arthur will enjoy sharpening their swords on it. DS
248 
* 
THE BULLETIN
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
Cart, Michael. From Romance to Realism: 50 Years of Growth and Change in Young
Adult Literature. HarperCollins, 1996. [302p] ISBN 0-096-024289-2. $24.95.
Reviewed from galleys.
This is a bright, breezily written, and highly capable examination of that amor-
phous and challenging genre, young adult literature. Cart devotes the first half of
the book, "That Was Then," to a discussion of the genre's history, and the second
half, "This Is Now," focuses on contemporary literature and current issues.
Throughout, he deals competently with both broad generic tendencies and spe-
cific texts, including some interesting explorations of the merits and the flaws of
major young-adult authors. His distinctly personal, often colloquial voice makes a
refreshing contrast to bland literary surveys: Cart has opinions, and he's neither
afraid to share them nor unclear about explaining their rationales. His thorough
research is demonstrated by his reliance on, acknowledgment of, or open disagree-
ment with most of the important writing in the field (although several of the quo-
tations and examples have a redundant second appearance). Footnotes are supplied
for each chapter, and an extensive selected bibliography is appended; the bound
book will have an index. DS
Stephens, Elaine C., Jean E. Brown, and Janet E. Rubin. LearningAbout... The
Holocaust: Literature and Other Resources of Young People. Library Professional
Publications, 1995. 198p. Trade ed. ISBN 0-208-02398-4; $29.50. Paper ed.
ISBN 0-208-02408-5; $18.50.
This useful guide divides its material into six categories: informational books;
autobiographies, biographies, and poetry; historical fiction; plays; contemporary
and creative interpretations of the Holocaust and its lessons; and other resources,
including organizations and other guides as well as films and journal articles. Titles
(intended to be a selection of the most useful rather than a comprehensive listing)
receive an age-of-audience classification, a page or so of summary, and suggestion
for teaching uses; additional titles are briefly summarized; and each chapter ends
with suggestions for student responses and activities. The arrangement is some-
times a bit confusing (there's no indication on the cross-referenced titles of the full
description's location, for instance), but the combination of breadth and focus
here will be helpful to those seeking possibilities in this area. DS
MARCH 1996 
* 249
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Accidents-fiction: Bohlmeijer
Adoption-fiction: Doherty
African Americans-fiction: Ferris;
Levy;
African Americans-stories: Sierra
Wiley
Alaska-fiction: Hall
Alcoholism: Langsen
Arithmetic: Geisert
Aunts-stories: Wasserstein
Baseball: Anderson
BEDTIME STORIES: Sierra
Dinosaurs; Pilkey
BIOGRAPHIES: Reef; Severance
Birthdays-stories: Caseley
Brothers and sisters-fiction:
Hurwitz; Kehret
Brothers-fiction: Hatrick
Bullies-fiction: Bawden
Careers: Anderson
Cats-stories: Sykes
Child abuse-fiction: Lawson
CONCEPT BOOKS: Miller
COUNTING BOOKS: Geisert
Cowboys: Cody
Crime and criminals: Aaseng
Current events: Aaseng; Sisulu
Death: Brown
Death-stories: Wild
Death-fiction: Bohlmeijer
Dinosaurs-stories: Sierra Dino-
saurs; Torres
Disabilities-fiction: Kehret
Dogs-fiction: Hall; Hearne
Dogs-stories: Johnson
Dolls-fiction: Waugh
Earthquakes-fiction: Kehret
Emotional problems-fiction:
Lawson
England-folklore: Williams
Epistolary fiction: Ware
Ethics and values: Fleischman
Family life-fiction: Clifford
Family problems-fiction: Pevsner
FANTASY: Jacques; Waugh
Fathers and sons-fiction: Ferris
Fireworks: Kuklin
Florida-fiction: Ferris
FOLKTALES AND
FAIRYTALES: Root; Sierra
Wiley
France-stories: Collier
Friends-stories: Caseley
FUNNY STORIES: Clifford;
Mahy
Ghosts-fiction: Deem
Giraffes-stories: Collier
Government: Aaseng; Leiner
Grandmothers-fiction: Bawden;
Mahy
Grandmothers-stories: Sisulu
Guatemala: Franklin
Guidance: Langsen
HISTORICAL FICTION:
McCully; Stanley; Temple;
Thesman
History: Severance
History, ancient: Fleischman
History, U.S.: Bunting; Leiner;
McCully; Margolin; Waters
Holocaust: Nerlove
Homelessness-fiction: Kroll
Homelessness-stories: Testa
Horses: Cole; Schrenk
250 
* THE BULLETIN
Horses-fiction: Haas Beware
Hospitals-fiction: Bohlmeijer
Illness-fiction: Hatrick
Indians, American: Margolin
Indians, American-fiction: Waters
Jews-fiction: Nerlove
Labor movement-fiction:
McCully
Latinos: Hoyt-Goldsmith
Literature, American: Reef
LOVE STORIES: Temple;
Thesman
Mexico-fiction: Stanley
Migrant workers: Hoyt-Goldsmith
Monsters-poetry: Prelutsky
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Haas House; Lawson
New York City-stories: Torres;
Wasserstein
Orphans-stories: Bunting
Paperboys-stories: Kroeger; Pilkey
Papergirls-fiction: Ware
Pets-fiction: King-Smith
Photography: Franklin
Pigs-stories: Geisert; Wild
Pirates-fiction: Mahy
POETRY: Dyer; Heide; Lauture;
Prelutsky; Sierra Dinosaurs
Poverty: Franklin
Reading aloud: Heide; Mahy;
Prelutsky
Reading, easy: Clifford; Cody;
Greene; Haas Beware; Haas
House; Hearne; Heide; Kehret;
King-Smith; Mahy; Ware
Reading, family: Brown; Dyer; Haas
House; Miller
Reading, reluctant: Prelutsky; Sleator;
Williams
Running-fiction: Levy
SCARY STORIES: Sleator
School-fiction: Greene
School-stories: Lauture
Shipwrecks-stories: Seymour
South Africa-stories: Sisulu
SPORTS STORIES: Doherty; Levy
Story hour: Bunting; Caseley; Collier;
Dyer; Johnson; Kroeger; Lauture;
Miller; Paxton; Pilkey; Root; Seymour;
Sierra Dinosaurs; Sierra Wiley; Sykes;
Torres; Wild
Tennessee-fiction: Freeman
Theater-stories: Wasserstein
Trains-stories: Bunting
Vikings-fiction: Hunt
War-fiction: Fleischman
Wolves-fiction: Hall
Women's studies: McCully; Thesman
Work-stories: Kroeger
World War II-stories: Nerlove
World War II: Pettit
'Although Meltzer includes the characteristics
of various breeds [of horses], aspects of horse
care, and biographies of some famous
animals, he focuses on the impact of the
creature's domestication on people's lives....
Worshipped in some cultures and glorified in
art, its considerable contribution to world
civilization is revealed through chapters that
include an overview of the horse's basic
character, its role in ancient history, and its
influence in more recent times. Using the
Ages 8-12. $14.95TR (0-06-024477 1); $14.89LB 
(0-06 024478-X)
t HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
, 10 E. 53rd Street, New York 10022
$15.00TR (0-06-020806-6) 
$15.00TR (0-06-022983-7)
$14.89LB (0-06-020807-4) 
$14.89LB (0-06-022984-5)
Written and illustrated in full color by
RICHARD EGIELSKI
"Buz the mosquito like bug is swallowed by a boy eating
cornflakes. A doctor sends a pair of pills to get rid of the bug.
What follows is a child's view of how medicine works: the pills
are fascistic policemen tracking Buz through unlikely anatomical
territory. In his debut as an author, Egielski is in complete
command of his artistic material.... A clever concept,
executed with style and wit ."-Kirkus Reviewos
"The bright, gaudy, almost plastic-looking illustrations... will get
a good pouring-over from young readers."-The Horn Book
Ages3 37.
$14.95TR (0 06023566-7)
$14 89LB (0-06-023567 5)
Also illustrated
in full color by
Caidecoft ~Medtalist
Richard Egielski
CALL ME AHNIGHITO
by Pam Conrad
Ages 5 9.
$14.95TR (0a-06-23322 2)
$14.89LB 
(0-06 023323-0)
THE TUB
GRANDFATHER
by Pam Conrad
Ages 4 8.
$15.OOTR (0-06 022895-4)
$14.89 LB (0-06-022896 2)
THE TUB PEOPLE
by Pam Conrad
Ages 4 8.
$15.OOTR (0-06-021340 X)
$14.89 LB (0 06-021341-8) 
A Laura Geringer Book
$4 95PB (0-06443306-4) 
L H, nerC~oln1 nCJ-,idrPn kFRnnoi
10Es 
3dStreet. New York 10022
r -*--------------------------_
I 
* Kirkus Reviews Pointer
* 
Absolutely Normal
III
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
te I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
Ir I
I
I
I
I
I
I 
contemporary teen life from one funny writer. [It] will quickly make 
I
I , 
its way into the hands of readers who loved Walk Two Moons."
I 
-- Kirkus Reviews
I 
Ages 9 up. $14.95TR (0-06-026989-8); $14.89LB (0-06-026992-8)
I 
Sharon Creech's
1995 Newbery Medal-winning
WALK TWO MOONS
Ages 8-12. $16.00TR (0-06-023334-6); $15.89LB (0-06-023337-0)
9 HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York 10022
L 
-
- -
-
-
- -
-
- -
-
-
- -
-
THE LION
AND THE UNICORN
A Critical Journal of Children's Literature
EDITORS:
Louisa Smith, Mankato State Uni
Jack Zipes, University of Minnesota
The Lion and the Unicorn is a
theme- and genre- centered
journal of international scope
committed to a serious, ongoing
discussion of literature for
children. The journal has become
nnotd fnr its inrtrviews with authT
editors, and other important
contributions to the field. Published twice a
year in June & December.
EUROPEAN CHILDREN'S
LITERATURE THEORY
(Volume 19, Number 1)
On the Success of Children's Books and
Fairy Tales: A Contrastive View of
Impact Theory and Reception Research
Charles Perrault and Jean-Jacques
Rousseau to the Rescue of French
Research: Literary Symbolism, "The
Purloined Letter" of Research
Poetics and Practicality: Children's
Literature and Theory in Britain
SPedagogy, Aesthetics, and Humanism:
The Three Muses of Italian Children's
Literature Theory
"Rosy Cheeks" and "Shining Eyes" as
Criteria in Criticism of Children's
Theater Critique
The Limits of Literary Criticism of
Children's and Young Adult Literature
Prepayment is required.
ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTnONS:
$19.50, individuals;
$38.00, institutions.
FOREIGN POSTAGE:
$2.65, Canada & Mexico;
$4.00, outside North America.
SINGLE-ISSUE PRICE:
$10.00, individuals;
$21.00, institutions.
Payment must be drawn on a U.S.
bank in U.S. dollars or made by
international money order. MD
residents add 5% sales tax. For
orders shipped to Canada add
7% GST (#124004946).
SEND ORDERS TO:
The Johns Hopkins University
Press, P.O. Box 19966,
Baltimore, MD 21211
To place an order using Visa
or MasterCard, call toll-free
1-800-548-1784, FAX us at
(410) 516-6968, or send
Visa/MasterCard orders to
this E-mail address:
jlorder@jhunix.hcf.jhu.edu
EAS
noted for its interviews with aut 
,
"Compelling reading, powerfully uplifting."
-
Douglas D. Alder, Dixie College, St. George, Utah
'VWHEN
Cruth
WAS
reason
German Youth against Hitler
--
I
The chilling, true story of four courageous teenagers who gambled
r lives on the truth. Intercepting forbidden BBC news broadcasts,
wrote flyers and distributed them throughout Hamburg under
dark of night. 
p was arrested, interrogated, tortured, and
tried by the "Peop 
sixteen-year-old leader, Helmuth
Htbener, was be
University of Illinois PreM 
SECOND CLASS
1325 South Oak Street 
POSTAGE
Champaign, 1. 61820 
PAID
U.S.A. 
CHAMPAIGN, IL
RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED
U 
11111111111
NIII 
11 1111111
0008- 
1 99603)49:7* -';
A Crow's Journey
By David Cunnin3 ham
t 
.
-· 
~ 
I 
L
Where does mountain snow go in spring 1 
ihrough the eyes or a curious crow, we warcn me
melted water as it trickes downhill and becomes a sparkling stream. David Cunningha's verse car-
ries the reader joyfully along on its current; his beautiful paintings give us an experience of nature
that is as refreshing as a dip in a mountain brook.
All Ages * ISBN 0-8075-1356-3 * $16.95
AlIfrt Whitman 8 Company 6ao OAt.n Sti.t Mo~t. Grov, ini, 
3iooss-i72a
g- 
,, 
i
NEW by the author/illustrator of
Nightfall, Country Lake
"Cunningham's first solo effort is an
unqualified success-this masterful pro-
duction is a reminder that now and then,
less really is more."
* POINTER Kirkus Reviews
"The book will transport anyone who
has whiled away a summer day to the
drowsy twilight time."
SchMl Libray Journal
·J12
~s 
~
