I LLINO
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
* 
t 
'Il
%^-^,^^
_·.·- 
·~- 
F
i
·
~I 
i
4p..py^'f..
r "A perfect choice for reading aloud. "
Erica Silverman
Illustrated in full color by S. D. Schindler
"Youngsters who have experienced the tense, giddy pleasure of a
good stare-down contest will recognize Duck and Gander's freeze-
in-place challenge. And what pros they are! Buzzing bees, cavort-
ing bunnies, swooping crows, gusts of wind leave them unruffled."
-Bulletin of the Centerfor Children's Books
A "Children are sure to identify with these characters and their
friendly, yet relentless, pursuit to do each other 'one better'."
-
Starred, School Library Journal*
"Schindler's delicate pastel illustrations lend a soft quality to the
humor and warmth of Silverman's tale of friendship."
-
Booklist
Ages 4-7 / 0-02-782685-6 / $14.95
SIMON & SCHUSTER BOOKS FOR YOUNG READERS
An imprint of Simon & Schuster Children's Publishing Division
866 Third Avenue * New York, NY 10022
THE BU L L E T I N
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS 
April 1995
Vol. 48 No. 8
A LOOK INSIDE
261 THE BIG PICTURE
Look for Me by Moonlight by Mary Downing Hahn
262 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
268 * SailAway written and illustrated by Donald Crews
275 * Grandaddy's Stars written by Helen V. Griffith and illustrated by James
Stevenson
278 * Humming Whispers by Angela Johnson
283 
* Alice the Brave by Phyllis Reynolds Naylor
290 
* The Ballad of the Pirate Queens written by Jane Yolen;
illustrated by David Shannon
291 
CHILDREN'S BOOK AWARDS 1995
292 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center fr Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
STAFF
Roger Sutton, Editor (RS)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Susan Dove Lempke, Reviewer (SDL)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Heather McCammond-Watts, Editorial Assistant (HMW)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS ADVISORY BOARD
Leigh Estabrook, Dean, GSLIS, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Selma K. Richardson, Professor, GSLIS
Christine Jenkins, Assistant Professor, GSLIS
Richard C. Anderson, Director, Center for the Study of Reading, UIUC
Jean Osborn, Associate Director, Center for the Study of Reading
P. David Pearson, Dean, College of Education, UIUC
Violet J. Harris, Associate Professor, College of Education
Nancy O'Brien, Education Subject Specialist, Library, UIUC
Peggy Miller, Associate Professor, Department of Speech Communication, UIUC
Ann D. Carlson, Associate Professor, GSLIS, Rosary College
Janice Harrington, Head of Children's Services, Champaign Public Library
Elizabeth Huntoon, Director Systemwide Children's Services, Chicago Public Library
Janie Schomberg, Librarian, Leal Elementary School, Urbana, Illinois
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $35.00; individuals, $29.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Roger Sutton, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 1512 N. Fremont St., #105,
Chicago, IL 60622
Second-class postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1995 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Paul Hunt, from Look for Me by Moonlight @1995 and used by permission of
Clarion Books.
APRIL 1995 
* 261
THE BIG PICTURE
Look for Me by Moonlight
by Mary Downing Hahn
It's a classic gothic set-up: a young woman, out of sorts with herself and the world,
finds herself in a romantic but sinister seaside inn. Tales of ghosts and past trag-
edies haunt the place. No one seems to understand her until a tall, dark, older,
handsome stranger comes to stay and perceives the depths beneath her unassum-
ing mien. Soon and inevitably, he spirals her into an unending circle of darkness.
All this, and a title taken from Noyes' classic romantic poem The Highwayman.
Yum, yum.
Mary Downing Hahn has long been adept at turning the conventions of
formula fiction to her own ends. The winner of numerous children's-choice awards,
she knows what kids expect from a story, and, to her credit, doesn't necessarily
take the easy way out-her Time of the Witch, for example, is one of the very few
novels for children in which the strange old lady everyone thinks is an evil witch
actually turns out to be just that. That book, though, and most of her others, are
solid middle-grade fare: nothing gets too scary. Now Hahn's fans are growing up,
and with this book she seems to be going along with them.
Cynda, the heroine of Look for Me by Moonlight, is sixteen, and a cranky
sixteen at that. When her mother and second husband decide to move to Italy for
three years, she comes up to Maine to live in an old inn run by her father and his
new family: "Maybe Mom thought it was Dad's turn to cope with me. Maybe I
was her revenge." Cynda takes everything as a slight: her pretty (and pregnant)
stepmother, her father's concentration on his writing, her young half-brother Todd's
position as adored and spoiled only child. So she's ripe and anxious for attention
when the mysterious and handsome Vincent, "called" by Cynda at the window
when she sees his sleek car drive by, shows up at the inn and is all too willing to
take advantage of her adolescent feelings of injustice. Vincent isn't interested in
sex, but while traditional ravishment is not to be this maiden's fate, you'd never
know it from Cynda's narration: "My neck throbbed painfully, reminding me of
what I'd done in the dark with Vincent, shameful things that separated me from
Will, from everyone. Things I could never tell." Will is a sweet teenaged boy who
is interested in Cynda, but whose attentions pale beside the power of Vincent's
vampire kiss.
This is hot stuff, and more erotic in its effect than it would have been if
Hahn had placed the sex on the surface. As in The Turn ofthe Screw, the corrup-
tion is both explicit and unnamed. Cynthia Grant's Uncle Vampire is a book
about a girl who disguises sexual abuse as vampirism; Hahn's book has it both
ways, with the bloodsucking both terrible reality and sexual nightmare. What's
even more audacious, Cynda, despite herself, likes it. And in a further Jamesian
twist ("... if the child gives the effect another turn of the screw, what do you say
to two children-?"), Vincent takes for his victim five-year-old Todd as well: "Todd
262 
* THE BULLETIN
sighed and lifted his face. 'Kiss me, Vincent. I like how your teeth feel."' The fact
that the siblings eventually destroy their abuser does nothing to deny his attrac-
tion.
When Hahn and I were talking at a conference a couple of years ago, she
told me she was a little worried about her loyal ten-to-twelve year-old audience
reading what was then her latest book, The Wind Blows Backward(BCCB 5/93), a
YA novel about a love affair between two high school students. Well, that was
nothing. The (discreet) sex in The Wind Blows Backward was tender, fumbling,
and unfrightening. Here it is not only discreet, it isn't in the book-and more
persuasively demonstrates its unruly power by its absence. This book admits a
truth uncommon in contemporary YA fiction: there is no such thing as safe sex.
Forget bodily fluids (although Cynda, tainted by Vincent's saliva and tempted
beyond resistance by a plate of bloody-rare beef, cannot)-the threat comes from
the inherently untameable urge, and from the dangers that arrive with wishes
granted. Cynda, after all, invited Vincent in.
I don't think Hahn has anything to worry about with her younger fans.
They will lap this up this as a straightforward scary story: a girl and her little
brother get ensnared by a vampire, kill him (with the ghostly help of Vincent's
previous victims), and live happily ever after. Older readers ready for the sexual
undertones will perhaps also see the dark heart of an old legend and how the power
of each continues to feed on the other. Hahn's a long way from Wait Till Helen
Comes, and she measures the distance with skill and daring. (Imprint information
appears on page 276.)
Roger Sutton, Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ABLE, 
DEBORAH 
Hate Groups. Enslow, 
1995 
104p 
illus. with
photographs 
(Issues in Focus)
ISBN 0-89490-627-5 
$17.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
ZEINERT, KAREN 
Free Speech: From Newspapers to Music Lyrics. 
Enslow,
1995 
128p 
illus. with photographs 
(Issues in Focus)
ISBN 0-89490-634-8 
$17.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Enticing covers (photo of a KKK cross-burning on Hate Groups; bonfire of books
on Free Speech) enclose competent if lackluster surveys of two hot topics. Each
book is clearly organized through chapters and subheads and takes a primarily
historical approach to its subject, but while coverage is broad, it's not that deep.
When either book tries to conceptualize its focus in any kind of theoretical way, or
tries to build an argument, the series-drone of the writing and the limitations of
space fail the complexities of the controversy. Hate Groups dances around the idea
that hate speech should be censored, but it won't quite make the commitment;
Free Speech segues from a brief discussion of the MacKinnon/Dworkin antipor-
nography ordinances into a paragraph about the thousands of different magazines
available to consumers. While neither book is as provocative as you'd think it
APRIL 1995 
* 263
couldn't help but be, they both are sensible overviews that will be useful for term-
paper research. Footnotes, bibliography, a reading list, and an index are appended
to each title. RS
ANCONA, GEORGE 
Cutters, Carvers & the Cathedral" written and illus. with pho-
tographs by George Ancona. 
Lothrop, 1995 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-12057-1 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-12056-3 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Ancona begins at the Cathedral of St. John the Divine in New York City, showing
a carver working on a limestone column with a chisel and mallet, then travels to
Indiana, where the limestone is quarried. He shows how dynamite blasts the earth
away to reveal the seam of limestone; we then see the laborious task of cutting out
enormous blocks using machines and muscle power. Returning to New York, he
introduces us to the variety of masons and carvers who work on the limestone
slabs, as well as to the draftsman using a computer to make templates. Ancona's
photographs catch the magnificence of a cathedral and the hard, precise work that
goes into quarrying the stone and making the carvings and statues. He introduces
the workers with pictures and quotations, presenting them as a community of
artisans from around the world, but all are described so briefly that neither their
jobs nor their personalities are explored. The space limitations of a thirty-two-
page book have forced Ancona to leave out so much information that while we do
read that work on the building began 100 years ago, we never learn the denomina-
tion of the Cathedral, who its architect was and whether his original plans are still
being carried through, or that it is the largest Gothic cathedral outside of Europe;
we are told, abruptly, that work on the cathedral has stopped-what are all those
workers doing now? And though they might have detracted from the handsome
book design, captions for the photographs would have been helpful. This tantaliz-
ing glimpse into a career seldom explored today both delights and frustrates. A
glossary is included. SDL
ANNO, MITSUMASA 
Anno's Magic Seeds; written and illus. by Mitsumasa
Anno. 
Philomel, 1995 
34p
ISBN 0-399-22538-2 
$15.95 
R 4-8 yrs
A wizard gives Jack two golden seeds, each about the size of a softball, and instructs
him to bake and eat one seed and to plant and care for the second. When Jack
obeys, the resulting plant bears two fruits which produce two seeds, and for six
years Jack repeats the cycle of eating one and planting the other. The seventh year,
he decides to get through the winter without eating a seed and plants them both.
The next year, he ends up with four seeds, planting three and eating one, and on
each succeeding page, Anno challenges readers to figure out how many seeds were
planted. As the years progress, the math becomes trickier: Jack begins saving
some of the seeds and selling some, but in the tenth year a hurricane blows almost
everything away. Jack has saved one bag of ten seeds, and the cycle begins again.
As a story, this is too repetitive, but as a series of intriguing math problems, the
book works well, providing counting practice for the youngest, counting by twos
and tens for kindergartners and first graders, adding and subtracting for older stu-
dents, and multiplication by twos for third graders. Comically angular people and
an assortment of sprightly animals add to the fun, and Anno's soft earthtoned
watercolors are arranged elegantly with lots of white space, always carefully setting
264 
* THE BULLETIN
the different seeds apart according to their destination. Despite its necessarily
monotonous quality, this is a solid choice for school and public libraries. SDL
ANTLE, NANCY 
Sam's Wild West Show; illus. by Simms Taback. 
Dial,
1995 
[4 0p] 
(Dial Easy-to-Read)
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1533-1 
$12.89
Trade ISBN 0-8037-1532-3 
$12.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 1-3
In the immortal words of the illustrious town marshal, "I'll be sheep dipped" if this
ain't the most ebullient equestrian entertainment ever to inspire the easy-reader
crowd. When Sam's Wild West Show rides-and flies-into town, the "folks
came from all over just to look." Sam and his entourage of bow-legged cowgirls,
drooping mustachioed cowboys, and patient horses ("Sam jumped rope on top of
a galloping horse") make for very funny reading, not to mention rib-ticklin' view-
ing. Pen-and-watercolor scenes depict a colorful melodrama energized with ap-
plause signs, cowpokes in polka-dotted bandanas and lime green hats, and unshaven
villains. Sam fortuitously stumbles into a whole mess of trouble when outlaws Flo
and Bo ride into town: "They were ugly. They looked mean. Even their horses
looked ugly and mean." The marshal skedaddles, the mayor and the banker git
real scared real quick, and the townsfolk elect Sam as marshal. With wit, a whip,
and the help of his friends, Sam dashingly saves the day. He rides off into the
sunset (in his hot-air balloon), but keep an eye out for this rascal-he just might
show up again, and if he does, kids will be clamoring to learn a new rope trick or
two. HMW
ASCH, FRANK 
Water; written and illus. by Frank Asch. 
Gulliver Green/Har-
court, 1995 
32p
ISBN 0-15-200189-1 
$14.00 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
With a minimum of words and a maximum of color, Frank Asch explores water in
its various forms. He begins with three of its weather-related forms: "Water is
rain. Water is dew. Water is ice and snow." Appropriately enough, watercolor is
the medium for each intensely hued painting as Asch shows, for instance, a close-
up of blades of multicolored grass dripping with multicolored dew. For most of
the book, we follow a boy who first plays with a toy sailboat and then rides in a
large sailboat, towing the toy behind, through a variety of bodies of water. He then
rescues a cat stranded in a tree and continues down a river into a city scene crammed
with people using water in various ways. In its attempted blend of story and sci-
ence, the book seems choppy and disjointed, but particularly careful observers may
find connections between most, if not all, of the paintings. The book's central
problem, however, (aside from the erroneous statement that "water is what fish
breathe ") is that Asch has painted everything in multiple rainbow hues, which,
though attractive, means the water is not differentiated from anything else in the
pictures. While not being the most effective of learning tools, this picture book
may help readers appreciate water in its many forms. SDL
BODKIN, ODDS 
The Banshee Train; illus. by Ted Rose. 
Clarion, 1995 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-69426-4 $14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
If the 1929 spring storms and flooding don't present enough danger to Train
APRIL 1995 
* 265
Number 1, headed out from Denver to Troublesome and Steamboat Springs, there's
also the large problem of the mysterious train that seems to be pursuing it down
the tracks-headed right for Gore Canyon, where a train and "all souls aboard"
had been lost twenty years ago. In a time when so many picture books match
extravagant art with ho-hum stories, this book will be a welcome relief for story
hours that need a little action. The writing is both charged and fluent, incorporat-
ing lots of train-talk made clear by context, and the foggy, atmospheric watercol-
ors catch all the fine detail of the train and its (spectral) pursuer. Rose makes the
mountain landscape, where the brave trainmen are caught between certain terror
and sudden death, beautiful but menacing. Relax-all ends well, just in time. RS
BRAMMER, DEB 
Peanut Butter Friends in a Chop Suey World; illus. by Grace
Kim. 
Bob Jones, 1994 
[17 7p]
Paper ed. ISBN 0-89084-754-1 
$5.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Amy and her family move from Wyoming to Taiwan to tell the Chinese "about
the one true God in heaven." Amy wants to learn Chinese and make "chop suey"
friends to convert to Christianity, but she also yearns for "peanut butter," i.e.
Western friends at her International School. (This metaphor is heavily overused.)
The sights and smells of Taiwan, vividly conveyed, both exhilarate and repel Amy,
and at first she keeps bravely plunging into the new world. At school, American
Jessica quickly befriends her, but demands that she choose between friendship
with Jessica and with a Chinese girl named Mickey. Gradually Amy becomes
discouraged with the difficulty of making Chinese friends and with the struggle to
please both Jessica and her conscience. When Amy finally asks God to solve her
problem, Jessica's parents split up and she moves away, leaving Amy free to be
friendly with whomever she pleases; Amy does not wonder why God has solved
her problem at Jessica's expense. In most ways, this is a typical story of a girl
wrestling with the problems inherent in a big move and in making friends, with
the religious viewpoint exploratory more than proselytizing, informing not over-
whelming the plot. The first-person narration is competent if a bit stiff, and
Brammer conveys the mixed emotions of a cross-cultural move well. Reviewed
from an unillustrated galley. SDL
BRUCHAC, JOSEPH, ad. 
A Boy Called Slow: The True Story of Sitting Bulk illus. by
Rocco Baviera. 
Philomel, 1995 
[32p]
ISBN 0-399-22692-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 6-10 yrs
In this undocumented chronicle, Bruchac recounts the early years of the young
Lakota boy who grows from an unprepossessing child named "Slow," to a youth
whose careful and deliberate actions bring honor to the name, to a young warrior
whose courage in defeating the Crow earns him his father's vision name Tatan'ka
Iyota'ke-Sitting Bull. The narration, at first formal and restrained, marks time
with the boy's measured development; then, with a startling cry of "Hiyu'wo!"
Slow springs into battle, and both hero and tale rush headlong into the climactic
victory scene. Bruchac does not reveal the English translation of Tatan'ka Iyota'ke's
celebrated name until the end, a dramatic effect that may be lost on younger listen-
ers yet unacquainted with Sitting Bull. Bavieras 
B ll 
era' 
lustrations-cunningly brushed
onto rough canvas to resemble painted hides-are often too darkly atmospheric to
266 
* THE BULLETIN
be shared in a group and the text initially moves as slowly as its subject. Still, this
title will be especially welcome in classrooms as an introduction to the Lakota
leader. EB
BURCHARD, PETER 
Charlotte Forten: A Black Teacher in the Civil War. Crown,
1995 
106p
ISBN 0-517-59242-8 
$16.00 
R Gr. 5-8
Forten's journals, kept with some regularity from her school years through the
time of her marriage to Francis Grimk6 at the age of forty-one, provide the basis
for this biography of a well-to-do African-American woman with personal and
familial connections to the abolitionist movement and other liberal causes of her
day. Given the book's subtitle, readers learn surprisingly little about Forten's ex-
periences as a teacher of the newly emancipated children on Hilton Head Island
(her actual duties apparently received little comment in her journal), but they will
catch tantalizing glimpses of several historical figures the young woman counted
among her close acquaintances-abolitionist William Lloyd Garrison, war hero
Robert Gould Shaw, poet John GreenleafWhittier. Although Burchard occasion-
ally adopts the tone of Forten's flowery prose in his own narrative, he nonetheless
faces squarely Forten's color bias regarding the "contrabands" and the blind eye
she turned toward slaves' sacking abandoned plantations. Forten's enthusiasms
and observations offer readers a look into the cultured, educated black community
of the mid-nineteenth century, a group less frequently studied than their enslaved
contemporaries. A bibliography and index are included. EB
CARRICK, CAROL 
Banana Beer; illus. by Margot Apple. 
Whitman, 1995 
32p
ISBN 0-8075-0568-4 
$14.95 
Ad 4-7 yrs
Charlie's father drinks too much, embarrassing Charlie in front of his friends,
shouting at him, and causing disruption in the whole family. Charlie even won-
ders if it's his fault that his father drinks, but discovers that trying to be a "better
boy" doesn't help-in fact, nothing does. After getting upset in school while
attempting an assignment to draw a "wish," Charlie gets a little support from his
understanding teacher, who explains that Charlie's dad does love him, but that
Dad's drinking makes him angry. What distinguishes this book from any number
of other bibliotherapeutic picture books about alcoholism is the fact that all the
characters are orangutans, thus the "banana beer" of the title. While this may be a
ploy to provide some alleviative distance and to allow Margot Apple's colored-
pencil illustrations to show such scenes as Daddy drunkenly stumbling over Charlie's
toys (a drama that could be pointlessly anxiety-provoking had the characters been
human), children in a home like Charlie's will certainly get the picture. RS
CECIL, LAURA, 
ad. 
The Frog Princess; illus. by Emma Chichester
Clark. 
Greenwillow, 1995 
32p
ISBN 0-688-13506-4 
$16.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
When the queen tells her sons to take brides, it is the third son, Marco the dreamer,
who ends up with a frog; when the queen declares that the son with the cleverest
wife will become king, Marco's talented frog-wife wins the contest by (figurative)
leaps and bounds. Of course, Marco's acceptance of his frog spouse breaks her
enchantment, she transforms into a beautiful princess, and they live happily ever
after as king and queen. Cecil tells her tale with precision and humor (Marco
APRIL 1995 
* 267
excuses his bride's non-appearance at court by explaining that "she has a croak in
her throat") and allows the tale's natural folkloric rhythm to carry the pace along.
Clark presents a swell cast of watercolor and charcoal characters, demonstrating
particularly successful creativity in the goofy hairdo department. Some kids may
be slightly confused by the cover, which shows an androgynous Marco who might
fit the title as well as his froggy companion, but that's a cavil-youngsters will
giggle at the fatuous elder brothers and will enjoy the three bridal tests, especially
the puppy-training component (Marco's wife teaches her dog to count on an aba-
cus and play the guitar). A brief source note explains that this version is adapted
from an Italo Calvino telling. DS
COERR, ELEANOR 
Buffalo Bill and the Pony Express; illus. by Don
Bolognese. 
HarperCollins, 1995 
6 4p 
(I Can Read Books)
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023373-7 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023372-9 
$14.00 
Ad 
Gr. 1-3
This title packs plenty of appeal for the beginning chapter-book audience-fleet
horses, threatening wolves, Indian raids, bamboozled robbers, and the heady knowl-
edge that it's all at least as true as any of Buffalo Bill Cody's own hyperbolized
accounts ever were. However, several glitches in text and illustration are, while not
deadly, most definitely annoying. Bill, who meets the criteria on the Pony Express
poster soliciting "Young, skinny fellows under 18," is challenged by the employer
because he is fifteen and thin. Bill's home station, marked on a map in one illus-
tration, disappears into the binding's stitching. No pronunciation hints are of-
fered, and if "Sioux" and "Paiute" are challenging to sound out, imagine what
primary schoolers will make of "Red Buttes." Still, with a little adult explanation
and coaching to smooth over the rocky stretches, kids should find this a pretty
exciting ride. EB
COFER, JUDITH ORTIZ 
An Island Like You: Stories of the Barrio. Kroupa/Or-
chard, 1995 
165p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08747-6 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-06897-8 
$15.95 
R Gr. 7-12
Twelve linked short stories explore teenage life in or about the Paterson, New
Jersey barrio. With sympathy and insight, Cofer tells of various kids, such as a girl
sent to spend the summer in Puerto Rico with her grandparents, a boy helped by
his teacher to find unsuspected power in poetry, a girl uneasy about working with
a mentally retarded man at her poolside summer job, a boy whose duty hour with
his grandfather takes a surprising turn; the kids flit through one another's stories,
providing continuity and a rich sense of layering. While the stories vary in plot
and theme, underlying them all is Cofer's deep respect for the possibilities and
potential in these youngsters and for the fragility and strength of the bonds with
family and friends: the final story, "White Balloons," about a theater group that
goes on after its leader dies of AIDS, addresses both the limits and the loyalty of
the community. Another common theme here is the experiential gap between the
older, stricter, Spanish-speaking generations and the younger, seemingly wilder,
city-bred teens. The voices here have a bite and authenticity that will appeal to
kids, too (about her Anglo crush, Bob Dylan Kalinowski, one girl says, "He flirts
with every girl in school. Even me. That's what I really like about Bob Dylan-
he's democratic"). The combination of interweaving of characters, intensity of
emotion, and deft control of language makes this a rewarding collection. DS
268 
* THE BULLETIN
COLE, SHEILA 
What Kind ofLove?: The Diary ofa Pregnant Teenager. Lothrop,
1995 
[192p]
ISBN 0-688-12848-3 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-10
When Valerie begins her diary in June, she clearly is in denial; although she has
not had her period for several months, she keeps hoping it will begin soon. It takes
her another three weeks to take the pregnancy test, because she had sex only once
and "can't be pregnant. I'm only fifteen!" Her boyfriend initially encourages her
by talking of marriage and rhapsodizing about the baby, but once his furious fa-
ther puts him in a prep school on the other side of the country, his thoughts turn
more to college and an independent future. Valerie's parents have strongly en-
couraged her violin-playing and want her to give the baby up, saying, "We're in no
position to help you, and even if we had the money we wouldn't. It'd only help
you ruin your life." As the pregnancy progresses, Valerie's violin career moves
forward, and by November, she has realized that the most loving and responsible
course for her to take is adoption. Cole writes frankly about sex and pregnancy,
acknowledging the sweetness of small babies but also the physical discomforts and
occasional embarrassments of teen pregnancy and childbirth. She notes at the
beginning that she bases her character on conversations with teenage mothers,
teachers, and social workers, and while her writing is blunt and unpoetic ("Duh!"),
it is authentic both in tone and feeling. There are no surprises here, just solid,
truthful writing about a teenager wrestling with the greatest of dilemmas. SDL
COTTONWOOD, JOE 
Quake!: A Novel. 
Scholastic, 1995 
[112p]
ISBN 0-590-22232-5 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
It's October 17, 1989, and Franny hasn't seen her childhood best friend, Jennie,
in five years. Now they are uneasily together at Franny's home in the Santa Cruz
mountains while their parents attend the World Series in San Francisco. You got
it-Quake! reads the title, and the book follows the brave if extremely predictable
actions of the two girls as they cope with the disaster and, in the process, rediscover
their friendship. Jennie, whose head seems permanently stuck to her music-blast-
ing earphones, proves a crack first-aider. Franny surprises herself as she adeptly
turns off gas lines at neighboring houses and, with Jennie's help, lifts a car to rescue
the old man trapped beneath. Aside from the girls' search for Franny's missing
dog, there's no real narrative beyond the chain of events; aside from three offstage
grocery-store looters, everyone in the village is cooperative and some-such as the
girls-heroic: "the best kind of hero ... Unrehearsed. Fumbling. An everyday
sort. A small hero." It's unusual to see girls spotlighted in a disaster story; this one,
easy to read and unintrospective, should appeal to reluctant readers of both sexes.
RS
CREWS, DONALD 
SailAway; written and illus. by Donald Crews. 
Greenwillow,
1995 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-11054-1 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-11053-3 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
3-7 yrs
A family of four heads out for a day of sailing; first they "row the dinghy out to our
sailboat," and turning the motor on they "putt. .. putt . .. putt ... Under the
APRIL 1995 
* 269
bridge" to the open water where they can hoist the two sails. Enormous blue
letters shading into white spell out "WHOOSH!" as the wind hits the sails, but
what starts out as a pleasant trip turns scary when the clear blue sky turns gray and
the small waves become "angry seas." However, the storm dies down and they
"motor toward port. putt... putt... putt... " through the twilight and darkness
and are once again "moored!" The book's format may remind readers of Freight
Train (BCCB 2/79) as will the play between light and dark, but the sea and sky
create a completely different feel; the perilous adventure is more reminiscent of
Shortcut (10/92). Crews achieves some striking effects: the bridge looms over the
tiny boat, and throughout the book the wind is palpably blowing into the faces of
the people, pushing on the sails, and whipping up the seas. The one misstep (aside
from the apparent absence of a rudder) is a spread showing the sailboat in four
positions tacking across the water, which will seem to nearly all children to be four
sailboats that look remarkably alike: putting a name on the boat might have less-
ened the confusion. Still, the final pages with the colors of the sunset glinting on
the water and lighting up the boat and the lighthouse shooting out its beams make
any flaw forgivable. While too many books make sailing look placid and gentle,
Crews captures it at its ferocious, thrilling best. SDL
CRUTCHER, CHRIS 
Ironman. Greenwillow, 1995 
[192p]
ISBN 0-688-13503-X 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-12
After quitting the football team and calling the coach an "asshole," high school
senior Bo is forced to join the "Nak Pack," an anger-management group for misfits
led by teacher Mr. Nakatani, a pint-sized Japanese American who thinks like
Polonius and talks like a cowboy: "You can fight bein' here all you want, pardner,
but when all the horses are in the corral, you gotta live with yourself an' how you
respond to the people you think are makin' your life hell." If you like Crutcher,
this is vintage stuff: Bo's narration, in the form of letters to talk show host Larry
King, is beguiling; Mr. Nak's preaching-there's a lot-is sensible and leavened
by his twang; Bo's fellow Nak-packers are a motley and moving crew, none more
so than Shelly, a classic Crutcher tough-girl object of love and romance for Bo. Bo
is in training for a triathlon (bicycling, running, swimming) so the book gets lots
of exercise to balance out the talk, and the race is made especially tense by the fact
that Bo's emotionally abusive father is helping out one of his competitors. The
book is a lot like Crutcher's others (and Lionel from Stotan! is one of Bo's teach-
ers), so if you haven't succumbed before you aren't likely to now, but fans will
welcome the winning formula. RS
DANZIGER, PAULA 
You Can't Eat Your Chicken Pox, Amber Brown; illus. by Tony
Ross. 
Putnam, 1995 
[112p]
ISBN 0-399-22702-4 
$12.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 2-3
In Danziger's last sortie, Thames Doesn't Rhyme with James (BCCB 1/95), the
heroine doesn't see much of London due to the attractions of her beau; in this one,
the somewhat younger protagonist misses many of the same sights due to chicken
pox. Amber has gone to London with her aunt Pam, and unfortunately the side-
trip to Paris to see her father, recently separated from her mother, is foiled by the
virus. Not to worry, too much-Dad comes to London to see Amber, and while
270 
* THE BULLETIN
he reassures her of his love, he also reminds her that there is no chance he and her
mother will get together again. This sequel to Amber Brown Is Not a Crayon (BCCB
6/94) is not as well-focused as its predecessor, with the trip itself lacking excite-
ment or punch and the divorce-blues theme lacking much new to say on a subject
covered with more nuance in many other books. The writing has the terse stop-go
style that Danziger has been into lately, but it is not employed with the crispness
that worked so well for... Is Not a Crayon. Amber does remain a spunky heroine,
though, and her fans will be interested in seeing just what she's been up to lately.
RS
DEFELICE, CYNTHIA, ad. 
Three Perfect Peaches: A French Folktale Retold by The
Wild Washerwomen Storytellers; ad. by Cynthia DeFelice and Mary DeMarsh; il-
lus. by Irene Trivas. 
Jackson/Orchard, 1995 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08722-0 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-06872-2 
$15.95 
Ad 6-10 yrs
Everything comes in threes in this tale of a princess who craves three peaches so
much that she will die without them. Three brothers each set out over three days
with baskets of peaches, but the first two brothers treat an old woman rudely along
the way. The first brother tells the woman his basket holds "rabbit droppings" and
the second brother tells her "horse manure"; so, of course, that's just what the
baskets hold when presented to the princess. Learning from their mistakes, the
youngest brother offers the old lady a peach and is rewarded with a magic whistle
which will make whatever he wants come to him and, if lost, will return to his
pocket when he claps three times. The whistle comes in handy when the king, not
wanting his daughter to marry a shabby country boy, sets the third brother an
impossible task and then tries to get the whistle away from him. The authors have
carefully transcribed their phrasing and intonation with ellipses, italics, and other
techniques so that the story reads very much as a storyteller would tell it; however,
the humor sometimes seems pointed towards adults rather than children. While
the snobby king gets his comeuppance (and has to kiss a horse's butt-kids will
love it), the hero is not especially lovable either; one also wonders why the king
doesn't put the whistle to use after he has gone to such great lengths to obtain it.
Trivas' droll watercolor illustrations contribute greatly to the fun; she mixes witty
detail with sumptuous color and a good dollop of energy, but it does seem very
strange that the "silver" whistle is clearly gold in each picture. The authors cite one
written source and explain that they have elaborated on it. SDL
DUNREA, OLVIER 
The Painter Who Loved Chickens; written and illus. by Olivier
Dunrea. 
Farrar, 1995 
32p
ISBN 0-374-35729-3 
$15.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
In one of those peculiar coincidences that encourages one's belief in an ordered
cosmos, Olivier Dunrea and Barbara Porte (see Chickens! Chickens!, reviewed be-
low) have each crafted a picture book about a painter of chickens. Dunrea's story
is of a city-dwelling man who paints all kinds of things for his living, but who truly
loves only to create pictures of chickens. He thinks that no one will appreciate his
barnyard oeuvre so he never offers it for sale, but eventually a wise customer hap-
pens in and declares the painter's chicken work "magical"; the ensuing success
allows the artist to buy his long-desired farm and raise and paint chickens to his
APRIL 1995 
* 
271
heart's content. Dunrea's gouache paintings are tidy and stylized, with smooth
flat surfaces and chicken details abounding in a gemiitlich Low-Countries setting.
Each spread has a full-page painting on the recto and a captioned image of a par-
ticular breed of chicken (Silkie, Barred Rock, etc.) on the verso above the text, and
it's too bad that there's no more information about these breeds in the back of the
book. This doesn't have quite the zip of Porte's poultry piece, and the story seems
a bit spun out, but Dunrea's sympathy for chickens (previously demonstrated in
The Broody Hen, 11/92) comes across clearly, and the book is a pleasant parable
about the rewards of doing what you love. DS
ELLIS, SARAH 
Out ofthe Blue. McElderry, 1995 
120p
ISBN 0-689-80025-8 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 5-7
Megan thinks that the secret her parents are keeping involves a surprise present for
her twelfth birthday, but it turns out to be bigger than that: years ago, Megan's
mother gave up a baby girl for adoption, and Mum and twenty-four-year-old Natalie
have now found each other through an adoption registry. Everyone else, even
Megan's strong-willed little sister, Betsy, likes Natalie, but Megan is filled with
suspicion and questions as she begins to adjust to this change in her life and family
role. The author tells her story with warmth and sensitivity, turning what could
have been just another problem novel into a rich family story. Where some au-
thors overexplain simple characters, Ellis allows small but penetrating glimpses of
complex ones: we really don't get to know Natalie (and Megan really doesn't
know her yet either), for instance, but she's clearly neither the demon Megan fears
nor the angel her mother had imagined. The humor of everyday life blends with
the story of an unusual situation to make a strong, affectionate, and readable por-
trait of a girl and her family. DS
EMBERLEY, REBECCA, ad. 
Three Cool Kids; ad. and illus. by Rebecca
Emberley. 
Little, 1995 
[32p]
ISBN 0-316-23777-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 3-8 yrs
The Norwegian folktale "The Three Billy Goats Gruff" gets an urban update:
instead of a grassy hill, the three Cool kids' sights are set on another vacant lot
down the street, with "sweet green grass and delectable weeds to eat." An enor-
mous sewer rat takes the place of the troll, but when Little Cool's sneakers go
"squincha, squincha, squincha"across the street and the rat screeches at him, the
youngest kid doesn't try to tempt the rat with the larger meal the sibling would
make, instead squealing, "Oh! How rude!... My big sister is coming, and she will
tell you what's what!" Sister Middle Cool does, and then Big Cool not only tells
the rat off but makes a huge racket with his horns against the sewer grate and
shakes the rat down into the sewer. This story has always had great appeal to the
youngest audiences, who often feel powerless in the face of their own trolls, but
Emberley here has modernized the story and given it an appeal for older children
with its urban setting and defiantly sassy attitude. Her collage illustrations also
eliminate any babyish feeling (and offer a truly scary-looking rat), and her use of
textured paper for fur works particularly well. It seems odd that she offsets the
plus of adding a female character as the middle goat by making her stereotypically
preoccupied with her appearance, but overall, this version is one that even cooler
kids will cheer. SDL
272 
* THE BULLETIN
EQUIANO, OLAUDAH 
The Kidnapped Prince: The Life ofOlaudah Equiano; ad. by
Ann Cameron. 
Knopf, 1995 
136p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-679-85619-6 
$16.00 
R Gr. 4-8
Cameron has abridged and simplified the autobiography of a native of Benin who
was captured and enslaved in the mid-eighteenth century, who was sold numerous
times, who served on a British vessel in the war against France, who was held by
masters on the American mainland and in the West Indies, and who eventually
purchased his own freedom. Readers whose knowledge of the Peculiar Institution
is limited to the nineteenth-century plantation system will be fascinated with the
details in this account-particularly Olaudah's experiences as a captive on African
soil, his adventure as a gunpowder handler on a warship, and his comparisons of
slave life in the English colonies and the West Indies. However, many of Equiano's
comments concerning the English may jar modern sensibilities: "I knew English-
men weren't spirits, just men with more knowledge than us Africans"; "[Captain
Doran] was very kind. If any of his slaves behaved amiss, he did not beat or mis-
treat them, he only sold them." Although Cameron provides adequate notes con-
cerning the extent of her editing and the aftermath to Equiano's narration, her lack
of specific comment on the style of his writing and its historical context may lead
naive readers to view him with unjust harshness, rather than seeing him as a diplo-
matic anti-slavery spokesman to a genteel European audience. EB
ESBENSEN, BARBARA JUSTER 
The Dream Mouse: A Lullaby Tale from Old Latvia;
illus. by Judith Mitchell. 
Little, 1995 
[32p]
ISBN 0-316-24975-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
3-6 yrs
A "dream mouse" travels through the twilit town, leaving dreams from the "load of
sleep" in his cart for the wakeful children: "Child, I bring you this dream of a
white swan. Out on the still lake she swims in a snowy shirt, whiter than linen.
Even your big sister, beating the flax all day, cannot make linen as white as this."
Loosely based upon images from Latvian folksongs, each of the dreamscapes is
tender and fanciful, but the book is not the "lullaby" suggested by the subtide.
Instead, it's a collection of pretty scenes that tips into the haziness of so many
dream books, which, while true to the free-floating nature of their inspiration, lack
the metaphoric and narrative cohesion necessary to a satisfactory picture book.
The illustrations, too, while achieving a dreamy atmosphere through the use of
offbeat colors and some lurid shading, have too little to do with one another even
as they painstakingly and overliterally recreate the images in the text. RS
FANG, LINDA, ad. 
The Ch'i-lin Purse: A Collection ofAncient Chinese Stories; illus.
by Jeanne M. Lee. 
Farrar, 1995 
127p
ISBN 0-374-31241-9 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 4-6
More sophisticated than folktales, these nine stories are liberally adapted from
Chinese operas, early novels, and legends. Most of the plots involve aristocratic
mini-dramas: a high-born bride discovers her groom is really a woman disguised as
a man and convinces the emperor to see the humor of the situation; a precious jade
threatens to draw its owner into a destructive war; and in the title story, a wealthy
young woman gives away a wedding present from her mother, only to be richly
rewarded for her generosity many years later. Fang, who in an author's note de-
scribes her family's tradition of reading and storytelling, has done extensive re-
APRIL 1995 
* 273
search and provided background and source notes for each selection. There's also
a glossary, along with a pronunciation guide and occasional light pencil illustra-
tions. The collection will have special interest to students of Chinese culture, but
a story such as "The Two Miss Peonys"-about a carp-spirit who chooses to be-
come human for the sake of the man she loves-will make an intriguing read-
aloud for fans of "The Little Mermaid," and storytellers as well as young readers
who have exhausted the European fairy tale canon can savor the somewhat myste-
rious tone of this classic sampling. BH
FEUER, ELIZABETH 
Lost Summer. 
Farrar, 1995 
[192p]
ISBN 0-374-31020-3 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 5-7
Twelve-year-old Lydia is not pleased to be shunted off for the summer to the camp
where her older sister works as a counselor, but her parents' recent divorce makes
the plan necessary. Her disappointment increases when her chances for a camp
friendship are limited to timid Karen or the bullying Carla: "What a choice, thought
Lydia. Karen or Carla. If only there was a box you could check off marked 'None
of the above."' Lydia does gradually and grudgingly grow closer to both girls, but
her displaced anger at her father leads her to a rash theft from Karen and into
ensuing trouble. The psychology of the characters is somewhat programmatic,
and their motivations, like the book's plot, tend towards the obvious instead of the
subtle. Feuer's at her best in depicting Lydia's friendship dilemma-neither Karen
nor Carla is a particularly engaging companion, and kids will understand the ne-
cessity that drives such summer alliances while acknowledging the moral questions
that surround them. DS
FRENCH, VIVIAN, ad. 
Red Hen and Sly Fox; illus. by Sally Hobson. 
Simon,
1995 
26p
ISBN 0-689-80010-X 
$15.00 
R 3-6 yrs
It's dastardly trickery and nail-gnawing melodrama, a "What's in Fox's Sack"-type
tale perfectly packaged for the youngest listeners, as Red Hen runs afoul of vora-
cious Sly Fox. The razor-toothed villain wheedles his way into her hut on the
pretext of needing his socks mended; trapping her atop a cabinet, he spins himself
around until the dizzy damsel plops right into his open sack. But our prudent
heroine always carries a needle, thread, and scissors, so while her captor dozes, she
snips her way to freedom, leaves a large stone substituting for her in the sack, and
flees to her cottage for "a strong cup of tea." Sly Fox, eager for "din-din," dumps
the stone into the boiling water and the rest, as they say, is history. Double-page
paintings feature simple, stylized shapes, frequently tipped and angled for an extra
jolt of energy, and ominous purple shadows hurled upon the ground and walls
offer an extra measure of tension. The audience will enjoy details of Sly Fox's
untidy den, strewn with bones of his last meal, while the adult readers-aloud will
appreciate the portrait of the vixen/odalisque tacked beside his bed. EB
GARLAND, MICHAEL 
Dinner at Magritte's; written and illus. by Michael
Garland. 
Dutton, 1995 
32p
ISBN 0-525-45336-9 
$14.99 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
Young Pierre spends the summer weekends in a country cottage next to the Magritte
residence, and one day, when things at his house are too quiet, he goes to visit the
274 
* THE BULLETIN
neighbors. He watches Magritte paint, meets a family visitor, goes for a walk,
plays croquet, and has dinner before returning home. Of course, this is the Magritte
household, so the visitor is Dali, and the images are laced with references to Dali
and Magritte (the man with the apple in front of his face, 
la The Son of Man,
presides over dinner, when it rains cats and dogs it literally rains cats and dogs, and
the best spread, a homage to Carte Blanche, shows the gaps between the trees be-
coming gaps in the people); smaller surrealisms also abound, such as a melting
clock on the wall and a window showing rain and sunshine respectively and simul-
taneously in two different panes. Garland's oils are controlled and sedate, with
softly glowing hues, but the art is stodgily drafted and sometimes awkward and
sentimental where the real Magritte's is clear-eyed and contemplative. This doesn't
provide the multitude of puzzles that David Legge's surreal Bamboozled(BCCB 3/
95) does, and it's a pity that its linkage to Magritte isn't made clearer by citations
of specific paintings. It's still an intriguing introduction to surrealism, however,
and kids will enjoy the "what's wrong with this picture?" game; they might also
enjoy hunting for the artist's dedication to his son ("Kevin is Pierre") worked into
every page. DS
GARIAND, SHERRY 
Indio. Gulliver/Harcourt, 1995 
[30 4p] 
(Great Episodes)
Trade ed. ISBN 0-15-238631-9 
$11.00
Paper ed. ISBN 0-15-200021-6 
$5.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
The predictable cycle of farming and hunting life in the pueblo has withstood
drought, flood, and Apache raids; therefore, despite her grandmother's death and
her brother's abduction during an enemy attack, Ipa looks forward to marriage
into a neighboring clan, confident of a secure and stable future. But on the eve of
her wedding a new enemy appears-Spanish operatives who seize Ipa, her beauti-
ful cousin Xucate, and other villagers to labor in the silver mines. Ipa's younger
brother is seriously injured in the mines, Xucate is raped by the mine owner, and
Ipa herself, in a somewhat sensational turn of events, is accused of murder. Gar-
land delineates the relationship between mine owners and the neighboring mis-
sion with considerable skill, and she offers a tender, if improbable, love story in the
bargain, as Ipa is reunited with a Spaniard who had once passed through her pueblo.
However, given that Ipa is initially presented as the likely heir to community tra-
ditions, it is somewhat baffling that her volatile cousin Xucate from the start resists
Spanish acculturation while Ipa assimilates with comparative ease. Likewise, no
compelling reason is given for the older brother's defection to the Apaches, and the
characters ultimately become archetypes for Garland's vision of a doomed culture.
Introductory notes discuss the author's use of the few known facts of sixteenth-
century Jumano pueblo culture. EB
GEORGE, JEAN CRAIGHEAD 
To Climb a Waterfall; illus. by Thomas
Locker. 
Philomel, 1995 
[32p]
ISBN 0-399-22673-7 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
5-8 yrs
George's dedication, "To the children who will climb the waterfall," begins this
rather ponderous evocation of the inspirational power of nature. A second-person
narration takes readers (and the pictures' nameless child-wanderer) on a journey
up a frothy, lavender-hued waterfall, which cascades through a tamed wilderness.
APRIL 1995 
* 275
Locker's serene, classical paintings match the meditative text with hazily atmo-
spheric grandeur-sweeping scenery, tranquil waters, and a dusty peach sky enhanc-
ing the feeling of calm. The problem is that waterfalls aren't calm at all, and both
the text and the art turn what surely must be noisy excitement into distant and
abstract serenity ("The waterfall is now part of you. Take it with you wherever you
go, and you will never be bored again"). Each step of the journey is carefully
prettified: the child is able to climb the waterfall barefooted (and take a swim
without even getting wet), and animals are oblivious to human intrusions. Any
potential for adventure is lost in this all-too-safe stroll. Still, the changes in visual
perspective do invite the audience into a relaxing, non-threatening exploration of
nature. HMW
GLEITZMAN, MORRIS 
Blabber Mouth; Trade ed. ISBN 0-15-200369-X; Paper ed.
ISBN 0-15-200370-3. 
Sticky Beak; ISBN 0-15-200366-5; ISBN 0-15-200367-
3. 
Each book: Harcourt, 1995 
[160p] 
Trade ed. $11.00; Paper ed. $5.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-7
"The reason I can't speak is I was born with some bits missing from my throat,"
writes Rowena Batts in a memo to her classmates on her first day in a new school,
but, fear not, her disability never comes between Ro and trouble. In BlabberMouth,
the trouble comes primarily from school bully Darryn Peck, whose teasing Ro
rewards by stuffing a live frog into his mouth and taping it shut; in the sequel
Sticky Beak, she must deal with the fact that her rowdy, eccentric father has mar-
ried her beloved teacher Ms. Dunning, and that they are expecting a baby. Both
books feature Rowena's impulsive, blustering narration and Gleitzman's slightly
manic humor; while Blabber Mouth finds its jokes in everyday school life (such as
a would-be friend who takes Ro on as a "community service project"), Sticky Beak
is slapsticky and a bit over the top (a potty-mouthed parrot plays a large role) and
will best be comprehended and enjoyed by fans of the first. In neither book is
Rowena's disability sentimentalized or, conversely, overcompensated for: whether
being a complete pain in the neck or worrying that her sibling-to-be will also be
mute, Ro makes her wishes known through sign language ("I switched on the
lamp so he could hear me"), never failing to make an impact on her fellows-as
when she throws a dessert jelly into a fan--or readers. The setting and slang are
Australian; U.S. readers will easily follow Ro's lead in picking up cues from the
context. RS
GRIFFITH, HELEN V. Grandaddy's Stars; illus. by James Stevenson. 
Greenwillow,
1995 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-13655-9 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-13654-0 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
This is the fourth book about Janetta and her grandfather (see Grandaddy and
Janetta, BCCB 4/93, etc.), and here Janetta is thrilled because Grandaddy, for a
change, is going to come and visit her. Once Grandaddy arrives, however, she's
afraid Baltimore won't measure up to the wonders of the old man's farm ("At
Grandaddy's place there were chickens on the porch, and from the windows you
could look out at the vegetable patch and the railroad track. Here you just saw
buildings"). Grandaddy, of course, charms Janetta back into self-confidence and
cheer, and he has a wonderful time seeing the sights (Janetta's cat, her school, her
276 
* 
THE BULLETIN
playground, her feather collection, and the stars they share outside their windows)
until he has to return home. Griffith manages to keep the story of this pair fresh
even in the fourth volume: Grandaddy is near-perfect, but he's droll enough, with
his tale-spinning and his talk of his beloved mule, that he never cloys, and Janetta's
anxieties will be recognizable to many youngsters. Stevenson's art offers warm and
cheerful scenes of companionship and some light-hearted vignettes (the mule on
the White House lawn, for instance) illustrating Grandaddy's stories. This would
make a successful readalone, with its neat, simple chapters, as well as readaloud,
and kids who know G & J won't want to miss this new installment. DS
HAHN, MARY DOWNING 
Look forMe by Moonlight. Clarion, 1995 
[208p]
ISBN 0-395-69843-X 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 7-12
See this month's Big Picture, p. 261, for review.
HAu, ELIZABETH 
Venus among the Fishes; written by Elizabeth Hall and Scott
O'Dell. 
Houghton, 1995 
[160p]
ISBN 0-395-70561-4 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 4-6
Coral, a dolphin, is on a dangerous mission to find safe waters for her diminishing
herd. After White Fang and his gang of killer whales attack her home, she and her
younger brother Snapper search for their adventuring brother, Silver. Predictably,
they encounter friend and foe along the way ("If Sea Fan had not kept her head, at
least one of us would now be shark dinner"); humans, of course, are their biggest
threat, capturing Coral along with her orcan nemesis. The book becomes a Lassie
meets Free Willy drama as Coral saves White Fang, falls in love with her human
trainer, and is reunited with her brother. The anthropomorphic plot borders on
the absurd: Silver tries to commit suicide by colliding with the tank wall after his
mate Spray dies, Coral is insanely jealous when her male trainer starts swimming
with his (human) female partner, and Coral performs the Heimlich maneuver on
Spray in a last-ditch attempt to save her life. The dolphin point of view is occa-
sionally delivered with a semblance of science, but the attempt to integrate human
emotions with dolphin "sound pictures" results in B-movie-like dialogue: "'Gone,'
he signaled. 'My Spray. Gone Forever. Why live?'" Hall, O'Dell's widow, took
over the research and writing on this book in a commendable attempt to complete
O'Dell's manuscript, but the result is unfortunately murky and stays in the shal-
lows. HMW
HEWETT, JOAN 
Tunnels, Tracks, and Trains: Building a Subway; illus. by Rich-
ard Hewett. 
Lodestar, 1995 
4 8p
ISBN 0-525-67466-7 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
The Los Angeles subway is shown from its earliest planning stages on, through the
draining of a park lake to make a worksite, the archaeological dig for artifacts from
Old Chinatown, the boring of the tunnel and all of the many engineering details
that must be carried out, to the design of the station and the training of the drivers.
What goes on beneath the ground in a city holds a certain fascination both for
children and adults; add the rush and noise of underground trains and the thrill of
powerful constriaction machines, and you should have an automatic winner. Un-
APRIL 1995 
* 277
fortunately, the technical descriptions are detailed but not always clear, and read-
ers often get no help from the uncaptioned photographs. An index is helpful; a
legendless map on the endpapers is not. Still, the Hewetts deliver a good deal of
information, and while children in Los Angeles may be the most enthusiastic audi-
ence, many others can satisfy their curiosity about subway construction. SDL
HIGH, LINDA OATMAN 
Maizie. Holiday House, 1995 
[192p]
ISBN 0-8234-1161-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Living in a trailer on Welsh Mountain in Pennsylvania, twelve-year-old Maizie has
been caring for her father and baby sister since her mother left them four years ago.
She and her sister Grace cut out pictures for their Wish Books of a "Wish Mother,"
"Wish Baby Brother," a "Wish Mamaw and Papaw" (grandparents), and a "Wish
Horse." Not being just a dreamer, Maizie takes on a summer job being a
"moonstriper" at the Blue Moon Nursing Home to earn money to help her hard-
drinking father pay the electric bill and to save for a strawberry-roan pony. As she
pursues her goals, several adults prove helpful, among them Amelia, an old lady at
the nursing home with a tart but philosophical tongue, Maizie's Aunt Virginia,
who teaches her to drive, and Chris, a Navajo nurse. Maizie copes with the diffi-
culties of her life in a stalwart, matter-of-fact way, which keeps the book from
being dreary but makes her unrealistically plucky. Though she claims to have new
hormonal mood swings they are never in evidence, so at the end when she finally
"gets very angry" with her runaway mother it's startling, especially since the book
ends on this note of disillusionment. Although they're rather sketchily drawn, the
varied crew of supporting characters adds texture to the story, and the rural setting
lends color. High's writing is well paced, and, overall, readers will find Maizie
both likable and admirable. SDL
HOPKINS, LEE BENNETT 
Blast Off.: Poems About Space; illus. by Melissa
Sweet. 
HarperCollins, 1995 
48p 
(I Can Read Books)
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024261-2 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024260-4 
$14.00 
R Gr. K-3
Hopkins collects twenty poems by a variety of writers on the subject of space: the
moon, the sun, stars, planets, and meteorites. Most, including his own two, are
fairly contemporary, except for "Star light, star bright," and one by Sara Teasdale
from the 1930s. Jane Yolen speculates on the moon's distress at the trash left
behind by astronauts; Eve Merriam wonders what the other planets see on Earth;
Ashley Bryan suggests "Sing to the sun/ It will listen/ And warm your words....
Sing to the moon/ It will hear/ And soothe your cares." J. Patrick Lewis manages
to succinctly explain something of the mystery of black holes: "A star that's just/
Too fat to hang/ Far out in space/ May pop-and bang!/ Its insides get/So blazing
hot-/ One day it's there,/ The next it's not!" Hopkins groups the poems together
nicely, as when, for instance, Barbara Juster Esbensen's conclusion "white/ glitter-
ing/ too many to count" leads smoothly into Karla Kuskin's "Counting the stars/
As they glitter bright white" which not only lends flow but improves the book's
usefulness as an easy reader. The poems are well chosen and on a topic many
children favor, and Sweet's watercolors capture their mix of wonder and joy well.
SDL
278 
* THE BULLETIN
HUTCHINS, HAzELJ. 
Within a Painted Past; illus. by Ruth Ohi. 
Firefly/Annick,
1994 160p
Trade ed. ISBN 1-55037-369-2 
$14.95
Paper ed. ISBN 1-55037-989-5 
$4.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Elements of fantasy and historical fiction blend in this story of twelve-year-old
Allison Moore, who pops through paintings in her Aunt Mavis' guest room to aid
nineteenth-century siblings Lily and Jo-Jo as they encounter snowstorms, grizzly
bears, and possible exile from Alberta to the home of a cruel couple in Eastern
Canada. The time-shift trick to the tale is not particularly nifty, and each succes-
sive character accepts the revelation of Allison's fourth-dimensional trekking with
remarkable ease; purist followers of this genre are not likely to be impressed. How-
ever, historical-fiction buffs may enjoy details of Lily's workaday life in a Canadian
mining town and empathize with Allison's admiration of the independence and
self-possession of Lily, an adolescent forced to shoulder many responsibilities of
adulthood. Pen-and-ink drawings, too cute for the tone of the narrative, are more
distracting than illuminating. EB
JACQUES, BRIAN 
The Bellmaker; illus. by Allan Curless. 
Philomel, 1995 
[352p]
ISBN 0-399-22805-5 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
"Redwaaaaallll!" The battle lines are tautly drawn and the valiant Redwall mice
embark yet again on a fearsome fur-raising adventure. This is the seventh book in
the series, and Jacques musters his finely honed skills to create a lively tale depict-
ing the warrior friends Mariel and Dandin (previously seen in Mariel ofRedwall,
BCCB 3/92) as they help woodland creatures in Southsward combat the foxwolf
usurper Urgan Nagru ("Try saying it both ways, it comes out the same. That's to
let my enemies know that I can come at them backward or forward, both ways.
But I have no enemies, they're all dead") and his treacherous mate, silvery Silvamord.
Meanwhile, Joseph the Bellmaker and four companions set sail upon a quest to
find the wandering Mariel and aid her in overcoming the blight of the south. This
land-and-sea epic has plenty of tension-kidnappings, killer sharks, dead-of-night
escapes, and daring skirmishes with the evil foxes and their rat hordes. Cunning,
bravery, and sheer grit ("Muscle and sinew stood out on the old badger's scarred
hide as she swung the ram, flattening rats against both walls") prevail on the side of
good, and although some of the dialogue is strained ("Acorn for your thoughts"),
the unwavering action is addictive. Jacques stretches his tried-and-true formula
and successfully introduces new characters (there is actually a good rat for once-
who loves blackberry scones), settings, and situations for beloved Redwall. Old
fans will cheer and new ones will be drawn in like mice to cheese. HMW
JOHNSON, ANGELA 
Humming Whispers. Jackson/Orchard, 1995 
121p
Library ed. ISBN 0531-08748-4 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-06898-6 
$14.95 
R* 
Gr. 7-10
For ten years Sophy has been coping reasonably well with her older sister Nikki's
schizophrenia; the loving support of Aunt Shirley, with whom the young women
live, the devotion of Nikki's boyfriend, and above all the joy Sophy finds in dance
have buoyed her up through those spells that compel Nikki to lose herself in the
streets for days at a time. Now, however, Sophy has begun to see an unfamiliar
face replacing her own in the mirror, the box beneath her bed is filling with items
APRIL 1995 
* 
279
she "collects" from local stores, and she must face the possibility that she may also
be a victim of the illness Nikki first manifested when she was Sophy's age, four-
teen. Through Sophy's intimate first-person narration, Johnson paints a riveting
portrait of a young woman who watches her self-control slipping away and learns
from her damaged but resilient sister how to face her fears. Focusing on relation-
ships rather than on symptoms and treatments, Johnson ably demonstrates the
pervasive effects of mental illness on an entire family; as Aunt Shirley observes,
"None of us would get out of this one untouched." EB
KING-SMITH, DICK 
I Love Guinea Pigs; illus. by Anita Jeram. 
Candlewick,
1995 
27p 
(Read and Wonder Books)
ISBN 1-56402-389-3 
$14.95 
R* 
4-7 yrs
Readers who never so much as considered having a guinea pig for a pet will prob-
ably want to rush out and buy one by the time they finish this picture book.
Through the chatty, personal text and Jeram's ink and watercolor pictures we learn
a little guinea pig history, anatomy, care and feeding. King-Smith is never dry
("Guinea pigs are such sensible animals. They're awfully easy to keep, because
they aren't fussy"), he adds many entertaining details ("Their water bottle often
needs washing, because they like blowing pieces of food back up the spout"), and
he tells us about some of his former pets, concluding with his memories of two
favorites, now buried beneath an apple tree: "I'm not sad about this-just happy
to remember what a lot of pleasure I've had from all my guinea pigs." Jeram's
illustrations are informal but never cartoonish, with expressive pen-and-ink scratchy
lines, and both richly saturated and delicate colors. Large type, lots of white space,
and drawings intertwined with text make this a good choice for beginning readers
as well as for reading aloud. SDL
KUKUN, SUSAN 
Kodomo: Children ofJapan; written and illus. with photographs
by Susan Kuklin. 
Putnam, 1995 
[48p]
ISBN 0-399-22613-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Kodomo means children, and here Kuklin focuses on seven of them to give a pic-
ture of contemporary Japanese child-life. Each child gives a brief first-person nar-
rative (whether interviews were conducted through a translator is not stated) telling
of school activities or participation in traditional customs such as a tea ceremony
or martial arts. Kuklin's decision to divide the book by locale (three kids from
Hiroshima and four from Kyoto) and, additionally, to concentrate on schooling in
Hiroshima and customs in Kyoto inadvertently gives the impression that the sec-
ond city is more fun than the first; "About Hiroshima" and "About Kyoto" pages
give information about the cities but are only tangentially related to the interviews.
There's also a page on Japanese writing at the end, and explanations of facts glanced
at in the text are placed in the margins, looking like captions to the color photos
but in fact functioning as footnotes. (An explanation of yen, for example, is placed
next to a photo in which the only currency to be seen is a U.S. greenback.) This
isn't as pulled-together a presentation as we've come to expect from this talented
photojournalist, but the book is quite browsable and the excellent photos offer
their own rewards--expect particularly heavy wear on the pages that show nine-
year-old Keiko and eight-year-old Masaaki at their respective martial arts classes.
RS
280 
* THE BULLETIN
KULPA, KATHRYN, comp. 
Short Takes: Brief Personal Narratives and Other Works
by American Teen Writers. 
Merlyn's Pen, 1995 
126p
Paper ed. ISBN 1-886427-00-3 
$9.75 
Ad 
Gr. 5-10
LANGSETH, JO-ANN, comp. 
White Knuckles: Thrillers and Other Stories byAmeri-
can Teen Writers. 
Merlyn's Pen, 1995 
141p
Paper ed. ISBN 1-886427-01-1 
$9.75 
Ad Gr. 5-10
These two paperback collections compile stories and essays originally published in
Merlyn's Pen, a magazine devoted to writing by teenaged authors. The alluring
"uncensored" claim on the back cover of Short Takes leads to a bit of a letdown-
none of the pieces (short stories, memories, observations) would shock even the
most straight-laced creative writing teacher, and both volumes suffer from a some-
what unnervingly bland anonymity of voice. While the writing is too careful (and
sometimes demonstrates an overreliance on a thesaurus) there are some good ideas
in the fiction, particularly; with its ghouls and space monsters and ancient curses,
White Knuckles will be the volume of choice for both readers and budding writers.
"La Maison Cherbignac" reads entertainingly like one of Jo March's melodramas,
and "The Boarder" demonstrates the sensibility if not the style of Flannery
O'Connor, with its low-key depiction of a strange family that cannot understand
why all its boarders keep moving out. RS
MCDONALD, MEGAN 
InsectsAre My Life; illus. by Paul Brett Johnson. 
Jackson/
Orchard, 1995 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08724-7 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-06874-9 
$14.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Amanda Frankenstein is a budding entomologist. She collects dead bugs, and skin
casings, and even mosquito bites, and she spends her free time chasing down in-
sects "under rocks, hidden on leaves, in sidewalk cracks." Her affinity gets her in
some trouble from classmates when she starts school ("When Amanda danced in
circles like a bee, no other bees followed. When she pulled out her Mexican jump-
ing beans for show-and-tell, no one believed there were caterpillars inside"), but
she finally meets a fellow obsessive, Maggie, who adores reptiles as earnestly as
Amanda loves insects. While the ending is a bit neat (and it's odd that knowledge-
able little Amanda seems to use the terms "bug" and "insect" interchangeably),
McDonald demonstrates a light touch and a pretty sense of particularity ("During
circle time, Ms. Scorpio read The Very Quiet Cricket, and Amanda made the cricket
sound, 'Cree! Cree! Cree!' because the computer chip in the back of the book was
broken"). Johnston's illustrations in watercolor, colored pencil, and pastel show
all the kids as solid and blocky individuals; the soft lines and muted colors balance
out Amanda's determined and slightly dorky visage. A sturdy and endearing paean
to kids in a topic-intensive phase and to kids' general individuality, this might
prompt audience discussion of favorite fields or their own rocky starts at school.
DS
MADGWICK, WENDY 
Citymaze!: A Collection of Amazing City Mazes; illus. by
Dan Courtney et al. 
Millbrook, 1995 
40p
ISBN 1-56294-561-0 
$12.90 
R Gr. 2-6
Before Carmen Sandiego there were Risk, Game of the States, and the venerable
Viewmaster travel reels. Continuing the tradition of these low-tech geographical
APRIL 1995 
* 281
amusements is this collection of city-maps-turned-labyrinths, which educate and
delight. Each double-page spread features a breezy guidebook description and
concisely drawn map of a portion of the city (twelve cities, on five continents), and
a tourist nightmare-you must trace your route between two points through a
maze of traffic jams, construction sites, "no entries," restricted turns, and dead
ends. The mazes are first-rate, offering a range of challenge from a comparatively
direct circuit around Sydney to an intricate serpentine meander through Venice.
Solutions are provided at the back of the book, together with additional informa-
tion about the city and a guide to landmarks located in and near the mapped areas.
The natural tendency of kids to attack mazes with indelible markers and pens may
limit the library shelf life of this title; in a classroom, under the vigilant eye of a
teacher, readers could be encouraged to trace the pilgrims' progress with a harm-
less finger. Bon voyage. EB
MARSDEN, JOHN 
Tomorrow, When the War Began. 
Houghton, 1995 
[288p]
ISBN 0-395-70673-4 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
In this book by a popular Australian novelist, Ellie and six of her friends have been
off on a camping trip in the bush, and they discover upon their return home that
their families have disappeared and that an unnamed foreign power has conquered
their country. This is a magnetic premise, and the book has appealing dollops of
survival themes (Ellie et al. learning to live hidden from the enemy in the bush),
sabotage (there's a thrilling scene when the teens blow up a bridge), and romance
(Ellie is torn between her physical attraction to fellow saboteur Homer and her
intellectual closeness to another, Lee). It's too bad that the suspense is undercut by
the first chapter, which reveals that Ellie is writing down in retrospect the story of
the group: since we know from the first page that Robyn is alive and well, there's
little tension in the scene which details her rescue from the near-clutches of the
invaders. Too, the characters are not rendered with enough distinction from each
other, so it's not always easy to tell-or care-what is happening to whom. It's
true that any story of teens against hostile adults will have appeal, and if Marsden's
writing does not here display the dramatic economy of his previous book, Letters
from the Inside (BCCB 10/94), he still has a handle on teenaged angst writ large.
RS
MARSHALL, JANET 
Look Once Look Twice; written and illus. by Janet
Marshall. 
Ticknor, 1995 
64p
ISBN 0-395-71644-6 
$13.95 
Ad 
Gr. K-2
A is for asparagus and B is for butterfly in this picture book, which is an alphabet
guessing game. In her introduction, the author says, "Patterns are everywhere in
the natural world: on fish and flowers, fruits and vegetables, animals and insects,
in the sky and in the water." Each lower-case letter of the alphabet is filled in with
a pattern found in nature; a turn of the page reveals the plant or animal in its
entirety. Some of the patterns will be easy to solve (S for strawberry, T for tiger),
while others provide more of a challenge but are guessable, such as P for pineapple.
However, a few of the answers would simply be impossible even for older children
and adults, clearly unfair in an identification book: how many readers will guess
kingfisher for K, or unicornfish for U? The book's design and its clean paper-
cutout illustrations stand out, especially because of the care taken to match the
282 
* THE BULLETIN
facing pages, with the red, green and black of the kingfisher, for instance, echoed
in the red and black letter "L" on a green background (although it's too bad king-
fishers aren't green). However, the entertaining concept and well-executed art-
work cannot compensate for the reader's feeling that the author has cheated a little
in the game. SDL
MEDEARIS, ANGELA SHELF 
Annie's Gifts; illus. by Anna Rich. 
Just Us Books,
1995 
30p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-94075-30-0 
$14.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-94075-31-9 
$6.95 
R 
4-8 yrs
Annie loves music as much as the rest of her family does, but although they are
musically talented, she cannot find an instrument that doesn't make her listeners
wince. When she tries the recorder, it "squeaked and squawked like chickens at
feeding time," and when she sings and plays piano, "her performance made every-
one squirm in their chairs." When she writes a poem about it and gives it to her
father, however, she gets the reassurance she needs that "not everyone can write
poetry and draw beautiful pictures the way you can." While being a little too tidy,
and possibly leaving children with the impression that they can tell immediately if
they are good at something that may in fact take many lessons to do well, this story
addresses a concern to which many young readers will relate. Rich's warm paint-
ings (featuring an African-American cast) are both cozy and comical; when the
author compares the sounds of an instrument as Annie plays it to something else,
Rich shows it intruding on the quiet suburban house (as when, for instance, a
truck roars through the living room). She paints people skillfully, and the pained
expressions on the faces of Annie's listeners are especially funny. Annie's family is
real and likable, and the message of each person finding his or her own gifts a
worthwhile one. SDL
MEYER, CAROLYN 
Drummers of ericho. Gulliver/Harcourt, 1995 
[33 6 p]
Trade ISBN 0-15-200441-6 
$11.00
Paper ed. ISBN 0-15-200190-5 
$5.00
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 7-10
Pazit Trujillo, new girl and only Jew in the vaguely situated town of Jericho, can
handle, just, participating in the school band's medley of Christian hymns, but
when the director announces that the band's steps will culminate in the form of a
huge cross moving across the football field, she refuses to march. Following in the
steps of Lasky's Memoirs ofa Bookbat (BCCB 4/94) and Peck's The Last Safe Place
on Earth (2/95), this novel pits the good guys against the fundamentalists, and it's
hardly a fair fight. Pazit's father goes ballistic and calls the local ACLU, the issue
becomes headline news, the other band members harass Pazit with whispers of
"Jew bitch" in the hallways and leave a gift-wrapped dead rat on her doorstep.
Only Billy, scared of losing his friends, but knowing what's right, stands up for
her-literally, in the obligatory school board meeting scene, where the "Chris-
tians" shout their slogans and hiss "the other side" as represented by Pazit's step-
mother, a hippie-ish potter who, along with the wise black school nurse, delivers
the Message in case readers couldn't figure it out on their own. Narrated from
Pazit's and Billy's points-of-view in alternating chapters, the book is suspenseful
but fundamentally unrealistic in its calculated setup, and while Pazit and Billy are
themselves sturdy enough characters, they're awash in a sea of stereotypes. RS
APRIL 1995 
* 
283
MILTON, JOYCE 
Big Cats; illus. by Silvia Duran. 
Grosset, 1994 
4 8p 
(All
Aboard Reading)
Library ed. ISBN 0-448-40565-2 
$7.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-448-40564-4 
$3.50 
M 
Gr. 1-3
The ferocious growling cheetah on the cover is certain to attract some reluctant
readers, who won't be disappointed with the first vignette-Milton begins with a
leopard catching a zebra. Readers who like their kitties cuddlier will enjoy the
baby cougars, lions, and leopards as well as the section on domestic cats. Those
with a taste for the supernatural will go for the page on weretigers, though it doesn't
fit with the rest of the book. Plenty of pictures, amateurishly executed, and short
sentences will also appeal. Unfortunately, while children will learn a little about
several cats, they will learn more about poor grammar. In her zeal for concocting
short sentences, Milton does not always include a noun and a verb ("Or animals to
hunt.") and she tediously begins sentences with conjunctions fifteen times in forty-
eight pages. Additionally, one of the more interesting illustrations, a map showing
where the big cats live around the world, loses a large section to the tight binding.
Poor writing and illustration and scattershot information make this one kid mag-
net most libraries will want to pass up. SDL
NAYLOR, PHYLLIS REYNOLDS 
Alice the Brave. 
Karl/Atheneum, 1995 
[14 4 p]
ISBN 0-689-80095-9 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-8
Fortunately, Naylor doesn't seem to be running out of epithets or adventures for
the redoubtable Alice (of Alice In-Between, BCCB 5/94, etc.), but the title here is
at first questionable: Alice's gang spends the summer hanging out by Mark
Stedmeister's pool, and Alice is secretly petrified-petrified-ofwater. Swimming
isn't the only summer activity: Alice and her friends Elizabeth and Pamela all do a
bit of growing up, especially when they read extracts of the exotic text of Talesfrom
the Arabian Nights (and find it bewildering-"From the look on her face, [Eliza-
beth] was still mulling over the maidenhead, but I was struggling with the Yemeni
wrigglings, while Pamela had probably progressed past the Abyssinian sobbings
and was all the way to Upper Egyptian heat"). Naylor's humorous precision about
the trials of adolescence is unmatched, with Alice in a quandary as to how to
inform Pamela that she needs to use deodorant or failing miserably as a hospital
visitor when she sympathetically likens the patient's hysterectomy to her friend's
getting her long hair cut off. And, as usual, Al's family comes through for her in
the clutches: her brother, Lester, takes her out to a private pool, and even if the
cops do get involved (the pool belongs to a sometimes girlfriend, who is out of
town), Alice still learns to face the water with equanimity by the end of the day.
There's nobody quite like Alice, yet she's like everybody-it's always good to see
her making a splash. DS
OUGHTON, JERRIE 
Music from a Place Called Half Moon. 
Houghton,
1995 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-395-70737-4 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
As the summer of 1956 approaches, the hottest issue to face Half Moon, North
Carolina is whether the Vacation Bible School should be open to the local Indian
children. Edie Jo Houp, age thirteen, is quite frankly afraid of her Indian neigh-
284 
* THE BULLETIN
bors; she has seen Cherokee Fish rough up a boy in gym, and she and her brother
have been threatened by a gang of "half breeds" while driving in their car. How-
ever, when Edie Jo begins to know-and possibly love-Cherokee, she reevaluates
her prejudices and questions her parents' actions and values. Cherokee's tragic
death becomes the catalyst for Edie to lay her fears to rest, offer a gesture of friend-
ship to his grieving sister, and "accept people for who they were." Oughton takes
the issue of integration to a personal level as she limns the ethical inconsistencies of
Edie's family with deft strokes. Daddy may really believe in racial equality, or he
just may enjoy a public argument; Grandma is at once the church peacemaker,
and, through her insensitive remarks, also the unwitting cause of an arsonist's at-
tacks; Mama resists integration, yet pays a funeral visit to Mrs. Fish because "los-
ing a child doesn't hurt less if you're an Indian." Oughton crafts her prose as
skillfully as her characterizations. Adult Edie's narration captures the graceful idiom
and easy confidentiality of the best spinners of family yarns; the three poems from
Edie's journal could stand on their own merit apart from their context within the
novel. This bittersweet tale is deeply satisfying both as coming-of-age story and as
social problem novel. EB
PORTE, BARBARA ANN 
Chickens! Chickens!; illus. by Greg Henry. 
Jackson/Or-
chard, 1995 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08727-1 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-06877-3 
$14.95 
R 4-6 yrs
With rhythmic prose and occasional internal rhymes meted out by a practiced
storyteller, this buoyant story will snag listeners with its infectious silliness. It's
about a man who draws nothing but chickens: "chickens in the sunshine and
chickens in the rain, chickens on rooftops and chickens pecking grain." Country
folk have no use for chicken pictures, and city folk don't know from chickens, so
it's not until he meets a woman who loves him as well as his pictures-and who
has the business sense to parlay poultry paintings into major money-that the
man makes his fortune. The rite-of-passage journey, triumphant resolution, and
happy marriage make this a contemporary fairy tale with down-home twists of
humor that are extended in Henry's paintings, stylized in a naive mode with flat
perspectives and brilliant color contrasts. Maybe the chickens look a bit like guinea
fowl in profile, but the riotous spirit is clearly defined, with blue or red birds
driving yellow cabs, green ones carrying black briefcases, and multihued others
cavorting throughout the imaginative compositions. The characters are African
American, the theme is follow your dream, and the book is a lot of fun. BH
RODOWSKY, COLBY 
Sydney, Invincible. Farrar, 1995 
[144p]
ISBN 0-374-37365-5 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-9
Sydney (of Sydney, Herself BCCB 10/89) is back, and her junior year has offered
her a few special challenges: she's been appointed editor of the school newspaper,
her mother and stepfather are going to have a baby, and her boyfriend's parents are
getting divorced. Sydney finds herself rising to the demands of editorship despite
the vague guidance of the paper's faculty sponsor, but she takes on more than she
can handle when the paper's staff decides to do an exposd of the cafeteria. Rodowsky
manages to tell a story with many complications quite simply, so that Sydney's
having to take a class from her teacher-mother and her embarrassment at her
APRIL 1995 
* 
285
mother's very public pregnancy blend smoothly into the yearbook story. The
ethical questions surrounding the paper's expose (which turns out to be a hatchet
job) are convincingly presented, although the dreamy, pseudo-artistic, and ulti-
mately disloyal faculty sponsor never quite rings true as a character. Sydney herself
is an immensely solid and likeable narrator, and fans of the first book won't want
to miss out on this latest installment of her story. DS
ROGERS, FRED 
Adoption; illus. with photographs by Jim Judkis. 
Putnam,
1995 
[32p] 
(Let's Talk About It)
Trade ed. ISBN 0-399-22432-7 
$15.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-399-22525-0 
$6.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-5 yrs
As one might expect from Mr. Rogers, this is a gentle, matter-of-fact, and reassur-
ing approach to the topic of adoption. The text addresses the young listener di-
rectly, explaining that "you could belong in your family by being born into it, or
you could belong in your family be being adopted into it" and suggesting that
"there may also be some times when you wonder about being adopted." The
emphasis, however, is on families and their strength through bad times and good.
Rogers' unaffected delivery has a way of making scary things unscary, which should
help parents as much as kids, and his concrete suggestions for kids dealing with the
issue (talk to your family, draw pictures, or pretend about it) will be a help to kids
who may not have thought about those options. The illustrations are sharp, clear
color photographs following the daily tasks of three different families; all the fami-
lies look real, if unrealistically tidy, and there may be a subtle message in the fact
that you can't tell if all the kids are adopted or not. The text may be a bit padded,
and it would have been nice to see more variety in the pictured families (while the
cast is multi-racial, they're all in two-parent, strictly nuclear setups), but this will
help kids and adults deal calmly with an often anxiety-provoking subject. DS
ROMAN, TRISH Fox, comp. 
Voices under One Sky: Contemporary Native
Literature. Crossing Press, 1994 
22 4p 
illus. and with photographs
Paper ed. ISBN 0-89594-720-X 
$12.95 
Ad 
Gr. 9-12
"Traded my moccasins for those whiteman's shoes,/ I got both feet in two ca-
noes"-this line from "Reservation Blues" expresses the immensity of loss, both
personal and cultural, which permeates this collection of over forty poems, short
stories, memoirs, songs, and legends written by contemporary Native American
writers. The breadth of contributions takes readers on a literary journey across the
entire back of Turtle Island (all of North America) and includes some well-known
authors (Joseph Bruchac, Louise Erdrich, Leslie Marmon Silko) as well as many
works by lesser-known voices. The mix is loosely arranged (vague headings such as
"Standing Up" and "Finding a Way" begin each of the six sections) and occasion-
ally enigmatic, but the variety nonetheless fosters an appreciation of ancestral ties
and storytelling traditions. Many of the selections are adult reminiscences about
growing up-forced schooling, coming of age fears, and cultural estrangement-
and most of them address the struggles with modern alienation and with weaken-
ing traditions. In Glen Cooper's memoir, "The Moose," he sees his father cry for
the first time because the moose he killed is contaminated by pollutants, and in "A
Mountain Legend" a young Cree boy meets a ghost of the past and is victorious in
overcoming his present-day fears. The collection is uneven, and sometimes aes-
286 
* THE BULLETIN
thetic quality is sacrificed for social didacticism ("Everything has changed since
white people came here; it's all mixed up now-too much candy, too much booze
and drugs. The people forget the old ways."-"Sara's Gift') but the book would
work well in classrooms as a reminder to students of how native cultures have
enriched North American literature. Occasional photographs and drawings, a
cultural/linguistic map, and author notes are included. HMW
SATTER, HELEN RONEY 
Our Patchwork Planet: The Story of Plate Tectonics; il-
lus. by Giulio Maestro and with photographs. 
Lothrop, 1995 
48p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-09313-2 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-09312-4 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 4-8
In this brief but thorough discussion of plate tectonics, Sattler covers collision and
subduction, rifting, faulting, and related earth-building processes. The text moves
smoothly from description of plates, to plate movement and resultant geomor-
phology, to consideration of the impact of plate movement on future human ac-
tivities. Eschewing overworn accounts of earthquake and volcanic devastation,
Sattler enlivens the hard science with subtler suggestions for Earth's distant future:
"New York City may be sitting on ... a fault" that could split Long Island in two;
"either the Great Basin area or the Rio Grande Rift will someday separate enough
to open a new ocean." Report writers and students seeking material to supplement
textbook lessons will particularly appreciate Maestro's comprehensible diagrams
and maps, as well as the index and reading list which features a host of readily
accessible periodical articles. This title will claim a place even in basic science
collections and will be useful to readers well into junior high. EB
SMOTHERS, ETHEL FOOTMAN 
Moriah's Pond. Knopf, 1995 
111p
ISBN 0-679-84504-6 
$14.00 
R Gr. 4-6
Annie Rye, age ten, and her two older sisters, Maybaby and Brat, are living for the
summer with their grandmother Moriah in rural Georgia in this sequel to Down in
the Piney Woods (BCCB 6/92) that, according to the author's note, is based on her
1950s childhood. Annie Rye tells her first-person narration in a southern African-
American dialect ("Brat or Maybaby neither one ain't got they mind on fishing")
which makes for tough going until the reader adjusts, and the opening chapter sets
the scene but has little action. Readers who persist, however, will be rewarded.
Annie Rye is suspicious of Betty Jean, the friendly-seeming granddaughter of the
white landowner for whom Moriah cleans and cooks. After Brat gets whipped, at
the landowner's demand, for sharing a soda with Betty Jean, Annie Rye is certain
she was correct in her suspicions, and her grandmother's heartbreak ("Like a hurt
so far down she can't dig it out") at having to whip Brat makes her feel even worse.
The next day, though warned not to, the three sisters can't resist wading in a
polluted pond, and Annie Rye is sworn to secrecy when her sisters dunk their
heads in the contaminated water. The resulting eye infection almost leads to trag-
edy, and adds another layer to the complicated relationship between the two fami-
lies. Annie Rye makes a vivid character, strong-willed and passionate, and her
descriptions of the now-exotic-sounding occurrences of her life (such as the clay-
eating neighbor who straightens the girls' hair, and the techniques of boiling clothes
cean in a kettle with lye soap) help recreate this particular time and place for the
Nintendo generation. SDL
APRIL 1995 
* 287
STEVENS, JANET, ad. 
Tops d& Bottoms; ad. and illus. by Janet Stevens. 
Harcourt,
1995 
34p
ISBN 0-15-292851-0 
$15.00 
R* 
4-8 yrs.
In a new version of this traditional gardening tale, clever Hare, who has "lost a
risky bet with a tortoise," outsmarts lazy, rich Bear. He offers to turn the land in
front of Bear's house into a vegetable garden, giving Bear the top half of every
vegetable and taking only the bottoms for himself and his family. Bear is annoyed
at harvest time when Hare has a nice pile of carrots, turnips and beets, so Hare
graciously reverses the deal for the next garden but comes out ahead just the same.
Stevens retells the story with vigor and humor, but the artwork is the real star. The
book opens lengthwise, which with most picture books would be a gimmick, but
with the top, bottom, and middle theme here, it's an ingenious twist. Visual jokes
abound; observant children will notice many details like the furnishings in the
Hare family house, which include a plastic pop-can-ring ladder and a clothespin
chair, while adults may get a particular kick out of watching the shutters fall off the
lazy Bear's house and the continuous fight against dandelions in the garden. As
always, Stevens' animals are quirky but never cutesy, with the Hare family all pointy
joints and long ears, and the bear looking both fierce and rumply. And not only
does Stevens paint a luscious vegetable, she paints on vegetables-the flap copy
states that she crafted her own vegetable-based paper for the original art. In the
satisfying conclusion the Hares are now prosperous and Bear industrious, while
readers have enjoyed a great story and even learned a few vegetable facts. SDL
TEMPLE, FRANCES 
Tonight, by Sea. Jackson/Orchard, 1995 
152p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08749-2 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-06899-4 
$15.95 
Ad Gr. 5-8
This is the second time Temple has taken recent events in Haiti as the basis for
fiction; here she has moved up almost to the present (just before Aristide's return)
to tell the story of a young girl, Paulie, and her family's plans for an illegal escape
across the Caribbean to "Mee-ya-mee." Their preparation of the boat is threat-
ened by the ominous presence of the macoutes, army thugs who "prowled among
them, took their chickens, beat up the teacher so there could be no more school."
Jean Desir, Paulie's best friend's big brother, poses a particular danger-no one
knows whose side he is really on. While Jean Desir demonstrates some inner
conflict, the characters for the most part are flat and idealized as poor, good, and
brave. Temple's storytelling, though, is strong enough to pull them along. There's
enough action to keep kids going through some of the more didactic passages, and
the sea journey has the pace and appeal of great-escape fiction. RS
THOMSON, PEGGY 
Katie Henio: Navajo Sheepherder; illus. with photographs by
Paul Conklin. 
Cobblehill, 1995 
51p
ISBN 0-525-65160-8 
$16.99 
R Gr. 4-7
"Her life-with sheep, rocks, plants, sky, and the wool for her hands to work
with-is harmonious." It's a hardwon harmony, since Katie Henio has survived
ceaseless work in a harsh climate and terrain to become a great-grandmother who
steadies her family in Navajo traditions. It's also hard to structure a description of
this harmony into the sequential organization of a book format, and Thomson's
photodocumentary, while vivid, sometimes seems to jump around in zig-zag pat-
288 
* THE BULLETIN
terns. However, between the perceptively composed photographs (both color and
black-and-white) and the smoothly incorporated interview quotations, the book
makes rich browsing and wakes readers to an existence where education is a herd of
sheep, and where past melds with present in a more intuitive and spiritual pathway
than many children travel. BH
VIORST, JUDITH 
Sad Underwear and Other Complications: More Poems for Chil-
dren and Their Parents; illus. by Richard Hull. 
Atheneum, 1995 
[80p]
ISBN 0-689-31929-0 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
"... for children and their parents," reads the subtitle, but it may well be that
adults will constitute the primary audience for Viorst's latest collection of verse.
Not because the selections are difficult-children's poets such as Myra Cohn
Livingston, David McCord and Eve Merriam routinely employ more sophisti-
cated imagery and meter-but because the humor of most of the poems tends to
come from what adults think is funny about childhood, not from what children
find funny themselves: "Who decided that vegetables are something a growing
child needs?/ Who decided that wonce is spelled o-n-c-e?" While Viorst is capable
of getting some nicely jaunty rhythms going, as in a jump-rope chant of the fifty,
well, forty-nine states, most of the poems overstay their welcome, as in a seventy-
three line retelling of "The Fisherman and His Wife," and they often end in a
shaggy-dog punchline that comments ironically on all that has gone before. How-
ever, fans of Ifl Were in Charge ofthe World and Other Worries (BCCB 7/82) may
well be looking out for this companion, so buy for demand. RS
WILBUR, RICHARD 
Runaway Opposites; illus. by Henrik Drescher. 
Harcourt,
1995 
34p
ISBN 0-15-258722-5 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
The text here consists of fifteen short poems from Richard Wilbur's Opposites
(BCCB 7/73) and More Opposites, each poem examines an antonymical relation-
ship in rhymed verse that ranges from the quick couplet ("What is the opposite of
riot?/ It's lots of people keeping quiet") to the longer, more conceptually involved
stanza ("I wonder if you've ever seen a/ Willow sheltering a hyena?/ Nowhere in
nature can be found/ An opposition more profound... "). The "Runaway" part
of the title comes from Henrik Drescher's illustrations and settings: with his trade-
mark vividly hued and anarchic pastiche, Drescher has filled the pages with de-
faced old portraits, cut-out newspaper letters, pen doodles, impossible animals,
and various and sundry extraneous materials. The effect is energetic, for sure, and
there's an appealing gaudy sinisterness to the sharptoothed people and animals
that frequent the pages; sometimes the art plays cleverly upon the poem, as when
the verse meditating on the possible opposites of "trunk" (two possibilities are an
elephant's tail or a wrapped package) sits atop a brown-paper parcel in the shape of
a pachyderm. Unfortunately the poems are often inclined towards the slight and
the art completely buries them: Wilbur's sly juxtaposition of the weeping willow
and laughing hyena, for instance, is overpowered by the double-spread length of
Drescher's spiky, steely-eyed hyena, and the illustrations frequently go off on their
own disorganized mission rather than playing-or working-with the concepts in
the poem. Nonetheless, while this doesn't have the artistic or conceptual finesse of
The Stinky Cheese Man, kids may enjoy the similar testing of artistic boundaries
and the creepy critters that frolic through the pages. DS
APRIL 1995 
* 
289
WILLIAMS, CAROL LYNCH 
Adeline Street. Delacorte, 1995 
[128p]
ISBN 0-385-31075-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-7
In this sequel to Kelly andMe (BCCB 3/94), Leah tells the story of the year follow-
ing the death of her sister and near-twin, Kelly. The family makes it through their
first Christmas without Kelly; Leah and her friend (and maybe soon her boyfriend)
Tom have some bike-riding adventures; a new girl with a troubled home life moves
to town and makes friends with Leah; and, finally, Leah discovers that her mother
is going to have a baby. Over every episode and every chapter is Leah's constant
wrestling with her grief for Kelly and her gradually easing guilt at surviving. Wil-
liams again displays an easy gift for evocation of place and voice; the Floridian
setting is specific, and immediate, and Leah's narration is authentic in its blend of
sorrow and adjustment. Readers may be a bit confused if they start here instead of
with the previous volume, and the book perhaps is oversupplied with lesser trag-
edies, such as Leah's and Tom's accidental shooting of a neighbor's rooster and
Leah's grandfather being rather casually run over by a truck; in the first book this
darkness seemed to foreshadow Kelly's eventual death, but it does begin to seem as
if Leah is simply exceedingly unlucky. The conviction and tenderness of the story,
however, make it a rewarding read, and those who enjoyed the previous book will
appreciate Leah's realization that gradually "life would be better for us all." DS
WYETH, SHARON DENNIS 
Vampire Bugs: Stories Conjuredfrom the Past; illus. by
Curtis E. James. 
Delacorte, 1995 
80p
ISBN 0-385-32082-5 
$13.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
"Once there was a witcher woman who could catch lightning and ride it across the
sky... " So begins the first of six spooky stories Wyeth has gathered, adapted, or
written for this collection. Characters include Little Mose, the son of a slave woman
swapped to another plantation; New Orleans voodoo queen Marie Le Veau and
her daughter; a boy and his father's ghost. The strong parts of this collection are
Wyatt's pleasing turn of phrase and the novelty of the material here-there aren't
any old chestnuts. Unfortunately, the plots are often poorly paced and stumble in
crucial places: "Akiba's Singing Water," for instance, stands out as a promising
ghost story but turns instead into a talky dream. Kids will still appreciate the
unusual fantasy in tales such as "Little Mose" and "Vampire Bugs," particularly if
the stories are read aloud in a darkened room. Black-and-white illustrations are
smokily intense but stiff and darkly reproduced; good source notes and bibliogra-
phy are included. DS
YEP, LAURENCE, ad 
Tree ofDreams: Ten Tales fom the Garden ofNight; illus. by
Isadore Seltzer. 
BridgeWater, 1995 
[94p]
ISBN 0-8167-3498-4 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-6
As ineffable as dreams may seem, these ten stories about them are surprisingly
solid, coherent, and invariably involving. From Japan, India, China, Greece, Bra-
zil, and Senegal, Yep has drawn a choice selection: the first is a magical tale of
badgers rewarding a couple for their kindness; the last is a riddle story with re-
markable resemblances to the Biblical Joseph and his dreams. In between comes a
varied parade of active plots and unusual characters, highlighted by smooth but
never pretentious narrative and a natural incorporation of dialogue. In addition to
290 
* 
THE BULLETIN
a poetic preface and an informative afterword, the stories are each introduced by a
densely hued oil painting, populated with figures of drolly un-dreamy solidity,
and a brief comment. Except for two specific acknowledgments, however, the
bibliography does not match specific stories with their sources. We must trust that
the clarity and grace of Yep's adaptations bear witness to his care in authentically
reflecting earlier versions. BH
YOLEN, JANE 
The Balladofthe Pirate Queens; illus. by David Shannon. 
Harcourt,
1995 
32p
ISBN 0-15-200710-5 
$15.00 
R* 
6-12 yrs
Long after hearing this story-poem, listeners will find themselves chanting the
chorus: "And silver the coins and silver the moon,/ Silver the waves on the top of
the sea,/ When the pirate ship comes sailing in,/ That gallant Vanity." Yolen never
forces a rhyme or makes a misstep in this true adventure about the female pirates
Mary Reade and Anne Bonney. The story is a thrilling one, as Captain Calico Jack
Rackham and his men stay below decks playing cards and drinking while Anne
and Mary attempt to fight off the "bristling man-o'-war" the Albion: "So shoulder
to shoulder and back to back,/ Stood Mary and stood Anne;/ Never was it said that
they/ Were feared of any man." Of course all are taken, and when Anne passes by
Calico Jack's prison cell, she tells him, "If you'd fought like a man,/ My Jack,
you'd need not die." The men are hanged, but Anne and Mary are both pregnant
and therefore escape the gallows; according to Yolen's note at the end, Mary may
have died in prison, but the story chooses the happiest of the possible scenarios, as
"Anne and Mary's children's children/ Round their households play," while Jack
and his men rise from their graves to sail a ghostly Vanity. Shannon's acrylic
paintings are magnificently dark and spooky. Rich and full of accurately por-
trayed historical detail, these are illustrations that children will want to pore over,
especially those of the two ships. The faces of the pirates are particularly vivid and
intense, and each painting has a hand-lettered caption, which sometimes includes
the words supposedly used in real life, as when Anne tells Rackham, "Hang like a
dog!" The closing note gives just enough factual background to send readers back
to the beginning to read it through again: "Silver the coins and silver the moon..... "
SDL
ZEINERT, KAREN 
Free Speech: From Newspapers to Music Lyrics.
See Able, p. 262, for review.
Note: Sheila Kelly Welch's A Horse forAllSeasons, reviewed in the January issue of
the Bulletin, is illustrated by the author; Sandy Rabinowitz, credited as the illustra-
tor in our heading, was responsible for the cover art only.
APRIL 1995 
* 291
CHILDREN'S BOOK AWARDS 1995
The Newbery Medal will be awarded to Sharon Creech for Walk Two Moons
(HarperCollins). The Newbery Honor Books are Catherine, CalledBirdy by Karen
Cushman (Clarion) and The Ear, the Eye and the Arm by Nancy Farmer (Jackson/
Orchard).
The Caldecott Medal will be awarded to David Diaz for Smoky Night (Harcourt),
written by Eve Bunting. The Caldecott Honor Books are Swamp Angel written
by Anne Isaacs and illustrated by Paul O. Zelinsky (Dutton), John Henry, written
by Julius Lester and illustrated by Jerry Pinkney (Dial), and Time Flies, written
and illustrated by Eric Rohmann (Crown).
The Coretta Scott King Award will be presented to Patricia C. and Fredrick L.
McKissack, authors of Christmas in the Big House, Christmas in the Quarters (Scho-
lastic) for writing and to James E. Ransome for The Creation (Holiday House),
written by James Weldon Johnson, for illustration. King Honor Books for writing
are Jacqueline Woodson's IHadn't Meant to Tell You This (Delacorte), Patricia C.
and Fredrick L. McKissack's Black Diamond: The Story ofthe Negro Baseball League
(Scholastic), and Joyce Hansen's The Captive (Scholastic). King Honor Books for
illustration are The Singing Man, written by Angela Shelf Medearis and illustrated
by Terea Shaffer (Holiday House) and Meet Danitra Brown, written by Nikki
Grimes and illustrated by Floyd Cooper (Lothrop).
The American publisher receiving the Mildred L. Batchelder Award for the most
outstanding translation of a book originally published in a foreign language is
Dutton Children's Books for Bjarne Reuter's The Boys from St. Petri. The honor
book is Sister Shako and Kolo the Goat by Vedat Dalokay (Holt).
The Laura Ingalls Wilder Award will be given to Virginia Hamilton.
The Scott O'Dell Award for historical fiction will be given to Graham Salisbury
for Under the Blood-Red Sun (Delacorte).
The Canadian Library Association's Best Book of the Year for Children is Some of
the Kinder Planets by Tim Wynne-Jones (Kroupa/Orchard). The Best Book of
the Year for Young Adults is Nobody's Son by Sean Stewart (Maxwell Macmillan).
The Amelia Frances Howard-Gibbon Award for illustration goes to Leo Yerxa for
Last LeafFirst Snowflake to Fall (Groundwood).
The Carnegie Medal was awarded to Robert Swindells for Stone Cold (Hamish
Hamilton).
The Kate Greenaway Medal was awarded to Alan Lee for Black Ships before Troy:
The Story of The Iliad, written by Rosemary Sutcliff (Delacorte).
The 1996 May Hill Arbuthnot Lecture will be delivered by Zena Sutherland.
292 
* 
THE BULLETIN
The Margaret A. Edwards Award will be given to Cynthia Voigt.
NCTE's Orbis Pictus Award for Outstanding Nonfiction for Children goes to
Safari beneath the Sea: The Wonder World of the North Pacific Coast by Diane
Swanson (Sierra Club); Honor Books include Wildlife Rescue: The Work of Dr.
Kathleen Ramsay by Jennifer Owings Dewey (Boyds Mills), Kids at Work: Lewis
Hine and the Crusade against Child Labor by Russell Freedman (Clarion), and
Christmas in the Big House, Christmas in the Quarters by Patricia C. and Fredrick
L. McKissack.
Much of the above information was graciously provided by the Children's Book
Council, which offers a materials brochure listing their many helpful publications.
To receive this, send a request, enclosing 6" x 9" SASE with 2 oz. first-class post-
age, to the Children's Book Council, 568 Broadway, Suite 404, New York, NY,
10012.
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Adoption-fiction: Cole; Ellis
Adoption: Rogers
African Americans-fiction:
Johnson; Smothers; Wyeth
African Americans-stories:
Medearis
African Americans: Equiano
Alcoholism-stories: Carrick
ALPHABET BOOKS: Marshall
Architecture: Ancona
Arithmetic: Anno
Art and artists-stories: Dunrea;
Garland, M.; Medearis; Porte
Art: Wilbur
Aunts-fiction: Danziger
Australia-fiction: Gleitzman;
Marsden
BEDTIME STORIES: Esbensen
BIOGRAPHIES: Bruchac;
Burchard; Coerr; Equiano
California-fiction: Cottonwood
Canada-fiction: Hutchins
Cats: Milton
Censorship: Zeinert
Chickens-stories: Dunrea; French;
Porte
Child abuse-fiction: Williams
China-fiction: Fang
Christians-fiction: Brammer;
Meyer
Cities: Madgwick
Colorado-stories: Bodkin
CONCEPT BOOKS: Anno
Current events: Able
Death-fiction: Williams.
Disasters-fiction: Cottonwood
Divorce-fiction: High
Dolphins-fiction: Hall
Dreams-fiction: Yep
Dreams-stories: Esbensen
Escape-fiction: Temple
Ethics and values: Able; Meyer;
Rodowsky
FANTASY: Hall; Hutchins;
Jacques
APRIL 1995 
* 293
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Danziger
Fathers and sons-fiction: Crutcher
Fear-fiction: Naylor
FOLKTALES AND
FAIRYTALES: Cecil; DeFelice;
Emberley; Fang; French; Yep
Foxes-stories: French
Friends-fiction: Brammer;
Cottonwood; Feuer; Naylor
FUNNY STORIES: Gleitzman
Gardening-stories: Stevens
Geology: Sattler
Grandfathers-stories: Griffith
Guidance: Carrick
Guinea pigs: King-Smith
Haiti-fiction: Temple
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Garland, S.; Oughton; Smoth-
ers
History, U.S.: Burchard; Equiano
Insects-stories: McDonald
Japan: Kuklin
Jews-fiction: Meyer
Journalism: Rodowsky
Latinos-fiction: Cofer
London-fiction: Danziger
LOVE STORIES: Garland, S.
Mazes: Madgwick
Mental illness-fiction: Johnson
Mice-fiction: Jacques
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Ellis; High
Music-stories: Medearis
Native Americans-fiction: Gar-
land, S.; Oughton; Roman
Native Americans: Bruchac;
Thomson
Nature study: George; Marshall;
Milton; Sattler
Pennsylvania-fiction: High
Pet care: King-Smith
Physical disabilities-fiction:
Gleitzman
Pioneer life-fiction: Hutchins
Pirates-stories: Yolen
POETRY: Hopkins; Roman;
Viorst; Wilbur; Yolen
Pregnancy, teen-fiction: Cole
Prejudice-fiction: Oughton;
Smothers
Prejudice: Able
Reading aloud: Wyeth
Reading, beginning: Antle; Coerr;
Hopkins; Milton
Reading, easy: Danziger; Griffith;
King-Smith
Reading, family: Rogers; Viorst
Reading, reluctant: Cole; Cotton-
wood; Crutcher; Madgwick
Refugees-fiction: Temple
Religious education: Ancona;
Brammer
Sailing-stories: Crews
SCARY STORIES: Wyeth
School-fiction: Rodowsky
School-stories: McDonald
Science: Asch
Sheep herding: Thomson
SHORT STORIES: Cofer; Kulpa;
Roman
Sisters-fiction: Johnson; Williams
Slavery: Burchard; Equiano
Social studies: Kuklin
Space-poetry: Hopkins
SPORTS STORIES: Crutcher
Story hour: Bodkin; Cecil; Crews;
DeFelice; Dunrea; Emberley;
French; Garland, M.; George;
Griffith; King-Smith; Marshall;
McDonald; Medearis; Porte;
Stevens; Yolen
Summer-fiction: Feuer; Naylor
Survival-fiction: Marsden
Taiwan-fiction: Brammer
Time travel-fiction: Hutchins
Trains-stories: Bodkin
Transportation: Hewett
War-fiction: Marsden
Water: Asch
Waterfalls-stories: George
West, the-fiction: Antle
West, the: Coerr
Work: Ancona
Writing: Kulpa
Look to North-South for the
best in easy-to-read books!
MIA THE BEACH CAT
"This is a light breeze of an early-reader boi
ing new readers' skills with a story close e
real life to be comfortable, but spiked with
suspense to be interesting. The format i
and open, and amiable, unbabyish penc
watercolor illustrations appear on every
giving plenty of clues to the text."
Bulletin of the Center for Children's B(
"The writing is simple, and the book is fil
with enough detail and dialogue to he
young readers' attention. The warm, mute
watercolors are filled with action."
School Library Journal
Ages: 7-9 / Grades: 2-4
48 pages / Full-color throughout
Llbrary edition: 1-55858-315-7 / $12.88
Trade edition: 1-55858-314-9 /$12.95
LITTLE DINOSAUR
om on the beginning-reader shelves
lelightful story .... 
a guaranteed
Lud hit." 
School Library Journal
.. has all the qualities necessary for
*ss: a clever little heroine, dinosaur
and an adorable rainbow-colored
>y dinosaur." 
Kirkus
his predictable tale gets a shot in the
rm from the spirited color Illustra-
tions ... 
that should keep readers
turning eagerly." 
Booklist
Ages: 7-9 /Grades: 2-4
64 pages/ Full-color throughout
Library edition: 1-55858-311-4 / $13.88
Trade edition: 1-55858-310-6 / $13.95
AnIC
3 B, 
SE 
8 
, N, 
1 0010E 
8
1123 BROADWAY, SUITE 8oo00, NY, NY 10010 / TOLL-FREE 800-282-8257
CELEBRATE
Twenty Tellabh
Multicultural F
by Margaret Read IV
225pp. 1994 ISBN
$40 U.S. and Canad
mat thi
story's
ing, drI
include
assist s
ning. A
childre-
PUTTII
IN A I
The Art
by Sheila I
136pp. 1!
$35 U.S. z
c-5
countries.
ormauon neeaea t
i their program plan-
:al way to introduce
Tale
ISBN 0-8242-0860-9
Canada, $40 other countries.
Dailey focuses on the
most 
basic 
genre
of folk literature for
.*t 
the storyteller: the
-
formula tale. She dis-
cusses the nine basic
types of formula tales
and offers numerous
examples 
of 
each.
The 38 tales offered
here represent many cultures and folk tra-
ditions. An annotated bibliography of folk-
tale resources and folktale collections is
also included.
THE POETRY BREAK
An Annotated Anthology
with Ideas for Introducing
Children to Poetry
by Caroline Feller Bauer
347pp. 1995 ISBN 0-8242-0852-8
$45 U.S. and Canada, $50 other countries.
Bauer 
offers 
a
simple, 
successful
approach to familiariz-
ing children with poet-
ry. Included are meth-
ods and activities for
making poetry a natur-
al part of a childs daily
and in the library. Over 
-
m
240 poems are provided, with tips and ideas
for effective presentation. A bibliography of
poetry collections and anthologies as well as
several indexes round out the volume.
SING US A STORY
Using Music in Preschool
and Family Storytimes
by Jane Marino
215pp. 1994 ISBN 0-8242-0847-1
$40 U.S. and Canada, $45 other countries.
Marino 
presents
over 75 songs with
music 
arrange-
ments to use in
preschool and fam-
ily storytime pro-
grams. 
Detailed
suggestions 
are
offered for plan- w
ning each type of 
"
program, choosing appropriate music,
and integrating it with stories, picture
books, dance, and movement to create a
stimulating and enjoyable experience.
Sharing Knowledse Since 1898
COMPANY
ii THE H.W. '
Crowd Pleasers
S aLn Green Sndte
by Libba Moore Gray pictures by Holly Meade 
,
* 
"Great for reading aloud and
for audience participation, this is
the funny adventure of a
small, sassy, flashy, grassy,
garter snake who won't
heed [his] mama."
- Booklist, starred review
"A romping, rhyming
delight.... The fresh and
funny torn-paper collages
a perfect complement to t]
p;
I/
spirited text." -
SLJ
TR S14.95 0-531-06844-7 * RLB $14.99 0-531-08694-1
Soup
tory from Jamaica
Temple
* "Begs to be read -
ven partially sung -
oud.... A delightful trickster
ale." -
SLJ, starred review
a gifted author of Taste of Salt
buts as a picture-book illustrator with
ively, handsome collages of cut, textured
aper." -
Kirkus
95 0-531-06859-5 * RLB $15.99 0-531-08709-3
Orchard Books
A Grolier Company
---
Year
Novak
HI
An
111
1~1 
II
While visiting the remote inn run by her father
and stepmother in northern Maine, sixteen-year-old
Cynda feels isolated from her father's new family but
finds solace in the attentions of a charming -
but
mysterious -
guest.
AgesllandUp 
192pages 
0-395-69843-X 1613.95
Other award-winning titles:
STEPPING ON THE CRACKS
1992 Scott O'Deli Award for Historical Fiction
1992 American Library Association Notable Children's Book
0-395-58507-4 
114.95
THE WIND BLOWS BACKWARD
1994 American Library Association, Best Books for Young Adults
0-395-62975-6 
$13.95
ust as we
celebrate the
advent of
Spring with new blossoms
of every color, BTSB
offers an extensive array
of new spring titles for
your library, ready to
plant on your shelves.
The new spring
supplement to our
1994-95 General
Catalog lists over 1200
new titles, each listed alphabetically by
author, title and subject matter, including ISBN and
Dewey Classification numbers. And when it comes to
special services, BTSB offers all the necessary tools to
make your job easier:
* Complete book processing, kits, cards, and
laminated jackets.
* Free unattached bar codes and diskettes for
automated systems.
* Lower prices for volume purchases.
Free pre-order computer lists of your titles.
* Pre-sorted catalog cards.
* Free ordering software for volume purchases.
Plant some new seeds in your library and watch
your young readers grow with knowledge and
excitement. Call today for complete information
and a copy of our latest General Catalog, listing over
15,000 in-stock titles.
• 
~Bound To Stay Bound Books, Inc.
1880 West Morton, Jacksonville, IL 62650
LX 
~ 
Toll Free: 800-637-6586; Fax: 800-747-2872
I 
·
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.S.A.
RETURN POSTAGE GUAANTED
Not-So-Nomd Nora
Grades 3-6, Ages 8-11
6x8, 128 Pages, $11.95
ISBN 0-8075-5767-6
Not-So-Normal Norman
by Cynthia Stowe
Illustrated by Cat Bowman Smith
"Norman is a tarantula, and he's the first client
to arrive when fourth-grader Anthony puts up
ads for a petsitting service. Anthony is eager to
earn money because finances are stretched at
home: his father, a carpenter, has injured himself
and is out of work... .Although Stowe demon-
strates a good grasp of the way children sense
household trouble even when they're told it's not
there, this is largely a cheerful chapter book, with
Norman finally eating and Dad perking up."
Booklist
Albert Whitman & Company * 6340 Oakton Street
Morton Grove, IL 60053-2723
I· 
;f 
·-
At 
to
SECOND CLASS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
a 
~~e~%~·
