T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by The Johns Hopkins University Press
January 2007
Vol. 60   No. 5
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
January 2007
Vol. 60 No. 5
201  The Big PicTure
 
 Kampung Boy written and illus. by Lat
202  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
213  • Water Street by Patricia Reilly Giff
215  • Skate by Michael Harmon
218  • Houndsley and Catina and the Birthday Surprise by James Howe; illus. by  
 
 Marie Louise Gay
220  • Writing Magic: Creating Stories That Fly by Gail Levine
229  • Wilky the White House Cockroach written and illus. by Howie Schneider
235  BuLLetIn BLue rIBBons 2006
237  suBjeCt And use Index
200 • The BulleTin
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
 
 
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the  
 
 
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison
Laura Baas, Reviewer (LB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Hope Morrison, Reviewer (HM)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Cindy Welch, Reviewer (CW)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Katrina Bromann
Melissa Zilic
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print or electronic $80.00; combined print & electronic $112.00; multiple in-
stitutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, $50.00; students, 
$15.00. In countries other than the United States, add $13.20 per subscription for postage; subscrib-
ers in Canada and Mexico add $9.35. Single copy rate: $9.00. Volumes available in microfilm from 
ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche 
from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be 
made payable to The Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Divi-
sion, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 
410-516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/jour-
nals/advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.uiuc.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2007 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image by Lat from Kampung Boy ©2006. Used by permission of First Second/Roaring Brook 
Press.
January 2007 • 201
the BIg PICture
Kampung Boy
written and illustrated by Lat
The author-illustrator of this title has long been a cause célèbre in Southeast Asia; 
Kampung Boy, his memoir of his youth in a small Malaysian village, was first pub-
lished there in 1979, and while it’s been imported to a multitude of countries since 
then, its appearance in this edition marks Lat’s first American publication. It’s been 
worth the wait: this is a lively and engrossing tale of an everyday life vastly different 
from those most American kids experience. 
Lat grows up in a cool and airy house on stilts in a rural area of Western 
Malaysia’s Kinta Valley, the world’s most productive tin-mining region. Here rubber 
smallholdings provide income for family members, grownups whiz around impor-
tantly on bicycles (brand names as lovingly treasured as the names of car models) 
while the only train is a blur that “never stopped at our kampung,” and students 
pay the schoolteacher with whatever they have to offer (some give him fifty cents 
or a dollar, others give him a plate of rice or sugar, some provide him with firewood 
they’ve picked up on their way to class). The village follows Indonesian and Muslim 
tradition: Lat’s birth (at which his grandmother was midwife, recompensed with 
a roast chicken, a plate of yellow rice, and a batik sarong) is followed by his ritual 
hair-shaving ceremony on the forty-fifth day (which involves what looks to be a 
very lulling rocking in a hammock), and he resignedly undergoes circumcision at 
the age of nine. The first-person narration, appearing in a font emulating hand 
lettering, has an easygoing, comradely tone, and it’s filled with understated affec-
tion for family, neighbors, and village life. Lat’s a master at making the story itself 
involving even as he weaves it into a visually dependent narrative, so it’s interesting 
to hear about his mother stuffing him with porridge even as the art shows a spiky-
haired baby spitting the food back out with a decisive “ptooi!” Context clarifies 
many unfamiliar elements—even if kids don’t know exactly what a tin dredge is, 
they’ll understand huge local machinery that seems monstrous to little kids—and 
the story has a warm assumption of insider status and an emphasis on universally 
understandable experiences (horsing around with friends, evading authority) that 
makes it a more intimately involving tale than those that carefully explain their 
daily realities to distant readers. 
The black-and-white pen-and-ink illustrations are, if you’ll pardon the 
pun, the real draw: though the format isn’t graphic-novel-styled panels, the single-
page scenes vividly and comedically portray Lat’s life. The kampung is a cheerful 
place of people hanging out in the tea stalls or checking out passersby from the open 
doorways of their stilt-legged houses, and the occasional caption helps identify key 
people or elements; a compact tree stump with a wild thatch of dark hair, young Lat 
is often exaggeratedly dwarfed by a confusing adult world or followed by motion 
lines as he darts through the countryside (sometimes happily butt naked). 
202 • The BulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
The district apparently has changed considerably since Lat’s youth; like 
Robert Peck’s or Gary Paulsen’s tales of youthful rural hijinks, this book describes 
a life that is all the more attractive for its disappearance. And as in so many idylls 
of country innocence, the protagonist himself must leave this world behind, in this 
case in a mixture of excitement and regret as he departs for boarding school with his 
grandmother’s words ringing in his ears: “Be humble because we are humble people. 
Always remember God and don’t forget about us back here in the kampung.”
The book’s audience not only won’t forget, they’ll wish for more (perhaps 
the second installment of his autobiography, Town Boy, will arrive on these shores 
soon). This companionable chronicle achieves that rare thing in an international 
title: making readers feel like they’re hanging out with a friend halfway around the 
world. (See review, p. 220, for publication information.)
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
Allen, ThomAs B. Harriet Tubman, Secret Agent: How Daring Slaves and Free 
Blacks Spied for the Union during the Civil War; illus. by Carla Bauer. National 
Geographic, 2006 191p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7922-7890-9 $25.90
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7922-7889-5 $16.95   
Ad Gr. 6-10
Reprising his exploration of the Founding Father’s Revolutionary War espionage ring 
in George Washington, Spymaster (BCCB 4/04), Allen now turns to the information 
runners who supplied intelligence to Lincoln and his generals. This is a more loosely 
focused work, and so much time is spent providing background on Tubman and 
the Underground Railroad (pertinent, but somewhat rambling) that the actual spy 
activity doesn’t get well underway until nearly a hundred pages into the text. Even 
then, Tubman (whom Allen irritatingly refers to as Harriet, even though he more 
formally calls male players by their last names) has evidently covered her tracks so 
well that her efforts can only be roughly sketched. Often more interesting are others 
in the Union network: the Dabneys, who signaled Confederate troop movement via 
clothesline; Mary Touvestre, who worked right under Jefferson Davis’ nose in his 
own household; Robert Smalls, who purloined a Confederate ship and surrendered 
it into Union hands; Richmond socialite Elizabeth Van Lew, who ran an entire ring 
of spies and passed messages in code. There’s participatory opportunity in strings of 
numbers tucked near the book’s gutter, which can be decoded and checked against 
the answer on a website, and lots of cramped period and contemporary artwork for 
perusing by readers with sufficiently acute eyesight. Apart from annotated endnotes, 
a timeline, and an index, an epilogue on evidence rounds out the volume by admit-
ting that very little is known about spying during the Civil War, and much of that 
is based on hearsay. Which, of course, leaves readers to wonder just how much of 
the previous hundred and fifty pages they can believe, but the thrill of tagging along 
on spy missions may suffice even in the face of uncertainty.  EB 
January 2007 • 203
Avi Crispin at the Edge of the World. Hyperion, 2006 234p
ISBN 0-7868-5152-X $16.99   
R Gr. 6-9
Avi’s latest novel picks up exactly where the Newbery Medal winning Crispin: The 
Cross of Lead (BCCB 10/02) left off: after relinquishing any claim to the throne, 
Crispin and his stalwart companion, Bear, have escaped Great Wexley and are headed 
off in search of safety. Members of Bear’s secret brotherhood are seeking him out 
as a traitor, however, and danger proves once again ever present. After a shooting 
leaves Bear so badly hurt that Crispin fears for his life, Aude, a healer and believer 
in the ancient religion, and her apprentice Troth discover the two in the woods and 
treat Bear. When Aude is brutally murdered over accusations of witchcraft, Troth 
decides to leave at once with Bear and Crispin, and the three, posing as a juggler 
and his two children, head out on new adventures. As in the first novel, the mutual 
care and support shared by Bear and Crispin carry the emotional weight of the story. 
The addition of Troth, a disfigured girl accustomed to bitter hatred, provides an 
opportunity for further demonstration our heroes’ capacity for love and essential 
goodness. Crispin is less sympathetic here, having evolved into a somewhat more 
obstinate, reckless boy who questions and often disobeys Bear’s guidance in the 
name of proving himself an adult, but readers will probably understand his bid for 
independence. The adventures are well crafted and the historical setting deliciously 
conveyed; fans old and new will eagerly await the conclusive third volume.  HM
BArTh-grözinger, inge Something Remains; tr. by Anthea Bell. Hyperion, 
2006 390p
ISBN 0-7868-3880-9 $16.99   
R Gr. 6-9
Erich Levi, the twelve-year-old son of a wealthy Jewish family living in a small 
German village in 1933, can’t understand why his parents are so upset by the re-
cent election of a political leader named Adolf Hitler. Soon, though, Erich grows 
aware of the manifold ways in which he is targeted because of his religion, from 
his growing mistreatment at school to the eventual destruction of everything that 
is familiar and good to him. Initially, Erich clings to the hope that the worst is 
behind him, that soon he will be allowed to spend time with his friends, to speak 
up in class, and to once again take pride in his religious convictions. After years of 
horrific oppression, though, Erich and his family come to “the abrupt realization 
that other people wanted to destroy them” and that their only chance for survival 
is to emigrate to the United States. This gripping novel, translated from German, 
powerfully sets up the social climate that eventually produced the Holocaust. The 
story evolves slowly, reading not as a series of statements of persecution but as a 
very deliberate answer to the long-considered question of how the Holocaust could 
have happened. Erich’s voice, in describing the myriad ways in which his familiar, 
comfortable world is disappearing, rings with clarity and confusion. Several plot 
complications (Erich’s two best friends are Christian, he falls in love with the niece 
of his hated instructor, who is a Nazi party leader in the community) add further 
emotional depth to the already complex world in which Erich lives. An epilogue 
identifies Barth-Grözinger as a present-day high school teacher in the village where 
the story is set; she and her students embarked on an eighteen-month research proj-
ect on the history of Jews in their community, and their research forms the heart 
of this story. While much of the story is fictionalized, Erich Levi is a true historical 
figure; his moving tale of loss of innocence vividly portrays how, despite emotional 
resistance and a sense of righteousness, the Nazi machine instilled deep fear and 
204 • The BulleTin
shame in all Jews of the era. In addition to the epilogue and author’s note, a notes 
section identifies unfamiliar terms used throughout the text.  HM
Bidner, Jenni Is My Dog a Wolf?: How Your Pet Compares to Its Wild Cousin. Lark/
Sterling, 2006 64p illus. with photographs
ISBN 1-57990-732-6 $9.95   
R Gr. 3-6
This inviting little volume on canine behavior starts with the precept that dogs and 
wolves do share certain similarities because of their shared ancestry, but that they’re 
not the same creatures. The book opens with a discussion of wildness vs. domesticity 
and the implications of this key difference and then explores pack behavior, canine 
smell and hearing, canine communications such as body language and barking, and 
some basic dog actions that have their roots in wild wolf behavior. Both main text 
and photo captions are lively and knowledgeable, with audience-appealing wit and 
relevant dog-owning details; the book avoids many of the common wolf-’n’-dog 
clichés and quietly emphasizes a dog-owner’s responsibility to keep a dog healthy 
and properly trained for the domestic state in which it lives, regardless of its wild 
ancestry. The intelligently selected photographs, many taken by the author, are 
genuinely effective at illustrating textual points, and the book’s compact trim size is 
appealing and the design lively. With its popular subject, unintimidating text, and 
browsable format, this will make many breeds of readers sit up and beg. A table of 
contents and an index add helpful accessibility to an already useful title, while an 
appendix offers a few websites for finding out more about wolves.  DS
Browne, AnThony Silly Billy; written and illus. by Anthony Browne. Candle-
wick, 2006 [32p]
ISBN 0-7636-3124-8 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 5-8 yrs
Billy’s an expert young worrier, worrying about hats, and clouds, and rain, and 
giant birds, among other things. Parental reassurance doesn’t solve the problem, 
but his grandmother presents him with a collection of Guatemalan worry dolls; 
Billy finds that telling them his worries helps, but then he starts to worry about 
the poor concern-burdened dolls. Worry dolls are always an appealing subject, and 
high-anxiety kids will certainly empathize with Billy. The story’s somewhat slight, 
though, and the book doesn’t acknowledge the problem that kids will immediately 
notice—Billy’s solution of making worry dolls for the worry dolls just makes a new 
raft of dolls to worry about, so unless Billy wants to make dolls into infinity, he’s 
going to have to get a grip. Browne’s clean watercolor-and-pencil illustrations have 
a surrealist’s poker-faced soberness in depicting the takeover of Billy’s bedroom by 
his worries, which nicely complements the gaiety of the worry dolls in their rainbow 
hues. It’s nice to see worry dolls back in children’s literature (see Regan’s Curse of 
the Trouble Dolls, BCCB 5/92, among others), and those kids not yet familiar with 
the idea will appreciate the notion of making something else do the heavy lifting of 
anxiety; might as well use this as a lead-in to the craft segment, since the audience 
will all immediately want their own dolls.  DS 
BunTing, eve Reggie; illus. by D. Brent Burkett. Cricket, 2006 105p
ISBN 0-8126-2746-6 $16.95   
R Gr. 2-3
The gray stuffed mouse with the bright red vest drifts down to Alex like a gift from 
heaven, tangled in the string of a dying helium balloon. In the long-honored tradi-
January 2007 • 205
tion of “finders, keepers” Alex lays claim, names the mouse Reggie, and forms an 
attachment that even startles Alex himself, calling up vague but pleasant memories 
from somewhere in his eight-year-old past. Almost immediately, though, signs 
appear around the neighborhood, posted by a distraught child who wants her toy 
back, and Alex does everything in his power to convince himself—and his friend 
Brian, in whom he confides his guilty secret—that he is under no obligation to 
give Reggie back. Only after he loses his dog, Patch, and nobody come forward to 
return his beloved pet does Alex truly begin to empathize with another child’s loss. 
This is a gentle tale with a predictable outcome; of course, Alex eventually does the 
right thing, and of course, Patch comes home, but readers experience authentic 
tension in waiting for Alex’s moment of realization as well as entertainment in 
watching Alex try out every lame excuse he can muster to postpone the inevitable. 
Alert readers may object to an awkward hole in the plot in which Alex tips his 
hand to the kids who lost Reggie in the first place but who never seem to pick up 
on the glaring clue. Nonetheless, the chunky typeface, scratchy black-and-white 
pictures, and all-too-familiar exercise in kid logic make for a discussion-worthy 
chapter book.  EB
Burleigh, roBerT Stealing Home: Jackie Robinson: Against the Odds; illus. by 
Mike Wimmer. Wiseman/Simon, 2007 [32p]
ISBN 0-689-86276-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 3-5
The author/illustrator team that brought us Home Run: The Story of Babe Ruth 
(BCCB 9/98) scores once more with a similarly formatted look at the career of 
Jackie Robinson. Again a poetically rendered narrative line in oversized font fol-
lows the star in action, and the featured base-stealing play approximates real time, 
as “the wild, dust cloud-heaving slide and quick foot under the too-late tag” ends 
with the “flat hands of the bent umpire signaling Safe and the thunder of screaming 
mouths.” Career details appear in sidebars masquerading as vintage baseball cards 
slapped against the warm background of worn and weathered wood. It’s here that 
fans get the scoop on Robinson’s “ability to reach full speed in just a few strides, his 
instinct for taking an extra base,” and, of course, his forbearance in the face of racial 
prejudice. Wimmer’s at the top of his game, capturing the competitors’ intensity in 
close-ups with photorealistic faces and expressionistic mood, feathering the edges of 
pumping legs and arms to harness speed onto the canvas. Even the spectators receive 
the same affectionate attention as the players, with a dozen or so carefully portrayed 
faces transformed from a scene of cautiously optimistic concentration to another 
scene of howling jubilation amid a rain of airborne popcorn. Yes, your 796.357 
shelves may already be sagging, but you have to squeeze this title in.  EB 
Busse, sArAh mArTin Banjo Granny; written by Sarah Martin Busse and Jacque-
line Briggs Martin; illus. by Barry Root. Houghton, 2006 32p
ISBN 0-618-33603-6 $16.00   
R 4-7 yrs
It’s hard to keep a boy and his granny apart, especially when he loves the bluegrass 
music she plays on her banjo. Owen’s grandmother responds to the bond between 
kid and grandparent by putting on her “thousand-mile shoes,” packing up her 
banjo, and making her way across the land. Little birds apprise Owen of his granny’s 
progress, while Granny makes her way across the daunting river, mountain, and 
desert by playing them the song of her grandchild, “who goes wiggly, jiggly, all-
206 • The BulleTin
around giggly, and tip over tumble for bluegrass music.” Though there’s a bit of a 
disconnect between the text’s calling Owen a “baby” and the sturdy young guy in 
the illustrations, the prose displays the unobtrusive poetry and lyrical playfulness 
of Martin’s earlier outings (The Water Gift and the Pig of the Pig, BCCB 5/03); the 
repetition and internal rhymes make it a tongue-tickling readaloud, and audiences 
will relish the folkloric heroism of the grandmother undaunted by natural obstacles 
as she journeys to her beloved grandson. Warmth suffuses the landscapes in Root’s 
mixed-media illustrations, with lemony morning light and golden shades of late 
afternoon predominating; Owen is a perky and eager figure, but it’s the image 
of Granny, sort of a bluegrass Mary Poppins as she rows, floats, and soars to her 
grandson, that’s the most dramatic. Lyrics and music for Granny’s song to Owen 
are included, as is a brief note about bluegrass music.  DS
cheng, AndreA Eclipse. Front Street, 2006 129p
ISBN 1-932425-21-7 $16.95   
R Gr. 4-7
Eight-year-old Peti is apprehensive about the arrival of his Hungarian relatives, who 
are coming to live in America. They have a twelve-year-old son, and Peti knows 
that older boys can shift from nice to bullying without much warning. His fears 
prove more than justified when it comes to his cousin, Gabor, who is grumpy at 
best and abusive at worst. Peti is also worried about his grandfather, who has been 
taken to a work camp in Stalinist post-war Hungary. As life gets increasingly strained 
at home, Peti spends more time at the library, where he learns about many new 
things, including secret codes, eclipses, and the Underground Railroad, that become 
meaningful for him in light of his circumstances. Cheng achieves a pitch-perfect 
characterization for this Hungarian-American boy in the early 1950s: Peti is chirpy 
and naïve with grownups, but he’s learning to keep his own counsel where the older 
boys are concerned; he’s worried and uncertain about his grandfather’s situation, 
but he’s cheered by the approval he gains for adult-pleasing behavior in contrast to 
his sulky cousin. His few possessions are well beloved, and his insatiable thirst for 
knowledge about his world is age-authentic. The metaphors that Cheng provides, 
her straightforward prose, and the connections she draws between life behind the 
Iron Curtain and life under American slavery make the difficult concepts Peti 
must contend with understandable to both him and the reader; children with and 
without first-hand experience with immigration and relatives in danger in faraway 
lands will warm to Peti’s plight.  KC 
codell, esmé rAJi Vive la Paris. Hyperion, 2006 210p
ISBN 0-7868-5124-4 $15.99   
Ad Gr. 5-8
This companion novel to Sahara Special (BCCB 4/03) tells the story of African-
American fifth-grader Paris McCray, child number five and daughter number one of 
the McCray clan. She’s ready to learn to play the piano, but she’s not sure she’s ready 
for her new piano teacher, Mrs. Rosen. Outspoken Mrs. Rosen is known throughout 
Chicago’s jazz circles as something of a legend, but Paris finds her overbearing and 
nosy from the get-go. Inevitably, Mrs. Rosen comes to play a key role in helping 
Paris to sort out her world, a world wherein her eighth-grade brother Michael is 
constantly beat upon by Tanaeja, one of Paris’ fifth-grade classmates, and her oldest 
brother Louis announces to the family that his girlfriend is pregnant. The novel 
is at its best when treating the complexities of cultural and social misunderstand-
ing: when Paris unknowingly wears to school the yellow star worn by Jews in the 
January 2007 • 207
Holocaust, given to her by Mrs. Rosen, she gets a fast lesson in world history, and 
when her class learns that Tanaeja’s older brother has died, she learns compassion 
she didn’t think she had. Like Sahara Special, Codell’s latest novel offers a breezy, 
introspective window into a young girl’s life. However, the book’s determination to 
touch upon a large number of complex issues, including social exclusion, prejudice, 
bullying, and death, results in a rapid shifting from topic to topic and a rather fre-
netic recalling of events that seem to simultaneously impact one another and stand 
alone. Paris is a likable character, however, and her slangy, stream-of-consciousness 
narration believably evokes that of a thoughtful, occasionally precocious preteen 
trying to figure out the realities of her world.  HM 
conwAy, celesTe The Melting Season. Delacorte, 2006 273p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90357-X $17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73339-9 $15.95   
R Gr. 7-12
Giselle lives under the shadow of her flamboyant mother, a former prima ballerina, 
and still bitterly misses her father, who died when she was small. She herself is a 
devoted young dancer and thus a student at a New York City school for “artisti-
cally gifted youth” (“We are so artistic it strains the mind,” she says dryly), living 
in a circumscribed urban world of ballet and school classmates, until she meets 
Will. Handsome young Will lives out of Manhattan and in a very different world 
than Giselle, but instant attraction blooms between them when they meet in the 
garden shop where he works; soon the two are in love, but Giselle’s fear of moving 
beyond the world of her childhood—a world built on her misperceptions rather 
than reality—may prevent her from engaging in real romance. The book itself is 
thoroughly romantic, creating a vivid milieu of lush artistic eccentricity and faded 
grandeur for Giselle’s current and past home life that’s just the sort of existence one 
imagines young ballerinas leading. Conway effectively operates on two planes, the 
manifest reality of Giselle’s voice with its contemporary snarkiness and legitimate 
teen frustration (Giselle’s mother really can be quite the public embarrassment), and 
a corps de ballet of metaphorical explorations of Giselle’s tentative moves toward 
maturation, from Giselle’s dance role as an ice-melting Spring to the startling ar-
rival of her rare menses. There’s plenty of hinting at the real truth about Giselle’s 
childhood—that her mother is silently accepting wrongly placed blame so as to 
protect her daughter’s fond memories of her father—but it’s believable that Giselle’s 
determined denial would make her the last, even behind the reader, to realize the 
facts. This is a sweet yet enjoyably sumptuous story of a ballet princess coming of 
romantic age, and it will satisfy exactly the teen fairy-tale fans and dance buffs that 
description suggests.  DS
cooley, BeTh Shelter. Delacorte, 2006 [224p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90347-2 $17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73330-5 $15.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
When Lucy’s dad died, she didn’t think things could get any worse, but they soon 
do: her father was mortgaged and indebted to the hilt, there’s no money to keep 
the family’s big house or pay Lucy’s private-school tuition, and even after subse-
quent housing downgrades, they must move into a shelter for homeless women 
and children. Though bitter, Lucy eventually begins to appreciate some of her 
sheltermates, and she’s also developing a solid friendship-cum-romance with her 
208 • The BulleTin
handsome and sympathetic classmate, Aspen, until her embarrassment about her 
lost status causes her to pull away. The book is realistic in its acknowledgment 
that middle-class solidity isn’t proof against financial disaster, and Lucy’s shock at 
the loss of all her familiar life landmarks is believable. The book sometimes reads 
more like a fairy tale than a problem novel, though, with melodramatic backstory 
(Lucy’s rich aunt, originally engaged to Lucy’s father, has been estranged from Lucy’s 
mother since the wedding), moral lessons (Lucy’s private-school friends prove false), 
and contrived events (Lucy’s homemaker mother finally gets a lucrative restaurant 
management job); the story details raise myriad questions (why does Lucy’s jobless 
mother never consider returning to the waitressing of her youth, why is the family’s 
financial slide all Lucy’s father’s fault when Lucy’s mother also evaded responsibility 
with her passivity, and why is there not even a discussion of the possibility of selling 
Lucy’s mother’s sapphire and diamond ring?). There’s still plenty of there-but-for-
the-grace-of-God appeal for a reading audience, and they’ll be relieved to see that 
Lucy’s family fortunes are finally back on the rise.  DS 
croggon, Alison The Riddle: The Second Book of Pellinor. Candlewick, 
2006 490p
ISBN 0-7636-3015-2 $17.99   
R Gr. 7-12
Maerad, obstinate, troubled, and magically gifted, continues her quest to save the 
world in this sequel to The Naming (BCCB 9/05). She finds her growing relation-
ship with Cadvan, a Bard who helped her escape her life as a slave and who is 
now traveling with her to work out the puzzle of the Treesong, both frightening 
(Maerad has never trusted men) and exhilarating (this is the first family she’s had 
in years). More pressing than the developing relationships or the continuation of 
her formal education, however, are the imminent and potentially lethal dangers 
that Maerad faces at every turn; indeed, both she and Cadvan have been framed 
as traitors to the Light and are wanted dead. If Maerad can’t figure out how the 
Treesong plays into her destiny as the Chosen One, though, the world will soon be 
overcome by darkness and evil, making friendships, schooling, and self-exoneration 
all meaningless. This entry suffers a bit from middle-novel syndrome, containing 
many events but little actual plot movement as Maerad travels toward the destina-
tion she is to reach in the next volume. Fortunately, strong character development, 
intriguing and ever-changing landscapes, and the integration of Bardic poetry and 
spells easily compensate for the lack of resolution. Readers will be fully drawn into 
Maerad’s adventures, and they will therefore likely devour the end matter (maps 
and appendices firmly reinforcing the claim that this series is indeed drawn from 
manuscripts of the lost civilization of Edil-Amarandh) that may indicate what will 
happen to her next. Tolkienesque in style, this series represents high fantasy at its 
most elegant; in addition, Meredith Pierce fans looking for tough but realistic 
heroines will likely embrace Maerad as one of their favorites.  AS
de mAri, silvAnA The Last Dragon; tr. by Shaun Whiteside. Miramax/Hyper-
ion, 2006 361p
ISBN 0-7868-3636-9 $16.95   
R Gr. 5-7
In this Italian import, a young elf, Yorsh, fulfills his destiny with the help of humans, 
two dragons, and an unstinting belief that kindness prevails. The postapocalyptic 
world in which Yorsh lives is harsh and ugly: he alone survives after all other elves 
have been murdered by superstitious humans or drowned in a terrible flood; cold 
January 2007 • 209
rain falls constantly; and children are almost all enslaved by illiterate landowners. 
Yorsh nonetheless believes in a prophecy that suggests that sun and peace will be 
restored if he can find the last dragon and somehow break the cycle of darkness. 
Along the way, he accepts help from a man and woman who first reluctantly and 
then lovingly aid and protect him. After finding the dragon, Yorsh spends thirteen 
years (a typical brooding period) caring for the fractious creature until its offspring 
is born; the second half of the book shifts focus to the daughter of the two humans, 
the newly hatched dragon, an older and wiser Yorsh, and their common goal of ful-
filling the prophecy. This novel rests comfortably on the border between unbearable 
sweetness and heartwarming tenderness; the sacrificial gestures and cozy friendships 
establish a story meant to tug at one’s emotions, while a sharp humor throughout 
leavens any saccharinity. De Mari offers carefully constructed protagonists that are 
complex within their ultimate benevolence: even Yorsh, who’s adorable, connected 
to nature, and giving to a fault, has moments of philosophical worry and sheer 
exasperation. While the pace is languid, it’s effective, and the plot elements offer 
an adventure of the best sort with firebreathing dragons, a smidge of romance, and 
a “brains over brawn” hero to whom readers will likely relate.  AS 
drescher, henrik Hubert the Pudge: A Vegetarian Tale; written and illus. by 
Henrik Drescher. Candlewick, 2006 [40p]
ISBN 0-7636-1992-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 6-9 yrs
The life of a pudge (a piglike creature with a nose like a long horn and two more 
horns on the side of its head) is usually a sorry thing: they’re fattened up in cramped 
quarters and slaughtered young for myriad human purposes (“Every part of the 
pudge was used. Even the squeal, which was canned and installed in car alarms 
and foghorns”). One young pudge, Hubert, manages to escape and make his way 
into the jungle, where he thrives and becomes “the first full-grown pudge since 
ancient times . . . big enough to give pudgy-back rides to elephants!” Eventually 
he returns, rescuing the other pudges and reforming the pudge farmer, who turns 
to making tofu dogs with the help of the liberated pudges. While the plot’s logic 
doesn’t bear too much close scrutiny (for instance, the herd of humongous pudgies 
is going to wreak considerable ecological havoc on that forest), this is ultimately 
a giddy animal-welfare fantasy that will appeal to the tender-hearted and the silly 
alike. As usual, Drescher’s illustrative style, in his ink and colored-pencil art, adds 
a note of eerie savagery to its whimsy: the pudgies have a human mien, with a 
stubbly texture that suggests five o’clock shadow, and the blotty ink lines have an 
edgy exaggeration that recalls new-wave cartooning. Kids may not catch all the 
sardonic humor, but they’ll love the notion of freeing the captives and the happy 
romping of enormous playful critters.  DS
eAsTon, kelly Aftershock. McElderry, 2006 165p
ISBN 1-4169-0052-7 $16.95   
R Gr. 7-12
One moment Adam is cozily riding in the car with his parents through Idaho on 
the way back to Rhode Island, and in the next a wreck has left his parents dead. 
Shocked, the seventeen-year-old stumbles away from the crash and into a strange 
limbo, where he wanders voiceless (he’s been unable to speak since the accident) 
across the country, falling in with a sequence of strangers and drifting into memories 
of his family and girlfriend as he gradually responds to his urge to head east toward 
210 • The BulleTin
home. This is an arresting opening, and the book offers an inventive and dramatic 
portrayal of the effect such an event might have on a teenager’s life. Vocabulary 
words, taken ostensibly from the homework Adam was doing with his mother 
in the car, act as resonant chapter epigraphs for Adam’s confused peregrinations, 
often highlighting the nature of a particular episode. The people Adam encounters 
are a believably diverse gallery and his travel is credibly fraught with danger and 
cruelty as well as random kindness, but it’s his struggling consciousness that’s the 
real focus. While his journey toward wholeness isn’t complete (by book’s end he 
still hasn’t regained his voice), he’s at least back in his hometown among his loved 
ones, a satisfying ending to this offbeat and poignant story.  DS
FArdell, John The Flight of the Silver Turtle. Putnam, 2006 233p
ISBN 0-399-24382-8 $15.99   
Ad Gr. 4-6 
In this sequel to The 7 Professors of the Far North (BCCB 10/05), the same sizable 
cast of characters, five children and seven professors, are all now settled into vari-
ous summer pursuits. Of course, what would a true summer vacation be for the 
fearless friends without a healthy dose of murder, intrigue, and breathless adven-
ture? Luckily for them, they accidentally stumble onto a case of mistaken identity 
involving a small airplane, a top-secret antigravity device, and an international 
crime organization, Noctarma. The protagonists are soon in the thick of it as they 
discover that Noctarma was actually correct in assuming the plane held important 
secrets; unfortunately, this discovery coincides with the kids’ realization that every 
adult pretending to help them is a secret agent for Noctarma. Fardell has a good 
sense of just how far an over-the-top adventure can be pushed to keep it rollicking 
and fun rather than ridiculous and unbelievable: the genuine friendships between 
the kids help to balance lines like “Those yella rattlesnakes!”, shouted out during 
the third last-minute plane rescue. This novel is definitely a sequel for established 
fans, though: the unwieldy number of characters (especially the professors, who are 
mostly relegated to bit parts this time) and too-brief references to earlier feats make 
it nearly impossible for new readers to jump in and understand this complex story. 
In addition, the explanations about ciphers and codes are occasionally overlong, 
interrupting the breakneck pace necessary for such an action-driven plot. How-
ever, a book that offers antigravity suits, kids saving the world, and the shadowy 
yet omnipresent Noctarma can be forgiven for the occasional misstep in character 
development or pacing.  AS 
FiTzgerAld, dAwn Soccer Chick Rules. Brodie/Roaring Brook, 2006 150p
ISBN 1-59643-137-7 $16.95   
R Gr. 5-8
Tess Munro, “beast” of the soccer field, must now devote her tenacity to an off-
the-field challenge—winning the upcoming school tax levy vote to save her athletic 
program from oblivion. After all, Tess lives according to her self-proclaimed “soccer 
chick rules,” and rule number five states that “losing sucks.” She therefore attacks the 
levy campaign with gameworthy intensity, but her best-laid plans frequently yield 
misfortunate, if humorous, outcomes—not to mention two strikes with the local 
cops (strike two comes when her attempt to organize a haunted-house fundraiser 
terminates in pumpkin-gut sledding down a residential street). Tess’ wry narration 
is funny, and there’s an authentic middle-school flavor to the displays of humor 
(fart noises and cleverly tasteless Halloween costumes) and the fierce boys vs. girls 
competitions; Tess’ family, at times distant and disapproving and at times loving and 
January 2007 • 211
supportive, adds another layer of familiarity to the story. Although the plot has its 
predictable moments and the soccer action is more compelling than the levy antics, 
the soccer and tax plots combine to drive the narrative action effectively since both 
have their basis in Tess’ single-minded compulsion to win, and the sports story and 
sporty protagonist are appropriately and enjoyably energetic. Many kids will echo 
Tess’ sports-centric view of school (“nine classes and lunch before the main event”), 
and they will scramble to read this literary romp on the athletic field.  LB
FleischmAn, sid The White Elephant; illus. by Robert McGuire. Greenwillow, 
2006 95p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-113137-7 $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-113136-9 $15.99   
R Gr. 3-6
Run-Run, a young mahout in “old Siam,” runs afoul of the arrogant young prince 
when his aged working elephant, Walking Mountain, sprays the regent with river 
water. Prince Noi slyly devises a punishment to fit the crime, cursing Run-Run with 
the gift of a white elephant, a beast so privileged that he must always have his way 
and never be allowed to labor. He may not work, but he certainly can eat, as Run-
Run finds out when he and Walking Mountain now have to care for and feed him. 
But Sahib, the white elephant, has a few surprises of his own—he actually wants to 
work, imitating Walking Mountain every chance he gets and threatening to bring 
the wrath of Prince Noi down upon Run-Run for his disobedience. Fleischman spins 
his original tale in brief chapters that take the tone of Kiplingesque fictional lore, 
but he incorporates his own wry sense of humor (“Was the animal named because 
he was like a foreign sahib, white and proud?”). McGuire’s softly shaded charcoal 
pictures vary in effectiveness; images are sometimes naïvely misshapen, but more 
often spare and solid as monumental sculpture. The climax, in which now-trained 
Sahib is responsible for saving Prince Noi from a tiger attack, rings true for a tale 
of a proud young man’s comeuppance; the conclusion, in which Run-Run leaves 
his village with both elephants in tow and a wish to enroll in school, feels far more 
like an improbable and overly convenient wrap-up. Still, there’s enough interest 
in the elephants and grace in the telling for a quick independent read or a more 
leisurely read aloud.  EB 
Fleming, cAndAce Tippy-Tippy-Tippy, Hide!; illus. by G. Brian Karas. Seo/
Atheneum, 2006 [32p]
ISBN 0-689-87479-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-7 yrs
In this sequel to Muncha!, Muncha!, Muncha! (BCCB 3/02), the rabbits are back to 
plague Mr. McGreely. It’s not his garden they’re trying to access this time, though, 
but his house, since the chill of winter has left the bunnies shivering outside. When 
direct importuning doesn’t work, the buns slip in through the mail slot, the chimney, 
and the window, getting around Mr. M.’s fortifications each time; he finally bricks 
himself in, waits out the winter, and emerges only to find the wily rabbits chow-
ing down on his tender young spring plants. This isn’t playing as effectively as the 
first book into real rabbit habits (and kids will feel sorry for the poor cold rabbits 
who end up spending winter in the snow), but audiences will still get a kick out of 
the rabbit hijinks and their sassy leavings (especially the literal rabbit spoor) that 
prove to Mr. McGreely they got around his defenses. Karas winterizes his pencil 
and paint illustrations by graying the tones and subduing the light slightly, and 
212 • The BulleTin
the lowered energy is seasonally appropriate as well; a few spreads offer diverting 
games of spot-the-bunny, and the bunnies’ innocent-faced determination remains 
humorous. While this doesn’t reach the sparkling standard of the previous title, 
fans of the intrepid anti-authoritarian rabbits will be pleased to see that even if the 
fuzzy little guys can’t get their way, they can still make trouble.  DS
FleTcher, susAn Alphabet of Dreams. Seo/Atheneum, 2006 294p
ISBN 0-689-85042-5 $16.95   
R Gr. 8-12
After her parents are seized by King Phraates following her father’s failed putsch, 
fourteen-year-old Mitra eludes capture by disguising herself as a vagabond boy. She 
and her young brother, Babak, spend three years hiding and subsisting until they 
discover Babak’s gift of dreams. Such a singular talent is impossible to keep secret for 
long, and Mitra and Babak are soon enslaved in the caravan of Melchior, the powerful 
Magus. Overlooking the increasing cost that dreaming for others has on Babak’s soul, 
Melchior appropriates Babak’s dreams to interpret the grammar and meaning of the 
stars; when he finds in Babak’s visions a foretelling of the imminent birth of a king, 
the caravan follows these portents west out of Persia. Mitra’s emotional pain—forged 
out of past losses (her parents and older brother), perceived mistakes (her failure to 
protect Babak), and cultural violations (her hidden gender results in breaches of 
taboo)—makes her tortured voice and insular behavior credible. Yet even as Mitra 
resolves to forgo love and trust to protect herself against further loss and betrayal, 
her encounters with a drooling donkey, a mangy camel, a one-eyed cat, a country 
rustic, and the benevolence of the Magus Balthazaar all soften her attitude. Fletcher 
plausibly recasts the Magi’s journey to Bethlehem into a journey that ultimately focuses 
less on seeking power and more on changing hearts. The tempo slows at times with 
Mitra’s numerous philosophical explorations, but the text’s lyrical language, nomadic 
landscapes, and varied conflict trump pacing flaws. Her literal and psychological 
journey encompasses a provocative mix of history, culture, philosophy, and religion; 
while such a mix may not have a ready-made audience, readers who enjoyed Donna 
Jo Napoli’s Song of the Magdalene (BCCB 1/97) or Nikki Grime’s Dark Sons (BCCB 
12/05) will find this similarly intriguing. A map, a list of books for suggested reading, 
and an author’s note with historical information are included.  LB 
Fredericks, mAriAh In the Cards: Love; illus. by Liselotte Watkins. Jackson/
Atheneum, 2006 [270p]
ISBN 0-689-87654-8 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
A surprising bequest changes the life of eighth-grader Anna; her late elderly neighbor, 
who was fond of nice reliable Anna, has left her an obstreperous cat and a deck of 
tarot cards. When Anna and her friends Eve and Syd try a reading of Anna’s future, 
it looks like she will get her wish: the attention of popular class hottie Declan. Sure 
enough, she and Declan do become closer, but Anna is confused about their rela-
tionship, her commitment to her friends, and the role of fate in determining her 
life. This is the first title in a trio of books (each of the three friends is scheduled 
for her own go with the cards), and Fredericks’ perceptive touches and original 
characterization lift it above the standard middle-school relationship drama. It’s 
keenly accurate that Anna mostly sees her motivation for niceness as avoiding the 
guilt of bad behavior, and she’s believably struggling with the social skill of bal-
ancing old (girl) friends and new (boy) friend. Declan isn’t a clichéd possessor of 
January 2007 • 213
shallow snobbery or secret depths, and his relationship with Anna goes in humanly 
credible rather than melodramatic directions. This is an easygoing yet thoughtful 
story that demonstrates that even for those who believe cards are predictive, life is 
unpredictable.  DS
Friend, nATAshA Lush. Scholastic, 2006 178p
ISBN 0-439-85346-X $16.99   
Ad Gr. 6-9
Eighth grade is pretty much hell for Sam, short for Samantha: her father’s alcoholism 
dominates the family, her mother has buried herself in yoga and refuses to admit her 
husband’s problem, and Sam’s growing breasts have made her the target of the boys 
at school (she lost her best male friend after he spearheaded a nasty prank involving 
her bra—or so she thinks). Yearning for some kind of sympathetic guidance, Sam 
leaves a plaintive note in a study carrel at the public library, hoping for a response 
from a high-school girl who frequents it; instead she gets a pseudonymous answer 
from a mysterious correspondent, whose feedback nonetheless bolsters Sam and 
whose real identity surprises her. This is essentially an old-fashioned problem novel 
that’s somehow strayed beyond its era’s boundaries, so the plot trajectory—Dad’s 
ramp-up to eventual violence against Sam’s little brother—will be unsurprising; 
the genre is confirmed by additional purposive and melodramatic elements (such 
as Sam’s near-rape at a high-school party) and by Sam’s contemporarily unlikely 
cluelessness (“My mom wants my dad to go to something for alcoholics—a place 
called A.A.”). What lifts the book is Sam’s smart, quietly desperate narration; though 
she’s acerbic in her observations (“But then I realize that no one at the office knows 
my father spent Friday night passed out in a cardboard box”), she’s also credible in 
her junior-high awkwardness about her growing body and the attentions it brings 
her, as well as her need and vulnerability in a frightening family situation. Readers 
will know all the story’s moves, but they’ll still sympathize with Sam’s anger.  DS
giFF, PATriciA reilly Water Street. Lamb, 2006 164p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90097-X $17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73068-3 $15.95   
R Gr. 5-8
Nory, from Nory Ryan’s Song (BCCB 10/00), is now well established in America 
and has a family of her own with Sean Mallon, who labors on the Brooklyn Bridge. 
Eighteen-year-old Annie is employed at a box factory, son Hugh ostensibly works 
at a market but in truth makes most of his money at illegal bare-knuckle fights, 
and thirteen-year-old Bird—the focus of this tale—wants to be a healer like her 
mother. Now old enough to attend at births, Bird is thrilled when her first delivery 
produces a healthy child that the grateful mother names after her. Other outings 
don’t go so smoothly, though, and when Bird can’t tolerate the bone and blood as 
her mother stitches up the head of a young brawler, Bird’s well-laid future plans are 
now in question. Fortunately, the support of lonely upstairs neighbor Thomas, who 
latches onto the Mallon family like a second son, puts her dreams back on track. 
Giff limns a fully credible family with a firm toehold in their adopted country; 
they may not be prosperous, but thanks to their cohesiveness and determination, 
the American-born children are on their way to the lives their parents sacrificed 
for them to enjoy. Equally credibly, the Mallon children tend to roll their eyes a bit 
when Mother and Father launch out on admonishing tales about starving times on 
the old sod. Readers who accompanied Nory’s family through its darkest hours will 
be in the rare position to appreciate this family story from both sides.  EB
214 • The BulleTin
grey, chrisToPher Leonardo’s Shadow: Or, My Astonishing Life as Leonardo da 
Vinci’s Servant. Atheneum, 2006 394p
ISBN 1-4169-0543-X $16.95   
R Gr. 6-9
Fleeing from a mob of pursuers who mistake him for a thief, Giacomo falls (liter-
ally) into the hands of Leonardo da Vinci, who takes the now-amnesiac boy home 
to become his servant. Several years later, fifteen-year-old Giacomo has become 
indispensable to the temperamental genius, although crusty Leonardo certainly 
won’t admit it. It’s Giacomo who keeps the creditors at bay, who plays the danger-
ous role of liaison between Leonardo and his mercurial employer, the Milanese 
duke Ludovico, and who ultimately spurs Leonardo to complete his masterpiece, 
The Last Supper, by arranging for a host of local merchants to erase Leonardo’s 
debts in exchange for being painted into a place at the famous table. If that’s not 
enough to keep a boy busy, Giacomo also delves into the mystery of his own past 
(he’s convinced he’s the son of Leonardo and one of Ludovico’s courtesans), pilots 
one of Leonardo’s experimental flying machines, takes clandestine lessons in the 
craft of mixing paints, helps foment and then foil an alchemist’s attempt on the 
life of the visiting pope, and offers a fairly sophisticated interpretation of the ele-
ments in The Last Supper (sans reference to Mary Magdalene or Opus Dei, just 
in case you’re wondering). If this all sounds a bit preposterous, even for historical 
fiction, well, it is. But it’s also rife with intrigue, and it boasts a cheeky take on the 
Master; in the end Grey is so unabashedly honest about straying from standard 
biographical takes on Leonardo that readers can just accept this as a flight of fancy 
and enjoy the ride.  EB
grimes, nikki The Road to Paris. Putnam, 2006 153p
ISBN 0-399-24537-5 $15.99   
Ad Gr. 4-6
Paris is only eight years old, but she’s had more than her share of trouble: her white 
father abandoned her African-American mother, who then chose alcohol over her 
children. After running away from an abusive foster home, Paris and her older 
brother, Malcolm, have been separated, and Paris has now been placed with the 
Lincoln family. There she gradually learns to trust her foster family, herself, and 
God, but what will happen now that her birth mother wants her back? This offers 
many of the traditional pleasures of the foster-child drama (Paris blossoms under the 
kindness she finds), while the racial issues, such as Paris’ own biracial identity (she 
has blonde hair and dark skin) and her experiences in the largely white suburban 
community (where the racism of a white friend’s father puts paid to a friendship), 
add a fresh dimension to the story. Unfortunately, the book tells rather than shows 
and does so episodically, so Paris jerks along from stage to stage without any clear 
indication of how she gets there. The story also goes for drama over credibility, un-
dercutting the impact of much of the story and leaving readers with many questions 
(why would gifted and experienced foster parents assume a child’s comfort with a 
totally dark bedroom? Why wouldn’t the saintly Lincolns take in Malcolm as well? 
Why can’t the Lincolns take Paris to see her brother?). Paris’ eventual willingness 
to return to her mother’s care is reassuring, but it’s poorly grounded and quickly 
explained, and it will shock those readers who’d been relishing the orphan-story 
flavor of the narrative. This therefore lacks the honesty and craft of Paterson’s classic 
The Great Gilly Hopkins (BCCB 5/78), but unflagging fans of rescue fiction may 
still find Paris’ coming into her own sufficient for satisfaction.  DS
January 2007 • 215
gross, PhiliP The Lastling. Clarion, 2006 248p
ISBN 0-618-65998-6 $16.00   
Ad Gr. 7-9
Initially, fourteen-year-old Paris is delighted to be invited on her uncle Franklin’s 
trip to the Himalayas; she eventually realizes, however, that his group is hunting 
exceedingly rare animals for their meat. Before she can explore her dual feelings of 
horror and fascination, Paris is distracted by the group’s gratuitous capture of Tahr, 
a preteen monk who has just seen his mentor, the only family he had, die. Paris 
and Tahr agree that a face Tahr saw just before his mentor perished was likely a 
yeh-teh (a yeti to English speakers), and Paris immediately tells the hunting group. 
Subsequently pursued by guilt, Paris joins with Tahr, haunted by his conviction 
that he killed his mentor (it was Tahr’s cry that distracted him during a precarious 
climb), in a quest to save the last yeh-teh, both hoping it will compensate for their 
wrongdoings. The strongest aspect of this novel is the character development of the 
protagonists: Paris undergoes remarkable growth, Tahr is an unusual and memorable 
character driven by his Buddhist ideals, and the young yeh-teh is intelligent and 
emotionally complex. Unfortunately, the rest of the novel is peopled with stock bad 
guys who twirl their mustaches as they contemplate ruination or heroic adults who 
swoop in with absolute altruism. In addition, the convoluted plot simply cannot 
stand up under the weight of endless contrivances and distractions: what are readers 
to make of the mysterious war going on in the background, how can this one small 
area hold so many “lasts” of species, and how in the world can Paris, Tahr, and the 
yeh-teh escape apparent doom? Even so, the yetis, the intriguing Himalayan setting, 
and a lightning pace help to balance the forced happy ending, so adventure fans 
looking for excitement may find this book to be a satisfying read.  AS
hArmon, michAel Skate. Knopf, 2006 242p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-97516-0 $17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-87516-6 $15.95   
R Gr. 7-10
Ian has too many piercings and too many opinions to fit in at his jock-infested 
high school, and although he’s brainy enough, his test scores reflect his demanding 
home life (he’s constantly on edge from having to care for himself and his little 
brother while his mother disappears for weeks at a time, only to return with a new 
drug dealer in tow) more than his potential. When his principal threatens that if 
he doesn’t opt for an alternative school things won’t go well for him, Ian finally 
snaps, decking a teacher, snatching his brother out of school, and taking off from 
Spokane to Walla Walla to find his father, whom he has never met. The trip is hard, 
but the end is harder—the address where he finds his father belongs to the state 
penitentiary. In an additional twist, Ian learns that his father is the warden rather 
than an inmate, and Dad might not want his damaged old kids in his bright and 
shiny new life. Ian’s forthright confrontations with school authority figures will 
win him major props from page one, and readers will continue to cheer for this 
outsider who finds life’s deck stacked against him. He is as honest with himself 
as he is with the teachers; he knows all along that he is making one bad decision 
after another, but he feels as though he has to pass through the unlivable to get 
to anything like a reasonable life for him and his brother. After establishing a few 
unrepentant villains, Harmon complicates his good adults nicely, revealing how 
their divided loyalties and their good intentions can both help and hurt children 
on the margins. This one’s a must-read for fans of Chris Crutcher.  KC 
216 • The BulleTin
hArTneTT, sonyA The Silver Donkey; illus. by Don Powers. Candlewick, 
2006 266p
ISBN 0-7636-2937-5 $15.99   
R Gr. 4-6
Two French girls, Marcelle and Coco, are thrilled to find an English soldier, fresh 
from the front line of World War I, hiding in the forest near their home; they’re 
determined to keep this secret and to tend the young lieutenant, who has gone blind 
(and who has deserted), and help him get back to England to see his dying young 
brother, John. The girls are particularly fascinated with the lieutenant’s good-luck 
charm, a small silver donkey, and they’re enthralled by the young man’s tales of 
donkey heroism. Finally, though, they must turn to their real work of getting him 
home, but how are two young girls to get a soldier across the Channel? This has a 
very different style than Hartnett’s young adult visions of tortured lives; the char-
acters are tenderly drawn, from the young lieutenant, psychosomatically blind as a 
consequence of the terrible things he’s seen, to Marcelle and Coco, enraptured by 
their find and largely clueless about its implications. The donkey stories, set off by 
a decorative border, are quietly relevant, yet they stand alone as absorbing animal 
tales. Though there’s definitely vivid evocation of war and its toll here, this isn’t 
The Machine Gunners but a gentle, fable-like tale about the connections between 
people and the human need that occurs under war’s shadow. Smoky gray-toned 
full-page illustrations have a distant mistiness that precludes engagement but adds 
to the mood.  DS
highTmAn, JAson Samurai. Eos/HarperCollins, 2006 310p (The Saint 
of Dragons)
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-054015-X $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-054014-1 $15.99   
R Gr. 7-10
In this sequel to The Saint of Dragons (BCCB 10/04), Simon St. George and his 
father, Aldric, are in the family business of dragon hunting, following in the foot-
steps of their legendary ancestor St. George. They and the Magician Alaythia devote 
the time not spent in active pursuit of dragons to training and study, and Simon 
sometimes chafes against the loneliness of the profession, wishing his father were 
less soldierly and more fatherly. When their home is attacked, Alaythia steals away 
to draw the dragons off; needing her magic for weapons and protection, father and 
son follow her trail to Japan, where they unexpectedly encounter Samurai dragon 
hunters who have been protecting a young St. George that Aldric and Simon did 
not know existed. The bellicose bluster of the Knights clashes uneasily with the 
more subtle and cooperative code of the Samurai, but their uncomfortable alliance 
must work in order to prevent a much more deadly one from forming between 
the two most powerful dragons in the East. Though the prose style is pedestrian, 
Hightman combines fast-paced, violent battles with fascinating character portrayals 
of the calculating, sadistic beasts to create a seductive read. The interweaving of 
dragon lore with contemporary urban environments and social problems heightens 
reader investment by positioning dragon hunting in the present, amid recognizable 
cityscapes. The human characters, while not quite as fascinating as their Serpent 
foes, nevertheless garner reader loyalty; fans of the previous title will relish this 
adventurous outing, and readers new to the series will likely wish to delve into the 
earlier outing and wait impatiently for the next.  KC 
January 2007 • 217
hoFFmAn, Alice Incantation. Little, 2006 166p
ISBN 0-316-01019-7 $16.99   
R Gr. 9-12
The year is 1500, and Estrella deMadrigal has just learned, to her complete disbe-
lief, that her family is not Christian but Marrano, Spanish Jews living double lives 
in the name of survival; though officially Estrella’s ancestors publicly converted to 
Christianity hundreds of years before, her family, like many others, continued to 
covertly practice their faith. When the persecutions begin, the deMadrigals are ini-
tially able to avoid unwanted attention, but when Estrella crosses her friend Catalina 
by falling in love with Catalina’s betrothed, Catalina turns the deMadrigal family 
in to the authorities. Estrella’s grandfather, a healer in the Kabbalah tradition, is 
brutally beaten to death, and her mother and brother are burned at the stake. This 
slim novel reads almost like a short story; the introspective first-person narration 
flows in and out of reality and dips into mysticism, recalling not only the factual 
occurrences but also Estrella’s more abstract responses to those events. Part of the 
novel’s impact derives from Estrella’s complete ignorance, since she is persecuted 
for beliefs she did not even know she had; that the persecution befalls her family at 
the hands of her best friend furthers Estrella’s horror (“And then I understood that 
she had no idea what she’d done to my family. She thought love and hatred were 
equal”). There’s quiet force in the very familiarity of the story of Jewish persecu-
tion, a story that seems to repeat itself throughout history and, as Estrella muses, 
“the rules always change, and we always lose.” Hoffman has delivered a complex 
and beautifully written record of a tragic historical chapter, commissioning readers 
never to forget what befell the victims of the time.  HM
hoFFmAn, ninA kiriki Spirits That Walk in Shadow. Viking, 2006 306p
ISBN 0-670-06071-2 $17.99   
R Gr. 7-10
Jaimie and Kim, new roommates, both came to college hoping to settle into 
“normal” lives, experiencing orientation, meeting their hallmates, and picking up 
boys. However, Jaimie, raised in familial traditions of magic, quickly ascertains 
that Kim’s depression is being caused by an external force, and when she learns 
that they are dealing with one of the powerful and mysterious “viri,” a being that 
feeds on human emotion, she knows that they are in way over their heads and she 
calls in her family for backup. Soon, their small dorm room is filled with three 
cousins, an uncle and aunt, and a shapeshifting household god, all of whom are 
determined to defeat the viri and let Jaimie and Kim get back to orientation before 
all of the good classes are full. Hoffman offers a well-balanced mix of magic and 
realism: plot twists are plausibly integrated while also being entirely unpredict-
able because they involve mystical creatures or incantations. Though fans of the 
author may recognize Jaimie as a character from The Thread That Binds the Bones, 
this book easily functions as a stand-alone novel. With wildly imaginative magical 
characters, snarky humor, and an ultra-cool college setting, this book will be an 
easy sell to fantasy and light horror readers as well as realistic fiction fans who can 
be convinced that the complex relationships and elegant writing are as strong in 
this novel as the otherworldly forces.  AS
218 • The BulleTin
howe, JAmes  Houndsley and Catina and the Birthday Surprise; illus. by Marie-
Louise Gay. Candlewick, 2006 42p
ISBN 0-7636-2405-5 $14.99   
R Gr. 1-3
As their second book (see Houndsley and Catina, BCCB 9/06) opens, Catina (a 
tiny white cat) is questioning why her friend Houndsley (a floppy-eared dog) seems 
so sad. Houndsley insists that it is not because of the rain, or because of the holes 
in his sweater, or because he wishes he were doing something else (“If I wanted 
to be doing something else, I would go and do it,” he explains), but because he 
doesn’t know when his birthday is. Catina, who doesn’t know her birthday either, 
empathizes so strongly that she also becomes sad, and the two part ways in a veil 
of mutual birthdayless blues. To cheer his friend up, Houndsley decides to bake a 
cake and throw a surprise party for Catina; unbeknownst to him, Catina is secretly 
knitting Houndsley a new (hole-free) sweater and planning a surprise party of her 
own. The two friends thus surprise each other on the very same night and declare 
that day their shared birthday ever after. Howe has created a warm, gently humor-
ous, makes-you-smile-all-over depiction of best friendship in this transitional reader 
that, with its three easy chapters, ample white space, and plenty of repetition, is 
invitingly accessible to early chapter-book readers. Touches of humor (“If I were 
baking this cake for you, I would have put worms in it. But this cake is for Catina,” 
Houndsley tells his bird neighbor) inspire laughter, but ultimately it is the two 
characters’ mutual drive to do something to please each other that will resonate 
with compassionate readers (upon finishing the cake, Houndsley declares, “I have 
never made anything so beautiful, and I have made it just for her”). Gay’s signature 
watercolor and pencil work perfectly meets the gentle tone of the narrative; Catina 
is soft and delicate, whereas Houndsley is clumsy and a touch rotund. Scraps of 
patterned fabric are used throughout the illustrations for umbrellas, clothing, and 
home decor, and the unexpectedness of the collage work makes for an additional 
splash of fun. Here’s hoping there are more adventures ahead for this cat and dog 
duo.  HM 
hursT, cArol oTis Torchlight. Lorraine/Houghton, 2006 142p
ISBN 0-618-27601-7 $16.00   
R Gr. 4-7
The year 1854 is a rough one for the citizens of Westfield, Massachusetts. School 
consolidation means that Irish immigrant children will be enrolled at the same 
school as their blue-blood neighbors, and the gentry are not taking it well. Anglo 
Charlotte and Irish Maggie strike up a friendship on the first day of fifth grade, 
unaware of each other’s background, and by the time peer opinion apprises them 
of the impropriety of their friendship, it’s too late to step back. Play and chitchat 
are reserved for the schoolyard, since neither can bring the other home, and teacher 
and students alike do what they can to make the girls’ lives a misery. Maggie’s uncle 
Hiram, though, is more broadminded than most, and as owner of the local buggy-
whip factory, he has promoted some Irish workers into supervisory positions. On the 
night of the community bonfire—separate celebrations held in the Anglo and the 
Irish sections of town—resentments come to a head, and some intoxicated rowdies 
set off to burn down the Irish Catholic church, just under construction. Maggie’s 
father rallies his neighbors to protect the building, while Uncle Hiram tactfully 
disperses the mob, and the community, if not miraculously cordial, at least gradually 
comes to its collective senses. The tale is based on a true incident in Westfield, and 
January 2007 • 219
Hiram Hull was, in fact, credited with defusing the volatile situation. Although 
the larger social message is glaring, the tale stays firmly rooted in child perspective 
through opening dialogues in each chapter in which Maggie and Charlotte frankly 
hash out what their elders are too reticent to speak about openly. Readers just dab-
bling in historical fiction will find this a brisk, unintimidating outing.  EB 
Johnson, AngelA Wind Flyers; illus. by Loren Long. Simon, 2006 [32p]
ISBN 0-689-84879-X $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 5-8 yrs
In this paean to the Tuskegee Airmen, a little boy describes the way his great-great-
great uncle transformed his childhood dream of piloting a plane into reality during 
World War II. The narrative is long on breathless awe of flight—“He had finally 
become a wind flyer,/ a smooth wind flyer,/ a Tuskegee wind flyer./ Flying high above 
it all;/ never to touch the earth again./ Forever a wind flyer”—but definitely short 
on details about how the Airmen contributed to the war effort. A single fleeting 
passage hints at their historic mission: “We were something. Some of us didn’t come 
back, but we never lost a plane we protected.” A brief concluding note expands 
upon this slightly, but never clearly defines the role of an aerial “escort group.” 
Long’s paintings are likely to be more enticing to a child audience—technicolor 
dreamlike scenes of monument-worthy biplanes and bombers and dignified young 
African-American pilots lined up in service to their country. What this title lacks 
in concrete detail, it makes up for in inspiration, but expect the response, “So, who 
were these guys?”  EB  
kimmel, eric A., ad. The Lady in the Blue Cloak: Legends from the Texas Missions; 
illus. by Susan Guevara. Holiday House, 2006 32p
ISBN 0-8234-1738-7 $16.95   
Ad Gr. 4-6
A half-dozen tales retold from Adina de Zavala’s History and Legends of the Alamo 
and Other Missions in and around San Antonio focus on religious mysteries associated 
with four different missions. In the title story, Indians greet the newly arrived friars 
with surprising foreknowledge of Christianity revealed to them by an apparition. 
“Rosa’s Window” and “The Bell” tell of lovers who are parted first by distance, 
then by death, sacrificing their happiness to further the success of the missions. In 
“The Miracle at the Gate,” the Blessed Virgin saves the mission from a Comanche 
attack; “The Padre’s Gift” tells of an otherworldly priest who protects his people 
from both Comanche and yanqui persecution. “The Christmas Vine,” themati-
cally related to the Christmas legend of the poinsettia, sees a poor child’s humble 
gift transformed into a beautiful offering to the Christ Child. In an introductory 
note Kimmel observes, “The padres are often condemned as agents of imperialism. 
There is some truth in this.” This, however, is the extent of the acknowledgment, 
and the stories included here reflect, as might be expected, a somewhat paternalistic 
attitude toward the Indian converts, a benign view of the work of the missionaries, 
and outright mistrust of the Apache and Comanche. The retellings themselves feel 
a bit overpadded, and Guevara’s fussily opulent oil paintings seem better suited 
to fairy tales than to religious legends. Nonetheless, these accessible folktales may 
be of value to readers interested in the early encounters between European and 
indigenous peoples.  EB
220 • The BulleTin
klAges, ellen The Green Glass Sea. Viking, 2006 321p
ISBN 0-670-06134-4 $16.99   
R Gr. 5-8
Dewey Kerrigan isn’t much for making friends; she’s actually most content when 
tinkering with a homemade radio or working out math problems, activities that 
offer comforting predictability. When her grandmother is no longer able to care 
for her, her physicist father arranges to have her join him in New Mexico, where 
he is working on a top secret “gadget” for the U.S. government that promises to 
help them beat the Nazis. Los Alamos is the ideal haven for Dewey—not only is 
she close to her beloved father again, but she’s surrounded by adults who take her 
enthusiasms seriously and even take time to mentor her through her projects. Two 
years of relatively smooth sailing come to an abrupt end, though, when her father 
dies in a car accident and thirteen-year-old Dewey must now rely on the hospitality 
of the Gordons, scientists whose own daughter Suze is none too enthusiastic about 
sharing her home with this interloper. Accessible prose and Dewey’s consistently 
childish concerns and activities skew the novel to a relatively young audience. The 
successful detonation of the bomb may be difficult for such readers to contextualize, 
especially in the absence of an explanation in the author’s note; nonetheless, the 
view of the Manhattan Project through the eyes of two out-of-the-loop children 
is an intriguing entrée to this somber piece of history, and interested readers may 
investigate further and flesh out the rest of the story.  EB
lAT Kampung Boy; written and illus. by Lat. First Second/Roaring Brook, 
2006 141p
Paper ed. ISBN 1-59643-121-0 $16.95   
R* Gr. 5-8
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 201, for review.
levine, gAil cArson Writing Magic: Creating Stories That Fly. Collins/Harp-
erCollins, 2006 167p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-051961-4 $16.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-06-051960-6 $5.99   
R Gr. 4-9
Thirty chapters full of writing exercises and engaging assignments make this a 
veritable treasure trove of advice and guidance for writers across a range of ages. 
Inexperienced writers who aren’t yet disciplined enough to create finished pieces 
are given an encouraging pass to keep making beginnings; veteran writers will be 
inspired to form writing groups and develop existing pieces through revision. Levine 
includes favorite passages from her own work and that of others to illustrate con-
cepts, and she debunks conventional wisdom about things like overusing the word 
“said.” She encourages writing right from the beginning by including an assignment 
to write from a list of story starters before she dives into substance; she follows up 
by outlining her philosophy of writing which she then continues to demonstrate 
throughout the book. The chapters are appealingly short, and each one concludes 
with the admonition “Have fun! Save what you wrote.” This book of sound, useful 
advice lacks only a pristine journal and favorite pen to get anyone’s creative juices 
flowing. An index is included.  KC
January 2007 • 221
mAnning, mick Snap!; written and illus. by Mick Manning and Brita 
Granström. Lincoln, 2006  [24p]
ISBN 1-84507-408-4 $14.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R 2-5 yrs
The circle of life is vividly if irreverently realized in this picture-book outing. A 
buzzing fly gets eaten by a frog who gets eaten by a duckling who gets eaten by a 
pike who gets eaten by a fisherman who—poor fellow—gets eaten by a bear. The 
cyclical nature of it all is captured in the final spread, which recalls the first—“Look! 
Another fly buzzing by.” As in this duo’s Yuck! (BCCB 10/05), the story is carefully 
patterned; the narrative itself recalls another famous fly-eating episode involving an 
old lady, reading, “Here snores the bear that swallowed the fisherman that caught 
the pike that ate the duckling that guzzled the frog that gobbled the fly that came 
buzzing by” and almost begging to be sung. There is a hint of science—the pointed 
effort made to demonstrate that the food chain does not end with humans comes 
clearly and amusingly across in the spread featuring a bear with a mouth full of 
fisherman, rubber boots dangling out—but this is mostly a successfully silly story. 
The book uses collage, colored pencil, and ink for its bold, large-scale illustrations. 
The compositions are particularly comedic in their illustrative cutaways, which show 
each creature resting matroshka-like within the creature by whom it was eaten; like 
the narrative, the full bellies accumulate so that the final spread shows the fly in 
the frog in the duckling in the pike in the fisherman, all safely encased in the big 
brown bear. This is jolly good fun for a quick readaloud, and the big pictures will 
carry remarkably well across a carpet full of preschoolers.  HM 
mArrin, AlBerT Saving the Buffalo. Scholastic, 2006 128p illus. with 
photographs
ISBN 0-439-71854-6 $18.99   
R Gr. 5-8
The decidedly unlovely American bison gets a handsome treatment in this cleanly 
designed and lavishly illustrated overview. In six well-organized chapters, Marrin 
moves smoothly from the place of the buffalo in Great Plains ecology, its life cycle 
and habits, Indian buffalo hunting before and after the introduction of the horse, 
the incursion of white settlers in the West and their decimation of the herds, and 
finally efforts from the turn of the last century onward to reestablish herds on 
open but protected ranges. Amid the extensive gallery of attractive reproductions 
is a single depiction of the buffalo from indigenous culture (a carved stone effigy), 
and among all the quotations cited, few apart from prayer verses are directly from 
Native American speakers, but Marrin does spend considerable time describing 
the economic and spiritual significance of the buffalo to the Plains Indians. This 
successfully covers a lot of ground in a text that should satisfy both researchers 
and recreational readers, and even kids prodded into report writing will welcome 
the efficient presentation. A glossary, source notes, bibliographies of children’s and 
adult books, and an index are included.  EB
mcdonAld, JAneT Harlem Hustle. Foster/Farrar, 2006 182p
ISBN 0-374-37184-9 $16.00   
R Gr. 7-10
In Brother Hood (BCCB 1/05), McDonald featured African-American prep-schooler 
Nate; here she focuses on the fate of Nate’s friend Eric, also known as Hustle. Eric 
has had a rougher go of it than Nate; he’s lived on his own until recently, when he 
222 • The BulleTin
moved in with his friend Ride and adopted Ride’s parents as his own. On probation 
for pursuing his former career as a shoplifter, Hustle’s got his eye on Jeannette, a 
project girl from Brooklyn who goes to Nate’s swanky private school. Catching 
her attention is no problem, but keeping it, and getting her grandmother’s seal of 
approval, will require Hustle to rethink his career choices. He settles on rap star, 
but he finds himself being taken advantage of in ways that he understands, and in 
deeper ways that he is utterly oblivious to. Nate doesn’t figure at all in this book, 
but his white friend Spence is unwittingly complicit in Hustle’s shakedown; despite 
his desire to be part of Nate and Eric’s world, he learns from his businessman father 
his uncomfortably mousy place in the rat race: “Let others save the world, Spence, 
we’re here to run it.” McDonald salts her prose with explanatory notes that set the 
plot developments in easily understood theoretical frameworks of secret dreams, 
parental worries, and urban Darwinism, providing a big picture for readers that 
largely eludes her characters. Though the book still displays the author’s usual 
melodramatic style and fairy-tale plot, this novel is simultaneously grimmer and 
wittier than its companion; McDonald takes her effective and readable dialogue 
and adds a keen understanding of the rap music industry’s exploitation of its most 
ardent fans. Hustle’s success is by no means assured by the end of the book, but his 
talent is affirmed as the real deal, and he, like Nate, is saved by a grassroots urban 
program that is working for Harlem’s most vulnerable young people, making this 
an inspiring and uplifting, not to mention funny, read.  KC 
mckinTy, AdriAn The Lighthouse Land: The Lighthouse Trilogy, Book I. Amulet/
Abrams, 2006  [400p]
ISBN 0-8109-5480-X $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 6-8 
After losing an arm to cancer, facing his parents’ divorce, and struggling to regain 
his voice (even he isn’t sure why he hasn’t spoken for a year), Jamie is certain his luck 
is finally changing for the better when he receives the good news that he’s inherited 
a small island and lighthouse in Ireland. The lighthouse appears to be dangerously 
close to crumbling, making it irresistible for Jamie and his new friend, Ramsey; 
while exploring it, they find a mysterious salmon that transports them to a different 
planet ninety-six light years away. There they discover that Jamie is a “Ui Neill,” a 
title which holds little meaning on Earth, but on Altair, the inhabitants believe him 
to be the savior they’ve been awaiting. Even with his arm miraculously restored and 
the help of the brilliant Ramsey, Jamie seems to be little match for the overwhelming 
force of the offensive, but he has chicken pox (relatively harmless on Earth, deadly 
in this new environment) on his side. Altair, doomed through encroaching ice and 
dwindling resources, is a creepy, fascinating setting and the inhabitants, fearful and 
defiant at once, are well developed. Unfortunately, there are too many contrivances 
and twists: the perfectly timed inheritance, the portal salmon, restorations of limbs, 
and of course, the chicken-pox salvation. Jamie’s agency and potential complexity 
as a haunted protagonist are diminished by the onslaught of external forces, both 
positive and negative, that sweep him along through the story. As this is the first 
novel in an expected trilogy, it is possible that Jamie may be further developed in 
such a way that he becomes as compelling as his ever-shifting environments. And 
just in case most of us have given up on those long-lost relatives who bequeath us 
cool stuff, here’s a new reason to hope. A map is included.  AS 
January 2007 • 223
moriArTy, JAclyn The Murder of Bindy Mackenzie. Levine/Scholastic, 
2006 494p
ISBN 0-439-74051-7 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Bindy Mackenzie is a chronic overachiever, sensitive as a brick wall to the effect 
she has on her peers; feeling as though her considerable gifts for academics, time 
management, and business should be shared, she organizes study sessions and semi-
nars for fellow students on topics like “Tame the Teen Monster Inside You!” Things 
begin to change in Year 11, when, due in large part to a class called Friendship and 
Development (FAD), she starts to understand her social position. However, her 
academic performance slips, and she finds herself increasingly tired and ill, stops 
doing her work, and begins to have hallucinations, going from unreliable narra-
tor to really unreliable narrator. The first two-thirds of this Australian import are 
more or less a justification of Bindy’s annoying personality and her unsuccessful 
bids to win friends, with much of the humor coming through her naïve descrip-
tions of wincingly embarrassing social gaffes. Just as the tedium of her self-serving 
narration threatens to become maddening, though, a strange twist occurs, placing 
Bindy at the center of a murder mystery. As her FAD group works to track down 
motives and suspects, the pace picks up and Bindy becomes a significantly more 
sympathetic—and simultaneously less grating and more comic—character. Fans 
of Moriarty will recognize favorite characters from her earlier works Feeling Sorry 
for Celia and The Year of Secret Assignments (BCCB 4/04), as all of the books take 
place in the same school. While Bindy’s plight doesn’t have near the appeal of her 
predecessors, the payoff of the murder mystery has a witty attraction of its own. 
KC
myers, wAlTer deAn Street Love. Amistad/HarperTempest, 2006 134p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028080-8 $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028079-4 $15.99   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Damien is a solid, well-rounded guy with a strong family behind him and a bright 
future ahead of him; Junice watches helplessly as her mother receives a twenty-five-
year sentence for drug trafficking and her grandmother slowly loses her grip on the 
here and now. Despite differences between the two, glances fly across the streets of 
Harlem and spark an attraction that neither of them expects or desires. Damien 
wears Junice down with his persistent requests for a coffee date, and the two fall 
in love against the advice of Damien’s friends and family and against Junice’s own 
street sense. When Junice decides to take her little sister and try to find a better 
life with a relative in Memphis, Damien can’t let her go, and the three face a very 
uncertain future together. The poetry in this free-verse novel is uneven, alternating 
between the bouncy rhythms, longer, more sophisticated sentiments expressed in 
a somewhat strained diction that doesn’t always scan, and stunningly lyrical mo-
ments that will touch readers where they live. Myers offers us a character set that 
is reminiscent of that of his The Beast (BCCB 1/04), featuring a gifted boy trying 
to play hero to a strong girl drowning in her circumstances, but that dynamic isn’t 
explored as effectively here. Since the poems alternate perspectives among multiple 
characters, the teens’ relationship, which starts out with such a tenuous attraction, 
doesn’t get sufficient narrative detail to adequately mark its growth and intensity; 
readers must do the work of filling in the gaps of how the pair’s love develops to 
the point where Damien is willing to leave his life behind for hers. The story is still 
a dramatic and appealing one, though, and the lovers’ fate will undoubtedly spark 
lively and thoughtful discussion.  KC  
224 • The BulleTin
owen, JAmes A. Here, There Be Dragons; written and illus. by James A. Owen. Si-
mon, 2006 326p
ISBN 1-4169-1227-4 $17.95   
R Gr. 6-9
The murder of a professor brings together three young men from Oxford, John, 
Charles, and Jack, who all had business with the victim; since the murderers are still 
at large, the three, guided by a mysterious visitor who seems to have expected them, 
must make an escape not only from the murderers but from London itself. They 
cross the Thames into the Archipelago of Dreams, the atlas of which, entitled the 
Imaginarium Geographica, prompted the murder of the professor—with the atlas 
and a ring of power, the Black King could usurp the throne of the Archipelago and 
cross over into our own world to continue his conquest. The three men become 
the new caretakers of the Geographica, and they meet up with various characters of 
myth and legend as they travel the Archipelago, seeking to thwart the ambitions of 
the Black King and seat the true descendent of Arthur on the throne. Historically, 
the caretakers of the Geographica have always been the authors who tell the stories 
of these imaginary lands, and the end of the novel reveals the caretakers to be J. R. 
R. Tolkien, C. S. Lewis, and Charles Williams and their escort H. G. Wells, with 
all of the events and places in the Archipelago somehow implicated in well-known 
fantasy literature. Readers will enjoy playing spot the classic plot; while ardent fans 
of the three Inklings (and let’s be honest, there are few of any other kind) might be 
bothered by a few deviations from reality, such as Tolkien’s being called John (he 
preferred Ronald), but the portrayal of C. S. “Jack” Lewis as an arrogant jerk in his 
early twenties is undeniably spot on. This will also serve admirably for those who 
just want a rollicking adventure without bothering with the allusions, and Owen’s 
occasional intricately created pen-and-ink illustrations make a strong addition to 
the enjoyment of the narrative.  KC
PATron, susAn The Higher Power of Lucky; illus. by Matt Phelan. Jackson/Ath-
eneum, 2006 134p
ISBN 1-4169-0194-9 $16.95   
R Gr. 4-6
It’s been two years since Lucky’s mother died; since then her guardian has been 
Brigitte, her father’s first wife, who’s a long way from her native France in Lucky’s 
trailer home in the little desert town of Hard Pan, California (pop. 43). Ten-year-
old Lucky is mostly happy in Hard Pan, hanging out with her knot-tying friend 
Lincoln (whose mother is determined her son will be president) and her dog, HMS 
Beagle, and eavesdropping on the various twelve-step groups that meet at the Found 
Object Wind Chime Museum and Visitor Center; at heart, though, she’s afraid 
that Brigitte’s stay is really only a temporary one. The book resorts to a threadbare 
convention, the misunderstanding of chance information, to drive Lucky to her 
climactic run from home, but the merits here lie not in original plotting but in the 
quirky and eccentric characters and setting. Hard Pan is vividly conceived, from 
the monthly deliveries of government surplus commodities (“It must be some kind 
of secret weapon,” says a local darkly of a delivery of inedible cheese) to the tightly 
connected knot of colorful inhabitants (Lucky is particularly plagued by five-year-
old Miles, who wanders around mooching food and insisting that he be read to 
from Are You My Mother?). Lucky herself is intense yet vulnerable, understandably 
longing to be certain that Brigitte considers her worth staying for. Fans of more 
traditional stories of youngsters finally finding the home they deserve will enjoy 
this offbeat treatment of the classic theme.  DS
January 2007 • 225
Pierce, TAmorA Terrier: Beka Cooper, Book One. Random House, 
2006 581p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-91468-4 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-81468-X $18.95   
R Gr. 7-10 
Sixteen-year-old Beka has spent most of her life dreaming of being a Dog, the 
common term for the law-enforcing Provost’s Guard. First, however, she must serve 
time as a rookie, or Puppy. Although theft, roguery, and murder are quick routes to 
wealth and status in the capital city of Tortall, Beka is determined to spend her life 
in the service of good. She is an ideal candidate for work as a Dog in the dreaded 
Lower City: her early years spent there establish her as a trustworthy insider, her 
impressive intuition and detective skills help her see things experienced Dogs have 
been missing, and her understanding that appearing fearless is often as effective 
as being fearless will serve her well. All of these traits will be needed, along with 
the help of her loyal trainers, to solve two concurrent mysteries: determining the 
identity of the Shadow Snake who has been kidnapping children, and finding a 
way to stop the murderous Crookshank, whose greed far outweighs his humanity. 
Though the villains largely lack depth, their superficial characterizations can be 
forgiven as the protagonists are so richly developed. Indeed, Pierce’s leisurely, de-
tailed introduction and exploration of characters result in a diverse and memorable 
cast. Although this means that the resulting novel is quite long, it also ensures that 
readers will be engaged enough in the fate of Beka, her friends, and the citizens of 
the Lower City that they will find that the conclusion comes all too soon. Several 
maps, brief character sketches, and a glossary are included to aid in understanding 
this intricate world.  AS
Plum-ucci, cArol The Night My Sister Went Missing. Harcourt, 
2006 202p
ISBN 0-15-204758-1 $17.00   
Ad Gr. 7-10
A group of teens from a small island town pass a gun around one night, and one 
of their number ends up missing, disappearing from the top of the abandoned 
pier on which they were illicitly partying. The night passes in harrowing suspense 
as the police try to figure out whether she fell, dove, or tumbled off the pier after 
being shot, and where her body might be. A parade of witnesses passes through 
the interrogation room, unaware that they themselves are being witnessed by Kurt, 
the victim’s brother, who sees everything through a one-way mirror the provincial 
police department had installed and forgotten about. The mystery evolves in an 
unexpected direction, uncovering a different crime altogether, with a victim whose 
abrasive personality has made her everyone’s favorite in the alleged shooting. The 
book leaks the mystery in dribs and drabs by focalizing the story through Kurt; 
though this technique builds suspense and allows for a slow unfolding of the com-
plicated plot threads and red herrings, it necessitates the clunky and unbelievable 
device of the forgotten surveillance room from which Kurt is made privy to the 
various witness statements. While she treads much of the same provocative ground 
that she has visited in other novels, such as the emotional clamshell effect of an 
isolated community and the off-center responses of victims to abusive situations, 
Plum-Ucci goes more for melodrama and pathos than depth of psychological 
insight here; the impact rather pales in comparison to her powerful explorations 
of group dynamics and abuse in What Happened to Lani Garver (BCCB 11/02) 
and The Body of Christopher Creed (BCCB 4/00). Still, the mystery is well paced 
226 • The BulleTin
and satisfyingly twisty, with a prurient payoff and a significant ick factor, and the 
climax, if predictable, makes emotional sense.  KC
PolcovAr, JAne Rosalind Franklin and the Structure of Life. Morgan Reynolds, 
2006 144p illus. with photographs
ISBN 1-59935-022-X $27.95   
Ad Gr. 9-12
James Watson’s The Double Helix, an irreverent account of young scientists deter-
mining the shape of DNA, remains an enduringly popular account of scientific 
discovery; it also offered an acknowledgedly distorted picture of scientist Rosalind 
Franklin, whose input and brilliantly precise images allowed Watson and his col-
leagues to ascertain the structure they sought to define. Since then several biogra-
phies have attempted to restore the reputation of Franklin, who might have shared 
in Watson’s Nobel Prize had she not died several years previously of cancer, and 
Polcovar draws on many of these as well as subsequent writings by Watson and his 
colleagues in creating her picture. The book chronicles the key aspects of Franklin’s 
life and scientific career, covering her early coal work and the work on viruses that 
consumed her dying years as well as giving some insight into her role in the DNA 
discoveries. The result is a fairly thorough picture in which Franklin nonetheless 
remains an enigmatic figure, who could be a prickly and hostile customer when 
she felt her territory was invaded but who later became friends with some erst-
while nemeses. The writing tends to be choppy and disjointed, however, and the 
scientific information is often dense and underexplained; the political aspects of 
the lab work can also be hard to sort out. This therefore would be tough going on 
its own for less scientifically informed readers, but it could make a useful co-read 
with The Double Helix as well as a text for science curricula. Photographs, many of 
them stock images, are included throughout; a timeline, endnotes, bibliography, 
and index are included.  DS
roBinson, shAron Safe at Home. Scholastic, 2006 151p
ISBN 0-439-67197-3 $16.99 
Ad Gr. 3-5
After “Jumper” Breeze’s dad suffered a fatal heart attack, Jumper and Mom move 
from their Connecticut home to Harlem to live with Grandma in her brownstone. 
Hoping to ease his adjustment to city life, Mom enrolls Jumper in a summer base-
ball camp, but the ten-year-old is as reluctant to pursue new friendships as he is to 
give up his beloved b-ball for what he considers a slower, more boring stint on the 
diamond. His problems are compounded when he discovers that his team captain 
is Marcus, the bullying kid he ran afoul of in a video arcade, and Marcus is not 
about to become a gentle, wise mentor any time soon. A couple of teammates ease 
Jumper into the group, his playing improves with time and effort, and the coach 
forces Jumper and Marcus to call an uneasy truce by assigning them to work as 
co-captains. That’s still not enough to defuse resentments, and when the treasured 
mitt Jumper inherited from his dad goes missing—nabbed by Marcus—it takes 
some delicate and creative thinking on the part of the team to restore the goods 
while ensuring that both boys save face. This is a solidly told story; in a closing 
note Robinson addresses her close involvement with Harlem RBI (Reviving Base-
ball in Inner Cities), and although her novel never overtly becomes a promotional 
vehicle, it clearly reflects her belief in and commitment to getting kids out on the 
field. More problematic is the inconsistency of dialogue, which veers from lengthy, 
somewhat stilted conversations to shorts bursts of more convincing street argot. 
January 2007 • 227
Baseball action scenes are minimal, but readers who are up for more action off field 
than on can take a seat in the bleachers.  EB  
roTh, susAn l. Do Re Mi: If You Can Read Music, Thank Guido d’Arezzo; writ-
ten and illus. by Susan L. Roth in association with Angelo Mafucci. Houghton, 
2006 40p
ISBN 0-618-46572-3 $17.00   
Ad Gr. 3-6
While most people haven’t heard of eleventh-century cleric Guido d’Arezzo, you 
couldn’t say his contribution has been unsung, since he created the system of musical 
notation upon which millions of singers and instrumentalists over the years have 
depended. Roth’s fictionalized tale depicts Guido’s wrestling with the problem of 
musical notation from his days as a choirboy in the town of Arezzo to his time in a 
monastery and to his return to Arezzo as choirmaster teaching his new system. It’s 
certainly an interesting topic for a book, and the book carefully includes histori-
cally documented facts (such as the choirmasters’ fear that a written system would 
endanger their livelihood). The invented scenes are strained and fluffy, though, 
and the text is unclear on some details (since it never explicitly states that Guido 
is also a monk, readers may wonder what he’s doing in the monastery) and silent 
about matters of significance (why doesn’t the book explain that his system noted 
pitch but didn’t differentiate duration, or include the poem from which he drew 
the system of “do-re-mi” note names?). The collage art makes the human figures 
ungainly and their faces often unfortunately misshapen, but there’s some dramatic 
geometry in its Italian landscapes. This might be more effective as source mate-
rial rather than as a direct reading experience, but there aren’t a lot of alternative 
titles about Guido d’Arezzo around, and this will help answer a few of those “who 
came up with that?” queries with which students often stump their teachers. An 
author’s note and a select bibliography (so select that 60% of it is in Italian) are 
appended.  DS
ruddell, deBorAh Today at the Bluebird Café: A Branchful of Birds; illus. by 
Joan Rankin. McElderry, 2006 [40p]
ISBN 0-689-87153-8 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5 
Nearly two dozen avian verses treat birds ranging from the eagle to the toucan, the 
vulture to the hummingbird. The poems, all rhymed, sometimes take off on flights 
of fancy (in “There’s a Robin in the Bathroom,” the bird “sings in the shower/ and 
bathes in the sink”), while in other instances they’re creatively describing reality 
(“Blue Jay Blues” describes the jay “hogging the feeder,/ and having his say”). The 
poems are quietly bolstered by ornithological knowledge, with even the fanciful 
poems generally reflecting particular habits of the subject species (robins, for in-
stance, are indeed noted lovers of bathing); while the meter falters occasionally, 
the inventive images, neat rhymes, and sparkling wordplay will give readalouds the 
gloss of a cardinal and the darting glee of a hummingbird. Rankin’s watercolors 
display a wide variety of mood, with the sweetness of the taste for pinky-purple 
whimsy counterbalanced by moody earthtoned reality; the glimmers and ripples of 
background hues are similarly sharpened by the fascinatingly concrete drafting of 
quills and feathers and a slight, sinister evocation of Tenniel in the occasional bird 
or animal. This would be a pleasing complement to Florian’s On the Wing (BCCB 
4/96), or it could stand on its own as a flock of diverting verse.  DS
228 • The BulleTin
russo, mArisABinA The Bunnies Are Not in Their Beds; written and illus. by 
Marisabina Russo. Schwartz & Wade, 2006 [32p]
ISBN 0-375-93961-5 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 3-6 yrs
You can put a trio of bunnies to bed, but you can’t make them stay there. That’s 
the lesson in this sprightly bedtime book, wherein a pair of rabbit parents keep 
settling down for adult time only to hear a noise that “sounds like the bunnies are 
not in their beds.” Indeed they’re not—the kids get up to run their train set, to 
play Wild West, to march in a band, with their parents firmly putting them back 
to bed each time. Finally, the bunnies emerge to find their parents fast asleep, but 
their plan to take advantage of the situation and play all night founders on their 
own somnolence. The plot is somewhat mild and meandering, but audiences will 
relish the idea of being the ones to party down while the staid adults conk out; 
sound effects and repeated phrases add gentle structure that will enhance listener 
enjoyment. Tidy gouache illustrations move from controlled vignettes of parental 
activity to increasingly large spreads of boisterous bunnies; while the compositions 
are a little unfocused, it’s hard to resist the sweetly rollicking gang of bunny siblings. 
Youngsters who find Christine Loomis’ Astro Bunnies and Scuba Bunnies (BCCB 
2/01, 2/04) a little too adventurous for nighttime will warm to this tale of rabbits 
closer to home but still not cowed by bedtime.  DS 
sAkAki, ichiro Scrapped Princess: A Tale of Destiny; ad. by Lianne Sentar; tr. by Paul 
Kotta; illus. by Yukinobu Azumi. Tokyopop/HarperCollins, 2006 [208p]
Paper ed. ISBN 1-59532-984-6 $7.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 6-9
Pacifica Casull has had a hell of a week: her adopted father is murdered, and Pa-
cifica learns that her birth parents tried to kill her as an infant and want her dead 
now because she is actually the Scrapped Princess, a figure destined to usher in an 
apocalypse by the time she turns sixteen. Before she has time to adapt to this new 
knowledge, Pacifica is kidnapped by Big Shot and Sinner, two daunting and powerful 
assassins who want the considerable reward offered for her death. For a teen who 
grew up in a weapons shop, Pacifica surprisingly lacks defensive skills; luckily, she 
has her adoptive brother, a heroic swordsman, and sister, a consummate magician, 
who quickly assume the roles of protectors, replacing their father. Sinner is easily 
the most gripping character: having heinously murdered his wife and her lover, 
he is now fiercely devoted to his young, desperately ill child (readers may realize 
well before Sinner does that his daughter, whom he cradles in his arms, is long 
dead). Unfortunately, the three protagonists are flat, each stuck in their gendered 
roles and lacking warmth or growth. In addition, the predictable manga-esque 
black-and-white illustrations add little to the story, and they will likely alienate 
older readers who may find them cartoonish. As this is the first translated book 
from a thirteen-volume Japanese series (since adapted into an anime cartoon), it 
is possible that Pacifica and her siblings will eventually emerge as fully developed, 
compelling characters; if the string of assassins whom the siblings elude are near as 
fascinating as Sinner, readers will still find much to enjoy in this series. Long after 
finishing this book, readers may be haunted by the ethical questions involved in 
saving a loved one who might cause the deaths of multitudes.  AS 
January 2007 • 229
sAlley, coleen Epossumondas Saves the Day; illus. by Janet Stevens. Harcourt, 
2006 40p
ISBN 0-15-205701-3 $16.00   
R 4-7 yrs
Epossumondas, that diaper-wearing, mischief-making marsupial from Epossumondas 
(BCCB 10/02) and Why Epossumondas Has No Hair on His Tail (BCCB 10/04), is 
celebrating his birthday. Mama is just about to make him strawberry shortcake when 
she realizes she’s plumb out of sody sallyraytus. She sends Baby Gator down to the 
store; he gets the sody but then runs into “a GREAT, HUGE, UGLY LOUISIANA 
SNAPPING TURTLE” who swallows him—and the sody—right up. Mama then 
tries sending Auntie (turtle eats her, too) and finally appoints herself, suffering the 
same fate as her previous sody-sallyraytus-buyers. When Epossumondas realizes that 
everyone is gone, he high-possum-tails it to the store himself and buys all the sody 
that’s left. On his way back, he too meets the GREAT, HUGE, UGLY LOUISIANA 
SNAPPING TURTLE, who tries to eat him up. Epossumondas will have none 
of that, however; he hollers at that turtle, “Don’t eat me! It’s my birthday, and I 
haven’t even had my party yet!”, clambers up a nearby tree, and flings the boxes of 
sody down at his pursuer; when the sody mixes with all that mean juice inside the 
turtle, he starts to blow up until he explodes, and Baby Gator, Auntie, and Mama 
land—safe, sound, and ready to party. Salley’s latest is a rollicking readaloud, full 
of playful repetition, delightful dialect, and just the right amount of danger. Epos-
sumondas is depicted as both clever and clueless, and listeners will wholeheartedly 
appreciate his moment of desperate and comedic heroism. Stevens’ mixed-media 
illustrations incorporate swatches of fabric, photographs, and fictional product 
labels (most notably, “Tail & Hammer Baking Soda”), adding to the haphazard 
playfulness of the tale. Salley and Stevens have proven once again that even a 
’possum can be endearing, and young listeners will gleefully join in for countless 
rounds of “Sody! Sody! Sody sallyraytus!” An author’s note provides information 
about the story’s setting.  HM
schneider, howie Wilky the White House Cockroach; written and illus. by Howie 
Schneider. Putnam, 2006 32p
ISBN 0-399-24388-7 $16.99   
R 5-8 yrs
The cockroaches have a long-standing agreement with the owner of Oscar’s Pizza 
Palace—they don’t come anywhere near the front counters, and Oscar doesn’t 
come gunnin’ for them. But Wilky is the young Turk of the pack, and despite 
warnings that he’ll end up like Uncle Julius, “a stain on the wall,” he climbs into 
the luscious cheese in a box to be delivered to the Oval Office. Now the wild chase 
is on, with Wilky scrambling just ahead of the President, First Lady, and White 
House staffers who are humiliated to admit that the leaders of the free world can’t 
track down a cockroach in their midst. Schneider adds extra fun to the chase by 
camouflaging Wilky on the polka-dot dress of the Minister of Interiors, as a raisin 
in the dessert at a state dinner, and even as an island on a world map in the War 
Room, all the while the crafty critter eludes pompous officials like the Secretary of 
Small Creatures, the Chairman of the Senate Tiny Problems Committee, and the 
Exterminator General. The visual send-up of the anxiety-ridden suits and visiting 
dignitaries matches the freewheeling humor of the goofy plot, and the black-outlined 
figures and scenes are filled in with rough strokes of color reminiscent of a kid’s 
coloring book. This administration knows when it’s beaten, and Wilky is finally 
offered Secret Service protection and all the pizza he can eat, if only he will vacate 
230 • The BulleTin
the White House for good. If Wilky can broker a deal like that, perhaps he should 
consider a run in ’08.  EB
siegel, sienA cherson To Dance: A Ballerina’s Graphic Novel; illus. by Mark 
Siegel. Jackson/Atheneum, 2006 60p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-689-86747-6 $17.95
Paper ed. ISBN 1-4169-2687-9 $9.99   
R Gr. 4-8
In this graphic-novel-formatted memoir, Siena Siegel tells of her dancing youth, 
from her early dance classes in Puerto Rico to her being bitten by the ballet bug in 
Boston after seeing the performance of the Bolshoi’s prima ballerina as the dying 
swan. Following years see the family going back and forth between New York and 
Puerto Rico, until at eleven Siena is accepted into the School of American Ballet. 
She then plunges into the world of ballet, particularly George Balanchine’s New 
York City Ballet, through her teen years, worshiping the top dancers and mourning 
Balanchine’s death, until she leaves the ballet at eighteen to attend college. The 
story is occasionally somewhat disjointed, but the episodes are vivid and the love 
of craft palpable. Young balletomanes will adore the narrative’s insidery specifics, 
delighting in dancing vicariously in the NYCB during the glory days of Balanchine 
and Baryshnikov. Mark Siegel, artistically depicting his wife’s youth, plays the gentle 
fluidity of his line-and-watercolor figures against the stylized geometry of dancers’ 
body shapes, adding mood and atmosphere with background washes in different 
hues, and making the most of the theatricality of stage and backstage scenes. The 
format will entice reluctant readers, especially girls, and ambitious young dancers 
will recognize a fellow terpsichorean spirit in Siegel.  DS 
sigsAwA, keiichi Kino No Tabi; ad. by Maya Bohnhoff; tr. by Andrew Cunningham; 
illus. by Kouhaku Kuroboshi. Tokyopop/HarperCollins, 2006 [208p] (The 
Beautiful World)
Paper ed. ISBN 1-59816-455-4 $7.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 6-9
Kino was only eleven when her parents tried to execute her because she refused to 
undergo the surgery that makes children into adults, and the penalty for disobedi-
ence is death. In a twist of fate, the stranger who made Kino question her destiny 
dies instead, leaving to her a talking motorcycle and a choice between sure death and 
an uncertain life out in the world. Kino, of course, chooses life, and the remaining 
chapters are allegorical vignettes of her experiences in each town that she visits. 
At every stop, injustice, intolerance, and cruelty rule in creatively presented and 
nicely varied situations, and Kino must learn when to pull out one of her myriad 
weapons and fight and when to try to evoke change through patience and wis-
dom. Happily, Sigsawa has created a heroine who excels at both of these methods: 
Kino is as gripping and well-developed in gritty battle scenes as she is when she 
debates philosophical issues with her world-weary motorcycle. Occasional black-
and-white illustrations pepper the story and introduce each chapter with mostly 
creepy glimpses into its featured town. This Japanese import, highly popular in 
its country of origin and the inspiration for a much-admired anime series, is the 
first volume of an eight-book sequence, and a note explains that the events were 
rearranged to become linear for the English translation. The chronological events 
are consequently easier to read and understand, but it is also clear how the slowly 
unfolding puzzle work of the original ordering would have added to the emotional 
January 2007 • 231
weight and complexity of this text. Nevertheless, this is an unforgettable beginning 
to a series built around a richly described and deeply flawed world and a worthy 
protagonist who hopes to save it.  AS
sonnenBlick, JordAn Notes from the Midnight Driver. Scholastic, 
2006 265p
ISBN 0-439-75779-7 $16.99   
R Gr. 6-9
Alex thinks the best way to work out his anger about his mother’s first post-nasty-
separation date is to get drunk and storm his father’s new house in hopes of con-
fronting him over his girlfriend. Doesn’t work. Instead, he ends up getting arrested 
for driving underage and under the influence, and he is sentenced to spend 100 
hours with a notoriously crotchety old man in a nursing home. After meeting Sol, 
Alex fires off a letter to the judge protesting his punishment, but it isn’t long before 
he finds the heart of gold in the mouthy curmudgeon. In the course of doing his 
time, he learns the requisite important lesson about life, turns his best friendship 
into a best friendship with benefits, and ends up bringing an old man back together 
with his long-lost daughter, all while becoming a much nicer guy. While the plot 
doesn’t do anything new or surprising, it treads its predictable path with a delicate 
step and a light-hearted humor and charm. One of Alex’s passions is jazz guitar, and 
since Sol, coincidentally, was a famous jazz guitarist himself back in the day, much 
of the emotional detail of the dénouement comes coded in musician lingo that will 
appeal to readers with a feel for jazz improvisation. The stylized metaphors don’t 
entirely cut out all of the didacticism of Alex’s character arc, but they do manage 
to pull the narrative back from the brink of overflowing sentimentalism and onto 
the less squishy ground of tidy and convenient happy endings.  KC
sTAuFFAcher, sue Donutheart. Knopf, 2006 199p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-93275-5 $17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-83275-0 $15.95   
Ad Gr. 5-8
Middle school is no place for a risk-avoidant, sensitive guy like Franklin Delano 
Donuthead, but as long as Sarah Kervick and Bernie Lepner have his back, he just 
may be able to survive the perils of the boys’ bathroom and the projectile saliva of 
his science teacher. He also has Gloria Nelots, the chief statistician for the National 
Safety Department, on speed dial, just in case. His new school year is fraught with 
changes that Franklin feels inadequate to tackle—his mom’s got a serious boyfriend, 
Bernie may be moving away, his crush Glynnis Powell has joined the cheerleaders, 
and Sarah’s deadbeat dad whisks her away without a forwarding address. Franklin 
hears the voice of his presidential namesake inside his head, however, and finds the 
courage to think and act on behalf of others instead of—well, okay, in addition 
to—comically obsessing over his own problems. It’s an invitingly quirky story, and 
the colorful cast adds interest. Unfortunately, most of the problems and projects 
in this book are entangled in ones carried over from the earlier Donuthead (BCCB 
1/04), and Stauffacher doesn’t manage the sequel form particularly well. Too many 
of the plot lines and in-jokes depend on the former book for basic comprehension, 
to say nothing of empathy; Sarah Kervick’s relationships to Franklin’s mom and 
to Gloria are particularly mysterious to anyone unfamiliar with Donuthead, and 
Stauffacher offers no reminders or explanations in the narrative to clear things up. 
There are other strange gaps and dangling ends in Franklin’s narration that can 
only be explained by his quirky fears and phobias, which are not well developed in 
232 • The BulleTin
this entry into his strange life story. Readers who enjoyed Franklin’s eccentricities 
in the first book will still enjoy this chapter in his character development; just warn 
them that this book doesn’t stand alone.  KC
TAylor, c. J., comp. All the Stars in the Sky: Native Stories from the Heavens; 
comp. and illus. by C. J. Taylor. Tundra, 2006 38p
ISBN 0-88776-759-1 $17.95   
Ad Gr. 3-5
Seven stories paying tribute to the wonders of the night sky originate from Native 
tribes across North America: the Ojibwa, Salish, Onondaga, Blackfoot, Netsilik 
(Inuit), Wasco, and Cherokee. In “Little Mouse and the Magic Circles,” White 
Hawk falls in love with a star maiden and faces the age-old problem of where two 
so different can make a home. “Snow Goose,” “There They Live in Peace,” and 
“Coyote Creates the Big Dipper” present origin tales for several of the sky’s constel-
lations, while “Grandmother Spider Brings Light” offers the simple and familiar 
lesson of the smallest participant’s being the most effective. “Old Man Steals Sun’s 
Leggings” is a trickster tale of sorts, and “Shaman Visits Moon” tells of an Inuit man 
who refuses the Moon’s invitation to live with him and his sister Sun for the sake of 
returning to his wife and children. The stories vary in quality and also in potential 
use; while some present themselves as suitable for oral retellings, others seem better 
suited to read alone, especially in their formality of language that distances them 
from their fireside origins. A single full-page acrylic painting accompanies each tale; 
the rich compositions teem with the action of the stories, with each sporting a sky 
sprinkled full of stars set against deep blue. While Taylor’s afterword does provide 
some brief background on each tribe highlighted in the collection, no information 
on the sources of the tales is provided.  HM
ThomAs, JAne resh Blind Mountain. Clarion, 2006 [128p]
ISBN 0-618-64872-0 $15.00
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 3-6
Though twelve-year-old Sam used to enjoy being an outdoorsy he-man alongside 
his macho father, there’s been a rift between the two ever since Sam developed an 
interest in playing the guitar in a band with friends, a pastime his dad considers 
“sissy.” Sam therefore is seething with resentment on their day hike in the Montana 
Rockies, but when an accident impairs Sam’s father’s vision, the dynamic changes. 
Now Sam must take charge and lead his father out of the pathless wilderness, a task 
that turns quickly from difficult to dangerous when Sam realizes they’re being stalked 
by a hungry mountain lion. The mountain lion is a superfluous addition, tipping 
into nature melodrama a plot that’s packed with sufficient inherent tension, and 
Sam’s eventual successful battle against the creature (he takes it out with a hatchet 
to the head) strains credibility. That may not trouble readers who are invested in 
the sheer excitement of the boy vs. nature plot, though, and the book is perceptive 
about Sam’s need for individuation (“Sometimes disobedience just felt good”) and 
his frustration at his father’s stern and unsupportive parenting. Short chapters and 
accessible language broaden the audience, and reluctant and struggling readers 
will particularly appreciate the speedy reading and high-stakes plot.  DS
wAiT, leA Finest Kind. McElderry, 2006 246p
ISBN 1-4169-0952-4 $16.95   
Ad Gr. 5-8
Jake Webber’s family has come down in the world since his father’s banking job 
January 2007 • 233
evaporated in an economic panic in 1838. Father has secured employment in a 
lumber mill, but that means relocating the family from Boston to Maine and leav-
ing them on their own most of the week. The lion’s share of responsibility falls on 
teenage Jake’s shoulders, since Mother remains confined inside their rundown new 
home caring for six-year-old Frankie, a disabled child (suffering from what we now 
know as cerebral palsy) whom the family feels compelled to hide from the neighbors. 
Jake is up to the job, though, going to school, setting traps, preserving food, and 
working at the local jail. Even allowing for the guidance and support he receives 
from his new friend Nabby, who is hiding a family secret of her own, it’s a definite 
strain to accept that there are enough hours in the day for anyone to accomplish 
everything Jake seems to manage, and there’s also wishful thinking in the ending 
that sees injured Father conveniently offered a new desk job and invalid Frankie 
brought out into the community. Readers will still find appeal in the notion of the 
heroic kid who’s the mainstay of the family in tough times, and the period setting 
adds interest. Wait laces the plot with details drawn from regional history, such as 
the burning of the jail and the ministrations of Dr. Theobold, who appears here as 
the Webber family’s confidante and savior when fever strikes Mother and Frankie. 
While Will Hobbs and Gary Paulsen are still the stalwarts in the genre, Jake’s story 
may be welcomed by fans of resilient, resourceful guys.  EB
wArren, FrAnk, ed. My Secret: A PostSecret Book. Regan/HarperCollins, 
2006 140p
ISBN 0-06-119668-1 $19.95   
R Gr. 9 up
“I don’t feel entirely alone when I go through the postcards on your website, or 
rather, I still feel alone, but I feel like there are a lot more people alone with me.” 
So says a reader of the phenomenally popular website PostSecret, a project that 
invites people to send in artistically crafted postcards confessing secrets they’ve 
never told. This title reproduces well over 100 of the submitted cards, none of 
which have appeared on the website (the previous title, PostSecrets, included web-
displayed cards), most of which seem to come from teens and twentysomethings. 
The result is a chorus of fascinating and diverse voices sharing secrets of sadness, 
glee, triumph, regret, and intriguing randomness, combining the vivid particularity 
of a good novel with the tantalizing promise of reality. Cards touch upon themes 
of suicide, sexuality, violence, and substance use but also treat more complex and 
personal issues, often with deft, touching, or humorous turns of phrase. Occasional 
quotes from site readers punctuate the stream, including a fascinating note from 
a New Zealand postal worker moved by the flow of cards passing through his/her 
mail center. Layout is effective, balancing simply designed and written cards with 
graphically dramatic missives, allowing most cards to work their magic individu-
ally as well as collectively. Suitable for a wide variety of reading levels, this will be a 
terrific discussion-starter, and it may inspire other creative arts and communication 
projects as well as the sharing of secrets.  DS
weATherFord, cArole BosTon Champions on the Bench: The Cannon Street 
YMCA All-Stars; illus. by Leonard Jenkins. Dial, 2007 32p
ISBN 0-8037-2987-1 $16.99   
Ad 6-9 yrs
Just a little over fifty years have passed since the all-black Cannon Street YMCA 
Little League team from Charleston, South Carolina took the state championship 
by default (white teams withdrew en masse from the league) but were denied the 
234 • The BulleTin
right to compete at nationals due to a regulation technicality. Weatherford follows 
Raven’s Let Them Play (BCCB 2/06) with a fictionalized retelling of events that 
comes up just a tad short of satisfying. The narrator is the team pitcher, Cleveland 
(also fictional), who talks about the dreams and hard work that shaped the team 
into first-class players, the hurt and resentment they felt when white teams refused 
to play against them, and the mixed emotions of the boys who attended the games 
in Williamsport, observing from the grandstand what should have been their 
own opportunity of a lifetime. Credible as Cleveland’s narration may be, it seems 
awkwardly disingenuous, since all the players’ and coaches’ actual names are listed 
in the author’s closing note, and the original team was alive and kickin’ at their 
2002 Little League World Series reunion. Moreover, Weatherford dissipates much 
of the emotion of the All-Stars’ story with an abrupt shift of focus to Cleveland’s 
fascination with Jackie Robinson’s Dodgers drama in the 1955 World Series. There’s 
plenty of energy in Jenkins’ collage and graffiti-styled mixed-media illustrations, but 
despite the flashes of eye-popping color, the overall tone is often dim and muddy. 
Raven’s title is bound to raise more cheers from the story-hour bleacher bums, but 
the sheer power of this study in injustice is worth the extra attention.  EB 
whiTmore, BeneTTe Shelter. Walker, 2006 298p
ISBN 0-8027-8884-X $16.95   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Sky is losing touch with her twin brother, Will, as he begins to spend more and 
more of his time high. She doesn’t know what to do, so she doesn’t do anything, 
except worry, until the night she comes home and finds him cold and barely breath-
ing. The summer that has led up to Will’s overdose has been filled with change for 
Sky—her mother has built a fallout shelter in their backyard, little dreaming that 
her sixteen-year-old children would use it as a space to hole up and party. She has 
also taken up with a new man, who thinks that his strong approach to discipline 
will straighten those teenagers right up. Sky loses her virginity to the guy of her 
dreams, only to find the experience indifferent and strange, and her best friend is 
nearly killed as she attempts to run away from her chaotic home life. Meanwhile, 
Sky is supposedly putting together a video diary of her summer for her art teacher. 
Although the chapters are called scenes, and many of them end with excerpts from 
the video diary, this is as far as Whitmore takes her form; the book is written in 
one- to two-sentence paragraphs with space between, so that it seems like it could 
be a screenplay, but it really is just a succession of observations and narrative infor-
mation that could just as easily have been transmitted in a more traditional format. 
While a lot happens, and Sky’s voice has a good deal of appealing snark to it, the 
succession of events doesn’t really come together into a coherent plot. Readers 
never know, for instance, what motivates Mom to build the bomb shelter, nor do 
we ever quite get to understand why Sky blames herself for her brother’s fall into 
drugs. All in all there are too many unanswered questions and a quirky premise 
that fails to realize its potential here, but the open format and spicy content may 
have appeal for reluctant readers.  KC 
January 2007 • 235
BuLLetIn BLue rIBBons 2006
There are always new challenges in the Blue Ribbon process, ranging this year from 
the increasing length of novels to the increasing preponderance of serial fiction, 
along with the familiar mission of evaluating the relative merits of a amazingly 
varied collection of books. Alongside the hard work, however, is ultimately a great 
pleasure and privilege: the exploration of rewarding, exciting books with colleagues 
of great dedication and conviction and the hard-won selection of the best of the 
lot. Here are the fruits of that taxing and wonderful labor. 
 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
FICTION:
Anderson, M. T. The Astonishing Life of Octavian Nothing, Traitor to the Nation: 
The Pox Party. Candlewick. Gr. 8-12 (November)
Anderson, M. T. The Clue of the Linoleum Lederhosen; illus. by Kurt Cyrus. Har-
court. Gr. 3-6 (July/August)
Hardinge, Frances. Fly by Night. HarperCollins. Gr. 7-10 (September)
McCormick, Patricia. Sold. Hyperion. Gr. 9-12 (December)
Parkinson, Siobhán. Something Invisible. Roaring Brook. Gr. 4-7 (May)
Pratchett, Terry. Wintersmith. HarperCollins. Gr. 6-8 (December)
Schlitz, Laura Amy. A Drowned Maiden’s Hair. Candlewick. Gr. 5-9 (November)
Stroud, Jonathan. Ptolemy’s Gate. Miramax/Hyperion. Gr. 6-8 (February)
Zusak, Markus. The Book Thief. Knopf. Gr. 9 up (May)
NONFICTION: 
Bausum, Ann. Freedom Riders: John Lewis and Jim Zwerg on the Front Lines of the 
Civil Rights Movement. National Geographic. Gr. 6-10 (April)
Butterworth, Chris. Sea Horse: The Shyest Fish in the Sea; illus. by John Lawrence. 
Candlewick. 4-8 yrs (October)
Engle, Margarita. The Poet Slave of Cuba: A Biography of Juan Francisco Manzano; 
illus. by Sean Qualls. Holt. Gr. 7-12 (July/August)
Fradin, Judith Bloom. 5,000 Miles to Freedom; by Judith Bloom Fradin and Dennis 
Brindell Fradin. National Geographic. Gr. 5-10 (May)
Krinitz, Esther Nisenthal. Memories of Survival; written by Esther Nisenthal Krinitz 
and Bernice Steinhardt; illus. by Esther Nisenthal Krinitz. Hyperion, 2005. Gr. 
3-6 (March) 
Krull, Kathleen. Giants of Science: Isaac Newton; illus. by Boris Kulikov. Viking. 
Gr. 5-8 (May)
Kudlinski, Kathleen V. Boy, Were We Wrong about Dinosaurs!; illus. by S. D. Schindler. 
Dutton, 2005. 6-10 yrs (January 2006)
236 • The BulleTin
Lat. Kampung Boy; written and illus. by Lat. First Second/Roaring Brook. Gr. 5-8 
(January 2007)
Miller, Norma. Stompin’ at the Savoy: The Story of Norma Miller; ed. by Alan Gove-
nar; illus. by Martin French. Candlewick. Gr. 4-8 (April)
Schlitz, Laura Amy. The Hero Schliemann: The Dreamer Who Dug for Troy; illus. by 
Robert Byrd. Candlewick. Gr. 5-8 (October)
PICTURE BOOKS: 
Bateman, Teresa. Keeper of Soles; illus. by Yayo. Holiday House. Gr. 2-4 (April)
LaReau, Kara. Ugly Fish; illus. by Scott Magoon. Harcourt. 6-9 yrs (July/August)
Long, Ethan. Tickle the Duck!; written and illus. by Ethan Long. Little. 2-5 yrs 
(February)
Pericoli, Matteo. The True Story of Stellina; written and illus. by Matteo Pericoli. 
Knopf. Gr. 2-5 (April)
Pinkwater, Daniel. Bad Bear Detectives: An Irving & Muktuk Story; illus. by Jill 
Pinkwater. Houghton. Gr. 2-4 (October)
Root, Phyllis. Looking for a Moose; illus. by Randy Cecil. Candlewick. 3-6 yrs 
(December)
Shannon, David. Good Boy, Fergus!; written and illus. by David Shannon. Blue 
Sky/Scholastic. 3-6 yrs (March)
Smee, Nicola. Clip-Clop; written and illus. by Nicola Smee. Sterling/Boxer. 1-3 
yrs (July/August)
Smith, Lane. John, Paul, George, and Ben; written and illus. by Lane Smith. Hy-
perion. Gr. 3-5 (May)
Weatherford, Carole Boston Moses: When Harriet Tubman Led Her People to Freedom; 
illus. by Kadir Nelson. Jump at the Sun/Hyperion. 6-9 yrs (November)
Winter, Jonah. Dizzy; illus. by Sean Qualls. Levine/Scholastic. 6-10 yrs (Novem-
ber) 
January 2007 • 237
Abuse–fiction: Grimes
Adventure: Avi; Croggon; 
Fardell; Fleischman; Grey; Gross; 
Hightman; Sakaki; Sigsawa; 
thomas
African Americans: Allen; Burleigh
African Americans–fiction: Codell; 
Grimes; Johnson; Mcdonald; 
Myers; robinson; Weatherford
Alcoholism–fiction: Friend
Animals: Marrin
Animals–fiction: Fleischman; Hart-
nett
Animals–stories: drescher; Fleming; 
Manning; Salley
Art: Warren
Art and artists–fiction: Grey
Aviation–stories: Johnson
Baseball–stories: Weatherford
BedtiMe BookS: russo
Bible–fiction: Fletcher
BioGrApHieS: Burleigh; Lat; 
polcovar; roth; Siegel
Biology: Bidner
Birds–poetry: ruddell
Birthdays–fiction: Howe
Brothers–fiction: Harmon
Brothers and sisters–fiction: plum-
ucci; Whitmore
Bullies–fiction: robinson
Careers–fiction: Giff
Cats–fiction: Howe
Civil War: Allen
College–fiction: Hoffman; n.
Communications: Warren
Crime and criminals–fiction: Fardell; 
Sakaki; Sonnenblick
dance and dancers: Siegel
dance and dancers–fiction: Conway
dating–fiction: Fredericks
death and dying–fiction: easton; 
klages; patron
dogs: Bidner
dogs–fiction: Howe
dolls–stories: Browne
dragons–fiction: de Mari; Hight-
man
drug abuse–fiction: Whitmore
ecology–fiction: Gross
elephants–fiction: Fleischman
Ethics and values: Bunting; dre-
scher; Gross; Sakaki
Faith–folklore: kimmel
Families–fiction: Cheng; Codell; 
Conway; Grimes; Harmon; Wait; 
Whitmore
FAntASy: Croggon; de Mari; 
Gross; Hightman; Hoffman; n.; 
Mckinty; owen; pierce
Fate–fiction: Fredericks
Fathers–fiction: Friend; Harmon; 
Hightman; klages; thomas
Fears–stories: Browne
FoLktALeS And FAiry tALeS: 
kimmel; Salley; taylor
Food and eating–stories: Manning
Foster care–fiction: Grimes; patron
Friends–fiction: Avi; Croggon; 
Fredericks; Friend; Hoffman; n.; 
Howe; Mckinty; Sonnenblick; 
Stauffacher
Subject and uSe Index
keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CApS 
refer to genres and appeals. in the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
238 • The BulleTin
Grandmothers–stories: Busse
GrApHiC noveLS: Siegel
Growing up: Lat
HiStoriCAL FiCtion: Avi; 
Barth-Grözinger; Cheng; Fleis-
chman; Fletcher; Giff; Grey; 
Hartnett; Hoffman; A.; Hurst; 
klages; Wait; Weatherford
History, European: Cheng
History, U.S.: Allen; Johnson; Mar-
rin
Holocaust–fiction: Barth-Grözinger
Homelessness–fiction: Cooley
HuMor: drescher; Manning; 
patron; Salley; Schneider; Stauf-
facher
Hunting–fiction: Gross
identity–fiction: Hoffman; A.
illness–fiction: Mckinty
insects–stories: Schneider
irish Americans–fiction: Giff; Hurst
Jews–fiction: Barth-Grözinger; Hoff-
man; A.;
Language arts: Levine
Latinos–folklore: kimmel
Law enforcement–fiction: pierce
Literature, children’s: owen
Literature, English: owen
Love StorieS: Myers
Magic–fiction: Hightman
Music and musicians–fiction: Codell; 
Mcdonald; roth; Sonnenblick
Music and musicians–stories: Busse
Muslims: Lat
MySterieS: Moriarty; pierce; 
plum-ucci
native Americans–folklore: taylor
Nature study: taylor
persecution–fiction: Hoffman; A.
Physical education: Burleigh
poetry: Myers; ruddell
politics–fiction: FitzGerald
poverty–fiction: Cooley
prejudice–fiction: Hurst
presidents–stories: Schneider
rabbits–stories: Fleming; russo
racism–stories: Weatherford
Reading aloud: ruddell
Reading, easy: Bidner; Bunting; 
Fleischman; Howe
Reading, reluctant: Siegel; thomas; 
Warren
relationships–fiction: Cooley; Fred-
ericks; Mcdonald; Myers
Religious instruction: kimmel
roMAnCe: Conway
runaways–fiction: patron
Science: polcovar
SpeCuLAtive FiCtion: Sigsawa
Spies and espionage: Allen
SportS StorieS: Burleigh; 
FitzGerald; robinson; Weather-
ford
Storytelling–fiction: Hartnett
Storytime: Busse; Manning; Salley
SurvivAL StorieS: thomas
teachers–fiction: Codell
toddLer BookS: Manning
toys–fiction: Bunting
voyages and travel–fiction: Avi; de 
Mari; easton; Fardell; Fletcher; 
Harmon; Sigsawa
voyages and travel–stories: Busse
Winter–stories: Fleming
Women’s studies: polcovar
World cultures: Lat
World War i–fiction: Hartnett
World War ii–fiction: Barth-Gröz-
inger; klages
World War ii–stories: Johnson
Writers and writing: Levine
Writers and writing–fiction: owen
