ILLI NI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
.t.,i 
t
S 
nauisn is pretiy IIIucIl 
Uime qUlll1:LtU1LICU 1Jully, ýac~y
and smart and small, . . . whose personality shapes his owners
schedules and habits. [And] this is a proper pony book, scratching
all the horse-yearning itches just right. The smooth-gaited text will
entice young readers trembling on the move beyond early-reader
series, the rhythm will help make the book a pleasing readaloud.
Apple's soft pencil illustrations (usually one per page) [give]
Radish plenty of perky oomph."
- Starred, featured review / Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
"With basic language, short sentences, and plenty of details about
horse care and riding technique, this beginning chapter book is a
sure bet for children with horse fever." -
ALA Booklist
Ages 7 up. $15.95 Tr (0-688-16688-1); $15.89 Lb (0-06-029159-1)
B Greenwillow Books * An imprint of HarperCollinsPublishers
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019 * www.harperchildrens.com
I 
.
.I
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
October 2001
Vol. 55 No. 2
A LOOK INSIDE
47 
THE BIG PICTURE
Tender by Valerie Hobbs
48 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
55 
* Pumpkin Eye written and illus. by Denise Fleming
55 
* Leonardo's Horse by Jean Fritz; illus. by Hudson Talbott
58 
* Hansel and Gretel by Jakob Ludwig Karl Grimm; tr. by Anthea Bell;
illus. by Dorothhe Duntze
64 
* Lord of the Nutcracker Men by lain Lawrence
70 
* Fair Weather by Richard Peck
78 
* The Land by Mildred D. Taylor
86 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
87 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Publications Office of the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of
the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of Illinois Press,
1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS)
Janice M. Del Negro, Contributing Editor (JMD)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Fern Kory, Reviewer (FK)
Kate McDowell, Reviewer (KM)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
OFFICE STAFF
Sabrina Austin
Jennifer DeBaillie
Natalie Hoyle
Jeannette Hulick
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $66.00; individuals, $50.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $5.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road,
Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson Associates, P.O.
Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to the University of
Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new address.
Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin ofthe Center for Children's Books, University of
Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
All inquiries about subscriptions and advertising should go to University of Illinois Press, 1325 S.
Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903, 217-333-0950.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The
Bulletin ofthe Centerfor Children's Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. E-mail:
bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2001 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Michael Morgenstern from Tender ©2001. Used by permission of Foster/
Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
OCTOBER 2001 
* 47
THE BIG PICTURE
Tender
by Valerie Hobbs
Haven't we read this one before? A resentful teen, through some fluke of fortune,
is forced to reconnect with a long-lost parent. The storyline-more properly reck-
oned as family-story subgenre than plot-has a trajectory and outcome as inexora-
bly fixed as a fairy tale. The author's mission is simply (and dauntingly) to present
fresh, believable situations that facilitate the inevitable reconciliation and to fash-
ion characters with, well, character, worthy of our caring. In Tender, Hobbs not
only fulfills but exceeds the goal, creating in the Tragers a fractured family that
we'd give our eye teeth to see healthy and healed.
Gran's sudden death leaves fifteen-year-old Liv Trager with nowhere to
go except California, where her estranged father makes a tenuous living diving for
abalone. Sporting her customary black garb and dyed locks and packing attitude
to spare, Liv is greeted at the airport by Dad's longtime girlfriend Sam, who in-
stinctively sees through Liv's pretensions and who is prepared to love and even like
her. Liv's not prepared, though, to love or like anything about the move and new
relationship, and although Mark Trager is clearly ready to do his best, his best
manifests itself in dour demeanor, clipped conversation, abrupt orders, and fum-
bling protectiveness that Liv resents. When Liv squanders her father's cash savings
on a shopping splurge, Mark puts her to work as tender on his boat, responsible
for overseeing the oxygen line on his diving equipment. Gradually introducing
Liv to the underwater world where he feels most at home, Mark in fact recreates
the nurturing parent-child relationship, in which care and guidance are demon-
strated rather than spoken, that they missed during Liv's childhood ("So he pulls
her around some more, sometimes stopping, poking around while she hovers above,
learning to be easy on her own, the very way a child learns to let go and take her
first steps. He's never far from her").
The third-person narration allows Hobbs to probe each character's mind,
but she eschews omniscient meddling. Instead, we share only Liv's view of events
as she warily circles those who would love her-guard up, senses heightened, jab-
bing to test their defenses, winded and weakened by Gran's death. She lands a
couple of punches, denying her father to the police when she's escorted home from
a midnight visit to the beach, slapping him with reminders of his past negligence
at every opportunity. It's Sam's diagnosis of breast cancer, though, that sends Liv
scampering for emotional cover and jolts her into awareness that "she's her father's
daughter after all. When the going gets tough, she bails," just as he did following
her mother's death fifteen years ago. Well before the dramatic boating-accident
climax wherein she clings for her life to a cooler lid, though, Liv finally compre-
hends that she's really not cut out to be a scrapper but a tender, a support to Sam
48 
* 
THE BULLETIN
in her medical ordeal and a lifeline to the father who's as devastated by losses-real
and feared-as she is.
Hobbs knows the difference between a happy ending and an easy end-
ing, and she leaves her readers with loads of hope but no guarantees. Abalone are
dwindling, Mark's competition is getting younger, and Sam, "bald as a beach ball"
from chemotherapy, isn't out of the woods yet. There's finally a family here,
though, loving and committed if uncertain of their collective future: "It was the
beginning of waiting, and they did it the way people wait for things they can't
stand to wait for: imperfectly, but with courage." (Imprint information appears
on p. 60.)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ADOFF, ARNOLD 
Daring Dog and Captain Cat; illus. by Joe Cepeda. 
Simon,
2001 
32p
ISBN 0-689-82599-4 
$16.00 
R 
6-9 yrs
Irving Dog and Ermine Cat lead a cozy, people-centered life during the day; at
night, however, they enjoy a swashbuckling and adversarial existence as Daring
Dog and Captain Cat. They "Drop/ Dog/ Food/ Bombs/ And/ Fling/ Tuna/
Fish/ Gren ades," scaring off other animals, running into furniture, and generally
wreaking havoc in the house until they finally settle down for a quick nap before
morning brings their domestic identities back to the fore again. This is more a
protracted conceit than a story, but Adoffs sinewy free verse changes pace deftly,
switching easily from a docile stroll to a headlong gallop utterly suited to those
mysterious pet bumps and bangs in the night. Though their interpretation is on
the literal side, somewhat limiting the verse, Cepeda's oil paintings are trimly drafted
in rich sunset colors. The pet pair make perky musketeers, complete with capes
and plumed hats, and they're clearly comrades as well as archenemies. Contempo-
rary kids know little of the nocturnal duel of the gingham dog and the calico cat;
this bestial battle offers a suitable replacement. DS
ALLEN, THOMAS B. 
Remember Pearl Harbor: American and Japanese Survivors
Tell TheirStories. National Geographic, 2001 
[57p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-7922-6690-0 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-9
Vivid and succinct, this account of the cataclysm of December 7, 1941 delivers a
harrowing yet balanced view of events. The opening chapter lays out the relation-
ship between the German advance in Europe and her ally Japan's consequent ex-
pansion through the Pacific. The next two chapters, which form the bulk of the
title, disclose offensive planning and strategy from the viewpoint of several Japa-
nese naval and air fighters who survived the battle, and American response from
OCTOBER 2001 
* 
49
the viewpoint of men and women stationed at the base. The final chapter com-
ments on America's formal entry into World War II and the anti Japanese-Ameri-
can sentiment that followed in the wake of the Pearl Harbor attack. Allen weaves
participants' testimonies into a smooth narrative, highlighting both the fierce de-
termination of Japanese midget-sub operators and aerial bombers and the electri-
fying shock and disciplined rally of American troops. Readers encounter neither
apologetics for Japan's attack nor indictment for American military mistakes-
simply a tense replay of the scene and a concluding gasp of hope that we'll never
see its encore: "[At] the U.S.S. Arizona Memorial, both Japanese and Americans
come together. In silence, they pray that never again will there be a Pearl Harbor."
Color maps and plenty of captioned black-and-white photographs enhance the
presentation (shots of Japanese training and armament are particularly notable),
and a timeline of World War II (charted to compare events in the European and
Pacific theaters) and index are included. EB
APPELT, KATHI 
Down Cut Shin Creek: The Pack Horse Librarians ofKentucky; by
Kathi 
Appelt 
and Jeanne 
Cannella 
Schmitzer. 
HarperCollins,
2001 
[6 4p] 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029244-X 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029135-4 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
In the 1930s, President Roosevelt's New Deal included employment for women
who were heads of households. In Kentucky, that employment meant local women
became "book women," who saddled up to supply makeshift library services to
locals. Appelt and Schmitzer open their book with an imagined account of a pack
horse librarian's day, from her rising before dawn, to her long trek through freez-
ing rain, to her return home after a twenty-mile circuit. The book then gives an
explanatory overview of the work of these women (there were few male pack horse
librarians), who spent long hours on horseback in all kinds of weather, carrying
"tattered books and magazines, a few bulletins from the WPA,-some reference
books, and a couple of homemade scrapbooks" from house to house and school to
school in the Kentucky mountains. The information is a little sketchy, and it's
surprisingly unconnected to the history of libraries at that time; the concluding
speculations about and claims of impact are unsupported. The tone is occasion-
ally unconsciously condescending (especially in the reproduction of mountain dia-
lect), and although these women deserve recognition, the authors have a tendency
toward romanticism. Still, this is a little-known part of American and library
history, and these women certainly deserve laurels and lauds. The bibliography
includes primary source materials, theses, interviews, and websites; black-and-white
photographs appear throughout. JMD
ATKINS, JEANNINE 
Becoming Little Women: Louisa May at Fruitlands. Putnam,
2001 
[208p]
ISBN 0-399-23619-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-8
This intriguing historical fiction is based on the time the eleven-year-old Louisa
May Alcott and her family spent at Fruitlands, Bronson Alcott's 1844 experiment
in politically correct living. The Alcott family and their followers live simply: they
50 
* 
THE BULLETIN
eat a meager vegetarian diet, try not to exploit animals, and wear clothes made of
linen ("'Linen is woven from flax, which grows freely in the fields.' Anna repeated
what Father had told them. 'If everyone stops using cotton the plantations will fail
and the slaves will be freed'"). The focus of this account is not on the principles
behind this living experiment, however, but its human cost. More particularly, we
see how Bronson Alcott's family is sacrificed to his theories: Mrs. Alcott (a clear
precursor of Little Women's Marmee) struggles to control her anger at the thought-
lessness of the men who set the philosophical and practical parameters of their
lives, forcing her to sew by candlelight (rather than use whale oil). Louisa herself is
hot-tempered and Jo-like, and readers may enjoy seeing those similarities as well as
recognizing aspects of the experience and personality of Meg, Amy, and Beth in
her sisters. Too often, however, this argues an adult-skewed thesis about family
tensions while trying to squeeze it into a middle-grades package (the cover suggests
a Little House-esque idyll) and streamline it into fictionalized narrative. Though
this is less sure of its audience than its facts, followers of the Alcott legend may find
it a real eye-opener. A bibliography is included. FK
ATWATER-RHODES, AMELIA 
Shattered Mirror. Delacorte, 2001 
227p
ISBN 0-385-32793-5 
$9.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Vampire-hunter Sarah Vida starts at a new high school and discovers that attrac-
tive classmate Christopher and his sister, Nessa, are vampires. Despite her resolve
not to get involved with the "leeches" she is sworn to kill, Sarah becomes emotion-
ally attached to the siblings, thereby breaching the laws of her witch clan. Her
determination to take out evil vampire Nikolas is compromised when she discovers
that Nikolas is Christopher's twin; her romantic involvement with Christopher
further complicates matters, so much so that her clan-leader mother determines to
bring Sarah to trial (and to her almost certain death) for crimes against the clan.
Sarah therefore turns to the vampires, receiving her first kiss from implied future
lover Christopher and resolving to find a peaceful spot where she can exist in the
world. The main plot is straightforward and fairly suspenseful, and the broadly
supernatural cast will be an effective lure for many readers. Unfortunately, sub-
plots involving the really evil vampire Kaleo, SingleEarth (a benign community of
undead, shapeshifters, witches, and others of supernatural ilk), and the social life of
vampires and their willing (and unwilling) victims clutter the story. The language
occasionally sounds like that of an adolescent drama queen, and the syntactical
construction is sometimes awkward. Nonetheless, the similarities in tone and hero-
ine to Demon in My View (BCCB 4/99) and Forests of the Night (9/00) make this
likely to hold the author's fans. JMD
Avi 
The Secret School. Harcourt, 2001 
153p
ISBN 0-15-216375-1 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
It's 1925, and Ida Bidson and her good friend Tom Kohl are both due to graduate
from their Colorado one-room schoolhouse in a few weeks and become the first in
their families to advance to high school. Their teacher, however, is called away on
a family emergency and the skinflint head of the school board announces that the
school will simply be shut down for the remainder of the year, leaving Ida and
Tom with no opportunity for completing required exit exams. The ten students
vote among themselves to keep the school open secretly with Ida as teacher, and
they seem to keep adult interference at bay until one curmudgeonly parent blows
OCTOBER2001 
* 
51
the whistle on their scheme to the board and throws Ida's future into jeopardy.
Critical adults in the novel call the children's scheme "playing school," and unfor-
tunately Avi's plotting does little to raise the action beyond that. Ida's parents are
miraculously supportive, her single encounter with a disruptive student is too eas-
ily settled, and her classroom management skills (acquired in her first week on the
job) would inspire a veteran teacher to a tearful fit of jealousy. Still, the plucky-
girl-makes-good theme is a hardy one, and readers looking for a quick tale and a
happy ending will surely award Ida's story a passing grade. EB
BARRON, T. A. 
Tree Girl. Philomel, 2001 
135p
ISBN 0-399-23457-8 
$14.99 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Rowanna, known as Anna, lives a solitary life with fisherman Master Mellwyn, an
old man who, according to the story he tells her, rescued her from the ghouls that
killed her parents when she was a baby. The now nine-year-old girl spends her
days climbing Old Burl (a fir tree with which she has uncanny communication),
keeping the master's seaside house, and wishing for a friend. One day, when the
master goes fishing, lonely Anna disobeys his steadfast rule against going into the
forest and discovers a bear cub who becomes her companion; after a brief time the
cub assumes the shape of a boy and reveals that he is really Sash, a tree spirit.
Sash's attempts to convince Anna that there are no ghouls in the forest at first
come to naught, but Anna's longing for the High Willow she can see on top of a
distant ridge is so great it overcomes her fear. She ventures into the forest and
witnesses the celebration of the tree spirits, after which she climbs the ridge and is
reunited with her mother, the High Willow. A popular high-fantasy author for
young adults (Heartlight, BCCB 12/90, and TheAncient One, 12/92, etc.), Barron
here writes a bucolic fancy aimed at middle-grade readers. Characterizations are
solid-Anna is an admirable heroine, Sash has the dashing allure of many fantasy
rescuers, and the misguided master is still sympathetic-and the tight focus helps
keep this manageable even for less confident readers. Unfortunately, much of the
narrative insists on telling rather than showing and too often gushing (there's an
overabundance of exclamation points) rather than telling. Still, Barron has created
a believable world that will have readers searching for their own Old Burl. JMD
BARTOLETTI, SUSAN CAMPBELL 
Black Potatoes: The Story of the Great Irish Fam-
ine, 1845-1850. Houghton, 2001 
[160p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-618-00271-5 
$18.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-10
American children familiar with the Irish Famine are most likely to think in terms
of its impact, particularly the influx of Irish immigrants to the Eastern seaboard at
mid nineteenth century. Here Bartoletti discusses the precipitating drama on the
other side of the "pond"-the potato blight, its often colorfully or tragically mis-
understood causes, and the societal attitudes and political legacies that exacerbated
the famine. "One of the harsh realities about famine," Bartoletti explains, "is that
it is not about a lack of food; famine is about who has access to food." In a
cogently presented text, she discloses how laissez-faire British economic policy re-
sulted in devastating hunger throughout a land with grain harvests bountiful enough
to export. This is much more than an economic treatise, however; examination of
soup kitchens and workhouses, cottage "tumblings" and evictions, burial rites and
emigration rituals painfully tot up the human cost of Parliamentary decision mak-
52 
* 
THE BULLETIN
ing. Bartoletti incorporates a great deal of oral history from children of famine
survivors, and their memories occasionally blur the line between fact and family
lore; most readers, however, will have little trouble distinguishing their voices from
those of the author. Period engravings illustrate the text, and a timeline, map,
bibliographic essay, and index will be included. EB
BEST, CARI 
Shrinking Violet; illus. by Giselle Potter. 
Kroupa/Farrar, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-374-36882-1 
$16.00 
R 
7-10 yrs
Tormented by mean Irwin, shy Violet yearns for the day-predicted by her best
friend, Opal-that she does something about the bully. When the class planet
play begins rehearsal, Violet is pleased with her part of Lady Space, the narrator
who speaks from offstage, and she looks forward to her debut. All goes well until
opening night, when Irwin sets off a goofy chain reaction, but Violet comes to the
rescue with her clever talent for mimicry. The book offers a little rapprochement
between Violet and Irwin, but nothing too saccharine, and Violet certainly achieves
enough sense of self to satisfy the most didactically inclined listener. With its
familiar narrow, elongated figures and a palette of muted but assertive colors (brick
red, teal blue, sidewalk gray), Potter's art suits the tone of Best's text. Similarly shy
souls will identify with Violet, and everyone will be happy to see her blossom.
JMD
BIRDSEYE, TOM 
Look Out, Jack! The Giant Is Back!; illus. by Will
Hillenbrand. 
Holiday House, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1450-7 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
In the time-honored tradition of sequels everywhere, this title manages to find
another villain (the vanquished giant's angry brother) to menace the hero (Jack of
beanstalk fame) in a story that aims for the same satisfaction of its predecessor.
Jack has relocated to North Carolina, where he's living a life of ease and growing
prize-winning roses, but into that idyll bursts the giant mark II with a new chant:
"Wham blam hickity hack!/ I'm gonna get that boy named Jack!/ He now be
living, but soon he'll roast!/ I'll spread him with mustard and eat him on toast!"
Carefully strategizing, Jack cozies up to the interloper and feeds him to the gills in
order to slow him down, but will satiation suffice to disable the big guy? Birdseye
has an easy, flavorful style evocative-likely deliberately-of Richard Chase's Jack
tales, and details such as the giant's devastatingly smelly feet add kid-appealing
color. The text is quite long, however, and there's not enough trickery and pace to
counterbalance the rambling. Hillenbrand's illustrations create an amiable and
slightly fantastical countryside, complete with rickety Jack shack and ubiquitous
roses (though more might have been made of those roses); while there are some
entertaining compositions, the art doesn't have the wit and bite of the visuals for
Wooldridge's WickedJack (BCCB 12/95), and the text would have benefited from
such an accent. This is nonetheless an enjoyable adventure with a classic hero, all
set for kids primed by Richard Walker'sJack and the Beanstalk (BCCB 12/99) for
a second chapter. DS
BLOCK, FRANCESCA LIA 
Echo. Cotler/HarperCollins, 2001 
215p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028128-6 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028127-8 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 9-12
Echo, elfin child of "angel" mother Eve and dying artist-father Caliban, doubts
OCTOBER 2001 
* 53
her worth and her parents' love for her, and as a result she turns to sex and anor-
exia. Echo's story alternates with chapters revolving around characters whose lives
impact, directly or indirectly, on hers: tormented rock stars trying to redeem
themselves, secretive young men exploding with longing and poetry, self-destruc-
tive girlfriends seeking connection with their fathers, and intensely sensual angels
coming to the rescue of young women who don't know their own worth. Echo
finally finds fulfillment in her art and in the arms of an angel-boy from her youth:
"Then Storm gave her back her tears, the ones she had given him so long ago, gave
them back deep into her womb, where they would become a child who would
never doubt. Who would know that magic is belief and who would believe." The
switch from first-person narrative to third-person narrative in every other chapter
impedes the momentum and tends to make the connections between chapters
somewhat obscure. The emotional pain of the author's characters is tangible, how-
ever, and their choices, while sometimes misguided, are understandable. 
Block
has a strained penchant for romantic names (Thorn, Smoke, Eden, Valentine,
etc.) reminiscent of the adolescent desire to reinvent oneself, but she also has a
penchant for transformative, kaleidoscopic language, and there are moments of
sheer exhilaration in words combined herein. JMD
CHRISTENSEN, BONNIE 
Woody Guthrie: Poet of the People; written and illus. by
Bonnie Christensen. 
Knopf, 2001 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-91113-8 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-81113-3 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-6
Christensen uses a succinct style to tell the life story ofAmerican songwriter Woody
Guthrie. She begins with his childhood on the Oklahoma prairie, where Woody
grew up hearing "wind and rain songs, thunder rumbling, lightning crackling
songs .... Woody was born into that music." The book both describes Guthrie's
personal involvement in historical events such as the Dust Bowl drought and the
rise of unionism and demonstrates those connections with short excerpts from
songs he wrote at the time. The woodcut and watercolor illustrations pair deep
black ink with sepia and pastels to dramatic effect, and the use of rough woodcut
lines creates a topically appropriate look of homey folk art. The design has an
appealing aesthetic and thematic coherence: 
the words to "This Land Is Your
Land" are broken into a few lines and handwritten across the tops of each spread
(the full lyrics appear again typewritten at the end of the story), and the first and
last illustrations show almost the same prairie scene, the first showing a shot of the
nearly empty prairie and the second showing Guthrie walking a path that cuts
across the wide expanse. This is a solid addition to the growing ranks of appealing
picture-book biographies, celebrating a folk figure well worth remembering. A
timeline of events is included. KM
DAVIES, NICOLA 
Wild about Dolphins. Candlewick, 2001 
53p 
illus. with
photographs
ISBN 0-7636-1454-8 
$10.99 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
In enthusiastic and exclamatory prose, zoologist Davies (author of Big Blue Whale,
BCCB 10/97) describes first her voyage aboard the Firenze on a scientific expedi-
tion to track and count dolphins along the Newfoundland coast and then a subse-
quent, similar voyage aboard the Elendil on the Indian Ocean. Numerous color
photographs (some by Davies herself) bring the action home, as does Davies' in-
54 
* THE BULLETIN
formal text and recreated dialogues. Sidebars and inserts with additional informa-
tion and images (maps, statistics, etc.) and the changing point size of the text make
the layout busy and crowded; choppy and incomplete sentences, poorly placed
definitions, and inserted factoids make reading through a bit haphazard. Still,
there are a lot of quotable facts, and kids turned off by the crowded pages will
probably take to the picture-heavy layout like a marine mammal to water. A guide
to dolphin species, two pages on dolphin research and conservation groups, and an
index are included. JMD
DOHERTY, 
BERLIE 
The Famous Adventures of Jack; illus. by Sonja
Lamut. 
Greenwillow, 2001 
[128p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-623619-3 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-623618-5 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Young Jill, off to seek her fortune, is taken in by old Mother Greenwood, who tells
her stories of that everyman hero, Jack: "Cousin Jack, Great grandfather Jack,
Uncle Jack, son Jack, and some is daft and some is dead and some is disappeared.
And some is lazy and good-for-nothing and waste-of-a-wishbone like my very own
son. But they're all called Jack." Doherty takes several traditional English Jack
tales and retells them within the framework ofJill's own adventure, in which Jill
finds and loses Mother Greenwood's son and, in the end, sets out to join him in
his journey up the beanstalk. The book seamlessly weaves the stories of Jacks and
Jill together into a satisfying blend of old and new. A firm grip on classic folk and
fairy-tale motifs and structure allows the author to ever-so-gently stretch the bor-
ders of the Jack tales, and the result is rife with humor and sly fairy tale references.
The down-to-earth voice of Mother Greenwood and the magical content of the
tales are a potent combination for storytelling and reading aloud, and the big print,
enhanced by decorative motifs, will reassure uncertain readers. Spice up the shelves
of novel-length retelling of fairy tales with this hearty stew of stories. JMD
FERRIS, JEAN 
OfSound Mind. 
Farrar, 2001 
[224p]
ISBN 0-374-35580-0 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
Theo has about had it. The only hearing member of an otherwise deaf family
("He'd lost track of the number of times people had misunderstood him and said,
'Your family is all dead?"), he's been relied upon for interpretation in situations
ranging from real-estate closings to negotiation with art galleries (his mother's an
imperious and successful artist) since he was very young; now Palma, Theo's mother,
is trying to keep him from going away to college next year so that he can continue
to serve as the family's conduit to the hearing world. Theo's encouraged in his
desire for separation by Ivy, herself the hearing daughter of a deaf parent, but it
looks like all Ivy's exhortations will go for naught when Theo's father, Thomas,
suffers a stroke, and Theo's family needs his communicative expertise more than
ever. Ferris has painted a fascinating picture of family life rarely seen in YA pages,
but there will be universal recognition of the book's core question: how do you
decide when it's time to serve your family's needs and when it's time to serve your
own needs first? The question is complicated here by a vivid and intriguing cast of
characters, such as the easygoing Thomas, who hates taking up his son's time for
his own needs, and the overdrawn but magnetic figure of Palma, the pampered
OCTOBER 2001 
* 55
princess of Gallaudet, refusing to let her family's priorities shift away from her;
there's additional energy from a story curve that doesn't always bend in the pre-
dictable places. The ASL speech is translated into English but differently format-
ted, effectively establishing both the fluidity of the language and the fact of its
translation here. Readers unfamiliar with the particulars will find them fascinat-
ing, and all will empathize with the general problem of family responsibility. DS
FLEMING, DENISE 
Pumpkin Eye; written and illus. by Denise Fleming. 
Holt,
2001 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-6681-0 
$15.95 
R 4-7 yrs
Fleming, mistress of the concrete, here uses that concreteness to different effect,
creating image-intensive Halloween verse ("piece of pie, pumpkin eye... / candle-
stick, burning wick") that evokes the nocturnal world of trick-or-treaters. The
connections may sometimes be a bit abstract for the youngest listeners, but the
pared-down text has a spooky edge that makes it very inviting for youngsters with
more boldness than attention span and that provides enough atmosphere to make
a satisfyingly unsettling mood piece. Fleming's homemade paper landscapes set
off their midnight-blue-well, probably eight-o'-clock blue-backdrops with glow-
ing orange and white accents as well as with the rainbow of colors represented in
the trick-or-treaters' costumes. Backlit black silhouettes and otherworldly looking
revelers bring a genuine chill that is occasionally offset by homelier images of lighted
windows and cheerfully garbed children. This will be just the shivery ticket for
kids looking to move from Halloween giggles to genuine spookiness. DS
FRITZ, JEAN 
Leonardo's Horse; illus. by Hudson Talbott. 
Putnam, 2001 
4 8p
ISBN 0-399-23576-0 
$16.99 
R* 
Gr. 4-7
Though this starts with a brisk and spirited overview of Leonardo's life, this isn't a
biography (for that, see Diane Stanley's Leonardo da Vinci, BCCB 9/96); it's an
examination of one of Leonardo's projects, which took five centuries for fulfill-
ment. Leonardo studied and planned for the creation of a huge bronze horse
"three times larger than life," analyzing the technical problems ("No one had tried
a single pouring of anything this large") and completing the clay model-but never
achieving the actual bronze casting. Come the twentieth century, an art lover
named Charlie Dent decided that Leonardo's horse deserved completion, plan-
ning a model and creating a dome that would house the finished object; when he
died of ALS just before completion, the Dome supporters brought in a talented
sculptor who realized that the horse needed redesign from scratch and who com-
pleted the task in time for Leonardo's horse finally to be delivered to the people of
Milan 500 years to the day of the destruction of Leonardo's original clay model.
This is an unusual and surprisingly touching story of a cumulative collaboration
("On the pupil of one eye of the horse, Nina had written in tiny letters Leonardo da
Vinci. On the other eye she had written Charles Dent. She had put her own name
in the curly mane of the horse"), and it also raises some interesting questions for
discussion (how much, for instance, is it still Leonardo's horse?). Talbott's mixed-
media art takes advantage of the book's arched shape (echoing the horse's Dome
home), and it adds information as well as beauty, with diagrams and maps inserted
where appropriate and a plethora of equestrian studies and models trotting through
the pages. He's fair about the drawbacks in Charlie Dent's rendition, but he's also
effective at capturing the spirit throughout all the horse's incarnations. For art
56 
* THE BULLETIN
lovers or just fans of quixotic dreams, this will be an offbeat and intriguing read.
An author's note and appended information gives more detail on benefactors, the
process, and the website of the organization behind the sculpture. DS
GLASS, ANDREW 
Mountain Men: True Grit and Tall Tales; written and illus. by
Andrew Glass. 
Doubleday, 2001 
42p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90841-5 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-32555-X 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 4-7
True biography and downright lies make up this compilation about seven legendary
mountain men of the American West. Opening sections on the Louisiana Purchase
and the fur trade set these wild trappers in their historical context; subsequent
sections concentrate on individual men and their famous (if sometimes exaggerated)
exploits. The adventures ofJim Bridger, Kit Carson, and Jim Beckwourth, among
others, are succinctly recounted in an involving combination of fact and fiction
that will surely draw even reluctant readers. The two or three pages of text devoted
to each mountain man are interspersed with full-page illustrations and spot art
depicting dramatic scenes of conflict and adventure. Glass' style is as rambunctious
as the men he depicts: swirling lines and contrasting colors enliven scenes of men
wrestling with bears, racing down the rapids, and brawling in taverns. Addenda
include "Mountain Man Necessaries" (hunting knife, Hawkin rifle, Newhouse
beaver trap, etc.), "Mountain Man Lingo" (definitions of such words as "didin's,"
"foofaraw," and "porkeater"), and a bibliography; endpapers display useful maps.
JMD
GRACE, CATHERINE O'NEILL 
1621: A New Look at Thanksgiving; by Catherine
O'Neill Grace and Margaret M. Bruchac with Plimoth Plantation; illus. with pho-
tographs by Sisse Brimberg and Cotton Coulson. 
National Geographic,
2001 
[48p]
ISBN 0-7922-7027-4 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-6
WATERS, KATE 
Giving Thanks: The 1621 Harvest Feast; illus. with photographs
by Russ Kendall. 
Scholastic, 2001 
[40p]
ISBN 0-439-24395-5 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-4
In October 2000 the Plimoth Plantation living-history museum staged a three-day
recreation of the 1621 feast, now commonly but imprecisely termed the First
Thanksgiving, and strove to present a more authentic vision of the event with
roots in European harvest traditions and Indian diplomacy. The above titles, aimed
at different audiences, cover this event through text and on-site photos. In Wa-
ters' offering, a six-year-old Plimoth settler and a Wampanoag teen alternately
offer their perspectives of Massasoit's visit and the reception of his entourage. The
"real time" story format, which Waters has employed in previous photoessays (Sa-
rah Morton's Day, BCCB 1/90, etc.), is well balanced and supplemented with ex-
tensive endnotes on the feast, the Plimoth recreation, and the development of the
Thanksgiving myth; a glossary (and an inaccurate recipe for samp) is also included.
Grace and Bruchac's title features brief but problematically organized thematic
chapters that give a broader view of Wampanoag life and take an overtly sterner
view of the settlers' exploitation of Wampanoag land and culture. Indeed, the
closing paragraph of the text could serve as thesis rather than conclusion: "Con-
OCTOBER 2001 
* 
57
sidering this history and what came in later centuries, Native people do not share
in the popular reverence for the traditional New England 'Thanksgiving.' To the
Wampanoag, the holiday is a reminder of the arrival of the English in their home-
land, a presence that brought betrayal and bloodshed." The address of some
thought-provoking issues, however, makes this a stimulating counterpoint to other
accounts and a guaranteed discussion-starter. In demonstrating how diverse cul-
tures approach a common experience, Waters prepares readers to grapple with
Grace and Bruchac's more challenging blasting of a popular myth. EB
GREENE, MEG 
Buttons, Bones, and the Organ-Grinder's Monkey: Tales ofHistori-
calArchaeology. 
Linnet, 2001 
[132p] 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-208-02498-0 
$25.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Focusing on five recent U.S. excavations, Greene introduces readers to the field
that incorporates traditional documentary research, standard shovel, pick, and brush
archaeological techniques, and some nifty modern technologies to uncover and
reinterpret sites and episodes from America's past that historians only thought
they knew. The structures, artifacts, treasures, and waste unearthed at locations
from Jamestown to Little Big Horn to New York's Five Points neighborhood have
forced researchers to revise old assumptions concerning the lazy disorganization of
Jamestown's gentlemen settlers, the relative veracity of white and Native American
accounts of Custer's Last Stand, and the poverty and dissipation of Five Points'
immigrant population. Coverage is strongest when Greene makes direct connec-
tions between newly discovered material evidence and interpretation: fine-quality
trade goods aboard LaSalle's ship La Belle suggest a higher French regard for the
Indians than previously considered, and nail and ash accumulations at Monticello
slave cabins testify to a clever method of fire prevention. Unfortunately, more
page space is devoted to historical background and excavation scene-setting than
to the meatier matter of interpreting the physical record. Still, this switch from
ancient to New World discoveries is refreshing, and aspiring archaeologists who
don't want to stray too far from Mom's home cookin' can ponder the possibilities
of finds right beneath their feet. EB
GRIFFIN, ADELE 
Amandine. 
Hyperion, 2001 
[2 2 4 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2530-8 
$16.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0618-4 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Delia is "nothing special," whether it be to her perennially disappointed parents or
the rest of the ninth grade at her new school, until she meets Amandine. Kitten-
ish, devilish Amandine sucks Delia into her world of imagination and deception
("Amandine herself was not very careful with the truth") and unspoken rules
("Amandine's friendship was like a game of strategy, and it always reminded me of
how bad I was at strategy, and how much I didn't know"), becoming the friend
Delia's parents have always hoped their daughter would bring home even as she
becomes the friend Delia's not sure she wants. When Delia finally disentangles
herself from Amandine, she's prepared for the loneliness, but she's not prepared
forAmandine's revenge nor her cunning impeachment of Delia through her knowl-
edge of Delia's secret weaknesses. It's hard to avoid comparing this to Fine's Tulip
Touch (9/97), but Griffin's work has a magnetism all its own. Amandine's allure is
glamorous if weird, and there's a gothic touch to her performances, especially her
58 
* 
THE BULLETIN
inveigling her way into Delia's parents' good graces and her master stroke of using
needy Delia's own foibles (inventing a brother, stealing trifles belonging to people
she admires) against her. While the portrayal of Delia's home life offers cold com-
fort even in the end, the book mercifully offers Delia refuge in the form of Mrs.
Gogglio, a kind neighbor who offers Delia genuine sympathy and a chance finally
to find her feet. Perceptive readers may realize that this makes Delia considerably
luckier than Amandine, but they, like Delia, will remain haunted by the gifted,
troubled girl. DS
GRIMM, JAKOB LUDWIG KARL 
Hansel and Gretel; tr. by Anthea Bell; illus. by
Dorothee Duntze. 
North-South, 2001 
26p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7358-1423-6 
$15.88
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7358-1422-8 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
This particular version of one of the most grim of the Grimm's tales is the antithesis
of the sanitized folktale. The precise text (translated by Anthea Bell) provides no
refuge from the enormous, gut fear of abandonment, and Duntze's illustrations
evince a nightmare-like reality that reaches out from the very first full-page painting.
There Hansel and Gretel, small and unnoticed, overhear their mother's terrible
plan to abandon them in the forest. The figure of the mother looms over the
woodcutter father, her pinpoint eyes staring and cruel, her hands filled with the
four coffins that will surely be their fates if her husband does not do what she asks;
the seated woodcutter, his face a mask of tragedy, has barren branches growing
from the hat that covers his bowed head. His arms encircle his vision of the fate of
his children: small and alone, surrounded by wolves. In other spreads, the tiny
world of the family, evident in their one-room house, is overwhelmed by the
hugeness of the forest. The night forest glimmers in deep shades of blue and green;
the children, in red-trimmed clothes, stand out amongst the trees, their spiky,
yellow-white hair like candle flames against the darkness. The gingerbread house
is a clash of color in that still green forest, unnatural and garish in its brightness.
The witch, fearsome and toothy, looms over Gretel the way her mother loomed
over her father. Gretel's apparent youth makes her actions even more heroic when
she pushes the witch into an oven that looks, literally, like the mouth of hell,
thereby freeing her brother. Finally, the scenes of mayhem are replaced with the
calm serenity of a bucolic pond and the joyful expression of the children's father,
who gathers his son and daughter in his arms, fresh blossoms blooming on his hat.
This is one dark forest worth getting lost in. JMD
HADDIX, MARGARET PETERSON 
Takeoffi and Landings. Simon, 2001 
201p
ISBN 0-689-83299-0 
$16.00 
R Gr. 5-7
Lori, fourteen, and Chuck, fifteen, have mixed emotions about accompanying their
motivational-speaker mom on her lecture tour while their younger siblings stay
home with their grandparents on the family's Ohio farm. Lori has been bitterly
angry for some time, resenting what she sees as parental desertion of the family in
her widowed mother's constant traveling. Unpopular and insecure Chuck is sure
he's going to ruin everything the way he always seems to. Their whirlwind country
tour changes all three of them, however, as the kids uncover secrets about the past
and their father's death, and Mom learns to know the children she's missed so
much. Haddix imbues her plot points with awkward and unlikely melodrama, but
the seething emotions will jolt readers into recognition. The alternation between
OCTOBER 2001 
* 
59
viewpoints (the third-person narration switches between Lori and Chuck, some-
times tossing a bit of Mom in as well) is effective, playing up the differences be-
tween Lori's increasing frustration and Chuck's increasing self-confidence as well
as emphasizing the gulf between their takes on every event in the trip. The talky
tell-all denouement scene does halt the swift pace, but there's also realism in its
incompleteness, with the trio still needing to hash things out and avoid old pat-
terns. Many kids wish something would move their family into sudden intimacy;
there's therefore a fair bit of vicarious satisfaction as well as readability in this tale
of a family that finds new bonds. DS
HARRIS, ROBIE H. 
Goodbye Mousie; illus. by Jan Ormerod. 
McElderry,
2001 
26 p
ISBN 0-689-83217-6 
$16.00 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
Many will guess right from the title that there's a pet funeral in the offing, and that
is indeed the sad outcome when a boy's beloved white mouse doesn't wake up one
morning. Mousie's young owner succumbs to grief and anger, but his dad's expla-
nations and his mom's assistance with a burial plan help the boy understand and
deal with his pet's passing. It's good to see a recognition that it hurts to lose small
pets, too, and the text is bare-bones simple and calmly direct, covering a range of
developmentally appropriate bereavement issues (including permanence-"When
I wake up tomorrow morning, Mousie won't be here"-and the possibility of
succession-"So, maybe someday, I'll get another mouse"). The book glides so
smoothly through the steps, in fact, that the story is suspiciously tidy (what's going
to happen when the narrator misses the toy car he's burying with Mousie more
than he misses Mousie?) and less involving than instructive (especially for baffled
parents of young mourners); there's little discussion of Mousie's life and ways, so
the audience never really gets a sense of the narrator's loss as they do in, for in-
stance, Viorst's The Tenth Good Thing about Barney. Ormerod's illustrations, es-
pecially the Mousie gallery on the endpapers (where Mousie is an inquisitive
nose-twitching charmer), do their best to fill that gap: the protagonist's toy mouse
and mouse-face slippers emphasize his involvement with his small friend, and the
pictures treat Mousie's still form tastefully and with respect as he's swaddled lov-
ingly in the narrator's old t-shirt awaiting his interment. Though it's overpowered
by its purpose, that purpose will undoubtedly make it useful, especially when the
preschool class pet goes the way of all mice. DS
HERMAN, JOHN 
Labyrinth. Philomel, 2001 
188p
ISBN 0-399-23571-X 
$17.99 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Gregory cannot forgive his father for committing suicide, and he cannot forgive
his mother for falling in love with someone else soon after her husband's death.
He slides deeper and deeper into depression and disaffection, breaking into houses
(he never takes anything), spying on the man he holds responsible for his father's
death, hanging out with bound-for-trouble classmate Jed. Meanwhile, in a paral-
lel contemporary world, Gregor has been chosen as one of the Golden Ten, and he
is about to embark on a voyage to the Mother Country, where he will serve his
home country in an important but unspecified manner. It is clear from both the
book's title and extensive foreshadowing that, in a page torn from classical mythol-
ogy, Gregor is being sent to his death in an actual Labyrinth, tribute and sacrifice
to the Minotaur. Gregory, on the other hand, descends not so much into a physi-
60 
* THE BULLETIN
cal labyrinth (although the underground tunnels beneath his town provide a con-
crete parallel) as an emotional one as he struggles with his anger and self-destruc-
tive desires. Each boy dreams about the other and the two plot lines converge,
until, in the end, both Gregor and Gregory struggle from the depths to the light.
Initially, strong momentum and a growing sense of tension will carry readers through
the parallel plot threads; in the end, however, the plot lines become tangled and
unclear and the momentum stalls, resulting in a murky anticlimax. Readers famil-
iar with Greek mythology may nonetheless enjoy putting Herman's puzzle-like
plots together into an almost coherent whole. JMD
HOBBS, VALERIE 
Tender. Foster/Farrar, 2001 
24 5p
ISBN 0-374-37397-3 
$18.00 
R* Gr. 6-10
See this month's Big Picture review, p. 47.
HOBERMAN, MARY ANN 
You Read to Me, I'll Read to You: Very Short Stories to
Read Together; illus. by Michael Emberley. 
Tingley/Little, 2001 
[32p]
ISBN 0-316-36350-2 $15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-3
These rhyming short stories are written in three columns: a left and right-hand
column for each of the two readers meant to alternate in the reading of most of the
text, and a middle italicized column indicating that the two readers should read
those lines together. Although this arrangement may sound awkward, Hoberman's
introduction deftly explains the format while employing the format ("You'll read
one side,/ I the other"), making the concept accessible to beginning readers, and a
longer author's note describes some possible pairs of readers. Each short story
covers a two-page spread and features, appropriately, two characters, one for each
reader; story subjects range from animals to friendship, focusing on compact and
child-appealing topics. Every story ends with a reassuring dual-voice variation on
the title ("Well, then, at last/ We both agree!/ I'll read to you!/ You'll read to me!").
The repetition, rhyming text, short lines, and use of unifying vowel sounds will
reassure young children who are just venturing into reading. Although the text
steers closer to academic exercise than story, Emberley's visual humor rescues these
light pieces, adding complexity to the otherwise unarticulated characters. His trade-
mark cartoon style is at its best here, eliciting a maximum of expression with a
minimum of line and using the columnar text arrangement to create sequential art
that moves down the pages, creating a comic-book effect. The final spread shows
enthusiastic mice conquering gigantic books, working together to turn the pages
that tower over their heads. Beginning readers will be encouraged by this visual
metaphor, as well as by the early successes they are likely to meet within these
pages, to go out and conquer the mountains of written word that lie ahead of
them. KM
HOLM, JENNIFER L. 
Boston Jane: An Adventure. 
HarperCollins, 2001 
[288p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028739-X 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028738-1 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
When Jane Peck resolves to abandon her tomboyish ways, she enrolls in a young
ladies' academy and embraces ladylike manners with a vengeance. Her efforts are
rewarded with a proposal of marriage (by mail) from her father's handsome ex-
OCTOBER 2001 
* 61
apprentice William, and she confidently sets off to join him in the Washington
Territory. Jane loses her companion on the hair- (well, stomach-) raising voyage
to the West Coast and arrives at last in Shoalwater Bay only to discover that her
fiance has temporarily left the region. Eastern rules of propriety mean nothing
here, and as Jane marks time waiting for William to return she loses her prissy
manners but gains the affections of Jehu Scudder, first mate from the Lady Luck,
who lingers around loading timber and keeping Holm's love plot simmering. It's
no surprise that William ultimately isn't what Jane hoped for and that Jehu will
step in briskly to fill the romantic void, but getting to this point involves a lot of
cloying spunkiness on Jane's part and a fair amount of platitude-spouting by the
supporting cast ("There's plenty of room for gals with grit and courage.... And
you've got both"; "Indians and pioneers toiling together peacefully. This is the
true bounty"). The structure of each chapter, which tests a lesson from The Young
Lady's Confidante against the shaggy reality of the 1850s Pacific Northwest, is
genuinely amusing, though, and readers who will chug through nearly 300 pages
for true love will savor the payoff. EB
HOOSE, PHILLIP 
We Were There, Too!: Young People in U.S. History. 
Kroupa/
Farrar, 2001 
264p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-374-38252-2 
$26.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Hoose rounds up dozens of biographical portraits and anecdotes from coloniza-
tion through the twentieth century to establish what has probably never been in
doubt-that children witnessed, participated in, and occasionally influenced Ameri-
can history. Primary sources are quoted wherever possible, and the range of voices
from various cultural groups is creditable. Within this diversity of experience,
though, there is little discernible cohesion, and the historic panorama speeds by
without focus (there's also a fair amount of credulity about secondary-source tid-
bits, some of which are questionably factual). Yes, child soldiers fought in wars,
and child laborers went on strike, and child activists helped power the Civil Rights
movement, but Hoose does not demonstrate how children's experiences were nec-
essarily disparate from those of adults or, for that matter, whether the many sub-
jects in their late teens were even considered children by their contemporaries.
Social Studies teachers should nonetheless find this a handy sourcebook for supple-
mental materials neatly organized by time period, while young history buffs may
use it to pinpoint persons and events for further investigation. Period illustrations,
a list of sources, and an index are included. EB
JENNINGS, PATRICK 
The Beastly Arms. 
Scholastic, 2001 
3 14 p
ISBN 0-439-16589-X 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
When their landlord raises their rent yet again, eleven-year-old Nickel and his
mother go apartment-hunting. At the end of an alley they find an odd little door,
and behind the door they discover an odd little man, the secretive Mr. Beastly,
who rents them the perfect apartment for a minuscule rent. Following strange
smells, noises, and comings and goings, the boy discovers that the tenants in Mr.
Beastly's building are beasts-animals he has rescued from the urban sprawl that
has destroyed their normal habitats-living in faithfully recreated, environmen-
tally correct space in the apartment building and its central woodsy courtyard.
This is a meandering sort of book, with involving but lengthy descriptions of the
city and those that inhabit it. The characters are strongly evoked (Nickel is an
62 
* THE BULLETIN
introspective kid, thoughtful about the universe while being somewhat absent-
minded about his day to day world), but the action is slow, and the suspense-
built up in nearly two hundred pages before Nickel and his mother actually move
into the Beastly Arms-ends in a denouement that is pleasant but not necessarily
sufficient after the long wait. Still, animal-loving readers may wish to share Nickel's
gentle world. JMD
KERLEY, BARBARA 
The Dinosaurs of Waterhouse Hawkins; illus. by Brian
Selznick. 
Scholastic, 2001 
[4 8p]
ISBN 0-439-11494-2 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Hawkins, a British artist who combined scientific observation with sculptorly imagi-
nation to create the earliest full-scale dinosaur reconstructions, receives fanciful
biographical treatment in three "ages" (chapters), corresponding to stages in his
career. Kerley focuses on his commissions in England and the United States and
on the destruction of his models-doubtless at the orders of New York's infamous
Boss Tweed. Although there is much intrinsic interest in this aspect of Hawkins'
story, dinophiles are here to see how Hawkins' interpolations stand the test of
subsequent scholarship, and this juicy topic gets short shrift. Selznick's closing
scene of comparative dinos displays anatomical contrasts, but it does so in a car-
toonish fashion that may not satisfy children who take all this quite seriously.
Dinosaurs rendered in fierce blues, teals, and purples would likely feel more at
home on a toy shelf than on a museum display, and the two concluding pages of
dense, double-columned author and illustrator notes pack intriguing details that
listeners would probably have appreciated within the text. Still, this is a child-
friendly introduction to an aspect of scientific procedure, and young museumgoers
might justly ponder how today's life-size reconstructions may alter in years hence.
EB
KIMMEL, ERIC A. 
ZigaZak!: A Magical Hanukkah Night; illus. by Jon
Goodell. 
Doubleday, 2001 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90004-X 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-32652-1 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Flying over the town of Brisk one Hanukkah night, two devils devise some im-
promptu mischief. Dancing dreidels, flying latkes, and Menorah candles that shoot
off like fireworks bedevil the townsfolk, and the panicked populace races to the
rabbi's house for rescue. The rabbi turns the tables on the evil spirits, recognizing
the good in their magic ("When magic creates good, it stays good. The forces of
darkness no longer possess it") and refusing to return candles, dreidels, or latkes.
The demons protest, the rabbi persists, and, of course, the night is won by the
clever holy man. Kimmel's original Hanukkah tale boasts an energetic chaos tamed
by its traditional European folktale structure. Despite some overexplanation, the
story has a quick pace, the antics of the devils are more mischief than mayhem, and
the action is more funny than frightening. Goodell's illustrations play to Kimmel's
text: his characters are overdrawn, their dramatic responses bigger than the inci-
dents deserve. The slickly depicted devils resemble the demons in Disney's Her-
cules: pointy ears, pointy tails, pointy claws, and malevolently humorous
expressions. The rabbi is a most worthy hero, standing calmly smoking his pipe
despite the ferocious efforts of the demons. This will add variety to holiday collec-
tions and provide additional laughs in readaloud and storytelling repertoires. JMD
OCTOBER 2001 
* 63
Koss, AMY GOLDMAN 
Strike Two. 
Dial, 2001 
133p
ISBN 0-8037-2607-4 
$16.99 
R Gr. 4-6
Gwen has always been as close as a sister to her cousin and best friend, Jess (the
girls' fathers are twin brothers), whether it be at school or, more importantly, on
the softball team sponsored by the Press Gazette, the newspaper at which their
fathers work. A newspaper strike leaves Gwen's father (labor) underfoot at home
when he's not on the picket line, Jess' father (management) working all hours to
get the paper out, and the girls largely annoyed that adult frailties have led people
to such an inconveniencing pass. As the strike continues, however, a divide breaches
the town, the girls' families, and eventually the girls themselves as their softball
team and friendships are riven by bitterness. This is an unusual subject in litera-
ture for young people, and Koss (author of TheAshwater Experiment, BCCB 6/99)
handles it deftly. Gwen's voice is realistic in its progression from disinterest in
what she sees as a temporary situation to grinding worry about her family (nuclear
as well as extended-she's afraid the tension will cause her parents to divorce) and
nearsighted if not blind loyalty to the labor side, and touches of insight into the
variety of changes this strike brings to families and the town add richness to the
picture. There's also a quick wit to Koss' style and a general sense of hope and
growth (Gwen, formerly not one to connect with those beyond her family, sees a
wider world and develops a friend in another teammate) that keep this a lively
read. Readers might wish to see a few issues more overtly settled (did the new
coach that management put in charge of the softball team really lie about calling
Gwen for practice?), but they'll appreciate both the seriousness of Gwen's dilemma
and the importance of resolving it. DS
KURLANSKY, MARK 
The Cod's Tale; illus. by S. D. Schindler. 
Putnam,
2001 
4 5p
ISBN 0-399-23476-4 
$16.99 
R Gr. 3-6
Although the gape-mouthed cod head in Schindler's cover art seems to herald
some manner of kiddie ichthyology, Kurlansky actually presents both a quirky
review of the way dried fish facilitated the exploration and European settlement of
North America, and an environmentalist salvo for conservation of a species. Breezy,
kid-friendly prose introduces readers to codfish lifestyle ("The cod spends its life
swimming with its big mouth wide open, trying to swallow whatever will fit") and
the way the fish's easy preservation enabled centuries of mariners to sail ever fur-
ther from home ports to explore, pillage, and/or colonize on a full stomach. As
landlubbers became better acquainted with the stockfish's tastiness and versatility
(witness the many recipes tucked amid the text for everything from cod "tongues"
to fried cod heads), cod's value rose, and with it rose the fortunes of such diverse
entrepreneurs as Boston's "codfish aristocracy" who lined their pockets from col-
lateral trades and Caribbean planters who fed their slaves as cheaply as possible on
the lowest quality cod. Predictably, as cod value rose, overfished cod populations
fell, and Kurlansky brings his essay to a cautionary conclusion: "And what will
happen to man if there are no more fish?" Schindler's line-and-watercolor scenes
are rendered with the delicate hatching of fine engraving and suffused with gentle
humor as burly Vikings chomp on massive slabs of salted fish and pilgrims look
with alarm upon the seafood offerings of hospitable (if broadly caricatured)
Wampanoag. This is a classic example of an unlikely subject made not only likely
but fascinating and informative through authorial and illustrative craftsmanship,
and it's bound to hook young readers. EB
64 
* THE BULLETIN
LAKIN, PATRICIA 
Fat Chance Thanksgiving; illus. by Stacey Schuett. 
Whitman,
2001 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-8075-2288-0 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Carla has hung onto her fantasy of a traditional Thanksgiving ever since she and
her mother lost their old home in a fire. "Fat chance," snorts her mother realisti-
cally, looking at the tiny kitchen in their new apartment, but Carla's determined
to create the feast of her dreams. Inspired by Pilgrim practice, Carla proposes to
use common space in the apartment building, and she manages to pull together
disparate residents in a nontraditional but most enjoyable "Fat Chance Thanks-
giving." This is undeniably sweet and not particularly surprising, especially the
ethnic diversity of dishes at the feast. The plot unfolds naturally, however, never
forcing its point, keeping a reassuring focus on the concrete rather than on the
message and consequently allowing young audiences to simply enjoy the big party.
Schuett's art also inclines towards sweetness, especially in the figures' sparkling
eyes, but there's a comforting familiarity to the multicultural cast, who all manage
to look like somebody real with whom you wouldn't mind sharing a building.
This would be particularly good for eliciting stories of youngsters' varied Thanks-
giving celebrations or for one-on-one sharing with relatives who may have their
own "Fat Chance Thanksgiving" stories to recount. DS
LANDAU, 
ELAINE 
Heroine of the Titanic: 
The Real Unsinkable Molly
Brown. 
Clarion, 2001 
[132p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-395-93912-7 
$18.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-10
Landau hooks her audience by launching right into Brown's role as a survivor and
heroine during the tragedy of the Titanic, delaying an account of her subject's life
from birth through death until chapter three. While keeping the focus on Brown's
experiences and personality, the text quietly illuminates the social and historical
landscape that surrounded her, contrasting her forthright support of causes such as
workers' rights and feminism with the more staid behavior generally expected of
women of her social status. Part of Landau's intent is to separate fact from legend,
and to this end she retells the rumors alongside accounts that set the facts straight.
Landau also intends to clear up misunderstandings generated by Hollywood and
Broadway portrayals of Molly Brown, but these efforts are less successful; many
young readers will be unfamiliar with the depictions being criticized and may need
further explanation. Following the riveting opening, the full account of Brown's
life occasionally drags, and the lure of her Titanic involvement may not be enough
to hold readers through details of marital stresses. Nevertheless, report writers will
find more than enough detailed information here (including a panoply of archival
photographs), and readers who are interested in early feminists and other rebels
before their times will be intrigued by the ways this heroine broke any number of
social molds. Endnotes, a bibliography, and an index are included. KM
LAWRENCE, IAIN 
Lord ofthe Nutcracker Men. 
Delacorte, 2001 
[22 4 p]
ISBN 0-385-72924-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-9
Johnny Briggs is proud owner of an exquisite set of nutcracker-style wooden sol-
diers, hand carved by his toymaker father. All that Johnny needs is a foe worthy of
OCTOBER 2001 
* 
65
his Teutonic warriors, which Britain's entry into World War I provides in unex-
pected fashion. Mr. Briggs enthusiastically enlists to fight for home and England,
and during his idle moments (or unendurable hours) in the trenches, he carves a
series of"Pierres" and "Tommys" that he ships to his expectant son. A mysterious
interplay gradually develops among the carved figures, soldiers' lives, and Johnny's
backyard wargames: Briggs' toy soldiers come to resemble ever more closely his
friends at arms, and Johnny's play often seems to direct the course and outcome of
battles. Lawrence directs the action with a masterful hand, and readers will be as
suspicious (and spooked) as Johnny that his bloodthirsty play scenes actually affect
the fate of his father's unit. An anti-war message is implicit throughout, but the
indictment is novelly directed as much against bloodlust instilled from youth as
against full-scale war. Thoughtful readers are bound to compare Johnny's soldiers
with contemporary video warriors, and they may think twice before defensively
muttering the familiar, "It's just a game." EB
LEE, TANITH 
WolfStar. 
Dutton, 2001 
232p 
(The Claidi Journals)
ISBN 0-525-46673-8 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
The second volume of this fantasy series (see Wolf Tower, BCCB 7/00) finds hero-
ine Claidi preparing for her wedding to Hulta chieftain Argul when their romantic
plans are torn asunder with an abrupt turn of events: Claidi is kidnapped by
warriors from the Wolf Tower, who deposit her at a castle far across the sea, in the
middle of a rainforest, with no explanation or hope of escape. The castle is a
massive clockwork puzzle, with innumerable rooms and stairways that move spo-
radically and unpredictably, often leaving the few members of the household
stranded in rooms arranged in unfamiliar configurations. Prince Venn, ruler of
the castle's human and clockwork inhabitants, resents Claidi's presence; eventu-
ally, however, he comes to see her as a kindred spirit, a victim of forces she does not
understand and cannot control. Together they attempt to affect their future by
discovering the truth about the past. The specifics of Claidi's world-from the
panoramic natural landscapes to the claustrophobic clockwork castle-are imagi-
native and precise, making her journey scenic and noteworthy. Unfortunately, the
opening chapters are a choppy summary of the previous book's main events, an
account of the kidnapping, and a description of the tedious journey to the clock-
work castle. The pace is unaccountably slow, and the surprisingly passive Claidi is
so nebulously defined that her dilemma cannot carry the plot. At the conclusion,
Claidi is left returning to Argul on a ship piloted by a sentient robot, indicating
that this combination of science and magic is not over yet; readers taken with the
craftsmanship of the blend will want to follow her. JMD
LEVINE, GAIL CARSON 
The Two Princesses of Bamarre. HarperCollins,
2001 
241p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029316-0 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029315-2 
$15.95 
R Gr. 4-7
Timid Princess Adeline has grown up relying on her bold sister, Princess Meryl, to
save her from various threats and phobias, so Adeline is devastated when Meryl
falls ill with the mysterious Gray Death. Unfortunately, their father is a bumbling
ruler whose constant consultation of The Book ofHomely Truths keeps him from
taking any decisive action towards curing his daughter. As Adeline watches her
sister's condition worsen, she realizes that she must search for a cure herself. The
first third of the book is rather slow, particularly the opening chapter that presents
66 
* THE BULLETIN
Adeline and Meryl as young children, but once Adeline begins her quest the action
never flags. She encounters gryphons, specters, dragons, and fairies, falling in love
with a sorcerer along the way; Levine's characterizations of these various magical
beings add some original twists to the fantasy staples. The text is sprinkled with
Bamarrian lore and recitations from Bamarrian heroic sagas that read authentically
like stiffly translated text and add depth to the portrait of the kingdom of Bamarre.
Levine's latest pair of princesses will find a welcome home on the bookshelves of
fantasy lovers throughout the realm. KM
LOVELL, PATTY 
Stand Tall, Molly Lou Melon; illus. by David Catrow. 
Putnam,
2001 
32p
ISBN 0-399-23416-0 
$14.99 
R 
5-8 yrs
Molly Lou Melon is one self-possessed kid. She's "just taller than her dog" and
she's the shortest girl in the first grade, but "she didn't mind. Her grandma had
told her, 'Walk as proudly as you can and the world will look up to you.' So she
did." Unfortunately, Molly moves to a new town, away from her friends and her
supportive grandmother. When class bully Ronald Durkin calls her "SHRIMPO!"
and "BUCKY-TOOTH BEAVER!" and tells her she sounds like a duck, Molly
shows her stuff: she scores a touchdown by ducking under Ronald's legs, she
stacks a tower of pennies on her teeth, and she "QUACK!"s so loud she makes
Ronald "somersault backwards, hit his head, and have to go to the nurse." Predict-
ably (but still happily), old Ronald comes around ("On the fifth day of school,
Ronald Durkin brought Molly Lou Melon a stacking penny for her tooth and
smiled at her"), and Molly Lou is able to write to her grandma that "everything
you told me is exactly right!" Prescriptive though this story may be, the text is fast
and funny, and Molly Lou is a fetching little heroine. Catrow's palette is intense,
and his sense of perspective distorted: he uses garish hues of acid yellow-green as a
constant throughout and sets the tiny Molly Lou Melon against huge houses, huge
school buses, and huge Ronald. The bulging-eyed, toothy characters aren't cute
(in fact, some of them are downright scary), but they are endearing. This will
make a comic readaloud, with easy lessons for class bully, new kid, and other as-
sorted listeners. JMD
Lu CHI FA 
Double Luck: Memoirs ofa Chinese Orphan; by Lu Chi Fa with Becky
White. 
Holiday House, 2001 
212p
ISBN 0-8234-1560-0 
$18.95 
R Gr. 5-8
This is an accessible autobiography about growing up on mainland China during
the mid-twentieth century. Orphaned at an early age, Chi Fa (whose name means
"new beginning" in English) is passed from relative to relative, until his aunt sells
him to a couple who promise to treat him like a son but instead use him as slave
labor. His trials are ameliorated by Sister, his older sibling, who tries at every
possible opportunity to assist him. She rescues him from the abusive couple and
places him first with an uncle and his family, then with an old woman and her two
adult sons, and finally with a man troubled by epileptic seizures. In each house
Chi Fa makes a place for himself, working hard and always retaining a sense of
compassion for others and respect for his family honor. He is sustained through-
out much hardship by Sister's words: "Chi Fa, you are lucky. Good fortune will
find you." Chi Fa moves from China to Shanghai; from Shanghai he escapes to
Hong Kong, and from Hong Kong he goes to Taiwan, where he begs on the street
OCTOBER 2001 
* 67
and works menial jobs to support his older brother and his family. Eventually, Lu
Chi Fa emigrates to the United States and becomes a successful restaurant owner
in California. The narrator's concrete, specific memories enhance the straightfor-
ward storytelling, whether reflecting the child's-eye view of the young Chi Fa or
the later mature voice that is informed by an eventful life. This is a true rags-to-
riches adventure, complete with swift action and harrowing events: Lu Chi Fa
moves from poverty to prosperity by the dint of hard work, strong cultural values,
the compassion of a few good people, and, as he says himself, luck. Each chapter
opens with a Chinese proverb; a map of Eastern China and a timeline are also
included. JMD
LUNGE-LARSEN, 
LISE 
The Race of the Birkebeiners; illus. by Mary
Azarian. 
Houghton, 2001 
[32p]
ISBN 0-618-10313-9 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-6
In one frozen Norwegian winter during the thirteenth century, the infant Prince
Hokun is in great danger from the Baglers, greedy nobles who would keep him
from the throne of his deceased father. The Birkebeiners, peasant soldiers loyal to
the king, take the prince and his mother across the snow-covered mountains in a
cross-country ski race against the elements to get them to a place of safety before
they can be attacked by the Baglers. Lunge-Larsen's retelling is based on the ac-
count of"Hakon Hakonsson's Saga," penned by Sturla Tordsson in 1264, but the
loyalty of the Birkebeiners and their determination and bravery against impossible
odds make these thirteenth-century heroes surprisingly relevant to today's readers.
The perilous Christmas Eve escape across snow-covered mountains in freezing
blizzard conditions is an adventure of the first order, and the illustrator takes full
advantage of the drama. Azarian (illustrator of Martin's Snowflake Bentley, BCCB
12/98) uses hand-tinted woodcuts to depict the harrowing story. Full-page and
full-spread illustrations feature intensely dramatic compositions, and elaborate or-
namental borders alleviate the challenge of possibly daunting text blocks. This is
an unusual action story that will add spice to storytelling and readaloud sessions.
An author's note and brief bibliography are included. JMD
LYNCH, CHRIS 
All the Old Haunts. HarperCollins, 2001 
[192p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028179-0 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028178-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-12
In ten stories about teens touched by shadows, a girl revels in her terrifying
grandfather's new vulnerability, a boy and his girlfriend must cross national bor-
ders in order to procure an abortion, a boy's trip to the post office becomes instru-
mental in his exploration beyond tight parental confines, and young people generally
struggle, not always with success, against their own and the world's darker sides.
Though some stories are forced (the post-office odyssey in "Pissin' and Moanin'"
seems more adolescent fantasy than likely rite of passage) or confusing (what is it
about the grandfather in "Chlorine" that elicits such corrosive fury in his rela-
tives?), Lynch is a gifted stylist who's magnetic even in his weaker writing. The
strongest material here is, unsurprisingly in light of Lynch's previous achievements
(such as Whitechurch, BCCB 4/99), the darkest: the narrator of "Two Hundred
Yards" chatters about the distance he's legally required to keep from the object of
68 
* THE BULLETIN
his affection ("That'd be another problem area for me, where I've been doing what
I'm not supposed to"); in "Good-bye Is Good-bye," a boy fears that his late cousin
won't rest until matters are completed ("So now all you have to do is finish," says
Cousin Nick to the boy. "Jump, like you were supposed to when I jumped. Which
you forgot to do"). While some readers may wish for more room to explore these
themes, others will be intrigued by these evocations of fear and yearning. DS
MACLACHLAN, PATRICIA 
Caleb's Story. 
Cotler/HarperCollins, 2001 
[128p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023606-X 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023605-1 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
This sequel to Sarah, Plain and Tall (BCCB 5/85) and Skylark (2/94) maintains
the series' focus on literacy as Anna passes on the duty of keeping the family jour-
nals when she moves to town to work with her sweetheart's father, a doctor, fight-
ing the flu epidemic. Caleb can't imagine what he'll write about... until a stranger
shows up and turns out to be his father's long-lost father. Caleb observes and
chronicles the tension between the father who deserted family and farm and the
son he left behind and seems to get to the root of the problem: the illiteracy that
kept the grandfather from ever writing to his son. Sparse, cleanly focused prose,
well-defined (if thin) characters, and an eventful plot make for an accessible and
involving read. However, while Sarah was characterized by a strong sense of place,
quiet wisdom, and a subtle eventfulness, this title has too many made-for-TV-
movie moments ("'You don't know how to read, Grandfather, do you?'... I went
over and took Grandfather's hand. 'I am going to teach you'") and plot pivots
seem forced (everyone pulls together when Sarah gets lost in a snowstorm). Caleb's
story ends with relatively shallow profundity ("'Fault,' said Papa very softly. 'Sa-
rah says fault doesn't matter'") and a veritable roll call of happy endings (Anna
escapes the flu; her boyfriend returns unharmed from World War I; Grandfather
starts keeping a journal). Readers who have been following the Witting family
fortunes will nonetheless enjoy seeing how much the plot has thickened, and
MacLachlan's intertwined themes of family and literacy, place and history, offer
intriguing curricular opportunities in an efficient package. FK
MATTHEWS, KEZI 
Scorpio's Child. Cricket, 2001 
[160p]
ISBN 0-8126-2890-X 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-9
Uncle Bailey--dour and covered with scars-has suddenly appeared on the Duprees'
South Carolina doorstep, and fourteen-year-old Afton Dupree is as upset by Mama's
refusal to discuss the travails that brought Bailey to this pass as she is by Bailey's
alarming mannerisms. Mama allows the neighbors to assume Bailey is just an-
other wounded soldier returning from World War II, but Afton senses otherwise.
Before she learns the truth about Bailey's past (he was on a penal farm for the
wrongful death of his girlfriend), Afton makes some ill-considered remarks to her
best friend, Deenie, that throw suspicion upon Bailey for a local death and a child's
disappearance. The literary world is already well-populated with eerie and menac-
ing uncles, but Matthews sidesteps any Uncle Silas-style melodrama by focusing
on Afton's credible resentment of her mother's secrecy. Her adolescent evaluation
of problems at home rings true, as even without concrete information Afton cor-
rectly perceives that an emotional burden underlies Mama's duplicitous relation-
OCTOBER 2001 
* 
69
ship with her often-absent husband and her aloof manner with the neighbors.
Each character in the tight ensemble cast pulls its weight, and as much is revealed
through dead-on dialogue as through Afton's narrative observations. Matthews
negotiates a microcosm of misunderstanding and pain without resorting to undue
angst or sensationalism, and readers who bask in the belletristic atmosphere of a
steamy Southern summer should find Afton's tale as satisfying as sweet tea and a
porch fan. EB
MCDONALD, JANET 
Spellbound. Foster/Farrar, 2001 
[14 4 p]
ISBN 0-374-37140-7 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Raven was the smart girl in her family, destined to do even better than her success-
ful older sister, Dell, and not only leave the projects but also go onto college; then
she's lured by a handsome boy at a party into the traditional slip-up, finds herself
pregnant, and leaves high school before graduation. Now that she's got her baby
son, Smokey, she's not sure what the future holds for her beyond hanging out with
her best friend, Aisha, and Aisha's baby. Dell, however, is determined that Raven
not let her abilities go to waste, and she encourages her sister to study for the Spell
Success program, wherein Raven's good showing in a spelling bee will bring her
entrance into a college prep program and maybe even a scholarship for college.
McDonald paints a vivid picture of a strong, hopeful girl in a strong, if sometimes
prickly, family; the open discussion of intraracial issues and tensions is piquant
and welcome, and there's plenty of warmth and salty downhome backchat to leaven
it. Unfortunately this sharp evocation sets the stage for a plot ofbeyond-Disneyesque
unlikelihood: though spelling has always been Raven's weak spot, a few months'
study is enough to make her a champion; this magical program apparently attracts
only sixteen applicants despite the apparently automatic bonus of college prep
instruction; Raven never seems to think about where she'll go to college or what
she'll do with Smokey when she does. This fantastical plot seems to be at odds
with the "keep it real" approach of the novel, but readers may become sufficiently
attached to Raven to be happy at her success, however unlikely the depiction of its
attainment. DS
MCDONNELL, CHRISTINE 
Ballet Bug; illus. by Martha Doty. 
Viking,
2001 
[112p]
ISBN 0-670-03508-4 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-6
Bea's been a diehard lover of ice hockey and nothing else until a ballet-crazed
friend introduces her to dance. Suddenly Bea's got the ballet bug, and she's awash
in leotards, tights, and slippers, finding new athletic joys in the unfamiliar steps
and looking forward to the class presentation of the Nutcracker. This has some
updated and contemporary details (Bea refuses to choose one pastime over the
other one, her friend Margaret will be one of the first African-Americans in the
school's history to dance Clara), but it's also filled with the juicy traditional ele-
ments of the ballet story, between nasty sabotaging rivals, temperamental older
dancers, stage mishaps ("Big angel pileup. One tripped and they fell like domi-
noes. Fallen angels everywhere"), and the sheer sweaty joy of life at the barre and
in the locker room. The end's somewhat abrupt, but the world matters more than
the plot here, and McDonnell's got that down pat: wannabe Fonteyns will dance
right through the pages. Reviewed from an unillustrated galley. DS
70 
* THE BULLETIN
PALATINI, MARGIE 
Tub-boo-boo; illus. by Glin Dibley. 
Simon, 2001 
33p
ISBN 0-689-82394-0 
$16.00 
Ad 
6-8 yrs
Henry is so filthy after playing outside that his mother insists that he take a bath in
the middle of the day. Henry obliges, and, after a few lengthy spreads showing
Henry amongst the bubbles, he finds himself in trouble: his "little big toe" is stuck
up the water spout, making a "tub-boo-boo." Henry's mother comes to the rescue
only to find her fingers stuck. Her fingers are followed by his father's tie, and a
police officer's "big little finger," until finally big sister Lucy contributes her cold
and slippery chocolate ice cream, which finally frees them all. Dibley uses unusual
perspectives to create a surreal fish-eye lens feeling, showing exaggerated expres-
sions and facial features painted in a slightly muddy acrylic palette. Although the
chatty writing style is initially inviting, repeated phrases, such as "tub-boo-boo,"
are forced and cutesy, and the plot lacks tension sufficient to sustain the audience
through the length of the book. The illustrations are unusual enough that they
may intrigue young onlookers despite the textual flaws, and some youngsters may
giggle at this tale of bathtime troubles. KM
PARKER, NANCY WINSLOW 
Land Ho!: Fifty Glorious Years in the Age of Explora-
tion with 12 Important Explorers; written and illus. by Nancy Winslow
Parker. 
HarperCollins, 2001 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027760-2 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027759-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-5
Certainly the subtitular "glorious" needs qualification, given the shipwreck and
slaughter endemic to the European Age of Exploration, but Parker is right on the
money when demonstrating how the efforts of her dozen featured explorers en-
hanced the political capital of their royal patrons and opened the sluices for a flood
of wealth into their nations. This is a tidy, economical, and often quite ironically
funny look at nautical adventurers from Columbus to Cabrillo, in which each
double spread per character zeros in handily on highlights of his voyage(s), the
specific contribution to European understanding of the nature and extent of the
New World, and a niblet of general-interest information, from havoc-wreaking
shipworms to flourishing indigenous American empires. Parker is especially good
at establishing the relationships among the explorers and making clear that fresh
discoveries and reports were foundational to subsequent voyages. Line-and-water-
color pictures are affectionately cartoony, and plentiful maps not only plot the
journeys (with the unfortunate gaffe of Vespucci's sail down the South American
coast to 400 south "longitude") but also demonstrate how rapidly the European
world view expanded during this period. Readers who use this as a Social Studies
supplement may wonder why Hernin Cortez is relegated to brief references in
other men's bios, but history buffs will be too pleased with what's here to miss
what isn't. EB
PECK, RICHARD 
Fair Weather. Dial, 2001 
139p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8037-2516-7 
$16.99 
R Gr. 5-9
Mysterious Aunt Euterpe, whose name is mentioned rarely and in hushed tones,
extends an invitation to her nieces and nephew to visit her in Chicago and attend
the Columbian Exposition, whose edifying wonders will expand their world view
well beyond the confines of their Southern Illinois farming community. After a
OCTOBER 2001 
* 
71
flurry of farm chores and a frenzied off-the-rack shopping spree, narrator Rosie is
on the train north with teenage elder sister Lottie, little brother Buster, and their
outspoken, tackily clad grandfather, who's joined the party on a purloined train
ticket. As the country mice sample the high-flown delights of the White City and
the seedier (and far more exciting) attractions on the Midway, they also begin to
understand that Euterpe's late husband has left her with pots of money, an inso-
lent and lazy staff, and an unfulfilled yearning to be accepted in Chicago society-
a dream the ex-farm girl is unlikely to achieve. Several days and fictional contrivances
later, however, the visitors do indeed facilitate her entree into the "better" circles
and assure happy endings all around. Peck draws the city/country relatives to
type, and consequently they're never quite as believable as Grandma Dowdel's
clan in his recent award winners (A Long Way from Chicago, BCCB 10/98, A Year
Down Yonder, 1/01). The highlights of the fair are nonetheless vividly evoked,
and the awe and sham of the event are winningly conveyed through Rosie's inno-
cent, perceptive, and thankfully never bumpkinish viewpoint. EB
RAND, GLORIA 
Sailing Home: A Story of a Childhood at Sea; illus. by Ted
Rand. 
Cheshire Studio/North-South, 2001 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7358-1540-2 
$15.88
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7358-1539-9 
$15.95 
R 
5-9 yrs
Tending the pets and pushing the baby's carriage, dining on fine dinnerware and
dancing to gramophone music, taking lessons from a private tutor and gathering
before a pink marble fireplace, the Madsen children shared experiences common
to well-off American children in the nineteenth century, except that their home
was aboard their father's tall ship, the John Ena, carrying cargo around the world.
Daughter Matilda acts as narrator in this account, based on the memoirs of Cap-
tain Madsen and his daughter Ena (an author's note is appended), and her tales
includes such kid-pleasing episodes as rescuing an overboard kangaroo, burying a
pet pig at sea, sneaking up into the rigging, narrowly surviving a cruel storm, and
celebrating Christmas around a wooden tree constructed by the ship's carpenter.
Ted Rand's watercolors capture both the vastness of their ever-changing maritime
neighborhood and the intimacy of the family's surprisingly posh quarters. The
family is irrepressibly jolly (except when they're being irrepressibly brave), but
their activities are portrayed as so engaging that one can hardly fault their per-
petual cheer. Older listeners who enjoy visiting the Madsens will be just about
ready to step up into the Roops' Goodbye for Today! (BCCB 4/00). EB
ROBINET, HARRIETTE GILLEM 
Missing from Haymarket Square. Atheneum,
2001 
14 3p
ISBN 0-689-83895-6 $16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
In a few short years, Dinah's family has gone from relative affluence and comfort
to the squalor of tenement living in 1886 Chicago. Dinah and her best friend
Olive, who is a recent Austrian immigrant, struggle to feed their families by work-
ing all day in a sewing factory and doing "humbug" at night, in which they distract
rich people and steal their money. Dinah's mother has lost her arm to a factory
machine and her father, a successful African-American labor organizer, has van-
ished without a trace. Robinet creates a sharp sense of the depth of Dinah's pov-
erty as well as the hostility that surrounds the poor in the disparaging glares of rich
onlookers. Although the daily quest for food is described in gripping detail, Dinah's
72 
* THE BULLETIN
quest to find her father builds momentum very slowly, and the overall energy of
the book flags. Thanks to help from the family dog and a few overly convenient
coincidences, Dinah and Olive finally do find and rescue Dinah's father (who's
been imprisoned by Pinkertons determined to keep him from attending the
Haymarket meeting). Robinet has chosen an unusual and vivid setting and cre-
ated a likeable heroine, both of which will help atone for some shortcomings in the
writing. Although most of the characters are fictional, an author's note gives fac-
tual information about the setting and the real Haymarket riots. A bibliography is
included. KM
ROBINSON, SHARON 
Jackie's Nine: Jackie Robinson s Values to Live By. 
Scholastic,
2001 
1 8 1 p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-439-23764-5 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 4-8
Jackie Robinson's daughter presents a series of brief stories and personal essays to
illustrate each of nine values dear to her late father: courage, determination, team-
work, persistence, integrity, citizenship, justice, commitment, and excellence. The
most involving stories are those, whether written by him or a member of his fam-
ily, that draw on Robinson's life; through the course of the book emerges a de-
tailed picture of their family struggles, from the public difficulties of Robinson's
historically unprecedented presence as a black man in professional baseball to the
more personal efforts of Robinson's children to establish their own identities in
the shadow of a hero. Although other pieces, such as those by Oprah Winfrey and
Michael Jordan, are less successful contributions, teachers will nevertheless find
many useful excerpts in this volume to support units on character development
and ethics. Young baseball fans may also, despite the purposive frame, appreciate
the complex portrait of a devoted player who struggled against racism with dignity
and courage. KM
RODDA, EMILY 
Rowan and the Travelers. Greenwillow, 2001 
[160p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029774-3 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029775-1 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Rowan's successful quest for water on the forbidden Mountain (chronicled in Rowan
ofRin, BCCB 6/01) is over, and he is happily settled into his daily routine of
caring for Rin's herd of ox-like Buksha. The arrival of the Travelers (nomadic
allies of the settled Rin-sters) disrupts the peace, however, and a misunderstanding
throws the two cultures into mutual suspicion. When a mysterious sleeping sick-
ness overcomes nearly all the residents of Rin and the Travelers are found to have
hurriedly departed, Rowan meets up with Zeel (a Traveler); the two descend into
the legendary Pit of Unrin in search of answers to the troubles between their two
cultures, barely escaping with their lives. Rowan then begins to understand the
connections between old legends and new horrors, and the race to save the inhab-
itants of Rin becomes even more desperate. Rodda develops Rowan a bit further
in this second entry (first published in Australia, the series currently has four vol-
umes there), spending more time on him and introducing some interest-catching
young adult characters. The dangers faced herein are much more concrete than in
the first novel, the pace is quicker, and the setting more clearly delineated. Young
fantasy readers will appreciate the succinctness of the text, and they will be drawn
deeper into Rowan's world. JMD
OCTOBER 2001 
* 73
ROMANEK, TRUDEE 
The Technology Book for Girls and Other Advanced Beings;
illus. by Pat Cupples. 
Kids Can, 2001 
56p
Library ed. ISBN 1-55074-936-6 
$14.95
Paper ed. ISBN 1-55074-619-7 
$8.95 
R 
Gr. 3-6
When Gina is assigned a science-project topic, Advanced Technology in Our Ev-
eryday Lives, she explores the inner workings of remote controls, smoke detectors,
automatic doors, bar codes, and many other mysterious modern conveniences.
Although the technological explanations take front and center, Gina's research
process makes an engagingly readable frame for the science as she explores a variety
of resources, including the internet and the school library, and consults a friendly
mixed-gender cast of technology experts. The illustrations show Gina's domestic
and school environs in cheerful if bland line-and-watercolor images, and layouts
are peppered with inset text boxes and explanatory diagrams. Although the design
is occasionally visually cluttered, the arrangement of information is clear and effec-
tive, capably explaining complex concepts while encouraging the reader to look
further. Text boxes also mention women who are scientists and engineers in the
fields that have made these technologies possible, enhancing a book that will be
inviting for young people of either gender. 
Simple experiments are described
throughout, and a compendium of further experiments is offered in the back of
the book. Even young readers who don't fancy themselves science aficionados will
have trouble putting this book down as Romanek takes the mystery out of every-
day technologies. KM
RUSSELL, JOAN PLUMMER 
Aero and Officer Mike: Police Partners; illus. with pho-
tographs by Kris Turner Sinnenberg. 
Boyds Mills, 2001 
[32p]
ISBN 1-56397-931-4 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Despite the equal billing of the title, police dog Aero is pretty much the star of this
solid photodocumentary; Officer Mike merely bathes in borrowed charisma as he
and his partner demonstrate their daily routine, their skills, and their public-rela-
tions activities. The book appears in nice digestible slices, with subheaded themes
("Signals and Commands," "Partners on Patrol") for every spread or two; there's a
rough logic to the progression that keeps the approach from becoming too dis-
jointed. While the text sometimes tips into the choppy or becomes somewhat
sweeping, there's plenty of well-presented information here, with special but not
dogmatic emphasis on safety for the public in interacting with Aero as well as in
benefiting from his services. The design opts for a multitude of smaller pictures
over fewer larger ones; since there's a preponderance of action shots, the result is a
lively visual sequence as Aero bounds through the pages and his day. This will add
both information and huggability to that ubiquitous Community Helpers unit.
DS
RYAN, PAM MUlsOZ 
Mice and Beans; illus. by Joe Cepeda. 
Scholastic,
2001 
[32p]
ISBN 0-439-18303-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
Rosa Maria is getting ready for her granddaughter's seventh birthday and for the
celebration that will bring the whole family to her casita. She knows her little
74 
* 
THE BULLETIN
house will be crowded, but she believes her mother's saying: "When there's room
in the heart, there's room in the house, except for a mouse." Each day of the week
Rosa Maria does chores connected to the birthday party; every night she sets a
mousetrap, only to find it missing the following day. By the time of the birthday
party all is ready-except Rosa Maria forgets to fill the pifiata. Luckily, as viewers
will have known all along, she has help-the mice who live in her house have been
assisting with the birthday preparations all week, and they've filled the piinata with
sweets. Rosa Maria then realizes she has remembered her mother's saying incor-
rectly all these years and the correct saying is "When there's room in the heart,
there's room in the house ... even for a mouse." Ryan's cheerful text is a festival all
its own, its pithy phraseology and folkloric overtones adding interest. Cepeda's
high-spirited, thickly brushed paintings display a beehived Rosa Maria in party-
colored clothes against party-colored backdrops; viewers will get a kick out of find-
ing the anthropomorphized little mice who, like the shoemaker's elves, secretly
assist with every task. The text includes italicized Spanish words (there is a brief
glossary and pronunciation guide), and repeating phrases are emphasized by chang-
ing size and color from spread to spread. Birthday books are popular additions to
storytimes, and this one is a gift wrapped in carnival colors. JMD
SAYRE, APRIL PULLEY 
Crocodile Listens;, illus. by JoEllen McAllister
Stammen. 
Greenwillow, 2001 
[24 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-16505-2 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-16504-4 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
A number of toothsome morsels pass close to Crocodile, but despite her hunger
she remains motionless: "Like an ancient dinosaur/ with scraggly teeth,/ Croco-
dile lies in the sand./ Birds call. Rivers run./ Baboons file past./ And all the while,
Crocodile listens." Finally, she hears the long-awaited sounds of her babies hatch-
ing beneath the earth: "Beeeeyo, beeeeyo, beeeeyo!/cry the babies./ Will their mother
hear them?" She then digs down to her hatchlings, helps one break free of his shell
and, gathering the babies in her mouth, proceeds to the river. Sayre's poetic re-
counting of the hatching of baby crocodiles tilts into anthropomorphism but still
delivers a pretty fair natural-science lesson (a page of facts about the Nile crocodile
is appended). Stammen's dry-pastel illustrations feature a most convincing croco-
dile mama and babies, whose detailed and realistic depictions will please the most
scrupulous of young naturalists. The repetition of animal sounds, the suspense of
the hatching, and the high-interest topic makes this title a good candidate for
reading aloud to preschoolers and primary graders. JMD
SCHAEFER, LLA M. 
This Is the Rain; illus. by Jane Wattenberg. 
Greenwillow,
2001 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-17040-4 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-17039-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Using the cumulative pattern of "The House that Jack Built," Schaefer describes
the water cycle in simple and poetic language: "This is the ocean,/ blue and vast,/
that holds the rainwater from the past." From ocean to vapor to clouds to rain,
from ditches to creeks to rivers to ocean, she clearly and cleanly follows this critical
cycle. Wattenberg's mixed-media illustrations (described as "a blend of photo-
OCTOBER 2001 
* 75
graphs and original imagery collaged on the computer using Adobe Photoshop")
have the same zing she brought to Henny-Penny (BCCB 5/00); spot graphics jux-
taposed against natural terrains result in a phantasmagoria of surreal images that
enhance and expand Schaefer's succinct text. The endpapers are inky black stud-
ded with starfish, and the opening spread-a black sky with golden starfish over
an ocean blue and vast--extends the image. Scallop shells float with triceratops
while rocky cliffs float on the horizon; green fish swim in the sky and shadow-
sculpted raindrops fall against black-and-white photo-clouds. Though her rhythms
sometimes falter, Schaefer gives young audiences a serviceable introduction to a
basic scientific principle; Wattenberg interprets that principle in playful fashion
that subtly underscores the interdependence of all living things. JMD
SCHEER, JULIAN 
A Thanksgiving Turkey; illus. by Ronald Himler. 
Holiday House,
2001' 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1674-7 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
The narrator of this picture book is thirteen when he and his mother move onto
his grandfather's farm, and his initial misgivings give way to pleasure in the farm
routine and his newfound closeness with Granddad. He's particularly taken by
Granddad's repeated promise that the two of them will together bag a wild turkey
someday, and he enjoys the grandfather/grandson outings in search of the wily old
bird Granddad sometimes sees. When the two actually encounter the bird, how-
ever, Granddad startles the boy with his response. The end isn't entirely surprising
(Granddad identifies with the bird and prevents his being killed), and the slow
pace and sometimes formal language of this holiday narrative will limit readership;
the text might actually fare better as a readaloud short story. It's nonetheless a
contemplative and highly descriptive narrative that speaks volumes to an intergen-
erational closeness that many youngsters will envy. Himler's faces waver between
awkward and interestingly rough hewn, but his blurred autumnal watercolors make
much of the play of light, especially early light, on the rural landscape, depicting a
world of loamy smells and crunching leaves underfoot. This is a little low on
genuine kid magnetism, but it's a gentle story that may provide a point of connec-
tion between generations. DS
SEDGWICK, MARCUS 
Witch Hill. Delacorte, 2001 
14 7p
ISBN 0-385-32802-8 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Jamie escaped from the fire that leveled his home, but he continues to be haunted
by the conflagration, particularly his failure to save his young sister (he thought
she was on the other side of the house with his parents). Temporarily lodged with
his aunt in the village of Crownhill (originally Cronehill), he's begun having night-
mares about witches and terrifying visions of fire: apparently, he is in psychic
contact both with the real witch who periodically terrorizes and kills apparently
healthy villagers and with the young girl falsely accused of witchcraft who burned
to death in Aunt Jane's house. After Jamie saves his cousin from the real fire that
concludes the novel ("Oh no. Not again.... But this time I know what to do"),
all of these ghosts are laid to rest and the reader finally meets Jamie's baby sister,
who is, after all, fine (she was rescued by a firefighter). This is at best accessible
and efficient, its relatively tame combination of psychological thriller, witch-hunt,
family drama, and history mystery pushing lots of generic buttons. Nonetheless,
76 
* THE BULLETIN
its mild British flavor may enhance its appeal for readers used to New-England-
style witches. FK
SINGER, MARILYN 
Monster Museum; illus. by Gris Grimly. 
Hyperion,
2001 
[40p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2457-3 
$15.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0520-X 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Just over a score of poems feature shady characters ranging from the estimable
Count Dracula to an Irish banshee. These creepy subjects are demonstrating less
their scary than their comic capabilities, however, whether it be Frankenstein's
monster's lament about being named for his master ("I'd rather be Bud/ Or
Wolfgang or Spud/ Or something not nearly so lame"-"Frankenstein's Mon-
ster"), the meditation on the comparative cuddliness of legendary creatures ("A
snake with a horn is a nightmare/ A horse with a horn is just cute"-"The Uni-
corn"), or the bickering duet of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde ("Dr. J: I'm an even
tempered gent/ Mr. H: No, I'm not, no, I'm not"-"Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde").
Though some of the scansion could be crisper, there's a heady blend of rollicking
and sophistication to the verses, which offer gleeful possibilities for readalouds
("Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde" begs on its knees to be read in tandem) as well as
reading alone. Grimly's line-and-watercolor art displays much of the trim preci-
sion and fondness for hatching of S. D. Schindler's work, making his baroquely
featured creatures, elaborate scenarios, and complicated spreads entertainingly de-
tailed rather than merely busy. Fans of monster movies and Prelutsky's Monday's
Troll (BCCB 3/96) will find plenty to snicker at here, and the "Gloss-Scary" offers
genuinely informative tidbits that will enhance reader understanding of these hor-
rors. DS
SKRESLET, LAURIE 
To the Top of Everest; by Laurie Skreslet with Elizabeth
MacLeod. 
Kids Can, 2001 
56p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 1-55074-721-5 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
Everest has been in the news for one thing and another in the last few years, which
may both explain the appearance now of Skreslet's account of his 1982 climb and
also prompt some audience interest in that account. A stubborn and individualis-
tic kid, Skreslet found his true metier through Outward Bound; his climbing skills
and knowledge of equipment won him a place with Canada's Mount Everest Ex-
pedition. The book goes on to detail the expedition's preparations, its partici-
pants, and the climb itself, including the physical depredations (ranging from
altitude sickness to sunburns on the inside of climbers' mouths) and tragedies
suffered (four members of Skreslet's team lost their lives in the climb). Skreslet's
prose unfortunately doesn't enhance the account, tending to be choppy and awk-
ward or dry; it is, however, effectively succinct, and his achievement as the first
Canadian to reach Everest's summit will give this title a particular resonance to
readers from northern North America. The photographs are a varied lot, but
many have a vivid immediacy that will draw readers without regard to national
boundaries, as in the double-page landscape panoramas or the view, literally, from
the top. While the layouts are a bit stodgy, the multitude of informative images
and sidebars give the book great browsing and reluctant-reader appeal. The book
finishes with a brief philosophical rumination and a coda about Skreslet's life since
OCTOBER 2001 
* 
77
the climb; there are no source notes or suggestions for further reading, but a glos-
sary and the URL for Skreslet's website are included. DS
SNYDER, ZILPHA KEATLEY 
Spyhole Secrets. 
Delacorte, 2001 
186p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90016-3 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-32764-1 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Hallie Meredith is resentful of the hand recently dealt her: after her father's death,
her mother has had to sell their house, Hallie has had to change schools, and she
and her mother have had to move into a small apartment in a converted mansion.
Hallie blames God for her troubles and gives up prayer, trying to cope with her
grief and despair alone. A need for a hiding place leads her to the forbidden attic
of the old mansion, where she discovers a tiny window that looks right into the
living room of an apartment in the high-rise next door. She spies on the apartment's
occupants and constructs scenarios to explain encounters among them. Arguing
adults, a sobbing teenage girl, a strange mask on the mantel-all become fodder
for Hallie's fact-free fantasies. Eventually Hallie maneuvers a meeting with Zachary,
the little boy who lives in the apartment; her growing concern for the boy's welfare
leads her to believe there is danger lurking, but this turns out to be yet another
figment of her overactive imagination. There are some intriguing elements here,
but they never add up to much. The tragic teenage girl's grief over being forbid-
den to see one boyfriend is mitigated when she gets another one; the object Hallie
thinks is a gun is actually a handheld computer; and the angry adults, divorcing
and fighting over custody of the children, suddenly reconcile. The characteriza-
tions are thin and the conclusion too neatly wrapped up, but readers with a pen-
chant for peering into other people's lives may find some voyeuristic pleasure here.
JMD
STANLEY, DIANE 
The Mysterious Matter of I. M. Fine. HarperCollins,
2001 
2 01p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029619-4 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-17546-5 
$15.95 
-
R 
Gr. 4-8
I. M. Fine writes a series of fantastically popular middle-grade horror novels called
"Chillers." Fifth-grader Franny stopped reading them because they gave her night-
mares, so she's now in a position to observe dispassionately-and then suspi-
ciously-how much they influence her classmates. First, they inspire a fad for jelly
worms candy (Franny's dad invests in the company and makes a bundle). Later,
readers seem to have psychosomatic illnesses and delusions based on recent plots.
Franny and her best friend, Beamer, develop their library and internet research
skills as they track down the author and thwart her twisted plot: in her last book
Fine planned to insert a subliminal message that would cause readers to reject
literacy forever. This fast-paced and timely exploration of the influence of books
on child readers is slyly didactic but also accessible, entertaining, and solidly plot-
ted. With the exception of one self-consciously Dickensian coincidence, this mys-
tery novel is unconventionally realistic: these sensible young detectives begin their
search with standard reference books like Something about the Author and, finally,
outmaneuver Fine because of their superior understanding of the VCR ("Grown-
ups-even really smart grown-ups--don't have a clue how far behind kids they
are, technologically speaking"). Light reading that respects its child audience, this
gently satiric mystery will give goosebumps to readers who appreciate genre fiction
and thoughtful comedy. FK
78 
* THE BULLETIN
STERN, MAGGIE 
Singing Diggety; illus. by Maggie Stern. 
Orchard, 2001 
4 8p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-30318-7 
$14.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-531-07179-0 
$4.95 
R Gr. 1-3
This concise easy reader features the further adventures of lovable canine Diggety
and his loving but frustrated master George (from George and George andDiggety).
In the opening chapter, George takes Diggety to obedience school, but obedience
is not one of Diggety's talents. Luckily, instructor Natalie is a woman of percep-
tion, and she realizes that Diggety's great talent is singing along with George's
harmonica ("George played as many notes as he could. 'AW-WHOOO, AW-
WHOOOOOO,' howled Diggety"). Chapter Two finds the ever-enthusiastic
Diggety (disguised as a reindeer) in trouble at a doggie costume party, where George
(dressed as a Dalmatian) wins the prize for "cutest dog." In the closing chapter,
George, accompanied by his responsible grownup Dad, brings Diggety to "sharing
time" at school. Diggety does not respond to George's commands, being far too
interested in the class rabbit, but Dad comes to the rescue by showing that he can
follow orders just fine. Stern's text is smoothly funny, and the humor of the situ-
ations will engage young readers. Sims' friendly renditions of George and Diggety
have a cozy hominess that will lure tentative readers right into the midst of Diggety's
adventures. JMD
STEWIG, 
JOHN 
WARREN, 
ad. 
Mother Holly; illus. 
by Johanna
Westerman. 
Cheshire Studio/North-South, 2001 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 1-55858-925-2 
$15.88
Trade ed. ISBN 1-55858-926-0 
$15.95 
R 
5-9 yrs
Rose and Blanche are stepsisters, but other than that they have little in common:
Rose is "pretty and industrious," while Blanche is "mean and lazy." When Rose
loses a spindle down the well, her wicked stepmother sends her after it, and "the
poor girl ... not knowing how else to solve her problem, jumped down the well
after the spindle." Her subsequent explorations prove her generous character and
lead her to Mother Holly's cottage, where she agrees to work for the old woman.
At the end of her faithful service, Mother Holly rewards her with a golden dress,
her lost spindle, and a shower of gold, and she sends her home. Hearing Rose's
adventures, Stepmother then sends Blanche to serve Mother Holly and also ac-
quire rewards, but Blanche is another kettle of fish entirely, ending up fairly rec-
ompensed with prickles, briars, and brambles. It is only through Rose's intercession
that Blanche is redeemed and the family prospers. Stewig's retelling of this Grimms'
tale has an ease of language that makes it quick and fluid. Westerman's illustra-
tions are occasionally a bit stiff around the faces, but the milieu is an old-fashioned
fairy-tale dream, handsome and detailed and stuffed with enticing bucolic tidbits.
A thorough source note is included. JMD
TAYLOR, MILDRED D. 
The Land. Fogelman, 2001 
[392p]
ISBN 0-8037-1950-7 
$17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 7 up
Although technically a prequel to the Logan family story (appearing in Roll of
Thunder, Hear My Cry and others), The Land both enriches the saga that reaches
into the 1940s and stands alone as a record of the first generation of young adults
to emerge from Reconstruction into the chilling backlash of Jim Crow. In this
entry we learn how Paul-Edward, already known to many readers as Cassie Logan's
OCTOBER 2001 
* 
79
grandfather and the Logan family patriarch, acquired the acreage that becomes
both hard-won surety for the Logans' fiscal independence and the provocative
symbol of "uppity" blacks for the white Granger family. Here, too, Paul-Edward
meets his beloved Caroline (widow of his closest friend), and the family's ferocious
dedication to the land germinates within their marriage. Taylor has not only in-
troduced decades of readers to characters of outstanding courage, she continually
proves herself to be a courageous storyteller, boldly exploring the thorniest themes
of interracial relations with honesty, insight, and sensitivity to the pain that is
slavery's legacy. Nowhere is struggle more poignantly embodied than in Paul-
Edward's wrenching transition from the protected, pampered offspring of a white
father and ex-slave mother to a young man whose paternal heritage is meaningless
to most of the white community and a signal for mistrust and derision for many
blacks. Paul-Edward's personal odyssey toward self-reliance raises a host of broader
challenges for readers to wrestle: Are there limits or boundaries to family love?
What does forgiveness entail? Will a true hero attack, amend, or reject a flawed
social system? Hard questions, indeed, and Taylor's compelling prose demands
that they be addressed. EB
THOMAS, FRANCES 
One Day, Daddy; illus. by Ross Collins. 
Hyperion,
2001 
26p
ISBN 0-7868-0732-6 
$15.99 
R 
4-7 yrs
Little Monster (from What If, BCCB 9/99) is clearly bolder than he used to be,
but he's still got his worries about his planned future in space exploration ("Ex-
plorers don't take their mommies and daddies with them"). Father Monster joins
his son in discussion of exploration, offering some suggestions for retained con-
nection along the way ("You might see Mommy and me waving from Earth"),
connections that his knowledgeable son rejects as impractical ("You'd be much
too far away to see"). Eventually LM, clearly destined for life in the stars while
Mommy and Daddy wait at home, gently explains that "you have to be lonely to
do some things" and that "one day I'll come back, Daddy." One more page for
closure would have been ideal, as the mere promise of eventual return makes an
overhasty end to the shared reverie. The description of the space journey has a
delicious blend of young-scientist knowledge and young-dreamer fantasy, how-
ever, and the interplay between father and son monsters is always intimate and
sometimes humorous ("That's kind of greedy of Jupiter," says Father Monster
when learning of Jupiter's possession of sixteen moons). With his stripy legs and
expressive matching ears, Little Monster remains one of the more endearing pic-
ture-book heroes, here ready for space in goggles and aircraft (yellow washtub
fitted with tail and wings); there's a Rosemary Wells-ish touch to his bottom-
heavy shape and bright-eyed insouciance (and occasional reservation) as he spins
through the galaxy in search of adventure, eluding the odd Martian and Jovian
dragon. Despite the abrupt ending, this has both charm and tender understand-
ing of a youngster's expanding boundaries, and it's going to make a dandy bedtime
book for those just moving beyond Loomis' Astro Bunnies (BCCB 2/01). DS
TINGLE, REBECCA 
The Edge on the Sword. Putnam, 2001 
277p
ISBN 0-399-23580-9 
$18.99 
R Gr. 6-10
Tingle has woven a compelling coming-of-age story set in ninth-century Britain
based on historical figure AEthelflaed, the Lady of the Mercians. Betrothed to her
80 
* 
THE BULLETIN
father's ally, Ethelred of Mercia, to secure the borders against the Danes, iEthelflaed
(Flad) is a pivotal, if unwilling, player in a national drama. Her position is pre-
carious, so Ethelred sends Red, a trusted thane, to act as her bodyguard. At first
Fled sees only that her freedom is being curtailed, and she twice eludes the vigilant
Red; the second time she is kidnapped by her father's enemies, and it is only Red's
intervention that saves her. The political situation is coming to a boil when Red
decides to teach Fled how to defend herself, with sword and dagger, on foot and
on horseback. She is a willing pupil, and her friendship with the thane is cemented
by their long hours of training, training that saves Flaed and her entourage's lives
when they are ambushed on the way to her wedding. Tingle has imagined an
action-packed life for JEthelflad without making her an anachronism. Flad re-
sents her betrothal because she hasn't met her future husband, but she sees quite
clearly her role and duty as the king's eldest daughter. Characterizations are fully
developed without the insertion of modern sensibilities, and the relationships among
the characters all seem emotionally true to the personalities that Tingle creates.
Notes about the historical IEthelflad are included. Hand this off to fantasy as well
as historical fiction fans; they'll appreciate Flad's abilities despite the absence of
magical glamor. JMD
VAES, ALAIN, ad. 
The Princess and the Pea; ad. and illus. by Alain Vaes. 
Little,
2001 
32p
ISBN 0-316-89633-0 
$15.95 
R 7-10yrs
Prince Ralph of Upper Crestalia wants a wife, but his mother, Queen Frieda, just
wants to keep collecting jewels. The royal mother announces the search for a
suitable bride, with the codicil that no one else may get engaged or married until
Ralph's future is assured. The queen finds fault with every possible bride, and the
prince storms off in his roadster. The car breaks down, and there he is, "no wife,
no car, no happiness." Along comes a tow truck driven by a young woman with "a
long braid coiled around her head, like a crown." It is none other than Opaline
von Highbredde, crown princess of Lower Crestalia, who is "only doing this trucking
thing" until she comes of age. Needless to say, Opaline passes all the queen's tests
(including the one involving a pea and twenty goose-down mattresses), and, as
soon as the queen realizes that the jewels of Lower C will be part of Opaline's
dowry, everyone lives happily ever after. Vaes' clever retelling of Andersen's classic
makes the most of its humorous opportunities, especially in the queen's hurdles
for wannabe princesses, whether tasks (walking the dog with a yo-yo, playing hop-
scotch blindfolded, double-dutching on one foot) or riddles ("Why did the chicken
cross the road?"; "What's worse than finding a worm in an apple?"). The comedy
is enhanced by his color-saturated illustrations of caricatured characters: fat little
pug dogs, enormous no-necked footmen in powdered wigs, a prince who looks a
teensy bit like Prince Charles, and the carefree, overalled Opaline. This is a strong
addition to comparative folktale collections, and it could find additional use in
readers' theater activities and writing exercises. JMD
WALLACE, BARBARA BROOKS 
Secret in St. Something. Atheneum, 2001 
14 9p
ISBN 0-689-83464-0 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Robin flees the cruelties of his stepfather, Hawker Doak, carrying stolen trinkets, a
few dollars, and his baby brother, Danny. Alone on the streets of late nineteenth
century New York City, Robin faces homelessness and starvation. Luck turns his
OCTOBER 2001 
* 
81
way and he finds secret shelter and a semblance of family with some street boys in
the basement of "St. Something," a wealthy church. The boys spend their days
selling papers, shining shoes, and scrounging pennies in order to support themselves
and to help Robin support Danny. Robin, however, is stalked by the villainous
Doak, who is determined to recover Danny. Doak's deathbed confession reveals
that Danny is the son of wealthy parents, the Jonathan Highcroffts, kidnapped by
Doak at the behest of greedy Highcrofft cousin Franklin, anxious for what he sees
as his rightful inheritance. All ends with an Oliver Twistian flair as Danny is
restored to his rightful parents, Robin is adopted by same, and the street boys find
a home with Jonathan Highcrofft's wealthy father. Wallace (known for such
historical romances as Sparrows in the Scullery, BCCB 1/98) visits familiar ground
here: the put-upon orphan boy with the heart of gold and ethics to match escapes
the greed-driven machinations of adults to come into his well-deserved (and well-
recompensed) own. Outlandish plot manipulations and contrived coincidences
proceed at an involving breakneck pace until the final chapters; there the momentum
fails when the denouement is muddy, the explanation of events goes on way too
long, and the villain goes unpunished. Still, this has some old-fashioned charm,
and readers may get caught up in this romantic picture of life on the not-so-mean
streets. JMD
WATERS, KATE 
Giving Thanks: The 1621 Harvest Feast.
See review under Grace, p. 56.
WEATHERFORD, CAROLE BOSTON 
Sidewalk Chalk: Poems of the City; illus. by
Dimitrea Tokunbo. 
Wordsong/Boyds Mills, 2001 
[32p]
ISBN 1-56397-084-8 $15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
The easy rhythms, evocative word choices, and smooth alliterations of the best
poems in this uneven collection provide vivid snapshots of city life, as in "On the
Corner": "The shoeshine man pops a cloth/ across black wing tips," and "A boy
with a boom box heads/ for the blacktop to shoot hoops." Family, race pride, and
religious faith share thematic space with kid's-eye views of the beauty shop and the
laundromat, where "a washer that's out of order" is a realistic feature of the urban
landscape in which a young girl reluctantly fluffs and folds. Other poems scan less
easily and some are more generic in tone and topic, such as the title poem, which
chirps that "doodling's sure to bring a smile." Watercolor illustrations, gaining
texture and depth from colored-pencil shadings, emphasize the diversity of the
city-dwelling population, whose accessories include wheelchairs and yarmulkes;
they're sometimes flatly and unimaginatively drafted, but their bright line and
color reinforce the collection's consistently positive tone. An index of titles and
first lines makes this accessible collection easy to navigate. FK
WERLIN, NANCY 
Black Mirror. Dial, 2001 
[25 6 p]
ISBN 0-8037-2605-8 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
Frances didn't think she could become any more isolated-she's an artistic loner
and scholarship student at swanky Pettengill Academy, she's a half-Japanese half-
Jewish ethnic curiosity in her largely Caucasian town, she's estranged from her
82 
* THE BULLETIN
father and her mother has returned to Japan and holed up in a Buddhist monas-
tery. On top of all this comes the suicide of her older brother, Daniel (also a
Pettengill student), apparently as a consequence of a longterm drug problem of
which Frances had been unaware. In her grief, Frances tries to connect with Unity,
the charitable organization that funded her and Daniel's scholarships and with
which Daniel was deeply involved. She's perplexed and angered by the hostility of
the group (especially Daniel's girlfriend, Sasha) towards her intention, and she's
also suspicious of Unity's charismatic leader and his plan to use Frances-and
Daniel's death-for publicity purposes; soon she uncovers indications that some-
thing is very wrong at Unity and that Daniel's death may not have been a suicide
at all. There is a smattering of extraneous details here and readers will see the plot
points coming well before Frances does (ranging from the drug smuggling that is
Unity's true mission to the unmasking of a mysterious older student as an under-
cover FBI agent), but there's still a good deal of pleasure in the tale of intrigue.
Frances is an appealingly bumbling heroine, unsure rather than Holmesian, so
she's sympathetic as she sorts out friends and foes, helped by classic devices ("In-
stead I paused just outside and, astonished at myself but also somehow excited,
shamelessly eavesdropped") and the requisite sidekick (a developmentally delayed
handyman underestimated by the Unity members). This doesn't offer the taut
psychological complexity of The Killer's Cousin (BCCB 9/98), but it's an enjoyable
tale of false fronts, dangerous secrets, and a girl's struggle to find the truth in a
world gone awry. DS
WHEELER, LISA 
Wool Gathering: A Sheep Family Reunion; illus. by Frank
Ansley. 
Jackson/Atheneum, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-689-84369-0 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 2-3
This flock of humorous poems about various ewes, lambs, and rams opens with an
illustration showing sheep hiking, skating, skipping, biking, and even wheeling a
wheelchair to the family reunion. The poetry is packed with humor; some poems
are expanded one-liners, such as the poem about a sheep who is master of various
martial arts: she "sure knows her chops!" Other poems play with word sounds,
such as "Aunt Eweginia," who knits gifts for the whole family from her own wool:
"Ewe mustn't watch/ Ewe see, that's rude./ Eweginia knits till she is nude." Some
rhymes are forced, and the poems that veer away from the humorous approach are
much less successful. Nevertheless, Wheeler's jokes are perfectly pitched for tick-
ling young funny bones; these poems are sure to elicit guffaws from those rarely
sated readers of joke books. Ansley deftly uses watercolors and simple ink lines to
depict sheep faces and stances that express as great a variety of sheep personalities
as one might expect to find at a large family gathering. Fans of humorous poetry
won't be sheepish; they'll flock to this in shear delight. KM
WILLEY, MARGARET, ad. 
Clever Beatrice: An Upper Peninsula Conte; illus. by
Heather Solomon. 
Atheneum, 2001 
[32p]
ISBN 0-689-83254-0 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-8 yrs
A young girl outsmarts a strong (but not very clever) giant in this retelling based
on Michigan and Canadian lore. When they eat the very last of their porridge,
Beatrice tells her worried mother "it is time for me to go out into the far north
woods and get some money." Even when her mother informs her that the only
OCTOBER 2001 
* 
83
way to earn money is by chopping down trees or making bets with "a rich giant
who loves to gamble on his own strength," Beatrice is undeterred. It is clear the
little girl cannot be a lumberjack, but a comment from her mother ("When you
are a rich giant... you don't have to be smart") gives her an idea. Willey (author
of Thanksgiving with Me, BCCB 11/98, and Saving Lenny, 3/96) puts a fresh spin
on an old motif in this story of "sharp as a tack" Beatrice tricking the giant out of
a sackful of gold. The text is pithily descriptive (Beatrice makes a fist "no bigger
than a walnut"), and the pace is quick. Solomon's mixed-media (watercolor, col-
lage, acrylic, and oils paint) illustrations have a three-dimensional impact which
adds to the vibrant energy of the visual images; there's a shimmering beauty to the
pine-forested landscape that's enhanced by the seamless interweaving of photo-
graphic components and sometimes blurred, sometimes feathery strokes of water-
color. Beatrice is a tiny, shock-headed girl in a patched red dress; the giant is a
good-natured looking fellow in an orange vest. Storytellers and story audiences
will welcome this clever new heroine. JMD
WILSON, JACQUELINE 
Vicky Angel; illus. by Nick Sharratt. 
Delacorte,
2001 
[15 6p]
ISBN 0-385-72920-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 4-8
Charismatic Vicky and her loyal shadow, Jade, have been inseparable for years and
expect to be together forever, until heedless Vicky dashes into the road in front of
an oncoming car. For Jade, the world has ended with Vicky's death ("I think,
Vicky Vicky Vicky. Whenever I start to drift and dream I hear the squeal of brakes
and the scream and I'm wide awake again"), and in her ache for her lost friend
she's exhilarated to find Vicky's ghost appearing to her. Vicky's pre-death sauciness
turns to something scarier and meaner in her ghost, as she teases Jade constantly,
harassing her about her developing friendship with the understanding Fatboy Sam,
taunting and ruling her from beyond the grave; when Vicky says, "You can't be
happy without me," Jade gets the point: "It's an order. I have to obey." Wilson's
writing is so plainspoken and accessible that it is easy to underestimate the extraor-
dinary empathy of this book. There's no attempt to resolve the question of the
reality of Vicky's ghost, because it doesn't matter-whether she's a manifestation
of Jade's grief or not, Jade must find a way to get rid of her, all that's left of the
person she's loved most in the world, if she's to survive. The book is absolutely,
evocatively authentic in its treatment of the aftermath and grieving in all its homely
details: Jade's fairly pathetic parents are all over the map and unable to help,
schoolmates have varying degrees of tolerance for Jade's deterioration, and there's
a nuanced and painful post-funeral scene wherein Vicky's mother recognizes Jade
as her main co-mourner but remains unable to let go her jealousy of Vicky's best
friend. When Jade, helped unpreachily by grief counseling with a kindly chaplain,
does finally manage to release Vicky, readers will see it both as a heartbreaking end
and a hopeful beginning. DS
WINTER, JONAH 
iBdisbol!: Latino Baseball Pioneers and Legends; written and il-
lus. by Jonah Winter. 
Lee & Low, 2001 
32p
ISBN 1-58430-012-4 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Following the format of Fair Ball!, Winter presents fourteen early Latin American
baseball superpowers who collectively clawed their way to U.S. recognition, re-
84 
* 
THE BULLETIN
spect, and finally, acclaim. Although all highlighted players are notable for prow-
ess on the field, the range of national background, professional experience, and
name recognition for North American readers is quite broad. Aficionados meet
the likes of Cuba's "Black Diamond," Jose Mendez, whose dark skin kept him out
of big-league ball but whose pitching ability landed him a clandestine job coaching
in the majors. There's Luis Triant, Sr. and Perucho Cepeda, who broke ground
for (and quite possibly outplayed) their better-known sons. And of course there
are the ones who "made it"-Minnie Mifioso, Roberto Clemente, Luis Aparicio,
Felipe Alou. Winter's text pumps the stats and career hype certain to please browsers
and serious readers alike, and his baseball-card-style acrylic action "shots" capture
the glaring whites, day-glo color highlights, and deep shadows of a blazing sum-
mer day at the park. A brief introduction comments generally on racial discrimi-
nation in the U.S. major leagues, but involvement of Latino foreign nationals in
Negro League play (which appears frequently within the sketches) could use some
additional comment. A concluding "Players at a Glance" page summarizes the
superlatives, suggesting some strong candidates for a fresh set of sports heroes. EB
WITTLINGER, ELLEN 
Razzle. 
Simon, 2001 
24 7p
ISBN 0-689-83565-5 $17.00 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Ken Baker is less than thrilled about his parents' decision to move to Cape Cod to
manage a vacation cottage colony, but there's little he can do except deal with it.
On a quick visit to the town dump Ken meets Razzle, a local character who im-
presses Ken as being quirky but interesting. Razzle becomes Ken's friend and the
primary subject of his photography, and he comes to admire her way of looking at
the world and coping with the difficult hand life has dealt her. Enter Harley,
Razzle's old friend and now nemesis, who sets her sexpot sights on the easily side-
tracked Ken. Distracted by Harley's obvious physical charms and possible sexual
availability, Ken spends less time with Razzle, instead taking glamor shots of Harley
and sneaking make-out sessions with her whenever his mother's back is turned.
Harley, however, is using Ken for her own ends, and the oblivious Ken foolishly
wounds Razzle as a result. Wittlinger (author of Hard Love, BCCB 7/99, and
What's in a Name?, 2/00) here presents a minor tour de force about a boy's coming
of sexual age, a rite achieved not by having sex but by recognizing the power of
same. While Ken's parents are sadly self-absorbed, there are other adults to bal-
ance the equation: Razzle's grandmother, who tries to keep the past from wound-
ing her granddaughter; handyman and plumber Frank, who knows more than he
can tell; and even Mrs. Thackeray, a painter who encourages Ken's art. The plot
develops in layers, emerging like a photograph in solution, the big shapes first, the
more delicate and elusive details later. Solid, focused, and emotionally true, this is
an involving and resonant story of love, loss, and coming of age. JMD
WOOLDRIDGE, CONNIE NORDHIELM 
When Esther Morris Headed West: Women,
Wyoming, and the Right to Vote; illus. by Jacqueline Rogers. 
Holiday House,
2001 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1597-X 
$16.95 
R Gr. 3-5
Among frontier tales, few seem taller than Wyoming Territory's improbable and
implacable stand for women's rights, and here Wooldridge sets down the story of
the woman (and, yes, a couple of men, too) who wrought the marvel. Esther
Morris arrives in the goldmining town of South Pass City and embarks on a cam-
paign of agitating allies (Colonel Williams Bright) and haranguing foes (lawyer
OCTOBER 2001 
* 
85
Benjamin Sheeks) for her cause until she not only wins the vote but lands herself in
public office and converts recalcitrant Sheeks to her way of thinking. That Morris
was a real-life activist is ever clear, but Wooldridge eschews a straightlaced bio-
graphical tone for a front-porch-style yarn. Her downhomey prose occasionally
rollicks right into a syntactical tangle ("But Mr. Ben Sheeks lost the day, and the
heretofore unheard-of up and happened"), but any lapse is more than countered
by vibrant, respectful acclaim for Wyoming's collective act of political courage.
(At a South Pass City memorial dedication, "nineteen human beings, two dogs,
and a cow remembered for a moment that once in time a thing bigger and better
than gold had happened here.") With a figurative shameless wink, Rodgers grabs
for the outrageous elements in this real-life drama, with characters that gasp, howl,
rage, sulk, and defy their opposition at every turn. Readers who've followed East-
ern suffragists in Rhoda Blumberg's Bloomers (BCCB 9/93) will want to see their
Western counterparts finally step out in style. EB
ZEMACH, MARGOT, illus. 
Some from the Moon, Some from the Sun: Poems and
Songs for Everyone; illus. by Margot Zemach. 
Farrar, 2001 
4 2p
ISBN 0-374-39960-3 
$17.00 
R 
3-6 yrs
People may be forgiven for double-checking the main entry; yes, Zemach died
well over a decade ago now. However, this is apparently a new collection of over
two dozen illustrated traditional rhymes, and it escapes that posthumous cobbled-
together air that so many post-passing projects evince. While some entries will be
familiar ("Star light, star bright"), the compilation skews toward older, less con-
temporarily known rhymes and songs (such as "There was a lady loved a swine"
and "Hannah Bantry/ In the pantry"), thereby avoiding redundancy with the many
nursery-rhyme picture books available. The layouts are rather decorously conven-
tional, but the art, with its trademark personable solidity enhanced by strong char-
acter, has enough power to energize the rhymes. Styles vary from fluid and
impressionistic (especially effective in spot-art landscapes) to comically lined and
vigorous (animal protagonists are particularly winning, but the traditional-looking
countryfolk are amiable as well), and there's a pleasing arc to the sequence that will
make continued perusal nearly as rewarding as the browse-and-taste approach. A
several-page coda on Zemach's career is somewhat piquant but definitely out of
place; it would have been more useful to employ that space for notes on the rhymes
and songs, since no source information is included. DS
-/ i \
j 
K•^
V/, K
86 
* THE BULLETIN
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
CULLINAN, BERNICE E. Read to Me: Raising Kids Who Love to Read. Rev. ed.
Scholastic, 2000. Paper ed. ISBN 0-439-08721-X; $6.95. 151p.
Cullinan's accessible title on raising children to be readers has been revised and
updated for a new generation of parents. The book outlines the ways and means
adults can encourage and support children in their reading attempts, arguing the
merits of providing children with a language and print-rich environment and of-
fering practical, developmentally specific ideas for incorporating reading, writing,
and other language play into daily activities. Issues addressed include why it mat-
ters, how to get started, age-related reading preferences, and children's writing as
well as children's reading; there are also tips for busy parents and a "did you know?"
section that reinforces developmental information and reading facts. An anno-
tated "Surefire Hits Booklist" with recommendations by age group is appended, as
is a brief selection of magazines for children and adults. The tone is dry and formal
and the bibliographies and examples minimal, old-fashioned (with many titles
from the seventies and eighties), and unfortunately light on nonfiction, but this is
still a useful resource. Librarians looking for some facts to support their literature-
based programming will want to start here. JMD
Fox, MEM. Reading Magic: Why Reading Aloud to Our Children Will Change
Their Lives Forever; illus. by Judy Horacek. Harvest/Harcourt, 2001. Trade ed.
ISBN 0-15-100624-5; $23.00; Paper ed. ISBN 0-15-601076-3; $12.00. 156p.
Australian expert Fox (former professor of literacy education and author of Harriet,
You'll Drive Me Wild, BCCB 6/00, and other picture books) makes her position
clear right from the title of this new book aimed at adult caregivers of children. In
a conversational, informal style she argues her point, discussing research about
brain development, relating success stories, and giving simple instructions in chap-
ters entitled "Keep It Regular," "And Do It Like This," and "Getting the Most
Out of It." (A chapter on "Troubleshooting" with reluctant or late readers is also
included.) The book makes clear connections between language, print, and gen-
eral knowledge and explains what happens when the three things come together in
the reading process. Fox's passionate belief in the power of language and the effi-
cacy of reading aloud occasionally runs away with her (she sweepingly claims that
"we could probably wipe out illiteracy within one generation" if adult caregivers
read aloud daily to the children in their charge), but her reading research facts are
more impressive if unfortunately unsourced. Pair this with Betsy Hearne's Choos-
ing Books for Children for a comprehensive and transpacific approach to children's
reading. JMD
OCTOBER 2001 
* 87
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
ADVENTURE STORIES: Lunge-
Larsen
African Americans-fiction:
McDonald; Robinet; Robinson;
Taylor
Animals: Sayre
Animals-fiction: Jennings
Animals-poetry: Wheeler
Archaeology: Greene; Kerley
Art: Fritz
Aunts-fiction: Peck
Baths and bathing-stories: Palatini
BEDTIME STORIES: Thomas
BIOGRAPHIES: Atkins;
Christensen; Glass; Landau; Lu;
Robinson
Birthdays-stories: Ryan
Books and reading: Appelt
Books and reading-fiction:
MacLachlan; Stanley
Brothers and sisters: Lu
Brothers and sisters-fiction: Werlin
Brothers and sisters-stories: Grimm
Bullies-stories: Best; Lovell
Career guidance: Romanek
Cats-stories: Adoff
Children and childhood: Hoose
China: Lu
Community helpers: Russell
Contests-fiction: McDonald
Cousins-fiction: Koss
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Werlin
CUMULATIVE STORIES:
Palatini
Dance and dancers-fiction:
McDonnell
Deafness-fiction: Ferris
Death and dying: Harris
Death and dying-fiction: Wilson
Dinosaurs: Kerley
Disabilities-fiction: Ferris
Disasters: Bartoletti; Landau
Diving-fiction: Hobbs
Dogs: Russell
Dogs-stories: Adoff
Ecology: Schaefer
Ethics and values: Koss; Taylor
Explorers and exploring: Parker
Fairs-fiction: Peck
Families-fiction: Ferris; Haddix;
Matthews
FANTASY: Atwater-Rhodes;
Barron; Doherty; Herman; Lee;
Levine; Rodda
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Hobbs
Fathers and sons-stories: Thomas
Fires-fiction: Sedgwick
FOLKTALES AND FAIRYTALES:
Birdseye; Doherty; Grimm;
Stewig; Vaes; Willey
Food and eating: Bartoletti;
Kurlansky
Friends and friendship-fiction:
Griffin; Wilson
Fish and fishing: Kurlansky
FUNNY STORIES: Vaes
GHOST STORIES: Wilson
Ghosts-fiction: Sedgwick
Giants-folklore: Willey
Giants-stories: Birdseye
Grandfathers-fiction: MacLachlan;
Scheer
88 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Grandmothers-stories: Ryan
Growing up-fiction: Wittlinger
Halloween: Fleming
Hanukkah-stories: Kimmel
HISTORICAL FICTION: Avi;
Holm; MacLachlan; Matthews;
Rand; Robinet; Taylor; Tingle;
Wallace
History, European: Bartoletti;
Lunge-Larsen; Tingle
History, U.S.: Allen; Appelt;
Christensen; Glass; Grace;
Waters; Greene; Hoose;
Kurlansky
History, world: Allen; Parker
Horses: Fritz
Illness-fiction: Rodda
Kidnapping-fiction: Lee; Wallace
Labor movement: Christensen
Labor movement-fiction: Koss;
Robinet
Lies and lying-fiction: Griffin
Literature, American: Atkins
Literature, children's: Atkins
LOVE STORIES: Block; Holm
Marine biology: Davies
Mice-stories: Harris; Ryan
Monsters-poetry: Singer
Mothers and sons-fiction: Herman;
Jennings
Mothers-fiction: Barron;
McDonald
Mountain climbing: Skreslet
Museums: Kerley
Music: Christensen
MYSTERIES: Lee; Stanley; Werlin
Mythology, classical: Herman
Nature study: Davies; Sayre
North America-folklore: Willey
NURSERY RHYMES: Zemach
Orphans-fiction: Wallace
Orphans: Lu
Parties-stories: Ryan
Photography-fiction: Wittlinger
Physical education: McDonnell;
Skreslet
Plays-stories: Best
POETRY: Singer; Weatherford;
Wheeler
Police: Russell
Princesses-fiction: Levine
Princesses-stories: Vaes
Readers' theater: Vaes
Reading aloud: McDonnell; Singer;
Wheeler
Reading, beginning: Hoberman
Reading, family: Hoberman
Reading, reluctant: Skreslet
Relationships-fiction: Block;
Wittlinger
School-fiction: Avi
School-stories: Lovell
Science: Romanek; Schaefer
Secrets-fiction: Matthews
Ships-stories: Rand
SHORT STORIES: Doherty;
Hoberman; Lynch
Shyness-stories: Best
Sisters-fiction: Levine
Social studies: Hoose
Spies and spying-fiction: Snyder
Sports-fiction: Koss
Stepsisters-stories: Stewig
Storytime: Fleming; Zemach
Suicide-fiction: Werlin
Teachers-fiction: Avi
Teenage parents: McDonald
Thanksgiving: Grace; Waters
Thanksgiving-fiction: Scheer
Thanksgiving-stories: Lakin
Toys-fiction: Lawrence
Trees-fiction: Barron
Uncles-fiction: Matthews
Urban life: Lakin; Weatherford
Vampires-fiction: Atwater-Rhodes
Voyages and travel: Appelt; Davies;
Landau; Parker
Voyages and travel-fiction: Haddix;
Holm
Voyages and travel-stories: Rand;
Thomas
War-fiction: Lawrence
Water: Schaefer
West, the: Glass
Witches-fiction: Atwater-Rhodes;
Sedgwick
Women's studies: Appelt; Atkins;
Landau
World War II: Allen
·c>
'•The Horn Book stars
FREEWI LL
CHRIS LYNCH
Will, a 17-year-old trying to recover from the tragic death of
his father and stepmother, believes himself to be responsible
for the rash of teen suicides in his town.
1 "In this unsettling narrative, an anguished boy addresses
himself in the second person with a steady stream of
observations and questions. .
. Will is deeply affected by the
deaths of two local teenagers, and the appearance of his
sculptures at the sites of the tragedies raises questions about
his connection to the events. .
.
Lynch guides the reader
through [Will's] complex internal journey with a remarkably
light touch, letting the book's title and those of the three
interior sections--'Faith,' 'Hope,' and 'Charity'--suggest
his themes." 
-Starred 
review / The Horn Book
"Intense, nightmarish storytelling: sometimes wildly funny,
sometimes heartbreaking, entirely memorable."
-Kirkus Reviews
Teen Fiction. $15.95 Tr (0-06-028176-6); $15.89 Lb (0-06-028177-4)
j HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019 * www.harperchildrens.com
S"Several inches below the
surface of the desert sand, a spadefoot
toad waits and listens for rain. . .. Sayre
writes about the natural world in a way that
is clear, precise, and poetic. The text, which
is akin to that of any good fiction picture
book in its brevity, affention to sensory
details, and read-aloud potential, also
conveys the life cycle of a single species
in a cogent and memorable way. .
~IBash's pictures illustrate the desert scenes
with pleasingly varied colors, perspectives,
and layouts. Preschool and primary
grade children will find this well- crafted
book a wholly satisfying introduction to
the spadefoot toad. .
. and the idea
of life cycles in general.'
-Starred review / ALA Booklist
"This is top-notch nonfiction for the
very young, introducing readers to
desert wildlife in general and in particular
to the remarkable spadefoot toad."
--Kirkus Reviews
Ages 6 up. $15.95 Tr (0 688 16614 8);
~. 
$15.89 Lb (0-688-16615 6) 
m1
MHO SCARES
A, BABY-
Wugust House!
"...perfect for that campfire
or darkened bedroom."
-Kirkus 
Reviews
... )U G IV U 
pupUIUIl
with junior high kids,
who'll be eager to tell
their own versions of the
horrors."-Booklist
THE SCARY STORY READER
Richard & Judy Dockrey Young
Introduction by Jan Harold Brunvand
Paperback $11.95 0-87483-382-5
Hardback $19.00 0-87483-271-3
Ages: 10-14
URBAN LEGENDS, HORROR TALES, 
"JUMP"
STORIES...AND MORE!
Ghost Stories from the American South 
Queen of the Cold-Blooded Tales
W. K. McNeil 
Roberta Simpson Brown
Paperback $9.95 0-935304-84-3
Ages: 9+
"...can scare the paisley right off your pants."
-San 
Francisco Chronicle
Favorite Scary Stories
of American Children
Richard & Judy Dockrey Young
Paperback $4.95 0-87483-563-1
Audiobook (for grades K-3) 
$12.00
0-87483-148-2
Audiobook (for grades 4-6) $12.00
0-87483-175-X
Ages: 5-12
"...for classrooms, storytelling settings, sleepovers,
and read-aloud sessions."
-School 
Library Journal
Ghostwise: A Book of Midnight Stories
Collected by Dan Yashinsky
Paperback $11.95 0-87483-499-6
Ages: 12+
ANNE 
IZARD 
STORYTELLER'S 
CHOICE 
AWARD
"...deliciously creepy collection."-The Bulletin
of the Center for Children's Books
Paperback $9.95 0-87483-408-2
Hardback $19.95 0-87483-332-9
Ages: 10+
"...heavily motivated ghosts, plus a witch or two,
doing nasty things, dripping body parts and various
pieces of ick-with-teeth: in short, efficient gross-out
tales that kids love and adults take care to read
long after eating."-Kirkus Reviews
Between Midnight and Morning:
Historic Hauntings & Ghost Tales
from the Frontier, Hispanic,
& Native American Traditions
Patrick M. Mendoza
Paperback $8.95 0-87483-607-7
Ages: 9-14
STORYTELLING 
WORLD 
AWARD
"...the tales are unusual...the writing style is plain
and unadarned."-School library Journal
AUGUST
H*USE
www. augusthouse. com
P.O. 
Box 3223 / Little Rock, AR 72203 / 201 East Markham 72201 / 501-372-5450 / FAX 
501-372-5579
I,,.,
Cboose Rigbt, Read!
Writing Fiction for Cildren
Stories Only You Can Tell
JUDY K. MORRIS
"Judy Morris's book is entertaining and intelligent,
but the exercises make it extraordinary. They will help
both novices and seasoned authors gain insight and
move forward with their writing." -
Jane Leslie Conly,
author of Crazy Lady!, a Newbery Honor Book
www.press.uillinois.edu/f01/morris.html
Hardcover, $19.95
Choosing 
..
THI 
CDoo$ing BoolX
Books for 
E  
for C0B1dr~if
Children 
.
A Commonsense Guide
: with Deborah Stevenson
Id-fri
nd si
Betsy Hearne 
,s.. 
-
:
Yoa're Only YoaUg Twice
Children's Literature and Film
TIM MORRIS
"[Morris] offers a series of pleasant, readable accoun
of his encounters with such classics as Black Beauty
The Secret Garden, Jumanji and Peter Pan. Groundi
his analyses in trips to the video store and reading al
to his son, Morris makes the question of whether Dr.
Seuss's 'oobleck' is really Lacan's objet petit a lot less
scary than it sounds." -
Publisher's Weekly
Hardcover, $24.95
available from your bookseller, 
I 
|I N1
call (800) 545-4703, or visit
www.press. uillinois.edu: 
s. ed..
More
QPrtSed
•] °-•Arnold
"The literal-minded lad who worried so hilari-
ously about losing his Parts (1997) returns for
a series of anxiety-inducing encounters with
figures of speech...[Young readers] will warm 
___
to this neurotic young rhymester."
-Kirkus Reviews
0-8037-1417-3 /$15.99/Ages 4-8
Also available:
PAR-r<
"A zany, ultimately reassuring take on
something that may indeed be a child's
bugaboo. "--Booklist
HC: 0-8037-2040-8 / $15.99
PB: 0-14-056533-7 / $5.99
Dial Books for Young Readers
A Division of Penguin Putnam Books for Young Readers
www.flenquinputnam.com
Univers
1325 So
Champ~
U.S.A.
RE'I~URN
ira":;i
You may now access The Bulletin Online with an individualized username
and password.
The Bulletin Online is available only to print subscribers, and includes the
1998-2000 volume years plus the current issues as they are published.
The online version allows you to search the current issue or the entire
database by author, title, age, or grade level.
To access The Bulletin Online:
I. Go to http://www.prairienet.orglccb/
2. You will be asked for a username and password, both of which are set
as the four- or five-digit number printed in the upper left-hand corner
of the mailing label on your print copy. When entering, do not
include the letter at the end of this number sequence.
3. The first time you log in, you will be required to change your pass-
word to something other than your username.
Remember, The Bulletin Online is not licensed for public use; only
individual print subscribers and institutional subscribers' staff are granted
access, so please do not share your access codes. We are working to
expand The Bulletin Online's capabilities and therefore create broader
electronic subscription options for individuals and institutions. Look for
details later this year.
Non-subscribers can learn more about The Bulletin of the Center for
Children's Books at our homepage: http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb/
Please e-mail any feedback or questions to: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu.
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street 
PERIODICALS
Champaign, IL 61820 
POSTAGE
U.S.A. 
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
RETURN SERVICE REQUESTED
~--.~~1
i, IL
F
I';*r·-
000 
936 
011 
0:III 
I 2;1 
-II11111
0008-9036(200110)55:2;1-U
f
f
i
^ 
;
