T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by The Johns Hopkins University Press
May 2008
Vol. 61   No. 9
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
May 2008
Vol. 61 No. 9
369  the BIg PICture
 
 Skim by Mariko Tamaki; illus. by Jillian Tamaki
370  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
373  • Peeled by Joan Bauer
395  • The Adventures of Sir Lancelot the Great by Gerald Morris; illus. by   
 
  Aaron Renier
396  • Sunrise over Fallujah by Walter Dean Myers
397  • Meet the Dancers: From Ballet, Broadway, and Beyond by Amy Nathan
405  • The Pigeon Wants a Puppy! written and illus. by Mo Willems
408  ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons
409  suBjeCt And use Index
368 • The BulleTin
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
 
 
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the  
 
 
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Katrina Bromann, Reviewer (KB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Katrina Bromann, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print or electronic $85.00; combined print & electronic $119.00; multiple in-
stitutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, $53.00; students, 
$15.00. In countries other than the United States, add $14.30 per subscription for postage; subscrib-
ers in Canada and Mexico add $9.90. Single copy rate: $9.00. Volumes available in microfilm from 
ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche 
from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be 
made payable to The Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Divi-
sion, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 
410-516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/jour-
nals/advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.uiuc.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2008 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image by Jillian Tamaki from Skim ©2008. Used by permission of Groundwood Books/House 
of Anansi.
May 2008 • 369
The Big PicTure
Skim
by Mariko Tamaki; illustrated by Jillian Tamaki
Bildungsromans are, for obvious reasons, a mainstay of YA literature. Much of 
the depicted coming of age depends on both the truly life-changing events, which 
may not even be noticed or acknowledged until later, and the seemingly small 
events that look to an outsider like mere blips in an ordinary life but feel pivotal 
to the adolescent experiencing them. The best coming-of-age stories acknowledge 
this blend of the minute and the grand, so that readers can easily see themselves 
and their own combination of monumental and insignificant instances that evoke 
change and spot their own embarrassments, triumphs, and transformations in the 
evolution of the protagonist. Although the graphic novel Skim is set in the early 
’90s in Canada and focuses on one Japanese-Canadian girl, there is such universal-
ity in her experiences both large and small that readers will see themselves more 
clearly through her. 
“Skim” is Kim’s nickname, initially thrust upon her by her peers but now 
claimed as her own. Readers see other understated acts of resistance play out over 
several months of her quiet adventures, heartbreaks, and small triumphs. Over the 
course of a school year, the sixteen-year-old experiences her first love (an ambiguous 
relationship with the poetic Ms. Archer, Skim’s teacher), connects with one of the 
former social queens whose own despair has led to introspection and a new open-
ness, and dips into local Wiccan culture. Unfortunately, as many teens already know 
too well, few things that seem perfect or forever live up to their potential: Skim is 
disappointed to find that the Wicca gatherings in the woods double as creepy AA 
meetings, making new friends can too often alienate old ones, and first romances 
(especially with flighty teachers) are more often fodder for depression than joy. 
Mariko Tamaki ably keeps Skim’s perspective sardonic and witty, the sharp 
clarity ensuring that the defeatist narration of her less than ideal circumstances 
remains a perceptive analysis rather than just a whine; Skim is wise enough to see 
that her future will not look like her high-school years, even as she agonizes in them 
now. At the same time, the author avoids imposing an adult perspective on Skim’s 
progression toward her own enlightenment. Skim is astute but not precociously so, 
and however clearly she may see her mistakes, they remain plentiful. 
Jillian Tamaki’s unpretentious and accessible drawings pair elegantly with 
the sixteen-year-old journaling voice throughout: the illustrations seem hand-done, 
avoiding slick stylization, yet they are deft enough to offer the reader insider access. 
The artful black-and-white images allow insight into Skim for which she herself 
may not be ready, offering additional truths about the protagonist (the visual nar-
rative often, for instance, suggests a despair that Skim won’t overtly ’fess up to) and 
370 • The BulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
providing two parallel versions of Skim in which readers have opportunity to see 
themselves. Furthermore, the juxtapositions of haunting art and spare text provide 
additional dimension, and there’s meaning as well as beauty in the wildness of the 
Canadian landscape into which Skim frequently escapes. 
This stunning coming-of-age novel will draw in not only GN buffs, who 
will appreciate the creative design and dramatic use of both illustration and narra-
tion, but also realistic-fiction fans who may not normally gravitate to the format 
but will find this a sympathetic standout. Readers may not necessarily share all their 
experiences with Skim, but they’ll identify with her because she is simply a girl strug-
gling, against all odds, to find a self that feels true and meaningful. This is a fight 
for relevance and maturity that adolescent readers, to varying degrees, likely find 
themselves waging on a daily basis. (See p. 402 for publication information.)
April Spisak, Reviewer
Abbott, tony The Postcard. Little, 2008 [368p]
ISBN 978-0-316-01172-3 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 6-9
Florida is the last place Jason wants to go, but when his grandmother dies his 
mother insists Jason must accompany his father to her funeral and help close up 
her house. Once in St. Petersburg, thirteen-year-old Jason finds himself isolated in 
a land of the elderly with his clearly troubled father, who’s secretive about his dif-
ficult childhood and struggling with the present. Jason’s therefore on his own when 
mysterious occurrences pique his curiosity about his grandmother’s past, but he’s 
quickly joined by Dia, the intrepid and mouthy girl who mowed his grandmother’s 
lawn, and the two kids are soon entrenched in a fifty-year-old mystery involving 
Jason’s grandmother in her youth, the writer of pulp serial fiction who loved her, 
and her brutal and jealous father. As Jason and Dia roam St. Petersburg following 
the clues left by Emerson Beale, Jason’s grandmother’s writer beau, Jason begins to 
realize that the drama sheds new light on his own family history—and that it may 
not be done playing out yet. The plot shimmers with originality even as it evokes 
genre fictions. Emerson Beale’s fast-paced pulp adventures, interspersed with the 
contemporary plot, are lusciously readable in their own right, and they ratchet up 
the contemporary suspense as it’s clear that the past and the present are rolling 
toward convergence. Abbott paints a muggy and evocative picture of contemporary 
St. Petersburg and effectively haunts it with the candy-colored dreams of mid- 
century Florida, exemplified in the luridly tinted period picture postcards, reprinted 
in black and white in the book, that serve as clues to the locations of the chapters 
of Emerson’s story. The author capably wrangles these elements into swiftly turning 
pages and an accessible drama wherein Jason’s family story is the payload of the 
high-spirited adventure, resulting in a genuinely heartwarming tale that’s touched 
with regret even as it moves hopefully toward a better future.  DS
May 2008 • 371
AbrAhAms, Peter Into the Dark: An Echo Falls Mystery. Geringer/HarperCol-
lins, 2008 [304p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-073709-2 $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-073708-5 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
Echo Falls’ youngest detective has her work cut out for her when a conservation 
officer turns up dead on her grandfather’s farm, and Grampy is arrested for his 
murder. Although Ingrid has honed her talents uncovering other nefarious crimes 
in her small town (see Down the Rabbit Hole, BCCB 4/05, Behind the Curtain, 
9/06), she knows the stakes are higher this time, as Grampy refuses to provide 
an alibi, and she herself will be called upon to testify to threats she witnessed her 
grandfather making against the officer. She takes to rereading her well-thumbed 
and prolifically highlighted volume of Sherlock Holmes stories in an attempt to 
channel the detecting powers of her hero. As in the other two books, Abrahams has 
selected a play for Ingrid’s community theater that provides emotional context for 
Ingrid’s dilemma: this time it’s “Hansel and Gretel,” and the fear of being alone in 
the woods and at the mercy of a witch both haunts Ingrid’s dreams and finds a real 
analogue in an action-filled conclusion that is itself the stuff of nightmares. Readers 
familiar with Ingrid’s previous adventures will be happy to see her friendship with 
Joey warming nicely, and they will empathize with her complex and demanding 
relationship with the curmudgeonly Grampy. Clues are sufficiently well laid that 
alert readers will be half a step ahead of Ingrid but no more, and the climax has that 
old-fashioned, Nancy Drew appeal of real danger at the hands of creepy villains. 
Ingrid might not be as smooth or quick on the uptake as Nancy, but she’s certainly 
just as resourceful and a good deal more credible for modern readers.  KC
AlexAnder, sAlly hobArt She Touched the World: Laura Bridgman, Deaf-
Blind Pioneer; by Sally Hobart Alexander and Robert Alexander. Clarion, 
2008 100p illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-618-85299-4 $18.00   
Ad Gr. 5-8
Though many children will have heard of Helen Keller, far fewer will be familiar 
with the name Laura Bridgman. The Alexanders try to remedy this deficit with 
their biography of the deaf-blind girl who, in the mid-1800s, paved the way for 
Helen Keller and others like her. After a darkly droll introduction (“If you had 
lived in 1841 . . . you would have named your favorite doll after her. . . . And then 
you would have poked out the doll’s eyes”), the book assumes a more conventional 
tone, covering in detail Laura’s early years (including the illness that took her 
sight, hearing, and much of her sense of taste and smell), school years, and, much 
more briefly, adulthood and death. An intriguing afterword explores the ways 
in which Laura’s life would have been different today as a result of current laws, 
medical practices, attitudes, and technology; thorough source notes, an extensive 
bibliography (including websites), and an index are also included. The numerous 
difficulties faced both by Laura and by those who sought to communicate with and 
instruct her are interestingly presented, Laura’s human flaws are not glossed over, 
and the authors provide a historical context for Laura’s situation. Unfortunately, 
the text is sometimes disjointed or even confusing, with speculation and digressive 
context discussions poorly expanding on known facts even as useful explanations 
are occasionally absent. While the multiple photos and illustrations of Laura, eyes 
covered by a dark ribbon or mask, are striking, some of the other photos and il-
372 • The BulleTin
lustrations seem more filler than anything else (a full-page photo of a phrenology 
model appears opposite a very brief explanation of phrenology and its interest to 
Laura’s doctor). Despite these flaws, this is a solid and informative look at a now 
little-known public figure.  JH
Averbeck, Jim In a Blue Room; illus. by Tricia Tusa. Harcourt, 2008 32p
ISBN 978-0-15-205992-7 $16.00   
R 4-7 yrs
It may be bedtime, but Alice is still wide awake—and complaining: “I can only 
sleep in a blue room. . . . Blue is my favorite.” Her mother brings her fragrant 
flowers, and hot tea, and a warm quilt, each of which Alice initially rejects for 
non-blueness; when Mama wisely encourages her offspring to try nonetheless, 
Alice is soothed and made drowsy by the scent, taste, and touch of the non-blue 
elements. Finally, just as Alice begins to nod off, Mama douses the light, and the 
moonlight illuminates the room and transforms everything in it into blueness. The 
conceptual twist of the not-blue blue room will initially get audiences caviling, but 
readers-aloud can follow Mama’s lead and encourage the listeners to rethink their 
perceptions; once they’re ready for the twist, they’ll find the notions of sensual 
expansion and visual subjectivity entrancing. The quiet, present-tense text recalls 
that of Raschka’s Can’t Sleep (BCCB 10/95), and the gently lilting rhythm is lull-
ingly suitable for its bedtime theme. The art, watercolors touched with gouache, 
sports a fluid yet rumply line that’s authentically homey. Tusa makes an interesting 
choice in severely limiting the blue in Alice’s bedroom prior to the big switcheroo 
(the blue that does appear is cool and slate-toned), which is a little unlikely for 
such a blue-besotted kid, but it makes the shift to blue moonlight dramatic and 
immediate; her closing compositions, with the focus drawing farther and farther 
away from Alice’s bedroom and into the sky, wind things down nicely and parallel 
the gradual drift away from consciousness of falling asleep. Unlike many bedtime 
books, this actually has a process that weary parents could try emulating with their 
own sleep-resistant tykes, and listeners may be intrigued enough by the novel view 
of moonlight to follow Alice into blue-bathed sleep.  DS
Avi A Beginning, a Muddle, and an End: The Right Way to Write Writing; illus. by 
Tricia Tusa. Harcourt, 2008 [176p]
ISBN 978-0-15-205555-4
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-6
Avon the snail and his friend Edward the ant returned from their adventure in The 
End of the Beginning (BCCB 11/04) with their friendship firmly cemented, and now 
Avon decides that the next phase in his life will consist of writing about his adven-
tures. Edward proves a stalwart companion as Avon struggles with wordsmithery of 
the slipperiest sort; the two banter back and forth with every utterance transform-
ing into a pun, a literalized metaphor, a confused homophone, or a punctuation 
puzzle. The wordplay is so thick, in fact, that it becomes tedious at times, pushing 
the limits of its humor beyond wonder at its cleverness into groans and make-it-
stops. Application and audience thus become a tad tricky; teachers attempting a 
readaloud will need to stop every few lines to puzzle out a pun or homophone that 
only works when one can see the words, but newer readers may miss a good bit of 
the artistry that happens when snail and ant unpack the inconsistent and imprecise 
ways we use everyday language. For bookish sorts, however, the delight will be in 
these selfsame devilish details. Occasional art freshens the whimsical characteriza-
tions and adds energy to the gentle plot.  KC
May 2008 • 373
bAek, mAtthew J. Be Gentle with the Dog, Dear!; written and illus. by Matthew 
J. Baek. Dial, 2008 34p
ISBN 978-0-8037-3250-6 $14.99   
R 5-8 yrs
Poor Tag: “He’s a lap dog, a gentle dog,” and he’d have such a happy family life if 
it weren’t for the not-so-tender ministrations of Elisa, the family’s baby daughter. 
Her parents try to teach her to “be gentle with the dog, dear,” but Tag is worn out 
with being squeezed and tackled, and he’s finally had enough when she takes his 
favorite toy. A growl elicits a burst of tears, to which Tag responds with a sympa-
thetic face lick, and it looks like the “gentle” lesson may finally be taking effect. 
At least until Elisa sees the cat . . . Though the logic isn’t crystal clear (was it Tag’s 
growl or the final understanding of parental teachings that made the difference?), 
the text is streamlined but wry, and its overt siding with the poor put-upon pup 
will quickly prompt kids to do the same. The art’s even, diagonal brushstrokes 
suggest woodgrain or textured plaster, an effect enhanced by the paint’s chalky 
opacity, while the simple black outlines and stylized draftsmanship confer a toylike 
yet two-dimensional appeal. We’ve had plenty of stories that offer pet proxies for 
dethronement anxiety; here’s one about the simple grind of sharing space with a 
toddler that’s sure to strike a chord with older sibs.  DS
bArry, FrAnces Big Yellow Sunflower; written and illus. by Frances Barry. Can-
dlewick, 2008 [18p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-3724-8 $5.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 3-5 yrs
The transformation of seed to plant seems especially miraculous with something as 
splashy as a sunflower, and this neatly engineered little book celebrates that miracle. 
The text is a sweet direct address to the seed, then the plant, then the flower, with 
each page alluding to a new step in germination and growth and asking the little 
thing what it’s going to be; finally it’s revealed that the seed has grown into the 
titular big yellow sunflower. Design is the name of the game here: each of the glossy 
cardstock pages is circular, and they’re attached in a clockwise sequence so that each 
completed page folds out into an overlapping disk on which appears a segment 
of yellow petals; the result is an appropriately oversized “flower” that builds as the 
book’s pages turn (under the final seedhead reveal is an additional lift-the-flap spread 
with information about growing sunflowers). While refolding is going to need adult 
supervision (or indeed intervention), that’s a clever and inviting botanical game, 
and the neat collage illustrations, with their fanciful touches of personified wildlife, 
document the plant’s growth with a mix of entertainment and information. This 
is an obvious choice to kick off a seed-starting project, and it could also serve as a 
rainy-day reminder of sunny outdoor possibilities to come.  DS
bAuer, JoAn Peeled. Putnam, 2008 [256p]
ISBN 978-0-399-23475-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Banesville, New York, is a tight-knit rural community in the Apple Valley; Hildy 
Biddle, hoping to follow in her late father’s journalistic footsteps, is the ace reporter 
at Banesville High’s newspaper, The Core. She’s therefore both professionally and 
personally interested when psychic phenomena seem to kick up at a creepy house 
that’s long been the subject of local legend, especially when the events seem con-
nected to both the mayor’s plan to revitalize Banesville and the interest by outsider 
374 • The BulleTin
real estate brokers in Banesville land. Banesville’s regular paper seems more inter-
ested in fear-mongering than truth-telling, but can Hildy and her newspaper col-
leagues manage to discover and reveal the truth in the face of determined political 
pressure? Bauer remains as Capraesque as ever here, while adding touches of The 
Front Page/His Girl Friday in elements such as the crusty old newspaperman who 
serves as Hildy’s mentor and, of course, in Hildy’s name, taken from those dramas’ 
protagonists. The message that a few determined citizens can fight back against 
injustice (here, the seizing of farmland through trickery and eminent domain) is 
familiar yet still empowering, and the book doesn’t limit itself to that classic theme. 
There’s thoughtful treatment of the media’s ability to manipulate as well as to inform 
and the vulnerability of people to believing what suits them (Hildy’s sweet cousin, 
Elizabeth, seeks contact with her dead mother and pours money into a fraudulent 
psychic who’s in league with the hopeful land barons); Hildy’s dogged tracking 
down of the epidemiology of various town rumors has a detective-story fascination 
as well as some telling implications about the nature of local legendry. Bauer fans 
know what they’re looking for, and they’ll find it here in this solid, humorous, and 
thoughtful account of idealistic teens battling adult corruption.  DS
billingsley, FrAnny Big Bad Bunny; illus. by G. Brian Karas. Jackson/Ath-
eneum, 2008 36p
ISBN 978-1-4169-0601-8 $16.99   
R 4-6 yrs
Big Bad Bunny is on a rampage, stomping and chomping her way across the 
landscape (“Big Bad Bunny comes to a mucky swamp. Does that stop Big Bad 
Bunny? No! Big Bad Bunny can go anywhere”). Meanwhile, nearby Mama Mouse 
discovers that one of her children, Baby Boo-Boo, has gone AWOL during naptime. 
Naturally, she immediately goes in search of her missing mouse, trailing along af-
ter Big Bad, who responds to each gentle call of “Baby?” with “BABY?! GRRRR. 
STOMP. ROAR.” When Big Bad Bunny finally comes to a “steep, slippery hill” 
(“Does that stop Big Bad Bunny? Yes! Big Bad Bunny is lost!”), Mama Mouse is 
right there to rescue her, much to Big Bad Bunny/Baby Boo-Boo’s shame but also 
relief. Sharper audience members may cotton on to Big Bad Bunny’s true identity 
(suspicious string ties under her chin and around her waist, her incongruous pink 
polka dot pajamas, and her triple-B name should point the way) and be tickled 
to be in on the joke, while others will want to re-experience the story once they 
know the twist. Repetition of phrases, crisp, active language, and the absurdity 
of the “terrifying” bunny/mouse will make this a pleasure for readers-aloud and 
audiences alike. Karas’ distinctive gouache, acrylic, and colored pencil illustrations 
add to the light-hearted fun, with the mutinous Big Bad Bunny dominating her 
early spreads, all terrible teeth and villainous eyebrows, in contrast to the milder, 
gentler demeanor of petite Mama Mouse. Their eventual reunion reveals not only 
Big Bad Bunny’s true size but also her true appearance underneath her tied-on ears 
and powder-puff tail, as well as the loving relationship between mother and child. 
Youngsters who publicly hate being babied but privately desire parental proximity 
will undoubtedly relate to Big Bad Bunny’s position, and they’ll be reassured by 
Mama Mouse’s unwavering love and respect for her Baby Boo-Boo.  JH
May 2008 • 375
blAckFord, hArriet Elephant’s Story; illus. by Manja Stojic. Boxer, 
2008 28p
ISBN 978-1-905417-75-9 $14.95   
R 3-6 yrs
The team that brought you Tiger’s Story (BCCB 6/07) now moves south to the 
African savanna and a new illustratogenic baby, Elephant. Starting out as a tiny—at 
least compared to her mother—infant, Elephant enjoys her youth amid the shelter 
of the protective herd, learning the daily skills of elephant life; when Elephant 
becomes a big sister, she watches over the new baby just as she herself was once 
cared for. The third-person narration focuses on kid-friendly characteristics and 
details (“Soon Elephant has to learn to control her trunk. It is hard work to get 
it to go where she wants”), and phraseology is cozy and personable (Elephant has 
“big floppy ears and a most extraordinary nose”). Though the events are modest, 
the book covers some important details about wild elephant life, including an event 
wherein the elephants run into trouble by encroaching on human habitation. The 
paintings are appealingly textured, with brushwork overlaying the planes of solid 
color to give a soft wispiness. Elephant is singled out among the herd by her slaty 
blue gray color, but it’s clear that she’s living in company, and audiences will enjoy 
the walk-on roles of other African wildlife such as giraffes and zebras. Like its feline 
predecessor, this is an inviting blend of pettability and biology, making for solid 
entry-level contemplation of wildlife that audiences may never see in the actual wild. 
A more technical but still accessible note conveys additional elephant facts.  DS
bodeen, s. A. The Compound. Feiwel, 2008 [256p]
ISBN 978-0-312-37015-2 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-9
In an effort to prepare for a nuclear disaster, Eli’s egomaniacal and absurdly wealthy 
father had a shelter built to accommodate his whole family for fifteen years; when 
the time finally came, he rushed his wife and children to safety, but Eli’s twin brother 
and grandmother didn’t make it inside. Now Eli’s remaining family has been in the 
Compound for six years, and even with the reduced numbers, the food supplies 
are dwindling rapidly. Beginning to suspect that his father is hiding something 
important, fifteen-year-old Eli is shocked to realize that there’s still life aboveground. 
After discovering his father to be even more untrustworthy and dangerous than he 
believed, Eli realizes that there will be life for all of them back on the surface if they 
can escape his dad, and that the lives of his mother and siblings depend on him. It’s 
an arresting setup, sort of a tragic version of Blast from the Past’s comedic take on the 
notion, and the suspenseful pace will keep readers engrossed as the book reveals the 
many horrible deceptions Eli’s father has enacted as part of his grand experiment. 
Unfortunately, these cruelties played out on the family are so over the top (e.g., 
intentional starvation to determine whether cannibalism is an instinctive survival 
technique) that they become melodramatic contrivances, weakening the otherwise 
sturdy and well-crafted mystery plot. In addition, Eli, hopelessly caught too long 
in unchanging guilt over being the surviving twin, makes for an unsympathetic 
narrator, as readers will likely tire of his angst while his family suffers around him 
unnoticed. In spite of the flaws, the movie-ready plot and flashy climax will still 
attract thriller fans, who will likely start imagining which new teen star could play 
Eli in the film version.  AS
376 • The BulleTin
brighton, cAtherine Keep Your Eye On the Kid: The Early Years of Buster 
Keaton; written and illus. by Catherine Brighton. Flash Point/Roaring Brook, 
2008 [32p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-158-4 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R 6-9 yrs
Born in a rooming house to parents on the vaudeville circuit, Joe Keaton “sat on 
frogs’ knees and . . . talked to wooden dummies while Dad and Mom did their 
act.” An acrobatic tumble down the stairs when little more than a toddler earned 
him the nickname Buster (“Gee, that was some buster the kid took”) from Harry 
Houdini himself, at least as the story goes in narrator Joe’s mind, and apparently 
inspired his parents with a new possibility for the act—tossing the tyke across the 
stage, where he would land on his feet with a deadpan glance at the audience. From 
then on it was to be life as a trouper, with only a day of formal schooling, an early 
infatuation with the brand-new moving-picture craze, a parting of the ways with 
his father, and an eventual move to California, where he was to establish his own 
studio. Brighton notes that Keaton “told a good story,” implying that some of the 
more improbable adventures related here—such as being sucked out the window 
in a tornado—should be taken with a shaker of salt, and the textual and pictorial 
references to Houdini put the audience (or at least adult readers) on ballyhoo alert. 
The Keaton story should have plenty of kid appeal, as he treads the boards as a 
child and smashes them to bits in his slapstick productions as an adult. Meticulous 
ink outlines are tidily filled with slightly muted color, conjuring a back-in-the-day 
atmosphere; narrow horizontal strips of illustration frequently appear above or 
below larger images to establish passage of time or distance. Add Don Brown’s 
Mack Made Movies (BCCB 5/03) and a silent short or two for a cinema-themed 
storytime.  EB
butler, dori hillestAd The Truth about Truman School. Whitman, 
2008 170p
ISBN 978-0-8075-8095-0 $15.95   
R Gr. 5-8
The Truman Middle School newspaper is restricted to puff pieces and pablum, 
so eighth-graders Zebby and Amr decide to mount a completely uncensored 
website where anybody can tell the truth about their school. It’s not long before 
an anonymous poster mounts a smear campaign against Lilly, a former friend of 
Zebby and Amr’s who now runs with the popular crowd, by first revealing a photo 
of Lilly’s formerly fat self, and then, when that doesn’t destroy her, linking to a fake 
blog wherein “Lilly” outs herself as a lesbian. The story is a canny combination of 
accessible presentation and clever craftsmanship, with the ethics of the situation 
particularly charged by the fact that readers don’t, for some time, know which of the 
various eighth-grade narrators is also speaking as “Anonymous,” Lilly’s persecutor, 
so nobody’s entirely off the bully hook. Individual morality is credibly complex, 
with Zebby genuinely supporting principles that make her keep the website un-
censored even as her bitterness about Lilly makes that decision the easy way out. 
The book is also sharply knowledgeable about inter-kid dynamics, ranging from 
Zebby and Amr’s mutual suspicion to their sad understanding of the effects of 
the slurs against Lilly (“If there’s one thing that makes people more nervous than 
Muslims,” says Muslim Amr dryly, “it’s people who are gay. . . . I don’t think there’s 
ever been a popular gay person in the history of middle school”). This is therefore 
considerably more than just a story about cyberbullying—it’s about the fragile trust 
May 2008 • 377
of democracy (idealistic Zebby is truly disappointed that this mess is what results 
from letting the people speak as they choose), the selves we show when we can 
evade consequences, the way shared opinion can bolster and escalate inhumane 
views, and the way victim and victimizer can coexist in the same person. Butler 
manages to wrap all that up in an easy-to-read story with a tense and compelling 
plot; readers will be sucked right into the true-to-life drama, and they’ll find plenty 
of fodder for thought about their own school’s social dynamics.  DS
childs, terA lynn Oh. My. Gods. Dutton, 2008 [224p]
ISBN 978-0-525-47942-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 8-10
Phoebe is only one year away from leaving for her dream college when her mother 
surprises her with entirely unexpected news: she has fallen in love with a man in 
Greece and she is moving the family halfway around the world so she can live with 
him. Suddenly, Phoebe is transplanted to a small island in Greece, registered at a 
mysterious and super-elite school, and burdened with an even bigger shock: all of 
the students (including her catty new stepsister) are descendants of Greek gods, 
complete with superpowers. Not only must Phoebe cope with the confusing hot 
and cold dynamics of an incredibly hunky classmate and the trickiness of suddenly 
having her family double in size, but she also could be zapped at any moment 
by the mostly unfriendly student body. The all-too-familiar student cliques get 
a creative twist as the Academy pupils group themselves by ancestor, with the 
Zeus/Hera golden teens orbited by Athena brainiacs, Poseidon beach bums, and 
the Hades goth kids. Unfortunately, the romance arc between Phoebe and her 
beau is clunky and unoriginal, with far too many ridiculous, mistaken assump-
tions and misunderstandings and far too little actual connection. In addition, the 
over-the-top dialogue, intriguing side plots that are left dangling, and a slightly too 
perfect ending result in a flashy but forgettable novel. Riordan’s The Lightning Thief 
(BCCB 10/05) therefore remains the standout in the god-kid genre, but chick-lit 
fans who are looking for a typical beach novel with an appealing twist will likely 
find this a satisfying read.  AS 
cirrone, doriAn Prom Kings and Drama Queens. HarperTeen, 2008 200p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-114373-1 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-114372-4 $16.99   
R Gr. 7-10
High school junior Emily Bennet finds inspiration in an odd place—headlines 
about Hurricane Emily rocking the coast of Florida lead her to want to make 
a similarly powerful, if significantly less destructive, impact on her world of Ft. 
Lauderdale. Specifically, she wants to get revenge on some friends that ditched her 
in eighth grade, develop a relationship with the hunky Boy Next Door, and see 
her name in print every week as the editor of her school newspaper. Unexpected 
circumstances help her achieve her goals in slightly compromised but still perfectly 
acceptable ways. Cirrone’s refreshingly light touch features pitch-perfect dialogue 
and sprightly plotting; she consciously avoids a winner-take-all, angsty approach 
to things like high-school dating politics and popularity rites, proffering a more 
sane and reasonable portrait of what it means to do the right thing even if it means 
losing a boyfriend or two—there are always other boyfriends to be had. There’s 
nothing particularly new or original here, but the voice has an invigorating freshness 
that will appeal to reluctant or vacationing readers who like their school romance 
stories light and happy.  KC
378  •  The BulleTin
Clinton, Catherine  Phillis’s Big Test; illus. by Sean Qualls.  Houghton, 
2008  32p
ISBN 978-0-618-73739-0  $16.00     
Ad  Gr. 2-4
In 1772, African-American teen poet Phillis Wheatley was called to appear before 
an illustrious group of learned gentlemen to prove that she had in fact written the 
poems that she was attempting to have published as a book. Focusing on Phillis’ 
walk to the testing site, Clinton uses flashbacks to show how Phillis arrived at this 
point in her life, detailing her purchase by the Wheatleys when she “was just shed-
ding her front teeth,” her education alongside the Wheatley children, her love of 
the classics, and her anxiety about the task before her. Unfortunately, the details are 
sketchy, and while there is an epilogue, there are no source notes or suggestions for 
further reading about this important figure in American letters, no examples of her 
poetry, no indication that no Boston publisher would print her work even with the 
imprimatur of the examiners, and no mention that she died alone and in poverty 
at thirty-one. Qualls’ fresh and distinctive acrylic and collage illustrations, which 
provided a synesthetic experience of the jazz scene in Dizzy (BCCB 11/06), don’t 
work quite as well here, although they do communicate Phillis’ determination as she 
makes her way through the surprisingly uncrowded streets of Boston and imbue her 
with a prim grace and a serene beauty. Because of her importance and the dearth of 
standalone books about Wheatley, this is worth adding to a collection, but readers 
will have to fill in a lot of gaps about her life and work themselves.  KC 
CoCovini, abby  What’s Inside Your Tummy, Mommy?; written and illus. by Abby 
Cocovini.  Holt, 2008  20p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-8050-8760-4  $8.95     
Ad  3-7 yrs
Parents who can make it past the conventional but inaccurate usage of “tummy” 
(“Inside a mommy’s tummy is a special place called her womb”) may find that this 
oversized title, with simplified explanations and life-size illustrations, could be a 
useful guide to prenatal development for curious siblings. Month by month double-
page spreads feature a fairly true-to-life sketch of a (fairly slim) mama’s ever-expand-
ing belly, with a superimposed drawing of the newcomer growing inside: “Month 
4, Weeks 14 to 18, The baby is getting fatter and its hair is growing. It’s starting 
to hear! But only things from inside its mommy, like . . . her heart thumping . . . 
her blood flowing . . . and her food being swallowed.” There are also a fair number 
of unexplained observations, such as “The baby pees 15 times a day,” which leave 
parents on their own to field questions. When readers and listeners reach day 280, 
week forty, on the timeline that runs along the bottom of the pages, it’s time for 
the big event, and a fold-down flap reveals the baby in head-down position, ready 
to make its debut, beneath the exhortation, “Push! Push! Push! Push!” There’s no 
talk of how the baby got in there, not much about how it gets out, and with the 
baby’s legs coyly crossed in each drawing, no hint of which gender it will be—which 
translates to just enough information for many children, but lots of BIG queries 
from more insistent tykes. Consider this as a streamlined alternative to Robie Harris’ 
It’s NOT the Stork! (BCCB 10/06).  EB
Connor, leslie  Waiting for Normal.  Tegen/HarperCollins, 2008  290p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-089089-6  $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-089088-9  $16.99     
R  Gr. 5-8
Addie’s life isn’t easy: her father died when she was little, and her mom and stepfather 
May 2008 • 379
have recently divorced. Dwight, her stepfather, has custody of her two younger half-
sisters and would love to have Addie as well, but Mommers wants someone with her 
to handle things like cooking dinner and holding down the fort while she chases 
her next dream of a new lover and a successful business. The fort, as it happens, is 
Dwight’s trailer; Mommers’ last business venture cost the entire family their house, 
and Dwight has taken the younger girls north to his job site, where they manage to 
carve out the normal family life that eludes Addie. Addie makes the best of things, 
though, as she finds supportive friends in Soula and Elliot, the people who run the 
gas station/convenience store across the lot. If you look up “resilient,” “trooper,” and 
“enabler” in the dictionary, you’ll find a composite portrait of Addie; her unflagging 
cheerfulness and good nature, especially in the face of her mother’s cavalier attitude 
toward child-rearing, will be endearing to some readers and maddening to others as 
she endures increasing neglect with quiet resignation. Readers familiar with genre 
conventions will know that the quirky, big-hearted Soula is doomed from the first 
mention of chemo (someone has to die, after all), but her loss is moving just the 
same. Addie’s team of rescuers, though tardy, comes through with everything one 
could hope for to ensure our long-suffering and deserving heroine her happy end-
ing; what would otherwise come across as some pretty serious maternal selfishness 
and abuse is softened by the comforting conclusion.  KC 
couloumbis, Audrey Love Me Tender. Random House, 2008 [224p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-93839-9 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-83839-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
Elvira’s mother is pregnant, which has put the world of thirteen-year-old Elvira 
into a spin: her eight-year-old sister is more of a brat than ever, hormones make 
mother Mel moody and demanding, and now Dad has gone off angry to try to 
make a comeback in Las Vegas as an Elvis impersonator. Just as Elvira is trying to 
sort all this out, a frantic call comes from an aunt that she’s never met that Mel’s 
estranged mother is dying. Mel packs the girls up and heads to Memphis, only to 
find that reports of her mother’s imminent demise have been exaggerated but that 
it is nonetheless time to sort out some family business. Couloumbis is at the top 
of her form here as she constructs believable, complex characters and sets them in 
dynamic relations with one another. The women in Elvira’s family are all stubborn, 
sharp-tongued, and manipulative, but they are honest in dealing with each other’s 
flaws as they realize their need for connection and shared strength. Instead of dig-
ging in and turning each other into convenient excuses to maintain past grudges, 
the women work past their differences and find the grace to forgive. Elvira proves 
that she is a member of this family as she replays some of her mom’s and aunt’s 
sibling difficulties in her relationship with her little sister, but she also engages in the 
emotional work of trying to really understand what motivates people, in particular, 
what motivates her own desire to be mean to her mom and her sister. As in most 
real families, there are no good guys and bad guys here, but there are patterns of love 
and pain that get respun in new arrays; readers who enjoy family drama will get a 
healthy dose of insight into what makes for solid, lasting relationships here—real, 
astringent love without a whiff of sweetness or sentimentality.  KC 
380 • The BulleTin
de lint, chArles Dingo. Firebird/Penguin, 2008 [224p]
ISBN 978-0-14-240816-2 $11.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-9
When Lainey turns up in seventeen-year-old Miguel’s small town, he immediately 
senses she is not like typical girls. It turns out that Lainey is even more unusual 
than he first imagined: she and her twin sister, Em, are shape-shifters, who must 
use their ability to turn into dingoes to avoid their power-hungry father and the 
ominous and ancient Warrigal, who needs the girls’ blood to release him from an 
old curse. Miguel knows that he is in over his head, but he also feels strongly that 
Lainey could be the love of his life, and that he must do whatever he can to save 
her and her sister from their familial and ancestral threats. This trim, succinct novel 
ably balances fantasy elements and Australian legend with a sweeping, modern-
day love story. Miguel, obviously well intentioned but woefully ill equipped to 
handle physical altercations, is a satisfyingly savvy protagonist who easily proves 
his worth as the nerd who gets the perfect girl through his creativity, good humor, 
and a willingness to take a punch even if he doesn’t really believe in fighting. The 
fated love angle will certainly draw in romance readers, and while they may be 
perfectly content with just following Miguel and Lainey’s connection through to 
its expected happy ending, the intriguing details about shape-shifting, dingoes, 
and Aboriginal traditions may also lead them to dig a bit further into Australian 
myths and culture.  AS
deAn, clAire Girlwood; illus. by Aya Kato. Houghton, 2008 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-618-88390-5 $16.00
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 6-8
Twelve-year-old Polly was the last person to see her troubled sister, Bree, before 
Bree disappeared into the woods. An extensive search turns up nothing, but Polly 
and her family refuse to give up hope; each member leaves supplies in the woods 
(fuel, clothing, food) that will help sustain Bree through the upcoming winter. Even 
while mourning Bree, Polly still finds comfort in her wise and earthy grandmother, 
her own growing abilities to sense auras, and in a particular magical grove in the 
woods where she imagines her sister to have taken refuge. She is also increasingly 
worried about encroaching developers, who have claim to the forest where she finds 
such peace and where she is certain her sister is still hiding. The extensive, elegant 
descriptions of the tangled, mysterious Idahoan woods are a haunting metaphor 
for Bree’s own tortured path (drug abuse, pregnancy rumors, and social ostracism 
are all part of her recent downward spiral) that led her into the forest as an escape. 
Unfortunately, magic muddles with potentially feasible mystery in confusing 
ways throughout the novel: the result is either a fantasy about fairies, auras, and 
the enchantment of nature that loses momentum when grounded within an envi-
ronmental-crusade plot, or a realistic fiction story about a girl with an overactive 
imagination that goes awry when unexplainable events occur. Apart from the genre 
cloudiness, however, Polly’s unflinching belief in beauty and the power of people 
to change their own destinies marries well with the optimistic tone of the novel; 
readers seeking an ultimately positive and hopeful read may therefore find this a 
satisfying outing. Reviewed from an unillustrated galley.  AS 
May 2008 • 381
dessen, sArAh Lock and Key. Viking, 2008 [432p]
ISBN 978-0-670-01088-2 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Ruby knows her life is less than ideal, but she can cope with her mother’s irrespon-
sibility and occasional bouts of drinking and disappearing, at least until Ruby can 
set out on her own when she’s eighteen. Unfortunately, her mom takes off about six 
months before that magic date, and Ruby finds herself first in the hands of social 
services and then living with the older sister who she thinks abandoned the family 
without looking back years ago. It’s a cushy landing, as her sister is now a lawyer 
and her brother-in-law is the founder of UMe.com, an enormously popular web 
community (think MySpace), and they are more than happy to have her living 
with them. This overlong story thus traces Ruby’s emotional awakening from a self-
contained loner to someone who is willing to both give and receive help from the 
others in her life, who are remarkably insistent on giving it to her despite her lack 
of gratitude or reciprocation. Dessen undeniably excels in creating densely textured 
worlds peopled by complex and multilayered characters, but the dialogue here is 
stilted and unnatural, and the first-person narration falls into a repetitive pattern 
of reporting a mildly interesting incident and then following up with an “and this 
is what I learned from that” concluding paragraph before moving on to the next 
mildly interesting incident and emotional progress report. Although Ruby herself 
is a bit bland to attract much of a fan base, her life lessons are certainly ones worth 
learning, and readers will invest in her desire to help her abused boyfriend break 
free of his situation as others have helped her.  KC 
ehlert, lois Oodles of Animals; written and illus. by Lois Ehlert. Harcourt, 
2008 52p
ISBN 978-0-15-206274-3 $17.00   
R Gr. 2-4
Ehlert turns her graphic lens to a broad overview of the animal kingdom, with over 
sixty animals represented by pithy poems. The poetry is a little unpolished, and 
there’s a definite vibe of “those dangerous animals” throughout the book even for 
some relatively innocuous creatures, but when the verses are on form they’ve got 
an aphoristic aptness that will entertain youngsters: “A cat/ is a purr/ wrapped up/ 
in fur”—“Cat”; “If her tail’s raised,/ give a skunk room,/ unless you like/ pee-you 
perfume”—“Skunk.” This is a sophisticated elaboration of the visual concepts in 
Color Zoo (BCCB 9/89); the art is even more vividly compelling than Ehlert’s usual, 
with an abstract air that recalls Gerald McDermott but strikes out into its own 
stylized field with dazzling high-contrast, not-remotely-natural colors (the shark is 
two shades of orange with teal fins, the porcupine a lush green with hot pink feet) 
and regularized assemblies of geometry constituting each creature. A note explains 
that nine shapes were employed in creations; while a few elements (the elephant’s 
trunk, the stingray’s tail) would seem to move beyond the strict limitations of the 
nine, the formality provides an intriguing visual rhythm, and audiences will be 
fascinated to see how much can be made of simple shapes in combination and a 
deft hand with the pinking shears. Multiple uses are possible here: this flashy vol-
ume would make an eye-popping readaloud, you could use it to talk about artistic 
styles (perhaps in connection with Molly Bang’s Picture This), or you could pair 
it with Douglas Florian’s beast feast (BCCB 7/94) for a quippy poetic overview of 
the animal kingdom.  DS
382 • The BulleTin
elliott, dAvid Jeremy Cabbage and the Living Museum of Human Oddballs and 
Quadruped Delights. Knopf, 2008 307p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-94333-1 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-84333-4 $15.99   
R Gr. 5-8
Life at Harpwitch’s Home for Mean Dogs, Ugly Cats, and Strey Children is just 
on the edge of bearable for eleven-year-old Jeremy, so when he gets adopted for the 
first time by an enormous woman who smokes two cigarettes at a time, he’s up for 
the adventure. Unfortunately, the minions of the evil Baron, who is dedicated to 
stamping out all difference and dissent, burn her neighborhood because of some 
seditious graffiti, and he finds himself back at HHMDUCSC. Just as the Baron tries 
to solve his problems with ever more restrictive laws, Jeremy’s life takes a turn for 
the better, when he is adopted by circus folk, dwellers at the titular Living Museum, 
who actually want a child to love rather than to use and abuse. The happiness of 
Jeremy’s newfound family is threatened, however, as the Baron’s thugs close in on 
the identity of the graffiti artist and attempt to seize power for themselves through 
his capture. In shades of Dickens and Dahl, this is a relatively straightforward fable 
about the abuses of power, especially when that power is conjoined with arrogance 
and stupidity. There are clear heroes and villains, and a sweet set of social outcasts 
whose physical peculiarities render them endearing and showcase the varieties of 
family life that are available to unprejudiced hearts. The plot moves quickly with a 
good deal of humor, suspense, and predictable twists, and the quirky characters are 
described in such a way as to encourage visualization, making this a good choice 
for strengthening the literacy skill sets of reluctant readers.  KC
engle, mArgAritA The Surrender Tree. Holt, 2008 [176p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-8674-4 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-12
Author of The Poet Slave of Cuba (BCCB 7/06), Engle here turns her poetic hand to 
more recent Cuban history, tracing the intra-island rebellions and colonial wars of 
the latter half of the nineteenth century through a small group of focal characters, 
most of them real historical figures. The protagonist is Rosa la Bayamesa, a slave 
with knowledge of herbs and healing, who as a child tends recaptured slaves for her 
plantation owner; after she is manumitted in 1868 (a freedom not recognized by 
Spain), she joins the rebel forces in the hills, caring for refugees and wounded fight-
ers. With her is her husband and fellow nurse, José; against her is General Weyler, 
the military governor of Cuba, and “Lieutenant Death,” a boy slavehunter in Rosa’s 
childhood who grows up to see her as the symbol of all he must defeat in order to 
succeed. Engle’s spare free verse gives voice to these characters, and the sequence 
(divided into five sections, three of them for the three wars of the period) vividly 
depicts the reality of an existence where hiding and resisting is a norm for half a 
century; she also manages to convey a simple yet lucid overview of the political 
and social forces clashing over the island’s fate. Since Cuba’s current transition is 
bringing the island again to the fore, the subject will have particular interest, and 
readers unfamiliar with the island’s past will find much food for thought in the 
correlation to the U.S.’s revolution and the World War II resistance efforts. With its 
compact writing and tight character focus, the poems could also serve as effective 
readalouds or readers’ theater, and they’ll certainly enhance reader understanding of 
the history of our side of the world. A historical note helps differentiate fact from 
creative license; a chronology and a references list are also included.  DS
May 2008 • 383
Fletcher, chArlie Ironhand. Hyperion, 2008 [400p] (The Stoneheart 
Trilogy)
ISBN 978-1-4231-0177-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-9
Not a minute has gone by since the end of Stoneheart (BCCB 7/07), when thirteen-
year-old George chose to stay with his only human ally, Edie, in order to rescue 
their bronze friend, the Gunner (a statue of a World War I soldier), instead of 
making amends for sparking conflict between the living statues who inhabit the 
parallel world of unLondon. The evil Walker reveals his terrible purpose: to use 
George’s burgeoning skills as a maker (one who can carve life into his sculpture) 
and Edie’s powers as a glint (one who can feel the pains of the past in statues) to 
release an ancient evil. Chapters alternate among George, bent on reuniting with 
Edie but forced to earn his place as an Ironhand by standing in three duels; Edie, 
fiercely defying the Walker as she tries to ascertain the Gunner’s whereabouts; the 
Gunner, stalwartly trying to escape the Walker’s entrapment and get back to his 
two young charges; and various other characters of the metal and stone sort. Old 
enemies come back with new allegiances, and the same goes for old friends as the 
fascinating ensemble of the first book swells to an almost uncountable mob in this 
installment. Fletcher surprises audiences with a few intensely creepy moments 
(the zombie-like, black-eyed Tallymen all but guarantee a lot of checking over the 
shoulder for days to come) and a gruesome discovery about the fate of the glints. 
While returning readers will benefit from an understanding of George and Edie’s 
emotional history, an introductory note brings newcomers up to speed and will 
effectively launch either group into the story. Like many struggling heroes, Edie 
and George have personal traumas to overcome, but they are also ferociously angry, 
and they are compelling as they channel that anger into action. Fletcher keeps up a 
snappy pace and a suspenseful sequence of events that induce steady page-turning. 
Fans will appreciate the open ending, contenting themselves with the thought that 
they won’t miss another minute when the final book picks up.  KB
Fletcher, christine Ten Cents a Dance. Bloomsbury, 2008 356p
ISBN 978-1-59990-164-0 $16.95   
R Gr. 9-12
Ruby Jacinski is perfectly resigned to leave school and become the breadwinner 
for her widowed mother, whose rheumatoid arthritis has forced her to quit at the 
packinghouse. But after a short stint in the pickled pigs’ feet department, Ruby 
can see that her future will be that of her mother—crippled and tossed aside by the 
time she reaches her thirties. Ruby follows up a lead from an attractive but danger-
ous young man, Paulie Suelze, at a local dance that lands her a job as a taxi dancer, 
renting dances to customers, which pays much better than the packinghouse ever 
will and allows Ruby to indulge her enthusiasm for swing music and hot hoofin’. 
Although she sees that there’s a fine line between the draconianly regulated evenings 
at the dance “academy” and the scamming and prostitution that often follow after 
closing, Ruby is determined to keep on the moral high road. That’s no easy trick, 
though, when lured by a dinner here, a friendly “loan” there, the pressure to keep 
well turned out for the customers, and the promise of true love with Paulie. Ruby 
may be technically on the up and up, but her reputation is thoroughly shattered, 
and after edging her way out of various scrapes, she’s horrified to realize that her 
lover Paulie, whom she believed intended to marry her, is actually interested in 
a business arrangement that will let her “spend more time off your feet than on 
384 • The BulleTin
’em.” Although Fletcher doesn’t soft-pedal the grim side of the 1940s taxi-dance 
trade, she’s less interested in sleaze than in the prospects for a teenage girl with 
limited skills who’s forced into adult responsibility. Ruby is a fully realized charac-
ter—rough-edged, optimistic, quick-fisted, fiercely loyal, and inclined to youthful 
bravado that blinds her to the fact she’s in way over her head. This is one number 
that will keep replaying in readers’ minds for a good long while.  EB
Fox, PAulA Traces; illus. by Karla Kuskin. Front Street, 2008 32p
ISBN 978-1-932425-43-7 $16.95   
Ad Gr. 3-5
“Something, someone was just here. Now there’s barely a trace of it . . . ” So be-
gins each of several descriptions of the subtle signs left when something passes by, 
such as the air and water bubbles left by a frog, the sand path of a turtle, or the 
contrails left by a jet plane. Each trace leads to a lyrical description of the passerby 
(“Slithering, quivering, curling, straightening, a snake has left a trace in the tall 
wild grass”). The conceit isn’t always successful, since a fox’s brush isn’t a trace left 
when he’s gone but a part of him when he’s here, and the verses move between 
literal and poetic interpretations, with, for example, kids’ shadows and windblown 
leaves offered as traces of the moved-on kids and wind, respectively, despite their 
actual simultaneousness. The book also starts out with a turn-the-page guessing-
game format on the frog that would have been an intriguing element, but the 
remaining pages don’t follow suit. Still, the compact lines are quietly vivid, with 
sonorous adjective sequences (“Plump, wattled, warty, croaking”) that would be 
particularly lip-smacking to read aloud. The illustrations are elegant, decorative, 
and vivid, combining slender, delicate line, smokily pigmented watercolor, and 
collage components in a variety of textures. Elements usually float across a white 
background, resulting in a look that recalls the lush intricacy of embroidery. Use 
this as a bridge between April Pulley Sayre and Joyce Sidman, or just to encourage 
language arts students to explore their own views of traces.  DS 
Frost, helen  Monarch and Milkweed; illus. by Leonid Gore. Atheneum, 
2008 36p
ISBN 978-1-4169-0085-6 $17.99   
Ad 6-9 yrs
In a simple but poetic text, Frost traces the life cycles of the monarch butterfly 
and the milkweed plant on which it lays its eggs. The monarch migrates north, 
where the flowering milkweed attracts her with its scent and hosts the eggs which 
will develop into a caterpillar, then a chrysalis, and finally a new monarch, that 
will eventually return south to Mexico and begin the cycle over again. It may take 
some time for young listeners to catch the rhythm and organizational pattern of the 
text, which switches focus between milkweed and monarch—steadily at first, with 
milkweed on the verso and monarch on the facing recto—then shifts exclusively to 
the butterfly’s development, and returns to milkweed several spreads later. Frost’s 
use of the singular term “Monarch” implies that each butterfly makes this entire 
remarkable journey; the end note, however, explains it will take several generations 
of monarchs to complete the migration north. Moreover, although text and notes 
describe a migration route between Mexico and the United States, endpaper maps 
cryptically show arrows leading directly from and into the Pacific Ocean as well. 
Gore’s acrylic and pastel pictures are informative and lovely, with stippled texturing 
to the backgrounds, delicate tracery in the leaves, diaphanous radiance to chrysalis 
and butterfly wings, and a double bleed, larger-than-life view of the monarch in 
May 2008 • 385
flight which should elicit surprised “oooh”s. Lois Ehlert’s Waiting For Wings (BCCB 
4/01) may be a preferred choice for butterfly pedagogy, but larger picture book 
collections could certainly accommodate this visually inviting title.  EB 
giblin, JAmes cross Did Fleming Rescue Churchill?: A Research Puzzle; illus. by 
Erik Brooks. Holt, 2008 [64p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-8183-1 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-6
It’s scientist biography time in Jason’s fifth grade, and he gets stuck with Sir Alexan-
der Fleming, of whom he’s never heard. Hoping to fire up his paper with what his 
teacher terms “colorful anecdotes” from the Internet, he finds a dramatic story of 
Fleming’s father rescuing Winston Churchill’s father and getting his son’s education 
paid for as a reward, but he’s crushed to see that the tale is probably legend rather 
than fact. Thoughtful Jason then turns his research lens on the process itself and 
turns his explorations of the legend into a key part of the paper. Noted nonfiction 
author Giblin is certainly qualified to tackle issues of soundness in research and 
critical thinking, and it’s a concept that could use a champion. However, the story 
itself isn’t particularly compelling, suggesting old didactic fictions in its informa-
tion-laden passages. The book also skirts the main issue by having Jason finding 
the urban legend on the debunking site itself, so that there’s little discussion of 
the need or process for questioning apparently authoritative statements and ac-
counts (and there’s no indication that print sources too require critical assessment). 
Nonetheless, kids will sympathize with Jason’s frustration at his apparent dog of a 
subject, and they’ll find his near-seduction by a myth an eye-opening cautionary 
tale. The book’s annotated sources helpfully allow readers to find Jason’s print and 
online material along with him, and a list of tips for writing a research report is 
also included; final illustrations not seen.  DS
golding, theresA mArtin Niner. Front Street, 2008 208p
ISBN 978-1-59078-549-2 $16.95   
Ad Gr. 5-7
“I’m the only person I know who’s had four mothers, and not one of them is left.” 
So says twelve-year-old Macey, known as “Niner” on account of her missing thumb, 
who was adopted at the age of six months after two stints in foster homes. Now 
her adoptive mother has left the family abruptly and her communications have 
dwindled away to nothing in the intervening months, leaving Macey oppressed 
by the conviction that something about her drives mothers away. When she finds 
a locket inscribed with her mother’s birthday next to their Philadelphia front step, 
she’s sure it’s some kind of message, but it ends up entangling her in a dangerous 
drama that involves a homeless boy named Eugene, Macey’s mean, slightly addled 
grandmother, a bullying classmate, and drug money. Macey’s longing for her mother 
is compelling and understandable, and her relationship with her stroppy, willful, 
and yet beloved younger sister is tenderly depicted. Overall, though, the events 
are contrived for maximum drama rather than believability, with obese Eugene a 
martyred cipher rather than a dimensional character, and Macey’s various anguishes 
the result of her family’s convenient tendencies to leak out only the most hurtful 
information and keep the truth secret until reveal impact would be maximal. Readers 
with a taste for the family dramas of Kimberly Willis Holt or Audrey Couloumbis, 
however, may nonetheless be drawn by the strong yet vulnerable heroine caught 
in a tough situation.  DS
386 • The BulleTin
hAddix, mArgAret Peterson Found. Simon, 2008 [320p] (The Miss-
ing)
ISBN 978-1-4169-5417-0 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7
While thirteen-year-old Jonah has always known that he was adopted, both he and 
his best friend, Chip, are shocked to learn that the same is true of Chip when both 
boys receive anonymous letters alluding to a common past and imminent danger. In 
fact, the two boys eventually discover that they share a highly unusual background: 
as infants, they were two of thirty-six babies found on an otherwise deserted plane 
that appeared out of nowhere. Armed with a few hints about their infancy, Chip 
and Jonah now seek all the answers about who the babies were, why they are now 
all being hunted, and which of the two groups chasing them (if either) are the good 
guys. Haddix admirably balances the exposition necessary to shape the first novel 
of a series while still providing enough life-threatening situations, governmental 
intrigue, and futuristic weaponry to make this an action-packed stand-alone novel. 
Readers will surely return for future installments, both to learn who each of the 
babies were (all of the infants are famous individuals pulled from the past, such as 
the Lindbergh baby or Anastasia Romanov), and to follow the protagonists’ time- 
traveling adventures as they try to right various time/space warps and arrange it so 
that all of the teens can stay in their present-day lives. Science fiction and adventure 
fans will find much to enjoy in this flashy, suspenseful volume, and they will cheer 
the fact that the intrepid protagonists, in spite of their youth, seem well equipped 
to take on potential evil at every turn.  AS
hAhn, mAry downing All the Lovely Bad Ones: A Ghost Story. Clarion, 
2008 [192p]
ISBN 978-0-618-85467-7 $16.00
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-7
When Travis and his younger sister, Corey, arrive at their grandmother’s inn for 
the summer, they’re thrilled to hear that the house has a history of hauntings—the 
sibs are inveterate pranksters, and they’re convinced they can easily concoct some 
“supernatural” effects that will spook the guests. Soon, though, they begin to en-
counter frightening phenomena that they didn’t produce, and they discover that 
their fake ghosts have awakened something real, dark, and uncontrollable within 
the house; now it’s their responsibility to put to rest the spirits they’ve provoked. 
Hahn’s experienced spooky hand masterfully sets up the situation, and the clever 
hook of the kids’ imitation eliciting the real thing is original and entertaining. 
The hauntings are genuinely creepy (“We’re the bad ones, the lovely bad ones,” 
the ghosts whisper as they invisibly pinch and torment the living), and the book 
makes particularly effective use of sour inn-staffers Mr. and Mrs. Brewster, locals 
long familiar with the sprites (“They been stirred up good and proper now,” says 
Mr. Brewster gloomily). Though the story loses a little tension when the youthful 
ghosts, who died at the inn when it was a poor farm in the nineteenth century, 
become sufficiently manifest and communicative to function as additional kid 
characters, there remains the literal specter of the evil administrator of the poor 
farm, which must be laid to rest if the inn is ever to have peace again. Accessible 
prose, shivery details, and creative touches combine to make this a truly satisfy-
ing ghost story that would transform with great eerie effectiveness into a chapter 
readaloud by flashlight.  DS
May 2008 • 387
herrick, steven Naked Bunyip Dancing; illus. by Beth Norling. Front Street, 
2008 201p
ISBN 978-1-59078-499-0 $16.95   
R Gr. 5-8
Christmas vacation is over and it’s back to school in the sweltering heat for this class 
of Australian sixth-graders. They have a new teacher who has long hair, a beard, and 
a fondness for Bob Dylan and poetry, but they prove that they have fondnesses of 
their own as they organize a school concert to showcase their various talents—rap, 
dance, poetry, and punk performance art, to name a few highlights. Using a by-
now-familiar format of free-verse poetry that alternates among the voices of various 
students and a more collective class voice, Herrick manages to capture the sweet 
earnestness and unassuming wit of sixth-graders as they experiment with their 
identities, experience the agony and ecstasy of first like-like, and test the limits of 
their hip vegetarian teacher’s sense of humor. The teacher is in fact a bit of a cliché, 
but he’s an awfully nice one, and the kids respond to his warmth by participating 
wholeheartedly in the class community that he encourages. Occasional scrawled 
black-and-white line art bring the students to inky, angular life. Despite a few tugs 
and snags, it’s a joyous year for this creative group of kids; American readers will 
need to adjust to the Aussie-isms (including the title, since the mythical bunyip 
is little known outside of Australia), but they’ll enjoy joining the class for their 
event-filled year.  KC 
hooPer, mAry Newes from the Dead. Roaring Brook, 2008 [256p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-355-7 $15.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
This fictionalized account of a ripped-from-the-headlines event (the headlines 
of 1650, that is) opens with servant girl Anne Green slipping back into a state of 
consciousness following her hanging for the crime of infanticide. With her body 
still immobilized from the trauma, Anne tries to make sense of her present condi-
tion and, uncertain whether she’s dead or alive, she passes the time by reviewing 
the sad chain of events that brought her to the gallows. Seduced by her employer’s 
grandson, she delivered a premature, stillborn baby; in an effort to keep the family 
name unsullied and the grandson’s propitious engagement on track, Sir Thomas 
Reade used his influence to have Anne charged with infanticide and hanged. While 
a seemingly dead Anne muses on this injustice, a team of scholars and physicians 
prepares to dissect her body, which they have purchased from the family at the time 
of the execution. A flicker of eye movement, a faint rale, and an uncertain pulse 
halt the proceedings, and as the attendant Sir Thomas bellows to carry on with the 
dissection, the medical men pool their strategies for reviving Anne, demonstrat-
ing how God’s justice has been manifest through this miracle—and securing their 
own professional laurels into the bargain. Anne’s comatose chronicle isn’t the most 
convincing narrative vehicle, and Hooper’s detailing of Anne’s sexual encounters 
and the melodramatic build-up to the dissection-that-almost-was propel readers 
into role of prurient voyeur that she seems to criticize in Anne’s contemporaries. 
Still, the based-on-fact story is undeniably compelling, and teens needn’t wait until 
Halloween for a brush with the macabre.  EB
388 • The BulleTin
hoPkins, lee bennett, comp. America at War: Poems Selected by Lee Bennett 
Hopkins; illus. by Stephen Alcorn. McElderry, 2008 84p
ISBN 978-1-4169-1832-5 $21.99  
Ad Gr. 5-9
War is a soberly relevant topic these days, and veteran anthologist Hopkins assembles 
a particularly American look at the historical and contemporary phenomenon of 
war poetry. The anthology comprises eight sections, one each for the American 
Revolution, the Civil War, World War I, World War II, the Korean War, the Viet-
nam War, the 1991 Gulf War, and the current Iraq War, each section beginning 
with a brief thumbnail sketch of that war and America’s involvement therein and 
containing five to eight poems. Poems vary from classics (excerpts from Whitman’s 
Song of Myself ) to contemporary (Tony Johnston’s moving “The Pony Chair”), poets 
from writers for children (Betsy Franco, Jane Yolen) to writers for adults (Stephen 
Crane, e. e. cummings). It’s a thoughtful enterprise, with interesting juxtapositions 
of current and older views, and some poetry worth unearthing alongside some 
newer verses worth knowing. However, readers who can’t bring their own context 
may miss some of that contrast and the significance of some of the entries (which 
aren’t always uniquely American in their viewpoint), and too much of the older 
verse is stodgy and too much of the new prosily literal. The art at its best has a 
1930s monumentalism, but its abstraction tends to depersonalize the effect of the 
poetry, and the non-militaristic scenes lean toward swoopily lined New Age imagery. 
Philip’s War and the Pity of War (BCCB 11/98) remains the standout collection 
of war poetry for young readers, but this could provide a bridge between current 
events and language arts, or a somber sidebar in exploring U.S. history. Indices are 
provided for authors, poem titles, and poem first lines.  DS
hostetter, Joyce moyer Healing Water: A Hawaiian Story. Calkins Creek/
Boyds Mills, 2008 217p
ISBN 978-1-59078-514-0 $17.95   
R Gr. 7-10
It’s the late 1800s, and Pia relishes life playing in the environs of his native Hawai‘i 
with his lifelong friend Kamaka, until the morning when his mother discovers the 
dreaded marks of leprosy on Pia’s neck and shoulders. The tragedy of his disease 
is nothing compared to the pain of being abandoned by Kamaka, who stays away 
from the moment he hears that his friend has been afflicted. Pia’s world is shattered 
by the anger he feels toward Kamaka, and he carries that anger with him as he is 
sent to the leprosy settlement on Moloka‘i to live out his life without friends or 
family. His anger keeps him alive but turns him into a criminal, as he steals food 
and allows himself to be adopted by the local thug. Things become even more 
complicated when Kamaka arrives with his wife, another victim of the dreaded 
and little understood disease, and he seeks Pia’s forgiveness for his behavior. For 
readers who’ve only ever imagined Hawai‘i as a vacation paradise, this is a riveting 
look into its history and people during a dark period. Pia’s perspective provides 
dimension to the values of native Hawaiians; he is distressed to find the qualities 
of family, sharing, and compassion largely absent in the leprosy village, and yet he 
finds those qualities strained to the point of breaking in himself. The portrait of 
Father Damien, the Belgian priest who dedicates his life to helping the villagers, is 
rendered so compassionately (and realistically) that it doesn’t carry the taint of the 
stereotypical white man’s rescue; instead, he reminds the people of the values they 
carry inside them already and draws them away from the despair and grief that have 
May 2008 • 389
temporarily kept them from helping and caring for one another. An extensive 
author’s note, glossary, and resource list are included; readers will find their compas-
sion stirred and their interest piqued through this truly fine historical novel.  KC
Iserles, InbalI The Tygrine Cat. Candlewick, 2008 [256p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-3798-9 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-7
Sent away by his mother as a young cat, Mati must adapt to a new community 
of mostly hostile felines, who are embroiled in a longstanding war with a nearby 
cat nation. Though he’d like to just blend in, Mati is secretly special, the target of 
evil supernatural forces that seek to destroy him and prevent him from gaining his 
full powers as the heir of the Tygrine Queen, and the cats surrounding him soon 
learn that all of their destinies depend on his survival. British author Iserles has 
constructed an elaborate feline world based on two very different types of cat, while 
also focusing enough on a few key characters to guarantee reader interest in how the 
longstanding war affects not only the two tribes but also individuals within them. 
Unfortunately, the complex plot is more ambitious than well crafted, and there’s 
little development of the mystical evil, Mati’s defeat of it, or the resolution of the 
old hostilities between his new community and their enemies. However, true feline 
fanatics, whether or not they are normally adventure readers, will appreciate the 
cat-centered world with its vocalized purrs, hisses, and references to “catisms,” and 
they’ll likely find the difficult plot worth sorting through for the satisfying offering 
of cat-centric mythology, kitty behaviors, and amiable kittenish protagonist. A map 
of Iserles’ fantasy world is included.  AS
JennIngs, rIchard W. The Pirates of Turtle Rock. Houghton, 2008 [160p]
ISBN 978-0-618-98793-1 $16.00
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-10
Cooper DeVille is doing the pirate thing, cruising the South Florida coast in search 
of plunder and buried treasure. Jenny Snow is doing the teenager thing, sunning 
herself on a rock and longing for an antidote to a serious case of ennui. When Coop 
spies Jenny, he’s determined to win her heart, but his aggressive wooing campaign, 
which involves a fair measure of stealth and the services of his outspoken parrot, 
doesn’t strike a spark. What he can offer her, though, is adventure, and they team 
up to uncover the priceless totem of the Ugiri-Tom people—with the help of Coop’s 
heirloom treasure map and Jenny’s dotty, liquor-soaked cryptologist uncle Daschell. 
Neither the tragic sinking of Coop’s ship Reprehensible, nor the archaeologically 
incorrect excavation techniques of Coop’s crew, nor the spurious shenanigans of a 
trio of jealous university professors can belay the happy ending, which finds Jenny 
married to a high-school sweetheart, Coop as captain of the Royal Nebraskan (“To-
day, cruise ships are the real pirate ships. . . . It’s a nasty, ruthless business”), and the 
Ugiri-Tom totem presiding over South Florida’s newest eco-tourism destination. 
Jennings has a flair for the preposterous, gleefully sending up pirate-story tropes, 
gently satirizing the laid back Florida lifestyle, brazenly crafting background lore 
for the fictional Ugiri-Tom, and delivering it all in the deadpan tone of a somewhat 
distant but bemused social pundit. This subtropical comic adventure will be a lively 
warm-up act to summer pleasure reading.  EB
390 • The BulleTin
Ji, ZhAohuA No! That’s Wrong!; written and illus. by Zhaohua Ji and Cui 
Xu. Kane/Miller, 2008 28p
ISBN 978-1-933605-66-1 $15.95   
R 3-6 yrs
When a pair of lace-trimmed red underpants gets blown across the path of a small 
white rabbit, the rabbit decides that the garment is in fact a hat, with two convenient 
holes to accommodate rabbit ears. An unseen narrator provides terse commentary 
in the white space below each neatly outlined double-page spread, insisting, “No, 
that’s wrong. It’s not a hat,” as the rabbit blithely encourages other animals in the 
forest to try on the new chapeau. A properly dressed donkey tries to set the rabbit 
straight, much to the narrator’s relief (“Yes, that’s right. They’re underpants”), but 
when the rabbit attempts to wear them the correct way, its tail gets in the way and 
its friends insist that this new look is all wrong. After a visual check in a mirror-
like pond, the rabbit decides that the underpants’ original location was the right 
one after all and rebelliously pulls apart the tidy outline that previously separated 
illustration from narration. The freed illustrations seep out of their confinement 
and totally fill the last spread as the rabbit firmly proclaims, “It’s a wonderful hat!” 
Endpapers depict the rabbit’s friends all trying out their own new millinery, in-
cluding a demure pig sporting a vest (the armholes make nice earholes) and a fox 
proudly wearing a pair of pen caps over its ears. The author/illustrators are right on 
target for their audience, catering both to those who insist on propriety and those 
who gleefully flout it, and the underpants focus is also sure to amuse. Watercolor 
backgrounds in blues, greens, and lavenders are subtly spattered and speckled, 
and the delicately outlined animals are attractive and expressive, particularly the 
long-eared rabbit whose large eyes give it an appropriately naïve look. Pair this 
with Barrett’s Animals Should Definitely Not Wear Clothing or Brett’s The Hat for a 
foolish and fashionable storytime, but be prepared for closet raids as kids don their 
own hilarious headgear.  JH
levine, gAil cArson Ever. HarperCollins, 2008 [256p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-122963-3 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-122962-6 $16.99   
R Gr. 6-9
Trusted fantasy author Levine takes her readers in a somewhat new direction, 
blending folklore and mythology in a lyrical story of faith and love. Olus, god of 
the winds, lives on Enshi Rock with the other gods. As the youngest god by cen-
turies, however, he is lonely, and so he moves to Hyte, where he takes up cover as a 
goatherd among the mortals. While his clever wind takes care of his flock, he falls 
in love with Kezi, the only daughter of the family from whom he rents his land. 
When Kezi’s mati falls ill, her pado makes an oath to Admat, the one and only god 
of Hyte, that he will sacrifice whoever first congratulates him if his wife recovers. 
In order to stop her aunt from doing so, Kezi becomes the human sacrifice, and 
another petition to Admat earns only a short reprieve. Kezi and Olus have just one 
month to face the trials that would make him a champion and her immortal, thereby 
rescuing her from death and ensuring their long future together. Kezi and Olus nar-
rate in the present tense, telling the same seamless story from their differing points 
of view. Their voices are distinct, but they’re also alike in purity and earnestness, 
which underscores their emotional connection and enforces the sincerity of their 
bond. Their story, drawn from the biblical legend of Jephthah and a Mesopotamian 
myth, is steeped in questions of faith and fate: Olus has never heard of Admat, and 
he struggles to understand the omnipotence of one god even as he supports Kezi’s 
May 2008 • 391
need for the familiar comfort of her religion; for her part, Kezi begins to question 
her blind acceptance of Admat’s rules. The discourse on religion and the afterlife 
is genuinely thought-provoking, but Levine avoids offering answers and instead 
emphasizes encouragement for happy endings. The striking beauty of the warm 
Mediterranean-like landscape sets the stage for heroic quests and romantic picnics, 
adding atmosphere to this compelling tale.  KB
levine, JoAn Topsy-Turvy Bedtime; illus. by Tony Auth. Candlewick, 
2008 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-3008-9 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-6 yrs
Arathusela, like most youngsters, fights bedtime tooth and nail, and when she discov-
ers one night that her parents are actually quite keen on going to sleep, the three of 
them agree that it makes more sense for Arathusela to put her parents to bed. This 
she does with great assurance, interrupting their favorite program, refusing them 
bedtime soda, making sure the toilet has been visited, and handing out goodnight 
hugs and kisses while keeping firm control over delaying tactics. Then Arathusela’s 
up all alone in the house, but after a brief period of entertainment, she’s lonely and 
wants in on the bedtime thing herself. This role-reversal story knows its details, and 
while young audiences may think Arathusela caves too soon when she gets the run 
of the place, they’ll find plenty of recognizable humor in her admonitions to her 
stalling parents. Both kids and grown readers-aloud may be particularly amused to 
notice that Arathusela has apparently learned her bedtime routine from very human 
parents whose patience tends to wear thin rather than the more saintly variety that 
usually populate bedtime books. Noted cartoonist Auth employs a lighthearted, 
flyaway line touched with delicate washes of color, and he mines considerable 
humor from a straightfaced exaggeration of scale that makes Arathusela a compact 
fireplug who’s not even knee-high to her gangly parents, a fanciful discrepancy that 
sits happily amid an otherwise largely realistic apartment-scape. Kids who relished 
the upended-bedtime joke in Rosenthal’s Little Hoot (BCCB 3/08) will giggle at 
the new incarnation of the device here.  DS
lindgren, bArbro Oink, Oink Benny; tr. from the Swedish by Elisabeth Kallick 
Dyssegaard; illus. by Olof Landström. R&S/Farrar, 2008 [26p]
ISBN 978-91-29-66855-1 $16.00
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-7 yrs
Yay, Benny’s back! The determined little Swedish porker (from Benny and the 
Binky, BCCB 5/02, etc.) is bored with mundane indoor events, so he takes his 
little brother for some outside fun. “Stay away from the mudhole,” says Mom, 
but, of course, that’s just where they end up. An initially risk-free game of running 
around the mudhole’s perimeter turns into mischief when a bully pushes Benny’s 
baby brother into the mud; jealous of the attention his little bro consequently gets 
from the popular Klara, Benny “falls” into the mud himself. On the way home, the 
lucky pigs get caught in a downpour that erases all trace of their misbehavior, so 
instead of maternal scolding they get sympathy and solicitousness. As usual, Lind-
gren manages a casual matter-of-factness in her narrative declamations that makes 
Benny’s adventures and reactions pure authentic child (“Some of their friends are 
really dumb,” the narrator confides. “Some are really nice”). The outing remains 
believable in its ups and downs even as it subtly creates a shape for the story, and 
392 • The BulleTin
readers-aloud have a lot of latitude with the simple text. Landström’s line-and-
watercolor illustrations as ever manage to be sturdily homey yet skillfully strange 
(what is it with all the potatoes scattered around Benny’s house? We’ll probably 
never know); capably varied compositions add drama to the visuals, while cozy and 
comic touches provide personality. Benny remains a boon companion for little ones, 
who will recognize the joy of forbidden tomfoolery with friends.  DS
lombArdi, tom My Summer on Earth. Simon Pulse, 2008 [256p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4169-5563-4 $8.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
What’s an alien to do when he finds himself in sunny California armed only with a 
hot teen male costume, a vague understanding of human life, and a mission to track 
down and bring back an errant extraterrestrial turned actor? Buy a beach house, 
find a girlfriend, and soak it all in, of course. While Clint does miss home, he is 
also captivated by the bizarre and wonderful Earth world, and he resents the fact 
that his assigned mission doesn’t allow for much exploration; therefore, in spite of 
knowing how upset his father and the scientists who sent him here will be, Clint 
decides to table his assignment until he has had a full range of human experiences. 
Absurd humor and sly commentary abound as Clint navigates elite Hollywood 
culture, the mysteries of human friendships and sexual relationships, and the alluring 
(but mostly toxic for aliens) draw of Earth cuisine. Apparently, sixteen-year-olds 
are similar everywhere, as Clint brings sarcasm, a jaded outlook on adults, and an 
unwavering belief in his own invincibility to his human costume. The result is part 
Holden Caulfield–style riffs on the world and part outsider-looking-in wry comedy 
in the vein of Adams’ The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy. Even hard-core science 
fiction fans will look beyond the space travel technology, the specifics of the human 
suit, and the intergalactic translation device to feel a bit of romantic sympathy for 
the impeccably developed and inevitable (though tragic) lost first love that Clint 
endures as his coming-of-age arc lands him back in his spacecraft to home. If they 
also soak in a bit of the intelligent social commentary about the alienation of all 
humans from themselves and each other, so much the better.  AS
lowell, susAn The Elephant Quilt: Stitch by Stitch to California!; illus. by Stacey 
Dressen-McQueen. Kroupa/Farrar, 2008 40p
ISBN 978-0-374-38223-0 $16.95   
R 5-9 yrs
Lily Rose and her family set out from Missouri in 1859 “to see the elephant,” 
that is, to venture across the continent in a covered wagon and settle in the fabled 
West. Like many a fictional pioneer before her, Lily Rose is recording the sights 
and experiences in a quilt, and as her family travels the Santa Fe trail, she stitches 
in relevant images—encounters with Apache and Pima Indians, cactus along the 
Gila River, prehistoric animal bones in the California desert. After the family ar-
rives at its final destination, her piecework is quilted at a cheerful gathering of new 
California friends (“Looky here! Many little needles fly quick, quick, quick”). Lily 
Rose embraces every inch of the journey, and her bouncy narration is well matched 
by the boldly hued pictures that fancifully incorporate bits of patchwork patterns, 
appliqué, and embroidery into literal renderings of the Western vistas. The crinkly 
eyed, ruddy-cheeked cast, in chunky overalls and swirly pinafores, bounds along 
like Patricia Polacco characters in overdrive. A brief list of sources, including a few 
for young readers, is included, as well as an author’s note on some of the true-life 
adventurers who inspired segments of Lily Rose’s tale.  EB
May 2008 • 393
mAnsField, howArd Hogwood Steps Out: A Good, Good Pig Story; illus. by Barry 
Moser. Porter/Roaring Brook, 2008 [32p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-269-7 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-7 yrs
Those familiar with Sy Montgomery’s adult work The Good, Good Pig  will recognize 
the protagonist here: 600-pound pig Christopher Hogwood. In this picture-book 
tale authored by Montgomery’s husband, Christopher Hogwood narrates his own 
account of a spontaneous spring outing. Having learned how to open the gate on 
his pen, Hogwood slips out to enjoy a balmy day, relishing a snack in somebody’s 
lettuce planting, the digging up of somebody else’s lawn (“I can roll up a whole 
lawn like a carpet if I want”), and an exploration of the lovely cool soil exposed by a 
backhoe; finally Officer Friendly catches up to Hogwood and coaxes him back home. 
It’s the pig’s unabashedly narcissistic, happily hedonistic voice that really makes this 
story; kids will giggle at his terming his owners his “feeders” and his assumption 
that all tasty crops are planted with his snacking in mind. Though Moser’s humans 
are somewhat stiffly drafted, his Christopher Hogwood is a magnificent porcine 
presence looming across the spreads, his harlequin coat a cheerful decorative item 
amid the verdant landscapes. He gets face time befitting a narrator and hero, but he 
remains realistically piggy in his blissful expressions. There’s a touch of No, David 
meets the barnyard here, and kids will thrill to Hogwood’s genial and unstoppable 
marauding even as they wish they too had a household porker.  DS
mebus, scott Gods of Manhattan. Dutton, 2008 [352p]
ISBN 978-0-525-47955-0 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 6-8
Rory has always had an unerring ability to see beyond illusions and tricks: no 
magician can ever fool him, and he is adept at spotting anomalous events in the 
New York streets around him. Unfortunately, his powers may put him at risk, as 
the thirteen-year-old has been chosen to perform a dangerous magical task that 
could, if mishandled, cause dire implications both in his world and the parallel one, 
Mannahatta, about which he has only recently learned. In addition, Rory knows 
little about the various parties who approach him for help, so he is ill equipped to 
judge whether he should trust the cockroach warriors, the mysterious and haunted 
magician, the Native American representatives, or the immortal gods who all suggest 
he should act on their behalf. Even if readers don’t recognize the specific characters, 
the premise that each of the gods of Mannahatta is actually a famous person who 
shaped New York history (Dorothy Parker is the Goddess of Wit, Babe Ruth the 
God of Heroes, and Boss Tweed the God of Rabble Politics) is unusual and clever. 
Unfortunately, the gods and their rebellious immortal children are disappointingly 
buried under a plot so twisty it will likely befuddle even careful readers. In addition, 
the moralistic side plot about the historical mistreatment of Native Americans in 
the U.S., while undoubtedly well intentioned, never quite seems in place within the 
rest of this glossy and quick-paced adventure. In spite of the concerns, the thrill of 
a kid setting off to save two worlds armed only with a butt-kicking younger sister, 
a couple of cockroach allies, and a vague understanding of his own talents may 
be enough to keep readers entertained right through to the final confrontations. 
A map, list of characters, and brief glossary will help readers track the many gods 
mentioned, and their residences in New York and Mannahatta.  AS
394 • The BulleTin
meehl, briAn Suck It Up. Delacorte, 2008 [336p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90321-9 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73300-7 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-10
Morning accepts that he will be an outcast no matter what he does: as a vampire, he 
certainly can’t blend in with the “Lifers,” and since he is quite rare in having been 
accidentally turned rather than hand-picked, he is much younger and less physi-
cally remarkable than his vampire academy cohorts. He is not without exceptional 
talents, however, and his graduation day physical transformations attract the atten-
tion of the president of the League (organized and peaceful vamps, as opposed to 
the people-sucking Loners), who wants to use the unassuming, unimposing, and 
vegan Morning (a soy blood substitute is his preference over the packaged blood 
other Leaguers consume) as the perfect poster child for a vampire coming-out day, 
the first significant attempt to make Lifers aware of this minority population. Morn-
ing accepts the role, and he is plunged into a world of publicity stunts and danger 
both from Lifers who find him threatening and from Loners who think he has 
betrayed vampires, all while trying to sort out his own ambitions and lost dreams. 
Meehl elegantly creates a well-designed vampire subculture that logically evolves 
out of the familiar stereotypes into one that accommodates organized membership, 
a thriving public information website, and even vegans. In addition, Morning, a 
too-young spokesperson trying to balance his childhood dreams of becoming a 
superhero or firefighter with his new immortality and heightened powers (but also 
limited career options), is a flawed and affable protagonist. Horror fans seeking 
a straightforward vampire novel may initially miss the fear factor, but the snarky 
humor, outsider-looking-in perspective, and fresh new takes on the familiar more 
than compensate.  AS
meltZer, milton Albert Einstein: A Biography. Holiday House, 2008 32p il-
lus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-8234-1966-1 $16.95   
Ad Gr. 3-5
Pity the biographer tasked with distilling the renowned physicist’s life work into 
a thirty-two-page title for the elementary school set. Don Brown approached the 
challenge in Odd Boy Out (BCCB 10/04) by concentrating on Einstein’s unconven-
tional upbringing, his quirkiness, and the practical fruits of his intellectual labor. 
Meltzer, by contrast, plows through those early years in flat, choppy prose that 
makes only fleeting reference to the boy’s experience of anti-Semitism, his indifferent 
performance in the classroom, and his refusal of military service. Elucidating the 
significance of Einstein’s groundbreaking theories is Meltzer’s strong suit, though, 
and he walks readers through a laudably accessible explanation that limits itself 
to science terms with which students are probably somewhat familiar (“Before 
Einstein, it was believed that space and time were absolute—that is, they never 
changed. Einstein said that they are elastic, or relative, and that mass and energy 
are two forms of the same thing”). The relationship between Einstein’s theoreti-
cal work and the development of the atom bomb is also well explained, and the 
inclusion of Einstein’s 1939 letter to Franklin Roosevelt warning of the destructive 
potential of such a device offers readers insight into both the scientist’s prescience 
and his underestimation of the weapon’s delivery system. Though the layouts are 
stodgily old-fashioned, the oversized font and large black-and-white photographs 
May 2008 • 395
make the presentation less daunting; an appended timeline neatly recaps events. A 
bibliography of adult resources is also included.  EB
morris, gerAld The Adventures of Sir Lancelot the Great; illus. by Aaron 
Renier. Houghton, 2008 [96p] (The Knights’ Tales)
ISBN 978-0-618-77714-3 $15.00
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
Sir Lancelot is certain that he is bound for greatness and a place in King Arthur’s 
retinue. He is less clear on why he keeps being challenged, by a single attacker at 
a time, on the last leg of his ride to the castle. Of course, Lancelot has stumbled 
into the middle of a jousting tournament, and his agility and the absolute ease 
of his victories greatly impress the king (and all of the ladies of the court). Soon 
Lancelot’s skills have won him great renown but also considerable drawbacks: 
constant confrontations from knights hoping to make their name off his defeat 
and incessant flirtation from women hoping to snag the dashing and successful 
knight. Such is the curse and blessing of being the best, and though Lancelot briefly 
tries a hermetic escape, he is soon drawn back to knightly life to fulfill his destiny. 
This trim novel, with simple vocabulary and brief, witty chapters, is an ideal fit for 
early readers whether Arthurian buffs or not, but fans of the legendary characters 
may find particular delight in this irreverent and unabashedly silly exploration of 
Arthur’s court and his most influential knight. Although Morris is best known for 
his middle-school novels on the same topic (The Squire’s Tale, BCCB 7/98, et al.), 
this younger glimpse into chivalry is equally successful, and it will ready the younger 
set to tackle his older oeuvre in a few years. Frequent black-and-white illustrations 
supplement the text, highlighting (and in most cases, exaggerating) elements from 
humorous passages.  AS
murdock, cAtherine gilbert Princess Ben: Being a Wholly Truthful Account of 
Her Various Discoveries and Misadventures, Recounted to the Best of Her Recollection, 
in Four Parts. Houghton, 2008 [352p]
ISBN 978-0-618-95971-6 $16.00
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 6-9
With the sudden deaths of her parents and childless uncle, fifteen-year-old Prin-
cess Benevolence becomes heir to the throne, and despite the tutelage of her aunt, 
Queen Sophia, she is far from ready to rule the valley kingdom of Montagne. Cal-
lous, recalcitrant, and unabashedly gluttonous, Ben would rather sabotage dance 
lessons and sulk through formal dinners than acquiesce to attempts to make her 
suitable for marriage, a priority that earns her an uncomfortable imprisonment in 
the tallest tower until she can learn to behave herself and hopefully slim down. As 
fate would have it, she discovers a hidden chamber in the tower, along with a book 
of magic, and these lead to her escape from the Chateau and eventual capture by 
Drachensbett, the neighboring kingdom, which she believes is responsible for her 
parents’ murder. Ben is not entirely convincing in her refusal to accept responsibility, 
and the book drags somewhat as it waits for her to discard her prejudices against 
Drachensbett and its handsome young prince. The writing is dryly formal (“To 
be sure, the curriculum through which I suffered could scarce inspire enthusiasm 
in even a conscientious princess”), a far cry from the down-home sensibility that 
characterized Murdock’s earlier success in Dairy Queen (BCCB 9/06). Neverthe-
less, Ben is a memorable anti-princess, and readers will relish the fiery exchanges 
396 • The BulleTin
between her and Prince Florian; it’s a rare fairy tale where the relationship between 
the happily-ever-after couple actually develops over time. Readers who don’t mind 
losing the period atmosphere might better appreciate contemporary royal misfit 
Princess Mia from The Princess Diaries (BCCB 12/00, et al.), but Princess Ben is 
a spunky forebear.  KB
myers, wAlter deAn Game. HarperTeen, 2008 218p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-058295-1 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-058294-4 $16.99   
R Gr. 6-10
Coach House is fully aware that senior Drew Lawson is a fine basketball player, 
but he’s not delivering the kind of cooperative play that will get the team through 
a tough season: “We’re trying to get a team effort out there, and you’re going out 
for showtime at the Apollo.” House has a hatful of strategies to readjust Drew’s 
attitude, including giving him a lot of bench time to cogitate on his role in the 
team, and putting a transfer student, Czech immigrant Tomas, out on the floor in 
Drew’s place. It’s a toss-up whether Drew will come around to the coach’s way of 
thinking or throw away his season—and college prospects—in a fit of anger. Drew’s 
hunger for stardom and keyed-up resentment are credibly portrayed, and his grudg-
ingly respectful relationship with talented newcomer Tomas is equally convincing. 
Drew’s introspective musings on Othello and on wasted lives in the ’hood are a bit 
heavy-handed, but they never hobble the solid plotting that presses steadily on to 
a satisfying conclusion. The young man may not be quite as good a player as he 
thought, but he’s good enough, and although he may not have landed a berth in 
a sexy college program, he’ll get a shot at some TV time—and an education. And 
he’s matured enough in his final high-school season to appreciate what his patience 
and hard work have achieved.  EB 
myers, wAlter deAn Sunrise over Fallujah. Scholastic, 2008 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-439-91624-0 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-12
Robin Perry has grown up on half-told family stories of the Vietnam War, and 
now he brushes aside his father’s ambitions for him to attend college in favor of 
enlistment in the Army. He lands in a Civil Affairs unit, which will follow on the 
heels of Marines and Infantry who lead the U.S. and coalition forces as they invade 
Iraq in 2003 to topple the Hussein regime and establish a nascent democracy. At 
least, that’s the plan, but even the military brass aren’t in full agreement of how 
Civil Affairs will function, and the haziness of their mission means Robin’s unit 
is called to undertake tasks including checking Iraqi households for contraband 
weapons, offering medical assistance, staging an informal soccer match that turns 
into a publicity opportunity, and arranging the ransom and transfer of kidnapped 
children. Myers balances ensemble drama with a gripping war story in which the 
identity of the enemy is never clear. Robin’s occasional letters home (including 
correspondence with Uncle Richie, whom readers may have met in Fallen Angels, 
BCCB 4/88) aptly capture the young man’s efforts to put an optimistic face on 
an experience that his narration clearly reveals as unrelentingly grim. In limiting 
the story arc to the early months of the war, Myers effectively augments the irony 
of the Civil Affairs mission, as Robin and his fellow soldiers keep alert for telltale 
signs of WMDs that readers know will never be uncovered. A glossary of terms 
and acronyms is appended.  EB 
May 2008 • 397
nAthAn, Amy Meet the Dancers: From Ballet, Broadway, and Beyond. Holt, 
2008 [256p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-8071-1 $19.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 4-8
Having tackled the lives of musicians in Meet the Musicians (BCCB 3/06), Na-
than now turns to hoofers, showcasing sixteen dancers who make their living on 
their feet. Each chapter discusses that dancer’s childhood experience with dance 
and their journey to becoming a professional, and the experiences are sufficiently 
variable, from late bloomers to early acolytes, fearless showoffs to nervous Nel-
lies, willowy ballerinas to compact ex-gymnasts, that all interested readers should 
find plenty with which to identify. Nathan has a knack for choosing genuinely 
original and informative aspects of the dancers’ lives, and chapters are bedecked 
with sidebar tidbits about the dancers’ (grueling) schedules during rehearsal pe-
riod, things they’ve learned about making daily class work for them, and helpful 
tips on performance (the book also cleverly uses The Nutcracker as a touchstone, 
with sidebars documenting when each dancer participated in the storied ballet). 
There’s a big difference between loving a pastime and making it your daily bread, 
and this book gives revealing snapshots and helpful details about what life is like 
as a not-so-young dancer. All of the multicultural, coeducational group of subjects 
are enthusiastic about their vocation, and none of them regret their choice, but it’s 
also clear from their descriptions of the rigor that it’s not for everybody. Whether 
young readers are genuinely considering a dance career or just want to add a little 
more reality to their terpsichorean fantasies, they’ll adore the backstage authenticity 
and lively readability here. Dramatic black-and-white photos of dancers, usually 
in mid-leap, decorate the chapters; a glossary, extensive annotated list of resources, 
and an index are included.  DS
PinkwAter, dAniel Bear’s Picture; illus. by D. B. Johnson. Houghton, 
2008 32p
ISBN 978-0-618-75923-1 $16.00   
Ad 4-7 yrs
“A bear wanted to paint a picture,” and so he began to do so, happily painting 
away in a rainbow of colors when “two fine, proper gentleman” come upon him. 
The knowledgeable gentlemen assert that bears can’t paint pictures and that the 
work in progress is silly, and they make mistaken guess after mistaken guess as 
to its subject. The bear finally informs them of his vision—it basically depicts a 
dream bear habitat—and when the gentlemen dismiss his efforts, he points out 
firmly that it’s not for them to judge (“It is MY picture”). The message is a little 
oversimplified, but young artists will immediately recognize the dilemma of being 
faced with seemingly superior interlocutors, and the encouragement of individual 
vision is uplifting. Pinkwater’s text has an abstract, fable-like tone that’s grounded 
with gentle touches of rhythm as the focus alternates between artist and critics, and 
his subtextual eye-rolling at the pretentious prejudgment of the critics will put kids 
happily on the bear’s side. Johnson gets the gentlemen’s number illustratively, putting 
them in period suits (including spats, hats, and walking stick for one) and shades 
of gray, taupe, black, and white that the eye initially reads as monochromatic, and 
their geometric angularity correlates to their rigidity. The bear and his painting, 
however, are less successful: with his popping blue white-ringed eyes, spiky texture 
marks, and two-dimensionality, our ursine artist isn’t particularly appealing, and his 
painting is a cacophony of unbalanced color that, ironically, makes the two critics 
398 • The BulleTin
look stylish and effective in contrast. Despite the book’s flaws, it will make young 
artists think; use it in conjunction with Haseley’s Twenty Heartbeats (BCCB 4/08) 
or Catalanotto’s Emily’s Art (BCCB 9/01) for a look at artistic philosophy.  DS
Prelutsky, JAck My Dog May Be a Genius; illus. by James Stevenson. Green-
willow, 2008 160p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-623863-0 $19.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-623862-3 $18.99   
R Gr. 3-6
The venerable comic pairing of Prelutsky and Stevenson returns in this collection 
of over 100 new poems. Those familiar with The New Kid on the Block (BCCB 
10/84) and A Pizza the Size of the Sun (BCCB 9/96) will recognize the format and 
approach here: big, near-square pages, airy spreads each featuring a vigorous verse 
or two accompanied by Stevenson’s speedy scrawls of spot art. Poems display the 
laureate’s familiar taste for punnery (the skunk who thought the judge had called for 
“odor in the court”) and pattern poems (“I’m Falling through a Funnel”), touches 
of bathroom humor (“The Zeenaleens are fond of beans . . . ”) and sly philosophy 
(how does the girl “sitting doing nothing” know when she’s done?). Plenty of po-
ems offer particular joys for readalouds, whether it be the alliterative yet disgusting 
menu of “Sandwich Stan” or the stuffed-nose rejoicing of “Sprig Id Here.” It’s worth 
having a deep bench of Prelutsky poetry, so you’ll want to include this alongside 
its predecessors. Indices to titles and first lines are appended.  DS
rAy, JAne The Apple-Pip Princess; written and illus. by Jane Ray. Candlewick, 
2008 32p
ISBN 978-0-7636-3747-7 $16.99   
R 6-9 yrs
Each of three royal sisters has seven days to try to prove herself the best choice to 
inherit her father’s throne in a kingdom that has become desolate, hungry, and 
heartbroken after the queen’s death. Predictably, the two oldest girls choose foolish 
tasks, each vying to build the best tower, while youngest daughter Serenity decides 
instead to plant seeds, starting with a single apple pip. Soon the villagers join in 
and young plants and trees begin to grow, but time runs short and Serenity fears 
that her efforts are not enough. The king, however, is moved by her accomplish-
ment, and even the older girls are not too proud to climb down from their towers 
and join everyone in rejoicing over the joyous change that Serenity has wrought. 
Audiences will find plenty of familiar folkloric ground here, and it combines with 
refreshing touches such as the author’s description of Serenity: “The truth is that 
she was little and shy and quite ordinary.” Occasional narrative asides (“But what 
of Suzanna and Miranda, you ask?”) also make the reading and listening experience 
a bit more intimate than more stylized fairy-tale fare. Ray’s elaborate and intricate 
illustrations depict a vaguely exotic locale populated with handsome dark-eyed, 
dark-haired, caramel-skinned people, friendly spotted birds, and a lean and atten-
tive little black cat. Photocollage elements make the elder daughters’ towers into 
fascinating dead ends; decorative borders create a window-like effect on some pages; 
and the last few spreads considerably lighten and brighten the previously muted 
palette, emphasizing the landscape’s transformation from barren to verdant. Kids 
who prefer their fairy tales straight up rather than Shrek-ified will undoubtedly 
enjoy this, as may young fans of The Secret Garden.  JH
May 2008 • 399
reinhArdt, dAnA How to Build a House. Lamb, 2008 [240p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-94454-3 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-84453-9 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Building houses is what seventeen-year-old Harper is spending the summer in Ten-
nessee doing; she, along with other high-schoolers volunteering with “Homes for 
the Heart,” are erecting a new home for victims of a devastating tornado. Harper 
is herself leaving behind a home destroyed, in her case by human action, as her 
father and stepmother are divorcing after nearly fifteen years of marriage. Harper’s 
upset enough at losing the only mother she’s ever known, but she’s also lost Tess, 
her same-age stepsister who had been her inseparable best friend—until Tess coolly 
hooked up with Harper’s best male friend and sometime lover. Reinhardt effectively 
reveals the details of Harper’s family’s creation and dissolution through intermittent 
flashbacks, and Harper’s narration is pained but not unfair, especially when she 
begins to realize the limitations of her knowledge (she’s the last in the family to 
learn that her father’s affair is actually what broke up the marriage). The familial 
and personal portraits are both subtle and complex, and Harper’s willingness to 
open herself up in her new relationship with Teddy, the college-aged son of the 
family for whom she’s building the house, makes her appealing in her courage as 
well as her vulnerability. Readers will find her journey of rebuilding an emotional 
and compelling one.  DS
roe, monicA m. Thaw. Front Street, 2008 235p
ISBN 978-1-59078-496-9 $17.95   
Ad Gr. 9-12
Dane was “untouchable, a deity on skis,” but now he’s helpless and immobile in 
a Florida rehab center miles away from his upstate New York home as a result of 
a near-fatal attack of Guillain-Barré Syndrome. The arrogant eighteen-year-old 
initially rejects the assistance of the physical therapist, sure that he can regain his 
former strength with determination and self-control. As his stay in rehab drags on, 
however, he begins to contemplate his failed relationship with his girlfriend, the 
price he’s been paying for his never-give-an-inch attitude, and the plight of Carissa, 
a teen who spends most of her days at the rehab center visiting her irreparably 
comatose father. The situation is ripe for a tasty mix of drama and contemplation, 
and the combination of Dane’s arrogance and helplessness makes him an intriguing 
protagonist. Unfortunately, the work tumbles into cliché, making Dane the simple 
product of a two-dimensional bullying father and making his girlfriend and the 
physical therapist soap-operatic devices rather than full characters; Dane’s worldview 
change likewise ends up more Hallmark than heroic. Melodrama fans may still find 
Dane’s multileveled rehabilitation to be a moving transformation, however, and 
they’ll be pleased to see him finding his feet literally and figuratively.  DS
rosoFF, meg Jumpy Jack & Googily; illus. by Sophie Blackall. Holt, 
2008 32p
ISBN 978-0-8050-8066-7 $16.95   
Ad 4-7 yrs
Jumpy Jack the snail gets by with a little help from his friend, Googily. As the two 
walk companionably home and enjoy a nice evening in their cozy shared house, 
Googily repeatedly reassures the nervous snail that there are no monsters, despite 
Jack’s great fear of same. The joke here is that Googily is in fact a monster himself, 
400 • The BulleTin
so that Jumpy Jack’s greatest fear is actually his constant succor. The problem is that 
the text is so poker-faced about that joke that young audiences may begin to wonder 
if Googily’s fantastical physique is something other than monsterly, and the unstated 
truth never offers any kind of payoff; the finale, in which Googily is frightened by 
an under-bed sock, fails to deliver any compensatory punch. Line-and-watercolor 
illustrations have a zany vivacity even as they echo the matter-of-fact tone of the 
text. Jumpy Jack, with his eyes peering out timidly from their stalks, actually looks 
rather more monstrous than Humpty-Dumptyish Googily, a nattily dressed blue 
wonder with bristly eyebrows and pointy teeth that somehow enhance rather than 
detract from his toylike cuddliness. Monsters, Inc. (which, coincidentally enough, 
had a monster nicknamed “Googly Bear”) is the ultimate exploration of this idea, 
but audiences who like their monsters in cuddly book form may still appreciate 
the duo’s warm if unusual friendship.  DS
sAvAdier, eliviA Will Sheila Share?; written and illus. by Elivia Savadier. Porter/
Roaring Brook, 2008 24p
ISBN 978-1-59643-289-5 $12.95  
R 2-4 yrs
The answer to the titular question is, initially, a decided “No!” Toddler Sheila refuses 
to share her toys or treats, although she is willing to share a box of cereal or a plate 
full of green beans. Wise Nana gently intervenes and leads Sheila by steps from 
sharing a hug and kiss to sharing a bowl full of delectable strawberries (as well as 
the toys and treats she previously hoarded) with a multi-age, multicultural group 
of children. Though Sheila’s turning point may be a bit implausible (Nana merely 
points out that Sheila’s refusal to share makes someone look sad, a situation that 
Sheila seemed indifferent to in a previous illustration), the compactness of the story 
is well suited to its potentially restless audience. A crisp, clean layout featuring large 
print (some of which appears in bold type for emphasis) above cheerful line-and-
watercolor illustrations, all against an expansive backdrop of white space, also make 
this a fine choice for group reading. Wispy-curled, rosy-skinned Sheila is endearing 
and amusing both in the ferocity with which she clutches her possessions (the image 
of her guarding her big blue ball is particularly humorous) and the magnanimity 
with which she finally shares. If your home/classroom/library frequently resonates 
with cries of “No! Mine!”, you may want to give this title a try.  JH
selZer, AdAm Pirates of the Retail Wasteland. Delacorte, 2008 [208p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90480-3 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73482-0 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-8
After shocking his teacher into quitting with his avant-garde sex-ed film project, 
La Dolce Pubert (a story told in How to Get Suspended and Influence People, BCCB 
5/07), Leon and the other members of the gifted pool are faced with the daunting 
task of coming up with a project that will top the last one without going too far 
over the top. The assignment is to create a monument, and while two of the boys 
attempt to get their sadistic and gifted kid–hating gym teacher to commit suicide so 
that they can erect a monument over his body, Leon and his maybe-girlfriend Anna, 
along with communist Edie and her mini-MacGyver boyfriend Brian, decide to do 
a filmed monument to the dying downtown area. They plan to take over the large-
chain coffee shop that they feel is symptomatic of all that is wrong with McBusiness 
everywhere and turn it into an office to see if anyone notices. Unlike the previous 
May 2008 • 401
book, where Selzer nailed early adolescent preoccupations and humor preferences 
with lots of bodily humor and explosions, this premise may prove a bit too slick 
for the target audience—the humor here depends on retail chain exhaustion, which 
for many teens is a late acquisition, if it appears at all. Leon’s unusual dilemma of 
being a dork faced with choosing between the advances of two girls takes up too 
much of the narrative space without moving things along. His parents, though, live 
up to their comic potential: they continue their pursuit of food disasters, and his 
dad, through an unfortunate attempt to create a new hair dye, ends up with first a 
green Mohawk, and then a sort of spiky rhino horn for his trouble. There are thus 
laughs to be had here; patrons with a penchant for thrift stores and bad coffee will 
be best suited appreciate the full impact of the jokes.  KC 
shouP, bArbArA Everything You Want. Flux, 2008 [312p]
ISBN 978-0-7387-1227-7 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
A winning Lotto Cash ticket means a $50 million windfall for Emma’s family, 
and for Emma it seems like the ideal solution: she’s been an unhappy, insecure 
freshman at college, unable to get over a high-school crush who never turned from 
boy friend to boyfriend, so the excuse to leave is welcome. The money seems to 
complicate as much as it helps, though, with Emma’s mother weighted down by 
guilt and the breadth of possibility and Emma’s older sister finding that the way 
she handles her unexpected riches is poisoning her new relationship. Meanwhile, 
Emma’s discovering that her problems didn’t get left behind at college, and that she 
can’t spend away the self-doubt that she carries with her like a shield. While the 
story is somewhat rambling and talky, it depicts Emma’s difficulty in moving on to 
adulthood with sympathetic perceptivity. Her narration is sharp yet revealing, and 
it’s particularly illuminating to see how much she’s missing because she can’t believe 
she’s worthy of other people’s interest, romantic and otherwise; other characters are 
vivid as well, especially her sweet, perky college roommate Tiffany, Emma’s polar 
opposite yet doggedly loyal friend, who tries to tell Emma about the possibilities 
available to her. The sudden-wealth plot runs as an undercurrent through the book, 
notable in Emma more for what it doesn’t change than what it does, even as the 
shakeup in her family forces her to finally define herself individually. This will be 
an interesting counterpoint to Caletti’s recent bonanza tale, The Fortunes of Indigo 
Skye (BCCB 3/08), and it will offer some reassurance to teens wondering about 
their own forthcoming family separation.  DS
singer, mArilyn Eggs; illus. by Emma Stevenson. Holiday House, 
2008 32p
ISBN 978-0-8234-1727-8 $16.95   
Ad Gr. 3-4
Listeners who enjoyed Aston’s An Egg Is Quiet can step up here to a wider breadth 
of information, illustrated with comparable delicacy. Singer begins with a brief 
discussion of eggs fertilized inside and outside the female’s body (although she 
steers pretty clear of mammalian—particularly human—ova), and then turns to 
differences in shell composition, size, shape, color, number, nesting and protection, 
brooding, and hatching. There’s probably too much data here for readers to absorb 
in one sitting, and although the topics unfold in orderly fashion, the lack of sec-
tion headings makes it difficult to identify text breaks. Stevenson’s gouache scenes 
and vignettes recall nineteenth-century naturalists’ illustration in their meticulous 
402 • The BulleTin
attention to detail. When several unrelated animals or eggs share the same page 
space, however, scale becomes confusing—a mayfly appears approximately the size 
of a newly hatched chick, and a cockroach is as long as a spiny anteater. The text 
is well suited to a late primary grade audience, though, and back matter includes 
such welcome features as an index, a glossary coordinated with italicized terms 
in the text, source notes, and more than a dozen websites for wildlife protection 
organizations.  EB
sleAtor, williAm Test. Amulet/Abrams, 2008 [320p]
ISBN 978-0-8109-9356-3 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 8-10
Seventeen-year-old Ann cannot help but be obsessed about the XCAS: this standard-
ized test determines the future career options for almost all teenagers. If she fails, 
she will face a bleak life as a drudge worker living in horribly substandard housing; 
if she passes, she will likely never have the lifestyle of the few elite, but she will at 
least be comfortable. Her focus on the upcoming exam is diverted, however, when a 
dangerous man begins following her as a threat to her politically active father. This 
threat leads to Ann’s becoming involved in a web of conspiracy and intrigue as she 
befriends the employee of this man (a shy but handsome immigrant who attends 
her classes) and, with his help, gathers evidence that the test itself is flawed, that 
the creators are corrupt, and that the entire educational system needs a dramatic 
overhaul. This dystopic society, crisply segregated into those who must dwell in 
the pollution and those who can literally fly above it, is a haunting backdrop for 
Ann’s desperation to enact change. Unfortunately, although teens will undoubt-
edly empathize with the resentment the characters feel about the tests, Sleator’s 
diatribe against standardized testing is so overwhelming that the characters are 
underdeveloped, the dialogue is inauthentic (often, the protagonist is used as a 
prop to spew dislike for the No Child Left Behind act), and there is little dramatic 
tension as the forces of good are guaranteed success. Nevertheless, high-schoolers 
organizing a revolt against an all-powerful educational system that is unbalanced, 
dehumanizing, and unfeeling will still resonate with readers, who may see glimpses 
of themselves in the downtrodden adolescents.  AS
tAmAki, mAriko Skim; illus. by Jillian Tamaki.  Groundwood/House of 
Anansi, 2008 144p
ISBN 978-0-88899-753-1 $18.95   
R* Gr. 9-12
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 369, for review.
thomPson, colin Good Neighbors; illus. by Crab Scrambly. HarperCollins, 
2008 214p (The Floods)
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-113199-8 $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-113196-7 $15.99   
R Gr. 3-5
In this Australian import, the familiar plot of a family with bad neighbors is cleverly 
upended when it turns out that the rotten folks next door are humans and the 
beleaguered Floods are a large family of witches and wizards. The Floods have tried 
being patient, ignoring the bordering trashy yard and annoying sounds, but they’ve 
finally reached their limit. Thus begins a series of “accidents” that happen to mem-
bers of the neighboring Dent family (one is turned into a sophisticated refrigerator, 
May 2008 • 403
another is eaten by a long-buried zombie in the yard), the end result being, much 
to the Floods’ delight, no more Dents. Thompson ably balances the several deaths 
and the macabre household in which the Floods live with humorous asides to the 
reader, absurd details about wizarding life, and a quick pace that keeps the reader 
from lingering too long on the individual fates of the Dents. In addition, as with 
the wretched children who visited Wonka’s factory, the Dent family is so horrid, so 
exaggeratedly unappealing, that little sympathy will be spared for their fates anyway. 
Readers will be introduced to the Floods as much through the extensive end matter 
(files on each family member will aid significantly, for example, in sorting out the 
many children) and the numerous black-and-white illustrations as from the story 
itself, the first in a series. Even if young horror buffs don’t spot the many nods to 
The Addams Family, they will certainly find this family, which gleefully breaks all the 
rules and considers bumping off neighbors a reasonable way to bring about peace, 
an intriguing and appealing group of protagonists. Pair this with Alan MacDonald’s 
trolls vs. bad human neighbors tale Trolls, Go Home! (BCCB 9/07), and readers 
may never see the folks next door in quite the same way again.  AS
trondheim, lewis Kaput & Zösky; tr. by Edward Gauvin; illus. by Eric 
Cartier. First Second, 2008 76p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-59643-132-4 $13.95   
R* Gr. 4-6
In this French import, the absurd misadventures of the daring Kaput and Zösky, 
space explorers and would-be conquerors, are presented in brief, full-color install-
ments that, when combined, form a graphic novel detailing several attempts at 
planet takeovers and a complete glimpse into the humorously bizarre psyches of the 
two comic protagonists. While Zösky may on the surface appear to be the logical, 
restrained counterbalance to Kaput’s bloodthirsty mania, they are both quick to 
shoot first and ask questions later (though few answers are forthcoming out of the 
various quivering remains), and they both revel in the idea of finding a planet on 
which they can settle as overlords. Unfortunately, the alien beings they encounter 
all seem to have something wrong: the inhabitants are bloodsuckers, or too good 
at hopscotch, or a mite too clever. No matter, the two always have each other, their 
ridiculously tiny spaceship, and an entire galaxy to explore. Following each story 
is a single-page cartoon titled “The Cosmonaut,” a brief single-gag amusement 
that acts as a palate cleanser for the next Kaput and Zösky excursion. The vibrant, 
sometimes even garish (though appropriately so) illustrations highlight the illogical, 
gory, and rampantly unsupervised world in which the protagonists dwell (imagine 
Calvin and Hobbes but with zero societal rules or grownup supervision). The few 
pauses built in to the stories are conveyed perfectly through wordless panels, as 
when Kaput, awaiting his next would-be assassin in a gladiator-style contest, stands 
miniscule in the giant arena, surrounded by splotches that represent his former 
competitors, momentarily quiet as he readies the weapon hidden in his mouth. 
While the humor sometimes relies on scatology or repeated gags, readers may like 
it all the better for that, and this hilarious collection is overall fresh, creative, and 
particularly appealing in the refusal to apply any sort of moral: sometimes space 
conquerors don’t have to learn from their mistakes, and they get to keep assuming 
that their next attempt will stick.  AS 
404 • The BulleTin
volPoni, PAul Hurricane Song. Viking, 2008 [144p]
ISBN 978-0-670-06160-0 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 8-10
Since his mother’s remarriage forced him out of their overcrowded apartment, 
sophomore Miles has been trying to adjust to life with his father, a horn player in 
New Orleans. It’s not going too well—Pop puts his gigs before everything, includ-
ing his son, and his attempts to instill some musical interest in Miles have come to 
nothing. Father and son are propelled into some unsought bonding time when the 
approach of Hurricane Katrina forces them and Pop’s brother to abandon their car 
mid-evacuation and take shelter in the Superdome. Pop and Uncle Roy have sharp 
memories of bad times in shelters during their childhood, and they advise Miles to 
be on guard for rough hours ahead as people under intense pressure are crowded into 
the facility. Even they couldn’t predict, though, the violence, inadequate provisions, 
failed hygiene systems, and total mismanagement that the following days would 
bring, and when they finally manage to bolt past security and slog their way back to 
check on what might be left of the neighborhood, they merely move from one circle 
of hell into another. The Miles/Pop tensions and Miles’ final embrace of his father’s 
jazz culture feel more like an excuse for a fictionalized revisit of the Superdome 
debacle than a fully developed plot, and the epilogue that hustles Miles and his kin 
to Houston, Seattle, and back to a FEMA trailer in New Orleans could undoubt-
edly be expanded into a story of its own. Volponi does, however, pay attention to 
racial issues not only surrounding the treatment of evacuees at the Superdome, but 
also in post-flood redevelopment, and his harrowing description of three days of 
anarchy will make this a useful quick pick for YA drama.  EB
voorhees, coert The Brothers Torres. Hyperion, 2008 [320p]
ISBN 978-1-4231-0304-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 9-12
Things aren’t going too badly for high school sophomore Frankie Torres—he’s 
making romantic headway with beautiful Rebecca, he’s got spending money in his 
pocket from working at his parents’ restaurant, he’s getting by in his classes, and 
he’s got the loyal friendship of Zach, whose jocular smack talk and ethnic slurs 
are a match for his own. Frankie’s New Mexico small town is a pressure cooker of 
classism and social expectations, though, and there’s no way Frankie—half Anglo 
and half Latino—can just lay low. His older brother Steve, a soccer star with col-
lege scholarship aspirations, is running with the cholos, dating a girl who can most 
charitably be described as every parent’s nightmare, and dabbling in criminal activity. 
However tough he sounds and bad he tries to be, however, Steve is no match for 
the big dogs in town, and by insisting that Frankie keep up the family “honor” and 
act like a “man,” he draws his younger brother into a series of violent confronta-
tions with both rich white kids and marginalized Latinos that threaten to drag 
them both down. This debut novel is solidly plotted and exceptionally well paced; 
escalating tension keeps the pages flying, while narrator Frankie’s self-deprecating 
humor prevents the action from devolving into Southwestside Story melodrama. 
YA readers should keep an eye on Voorhees and hope he’s got another powerhouse 
story waiting in the wings.  EB
May 2008 • 405
willems, mo The Pigeon Wants a Puppy!; written and illus. by Mo Willems. Hy-
perion, 2008 [36p]
ISBN 978-1-4231-0960-0 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 3-6 yrs
Up until now, the plight of the pigeon has been the strain and disappointment 
of a dream deferred: he didn’t get to drive the bus, he didn’t get to eat his whole 
hot dog, he didn’t get to stay up late. Alas, though, our pigeon is a romantic who 
won’t stop wishing, and now he’s wishing for a puppy. Broad hints that indicate 
he has no idea what to do with a puppy (“I promise I’ll water it once a month”) 
will start the giggles, but this time the real humor is reserved for the pigeon’s get-
ting what he wants instead of not getting it and realizing too late that it wasn’t 
what he thought it would be like at all. To the range of emotions this one-eyed 
pigeon has been so articulate in conveying—he’s been coy, he’s been mad, he’s been 
disappointed—Willems adds here wistful romantic fascination, complete with a 
kicked-up foot, clasped wings, and droopy eyelids, and abject fear, which nearly 
chases our bird off the page. The puppy seems benign enough with his friendly 
smile and waggy pink tongue, but his size relative to the pigeon gets the message 
across, and the pigeon’s transfer of dreamy affection to a wish for a walrus puts us 
back on more familiar ground—if you’re gonna dream, dream big enough that you 
are not bothered by the possibility that the dream might come true. This is another 
hit for our favorite blue daydream believer.  KC  
winters, kAy Colonial Voices: Hear Them Speak; illus. by Larry Day. Dutton, 
2008 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-525-47872-0 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
On the morning of December 16, 1773, the citizens of Boston have a lot on their 
minds. Ships filled with tea are moored in the harbor, and there’s uncertainty 
whether the governor will let them sail away without unloading, or whether there 
will be a showdown over the despised tea and its requisite tax. Ethan, the printer’s 
errand boy, makes some unobtrusive stops at various merchants’ and tradesper-
sons’ establishments, to “share notice of about the meeting at Old South,/ pass 
the secret to the Patriots,/ and listen to the tittle-tattle from the Loyalists.” Each 
of the featured workers delivers a free-verse monologue that comments on his or 
her trade and takes a stand on the evening’s upcoming event. Although the free 
verse is a little prosy at times, the individuation of characters is noteworthy, with 
Winters particularly skillful at tying the nature of each job to a probable reason 
for that merchant’s political position. The milliner, for example, can’t see why her 
well-to-do clients would quibble over what amounts to so small a tax, and she’s 
obviously interested in keeping the flow of goods between America and the continent 
robust. The slave blacksmith and the Indian basket-seller are disinterested or even 
contemptuous of the Patriots’ cries for a freedom that they are unlikely to share. 
The shoemaker, whose shop is a popular gathering spot, keeps his own counsel: “I 
do not share my views./ Don’t want to lose my customers who differ.” Day’s line-
and-watercolor illustrations are equally adept at displaying the accoutrements of 
each occupation and the variety of responses among the Bostonians as they read 
the latest broadside. A glossary and list for further reading (with children’s sources 
highlighted) are included, as well as paragraphs offering additional information 
on each trade.  EB 
406 • The BulleTin
woodruFF, elvirA Fearless. Scholastic, 2008 [208p]
ISBN 978-0-439-67703-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
M Gr. 4-7
Aunt Alice has offered shelter and board to her two motherless nephews, Digory 
and Cubby Beale, while their father is away at sea, but when word arrives that Mr. 
Beale’s ship has sunk, she sends Digory off to Plymouth to confirm that his father’s 
name is officially listed among the lost. Cubby sneaks away to join his older brother, 
and after losing their few possessions on the journey, they are narrowly saved from 
arrest (and probable hanging) for theft by a kindly man who takes Digory on as 
an apprentice. The Beales’ benefactor turns out to be Squire Henry Winstanley, 
whose lighthouse at the infamous Eddystone Reef off England’s southern coast has 
saved countless sailors’ lives over the five years it has been standing. Readers who 
skip ahead to the closing notes will learn that Winstanley was a beloved eccentric 
and a doomed man—when the fictional brothers accompany him on his journey 
to make emergency repairs during what turns out to be the freakish storm of 1703, 
Winstanley won’t be around for a happy ending. The boys fare better, though, find-
ing their father, inheriting a cache of silver from Winstanley, and returning to their 
home in Mousehole, no longer reliant on Aunt Alice’s meager hospitality. The Beale 
boys’ story is little more than perfunctory, and it’s stodgy and contrived; Winstanley 
is the real draw, but by capturing only the final few months of his life, Woodruff 
omits his design and improbable construction of the lighthouse and reduces the 
inventive marvels scattered around his estate to a simple inventory of mechanical 
wonders. Although this title does introduce readers to an historical figure whose 
hubris and heroism are worthy of further investigation, it never fully succeeds as 
either an adventure story or a fictionalized biography. In addition to the author’s 
note, two glossaries and a bibliography are included.  EB
yAccArino, dAn Go, Go America; written and illus. by Dan Yaccarino. Scho-
lastic, 2008 [80p]
ISBN 978-0-439-70338-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 3-5
The Farley family has just packed the station wagon for an auto tour of the States 
(yes, even Alaska and, improbably, Hawaii), and their interests tend toward the 
oddball, unorthodox, and eccentric. As they snake across country, they skip the 
cultural notables in favor of a visit to Einstein’s brain in New Jersey, a duck-calling 
contest in Arkansas, a rubber-chicken factory in Utah, and a bathtub race in Alaska. 
They also frequently caution readers to avoid transgressing peculiar regional laws: 
“On Market Street in San Francisco, the law requires elephants to be kept on a 
leash”; “In Marshalltown [Iowa], horses are forbidden to eat fire hydrants.” The 
retro-styled cartoon Farleys, dashing along the dotted line from vignette to vignette 
against Smartees-colored backgrounds in some seriously frenetic layouts, could 
be the Jetsons’ forebears, although an opening photograph of a Yaccarino “family 
road trip, circa 1970” hints that the true models are closer to home. A U.S. map, 
with states bearing route signage page numbers, serves as a table of contents, and 
a concluding roster of vertical info strips offers state fast facts and postal abbrevia-
tions in alphabetical order. The information is inclined to be questionable (and 
at least one entry appears in the wrong state), running more toward tourist-board 
claims and creative interpretations than rigorous accuracy; while a list of sources 
is included (without specific citations, though), even Yaccarino seems unwilling 
May 2008 • 407
to attest to the veracity of his data: “It is possible that some laws are no longer ac-
tive. But regardless, most of them are still unbelievable.” Page-thumbers and trivia 
hounds probably won’t be too persnickety, though, as they while away the miles 
between “I gotta go!” and “Are we there yet?”  EB
ZenAtti, vAlérie A Bottle in the Gaza Sea; tr. by Adriana Hunter. Bloomsbury, 
2008 [157p]
ISBN 978-1-59990-200-5 $16.95   
M Gr. 7-10
Horrified by a suicide bombing in a local cafe that took the life of a young woman 
on the eve of her wedding, Israeli teenager Tal Levine decides to make her own 
tiny effort to stop the violent madness by sending her thoughts and her email ad-
dress to an unknown Palestinian recipient via a message in a bottle. Tal may have 
fantasized that a girl her own age, with her own desires for peace, would become 
her new correspondent, but instead the bottle is retrieved by “Gazaman,” a bitter, 
angry young man who alternately mocks her Pollyanna-ish overtures or ignores 
her missives altogether. Tal is relentless, though, and at last she softens him up to 
discuss the way political division has affected their lives and to fill her in on personal 
experiences that have turned him to pessimism. Zenatti’s novel oozes the good in-
tention of offering equal voice to Israeli and Palestinian viewpoints, but the email 
exchanges are laden with awkwardly integrated history lessons, and Gazaman’s Big 
Secret is a rather undramatic letdown. Tech-savvy teens will wonder why it took 
Gazaman so long to use the internet service in a downstairs office rather than at a 
dangerously public internet cafe, or why he and Tal didn’t catch on to text messag-
ing much sooner. Moreover, a melodramatic conclusion that has Gazaman inviting 
Tal to rendezvous with him four years later at the Trevi Fountain in Rome (haven’t 
Deborah Kerr and Meg Ryan tried this sort of thing already?) is undermined by 
the fact that the September 13, 2007 date for their meeting has already passed, and 
readers could logically be apprised of any romantic resolution. Teens impassioned 
over peace in the Middle East may want to take a pass on this title and YouTube 
Daniel Barenboim’s West-East Divan Orchestra instead.  EB 
408 • The BulleTin
ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons: resourCes for teAChers And LIBrArIAns
hAhn, dAniel The Ultimate Teen Book Guide; ed. by Daniel Hahn and Leonie 
Flynn. Bloomsbury, 2008 432p illus. with photographs
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-8027-9731-5 $16.95
Last month’s Professional Connections noted an Australian guide to YA literature; 
now we’ve got a British counterpart to it. Recommendations are listed alphabeti-
cally by title, with one or two per page; each book receives a paragraph or two of 
annotation by a named contributor, while a sidebar of “Next?” possibilities offers 
a handful of readalikes. Interspersed throughout are tasty features such as “The 
Ultimate Teen Readers’ Poll” lists (the ten top results for “Book That Changed Your 
Life,” “Book You’ve Read Over and Over,” etc.), brief thematic booklists (“Behind 
Bars,” “My Friend, My Enemy”), and focus entries on genres and topics ranging 
from fantasy to graphic novels to “short and gripping books.” Contributors include 
authors (many of them well known), librarians, teachers, and teens, and books range 
from adult classics (Ethan Frome, Tess of the d’Urbervilles) to recent YA titles (A Long 
Way from Chicago, Looking for Alaska); each entry has a recommended starting age. 
It’s a little annoying that entries don’t include publication information for the books 
and the age ranges seem somewhat arbitrary, but the personable testimonies and 
the broad, British-tinted range of recommendations with their additional linkages 
could be useful to librarians seeking booktalk and readers advisory material as well 
as to interested teens. Thumbnail biographies of the contributors and an index of 
authors are included.  DS
Blowing our own horn DeparTMenT:
wyile, AndreA schwenke Considering Children’s Literature: A Reader; ed. by 
Andrea Schwenke Wyile and Teya Rosenberg. Broadview, 2008 374p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-55111-604-4 $39.95
This collection of over thirty critical essays on children’s literature reprints articles 
by authors ranging from Perry Nodelman to Natalie Babbitt, including Bulletin 
editor Deborah Stevenson’s “Narrative in Picture Books or, The Paper that Should 
Have Had Slides.”  DS
May 2008 • 409
Abandonment–fiction: Golding
Abuse–fiction: Dessen
Actors and acting: Brighton
Adoption–fiction: Elliott; Golding; 
Haddix
ADvEnturE: Abbott; Elliott; 
Fletcher, Charlie; Haddix; Iserles; 
Jennings; Woodruff
African Americans: Clinton
African Americans–fiction: Myers 
Game; Myers Sunrise; volponi
Animals–fiction: Avi
Animals–poetry: Ehlert
Animals–stories: Billingsley; Black-
ford; Ji; Mansfield
Art: Ehlert
Art and artists–stories: Pinkwater
ArtHurIAn lEGEnD: Morris
Babies: Cocovini
Babies–stories: Baek
Basketball–fiction: Myers Game
BEDtIME storIEs: Averbeck; 
Billingsley; levine, J.
BIoGrAPHIEs: Alexander; Brigh-
ton; Clinton; Meltzer; nathan
Biology: Cocovini; Frost; singer
Brothers–fiction: voorhees
Brothers–stories: lindgren
Brothers and sisters–fiction: Hahn
Bullies–fiction: Butler
Butterflies: Frost
Careers: nathan
Cats–fiction: Iserles
Clothing–stories: Ji
Colors–stories: Averbeck
Crime and criminals–fiction: Abra-
hams; Golding; Hooper
Cuba–poetry: Engle
Current events: Myers Sunrise; 
Zenatti
Dancers and dance: nathan
Dancers and dance–fiction: Fletcher, 
Christine
Death–fiction: Connor; Hooper
Disabilities–fiction: Alexander; roe
Disasters–fiction: volponi
Divorce–fiction: reinhardt
Dogs–stories: Baek
Dystopias–fiction: sleator
Ethics and values: Bauer; Bodeen; 
Butler; Fletcher, Christine; Hop-
kins; Meehl; Pinkwater; selzer; 
sleator; Zenatti
Faith–fiction: levine, G.
Families–fiction: Bodeen; Cou-
loumbis; Dessen; reinhardt; 
volponi
Families–stories: levine, J.
FAntAsy: Childs; de lint; Dean; 
Elliott; Fletcher, Charlie; Iserles; 
levine, G.; Mebus; Meehl; Mur-
dock; thompson
Fathers–fiction: levine, G.
Fear–stories: rosoff
Folk-lIkE tAlEs: ray
Friends–fiction: Cirrone; Fletcher, 
Charlie; trondheim
Friends–stories: rosoff
Gangs–fiction: voorhees
Gardens and gardening–stories: 
Barry; ray
Gays and lesbians–fiction: tamaki
Geography: yaccarino
GHost storIEs: Hahn
Subject and uSe Index
keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in All-CAPs 
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
410 • The BulleTin
Gods and goddesses–fiction: levine, 
G.; Mebus
Grandfathers–fiction: Abrahams
Grandmothers–fiction: Abbott
GrAPHIC novEls: tamaki; 
trondheim
Growing up–fiction: shoup; tamaki
HIstorICAl FICtIon: Fletcher, 
Christine; Hooper; Hopkins; 
lowell; Woodruff
History, U.S.: lowell; Winters
History, world: Engle
Homework–fiction: Giblin
HuMor: Bauer; Herrick; Jennings; 
Ji; levine, J.; lombardi; Mans-
field; Morris; Prelutsky; selzer; 
thompson; trondheim; Willems
Hurricanes–fiction: volponi
Illness–fiction: Hopkins; roe
Internet–fiction: Butler
Iraq War–fiction: Myers Sunrise
Journalism–fiction: Bauer; Cirrone
knights and chivalry–fiction: Morris
Language arts: Avi; Fox
latinos–fiction: voorhees
latinos–poetry: Engle
Literature, American: Clinton
lovE storIEs: de lint
Magic–fiction: thompson
Mathematics: Meltzer
Middle East–fiction: Zenatti
Money–fiction: shoup
Monsters–stories: rosoff
Mothers–fiction: Connor; Cou-
loumbis; Golding
Movies: Brighton
Music and musicians–fiction: volponi
MystErIEs: Abbott; Abrahams; 
Dean
Mythology, classical: Childs
Nature study: Barry; Blackford; Fox; 
Frost; singer
neglect–fiction: Connor
neighbors–fiction: thompson
new york City–fiction: Mebus
night–stories: Averbeck
Pets–stories: Baek; Willems
Physical education: Myers Game
Pigs–stories: lindgren; Mansfield
Pioneers–stories: lowell
Pirates–fiction: Jennings
PoEtry: Ehlert; Engle; Herrick; 
Hopkins; Prelutsky
Politics–fiction: Bauer
PoP-uP Books: Barry
Pregnancy: Cocovini
Prejudice–fiction: Hopkins
Princesses–fiction: Murdock
Princesses–stories: ray
Quests–fiction: Mebus
Readers’ theater: Winters
Reading aloud: Ehlert; Hahn; Her-
rick; Prelutsky; Winters
Reading, easy: Morris
Reading, reluctant: Cirrone; Elliott; 
yaccarino
rehabilitation–fiction: roe
relationships–fiction: reinhardt; 
selzer
revolutionary War–poetry: Winters
romance–fiction: de lint; Murdock
sCAry storIEs: Hahn
school–fiction: Butler; Childs; Cir-
rone; Giblin; Herrick; selzer
Science: Meltzer
sCIEnCE FICtIon: Haddix; 
lombardi; sleator
secrets–fiction: Bodeen
sharing–stories: savadier
ships and sailing–fiction: Woodruff
sisters–fiction: Couloumbis; Dean; 
Dessen; reinhardt
slavery–poetry: Engle
space travel–fiction: trondheim
sPorts storIEs: Myers Game
Storytime: Barry; Blackford; Ji; 
lindgren; Mansfield; Pinkwater; 
savadier; Willems
time travel–fiction: Haddix
toddlers–stories: savadier
vampires–fiction: Meehl
voyages and travel–fiction: lombardi
voyages and travel–stories: lowell
War–fiction: Myers Sunrise
War–poetry: Engle; Hopkins
Wealth–fiction: shoup
Wishes–stories: Willems
Witches–fiction: thompson
Writers and writing: Clinton
Writers and writing–fiction: Abbott; 
Avi
