I IL 
NOI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
y and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
4
P; 
j··'
;6· 
. .:.jix1 ·
"A good entry into India, Buddhism
and the concept of reincarnation."
-Booklist
THE GOLDEN DEER
Retold by Margaret Hodges
Illustrated in full color by Daniel San Souci
"In this reverent version of a Jataka tale, a magnificent stag
known as the Banyan Deer goes willingly to sacrifice in place of a
pregnant doe. When the king of Benares hears the deer speak, he
releases it, pledging protection to its herd and to 'creatures of all
kinds who live in fear of men.'...San Souci's exact, brightly lit
waterolors follow the story closely, capturing the grace and dig-
nity of both the dappled golden deer and the theme of concern for
all life" -Kirku 
Reviews
$14.95 8BE/0-684-19218-7/Ages 6-8
SBE Indicates a reinforced hardcover edition.
CHARLES
SCRIBNER'S
SONS
An imprint of the
Macmillan Children's Book Group
866 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10022
THE
BUvL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
November 1992
Vol. 46 No. 3
A LOOK INSIDE
65 THE BIG PICTURE
Ajeemah and His Son by James Berry
Taste ofSalt by Frances Temple
66 NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
68 
* Humbug by Nina Bawden
77 
* The Night of the Whippoorwillby Nancy Larrick
89 
* Don't You Know There's a War On? by James Stevenson
93 
* June 29, 1999 by David Wiesner
96 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
98 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 54 East Gregory Drive,
Champaign, IL 61820.
STAFF
Betsy Hearne, Editor and Associate Professor, GSLIS (BH)
Roger Sutton, Executive Editor (RS)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Kathryn Jennings, Reviewer (KJ)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS ADVISORY BOARD
Leigh Estabrook, Dean, GSLIS, U. of II. at Urbana-Champaign
Selma K. Richardson, Professor, GSLIS
Richard C. Anderson, Director, Center for the Study of Reading
P. David Pearson, Dean, College of Education
Violet J. Harris, Assistant Professor, College of Education
Peggy Miller, Associate Professor, Dept. of Speech Communication
Ann D. Carlson, Assistant Professor, GSLIS, Rosary College
Carol Fox, Youth Services Consultant, Illinois State Library
Janice Harrington, Head of Children's Services, Champaign Public Library
Elizabeth Huntoon, Director Systemwide Children's Services, Chicago Public Library
Janie Schomberg, Librarian, Leal Elementary School, Urbana
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $35.00; individuals, $29.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $3.00. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 54 E. Gregory Drive, Champaign, IL 61820.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 54 E. Gregory Drive, Champaign, IL 61820.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Betsy Hearne, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 1512 N. Fremont St., #105,
Chicago, IL 60622
Second-class postage paid at Champaign, Illinois, and additional mailing offices
© 1992 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
This publication is printed on acid-free paper
Cover illustration by Bernie Fuchs, from jacket art of Ajeemah and His Son, © 1992 by Bernie
Fuchs and used by permission of HarperCollins Publishers.
NOVEMBER 1992 
* 65
THE BIG PICTURE
Ajeemah and His Son
by James Berry
Taste of Salt
by Frances Temple
Novels centered on social and political injustice are too often more successful as
messages than as fiction, especially in children's literature, where the didactic tends
to overshadow the aesthetic. It's therefore impressive to find, in one publishing
season, two novels that allow young readers deep insight into the way politics
shapes human life. James Berry's Ajeemah and His Son and Frances Temple's Taste
ofSalt portray, respectively, historical and contemporary views of injustice toward
black Caribbeans enslaved first by law and later by poverty. 
Both views are
profoundly moving because of the craft each novelist has exercised in characterizing
individuals ensnared in dramatically suspenseful situations.
Ajeemah and his eighteen-year-old son, Atu, are literally ensnared-
ambushed in 1807 by slave traders while journeying to present a bride price, two
pieces of gold hidden in Ajeemah's sandals, for Atu's betrothed, Sisi. The story of
their agonizing voyage across the sea and their bondage on Jamaican sugar
plantations ends in tragedy for one, survival for the other. With eighty-three pages
of hypnotic prose, Berry telescopes a story covering thirty-three years, from
Ajeemah's capture to the marriage of his daughter two years after the British West
Indies slavery-abolition law. The pace achieves a kind of poetic momentum. Intense
scenes and rhythmic dialogue punctuate the narrative and focus the characters as
singular individuals pinioned by history. Most unforgettable is the impact of slavery
on children: the family that Ajeemah is forced to leave behind in Africa, the eldest
son whom slavery turns brutal, the Jamaican daughter who brings to the future
only a vague, sad discomfort with the traditions that have sustained her father.
The tale ends on a note of hope, but it is hope mixed with bitter irony, not the false
hope of happily ever after.
The same tone characterizes Frances Temple's Taste ofSalt, a novel about
Djo, one of Aristide's young followers in Haiti, and Jeri, the girl whose tape-
recording of Djo, as he describes his life in the slums of La Salina, inspires her to
tell of her own trauma. Both young people are victims of attacks by the Tonton
Macoutes, Duvalier's thugs who have beaten Djo nearly to death and whom Jeri
barely escapes when she's trapped among a group of voters machine-gunned during
the dictator's effort to stop a 1987 election. The two main characters emerge with
distinct, natural voices, and the love that grows between them provides an appealing
66 
* THE BULLETIN
resolution, though it's darkened by an experience of oppression shared vividly with
the reader. Temple handles, with unobtrusive ease, the intricacies of changing and
emerging viewpoints, the juxtaposition of past and present, the blend of political
and personal, the balance of romance and violence.
Both of these books are as painful as they are absorbing. Djo's physical
appearance, after being kicked and burned, is enough to make readers flinch away
from his makeshift hospital room. But like Jeri, we can learn to look directly and
deeply at hurting as a first step toward healing. Djo's broken front teeth do not
keep him from speaking. The broken legs of the horse that Ajeemah's son first
loved and then crippled to keep his owners from riding represent ultimate defiance.
These are not easy subjects, but they tell a story which is ongoing, a story of which
we are all part whether or not we look.
That children's literature, despite some corrosive effects of commercialism,
still gives young people a chance to learn and care about situations worlds away
from their own-albeit nearby geographically, or as close at hand as the TV news-
is a hopeful sign in itself. If publishers can take the risk of developing writers such
as Frances Temple (this is her first book) and James Berry (Spiderman Anancy,
BCCB 12/89; A Thiefin the Village, 7/88), we professionals can ask ourselves for
the courage and energy to introduce their brave books to brave children.
Betsy Hearne, Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ALLEN, JUDY 
Tiger; illus. by Tudor Humphries. 
Candlewick, 1992 
30p
ISBN 1-56402-083-5 
$14.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Set in a South China village where rumors have started about a dangerous tiger
and a great hunter who will come to kill it, this is the story of what happens after
young Lee says, "I hope it gets away." Both the hunter and the tiger are real, it
turns out, but the hunter shoots photographs and the tiger is content to stalk deer
or wild pig, without threatening humans. Allen has cleverly built suspense into
the story, first by fear for the villagers and then by fear for the tiger; she's also built
information quite naturally into the interaction of child, man, and animal, all
strangers but each respectful of the other. Humphries' art makes strong collabora-
tion for the narrative; his drafting maintains meticulous anatomical fidelity with-
out becoming mechanical, and his skillfully textured watercolors are expressive in
both close-up portraits and distant landscape. Bolstering the subtle message of
NOVEMBER 1992 
* 67
environmental awareness that is incorporated into both story and illustration is a
double spread of facts about tigers as an endangered species. A high-powered
picture book, this offers listeners the triple attraction of animal tale, Asian back-
drop, and nature lesson. 
BH
AYER, ELEANOR H. 
Margaret Bourke-White: Photographing the World. Dillon,
1992 
112p 
illus. with photographs 
(People in Focus)
ISBN 0-87518-513-4 
$12.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
While perhaps not as famous as her contemporary, Dorothea Lange, Bourke-White
was an astute, versatile photographer, as celebrated for her monumental photos of
buildings and dams as she was for her portraits of sharecroppers. Remembered as
the originator of the photo-essay, Bourke-White was instrumental in the begin-
ning of Life magazine, an association that lasted until her death from Parkinson's
disease in 1971. This biography is clear and compact, with a good balance of
personal details, professional accomplishments, and assessment of historical im-
pact. One could wish for more photos by Bourke-White rather than ofBourke-
White; still, the book does include some of her most renowned pictures, such as
her portrait of Gandhi at his spinning wheel and the ironic lineup of Louisville
Flood victims against a happy billboard: "World's Highest Standard of Living."
Notes, chronology, bibliography, and an index are appended. RS
AYRES, BECKY HICKOX 
Matreshka; illus. by Alexi Natchev. 
Doubleday,
1992 
32p
ISBN 0-385-30657-1 
$15.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
A little Russian girl escapes from Baba Yaga, the witch, with help from her brave
Matreshka nesting dolls. As the girl's predicaments go from bad to worse, she is
aided by each progressively smaller Matreshka doll. Vivid watercolors portray the
gleeful, toothless Baba Yaga pursuing a frightened girl who is always on the verge
of being caught. The illustrations of Baba Yaga's traditional chicken-legged hut
are wonderfully funny, gruesome, and Russian all at once. The familiar capture-
and-escape plot in this simple folktale, as well as the lively illustrations, guarantee
a wide appeal to young children and storytellers. KJ
BAKKEN, HARALD 
The Fields and the Hills: Book One: The Journey, Once
Begun. 
Clarion, 1992 
228p
ISBN 0-395-59397-2 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
First in a projected series, this blandly titled book is about an orphaned boy, Weyr,
who escapes from the drudgery of his village. He overcomes his inbred Tam preju-
dice against the Agari people when he joins a party of them traveling south. The
Agari prove to be kinder than anyone has ever been to Weyr, and he grows to trust
his new friend, Kamlar, well enough to tell him about his secret "witch" senses of
special sight and hearing. The first chapter is conspicuously loaded with alien
terms ("Weyr gathered the only other tob and the two other blavs he owned") and
three fictional moons, but the foreign language eventually settles into the story.
Much of the tale moves slowly as Weyr gets used to his new friends and their
different ways. The action speeds up when Weyr and Kamlar are kidnapped, and
Weyr finally takes advantage of his strange powers in order to escape. Some ques-
tions raised in the book are left dangling, presumably to be answered by the
68 
* THE BULLETIN
sequel(s)-who are the people in Weyr's visions? Why does Weyr look part Tam,
part Agari? Where did his special powers come from? If the second book picks up
at the same level of action that the first attains in the end, this series has a lot of
potential. KJ
BAWDEN, NINA 
Humbug. Clarion, 1992 
133p
ISBN 0-395-62149-6 
$13.95 
R* 
Gr. 4-7
Cozy cover art that depicts a sweet old lady cuddling a young girl doesn't nearly
suggest the tone of this terrific suspense story, which is about an old lady and a
little girl . . . and another evil little girl who torments them both. Cora, who is
eight, has come with her sister and brother to stay with their grandparents while
their parents are in Japan for six months. When Granny breaks her leg, it is de-
cided that Cora will go next door to stay with "Aunt" Sunday and her young
daughter: "Her name is Angelica. We thought it would be fun for you to have
someone to play with." Angelica, as apparently celestial as her name, reveals her
true self as soon as the two girls are alone in Angelica's bedroom, and Cora is
assigned the bottom bunk. "I don't want your pee dripping down on me." Cora
finds an ally in Angelica's grandmother, who pretends enfeeblement to avoid
Angelica's attention; Aunt Sunday is eventually revealed to be less Angelica's co-
conspirator than her favorite victim. This is classic storytelling: Bawden sets up
the situation in five pages, introduces Angelica within nine, and never lets up the
menace until the end. Along with enjoying the elemental appeal of the Bad Seed
story, readers will also appreciate brave, sturdy Cora, who knows how to stick up
for herself and gives as good as she gets. RS
BENDICK, JEANNE 
Eureka! It's an Airplane!; illus. by Sal Murdocca. 
Millbrook,
1992 
4 8p 
(Inventing)
ISBN 1-56294-058-9 
$13.90
Eureka! It's an Automobile!; illus. by Sal Murdocca. 
Millbrook,
1992 
4 8p 
(Inventing)
ISBN 1-56294-057-0 
$13.90 
M 
Gr. 2-4
These two titles in Millbrook's "Inventing" series are illustrated with busy, bright
pages complete with little animal mascots and cartoon-balloon comments that pop
up everywhere. A lot of information, most explained thoroughly but some left
unclear, is packed into these slim books. The best and most coherent section in
either book is the one that explains the four forces (thrust, lift, drag, gravity) at
work when an airplane is flying. The history of cars and planes is told well in both
text and pictures. In technical sections, though, the author relies too heavily on
the illustrator to complete a description, particularly of engine mechanics: 
"A
turboprop works like this" is followed only by an ambiguously-labeled drawing.
The contrived device of speaking to the reader as though he or she is inventing the
car or airplane is a bit patronizing: "Even with wheels it's hard to move your load
over bumpy fields and through woods, so what else do you have to invent? How
about a road?" A glossary and index are provided in each book. The combination
of cute animals and condescending questions to the reader unfortunately places
the interest level far below the comprehension level. Older children who can ig-
nore the gimmicks will learn a lot. KJ
NOVEMBER 1992 
* 69
BERRY, JAMES 
Ajeemah and His Son. 
HarperCollins, 1992 
[84 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021044-3 
$12.98
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021043-5 
$13.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 6-12
See this month's Big Picture for review.
BIBLE 
Messiah: The Wordbookfor the Oratorio; words selected by Charles Jennens;
illus. by Barry Moser. 
Perlman/HarperCollins, 1992 
4 8p
ISBN 0-06-021779-0 
$20.00 
Adult 
M
One of the more lavishly unnecessary Christmas books of the year, this expensive
volume includes all the words (sans repeats) to Handel's Messiah, a scholarly intro-
duction by British conductor Christopher Hogwood to the oratorio, and fancy
watercolors (some abstract, some figurative) by Barry Moser that illustrate various
selections. Red rubrics and occasional bits of Latin add even more class to the act,
but nothing can disguise the fact that this is yet another picture book in search of
an audience. The jacket flap suggests that "this elegant volume" is "perfect for
family sing-alongs at home or at the concert hall," all of which is mischievous
nonsense: this is not the text as sung, and no music is included, rendering the
book useless for singing. What this book is perfect for is the coffee table, where its
ostentatious piety can reign forever and ever, unread. RS
BUNTING, EVE 
Coffin on a Case. 
HarperCollins, 1992 
106 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-020274-2 
$12.89.
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-020273-4 
$13.00 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Henry Coffin's father is a private detective who models himself after Sam Spade,
while Henry hopes to model himself after his father. The summer after sixth
grade, Henry falls into a doozy of a case: Lily, a sexy older woman (sixteen), has
lost her mother, and with Henry's father out of town, Henry takes on the case. He
and Lily eventually track down her mom to a basement where thieves have hidden
her after she witnessed their crime, and Henry saves the mom, the loot, and the
day. This is a cheerful homage to hard-boiled detecting, with its own twists and
charm: when arranging a signal with Lily, for instance, Henry says "I can't whistle.
I'll cluck like this," and a brief argument ensues as to whether the cluck belongs to
a hen or a woodchuck. Lily is no dumb blonde but still seems a likely enough
fantasy for boys Henry's age, as does the rest of this blithely improbable boy-
wonder tale. A good mystery for young romantics, this'll set them on the Bogart
trail. DS
CECH, JOHN 
First Snow, Magic Snow, illus. by Sharon McGinley-Nally. 
Four
Winds, 1992 
34p
ISBN 0-02-717971-0 
$14.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Elaborating on a Russian folktale about a barren couple who make a child from
snow, Cech has added a realistic plot of Snowflake's saving her village friend from
drowning after his sled falls through the ice. When spring comes and Snowflake
disappears near the heat of a fire, her parents travel north to plead with Grandfa-
ther Frost for her return. This journey, along with the creation of the magic child
and the concluding promise of her return each winter, has a mythic quality that
doesn't entirely fit with the rescue episode. As in My Grandmother's Journey (BCCB
70 
* THE BULLETIN
11/91), Cech's writing is lyrical, but this runs long for a picture book, and McGinley-
Nally's art is crowded by the tight fit of text and ornate graphic imagery, including
many doll-like figures. Read aloud in the primary grades, the book would make an
interesting contrast with the Greek tale of Ceres regaining Persephone every spring
of the year. BH
CLIFFORD, ETH 
Flatfoot Fox and the Case of the Nosy Otter; illus. by Brian
Lies. 
Houghton, 1992 
4 8p
ISBN 0-395-60289-0 
$13.95 
R Gr. 1-3
Flatfoot Fox, "the smartest detective in the whole world," is back in another funny
mystery. In this second book (a followup to Flatfoot Fox and the Case ofthe Missing
Eye), Flatfoot Fox, accompanied by the faithful Secretary Bird, searches for Mrs.
Chatterbox Otter's missing son, Nosy. The fun of the story lies not so much in the
plot asin the characters. Crabby Crow offers to help as long as Mrs. Chatterbox
Otter promises to stop talking for 24 hours. Terribly Worried Woodchuck is too
preoccupied to have seen Nosy, and Lame-Brain Swan "never makes any sense at
all.". The pen-and-ink illustrations add to the humor, especially one of Lame-
Brain Swan turning his head upside down to converse with Flatfoot, and another
of the detective team climbing in through the roof of Motherly Mouse's house to
have tea. Both kids and adults will appreciate the visual jokes-a bottle of ink
strapped to Secretary Bird's leg, fish dropping out of Mrs. Otter's purse-as well
as the textual ones: "I am the smartest detective in the world. I know when
someone is knocking at my door." Newly independent readers will wait eagerly
for the next Flatfoot Fox mystery. KJ
COOPER, ILENE 
The New, Improved Gretchen Hubbard. Morrow, 1992 
[208p]
ISBN 0-688-08432-X 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-7
One of the more harrowing scenes in popular school-and-family fiction occurs in
Cooper's Queen ofthe Sixth Grade (BCCB 11/88), in which class queen Veronica
forces Gretchen, the school fat girl, to humiliate herself in gym class. But Gretchen
has slimmed down, and she discovers that being cute can bring problems of its
own-like an older man (fifteen) who makes Gretchen feel definitely not ready.
One of the nicest things about Cooper's Kennedy Middle School series is its com-
plete lack of false sophistication: readers might enjoy the Sweet Valley Twins, but
Jessica and Elizabeth hardly seem like the girls next door. The book has a good
mix of storylines carried over from previous entries in the series and new events
(such as a movie being made in Forest Glen); the kids are real and easy to like. RS
DEFELICE, CYNTHIA 
Devil's Bridge. Macmillan, 1992 
95p
ISBN 0-02-726465-3 
$12.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
A year after his beloved father's drowning during a hurricane off the shore of
Martha's Vineyard, eleven-year-old Ben Daggett is still grieving deeply when the
annual fishing derby comes around-all the more so, when he overhears two men
conspiring to cheat by entering a striped sea bass they've injected with mercury to
weigh more than Captain Daggett's famous record catch. There are two stories
going on here: one about Ben's adjustment to his father's death and his mother's
NOVEMBER 1992 
* 71
dating someone else; the other about two villains trying to grab a handsome cash
prize. The first is a sometimes obvious but vividly realized story, with authentic
fishing scenes and an especially strong climax when Ben catches a winner and lets
it go (along with the anger and confusion he's been harboring); the second is a
contrived melodrama with cardboard characters, which may hook readers at a
Hardy-Boys level and lead them to think about the deeper level of the story. BH
DUNREA, 
OLIVIER 
The Broody Hen; written and illus. by Olivier
Dunrea. 
Doubleday, 1992 
32p
ISBN 0-385-30597-4 
$15.00 
R 
3-6 yrs
With taupe watercolors into which he introduces colors as rhythmically as he writes,
Dunrea describes "a broody hen, a moody hen/ who hatched a clutch of eggs."
The first refrain, "But the egg rolled off and broke," accompanies the hen's at-
tempts to lay her eggs in ludicrously inappropriate places, including a bathroom
shelf from which the egg falls toward the head of a bathing farmer. Settled finally
into her pen, she hatches a clutch of speckled eggs, each a slightly different hue,
and then marches-like the words and pictures-to the chicken yard with all her
"speckled peepers." This has the primal appeal of a nursery rhyme and a cumula-
tive folktale rolled into one, with the kind ofstraightfaced graphic wit that charac-
terized Dunrea's Deep Down Underground (BCCB 1/90).
EWING, KATHRYN 
Family Karate. Caroline House, 1992 
96p
ISBN 1-56397-117-8 
$13.95 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Little did Jennifer know that, when her letter to the advice column of Totally Teen
magazine was printed and answered, it would change her family's life. Jennifer has
asked "Dear Denise" what to do about her basically happy family's constant fight-
ing, and she receives the advice "When disagreements arise, try putting yourself in
your brothers' and sisters' shoes." When Jennifer follows this advice, her new
understanding leads her to perform helpful and pacifying activities (finding a date
for her lonely big sister, helping her little sister clean a deliberately muddied school
uniform) that make the family's existence much smoother. Jennifer's extrafamilial
life, however, is not going so well, because Brandon Ackerman (her big crush) asks
another girl to the eighth-grade dance; eventually, despite her own unwitting self-
sabotage, she finds someone else to go with. This is a lively and easy story of a big
Catholic family (somewhat smaller and less frantic than Colleen McKenna's
Murphys), and the plot contrivances don't impede the pleasure of the read. The
characterization isn't deep, but the parts are played well enough, with a friendly
nun, a sympathetic piano teacher, and a loyal best friend all appearing as needed.
This is an engaging look at family and interpersonal dynamics, and if it creates an
empathy trend among its readers, so much the better. Realistic pencil illustra-
tions, literal rather than interesting, appear throughout the text. DS
FABER, DORIS 
Calamity Jane: 
Her Life and Legend. Houghton,
1992 
62p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-395-56396-8 
$14.95 
R* Gr. 4-8
Calamity Jane was a real person . . . sort of, and Faber's mingling of biography,
history, and folklore to tell her story is itself an intriguing commentary on how
72 
* 
THE BULLETIN
legends are made. As the author asks in her first chapter, "was she a real person or
just a made-up character in adventure stories? The answer to this question is a
little complicated." Calamity Jane, born Martha Jane Cannary in Missouri in
1852, was a rough-and-ready tomboy who left home to travel around the West as
a bullwhacker, amateur nurse, camp follower, and hard drinker. The other sto-
ries-scouting for General Custer, marrying Wild Bill Hickock, single-handedly
saving this wagon train or that-may or may not be true, and many, according to
Faber, were invented by dime novelist Ned Wheeler and by the heroine herself.
With little reliable fact to go on, Faber's portrait of Cannary remains elusive, but
the legend of Calamity Jane comes through strong and clear, just the way she
would have liked it. The book is spaciously and cleanly designed, with reproduc-
tions of old photos and dime novel covers ("DEADWOOD DICK ON DECK;
Or, CALAMITY JANE, The Heroine of Whoop-Up") that further the evidence
of both life and myth. A bibliography of sources, a reading list for young people,
and an index are all appended. RS
GELLER, MARK 
Who's On First? Zolotow/HarperCollins, 1992 
[6 4 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021085-0 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021084-2 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-9
Now you see it, now you don't. Geller's novels are so compressed that they can
come and go before you know it, witness the cogent brevity of What I Heard
(BCCB 6/87). If you keep your eyes open, you'll get a keen glimpse of human
nature, especially adolescent humans. In sixty pages of conversational first-person
narrative liberally spiked with dialogue, Alex tells how concerned he's been about
his shy older sister's lack of romance, which Alex tries to fix with nearly disastrous
results. The date he finds for her turns out to be somebody Alex doesn't like, while
a comedy of errors nearly leads to his jeopardizing her relationship with someone
he does like, his baseball coach. All's well that ends well, however, and Alex comes
out of it all with his sense of values reaffirmed. This is a likable teenager whose
interactions with his friends and family are natural and will sit easily with both
average and reluctant readers, who will enjoy knowing what Alex doesn't and
watching the confusion unfold. His exchange with a whizz-kid cousin at a wedding
he doesn't want to attend is an especially humorous scene that will make a good
excerpt for booktalks. BH
GODDEN, RUMER 
Listen to the Nightingale. Viking, 1992 
[215p]
ISBN 0-670-84517-5 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Excepting a few passing references to skinheads, blue jeans, and the Queen, this
extravagant ballet story could have taken place in the 1930s. Orphaned Lottie,
whose prima donna mother died tragically while giving birth to her, is eager to
follow in her mother's footsteps, and the chance for a scholarship at the Queen's
Chase ballet school seems like a dream come true. But then Prince, a little spaniel
puppy, enters Lottie's life (actually, she steals him from a pet store) and her affec-
tions become divided: Prince or ballet? Like dePaola'sJingle, the Christmas Clown,
reviewed last month, this is a holiday confection that Has It All, all in this case
being orphans and half orphans, kindly aunts and headmistresses, a spoiled little
rich girl, a heartwarming makeshift Christmas, and, of course, Prince the puppy,
NOVEMBER 1992 
* 
73
who manages an eleventh-hour rescue of Lottie's school's annual production. Al-
though this saga does not tug at the heartstrings as adroitly as do some of Godden's
other books, it is filled with appealing characters and situations, and the plot is just
complicated enough to leaven the predictability of its rewards. RS
GRIMM, JAKOB LUDWIG KARL 
The Bremen Town Musicians; ad. and illus. by Janet
Stevens. 
Holiday House, 1992 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-0939-2 
$15.95 
R* 
4-7 yrs
With a spiny-lined bravura akin to Glen Rounds' recent picture-book art, plus
some inspired watercolor and pastel work on rice paper, Stevens has rejuvenated
the Bremen Town musicians with an energy that will inspire both parents and
professionals to include this Grimm standby in yet another story session. The
retelling is as spiked with humor as the line work ("'I'm so hungry I could eat a
horse,' moaned the dog"), and the postures of the "scraggly and bedraggly" ani-
mals are as comical as their expressions. That Stevens can pull off chaos without
clutter is a real tribute to her powers of composition and design. She does it partly
by a contrast of dark and light hues, a trick that especially fits the nighttime action
here; partly by overlapping shapes; and partly by textural variety. The detail is
minimal but droll. Best of all, Stevens can draw. This story of the four superannu-
ated animals that fool a band of robbers into abandoning a hideaway will inspire
children to laughter and adults to empathy. There's hope for us old folks yet. BH
HILL, SUSAN 
The Glass Angels; illus. by Valerie Littlewood. 
Candlewick,
1992 
93p
ISBN 1-56402-111-4 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Tilly lives with her widowed mother, a seamstress, in the austerity of Britain just
after World War II, in which Tilly's father was killed. Despite Tilly's mother's
hard work, Tilly's eagerly anticipated Christmas is likely to be a pinched and dis-
appointing time, but when real disaster strikes-Tilly's mother falls ill and the
expensive wedding gown she's sewing is ruined by rain-plucky Tilly finds that
human kindness alone can brighten up a holiday. The smooth and evocative de-
tail of the writing keeps the story's sweetness from cloying, especially as Tilly, a
basically content child, seems to be the recipient of fairy-tale bounty rather than
the object of moralizing. Tilly's friendship with the old lady downstairs, who
brings the beauty of a softer era (including the glass angels of the title) into the
little girl's life, is delicately depicted without being overplayed. The small ink
drawings are more effective and appealing than the color paintings, but both show
Tilly faithfully trudging through the gloom in hope of her deserved reward. The
charm of this story would be well-shared by adults and children in a chapter-by-
chapter Christmas readaloud, and individual readers who loved Kate Douglas
Wiggin's The Birds' Christmas Carol(as well as those readers whose tastes are rather
less mawkish) will enjoy this atmospheric tale of holiday hope. DS
HINTON, LEANNE, ad. 
Ishis Tale of Lizard; illus. by Susan L. Roth. 
Farrar,
1992 
32p
ISBN 0-374-33643-1 
$14.00 
R* 
Gr. 2-4
With background notes that would warm the cockles of an anthropologist's heart,
Hinton has adapted some of the episodes told by Ishi, last of the California Yahi
tribe, during the second decade of the twentieth century. From both an artistic
74 
* THE BULLETIN
and folkloristic point of view, Ishi's story of Lizard is an intriguing one, and young
listeners or independent readers who have studied Native American societies will
find that the repetition makes for rhythmic reading aloud: "Lizard. He made
arrows. He worked at his arrowmaking." Thus begins a description, punctuated
by the refrain, "That's what he did," of Lizard's sending a long-tailed relative out
to get foreshaft wood, killing a grizzly that eats the relative (swallowed alive and
rescued, like Little Red Riding Hood), dancing with women and children, gather-
ing pine nuts, and escaping his enemies. The chant-like narrative is illustrated
with highly textured rice paper collages that stylize the figures and landscape. As a
picture book, this makes landmark efforts not to abandon its cultural context for
easy listening by contemporary preschool children. At the same time, a young
audience given to understand differences in culture will accept the fragmented
quality of the text with ease in response to the sturdy cadence and striking art. BH
HOL, COBY 
Tippy Bear's Christmas; written and illus. by Coby Hol. 
North-
South, 1992 
2 6 p
Library ed. ISBN 1-55858-157-X 
$11.88
Trade ed. ISBN 1-55858-156-1 
$11.95 
R 3-6 yrs
Crisp, simple fabric and brown-paper collages illustrate an equally simple story of
a little bear-boy getting ready for Christmas. While his parents are out shopping,
Tippy bakes honey cakes, chops down and decorates a Christmas tree, and invites
a bird and hedgehog in for a holiday snack. Older kids might find this overly
sedate, but the younger ones will appreciate Tippy's accomplishments, his friends,
and his Christmas enthusiasm: "It's the most beautiful holiday in the whole year!"
A low-key, low-tech complement to the many lavish Christmas extravaganzas pub-
lished for children (see Marzollo's and Wick's I Spy Christmas, reviewed below),
this could provide some story hour soothing for holiday anxieties, your own in-
cluded. RS.
HOPPE, JOANNE 
Dream Spinner. Morrow, 1992 
[2 4 0p]
ISBN 0-688-08559-8 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
"There's something called dream spinning," says Mary Barrone in a report for her
sophomore English class, "where you can pick any person, any time period, or any
place you want to visit." Mary, unhappy with her new stepmother and stepbrother
and the move to an old Victorian house, finds herself increasingly drawn to the
world she encounters in her dream experiments. In these visits she is Christabel,
the niece of an early owner of the house, but the dreams are overlaid with a portent
of doom that centers on a nearby railway station. Mary researches what she can
about these people and their times, letting schoolwork, family, and an incipient
boyfriend fall by the wayside, until tragedy strikes her friends from the past
(Christabel/Mary's uncle by marriage falls in love with her, which estranges him
from his wife; he dies soon after in a railway accident). While visitation to the past
is always an interesting idea, it's never clear precisely why it happens to Mary or
what it thematically means to the story, and the scenes in the past tend to be
overinformative and under-engaging. Hoppe does a better job of depicting Mary's
absorption in the past, as well as the new family's subtle and not so subtle adjust-
ments to one another; lovers of old houses and gently historical time travel stories
will find this a fairly satisfying read. DS
NOVEMBER 1992 
* 
75
HOTZE, SOLLACE 
Acquainted with the Night. Clarion, 1992 
230p
ISBN 0-395-61576-3 
$13.95 
R 
Gr. 7-12
It's 1970, and Molly, waiting for her cousin Caleb to join her family at their sum-
mer island home, wonders, "What does a girl just turned seventeen, for whom life
has been easy, say to a man of twenty-one who has returned from a war in which
he almost lost his life?" Molly and war-haunted Caleb, double cousins (both sets
of parents are siblings), are drawn together by their shared artistic tendencies and
by their encounter with a ghostly old lady-or is it a young girl? The grieving
spirit appears to be that of Evaline Bloodsworth, a former Massachusetts mill girl
who died an island pariah early in this century (she tragically and unwittingly
married her illegitimate son); Evaline appears to Molly to warn her about the grow-
ing romantic attraction between the cousins, who eventually and regretfully part.
The moody atmosphere, full of low-lying mist and brooding on the past, makes
for a particularly romantic read, and Hotze is adept at depicting childhood inti-
macy becoming adult longing for forbidden fruit: "Maybe," says Molly, ostensi-
bly about Evaline, "their blood ties were so close they had a special feeling for each
other without knowing why. Maybe that's what made the relationship so special
and why they fell in love." Evaline (whose story is based on a real New England
woman) is a poignant ghost, but she haunts Molly and Caleb less than their own
internal demons, which can be very scary indeed. Hotze, author of A Circle Un-
broken (BCCB 10/88), here spins a different kind of tale, but this sad and touch-
ing love story, full of longing for the dead and the living, will strike enjoyably
bittersweet chords with new readers as well as old fans. DS
JAFFE, NINA 
In the Month of Kislev: A Story for Hanukkah; illus. by Louise
August. 
Viking, 1992 
[32p]
ISBN 0-670-82863-7 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-7 yrs
A classic folktale of Hassidic wisdom, this pits the stingy rich man, Feivel, against
the poor peddler, Mendel, whose hungry children content themselves with the
aroma of latkes under Feivel's window until he accuses them of theft: "... these
children have been smelling my latkes for the entire holiday! It's as if they took the
food right out from under our noses ... at least they should pay for it." Rabbi
Yonah then collects Hanukkah gelt from a crowd of listeners, shakes the bag of
coins, and reimburses Feivel for the smell of his latkes-with the sound of money.
Full-color woodcuts vivify the shtetl setting in neat, warm-toned compositions;
the figures are doll-like but dignified and well drawn. Feivel's transformation
(henceforth, his family and Mendel's feast together every year) provides an apt
parallel with Scrooge's, for teachers and librarians looking to pair Christian and
Jewish holiday traditions. BH
JONAS, ANN 
The 13th Clue; written and illus. by Ann Jonas. 
Greenwillow,
1992 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-09743-X 
$13.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-09742-1 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
A sort of Westing Game of picture books, this begins with a diary entry: "Dear
diary, what a terrible day. No one said anything at breakfast and now no one is
even home. At least they sang to me at school. That's funny. The light just went
76 
* THE BULLETIN
on!" From there, a trail of clues leads the narrator-and the listener/reader--on a
chase from attic to backyard, where cleverly contrived letters (NO WINTO WOODS
shaped from laundry hanging on a clothesline, for instance) help her find the friends
waiting with a surprise birthday party. It's a game children will enjoy playing
more than once, especially since even the youngest can "read" the book indepen-
dently once their adults point out the few words scattered across the landscape. In
fact, beginning readers would enjoy the walk from word to word, as well, and the
view along the way is worth a pause. Soft greens and browns shade the ingenious
perspectives on rounded rocks, trees, and flowers. A mystery and a birthday com-
bined are hard to find at the picture book level, where Jonas' playful devices will
ensure audience involvement. BH
JOSEPH, LYNN 
An Island Christmas; illus. by Catherine Stock. 
Clarion,
1992 
32p
ISBN 0-395-58761-1 
$14.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Stock's fluent watercolors stream radiant island sunlight onto Joseph's lilting evo-
cation of Christmas traditions in Trinidad and Tobago. Rosie picks the sorrel for
the special Christmas drink ("Sorrel, sorrel, red and sweet./ Sorrel, sorrel, melt de
heat"); she and her brother help Mama with the alloe pies ("Alloe pies, alloe pies,
spicy and strong./ Eat with de sorrel so I don't burn my tongue"). The two chil-
dren put up the Christmas tree, a branch from a guava tree, and sit in their tree
house to make presents for the family. Although this is more holiday catalog than
story, the details of island Christmas caroling by a parang band, the exotic and
delicious-sounding foods, and the more familiar comforts of family and presents
will keep kids interested. Joseph's patois lilts but does not overwhelm ("De next
thing we know, Christmas Eve gliding in like a limbo dancer under de stick");
Stock's paintings show a cozy contemporary family celebrating Christmas in Eas-
ter colors. RS
KING-SMITH, DICK 
Sophie's Tom; illus. by David Parkins. 
Candlewick,
1992 
112p
ISBN 1-56402-107-6 
$13.95 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Sophie, the resolute young heroine of Sophie's Snail (BCCB 1/90), is back and as
animal-mad as ever: here she finds a stray cat and tries to talk her parents into
letting her keep it. Set against the backdrop of this story are Sophie's first experi-
ences with school (more of a shock to the educational system than to Sophie, it
seems) and a bout with chicken pox. Sophie's uncompromising nature makes her
such an admirable heroine that kids older than her six years will still find her
adventures enjoyable, particularly as she battles with her loathsome schoolmate
Dawn ("Sophie had taken Dawn's toy pony, a pink pony with a long silvery mane
and tail, called Twinkletoes, and jumped up and down on it until it was a dirty
squashed lump whose toes would never twinkle again"). She does find pleasure in
her placid classmate Duncan, who serves as a surrogate pet until his defection leads
to his being depicted in Sophie's farm picture as buried to the ankles in the manure
pile-headfirst. It's entertaining to watch Sophie trick her parents into letting her
keep Tom, although the end-Tom, no tom, has kittens-wins no points for
originality. The illustrations are black-and-white line drawings made of simple
hatch and crosshatch, appropriately understated. A good readaloud for Sophie's
contemporaries, this is a funny chronicle of a rugged and interesting little girl. DS
NOVEMBER 1992 
* 
77
KOERTGE, RON 
The Harmony Arms. 
Joy Street/Little, 1992 
177p
ISBN 0-316-50104-2 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 7-10
When his mother decides to go away for a while with her boyfriend, fourteen-year-
old Gabe is bundled off with his father for a month in L.A. Also along on this
sojourn-the reason, in fact, for the trip-is Timmy the Otter, a hand puppet
(and bane of Gabe's emerging maturity) whom Gabe's father has parlayed into a
popular children's book and who now has a chance to star in a movie. Koertge's
fifth novel is facile fun, relatively plotless but entirely amiable, as Gabe and his
father meet the wacky but warmhearted inhabitants of the Harmony Arms, a run-
down motel in Burbank where they're staying: Cassandra the psychic; Mr. Palmer
the nudist; and (of most interest to Gabe) Tess, an intense girl, daughter of the
motel manager, thoroughly involved with making a movie of her life, Mondo Tess.
"I started like sixteen months ago when Mom got me the camcorder, and I film
every important thing that happens to me." There's a sweet romance between
Gabe and Tess, a new understanding between Gabe and his father, even a rap-
prochement between Gabe and Timmy. Although these relationships are ren-
dered somewhat superficially, the light touch and nimble wit ensure that readers
will have a good time seeing everything happily worked through. RS
KORMAN, GORDON 
The Twinkie Squad. Scholastic, 1992 
[160p]
ISBN 0-590-45249-5 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Douglas is an irritating misfit, Commando (Armando) is unfairly charged with
assault, Rick is hyperactive, and Anita doesn't have an opinion of her own; they,
plus a few other middle school students, make up the Twinkie Squad, officially
known as the Special Discussion Group, which meets after school with counselors
in order to help difficult students "adjust." This is mainly the story of Doug,
obsessed with Pefkakia, the country of his birth (his father's a U.S. ambassador
and the family happened to be there when Doug's mother went into labor), and of
how his stubborn schemes change the Twinkie Squad into the exclusive and mys-
terious Grand Knights of the Exalted Karpoozi. Along the way there are school
pranks, snobby cheerleaders, harried principals and all the usual slapstick school-
story suspects. It's TV sit-com depth, including some visual gags that don't play
so well on paper, but there's also genuine humor: as he sets a trap, Douglas muses
"I think this is a lot like the excitement and playful exhilaration Pefkakians feel
while frolicking amidst the bulrushes." Readers (who in real life would refuse to
associate with the Twinkie Squad) will enjoy the idea of despised kids taking their
destiny into their own hands and outsmarting adults and popular kids in this cheer-
fully puerile story. DS
LARRICK, NANCY, comp. ed. 
The Night of the Whippoorwill; illus. by David
Ray. 
Philomel, 1992 
71p
ISBN 0-399-21874-2 
$19.95 
R 
Gr. 3-6
With the ear for mellifluous poetry that distinguished her earlier anthology When
the Dark Comes Dancing (BCCB 12/83), Larrick has gathered thirty-four poems
to celebrate the night. Elizabeth Madox Roberts' cleverly cadenced poem about
six darkening houses on a hill opens the anthology, vihich includes Federico Garcia
Lorca, Ted Hughes, Carl Sandburg, Patricia Hubbell, Claudia Lewis, and others,
with a sprinkling of Native American and traditional verses. Walter de la Mare's
78 
* THE BULLETIN
"Silver" exemplifies the Yeats-like musicality of many selections here: "And move-
less fish in the water gleam,/ By silver reeds in a silver stream." Ray's illustrations
have a gleam of their own, relying on teal blues tinged with white or gold for
surreal, starlit effects; the shapes are softly rounded to envelop the print. These are
more mature than lullabies but comforting nonetheless, despite the suspense of
nighttime acknowledged by poets such as Randall Jarrell ("The owl goes back and
forth inside the night,/ And the night holds its breath"). Langston Hughes' invi-
tation in "Harlem Night Song" dominates the book: "Come,/ Let us roam the
night together/ Singing." BH
LAWLOR, LAURIE 
Addie's Long Summer; illus. by Toby Gowing. 
Whitman,
1992 
173p
ISBN 0-8075-0167-0 
$11.95 
R Gr. 3-5
The third in a series (see Addie's Dakota Winter, BCCB 12/89, and AddieAcross the
Prairie) depicts twelve-year-old Addie and her pioneer family sharing their Dakota
sod home with two visiting cousins. Although she is charming at first, cousin
Elizabeth soon proves to be cruel and thoughtless; shy, overweight cousin Maudie
is an unexpected pleasure. Meanwhile, Addie frets about attending high school in
the fall and about her best friend's problems, while her parents worry about an
escaped prisoner and the drought. Although the writing sometimes seems stiff, in
general it fits the style of the old-fashioned family story. Lawlor handles her mul-
tifaceted plot skillfully, tying all the loose ends together in an exciting climactic
chapter. Addie fans will enjoy this latest saga. KJ
LINDBERGH, ANNE 
Travel Far, Pay No Fare. HarperCollins, 1992 
[192p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021776-6 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021775-8 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Owen Noonan is unhappy: he's a city boy stuck in Vermont, his mother is remar-
rying, and her marriage to her late sister's husband will make Owen's weird nine-
year-old cousin, Parsley, his stepsister. Parsley livens up Owen's summer, how-
ever, when she shares a secret with him: she has a magic bookmark that allows
her-and now Owen as well-to travel into books. Traveling into works such as
Alice's Adventures in Wonderland The Yearling, and Little Women, the kids try to
save doomed animals (Parsley, in fact, has been bringing back cats in order to drive
away Owen's allergic mother). They find that when they enter a book, or even
bring back an animal such as The Yearling's Flag, the written outcome of the book
never changes: "No matter how much you and I change a story," says Parsley in a
fit of literary philosophy, "the book will stay the same." The bookmark eventually
runs its course, just after Owen manages to snatch Parsley back from a volcano,
leaving the kids with a deer, a canary, and an acceptance of their parents' marriage.
The characterization here is well done, with unpleasant and imaginative little Pars-
ley particularly vivid, but the main story is the magic, which Lindbergh pulls off
quite effectively. The Edward Eager-ish plot is well-turned, with the occasional
logical lapses presumed to be part of the mystery, and the books-within-the-book
are surprisingly successful. The bookish will enjoy the excursions, and kids hunt-
ing hopefully for their own magical adventures will find this a satisfying substitute.
DS
NOVEMBER 1992 
* 
79
LYONS, MARY E. 
Lettersfrom a Slave Girl: The Story ofHarrietJacobs. Scribner's,
1992 
[19 2 p]
ISBN 0-684-19446-5 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Nearly twelve years old at the beginning of this epistolary novel based on a histori-
cal figure, Harriet Jacobs writes her first letter on the empty pages of an old ac-
count book that she gets from her dying mistress, who has taught her how to read.
What Harriet had hoped for but does not get is freedom from slavery. Deeded to
her old mistress' three-year-old niece, Harriet is soon subject to sexual harassment
by the child's father. To save herself from his cruel attentions, she becomes preg-
nant by another white man, who protects neither of the two children she bears
him. Many of the letters are written during her seven years' of hiding in a tiny attic
to which she escapes, and she writes-as a kind of diary-to the dead (mother,
father, and other family members) as well as the living. Fleeing north, Harriet is
finally freed after years of evading her former owners, as readers learn from an
author's note following the subject's first "real" letter to her grandmother from
Philadelphia. Lyons has supported both the main incidents and minor details here
with a great deal of research, and a family tree will help readers figure out the
complex relationships that evolved when slave women were forced to bear their
owners' children into slavery. The characters here are essentially objects of the
action, but that action is dramatic enough, in spite of the distancing framework, to
involve an adolescent audience. Teachers who pair this with the diary of Anne
Frank because of the similarity of situation should emphasize that this is a fiction-
alized account based on the historical Harriet Jacobs' own readily available auto-
biographical writings. BH
MACDONALD, CAROLINE 
Speaking to Miranda. Perlman/HarperCollins,
1992 
[25 6 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021103-2 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021102-4 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Miranda was Ruby's childhood imaginary friend, and, at times, subtle foe. Ruby
never knew her father, and her mother Emma died when Ruby was five, leaving
Ruby with Emma's capable boyfriend Rob, who brought Ruby up as his daughter.
Now that Ruby is eighteen, Miranda, missing for many years, seems to be whisper-
ing encouragement to Ruby that she find and uncover the secrets of her mother's
mysterious life and sudden death. According to Rob, Emma just showed up one
day in Sydney with her baby, refusing to discuss who she was or where she was
from. Ruby's quest for her mother is both narratively and emotionally suspense-
ful, although there are a few spots where overly fortuitous circumstances propel
the plot. The ending, which reveals secrets about Emma, Ruby, and Miranda, is
properly planned, convincing and shocking. Some search-for-the-real-parent sto-
ries are dogged but dull; this one, like Ehrlich's Where It Stops, Nobody Knows or
Mazer's Taking Terri Mueller, probes the gothic possibilities of the genre, using
them to excite but not exploit. RS
80 
* 
THE BULLETIN
McKAY, HILARY 
The Exiles. 
McElderry, 1992 
217p
ISBN 0-689-50555-8 
$14.95 
R* 
Gr. 5-9
The exiles are the four obstreperous Conroy sisters, Ruth, Naomi, Rachel and
Phoebe, ranging in age from thirteen to six; they've been bundled off to their
grandmother's house in the English Lake Country for the entire summer. Big
Grandma thinks the girls' voracious reading has warped their minds, so they spend
the summer almost book-free. Instead they discover the outdoors, if rather reluc-
tantly, and find a friend in a neighbor boy (originally hired for the job, but eventu-
ally willing to host them for free) with whom they do some local exploring until
Naomi breaks her arm. It's a story about a stretch of time rather than any particu-
lar event-the biggest plot point is the discovery of Big Grandma's book stash,
which (naturally) leads to the Conroys' accidental burning down of the garage in
which it's hidden-but it's the characters and dialogue that make this book. The
Conroys are guilelessly demonic, like enchanting March sisters from hell, and McKay
gives everything a quirky twist: Phoebe's hobby, for instance, is fishing with a
string and a stick in a bucket that contains only water ("The total hopelessness of
the activity was very soothing. . . . Without the emotional stresses of success and
failure, she was entirely free to enjoy the pleasures of the moment"), and the girls
repeatedly check that Big Grandma's three cans of dog food (she owns no dog)
remain intact, thereby proving that she hasn't palmed any off on them as last
night's dinner. 
Although the girls are most memorable as a mob, they do have
their individuality, and Big Grandma is aforce majeure throughout; she never soft-
ens, but we and the girls become accustomed to her. This is reminiscent of Anne
Fine's work, and Fine fans as well as lovers of a good Swallows andAmazons sum-
mer story should enjoy McKay's extremely and continuously funny book. DS
MAHY, MARGARET 
Bubble Trouble and Other Poems and Stories; written and illus.
by Margaret Mahy. 
McElderry, 1992 
[80p]
ISBN 0-689-50557-4 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-5
Like Mahy's Nonstop Nonsense (BCCB 6/89), this is a lighthearted collection of
silly stories and bouncy narrative poems in the Learian spirit. The rhyme comes
close to tongue-twisting proportions: "In a garden folly, Tybal, and his jolly mother,
Sybil,/ Sat and played a game of Scrabble, shouting shrilly as they scored./ But
they both began to babble and to scrobble with the Scrabble/ As the baby in the
bubble bibble-bobbled by the board." "The Gargling Gorilla"--one of the two
prose stories-in fact depends on word play for its plot. None of these have the
punch of Mahy's more sustained humor in The Blood-and-Thunder Adventures on
Hurricane Peak (BCCB 10/89), but they're good for quick entertainment at bed-
time or for mood brightening in a classroom. Similarly, Mahy is no Quentin
Blake (who illustrated Nonstop Nonsense), but her pen-and-ink drawings have a
dashing abandon that compensates for the occasional awkward line. Between the
narrative absurdity and the exaggerated sound effects, this will provide the fun that
seven-, eight-, and nine-year-olds crave in their reading. BH
MARGOLIES, BARBARA A. 
Kanu of Kathmandu: A Journey in Nepal; written and
illus. with photographs by Barbara A. Margolies. 
Four Winds, 1992 
37p
ISBN 0-02-762282-7 
$14.95 
Ad Gr. 2-4
Kanu, an eight-year-old boy who lives in Nepal's capital city, is the ostensible
NOVEMBER 1992 
* 81
guide of this travelogue, taking readers on a tour of Kathmandu and some of its
surrounding villages. Although Margolies' photos provide lots of local color, the
total effect is a bit like looking at someone's vacation slides in no particular order.
Kanu goes to a village market, walks down a few streets, points to the mountains,
visits some temples, and chats about various passersby: "'Oh, there is a sadhu, a
holy man, with a snake!' says Kanu. 'Let's get away.... I am afraid of snakes!"'
Each double-page spread includes several uncaptioned photos, and it's not always
possible to link photos and text. One spread, for example, has Kanu describing
two statues, but photos don't make clear which is which. This is a superficial look
at a complex country, but it's useful as a browsable social studies supplement. RS
MARZOLLO, JEAN 
I Spy Christmas: A Book of Picture Riddles; illus. with photo-
graphs by Walter Wick. 
Scholastic, 1992 
[33p]
ISBN 0-590-45846-9 
$12.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-7 yrs
This holiday companion to ISpy (BCCB 2/92) combines the optical minesweeping
of Handford's Waldo books with the cozy grandeur of Martha Stewart. Wick's
large double-spread photographs are absolutely filled with Christmas parapherna-
lia: ornaments, stuffed animals, dolls, candy, holly and pinecones-and nary a
battery-driven object to be seen. While the air is one of lavishly conspicuous con-
sumption, there's a mouthwatering appeal to the excess, and all the photos are
cleverly designed: crammed but never crowded. Each spread is captioned with a
riddling verse that invites viewers to find objects hidden in the photo ("I spy a
rooster, a Santa with a cane,/The shadow of a star, a car for a train"), and there is
a good mix of the easy-to-find and the hard-to-spot. With its nostalgic, Christmasy
appeal, the book will provide seasonal diversion for the lap-sat as well as the -
sitting, who can have a great time playing point-and-look together. RS
MASTERS, ANTHONY 
A Watching Silence. 
Simon, 1992 
153p
ISBN 0-671-79173-7 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Martin's family has left Indiana for a year to live in the Shetland Islands, where he
finds himself drawn to an abandoned island village at the edge of the sea. That
village leads him into mystery: first he finds an ornately beautiful silver knife, and
then someone costumed as a cat steals it from him. A local authority, Magnus
Dunglas, thinks the knife might have come from the Fairy Hoard, an ancient and
valuable collection of silver and gold objects that disappeared from the local mu-
seum a decade ago. When a Nigerian ship runs aground on island rocks, Martin
suspects a connection with the missing Hoard and investigates, finding implica-
tions that both the ship and the curator of the local museum are involved in the
mystery. Martin runs into trouble when a friendly boy from the ship turns out to
be a dupe of the criminals and leads Martin into capture (from which he escapes to
save the day). The story, first published in Britain, is at its best at the start when
Masters successfully evokes the spookiness of the old village, but it deteriorates
into B-grade adventure with too many plot twists and turns (first the curator is the
villain, then Magnus, then both of them) and action for action's sake only (it's not
really clear why the various bad guys feel so threatened by young Martin, or why
he's taken to either of the small islands on which he's imperiled). It's still a pleas-
ant, slightly exotic read for adventure fans, who will enjoy the story of a plucky boy
triumphing against the bad guys. DS
82 
* THE BULLETIN
MEDDAUGH, 
SUSAN 
Martha Speaks; written and illus. by Susan
Meddaugh. 
Houghton, 1992 
32p
ISBN 0-395-63313-3 
$13.95 
R* 
5-8 yrs
When Helen attempts to get rid of her alphabet soup by feeding it to the family
dog, something strange happens: "The letters in the soup went up to Martha's
brain instead of down to her stomach." (This contention is proved by a handy Dr.
Science diagram of the process.) This gives the pooch the power to speak, and
speak she does, at first to the family's delight (Martha answers many important
canine sociological questions and freaks out pizza delivery people by answering the
door). Prodigies can be problems, however: Martha teachers herself to use the
phone and orders the delivery of cases of barbecued beef; having the social judg-
ment of a small child, she tattles and makes embarrassing remarks ("Why is that
man so fat?"); and she never, ever shuts up. Dismayed by her family's eventual
outburst, the mutt mopes silently until her vocal powers are needed to save the day
when the house gets burgled ("We got a call at the station," say the police. "Some
lady named Martha"). The illustrations are innocent and unsuspecting line-and-
wash, with Martha's speech balloons floating happily and sometimes bursting into
pages of Martha-monologues; other pleasurable illustrative touches are Martha,
enthroned in an easy chair, explaining dogdom to her floor-seated family, and the
burglar, who, judging by his pointy-eared mask, must be a cat burglar. This is a
very funny book both for readers-aloud, who may be familiar with creatures who
have learned to speak but not to be quiet, and for the read-to, who will doubtless
be found hopefully proffering Campbell's alphabet special to their own pets. DS
MERRILL, JEAN 
The Girl Who Loved Caterpillars: A Twelfth-Century Tale from
Japan; illus. by Floyd Cooper. 
Philomel, 1992 
32p
ISBN 0-399-21871-8 
$14.95 
R 5-8 yrs
Adapted from an anonymously written twelfth-century Japanese tale, this story of
an independent girl has a surprisingly contemporary tone, perhaps because it's
part of an unfinished manuscript. Izumi refuses to follow the fashions her socially
ambitious parents hope will attract a wealthy husband. Instead, she remains ab-
sorbed in her study of caterpillars, worms, toads, and insects, often brought to her
by poor boys whom she rewards with expensive possessions which she cares noth-
ing about. Finally her reputation attracts a witty nobleman who admires her for
her unique nature. They exchange amusing, mutually admiring notes, but this is
not a romance; the nobleman leaves her garden forever, as she calls for her scruffy
friends to bring fresh leaves for her caterpillars. Merrill's adaptation is cleanly yet
elegantly styled, as are Cooper's pastel double spreads, which elaborate on the
many vivid images in the story, including Izumi's furry eyebrows-she will not
pluck them into a fine line as the court ladies do. While the art is soft-edged, it's
not sentimental but is instead sustained by sturdy drafting and muted colors. The
suspended ending, which may leave some younger listeners puzzled, will provide
primary graders with an intriguing take-off for discussion. BH
MEYER, CAROLYN Where the Broken Heart Still Beats: The Story of Cynthia Ann
Parker. Gulliver/Harcourt, 1992 196p (Great Episodes)
Trade ed. ISBN 0-15-200639-7 $16.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-15-295602-6 $6.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-9
NOVEMBER 1992 
* 83
A historical novel alternates chapters of excerpts from a fictitious journal by 13-
year-old Lucy Parker with a third-person account of Cynthia Ann Parker, her 34-
year-old cousin captured as a child during an Indian raid and recaptured by whites
after marriage and motherhood among the Comanches. Named Nadua by the
Comanches, who call themselves The People (Nermernuh), Cynthia Ann hates the
settlers' ways, longs to return to her husband and sons, and tries to run away
whenever she can with her baby daughter, Topsannah (Prairie Flower). Lucy,
whose grandfather has appointed her to help Cynthia Ann learn English, is the
only white who sympathizes with Cynthia Ann's grief and culture shock-it is
little more than three and a half years before both Topsannah and her mother die,
one of fever, the other of a broken heart. The dual viewpoint here successfully
allows a glimpse into whites' and Indians' polar divergence of thinking, though the
narrative is sometimes freighted with information that slows down the story, as in
the explanation of vision quests that interrupts a dramatic episode when Cynthia
Ann flees for time alone in the woods. A few descriptions seem overgeneralized,
especially one set against the constant Biblical instruction to which Cynthia Ann is
exposed in an attempt to convert her: "Her people didn't think about right and
wrong. They simply lived their lives, hunting buffalo and making war on their
enemies." However, the journal entries develop a believable character, and Meyer
is careful neither to judge nor to glorify the Indian traditions of beating enslaved
captives, killing and scalping enemies, or stealing livestock. Neither does she white-
wash the whites' hatred and misunderstanding of Indians. The irreversible clash
of life styles that exists here in one person forecasts doom for an entire people. A
thoughtful and thought provoking book, this embroiders liberally but convinc-
ingly on the few facts known about the subject, a famous captive who was mother
of the Comanche leader Quanah Parker. A map, photograph, and bibliography
extend the story, and an author's note distinguishes fact from fiction. BH
MICHENER, JAMES, ad. 
South Pacific: based on Rodgers and Hammerstein's South
Pacific; illus. by Michael Hague. 
Gulliver/Harcourt, 1992 
32p
ISBN 0-15-200618-4 
$16.95 
M 
Gr. 2-4
"During one dance she happened to look across the crowded room and see a man
staring at her." Nope, it's just not the same. James Michener's retelling of the
musical South Pacific (in turn based on Michener's Tales from the South Pacific) is
decidedly prosy, reading a bit like a Cliff Notes rendition of a much-loved classic.
All the events are outlined, but all the romance is lost, and Oscar Hammerstein's
lyrics-not to mention Rodgers' melodies-are conspicuous by their absence: "It's
called Bali Ha'i, and it's a very exciting and mysterious place" is no substitute for
that haunting song. Michael Hague's watercolors are gorgeously colored, all sun-
set golds and reds, green palms and aqua waters, but the figure drawing is awk-
ward, with the characters' faces often looking peculiarly contorted. In any event,
this really isn't a book for children; it's a nostalgia piece for grownups who haven't
the imagination to listen to the record. RS
MIKOLAYCAK, 
CHARLES, 
ad. 
Orpheus; ad. 
and illus. by Charles
Mikolaycak. 
Harcourt, 1992 
32p
ISBN 0-15-258804-3 
$19.95 
M 
Gr. 7 up
Mikolaycak's retelling of the myth of Orpheus and Eurydice is elegant and re-
strained, lyrical in its evocation of Orpheus' songs. His paintings are equally el-
84 
* THE BULLETIN
egant in their sinuous technical effects-and that's the problem. This is an all-
nude Orpheus, and while the bodies are entirely handsome, they are sleek and
glamorized. The persistent absence of genitalia, suggestively lost in shadow or
veiled with a long white scarf/fig leaf that winds through the pages, gives the book
a strip-tease aura that detracts from the real mystery of both myth and pictures.
Too, content is sometimes lost in style, as in the picture where Orpheus, stoned by
an angry crowd, lies prone, his handsome buttocks and muscular thighs parted
while refined rivulets of blood stream down his shoulders. (The next picture of
Orpheus drowning shows yet more rivulets, here running from his nose and mouth.)
To be sure, this is one gorgeous book, each oversized page decoratively framed
with matte-charcoal borders, but the tone is more facile than classical. The ques-
tion of audience naturally arises with a sexy picture book intended, according to
the publisher, for ages twelve and up. It's neither the sex nor the format that are
problematic so much as the fact that style and story have not found each other. RS
NORMAN, ROGER 
Albion's Dream: A Novel of Terror. Delacorte, 1992 
209p
ISBN 0-385-30533-8 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 7-12
And you thought Jumanji was trouble. Twelve-year-old Edward Yeoman, on holi-
day at his uncle's West Country farm, finds an old homemade board game called
"Albion's Dream" hidden away. Struck by the warnings attached to the game and
the resemblance of one of the face cards to his school headmaster, he takes it back
to school and begins to play it with his cousin. They find more parallels between
the face cards in the pack and real people, including themselves, as well as similari-
ties between the geography on the board and real country; more frightening still,
they find parallels between events depicted in the game and real happenings there-
after, and the cousins begin deliberately to influence events through the game.
The new school doctor (the image of Death in the game) has sought Albion's
Dream for years; he sees it as the key to power ("The dream of Albion is mastery"),
and his attempts to acquire it threaten the boys and the school. Along with some
appealing boys'-school heroes, there's real menace here in the character of Dr.
Death and the possibilities of peril for many. The game is carefully depicted with-
out being tedious, and Norman's use of Anglo-Celtic and Arthurian lore (Puck,
Merlin, and Galahad all appear) will attract Susan Cooper fans. More subtle than
the "novel of terror" claimed by the subtitle, this is a deliberately paced, atmo-
spheric, and spooky book. DS
PETERS, RUSSELL M. 
Clambake: A Wampanoag Tradition; illus. with photographs
by John Madama 
ISBN 0-8225-2651-4
REGGUINTI, GORDON 
The Sacred Harvest: Ojibway Wild Rice Gathering; illus.
with photographs by Dale Kakkak. 
ISBN 0-8225-2650-6
Each book: Lerner, 1992 
4 8p 
(We Are Still Here: Native Americans Today)
$14.96 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Food is a tasty way to cross cultures: think of how good that goat's milk seemed in
Heidi. These two attractively designed entries in a new series describe Native
American traditions through the eyes of a contemporary Indian kid. While Clam-
bake is the more prosaically named of the two, it is also the more ritualistically
toned, an account of a Mashpee boy and his grandfather preparing a lavish tradi-
tional clambake in honor of a tribal elder. The food-chowder, clams, lobsters,
corn, sausage-looks delicious, and the preparation (finding clams, heating stones,
NOVEMBER 1992 
* 85
layering seaweed) exotic enough to be interesting and sensible enough to be emu-
lated (the same recipe and procedures appear in The Joy of Cooking). The Sacred
Harvest follows an Ojibway boy on his first wild-rice harvesting. While this book
doesn't have the party atmosphere of the other, and the central food product will
be unfamiliar to many kids, they will still appreciate the portrait of a boy working
with his father, learning the tricks of poling the canoe through the rice beds and
knocking the rice off the stalks. Both books are cleanly designed, and have a
plentiful use of color photographs, clearly sequenced and with a savvy snapshot
quality that reminds readers of the contemporary settings. These will fit right into
curriculum-coordinated cooking projects. RS
PINKWATER, DANIEL 
The Phantom ofthe Lunch Wagon; written and illus. by Daniel
Pinkwater. 
Macmillan, 1992 
32p
ISBN 0-02-774641-0 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 1-3
The primary colors and childlike style of Pinkwater's illustrations generally make
for appealing picture books. This one is about a lunch wagon that has a history of
being haunted by a phantom ("Compared to a phantom, a ghost is a joke"). Closed
after patrons complained of strange noises and eerie shadows, the lunch wagon is
reopened by the intrepid Chris Kevin-Keith. When our triply-named hero and
old Mr. Wiggers find out what the phantom really is (a kitten), the built-up sus-
pense unfortunately falls a little flat, but young readers looking for a mystery will
forgive Pinkwater's predictable ending because of all the gloriously creepy pages
that precede it. KJ
QUINDLEN, ANNA 
The Tree that Came to Stay; illus. by Nancy Carpenter. 
Crown,
1992 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-517-58146-9 
$13.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-58145-0 
$13.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
This story, written by one of the New York Times' best essayists and storytellers,
isn't much of story at all: a family picks out a Christmas tree, chops down the
Christmas tree, puts up and decorates the Christmas tree, and takes down the
Christmas tree. The three children, Bud and Woo and Bubba, are a predictable
chorus, each lamenting the end of Christmas and the taking down of the tree, until
Mom has the idea of taking off the needles and putting them in a basket for post-
holiday sniffing. The tone is flatly expository ("'I hate it when Christmas is over,'
said Bud, his eyes scratchy. He closed his eyes and tried to make the picture of the
tree with its lights and balls behind his lids again, but it only made him feel sadder)
and lacks tension; a taste of Quindlen's wit would have been nice. Any Christmas
picture book has allure, of course, and Carpenter's pastel illustrations supply an
ample dose of seasonal motifs: snow, trees, lights and baubles, and the requisite
idealized portrait of suburban family happiness. RS
RAMACHANDER, AKUMAL 
Little Pig; illus. by Stasys Eidrigevicius. 
Viking,
1992 
26 p
ISBN 0-670-84350-4 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 4-6
This avant-garde picture book is a good example of material that depends on get-
ting to the right audience. For upper-elementary graders, the haunting fable about
a pig farmer, Mary, who betrays the baby pig she has nurtured will stimulate dis-
86 
* THE BULLETIN
cussion about victimization and justice. Mary shows great affection for Little Pig
until he grows up, whereupon she tricks him into the same van that hauled away
Mama and Papa Pig. This time, however, the tables are turned, and the farmer
seems ultimately headed for the fate she had planned for the pig, which escapes
with the help of some school children. The brilliant photographic art will invite
readers to see a series of eerie masks, held in place by human hands, as a play
between real and story worlds-such images could even serve as an introduction to
Greek drama. However, there's no question that both story and art would confuse
or even terrify preschoolers, who would sense but not really understand the impli-
cations of the truck that hauls away the pigs, the song that Little Pig loves and that
the farmer uses to lure him into the truck, and the Kafkaesque transformation of
the pig farmer into a pig. This is not deceptive in the sense of being an adult book
in the guise of a children's, but it does underscore the importance of identifying
and defining a new genre of picture books for older children. BH
RATHE, GUSTAVE 
The Wreck of the Barque Stefano off the North West Cape of
Australia in 1875. 
Farrar, 1992 
136 p
ISBN 0-374-38585-8 
$17.00 
R 
Gr. 9 up
Let's hope YA's aren't put off by the windy title and pedantic introduction here;
this true story of two young seamen, Miho and Ivan, who survive a wreck and are
saved by aborigines, has the riveting appeal of the best survival stories. Upon the
boys' eventual return to Croatia, they tell their story to a priest; the present book is
Miho's grandson's adaptation of that manuscript. As in Jill Paton Walsh's Grace
(BCCB 6/92), the shipwreck itself only provides the beginning of the drama; also
like that book, this is no romanticized account of self-sacrificing heroics. At first
Miho and Ivan are among nine known survivors; that number dwindles rapidly as
the sailors die of thirst, exhaustion, and exposure. The book's most horrific mo-
ment comes when Miho and Ivan, mad with hunger, fall upon a fresh corpse,
intending to consume it, while another man, dying, watches. Miho reflects, "it
was then I realized how strange it was that the first cannibal I encountered was
myself." The boys' meetings and travel with aboriginal tribes form the core of the
narrative, and Miho's European condescension ("Maybe I could baptize them; I
wished that they were white") gradually and necessarily retreats. In fact, a second
scene of ritual cannibalism among the aborigines is movingly described. Robinson
Crusoe-like details of hunting, fire-making and finding water are appealing ele-
ments in their own right and also serve as evidence for the moral tale, as Miho and
Ivan are forced to learn new ways to survive and, consequently, new ways of look-
ing at the world. Maps and photos are included, as is a rather dull epilogue that
tells what happened to Miho and Ivan after their return to Europe. Notes, an
index, and an aboriginal-English-Italian glossary are appended. RS
REGGUINTI, GORDON 
The Sacred Harvest: Ojibway Wild Rice Gathering; illus.
with photographs by Dale Kakkak.
See review under Peters, above.
ROSEN, MICHAEL J. 
Elijah's Angel: A Story for Chanukah and Christmas; illus. by
Aminah Brenda Lynn Robinson. 
Harcourt, 1992 
32p
ISBN 0-15-225394-7 
$13.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
The ten-year-old Jewish boy who recounts the story of his friendship with an aging
African American artist feels guilty about accepting a Christmas angel carved from
NOVEMBER 1992 
* 87
wood. He has wanted one of Elijah's works but knows his parents won't buy
"God and the Angels" or "The Infant Jesus": "'Those are called "graven images,"'
my father explained to me. 'Jews don't think God has one particular face, so we
don't believe he can be pictured.'" (Jews don't think of Jesus as God, either, but
perhaps that's just a textual slip.) After a period of authentically detailed panic,
Michael is reassured by his parents, who evidently agree-though this is not clear
from any discussion in the story-to Michael's giving Elijah the Menorah he has
made in school and already presented to his parents as a gift. The situation is
strong enough to overcome some selfconscious styling (the shop is "as crowded
with Elijah's carvings as Elijah's carving of Noah's ark is crowded with animals").
The paintings are thickly textured, with heavy outline emphasizing the rounded
shapes and expressive portraiture. The style is appropriately naive, though the
artist will have to answer to children searching in vain for the two mosquitoes that
"Elijah always points out" in his Noah's Ark picture. This is a book that tries to do
a lot-perhaps too much-in both narrative and graphic points of view, but the
characters are strong. BH
SEYMOUR, TRES 
Life in the Desert. Jackson/Orchard, 1992 
90p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08608-9 
$12.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05458-6 
$12.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Rebecca's a quickwitted, sociable type who's attractive enough to draw the atten-
tion of popular jock Martin Steward and sensible enough to dislike his arrogance.
The person who interests her is O. Z., a mysterious and brilliant classmate who
seems to drift in and out of reality, preferring his visits to the Desert, a fantasy
world to which he retreats for escape from his demanding parents. Rebecca's
befriending him leads to an unintentional betrayal that brings O. Z. to a climactic
attempt at suicide, and, ultimately, to a real bonding with her. The focus and
writing in this first novel are well defined, but a few aspects need stronger develop-
ment: we are told O. Z. is brilliant rather than shown it, so his deep neuroticism
appears to come out of nowhere (his family seems more irritating than traumatiz-
ing). Rebecca's black friend Maria, too, seems shortchanged as Rebecca brushes
her off frequently with no explanations or real interchange; she becomes a func-
tional foil. However, the suspense of O. Z.'s exposure is very real: Martin grabs
his diary and exposes him to ridicule in a sequence reminiscent of, but more bitter
than, Harriet the Spy-this is high school, after all. The narrator is a confident
character with a surprisingly fresh sense of repartee. A smart mouth with a soft
heart is common enough among adolescents, but this protagonist has a singular
turn of mind, as well. BH
SHANNON, JACQUELINE 
I Hate My Hero. Simon, 1992 
197p
ISBN 0-671-75442-4 
$13.00 
R Gr. 4-7
Rachel Harper's sixth grade is putting together a regular video newscast and Rachel
is a copywriter; her best friend, Cherry Hill Summers, is one of the co-anchors.
There's a dearth of grade-school news, which is why it's a journalistic as well as a
personal lifesaver when Cherry Hill executes the Heimlich maneuver on Rachel,
thus saving her from choking while the sixth-grade camera-girl captures it all on
video. Cherry Hill is acclaimed as a heroine, and in interview after interview (as
well as in informational assemblies) she basks in the limelight as shyer Rachel is
characterized as a feckless victim. The girls' already strained friendship is severed
permanently after a wrestling match over the microphone at what turns out to be
88 
* THE BULLETIN
their final assembly, and the subsequent scorn of the increasingly popular Cherry
Hill (who has renamed herself "Cher") makes Rachel a school pariah. While there
are small subplots about journalistic ethics, this is really a well-told story of two
friends who, despite subtle indications of growing difference, don't so much drift
apart as career apart; Rachel's funny and yearning narration captures the humilia-
tion of the rescue as well as the pain and helplessness of losing a friend she doesn't
want to lose. The unusual approach enlivens the already interesting middle-grades
friendship story, and readers who ordinarily bypass the genre may find this jour-
nalistic tale newsworthy. DS
SHARPE, SUSAN 
Chicken Bucks. 
Bradbury, 1992 
128p
ISBN 0-02-782353-9 
$13.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Twelve-year-old Mark Swenson is shocked when he hears his parents might not be
able to plant crops on their southern Minnesota farm this spring; his parents' poor
finances also mean his dad won't be buying him a calf for his 4-H project. Mark
and his parents eventually work out their problems with creative solutions. Dad
learns from an unconventional neighbor how to farm without expensive chemicals
and gets the crops planted. Mark buys some chickens at an auction and spends the
summer selling eggs and vegetables with his friend, Emma. The story takes an
environmental bent when Mark's father quarrels with his brother-in-law over the
subject of farm chemicals. Mark has several misunderstandings with his wealthier
cousins, who make fun of Mark's chickens. For contemporary farm kids, Mark
and Emma and even Mark's cousins are all portrayed as unbelievably wholesome.
Determined, plucky and well-behaved, these kids are too good to be true. Mark,
for example, admires Emma because she is "a good sister to little Lisa." Despite
their perfection, Mark and Emma's single-minded determination to succeed with
their produce stand is infectious. This will appeal to the kid who dreams of mak-
ing his own bucks. KJ
SHEA, GEORGE 
Amazing Rescues; illus. by Marshall H. Peck III. 
Random House,
1992 
48p 
(Step into Reading Books)
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-91107-3 
$7.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-679-81107-9 
$3.50 
Ad 
Gr. 2-5
These simplified accounts of true dramatic rescues are short on style but long on
reluctant reader appeal. The episodes include a parachuting accident ("Debbie
can't see Guy. And Guy can't see Debbie. And they are zooming toward each
other!"); an alligator attack ("Suddenly, it leaps high out of the water and sinks its
big sharp teeth into the girl's arm!"); and Baby Jessica ("She is stuck halfway down
the well. Twenty-two feet below the ground!"). Watercolor illustrations are awk-
ward but appealingly melodramatic, and that about sums up the tone of the text as
well. With "boy's-book" written all over it, this is an acceptable complement to
the generally more sedate offerings of the easy-reader genre. RS
Sis, PETER An Ocean World; written and illus. by Peter Sis. 
Greenwillow,
1992 
[2 6p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-09068-0 
$13.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-09067-2 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
NOVEMBER 1992 
* 
89
Sis has applied the practise he got painting vast expanses of water as background
for Columbus' voyage in Follow the Dream (BCCB 10/91) to an imaginative, nearly
wordless pictorial narrative about a whale released from captivity into the sea. The
irony of contrast between the artificial "Ocean World" tourist attraction, where
the baby whale grows up to crowd his tank, and the real ocean world, where he's
free to roam and find a mate, becomes visually clear through a deliberated varia-
tion of space. Other graphic ironies abound: an endpaper New York City so
befogged that it appears to be underwater (with a ghostly whale shape floating
above the buildings); a reference to Leo Lionni's Swimmy in the shape of a school
of white fish with a dark one for an eye; a number of ocean objects shaped like the
whale, including an island, a cloud, a submarine that exchanges sonar signals with
the whale, a shipwreck, a garbage boat, and finally... another whale. Of course,
it's love at first sight. In spite of the controlled simplicity of composition, there's
plenty of textural variation to hold the eye, and kids will enjoy hearing the pictures
storytold, "reading" the pictures alone or writing a story to accompany them, and
playing that world-famous game of find the whale shapes in every picture. The
game, really, contains the environmental message: it's more fun to look for whales
swimming free in the sea than overfilling a pool. BH
STANLEY, DIANE 
Moe the Dog in Tropical Paradise; illus. by Elsie
Primavera. 
Putnam, 1992 
32p
ISBN 0-399-22127-1 
$14.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
For readers too sophisticated for Margaret Bloy Graham's Harry, but not yet ready
for Maira Kalman's ultra-hip Max, Moe the Dog and his pal Arlene might make
for some diverting new friends. Moe and Arlene, dogs in an otherwise human
world, are cold. Free for a week's vacation (in January) from their jobs with the
Frozen Cow Ice Cream company, Moe and Arlene look for ways to keep warm,
but the cinema is showing Polar Voyage and Whales oftheArctic and a trip to Tahiti
costs too much. Arlene goes home discouraged (and cold), and Max does the
same, but a hot bath gives him an even hotter idea, and after a trip to the attic, the
art store, the grocery, and the building supply, he creates his own tropical paradise
and invites Arlene over for a swim. Stanley's storytelling has a casual swing that's
just right for this tale of two against the ice; Primavera's ebullient watercolors show
the cozy contrasts between out there and in here, with Moe's tropical paradise a
vision of sand, sunsets, and swaying palms. Moe and Arlene settle on Egypt for
their next vacation-let's hope they take us along. RS
STEVENSON, JAMES 
Don't You Know There's a War On?; written and illus. by James
Stevenson. 
Greenwillow, 1992 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-11384-2 
$13.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-11383-4 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
6-9 yrs
Tender, minimalist watercolors give a sketchbook quality to a simple, honest remi-
niscence of the 1940's war at home. The narrator recalls Spam, blackout shades,
gas stickers and plane-spotting; he and his friends put out a "war" newspaper ("We
didn't give away any secrets") and spy on old Mr. Schmidt. The boy also remem-
bers his fear when his father joins the army. "I kept a picture of my father in my
room. If I wished hard enough, he wouldn't get killed." (As it turns out, the
father is stationed in Florida, occasioning a terrific vacation for the boy and his
90 
* THE BULLETIN
mother.) The illustrations are small vignettes, spaciously scattered four or five to
each double-page spread, and although the colors are quiet, there's plenty of hu-
mor, as in the sketch illustrating the differences-not many-between friendly
and enemy planes. What keeps nostalgia at bay here is the specific immediacy of
detail and the clarity of the recollection: "We stopped putting out The Blackout
when Sally Ann Curtis's brother got killed in Germany. We didn't know what to
say." These will be grandparents' tales for today's children, who may require some
context for things like war stamps and gas stickers; such explanation may also
provide a sobering context for wars that, via TV, seem very far away. RS
TALBOTT, HUDSON 
Your Pet Dinosaur: An Owner's Manual, by Dr. Rex of the
Museum of Relatively Natural History; written and illus. by Hudson
Talbott. 
Morrow, 1992 
40p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-11338-9 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-11337-0 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 3-6
A lunatic pet-owner's manual with a touch of how-to-parent thrown in, this is
noted medical personality Dr. Rex's guide to the rewards of dino ownership (Dr.
Rex will be familiar to readers of Talbott's We're Back). Many important aspects
of dinosaur care are covered: selection ("Do I really want a new family member or
just to get rid of the old ones?"), discipline (a bazooka-sized squirt gun full of pink
goo, designed "for mass-producing cafeteria desserts," does a dandy job in one
illustration), and, realistically, the occasional problems of adolescence ("The heart-
break of delinquent dinos" reads a caption under a picture ofhot-rodding reptilian
yahoos). There are also useful tips on feeding, housebreaking, and fashion dos and
don'ts, as well as a brief interview with Dr. Rex and a page of advice column
letters. This is all most useful to prospective dinosaur owners, and it's pitched at a
perfect grade-school level of sophistication that will draw guffaws from apprecia-
tive young readers. Watercolor illustrations feature vividly colored and expressive
megalasauruses, triceratopses, and their kin (apparently typologically correct), who
belong to tiny pale Wonder-Bread humanoids who live in neat suburban subdivi-
sions. Nice big print makes the text, if not always the dinosaurs, unthreatening;
both the pictures and text are reminiscent of an extended Far Side cartoon, which
is bound to make this a hit with Gary Larson fans as well as young parody aficiona-
dos. DS
TAN, AMY 
The Moon Lady; illus. by Gretchen Schields. 
Macmillan, 1992 
32p
ISBN 0-02-788830-4 
$16.95 
M 
6-9 yrs
This story, a grandmother's reminiscence of a childhood fright, is apparently adapted
from Tan's adult novel The Joy Luck Club, and it probably should have stayed
there. As a picture book text, it's too long, rambling, and overextended: a little
Chinese girl goes to a festival, gets her new clothes messy with eel blood, falls in the
water, is rescued by a passing fishing boat, and finally sees the fabled, wish-fulfill-
ing moon lady, who turns out to be incapable of granting wishes and is a man
besides. There's lots of description, but no sense of direction. The ending, in
which Nai-nai draws some vague moral from the previous goings-on, sweetens up
the story and feels tacked-on. Schields' line-and-watercolor paintings are big and
very busy, owing something to Chinese pop art in their ornateness, but with a
garish coloring that's all their own. Like Michener's South Pacific reviewed above,
this only looks like a picture book. RS
NOVEMBER 1992 
* 91
TEMPLE, FRANCES 
Taste ofSalt. Jackson/Orchard, 1992 
179p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08609-7 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05459-4 
$14.95 
R* Gr. 7-12
See this month's Big Picture for review.
TURNBULL,ANN 
Speedwell. Candlewick, 1992 
[128p]
ISBN 1-56402-112-2 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-7
It's England in 1930, and there's no work to be had for Mary's father, a miner with
a history of union activism. Mary, eleven, is her father's girl, like him absorbed in
the hobby of pigeon racing, while her older sister goes off to work as a housemaid
and her mother labors to keep the family fed. When her father leaves town to find
work, Mary takes it upon herself to keep up with the training and racing of her
beloved pigeons, especially Speedwell, her hope for a glorious win in a long-dis-
tance race. While the plot slips into cliche at times (Mary fortuitously becomes
friends with the school pariah, and she inopportunely twists her ankle in a danger-
ous spot while briefly running away from home), Turnbull gives it a fresh and
individual slant. The pigeon-raising and racing is intriguing, and the triumph at
the end lies not in Speedwell's winning the big race but in her making it home at
all. Without preaching, the book also conveys the bitter realities of Depression
poverty (it's a shock when Mary's mother cooks two of the pigeons to feed her
undernourished family, but it's understandable as well). This is a matter-of-fact,
well-written story of a time and way of life alien to most contemporary kids, and
young readers will enjoy their flying visit. DS
USHINSKY, KONSTANTIN 
How a Shirt Grew in the Field; ad. by Marguerita Rudolph;
illus. by Erika Weihs. 
Clarion, 1992 
32 p
ISBN 0-395-59761-7 
$13.95 
R 4-7yrs
This newly illustrated edition of a Ukrainian story originally translated in 1967
(BCCB 9/67) is a fictional description of flax-to-linen production. A little boy
named Vasya is perplexed when his father plants a field with shiny seeds, telling
Vasya "I am sowing flax seeds, so that shirts will grow for you and baby Anya."
His confusion grows when neither the blue blossoms nor the dry brown pods that
they become look anything like a shirt. As Vasya watches his sisters soak and beat
the harvested flax straw, young listeners will enjoy feeling superior to Vasya, who
still doesn't understand. Weihs' uncluttered paintings have the simplicity of folk
art in their depiction of three women working through the seasons to produce
linen. The mood is cozy, the setting is rustic. Despite its minimal plot, this is a
fascinating book that describes step-by-step the old art of making handmade linen.
This book could be used with "Charlie Needs a Cloak"by DePaola (BCCB 6/74)
for where-does-it-come-from questions among preschoolers. KJ
VOGEL, ILSE-MARGRET 
Bad Times, GoodFriends: A PersonalMemoir. Harcourt,
1992 
239p
ISBN 0-15-205528-2 
$16.95 
R Gr. 9 up
Following a quickstudy of her younger years, Vogel concentrates this narrative on
the period from 1943 to 1945, when she and a network of anti-Nazi friends sur-
92 
* THE BULLETIN
vived the terror and turmoil of Berlin during the downfall of the "Thousand Year
Reich." The friends are the organizing structure here: each of six is subject to a
story-portrait that also serves to mark the drama of the approaching war fronts. At
first, these segments seem somewhat fragmentary, partly because of the detached
narrative tone, which is sometimes personalized by brief, italicized insights into
the narrator's feelings. Then her telling intensifies, along with the action, to a
climactic account of bombardment and streetfighting by the Russians, seen by
some as liberators and by others as savage rapists. What overrides Vogel's occa-
sional awkwardness of style is a vivid sense of detail that renders many scenes
ineradicable, however disconnected they may seem in terms of sustained develop-
ment. Out of the montage emerges, for the reader, an authentic experience of one
woman's war-a lucky woman, relatively speaking, who survived on the strength
of fatalistic defiance. A thought provoking accompaniment to Aranka Siegal's
Upon the Head ofthe Goat (BCCB 2/82) and other Holocaust literature for young
adults, this stands nearly alone in evoking the experience of non-Jewish German
passive resisters to Hitler's regime. A chronology, glossary, and list of personae
will help orient the reader. BH
VOIGT, CYNTHIA 
Orfe. Atheneum, 1992 
120p
ISBN 0-689-31771-9 
$12.95 
M 
Gr. 9-12
Orfe is a flame-haired, musically talented, childhood friend of the narrator, who
recounts the tragedy-with shades of Orpheus and Eurydice-ofOrfe's love for a
drug addict named Yuri, beautiful in all ways except for his habit. Orfe gains her
first audience by vomiting onstage at every chorus of a punk rock song called
"Current Events." Then she finds brief happiness with her own band, managed by
the narrator, and with Yuri; but he is fed drugged icing on a cake at his and Orfe's
wedding, whereupon he disappears with the evil inhabitants of his past and Orfe is
killed when an ersatz performing stage collapses. Aside from melodrama, one of
the basic problems here is that, while we are told repeatedly what a genius Orfe is,
we never get a real sense of her music aside from her being able to throw up on cue.
She mostly stands with her head bent in a too characteristic pose while her friends
do a lot of talking; even the moments after Yuri's contrivedly dramatic abduction
are filled with talky philosophy. When the characters are not delivering messages,
they are often inarticulate ("'I think,' Orfe said, 'that love is like being alive, in this
respect, or peace too. Yeah, all three of them have the quality of-you never feel as
if there has been enough"). If we are to believe Yuri's frequently emphasized devo-
tion to Orfe, and the fact that he's had the perseverance to shake his habit, it
becomes unbelievable that he doesn't follow her out of the drug den when she goes
in after him. The redeeming feature in all this is the narrator, Enny, a solidly
realized character whose experiences as a young child, defended at school by a
fierce friend, are credibly rendered and moving. Despite several time transitions
that seem purposefully jarring and therefore pretentious, Enny gets the story told
with some real presence. BH
WAGGONER, KAREN 
The Lemonade Babysitter; illus. by Dorothy Donohue. 
Joy
Street/Little, 1992 
32p
ISBN 0-316-91711-7 
$14.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
"No more babysitters," insists Molly, and when old Mr. Hubert from down the
street appears for the job, she tries everything she can think of to discourage him.
NOVEMBER 1992 
* 
93
She fixes his hair, but he merely says "I must look very handsome"; she gives him
dancing lessons, and he shuffles off to Buffalo with unmatched style and stamina;
she requires a zoo visit, where he proves himself as capable of obstreperousness as
Molly herself. Molly, now enamored in her own straightforward way (when she
takes Mr. Hubert's hand, he says "Your hand is very sticky," to which she logically
replies, "Maybe your hand is sticky"), takes the now-exhausted babysitter home
and pampers her new friend with stuffed animals and lemonade. The illustrations
are controlled yet idiosyncratic: Donohue frames each page with a linear and
thematically appropriate border, and a meticulous attention to details such as scales
on fish and ribs on stockings lend the art a gravity belied by its comic perspective
(Mr. Hubert seems a big bear next to sprite-like Molly), expressive lines (there's a
dancing cat that rivals Snoopy in terpsichorean energy), and light-hearted pastels
(the lavender seals at the zoo are particularly fetching). The artist's particular gift
for characterful stuffed animals extends even to some patchwork-quilt-like zoo
animals and to Mr. Hubert himself. Mr. Hubert may be preternaturally good-
natured, but this is still an endearingly executed and wisely understated story of a
little girl who finds a friend where she least expected. DS
WERNER, VIVIAN, ad. 
Petrouchka: The Story of the Ballet; illus. by John
Collier. 
Preiss/Viking, 1992 
32p
ISBN 0-670-83607-9 $16.00 
R 
Gr. 5-
The Russian story of Petrouchka, usually told through music and dance, is adapted
here into a picture book about the three life-size puppets who are the principal
characters. Petrouchka, a pathetic clown-puppet, sacrifices himself in his love for
the ballerina-puppet. When released by death, Petrouchka's soul dances in free-
dom on the tent-tops. The heavy theme is compounded by the stark colors of the
sophisticated gouache paintings, all browns and blacks and desert yellows. There
is a discrepancy between text and pictures in the scene where "[The peasants] wore
feast-day clothes, bright tunics embroidered in very color of the rainbow"; this is
illustrated by three stiff figures dressed in plain, drab clothing. If the scenery isn't
always as described in the story, the colors and facial expressions do reflect the
complex emotions of the characters. Although this is too long and dark for a
typical picture book reader, a ballet lover will appreciate it for its artistic interpre-
tation, and parents may want to read it aloud before taking children to see the
dancing itself. Historical notes are added. KJ
WIESNER, DAVID 
June 29, 1999; written and illus. by David Wiesner. 
Clarion,
1992 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-59762-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-9 yrs
It's certainly no coincidence that June 29, 1999 is a Tuesday (BCCB 5/91). A few
Tuesdays before that date, budding scientist Holly Evans had sent aloft helium-
held vegetable seeds; now, giant vegetables are descending: "Cucumbers circle
Kalamazoo. Lima beans loom over Levittown. Artichokes advance on Anchor-
age." Although the joke goes on a little too long, this benevolent invasion provides
Wiesner with some delectable opportunities for illustrative aplomb: the big veg-
etables peacefully settling into the backyards of America (giant broccoli in Holly's)
look like just another part of the scenery, their luscious greens beautifully at home,
their size a source of wonder, manna from heaven. The American ethos soon takes
94 
* THE BULLETIN
over, and giant vegetables are traded around the country, becoming a source of
several new ventures, some unsuccessful, such as a perishable Mt. Rushmore:
"Potatoland is wisely abandoned." In a picture visually and thematically reminis-
cent of Wiesner's Hurricane (BCCB 11/90), Holly turns her broccoli into a tree
house where she ponders the unexpected results of her experiment; concluding
that these aren't the same vegetables, she wonders what happened to hers. You'll
see. RS
WILD, MARGARET 
Thank You, Santa; illus. by Kerry Argent. 
Scholastic,
1992 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-590-45805-1 
$12.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
The idea here-an exchange of letters between a generous Australian girl, Samantha,
and Santa Claus-will have some inherent appeal for kids but even more for adults,
many of whom have a vested interest in promoting both Santa Claus and thank-
you notes. The development of the idea is a bit mechanical, with Samantha and
Santa writing on alternate months, sharing information on polar animals, com-
miserating about a sick reindeer, and giving each other good-hearted presents after
the year's correspondence. Samantha presents Mrs. Claus with a paintbox, Santa
with knitting needles (as well as instructions on how to use them), and the rein-
deer with woollies she has knitted herself; Santa brings snow for the overheated
polar bear that Samantha has watched and worried about in the zoo. Commer-
cially smooth illustrations make competent use of color-pencil effects, though the
central character appears more preadolescent than preschool, a point that will not
deter true believers. BH
WILLARD, NANCY 
Beauty and the Beast; illus. by Barry Moser. 
Harcourt,
1992 
80p
ISBN 0-15-206052-9 $19.95 
R Gr. 5-9
The time is early in the twentieth-century, the place is New York, and the plot is a
fairy tale fictionalized in the way "Beauty and the Beast" has inspired authors and
artists to assay for more than a hundred years. True to this tradition, Willard
names and develops the characters, elaborates the setting, and joins hands with an
impressive artist who lends her descriptions graphic weight-heavy weight, in this
case. Romantics may be slightly jarred by the contrast between the author's lush
prose ("Maples washed the air with a warm honeyed light and lit up the road like
torches") and Moser's stark black-and-white wood engravings, which project an
aura of American Gothic gloom. At the same time, it's a relief to get away from
the rosy cartoons that have deluged the market since the release of Disney's film,
and the bookmaking here will attract readers who think they're too old for fairy
tales but are in fact exactly the right audience for this one. Those who have en-
joyed Willard and Moser's sophisticated collaboration in East ofthe Sun and West
of the Moon (BCCB 11/89) or The Ballad of Biddy Early (1/90) will gravitate to
this one as well. BH
WILLAMS, MARCIA 
Greek Myths for Young Children; written and illus. by Marcia
Williams. 
Candlewick, 1992 
34p
ISBN 1-56402-115-7 
$17.95 
R Gr. 2-6
This Tintin of the Olympiad may make Robert Graves turn over in his grave, but
NOVEMBER 1992 
* 95
it will persuade a broad range of kids to become culturally literate as they pore over
comic strip versions of Pandora's Box, Arion and the Dolphins, Orpheus and
Euridice, the Twelve Tasks of Hercules, Daedalus and Icarus, Perseus and the
Gorgon's Head, Theseus and the Minotaur, and Arachne verses [sic] Athena. While
the text under each strip is fairly straightforward, the cleverly cartooned characters
and the ballooned remarks add an irreverent zest that Pan himself would have
relished ("I would cook it for you," Prometheus says to the vulture tearing out his
liver, "but we're a little short on fire"). There are some full-color gory bits, just as
there were in the early Greek versions, some graphic wit, and some guaranteed
hours of detailed viewing, with a varied layout broadened by periodic full-page
spreads. Good drawing, well-reproduced color, and time-tested stories raise this
several cuts above modern superheroes such as Wonder Woman (Athena in dis-
guise?) and Spider Man (Arachne in drag?). BH
WITTMANN, PATRICIA 
Go Ask Giorgio!; illus. by Will Hillenbrand. 
Macmillan,
1992 
32p
ISBN 0-02-793221-4 
$14.95 
R* 
5-8 yrs
Round and beaming Giorgio likes to work, and he has three jobs: when he wears
his flat blue cap, he runs the gas station; when he wears his straw hat, he tends his
garden; and when he wears his chefs hat, he runs the cafd. Giorgio's willingness
leads him into overextension, however, as he fills in for the railroad stationmaster
(brown hat with gold braid), the postman (royal blue and gold hat), and the fish-
erman (orange waterproof hat), as well as performing his three regular jobs. After
excess takes its toll, Giorgio returns to his original three hats, and the town, in
gratitude, gives him a fourth-a nightcap. The illustrations are oil and pastel,
with spicily rich colors in deceptively simple small-town compositions. Hillenbrand
gives a de Chirico slant to many perspectives (an incoming train presents a visible
Doppler effect), but he never takes attention away from the people, especially
Giorgio and his nemesis, the puckish small boy who always announces, with flail-
ing hands and despairing mouth, where Giorgio's services are needed now. It's a
spirited and gentle story with trains and cars, a goat, food, hats, and mayhem-in
other words, something for everyone. DS
96 
* 
THE BULLETIN
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
Is there any such thing as a book "for all ages"? Even if we narrow it down
to Milton Bradley's famous designation on the Monopoly box, for ages "eight to
eighty," there are few: 
Charlotte's Web, Carroll's Alice books, some of Hans
Christian Andersen. Everyone will have one or two nominations. Not that broad
age appeal is a measure of greatness. Little ones and parents alike appreciate
Goodnight, Moon, and while fifth-graders may be bored by a bedtime litany that
enchanted them when younger, they bring themselves to Harriet the Spy in a way
that younger children or adults cannot. Similarly, you might need to be between
the ages of twelve and twenty-one to feel fully the travails of Holden Caulfield in
Catcher in the Rye.
"All ages" is a rare recommendation here at The Bulletin; the last time we used
it was for Donald Hall's The Oxford Book of Children's Verse in America, published
in 1985. Among publishers, however, and ever increasingly, it seems a very popular
code. My question is: code for what?
Look atJames Michener and Michael Hague's South Pacific, reviewed on page
eighty-three. Michener's original book, Talesfrom the South Pacific, is an engaging,
if dated, collection of linked stories about soldiers and nurses during World War II;
Michener and Rodgers and Hammerstein's South Pacific is an enduring landmark
in American music. But this picture book, said by the publisher to be for all ages,
isn't really for anyone: stripped of nuance and motivation, the characters aren't
complicated enough for an adult audience, but the romantic concerns ofNellie and
Emil are too sophisticated for children.
Amy Tan and Gretchen Shields' TheMoon Lady, (p. 90) is another book that
tries to be for both kids and grownups and ends up being a book for neither. The
story is a grandmother's reminiscence, a childhood drama viewed through the lense
of memory and didactically amplified (and garishly illustrated) for a young
audience. Adults can find the same story better told in Tan's The Joy Luck Club,
children would be better served by any number of picture books that speak without
strain to the immediacies of childhood.
The picture book version of The Messiah (p. 69) is attributed by the publisher
to Handel although he had nothing to do with the words, the only element of the
oratorio as printed here. The book is well designed, handsomely illustrated, and
pointless: 
you can't sing from it, and it doesn't offer much food for silent
contemplation, with the production values speaking louder than the words. It needs
music--one is in fact surprised, given the lavishness of the book production, that
a CD is not included, with the whole enclosed in a pricey keepsake case.
Charles Mikolaycak's version of the Orpheus myth (p. 83) offers slightly
different problems. No one is pretending this is a picture book for young children.
But is it even a book for older kids or teens? The difficulty isn't the nudity (In the
NOVEMBER 1992 
* 
97
Night Kitchen shows more, genitalia-wise); it's the glossy sexiness that betrays the
ancient story, and the coyness that betrays the nudity. This book, like the ones
mentioned above, wants to have it both ways, in this case naked buttocks and hidden
penises.
None of this is to say that there is no such thing as a picture book for older
children: Van Allsburg (The Mysteries ofHarris Burdick), and Macaulay (BAAA),
Demi (Chingis Khan) and many others, including both Moser (The Ghost Horse of
the Mounties) and Mikolaycak (The Highwayman) have all created or illustrated
books that are complicated enough for upper-elementary or junior high readers
without grubbing for a grown-up audience as well. Ramachander and Eidrigevicius'
Little Pig, (p. 85) is the same, an innovative book that beckons adult interest and
speculation without betraying its primary audience of children. In fact, the scariest
aspect of this trend is the implied search for something more important than picture
books for children, i.e., picture books for adults.
These books are designed to appeal to adult buyers, in this case primarily
parents, of children's books. They are meant to play on the adult response to an
author ("I love Amy Tan's books"), subject ("I sang in the Messiah) or style ("that
Orpheussure is gorgeous") that has nothing to do with the child for whom the book
is ostensibly being purchased. Glamor is seductive. 
Librarians, teach~ers, and
booksellers sometimes need to remind themselves and other grownups just why they
are buying children's books in the first place.
Roger Sutton, Executive Editor
Books received:
Barbara Wall's The Narrator's Voice: The Dilemma of Children's Fiction is an
exploration of irony, narrative voice, and implied audience, primarily in English and
Australian books for children. (St. Martin's Press, 292p, ISBN 0-312-04487-9,
$39.95)
The Braid ofLiterature: Children's Worlds ofReading, by Shelby Anne Wolf
and Shirley Brice Heath, is an intensive study of Wolf's two young daughters and
their reading patterns, tastes, and responses to story. (Harvard University Press,
264 p, ISBN 0-674-08040-8, $24.95)
98 
* THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this new index, which
will appear in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-
CAPS refer to genres and appeals. In no way meant to be a cataloging aid, this
rather idiosyncratic index is instead intended to lead readers to those books re-
viewed that could fill a particular gap in a collection; to help teachers and librarians
find books that might be useful in various school or recreational settings; and to
help in those requests for a "love story" or a "scary story." In the case of subject
headings, the subhead "stories" refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fic-
tion," to those books intended for independent reading. Although subscriber re-
sponse to The Bulletin's format, features, and reviews is always welcome, we would
especially like to hear your comments about the usefulness of this new index and
your advice for ways it could be expanded or improved. Please direct your sugges-
tions to executive editor Roger Sutton at the editorial office address found on page
64.
Adoption-fiction: MacDonald
African-Americans-stories: Rosen
African-Americans-fiction: Lyons
African-Caribbeans-fiction: Berry
Airplanes: Bendick
Animals-fiction: Clifford
Animals-stories: Grimm
Australia-fiction: MacDonald
Australia: Rathe
Automobiles: Bendick
Babysitting-stories: Waggoner
Ballet-fiction: Godden
Ballet: Werner
Bears-stories: Hol
BIOGRAPHIES: Ayer; Faber
Birds-fiction: Turnbull
Birthdays-stories: Jonas
Books and reading-fiction:
Lindbergh; McKay
Brothers and sisters: Geller
Bullies-fiction: Bawden
California-fiction: Koertge
CAPTIVITY NARRATIVES:
Meyer
Catholics-fiction: Ewing
Chickens-stories: Dunrea
China-stories: Allen; Tan
CHRISTMAS STORIES:
Godden; Hill; Hol; Joseph;
Quindlen; Rosen; Wild
Christmas: Bible; Marzollo
Clothing-stories: Ushinsky
Cousins-fiction: Hotze, Lawlor
Death-fiction: DeFelice
Dinosaurs-fiction: Talbott
Dogs-fiction: Godden
Dogs-stories: Meddaugh; Stanley
Dolls-stories: Ayres
Drug abuse-fiction: Voigt
Ecology: Allen
Emotional problems-fiction:
Seymour
England-fiction: Bawden;
Godden; Hill; McKay;
Norman; Turnbull
Ethics and values: Ramachander
EVERYDAY LIFE STORIES:
Cooper; Ewing; Geller; King-
Smith; Korman; Lawlor;
Shannon
FAIRYTALES AND
FOLKTALES: Ayres; Grimm;
Hinton; Jaffe; Willard
Family reading: Marzollo;
Stevenson
FANTASY: Bakken; Norman
Farm life-fiction: Sharpe
Fathers and sons-fiction: Koertge
Fishing-fiction: DeFelice
Food and eating: Peters; Regguinti
NOVEMBER 1992 
* 
99
Friends-fiction: Seymour;
Shannon
Friends-stories: Stanley;
Waggoner
FUNNY STORIES: Clifford;
Korman; Mahy; Talbott
GAME BOOKS: Jonas; Marzollo;
Sis
Games-fiction: Norman
Germany: Vogel
GHOST STORIES: Hotze
Grandparents-fiction: Bawden;
McKay
Grandparents-stories: Tan
Haiti-fiction: Temple
Hanukkah-stories: Jaffe; Rosen
HISTORICAL FICTION: Berry;
Lawlor; Lyons; Meyer; Turnbull
History, American: Berry
History, U.S.: Ayer; Faber;
Lawlor; Lyons; Meyer; Steven-
son
Hotels and motels-fiction:
Koertge
Inventions: Bendick
Jamaica-fiction: Berry
Japan-stories: Merrill
Jews-folklore: Jaffe
Jews-stories: Rosen
Letter-writing-stories: Wild
Lizards-stories: Hinton
LOVE STORIES: Hotze
Magic-fiction: Bakken; Lindbergh
Martha's Vineyard-fiction:
DeFelice
Music and musicians-fiction:
Voigt
Music: Bible
MYSTERY STORIES: Bunting;
Clifford; Masters
MYTHOLOGY, CLASSICAL:
Mikolaycak; Williams
Native Americans-folklore:
Hinton
Native Americans: Peters;
Regguinti
Native Americans-fiction: Meyer
Nepal: Margolies
New Zealand-fiction: MacDonald
Night-poetry: Larrick
Pets-fiction: King-Smith; Talbott
Photography: Ayer
Pigs-fiction: Ramachander
POETRY: Larrick; Mahy
Puppets-fiction: Werner
Reading aloud: Hill; King-Smith;
Mahy
Reading, easy: Clifford; Shea
Reading, reluctant: Bunting;
Geller; Shea; Talbott
Religious education: Rosen
Restaurants-stories: Pinkwater
Russia-fiction: Werner
Russia-folklore: Ayres
Russia-stories: Cech
Science experiments-stories:
Wiesner
Shetland Islands-fiction: Masters
Shipwrecks: Rathe
Sisters-fiction: McKay
Slavery-fiction: Berry; Lyons
Social issues: Temple; Vogel
Social studies: Margolies
Stepfamilies-fiction: Hoppe
Story hour: Ayres; Dunrea;
Grimm; Hinton; Hol; Jonas;
Meddaugh; Pinkwater; Sis;
Ushinsky; Wild; Wittmann
Suicide-fiction: Seymour
SURVIVAL STORIES: Rathe
Tigers-stories: Allen
Time travel-fiction: Hoppe;
Lindbergh
Transportation: Bendick
Trinidad and Tobago-stories:
Joseph
Tuesdays-stories: Wiesner
Vacations-stories: Stanley
Vegetables-stories: Wiesner
Weight control-fiction: Cooper
West, The: Faber
Whales-stories: Sis
Winter-stories: Cech
Women's studies: Ayer; Faber;
Meyer
Work-fiction: Sharpe
Work-stories: Wittmann
World War II-stories: Michener;
Stevenson
World War II: Vogel
I /- 
Starred in ALA Booklist Kirkus Reviews pointer
Immigrants, and French Fries All Play a Part
MILTON MELTZER
Photographs, paintings, and etchings
"Meltzer's long subtitle suggests the range of his latest fascinating explo-
ration of social history. Covering the potato's economic importance, its
early culture and the superstitions that attended its spread, the terrible
consequences of Ireland's potato famine, and even some methods of
cooking this versatile vegetable, Meltzer skillfully dramatizes the inter-
relationship among different fields of knowledge." 
-Kirkus Reviews
"A wonderful example of nonfiction writing at its best: it's interesting,
amusing, and carefully sourced." 
-ALA 
Booklist
Ages 8-12. $15.00* (020806-6); $14.89t (020807-4)
Also by Milton Meltzer
ALL TIMES, ALL PEOPLES A BOOK ABOUT NAMES
A World History of Slavery 
Pictures by Mischa Richter
Pictures by Leonard Everett Fisher 
Ages 10 up. $13.89t (0-690-04381-3)
Ages 8-12. $15.89t (024187-X)
. HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York 10022
HarperCollins ISBN prefix: 0-06. *Trade ed. tLibrary ed.
Publisher's prices only and in no way reflect the prices at which available from any other source.
Ms. Frizzle's class is doing a project
ie ocean....Those familiar with the
itable school bus and its previous
lstical journeys are in for another
- School Library Journal, starred review.
"Complete with wild hair and wacky
rdrobe. Ms. Frizzle...has returned....
nother first-class entry in a stellar
teries that makes science fascinating
and fun. We eaperly await more
trips on Ms. Frizzle's extraordinary
bus."
Also Available:
THE MAGIC SCHOOL
BUS AT THE
WATERWORKS
"Surprising, inventive,
accurate and very funny."
- New York Times.
HC 0-590-43739-9 $13.95
PB 0-590-40360-5 $3.95
THE MAGIC SCHOOL
BUS INSIDE THE
HUMAN BODY
S"Kids will love this book."
- School Library Journal,
starred review.
HC 0-590-41426-7 $13.95
PB 
0-590-41427-5 
$3.95
THE MAGIC SCHOOl
BUS INSIDE THE
EARTH
* 
"Ms. Frizzle (is) the
wackiest, wisest teacher
in picture books."
- Booklist,
starred review.
HC 0-590-40759-7 $13.95
Pn 
r90n4076c0n 
$9 K
THE MAGIC SCHOOL
BUS LOST IN THE
SOLAR SYSTEM
0 
"Who could resist the
gravitational pull of this
popular series?"
- Booklist boxed review.
HC 0-590-41428-3 
$13.95
PB 0-590-41429-1 
$3.95
-
Booklist, boxed review.
THE MAGIC SCHOOL
BUSTM ON THE
OCEAN FLOOR
By Joanna Cole
llustrated by Bruce Degen
0-590-41430-5 
48 pp.
Ages 6-9 
Full color
Hardcover 
$14.95
C 
40 SC 
HOLAST I C 730 Broadway, New York, NY 10003
9' 
Starred in The Bulletin
Here are tales gone awry. Having kissed the wrong Sleeping Beauty
25 years earlier, Prince Charming finds the real one. In "A Beauty in the
Beast," Beast's looks are perfection; Beauty's, alas, are not. And what's one
to make of the regrets shared by this Frog and the Princess who kisses him?
"Watching Brooke change a story while staying within its parameters
is a delightful experience. [Told with elegance and style his] versions are
rich in ambiguity and contain many wonderful lines." -Booklist
"The clever play on traditions... [creates] fine-tuned entertainment."
-The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Book
Ages 10 up. $15.00* (020271-8); $14.89t (020272-6)
Also by William J. Bro
A TELLING OF THE TAL
FIVE STORIES
Pictures by Richard Egielski
A 1990 ALA Notable Children's I
Ages 8-12. $13.00* (020688-8) $12.89t (
HarperCollins ISBN prefix: 0-06. *Trade ed. tLibrary ed.
Publisher's prices only and in no way reflect the prices at which available from any other source
9 HarperCollins Children'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York 10022
-i
WOODY' 20~
wh 
e i 
WOODY GUTHRIE ith
[ MARJORIE MAZIA GUTHRIE
Full-color pictures by Woody Guthrie
"This collection of one of America's finest folksingers
and song writers is a great resource for those
who sing with the very young. A 'replication of an
unpublished songbook,' [it] features hand-lettered lyrics,
music, and sketches done by Guthrie himself. Written
with much repetition and with a lot of action...the songs
are truly timeless and so singable-just the ticket for
preschool children!"--School Library Journal
All Ages. $16.00* (020282-3); $15.89t (020283-1)
And for everyone!
WOODY'S 20 GROW BIG SONGS
Book and Cassette Package
To accompany the book, Arlo Guthrie has produced a new
recording that features the voices of Woody Guthrie and his
children and grandchildren singing the 20 Grow Big Songs.
All ages. $24.95* (021033-8)
HarperCollins ISBN prefix: 0-06. 'Trade ed.
tLibrary ed. Publisher's prices only and in 
" 
* 
H 
-I.Colish « 
ldre 
"usBoo
no way reflect the prices at which available 
HarperCo 
s 
re
from any other source. 
10 East 53rd Street, New York 10022
ks
ew! 
Postcards
from
America
Penn Mullin
Illustrations by Damon Rarey
A great mix of reading for fun and
knowledge! Several sites of historical
interest are visited by a multicultural
group of teens who win a cross-country 
-. "v """. 
"."*7- 
- "$ '
trip with their teacher. At each location 
softcovers #957-5 $15/set
(Washington D.C., New York, Chicago, Mt. Rushmore, and San
Francisco) the group encounters an adventure that adds
considerable spice to these high-low novels. (2nd grade readability.)
HIGH NOON BOOKS 20 Commercial Blvd. Novato, CA 94949
(415) 883-3314 1-(800) 422-7249 FAX: (415) 883-3720
Multicultural Children's Literature in the
United States: A Research Agenda for the
1990s-Issues, Concerns, Directions
/TIT*_- .
... 
1£• 
f 
\f \ 
J-". 
-
•l l[-__
(winter 1993), eaite 
Dy
Karen Patricia Smith
This timely issue of Library Trends discusses
and analyzes multicultural children's
literature over time as well as its availability
and promotion within various settings. The
focus is on literature by and about African
American, Hispanic, Asian, and Native
American people.
Library Trends is published by the Graduate
School of Library and Information Science at the
LIBRARY
TRENDS
Multicultral Children' Literture
in the United Suil: A Reearcb
Agend for the 199k
luuns, Cncenm , Direclions
(Winecr 1915)
Uniersity yol llinois
Gradute School of Library
and Inlormcnio Science
University of Illinois. Single copies are $18;
annual subscriptions are $60 ($65 foreign). To
order, contact the University of Illinois Press, Journals
Department, 54 East Gregory Drive, Champaign, Illinois 61820.
"
luYlfnuui 
~J~~I
Now~veryone 
cltrt
singcJm2B 
with.··
Bul(alo GBb
On'Ibp 
o( Old Smok?
Cpsc~v ~ones
ShPnandoah
6o~ll 
Au"' 
Rh~dp
Thlu Land IsYour 
Lsnd
Ho~neon th' 
RsnBe
~m.Torn.Turn
II I Had a Hslancr
1N~ Shnll O,~"rO~~'
Oh, Suuanna!
ysnk~e Doodle
~lm 
~ma bnFt-
· · ·~W~""'~~-~ ifirle3cecl
10101010101010101010lolololo~fdhSo~Zs;utject.
bytit~~
**-----------------------*------------------*----*--------*-
# Kirkus Reviews pointer
by FRANCESCA LIA BLOCK
"Block's third visit to the pop L.A. world focuses on Weetzie Bat's
teenage daughter and Raphael, Witch Baby, and Angel Juan, who
start a rock band (the 'Goat Guys'). Four chapters portray [their] rite
of passage into adulthood. In the last [they] recall themselves [from
the demands of success and the seductions of the drug culture] to a
more wholesome being. Block continues to illuminate serious
contemporary themes with fresh imagery and a wonderfully lyrical
and original style. Not to be missed." -Kirkus Reviews
"The darker scenes [including scary cocaine sequences] reveal a
power that's been untested by the charming whimsey for which
Block has been celebrated." -Bulletin of the Center
for Children's Books
Ages 12 up. $14.00* (020269-6); $13.89t (020270-X)
A Charlotte Zolotow Book
Also by Francesca Lia Block
WEETZIE BAT
1989 ALA Best Book
for Young Adults
1990 ALA Recommended Books
for Reluctant YA Readers
Ages 12 up. $12.95* (020534-2);
$12.89t (020536-9)
Harper Trophy paper ed. $3.95*
(447068-7)
A Charlotte Zolotow Book
HarperCollins ISBN prefix: 0-06. 'Trade and paper eds.
tLibrary ed. Publisher's prices only and in no way reflect
the prices at which available from any other source.
WITCH BABY
1991 School Library Journal
Best Books
1992 ALA Recommended Books
for Reluctant YA Readers
Ages 12 up. $14.00* (020547-4);
$13.89t (020548-2)
Harper Trophy paper ed. $3.95*
(447065-2)
A Charlotte Zolotow Book
- HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York 10022
... a.ee-....e..eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeoeeee-eeeeee~
-------- 
-. 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
..-------.----- 
-----
LOK 
L8
-
Starred in School Library Journal
The
KING'S EQUAL
by Katherine Paterson
Full-color pictures by Vladimir Vagin
"Finding a princess who is the 'king's equal' in comeliness, intelligence,
and wealth is an order that confounds the wisest, most loyal councilors
in this distant realm. Finding a book equal in quality to this one is an
even more formidable task. [Newbery Medalist] Paterson weaves her
story within the structure of familiar fairy tales [and] her careful
attention to the beauty and variety of descriptive language is evident
on every page....Vagin's illustrations are exquisite, luminous in color,
clarity, and precision. Young listeners will be spellbound and should
want to return to the book again and again." -SLJ
Ages 7-10. $17.00' (022496-7); $16.89t (022497-5)
Author of Bridge to Tembithia, The Great Gilly Hopkins, and Jacob Have
I Loved, Katherine Paterson's most recent HarperCollins book is
THE SMALLEST COW IN THE WORLD
An I Can Read Book*
Full-color pictures by Jane Clark Brown
Ages 4-8. $13.00' (024690-1); $12.89t (024691-X)
For a free Katherine Paterson
biographical brochure write: 
HarperCollns ISBN prefix: 0-06. 
rade ed.
HLibrl 
ed.Publisher's prices only and 
in
lU 
HarperCollinsCbildren'sBooks 
1ayrect 
the 
s 
prices at which aiable
I 1 I ltt • rf •tr ppt 
Ir 
v7nr-lr 
11-49 
f- 
M, 
Vt 
r- 
, Inn,)*
Barbara Harrison and Daniel Terris
"Deftly told"*suspense from
Robert Westall
"A masterful job of characterization....vintage Westall."
-
Booklist.*
"A superb story....Subtle and richly menacing." -
Bulletin of the
Center for Children's Books.
"Teenage horror fans will love Yaxley's Cat....Westall has
produced another winner." -
VOYA.
And don't miss:
BLITZCAT * "A commanding, riveting tour de force." -
Horn Book,
starred review. HC: 0-590-42770-9 
$12.95 
PB: 0-590-42771-7 $3.25
THE PROMISE "Moves from a slow, comfortable beginning to an edge-
of-the-seat conclusion." -
Horn Book. HC: 0-590-43760-7 $13.95
PB: 0-590-43761-5 $3.25 (April 1993)
GHOST ABBEY * "Westall provides another of his fine, suspenseful
novels." -
Kirkus, pointed review. 
HC: 0-590-41692-8 $12.95
PB: 0-590-41693-6 $2.95
Thei 14e0 C We*4e
Zora Neale Hurston's best-loved novel is now available in a deluxe
clothbound gift edition designed by Barry Moser, with nine original drawings
by award-winning illustrator Jerry Pinkney, a foreword by Ruby Dee, and an
introduction by Sherley Anne Williams. $24.95
At bookstores or
order toll free
800/545-4703
(MD residents,
301/338-6927)
/o 
r. 
. .
f ..
r4uwe4,dut a4 
1/UwU4 
i4e4&A
HARRY and C'HICKEN
by Dyan Sbetdofl
iIlustrat buy Sue Heap
"SQhaldonh 
s ht, 
f~fno~ 
g tory:
~~~b~sr Weekl 
'YZ~
Sth With an agl and vlg-
oru ~tewdwl h fomat."
bKrkUS
* i S .9 
Mc 
i 'ay i
SOr" 
P9: 
LC9176
Ag' -t 
p
Masy
Lcotl
'BIN, 1b~seP2O1k
•pv r
Albert Whitman & Company's
Fall Harvest of Books
1992
Great-Gmndma Tells
of Threshing Day
by Vrad Cross
Fullcolor mlraions by Gal Owens
Ages 6-11 $15.95 -Jacketed
ISBN 0-80753042-5 * September
Abualita's Paradlse
El Paralso do Abuellta (Spanish edion)
by Carmen Santao Nodar
Futl-coo ustr 
BElla 
by Da 
Paterso
AgN 5-8 - $1395 Sepember
ISBN 0-4075-0129-8 (Engiwh)
ISBN 0-80075346-3 (Span h)
The Cat Came Back
Retold by I Stain
Ful- 
lb ustatons by the author
Ages 6-11 - $13 95 Septmber
ISBN 0-8075-1097-1
Black Like Kyra, White Like Me
by Judith Vgna
Full-color Ausbatons by the author
Ages 711 $13. 
September
ISBN 06075.-0778-4
A Concepr 
Book
Where Is the Bear In the City?
by Bonnie Larki Nms
Full-dor Iustraons by Madelain Gll
Ages 2-6 $11.95 * Septmber
ISBN -807-&437.-3
Space Probes to the Planets
by Fay Robinon
With full-color NASA photographs
Ages 48 * $14.95 * October
ISBN 0-8076-748-8
Down In th Sea: The Jellyfsh
Down In the Sa: The Octopus
Each 
book by Paricia KIte
ustated with fue 
r phoographs
Ages 3-8 * 13.95 • Seplenbeo
ISBN 0-8075-1712-7 Jellyfsh
ISBN 0-8075-1715-1 Octopus
Natalie Spitzer's Turtles
by Gina Wllner-Pardo
FuNl-color ustraaton 
by Molly Delaney
Ages 5s. $135 
• 
September
ISBN 0-8075-5515-0
A Concept Book
Kathy's Hats: A Story of Hope
by Trudy Krier
Full-cor illustralon by
Nadine Bernard Westcot
Ages 6-10 * $13.95 SepMmber
ISBN 0-8075-41168
A Conc pBoOk 
S
The Two 
'Clock Secret
by Belehay Roberts
Fu`-olor Mlustraon by Robin Kram
Ages 4-7 * $13 95 SepOmber
ISBN-0-8075-8159-3
Oh, How Waflel
Riddles You Can Eat
by Judith Maws and Fay Robinson
Iuntlraed by Car Whitng
Ages 6-9- $8.6 
5 Ocroer
ISBN 0S075-5g07-
George On His Own
by Laure Lawtor
Illusrated by Toby Gowtng
Ages 8-12 $11.95 Noveriber
ISBN 0-8075-2623-4
On Being Sarah
by ElzabSth 
Helman
Iluated by LUo Salo
Ages 10-14 $11.96. October
ISBN 0-8075-6068.
How the Second Grade
Got $8,205.SO to Visit
the Statue of Liberty
by Natishan 
Zielran
Full-olor lusirasons by Bit SLin
Agos 5 
$1395.- September
ISBN 0-9075-3431-5
Albert Whitman Prairie Books
Paperback editiorn of Hardcv Favorites
Available Sepember 1992
All About Asthma
by Wllam Ostrow and Viian Ostrow
Ilustrated by Blanche Sims
Age 7 12 $4.95
ISBN 0-075-0275-8
Ages 246 * $4. 
eac
ISBN 0-8075-3130 
Hallowen
ISBN 0-8075-3142.1 Henukkth
My Body Is Private
by Unda Waloord Gird
mkut-ed by Rodney Pale
Ages 6-10 * $4 5
ISBN 0-075-5319
New
Boxcar Children *Mysterles
#30, The Dsappearing
Friend Mystery
ISBN 0 8075-1628-7 Paper
ISBN 0-8075-1627-9 Cloh
Septckber
#31, The Mystery of the
Singing Ghost
ISBN 0-8075-53948 Paper
ISN 0-8075-5307-2 Cloth
October
#32, The Mystery in the Snow
ISBN 080755393 X Paper
ISBN 0-8075-5392-1 Cloth
Novemwber
Ages 7 12
Papetback $3.50 * Hardcover $10.95
Price subject to change
Send ifr a free catalog
Al books In publher's reinloroed 
bindng
Albert Whitman & Company * 6340 Oakton Street - Morton Grove, Illinois 60053-2723
University of Illinois Press
54 East Gregory Drive
Champaign, IL 61820
U.SA.
RETUN POSTAGE GUA 
rruAN
SECOND CLASS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
