U
ILL I N 
I S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
'7
;·;··-- 
-
s~:"
la'*
S1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019 * www.harperchildrens.com 
I
THE
B UL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
November 2000
Vol. 54 No. 3
A LOOK INSIDE
95 
THE BIG PICTURE
The Serpent Slayer and Other Stories of Strong Women ad. by Katrin
Tchana; illus. by Trina Schart Hyman
96 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
97 
* The Rose and the Beast: Fairy Tales Retold by Francesca Lia Block
99 
* The Hunter: A Chinese Folktale ad. by Mary Casanova; illus. by Ed
102
111
112
127
128
Young
* Cold Feet ad. by Cynthia DeFelice; illus. by Robert Andrew Parker
* Gold Dust by Chris Lynch
* Burning for Revenge by John Marsden
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
__ _ _ _ __ __ _~
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL
61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor (JMD)
Deborah Stevenson, Associate Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elaine A. Bearden, Reviewer (EAB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Fern Kory, Reviewer (FK)
Kate McDowell, Reviewer (KM)
CENTER STAFF
Jeannette Hulick
Melanie Kimball
Jennifer VanWinkle
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $60.00; individuals, $50.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $5.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from Bell & Howell, 300 North Zeeb
Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson Associates,
P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to the
University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
All inquiries about subscriptions and advertising should go to University of Illinois Press, 1325 S.
Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903, 217-333-0950.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin
of the Centerfir Children's Books, 51 E. Armory Ave., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. E-mail:
bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2000 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Trina Schart Hyman from The Serpent Slayer and Other Stories ofStrong Women
©2000. Used by permission of Little, Brown and Company.
NOVEMBER 2000 
* 95
THE BIG PICTURE
The Serpent Slayer, and Other Stories of Strong
Women
ad. by Katrin Tchana; illus. by Trina Schart Hyman
Past popular wisdom held that female characters in folk and fairytales were passive,
weak, and brainless, an impression most likely garnered from animated retellings
featuring big-eyed damsels often in distress. Rosemary Minard, Ethel Johnston
Phelps, James Riordan, and Angela Carter addressed this apparent lack of pre-
ferred role-models by researching, collecting, and retelling, to various extents, tra-
ditional folktales featuring women in active roles, and books containing those stories
found their way to secure spots on library shelves. These titles were followed by
picture-book versions of similar tales as well as more collections, until the tradition
of the active folktale heroine in books for youth was at least tenuously established.
Here to cement that tradition is Katrin Tchana and Trina Schart Hyman's first
collaborative effort.
This is a collaboration between adaptor and illustrator, mother and daugh-
ter, and that familial connection resonates within the storytelling tradition of the
selected tales. Mothers and daughters, sisters and wives all indelibly make their
mark in these eighteen folktales featuring heroines who win the day through cour-
age, cleverness, and, sometimes, subterfuge. Tchana offers solid retellings of the
oft-anthologized ("Kate Crackernuts") and the not oft-anthologized ("Sister Lace"),
from countries ranging from Russia to the Gambia. Her affection for her subject
is clear from the preface (wherein she states her reasons for compiling this collec-
tion) and from her precise handling of the tales themselves.
The opening sentences of the tales are crisply evocative, instantly trans-
porting reader and listener to the worlds the focal characters inhabit: "In the dark
time of the year, when the days are short and a cold wind blows from the north, a
serpent came to live in an old cave on the mountain of Yung Ling" ("The Serpent
Slayer"); "Marcela was working in her father's pumpkin patch, looking pretty as a
pumpkin herself, when the king rode by on his fine white horse, hunting for wild
pigs" ("Clever Marcela"); "Long ago there was a powerful emperor who lived in a
palace of pure gold in the midst of a city more splendid and dazzling than the
world had ever known before" ("The Magic Lake"). Most of Tchana's heroines
travel the well-worn path to happily-ever-after endings, but several women take
the more adventurous road to unresolved, ambiguous conclusions ("Grandmother's
Skull"; "Sun-Girl and Dragon-Prince"). The thematic variety of the stories pro-
vides something for everyone: tales of swashbuckling adventure ("The Rebel Prin-
cess"); compassionate courage ("Nesoowa and the Chenoo"); redemptive love
("Three Whiskers from a Lion's Chin"); and clever self-determination ("Duffy the
Lady") shine from an impressively designed volume.
96 
* THE BULLETIN
Each tale opens with an illustrative vignette reflecting some plot inci-
dent, and each contains a full-page painting that evokes the emotional sensibility
of the tale. Hyman's ink and acrylic art balances between the robust and romantic;
the larger-than-life heroines are given stature, energy, and power through the artist's
visual characterizations. Women old and young, plump and willowy, maidenly
and motherly have their defining moments in this classy compendium, and there
is enough physical variety here to ensure that just about everyone will see someone
that looks like her.
Humor, suspense, romance, and horror are reflected through the me-
dium of Hyman's powerful art. There isn't a glamorized, gauzy moment in the
bunch, but readers and listeners won't miss the fluff. The artist eschews fussy
ornamentation, instead employing fluid, bolder lines that suit her bolder subjects.
The women are dynamically posed: Li Chi, barefoot with curved sword and flying
hair, aims a death blow at a hideous scaled serpent with horrific fangs and malevo-
lent eyes; dark-eyed Nesoowa sits in the almost-night across from a monstrous,
cannibalistic Chenoo, offering soup and affection; wary Maria crouches in the
brush, flute on her shoulder and machete in hand, waiting for the mountain lion
that will either save her marriage or eat her.
The strength of this collection rests not on individual stories or images,
but instead upon the connections among these particular stories and these particu-
lar images. Other recent compilations have made inroads in the redefinition of the
popular image of women in folktales-Kathleen Ragan and Jane Yolen both have
similarly themed collections-but this collection has a pronounced advantage over
its more academic predecessors. 
Tchana's fresh and unpretentious storytelling
voice is reinforced by the earthy glory of Hyman's illustrations, and the result is an
elegantly conceived and executed volume that belongs on the shelf at home, in the
library, and in school. Generous source citations provide plenty of opportunity
for tracing the evolution of the tales and for seeking out additional variants. Here
are women to make us proud; to paraphrase one story's closing line, may their
spirits live forever. (Imprint information appears on p. 123.)
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ALLEN, DEBBIE 
Dancing in the Wings; illus. by Kadir Nelson. 
Dial, 2000 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-8037-2501-9 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-6
A big problem turns out to be a big asset in this tale of a dramatic turnaround in
the fortunes of Sassy, a young African-American ballet student whose outsized feet
and corresponding height have often left her dancing in the wings while other
dancers formed matched chorus lines and the girls who did not tower over the
boys in the class were featured in recital duets. When a scout comes to choose
NOVEMBER 2000 
* 97
dancers for a summer dance festival in Washington, D.C., Sassy signs up for try-
outs but has a hard time holding on to her attitude until her Uncle Redd convinces
her to see her height as a gift. This basic plot is nothing new, of course, but the
first-person narration-which relates some mild trash-talking at the tryouts and
regular exchanges of insults between Sassy and her brother, Hughie-gives Sassy's
story a distinct flavor. The engaging illustrations (oils on photocopied pencil draw-
ings) evoke the taupes, pinks, and browns of the dancers in the studio as clearly as
the blue jeans and asphalt gray of the schoolyard, while they also help to place
Sassy firmly within a family and her community. While the success enjoyed by
Sassy and her brother is rather more complete than that enjoyed by most young
people, whatever their assets or aspirations ("By the end of the summer Hughie
had won the grand prize at space camp in Alabama, and I got to dance a duet with
Dwight in the summer concert"), most young dreamers will approve of this Cin-
derella story for those who shop in the big and tall section. FK
ANEMA, DURLYNN 
Louise Arner Boyd: Arctic Explorer. Morgan Reynolds,
2000 
112p 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 1-883846-42-0 
$19.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
In 1920, thirty-two-year-old Louise Arner Boyd found herself a wealthy heiress
after the death of her parents. Early dabbling with travel led quickly to a passion
for the Arctic ice, and she turned not just into an explorer but a funder and direc-
tor of several Arctic expeditions, taking photographs and sponsoring scientific re-
search that added considerably to Arctic knowledge. Her expertise was sufficiently
notable that U.S. military intelligence put her to work as an Arctic expert during
World War II; her career highlights also include geographical society medals and
election to the policy-making body of the American Geographical Society. The
book hits on the high points of the life of this little-known explorer, depicting
Boyd as a female pioneer not just for her travels but also for her administration of
these expeditions: she was the boss. While the author doesn't shirk from the fact
that wealth made Boyd's achievements possible, it's also clear that wealth alone
wouldn't have gotten Boyd where she went. Unfortunately, the treatment is on
the superficial side and the writing is disjointed in the extreme, with random leaps
of thought between paragraphs making the exposition not just choppy but confus-
ing. Nonetheless, Boyd is an unusual figure deserving of more than footnote sta-
tus in the history of exploration, and this title provides an easy introduction to her.
Black-and-white photographs offer varying degrees of clarity; a timeline, a bibliog-
raphy, endnotes, and an index are included. DS
BLOCK, FRANCESCA LIA 
The Rose and the Beast: Fairy Tales Retold. Cotler/
HarperCollins, 2000 
229p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028130-8 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028129-4 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 9 up
A girl with skin as white as snow chooses love over passion. A maiden no bigger
than her mother's thumb becomes muse to a disheartened poet. Three sisters
tremble between jealousy and redemption. Nine well-known western fairy tales
are here glazed with the theme of romance redeemed. The language is redolent
with symbol and suggestion, peppered with a subtle, surprising humor that results
in intellectual double-takes. The stories themselves are so convoluted they are
nearly psychedelic, but even in her less successful pieces Block achieves a graceful
98 
* 
THE BULLETIN
awkwardness of style, infusing her retellings with a quirky sense of fairyland's shad-
owy side that offers opportunity for discussion and even wonder. The author sets
her tales in refracted space similar to an Escher drawing, rebuilding Los Angeles as
a fairy-tale universe where wolves are sexual predators, seemingly helpless females
carry knives they know how to use, and an abusive childhood can be redeemed by
love. Just when the collection teeters on the brink of declaring that love conquers
all, Block's Beauty and Beast step into the rose garden and turn popular romance
into metaphysical mystery. Angela Carter and Emma Donoghue have ventured
this way before; their fans will eagerly accompany Block on her journey through
this dark but magic mirror. JMD
BRADLEY, KIMBERLY BRUBAKER 
Weaver's Daughter. Delacorte, 2000 
166p
ISBN 0-385-32769-2 
$14.95 
R Gr. 4-7
Each autumn since her family moved to the Southwest Territory (now Tennessee),
Lizzy Baker's asthma attacks have become more severe. The near-heroic ministra-
tions of her family (particularly her mother and elder sister, Hezzy) pull her through
in spite of the doctor's useless dosing and purging, but Lizzy must confront the
inescapable fact that the coming year may well be her last. Terror that she is
reluctant to share with her family causes her to withdraw at first into a frantic effort
to produce a woven coverlet that will be her legacy, yet she's still finding much to
live for: interesting new neighbors; a maturing Hezzy who pursues the neighbors'
son; the Bakers' new baby; and the homely routines of the farming year that Lizzy
loves. In a final attempt to dodge another, probably fatal attack, she is forced to
separate from her close-knit family and remove to the sea air of Charleston. Brad-
ley deftly weaves into Lizzy's tale a bit of The Wings of a Dove's Milly Theale's
determination to live fully until she has no choice and a bit of the March family's
loving support and faith-filled resignation to God's will for Beth. Deeply touching
but never morose, this title delivers the hanky-soaking pleasure of a great sick-girl
story and considerable insight into a time when families hoped for the best but
braced for the worst. EB
BURLEIGH, ROBERT 
Messenger, Messenger; illus. by Barry Root. 
Atheneum,
2000 
32p
ISBN 0-689-82103-4 
$16.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
The fearless figure of the intrepid bike messenger hasn't gotten much attention in
children's literature, but here's a title out to change the situation. Brief couplets
trace the day of messenger Calvin Curbhopper from his morning ride downtown
to his pell-mell rush through the city with packages and documents for delivery.
Burleigh's an accomplished author of biography for young people (see Home Run:
The Story ofBabe Ruth, BCCB 9/98, etc.), but his versification skills aren't strong:
the components have some impact, but the tetrameter too often wobbles like a
slowly ridden bike, making readalouds choppy and uneven. The art is more suc-
cessful, depicting Calvin's semi-outlaw existence with drama and flair: his studio
apartment will look glamorous to many youngsters, with its bed on the floor and
absence of parental supervision. His breezy travels around the city have an envi-
able freedom accented by some creative viewpoints and perspectives, such as the
head-on view of him pelting across the bridge to work or the image of him leaning
casually against a pole with one hand as he radios in with his other rather than
deigning to dismount his trusty bicycle. Calvin himself is a scarlet-helmeted des-
perado in flip-up shades and goatee, race/ethnicity nonspecific beyond general ur-
NOVEMBER 2000 
* 99
ban coolness. Root's gouache runs to sun-drenched yellows, and his image of
downtown has high-speed excitement and urban beauty. Add some entertaining
illustrative details (a Batmobile holding up traffic, for instance), and you've got a
visual world kids will yearn for, bumpy textual ride or no. DS
BYRD, ROBERT, ad. 
Saint Francis and the Christmas Donkey; ad. and illus. by Robert
Byrd. 
Dutton, 2000 
[40p]
ISBN 0-525-46480-8 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-8 yrs
St. Francis ofAssisi meets a disgruntled donkey who complains about its lot in life:
"Ever since the beginning of time, we donkeys have carried heavy loads on our
small backs, and people have made fun of the way we sound. This does not seem
fair." To placate the beast, St. Francis tells the donkey the story of creation, in-
cluding a pourquoi episode about how donkey got his bray, long ears, and life of
burden-bearing. The saint ends with the story of Jesus' birth and the important
role the donkey played in getting the Holy Family to Bethlehem. Byrd has
"reconfigured" these tales into a lengthy, naively illustrated Christmas story. The
format of the line-and-watercolor art varies from double-page full-bleeds to full-
page pictures ornately framed. Byrd's representation of the creation echoes Peter
Sfs' cosmic compositions; the Assisi and Bethlehem settings resemble Brian
Wildsmith, and the perspectives and compositions of the vista-like landscapes are
influenced by Italian frescoes. Plot-wise, there is a lot happening here (an intro-
duction to the life of St. Francis, the creation story, the Nativity story), and the
writing is too haphazard and wordy to get the story across effectively. While the
text doesn't have quite the pleasant polish of the illustrations, this walks the line of
popular appeal very neatly, and it is sure to satisfy those looking for an unusual
Christmas story that doesn't stray too far from tradition. JMD
CASANOVA, 
MARY, ad. 
The Hunter: A Chinese Folktale; illus. by Ed
Young. 
Atheneum, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-689-82906-X 
$16.95 
R* 
5-8 yrs
Hai Li Bu, a young hunter responsible for the well-being of his village, saves the
daughter of the Dragon King; in return, he is granted the boon of understanding
the language of animals, and he becomes a hunter without equal. The Dragon
King warns Hai Li Bu that to tell of his boon is to turn to stone, but circumstances
force him to reveal himself in order to save his village: "And to this day it is said
that somewhere in China, high on a mountain peak, still stands the statue of Hai
Li Bu, gazing upon his valley below, where the villagers listen to every person,
including the youngest child." Casanova's elegant text merges effortlessly with the
elegant formality of Young's gouache and pastel illustrations. Painted lines in
burnt sienna and cloudy black flow against varying shades of gold and orange;
white highlights are used for subtle emphasis (a white beard, water), and touches
of deep orange and dull rose subtly hint at the setting sun. Gold Chinese charac-
ters representing an element of the plot sit in the bottom right hand corner of each
spread; a key at the beginning of the book identifies each combination. Young's
masterful compositions have unfailing balance and uniquely varied perspectives;
the apparent simplicity of his graceful lines emphasize the tale's emotional impact.
Complex, powerful, and beautiful, this is a strong story melded with equally strong
images that deserves a permanent place on library shelves. JMD
100 
* THE BULLETIN
COBB, VICKI 
Squirts and Spurts: Science Fun with Water; Library ed. ISBN 0-
7613-1572-1; Bangs and Twangs: Science Fun with Sound; Library ed. ISBN 0-
7613-1571-3. 
Each book: 
illus. by Steve Haefele. 
Millbrook,
2000 
48p 
$23.40 
R 
Gr. 3-6
There's actually little here in terms of scope or activities that hasn't been covered in
other middle-grades science offerings, but Cobb's lucid, chatty explications of sci-
entific principles and unfailing ability to select the most engaging hands-on dem-
onstrations send her, once again, to the head of the pack. Bangs employs dancing
sugar crystals, paper cup walkie-talkies, and delightfully annoying dental floss
"squawkers" to illustrate how vibrations travel in waves through various media.
Squirts sends experimenters off to the bathtub and into the great outdoors with an
assortment of balloons, bottles, canisters, drinking straws-or simply teeth, cheeks,
and a mouthful of water-to test ways in which water and air pressure are har-
nessed for everything from aerosol bottles to hydraulic lifts. Haefele's loud, comic-
book style pictures, in which a broad caricature of Cobb herself appears as host
"V.C.," pump a little sass into the science and genuinely enhance textual explana-
tions into the bargain. If the 500s shelves need a little shaking up, slip these titles
in and start a little commotion. EB
COLIER, BRYAN 
Uptown; written and illus. by Bryan Collier. 
Holt, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-5721-8 
$15.95 
R 
6-9 yrs
Uptown is New York City's Harlem, seen through the loving eyes of the young
African-American narrator. The boy's declarations ring out: "Uptown is chicken
and waffles served around the clock. At first it seems like a weird combination, but
it works .... Uptown is weekend shopping on 125th Street. The vibe is always
jumping as people bounce to their own rhythms." The boy shows off the high-
lights of his neighborhood from the Apollo Theater to a barbershop, from a Van
Der Zee photograph to a basketball game. Collier's loose, informal text wanders
through watercolor and collage illustrations, the letters changing color and size to
suit the backdrop. The combination of photo-collage and painted images is eerily
realistic, resulting in an energetic effect that augments the often subtle palette.
The people's faces are a soft counter to the architectural solidity of porches and
buildings, and the compositions are imaginative and varied (the jazz spread is par-
ticularly compelling). While the rambling text is a bit obvious, the illustrations are
intricately constructed and effectively composed. Aimed at a younger audience
than Myers' Harlem (BCCB 3/97), this is a visual love song that makes it easy to
see why the narrator loves it uptown. JMD
CRAFT, K. Y., ad. 
Cinderella; ad. and illus. by K. Y. Craft. 
SeaStar, 2000 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 1-58717-005-1 
$15.88
Trade ed. ISBN 1-58717-004-3 
$15.95 
R 
5-9 yrs
The tale of the maiden who wins true love and good fortune through her kind
heart and the intercession of her fairy godmother may well be the most popular
fairy tale in any library or classroom collection. Craft's adaptation, based on Perrault
and Lang, offers little that's new (despite Cinderella's chance meeting with the
prince in the woods). The point of this title is not the storytelling, however, but
the lavish illustrations. Craft, already known for her highly ornamental visual
interpretations of Marie Craft's Cupid and Psyche (BCCB 9/96) and Marianna
Mayer's The Twelve Dancing Princesses (BCCB 6/89), lets any pretense of artistic
NOVEMBER 2000 
* 
101
moderation fall by the wayside here. The paintings are rendered in a fulsome style
that combines Parrish and Watteau; the romantic treatment of light, the lush ide-
alism of the countryside, and the gorgeously detailed costumes all contribute to a
sense of fairy-tale drama. Paintings are accompanied by decoratively framed text
boxes; double-spread depictions of sweeping dramatic scenes (the transformation,
the ball, the flight) add to the classic storybook sensibilities this title seems deter-
mined to evoke. Although this glamorized, rococo approach to illustration may be
overly mannered for some, it certainly captures the sense of magic dear to the
hearts of fairy-tale fans. JMD
DARROW, SHARON 
Old Thunder and Miss Raney; illus. by Kathryn
Brown. 
Kroupa/DK Ink, 2000 
[32p]
ISBN 0-7894-2619-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Miss Raney Cloud, a devotee of the art of biscuit making, is ready to trounce all
comers at the Washita County Fair. She and her horse, Old Thunder, have been
longtime contenders and, let's face it, longtime losers in every event at said fair,
and Raney is determined to change the pattern. Unfortunately, she doesn't quite
make it back from a supply run to town when the big storm hits-but it turns out
that the tornado whirl has done a dandy job of sifting the flour, and the ensuing
biscuits are delicious. Alas, they win no baked-good prizes; Old Thunder, how-
ever, is so energized by his biscuit breakfast that he sails past the competition in the
plow-horse race, and Raney and Thunder take home a blue ribbon after all. There's
a good old tall-tale flavor to both the language and proceedings here, with Miss
Raney's ejaculations of "Horsefeathers!," "Pshaw!," and "Fiddle-dee-dee!" giving
the reader-aloud plenty of fodder. Brown's artwork spins the story into an endear-
ing down-home fantasy. Her sharp, scratchy lines evoke Kimberly Bulcken Root,
and her visual characterizations are picturesque and distinctive: Raney's loyal
Thunder is a patient-eyed, rawboned old plug with dinner-plate feet, and Raney
herself is, iconoclastically, a pretty young woman with a flyaway braid bouncing
behind her and cowboy boots peeking out from under her dress. Pair this with
Linda Arms White's Comes a Wind (BCCB 3/00) for a breezy readaloud, and pass
the biscuits (recipe on back cover). DS
DAVIS, ROBERT 
The Friendly Beasts; illus. by Sharon McGinley. 
Greenwillow,
2000 
26p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-17422-1 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-17421-3 
$15.95 
R 3-8 yrs
McGinley offers here a bright and joyous reillustration of the carol, set to an an-
cient French tune, in which beasts and birds gently boast of the roles they played at
Jesus' nativity. "'I,' said the camel, yellow and black,/ 'Over the desert upon my
back/ I brought Him gifts in the Wise Men's pack.'" The artist's palette employs
a crayonish spectrum of nearly garish saturated shades of primary and secondary
colors, highlighted with patches of black and white pattern that sometimes crowd
already busy compositions. Nonetheless, the Holy Family sprawls comfortably in
their Bethlehem haven amid swooping angels, leaping fishes, and the whole shaggy
menagerie that crowd them for a good, close look at the baby; elongated, chiseled
features reminiscent of santos figures and a buoyant disregard of perspective add a
touch of magical realism in harmony with the more mystical aspects of Christmas.
102 
* THE BULLETIN
A simple piano arrangement and lyrics are included, and a closing note attributes
the familiar words to Robert Davis, who "is rarely given credit for transforming an
ancient festival song into a modern children's classic." EB
DEEDY, CARMEN AGRA 
The Yellow Star: The Legend ofKing Christian X ofDen-
mark; illus. by Henri Sorensen. 
Peachtree, 2000 
32p
ISBN 1-56145-208-4 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 3-5
During the Nazi occupation of Denmark, Jews were ordered to wear a yellow six-
pointed star on their clothing, so they would stand out from their fellow Danes
and be easily identifiable. Legend has it that in defiance, Danish King Christian
had such a star sewn on his own clothing, and that his people, Jews and Gentiles,
followed his example, "and, once again, in the country of Denmark, there were
only Danes." Professional storyteller Deedy retells this legend (identified as un-
substantiated in an extensive author's note) in unadorned, effective language that
lends currency to history. The succinct, provocative opening lines ("Early in the
year 1940, in the country of Denmark, there were only Danes") are enhanced by a
Copenhagen street scene crowded with various citizens; each illustration that fol-
lows further substantiates the text, giving a solid sense of times passed. The spare
but resonant storytelling is given an authoritative setting in Danish illustrator
Serensen's paintings; his formal style and balanced compositions reinforce the mood
and dignity of the story. The placement of the historical note at the end of the
book instead of at the beginning exacerbates the obvious problem of the possible
reinforcement of false history. In the hands of a context-providing adult, however,
this tale will find heavy use as a readaloud and discussion starter, whether the topic
is truth, history, heroism, or moral dilemmas. JMD
DEFELICE, CYNTHIA, ad. 
Cold Feet; illus. by Robert Andrew Parker. 
DK Ink,
2000 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-7894-2636-6 $15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
7-10 yrs
Bagpiper Willie McPherson can't help himself, really. He's nearly frozen to death,
and "a poor man is a practical man. If you've ever had cold feet, nothing in your
pockets, and less in your stomach, you'll understand what Willie began thinking
as he looked at those two stout legs with their two black boots." Stealing the boots
from a dead man's feet seems like the only thing to do. Trouble is, the dead man
is solid ice, and when Willie tries to take the boots, the feet snap off at the ankle,
frozen into the shoe. Willie takes the boots anyway, thawing them out with the
help of Blossom the cow, resident of the barn in which the piper seeks shelter.
Through deliberate mischief and unexpected luck, Willie winds up ensconced in a
warm farmhouse. He answers a knock on the door and welcomes a stranger: "'Come
in, have some food and drink, sit with me by the fire and warm your poor,
cold-' He paused. 'Feet?' said the man. 'As a matter of fact, that's why I've
come ... '" DeFelice turns a macabre, disconcertingly funny tale into a cliffhanger
that can be played for silly laughs or serious chills. Parker's line-and-watercolor
illustrations have a loose freedom of line that suggests haphazardness, but a closer
look reveals controlled drafting and harmonious compositions. Burnished sienna
hues warm both barn and bovine, and frosty cobalts cool the winter twilight. This
folksong-based tale (retold by DeFelice from an oral telling by renowned British
storyteller, Richard Walker) is a ghost-story teller's dream, just waiting to be de-
frosted in classroom and library. JMD
NOVEMBER 2000 
* 
103
DUNREA, OLVIER 
Bear Noel; written and illus. by Olivier Dunrea. 
Farrar,
2000 
32p
ISBN 0-374-39990-5 
$16.00 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Christmas Eve "is the night when Bear Noel brings Christmas to the animals of
the north woods," and the creatures are spreading the news of the imminent ar-
rival. First Wolf and Hare meet ("'He is coming,' whispers Hare. 'Who is com-
ing?' Wolf asks. 'Bear Noel!' Hare cries"); then they acquaint Fox with the
information, adding a line to the "He is coming" litany, then in turn they encoun-
ter Boar, Hedgehog, and several others, the group each time adding an animal and
the refrain gaining a line. Finally Bear Noel arrives, bringing gifts to the assembled
and hanging the tasty treats decoratively on their tree on "the night when all crea-
tures may come together without fear." While there's a stately resonance to the
text, the refrain starts to drone, the ursine visitation lacks drama (though not rev-
erence), and the pun on Pere Noel will fly over most kids' heads. Dunrea's forest
contrasts creamy white snow with slate-blue night skies freckled with falling snow.
The quietly majestic landscape is populated with fetching wildlife, realistic except
for a slight bipedal tendency; restraint characterizes the draftsmanship, with deli-
cate detailing of hedgehog spines, possum tails, and owl wings adding texture to
the figures. Bear Noel himself evinces dignified warmth rather than jollity as he
paces through the wood in his cozy sheepskin-looking coat. Though not as well-
turned as Kennedy's The Beasts of Bethlehem (BCCB 12/92), this may evoke a
similar sense of wonder in young animal lovers. DS
FALCONER, IAN 
Olivia; written and illus. by Ian Falconer. 
Schwartz/Atheneum,
2000 
38p
ISBN 0-689-82953-1 
$16.00 
R* 4-7 yrs
Olivia is an ebullient young porker who is "very good at wearing people out," and
her performance of even mundane tasks ("Olivia gets dressed. She has to try on
everything") bespeaks a passionate excess that makes that exhaustive talent believ-
able. Rather than a story, the book offers a gallery of Olivia adventures from a
museum visit (the starstruck Olivia fancies herself a Degas ballerina) to a bedtime
readaloud (a Maria Callas biography) and finally sleep, but Olivia's forceful char-
acter is nearly a story in its own right. Though there's the merest whiff of adult
Manhattanite archness to the enterprise, Falconer's succulendy concise text and
personably porcine illustrations have genuine child appeal and perspective. Main
impact honors go to the art: the largely dichromatic palette (almost all illustra-
tions rely on charcoal shades of black with brief accents of red gouache) features an
endearingly top-heavy Olivia prancing around on her hind legs, an audacious ham
on the hoof. The art does much with little, using minimal lines and ear position to
make Olivia one expressive pig, and the elegant layout floats spot art across glossy
expanses of white space. Olivia's fetchingly upturned nose and dogged-pigged?-
determination will make her plenty of young friends. DS
Girls and Their Horses: True Tales from American Girl. 
American Girl,
2000 
64p 
illus. and with photographs 
(American Girl Library)
Paper ed. ISBN 1-58485-039-6 
$7.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-5
This compilation of articles from American Girl magazine offers five brief profiles
of horse-blessed girls. One rides in the Little Britches Rodeo, another's getting a
pony foal at the Chincoteague auction, another works at her parents' horse farm,
104 
* THE BULLETIN
and there's a vaulter and a show jumper to boot. The pieces here have an under-
standably magazine-style flavor, with action photographs, illustrated sidebars, sub-
headings in contrasting colors, and soundbites of text nestling together comfortably
on the glossy pages. What's enticing in a magazine seems superficial in a book,
however: we don't learn enough about any one child or event, and the exclama-
tory style starts sounding a little desperate; the horsey facts and website pointers
are sound but scanty. The photographs (librarians should resign themselves to the
disappearance of the attached series of eminently desirable horsey trading cards)
will be the main draw for most readers, however, and alluring depictions of irre-
sistible horses and equestrian possibilities will have many youngsters poring raptly
over the pages. This isn't a great source of information, but it will satisfy young
equiphiles in search of a quick and painless browse. DS
GLASER, OMRI 
Round the Garden; illus. by Byron Glaser and Sandra
Higashi. 
Abrams, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-8109-4137-6 
$15.95 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
A tear begins the water cycle in this one-sentence nod to "The House that Jack
Built": "This is the tear/ that made the puddle/ that the sun evaporated/ that made
the cloud/ that made the rain fall/ that watered the garden ... " Each short clause
inhabits its own spread of bold color, followed by a double-spread detailed inves-
tigation of tear, puddle, evaporation, clouds, rain, garden, etc., until things come
round full circle to a tear-causing onion. A palette of vibrant summery colors
forms the background for the digitally created art, giving the impression of sharply
executed cut-paper collage. Vertical lines, attention to pattern, and perspective
add visual energy to the illustrations. The slight text simply doesn't measure up to
the ingenuity of the illustrations, which results in an unbalanced presentation.
Nonetheless, you could pair this book with Lois Ehlert's Making Vegetable Soup to
draw children into a discussion of science through word and art. EAB
GLASS, ANDREW 
Bewildered for Three Days: As to Why Daniel Boone Never Wore
His Coonskin Cap; written and illus. by Andrew Glass. 
Holiday House,
2000 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1446-9 
$16.95 
R Gr. 3-5
As the aging Daniel Boone poses for his portrait, he explains to the disappointed
painter exactly why his legendary headgear will not be making an appearance. It
seems that the coonskin cap was swiped right off his boyhood head by a covetous
bear, and while pursuing said cap, Daniel found himself pursued by Indians. He
hid out for a long uncomfortable night in a hollow log already claimed by a mother
raccoon and her offspring, and in gratitude for their hospitality, he solemnly swore
off furry haberdashery forever. Glass' original tall tale, suggested by rather than
based on several events in Boone's life, has genuine kid appeal in both narration
and illustration. Boone spins his yarn with enough humility to make it almost
believable: "'Twas a solemn debt of gratitude. A promise, pure and simple....
Fact is, when I carved out the Wilderness Road to lead folks through the
Cumberland Gap, I was wearing a wide-brimmed hat near as tall as this tale I'll tell
ye to pass the time." Ragged-edged pencil and oil pastel pictures, rough as tree
bark, convey the eerie density of forested land inhabited by fearsome (if stereotypi-
cal) Indians and tentatively probed by white frontiersmen. While generously dish-
ing out humor, Glass also acknowledges the inevitable native/settler conflict with
NOVEMBER 2000 
* 
105
sad resignation: "I fear there is no way to share a land so differently understood."
A bibliography and detailed historical endnote are provided. EB
GRAY, DIANNE E. 
Holding Up the Earth. Houghton, 2000 
210p
ISBN 0-618-00703-2 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Fourteen-year-old Hope has an intense attachment to her backpack, in which she
carries what little she has left of her mother's ashes, and she dreads being accepted
into another foster family just to be turned out in the end. Her new foster mother,
Sarah, takes Hope to stay with Sarah's own mother, Anna, for the summer. There
Hope is introduced to the history of Anna's farm through Anna's collection of
letters and diaries written by young women who lived there in the past, from the
first settlers during Westward expansion on to the present day. As Hope becomes
immersed in these stories, Gray's prose shows tensions between Anna and Sarah,
who is jealous when Hope shares secrets more readily with Anna than she does
with Sarah. Through the inserted diaries and letters, Gray creates a strong sense of
the personalities and traditions that permeate Anna's farm. Unfortunately, the
inserted stories are occasionally so lengthy that they dominate the narrative, and
the historical figures are more vividly portrayed than Hope's own personality. Still,
young women seeking their own niche will find peace in the profound sense of
place on Anna's farm as Hope begins to put down roots. KM
HILL, KIRKPATRICK 
The Year ofMiss Agnes. 
McElderry, 2000 
[128p]
ISBN 0-689-82933-7 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-6
Always before, new teachers have departed this remote Alaskan village on the
Koyukuk River before the beginning of the next school year. Opening chapters
vividly portray postwar village life as a girl named Fred overhears gossip about how
stern the soon-to-arrive teacher is, what a good teacher Miss Agnes has been in
other villages, and how she "talks funny" (she's English). The story progresses at a
comfortably meandering pace, as Fred tells brief stories about her deceased father
and other people who are important to her. Eventually all the anecdotes focus on
the creative strategies Miss Agnes uses to encourage the children in her class to
enjoy learning; she even convinces a few of them that they might someday attend
college in Fairbanks. Hill has woven a story that is uplifting in the best sense,
letting the effects of Miss Agnes' teaching speak for themselves by remaining true
to the widening perspective of the curious and eager Fred. When summer comes,
the whole village goes off to fish camp, and Fred expects to find a new teacher
when they return. Instead, Miss Agnes stays, and readers will feel as satisfied as
Fred does with the first teacher who didn't leave. KM
HOLEMAN, LINDA 
Raspberry House Blues. 
Tundra, 2000 
192p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-88776-493-2 
$6.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
"You're not my real mother," sixteen-year-old Poppy hurls at her adoptive mother
after discovering that she's going to be left behind in Vancouver while her mother
vacations in Greece. In rebellion, Poppy takes off to Winnipeg and her father,
secretly planning to seek her birth mother there. Her father's house isn't the sanc-
tuary she'd hoped; he's got a green-living vegan girlfriend, a two-year-old
unhousebroken son, and another baby on the way, and Poppy's expected to help
in reducing the household disorder. Poppy would much rather be spending time
106 
* 
THE BULLETIN
with glamorous but odd actress Becca Jell, with whom she is fascinated; soon fam-
ily loyalties become even more confusing when Poppy becomes convinced that
Becca is her birth mother. Poppy's self-centeredness is believable, and Holeman
paints an effective picture of a teenager's unintentional carving out of a family
niche as Poppy develops a sense of belonging in her father's household. While the
extremes of Poppy's narration are authentic, the heavy swing of the pendulum
sometimes unbalances characterization. Poppy's fascination with Becca isn't just
the credible romanticism of an adolescent but also a romanticized literary turn that
self-awareness doesn't mitigate, with Poppy's change of heart about searching for
her birth mother more narratively convenient than convincing. Poppy's is a com-
pelling voice of resentment, however, and readers chafing at their own familial
confines will empathize with her. DS
HOWARD, ELLEN 
The Log Cabin Christmas; illus. by Ronald Himler. 
Holiday
House, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1381-0 
$16.95 
R 
6-8 yrs
Elvirey and her family, introduced in The Log Cabin Quilt (BCCB 10/96), are
facing Christmas without Mam, and their grief manifests itself in near palpable
gloom. Outspoken Elvirey drags the issue everyone has been avoiding out into the
light-it's already Christmas Eve and no preparations have been made for the
event Mam most cherished ("'Ain't there gonna be no Christmas, Granny?' I cried.
'Hush up, child,' she said"). But the floodgates are open, and as the family erupts
in a quarrel, Elvirey takes it upon herself to garland the cabin with pine. Although
no one will apologize or openly acknowledge loss and pain, each quietly contrib-
utes to her holiday effort with candles and calico bows, a tub of bath water and a
shoofly pie ("Then we were peaceful, Granny and Pap and Sis and Bub and me. ...
Seemed like Mam was with us, too"). The scene is overdrawn, but Howard keeps
Elvirey's narration simple, factual, and understated, allowing considerable pathos
to arise naturally from the situation rather than from heavy-handed explication. It
is Himler who supplies the overt sentiment with hazy watercolor scenes of the
grieving family, stiflingly close and yet emotionally isolated among the muddy
shadows of their cabin, as they transform their home with golden light, cheerful
festoons, and a treasured china jug. Only an unredeemed Scrooge is likely to make
it dry-eyed through the closing lines ("I looked at their faces, aglow in the light.
Then I opened my mouth and sang. 'Joy to the World!'"), so have the tissues at
hand. EB
HuuSKA-BEITH, LAURA 
The Book ofBadldeas; written and illus. by Laura Huliska-
Beith. 
Tingley/Little, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-316-08748-3 
$14.95 
Ad 
6-10 yrs
This lighthearted take on the acuity of hindsight offers a few handfuls of promising
notions gone wrong. Some of these ideas smack of authenticity ("Parking your toy
truck in the oven"), while others seem contrived to force a chuckle ("Creating your
own intergalactic communication device ... with parts from your Dad's new ste-
reo".) Some-"Keeping your glue stick and lip balm in the same pocket"- 
are
potent enough to stand on their own Others rely on illustration to drive the point
home-"Letting a friend bring her pet porcupine to your birthday party" shows
balloons popping as the offending creature makes its progress down the party table.
Acrylic and collage pictures incorporate a rubbery-limbed, bubble-headed cast into
NOVEMBER 2000 
* 
107
overwrought, gravity-defying compositions that keep visual energy pumping even
when the text flags. Jacket flap information suggests that some of the author's very
best bad ideas have been prudently omitted; no doubt teachers brave enough to
use this as yeast for a creative-writing project will find their own students' mishaps
will rise much higher. EB
HUNECK, STEPHEN 
Sally Goes to the Beach; written and illus. by Stephen
Huneck. 
Abrams, 2000 
35p
ISBN 0-8109-4186-4 
$17.95 
R 4-7yrs
The beach-bound Sally of the title is a black Labrador Retriever, who narrates this
account of a doggy vacation. The text is simple and declarative ("We pack the car
and drive to the ferry. We get on board. I meet lots of dogs"), the plot essentially
a minimal string of activities. The energy comes instead from the art: oversized
pages feature strongly lined woodcuts starring a sporty white-line-textured Sally.
Retro colors emphasize oceanic aquamarine and its complementary orange; Huneck
deftly employs the wood's own grain to create waves in the printed ocean, which
provides a delicate contrast to the more traditional woodcut solidity of the other
figures. The illustrations conspire effectively with the first-person text in
marginalizing humans-though there's a hand here and there and some excellent
comic feet at the end, this is a story of dogs rather than people, with Sally and her
friends taking center stage. Though there's a designerly edge to the art, it pulls the
narrative together with poker-faced humor, and audiences will giggle at Sally's
species-centric island frolic. DS
ISHERWOOD, SHIRLEY 
Flora the Frog; illus. by Anna C. Leplar. 
Peachtree,
2000 
26p
ISBN 1-56145-223-8 
$16.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Flora doesn't want to be a frog in the school play ("Flora wished that she could be
a fairy with wings or an elf with bells on her toes"), and in a fit of pique she throws
her homemade frog costume up into a tree. Things go downhill for poor Flora
after that: she refuses to participate in play rehearsal, and she lies to her mother
and aunt about the costume. Disgruntled and guilty, Flora bounces her ball an-
grily over the backyard fence; the ball lands next to a pond that just happens to
have three frogs in it, sitting on lily pads. The frogs leap into the air, scattering
silvery drops of water and changing Flora's point of view: "'I could have spangles
on my frog costume,' she said to herself. 'How wonderful to be a frog, jumping
high into the air!'" With the assistance of her mother and aunt, Flora retrieves her
costume, "then all three hurried home to sew on his spangles." Isherwood's to-
the-point story effectively depicts Flora's reluctance to be the frog as well as her
reluctance to tell anyone how she feels about it. Leplar's watercolors feature lively
crowded classrooms and trim neighborhood scenes, but unfortunately monoto-
nous compositions and awkward drafting mar the illustrations. The crisis here
may seem small, but young viewers will understand the tension and appreciate the
solution. JMD
JENNINGS, RICHARD 
Orwell's Luck. 
Lorraine/Houghton, 2000 
14 6p
ISBN 0-618-03628-8 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 5-7
On the first day of a new year, the nameless narrator finds a crippled rabbit in her
front yard next to the newspaper (which she retrieves religiously each morning to
108 
* 
THE BULLETIN
read her daily horoscope). She adopts the rabbit, naming him Orwell, and soon
realizes that Orwell is sending her secret messages (sometimes personal advice,
sometimes predictions of future events) through the horoscope pages and other
media. She's determined to heal Orwell, to which end she pursues additional and
expensive veterinary treatment, and she's also determined to puzzle out the mean-
ing of this communicative phenomenon, so she joins forces with a boy in her class
for a science experiment examining Orwell's abilities. This is already an offbeat
plot, and it's rendered more unusual still by the novel's propensity for epistemo-
logical inquiry as the protagonist ponders the meaning of it all. Jennings pulls off
this quirky project with flair, however; the writing is restrained and accessible,
assisted by a narrator whose grave precision and sly humor sometimes recall Patrice
Kindl's heroines. Readers who are intrigued by strange phenomenon in their own
lives may want to read about this narrator, her mysterious rabbit, and the provoca-
tive questions about the bond between them. KM
KETTEMAN, HELEN 
Armadillo Tattletale; illus. by Keith Graves. 
Scholastic,
2000 
[32p]
ISBN 0-590-99723-8 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
"In the bare bones beginning, Armadillo's ears were as tall as a jackrabbit's and as
wide as a steer's horns," and that meant that Armadillo "could hear anything and
everything." Such a talent makes Armadillo a terrible busybody; he eavesdrops on
conversations that are none of his business and then runs around telling tales about
what he's heard. His ears are so long, however, he trips over them, slowing his
running enough so the other animals can get to the water hole first and keep him
from getting to the fresh water. One day Armadillo tells tales on the wrong ani-
mal, and a very angry Alligator "nipped and snipped and clipped at Armadillo's
ears until there was nothing left but tiny, teeny, itsy, weenie little ears." Armadillo
can't eavesdrop without his ears, but he does stop tripping over them; he can
finally run fast and get his share of water. The language is fresh and funny, and
there are any number of moments for a reader-aloud to do some serious scenery
chewing. The lesson is heavy-handed, though, and the trade-off (acute hearing for
speed) obscures the message (Armadillo never really learns to control himself, and
he gets to run fast anyway). Graves' acrylic, ink, and pencil illustrations take full
advantage of the humorous text; the caricatures of Armadillo and his long-suffer-
ing neighbors showcase exaggerated facial features and distorted body proportions.
Deep blue skies and cool blue water contrast with otherwise desert colors, and
hand-lettered display type adds interest to otherwise standard text-blocks. The
moral might be a bit much for older listeners, but younger ones will happily follow
Armadillo through his learning curve, and they'll get the message loud and clear.
JMD
KRAUS, ROBERT 
Mouse in Love; illus. by Jose Aruego and Ariane
Dewey. 
Orchard, 2000 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-33297-7 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-30297-0 
$15.95 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
Those storytime leaders who have used Whose Mouse Are You? and Where Are You
Going, Little Mouse? to great success will appreciate the return of Mouse. This
time, he's in love: "She's the mouse of my dreams. I've never met her. But try as
NOVEMBER 2000 
* 
109
I may, I can't forget her." Mouse searches near and far, never noticing the pink-
bowed mouse who smiles at him so encouragingly, until finally, on returning home,
he realizes that his true love lives right next door. This text lacks the rhythmic
readaloud bounce of the previous titles (and the love story will mystify many pre-
schoolers), but the story still has enough pizzazz to hold those listening tots. Aruego
and Dewey use ink, watercolor, and pastels to set Mouse (and his true love) off to
best advantage, and, while the compositions aren't particularly noteworthy, the
gray main characters stand out against grass green, sky blue, and sunset gold. The
pictures are the right size for group viewing, and a trilogy of Mouse is as good a
story program as any. Combine with some rodent rhymes and furry fingerplays
for a storytime that is anything but mousy. JMD
LANGLEY, JONATHAN 
Missing!; written and illus. by Jonathan Langley. 
Cavendish,
2000 
2 6p
ISBN 0-7614-5078-5 
$15.95 
Ad 4-7 yrs
Daisy's pet cat, Lupin, always meets her at the bus stop when she comes home
from school, but "when the holidays started, Daisy didn't go to school . .. but
Lupin didn't know." Lupin goes to the bus stop at the usual time, but no Daisy;
Daisy calls Lupin in for treats, but no Lupin. Girl and cat search for one another,
each imagining progressively dire consequences (Lupin eaten by a shark, Daisy
frightened by a dog) till they both reach similar disheartening conclusions: "Lupin
doesn't love me anymore, thought Daisy"; "Daisy doesn't love me anymore, [Lu-
pin] thought." Finally, happily, the two meet in a joyous reunion, culminating in
Daisy demanding "WHERE HAVE YOU BEEN?!" of a perplexed Lupin. The
text runs on, but the imaginative fancies of girl and cat and the soupqon of sus-
pense will hold listeners. Panels of watercolors are, on the whole, cheerily func-
tional, the clean palette and simple lines reminiscent of Tomie dePaola; the
characterization of Lupin, an expressive if tubby tabby, keeps the art from tipping
completely into the bland. A big ball of fluff, Lupin meanders through the pages,
his dot-eyed feline face and on-end fur responding to every imagined catastrophe.
Youngsters will make sure their own kitties are kept aware of schedule changes
after listening to this cautionary tale. JMD
LASKY, KATHRYN 
First Painter; illus. by Rocco Baviera. 
Kroupa/DK Ink,
2000 
34p
ISBN 0-7894-2578-5 
$16.95 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
Children who are familiar with Patricia Lauber's Painters ofthe Caves will be aware
that several explanations have been proposed for the "Why?" behind the oldest
known cave art at Chauvet, France. Here Lasky grasps one possible interpretation
and spins it into an imaginative tale of an adolescent girl who, distressed by the
slow starvation of her clan in a drought, musters her powers as a shamanistic "Dream
Catcher" to work the magic that will bring back the rain. Following visions from
a dream, Mishoo ventures deep into a cave where the rock contours encourage-
virtually compel-her to apply her paints in animal shapes to the walls rather than
in patterns to her body ("I trace the outline of the horse's head buried in the stone
and follow the pale gray vein to draw the horse's back"). An accidental sneeze
leads her to the technique of blowing paint against a surface; a good night's sleep
enables her to solve the problem of conveying motion by adding extra legs to her
images. Happily, the magic works, the rain returns, and cave art is "born," fully
110 
* THE BULLETIN
developed. Plausibility is stretched mighty thin, but literal reconstruction of events
is hardly at issue here. Mishoo's poetic narration suggests the mystical formality of
the guardian of clan lore, while Baviera's dense, shadowy illustrations, rendered in
such elemental media as bear grease, raw pigment, charcoal, and animal fur, en-
hance the prehistoric atmosphere. As Lasky notes in her afterword, this is a reflec-
tion on "the birth of artistic imagination"; pair it with Lauber's title for a bit of
cerebral spelunking. EB
LEVITIN, SONIA 
Dream Freedom. 
Silver Whistle/Harcourt, 2000 
192p
ISBN 0-15-202404-2 
$17.00 
Ad 
Gr. 6-8
The frame of this novel-an American boy named Marcus and his classmates are
encouraged by their teacher to make efforts on behalf of people in slavery in Sudan-
encloses short pieces written from the perspectives of enslaved people, family mem-
bers left behind, and a slave trader's son. The stories of the Sudanese people are
compelling in content but are also tonally similar, written in stilted language that
makes it difficult to distinguish one narrator from another. In addition, the fram-
ing story of Marcus' school activism is significantly less compelling than the indi-
vidual stories of the Sudanese people, which weakens the overall effect of the book.
The stories do explore some complicating aspects of assistance, such as whether
donating money to families so that they can buy back their loved ones (as Marcus'
class does) will simply encourage the slave trade further, but this is largely, as Levitin
states, a call to action rather than an examination. In that role, if not in the narra-
tive role, the novel is fairly successful; readers who are interested in issues of social
justice and human rights will be moved by these accounts and may be motivated
to contact the charitable organizations listed in the back of the book. KM
LODGE, BERNARD 
Shoe Shoe Baby; illus. by Katherine Lodge. 
Random House,
2000 
[28p]
ISBN 0-375-81084-6 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-8 yrs
This text-heavy concept book describes the specialized needs of "seven very weird
customers"-one for each day of the week-who show up at the eponymous shoe
store of the also eponymous heroine, who comes "from a great family of shoe mad,
shoe people." Shoe Shoe Baby's customers range from homesick "Conchita from
Costa Rica," a Carmen Miranda lookalike who is thrilled to be able to buy "shoes
with a view" of palm trees and sunshine, to "Tex from New Mex.," who buys
"B-r-r-ronco Boots, the fastest shoes in the West," to "Miss Fussyboots," who
comes in on Sunday and tries on all the shoes in the store, finally choosing the ones
she came in wearing. This last experience drives Shoe Shoe to dream of "lovely
Barefoot Island, where no one could wear shoes, or buy shoes, or ever, ever, sell
shoes," but only until the alarm goes off, signaling the start of another week at the
store. Dynamic layouts in vibrant watercolors add liveliness to this catalogish tale,
while type ofvarious sizes and thicknesses cearly signals textual emphases. However,
the gags themselves don't have a lot of obvious appeal for young children (though
the adult narrator is portrayed in childish postures and hairstyles), and the text's
internal rhymes and alliterations are sometimes buried by less subtle repetitions
("Grandma Cloggy made clogs from logs"). Still, the story could spur kids to design
sneakers or party shoes to meet their own fashionable footwear needs. FK
NOVEMBER 2000 
* 
111
LOWRY, Lois 
Gathering Blue. 
Lorraine/Houghton, 2000 
215p
ISBN 0-618-05581-9 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
The Singer's ceremonial robe is embroidered with key events of the people's his-
tory (including the Ruin, the story of the most recent destruction of civilization),
and every year the Singer sings that history in an important ritual, guided by the
pictures on his robe and the carvings on his staff. Three orphans, wards of the
Council of Guardians, are being groomed for important roles in the Singer-related
rites of their sans-technology society: Kira is to embroider an unfinished section of
the Singer's ritual robe, Thomas is to finish carving the Singer's ritual staff, and Jo,
the current Singer's apprentice, is to complete the unfinished song. Kira's recogni-
tion of the enforced servitude of the three's artistic creativity to the political ends
of the Council nearly sends her fleeing for her freedom, but she realizes that she
and the other artists are the only hope for a future substantially different from the
past. Lowry's setting boasts some standard dystopian characteristics. The post-
apocalyptic landscape is atmospherically medieval, the isolated village crowded
around a disintegrating but still impressive public building. The brutish environ-
ment is exemplified by the accepted practice of leaving the deformed, injured, or
otherwise physically damaged out in the "Field of Leaving" for the beasts, and by
the near-feudal class distinctions that separate the haves from the have-nots. Char-
acterizations are succinctly and sympathetically rendered, but numerous plot strands
end in a snarl of unanswered questions, and the theme is never clearly articulated.
It is unclear if the young artists' creativity is the fulfillment of prophecy or magic
or simply the natural evolution of things, and the final curtain appearance of Kira's
father, with all the answers Kira needs, strains even the flexible limits of fantasy.
Still, Kira is a resolute, doughty character whose struggle to take control of her
artistic destiny may inspire young readers seeking to take control of their own
futures. JMD
LYNCH, CHRIS 
GoldDust. HarperCollins, 2000 
196p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028175-8 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028174-X 
$15.95 
R Gr. 5-8
Richard Riley Moncrief flourishes within the parameters of home, seventh grade,
and baseball diamond, until a pair of outside events forcibly expand his dreams
and sully his junior-high faith in the world order. First, his beloved Red Sox sign
a duo of rookies Fred Lynn and Jim Rice, the Gold Dust Twins, for the 1975
season, and Richard knows with absolute adolescent certainty that he is destined
to be the next Lynn; all he needs is a counterpart to grow into Rice's shoes. Fate,
in the guise of public school busing, delivers the goods-along with the influx of
new students dodging school integration, there arrives at his parochial school the
polished, mannerly Napoleon Charlie Ellis, an upscale transfer student from
Dominica badly in need of a friend. Richard tries to groom him for their tandem
future on the diamond, and Napoleon plays along for the sake of friendship. But
Napoleon sees with an outsider's acuity the subtle racism that permeates profes-
sional play, and when he forces Richard to recognize the taint, Richard lashes back
as if he had been personally attacked. Lynch displays an unerring sense of the scale
of junior-high life, measuring the precise importance of school and neighborhood
against the backdrop of the wider world the boys are just beginning to negotiate
independently. Richard's naive belief that baseball can and should mitigate all
112 
* 
THE BULLETIN
social ills is at once endearing and infuriating; Napoleon's brittle arrogance barely
masks a sensitive spirit seeking the comfort of peers. Their tenuous friendship is
one readers are bound to respect and remember. EB
MARSDEN, JOHN 
Burning for Revenge. 
Houghton, 2000 
263p
ISBN 0-395-96054-1 
$15.00 
R Gr. 7-10
In the latest installment of this consistently satisfying nail-biter of a series (Tomor-
row When the War Began, BCCB 4/95, et al.), Ellie continues to document the
guerrilla activities of her band of reluctant freedom fighters, but it is her some-
times-lover Lee who impels the action this time around. Chafing at their recent
failures and unable to endure inactivity, he leads his friends away from the relative
safety of their hideout in the Australian outback with only the vaguest hope that
an opportunity will present itself for them to weaken the stranglehold the un-
named invaders have on their country. Freak circumstances place them right where
they can wreak major mayhem-the airfield at Wirrawee, which is now a vital
enemy air base. Marsden's teen crew launches a suicide mission of pyrotechnic
destruction that rivals any of their previous exploits and is successful (except, thank-
fully, in its suicide aspect) beyond their wildest expectations. As they lay low in a
deserted town, they begin to make contact with a tribe of half-starved feral chil-
dren who rekindle some of the teens' diminishing sense of humanity, and Lee
sneaks off on midnight trysts with a young woman whose betrayal nearly costs him
and Ellie their lives. Teens who are inured to the visceral thrills delivered by a big
screen and Dolby surround sound just may be convinced by Marsden's latest that
humble print on paper can conjure the same edge-of-the-seat delights. EB
MEDDAUGH, 
SUSAN 
Martha and Skits; written and illus. by Susan
Meddaugh. 
Lorraine/Houghton, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-618-05776-5 
$15.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Martha's family gets a new arrival in the form of a young puppy, Skits. A fond
older sister, Martha takes Skits in paw, trying to divert him from his lust for chas-
ing anything in flight. She fails, however, and even as a grown dog Skits finds
pursuit of the airborne his favorite vocation-and his only distinction, since even
with the aid of alphabet soup he can't emulate Martha's speaking skills. This
means that when one day he gets lost, he can't call for help, and Martha must find
a way to save the day. The loopy humor here doesn't have the crispness of the
other Martha adventures: the plot rambles, and the different elements are more
thrown together than connected. The illustrations remain diverting, however,
with their lighthearted, firmly grounded fantasy and zippy speech balloons. Plain,
savvy Martha and big, dorky Skits are an endearing canine pair, and Martha fans
will still lap this up. DS
MILLER, WILLIAM 
Tituba; illus. by Leonard Jenkins. 
Gulliver/Harcourt,
2000 
32p
ISBN 0-15-201897-2 
$16.00 
Ad 
7-10 yrs
Tituba of Salem Village gets a sympathetic treatment in this fictionalized account
of her life. The narrative describes her dislocation from her home in sunny Barba-
dos to days in the grim and crowded city of Boston and then to quieter times in
Salem Village. There Tituba's tales of her "ancient island beliefs" give her young
charges eerie nightmares, leading to an accusation of witchcraft. Tituba saves her
NOVEMBER 2000 
* 
113
life by confessing and finds herself in prison, where the moon of her beloved island
brings her hope. Though the approach from Tituba's point of view is a useful one,
the book unknowingly sets itself up for complications by suggesting that Tituba
may indeed have supernatural powers and that the historicality of her beliefs ren-
ders them acceptable (which would unfortunately legitimize her captors' beliefs as
well); the end, in which she finds spiritual freedom in the face of continued slavery
after her release from prison, strains for hopefulness without offering much genu-
ine closure. The point of view is a usefully contrasting one, however, and the
point of religious tolerance is made quietly rather than belabored. The art is the
most effective aspect of the book: while the photorealistic faces are occasionally
stiff (and the children disconcertingly contemporary in appearance), and the world
shines with an unlikely cleanliness, the mixed-media art glows with expressionistic
color; stenciled layers give the look of collage, with crisp edges combining with
shimmering highlights to give an air of magic realism. Tituba sometimes falls by
the wayside in discussions of the Salem phenomenon, and this will help young
people remember one of its main players. DS
MOEYAERT, BART 
Hornet'sNest; tr. by David Colmer. 
Front Street, 2000 
127p
ISBN 1-886910-48-0 
$15.95 
M 
Gr. 6-9
Fourteen-year-old Susanna is in the middle of a village squabble about the nui-
sance barking of dogs belonging to Rudy, husband of Helen, an old family friend.
Susanna and her widowed mother, Edith, have not signed the petition requesting
the dogs be removed, but her mother shortly capitulates, leaving Susanna to cham-
pion Helen alone. From Susanna's musings it is clear that Edith has never recov-
ered from the death of her husband in a hunting accident some years ago; what is
unclear is why there is such hostility between the widow and the townspeople.
The arrival of a dark-eyed traveling puppeteer gives the adolescent Susanna some-
thing to dream about, but when the young man turns out to be just an itinerant
showman and not the handsome answer to Susanna's prayers, she responds with
an act of rebellion that ends in ugly violence and near-tragedy. There are obvi-
ously grownup secrets to which Susanna is not privy, and the short novel (first
published in the Netherlands) follows her attempts to discover them. Insinuations
that Rudy's interest in Susanna is prurient, that Susanna's father and Helen may
have had more than a casual friendship, that there is something else besides bark-
ing dogs creating the conflict between Helen, Rudy, and the village offer possible
answers, but none of these plot glimmers shine with any clarity. In the end the
puppeteer leaves on his motorbike, Rudy is hospitalized, the dogs are running
loose, and Susanna and her mother are basically where they were at the beginning.
Puzzling without being intriguing, this is one title that seems to have lost some-
thing in the translation. JMD
MYERS, LAURIE 
Surviving Brick Johnson; illus. by Dan Yaccarino. 
Clarion,
2000 
74p
ISBN 0-395-98031-3 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Alex's fifth-grade year gets off to a bad start when he antagonizes hulking Brick
Johnson, and now he's running for his life. He realizes that his lucky baseball
cards may not be enough to save him from doom, so he signs up for karate class;
this plan evinces its own flaws when Brick turns up as a classmate. Myers has a
high-spirited effervescence that pumps life into the well-worn trope of the per-
114 
* THE BULLETIN
ceived bully being wrongly feared (Maggie Lewis' Morgy Makes His Move, BCCB
10/99, is another excellent entry in the genre), with Alex's little brother Bob stick-
ing up for Brick (who's a gifted comic when reading aloud to the younger kids)
and Alex's reaction clearly excessive ("A boy at school is going to maim me") from
the start. Alex's tendency to assess his life as if he were responding to reporters'
questions is amusing, and his exploration of the surprises of karate-both the phi-
losophy of the art and the interaction with Brick-is capably and cheerfully de-
picted. The hidden lesson is painless, and readers will be happy to see Brick and
Alex bond over baseball cards. Yaccarino's black-and-white illustrations evince
their usual solidly geometric charm, and the rotund, toylike figures infuse further
energy into the book. DS
NAPOLI, DONNA Jo 
Shelley Shock. 
Dutton, 2000 
[160p]
ISBN 0-525-46452-2 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Adam (from Soccer Shock and Shark Shock) has a good chance of getting on the
middle-school soccer team, and he's also got a shot at being on the math team. In
both cases, however, he may be edged out by a wiry new kid, a kid who proves, to
the horror of his all-male soccer friends, to be a girl. Uneasy about the treatment
(ranging from cold shoulder to persecution) his friends are giving Shelley, Adam
tries to mediate despite the possibility of missing his place on the team; some of
that kindness to Shelley gets misconstrued by Kim, a girl who would like Adam to
be more than just a friend, but everything Adam does to clarify the situation (and
he does like Kim back) seems only to make it worse. The "Oh, no, it's a girl!"
sports plot isn't new, but Napoli gives it some quiet intensity and original treat-
ment: Shelley's no sweetheart, the boys really are vicious to her, and the coach, a
truly good guy, solves the dilemma by expanding the team to allow membership
for all who wish it. The romantic hijinks story is less successful; the subdued tone
sits oddly with the semi-slapstick action, and the return of Adam's magical talking
freckles is superfluous at best. Adam's adventures remain reassuringly readable,
however, and the mild fantasy and thoughtful exploration of moral dilemmas will
satisfy fans of his previous exploits. DS
NEWTH, METTE 
The Transformation; tr. by Faith Ingwersen. 
Farrar,
2000 
195p
ISBN 0-374-37752-9 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Navarana strives against tradition to become a shaman and, following in her late
father's footsteps, a hunter, hoping to help her people during the famine resulting
from a mini ice-age. Her hunting trip nets her not only an old bear but a young
monk, Brendan, the last survivor of a deputation to convert the heathen Greenland
Inuit to Catholicism. Though afraid of his strangeness, she rescues him from
starvation and introduces him to her settlement, where he learns Inuit ways while
struggling with his faith and conscience. His bond with Navarana strengthens,
and the two journey together on a quest to bring the sun back to the people.
Newth combines history and mysticism here: the mysterious fifteenth-century
extinction of Christian settlements in Greenland provides an intriguing spring-
board for this examination of two peoples'-and two persons'-beliefs. Newth
(who also wrote about historical Greenland in TheAbduction, BCCB 11/89) effec-
tively realizes a world of implacable nature and desperate physical circumstances,
NOVEMBER 2000 
* 
115
and she writes with perceptive imagination of the human struggle to find meaning
in such a situation. The depiction of Navarana and Brendan's relationship be-
comes considerably less interesting, however, when it turns to soppy romance and
the mysticism succumbs to romanticization as well. The author's partisanship
(Brendan's religion suffers mightily and programmatically in comparison to
Navarana's) also undermines the breadth of her vision. This is nonetheless a highly
original story whose determined heroine will find friends among fans of George's
Julie and O'Dell's Karana. DS
NIKOLA-LISA, W. 
The Year with Grandma Moses. 
Holt, 2000 
32p 
illus. with
photographs
ISBN 0-8050-6243-2 
$20.00 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
Many young people won't be familiar with that most famous of folk painters,
Grandma Moses; Nikola-Lisa offers a gentle introduction, adding his own under-
stated text about the turning of the seasons to reproductions of Moses' art and
selections from her autobiographical writings. The well-selected excerpts offer
vivid specifics about Moses' rural past-the morning routine of labor, her dashed
hopes of a new red dress for Thanksgiving (her parents didn't realize stores would
be closed), her children's rumbustious play on the farm. Her landscapes display
the vigor and clarity of detail that made them popular with adults and will make
them popular with young viewers; kids who enjoy poring over Arthur Geisert's
cross-sections of human habitation will find the same enticements here as they
piece together the smaller dramas within the panoramas of country life. Though
its quiet lyricism is attractive, Nikola-Lisa's text is out of place here; it's superflu-
ous in the face of Moses' articulate recollections, and the two narratives, with their
very different styles and reading levels, will be difficult to negotiate as a readaloud
or a readalone. Nonetheless, this is an agreeable encounter with both an unusual
artist and a piece of the rural American past. DS
ONYEFULU, IFEOMA 
A Triangle for Adaora: An African Book of Shapes; written
and illus. with photographs by Ifeoma Onyefulu. 
Dutton, 2000 
26p
ISBN 0-525-46382-8 
$16.99 
R 3-5 yrs
The nameless narrator is worried about his little cousin Adaora, because she won't
eat her paw paw fruit until she finds a triangle. He leads Adaora on a triangle hunt
through their African village, encountering a variety of shapes as they go, until
finally they spot Auntie Felicia's headdress in the desired shape. Auntie Felicia
scolds them for wandering so far, but she takes the children home and sews purple
shapes-triangle, circle, rectangle, square-on the front of a new dress for Adaora.
The plot is simple but effective, augmented successfully by crisp photographs that
show the people that Adaora and her cousin meet on their quest. An unusual
layout serves to reinforce the reader's shape identification, with the verso page of
each spread showing a photograph of an object or objects roughly approximating
a geometric shape (a robe is a rectangle, a drum is a circle, a plantain is a crescent,
etc.). The recto shows a close-up of the objects alone, isolating the geometric
figure visually from its surroundings in the previous photograph. The figure shown
in each spread is repeated again in small decorations at the beginning of each piece
of text. When the photographs show objects that may be unfamiliar to an Ameri-
can audience, inset boxes offer brief definitions. Preschoolers will be captivated by
Adaora's determined search for a triangle and by her shape-decorated pink dress,
116 
* THE BULLETIN
and librarians will want multiples copies to round out their materials on shape
recognition. KM
PARKINSON, SIOBHAN 
The Leprechaun Who Wished He Wasn't; illus. by Donald
Teskey. 
O'Brien, 2000 
77p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-86278-334-8 
$7.95 
R Gr. 3-5
Laurence is sick of being a leprechaun, tired of "sitting under a boring old rain-
bow, guarding a mouldy old crock of gold and making endless shoes." He'd rather
be "huming" (human), because "all the really hip people are huming beings." A
humorously gruff meeting occurs when a young girl named Phoebe spots Laurence,
and eventually they find that they have something in common: Laurence is des-
perate to be bigger, while the plump Phoebe would rather be smaller. Phoebe
takes Laurence home with her so that he can live amongst "huming beings," and
he makes himself comfortable in her dollhouse. Despite the leprechaun's almost
irresistible urge to play tricks on the household, Phoebe and Laurence soon be-
come fast friends. Parkinson's text rolls along with a quick and humorous pace
reminiscent of Roald Dahl's work, from the witty repartee between human and
leprechaun right down to the droll mispronunciations of words. Teskey's black-
and-white illustrations use loose lines and ink spatters, creating characters with an
expressiveness and motion that bring to mind illustrations by Quentin Blake. Al-
though the plot meanders, fans of Dahl's shorter chapter books will welcome the
diversions as they enjoy Laurence's attempts to curtail his leprechaun tendencies
and fit into the "huming" world. A glossary of Irish terms is included. KM
PATNEAUDE, DAVID 
Haunting at Home Plate. Whitman, 2000 
18 1 p
ISBN 0-8075-3181-2 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Mr. Conger, the Dodgers' manager, has been bounced from the league for unethi-
cal practices; not only has the team lost their ace pitcher, Conger's son Gannon,
but they're in danger of disbanding for lack of an adult in charge. Sixth-grade
narrator Nelson convinces his med-student cousin, Michelle ("Mike"), to take the
team on, and in her capable hands players shift positions, improve their skills, and
gain a real shot at the playoffs. Mike gets some uninvited coaching assistance from
an unlikely source-tips scratched in the dirt, apparently by the ghost of Andy
Kirk, a baseball-crazy adolescent who fell to his death from the tree at their prac-
tice field in 1946. Patneaude keeps his readers guessing: Is there a ghost? Can
these bickering middle-schoolers pull themselves together as a team? Will Gannon
cream them at the playoffs? Adults are portrayed less successfully-Mike's a bit
too competent, Nelson's dad's a bit too supportive, Mr. Conger's a bit too despi-
cable. Still, grade-schoolers seldom have trouble ignoring any adult presence in
the face of immediate kid concerns, so count on these Dodgers to score. EB
PREZ, AMADA IRMA 
My Very Own Room/Mi propio cuartito; illus. by Maya Chris-
tina Gonzalez. 
Children's Book Press, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-89239-164-2 
$15.95 
R Gr. 2-4
The narrator is on a quest for a room of her own; she is almost nine years old, and
she's tired of sharing a room with her five brothers. The family house is tiny, often
further crowded with visiting friends and relatives from Mexico, and the girl yearns
for a little space. Imagination and teamwork make her dream come true. The girl
and her mother devise a room separated from the rest of the house by a flowered
NOVEMBER 2000 
* 
117
curtain of yellow flour-sacks, and everyone pitches in to paint and furnish the new
space: brothers Hector and Sergio mix paint, Tfo Pancho contributes his bed, and
Mamai turns in her Blue Chip stamps for a white ceramic lamp with a ruffled
shade. The Mexican-American narrator is wistful and determined by turns, and
her family rises to the challenge of providing the maturing girl some privacy with
loving grace. Gonzalez' palette is replete with joyfully exuberant colors; rich ma-
gentas, purples, and blues contrast with the warm golds of faces and arms, and the
dark eyes and hair offer further contrast with the backgrounds and skin colors.
Perez based this story on her own life (and her own quest for her own room), and
the text, in Spanish and English, exudes a comfortably familiar, accessible voice.
JMD
PINKNEY, ANDREA DAVIS 
Let It Shine: Stories of Black Women Freedom Fighters;
illus. by Stephen Alcorn. 
Gulliver/Harcourt, 2000 
107p
ISBN 0-15-201005-X 
$20.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Ten African-American women instrumental in "the pursuit of racial justice" in
American history are given adulatory treatment in this collective biography.
Pinkney's selection of women spans from the pre-Civil War era (Sojourner Truth,
Harriet Tubman) to the twentieth-century political arena (Fannie Lou Hamer,
Shirley Chisholm), and includes women of courage both well-known (Ida B. Wells-
Barnett, Mary McLeod Bethune) and less celebrated (Biddy Mason, Dorothy Irene
Height). Each mini-biography opens with a full-page color portrait by Alcorn, the
birth and (where applicable) death dates of the subject, and a quote from each
woman. Pinkney's conversational writing style has an ease of expression and an
appealing informality that will draw middle-graders; she speaks directly to readers,
inviting them to appreciate the notable attributes of each woman. The author's
justifiable admiration for her subjects sometimes overwhelms the text; the lan-
guage leans toward the florid, and the writing is repetitive. The handsome book
design and oversized format display Alcorn's paintings to their best advantage;
more representational than naturalistic, the image of each woman is accompanied
by objects and icons that reflect and embody her life. A general bibliography is
included, as is a list of biographies; sources for quotes are not included. JMD
PROSE, FRANCINE, ad. 
The Demon's Mistake: A Story from Chelm; illus. by Mark
Podwal. 
Greenwillow, 2000 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-17566-X 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-17565-1 
$15.95 
Ad 
7-10 yrs
Invisible demons, incomplete at their creation and "too terrifying to show them-
selves to humans," crash a Chelm party in honor of Chaim Pupkin ("My name is
Charles now"), who is visiting from America. Although they do their best--or
worst-to unsettle the guests, the demons are intrigued by Charles' tales of the
golden land and they decide this would be a wonderful place to ply their pranks.
Emerging from their packing crate, which had sat unaddressed in a warehouse for
fifty years, they find themselves in a present-day America as wondrous as expected
but strangely impervious to their trickery. Tangled hair is righted with a rinse,
spoiled milk is easily replaced at the grocery store, a torn coat is simply a good
excuse for a brand-new one. But as they are about to lose heart, demon Zereda
demonstrates the fun to be had infecting computers and jamming traffic signals,
and the demons make themselves at home. The ever-charming Chelmites make
118 
* 
THE BULLETIN
little more than a cameo appearance here, and their antics are sorely missed. Left
in their stead is a string of somewhat forced episodes devoid of noodlehead pa-
nache. Podwal contributes several fine spreads, particularly of the invisible de-
mons suggested by floating articles of clothing, but even his signature boxy
compositions, thickly rendered in gouache with a heavy, determined hand, are
more literal than imaginative. The previous Prose/Podwal collaboration, TheAngel's
Mistake (BCCB 7/97), remains the more heavenly delight. EB
REES, CELIA 
The Truth Out There. 
DK Ink, 2000 
[224 p]
ISBN 0-7894-2668-4 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Josh' grandmother suffers a stroke and dies, and Josh and his mother take up
residence at her house in a small English town to sort through her effects. Josh
stays in the bedroom that belonged to his uncle Patrick, who died at thirteen, and
he finds unsettling traces of Patrick in the room. He privately discovers that his
mom is composing a story that reveals the previously shrouded fate of Patrick;
concurrently, he's realizing that his latest computer game, Alien State, appears to
have uncanny resemblances to both his grandmother's house and to the story which
his mother is writing. Josh's much-criticized game proves to be the key to the
reunion of his mother with the long-lost Patrick, who suffers from autism and who
was quietly committed to an institution by Josh's grandfather years before. Rees
presents several possible solutions to the mystery of what happened those many
years ago (was Patrick an alien?) before revealing the final constellation of events.
The story suffers from lagging pace and the insertion of a distracting extra charac-
ter in the form of a romantic interest for Josh, both of which dilute the impact of
this otherwise engaging novel. Despite these flaws, readers of both science fiction
and realistic fiction will be drawn into this story of (possible) aliens and old family
secrets. KM
RICHARDS, JEAN, ad. 
The First Olympic Games: A Gruesome Greek Myth with a
Happy Ending; illus. by Kat Thacker. 
Millbrook, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-7613-1311-7 
$22.90 
M 
6-9yrs
Tantalus, "a man who was not very nice," tries to pay back the gods for a very fine
dinner with an even better one of his own-a stew made from his son Pelops. The
horrified gods condemn Tantalus to his renowned perdition of eternal hunger and
thirst and return Pelops to life. The young man, true to mythological form, goes
off in search of a kingdom, is challenged to a race by the King of Elis for the hand
of his daughter Hippodamia, and wins both lady and kingdom at the cost of her
father's life. In the king's memory, games are established to be held every four
years on the fields of Olympia, a tradition that (excepting centuries following a
massive sixth-century earthquake) continues to this day. Richards tidies up most
of the promised "gruesome" bits with cloying asides and mollifying explanations.
Pelops' grizzly murder is prefaced with "And then Tantalus had a terrible idea, a
horrible idea. Remember I told you he was not a very nice man"; likewise, the king
of Elis' bargain and demise is brushed off with "Pelops and Hippodamia were very
sad that the old king had died. He had not really been a mean king, you see."
Thacker, too, softens Olympian justice with a Tantalus who seems more puzzled
than tortured by his watery, fruit-bowered damnation. Mixed-media figures, in
pastel and earth tones softly muted with gray, are stiffly posed to suggest ancient
NOVEMBER 2000 
* 
119
pottery and friezes, yet their swollen, sweetly puckered lips (even on heads mounted
on pikes) make it difficult to take their plights and triumphs seriously. EB
RUBIN, SUSAN GOLDMAN 
Fireflies in the Dark: The Story ofFriedlDicker-Brandeis
and the Children of Terezin. 
Holiday House, 2000 
4 8p 
illus. with photo-
graphs
ISBN 0-8234-1461-2 
$18.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Between its cultural events and its serving as the model city of resettlement in a
Nazi "documentary," the concentration camp Terezin was steeped in bitter irony.
In her two years at the camp (she was eventually transferred to Auschwitz, where
she died), Friedl Dicker-Brandeis struggled to take advantage of that irony, teach-
ing art to the incarcerated children and helping them put on performances that
would permit them creative expression and momentary escape from their surround-
ings. Rubin draws on interviews with some of the few survivors among Dicker-
Brandeis' pupils as well as other sources on Terezin, using reproductions of the
children's own art and other relevant images to convey Dicker-Brandeis' impact.
Though the pictures (particularly Dicker-Brandeis' last haunting image, a study of
a girl's face) are effective, the text is problematic. Writing is choppy ("She was
small and lively. Many of the children were taller than she was. Friedl brought
paper, paint, and pencils") and often confusing, with references unclear (what was
"the Little Fortress" to which children were sent for punishment?) and chronology
uncertain. The result is therefore unfocused and skittery, providing no real in-
volvement with Dicker-Brandeis or empathy for her impact. Stodgy layout (the
double-columned text is crammed onto the page) detracts further from the effect.
There's a moving story in here, but most readers won't be able to extract it; they'll
be better off with the equally accessible and more visually affecting I Never Saw
Another Butterfly. A thorough list of references (including videos, audio record-
ings, unpublished diaries, and electronic resources as well as books) is appended, as
is an index. DS
RYLANT, 
CYNTHIA 
The Case of the Climbing Cat; illus. by G. Brian
Karas. 
Greenwillow, 2000 
48p 
(The High-Rise Private Eyes)
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-16309-2 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-16310-6 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 1-3
The Case of the Missing Monkey; illus. by G. Brian Karas. 
Greenwillow,
2000 
48p 
(The High-Rise Private Eyes)
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-16305-X 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-16306-8 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 1-3
A duo of chapter-book gumshoes make their debut in these beginner mysteries,
both of which center around theft among the big city cliff dwellers. Jack Jones, a
raccoon whose ever-complaining stomach often distracts him from noting vital
clues, and Bunny (yes, a bunny) Brown, who's cearly the brains of the outfit, owe
more to the tradition of Moonlighting than that of Dashiell Hammett. In the
feline adventure, a pair of binoculars goes missing from an apartment terrace, and
the detectives nab the perp at the city aviary-where better to find a cat with
binoculars? In the Monkey episode, the thief revisits the scene of the crime and
actually returns the glass monkey he had taken to amuse his baby. Each mystery is
solved with a single clue, and each criminal is generously--or lamely, depending
on one's point of view--forgiven for "borrowing" the missing article. Karas' de-
120 
* THE BULLETIN
tectives' are dopily endearing, but his acrylic, gouache, and pencil scenes do little
to set a mood for dark deeds in the urban jungle. Neither Rylant nor Karas is in
peak form here, and although novice readers may find satisfaction in ferreting out
clues in a solo read, Sharmat's Nate the Great still has the primary P.I. market
cornered. EB
SAN SoucI, ROBERT D., ad. 
Peter and the Blue Witch Baby; illus. by Alexi
Natchev. 
Doubleday, 2000 
[32p]
ISBN 0-385-32269-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 6-9 yrs
A rejected would-be Tsarina proves to be a witch and curses Tsar Peter: "When
you find your hoped-for bride, your ruin will be at hand." Soon thereafter, he falls
in love with a portrait of the Little Sister of the Sun, but just before he departs to
meet her, an old woman brings an orphan baby to the palace door. Peter takes the
baby into his household, despite the fact that "when she smiled, her teeth were as
black as an iron cooking pot." When Tsar Peter journeys to the home of the Little
Sister of the Sun she shows him the wonders of her cloud castle, including a magic
window through which Peter sees his household-in ruins. He hastily returns,
only to be pursued by "a huge baby girl, her skin as blue as the sky, sucking her
thumb," from whom he is finally saved by his true love. Natchev uses active pen-
and-ink lines, textured colored pencil, and watercolors that balance earth tones
with regal Russian blues and vivid reds to capturing the active rhythm of Tsar
Peter's adventures. San Souci tells this adventure (classified in CIP information as
a Russian folktale, but no source notes are included) with deft pacing and simple
but engaging characterizations. The images, both textual and illustrative, of the
horrifying Witch Baby are creepily captivating, and young readers will delight in
the chilling figure of the gigantic blue baby with metal teeth, who finally disap-
pears "into the bottomless blue sky." KM
SHULEVITZ, URI 
What Is a Wise Bird Like You Doing in a Silly Tale Like This?;
written and illus. by Uri Shulevitz. 
Farrar, 2000 
34p
ISBN 0-374-38300-6 $16.00 
M 
6-9 yrs
"The Empire of Pickleberry consisted of the village of Pickleberry, four and a half
acres of land, and a population of twenty-six and a half citizens"; among the 26.5
are the emperor and his twin brother, the janitor, but not included in the count is
the emperor's brilliant talking bird, Lou. A sage in a cage, Lou manages to escape
his golden confinement; a salesman recaptures him, but Lou lulls him to sleep
with a lengthy nonsense story of Pickleberry, then flies to his Aunt Millie and tells
her another saga of that odd empire. While Pickleberry is a promising venue and
the concepts are amusing, the meandering plot squanders the silliness' steam, with
a result exhaustingly akin to relentless primary-grades' giddiness rather than the
Chelmic absurdity the story occasionally suggests. The art has a focused exuber-
ance the text lacks: the lines are dense yet vigorous, with a formality recalling
woodcuts in some details contrasting with the playfully dot-eyed and mustachioed
people and the elegantly italicized speech in balloons; pencil and watercolor con-
tribute texture as well as color, with an emphasis on warm gold and royal blue
(Lou's plumage colors). Youngsters may be diverted by this nonsensical journey,
but they'll be bewildered by the absence of destination. DS
NOVEMBER 2000 
* 
121
SINGER, MARILYN 
A Dog's Gotta Do What a Dog's Gotta Do: Dogs at Work. Holt,
2000 
86p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8050-6074-X $16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Herding dogs, guard dogs, movie dogs, sled dogs, tracking dogs, therapy dogs, and
others get their due in this overview of dog duties. In chatty, sometimes breathless
prose, Singer relates anecdotes of dogs worldwide, some famous (Lassie, Balto the
sled dog, Barry the heroic Swiss St. Bernard) and some more quietly devoted, and
intersperses accounts with a few background facts. This is Readers' Digest-style
nonfiction: the assertions are vague and unsourced, and the accounts and assess-
ments superficial. Though dogs still retain their enduring charm, and the breadth
of material here may bring readers into contact with a new tidbit or two, most will
find more satisfaction in more involved but equally readable titles such as Peg
Kehret's Shelter Dogs (BCCB 4/99) or Patricia Curtis' Dogs on the Case (BCCB 9/
89). Black-and-white photographs are small and only intermittently relevant; an
index is included. DS
STEVENSON, JAMES 
Christmas at Mud Flat; written and illus. by James
Stevenson. 
Greenwillow, 2000 
48p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-17302-0 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-17301-2 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 1-3
The Mud Flat gang (The Mud Flat Olympics, BCCB 11/94) is back and they're
preparing for Christmas. Nine brief chapters offer glimpses of Sheldon's Christ-
mas list, Freddy's pre-Christmas rush at the fix-it shop, Larry and Albert's Santa
vigil, and Priscilla's nontraditional Santa impersonation (she's a snail). The char-
acters aren't well differentiated (it can be hard to tell who's who in the art), and the
individual stories generally lack impact. Familiarity with the other titles will give a
bit more context, however, and the text has an easy flow, with the waiting-for-
Santa theme providing an element of holiday charm. Stevenson's illustrative vi-
gnettes have a scribbly and personable informality, and they depict various animal
species gathered together in amicable diversity, with dogs and pigs, mice and birds
(and a few indeterminate critters) all proud residents of Mud Flat. While this isn't
the best entry point into the series, followers of the Mud Flatters will want to join
their seasonal festivities. DS
STEWART, LINDA 
The Big Catnap. Cheshire House, 2000 
133p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-9675073-5-9 
$10.95 
R Gr. 5-9
As the title suggests, this is a feline homage to Raymond Chandler: Sam, the
hardboiled cat detective, is hired by a gorgeous but dizzy dame to find her brother,
Sandy (a noted actor famous for his appearance in commercials for Catslop catfood).
In the search for the missing moggy, Sam discovers a secret marriage, a dashing
stunt double, an understudy who's actually Sandy's brother, and some very nasty
humans who are holding the star kitty for ransom. The plot's unnecessarily elabo-
rate and it's hard to keep track ofwhodunwhat, but that's true of Chandler as well.
Most readers simply won't care: even if they haven't dallied with detective fiction,
they'll recognize the components and revel in the feline play. Stewart keeps her
affectionate takeoff perfectly pitched, abandoning moderation in an imitative free-
for-all of comedic catty touches that further the noir vision as well as add enjoy-
ment ("I felt as low as a submarine. I'd been reckless and I'd been wrong ....
122 
* THE BULLETIN
Meow culpa. That's Latin, and it means 'I am one guilty cat"'). While there's an
inevitably secondary flavor to the narrative, there's also a sassy, noncondescending
edge (absent from Mary Stolz's similarly themed Casebook ofa Private (Cat's) Eye,
BCCB 6/99) that ensures that the reading pleasures are nonetheless genuine. Don't
overlook this as a snappy readaloud, too, especially if you can muster a passable
imitation of Bogart-or a domestic shorthair. DS
TALBOTT, HUDSON 
Forging Freedom: A True Story ofHeroism During the Holo-
caust; written and illus. by Hudson Talbott. 
Putnam, 2000 
6 4p
ISBN 0-399-23434-9 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Talbot recounts the experiences of a personal friend, Jaap Penraat, from his boy-
hood in Amsterdam through his Resistance efforts in smuggling Jews out of the
German-occupied Netherlands, for which the Holocaust Heroes and Martyrs' Re-
membrance Authority accorded him the title of "Righteous among the Nations."
Although Penraat's audacious-and miraculously successful-plan to guide groups
ofJewish "construction workers" into France with counterfeited documents is thor-
oughly gripping, events leading up to his heroic feats are too often rendered in
choppy reconstructed dialogues, into which heavy doses of historic background
(and the occasional platitude) have been forced. "'Penraat,' muttered [Nazi]
Herman. ... 'You think you're so smart, but we're the ones fighting for our white,
Aryan race. Someday you'll thank us.'" A grab bag of mixed-media illustrations
runs the gamut from a delicate gray watercolor vignette of soberly clad Dutch Jews
with oversized yellow stars, to a film noir-ish spread of trench-coated Penraat on a
railway platform, to the lurid propaganda poster imagery of soldiers saluting Hitler
amid the devastation of Kristallnacht. Ken Mochizuki's Passage to Freedom (BCCB
9/97) offers a more tightly focused middle-grades account of the Resistance, but
students who value true hero stories may still want to add this to their reading list.
EB
TARBESCU, EDITH, ad. 
The Boy Who Stuck Out His Tongue: A Yiddish Folktale;
illus. by Judith Christine Mills. 
Barefoot, 2000 
[32p]
ISBN 1-84148-067-3 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-7 yrs
This retelling of a Yiddish folktale, set in a Hungarian village of "kind but foolish
folk," recounts the story of a rude boy who sticks out his tongue when asked to
help his mother. Suddenly, he slips on the icy ground and falls against a wrought-
iron fence, tongue first. His tongue sticks fast, and neither Mendel the cobbler,
Yusel the butcher, Hershel the baker, nor any of the other kind but foolish village
residents can help the mother free her boy. Finally a traveling blacksmith wanders
by and saves the day by warming the iron with hot coals until the boy's tongue is
released. The young scamp promptly reforms and promises to be helpful and
polite for the rest of his days, providing a happy if predictable ending. Mills draws
on a folk-art style to create solid figures with expressive rounded faces, using a
palette of solid blues, greens, and reds in the villagers' coats, hats, and scarves to
contrast strongly with the subtly varied white backgrounds of blowing wintry snow.
Decorative Hungarian-style tapestries adorn the edges of the pages; they're attrac-
tive, but they add more distracting elements to already jumbled compositions.
The finger-wagging element of the story may appeal more to the adults in charge
of children than to children themselves, but youngsters will relish the pre-solution
NOVEMBER 2000 
* 
123
chaos and may appreciate getting their itch for justice scratched. Although Tarbescu
does not provide a source note, jacket copy indicates that she heard this tale from
her Hungarian-born father. KM
TCHANA, KATRIN, ad. 
The Serpent Slayer and Other Stories ofStrong Women; illus.
by Trina Schart Hyman. 
Little, 2000 
113p
ISBN 0-316-38701-0 
$19.95 
R* Gr. 4-8
See this month's Big Picture, p. 95, for review.
THESMAN, JEAN 
Calling the Swan. 
Viking, 2000 
147p
ISBN 0-670-88874-5 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Skylar Deacon is attending summer school between her freshman and sophomore
year in order to get a head start on next year's classes. Her first-person narration
hints at a tragedy that has put the Deacon family in a state of crisis, and it is clear
that pulling free from her emotionally fragile mother, even if it's only by taking the
bus across town for class, is quite an accomplishment. Skylar's counselor/priest
encourages her tentative steps to normalcy; her grandmother helps her circumvent
her pathetically needy mother; and her older sister, Alexandra, offers advice and
support. Increasingly puzzling encounters between Skylar and Alexandra reveal
that Alexandra is gone, the victim of an unsolved kidnapping. (Whether Alexandra
is a figment of Sky's imagination or an actual ghost is a plot-knot left to the reader
to unravel.) The novel has an underlying pathos that dissolves slowly into hope-
fulness as Skylar emerges from the emotional stasis brought on by Alexandra's
disappearance. Thesman's troubled narrator is a wounded personality striving to
return to a normal life, and her tentative forays into friendship are delicately ma-
neuvered and painfully normal. The author teases out the protagonist's gradual
transformation and subtly alters the reader's perception of Alexandra from sup-
portive sibling to grief-induced specter. Skylar's point of view is a narrow one by
choice, and it's all Thesman lets the reader see until Sky herself opens her eyes to
her own vast horizon. JMD
TURNER, ANN 
Learning to Swim. 
Scholastic, 2000 
[128p]
ISBN 0-439-15309-3 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 7-12
This series of free-verse poems tells of author Turner's youthful experiences one
summer at the family's vacation house, where an older boy sexually molested her
("and I didn't even know/ I could say/ no"). The boy's repeated abuse sends her
reeling, making her shrink from people and destroying her confidence; her antici-
pated mastery of swimming turns instead to failure and regression. Finally she
tells her mother, the abuse stops, and familial love pulls her back from the dark.
The sincerity is palpable and the young narrator's anguish vivid and believable.
Those strengths are the sequence's main merit, however, since the poetry is prosy
and at times pedestrian, and the trajectory and events here follow a fairly familiar
path. Though the message that it's important to tell an adult may not be new (and
that's not always as effective a solution as it is here), it's still one worth reiterating.
Turner's emphasis on the rewards of healing fills out the picture in a way problem
novels on the topic rarely do, and the emotional resolution may reassure and en-
courage young readers dealing with darknesses of their own. DS
124 
* THE BULLETIN
VANDE VELDE, VIVIAN 
Magic Can Be Murder. Harcourt, 2000 
[208p]
ISBN 0-15-202665-7 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Nola is a witch trained by her mother, Mary, who is now somewhat senile (maybe)
and prone to talking aloud to the voices inside her head. Nola spends her time
trying to get enough work to keep them from starving, while watching over her
shoulder for the hostile-to-magic authorities. A scrying spell mistakenly left float-
ing in a bucket threatens to expose the two women, and Nola's efforts to discover
the urgency of their danger makes her magical witness to murder. Spell-casting
aside, the atmosphere is that of an English Cozy mystery within a surprisingly
domestic fantasy landscape: the handsome investigator is devoted to justice, the
pretty kitchen maid is in cahoots with the murderous heir apparent, and a myste-
rious lady with something to hide desperately tries to keep suspicion from falling
on the innocent. The author handles the romance between self-deprecating Nola
and stalwart investigator Galvin with restraint and humor that keeps it from being
too pat, and moments of real suspense are relieved by the frenetic magical slapstick
of the admirable if nearly overwhelmed Nola. Dialogue is fast and funny, the
characters evincing a certain human desperation that makes them (the good guys,
anyway) unfailingly sympathetic. Introduce Rowling fans to Vande Velde, and
watch them make magic. JMD
WALLACE, BILL 
Coyote Autumn. 
Holiday House, 2000 
210p
ISBN 0-8234-1628-3 
$16.95 
R Gr. 4-7
Brad's the new kid in his Oklahoma school, but he likes the southwest; since he's
long hoped for a dog, he's particularly intrigued by the local coyotes. When a pup
is left orphaned by coyote hunters, he rescues it, secreting his contraband wildlife
in the old dog pen behind the shed in the backyard. His secret gets out when his
family surprises him with a birthday dog and discovers Scooter in the pen. Though
Brad gets permission to keep both Scooter and Button, the new puppy, the differ-
ence between the domestic pet and the befriended wild animal becomes apparent
as time goes on, and he has to make some hard decisions. While there's some
snork-snork Gordon Korman-type humor that clashes with the main story, this is
generally a solid and perceptive yarn about a kid who realizes that high hopes and
good intentions aren't enough to achieve his dream. Wallace gives Scooter enough
undeniable appeal to make the difficulty of Brad's decision clear, but there are also
enough clear risks (Scooter forces the issue by biting Brad's sister) to make Brad's
yielding of Scooter to a wildlife refuge sad but understandable (the book also ex-
plains that there's no guaranteed success in returning a human-owned animal to
the wild). There's no egregious villainy here, either (the coyote hunter is a nice old
guy); this isn't a Disneyesque story of evil human predation, just an accessible and
unmelodramatic account of a kid's bittersweet attachment to a wild animal. Give
it to dog lovers looking for a walk on the wild side. DS
WALLACE, NANCY ELIZABETH 
Paperwhite; written and illus. by Nancy Elizabeth
Wallace. 
Houghton, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-618-04283-0 
$14.00 
R 4-7 yrs
A cold winter is brightened by the growing of paperwhites in this effective story.
Lucy and neighbor Miss Mamie (both anthropomorphized bunnies) fill a jar with
NOVEMBER 2000 
* 
125
stones, water, and a paperwhite bulb one "dark winter day," and for days afterward
Lucy asks, "Miss Mamie, did it grow yet? Did we make spring?" Lucy visits Miss
Mamie often, and, while waiting for the bulb to grow, the two gardeners make
cookies, play the piano, and string beads. Finally, the paperwhites blossom, and "a
sweet fragrance filled the air." The streamlined text is beguilingly simple, clearly
and succinctly representing the friendship between the older Miss Mamie and the
young Lucy, the subtle changes of the season, and the life cycle of the paperwhite.
The collage illustrations evince sharp, clean lines and startlingly rich colors; the
compositions are unfussy and sturdy. The palette is reminiscent of that in Clem-
ent Hurd's pictures for Goodnight, Moon: effective use of tomato red as a back-
ground color warms the scenes of Lucy and Miss Mamie's activities, and the
contrasting colors (yellow daffodils, green and white paperwhites, blue table) all
have that shiny, primary-school finish. This is a neatly put-together tale that should
warm up some winter storytimes. JMD
WARDLAW, LEE 
Saturday NightJamboree; illus. by Barry Root. 
Dial, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-8037-2189-7 
$15.99 
R 
5-8 yrs
Kids have nightlife too, as the nameless narrator makes clear in her poetic account
of her Saturday evenings. Her parents like to put on the dog and go dancing, but
while they're out, she has her own special events: with Carlene the babysitter she
has "show time," elaborately costumed country performances in the satisfying acous-
tic space of the bathroom; with Chet the babysitter she has "chow time," bowls of
different chilis to sample in an at-home diner; when Uncle Buffalo Beau sits she
gets bedtime sagas of the long-ago west. Best of all, however, is when her parents
stay home and they have their own family dancing. The rhyme's a bit forced and
jingly, but it settles into itself after a few pages, and there's a satisfying twang to the
narration and to the boot-scootin' milieu. Root's watercolor and gouache art runs
to the burnished yellows and oranges of evening light, which also make a lively
counterpoint to the lavender and blue shadows stretching across the scenes. Our
narrator is an energetic mop-top and her babysitters a picturesquely motley crew,
all of whom fit happily into the country-without-cattle design theme. Real-life
babysitters will look awfully bland after this, but enterprising youngsters may be
able to use this to spur their caretakers into lively Saturday nights at home. DS
WINTER, LAUREL 
Growing Wings. 
Houghton, 2000 
195p
ISBN 0-618-07405-8 
$15.00 
Ad Gr. 6-10
Eleven-year-old Linnet is mysteriously growing wings, and she has no one to con-
fide in but her mother, Sarah, who also grew wings at the onset of puberty. Unfor-
tunately, Sarah's own mother cut her daughter's wings off when she was fifteen,
and Sarah's bitterness about this event makes conversations with Linnet terse and
tense. When the wings become too conspicuous, Sarah takes Linnet to a hotel and
apparently abandons her, whereupon Linnet follows hints left by her mother and
finds the house of the grandmother she has never met. Her grandmother takes her
to a secret cabin up in the mountains where a secluded community of winged
people dwells. There Linnet meets the sourly adolescent Andy, who is instantly
jealous of Linnet's slender frame and large wings, since much of the community
activity revolves around seeing if one of their members can learn to fly. Linnet's
relationship with the unpredictable and occasionally destructive Andy becomes
such a focus of the novel that the reappearance of Linnet's mother seems periph-
126 
* THE BULLETIN
eral and weak, and the plot twists involving escape from the community and the
secrets of the winged pile up rather than add layers. Despite having more implau-
sible plot bumps than the premise can handle, Winter's prose soars with a light
and mysterious touch that sustains suspense, creating impressionistic renderings of
characters through pithy dialogue while deftly weaving avian imagery throughout.
KM
WYATT, VALERIE 
The Math Bookfor Girls and Other Beings Who Count; illus. by
Pat Cupples. 
Kids Can, 2000 
64p
Library ed. ISBN 1-55074-830-0 
$14.95
Paper ed. ISBN 1-55074-584-0 
$9.95 
R Gr. 3-6
A cornucopia of activities entices upper elementary girls to stretch their math skills
in measurement and probability, geometric construction and graphing, using a
calculator and changing scale. The dabbler's approach, similar to that employed
successfully by Vicki Cobb in her books of science experiments, works particularly
well here-testing how many girls can fit inside a cubic yard of rolled newspaper
tubing, sponge-printing tessellated wrapping paper, measuring a large perimeter
with a taped bicycle wheel. Activity directions are clear and simple, and cheerful
line-and-watercolor cartoons keep the presentation breezy. In a concluding note
Wyatt articulates her goal to "show girls that math relates to the real world-to
their world"; readers of a feminist bent may resent the subtle implication through-
out many of the activities that this world revolves around dolls and body shape and
parties and cake baking. However, boxed inserts on adult women who use math
in their careers considerably expand the audience's view beyond girly pursuits to
the grittier worlds of environmental engineering, wildlife management, computer
programming, restaurant management, landscape architecture, etc. A glossary and
index are included, and a page of solutions to (or handy hints for) Wyatt's math-
ematical challenges will encourage the numerically faint-hearted. EB
YEZERSKI, THOMAS F. 
Queen of the World; written and illus. by Thomas F.
Yezerski. 
Farrar, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-374-36165-7 
$16.00 
Ad 
4-8 yrs
Rivalrous siblings agree to settle the question of which of them is to be the queen
of the world-"forever... with no taking it back"-by determining which of the
presents the three sisters made for their mother's birthday she likes best. Of course,
Mom unhelpfully appreciates all three of the presents equally, which leads to a
fracas, which leads to what the unnamed narrator describes as "the worst sound
you could hear. Mom was crying-not loud, not a lot-but she was crying." Sent
to their room "to think long and hard about what we had done," the girls figure
out a way to "make things right." You can probably guess who they crown Queen
of the World the next morning. This particular spin on a familiar dynamic is more
likely to appeal to parents than children, though not all adults will be convinced of
the bibliotherapeutic effectiveness of vicarious shame. However, the lively, un-
cluttered watercolor illustrations and the expressive, cartoonishly square-jawed sib-
lings are appealing, and there are moments of psychological realism (like when the
sisters crowd together in the top bunk, "as far away from what we had done as we
could get") that will speak to child readers, whether or not they are mature enough
to serve their emotionally frazzled mothers breakfast in bed. Teachers looking for
books to stimulate group discussions of conflict and problem solving might also
find this useful. FK
NOVEMBER 2000 
* 
127
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
Jones, Raymond E., and Jon C. Stott. Canadian Children's Books: A Critical
Guide to Authors and Illustrators. Oxford University Press, 2000. Paper ed. ISBN
0-19-541222-2; $24.95. 538p.
More and more Canadian children's literature is making it across the border to the
U.S. these days, but we don't always appreciate the extent of its achievement.
Jones and Stott make that easy with this volume, which examines over 100 authors
and illustrators ranging from historical figures such as Catherine Parr Traill and L.
M. Montgomery to contemporary contributors such as Tim Wynne-Jones and
Gordon Korman. Entries range from two to six pages, providing brief biogra-
phies, lists of credits (with citations for reviews), and sometimes references to se-
lected secondary material such as interviews and critical discussions; they then go
on to examine each figure's work, sometimes in some depth, with attention to the
nature of their particular contribution and their strengths and weaknesses. Read-
ers will doubtless have their own favorites they feel should have been included (W.
D. Valgardson? Martha Brooks?), but that's unavoidable with this sort of project.
The reach here is impressive, as are the achievements of the authors and illustrators
examined. The entries reflect the Canadian mosaic, with myriad cultures repre-
sented (including some French-Canadian material that's been translated). Jones
and Stott's critical explorations help shed some national light on the significance
of well-known authors and illustrators as well as providing a useful introduction to
those whose work may be less familiar than it deserves to be. This is an overdue
overview that will enhance knowledge about some significant contributions to
children's literature. Appendices list Canadian award winners and sources for fur-
ther reading (largely Canadian); an author/title index is included. DS
Montanaro, Ann R. Pop-Up and Movable Books: A Bibliography, Supplement I,
1991-1997. Scarecrow, 2000. ISBN 0-8108-3728-5. $95.00. 960p.
Montanaro's labor of scholarly love continues in this addition to her 1993 bibliog-
raphy of pop-ups. As the page count indicates, there's a lot to add (she's also
included entries published prior to 1991 if they weren't included in the first vol-
ume). Entries are alphabetized by title, and they often include designer name,
country of printing and/or manufacturing, and series title as well as author/title/
publisher information; though ISBNs are not provided, some entries have OCLC
numbers or RLIN numbers. Descriptions are brief, with emphasis on technical
details rather than evaluative detail. Name (author, illustrator, and designer), se-
ries, and date indices follow; they are cumulative, noting which tites appear in
which volume (in a slightly confusing move, this volume is labeled Supplement 1
but treated as Volume 2). While the material is specialized, with more focus for
the researcher or fancier than the front lines of youth service, this is as definitive a
resource as you're going to find on this subject, and those seeking to broaden their
paper-engineering horizons won't want to miss it. DS
128 
* THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Adoption-fiction: Holeman
ADVENTURE STORIES:
Marsden
African Americans: Pinkney
African Americans-fiction: Allen
African Americans-stories: Collier
Africa-stories: Onyefulu
Alaska-fiction: Hill
Animals-fiction: Stevenson
Animals-stories: Dunrea; Ketteman;
Kraus
Art: Nikola-Lisa
Art and artists: Nikola-Lisa; Rubin
Art and artists-fiction: Lowry
Art and artists-stories: Lasky
Aunts-stories: Isherwood
Babysitters-stories: Wardlaw
Ballet-fiction: Allen
Baseball-fiction: Lynch; Patneaude
Beaches-stories: Huneck
Bicycles-stories: Burleigh
BIOGRAPHIES: Nikola-Lisa;
Pinkney; Talbott
Brothers-fiction: Myers
Brothers and sisters-fiction: Allen;
Holeman; Rees
Bullies-fiction: Myers
Cats-fiction: Stewart
Cats-stories: Langley
Caves-stories: Lasky
China-folklore: Casanova
Christmas-fiction: Stevenson
Christmas-stories: Byrd; Davis;
Dunrea; Howard
CONCEPT BOOKS: Onyefulu
Cousins-fiction: Patneaude
Cousins-stories: Onyefulu
Coyotes-fiction: Wallace, B.
Creativity-stories: Lasky
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Patneaude
Dancers and dancing-fiction: Allen
Death and dying-fiction: Moeyaert;
Thesman
Death and dying-stories: Howard
Denmark-fiction: Deedy
Detectives-fiction: Rylant; Stewart
Disabilities-fiction: Rees
Dogs: Singer
Dogs-stories: Huneck; Meddaugh
Ethics and values: Deedy; Levitin;
Lowry; Lynch
Explorers and exploring: Anema
Explorers and exploring-fiction:
Glass
Families-fiction: Perez; Rees
Families-stories: Howard; Yezerski
FANTASY: Lowry; Napoli;
Parkinson; Vande Velde; Winter
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Holeman
FOLKTALES AND FAIRYTALES:
Block; Byrd; Casanova; Craft;
DeFelice; Prose; San Souci;
Tarbescu; Tchana
Food and eating-stories: Darrow
Foster care-fiction: Gray
Friendship-fiction: Lynch; Marsden
Friendship-stories: Meddaugh;
Wallace, N.
FUNNY STORIES: Huliska-Beith;
Prose; Shulevitz
Gardens-stories: Glaser
Ghosts-fiction: Patneaude
NOVEMBER 2000 
* 
129
Ghosts-stories: DeFelice
Gods and goddesses-stories:
Richards
Greenland-fiction: Newth
HISTORICAL FICTION: Deedy;
Gray; Hill; Howard; Miller;
Newth
History, U.S.: Pinkney
History, world: Rubin
Holidays-stories: Byrd; Dunrea
Holocaust, the: Rubin; Talbott
Holocaust, the-fiction: Deedy
Horses: Girls
Horses-stories: Darrow
Hunters and hunting-stories:
Casanova
Imagination-stories: Lasky
Inuit-fiction: Newth
Latinos-fiction: Perez
Leprechauns-fiction: Parkinson
Mathematics: Wyatt
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Gray; Holeman; Moeyaert;
Thesman; Winter
Mothers and daughters-stories:
Isherwood; Yezerski
Mothers and sons-fiction: Rees
Mothers and sons-stories: Tarbescu
MYSTERIES: Rylant; Stewart;
Vande Velde
MYTHOLOGY: Richards
Neighbors-stories: Wallace, N.
Olympics, the: Richards
Pets-fiction: Jennings; Wallace, B.
Pets-stories: Langley
Philosophy-fiction: Jennings
Pigs-stories: Falconer
POETRY: Turner
Rabbits-fiction: Jennings
Racism-fiction: Lynch
Reading aloud: Singer; Stewart
Reading, easy: Rylant
Reading, reluctant: Girls
Religion-fiction: Newth
Rhyming stories: Collier; Davis;
Glaser
Russia-folklore: San Souci
School-fiction: Levitin; Myers;
Napoli; Patneaude; Thesman
School-stories: Isherwood
Science: Cobb; Glaser
Secrets-fiction: Rees
Sexual abuse-poetry: Turner
Shapes-stories: Onyefulu
Shoes-stories: Lodge
Sisters-fiction: Thesman
Sisters-stories: Yezerski
Slavery-fiction: Levitin
Slavery-stories: Miller
Social studies: Pinkney
Sports-fiction: Napoli; Patneaude
Storytelling: Casanova; Darrow;
DeFelice; Ketteman; San Souci;
Tchana
Storytime: Darrow; Huneck; Kraus;
Wallace, N.
Tall tales: Darrow; Glass
Teachers-fiction: Hill
Terrorism-fiction: Marsden
Urban life-stories: Burleigh; Collier
Voyages and travel-stories: Burleigh;
Kraus
War-fiction: Marsden
Witches-fiction: Vande Velde
Women's studies: Anema; Pinkney;
Tchana
World War II: Rubin; Talbott
World War II-fiction: Deedy
Sta^rr 
1ed 
n 
LA
4L "Shawn McDaniel thinks his Father
is considering killing him.
"Of course, no one
knows that Shawn
is able to think
at all because
the 14-year-old,
who has cerebral
palsy, can't speak,
interact, or control
his movements.
But Shawn is
also a genius; he
remembers every-
thing that he hears.
And one more
thing- the seizures
which his family
members find so
pitiable, release his
soul in a way that
enables him to feel
and see things that
would be impos-
sible to experience
in his trapped
hnArr qh•wrn
» v•.y. 
i , 
J 
»
would like to live, but he understands that his father wants him
dead for the most unselfish reasons.... Readers spend the whole
book inside Shawn's head, a place so vivid, so unique they will
be hard pressed to forget its mix of heaven and hell. Nor will
they easily stop thinking about all the big issues Shawn raises.
This short novel packs a punch ... an intense reading
experience." 
-Starred review / ALA Booklist
Ages 10 up. $14.95 Tr (0-06-028519-2); $14.89 Lb (0-06-28518-4)
SHarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019 * www.harperchildrens.com
Keen un 
iachih
with the
latest in
Teaching!
Teaching K-8 is filled with hundreds of unique ideas and
activities that help teachers present new challenges to their
students, learn new concepts and develop new skills.
Monthly articles include:
Carol Otis Hurst on...
* Children's Books * Teaching in the Library
Plus... * The Parent Connection * Interviews with
children's book authors and illustrators * Science
* Technology and more!
)on't miss this valuable
resource for your library -
subscribe today.
Call 800-678-8793 or visit
our website at
www.TeachingK-8.com
--- -------
LOUISE
RE
At4IGV', 
4
FULL- F~o
ji "American readers
wondering what on earth 
:~* 
"Georgia
'full-frontal snogging' is will 
is brash, heedless
find the answer in the helpful 
and extremely funn)
(and hilarious) glossary 
-Starred review /
appended to this antic diary 
The Bulletin of the
of a year in the life of an 
Center for Children's Boc
English girl named Georgia
Nicolson. Snogging is, 
*- 
"Rennison
simply, 'kissing with all the 
exquisitely captures the
trimmings,' and it's much 
adolescent ability to
on 14-year-old Georgia's 
turn chaos into
mind these days. She 
stand-up comedy..
has fallen in love with 
[in her] spectacular
an older man (he's 
YA debut."
17), a Sex God 
-Starred review /
named Robbie. IL 
Publishers Weekly
ThetrobleisAges 12 up. $15 95 Tr (0-06-028814-0)
S.G. is dating a girl 
$15.89 Lb 100-0M28871 X)
who--brace yourself--wears a
thong. Georgia is a wonderful 
l(
character whose misadventures 
r
are not only hysterically funny 
mCI
but universally recognizable."
--Starred review / ALA Booklist 
I
'ks
Geraldine McCaughrean
Winner of the Carnegie Medal
"m- "The hero's quest provides the foundation tor this richly imagined
fantasy set in 1919 England. [After] 11-year-old Phelin encounters
the Domovey, he [is sent] on his way to conquer the Stoor Worm,
a Loch-Ness-like monster of gigantic proportions. With WWI raging,
artillery fire begins to awaken the sleeping worm and to speed the
hatching of the stones nesting in her body. . . . This evocative fantasy
distinguishes itself by way of vivid imagery, compelling action and
often Siren-like lyricism." -Starred 
review / Publishers Weekly
"[Weaving] elements from old Celtic lore into an allegory against war ...
McCaughrean has created a story of amazing depth and breadth."
-The Horn Book Magazine
"A whopping good read." -The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
Ages 10 up. $15.95 Tr (0-06-028765-9); $15.89 Lb (0-06-028766-7)
>w«. .._.
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.S.A.
RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED
0008-9036(20
0008-9036(200011)54:3;1-U
b 
A
i: 
:4
PERIODICALS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
is Online!
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books is now
available to our print subscribers as a searchable online
database. Print subscribers are now able to browse the latest
issue online, look through archived issues beginning with
the 1998 volume year, and search for reviews by title,
author, and reading level. A sample issue of the online
Bulletin is available at:
http://www.prairienet.org/cgi-bin/ccb/bulletin.cgi
The staff of The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
cordially invites you to browse through the online version.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
The Best of Tradition and Technology
1~
··;t ··
i·i
I
F-·~:II:F
