ILLINOI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
-- School Library Journal stars
Pd
Jfl
Vn
er
AM
)R I'ANT
BY MARGARET WISE BROWN
PICTURES BY CHRIS RASCHKA
I'
L-- .%
"In comforting language and perfect rhyme, this previously
unpublished companion to Brown's classic The Important Book
identifies significant achievements and developments, year by year
[from ages one through six], in a child's life. Raschka has done a
lovely job of creating [full-color] illustrations that...show children
joyfully testing new abilities." -Starred review / School Library Journal
"[Caldecott Honor recipient] Raschka's illustrations are innovative,
intriguing, and brimming with vitality." -The Horn Book
Ages 4-8 * $15.95TR (0-06-026282-6); $15.89LB (0-06-026283-4)
Joanna Cotler Books
The 50th Anniversary Edition
THE IMPORTANT BOOK * Margaret Wise Brown
Full-color pictures by Leonard Weisgard
Ages 4-8 * $14.95TR (0-06-020720-5); $14.89LB (0-06-020721-3); $5.95PB (0-06-443227-0)
f HarperColinsChilrenSBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York, NY 10022 * www.harperchildrens.com
It
-c, · CI
w
THE
BUvL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
December 1999
Vol. 53 No. 4
A LOOK INSIDE
119 THE BIG PICTURE
Jack and the Beanstalk ad. by Ann Keay Beneduce; illus. by
Gennady Spirin
Crazy ack by Donna Jo Napoli
Jack and the Beanstalk ad. by Richard Walker; illus. by Niamh Sharkey
120 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
124 * Crusader by Edward Bloor
127 * The Cello of Mr. 0 written by Jane Cutler; illus. by Greg Couch
136 * Good Sports: Winning, Losing, and Everything in Between written by
Therese Kauchak; illus. by Norm Bendell and with photographs
141 * Building the Book: Cathedral written and illus. by David Macaulay
155 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
156 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
f
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL
61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor (MD)
Deborah Stevenson, Associate Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison
Elaine A. Bearden, Reviewer (EAB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Janice N. Harrington, Reviewer (NH)
Fern Kory, Reviewer (FK)
CENTER STAFF
Melanie Kimball
Jeannette Hulick
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $60.00; individuals, $50.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $5.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from Bell & Howell, 300 North Zeeb
Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson Associates,
P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to the
University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 51 E. Armory Ave., Champaign,
IL 61820-6601. E-mail: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edulpuboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1999 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Niamh Sharkey from ack in the Beanstalk ©1999. Used by permission of
Barefoot Books.
DECEMBER 1999 
* 
119
THE BIG PICTURE
Jack and the Beanstalk
ad. by Ann Keay Beneduce; illustrated by Gennady Spirin
Crazy Jack
by Donna Jo Napoli
Jack and the Beanstalk
ad. by Richard Walker; illustrated by Niamh Sharkey
There is an odd gestalt to children's literature. A topic, any topic, sparks multiple
creative imaginations simultaneously and before you can say "fee, fi, fo, fum," we
have several new titles on the same subject during the same publishing season.
This season we have that traditional agrarian hero Jack and his legendary legumes.
Jack and the Beanstalk illustrated by Gennady Spirin is a stellar example
of classic fairy-tale illustration. Spirin's artistic interpretation of Jack's quest fea-
tures a robust young Jack, "a lively likable lad, but if he had one fault it was his
curiosity." Spirin sets the tale in Elizabethan England, then takes full advantage of
history to explore fanciful costuming, ornate border designs, and architectural motifs
in the intricate watercolor imaginings of his fairy-tale countryside. Jack trades the
floridly handsome Milky White to a floridly handsome yeoman for ten multicol-
ored beans. The wicked giant, dressed in a red slashed doublet and sporting striped
stockings, is a true glutton, for gold as well as food, and the border surrounding
descriptions of his repasts are replete with platters of suckling pig, goblets of wine,
boards of cheese, baskets of bread, and cauldrons of soup. This faithful retelling is
true to the most familiar traditional versions: Jack returns to the giant three times
to retrieve his father's stolen wealth and he avenges his murder by chopping down
the beanstalk and slaying the giant. The formal literary style of this retelling suits
the old world charm of the illustrations.
Storyteller Richard Walker, on the other hand, stays close to tradition by
departing from it. Careening off classic written versions ofJack and the Beanstalk,
Walker regales his readers with an energetic, far from literary retelling. He intro-
duces Jack in the conspiratorial voice of the oral storyteller: "I'm not going to start
off by saying that Jack was lazy. When there was an adventure in the offing, he was
not lazy at all. But most of the time, he just did a little bit of this and a little bit of
that." Sharkey's oils depict Jack as a naive innocent, all round-eyed and round-
mouthed, wearing a jester's cap that suits his role as unintentional but effective
trickster. Jack gets his six beans from a strange little man whose open-topped head
boils with ideas; the giant is a flat-headed Frankenstein's monster, primarily all-
120 
* THE BULLETIN
seeing eyes and all-crunching teeth. When Jack's distraught mother throws the
beans out the window, "things began to happen. The beans slipped down through
the cracks in the ground. Their roots wriggled deep into the earth and shoots
pushed upward. They burst through the hard crust of the soil and, twisting and
tangling together, they grew high into the sky." Sharkey's oil paintings reinforce
the rollicking pace, with off-kilter perspectives and flexible horizon lines giving a
sense of the characters racing through other-dimensional space. Walker compresses
traditionally tripartite events into singular action and vivid language: "And the
last time I went to visit, the harp played jigs and reels, so we all had a merry dance."
Donna Jo Napoli knows traditional folklore, and that is never more evi-
dent then when she strips an old tale to bare bones and then adds newly imagined
body, heart, and soul. The title character of CrazyJack has been mourning since
his desperate father disappeared up the mountain one foggy night and was never
seen again. Jack and his mother have lost nearly everything-farm, land, live-
stock-and they can barely eke out a living working someone else's property. Jack's
beloved, Flora, has decided to accept the proposal of William, a phlegmatic but
prosperous farmer, since it appears Jack will never get over his grief and guilt at his
father's disappearance. Jack trades the family cow for seven beans in the colors of
the rainbow, which grow overnight: "The dark stalk climbs, thick around as a
pine sapling. Its tendrils curl into crevices, like fingers. The massive leaves are flat
and shiny and heart shaped." And up he climbs, and he finds his father's fate along
with his own fortune. Napoli searches deeply for the emotional motivations be-
hind flat archetypes, for the connections between anonymous characters; she names
them, rescuing them from the obscurity that is "happily ever after" and turning
them into protagonists participating in stories that have depth and substance.
There is precedent for writers and illustrators' finding inspiration in tra-
dition; they use it as sounding bell, whetstone, or catapult for their creativity. The
conjunction of three versions of this adventure similar in plot yet unique in execu-
tion points to the universal appeal of the folktale. It also reminds us that a good
story, no matter how old or how familiar, never really goes out of style. (Imprint
information appears on pp. 123, 144, and 152.)
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ASHABRANNER, BRENT 
The New African Americans; illus. with photographs by
Jennifer Ashabranner. 
Linnet, 1999 
[105p]
ISBN 0-208-02420-4 
$21.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-5
This work brings together the history of African immigration to America, a survey
of contemporary African immigrant life and contributions, and a brief overview of
DECEMBER 1999 
* 
121
American immigration laws and their impact. In a conversational tone, Ashabranner
offers personal perceptions and sets the stories of specific immigrants in the socio-
historical context of African immigration. The book notes contributions of new
African immigrants to American society and draws parallels between this and other
immigrant groups. Despite the fresh topic, this title is marred by uninspired writ-
ing, poor organization, and shallow discussion. It doesn't address prejudice against
Africans, the relationship between the African immigrants and African Americans,
or how Africans sustain their religious institutions in America. The discussion of
the skills and talents that Africans bring to America is interesting, but suddenly
switching to the complete text of one Ethiopian folktale singled out from
Ashabranner's own book interrupts the flow of the narrative. The writing is stron-
gest when revealing the voices of individual immigrants and their traditional val-
ues. Despite these flaws (and several lapses, with phrases such as "in the African
mind," into viewing Africa as monolithic), the work contains new information
that will expand the worldview of readers. Captioned black-and-white photo-
graphs are interspersed throughout. A bibliography is included, and the bound
book will have an index. JNH
Avi 
Midnight Magic. 
Scholastic, 1999 
[256p]
ISBN 0-590-36035-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Set during the Italian Renaissance, this novel of court intrigues and machinations
offers a blend of history and suspense reminiscent of adult historical mysteries.
Fabrizio, age twelve, is the only servant to disgraced magician Mangus. When a
secret summons from the king calls Mangus to court, Fabrizio accompanies him,
his loyalty to the old man who raised him demanding it. Mangus has renounced
the "Dark Arts" (he was really only an expert at sleight of hand and illusion) after
being tried and convicted for heresy by the king's closest advisor and the power
behind the throne, Count Scarazone. But now it seems the king's young daughter,
Teresina, is being haunted by a ghost, and the king wants Mangus to use his pow-
ers to free her. Fabrizio, roaming about the palace halls and secret passageways,
becomes enmeshed in plots and counterplots involving attempted murder, revenge,
royal weddings, and the ghost of Lorenzo, the missing heir to the throne. All ends
well in a Copperfieldesque grand illusion that results in the true traitor revealed
and Mangus handsomely rewarded. Avi has a flair for selecting a literary style and
then making the most of it, and this novel is no exception. Fabrizio is a likable
character with an engaging touch of the rogue; Mangus is wise if not wizardly, and
the relationship between the two smacks of real affection. The rest of the charac-
ters are colorful and stylish, and the plot (although you can see the end coming)
has a well-paced momentum that will involve readers in the drama. JMD
AYLESWORTH, 
JIM, ad. 
Aunt Pitty Patty's Piggy; illus. by Barbara
McClintock. 
Scholastic, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-590-89987-2 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Aunt Pitty Patty and her little niece Nell acquire a pig at the market, but the
oinker, apparently having some awareness of a dinner table in wait, balks at the
gate: "It just sat there sayin', 'No, no, no, I will not go!'" Little Nelly entreats a
dog to bite the pig, and when it refuses, she asks a stick to hit the dog; an escalation
of refusals leads her through a fire, some water, a butcher, a rope, and a rat. A cat's
122 
* THE BULLETIN
willing to consider the proposal on terms that lead Nelly to a cow and then a
farmer, whereupon the wound-up plot unwinds with a bang as the action runs
sequentially through the characters and gets that porker through the gate. The
cumulative plot gallops along, egged on by the eminently chorusable refrains of
"No, no, no, I will not go!", and youngsters will get a giggle out of the chaotic
conga that sends piggy squealing on in. McClintock sets the tale in a world of
countrified early Americana (the cream pages, basketweave endpapers, and brown
pencil shading the watercolors add to the antique look), with Nelly zipping down
the dirt road in her high-button boots and yellow-ribboned hat; the faces are lively
rather than stylized, however, and the subtle but cheerful anthropomorphism of
the animals is particularly piquant. It's too bad that no note on tale origin is
provided; the unexpected inclusion of a recipe for corn bread, a food mentioned
nowhere in the text, doesn't really compensate. Not that the audience will care-
ham up the rumpus, and they'll squeal with delight. DS
AYLESWORTH, JIM, ad. 
The Full-Belly Bowl; illus. by Wendy Anderson
Halperin. 
Atheneum, 1999 
[4 0p]
ISBN 0-689-81033-4 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
This is the story of the bowl that stays full of whatever is put into it, no matter how
much is taken out. "A very old man" rescues "a wee small man" from being a fox's
lunch, and as a reward is given a magical bowl. First he fills it with stew, then
strawberries, then pennies, and finally he decides to make himself rich by trading
in the pennies for gold. A mouse jumps into the bowl, and the old man's small
cottage is overrun with rodents. The old man evens the odds by putting his cat in
the bowl, at least until the bowl is knocked off the table and shattered. The old
man keeps all the cats, "because to him, they were the sweetest cats in the world."
Halperin's framed colored-pencil illustrations suit the fanciful nature of this tale,
and her attention to everyday details makes even the most farfetched moments
plausible. (Although young readers will ask how the bowl gets knocked off the
table when on the previous page it's already on the floor.) Graceful drafting and a
soft pastel color scheme combine with full-page pictures and comic-strip-style panels
to further the story. While a source note would have been handy, Aylesworth tells
the tale with relish, and readers-aloud and storytellers seeking something worth
discussing should belly up to the bowl. JMD
BANKS, KATE 
Howie Bowles, Secret Agent; illus. by Isaac Millman. 
Foster/Far-
rar, 1999 
89p
ISBN 0-374-33500-1 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 2-4
It's Howie's first day in third grade at his new school, and it doesn't bode well that
classmate Mary Reilly greets him with, "My mom's on the school board.... She
could get you kicked out of school." An odd dinner entree, a forgotten lunch bag,
and unexpected collusion from the administrative office confer on Howie a new
name and, more importantly, a new persona-Secret Agent Bean Burger, who
instantly earns the admiration of his classmates by implying that he's at school on
a covert mission. A mission soon, in fact, presents itself and Howie (er, Bean)
must solve the mystery of the gum-clogged water fountains or lose his new friends.
Howie's new-kid-in-town plight is a familiar one, and although there aren't too
DECEMBER 1999 
* 
123
many surprises as he tidily ties up the case, the third-grade patter and host of
schoolhouse "crimes" keep the action rolling. Black-and-white full-page illustra-
tions provide plenty of rest stops for new chapter-book inductees. EB
BARTOLETTI, SUSAN CAMPBELL 
Kids on Strike! Houghton, 1999 
208p 
il-
lus. with photographs
ISBN 0-395-88892-1 
$20.00 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Although much has been written about child labor past and present, Bartoletti
focuses here on children's participation in organized labor actions. Eight substan-
tial chapters cover various industries (from spinning to mining to shoe shining),
and differing outcomes (from failed strikes to landmark gains) in the nineteenth
and early twentieth centuries. Readers can observe a broad spectrum of children's
experiences-New York bootblacks who organized for relief from uniform rental
fees; "newsies" whose business acumen (and outright cheating and deceit) kept
their families afloat; young mine workers who testified at federally mandated arbi-
tration hearings; children sent to foster homes (for safety and publicity) during the
violent Lawrence, Massachusetts mill strike. Coverage does fall short in several
key areas, though. Child farm labor is virtually ignored, black child laborers re-
ceive cursory attention, larger national issues of Socialism, anarchism, immigra-
tion, (and even the problem of defining the age of adulthood) are weakly addressed.
Still, Bartoletti's text and the bounty of period photographs are engaging enough
to whet readers' appetite for more, and extensive chapter-by-chapter bibliogra-
phies can lead serious upper-grade researchers onto more specific materials. An
index and timetable of federal child labor laws are included. EB
BENEDUCE, ANN KEAY, ad. Jack and the Beanstalk; illus. by Gennady
Spirin. 
Philomel, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-399-23118-8 
$15.99 
R 
5-8 yrs
See this month's Big Picture, p. 119, for review.
BLAKE, QUENTIN 
Zagazoo; written and illus. by Quentin Blake. 
Orchard,
1999 
32p
ISBN 0-531-30178-8 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
George and Bella are a happy carefree couple, thrilled to receive a package one day
containing a pretty little pink thing named Zagazoo. "George and Bella spent
happy days throwing it from one to the other," but after a time Zagazoo turns into
a huge baby vulture with terrifying screeches; then he becomes a small elephant,
clumsily knocking over the furniture and eating "anything he could lay his trunk
on"; then he becomes various other creatures in turn, until finally emerging as "a
young man with perfect manners." While the joke here is more on kids than for
kids, since they're not likely to appreciate the generalized reduction of their par-
ticular growth experience to animal-symbolized stages, the randomness of the ever-
changing household has an anarchic delight that's sure to please. Blake's whizzy
line-and-watercolor figures gain character from their informality and keep things
appropriately ridiculous (the happy trotting warthog is particularly endearing) as
they float about in the pages' white space. This might also offer an entertaining
slant on any young sibling interlopers, and parents can put into whatever context
they choose their own final transformation into "large brown pelicans." DS
124 
* 
THE BULLETIN
BLOOR, EDWARD 
Crusader. Harcourt, 1999 
[38 4 p]
ISBN 0-15-201944-8 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 9-12
Roberta's life is essentially one of desolation; with her mother killed in a robbery
seven years ago, she lives nominally with her father but in reality largely alone
(Dad spends most of his time with his girlfriend, Suzie). She keeps to herself but
has no time for a social life anyway, since she spends non-school hours working for
no pay at the family's virtual reality arcade. The mall (managed by Suzie) that
contains the arcade is having some serious problems, however: racist vandalism
plagues a fellow store-owner, and the mall's financial success is dwindling, which
means owners are depending on the recapitalization of the loans for their continued
livelihood while the local politico seems to have a vested interest in mowing it
down. As these events unfold, Roberta, a budding journalist, begins to discover
the hidden secrets of the past as well as the present, realizing that the financial
distresses that plague her family have long roots and terrible consequences. Bloor,
author of Tangerine (BCCB 3/97), again creates a world filled with dark silences
and dangerous denials, peopled with characters of authentic strengths, weaknesses,
and human quirks. The best part of this book lies in those human strengths, in
fact; in the beauty of Mrs. Weiss, the elderly shopowner who dotes on Roberta,
spending years pretending that her husband is buried in the same cemetery as
Roberta's mother so that Roberta can visit the person she misses so much; in the
beauty of Roberta's cousin Kristin, whose loyalty to her cousin outstrips her
indulgence of powerful and popular friends, and who, after facial disfigurement,
comes to grips with the strengths she's never acknowledged within herself. The
ending is over-resolved, with the loneliness and tragedy that plagues Roberta's life
unfortunately undercut by a multitude of plot devices ranging from creative video-
dubbing to over-villainizing of Roberta's father (who was actually more hateable as
a credibly rotten father than as the engine behind his wife's death). However, the
book offers a gallery of compelling characters, and Roberta's struggle against the
relentless sadness of her life remains gripping to the end. DS
BOYNTON, SANDRA 
Bob and 6More Christmas Stories; written and illus. by Sandra
Boynton. 
Little Simon, 1999 
18p
ISBN 0-689-82568-4 
$7.99 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Each spread in this holiday offering is a two-page short verse focusing on some
aspect of Christmas. Boynton's text is so abbreviated that, alone, it wouldn't have
much substance, but her illustrations are as much a part of the narrative as are the
words, and together they make comic sense. The opening story-verse, "Bob," is a
jolly little jingle about a mini-reindeer: "I have a tiny reindeer/ He says his name
is Bob./ He likes to entertain me./ He says it is his job." The simple ditty is
accompanied by illustrations of a diminutive Bob juggling peas, sitting on the
edge of a saucer, and dancing a soft shoe with a candy cane. Subsequent stories-in-
verse include an invitation to the "Merry Christmas Party," a yellow chick who
yearns to be "The Star" on the top of the Christmas tree, and a "Christmas Lullaby,"
among others. While not all the verses are equally successful (some are a bit list-
like, as in "Eight Wishes," and all have the feel of an extended greeting card) they
have the advantage of featuring Boynton's happy troupe of familiar players (hippos,
cats, etc.) against sturdy pages all merry and bright. JMD
DECEMBER 1999 
* 
125
CARRICK, CAROL 
Upside-Down Cake; illus. by Paddy Bouma. 
Clarion,
1999 
64p
ISBN 0-395-84151-8 
$14.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Between his ninth birthday and his tenth, the young narrator loses his father to
cancer. From the hand-lettered first page of his account of that year, the boy
clearly (and programmatically) articulates his feelings about the ways his life was
changed by his father's diagnosis, treatment, home care, and death. (This retro-
spective eloquence is a striking contrast to the reticence of his parents: Mom gives
him little overt support, and Dad doesn't say "I love you" until he's dying.) The
pencil drawings on almost every page help slow the quick pace of the minimally
detailed narration, but they add few telling details and shed little emotional light.
Readers who can relate to the narrator's feelings will be able to fill in the blanks
themselves; others will gain some insight into the loneliness that often accompa-
nies a tragedy and the guilt a child can feel after such a loss. FK
CARROLL, LEWIS 
Alice's Adventures in Wonderland; illus. by Helen
Oxenbury. 
Candlewick, 1999 
206p
ISBN 0-7636-0804-1 
$24.99 
R 7-12 yrs
CARROLL, LEWIS 
Alice in Wonderland; illus. by Lisbeth Zwerger. 
Neugebauer/
North-South, 1999 
103p
ISBN 0-7358-1166-0 
$19.95 
R Gr. 4-7
We've got two unabridged Alices by stalwart and important illustrators available
this holiday season, and they've taken quite different tacks. Oxenbury's art ap-
pears in a warm family storybook, a thick volume with creamy pages. Her Alice is
not only modern (bopping through Wonderland in a blue tank dress and white
tennies) but also indisputably a little kid: she sprawls, vaguely bored, next to her
sister and glares petulantly, arms akimbo, at the Red Queen; you've seen her cut-
ting through your backyard or bouncing down the street on training wheels. With-
out being sentimental, this is a softer-edged dream, with the fantasy intriguing
rather than dangerous. The animals are endearing, the watercolors rely on muted
spring hues, and solid but informal pencil sketches extend the vision and add to
the cozy security. Zwerger, on the other hand, works on the glossy tall pages of a
picture book, with full-page art restraining itself decorously from touching the
page edges (no bleeds here); color spot art, ranging from tiny tableaux to single
objects (the pebbles-turned-cakes shower through the text's margins), appears on
just about every page. Her vision is more angular and spiky: where Oxenbury's
Alice cuddles her flamingo and wields it gently, smiling at it in harmless complic-
ity, Zwerger's Alice is nearly buried under her leggy bird. Emphasis on white, red,
and black (Alice herself is in a tricolored outfit that has an Art-Deco schoolgirl
look to it) echoes the cards and keeps the palette energized rather than restful.
Though not as artistically original as Prachaticka's Alice (BCCB 2/90), Zwerger's
images aren't as domestic and familiar as Oxenbury's, either; often she blithely
cuts off pieces of Alice, showing only her legs (when Alice outgrows the house) or
all but her face (when Alice hastily departs the courtroom), and the mock turtle is
cleverly a cow in a turtle "skin." These are two solid Alices with two very different
approaches from illustrators with definite fans: both of them are worth adding to
the collection. DS
126 
* THE BULLETIN
CART, MICHAEL, ed. 
Tomorrowland: Stories about the Future. Scholastic,
1999 
[22 4 p]
ISBN 0-590-37678-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-10
Temporally themed anthologies are all the rage these millennial days (see Gallo's
Time Capsule and Avi's Second Sight, both BCCB 11/99); this collection of ten
stories, some from writers not usually seen in the short-story arena (Jon Scieszka,
for instance), focuses on a more general concept of "future." In James Cross
Giblin's "Night of the Plague," a young eleventh-century monk fears that the epi-
demic means that humankind has no future, and in Ron Koertge's "A Robot Doesn't
Have a Curve Ball" young teens in 2000 discuss the futuristic dreams on which the
millennium failed to deliver ("My grandmother's really funny about robots ...
they were the year 2000 to her. She's totally steamed she hasn't got one"). More
traditional entries in the genre include Rodman Philbrick's "The Last Book in the
Universe" and Katherine Paterson's "The Last Dog," both exploring dystopic fu-
ture existences. While there are a few strong entries (Lois Lowry's "Rage" tellingly
portrays an old man whose hoped-for future proved to be a bitter disappoint-
ment), generally the stories here emphasize concept at the cost of emotional in-
volvement or writerly subtlety, and some of the concepts are fairly shopworn; the
result is a collection less successful, if somewhat more accessible, than other such
anthologies. Still, the short takes will provide quick and sometimes thought-pro-
voking gratification as readalouds as well as independent futuristic reading. DS
CONRAD, PAM 
Blue Willow; illus. by S. Saelig Gallagher. 
Philomel, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-399-22904-3 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
Aristocratic Kung Shi Fair and fisherman Chang the Good are star-crossed lovers
kept apart by Kung Shi Fair's wealthy merchant father in this lengthy literary tale.
Reluctant to allow his daughter to wed, the merchant puts many obstacles in the
couple's path; all are overcome by Chang the Good, but still, the merchant will
not give his consent. Kung Shi Fair drowns in a storm, seeking her love; the grief-
stricken Chang the Good is killed by frightened villagers who mistake him for a
marauding tiger. A rainbow and two kissing swallows (presumably the dead lovers
united) inspire the merchant to commission the Blue Willow plate (designed in
England in the eighteenth century and the inspiration for this legend) in honor of
their love. Gallagher's acrylic, pastel, and mixed-media illustrations are artfully
detailed and subtly hued, with a rich palette that adds weight and substance to the
effectively balanced compositions. The characters are expressive and emotive, of-
ten looking out of the pages directly at the viewer, a la Trina Schart Hyman. The
drafting is masterful if somewhat slick, and the illustrations certainly reflect the
romantic influence of the eighteenth century European fascination with things
oriental. Though the text is somewhat flowery and overwritten, this will still have
appeal for those preadolescents who think stories of doomed love deep. JMD
COOPER, SUSAN 
King ofShadows. 
McElderry, 1999 
186p
ISBN 0-689-82817-9 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 6-9
American orphan Nat Field is the acrobatic Puck in a prestigious company pre-
senting Shakespeare's A Midsummer Night's Dream at the newly restored Globe in
London. Shortly after arriving in England, Nat falls deliriously ill; when he comes
to, he finds he has been transported back in time to Shakespeare's England, where
DECEMBER 1999 
* 
127
he is to play Puck opposite the renowned playwright's Oberon. Details of Elizabe-
than theatrical life fascinate, as do the characterizations of such famous treaders of
the boards as Shakespeare himself, Richard Burbage, and Will Kempe. Nat's ad-
justment to living in the past serves as the vehicle for his adjustment to his mother's
death and his father's suicide, and his affectionate, healing relationship with Shakes-
peare is touchingly realized. Conflict among the players, political intrigue, a per-
formance which Elizabeth I secretly attends, and Nat's coping without
twentieth-century amenities will keep the pages turning. Nat returns to his own
time to discover that the Nat Field he replaced in the past has been in the present
being treated for bubonic plague with modern antibiotics. The time switch was
purposefully arranged (by the current director of the company, an ageless Burbage)
to keep Shakespeare from contact with the infected Nat and perhaps sickening and
dying rather than writingJulius Caesar, The Tempest, Othello, etc. The facile con-
clusion is weakly supported, but the Elizabethan theater life has a great deal of
colorful charm; those readers too young for Shakespeare in Love might get a charge
out of this. JMD
CROSS, GILLIAN 
Tightrope. Holiday House, 1999 
[208p]
ISBN 0-8234-1512-0 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Ashley's the fair-haired good girl, a help to her sick mother, kind to all the old
ladies of the neighborhood, and the private favorite of the local shopkeeper. Se-
cretly, however, she's a daring graffiti artist, leaving her dramatic tag in apparently
inaccessible places. This talent brings her to the attention of Eddie Beale, whose
personal magnetism and local power are legendary, and who begins to assist Ashley
and her mother. It's to Eddie that Ashley turns when threatening phone calls and
a lurking presence at the back door convince her that she's in danger, but soon it
looks like she's mistaken about who's providing protection and who's the source
of menace. The book intersperses brief first-person monologues from a variety of
characters with the third-person narration; the result is an effective demonstration
of the web of connections that creates the power of somebody like Eddie and that
can also bring him down. Cross fills in the corners of her story with an impres-
sively co-dependent relationship between Ashley and her mother and with the
drifting apart of Ashley's family (her two younger sisters now live with their aunt
and uncle, who consider them their own). It's the carefully crafted power-play
drama and its accompanying twists that will keep readers absorbed here, however,
and they'll relish the tension as well as the surprising final justice. DS
CUTLER, JANE 
The Cello ofMr. O; illus. by Greg Couch. 
Dutton, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-525-46119-1 
$15.99 
R 
6-9yrs
The narrator of this story is a young girl surviving in a war zone: "My father and
most of the other fathers, older brothers-even some of the grandfathers-have
gone to fight. So we stay, children and women, the old and the sick, managing as
best we can. I am afraid almost all the time." Cutler (author of 'GatorAid, BCCB
9/99) evokes hope amidst despair, telling the story of the quiet heroism of day-to-
day survival amidst deprivation and danger. One day Mr. O, a reclusive old man,
comes out of the building with his cello. He sits in "the center of a deserted square
in a besieged city" and plays Bach's "powerful and reassuring notes." When his
cello is destroyed by an exploding shell, Mr. O does not capitulate. Instead he
128 
* THE BULLETIN
plays Bach on his harmonica, and "the music makes us feel happy. And the cour-
age of the harmonica player makes us less afraid." Cutler's gritty yet poignant
story is given added depth by Couch's controlled watercolors. Full-page and smaller
illustrations of the ruined cityscape and the bare interiors are designed for maxi-
mum effect, the eye of the viewer constantly being drawn into the center of the
composition by the varying perspectives. In the opening spreads it is the images of
the bombs and their aftereffects that provide the explosions of red and orange that
warm the pages; after Mr. O begins to play, it is the music, curling up from the
cello in a cloud of colors, sailing around the narrator's head in a rainbow of notes,
that adds intensity. JMD
FAULKNER, KEITH 
The Big YAWN; illus. by Jonathan Lambert. 
Millbrook,
1999 
16p
ISBN 0-7613-1029-0 
$9.95 
R 2-5 yrs
Alliteration, a sense of understatement, and short repetitive sentences filled with
gorillas, alligators, and tigers enliven this bedtime readaloud, where "As the sun
was setting over the rain forest the little bug yawned. Up in the tallest treetop the
parrot opened its mouth and yawned. Over in the lush leaves the slithering snake
stretched its scaly mouth and yawned." Initially, the viewer's eye is led across the
spread by the jagged horizontal line of a tree branch, and then by triangular com-
positions of color and shape that form each animal character; in all but the first
two spreads, the viewer moves from the animal's tail on the left to its yawning
mouth on the right. The tropically colored bug and bird, the ice-blue gorilla, and
the lime-hued alligator all contribute to the story's gentle humor while the colors
subtly build to the energetic sunset oranges of the tiger and the text builds to the
story's denouement: "and as the moon and stars came out, all the animals closed
their sleepy eyes and whispered zzzzzz." Cut-out yawns given to each character
(including a cutaway cover with a hippo's wide, yawning mouth) and the chance
to pull the flap at the end that helps the animals close their eyes will keep young
readers up way past bedtime. So grab your blankie, snuggle in, and don't forget-
yawning is contagious. JNH
FRITZ, JEAN 
Why Not, Lafayette?; illus. by Ronald Himler. 
Putnam, 1999 
[96p]
ISBN 0-399-23411-X 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Once again Fritz musters her considerable gifts of wit and verve to resuscitate a
Revolutionary War hero in danger of death-by-textbook-prose. In her capable
hands, the Marquis de Lafayette emerges as a nineteen-year-old stifled by three
years of marriage, bubbling with enthusiasm for the heady eighteenth-century con-
cept of republican government, and aching for a life of action with the promise of
personal glory. Never resorting to speculative dialogue or similar trappings of
fictionalized history, Fritz manages to convey the ardor of Lafayette's admiration
for General Washington, his rivalries with fellow officers, the outspoken tempera-
ment and noisy convictions that imperiled his life during the French Revolution,
his late-blooming love for his devoted wife, and his humble gratitude and childlike
delight over his American tour at the fiftieth anniversary of the American Revolu-
tion. Himler's black-and-white full-page sketches impart the dignity due a hero
while eschewing the reverence of traditional portraiture that so often fossilizes the
Founders. Vive Lafayette. Vive Fritz. EB
DECEMBER 1999 
* 129
GERSHATOR, PHILLIS 
Tiny and Bigman; illus. by Lynne Cravath. 
Cavendish,
1999 
32p
ISBN 0-7614-5044-0 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Miss Tiny isn't, and that's a problem, because all the men on her "green and rocky
island in the West Indies" don't want to marry a woman bigger, stronger, and
louder than they are. But Miss Tiny's romantic troubles are over when Mr. Bigman
(who also isn't) moves close by. Mr. Bigman, an enlightened fellow, doesn't mind
at all when the strong and resilient Miss Tiny helps him build a house, start a
garden, paint a boat, etc. and "he was properly grateful, too, kissing Miss Tiny all
day long on her soft brown cheek and once in a while on her pretty red lips.... His
smile was always answering Tiny's smile, and before long they were smiling to-
gether before the preacher." When Tiny tells her husband "Baby coming soon,
Bigman!", they dance gleefully in the street, but a hurricane is coming, too, and it
is up to Tiny to hold onto the roof: "The roof stayed on and the rain stayed out,
and the baby was born in a nice, dry house." The text has a readaloud beat that
lends energy to the already endearing characters, and the message is so understated
that it never overwhelms the humor. Cravath's illustrations feature electric blue
skies and red-roofed houses, and sunny weather conditions that match the charac-
ters' sunny dispositions. This is a modern tall tale (Mr. Bigman happily talks on
his cell phone and works on his laptop while Miss Tiny blows incoming storms
back out to sea) that features a capable heroine who's still in touch with her femi-
nine side. Move over, Swamp Angel, and make some room for Tiny. JMD
GOODE, DIANE, ad. 
The Dinosaur's New Clothes; ad. and illus. by Diane
Goode. 
Blue Sky/Scholastic, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-590-38360-4 $15.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Andersen's "The Emperor's New Clothes" gets a prehistoric makeover in this oth-
erwise faithful adaptation. Goode envisions her emperor as a Tyrannosaurus Rex
cum Louis XIV, complete with powdered wig, brocade morning coat, and feath-
ered hat; his coats feature illustrations from such well-known tales as "Jack and the
Beanstalk," Alice in Wonderland, and "Rapunzel." The setting is the French palace
of Versailles, gilded with gold paint and ornately decorated with laughing dino-
saurs/cherubs and elaborate frescoes. While the delicate pastel palette used for the
full and double-page watercolors makes these dinosaurs look airily aristocratic de-
spite their bulk, it also tends to be washed out and lacking in intensity. Spot art on
the text pages depict a variety of smaller dinosaurs prostrate with hilarity at the
emperor's foolishness, pointing claws and holding their heads. Goode makes this
somewhat gimmicky transmutation of the French ruling class into dapper dino-
saurs work by her consistent (and humorous) integration of the prehistoric and the
aristocratic; hand this to grade-schoolers and watch them pull out the dino-dictio-
naries to identify the royal rascals. JMD
GRANFIELD, LINDA 
High Flight: A Story of World War II; illus. by Michael
Martchenko. 
Tundra, 1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-88776-469-X 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
Although so many boy soldiers slipped from life before they ever had the opportu-
nity to make their mark in a public forum, nineteen-year-old Royal Canadian Air
Force pilot John Magee left behind a joyous paean to flight before his Spitfire
130 
* THE BULLETIN
crashed in a practice exercise over England. An amateur poet during his school
days, Magee dashed off the "ditty" (his term) "High Flight" for the amusement of
his relatives; the poem (with its famous line "[I] put out my hand, and touched the
face of God") would later be published and widely quoted by aviators, astronauts,
and others whose imaginations are touched by the possibility of flinging their "ea-
ger craft through footless halls of air." Granfield's earnest account is, unfortu-
nately, not as tightly focused as one might wish. Part biography, part history, part
literary criticism, and part raw adulation, the ambitious text is densely packed into
a picture-book format that is rather weighty for younger readers, yet probably too
childish looking to attract the junior high audience that may be familiar with Magee's
poem. Martchenko's watercolor scenes of war-ravaged England, proud fighter
pilots, and carefully detailed aircraft should certainly make the cramped text less
intimidating, and lead readers to reflect on the courage and accomplishment of
one not much older than themselves. EB
GREGORY, KRISTIANA 
Cleopatra VII: Daughter of the Nile. 
Scholastic,
1999 
222p 
(The Royal Diaries) 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-590-81975-5 
$10.95 
R 
Gr. 6-9
In this new series that obligingly creates diaries for those famous women who care-
lessly forgot to write one, Gregory gives voice to the thoughts of twelve-year-old
Cleopatra, third daughter of the tottering King Ptolemy Auletes, who desperately
needs Roman assistance to shore up his power. Her eldest sister's lethal intentions
send Cleopatra and her father to Rome, where her beauty and knowledge help
secure the desired support; after more than a year (and the execution not only of
Cleopatra's eldest sister but also of the next in line) they triumphantly return, with
Cleopatra's succession of her father nearly assured-if she can survive the plots
against her. Gregory paints an exciting picture of riches, heritage, and conspiracy;
Cleopatra's occasional encounter with Marc Antony (nearly two decades before
their famous union) and the child Octavian (later to defeat the lovers in the battle
that prompts their suicide) adds piquancy for readers in the know. The book
understandably makes Cleopatra the heroine of her own diary but drops some
evocative hints of caprice and heedlessness (she sympathizes with the Egyptian
people's hatred of her spendthrift father and then eagerly plans a golden jeweled
collar for her pet leopard) and resists the urge to soften Cleo's determination to
obtain the throne. More fictionalized than even Robert Graves' I, Claudius but
similarly entertaining, this will entice lovers of lurid history and royal melodrama
into a satisfying and soapy read. Extensive back matter includes a family tree,
historic notes, illustrations (later engravings and reproductions of classical images
in sculpture, and historic sites and objects), maps, an epilogue, and an annotated
who's who of relevant personages. DS
GRIFFIN, ADELE 
Dive. 
Hyperion, 1999 
[14 4 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2389-5 
$15.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0440-8 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
In a clean, introspective style, narrator Ben looks back on his relationship with his
troubled older stepbrother, Dustin. The bulk of the narrative focuses on young
Ben's first experience with security, when his flighty mother Gina marries the sol-
idly dependable Lyle. Ben relates the trouble he and Dustin had adjusting to their
parents' marriage, easily seeing that it was more difficult for Dustin than for him.
DECEMBER 1999 
* 
131
The marriage breaks up, Ben refuses to leave the only stability he has ever known,
and he stays with his stepfather; Dustin moves out to California to live with Ben's
mother. When Dustin ends up in the hospital after a diving accident, Ben, Lyle,
and Lyle's girlfriend, Mallory, go out to see him, and Ben must deal with his
responses to both his estranged mother and his injured stepbrother. While Ben is
articulate about his own emotional state throughout the novel, and while he re-
lates his experiences involvingly, he does so with the wisdom of hindsight in a
voice that never really settles on a tone or age. There is no resolution, for Lyle and
Dustin, or Ben and Dustin, or Ben and his mother. The implication that Dustin
is self-destructive is made but never clearly articulated or integrated into the plot.
The title (which refers to Dustin's talent for making "the perfect dive") is also the
image used to give insight into Dustin early in the novel and to close Ben's reverie:
"You are standing high and straight, your shoulders square against the wind and
your eyes lost on the distance. I watch your body flicker and sharpen and fall
through the air to the water, hardly rippling its surface as you disappear beneath
it." This is lyrical, but it's not effectively connected to the earlier occurrence.
Griffin has a talent for emotional imagery that asserts itself throughout, but the
main character is burdened by an overabundance of self-awareness without enough
action in the plot to balance it. JMD
HARRISON, BARBARA 
Theo. 
Clarion, 1999 
166 p
ISBN 0-899-19959-3 $15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Theo and his older brother, Soc, are barely eking out an existence in Athens under
German occupation; when a Nazi edict announces the rounding up and deporta-
tion of orphans, the boys take off for the countryside and the resistance, planning
to hook up with a village priest and his wife. When Soc is caught and executed by
the Germans for performing an act of sabotage, a stunned Theo is taken in alone
by the couple, whereupon he forms a bond with them and with some other dis-
placed orphans and begins to explore his own bravery--and his own definition of
bravery-when resistance activities and German reprisals heat up. Greece's expe-
rience of World War II is rarely treated in children's literature, and Harrison deals
capably with the politics (the largely communist resistance movement) and history
(Theo is accompanied by Karagiozis, a traditional shadow puppet, who in perfor-
mance comments satirically on current events and links them to classical Greece)
as well as effectively capturing the privations, disorganization, and grand and petty
assaults of the countryside under occupation. Unfortunately, the human side isn't
as strong here: though Theo's development of courage (including an ironic paral-
lel to the defiant "No" of Greece to the Axis) is laid out carefully, neither he nor
the others really engage as characters, so the book is more informational than in-
volving; the deaths of Soc and other characters serve more to illustrate the terrible
price of resistance than to convey Theo's personal tragedy. Still, it's a picture of
World War II that most readers won't have seen, and those that wish to expand
their view will appreciate it. DS
HODGES, MARGARET 
Joan of Arc: 
The Lily Maid; illus. by Robert
Rayevsky. 
Holiday House, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1424-8 
$16.95 
R 6-9 yrs
The fourth in a spate of recent Joan titles (Diane Stanley's Joan ofArc, BCCB 9/
98, Josephine Poole's Joan ofArc, 9/98, and Michael Morpurgo's Joan ofArc of
Domrkmy, 7/99), this is aimed at the youngest audience of all of them. Hodges
132 
* THE BULLETIN
keeps her language simple ("How could a poor peasant girl save France? She knew
nothing about fighting"), tracking the events of Joan's triumph and downfall in
streamlined prose accessible to early Joanophiles. Sometimes a little more com-
plexity would have made things clearer (the book doesn't explain why it's worth
noting that the "army captains and noblemen" in charge of Joan's imprisonment
were English), but the high points and the tragedy get their due nonetheless.
Rayefsky's art draws on drypoint and etching techniques, with spiky black lines
and muted colors on brown backgrounds in severely framed rectangles; though the
restrained colors may seem a bit drab to young viewers, and the face-drawing is
sometimes a bit cartoonish or modern (in closeups Joan has a slightly MTV fla-
vor), the images are medievally atmospheric and appropriately hagiographic (par-
ticularly dramatic is the stark scene of an imprisoned and despairing Joan). If
everybody's into Joan, the younger set isn't going to want to be left out, and this
will make for an evocative and serviceable introduction. DS
HOLT, KIMBERLY WILLIS 
When Zachary Beaver Came to Town. 
Holt,
1999 
227p
ISBN 0-8050-6116-9 
$16.95 
R Gr. 5-8
The town to which Zachary Beaver ("the fattest boy in the world") has come is
Antler, Texas, where Toby the narrator and his friend Cal are eager for any kind of
distraction. Cal's trying not to think about his brother, who's fighting in Viet-
nam, and Toby is avoiding acknowledging his mother's departure for a music
contest in Nashville. Zachary, who changes from a sideshow attraction to an in-
cipient friend when his manager runs out on him, proves a successful diversion-
until Toby finds out that his mother has left his father, and Cal discovers that his
older brother has been killed in action. Holt, author of My Louisiana Sky (BCCB
6/98), writes smoothly and convincingly of a summer of difficult change in a small
town. Zachary is particularly deftly handled, both the randomness of his appear-
ance in Antler and his physical and emotional manifestations. The plot is so care-
fully steered that it leaves no surprises-it's inevitable that Toby's mother leaves
for good, that Cal's brother will not return, that Zachary proves to be lying about
his glamorous travels, that the beautiful girl only likes Toby as a friend-but the
journey down the road is still a touching and rewarding one. DS
HOLUBITSKY, KATHERINE 
Alone at Ninety Foot. 
Orca, 1999 
169p
Trade ed. ISBN 1-55143-127-0 
$14.95
Papered. ISBN 1-55143-129-7 
$6.95 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Fourteen-year-old Pamela is trying to pull her life together after the suicide of her
mother, who, in the grip of depression, leapt to her death in a local canyon. Pamela
feels distant from her friends, especially the boy-crazy Joanne, who's been trying to
curry favor with popularity-queen Danielle; she'd rather spend time on her own in
the park where her mother died. Things start to change, however, with her father's
acquisition of a serious girlfriend, with Pamela's own interest in a boy (who's cur-
rently encumbered by the evil Danielle), and with the passage of time and process
of healing. Holubitsky deftly captures the clumsy sulkiness that hides adolescent
heartbreak, with numbness, mundane observation, and grief combining credibly
in Pamela's touching narration. The book has a nice line in understatement, espe-
cially in characterization (Pamela succinctly describes her friendship with "One
thing about Joanne is, she doesn't give up easily. The thing about me is, I do");
DECEMBER 1999 
* 
133
Dad's awkward but eminently worthy girlfriend is a particularly original and re-
freshing depiction. Though some of the climactic successes are too pleasant to be
entirely believable (such as the vanquishing of Danielle), this is a story that man-
ages to avoid traps of obvious confessionality while still compellingly revealing the
pain and labor of adjustment to loss. DS
HOOBLER, DOROTHY 
Real American Girls Tell Their Own Stories; by Dorothy
and Thomas Hoobler. 
Atheneum, 1999 
104p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-689-82083-6 
$12.95 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Through excerpts from letters, diaries, and memoirs, readers discover the child-
hoods of American girls from a variety of class, cultural, and historical perspec-
tives. The voices of twenty-four girls span the eighteenth through twentieth century.
Arranged in brief topical sections, "Best Friends," "School Days," "In Trouble,"
"Just Having Fun," "Boys," and "Becoming a Woman," the excerpts come from
primary sources, mostly from the mid to late 1800s. Many readers will recognize
Louisa May Alcott and Red Cross founder Clara Barton, but most of the names
will be unfamiliar, such as the Winnebago Mountain Wolf Woman or Helen
MacKnight, one of the first women doctors in the U.S. The excerpts are humor-
ous, distinctive, and implicitly feminist, while covering topics and feelings that
will resonate with contemporary readers: "Have come across such a glorious book
called 'Boys Play Book of Science.' Am going to read it through and see if whether
ain't some experiments Bess and I can try. Won't it be jolly if we really can? But
it takes money money money even for the privilege of blowing one's self up"-
from the diary of Martha Carey Thomas, 1870. The writings range from the
girlish voice of a nine-year-old, to Mountain Wolf Woman's poignant recounting
of her first menstruation, to an incident of prejudice recalled by an Asian Ameri-
can teenager. The best excerpts are diary entries which engage readers through the
immediacy of first person and the specificity of time and place: "I don't want to be
alive when the year 2000 comes, for my Bible teacher says the world is coming to
an end then, and perhaps sooner." 
Black-and-white photos (unfortunately
uncaptioned) and a list of credits accompany the text. This book should find
readers among the fans of the American Girl or Dear America series and can serve
as a springboard to history and journal writing. JNH
HUANG, CHUNGLIANG AL 
The Chinese Book ofAnimal Powers; written and illus.
by Chungliang Al Huang. 
Cotler/HarperCollins, 1999 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027729-7 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027728-9 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 4-8
"Chinese legend tells us that the lord Buddha summoned the animals to hear of
their powers in his sermon under the Banyan Tree," assigning one of twelve ani-
mals and their characteristics to years and months. Huang has put together a clear,
detailed summary of the powers of each beast, and in the glossary he has given the
birth years and months influenced, according to tradition, by each animal. He
introduces what is commonly called the Chinese Zodiac in conversational lan-
guage with a friendly tone that is always aware of his young audience. Huang's
calligraphy (including both the Chinese sign for the animal and its transliteration
into the Roman alphabet) and paintings soar across the white pages in sweeping
black lines that dominate the available space and give a sense of energetic move-
ment. Small red medallions featuring the calligraphic sign for the animal and a
134 
* THE BULLETIN
tiny sketch of the animal itself add accent, and the changing colors of the typeface
(red, purple, green) and their varying layouts lends an unobtrusive variety to the
book's design (though the correlation between symbols in the text proper and
symbols in the key at the back is not entirely clear). This is an introduction to
Chinese myth and legend, but it is also an elegant piece of bookmaking that will
cross curriculum lines with ease while appealing to the audience it addresses. JMD
Hush, Little Baby: A Folk Song with Pictures; illus. by Marla Frazee. 
Browndeer/
Harcourt, 1999 
40p
ISBN 0-15-201429-2 
$15.00 
R 
3-6 yrs
A howling baby is desperately soothed by older sister, mother, and father in this
illustrated lullaby. Frazee's acrylic ink and pencil illustrations reflect the West
Virginia terrain she studied for inspiration, and the details of the domestic scenes
(rush-seated chairs, cast-iron cauldrons, toys, etc.) offer a concrete look at Appala-
chian daily life in the past. The visual narrative would be strong enough to stand
as a wordless book, and it adds a rich layer of nuance to the familiar words of this
old song. The story begins on the endpapers, as the older sister of the titular baby
spies an itinerant peddler in front of an inn; the title pages show a displeased sister
frowning at the care with which her parents put the sleeping baby into the cradle;
the dedication page shows big sister waking the baby, and only after that do the
lyrics begin. The illustrations hark back to Brinton Turkle's Obadiah picture
book series; Frazee's skillful drafting, earth-toned palette, and expressive character-
izations add a lively immediacy to this historical piece. A clear sense of story
guides the art, and that makes this a tune easy to sing along with. Musical nota-
tion is included. JMD
IRVING, WASHINGTON 
Rip Van Winkle; ad. and illus. by Will Moses. 
Philomel,
1999 
4 8p
ISBN 0-399-23152-8 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Retold and illustrated in an appropriately folksy style by the great-grandson of
Grandma Moses, this text-heavy picture-book adaptation of Washington Irving's
1820 tale about a man who sleeps through the Revolutionary War offers readers a
look at the natural beauty of the Hudson River Valley landscape in which the story
takes place. The crude human figures and buildings depicted in the variously sized
oil paintings reinforce the story's antiquity and to that extent exacerbate the reader's
historical distance from this classic American tale. Modern attention spans and
tastes make this a challenging readaloud, while the picture-book format may put
off older readers. Some youngsters, though, may find this format more accessible
and engaging than a text-only version and browsers will appreciate the natural
beauty of the impressionistically detailed and richly colored fall landscape. FK
JAM, TEDDY 
The Stoneboat; illus. by Ange Zhang. 
Groundwood/Douglas &
McIntyre, 1999 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-88899-368-4 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
6-9 yrs
The young narrator acts more from impulse than intent when he pulls his dour,
reclusive neighbor Mr. Richard out of the powerful whitewater of the river. His
sister reminds him later that Dad owes Mr. Richard two hundred dollars (and
DECEMBER 1999 
* 
135
banks have foreclosed on farms for amounts not much greater), and he decides to
visit Richard at night to argue that saving his life should cancel the debt. When he
encounters the taciturn giant clearing rocks from his field by moonlight, the boy
cannot bring himself to speak; instead they work side by side removing a tremen-
dous boulder. Dad joins the work and, after dismissing his son, has private words
with Richard. The narrator concludes by observing, "Once when I was at home
for a visit I discovered that my father had become friends with him, and that they
often went fishing together summer mornings." Listeners will be drawn to debate
whether it was a sense of simple justice or admiration for the hard-working boy's
determination that softened Richard, or whether he really needed any softening to
begin with. Even adult readers may discover that assumptions that all literary
money lenders are created equal (and hateful) have drawn them into Jam's cleverly
laid trap. Densely layered paint and simple, sturdy shapes create characters as
elemental as their rocky landscape and underscore the silent power of the mysteri-
ous neighbor. This is a subtle but effective commentary on the danger of snap
judgments. EB
JENNINGS, PATRICK 
Putnam & Pennyroyal; illus. by Jon J Muth. 
Scholastic,
1999 
[16 3p]
ISBN 0-439-07965-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Nine-year-old Cora, on a visit to her Uncle Frank in southern Arizona, demands
to know if his story about Putnam, a stick-in-the-mud pied-billed grebe who lives
in Coot Pond, and Pennyroyal, an individualistic least grebe he meets after both
are sucked into an underwater cave, is "supposed to teach me something." But
Uncle Frank asks Cora Lee not to "go hunting for lessons" and in the end she
draws the moral from the tale of her own volition. This fable by the author of
Faith and the Electric Dogs (BCCB 1/97) has its own compelling messages, and the
relationship between uncle and niece is played out with a sophisticated humor that
children will appreciate at least partly because the child often gets the best of the
adult. The deepest pleasures of this text are the original and somehow believably
self-reflective animal characters, accurate zoological details imparted by a narrator
who cares deeply about the natural world-and who believes in the abilities and
intelligence of children-and an engaging child character firmly anchored in real-
ity who, like the reader, gets lost for a time in the storyteller's tale. Sketchy pen
and ink illustrations demonstrate a keen eye for natural detail and appreciation for
perspective while simultaneously showing the value of leaving some things to the
imagination. Putnam's story will make readers and listeners wonder with the nar-
rator why there aren't more grebe stories and be grateful to have this one. FK
JONES, JOY 
Tambourine Moon; illus. by Terry Widener. 
Simon, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-689-80648-5 
$16.00 
R 5-8 yrs
Noni is walking home one night with her grandfather and "the city streets are
dark. The shadows of the parked cars are as huge as giants, as gray as rats and twice
as creepy. The houses all have mean expressions on their faces." Grandaddy stops
to look at the moon, and Noni forgets her fear as he tells the story of the first time
he saw her grandmother Ismay after hearing her sing in the Starfire Choir at the
Star of Bethlehem Baptist Church: "When she came out the church door she had
this big yellow tambourine in her lovely brown hands." Grandaddy mistakenly
136 
* 
THE BULLETIN
carries off Ismay's tambourine after seeing her to her door, and, on his walk home,
"that tambourine jumped right out of my hand! It shot itself higher, higher, higher,
till it settled in the sky. That big, yellow tambourine just hung there, glowing and
pouring light all over the night like butter running down the sides of a hot bis-
cuit." Grandaddy's story is a gentle evocation of romance past but treasured, and
it provides an effective distraction from Noni's fear of the dark (though it may
prove to be a bit distant for a young audience). Widener's acrylics depict a gentle
night of dark blues and deep greens; the compositions are notable for strong curv-
ing lines and monumental figures. The light that comes with Grandaddy's first
view of Ismay never fades but becomes a golden glow that suffuses both story and
pages. 
JMD
KATZ, KAREN 
The Colors of Us; written and illus. by Karen Katz. 
Holt,
1999 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-5864-8 
$15.95 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
Lena is learning to mix colors. When she tells her mother that "brown is brown,"
mother and daughter walk through their neighborhood observing the diverse skin
colors of their neighbors: "My best friend, Jo-Jin, lives close to the playground.
Jo-Jin is the color of honey. Two streets over, we meet my cousin Kyle. His skin
is a reddish brown, like leaves in fall." The story ends with a humanistic epiphany:
"At last my pictures are done, and I've painted everyone. 'Look, Mom,' I say.
'The colors of us!'" Using collage, gouache, and colored pencils, Katz creates a
multicultural array of skin tones from toffee to cinnamon, with big-eyed, circular
faces filling the spreads. The naive illustrations are flat, but they achieve depth
through rich if sometimes busy patterning (polka dots, floral designs, plaids). The
skin tones do not always convincingly match the text's descriptions (young readers
may have difficulty seeing the difference between Carlos's light cocoa brown and
Rosita's butterscotch) and at times the similes are unclear (what color is pizza
crust?). The point is made, however, and listeners will easily absorb the concept
that people come in diverse hues. This may help preschoolers who are asking
questions about skin color or looking for more creative ways to use their crayons.
JNH
KAUCHAK, THERESE 
Good Sports: Winning, Losing, and Everything in Between;
illus. by Norm Bendell and with photographs. 
American Girl, 1999 
96p
Paper ed. ISBN 1-56247-747-1 
$8.95 
R Gr. 3-8
Kauchak adds a strong entry to the American Girl Library with her clear, concise
text (accompanying vivid photographs and lively line and watercolor drawings)
offering unpatronizing advice for girls competing in sports. Topics range from
physical and mental preparation for competition to playing as part of a team to
deciding when it's appropriate to quit. Kauchak's chapters (for example, "Warm-
ing Up: Sporty Girls of the Past, Safety Tips for Today") offer a loose structure,
but a lack of index combined with two-page mini-topics make the book more
useful for magazine-type browsing than for research. Layouts are full but never
crowded, while chapters most often conclude with a "Huddle" to summarize main
points. A chapter called "Sports Center: Learning More" ends the book, listing
sports organizations and internet resources, with the caveat that some sites may
have changed since the book was printed. And yes, memory pages are appended
for girls to record their goals, best memories, and heroines/heroes. With this ener-
DECEMBER 1999 
* 
137
getic playbook outlining the strategy for sports success, girls can't help but catch
the enthusiasm. EAB
KHAN, RUKHSANA 
Dahling, if You Luv Me, Would You Please, Please
Smile. 
Stoddart, 1999 
206p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-7737-6016-4 
$8.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Zainab feels like the perennial outsider at her Canadian school: she doesn't have
the requisite expensive brand-name clothes, she's one of only two students of In-
dian ancestry there (and the other, also in grade eight, is a Hindu who finds Mus-
lim Zainab's acceptance of meat-eating disgusting), and she's without friends.
Zainab hopes things might change when she directs the class play for school com-
petition, but she's going to have to find a way to get along with the class heartthrob
and theatrical power junkie, who wants to be the star and his girlfriend to be his
leading lady. The theatrical drama here isn't particularly compelling or original,
and readers won't be surprised that, after various trials and tribulations, Zainab's
play takes first prize in the contest. What is compelling and original here is the
treatment of Zainab's faith and its relevance to her daily life: without being preachy
or ham-handedly informational, Khan depicts Zainab as a devout girl in a devout
family who both embraces and questions the tenets of her faith. There's a well-
handled complexity in the scenes where Zainab submits to the will of her bossy
older sister and uncomfortably listens to catalogues of fault; the book makes it
clear that older sister Layla takes a most irreligious pleasure in bossing her younger
sister but also gives credence to Zainab's contemplation of her character. Despite
the lagging of the play plot, the family intensity will engage readers, and proud and
stubborn Zainab is worth knowing. DS
KOSTYAL, K. M. 
Trial by Ice: A Photobiography ofSir Ernest Shackleton. National
Geographic, 1999 
64 p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-7922-7393-1 
$17.95 
R* Gr. 4-8
This is the third book in the current round of Shackletoniana (see Jennifer
Armstrong's Shipwreck at the Bottom of the World and Elizabeth Cody Kimmel's
Ice Story, both BCCB 2/99), and this one too does an effective job of chronicling
one of the greatest of twentieth-century explorers despite the irony that his expedi-
tions never achieved their intended ends. Whereas the other titles focused mainly
on the famous travails of the Endurance expedition, Kostyal takes a more generally
biographical approach, capably examining Shackleton's several voyages ranging
from his early journey with Scott (Kostyal candidly notes that the two were not the
most amiable of colleagues) to his final fatal voyage on the Quest. The visuals bear
out the subtitle: not only are photographs thickly clustered throughout, they're a
major design element, their monochromatic tones reproduced in a black tinged
with dark arctic blue (pointed up by the blue captions and page numbers). Fre-
quent usage of sweeping landscape shots for double-page spreads, with text super-
imposed on the picture, helps convey the wide-skied reality of the frozen wastes;
photos of artifacts, such as Shackleton's signed Burberry helmet and a news head-
line when Shackleton was discovered alive after the wreck of the Endurance, pro-
vide even more concrete reminders of the reality of a hard-to-believe life. The
visual approach and shorter length will entice young adventurers who don't have
the patience for the longer accounts of Kimmel and Armstrong, and even sophis-
ticated readers will appreciate the haunting images. A map, chronology, bibliogra-
phy, and index are included. DS
138 
* 
THE BULLETIN
KUHN, BETSY 
Angels of Mercy: The Army Nurses of World War II. 
Atheneum,
1999 
114p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-689-82044-5 
$18.00 
R 
Gr. 5-8
In six gripping chapters, one for each year of the war and its immediate aftermath,
Kuhn tracks nurses in the Pacific and European theaters-those who enlisted for a
taste of island paradise and found themselves embroiled in war, and those who
answered the government call for medical practitioners. From the opening attack
at Pearl Harbor with its flood of casualties, to incarceration in Philippine intern-
ment camps, to flight behind enemy lines in Albania, to harrowing service to liber-
ated concentration camp prisoners, the nurses experienced the same perils and
horrors as their brothers at arms. Kuhn has an unfailing eye for the telling details
that bring her account to life: women hacking down bamboo trees to expand
hospital space; New Guineans using anti-malaria pills to dye their clothing yellow;
racially segregated blood supplies; a wedding gown successfully shipped from North
Carolina to occupied France in time for a military wedding; a cathedral-turned-
hospital in which the baptismal font served as the staff scrub basin. Period photos
from the Army Nurse Corps archives of groomed and grinning nurses, chipper as
recruitment poster girls, stand in vivid contrast amid the textual record of mud
and muck, exhaustion and privation. Not just for history fans and medical enthu-
siasts, this title should appeal to most readers with a penchant for true life adven-
ture stories. Notes, bibliography, and index are included. EB
KURTZ, JANE 
I'm Sorry, AlmiraAnn; illus. by Susan Havice. 
Holt, 1999 
120p
ISBN 0-8050-6094-4 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Yet another young heroine packs her wagon to hit the Oregon Trail. In this liter-
ary trek, Sarah Benton leaves Missouri with a light heart because her best friend,
Almira Ann Hastings, is moving with her family to the West as well. It's boredom
and discomfort rather than danger that take their toll on this wagon train, and the
girls begin to discover the truth that familiarity does indeed breed contempt. Almira
Ann's sweet disposition now seems timid and whiny; Sarah is nagged by jealousy
over Almira Ann's beloved imported doll. A scuffle in the wagon leads to a broken
leg for Almira Ann and a stricken conscience for Sarah, who plots a way to make
amends for her misbehavior. Kurtz takes readers on an uneasy ride, jostling be-
tween an Oregon Trail adventure story and a squabbling-girlfriends tale, but never
doing full justice to either. Sarah's guilt is too often mitigated by trail interests to
be very troublesome; although the families supposedly reach Oregon, readers are
tossed off the wagon in present day Idaho and never experience the rest of the trip.
Still, the friendship angle of Kurtz's tale may entice those who favor contemporary
stories to dabble in historical fiction, and the full page line drawings will keep the
chapter book set engaged. A trail map and historical notes are included. EB
LASKY, KATHRYN 
Elizabeth I: Red Rose of the House of Tudor. Scholastic,
1999 
237p 
(The Royal Diaries) 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-590-68484-1 
$10.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Another in the Royal Diaries series (see Gregory, above), this allows young Prin-
cess Elizabeth to share the daily doings of her eleventh through thirteenth years,
which takes her up to the death of her father, Henry VIII. Elizabeth's feelings
about her father are a major theme in this fictional journal as she periodically aches
for his attentions, fears his disapproval, and scampers with joy like a puppy at any
DECEMBER 1999 
* 
139
mark of favor ("I can almost still feel the pinch he gave my cheek. It is lovely. I
wish it had turned red and left a mark"). She's also aware of court intrigues and
affairs and the vagaries of political fortune (in Lasky's version, it's Elizabeth who
warns Catherine Parr of her husband's pending action for heresy against her, thus
allowing the sixth queen to keep her head on her shoulders). Lasky goes to lengths
to make her heroine modern in viewpoint where Gregory, in Cleopatra's diary,
largely avoided anachronizing; she also happily makes Elizabeth's sister Mary a
one-note scheming villainess, which means this title could make an entertaining
companion to Carolyn Meyer's Mary, Bloody Mary (BCCB 10/99), which beati-
fies Mary and casts all blame on Elizabeth's mother. Though clearly aiming at the
same historical fiction audience as the Dear America books, this series' use of real
subjects and more distant history provides greater creative challenges; in this entry
the burdens weigh a bit too heavily, and the fiction and history tend to exist at one
another's expense. Still, the atmosphere of Tudor court life is rarefied and exotic,
with its details ranging from elaborate dress to vermin, and readers who want to
know more about young Bess than She Was Nice to Mice will relish the pretend
peek into her private world. Back matter includes period art and a family tree as
well as a historical note. DS
LAUBER, PATRICIA 
The Tiger Has a Toothache: Helping Animals at the Zoo; illus.
by Mary Morgan. 
National Geographic, 1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-7922-3441-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
Ten animals each get a brief vignette about their interaction with the zoo vet in
this accessible title. From a frog that mistook a stone for his lawful insect prey and
subsequently suffered a bellyache to a tortoise with a broken leg whose assistive
device is a skateboard, the animals have their maladies detected and rectified within
a couple of pages. While this ease and optimism may be a bit misleading and the
simple text structure clashes with words such as "anesthetic," the array of problems
and critters is impressive. The book also makes some good points, quietly empha-
sizing the need for familiarity with an animal's normal behavior and the risk that
visitors can present to zoo animals (the gorilla's cold may come from food thrown
by a visitor, and a coin casually tossed into the penguins' pool results in a near-fatal
penguin poisoning) as well as wisely including an example of the vet's helping an
animal not by surgery or medication but by leaving it alone and letting nature take
its course. The illustrations are cheerful watercolors that run to blandness (and the
faint smiles on the faces of the recovered animals undercut the factual validity of
the text). This is an engaging look behind the zoological scenes, however, and it
will both entertain and educate (there's a final page with advice for zoo visitors)
young zoogoers. DS
LAUBER, PATRICIA 
What You Never Knew about Fingers, Forks, & Chopsticks; illus.
by John Manders. 
Simon, 1999 
[32p] 
(Around-the-House History)
ISBN 0-689-80479-2 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-6
As the opening of this book points out, "the first step in eating is to bring food to
your mouth, but how you do this depends on where you live." The text then
traces the history and development of the various human eating practices, starting
with Stone Age people's use of flint to cut meat through the practices of various
140 
* THE BULLETIN
civilizations and eras and finishing with some contemporary around-the-globe
conventions. Lauber offers relevant tidbits about class, economics, and technol-
ogy, and she's particularly good at putting familiar practices in context rather than
elevating them as a norm: there's a piquant parallel of etiquette rules for medieval
diners, eighteenth-century eaters, and "today's very refined people," and the book
notes that "in today's world, the largest number of people eat with fingers or chop-
sticks. The smallest number eat with knives, forks, and spoons." Manders' art-
work is Mad-magazinesque zany in a David Catrow palette, and speech balloons
provide denizens of all eras with glib jokey patter in situations ranging from the
invention of cooking sticks to a formal Victorian dinner; sketches of historical
utensils add a less fictional touch. Though this covers some of the same ground as
Giblin's From Hand to Mouth, the picture-book format here will lure younger
readers, and it's such an appetizing subject that you can't go wrong with a second
helping. A bibliography is included. DS
LOWERY, LINDA 
Aunt Clara Brown: Official Pioneer; illus. by Janice Lee
Porter. 
Carolrhoda, 1999 
48p 
(On My Own Biographies)
Library ed. ISBN 1-57505-045-5 
$14.95
Paper ed. ISBN 1-57505-416-7 
$5.95 
R* Gr. 2-4
This effectively focused chapter-book biography tells the story of the first woman
and the first African American to be designated a Colorado "pioneer." Clara Brown,
born in 1802, gained her freedom in 1856, twenty years after her ten-year-old
daughter had been taken from her. After three years of fruitless searching for her
Eliza Jane, Brown joined a wagon train heading west to Colorado, where she opened
a laundry and made a small fortune (at fifty cents per shirt), which she invested in
real estate. She returned to Kentucky to resume her search after Emancipation and
came back without her daughter but with twenty-six newly freed slaves: "Clara
gave each person a home or a piece of land. She taught them how to start their
own businesses. In return, they spread the word about Eliza Jane." The well-
defined primitivist shapes, canvas-y textures, and muted earth tones of the illustra-
tions perfectly evoke the roughness of the terrain and the historical period, as well
as the powerful basic emotions motivating the characters. The straightforward
text allows the facts speak for themselves: "At night, the men [in the wagon train]
argued about whether slaves should be free. They argued about where Clara should
sleep. Should she sleep in the wagons with the other women? Or should she sleep
outside with the cattle?" A good story and a solid resource (the afterword includes
a photograph of Clara Brown and a timeline), this book will engage young readers
emotionally and intellectually. FK
LYNCH, WAYNE 
Penguins!; written and illus. with photographs by Wayne
Lynch. 
Firefly, 1999 
[6 4p]
Library ed. ISBN 1-55209-421-9 
$19.95
Paper ed. ISBN 1-55209-424-3 
$9.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-8
The title's exclamation point is justified by the enthusiasm of this personably guided
tour of the seventeen species of penguins in the Southern Hemisphere. A readable
melange of anecdote, explanation, gee-whiz facts, and "hot new research" in pen-
guin studies, the text and plentiful accompanying photographs successfully por-
tray penguins as "more than cute creatures that waddle and bray." The grittier
DECEMBER 1999 
* 
141
facts of penguin life-their eating, excreting, mating, and meetings with preda-
tors-are explored along with their evolution and adaptive behaviors. The text is
usefully chunked and invitingly labeled (the chapter titled "What's on the Menu?"
is further subdivided into "Chasing the Chow" and "Feeding the Kids") and aptly
placed photos offer engaging visual reinforcement of textual details. An index is
provided to help report-writers pinpoint information and photographs of specific
penguins, each of which is also represented in a photo glossary in the back of the
book, across from an Antarctic-centered map identifying penguin habitats from
southern Africa and Australia to South America. This one might well be the an-
swer to the question of what's black and white and read all over. FK
MACAULAY, DAVID 
Building the Book: Cathedral; written and illus. by David
Macaulay. 
Lorraine/Houghton, 1999 
112p
ISBN 0-395-92147-3 
$29.95 
R 
Gr. 6-12
It's been twenty-five years since Cathedral, Macaulay's first book, graced library
shelves, and he's back for a reconsideration in an intriguing metabook in which he
not only describes the process of making Cathedral but also gets a chance to polish
up aspects he'd like to have done differently. The book is filled with Macaulay's
preliminary sketches, pages of early drafts, and source photographs, with copious
commentary on procedure ("the order in which I made the drawings was deter-
mined entirely by whether I had enough information and not at all by their final
sequence") and the forces behind creative decisions ("In the end I settled for a
simple cross section because it did the job and I was running out of time"). The
commentary text appears in small print while the original text of Cathedral appears
in large print (with a few visible emendations where the author succumbs to the
post-publication editing urge); the visuals are not always as clearly differentiated,
however, so that it might help to have a copy of the original on hand to clarify
which artwork actually appears in it and where. The breezy and sometimes self-
deprecating discussion of process engagingly acknowledges mistakes and ignorance
as well as usefully exploring artistic concepts, so it's both an enjoyable read and an
eye-opener for wannabe illustrators. For a somewhat older audience than
Christelow's What Do Illustrators Do? (BCCB 5/99), this gives a behind-the-scenes
peek that should fascinate anybody interested in the heavy lifting and stubbed toes
of the bookmaking process. DS
MAZER, NORMA Fox 
GoodNight, Maman. Harcourt, 1999 
[192p]
ISBN 0-15-201468-3 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
When the novel opens, Karin Levi, her older brother, Marc, and their mother are
hiding in a Paris attic from the Nazis. Karin relates the tedium and fear of the
months spent isolated in the tiny space and recalls her life before the Nazis and the
death of her father at their hands. The family is turned out of the attic by their
protector (to whom they pay rent) when she becomes fearful of discovery; their
flight leads them to Valence and Monsieur Taubert, who conceals them and ar-
ranges for transport to Italy. Too sick to travel, Karin's mother insists that her
children go on without her. The two make their way to Naples, the American
army, and a ship called the Henry Gibbins that transports them to America and a
refugee camp in Oswego, New York. Karin's view of her life is a chilling combina-
tion of adolescent angst and adult world-weariness. She has been greatly affected
142 
* THE BULLETIN
by her loss of security and family, and that is never more evident than in her
increasingly desperate exchanges with Marc, who is her only connection to her
family and her past. Karin writes letters to her mother almost daily, yearning for
their reunion, saving the missives to share with her when they are finally together.
The reader will surmise, long before Karin, that that reunion will never come to
pass; Karin's mother died before they reached the United States, and Marc has
been keeping it from her in a misguided effort to spare her. Bat-Ami's Two Suns in
the Sky (BCCB 7/99) also dealt with the refugees in Oswego and their adjustment
to a new life; this title, aimed at a slightly younger audience, spends more time on
the circumstances leading its characters to the United States and concentrates on
the emotional responses of a single articulate individual. Mazer convincingly con-
structs a fictional yet moving memoir of one girl's forever-altered life, and in Karin
she gives readers a memorable heroine. JMD
MEAD, ALICE 
SoldierMom. Farrar, 1999 
152p
ISBN 0-374-37124-5 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Jasmyn's ready for her big seventh-grade season in basketball (she's just been named
team captain) when her home life bounces out of control: her army reservist mother
is called overseas to Saudi Arabia in the maneuver that becomes Desert Storm.
Since Jasmyn's divorced father lives in Japan and her grandparents in Florida, this
means that Jake, Mom's boyfriend, will have to move in and take care ofJasmyn
and her little half-brother, Jake's son Andrew. Unfortunately, Jake isn't particu-
larly competent at running a household, and the burden of administration falls
largely on Jasmyn, who's already resentful of her mother's departure, and who is
furious to realize that under Jake's single parenting her obligations will take a toll
on her beloved basketball. While the book sometimes overplays the message about
duty at home and away, the picture of a kid struggling in an unaccustomed and
unfair situation (Jake really isn't pulling his weight in taking care of his own son,
let alone Jasmyn) is an effective one. Mead fills in that picture with believable
secondary characters, including previously underestimated neighbors and Jasmyn's
best friend (who wants everybody to get along, so she keeps bringing Jas and her
basketball nemesis together with stormy results). Though this lacks the edge of
Caroline Cooney's Mom's-gone-to-war Operation: Homefront (BCCB 12/92),
there's an emotional impact here that will resound with other youngsters making
sacrifices for the familial good. DS
MEDDAUGH, 
SUSAN 
The Best Place; written and illus. by Susan
Meddaugh 
Lorraine/Houghton, 1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-97994-3 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
The poor old wolf was enjoying his peaceful screen porch when his friend the bird
puts a flea in his ear about the wonders of elsewhere ("How did he know? Maybe
there was a better view, a place more magical than his own screen porch"). He
embarks on a series of adventures, finding them piquant but short of the screen-
porch comfort he so highly esteems, but his return poses a problem: the new
owners of his house won't give it back. The ordinarily peaceful wolf throws a
tantrum, which causes the forest denizens to reconsider the wisdom of proximity
to a wolf; finally, however, everybody unites in rapprochement in the wolfs new
house--a tree house with a view even better than that from his screen porch. The
DECEMBER 1999 
* 
143
story is somewhat aimless and the end is flat (what happened to his desire to be
inside and outside at the same time, and whence cometh this sentimentality about
the companionship of friends?). The narrative nonetheless bubbles along cheer-
fully, and the various locations and various houses will intrigue young viewers
(especially if they're familiar with moving house). The wolf is a sympathetic hero,
and he's droll indeed when he cringes in embarrassment after forgetting himself so
far as to howl in his nice friendly neighborhood. Meddaugh's reliable watercolors
depict a tidy forest suburbia, and initial wolf preferences aside, it's clear this nifty
treetop-dwelling with its wraparound windows and dormered second story is the
queen of the neighborhood. Between the pleasure of hunting for animals in the
spread (check the snake slithering up the stairway in the last picture) and the lure
of adventure and home, audiences will find this a pleasurable place. DS
MOORE, ISHBEL 
Daughter. Kids Can, 1999 
21 6p
ISBN 1-55074-535-2 
$14.95 
Ad Gr. 6-9
When Sylvie comes home to find her mother teetering on the balcony railing of
their tenth floor apartment, it's clear that she can no longer ignore the signs that
something is really wrong. In fact her mother has Alzheimer's disease, which cata-
pults fourteen-year-old Sylvie into the parental role (her divorced father has had
minimal contact with the family) as her mother deteriorates and leaves her with
little time for friends, schoolwork, or her piano studies. Moore's description of the
changes in Sylvie's mother effectively conveys the tragedy, and she compellingly
depicts Sylvie's anguish at both the loss of her active mother and the change in her
own life. The events are awfully tidy and book-driven, however, with the early
onset of Sylvie's mother's disease and her rapid decline in a few short months more
convenient than typical, the revelation that her father's distance was due to her
mother's intervention contrived, and Sylvie's budding romance with a boy who
understands Alzheimer's because of his stricken grandmother unnecessarily dove-
tailed. Though the book doesn't have the subtlety or depth of Willner-Pardo's
Figuring Out Frances (BCCB 10/99) or Marion Dane Bauer's An Early Winter
(10/99), readers won't forget the picture of the disease's impact. DS
MORA, PAT 
The Rainbow Tulip; illus. by Elizabeth Sayles. 
Viking, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-670-87291-1 
$15.99 
R 
5-8 yrs
Estelita (Stella, in school) knows that her mother is not like other mothers; she
wears dark clothes, speaks Spanish instead of English, and doesn't use any makeup.
Unlike her reserved mother, Estelita is an adventurous child who wants to have
dresses in "all the colors" in her closet. When it is time for the May parade at
school, Estelita gets her chance when she requests a multicolored tulip costume.
Her joy in her costume is short-lived; when she arrives at school she realizes her
costume is different from all her classmates' monochromatic petals, and she feels
"quiet as a snail inside." Under the proud eyes of her mother and brothers, how-
ever, Estelita seizes the opportunity to do her best and learns something about the
joy and sorrow of being different. Estelita tells her own story in the questioning
voice of a young girl finding her way in the world. Her point of view is always true
to the child she is, and her change of heart (regarding her Mexican mother's adap-
tation to life in the United States) is so gently interwoven into the story that it is a
natural extension of the plot instead of a heavy-handed message. Sayles' soft-
edged paintings are pastel-like in texture, and their rose and pumpkin hues reflect
144 
* THE BULLETIN
the warm family relationships Mora lovingly depicts. Set against crisp white pages,
the illustrations are carefully composed, with unusual perspectives that make the
pictures more complex than a first glance indicates. Mora incorporates Spanish
words and sentences into her text with ease, and, while the story is not prescriptive,
it has many layers for discussion and reflection. JMD
MOTHER GOOSE 
Sylvia Long's Mother Goose; comp. and illus. by Sylvia
Long. 
Chronicle, 1999 
109p
ISBN 0-8118-2088-2 
$19.95 
Ad 
6 mos.-4 yrs
Eighty-three nursery rhymes are given anthropomorphic treatment in this solid if
lengthy collection. From Lucy Locket to Betty Blue, Old Mother Hubbard to
Peter the Pumpkin Eater, Long personifies the characters in these nursery rhymes
as a startling variety of woodland creatures in fashionable if old fashioned attire.
The layout and design of the book are controlled and somewhat static: framed
and unframed full-page watercolors alternate with smaller art; the clear typeface is
set on the page in standard configurations or boxed by some compositional ele-
ment. Long's animals are somewhat reminiscent of Janet Stevens but with less
carefree humor; the drafting is uneven and the country settings and interiors ge-
neric. If you read this title straight through from cover to cover, all the animals
begin to look alike, but browsers paging through will find much to occupy the eye.
This is a substantial collection of old favorites, and those looking for a traditional
sampling will certainly find it here. JMD
NAPOLI, DONNA Jo 
Crazy Jack. Delacorte, 1999 
134p
ISBN 0-385-32627-0 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 9-12
See this month's Big Picture, p. 119, for review.
NOLAN, HAN 
A Face in Every Window 
Harcourt, 1999 
[272p]
ISBN 0-15-201915-4 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
JP O'Brien's secure world is a thing of the past with the death of his grandmother;
Grandma Mary had been the anchor of the family, taking care not only of Pap,
JP's mentally challenged father, but also of JP's sheltered mother and, of course,
JP. Change continues when Mam erupts from her shell, moves the family to a
farmhouse in the country, and peoples it with waifs and strays ranging from Larry,
the outcast older brother ofJP's best friend, to Bobbi, neighborhood bully but also
abused child. While JP's mother comes into her own (which involves a friendship
with a handsome doctor that JP thinks may have become an affair) and the house
buzzes with action in a cross between a commune and an artist's colony, JP feels
less and less defined as a person and sees himself becoming completely dispensable
to his own family. Though the family situation echoes that in Holt's My Louisiana
Sky (BCCB 6/98), the family dynamics here suggest Qualey's Everybody's Daugh-
ter (3/91), with the child of the household frustrated that expansive adult generos-
ity diminishes the teen's space and position (the final straw here is Mam's pregnancy,
which will wrest JP's only-child status from him). Nolan adds some intriguing
character exploration across the board, with JP's Mam exploring the implications
of her unusual marriage and JP finding himself drawn to Bobbi and anguished by
her eventual domination by a boyfriend just like her abusive father. This may be
DECEMBER 1999 
* 145
Nolan's most accessible novel, but there's still nothing bland or homogeneous
about her strong cast as they vigorously search for their identities. DS
OPIE, IONA, comp. 
Here Comes Mother Goose; illus. by Rosemary
Wells. 
Candlewick, 1999 
108p
ISBN 0-7636-0683-9 
$21.99 
R 
1-4 yrs
My Very First Mother Goose (BCCB 12/96) is a tough act to follow, but Opie and
Wells have produced a solid if not inspired sequel. Echoes of MVFMG abound in
the format and design of this title from its division into four chapters to Wells'
graphic eloquence to intensely hued pages and high production values. Spot art
and energetic full-page compositions add a zesty variety to the layout that will
draw in viewers. A selection of dynamic rhymes from both sides of the pond
features the familiar ("One, Two Buckle My Shoe") and not so familiar ("I'm a
Girl Guide") as well as the unusual ("My Ma's a Millionaire"). The choice of the
fifty-six rhymes seems a bit random, and the drafting is less carefully distinct. The
high-spirited humor, however, is consistent throughout, and fans of the previous
title will flock to this new volume with justified enthusiasm. JMD
OTTO, CAROLYN 
Pioneer Church; illus. by Megan Lloyd. 
Holt, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-2554-5 
$16.95 
R 
5-9 yrs
In a fictionalized account of a small landmark church in Pennsylvania, Otto fol-
lows its construction, burning, rebuilding, abandonment, and eventual renova-
tion by generations of members. Four colonial families clear the land and erect a
small log church at which they serve as both preachers and worshipers until their
town grows large enough to warrant a traveling minister. The Revolutionary War
finds the small German flock harboring runaway Hessian soldiers, one of whom
marries the local woman who nursed them. Prosperity and a call for modern
facilities relegate the church to a sagging, neglected haven for birds and rodents
until, in the late twentieth century, community members bring it back to life not
only as an historic showplace, but also as a sacred site for weddings and Easter
sunrise services. Lloyd's oil paintings pay tribute to naive artists who employed
foreshortened perspectives and "stock" bodies with individuated faces; figures in
formal portrait poses that stare solemnly off one page may, however, assume a
more relaxed, sinuous, even animated stance in the next. Otto and Lloyd grace-
fully avoid turning their story into a dry lesson in urban development or a mis-
guided diatribe on historic preservation; this is an affectionate, child's-eye view of
two hundred years of history cherished by a proud community. EB
PALATINI, MARGIE 
Ding Dong Ding Dong; illus. by Howard Fine. 
Hyperion,
1999 
[3 2p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2367-4 
$16.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0420-3 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Nobody in the jungle seems interested in Ape-On cosmetics and, having had his
toes jammed in slamming doors once too often, the giant gorilla salesman decides
to try his luck in New York City. Mistaken for a window washer, he scales the
Empire State Building and, on the brink of his first big sale, slips and plummets to
the street. Entrepreneurial success may elude him, but a Hollywood agent recog-
146 
* THE BULLETIN
nizes his true potential and signs the gorilla on as the next King of motion pictures.
This replay of the classic King Kong flicks will probably elicit some giggles from
the picture book set, but they're far likelier to latch onto goofy trade names (Mon-
key C, Monkey Dew Lotion, Da-Vine jungle perfume, No More Monkey Shine
powder) than to catch the broad allusions to Tarzan, Stanley and Livingston, and
Fay Wray. While Palatini's text dabbles in schtick, it's Fine's pastels that pay real
tribute to the silver screen. Captured at cinematic camera angles towering over the
jungle or dwarfed by Gotham's skyscrapers, the plucky, misunderstood behemoth
is transformed into an appealing, sympathetic hero-an Everyape with thick spec-
tacles and the gentlest of fingers on the doorbells, just trying to make a living. The
main joke here, though, will elude the intended audience, so it might be a lot
simpler to rent the video than to explain, "There was this great old movie called
King Kong.. ." EB
PARK, LINDA SUE 
Seesaw Girl; illus. by Jean and Mou-sien Tseng. 
Clarion,
1999 
90p
ISBN 0-395-91514-7 
$14.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Like any middle-class girl in seventeenth-century Korea, Jade is not allowed past
the walls of her family's Inner Court, but she breaks tradition to make a secret visit
to a friend. Her brief glimpse of the outside world gives Jade strength to champion
a wronged servant, pursue her interest in art, and discover a way to see the moun-
tains that surround her city. It also brings her new realizations about life outside
her home: poverty, the less restrictive lives of women in the lower classes, and the
political turmoil from contact between Korea and the west. Through its accessible
if didactic narrative, the book provides information about women's lives in the
Choson Period: little education, tedious domestic labor, and pervasive restric-
tions. Unfortunately, the text often explains customs without integrating the ex-
planations into the narrative, and there is little drama or momentum here. Jade is
a likable character, however, and her development is in keeping with the time and
setting. At the end, she returns to the inner court and the traditional female role:
"It is not enough, she thought. But I will make it enough." The book concludes
with an author's note about the historical period and a bibliography. JNH
PEARSON, GAYLE 
Don't CallIt Paradise. Karl/Atheneum, 1999 
153p
ISBN 0-689-82579-X 
$15.00 
R Gr. 6-10
Maddie's vacation seems perfect: she's visiting her best friend, Beanie, and Beanie's
family (whom Maddie has always adored) in their new home in California. Even
Beanie's older brother, Buddy, has changed from an annoyance to a handsome
young man whose attention Maddie finds flattering. It's Beanie herselfwho proves
to be the problem, provoking her brother's derision with her timidity and touchi-
ness--or is it that Maddie's infatuation has now blinded her to Buddy's flaws and
caused her to leave her friend in the lurch? In Maddie, Pearson creates a convinc-
ing picture of a young teen bored with the familiar routine of home ("I was almost
fourteen and I knew that in a lot of ways I was changing"), attracted to the verdant
grass on the other side of the fence, and ripe for some major mistakes. The book
also offers a subtle exploration of the McBean family, with parents who relish
Buddy's golden surface to the point of accepting his every lie and ignoring their
daughter's vulnerability to his insults. Maddie's suppressed memory of a past
cruelty of Buddy's is a rather heavy-handed plot device, and the story's somewhat
DECEMBER 1999 
* 
147
programmatic, but the compelling writing keeps Maddie's ambivalence vivid and
understandable. Readers inclined to yearn after their friends' cool parents may
find that this gives them second thoughts, and they'll certainly enjoy the danger-
edged flirtation between Maddie and Buddy. DS
PLATT, RICHARD 
Castle Diary: The Journal of Tobias Burgess, Page; illus. by Chris
Riddell. 
Candlewick, 1999 
64p
ISBN 0-7636-0489-5 
$21.99 
R 
Gr. 3-7
Platt, also the author of the text for Stephen Biesty's Cross-Sections Castle (BCCB
12/94), here gives a longer account of life behind the battlements. Young Tobias
spends his twelfth year at his uncle's castle as a page, learning the gracious ways of
noble life in the thirteenth century. Tobias details the annoyance of lessons, the
pleasures of the hunt, the exhaustion of the harvest, and the bounty of a grand
feast, among other things, while letting readers peek over his shoulder. Though
the modern viewpoint occasionally intrudes (as in Tobias' skepticism about medi-
eval medical care), his journal includes both the expected and appealing medieval
heartiness and some harder edges as well (the lot of the peasants is clearly no pic-
nic). Riddell's illustrations use the oversized pages for detail-rich watercolors of
life in the rush-strewn castle. The human faces are sharp-nosed and expressive
almost to the point of caricature, pandering to no illusions about romantic beauty
either of medieval persons or surroundings. Reluctant readers and those seeking a
masculine counterpart to Catherine, Called Birdy will enjoy the page's pages. DS
PRIMAVERA, ELISE 
Auntie Claus; written and illus. by Elise Primavera. 
Silver
Whistle/Harcourt Brace, 1999 
[40p]
ISBN 0-15-201909-X 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Sophie Kringle's aunt has an undisclosed profession that keeps her away on busi-
ness trips from Halloween to Valentine's Day. Sophie determines to find out just
what her "mysterioso" aunt is up to, so she stows away on her aunt's magical
elevator and is transported to Santa's workshop at the North Pole. Mistaken for
an elf, Sophie volunteers to fetch the "Bad Boys and Girls" list for reasons of her
own. When she sees her brother's name on the list, she unselfishly changes it to
hers, subsequently learning the true meaning of Christmas and the truth about her
aunt (turns out Auntie Claus is Santa's sister). Primavera's illustrations help carry
this addition to the holiday pantheon over any serious plot bumps on the road to
Christmas spiritdom. Gouache and pastel drawings in hues of winter blues, berry
reds, and Christmas greens add a festive glow to the Bing Cherry Hotel in New
York City, Auntie Claus's penthouse (number 25C), and the North Pole itself.
Christmas motifs abound, from gingerbread men to ornamented shoes to a hair-
style that looks like a Christmas tree (at least from the back). Auntie Claus is the
picture of the urban sophisticate (her personality is Auntie Mame on Yuletide
overdrive) and the story rolls merrily along until the foregone conclusion ("I knew
you had it in you. Merry Christmas, darling," says Auntie Claus, when Sophie
learns "it's better to give than receive"). Though the compositions get a bit dark
and crowded, and the depiction of the characters leans toward the stolid, this story
still has a touch of that old Christmas magic. If Sophie's change of heart is a little
quick, well, Christmas is the time for miracles, after all. JMD
148 
* THE BULLETIN
ROBBINS, KEN 
Trucks: Giants of the Highway. Atheneum, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-689-82664-8 
$16.00 
R* 4-7 yrs
Anyone who tools along the Interstate on a mere quartet of tires must humbly
acknowledge that eighteen wheelers rule the road; in this photoessay the big rigs
get the royal treatment they command. Robbins capably rolls out a perfect pre-
and primary-school-sized load of information: definitions of the parts of the rig,
types of trailers and the freight they haul, and a bit about life as a long-haul driver.
It's the photos, though-veritable glamor shots of the titans themselves-that are
bound to mesmerize a young audience. Avoiding crowded urban shots, Robbins
follows the semis along stretches of open road where they show to best advantage.
Hand tinting enhances the photos so that the tractors glow bright as the neon at an
all-night diner. An elongated format handily accommodates the lengthy trailers,
from flatbeds loaded with lumber, to gleaming tankers, to a detached boxcar adorned
with tags and graffiti, standing under pink-tinged clouds on a rain-slicked lot.
Although the men and women drivers receive their due, it's the towering tractors
ranked in chorus-line precision at a truck plaza under a full moon that evoke real
romance. A lone truck on a two-lane ribbon laced through endless green hills
attests that trucking "can be a lonely way of life," but the brawny beauty of Robbins'
powerful rigs should have kids itching to hit the road. EB
RuRS, MARGRIET 
Emma and the Coyote; illus. by Barbara Spurll. 
Stoddart,
1999 
24p
ISBN 0-7737-3140-7 
$15.95 
R 
4-8 yrs
The farmer is convinced that "coyotes are smarter than chickens," but Emma the
stalwart hen believes in taking things-including coyotes-into her own hands.
After several successful routs of the coyote, one very close call, and a climactic
scene in which Emma accidentally captures her nemesis, walking away "on legs
that trembled just a little," the farmer and his wife begin to think that "some
chickens are smarter," but the reader knows it's a little more complicated than
that. This is a natural readaloud from the storyteller's poetic first line-"Emma
fitted on her nest like the lid on a cookie jar"-through the zippy dialogue (includ-
ing cucking opportunities: "Tok!"). The wide-eyed farm creatures are less outsized
than Kellogg's but have a similarly well-rounded cartoony charm perfectly suited
to this small-scale tall tale; though the illustrations are slick and unsubtly colored,
there's a gleeful exaggeration to the expressions that viewers will find giggle-wor-
thy. Ground-level perspectives emphasize the fact that the human characters play
only supporting roles, and young audiences will enjoy looking for the glimpses of
furry tail that will enable them to warn Emma that danger is near. FK
SCHWARTZ, 
DAVID M. 
If You Hopped Like a Frog; illus. by James
Warhola. 
Scholastic, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-590-09857-8 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Math meets imagination in a dozen musings on feats within the animal kingdom:
"If you ate like a shrew... //... you could devour over 700 hamburgers in a day";
"If you high-jumped like a flea... .//... you could land on Lady Liberty's torch."
Warhola's illustrations, which humorously exaggerate the human implication of
each situation, feature an unfortunately waxy, ill-shaped cast rendered in a muddy
palette. Math buffs won't be overly troubled by artistic shortcomings, though,
when they reach the final four pages of calculations that clearly disclose the arith-
DECEMBER 1999 
* 
149
metic alchemy behind each comparison, and their teachers will undoubtedly make
the most of the challenge included with each explanation: "A 3-inch frog can hop
60 inches. That means the frog is jumping 20 times its body's length .... If you
could jump 20 times your body length, how far could you go?" Get out the mea-
suring tapes, scales, and calculators; class is in session. EB
SHELDON, DYAN 
Confessions of a Teenage Drama Queen. 
Candlewick,
1999 
272p
ISBN 0-7636-0822-X 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Mary Elizabeth Cep, self-christened Lola, is an ex-New-Yorker who plans to take
her new suburban school by storm. In her way is a social structure presided over
by local princess Carla Santini, who has the drama club in a death grip and expects
to win the role of Eliza Doolittle for which Lola is also aiming. The result is a diva-
off, with Lola aided by her loyal assistant Ella and a total disregard for the truth;
the battle goes beyond My Fair Lady (where Lola's Eliza is in danger of being
upstaged and sabotaged by Carla's Mrs. Higgins) to a final concert and party for
the hot band Sidhartha, events that both Carla and Lola have sworn to attend.
Lola's operatic narration is entertaining, but the self-absorption gets rather wear-
ing and the book seems unaware that there's little to choose from between atten-
tion-seeking Lola and power-seeking Carla. The rock-party escapade (involving
Lola and Ella spending a night trying to keep the drunken lead singer out of trouble
on the streets of New York) is a sit-comish lark, with both the energy and superfi-
ciality that implies. Don't look here for depth, but readers with a taste for broad
humor and campy catfights will want to see what Lola gets. DS
SHREVE, SUSAN 
Ghost Cats. 
Levine/Scholastic, 1999 
[128p]
ISBN 0-590-37131-2 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-8
This isn't really the ghost story the title suggests (the ghost cats do not appear until
the last few pages of the novel) but instead a quietly drawn story of reluctant ad-
justment to difficult transition. Peter, the eldest of four children of a pediatric
neurosurgeon and his wife, has been trying to get his tight-knit family to recre-
ate--or at least mourn the loss of-the nomadic and somewhat isolated life they'd
lived since he was born in Ghana, where his father had a temporary appointment.
Since then they had moved to a different spot on the globe almost yearly, collect-
ing cats along the way, until they finally landed in Boston, where Peter's father
took a permanent position at the urging of his wife, who wants to go to law school.
Peter's anger (and depression) intensifies as he watches the other members of his
family adapt to life at "home" in America, where the "real Christmas" his mother
is so excited to give her children violates the sanctity of the unique family tradi-
tions surrounding their previous "little tiny Christmases." The story (narrated by
Peter) is mostly told as an extended flashback (the book begins with Peter's discov-
ery of the death of his beloved cat); this and other, smaller time shifts may confuse
the reader momentarily, but Peter's grief both for his cat and his way of life are
crystal clear, and the ghost cats become an appropriate symbol of Peter's readiness
to let the past become a memory. His clear-voiced resistance to his parents' subtle
and unselfconscious Americanization program and his outsider perspective on his
American schoolmates, whose ways are foreign to him, offer readers a fresh look at
culture and family which adds a realistic level of complexity to the psychological
portrait of a child resisting change. FK
150 
* THE BULLETIN
SIMMONS, JANE 
Daisy's Favorite Things; written and illus. by Jane
Simmons. 
Little, 1999 
8p
ISBN 0-316-79762-6 
$5.95 
Ad 
1-3 yrs
Go to Sleep, Daisy; written and illus. by Jane Simmons. 
Little, 1999 
8p
ISBN 0-316-79761-8 
$5.95 
R 
1-3 yrs
The irrepressible and undeniably adorable duckling Daisy of Come Along, Daisy!
(BCCB 9/98) is back in two sturdy board books. Daisy's Favorite Things is a list of
her favorite things to do (play with butterflies, swim, sleep under Mother Duck's
warm wing, etc.); the second title features Daisy's mother telling her Go to Sleep,
Daisy, as the duckling is distracted by night noises (from bats fluttering, owls hoot-
ing, and mice squeaking, etc.). The very basic text of Favorite Things is cataloguish
and, while Simmons' illustrations have the same cozy charm as when Daisy came
along, the story line is weak and the language lacks energy. Go to Sleep, on the
other hand, has a basic text as well but the repeating refrain and internal rhymes
add rhythm and momentum, even in such a minimal narrative. Daisy is an en-
dearing little quacker, with her big orange feet and yellow beak, and toddlers are
going to be quite happy with her simpler if scantier adventures. JMD
SLATE, JOSEPH 
Crossing the Trestle. 
Cavendish, 1999 
14 4 p
ISBN 0-7614-5053-X 
$14.95 
R Gr. 4-7
Up until now Petey has managed, with the help of older sister Loni, to cross the
abandoned railroad trestle that leads to his school in the West Virginia mountains.
Loni won't be going back to school in fall, though; she has lost an eye in an auto
crash that took their father's life, and she's unwilling to face the jeers of classmates.
Loni finds consolation and guidance from traumatized World War II veteran Stone
Gardner, who has been commissioned to paint a local mural; Petey likes Stone,
too, and knows that he's just the mentor Loni needs, but he worries that Stone and
his mother are falling in love. Stone might be the best family friend he can imag-
ine, but Petey resists the idea that anyone could take his father's place. Slate fash-
ions a warm and convincing period piece in which his characters, while wrestling
demons every bit as powerful as those of many of their fictional postwar counter-
parts, refreshingly admit their problems, grapple with them head-on, and embrace
the support and advice of family and friends. Their happy ending is merited rather
than contrived, and readers will watch them head off for new prospects westward
with the utmost satisfaction. EB
SLEATOR, WILLIAM 
Boltzmon! Dutton, 1999 
150p
ISBN 0-525-46131-0 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Chris spends most of his free time in his room, playing on his computer in Arteria,
a fantasy world of his own creation, and avoiding his poisonous older sister, Lulu.
When Chris encounters the boltzmon, a sentient, unpredictable remnant of a black
hole, his fantasy world becomes reality, and he is locked in a race to redeem his
sibling and save his own life. The idea of an unknowing creator's fantasy actually
being the reflection of a parallel reality is a common one in science fiction, and
Sleator's use of the boltzmon (which is an actual concept in physics) as a triggering
device for eleven-year-old Chris' journey through time and space is intriguing.
The writing, however, is choppy, and the logic that should underpin the notion of
parallel universes is never adequately explained. Chris' motivation to save the
DECEMBER 1999 
* 
151
sister who is indirectly responsible for his foreseen death is unclear, and Lulu's
concluding change of heart is convenient but not entirely credible. As a portrayal
of sibling antagonism, this novel has some bite, but unfortunately the characteriza-
tions have little dimensionality in either universe. Still, Sleator's fans may appreci-
ate this foray into the virtual made real, and the boltzmon may even trigger some
interest in the physics of such a concept. JMD
STRICKLAND, TESSA 
Please, Mr. Crocodile!: PoemsAboutAnimals; illus. by Rosslyn
Moran. 
Barefoot, 1999 
[40p]
ISBN 1-902283-62-7 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
The lives of mammals, birds, a reptile, and a spider are depicted in this menagerie
of traditional, free, and narrative verse. In a lengthy introduction, Strickland de-
scribes her intent to expose readers to poetry more complex than nursery rhymes
and gives a brief description of the types of poems she selects. Familiar poets such
as Wordsworth, Dickinson, Cullen, de la Mare, and Nash appear with lesser known
poets such as Barbara Juster Esbensen, Julie Holder, and Adelaide O'Keeffe. The
freely organized collection of twenty-one poems is heavy with rhyme: "Dogs like
to bark./ They like it best after dark./ They not only frighten prowlers away/ But
also hold the sandman at bay." The stronger poems (such as Grahame's "Duck's
Ditty") are usually by oft-anthologized poets (but "Hyena," translated from the
Yoruba by Ulli Beier, also stands out for its thoughtful moodiness). Overall the
quality of poetry is uneven, too often featuring forced rhymes and distorted syntax
and displaying the sing-songy quality frequently associated with children's poetry.
Flat watercolors do not distract from the poems, but their awkward drafting and
conventional depictions-of a cat playing with a leaf, a spider in a web, a dog
chasing a ball-add little interest. Primary-school children unfamiliar with these
poems may enjoy the rhyme, the storytelling, and hearing the poems read aloud.
After their first dose ofWordsworth's "The Kitten Playing with the Falling Leaves,"
however, they may beg "Please, Mr. Crocodile, bring on the Silverstein!" JNH
THORNE-THOMSEN, KATHLEEN 
A Shaker's Dozen; by Kathleen Thorne-Thomsen
and Paul Rocheleau. 
Chronicle, 1999 
32p 
illus. with photographs.
ISBN 0-8118-2299-0 
$15.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Spare double-page spreads relay information about Shakers and their handicrafts
while telling the story of "One Shaker house/ Entered through two Shaker doors/
Guarded by three Shaker doves." Captions at the bottom of the spreads, though
terse, provide more detailed explanation about the objects enumerated and de-
picted: "Shakers liked to draw and to give drawings as gifts. These doves were
drawn by a young Shaker who imagined the birds were carrying gifts to her fam-
ily." (The caption for the ten Shaker dolls, which explains that Shaker sisters spent
evenings "stitching" dolls, may confuse readers when most of the dolls have porce-
lain faces rather than being the ragdolls one might expect.) Crisp color photo-
graphs and black-and-white archival images are carefully arranged in keeping with
Shaker simplicity; each spread has liberal expanses of white space within warm
frames of color, punctuated by small Shaker drawings of animals. The composi-
tions are not all equally successful: the six Shaker tools appear cluttered and pushed
to the bottom half-page, one of the four Shaker rugs trips across its gutter, and the
three hand-drawn Shaker doves seem out of place amidst the photographic spreads.
152 
* THE BULLETIN
Though a specialized counting book with a limited audience, this title is hand-
some, and its information about Shaker society, though brief, may serve as an
accessible introduction. The work ends with a two-paragraph description of the
Shakers, a bibliography, and photo credits. JNH
VOIGT, CYNTHIA 
Elske. 
Schwartz/Atheneum, 1999 
24 5p
ISBN 0-689-82472-6 
$18.00 
Ad 
Gr. 9-12
Elske is the "death maiden," she who is chosen to accompany her tribal leader, the
Volkking, into the afterlife on the occasion of his death. The cunning of her
grandmother saves her from this fate, and the kindness of fortune sees her safely
ensconced as servant to rebellious noblewoman Beriel. Elske becomes devoted to
Beriel, seeing in her a self-mastery and direction she was unaware was available to
women. She aids Beriel in her quest to claim her rightful throne from her usurper
brother, is the pivotal ingredient in a plan to overthrow the vicious Volkaric, and
finds true love in the form of Lord Dugald, Beriel's cousin. This fourth volume in
the saga of the Kingdom (The Wings ofa Falcon, BCCB 9/93, On Fortune's Wheel,
7/90, and Jackaroo, 9/85) stands alone, although there are subtle references to
elements in previous titles. While the narrative is involving and complex and the
layers of social organization and political intrigue deftly woven, the scene is set
with painstaking detail that slows the momentum just enough to make the plot
trajectory drag, and the final crisis is too rapidly resolved. Elske is an intriguing if
distant character, her buried emotions emerging briefly and suddenly. Surpris-
ingly, in a novel where the women are pivotal, the male characters are livelier and
more three-dimensional. The lure of the adventurous quest is strong, however,
and Elske is a protagonist whose fortunes are worth following. Readers eager to
delve into the previous Kingdom titles will want to delve here as well, and they'll
be glad of whatever gold they mine. JMD
WALKER, RICHARD, ad. Jack andthe Beanstalk; illus. by Niamh Sharkey. 
Barefoot
Books, 1999 
[4 0p]
ISBN 1-902283-13-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
See this month's Big Picture, p. 119, for review.
WATERS, VIRGINIA 
Are We There Yet, Daddy?; illus. by S. D. Schindler. 
Viking,
1999 
32p
ISBN 0-670-87402-7 
$15.99 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Daddy has no sooner pulled the shiny yellow Beetle out of the garage when his son
pops the inevitable, endlessly repeated car question. But Daddy's got this one
under control; he's supplied his boy with a map, and leaves the figuring to him:
"Just look at the map, Son./ Then you will know,/ We have 100 more miles to
go." A foldout map gives an overall view of the hundred mile trip to grandma's
house, and boxed insets show the location of each segment traveled as the antsy
passenger counts down along the way. Prosaic rhymed verses ("Entering a tunnel
that isn't very wide./ Entering a tunnel, it's really dark inside") add a wafer-thin
veneer of episodic diversion to what is obviously an academic double exercise in
map reading and counting backwards in groups of ten. The situation rings true
enough, though, and Schindler's cheery colored-pencil pictures realistically con-
DECEMBER 1999 
* 153
vey the changing terrain. Close correlation between double-spread scenes and
visual hints on the inset maps make tracing the route a breeze, and green mile
marker signs aid in the countdown. Although this title will probably see the most
use in primary counting and social studies units, an ambitious parent might be
inspired to highlight Junior's very own map just before embarking on an extensive
family road trip. EB
WILLIAMS, KAREN LYNN 
One Thing I'm GoodAt. 
Lothrop, 1999 
[144p]
ISBN 0-688-16846-9 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Julie is a fourth grader with real problems at school. Her social life is in disarray
and she keeps accumulating "poor work papers" to be signed by her parents. These
difficulties are exacerbated by the tense situation at home since her father's heart
attack. Nonetheless, in a series of plot twists worthy of a sitcom, Julie ends the
novel not just with a new best friend, increased family harmony, and renewed self-
esteem, but once it becomes clear that she is the one who taught her bright pre-
school-aged brother how to call 911, she's also a "class hero" and a "TV 4 news
star." As the TV reporter says to Julie, "Without your . . fine work as a teacher,
your dad might not be alive now." After this experience, Julie is anxious to write
her next essay and confident that the paper on "One thing [sic] I'm Good At" will
not need to be signed by her parents. However, this happy ending does not con-
vincingly deal with the fact that Julie simply isn't reading or writing at her grade
level, as we see when she misreads an invitation and packs for a sleepover rather
than a swim party. The overdrawn situations and overfamiliar characters (includ-
ing a poor little rich girl) undercut the ability of the novel to offer insight into
Julie's situation, though readers will empathize with her school-related stresses.
FK
WILLNER-PARDO, GINA 
Spider Storch's Desperate Deal; illus. by Nick
Sharratt. 
Whitman, 1999 
69p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8075-7588-7 
$11.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-8075-7589-5 
$3.95 
R Gr. 2-4
Readers familiar with Spider Storch from his previous outings (Spider Storch's
Carpool Catastrophe, BCCB 2/98, etc.) will know that the third grader is cursed,
by virtue of his mother's friendship with her mother, with a connection to the
pestilent Mary Grace Brennerman. Now things are even worse-Mary Grace's
mother is getting married, and Mary Grace is going to be the flower girl who
partners up with the ring bearer: Spider. Spider's angst at this infamy leads him to
barter his independence for Mary Grace's silence, which means succumbing to her
list of demands such as picking her first for kickball and convincing his friends to
play baby bunnies in Mary Grace's dramatic production. While nobody seems to
notice that these kids are mighty old for these wedding roles, Willner-Pardo still
gets a fair amount of humor from Spider's deal with the devil, and commiserating
readers will cheer when Spider breaks free of bondage ("I don't care what you do to
me. Tell everyone in the world about the wedding... you dumb old Sasquatch").
Though there's some mediating rapprochement between the two at the end, it's
the enmity that's the diversion here; kids who would ordinarily run a mile from a
wedding story may therefore want to get hitched to this one. DS
154 
* 
THE BULLETIN
WILSON, JACQUELINE 
The Lottie Project; illus. by Nick Sharratt. 
Delacorte,
1999 
21 4p
ISBN 0-385-32718-8 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Charlie, short for Charlotte, is content with her life as social ringleader at school
and beloved daughter to her single mom at home. A new school year, however,
brings a strict teacher who seats Charlie next to a disliked boy, skewing her rela-
tionship with her two best friends; then her mother loses her job, which sends the
two into financial panic and results in desperation employment. As if that weren't
bad enough, it looks like Charlie's mother may have found a boyfriend in the
person of one of her new employers, and a resentful Charlie is thrown together
with the man's shy five-year-old son. Wilson piles on a bit too much here (espe-
cially the runaway attempt by the five-year-old), and the titular "Lottie project," a
history assignment wherein Charlie writes a fictionalized account of a Victorian
servant girl's life, is neither credible as Charlie's work or effective as a counterpoint
to the story. Fiery Charlie and her changing situation are sympathetically con-
veyed, however; the lively first-person narration captures her exasperation and
underlying worry as the world slips out of her formerly capable control. Despite
the flaws, readers will enjoy the easygoing tone, chipper black-and-white line draw-
ings, and energetic heroine. DS
YAMANAKA, LOIS-ANN 
Name Me Nobody. 
Hyperion, 1999 
229p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2394-1 
$15.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0452-1 
$14.99 
R Gr. 9-12
"Where Von go, Emi-Lou go," says everyone about lifetime friends Yvonne (who
calls herself Von, much to her father's chagrin) and Emi-Lou (called "Louie" by
Von). This is considerable comfort to Emi-Lou, who is overweight, insecure, and
illegitimate, being raised by her Japanese grandmother in Hawaii while her party-
girl mother takes off to the mainland with a man who might or might not be Emi-
Lou's father. At fourteen, she's become pretty much inured to the lesbian jokes
about her relationship with Von, but she's forced to sort out some complex emo-
tions when it turns out that Von is a lesbian, and her focus on her new girlfriend is
leaving Emi-Lou in the cold ("I want to scream, She's my best friend. Give her back
to me"). Yamanaka's voice is simultaneously bubbly and tart, with Emi-Lou's
narration plainspoken ("But I still want her to think that I think she's normal and
to discourage her from being a lez") but liltingly Hawaiian in its syntax and vo-
cabulary. There's an underlying tenderness to the fierce attachment between Von
and Louie (Von marches Emi-Lou through a diet program that leaves Louie with
an attractive new body that makes her uncertain) and to Emi-Lou's exploration of
her own romantic impulses. The edges aren't softened here, though: Von's new
girlfriend actively dislikes Emi-Lou and treats her shabbily, Emi-Lou slaves away
at homework for one boy she likes and discovers the boy who likes her takes out a
faster and more popular girl when public occasions demand it. While this may
look like a different world to a lot of teen readers, the social dynamics will be all
too familiar, and Yamanaka's exploration is memorable and effective. DS
DECEMBER 1999 
* 
155
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
Lipman, Doug. Improving Your Storytelling: Beyond the Basics for All Who Tell
Stories in Work or Play. August House, 1999. Paper ISBN 0-87483-530-5; $14.95.
224p.
As a practicing storyteller and storytelling coach, Lipman brings much of his own
personal experience to this handbook, walking the reader step-by-step through
exercises designed to develop unrecognized or under-utilized skills. The author
discusses the transfer of images through oral language, kinesthetic imagery and
characterization, methods for learning stories, story structure, audiences, voice,
and performance anxiety, among other topics. While many of the concepts put
forth can be found in titles on drama, folklore, communication theory, and psy-
chology, Lipman synthesizes approaches from various disciplines and provides ter-
minology and definitions with which to discuss the art and craft of storytelling. In
addition to the practical help Lipman offers to experienced storytellers seeking
improvement (this is one of very few available instructional titles that is not aimed
at the novice teller), he has also contributed to establishing a language for the
discipline, and an agreed-upon terminology is the first step toward professional
discourse and discovery. Chapter notes and a bibliography are included. JMD
Norfolk, Bobby, and Sherry Norfolk. The Moral of the Story: Using Folktales for
Character Development. August House, 1999. Trade ed. ISBN 0-87483-542-9;
$24.95; Paper ed. ISBN 0-87483-555-0; $14.95. [17 6p.] Reviewed from galleys.
Considering the somewhat prescriptive nature of the title, one would expect this
volume to be pedantic and dry, but the Norfolks' presentation is cogent, lively,
and engaging. (A list of"Dos and Don'ts" includes "Don't beat kids over the head
with the moral" and "Don't say NO, ask WHY!") The authors efficiently accom-
plish their mission: to show educators how to use traditional folktales to stimulate
the discussion of ethics and moral choices in groups of young people. Whether
using folktales in the classroom does, as the authors' claim, help "refine moral
reasoning to greater maturity" or not, the Norfolks' approach to stories, storytell-
ing, and their audiences (many of them at-risk youth) is a successful and replicable
one. The introduction and chapters on Getting Ready, Storytelling as an Experi-
ential Approach to Character Education, Making It Work, etc. set up the premise,
but it is the stories themselves, and the case studies and suggestions for discussion
that follow, that really clinch the argument. Eleven folktales are included, plus
one personal story and a Readers' Theater Script for the final tale; all retellings
have detailed source notes. The authors give a succinct and intelligent overview of
the development of Character Education curriculums, and they connect stories
and related exercises to classroom uses and learning styles. Bibliographies, an in-
dex, and a child development chart to aid in story selection are appended. JMD
156 
* THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Actors and acting-fiction: Cooper
ADVENTURE STORIES: Voigt
African Americans: Ashabranner
African Americans-stories: Jones
Animals: Lauber Tiger; Lynch;
Schwartz
Animals-poetry: Strickland
Animals-stories: Faulkner; Jennings;
Meddaugh; Simmons
Arithmetic: Schwartz
Art and artists: Macaulay
Art: Carroll Alice; Carroll Alice's
Aunts-stories: Primavera
Aviation: Granfield
Babies-stories: Blake
BEDTIME STORIES: Faulkner
BIOGRAPHIES: Fritz; Granfield;
Hodges; Hoobler; Kostyal;
Lowery
Books and bookmaking: Macaulay
Brothers and sisters-fiction: Mazer;
Pearson; Slate; Sleator; Williams
Brothers and sisters-stories:
Primavera
Brothers-fiction: Harrison
Cats-fiction: Shreve
Chickens-stories: Ruurs
Children's literature: Carroll Alice;
Carroll Alice's
China-folklore: Huang
Christmas-stories: Boynton;
Primavera
Churches-stories: Otto
Colors-stories: Katz; Mora
COUNTING BOOKS: Thorne-
Thomsen
Coyotes-stories: Ruurs
Crime and criminals-fiction: Bloor;
Cross; Pearson
Death and dying-fiction: Carrick;
Moore; Nolan
Dinosaurs-stories: Goode
Disabilities-fiction: Nolan
Disease-fiction: Moore
Divorce-fiction: Griffin
Ducks-stories: Simmons Daisy's;
Simmons Go
England-folklore: Beneduce;
Napoli; Walker
Ethics and values: Bloor; Cross;
Jam; Khan
Explorers and exploring: Kostyal
Families-fiction: Mead; Nolan;
Shreve; Slate
FANTASY: Carroll Alice; Carroll
Alice's; Cooper; Napoli
Farms-stories: Ruurs
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Bloor; Conrad; Williams
Fathers and sons-fiction: Carrick;
Griffin; Napoli
Fathers and sons-stories: Jam;
Walters
FOLKTALES AND FAIRYTALES:
Aylesworth Aunt; Aylesworth
Full; Beneduce; Goode; Napoli;
Walker
Food and eating: Lauber What
Friendship-fiction: Holt; Kurtz;
Pearson; Sheldon; Wilson;
Yamanaka
Future-fiction: Cart
Gorillas-stories: Palatini
DECEMBER 1999 
* 
157
Grandfathers-stories: Jones
Greece-fiction: Harrison
Hawaii-fiction: Yamanaka
HISTORICAL FICTION: Avi;
Gregory; Harrison; Holt; Jam;
Kurtz; Lasky; Mark; Mazer; Park;
Slate
History, U.S.: Bartoletti; Fritz;
Hoobler; Lowery; Otto; Thorne-
Thomsen; West, D.; West, J.
History, world: Fritz; Granfield;
Hodges; Lauber What; Platt
Holocaust, the-fiction: Mazer
Homosexuality-fiction: Yamanaka
Immigration: Ashabranner
Korea-fiction: Park
Labor Unions: Bartoletti
Latinos-stories: Mora
Magic and magicians-fiction: Avi
Maps-stories: Walters
Mathematics: Schwartz
Middle ages: Platt
Mothers and daughters: Lowery
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Cross; Holubitsky; Mazer; Mead;
Moore; Wilson
Mothers and daughters-stories:
Katz; Mora
Mothers and sons-fiction: Griffin;
Holt; Nolan
Moving-fiction: Shreve
Moving-stories: Meddaugh
Music and musicians-stories:
Cutler; Hush
MYSTERIES: Banks; Bloor
Nature study: Lynch
Nature-fiction: Jennings
NURSERY RHYMES: Opie;
Mother Goose
Nurses: Kuhn
Penguins: Lynch
Physical education: Kauchak
Pigs-stories: Aylesworth Aunt
Plays-fiction: Khan
POETRY: Strickland
Princesses-fiction: Gregory; Lasky
Race-fiction: Khan
Reading aloud: Aylesworth Aunt;
Jennings; Strickland
Reading, beginning: Lowery
Reading, easy: Banks; Carrick
Reading, reluctant: Platt
Religion-fiction: Khan
Religious education: Hodges;
Thorne-Thomsen
Renaissance, the-fiction: Avi
Romance-fiction: Conrad
Saints: Hodges
School-fiction: Banks; Khan;
Sheldon; Williams; Wilson
School-stories: Mora
SCIENCE FICTION: Sleator
SHORT STORIES: Cart
Sisters-fiction: Khan
Slavery: Lowery
SPORTS: Kauchak
Stepbrothers-fiction: Griffin
Storytelling: Aylesworth Aunt;
Aylesworth Full; Gershator;
Walker
Storytelling-fiction: Jennings
Storytime: Aylesworth Aunt;
Faulkner; Gershator; Hush;
Ruurs; Simmons Daisy's;
Simmons Go; Walker
Suicide-fiction: Holubitsky
TALL TALES: Gershator
Time travel-fiction: Cooper
Transportation: Robbins
Trucks: Robbins
Uncles-fiction: Jennings
Veterinarians: Lauber Tiger
Voyages and travel: Kostyal;
Robbins
Voyages and travel-fiction: Walters
Voyages and travel-stories: Walters
War-fiction: Mead; Slate
War-stories: Cutler
Weddings-fiction: Willner-Pardo
West, the-fiction: Kurtz
Women's studies: Hodges;
Hoobler; Kauchak; Kuhn
World War II: Granfield; Kuhn
World War II-fiction: Harrison;
Mazer
Writers and writing: Granfield;
Macaulay
Writers and writing-fiction: Mark
Zoos: Lauber Tiger
158 
* THE BULLETIN
STATEMENT OF OWNERSHIP, MANAGEMENT AND CIRCULATION OF THE
BULLETIN OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS (ISSN 0008-9036), as
required by 39 U.S. Code 3685.
THE BULLETIN OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS is published eleven
times a year (monthly except August); annual subscription price is $60.00 (institutional,
domestic), $67.00 (institutional, foreign), $50.00 (individual, domestic), $57.00 (individual,
foreign).
The owner and publisher is the Center for Children's Books of the Graduate School of
Library and Information Science at the University of Illinois, a nonprofit organization.
Office of publication is located at 51 E. Armory Ave., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. The
managing editor is Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 51
E. Armory Ave., Champaign, IL 61820. There are no stockholders, bondholders, mort-
gages, or other security holders.
The purpose, function, and nonprofit status of this organization and the exempt status
for Federal income tax purposes have not changed during the preceding 12 months.
Average number of copies printed per issue (net press run) during the preceding twelve
months: 4571; number for single issue nearest filing date: 4492. Average number of copies
of each issue distributed by mail to paid subscribers during preceding twelve months: 3850;
number for single issue nearest to filing date: 4090. Average number of copies distributed
for free per issue during preceding 12 months: 77; number for single issue nearest to filing
date: 81. Average number of total copies distributed during preceding 12 months: 3927;
number for single issue nearest to filing date: 4171. Average number of copies of each issue
not distributed (office use, unaccounted, spoiled after printing) during preceding 12 months:
644; number for single issue nearest to filing date: 321.
I certify that the statements made by me above are correct and complete.
Marlo Welshons
Director of Publications
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
October 12, 1999
a
S"A cross between Oliver Twist and a fairy tale, this charming story set on
the edge of Harlem in 1926 features feisty [11-year-old] trouble-maker
Dave. [Orphaned,] he is sent to the Hebrew Home for Boys [where] most
of the adults he encounters are petty and brutal. He sneaks out at night,
[however, and] meets a fortune teller [and a] young black heiress whose
mother runs salons for artists of the Harlem Renaissance. This chance
encounter proves to be the boy's ultimate salvation. This novel will
provide inspiration for all children while offering a unique view of a
culturally diverse New York City"-Starred review/School Librory Journal
S"[With] this poignant and energetic novel... the Artful Dodger has
met his match in Dave."-Starred review/Publishers Weekly
Ages 8 up. S15.95TR (0-06-028153-7); S15.89LB (0-06-028154-5)
Gail Carson Levine's books include
ElLA ENCHANTED * 1998 Newbery Honor Book
Ages 8 up. S15.95TR (0-06-027510-3); S15.89LB (0-06-027511-1); S5.95PB (0-06-440705-5)
9i HarperCollinsChildren'Books
10 East 53rd Street, New York, NY 10022 * www.harperchildrens.com
Keen un 
'eachinhe
with the
latest in
Teaching!
Teaching K-8 is filled with hundreds of unique ideas and
activities that help teachers present new challenges to their
students, learn new concepts and develop new skills.
Monthly articles include:
Carol Otis Hurst on...
* Children's Books * Teaching in the Library
Plus... * The Parent Connection * Interviews with
children's book authors and illustrators * Science
* Technology and more!
U.:I.~
.
Don't miss this valuable
resource for your library -
subscribe today.
Call 800-678-8793 or visit
our website at
www.TeachingK-8.com
I
··i·-·~~.~...,,
-· ··-~-,
"A delight from endpaper to endpaper."
-
School Library Journal
Sammy and the Dinosaurs
Orchard Books A Grolier Company www.grolier.com
I
-^-ALA Booklist and School LibraryJournal star
\ 
\. 
I\
Story and 
F i
full-color pictures by Juls 
Feffer
S"When George's mother tells him to bark, the
puppy meows-then quacks, oinks, and finally
moos! Like any good mother, the canine marches
her son to the vet, who sets right to work ...
Young readers will roar with laughter at this
slapstick farce with simple line drawings, set
against pastel backgrounds, which convey a full
range of emotions."
-Starred 
review School Library oural
"Oh, the expression Feiffer manages to coax
out of a few keen strokes. His characters are
unforgettable, the text is brief and easy to follow,
and the pictures burst with the sort of broad
physical comedy that a lot of children just love."
-Starred 
review / ALA Booklist
Ages 2-6. $14.95TR (0-06-205185-7); $14.89LB (0-06-205186-5)
MI 
L DI 
B 
KS -
HC 
S 
P
THE
8\\
uckauc
,buc 
•oo~oFaro 
,
•!•• 
•i"• " 
and Quit and Carne BaclNraka
.
....
I.. 
.l 
p
* 
"Finally, another of
Sandburg's Rootabaga Stories 
i
has been made into a picture
book-and a fine one."* 
' 
Snbr
THE HUCKABUCK 
c 
DvdSal
PI( T r),ES .Y David Small
FAMILY
and How They Raised Popcorn
in Nebraska and Quit and Came Back
by Carl Sandburg
Pictures by David Small
* "With exuberant energy, the artist illustrates the reverence Sandburg held
for the Midwest -
its farming, industry, and people. He communicated it through
his rhythmic text that is delicious on the tongue -
that plays, details, catalogs,
and repeats until the story feels like a spell." -*Starred, 
School Library Journal
"Delightful." -Booklist
"It's hard to think of a better pairing than Sandburg and Small. Small's
watercolors have a translucent, airy quality that suits the fantastical elements of
Sandburg's story, and his drafting is solid enough to ground the illustrations in
the rich earth where Sandburg set his uniquely American tales... Use this freshly
joyous little picture book to point your listeners toward Sandburg's collection of
Rootabaga Tales, and bring these stories to a waiting generation of readers and
listeners." 
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
$16.00 / 0-374-33511-7 / All ages
Farrar • Straus • Giroux
"The characters are solid.... Pryor does |
a superb iob of weaving real events into I
ative." -School Library Journal
0-688-15669-X 6
"Exciting... the historical details are
vivid... will make readers reflect anew
on American history."
-Kirkus Reviews
"Makes history more imaginable for a
young audience.... Illustrates that
things are not as simple as right or
wrong-in friendships, family, and
politics." -ALA Booklist
0-688-15671-1
Each by Bonnie Pryor, pictures by Bert Dodson, Ages 8 up. RTE $15.00
*i HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019 www.williammorrow.com
A merican Adventures! 
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.S.A.
RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED
I II11111
0008-9036(199912)53:4; 1-2
As 
t: 
; 
ii·- 
·:-·
PERIODICALS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
is online!
It is our great pleasure to announce that, beginning with the
1999-2000 volume year, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's
Books will be available to our print subscribers as a searchable
online database. Print subscribers will be able to browse the
latest issue online, look through issues from the 1998-99 volume
year, and search for reviews by title, author, and reading level.
The staff of The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
cordially invites you to browse through the September 1998
sample issue at:
http://www.prairienet.org/cgi-bin/ccb/bulletin.cgi
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
The Best of Tradition and Technology
ii,, in :as
i" 
;P
-,1.X 
Ig·
iii ;.·;Cii 
a
-$ 
~·r
ii~"~" 
i- 
; -.3:"i_1
