I LLINOJ S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
IIP 
~i 
:_ ~_
. --.....-
:----- 
-- 
· ·
...- ~. 
....
f'" 
-
Y
'vALA Booklist stars
-year-old Elvin, a wise-
rweight incompetent
iduding wrestling.
vers-with grit and
wn place for himself
nny, poignant coming-
As finely tuned as any
s, this wry, thoughtful
iks with wisdom and
tto the victim and the
outsider in us all."
-Booklist
Age12 up.
$13.95TR (0-06-023584-5)
$13.89LB (0-06-023585-3)
Vucr riung taIuuei nouumw y ,rmnns Lynchn
GYPSY DAVEY 
ICEMAN
5 ALA Best Book for You 
Adults 
A 1995 ALA Best Book for Young Adults
995 ALA Recomended Book 
A 1995 ALA Recommended Book
Reluctant Young Adult Readers 
for Reluctant Young Adult Readers
$14.00TR (0-06-023586-1) 
$15.00TR (0-06023340-0)
$13.89LB (006-023587-X) 
$14.89LB (0-06-023341-9)
$3.95PB (0-06447144-4)
SHADOW BOXER
A 1994 ALA Best Book for Young Adults
A 1994 ALA Recommended Book for Reluctant Young Adult Readers
$14.95TR (0-06-023027-4); $14.89LB (0-06-023028-2)
$3.95PB (0-06-447112-8)
8 HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York 10022
A 199
Al
for
_ 
__~ 
___
.. s ----
i
THE BU L L E T I N
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
December 1995
Vol. 49 No. 4
A LOOK INSIDE
117 THE BIG PICTURE
Winter Rescue written by W. D. Valgardson; illustrated by Ange Zhang
118 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
121 * The Stories Huey Tells written by Ann Cameron; illustrated by Roberta
Smith
123 * Whatjamie Saw by Carolyn Coman
125 * The Middle Passage: White Ships, Black Cargo illustrated by Tom
Feelings
128 * Her Stories: African American Folktales, Fairy Tales, and True Tales
written by Virginia Hamilton; illustrated by Leo and Diane Dillon
140 * Rebel written and illustrated by John Schoenherr
147 PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
148 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
STAFF
Roger Sutton, Editor (RS)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Susan Dove Lempke, Reviewer (SDL)
Heather McCammond-Watts, Reviewer (HMW)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Tara L. Rivera, Editorial Assistant
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS ADVISORY BOARD
Leigh Estabrook, Dean, GSLIS, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Selma K. Richardson, Professor Emeritus, GSLIS
Christine Jenkins, Assistant Professor, GSLIS
Richard C. Anderson, Director, Center for the Study of Reading, UIUC
Jean Osborn, Associate Director, Center for the Study of Reading
Violet J. Harris, Associate Professor, College of Education
Nancy O'Brien, Education Subject Specialist, Library, UIUC
Peggy Miller, Associate Professor, Department of Speech Communication, UIUC
Ann D. Carlson, Associate Professor, GSLIS, Rosary College
Janice Harrington, Head of Children's Services, Champaign Public Library
Elizabeth Huntoon, Director Systemwide Children's Services, Chicago Public Library
Janie Schomberg, Librarian, Leal Elementary School, Urbana, Illinois
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $35.00; individuals, $29.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Roger Sutton, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, Children's Research Center, 51
Gerty Drive, Champaign, IL 61820
Second-class postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1995 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Ange Zhang, from Winter Rescue ©1995 and used by permission of Margaret
K. McElderry Books.
DECEMBER 1995 
* 117
THE BIG PICTURE
Winter Rescue
by W. D. Valgardson; illustrated by Ange Zhang
Children's books that celebrate the bond between children and their grandparents
are many and convenient, allowing the affirmation of family ties without the messy
intensity of parent-child relationships. Two pitfalls, though, present themselves:
idealization, where granny and gramps, their own lives unrealistically child-cen-
tered, only serve to impart gentle wisdom to the young; and sentimentalization,
where a visit with the old folks means a cozy stroll in the park (or, given the season,
the "bestest" present under the tree). And too often, the "specialness" of the
relationship seems to be enough-who needs a plot?
Winter Rescue not only has a plot, it has a pair of grandparents who
actually make their young descendant do things he doesn't want to do, such as
work. Visiting his grandparents for the Christmas holidays, all Thor wants to do is
watch television, but no such luck. Grandfather is an ice fisherman on Lake
Winnipeg, his hired man has taken sick, and Grandmother, over both her husband's
and her grandson's protestations, insists that Thor will have to forego his usual
Saturday morning cartoon-fest and go out onto the ice to help: "I helped my
father when I was his age."
Author Valgardson and illustrator Zhang know something we suspect
Grandmother knows as well: attention to details makes things interesting, and
involvement with them becomes its own reward. Thor learns what he has to wear
("long underwear, two pairs of socks, two pairs of pants, two shirts, a sweater, a
jacket, gloves, and mittens"-plus a really cool hat) and once he and Grandfather
get out onto the frozen lake, he learns what he has to do ("We have to set a gang of
nets,' Grandfather said, pointing at some boxes of nets. 'We have to take them
under the ice for eighty yards'"). While the jigger pulls the net under the ice, Thor
must trace its progress from above. If you don't know anything about jiggers and
nets, the text, the pictures, and Grandfather tell you everything you want to know-
and that's a lot, because by this time you're as hooked as the jigger and Thor.
Thor's successful assistance with the fishing is but a prelude to his real
triumph, when, on the way back home, he and Grandfather discover that one of
the feckless snowmobilers they encountered earlier in the day has fallen through
the ice. Grandfather is too heavy to get close enough to the man to help, so guess
who has to come to the rescue: "'Me?' Thor said." Yup, and his newly awakened
skill and courage make Thor the hero of the day. Grandfather sums it up: "He
can find the jigger and he's brave. I'd take him fishing with me anytime."
I was recently consulting with some first-graders who are constructing a
classroom library, and two girls asked me, "What kinds of books will boys read?"
(Even then, it starts.) I asked the one boy in the group what he thought, and
William replied, "I don't know. Good books, I guess." If the kind of book a boy
118 
* THE BULLETIN
will read is one about a boy doing manly things with his grandfather, learning to
work, and learning to be brave (and coming home to ponnukokur-Icelandic-
Canadian pancakes, recipe included--cooked by his grandmother), then, well,
this is that kind of book. But more than boys will like a story with this much
action, focus, and the kind of danger that's allowably exciting for its parallel assur-
ance of safety ("I won't let anything happen to you," says Grandfather when Thor
begins the rescue). The art, too, sustains the adventure by keeping an attentive eye
on the events, and it provides comfort: the colored-pencil pictures have a cozy
homespun quality that plays bulky figures against the harsh lines of the icy
Manitoban landscape. The text and the pictures both know that getting warm
counts as a plot-point only if you've been cold in the first place, and that's an
adventure anybody can appreciate. (Imprint information appears on p. 142.)
Roger Sutton, Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ADLER, DAVID A. 
One Yellow Daffodil: A Hanukkah Story; illus. by Lloyd
Bloom. 
Gulliver/Harcourt, 1995 
32p
ISBN 0-15-200537-4 
$16.00 
R 
5-9 yrs
In a story which closely parallels Stephen Schnur's The Tie Man's Miracle, re-
viewed below, an elderly florist, with the help of two children and a menorah, is
finally able to come to terms with the murder of his family in the Holocaust.
Where Schnur's Hanukkah tale has a supernatural twinge to it, Adler's remains
firmly realistic, with greater texture if less mystery. While his choice to tell the
story from the old man's point of view may distance young listeners, the narrative
is more explicit about what happened in the Holocaust than is Schnur's book,
which seems to be for a slightly younger audience. Bloom's paintings, somber-
toned but accented with bright bouquets, have a quiet elegance and sober warmth
that respect the dignity of the holiday and the darkness of the memories. RS
ALEXANDER, LLOYD 
The House Gobbaleen; illus. by Diane Goode. 
Dutton,
1995 
[40p]
ISBN 0-525-45289-3 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-7 yrs
A perfect story-hour companion to Margot Zemach's picture-book version of the
old Jewish tale It Could Always Be Worse (BCCB 5/77), this plays on the same
theme: when things seem bad, just invite trouble into the house and things will
soon seem so terrible that the old days will look terrific. The setting here, though,
is distinctly Irish. Tooley grumbles about his small potatoes, leaking roof, and
rebellious pig. His wise cat, Gladsake, asks whether Tooley would prefer "a roof
with a leak or a leak without a roof," but Tooley insists on seeking better luck
through a leprechaun-like visitor who commandeers Tooley's food, tobacco, and
bed. (Surely Tooley should take a hint from those suspicious scowls dominating
DECEMBER 1995 
* 
119
all the ancestral portraits on his wall.) It's Gladsake who finally gets rid of the
creature by fabricating an even more malevolent presence (the Gobbaleen), leav-
ing Tooley to count his blessings instead of complaining. Goode's mellifluous
colors and textures are sharpened by the grotesque expressions and poses of her
bug-eyed characters. The artistic action is fast-paced, but the liveliest figure is
gingery Gladsake, whose fur matches-but whose brain far outweighs-his master's.
BH
BELLER, SUSAN PROVOST 
To Hold This Ground: A Desperate Battle at
Gettysburg. McElderry, 1995 
95p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-689-50621-X 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
In an approach reminiscent of Jim Murphy's The Long Road to Gettysburg, Beller
follows the experiences of two antagonists engaged in the hostilities at Gettysburg.
She examines the struggle from the commanders' points of view: Confederate
Colonel Oates relates how following his personal strategy to attack Big Round
Top, instead of launching the doomed offensive at Little Round Top, would have
won the Confederates Gettsyburg, and Union Colonel Chamberlin presides over
the Appomattox surrender rites. The book, however, conveys little sense of any
action concurrent with the Little Round Top portion of the battle (Pickett's Charge,
for example, is relegated to a single paragraph). Her prose is peppered with mili-
tary history cliches-"days of glory," "change his life forever," "moment in his-
tory," death as "the final battle." Period photos are less attractively presented than
in The Long Road, and maps, although clear, are somewhat cramped. Readers who
need "one good book" on Gettysburg will prefer Murphy's title, but those seeking
a supplemental view will find enlightening material here. EB
BLEDSOE, LUCY JANE 
The Big Bike Race; illus. by Sterling Brown. 
Holiday House,
1995 
90p
ISBN 0-8234-1206-7 
$13.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
"What a dumb, dumb bike. And he'd have to ride it every day if he didn't want to
break his grandma's heart." Ernest (who's trying to outgrow the nickname "Ernie")
had his hopes set on a fancy silver racing bike for his tenth-birthday present, but all
that Grandma could afford was an old, yellow, fat-wheeled, no-speeds secondhand
bargain with streamers on the handles. Hard work and some fortuitous plotting,
however, get Ernest his racing bike-and some lessons in bicycle racing, fortitude,
and self-respect-in the end. Although the story is formulaic and too neat, the
predictable appeal of wishes granted is given a warm context in the friendship
Ernest strikes up with a champion cyclist, a young African-American man (Ernest
is also black) who motivates Ernest to train for his dream and who learns from
Ernest in return. The writing is direct and simple; the print is big and the margins
wide; pencil illustrations are stiff and ungainly but attentive to the action. RS
BOSSE, MALCOLM 
Tusk and Stone. 
Front Street, 1995 
24 4p
ISBN 1-886910-01-4 
$15.95 
R Gr. 6-10
Arjun can make little sense of the tragedies that suddenly strike on his journey
across India-his caravan is attacked, most of its members are butchered by ban-
dits, his sister is kidnapped, and he is drugged and sold into the army. Only
humility, which comes from acceptance of his karma, puts Arjun on the path to
rebuilding his life; with his modest attitude of "I am a soldier, bought and paid
120 
* 
THE BULLETIN
for," he attracts the attention of his commanders and rises through the ranks as an
elephant handler and mahout, a mounted soldier. When his Brahman pride resur-
faces under the acclaim he receives as a warrior, the young man falls at the hand of
a jealous rival, and he must once again recreate his life, this time as a stone cutter
and carver. Neither the exotic setting of seventh-century India nor the challenging
Indian vocabulary (sans glossary) gets in the way of this rousing adventure tale,
which rivets its audience with the opening massacre and holds it fast through el-
ephant-breaking and military engagements. The final quarter of the novel takes a
slower, reflective turn, as Arjun masters the stonecarvers' craft and examines his
religious sentiments. Fans of The Examination (BCCB 10/94) will gladly follow
Bosse to his latest venue, and readers seeking a fresh twist in an action novel can
come along, too. EB
BRASSEY, RICHARD 
How to Speak Chimpanzee; written and illus. by Richard
Brassey. 
Crown, 1995 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-517-70899-X 
$13.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-70898-1 
$12.00 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
An entertaining mixture of primate information and gleeful troublemaking, this
tempts youngsters into behaving like apes in the name of science. Brassey describes
chimp ways of saying hello, defining territory ("Choose a tree outside your house.
Jump up and down and beat on it with your fists and feet. If you don't have any
trees, you can try beating on your front door"), expressing fear ("Clamp your teeth
together but open your lips very wide and scream. . . . Okay, so you never get
scared. Try it anyway") and passing on various other important chimpanzee mes-
sages. The line-and-watercolor illustrations are clear, literal, and entertaining, and
the text's dry remarks on the differences between chimps and people ("Unfortu-
nately, most human hair does not stand on end by itself, so you may need hair gel")
add to the amusement level. While the information seems genuine enough, there
are no notes to prove that Brassey's not making the whole thing up, some of the
sounds aren't too clearly explained, and the brief introduction about chimpanzees
and language fails to acknowledge the controversiality of the claim that some apes
have been taught sign language. You might find quite a few useful applications for
this (before a field trip to the primate house, for instance, although you may get the
class kicked out), but its major effect will be to demonstrate that science doesn't
have to be quiet. DS
BROOKS, 
POLLY SCHOYER 
Cleopatra: 
Goddess of Egypt, Enemy of
Rome. 
HarperCollins, 1995 
[160p] 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023608-6 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023607-8 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Schoyer's previous book chronicled the life and times ofJoan ofArc (BCCB 7/90),
and now she goes back even further in time to another enduring heroine, although
of a rather different stripe. It's a difficult thing, after two thousand years, to sift the
fact from the legend and the Roman propaganda, but the book does a good job of
it: the Cleopatra who appears here is an intelligent stateswoman and a proud
Egyptian (Schoyer never explicitly addresses recent claims about Cleopatra's race
but carefully explains her Greek heritage and her Egyptian patriotism) as well as
the lover of two of the most powerful men in the Roman world. That world is also
well-portrayed here, with clear discussions of how Roman politicking and xeno-
DECEMBER 1995 
* 
121
phobia affected the Egyptian queen's country and her status both at home and
abroad. For older readers than is Diane Stanley's Cleopatra (BCCB 10/94), this
not only offers an up-close look at a glamorous legend but would also be a useful
accompaniment to a reading of Shakespeare's Julius Caesar or, of course, Antony
and Cleopatra. Maps, photos of sculptures, and images from contemporaneous
Egyptian art give a visual entree into the text; notes, a bibliography, and an index
are included. DS
BURKS, BRIAN 
Runs With Horses. Harcourt, 1995 
118p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-15-200264-2 
$11.00
Paper ed. ISBN 0-15-200994-9 
$5.00 
R 
Gr. 5-9
He has excelled in most phases of his rigorous training and has completed two of
the four raids required to become a Chiricahua Apache warrior; now Runs With
Horses eagerly prepares for his third raid with Geronimo's band. Although he
conducts himself valiantly on the raid, rescuing his friend Little Face from a deep
crevice, Runs With Horses is destined never to complete his training; these last
Apache rebels are forced to submit to terms of peace with the U.S. and Mexican
governments. While readers may initially be attracted by the Geronimo connec-
tion, it is the action/adventure storyline that will keep them engaged. Burks sup-
plies enough historic background in the brief factual prologue and epilogue so that
no reader will fail to understand the story's concluding stroke of dramatic irony:
the boys stubbornly deny their fate, boasting, "'Songs will be sung about us.'... 'Of
all the warriors, we will be the greatest."' EB
CAMERON, ANN 
The Stories Huey Tells; illus. by Roberta Smith. 
Knopf,
1995 
102p
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-96732-X 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-86732-5 
$15.00 
R* Gr. 2-3
Long-suffering younger brother to the fabled Julian (The Stories ulian Tells, BCCB
1/82, etc.), Huey now gets some stories of his own, although Julian and friend
Gloria feature as prominently here as does Huey in the previous books. It's not
easy to write about a younger child for an audience of older ones, as you risk
patronizing the characters for the sake of the readers, or vice versa. But Huey is
Us: afraid of the dark ("It's hard to be brave when you're asleep") and of weird
food ("Because of the radish, they added to the rule. You cannot use a magnifying
glass to prove you tasted something"). At his best, Huey is creative ("Just yester-
day there was no such thing as Banana Spaghetti in the whole world-and now
there is") and loving ("I picked some of the flowers for my mother. I found a
special stone to show my dad and Gloria. And Julian, maybe"). The print is big
and so is the wisdom. Serviceable pencil illustrations aren't up to the level of the
story, but they will encourage new readers. RS
CAREY, PETER 
The Big Bazoohley; illus. byAbiraAli. 
Macrae/Holt, 1995 
135p
ISBN 0-8050-3855-8 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Nine-year-old Sam Kellow is the offspring of a gambler father, who's always in
search of the Big Bazoohley (the ultimate win), and of a painter mother, whose
one-a-year paintings fetch prices that give the up to the Kellows' seesaw life. When
it seems like a painting sale has fallen through, things look grim for the Kellows
until Sam is kidnapped one night and forced to compete in the Perfecto Shampoo
122 
* 
THE BULLETIN
"Perfecto Kiddo" competition, the lucky winner of which will receive ten thou-
sand dollars. Sam sees this as a providential if peculiar chance at the Big Bazoohley
and takes a whack at the contest in hopes of saving his family from destitution.
Carey dreamily paints a vision of a snowbound Toronto full of eccentrics and
strangeness, but the faraway feeling keeps us from really engaging with young Sam;
the predictability of the contest is, therefore, not compensated for by any substan-
tial relief at Sam's success in it. It's always nice to see a kid save the metaphorical
farm, however, and the glamorous sheen this story puts on a fairly ordinary plot
may entice some young readers. Ink-and-wash vignettes and full-page illustrations
enhance accessibility but rarely extend the text. DS
CARTER, ALDEN R. 
Between a Rock and a Hard Place. Scholastic, 1995 
213p
ISBN 0-590-48684-5 
$14.95 
R Gr. 7-10
Fifteen-year-old Mark is far from elated about his participation in the family's
traditional male rite of passage: a week's canoe trip in the Boundary Waters with
no adults. His cousin Randy, Mark's trip partner, is equally unhappy about the
prospect, but the boys find their forced togetherness and their shared resentment-
at having to make the trip and at oppressive family dynamics-bring them closer
and they actually begin to enjoy the outing. Soon, however, bad luck begins to
turn to tragedy when, after an early turn-back to replace bear-ravaged supplies,
they lose the canoe-and Randy's insulin-in river rapids and find themselves
struggling to make it back on foot through the wilderness before Randy's diabetes
sends him into a possibly fatal coma. This is old-fashioned, Paulsenesque adven-
ture and it's capably executed, with the self-worth theme and the details of the
northwoods setting adding to the suspense rather than cluttering it. The boys are
sympathetic in their convictions of inadequacy and in their growing friendship;
the easy flow of the locker-room guyspeak between the two is readable and con-
vincing. You don't read this kind of book for surprises, you read it to share the
triumph of an ordinary person just like you, and Carter's readers will feel satisfy-
ingly included in the boys' heroic adventure. DS
COHEN-POSEY, KATE 
How to Handle Bullies, Teasers and Other Meanies: A Book
that Takes the Nuisance Out ofName Calling and Other Nonsense; illus. by Betsy A.
Lamp6. 
Rainbow, 1995 
[96p]
Paper ed. ISBN 1-56825-029-0 
$8.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Cohen-Posey, a professional therapist, here attempts to give kids some tools for
deflecting and dealing with the titular menaces. There's some useful insight here
("Bullies expect insulting replies to their comments. They don't know what to do
when they hear a compliment"), and the book offers a variety of clear and specific
ways to deal with several kinds of verbal taunting. The format includes many little
dialogues, a few checklists, and some multiple-choice questions that give the book
an open feel and a certain browsability. Unfortunately, the tone is facile and some-
times dips into the condescending, particularly in the areas dealing with bigotry,
and the author writes easier capitulationsfromnbullies than real life tends to offer;
she also touches only gingerly on the problem of physical violence, failing to con-
sider how many bullies will simply pound their victim to flinders when verbal
bullying ceases to satisfy. It's still a useful book, however, giving some much-
needed specific help on a too-common problem; adults might find this convenient
to keep on hand to help victims. Reviewed from an unillustrated galley. DS
DECEMBER 1995 
* 123
COMAN, CAROLYN 
WhatJamie Saw. 
Front Street, 1995 
[128p]
ISBN 1-886910-02-2 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 4-6
What Jamie saw was his stepfather Van throwing Jamie's crying baby sister across
the room: "And quicker than Jamie could even take in what he'd just seen, quicker
than any beginning or middle could possibly be, he saw the ending: saw his mother
catch her, catch his baby sister Nin-there, plop, in her arms." Jamie's mother,
Patty, immediately takes the children to the car, grabs some things, and takes
herself, Jamie, and Nin to refuge at her friend Earl's apartment, the first step in
making a safe life for the family. With unfaltering control and economy, Coman
puts us at the heart of a crisis. The setting, sparely and precisely evoked, is a gray
Vermont December, and Coman is nervy enough to place the climax on Christ-
mas Eve, when Van comes to the family's isolated trailer and finds the children
alone, Patty having gone to the store for cranberries. The resolution isn't what any
of them expect, and neither is the (seasonally appropriate) epiphany, the squall of
a baby who wants some attention. It's a story that in other hands could easily slip
into soap opera, problem novel, or patronizing trailer-park verismo, but the steady
hewing to Jamie's point of view and the plain, rhythmic prose keep us with the
characters, troubled but trying hard. The book is as much about what doesn't
happen to Jamie and Patty as it is about what does, but the lack of exterior action
is more than balanced by the intensity of the interior drama. RS
CONRAD, PAM 
Our House: The Stories of Levittown; illus by Brian
Selznick. 
Scholastic, 1995 
6 5p
ISBN 0-590-46523-6 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Between an introductory historical section entitled "First, the Potato Fields" and a
conclusion called "Last, the Memories" are sandwiched six short stories about chil-
dren who have lived in the archetypal Long Island suburb of Levittown. Each
protagonist comes from a different decade between the 1940s and the 1990s; it is
the first two stories-about a boy who makes his mark in wet concrete and a girl
determined to become a photographer-and the last one, in which a child is killed
in a bicycle accident, that are the most richly developed in terms of both plot
character and incident. They are also the stories with the most intergenerational
dynamics. The other three, about a boy who has lost his brother to the war in
Vietnam, a girl exploring new routes to learning during a long teachers' strike, and
a boy creating a writer's notebook, seem flatter in tone as well as technique. The
voices are varied, however, and the portrayal of one setting (and a suburban one at
that, a kind which is not often treated to study) through chronological periods is a
kind of historiography that will open new ways of thinking about time and place.
Black-and-white pen sketches open and close each chapter, while the retro cover
art effects a shadowy summons. BH
COOPER, ILENE 
Buddy Love: Now on Video. 
HarperCollins, 1995 
183p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024664-2 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024663-4 
$13.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Two things interest Buddy Love: "watching television and watching girls." The
second is a more recent phenomenon for Buddy, fueled by his homeroom teacher
("Most guys were interested in women's fronts. But there was something about
Miss Danardo's back that gave Buddy the shivers") and by his grouchy older sister
124 
* THE BULLETIN
Sharon's new pal, the friendly and flirtatious Estella. We never quite know how
Estella feels about Buddy, which is one of the offhand charms of this book. There
is a plot-Buddy is making a videotape of frequently surprising family memories
for a school project-but the real story is Buddy's tentative, shifting relationships
with his parents and grandmother, with Sharon, with his bossy friend Ron, and
with his former best friend Amy, now ostracized from the in-crowd and neglected
by a justly shamefaced Buddy. Cooper's intuition of middle-school reality is up-
beat but sheared of didacticism; her sense of humor has a rueful edge that brings us
even closer to the characters. Buddy Love makes a swell friend for those boys who
just can't relate to Bingo Brown. RS
COOPER, MICHAEL L. 
Bound for the Promised Land: The Great Black
Migration. Lodestar, 1995 
86p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-525-67476-4 
$15.99 
R Gr. 5-9
The demographic upheaval that shifted the majority of black Americans from ru-
ral South to urban North is examined in this cogent, eminently readable history.
Beginning with the push of southern Jim Crow laws and the pull of northern
industrial job openings at the onset of World War I, Cooper discusses the mi-
grants' new political and social liberty, community building, establishment of black-
owned businesses, and cultural achievements. Without minimizing the obstacles
to progress posed by discrimination in the North, this balanced account also ad-
dresses opposing viewpoints among black leaders. Booker T. Washington openly
discourages migration; the Chicago Defender recruits migrants, then chastises them
for their boorish behavior; W.E.B. DuBois ridicules Marcus Garvey's UNIA (Uni-
versal Negro Improvement Association) as an acronym for "ugliest Negroes in
America." The dynamic relationship between the migration and larger national
and international events-World War I, Caribbean migration, the Great Depres-
sion-is smoothly explained throughout the volume. Black-and-white period
photos, bibliographic essays, a reading list, and an index are appended. EB
FARRELL, MAME 
Marrying Malcolm Murgatroyd. Farrar, 1995 
122p
ISBN 0-374-34838-3 
$14.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Hannah is one of the cool kids in sixth grade, but she has an albatross around her
neck: Malcolm Murgatroyd. Geeky Malcolm, the butt of everyone's jokes, hap-
pens to be the son of Hannah's parents' best friends, and Hannah is terrified that
people will find out how much of her life-vacations, weekends, special occa-
sions-has included Malcolm. Her embarrassment is complicated by the fact that
Malcolm has been a stalwart supporter and close friend of Hannah's little brother,
lan, whose muscular dystrophy has cut him off from his peers. Farrell captures the
nerve-wracking struggle for middle-school position vividly, and she makes Malcolm
genuinely unappetizing in a way that kids will find all too familiar. The book is
somewhat less convincing in Hannah's eventual acceptance of Malcolm as a friend
(and it skirts some interesting issues about parent-generated friendships for chil-
dren: Hannah cries, "He's not my friend, he's my responsibility!" but that accu-
rate claim is never really dealt with), and Malcolm's quiet nobility is laid on a bit
thickly. Still, Hannah's mixture of good intentions, self-absorption, and guilt is
authentic, and her dilemma is one that young readers will understand perfectly.
DS
DECEMBER 1995 
* 125
FEDER, PAULA KURZBAND 
The Feather-Bed Journey; illus. by Stacey
Schuett. 
Whitman, 1995 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8075-2330-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Although Rachel seems to have heard the story before ("'Tell me the once-upon-a-
time story, Grandma,' said Rachel. 'The feather-bed story'") Grandma tells it
anew when her precious feather pillow is accidently ripped, allowing many of its
feathers to fly in the wind. Grandma tells Rachel and her little brother Lewis
about when she was little during World War II and was hidden from the Nazis by
a Christian family. Concealed in the basement, Grandma successfully eluded the
enemy until a neighbor spotted her, and the family was forced to send her into the
woods with other Jews where she lived until the war ended two years later. In
circumstances that are somewhat contrived, the kind farmer fortuitously received
Rachel's feather bed (which she had left behind in the ghetto) as a gift and later
sent it on to Rachel in America in its diminished-by-fire form as a pillow. While
the central image of the feather bed is awkwardly placed upon the frame of the
story, Grandma's restrained retelling of the events of the Holocaust is gentle enough
for those not ready for more immediate accounts. Schuett's acrylic and pastel
illustrations share the soft tone of the text, but plainly show the terrors of Grandma's
childhood existence. RS
FEELINGS, TOM 
The Middle Passage: White Ships, Black Cargo; illus. by Tom
Feelings. 
Dial, 1995 
80p
ISBN 0-8037-1804-7 
$40.00 
R* 
Gr. 7 up
Following a description of Feelings' own quest for his African past comes a histori-
cal overview of the slave trade (by John Henrik Clarke), all printed on gray paper,
and then sixty-four pages of wordless graphic narrative depicting the horrors of
capture and subjugation, from home village to distant shores. The large size and
black endpapers signal the dramatic tone of the book, which is sustained through-
out an innovatively formatted gallery of black and white images. The opening
spread of a brilliantly sunlit landscape quickly gives way to scenes of bloodshed as
black people are attacked, beaten during a forced march to seaside fortresses,
branded, and loaded in cramped tiers aboard ship. Scenes of rape and murder
gather power from chiaroscuro-the contrast of ghostly whites and their precisely
delineated dark victims. Rhythmically repeated lines and shapes are often soft-
ened by mottled textures or fuzzy backgrounds, yet the viewer is constantly taken
by surprise, a reflection of the human cargo's experience of shock. The collage
effect of superimposed images intensifies a sense of action in the more impression-
istic scenes, while literal details such as rats gnawing on a dead body sharpen the
edges of a tragic subject. A map, bibliography, and footnotes conclude the book,
which will provoke discussion among junior-high and high-school students (not
to mention adults) accustomed by film and television to pictorial narrative. It's
risky to produce a beautiful book about an ugly subject, and this is all the more
politically charged by the prominence of some graphically rhetorical poster-like
scenes such as that of a baby suspended between two spears, and by Clarke's idyllic
representation of Africa (although Feelings shows blacks brutalizing other blacks).
Like the Holocaust, however, slavery evokes emotional response as well as intellec-
tual understanding, and Feelings has justifiably imbued history with agony. BH
126 
* THE BULLETIN
FLEISCHMAN, PAUL 
A Fate Totally Worse than Death. Candlewick, 1995 
124 p
ISBN 1-56402-627-2 
$15.95 
M 
Gr. 8-10
Tiffany, Brooke, and Danielle, the golden girls of Cliffside High, find themselves
turning into Golden Girls instead when they begin to rapidly age, deteriorate, and
decide they are suffering supernatural retribution for their murder of a rival girl the
year before. If it sounds stupid, it's supposed to: cover, flap copy, and CIP label
the book a "parody," but of what, isn't quite as clear. While Fleischman loosely
frames his tale along the lines of Christopher Pike and his ilk, this isn't attentive
enough to the tenor or narrative conventions of the teen horror novel to score any
points off of the genre. The book seems more often like a take-off on teenagers
(girls, especially) themselves, but the moral center and the target of the satire are so
poorly defined that the book is neither pointed nor funny. It is, though, vulgar
and unsubtle (an incontinent, diaper-seeking Tiffany pees on a pharmacy floor
and blames the yellow puddle on acid rain) so teens who love the gross-out thrills
of the mass-market series can find the same thing here-which doesn't seem to be
quite what was intended. RS
GANTOS, JACK Jack's New Power: Stories from a Caribbean Year. 
Farrar,
1995 
21 4p
ISBN 0-374-33657-1 
$16.00 
R* 
Gr. 5-8
Jack, of Heads or Tails (BCCB 7/94), returns; this time, eight linked stories tell of
the year he and his family lived in Barbados. The exigencies of daily life take a
darker turn in this volume, as Jack, twelve at the start of the book, tries to come to
terms with his demanding but unreliable father and begins to see the strains in his
parents' marriage; other milestones include the mysterious disappearance of a boy
just Jack's age, his enduring but hopeless crush on a friend of his sister's, and,
finally, his unhappy departure from the island. Character and character dynamics
are deftly conveyed, especially with Jack's bossy, capable sister Betsy and his loving
but very flawed parents. The rueful yet energetic humor (physical as well as ver-
bal) that enlivened the first book is present here too, and these stories work to-
gether better and benefit from the sunnily exotic Barbadian locale. Gantos achieves
an intriguing balance of the bitter and the sweet in this account; young readers
whose lives are similarly mixed will appreciate Jack's narrative. DS
GARCIA, GUY 
Spirit ofthe Maya: A Boy Explores His People's Mysterious Past; illus.
with photographs by Ted Wood. 
Walker, 1995 
[48p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8380-5 
$17.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8379-1 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-5
Numerous children's books survey Mayan ruins and speculate on the civilization's
rites and customs, but this photoessay considers the response of a very modern
twelve-year-old Lacondo'n boy to his newly discovered Mayan roots. According
to the obviously set-up but effective framework, Kin has never shown much inter-
est in his forebears, but one of Grandfather's stories about the Mayan king Pacal
sparks his imagination and prompts him to go exploring the Palenque site in search
of the ruler's tomb. The reader is treated to some stunning (but uncaptioned)
views of the ruins as the narration traces Kin's convincingly haphazard, daydreamy
search and his emotional response to his discoveries ("Kin feels a twinge of sadness
at seeing his father selling trinkets to tourists at the gates of the great city his
DECEMBER 1995 
* 127
ancestors once ruled"). A concluding segment alludes to political tensions be-
tween Indians and their neighbors of Spanish descent in Chiapas; a list of further
reading is included. EB
GARIAND, SHERRY 
Cabin 102. 
Harcourt, 1995 
[224 p]
Trade ed. ISBN 0-15-200663-X 
$11.00
Paper ed. ISBN 0-15-200662-1 
$5.00
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 5-8
Secretly terrified of the water ever since almost drowning at the age of five, Dusty,
now twelve, is less than thrilled to be spending summer vacation with his father
and new stepfamily on Galveston Island. He's really not happy when his step-
mother-in the first of too many contrivances-wins a vacation cruise through
the Caribbean for the whole family. Moping all the way, Dusty goes along, but
once aboard ship discovers a tantalizing mystery in the person of a sobbing girl in
the supposedly deserted cabin next to his own. Even without access to the books
about shipwrecks Dusty finds in the ship's library and the ominous stories (what
else?) he hears from the kindly Jamaican cabin steward (who else?), readers will
know far sooner than the boy himself that the girl he befriends is a ghost, a Taino
ghost to be exact, killed in a storm after being taken captive by the Spanish. (Read-
ers will also know that her forecasting of"Hurakan!" should not be taken lightly.)
This is pure formula, and while the writing succumbs to cliche almost as often as
does the plot, series mystery fans might have a smooth sail. RS
GREENBERG, JAN 
TheAmerican Eye: Eleven Artists ofthe Twentieth Century; writ-
ten by Jan Greenberg and Sandra Jordan. 
Delacorte, 1995 
120p 
illus. with
photographs
ISBN 0-385-32173-2 
$22.50 
R 
Gr. 6-12
More straightforwardly biographical than the authors' previous works on art (The
Painter's Eye, BCCB 12/91, and The Sculptor's Eye, 11/93), this book examines
American impulses in twentieth-century art by giving a chapter to each of eleven
American artists. Figures included range from the ubiquitous (Georgia O'Keeffe,
Jackson Pollock, Edward Hopper) to the less popularized (Arthur Dove, Eva Hesse,
Romare Bearden), and their works (four or five pictured per artist) include a vari-
ety of painting and sculpture styles with a broad range of influences (kids will
particularly enjoy the pop-culture homages of Stuart Davis and Andy Warhol). As
usual, the writing is crisp and clear, although the more static format and absence of
living artists keep this text from being as energetic as the last two. Still, it's a
cohesive and convincing approach to a particularly American flavor of art, and
would make for helpful pre-museum-visit preparation as well as an independent
read for budding young artists. A glossary, list of artworks pictured in the book,
list of museums containing the artists' work, a bibliography (both general and for
specific artists), and an index are included. DS
GUIBERSON, BRENDA Z. 
Lighthouses: Watchers at Sea; written and illus. by Brenda
Z. Guiberson and with photographs. 
Holt, 1995 
70p 
(Redfeather Books)
ISBN 0-8050-3170-7 
$15.95 
R Gr. 3-6
Lighthouses may be built to repel, but they're awfully enticing, and Guiberson
gives them their full glory here by relating tales of tragic shipwrecks and ship-
wrecks averted, lighthouses succumbing to the forces of the sea, and the lonely and
128 
* THE BULLETIN
often arduous life of the lighthouse keeper (and a few ghostly lighthouse inhabit-
ants to boot). Mixed in with the drama is technical information about lighthouse
construction, lens design, and modern methods of obstacle avoidance that have
essentially supplanted lighthouses. The book could be a little more factually com-
plete (often the illustrations are missing either a date or a full place name, and
sometimes terms in captions aren't described anywhere), but it offers a neat, un-
derstandable, and sometimes haunting treatment of various aspects of a historical
romantic phenomenon. An index and bibliography are included. DS
HAMILTON, VIRGINIA, ad. 
Her Stories: African American Folktales, Fairy Tales,
and True Tales; illus. by Leo and Diane Dillon. 
Blue Sky/Scholastic, 1995 
112p
ISBN 0-590-47370-0 
$19.95 
R Gr. 5-8
Hamilton divides this collection up into five sections: Her Animal Tales, Her
Fairy Tales, Her Supernatural, Her Folk Ways and Legends, and Her True Stories,
each of them dealing with female protagonists (or, in the last section, real women)
in a different kind of story. Hamilton's easy and alluring storyteller's voice lends
itself equally well to the scary ("Macie and the Boo Hag") and to the cleverly
humorous ("Malindy and Little Devil"), combining with the Dillons' lush tab-
leaux to energize familiar motifs and stories ("Catskinella") as well as bring unfa-
miliar ones to life. The women aren't all heroic, and some are downright unpleasant,
which gives a pleasing variety to the anthology, as does the inclusion of more enig-
matic stories as well as the literal and obvious. Hamilton appends a comment after
each story which explains and expands its milieu but rarely identifies the tale's
specific sources. An afterword describing Hamilton's own interest in stories and a
list of useful folkloric texts are included. DS
HAUSMAN, GERALD 
Doctor Moledinky's Castle: A Hometown Tale. 
Simon,
1995 
151p
ISBN 0-689-80019-3 
$15.00 
M 
Gr. 5-7
This is a collection of fourteen loosely linked short stories, focusing on the eleven-
year-old narrator Andy and his friend Pauly and their adventures in their small
New Jersey town in the summer of 1957. Andy describes run-ins with eccentric
neighbors, unexpected friendships with tough kids from across town, and his labor
at the peculiar zoo of Dr. Moledinky, who keeps various animals caged for show
and is revered by the townsfolk as a scholar. This is similar to Jack Gantos' Heads
or Tails (BCCB 7/94) in its protagonist, format, and setting, but it lacks that book's
smooth writing and deft humor: Hausman's tone wavers between sentimental and
breezy, with the funny bits often weak; the stories' order seems arbitrary, with
some of the encounters feeling redundant and the final payoff, the unmasking of
Dr. Moledinky's ordinariness, anticlimactic. Some of the stories, however, have a
nicely anecdotal flavor (such as "Sleazy Joe Wormwood and the Pit of Death"),
and there's a slightly nostalgic but still invigorating energy in the picture of the two
boys roaming their neighborhood and discovering the unanticipated. DS
HEAD, JUDITH 
Culebra Cut. Carolrhoda, 1995 
153p
ISBN 0-87614-878-X 
$14.96 
Ad Gr. 4-6
William Thomas is smitten with enthusiasm for the engineering marvel of his age,
the Panama Canal project, and his happiness should be complete when his physi-
cian father accepts employment as the doctor at the Culebra Cut, an excavation
DECEMBER 1995 
* 129
prone to severe mudslides. But William's parents lay down restrictive house rules
and so, of course, William sneaks out to explore the dangerous site on his own.
The boy's domestic griping and clandestine treks ring true, as do the condescend-
ing attitudes of the U.S. workers toward their Meso-American counterparts.
William's friendship with Victoria, a self-assured Jamaican girl, is less convinc-
ingly drawn, however, and the ending (Victoria leaves Panama with her sick fa-
ther) shears off as abruptly as a collapsed canal wall. Concluding notes supply
background on the history of the canal project. EB
HERRERA, JUAN FELIPE 
Calling the Doves/El canto de las palomas; illus. by Elly
Simmons. 
Children's Book Press, 1995 
32p
ISBN 0-89239-132-4 
$14.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
A lyrical, nostalgic (and bilingual) text and elegantly lined, muralistic paintings
recall one boy's cozy memories of migrant farmworking, "my father curling a trac-
tor around the earth,/ my mother holding her head up high with song." Aside
from one brief fragment in which the boy's father tells him of the difficult lives and
deaths of his own parents in Mexico, there is little sense of hardship here; as with
Courtni Wright'sJumping the Broom, about a slave wedding ceremony (BCCB 7/
94), this book balances precariously between a story of family pride and one of
sentimentalized history. Still, details of la lucha can be found elsewhere, and
while the prose-poem is not strong on narrative, its images are evocative of the
warm bonds between people and between people and their work and landscape.
Simmons' paintings, effective in Argueta's myth-retelling Magic Dogs ofthe Volca-
noes (BCCB 2/91), here find a similar magical realism in a realistic story, fantastic
suns and skies warming a rich land and, spiritually speaking, rich people. RS
HIGH, LINDA OATMAN 
Hound Heaven. 
Holiday House, 1995 
194 p
ISBN 0-8234-1195-8 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Since the death of her parents and baby sister in a car crash, Silver Nickles lives
with her grandfather in a two-room tarpaper shack on Muckwater Mountain; more
than anything, to fill the hole in her heart left by her family's death, she wants a
dog. Papaw won't let her have one, so twelve-year-old Silver instead gets a job
with an unpleasant local dog-breeder whose geeky son has an unrequited crush on
Silver. Soon, however, Papaw suffers a heart attack that sends him to the hospital,
and Silver finds that her faith and hope are concentrated not on dogs but on his
getting well and coming home to her. Characterization here isn't deep (Papaw is
pretty much the standard crusty old grandfather), and the plot is often contrived
(at the end, Silver is named Miss Independence at the Fourth of July parade and,
of course, gets a dog). Silver's narration, however, is touching in its yearning and
appealing in its gentle humor, and the book's respectful and thoughtful treatment
of the religious faith that Silver finds a mainstay of her life enhances her character
without impeding the flow of the story. Kids who enjoyed the author's Maizie
(BCCB 4/95) will appreciate meeting another of High's strong-minded small-
town heroines. DS
HONG, LILY TOY 
The Empress and the Silkworm; written and illus. by Lily Toy
Hong. 
Whitman, 1995 
32p
ISBN 0-8075-2009-8 
$16.95 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
A silkworm cocoon drops from a mulberry tree into the steaming teacup of Em-
130 
* THE BULLETIN
press Si Ling-Chi; she fishes it out, notices the fine, shiny thread unwinding from
it, and the rest is (fictionalized) history. Hong bases her tale on the legend of
Yellow Emperor Huang-Ti and his wife, under whose rule the art of silk produc-
tion was reputedly born. The text is both engaging and convincing, and listeners
may need to be reminded that this is "just a story." Illustrations are less enticing;
dusty pastel, matte-finished acrylics capture none of the luster of the prized fabric.
Crowded composition frequently deflects the interest from the central figures, and
even the emperor's splendid robes get lost in the visual shuffle. However, classes
pursuing a unit on fabric or clothing will appreciate this fluent yarn and Hong's
concluding comments on silk science and trade. Try pairing it with dePaola's
Charlie Needs a Cloak. EB
JONES, DIANA WYNNE 
The Crown ofDalemark. Greenwillow, 1995 
4 71p
ISBN 0-688-13363-0 
$17.00 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Mitt (from DrownedAmmet, BCCB 6/78) has arrived in North Dalemark only to
discover-to his dismay-that it's got the same petty infighting and dangerous
power struggles as the South. He tries to survive with his head intact; meanwhile,
the presence of Moril (from Cart and Cwidder, 6/77) unnerves him, memories of
the past haunt him, and dreams of the Undying stalk his nights. Time shifts ahead
200 years when thirteen-year-old Maewen meets a mysterious stranger who throws
her back in time in order to lead Mitt, Moril, and their companions on a search for
the sacred objects that will reunite Dalemark. Of course, book three (The Spellcoats,
2/80) must play a role as well, and so the evil mage Kankredin rears his ugly head
again (he is disguised as a horse) to disassemble the world. It's complicated, lengthy,
and dense with dialogue-readers unfamiliar with the trilogy might be lost, and
even veterans may find themselves consulting the glossary of Dalemark terms in
the back. It takes too long to set the scene before the action really starts, but once
it does, readers will welcome back these spirited friends from Dalemark with more
than a few laughs at their idiosyncratic behavior and verbal sparring: "'Flaming
Ammet!' ... 'Drop that, you hooded horror, you!'" HMW
KODAMA, TATSUHARU 
Shin's Tricycle; tr. by Kazuko Hokumen-Jones; illus. by
Noriyuki Ando. 
Walker, 1995 
34p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8376-7 
$16.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8375-9 
$15.95 
Ad 
7-10 yrs
"Every August I am haunted by the same memory. In my mind I see my son, Shin,
riding the red tricycle that he dreamed of getting for his birthday. But this happy
picture disappears behind a cloud of smoke and ash." The point of view here is
clearly a father's, and it is retrospective-a lamentation for the three children he
lost in the bombing of Hiroshima, with particular focus on his three-year-old son
Shin, the proud new owner of a tricycle. The tricycle is now a famous display at
the Peace Museum in Hiroshima, and Shin, who gripped the handle even as he
died, is nothing but a pile of "little white bones" like his two sisters, who were
burned to death while pinned under some roof beams, and like his friend Kimi,
with whom he was buried. The inevitable question here is one of audience, and
the inevitable comparison is with Hiroshima No Pika by Toshi Maruki (BCCB 10/
82). While the impressionistic paintings and historical opening of Maruki's book
clearly signal an older audience, the pictures here-heavily textured, bled pages in
dark or flaming colors-are literal, with a hint of social realism. The subject is
DECEMBER 1995 
* 
131
shocking, but the pictorial style seems geared to preschoolers. The text, which is
printed on cool gray rice paper, focuses the story from a parental viewpoint, unlike
the story of seven-year-old Mii in Hiroshima No Pika. Because the children all die
here and the father survives (Mii survived, although in a wounded and trauma-
tized state; it was her father who died), the book seems more hopeless and over-
whelming despite the statement that Shin's short life "had a great purpose" of
making us all "strive for a lasting peace." These last statements in the author's note
won't offer much consolation to the targeted audience of seven to ten-year-olds,
but adults will find use for the book as a discussion piece for selected groups or as
a companion to Hiroshima No Pika, which is most effectively shared with older
elementary and middle school students. BH
LESTER, ALISON 
Yikes!: In Seven Wild Adventures, Who Would You Be?; written
and illus. by Alison Lester. 
Houghton, 1995 
32p
ISBN 0-395-71252-1 
$14.95 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
Sassy rhyme gives a brief account of the characters and their adventures in seven
dramatic settings, such as In a Raging Storm at Sea, In the Wild West, Under the
Big Top, and In the Frozen North. Each locale gets two spreads, the first describ-
ing eight dramatis personae (taken straight from Saturday-morning serial stereo-
types) and the second compactly relating, in eight galloping lines, their intertwined
adventures ("The sharks have called it even with Blood and Guts McCoy,/ and the
richest baby in the world is bobbing like a buoy" detail the fates of two caught in
the raging storm at sea). Despite the liveliness of the lines, however, the premise
muddies things: there's never enough time to get involved in any story so there's
no reason to choose someone with whom to identify, and since there's no cumula-
tive value in the stories the book gets rather long by the end. Lester's sharp-edged
and speedily detailed paintings helps keep things moving along, though, and kids
will enjoy the robust balladry of the words even if they can't quite get into the
stories. DS
LEVY, ELIZABETH 
The Drowned. Hyperion, 1995 
190p
ISBN 0-7868-0135-2 
$16.95 
R Gr. 7-10
Lily is spending the summer with her aunt in Atlantic City; her father drowned
there a few years ago, leaving Lily haunted by a fear of the ocean, and her mother
is off on a vision quest in New Mexico. Helped by Clark, a boy she meets on the
boardwalk, she decides to make money by leading a tour of spooky Atlantic City
sights and finds herself becoming obsessed with the story of the drowned boy
whose mother still keeps his bed out on the lawn to lure him back home. When
Lily falls ill at the drowned boy's house, the boy's mother, Mrs. Gurney, seems
somehow to be endangering her even as she cares for her, and Clark seems to be
trying to protect her from a menace he knows only too well but refuses to ac-
knowledge. Although the story's ambiguities sometimes veer into vagueness, Levy
keeps the audience guessing till the very end, and her story of watery doom has an
enticing blend of local atmosphere and classic supernatural horror motifs. Lily
and Clark are compelling protagonists, and the book's straightforward and acces-
sible style will have a particular appeal for readers who find the linguistic complex-
ity and sophistication of Westall and others daunting but who appreciate a good
sinister story. DS
132 
* THE BULLETIN
McCoLLEY, KEVIN 
Sun Dance. Simon, 1995 
233p
ISBN 0-689-80008-8 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Randy thinks that a cross-country, beer-toting car trip with his big brother is going
to be quite the escapade-not to mention an escape from his sad family life in
small-town Minnesota. But when Mike, a bitter Navy veteran, hatches a scheme
to blow up a nuclear reactor in upstate New York, Randy realizes that a lot more is
riding on this trip than just adventure. It's a sordid journey, but a romantic book.
Randy is smart and sensitive and literate enough to spell out his parallels to
Hemingway and Salinger, but while he is a believable young dreamer, poignant in
his yearning to be an Indian warrior, the other characters (Mike, Mike's victimized
girlfriend Analee, his dope-fried friend Goon) are stereotyped and the road story
regularly succumbs to formula. There's enough seamy action to keep readers hooked
but they might be puzzled by the ending: did they or didn't they blow the darn
thing up? RS
McGINNis, LILA 
IfDaddy Only Knew Me; illus. by Diane Paterson. 
Whitman,
1995 
32p 
ISBN 0-8075-3537-0 
$14.95 
Ad 
5-7 yrs
When the five-year-old narrator, Kate, discovers that the father she has never known
lives in the same town, she and her sister Glory go to see him. Not only does he
not recognize either of them, but he tells them that his brand-new baby boy (parked
in a stroller nearby) is the only child he has. Mom's explanations are as good as she
can make them: Dad left because "he changed his mind. He didn't want a family
anymore" (until he launched a new one). The only reason Dad doesn't love the
girls is because he doesn't know them ("And he never wants to know you because
he's afraid if he did, he would love you"). The ending is careful, with Kate suggest-
ing that even though her father's heart has not stretched to accommodate all of his
children, she would "stretch a place for him. In case." It's a sad story, and perhaps
more realistic than we would like to think, although most fathers who are consci-
entious enough to be regular with a check seem interested in an occasional update
on what it's being spent for. The bibliotherapeutic tone is supported by reassur-
ingly literal watercolors-dominated by soothing blues and greens-in which all
the characters are physically attractive, their environment pleasant, and the hurt
assuaged by loving hugs, lemonade, and cookies. BH
MAcLACHLAN, PATRICIA 
What You Know First; illus. by Barry Moser. 
Cotler/
HarperCollins, 1995 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024414-3 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024413-5 
$14.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
A little girl muses both lyrically and sullenly about her family's upcoming move:
"I could/ If I wanted/ Tell Mama and Papa that I won't go." She thinks about all
the things she loves about the family farm, "the tall cottonwood that was small
when Papa was small," and reflects that her parents are sad about the move, too:
"So/ Why are we leaving if everyone's so sad?" Details in Moser's dark, almost
haunted, engravings suggest a '30s setting, but there's no suggestion of the Dustbowl
or impoverishment; indeed, the girl's plaintive query goes unanswered. Although
there is a self-conscious and adult sensibility consistently on display here,
MacLachlan does capture the elegiac mood quite well, and while Moser's pictures
don't always go far enough in extending the text, they have an appropriately som-
ber sweetness. RS
DECEMBER 1995 
* 
133
MCMILLAN, BRUCE 
Grandfather's Trolley; written and illus. with photographs by
Bruce McMillan. 
Candlewick, 1995 
26p
ISBN 1-56402-633-7 
$15.95 
M 
3-6 yrs
"I remember ... "-not two words you generally want to start a picture book with,
for they too often presage a nostalgic story more concerned with recollecting child-
hood than recreating it. In this picture book, illustrated with black-and-white
photographs hand-tinted a la Ken Robbins, the narrator remembers when she was
"a little girl," and would go help her grandfather run the trolley. Not much hap-
pens: they go down the track (" 
Clackety-clackety, clackety clack"), they stop at the
end of the line and the girl goes for a little walk, she brings the power controls from
one end of the train to the other, they go back. Although the most interesting
moment, when the girl helps Grandfather with the controls, needs elucidation,
this is sweet, faintly exotic in an old-timey way, and certainly easy to follow-but
there's no story. The photos are sweet as well, fuzzy at the edges and brightened
with such touches as the girl's yellow hair ribbon blown in the breeze while
Grandfather's white whiskers stream like a puff of smoke. A note explains that the
trolley pictured is now housed at the Seashore Trolley Museum in Maine, where
kids can take it for a ride. RS
MASTERS, SUSAN ROWAN 
Summer Song. 
Clarion, 1995 
[160p]
ISBN 0-395-71127-4 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Etta May has lived with her grandparents ever since her mother left when she was
a little girl, but her grandmother died last year and now her grandfather, Gent, is
frail and ill. Etta May resists the new custodial intentions of the mother she's
known only from occasional letters and visits, insisting that she and Gent are fine
on their own in their old trailer. Eventually, however, it becomes clear that Gent's
emphysema means he won't come home from the hospital, and Etta May realizes
that she must adjust to the changes and impending losses in her life in order to
grow up. This is a sweet, if completely predictable, story: Gent is a typical loving
but crotchety grandfather (see also Linda Oatman High's Hound Heaven, reviewed
above), but Etta May's determined love for and loyalty to her grandfather give the
story strength, and Etta May's friend Quentin provides an unrealistic but upbeat
subplot as his musical talent is finally recognized in a radio contest. Masters makes
Etta May's downhome narration warm and credible, and her struggle with a diffi-
cult time will elicit empathy from many readers. DS
MEAD, ALICE Junebug. Farrar, 1995 
102p
ISBN 0-374-33964-3 
$14.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Reeve McClain, a.k.a. Junebug, is justifiably skeptical of turning ten, since that's
the age at which boys are recruited into gangs at his housing project. Several older
friends have already succumbed to the pressure-one has even stolen money from
a drug dealer in order to beat it out of town. Unable to imagine a way out, Junebug
(who is African American) hangs with his little sister and fantasizes about sailing
his own ship to the West Indies. Mead details many of the grimmer realities of
Junebug's world-broken elevators, fear of crossing open spaces, violence that erupts
like weeds through the pavement; others she underplays, never explicitly confront-
ing the drug-dealing and pimping that Junebug witnesses daily. The first-person
nine-year-old's narration is unconvincing ("Tears in my eyes make the glass in the
134 
* THE BULLETIN
gutter sparkle like diamonds") and the novel's ending, in which Junebug's mother
gets a new job with free lodging outside the projects, is soothing but decidedly too
easy. However, readers who've seen Junebug through his travails will cheer the
promise of a softer future for him. EB
MEDEARIS, 
ANGELA 
SHELF, ad. 
Too Much Talk; illus. by Stefano
Vitale. 
Candlewick, 1995 
26p
ISBN 1-56402-323-0 
$15.95 
R 
4-7 yrs
This reworking of the familiar folktale about talking objects and their startled
owners is notable for its consistently predictable text, simple enough to invite pre-
schooler echoes, and for its stylish West African motifs, sophisticated and comical
enough to engross an older audience. As yam talks to farmer, cloth talks to weaver,
and chair talks to chief, each human takes off with a bold-lettered "Aiyeee!" certain
to raise story-hour noise by several decibels. Vitale's oil-on-wood pictures feature
a vibrant, expressive parade of horrified townsfolk, whose cumulative images amass
along with the text. Traditional West African tools, garb, and borders invite more
leisurely examination than the lightning-quick storyline will allow. The story's
source is briefly noted as "a tale from Accra in Ghana, West Africa." EB
MELTZER, MILTON 
Hold Your Horses!: A Feedbag Full of Fact and
Fable. HarperCollins, 1995 
[160p] 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024478-X 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024477-1 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 4-7
Taking the same approach with horses as he did with potatoes (BCCB 9/92) and
gold (3/94), Meltzer examines equines' uses and contributions throughout his-
tory, starting with charioteers' steeds, through knights' chargers, military mounts,
cowponies, farm horses, and racetrack Thoroughbreds. While it seems that Meltzer's
knowledge comes from other sources rather than experience (some errors, such as
the inclusion of"white" in the colors ofArabian horses, the common but mistaken
differentiation between Native American and European methods of steering horses,
and the implication that the recent horse-killing scandal occurred in Thorough-
bred racing rather than showjumping, creep in), he has neatly synthesized several
thousand years of culture. Meltzer's notes on his sources are too vague to be much
help, since they include no page numbers or date citations for journals; a bibliog-
raphy and index are included. Diehard equestrians will already have books that
cover this much and more, but neophytes and younger readers will appreciate this
readable survey of the horse's career through the ages. DS
MOHR, NICHOLASA 
The Magic Shell; illus. by Rudy Gutierrez. 
Scholastic,
1995 
90p
ISBN 0-590-47110-4 
$13.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Jaime is disconsolate about his family's move to New York City from his beloved
village in the Dominican Republic, but his wise great-uncle, Tio Ernesto, has given
him a conch shell that he promises will get Jaime through the rough transition.
Sure enough-when Jaime, bored and lonely in the New York winter, listens to
the shell, he feels like he's back with his friends in the tropics. Jaime seems to be
about eight, and Mohr has drawn an affectionate portrait of a boy in a new land;
that said, the crisis is resolved fairly early on (Jaime makes friends, discovers snow
DECEMBER 1995 
* 
135
and ice-skating) so that there isn't much dramatic tension. Mohr tries to whip it
back up again by having Jaime homesick for New York when he goes back for the
summer to his island, but by then the book has already revealed its formula, and it
won't work twice. Pleasant, cozy, and easy to read, the book has little surprise but
does offer comfort, a shell to the ear. RS
MOORE, MARTHA 
Under the MermaidAngel. Delacorte, 1995 
168p
ISBN 0-385-32160-0 
$14.95 
R Gr. 6-9
Jesse is thirteen, struggling with flat-chested adolescence and with grief for the
death of her baby brother, when charismatic Roxanne moves into the trailer next
door. Roxanne is a flame-haired eccentric, twice married (once widowed, once
divorced), who, she confesses to her new friend Jesse, has moved to little Ida, Texas
because the child she gave up for adoption thirteen years ago lives there. En route
to helping Roxanne meet her child ("If I could hug my baby, just once, it'd last me
the rest of my life"), Jesse gets involved with the student newspaper and with
planning a party for the Alzheimer's-stricken curator of the local museum of oddi-
ties, who's moving into a nursing home. While the book does dip occasionally
into sentimentality and predictability (it's no surprise that Roxanne's child is the
boy Jesse can't stand, and that she eventually comes to terms with the loss of her
brother), it has an easy voice and a light hand with the offbeat individuality that
makes it one of the better entries in the lately popular category of first-person rural
narratives. DS
MORPURGO, MICHAEL 
Wreck of the Zanzibar; illus. by Francois Place. 
Viking,
1995 
69p
ISBN 0-670-86360-2 
$14.99 
R 
Gr. 5-8
When his great-aunt Laura dies and leaves Michael her diary, he learns the secret
of her most coveted legacy: "Zanzibar." While Morpurgo cagily keeps Zanzibar's
identity a secret until the last pages of the brief novel, he intrigues us with Laura's
story of growing up on Bryher Island, one of the remote Scilly Isles, which in
Laura's girlhood was struck with a series of natural and personal disasters that
seemed destined to drive all the island families back to the Cornish mainland.
There's a taste of fantasy here and a touch of Grace Darling (see Jill Paton Walsh's
Grace, BCCB 6/92), but mostly a story of a girl determined to get herself and her
family through hard times, creating a local legend as she does it. Watercolor vi-
gnettes are inconsistent in style but open up the page design. RS
MYERS, WALTER DEAN 
Shadow of the Red Moon; illus. by Christopher
Myers. 
Scholastic, 1995 
183p
ISBN 0-590-45895-7 
$14.95 
NR Gr. 5-8
Justly acclaimed for his realistic contemporary fiction, Myers seems to have lost his
way in this post-apocalyptic fantasy. When the Fens invade the crystal fortress of
the Okalians, Jon is sent by his parents to seek the mythical Okalian homeland,
the Ancient Land, where the Okalians lived before a meteor and a plague had
ravaged the world. Jon meets two other children, sister and brother Lin and Kyra,
and the three undergo trials of physical and spiritual survival in the face of many
threats. Most notably they face the Fens, seemingly feral children who want, it is
somewhat murkily revealed, the same things as the Okalians-safety and comfort.
The premises of the fantasy are both overelaborate and underdeveloped, and there
136 
* 
THE BULLETIN
is no sense of place: the characters seem to be walking along a map rather than
within a landscape. And even though Myers gives very specific directions as to
where the characters are going, the story is often unclear, as in a scene, for example,
where Jon and the others are discussing whether he killed a Fen when it was al-
ready shown that he had not. The writing is confusing ("He held his breath too
much, so that the very act of breathing was difficult") and sometimes careless ("Kyra
was up ahead, walking in long, loping strides, both arms stretched out to his sides"),
and dialogue impedes the story more than it furthers it, with an abundance of
pronouns that lack certain antecedents. You would wish these characters well if
you could only figure out who they are, where they are, and what they're talking
about. RS
PINKNEY, BRIAN 
Jojo's Flying Side Kick; written and illus. by Brian
Pinkney. 
Simon, 1995 
32p
ISBN 0-689-80283-8 
$15.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
As JoJo prepares for her Tae Kwon Do yellow belt exam, everyone has a bit of
advice. Grandaddy says she should fancy up her footwork; friend P.J. insists she
yell louder; Mom suggests visualizing her moves. But JoJo's real anxiety centers
around a misshapen tree in her yard which she watches through her window at
night, afraid it will climb in. The next dayjojo pictures the board in her instructor's
hands as "the creepy bandit tree," and she splits it with a vicious kick, winning her
promotion and conquering her fear in one blow. Martial-arts training is a topic
neglected for the picture-book set, and a young female practitioner is a welcome
protagonist. However, the dynamic scratchboard pictures, which take clever ad-
vantage of the Tae Kwon Do studio's mirrored walls, overpower the slender, pre-
dictable plot. Dark, swirling scenes have a surreal quality that clashes with the
prosaic tone of the tale. EB
POHRT, TOM, ad. 
Coyote Goes Walking; ad. and illus. by Tom Pohrt. 
Farrar,
1995 
32p
ISBN 0-374-31628-7 
$16.00 
R Gr. 2-4
Pohrt, who illustrated Crow and Weasel by Barry Lopez, has retold four tales from
the Gros Ventre and Assiniboine peoples: a flood/creation myth; an encounter
with mice celebrating a sun dance inside a buffalo skull where Coyote sticks his
nose and finds trouble; a scenario of Coyote trying to get dinner by pecking a pine
tree like Woodpecker; and a story in which Coyote's disrespect toward a buffalo
skull is punished as surely as was his previous curiosity and foolishness. These are
episodes rather than tidied-up folktales, and they are all the more authentic for not
perpetrating neat endings. Coyote's methods for dealing with disaster include
name-calling, laughter, and walking away from the whole situation, and Pohrt's
fine brown-toned watercolors accord the trickster a quiet dignity that's humorous
without indulging in slapstick. Coyote perched precariously on a branch, for in-
stance, with a wooden beak tied to his snout, allows the inherent absurdity of the
incident to reveal itself without cartooned exaggeration. And the picture of an old
buffalo smoking his pipe has an uncanny power: "The colors and light of the
setting sun began to flicker through the old bull's hide as he slowly disappeared
before Coyote's eyes." The brevity of the episodes, the large print, and the re-
strained art give the book scope as a readalone for students exploring American
Indian lore as well as a readaloud for younger children. BH
DECEMBER 1995 
* 137
QUALEY, MARSHA 
Hometown. 
Houghton, 1995 
1 6 3p
ISBN 0-395-72666-2 
$14.95 
R Gr. 7-10
Border's casual teen existence is disrupted when his father decides to leave Albu-
querque and return to the small Minnesota town where he grew up. Border has
serious problems in Red Cedar: not only does he find small-town life stifling, he
must contend with local resentment of his father, a former draft-dodger, whose
reappearance during the Gulf War seems particularly ill-timed. Qualey again tan-
gentially connects with the same group of people she wrote about in Everybody's
Daughter (BCCB 3/91) and in Come infrom the Cold (11/94); Border's father was
the amiable friend of the hero in the latter book, and the setting is the same small
town twenty-five years later. The book doesn't allow that connection to over-
shadow its focus on Border, however, as he struggles to place himself in this new
milieu and define himself both politically and personally in relationship to his
father. Additional implications of the relationship between past and present, both
globally and locally, enrich but never overwhelm the plot. The short vignette-size
chapters don't slow the pace but convey Border's disorientation at all the changes
that surround him, and the characterization, always Qualey's strong point, keeps
the strong-minded but uncertain young teen an engaging figure. DS
RANKIN, JOAN 
The Little Cat and the Greedy Old Woman; written and illus. by
Joan Rankin. 
McElderry, 1995 
32p
ISBN 0-689-50611-2 
$16.00 
R 4-7 yrs
An innocent striped tabby gazes longingly at the plump, kind-faced lady who is
preparing a delicious meal. Appearances, however, are deceiving. When the cat
nibbles at a tasty dish, the sweet old lady turns into a flushed, pig-eyed hag who
throws her pitiful pet out into the rain, where he, in turn, "grows as large as his
anger" and comes back for revenge. The deadpan nursery-story tone contrasts
exceptionally well with the zany watercolor renderings of the cat's frenetic ram-
page. "He easily pushed through the door with his heavy weight"-a demon-
eyed, tied-dyed monster shatters the door as the old woman enjoys her repast in
contented ignorance, and then the now-titanic tabby teaches her a lesson. Even
with the happy ending, this cautionary tale should leave the story hour set gasping,
giggling, and in absolutely no doubt of the message: "Share... or else." EB
RANSOM, CANDICE F. 
When the Whippoorwill Calls; illus. by Kimberly Bulcken
Root. 
Tambourine, 1995 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-12730-4 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-12729-0 
$16.00 
R 5-7 yrs
Unlike many nostalgic evocations of past and place (Rylant's When I Was Young in
the Mountains, BCCB 4/92, for instance), this story is rooted in the hard facts of a
materially poor but naturally beautiful home. The young narrator describes her
family's subsistence living as tenants in a mountain cabin before the owner sold
the Blue Ridge property to be part of a national park. Their sadness at leaving is
tempered by a new house with "inside taps and electric lights," but it is not until
they return for a restorative visit that Pap admits, "Sometimes ... change is good."
The idea that moving is often bittersweet is a much richer field for exploration
than is simplistic yearning, and Root has reinforced Ransom's story with dark,
woodsy watercolors true to the smudges of a rural life where water is cold and work
is constant. At the same time, viewers catch a glimpse of starlit or snowcovered
138 
* 
THE BULLETIN
scenes, of wild brambles and hilly skylines, that inspire the family's love for the
land. Early one morning, as the mule pulls their wagon toward town, the narrator
asks if the glow she sees is treasure-a mountain filled with gold about which she's
heard. "'You might say,' Pap answered. 'That light marks the beginning of a new
day."' A note explains the federal purchase of Blue Ridge lands. BH
ROSENBERG, Liz 
The Carousel; illus. by Jim LaMarche. 
Harcourt, 1995 
32p
ISBN 0-15-200853-5 
$16.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Two sisters are amazed to discover, on a detour through the park on a winter's day,
that the carousel horses have come alive. Both the narrating younger girl and her
caretaking elder sister catch a ride on the wild flying ponies, then tame the crea-
tures by fixing their broken merry-go-round, whereupon the horses (and zebra)
return to their places. That's the story at its literal and most successful level, but
underlying it is the girls' grief for their apparently deceased mother and their rec-
ognition of the enduring nature of her place in their lives despite her absence;
Rosenberg engages in some subtle suggestion and deliberate ambiguities here that
may touch some young listeners but will confuse others. The dusty colored-pencil
and acrylic art is at its best in the fantasy realm of the carousel gallop, spreads of
which display an energy lacking from the more earthbound scenes. Kids probably
won't get the full symbolism here, but they'll find the darker tone intriguing and
revel in the classic escape of the denizens of the merry-go-round. DS
SACHS, MARILYN 
Ghosts in the Family. Dutton, 1995 
16 5p
ISBN 0-525-45421-7 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 5-7
Gabriella loves her family stories, such as those about her parents' meeting and
about her ancestor, Gabriel Valencia, whose portrait hangs in her bedroom and
whose ghost is rumored to appear; she's also sadly accustomed to the story about
her father's old California Spanish family cutting him off when he married her
Mexican-American mother. When Gabriella's mother dies in an accident while
Gabriella's father is traveling in Asia, Gabriella stays first with friends but then
ends up at the house of her father's dying mother and his sister. There she discov-
ers that her father has been lying to both sides of his family for years and that his
embarrassment about his wife and child was the only thing keeping Gabriella from
knowing her grandmother and aunt; the closeness she develops with her aunt and
her new knowledge of her father mean that she must make a difficult choice when
he eventually returns. Sachs paints an absorbing portrait of a young girl dealing
with divided loyalties and with family truths revealed as fictions. The story is
occasionally a bit overly tidy (as with Gabriella's relatively speedy attachment to
her aunt), but the ghostly motif adds atmosphere to a plot already intriguingly
filled with secrets. Young readers, who will probably be familiar with situations
where adults are not telling them all they want to know, will relish the drama of
Gabriella's discovery and growing understanding. DS
SAN Souci, ROBERT 
Kate Shelley: Bound for Legend; illus. by Max
Ginsburg. 
Dial, 1995 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1290-1 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1289-8 
$14.99 
R Gr. 3-5
Kate Shelley braves the stormy bridge once again, in this picture-book biography
that sticks more closely to the facts than did Margaret Wetterer's Kate Shelley and
DECEMBER 1995 
* 
139
the Midnight Express (BCCB 11/90). Something of a folk hero in her native Iowa,
Kate Shelley made her way through a fierce summer storm in 1881 to tell the
stationmaster that an engine had gone down in Honey Creek; even more desper-
ately, she needed to stop the eastbound express to Chicago before it reached the
now-severed bridge. San Souci points out, as Wetterer does not, that the express
train had already stopped because of the storm; while Kate Shelley was certainly
brave, she was also unwittingly beside the point. (San Souci and Wetterer also
differ in their accounts of the wrecked engine, with only San Souci mentioning
fatalities.) The newer book is the fuller account, probably too full for story hour
and better appreciated as a choice for individual reading. Ginsburg's illustrations
are painterly and studied, not particularly well-matched to the dramatic story. RS
SANDERSON, RUTH, ad. 
Papa Gatto; ad. and illus. by Ruth Sanderson. 
Little,
1995 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-316-77073-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-7 yrs
Sanderson gives some old-fashioned elegance to this Italian fairy tale, which stars a
cat but has many links to Perrault's Cinderella. Papa Gatto, luxuriously dressed
and ever the aristoc(r)at, needs a sitter for his recently motherless kittens. Sophia,
beautiful of mien but greedy at heart, takes the job, neglecting the kittens but
finding-and stealing-a beautiful necklace. Papa Gatto catches (and scratches)
her and looks for new help, finding it in Sophia's kind, hardworking, and ne-
glected stepsister Beatrice, who loves the kittens, and-eventually-is rewarded
with a prince for her virtues. Save Papa Gatto and his kittens, all the characters are
human, and it's fun to watch the cat lording it over them, even though Papa Gatto's
dictates are always just and thoughtful. Although Sanderson's figure drawing is a
little stiff, the golden Renaissance tones and sumptuous wardrobing resist glamor
through the focus on the kittens and gentle Beatrice (who, despite the text's state-
ment that she is the plainer of the stepsisters, is the looker). RS
SATHRE, VIVIAN 
Mouse Chase; illus. by Ward Schumaker. 
Harcourt, 1995 
34 p
ISBN 0-15-200105-0 
$12.00 
R 
2-5 yrs
Cat chases mouse. That's the plot, but at the pens of Sathre and Schumaker, what
a tense and elegantly presented plot it is. Two-word sentences, each with a verb
the soul of precision, gently stretch the listeners' vocabulary: "Wind blows. Leaf
flutters. Mouse grabs. Wind swirls. Leaf rises. Mouse sails." Cat cunningly
stalks Mouse to the stream where "water swells. Mouse sails. Cat wails," and the
elusive prey makes a hairbreadth escape on a floating leaf. Schumaker's Cat is
surely menacing, but never evil, and children will recognize that it's just doing its
natural feline thing. Black ink lines whirl through muted, matte paintings, under-
scoring the action of wind and water while energizing each double-page spread.
Slightly undersized and printed on heavy stock, this selection will stand up to the
repeated thumbings it's bound to receive. EB
SCHERTLE, ALICE 
Down the Road; illus. by E. B. Lewis. 
Browndeer/Harcourt,
1995 
40p
ISBN 0-15-276622-7 
$16.00 
R 
4-7 yrs
"This is what it's like to be grown up," Hetty muses. "You have money in your
pocket, and you can go down the road all by yourself." The little girl makes her
140 
* 
THE BULLETIN
first solo jaunt to Mr. Birdie's store for fresh eggs, determined to prove how re-
sponsible she is. On the way home, temptation beckons in the guise of an apple
tree; Hetty breaks the eggs while picking fruit, then hides among the branches in
shame. Papa and Mama take her failure better than she expects and, instead of
scolding, join her in the tree and share apple pie for breakfast. Lewis' impression-
istic paintings, reminiscent of Ted Lewin's watercolors, capture the intense pride,
guilty pouting, and calm contentment that animate Hetty's bright, bronze fea-
tures. Listeners will recognize and relish the homey details of Hetty's trip-check-
ing her pockets for the change, placing her order "just as Mama would have
done"-as they accompany her on this foray into independence. EB
SCHNUR, STEVEN 
The Tie Man's Miracle: A Chanukah Tale; illus. by Stephen T.
Johnson. 
Morrow, 1995 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-13464-5 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-13463-7 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-9 yrs
On the last night of Chanukah, the old tie-seller, Mr. Hoffman, comes around to
Seth's house with his wares. With much encouragement, he stays for the lighting
of the menorah, and tells them of his family, which included a son the age of Seth,
and a daughter named, like Seth's sister, Hannah. Seth is puzzled when Mr.
Hoffman says he "lost" his family in the war, and his father explains, "Before you
were born ... there was a terrible war. Many people were killed, especially Jewish
people." At dinner, wanting to tell them something happier, Mr. Hoffman talks
about his village's (less than traditional) belief that if all nine candles on the meno-
rah burn out together, the wishes of those watching are carried to God on the
smoke; that evening the miracle occurs as Seth is watching, and he wishes "Please
give the tie man back his family." They never see Mr. Hoffman again. Delicately
told, Schnur's story is profoundly moving in more than one way: a boy's innocent
joy in Chanukah is changed as he learns a terrible fact from history, but the holi-
day is enriched forever by his concern for a person who had seemed ordinary and
uninteresting. Johnson's watercolors reflect the gravity of the story in their sim-
plicity, keeping tightly focused on the family and their guest. Miles away from the
luscious holiday book, this makes an excellent choice for families who are ready to
broach this topic and for curriculum units on the Holocaust. SDL
SCHOENHERR, JOHN 
Rebel; written and illus. by John Schoenherr. 
Philomel,
1995 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-399-22727-X 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
3-6 yrs
A gently informative and straightforward text about the brooding, birth, and up-
bringing of a gaggle of goslings is mischievously subverted by Schoenherr's appar-
ently serene watercolors. "The world is cold, but the nest is warm. They huddle
close under their mother"-all but one, the "rebel" of the title, who has scuttled
off to investigate an equally curious fawn. "Like one bird they swim together,
eating all they can" except for the rebel, who's paddled off to check out a butterfly
(and who in turn is espied by an underwater turtle). The joke unrolls quietly in
the accurate but atmospheric pictures and turns into drama when the rebel's wan-
derings take it far from its family, who are now ready to fly off to the communal
brooding ground. All ends well, with what looks like a "Hey!" cry from the rebel
DECEMBER 1995 
* 
141
to its family across the pond, and a little rebuke from Papa (or is it Mama?) to stay
in line. In this picture book that shows how words and illustrations can each sing
their own tune to a harmonious conclusion, audiences are allowed to hear the facts
and watch the story. RS
STEARNS, MICHAEL, comp. 
A Starfarers Dozen: Stories of Things to Come; illus.
by Michael Hussar. 
Yolen/Harcourt, 1995 
218p
ISBN 0-15-299871-3 
$17.00 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Morphing teenagers, a robotic teddy bear, and a Vet-o-Saurus are protagonists to
be reckoned with, and their tales are not only enticing science fiction, but also
work well as coming-of-age stories. The fourteen authors who contributed to this
companion to A Wizard's Dozen (BCCB 1/94) have each chosen very distinct,
experimental, and highly individualized perspectives of the future, yet they all fo-
cus on the internal struggle to understand oneself and one's place in the world (be
it spacecraft or alien planet). Several of the stories explore the painful side effects
of urbanization on already-alienated teens: "Secret Identity," "Suraki," and "Wild-
ing" portray accidents waiting to happen as peer pressure mounts to uncontrol-
lable levels. "Flyboy" and "Jones and the Stray" are honest and moving in their
raw portrayals of loneliness, and "On Perdition" presents a chilling dystopia. Oc-
casionally some of the writing is abrupt and unresolved-making one wish the
stories were longer-but there's cyberpunk and time travel and a flash of futuristic
vision that shines through clearly. Hussar's spikily detailed ink headpieces add a
visual component to the collection's atmosphere. HMW
TAYLOR, WILLIAM 
Numbskulls. 
Scholastic, 1995 
120p
ISBN 0-590-22629-0 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Chas, who acquired a new baby sister in Knitwits (BCCB 1/93), has returned, this
time to deal not only with his happy-go-lucky family but also with the maniacal
yet powerful neighbor girl, Alice Pepper. Alice tricks Chas and his friends Jacko
and Spikey into signing exceedingly binding contracts in which she receives money
from them in exchange for teaching them the secrets of, respectively, spelling,
riches, and sex. Alice's teaching methods (strapping the boys to a dentist's chair,
swatting them with a garden hose, and assigning them bizarre homework) are
dramatic but ineffectual-except on Chas, who becomes a good enough speller to
challenge Alice for top honors in the school spelling bee. The story is sillier and
more frenetic than it was in the first book, and it relies too much on the mental
denseness of Chas and his friends. Taylor is still a funny writer, however, and this
relentlessly goofy story will appeal to slapstick-inclined aficionados of Gordon
Korman and of other practitioners of broad middle-school comedy. DS
TURNER, ANN 
Elfong. Yolen/Harcourt, 1995 
[208p]
ISBN 0-15-200826-8 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Her summers with Grandpa and his cat Sabrina have always been a highlight, but
this one promises to be something special when Maddy spots a cat wearing an
intricately-wrought saddle, and eventually meets its rider-an elf named Nata.
Nata (whose point of view alternates with Maddy's) and his fellow elves are facing
great danger in the form of an owl, the Horned One, who is determined to exact
vengeance for the time, eons ago, when an elf violated the Covenant and killed an
142 
* THE BULLETIN
owl. Some derring-do is promised here, but the tone and much of the imagery
have a daintiness that takes the edge off the drama: "'Heart,' the creature nodded.
He placed his hand over his chest, over the middle. 'Elves have hearts, too."'
Though there is little originality in either the story or its use of familiar fantasy
motifs, Maddy and Grandpa make for an easy entree into a lyrically drawn land-
scape of nature and magic. This is the first book in a projected trilogy. RS
UPDIKE, JOHN 
A HelpfiulAlphabet of Friendly Objects; illus. with photographs by
David Updike. 
Knopf, 1995 
34p
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-94324-2 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-84324-8 
$16.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Brief poems by John Updike and photographs by his son David illuminate each
letter of the alphabet. The poems in a variety of verse forms are often lively and
gratifyingly specific, containing some pleasingly vivid turns of phrase (icicles, for I,
solidify "like a drop from a nose/ that went and froze"), but they sometimes roam
way beyond their audience's ken (the nickel buys "less than one mere penny did/
once upon a time") or get bogged down in philosophy and/or confusing syntax
("A cat has feelings,/ this we know,/ and maybe apples, too./ Umbrellas, maybe
not"). The photographs are inventively composed and energetic, but they often
have problems of tone (washed out or shadowy) or texture (grainy or blurred)
unfortunately accented by the muted but unharmonious background colors of the
pages, and they occasionally clash with the verse (the domestic rabbit with bright
black eyes pictured doesn't match the poem's wild rabbit with "pale eyes"). These
are still nice "starter" poems, however, vaguely reminiscent of Dorothy Aldis, and
kids will relish the combination of the mundane subjects and the dancing poetic
sounds. DS
VALGARDSON, W. D. 
Winter Rescue; illus. by Ange Zhang. 
McElderry,
1995 
40p
ISBN 0-689-80094-0 
$15.00 
R 4-7 yrs
See this month's Big Picture, p. 117, for review.
VAN DER LINDE, LAUREL 
From Mustangs to Movie Stars: Five True Horse Legends
of Our Time. 
Millbrook, 1995 
71p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 1-56294-456-8 
$16.90 
Ad Gr. 3-6
Junior'oroe-iovers haven't had much in the way of collective equine biographies
since the classic C. W. Andersons; here Laurel van der Linde offers a new addition
to that pleasing genre. The book offers five chapters, four on horses of varying
levels of fame (a mustang successfully competing at the national level in the elegant
sport of dressage; Native Dancer, the first racehorse whose fame was sealed by
television; a famous Irish show jumper; and the Arabian who played the title role
in The Black Stallion) and one chapter on the history and habits of the Anheuser-
Busch team of Clydesdales. The photo reproductions vary in quality (and the
cover photo isn't of any of the horses featured in the book), and it's not clear why
the author chose these particular subjects or whether any of her information is
firsthand, since no notes are provided. This is still the sort of personalized horse-
manship equiphiles hunger for, with details about feeding, training, and personal-
ity combining with glossy photos and an easy text to make an enticing literary
nosebag. A glossary, index, and list of books for further reading are included. DS
DECEMBER 1995 
* 143
VAN LEEUWEN, JEAN 
Oliver ed Amanda and the Big Snow; illus. by Ann
Schweninger. 
Dial, 1995 
[4 8p] 
(Dial Easy-to-Read)
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1763-6 
$12.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1762-8 
$12.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 1-3
We first met Oliver and Amanda Pig in 1979, and now, sixteen years later, their
family adventures are as fresh and funny as ever. A big snow transforms the out-
doors, turning the apple tree into "a crooked ghost," and it creates opportunities
for making snow forts, having a snowball fight with "bad guys," and building a
snow pig, which becomes riotously misshapen with Oliver and Amanda's addi-
tions. Older Oliver attacks the snow with gusto, performing all kinds of sledding
tricks; for smaller Amanda, the snow is more intimidating as she steps into deep
drifts, but when she realizes how much fun the falling-off-the-sled part of sledding
is, she goes "zooming and whizzing and spinning like tops down the big hill" with
her brother. Schweninger's illustrations depict a snowy world decorated with the
cheery colors of children's winter clothing and toys, and young readers will wish
they could bundle up and join Oliver and Amanda outside. SDL
VOETBERG, JULIE 
I Am a Home Schooler; illus. with photographs by Taasha
Owen. 
Whitman, 1995 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8075-3441-2 
$15.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-8075-3442-0 
$6.95 
Ad 
Gr. 1-3
Nine-year-old home-schooler Teigen gets up at seven, "just like kids who go to
regular schools," prays with her family, does animal chores in the barn, practices
her piano; then she starts her math, reading, English, and penmanship. By lunch-
time she is finished: "Maybe that's because I don't spend time changing class-
rooms, going to recess, or waiting for the teacher to help me." Thursday is "Co-op"
day, where Teigen meets with over one hundred other home-schooled children in
a church and goes to gym, history, and science. Writing in Teigen's voice, the
author is careful to address each of the potential objections to home schooling,
commenting on home-schooled children's test scores, social lives, and opportuni-
ties for study outside the home. A concluding note explains more of the reasons
for home schooling, and the types of families involved. Owen's hand-tinted pho-
tographs lend a distinctive air to the book, but most of the pictures appear over-
exposed as a result of the tinting, and the quality varies. This will satisfy the
curiosity children have about another way to learn, but seems calculated to per-
suade more than inform. SDL
VOGEL, CAROLE GARBUNY 
The Great Midwest Flood. Little, 1995 
32p 
illus.
with photographs
ISBN 0-316-90248-9 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
It's hard for a book on flooding to compete with flashier disaster works on storms,
earthquakes, and volcanoes because, as Vogel notes, "Tornadoes wreak havoc in
minutes. But [flooding is] a slow motion disaster." Nonetheless, she has pro-
duced a workmanlike account of the 1993 floods that crept and surged over the
floodplains of the Mississippi and its tributaries, causing loss of life and property.
Physical dynamics of flooding are explained in terms generally clear enough for
grade-school readers, and a diagram of levee erosion is particularly helpful. How-
ever, the tone varies from tense ("[St. Louis'] floating Burger King restaurant and
144 
* 
THE BULLETIN
World War II minesweeper slammed into the city's largest bridge and continued
onward") to drily confusing ("The distance between opposing bluffs on either side
of the Mississippi Valley averaged three to six miles from Davenport, Iowa, to the
Ohio River, a 493-mile stretch.") Upstream-downstream politics of flood control
are virtually ignored, and neither glossary nor index is provided; however, the ex-
pansive gallery of color photos of submerged landscapes and water-logged evacu-
ees is bound to draw browsers. EB
WEIDE, BRUCE 
There's a Wolf in the Classroom!; written by Bruce Weide and
Patricia Tucker. 
Carolrhoda, 1995 
56p 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-87614-939-5 
$16.13
Paper ed. ISBN 0-87614-958-1 
$8.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Bruce Weide and Patricia Tucker hold what for many children would be a dream
job: they house, train, and care for a young wolf, and they bring her to schools and
community centers for educational programs. Repeatedly explaining that their
wolf, Koani, is not a pet but a "teacher," they show that caring for her is a fulltime
job. Although the use of a wolf that walks on a leash, licks strangers' faces, and has
dog "friends" does not in fact speak in any scientific way to the debate over reintro-
ducing wolves into the wild, there's no doubt that Koani is an affecting spokeswolf
for her species. There's a calculated storyline and the writing is sometimes patron-
izing, but the book is more clear and informative than Ron Hirschi's When the
Wolves Return (BCCB 2/95) and offers the bonus of the many color photos of
Koani at work, play, and small-scaled mayhem. RS
WHEELER, CINDY 
Simple Signs; written and illus. by Cindy Wheeler. 
Viking,
1995 
32p
ISBN 0-670-86282-7 
$12.99 
Ad 
3-7 yrs
Pre- and primary-schoolers are introduced to twenty-eight everyday terms in Ameri-
can Sign Language, each of which has been selected for its interest among this age
group and for the ease of its execution. Each page features a single word, a rather
literal and pedestrian painting, and a sketched diagram of the appropriate hand
movement. What the volume lacks in pictorial panache, it makes up for in clarity
of ASL presentation. Not only are the diagrams easy to follow, each is accompa-
nied by a mnemonic "hint," e.g. "dog-pat your leg as if calling a dog." Scanty
vocabulary and the absence of connecting words and syntax rules limit the range of
the title's usefulness. Still, it offers an entree to ASL for youngsters not yet ready to
sign the alphabet and some insight into the rationale behind much of ASL for
older members of the audience. EB
WILSON, SARAH 
GoodZap, Little Grog; illus. by Susan Meddaugh. 
Candlewick,
1995 
[32p]
ISBN 1-56402-286-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Little Grog is a youthful humanoid living on an alien and vaguely prehistoric
planet: the androgynous child goes through his/her day encountering brontosau-
rus-like Giant Chiwangas, snake-like starfish called Day-stars, and playful reptil-
ian smibblets, all of whom seem as interested in romping as Grog is. Wilson's
nonsense-tinged poem traces Grog's day from wakeup call ("Zoodle oop, little
Grog,/ give a hug; stretch and yawn") through midday revels ("So trok with the
DECEMBER 1995 
* 
145
frullops/ and chase every sun./ Yoop dooz, little Grog./ Come have fun! Come
have fun!") to bedtime ("Now dream with the froozels/ and snuggle your feet./
Good zap, little Grog./ Go to sleep./ Go to sleep"). Wilson's quite good at keep-
ing the poetry simple and mood-appropriate, but the nonsense covers up a bland
and plotless story and the coinages don't have the joyous internal logic of a Carroll
or the eccentric grandeur of a Seuss. Meddaugh's line-and-watercolor illustrations
employ a light-hearted jellybean palette, a pleasing interplanetary sweep, and a
collection of imaginative figures (note the ooglets, clearly kin to Meddaugh's fa-
mous Martha, who keep chasing the flying glipneeps and generally getting into
trouble). Youngsters unwilling to forgo the nightly ritual but who are beginning
to find familiar bedtime stories a bit tame will appreciate this exotic but cozy ver-
sion. DS
WITTLINGER, ELLEN Noticing Paradise. Houghton, 1995 [192p]
ISBN 0-395-71646-2 $14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 7-10
Cat's family is cruising the Galapagos Islands through their good fortune at Cow-
Plop Bingo (it works just like it sounds); Noah is there, with his older half-brother,
because his playboy father has just dumped his mother for a younger woman.
With Cat being a rather serious sort and Noah something of a jock, it is as unlikely
to them as it is certain to readers that a great passion is in the offing. They take a
while to get there, though, with the course of true love impeded as well as im-
proved by the teens' discovery that there's a mystery aboard the M/VSantiago and
that the handsome tour guide Diego is involved in something of a shell game.
While the Islands and the shipboard setting provide a romantic and ecological
background for the love story, the mystery is limply concluded and several threads
about other passengers are left hanging. But Noah and Cat, narrating in turns, are
an engaging couple, sparky in argument and sweet in reconciliation. RS
WOOD, AUDREY, ad. 
The Rainbow Bridge: Inspired by a Chumash Tale; illus. by
Robert Florczak. 
Harcourt, 1995 
32p
ISBN 0-15-265475-5 
$16.00 
NR 
5-8 yrs
Excessive and self-important oil paintings provide Wood's unsourced retelling of a
Chumash creation myth with plenty of (unintentional) humor. The goddess Hutash
wants some company on her island home, so she creates humans; her husband, the
Milky Way, provides them with fire. In time, the island becomes overpopulated,
so Hutash makes a rainbow bridge so that some of the Chumash can move to the
mainland; those who fall off the bridge in passing become dolphins: "brothers and
sisters of their tribe." The story is undistinguished if inoffensive, but the pictures
are ludicrous, startlingly incongruous with the tone and nature of the text. Tech-
nically, they are impeccable, but the coloring is unrelievedly lurid and the photo-
realistic figures, Goddess and Chumash alike, are posed and draped in ways that
recall Hollywood hula-hula epics of the 1940s. RS
WOOLDRIDGE, CONNIE NORDHIELM, ad. 
Wicked Jack; illus. by Will
Hillenbrand. 
Holiday House, 1995 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1101-X 
$15.95 
R* 
5-8 yrs.
A lively adaptation of "Wicked John and the Devil" collected by Richard Chase
(and also by Zora Neale Hurston, according to the source note), this story-hour
146 
* THE BULLETIN
trump gets fresh visual energy from Hillenbrand's coal-smudged oil pastels, in
which Jack bears a telling resemblance to the devil he tricks. Jack is running short
of "folks to practice his meanness on," so he takes in and feeds an old man who
turns out to be St. Peter. Jack's reward is three wishes, which he selects somewhat
randomly: anyone sitting in his rocking chair will stick to it; anyone touching his
sledgehammer or thorn bush will stick to those as well. Naturally, the Devil's two
children and the Devil himself get stuck, so when Jack's time comes to die, they
refuse him entrance to hell after St. Peter says he doesn't qualify for heaven. Jack
is left to wander the swamp with a live coal ("You go start yourself a hell of your
own!"), the light from which some misguided people mistake for marsh gas.
Hillenbrand has a knack for being eerie without getting scary: there's enough
sunny yellow and white space to keep things cheerful, the bright red devil children
are too small to worry about, and the big one-with languorously half-lidded eyes,
a slightly dinosaurish tail, smoke billowing from both pointy ears-is downright
funny. On the other hand there's no demeaning cuteness here, and the purply-
green twilight scenes in the Great Dismal swamp sustain Wooldridge's respectful
balance of the familiar and the fantastic. A fine variant to pair with Brusca's The
Blacksmith and the Devils (BCCB 12/92) or Calhoun's Big Sixteen (12/83). BH
YOUNG, ED, ad. 
Donkey Trouble; ad. and illus. by Ed Young. 
Atheneum,
1995 
32p
ISBN 0-689-31854-5 
$16.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
Aesop's fable, often called The Man, the Boy and the Donkey, moves to the desert
in Young's retelling, but the basic story remains the same. An old man must sell
his donkey, but when he and his grandson take the animal to market they are
criticized by all they meet. Somebody has something to say if they both walk, both
ride, if the old man rides, or if the boy rides, and finally they take the advice of a
wise man: "Do you know what a heavy load you are to that poor animal? Carry
him a ways and you'll see." They end up losing the donkey, retaining only "the
wisdom that to prosper, they must follow their own hearts." Young captures the
vastness of the desert by setting cutouts of the people against the horizon with a
large sun moving across the sky, changing the light and colors. He uses pastels on
brown paper for a somewhat spooky, luminous effect, but showing the pair from
such a distance diminishes the reader's feeling for their conflict. With its dark
pages and somber tone, what often is a funny fable with a pithy moral becomes
overly weighty, but it may provoke discussion about making choices in the face of
contradictory opinions. SDL
DECEMBER 1995 
* 
147
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
Hopkins, Lee Bennett. Pauses: Autobiographical Reflections of 101 Creators of
Children's Books. HarperCollins, 1995. 233p. ISBN 0-06-024748-7. $23.00.
This is a compilation of Hopkins' interviews with authors and illustrators, con-
ducted primarily in the '60s and '70s. Each figure gets a paragraph of updated
biography and a two or three-page edited version of the interview; while topics
addressed vary, the interviews all tend to describe growing up, beginnings as a
children's author or illustrator, and the creative process. It's a broad range of
smatterings, and while the book isn't particularly surprising or enlightening, it
offers a generally pleasing visit with old friends (as the dates suggest, many of the
interviewees have since passed on and none of them are recent stars) and a few
intriguing tidbits (Munro Leaf and Dr. Seuss combined efforts on an army film
warning about the dangers of the malaria-carrying mosquitoes). The text is easy
and accessible, so it might also be profitable to share the collection with youngsters
particularly interested in authorship and illustration. An appendix listing winners
of major awards and an index are included. DS
MacDonald, Margaret Read. Bookplay: 101 Creative Themes to Share with Young
Children. Library Professional Publications, 1995. 225p. ISBN 0-208-02280-5.
$32.50.
The endlessly inventive MacDonald has returned with more suggestions for li-
brary programs for the younger patrons. She demonstrates an appealing combina-
tion of pragmatism and lack of inhibition, offering thematically linked sessions
ranging from whales to self-esteem involving finger plays, songs, readalouds, art
projects, and various other activities. Musical notation for songs, a bibliography
(cross-referenced to program numbers), and an index are included. DS
The Children's Book Council has asked us to announce the following:
"The Children's Book Council is currently at work on the next edition of Children's
Books: Awards e Prizes, with a projected publication date of September 1996. We
would be glad to consider information on new awards-U.S. and foreign-for
possible inclusion in this next edition. Awards should be for children's books
only, not to include other media, can be awards administered by adults or selected
by young people, and should be accolades given to authors or illustrators for a
specific book or body of work, but not service awards. Please note that we have
updated information for awards already appearing in the last edition, which in-
cluded awards through the spring of 1992. We are looking for information on
new awards created after that time. Please send information on the award itself
and its parameters, contact name and address, and list of winners since the award's
inception-no later than December 27, 1995-to: Children's Books Council/
A&P, ATTN: Gitta Raffelsbauer, 568 Broadway, Suite 404, New York, NY
10012."
148 
* THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
ADVENTURE STORIES: Bosse;
Burks; Carter; Jones; Myers
Africa, West-folklore: Medearis
African Americans: Cooper, M.;
Feelings; Hamilton
African Americans-fiction:
Bledsoe; Cameron; Mead
African Americans-stories:
Pinkney; Schertle
American Indians-fiction: Burks
American Indians-folklore: Pohrt
American Indians-stories: Wood
Archaeology: Garcia
Art and artists-fiction: Carey
Art: Feelings; Greenberg
Atomic bomb-stories: Kodama
BEDTIME STORIES: Wilson
Bicycling-fiction: Bledsoe
BIOGRAPHIES: Brooks;
Greenberg; San Souci
Brothers and sisters-fiction: Farrell
Brothers and sisters-stories: Van
Leeuwen
Brothers-fiction: McColley
Bullies: Cohen-Posey
Caribbean Islands-fiction: Gantos
Cats-fiction: Turner
Cats-stories: Rankin; Sanderson;
Sathre
Child abuse-fiction: Coman
Chimpanzees: Brassey
China-stories: Hong
Civil War: Beller
Cliques-fiction: Cooper, I.;
Fleischman
Clothing and dress-stories: Hong
Contests-fiction: Carey
Cousins-fiction: Carter
Coyotes-stories: Pohrt
Death-stories: Rosenberg
Disabilities-fiction: Farrell
Disasters: Vogel
Dogs-fiction: High
Dolphins-stories: Wood
Education: Voetberg
FABLES: Young
FANTASY: Jones; Myers; Turner
Farm life: Herrera; MacLachlan
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Sachs
Fathers and daughters-stories:
McGinnis
Fathers and sons: Garcia
Fishing-fiction: Carter
Fishing-stories: Valgardson
FOLKTALES AND
FAIRYTALES: Medearis;
Pohrt; Sanderson; Wooldridge
Food and eating-stories: Rankin
Friends-fiction: Cooper, I.;
Farrell; Hausman
FUNNY STORIES: Fleischman;
Taylor
Gal:apagos Islands-fiction:
Wittlinger
Gangs-fiction: Mead
Geese-stories: Schoenherr
GHOST STORIES: Garland;
Levy; Sachs
Grandfathers-fiction: High;
Turner
Grandfathers-stories: McMillan;
Valgardson
Grandmothers-stories: Feder
DECEMBER 1995 
* 
149
Guidance: Cohen-Posey;
McGinnis
Gulf War-fiction: Qualey
Hanukkah-stories: Adler; Schnur
HISTORICAL FICTION: Bosse;
Burks; Head
History, ancient: Brooks
History, U.S.: Beller; Cooper, M.;
Feelings; Guiberson; San Souci
Holocaust-stories: Adler; Feder;
Schnur
Horses: Meltzer; van der Linde
India-fiction: Bosse
Ireland-stories: Alexander
Island life-fiction: Gantos;
Morpurgo
Italy-folklore: Sanderson
Japan: Kodama
Jews-stories: Adler; Feder; Schnur
Kidnapping-fiction: Carey
Latinos-fiction: Mohr; Sachs
Latinos-stories: Herrera
Lighthouses: Guiberson
LOVE STORIES: Hall; Levy;
Wittlinger
Martial arts-stories: Pinkney
Mayans: Garcia
Mexico: Garcia
Mice-stories: Sathre
Mothers and sons-fiction: Coman
Moving-fiction: Mohr
Moving-stories: MacLachlan;
Ransom
Nature study: Brassey;
Schoenherr; Weide
New York City-fiction: Mohr
Panama Canal-fiction: Head
Pigs-stories: Van Leeuwen
POETRY: Lester; Updike; Wilson
Reading aloud: Cameron;
Hamilton; Pohrt
Reading, beginning: Van Leeuwen
Reading, easy: Bledsoe; Cameron;
Mohr
Reading, reluctant: Brassey;
Cooper, I.; Fleischman; Levy;
Taylor; van der Linde
Rivers: Vogel
Rural life-fiction: High; Moore
Rural life-stories: Ransom
School-fiction: Cooper, I.; Farrell
SCIENCE FICTION: Stearns
SHORT STORIES: Conrad; Gantos;
Hausman; Levy; Stearns
Sign language: Wheeler
Sisters-stories: McGinnis; Rosenberg
Slavery: Feelings
Sports-stories: Bledsoe
Story hour: Alexander; Hamilton;
Herrera; Hong; Medearis; Pinkney;
Rankin; Rosenberg; Sanderson; Sathre;
Schertle; Schoenherr; Wilson; Wood;
Wooldridge; Young
Survival-fiction: Carter
Toronto-fiction: Carey
Trolleys-stories: McMillan
Voyages and travel-fiction: Garland;
McColley; Wittlinger
War: Kodama
War-fiction: Bosse; Burks
Winter-stories: Van Leeuwen
Wolves: Weide
Women's studies: Brooks; Hamilton
World War II-stories: Kodama
*"A 
MUST-BUY FOR EVERY COLLECTION."*
Alexander, Who's Not
(Do you hear me? I mean it!)
e
)RST
ser
ruz
*"Alexander is back. This time he refuses to move 1000
miles away. . . .Youngsters will enjoy the range of feelings
here.... A terrific read-aloud ... "
-Starred, 
School Library Journal*
*"There's a rare combination here of farce and immediacy
and a wonderful empathy for the child's point of view."
-Starred, 
Booklist
"[Glasser's] black-and-white drawings comically capture real
events as well as those that occur only in Alexander's animat-
ed imagination. Facial expressions and body language are
right on target." 
-Publishers Weekly
$14.00/0-689-31958-4/Ages 5-8
ATHENEUM BOOKS FOR YOUNG READERS
An imprint of Simon & Schuster Children's Publishing Division
1230 Avenue of the Americas * New York, NY 10020
,#-I 
.
Is 
r
JUST MY
DAD&ME
by Leah Komaiko
Full-color pictures by Jeffrey Greene
"'I'm going to sea/Just my dad and me'
A young girl's dreams of being alone with
her father on this bright summer day are
quickly dashed when they are joined by
noisy carloads of relatives. Because they
won't disappear, she does, alone, on a most
imaginative, fanciful dive to the bottom
of the sea .... The story has a strong and
reassuring message for children about using
family as a safe base from which to explore
and return. Greene's photorealistic paintings
are rich and expansive, [expertly conveying]
the story's general exuberance."-SLJ
Ages 3-7. $15.95TR (0-06-024573-5)
$15.89LB (0-06-024574-3)
A Laura Geringer Book
it HarperCollinsChildren'Books
10 East 53rd Street, New York 10022
LIZ ROSENBERG
ILLUSTRATED BY JIM LAMARCHE
TWO SISTERS REMEMBER their mother telling them that
the carousel horses sleep all winter and wake in the spring.
Then one February twilight, the girls hear strange noises
coming from the carousel in the park. Peeking inside the carousel
canvas, the girls can't believe their eyes. Could it be that the horses
are whinnying . .. moving . .. clopping their hooves . . . alive?
A magical carousel, memories ofa mother's love, and the imaginations
of two sisters create a breathtaking tale of courage and adventure, a fantastic
story luminously illustrated with radiant paintings by Jim LaMarche.
Ages 4-8 * 0-15-200853-5 * $i6.oo
HACUT 
Cdde* 
ok
AV *
9)t
)oXvn the 9ioad
ice 
Csf 
ertle 
ILLUSTRATED BY C. 
B. 
L-ewus
Sometimes Hetty walked with Mama down the dusty road. Sometimes
she walked with Papa. But Hetty had never, ever been allowed down the
dusty road all by herself...
* "The story is remarkable for its evocative imagery, and the loving interchange
between the characters sets a charming tone. The words are perfectly comple-
mented by Lewis' dazzling, impressionistic watercolors that show the joyous
power of love and depict a warmly supportive world in which Hetty ventures forth
toward independence. A fine book that speaks straight to the heart." -Booklist
AGES 4-8 * 0-15-276622-7 * $S6.00 * BROWNDEER PRESS
HARCOURT 
Offlib-ciisBooks
BRACF
6mn beloved bunnies 
sc
mmo 
throuuh their second
ClassIc 1MreeK comeUayI
Max and Ruby's MIM>
ANOTHER GREEK MYTH
*"A hilarious story...full of child appeal....Once again
the bossy elder bunny attempts to shape up her impish
sibling hrough the power of my 
th s te 
teahing
him the folly of gluttony."-SLJ (Starred Review)
"Wells's pictures reveal the mischief of the small child
with magical power."-Booklist
"A droll narrative...typical of the rrepressible Max and
his clever creator. -Publishers Weekly
Full color. Ages 4-8. Tr. 0-8037-1782-2. $12.99
Lib. 0-8037-1783-0. $12.89
Also Available:
MAX AND RUBS FIRST GREEK MYH
Pandora's Box
k
L^l
1~
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.SA
RETURN POSTAGE GURANTED
SElsa, Star of the Shelter! 
*
* by Jacqueline Wilson * Illustrate
* 
Ten-year-old Elsa lives in England.
* She tells a lot of jokes and hopes to be a
Sbig star one day. She does her best to
Scheer up her family-but no one seems
* to laugh much anymore. Not since they
Slost their lovely house and had to move
* Into the Royal Hotel-a homeless shelter.
* 
Elsa has had enough trouble getting
along with her stepfather, Mack. Now that
.
they're crammed into one room together,
Salong with Elsa's mother, brother, and
Ssister, sparks are sure to fly.
Readers will cheer this rambunctious
Sand spirited heroine who saves the day
.
for both her family and the other shelter
r residents.
* 
Albert Whitman & Company
* 
Morton Grove, Illinois
** *** 
** ** ** **** * 
f* * 
*
SECOND CLASS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
il;d
t~i~·"
1 
;---·· 
·~ 
-
~- 
i- 
·
-
I; 
--- 
-
I··--· 
·
--- 
- ·--- 
·
Af 
.S
r
I~
** ..<* ; .
At 
$19
~··-"
