T H E
B U L L E T I N
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN’S BOOKS
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by The Johns Hopkins University Press
September 2012
Vol. 66   No. 1
2715 N. Charles Street • Baltimore, MD 21218 • 1.800.548.1784 • 410.516.6987 • www.press.jhu.edu/journals
The Bulletin of the  
Center for Children’s Books
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
Provides concise summaries and critical evaluations 
of current children’s books.
Published monthly (except August)
issn: 0008-9036 / e-issn: 1558-6766
Children’s literature*
R. H. W. Dillard, Editor-in-Chief 
Julie Pfeiffer and Michelle Ann Abate, Editors
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published annually
issn: 0092-8208 / e-issn: 1543-3374
Children’s literature 
assoCiation Quarterly*
Katharine Capshaw Smith, Editor
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published quarterly
issn: 0885-0429 / e-issn: 1553-1201
The lion and the uniCorn
A Critical Journal of Children’s Literature
David L. Russell, Karin E. Westman,  
and Naomi J. Wood, Editors
An international theme- and genre-centered  
journal committed to a serious, ongoing discussion  
of literature for children.
Published three times a year
issn: 0147-2593 / e-issn: 1080-6563
*Please direct inquiries and orders to the ChLA:  
www.childlitassn.org.
The Johns Hopkins University Press Journals in 
ChiLDreN’S LiterAture
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
September 2012
Vol. 66 No. 1
3 
 the BIg PICture
 
 Long Lankin  by Lindsey Barraclough
4 
 new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
5 
•  Growing Up Muslim: Understanding Islamic Beliefs and Practices  by 
Sumbul Ali-Karamali
10 • How Do You Feel?  written and illus. by Anthony Browne
47 • Liar & Spy  by Rebecca Stead
48 • The Raven Boys  by Maggie Stiefvater
50 •  Where Do Presidents Come From?: And Other Presidential Stuff of 
Super-Great Importance  written and illus. by Michael Townsend
57  ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons
58  suBjeCt And use Index
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R Recommended.
Ad Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR Not recommended.
SpC Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the  
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor (KQG)
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Claire Gross, Reviewer (CG)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
Hope Morrison, Reviewer (HM)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Melissa Funfsinn, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print or electronic $93.00; combined print & electronic $130.00; multiple in-
stitutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, $55.00; students, 
$20.00. In countries other than the United States, add $16.50 per subscription for postage; subscrib-
ers in Canada and Mexico add $11.99. Single copy rate: $10.00. Volumes available in microfilm from 
ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche 
from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be 
made payable to The Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Divi-
sion, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 
410-516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/
journals/advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2012 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image from LONG LANKIN. Text copyright (c) 2011 by Lindsey Barraclough. Front jacket 
photography copyright (c) 2012 by Christophe Dessaigne/Trevillion Images. Reproduced by permis-
sion of the publisher, Candlewick Press, Somerville, MA.
SepTemBer 2012 • 3
the BIg PICture
Long Lankin
by Lindsey Barraclough
Any storyteller knows that folklore is as rich with terrifying villains and creepy 
bad guys as it is with clever heroes and happy endings. Long Lankin, the titular 
baddie of a centuries-old British folk ballad, is one such monster, but while his tale 
is tellably rife with murder, witchcraft, and revenge, the story has been previously 
untapped as a source for novelistic adaptations. That changes here, as Barraclough 
pits this nightmarish creature against two resourceful but vulnerable little girls to 
create a stunningly atmospheric and genuinely horrifying story. 
It’s 1959, and sisters Cora and Mimi have been shipped off to an old family 
estate in the English countryside to stay under the care of a distant relative. About 
as welcoming as the gloomy, dilapidated rooms of Guerdon Hall itself, Aunt Ida is 
ready to return the girls to London almost as soon as they appear on her doorstep, 
but with the sisters’ mother institutionalized and their father incommunicado, the 
old woman is stuck with the girls for the time being. After making the acquain-
tance of a village boy, Cora begins to suspect that her aunt’s anxious demeanor has 
to do with an ancient legend regarding the Hall’s history, and an encounter with 
a ghostly woman and the grisly spirits of dozens of murdered children convinces 
Cora that she needs to get herself and Mimi out of the small town before the sisters 
meet a similar end. Escape quickly becomes a non-option, however, and Cora is 
forced to investigate the past of her extended family and find a way to defeat a 
centuries-old evil. 
Barraclough begins her adaption of the ballad with a splendidly developed 
setting; Guerdon Hall is entirely believable as a place where folklore would come 
to life. The stuffy, shadowy halls of the crumbling estate are vividly portrayed in 
cinematic prose, and the house soon becomes nearly suffocating with its menace. 
The surrounding town carries an air of desperation about it, as the residents at-
tempt to forge their way into the twentieth century even as they are haunted by 
the unpleasant details of their village’s past. The oppressive summer heat plays a 
part as well, creating a feeling of strained stillness, an eerie peace that is abruptly 
shattered with the arrival of Cora and her sister. 
The narration alternates between Cora, the village boy Roger, and Aunt 
Ida, a device that serves to echo the omnipresent gloom of the setting with Ida’s 
fraught voice while conveying a sense of vulnerability and innocence through the 
children’s perspective. Their everyday doings of dares and mischief seem to exist 
in a safe cocoon, escaping the sinister force that otherwise surrounds the kids, 
and the tension amps up considerably as the creepier elements come out to play. 
4 • The BulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
Before Long Lankin even make his appearance, Cora must contend with the afore-
mentioned murdered young ones, a ghost with a cautionary tale, a few demented 
townspeople, and adults who remain mysteriously mum on the town’s history of 
missing children. The presence of Long Lankin is at first only made evident by 
mysterious scratching sounds, a rotten smell near an old graveyard, and whispered 
rumors, but Barraclough fulfills on the book’s promise of true horror, giving read-
ers a spectacular scene in which the unfathomably evil villain appears sitting upon 
a throne of bones and brandishing sharp teeth and an appetite for young flesh. 
That image will sear itself into readers’ memories, and it’s not the only 
vivid horror the book offers. Like all the best scary stories, this will haunt readers 
well after the tale has been told, leaving teens who have long thought themselves 
too old for the bogeyman double-checking the locks on their doors. (See p. 7 for 
publication information.)
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor
Abdel-FAttAh, RAndA The Friendship Matchmaker. Walker, 2012 [192p]
ISBN 978-0-8027-2832-6 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-6
Lara Zany is the self-appointed Potts County Middle School’s Friendship Match-
maker, and her mission is to link lonely souls up with compatible types so that the 
social world of middle school runs smoothly. Part Jane Austen’s Emma and part 
Harriet the Spy, Lara keeps notes on the more troublesome cases, those she calls 
TLs, for Total Loners, so that she can try to help them overcome the obstacles that 
keep them from having friends. Basically, she advises fitting in, conforming to 
norms, and not drawing attention to yourself, dismissing admonitions to be true 
to yourself as adult nonsense. When a new girl, Emily, comes to school and begins 
to make friends without adhering to any of Lara’s principles, Lara is stymied. She 
challenges Emily to a contest that will prove who is better when it comes to match-
ing friends, and she finds out that maybe the rules aren’t so hard and fast after all. 
Lara’s narrative voice is fresh and funny in this Australian import, and the plot arc 
is both predictable enough and surprising enough to draw readers into her engag-
ing predicament. Her lists (in handwritten interpolations that add accessibility to 
the pages) will ring true with young tweens, particularly those whose first concern 
is figuring out the mysteries of peer dynamics, and her entrepreneurial ambitions 
add a contemporary dynamic to the age-old impulse to meddle in other people’s 
SepTemBer 2012 • 5
lives. The excerpts from her friendship manual will certainly encourage debate as 
to their validity, and they may even suggest some creative writing in response.  KC 
AdA, AlmA FloR Love, Amalia; written by Alma Flor Ada and Gabriel M. Zubi-
zarreta. Atheneum, 2012 [125p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2402-9 $14.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2404-3 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 5-7
For as long as she can remember, sixth-grader Amalia has spent every Friday after-
noon at Abuelita’s home, listening to her grandmother read aloud from her beloved 
box of letters and learning about their many distant relatives. When Abuelita passes 
away, Amalia’s home is flooded with family members she only knew from Abuelita’s 
stories, and they seem far too happy about being together given the circumstances. 
In time, and with the help of Abuelita’s box of letters, Amalia comes to peace with 
the loss of her grandmother and uses letter writing as a means of reaching out to 
those relatives she is just starting to know. This is a touching portrayal of love and 
loss, but unfortunately it leans heavily towards the sentimental. Abuelita’s life lessons 
are delivered to Amalia in heavy-handed speeches, and the subplot about Amalia’s 
friend Martha, who moves away, detracts from the family story. What’s effective is 
the careful structure: the opening chapters introduce Abuelita’s three adult children 
through stories, and, following her grandmother’s death, Amalia gets to know them 
in person for the first time. The emotions ring true, with Amalia’s raw pain of loss 
and resentment respectfully and vividly depicted. Those with a penchant for the 
dramatic will warm to Amalia’s experiences; there is also potential curricular use in 
promoting letter-writing both as therapy and a tool for building relationships.  HM
Ali-KARAmAli, Sumbul Growing Up Muslim: Understanding Islamic Beliefs and 
Practices. Delacorte, 2012 [224p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98977-3 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74095-1 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98340-5 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-9
With an appealing organizational approach, Ali-Karamali dives right in to the 
discussion of her faith, starting with the matters of food and dress and prayer rugs 
and fasting that are most likely to mark young Muslims as “other” among their 
Judeo-Christian agemates. Just beyond the religious debate over halal marshmallows 
and getting sleepy at school during Ramadan, though, lies a substantive introduc-
tion to the Five Pillars of Islam, around which Part I is subtly organized. Part II 
focuses on the Prophet Muhammad, the development and spread of Islam, and 
the foundational religious documents—the Qur’an, the Sunnah, and the Shariah. 
Part III discusses contemporary Muslim demographics, sorting through differences 
between sects that are regularly mentioned in the news, the relationship between 
Islam and Nation of Islam, and the differences between religious, cultural, and po-
litical practices within Muslim majority nations. Ali-Karamali, an Indian-American, 
clearly positions herself here as a devout and progressive Muslim, respectfully 
delineating other points of view and acknowledging their validity, but she draws a 
line at views on violence and oppression that she staunchly denotes as anti-Islamic. 
6 • The BulleTin
Chapter headings and an index allow readers to navigate easily toward any topic 
of personal interest, and Ali-Karamali’s conversational writing style makes this an 
accessible introduction for middle-schoolers to a somewhat complicated subject. 
Chapter notes and an extensive bibliography are also included.  EB
AndeRSon, Jodi lynn Tiger Lily. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 2012 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780-06-200325-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-211461-7 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 8-12
Living on the social edge of her village in Neverland and reared by an ambiguously 
gendered shaman, Tiger Lily may be a bit witchy herself. The loneliness that comes 
with her outsider status has instilled in her both fearlessness and wanderlust, a com-
bination that eventually drives her into the forbidden lands where Peter Pan lives. 
She and Peter approach each other warily, recognizing a common inner wildness, 
which soon turns to respect and a fierce love. Tiger Lily has other commitments, 
though, such as her engagement to a loathsome older man in repayment of a debt, 
while her adopted father—the aforementioned shaman, Tik Tok—requires her care 
after an event in the village leaves him emotionally devastated. All of this proves 
too much for Peter, so he pushes Tiger Lily away and falls for the simple, devoted 
Wendy, who satisfies some masculine longing in him that Tiger Lily always chal-
lenged with her strength and independence. Tiger Lily’s tale is told by Tinker Bell, 
who in this rendering is devoted to the girl and who struggles with her deep love for 
both Tiger Lily and Pan. The elements of the original tale are all present, but they 
are played out with subtle but credible twists in interpretation and focus. Though 
the book is suitable for younger readers, the suggestive allusions and penetrating 
insights into gender, aging, and colonization pay more sophisticated attention to 
the craft of adaptation by drawing out ideas latent in Barrie’s work. Unlike other 
sequels and revisions of Peter Pan, this is serious and moving; indeed, it stands up to 
comparison with Terry Pratchett’s Nation (BCCB 11/08) in its emotional intensity 
and ideological concerns.  KC
bAch, Shelby Of Giants and Ice. Simon, 2012 [352p] (Of Ever Afters)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3146-1 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3148-5 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
Sixth-grader Rory Landon has inherited none of her celebrity parents’ coolness, so 
she generally makes few friends whenever she transfers into yet another new school 
due to her actress mother’s filming schedule. Fighting a dragon, however, has a 
remarkable way of bringing people together, as Rory discovers when she helps slay 
a reptilian beast on her first day at the Ever After School and acquires a couple of 
close friends. The school—technically an after-school program—is a secret training 
academy for fairy-tale characters, preparing ordinary kids like Rory who are destined 
to be heroes in their own version of a famous story. Although Rory’s Tale is yet to 
be determined, she still gets to practice with a sword, attend the Fairie Market, and 
even accompany her friend Lena on Lena’s beanstalk-climbing and giant-slaying 
Tale—all while keeping the details of her new extracurricular activities from her 
overprotective mother. Although the start is a little slow, the book offers a thorough 
setup and substantial character development, establishing Rory as a girl who too 
SepTemBer 2012 • 7
often lets her desires take second place to those of her parents and who desperately 
needs to build an identity of her own. Action fans will be rewarded with spectacular 
sequences in the book’s latter half, featuring battles with snarky dwarves, fearsome 
baby dragons, and, as the title hints, a couple of giants. There’s a Potter-esque feel 
to Rory’s fate as the Destined One, and young female readers will be particularly 
pleased to see a girl in the role of the active heroine who determines exactly how 
her Tale will play out.  KQG
bARRAclough, lindSey Long Lankin. Candlewick, 2012 [464p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-5808-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-6108-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 7-10
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 3, for review.
bAueR, mARion dAne Dinosaur Thunder; illus. by Margaret Chodos-Ir-
vine. Scholastic, 2012 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-590-45296-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 5-7 yrs
While older brother Chad welcomes the pending thunderstorm with a dance 
around the living room, young Brannon runs off in fear. Different family members 
go after him in turn, each trying to help by offering a metaphor for the storm, 
but their suggestions only lead to Brannon imagining himself being chased by a 
“big cat purring,” at the center of “angels bowling in heaven,” and overwhelmed 
by “clouds bumping together.” Finally, Chad offers him a description that he can 
handle: “Don’t be scared . . . that thunder is only dinosaurs stomping around. 
And you know about dinosaurs.” Since Brannon loves dinosaurs, this metaphor 
helps him to appreciate the great big noisy storm in a whole new way, even joining 
his brother to “do the dinosaur thunder dance” after a particularly loud crash of 
thunder. This rainy-day picture book offers just the right balance of imagination, 
sound effects, and emotional development. Brannon’s fears are effectively detailed, 
and the dinosaur solution is both believable and sincere. Chodos-Irvine, known 
for her unusual printmaking techniques, here serves up a cast of blocky characters 
with touches of texture and color, using blank space as outline to lend a sense of 
dimension. This is a fine addition to rainy-day units as well as a comforting tale 
for family use and discussion.  HM
bicK, ilSA J. Shadows. Egmont, 2012 [528p] (The Ashes Trilogy)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-176-1 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-378-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 9-12
In this sequel to the nail-biting horror of Ashes (BCCB 10/11), Alex must face the 
hard truth that the supposedly good people of Rule, a small enclave of those who 
survived the electromagnetic pulse that killed much of the world’s population, are 
actually feeding the Changed (teenagers who have been transformed into mute 
cannibals by the same pulse). Elsewhere, Tom has recovered in the wilderness and 
searches for Alex as he tries to avoid the bounty hunters looking for the Spared; 
Peter is not so lucky, and ends up in the hands of Finn, whose sadistic experiments 
8 • The BulleTin
might have some utility if he weren’t bat-guano crazy. Meanwhile, Chris and Lena 
have also escaped Rule, but their path through Changed territory is threaded with 
danger. Bick amps up both the gore and the suspense in an already hair-raising, 
edgy thriller series, and her prose style has grown even richer, offering imagery that 
is disturbingly vivid and horrifically, perversely beautiful at times. She also deepens 
and complicates the motivational base by introducing a fraught history of inter-
generational conflict and corruption as well as the possibility that main characters, 
including Alex and Lena, are still vulnerable to having their status change from 
Spared to Changed. Readers should be warned to clear their calendars before they 
pick this up, because they won’t be doing much of anything else until they turn 
the last, cliff-hanging page.  KC
boeltS, mARibeth Happy Like Soccer; illus. by Lauren Castillo. Candlewick, 
2012 32p
ISBN 978-0-7636-4616-5 $15.99 
R 6-9 yrs
Nothing makes Sierra happier than playing soccer on her new suburban team, 
where the ball “spins on this spread-out sea of grass with no weeds, fields with no 
holes, and real goals, not two garbage cans shoved together.” Her only sadness is 
that her aunt, who always works on Saturdays, cannot attend the games. In fact, 
her aunt’s one opportunity to see her niece play ends in disappointment when the 
game is rained out; fortunately, Coach Marco schedules the makeup game on a 
Monday and at the lot in Sierra’s neighborhood, allowing Sierra’s auntie to finally 
come and cheer Sierra on. Sierra’s narrative voice is both strong and sincere, and 
readers will relate to her love of the game and her love for her aunt (seemingly 
her guardian). The end’s a little implausible, but that’s easily forgiveable since 
it ensures that Sierra gets her moment in the sun. Castillo’s illustrations boast a 
multicultural cast of characters (Sierra herself has dark skin and kinky black hair), 
set against contrasting backdrops of city neighborhood and suburban soccer field. 
Chunky black lines outline the watercolor figures, and a muted palette matches 
the understated tone of the story. What could have been a pedantic lesson in class 
contrast instead is a heartfelt and honest reminder that everyone needs fans on the 
sidelines once in a while.  HM
bRAcegiRdle, P. J. The Dead Family Diaz; illus. by Poly Bernatene. Dial, 
2012 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3326-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 6-9 yrs
So what do the dead themselves think of the Day of the Dead? According to this 
picture book about the skeletal Diaz family, they’re pretty pleased about it: “The 
Living are our friends,” says Mrs. Diaz, “and this is the one time each year every-
one gets together to celebrate.” Young Angelito Diaz is not so sure, since his sister 
Estrella keeps teasing him about the “big red tongues and bulging eyes” of the 
Living. When he gets separated from his family amid the festivities, he’s therefore 
relieved to make a buddy of another boy, Pablo, who joins him in his worry about 
them—until they simultaneously realize the truth about each other: “AAAAAAAH! 
YOU’RE ONE OF THEM!” It’s unsurprising but pleasing that the living boy 
and dead boy bond despite their difference (mostly over scaring the heck out of 
Estrella), but even that modest message is slightly satirical, and it never overtakes 
SepTemBer 2012 • 9
the sheer fun of the concept. Bracegirdle keeps the thematic jokes coming about 
the dead family and their day out, so kids will have plenty to snicker at throughout. 
Bernatene’s illustrations rejoice in spooky celebration; the digitally created art crams 
spreads full with the glowing fuchsia, teal, and orange palette of the holiday, creat-
ing compositional rhythm with the chalky white faces (skulls for the dead, skull 
masks for the living) and crisply patterned streamers of papel picado. The result is 
an enticing yet effectively balanced whirlwind of festive activity, carefully punctu-
ated by sparer scenes between the two kids, that’ll make youngsters yearn to party 
along with the holiday-makers. It’s nice to see a Day of the Dead book that finally 
gives Halloween a run for the spooky entertainment money. A brief note about 
the holiday is appended.  DS
bRodien-JoneS, chRiStine The Scorpions of Zahir; illus. by Kelly Murphy. Dela-
corte, 2012 [256p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90783-5 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73933-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89749-8 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys 
M Gr. 4-7
Though only eleven years old, Zagora Pym is determined to live the adventurous 
life of her archaeologist father. When Dr. Pym gets a message to meet his old col-
league Pitblade Yegen, who had been presumed dead, Zagora, her father, and her 
astronomy-obsessed brother, Duncan, are off to Morocco, where things are getting 
pretty strange indeed. The planet Nar Azrak is on a collision course with Earth—
with Morocco, to be specific—an event foretold by the long-lost Azimuth people 
after the Oryx Stone from their pyramid was stolen and a plague of scorpions was 
unleashed in their city, driving out both the Azimuth and the oryx that once thrived 
in the region. If Yegen’s dastardly cousin can be held at bay, and Zagora can trust a 
young woman from the surviving Azimuth, and the camels would cooperate, and 
Dad can be saved from his kidnappers, and Zagora’s uncanny gift of “desert sight” 
proves reliable, and Duncan can quit whining, then the stone might be restored 
and the Earth saved. It’s a tall order, but Brodien-Jones determinedly, if clumsily, 
orchestrates the action for a happy ending. Despite the number of plot points that 
lead from peril to triumph, not too much exciting really happens; mostly there’s 
lots of discussion about current peril and coming triumph. There’s always a shred of 
legend or a glyph on hand to explain requisite background, and even the climactic 
battle scenes suffer from stiff, contrived narration (“‘Hey, everybody, we can do 
this. . . . We’re smart and we’re tough, and we’re not scared of anything.’ The others 
stared back with resolute expressions”). Fantasy newbies who want an easy read 
with a feisty girl protagonist might give this a look, but this won’t hold a candle to 
the mythological mayhem of Riordan’s Kane Chronicles.  EB 
bRown, JenniFeR Perfect Escape. Little, 2012 364p
ISBN 978-0-316-18557-8 $17.99 
R Gr. 7-10
When Kendra and her brother, Grayson, were kids, Grayson’s need to follow rou-
tines and count rocks and coins that he placed in perfect alignment seemed merely 
quirky; now, however, he clearly has a severe and sometimes unmanageable case of 
OCD, he’s in and out of hospitals, and Kendra feels that his condition has taken 
over her life as well. The pressure to be the perfect sister is overwhelming, and it 
10 • The BulleTin
leads her to become involved in a cheating ring rather than admit that she isn’t the 
straight-A, straight-edge person she thinks her parents need her to be. With her 
future about to unravel, and her brother clearly not getting any better, she decides 
to take Grayson and drive west from Missouri to California, hoping that seeing an 
old friend—and Grayson’s ex—might restore some sort of sanity to their lives. The 
roadtrip brings revelations, but not necessarily the ones she hoped for. The stark 
honesty of Kendra’s feelings about living with a brother with a mental illness will 
touch readers, but it is Grayson’s responses that really set this apart as an unflinching 
and heartbreaking portrayal of the complexities of such a relationship. Their love 
for each other is as fierce as their jealousy, anger, guilt, and grief over having to live 
with circumstances they simply can’t control or make better. Kendra’s choices are 
unbelievably ill conceived, and yet they drive both her and Grayson to the necessary 
breaking point from which they can ultimately begin to heal.  KC
bRowne, Anthony How Do You Feel?; written and illus. by Anthony 
Browne. Candlewick, 2012 24p
ISBN 978-0-7636-5862-5 $14.99 
R* 3-6 yrs
The adorable overalls-clad chimp Browne previously featured in I Like Books and 
Things I Like here catalogs a range of emotions and states of being, including stan-
dards such as happy, sad, angry, sleepy, and hungry, along with slightly more complex 
feelings of boredom, guilt, and confidence. Opposites are frequently paired (“I can 
feel CONFIDENT. . . but I can also feel shy”), which may aid young listeners in 
comprehending the meaning of the various terms. The streamlined but striking 
watercolor and gouache paintings add dimension to the meanings: “Well, sometimes 
I feel bored” partners with a pale, featureless spread with monochromatic figures, our 
protagonist standing with eyes closed and arms crossed as a small pile of discarded 
toys sits in a corner; “Sometimes I feel lonely” shows the chimp, now reduced to a 
very small size and posed with hands clasped together uncomfortably, against a sea 
of blank white space. The clean simplicity of the book’s design and concepts make 
this very accessible for a young audience, while the richer subtleties of the illustra-
tions and the conversational tone will provoke plenty of worthwhile discussion. 
This will be a useful and attractive addition to curricular studies of feelings, as well 
as a handy tool for parents and an enjoyable selection for library storytimes.  JH
buRg, ShAnA Laugh with the Moon. Delacorte, 2012 [256p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90469-8 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73471-4 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98568-3 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 7-10
Less than a year after losing her mother, thirteen-year-old Clare finds herself on a 
plane to Malawi alongside her father for a several-month stay, and she is none too 
happy about it. What appears at first to be teenage petulance is in fact deep-seated 
resentment that her father appears to have recovered from Clare’s mother’s death, 
and Clare cannot forgive him for moving on. While attending school, Clare finds 
herself particularly drawn to Memory, a girl who, like Clare, has lost her mother. 
More sadness comes to Memory’s family, though, after her younger brother falls 
ill while on a trip with the girls and dies in the very hospital where Clare’s father is 
working, Clare must come to terms with death once again. The novel is strongest in 
SepTemBer 2012 • 11
its presentation of loss and mourning; Clare’s emotions in dealing with her mother 
are raw (her mother often appears and speaks to her in dreamlike sequences), and 
the additional loss of Innocent brings many of those feelings back. Unfortunately, 
the story spends too much time developing Clare as a whiny, privileged American 
for the sole purpose of bringing her around by the novel’s end, and the trajectory is 
both didactic and predictable. Still, Clare eventually becomes a likable protagonist, 
and readers may enjoy experiencing her growth in the richly detailed Malawian 
setting. An author’s note is included.  HM
buRleigh, RobeRt George Bellows: Painter with a Punch!; illus. by George Bellows 
and with photographs. Abrams, 2012 40p
ISBN 978-1-4197-0166-5 $18.95 
R Gr. 3-6
“Is this strange? An artist here, in a smelly, grungy saloon? Shouldn’t an artist search 
for beautiful things to paint?” Fortunately for middle-grade children being nudged 
toward biography reading, early twentieth-century painter George Bellows looked 
for inspiration in just the kinds of ordinary, even seedy, places kids might want to 
tag along to, and Burleigh is an enthusiastic and adept tour guide through Bellows’s 
New York milieu. Crisp reproductions coordinate closely with the text, so readers 
will easily connect the “bright-eyed, confident, cocky children [Bellows] passes 
along the way” with the image of “Frankie, the Organ Boy” or to understand that 
the “Blue Morning” painting of workers on the new Pennsylvania Station demon-
strated how “like all New Yorkers, George is fascinated by the many construction 
sites, which are busy day and night.” Present-tense narration ushers children briskly 
through the text with a pacing they are more accustomed to find in fiction; gener-
ous font and leading size enhances accessibility. Children reluctant to look much 
farther afield than Mike Venezia’s Getting to Know series for art history should 
be delighted with this field trip, which is bound to take them places their genteel 
teachers probably never will. Source notes, bibliography, index, illustration credits, 
and a state-by-state list of museums displaying Bellows’ work are included.  EB
cAlhoun, diA Eva of the Farm; illus. by Kate Slater. Atheneum, 2012 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-1700-7 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-1702-1 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 5-7
Twelve-year-old Eva (Evangeline) loves her life on the family orchard in Washington 
State, loves her baby brother Achilles, and loves to write poetry. Indeed, writing 
poetry is Eva’s way of making sense of her world, as she writes about how much 
she misses her grandmother and her former best friend, Chloe, and how she wor-
ries that her family will lose their farm that, to her, is utterly magical. This last 
worry is not an idle one, as a events soon put Eva’s family in dire financial straits. 
However, Eva’s poetry, a newfound adult friend, and Eva’s own strength bolster her 
through this difficult time, and although the story ends with the farm’s ownership 
still in limbo, there is a feeling of hope and possibility as well. Calhoun writes Eva’s 
story in ragged-right-margin prose, with Eva’s many poems tuned a bit tighter and 
printed in italics to differentiate them from the main narrative. The poetic voice 
of the narrative generally works well, and some of Eva’s poems are lovely in their 
simplicity (“Sit/ in the pure snow./ Fall/ on your back. Swish/ arms up and down./ 
Make/ a snow angel./ Do/ it again./ Fill/ the orchard with angels./ Watch/ them 
12 • The BulleTin
rise from the snow./ Send/ them flying to Achilles”). Others are a bit overwrought, 
even for an imaginative twelve-year-old, and Eva’s melodramatic artistic nature 
slips into the histrionic at times. Calhoun deftly handles Eva’s relationships with 
her parents, her brother, and her former BFF, however, rendering them realistic in 
their complexity and intensity. The potentially hopeful but ultimately unresolved 
ending is also refreshing, and kids who have also faced financial uncertainty may 
especially relate to Eva’s family’s plight.  JH
cAlonitA, Jen Belles. Poppy/Little, 2012 352p
ISBN 978-0-316-09113-8 $17.99 
R Gr. 7-10
Since her mother died a few years ago, fifteen-year-old Izzie and her grandmother 
have been taking care of each other; and Izzie feels loved and supported in their 
close-knit beachside town despite their lack of ready cash. When Grams’ declining 
health forces Izzie’s social worker to place Izzie with an estranged uncle, however, 
Izzie suddenly has a new life in a ritzy nearby neighborhood, and since her uncle is 
running for office, Izzie is publicly painted as a poster child of her uncle’s charity, a 
Cinderella story of rags to riches. While the mean girls (including her cousin, Mira) 
at her posh new school are sweet to her face, they do everything they can to keep 
her at arm’s length; then Brayden, the queen bee’s long-time boyfriend, becomes 
interested in Izzie, and the gloves come off and the girls move into active sabotage 
mode. Izzie is a well-developed, sympathetic character; she’s a stalwart survivor, 
keeping a level head despite her sudden immersion in a scene where you never 
wear the same $700 dress twice. Mira is also well drawn as a conflicted teen who 
has been ensnared too early into the social drama of the politically well-connected, 
and who as a result can’t quite figure out how to be moral, loyal, and savvy all at 
the same time. Calonita does a masterful job of depicting the conflict of worlds 
between the classes, showing them both at their best and worst, though she does 
lean a little on the side of the boardwalk crowd rather than the country clubbers. 
Fans of Sarah Dessen and Abby McDonald will enjoy the enveloping realism of 
the emotions and the scene-setting as Izzie and Mira work out what it means to 
be friends as well as family.  KC  
cARteR, RAchel So Close to You. HarperTeen, 2012 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-208105-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-208107-0 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 7-10
At seventeen, Lydia Bentley knows she’s too old to keep buying into her grandfather’s 
crackpot theories about the Montauk Project, but she still finds herself humoring 
the old man, maybe because he insists that the decades-past disappearance of his 
own father is linked to the project’s rumored dabblings in time travel. When she 
joins Grandpa for one of his weekly hikes through the state park to search for evi-
dence of a secret underground government laboratory, she stumbles into a portal 
that transports her to 1944, the year her great-grandfather went missing. Joined 
by Wes, an enigmatic boy who may or may not be working for the Project, Lydia 
attempts to find a way to save her soon-to-be-gone relative but realizes that messing 
with time means messing with her own future and perhaps her very existence. The 
time-travel element is effectively constructed, as Carter builds on some of the more 
basic rumors surrounding the true-life Project Montauk, name-drops a few historical 
SepTemBer 2012 • 13
figures including Nikolas Tesla, and offers several jargon-free (albeit pseudoscience-
full) explanations of how the travel would actually work. The romance between 
Wes and Lydia is disappointingly less believable, as her sudden infatuation goes 
against Lydia’s practical nature, nor is it plausible that lab-raised Wes, used to a life 
of control and order, easily risks his life for a pretty girl. Still, the 1940s setting is 
rife with period detail from USO dances to air-raid drills to rationed pantyhose, 
while a cliffhanger ending leaves an opening for future installments; fans will want 
to prepare accordingly for further travels on the time-space continuum.  KQG
cARteR, Scott williAm Wooden Bones. Simon, 2012 [160p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2751-8 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2753-2 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 4-6
In this sequel to Collodi’s Pinocchio, young Pino (Pinocchio) and his father, the 
woodcarver Geppetto, try vainly to keep a low profile after Pino’s amazing trans-
formation from a wooden puppet into a flesh-and-blood boy. Desperate people 
soon start showing up at their door, however, begging Geppetto to create and then 
“bring to life” wooden versions of their departed family members, as they believe 
Geppetto did with Pino. When Pino himself tries to recreate Geppetto’s dead wife, 
Antoinette, the result is deeply disturbing: though Pino actually can animate his 
wooden figures, they are only alive in the sense that the wooden creations are able 
to move independently, and the mute but mobile “Antoinette” thoroughly alarms 
the village. From that moment on, Geppetto and Pino are on the run from people 
who are both frightened of and hungry for Pino’s “life”-giving powers, and Pino 
and his father must face wolves, a strange race of tree-dwelling people, and folks 
who turn on the pair when Pino refuses to use his abilities to serve them. Carter’s 
plotting is taut and quick-paced, and his characters and the situations they face 
(the tree-dwellers are particularly intriguing) are fresh and original. He especially 
excels at building and maintaining a slightly ominous atmosphere: “The puppet’s 
mouth moved up and down, creaking as it swiveled on its hinges, but no other 
sound came out. Outside thunder boomed repeatedly across the valley, sounding 
to Pino much like a mallet pounding on a hollow log.” However, the ending, in 
which Pino and Geppetto escape onto a ship, feels somewhat rushed and unsat-
isfying, and a key concluding development—Pino (who was, intriguingly, slowly 
returning to his wooden form as he exercised his magical power) suddenly and 
completely becomes human again after a last-ditch animation of an army of wooden 
creatures—is random and inexplicable. Still, this is a compelling and unusual read, 
and even the kids who don’t normally touch reworkings of classic stories may find 
Pino’s creepy-edged story fascinating.  JH
clementS, AndRew About Average; illus. by Mark Elliott. Atheneum, 
2012 [128p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4169-9724-5 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4169-9726-9 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 4-7
Sixth-grader Jordan Johnston longs to be really good at something, so she starts 
keeping a “Things I’m Great At” list. When the list gets into the hands of bully 
Marlea, Jordan is humiliated and furious. Rather than report the incident to the 
14 • The BulleTin
guidance counselor, Jordan decides on a daring strategy: to attack Marlea with 
“industrial-strength niceness” at every turn. Taking place over a single school day, 
the story is largely told from Jordan’s perspective, with additional contributions 
from Jordan’s teacher and a local radio weatherman. The weather story and Jordan’s 
tale eventually meet in a climax that has a tornado striking the school’s gymnasium 
and Jordan saving the day. This slim novel is packed with thoughtful observations 
about bullying, but many of these perceptions feel more adult-driven than child-
centered, and the tornado is too obviously a device that gives Jordan an opportunity 
to shine. This may well evoke some discussion in classrooms, however, and it could 
appeal to readers drawn to stories of personal growth.  HM
czeKAJ, JeF Oink-A-Doodle-Moo; written and illus. by Jef Czekaj. Balzer + 
Bray, 2012 32p
ISBN 978-0-06-206011-2 $16.99 
R 4-6 yrs
“Psst,” the pig on a farm tells the rooster, “I have a secret.” The pig’s secret is “Oink,” 
which the rooster passes on to the cow as “Oink-a-doodle-doo. Pass it on.” The 
cow, of course, throws a “moo” on the end of that when relaying it to the frog, and 
so on, until the cat asks the dog, “Are you sure you’re ready?” before launching 
into the now-lengthy litany: “Hee-haw-oink-baa-quack-caw-ribbit-hiss-neigh-
meow-moo-hoo-squeak.” Is it any wonder the dog gulps nervously when told to 
“pass it on”?  He tries to tell it to the pig (“Oink-a . . . Um, uh . . . Ribbit-quack 
. . . hiss-something-something moo”) but soon confesses, “I can’t do it,” to which 
the pig responds, “Don’t worry . . . we’ll just start over!” Yes, this is a pretty much 
a one-note joke extended into picture-book length, but it’s one that young kids 
will heartily enjoy, and the ever-upping ante of animal sounds will both amuse and 
challenge them. Czekaj’s cartoonist skills are evident here, as the illustrations—with 
their flat colors, black outlines, and slightly exaggerated animals—have a definite 
comic sensibility. The simple compositions, dynamic posed animals, bright colors, 
and large word bubbles will make this as successful with larger groups as it will be 
with an audience of a few. Possible uses abound, from putting it into the line-up of 
a farm-themed storytime, to introducing kids to the listening/memory challenge of 
the game “Telephone,” to a possible transformation into an introductory readers’ 
theater performance or puppet show.  JH
dowell, FRAnceS o’RoARK The Second Life of Abigail Walker. Atheneum, 
2012 [240p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-0593-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-0595-0 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-7
“Sixth grade is no time to go off on your own, pretending like having friends didn’t 
matter.” Which is why Abby, lost after her best friend moved away, resignedly pan-
ders to Kristen the bully until one day she can’t take it any more and openly disagrees 
with her, immediately becomes the designated target of Kristen and her henchgirls. 
It’s not all bad, however: Abby, having suffered her most feared consequence, starts 
taking more chances. She makes new friends in school and she becomes close with a 
family on the edge of town that’s struggling with its own problems. Dowell remains 
one of our preeminent observers of young girls negotiating growth and change, 
and her attention to preadolescent dynamics remains keen and perceptive; she 
SepTemBer 2012 • 15
varies effectively between clearly articulating some hard-won concepts (“It wasn’t 
fair that Abby had to pretend things were nice all the time”) and leaving others 
tacit (Abby’s new school friends are all comfortably outsiders themselves). Abby’s 
growing relationship with the farm family works effectively to demonstrate that 
there’s more going on in the world than the concerns of a couple of mean eleven-
year-olds. The presence of a fox, whose viewpoint the book occasionally follows, 
and whose acknowledged role is that of story catalyst, offers a slightly supernatural 
element, but this is really the tale of a girl’s working her way through a paradigm 
shift about daily life. It’s refreshing to see a literary solution that’s not beating or 
reforming the mean girls but instead expanding your world so they don’t matter, 
and Abby’s openness to new possibilities could certainly inspire discussion.  DS
FAlconeR, iAn Olivia and the Fairy Princesses; written and illus. by Ian Fal-
coner. Atheneum, 2012 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5027-1 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5028-8 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 5-7 yrs
Olivia can’t understand it—why do all the other little girls want to dress up like 
princesses all the time? When her mother reminds Olivia that just last year she, 
too, wanted to be a princess ballerina for Halloween, Olivia counters that “that was 
when I was little. I’m trying to develop a more stark, modern style,” as Falconer 
depicts her dressed in a stretchy charcoal tube, trying out multiple poses à la Martha 
Graham’s Lamentation. Even bedtime stories remind Olivia of the popularity of 
princesses, and as sleep eludes her she tries to imagine alternate future occupations, 
such as nurse (“I could use my brothers to practice bandaging. And various other 
treatments,” she muses while imagining herself holding a hypodermic needle as her 
near-mummified brothers look on). Finally, in typical Olivia style, she decides to 
go straight to the top of the power chain: “I want to be queen.” While the plot is a 
bit loose, independent-minded Olivia continues to be an endearing and distinctive 
heroine, and many a kid (and adult) weary of Barbie-pink fluff will find Olivia’s 
perspective refreshing. The pastel mint and ballerina-pink cover design may appeal 
to the very sensibilities Olivia is eschewing, and the hordes of piglets clad in rosy 
tutus are actually quite adorable, but confident Olivia pictorially makes a strong 
case for striped ensembles and primary hues as she attractively poses in Falconer’s 
charcoal and gouache illustrations. This is a helpful reassurance that there are enjoy-
able alternatives to pink princesses for imaginative play and dressup possibilities.  JH
FARiSh, teRRy The Good Braider. Cavendish, 2012 222p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7614-6267-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7614-6268-2 $17.99 
R Gr. 9-12
It’s 1999, and Viola, walking along a seemingly quiet road in war-torn southern 
Sudan, witnesses the senseless murder of a young man by a soldier who then rapes 
her. Such an event shames her family, so Viola her mother, and her younger brother 
make their way out of the country in a long process, which involves a UN airlift, 
miles of dangerous roads, and several years in Cairo (where her younger brother dies 
of dysentery) before they obtain the papers they need to get to Portland, Maine. 
Once in America, Viola and her mother must navigate the unfamiliar waters of 
American culture, a process fraught with trouble for Viola as she struggles with 
16 • The BulleTin
what is clearly PTSD and her mother resorts to abuse in an attempt to restrict her 
daughter to traditional ways. Viola’s narration, in spare ragged-right text, power-
fully conveys the horrors of her experiences in Sudan and her confusion in her new 
home. While the first part of the book offers more situational drama, the second 
part offers a fascinating glimpse of the experience of contemporary refugees living 
in America. Throughout the novel, Viola is largely alone in making sense of her 
experiences, and her isolation is poignantly depicted. The extensive imagery and 
detailed language make this an excellent choice for a high-school readaloud as well 
as a strong offering for readers with an interest in global understanding and current 
events. An historical note is included.  HM
FeARing, mARK Earthling!; written and illus. by Mark Fearing. Chronicle, 
2012 248p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-8118-7106-8 $22.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4521-0906-0 $12.99 
R Gr. 4-6
When Bud boards the bus for his first day at his new school, he’s nervous; when 
he realizes that said bus is filled with aliens, has launched into space, and is headed 
for Cosmos Academy, he’s downright terrified. As it turns out, however, the “best 
school in the galaxy” functions pretty much like any other middle school, and as 
long as Bud keeps his origins under wraps by pretending to be a benevolent Tenar-
ian, instead of a hated Earthling, he should be able to avoid trouble until he can get 
home. Unfortunately, his attempt to back to Earth by hijacking a spaceship does 
draw attention, but he has plenty of help in the alien forms of his new buddies, the 
whip-smart Gort, a multi-tentacled janitor, and a kind—if a bit slimy—teacher. 
Fearing’s sci-fi-lite graphic novel is a charming addition to the recent boom of mad-
cap space journeys in graphic-novel format (Hatke’s Zita the Spacegirl, BCCB 1/11, 
etc.). A bright palette, bold lines, and a plethora of fascinating creatures make the 
illustrations a pleasure to view, and they add a fair amount of clever visual humor 
as well. The straightforward storyline and uncluttered panels make this particularly 
useful for students just getting into graphic novels, but even veteran comic readers 
will find plenty to giggle over here.  KQG
Fleming, cAndAce On the Day I Died. Schwartz & Wade, 2012 [208p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96781-8 $19.99
Trade. Ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96781-1 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89863-1 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
Mike Kowalski figures his parents will forgive his broken curfew if he takes the 
time to give a ride to a girl in distress who flags him down on the road. The classic 
vanishing-hitchhiker setup naturally leads Mike to the graveyard, where a host of 
ghosts who died in their teens cajole Mike into staying to hear their stories. The nine 
tales cover more than a century, from the mirror that devoured a snobby sister and 
her jealous twin at the Columbian Exhibition of 1893, to a young photographer 
who fatally disturbed the ghosts of inmates in the ruins of an insane asylum in 
2012. While the chronology skips around, the intensity of the stories builds subtly, 
just as an evening’s worth of ghost stories should. Attaching the stories to sites in 
the Chicagoland area adds an aura of veracity, and the historical periods are often 
cleverly pertinent to the tales, especially the setting of a 1930s funeral home and 
SepTemBer 2012 • 17
the hood ornament from hell in a 1980s junkyard in northwest Indiana. Fleming’s 
closing notes on each tale are as involving as the stories themselves, commenting on 
the sources (some specific, some inspirational) for each. Graduates of San Souci’s 
Dare to Be Scared series will welcome this fresh title, as will teachers looking for 
middle-school readalouds for the run up to Halloween.  EB
Fox, mem Two Little Monkeys; illus. by Jill Barton. Beach Lane/Simon, 
2012 32p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4169-8687-4 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3577-3 $12.99 
Ad 3-5 yrs
In this lilting rhyming story, playful monkeys Cheeky and Chee hear something 
prowling in the tall grass and eventually decide to take cover in the “big old tree” 
nearby. Which turns out to be a good thing, since there’s a leopard lurking at the 
base. The monkeys, deciding to put even more distance between them and the 
leopard, then bravely leap to another tree where they revel in their safety (and in 
the tree’s tasty fruit). The meter of the short lines is catchy, and the simian antics 
will appeal to youngsters. The repetition, with all the lines ending in “ee” to rhyme 
with “Chee,” rapidly grows tiresome, though, and it’s not clear why the nearby big 
tree that was the first safe place turns out not to be safe enough. Pale blues, greens, 
and tans dominate the pencil and watercolor illustrations, while Cheeky and Chee 
are depicted as identical gray and white monkeys with expressive features and use-
ful hands and feet; touches of humor, such as a monkey covering his own eyes to 
“hide” from the leopard, add cuddly charm. Listeners may appreciate the playful 
mood of these two little monkeys, and they’ll certainly celebrate a safe escape and 
a tasty snack.  HM
gARSee, JeAnnine The Unquiet. Bloomsbury, 2012 [400p]
ISBN 978-1-59990-723-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 8-12
With her bipolar disorder seemingly under control, sixteen-year-old Rinn Jacobs is 
looking forward to a fresh start as a “normal” girl at her new school. She discovers, 
however, that moving with her mother back to Mom’s old hometown comes with its 
own set of emotional baggage: the house they’re living in most recently belonged to 
a suicidal old lady, the hot guy across the street is the son of her mother’s cheating 
high-school ex-boyfriend, and Mom herself is acting all kinds of weird, forgetting 
to monitor Rinn’s meds and snapping at the slightest infraction. Meanwhile, Rinn 
finds herself strangely drawn to the swimming pool at her new school, the site of 
the tragic drowning accident twenty years ago that has given rise to the town’s most 
notorious ghost story. A séance gone awry leaves Rinn questioning her sanity, but 
when her friends start dying, she’s certain that the voices she’s hearing this time 
are real. The focus here lies much more on the chill factor than any sort of cred-
ible character or plot development, and Garsee sets a spine-tingling, creepy stage 
of shadowy hallways and disembodied voices; supporting players, however, are 
straight from central casting, including the bitchy queen bee, the poor, rejected fat 
girl, and the hunky, wholesome farmboy. Rinn herself seems to be merely a vessel 
through which the story is told, with even her bipolar condition an overconvenient 
device. Nonetheless, Annaliese, the ghost of the drowned girl, is deliciously wicked, 
and there’s something perennially appealing about vengeful ghosts. Just be ready 
to answer questions about your own local haunts after this one circulates.  KQG
18 • The BulleTin
ghoulStone, RotteRly Undead Ed; illus. by Nigel Baines. Razorbill, 
2012 [224p]
ISBN 978-1-59514-531-4 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 3-5
A failed birthday party is one thing, but waking up dead and being attacked by his 
detached (and now apparently sentient) left arm is an all-time low for loser Ed Bagley 
on the day he turns thirteen. Newly zombified and stinking to high heaven, Ed is 
soon befriended by Max Moon, a werewolf who guides him through the rotting 
underworld of Ed’s former hometown, Mortlake, helping the deceased boy escape 
hungry ghouls (who resemble fat babies with very sharp teeth) and introducing 
Ed to Evil Clive and his gang of other undead beings, including various vampires, 
werewolves, ghosts, etc. With their help, Ed tracks down his renegade arm, exorcises 
the demonic clown spirit that has possessed it, and sends the clown and his fellow 
murderous buddies packing—at least until the promised next book. The plot is 
slight and often illogical, with the humor more hopeful than successful at times; 
nonetheless, the book’s gross-out antics combine with wide leading, large type, 
and plenty of pictures to make this an easy sell to reluctant readers. Ghoulstone, 
aka British author Nigel Baines, includes a fair amount of British slang that will 
require some explaining, but savvier readers might be able to glean their meanings 
from context. Black and white cartoonish illustrations feature the round-eyed, 
slightly chubby Ed in various states of decay and dominate half of the pages while 
the remaining spot art is heavy on the blood, guts, and gore. Enthusiasts of rot and 
decay will find plenty to “eeeww” over here.  KQG
goeglein, t. m. Cold Fury. Putnam, 2012 [320p]
ISBN 978-0-399-25720-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
Sara Jane Rispoli is about to have her naïve faith in her family ripped right out from 
under her. She begins to suspect something is amiss when her beloved uncle Buddy 
starts acting belligerently towards her father, and when, at her grandfather’s funeral, 
a cluster of dark-suited men all need to have a private word with Dad. All doubt is 
gone when she arrives home one evening to find the place tossed, her parents and 
brother gone, a cryptic video left behind, and a bogus policewoman hot on her 
tail. Sara Jane gets a short breather while hiding out with her boxing mentor, but 
if she’s to find her family, she has to actively pursue a trail of clues that lead her to 
a hidden room beneath the family bakery and a black book that contains the real 
family secret—instructions on how to run daily operations of the Chicago mob. 
The chase is on, as Sara Jane careens through the underside of the city, popping 
through “Capone doors” in historic buildings, diving into temporary safe houses, 
and closing in on her family’s captors, all while learning about her own odd inherited 
ability to muster and direct her anger to manipulate her adversaries. Teens who 
think all the really butt-kickin’ literary heroines currently hang out on the fantasy 
shelves have not met Sara Jane Rispoli. By the end of this first adventure, she’s up 
to her neck in her family’s line of mob politics and there’s no turning back—and 
that will suit her newly won fans just fine.  EB
SepTemBer 2012 • 19
goodmAn, SuSAn e. It’s a Dog’s Life: How Man’s Best Friend Sees, Hears, and Smells 
the World; illus. by David Slonim. Roaring Brook, 2012 [32p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-448-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-6
Who knows what Fido knows? Well, Fido does, or, in this case, Joe, the scruffy 
canine narrator of this factual overview of canine life, knows, and he’s willing to 
tell. In breezy and readable style he explains the long relationship between humans 
and dogs, a relationship that started with a crucial human thought: “Ah, a garbage 
disposal that doubles as a watchdog.” The book’s main focus is doggy perception and 
behavior, offering facts about the human/dog difference (“Humans have 5 million 
special cells in their noses that detect smells. The average dog has about 220 mil-
lion”) and canine expressions (there’s a “Woof/English dictionary”) and answering 
a few quirky questions (“Why do dogs like to roll in gross stuff?”), concluding with 
a quick roundup of additional information. The sprightly and conversational ap-
proach manages to be energetic without being cheesy, and the information is simply 
and, save for a couple of vague spots, clearly conveyed. Slonim’s cheerfully cartoony 
watercolors marry playfulness with information; his mutts pose for diagrams, chat 
in speech balloons, and model behaviors, and illustrative captions are often amus-
ing as well as educational. With its goofy, informative charm, this has potential 
for readers hurried or reluctant as well as simply dog-loving, and it’ll make a good 
advance from Calmenson’s May I Pet Your Dog? (BCCB 6/07) and George’s How 
to Talk to Your Dog (BCCB 4/00). A brief bibliography of books, both fictional and 
nonfictional, adult’s and children’s, about dogs is appended.  DS
gRegoRy, PhiliPPA Changeling. Simon Pulse, 2012 [272p] (Order of 
Darkness)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5344-9 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5346-3 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys 
M Gr. 8-10
Italy in 1453 is rife with superstition, and seventeen-year-old Luca Vero has been 
charged by the Church with the task of investigating reports of supernatural phe-
nomena in an effort to stop the spread of heresy and darkness across Europe. His 
first assignment is a nunnery just north of Rome, where the residents are expe-
riencing strange visions along with mysterious wounds. Isolde (also seventeen) is 
the convent’s recently appointed abbess, and her arrival marked the beginnings of 
the strange occurrences, leading most of the nuns to believe that Isolde is a witch 
responsible for the current crisis. Luca is not so sure, however, particularly after 
meeting and bonding with the beautiful Lady Abbess, and he and his traveling 
companions set out to clear her name. This first YA title by adult author Gregory 
is largely unshaped, haphazardly bringing two plot lines together in a predictable 
and wholly unoriginal outing. The dialogue is often at odds with both the histori-
cal setting and various characters’ motivations, with Isolde and her female servant 
Ishraq particularly contradictory as they go on long lectures about the equality of 
the sexes all while waiting for the nearest guy to save them. Isolde and Luca pur-
port to be the heroes here but are disappointingly bland; fortunately, Ishraq and 
Luca’s companion Freize offer a bit of levity and comedic relief in what is overall 
a misfire by the well-known author. Point readers looking for a well-developed, 
slightly supernatural take on historical fiction to Robin LaFever’s recent Grave Mercy 
(BCCB 4/12) instead.  KQG
20 • The BulleTin
hAineS, KAthRyn milleR The Girl Is Trouble. Roaring Brook, 2012 [336p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-610-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-10
Readers of Haines’s The Girl Is Murder (BCCB 7/11) just knew Iris Anderson would 
be back—not only had her gumshoe father virtually promised to introduce her to 
the trade, but she was left with genuine reason to doubt the claim that her mother’s 
suicide was the result of depression. Now, as the U.S. has fully entered the second 
World War, Iris is faced with a pair of thematically connected mysteries: first, who 
is sending anti-Semitic threats to Jewish students in her high school; second, how 
did Iris’ Jewish mother come to die in a hotel room in a notoriously nationalistic 
German part of New York? Again, fifteen-year-old Iris is notably rash as both an 
investigator and a daughter, thinking nothing of lying through her teeth to come 
and go as she pleases, drinking and smoking to impress a guy, and waltzing into 
danger with nary a plan. It’s this bratty heedlessness, though, that accounts for 
much of the appeal of this blossoming series, as Iris steps into the role of the an-
tithesis to Nancy Drew, the girl detective whom she openly scorns. The gravity of 
the revelation of Mrs. Anderson’s murder makes the nasty shenanigans in the high 
school seem somewhat trivial by comparison, but the two plot threads in tandem 
offer fans historical insight as well as a nicely crafted mystery.  EB
hARPeR, chARiSe meRicle Wedgieman: A Hero Is Born; illus. by Bob Shea. Ran-
dom House, 2012 [48p] (Step Into Reading)
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-97058-0 $11.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-307-93071-2 $3.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 1-3
This new superhero may sound like the successor to Captain Underpants, but that 
wasn’t his original plan. As this origin story explains, he was actually born Veg-
giebaby (“He wasn’t scared of vegetables, no matter what they looked like”), and 
grew from Veggieboy into Veggieman. When he saved a boy stuck in a tree, the 
rejoicing children, misreading the stick-amended V on his chest, cheered their new 
hero, “Wedgieman,” who confirmed the rightness of his new title by adjusting his 
uncomfortable costume. Harper is a master of tersely humorous sentences, and she 
displays that talent to good effect in this easy reader, broadly winking at the reader 
with the satiric over-the-top advocacy for vegetables while keeping the text spare 
and accessible. There’s both a retro flair and a faint touch of South Park to Shea’s 
digital illustrations, which rely strongly on flat, geometric graphics in a palette that 
emphasizes (naturally) veggie green. With its cheerfully irreverent approach, this is 
both helpfully formulaic and wittily inclusive, a combination that will be welcome 
to youngsters who watch at a much higher sophistication level than they read.  DS
hARtmAn, RAchel Seraphina. Random House, 2012 [480p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96656-9 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86656-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89658-3 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 7-10
A gift for music isn’t the only legacy Seraphina’s long-dead dragon mother left to 
her; the sixteen-year-old girl also inherited a ring of telltale scales and a psychic 
connection to other human-dragon half-breeds. In the kingdom of Goredd, where 
SepTemBer 2012 • 21
the tentative peace between human and dragons strains under fear and prejudice, 
Seraphina’s heritage could very well get her killed by either the bigoted humans 
who would view her with disgust or the coldly rational, emotionless dragons who 
would take her existence as an affront to scientific reason. Thus far, she’s been able 
to keep her reptilian side a secret, but the task becomes more difficult when she 
finds herself ensnared in a political plot after a prince is murdered and a dragon is 
blamed. The medieval-esque world, filled with saints and dragons, is as deftly crafted 
as the characters themselves; Goredd has a distinct history, fraught with struggle 
and survival, and its residents reflect the conflicting ideologies that and traditions 
that inform their world. Seraphina’s voice—passionate, wry, and wise—easily con-
veys her internal battle as a half-breed: the nonchalance of her self-loathing makes 
her struggle for identity even more heartbreaking. Secondary characters are given 
just as much nuance, and the romance between Seraphina and a bastard prince 
proceeds with believable hesitation and wariness, given the complications it will 
bring to both their lives. That romance is eventually put aside in this installment, 
but readers will want to plan to return to this richly developed world to see where 
this intricate fantasy goes next.  KQG
heSSe, KARen Safekeeping; written and illus. with photographs by Karen 
Hesse. Feiwel, 2012 [304p]
ISBN 978-1-250-01134-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
When news arrives that the president has been assassinated, seventeen-year-old 
Radley, who’s been volunteering at an orphanage in Haiti, hops a plane back to the 
States out of worry for her parents. Upon landing in New Hampshire, she finds 
that her cell and credit cards don’t work and that she’s forbidden to cross state lines 
without papers; she walks home to Vermont, dumpster-diving for food and hiding 
from passing vehicles, only to discover her family home empty, with no hint of 
where her parents may have gone. She keeps walking, heading north to Canada, on 
the road meeting up with Celia, a wounded young woman who reluctantly accepts 
Radley’s companionship. After days of grueling travel and a harrowing border-jump 
into Canada, they make a home together out of an abandoned schoolhouse and wait 
to see what happens next. Hesse keeps the reader in suspense about the state of the 
country by means of Radley’s limited perspective, doling out nuggets of informa-
tion about the American People’s Party, its rise to power, and the post-assassination 
riots; these rare glimpses make a sometimes frustratingly vague backdrop to Radley’s 
story, but the survival elements are still compelling. The realistic treatment of the 
experiences of ordinary people in suddenly harsh circumstances makes for an ab-
sorbing character study, and the tale is suffused with an understated sadness and a 
vivid sense of place. The book is punctuated with black and white snapshots that 
play with light, shadow, and distance, effectively capture the forested isolation of 
the road and the beauty and simplicity that coexists with fear in this new life.  CG
hoole, eliSSA JAnine Kiss the Morning Star. Cavendish, 2012 226p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7614-6269-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7614-6271-2 $9.99 
Ad Gr. 9-12
Inspired by Kerouac’s Dharma Bums, best friends Anna and Kat embark on a road 
trip that is equal parts Horner’s A Love Story Starring My Dead Best Friend (BCCB 
22 • The BulleTin
6/10) and Bray’s Going Bovine (BCCB 11/09). With no real objective except to 
cement their friendship and find God (in the nonreligious, beat-poet sense of the 
concept), they pursue a list of metaphorical destinations: old people, church, nature, 
drugs, meditation, etc. Cementing their friendship is complicated by the fact that 
they’re also falling for each other, which is particularly confusing since neither of 
them really identifies as gay. Anna in particular is happy to remain undefined (both 
“lesbian” and “bisexual” have political connotations she feels divorced from), and 
her observations on the fluidity of her own identity are thought-provoking. The 
road trip itself, though, is improbably eventful, veering from harassment and rob-
bery to an ill-fated attempt to join a mission to Mexico (church and old people: 
check) to hitchhiking with some free-spirited band groupies to backpacking in the 
wilderness, complete with bear attack (nature: check). Through it all both girls 
are trying to figure out how to build a meaningful future for themselves in which 
they can pursue their dreams (Kat’s an artist, Anna a writer) without selling out. 
This is pure Kerouac tribute, all wacky encounters and frenetic revelations and 
self-conscious (bordering on pretentious) narration; each chapter also begins with a 
Kerouac quote. The book’s contrived plotting and slightly distant characterizations 
leaves little for non-Beats to latch on to, but nascent Kerouac fans will eat it up.  CG
hooSe, PhilliP Moonbird: A Year on the Wind with the Great Survivor B95. Far-
rar, 2012 [160p] illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-374-30468-3 $21.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 5-9
The rufa red knot “has to be among the toughest four ounces of life in the world.” 
The tiny shorebird chows down several times its weight in mussels during the warm 
months of the Patagonian “winter,” then begins its nine-thousand-mile marathon 
flight to its breeding ground near Hudson Bay, making several rest and refueling 
stops along the way and arriving just in time for warming weather in the far North. 
Then it’s nine thousand return miles, a few months of R & R, and time to hit the 
road—well, sky—again. The red knot leg-tagged as B95 is the reigning champion 
among these avian athletes, at least eighteen years old at the time of Hoose’s 2010 
investigation and still going strong. Hoose reviews the known data about the rufa 
red knots’ flight paths and stopovers and combines it with information about B95 
sightings to imagine how the diminutive creature weathers the brutal flight year 
after year after year. Not only does B95 survive storms and predators, but he also 
seems impervious to the forces (particularly tourism at feeding sites and over-
harvesting of horseshoe crabs, whose eggs provide a vital source of nourishment) 
that are diminishing the population to the point of getting the birds on many 
endangered species lists. Putting an actual beaked face to the problem of animal 
endangerment makes the story of the species’ peril all the more compelling, and only 
the truly hard of heart could resist cheering for B95 to make it through one more 
trip. Each chapter, which traces a leg of the round trip journey, features a wealth 
of photographs (color in the bound book) and a profile of a scientist, advocate, or 
guardian of the rufa red knot’s cause. Source notes, a bibliography, and an index 
are included. (Psst. B95 was sighted at Reeds Beach in May of this year, but keep 
that spoiler to yourself and let readers Google their own way to an update.)  EB
SepTemBer 2012 • 23
hoRvAth, Polly One Year in Coal Harbor. Schwartz & Wade, 2012 [224p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96970-6 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86970-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98536-2 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
At the end of Everything on a Waffle (BCCB 3/01), Primrose Squarp was joyfully 
reunited with her parents, who had been missing at sea for a year. Now she’s back 
in her happy home but still close with Evie and Burt, her affectionate foster parents, 
and she’s delighted when another foster child, a boy named Ked, is placed with 
them. She and the kindly but taciturn Ked become good friends, with Primrose 
determined to save him from whatever ill-fortune landed him in foster care. That 
relationship anchors her days as she attempts to further the romance between her 
uncle Jack and Miss Bowzer, who runs the restaurant that serves everything on a 
waffle, and as she joins the protest against logging on nearby Mendolay Mountain. 
After hoping so hard that Ked will be able to stay, she’s absolutely devastated when 
Ked suddenly leaves their small Canadian fishing town and returns to his abusive 
father. Horvath again brings Coal Harbor to vivid life through Primrose’s sharp-
eyed and wittily judgmental narration, yet underneath the coolly observant tone 
remains a preteen who makes heartfelt connections and yearns for happiness for 
those she loves. That last is her main challenge here, in fact; as a kid who herself has 
been the person in need, she’s keenly aware of the experience (“It is human nature 
to secretly suspect that the things that happen to people are really their own fault 
in some way”) and now deeply intent on protecting others from pain (“I can’t help 
thinking I can save the things I love with the force of my feelings”). While it nearly 
breaks her heart to learn that she can’t, the author allows Primrose to discover this 
fact but also to enjoy an ending of fairy-tale satisfaction. Peppered with the same 
kind of homey, eccentrically editorialized recipes as the first book, this is a satisfying 
followup course to the Newbery Honor entree.  DS
JAden, deniSe Never Enough. Simon Pulse, 2012 [400p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2907-9 $9.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2908-6 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
Loann huddles in her pretty, popular sister Claire’s shadow, trying to avoid the 
stinging jabs of Claire’s friends. It’s her own friends who turn on her, though, when 
an unfortunate lunchtime incident ends up embarrassing one of Loann’s crew. The 
fallout is devastating for Loann when her former BFF reveals to the whole school 
her crush on her sister’s boyfriend, Josh, but Loann finds a new friend in Marcus, 
who gives her mixed signals but appreciates her dry wit. All is not as peachy as it 
seems in her sister’s world, however, and it slowly dawns on Loann that Claire is 
descending into an eating disorder; her attempts to approach her sister, though, 
are complicated by their changing relationships—and by Loann’s sex with Josh. 
Although much of the conflict focuses on Claire’s eating disorder, this is really 
Loann’s book; she has to learn to balance her love for her sister with her jealousy, 
when to push and when to back down, and who she might be other than a poor 
substitute for her sister. Her relationship with Marcus is key to her maturing pro-
cess; like Claire, he has a potentially life-threatening problem that requires delicate 
handling, and it is through their relationship that Loann acquires the wisdom and 
24 • The BulleTin
courage to confront her family’s dysfunction. With well-developed complications 
and the convincing realism of daily life—Loann gets a job, struggles with classes, 
and develops her talent for photography while she’s trying to sort out her social 
and emotional field—this novel ably leads readers through a rocky terrain of con-
temporary teen problems.  KC
Kelley, Ann Lost Girls. Little, 2012 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-09062-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-20178-0 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-9
Bonnie MacDonald, who lives in Thailand while her father serves in the Vietnam 
War, pursues a normal course of activities with her military-brat buddies, and now 
her group is off on a camping trip to a nearby island with a glamorous but inept 
chaperone. The boat breaks down, the girls are dumped on an island regarded as 
taboo by the locals, a storm kicks up and promptly takes one life, and if you’re 
familiar with the genre of survival stories, you can pretty well guess the rest. Nar-
rator Bonnie, age fourteen, is level-headed, while another girl has a great outdoor 
skills set, and yet another rises imaginatively to any crisis. Despite the flightiness 
of the younger campers, the laziness of the older campers, and the alcohol-and 
drug-induced stupor of the chaperone, this core threesome handily makes the 
survival-story rounds of hunting and gathering, building huts and fires, and 
husbanding supplies right up to the moment of death or rescue. Trope-intensive 
plotting notwithstanding, the novel has a lot to offer girls who feel short-changed 
by the adventure story genre; they will particularly appreciate the central cast of 
girls who prove as hardy and ingenious as any male fictional counterpart. Kelley 
generally treats the situation with pragmatism rather than pessimism, but you do 
have to marvel at her slightly sadistic irony in naming the girls’ scouting organiza-
tion the Amelia Earhart Cadets.  EB
KePhARt, beth Small Damages. Philomel, 2012 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-399-25748-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 10-12
Reeling from the death of her father, Kenzie is bitterly convinced that her mother 
is determined to erase all memories of him. When Kenzie becomes pregnant, her 
mother and boyfriend attempt to persude her to terminate the pregnancy, but 
she resists, feeling that the baby is a part of her father. Her mother calls on some 
contacts in Spain, finding a place for Kenzie to stay for the duration of her preg-
nancy as well as adoptive parents for the child; Kenzie is then whisked away from 
her plans for spending a last summer with friends at the beach to an unfamiliar, 
starkly beautiful landscape where she is surrounded by people who, while not 
unfriendly, are taciturn and gruff, bearing the scars of tragic pasts. Kephart always 
walks the line where verbal artistry meets story; here she tips decidedly toward the 
artistry side, creating a lush and loving portrait of the life, people, and foods of 
Spain, with Kenzie’s presence there and her dilemma of an unplanned pregnancy 
clearly secondary in importance. Kenzie’s situation leaves her steeped in loss and 
isolation, but in contrast she is surrounded by men who rear bulls for fights in 
Madrid, gypsies who fill the summer evenings with haunting music, and a fiercely 
sensitive elderly cook who was thwarted in love by a wartime separation. The pace 
SepTemBer 2012 • 25
is languid, laden with sophisticated symbolism and exotic detailing that require, 
and fortunately repay, patient reading. Armchair travelers who find their yearnings 
for romance satisfied in place rather than story arc will appreciate the subtlety of 
Kephart’s homage to a country she loves.  KC
KeyeS, moRgAn Darkbeast. McElderry, 2012 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4205-4 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4207-8 $9.99 
R Gr. 4-7
Each child born in Duodecia is bound to a darkbeast, a creature that takes away 
their so-called bad emotions, like anger and fear, and helps them obey and mature. 
Unlike other children, however, Keara has come to love her darkbeast, Caw, and 
when she is instructed to kill the raven on her twelfth nameday (children must slay 
their darkbeasts as a rite of passage), Keara refuses and flees her family home. That 
act of rebellion has the Inquisitors hot on her trail, but she manages to find refuge 
by disguising herself among a group of traveling actors; unfortunately, when the 
troupe puts on a controversial play, Keara once again must escape with Kaw. The 
book’s unusual premise is sure to draw readers, and the intriguing, medieval-esque 
world with just a touch of magic will both entrance fans of fantasy and satisfy those 
who prefer their stories more grounded in reality. Keara’s dilemma will feel familiar 
to readers who have struggled to hold onto the security of childhood, who have 
failed to meet the expectations of grownups, or who are bewildered by the actions 
of people they trust—in other words, everyone. The plot suffers from a few logical 
missteps, particularly in the seemingly wise troupe leader’s continuous stoking of 
the Inquisitors’ ire, but mostly this is a thoughtful, magical tale with a message that 
kids on the cusp of adulthood will find comforting.  KQG
KinKAid, S. J. Insignia. Tegen/HarperCollins, 2012 [464p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-209299-1 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-209301-1 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 7-10
World War III has been outsourced to Mars; fought by machines between two mas-
sive conglomerates of nations and allied corporations, it’s a war with no direct human 
cost, a mere game with political consequences agreed upon by all the players. As 
the machines get bigger and better, they require human operators to interface with 
them, and only teens have the “neural elasticity” to make the connection. Enter Tom, 
a gaming prodigy whose father’s anticorporate conspiracy theories and alcoholism 
have left him homeless and desperate. After he’s recruited into the fighting program 
and implanted with a neural processor, he discovers his unique ability to interface 
with servers he shouldn’t be able to access, which leads to secret duels (in the virtual 
simulation environment) and an odd almost-friendship with the legendary enemy 
fighter Medusa. The exposition is a bit clumsy, and the secondary characters (which 
include amiable roommate Vik, mercenary hot girl Heather, and prickly hacker girl 
Wyatt) are relatively stock. The political commentary—an indictment of monopoly 
capitalism, corporate-backed politics, and news as entertainment—is far from 
subtle, but it creates a compelling backdrop of corruption and surveillance against 
which Tom’s personal drama of loyalty, brainwashing, resistance, and friendship 
unfolds, setting the stage for larger-scale upheavals in future series volumes. Tom’s 
longing for family and significance add a relatable human dimension to the story. 
26 • The BulleTin
Incorporating elements of both Ender’s Game and Feed (BCCB 11/02), this novel 
should appeal strongly to genre fans—after all, who wouldn’t want to see massive 
robots battling it out on Mars?  CG
KnudSen, michelle Big Mean Mike; illus. by Scott Magoon. Candlewick, 
2012 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-4990-6 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 5-8 yrs
With his combat boots, collar spikes, and pointy claws, Big Mean Mike is one 
tough dog. He is therefore appalled by the adorable fuzzy bunnies that have taken 
up residence in his muscle car. The cute creatures threaten Mike’s bad boy reputa-
tion, particularly when they accompany Mike to a monster truck show, but by that 
point Mike’s heart is already softening (“Gosh, you guys are cute”). In fact, when 
confronted by some fellow toughs after the show, he stands up for his newfound 
friendship:  “I can hang out with whoever I want! I like these bunnies. They know 
how to have a good time. And they’re adorable! Any of you got a problem with 
that?” Knudsen’s oddball friendship story is immensely appealing, and the humorous 
combination of Mike’s tough-guy trappings with adorable, fuzzy bunnies ensures 
that this will reach a wide swath of the juvenile population. While the involving 
storytelling and clear illustrations make this a natural readaloud choice, the straight-
forward vocabulary and short, direct sentence structure make this accessible for 
young solo readers as well. Magoon’s digitally created illustrations feature saturated, 
slightly smoky colors, black outlines, and strong compositions, and the contrast 
between the toothy, heavy-browed Big Mean Mike and the smudgy, rosy-cheeked, 
white bunnies is both striking and hilarious. A parting scene in which the bunnies, 
clad in cool black shades, cruise around with Mike in his flame-emblazoned purple 
muscle car is particularly rib-tickling. It’s rare to find a book that will appeal to 
both the lovers of monster trucks and the kids who go into raptures at the sight of 
a fuzzy little critter; this is that book.  JH
KnutSSon, cAtheRine Shadows Cast by Stars. Atheneum, 2012 456p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-0191-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-0193-8 $9.99 
Ad Gr. 7-10
Magical realism meets dystopia in this intriguing debut novel set in a future Canada 
decimated by a seemingly unstoppable plague. Cass and her twin Paul are Métis, 
descended from aboriginal Canadians and early European settlers, and both have the 
rare ability to perceive the spirit world. With aboriginal blood in demand for its re-
sistance to the plague, Cass and Paul flee the technologically advanced mainland for 
the Island, a sovereign territory protected by a treaty between the North American 
government and the remaining coalitions of First Nations peoples on the continent. 
It’s also home base for a guerrilla resistance movement to which Paul quickly signs 
on, while Cass struggles with the restrictions of her new community (which has its 
own forms of tyranny and exclusion), finds a place as the apprentice to a medicine 
woman who helps her gain control over her spiritual powers, and forges a romance 
with the son of the Island’s missing leader. For a book about the end of the world, 
this takes a surprisingly quiet approach, focusing its evocative prose and dreamlike 
atmosphere on Cass’ internal journey and her evolving understanding of the spirit 
world. Unfortunately, this leaves the world-building, character development, and 
SepTemBer 2012 • 27
macro-plot all underdeveloped, adding up to a story that is frustratingly vague and 
meandering, with conflicts and characters whose importance is asserted but never 
felt. Cass is nevertheless a unique addition to the dystopian heroine roster, while 
the futuristic extrapolation of First Nations exploitation and resistance makes for 
a compelling sociopolitical backdrop; the blend of mysticism with technological 
advancement will have appeal for both fantasy and sci-fi fans.  CG
KoeRtge, Ron Lies, Knives, and Girls in Red Dresses; illus. by Andrea Dezso. Can-
dlewick, 2012 [96p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-4406-2 $19.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
In sharp, ironic, and often darkly funny free verse, Koertge reimagines twenty-three 
well-known fairy tales, from “Bluebeard” to “Thumbelina” to “Goldilocks and the 
Three Bears”, in free-verse poetry whose verse paragraphs hover between fragmented 
prose and poetry. Like others who have pursued this project before him, he draws 
out the repressed, unvoiced sides of the stories. The boy who exposed the naked-
ness of the emperor tires of being right when everyone around him objects, and he 
concedes the point by adopting his own set of invisible clothes; Hansel and Gretel’s 
appetite for revenge isn’t fully sated on the witch, so they turn their attention to 
their weak-willed father; the tale of Little Thumb has entirely the wrong moral. 
Koertge keeps his ironic lens focused on preadolescent concerns, such as the lust 
for excitement regardless of danger, the fecklessness of parents, the casual cruelty of 
revenge, the malaise of happily ever after. The accompanying illustrations—digital 
silhouettes of skeletons, princesses, ogres, dismembered limbs, children in cages, 
and woodcutters, some dripping with gore—are a shade more grisly than the poems 
themselves, extending their meaning through evocative tableaus of key scenes and 
providing inspiration for art and storytelling projects. The poems would also make 
good scripts for readers’ theater or savory choices for reading aloud, and the book 
would make a splendid companion to Strauss’ Trail of Stones (BCCB 4/90).  KC
KRAegel, Kenneth King Arthur’s Very Great Grandson; written and illus. by Ken-
neth Kraegel. Candlewick, 2012 34p
ISBN 978-0-7636-5311-8 $15.99 
R 5-8 yrs
“Henry Alfred Grummorson was the great-great-great-great-great-great-great-
grandson of King Arthur,” and in true Arthurian style he arises on his sixth birthday, 
saddles up Knuckles (his “trusty donkey”), and heads for the hills to face the resident 
dragon. The dragon tries to challenge Henry with his impressive smoke rings, but 
Henry wants a proper fight, dagnabbit, so the dragon refers him to the Cyclops 
in the mountains. Unfortunately, the Cyclops is equally unimpressive, as are the 
griffin and the leviathan that Henry subsequently searches out. One would think 
the boy would be disappointed to come up empty on his first quest for glory, but 
in fact, Henry kind of likes his new friends and he figures he’s actually done pretty 
well just to face the monsters at all: “To his knowledge, not even the great King 
Arthur had accomplished as much in his first two days as a six-year-old.” There’s 
an appropriately folkloric pattern to Henry’s quest, and the surprising outcome of 
his search for a battle partner is humorously satisfying. Henry’s dashingly defiant, 
archaic dialogue is equally comical, making this a pleasure to read aloud. Kraegel’s 
line and watercolor illustrations feature a diminutive, helmet-clad Henry relentlessly 
28 • The BulleTin
pressing onward, sword extended, against the four not-so-fearsome creatures. While 
the figures are generally rendered with an almost naïve simplicity, details of the 
monsters’ appearance (the feathers and fur of the griffin, the scales of the dragon) 
and the geographical backgrounds are intricately detailed; the sea is particularly 
arresting as the multiple currents and waves look like a thorny tangle of branches 
in subtly varying hues of blue. Pair this with any number of amusing tales about 
knights (such as Wojtowycz’s Elephant Joe, Brave Knight!, reviewed below), or with 
a more traditional chivalrous tale for an interesting literary contrast.  JH
lAchenmeyeR, nAthAniel The Boo! Book; illus. by Nicoletta Ceccoli. Atheneum, 
2012 40p
ISBN 978-1-4169-3513-1 $17.99 
R 5-7 yrs
According to Lachenmeyer, it’s not only buildings that can be haunted—apparently 
ghosts can dwell in the pages of a book as well. He presents helpful instructions on 
ghost detection and appropriate handling: “Never say anything uncomplimentary 
about ghosts in the presence of a haunted book” or read a haunted book “on the 
anniversary of the day the ghost first took up residence in the book” (otherwise 
you’ll get “sucked up into the book”). It is also crucial to regularly pay some atten-
tion to the haunted book so that the ghost doesn’t become bored and leave—the 
last page turn depicts just such an incident, with a large pop-up ghost departing 
a home, suitcase in hand. Lachenmeyer’s imaginative text is both straightforward 
and lyrical, keeping the haunting more spookily magical than scary. It’s Ceccoli’s 
impressive and intricate illustrations, however, that truly bring this book to ethereal 
life. Using “a combination of plasticine puppets, digital photography, Photoshop, 
and acrylics on paper,” Ceccoli creates an almost three-dimensional, soft-focus 
world of muted, twilight tones in which horizons are tilted and objects float or 
turn upside down. The effect is beautifully supernatural rather than creepy, and 
the blue-gray, cat-eared, rosy-cheeked ghost is appealingly stuffed-animal-like, the 
only hint of his spectral origins being two tiny fangs. This would make a fine ad-
dition to either a Halloween- or book-themed storytime or add a delicious hint of 
eeriness to a bedtime readaloud.  JH
lAnAgAn, mARgo The Brides of Rollrock Island. Knopf, 2012 [320p] 
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96919-5 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86919-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 9 up
Ugly young Misskaella is mocked and feared for her magic, which connects her 
to the seals that frequent her isolated island home and gives her the power to 
“persuade them to combine . . . into a manlike or a womanlike form.” Impatient 
for love, she creates a man from a seal, but after a single magical night she releases 
him back to the sea; the resulting baby boy must also be given up to the sea if he 
is to survive. Driven by loneliness, bitterness, and a longing for power, Misskaella 
begins calling forth seal-women as wives for the men of the island and charging 
the men a steep price to hide their wives’ skins so that they may never return to 
their underwater home. As the years pass, the men are in her debt and in thrall 
to their imprisoned wives, and all the human women have fled to the mainland. 
The haunting narration shifts from Misskaella herself to townspeople Bet and 
Dominic, part of the first generation affected by the coming of the seal-wives, to 
SepTemBer 2012 • 29
Daniel, part of a generation of half-selkie children who realize they must free their 
mothers. Lanagan fully inhabits each narrative voice, loading her densely crafted 
prose with visceral descriptions that emphasize the animalistic undertones of hu-
man interactions. Creepiest of all are the seal-women themselves, doll-like and 
passively irresistible. Brief codas by Bet’s daughter Lory, the first girl to return to 
the island after the sea-wives leave, and Misskaella’s adopted successor Trudle hint at 
the healing possibilities of new beginnings. Like Lanagan’s previous Tender Morsels 
(BCCB 11/08), this eerie, evocative story breathes mesmerizing life into familiar 
fairy-tale constructs as it explores issues of power, agency, culpability, freedom, and 
love within a deceptively quiet atmosphere of intimate horror.  CG
lARochelle, dAvid It’s a Tiger!; illus. by Jeremy Tankard. Chronicle, 
2012 32p
ISBN 978-0-8118-6925-6 $16.99 
R 3-6 yrs
The young protagonist invites us into a story in a jungle setting of picturesque 
tranquility, until . . . “Wait a minute. That’s not a monkey. That looks like . . . // A 
TIGER! RUN!” We follow our narrator into a shadowy cave for safety, but what’s 
that lurking there? You guessed it: “A TIGER!” The pattern continues, with each 
seeming escape leading the plucky kid right into a new tiger trap (on a departing 
boat: “Say, I’ve never seen a sea captain with a tail before, have you?”). Finally, the 
tiger gets what he wanted—some ear-scratching and belly rubs—and everything 
calms down, until the protagonist starts telling a story which begins it all again with 
a crocodile. Any child who’s ever delightedly fled from a playfully roaring adult 
will recognize the game here, especially with a reader-aloud who can ham up the 
tiger’s part for maximum effect. The clear absurdity of the situation papers over any 
logical glitches, and the structure that suggests an endless chain of good-humored, 
persistent predators provides for a satisfying final joke. Tankard’s art, familiar from 
the irresistible Grumpy Bird (BCCB 3/07), is dense with thick, playful lines, while 
digital colors, often mottled or striated, fill and sometimes overflow the elements. 
The critters are somewhere between toy and cartoon, so the tiger’s threat is mitigated 
by his adorably simplistic, babyishly round shape and the fanciful details, in both 
text and art, that frame the proceedings as make-believe. Youngsters may press 
stuffed animals into service to enhance the narrative here, but there’ll be plenty of 
goofy fun just in the shriek-and-giggle sharing.  DS
lAybouRne, emmy Monument 14. Feiwel, 2012 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-312-56903-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 8-12
When a vicious hailstorm sends traffic into deadly chaos, a quick-thinking school-
bus driver brings the fourteen kids in her charge to safety by crashing directly into 
the Greenway megastore in Monument, Colorado. While she goes off for help, the 
students, who range from kindergarten through high school, realize they could be a 
lot worse off. National Connectivity, the national wireless service in 2024, is down, 
but there’s electricity, plenty of food (one girl knows how to work the pizza oven), 
and the comfort of knowing they are surrounded by anything they could need to 
ride out bad weather. No self-respecting survival-story author, though, will let the 
kids off that easily. The hail was triggered by a volcanic eruption, which caused a 
tsunami and earthquakes, which released chemical weapons under development at 
30 • The BulleTin
the Colorado NORAD site. (Now, that’s more like it.) While narrator Dean lusts 
after Astrid, his computer-geek brother rigs an old-school television to monitor 
the news, several kids have reactions to the airborne chemicals, the football stars 
get stoned (handy, that pharmacy), desperate outsiders try to break in, little kids 
variously wallow in junk food or panic, the sophomore girl tries to seduce the ston-
ers, and just about anything you think might happen does. The star of this outing 
is probably the megastore itself, and much of the reader’s pleasure derives from 
imagining just how you’d deploy the endless supply of stuff at hand for survival 
and pure hedonism. Laybourne keeps most of her cast alive but splits them into 
evacuees and store-dwellers by tale’s end, which surely means there’s more cinematic 
mayhem to come. Pass the five-pound bag of corn chips.  EB
levithAn, dAvid Every Day. Knopf, 2012 [336p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-97111-2 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-307-93188-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 9-12
The narrator of Levithan’s innovative, ambitious new novel, known only as A, wakes 
up in a new body every day, one that’s always around the same age as A, always 
within a couple hours’ radius of where the last host was. A has a strict noninterfer-
ence policy with these borrowed lives and has forged a unique perception of human 
consciousness and connection as part of this rootless existence. When borrowing 
Justin, though, A falls for Justin’s sweet, troubled girlfriend, Rhiannon, and starts 
taking risks to court her, including telling her about A’s existence. As Rhiannon 
struggles to adjust to the possibility of falling in love with someone who is only 
consciousness, unattached to race or gender or any other external characteristic, A 
is pursued by a former host who, piecing together the clues A was careless enough 
to leave, starts a public witch hunt for what he believes is a devil bent on possession. 
At the same time, A begins to suspect that there may be others out there who lead 
the same strange existence—but how to find them? This unconventional romance 
considers some fascinating and unexpected questions about the nature of identity, 
consciousness, love, and gender. The philosophically dense underpinnings don’t 
overwhelm the story, though, which features the sweet, smart, sad, hopeful teens 
Levithan fans will expect. Readers will identify with A’s profound longing for con-
nection (“I want to get back to yesterday. All I get is tomorrow”), but they’ll also be 
intrigued by the butterfly effect A’s presence may have on numerous other teens who 
make brief but memorable appearances. Speculative fiction fans will appreciate the 
in-depth consideration of the wild premise, while readers who enjoyed McLaughlin’s 
Cycler (BCCB 7/08), Brooklyn, Burning (BCCB 11/11), and other gender-bending 
tales will find this a rewarding treatment of some similar themes.  CG
levy, JoAnne Small Medium at Large. Bloomsbury, 2012 [208p]
ISBN 978-1-59990-836-6 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-7
After being struck by lightning at her mother’s wedding, twelve-year-old Lilah 
wakes up in the hospital hearing her grandmother’s voice—a comforting thing, 
if only Bubby hadn’t passed away four years previously. Bubby Dora helpfully 
explains that Lilah is not, in fact, going crazy, but that Lilah’s brush with death has 
left her with the ability to hear ghosts. The seventh-grader takes the news in stride, 
SepTemBer 2012 • 31
as does her friend Alex, in whom she confides. The two decide to put Lilah’s skills 
to good use, utilizing her knowledge from the beyond to set her unhappily single 
father on a few dates, put on an amazing fashion show at school, and secure dates 
for the two of them to the upcoming dance. Of all the fictional girls lately gifted 
with communicating with the dead, Lilah is by far the most charming, accepting 
the onset of her talent with a refreshingly angst-free enthusiasm and addressing her 
new ghostly friends with as much frankness and sassy wit as she does her corporeal 
pals. It helps that the spirits with whom Lilah is dealing tend to be more benevolent 
than the average restless dead, and their issues are usually easily solved by Lilah’s 
communicating a simple message of encouragement or hope to a loved one left 
behind. The inclusion of such middle-school milestones as first dance, first kiss, 
etc., and Lilah’s pitch-perfect tween narration make this good-natured dramedy 
an easy sell to pre-adolescents, particularly those who have found the ghost story 
genre to be a bit too grave (ha) for their liking.  KQG 
lewiS, J. PAtRicK Last Laughs: Animal Epitaphs; written by J. Patrick Lewis and 
Jane Yolen; illus. by Jeffrey Stewart Timmins. Charlesbridge, 2012 32p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-58089-260-5 $16.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60734-453-7 $9.99 
R Gr. 3-7
This collection of “once upon a tomb” poems offers over thirty darkly punny, often 
extremely pithy ditties about the ends of a variety of animals. Subjects range from 
the turkey (“Sorry, no leftovers”) to the “Infirm Worm” (“You’ll find you’ve no more 
wiggle room”) through critters as varied as insects, fish, and mammals. While not 
every poem hits the jokey sweet spot it’s aiming for (and there’s one that’s silently 
adapting a college fight song), the speedy sepulchral irreverence will suit the tastes 
of many young readers, and the blend of sophistication and brevity makes the verses 
excellent bait for the poetry-reluctant. The art, digitally adapted ink and gouache, 
relies heavily on a sober dark brown that gives the impression of monochromatic 
illustration until one notes the touches of red (blood, of course), yellow (the fizz of 
the electrocuted goose), and warmer russet tones (in, for instance, the onrushing 
car that takes out the rooster). The grim polish and macabre comedy recall Lane 
Smith’s work in The Stinky Cheese Man (BCCB 10/92); the style veers interestingly 
from impressive naturalistic detail (the doomed whale) to pure cartoon slapstick (the 
flattened roadkill newt). The charms here will appeal to lovers of Edward Gorey, 
Tim Burton, and their deliciously creepy kin, and the entries could make a ghastly 
and hilarious choice for older reading aloud with the right irreverent group. There 
is a table of contents, and the copyright page sorts out which poet wrote what.  DS
litwin, eRic Pete the Cat and His Four Groovy Buttons; illus. by James 
Dean. Harper/HarperCollins, 2012 32p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-211058-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-211061-9 $11.99 
Ad 4-7 yrs
This latest installment in the Pete the Cat series opens with Pete putting on his 
favorite shirt, the one with “four big, colorful, round, groovy buttons”—when 
all of a sudden (“POP! OH NO!”) a button pops off and rolls away. Pete doesn’t 
sweat it, though; instead, he goes on to sing about his three buttons, then, when it 
happens again, his two buttons, his one button, and, finally, when all the buttons 
have popped, his certain-not-to-pop-off-and-roll-away belly button. While this 
32 • The BulleTin
possesses much of the same catchy readaloud flavor of the previous titles, it is slim 
on plot and a bit too heavy on repetition. Moreover, while the central lesson of the 
story seems to be the repeated refrain that “buttons come and buttons go,” young 
listeners are not likely to care much about the permanence (or impermanence) of 
buttons, making this a somewhat weak focus for a lesson in going with the flow. 
Still, the snappy tune is great fun, and the laid-back characterization of Pete jux-
taposes perfectly with his wide-eyed expression and cool blue color. Teachers will 
appreciate the simple subtraction concepts integrated into the text (complete with 
numeric formulas), and viewers will love the bold acrylic and line compositions. 
Pair this with previous titles for a Pete-inspired story singalong or share the video 
version of the story, available online, for a multimedia storytime.  HM   
lo, mAlindA Adaptation. Little, 2012 [400p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-19796-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-21446-9 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 9-12
David and Reese are trying to return to San Francisco from a debate competi-
tion in Phoenix when a strange rash of bird strikes leaves all air traffic grounded. 
Attempting to drive home instead, they are forced into a detour that takes them 
near legendary alien hotspot Area 51, where their car crashes after a bird flies into 
their headlights. Twenty-seven days later, they wake up in a secret facility with no 
memory of anything that has occurred since the crash, and they are released home 
with the warning that details of the crash and medical treatment (including their 
strange new healing ability and the fading scars that suggest they had been “cut 
open and sewn back together”) are classified. As Reese struggles to get on with 
her life and gets over her longtime crush on David to pursue a relationship with 
perky, pink-haired Amber, she is dogged by the sense that her body is irrevocably 
changed—and that people are following her. Lo invokes a paranoid X-Files  sensibil-
ity here, layering conspiracy atop conspiracy and balancing ambitious twists with 
nuanced relationships that are ultimately as important to the sci-fi plotting as they 
are to the character development. Reese’s vague sensory memories of her missing 
time are appropriately creepy, and they work well to set up the final revelation of 
what is really going on. Fans of Lo’s previous fantasies will appreciate her continued 
facility with mystery and atmosphere, and her satisfying twist on classic alien tropes 
is sure to attract some new admirers.  CG
long, ethAn The Wing Wing Brothers Math Spectacular!; written and illus. by 
Ethan Long. Holiday House, 2012 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8234-2320-0 $15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 3-6 yrs
Who better to charm pre- and primary-schoolers into math than avian cousins of 
the duck (Tickle the Duck, BCCB 2/06) they tickled in their toddler years? With 
their trio of acts, the Wing Wing Brothers’ circus (pun fully intended) introduces 
the concepts and notation of “greater than” and “less than” (“Act I: Comparing”) 
and a pair of follow-up demonstrations of easy addition and subtraction (“Act II: 
Addition and Subtraction”; “Act III: More Addition and Subtraction”). Wendell and 
Wilmer compete to see who can keep the most plates spinning, as their brothers 
continually toss more plates at them, right up to the inevitable smashing finish: 
SepTemBer 2012 • 33
“0 = 0.” Act Two involves pie juggling, with five in the air at once. The act shifts 
from juggling to slapstick pie-in-the-face—and the perfect occasion to introduce 
subtraction. Act Three reinforces the previous material, with the Wing Wings 
popping in and out of an illusionist’s magic cabinet; rapid-fire appearances and 
disappearances put arithmetic skills to use in keeping track of the birds, until Walter 
blows the trick—literally—with a gas attack that blasts the cabinet to smithereens 
and sends his brothers rushing to put clothespins on their beaks. A closing note 
soberly remarks that “this book meets the Common Core State Standards for 
kindergarten mathematics in Counting and Cardinality” which seems pretty darn 
hilarious when appended to pie throwing and flatulence. But from whom would 
you prefer to learn arithmetic—Long’s zany, googly-eyed, stick legged birdies, or 
your math teacher?  EB
lóPez, diAnA Choke. Scholastic, 2012 230p
ISBN 978-0-545-41822-5 $17.99 
R Gr. 6-9
Best friends Windy and Elena are ordinary eighth graders, not A-listers like Windy 
longs to be. Elena, however, is less interested in the popular crowd, and Windy is 
beginning to find herself embarrassed by Elena’s refusal to let go of her childish 
habits. When a pretty, sophisticated new girl named Nina shows up at school, 
Windy is happily surprised by her attention, especially when Nina stands up to the 
popular mean girls on Windy’s behalf. As Windy becomes closer to Nina, though, 
she learns that Nina has a troubled past centering on her addiction to the choking 
game, which gives kids a brief thrill by cutting off their oxygen. Nina asks Windy 
if she wants to be “breath sisters,” convincing her that the choking game is more 
about trust than about getting high; though Windy desperately longs to be one of 
Nina’s inner circle, she soon realizes that the cost is just too high. Straightforward, 
simple prose and a high-interest topic make this a useful book for middle school, 
with several elements besides the dangers of the choking game that will spark im-
portant discussions. For instance, Windy’s father is struggling with his professional 
image, and his issues with appearance parallel Windy’s desire to join the popular 
crowd as well as tackling issues of prejudice against Mexican Americans (the cast is 
largely Latino/Latina). Windy is also getting some pressure to figure out what her 
interests are and how they will parlay into possible career choices. This is therefore 
clearly a novel written to highlight a practice that results in death or brain damage 
for as many as a thousand teens each year, but it also deals effectively with the many 
struggles ordinary kids face as they transition from tween to teen. Web resources 
for learning more about the choking game are included.  KC  
loth, SebAStiAn Zelda the Varigoose; tr. by David Henry Wilson; written and 
illus. by Sebastian Loth. NorthSouth, 2012 48p
ISBN 978-0-7358-4076-8 $15.95 
R 3-6 yrs
In this Swiss import, Zelda—a cute, stubby-beaked yellow goose—imagines herself 
as a variety of different creatures such as a “goosnail” (a combination goose and snail), 
a “chamelegoose” (chameleon/goose), and a “butterfloose” (butterfly/goose). On 
each spread, Zelda conveys her new hybrid identity in a riddly couplet (“It doesn’t 
matter where I roam,/ Because I always feel at home” says the “goosnail”) while the 
recto features two layers, a clear overlay of the contributing animal’s distinguishing 
features that neatly connects with the underlying art of Zelda as goose, so that an 
34 • The BulleTin
overlay printed with butterfly wings transforms the waddling Zelda beneath into the 
aforementioned “butterfloose.” In a nice design touch, backgrounds have a subtle 
digital pattern linking them thematically (a close-up of a pale green lettuce opposite 
the “goosnail,” for instance). Zelda’s backgrounds are equally subtle, as her golden 
form stands out against a pale beige page accented with minimal details printed 
in white. The rhyming text is functional rather than sparkling, but it’s the visuals 
that are the point here; the skillful and attractive book design, the novelty of the 
overlays, and Zelda’s vivacious poses will win over most kids. Youngsters who love 
pretend play and dress-up will also relate to Zelda’s imaginative combinations, and 
this might easily be used to inspire kids to create their own animal mashups as well.
lyon, geoRge ellA Holding on to Zoe. Ferguson/Farrar, 2012 [176p]
ISBN 978-0-374-33264-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
Sixteen-year-old Jules, now pregnant, is intrigued by the idea of carrying a new 
life, because she sees it as having the potential to give her own life direction. When 
she finds out that it’s an ectopic pregnancy, she refuses to believe her baby won’t 
be born. Her refusal becomes pathological; convinced that she has had the baby 
and now works at a Toyota factory with baby safe in the company daycare room, 
Jules organizes her life around caring for Zoe. Even when she loses her job—that 
is, comes home from the mental hospital —she continues in her delusion, accepting 
the help of a therapist only because the therapist pretends that Zoe is real. Jules’ 
blinded narration could make the truth about Zoe a twist, but the text tips its hand 
early on, so that the only one who believes that Zoe is real is Jules herself. While 
the book underexplains Jules’ problem somewhat, the strength of her delusion is 
remarkable, and her mother’s emotional coldness gives some indication as to why 
Jules so insistently prefers her own perspective of the world to the real one. The 
real value of this story, though, is the insightful sensitivity with which Jules’ early 
consideration of her pregnancy is treated, and the way it gives purpose and focus 
to her aimless existence; readers will gain an important new perspective on why 
some teens welcome the idea of pregnancy.  KC  
mAcAulAy, dAvid Castle: How It Works; written and illus. by David Macaulay 
with Sheila Keenan. Macmillan, 2012 [32p] (My Readers)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-59643-744-9 $15.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-59643-766-1 $3.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 2-4
Adults who developed an early taste for architecture—or medieval warfare—from 
Macaulay’s venerable Castle (BCCB 9/77) will leap at the chance to introduce 
his work to a new generation. Happily, this is not a simply a pared-down retread 
of the original but a well-crafted chapter book that is satisfyingly complete for a 
younger audience. Those familiar with the first iteration of Castle will recognize 
the intricately detailed artwork (here in color), the helpful cross sections, and the 
overhead views that made reconstructing the edifice in the mind’s eye such a pleasure. 
Macaulay’s understated visual humor is also on display: the donkey who balks at 
the steep ramp to the castle gate; the line of soldiers with hay “toilet paper” in hand 
waiting in line for their turn at the shaft and pit facility; even the dead animal in 
the catapult (“Fire! Whoosh! Pigs away!”) The use of second person invites readers 
SepTemBer 2012 • 35
into the fictional framing story, casting them in turn into the role of attacker and 
defender. End matter includes a diagram of the castle with defined “words to know” 
pointing to relevant features, an index, and a brief list of print and online resources 
(castle sale and rental information, anyone?) for further investigation. Engrossing 
nonfiction chapter books are not always easy to come by, so scoop this one up.  EB 
mAizeS, SARAh On My Way to the Bath; illus. by Michael Paraskevas. Walker, 
2012 [32p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-8027-2365-9 $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-8027-2364-2 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
It’s bathtime, but Livi would much rather play than take a boring old bath. While 
her increasingly frustrated mom hollers from offstage, Livi creates an assortment of 
imaginary scenarios to keep herself entertained as she slowly makes her way from 
the couch to the bathroom: she pretends to be a snake, a rock star, and ultimately 
a jungle cat (who pounces on her mother); finally obeying Mom’s direction to get 
into the tub, she then imagines hersef a shark. Like-minded listeners will recognize 
the way imaginative Livi’s creative train of thought weaves easily in and out of the 
real world and turns everyday things into fantasy fodder. The digitally created art 
features cartoon-like compositions with thick black outlines and a broad color pal-
ette. While many spreads lean towards the overbusy, the energy of the illustrations 
largely matches that of the wild-eyed, redheaded protagonist, who’s surrounded by 
an omnipresent flurry of energy lines. Mom amusingly appears only in monitory 
word balloons until Livi the jungle cat makes her mom-catching leap. Librarians 
may want to have a go at asking listeners to act out Livi’s fantasies along with her 
. . . if they dare.  HM
mAndAnnA, SAngu The Lost Girl. Balzer + Bray, 2012 [432p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-208231-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-208233-6 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 9-12
The Weavers created Eva for one purpose: she is essentially a life understudy to 
a girl named Amarra, whose life she will step into should Amarra suffer tragedy. 
After a cloistered, secretive existence studying Amarra’s journals and mimicking 
her every experience, Eva is abruptly thrust into real life (and moved from England 
to India) when Amarra dies. Amarra’s parents, who contracted for her existence 
out of the fear of ever losing their daughter, and her siblings, who have their own 
“echoes,” know that she’s not really Amarra, though, and their grief interacts with 
their growing appreciation of Eva as her own person. Mandanna takes her time 
setting up Eva’s frame of reference—the talking heads on TV who dismiss her as a 
soulless abomination; the absolute power of the Weavers over her life; the constant 
balancing game between taking what freedoms she can and protecting herself from 
retribution—and then moves the plot into an equally mine-filled exploration of 
the space Eva is expected to fill in her new life. Eva is driven by a deep-seated anger 
over her lack of control over her own existence, tempered by genuine sympathy 
and affection for Amarra’s family, even when they commit unforgivable betrayals. 
While the book’s pace can lag at times, the relationships are the driving force here, 
and the breathtakingly complex character development is set against a sinister, 
36 • The BulleTin
Frankensteinian underworld that promises plenty of philosophically fraught conflict 
and intricate backstory. It all ties together for an emotionally satisfying debut novel 
that offers a compelling meditation on the nature of humanity, consciousness, and 
self-ownership.  CG
mAnning, JAne Millie Fierce; written and illus. by Jane Manning. Philomel, 
2012 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-399-25642-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
Millie’s initially a milquetoast, but after being overlooked once too often she snaps: 
“Millie frizzed out her hair and made the crazy eye. . . . ‘Look at me and my feroc-
ity!’ she yelled.” As Millie Fierce, she commands attention (“Now people looked 
Millie Fierce right in the eye. They were mad”) and leaves a swath of destruction 
wherever she goes, which is just what she wants. Or is it? Millie’s trajectory is comi-
cally described with excellent, appalling detail (she “grabbed the biggest, best piece 
of cake, the one with TWO roses on it”). While it’s not a huge surprise that she 
eventually forswears her fierce ways, this is about the journey more than the moral, 
and many kids who’ve considered—or indulged in—acting up to make themselves 
more visible will sympathize with Millie’s antics. The watercolor illustrations fea-
ture weirdly comic figures, with broad heads and spindly legs, whose exaggeration 
is most marked when Millie’s on her rampage; softly dappled textures and gently 
nuanced washes in the backgrounds help to pad the sharp edges of Millie’s ferocity. 
Most kids have felt like both versions of Millie at one time or another, and they’ll 
be relieved to see that the two can coexist.  DS
mARtin, c. K. Kelly Yesterday. Random House, 2012 [368p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96650-7 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86650-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89644-6 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 9-12
After a dystopian prologue that lets the reader know that life is not what it seems, 
Freya wakes up in 1985 Canada with a set of memories that say she’s a recent 
transplant from New Zealand, where her father died in a gas explosion. She can’t 
reconcile these memories with her dreams and instincts, though, and when she 
sees a startlingly familiar boy on a class trip, she follows him home and starts to 
unravel the mystery of her identity and past. This intriguing beginning plays with 
perception and reality in a layered plot that never quite lets readers know where 
they stand. Unfortunately, this flattens into a more standard, linear action-adventure 
after hypnosis unlocks Freya’s memory, filling readers in on seventy-eight years of 
environmental disaster and political turmoil with contrived exposition that reads 
like an excerpt from a history textbook. Relationships take precedence over world-
building, with the book mainly focusing on the two teens trying to live their own 
lives separate from the attempts at world-saving unfolding around them. That’s a 
compelling story, but it means that many fascinating aspects of the setup (which 
include a devastating future plague, a wormhole that sends people on a one-way trip 
to the past, and a plan to fix the future that’s already created numerous paradoxes) 
are provocatively introduced but then never really developed. The slow develop-
ment of the star-crossed romance (combined with Martin’s chick-lit pedigree) will 
SepTemBer 2012 • 37
ease unfamiliar readers into the dystopian genre, however, and the open ending 
leaves room for a sequel that could explore some of the threads left dangling.  CG
mcbRide, KRiStinA One Moment. Egmont, 2012 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-086-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-269-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
Maggie’s boyfriend, Joey, is always up for a bit of illicit excitement, and sometimes 
she still feels the need to impress him. When he asks her to jump off a high rock 
ledge into their swimming hole, she therefore goes along until the very last minute, 
when something strikes her as off. The next thing she knows, she is alone on top 
of the ledge, with Adam, the anchor of their group, trying to coax her down the 
rock face and away from the body of her dead boyfriend by the edge of the water. 
While Maggie struggles to remember what happened before Joey jumped, the 
friends pull together and apart as they try to make sense of the horrific accident. 
Adam is especially tortured, and it soon becomes clear that Joey was keeping secrets 
from Maggie that Adam knew about. What emerges is a convincing and relatively 
low-key portrayal of the close bonds of friendship strained by tragedy and betrayal. 
McBride gets the gravitas of both Joey’s death and his secrets just right; as painful 
as the whole situation is, it’s not world-ending for anyone but Joey, and the others 
have to figure out how to live with present emotions rather than drown in past 
regrets. Maggie’s response is particularly credible and ultimately healthy, as she 
finds an effective way to bring closure to a relationship that would eventually have 
ended naturally anyway. Readers looking for a sensitively handled drama with keen 
insight into the emotional lives of teens will enjoy this.  KC
mccARty, PeteR Chloe; written and illus. by Peter McCarty. Balzer + Bray/
HarperCollins, 2012 34p
ISBN 978-0-06-114291-8 $16.99 
R 3-5 yrs
Chloe the bunny (the object of Henry’s infatuation in Henry in Love, BCCB 
3/10) has ten older siblings and ten younger siblings, and her favorite time of day 
is “family fun time.” She’s therefore disappointed when her father brings home a 
TV and all the little bunnies gather around it rather than play together. When she 
and her baby sister leave the TV to go exploring, they discover a swath of bubble 
wrap in the TV box, and soon all the bunnies are happily hanging out in the TV 
box and popping bubble wrap together. Popping notwithstanding, the tone of the 
story is quiet and understated, while Chloe is an appealingly determined heroine. 
Listeners will appreciate both her frustration over the shifting family dynamic and 
her resolve to find an equally entertaining alternative. McCarty’s distinct illustrative 
style features finely detailed colored-ink characters set against large cream-colored 
backdrops. While brown shading dominates, simple splashes of pattern and open 
blocks of color offer visual contrast. TV-focused young people may not understand 
Chloe’s stance, but no one can deny the appeal in the simple satisfaction of her 
alternative activity—as her brother says, “I wish we could pop bubbles and smash 
boxes every night.” Who doesn’t?  HM
38 • The BulleTin
mccoRmicK, PAtRiciA Never Fall Down. Balzer + Bray, 2012 216p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-173093-1 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-211445-6 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 9 up
This stunning novel is based on the life story of Arn Chorn-Pond, a child in 
Cambodia when the Khmer Rouge came to power in 1975. The story follows Arn 
over four horrific years in Cambodia, first in the Khmer Rouge work camps, where 
torture and sadistic murder were as commonplace as starvation and malaria, then 
as a boy soldier, fighting alongside the Khmer Rouge against the Vietnamese and 
playing witness to an entirely different variety of brutality and death. Ending up in 
a refugee camp in Thailand, he is befriended by an American volunteer who brings 
him to the U.S., where he becomes a leading voice of Cambodia in the West. Arn’s 
tale brings to light much of what was going on during the infamous years under the 
Khmer Rouge’s genocidal rule. Narrated in Arn’s inflected English (a note explains 
that the author sought to capture the cadence of his real voice), the powerful ac-
count provides a solidly constructed perspective that makes the atrocities powerfully 
immediate. Ultimately, though, this is a story of Arn’s survival—under the Khmer 
Rouge, alongside the Khmer Rouge, and as a traumatized refugee haunted by ghosts 
of the past. This compelling chronicle deserves to be widely read, discussed, and 
reflected upon by a generation of young people who may be largely unaware of 
this dark chapter in world history; it could also be used alongside Beah’s A Long 
Way Gone (BCCB 5/07) for a look at modern-day boys caught in the machinery 
of war. An epilogue and author’s note are included.  HM
meRRell, mAR’ce Wicked Sweet. Feiwel, 2012 328p
ISBN 978-0-312-60749-4 $16.99 
R Gr. 7-10
Slightly nerdy Chantal wants the summer before her senior year to be like all the 
ones before it, spending her time working on a quirky project with her best friend, 
Jillian. Jillian, though, has other ideas: she’s got her sights set on finding a boyfriend, 
namely, the very cute, very rich Parker. Parker seems more than willing; in fact, 
he and his friend Will, who’s a bullying jerk, are aggressively pursuing Jillian and 
Chantal, respectively. It turns out that the boys also stage projects, and their latest 
challenge is to get kisses from these two smart girls. While Parker finds himself 
drawn to Jillian, Chantal plots a complicated revenge on Will. Channeling the 
velvety voice and serene attitude of British “domestic goddess” Nigella Lawson, 
Chantal begins a comically sensual cake baking campaign that will ultimately end 
with Will being seriously and publicly embarrassed. What makes this rather silly 
plot work are the well-developed characters, all of whom struggle with complicated 
family situations. Jillian, for instance, has an irresponsible mother who expects her 
to take care of her younger brothers, while Parker’s family has high expectations 
for his corporate future. Will, on the other hand, seems destined to follow in his 
father’s emotionally stunted footsteps even though he hates the man, and Chantal 
is happy to lose herself in the precision and sweetness of baking despite her mother’s 
rigid prohibitions against sentiment and desserts. Readers are given intimate access 
through chapters from each character’s perspective, a technique that renders the 
girls and Parker more likable and Will more hatable. At once funny and poignant, 
this will appeal to readers with a taste for cake and romance, but be aware that you 
may be moved to bake something decadent.  KC
SepTemBer 2012 • 39
milleR, mAggie My First Ghost; written by Maggie Miller and Michael Leviton; 
illus. by Stephanie Buscema. Disney Hyperion, 2012 32p
ISBN 978-1-4231-1949-4 $16.99 
R 4-7 yrs
“WARNING: A ghost friend is a big responsibility. Are you sure you want a ghost 
friend of your very own? If not, CLOSE THIS BOOK NOW. To claim your free 
ghost, just turn the page.” Audiences who turn that page, and the next, will find 
not only their very own ghost but also a guide to its care and a catalog of its finer 
qualities (a ghost is not only better than a pet, it’s better than a brother or sister: 
“Your ghost will never hog the bathroom. Your ghost will never punch your arm”). 
Ghost owners are admonished to never feed or wash their ghosts, reminded that a 
ghost’s natural temperature is “room temperature,” and given a list of ghost-friendly 
activities, including tag and hide-and-seek. Picky kids may quibble with a few of the 
claims (how can you paint a picture of or play tag with a ghost who is, the authors 
state, invisible?), but most youngsters will take to this like a phantom to a decrepit 
mansion. Even fearful kids will find Buscema’s cheery, floaty white ghosties more 
friendly than frightening. The smiling, sprightly shades have stripy “arms” and sport 
ball caps or bows and red tennies that dangle below the sheet-like white “bodies,” 
while the human figures and bright backgrounds recall mid-century advertising 
in their style and detailing. Pair this with Lachenmeyer’s The Boo! Book, reviewed 
above, share it in a non-spooky Halloween storytime, or use it to prompt writing 
or art projects on a similar theme.  JH
monAghAn, AnnAbel A Girl Named Digit. Houghton, 2012 [192p]
ISBN 978-0-547-66852-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
Farah learned her lesson years ago: hide the fact that you are a mathematical savant 
under a vapid, nonthreatening exterior, and all will be well. When she notices a 
reverse Fibonacci sequence appearing on the screen during a popular TV series 
and figures out that it is linked to a terrorist attack at JFK airport, however, the 
seventeen-year-old does what she has to: goes to the FBI. There she meets a very 
attractive, talented young agent who doesn’t believe her in the least, until Farah’s 
continued investigation brings on the ire of a well-known environmental terrorist 
group. She and John, her FBI cutie-pie, stage a pretend kidnapping to get Farah off 
the streets, figure out the coded transcripts of the terrorists behind the attack, and 
take off to New York. Unfortunately, they find themselves set upon by assassins in 
every safe house, indicating that there is leak at the FBI itself, so they have to come 
up with a new plan with the help of John’s CIA agent father. This fast-paced caper 
novel will appeal to readers who like their nonstop action aided and abetted by 
romance and humor. John, as the older man, fights his feelings more than Farah, 
whose attempts at kissing are continually thwarted by the imposition of imminent 
danger, but eventually the two find their way to a two-geeks-in-love conclusion 
that proves that true love is no impediment to efficient crime-solving. While not 
nearly as laugh-out-loud funny as Jaffe’s Bad Kitty books, this will find favor with 
readers who appreciated the fast-paced intrigue of that series.  KC
40 • The BulleTin
muRPhy, Jim Invincible Microbe: Tuberculosis and the Never-Ending Search for a 
Cure; by Jim Murphy and Alison Blank. Clarion, 2012 [160p] illus. with 
photographs
ISBN 978-0-618-52574-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
Murphy and Blank present a well-balanced introduction to the scientific, medical, 
and social history of the disease that has been a verified torment all the way back to 
Homo erectus. As humans domesticated animals and began to live in more dense 
population groups, conditions for the spread of tuberculosis increased, while the 
abilities of physicians to treat or cure it most certainly did not. As scientists floun-
dered their way toward a modern understanding of the disease (especially through 
the work of Robert Koch and Herman Biggs), sufferers grasped at treatments that 
offered hope, from patent medicines and blood letting, to the generally benign 
regimens at mountain sanatoriums. Reactions to the victims themselves ranged 
from romanticizing the disease to deporting victims out of the country. The authors 
make condensing and organizing copious amounts of information seem effortless, 
and the personal stories and wealth of photographs help put a human face to the 
epidemic. An annotated bibliography and source notes are included and the bound 
book will also have an index; pronunciations are featured within the text. Murphy’s 
acclaimed An American Plague (BCCB 6/03), on the yellow fever scourge of 1793, 
ended on an eerily pessimistic note, and his current examination of tuberculosis isn’t 
much cheerier, with the ascent of drug resistant strains of the disease, the decrease 
of public health budgeting, and the ease of spreading any kind of contagion around 
our shrinking global village. For middle-school students who will one day manage 
disease control, though, it’s not too soon to start thinking about the issues.  EB
noblemAn, mARc tyleR Bill, the Boy Wonder: The Secret Co-Creator of Batman; 
illus. by Ty Templeton. Charlesbridge, 2012 48p
ISBN 978-1-58089-289-6 $17.95 
R Gr. 3-5
Every superhero has an origin story, and Nobleman parallels his picture-book history 
of the literary creation of Superman (Boys of Steel, BCCB 10/08) with the equally 
riveting story of Milton “Bill” Finger, whose vital role in the development of Batman 
has not been fully credited—or remunerated—since the character debuted in 1939. 
Whereas the Shuster/Siegel vs. DC battle royale is relegated to the epilogue of Boys 
of Steel, the injustice suffered by easygoing Bill Finger at the hands of Batman’s more 
assertive co-creator, Bob Kane, is the main event here. Boxed narration is heavily 
and delightfully laced with “bill” and “finger” puns and wordplay: “Bob publicly 
accused Bill of exaggerating. Despite that, Batmanians believed Bill. They began to 
murmur that he should be credited as the co-creator of Batman—that his Bill was 
long past due.” Templeton’s color artwork is a stylized homage to the period, with 
large frames, boxed insets, and splash pages that suggest rather than rigidly emulate 
the flow of a comic book. Engrossing and appropriate as the information in the 
main text may be for young listeners and readers, a six-page appended author’s note 
once again saves a heckuva lot of the good stuff for the older readers who will tackle 
its denser, sparsely photoillustrated prose. Here Nobleman discusses his research 
into the life of Bill Finger, which begins as a photo hunt and ends by uncovering 
an entire branch of the family that had lost all public connection with Finger, and 
who now collect royalties from DC: “And it may be as close to a happy ending as 
SepTemBer 2012 • 41
Bill Finger will ever get. He just didn’t live long enough to experience it.” Older 
readers will enjoy the vindication, and they will never again read the words “Bat-
man created by Bob Kane” without a mildly disdainful snort.  EB
o’connoR, JAne Nancy Clancy: Super Sleuth; illus. by Robin Preiss Glass-
er. Harper/HarperCollins, 2012 124p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-208293-0 $9.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-208294-7 $8.99 
R Gr. 2-3
Nancy Clancy, of Fancy Nancy (BCCB 2/06) fame, is back, this time in early chapter 
book format. This first title in a planned series finds Nancy armed for sleuthing 
with a rhinestone-encrusted magnifying glass, a notebook, a flashlight, and a pink 
trenchcoat and searching for a mystery to solve. Fortunately, fate provides not just 
one but two mysteries: She and her friend Bree overhear a conversation that alludes 
to a secret being kept from Nancy; then a marble belonging to their teacher disap-
pears from their classroom. O’Connor adeptly transitions her readers to the older, 
wiser Nancy; the familiar flair is still there, most notably in Nancy’s taste for fancy 
words and accessories, and those who remember Nancy from the picture books will 
enjoy seeing her in a more developed storyline. There is plenty of appeal for new fans 
as well, since Nancy is a smart and likable protagonist with a playful appreciation 
for the dramatic. The mysteries are well-plotted, with just enough clues thrown in 
to entice young readers to figure out the situations on their own. Illustrations are 
black and white rather than color, but they offer the same delicate, detailed lines 
and spirited, gently humorous style as the picture books.  HM
oAteS, Joyce cARol Two or Three Things I Forgot to Tell You. HarperTeen, 
2012 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-211047-3 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-211049-7 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 9-12
Senior year brings promise to affluent Quaker Heights High, but several seniors are 
still reeling from the death, likely suicide, of their charismatic and beloved friend, 
Tink. Merissa starts with perfection (early admission to Brown, cast as the lead in 
the school play) and then spirals down into withdrawal and self-destructive cutting 
after her father leaves for another woman. Eager, acceptance-hungry Nadia devel-
ops a crush on a teacher that leads to disaster when she gives him an anonymous 
birthday present of a painting she took from her family’s guest room—a painting 
that’s worth three million dollars. The girls’ stories proceed sequentially, each largely 
standing alone, but Tink’s death (and her possible ghostly appearance) is clearly an 
influence on both of them, illustrating the way such an event can be a catalyst for 
further tragedy. Both girls are also struggling to negotiate the high-expectation, high-
pressure land of privileged youth and trying to please unappeasable and withholding 
fathers, territory that Oates limns with tenderness and clarity. Characterization of 
our two heroines is detailed and effective, with Nadia, the sweet, needy girl led 
into bad choices by her yearning, a particular standout. Merissa’s story has much 
in common with Delia Ephron’s The Girl with the Mermaid Hair (BCCB 2/10), 
also a perceptive chronicle of a teenage girl’s renegotiation of her relationship with 
her father, and readers who enjoyed Ephron’s work will find Oates’ explorations 
rewarding.  DS
42 • The BulleTin
oPPel, Kenneth Such Wicked Intent: The Apprenticeship of Victor Franken-
stein. Simon, 2012 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-0318-5 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-0320-8 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Even though young Victor Frankenstein’s attempts to save his twin brother Konrad’s 
life through alchemy failed (in This Dark Endeavor, BCCB 9/11), his appetite for 
the dark arts has only been temporarily dampened. After burning the contents of 
the Dark Library, he is drawn to a book that did not succumb to the fire, and finds 
therein the key to communing with the dead. Convinced that he has received a 
message from Konrad, he investigates further, discovering a way to actually cross 
over into the spirit world. Victor follows and finds Konrad, lonely and in limbo, 
stuck in the family home while seemingly dark forces menace him from outside 
and under the house. Elizabeth, Konrad’s betrothed and Victor’s passion, also 
travels through the portal, as does their trusty friend Henry Clerval. There they 
find power and threat, as well as a desire and possible method to bring Konrad 
back to life. Little do they realize that they are being co-opted by an ancient evil, 
and if their plans succeed, that evil will be released from its centuries-old confine-
ment. Oppel seamlessly combines Victorian sensibilities with prehistoric myth and 
timeless relationship dynamics to plunge readers into a genuinely creepy horror 
tale; in particular, Elizabeth’s fervent belief wars unsuccessfully with her desire, 
making her vulnerability to the homunculus the trio creates to provide a host for 
Konrad’s spirit to inhabit all the more terrifying. Victor’s obsession with acquiring 
knowledge of any kind and at any cost ripens as the series continues, firmly and 
convincingly establishing the character he will become in Shelley’s classic. Henry 
also grows into a stalwart foil for Victor’s and Elizabeth’s lack of balance, rounding 
out a successful, tried-and-true character constellation. Readers who enjoyed the 
first in the series will be well pleased with this sequel.  KC
PinKwAteR, dAniel Bear in Love; illus. by Will Hillenbrand. Candlewick, 
2012 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-4569-4 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-6 yrs
Bear lives alone in a cave “just big enough for him.” One morning, he finds a car-
rot left outside his cave’s mouth; the next morning, there are two carrots, the next, 
three, the next, a big pile, leaving the bear utterly delighted (“Someone must like 
me to leave these good things!”). In turn, he leaves a honeycomb, which elicits a 
flower in response; then he leaves blueberries, for which he receives a cookie, and so 
on, but every time he tries to catch a glimpse of the secret giver, he fails. Eventually, 
though, the bear and his secret friend, a wee rabbit, finally meet, and after a bit of 
initial misunderstanding (“You are quite the big strong bunny,” says the rabbit to 
the bear admiringly) become happy pals. Daniel Pinkwater hasn’t previously been 
famous for stories of cozy charm, but this friendship tale has cozy charm in spades; 
the gift-exchange plot is sweet, and the bear’s unassuming, childlike dialogue and 
taste for singing little songs to himself will win young listeners (and remind them 
of Winnie-the-Pooh). Hillenbrand opts for a subtler palette than usual, with pale 
gestural smudges of trees in the backgrounds; the starring bear is a soft, warm cream 
accented with smudgy strokes of shadow that give him just enough impact to gently 
SepTemBer 2012 • 43
stand out. He’s particularly endearing as he walks the line between actuality, toy, 
and cartoon, prancing happily through the woods on his hind legs one moment and 
curling up for a snooze in his cave the next. Despite the title, the bear and bunny 
relationship seems quite platonic, but audiences will delight in the playfulness of 
their growing friendship.  DS
RAy, deboRAh KogAn Paiute Princess: The Story of Sarah Winnemucca; written and 
illus. by Deborah Kogan Ray and with photographs. Foster/Farrar, 2012 [48p]
ISBN 978-0-374-39897-2 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-5
This biography traces the life of Thocmetony, a Paiute girl who came of age in the 
mid 1800s, and who was greatly influenced by her grandfather, a tribal chief whose 
initial encounters with white explorers disposed him to look upon them as guests 
and friends. Spurred by escalating rumors of white barbarity, Thocmetony attended 
a mission school, became proficient in English, and served as an interpreter. Her 
own experiences of bigotry and broken treaties at the hands of white individuals 
and government representatives led her to take a more aggressively activist role as 
liaison between the Paiute and the white community—trying anything she could 
think of, from public spectacles and speeches to letter-writing campaigns, to advance 
the cause of justice for the Paiute.  Using the name Sarah Winnemucca, given to 
her by white acquaintances of the family, she became an important conduit of views 
and information between two increasingly oppositional worlds, and she was, sadly, 
never fully accepted by either. Ray explains explicitly that “the notion of an ‘Indian 
princess’ was . . . the creation of whites,” and it is therefore somewhat disconcert-
ing that the title of Winnemucca’s biography perpetuates the “princess” misnomer. 
However, notes and picture captions carefully point out common misinterpretations 
of personal and place names and explain the political reasons for Winnemucca’s 
occasional wearing of non-tribal clothing. Watercolor and pencil illustrations are 
more successful at conveying the sweep of the Nevada landscape than features of 
individuals; several period photographs, however, provide more visual specificity. A 
map and six pages of appended notes, timeline, and resources will assist readers in 
developing a broader context in which to place Winnemucca’s personal struggle.  EB 
RobinSon, michelle What to Do If an Elephant Stands on Your Foot; illus. by 
Peter H. Reynolds. Dial, 2012 [32p] 
ISBN 978-0-8037-3398-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 5-7 yrs
What do you do if an elephant stands on your foot? “Keep calm. Panicking will 
only startle it.” Of course, the child explorer to whom the narrator addresses this 
advice immediately panics. Panicking leads to running, which brings out the ti-
gers, which means you should be very quiet, which naturally brings on a sneeze, 
which sends a rhino charging after the kid, and so on and so on. The poor kid in 
fact does everything that the narrator advises against, leading to a passel of animal 
near-attacks and a very frustrated narrator. Luckily, a few monkeys swing to the 
rescue and save the kid, but a final admonition from the narrator to apologize to 
an elephant without startling it leads to . . . you guessed it, another chase. Listeners 
will quickly catch on to the pleasantly predictable pattern of events and enjoy the 
anticipation and satisfaction that every page turn brings, as the kid reacts exactly 
44 • The BulleTin
the wrong (but natural) way in each new situation while the narrator’s increasing 
vexation reaches comic proportions. Reynolds’ zesty art builds both tension and 
slapstick humor as the child (dressed as a proper explorer with hat, multi-pocketed 
vest, and binoculars) sheds drops of sweat and runs in open-mouthed (but hilarious) 
terror and the ponderous, irritated, and sometimes hungry animals stir up clouds 
of dust or splashes of water in their ill-tempered pursuit. Reading this aloud will 
be a delight for reader and audience, and readers-aloud who aren’t afraid of a little 
boisterous fun may want to get the kids to act this one out.  JH
RoSenthAl, Amy KRouSe Wumbers; illus. by Tom Lichtenheld. Chronicle, 
2012 34p
ISBN 978-1-4521-1022-6 $16.99 
R Gr. 2-4
Rosenthal and Lichtenheld offer up an homage to Steig’s classic play on words C 
D B ! (BCCB 12/68) in this picture book game of inserting numerals into words 
in which the numeral’s name is part of the word’s pronunciation (for example, 
“l8ter” is “later”). A girl learning to play an instrument is captioned “She’s learning 
to play a 2ne on the 2ba”; a balloon seller says, “4give me, 4 this is bel8ed, but it 
seems once again I have overinfl8ed” to the mother of a now airborne child. There’s 
a useful range of difficulty to the “wumbers,” from the simple “gr8” to the more 
challenging “I think it 7” (“I think it’s heaven”); occasional higher-level vocabulary 
words (such as “bel8ed” and “4midable”) will also provide some teachable mo-
ments. Younger children will likely need some adult guidance at first, but older or 
more word-savvy kids will likely be able to sort it out on their own. Lichtenheld’s 
illustrations (rendered in ink and PanPastels), bright, primary colors, cartoonish 
figures, and heavy black outlines, keep the visuals lively, and the simplicity of the 
compositions keeps the focus tight, making it easy for kids to use the pictures to 
help figure out the meaning of the wumbers. This could easily be tied into ele-
ments of popular culture, such as similar word-number combinations on license 
plates and texting lingo, and could also serve as inspiration for kids to come up 
with their own wumbers.  JH
RoSSetti, RinSAi The Girl With Borrowed Wings. Dial, 2012 [300p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3566-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 8-12
The unforgiving desert that surrounds Frenenquer’s home forces the seventeen-
year-old to stay inside, but even if she could bear the heat and had the nerve to 
brave it, her strict father wouldn’t allow her out. When Sangris, a Free person and 
shapeshifter, finds his way into Frenenquer’s bedroom and offers her a chance to 
fly, though, she breaks the habits of a lifetime and goes. The two spend their nights 
visiting Frenenquer’s childhood homes together, but the idyll ends when Sangris 
expresses his love for her; since Frenenquer cannot reciprocate, she returns to the 
isolation of her father’s house. The supernatural element of this appealingly odd tale 
is as symbolic as it is magical: the possibilities presented by Sangris and his wings 
have the same sort of reckless freedom that often accompanies first love, heedless of 
the rules of the regular world. Rossetti deftly portrays this sense of invincibility in 
the luxurious beauty of the open sky in direct contrast to the insular, bland world 
of Frenenquer’s school and house (with little indication of actual geographic setting 
or time period). Frenenquer herself is superbly drawn, and her narration is a lesson 
SepTemBer 2012 • 45
in nuanced character development: at times, she directly addresses readers with an 
arresting sense of intimacy while simultaneously holding them at arm’s length, a 
device that mimics her push-and-pull relationship with Sangris. Fortunately, there 
is a happy ending here, so hand this to teens who like their love stories thoughtful, 
dramatic, and ultimately optimistic.  KQG
SAudo, coRAlie My Dad Is Big and Strong, But . . . ; tr. from the French by 
Claudia Zoe Bedrick; illus. by Kris Di Giacomo. Enchanted Lion, 2012 26p
ISBN 978-1-59270-122-3 $16.95 
Ad 4-7 yrs
This French import takes an array of typical bedtime shenanigans and turns them 
upside down, so that instead of a parent working tirelessly to get a child to settle 
down for the night, a child is struggling with trying to get his father to go to sleep. 
When his son tries to get him to go to bed, Dad pulls all the usual tricks, first 
simply resisting bedtime, then running wildly around the house, then requesting 
a story, then one more story, then objecting when the child turns out the lights . . . 
and that is where the story ends. There’s no real plot here, just a playful concept 
stretched out to picture book length, and while the child’s imitation of the parent 
is pitch perfect, much of the humor is aimed at the adults reading the book aloud 
than at the children listening (“I tell myself: ‘Hang on, we’re almost there’”). While 
the concept falls short, the illustrations, brown paper textured with colored pencil, 
accented with collage elements, are effectively quirky and vivid. The figures are 
childlike pencil drawings with only touches of shading, and their surroundings 
alternate from sparely understated (some images seem almost to be erased from the 
page) to ornately detailed photographic elements. Rosenthal’s Bedtime for Mommy 
(BCCB 4/10) is a more kid-effective treatment of the same story, but audiences 
will still find the notion of a parent refusing to go to bed giggle-worthy and may 
even seek to involve the family in playing out the joke.  HM
ScieSzKA, Jon, ed. Guys Read: The Sports Pages; illus. by Dan Santat. Walden 
Pond/HarperCollins, 2012 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-196378-0 $16.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-06-196377-3 $6.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-219014-7 $5.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-7 
Scieszka opens his third volume in the Guys Read series with a sage observation 
from his son: “Just because a guy likes to play sports doesn’t mean he likes to 
read about them.” It would take a confirmed bibliophobe, however, not to find 
something enjoyable in this collection of ten original entries by noted authors, and 
even a couple of participants in the sports industry. Dan Gutman starts out with 
a bang, offering a readaloud-worthy take on game six of the 1986 Red Sox/Mets 
World Series, in which he claims to have personally kept the Mets alive via a lucky 
grapefruit. Among the stronger entries are a cautionary tale by Anne Ursu on what 
not to say to a girl pitcher, a take on wrestling and bullying from Joseph Bruchac, 
and a wild crosstown team bus trip to reclaim a purloined trophy and rediscover 
the pleasures of an unscored pick-up game, courtesy of Gordon Korman. Entries 
from the non-writers (hockey player Dustin Brown and sportscaster James Brown) 
aren’t as strong, but as with any decent short-story collection, nothing’s easier than 
to skip the slow bits and move on to livelier play; since Scieszka’s literacy agenda is 
46 • The BulleTin
all about dumping the dull and embracing the engaging, guys (and curious girls) 
will feel free to read one or read ’em all.  EB
Scott, nAthAn KumAR, ad. The Great Race; ad. by Nathan Kumar Scott; illus. 
by Jagdish Chitara. Tara, 2012 34p
ISBN 978-93-80340-15-9 $16.95 
R 5-8 yrs
In this Indonesian folktale, Kanchil the mouse deer, who is certain that he is the fast-
est animal in all the forest, challenges the other forest animals to a race, a challenge 
met only by Pelan the Snail. Cocky Kanchil mockingly agrees to race the snail, but 
he loses both that race and the rematch he indignantly insists upon. A double-page 
spread reveals the punchline and the trickster’s secret: the snail has a twin brother 
(“The two snails were happy to have taught Kanchil a lesson!”). A note explains 
that Kanchil is a legendary trickster in his own right, so this tale is actually turning 
the tables by making him the butt of the joke. This clever adaptation is brought 
vividly to life in the artwork of Jagdish Chitara, an Indian artist from Gujarat, India, 
who uses a traditional textile format: the palette is exclusively deep red and black 
set against cream colored pages, and the compositions are block printed and then 
hand painted. Similar to Arni’s Sita’s Ramayana (BCCB 12/11), this is a remarkable 
vehicle for introducing a lesser-known folk art form to children as well as being a 
wonderful addition to trickster-tale collections. An extensive note about Chitara’s 
craft is included, along with photographs of the process.  HM
ShuSteRmAn, neAl UnWholly. Simon, 2012 [416p] (Unwind Trilogy)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2366-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2368-8 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 8-12
In Unwind (BCCB 2/08), unlikely teen rebels Connor, Risa, and Lev made a 
stand against unwinding, the legally sanctioned practice of terminating teens (and 
then transplanting their organs) that serves as a form of retroactive abortion in the 
future. In the aftermath of their uprising, things have only gotten worse, with the 
authorities cracking down on runaway Unwinds and black market for parts boom-
ing. While Connor attempts to run the resistance movement (no easy task when it’s 
mostly made up of rescued delinquents), Risa is captured and forced to become a 
friend for Cam, a prototypical “composite human” made from the harvested parts 
of ninety-nine different Unwinds and the harbinger of what unwinding’s strongest 
proponents see as its future. Hitting the ground running, this sequel introduces a 
huge cast of new characters and explores the technological and political origins of 
the unwinding system in greater depth than the first volume did, showing how such 
a horrific system could become socially entrenched (a case supported by strategically 
placed excerpts of actual contemporary news articles). Shusterman is not afraid to 
have his characters make unforgivable choices—the world they live in sometimes 
necessitates them—as they learn more about who controls the system they are 
fighting and try to defeat it. For now, the narrative reaches a satisfying climax in a 
complex high-octane battle among at least four different forces (including a splinter 
cell of unwinds who want to take over leadership from Connor). Thematically rich 
and packed with action, commentary, and consequences, this is a strong pick for 
dystopia fans that will also appeal to reluctant readers.  CG
SepTemBer 2012 • 47
StASSe, liSA m. The Forsaken. Simon, 2012 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3265-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3267-3 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 9-12
When Alenna takes a mandatory test designed to predict future criminal behavior, 
she’s immediately exiled to Island Alpha with the other supposed delinquents. The 
island is a battlefield for two warring factions: one a terrifying cult run by the masked 
Monk, the other a ragtag band of teens clinging to the hope of escape. Alenna finds 
a place with the latter and joins an expedition to the deadly gray zone, which they 
believe holds the key to getting off the island. The journey there is riddled with 
threats not just from the Monk but from the aerial robotic “feelers” that regularly 
carry teens of both factions away to presumed death, or worse. Mysteries abound, 
from the fate of Alenna’s parents to the identity of the Monk to the true purpose 
of the feelers and the gray zone, but the twists, while satisfying on a world-building 
level, are oddly passive in their conveyance: Alenna often hears the big revelations 
in clunky expository dialogue rather than figuring them out for herself. Readers 
lured in by the promise of a strong heroine may also find themselves frustrated 
by the amount of time Alenna and her friend Gadya spend sniping over the cute 
warrior who’s taken a shine to Alenna. Still, the island is a compellingly brutal 
microcosm of a nation that’s traded freedom for stability, and a surprising ending 
opens the world up for exciting future developments in the planned sequels. With 
iconic inspirations ranging from Minority Report to Lord of the Flies to The Hunger 
Games (BCCB 11/08), this will have strong appeal for dystopian fiction fans.  CG
SteAd, RebeccA Liar & Spy. Lamb, 2012 [208p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90665-4 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73743-2 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89953-9 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 5-7
There are many changes in the life of Georges, whose father lost his job and whose 
family has therefore moved to a new apartment, while his mother works double 
shifts at the hospital and hardly sees her family. Georges quickly gets to know 
Safer, a boy who lives upstairs, and finds himself involved, whether he likes it or 
not, with Safer’s favorite pastime: spying on the rest of the building. At school, 
Georges is an outsider often bullied by the popular kids, and it looks like the abuse 
is going to come to a head soon in a legendary science project, whose results are 
commonly believed to foretell your destiny. Stead, author of the Newbery winner 
When You Reach Me (BCCB 9/09), remains both a smooth, engaging stylist and a 
master craftsman, who deftly fits original plot pieces together into a cohesive but 
often surprising whole. Both Safer and Georges, for instance, are hiding secrets, 
and the book drops occasional hints that there is more to their stories. That just 
adds to their appeal as characters, however, which is already considerable; in fact, 
the book overall is gifted with inimitable personalities, such as Safer’s sweets-mad 
little sister, Candy, and Georges’ quirky deskmate and gradual friend, Bob English 
Who Draws. The story also marshals those characters in a couple of glorious and 
inspiringly creative victories for the underdogs at school, in keeping with its general 
championing of thinking outside the box. Readers will sympathize with Georges 
and Safer as they negotiate various familiar obstacles, but it’s the celebration that 
will leave them exultant.  DS
48 • The BulleTin
StieFvAteR, mAggie The Raven Boys. Scholastic, 2012 [416p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-42492-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-46979-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 7-12
Blue has been reared in a house full of bona fide psychics, but her own powers are 
usually limited to enhancing the energy flow of the supernatural visitations. When 
she sees the spirit of a boy who is destined to die within the coming year, she fears 
that the prophecy that has haunted her since birth—that she will kill her true love 
with a kiss—might be close to fulfillment. A few days later she actually meets the 
boy of her vision, Gansey, who’s a student at the posh local boarding school. He 
and his friends are on a quest to find the precise location of a nearby ley line, and 
Blue joins their quest, which becomes fraught with danger and mystery as they 
get closer to finding the ley line and releasing its ancient power. Amid well-paced, 
suspenseful plotting intriguingly overlaid with history, myth, and legend, Stiefvater 
creates a compelling human drama of boys whose privilege or lack thereof colors all 
of their interactions. Gansey is especially poignant as the obscenely wealthy progeny 
of old Virginia money, a circumstance that propels him to find ways to make his 
life meaningful on his own terms. Adam, his closest friend, is equally focused on 
not allowing Gansey to use either his money or influence to rescue him from his 
abusive, poverty-stricken home life. Ronan is the group’s wild card, a loose can-
non whose grief over the loss of his father explodes in temperamental outbursts of 
violence. Their fierce loyalty to one another survives anger over well-meaning but 
often clumsy interference in each other’s lives, but their fear that they might end up 
destroying one another adds another layer of intensity to their interaction. The band 
of brothers easily makes room for Blue, knowing that they need her talents—and 
her belief in both the supernatural and in them—to be not only successful but also 
wise in their dealings with the powerful forces they seek to engage.  KC
tAShJiAn, JAnet For What It’s Worth. Holt, 2012 [224p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-9365-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 6-8
The year is 1971, and Quinn, a music-crazy middle-schooler, is living in Laurel 
Canyon, Los Angeles, the nexus of the exploding rock-and-roll scene. Everything 
in his life seems on the cusp of great change: his beloved older sister has just left 
for college, new girl Caroline becomes his first girlfriend (shortly after becoming 
the first girl he ever has a real conversation with), and Frank Zappa hires him to 
transcribe his music. At the same time, larger changes are threatening to rock Quinn’s 
world, as the draft and the Vietnam War edge ever further into his protected world 
by a way of a draft dodger who asks for his help and the classroom conversations 
that challenge his priorities. Then, in the midst of all this, Quinn’s Ouija board 
starts giving him messages from Janis Joplin, Jimi Hendrix, and Jim Morrison, all 
recently deceased. There’s a whole lot of plot crammed into this book, and not all 
of it works; readers may find it easier to suspend disbelief for the Ouija board con-
ceit than for the connections Quinn has to a who’s-who of celebrities. In addition, 
the text is heavy with underexplained references that may alienate more than they 
educate readers who can’t already place them. Tashjian nonetheless captures the 
anything-can-happen energy of this particular historical moment and the infectious 
excitement of the explosion of creativity in 1970s musical culture. The dissonances 
SepTemBer 2012 • 49
and convergences between the anxieties of war and protest and the escapism of 
rock-and-roll party culture are compellingly mapped, providing readers insight into 
some watershed historical and cultural moments. The narrative is intercut with song 
and album lists and transcripts of Quinn’s school-newspaper music column, “For 
What It’s Worth,” which is a fount of fascinating music trivia.  CG
temPlemAn, mccoRmicK The Little Woods. Schwartz & Wade, 2012 [336p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96943-0 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86943-3 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98349-8 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 7-10
Ten years ago, Cally’s older sister went to spend a vacation with the daughter of a 
teacher at St. Bede’s Academy and never returned. The two little girls went missing 
from their beds and were presumed to have died in a fire in the woods behind St. 
Bede’s. Now Cally has turned her loss into sympathy scholarship dollars, enrolling 
in St. Bede’s in hopes that a diploma from the well-respected school will open op-
portunities for her. Keeping her history a secret, she is soon swept up in the privi-
leged social landscape. She immediately discovers, however, that another girl has 
gone missing from the school, and her curiosity is piqued, fueled by the suspicious 
behavior of some of her teachers and classmates and by the mysterious delivery of 
a puzzle box with a coded message inside. The story takes a few conventional turns 
and some unexpected ones, establishing a rhythm that is sure to please mystery 
fans as they follow the clues and have their suspicions confirmed and thwarted by 
turns. Meanwhile, a substantial romance plot develops that spins Cally a bit out 
of control amidst the wealth of boy riches that St. Bede’s has to offer an edgy new 
girl. With swift pacing and sure-footed plotting, a conventional murder mystery 
laced with a touch of creepiness, and an honest portrayal of hormones outrunning 
hearts, this is sure to attract a broad fan base.  KC
tennAPel, doug Cardboard; written and illus. by Doug TenNapel. Graphix/
Scholastic, 2012 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-41872-0 $24.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-545-41873-7 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys 
M Gr. 5-8
Having recently fallen on hard times, Cam’s dad can’t afford more than a cardboard 
box for Cam’s birthday, but father and son try to make the best of the gift by jok-
ily using the box to construct a boxer, a strapping heavyweight fighter. When the 
boxer comes to life, and Cam and his dad realize the box’s original materials must 
be something magical, they use the remaining scrap to make a cardboard factory 
that produces more magical cardboard. Neighborhood bully Marcus gets wind 
of this and proceeds to steal the factory, make an army of terrifying cardboard 
monsters, and threaten to destroy the whole neighborhood. The story turns from 
imaginative to didactic when what began as a playful fantasy quickly transforms 
into a simplistic take on the nature of bullies. TenNapel’s portrayal of Marcus is 
particularly limited, depicting the boy as a spoiled and coddled adolescent simply 
in need of some good hard work, and the art is even less forgiving: greasy hair, 
jumbled teeth, and black nail polish all work to position Marcus as the Goth poster 
child, and the redeeming scene in which he is clean-shorn and polish-free feels more 
50 • The BulleTin
like a cheap promotion of conformity than a genuine part of the story. Otherwise 
the illustrations are impressive, utilizing full-spread illustrations and sequenced 
panels to maximize both action and emotion, while the beings that spring from 
Marcus’ imagination via cardboard rival some of Shaun Tan’s inventive creatures. 
Unfortunately, the kids who would appreciate the artistic vision here might be the 
very same ones who will be insulted by the two-dimensional characterizations, so 
you might have better luck sending them Tan’s way in the first place.  KQG
townSend, michAel Where Do Presidents Come From?: And Other Presidential 
Stuff of Super-Great Importance; written and illus. by Michael Townsend. Dial, 
2012 [160p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3748-8 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-7
Townsend fans will immediately recognize his familiar style in this graphic-novel-
formatted title: manic bunnies and monkeys; smarty-pants kids with wide mouths, 
pointy teeth, and vacant Orphan Annie eyes; and a supporting crew of caricatures, 
robots, and talking objects. This time they are gathered in the service of teaching 
an election-year civics lesson on the presidency, its historical roots, its perks, and its 
problems. Townsend supplies the straight facts in a deadpan, mock-pedantic tone 
that gleefully contrasts with the send-ups of historical dramatis personae and the 
antic blather of the cartoon children soaking up the lessons. Since it’s no accident 
that the release date for this venture coincides with the run-up to this year’s election, 
kids can be forgiven if they skip over the background chapters on Washington and 
the Revolution and the separation of powers and cut right to the chase: who can 
run for office (no angry bunnies); who hung presidential underwear in the White 
House; what goes on at Camp David (“blah blah blah blah blah peace treaty”); 
and what’s the deal with this whole electoral college thing? Social studies teachers 
with a wacky streak who stick around long enough to see through the mayhem 
will appreciate the solid information and traditional—almost stolid—organization, 
complete with chapter reviews. Extra credit, kids?  EB
tRent, tiFFAny The Unnaturalists. Simon, 2012 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2206-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2208-7 $9.99 
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
Sixteen-year-old Vespa Nyx’s scholarly plans are abruptly put on hold when she 
discovers that she has magical powers—an offense that, in New London where 
the Church of Science and Technology reigns supreme, would earn her execution. 
Meanwhile, Syrus, a young boy living in the wilds surrounding the city, is charged 
with the task of procuring a witch for the forest’s ruling Elemental (a nature spirit) 
after a band of city guards invades and slaughters a group of Tinkers, an ancient 
race that protects the magical creatures of the woods. Events bring the two together 
as Vespa realizes that her father is planning to use her magic to power a science 
experiment that may be New London’s doom and Syrus discovers that his people 
are meeting fates far worse than death inside the city walls. A steampunk-themed 
city meets a bevy of fanciful creatures in this intriguing mashup that unabashedly 
positions technology against nature. The alternation between Vespa’s voice and 
the third-person narration that focuses on Syrus brings the contrast between their 
SepTemBer 2012 • 51
worldviews into sharp relief. Vespa is a charming heroine, at once prickly and 
vulnerable, competent enough to get out of tricky situations yet still willing to 
swoon over a handsome rebel. Syrus is slightly less developed, but his compassion 
for the creatures he is sworn to protect will ring true with animal lovers. Younger 
fans of The Girl in the Steel Corset (BCCB 9/11) will find plenty to like here.  KQG
tRine, gReg The Adventures of Jo Schmo: Dinos Are Forever; illus. by Frank W. 
Dormer. Harcourt, 2012 [112p]
ISBN 978-0-547-76341-5 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-4
     The Adventures of Jo Schmo: Wyatt Burp Rides Again; illus. by Frank W. Dor-
mer. Harcourt, 2012 [112p]
ISBN 978-0-547-80795-9 $12.99 
R Gr. 2-4
“Jo Schmo came from a long line of crime fighters. She knew that one day she 
too would wear a badge.” That day comes sooner than fourth-grader Jo expects 
when she receives a cape and a Superhero Instruction Manual from her retiring 
superhero uncle. With the encouragement of her grandpa Joe, a retired sheriff, and 
the help of her dog, Raymond, Jo begins taking down bad guys, starting in Dinos 
Are Forever with a pair of bumbling bank robbers and Dr. Dastardly, a mad genius 
bent on taking over the world. Dr. Dastardly uses his Re-animator Laminator gun 
to unleash reanimated dinosaur skeletons on San Francisco, but neither dinosaurs 
nor doctor are a match for Jo’s “Knuckle Sandwich” and Raymond’s excessive drool. 
In Wyatt Burp Rides Again, Jo and Raymond travel back in time to capture Wyatt 
Burp, the infamous villain of the Old West who can bring down a bank vault door 
with one sarsaparilla-fueled burp. Although the frequent digressions for a humorous 
aside sometimes cause the pacing of both books to lose steam, the meandering is 
generally amusing enough to be worth it.  Raymond is particularly hilarious as he 
makes numerous funny but silent “comments”: “Raymond gave the package the 
once-over with his nose, then looked at Jo in a way that said, ‘I detect snacks. Open 
it at once.’” Plentiful monochromatic illustrations, some in comic-strip-style panels, 
feature blocky figures in dynamic poses and possess a childlike sensibility. There’s 
plenty of goofy middle-grade appeal here for both boys and girls; hand this to kids 
suffering from Phineas and Ferb withdrawal now that school is back in session.  JH
umAnSKy, KAye Clover Twig and the Perilous Path; illus. by Johanna Wright. Roar-
ing Brook, 2012 [256p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-754-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-6
After piloting a magical flying cottage and mediating a decades-old dispute be-
tween her witchy employer, Mrs. Eckles, and Mrs. Eckles’ even witchier sister, 
Mesmeranza (in Clover Twig and the Magical Flying Cottage, BCCB 10/09), ever-
sensible eleven-year-old Clover Twig was hoping she’d have a bit of a break from 
supernatural tomfoolery. Alas, such is not the case: her youngest brother vanishes 
along the mysteriously disappearing and reappearing Perilous Path, an event that 
coincides with the return of Mesmeranza, who attempts to use Clover’s brother’s 
disappearance to get the young girl to do her bidding. Joined by her clumsy but 
lovable pal, Wilf, Clover ventures down the Path in search of her brother, narrowly 
52 • The BulleTin
escapes Mesmeranza’s machinations, meets up with a rogue clown and runaway 
debutante, and generally has a rollicking adventure. Umansky set the bar fairly 
high with Clover’s first outing, and while the plot here doesn’t quite rise the absurd 
originality of its predecessor (it’s hard to top a talking cat), fans will be delighted to 
revisit the quirky characters and the author’s wry, enchanting humor. Brisk, playful 
dialogue and a fairytale-esque setting populated with lively, only-slightly-menacing 
creatures add to the charm, while the black and white illustrations, recalling Quentin 
Blake, match the story’s mischievous tone.  KQG
vAnce, JAcK The Moon Moth; ad. and illus. by Humayoun Ibrahim. First 
Second/Roaring Brook, 2012 114p
ISBN 978-1-59643-367-0 $17.99 
Ad Gr. 9-12
In this graphic-novel adaptation of the classic sci-fi short story first published in 
1961, Edwer Thissell, the new human consular representative to the planet of 
Sirene, finds himself thrust unprepared into the intricacies of Sirene culture even 
as he is tasked with tracking down a human criminal (Haxo Angmark) believed to 
be hiding among the planet’s denizens. The twist? In Sirene’s highly ritualized and 
status-oriented culture, everyone wears masks at all times (and it’s a mortal offense to 
divest anyone of their mask), so Angmark could be hiding in plain sight. There are 
many challenges inherent in adapting this work, from visually conveying characters’ 
emotions in a masked society to relaying the urgency of Thissell’s situation to bring-
ing the alien world to life, and it’s only at this last element that Humayoun truly 
excels. Using coded (with colors and patterns linked to instruments described in a 
prefatory glossary) speech-bubble borders to denote the instrumental accompani-
ments to Sirene’s sung language, each of which has particular social connotations, 
is an inspired and visually striking conceit. The world itself is vibrant and strange, 
conveyed in rich jewel tones with a wealth of detail. Unfortunately, the story too 
often lags, becoming mired in exposition that stalls the visuals in drawn-out conver-
sations in enclosed spaces. While the world-building benefits enormously from the 
visual medium, the intricacy and intellectualism of Thissell’s social maneuverings 
and the accompanying fugitive mystery may be better suited to text alone. Still, 
graphic-novel fans will find much of visual interest here, and sci-fi aficionados will 
appreciate the new take on a classic tale of identity and intrigue in an alien world. 
A biographical tribute to Vance’s life and work opens the book.  CG
vAught, SuSAn Freaks Like Us. Bloomsbury, 2012 [288p]
ISBN 978-1-59990-872-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
Narrator Jason Milwaukee and his only friends, Sunshine and Drip, huddle together 
in a tight pack. Special ed students who are labeled at school with the initials of 
their psycho-social disorders and kept apart from the mainstream, they refer to 
themselves as “Alphabets” or “short bus kids.” They are the first to be suspected 
and the last to be believed when things go wrong, and things have gone terribly 
wrong: Sunshine got off the school bus, said good-bye to Jason, and never showed 
up at home. Jason’s military mom pulls strings to get an FBI investigation underway 
with astonishing speed, but it’s Jason who promptly comes under the scrutiny of 
the lead investigator, Agent Mercer. Told that the first twenty-four hours after a 
disappearance are of critical importance, Jason and Drip join forces to elude Mer-
SepTemBer 2012 • 53
cer’s attention and pursue some hunches of their own. It’s an uphill battle, though, 
between Mercer’s bullish interrogations and a brutal beating by a set of bullies that 
had been harassing Sunshine. Readers may figure out the mystery well in advance of 
the conclusion, but that should not diminish the pleasure of the race-against-time 
plotting that drives the tense, first-person narration as schizophrenic Jason tries to 
keep focused on the mission while reasoning with the voices inside his head.  EB
veRe, ed Bedtime for Monsters; written and illus. by Ed Vere. Holt, 2012 32p
ISBN 978-0-8050-9509-8 $14.99 
R 3-6 yrs
What if there are really monsters? And what if one of those monsters is “thinking 
about you in an eating-you-up kind of way” and thus proceeds dauntlessly and 
hungrily through all kinds of obstacles? That’s the premise of this silly-scary pic-
ture book that draws out the suspense of the oncoming monster with taunting, 
haunting sound effects (“Might you also hear a creak creak creak as he starts to 
climb the stairs?”), only to end in a real horror: “a disgustingly sloppy goodnight 
kiss!” Like LaRochelle’s It’s a Tiger, reviewed above, this is a tale that turns threat 
into playfulness, and Vere carefully balances the two elements. The details of the 
monster’s anticipation offer excellent opportunities for a readaloud star turn, and 
the final kissing attack will be a giggly treat for lapsitting youngsters. Digital planes 
of saturated color, often in foreboding tones, gain definition from soft, shaggy 
pencil lines in the comic artwork. The star of the show is indisputably the traveling 
monster, who looks rather like a bilious green version of the Abominable Snowman 
from Rudolph, the Red-Nosed Reindeer, enhanced by even bigger, poppier eyes, some 
Martian-esque ears, and spanking hot-pink accents in horns and toenails. The art 
capably and repeatedly undercuts the menace, with the monster dopily toddling 
off on a wee red bicycle (complete with ringing bell) as the text threatens that “he’s 
coming to find you.” While this is probably a little too exciting to be a genuine 
bedtime book, it’s an enjoyable goofy outing that will be widely enjoyed by kids 
and their monstrous, kissy grownups.  DS
wARmAn, JeSSicA Beautiful Lies. Walker, 2012 [416p]
ISBN 978-0-8027-2338-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 8-12
Identical twins Rachel and Alice have lived with their aunt and uncle ever since 
they were orphaned at the age of nine, making their preternatural bond more im-
portant than ever. At the carnival one summer night, Alice disappears, and Rachel, 
knowing her sister hasn’t simply slipped away and suspecting the disappearance is 
criminally connected to her own previous actions, frantically pushes family, friends, 
and police to help find her. As she attempts to seek clues to her sister’s whereabouts, 
she’s hampered by two things: her growing uncertainty about her own perceptions 
of reality, as experience after experience turns out to be a vision that only she saw; 
and the fact that she is actually Alice, not Rachel, trapped in one of the identity-
swaps that she and her sister frequently practiced. Warman uses a classic suspense 
story as the seed of something shimmeringly poignant and cunningly enigmatic. 
She draws the relationship between the sisters with lush, heartbreaking intensity, 
offering glimpses of its growth in flashbacks; readers will therefore be as stunned 
as Alice to find that Rachel had begun to keep things from her. Characterization is 
cleverly executed, with people chattering heedlessly to Alice-as-Rachel about what 
54 • The BulleTin
Alice is like, but its vividness extends to secondary characters, with Rachel’s damaged 
yet defiantly perky friend Kimber, who ends up Alice’s ally, a particular standout. 
There’s mystery upon mystery here, but they’re all imbued with tenderness and 
tragedy, and the final, supernaturally touched puzzle is genuinely surprising and 
original as well as steeped in sadness. Ultimately, Warman seems to specialize in 
intimacy made urgent by grief, and it’s that as much as the thriller plot that readers 
will be left remembering.  DS
williAmSon, duncAn The Coming of the Unicorn: Scottish Folk Tales for Children; 
ed. by Linda Williamson. Floris, 2012 140p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-86315-868-1 $15.95 
R 8-12 yrs
This engaging collection of Scottish folktales opens with a splendid bit of scene-
setting in the introduction, in which the niece of noted Scot storyteller Williamson 
tells of her experiences as a “wee one” sitting around the campfire listening to the 
“cracks and tales” told by her uncle and his fellow Travellers (Scotland’s version of 
Gypsies): “There was no such thing as the ‘children’s place’—everybody’s place was 
round the campfire.” Following this inviting opening is an assortment of eighteen 
traditional stories that run the gamut of familiar thematic elements, from the 
virtues of humility in “The Tramp and the Boots,” to the triumph of cleverness 
over power in “Jack Goes Back to School,” to the benevolent beauty of nature in 
“The Broonie of Cara.” The conversational style, replete with colloquialisms and 
slang (helpfully defined in the glossary in the back), not only draws the reader in 
with its direct addresses and playful winks but also serves to pay a powerful tribute 
to the oral tradition that gave rise to these stories. Most of the tales, therefore, are 
far better suited to be read aloud than alone—just make sure you’ve got plenty of 
kindling to keep the fire going.  KQG
woJtowycz, dAvid Elephant Joe, Brave Knight!; written and illus. by David 
Wojtowycz. Random House, 2012 32p
ISBN 978-0-307-93087-3 $16.99 
R 4-7 yrs
Elephant Joe and Zebra Pete are hanging out on their floaties in the castle moat 
when they discover that the Dark Knight has stolen the king’s crown. After quickly 
rounding up some armor and horses, the heroic pair heads out to the Dark Knight’s 
tower, where they find an alligator damsel in distress—and a dragon, who’s lurking 
around the back. After asking the dragon nicely, the duo finally gains access to the 
tower only to discover that the damsel isn’t really in distress; she’s the Dark Knight 
in disguise, and she races off with the crown to take the king’s castle. With the 
help of the dragon, Elephant Joe and Zebra Pete thwart her plans, and the grateful 
king knights Joe and Pete, punishes the Dark Knight by making her kiss a frog 
(“Oh, yuck!” says the Dark Knight) who has been making asides on almost every 
page, and serves up a feast for the victors. This is a merry faux-medieval romp, and 
Joe and Pete are likable heroes. Wojtowycz’s plotting and dialogue are engagingly 
reminiscent of children’s own dramatic play situations (“Dark Knight, you have 
been very bad. How shall we punish you?” “Make her kiss that frog”), and the story 
may inspire similar imaginative play on the playground. The vibrantly colored art 
(digitally created collage) uses multiple patterns and textures (the armor, for ex-
ample, looks like creased aluminum foil) for visual interest, and chubby Elephant 
Joe and stripy Pete (who looks a bit like an odd bunny wearing a pink snout) are 
SepTemBer 2012 • 55
humorously straight-faced as they interact with the king, dragon, and villainess. 
Share this with fans of the imaginative-play-themed The Backyardigans, or pair it 
with Goodnight, Good Knight (BCCB 2/00) for a chivalrous storytime program.  JH
yAKin, boAz Marathon; illus. by Joe Infurnari. First Second/Roaring Brook, 
2012 188p
ISBN 978-1-59643-680-0 $16.99 
R Gr. 8-12
In this graphic novel, Yakin adeptly melds history, legend, and imaginative back-
story to recreate the Battle of Marathon from the perspective of the runner Eucles 
(also known as Pheidippedes), who reputedly ran either from Athens to Sparta to 
beg for reinforcements against the Persian forces of King Darius, or from from 
Marathon to Athens with news of victory. In Yakin’s telling, Eucles achieves both 
feats, and with strong personal impetus. The exiled Athenian tyrant Hippias, who 
now accompanies the Persians against Athens, had murdered Eucles’ parents in 
retaliation for his failure to deliver a message in a timely manner. Now Eucles will 
move heaven and earth to avenge his parents’ death by assuring the rout of Hippias 
and the Persian fleet. Infurnari’s dynamic monochrome drawings capably capture 
the strenuous exertion of Eucles and the small band of soldiers who accompany 
him to Athens, the roiling chaos of the battle itself, and the heartbreaking climax 
in which Eucles dies amid the Athenians’ victory celebration. Certainly coverage of 
the Summer Olympics will bring this legend into currency, but it’s the reader with a 
yen for noble heroes and classical warfare—not canoe slalom and trampoline—that 
will appreciate this gripping title.  EB
ylviSAKeR, Anne Button Down. Candlewick, 2012 [192p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-5396-5 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-6207-3 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-6
This companion to The Luck of the Buttons (BCCB 4/11) shifts the spotlight onto 
cousin Ned, who is desperate to play football and earn the respect of the hometown 
hero, Lester Ward, who is off to the University of Iowa and a glorious career on the 
gridiron. Lester’s parting flourish is a pass to the bevy of younger boys, and Ned 
makes the catch fair and square. Lester’s younger brother, though, is having none 
of it, and thus begins a contentious summer in which the scrawnier guys, led by 
Ned, try to recapture the pilfered football and wrangle their way into a game with 
the bigger boys. This is 1929, and football is almost exclusively a game of brawn, 
so anyone with a bit of imagination and the ability to keep a team secret can devise 
tactics to take opponents by surprise. Ned’s elderly grandfather may not have much 
steam, but he still has a mind for strategy, and he becomes the de facto coach for 
Ned’s team. Even more important, he becomes Ned’s advocate in convincing the 
farm-bound family that Ned should be able to go to the Iowa game, and he offers 
to accompany the boy himself. Life—and death—get in the way of these well-laid 
plans, and Ned’s dreams arrive tarnished in a way he didn’t expect. Ned’s story 
is less about the game than the negotiation and competition that establishes the 
adolescent hierarchy. Readers looking for smashmouth action have come to the 
wrong book, but those who were happily immersed in the small-town comedy and 
drama in Ylvisaker’s Buttons debut will settle right back into the leisurely rhythm 
of Goodhue, Iowa.  EB 
56 • The BulleTin
yum, hyewon Mom, It’s My First Day of Kindergarten!; written and illus. by 
Hyewon Yum. Foster/Farrar, 2012 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-374-35004-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-6 yrs
It’s the first day of kindergarten, and our narrator’s mother is anxious (“What 
if you don’t have time to finish your sandwich at lunch? . . . Did I pack all your 
school supplies?”) while her son is all confidence—until he gets there and wonders 
momentarily if he really is ready for “big kids’ school.” With just a little reassurance 
from his mom and his new teacher, however, he jumps right into kindergarten and 
has a marvelous time, while his mother’s worries also lessen once he’s there. This 
goes beyond usual school-start books with its role reversal and emotionally powerful 
illustrations, in which the worrying mother is tiny and blue-toned in contrast to her 
strapping, ruddy-cheeked son; as her fears decrease, Mom’s color warms up and her 
size increases. The boy too shifts to blueness when anxiety strikes him at the door 
of his classroom (depicted on that page as an open door into blue-gray emptiness), 
but he’s quickly back to normal inside the cheerful, kid-filled classroom. Confident 
kids like the protagonist will be tickled to find that it’s the adult, and not the kid, 
who needs to be reassured, and they’ll be intrigued by the visual representation 
of the characters’ changing emotional states. Parents who are facing or who have 
survived their kids’ “first days” will easily sympathize with the mother.  JH
zhAng, KAt What’s Left of Me. Harper/HarperCollins, 2012 [352p] (Hy-
brid Chronicles)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-211487-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-211489-1 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 9-12
In an alternative world, everyone is born with two souls, two consciousnesses that 
share control over a single body. In the U.S. most “settle” at an early age, with the 
dominant soul taking over and the other disappearing. Those who don’t settle, 
known as “hybrids,” are institutionalized as a threat to society, and the fact that 
hybrids predominate in every other country drives an intense xenophobia. Eva and 
Addie never completely settled; instead, Eva’s consciousness remains trapped and 
awake, a voice in Addie’s head. Then Hally and her brother Devon befriend Addie, 
reveal that they are hybrids passing as settled, and promise to teach Eva to surface 
again so that she can have a real life. When all three (six?) of them are exposed 
and taken to a government treatment center, they fight to stay whole and uncover 
some disturbing truths about the nature of hybrids and how they are controlled and 
“fixed.” This startlingly original concept provides a compelling gateway to intensely 
personal discussions of prejudice, stigma, identity, and loss. Debut novelist Zhang 
makes the emotional complexity of two souls sharing a body feel deeply real, and 
she doesn’t shy away from issues of privacy (Eva likes a boy Addie isn’t wild about) 
and resentment (both girls’ lives are immensely complicated by the others’ mere 
existence) even as she completely sells the centrality of this relationship, fraught 
with envy and comfort and love and fear, to the girls’ lives. It’s this relationship 
that makes the thoughtful world-building pay off in a climactic reveal that will 
have readers clamoring for volume two.  CG
SepTemBer 2012 • 57
Blowing our own horn DeparTmenT:
Kidd, Kenneth And michelle Ann AbAte, eds.  Over the Rainbow: Queer 
Children’s and Young Adult Literature.  University of Michigan Press, 2011 420p 
Trade ed. 978-0-4720-7146-3 $95.00
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-4720-5146-5 $45.00
GSLIS professor and former CCB director Christine Jenkins contributes a chap-
ter, “Young Adult Novels with Gay/Lesbian Characters and Themes: A Historical 
Reading of Content, Gender, and Narrative Distance,” to this collection of essays 
on LGBTQ topics in children’s literature. Jenkins builds upon previous research 
to identify significant gay/lesbian content and/or themes in over sixty books and 
examines their portrayals of gay/lesbian characters, gender representation, and 
narrative distance. 
mcdowell, KAte And cARoline nAPPo “Evolution in Children’s Science Books:  
Recommendations and Library Collections, 1863-1956.”  Library Trends 60.4 
(Spring, 2012): 655-674.
GSLIS professor, CCB affiliate, and former Bulletin reviewer Kate McDowell and 
co-author Nappo draw on the Main Street Public Library (MSPL) database of 
the collections of five small Midwest public libraries to explore and analyze trade 
books about evolution that were published and recommended to young people 
from 1863 to 1956, investigating the ways in which evolution was characterized 
for young people and how the descriptions changed over time.
The Newbery and Caldecott Awards: A Guide to the Medal and Honor Books, 2012 
Edition. ALA Editions, 2012 184p
Paper ed. 978-0-8389-3601-6 $30.00
The latest edition of the annual guide to the Newbery and Caldecott awards includes 
a new essay by Bulletin editor and CCB director Deborah Stevenson chronicling 
the Newbery’s coverage in the media over the years, from the fanfare of its incep-
tion through colorful details about various award winners to the touchstone it is 
today. The book itself includes an easy-to-use format and bibliographic citations 
and indexes for all past and present award winners and honorees. 
Also of note:
Bulletin reviewer Karen Coats gave the keynote address at the Asian Conference 
on Arts and Culture at Srinakharinwirot University in Bangkok this past August. 
Her talk was entitled “The Arts of the Cradle, the Cradle of the Arts.” 
ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons: resourCes for teAChers And LIBrArIAns
58  •  The BulleTin
Abuse–fiction: Lyon 
Actors and acting–fiction: Keyes
ADVENTURE: Bach; Brodien-
Jones; Kelley; Kinkaid; Goeglein; 
Monaghan
Africa–fiction: Burg; Farish
Aliens–fiction: Lo
Animals: Goodman
Animals–poetry: Lewis
Animals–stories: Czekaj; Fox; Loth; 
Pinkwater; Robinson; Scott
Architecture: Macaulay
Art and artists: Burleigh 
Aunts and uncles–stories: Boelts 
Baths–stories: Maizes
Bears–stories: Pinkwater 
BEDTIME STORIES: Saudo; Vere
Behavior–stories: Manning
BIOGRAPHIES: Burleigh; Noble-
man; Ray 
Biology: Goodman; Murphy 
Birds: Hoose
Books and reading: Nobleman
Books and reading–stories: Lachen-
meyer
Brothers–fiction: Oppel; Umansky
Brothers–stories: Bauer 
Brothers and sisters–fiction: Brodien-
Jones; Brown
Brothers and sisters–fiction: Mc-
Carty
Bullies–fiction: Clements; Dowell; 
Stead; Tennapel
Buttons–fiction: Litwin 
Cambodia–fiction: McCormick
Camps and camping–fiction: Kelley
Castles: Macaulay
Cats–stories: Litwin 
Chicago–fiction: Fleming; Goeglein
Clones–fiction: Mandanna
Comic books: Nobleman
CONCEPT BOOKS: Browne; 
Long; Loth
Costumes–stories: Falconer
Crime and criminals–fiction: 
Goeglein; Trine
Death–fiction: Ghoulstone; Oates
Death–poetry: Lewis
Disguises–fiction: Vance
Dogs: Goodman
Dogs–stories: Knudsen
Dragons–fiction: Hartman
Dragons–stories: Kraegel; Wojtowycz
Dystopias–fiction: Bick; Hesse; 
Knutsson; Martin; Shusterman; 
Stasse
Eating disorders–fiction: Jaden
Emotions–stories: Bauer; Browne; 
Yum 
Environmentalism–fiction: Horvath 
ESP–fiction: Brodien-Jones; Levy; 
Warman
Ethics and values: Abdel-Fattah; 
Calonita; Horvath; Levithan; 
López; Shusterman
Fairies–fiction: Anderson
Families–fiction: Ada; Calhoun; 
Horvath; Lyon; Oates
FANTASY: Anderson; Bach; Bro-
dien-Jones; Carter, S.; Hartman; 
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
SepTemBer 2012  •  59
Keyes; Lanagan; TenNapel; Trent; 
Umansky
Farms–fiction: Calhoun
Farms–stories: Czekaj
Fathers–fiction: Burg; Rossetti 
Fathers–stories: Saudo
FOLKTALES AND FAIRY TALES: 
Carter, S.; Koertge; Scott; Wil-
liamson
Folktales and fairy tales–fiction: 
Bach; Lanagan
Food and eating–fiction: Harper; 
Merrell
Friends–fiction: Abdel-Fattah; Air-
good; Dowell; Hoole; López; Mc-
Bride; Merrell; Stead; Stiefvater
Friends–stories: Knudsen; Kraegel 
Future–fiction: Martin; Shusterman
Genocide–fiction: McCormick
Ghosts–fiction: Fleming; Garsee; 
Levy
Ghosts–stories: Lachenmeyer; Miller
Government: Townsend
Grandfathers–fiction: Ylvisaker
Grandmothers–fiction: Ada
GRAPHIC NOVELS: Fearing; Ten-
Napel; Townsend; Vance; Yakin
Grief–fiction: Ada; Burg; McBride; 
Oates
Hair–stories: Barton
Halloween: Bracegirdle; Lachen-
meyer; Miller
Health: Murphy
Heroes–fiction: Harper
HISTORICAL FICTION: Gregory; 
Haines; Hayles; Kelley; Tashjian; 
Yakin; Ylvisaker
History, U.S.: Burleigh; Ray; 
Townsend 
History, world: Macaulay; Murphy
Holidays: Bracegirdle
HORROR: Barraclough; Ghoul-
stone
HUMOR: Barton; Bracegirdle; Fal-
coner; Fearing; Fox; Goodman; 
Harper; Knudsen; LaRochelle; 
Lewis; Maizes; Manning; Miller; 
Pinkwater; Robinson; Rosenthal; 
Saudo; Vere; Wojtowycz
Identity–fiction: Levithan; Zhang
Imaginary creatures–fiction: Wil-
liamson
Imagination–stories: Maizes
Immigrants–fiction: Farish
India–stories: Scott
Islam: Ali-Karamali
Jews–fiction: Haines
Knights–stories: Kraegel; Wojtowycz 
Language arts: Ada; Koertge; 
Rosenthal
Latinos–fiction: López
Literature, English: Oppel
Magic–fiction: Hartman; Lanagan; 
Trent; Umansky
MAGICAL REALISM: Knutsson
Mathematics: Long
Missing persons–fiction: Carter, R; 
Vaught; Warman 
Monkeys–stories: Browne; Fox
Monsters–stories: Barton; Vere
Mothers–fiction: Farrish; Lyon
Mothers–stories: Yum 
Music and musicians–fiction: Hart-
man; Tashjian 
MYSTERIES: Goeglein; O’Connor; 
Templeman; Vaught 
Native Americans: Ray 
Natural disasters–fiction: Laybourne
Nature study: Goodman; Hoose
Nuns–fiction: Gregory 
Obsessive-compulsive disorder– 
fiction: Brown
Pigs–stories: Falconer
POETRY: Lewis; Loth
Pregnancy–fiction: Kephart; Lyon
Prejudice–fiction: Zhang
Presidents: Townsend
Prison–fiction: Stasse
Private investigators–fiction: Haines 
Puzzles–fiction: Templeman 
Rabbits–stories: Knudsen; McCarty; 
Pinkwater
Readers theater: Koertge 
Reading, aloud: Fleming
Reading, easy: Harper; Knudsen; 
O’Connor; Trine 
Reading, reluctant: Ghoulstone; 
Goodman; Shusterman
60  •  The BulleTin
Refugees–fiction: Farish; McCormick
Relationships–fiction: Calonita; Hesse; 
Hoole; Horvath; Jaden; Levithan; 
Mandanna; Merrell; Oppel; Pitcher
Religious studies: Ali-Karimali
Revenge–fiction: Garsee 
Rock and roll–fiction: Tashjian 
ROMANCE: Anderson; Carter, R; 
Martin; Rossetti
SCARY STORIES: Fleming
School–fiction: Abdel-Fattah; Burg; 
Calonita; Clements; Dowell; Fear-
ing; O’Connor; Oates
School–stories: Yum 
Science: Hoose; Murphy
SCIENCE FICTION: Kinkaid; 
Knutsson; Lo; Mandanna; Stasse; 
Vance; Zhang
Scotland–fiction: Williamson 
Secrets–fiction: Jaden; Lo; McBride; 
Stead 
Selkies–fiction: Lanagan
SHORT STORIES: Fleming; Scieszka
Sisters–fiction: Barraclough; Jaden; 
Warman 
Soccer–stories: Boelts 
Social studies: Ali-Karamali 
Space travel–fiction: Fearing
Spain–fiction: Kephart
SPECULATIVE FICTION: Levithan 
Sports–fiction: Scieszka; Ylvisaker
Sports–stories: Boelts 
STEAMPUNK: Trent 
Storytime: Browne
Superheroes–fiction: Trine
SUPERNATURAL STORIES: Barra-
clough; Bick; Carter, R; Garsee; 
Levy; Oppel; Rossetti
SURVIVAL STORIES: Hesse; Kelley; 
Laybourne; Stasse; Stiefvater
SUSPENSE: Garsee; Monaghan; 
Templeman; Vaught 
Teachers–fiction: Clements
Television–stories: McCarty 
Terrorism–fiction: Monaghan
Tigers–stories: LaRochelle
Time travel–fiction: Carter, R 
Video games–fiction: Kinkaid 
Voyages and travel–fiction: Brown; 
Carter, S.; Hoole: Kephart; Keyes
Weather–fiction: Clements; Lay-
bourne
Weather–stories: Bauer 
Witches–fiction: Umansky
Women’s studies: Ray 
Word games: Rosenthal 
World cultures: Ali-Karamali
Writers and writing–fiction: Calhoun
Zombies–fiction: Bick; Ghoulstone
