U
ILLIN
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
rary and Information Science
University of Illinois Pr
4 
bA
41- 
f
* " [An] endearing reminiscence."*
Re 
ae 
roer,
PATRICIA 
PoLACCo
A "Featuring an obnoxious, freckle-faced, bespectacled boy and a
comforting, tale-telling grandmother, this autobiographical story is
as satisfying as a warm slice of apple pie."
-
Starred, School Library Journal*
I "The text rings true with the authentic battling words of child-
hood spats. Breezy, zestfully hued artwork affords Polacco's
characters ... an almost irrepressible energy."
-
Starred, Publishers Weekly
0-671-72751-6 / $15.00 / Ages 4-7
An ALA Notable Book
An SLJ Best Book of the Year
SIMON & SCHUSTER BOOKS FOR YOUNG READERS
An imprint of Simon & Schuster Children's Publishing Division
866 Third Avenue * New York, NY 10022
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
May 1995
Vol.48 No. 9
A LOOK INSIDE
297 THE BIG PICTURE
The Great Fire by Jim Murphy
298 NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed tides include:
302 * In the Middle of the Night by Robert Cormier
303 * The Midwife's Apprentice by Karen Cushman
304 * The Warm Place by Nancy Farmer
318 * Too FarAway to Touch written by Leslda Newman;
illustrated by Catherine Stock
322 * Pinocchio's Sister by Jan Slepian
329 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
330 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
STAFF
Roger Sutton, Editor (RS)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Susan Dove Lempke, Reviewer (SDL)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Heather McCammond-Watts, Editorial Assistant (HMW)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS ADVISORY BOARD
Leigh Estabrook, Dean, GSLIS, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Selma K. Richardson, Professor, GSLIS
Christine Jenkins, Assistant Professor, GSLIS
Richard C. Anderson, Director, Center for the Study of Reading, UIUC
Jean Osbom, Associate Director, Center for the Study of Reading
P. David Pearson, Dean, College of Education, UIUC
Violet J. Harris, Associate Professor, College of Education
Nancy O'Brien, Education Subject Specialist, Library, UIUC
Peggy Miller, Associate Professor, Department of Speech Communication, UIUC
Ann D. Carlson, Associate Professor, GSLIS, Rosary College
Janice Harrington, Head of Children's Services, Champaign Public Library
Elizabeth Huntoon, Director Systemwide Children's Services, Chicago Public Library
Janie Schomberg, Librarian, Leal Elementary School, Urbana, Illinois
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $35.00; individuals, $29.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster. Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Roger Sutton, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 1512 N. Fremont St., #105,
Chicago, IL 60622
Second-class postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
O 1995 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration from Harper's Weekly, October 18, 1871, reproduced in The Great Fire @1995
and used by permission of Scholastic Inc.
MAY 1995 
* 297
THE BIG PICTURE
The Great Fire
by Jim Murphy
A peg leg wedged into the floorboards of a burning barn, a leather hat writhing in
the heat, fireproof buildings gutted, beerhall carousers singing amid the blaze-
the 1871 Chicago Fire has all the stuff a young pyrophile's dreams are made of.
This account offers not only the luridly enticing details disaster junkies crave, but
also a more complex analysis of the causes of the conflagration than is usually
offered in children's history books, and an examination of evolving fire apocrypha
that introduces young readers to some rudimentary historiography.
Murphy opens with a riveting portrait of a tinder town ready to ignite. Wooden
buildings, roofed with tar, huddle together on small city lots. Commercial enter-
prises that run on volatile materials are interspersed throughout residential neigh-
borhoods, and the city is girded with wooden sidewalks waiting to conduct flames
through a "highly combustible knot." Add a lengthy spell of dry weather with
high winds and the scene is set for disaster.
Why one particular barn fire in a season's worth of similar fires blazed out of
control has been the subject of debate since the original inquest, and Murphy
weighs the evidence as he describes events which, but for their consequences, could
play as comedy. Human error undoubtedly contributes: no alarm bell sounds at
the Courthouse; visual sightings are inaccurate and wagons are dispatched to the
wrong street; one patrolman ignores a supervisor's signal order, while another turns
in an inaccurate second alarm. Even nature conspires against containment as an
updraft ignites a church spire, hurling embers across the river into another quad-
rant of the city.
But of course it's the human melodrama the audience expects, and as Murphy
traces the fire's progress, he also deftly incorporates the testimonies of four eyewit-
nesses who observe the inferno from radically different vantage points. Joseph
Chamberlin and Horace White, both newspapermen, initially savor their encoun-
ter with what is obviously a major news item. White describes a scene of orderly
evacuation: "There was no panic, no frenzy, no boisterousness, but only the haste
which the situation authorized." This is definitely not the experience of Claire
Inness and Alexander Frear. Separated from her family by a panicking mob, twelve-
year-old Claire is trapped in an alley and receives no aid from people in flight;
Frear, attempting to move his in-laws to safety, encounters "a mob of men and
women, all screaming and shouting... intercepting each other as if deranged."
Here Murphy makes an analytical leap at which children's authors often balk-
he guides readers into considering circumstances and predispositions that influ-
ence the disparate accounts. Do Horace White's public statements reflect his role
as civic booster? ("After all," Murphy points out, "a city that had gone wild would
not instill much confidence in potential business investors.") Could a shift in the
wind simply have bought White's neighborhood time to make an orderly retreat?
298 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Chamberlin's testimony concerning two drunken boys and "wretched
female[s] ... rushing out almost naked" should be weighed against his known dis-
taste for the inhabitants of the De Koven Street area. In the concluding chapter,
"Myth and Reality," Murphy demonstrates how similar attitudes, among mem-
bers of White's and Chamberlin's class, would direct public outrage against society's
easiest targets-Mrs. O'Leary, portrayed as an old hag who burned the barn for
the insurance money, and "a drunken Fire Department," unable to respond to an
emergency, creating a legacy of urban myth that lingers today.
Carefully credited and captioned period photographs and engravings, collected
by the author, mirror the range of experiences presented within the text: calm
spectators view the blaze from the river bank; a child is trampled by a fleeing
crowd; booster spirit emerges in a "Laborers Wanted" sign perched on the portico
of the burnt-out Insurance Exchange. Each chapter concludes with an identical
base map, shaded to indicate the current extent of the fire; the tiny area of the fire's
origin is pindotted on each map-a chilling visual reminder of the fragile infra-
structure, bungled communications, and plain rotten luck that condemned a city
to ashes. (See imprint information on p. 318.)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ADLER, DAVID A. 
Child of the Warsaw Ghetto; illus. by Karen Ritz. 
Holiday
House, 1995 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1160-5 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 3-5
With a broader canvas than A Picture Book ofAnne Frank (BCCB 3/93) or Hilde
and Eli (11/94), this author-illustrator team's latest Holocaust biography moves
beyond the picture-book audience. The book focuses upon death-camp survivor
Froim Baum, who grew up in the Warsaw Ghetto and was sent at age twelve by his
widowed and impoverished mother to live at the fabled Janusz Korczak's orphan-
age. Because Froim was not wearing his Jewish armband at the time, he was not
taken with Korczak and the other children to Treblinka; instead, Froim and his
family paid smugglers to get them out of the Ghetto to a relative's house where
they were captured some months later. In order to convey a wider picture of the
Ghetto (and the uprising, which occurred after Froim escaped), Adler necessarily
incorporates more straightforward historical information than in the previous books,
making the book less suited to reading aloud but more useful for middle-grades
research and independent reading. Appropriately, Ritz's charcoal-and-pastel illus-
trations (on somber gray pages) have a more sophisticated tone, and they are mod-
eled on photographs (some well-known) but do not seem stiff. RS
ANHOLT, CATHERINE 
What Makes Me Happy?; written and illus. by Catherine
and Laurence Anholt. 
Candlewick, 1995 
26p
ISBN 1-56402-482-2 
$13.95 
R 3-6 yrs
"What makes me laugh?" asks the little girl on the first page; the recto responds
MAY 1995 
* 299
with "tickly toes/ a big red nose/ being rude/ silly food/ acting crazy/ my friend
Maisie." Next a little boy asks, "What makes me cry?" and offers similarly rhymed
answers, and other children explore the causes of boredom, pride, jealousy, fear,
and so on. The answers-sometimes verses, sometimes a pithy single reply-are
tidy and clever, and the examples understandable (although there seems to be a
moment of serious naivet&--one of the scary things mentioned is "gangs," here
represented by jeering toddlers in costumes). The line-and-watercolor illustra-
tions have a plenitude of delicate detail and a solidifying use of hatching and pat-
terns, and the layout nicely balances the varied formats on the recto against the
constant visual refrain of the question-posing verso. This is friendly without being
sappy and honest with a light touch ("What makes me jealous?" ask the identical
twins; "Her!" they respond, pointing to each other) on a sometimes difficult sub-
ject. Kids will recognize the emotions and the situations, and they may want to
start listing responses of their own. DS
ARMSTRONG, JENNIFER 
King Crow; illus. by Eric Rohmann. 
Crown, 1995 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-517-59635-0 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-59634-2 
$15.00 
R 6-10 yrs
Armstrong blends elements of folktales, mythology, and ancient Irish history into
an original tale of two kings, one good and one evil. Cormac, beloved by his
people, is forced to fight evil Bregant, and in the battle falls from his horse and
loses his sight. The next day, wandering blind, he meets a crow wounded by an
arrow; when the king kindly removes the arrow, the crow promises to return the
favor, and he does so when Cormac is taken prisoner. Each morning the bird visits
Cormac's cell and tells him what he has heard, allowing Cormac to fool his jailers
into believing he has mysterious powers; the clever king also manages to take each
report and turn it into a foreshadowing of Bregant's death. By the third day,
Bregant is so shaken he visits the cell himself, and he ends up plunging "from the
tower to the torch-lit courtyard below." Armstrong's story is solidly constructed
and satisfying, though somewhat difficult to read aloud smoothly. Rohmann's
paintings are the Gone with the Wind of picture-book illustrations, providing spec-
tacle on a grand scale. He avoids the trap many lush books fall into of being stiff
and dull: these pictures roar with movement and life, while Cormac himself re-
mains the center of calm. The opening pages alone, showing the opposing armies
with their different shields, flags, and strange musical instruments, will give obser-
vant children much to enjoy, and those favoring drama will not be disappointed.
In his zest for breaking free of constraints, the artist may have used too many
unconventional perspectives, and his choice of never showing Cormac and Bregant
face to face seems odd, but overall, this is a rich combination of story and illustra-
tion with plenty to gratify action fans. SDL
BANKS, JACQUELINE TURNER 
Egg-Drop Blues. 
Houghton, 1995 
[128p]
ISBN 0-395-70931-8 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 4-6
Judge and his twin brother Jury, from Project Wheels, etc., are back, and Judge
narrates the story of the discovery of his dyslexia, his struggle to pass sixth-grade
science, and his and Jury's participation in the egg-drop contest in the science fair;
while he's attempting to deal with all that, his divorced father announces he's
remarrying. The plot threads aren't well-defined and characterization is some-
300 
* THE BULLETIN
times a bit vague; it's not clear, for instance, why Jury is being such a pill for much
of the book, or why there is repeated portentous mention ofJury's participation in
forbidden football games (unless it's supposed to be a teaser for the next volume in
the series). Judge, Jury, and their "posse" (group of school friends), however, are a
likable multiracial bunch of kids, and the adults are warm and goodhearted with-
out being bland or sappy. Kids will appreciate Judge's account of his battles with
the exigencies of daily life, and fans of the first two books will want to tag along
with the twins in their new outing. DS
BAT-AMI, MIRIAM 
Dear Elijah. Farrar, 1995 
106p
ISBN 0-374-31755-0 
$14.00 
Ad Gr. 4-7
When a heart attack lands Rebecca's father in the hospital, she pours out her thoughts
in a series of letters to the prophet Elijah, who, the author notes at the beginning,
is seen by some as an "ever-present wise man who wanders around in disguise and
aids those in distress." In many of the letters, Rebecca reflects upon what it is like
to be twelve years old and on her feelings about being Jewish and the coming
Passover holiday. She speaks to Elijah with great familiarity: "E., you look posi-
tively wonderful. And you're riding your chariot... (It had a tune-up, by the
way.)" The narrator's tone is kept informal, but she rarely sounds like a modern
girl; despite the author's working into the text Rebecca's statement "I love old,
outdated expressions," the protagonist's use of phrases such as "Mr. Big Cheese," a
"quick-change artist," and calling her sister a "looker" sometimes makes her sound
like a slangy sixty-year-old. The author also seems to be trying too hard to make
Passover preparations sound thrilling: "When one of us found a chometzdikeh
item, that person shouted, 'Found it!' You'd have thought we were playing Jeop-
ardy! or Bingo or Wheel of Fortune, and Vanna White was wheeling in the hot
prizes." And after giving such a build-up, Bat-Ami makes an odd choice in remov-
ing her heroine from the scene on Passover, when, after her father is moved to
intensive care, she runs from the house and sits writing a letter about what she
imagines is happening at the seder. However, the author does create a vivid char-
acter in Rebecca, and she gives young readers some insight into the life of an Or-
thodox Jewish girl. A thorough glossary is included. SDL
BlSCHHOFF-MIERSCH, ANDREA 
Do You Know the Difference?; written by Andrea
and Michael Bischhoff-Miersch; tr. by Rosemary Lanning; illus. by Christine
Faltermayr. 
Neugebauer/North-South, 1995 26p
Library ed. ISBN 1-55858-372-6 
$14.88
Trade ed. ISBN 1-55858-371-8 
$14.95 
R Gr. 2-4
Vivid illustrations and clear explanations dispel some common confusion in this
picture-book-sized volume. On facing pages, two similar animals are compared,
beginning with gorillas and chimpanzees. While highlighting the differences be-
tween the pairs, the text also gives brief background information and the occa-
sional fun fact-for instance, that the ancient Egyptians mummified crocodiles.
Some of the comparisons point out distinguishing characteristics of animals which
are easily confused (alligators/crocodiles, jaguars/leopards, seals/sea lions) while
others show animals with surprising differences or similarities (though hyenas and
African wild dogs resemble each other, hyenas are more closely related to cats,
while African wild dogs are in the dog family). Picture captions and line drawings
in each border give additional, though sometimes repetitive, information; the line
MAY 1995 * 301
drawings are disappointingly inconsistent, sometimes effectively contrasting ani-
mal parts, but often just throwing in an unrelated piece of information. Faltermayr's
paintings, in a softened photorealistic style, work particularly well; she captures
the imposing presence of the animals and plays up the features (such as the jaguar's
stockier build) which differentiate them. With its pinpointing of animal phy-
siques, this makes a fine choice for preparing children for zoo trips and for clearing
up questions later. SDL
CANNON, JANELL 
Trupp: A Fuzzhead Tale; written and illus. by Janell
Cannon. 
Harcourt, 1995 
48p
ISBN 0-15-200130-1 
$15.00 
R 3-6yrs
"Fuzzheads" look a bit like upright, human-sized Persian cats, so it stands to rea-
son that Trupp, seized by a desire to see the world, must disguise himself for his
adventure among people. With the help of a raven, Krok, Trupp denudes a scare-
crow of its clothes, and he and Krok make their way to the big city and are taken
under the wing of Bernice, a bag lady. From the creator of the popular Stellaluna,
this is another striking production, and while the slender story is overwhelmed by
the pictures, there's enough of it to keep the book off the coffee table. (As far as
saintly bag-lady books go, this one is cozy but fairly unsentimental.) Fluffy white
Trupp with his clear aqua eyes makes for a formidable if cuddly visual presence,
and his delicate feline looks are given weight by his boyish posture and move-
ments. Cannon places the characters against stylized backgrounds just this side of
surreal (such as a picture of Trupp making his way through a steep sandstone
canyon bisected by a slash of blue sky), but the perspective is dose and focused
tightly on the figures so that we don't lose the action to the scenery. RS
COLE, HENRY 
Jack's Garden; written and illus. by Henry Cole. 
Greenwillow,
1995 
[25p]
ISBN 0-688-13501-3 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
3-7 yrs
This time, Jack plants a flower garden instead of building a house. In the middle
of each double-page spread, we see Jack's garden with a border of related items; on
the first, "This is the garden that Jack planted," Jack is standing on the bare dirt,
holding a (labeled) shovel, while outside the frame are gardening tools, also la-
beled. The final version of the cumulative verse reads: "These are the birds that
chased the insects that sipped nectar from the flowers that blossomed from the
buds that formed on the plants that grew from the seedlings that sprouted with the
rain that wet the seeds that fell on the soil that made up the garden that Jack
planted," and along the way we have seen labeled seeds, insects, clouds, birds, and
eggs. Unfortunately, one problem pervades the book: sizes of objects are dispro-
portionate, beginning with the ladybird beetles (commonly known as ladybugs)
on the cover that are as large as the pictured yellow warbler and continuing through-
out. Jack plants an interesting variety of weeds, wildflowers, and conventional
flowers, but Cole doesn't follow any of them all the way from seed to flower, and
the final picture shows only a few of the plants. Cole's colored-pencil drawings
will appeal to any nature lover, however, since he wisely adds enough wildlife to
amuse children who would find plants alone boring, and his rhyme may even get
some young fingers itching to garden. SDL
302 
* 
THE BULLETIN
COOPER, MELROSE 
IGot Community; illus. by Dale Gottlieb. 
Holt, 1995 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-3179-0 
$14.95 
M 
5-8 yrs
The idea of this book-the celebration of various individuals' contributions to the
community-may not be particularly original, but it's a goodhearted one, as a
first-person narration praises the virtues of the young speaker's neighbor, babysitter,
friend, librarian, and others who help, care for, and guide the narrator. Unfortu-
nately, the well-meaning message can't compensate for an inadequate medium.
The rhymed text may be labeled "vernacular" on the jacket flap, but this is nobody's
demotic speech: "I got a sitter, helps me safe,/ Pulls on my gloves so my hands
don't chafe,/ Ties up my hood when the wind acts furious,/ Answers my askin's
when I get curious." The language throughout is similarly a blend of "vernacular"
(represented by dropping the goff of participles and replacing them with apostro-
phes), the saccharine, and the syntactically confusing (the fireman is "heavin' a
hose in booted feet"); the ideas in the couplets seem driven by the forced rhymes
(as in the hand-chafing example above), and the scansion wobbles. It's also pecu-
liar that one of the many narrators ends the book by suggesting that the commu-
nity should "count on me!" when there's been nary a hint of reciprocity. Gottlieb's
bright acrylic illustrations, showing a happy multicultural cast, are solid and cheer-
ful but slighter and less imaginative than usual, with little variety in composition
or perspective. This may warm the cockles of a few adult hearts, but it probably
won't induce respect or appreciation for the community in kids who didn't have
such feelings already. DS
CORMIER, ROBERT 
In the Middle of the Night. Delacorte, 1995 
[256p]
ISBN 0-385-32158-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
In three narrative threads that twist into each other, a woman nurses her rage over
a childhood accident that "killed" her many years ago, a man still wrestles with his
guilt over that tragic event, and his son Denny finds himself drawn into the pain of
them both. Lulu was thought dead after the balcony in the Globe Theater crashed
to the ground (and killed twenty-two children), but, revived by doctors, she lived
again to focus her revenge on the boy she thought responsible: John Paul, a teen-
aged usher who had been sent up to the balcony to investigate strange noises and
who inadvertently started a fire when he lit a match for light. Despite John Paul's
official exoneration, Lulu has been tormenting him with phone calls and letters
ever since, and Denny has grown up with the family rule that he must never an-
swer the telephone. One day, though, as the twenty-fifth anniversary of the trag-
edy approaches, he cannot resist, and Lulu finds a new victim for her rage. Morally,
this is less complicated than much of Cormier's work and in fact less complicated
than the book seems to want to be: while Lulu, John Paul, and Denny each wrestle
with demons, their struggles fail to parallel or meet on any plane more than the
narrative. Lulu's fear of the death she got a glimpse of, Jean Paul's private atone-
ment, Denny's fear of involvement with anything that might be trouble--each is
compelling, but none have enough to do with one other. As far as storytelling
goes, though', it's classic Cormier. Relatively speaking, however, it's easy Cormier,
and kids who find themselves at a loss with the narrative intricacies of After the
First Death or Fade should have no trouble following the plot and its suspenseful
turns. RS
MAY 1995 
* 303
CRIMI, CAROLYN 
Outside, Inside; illus. by Linnea Asplind Riley. 
Simon,
1995 
[34 p]
ISBN 0-671-88688-6 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 3-7 yrs
An early morning thunderstorm blows up outside, but inside Molly wakes up,
puts on her red flannel robe and her slippers, and spends a cozy time with her cat
and her bird. For each event outside, there is a parallel inside: "Outside, the rain
spills from the clouds, shussh-wissh, shussh-wissh, shussh-wissh. Inside, the clock
ticks in the hall, tink-tunk, tink-tunk, tink-tunk." Once the storm winds down
and the sun comes out, "Molly swings the door open ... and lets the outside in!"
The nicely rhythmic text evokes the pleasures of wild weather while one is safe
inside, and many of the sounds are repeated within lines without actually rhym-
ing. Riley's pictures carry through the echoing effect of the parallels in the text by
using parallel shapes in the pictures. For instance, when a frog is shown outside,
the syrup and butter on Molly's pancakes make the shape of a frog inside-in fact,
frog shapes are repeated throughout. The painted-paper illustrations feature curves
with lots of movement, solid shapes with speckled highlighting, and intense though
never garish colors. The rabbit outside huddling against the tempest reflects a
child's fear of storms, but Molly's calm acceptance of the weather helps make this
a good choice for soothing the jitters. SDL
CUSHMAN, KAREN 
The Midwife's Apprentice. Clarion, 1995 
[112p]
ISBN 0-395-69229-6 
$10.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
She starts out as Brat, aged twelve or thirteen; the midwife finds her hiding in a
dungheap, christens her Beetle (short for dungbeetle), and takes her on as a slavey
and gofer. As Beetle begins to grow in confidence and in knowledge, she names
herself Alyce, and although she suffers setbacks (a crisis in confidence when at-
tempting to deliver a baby on her own), she eventually realizes that midwifery is
her destiny and becomes a full-fledged apprentice. As she did in Catherine Called
Birdy (BCCB 6/94), Cushman blends earthy realism with a certain pastoral cozi-
ness in her picture of early England, which, added to an appealing heroine, make
the story an absorbing tale of another time. Her depiction of inarticulate Alyce's
gradual blossoming remains credible, never demanding too much of her heroine
or her readers. The book's brevity and simplicity also commend it to older readers
who find the era intriguing but are intimidated by more epic tales of medieval life.
Cushman adds an historical note about midwifery, which includes mention of the
maternal and child mortality that never appears in the story itself. This is an
offbeat, well-crafted story; fans of the author's first book will enjoy it. DS
DEAN, JAN 
Finders. McElderry, 1995 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-689-50612-0 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
Helen is sixteen, and she's starting to question the sufficiency of her adopted fam-
ily; her beloved grandfather's attempt to help by taking her away for a weekend
goes wrong when the old man suddenly dies. Soon Helen realizes that, biological
relative or not, her grandfather has passed on his psychic gift of "finding" to her,
and she undertakes to find a missing artifact for a mysterious Mr. Morgan, who
had originally been seeking her grandfather's help. It becomes apparent that Mr.
304 
* THE BULLETIN
Morgan too has his powers and that Helen's gift will lead her into danger as well as
knowledge. Dean has smoothly combined the family drama with the supernatural
story (and thrown in an appealing boyfriend for Helen to boot, in the person of
next-door-neighbor Col) with excellent results. The complex relationships in
Helen's family, with her hostility and similarity to her demanding mother and her
legacy of clairvoyance from her grandfather, are subtly depicted and imply that
there's more to passing on familial characteristics than genetics. The spooky story
of Mr. Morgan, a selkie who tries to lure Helen to her doom for knowing too
much, is a tasty blend of ominous and appealing. Dean's depiction of Helen's
fragmented awakening to her gift occasionally makes things a bit murky, but the
easy dialogue and Helen's friendship with loyal Col keep this an accessible and
appealing fantasy. DS
DEMUTH, PATRICIA BRENNAN 
In Trouble with Teacher; illus. by True
Kelley. 
Dutton, 1995 
[80p]
ISBN 0-525-45286-9 
$13.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Montgomery's third-grade teacher, Mrs. Wix, seems much more demanding than
nice Miss Pink from second grade, who never made him read aloud and gave easy
spelling words. Montgomery is certain he is doomed to participate in what he
terms the "Flunker's March," where children who miss too many of Mrs. Wix's
overly tricky spelling words must go to the front of the classroom and speak pri-
vately to her. Sure enough, he flunks the test ("Any kid could tell them that
elephant has anf in the middle, not ap !"), but discovers to his relief that, instead
of yelling at him, Mrs. Wix offers a plan to help him improve his spelling and even
compliments his storytelling skills. Demuth addresses a fear all children feel at
some point--getting in trouble with the teacher-with gentle humor, although
her tone often sounds more like an adult interpreting the frustrations of child-
hood: "There were so many spelling rules to learn, so many exceptions to every
rule." A scene with a baseball game that distracts Montgomery from studying
seems dropped in, but the other subplot of his friendship with Ben, who can't
draw any better than Montgomery spells, is nicely integrated. Kelley's line draw-
ings provide additional laughs, and their quantity helps make this a good choice
for children moving out of easy readers into short chapter books. SDL
FARMER, NANCY 
The Warm Place. Jackson/Orchard, 1995 
152p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08738-7 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-06888-9 
$15.95 
R Gr. 4-7
Ruva is still just a slip of a young giraffe when she is captured in Africa by the cruel
and unscrupulous Skeekee, who intends to sell her to a zoo in San Francisco. The
wise sea rat Rodentus von Stroheim the Third is only the first of the helpers to
come to Ruva's aid; others include the chameleon Nelson, another rat named Troll,
and an African-American boy named Jabila-not to mention the voracious colony
of Gross Green Sea-Going Sargasso Snails. Animal fantasies have an annoying
tendency to turn coy, but Farmer keeps her story fresh through lots of action and
snappy dialogue (Rodentus tells Ruva, "They are taking you to a zoo where ugly
little humans called children will throw popcorn at you"). As she demonstrated in
The Ear, the Eye and the Arm (BCCB 3/94), Farmer knows how to keep her char-
acters moving, from Africa across the sea to the zoo, back out to sea and home
MAY 1995 
* 
305
again, pitting brave if sometimes cantankerous heroes against the demonic Skeekee
and his horrible family. The judiciously paced text in twenty-four suspenseful
chapters offers a month's worth of readalouds. RS
FERRIS,JEAN 
Signs ofLife. 
Farrar, 1995 
122p
ISBN 0-374-36909-7 
$14.00 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Sixteen-year-old Hannah's life was altered irreversibly when her identical twin,
Molly, died in a car accident on New Year's Eve; now Hannah and her parents are
vacationing in France, trying to bring the shattered family back together again
while her father attains his long-cherished goal of seeing the Lascaux cave paint-
ings. Hannah is disturbed by her reaction to the cave paintings and to the area:
she sees visions of the prehistoric people who created the art, visions that suggest a
long-ago conflict connected to her own. Ferris, author of the knotty family drama
Relative Strangers (BCCB 11/93), displays again her smooth writing and her keen
perception about family balance as Hannah struggles to come to terms with her
grief and her only-child status. Hannah's visions, however, never quite ring true,
and the italicized interpolations amid the real plot detract from the intensity of the
story. More successful, if a bit overidealized, is Hannah's brief romance with a
young Gypsy from a nearby traveling circus; readers may, in fact, be more involved
with the pastoral tale of young love in the French countryside than with the core
story of adjustment to loss. DS
FISHER, LEONARD EVERETT, ad. 
Moses; ad. and illus. by Leonard Everett
Fisher. 
Holiday House, 1995 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1149-4 
$15.95 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
With mystery, restraint, and solemnity befitting the patriarch, Fisher's thick brush
strokes shape the contours of Moses' long life. From the crisp outlines of river
reeds slicing across the eerie moonlit night when Moses is stealthily hidden in the
bulrushes, to the sunbaked city of Kadesh where the Israelites are dwarfed by the
imposing earthen walls and deeply cut shadows, the emotional impact of this story
is in the illustrations. In contrast, the text is a distant summary. Some of the
transitions are awkward and truncated, and God speaks as if he has an ancient chip
on his shoulder: "Thou shalt have no other gods before me. Remember?" The
Exodus is a complex tale, and Fisher does try to cover as much of the entire story as
possible. It is useful to have the magnitude of the journey pointed out (and mapped
out as well), but there are many elements that need greater elucidation and depth,
such as the concept of Passover and an explanation of the Commandments vs. the
Law. The factual narrative is biblically accurate, but the staid text and dramatic art
are speaking at different levels and the storytelling is stranded somewhere in be-
tween. A bibliography and maps are included. HMW
FrTCH, JANET 
Kicks. 
Clarion, 1995 
[192p]
ISBN 0-395-69624-0 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 7-10
Laurie, fifteen, has been following the lead of her dangerous friend Carla, shoplift-
ing at Frederick's of Hollywood, hitchhiking to the Santa Monica beach, picking
up cute guys. But Laurie, inhibited by the strictures of her stem mother, a Russian
emigre, isn't that far gone, and recovers her wits in time to both pull Carla from
the precipice and give her the boot. Although never as onstage sordid as Shelley
306 
* THE BULLETIN
Stoehr's Weird on the Outside (BCCB 3/95), there are plenty of seamy moments
here to keep fans entertained; pawed and put-upon at every turn, Laurie proves as
adept as any Victorian heroine at defending her virtue. While the trappings may
be tawdry, the book, like Go Ask Alice, is rock-bottom conservative, with its you-
should-have-listened-to-mama theme played out as Laurie's mother rescues Carla
from what is to all intents and purposes an opium den, populated by drug-dealing,
sex-fiend bikers. Fun? Sure. Shallow? Absolutely. RS
FLETCHER, RALPH 
FigPudding. Clarion, 1995 
[160p]
ISBN 0-395-71125-8 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-6
In a series of linked, short-story-like episodes, twelve-year-old Cliff recalls what
turned out to be a rough year in his family's life. It's a big family-six kids-and
while sibling tussles are the order of the day, bonds remain strong even when
second-grader Teddy seems doomed to sit in exile beneath the kitchen table for-
ever for his various transgressions, or when lone sister Cyn decides she'd much
rather belong to the vegetarian family down the street. None of them is prepared
for the sudden death of eight-year-old Brad in a bicycling accident, and, truth-
fully, neither are readers, for Brad, despite a memorable evening when he ate the
heads off of everybody's marshmallow chickens, is fictionally the least developed
of the family members. While we perhaps aren't as saddened by the death as we
seem meant to be, the grief of Cliff and the others is palpable and honest in its
range of manifestations. References to a grandmother's having fought for suffrage
and an uncle's having fought in World War II seem to set the book sometime in
the 1960s or early '70s, and the book has the quality of an affectionate family
memoir, with humor triumphing over sadness and funny specifics (punishment
goes for naught when it's discovered that Teddy likes life under the table) that give
the book a warm particularity. RS
FORRESTER, SANDRA 
Sound the Jubilee. 
Lodestar, 1995 
184 p
ISBN 0-525-67486-1 
$15.99 
R Gr. 5-8
Compared to her friends who toil in the cotton fields and live in decrepit slave
cabins, eleven-year-old slave Maddie has it fairly easy, working in the big house
under a relatively benign mistress and living with her family in relatively comfort-
able quarters off the kitchen. But, as Maddie's father warns, they are still not free,
and Maddie can see the results of brandings, whippings, and privations suffered by
the slaves less fortunate--or more courageous-than she. When the mistress,
escaping the nearby Union Army, takes Maddie's family with her to retreat on
North Carolina's Outer Banks, the family uses its chance to escape and join a
black settlement on Roanoke Island, protected-and exploited-by the Union
Army. While characterization is somewhat idealized and the writing prone to
telling more than showing, there is plenty of action, and Maddie's story is involv-
ing as well as revealing of a little-known piece of Civil War history. RS
FRENCH, VIVIAN 
Spider Watching; illus. by Alison Wisenfeld. 
Candlewick,
1995 
27p 
(Read and Wonder)
ISBN 1-56402-543-8 
$14.95 
Ad 4-6 yrs
A girl and her brother love spiders, but when cousin Helen comes for a visit, she
screams and runs away from the house spiders living in the shed. However, a
MAY 1995 
* 307
spider's web covered in dew does catch her interest, and when she accidentally
tears a hole in the web and sees how quickly and perfectly the spider works to
repair the damage, she begins to share the fascination her cousins have with the
eight-legged creatures. This story/science book puts background information about
spiders, with an assortment of one-line facts, on the left, and the story unfolds
independently on the right-hand pages. Though French accomplishes her goal of
encouraging children to appreciate spiders and not to shriek at their appearance,
this is one of the slighter entries in this series. The book, while pleasant enough, is
a barely fleshed-out anecdote with a few spider facts on the side. Wisenfeld's
watercolors achieve an unusual stencil effect, and her spiders are both delicate and
intricate; the people, in contrast, stand stiffly and stare blankly. Readers in sec-
tions of the country populated with brown recluse spiders may be concerned that
Helen is encouraged by the children to pick up the shed spiders; one picture does
show three poisonous spiders (northern black widow, red widow, and funnel weaver)
and the caption says, "Some spiders, like these, are deadly poisonous and should
never be touched." SDL
FROEHLICH, MARGARET 
WALDEN 
That Kookoory!; illus. by Maria
Frazee. 
Browndeer/Harcourt, 1995 
40p
ISBN 0-15-277650-8 
$15.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Rooster Kookoory is beside himself with excitement about the Edgerton Fair ("El-
ephants ... sword swallowers, fat ladies, tawny lions, roly-coasters!"), but his hu-
man friends don't really mind, saying, "Oh, that rooster! What a pester! What a
pother! What a love!" On fair day, a weasel tracks Kookoory throughout the town
as he wakes his friends up, and then trails him to Edgerton. When the weasel
makes his move, Kookoory's friends come to the rooster's rescue, and then spend
a happy day at the fair. While some readers will delight in Froehlich's wordplay
("The baker launched an eye-squinting sneezer of a cloud of powdered sugar at the
weasel"), others may grow impatient with the lengthy text and sometimes strained
verbiage ("They'd gone zippity-lu and jazz on the roly-coaster"). Illustrator Frazee
uses colored-ink washes and delicate black lines with great skill, achieving an old-
fashioned appearance that is refreshingly lively. Kookoory is both handsome and
comical, the people are nicely individualized, and in the background scenery Frazee
manages to include detail and a sense of sweep. SDL
GEORGE, LINDSAY BARRETT 
In the Woods: Who's Been Here?; written and illus. by
Lindsay Barrett George. 
Greenwillow, 1995 
42p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-12319-8 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-12318-X 
$15.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
A brother and sister take a walk with their dog through the woods, where they stop
to investigate evidence that animals have been there before them. George alter-
nates between illustrations showing the children as they point out their discoveries
(such as pinecone seeds on a stone ledge) and full-page spreads showing the animal
doing whatever left the traces behind (in this case, a red squirrel eating seeds).
Eight little mysteries are shown, some guessable, some not, culminating in the
sight of a picnic basket and a hiding adult (presumably their father). Some chil-
dren may be troubled by the startling intrusion of pictures showing a goshawk
drawing blood from a blue jay with its sharp talons, or of a fox killing a wood-
chuck; others, of course, will relish the peek into a less bland side of nature than
the text's tranquil tone might indicate. The alternation between events of the past
308 
* THE BULLETIN
and the present may confuse viewers, but George's gouache paintings capture a
remarkable range of textures and light, with great attention to detail in the wood-
land scenes. The final page gives brief factual information about the animals de-
picted. SDL
GREENWOOD, BARBARA 
A Pioneer Sampler: The Daily Life ofa Pioneer Family in
1840; illus. by Heather Collins. 
Ticknor, 1995 
240p
ISBN 0-395-71540-7 
$18.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Readers follow the fictional Robertson family through the course of a year to learn
about the chores and activities of pioneers, circa 1840. Each chapter, loosely orga-
nized around a theme such as "Sheep-Shearing" or "The Peddlar's Visit," includes
an anecdote involving a Robertson family member and about half a dozen focus
articles on related interests. Greenwood details such neglected topics as time-keep-
ing and trout-tickling while glossing over other child-pleasing but less delicate
matters-privies and the annual pig-slaughter. Occasionally the focus pieces, which
contain most of the volume's factual information, also incorporate references to
the Robertsons; students using this work for research must carefully sift fact from
fiction. Activity projects (several requiring adult assistance) range from the women's
crafts of dyeing and weaving and candledipping to methods for load lifting and
hauling relegated to pioneer men. Although the book was originally published in
Canada as A Pioneer Story: The Daily Life ofa Canadian Family in 1840, the locale
as presented here gets no more specific than "out west" or "the backwoods"; expe-
riences can be similarly generic: "Every pioneer family had a small flock of sheep."
Plentiful detailed sketches enhance the text; a glossary and index are included. EB
HALE, SARAH JOSEPHA 
Mary Hada Little Lamb; illus. by Salley Mavor. 
Kroupa/
Orchard, 1995 
26p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08725-5 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-06875-7 
$14.95 
R 
2-5 yrs
Artist Salley Mavor takes the almost too-familiar American children's poem and
gives it a new charge with her fabric-relief illustrations. The pictures look old-
fashioned, very much in keeping with the rhyme, but they're actually fresh and
unusual. Mavor combines fabrics, embroidery, and many other objects such as
small stones and pieces of wood into three-dimensional artwork which is then
photographed (with an occasional blurring in the photos). The people are fabric
dolls, while Mary's lamb, according to an artist's note, is covered with real wool
tied in french knots; the dolls seem a bit stiff, but the lamb is frolicsome and
expressive. While the pictures match the poem well, what kids will really enjoy is
poring over the many details and figuring out how Mavor made the apples on a
tree, lettuce in a garden, or Mary's toes. Even those older than the nursery-rhyme
set may want a chance to examine the craftsmanship here. Notes at the end explain
the disagreement over the authorship of the poem and the technique of the art-
work. SDL
HAN, SUZANNE CROWDER, ad. 
The Rabbit's Escape; illus. by Yumi Heo. 
Holt,
1995 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-2675-4 
$15.95 
R 5-8 yrs
Following the format of her previous volume, The Rabbit's Judgment (BCCB 5/
94), Crowder offers another Korean rabbit tale with text in Korean and English.
MAY 1995 
* 309
When the Dragon King of the East Sea falls ill, his physician tells him that he can
only be cured by eating the fresh raw liver of a rabbit. A loyal turtle leaves the sea
for the land and lures the rabbit back underwater, but the rabbit wiggles out of his
dilemma by claiming that he's left his liver aboveground ("Unfortunately, my liver
is not with me at the moment") and needs to go fetch it. All ends happily, as the
title suggests: Rabbit gets away, a god rewards the turtle for his fidelity with a
ginseng cure for the king, and the king recovers fully. Han's text is cean, direct,
and spirited, and the additional visceralness of the liver-eating motif should get
youngsters' attention. Heo's art (which is, according to the jacket flap, a combina-
tion of oil, pencil, and collage) often looks like intricate and stylized cave painting,
with figures flying through the pictures in happy defiance of gravity and perspec-
tive; the characters are original and eyecatching, with the Dragon King fiercely
angular, the turtle luminous and rueful, and the rabbit bulbous yet sly. A note on
Han's sources (basically directing readers to her adult collection of folktales) and
on the Korean alphabet are included. DS
HAUGAARD, ERIK CHRISAN 
The Revenge ofthe Forty-Seven Samurai. Houghton,
1995 
[240p]
ISBN 0-395-70809-5 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-9
Lord Kira demands a bribe; Lord Asano refuses to pay; insults and violence be-
tween the two lords unleash the Shogun's wrath and Lord Asano is forced to com-
mit ritual suicide, thus compelling his samurai retainers to commit their own lives
to avenge their dead master's honor. Narrator Jiro, a lowly servant in the chief
samurai's household, observes the intricate plans for revenge and, as a trustworthy
if not entirely enthusiastic vassal, he assists in preparing for the final assault on
Lord Kira. Privy to elements of the plan, but marginalized from the courtly code
that demands human life as payment for debts of honor, Jiro admires the bravery
of his betters even as he questions the value of their self-sacrifice. The narrator's
ambivalence allows Haugaard to explore ethical implications of the samurais' sui-
cidal mission of honor while he refrains from judging their actions. Plotting and
intrigue rather than swordplay propel the action, and bloodthirsty readers must
wait as patiently as the conspirators for the climactic attack. An epilogue leaves
readers to ponder the mores of this distant culture: Jiro is asked, "Would you have
done it?" "No, I would not.... But then I am not a samurai." EB
HAYASHI, NANCY 
Superbird to the Rescue; written and illus. by Nancy
Hayashi. 
Dutton, 1995 
118p
ISBN 0-525-45198-6 
$13.99 
R 
Gr. 3-5
When a sales clerk forgets to remove a security tag, Jesse and Walter accidentally
set offa store alarm, but their encounter with the store detective gives them a great
idea: they will catch shoplifters, too, with the aid of their walkie-talkies and Jesse's
pet parrot, Zenith. Zenith is so protective of Jesse that she swoops in to save him
whenever his brother beats up on him, so Jesse and Walter figure (mistakenly, as it
happens) that she will protect him while they are making their "citizen's arrests."
Though the action is fairly predictable, there are some good laughs here, and the
two young heroes are both likeable and true-to-life in their relish for concocting
schemes together. Hayashi's illustrations are casual and zesty. Aside from an abrupt
conclusion, this is a solidly entertaining choice for young readers. SDL
310 
* 
THE BULLETIN
HENs, ETHEL, ad. 
The Cat and the Cook and Other Fables of Krylov; illus. by
Anita Lobel. 
Greenwillow, 1995 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-12311-2 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-12310-4 
$15.00 
R 6-9 yrs
Anita Lobel's welcoming cover painting depicts (one assumes) the Russian fabulist
Ivan Krylov embraced by his muse, who wears a dress that is woven of stories: the
twelve brief fables that comprise this book. At their best, the fables demonstrate
the crisp irony that defines the genre. A hungry kitten learns her lesson only too
well when a starling convinces her to eat a goldfinch; another cat devours an entire
chicken while his master scolds and lectures, oblivious that "words are wasted when
it's time for action"; a kite brags of its heights until a lower-flying but untethered
butterfly points out that "I roam where I wish. I am free." Some of the selections
are slightly more allusive, and a couple ("The Donkey and the Bell," "The Eagle
and the Mole") seem to miss the points they were aiming for. Still, the book is an
able companion to the omnipresent Aesop, and Lobel's full-page watercolor-and-
gouache paintings use thick textures, warm tones, and a generous line to recreate a
bucolic Russian milieu. Heins provides a complete and informative note on Krylov
and her adaptation of his work. RS
HOPKINS, LEE BENNETT, comp. 
Small Talk: A Book of Short Poems; illus. by
Susan Gaber. 
Harcourt, 1995 
48p
ISBN 0-15-276577-8 
$14.00 
R 
Gr. 1-4
Hopkins collects thirty-three poems that together constitute no more than one
hundred lines of poetry: these are very short poems, indeed. Twenty-seven au-
thors are represented, ranging from Mother Goose to Carl Sandburg to several of
today's poets for children. Hopkins has loosely arranged the poems into seasons,
beginning with spring and Betsy Hearne's "Sssh": "Spring whispers secret/ rain to
the listening trees/ till they shout loud green." The poems gradually shift to sum-
mer, with lyrics about the sea and about being happily alone (X. J. Kennedy's "In
the summer young Angus McQuade/ Carries off to his castle of shade/ Two cool
soothing pillows,/ The Windin the Willows, And an ocean of iced lemonade") and
also about being lonely (Richard Wilbur's "What is the opposite of two? A lonely
me, a lonely you"). The second half of the book tends toward the melancholy, as
summer turns to fall and the verses dwell on change, growing old, and sadness. It
concludes with two more uplifting choices: Eve Merriam's gentle winter poem
ending "snowflake feathers/ from snow-white birds/ snow is a poem/ without any
words" and Victoria Forrester's poem about poems: "Paper windmills,/ softly
blow;/ let them turn,/ let them go./ A poem so spun/ may bring delight/ and words
to keep/ against the night." Gaber illustrates each entry with a watercolor or col-
ored-pencil drawing, each image carefully chosen to extend the poem's meaning.
The occasional full-page illustration gives variety to break the book up, but the
smaller pictures with their geometric borders are particularly skillfully rendered.
The combination of brevity with a format using lots of white space and large type
may make this one of the more enticing poetry books for young readers. SDL
HURWITZ, JOHANNA, ed. 
Birthday Surprises: 
Ten Great Stories to
Unwrap. Morrow, 1995 
119p
ISBN 0-688-13194-8 
$15.00 
R Gr. 4-7
Ten children's authors including the editor create stories based on this premise: a
MAY 1995 
* 311
child receives many presents on his or her birthday, but one beautifully wrapped
box is empty. Richard Peck takes the opportunity to unveil a little more of the
enmity between his much-loved character Blossom Culp and her opponent Letty
Shambaugh; David Adler's cheeky narrator delights in manipulating the adults
around her, wanting to emulate her uncle who sends her "snow from Alaska. Isn't
he great?" Some gifts help teach lessons, as in Pam Conrad's story of a young
pioneer woman, and in Ann M. Martin's story where the hero is disappointed by
his grandfather's empty box until the forest animals convince him that "there is no
such thing as empty." Two poignant stories take place in hospital rooms: in Jane
Yolen's, a girl's mother gives her a beautiful but empty box, saying, "It's you" with
her last breath; in James Howe's acutely observed tale, a boy lies near death but is
encouraged to fight by a mysterious man and his gift of the empty box. The
book's narrow premise serves to highlight the different choices each author has
made: there are wide ranges in setting, tone, narrator, and mood. The formal
variety-the book includes a fairy tale by Barbara Ann Porte, a story in rhyme by
Karla Kuskin, and Johanna Hurwitz's epistolary story-keeps things fresh through-
out. An introduction by Hurwitz explains the concept, and by the end readers
may feel challenged to figure out how many changes they could ring on a single
theme. SDL
JENNINGS, LINDA 
Tom's Taik illus. by Tim Warnes. 
Little, 1995 
[26p]
ISBN 0-316-13341-8 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 3-7 yrs
Fussy Tom the piglet compares his "curly-twirly" tail with the other animals' and
finds it sadly lacking: "'Even the rat's tail is less curly than mine,' said Tom miser-
ably." Tiring of his complaints, the other farm animals try various solutions, and
finally they hit on pulling the tail and coating it with mud until it dries and stiffens
into a "long, thin pencil." Tom's sharp little tail then, inevitably, makes him a
nuisance to the other animals. By the story's end, Tom has his curly-twirly tail
back, but begins yearning for a "long, elegant nose like Hannibal the horse instead
of this silly snout." Children always enjoy feeling superior to characters who are
more foolish than they are, and they'll warm to Tom, who, despite his complain-
ing nature, is a lovable little pig. Warnes' paintings match the zippy story per-
fectly, with his comical animals and cheery palette; the series of pictures showing
Tom marching around the farm with Sam the sheepdog pulling his tail straight is
particularly funny. Though Tom is never satisfied, story-hour listeners certainly
will be. SDL
JOHNSTON, TONY 
Alice Nizzy Nazzy: The Witch of Santa Fe; illus. by Tomie
dePaola. 
Putnam, 1995 
[32p]
ISBN 0-399-22788-1 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-8 yrs
As her closing note tells, Tony Johnston has taken the familiar old Russian witch,
Baba Yaga, and moved her "to a snazzy new location." Alice Nizzy Nazzy lives in
the desert in an adobe hut that stands on roadrunner feet, surrounded by prickly
pear cactus which can all move around on command. When a little girl, Manuela,
comes looking for her missing sheep at the hut, she is caught by Alice Nizzy Nazzy
and popped in her cooking pot. Alice, with her yellow skin, beady red eyes, black
snapping teeth, and hair in strings ofchiles, is a fearsome sight, but Manuela bravely
312 
* 
THE BULLETIN
and gently persists in trying to get back her sheep. Since, as it turns out from the
witch's preliminary taste of broth, good children such as Manuela taste sour, she is
released along with her sheep, and Alice takes off in her flying mortar to find a
naughty child to devour instead. Johnston's writing snaps with life, and her char-
acteristic asides ("Oh, my!") build in some storytelling flair. dePaola has filled the
book with the bright colors of the Southwest, using brick red borders and lots of
teal, purple, and orange. Alice is a satisfying blend of spookiness and silliness, and
her sidekick, the great horned lizard, takes in all of Alice's wicked actions with a
worried expression. For children unfamiliar with Baba Yaga, this may seem fun-
nier the second time around, when they can be certain Manuela is not going to be
dinner, then they will love the goofier moments and still have a good shiver. SDL
KATZ, WELWYN WILTON 
Time Ghost. McElderry, 1995 
171p
ISBN 0-689-80027-4 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 6-9
An exceptionally well-executed time-travel matrix forms the structural heart of
this novel about two girls, Sara and Dani, who, with their brothers and Sara's
formidable grandmother, travel to the Arctic-what's left of it anyway. The set-
ting is the mid-twenty-first century when much of earth's natural beauty and re-
sources have been destroyed by pollution, overpopulation, and the "Greysuits"
(Grandma's name for an ever-greedy corporate elite), who are intent upon taking
the rest. In contrast to the nature-loving Dani, Sara has been whiny and scared the
whole trip, but both girls are frightened when, along with one of the Greysuits,
they find themselves back in the past, specifically Grandma's past, when she was a
young girl living on a quiet lake in 1993. While there isn't enough room in this
review to go into the details of how the time travel works, it in fact works very well
indeed, and Katz brings the travelers back home (always a trick) with the same
assurance. The ecological theme occasionally rears its head into preachiness, but it
is generally kept in check by the slick turns of plot and the realism of the charac-
ters. Grandma may be right, but she is rather overbearing, and Sara's reliving of a
crucial episode in Grandma's girlhood brings each to a more reasonable under-
standing of the other. RS
KEISTER, DOUGLAS 
Fernando's GifitEl Regalo de Fernando; written and illus. with
photographs by Douglas Keister. 
Sierra Club, 1995 
[32p]
ISBN 0-87156-414-9 
$16.95 
R 
5-9yrs
Fernando goes to bed at night lulled by the sound of rain on his tin-roofed house
and wakes up every morning with the prospect of fresh bananas growing outside
his window-all he has to do is pick one. Keister photographed the Vanegas
family in their home in the Costa Rican rain forest and the bilingual text is nar-
rated by young Fernando, whose wide smile and wiry body exude playful energy
throughout the book. The text is honest, refreshingly unsentimental, and even
humorous at times: "I hear that in some places, they give dogs special names, just
like people. We call our dogs Brown Dog and Black Dog." The plight of the rain
forest is often described with unnecessary melodrama, but here Keister simply lets
the daily life of Fernando unfold in quiet yet heartfelt ways: Fernando gives his
friend Carmina a sapling for her eighth birthday and they plant it together with
the unassuming wish "that it will be safe and live a long, long time." Both the text
and the photographs are presented dearly and simply. Each spacious text page is
decorated with a chocolate-brown hieroglyphic design and the paper itself is warm
and grainy (and, according to a note, manufactured from tree-farm wood). Al-
MAY 1995 
* 313
though harsh lighting makes a few indoor shots rather surreal, the photos are gen-
erally lush and inviting, especially one showing Fernando and his dad laughing
and splashing underneath a waterfall. Keister does not presume to give easy an-
swers or even the full complexity of the issue, but he does provide an admirable
glimpse into the life of one family who genuinely loves the rain forest and who are
trying to create a sustainable living from it. HMW
KIMMEL, ERIC A., ad. 
The Valiant Red Rooster: A Story from Hungary; illus. by
Katya Arnold. 
Holt, 1995 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-2781-5 
$15.95 
R 4-9 yrs
When a "kindly old woman" runs out of grain and money, her valiant red rooster
tells her, "Now I will provide for you." While pecking in the road for spilled grain,
the rooster finds a diamond button, but when a greedy sultan spots the rooster
with the button, he steals it. After telling the sultan "You had no right to steal my
button," the rooster sits on sultan's window and crows, "Ku-keri-keri! The button
belongs to me!" The sultan orders his soldiers-the bondarjis, the sipahis, and the
bashi-bazouks-to throw the rooster into the well, but the rooster drains the
wellwater into his gizzard and returns. The rooster's ingenuity and his tremen-
dous gizzard save him each time, until the sultan ends up with a group of angry
bees down his pants and decides to return the button to the rooster. Kimmel tells
the story with such enormous energy and momentum that children may find it
difficult to sit still to listen; they will find the sultan's defeat and the feast the
rooster brings home to the old woman most satisfying. Arnold's paintings, in her
distinctive vibrant watercolors with thick black lines superimposed, are equally
vigorous. It is not always easy to distinguish the features of each picture in the
jumble of line and color, but the magenta skin and lumpy build of the old woman
and of the sultan are comical and grotesque. Kimmel includes source notes for this
story, which is based on one found in Kate Seredy's The Good Master. SDL
KING-SMITH, DICK 
Sophie Is Seven; illus. by David Parkins. 
Candlewick,
1995 
123p
ISBN 1-56402-542-X 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
The redoubtable Sophie, "lady farmer," has returned, unmellowed by her increas-
ing age. She's still trying to earn money towards her farm (she attempts a walkathon
around the backyard but neglects to sign up sponsors beforehand), she and her pal
Andrew help the teacher-or is it the other way around?-with the school farm
unit, she plays the Pied Piper of Hamelin in the school play, and she finally gets to
start her long-awaited riding lessons. This doesn't quite have the dash of previous
volumes: the humor is more often pointed towards adults, the plot is more epi-
sodic, and Sophie's adversary Dawn seems more like a victim here than an enemy,
since she does nothing in this book to warrant Sophie's repugnance. Vigorous
Sophie is still an engaging heroine, however, and fans of her earlier adventures
won't want to miss this one. DS
KORNBLUTH, JESSE 
Airborne: The Triumph and Struggle of Michael
Jordan. Macmillan, 1995 
[112p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-02-750922-2 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
The media and marketing blitz surrounding Michael Jordan is a phenomenon in
itself, and Kornbluth joins the journalistic fray by compiling his interviews with
314 
* THE BULLETIN
Jordan alongside personal observations, accounts from family and friends, and
action photos. Due in large part to Jordan's (temporary, as we all now know)
retirement and the tragic death of his father, the struggles somewhat outweigh the
triumphs in this rather sobering biography. Kornbluth chronologically tracks
Jordan's life from childhood "laziness" (all he wanted to do was play sports), high-
school rejection (he didn't make the varsity team), collegiate recognition, NBA
victories, and finally to Jordan's future, which was uncertain at the time of the
book's publication. Kornbluth emphasizes the business of basketball, and he por-
trays Jordan as a misunderstood artist trying to compete against the demons of the
spotlight. Sometimes he relies too much on undocumented speculation (there are
no citations to authenticate his assertions) and sensationalized sound bites ("It
took a bullet to his father's heart to get his attention") that make Jordan's life seem
like a made-for-TV movie, and readers may be left with many unanswered ques-
tions about Jordan's opinions, game strategies, and personal relationships. How-
ever, kids will learn about contracts, salaries, the Nike corporation, and
advertising-important aspects of the game that are played out behind the scenes.
Readers searching for greater insight into Michael Jordan as a person may find
more depth in his own intimate autobiography, RareAir, but this biography is like
a Jordan free-throw shot: it's predictable, but it places the ball squarely in the net.
HMW
KROLL, VIRGINIA Jaha and Jamil Went Down the Hill: An African Mother
Goose. 
Charlesbridge, 1995 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-88106-867-5 
$15.88
Trade ed. ISBN 0-88106-866-7 
$14.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-881060865-9 
$6.95 
NR 
3-6 yrs
Even the most fervent multiculturalists will indulge in a little eye-rolling at this
calculated offering of rhymes that "Mother Goose might have written, had she
visited Africa": "Jaha and Jamil went down the hill/ To fetch a pail ofwater./ They
met Atu and Siwatu/ And Asha with her daughter." Without the mini-drama that
the original "Jack and Jill" presents, that verse gives children no reason to remem-
ber it. Mother Goose is a tough old bird, and it seems unlikely that she would
have much patience with the prissiness often in evidence here; never one overly
given to messages, she might well peck at such sermons as "Canopies are falling
down,/ Falling down, falling down./ Canopies are falling down,/ Sad rain forest!"
Crowded and stiffly drafted watercolor illustrations and labels set each rhyme in a
particular African nation, but there are no notes or explanations as to how the
rhymes were assigned their locales. RS
LAUBER, PATRICIA 
Who Eats What?: Food Chains and Food Webs; illus. by Holly
Keller. 
HarperCollins, 1995 
32p 
(Let's-Read-and-Find-Out Science)
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-022982-9 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-022981-0 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 1-3
Lauber demonstrates the interconnectedness of nature by showing how creatures
form chains through the foods they eat. A leaf is eaten by a caterpillar, which is
eaten by a wren, which is eaten by a hawk: the hawk is the top of the food chain,
"the one nobody else eats," but the hawk needs the leaf just as much as the caterpil-
lar does. Lauber gives several examples, from short chains (apple to child) to the
web of connections between sea creatures. She uses sea otters to show how the
MAY 1995 
* 315
disappearance of one link in the chain can disrupt the flow of food both up and
down: when the otters were overhunted they stopped eating sea urchins, who then
consumed the kelp beds leaving no food for the fish; when the otters were restored,
the other animals began to flourish again. Keller's watercolor-and-line illustra-
tions do much to lighten the serious tone of the text, and they make the informa-
tion clear with simple diagrams containing plants, animals, and helpful directional
arrows. Primary-grade students will be able to read this alone, but even preschool-
ers will be able to understand a rather sophisticated point in the science of conser-
vation. SDL
LEVINE, 
ELLEN 
Anna Pavlova: 
Genius of the Dance. Scholastic,
1995 
132p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-590-44304-6 
$14.95 
R Gr. 5-8
Pavlova is the most famous figure in early twentieth-century classical ballet, and
Levine paints a picture of the great ballerina's life, covering Pavlova's early years in
Russia, her later settling in England, and then her extensive touring through Eu-
rope, the United States, South America, and Asia. While the book has a distinctly
hagiographic tone, and some scenes from the dancer's early life seem to be fiction-
alized (no source notes are provided for dialogue), this is a competent account with
many enlivening specifics, such as the fact that all the dancers in the company had
to "Russianize" their names for PR purposes. There's not much insight into
Pavlova's character and little examination of her impact on dance, but it's a good
old-fashioned account of a glamorous life. A glossary, bibliography, and index are
included; several pages of black-and-white photographs appear in a glossy insert.
DS
MAHY, MARGARET 
The Pirate Uncle; illus. by Barbara Steadman. 
Overlook,
1995 
128p
ISBN 0-87951-555-4 
$14.95 
R Gr. 4-7
Nick, age nine, and his little sister Caroline feel a bit nervous about staying with
Uncle Ludovic, whom their mother refers to as "a pirate." While driving in his
rickety car to his house by a New Zealand beach, Ludovic fills the kids in on how
he became a pirate ("I was led astray by jolly companions. And then I got treasure
fever"), and he enlists their help in becoming reformed. Eventually Nick figures
out that Ludovic's piracy is far more show than reality, and he and Caroline relax
and settle in to enjoy their vacation. Mahy has sketched the dream trip for many
a youngster: days on the beach and in the water with a slightly mysterious but
warmhearted uncle who delights in such tricks as turning lunch into a treasure
hunt. There's never a truly anxious moment for the reader, and if Mahy doesn't
keep a tight focus on her hero, the chattiness of her style allows for a certain loose-
ness in structure. Short chapters and conversational tone make the book (first
published in Great Britain in 1977) a good read-aloud choice for children as young
as third grade. SDL
MANUSHKIN, FRAN 
Rachel, Meet Your Angel 
Puffin, 1995 
118p 
(Angel
Corners)
Paper ed. ISBN 0-14-037198-2 
$3.99 
M 
Gr. 4-6
The "Angel Corners" logo-a halo--and sweetsy cover art make this paperback
look like a series offering from a religious press, but fear not--these angels are
316 
* THE BULLETIN
strictly nonsectarian.and the only higher power mentioned is Florinda, Queen of
the Angels and principal of the Angel Academy, which trains guardian angels.
Angel Corners is in the time-honored tradition of a series in which four girls have
a club (the Angel Club); the twist is that each girl gets a guardian angel to help her
through her problems. Rachel (new girl in town, bereft after her father's death,
beset by class-queen Felicia) is assigned Merrie, who first appears to Rachel as a
bird with "glittery red wings" that hovers about to clue Rachel in to solutions to
her dilemmas. Sorry, folks-it ain't gonna fly. The appeal of a series like this is in
its reflection and idealization of everyday life, allowing its characters to face small
but interesting challenges-the angel angle is silly and superfluous. While the
writing here is competent it cannot overcome the vacuousness of the story's premise
and its too-easy celestial solutions. RS
MmANO, JAN 
The Mona Lisa ofSalem Street. Little, 1995 
155p
ISBN 0-316-54614-3 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
After a series of stays with other relatives, orphaned Nettie and her brother John
Peter are sent at last by nasty Grandma Bessie to live with their "rich" grandfather
in Boston. Nettie, initially excited, warns herself not to learn to love this relative
because inevitably they will be sent back, but she's horrified to realize her new
residence is a funeral home. Her brother, who previously wouldn't speak to any-
one but Nettie, warms up instantly to their loving, lonely Italian grandfather, but
Nettie remains reserved. Great-aunt Aleta, an aspiring actress, seems far more
glamorous, though John Peter pegs her as a phony. Through a dead-pet-as-cata-
lyst plot twist at the end, Nettie confronts the deaths of her parents and allows
herself to finally feel as "warm and safe" with her grandfather as she had with her
parents. Some of the moments are tender, as when the children find the markings
on a door measuring the growth of their father, but while the book mostly seems
set in a gentler time than the present, occasional references to President Clinton
and cellular phones give pause. The subplot of Nettie's neighbor Josephine and
her agoraphobic mother, the "Mona Lisa of Salem Street," seems almost tacked
on, and the plot generally lurches along haphazardly. Marino writes elegantly,
though, and her characters, even feckless Aleta, are both believable and likable.
SDL
MARKLE, SANDRA 
Outside and Inside Snakes. Macmillan, 1995 
40p 
illus.
with photographs
ISBN 0-02-762315-7 
$16.00 
Ad Gr. 2-4
Markle, author of Outside and Inside Birds (BCCB 11/94), this time walks chil-
dren through a snake's anatomy, leading the way with questions ("Is this a bright
yellow worm or the snake's tail?") and with comparisons to a child's own body
("Its body, like yours, can only bend where two bones meet. Having lots of small
bones lets it coil and bend easily"). Once again, she interweaves images, captions,
and text into a coherent whole, and uses crisp, striking photos and the occasional
computer-enhanced picture. Though the brilliantly colored emerald boa on the
cover is alluring, this is not a book that will convert anyone from snake hater to
snake lover, with its many photos of snakes attacking or devouring prey and its
extreme dose-ups of fangs and venom (though for some, of course, this will be the
book's high point). Markle's organization occasionally falters, with discussions of
skin, for instance, spread throughout the book; in several places it is difficult to see
what she refers to in the caption, and one caption misses labeling the photo's focal
MAY 1995 
* 317
point, a green oval-shaped organ in a dissected snake's abdomen. Libraries with
lots of young herpetologists will want this title, which includes a combined glos-
sary/index. SDL
MIAELSEN, BEN 
Stranded Hyperion, 1995 
[288p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2059-4 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0072-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 5-7
The loss of her right foot, severed in an accident four years ago, is the least of
twelve-year-old Koby's problems. Her parents are arguing more and more fre-
quently, and while boating through the Florida Keys she's discovered an injured
mother-and-son pair of pilot whales (a kind of dolphin) who will only survive with
her intervention. Mikaelsen (see Sparrow Hawk Red BCCB 6/93) knows the first
rule of adventure stories for children: put the kid-hero and reader-smack in the
middle. Even as readers empathize with Koby's various dilemmas, they will envy
the circumstances of her afterschool life, boating and swimming unattended through
the Keys and free to find her own crisis to handle. Heck, she even lives on a
boat-until her mother becomes fed up with their hand-to mouth existence and
moves herself and Koby to a friend's house on solid ground. Although the plot-
ting tends towards didactic ends-Koby saves the dolphins, overcomes her embar-
rassment about her disability, and brings her parents back together, however
tentatively-Koby is a seaworthy heroine who makes things happen. (An obliging
hurricane does its bit as well.) Girls don't often enough feature in such fast-paced
fare, so this is definitely welcome; besides, it's refreshing to see a novel about dol-
phins that don't have ESP. RS
MORPURGO, MICHAEL, ad. 
Arthur, High King of Britain; illus. by Michael
Foreman. 
Harcourt, 1995 
138p
ISBN 0-15-200080-1 
$19.95 
R 
Gr. 6-9
It's hard to resist an Arthurian legend in full-fledged regalia (complete with an
extra-large trim size), and this majestic vision of the glory days of Camelot is entic-
ing indeed. The sweep of this version encompasses a rich array of beloved stories
(Excalibur, Guinevere, Launcelot) as well as some of their noteworthy yet lesser-
known kin (Tristram and Iseult, Gawain and the Green Knight, Percivale). Al-
though he offers no source notes, Morpurgo has clearly done wide research, and he
weaves a tapestry of different tales from different time periods. He follows in a
time-honored tradition of adaptation and abridgement, but he never neglects the
integrity and authenticity of the stories he tells. The framing device is simple: a
modern boy stumbles onto a remote island where he is cared for by an ancient man
claiming to be Arthur Pendragon. Arthur tells the boy his life story in an almost
painfully honest retrospective. He is a complex character: an impetuous youth, an
august yet sometimes rash ruler, a jealous lover, and a tortured man trying to live
up to his epic persona. It is a heady mix, but Foreman illustrates the weighty
legend with a lighter touch. His soft watercolor scenes are pricked with a cool
freshness; blues, greens, golds, and purples shimmer together into variances of
seasonal changes, windswept hilltops, and shadowed castles. Morpurgo's storytell-
ing is graced with smooth transitions and sharp-witted asides that serve the mythic
tales well. This is a far cry from The Sword in the Stone's lightheartedness; it's the
real thing-darkness and all--and budding Arthurian devotees may want to read
this as a tantalizing precursor to Le Morte d'Anrhur. HMW
318 * THE BULLETIN
MURPHY, JIM 
The GreatFire. Scholastic, 1995 
144p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-590-47267-4 
$16.95 
R* Gr. 4-7
See this month's Big Picture, p. 297.
NAMIOKA, LENSEY 
Yang the Third and Her Impossible Family; illus. by Kees de
Kiefte. 
Little, 1995 
[14 4p]
ISBN 0-316-59726-0 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Unlike her younger brother (see Yang the Youngest and His Terrible Ear, BCCB 6/
92), Yingmei (Mary) is a talented musician; her problem is that she wants desper-
ately to become friends with Holly, a pretty, popular girl in the school orchestra.
Holly doesn't seem all that interested until it appears that Yingmei will be able to
take a kitten, forbidden by Holly's parents, off her hands. The kitten is forbidden
by Yingmei's parents as well, and although the subplot about Yingmei and Fourth
Brother hiding the kitten in their basement is clich6d and formulaic, it provides
light relief to the more serious story about Yingmei's attempts to fit into American
culture-not an easy task, considering her "impossible" family. Her father some-
times mispronounces English to embarrassing effect ("lice" for "rice," for example)
and her mother continually if unknowingly thwarts Yingmei's friendship with Holly
by alienating Holly's mother with inappropriate questions and compliments ("Why,
you're not skinny at all, Mrs. Hanson. You're actually quite fat!") that were con-
sidered polite back in China, but aren't in America, where the Yang family has
lived for just over a year. Yingmei learns her lessons (including the fact that Holly
isn't worth it), makes a good friend elsewhere, and finds a home for the kitten, all
of which is predictable but satisfying, and her bouncy narration is a refreshing
contrast to the more sober "multicultural" fare we've been seeing. Occasional line
drawings are witty and graceful. RS
NEWMAN, LESLUA 
Too Far Away to Touch; illus. by Catherine Stock. 
Clarion,
1995 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-395-68968-6 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Stock's gravely tender charcoal-and-watercolor paintings make a lovely comple-
ment to Newman's touching portrait of the love between little Zoe and her uncle
Leonard, who is dying ofAIDS. Uncle Leonard has arranged plans for one of their
"great adventures": he is taking her to the Hayden Planetarium, where Uncle
Leonard explains that the stars are "too far away to touch, but close enough to see."
That image recurs when Sophie, Uncle Leonard and his companion Nathan go to
the beach one evening, where they spot a shooting star and Sophie talks to her
uncle about his disease, asking where he will go after he dies: "'I don't know where
I'll go,' Uncle Leonard said, 'but I know where I'll be. Too far away to touch, but
close enough to see.'" Adults will be hard put to make it through this dry-eyed.
The text has a direct simplicity that has eluded other picture books on the subject
such as Patricia Quinlan's Tiger Flowers (BCCB 7/94), and Stock's pictures move
quietly between such light-filled scenes as Zoe and Uncle Leonard snacking at a
cafe (where Leonard takes off his beret to reveal his newly scarce hair, "part of the
disease") and another with uncle and niece holding each other on the beach blan-
ket beneath the stars. Whether the book's quiet power will speak to young chil-
dren is another question. There isn't really a story, and some children may not
understand, as Zoe does, that she will be able to "see" Uncle Leonard every time
MAY 1995 
* 
319
she thinks of him, particularly since this idea is conveyed metaphorically, with Zoe
"seeing" the shooting star after it has disappeared. Still, the book is a poignant
respite from the more didactic and bibliotherapeutic tites that have sprung up in
response to the AIDS crisis. RS
OLD, WENDIE C. 
Stacy Hada Little Sister; illus. by Judith Friedman. 
Whitman,
1995 
32p
ISBN 0-8075-7598-4 
$13.95 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Stacy greets her new baby sister Ashley with mild skepticism and a slight case of
jealousy; when the baby dies in her sleep at a few months of age, Stacy wonders
whether she has in some way caused the baby's death ("Did she die because Stacy
had wished Ashley would go away?"). Absorbed in their own mourning, the oth-
erwise affectionate parents are not aware of their daughter's confusion until Stacy
timidly asks, "Will I catch SIDS when I go to sleep?" In frankly discussing Ashley's
death, the entire family begins to recover from their grief. Old somewhat simpli-
fies the messy, anguished emotions which are to be expected following a death;
although mention is made of the parents' moodiness and withdrawal, Stacy herself
displays no overt behavioral changes. The parents' response to Stacy's frightened
query-awkwardly explaining the SIDS acronym before getting to the heart of the
question-is unrealistic. The no-nonsense introductory note to parents which
sorts SIDS facts from myths may prove to be as valuable as the text to families
struggling to explain this tragedy to a small child. EB
ONYEFULU, IFEOMA 
Emeka's Gift: An African Counting Story; written and illus.
with photographs by Ifeoma Onyefulu. 
Cobblehill, 1995 
19p
ISBN 0-525-65205-1 
$14.99 
R 3-6yrs
With a more cohesive structure than her previous concept book, A Is for Africa
(BCCB 9/93), author/photographer Onyefulu counts from one to ten as a young
boy goes on a journey to visit his grandmother. Emeka ("One boy") passes two
friends playing a game, three women on their way to the market, where he sees
four new brooms, five children in hats, six beaded necklaces, etc. This idea isn't
new, but it's nicely done, with Emeka's desire to bring his grandmother a present
providing a slender narrative thread and simple information about Nigerian vil-
lage life making the book useful for pre-primary crosscultural understanding (al-
though it would have been helpful had the author included the local language's
words for the numbers). Color photos are clear and countable; the design is clean
and open. RS
PHILIP, NEIL, comp. 
Songs Are Thoughts: Poems of the Inuit; illus. by Maryclare
Foa. 
Orchard, 1995 
26p
ISBN 0-531-06893-5 
$15.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Although a list of sources and an introduction precede this picture-book collection
of Inuit "songs" (many collected by explorer Knud Rasmussen), most readers are
going to need more information for understanding the context of the lyrics: how
were they sung? how were they translated? While they may be culturally authen-
tic, when taken on their own in translation some of the poems (a term used inter-
changeably with songs here) seem verbally sterile ("A wonderful occupation/ Making
songs!/ But all too often they/ Are failures") and the untranslated ejaculations ("Wa-
wa," "Hayai-ya-haya") will be greeted with "what does that mean?," a question this
320 * THE BULLETIN
book does not answer. There are some strong selections: "The Mother's Song," a
sweet lullaby; "Bear Hunting," in which a game of "catch-me-who-can" ends in
death; "The Old Man's Song," which poses four riddles ("The sun's origin,/ The
moon's nature,/ The minds of women,/ And why people have so many lice").
While the text holds too few such surprises, Maryclare Foa's oil paintings facing
each poem combine a folklike directness with energetic brushwork to add life and
give some cultural context. RS
PINKNEY, ANDREA DAvis 
Hold Fast to Dreams. Morrow, 1995 
[112p]
ISBN 0-688-12832-7 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-7
Dee has been apprehensive about her family's move from Baltimore to suburban
Connecticut; she just knows that she's going to be the only African-American kid
in the seventh grade. And so she is, but persistence, self-respect, and talent with a
camera help her find a place as well as enabling her to offer sisterly support to her
younger sibling Lindsay, who has elected to attend a private school instead, and
who faces racist taunting from the leading girls' clique. Dee's narration is rueful,
funny, and engaging, and while the story has a clearly didactic intent, its lessons
are for the most part capably integrated into event and character. RS
PITRE, FELIX, ad. 
Paco and the Witch: A Puerto Rican Folktale; illus. by Christy
Hale. 
Lodestar, 1995 
32p
ISBN 0-525-67501-9 
$13.99
Spanish ed. Pacoy la bruja ISBN 0-525-67514-0 
Ad 4-8 yrs
In this Puerto Rican variation of the Rumpelstiltskin story, Paco is captured in the
woods by an ugly old bruja (witch) who threatens to make him into the came for
her stew unless he can guess her name. While slavishly drawing water for the
witch, Paco meets a crab who puts him onto la bruja's true identity. Foiled and
enraged, the witch seeks the animal who blew the whistle on her; she tricks the
crab into playing a rhyming game in which he inadvertently admits his guilt, and
he scurries under a rock to avoid her wrath-where, of course, he is to this day.
Pitre's telling is liberally sprinkled with Spanish terms, each of which is defined in
context when it first appears; with over forty words and phrases introduced, fre-
quent interruptions are choppy, confusing, and a bit tiresome. Bright, stylized
acrylics provide lots of energy with their swooping, exaggerated lines and durable
purple tones. This fresh spin on a popular tale may attract listeners drawn to
foreign language books and ESL students who will appreciate familiar vocabulary
as they wrestle the vagaries of English. A source note and glossary are included,
and an all-Spanish text edition is available. EB
RLANT, CYNTHIA 
Henry and Mudge and the Best Day of All; illus. by Suqie
Stevenson. 
Macmillan, 1995 
4 0p
ISBN 0-02-778012-0 
$14.00 
R Gr. K-3
Henry's May 1st birthday is the "best day" of the tite: after waking up Mudge
with the promise of "lots and lots of crackers," Henry discovers the house, even
the bathroom, festooned with balloons. Strawberry pancakes for the whole family
are followed later that afternoon by a birthday party with friends (and their dogs).
The guests start out shy, but the carnival-type games in the backyard get everyone
in the party, mood, and Mudge is particularly happy when crackers fall from a
MAY 1995 
* 321
pifiata. At the end, the family snoozes in the grass with big smiles all around.
Since Mudge is peripheral to the action on Henry's big day, this isn't as effective as
earlier tites, but a joyful feeling pervades the book. Rylant manages again to take
a simple childhood experience and make it special while keeping the text easy to
read and understand. Jaunty line-and-watercolor pictures capture the ecstatic ex-
pressions, and Stevenson's style remains free and breezy; her use of white over
colors occasionally detracts from her crisp lines, and Mudge appears much yellower
than in previous books. Nonetheless, Henry's birthday makes another fine outing
for this pair of friends. SDL
SANDEMAN, ANNA 
Bones; illus. by Ian Thompson and with photographs. 
Copper
Beech, 1995 
30p 
(Body Books)
ISBN 1-56294-621-8 
$12.90 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
A chatty, clearly developed text explains how bones hold up our bodies and how
muscles, joints, and ligaments work together to facilitate movement. There are
some quirky facts ("You have the same number of bones in your neck as a giraffe-
seven"), interesting photos (the tallest man alive), and helpful diagrams (living
bone tissue). The color photos of energetic kids are overlaid with skeletal draw-
ings, and the effect is slyly amusing and lively-a refreshing change from the typi-
cal dead-skeleton-on-a-post routine. Kids will appreciate the section on broken
bones and may be surprised to learn that they have more bones than their elders
do. The information is sketchy at points (the nutrition section does not even
mention calcium) and a glossary is sorely missed, leaving terms such as blood clots
and tendons undefined and confusing. Generally, however, this is an animated
and satisfying introduction. An index is included. HMW
SANFIELD, STEVE, ad. 
Bit by Bit; illus. by Susan Gaber. 
Philomel, 1995 
[32p]
ISBN 0-399-22736-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-7 yrs
On the cover, a storyteller holds his own copy of this very book, which cover
shows another him holding another book, and so on, thus giving us a hint of the
sly humor of the story and pictures inside. Based, according to the author's note,
on an old Yiddish or Russian folk song his grandmother sang, the book tells the
familiar story of a beloved piece of cloth (for another recent version see Phoebe
Gilman's Somethingfrom Nothing, BCCB 2/94). Zundel the tailor eventually saves
enough money to buy cloth to make himself a coat, which he loves so much that
"he wore it and wore it and wore it and wore it until bit by bit he w--o-r--e it
out." Taking the remaining good cloth from the coat, he remakes it into a jacket,
which he wears out again and remakes the cloth into a vest. The cycle continues
until there was "just enough of that beautiful cloth... for me to begin this story all
over again," and our storyteller, smiling in satisfaction at the story's conclusion,
returns to the illustrations with his own now-closed book. Sanfield retells the
story rhythmically and with humor, and Gaber's illustrations, with their clever
frame of the storyteller's performance and recursive book jacket, add immensely to
the fun and extend the story. With each change in the cloth, Zundel's life has
progressed, as he meets a woman, marries, and has a baby; the child grows till there
are five candles on a birthday cake and another baby is on the way. Filled with
movement and comic touches, the paintings are richly intense with lots of oranges
and blues, and the pairing of the circular story with book covers echoing into
infinity shows how well story and pictures work together. SDL
322 
* 
THE BULLETIN
SATTLER, HELEN RONEY 
The Book ofNorth American Owls; illus. by Jean Day
Zallinger. 
Clarion, 1995 
[64p]
ISBN 0-395-60524-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-7
Sattler opens with an anecdote from her childhood, when her father got rid of an
owl living in their barn; she notes that while some people dislike owls because they
are birds of prey, "most people, however, are as fascinated by and respectful of owls
as I am." Sattler claims that most of the information known about owls has been
learned in the fifteen years since they became legally protected and scientifically
observed. She includes chapters on their predatory skills, their complicated court-
ship rituals, owl babies (and their extremely protective parents), and the future
prospects for owls, enlivening her discussion with intriguing tidbits, for example,
about the owls who keep snakes in their nests as "housekeepers." The second half
of the book devotes a page apiece to each of the North American owls, with a large
watercolor illustration and a map showing its range. There is a list of owls by
family, genus, and species, a bibliography, and an index. Clean book design, with
large type, lots of white space, and plenty of softly realistic pictures make this both
informative and attractive, a good choice for owl-lovers and report-writers alike.
SDL
SHELBY, ANNE 
Homeplace; illus. by Wendy Anderson Halperin. 
Jackson/Or-
chard, 1995 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08732-8 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-06882-X 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
"Your great great-great-great-grandpa built this house," the story starts, and it goes
on to tell how he planted the land while his wife worked inside and took care of the
children, one of whom was the listener's great-great-great-grandpa, and then he
grew up ... And so on, down the generations for 185 years with each generation
adding to the house and taking care of the land, until the speaker is revealed to be
a grandmother speaking to her young granddaughter. The theme of local con-
stancy and change, reminiscent of Nadia Wheatley's My Place (BCCB 7/90), is
attractively expressed in the narrator's gentle storytelling prose ("Here you are,
growing like a melon in a patch, like tulips in the springtime of the year"), al-
though squirmy youngsters may be waiting for something more active to happen
than merely the passage of time. The subdued pencil-and-watercolor illustrations
are tender but sturdy, with layouts of inspired variation: the pictures shift from
single images in delicately scrolled frames, to multipaneled scenes in an array of
sizes, to door-frame half moons, each showing bits and pieces of daily life to give
the flavor of each pictured era in the two centuries chronicled. This is in many
ways an American romantic ideal that is an American rarity, so many contempo-
rary youngsters may well find it exotic; they'll still enjoy the book as a quiet family
readaloud, and it's a natural for Grandparents' Day. DS
SLEPIAN, JAN 
Pinocchio's Sister. Philomel, 1995 
[12 8p]
ISBN 0-399-22811-X 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Ten-year-old Martha is part of her ventriloquist father's vaudeville act, but she's
upstaged by Iris, the wooden dummy who's the star of the show and the apple of
Martha's father's eye. Currently staying in Mama Rosie Pelosi's theatrical board-
MAY 1995 
* 323
inghouse, Martha makes friends with Mama Pelosi and with Stashu, a young Pol-
ish acrobat; her desperate desire to supplant Iris in her father's affections leads her
to obtain Stashu's help in a plan for stealing the doll. The story is part Lost Em-
pires-style vaudeville drama, with chatty backstage details and Mama Pelosi saving
the show by filling the shoes of the injured headliner. It's also part film noir, with
Martha starting to believe that Iris knows her thoughts and can speak even with-
out the ventriloquist's guidance; the story's end, in fact, depicts Martha's losing
touch with reality and trying to be Iris. The "this is all a play" epilogue undercuts
the chill of that finish by suggesting that Martha found what she needed from
Mama Pelosi and grew up happy while her father faded with vaudeville; unfortu-
nately, the postscript is too vague to reassure worried readers but sufficiently equivo-
cal to undercut the psychological drama. The intensity of Martha's loneliness and
displacement, however, makes for an absorbing read. Since Martha's father really
does prefer Iris to Martha, there's a toughness to Slepian's treatment of the situa-
tion ("The doll was funny and clever and pretty and Martha was not") that offers
an intriguing contrast to reassuring books about wrongheaded childish fears. The
language stays pretty simple, the friendship of Martha and Stashu adds some gen-
tler touches that keep the book from becoming too dark, and the unusual combi-
nation of grit and stagecraft will pull readers looking for an alternative to blander
middle-grades fare. DS
STEIG, WILLIAM 
Grown-Ups Get to Do All the Driving; written and illus. by Wil-
liam Steig. 
Di Capua/HarperCollins, 1995 
48p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-205081-8 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-205080-X 
$14.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
It's a funny title, and there's an equally funny cover illustration of a small and
disgruntled boy strapped into the passenger seat while his elder smugly takes the
wheel, but the humor in this picture book about the foibles of grownups is a little,
well, grownup. There's no plot, nor any real progression in this lengthy litany of
observations cum complaints, from "Grown-ups want children to be happy" to
"Grown-ups make you go to the dentist" to "Grown-ups are always weighing them-
selves." While kids may enjoy the subversive point of view ("Grown-ups are mean")
and the pictures of adults making fools of themselves, the book assumes a certain
knowingness on the part of its audience that will be alien to most children who,
despite their cavils, want to do all the driving, want to be grownups. The illustra-
tions are often classic portraits of lumpy, slovenly adults amusing themselves at the
expense of sturdy, sensible children; unfortunately, the book seems to be doing the
same thing. This is less an album of snapshots of how children see us than it is one
of us looking at ourselves. RS
STEWART, SARAH 
The Library; illus. by David Small. 
Farrar, 1995 
34p
ISBN 0-374-34388-8 
$15.00 
Ad 4-6 yrs
Librarians, probably, will be the real audience for this story-in-verse about reader
and book collector Elizabeth Brown, who displayed her obsession from an early
age: "She didn't like to play with dolls,/ She didn't like to skate./ She learned to
read quite early/ And at an incredible rate." The books pile up as the years go by
and Elizabeth is left with no other choice but to sign over her house and all its
contents to the town, which prompdy turns the whole shebang into the "Elizabeth
Brown Free Library." It's a wish-fulfilling story about every librarian's collection-
development dream, and after freeing herself from her books, Elizabeth and her--
324 * THE BULLETIN
what else?--cat move in with a similarly inclined lady, and the two get library
cards and read to a ripe old age. Both the rhyme and the line-and-watercolor
pictures are elegant and witty but a little sedate. While self-styled "information
specialists" probably won't appreciate this take on our image, those of us who enjoy
being bookish old maids will get a kick out of it. RS
THOMASSIE, TYNIA 
Feliciana Feydra LeRoux: A Cajun Tall Tale; illus. by Cat
Bowman Smith. 
Little, 1995 
32p
ISBN 0-316-84125-0 
$14.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Feliciana Feydra is her Grampa Baby's favorite grandchild; he indulges her ("He
jellied her toast with blackberry preserves to the very edges of the bread") and she's
his shadow ("Wherever Grampa Baby was, Feliciana Feydra was a heel behind").
When it comes to alligator hunting, though, he'll only take her six older brothers
no matter how much she begs to come along. One year, however, F. F. heads out
to the bayou by her lonesome and meets up with a hungry 'gator just as Grampa
Baby and her brothers show up; turns out that our heroine's too clever to be reptile
food, and she saves herself and the boys, as well as bringing home enough alligator
tail for a feast. This is more reality-based than Isaac's Swamp Angel-the tale is
outrageous rather than impossible-and it has a high-spirited flair all its own.
Thomassie includes a Cajun glossary (and a "Recipe for a Cajun Accent" on the
back cover) for those uneasy in the bayous, but the vocabulary is pretty clear in
context, and her lilting text begs to be read aloud ("Feliciana Feydra was Grampa
Baby's teetsie-walla. Hoooo, he spoiled her rotten!"). Smith's watercolors rely on
deep hues, particularly of greens and reds, but the effect is intense rather than
somber; Feliciana Feydra's gap-toothed visage and perkily restless habits (she's hang-
ing upside down in places, sauntering Huck-Finnishly in a straw hat in others, and
bouncing with enough vigor to lift her pigtails to the horizontal just about con-
stantly) make her an endearing protagonist. Despite the ending ("Yall pass a good
time tonight, too, ya hear?"), this ain't no bedtime story-crack this one open,
think of crawfish, and laissez le bon temps rouler. DS
VAUGHAN, MARCIA 
Whistling Dixie; illus. by Barry Moser. 
HarperCollins,
1995 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021029-X 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021030-3 
$15.00 
R 
4-8 yrs
With Dixie Lee, it's just one new critter after another; she serenely displays her
'gator and snake and owl with an "I 'spect I'll keep it for a pet," and Mama re-
sponds with a predictable "Mercy me." The glib gal gets her way by convincing
Mama that her menagerie, strategically housed in the well, the gomper (false teeth)
jar, and the chimney, will ward off slimy chum turners, bogeymen, and the dreaded
Mist Sisters. Of course she's right, and after Grandpappy suffers some misadven-
tures with the beasties, the family enjoys "enough good luck to last a lifetime."
Vaughan delivers a text that is as much fun for the reader as for the audience,
offering plenty of opportunity to ham up the comedy ("Cross my heart and hope
to sit on a splinter") and the mystery ("Slithering and squirming, slinking and
sliding, they headed straight for the well.. .") Moser's paintings, which feature
the intense clarity and severe bordering of old-fashioned snapshots, are witty, moody,
and eerie in turn; subtle watercolor renderings of swamp vegetation form a back-
ground for the text. A good read in any season, this is one to keep in mind for a
Halloween treat. EB
MAY 1995 
* 
325
VIGNA, JUDITH 
My Two Uncles; written and illus. by Judith Vigna. 
Whitman,
1995 
32p
ISBN 0-8075-5507-X 
$14.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Elly is excited about the diorama she and her uncle Ned are secretly making as a
surprise for her grandparents' fiftieth wedding anniversary party, so she's upset
when it turns out that Uncle Ned won't be coming. Grampy refuses to meet
Uncle Ned's lover, whom Elly calls Uncle Phil, and Ned says he won't come to the
party unless Phil is welcome too. Unlike Michael Willhoite's now-notorious Daddy's
Roommate (BCCB 3/91), this picture book on a similar theme has a plot and real
characters and is clear and on target for this age group in its definition of gay.
"Sometimes a man loves another man in the way a married couple love each other,"
says Daddy. He goes on to define lesbian and explain that some people-like
Grampy-feel uncomfortable around gays and lesbians or believe that being gay is
wrong. It's a short lecture and otherwise Vigna lets the messages spell themselves
out through the story, which ends realistically (Ned drops off the present but does
not come to the party) yet hopefully (Grampy drives Gran over to Ned and Phil's
apartment so she can thank them for the diorama and gives the two men a friendly
wave through the window). It's good to have a picture book about a gay uncle
who does not have AIDS (see Jordan's Losing Uncle Tim, BCCB 11/89, Patricia
Quinlan's Tiger Flowers, 7/94, and Leslda Newman's book reviewed above) and
Vigna's watercolor illustrations have a simplicity and light line that keep the pro-
ceedings from becoming too soap opera-ish. RS
WALACE-BRODEUR, RUTH 
Goodbye, Mitch; illus. by Kathryn Mitter. 
Whitman,
1995 
32p
ISBN 0-8075-2996-6 
$13.95 
R 4-8 yrs
Michael, who looks from the pictures to be about eight years old, tells of his be-
loved cat's last few weeks, beginning with Mitch's refusal to eat his favorite foods.
Michael has never known a time when Mitch wasn't around: "He slept on my bed
every night. Mitch and I even had the same color hair. The color of marmalade,
Mom says, though Mitch's was striped." When the mother takes Mitch to the vet,
the news is bad; Mitch probably has a tumor, and surgery "wouldn't help for long,
and it would be painful." The family decides to let Mitch be, and two weeks later,
the cat dies in Michael's arms. The cat's gradual weakening and final days are
realistically and tenderly depicted, as is the child's reaction to it all. Soft greens
predominate in Mitter's watercolor-and-colored-pencil art, balancing the orange
hair of cat and boy. The drawings are stiff and overliteral, but they're sweet with-
out being saccharine, and they capture the loving relationship between the boy
and cat. SDL
WARNER, SALLY 
Dog Years; written and illus. by Sally Warner. 
Knopf,
1995 
151p
ISBN 0-679-87147-0 
$13.00 
R Gr. 4-7
With his father in prison for robbery, sixth-grader Case feels like he is trapped in a
dog year, where one year seems like seven: his father calls periodically to criticize
Case's friends and interests, he has no privacy in the apartment he shares with his
mom and six-year-old sister, and so far at his new school he has made only one
friend, the slightly weird Ned. However, when his English class starts a newspa-
per, he takes his insight about dog years and turns it into a cartoon starring Spotty
326 
* THE BULLETIN
the dog, which addresses many of the anxiety-provoking problems middle-schoolers
face: "Spotty sez: 1. Keep all leftover food in your locker. 2. Never wash your
GYM clothes. 3. Especially the sox. Then U will always know your locker."
Popular Tyler, whose father is a successful businessman, concocts a plan to sell the
cartoon, and Case must wrestle with his growing awareness that Tyler is cheating
and using him, while Case has been cheating Ned of the credit he deserves for
lettering the cartoons. Though the book will be read and enjoyed by some readers
as a breezy story of a boy coming through a tough patch in his life, more discerning
readers will pick up on the subtle way Warner reveals the choices her characters
have made about the ways they live. Because Warner writes with such a light
touch, she is able to deal with complex and difficult ethical issues without ever
seeming depressing or moralistic, and she sketches her vivid characters with a re-
markable economy of words, keeping the text short. The large print, Case's funny
cartoons, and Spotty's appearance at the beginning of each chapter help make this
a particularly appealing book for children going through dog years of their own.
SDL
WILLAMS, MARIA, ad. 
The Adventures of Robin Hood; ad. and illus. by Marcia
Williams. 
Candlewick, 1995 
26p
ISBN 1-56402-535-7 
$17.95 
R Gr. 2-6
Williams, who very successfully adapted Greek myths into near-comic-strip panel
narratives (BCCB 11/92), here gives the Robin Hood legend the same treatment.
It's rather a daring move, because kids tend to hold Robin Hood dearer than they
do Perseus, but the breezy approach keeps up the pace without cheapening the
romantic hero. Most episodes ("Robin of Locksley Becomes an Outlaw," "Robin
Gets a Ducking," "Marian Arrives in Sherwood") fit into a single oversized double
spread, while the text tells the story straight. Williams' energetic line-and-water-
color illustrations have an appealing slyness to them, including entertaining details
such as Robin's peculiar dog, and a multitude of sassy speech balloons offer often-
sarcastic banter so there's as much wordplay as swordplay. The format softens the
impact of some of the direr deeds of the sheriff and others, so that kids can shed a
tear or two over Robin's death without having nightmares about it. Although
she's included most of the classic Robin Hood stories, Williams hasn't mentioned
her sources; it's a pity she didn't append a reading list either, because this will whet
kids' appetites for more. DS
WILUS, PATRICIA 
Out ofthe Storm. 
Clarion, 1995 
[160p]
ISBN 0-395-68708-X 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
World War II is over, but Mandy's father will never come home as he promised.
Mandy, her brother, and her mother must come to terms with his death and with
the struggle to survive without him-financially as well as emotionally. Their visit
to a relative's sheep farm turns into a permanent move when Mandy's mother gets
a chance to manage and then buy the local general store. Mandy's responsibility
for the sheep, which she at first resents, ultimately allows her to accept the change
in their lives. The writing here is sometimes labored ("A wail threatened to come
screeching out of Mandy's throat, but she fought it down") and repetitive in em-
phasizing Mandy's determination to return to their previous hometown, but the
family dynamics and sense of loss are credibly developed. The anger Mandy's
MAY 1995 
* 327
mother feels about her husband's death is especially realistic, as is the hope nur-
tured by Mandy's brother that somehow his father will return. A climactic storm,
while predictable, is dramatic and authentically detailed. Many scenes will linger
in reader's minds, not the least of which is Mandy's comprehension of a classmate's
problematic home life and her own insight into stern Aunt Bess' integrity as a
sheep farmer. In fact, it is the characters' intense relationships that give immediacy
to the historical setting. BH
WILSON, GINA 
Prowlpuss; illus. by David Parkins. 
Candlewick, 1995 
26p
ISBN 1-56402-483-0 
$15.95 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Even one-eyed, one-eared cats need love, and Prowlpuss is combing the night
alleys in search of his heart's desire, the elusive "tiny-white-star cat." Spurned by
the flirty feline who won't come down from the tree for him, Prowlpuss heads
back at dawn to the apartment of plump, plain Nellie Smith, who embraces her
errant pet, gushing, "That's my jowly Prowly! My sweet Prowly-wowly!" If the
moniker Prowlpuss has a suspiciously familiar ring, it's because Wilson owes a
sizeable debt to T. S. Eliot's practical cats. At her best she shares a playful delight
in cat naming-"He's not a sit-on-the-mat-and-lick-yourself-down cat./ He's an
out-on-the-town cat,/ A racer, a chaser,/ a 'You're a disgrace'-er"-but then breaks
her cadence with an unsubtle "AHA!" or "No, he's not!" While this story in rhyme
could please a group, many of Parkins's enticingly shadowy watercolors are simply
too dark to be seen past the knee-huggers in the first row, and while the golden,
grainy Prowlpuss is a satisfyingly piratical ruffian, his love interest is too stiffly
rendered to be a convincing siren. Still, the nocturnal adventure of this street-
tough tom may offer a refreshing counterpoint to fluffy kitten tales. EB
WRIGHT, COURTNI C. 
Wagon Train: A Family Goes West in 1865; illus. by
Gershom Griffith. 
Holiday House, 1995 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1152-4 
$15.95 
M 
5-8yrs
At the close of the Civil War, a family of ex-slaves purchases a wagon with the
money they had been saving to buy their freedom and bands together with others
from a neighboring plantation to form a train bound for California. Ginny, a
daughter of indeterminate age, narrates their adventures, if adventures they can be
called. Except for a frightening episode in which Pa suffers a rattlesnake bite, and
another involving a benign encounter with an Indian scout, nothing very exciting
happens, and even the physical rigors of the journey are prosaically described.
Griffith's watercolors do not supply the missing drama; many are stiffly posed
family scenes reminiscent of vacation snapshots. Ginny's textbook-perfect gram-
mar when narrating ("Ma pounds the shirts, pants, and dresses on the stones to
remove the dust and dirt of the trail") contrasts awkwardly with her and her family's
speech ("Yes, chil'ren, that California all right. We done made it. We's home").
In all, the journey is related somewhat generically-and such questions as how
they got from the Oregon Trail to California and why they encounter saguaro
cactuses far north of their habitat are unanswered. Wright's audience will surely
benefit from an important perspective often overlooked in accounts of the pio-
neers-that not all settlers looked like the Ingalls family. However, with this les-
son learned, listeners can turn to more compelling accounts ofwestward migration.
EB
328 * THE BULLETIN
WYNNE-JONEs, TIM 
Some oftheKinder Planets. Kroupa/Orchard, 1995 
130p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08751-4 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-09451-0 
$14.95 
R Gr. 4-7
Canadian Wynne-Jones, perhaps better known to U.S. audiences for his picture
books (Zoom Away, etc.), appears here as a short-story writer. Nine stories tell of
children encountering other worlds, whether celestial (as in "Night of the Pome-
granates," where Harriet sees Mars through a telescope), literary (in "Tweedledum
and Tweedledead" a boy's best friend gently blackmails him into reading Alice in
Wonderland), or supernatural ("The Clearing" uses a Vanishing Hitchhiker motif
to bring a lonely boy a friend for a time). The stories may not pack as much of a
punch as young readers are accustomed to, but the language and themes are acces-
sible to a younger short-story audience than usual. The writing is thoughtful,
inventive, and often humorous; stories such as "Save the Moon for Kerdy Dickus,"
which tells how a hi-tech, new-agey family gets mistaken for extraterrestrials by a
farm boy, would provide pleasingly offbeat readalouds. This would make a good
middle-grades introduction to the short-story genre. DS
ZIEFERT, HARRIET 
Oh, Whata Noisy Farm.t;illus. by Emily Bolam. 
Tambourine,
1995 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-13261-8 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-13260-X 
$15.00 
R 2-5 yrs
When the bull starts chasing the cow, the farmer's wife hollers and runs after the
bull, the farmer follows, banging on a pan, and several animals add on to the line
in this cumulative tale: "With the farmer's wife shouting, the farmer CRASH
BANGING, the goose HONK HONKING, the dog BOW WOWING, and the
cat MEOWING-oh, what a noisy farm!" After the cow and the bull agree to be
friends, everyone settles down for a nice nap. Small children, who are fond of
chasing each other and shouting, will particularly enjoy this simple, happy story
(adults, on the other hand, may enjoy a grownup giggle at the euphemistic "friend-
ship"). With its bright colors against a white background, and its childlike strokes,
this makes a visually appealing (and easily seen from a distance) book for toddler
storytime. The large type, easy-to-predict text and short words make it a good
choice for early readers as well. SDL
)1 o
MAY 1995 
* 329
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
Bauer, Caroline Feller. The Poetry Beak: An Annotated Anthology with Ideas for
Introducing Children to Poetry; illus. by Edith Ringham. Wilson, 1995. 347p.
ISBN 0-8242-0852-8. $45.00.
"Poetry breaks" are a sort of gentle guerilla poetry experience, where a volunteer, a
parent, a teacher, a librarian, or whoever breaks into the normal order of things to
share a poem. Bauer's book is a compact and complete do-it-yourself poetry-break
packet, including ideas for presentation, settings, and general poetry activities; she
includes a good 250 pages of poems, suggesting a poem-specific project or topic-
extending book after most of the verses. A helpful bibliography includes adult
books on kids and poetry as well as poetic anthologies, poetry books with pictures,
poetry for young adults, and other useful categories; there is a general index to the
book, as well as tide, author, first line, and subject indices to the poems. DS
Cart, Michael. What's So Funny?: Wit and Humor in American Children's Litera-
ture. HarperCollins, 1995. [288p.] ISBN 0-06-024453-4. $25.00. Reviewed
from galleys.
In his introduction, Cart expresses his approbation for works that "shar[e] one's
readerly enthusiasm for truly good books." This is essentially his accomplishment
as he surveys the fond and the funny in children's books, focusing on the works of
Hugh Lofting, Walter R. Brooks, Robert Lawson, Eleanor Estes, Arnold Lobel,
Beverly Cleary, and others. The book is thoroughly footnoted, but the author is
avowedly suspicious of the effects of academic scholarship upon humor; as a result,
the book is less a study than an affectionate, detailed description of the major
characteristics of-and characters in-American children's literary humor. DS
Konigsburg, E. L. TalkTalk: A Children's Book Author Speaks to Grown-Ups.
Karl/Atheneum, 1995. [192p.] ISBN 0-689-31993-2. $29.95. illus. with photo-
graphs. Reviewed from galleys.
Nine of Konigsburg's lectures and speeches, ranging from her Newbery Award
acceptance speech in 1968 to her Anne Carroll Moore Memorial Lecture in 1992,
are arranged chronologically here. The author demonstrates her characteristic wit
and style both in the lectures themselves and in her newly written introductions;
the subjects touched upon-multicultural literature, the importance of language,
the genesis of her ideas-are familiar but always worth exploring, and adults look-
ing for more insight into the author and into authorship for children will find this
a particularly accessible text. DS
330 
* THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletins alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Adoption-fiction: Dean
Africa-poetry: Kroll
African Americans-fiction: Banks;
Farmer; Forrester; Hayashi;
Pinkney
African Americans-stories: Wright
AIDS-stories: Newman
Anatomy: Sandeman
Animals-stories: Ziefert
Animals: Bischhoff-Miersch
Arctic regions-fiction: Katz
Art: Hale
Asian Americans-fiction: Namioka
Ballet: Levine
Basketball: Kornbluth
BIBLE STORIES: Fisher
BIOGRAPHIES: Adler; Fisher;
Kornbluth; Levine
Birds-stories: Armstrong
Birthdays-fiction: Hurwitz; Rylant
Books and reading-stories: Stewart
Bullies-fiction: Warner
Cats-fiction: Namioka
Cats-stories: Wallace-Brodeur;
Wilson
Chicago: Murphy
Chickens-stories: Froehlich;
Kimmel
Childbirth-fiction: Cushman
Civil War-fiction: Forrester
Community life-stories: Cooper
CONCEPT BOOKS: Anholt;
Onyefulu
Costa Rica: Keister
COUNTING BOOKS: Onyefulu
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Cormier; Fitch
Death-fiction: Ferris; Fletcher
Death-stories: Old; Wallace-
Brodeur
Disasters: Murphy
Dogs-fiction: Rylant
Dolphins-fiction: Mikaelsen
Drug abuse-fiction: Fitch
Ecology: Katz; Keister
Emotions-stories: Anholt
England-folklore: Morpurgo;
Williams
Ethics and values: Warner
FABLES: Heins
Family life-fiction: Fletcher
FANTASY: Dean; Farmer; Katz;
Morpurgo
Farm life-fiction: Willis
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Slepian
Fathers and sons-fiction: Warner
Florida-fiction: Mikaelsen
FOLKTALES AND
FAIRYTALES: Armstrong;
Han; Johnston; Kimmel; Pitre;
Sanfield; Thomassie; Vaughan
Friends-fiction: Fitch; Hayashi;
Namioka
FUNNY STORIES: King-Smith;
Mahy; Steig
Gardening-stories: Cole
Giraffes-fiction: Farmer
Grandmothers-fiction: Katz
Guidance: Newman; Vigna
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Cushman; Forrester; Haugaard;
Willis
MAY 1995 
* 
331
History, U.S.: Forrester; Green-
wood; Murphy; Shelby; Wright
Holocaust: Adler
Homosexuality-stories: Vigna
Horses-fiction: King-Smith
Hungary-folklore: Kimmel
Illness-fiction: Bat-Ami
Ireland-folklore: Armstrong
Japan-fiction: Haugaard
Jews-fiction: Bat-Ami
Jews-folklore: Sanfield
Jews: Adler
Kings-stories: Armstrong
Knights and chivalry: Morpurgo
Korea-folklore: Han
Libraries-stories: Stewart
Louisiana-stories: Thomassie
LOVE STORIES: Ferris
Middle Ages-fiction: Cushman
Music and musicians-fiction:
Namioka
MYSTERY STORIES: Cormier
Native Americans-poetry: Philip
Nature study: Bischhoff-Miersch;
Cole; French; George; Keister;
Lauber; Markle; Satder
Nigeria: Onyefulu
NURSERY RHYMES: Kroll
Owls: Satder
Parents and children-fiction:
Mikaelsen
Pets-fiction: Hayashi
Photography-fiction: Pinkney
Physical disabilities: Mikaelsen
Pigs-stories: Jennings
Pioneer life: Greenwood
POETRY: Cooper; Hopkins;
Kroll; Philip
Puerto Rico-folklore: Pitre
Puppets-fiction: Slepian
Rabbits-stories: Han
Rain forests: Keister
Reading aloud: Farmer; Hurwitz;
King-Smith; Mahy; Wynne-
Jones
Reading, beginning: Rylant;
Ziefert
Reading, easy: Demuth; Hayashi;
Hopkins; Lauber
Reading, family: Anholt;
Newman; Shelby; Vigna;
Wallace-Brodeur
Reading, reluctant: Cormier;
Fitch; Namioka; Warner;
Williams
Religious education: Fisher
Russia-folklore: Sanfield
School-fiction: Banks; Demuth;
Warner
SHORT STORIES: Hurwitz;
Wynne-Jones
Sisters-fiction: Pinkney
Slavery-fiction: Forrester
Snakes: Markle
Spiders: French
Storms-stories: Crimi
Story hour: Armstrong; Cooper;
Crimi; Froehlich; Hale; Han;
Heins; Hopkins; Jennings;
Johnston; Onyefulu; Pitre;
Sanfield; Steig; Thomassie;
Vaughan; Wilson; Ziefert
Storytelling-stories: Sanfield
Teachers-fiction: Demuth
Theater-fiction: Slepian
Time travel-fiction: Katz
Uncles-fiction: Mahy
Uncles-stories: Vigna
Voyages and travels-fiction:
Farmer
Weather-stories: Crimi
West, the-stories: Wright
Witches-stories: Johnston; Pitre
World War II: Adler
Writing: Hurwitz
Zoos-fiction: Farmer
Congratulations
VIRGINIA HAMILTON
Winner of the 1995
Laura Ingalls Wilder Medal
Greenwillow Books
Harcourt Brace Children's Books
HarperCollinsCildren 'sBooks
Alfred A. Knopf Books for Young Readers
The Putnam & Grosset Group
Scholastic Inc./ The Blue Sky Press
Simon & Schuster Children's Publishing Division
"There is no book more important
to me than this one." - Alice Walker
Their Eyes Were
Watching God
ZORA NEALE HURSTON
Foreword by Ruby Dee
Introduction by Sherley Anne Williams
Illustrated by erry Pinkney
Upon its initial publication in 1937 this
novel about a proud, independent black
woman was generally dismissed by male
reviewers. It was out of print for over
thirty years. Since its reissue by the
University of Illinois Press in 1978, Their
Eyes Were Watching God has been the
most widely read and highly acclaimed
novel in the canon of African-American
literature. With this publication of a richly
illustrated deluxe edition, a novel by a black
woman is accorded treatment as a classic.
"More than just an ordinary reprint....
A celebration of a long-neglected novel
and author who are finally receiving their
deserved recognition." - Library Journal
Illus. $24.95
Order toll free 800/54547C3
Universit 
ofIllinoisPres
1325 
.outli 
Oak.Strect
Champaign, IL 61820 
^^^
Lookingfor
Award-Winning Booktalks?
Take a look at...
Booktalking the 
ard
Winners: 1992-1993
By JonI Richardst Bodart/
224pp. 1995 ISBN 0-8242-086k
$32 U.S. and Canada,
$36 other countries. 
'
Prlze-Wnn 
Booktal 
r All
Ages and Auden es/
Booktalking the Award Winners is a new
series composed of booktalks about
prize-winning children's and young adult
literature. This first volume contains
some 250 talks on titles honored in 1992-
1993-in all, 26 awards are represented.
Indispensable for Both Beginning
and Experienced Booktalkers
Prepared by librarians and reading spe-
cialists, and edited by Joni Richards
Bodart, creator of the popular Booktalk!
series, Booktalking the Award Winners
will help introduce young people to out-
standing new titles and motivate them to
discover the pleasures of reading.
Titles in the 1992-1993 Volume
Include:
*Ajeemah and His Son *Dark Thirty
*Extremely Weird Endangered Species
*Haymeadow *Jim Ugly *The Stinky
Cheese Man and Other Fairly Stupid
Tales *Letters From Rifka *Missing May.
To Order Call Toll-Free
800-367-6770
Outside U.S. and Canada call
718-588-8400. Fax 718-590-1617.
VISA, MasterCard, American Express
accepted (telephone orders only).
STHE H.W. WILSON
COMPANY
Sharing Knowledge Since 1898
.. am... 
I 
m..... 
I....m.. Um-
I~~.PHIllaOlla
-
AND 
THE
by WILLIAM MAYNE
ILLUSTRATED BY NORMAN MESSENGER
A 1995 ALSC/ALA Notable Children's Book
Grades 3-6 * ISBN: 1-56458-713-4 * $12.95
DORLING KINDERSLEY PUBLISHING, INC.
95 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016
Dorling Kindersley books are distributed by Houghton
Mifflin Company. For information call 1-800-225-3362.
"Hob, a helpful house spirit, moves into
a new family's enchanted cottage and
must confront an army of goblins.
A spellbinding fantasy with sparkling
language that makes the existence of
fairies and witches seem perfectly natural."
-
SLJ's BEST BOOKS 1994,
School Library Journal
* "...A perfect choice for readers with
a taste for classic fantasy."
-
School Library Journal,
starred review
* "...Both comical and suspenseful,
a tour de force from one of
Britain's greats....
--
irkus Reviews, pointered review
" ...the world of Hob and his humans is
well-imagined, and Mayne writes with
both charm and menace."
-
The Bulletin of the Center
for Children s Books
THE LION AND THE UNICORN
A Critical Journal of Children's Literature
EDITORS: Louisa Smith & Jack Zipes
T he Lion and the Unicorn is a them
genre- centered journal of interr
scope committed to a serious, ongoing
cussion of literature for children. The
journal has become noted for its inter
views with authors, editors, and other
important contributions to the field.
Published twice a year in June &
December.
Prepayment is required.
ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTIONS: $19.50, individuals; $38.00, institutions.
FOREIGN POSTAGE: $2.65, Canada & Mexico; $4.00, outside North America
SEND ORDERS To: The Johns Hopkins University Press,
P.O. Box 19966, Baltimore, MD 21211
CALL TOLL-FREE: 1-800-548-1784 * FAX: (410) 516-6968
E-MAIL ADDRESS: jlorder@jhunix.hcf.jhu.edu
WINROFTE1950WER 
EA
Sharon Creech
Jr_
lor
WALK TWO
MOONS
Awarded by the American Library
Association for the most distinguished
contribution to American literature
for children published in 1994.
"Walk Two Moons tells the story
of 13-year-old Salamanca, of Native
American ancestry, who sets out with
her grandparents to visit her mother in
Idaho. The book is packed with humor
and affection and is an odyssey of
unexpected twists and surprising
conclusions" -Newbery Award
Selection Committee
Ages 8-12. $16.00 TR (0-060233346)
$15.89 LB (06023337-0)
CATHERINE, CALLED BIRDY
by Karen Cushman
"In the course of a year, compelling journal
entries express the keen intelligence and longing
for independence of Catherine, a 13th-century
girl. Her lively, humorous descriptions of
life on an English manor, midst unwanted suitors
and ever-present fleas, reach through time
to speak to moder readers.
-Newbery 
Award Selection Committee
Available in a HarperTrophy Paperback edition,
nminn in MmAi 100
Ages 12 up. $3.95 PB (0-06-440584-2)
(Cloth edition is published by Clarion Books)
af HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
10 East 53rd St., New York, NY 10022
Univtsity of Illinois Pres
1325 South Oak Street
Qhapaign, IL 61820
U.SA.
REUmN PosrAGE GUARANTED
Chosen by the New York Public Library
for its Books for the Teen Age List!
SEED OF SARAH
Memoirs of a Survivor
SECOND EDITION
Judith Magyar Isaacson
"A stunningly frank account of a young
woman's coming of age under extraordi-
nary conditions." - Andrew Silow Carroll,
Washington Jewish Week
The second edition includes a new final
chapter, "A Time to Forgive?" detailing
Isaacson's return visits to Germany in
the 1980s.
Paper 
I 
, 
$ 
( 
5-0
;s
IPl. 
80
SECOND 
LASS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
Seed
MFIMOIRS 
-OF 
A SIURVIVOR
Judith M.ilyar Isc'ni
; 
__ 
;1 
x
--- -
--
~2ula~s/
Paper, $12.95
(800) 545-4703
0 
49.*-* 
?
ii. *ri 
Ii
