T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by Johns Hopkins University Press
January 2015
Vol. 68   No. 5
 
To order
Call 800.548.1784 or 410.516.6987; fax 410.516.3866;  
e-mail: jrnlcirc@press.jhu.edu; or visit us online at  
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
essential.
Deborah Stevenson, Editor 
UniversiTy of illinois aT Urbana-Champaign
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books provides 
concise summaries and critical evaluations of current 
children’s books. This invaluable resource assists 
readers with questions regarding the ever-evolving 
children’s literature field. Reviews give an in-depth 
look at a selected book’s content, reading level, 
strengths and weaknesses, and quality of the format, 
as well as suggestions for curricular use. 
Published monthly (except August). Volume 68 (2015).  
ISSN 0008-9036; E-ISSN 1558-6766.
the Bulletin of the Center  
for Children’s Books
annUal individUal sUbsCripTions
$55.00 (print); $62.00 (online)
annUal insTiTUTional sUbsCripTions
$103.00 (print); $115.00 (online);  
$144.00 (print & online)
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
January 2015
Vol. 68 No. 5
245  the BIg PICture
 
 Coming Home  written and illus. by Greg Ruth
246  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
249 • Lowriders in Space  by Cathy Camper; illus. by Raúl the Third
255 •  Because They Marched: The People’s Campaign for Voting Rights That 
Changed America  by Russell Freedman
271 •  Clariel  by Garth Nix
271 •  Maddy Kettle: The Adventure of the Thimblewitch  written and illus. by Eric 
Orchard
274 • Gabi: A Girl in Pieces  by Isabel Quintero
284  2014 BuLLetIn BLue rIBBons
289  suBjeCt And use Index
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R Recommended.
Ad Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor (KQG)
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
Alaine Martaus, Reviewer (AM)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Melissa Albarran, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print $103.00 or electronic $115.00; combined print & electronic $144.00; 
multiple institutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, 
$55.00. In countries other than the United States, add $17.60 per subscription for postage; subscrib-
ers in Canada and Mexico add $13.75. Single copy rate: $11.00. Volumes available in microfilm from 
ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche 
from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be 
made payable to Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 
2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 410-
516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/journals/
advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2014 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image from Coming Home copyright ©2014 by Greg Ruth and used by permission of Feiwel 
and Friends.
January 2015 • 245
the BIg PICture
Coming Home
written and illustrated by Greg Ruth
Who is a stranger to the experience of awaiting the arrival of an absent loved one? 
The preschooler wonders how long it will be until Dad gets to the daycare center 
for pick-up; the parent counts down the hours until her teen gets home from prom 
safe and sound; the nursing home resident watches for his weekly visitor—all shar-
ing the same bright anticipation, tinged with a shadow of anxiety. Separation issues 
seem to be part and parcel of the human condition, but how much more poignant 
must they be for children of parents on military deployment? In this nearly wordless 
picture book, Ruth invites viewers to join a young boy at the airport as he crosses 
the tarmac for the first sight and first touch of his own returning soldier.
The genius of this presentation lies in Ruth’s masterful manipulation of 
time and perspective. The action transpires in something close to real time; in-
deed, careful perusal of the pictures and speculation about the boy’s state of mind 
can bring the pacing into near alignment with the minutes (or could it be mere 
seconds?) between his opening glance across the velvet rope barrier, his race across 
the tarmac, and the moment of reunion. Although, technically, viewers watch the 
boy’s movements, they also concurrently adopt his precise point of view thanks to 
a clever pictorial strategy. As the boy scans the arrivals and their families, steadily 
quickening his pace, each pair or group he notices and then promptly dismisses 
is brought to the foreground in full color, while the rest of the crowd retreats into 
a roughly sketched gray background. Thus Ruth stages the complete scene while 
allowing audiences to move freely within it as detached observer and invested par-
ticipant. We recognize the joy of each reunion, but it never become the boy’s—or 
our—emotional concern. We haven’t found the right soldier yet. 
With such emotionally fraught subject matter, it’s imperative to dance 
along an extremely fine line, avoiding maudlin manipulation while conveying 
legitimate sentiment, and Ruth carefully crafts his narrative to keep in balance. 
Not a single word or phrase pushes an emotional agenda (“Waiting”; “Watching”; 
“Where is . . . ?”); Ruth never ascribes “correct” feelings but allows the audience 
to attribute or experience their own. He also deftly incorporates touches of humor 
to relieve the tension: true to young guy perspective, the boy can’t help but cast a 
sideways glance—accompanied by a summary “Sheesh!”—at a smooching couple. 
There’s also an inventive touch of misdirection: if the cover art and the opening 
scene seem to promise a shopworn tale of a boy and his dog, audiences are in for a 
surprise when the dog promptly takes off, leash flying in its wake, straight into the 
arms of a camo-clad woman. It’s the boy’s—and our—first disappointment (“Lucky 
246 • The BulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
dog”). It’s also now clear that, since the dog belongs to the woman holding his 
leash, she must not be the boy’s mother. So, who is he with? Who is he expecting? 
The penultimate spread, a jubilant shout of “MOM!”, solves the mystery. It also 
may, and therefore should, cause viewers a brief moment of embarrassment if they 
fell right into the trap of assuming the boy is expecting a father’s return, especially 
since Ruth had already given a visual nod to soldiers of both genders and families 
of various configurations. 
Ruth remarks in a closing note, “No soldier goes to war alone—he or she 
always brings along their family and friends with them.” Teachers, librarians, and 
families selecting books that introduce military service to a very young audience will 
do well to include this tribute to military families, whose profound experiences are 
often acknowledged only in tragic stories of bereavement or in joyful but fleeting 
photo ops. (See p. 276 for publication information.)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer 
Alender, KAtie Famous Last Words. Point/Scholastic, 2014 312p
ISBN 978-0-545-63997-2 $18.99   
R Gr. 7-10
Willa blames herself for her father’s untimely heart attack two years ago, and she’s 
been trying, unsuccessfully, to contact his spirit ever since. Now living in Holly-
wood, she’s also trying to adjust to her new life as the stepdaughter of the famous 
director who swept her mother off her feet while filming in their small town in 
Connecticut. In their new home, however, she finds her efforts to contact the spirit 
realm have put her in touch with a troubled ghost who desperately wants her atten-
tion; her stepfather is also worried because a serial killer has been targeting young 
women and staging their murders in the style of famous movies. Discovering an 
unlikely ally in a moody boy who is obsessed with the serial killer, Willa sets out 
to solve the puzzle of her haunting, only to find herself in real danger when the 
two mysteries of the book—the identity of the serial killer and the identity of the 
ghost—come together in a nail-biting conclusion. Though the serial killer’s iden-
tity won’t be a huge surprise to readers, there is enough ambiguity to make Willa’s 
near-fatal misapprehension credible, and the scenes with the ghost are genuinely 
terrifying even though she’s ultimately on Willa’s side. The ghost herself is a feisty 
sort, and while that makes her a most uncomfortable partner for Willa, her anger 
January 2015 • 247
and frustration over her fate certainly ramp up the suspense in this thrilling and 
thoroughly entertaining page-turner.  KC
Antony, Steve Betty Goes Bananas; written and illus. by Steve Antony. Schwartz 
& Wade, 2014 26p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-50762-1 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-50761-4 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-50763-8 $10.99   
R 3-5 yrs
Betty may be a gorilla, but the perkily attired simian responds to adversity with 
a toddler’s hair-trigger outrage. Her first tantrum arises when she can’t peel her 
banana; then she’s upset because somebody else peeled her banana; finally she 
loses it when her peeled banana tragically breaks. Each meltdown elicits a visit 
from parental Mr. Toucan, who calmly settles Betty down (“There is no need for 
that”) and moves her past the logjam, but progress is always only temporary; even 
when Betty’s finally enjoyed her banana (“YUM!”), she spots another one and it 
looks like the cycle will start all over again. The book is well informed about the 
kind of obstacles that set off a toddler, and Betty’s tantrums offer lots of comically 
melodramatic sound effects for readers-aloud to perform and audiences to join in 
on. Illustrations involve colored pencil (employed, amusingly enough, on banana 
paper) and Photoshop, creating simplified scenes that float Betty, Mr. Toucan, 
and text against vibrant solid backdrops; the robust crayon texture of the colored 
infill and Betty’s wide, childlike face add to the toddleresque flair. Antony employs 
visual sequences with particular humor and cunning, with repeated scenes of Betty 
in profile showing her features slightly changing as she moves step-by-step toward 
meltdown. Kids with younger siblings in this stage will particularly appreciate 
the humorous take on toddler irascibility, while youngsters newly able to weather 
banana unpredictability themselves will appreciate their hard-earned wisdom.  DS
ApplegAte, KAtherine Ivan: The Remarkable True Story of the Shopping Mall 
Gorilla; illus. by G. Brian Karas and with photographs. Clarion, 2014 40p
ISBN 978-0-544-25230-1 $17.99   
R 6-9 yrs
With understated drama, Applegate compactly relays the true story of the real 
Ivan behind The One and Only Ivan (BCCB 2/12), a gorilla poached as a baby in 
central Africa in 1962 and shipped as a novelty purchase to a store in Washington. 
The book covers Ivan’s bucolic African beginnings, his capture and arrival in the 
U.S. (along with a baby female gorilla who died shortly afterwards), his upbringing 
among humans until age three, his subsequent installation in a cage in a shopping 
mall, the growing protest against his impoverished existence there, and his eventual 
release into a more hospitable habitat at Zoo Atlanta. An author’s endnote and a note 
from one of Ivan’s keepers at Zoo Atlanta offer more detailed information about his 
story, and three photos of Ivan are included, as is a photo of one of his paintings. 
While Karas’ subtle palette and gentle, cozily textured illustrations make it easy to 
understand the impulse to treat the adorable baby Ivan and his age-mate Burma as 
human-like pets, the scenes of Ivan in the wild and, in contrast, in captivity under-
score the questionable ethics of such behavior. Particularly moving are the scenes 
in which a high-flying airplane, seen from a baby gorilla’s vantage point, heralds 
Ivan’s first, doomed contact with humans, and the depiction of Ivan huddled in a 
dark shipping crate. The text is streamlined but powerful, and younger kids who 
248 • The BulleTin
aren’t up for the linguistic and emotional challenges of Applegate’s fictional account 
of Ivan will find this a thoughtful and intriguing introduction; older readers who 
have read The One and Only Ivan may enjoy it as well.  JH
BArnhill, Kelly The Witch’s Boy. Algonquin, 2014 372p
ISBN 978-1-61620-351-1 $16.95   
R* Gr. 5-7
The loss of Ned’s twin brother leaves a difficult legacy: Ned’s father feels guilty for 
not saving his son, Ned’s mother misused her magic to ensure Ned’s survival, and 
the town seems to believe the wrong brother lived. Far away, Aine struggles with 
her father, the Bandit King, who is driven by grief and greed to find the magic 
stored in Ned’s home. When Aine and Ned meet, they’re initially distrustful but 
eventually become deep friends. Warring nations, mysterious stone figures, and 
the running thread that magic is alive and dangerous all add to the gripping core 
narrative of two children who find wells of strength and ingenuity from being 
pushed out of their comfort zones. The setting is exceptional: lush descriptions are 
flawlessly integrated, conveying a deep understanding of the natural world and the 
people, flawed and complex, who populate it. Quiet desperation leavens the novel, 
counterpointed with the protagonists’ staunch striving for better lives (whether 
gotten through good or corrupt means). Offer this to Gaiman and Wynne-Jones 
fans, and to realistic fiction buffs who are open to brilliant coming-of-age stories 
sharing space with touches of magic.  AS
BirminghAm, mAriA Tastes Like Music: 17 Quirks of the Brain and Body; illus. by 
Monika Melnychuk. OwlKids, 2014 40p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-77147-010-0 $17.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-77147-083-4 $11.95   
R Gr. 4-8
This slender nonfiction title offers a quick and lively tour through some unusual (if 
not necessarily uncommon) physiological characteristics, ranging from neurological 
challenges such as developmental topographical disorientation (people can’t place 
where they are in their own neighborhoods or even houses) to sensory traits such 
as supertasting to growth irregularities like hyperdontia (extra teeth). Each spread 
offers a brief overview of a characteristic in energetic titled paragraphs, with lively 
sidebars providing more information and, often, a short interview with someone 
possessing the feature. While not all characteristics are equally compelling in their 
presentation, Birmingham (who interviews herself in the section on anosmia) does 
an unusually fine job of her overviews, making them genuinely fresh and informa-
tive while keeping them to an accessible length. This is a quick pick that balances 
legitimate scientific interest with believe-it-or-not appeal and an unthreatening 
mass-market look; readers will want to share details out loud with one another, 
while younger kids reading at an advanced level and reluctant readers willing to zip 
past the occasional technical term will both find this rewarding. Attractively edgy 
cartooning provides spot art in every spread, sometimes with bonus anatomical 
diagrams. An index is included; while there are unfortunately no notes, the acknowl-
edgments of interviewees and consultants suggests creditable primary research.  DS
January 2015 • 249
BlAcKer, terence The Twyning. Candlewick, 2014 421p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6902-7 $16.99   
R Gr. 5-7
Efren the rat lives in a thriving community under Victorian London, until people 
decide to wipe the rats out. Leading the humans on this quest is a strange and venge-
ful man, who seems to have taken it as his life mission to destroy all rats, helped 
by his reluctant assistant, Dogboy, a kid who feels more closely allied with animals 
than with the brutal adults who surround him. One of the boy’s very few friends 
is Caz, a homeless girl who lives in a junkyard; Caz’s ability to communicate with 
the rats via telepathy makes her resolve to resist the raticide, even at great personal 
risk. This is no fluffy animal fantasy: rodents and humans alike are mostly, albeit 
compellingly, portrayed as savage, mean-spirited, or dangerously ignorant. The 
happy ending, while perhaps a bit contrived given the bleak beginning and middle, 
is at least a worthy respite for the long-suffering Dogboy, Caz, and the rats. Readers 
who roll their eyes at books that suggest nobility and honor are implicit traits in 
talking animals (or talking humans, for that matter) will find this to be a bracing 
change of pace.  AS
BucKinghAm, royce Scott The Terminals. Dunne/St. Martin’s Griffin, 
2014 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-250-01155-8 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-250-02105-2 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 8-10
Cam is understandably stunned to be diagnosed with a terminal illness, a brain 
tumor to be exact. When he is offered the chance to use his final year alive to join 
an elite group of other “terminals” who get special training (and sometimes secret 
medication to enhance them) and go on dangerous, thrilling missions, he’s in, be-
cause why the heck not? Cam takes to the challenges immediately, observing how 
much the enhanced operatives can do and trying to live up to the expectations for 
him. Of course, YA readers should know by now to never trust anyone in a white 
coat who tells you they know what is best for you, and soon Cam begins to discover 
horrific secrets about the true nature of this experiment. Cam’s teammates are in-
triguing characters, dealing with their terminal diagnosis in dramatically different 
ways. Unfortunately, the book never manages to rise above the outlandishness of 
the premise, since it requires that not a single family ever pursues further treatment 
or second opinions (the tumors are, of course, complete fabrications and these 
teens are just guinea pigs for a dangerous drug that enhances their abilities, until 
it generally kills them). However, teens who are seeking a quick, heart-pounding 
adventure and don’t worry overmuch about believable plot twists will find this fills 
the bill and then some.  AS
cAmper, cAthy Lowriders in Space; illus. by Raúl the Third. Chronicle, 
2014 111p (Lowriders)
ISBN 978-1-4521-2155-0 $22.99   
R* Gr. 5-9
This buoyant graphic novel highlights lowrider culture with all the flair the subject 
deserves. Three eccentrically anthropomorphized animal pals labor under a demand-
ing boss, hoping for the day that they can open their own garage. A contest to find 
the vehicle with the best detailing seems promising, except for the minor problem 
250 • The BulleTin
that they don’t even possess a car to make fancy. However, that problem is nothing 
that an abandoned junker, some cleverly gathered supplies, and a trip through space 
won’t solve, and the resulting car is truly magnificent. There isn’t much plot in this 
graphic novel, as it is clear from the start the earnest, cooperative friends will emerge 
victorious, but it’s obvious that the story isn’t really the point here. The magnificent 
red, blue, and black pen drawings set against lush, creamy backgrounds make each 
page individual works of art, the illustrator balancing charm, hipness, and artistry 
perfectly in the loopy yet stylish car buffs. In addition, the automotive slang and 
smooth Spanish/English mix are as fun and engaging as the central narrative arc, 
and the charm even extends to the copious end materials, which include a glossary, 
artist note, an impeccably edited note about lowriders, and an epilogue. While the 
author makes it clear that being poor isn’t some sort of magical state of being that 
inspires happiness, it’s also evident that the one with the most money doesn’t always 
win the day, and that a community that supports you can compensate for a great 
deal. It’s not a bad takeaway, and artistically inclined readers will undoubtedly leave 
not only delighted with the story but also inspired by the artist’s extreme low-tech 
approach to drawing that produced such impressive results.  AS
clAre, cASSAndrA  The Bane Chronicles; by Cassandra Clare, Sarah Rees Bren-
nan, and Maureen Johnson; illus. by Cassandra Jean. McElderry, 2014 505p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-9599-9 $22.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-9566-1 $11.99   
R Gr. 9-12 
Magnus Bane, the colorful, fashion-conscious warlock of Cassandra Clare’s The 
Mortal Instruments and The Infernal Devices series, stars in this collection of eleven 
short stories, ten of which were previously published electronically. Tales trace Mag-
nus’ adventures from eighteenth-century Peru and Paris, through nineteenth-century 
London, and into twentieth-century New York City. Along the way he crosses paths 
with faces familiar to fans of Clare’s novels, filling in narrative gaps only hinted at 
in longer works and providing glimpses of the Shadowhunters in their older and 
younger years. Though readers unfamiliar with both series may find themselves 
lost in the numerous intertextual references and enormous cast, knowledgeable 
fans will chuckle over the inside jokes and appreciate seeing more of secondary 
characters like Ragnor Fell, Camille Belacourt, and Raphael Santiago. The stories 
vary in tone from the breezy and humorous (“What Really Happened in Peru,” 
“What to Buy the Shadowhunter Who Has Everything”) to the serious and deadly 
(“The Midnight Heir,” “The Fall of the Hotel Dumort”). Magnus meanwhile is 
the personification of whimsy, careless but likable, and the narratives reveal hidden 
depths within his secret past. He isn’t quite strong enough to hold a story on his 
own, so the most successful entries are those in which he is an observer and support 
character. Series fans will likely come looking for the exclusive content and happily 
stay for the alternative, expanded view of their favorite paranormal warriors.  AM
condie, Ally Atlantia. Dutton, 2014 [320p]
ISBN 978-0-525-42644-8 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Generations ago, the underwater city of Atlantia became the last chance of survival 
for an increasingly polluted world; some humans were selected to remain Above and 
work to send food and resources to Below, ensuring the survival of those chosen 
January 2015 • 251
for Atlantia. At least, that’s the story that teenaged sisters Rio and Bay have always 
been told. After the sudden death (and likely murder) of Rio and Bay’s mother, 
the Minister of Atlantia, and the inexplicable choice by Bay to go Above, Rio is 
left confused and bereft—she was, after all, the one who always dreamed of going 
Above and it was Bay who made her promise that the siblings would remain together 
forever. Now Rio is playing a dangerous cat and mouse game with the Council 
(her mother’s potential murderers) and her aunt, a powerful siren who wants Rio 
to use the her own siren voice (an ability she has kept hidden for years) to uncover 
the true history of Above and Below. The world-building manages to be both 
overexpository and vague, focusing too much on minutiae and not enough on the 
grander workings of Atlantia, while the plot becomes more and more convoluted 
as not-so-stunning secrets are revealed. The human drama, however, is eloquently 
conveyed, with Rio’s thoughtful, at times imagistic narration perfectly capturing 
her devastation at the sudden loss of both her sister and mother, as well as her 
contemplations on who she now is without them. Readers who can see past the 
flawed setup may find sufficient reward in the heartfelt family story about what 
love and loyalty look like in the midst of serious obstacles.  KQG 
cronn-millS, KirStin Transgender Lives: Complex Stories, Complex Voic-
es. Twenty-First Century, 2014 88p illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-7613-9022-0 $34.60   
R Gr. 7-12 
In chapters that blend first-person discourse (apparently based on author interviews 
or prompts), editorial segues, and objective information, Cronn-Mills offers an 
overview of a range of gender-nonconforming life experiences. Paying careful at-
tention to vocabulary and terminology preferred by the GLTB(QQIA) community, 
she navigates the distinction between gender identity and sexual orientation and 
advances the voices of people who have transitioned from assigned birth gender 
to current gender, with varying degrees of medical intervention. Whereas the 
testimonies here are briefer and more frequently interrupted than those of Susan 
Kuklin’s Beyond Magenta (BCCB 2/14), the information concerning hows and 
whys of hormonal and surgical interventions (as well as the choice to elect neither 
option) makes this a complementary resource. Although the title refers specifically 
to transgender persons, Cronn-Miller also includes gay drag performer Dave Gaer, 
who appreciates his feminine traits without transitioning from his birth identity, 
and genderqueer Julia Kelleher, who avers, “I don’t think I am really a man or a 
woman.” Inclusion of these related perspectives broadens the range of issues and 
offers valuable clarifications for readers who are sorting through what may be 
an unfamiliar set of life experiences. A timeline of selected transgender events is 
included, as well as a glossary, a selected Who’s Who of trans* Americans, source 
notes, resources, and index are included. YAs familiar with Cronn-Miller from her 
Stonewall Award–winning Beautiful Music for Ugly Children (BCCB 1/13) will be 
particularly pleased to encounter her nonfiction work.  EB
crowe, chriS Death Coming up the Hill. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 
2014 204p
ISBN 978-0-544-30215-0 $16.99   
R Gr. 7-10 
Seventeen-year-old Ashe feels like he lives in a war zone, a cold war between his 
parents, who only stay together for his sake. Mom is an outspoken pacifist, who 
252 • The BulleTin
participates in rallies against the Vietnam War; Dad is a hawk, who has just about 
reached the end of his patience with his wife’s activities. Ashe is philosophically 
aligned with his mother but appreciates his father’s support and affection, so he 
has brokered an uneasy truce with each. The brittle peace shatters when Mom 
becomes pregnant with the child of another protestor, Dad abandons her, and the 
two fight for custody of Ashe. The fact that the newborn girl is black sends Dad 
over the edge, and he threatens to cut off all financial assistance to his son if Ashe 
will not voluntarily live with him—an ultimatum that means that Ashe will lose 
his chance at college and a military deferment unless he renounces Mom and the 
half-sister he instinctively loves. The plot sounds like pure soap opera, and the 
structure of the novel, haiku verse with a syllable for each of the 16,592 soldiers 
killed in 1968, seems at first glance to be a forced gimmick. Crowe nonetheless 
pulls it off, with the themes of antiwar activism, women’s limited rights, racism, 
and patriotism intelligently braided together, and the workings of the Vietnam era 
draft system with its potential for discrimination and entrapment on full display. 
Readers will settle quickly into the haiku, most likely either ignoring it or pausing 
to take notice of those moments in which the rhythm cannily emulates speech 
patterns. YAs convinced they don’t like historical fiction should take a look at this 
gripping, fast-moving quick pick.  EB
cruSchiform Full Speed Ahead!: How Fast Things Go; written and illus. by Crus-
chiform. Abrams, 2014 58p
ISBN 978-1-4197-1338-5 $18.95   
R Gr. 2-5
The design of this French import is simplicity itself: on the verso of each double-page 
spread is a speed notated in big, blocky print (kilometers per hour is prominent; 
miles per hour is included in smaller typeface), and numbered labels for the items 
featured on the recto that travel at that speed. “3 km/h,” as it happens, is the speed 
of a Tegenaria spider, an excavator, and a person walking; a bullet and the Earth’s 
rotation both clock in at “1,700 km/h.” The illustrations, in black, yellow, and 
orange against backgrounds of ultramarine, are the epitome of Deco sleek, and the 
oversized trim allows ample room to accommodate such behemoths as a passenger 
jet, a tornado, and the Hindenburg. There’s no attempt to keep objects in scale, nor 
is that necessary since the whole point is the thought-provoking and often gasp-
worthy juxtaposition of entities that seem to have nothing in common but similar 
speed. Clearly some speeds noted in the main text will spark skepticism: the speed 
of a person walking, for example, must vary according to individual hustle. A flip 
to the back of the book though should clarify, if not settle, incipient arguments, 
with short paragraphs on how each speed was identified (“normal,” “determined,” 
and “fast” human paces are noted). While there’s plenty of scope for curricular use 
here—from graphing to creative writing—there’s enormous pleasure in a leisurely 
browse, accompanied by nuggets of fascinating did-you-knows.  EB 
de grAmont, ninA The Boy I Love. Atheneum, 2014 271p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8056-8 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8058-2 $10.99   
Ad Gr. 6-9
When Wren and her best friend, Allie, start a new school together, things don’t go as 
well as they’d hoped, especially when Tim, the boy Allie has claimed for her crush, 
seems much more interested in Wren. When Wren discovers that Tim’s gay, she 
January 2015 • 253
shields his secret by letting everyone think that she is his girlfriend, which strains 
her relationship with Allie to the breaking point. Meanwhile, Wren’s aunt’s broken 
engagement with a man whose ancestors her ancestors once owned is clearly meant 
to provide a parallel to Wren’s own bitterness with the prejudice Tim will face once 
he comes out. The plot is, in fact, tidy to the point of being an extended sermonic 
illustration of the need to take a stand against injustice, with all of Wren’s family 
and friends behaving as the good guys and everyone else on the wrong side of both 
history and current sensibilities regarding race and sexual orientation. Even her 
mother’s passion for rescuing animals provides a model for Wren’s fierce desire to 
protect Tim. Wren repeatedly breaks the fourth wall in her first-person narration and 
directly addresses the audience, enhancing the pointedness of the message but also 
giving a immediacy to the story itself, as if the reader were a friend who had asked 
for a recap of the complicated goings-on of Wren’s sophomore year. Fortunately, 
Wren is kind enough, and self-aware enough, particularly of her petty jealousies 
and her need to be a better person, to spark just that kind of interest.  KC 
devine, eric Press Play. RP Teens, 2014 [368p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-7624-5512-6 $9.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7624-5553-9 $9.95   
Ad Gr. 9-12
Greg wants out—out of his no-future town, and out of his oversized, flabby 
body. To that end he adheres to two clear goals: he will embark on a stringent but 
sensible weight-loss regimen of nutritious meals and exercise, and he will make 
a documentary of his efforts that will wow a film-school admissions committee. 
He thinks he has no close friends, but longtime buddy Quinn acts as his personal 
trainer; he picks up additional support from overweight Ollie, who’s also striving 
to lose pounds, and Ella, who shares his interest in filmmaking. Greg could prob-
ably handle the relentless bullying from the class jocks, but when he accidentally 
films some incriminating footage of vicious hazing by the lacrosse team, in which 
coaches and adult boosters appear to be complicit, he, Quinn, Ollie, and Ella are 
threatened and even assaulted, with no clear path to an authority who could shut 
down the team’s ritual. The plot relies heavily on the old don’t-tell-the-parents 
chestnut, and the action feels strung out to accommodate an ever more violent series 
of smackdowns. The quartet’s backstories, though, supply a level of psychological 
drama that less bloodthirsty teens will want to follow, and the Big Finale ending, 
set at an all-school assembly, is sure to elicit a fist pump of righteous relief.  EB
dowell, frAnceS o’roArK Phineas L. MacGuire . . . Gets Cooking!; illus. by 
Preston McDaniels. Atheneum, 2014 195p (From the Highly Scientific 
Notebooks of Phineas L. MacGuire)
ISBN 978-1-4814-0099-2 $16.99   
R Gr. 2-4
It turns out it was a mistake for nine-year-old Phineas (from Phineas MacGuire 
Erupts!: The First Experiment, BCCB 7/06) to complain about his mother’s cooking, 
because now he’s on the hook for making dinners for his family. He begins to find 
some scientific appeal to the project (“As a scientist, I was hoping for the kind of 
dinner that might blow up at the last minute”) and learns more about cooking as 
he and his friends try to develop a competition brownie recipe—and as he tries to 
fend off the school bully with the bully’s required brownies. Phineas is particularly 
endearing as a science-loving kid who’s not a know-it-all genius but is an enthusiastic 
254 • The BulleTin
novice drawn by slime and explosions, and his culinary education is plausible and 
amusingly described (leavening is “kind of like the yeast ate a bunch of junk food 
and farted”). The retrain-the-bully subplot isn’t completely original, but the kid-
level pragmatism keeps Phineas’ scientific approach from being didactic, and the 
fact that the bully never self-recognizes is absolutely believable. McDaniels’ black 
and white spot art and full-page illustrations have a fine sense of the ridiculous, 
accentuating the silly side of the story. Firm friends of Phineas won’t need any en-
couragement to dive into this new adventure, and the cooking theme—especially 
the brownie-baking—will draw a wide audience.  DS
eScoffier, michAël Take Away the A: An Alphabeast of a Book; illus by Kris Di 
Giacomo. Enchanted Lion, 2014 58p
ISBN 978-1-59270-156-8 $17.95   
R 6-9 yrs 
This alphabet book with a difference doesn’t just illustrate what a letter is for, it 
demonstrates how much difference it can make: “Without the A, the BEAST is the 
BEST. . . . Without the D, DICE are ICE.” Each spread offers a different alphabeti-
cal minimal pair and turns the contrast into a drama of its own, some drawing on 
folk rhymes and tales (the moon says “moo!” to the cow jumping over it as the cat 
fiddles away) and some creating amusing original scenarios (“YOURS is OURS” 
captions a skydiving monkey, surprised to be sharing his chute with an octopus 
and a mouse). While the playful logic of the sentences stretches a little when the 
relationships get a little more complicated (as when “the GLOVE falls in LOVE”), 
the game remains engaging, and the imaginative situations are delightful in their 
peculiar richness, like a glimpse into some strange fantasy world. Characterful mot-
tling occasionally touched with collage elements lends a rustic texture to the scenes, 
whose hand-hewn appearance is emphasized by rough edges falling just short of 
the page boundaries. Trim yet casual linework adds delicacy, while the cast, largely 
anthropomorphized animals, are portrayed with sly comedy; viewers will especially 
enjoy tracking the doings of the little white rat as he appears in scene after scene. It 
would be hard to resist expanding this into a language arts game where kids make 
their own paired changes (perhaps in tandem with Richard Wilbur’s Disappearing 
Alphabet, BCCB 12/98), but there’s plenty of enjoyment here just in seeing the 
familiar letters in new and playful ways.  DS
fredericK, heAther vogel Absolutely Truly. Simon, 2014 355p (A Pump-
kin Falls Mystery)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2972-7 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2974-1 $10.99   
R Gr. 4-6
Twelve years old and six feet tall, Truly Lovejoy finds it difficult to blend in with 
the crowd in the small town of Pumpkin Falls, New Hampshire, where she and 
her family have moved to be near Truly’s grandparents after Truly’s wounded fa-
ther returned from Afghanistan. Helping out at the family bookstore, Truly finds 
a mysterious letter in a first edition of Charlotte’s Web, which is then stolen; Truly 
decides to investigate, since the sale of the first edition could ease the financial 
woes that threaten to close the bookstore’s doors and eliminate her father’s only real 
job prospect. The cozy setting, with its covered bridges, waterfalls, and pleasingly 
eccentric cast of residents, lends an appealing backdrop to this gentle mystery/
family drama, as even the somewhat cynical Truly comes to discover the pleasures 
January 2015 • 255
of small-town living. The two mysteries, that of the book’s theft and the writing 
of the letter hidden within it, aren’t necessarily imperative or urgent (it’s clear that 
Truly’s father and his sister will figure something out financially), but they effectively 
scaffold Truly’s emotional issues of finding her place in her new town and negotiat-
ing the shifting family dynamics as her dad recovers. The Lovejoy brood, which 
includes Truly and her four siblings, a harried but loving mother, a mopey dog, 
and a quirky aunt, is one of those big families that manage just the right balance 
of teasing, realistic arguing, and good humor. Fans of Birdsall’s The Penderwicks 
(BCCB 9/05) will find this a warm, charming readalike.  KQG 
freedmAn, ruSSell Because They Marched: The People’s Campaign for Voting Rights 
That Changed America. Holiday House, 2014 83p illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-8234-2921-9 $20.00   
R Gr. 5-9
Juxtapose the year 1965 and the place Selma, Alabama, and images of Bloody 
Sunday at the Edmund Pettus Bridge come to mind, with tear gas, bullwhips, and 
nightsticks pitted against unarmed, nonviolent voters’-rights marchers. In this 
densely illustrated history, Freedman fleshes out the events that surrounded that 
pivotal day, examining black citizens’ previous attempts at surmounting obstacles 
to voter registration (from poll taxes, to abbreviated office hours, to rigged exams), 
local marches led by respected teachers, and ultimately a trio of high-profile marches 
that finally led to vindication, the Voting Rights Act of 1965. Of particular note is 
Freedman’s skill in tracking the involvement of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.—his 
absence from the first march, his controversial call to stop the second march before 
crossing the bridge, and his speech during the third march to Montgomery—while 
crediting the extraordinary leadership of local figures such as Rev. Frederick Douglass 
Reese. Testimony from participants is skillfully woven into the text, and large black 
and white photographs provide close-ups of the violent confrontations. A brief but 
effective timeline keeps events in order; source notes, a selected bibliography, and 
an index are also included.  EB
furniSS, clAre The Year of the Rat. McElderry, 2014 289p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-2099-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-2101-0 $10.99   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Tragedy hits Pearl’s life when her mother dies, leaving behind a prematurely born 
infant, Rose, whom Pearl dubs “The Rat.” Pearl has always loved her stepdad, but 
he’s now focused on his delicate biological daughter, and Pearl is spiraling into a 
morass of grief and isolating herself from everyone, with only occasional appearances 
from her mother’s practical ghost to give her days meaning. This is a poignant story, 
and Pearl’s fluent, immediate narration testifies to her sadness and alienation (“All 
I can think about is how The Rat is becoming more of a person, more solid and 
real, and I’m becoming less of one”); her realization that she’d overinvested in her 
mother’s biased view of her father’s family is a familiar literary trope, but it’s more 
believable here than usual. The book throws secondary characters under the bus 
in order to ensure Pearl’s isolation, though, requiring that seemingly sympathetic 
family and friends treat the clearly troubled teen with shallow matter-of-factness; 
Pearl’s mother’s ghost is also too mundane to be really interesting, in a portrayal 
that doesn’t really make her interesting as a character or impactful as a ghost. Eliza-
beth Scott’s Heartbeat (BCCB 1/14) tackles the same subject with more emotional 
256 • The BulleTin
resonance and cohesion, but Pearl’s agony may still speak to many readers who 
empathize with her distancing and pain.  DS
gAy, mArie-louiSe Any Questions?; written and illus. by Marie-Louise 
Gay. Groundwood/House of Anansi, 2014 56p
ISBN 978-1-55498-382-7 $19.95   
R 6-8 yrs
In this author visit between covers, author and illustrator Gay addresses some of 
the questions she’s been asked by children at various school visits and leads viewers 
through the process of turning artistic inspiration into stories and pictures. One 
child’s question of “Where does a story start?” jumpstarts the exploration, and il-
lustrations teem with children (and animals) who ask questions and offer advice in 
speech balloons, guiding the narrative through the gradual development of a story 
about a shy young giant. As the crowdsourced tale comes to a close, the kids decide 
to write another story, and “The End” becomes “The Beginning.” An author’s note 
offers answers to the kids’ questions (e.g., “Can you draw a horse?”; “Have you 
ever touched a snake?”) and includes a mailing address for Gay so audiences can 
send in further queries. This is not only a joyful ode to curiosity and creativity but 
also a helpful model for adults and kids interested in creating written and artistic 
narratives; it also has obvious use as part of an author/illustrator study or as a com-
panion piece to Gay’s Stella and Sam titles (Read Me a Story, Stella, BCCB 9/13, 
etc.). Gay’s watercolor, pencil, pastel ink, colored pencil, and collage illustrations 
in her standard style evoke a sense of creative busyness and productivity, with lots 
of amusing or intriguing little asides. An intrepid teacher or librarian with chart 
paper or a SmartBoard and a group of inventive kids could have a particularly fine 
time with this.  JH
goodAll, JAne The Chimpanzee Children of Gombe; illus. with photographs by 
Michael Neugebauer. Minedition, 2014 [60p]
ISBN 978-988-8240-83-8 $19.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 4-8 yrs
Prolific writer, researcher, and educator Jane Goodall addresses young listeners in 
a photoessay that introduces the behavior of some of the younger chimpanzees at 
Gombe National Park in Tanzania. Large, uncaptioned color photographs coor-
dinate with slightly oversized text, focusing on the undeniably adorable chimps as 
they cuddle their mothers, wrestle their siblings, climb, kiss, badger, tickle, eat, and 
groom. Browsing is a more satisfying experience than reading, as the tone of the 
narration is precious, and the syntax can be occasionally clunky: “Now I would like 
you to come with me into the forest. We will pretend it’s just one day but actually 
we shall be going back every few years so that we can find out what happens with 
the different families.” Neugebauer’s color photographs, though, should please 
chimp lovers with close-ups and action shots, and this title will put the esteemed 
Dr. Goodall on the radar of children just developing a serious interest in primates. 
Notes on chimpanzee endangerment and on the organizations that advocate for 
chimps are included.  EB 
January 2015 • 257
goSling, ShAron The Diamond Thief. Switch/Capstone, 2014 [336p]
ISBN 978-1-63079-002-8 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
As light with her fingers as she is on her feet, sixteen-year-old Rémy Brunel performs 
on the circus trapeze during the day while putting her skills to use as a cat burglar 
in Victorian London during the night. When she bungles an attempt to steal a 
massive jewel from the Tower of London, she’s forced to flee both her abusive boss, 
who compels her to steal, and the police pursuing her, but only after she learns that 
the jewel, now stolen by someone else, might lift the curse handed down to her by 
her parents. Meanwhile, Thaddeus Rec, an up and coming detective with Scotland 
Yard, is wrongly framed for the theft, and he too goes on the lam, where he meets 
up with Rémy. Negotiating the seedy underbelly of the city to clear their names 
(or, in Rémy’s case, find the diamond to steal back), the pair faces off with Lord 
Abernathy, a maniacal old man bent on using a fleet of mechanized submarines 
and other weaponry powered by the gem to overtake the British government. The 
action here is first rate, moving readers breathlessly from one danger to the next as 
Thaddeus and Rémy escape flooding tunnels, outwit menacing guards, and ulti-
mately pull off quite the jewel heist. Unfortunately, that leaves little time for either 
character or plot development, so the details of Rémy’s curse remain vague and 
the sudden romance between Thaddeus and Rémy is contrived. Still, the Victorian 
setting and plethora of gadgetry may find an audience among steampunk fans who 
will settle in for Remy’s high-wire act.  KQG 
grAudin, ryAn The Walled City. Little, 2014 429p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-40505-8 $18.00
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-40504-1 $9.99   
R Gr. 9-12
Three teens are trying to survive in Hong Kong’s Kowloon Walled City, fully aware 
that their ethical and moral compasses would not pass muster elsewhere but knowing 
they are doing what they can in this hellish location to keep going for another day. 
Jin seeks her sister who was sold into prostitution, Dai tries to right his own past 
wrongs by going undercover to take down the baddest of the bad guys, and Mei, 
Jin’s sister, endures brothel life and never stops hoping for an escape. While the three 
eventually meet one another and make a plan, they know they must hurry, because 
the days of the Walled City are numbered and it is not at all clear who will emerge 
safely as it collapses. The perspective shifts from chapter to chapter, the narration 
moving between the three teens, and there is pleasing and well-integrated overlap, 
so that often readers are getting multiple views of the same moments. In spite of 
the fact that the descriptions are often of horrific things, they are lyrically crafted, 
painting vivid snapshot images of what might lead people to make unimaginable 
choices. Readers who understand that sometimes just getting out alive is enough will 
find this a sharp, compelling novel. A short author’s note explains the facts about 
the Kowloon Walled City and gives readers enough to dig more on their own.  AS
grAy, clAudiA  A Thousand Pieces of You. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 
2014 357p
ISBN 978-0-06-227896-8 $17.99   
R  Gr. 9-12
When Marguerite Caine’s physicist father dies in a mysterious accident and his 
likely murderer, the brooding young genius Paul, escapes into another dimension, 
258 • The BulleTin
Marguerite joins with Theo, another of her father’s students, to follow Paul across 
parallel worlds where she may enact her revenge. A malfunction traps Marguerite in 
tsarist Russia with no Theo and an alternative Paul, whose kindness reminds her of 
the Paul she could never admit she loved and who could never have murdered her 
father. Marguerite is forced to face that fact that Paul may be innocent, that Theo 
may be more treacherous that she realized, and that a global corporate conspiracy 
may soon put not only her own family and world but also every dimension in 
jeopardy. As a spirited romantic adventure, this novel is a delicious success. With its 
plucky, black-sheep heroine and its love triangle involving two equally swoonworthy 
young men, no new ground is being broken here character-wise, but the evocative 
settings, heart-racing romance, and fast-paced storytelling will have readers happily 
ignoring any sense of déjà vu. The science is specious at best, but even the narrator 
herself dismisses specifics and plausibility as irrelevant, giving readers permission 
to revel in suspended disbelief. So while not a great choice for readers looking for 
strong science fiction, this novel and its likely sequels are an excellent what’s-next 
for fans of Khoudry’s Corpus novels (Vitro, BCCB 3/14), Oliver’s Delirium series 
(BCCB 2/11), and those who like their trans-dimensional travel with a little less 
physics and a lot more passion.  AM
green, tim First Team. Harper/HarperCollins, 2014 327p
ISBN 978-0-06-220875-0 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 4-6
Books with quarterbacks on the cover do not generally open with bullets flying, 
planes crashing, and the hero emerging from a three-week coma to find his face—
and his father’s—have been altered by plastic surgery. Readers coming off Green’s 
New Kid (BCCB 3/14) will have realized that the previous title threw them a 
sports-novel curve ball, shifting a tried-and-true new-player-makes-good plot into 
a conspiracy thriller. Now Brock’s father comes clean to Brock about his mother’s 
death, the family’s undercover government work, and Dad’s past need to flee from 
Russian mobsters on the verge of capture and indictment. With new identities, 
father and son should be able to settle into a quiet life in a small Ohio town. That’s 
fine with Brock, who at the urging of buddy Mak goes out for football to pass the 
time until baseball season. He knows he’s cut out for quarterback, but the nepotistic 
offensive coordinator begs to differ, pulling every dirty trick in the book to keep 
Brock on the bench. Dad and Brock each flirt with romance, the threat of assas-
sination abates, Mom turns out to be very much alive, and Brock gets his inevitable 
moment in the stadium lights, unfortunately reverting what was an unusual twist 
in the sports genre to business as usual. Motormouth Mak, who cannot say enough 
about life lessons from his revered father, is a genuinely warm and funny sidekick, 
though, and there’s still enough core action to make an entertaining novel.  EB
hArriS, tereSA e. The Perfect Place. Clarion, 2014 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-547-25519-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7
Treasure’s father has been gone two months, and Treasure, her little sister, Tiffany, 
and their mother can’t pay their rent. With their landlord threatening eviction, their 
mother whisks the girls away to a tiny town in Virginia and leaves them with their 
ancient, grumpy Great-Aunt Grace while Mom sets off to find their wayward father. 
Treasure and her aunt immediately take to verbally sparring, with Treasure pulling 
January 2015 • 259
out all of the multi-syllable dictionary words that she and her father loved to learn 
together. She also gets reluctantly involved with some of the kids in town, including 
Terrance, a boy who won’t stop talking, and a couple of mean-spirited girls. When 
she helps her great-aunt solve a minor mystery, and Grace in turn helps Treasure 
get a bit of revenge, the two achieve détente, and Treasure begins to rethink what 
it means to find your perfect place. Although the plot arc is sweetly predictable, 
Treasure’s happy ending is one she makes rather than one that is unrealistically 
contrived, putting such a feat within reach of readers whose own circumstances are 
less than ideal. Treasure’s love of words adds texture to her character, and Terrance’s 
open admiration for her verbal ability validates both of these smart kids as likable 
and worthy of emulation. The small-town dynamics draw on recognizable characters 
without becoming stereotypes; Great-Aunt Grace, for instance, is full of surprises. 
Treasure herself is a resourceful and mature sixth-grader who stands up for herself 
and earns the well-deserved respect of the adults in her life.  KC
hAtKe, Ben Julia’s House for Lost Creatures; written and illus. by Ben Hatke. First 
Second, 2014 36p
ISBN 978-1-59643-866-8 $17.99   
R 5-8 yrs
Hospitable young Julia and her roaming, multistory house (it travels on the back 
of a very large tortoise) have settled at the seashore and gained some guests: a 
troll, a mermaid (with strategically positioned hair and arms that mostly cover her 
bare chest), a ghost, a dragon, and a band of folletti (gnome-like characters). The 
visitors prove too raucous and messy, however, straining Julia’s generosity until 
they’re joined by just the right sort of guest: a mustachioed mechanical robot with 
a troupe of tiny robotic minions, all eager to clean and repair. This is an pleasing 
flight of fancy, grounded by the details of Julia’s house and by the cozy tones of 
the art. The streamlined storytelling keeps the focus on the concept and on the 
homey illustrations. Ginger-haired Julia, clad in a kerchief, a dress and apron, and 
pink high-top sneakers, is a winning heroine, and the folkloric characters—the 
troll with his leafy legs, the blue-haired mermaid, a patchwork cat—are visually 
intriguing figures. Share this with kids who enjoyed Sherry’s terrapin-as-house tale 
Turtle Island (BCCB 9/14) or with those who gravitate towards the fantastical.  JH
hillS, tAd Rocket’s 100th Day of School; written and illus. by Tad Hills. Schwartz 
& Wade, 2014 32p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-39096-5 $15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-39095-8 $12.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-385-39097-2 $3.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-39098-9 $3.99   
R Gr. 1-2
Tad Hills’ pedagogically inclined canine hero Rocket has moved into beginning-
reader format, and here he’s preparing for that popular rite of passage, the 100th 
day of school. His friends help him gather his 100 items, ranging from words to 
pencils to acorns, and an obliging squirrel, Bella, allows him to store his collection 
in the tree hollow where she lives. When Rocket’s five acorns go missing from the 
tree, Bella confesses that she couldn’t resist eating them (“I LOVE ACORNS SO 
MUCH!”); fortunately, Rocket comes up with an ingenious substitute that not 
only gets him to 100 but allows him to showcase his five helpful friends as well. 
The plot is more mild-mannered than dramatic, but it touches on elements relevant 
260 • The BulleTin
to young audiences—problem-solving, forgiveness, and lack of self-control in the 
face of a beloved snack, in addition to the 100 objects challenge. Hills’ expansive 
spot art, in colored pencil and acrylic, is cleverly styled, with action pared down 
from picture-book level to suit the greater weight of text, but with design still sug-
gesting an illustrative prominence that makes diving into the text less daunting. 
The portraits are therefore particularly key, and furry Rocket, with his slightly 
anxious eyes, is satisfying as both cuddly pet and kid stand-in. Young Rocket fans 
will cheerfully follow him in any trim size, and kids struggling with the 100 days 
challenge may appreciate the support.  DS
hoBAn, ruSSell Jim’s Lion; illus. by Alexis Deacon. Candlewick, 2014 78p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6517-3 $15.99   
R Gr. 3-5
The menacing lion on the cover of this title is no more comforting than Jim’s 
prospects; faced with a life-threatening illness, Jim, like his his parents, is prepared 
for the worst. Jim’s African nurse, Bami, shares with him the secret that one of the 
animals that visits him in his dreams is his “finder,” the one who can bring him 
back if he gets lost during his operation. The animal needs to be as fierce as the 
disease itself, so Bami gives Jim a “don’t-run” stone to help him be brave enough 
to meet his protector. Originally published as a picture book in 2001, the text gets 
an expanded visual treatment here with more immersive art that involves graphic 
novel–type panels (though text remains largely independent), and it develops Jim’s 
plight in more detail, vividly depicting his dreams. With the exception of some 
humor in the sequence where Jim auditions animals for the role of finder, the dream 
sequences are, in a word, terrifying, which seems appropriate given the terrors of 
being critically ill and facing an operation that one may not survive. The dream Jim 
has during the operation is perhaps the most frightening of all, as both Jim and his 
magnificent lion are attacked by aggressive, nondescript but vaguely organic shapes, 
and each gets lost in a blood-hued sea. The intensity of the imagery calls to mind 
the respect afforded to children’s emotional capacities found in Shaun Tan’s “The 
Red Tree” (in Lost and Found, BCCB 5/11). While not for the timid, this may be 
just what the doctor ordered for children with vivid imaginations facing their own 
traumatic ordeals.  KC 
icinori, ad. Issun Bôshi: The One-Inch Boy; ad. and illus. by Icinori; tr. from the 
French by Nicholas Grindell. Little Gestalten, 2014 34p
ISBN 978-3-89955-718-3 $19.95   
R 5-8 yrs
This translated French retelling of a Japanese folktale features tiny Issun Bôshi, who 
was the delight of his parents and the countryside, but by fifteen, “he still hadn’t 
grown; not an inch, not one little tiny bit.” Going off to seek his fortune, he sidesteps 
an ogre, finds himself in a lively city, and then charms a nobleman’s daughter, whose 
father hires Issun Bôshi to amuse the girl. When she and Issun Bôshi are walking in 
the woods one day, the ogre seizes the girl and swallows Issun Bôshi; our compact 
hero fights his way back out of the ogre’s mouth, uses the ogre’s magic hammer to 
make himself a full-sized man, and easily routs his craven opponent. And the girl? 
“People say that the nobleman’s daughter has taken a different view of Issun Bôshi 
and that their story is not yet over.” The retelling is assured and effective, with a 
storyteller’s fluency (“The world is so big and Issun Bôshi so small”) and deft use of 
oral-friendly repetition (“Ti-Ki-Ki!” cries the ogre repeatedly). The art is dramatic, 
January 2015 • 261
three-color silkscreen in teal, lemon, and neon orange on creamy matte pages; the 
careful overlay and subtle textures give a fantastical or theatrical feel to the elaborate 
backgrounds (and there’s a Where’s Waldo pleasure in hunting for wee Issun Bôshi 
in those scenes), while the solidity of the pigment makes focused scenes (like Issun 
Bôshi’s meeting with the huge orange ogre) monumental. The arrestingly unusual 
illustrations will draw creative audiences, and the smooth retelling of a tale rarely 
heard by American kids will enliven readaloud sessions and provide a counterpoint 
to tiny European folktale heroes.  DS
JAecKel, Jenny Siberiak: My Cold War Adventure on the River Ob; written and 
illus. by Jenny Jaeckel. Raincloud, 2014 [120p]
ISBN 978-1-941203-04-0 $22.00
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 10-12
This graphic novel–format memoir explores a young woman’s peacekeeping and 
goodwill group trip along Siberia’s Ob River in 1988. While thrilled to have been 
chosen, Jenny quickly learns that she isn’t prepared for such a massive adventure. 
After several days of trekking, traveling, and endless introductions, though, the 
shy girl gathers a few close pals and breaks out of her shell enough to absorb her 
incredibly beautiful (and lucky) trip. Text-heavy panels share space with scenes 
wherein the protagonists are portrayed as simply drawn animals with expressive 
features; while the use of contrasting white space and dark shading is effective in 
reinforcing the narrator’s frequently shifting perspective, there is a lot to absorb in 
many panels given the small text and overall visual darkness. Even so, the openness 
of the Russian people Jenny’s group encountered is instantly clear in the depiction 
of the residents’ faces, and it is obvious that their easy generosity and acceptance 
were standout memories for Jaeckel. While her adult perspective occasionally peeks 
through, particularly in the slightly weary acknowledgment that her group didn’t 
do as much as they believed to alter the course of the Cold War and American/
Russian relations, a raw feeling of authentic isolation pervades the novel as Jaeckel 
frequently indicates the ways in which her social awkwardness limited her own 
experiences. Teens might not know much about the Soviet/American relations at 
the time, but there is enough context woven seamlessly into the early sections that 
they’ll be up to speed and better able to absorb what an unusual trip this was.  AS
JenKinS, Steve Creature Features: 25 Animals Explain Why They Look the Way They 
Do; written by Steve Jenkins and Robin Page; illus. by Steve Jenkins. Houghton 
Mifflin Harcourt, 2014 32p
ISBN 978-0-544-23351-5 $17.99   
R Gr. 2-4
Estimable natural historian Jenkins turns here to a Q&A format in this gallery of 
unusual animal features. Each page offers a question (“Dear Egyptian vulture: Why 
no feathers on your face?”), an answer (“Are you sure you want to know? . . . I stick 
my face into the bodies of the dead animals I eat, and feathers would get pretty 
messy”), and a full-face portrait with emphasis on the feature in question. Charac-
teristics discussed are generally intriguing and even grotesque, such as the mandrill’s 
colorful nose (“My rear end is pretty colorful too”), the horned frog’s “ginormous” 
mouth, the red squirrel’s furry ears, and the giraffe’s purple tongue. The language 
of the questions is funny, varied, and irreverent, and the answers are as personable 
as they are compactly informative. The facial focus makes the experience even more 
262 • The BulleTin
like a face-to-face interview, and the cut-paper illustrations are particularly strong 
on dimensional oddities such as the star-nosed mole’s anemone-like proboscis and 
the puffer fish’s inflated prickliness. Though the text is accessible for reading alone, 
the Q&A format is a natural for a lively and unusual readaloud—funny voices 
optional but recommended. A closing cleverly designed diagram identifies the scale 
of all the animals and their usual habitat; a brief bibliography is also included.  DS
John, Jory Goodnight Already!; illus. by Benji Davies. Harper/HarperCollins, 
2014 [32p]
iSBn 978-0-06-228620-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-7 yrs
Sleepy Bear takes his cuddly bunny and heads to bed (“I could sleep for weeks. 
Months, even!”), but his sleep is disrupted by his bouncy neighbor duck, who’s ready 
for entertainment (“Hey! I’m bored! Want to hang out?”). Every time Bear manages 
to chuck Duck out of the house and doze off again, the wily waterfowl finds a way 
back in and clamors for company and attention. Finally a fed-up bear manages to 
eject Duck, who goes home and nods off—while poor Bear is now roused and wide 
awake. There’s definitely a toddler/parent vibe in the relationship between dynamo 
Duck and weary Bear (particularly Duck’s insistence that his stubbing his beak was 
an emergency that required Bear’s immediate attention); their dialogue, especially 
when Duck pelts Bear with eager questions (to which the answer is always “No”), 
is scripted perfectly for reading aloud with maximum comic élan. The digital art 
draws on a retro-tinged palette of teal blues (especially in Bear’s nocturnal scenes) 
emphasized with the occasional contrasting goldenrod in full-bleed backgrounds. 
Bear and Duck evince a lively individuality that contrasts with the smooth even-
ness of the backgrounds and the touches of orderly pattern; Bear is a wonderfully 
lugubrious foil for Duck, a softly rumpled blend of brown and black strokes that 
suggests a whiskery dad awakened in the night. An anarchic mix of bedtime and 
anti-bedtime book, this could provide a great transition point to more soporific 
texts—or a heavy-handed hint from parents just trying to get some sleep.  DS
JohnSon, reBeccA l. Chernobyl’s Wild Kingdom: Life in the Dead Zone. Twenty-
First Century, 2014 64p illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-1154-8 $34.60   
R Gr. 6-10
Although the Zone of Exclusion, or “dead zone,” around the site of the Chernobyl 
nuclear reactor in the Ukraine has been officially declared off-limits for habitation 
following the 1986 accident that rendered the region radioactive, wildlife evidently 
didn’t get the memo and have moved into the area, where many creatures now 
appear to thrive. With people largely evacuated (a few have resettled under the 
radar), industry, traffic, agriculture, and their stresses on the environment have 
also disappeared, and in their place is open land inviting to flora and fauna. As 
Johnson explores in this title, however, the jury is out on the health and prospects 
of the animals that inhabit the dead zone. Robert Baker, who studies voles around 
Chernobyl, sees a species with few obvious mutations, and posits that their expo-
sure to radiation may stimulate internal defenses against its harms. On the other 
hand, Timothy Mousseau and Anders Møller, who have looked at barn swallows 
and fire bugs, find extensive evidence of mutations and suggest a bleaker future 
for area wildlife. Following a chapter on the Chernobyl disaster itself, Johnson 
January 2015 • 263
lays out the scientists’ opposing arguments in clearly organized chapters and notes 
the urgency of these studies in light of the 2011 nuclear disaster at the Fukushima 
Daiichi plant in Japan. A narrowly focused topic, clear presentation, and light page 
count make this an easy pick for academic strugglers faced with a research assign-
ment, but any readers with an interest in endangered animals—not to mention 
human-generated and nature disasters—will be drawn to this title as well. Color 
photos, maps, a glossary, source notes, a bibliography, recommended resources, 
and an index are included.  EB
Judge, litA Born in the Wild: Baby Mammals and Their Parents; written and illus. 
by Lita Judge. Roaring Brook, 2014 48p
ISBN 978-1-59643-925-2 $18.99   
R 5-8 yrs
Author-illustrator Judge takes zoology to an endearing place in this examination of 
babies and their needs. Each section identifies an important characteristic (“The 
baby is hungry!”) and then offers a spread exploring the way several different mam-
mal families meet that need (grizzly bear cubs nurse for two or three years, wolf 
pups snack on food regurgitated by adults, guanacos can eat grass when they’re 
only two weeks old). The characteristics are sometimes a little broad (“The baby 
needs to move”), but they provide a good way to get at the different way mammals 
achieve similar aims; inclusion of several primates helps ramp up the identification 
factor. The rusticity of the scrawled, textural hatching in the colored pencil and 
watercolor art helps keep the slightly anthropomorphized, often smiling animal 
figures from becoming saccharine; instead they’re cuddly and appealingly scruffy, 
and their family groupings are playful as well as warm. A closing section offers more 
information about each of the animals featured; a glossary, bibliography, and brief 
list of websites is also included.  DS
KirK, dAniel You Are Not My Friend, But I Miss You; written and illus. by Daniel 
Kirk. Abrams, 2014 32p
iSBn 978-1-4197-1236-4 $16.95   
R 3-5 yrs 
A sock monkey angrily asserts his ownership of a red ball, offering the aqua and 
white dog who took it the ultimate preschool putdown: “You are not my friend. 
Not anymore!” After the monkey takes back his ball, he admonishes his former 
friend, “Friends are supposed to share” and taunts, “YOU cannot play with ME.” 
However, the monkey finds himself missing his puppy pal, recognizes his own 
contribution to the problem, and reaches out to his friend again, inviting the 
eager dog to play catch. The storyline is a bit predictable, but the clear laying out 
of the challenges that come with sharing and negotiating young friendships and 
the honest depiction of the emotions that accompany those situations are spot-on 
for the age of its intended audience. Crisp, simple language and bold and equally 
straightforward illustrations make this useful for sharing both one-on-one and with 
groups of young children. The cleanly composed art (pen and ink, with color and 
texture added digitally) focuses on the dimensional figures in airy backgrounds, 
emphasizing the action and the characters’ feelings. Day-care groups, preschools, 
families, and libraries will all find this helpful and entertaining; for a multi-age 
audience, it would pair well with Shutta Crum’s Mine! (BCCB 7/11).  JH
264 • The BulleTin
lAthAm, irene Dear Wandering Wildebeest and Other Poems from the Water Hole; 
illus. by Anna Wadham. Millbrook, 2014 33p
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-1232-3 $17.95   
R Gr. 3-6
Fifteen poems capture the denizens of the African water hole, from impalas and 
elephants to oxpecker birds and dung beetles. Entries vary between rhymed and 
unrhymed, but all are compact, rhythmic, and short-lined, with frequent tasty 
soundplay (“white tackles/ in a rugby tangle”) that will enhance readaloud pleasure. 
Spreads follow the format best known in Joyce Sidman’s work, counterpointing 
the poem with a prose paragraph adding factual information about the featured 
topic. The mixed-media art creates an immersive milieu in the full-bleed spreads; 
the folkloric naïveté of the animal portraits and touches of pattern and background 
details have a fanciful air that’s not always congruent with the natural history 
emphasis of the text but is nonetheless visually pleasing. The book would pair ef-
fectively with the African entries in the Face to Face with Animals photoessay series 
(Joubert’s Face to Face with Elephants, BCCB 1/09, etc.) or make a lively script for 
a performance. End matter includes a brief bibliography for further reading on 
water hole animals and a list of websites.  DS
lehmAnn, devrA Spinoza: The Outcast Thinker. Namelos, 2014 269p illus. 
with photographs
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-60898-180-9 $22.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-60898-181-6 $14.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60898-182-3 $9.95   
R Gr. 10 up
The radical ideas of seventeenth-century philosopher Baruch Spinoza were enough 
to get him excommunicated from his Jewish community, vilified by both secular 
and religious leaders in the Netherlands, and even rejected by the philosophers 
and freethinkers he sought to champion. Today, however, those same ideas, which 
include absolute freedom of speech and a clear separation between church and state, 
are at the heart of secular democracies around the world. In this lucid introduction 
to Spinoza’s life and thought, Lehmann walks readers through the contexts that led 
Spinoza to his belief that man’s chief responsibilities are to think for himself and 
follow the dictates of reason wherever they lead. She begins by painting a clear if 
somewhat limited picture of the religious intolerance that forced the migration of the 
Jews from Spain to Portugal to that most tolerant of European cities, Amsterdam. 
There Spinoza grew up in a thriving Jewish community, learned the tenets of his 
faith, and was later excommunicated for such crimes as questioning the authority 
of scripture, the immortality of the soul, and any doctrine that anthropomorphized 
God. Though Lehman doesn’t sell her subject by making explicit what his legacy 
is and why it matters, her clear prose and short chapters make this an accessible 
historical biography for young adults; her exploration of Spinoza’s relationship with 
Judaism gives the book particular interest for many collections. Readers already 
asking their own questions about theology and political life will find her explana-
tions of Spinoza’s thought easy to follow.  KC 
January 2015 • 265
lingArd, JoAn The Sign of the Black Dagger. Kelpies/Floris, 2014 208p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-178250-131-2 $9.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-178250-148-0 $3.99   
Ad Gr. 3-5
Two pairs of Scottish children, living two hundred years apart, must solve mysteries 
to find their fathers, who have each disappeared after incurring significant debts. 
The modern kids find a diary penned by the two historical children, who stumble 
onto a political mystery that, if solved in time, may save a life and gain their father 
his freedom. All ends well for both fathers and joyful reunions ensue. This clever 
Scottish import presents the Edinburgh Royal Mile as a lively setting both in 1796 
and now. The diary format works naturally to allow for some historical exposi-
tion to sneak in, and the historical children are realistically developed, clever but 
working from an entirely different set of morals and limitations than their modern 
counterparts. Unfortunately, the mystery itself doesn’t allow for much more than 
passive following, and it’s not gripping enough to lure readers back for rereading to 
see if the clues actually line up. In addition, all four children are so perfect—they 
don’t quarrel, they honor their parents, and they are universally kind—as to be dull 
and unrealistic. Nevertheless, historical fiction fans may appreciate the dual nar-
rative and the hints of rich political intrigue that they can investigate further.  AS
little, KimBerley griffithS Forbidden. Harper/HarperCollins, 2014 [400p]
ISBN 978-0-06-219497-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
In the desert sands outside of Tadmur, Jayden and her tribe avoid the increasing 
reach of Hammurabi’s Babylonian empire by remaining nomads, traveling on camels 
and setting up temporary tent villages. Jayden is betrothed to Horeb, her tribe’s 
leader, although she’s horrified by his casual cruelty and rage. When her mother 
dies in childbirth, Jayden is certain her last chance of escaping Horeb dies with her, 
but then a mysterious and handsome stranger shows up, seeking refuge with her 
tribe. Despite Jayden’s attempts to resist Kadesh’s appeal, the two eventually give 
in to their attraction; unfortunately, their romantic encounter (mostly chaste, by 
modern standards) is witnessed by Horeb, the lovers are separated, and Jayden is 
forced to flee to a city she’s never known. An author’s note on historical accuracy is 
sorely needed, especially in regards to the customs of the various religions portrayed 
here, and Horeb’s villainy tips too often into caricature. Nonetheless, rich historical 
details are deftly woven into Jayden’s narration, and the dynamics of Jayden’s tribe 
are vividly drawn, making her powerlessness in the situation painfully clear. The 
romance between Kadesh and Jayden is sweet and tender, but through her journey 
to the city and in ultimate decision to reinvent her life, Jayden’s story becomes as 
much about finding herself as it is about finding love.  KQG 
loveJoy, ShAron Running Out of Night. Delacorte, 2014 285p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-99147-9 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74409-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-37846-8 $7.99   
R Gr. 5-7
Battered and abused by her father and brothers, a twelve-year-old girl, nameless 
since birth, finally decides to run away after discovering a fugitive slave hiding on 
her family’s farm in 1858 Virginia. Zenobia, the slave, names the girl Lark, and the 
266 • The BulleTin
two set off in the night, pursued by vicious slave traders and Lark’s sadistic father 
and brothers. The forest is far from friendly, with poisonous snakes and flooding 
rivers, and a narrow escape from their trackers temporarily separates the girls, but 
they eventually find each other and safety in a nearby Quaker town, a known stop 
on the Underground Railroad. Unfortunately, the stop is also known to the slave 
traders, who show up in the dead of night and kidnap Zenobia, another slave, 
and the Quaker woman who helped them; Lark must therefore turn South—and 
back toward the home she thought she left behind—to save them. An author’s 
note points toward Lovejoy’s careful research, and she paints a raw picture of the 
casual violence that slavery entailed—the scene in which the traders read out a list 
of runaway slaves described primarily by their scars and injuries is particularly tell-
ing. While the book parallels Zenobia’s and Lark’s abusive situations, it’s also aware 
that Lark’s color and privilege give her possibilities that remain closed to Zenobia. 
Lark’s folksy, rural dialect might initially challenge some readers, but the voice 
lends an authenticity to the tale and makes for an immersive experience, especially 
with Lark’s vivid descriptions of the Virginian wilderness. Cliffhanger endings for 
nearly every chapter prove that adventure tropes can work just as well in historical 
fiction to keep the pages turning, and a happy but bittersweet conclusion ensures 
that both girls finally find safety.  KQG 
mAchAdo, AnA mAriA Until the Day Arrives; tr. by Jane Springer. Groundwood/
House of Anansi, 2014 [152p]
ISBN 978-1-55498-455-8 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-8
Bento and Manu, orphaned siblings in early seventeenth century Portugal, have 
found work and a safe haven in a Lisbon tavern. However, after Bento is arrested 
amid a drinking brawl, he’s confined to a dungeon awaiting trial. Manu, utterly 
devoted to Bento, launches a desperate plan to reunite with him in prison but 
lands instead in the home of Don Diogo and Dona Ines, where Manu’s adamant 
refusal to bathe reveals the fact that she is Manuela, not Manuel. The kind couple 
arranges for the best deal they can broker for Bento—transportation to the colony 
of Brazil—where the siblings are put into the care of Jesuit missionaries. Even as 
they begin to thrive under the protection of the priests, though, and find meaningful 
work, they become increasingly aware of the displacement of the indigenous people 
and the imported African slaves. By sharing information from acquaintances and 
coworkers, Bento and Manu piece together the interrelationship of a family of slaves 
dispersed among different owners and try to organize their flight to a quilombo, a 
community of runaways in a more remote area of the Brazilian interior. The slim 
import reads as a kind of extended fairy tale, with timely interventions by two-
dimensional characters, facile success in the children’s artistic endeavors, and the 
promise of unlikely interracial and inter-class marriages for both Bento and Manu. 
The simplicity and familiar tropes of the tale, though, make accessible to younger 
readers a chapter of European colonization and chattel slavery not deeply explored 
in American school curricula. A glossary and historical note are included.  EB 
January 2015 • 267
mAcK, Jeff Duck in the Fridge; written and illus. by Jeff Mack. Two Lions, 
2014 [34p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-477-84776-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-477-89776-8 $3.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-6 yrs
When a little boy asks his dad why they always read Mother Goose at bedtime, his 
father explains: it all started when he was a boy and found a duck in the fridge. 
That duck is just the beginning of an escalating invasion of livestock that proceeds 
through a multitude of ducks to a pair of sheep (to get rid of the ducks, of course), 
a trio of dogs (for chasing off the ducks and sheep), and a herd of cattle (to scare 
away dogs, sheep, and ducks), leaving young Dad with a household full of boisterous 
critters. Finally, in a last-ditch effort to get everyone to stop their commotion and 
go to sleep, the dad read selections from Mother Goose to the crowd of critters, a 
plan that actually worked. “So that’s why I read Mother Goose to you every night,” 
the dad says—and then says goodnight to the ducks, sheep, dogs, and cows still 
populatig the house. The zany storyline will strike a chord with both imaginative 
adults open to making up ridiculous bedtime stories and the kids who are only 
too happy for bedtime to be postponed by a goofy tale. Silly asides in dialogue 
bubbles (“Why did she jump over the moon?” “To get to the udder side!”) further 
enhance the absurd storyline. The controlled compositions keep the increased 
chaos nicely in check, and Mack thoughtfully provides humorous touches—such 
as the card-playing dogs—for the adults as well. Bring this out at bedtime but be 
prepared for a rambunctious reaction, and perhaps follow up with some mellow 
Mother Goose.  JH
mArtínez, clAudiA guAdAlupe Pig Park. Cinco Puntos, 2014 253p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-935955-76-4 $15.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-935955-77-1 $9.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-935955-78-8 $9.95   
Ad Gr. 6-10 
Masi’s family bakery, “like most of Pig Park, sprouted in the boom and shadow of 
the American Lard Company,” but the Chicago neighborhood has fallen on hard 
times since the company’s departure. A local businessman decides that they can 
turn the place around by building a massive pyramid, La Gran Pirámide, that will 
become a tourist draw and revitalize local businesses. Fifteen-year-old Masi throws 
herself into the project, thrilling at the chance to have an unusual summer experi-
ence with her friends—and with handsome young Felix, the representative of the 
national visionary behind the project—but soon events reveal that the project’s 
real goals may not be what the community had been promised. The premise is 
unusual and the setting, the largely Latino but overall diverse factory neighborhood 
now left without its factory, is vividly conveyed (including the luscious details of 
Masi’s family’s bakery treats). The writing is emotionally flat, though, with more 
telling than showing when it comes to Masi’s feelings about Felix (and her friend’s 
brother, Marco) and about her mother’s leaving the family, so the events ultimately 
lack engagement despite their inherent interest. The phoenix-like ending (report-
ers drawn to the neighborhood when the pyramid burns down lead to Pig Park’s 
revival) also seems implausibly rosy. Many readers will sympathize with Masi’s love 
for her struggling neighborhood, though, and they will be intrigued to see if Pig 
Park can put itself back on the map.  DS
268 • The BulleTin
mccArney, roSemAry Because I Am a Girl: I Can Change the World; by Rose-
mary McCarney with Jen Albaugh and Plan International. Second Story, 
2014 [96p] illus. with photographs
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-927583-44-9 $16.98
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-927583-45-6 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-8
Cofounder of the “Because I Am a Girl” initiative, a global campaign concerned 
with the human rights of girls and women, McCarney offers a brief overview of 
gender inequality based around the initiative’s eight-point manifesto. The section 
titled “Because I am a girl . . . I watch my brothers go to school while I stay home,” 
for example, tells the story of Anupa in Nepal, who longs to get an education 
but is instead sold as a Kamlahari, a domestic slave, when her parents default on 
a debt. Other sections look at topics such as girls’ access to food and water and 
the emotional and physical tolls of being a child bride. The book then goes on 
to explore the grassroots activism that seeks to address some of these problems 
(“Because I am a girl . . . I am the heart of my community”), including a group of 
Bangladeshi girls and boys who have organized to end child marriage and a group 
of Indian girls who have trained as birth attendants to ensure safer birthing prac-
tices. The book’s organization is somewhat haphazard, with the manifesto at times 
only loosely relating to the information, and clear, crisp photos of smiling girls 
and colorful layout sometimes jar with the unsettling statistics on global poverty 
and violence; additionally, the absence of any footnotes, citations, or explana-
tions means it’s unclear how the first-person narratives were obtained, translated, 
and edited. Nonetheless, there’s compelling information here about the plight of 
women and girls around the world and the gender norms, cultural practices, and 
socioeconomic forces that continue to marginalize girls, and the girls’ voices lend 
the text immediacy and intimacy. Young readers may overall appreciate the spirit 
of the book’s overall optimistic outlook and the initiative’s driving principle that 
girls can change the world.  KQG 
mcdonough, yonA zeldiS Little Author in the Big Woods: A Biography of Laura 
Ingalls Wilder; illus. by Jennifer Thermes. Ottaviano/Holt, 2014 152p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-8050-9542-5 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-62779-279-0 $9.99   
Ad Gr. 2-4
This appealingly accessible biography starts with family background and goes on to 
cover the periods of Laura’s life featured in the “Little House” novels as well as some 
family information absent from the books. Additionally, McDonough explores the 
controversy over how much influence Rose Wilder Lane had on the Little House 
manuscripts and chronicles Wilder’s later years after the books’ publication. The 
smooth-flowing prose is easy to follow, and short sentences, a large typeface, and 
Thermes’ softly textured monochromatic art (slightly reminiscent of Lois Lenski’s 
work) make this an attractive choice for newly independent readers. Unfortunately, 
some of the book’s claims are questionable (for instance, there’s a suggestion that 
there were no other series of books for children before the Little House books) 
or unclear, and McDonough too easily glosses over the books’ contemporarily 
problematic treatment of race and colonialism. Despite those flaws, though, this 
definitely fills a niche, and younger Laura Ingalls Wilder fans or readers of Anderson’s 
Pioneer Girl: The Story of Laura Ingalls Wilder (BCCB 4/04) may find this both 
January 2015 • 269
informative and engaging. The book closes with recipes, a glossary, a bibliography, 
and source notes.  JH
mcmullAn, KAte, ad. Pinocchio; ad. by Kate McMullan; illus. by Pascal Lemai-
tre. Ottaviano/Holt, 2014 [144p] (Cartoon Classics)
ISBN 978-0-8050-9699-6 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys   
M Gr. 2-4
A lonely old woodcarver creates a boy puppet from a piece of talking wood; the 
puppet eases some of the old man’s heartache, but more often than not, the wooden 
boy’s bad judgment leads to mischief and he realizes he has much to learn before 
he can become a “real boy.” Readers familiar with the more saccharine Disney ver-
sion of Pinocchio may be in for a bit of a surprise with McMullan’s retelling, which 
sticks closely to Carlo Collodi’s 1880 original; it’s often a dark tale, with Pinocchio 
throwing a hammer and killing Cricket in the first few pages and getting hanged 
from a tree. McMullan also makes a point to hold to the original’s serial element, 
giving each episode its own chapter, which results in a choppy and disjointed read; 
additionally, the flatness of the language makes it difficult to contextualize the tone, 
which skitters from sentimentality to black humor, or to engage emotionally. Which 
is historically valid, but the Cartoon Classics approach is clearly setting this retelling 
out as a viable title for modern young readers in its own right, and that’s a tough, 
possibly insurmountable challenge with a tale so bounded by the conventions of its 
time and at odds with those of ours. Lemaitre’s playful, energetic black and white 
cartoons, appearing in panel sequences and full-page images as well as spot art, slyly 
emphasize the exaggeration to come down more on the comedic side of the story’s 
tone. While a compelling effort to bring a classic to a new format, this ultimately 
reveals a morality tale that doesn’t really translate to the modern world.  KQG
mcneil, gretchen Get Even. Balzer + Bray/HarperCollins, 2014 389p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-06-226085-7 $9.99   
R Gr. 7-10
An unlikely assemblage of girls discovers they are all sick and tired of the bullies in 
their private Catholic school humiliating their vulnerable classmates. They form a 
secret society they call DGM, short for “don’t get mad—get even,” which targets 
and embarrasses the bullies. When one of DGM’s targets turns up dead, however, 
the girls start to panic; they don’t really know one another that well, after all, so 
could one of them be the killer? As their solidarity and trust are strained, their 
individual histories surface, revealing their own implication in past bullying. This 
relational web allows the deepening of each girl, exploring her emotional growth and 
development of empathy while maintaining a firm distinction between immature 
characters who make mistakes and truly bad actors. Forgiveness and self-sacrifice 
also become key parts of their character arcs, enabling them to come together and 
earn the reader’s empathy as well. As is typical of ensemble casts, each girl has a 
particular, exaggerated skill set, a difficult home life, and a romance in some stage 
of development; McNeil manages the texture of character development skillfully 
enough so that the tensions between the girls are logically credible even if some 
of the other elements are far-fetched in the way of the whodunit-at-school genre. 
Unfortunately, their prime suspect ends up dead and the murderer remains at large, 
turning this page-turning mystery into a victim of the publishing rage for sequels; 
the ending isn’t breathless, but it’s engaging enough for readers to want to know 
the outcome.  KC
270 • The BulleTin
morAcho, criStinA Althea & Oliver. Viking, 2014 [384p]
ISBN 978-0-670-78539-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 10-12
Best friends for years, now seventeen-year-old Althea and Oliver have come to 
a crossroads in their seemingly perfect relationship. Althea finds herself longing 
to be more than friends, while Oliver struggles with the onset of a rare sleeping 
disorder that leaves him desperate to maintain the status quo. When Althea crosses 
an unforgivable line (she takes sexual advantage of an impaired Oliver), though, 
their friendship quickly unravels. Oliver runs away to New York City, where he 
hopes to find a cure and a future; Althea initially flounders in their small North 
Carolina hometown but then follows Oliver to New York, hoping for forgiveness. 
Forced finally to face the world alone, the two learn to be stronger apart and find 
it just might be the way to back to each other. Focusing on older teens, this emo-
tionally intense novel offers a memorable cast of complicated characters seeking a 
sense of self-worth away from the structures that have always defined them. Solid 
(though occasionally effortful) writing keeps the narrative moving forward, even 
as the characters themselves begin to wallow. The story grows stronger once both 
characters arrive in the city and the book explores the benefits of letting a lifetime 
friendship go. This is a dark tale of faltering friendship, and those willing to follow 
Althea and Oliver down the crooked path will ultimately find themselves rewarded 
with a very grown-up story of redemption and self-discovery.  AM 
myerS, SuzAnne Stone Cove Island. Soho Teen, 2014 [240p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-61695-437-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-61695-438-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-9
Hurricane Victor ravages seventeen-year-old Eliza’s hometown, devastating the 
tourist-driven economy of her small island off the East Coast. Desperate to help 
the town she loves, Eliza organizes a community clean-up day. While sifting 
through the wreckage of the lighthouse, she comes across a mysterious letter that 
references a twenty-five-year-old murder—a murder neither she nor any of her 
friends have ever heard of. Intrigued, Eliza starts sleuthing, but what she uncov-
ers frightens her even more than the initial cryptic letter: a string of unexplained 
deaths, a secret society, and the possibility that her beloved father is at the center 
of it all. The book opens with Eliza wandering down a flooded street the morning 
after the hurricane, surrounded by the old photos and toys floating by, and this 
unsettling image seamlessly then translates to the murder mystery, where Eliza 
finds herself digging through people’s private lives in order to get to the truth. The 
tension between Eliza’s need to know and the possibility that her discoveries could 
hurt those she loves is mined to brilliant effect, rendering each suspect villainous 
and sympathetic by turns. A final, stunning twist absolves most of them from the 
crime but leaves them nonetheless guilty of some pretty awful behavior, behavior 
that has Eliza questioning her childhood home and everyone around her. Taut and 
atmospheric, this will satisfy those readers who are constantly pilfering their parent’s 
mystery books for a good thrill.  KQG 
January 2015 • 271
nAdol, Jen This Is How It Ends. Simon Pulse, 2014 310p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-0211-8 $18.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-0210-1 $11.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-0212-5 $8.73   
Ad Gr. 9-12
Riley loves Sarah, but she’s dating his best friend, Trip. When they and two other 
friends discover a pair of binoculars that shows them scenes of things that haven’t 
happened, they can’t help but wonder: is what they see the actual future or their 
deepest desires? Riley sees himself in bed with Sarah in a college dorm and Natalie 
sees her abusive father brutally murdered, so it could go either way. When Natalie’s 
vision comes true, the implications of these scenes become weighty; as the mystery 
unravels, Riley is tortured by the possibility that Sarah might have feelings for him 
and that his future vision means he may betray his friend, just as Riley’s mother 
betrayed his father. Late in the novel, the device of the binoculars is partially 
explained through Sarah’s mother’s dabbling in quantum physics, taking this out 
of the realm of magic realism and into a genre blur of science fiction, soap-opera-
style romance, and murder mystery; the result is messy and diffuse, and the main 
device is never sufficiently explored. Fortunately, Riley is a compelling character 
struggling to find himself amid an ethical morass, and the murder mystery holds 
its own interest; readers who like a moody romance or a compelling crime drama 
may enjoy this.  KC 
nix, gArth Clariel. Harper/HarperCollins, 2014 382p
ISBN 978-0-06-156155-9 $18.99   
R Gr. 8-10
Nix fans will surely rejoice at this sharp, gripping prequel to his beloved fantasy 
trilogy of Lirael (BCCB 5/01), Sabriel (BCCB 12/96), and Abhorsen (BCCB 3/03). 
Clariel, who later turns up in the trilogy under a different name, chafes under 
the weight of her parents’ expectations for her, when all she desperately wants 
is to retreat to the forest and live a solitary life. It is perhaps little wonder, then, 
that she responds as a trapped animal might, lashing out with berserker fury and 
short-sighted, impulsive decisions, in her efforts to get out of the endless politics 
in which her family is involved. While Clariel is not always a likable character, she 
does inspire deep sympathy, particularly when she only realizes how much deep 
support and love her parents offered after they have gone. Readers already in the 
know about the setting and characters will likely get a bit more out of the novel, 
though the beauty of a prequel is that it will not only present unknown scenarios 
even to the most intense devotees but also pave a path for new fans to dive into the 
existing trilogy. Although it’s clear that no true happy ending is possible, given the 
intense early tragedies and horrifying political structure in place, there is at least a 
hopeful note that matches the overall tone of the other volumes.  AS
orchArd, eric Maddy Kettle: The Adventure of the Thimblewitch; written and 
illus. by Eric Orchard. Top Shelf, 2014 89p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-60309-072-8 $14.95   
R* Gr. 2-4
This gorgeous, slender graphic novel covers a significant amount with minimal 
words, and at a length that will welcome even young elementary-grades readers. 
Maddy’s parents have been turned into kangaroo rats and she’d rather they go back 
to being humans, even if it means she must face the Thimblewitch, the mysterious 
272 • The BulleTin
figure behind their transformation. By the time Maddy meets the Thimblewitch, 
she has gathered allies and wisdom, and she is perfectly willing to make peace as 
long as she can have her human grownups back. The illustrations invite lingering; 
the delicately hatched figures have an appealing and slightly edgy eccentricity, and 
earthy shades effectively contrast with cool nocturnal blues. The creativity of the 
art and the relative sparseness of words results in a true melding of text and draw-
ings, as both are necessary to impart the magical tone of the graphic novel. While 
the witch and goblins are drawn to be fearsome, there are no true bad guys in this 
book, simply desperate creatures pushed beyond their means, and Maddy’s steady 
ability to see beyond the surface is an endearing trait that is carefully reinforced 
through all of her actions. The sudden ending makes this whole book feel almost like 
a first chapter, but there is resolution enough to satisfy readers even while they will 
likely be busy imagining up what Maddy and her motley crew may face next.  AS
peet, mAl Night Sky Dragons; by Mal Peet and Elspeth Graham; illus. by Patrick 
Benson. Candlewick, 2014 64p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6144-1 $15.99   
Ad Gr. 2-4 
Young Yazul lives in a han, a fortress of safety along the Silk Road where travelers 
and traders stop, trade, and refresh themselves. He’s particularly close to his beloved 
grandfather, who helps him make fantastical kites, and who indulges Yazul in his 
penchant for pranks, both pastimes of which Yazul’s stern father disapproves. When 
bandits arrive and surround the isolated han, however, Yazul and his grandfather’s 
creative thinking may prove the key to defeating them. There’s an old-fashioned 
flavor to this long-ago-and-far-away tale, and that distance and the slowness of 
the tale’s initial pace initially impair engagement. Once the pieces start falling into 
place, though, the trickster elements of the story will intrigue readers, and even a 
low-key bandit-routing such as this has some kid appeal. Decoratively bordered 
images, primarily on tawny backgrounds that suggest vellum, employ thickly 
brushed watercolors in scenes dominated by earth tones; the hues are sometimes 
too dustily undifferentiated for impact in the larger scenes, but the closeup portraits 
and monochromatic vignettes evince more personality. There’s not much material 
for young people about this place and time, and Yazul’s experiences might provide 
a personal entrée to a broader exploration.  DS
perKinS, lynne rAe Nuts to You; written and illus. by Lynne Rae Perkins. Green-
willow, 2014 259p
ISBN 978-0-06-009275-7 $16.99   
R Gr. 3-5
When a hawk flies off with Jed, a gray squirrel, he manages to extricate himself 
only to land in an unfamiliar realm populated by red squirrels. Meanwhile, Jed’s 
friends TsTs and Chai leave in search of Jed; the three friends eventually reunite, 
but they are separated again when humans with chainsaws begin cutting down 
swaths of trees along the power lines that Chai and TsTs have followed to find Jed. 
The three friends realize that this tree-felling will reach their home, so they return 
to save family and friends. While there’s a touch of hokeyness in the framing de-
vice, wherein the author converses with a squirrel, the story by Newbery winner 
Perkins is energetic, thoughtful, and amusing, and the short chapters and quick 
pace will keep kids moving through the text. This would also lend itself to reading 
aloud—the red squirrels’ rural dialect in particular would be a hoot to attempt. 
January 2015 • 273
Perkins’ delicate yet sturdy art appears throughout and brings readers into her 
well-imagined squirrel world. Hand this lively tale to both the nature-loving kids 
and the animal fantasy lovers.  JH
phillipS, lindA vigen Crazy. Eerdmans, 2014 [320p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-8028-5437-7 $9.00
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Laura has plenty on her plate already, with a fierce, unrequited crush on Dennis and 
a serious anxiety problem. Now her mother’s deteriorating mental health moves from 
sadness to mania, and Laura fears it’s her fault, since it seems as though it’s painting, 
the pastime that Laura encouraged her to resume, that pushes her mother over the 
edge into a breakdown. Fearing that she might be similarly affected, Laura shifts 
from painting to sculpture and finds a sympathetic friend in a local gallery owner 
who has lost her daughter. Together, the motherless daughter and the daughterless 
mother work out their sorrow through their art, and between the gallery owner and 
a budding relationship with Dennis, Laura is emboldened to insist that the adults in 
her life tell her the truth about her mother’s illness. Although in the book’s setting 
of 1963, diagnosis and public understanding about mental illness are far from what 
they are today, readers will still be able to relate to Laura’s fears and frustrations. 
Phillips’ free-verse poetry has a meaty narrative solidity that, while keeping readers 
focused on Laura’s emotional state, nevertheless captures the period with material 
detail like clothing and historical referents such as the assassination of JFK. Though 
admittedly autobiographical and keyed to a particular trauma, Laura’s story is one 
that will resonate widely with contemporary readers as they seek avenues of sup-
port through their own struggles to remain sensitive to mothers who sometimes 
disappear, and almost always to some degree disappoint.  KC
philpot, chelSey Even in Paradise. Harper/HarperCollins, 2014 360p
ISBN 978-0-06-229369-5 $17.99   
Ad Gr. 9-12
When Charlotte is drawn into the orbit of her boarding-school classmate Julia 
Buchanan, she ends up replacing Julia’s former best friend and abandoning her 
own. Julia’s need is as compelling as her spirit; she is grieving the loss of her older 
sister, who was killed in a car crash that Julia survived. Charlotte soon finds herself 
in love with Julia’s entire family, who are as wealthy and old-monied as Charlotte 
is working class, and she’s particularly drawn to Julia’s brother, Sebastian. However, 
she’s also worried that Julia will be hurt; even though Julia knows that Charlotte, 
unlike Julia, is straight, Julia still seems to need their relationship to be exclusive. 
They reach an agreement, though, that works for Charlotte until she realizes just 
how broken Julia is. Unfortunately, the reveal of Julia’s damage lacks narrative con-
viction; the climactic scene that destroys Charlotte’s relationship with the family 
reads more like a prank gone wrong, making the aftermath overplayed and emotion-
ally unconvincing. Charlotte herself is a bit of a puzzle, with many aspects of her 
character and motivation, other than a basic kindness, underdeveloped. However, 
the development of her friendships with Julia and Sebastian and the portrait of 
the Buchanan family have a seductive and lyrical cast; readers will totally get why 
Charlotte is charmed by this fragile family who are trying so hard to regain their 
balance after tragedy.  KC 
274 • The BulleTin
portmAn, frAnK King Dork Approximately. Delacorte, 2014 [368p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90591-6 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73618-3 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98567-6 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
The first half of Tom’s sophomore year (in King Dork, BCCB 5/06) ended in chaos 
and bloodshed that erupted at an epic, unauthorized concert featuring the band 
Tom formed with the increasingly enigmatic Sam Hellerman. This sequel, which 
takes up right where the first book left off, ends in nearly the exact same way. It 
begins, however, with what looks like a real chance for Tom to escape the oppressive 
bullying that plagued him, since Tom is now at a new school where he is surprised 
to find himself in an almost neutral position on the social scale and with a pretty 
girlfriend. As the year progresses, though, those achievements begins to erode, and 
Tom’s return to being King Dork is an even greater letdown after his small taste of 
social success. The draw of this sequel is the continuation of Tom’s irreverent and 
stylized social commentary, which wanders far and wide of anything resembling a 
plot, though he has developed some witty new tics to highlight his fascination with 
advanced vocabulary. Other things haven’t really changed for Tom, including the 
struggle to make decent music without an overabundance of talent, the struggle to 
find girls who put out at least a little, and the struggle to avoid being on the wrong 
end of taunts and fists. For those who liked the first book, then, this is more of the 
same, but somewhat disappointingly so; only slight variations in the players and 
the absence of the well-played parodic element that linked the first book so success-
fully to Catcher in the Rye establish the difference. Tom’s self-awareness and sense of 
his own culpability has sharpened considerably, however, drawing out the cynical 
understanding that high school success rests almost entirely in your willingness to 
dream smaller and play by certain unwritten but ironclad rules.  KC
Quintero, iSABel Gabi: A Girl in Pieces. Cinco Puntos, 2014 284p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-935955-94-8 $17.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-935955-95-5 $11.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-935955-96-2 $11.95   
R  Gr. 9-12
Seventeen-year-old Gabi Hernandez is having a drama-filled senior year. One of 
her best friends is pregnant by the school’s biggest player, while the other has been 
kicked out by his family for being gay. Her meth-addicted father has taken to living 
on the streets, and her mother is hassling Gabi about her virginity, her weight, and 
her tendency not to act Latino enough. Through it all, Gabi fights to define herself 
on her own terms, with a little bit of help from spicy snacks to keep her energy up. 
Using her personal journal and her emerging talent at poetry, she explores the bumpy 
ground between being a woman and being a good girl, between being herself and 
being a loyal daughter, between being in a relationship, being a friend, and being 
in love. While seemingly constructed from a checklist of adolescent problem-novel 
tropes, this novel in fact crafts a genuine, heartfelt portrait of its heroine’s emotional 
and intellectual life. Despite everything happening around her, Gabi’s own story is 
oddly almost plotless, a kind of normality (late alarm clocks, college applications, 
first boyfriends) that stands in contrast to the chaos around her. The narrative is 
therefore ultimately compelling, moving from one moment to the next, while Gabi 
January 2015 • 275
reacts to events big and small and usually out of her control. It’s the voice here that 
really makes the novel work, as every Spanglish-inflected thought from the mundane 
to the insightful to the poetic is steeped in a sense of Gabi’s character; even the 
poetry is authentically teen and occasionally heart-rending. Readers looking for 
an alternative to action-packed genre fiction will appreciate this glimpse into one 
teen girl’s world and may just find a bit of themselves there.  AM
rAASch, SArA Snow Like Ashes. Balzer + Bray/HarperCollins, 2014 416p
ISBN 978-0-06-228692-5 $17.99   
Ad Gr. 8-10
The Kingdom of Winter was vanquished by the Kingdom of Spring sixteen years 
ago, and most Winterians are enslaved in their former homeland, with only a hand-
ful remaining free. Meira has grown up part of a fierce but tiny group dedicated to 
restoring the freedom of Winter and creating a kingdom where they can use their 
own magic, revel in the eternal cold, and avenge the endless deaths brought on by 
power-hungry evil. Meira’s magical abilities seem to be awakening at startling speed, 
and she’ll need them in the upcoming climactic final battle in this world of eight 
kingdoms. The world-building is fairly effective: the setup is a cool premise, and 
the author conveys the backstory subtly. Unfortunately, there is a troubling racial 
undertone that cannot be ignored: the bravest, most beautiful, and most heroic of 
all the people in all eight kingdoms are also the palest, with white hair and frequent 
descriptions of fair, ivory features. In addition, Meira is not only boy crazy but 
fickle, and her tendency to miss important clues and key chances to enact change 
because she is distracted by shirtless chests or twinkling eyes impairs her impact 
as a protagonist. Even so, Meira’s got plenty of snarky humor and an ultimately 
earnest devotion to her beleaguered people, and those positive traits may keep 
readers engaged through to the end to see how it all plays out.  AS
roSen, Suri Playing with Matches. ECW, 2014 [256p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-77041-182-1 $10.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
After sixteen-year-old Raina gets expelled from her Manhattan school, she and 
her sister end up in Toronto with their strict aunt. What’s worse, her sister isn’t 
speaking to her, blaming her for her broken engagement. A broken engagement 
in the Jewish community is no small thing, but Raina can’t figure out how she is 
responsible. However, after making a romantic match for a family friend, she sees 
a way to make things right: if she can develop her ability to make matches, she 
can find a husband for her sister and repair their relationship in one fell swoop. 
Unfortunately, Raina is both clumsy and somewhat hapless, and her clients—well, 
let’s just say there is a reason why some of them have been unsuccessful at finding 
an ideal match. While these qualities, as well as the machinations of some rowdy 
oldsters in the community, lead to much comic chaos, Raina does bumble her way 
to some successful and surprising matches, managing along the way to do her share 
of repairing the problems she helped create. The intergenerational friendships she 
forms add to the warmth and humor, as well as lending perspective to the inten-
tions behind the rules at which Raina chafes. Besides being a sweet, big-hearted 
coming-of-age comedy, this offers a fascinating glimpse into the importance of the 
matchmaking role in observant Jewish communities.  KC
276 • The BulleTin
ruth, greg Coming Home; written and illus. by Greg Ruth. Feiwel, 2014 30p
ISBN 978-1-250-05547-7 $16.99    
R* 4-7 yrs
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 245, for review.
Schindler, holly Feral. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 2014 417p
ISBN 978-0-06-222020-2 $17.99   
Ad Gr. 9-12
After being brutally attacked in Chicago, Claire is scarred both emotionally and 
physically. She is tentatively hopeful about a new home in Missouri, but there’s little 
peace there for her either: she soon discovers a dead body and is then haunted by 
the spirit of the dead girl, who appears to have taken up residence in a feral cat. The 
novel has a mystery element, as the murderer of Selena, the girl found by Claire, 
isn’t known, but the book provides few clues that would allow readers to reach the 
solution on their own. Much stronger is the book’s central plot about two girls who 
speak up for themselves and dare to pursue secrets perhaps best left alone, which is 
compellingly created. Claire’s clear PTSD is intense; she is haunted by much more 
than Selena as she grapples with nightmares, numerous triggers, and a terror of 
strangers, none of which were part of her life a short time ago. It’s hard to maintain 
focus on Claire and her slow, hard-won recovery, however, due to the confused 
and overly complex ghost/murder mystery and an overabundance of peripheral 
characters who mostly represent teen stereotypes (though there is some subtlety in 
the ways in which the characters are squashed by their social boundaries as much 
as they exist well within them). Ghost-story fans are the likeliest audience, and 
they’ll find some effectively eerie passages that will leave some lingering chills.  AS
ShepArd, SArA The Perfectionists. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 2014 322p
ISBN 978-0-06-207469-0 $17.99   
R Gr. 9-12
The marketing genius behind Pretty Little Liars (BCCB 2/07) has come up with 
yet another book-to-TV-series drama that capitalizes on all of the elements that 
draw audiences. Five beautiful girls conspire to prank Nolan, a boy who has hurt 
them all in some way, by slipping him an Oxy at a party and writing damning 
messages on his face with a Sharpie. The morning after the party finds him not 
so much embarrassed as dead, however, and the girls are desperate to avoid being 
accused while finding the real killer. They eventually narrow their suspect list down 
to their lecherous photography teacher, whom Nolan was blackmailing, but getting 
the goods on him proves more difficult than they expected. The murder mystery is 
only one element of the story, of course; each character has to be fleshed out, along 
with her involvement with Nolan and the other students in the pressure cooker of 
their highly competitive suburban high school. The atmospherics of beautiful girls 
with haunting secrets (ranging from abusive families to stalkers to the challenging 
of parental expectations) are deftly handled. While the genre characteristics on 
display here are easy to dismiss as facile or critique for their cynical exploitation of 
lowbrow media audiences, there isn’t one that hasn’t been exploited by the greats 
(Hitchcock, Christie, Chandler), so don’t hate them because they’re shiny. Fans of 
Pretty Little Liars will line up for this new-but-familiar guilty pleasure.  KC
January 2015 • 277
Summer, mAry elizABeth Trust Me, I’m Lying. Delacorte, 2014 328p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-99151-6 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74406-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-38288-5 $10.99   
R Gr. 7-10
Julep Dupree ran her first con when she was ten, and since then she’s been adept at 
the family business of grifting. When the teenager comes home one night to find 
her apartment trashed and her father missing, she figures her father has gotten in 
over his head, and she knows that she has to find him herself rather than go to the 
police. Luckily, she’s got some favors to call in from little jobs she has undertaken at 
her private school, and with the help of her computer-savvy partner, Sam, she starts 
tracking down obscure clues that her father has left her in a scavenger-hunt style. 
Her quest has also attracted the attention of Tyler Richland, the mind-erasingly 
handsome son of a senator. Tyler wants to help, Sam wants to help, the new barista at 
the local coffee shop wants to help, a dangerous-looking woman in a black Chevelle 
wants to help, but whom can Julep trust? What has her father gotten himself into, 
and how can she protect her friends while getting him back? This well-paced, well-
plotted mystery has its share of barely plausible moments, but for the most part, 
the suspension of disbelief holds as Julep navigates between suspicious principals 
and threatening mobsters while trying to sort out her confused feelings about Tyler 
and Sam. Her final con is a masterpiece of leverage, but a shocking event prevents 
any fist-pumping triumph. Readers who enjoy Jaffe’s Bad Kitty (BCCB 4/06) and 
Giles’ Fake ID (BCCB 3/14) will want to pick this up.  KC 
SwenSon, JAmie A. If You Were a Dog; illus. by Chris Raschka. Farrar, 2014 40p
ISBN 978-0-374-33530-4 $17.99   
R 4-6 yrs 
“If you were a dog,” ponders the unseen narrator here, “would you be a speedy-
quick, lickety-sloppidy, scavenge-the-garbage, frisbee-catching, hot-dog-stealing, 
pillow-hogging, best-friend-ever sort of dog? Would you howl at the moon? AR-
ROOOOO! Some dogs do.” This imaginative speculation continues, considering 
what life would be like as a cat, a fish, a bird, a bug, a frog, or a dinosaur, before 
coming back to logical ground to note that listeners may not be those animals but 
they can still sound and act like them as well as “giggle, giggle, giggle! like a kid!” 
This is readaloud catnip for adults and kids alike, as the speculative bits are packed 
with savory, sonorous vocabulary and the multiple animal sounds provide plenty 
of opportunity for audience participation. The simple, consistent structure of the 
book gives ballast to the fanciful descriptions of each animal. Raschka’s illustrations 
likewise provide both solidity and whimsy to the story. Each descriptive phrase (e.g., 
“sandpaper-licking”) gets a sectioned-off colored “block” with a separate picture (a 
cat licking a human), and the illustrations, while stylized in the standard Raschka 
style, are also tightly and sturdily composed. Share this with littler ones simply 
for the fun of the concepts and the auditory and vocalizing pleasures; older kids 
might enjoy coming up with their own lists of descriptive phrases for animals or 
performing this as a spirited choral reading.  JH
278 • The BulleTin
tAlley, roBin Lies We Tell Ourselves. Harlequin Teen, 2014 [384p]
ISBN 978-0-373-21133-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-10
The small fictional town of Davisburg, Virginia is a hotbed of racial tensions in 
1959 as its previously all-white Jefferson High School is court-ordered to integrate. 
Senior Sarah Dunbar is one of ten African-American students starting classes there, 
and if the first day of insults, physical attacks, and teacher indifference is any indi-
cation, making it to graduation will be a difficult task. Linda Hairston, daughter 
of the town’s most vehement opponent to integration, can’t believe Sarah and her 
“people” would have the gall to go and wreck her senior year with their presence. 
A French project throws the two girls together, however, in an experience that 
eventually causes Linda to have a change of heart. Talley manages to imbue this 
familiar trajectory with a rawness that matches its earnestness, allowing both girls to 
compellingly narrate in turn and providing two carefully constructed character arcs. 
Sarah is particularly fascinating as the polite, intelligent good girl who nonetheless 
chafes under the pressure of having the success of an entire movement tied to her 
enduring another day of groping and name-calling. Linda is initially a bit flat, but 
her characterization expands dramatically as she tries to come to terms with her 
romantic attraction to Sarah and their shared kiss, and the story becomes as much 
about the two girls figuring out their sexuality as it does about race relations. Talley 
effectively manages all these elements, and an informative author’s note lists her 
sources and suggests further reading.  KQG
tingle, tim No Name. 7th Generation, 2014 [162p] (Pathfinders)
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-939053-06-0 $9.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 6-9
After a particularly brutal encounter with his abusive father, sixteen-year-old Bobby 
Byington decides he’d rather live in a hole in the ground than with his dad’s drunken 
rages. So the Choctaw teen, along with some help from his Cherokee best friend 
and a neighbor girl, digs a hole in his backyard, disguises it with leaves, and sets 
up a mostly comfortable place where he can hide out while still observing his old 
man. Over the course of the week that Bobby is “missing,” his dad seems to undergo 
a transformation, finally recognizing how harmful his behavior has become and 
trying to make amends by leaving food out for Bobby and reducing his drinking. 
Bobby’s initially unmoved, but an old Choctaw tale told to him by a family friend 
ultimately convinces him that forgiveness is a powerful force and might be the 
thing that makes his father’s change permanent. This addition to the Pathfinders 
series has hi-lo appeal and accessibility, with Tingle’s direct storytelling style lend-
ing a smooth narrative arc. Bobby’s internalization of his father’s emotional abuse 
is compellingly depicted as Bobby tries to separate his identity from his father’s 
opinions. Unfortunately, the tidy ending that sees Bobby’s dad a changed man is 
both unconvincing, in that it happens abruptly, and problematic, in that it puts 
most of the onus of their reconciliation on Bobby and his forgiveness. This message 
will ring particularly hollow to kids who have been caught in an abuse cycle that 
includes the usual “honeymoon” period of making up before the violence starts 
again. Nonetheless, Bobby is a genuinely sympathetic character, and readers will 
be hoping for his sake that his dad’s attempts at rehabilitation stick.  KQG 
January 2015 • 279
tripp, Ben  The Accidental Highwayman; written and illus. by Ben Tripp. Tor, 
2014 303p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7653-3549-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4668-2263-4 $9.99   
R* Gr. 6-9
Fictional editor and annotator Ben Tripp tells the story of sixteen-year-old acrobat-
turned-servant Kit Bristol, who took up his master’s highwayman disguise and the 
reins of his magnificent horse Midnight only to find himself in the middle of a Faerie 
rebellion. Now Kit’s being chased across eighteenth-century Britain, pursued both 
by human soldiers, who want him dead for crimes he didn’t commit, and a pixie 
army, who want the Faerie princess he’s been charged with protecting. Kit finds 
help from a menagerie of strange yet talented traveling companions; disguised as a 
traveling circus, they make their way slowly across the countryside, dodging the law 
in a series of fantastic, spellbinding escapades. This delightful, rousing adventure in 
the spirit of quest fantasies like Goldman’s The Princess Bride and Gaiman’s Stardust 
will have readers cheering as poor, clueless Kit tumbles from one misadventure to 
the next. The caravan moves slowly, but the story does not, as each chapter brings 
magic, danger, and many a near-capture. Kit is an amusingly innocent narrator, 
who emerges as a hero worth rooting for, though his troop of memorable misfits 
nearly outshines him at every turn. The story-within-a-story structure manages to be 
both charming and unobtrusive, but the real strength here lies in the novel’s broad 
appeal, with its combination of wit and wonder, sword-fighting and spellcasting, 
friendships and seemingly doomed romance making it a likely hit with a variety 
of ages and readerships.  AM
vAn AllSBurg, chriS The Misadventures of Sweetie Pie; written and illus. by Chris 
Van Allsburg. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2014 32p
ISBN 978-0-547-31582-9 $18.99   
M 7-9 yrs
Poor Sweetie Pie: the hamster finally leaves the petshop for a series of indifferent 
owners, and even his escape in a plastic hamster ball just leads him to another 
problem placement. Finally he’s made a class pet, but his weekend caretaker lets 
him escape into the wintry outdoors; though the class is sure Sweetie Pie died in 
the snow, he actually hibernated, and he now lives happily in a tree with his squirrel 
friends. The story is grimly purposive and yet not very clear; since there are no decent 
models for animal caretaking to make it a lesson in husbandry, it seems to be just 
an old-school moral tale focusing here on the evils of animal domestication—but 
the solution offered isn’t likely to work out so well for most domestic hamsters, 
and the plot lacks the peaks and valleys that make animal welfare sagas like Black 
Beauty so absorbing. The smooth, softly shaded colored pencil and watercolor art 
sets the drama against bland, innocent backdrops, which makes the contrast of the 
anthropomorphized hamster’s distress and the savagery of the humans all the more 
alarming, especially in the hamster’s-eye view of threats such as the snarling dog. 
While this might be used as a scared-straight tool for encouraging better animal 
treatment, it’s a pretty blunt instrument likely to cause some collateral damage with 
its unhappy audience.  DS
280 • The BulleTin
viorSt, Judith And Two Boys Booed; illus. by Sophie Blackall. Ferguson/Far-
rar, 2014 32p
ISBN 978-0-374-30302-0 $16.99   
Ad 5-7 yrs
A boy initially isn’t anxious about singing his song in the school talent show (he’s 
“practiced a billion times”), but waiting his turn as his classmates perform takes 
a toll on his nerve. Eventually, he’s on, and his narration reveals his tension by 
garbling the phrase that’s opened every spread: “On the talent of the morning 
show, I was ready to song my sing.” Finally he begins, getting it right after a few 
stumbles, and even though “two boys booed,” the rest of the audience applauds his 
song. The structure of the boy’s repetitions of self-reassurance builds tension, and 
the repetition itself is credible as a self-calming technique while the boy’s ultimate 
success under stress is heartening. Blackall’s spare illustrations feature a multicultural 
cast of kids against a lot of clean white space, keeping the focus on the kids and 
their actions and expressions. Book design impedes success here, though, as the 
lift-the-flap feature is too often distracting or superfluous; flaps showing the boy 
happily rising out from under the covers of his bed and depicting the contents of 
one pants pocket are amusing but don’t serve much purpose, while other flaps are 
more confusing than clarifying. Most kids, however, will sympathize with this guy, 
and the book might make a useful precursor to a class or school performance.  JH
wAlKer, SAlly m. Ghost Walls: The Story of a 17th Century Colonial Home-
stead. Carolrhoda, 2014 136p illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-7613-5408-6 $20.95   
R Gr. 7-12
In 1638, Maryland provincial secretary John Lewger built the colonial equivalent 
of a McMansion, a two-story, four-room house that was doubtless the envy of his 
neighbors. It not only served as the Lewgers’ home but also as the official assembly 
house for the colony, and it was thus the site of several well-documented episodes 
of the period’s history. By the early 1700s it fell into neglect, was cannibalized for 
building materials, and nearly slipped from notice until the 1960s, when archae-
ologists attempted a first excavation. Others followed, and now the homestead is 
preserved as a partially excavated, partially reconstructed artifact enclosed within 
a modern museum. Walker focuses on the past and ongoing research that has 
brought the estate back to life, discussing the physical excavations and the search 
for documentary evidence that occasionally overlap with each other, much to the 
delight of investigators. Teens fascinated by archaeological fieldwork will appreci-
ate Walker’s inclusion not only of the dig but the reasoning behind many of the 
archaeologists’ conclusions (often tentative and changeable) concerning use of 
space and artifacts. There are also plenty of good stories for history buffs, from 
the gruesome murder of a servant (likely a slave), to trials concerning deaths of 
neighboring Yaocomaco Indians at the hands of white settlers, to the occasion of 
the first-known vote cast by a person of African descent in colonies. Plentiful il-
lustrations include photographs of the excavated sites, artifacts, and documents, 
as well as computer-generated reconstructions of the homestead at various points 
in its history. A timeline, source notes, bibliography, and index are appended.  EB
January 2015 • 281
wAlrAth, dAnA Like Water on Stone. Delacorte, 2014 353p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-99142-4 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74397-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-37329-6 $10.99   
R  Gr. 9-12
Convinced of the essential goodness of his countrymen, the paterfamilias of the 
Armenian Christian Donabedian family ignores both history and the advice of 
relatives abroad and citizens at home to emigrate before the predicted and almost 
inevitable bloodbath that will be World War I. The situation soon deteriorates, and 
his oldest sons are taken away by Turkish soldiers and shot; his oldest daughter, 
married to a Kurd, is in dire danger; and the pleadings of his youngest son, Shahen, 
to move to America now have the clear ring of wisdom. When another band of 
soldiers arrives at the homestead, the parents make a horrifying self-sacrifice to give 
Shahen, his twin sister Sosi, and littlest child Mariam time to run. An exhausting 
and dangerous two-month trek leads them to Aleppo, where an Arab merchant 
hides them among his Muslim family until war’s end and the long-hoped-for letter 
from America arrives, inviting them to join their uncle’s family. The novel, written 
in verse, presents a steep learning curve for readers who have little background on 
the war and the Armenian genocide. The cast of characters at the front of the book 
and the glossary at the back, as well as an author’s note, are lifelines for keeping 
track of personal names, foods, musical instruments, etc. Add to this the spare 
imagery of the poetry and the inclusion of an eagle that not only observes and com-
ments on the action but also intervenes in the children’s behalf, and readers have 
a challenging but moving experience ahead of them. Patience pays off, however, 
and the ensuing tale (inspired by Walrath’s desire to reconstruct a chapter of her 
own family history) is both tragic and uplifting, a fitting contemporary successor 
to Bagdasarian’s moving Forgotten Fire (BCCB 1/01).  EB
wAugh, SAndrA Lark Rising. Random House, 2014 372p (Guardians of 
Tarnec)
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-449-81749-0 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-449-81748-3 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-449-81750-6 $10.99   
Ad Gr. 8-10
Lark thinks that her magical abilities are a curse, but it turns out that she is just 
too gifted for her small hometown. She is actually one of four key Guardians who 
protect the amulets of Balance, and the formerly quiet and reserved girl must now 
travel to find the stolen orb of Life. Accompanying her is one of the Riders, a 
group of men charged with protecting the Guardians and the land. A languid first 
half, mostly establishing Lark’s personality and the lay of the land, gives way to 
romance, violence, and dizzying adventure as Lark and her companion embark on 
their quest to find the orb. The use of magic in this novel is creatively developed, 
and Waugh carefully connects it to natural elements in elegant and consistent ways. 
Unfortunately, Lark is a bit of a mess: prone to long periods of self-recrimination 
and self-pity, not terribly good at saving herself, and stubborn to a wearying extent. 
In addition, her romantic partner, the bland Gharain, whose only personality traits 
seem to be seething anger or lust, is a disappointment, and the budding partner-
ship doesn’t add anything much to the plot. Even so, setting-driven readers may be 
curious enough to return to this anticipated series to see who the other Guardians 
are, whether evil can be defeated, and if the land will survive this new upheaval.  AS
282 • The BulleTin
weAtherford, cArole BoSton Leontyne Price: Voice of a Century; illus. by Raul 
Colón. Knopf, 2014 34p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-95606-5 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-85606-8 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-39246-4 $10.99   
R 5-8 yrs 
In this picture-book biography, Weatherford races through the life of opera soprano 
Leontyne Price, who rose to acclaim and a continent-spanning career despite the 
pervasive bigotry that made her success an unlikely triumph. The book captures a 
moment in American history in which the stage door had already been opened by 
Marian Anderson but few black singers had yet walked through, emphasizing Ander-
son’s influence on Price and the younger woman’s awareness of the limits Anderson 
faced. The text sails smoothly as Price soars on Broadway, at La Scala, and at the 
Met, claiming roles such as Aida as her own. Colón’s soft-edged, grainily textured 
scenes capture Price’s glamor at the pinnacle of her success, with swirls of rainbow 
color winding through each performance. Although no source notes are included, 
a closing note supplements the information and lists a number of black divas who 
followed in Price’s steps, suggesting topics for further research and listening.  EB
wertheim, l. Jon The Rookie Bookie; by L. Jon Wertheim and Tobias Moskowitz; 
illus. by Neil Swaab. Little, 2014 262p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-24981-2 $17.00
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-24976-8 $9.99   
Ad Gr. 4-7
Mitch Sloan’s parents, a potter and painter, lose their California business and move 
to Indiana, and Mitch faces the age-old problem of establishing himself socially 
in a new seventh grade. Things get off to a surprisingly good start when he meets 
Jamie, a girl who shares his enthusiasm for sports and joins in on his scheme to 
make quick bucks by managing bets among a few classmates on a Colts game. In 
no time Mitch’s locker is surrounded by kids as he hands out the week’s winnings 
and pockets his share of the cash. Some alert adults shut down the bookie business, 
though, and it looks like Mitch has lost his one true friend, never established a 
friendship with any of his “clients,” and worst of all, hasn’t really caught on to why 
taking “harmless” bets should have everybody’s knickers in a twist. Eventually, he 
finds a better outlet for his business acumen in helping his parents set their gallery 
straight, and all is right with the world. Not that readers are likely to notice, but 
this novel is peppered with observations and theories drawn from the authors’ 
adult work Scorecasting: The Hidden Influences Behind How Sports Are Played and 
Games Are Won that often amount to little more than aphorisms shoehorned in 
at appropriate moments. Once Mitch’s older brother Kevin breaks through with 
some candid talk on why making money isn’t the problem here—ripping off your 
would-be friends is—the authors’ adult and kid messages finally begin to fuse. 
Most readers will recognize Mitch’s archetype—the nerdy kid who tries a little 
to hard— among their classmates and admit that what he lacks in social skills he 
makes up for in chutzpah.  EB
January 2015 • 283
yolen, JAne Centaur Rising. Ottaviano/Holt, 2014 [272p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-9664-4 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-6
By the summer of 1964, thirteen-year-old Arianne has pretty much given up on 
the notion of magic. Instead, she focuses on more practical pursuits: helping her 
single mother run the struggling horse farm Arianne’s deadbeat dad left them and 
caring for her younger brother, Robbie, whose severe birth defects put both emo-
tional and financial strain on the family. Eleven months after Arianne witnesses a 
strange glow in their meadow following the Perseid meteor shower, one of their 
horses gives birth to a centaur. The family rallies to care for the creature, whom 
they name Kai; when their efforts to keep Kai’s existence a secret fail, Arianne and 
her mother must deal with town gossips, international paparazzi, and the return 
of Arianne’s money-grubbing father, who sees this “monstrosity” as a way to make 
a quick buck. Arianne is a warm and likable narrator, and her solid pragmatism 
makes her easy acceptance of the centaur even more believable—after her initial 
shock, she simply gets down to the business of caring for Kai. Too often, however, 
the authorial hand is painfully obvious, from the forced comparisons between Rob-
bie’s and Kai’s conditions, to the conveniently overheard conversations required to 
move the plot along, to the caricatured and overwrought depiction of the villain-
ous father. Still, Yolen’s blend of gentle fantasy and family drama will certainly be 
familiar to her fans and may well attract a few newcomers who like their realism 
dosed with both magic and sentiment.  KQG
284 • The BulleTin
BuLLetIn BLue rIBBons 2014
Poetry! That was the big story this year, with so many impressive collections that we 
broke them into a separate section, and with a trio more of individual biographies/
autobiographies in compelling verse scoring under the nonfiction. There’s a pleasing 
streak of adventure running through the fiction list, while poignancy and humor, 
sometimes in the same book, make strong showings in the picture book list. It’s 
been a profound and delightful journey; share it with your patrons by downloading 
the PDF of the list in trifold format from http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu.
 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
FICTION:
Auxier, Jonathan. The Night Gardener. Amulet/Abrams. Gr. 4-6 (May)
Nineteenth-century rural England provides the perfect spooky setting for this bril-
liant ghost story of a tree that grants wishes—but at an extraordinary cost.
Caine, Rachel. Prince of Shadows: A Novel of Romeo and Juliet. New American 
Library. Gr. 9-12 (May)
This irresistible reconceptualization of Shakespeare’s tale of doomed love offers a 
strong setting, lush language, and a complex, well-developed cast centered not on 
the star-crossed lovers but on secondary player Benvolio.
Cokal, Susann. The Kingdom of Little Wounds; illus. by Pier Gustafson. Candlewick, 
2013. Gr. 10-12 (January)
An immersive and fascinating blend of fairy tale and history, this darkly lyrical story, 
following three young women in sixteenth-century Scandinavia, is as challenging 
as it is ultimately rewarding.
Giles, L. R. Fake ID. Amistad/Harper Collins. 7-10 (March) 
Nick wearies of life in Witness Protection, but he knows it is his family’s lifeline, 
which makes him all the more determined to solve a risky mystery that threatens 
his secret in his new hometown; cutting dialogue and impeccable character devel-
opment add to the mix. 
Grove, S. E. The Glass Sentence. Viking. Gr. 5-8 (September)
Cartography is cool in this clever yet emotionally engaging novel about a world 
where time and location have all been shifted around and one small group must 
use maps to battle against an exceptionally compelling villain. 
Nelson, Blake. The Prince of Venice Beach. Little. Gr. 7-10 (July/August)
January 2015 • 285
A dreamy, surf-influenced detective story features a memorable protagonist, Cali, 
and his slow move toward adulthood and responsibility through his noir-tinted 
investigations. 
Petruck, Rebecca. Steering Toward Normal. Amulet/Abrams. Gr. 6-10 (September)
In this warm, well-crafted novel, two boys discover that they are bonded by more 
than their individual but similar losses: they are actually half-brothers.
Sax, Aline. The War within These Walls; tr. from the Dutch by Laura Watkinson; 
illus. by Caryl Strzelecki. Eerdmans, 2013. Gr. 10 up (January)
Understated narration and a spare book design make for a startling and moving 
effect in this fictional memoir of a young Jewish man’s time in the Warsaw ghetto.
Smith, Andrew. Grasshopper Jungle: A History. Dutton. Gr. 9-12 (February)
Smith’s wryly humorous postmodern style matches surprisingly well with a sci-fi 
B-movie plotline in this Vonnegut-esque tale of a plague of six-foot tall, man-eating 
praying mantises.
Tamaki, Mariko. This One Summer; illus. by Jillian Tamaki. First Second. Gr. 7-10 
(June)
A poignant graphic novel highlights the painful, joyful, sometimes frightening 
moments between childhood and adolescence, and one girl’s summer on the cusp. 
Yang, Gene Luen. The Shadow Hero; illus. by Sonny Liew. First Second/Roaring 
Brook. Gr. 7-12 (September)
This tour de force graphic novel takes a little-known Asian character from 1940s 
comic books and gives him a vivid and humorous new story. 
NONFICTION:
Chin, Jason. Gravity; written and illus. by Jason Chin. Porter/Roaring Brook. 4-7
yrs (May)
This exceptional picture book explores the concept of gravity, and what would 
happen if it suddenly stopped working; vivid illustrations offer high-impact spreads 
worth lingering over, giving enough time for some science to sink in as well. 
Farrell, Mary Cronk. Pure Grit: How American World War II Nurses Survived Battle 
and Prison Camp in the Pacific; illus. with photographs. Abrams. Gr. 6-10 (April)
Interviews, memoirs, and photographs provide compelling source materials and 
lend immediacy and intimacy to this account of World War II through the eyes of 
the female nurses that were stationed in the Pacific.
Fleming, Candace. The Family Romanov: Murder, Rebellion, and the Fall of Imperial 
Russia; illus. with photographs. Schwartz & Wade. Gr. 7-12 (September) 
This compelling nonfiction narrative reads as absorbingly as any fictional drama 
while providing a close examination of the factors leading up to the fall of Russia’s 
most famous family.
286 • The BulleTin
Kuklin, Susan. Beyond Magenta: Transgender Teens Speak Out; written and with 
photographs by Susan Kuklin. Candlewick. Gr. 9-12 (February)
The remarkable variety in the cultural, social, and sexual identities of the six teens 
highlighted is impressive, but even more inspiring for readers will be the subjects’ 
honest, nuanced, and engaging personal stories. 
Nelson, Marilyn. How I Discovered Poetry; illus. by Hadley Hooper. Dial. Gr. 7-12 
(March)
This slender poetry sequence covers a large span of the author’s early life as she 
and her military family, often the only black people at their post, moved around 
the country and the author negotiated her identity as a writer and as an African 
American against the backdrop of the civil rights movement.
Powell, Patricia Hruby. Josephine: The Dazzling Life of Josephine Baker; illus. by 
Christian Robinson. Chronicle. Gr. 2-5 (January)
This jazzy, lively free-verse biography of legendary performer Josephine Baker 
embodies the determination, beauty, and spirit of the woman herself. 
Rappaport, Doreen. To Dare Mighty Things: The Life of Theodore Roosevelt; illus. 
by C. F. Payne. Disney Hyperion, 2013. Gr. 3-5 (January)
A large trim size, wryly humorous illustrations, and a general tone of amused awe 
make this addition to Rappaport’s biography canon a worthy match for its ambi-
tious, energetic subject.
Sheinkin, Steve. The Port Chicago 50: Disaster, Mutiny, and the Fight for Civil Rights; 
illus. with photographs. Roaring Brook. Gr. 7 up (February)
With gripping first-hand accounts and a commanding narrative voice, this title 
recounts a historical injustice that remains unresolved: the supposed mutiny of fifty 
African-American seamen after a horrific World War II tragedy. 
Stewart, Melissa. Feathers: Not Just for Flying; illus. by Sarah S. Brannen. Charles-
bridge. 4-7 yrs (March)
Even very young children will appreciate this lush, informative book about all the 
myriad uses for feathers, and they’ll linger over the stunning individual portraits 
of each highlighted bird. 
Sutcliffe, Jane. The White House Is Burning: August 24, 1814; illus. with photographs. 
Charlesbridge. Gr. 5-8 (September)
Sutcliffe pulls together a variety of primary sources and eyewitness accounts to offer 
a gripping play by play of a dramatic moment in one of our less-studied American 
wars; this page-turner is an obvious complement to a classroom unit and also serves 
as a thrilling read for history buffs. 
Woodson, Jacqueline. Brown Girl Dreaming. Paulsen/Penguin. Gr. 7-12 (September)
Budding writers will find much inspiration in this lyrical, layered free-verse memoir 
that traces Woodson’s life and family from before she was born onward to her own 
childhood and her budding love of writing. 
January 2015 • 287
POETRY:
Duffy, Chris, ed. Above the Dreamless Dead: World War I in Poetry and Comics; 
illus. by Hannah Berry, Stephen R. Bissette, Eddie Campbell, et al. First Second. 
Gr. 9 up (November)
A cadre of comic book artists offer their graphic interpretations of trench poetry, 
bringing the works of Wilfred Owen and Siegfried Sassoon to a new generation 
and connecting modern readers to World War I through artistry that is both sear-
ing and compassionate.
Heppermann, Christine. Poisoned Apples; illus. with photographs by Regina Belmon-
te, Ashley Gosiengfiao, Lissy Laricchia, et al. Greenwillow. Gr. 10 up (December)
Lyrical and lacerating poetry, coupled with moody black and white photographs, 
draws on familiar fairy tale plots and tropes to lay bare the cultural perils of being 
young and female.
Janeczko, Paul. Firefly July: A Year of Very Short Poems; illus. by Melissa Sweet. 
Candlewick. Gr. 2-5 (April)
Thirty-six well-chosen poems divided into four seasonal sections leap into luminous 
life when paired with stunning and inventive mixed media art
Sidman, Joyce. Winter Bees & Other Poems of the Cold; illus. by Rick Allen. Houghton 
Mifflin Harcourt. Gr. 5-8 (December)
Dimensionally layered linocut illustrations add vivid drama to these skillfully crafted 
and truly lovely poems evoking the natural world in winter.
PICTURE BOOKS:
Black, Michael Ian. Naked!; illus. by Debbie Ridpath Ohi. Simon. 4-7 yrs (July/
August)
What’s more fun than running around post-bath naked? This effervescent, carefully 
illustrated (all full frontals are cleverly obscured) book takes a look at a boy’s joyful 
quest to keep the clothes off for as long as possible. 
Campbell, Scott. Hug Machine; written and illus. by Scott Campbell. Atheneum. 
4-7 yrs (September)
This sweet, cuddly picture book about a boy who is so good at what he does that 
he is known as a hug machine will be the perfect tool for adult readers-aloud who 
want to encourage snuggling time with their own little ones. 
Dolan, Elys. Weasels; written and illus. by Elys Dolan. Candlewick. Gr. 1-4 (Feb-
ruary)
It’s pretty clear that if any animal was going to be sneaky enough to take over the 
world, it would be weasels, as Dolan illustrates in this visually elaborate and ir-
reverent look at their world domination headquarters. 
Dubuc, Marianne. The Lion and the Bird; written and illus. by Marianne Dubuc; 
tr. from the French by Claudia Z. Bedrick. Enchanted Lion. 5-7 yrs (July/August)
288 • The BulleTin
Minimal text pairs with serene illustrations to explore the enduring friendship 
between a lion and an injured bird he rescues; impeccable use of white space 
emphasizes the loneliness that accompanies having a friend who isn’t always near. 
Frazee, Marla. The Farmer and the Clown; written and illus. by Marla Frazee. Beach 
Lane/Simon. 4-6 yrs (November)
This wordless picture book, describing a lonely farmer’s kindly rescue of a lonely 
child clown who’s fallen off of a circus train, has all the poignant comedy of an 
old silent film.
Haughton, Chris. Shh! We Have a Plan; written and illus. by Chris Haughton. 
Candlewick. 4-7 yrs (November)
Four little guys out on a cool blue night are determined to catch themselves a bird 
despite their rampant ineptitude in this tightly structured, very funny tale where 
the littlest one knows best.
Nolan, Dennis. Hunters of the Great Forest; written and illus. by Dennis Nolan. 
Porter/Roaring Brook. 4-7 yrs (December)
No words are needed in this silent, comedic depiction of a great hunt, where a de-
lightfully motley group of tiny people evade the hazards of an oversized landscape to 
acquire and bring back to their village a great bounty: a kid’s campfire marshmallow.
Offill, Jenny. While You Were Napping; illus. by Barry Blitt. Schwartz & Wade. 6-9 yrs 
(October)
In this comic piece of literary torture, an older sister describes all the kid-irresistible, 
utterly fantastical wonders her younger brother missed due to his having to nap; 
absurd and dreamy illustrations emphasize the unreality while still making the 
proceedings tantalizing.
Ruth, Greg. Coming Home; written and illus. by Greg Ruth. Feiwel. 4-7 yrs (Janu-
ary 2015)
Spare text echoes the thoughts of a young boy, combining with understated but 
dramatically composed illustrations as he searches the airport crowds to find the 
soldier he’s there to welcome home.
Shea, Bob. Kid Sheriff and the Terrible Toads; illus. by Lane Smith. Roaring Brook. 
5-8 yrs (December)
Flavorful text and a hilarious premise mark this comic Western, about a tortoise-
riding kid sheriff whose obsession with dinosaurs hides a cunning plan for victory 
over some ornery villains.
Tan, Shaun. Rules of Summer; written and illus. by Shaun Tan. Levine/Scholastic. 
Gr. 3-5 (July/August)
True to Tan form, this book is exquisite and bizarre, all at once, as it describes the 
changing relationship between two brothers over the summer in spare allusive text 
and surreal art.
January 2015 • 289
Abuse–fiction: Lovejoy
Adventure: Buckingham; Gos-
ling; Perkins; Summer; tripp
Africa–poetry: Latham
African Americans: Weatherford
African Americans–fiction: Lovejoy; 
talley
Alcoholism–fiction: tingle
ALPHABet BOOKS: escoffier
Animal welfare: Applegate; Goodall
Animals: Jenkins; Johnson; Judge
Animals–fiction: Blacker; Perkins
Animals–poetry: Latham
Animals–stories: van Allsburg
AntHOLOGieS: Clare
Archeology: Walker
Armenia–fiction: Walrath
Aunts–fiction: Harris
Babies: Judge
Babies–fiction: Furniss
Bears–stories: John
BedtiMe StOrieS: John
Behavior–stories: Antony
BiOGrAPHieS: Jaeckel; Lehmann; 
Mcdonough; Weatherford
Biology: Birmingham; Jenkins 
Body image–fiction: devine
Books and reading: Gay 
Books and reading–fiction: Frederick
Books and reading–stories: Mack
Brazil–fiction: Machado
Brothers and sisters–fiction: Mach-
ado
Bullying–fiction: devine; dowell; 
Mcneil; Portman
Cars–fiction: Camper
Chicago–fiction: Martínez
Chimpanzees: Goodall
China–fiction: Peet
Chores–stories: Hatke
Civil rights movement: Freedman
Colonialism–fiction: raasch
COnCePt BOOKS: Cruschiform; 
escoffier
Contests–fiction: Camper;
Crime and criminals–fiction: 
Alender; Buckingham; Condie; 
Gosling; Graudin; Gray; Mc-
neil; Myers; nadol; Schindler; 
Shepard; Summer; tripp
diaries–fiction: Lingard
disabilities–fiction: Yolen
disasters–fiction: Myers
dogs–fiction: Hills
dogs–stories: Swenson
dreams–fiction: Hoban
ducks–stories: John
dystopias–fiction: Condie
Ecology: Johnson 
ePiStOLArY nOveLS: Quintero
Ethics and values: Blacker; devine; 
Lehmann; McCarney; van Alls-
burg; Wertheim
Families–fiction: Crowe; Frederick; 
Harris; nix; Philpot; Quintero; 
Yolen
FAntASY: Barnhill; Clare; Hatke; 
nix; Orchard; raasch; tripp; 
Waugh
Fathers–fiction: Green; Summer; 
tingle
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. in the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
290 • The BulleTin
Fathers–stories: Mack
Fear–stories: viorst
Films and filmmaking–fiction: devine
FOLKtALeS And FAirY tALeS: 
icinori
Food and eating–fiction: dowell
Friends–fiction: Barnhill; de Gra-
mont; Harris; Moracho; Perkins
Friends–stories: John; Kirk
Gambling–fiction: Wertheim
Gender: Cronn-Mills
Ghosts–fiction: Alender; Furniss; 
Schindler
GLBtQ people: Cronn-Mills
GLBtQ people–fiction: de Gramont; 
Philpot; talley
Gorillas: Applegate
Gorillas–stories: Antony
Grandparents–fiction: Peet
GrAPHiC nOveLS: Camper; 
Jaeckel; Orchard
Grief–fiction: Furniss
Guests–fiction: Hatke
Hamsters–stories: van Allsburg
HiStOriCAL FiCtiOn: Crowe; 
Lingard; Little; Lovejoy; Machado; 
Peet; Phillips; talley; Walrath
History, U.S.: Freedman; Walker 
History, world: Jaeckel
Hong Kong–fiction: Graudin
Houses: Walker 
HuMOr: Antony; Camper; escoffier; 
John; Mack; Portman; Swenson
identity: Cronn-Mills
illness–fiction: Hoban; Moracho
imaginary creatures–stories: Hatke
imagination–stories: Swenson 
Japan–stories: icinori
Jews: Lehmann
Jews–fiction: rosen
Kites–fiction: Peet
Language arts: escoffier
Latinos–fiction: Martínez; Quintero
Literature, children’s: Mcdonough; 
McMullan
Magic–fiction: Orchard; raasch; 
Waugh; Yolen
Mental illness–fiction: Phillips
Middle east–fiction: Little
Mothers–fiction: Furniss; Phillips
Mothers–stories: ruth
Music and musicians: Weatherford
MYSterieS: Alender; Frederick; 
Lingard; Mcneil; Myers; nadol; 
Shepard
Mythological animals–fiction: Yolen
native Americans–fiction: tingle
nature–poetry: Latham
Nature study: Goodall; Jenkins; 
Judge; Latham
neighborhoods–fiction: Martínez
nuclear disasters: Johnson 
Opera: Weatherford
Performing–stories: viorst 
Pets–stories: van Allsburg
Philosophy: Lehman
Physics: Cruschiform 
POetrY: Latham
Politics–fiction: nix
POP-uP BOOKS: viorst
Prejudice–fiction: de Gramont
Problem-solving–fiction: Hills
Problem-solving–stories: Kirk 
race relations–fiction: Crowe
racism: Freedman 
racism–fiction: talley
rats–fiction: Blacker
Reading, advanced: Birmingham
Reading aloud: Jenkins; Latham
Reading, beginning: Hills
Reading, easy: dowell; McMullan; 
Orchard 
Reading, reluctant: Birmingham; 
tingle
relationships–fiction: Little; Martínez; 
Moracho
revenge–fiction: Mcneil
romance–fiction: Gray; Philpot; 
rosen; Waugh
runaways–fiction: Lovejoy
russia: Jaeckel
School–fiction: de Gramont; devine; 
Hills; Mcneil; Portman; Shepard; 
Wertheim 
Science: Birmingham; Cruschiform; 
dowell; Goodall; Johnson
SCienCe FiCtiOn: Buckingham; 
Camper; Gray; nadol
January 2015 • 291
Scotland–fiction: Lingard
Sexual assault–fiction: Moracho
Sharing–stories: Kirk 
SHOrt StOrieS: Clare
Sisters–fiction: Condie; rosen
Size–stories: icinori
Slavery–fiction: Lovejoy; Machado
Soldiers–stories: ruth 
Sports–fiction: Green 
Squirrels–fiction: Perkins
SteAMPunK: Gosling
Stepfamilies–fiction: Alender
SuPernAturAL StOrieS: 
Schindler
SurvivAL StOrieS: Graudin
SuSPenSe: Green 
tantrums–stories: Antony
time travel–fiction: Gray
toys–fiction: McMullan
twins–fiction: Barnhill
verSe nOveLS: Crowe; Phillips; 
Walrath
vietnam War: Crowe 
voyages and travel: Jaeckel
voyages and travel–fiction: Little; 
tripp; Waugh
Witches–fiction: Orchard
Women’s studies: McCarney
World cultures: McCarney
World War i–fiction: Walrath
Writers and writing: Gay; Mc-
donough
Zoos: Applegate 
 
To order or To Join
Call 360.571.4520; visit us online at www.childlitassn.org; or 
write ChLA at P.O. Box 138, Battle Creek, MI 49016-0138.
MeMbers get it.
Claudia Nelson, Editor  
Texas a&M UniversiTy
Anne Morey, Texas a&M UniversiTy and  Sara K. Day, 
soUThern arkansas UniversiTy, Associate Editors
Children’s Literature Association Quarterly publishes 
first-rate scholarship in children’s literature studies. 
Each issue features an editorial introduction, juried 
articles about research and scholarship in children’s 
literature, and book reviews. The Quarterly is available 
to members of the Children’s Literature Association 
(ChLA) as a benefit of membership.  
Published quarterly in Spring, Summer, Fall, and Winter for 
the Children’s Literature Association (ChLA). Volume 40 (2015). 
ISSN 0885-0429; E-ISSN 1553-1201.
Children’s literature assoCiation Quarterly
Individual and institutional 
subscription is one of many benefits of 
membership to the ChLA.
 N. Charles Street • Baltimore, MD  • ... • .. • www.press.jhu.edu/journals
BOOKBIRD
A Journal of International Children’s Literature
Roxanne Harde, E
Published by the International Board on Books for 
Young People (IBBY).
Published quarterly
: - / -: -
The BULLETIN of the 
CENTER for CHILDREN’S BOOKS
Deborah Stevenson, E
Provides concise summaries and critical evaluations 
of current children’s books.
Published monthly (except August)
: - / -: -
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE*
R. H. W. Dillard, E--C
Amanda Cockrell, E
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published annually
: - / -: -
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE 
ASSOCIATION QUARTERLY*
Claudia Nelson, E
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published quarterly
: - / -: -
The LION and the UNICORN
A Critical Journal of Children’s Literature
David L. Russell, Karin E. Westman, 
and Naomi J. Wood, E
An international theme- and genre-centered 
journal committed to a serious, ongoing discussion 
of literature for children.
Published three times a year
: - / -: -
*Please contact us for more information or to join.
Johns Hopkins University Press Journals in 
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE
JHU Press Journals…
…break new ground 
…win awards 
…advance scholarship
The Johns Hopkins University Press is 
not just a publisher. We’re your partner in 
taking your journal beyond paper. JHUP 
has published scholarly journals for more 
than 130 years and combines a tradition 
of accomplishment with innovating 
publishing and marketing strategies. Our 
stewardship of original ideas and research 
since 1878 puts us at the forefront of 
publication and association management. 
Our staff simply helps you make ideas 
available to a world wide audience. We work 
with you to develop an online presence, 
publicize your work through Facebook 
and Twitter, share your message through a 
specialized list serv, and much more.
We invite you to join us as we continue to 
chart a vibrant new course in publishing. 
Please visit www.press.jhu.edu/journals 
for more information.
