I LL I N
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
•a» 
.
~ 
_~ _
~"lii 
~s
1, 
b
:r 
; 
of
L;I; 
;r
It·.
;*i·s~`F 
b)ii
: 
"d~P! Ilii 
j~ d~I 
ib 
r 
ii 
,,
r
Fa
THE
B UL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
May 1994
Vol. 47 No. 9
A LOOK INSIDE
279 THE BIG PICTURE
The Mennyms by Sylvia Waugh
280 NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
280 
* By the Dawn's Early Light written by Karen Ackerman; illus. by
Catherine Stock
289 * A Word to the Wise and Other Proverbs compiled by Johanna Hurwitz;
illus. by Robert Rayevsky
290 * Tiger, Tiger, Burning Bright by Ron Koertge
291 
* From Head to Toe: How a Doll Is Made written and illus. with photo-
graphs by Susan Kuklin
296 * Alice In-Between by Phyllis Reynolds Naylor
306 PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
307 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
,^ ^ 
^-re 
aw 
^1.1
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
STAFF
Betsy Hearne, Editor and Associate Professor, GSLIS (BH)
Roger Sutton, Executive Editor (RS)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS ADVISORY BOARD
Leigh Estabrook, Dean, GSLIS, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Selma K. Richardson, Professor, GSLIS
Richard C. Anderson, Director, Center for the Study of Reading, UIUC
Jean Osborn, Associate Director, Center for the Study of Reading
P. David Pearson, Dean, College of Education, UIUC
Violet J. Harris, Associate Professor, College of Education
Nancy O'Brien, Education Subject Specialist, Library, UIUC
Peggy Miller, Associate Professor, Department of Speech Communication, UIUC
Ann D. Carlson, Assistant Professor, GSLIS, Rosary College
Janice Harrington, Head of Children's Services, Champaign Public Library
Elizabeth Huntoon, Director Systemwide Children's Services, Chicago Public Library
Janie Schomberg, Librarian, Leal Elementary School, Urbana, Illinois
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $35.00; individuals, $29.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Betsy Hearne, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 1512 N. Fremont St., #105,
Chicago, IL 60622
Second-class postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1994 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Richard Ross, from The Mennyms ©1994 and used by permission of
Greenwillow Press.
MAY 1994 
* 279
THE BIG PICTURE
The Mennyms
by Sylvia Waugh
The Mennyms are a large English family-there's Granpa (Sir Magnus); his wife,
Tulip; their son, Joshua; his wife, Vinetta; and their children, Soobie, Appleby,
Poopy, Wimpy, and Googles. And they are living, human-sized rag dolls. Please
don't stop reading, because this is not a coyly whimsical, frill-bedecked literary
sachet but an inventive, funny, and convincing fantasy written with crisp disci-
pline.
The Mennyms (plus Miss Quigley, who lives in the closet) have resided in their
house since their maker's death forty years ago, and since "even rag dolls have bills
to pay and things they want to buy," Sir Magnus writes, Joshua is a night watch-
man, and Vinetta sews, between them providing enough income for payment of
rent and utilities. Soobie, the plain-spoken and serious oldest son, occasionally
mourns the pointlessness of their lives; Appleby, rebellious teenager, haunts the
London street markets as her whim takes her; Poopy and Wimpy, the ten-year-old
twins, spend most of their time playing, and Googles, the baby, does typical baby
things. They never get any older, however, they never eat or drink, and their
pleasures are divided into "reals" and "pretends"-ironing crumpled Mennym
clothes is a "real" that Vinetta enjoys, but Joshua equally treasures his ritual mug of
"pretend" tea.
Yet this static and unaging community does change; that's part of the point of
the book. First the family is put in an uproar when their Australian landlord
suggests paying them a visit ("You must have realised that man-size, talking, rational
rag dolls do not exist anywhere else in the world," Granpa reminds them all,
whereupon "Vinetta thought briefly of the Muppets, but appreciated the difference
even as she thought"), and they discover in the attic a nearly finished doll, who,
once assembled, proves to be Soobie's hitherto-unknown twin sister Pilbeam.
Between the revelations occasioned by the landlord's planned intrusion and the
addition of strong-willed Pilbeam to the family, the Mennyms expand and adjust,
finally inviting Miss Quigley out of her cramped quarters and into the family as
nanny for Googles, who herself blossoms under the new attention.
The plotting and planning of the Mennyms, concealing their button eyes with
glasses and their cloth hands with gloves to pass in the human world, is explored in
entertaining depth, as is the peculiar facility of the rag dolls' memory that enables
them to "remember" the childhoods they never had. What makes the story so
successful, in fact, is Waugh's ability to combine logical fantasy rules (the kids
have a birthday every year, always the same birthday) and absurd specific detail
(Soobie is bright blue, so he rarely goes out as he makes an unconvincing human)
280 
* THE BULLETIN
with a sense of effervescent family life, as these very distinct personalities struggle
to coexist and survive in a family that ends up having three permanent adolescents.
In some ways this is an old-fashioned English fantasy, the kind you don't see too
much anymore, in that it uncynically conjures up a world of domesticated magic.
The word "old-fashioned," however, suggests a preciousness at odds with this book
and its antecedents, such as Mary Norton's The Borrowers. A delicately imagina-
tive concept fares better when complemented with vigor, as it is here, rather than
with yet more delicacy. Once one leaps the initial hurdle of belief, accepting the
Mennyms as alive, it's all quite sensible, because the family dynamics are recogniz-
able.
This could be read aloud to younger kids, but it would be a shame to keep it
from older readers even though they might be leery of the rag-doll idea; as Vinetta
wisely states, "There is some part in each of us that is never too old for a good tale
of magic." Maybe you can suggest to secret junior-high readers of The Borrowers
that they share this with a grade-schooler-for the younger child's good, of course.
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ACKERMAN, 
KAREN 
By the Dawn's Early Light; illus. by Catherine
Stock. 
Atheneum, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-689-31788-3 
$14.95
Spanish ed. Al amanecer tr. by Alma Flor Ada
ISBN 0-689-31917-7 
$14.95 
R* 
5-8 yrs
A gently ironic title summons thoughts of stars and stripes and men triumphant in
battle, but the cast here comprises women and children of color, and the struggle is
a daily one to put bread on the table and keep a family together. Young Rachel
describes a typical evening in which her mother leaves to work the factory night
shift just as Rachel, her little brother Josh, and her grandmother Nana are setting
the table for dinner. Alternately then, she tells what she and Mom do while most
of the rest of the world winds down and rests, and finally, what a joyful reunion
her mother's return at dawn brings for the sleepy children. It's more sequence
than story, but the characters are warmly realized and the watercolor paintings
strong enough to rivet kids' attention. Both text and art individualize rather than
generalize, so the picture of a family coping with a situation that's admittedly
difficult is filled with vivid particulars from the first double spread of a fog-bound
city to the last sun-filled cuddle on the couch. Stock's figures, without being
glamorized, are deeply beautiful in expression and comfortable in posture; there's
something to be said for experienced drafting. Her colors, too, have a quiet grace
that makes blended patterns seem second nature to each composition. Also avail-
able in a Spanish edition, this is a genuine introduction to real heroes. BH
MAY 1994 
* 281
AYLESWORTH, JIM 
My Son John; illus. by David Frampton. 
Holt, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-1725-9 
$15.95 
R 
3-6 yrs
"Diddle diddle dumpling,/ My son John," is just one of the kids in this big farm
family; there are fourteen others, each one introduced with a celebratory verse:
"Bonny bonny bridle,/ My daughter Rose./ Combs her mare/ In old work clothes./
Hay in hair/ And dirt on nose./ Bonny bonny bridle,/ My daughter Rose." The
book takes the children from morning ("Yellow yellow sunup,/ My son Ed") through
chores ("Chipper chipper woodpile,/ My son Neil") through bedtime ("Snowy
snowy pillow,/ My daughter Kate"), each verse faced by a boldly lined, rustically
curvy woodcut portrait in sophisticated hues. Here and there, inspiration flags
among the verses, but echoing the verve of the pictures, the rhythms are always
sturdy and call for chanting along. RS
BEDARD, MICHAEL 
Painted Devil. Atheneum, 1994 
[2 24 p]
ISBN 0-689-31827-8 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Alice's pleasant part-time job at the local public library turns sinister when the new
librarian, Mr. Dwyer, becomes preternaturally obsessed with the Punch-and-Judy
set he has resurrected from the basement and plans to use in a gala children's
program. Children's librarians may find this a tempting premise for a horror novel,
but as far as young readers go, the frights are a long time coming and the story is
complicated by too many side issues. There's a doll family, for example, which at
first seems an important part of the proceedings but then becomes tangential, and
many contortions are required to fit the present threat of the puppet show into an
old cycle of child-murder that has secretly haunted the town and that Alice's Aunt
Emily, a childhood witness at a deadly magic show, has come back home to stop.
If it sounds complicated, it is. The writing, too, often goes into overdrive, with
pathetic fallacies ("An old manual typewriter teetered on the edge of the table, as if
it might be contemplating suicide") competing for space with cliches ("the relent-
less drumming of fate demanding entrance"). The heavily ornamented writing
takes some getting used to, but the story gathers power as it progresses, shedding
the surfeit of motifs in favor of a more strongly focused narrative. Scariest of all is
the Devil puppet of the title ("It's bad," says Alice's little sister. "Bad. It has scary
eyes and it says things"), and the final confrontation between Alice, Emily, and the
possessed Mr. Dwyer provides a satisfyingly gothic climax. RS
BOLDEN, TONYA, comp. 
Rites of Passage: Stories about Growing Up by Black Writers
from Around the World. Hyperion, 1994 
[240p]
ISBN 1-56283-688-3 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Seventeen stories, all fairly contemporary, all previously published, comprise this
collection. Authors represented are mostly writers of talent rather than fame, so
the names may not be familiar to readers young or old; the contributors hail from
all over, including the U.S., Britain, Jamaica, Barbados, Ghana, South Africa, Costa
Rica, and Australia. While some of the stories are more successful than others, all
tell with compelling voices about young black protagonists; a variety of genres
(fantasy, realism) and themes (some stories deal overtly with race, some do not)
enhances the breadth of the compilation. Particularly gratifying entries include
Barbara Burford's "Dreaming the Sky Down," about a British girl who finds her-
282 
* THE BULLETIN
self able to fly; Clarence Major's "My Mother and Mitch" about a boy's mother's
serendipitous but doomed friendship with an older white man, and Toni Cade
Bambara's stalwart "Raymond's Run," which starts off this collection. Quirky
footnotes occasionally explain foreign terms or enigmatic allusions; superfluous
epigraphs, apparently the editor's addition, precede each story; an "About the Con-
tributors" section provides brief biographies that mention additional books should
a reader wish to pursue a particular author further. Altogether, it's a fresh assort-
ment of imaginative voices that would provide good material for globally themed
reading aloud, and many kids will enjoy a private circumnavigation as well. DS
CARSON, Jo 
The Great Shaking: An Account ofthe Earthquakes of1 811 and 1812
by a Bear Who Was a Witness, New Madrid, Missouri; illus. by Robert Andrew
Parker. 
Jackson/Orchard, 1994 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08659-3 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-06809-9 
$14.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
"The shakings began as if Mother was rising from her sleep. She sleeps in the
winter like I do. Something itched her. I was pushed from my fold in her skin."
Jo Carson, who so skillfully walked a fine line between personal narrative and
poetry in Stories I Ain't Told Nobody Yet (BCCB 2/89), here imagines a bear's
account of several violent nineteenth-century earthquakes. The leap from human
to anthropomorphized animal makes this less successfully innovative, as the de-
scription of a real natural disaster assumes pseudo-mystical proportions: "And in
the terrible thunders, The Great Bear reminded Mother that some of her children
need to sleep in the cold season, and she remembered my kind and stood still again
with only a leaning from time to time." It's evocative, but what's going on? Whereas
folklore gives traditional clues to a magical context, and fantasy develops realism
through carefully detailed inner logic (is The Great Bear an ursine god? A constel-
lation? What's his relation to Mother Nature?), the combination of history, sci-
ence, and animal fantasy is confusing for a picture book audience that hasn't sorted
out the differences yet. A concluding note does lay out an explanation ex post
facto, and the narrative is undeniably vivid. Parker's full-color, full-page pictures
have a thicker texture and darker palette than usual, projecting a monolithic qual-
ity that heightens the drama of precipitous events. BH
CASEY, MAUDE 
Over the Water. Holt, 1994 
[256p]
ISBN 0-8050-3276-2 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 6-9
Between famine in the past and fury in the north, Ireland has suffered more than a
century of dramatic conflict. It's all the more amazing, then, for a children's book
to concentrate on-and to capture with such authentic subtlety-the common,
everyday pain of emigration. "We live in England, but." Thus begins Mary's story
as she recounts the family's yearly holiday back to Ireland, back to the farm and the
loved ones and the land that holds their hearts. Yet Mary seems to belong in
Ireland no more than she does in England, and her mother suffers so much alien-
ation that the two cannot comfort one another: "... all she ever does is avoid me,
or hit me, or tell me to pray!" The novel is rich in stories, both those commemo-
rating the past and those unfolding the present. Granny's tale of a wedding pro-
posal on the day her home was destroyed by the British, for instance, is as gripping
as Mary's witnessing a fire that kills the baby pigs she has helped deliver. And her
MAY 1994 
* 283
aunt's account of Mammy's childhood beating at the hands of Mary's grandfather
is as immediate as Mary's beating at the hands of her own father. Scene by scene,
the protagonist's understanding is stretched to encompass the best and worst of
her heritage, the consequences of poverty and oppression, the depth and comfort
of traditions, and the necessity for self-respect in forging a life. For Mary, this trip
holds heaven as well as hell, and if the closing dynamics seem strained toward
resolution with each family member who's been at odds with her, Mary's develop-
ment is hardwon and convincing to the end. Casey's writing flows with effortless
grace, whether the scenario calls for an internal monologue of observations on a
train trip, or the description of a dream-like horseback ride, or the angry dialogue
of a fight among siblings. With some of the same complexity as Shizuko's Daugh-
ter by Kyoko Mori (also in Holt's Edge series, and reviewed in BCCB 5/93), this
features a similarly strong voice and a sustained tension that will exert magnetic
force over children facing today's myriad forms of exile. BH
CHERIPKO, JAN 
Voices ofthe River: Adventures on the Delaware; written and illus.
with photographs by Jan Cheripko. 
Boyds Mills, 1994 
48p
ISBN 1-56397-325-1 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Author-photographer Cheripko and fourteen-year-old Matthew Smith together
canoed the 215 miles of the Delaware river, and this photoessay is an almost hour-
by-hour journal of the ten-day trip. The book does both too much and not enough:
while filled with details, the lengthy text often takes a summary tone and fails to
distinguish big moments, such as shooting the rapids, from insignificant tangents,
such as anecdotes about the hotels they stayed in and what the two had for dinner.
The sightseeing reports, as well, are variable. The Delaware Water Gap is summa-
rized as "magnificent," yet (boys being boys, one supposes) we get a very specific
rundown on the riverside traffic: "We saw some of the cars that park in New
Hope-Corvettes, Jaguars, Porsches, BMWs, and even an Alfa Romeo." Color
photographs are clear but often too small and, like the text, take a desultory turn
too often. While the book is subtitled "Adventures on the Delaware," there's little
excitement here, and you have to wonder if these guys truly enjoyed themselves.
What works best are all the little how-to examples that will allow readers to paddle
off on their own imagined adventures. RS
COLE, BABETTE 
WinniAllfours; written and illus. by Babette Cole. 
BridgeWater,
1994 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8167-3308-2 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Winni Allfours is a typically obsessive horse-crazy girl, but her parents, "who were
very strict and only ate vegetables," refuse to get her a pony. Winni eats so many
carrots that she becomes a horse, and a promisingly speedy racehorse at that. After
escaping from an evil horse dealer (by driving his van) she wins her race, carrying
her frantic father on her back and setting a world record. This is relentlessly,
satisfyingly silly, with bright writing and an entertaining idea taken to its absurd
extreme (Winni, by the way, remains a horse in the end, finding it immensely
more satisfying than attending school). The light-hearted line-and-wash art shows
Winni as a rather gawky young girl but a very handsome horse in her own cartoonish
way: with her two long braided pigtails and her rotundity of form, she would be
horsily Brunnhilde-ish were it not for her spirit and agility. Cole clearly knows her
284 
* THE BULLETIN
equine stuff, with small horsey details (such as Winni's fantasy of a three-day event)
accurate as well as entertaining; a few Americanizations of the text clash slightly
with the obviously British setting, but it doesn't really detract from the story. For
all little girls who've firmly stated that they want to be a horse when they grow up,
this is their fantasy taken to a degree they may not have dared and will deeply
appreciate. DS
COLLIER, JOHN 
The Backyard; written and illus. by John Collier. 
Viking,
1993 
32p
ISBN 0-670-83609-5 
$14.99 
R 
6-9 yrs
In this imaginative journey back through time, an unseen child muses on the changes
that have occurred in his own backyard on the Great Plains. Where a wide lawn
now spreads, there once were carpenters who "sweated and laughed ... and sang
songs I never heard, all in my backyard." Before them came farmers, braves, chiefs;
dinosaurs and fishes and volcanoes that "rose out of lifeless seas"; "hydrogen and
darkness and the hand of God." Although this solemn, stately prose is hardly that
of a child's voice, it harmonizes well with Collier's elegantly composed pastels.
Spare in detail, heavily textured, and set against generous white borders, the illus-
trations comprise a gallery of child-compelling images-a dead cowboy, a tyran-
nosaur, an explosive sun. The final large frame, in which wooden backyard swings
are tossed as easily as leaves by an approaching storm, reminds the reader that
human handiwork remains at the mercy of natural forces. The disproportion
between historic and geologic time might disturb those who would force Creation
into the Procrustean bed of an accurate time line. Seven turns of the page cover a
few hundred years; the next four race all the way back to the cosmic abyss. But this
very disregard of scale offers an object lesson in the difficulty of applying human
time to evolutionary and earth-building processes. And a child's imagination,
after all, must be allowed to set its own pace. EB
DUBOIS, MURIEL L. Abenaki Captive. Carolrhoda, 1994 
180p 
(Adventures
in Time)
ISBN 0-87614-753-8 
$14.96 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Based on historical events, this novel tells the story of John Stark, who with his
friend Amos Eastman was captured by the St. Francis Abenaki in 1752 in what is
now eastern Canada. Dubois provides a fictional foil for Stark in a young Abenaki
man named Ogistin, whose brother has been killed by whites and whose desire for
revenge makes him at first hate Stark, who wins favor with the Abenaki and stays
among them for a time. There's not much characterization here, but there's drama
in the capture (which leaves a third man in Stark's party dead) and the book treats
some little-mentioned realities of colonial life (the divisions between French and
English, Catholic and Protestant, for instance). The different philosophies of
European and Abenaki are discussed, and there's a running thread about Ogistin's
guardian spirit, a lynx, that never quite ties into the rest of the story, but the real-
world plot remains the important one. Clearly written and easily readable, this is
a historical episode that allows a glimpse into a time and place more often my-
thologized than chronicled. While there's no explanation of what exactly is fact
and what fiction and no citation of source material, a note about the fate of John
Stark, a glossary of Abenaki words, and a list of books for further reading are
included. DS
MAY 1994 
* 
285
FILIPOVIC, ZLATA 
Zlata's Diary: A Child's Life in Sarajevo; tr. by Christina
Pribichevich-Zoric. 
Viking, 1994 
200p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-670-85724-6 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
"BOREDOM!!! SHOOTING!!! SHELLING!!! PEOPLE BEING KILLED!!!
DESPAIR!!! HUNGER!!! MISERY.!! 
FEAR!!! That's my life! The life of an
innocent eleven-year-old schoolgirl!!" At first, Zlata's writing style shows the im-
mature dramatics of any preadolescent, but as the war wears on for two years, she
becomes, alas, much older in her observations, as when she records the death of
her cousin: "He was killed in Melic's garden. It was a sniper. Awful. Everybody
was in the garden and the sniper picked him out." And three days later: "Our own
tiresome sniper, we call him 'Jovo,' was in a playful mood today. He's really out of
his mind. There he goes! He just fired another bullet, to shake us up." In addi-
tion to celebrating birthdays and trying to study without electricity, gas, or water,
Zlata keeps track of shells (at one point, three to four a minute from four in the
morning until ten at night), friends leaving the city (Zlata and her family later
escape to Paris themselves), and journalists coming to sniff out the story of a suc-
cessor to Anne Frank. Despite all the hype-and Zlata knows halfway through
her diary that it's going to be published-she keeps a level head and deepens her
tone. Although the entries are often repetitive and the book is in many ways
intended for adults, it will also appeal to young readers, who can empathize with
Zlata's naive but telling criticisms of "the kids," as Sarajevo's ordinary citizens call
the politicians who play with their lives. If anything, the world's awareness and
Zlata's own self-awareness increase the irony of "a STUPID war" (her family in-
cludes Serbs, Croats, and Muslims) that everyone decries and no one seems able to
stop. BH
FLEMING, DENISE 
Barnyard Banter; written and illus. by Denise Fleming. 
Holt,
1994 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-1957-X 
$15.95 
R 
16 mos.-3 yrs
Put 'em to sleep with Gliori (see below); wake 'em up with Fleming. Inventively
constructed collages (the author note gives some information on the process) illus-
trate a very simple rhyming catalog that relies heavily upon animal onomatopoeia
for its effect: "Cows in the pasture, moo, moo, moo/ Roosters in the barnyard,
cock-a-doodle-doo." That's pretty much it, except for a game element, hinted at
twice in the text, in which children are supposed to find the goose chasing a drag-
onfly in each big and boldly designed double-spread picture. This isn't very hard
to do, but toddlers will love to point and crow, just as they will finger the spattered
textures of the pictures and trace the vigorous postures of the barnyard creatures.
While entirely appropriate for lap-sitting one-on-one, it's also a story hour natural,
where group reciting will soon give way to mass shrieking-better save it for the
end. RS
FRAUSTINO, LISA ROWE 
Grass and Sky. 
Orchard, 1994 
155p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08673-9 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-06823-4 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
After a long estrangement from the old man, Timmi (named for her grandmother
Timothea) and her family have come to see her grandfather, living on a lake in the
Maine woods. Timmi, after years of unanswered letters, is wary of Grampy, and
besides, she'd rather be home pitching for the baseball team. The story of Grampy
286 
* THE BULLETIN
and Timmi's gradual rapprochement is predictable, albeit satisfying, but the book,
a first novel, needs to surround its characters with more of a story than it has.
Timmi, her younger sister Rebecca, and Grampy (the parents spend most of the
book in town at a high school reunien) cook together, do jigsaw puzzles, explore
the lake and woods, get mad at each other and eventually find an enduring bond
(just in time, too, as a hospital visit reveals that Grampy's days are numbered), but
it's more dynamics than action. The closing revelation that Dad had severed ties
with Grampy because of Grampy's alcoholism doesn't have the impact it should
have, with everyone forgiving everyone else fairly easily. Grampy, now six years
sober, spouts quaint down-east dialect ("Well, JiminyJehoshafat, it'll be dark soon!
I'll hustle us up some eats") which, combined with a taste for tall tales, renders him
somewhat two-dimensional, but Timmi is thoroughly believable, with the sum-
mery woodland landscape making an appealing backdrop for burgeoning family
ties. RS
GILSON, JAMIE 
It Goes Eeeeeeeeeeeee!; illus. by Diane de Groat. 
Clarion,
1994 
6 8p
ISBN 0-395-67063-2 
$13.95 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Richard (from Itchy Richard) and his friends in Mrs. Zookey's second-grade class
are preparing for Endangered Animal Month, but troublesome Patrick, armed
with a Super Soaker, a lurid imagination, and a glib tongue, keeps trying to make
things difficult. Patrick is obsessed with bats after encountering one with Richard,
and budding zoologist Dawn Marie, who's thrilled to have bats in her garage,
eventually settles Patrick down some and teams up with him for an endangered
species report on bats. This is a lively school story, and the bat information is
woven smoothly into the story rather than being the obvious raison d'etre of the
book. Richard's narration is simple but credible and Patrick is realistically obnox-
ious without being completely unsympathetic. The Eeeeeeeeeeeee! of the title and
the eeeeuw of the subject matter will draw curious young readers, who will be
rewarded with a sprightly tale. Pencil illustrations are realistic without being
overliteral. DS
GLASSMAN, PETER 
My Working Mom; illus. by Tedd Arnold. 
Morrow,
1994 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-12260-4 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-12259-0 
$15.00 
R 
4-6 yrs
What purports to be a flat bibliotherapeutic text ("It isn't easy having a working
Mom") takes on another dimension as the illustrations spoof the young narrator's
complaints about her mother's career. Mom is shown to be a witch who's often
busy in her laboratory (dropping weird ingredients into a cauldron) or "flying off
to a meeting somewhere" (on a broomstick). Still, she has her assets, primarily
magic, and she certainly manages to impress the kids at school when she comes to
talk about her job. Some of the other parent/child sets are a little strange-looking
themselves, with an assortment of fangs, green fins, mummy wrappings, and out-
size pointy ears which contrast with the cute blond narrator and show that this is a
world where fantasy and reality blend in a cozy brew. Of course it's the playoff
between the straightfaced account and the goofy pictures that gives the mix its
kick. Arnold's colored pencil and watercolor art work features large-mouthed car-
toon characters in scenes rampant with frogs, newts, toads, spiders, cat, and mouse.
MAY 1994 
* 287
Dad looks perennially baffled, never more so than when he sits down to a tradi-
tional red-checked tablecloth set with a meal consisting of sea monster. It's a one-
joke book, but kids will chuckle the whole way through. BH
GLIORI, DEBI Mr. Bear Babysits; written and illus. by Debi Gliori. Artists & Writ-
ers Guild, 1994 [3 2p]
ISBN 0-307-17506-5 $13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 3-6 yrs
Mr. Bear has to take over babysitting duties when his wife, preoccupied with their
own cranky baby, can't fulfill her promise to look after the cubs in the Grizzly Bear
home next door. That family has a baby too, and Mr. Bear's timid attempts to
care for it aren't helped by the older siblings, Ted and Fred and Fuzz: "'You're not
very good at that,' said Fred as Mr. Bear drenched himself in the bathwater." "I
don't think you're a real babysitter," chimes in Fuzz, while the baby just keeps on
crying. The havoc in the Grizzly-Bear household is gently limned by Gliori; the
house is a mess, but it's a cozy mess, all soft lines and warm colors, with Mr. Bear
himself a comfortable tawny presence. The picture of Mr. Bear and the baby (the
others having been dispensed with via some serious tough love) snoozing together
in front of the fire is apt to provoke fairly won cooing, it's so toasty and furry and
adorable. And when Mr. Bear goes home and rocks his own baby the same way,
everybody will be all set for a little nap. RS
GORMAN, CAROL 
Jennifer-the-Jerk Is Missing. Simon, 1994 
135p
ISBN 0-671-86578-1 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Thirteen-year-old Amy is unhappy about babysitting her father's boss' kid for the
weekend: Malcolm's a weird little genius with a penchant for fantastic tales, so
when he maintains he saw his rich, disliked classmate Jennifer being kidnapped,
nobody believes him. He sticks to his guns, however, and he and Amy investigate
(the cops don't believe him because he's told them tall tales before), discovering
that Jennifer really was kidnapped and that they must rescue her because her par-
ents are out of the country and can't be reached. There's not a shred of reality
here, and the characterizations are all pretty shallow, but it's a lively, silly adven-
ture with gratifyingly youthful heroes succeeding in the face of adult incompe-
tence. Kids may not remember the book afterwards, but they'll enjoy it during.
DS
GOTTFRIED, TED 
Libya: Desert Land in Conflict. Millbrook, 1994 
160p
ISBN 1-56294-351-0 
$16.90 
R Gr. 7-12
Libya is one of only a handful of countries the U.S. doesn't seem to mind officially
regarding as an enemy, so it's a challenge to any writer to provide a balanced pic-
ture, reporting (and challenging) the saber-rattling that comes from both sides.
Gottfried's is a fair report, placing the Qaddafi regime within an understandable
historical and religious context and explaining the contemporary factors of pan-
Arabism and oil politics that inform Libya's often belligerent presence on the world
stage. While the historical chapters sometimes fall into a summary tone, the analy-
sis of Qaddafi's revolution has a journalistic impact with a good balance of report-
age and interpretation. Source notes are too few, but occasional black-and-white
photos, a chronology, a reading list, and an index add reference and research value.
RS
288 
* THE BULLETIN
HAFEN, LYMAN 
Over the Joshua Slope. 
Bradbury, 1994 
[160p]
ISBN 0-02-741100-1 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Twelve-year-old Brian Winsor wants to be home listening to music and doing
regular modern kid things. Instead, he has to participate in the spring cattle drive,
taking his injured father's place rounding up and moving cows. Brian feels un-
equal to the task and to his taciturn father's expectations, but he struggles through,
getting to know his father's colleagues, Malcolm and Will, and finding a range-
riding mentor in Will. The parameters of the boy-becomes-a-man plot are fairly
traditional, with cliches such as the half-wild young horse needing to be conquered
by the young man, but Hafen invests the situation with honest emotion and cred-
ible detail. Brian's a sympathetic character as he gets lost, nervous, and occasion-
ally downright stupid when faced with this important challenge, and readers will
understand his pride in his accomplishment. City slickers looking for a taste of
contemporary cowboying will enjoy the wide-open spaces here. DS
HAN, SUZANNE CROWDER, ad. 
The Rabbit's Judgment; illus. by Yumi Heo. 
Holt,
1994 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-2674-6 
$15.95 
R* 
5-8 yrs
A thorough opening source note attests to the care that's gone into adapting this
Korean variant of "The Tiger, the Brahmin, and the Jackal," akin to an ancient
Jataka tale. The tiger who's fallen into a pit gets out with the help of a passing
stranger, whom he then threatens to eat. Pointing out the injustice of such an act,
the man persuades the tiger to accept judgment from a pine tree and an ox-both
of whom, having suffered at the hands of men, urge the tiger to proceed with his
meal-and finally from a rabbit, who demands to see a reenactment of the event
and then tells the man to leave the tiger in the pit this time. It's a tough fable, and
the text, which is written in Korean and English and which appeared in the author's
earlier collection Korean Folk and Fairy Tales (published in Korea) is accompanied
by surrealistic paintings that emphasize the symbolic without sacrificing the literal.
Yumi Heo's highly patterned pictogrammatic figures, steeped in brown and an-
tique gold, radiate a nervous energy that heightens the suspense built into the
narrative. A dual-language book that satisfies aesthetic criteria as well as furthering
multicultural causes. BH
HAUSHERR, ROSMARIE 
What FoodIs This?; written and illus. with photographs by
Rosmarie Hausherr. 
Scholastic, 1994 
40p
ISBN 0-590-46583-X 
$14.95 
R 
4-8 yrs
In the same format as her What Instrument is This? (BCCB 10/92), Hausherr ex-
plores the tasty world of food: a color photograph of an energy-filled kid/food
encounter shares a page with a question ("What food grows without seeing the
sun?"); turn that page to find a more sober black-and-white photograph and a
paragraph or two explaining the answer ("The crunchy orange CARROT is a root
vegetable that grows from a tiny seed"). The question-and-answer format doesn't
always work quite as smoothly as in the previous book (the first question, "What
food comes from grass that an animal has eaten?," is rather oddly posed and the
answer-milk-unexpected), but the information is generally clearly explained
("The part of a plant that has seeds in it is always the fruit"). Useful back matter
includes "From Flower to Fruit" (an explanation of pollination), a glossary of words
MAY 1994 
* 289
italicized in the text, an explanation of the food guide pyramid and its individual
components, and a page on "Good Nutrition: What Parents Can Do." The real
draw here is the attractive format and the delightful multiethnic array of child
food-presenters, one of whom beams over a bowl of rice, another slurps water
from a drinking fountain, and a third balances a raspberry on his tongue. This is
a cheerful and appealing introduction to the serious topic of food. DS
HESSE, KAREN 
Sable; illus. by Marcia Sewall. 
Holt, 1994 
81p 
(Redfeather
Books)
ISBN 0-8050-2416-6 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Easy to read and as basic in appeal as an animal story can be, this is young Tate's
account of how she got a dog her mother didn't want, and how she got to do the
woodworking her father didn't want her to try. The dog comes first, wandering
into the yard as a starved stray that Tate feeds, then names Sable and adopts de-
spite the protests of her mother, who was badly bitten as a child. Sable is gentle
but has the bad habit of wandering off and returning with neighbors' belongings.
Tate is forced to give away the dog to someone with a fenced yard, which gives
independent Tate the idea of fencing a dog run herself. She's too late-by the
time she finishes the project, Sable has run away from the new owner. Tate expe-
riences an agonizing sense of loss, but the dog reappears, starving again and this
time injured as well. The reunion coincides with Tate's parents' recognition of her
responsibility; yet none of this seems pat. The protagonist's anxiety is convincing
and contagious to readers, her voice carries a direct authenticity, and even the
stock device of a climactic storm seems freshened by the taut pace and simple
writing. The rural hard-times New England setting, reinforced by Sewall's home-
spun pencil drawings, has a sharp but unlabored presence of its own. Practicing
readers will recognize this as an early chapter-book of the first order. BH
HURWITZ, JOHANNA, comp. 
A Word to the Wise and Other Proverbs; illus. by Robert
Rayevsky. 
Morrow, 1994 
34 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-12066-0 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-12065-2 
$15.00 
R* Gr. 2-4
Artist Rayevsky has frequently sharpened his razor wit on folktales. It's fun to see
him change pace with Hurwitz' collection of proverbs, which are satirically linked
by sly pictures into a story filled with contemporary as well as old-fashioned-and
outlandish-images. Don't start looking at the endpapers until the end, or you'll
never get past their hysterical mix-and-match detail. Go directly to the title spread,
which cinches the tone with two illustrations, one of a master ordering his dog to
fetch, and the other of the dog ordering his master to fetch (both return with sticks
in the dedication spread). Now check out the preface picture poking fun at the
very nature of proverbs, which are receiving a straightforward explanation on the
opposite page while an audience stares adoringly up at a comical portrait of Ben-
jamin Franklin. Typically, the first three proverbs are constructed, via illustration,
into a kind of visual narrative with a loose but humorous plot. The early bird that
catches the worm while his buddies nap becomes, in the next spread, the bird in
the hand that's worth two in the bush and that later jumps out of the frying pan
and into the fire-a fire that subsequently heats up a watched pot that never boils
while too many cooks spoil the broth. It's free association with a vengeance, and
both compiler and artist are keenly aware of the contradictory advice inherent in
proverbs (there are, after all, two sides to every question), which Hurwitz points
290 
* 
THE BULLETIN
out through several examples in her afterword. 
Rayevsky, meanwhile, satirizes
everything: human, canine, feline, and rodent; rich and poor; male and female;
black and white. It's all grist for his mill. Clean compositions feature intensely
colored figures against a pristine background that offers humorous contrast with
the chaotic level of activity. The artist has fully imagined each scene, developed
sequences by chain reaction, and set into motion a visual riot of cause and effect
that will inspire rebellious delight rather than the rebellious yawn that often greets
traditional, tried-and-true wisdom. In fact, it's kids older than the preschool pic-
ture book audience who will get the full benefit of this sophisticated fun. BH
JOHNSTON, JULIE 
Adam and Eve and Pinch-Me. Little, 1994 
180p
ISBN 0-316-46990-4 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Sarah is fifteen, and after a long series of unhappy foster homes she's mastered the
art of detachment and control. Now she's been placed with the Huddlestons, Ma
and Hud, and their other two foster children, clingy young Josh and nasty teenage
Nick. Left in peace at the Huddleston farm, Sarah pounds out her feelings on her
computer keyboard and finds herself settling in and growing fond of Ma and Hud.
Her hopes of security are dashed, however, when tragedy befalls Hud, and Sarah's
biological mother attempts to reclaim her daughter. Johnston, the author of Hero
of Lesser Causes (BCCB 4/93), is a smooth and gifted writer, and while the plot
here (somewhat similar to that of Rylant's Missing May) is fairly predictable, the
evocation of Sarah's feelings is nuanced and sensitive. The Canadian small farm-
town setting lends atmosphere, and the drama of abandonment and self-realiza-
tion is touching. DS
JONES, DIANA WYNNE 
Hexwood. Greenwillow, 1994 
[304p]
ISBN 0-688-12488-7 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Sophisticated science fiction fans who enjoy jigsaw puzzles will go galactic over
Jones' latest novel, which seems to unfold backwards as the story twists with the
suddenness of a snake and Earthly characters turn out to be otherworldly. Less
avid readers may just get confused as the action shuttles between several scenarios:
a set of ominously powerful Reigners and their Servant from Homeworld, an ado-
lescent protagonist and her family inhabiting a contemporary English town, and a
machine-induced field of theta-space that draws in the whole cast and plays havoc
with time and minds. This mischievous Bannus machine, determined to select
new leaders for the universe, is just one complex aspect of a fictional world that
crosses cybernetics with magic to produce Arthurian legend in future shock. Readers
who get involved in the gradual assemblage of plot pieces will be rewarded with a
highly concentrated ending when the variously guised characters, including Mer-
lin and two dragons, battle toward triumph or termination. BH
KOERTGE, RON 
Tiger, Tiger, Burning Bright. Kroupa/Orchard, 1994 
179p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08690-9 $15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-06840-4 
$15.95 
R* 
Gr. 5-8
Jesse's grandfather, a weathered old cowboy, swears he saw tiger tracks the last
time he and Jesse went riding in the hills behind their rural California town, but
Jesse, thirteen and anxious, won't let him tell anybody, "'cause they'll tell Mom,
and she'll say you're senile." Both Jesse and his mom have been worried about
MAY 1994 
* 291
Pappy's increasing forgetfulness, but Jesse won't hear of putting Pappy into Golden
Oaks, the local nursing home in their dusty, rundown town, even though Mom,
tough and loving, is becoming more and more definite on the subject. Nowhere
else has Koertge better blended pathos and humor, as Jesse enlists the reluctant
help of his African-American friend Kyle in keeping Pappy's forgetfulness, mental
wanderings, and accidental fires a secret from Mom. Pappy is both hero and
father figure to Jesse, and it's heartbreaking to watch his decline. "Sometimes I
don't know if you're kiddin' me or not," says Jesse, and Pappy winks in reply:
"Sometimes I don't know myself." A supporting cast of eccentrics and lots of fast-
talking repartee don't lighten the drama so much as make it more real, placing
Pappy in a community of all sorts of unlikely types jostled together, facing inevi-
table extinction but not ready to roll over just yet. RS
KRULL, KATHLEEN 
City within a City: How Kids Live in New York's Chinatown;
ISBN 0-525-67437-3. 
The Other Side: How Kids Live in a California Latino
Neighborhood; ISBN 0-525-67438-1. 
Each book: illus. with photographs by
David Hautzig. 
Lodestar, 1994 
4 8p 
$15.99 
(A World of My Own)
R 
Gr. 4-7
In a welcome pair of "at-home" versions of the colorful cultural profiles we've
been seeing about kids in other countries, Latino children in Southern California's
Chula Vista and Chinese-American children in New York City's Chinatown here
talk about how they've learned to mediate two cultures, the one they were born
into and the one to which their parents have brought them. In many ways, these
books are a model for the genre. They're strongly focused on the young subjects,
there's a greater emphasis on daily life than on exotic foods or "festivals," and the
color photos are plentiful, sharp, and unposed. The Other Side shows Mexican-
American kids in school; out with their friends; traveling to Tijuana, seven miles
away, to see relatives (and doctors-medical care is much cheaper there). City
within a City similarly follows its subjects through daily routines of school and
family life. General facts and controversies (illegal immigration, bilingual educa-
tion) are successfully drawn from the anecdotal portraits, although City demon-
strates some ambiguity over the number of Chinese living in New York. Each
book has a map, a reading list, and an index; further volumes in the series are
planned. RS
KUKLIN, SUSAN 
From Head to Toe: How a Doll Is Made; written and illus. with
photographs by Susan Kuklin. 
Hyperion, 1994 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 1-56282-667-0 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 1-56282-666-2 
$15.95 
R* 
Gr. 2-4
Autumn is a rosy-cheeked, nattily dressed doll, presumably available in your local
toy store, and this photoessay (reminiscent of Kathryn Lasky's Dollmaker, BCCB
1/82, although Kuklin deals with mass production and writes for younger readers)
shows how she came to be, following her through her design, molding, eye-setting,
hairdressing, and costuming. Kuklin focuses on the specific craftspeople along the
doll-making line, allowing Wellington the eye-installer ("'All the time I'm making
a doll I look at her and say, "How ya doing?" To me, this is a little baby'") and
Greta the dresser ("Dolls are great because they smile back-they don't talk back")
to comment on the work and the final product. Kuklin is a talented documentar-
ian and she seems inspired by the slightly peculiar situation here: the conversa-
292 
* THE BULLETIN
tional text is lively and entertaining, and the photos, filled with disembodied heads
and naked doll-butts as well as tidy doll dresses, have a surreal charm. Kids who
believe dolls to be small people may find some scenes (such as the eyeball being
thrust into Autumn's bald but lipsticked head) a little alarming, but the let's-see-
how-it-ticks school of youngster will get a kick out of all the mechanical details
and the posterish double-spread filled with eyeballs staring right at the reader. DS
KUSKIN, KARLA 
City Dog; written and illus. by Karla Kuskin. 
Clarion,
1994 
32p
ISBN 0-395-66138-2 
$14.95 
R 
3-5 yrs
The scene opens with a stack of travel gear on the verso of the title spread and a
loooooong red leash stretching, knots and all, across to the lower right-hand cor-
ner of the recto, where a happy tan-colored mutt looks back at his family as if to
say, "LET'S GO." Later, a double spread solid with buildings that dwarf the car
("We took the dog") gives way to a sweep of open green fields ("to the country").
The rest is a verbal and visual romp as poetry and motion take over until both
draw to a close: "And she/ the city dog,/ skipped out/ drinking dark air/ feeling a
little wild// while floating in the middle of the night/ the melon yellow moon
looked down/ at the pretty city dog/ kicking up the countryside,/ and smiled."
Kuskin's soft-edged, sun-dappled watercolors make a spacious setting for the verses,
which appear in one piece for a cohesive reading at the book's end. Words and
pictures that at first glance appear naive accrue a rhythmic warmth that deepens
with each runthrough. It will be clear to even the youngest listener that city dogs-
and children-enjoy an occasional break from crowded urban routines. BH
LEVINE, ABBY 
Ollie Knows Everything; illus. by Lynn Munsinger. 
Whitman,
1994 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8075-6020-0 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-6 yrs
It's refreshing to see an unpretentious family book with wit and pizazz. Levine
provides the wit via Herbert, from whose younger-sib's view of know-it-all brother
Ollie we watch the O'Hares take their vacation to New York. Munsinger provides
the pizazz with her pen-and-watercolor pictures, which feature some humorous
details and clever drafting reminiscent of Wallace Tripp's art. All the characters
are animals, allowing Munsinger to spoof the New Yorkers crammed on a subway
(rabbit Ollie gets "stuck between a large lady and a tall, thin man"-actually an
elephant clothed in pink and a blue-jacketed giraffe), as well as the main charac-
ters; take a gander at the O'Hares marching in their matching white robes to the
hotel pool. There's even a plot: Ollie, who knows everything ("'Will he always be
older than me,' Herbert asked Mother, 'even when I'm seven?'"), gets lost, much
to the distress of his family, even Herbert in spite of himself ("Can I be the oldest
now?"). For kids going on a trip to New York, this is a must; otherwise, just share
it aloud with the local bunnies. BH
LINDBLAD, LISA 
The Serengeti Migration: Africa's Animals on the Move; illus. with
photographs by Sven-OlofLindblad. 
Hyperion, 1994 
40p
Library ed. ISBN 1-56282-669-7 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 1-56282-668-9 
$15.95 
R Gr. 3-6
With an inviting balance of text, captions, and dramatic color photographs, ad-
MAY 1994 
* 293
venture mavens Lisa and Sven-Olof Lindblad chart the long migratory trek of
zebra and wildebeest across the Serengeti, "the force of those nine million hooves
pounding the earth and causing the ground to shudder [making] you feel as though
you were in the middle of an earthquake." Not to mention the predators "that
follow them every step of the way." Lisa's text is brief and clearly sequenced along
the stages of the nine-month migratory cycle; Sven-Olof's photos-some crossing
two-thirds of the double-spread pages-mix close-ups of animals with distance
shots of herds and evocative landscapes. There's a bit of confusion about time,
with the animals seeming to take much more time going north than they do re-
turning south, but the steps of the cycle are clear, and a map further delineates the
route. The layout is spacious, and a glossary provides concise definitions of the
terms used in the text. RS
LOTTRIDGE, CELIA BARKER, comp. and ad. 
Ten Small Tales; illus. by Joanne
Fitzgerald. 
McElderry, 1994 
64p
ISBN 0-689-50568-X 
$15.95 
R 
3-6 yrs
The compiler's experience as a storyteller comes through loud and clear in this
culturally varied collection of ten folktales that are well suited, in their narrative
patterns, to very young listeners. Malaysia, Russia, Indonesia, Puerto Rico, China,
central Africa, and India are the countries of origin for this lore, most of which has
sources cited in the concluding notes. Fitzgerald's pen-and-watercolor illustra-
tions emphasize cozy pastel hues that lend a reassuring note to folkloric action
such as a fox's eating up the chicken and goose, "every bit," in "The Fox and the
Walking Stick" (other versions have the fox eating many more!). The plots, too,
are geared to early concerns: "I want to sleep in the middle," demands the little
boy, thereby saving himself and his father from an attack by a puzzled tiger in
"Four Legs, Four Arms, One Head." Lottridge's sound effects will have kids chant-
ing along with the screeeeee of the door and the boo-hoo of the boy and the ruff-ruff
of the dog and the maaaaaaaaaa of the nanny goat and the naaaaaaaaaaaaaaay 
of
the pony and the squirt-squirt of the oilcan in "The Old-Fashioned Bed." Not to
mention the wa-wa-wa of the boat and the way-way-way of the paddle in "The
Journey of Tiny Mouse"; or the "pum, pum, pum/ Here I come/ In my drum" of
the old woman in "The Magic Drum"; or the creeping turtle, slithering snake,
boinging rabbit, tromping elephant, and "bumpity, bumpity, bumpity, bumpity,
CRASH!" of "The Great Big Enormous Rock." In combined effect, the rhythm of
both the retellings and the art will captivate bedtime or storytime listeners. BH
MCCLELLAND, JULIA 
This Baby; illus. by Ron Brooks. 
Houghton, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-395-66613-9 $13.95 
R 
4-7 yrs
"This baby" is what Andrew's family keeps calling Andrew's sibling-to-be, but
Andrew's not sure he wants to be a sibling at all. "This stupid baby is wrecking
everything around here!" he shouts, and when he's sent to his room he screams "I'll
stay in there forever! I'll never come out! I'll die in there and then you'll be sorry!"
Eventually his family explains the importance of his new role to him, and when
finally he sees his new sister, his superior status allows him to feel "sorry for anyone
who came into the world looking like that." First published in Australia, this is a
cheerful dethronement story with high-spirited writing and cozy family drama.
The plot, the animal characters, and the design make the book a dead ringer for A
Baby Sister for Frances, although Andrew's family looks a little more bearlike-or
294 
* THE BULLETIN
perhaps wombat-like?-and the line-and-wash art has a fineness in the detail that
counterpoints the straightforward story nicely. There's always room for a good
funny story about adjusting to that interloping infant, and this is a well-executed
and entertaining offering. DS
MACGRORY, 
YVONNE 
The Secret of the Ruby Ring; illus. by Terry
Myler. 
Milkweed, 1994 
[190p]
Trade ed. ISBN 0-915943-88-3 
$14.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-915943-92-1 
$6.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
For those who like their time-travel fantasies jumpstarted and smooth-riding, here's
an easy Irish entry in the genre. Lucy is given a ring by her grandmother, the ring
can grant wishes, Lucy accidentally wishes herself into the past and loses the ring,
thereby becoming unable to use the ring's secondwish and get herself back home.
Lucy finds that she's a new housemaid in Langley Castle, a stronghold of the En-
glish landlord class in 1885 Ireland, but while there's many an upstairs-downstairs
glimpse at daily manor life (and some awkwardly worked-in discussion of nation-
alist resurgence), the historical aspect doesn't work for much more than atmo-
sphere, since the past and present don't interact and the plot is entirely centered on
Lucy's continuing attempt to regain the magic ring. For all the difference it would
make to the story, Lucy could have gone back to Elizabethan England or ancient
Rome. It is, though, a simple, straightforward tale, and while seasoned fantasy
fans might want a few more complications, neophytes can just sit back and enjoy
the search. RS
McNEIL, M. E. A., ad. 
The Magic Storysinger: From the Finnish Epic Tale Kalevala;
ad. and illus. by M. E. A. McNeil. 
Stemmer House, 1994 
112p
ISBN 0-88045-128-9 
$16.95 
R Gr. 4-7
"When Viiin6 was born, he was an old man," begins this adaptation of Finland's
national saga, which continues with sly and often contradictory humor through-
out many episodes, from the creation of the world to two suitors' struggle for
Louhi's daughter, who wants no part of either. Although the cast may be confus-
ing to readers with no background-and there's no glossary or list of dramatis
personae to guide them-many of the stories make fine reading aloud: how iron
turned dangerous, for instance, when a wasp sent by Hiisi the evil-doer dropped
poison into the iron-tempering liquid that a bee was supposed to sweeten with
honey. "And so Iron became angry when he came out of the forge. He forgot his
promise and cut his clan, bit his kin and made blood flow everywhere." These
tales will also make intriguing comparison with other mythologies, "Death's Is-
land" with the Greek underworld, for instance, or "In the Belly of the Giant" with
Jonah and the Whale. McNeil has retained an understated wit ("She heard a
moaning from the direction of the sea. 'That is a man. The wind does not com-
plain so much,'" says Louhi) which is not always apparent in her art; the stylized
images and landscapes are more graceful than several realistic scenes featuring awk-
wardly drafted characters such as those at Louhi's feast. Still, aside from de Gerez
and Cooney's picture book Louhi, Witch ofNorth Farm (BCCB 10/86), it's hard
to come by this lively material in a form accessible to children. An afterword gives
a bit of background on the Finnish tradition of oral poetry, and on the collection
and publication of the epic itself. BH
MAY 1994 
* 295
MAHON, K. L. Just One Tear. Lothrop, 1994 
[64 p]
ISBN 0-688-13519-6 
$10.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Quietly lugubrious, this fictional diary charts the emotional recovery of a thirteen-
year-old boy (so indicated by a single pronoun halfway through the text) after his
father's death. The entries are brief, sometimes just half a page, and the circum-
stances of the death, a murder, are revealed gradually. While there's much melo-
drama in the events related, the writing itself is spare and controlled, as in this
scene where the boy is seeing the school counselor: "It was good in there with him.
Just his voice. No background noise. No screaming. No murmuring. Just his
soft, soothing voice. I'll be going there often now, I think." Reflecting the de-
pressed state of the narrator, the tone is unvarying and distanced, flattening such
dramatic events as the suicide of an unnamed friend with an unnamed problem.
Written by a fourteen-year-old Australian girl, this is a hi-lo The Bell ar, and will
grab the interest of problem-novel fans. RS
MARX, TRISH 
Echoes of World War II. 
Lerner, 1994 
96 p 
illus. with photo-
graphs
ISBN 0-8225-4898-4 
$14.96 
R 
Gr. 4-7
While Jewish victims' experiences of Nazi persecution have been amply recounted
in children's literature, this is one of the few attempts at a more inclusive picture of
how children suffered in other arenas of the war as well: a girl in the French
Resistance, a child sent away to escape the bombing of London, the daughter of an
anti-Nazi German, a British boy interned by the Japanese in a Philippine camp,
and a Japanese girl who fights starvation. These, in addition to a family of Ger-
man Jewish children who escaped as refugees to England, show how much the
children of enemies had in common. Based on interviews and laced with quota-
tions, every account begins with some background information on the war and
proceeds with the young person's story. After an initial photograph of each sub-
ject, the other pictures are drawn from general wartime photo files, which can
seem to conflate the subject's experience with those of the often unknown persons
pictured. However, the blend of personal anecdote and factual account brings the
war into immediate focus, and Marx has a clean, selective style that never interferes
with the voices she's echoing. BH
MEDEARIS, ANGELA SHELF 
Our People; illus. by Michael Bryant. 
Atheneum,
1994 
32p
ISBN 0-689-31826-X $14.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
"Daddy says our people built the pyramids," opens this child's-eye mini-history,
and the intention to boost black pride with a recitation of accomplishments by
African-Americans' ancestors is an admirable one. "I wish I could have been there,"
continues the narrator, finishing an elaborate construction of wooden blocks. "I
would have helped them with the plans." This litany of what they did and what
she would like to have done culminates, after her father's steady encouragement,
with a fantasy of herself as an astronaut: "I want to do something great. Just like
the rest of our people." It seems odd to launch the book with ancient Egyptians,
which implies a hotly contested Afrocentrist view of the building of the pyramids,
but that's the pitfall of generalized history. The kings, queens, poets, mathemati-
cians, and artists of Africa, along with the explorers, underground railroad leaders,
296 
* THE BULLETIN
cowboys, politicians, businessmen, teachers, doctors, farmers, and inventors whom
Daddy cites as examples-and whom the narrator then envisions-are the main
point here, and both parents and teachers will find the lesson useful. Bryant's
watercolor illustrations emphasize the inspirational aspects of the text, alternating
dramatic historical scenes with cozy interiors in which the narrator acts out her
fantasies-leading her dolls and stuffed toys to freedom in a little red wagon, for
instance, or riding on her father's back past a poster with "Black Cowboys" crossed
out to read "Black Cowgirls." There's even a touch of humor here and there (the
other poster depicts a stolid cow and reads "Moooo") to animate the purposeful.
BH
MURPHY, CATHERINE FREY 
Songs in the Silence. 
Macmillan, 1994 
[192p]
ISBN 0-02-767730-3 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 5-8
With her little brother Josh in intensive care for a bad burn he received, Hallie is
out in the Portland (Maine) harbor off her island home in a dinghy, brooding over
her self-determined guilt for the accident, when she finds herself capsized and
drowning. A mysterious voice tells her what to do and eventually lifts her to safety
onto a rock. It's a whale, staying in the harbor to nurse her sick baby, and Hallie
soon figures out that when she's on a boat or in the water she can telepathically
communicate with the whale, who calls herself Melae. The fantasy element isn't
very imaginative, relying on new-age whale stereotypes of ecologically conscious
gentle giants, but Hallie's pain at Josh's crisis is quite real, as is her longing for
someone to confide in, her parents being absorbed in Josh and spelling each other
at the hospital on the mainland. The most finely drawn relationship here is be-
tween Hallie and her best friend Melissa, whom Hallie has shut out, first from her
pain, and then from her secret talking with Melae-who has troubles of her own,
as scientists are trying to force her from the harbor in the fear that she will beach
herself. Melae's end of the conversation is a bit Yoda-like ("SMALL ONE, THERE
IS NO ALONE. ALL OF US ARE TOGETHER") but she's a comforting pres-
ence, as are Melissa's family, as is the cozy Maine island setting. RS
NAYLOR, PHYLLIS REYNOLDS 
Alice In-Between. 
Karl/Atheneum, 1994 
144p
ISBN 0-689-31890-1 
$14.95 
R* Gr. 6-8
The indefatigable Alice-who has been in agony, rapture (BCCB 6/89), reluc-
tance (4/91), and April (3/93)-now undertakes that most difficult period of all,
the summer between seventh and eighth grades. It starts in spring, actually, with
her thirteenth birthday, which has not brought the mature beauty for which Alice
had hoped. And without a mother, she doesn't have all that much help from her
family. "Look at my face and tell me what you see," she asks her twenty-year-old
brother. "Cheez Whiz on your chin," replies Lester. But Lester, whose love life is
of great interest to Alice, does take her out for a dress-up birthday evening, where-
upon she accidentally falls prey to her first "pawing" by an older man. And later
on, in a vividly realized scene, the pubescent Pamela gets into a sexually threaten-
ing situation on an overnight train trip that she and Alice and their shy friend
Elizabeth take to Chicago. Like Betsy Byars, Naylor has the ability to treat serious
problems with funny flair. Alice's yearning for her long-dead mother, which over-
comes her unexpectedly in the middle of a classroom recitation of poetry, will have
readers crying right along with Alice. Yet it's all slipped between laugh-aloud lines
that dominate the tone and will lure fans back for more of the same. While the
MAY 1994 
* 297
characters have been confidently established already, Naylor's energetic dialogue
and sprightly episodes keep the series fresh. BH
NIXON, JOAN LOWERY 
Shadowmaker. Delacorte, 1994 
[192p]
ISBN 0-385-32030-2 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Dogs barking in the night alert Kate Gillian and her mother to the shadowy figure
lurking outside their ill-protected beach house. These women have cause to be
afraid. Mom is on leave from her Houston-based job as an investigative reporter;
her reputation as a muckraking journalist has already aroused the hostility of the
townsfolk; a boy in Kate's sophomore English class has made veiled threats against
her. Worst of all, local sheriff cum literati Everett Granger seems unwilling to take
their fears and reports seriously. As he says, only a few misdemeanors have ever
disturbed the peace of Kluney--outsiders either bring or make their own trouble!
At first the sheriffs attitude seems prophetic, as Mom begins investigating possible
toxic waste dumping by the town's major employer. But as in any good mystery,
so obvious a motive for threats and harassment must be a red herring. Nixon
rapidly weaves a deadly web of connection between the shadows outside the beach
house, the murder of a carnival worker, the disappearance of an emotionally un-
stable high school girl, an English teacher's prop closet, and the sudden romantic
interest of the school heart-throb in Kate herself. Tension between daughter and
mother over the waste investigation and their protracted stay in Kluney adds a nice
touch of realism. And the character of the awkward and annoying Lana Jane,
around whose disappearance the action pivots, is beautifully realized in its painful
vulnerability. A solid, read-it-straight-through thriller. EB
PAULSEN, GARY 
The Car. Harcourt, 1994 
[17 6 p]
ISBN 0-15-292878-2 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
"He was alone. His name was Terry Anders. He was fourteen years old, living in
Cleveland, Ohio, and his parents had left him." This is vintage Paulsen, with the
isolated boy undertaking a journey not with a boat (The Voyage ofthe Frog, BCCB
1/89), dogs (The Haymeadow, 5/92), or implement (Hatchet, 12/87), but with a
car he's built from a sophisticated kit with and a middle-aged Shakespeare-quoting
hippy he's picked up who's also a Vietnam-vet fighting machine and student-of-
life ("I am learning" is a favorite phrase). The two of them-three, since the car's
an important character-pick up the veteran's buddy, who owns a super-souped
Harley Davidson and who summarizes the two men's friendship, which verges on
telepathic, with a kind of tough, offhand casualness that the author often uses to
take readers by surprise. "Oh, we go back a long ways. Did a little war, a little
peace together. There was a time when he thought he was in love with me ....
Yeah. He's gay. You didn't know?" The point is that Waylon's homosexuality
isn't important (that's all we ever hear about it), and it's Terry's job to figure out
what is important about the characters or situations that highlight their odyssey,
including a wise old Native American living alone on the prairie, a religious com-
mune that oppresses women, an archetypal poker game that brings in some of the
money they travel on, the brothel of a prostitute who had a heart of gold before she
died of AIDS, the site of Custer's last stand ("The soldiers were the losers. And the
Indians, of course"), and a series of drunken rednecks and/or cowboys who threaten
the voyagers and end up bloody and bruised at the hands of the two martial arts
298 
* THE BULLETIN
experts. A lot of posing goes on here, but macho kids, to whom there are not
enough young adult books directed in this world, will soak it up. BH
PERRAULT, CHARLES 
Puss in Boots; tr. by Naomi Lewis; illus. by Stasys
Eidrigevicius. 
North-South, 1994 
26p
Library ed. ISBN 1-55858-120-0 
$14.88
Trade ed. ISBN 1-55858-099-9 
$14.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Compared to the flamboyant editions of "Puss in Boots" illustrated by Fred
Marcellino (reviewed under Perrault in BCCB 12/90) and Alain Vaes (4/92), Stasys
Eidrigevicius' art is somber indeed. His penchant for portraying victimization
through surrealistic images (see Ramachander's Little Pig in BCCB 11/92 and
Baumann's The Hungry One, BCCB 3/93) highlights the horrific elements of a
story that's basically a sequence of cat and mouse games. Puss trick-traps a rabbit,
a king and his daughter, and an ogre, in that order-and some say his own master
also, as translator Naomi Lewis points out in her introductory note on the story's
variants. Each of the dark full- or two-page paintings here shows one of the char-
acters in a subtle form of entrapment: even Puss is tied by his bootstrings to the
sack that holds what he catches. This visual theme gets heavy, as when the minor
character of a fieldworker, asked whose fields she works, occupies a distracting
double spread that's rendered dramatic by her being tied to the earth with her hair.
As Perrault points out in his moral, wit and charm can overcome brute power;
although the tale may be cruel, it's also playful. The pictures per se are arresting,
and Naomi Lewis' translation and adaptation are skillful, but this particular cat
should lighten up to suit this particular story. BH
PORTE, BARBARA ANN 
Harry's Birthday; illus. by Yossi Abolafia. 
Greenwillow,
1994 
4 8p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-12143-8 
$13.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-12142-X 
$14.00 
R 
Gr. 2-3
When it comes right down to it, forget the clown, forget the party at Charlie
Cheese, all Harry really wants for his birthday is a cowboy hat. He gets it-and
more-but not before hearing stories of assorted birthday dramas from his friend
Dorcas (about the time her birthday party was wiped off the boards by an expan-
sive competitor) and from his Aunt Rose (who recalls the party where Wendy
Wallerstein, a "somewhat overdressed child who loved to eat," choked on a silver
sugar bead). What Harry's party may lack in theatrics, it more than compensates
for with a really good time for all concerned, especially Harry, now the proud
owner of seven cowboy hats. Anticipation and gratification: a perfect birthday
formula. Abolafia's pen-and-watercolor sketches sit nicely within the expansive
white space of the pages, and the lower right-hand corners feature a flip-cartoon of
Harry's hat trick. RS
RASCHKA, CHRIS 
Elizabeth Imagined an Iceberg; written and illus. by Chris
Raschka. 
Jackson/Orchard, 1994 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08667-4 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-06817-X 
$14.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Elizabeth is a young girl who encounters an alarming personage when she's out on
her own. Madam Uff Da (she doesn't look Norwegian, but who knows?) is large,
loud, and eager to make Elizabeth's acquaintance, but "it seemed to Elizabeth that
MAY 1994 
* 299
somehow something was not right." When Madam Uff Da scoops her up and
dances with her, Elizabeth takes inspiration from her strong friend, the imaginary
iceberg, and tells the lady to "get away from me!" and then departs in safety. The
moral of the story ("Elizabeth imagined her own self and remembered how strong
she could be") is laudable if didactic and the overwhelming Madam U. D. inven-
tively unpleasant in a way that adults really can be with kids. The pivotal iceberg
motif never really fits in with the rest of the plot, however, and the sing-y text is
sometimes nicely balanced between poetry and prose but other times more rhyth-
mic than sensible. Raschka's scribbly and vigorous black lines, with charcoal smudg-
ing over the slightly smoky colors of the art, keep the situation both intense and
playful, and there's a classic eat-you-up picture of Madam UffDa's huge and grasp-
ing hands and voracious red mouth reaching towards a buffeted Elizabeth. DS
RATHMANN, PEGGY 
Good Night, Gorilla; written and illus. by Peggy
Rathmann. 
Putnam, 1994 
36 p
ISBN 0-399-22445-9 
$12.95 
R* 
2-5 yrs
Is GoodNight, Moon too sedate for you? Well, here's a livelier bedtime goodnight:
a zookeeper makes his final rounds of the day, bidding his charges good night,
while unbeknownst to him the gorilla, who has taken his keys, lets each animal out
after the keeper has passed. The critters (gorilla, lion, hyena, giraffe, and arma-
dillo, plus a bonus non-zoo mouse) cheerfully follow the zookeeper home to his
house and curl up for the night in his room, undiscovered until his wife says "Good
night, dear" and gets more responses than she had bargained for. Mrs. Zookeeper
then trudges back to the zoo and returns the would-be guests, but the gorilla and
his mouse sidekick sneak back again for a little creature comfort. Except for the
final sleeping "Zzz" of the gorilla, the text is simply the repetition of "Good night,
-" 
to the appropriate animal or person, but the storytelling art unfolds the plot
delightfully. Small entertaining touches abound, such as the ubiquitous but never-
mentioned mouse (an illustrative tip of the hat to Clement Hurd?) diligently drag-
ging around the gorilla's banana; the toy Babar in the elephant's cage and the toy
Ernie in the armadillo's enclosure; and the elephant's comradely grasp on the lion's
tail as they both fall asleep in the zookeeper's bedroom. Rathmann's lines are
rounder here than in her previous work, the animals have a cheerful simplicity of
mien, and the palette relies on a twilit glow of pink and green that lends a gentle
circus flavor to the proceedings. The comedic blackout spreads (just speech bal-
loons and startled eyes against the blackness) add punch to the punchline. Really
young kids, who don't get enough involving stories, will enjoy being in on the
gorilla's secret return (on the cover, he peers out at the audience with his finger on
his lips in a conspiracy of hush) and they'll relish both the dragging out of bedtime
and the final multi-species slumber. The book is even manageably small, so if one
were to fall asleep with it in bed, it wouldn't push any stuffed animals aside. DS
REAVER, CHAP 
Bill. Delacorte, 1994 
[224 p]
ISBN 0-385-31175-3 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 5-8
It sounds like the ingredients for formula fiction: a motherless Kentucky moun-
tain girl, her loyal dog, her alcoholic absentee father, a good-hearted revenue of-
ficer who wants to adopt her, a newfound boyfriend, a hidden treasure that she
digs up in the deep woods, and a heartless villain in hot pursuit. So it's all the more
300 
* THE BULLETIN
extraordinary that Reaver's perfect sense of pace, flawless downhome style, hu-
morously individualized characterizations, and absolute fidelity to the protagonist's
viewpoint make for unique reading. Although the plot is a gripper, the relation-
ships are what dominate Jessica Gates' narrative, especially her relationship with
the dog who has saved her from profound loneliness and who ultimately saves her
life. She's a smart, funny kid, and Bill is a smart, funny dog, but Reaver, who died
in 1993, knew that sadness was an essential part of comedy: Jess must learn to let
go a father doomed by his fatal flaw even while she never lets go the dog who seems
doomed by his great heart. That all this unfolds naturally with a light touch and
witty tone is another tribute to the author. Part of his trick is planting clues that
are subtle enough not to sound like clues till they add up to action. When a bull
whose ferocity will play a crucial role later in the book first appears, the revenue
officer questions Jess about how her father usually gets through the field: "I pointed
to the sledgehammer, leaning against the gatepost. 'He bangs it down on top of
Howard's head and it sort of calms Howard down.'" The writing shows how well
dialect can be managed when it's not artificially strained, and the narrator reveals
herself unselfconsciously. "I wanted to be nice and have manners but I didn't
know what all of them were. Except don't eat with your fingers. Except biscuits."
Her reflection precedes a hilarious scene in which Jess, during a dinner at the
revenue officer's house, must cope not only with unaccustomed manners but also
with Bill, who steals napkins off the guests' laps and brings them, one at a time, for
a tug-of-war game under the table. This is storytelling in the best southern tradi-
tion, and readers (or listeners, if it's shared aloud with kids put off by the amateur-
ish cover art) will eat it up. BH
REYNOLDSON, FIONA 
Women and War. Thomson Learning, 1994 
4 8p 
illus.
with photographs 
(World War II)
ISBN 1-56847-082-7 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Covering subjects such as evacuation, food and supply shortages, job roles, com-
bat, resistance, forced labor, and imprisonment, this survey summarizes women's
global experiences during World War II. Given the vast scope and brief treat-
ment, it's commendable that the author has balanced generalizations with indi-
vidual eyewitness accounts, though the format seems to work against her attempt
at organization. Captioned photos and margined blocks of narrative vie for atten-
tion with the text itself, which jumps around considerably trying to cover so many
bases. Most quotations are cited, though the six-book bibliography is woefully
inadequate. A glossary and chronology will help students, who should see this as
no more than a starting point toward in-depth coverage elsewhere. While the
book does not flinch from the tragic facts women faced during the war, including
rape and concentration camp brutality, occasional passages reveal a devastating
paucity of thought, as when the conclusion seems to imply frivolity on the part of
women not at war. Historical black-and-white photographs and color reproduc-
tions of war posters will draw browsers. BH
ROYBAL, LAURA 
Billy. 
Houghton, 1994 
23 6 p
ISBN 0-395-67649-5 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Billy Melendez is a high-school junior living in rural New Mexico with his father,
working hard to earn money for college, and lately in trouble because of his feud
with another kid at school. When this feud escalates into a fight that requires
police intervention, the cops turn up the information that Billy is in fact a missing
MAY 1994 
* 
301
boy named William Campbell, and within a day Billy is whisked away from his
biological father (who had taken Billy away from his mother's sister and her hus-
band, who had adopted him after his mother's departure) and back to Iowa. Billy
has a difficult time adjusting to the family he left when he was ten, particularly
because he believes that they never cared enough to look for him, but also because
his independent rural ways and western comportment don't suit his Iowa family
or school. The story is sort of a masculine version of Pfeffer's Twice Taken (BCCB
3/94), and the concept of kidnaped-child-unwillingly-returned remains as com-
pelling as ever. Unfortunately, Roybal has a tendency to sacrifice credibility for
drama (Billy's martyrdom in the face of unjust opposition is a little excessive), and
Billy's impetuous actions (he tends to punch people or take off), however well-
rationalized, are foolish enough that his constant resentment seems self-indulgent.
It's still a good read, and the classic teen themes of misunderstanding and desire
for control over one's own life will find a sympathetic audience. DS
RYDELL, KATY 
Wind Says Good Night; illus. by David Jorgensen. 
Houghton,
1994 
32p
ISBN 0-395-60474-5 
$14.95 
R* 
3-6 yrs
Sleepy-soft colored pencil drawings swathe a nocturnal mood around a simple,
cumulative bedtime story about a girl who cannot sleep because Mockingbird is
singing, and Mockingbird can't stop singing until Cricket stops playing, and Cricket
can't stop playing (the fiddle) until Frog stops strumming the bass, "but Frog was
deep in the swing, lost in the beat, with a night full of rhythm in his hands and
feet." And on it goes, as Moth and Moon and Cloud keep each other-and the
little girl-up. Rhymes and rhythms are easy here, in tune with the hazy greens
and charcoal grays of the pictures. It's an appropriately hypnotic sequence: after
each creature makes its apologies, Wind carries Cloud to cover Moon, "so Moth
will stop dancing, so Frog will stop strumming, so Cricket will stop playing, so
Mockingbird will stop singing, so the child can go to sleep," and each in succession
nods off. The sequence is sweet but not sticky, with Jorgensen's drawing giving an
individualized, quietly eccentric flair to each character. The writing is expertly
cadenced, and by the last page you'll find yourself whispering. RS
RYLANT, CYNTHIA 
Something Permanent; illus. with photographs by Walker
Evans. 
Harcourt, 1994 
6 4 p
ISBN 0-15-277090-9 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7 up
Walker Evans' Depression-era photographs, many of which appeared in a moving
collaboration with writer James Agee (Let Us Now Praise Famous Men), tell stark
and sometimes desperate stories of their own. They also stimulate viewers to imagine
the lives of the subjects depicted. The introduction of a third element, Rylant's
poetic reflections accompanying a selection of Evans' work, variably enhances,
limits, or contradicts the photographic images. The most successful of the twenty-
nine poem/picture sets are the simplest: "Birdhouses," for instance, is a three-line
poem ("People said they were/ a good excuse/ for looking up") opposite the strik-
ing composition of a pole with gourds hanging from it against a clouded sky.
These verbal and visual images enrich each other. A longer poem, "Shoes," is also
a good fit for Evans' photo of two worn workboots in the dirt, as is "Mule" for the
patient creature harnessed in the picture beside it. "Gunshop," on the other hand,
is a poem that seems to ignore the complex irony of the photograph: Rylant
concentrates on the figure framed in Todd's Gun Store without addressing the
302 
* THE BULLETIN
strange Chinese dummy that dominates the top half of the picture. Similarly, the
warmth of her poem "Barbers" seems tonally at odds with the bleak interior por-
trayed in Evans' photo. Students who explore the relationships between word and
picture here would do well to have been guided into writing their own responses
first, to clarify the potential variations of interpretation generated by these extraor-
dinary photographs. The silver endpapers, in themselves a clever representation of
the early photographic process, nevertheless seem a posh bit of bookmaking in
contrast to Evans' plain style and the poverty accentuated by many of the scenes he
captured. Those of Rylant's poems that don't depend on the pictures for subject
clarification can stand alone on their tightly compressed narrative quality. BH
SCOTT, MICHAEL 
October Moon. 
Holiday House, 1994 
158p
ISBN 0-8234-1110-9 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-9
Things have gone wrong from the first day Rachel's family came from California
to the stud farm they've purchased in Ireland: arson plagues the barns and stables,
someone's slashed Rachel's waterbed, the library is destroyed, and the servants are
creepy. Rachel's wealthy father suspects a protection racket, the local police in-
spector suspects Rachel, but Rachel learns that the farm is the locus for a werewolf
cult, determined to pass on their curse by attacking the new family on Halloween.
This is straight genre fiction, with a beleaguered but headstrong heroine, an an-
cient curse, a humane monster who attempts to save the family from his more
bloodthirsty relatives, and, in the end, a victory for evil: "Rachel Stone opened her
mouth and howled." Sorry to give everything away, but the book is predictable, if
lots of fun to read. As is usual for formula horror fiction, at least a grudging
suspension of disbelief-on the part of the characters as well as the reader-is
required, but Scott spins the tale with efficient zest. RS
SHELDON, DYAN 
Under the Moon; illus. by Gary Blythe. 
Dial, 1994 
[26p]
ISBN 0-8037-1670-2 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-9 yrs
A rapturous meditation on Indian America, "when every thing on earth had a
voice and a heart, and time was measured by the changings of the moon," is ac-
companied by photorealistic oil paintings that positively dazzle with elaborately lit
special effects. When Jenny finds what might be an old arrowhead in her back-
yard, she begins to imagine the beautiful, pre-lapsarian times of buffalo and braves
on horses, of "the voices of women bent over their fires; the voices were soft and
laughing." When she sleeps outside in her tent that night, "the arrowhead still fast
in her hand," those soft voices come back, and Jennie finds herself dreaming of
Indians who, softly, gently, want their arrowhead back, so she hands it over and
listens to the drum and the flute and the stories about the good old days, "when
the land was as large and as open as the sky." The tone is hushed but affected, and
the pictures are ostentatiously romanticized. It's the kind of book that many adults
will call "beautiful," but it's lacking both the vigor and the poetry that could make
it come alive for children. RS
SHERMAN, JOSEPHA 
Gleaming Bright. Walker, 1994 
[17 6 p]
ISBN 0-8027-8296-5 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
For those who take their fantasy neat, here's an uncomplicated quest-tale with
MAY 1994 
* 
303
some forthright role-reversal, as a young princess goes off in search of the magical
box, "Gleaming Bright," that can save her father's kingdom from drought and
pillage-as well as saving her from an unwanted marriage to a cruel king. The
story is swift, as Finola, all the while sought by her worried father's men, goes
through the forest to the lair of evil Rhegeth, the "Dark Druid," who stole Gleam-
ing Bright from her grandfather. Along the way, she acquires a friend in a talking
stag and an unwanted suitor in Fiain, a sexy outlaw. Despite the feminist theme,
there are some purple patches that seem more appropriate to a bodice-ripper ("she
couldn't keep from thinking about the strange, hot thrill that had shot through
her at the feel of Fiain's lips on hers"); true to form, Finola rejects the outlaw (who
turns out to be an enchanted weasel) in favor of the stag (who turns out to be the
long-missing prince-next-door she was supposed to marry all along). While the
story is formulaic, kids uneasy or unskilled with the elaborate world-building that's
a part of so much high fantasy will have a much easier time here, and Finola is an
impetuous heroine ("'All right, Gleaming Bright,' she cried, 'no more cute tricks'")
who makes an attention-getting focus for the action. RS
SPOONER, J. B. 
The Story of the Little Black Dog; illus. by Terre Lamb
Seeley. 
Arcade, 1994 
[32p]
ISBN 1-55970-239-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Captain Douglas enjoys his solitary life in his Martha's Vineyard house and on his
schooner in the harbor, so he's reluctant to take in the small black puppy his friend
found stranded. The pup tears up the house and pees on the rug, but she turns out
to be a sea-dog, happy on board and skilled at getting around the boat. When a
permanent home is found for the pup, Captain Douglas realizes how attached to
her he's become and keeps her for his own. The story, supposedly based on the
legend that inspired the name of the Black Dog Tavern (although the connection
is never made clear-did Captain Douglas start the restaurant?), is an appealing
doggy tale with some judiciously restrained sentimentality and even a touch of
suspense as the captain races to get Black Dog back from the New Yorkers who
plan to take her home on the ferry. The watercolor art is full of deep tones and
careful detail, but there's more labor than fluidity in the awkwardly drafted faces
and figures. It's hard to go wrong with a puppy, a boat, and a crusty old sea
captain, however, and this is a gentle tale that kids will warm to. DS
STEVENSON, JAMES 
Fun/No Fun; written and illus. by James Stevenson. Green-
willow, 1994 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-11674-4 
$13.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-11673-6 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-8 yrs
In a style and format akin to his Don't You Know There's a War On? (BCCB 11/
92), Stevenson reminisces about the very ordinary activities of his childhood. Each
snappy bullet of a memory is categorically labeled as "fun" or "no fun" (except for
Valentine's Day and a tour of a "ghost room," which defy offhand assessment).
Many judgments will elicit sympathetic agreement from youngsters: "Fun was
when the ice cream truck came," and "Fun was when the teacher was busy." Oth-
ers will require some explanation: "Fun was listening to 'The Shadow' on the
radio." And still others may prove inspirational: "Fun was ... wrapping the mud
304 
* 
THE BULLETIN
in the skunk cabbage leaf. . . and throwing it at your friends." A rough, blurry,
and often quite tiny watercolor sketch accompanies each memory. The style works
well-the small pictures encourage intimate intergenerational sharing, and the
smudgy, energetically brushed images level the differences in age and experience
between narrator and child. Trust the man who knows that toasted almond was
the best flavor! EB
VITEBSKY, PIERS 
The Saami ofLapland. Thomson Learning, 1994 
48p 
illus.
with photographs 
(Threatened Cultures)
ISBN 1-56847-159-9 
$16.95 
R Gr. 3-6
Less sentimental than Jan Reynolds' Far North on the same people (BCCB 4/92)
this survey of the Saami, often known as the Lapp, is comprehensive in coverage,
with equal attention given to old traditions and new directions. While the Saami
have been popularized as a picturesque reindeer-herding people, the author points
out that only ten percent of them actually work as herders while the rest "live in a
way that seems almost exactly the same as their Scandinavian neighbors." That
said, the sharp color photographs of the traditional costumes, Christmassy rein-
deer, Nordic landscape-and snowmobiles-have a crisp allure, accenting the
double-columned text. In addition to the herding Saami, the book pays attention
to Norway's coastal Saami, who traditionally have engaged in fishing and farming,
and explores the ecological and development controversies that affect both groups.
Unlike many current books indulging in nostalgia for "peoples" who follow "the
old ways," this one is honest about the paradoxes of cultural independence and
sociopolitical assimilation. Maps, glossary, directory of organizations, reading list,
and an index are all included. RS
WALLACE, BILL 
Blackwater Swamp. 
Holiday House, 1994 
185p
ISBN 0-8234-1120-6 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 5-7
Ted is intrigued with the so-called "witch" of Blackwater Swamp, an old African
American woman who lives alone on a small island in the swamp near Lakeview,
the Louisiana town where Ted's family has recently moved. Unfortunately, Ted's
friend Jimmy is interested in her, too, throwing out dark hints that the woman is
responsible for the spate of burglaries that is worrying the town. Readers will spot
before Ted does that Jimmy is No Good, but that won't keep them from wanting
to see how it all works out. Is it a boys' book? You bet, though girls, too, will enjoy
the plain prose, easy-to-follow plethora of action, and appealingly ordinary hero.
The anti-racism message is clear but sufficiently plot-driven, and the witch is of
course no witch (although she does manage to put a big scare into the main villain,
Bubba). She's instead a wise woman who cares for the creatures of the swamp
(who in turn protect her from guys like Bubba); this characterization will easily
prove just as compelling to readers as would the more lurid imaginings of the local
bigots. RS
WAUGH, SYLIA 
TheMennyms. 
Greenwillow, 1994 
[21 6 p]
ISBN 0-688-13070-4 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 5-8
See this month's Big Picture, p. 279.
MAY 1994 
* 
305
WILD, MARGARET 
Our Granny; illus. by Julie Vivas. 
Ticknor & Fields,
1994 
32p
ISBN 0-395-67023-3 
$13.95 
R 
3-5 yrs
Alternating between observations of what other grannies are like and what "our
granny" is like, the narrator describes a wide variety of housing situations, bodies,
clothing, work, activities, relationships, kisses, and-most important of all from
the narrator's viewpoint-grandchildren. In case you're wondering, "our granny
lives with us in our house. . .. has a wobbly bottom. ... wears a funny bathing
suit .... marches in demonstrations.... does special exercises to make her bottom
smaller." She also wears her dead husband's old red sweater sometimes and never
forgets goodnight kisses. It's Vivas' exuberant watercolors that give this catalogue
personality. The cheerful diversity of color and shape creates, in turn, a cheerful
diversity of visual characterization, with portraits and postures activating the star-
tling white background of each double spread. Overall, the tone is warm, and if
there's no story or real punchline, "We love our granny" may be enough for
intergenerational readaloud bonding sessions. BH
WILDSMITH, BRIAN 
Jack andthe Meanstalk; written and illus. by Brian and Rebecca
Wildsmith. 
Knopf, 1994 
26p
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-95810-X 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-85810-5 
$15.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
"Now we shall see how fast my vegetables grow," crows Professor Jack after sub-
jecting his garden seeds to a collection of chemicals delivered via a mad-scientist
array of tubes and vats and Bunsen burners. Whoops-up through the laboratory
ceiling, up through the roof of the house, growing and growing into space climbs
a wildly developing plant, no two of its many leaves the same pattern. The gov-
ernment tries to shoot it down, its enormous roots are toppling towns, and worse
yet, a satellite sends back pictures of a big space monster making its way down the
stalk to earth. While what went up does not come down (nibbling of the plant's
roots by woodland creatures causes the plant to float off into space, taking the
monster with it) it does go away, leaving Professor Jack a much wiser gardener. It's
a slender lesson upon which to hang a tale, but the extravagant pictures of the
plant growing feverishly across expansive double-spreads have their attractions-
much more so, ironically, than the peaceful, pretty tomato vines Jack grows in its
stead. RS
"cA
306 
* 
THE BULLETIN
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
Bauer, Caroline Feller. New Handbook for Storytellers, with Stories, Poems, Magic,
andMore; illus. by Lynn Gates Bredeson. Rev. ed. ALA, 1993. 550p. ISBN 0-
8389-0613-3. $44.00 (ALA members $39.60).
Bauer's popular introduction, which incorporates a broad variety of media and
props into the storytelling process, is here updated from the 1977 edition with
new suggestions, examples, and book lists. Beginners and veterans alike can ben-
efit from this practical approach to program planning and promotion, story selec-
tion and preparation, and activities extending various themes or occasions. BH
McGovern, Edythe M. and Helen D. Muller. They're Never Too Youngfor Books:
A Guide to Children's Books for Ages 1 to 8. Rev. ed. Prometheus Books, 1994.
342p. Paper ed. ISBN 0-87975-858-9. $14.95.
Emphasizing titles published for children since 1980, when this book was first
published, McGovern and Muller outline the uses of literature with young chil-
dren and provide briefly annotated lists organized by theme and genre. Criteria
for evaluation and tips for reading aloud are also included. BH
Schmidt, Gary D. Katherine Paterson. Twayne, 1994. 153p. (Twayne's United
States Authors Series-Children's Literature) ISBN 0-8057-3951-3. $22.95.
Taking Paterson's conclusion from a 1977 National Book Award speech-"I want
to be a spy for hope"-as a keystone, Schmidt explores the author's prolific work
in thematically connected, and to some extent chronological, groupings laced with
comments from Paterson herself, especially on the dialogue between her Chris-
tianity and creativity. An introductory biographical sketch and a full bibliography
add to Schmidt's discussion of Paterson's historical fiction, realistic fiction, and
picture books. BH
From the journals:
Campbell, Patty, "The Sand in the Oyster [YA horror fiction]," Horn Book, March/
April, 1994.
Freedman, Russell, "Bring 'Em Back Alive: Writing History and Biography for
Young People," School LibraryJournal March, 1994.
Meyer, Nadean J., "Hypertext and Its Role in Reading," Journal of Youth Services
in Libraries, Winter, 1994.
Phillips, Jerry, "The Mem Sahib, the Worthy, the Rajah and His Minions: Some
Reflections on the Class Politics of The Secret Garden," Lion and the Unicorn,
December, 1993.
Sarland, Charles, "Attack of the Teenage Horrors: Theme and Meaning in Popu-
lar Series Fiction," Signal January, 1994.
MAY 1994 * 307
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
African Americans-fiction:
Koertge; Wallace
African Americans-stories:
Medearis
Alcoholism-fiction: Fraustino;
Reaver
Asian Americans: Krull
Aunts-fiction: Bedard
Babies-stories: Gliori; McClelland
Bats-fiction: Gilson
BEDTIME STORIES: Ackerman;
Gliori; Lottridge; Rathmann;
Rydell; Sheldon; Spooner
Bears-stories: Carson; Gliori
Birthdays-fiction: Porte
Blacks-fiction: Bolden
Boats-stories: Spooner
Brothers and sisters-fiction:
Naylor
Brothers-stories: Levine
California-fiction: Koertge
Canada-fiction: Dubois; Johnston
Canoeing: Cheripko
Cats-stories: Perrault
Child care-fiction: Gorman
Current events: Filipovic;
Gottfried
Death-fiction: Mahon
Dogs-fiction: Hesse; Reaver
Dogs-stories: Kuskin; Spooner
Dollmaking: Kuklin
Dolls-fiction: Waugh
Dreams-stories: Sheldon
Earthquakes-stories: Carson
Emotional problems-fiction:
Mahon
England-fiction: Jones
Ethics and values: Han; Wildsmith
EVERYDAY LIFE STORIES:
Stevenson
Family life-stories: Ackerman
FANTASY: Jones; MacGrory;
Murphy; Sherman; Waugh
Farm life-fiction: Johnston
Farm life-stories: Aylesworth;
Fleming
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Reaver
Finland-folklore: McNeil
FOLKTALES AND
FAIRYTALES: Han; Lottridge;
McNeil; Perrault
Food and eating: Hausherr
Foster children-fiction: Johnston
FUNNY STORIES: Gorman;
Naylor
Geography: Collier
Grandfathers-fiction: Fraustino;
Koertge
Grandmothers-stories: Wild
Growing up-fiction: Naylor
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Dubois
History, American: Dubois
History: Collier; Marx;
Reynoldson
Homosexuals-fiction: Paulsen
Horses-fiction: Hafen; Scott
308 
* THE BULLETIN
Horses-stories: Cole
Iowa-fiction: Roybal
Ireland-fiction: Casey; MacGrory;
Scott
Kidnapping-fiction: Roybal
Korea-folklore: Han
Language arts: Hurwitz
Lapps: Vitebsky
Latinos: Krull
Libraries-fiction: Bedard
Libya: Gottfried
Louisiana-fiction: Wallace
Maine-fiction: Fraustino; Murphy
Martha's Vineyard-stories:
Spooner
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Casey; Nixon
Mothers and sons-fiction: Koertge
MYSTERY STORIES: Nixon;
Wallace
Native Americans-fiction: Dubois
Native Americans-stories: Sheldon
Nature study: Lindblad
New Mexico-fiction: Roybal
New York City-stories: Levine
Nutrition: Hausherr
Photography: Kuklin; Lindblad;
Rylant
POETRY: Aylesworth; Kuskin;
Rylant
Prejudice-fiction: Wallace
Rabbits-stories: Levine
Ranch life-fiction: Hafen
Reading aloud: McNeil; Reaver;
Waugh
Reading, easy: Gilson; Hesse;
Porte
Reading, family: Fleming;
Lottridge; Medearis; Stevenson;
Wild
Reading, reluctant: Mahon;
Nixon; Scott; Wallace
Religious education: Collier
Rivers: Cheripko
Sarajevo: Filipovic
Scandinavia: Vitebsky
SCARY STORIES: Bedard; Scott
SCHOOL STORIES: Gilson
School-fiction: Fine
SCIENCE FICTION: Jones
Serengeti Plain: Lindblad
SHORT STORIES: Bolden
Social studies: Gottfried; Krull;
Vitebsky
Story hour: Aylesworth; Cole;
Fleming; Glassman; Gliori;
Han; Hausherr; Kuskin; Levine;
Lottridge; Perrault; Spooner;
Wildsmith
Strangers-stories: Raschka
Time travel-fiction: MacGrory
Toys: Kuklin
Vacations-stories: Kuskin
Voyages and travel: Cheripko
Voyages and travel-fiction:
Paulsen
War: Filipovic; Marx; Reynoldson
Werewolves-fiction: Scott
Whales-fiction: Murphy
Witches-stories: Glassman
Women's studies: Reynoldson
Work-stories: Ackerman;
Glassman
World War II: Marx; Reynoldson
Zoos-stories: Rathmann
a
Ilustrationsfrom top: AvinAiey© 1993by BrianPinkney; 
RsfPassage©1993byFloydCooper; TheBig 
Slon 
HYPERION BOOKS FOR CHILDREN
©1993by Maryann Kovalski; 
Lkingat Paintings: 
Musicans, 
Street Musicians 1940 by Wiliam H. Johnson 
114 Fifth Avenue, New York,NY 10011
*"[An] inspiring story of a pioneer in American
modem dance.... [The] illustrations conveyAlvin
Ailey's grace as a dancer as well as his strength
and pride in his art."- Horn Book, Starred
ALVIN AILEY
By Andrea Davis Pinkney * Illustrated by Brian Pinkney
Ages 5-10 * Tr.: 1-56282-413-9 $13.95 * Lib.: 1-56282414-7 $13.89
0 "A rich and rewarding assortment.... of
particular interest because of [the stories']
high quality as well as for their diverse
insights."-Kirkus, Pointer
RITES OF PASSAGE
Stories About Growing Up by Black Writers from Around the World
All Ages * Tr.: 1-56282-688-3 $16.95
"Text and art work together to give the old-
fashioned, slice-of-life story a vivid urban set-
ting and very human drama.... perfect for
reading aloud. "-Horn Book
THE BIG STORM
By Rhea Tregebov * Illustrated by Maryann Kovalski
Ages 5-9 * Tr.: 1-56282-461-9 $13.95 * Lib.: 1-56282-462-7 $13.89
" . these two new entries in the Looking at Paintings
series each show nineteen reproductions ... The clear-
ly written texts combine a history of each artist with
information about technique and style." -Horn Book
Looking at Paintings: DOGS * MUSICIANS
By Peggy Roalf
Dogs Lib.: 1-56282-531-3 $14.89 Pb.: 1-56282-530-5 $6.95
Musicians Lib.: 1-56282-533-X $14.89 Pb.: 1-56282-532-1 $6.95
!
1-1994 Newbery Honor Books\
CRAZY LADY!
by Jane Leslie Conly
"Interweaving the lives of an alcoholic
and her developmentally disabled son
with that of protagonist twelve-year-old
Vernon, Conly has created a powerful
drama. The off-beat friendship has
repercussions throughout the neigh-
borhood, changing the lives of all
involved. The reader becomes aware
that Vernon's growing self-esteem and
maturity comes about through his
willingness to help his friends."
-1994 
Chair, Newbery Award Committee
Ages 10 up. $13.00TR (0-06-021357-4)
$12.89LB (0-06-021360-4)
A Laura Geringer Book
DRAGON'S GATE
by Laurence Yep
"A carefully researched and well-written
account of the lives of the Chinese
who built the transcontinental railroad
in the Sierra Mountains. This glimpse
into the complex working community
of California at the time of the U.S.
Civil War is also a story of the relation-
ship between a father and son. Yep's
strong characterization, senstive por-
trayal and non-judgmental voice
heightens our awareness of the love
of one's homeland. Told with human-
ity and compassion, Dragon's Gate
is a tribute to the survival and courage
of these immigrants."
-1994 Chair, Newbery Award Committee
Ages 12 up. $15.00TR (0-06-022971-3)
$14.89LB (0-06-022872-1)
& 
H 
Clli 
Child
'
B 
l
\ 
10 E. 53rd St., New York 10022
ar 
er 
o 
ns 
rens 
oo 
s
A previously unpublished novel by
RICHARD WRIGHT
author of
Black Boy and Native Son
Forced to leave his foster home at fifteen, Johnny "finds
himself in the dark streets of Harlem, his only refuge a
vicious gang of muggers. Written by Wright in the 40s... the
story is swiftly, even excitingly told, and unrelentingly brutal.
Kids will respect the honest portrayal of Johnny's bleak
journey to nowhere."
-Bulletin 
of the Center I
for Children's Books 
RICHARD
"Striking characters, 
W RIGHT
VIVIu 
ullCAoyu., 
ai Ii
enduring themes
introduce a new
generation to
Wright's powerful
voice. "-School
Library Journal
"This archetypal
story of the loss
of identity and the
search for man-
hood... will hold
teens fast."
-ALA 
Booklist
Aoes 12 u.n
$12.95TR
(0-06-023419-9)
$12-89LB 2 
RITE OF
(006-0234202) 
PASSAGE
Afterword by Arnold Rampersad
9t HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York 10022
i
---i·:-·:
The continuation of the Newbery Medal-winning
Sarah, Plain and Tall
Skylark
Patricia MacLachlan
Sarah and Jacob, Caleb and Anna, are now a joyously happy family.
Then a devastating drought descends on the prairie and Sarah, with her
stepchildren, returns to her old home in Maine, to await Jacob's coming
to fetch them. "MacLachlan's prose is as lyrical and graceful as ever.
Packed with meaning and portent, each sentence shows the careful touch
of a master of understatement. Her sure hand in Skylark will undoubtedly
win her many new readers'--School Library Journal. "This stirring novel's
flawlessly crafted dialogue and imagery linger long after the final, hopeful
message is delivered-by Caleb, who looks ahead to the spring, when
flowers will return, the river will run again, and Sarah
will have 'our baby.'"-(starred) Publishers Weekly
Ages 8-10. $12.00TR (0-06-023328-1); $11.89LB (0-06-023333-8)
Also by Patricia MacLachlan
SARAH,
PLAIN AND TALL
SHarperCWinner,
11986 
Newbery Medal
1986 Scott O'Dell Award
Sfor 
Historical Fiction
Ages 8-10.
$12.00TR (0-06-024101-2)
$11.89LB (0-06-024102-0)
$3.95PB (0-06-440205-3)
';L |A 
Charlotte Zolotow Book
4 HrperCollinsChildren'sBooks
a e ..
10 East 53rd Street, New York 10022
I
"A read-aloud treasure....A masterful and
creative meeting of the minds between author
and illustrators." -Horn Book
Stie Sorce erers
BY NANCY WILLARD
ILLUSTRATED BY LEO AND DIANE DILLON
"The glee-filled text speeds along to a pleasing
____L- 
_ ___:____i_ ,_ -i--n-_ 
L_ 
L 
1
con
rea,
ima
cap
qui
fair
"W
tha
Dil
exq
det.
just
tigi
0-5!
All
THE.
ScH
555
NE1
100
I - Starred in School Library Journal
The True Story of Why People Search for It,
Mine It, Trade It, Steal It, Mint It, Hoard It,
Shape It, Wear It, Fight and Kill for It
mfiltoQ f\eltzer
Photographs, drawings, and prints
"From the legends of El Dorado, to gold rushes
all over the world, to the metal's many uses in
art and medicine.., enslavement, cruelty, murder,
and racial hatred seem to follow this brilliant
element. Meltzer demonstrates his winning
approach to nonfiction with this straightforward,
highly interesting overview. Gold definitely
brings new luster to the subject."-SLJ
"Meltzer weaves together history, science, biogra-
phy, economics, and art [in this] model for the
whole language curriculum."-ALA Booklist
Ages 8-12. $15.00TR (0-06-022983-7); $14.89LB (0-06-022984-5)
Among Milton Meltzer's HarperCollins works
THE AMAZING POTATO
A Story in Which the Incas, Conquistadors, Marie Antoinette,
Thomas Jefferson, Wars, Famines, Immigrants, and
French Fries All Play a Part
1993 ALA Notable Children's Books
1992 Books for Youth Editors' Choices (Booklist)
1992 Notable Children's Trade Books
in Social Studies (NCSS/CBC)
Ages 8-12. $15.00TR (0-06-020806-6); $14.89LB (0-06-020807-4)
I HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York 10022
ALA Notable Book
Horn Book Fanfare
US Winner, International Ezra Jack Keats-UNICEF Award
Ages 3 - 6 TR $14.95 0-531-05469-1 RLB $14.99 0-531-08619-4
06 RC 
A RD BO 0m 
K~S 
S
Zora Neale Hurston's best-loved novel is now available in a deluxe
clothbound gift edition designed by Barry Moser, with nine original drawings
by award-winning illustrator Jerry Pinkney, a foreword by Ruby Dee, and an
introduction by Sherley Anne Williams. $24.95
At bookstores or
order toll free
800/545-4703
(MD residents,
301/338-6927)
oII. 
.. 
fre
m#awid.c, 
0h JIUe 
I'aemu
Wde are proud to annonce the publication
of three best-selling Mulberry picture
books in Spanih-language editions. A
team of exet fromn a variety of Spanish-
speakn culturres worked together to
create uni~versal, accuate, and literar
traslations. Look for thre more
Mulberry Books in Spanish nex season.
p-Gt,,O
EL~t S'N~*
uWbWnggtaih
(Liar's song)
George Shannon
Illstate b Jse Aauego and Arin Dewey
Translated by Alda Marcuse
A rollicking foltae fro 
the American Southwest.
PA 546.95/0-688-13201-4; LB S14.93/0-88131 
5.X
Ages 4 up. 32 pp. May
5TEvI~ KELLOCGG
UNY 
SILLN PABA Ml MAM
(A Chai for My Mother)
Vera 
B Wllam
Trnlated 
by Ad Manruse
An awr winning and beanwamng 
lamily stoty.
PA 54.95/0-688-13200.6; LBi 514.93/0-688-13616-8
Ages 4 up. 32 pp. May
PAU BUNYAN
Steven. Kelg
Translated by Aida. Marcuse
introduce America's funniest, fastest,
and favorite tail-tale hero.
PA 55.95/0-88-13202-2
LB 515.93/0-688-13614-1
Ages 3 up. 48 pp. May
vV,
~MULBERR 
BOOKS enEpal
V'rnlmpn 
i5m 
M,~ 
&(0 
nb 
li 
HArooM 
od ,, 
A 
,.,nn , 
cv Y~ok NY 1(5)1
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.S.A.
REmrUN POSTAGE GUARANTEED
ISBN: 1-56458-203-5
LC: 92-54320
Price $16.95
* It's the opportunity
to see the paintings
so different in technique
side by side that is the
book's crowning
feature.
-BOOKIIST
SECOND CLASS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
DORLING IlKINDERSLEY
95 MADISON AVENUE 
* NEW YORK, 
NY * 10016
