T h e
B u l l e t i n
of the Center for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
School of Information Sciences
by Johns Hopkins University Press
October 2021
Vol. 75   No. 2
75 
YEARS
o
f
 
d
e
d
i
c
a
t
i
o
n
 
t
o
 
y
o
u
t
h
 
l
i
t
e
r
a
t
u
r
e
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
TO ORDER
CALL: 800.548.1784 or 410.516.6987   FAX: 410.516.3866
E-mail: jrnlcirc@jh.edu; 
or visit us online at
Deborah Stevenson, Editor  
University of illinois at Urbana-Champaign  
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books 
provides concise summaries and critical 
evaluations of current children’s books. 
This invaluable resource assists readers 
with questions regarding the ever-evolving 
children’s literature field. Reviews give an 
in-depth look at a selected book’s content, 
reading level, strengths and weaknesses, and 
quality of the format, as well as suggestions for 
curricular use. 
Published monthly except August.  
Volume 74 (2021).  
P-ISSN: 0008-9036; E-ISSN: 1558-6766.
Bulletin of the Center for 
Children’s Books
Annual Individual 
Subscriptions 
$55.00 (print);  
$65.00 (online)
Annual Institutional 
Subscriptions 
$125.00 (print);  
$140.00 (online);  
$175.00 (print & online)
FOUNTAIN  
OF YOUTH
A Look Inside
T h e B u l l e t i n
of the Center for Children’s Books 
October 2021
Vol. 75 No. 2
45  The Big Picture
 
 Himawari House written and illus. by Harmony Becker
46  New Books for Children and Young People
 
 Reviewed titles include
49 •  The Witch Owl Parliament written by David Bowles; illus. by Raúl the 
Third; color by Stacey Robinson; lettering by Damian Duffy
55 •  With Great Power: The Marvelous Stan Lee: An Unauthorized Biography 
written by Annie Hunter Eriksen; illus. by Lee Gatlin
60 •  Living Ghosts and Mischievous Monsters: Chilling American Indian Sto-
ries written by Dan SaSuWeh Jones; illus. by Weshoyot Alvitre
63 •  Run: Book One written by John Lewis and Andrew Aydin; illus. by L. Fury 
and Nate Powell
75 • Inside Cat written and illus. by Brendan Wenzel
78  Subject and Use Index
Explanation of code symbols used with reviews
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
 Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or 
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
© 2021 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois School of Information Sciences by Johns Hopkins University Press, 
2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, MD 21218-4363, USA. Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, 
MD 21233-9651, and at additional mailing ofﬁces. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The 
Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363.
Reviewing Staff
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Editor (KQG) 
Quinita Balderson, Reviewer (QB) 
Natalie Berglind, Reviewer (NB) 
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB) 
Fiona Hartley-Kroeger, Reviewer (FHK) 
Alaine Martaus, Reviewer (AM) 
Adam McConville, Reviewer (AMM) 
Kiri Palm, Reviewer (KP) 
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS) 
Deborah Stevenson, Reviewer (DS)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
Office Staff
Anna Wiegand, Editorial Assistant
Subscription rates
For up-to-date pricing information, please visit the journal webpage at: http://www.press.jhu.edu/
journals/subscribe. Subscription checks should be made payable to Johns Hopkins University Press. 
All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new address.
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 
2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 410-
516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/journals/
advertising. Or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.ischool.illinois.edu
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Harmony Becker from Himawari House © 2021, used by permission of 
Macmillan.
October 2021 • 45
The Big Picture
Himawari House
Written and illustrated by Harmony Becker
Becker’s webcomic, Himawari Share, comes to print in an immersive graphic novel 
that explores cross-cultural identity and the power of language to separate and to 
unite. Nao, born in Japan but raised from early childhood in the United States, 
spends her gap year in Japan trying to reclaim the culture she pushed behind her 
in order to fit in with her American friends. While attending Haseda Japanese Lan-
guage Institute, she lives in a shared residence with other Asian born housemates, 
who are similarly using Himawari House as home base to put distance between 
themselves and personal and family pressures. Having felt perpetually marginalized 
in America, Nao feels equally marginalized in Japan, struggling now with a language 
she once abandoned and questioning whether she even has a right to fully claim 
her Japanese heritage.
Readers are tossed into the deep end of the pool, immediately drawn into 
Nao’s exhausting navigation of transactional dialogues with strangers, inscrutable 
signage, and the heavily accented English of her housemates and Haseda teachers—
armed only with vague memory of her mother’s speech and translation apps on her 
phone. Becker is nothing short of brilliant in capturing aural confusion in a print 
medium. Nao’s search for her new residence is a gem of cringe-worth comedy, as she 
struggles to ask a bystander where Himawari House is located while standing directly 
in front of it and its clear signage—in Japanese characters. Things get worse. Each 
housemate Nao meets presents a fresh linguistic challenge: Tina, from Singapore, 
is adept at rapid fire Singlish; Hyejung, from Korea, falters in Japanese; Shinichi 
and brother Masaki, from Japan, respectively speak very fast or not at all. Speech 
bubbles track the speakers’ language choices and idiosyncrasies in Asian language 
characters, Asian transliteration, and English speech; blurred lines (and there are 
many) are interjected when stretches of address go by too quickly to process, build-
ing a window into the listening and the speaking experience of communication.
Manga mashes with Western comics convention, and chapter headings 
reference Japanese phrases, lifestyle trends, festivals, and slang sans translation. This 
may sound like heaven to YA Japanophiles with a storehouse of contextual back-
ground, but they might want to put smugness on hold. Nao and her non-Japanese 
housemates have some sensitive but pointed debate over how far rights extend for 
Americans—or indeed, for themselves—to self-swaddle in a culture not entirely 
their own. Backstories for the Himawari housemates are sensitively developed to 
parallel Nao’s need to discover who she is and what she wants, but the particulars of 
the circumstances that drove them to and keep them in Japan, extend the discussion 
46 • The Bulletin
New Books for Children and Young People
Bacon, Lee Imaginary; illus. by Katy Wu. Amulet/Abrams, 2021 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781419746642 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781683359692 $15.54
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
As Zach’s imaginary friend, Shovel knows that he should have faded away a long 
time ago like the other kids’ pretend pals, but Zach’s dad died when Zach was six, 
leaving him more comfortable with Shovel in a fantasy world than in the painful 
real one. Now, however, Zach is entering middle school and Shovel is going to make 
sure sixth grade is awesome. Unfortunately, a poorly timed conversation between 
Zach and Shovel is overheard by a group of bullies, all but ensuring a miserable 
year. Zach finds a surprise friend in the new girl, though, and after the teasing 
escalates, Zach and Anni hatch a plan to give the bullies their comeuppance. The 
plan works and even gains Zach another pal—but as Zach gets more support in the 
real world, Shovel is slowly fading away. This is a delicate, accessible story about a 
grief so sharp that it bleeds joy from reality; neither the adults nor kids recognize 
Zach’s pain for what it is, and Shovel is the only one who can truly see how his 
sadness drags him down. Shovel’s second-person narration has a subtle complexity 
depending on readerly interpretation of him as either a coping mechanism or a 
true element of fantasy, but in the end he’s an effective model for youngsters with 
friends in pain.  KQG
Barnett, Mac What Is Love?; illus. by Carson Ellis. Chronicle, 2021 [44p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781452176406 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781452176642 $11.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad 5-7 yrs
“What is love?” asks our young narrator of his grandmother, who sends him out 
into the world to seek the answer. It’s a puzzling process: the fisherman says love is 
of embracing a new homeland beyond a Western/Eastern binary. There’s no easy 
resolution to Nao’s search for identity but she returns to America with a clearer 
understanding of her mother’s heartache at losing much of her own culture, and 
of her own determination to move freely in both spheres. (See p. 47 for publica-
tion information.)
Betty Bush, Reviewer
October 2021 • 47
a fish, the actor says love is applause, the cat says love is the night, the soldier says 
love is a blade, and so on. After years go by, the now grown man returns home with 
joy and greets his grandmother with an embrace, clearly the answer to his question. 
There are some pleasingly humorous touches along the way (to the fisherman, the 
narrator says, “But I don’t like fish . . . They’re slimy and taste bad. And they have 
creepy eyes”), but ultimately the parable is tough to parse, since the examples the 
boy encounters along the way don’t really map onto his ultimate discovery. Ellis’ 
gouache art is familiarly spare yet gemütlich, picking up the text’s folkloric mood 
as the boy travels. Kids may need a little prompting to understand the conclusion, 
but it could lead to some interesting discussions about how we all define love.  DS
Becker, HarMony Himawari House; written and illus. by Harmony Beck-
er. First Second, 2021 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781250235565 $24.99
Paper ed. ISBN 9781250235572 $17.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R* Gr. 9-12
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 45, for review.
Biedrzycki, david Invasion of the Unicorns; written and illus. by David 
Biedrzycki. Charlesbridge, 2021 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781623542726 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781632898913 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 4-6 yrs
Tasked with determining if Earth is ripe for invasion by the unicorn army, Secret 
Agent Bubble07, looking exactly like a toy stuffed unicorn, infiltrates an arcade 
claw machine and is soon brought home by a clueless Earthling child. Humans 
are a confusing bunch, Bubble07 reports to the unicorns’ Fearless Leader, letting 
dirty furry animals into their home, riding on a yellow transport with other noisy 
Earthlings, and sitting around a fire eating “something called Sa-morrs.” By day 
32, the agent is ready to call in a rescue—but wait: then there’s snow, and cake, and 
bedtime stories, and hugs, and maybe Earth isn’t so bad after all. This is a playful 
little tale with a touch of ironic humor, and Bubble07’s dutiful reporting makes a 
amusing contrast to the visual details. The illustrations are compellingly structured, 
as the book begins in mostly black and white, echoing a mixture of Brian Selznick’s 
graceful shading with Dan Santat’s goofy cartooning, and then carefully moves into 
a world of color with unicorn pastels and cheerful pops of brightness. While some 
human figures are stiff and awkward, the stubby-legged, slightly poofy unicorn 
and their brown-skinned Earthling child make an adorable pair. This is clever in 
its sweetness, and sharp-eyed viewers will enjoy catching the occasionally appear-
ing llama who mischievously eyes the audience throughout the book, perhaps on 
a mission of reconnaissance as well.  KQG
BisHara, cristin Vial of Tears. Holiday House, 2021 [320p] illus. with 
photographs
Trade ed. ISBN 9780823446414 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780823450343 $11.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad Gr. 9-12
When seventeen-year-old Sam touches a coin from her great grandfather in Leba-
non, she and her younger sister Rima are thrust into the Phoenician underworld. 
48 • The Bulletin
The sisters get separated, and Sam must rely on the shady god Eshmun, who wants 
his obol (burial coin) back so he can find his family. Sam gets manipulated by an 
elephant woman into stealing a vial of Eshmun’s healing tears for his evil uncle 
Môt, and is swept up in a prophecy that dictates a god will marry a beautiful mortal 
woman and give birth to the savior of the ru.hā (spirits of the dead). The plot is 
chaotic and unwieldy, and every problem that arises for Sam is easily fixed, often 
without total logic (the bad guys take each other out at one point). Most of the 
male characters comment excessively on Sam’s beauty, and worse, threaten to rav-
ish her—in a particularly dark moment, a coliseum of people root for Môt to rape 
Sam publicly. Still, the setting with the Phoenician pantheon is complex and will 
likely be a draw for readers interested in mythology, while the fantasy element is 
effectively balanced with the realism of the sisters’ difficult life circumstances (mom’s 
an addict, dad’s MIA, and their decrepit trailer is overdue on rent). An author’s note 
includes inspirations, recipes, and pictures of the author’s own Lebanese family.  NB
BLackaLL, sopHie Negative Cat; written and illus. by Sophie Blackall. Paulsen/
Penguin, 2021 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780399257193 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780698172982 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
“On day 427 of asking for a cat . . . my parents finally give in,” says our little boy 
narrator, but he has to meet several conditions, including reading twenty minutes 
a day (“Ugh! I’m not so great at reading”). His mother takes him to the shelter and 
he picks out a cat he names Max, but the kitty is unimpressed by his new home 
and opts to puke up hairballs, eat flowers, and sit on laptops. The boy’s mom 
calls the shelter to complain about Max’s less-than-sunny disposition, but when 
the woman from the shelter comes, the boy cleans up his room and tries to read, 
which draws Max quietly to his arm in a perfect picture of well-behaved cat-hood. 
This readaloud is an excellent depiction of the drawbacks of cat ownership, from 
cleaning up unwanted messes to only receiving affection when it’s desired by the 
feline party, but its message that cats are still worth keeping around (and make 
particularly good reading buddies) is both sweet and helpful to would-be cat own-
ers with certain expectations. The digital art has a vintage look, with cartoonish 
characters, pronounced shading, and faded hues printed on old wallpaper. A note 
at the end details Blackall’s inspiration from her own negative cat and an animal 
rescue that encouraged kids’ reading and cats’ wellbeing by having kids read aloud 
to the shelter cats.  NB
BLackwood, Lauren Within These Wicked Walls. Wednesday/St. Martin’s, 
2021 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781250787101 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781250787118 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Nineteen-year-old Andromeda has trained from childhood to be a debtera, fashion-
ing magical protections against the Evil Eye. Unfortunately, she has recently been cast 
out by her mentor and, without the license needed to secure a real position, she must 
take any job. Desperation brings her to the castle home of the enigmatic Magnus 
Rochester, where she’s tasked with cleansing it of its many curses. Determination 
October 2021 • 49
keeps her there, despite disembodied hands, rooms flooded with blood, violent 
book-throwing spirits, and mysteriously vanishing staff, not to mention Rochester’s 
snobby, disapproving guests. As she crafts shielding silver amulets, though, Andi 
spends time with Magnus and finds his erratic behavior hides a wounded soul and 
possible soulmate. More an homage to Bronte’s Jane Eyre than a clear retelling, 
Blackwood’s eerie, evocative debut fully embraces its gothic lineage and brings a 
welcome contemporary feel. The unique world building blends a medieval church 
mysticism and a cleverly crafted magic system, giving the magic-wielding Black 
heroine plenty of heart-stopping horrors to overcome. The setting—an alt-world, 
Ethiopian-inspired desert nation, a bitterly cold, European-style castle, and no 
clear time period—frees Andromeda to be the witty yet damaged heroine without 
slipping into the trope of ahistorical feminist. Magnus, initially uninspiring as the 
spoiled Byronic brooder, ultimately wins hearts as the imperiled hero desperate for 
love and rescue. The book is sure to lure readers in with the promise of hair-raising 
chills and passionate romance.  AM
BowLes, david The Witch Owl Parliament; by David Bowles; illus. by Raúl the 
Third; color by Stacey Robinson; lettering by Damian Duffy. Tu/Lee & Low, 
2021 [112p] (Clockwork Curandera)
Paper ed. ISBN 9781620145920 $17.95
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 8-10
When a book markets itself as a “steampunk reimagining of Frankenstein set in 
colonial Mexico,” you know you are in for an adventure. This visually stunning 
graphic novel delivers on all fronts, exploring the Frankenstein concept through 
an entirely new perspective. Cristina is an apprentice curandera (healer), and her 
inexperience is her downfall when she is killed by witch owls. Her brother is unable 
to let her go, and he’s willing to use any alchemy and science to rebuild her, even it 
means bending the ethical and religious rules of this fictional nineteenth-century 
version of Mexico. Meanwhile, Cristina is determined to help her people in the 
Republic of Santander, as she can see that the very core of their freedom—and 
maybe their lives—is at risk. Raúl the Third’s impeccable illustrations explore the 
darker themes with harsh lines and a stern color palette: the intricacies enrich the 
text and highlight key details. The creative use of panels keeps things moving, as 
does the action-packed text, and if the fast pace doesn’t quite allow for full character 
development or world building, the expected two additional graphic novels might 
fill those gaps. The undercurrent of loss, love, and the refusal to let someone go 
if you have a way to save them will certainly raise questions in readers about how 
they might respond, and there is plenty left unanswered here to lure them back 
for follow-ups. An author’s note and some original sketch work offer background 
on the writing and collaboration process.  AS
cHoksHi, rosHani 
The Bronzed Beasts. 
Wednesday/St. Martin’s, 
2021 [400p] (The Gilded Wolves)
Trade ed. ISBN 9781250144607 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781250144621 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
While it appeared that Séverin threw his lot in with the Fallen House and sold out 
his crew at the end of The Silvered Serpents (BCCB 3/20), Enrique, Laila, Hypnos 
and Zofia realize that he secretly left them plans to meet up in Venice, crack a few 
50 • The Bulletin
codes, find the map to an ancient temple, and eventually play a lyre that would 
turn them all into gods. Séverin may want divinity but Laila just wants to live; 
half-Forged, she’s doomed to die in ten days and her friends will do anything to save 
her, including hunt for clues in an ancient cemetery, face down a sea of animated 
skeletons, detonate a variety of explosive devices, and reluctantly deal with Séverin’s 
general smugness. The breathless action that marked the previous title is amped up 
even more here, with the stakes growing higher as Laila’s death quickly approaches, 
and the urgency is made particularly palpable by her increasing inability to feel pain 
and the deterioration of her other senses. Focalization shifts among the friends, 
so readers see both action sequences and emotional moments through multiple 
lenses. Like the other books in the trilogy, however, the centerpiece is always Séverin 
and Laila’s romance, and Séverin’s character arc is refreshing as an alpha romantic 
lead who moves from a selfish need to be the god that would restore Laila’s life to 
a realization that her fate is not his and that she may be able to save herself. The 
ending doesn’t quite meet the book’s internal logic, but it’s terrifically bittersweet 
and absolutely satisfying for fans of tragic melodrama and epic romance.  KQG
capin, HannaH I Am Margaret Moore. Wednesday/St. Martin’s, 2021 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781250239570 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781250239587 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 8-12
For Margaret Moore, weeks at the Marshall Summer Naval School have always 
meant freedom and friendship, boating and swimming, semaphores and regimen-
tal drills, growing stronger and closer with the girls of Deck Five: Rose, Flor, and 
Nisreen. That changed last summer when Margaret’s secret romance with an un-
named boy strained their bond, broke her heart, and ended in tragedy and scandal. 
Now all the girls are back for their final summer, still plagued by rumors of death, 
dishonor, and blame. As strange events begin to occur, it becomes increasingly clear 
that Margaret never really returned; she’s now just the ghost of a girl haunting the 
camp and the people she loves, leaving readers with the twin mysteries of what 
happened to her and what will happen next. Capin (Foul is Fair, BCCB 3/20) 
returns with another gripping story of the ferocious power of female friendship in 
the face of boys’ callousness and systemic inequalities. Margaret’s narrative voice, in 
lyrical first-person prose, plays with verb tense, which alongside references to period 
details such as saddle shoes and characters at different life stages, only heightens the 
intrigue. The story, meanwhile, deftly weaves clues without letting the slow reveal 
linger too long, though readers will likely guess Margaret’s demise long before she 
does. Characters with diverse cultural backgrounds and sexual identities round 
out the girl-power cast. A delicious, poetic thriller, it’s perfect for those who love a 
novel that hints at secrets instead of telling them.  AM
carson, rae Any Sign of Life. Greenwillow, 2021 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780062691934 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780062691958 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 8-10
When high school senior Paige wakes up from a six-day coma, her world has changed 
drastically: her parents and brother lay dead in their beds from the same flu that 
felled her, and the outside is worse, with decomposing bodies in cars and an eerie 
silence settled over her town. Paige is a practical girl, though, and she analyzes 
October 2021 • 51
her situation, gathers supplies, and sets out to find if anyone anywhere is alive. 
Fortunately, she finds football star Trey and emo girl Tanq, but both are clueless as 
to what’s going on; a radio broadcast directs them to a safehouse, but first they’ll 
encounter a danger more serious and deadly than the presumed virus. Carson steeps 
her writing in the physicality of bodies and societies breaking down: the rotten 
stench of thousands of dead bodies overtaking the air; sewer-gas explosions setting 
streets on fire; moldy fruit decaying on shelves. Set just a few years in the future, 
this mines the very real fears seeded by COVID for tension, working especially 
well when Paige references that pandemic as an analog to her current situation and 
compares the anxiety and loneliness she felt as a kid during the shutdown to the 
isolation she feels now. It’s almost a relief, then, when the plot takes a marked turn 
into science fiction and focuses on the adrenaline rush of surviving a direct violent 
attack and not an insidious pathogen. While the immediate threat is eventually 
vanquished, there’s no guarantee of long-term safety, a disquieting situation readers 
may recognize.  KQG
carter, caeLa Fifty-Four Things Wrong with Gwendolyn Rogers. Quill Tree/
HarperCollins, 2021 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780062996633 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780062996657 $8.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 4-7
Reading a psychological assessment of herself clarified for Gwendolyn, now eleven, 
exactly how much is wrong with her, so she wrote a list to remind herself of what 
to avoid. It doesn’t seem to help, as she still loses her pencils every day and has 
full-on meltdowns at school; only her half-brother, Tyler, who has his own struggles 
with ADHD, seems to understand. Gwendolyn longs for a chance to go back to 
the stable where she forged a bond with the horse she rode, but it seems like she 
can never master her behavior long enough to earn that reward. Finally, she gets a 
chance for a different approach with a new doctor, and she begins to see that her 
list is a punishment, not a description. Gwendolyn’s narration vividly conveys the 
experience of a smart kid who desperately wants to meet expectations but just can’t 
manage it, and her self-recriminations, clearly internalized from the condemna-
tions of frustrated adults, are heartbreaking; her desire to have an official diagnosis 
because it means she’s not simply bad is sadly credible. While the book gets a little 
didactic at times, the information about neurodiversity and about the ways gender  
can affect responses to struggling kids (“They never call boys’ moms,” a classmate 
of Gwendolyn shrewdly notes) is valid and important. It’s been a few years since 
Gantos’ Joey Pigza Swallowed the Key (BCCB 11/98), so it’s good to see a fresh new 
take on a kid with processing issues and a much-deserved reason for hope. A note 
explains the author’s own challenges with neurodiversity.  DS
cHase, pauLa Keeping It Real. Greenwillow, 2021 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780062965691 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780062965714 $8.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
Marigold Johnson fears she’s drifting apart from her best friend, Justice, one of the 
few other Black kids in her toney private school, so when Justice lands a fashion 
internship the summer after their eighth grade, she decides to join him. The intern-
52 • The Bulletin
ship is at the internationally famous hip-hop media/fashion company owned by 
her parents, so she has no problem getting a spot, a fact that frustrates Justice. As 
summer progresses, she grows competitive with another intern Kara, who’s clearly 
no fan of Marigold and who’s becoming close with Justice, but then she discovers 
the truth about Kara and an ugly Johnson family secret. Chase turns to a very 
different setting than in her Pirates Cove books (So Done, BCCB 7/18, etc.), and 
Marigold credibly describes her dilemma of being too Black at school but not Black 
enough when relating to other city kids without her multi-millionaire privileges. 
Marigold’s blindness to her privilege and her effect on the other kids is painfully 
believable, and the revelation of the family secret is a real twist that brings the focus 
even tighter on privilege disparity while also pointing to some shocking deficits 
in Marigold’s parents. As a result, what could be a merely soap-operatic develop-
ment on top of some enticing fashion scenes circles back with thematic relevance. 
Marigold’s emotional, often un-self-aware narration makes her story especially ripe 
for discussion about perspectives and relationship dynamics.  DS
cLarke, Maxine BeneBa When We Say Black Lives Matter; written and illus. by 
Maxine Beneba Clarke. Candlewick, 2021 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781536222388 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781536225648 $16.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R* 4-9 yrs
In this poignant, timely picture book, a Black couple addresses their young child as 
he grows up, explaining what is meant at both a personal and political level by the 
phrase Black Lives Matter. The rhythmic text balances the hope of social change 
with the pain of past and present trauma, creating a joyful celebration of Black art 
and culture while fully acknowledging the violence and tragedy that marks the very 
real experiences of many Black people in the U.S.: “Darling, when we sing that 
Black Lives Matter,/ and we’re dancing through the streets,/ we’re saying: fear will 
not destroy our joy,/ defiance in our feet.” Clarke, author of The Patchwork Bike 
(BCCB 10/18), strikes a haunting note in her illustrations as scenes with dynamic 
movement of singing and dancing are suddenly paused in immobility as a figure 
kneels next to police tape and marchers stand off with officers in riot gear. The 
stylized art, thick with pastels and backgrounded by dark paper, keeps the figures 
faceless but powerfully posed; the silhouette of the child and parent shedding tears 
against cloudy smoke packs a visceral punch. Active words—“scream,” “sob,” “bel-
low,” “whisper”—are emphasized with different font, color, and even layout, calling 
specific attention to the energy, willingly or reluctantly given, that is required to 
protest. It’s a compassionate, exultant, and honest look at a social movement and 
its motivations and a guaranteed conversation starter with youngsters.  KQG
coHoe, saMantHa Bright Ruined Things. Wednesday/St. Martin’s, 2021 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781250768841 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781250768858 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Eighteen-year-old Mae has lived all her life on an island dominated by the wealthy, 
powerful Prosper family, whose control of the island’s spirits gives them access to 
aether, a magical, profitable energy source. Mae has been secretly in love with the 
October 2021 • 53
black sheep of the family, Miles, for years, but before she knows it, she’s engaged 
to the embittered heir, Ivo. When an aether spirit turns up dead right before the 
Prospers’ annual gala, Mae has to choose between conflicting impulses about whom 
to trust and how far her ambitions reach. Sheltered and restless, intensely curious 
about the outside world in the Jazz Age, Mae is part Miranda, part Caliban in this 
reworking of Shakespeare’s The Tempest. She isn’t always likable as her desires war 
with her habitual subservience and growing awareness of the Prospers’ abuses, but 
she shouldn’t have to be. Mae isn’t a plucky heroine but a hungry young woman 
realizing that, exploited though she is, she benefits from a system of colonial oppres-
sion. Cohoe (A Golden Fury, BCCB 10/20) ably combines a postcolonial reading 
of The Tempest with the literary tradition of edgy, electric aristocrats and outsiders 
in London’s 1920s social scene (à la Nancy Mitford and Evelyn Waugh). This will 
appeal to a broad audience, from fans of Shakespeare to Lockhart’s We Were Liars 
(BCCB 6/14) to Cooper’s Montmaray Diaries series.  FHK
coLes, MicHeLLe Black Was the Ink; illus. by Justin Johnson. Tu/Lee & Low, 
2021 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781643794310 $21.95
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
Malcolm has plenty of reason to be angry: his father was killed by police when 
Malcolm was young, and he himself just had a terrifying experience in a mistaken 
arrest. However, when he rips up posters of civil rights icons his father had hung 
on his bedroom wall years ago, his mother ships him from D.C. to the family farm 
for what she hopes will be a calming timeout. It’s no better for a Black teen in 2015 
Mississippi, though. The farm has been condemned to make room for a highway; he’s 
arrested after defending himself in an attack by white teenagers; and now he’s being 
repeatedly transported back in time by Cedric, an ancestral ghost who demands he 
save the family property. At the core of this novel is a well-intentioned exploration 
of how a brief period of promise for Black citizens during Reconstruction devolved 
rapidly and tragically into de facto disenfranchisement and Jim Crow retribution. 
However, Coles’ narrative strategy—sending Malcolm back to Reconstruction 
Era D.C. as Cedric, an aide to a series of historical Congressmen—never takes on 
much life beyond a pedagogical device to school Malcolm, and readers, in period 
history. Highlighted episodes are eye-opening, and the audience will likely share 
Malcolm’s outrage that this chapter in Black American history rarely makes it 
into the curriculum intact, but the contemporary plot strand never gains traction 
among the instructional time shifts. Nonetheless, readers will appreciate Malcolm’s 
growth as an activist and artist (with Malcolm’s detailed renderings realized by Justin 
Johnson’s black and white illustrations). Black statesmen biographies, a timeline, 
and an Author’s Note author’s note are appended.  EB
deroMa, Mags Awake; written and illus. by Mags DeRoma. Roaring Brook, 
2021 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781250753199 $18.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 4-6 yrs
Bedtime rituals from toothbrushing to book reading to goodnight snuggles are com-
plete, and the narrator and her dog Oscar are ready to settle down. However, there’s 
a third set of eyes in the room, and there’s not going to be any sleep until the girl 
54 • The Bulletin
evicts the unwelcome spider from her room. She concocts several outlandish plans 
for pest removal: sending it flying off on a paper airplane, lassoing it, launching it 
to the moon on a homemade rocket, or even, as Oscar suggests by pushing a book 
of nursery rhymes to her, washing it down the water spout outside her window. 
She settles on the time-honored method of trapping it under a glass and realizes 
the eight-legged creature isn’t nearly as scary as she thought; the closing scenes of 
an overturned glass, a spider nestled into its outdoor web, drowsy narrator and dog, 
and a blackout as the lamp clicks off assure viewers that everyone will sleep happily 
tonight. The plot is wispy, but the impossibility of nodding off with a creepy-crawly 
in the room strikes a virtually universal chord. It’s the artwork, though, that carries 
the story—“paint and soft pastels on a gazillion pieces of cut paper, all collaged 
together” convey the eeriness of the nighttime prowler that keeps getting bigger 
in the little girl’s imagination, while humorously spotlighting her inflated fear and 
planned overkill of the fragile little arachnid that just wants to get back to its web. 
An addendum demonstrates how to trap a spider with glass and cardboard, plus 
courage and a kind heart.  EB
durfey-Lavoie, Lee Just Roll with It; illus. by Veronica Agarwal. Random 
House Graphic, 2021 [336p]
Library ed. ISBN 9781984897008 $23.99
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593125410 $20.99
Paper ed. ISBN 9781984896995 $12.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781984897015 $8.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad Gr. 4-6
The first few days of sixth grade are bumpy for Maggie, so she takes comfort in 
her usual ritual of rolling her twenty-sided die to help her make sense of tricky 
situations. Making a new friend turns out to be easy, but an encounter with a bully 
and, more troubling, rumors about a monster lurking on the school grounds leave 
her anxious and uneasy. Choosing an extracurricular activity is also proving to be 
difficult, given the success of her overachieving older sisters, but she eventually finds 
her place in the school’s RPG club. Unfortunately, the support from her new pals 
and her family can only soothe her worries so much, and soon she finds herself 
relying on the die more often than not. This graphic novel excels at portraying the 
constant presence of OCD and how it can rear its head even in seemingly happy 
times (her interactions with her new friends are often dictated by what number 
she rolls), giving a more nuanced look at the challenges posed by this specific type 
of anxiety disorder. The art has echoes of Noelle Stevenson and moves fluidly 
from a bubbly cheerfulness to a more oppressive claustrophobia as Maggie falls 
further into her various rituals. Unfortunately, the rest of the plot is chaotic, often 
fumbling over too many secondary storylines, and the subplot about the school 
monster never coheres with the rest of the narrative. Characters serve mostly as 
proxies for a good therapist, speaking stiffly in supportive phrases but lacking 
authenticity. Still, the advice they give is helpful and compassionate, making this 
a serviceable companion to Telgemeier’s Guts (BCCB 9/19) or Fung’s Living with 
Viola, reviewed below.  KQG
October 2021 • 55
eriksen, annie Hunter With Great Power: The Marvelous Stan Lee: An Unauthor-
ized Biography; illus. by Lee Gatlin. Page Street, 2021 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781645672852 $18.99
Reviewed from digital galleys 
R 6-9 yrs
The titular “unauthorized” winkingly confers a measure of creative liberty in 
this rollicking picture book biography of the generative force behind the Marvel 
Comics Universe. Mild-mannered Stanley Lieber, commissioned to help support 
his family, began as Errand Boy at Timely Comics, whooshing copy and coffee 
to staff, and even supplying snippets of dialogue when writers’ inventive juices 
temporarily ran dry. When luminaries Joe Simon and Jack Kirby quit, teenager 
Stanley (now a writer himself, under the name Stan Lee) became editor, dutifully 
cranking out adventures of heroes with chiseled physiques and virtuous bona fides, 
but becoming increasingly dissatisfied with his tepid output as Timely became Atlas, 
and Atlas became Marvel. Bravely daring (with his wife’s encouragement) to try 
something new, he unleashed a new stable of protagonists, with relatable foibles and 
far quirkier physiologies—the Spider-Man, Hulk, Thor, and myriad Marvel crew 
that delight readers today. Gatlin’s mixed media pictures gleefully zoom in on the 
improbable bits of the Stan Lee success story—from his father’s fiat to find a job 
(“Liebers never loaf around!” insists paterfamilias over his newspaper and coffee), to 
his bosses’ initial rejection of the Spider-Man concept (“This sounds like a comedy 
character, not a hero!”), to the playful renderings of a mature Stan Lee in the role 
of his own creations. End matter includes further information on Lee’s career and 
bibliography. Pair this with Marc Tyler Nobleman’s Boys of Steel (BCCB 10/08) for 
a rousing Team Marvel v. Team DC cosplay story time.  EB
faHMy, Huda Huda F Are You?; written and illus. by Huda Fahmy. Dial, 
2021 [192p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593324301 $22.99
Paper ed. ISBN 9780593324318 $14.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593324325 $8.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 6-8
Huda was used to being one of the few Muslim kids at her old school, so the 
move to Dearborn, Michigan, where there’s a large Muslim population has left 
her shaken—if she’s not the girl in the hijab, who is she? After a few serious misses 
inserting herself into several cliques, she manages to make friends and even becomes 
more comfortable in her own interests, but unfortunately, she’s yet again forced to 
confront both microaggressions and overt bigotry. In this semi-autobiographical 
graphic novel, Fahmy portrays the negotiations of identity—be it social, cultural, 
or personal—in high school with humor and genuine warmth. Huda is eminently 
relatable as she analyzes the social hierarchy and comes to the conclusion that there’s 
no way she’d fit in as she is, opting instead to feign interest in gaming or fashion or 
sports until she realizes some things are just not for her. While the story follows her 
freshman year, various flashbacks to her previous school and other asides detailing 
the lives of her parents and family give readers a fuller picture of Huda as a kind, 
funny, smart kid who is more normal than she thinks she is. There’s also realism 
to Huda’s encounters with anti-Muslim sentiment, as she moves between shame, 
anger, and eventual pride in her identity as a Muslim. The art is a bit more free 
flowing than Raina Telgemeier’s familiar panels, but the style and draftsmanship 
56 • The Bulletin
has a similar accessibility. Fans of Craft’s New Kid (BCCB 1/19) will appreciate 
another funny, thoughtful story of negotiating school dynamics, cultural identity, 
and individual agency. KQG
forMan, gayLe Frankie & Bug. Aladdin, 2021 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781534482531 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781534482555 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad Gr. 4-6
Bug’s older brother, Daniel, has convinced their single mother that he should 
have a break from playing companion and protector to his sister the whole time 
Mama’s at work. A solution arrives in the guise of Frankie, nephew to family friend 
and neighbor Phillip, who’s hosting him for the summer. Frankie’s not great pal 
potential, refusing at first to go in the ocean, eat the delicious local food, or stray 
too far from his uncle. However, he is as fascinated as Bug by efforts to catch the 
Midnight Marauder, a serial killer who’s at large in the greater L.A. area. Two odd 
duck tweens making the best of a messy 1980s summer by pursuing overimagina-
tive leads on a murderer (particularly one based so obviously and closely on the 
real-life Night Stalker) easily sustain middle-grade interest, and the addition of 
menacing skinheads popping up on the streets pumps up tension. The friends-
in-the-making story gets swamped by waves of problem novel plots that accrue, 
from the skinheads’ assault on gay Uncle Phillip, to the arrival of Bug’s bigoted 
maternal aunt, to Mama’s revelation of a family secret concerning Daniel and Bug’s 
Salvadorean-American ancestry. Each subplot is worthy of more development than 
it gets, and Forman’s series of reveals mostly fall flat as readers anticipate them and 
the characters themselves are not particularly nonplussed. The crime story and the 
kids on the loose still have appeal, but for historical fiction about summer antics, 
you still can’t beat Rita Garcia-Williams One Crazy Summer (BCCB 2/10) and its 
sequels.  EB
fox, MeM Cat Dog; illus. by Mark Teague. Beach Lane/Simon, 2021 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781416986881 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781439157411 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 3-6 yrs
Our story starts out simply enough with a big, scary dog . . . or maybe it’s a sweet, 
sleepy dog? Regardless, there’s also a cat . . . and maybe a mouse? Yes, a mouse, 
and the cat and dog are going to chase it! . . . Or is it just the cat? This short and 
silly picture book is a winkingly clever introduction to an unreliable narrator for 
youngsters. Casual, colloquial text walks readers through this ever-changing scene, 
giving kids a chance to predict what might happen next. The lazy, spotty dog and 
striped, cunning cat are clearly excellent companions, cautiously watching the 
large-bellied mouse as it appears, then disappears, then maybe reappears from its 
hole. Teague’s unmistakable acrylic art is in its element, eliciting giggles with the 
first page turn as the big, scary dog transforms into the sweetly confused pup we’ll 
soon get to know. A perfect pick for wrangling little ones to start up storytime, this 
quick read is bound to be requested for marathon repeating sessions.  KP
October 2021 • 57
fung, rosena Living with Viola; written and illus. by Rosena Fung. Annick, 
2021 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781773215488 $22.95
Paper ed. ISBN 9781773215495 $17.95
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 4-7
The first day of middle school does not go well for Olivia, and her humiliation is 
only amplified by the voice of Viola, Olivia’s shadow self that follows her around 
criticizing her every move in this graphic novel. As Olivia navigates social hierarchy 
dynamics and friend drama, she’s further rattled by the pressure of her large ex-
tended Chinese-Canadian family to be the best in whatever she does, and by their 
unwillingness to talk about a cousin battling his own mental health issues. This is 
a keenly felt and nuanced look at anxiety disorder, giving heed to Olivia as a full, 
fleshed out person believably unable to recognize and reckon with her anxiety. Viola 
floats literally and visually in and out of the scenes, sometimes gone for panels at a 
time only to rear up and bring her dark, inky blues and erratic lines with her, and 
the scene in which she ties up Olivia’s mouth, just as she’s asking her parents for 
help, with a ribbon emblazoned “bad daughter” is a painfully authentic representa-
tion of Olivia’s struggle. When Viola is not in the picture, however, Olivia’s inner 
turmoil is contextualized in events and situations both good and bad: her new 
groups of friends are funny and welcoming, but personalities clash; her affection 
for her parents is complicated by her embarrassment of their immigrant status; 
even her love of art comes up against the scrutiny of classmates and teachers. Thus, 
readers see Olivia’s insecurities both arising from her and influenced by others, a 
situation plenty of kids, anxious or not will relate to. This is a must have for fans 
of Telgemeier’s Guts (BCCB 9/19) and Libenson’s Just Jaime (BCCB 4/19).  KQG
geHrLein, Brian The Book of Rules; illus. by Tom Knight. Farrar, 2021 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780374314545 $18.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 3-6 yrs
As the title states, this book has a lot of rules and if listeners don’t follow them, 
they’ll be gobbled up by Dennis, a horned, hairy purple beast (who, despite his size 
and tusks, is entirely unintimidating). Fortunately, the rules are pretty easy, starting 
with sitting down and sitting up straight and then getting silly with mooing like a 
cow or making fish faces. It becomes tricky when there’s no smiling allowed, but 
eventually viewers get to settle down again with some focused breathing—though 
Dennis still needs to be fed (luckily, he’s content to just eat the book, not the kids). 
Dennis is instantly endearing as he lumbers through the pages with futile attempts 
to seem scary while the unseen narrator continues to threaten listeners with his 
insatiable hunger, a humorous juxtaposition that will surely elicit some giggles. This 
is a ready-made storytime that would work particularly well with library newbies, 
and the book’s diverse set of youngsters make excellent rule-following models for 
any kid needing a bit of instruction in guided play.  KQG
58 • The Bulletin
gLock, sopHia Passport. Little, 2021 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780316458986 $24.99
Paper ed. ISBN 9780316459006 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780316458993 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 7-12
In this graphic memoir, Glock, daughter of U.S. intelligence agents, recounts her 
last years of high school in an unnamed Central American country, initially at pri-
vate local schools and then as a transfer to the American school. With parents who 
were tight-lipped concerning their jobs but rigorous in vigilance for their children’s 
safety, Sophie predictably rebelled, as she made forbidden walks to school, entered 
into a sketchy codependent friendship with adventurous Beth, lied to her parents 
when she went out clubbing, and habitually crushed on the wrong guys. Sophia’s 
informal education also included an awakening, brought on by the devastation of 
Hurricane Mitch, to the vast differences between her family’s relatively sheltered 
life and those of Central Americans, as well as the late-in-arriving realization that 
her parents were essentially U.S. spies. Soft grays and mauves establish an aura of 
memory, over two decades distant from the 1998 setting, and the artwork effec-
tively deploys subtle elements: the scarlet of her sister’s purloined clingy sheath that 
signals her wilder escapades; the barred home windows through which she views 
her host country—representing entrapment as much as security; the frequency 
of scenes in which Sophia or her parents are portrayed with their backs toward 
each other. Glock’s author’s note discusses her misgivings about writing about her 
parents’ sensitive careers, and about the CIA clearance as “the reason many details 
have been removed from the book”—which, of course, makes the memoir that 
much more engrossing.  EB
gong, cHLoe Our Violent Ends. McElderry, 2021 [512p] (These Violent 
Delights)
Trade ed. ISBN 9781534457720 $19.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781534457744 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
After killing the monster that was literally plaguing Shanghai (These Violent Delights, 
BCCB 11/20), Juliette Cai has spent the last four months in a delicate balancing 
act, maintaining her tenuous position as the heir to the Scarlet Gang, keeping Roma 
Montagov, her ex-lover and heir to the rival White Flowers, at an arm’s distance, 
and hiding his presumed dead friend to keep the peace and keep Roma alive. If 
that wasn’t enough, the Communists, the Nationalists, and other foreigners are 
competing for control of the city, and the monster has reared its ugly head again, 
threatening any attempts at order with another infectious outbreak. Juliette and 
Roma are forced together by their scheming parents to hunt down a cure for the 
illness and consolidate power in the two gangs, but they both know an ambush 
when they see one and realize that they’ll have to choose between each other and 
their families. In lesser hands, the sheer number of moving parts here could have 
become a clunky mess, but Gong keeps them all ticking along smoothly, anchor-
ing the shifts among violence, horror, and political intrigue with deeply nuanced 
characterizations of Juliette and Roma. Their roles have switched here from the 
previous title, with Roma furious, heartbroken, and out for revenge, and Juliette 
weaving a complicated web of lies to keep Roma safe; neither is innocent in the 
October 2021 • 59
bloodbaths that have resulted from their families’ rivalry but each is hopeful that 
they’ll be able to save everyone, even if they must sacrifice themselves. This is a 
Shakespearean tragedy to the bitter end, and the final events might be inevitable 
but are nonetheless heartbreaking.  KQG
HarreLL, roB Batpig: When Pigs Fly; written and illus. by Rob Harrell. Dial, 
2021 [240p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593354155 $14.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593354179 $8.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad Gr. 3-5
Gary Yorkshire is your perfectly ordinary pig, playing video games, taking mud 
baths, and hanging with his pals until one day he’s bitten by a bat and suddenly has 
superpowers. Like most sixth graders (swine or human) would be, Gary’s thrilled 
and begins the most important part of being a superhero: designing a costume and 
coming up with a motto. With that done, he’s finally ready to fight bad guys, and 
the first half of the book switches between a deadly situation in which he’s tied to 
a rocket by a monster and Gary’s origin story; it’s an effective structure that keeps 
readerly engagement as scenes bounce between the action of the rocket dilemma 
and the explanations of Gary’s powers, and direct address from the snarky narrator 
brings added appeal. The final part of the book, however, is tacked on and rushed 
as Batpig takes on another villain, the Butcher, in anti-climactic fashion. The design 
derives much of its style, from font to palette, from Pilkey’s Dogman series but with 
a touch more sophistication. Despite the flagging pace, the book’s punny humor, 
dad jokes, and pure absurdity may win the day here, especially for fans of Captain 
Underpants or Moyer’s Ham Helsing: Vampire Hunter (BCCB 5/21).  KQG
Higgins, carter Audrey L & Audrey W: Best Friends-ish; illus. by Jennifer K. 
Mann. Chronicle, 2021 [184p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781452183947 $14.99
E-book ed. 9781797200620 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 2-3
Second grader Audrey L can’t seem to find her niche; she’s not the best artist, or the 
best runner, or the best student in Ms. Fincastle’s class, but maybe, just maybe, she 
can be the best Welcome Ambassador to the new kid Audrey W. The week starts 
badly with Audrey L dropping the cake she had made for Audrey W, but things take 
a brighter turn when the two girls discover their shared love of the color purple, fancy 
stationery, and winged unicorns. Still, making new friends is difficult, especially 
when Audrey W proves to be quite the go-getter, and eventually a playdate gone 
wrong threatens to derail the whole relationship. Higgins has a keen ear for both the 
chaos of elementary school classrooms and the turbulent inner lives of elementary 
aged kids; noisy music lessons, unexpected fire drills, and tricky spelling tests make 
up the school milieu, while focalization on Audrey L paints an authentic picture of 
an insecure kid’s challenges with making friends. The text is simple and direct but 
often steeped in the sensorial, effectively conveying Audrey L’s emotions: “Bobo’s 
clatter matched Audrey’s insides, all jangly and rattly and antsy.” Black and white 
illustrations recall Quentin Blake’s scratchy pencilwork muted with dappling shades 
of gray. Readers who’ve outgrown the first-grade escapades of Green’s Princess Posey 
(Princess Posey and the First Grade Parade, BCCB 6/10, etc.) but aren’t quite ready 
60 • The Bulletin
for English’s Carver Chronicles (Skateboard Party, BCCB 2/15, etc.) will find their 
sweet spot with this easy reader.  KQG
Hudson, wade Defiant: Growing Up in the Jim Crow South. Crown, 
2021 [272p]
Library ed. ISBN 9780593126363 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593126356 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593126370 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad Gr. 5-8
Book publisher and editor of The Talk: Conversations about Race, Love & Truth 
(BCCB 9/20), Hudson turns author with a memoir that opens chillingly with his 
arrest in 1970 on the charge of conspiring to assassinate the Baton Rouge mayor. 
This effective teaser segues into autobiographical flashback comprising a stream of 
memories that unfortunately feel largely undifferentiated by importance or per-
sonal impact. There’s great raw material here that attests to a supportive extended 
family, schools poor in resources but staffed with teachers who helped him rise, a 
community that had his family’s back in bad times, and a church that helped steer 
his soul toward activism. From this a few memorable episodes emerge—a family 
ghost tale of a revenant aunt; Hudson waiting through a two-week revival meeting 
to receive his call to Jesus; the thrill of having an original piece of music recorded 
and the disappointment of finding it arranged like Lawrence Welk. Readers will 
certainly be more interested in a speedier return to the drama of the opening 
scenes, though, and return he does; the final chapters that limn Hudson’s activist 
work that put him and two colleagues onto the radar of police, his frame-up on 
false charges, and the skill of the Black attorney who took his case, are sufficiently 
riveting to make readers wish this had formed the memoir’s core rather than its 
bookends. Personal and historical notes, sources, and a timeline are appended.  EB
Jones, dan sasuweH Living Ghosts and Mischievous Monsters: Chilling American 
Indian Stories; illus. by Weshoyot Alvitre. Scholastic, 2021 [176p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781338681628 $26.99
Paper ed. IBSN 9781338681604 $12.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781338681635 $12.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 4-8
This crowd-pleasing anthology of traditional and contemporary tales introduces 
readers to other-worldly presences from First Nations across the United States and 
Canada. Editor and contributor Jones, a member of the Ponca Tribe of Indians of 
Oklahoma, gathers the stories into five sections—Ghosts, Spirits, Witches, Mon-
sters, the Supernatural—prefaced by notes on what makes each category distinct. 
Many readers will dive right into Ghosts expecting maximum shivers, but as Jones 
notes, “In my experience they have little to no physical effect on the living—unless 
someone hurts themselves when reacting to a ghost!” Indeed, the creeps build as 
the title proceeds, and cursed dolls, ice-hearted cannibal monsters, vampire rock 
art, flying orbs that presage death, possession by man-otter, and medicine-men 
turned evil leave ghostly apparitions looking pretty anemic. Particularly engrossing 
are the many contemporary attestations of personal encounters, delivered without 
macabre flourish but packing a dramatic wallop by tellers confident of the reality 
of their experiences. Alvitre, a member of the Tongva tribe of Southern California, 
October 2021 • 61
supplies an appropriately eerie line drawing for each tale; sources and suggestions 
for further reading are included, as is a note from Jones about how he collected 
and compiled the stories, along with the assurance, “Some tribal cultures are not 
allowed to share certain ghost stories because the spirits are so real to them that 
saying the spirit names may endanger the storytellers and their families — I respect 
that, and I did not include those stories.”  EB
Jones, kiMBerLy Why We Fly; by Kimberly Jones and Gilly Segal. Sourcebooks 
Fire, 2021 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781492678922 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781492678939 $17.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad Gr. 8-10
Leni Greenberg is determinedly returning to cheer after a tough second concussion 
and broken ankle; she’s also got a shyly growing connection with Three, the school 
quarterback. Her best friend, Nelly Irons, is a hard-driving leader, so it’s a shock 
when Leni is chosen as cheer captain over Nelly. Then school alum Cody Knight, 
who’s Black, takes a knee in protest at a pro football game, and Leni, who’s white, 
convinces the cheer team to follow suit in support. The resulting storm plays out 
with consequences for Leni, Nelly, and Three, as well as their relationships with 
one another. Narration that alternates between Leni and Nelly contrast two very 
different experiences of the same event, with Leni a well-meaning white girl who 
doesn’t fully grasp the implications for her Black peers (Nelly suffers a college-
application-disrupting school suspension, while Leni receives no discipline). There’s 
some excellent dissection of Leni’s privileged naïveté (“I’m saying you’re over here 
talking about civil disobedience, knowing they’re going to be gunning for us, and 
you’re not even thinking about whether your friends are wearing the same size targets 
as you or whether you have armor they don’t”), and the portrayals of Nelly’s and 
Three’s protective and determined parents are sharp and convincing. The focus is 
often diffuse and distracted, though, with overexplanatory speechifying slowing 
down the pace; there’s also never any real sense of friendship between Nelly and 
Leni, so its apparent loss has little impact. The outcome is ambiguous, but there’s 
realism in that, and readers may find plenty to discuss on all sides here.  DS
ivery, kwaMe The Problem with the Other Side. Soho Teen, 2021 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781641292054 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781641292061 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
It’s sophomore year, and Uly and Sallie, who’ve been in a play together, have fallen 
for each other, bonding over their passion for The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly. The 
sunny days of early romance are clouded, however, by the race for school president: 
Sallie’s sister Leona, who’s white, campaigns with dog-whistle racism, and Uly’s sister 
Regina, who’s Black, pushes back hard. Then both candidates draft their sibs to be 
campaign manager, and it becomes impossible for the couple to separate love life 
from political life: information gets leaked, loyalties get questioned, and Leona’s 
associates move from dog whistles to outright white supremacism. There’s plenty 
of reality in this story of interracial romance, and the book effectively alternates 
between Sallie’s and Uly’s narrations, allowing readers insight into the struggles on 
both sides; Sallie’s initial denial and eventual sad realization of her sister’s racism are 
62 • The Bulletin
especially well portrayed. Leona’s character is less effective, though, in that there’s 
little positive about her from the get-go, and secondary characters aren’t clearly 
drawn; more problematic is the dramatic twist in the ending that lacks connection 
with the main story. It’s still a thought-provoking exploration of the way racism 
cloaks itself while still empowering its adherents and how quickly it can poison a 
group if allowed to flourish, so readers will have much to discuss.  DS
Lackey, Mercedes Briarheart. Little, 2021 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780759557451 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780759557864 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
When an uninvited Dark Fae shows up at Miriam’s royal stepsister’s christening and 
attempts to curse baby Aurora, Miri instinctively leaps to shield the infant—and 
somehow magically blasts the wicked party-crasher into oblivion. Miri’s hitherto-
unsuspected magic and her devotion to Aurora prompt the formation of a group 
of like-minded youngsters to train as the princess’ protectors, with Miri getting 
magic lessons from one of Aurora’s guardian Light Fae on top of the group’s combat 
training. The “Sleeping Beauty”-with-a-twist plot is low on drama; there’s more 
cooperation than conflict as Miri and the other Companions settle into their routine 
with a minimum of hazing and a maximum of supportive adults. Their training is 
punctuated by adventures (meeting talking animals, saving a dragon, braving the 
dangerous Goblin Market with nods to Christina Rossetti) in which all’s inevitably 
well that ends well. The easygoing plot will lag for some, but it may make this a 
friendly choice for younger readers with advanced vocabulary. Lackey gives Miri’s 
narration a light, contemporary voice that harmonizes with a plethora of realistic 
detail about daily life in the pseudo-medieval-European setting. Unanswered ques-
tions about Miri’s mystery Fae heritage and lots of upcoming vulnerable birthdays 
for Aurora leave room for potential sequels.  FHK
Lasky, katHryn Faceless. HarperCollins, 2021 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780062693310 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780062693334 $8.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad Gr. 5-8
Alice Winfield has grown up in a family of spies that, for generations, has served 
Britain through the Rasas espionage ring, all of whose members share the useful trait 
of totally forgettable faces. Although the Winfield parents are active members, and 
Alice herself has gone through training and has assisted on missions in a minor way, 
older sister Louise has bowed out of the Rasas and opted for facial surgery to put 
her past behind her. Alice notices that Louise has undergone personality changes 
as well, and although she’s pleased to be working with her parents in Germany on 
a plot to assassinate Hitler, Alice is mighty uneasy—even suspicious—of what’s 
behind her sibling’s sudden and uncharacteristic behavior. Lasky’s novel, part spy 
thriller and part domestic drama, incorporates plenty of historical detail surround-
ing Operation Valkyrie, with Claus von Stauffenberg operating here not only in 
his real-life role as assassination conspirator but also as fictional contact for Alice as 
she insinuates herself into Hitler’s inner domestic circle. The drama is considerably 
hobbled, though, by the weight of in-text definitions and German translations, and 
by laborious explanations of myriad details ranging from Peter Pan and the Secret 
October 2021 • 63
Garden to Wagner’s Ring Cycle. The reveal about Louise’s agenda is dispatched at 
last with a frisson of drama and a perfunctory explanation, and while the family’s 
escape from German after the conspiracy’s failure comes as a relief, it squeezes in 
yet another plot point—the Winfields save a refugee child—that begs and deserves 
fuller exploration. Middle -school historical fiction enthusiasts not yet ready for 
Killeen’s Orphan Monster Spy (BCCB 3/18) should nonetheless find this an intrigu-
ing entrée into the end days of Nazi Germany. An author’s note is appended.  EB
Lewis, JoHn Run: Book One; by John Lewis and Andrew Aydin; illus. by L. Fury 
and Nate Powell. Abrams, 2021 [160p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781419730696 $24.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781683353829 $18.65
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 6-12
The ink is hardly dry on the Civil Rights Act of 1965 when the white suprema-
cist push-back accelerates, and author John Lewis witnesses the twin tragedies 
of continuing attacks on Black voters and fracturing of ideologies among Black 
leadership. A tour de force title page spread seamlessly connects Lewis’ previous 
March series with this companion volume, as threatening ranks of hooded Klans-
men make a mockery of nonviolent civil rights protest actions, and Black citizens 
in the background are implicitly put on the run. Within this context Lewis, still 
chairman of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee, tries to maintain 
the organization’s founding commitment to nonviolence, even as enforcement of 
voting rights laws withers across the South, and new voices emerge within SNCC 
and the broader civil rights movement, demanding that force be met with force. 
By this volume’s cliff-hanging conclusion, the Vietnam War is claiming a dispro-
portionate number of Black lives; Julian Bonds has been duly elected a Georgia 
congressman but repeatedly denied his seat; Stokely Carmichael has taken the reins 
at SNCC with more militant principles; and Lewis’ philosophical underpinnings are 
in danger of sliding into irrelevance. Readers know, of course, that Lewis’ story has 
a more promising trajectory, and the now passed congressman leaves an authorial 
legacy here along with his legislative work. A wealth of back matter—biographies; 
notes on sources; page-coordinated comments on resources for textual and visual 
content; artist notes—offers timely insight into America’s ongoing confrontation 
with intransigent racism.  EB
Lyon, JuLia A Dinosaur Named Ruth: How Ruth Mason Discovered Fossils in Her 
Own Backyard; illus. by Alexandra Bye. McElderry, 2021 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781534474642 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781534474635 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad 4-7 yrs
In 1905, seven-year-old Ruth Mason began to notice odd objects scattered near her 
family’s cabin in South Dakota. She couldn’t identify them, and neither could her 
family, but she sensed their importance. While science had discovered the thrill of 
dino acquisitions, with the infamous Bone Wars waged only a few decades prior, 
interest hadn’t followed to her area, so Ruth collected and arranged bone fragments 
artistically on her own. It wasn’t until 1979, when Mason ran the ranch, that a pa-
leontologist came to call and Mason displayed her treasures. Respect and excavators 
followed, and as the land and surrounding region yielded find after amazing find, 
64 • The Bulletin
she finally got some of the credit she deserved, acknowledged in the names of the 
Ruth Mason Quarry and the nickname “Ruth” given to the Edmontosaurus found 
in her quarry and now on display in Cardiff, Wales. One would wish for more detail 
on Mason’s personal collection activities over the years or for more particulars on 
the dig at her quarry; as the narrative stands, though, Ruth appears as little more 
than a footnote with some naming rights, glamorized into a doe-eyed Disney-esque 
heroine in Bye’s digital artwork. An author’s note adds some historical context and 
speculation concerning Ruth’s personal life; a list of resources is also appended for 
readers pursuing further biographical excavation.  EB
MacLear, kyo The Big Bath House; illus. by Gracey Zhang. Random House 
Studio, 2021 [40p]
Library ed. ISBN 9780593181966 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593181959 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593181973 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R* 4-7 yrs
This gently celebratory second-person narration chronicles a girl’s visit to her 
beloved grandmother in Japan, highlighted by an outing, along with aunties and 
cousins, to the community bath house. Once there, it’s clothes/yukatas off and a 
pre-soak scrub (“you’ll do the soapy leg can-can”), and then everybody’s into the big 
communal tub with an “Ahhhhh” for a happy shared experience of “newly sprout-
ing,/ gangly bodies” and “cozy, creased,/ ancient bodies” all together. Afterwards, 
there’s a warm towel cuddle from an auntie, “sweet shaved ice for slurping,” and a 
quiet nighttime walk home. The lilting, occasionally rhyming text is redolent with 
familial love and the joy of a special shared experience, and Maclear is especially 
deft at evoking the way affection transcends language barriers. Rumpled, friendly 
lines, and gouache and watercolor art has a homey familiarity in cozy scenes of 
cousins goofing off together and chatting aunties; there’s an amiable yet wholesome 
candor in the communal naked bathing scenes about all kinds of women’s and girl’s 
bodies that tracks with the author’s stated goal of sharing and celebrating a culture 
where that’s a common shared experience. That experience will be run of the mill 
to many youngsters and eye-opening to others; while it could certainly prompt 
some interesting discussions about varying mores and why this doesn’t mean you 
can run naked through the library, it’ll also be welcomed as a warm and tender 
story of time with beloved distant family. A brief glossary explains Japanese terms; 
the author’s note explains her own history of such family and bath house visits.  DS
Martin, stepHen w. Fluffy McWhiskers Cuteness Explosion; illus. by Dan Ta-
vis. McElderry, 2021 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781534441453 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781534441460 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 4-7 yrs
Feline Fluffy McWhiskers has a problem: she’s so dang adorable that the other 
animals literally explode when they gaze upon her furry little face. Her dangerous 
cuteness makes friendships pretty much impossible (even a written letter ends up 
with a kaboom) and after the failures of her best attempts disguise herself (a paper 
bag over her head, an ugly sweater, a bad haircut), she finally decides that making 
a home on a deserted island is her best bet. It’s a safe but solitary life until one day 
October 2021 • 65
a newcomer arrives; the canine stranger, however, does not detonate when faced 
with Fluffy, perhaps because his sheer ugliness counteracts the kitty’s cuteness. Sure, 
there are more than a few logic holes here, but this is all about Fluffy’s meme-worthy 
visage, and her wide-eyed, poofy little figure does indeed feel a little overwhelm-
ing in its irresistible charm. The sweetness comes with an absurdly morbid edge 
in the vein of Raschka’s Arlene Sardine (BCCB 9/98), though, as animals explode 
in a riot of splattered bursts of saturated rainbow hues, with the implication that 
their kaboom is the end of their road. This might therefore appeal to a snarkier 
audience than sweet, and the explosions will certainly make for a lively, if vaguely 
unsettling, storytime.  KQG
MatHeson, cHristie Shelter. Random House, 2021 [192p]
Library ed. ISBN 9780593376393 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593376386 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593376416 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad Gr. 4-6
Maya’s family is struggling: Maya’s freelance-writer dad has been in the hospital 
for months after being hit by a car, and Maya’s mother, a teacher, is desperately 
searching for a new job. Now ten-year-old Maya, her mother, and her little sister 
live in a family shelter after losing their rented San Francisco house, and Maya 
tries to keep it together at her tony private school (which she attends for free as 
a former teacher’s child). That means keeping her shelter life a secret even from 
her best friend and certainly from her bullying classmate, Sloane. Matheson 
writes with kind candor about the realities of carrying your possessions around 
in a backpack and being unable to afford a coat in the winter rain, and Maya is 
especially sympathetic in her determination not to worry her mother further with 
any negativity or setbacks. However, the Sloane plot overbalances the treatment 
of homelessness, and her characterization as a jealous girl rich in money, but poor 
in love, feels cliché. Maya’s also gifted with some extraordinary good luck, both in 
her schooling and in the resolution to her family’s situation, that puts a rosy sheen 
on her experience. This might nonetheless serve as an introduction to the issue for 
the currently comfortable, whose eyes may be opened about their own classmates’ 
struggles. A note about homelessness is included.  DS
MatHieu, Jennifer Bad Girls Never Say Die. Roaring Brook, 2021 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781250232588 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781250232595 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
It’s 1964 in Houston, and fifteen-year-old Evie goes to Eastside High on the poorer 
side of the tracks. Evie and her friends wear heavy makeup, cut class, sneak out of 
the house, and drink—often labeled “bad girls” by classmates and family. When 
Evie gets cornered by a posh River Oaks boy, a girl named Diane saves her from 
being sexually assaulted by stabbing and killing the attacker. Though Diane is from 
the wealthier River Oaks, she and Evie begin to form a special bond based on their 
secret, and as the two become closer friends, Evie realizes that there’s a lot more to 
Diane than she would’ve expected—but when Diane’s secret Eastside ex is accused 
of the murder instead, the girls are forced to take action. Described as a reimagining 
of The Outsiders, Mathieu’s novel is distinctly ’60s—many of the girls bond initially 
66 • The Bulletin
over their favorite Beatle, and there are conversations about racism, segregation in 
Evie’s schooling, and police brutality. The trope of Evie’s mother pressuring her to 
marry a nice boy and settle down is a bit dated, but the feeling Evie expresses over 
being stuck in her teenage trappings will ring true to many, and her efforts to eschew 
gender expectations will be felt by any teens who face gender-discriminatory dress 
codes at school. This would make an interesting read alongside The Outsiders in a 
classroom setting where gender is a centered part of the discussion.  NB
Mccrossen, carrie Margot Mertz Takes It Down; by Carrie McCrossen and Ian 
McWethy. Philomel, 2021 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593205259 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593205266 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad Gr.9-12
Seventeen-year-old Margot has fallen into a very lucrative side-hustle. With the 
help of tech genius friend Sammi, she’ll erase all digital evidence of your most 
embarrassing mistakes, from a sugar-high induced striptease video to an ill-advised 
dick-pic. Convinced her work is virtuous, she easily rationalizes every action, be it 
hacking phones, planting spyware, impersonating lawyers, or callously using people. 
Now, her latest job has uncovered a secret porn site featuring photos of her female 
classmates posted without consent, and Margot commits to taking down the site 
and anyone involved in its creation. As her efforts spin out of control, however, she’s 
forced to face the limits of what she can do, how she determines who is guilty, and 
how good she really is. Margot’s righteous fury will resonate with many readers, 
who will cheer her efforts to protect victims, gain justice, and enact revenge, and 
it’s during her undercover capers that the novel is at its best. Unfortunately, snarky 
commentary leans into tired teen stereotypes and often reads like pontificating, 
and the novel as a whole has a clear didactic undertone. Margot ultimately grows 
from self-important to self-effacing but at the expense of story, as she spends final 
chapters atoning for her misdeeds and leaving justice in the hands of capable adults. 
The ending lacks a certain poetic justice, but it nonetheless works as a realistic 
alternative to recent angry-girl revenge-fantasy novels.  AM
McfaLL, cLaire Ferryman. Walker US/Candlewick, 2021 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781536218459 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781536222333 $18.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
When Dylan’s Scottish train crashes, she’s the only passenger to walk away—into 
an empty landscape whose only other denizen is an attractive boy called Tristan. 
This is because Dylan is dead, and Tristan is an immortal psychopomp assigned 
to guide her to whatever lies beyond. As the pair journeys across the wasteland, 
avoiding soul-hungry demons, they fall in love, leading Dylan to break the rules 
of the afterlife and turn back for a chance to reunite with Tristan in the land of 
the living. The bulk of the action is dedicated to the initial journey with a more 
compelling, risk-filled final act when Dylan must negotiate the wasteland alone. 
Dylan displays a lot more pluck and determination when she’s retracing their steps, 
but neither she nor Tristan is developed enough to make the afterlife-or-death stakes 
of their reunion convincing. Though the execution falls short of the concept, this 
UK import, first in a trilogy, will certainly fit the bill for those who just want to 
read about a disaffected girls and protective supernatural boys.  FHK
October 2021 • 67
Mcginty, aLice B. Bathe the Cat; illus. by David Roberts. Chronicle, 
2021 [48p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781452142708 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781452169170 $11.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 3-6 yrs
Before Grandma Marge shows up, two dads and their kiddos have a list of chores to 
get through, which are helpfully laid out in magnetic tiles on the fridge; mopping 
the floor, scrubbing the dishes, and vacuuming the rug are all fine and well, but 
when the cat hears that it will be getting a bath, the tricky feline takes a swipe at 
the magnets and sends everything into chaos. Now Sarah is feeding the floor, Dad 
is scrubbing the fishes, and Bobby’s bathing the mat; one more swipe, and things 
get even crazier, with Dad this time mowing the floor, Sarah scrubbing the lawn, 
and Bobby rocking the dishes. This will be an absolute hoot at storytime with the 
rhythmic text lending bounce and energy, and the wacky word play guaranteeing 
giggles. The father’s increasingly frantic desperation is ripe for dramatic interpre-
tation: “HOLY HORNETS—Ten ‘til two!/ I’ve had ENOUGH—all of you!/ 
It’s almost time for Grandma Marge./ So LISTEN UP. I’m taking charge.” The 
watercolor and pencil art has a retro feel, both in bold palette and stylized figures, 
but the family makes for a fully diverse representation of modernity, with the two 
Black dads wrangling their family into tidiness. Pair this with Darbyshire’s Put It 
on the List! (BCCB 5/09) for a lively take on household tasks.  KQG
Mcginty, sean Rainbow in the Dark. Clarion, 2021 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780358380375 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780358379805 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Take a bit of sci fi and a heavy dose of fantasy, bring in elements of The Wizard of 
Oz but make them even darker, and the result is this twisty story of a teens trapped 
in a game-like world. The eponymous Rainbow and the rest of the group must do 
all the familiar video game things: complete quests, defeat increasingly difficult 
challenges (including facing off with a formidable villain who is all the more so 
for first appearing to be their savior), and gain experience points. The book is 
purposely light on details, and it’s never clear if Rainbow is imagining, dreaming, 
hallucinating, or living the events; the main point is that they feel real to Rainbow, 
and the life-or-death stakes do as well. It doesn’t sound funny, but the humor is 
clever and wry, and video game buffs will be particularly tuned in to appreciate all 
the clever nods to gaming tropes. McGinty takes on the second person perspective 
with aplomb, keeping Rainbow gender neutral and just as confused as the reader, 
so that anyone can fully immerse themselves into the morass in which the group 
is thrown. Fans of Shaun David Hutchinson’s or Dia Reeves’ unreliable, tricksy 
narrators will appreciate the ambiguity here.  AS
McnicoLL, eLLe A Kind of Spark. Crown, 2021 [192p]
Library ed. ISBN 9780593374269 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593374252 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593374276 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
Addie is eleven, autistic, and struggling in her Scottish school with an unsympa-
thetic teacher and an ex-friend who’s joined forces with a bully. Her best support 
68 • The Bulletin
is her older sister, Keedie, who’s also autistic, and there’s a growing friendship with 
a new girl, Audrey, but she’s still keenly aware of her outsider status. She’s therefore 
intrigued when she discovers her town has a history of witchcraft-based persecu-
tion that resulted in the torture and execution of women deemed outsiders, and, 
seeing herself as someone who would have been targeted, she crusades for the town 
to memorialize the women it destroyed. McNicoll, herself autistic, writes Addie’s 
narration with power and determination; it’s especially strong at revealing the 
sheer labor required for Addie to negotiate the world (“The real Addie is behind a 
mask of social rules, regulations, and strange neurotypical customs”) and the toll 
it takes, which is evident in Keedie as well. The witch plot interweaves effectively, 
and it gives a contemporary immediacy to the history as well as making emotional 
sense for Addie. Whether they’re facing similar neurodivergent challenges or not, 
readers will appreciate Addie’s honesty, and they may follow her lead in reconsider-
ing history.  DS
Meyer, Marissa Gilded. Feiwel, 2021 [512p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781250618849 $19.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781250618832 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Cornered by the wicked Erlking on the night of the wild hunt, Serilda claims that 
she can spin straw into gold, a lie that saves her life but lands her in the Erlking’s 
castle on the next full moon with a room full of straw and an impossible task. 
Fortunately, Gild, an impish (and attractive) poltergeist shows up, offering help 
in exchange for Serilda’s golden necklace. Gild easily fulfills his end of the bargain 
and does so a second time for Serilda’s ring; when the Erlking makes the third 
demand, however, Serilda has nothing left to give Gild, and the romance that 
has sparked between them only complicates things further. While Meyer’s Lunar 
Chronicles (Cinder, BCCB 2/12, Scarlet, BCCB, 2/13, etc.) pushed various fairy 
tales into science fiction, she hews closely to the Rumpelstiltskin inspiration here, 
mining elements from other Germanic folklore and culture for atmosphere. It is 
most certainly a dark and forbidding atmosphere, with the Erlking a true villain 
and his decaying castle a nightmare of ghouls, ghosts, and gore. Serilda is as much 
a trickster as she is heroine, casting lies as she sees fit, but she’s a genuinely caring 
soul, making it pleasing to watch her romance blossom with the equally clever and 
equally sweet Gild and heartbreaking to see it tested. The backstory to Gild’s exis-
tence in the castle is particularly compelling and will hopefully be further explored 
in the promised sequel.  KQG
Miyares, danieL Hope at Sea: An Adventure Story; written and illus. by Daniel 
Miyares. Schwartz, 2021 [44p]
Library ed. ISBN 9781984892843 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 9781984892836 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781984892850 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad 4-7 yrs
Hope has listened long enough to her father, a ship’s carpenter, tell tantalizing tales 
of his voyages, and she’s sure she’s ready to join him. She slips out of the house 
disguised as a boy, up the gangplank as Papa says goodbye to Mama at the dock, 
October 2021 • 69
and into a covered lifeboat, where she awaits her inevitable discovery. By the time 
Papa finds her, it’s too late to turn back, so he puts her to work, teaching her skills 
from knots to navigation, and allowing her to determine on her own that life at 
sea is no picnic. As they near the end of the voyage near their home port, a violent 
storm wrecks the ship and forces them to row to safety. Now Papa has had enough 
seafaring, and he uses salvage wood from the ship to build a lighthouse for the safety 
of other sailors. It’s an engaging wishful adventure, but even naïve listeners will sense 
that this is a highly condensed, optimistically orchestrated series of events, from 
Papa’s relatively calm reaction to finding his daughter onboard, to the ample dad/
daughter together time, to the fortuitous location of the shipwreck near their own 
home shore, and the shift to lighthouse building ebbs the energy from the seafaring 
narrative. However, the detailed line and watercolor illustrations, which gently hint 
at tinted scrimshaw, supply visual information neatly stowed for a primary-grade 
audience. This pint-sized adventure at sea, as sweet as it is salty, may be just the 
ticket for a historical fiction readaloud.  EB
owen, Margaret Little Thieves. Holt, 2021 [512p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781250191908 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781250191915 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
Discarded by her mother, used as a pawn by her godmothers Death and Fortune, 
and betrayed by her royal mistress, Vanja Schmidt grabs, quite literally, the chance 
to change her fate by stealing Princess Gisele’s enchanted pearls and taking on her 
appearance. Unsatisfied by simply living among nobility, she also steals from them, 
but she gets in over her head after thieving the prized possession of a Low God, and 
now she’s got only a few weeks to make amends before she transforms into gems. 
Complicating matters further are the appearance of a nosy prefect investigating 
Vanja’s burglaries and the return of her boorish and apparently murderous fiancé. 
This retelling of “The Goose Girl” is unwieldy at times, but it is fortunately firmly 
anchored in Vanja’s biting, acerbic narration; this is a girl who does not suffer fools 
and is clever enough to have a back-up plan for her back-up plan, neither of which 
involve loyalty or love. It’s a bit disappointing then when her villainy is so easily 
softened by the interest of a handsome guy, but the crumbling of her bravado 
outside of that relationship is painfully believable as current circumstances trigger 
memories of past traumas. While more details about Death’s and Fortune’s roles 
would have certainly been welcome, there’s enough dark magic and folkloric ele-
ments here to effectively echo the sinister nature of the source material. Readers 
of Hale’s The Goose Girl (BCCB 11/03) and Khanani’s Thorn (BCCB 2/20) might 
appreciate this recasting of the original tale’s traitorous maid.  KQG
poHL, Laura The Grimrose Girls. Sourcebooks Fire, 2021 [400p]
Paper ed. ISBN 9781728228877 $10.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781728228884 $9.99/US
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 8-10
An elite Swiss boarding school is the backdrop for this murder mystery laced with 
fairy tales. Ella, Yuki, and Rory are still reeling from the death of their other best 
friend, even more so because it is unclear whether it was a suicide, accident, or a 
murder. Enter Nani, a new student who gets thrown into their group because she 
70 • The Bulletin
literally ends up with the dead girl’s bed, and this diverse, plucky foursome had better 
be quick about solving what is happening with an ominous fairy tale collection that 
has real girls’ names written as marginalia before more deaths occur. The isolation 
of the school and dark fairy tale references make for an unsettling backdrop, and 
while girls the girls themselves exist more as representations (the good girl, the new 
girl, the rich girl) rather than memorable protagonists, there’s certainly plenty of 
potential in future volumes for them to gain more depth and nuance. A chilling 
climax will keep readers engaged and anticipating the next volume.  AS
ruBin, adaM Gladys the Magic Chicken; illus. by Adam Rex. Putnam, 
2021 [48p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593325605 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593325612 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 5-8 yrs
In Ancient Times (“Three thousand years before your grandma’s grandma’s grandma 
was born”), when people apparently talk in unfurling scrolls sporting letters in 
Disney’s Hercules font, Gladys the chicken belongs to a scrawny Shepherd Boy, 
who looks upon his own face in a pool of water and wishes to be beautiful. Because 
of the lack of mirrors available to him, the Shepherd Boy doesn’t see his face again 
for a long time, until he has bulked up and grown out his hair to the point of re-
sembling an ancient history Fabio; since he made the wish in Gladys’ presence, he 
attributes the transformation to her and markets her as a magic chicken. Gladys’ 
adventures are just beginning, as she’s sold to a Traveling Merchant, nearly cooked 
by a Long-Bearded Bandit, rescued by a Brave Swordsman, and eventually gifted to 
a Learned Princess, who wishes for adventure just before a Fearsome Pirate shows 
up and whisks her away to sea. Gladys is eventually rescued by a beautiful Lone 
Rider and returned to the Shepherd Boy, having brought him a lifelong companion. 
Rex’s art is digitally painted and highly detailed, bringing humor to the Shepherd 
Boy’s absurdly hunky shoulders and using a blend of cool tones to shadow the many 
detailed, action-filled scenes. The wordy narrator of this readaloud may make it 
harder for kids just starting out to try on their own, but the absurdity and the arch 
humor of it all are sure to elicit more than a few laughs, and the final lesson that 
there is magic in ordinary things (Gladys the chicken, in this case) is very sweet. 
Give this to the kid who has an obsession with Ancient Greece and Egypt to scratch 
the itch for an entertaining story set in a parody of those times.  NB
saLas, Laura purdie If You Want to Knit Some Mittens; illus. by Angela Mat-
teson. Boyds Mills, 2021 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781629795645 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781635924657 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 4-7 yrs
If you want to knit some mittens, our young pigtailed narrator says you’ve got to 
go to the source and get your very own sheep. Then you’ve got to keep her warm 
through the winter, shear her in spring, card the fleece, spin the wool into yarn, 
plant, pick, and soak marigolds for the dye, color the yarn, and then, eventually at 
step eighteen, grab a book, learn to knit, and then finally, a sunny pair of yellow 
mittens is ready for the winter cold. Even the craftiest DIYer will be surprised at 
the lengths the kiddo goes to get the perfect golden material for their winter gear, 
October 2021 • 71
but they’ll be delighted by her woolly friend and the other farmyard animals that 
trail behind her as she sets about her task. Gentle humor keeps the many instruc-
tions from seeming too list-like (do not, our narrator advises, give into your sheep’s 
requests for mohawks or “sheeptails”), and the textured illustrations, painted with 
acrylics, gouache, and “a touch of color pencil on wood board” are appropriately 
cozy and soft. Pair this with Barclay’s Sheep Dog and Sheep Sheep (BCCB 7/20) for 
some more sheep shearing shenanigans and be sure to have out the knitting books in 
case viewers want to skip the livestock and get straight to the mitten making.  KQG
saLvatore, r. a. The Color of Dragons; by R. A. Salvatore and Erika Lewis. Harp-
erTeen, 2021 [416p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780062915665 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780062915689 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
M Gr. 8-12
When seventeen-year-old Maggie somehow performs real magic with moonlight 
during a magic show with her adoptive father Xavier, the two catch the attention 
of the prince of the Walled City, who insists they come back with him to his father 
to fulfill a prophecy. Maggie has to hide that the magic is hers and not Xavier’s, as 
Xavier will be executed if there is no purpose for him at court. Meanwhile, Griffin, 
a knight in the king’s service, struggles to uphold his position as the favorite of the 
unpredictable and cruel king, and he soon also grapples with the ethics of slaying 
draignochs, dragon-like beasts who once terrorized the land, for sport. This fantasy 
novel reads like formulaic, fill-in-the-blank genre fiction from the ’80s, with little 
improved upon from that era. The uninspired plot is as lacking as its characters 
and their flat chemistry, while generic placenames like the Walled City or the Top 
(where rich people live) and Bottom (where poor people live) only add to this ef-
fect. Fantasy readers who find familiarity and comfort in formula may still want 
to pick this one up, but Bertrand’s City of the Uncommon Thief (BCCB 1/21) or 
Rutkoski’s The Midnight Lie (BCCB 4/20) would provide more unique additions 
to collections overflowing with the genre  NB
sHusterMan, neaL Roxy; by Neal and Jarrod Shusterman. Simon, 2021 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781534451254 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781534451278 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Siblings Ivy and Isaac Ramey, high school senior and junior respectively, arrived 
at their drug addictions along different routes. Ivy realized it was time to pull her 
act together and, with the help of Adderall, graduate and prove to her parents she’s 
not the loser they think; Isaac purloined a couple of his grandmother’s OxyContin 
to help manage pain from injuries that would certainly sideline him when college 
soccer scouts come to check out his team. Of course, readers know just where this 
is headed, and that it won’t be pretty, particularly as the Shustermans open their 
tale with a grim scene in which paramedics cannot revive an overdose victim identi-
fied only as “I. Ramey.” However, there’s a parallel cast involved in the impending 
tragedy: a full gamut of personified drugs bring their users to the never-ending 
Party, where they vie with each other to seduce their plus-ones to move upline, 
ever closer to the ultimate fatal experience. Ivy’s growing dependence on “Addison” 
and Isaac’s passionate fling with “Roxy” are part of a devious dare between the 
72 • The Bulletin
drugs (Addison feeling inferior and discredited by his more powerful colleagues, 
and Roxy flaunting her ascendent status in the pharmacological hierarchy) to 
single-handedly cause the user’s death. What could all too easily remain a gimmick 
becomes instead a compelling narrative force, and an entry into serious discussion 
of the line between therapeutic and recreational uses and how quickly and easily 
medicinal purpose is twisted by unmonitored distribution and usage. Watch for 
bold-typeface subtext embedded in chapter titles and in the penultimate chapter 
that enhances the extended metaphor.  EB
sMitH, cHarLes r., Jr. Song for Jimi: The Story of Guitar Legend Jimi Hendrix; 
illus. by Edel Rodriguez. Porter/Holiday House, 2021 [56p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780823443338 $22.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780823450305 $13.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 3-6
Smith and Rodriguez offer here a biography/tribute to guitar legend Jimi Hendrix 
in a picture book format tailored to a middle-grade audience. The book follows 
Hendrix from a childhood fraught with domestic turmoil and shadowed by the 
death of his mother through his mastery of and experimentation with electric 
guitar, ending with the Jimi Hendrix Experience’s U.S. iconic performance at the 
Monterey Pop Festival in 1967. Smith casts his narration in free verse rhythms 
reflective of Hendrix’s musical style at each period under discussion, and endnotes 
and a playlist direct careful readers to songs that inspire sections of verse. Rodriguez 
tracks Hendrix through a vibrant visual age progression that will engross readers 
with the revolving door of looks the emergent superstar tried en route to his pin-
nacle of fame, with ink and digital compositions quoting concert poster art of the 
late ’60s. A timeline of Hendrix’s life—which delivers something of a gut punch 
in demonstrating how little time elapsed between Monterey Pop and his death—is 
included, along with a discography and list of references.  EB
sMy, paM The Hideaway; written and illus. by Pam Smy. Pavilion, 2021 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781843654797 $19.95
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 5-7
Unable to deal with the abusive situation at home, young Billy follows through with 
his plan and runs away to a lonely graveyard; meanwhile, in alternating chapters, the 
search for the missing boy begins. It’s a simple tale but talented author and illustrator 
of the remarkable Thornhill (BCCB 7/17) shows again how gifted she is at layered 
storytelling, as the events unfold from multiple perspectives before converging to 
show the reconciliation of a mother and her son, as well as a reckoning with life, 
death, and the afterlife itself. There’s idealism in the fact that the one person Billy 
encounters in his graveyard hideaway is incredibly kind, generous, and even a bit 
tuned into the supernatural, but it’s a welcome levity as Billy could use a lucky break 
more than most. The ethereal and intricate illustrations are an extraordinary treat, 
and Smy masterfully uses angles and shadows to convey emotion; the gradual shift 
to softer curves and grays replacing black is a subtle one that hints at love renewed 
and connections thought lost being rebuilt. This is a thoughtful mix of ghost story 
and family drama with a cautiously happy ending, and there’s a rewarding amount 
of depth here to keep readers pondering long after the brief novel ends.  AS
October 2021 • 73
strycHacz, isaBeL Starling. Simon, 2021 [448p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781534481107 $19.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781534481121 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad Gr. 8-12
The Wilding sisters have always been considered outcasts in Darling, which suits 
solitary Delta just fine, but they unfortunately draw the attention of their small 
town when something flashing crashes from the sky into the woods on their prop-
erty. Delta and her sister Bee manage to find the falling object—which turns out 
to be a glowing boy—before her neighbors can descend upon the forest, and Delta 
decides to hide him in the house until the sisters figure out what to do with what 
they assume to be an alien. Starling, however, is something more than that, and 
while he’s looking for the energy source that might return him home, he and Delta 
grow closer; in the end, however, he knows that his true nature will keep them 
apart. There is a whimsical romanticism to the story and it swoons eagerly into the 
star-crossed lovers theme, but Starling and Delta’s relationship is never really given 
room to breathe, with the two instantly falling for each other but having very little 
chemistry. Similarly, the hostility of the Darling citizens is never explained, nor 
is the story of the sisters’ missing father fully explored. More interesting are Bee, 
whose loyalty to her sister is tested by this new love, and Delta’s ex-boyfriend, who 
chafes under his domineering father. Thomas’ When Light Left Us (BCCB 3/18) 
would be a more satisfying choice for those looking for a mix of sci-fi and magi-
cal realism, but the explosive final third act here is certainly a reward for readers’ 
persistence.  KQG
sweeney, kate Catch the Light. Philomel, 2021 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593350232 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593350249 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Senior year promises to be difficult for Marigold, usually called Mary; after the 
death of her father, her struggling mother decided to move the remaining family 
to rural New York to stay with the girls’ aunt, El. Mary desperately misses her best 
friend, Nora, and friend-turned-boyfriend, Bennett, and the rest of her California 
life; she also misses her mother, who still seems to be disappearing into her work. 
Gradually Mary makes some new friends, especially Jesse, the handsome photog-
raphy-loving classmate who has the only darkroom in town, bait for photographer 
Mary. However, she’s still in limbo, straining to remember her father, unable to 
face the future or fill out college applications, refusing to tell her friends or her 
mother the truth about how she’s doing, and falling for Jesse without making a 
break from Bennett. Sweeney writes with fluid elegance, effectively capturing the 
foggy disengagement often conferred by mourning, as Mary sleepwalks through 
life, always responding to her mother’s rote inquiries with the rote response that 
she’s fine. The portrayal of her drift from her distant friends is especially acute, as 
attempts to bridge the gap fail in the face of retreats to superficiality; meanwhile, 
she feels intensely responsible for troubled fourteen-year-old Bea, whose downward 
spiral is going unnoted by their mother except for the occasional argument. The 
shift toward romance with Jesse still offers plenty of sweetness despite the shadows, 
and there’s a lot of hope here, with Mary working her way out of her frozen state 
and loving her friends and family.  DS
74 • The Bulletin
swender, Jennifer Stuck. Crown, 2021 [144p]
Library ed. ISBN 9781101932957 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 9781101932940 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781101932964 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 3-5
Starting at yet another new school, Austin aims to fly safely under the social and 
academic radar: he’ll avoid pointless friendships by keeping his mouth closed and 
his too-tall self as inconspicuous as possible, and he’ll hide his reading struggles by 
listening to audiobooks or by wow-ing his teacher and classmates with his art skills. 
However, this school throws him nothing but curves: the fourth grade teacher, Mrs. 
G., is quite welcoming; friendly, motor-mouthed Bertie is sweetly protective; the 
school rules are clear and sensible; and the class projects are actually kind of inter-
esting. Just as Austin begins to envision a permanent place for himself in this novel 
environment, though, his reading issues surface, necessitating tutoring sessions with 
classmate Dee, whose behavioral oddities Austin quietly despises. Swender reprises 
the keenly observed portrayals of school dynamics she introduced in Solving for M 
(BCCB 4/19), sensitively conveying how the confluence of a well-managed school, 
creative instruction, and an atmosphere of sensible and consistent discipline can 
offer a haven for a struggling kid. Swender keeps the perspective true to Austin’s 
immediate concerns, and although perspicacious middle -grade readers will catch 
clues to some of the home issues that could be impacting his frequents moves and 
curricular scuffles, everyone will be happy to see him ultimately settle into a place 
of friendship and success.  EB
waLters, sara The Violent Season. Sourcebooks Fire, 2021 [288p]
Paper ed. ISBN 9781728234106 $10.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781728234113 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad Gr. 9-12
Every November, one or more residents of Wolf Ridge die a particularly violent 
death, a pattern that is unacknowledged but accepted by the small town. Last year, 
it was Wyatt’s mom, stabbed to death by an unknown intruder, and since then 
Wyatt’s unhealthy attachment to her friend Cash has only grown more toxic. One 
night, however, Cash takes his possessiveness to a whole new level and assaults her, 
and she finally decides to cut him off. She’s helped in part when she’s teamed up 
for a project with the school golden boy Porter, whose attention and sympathy 
eases Wyatt’s pain, but unfortunately Porter has his own problematic connection 
to Cash. Walters mines the suffocating chill of a small town on the eve of winter 
for all its worth, casting an otherworldly eeriness to the story that echoes Wyatt’s 
belief that there must be some sort of outside reason for so many tragic Novembers. 
The portrait of her relationship with Cash is painfully accurate as readers see her 
internalize his constant gaslighting and look for the good in him, even after the 
assault. Unfortunately, she never gains much agency here, merely leaving Cash’s 
arms for Porter’s, and while Porter’s a perfectly decent guy and Wyatt is certainly 
deserving of that decency, she seems all too willing yet again to put her well-being 
into someone else’s hands. Still, Wyatt’s imagistic narration is lacerating in its por-
trayal of grief and trauma, and readers struggling with their own scars, emotional 
or physical, may appreciate her eloquent articulation of her pain.  KQG
October 2021 • 75
weLLs, reBecca kiM Briar Girls. Simon, 2021 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781534488427 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781534488441 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Lena was cursed at birth by a witch: anyone she touches with her bare skin bursts 
into flame and dies. In hopes of escaping her constrained life and finding a way to 
break the curse, she follows a beautiful, mysteriously injured girl named Miranda 
into the Silence, a sinister forest beyond which is the Gather, a city where mages 
can do magic. Miranda, having failed in her mission to kill the princess sleeping 
at the top of a briar-covered tower, has soured on the evil mage-king she served, 
and Lena wants to trust her, but people (including Alaric, the unhappy, alluring 
servant of the witch who cursed Lena) keep advising her against it. As Lena searches 
for answers, her hunger for touch—possible, she learns, through a loophole in the 
curse—leads her to explore her sexuality, first with Alaric and then with Miranda. 
Her yearning for physicality and connection yields a sweetly angst-free love story, 
while she reacts to revelations about her parents’ decisions with understandable 
anger and resentment. A few plot elements are overly convenient, but there are solid 
emotional throughlines, and for readers whose criteria are “bisexual sex-positive 
fairy tale,” this is it.  FHK
wenzeL, Brendan Inside Cat. Chronicle, 2021 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781452173191 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781797214740 11.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R* 4-7 yrs
Inside Cat is an expert on what’s outside the windows of its home—it observes 
construction, nature, and other animals daily. The rhyming text soon reveals that 
Inside Cat has its own eccentric interpretation of phenomena viewed at a distance, 
though, when it assumes that helicopters are “roaring flies,” that bubbles are “float-
ing eyes,” and that a construction worker poking a head out of a manhole lives 
underground. “Inside Cat might know it ALL!” the page boldly exclaims right before 
Inside Cat finally goes out the front door and sees the actual vivid city around it: 
“Oh.” Wenzel cleverly depicts the inside of the house as predominantly negative 
space with partially transparent outlines, while the views out of the windows in 
varied shapes are depicted in vivid color. Inside Cat itself is a scribbly ball of energy 
with a frequently open Muppet-like mouth to match its frenetic energy. As the 
picture book progresses, outside reality joins up with interior drawings to hybridize 
what Inside Cat sees with what it imagines: a girl’s seesaw partner is a dinosaur, for 
example, and that subterranean construction worker brings a wedge of cheese to 
some eager mice. The soothing cadence with its recurring refrain (“Inside cat knows 
many windows, finds a view wherever it goes”) makes this a pleasing bedtime pick 
for those who want to contemplate what their pets think of the outside world and 
enjoy sparking their own imaginations before sleep.  NB
76 • The Bulletin
weyMoutH, Laura e. A Rush of Wings. McElderry, 2021 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781534493087 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781534493100 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 8-12
Rowenna’s mother, Mairead, is murdered by a supernatural creature on a stormy 
night in their Scottish seaside village, but then when Rowenna’s father and brother 
return from a day’s fishing, Mairead returns with them as well. The new Mairead is 
a fuath (evil spirit), though, threatening Rowenna and eventually cursing the entire 
family by transforming her brothers into swans and magically taking Rowenna’s 
ability to speak. With the blame for the dark magic on her shoulders, Rowenna 
must use the unrefined craft the real Mairead refused to teach her to break the 
curse—and she’ll get embroiled in Inverness politics and the gimmicks of a ter-
rifying man named Torr Pendragon along the way. Weymouth’s novel is brimming 
with fairy-tale magic and creatures from Scottish folklore; while some of the places 
and events are fictional, the novel still maintains a wonderfully immersive histori-
cal fiction feel. Beyond its exquisite story and eighteenth-century Scottish setting, 
readers will be swept up in Rowenna’s battle with her inner demons, the choices 
she must make against a nuanced, realistically manipulative villain, and the struggle 
of prioritizing herself versus others in an oppressive situation. Those who enjoyed 
Lim’s Six Crimson Cranes (BCCB 7/21), also based on “The Wild Swans,” will 
have a lot to consider about each novel’s unique take on the source material.  NB
yeLcHin, eugene The Genius under the Table: Growing Up behind the Iron Curtain; 
written and illus. by Eugene Yelchin. Candlewick, 2021 [208p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781536215526 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781536222340 $16.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R* Gr. 4-7
The multitalented author/illustrator here turns his lens on his own life as a child 
in Soviet Russia during the 1960s and ’70s, living in a one-room Leningrad apart-
ment with his older brother, parents, and grandmother. His brother was a gifted 
figure skater, and his mother, who worked for the ballet academy connected with 
the Kirov Ballet and was a devotee of its star Mikhail Baryshnikov, was determined 
that her younger son too would have an important talent, since that was the route 
to a better life under the Soviet regime. Young Yevgeny (Russian for Eugene) was 
sadly lacking in any of the talents they prized, however, preferring to secretly draw 
on the underside of the table under which he slept, pilfering his father’s pencil to 
sketch quietly late at night. This spirited memoir, generously interspersed with lively 
black and white drawings, paints a vivid picture of life under the Soviet regime, as 
Yevgeny questions strange gaps in family history and the Yelchins loudly praise the 
Soviet government to placate the KGB spy in their building, even as antisemitism 
limits their possibilities and means constant harassment. The tone, however, is 
energetic and often humorous amid the danger and tragedy as Yelchin describes 
his tart-tongued grandmother, his poetry-loving father, his Misha-loving mother 
(who is grief-stricken at the dancer’s defection), and his fascination with illicit 
Americana. Ultimately the memoir ends on a hopeful note, but as young Yevgeny 
is just beginning to explore his artistic talent there are likely more stories to tell, so 
with any luck Yelchin will follow this with a second autobiographical volume.  DS
October 2021 • 77
Corrections
In the September issue review of Brigid Kemmerer’s Defy the Night, we stated that 
the book was a stand-alone fantasy, but it will indeed have a sequel. We apologize for 
leaving our readers in the dark and are glad for the chance to enlighten them now.
In the September issue, we referred to Vikram Madan’s Let’s Make Cake as Let’s Make 
a Cake. We are pleased there is potential for more than one cake.
78 • The Bulletin
Abuse—fiction: Smy
Activism: Hudson; Lewis
Addiction—fiction: Shusterman
ADHD—fiction: Carter
ADVENTURE: Chokshi; Harrell; 
Miyares
African Americans: Hudson; Lewis
ANTHOLOGIES: Jones, D.
Anxiety—fiction: Durfey-Lavoie; Fung
Appearance—stories: Martin; Rubin
Asian Americans—fiction: Becker
Autistic people—fiction: McNicoll
BEDTIME STORIES: DeRoma
BIOGRAPHIES: Eriksen; Hudson; 
Lewis; Lyon; Smith; Yelchin
Black people—fiction: Chase; Coles; 
Jones, K.
Black people—stories: Clarke
Books and reading—stories: Blackall
Bullying—fiction: Matheson
Cats—stories: Blackall; Fox; Martin; 
Wenzel
Chickens—stories: Rubin
Chinese Canadians—fiction: Fung
Chores—stories: McGinty, A.
Codes and ciphers—fiction: Chokshi
Comics: Eriksen
Crafts—stories: Salas
Crime and criminals—fiction: 
Forman; Harrell; McCrossen; 
Owen
Current events: Clarke; Coles; Ivery; 
Shusterman
Curses—fiction: Weymouth
Death—fiction: McFall; Sweeney; 
Walters
Depression—fiction: McGinty, S.
Dinosaurs: Lyon
Dogs—stories: Fox
Dragons—fiction: Salvatore
Drugs—fiction: Shusterman
Ethics and values: Barnett; Clarke; 
Cohoe; Glock; Jones, K.; Mathieu
Families—fiction: Carter; Chase
Families—stories: Maclear; McGinty, A.
FANTASY: Bishara; Blackwood; 
Bowles; Chokshi; Gong; Lackey; 
McGinty, S.; Meyer; Owen; 
Salvatore; Weymouth
Fathers—stories: Miyares
Folktales and fairy tales—fiction: 
Lackey; Meyer; Owen; Pohl;  
Weymouth
Friends—fiction: Bacon; Capin; 
Forman; Higgins; Mathieu; Pohl; 
Sweeney; Swender
Ghosts—fiction: Capin; Smy
Grandparents—stories: Maclear
GRAPHIC NOVELS: Becker; 
Bowles; Durfey-Lavoie; Fahmy; 
Fung; Glock; Lewis
Grief—fiction: Bacon; Sweeney; 
Walters
Guitars: Smith
HISTORICAL FICTION: Forman; 
Lasky; Mathieu
History, U.S.: Coles; Glock; Hudson; 
Lewis
Homelessness—fiction: Matheson
HORROR: Blackwood; Carson
Houses—stories: Wenzel
HUMOR: Biedrzycki; Blackall; 
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
October 2021 • 79
Gehrlein; Harrell; Martin; 
Rubin; Salas
Identity—fiction: Becker; Fahmy
Illness—fiction: Carson; Gong
Imagination—fiction: Bacon
Japan—stories: Maclear
Japan—fiction: Becker
LGBTQIA people—stories: McGinty, 
A.
Literature, English: Blackwood; 
Bowles; Cohoe; Gong
Love—stories: Barnett
Magic—fiction: Blackwood; Cohoe; 
Lackey; Meyer; Salvatore
MEMOIR: Fahmy; Yelchin
Mexico—fiction: Bowles
Mice—stories: Fox
Monsters—fiction: Gong; Gehrlein; 
Smy
Music and musicians: Smith
Muslims—fiction: Fahmy
MYSTERIES: Chokshi; McCrossen; 
Pohl
Mythology, classical: Rubin
Native Americans: Jones, D.
Nature study: DeRoma
Neurodiverse people—fiction: Carter
Paleontology: Lyon
Persecution—fiction: McNicoll
Pets—stories: Blackall
Prophecies—fiction: Bishara; Salvatore
Protests—fiction: Jones, K.
Race—fiction: Jones, K.
Racism—fiction: Coles; Ivery
Racism: Hudson
Reading, easy: Harrell; Higgins
Relationships—fiction: McCrossen; 
Strychacz; Sweeney; Walters
RHYMING STORIES: Clarke; 
McGinty, A.; Wenzel
Romance—fiction: Choksh; Ivery; 
McFall; Meyer; Strychacz
Royalty—fiction: Owen
Rules—stories: Gehrlein
School—fiction: Bacon; Becker 
Carter; Durfey-Lavoie; Fahmy; 
Fung; Higgins; Ivery; Matheson; 
McNicoll; Sweeney
SCIENCE FICTION: Carson; 
McGinty, S.
Science: Lyon
Secrets—fiction: Chase
Sexism—fiction: McCrossen
Sexual assault—fiction: Bishara
Sheep—stories: Salas
Ships and sailing—stories: Miyares
Sisters—fiction: Bishara; McNicoll; 
Strychacz
Spiders—stories: DeRoma
Spies and espionage—fiction: Lasky; 
Glock
Stars—fiction: Strychacz
Storytime: Fox; Gehrlein
Superheroes—fiction: Harrell
SUPERNATURAL STORIES: Jones, 
D.; Smy; Walters
THRILLERS: Capin
Time travel—fiction: Coles
Toys—stories: Biedrzycki
Unicorns—stories: Biedrzycki
Video games—fiction: McGinty, S.
Voyages and travel—fiction: McFall
Voyages and travel—stories: Barnett
Women’s studies: Lyon
World War II—fiction: Lasky
Writers and writing: Eriksen; Yelchin
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
Bookbird:
A Journal of International Children’s Literature
The Bulletin of the Center for 
Children’s Books
Children’s Literature
Children’s Literature 
Association Quarterly
Journal of the History of 
Childhood and Youth
The Lion and the Unicorn
