ILLI NI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
I~
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
'p9., ·
..
-9: 
Hapr•ii
THE
BUvL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
April 2003
Vol. 56 No. 8
A LOOK INSIDE
301 THE BIG PICTURE
Lizards: Weird and Wonderful by Margery Facklam; illus. by Alan Male
302 NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
303 * Silent Movie by Avi; illus. by C. B. Mordan
307 * Stanley, FlatAgain! by Jeff Brown; illus. by Scott Nash
312 
* Bow Wow Meow Meow: It's Rhyming Cats and Dogs written and illus. by
Douglas Florian
317 
* Annie Rose Is My Little Sister written and illus. by Shirley Hughes
321 
* Alchemy by Margaret Mahy
340 
CHILDREN'S BOOK AWARDS 2003
342 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Centerfor Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Publications Office of the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of
the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of Illinois Press,
1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS)
Janice M. Del Negro, Contributing Editor (JMD)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JMH)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
OFFICE STAFF
Jennifer DeBaillie
Natalie Hoyle
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $66.00; individuals, $50.00; students, $15.00. In countries other than the
United States, add $7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya
Company Ltd. Single copy rate: $5.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus
Reprint Co., Route 100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from ProQuest, 300
North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin ofthe Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
All inquiries about subscriptions and advertising should go to University of Illinois Press, 1325 S.
Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903, 217-333-0950; toll free 866-244-0626.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The
Bulletin ofthe Center for Children's Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email:
bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2003 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Alan Male from Lizards: Weird and Wonderful ©2003. Used by permission of
Little, Brown and Company.
APRIL 2003 
* 
301
THE BIG PICTURE
Lizards: Weird and Wonderful
by Margery Facklam; illus. by Alan Male
What do you know? Lizards really are weird and wonderful, as Facklam makes
clear in this delightful, accessible, and scaly nonfiction entry that introduces read-
ers to a reptilian baker's dozen. There are lizards here to coo over (the gecko really
is pretty cute), lizards here to gross out your little sister (the full frontal portrait of
a Gila monster consuming a kangaroo rat may even get a reading kid banned from
the dinner table if judiciously revealed), and lizards to marvel at (the birdlike basil-
isks can actually run across the top of the water), plus general lizard information
that will give youngsters a bit more context for that next zoo visit or woodshed
run-in.
The recent growth of nonfiction for young people has been a boon, since
there have been more and more excellent titles exploring the world's factual won-
ders; sometimes, though, such titles have succumbed to increasing employment of
bells and whistles rather than relying on faith in the interest value of the subject
itself. This book doesn't make that mistake; in fact, it's a rather unassuming vol-
ume in layout, focusing not on its production values but on, thank heavens, liz-
ards, making it better conceived than some fancier titles. There's also a well-chosen
lizard cast, which includes big famous lizards such as the Komodo dragon, smaller
famous lizards such as the chameleon, undeservedly obscure lizards such as the
glass snake (which might be better known were it not pretending to belong to
another biological suborder), and others who could each make absorbing single-
title subjects in their own right. Facklam, however, never turns this into a hasty
encyclopediac compendium: this is more like attending a lizard party with a fond
hostess who offers enticing gossip by way of introducing her guests and their con-
nections. Her witty overviews are rich with just the kind of information kids want
to know (the popularity of our gentle cover lizard, the chuckwalla, as a main dish
because of its flowery diet, or the study of the mysterious sticking power of gecko
toes), even down to the final chart explaining "how to tell the difference-or try
to" between snakes, lizards, and salamanders. The occasional anecdote adds fur-
ther spice and suggests a warm appreciation for the subject and writings thereon
(the author has a good eye for piquant quotes), and details and implications about
biology, ecology, geography, and a few other subjects add depth to the entries.
Male's art offers lizards worthy of the text. His occasional backgrounded
human figures are stiff and almost deliberately inferior, as if trying not to upstage
the magnificent reptiles, which are the really important characters in these spreads.
His lizards often evince an astonishing photorealism: there's an almost three-
dimensional articulation to the scales of the basilisk, the moth-eaten shedding skin
of the marine iguana, and the glossy beading on the Gila monster. These are no
taxidermized images, however-he displays a wildlife photographer's instinct for
302 
* THE BULLETIN
strong compositions, with lizards spilling across the pages, sometimes directing the
visual flow with their lanky bodies. The illustrations also evince a pleasing taste for
drama; aside from the show-stopping Gila monster, there are several other lizards
involved in the delicate act of acquiring dinner, including a chameleon with his
tongue tidily unfurled to retrieve a grasshopper.
This is the kind of title that's blessedly useful in a multitude of direc-
tions. The action and unpatronizing humor will appeal to a broad range of read-
ers, from precocious youngsters to reluctant middle-schoolers; the lively text and
dramatic images would make it an effective change-of-pace readaloud (especially if
there's a class lizard present or arriving); its plethora of information allows it to slip
neatly into various curricular units. Even kids cold-blooded about reptiles will
find something to interest them here. (Imprint information appears on p. 312.)
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ADLER, DAVID A. Mama Played Baseball; illus. by Chris O'Leary. 
Gulliver/
Harcourt, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-15-202196-5 
$16.00 
Ad 
5-7 yrs
There's a war on, Daddy's been called into the service, and Mama must get a job to
keep the family going. Her strongest skill is fielding a ball, and after enlisting her
young daughter (the narrator) at practice, Mama's off to tryouts for the All-American
Girls' Professional Baseball League. She makes the team, and all through the season
Grandma, Grandpa, and daughter cheer at the home games and wait out the road
trips. One day Mama dons her uniform and heads off to the train station with her
little girl in tow for a surprise: "'Are you taking me to a faraway game?' Mama
didn't answer. She just smiled." No, they are there to meet Dad, home from the
war: "Mama touched his cheek and said, 'You look so handsome in your uniform.'
Dad smiled and said, 'And you look so pretty in yours.'" Adler offers an engaging
premise, but there's more family sentiment here than contextual details concerning
the women's league and the war that effectively spawned and nurtured it. Although
O'Leary supplies some inviting depictions of leggy Mama stretching for a catch
and loping athletically through the depot to greet her husband, a few too many
spreads focusing on somber neighborhood streets and quiet family gatherings will
probably leave viewers clamoring for less posing and more action. An author's
note briefly comments on the League, but listeners must puzzle out references to
The Jack Benny Show and Grandpa's old war medals on their own. EB
ADLER, DAVID A. 
A Picture Book of Lewis and Clark; illus. by Ronald
Himler. 
Holiday House, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1735-2 $16.95 
Ad 6-8 yrs
Adler climbs aboard the L & C bicentennial bandwagon with this primary-grades
offering that's part biography and part expedition history, neither fully successful.
APRIL 2003 
* 303
Organization is problematic, opening with the 1804 Corps of Discovery, back-
tracking through truncated life stories of Meriwether Lewis and William Clark,
weaving in some background about the Louisiana Purchase and Jefferson's early
plans for an exploration party, and then rejoining the Corps in Clarksville, Indi-
ana, 1803. The Corps' discoveries and exploits are reduced to little more than an
outline, with natural sights passing in a blur and human encounters generally de-
picted as undifferentiated events ("They met many American Indian tribes and
their chiefs. Lewis and Clark spoke with them, and distributed gifts and peace
tokens"). Himler softens the Easterners' view of the panorama with hazy water-
color scenes, blunting the Western ranges, smoothing the riverbanks, shrinking
the buffalo. Still, there's sufficient data in text, notes, and timeline to clue kids in
on the anniversary hoopla and possibly whet their appetites for other picture books
treatments, such as Rosalyn Schanzer's How We Crossed the West (BCCB 11/97).
EB
ALLEN, SUSAN 
ReadAnything Good Lately?; by Susan Allen and Jane Lindaman;
illus. by Vicky Enright. 
Millbrook, 2003 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7613-2322-8 
$22.90
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7613-1889-5 
$14.95 
Ad 
6-8 yrs
Starting with the title question, the text segues into a biblio-alphabet, featuring
"an atlas at the airport," "a biography in bed," "comic books around the camp-
fire," and on until the "zodiac at the zoo." This is not a book for teaching the
alphabet so much as a book that uses the alphabet as an organizing principle; it's
therefore rather strained, though it may be useful as an introduction to different
kinds of literature. Cozy everyday interiors and exteriors feature boxed upper and
lower case Crayola-colored letters in the upper left corners of each page, with a
letter-related object featured near the letter itself (a rainbow for the letter R, a lady
bug for the letter L, a bumblebee for the letter B, etc.); thought balloons above the
heads of the reading characters give clues to the content of their reading matter.
That's a lot to ask of a spread, and the compositions sometimes go beyond the
cheerfully bustling to the visually overcrowded, but lapsitters will enjoy playing
seek-and-find with the details in the busy illustrations. The invitation on the final
page to "think of places" where the reader might read other forms of literature may
provide adults with another pedagogical but playful platform. JMD
Avi 
Silent Movie; illus. by C. B. Mordan. 
Schwartz/Atheneum, 2003 
4 8p
ISBN 0-689-84145-0 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 2-4
The often-experimental Avi takes another new direction here, attempting to bring
the silent-movie format to the printed page. He's certainly got a plot to tug at
early cinematic heartstrings: young Gustave leaves Sweden with his mother to join
his father in America, the land of opportunity, but the family fails to reconnect in
New York. Struggling to stay alive, Gustave is enraged when a thief steals the few
coins he's managed to beg. Fortunately, a friend from the old country gives the
mother a job and both of them a place to sleep; even more fortunately, Gustave's
apprehension of the dastardly thief catches the eye of Bartholomew Bunting, movie
producer, and gets him a profitable role in the movies; more fortunately still,
Gustave's father sees his son onscreen and finally manages to reunite with his fam-
ily. The story is cornball but appropriately and consciously so; while the textual
captions are sometimes somewhat disjointed, the action moves along briskly.
304 
* THE BULLETIN
Though the visuals are considerably more static than even those of the jerkiest one-
reeler, Mordan has made the most of his black-and-white engravings, drawing
strongly on popular convention in his figures' poses and appearance (the flashing-
eyed villain sports beetle brows and a humongous and terrifying mustache). His
deft hatching and crosshatching effectively convey the grainy textures of early film;
shiny black backgrounds suggest the dark of film material as well as film medium,
while the white text and slender white borders dramatically pierce the darkness.
Since this is designed entirely in reference to the genre of early film, it will probably
have its greatest effect when used in concert with exploration of such movies (or
other visual narratives) so that young audiences get a chance to appreciate its full
range; they may even contemplate creating silent movies, in books or on video, of
their own. DS
BANKS, KATE 
Mama's Coming Home; illus. by Tomek Bogacki. 
Foster/Farrar,
2003 
[2 6p]
ISBN 0-374-34747-6 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-6 yrs
In this lively rhythmic story, a busy mother makes her way home from her urban
workplace at end of day while a busy father prepares dinner and tries to exert a
modicum of control on the domestic chaos of a baby, two boys, a dog, and a cat.
The pace is quick and, in a homey way, suspenseful as text and art cut between
Mama's commute and homefront anticipation, repeating the "Mama's coming
home" refrain at least once on every spread, until finally there's the joyous home-
coming ("Kisses flying. No more crying./ Mama's at the door...// Mama's home!").
While the rhythm varies considerably (occasional rhymes, both end and internal,
add further piquancy), the effect is that of intentional and galloping informality.
The details about home, familiar and accessible to young audiences, balance deftly
with the mundane components of the workday, which are often an unpicturable
mystery to kids. Bogacki uses the same nubbly, crayon-like paintstrokes and child-
like draftsmanship he employed in Jenkins' Five Creatures (BCCB 2/01); home
and away visions contrast slightly in their paired and softly rounded scenes, with
slashing rains and slate grays dominating Mama's travels while home is awash in
sunny and cheerful colors. It's nice to see a caretaking dad, and the waiting-for-
parent theme and details will resonate with any youngster whose family is only
complete after somebody's workday ends. DS
BATT, TANYA ROBYN, ad. 
The Faerie's Gift; illus. by Nicoletta Ceccoli. 
Barefoot,
2003 
32p
ISBN 1-84148-998-0 
$16.99 
R 
5-8 yrs
A poor woodcutter saves a faerie from an attacking hawk, and as a reward he is
given one wish. His good fortune turns problematic, however, when his wife, his
mother, and his father all suggest different ways to use the wish: his childless wife
wants a baby, his blind mother wants her sight, and his poor father wants riches
("Suddenly, that one wonderful wish seemed to him to be nothing but a heavy
burden. How could he know what was the right thing to wish for?"). A flash of
inspiration provides the answer that makes everyone's wish come true, and all ends
happily. The clean, unflowery language supports the swift yet unhurried pace of
the tale, making it an easy choice for reading or telling aloud. Ceccoli's airy acrylic
and oil pastel illustrations suit the out-of-time ("Once upon a time, and it wasn't
APRIL 2003 
* 
305
my time and it wasn't your time . .. ") setting of the tale. The cool greens of the
forest and blues of the night sky are warmed by a sunset glow that suffuses most of
the pages. Stylistically, Ceccoli is a combination of Dorothee Duntze and Giselle
Potter: elongated figures and domestic objects often float untethered in composi-
tions that reflect both the concrete actions and the ephemeral thoughts of the
characters. A note identifies the storyteller from whom Batt heard "the original
seed of this tale" and states that "it can be found in many forms across many
cultures," but no specific written source is given. JMD
BENDUHN, TEA 
Gravel Queen. 
Simon, 2003 
[16 0 p]
ISBN 0-689-84994-X 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
It's the summer before senior year, and Aurin is expecting the usual, hanging out
with her best friends, Kenney (a glamour girl with social ambitions) and Fred
(openly gay), and trying to avoid her warring parents. It's no surprise that Fred is
mooning over handsome Grant Grayson, and it's no surprise that Kenney thinks
that hanging out with Grant's cool cousin Neila ("so ethnic-chic," says Kenney
about African-American Neila) might boost the trio's trendy quotient. There's
considerable surprise, however, for Aurin in her own strong and reciprocated at-
traction to Neila, in the development of their relationship, and in the effect that
relationship has on the ever-demanding Kenney. Benduhn parts from reality in
her blissfully romantic picture of confident, enticing Neila and her certain affec-
tion for Aurin, and the device of Aurin's recounting scenes in film-director terms
often seems just an excuse for lush description, but there's sincere sweetness in the
story of awakening interest and self-knowledge. The contrapuntal story of Aurin's
changing relationship with Kenney is satisfyingly complex: it's a credible depic-
tion of a friendship wherein the power dynamics are changing, it's refreshing to see
an examination of the jealousy even a platonic friend may feel when she's de-
throned as main girlfriend, and Kenney, with her needy bossiness, is a rather in-
triguing character. This isn't quite up to the standard of Ryan's Empress of the
World (BCCB 9/01), but it should still suit readers looking for a romantic coming-
out story with some intriguing trappings. DS
BENNETT, JILL, comp. 
Grandad's Tree: Poems about Families; illus. by Julia
Cairns. 
Barefoot, 2003 
32p
ISBN 1-84148-541-1 
$16.99 
R 
4-8 yrs
The poems in this collection reflect a diverse range of experience under the rubric
of family. Included are poems that show the various sentiments of family life:
humor, affection, sorrow, sibling rivalry, and intergenerational love. The collec-
tion is decidedly multicultural, featuring work from such notable contemporary
children's poets as Arnold Adoff, Grace Nichols, Michael Rosen, and Eve Merriam,
among others, as well as classics from Christina Rossetti and Carl Sandburg. There
are some purposive and weak entries, and the sophistication level varies somewhat,
but there are also a multitude of fresh and lively poems. Watercolors underscore
the multicultural (and, indeed, global) viewpoint; though figures are occasionally
more awkward than naive, there's an accessible specificity to many of the scenes
and a decorative balance that presents the poems to good advantage. Those look-
ing to broaden the family beyond Javaka Steptoe's In Daddy's Arms I Am Tall
(BCCB 2/98) will find this a useful poetic compilation. KC
306 
* THE BULLETIN
BLUITGEN, KARE 
A Boot Fellfrom Heaven; illus. by Chiara Carrer. 
Kane/Miller,
2003 
[3 0p]
ISBN 1-929321-45-X 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-10 yrs
While dangling his feet off a low-floating cloud, God drops a boot. How annoy-
ing, since "he's had the boots for ages and has grown very fond of them." There's
nothing to do but go down and get it-a quick trip to Earth and sprint back home
to heaven. Human beings, however, are less than cooperative when faced with a
semi-shod old man spouting a cock-and-bull story concerning divine identity and
errant footwear. God is sassed, patronized, and generally put off; after an encoun-
ter with the cops ("Tomorrow we'll take you to a nice place where you can meet
Napoleon and Caesar and lot of other people who think they're God too"), he's
even left cooling his, hmm, heel in the slammer. Finally it's a little boy who hands
over the missing boot: "I saw a boot falling from the sky. Nobody but God could
lose a boot like that." Bluitgen's tongue-in-cheek narration is ably accompanied
by Carrer's inventive mixed media scenes, in which broad swabs of paint, clipped
newsprint, photo snippets, and cartoon-like drawing turn Earth into a setting more
surreal than heaven itself. After God's rollicking adventures down below, Bluitgen's
moral on childlike faith lands with overly tidy finality. Nonetheless, adults look-
ing for a parable with some punch will want to add this to the Sunday school
canon. EB
BLUTHENTHAL, DIANA CAIN 
I'm Not Invited?; written and illus. by Diana Cain
Bluthenthal. 
Jackson/Atheneum, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-689-84141-8 
$16.95 
R 
6-9 yrs
Minnie overhears a conversation, and to her little-girl ears it sounds as if her best
friend, Charles, is having a party. Anticipation of a forthcoming invitation changes
to anxiety and then to sadness as the expected invitation never arrives. On the day
of the party, a morose Minnie bicycles past Charles' home, only to see the house
festooned with balloons of many colors. Convinced Charles has abandoned her,
Minnie goes to the dirt field to play kickball with her other friends. She runs into
Charles, and the mystery is revealed: it isn't Charles' party, it's his sister's. Al-
though Bluthenthal dedicates this story "to anyone, or the friend of anyone, who's
ever felt left out," she pulls her punch in the end, since Minnie isn't really left out,
she's just mistaken. Minnie's progressive unhappiness is so successfully limned,
however, that the story is still poignant, despite the happy ending. Watercolor
illustrations are clean-lined and simple, and changing layouts from page to page
(vignettes and full- and half-page paintings) add variety for the viewing eye.
Bluthenthal has Minnie's point of view down pat, and her falling spirits as the
week goes by with no sign of an invitation and no word from Charles are palpable.
Adults may find this particularly useful for creating empathy in the primary-grade
social set. JMD
BRODSKY, 
BEVERLY 
Buffalo; comp., written, and illus. by Beverly
Brodsky. 
Cavendish, 2003 
37p
ISBN 0-7614-5133-1 
$18.95 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Haunting paintings in watercolor and oil are the heartbeat of a book that presents,
in accompaniment, song-poems from Plains Indian tribes who survived and thrived
on buffalo meat, hides, sinews, bones, and the spiritual connection between hu-
APRIL 2003 
* 307
man and animal lives. Brodsky's deeply textured, monolithic compositions reach
for that spiritual connection, barely suggesting, in some cases, the literal details but
always respecting the anatomical proportions of these powerful beasts through the
play of their shapes against earthtoned or blood-red backgrounds. Contrasting
lyrics in turquoise are effectively offset with explanations in smaller black typeface,
which describe both specific rituals and more general cultural context of the buffalo's
significance among the Pawnee, Mandan, Osage, Sioux, Dakota, and Hidatsa.
Stark chants recount the buffaloes' cycle, from herds at their peak ("I rise, I rise,/ I,
whose tread makes the earth rumble") to an old bull's sad decline ("our father/ the
buffalo/ heavy with age,/ endlessly walking,// too heavy to rise again/ if he should
fall"). Source notes primarily cite I, the Song, Classical Poetry ofNative North America
and bulletins or annual reports of the Bureau of Ethnology. Unfortunately, the
notes refer to incorrect page numbers for all the poems, but diligent readers can
match the first phrase of each poem, which is cited in the notes, back to the right
text. Despite the varied media and styles that Brodsky employs, the total effect of
the book is cohesively intense, and the cover-two staring eyes and two dark rect-
angles for nose and mouth, all set against mottled browns bled off the page-is
riveting. Pair this with Russell Freedman's Buffalo Hunt (BCCB 10/88) for a
combination of aesthetic and factual understanding. BH
BROWN, JEFF 
Stanley, Flat Again!; illus. by Scott Nash. 
HarperCollins,
2003 
87p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029826-X 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-009551-2 
$14.99 
R* 
Gr. 2-4
The one character who's better when he's two-dimensional returns in this happily
goofy new title. Stanley Lambchop's flatness cure (he'd been inflated with a bi-
cycle pump) unfortunately loses its efficacy when he's accidentally struck on his
Osteal Balance Point (according to his doctor, now the world's leading expert on
flatness), so he's flat again. While flatness has its advantages (Stanley makes a
dandy spinnaker on a family friend's yacht), Stanley's a little daunted by the vari-
ous adventures he's encountered over the last few books ("Why am I always get-
ting flat, or invisible or something?"). Fortunately, his minor reservations are easily
overcome, and he's ready and willing to save his unpleasant classmate when a
building partially collapses around her, leaving only enough space for a flat person
to reach her. Brown has perfect pitch with this eternally loopy story, treating the
strange happenings with a deadpan Thurberesque humor that makes even Stanley's
angsting (and a very nonproductive visit with the school counselor) warmly come-
dic. It's the parodic normality of the situation that renders the proceedings enter-
tainingly ridiculous, as when the doctor penetratingly inquires, "Is there, perhaps,
a family history of flatness?" or the fire chief points out the limited damage Stanley
could sustain in a total building collapse: 
"We've got to remember the boy is
already flat." Nash's illustrations give the Lambchops a comically Weeble-like
roundness, and even Stanley has a perky, if pressed, presence. DS
CHEN, DA 
Wandering Warrior. Delacorte, 2003 
322p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90089-9 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73020-9 
$15.95 
M 
Gr. 5-8
The distinctive moles on Luka's feet mark him as the future emperor of China,
destined to wrest control of the kingdom from the Mogos under their evil leader,
308 
* THE BULLETIN
Ghengi. The boy is lovingly protected, nurtured, and tutored by the monk Atami
until the pair are separated by their enemies. After dodging a death sentence with
the assistance of kung fu grandmaster Gulan (who is also Atami's old colleague),
Luka makes his way to a monastery where he's party to entirely too many fortu-
itous reunions, he spars with jealous boy monks, he rides mythical beasts, and he
generally passes the time in martial-arts escapades until the inevitable showdown
with Ghengi (who-shades of Luke Skywalker-is Luka's father). Chen gets off
to a good start with the time-honored but viable tale of a pauper prince awaiting
his true destiny; unfortunately, he hangs this plotline in the back of the closet and
garbs the story with cardboard characterizations, a glitzy parade of fantastical fauna,
and dialogue worthy of a dubbed Asian B movie: "Way to go, Luka man. You are
very, very holy there"; "'You still stink.' 'Now you do too.' 'This whole place
stinks' . . . 'Stop being such a clean monk. Stinking is mighty good for you.'"
Readers in search of a gripping martial arts tale will want to look a bit further East,
to Haugaard's The Boy and the Samurai (BCCB 4/91) and other such adventures
or Kimmel's Sword of the Samurai (4/99). EB
CHENG, ANDREA 
Goldfish and Chrysanthemums; illus. by Michelle Chang. 
Lee
& Low, 2003 
[32p]
ISBN 1-58430-057-4 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-9 yrs
Nancy's Grandma Ni Ni receives a letter from her brother in China explaining
that the city is tearing down their father's old house to make way for a new apart-
ment building. Ni Ni shows Nancy and her brother photographs, sharing her
fond memories of her old garden: "Ba Ba had a fishpond in the middle.... All
day I follow him, help him pinch the buds and feed the fish." It is cear to Nancy
that Ni Ni mourns the loss of her father's house and garden, and later that day at
the schoolyard fair she wins a cheer-up present for her grandmother-two gold-
fish. Nancy decides to dig a goldfish pond under the backyard honeysuckle bush,
and, with the help of her brother and their neighbor, Mrs. Zalinsky, she does just
that. A delighted Ni Ni christens the pond "Ba Ba's Garden in America," and they
take pictures to send to China. The story is warmhearted, and there's some origi-
nality in focusing on the adult, rather than the child, who's sad at what's left be-
hind. Unfortunately, the story is overly explanatory and text-heavy. The oil
paintings are stiff and literal, with pedestrian compositions, and their yellowed
finish makes the palette dingy. Still, the obvious affection among the various
family members makes Nancy's efforts both touching and credible, and the not-
so-far-fetched conclusion is quietly but solidly satisfying. JMD
CODELL, ESMI RAJI 
Sahara Special. Hyperion, 2003 
[208p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2627-4 
$16.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0793-8 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
There are two stories of Sahara's life: one, the file the school keeps on her, contain-
ing her yearning letters to her absent father and information about her educational
Special Needs; two, the narrative she herself writes and secretes in a special spot in
her beloved library. The arrival of an enthusiastic and iconoclastic new fifth-grade
teacher, Miss Pointy, heralds an educational change that means growth for every-
body in the class, but especially for Sahara, who finally receives the encouragement
APRIL 2003 
* 
309
to allow her to become publicly the writer she is privately. Though there's some
wishful unreality both in the level of Sahara's writing skills and in the portrait of
the colorful Miss Pointy (who's rather a cliche of the eccentric and inspired teacher),
Codell has a plainspoken yet vivid creativity of expression that gives the story an
effervescent enjoyability ("A teacher who had a brother who ate dirt! A teacher
who would lend you two dollars!"). The book is knowing about classroom dy-
namics, making the most of its economical characterizations of Sahara's classmates,
but ultimately it's Codell's firm championing of her underdog narrator that pro-
vides the satisfaction here ("If they kept files on grown-ups," says Sahara saga-
ciously, "it would be a different story, wouldn't it?"). Readers may yearn for their
own Miss Pointy, but one hopes they get the real message even without her: their
voices are theirs to find. DS
COOPER, HELEN 
Sandmare; illus. by Ted Dewan. 
Farrar, 2003 
72p
ISBN 0-374-36406-0 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 2-4
The Sandmare begins life as a drawing on the sand, with a pebble for an eye and
only two legs, because Polly's father can't draw legs very well. Polly, who helped
her father draw the sand horse, wishes that it could escape the confines of the
beach. Her father warns her that wishes like that don't often come true, but as it
happens, the Sandmare herself had wished to be free at the same time, "so the wish
was very strong." Sandmare must get far away from the beach if she is to survive,
and fortunately she's assisted by the sun, a curious dog, a herd of beach ponies, a
pink gorilla, a glass horse in a shop window, a toy horse on wheels, and finally by
Polly herself; despite all of her helpful friends, though, there are a fair number of
villains who would thwart her progress, and their presence adds suspense and gentle
excitement. Pen and ink drawings throughout the text add to the whimsy and aid
in comprehension of the more fantastical elements. This early chapter book is
undeniably sweet, but there is enough wit, suspense, and even eeriness (the hyp-
notic merry-go-round horses that tempt the Sandmare to abandon her quest and
go back to the sea are just plain spooky) to save it from being cloying or sentimen-
tal. Young readers who believe in the power of wishes and who sense wonder in
sand, sea, and sky will find much scope for the imagination here. KC
CORBET, ROBERT 
Fifteen Love. 
Walker, 2003 
[192p]
ISBN 0-8027-8851-3 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-10
The rest of the school sees Will Holland as the loner who's always in his tracksuit,
but Mia Foley thinks he's deep; most of the school sees Mia Foley as the tagalong
to her two flashy friends, but Will thinks she's a glamorous beauty. While it's
obvious to readers that these two should get together, Will and Mia have a lot to
negotiate before that can happen: her disintegrating family life (her father's cheat-
ing on her mother), his high-pressure parents (they want him to be a tennis cham-
pion), and the social vagaries of teenage life (including a play for Will by Vanessa,
Mia's former best friend). This Australian import has been heavily, if not com-
pletely effectively, Americanized, but there's energy enough in the story to survive
all manner of translation. The book manages the difficult feat not just of combin-
ing two viewpoints but of successfully combining levels of seriousness, so that
funny and rueful fifteen-year-old anxiety about one's social position blends smoothly
with harder issues. There's a matter-of-fact acknowledgment of the different de-
310 
* THE BULLETIN
grees of comfort even close friends can have with romance and sex and the effects
such difference can have. There's also heartbreak at parental betrayal (Mia finally
gets through to her father by presenting him with her smashed, formerly precious
viola, which had previously been his), anxiety about family futures (Will's younger
brother, Dave, was the tennis star in the family until a serious spinal injury changed
his life), and exploration of the possibility of forgiveness and improvement in all
relationships, not just the romantic ones. Such a wider implication is certainly
welcome, and it won't interfere with the pleasures of those readers who just want
to see Will and Mia finally get together. DS
CRUM, SHUTTA 
Spitting Image. 
Clarion, 2003 
[224p]
ISBN 0-618-23477-2 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-8
Jessica Kay Bovey begins her summer full of unanswered questions about who she
is and where she fits in the world. When a VISTA volunteer shows up in Baylor,
Kentucky to help fight the War on Poverty, Jessie eagerly joins the cause by raising
money to help her best friend get new glasses. She realizes, however, that helping
people is a complicated process. On the one hand, newspaper pictures of poverty-
stricken miners and their families can help stir people into doing the right thing,
but on the other hand, what about the pride of the folks-her friends and neigh-
bors who are doing the best they can to care for their families-who are in the
pictures? Though she occasionally waxes a bit too philosophical for a twelve-year-
old, Jessie has an engaging and believable narrative voice. The characters in this
novel are developed most eloquently by their physical touch-a character's gentle-
ness or brutality shows as he tousles a child's hair or allows a young girl to rest her
cheek on his head, or as he grabs a collar or strikes a blow-suggesting that it is the
relationships between people that give the town of Baylor its identity and ulti-
mately its strength. This tight attention to atmospheric detail and human connec-
tion is the real strength of the book; the tender touches of the loving characters
embrace both Jessie and the reader as the narrative moves through the more diffi-
cult terrain of poverty, rape, and racial and domestic violence that seem to be an
accepted, if not acceptable, part of Jessie's world. KC
CULLEN, CATHERINE ANN 
Thirsty Baby; illus. by David McPhail. 
Little,
2003 
[24 p]
ISBN 0-316-16357-0 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
2-5 yrs
"'I'm thirsty,' said the baby, 'and I need a drink'" begins the catchy refrain of this
tale featuring an insatiably thirsty little tyke, who drinks his bottle and follows up
by drinking all the water in the bathtub, the pond, the river, and finally, the ocean.
The rhyming couplets of the text and the frequent repetition of the baby's requests
(and of his family's "good boy" responses) make this book an infectious, irresist-
ible readaloud; the humorous hyperbole of the wee one's tremendous capacity for
liquid containment will have listeners giggling as well as rapt. McPhail's art echoes
various artists from Tenniel to Sendak: sometimes loose, flowing lines bound his
watercolors, but other times Victorianesque hatching adds a sharp and paradoxi-
cally humorous formality. His baby sometimes has the eerie premature sophistica-
tion of a doll, appropriate to a young one of such advanced appetite and capacity;
the sunset hues that imbue scenes both external and internal additionally suggest a
APRIL 2003 
* 311
"once upon a time" location that just happens to look a great deal like real life.
This is a perennially successful formula: infant greed and excess eventually sated
and effectively contained in tightly controlled rhyme. KC
DALY, NIKI 
Once upon a Time; written and illus. by Niki Daly. 
Farrar,
2003 
26p
ISBN 0-374-35633-5 
$16.00 
R 6-9 yrs
Sarie dislikes school, particularly reading; when it's her turn to read aloud she feels
sick and trembly: "Those words! So many of them-running together, row after
row, page after page. They tripped up her tongue. She stuttered and stammered
over them." Except for Emile, who harbors a secret crush on Sarie, all her class-
mates laugh at her fumbling efforts. Fortunately, Sarie has an escape in her Sun-
day visits to old Auntie Anna, her friend across the veldt. One Sunday Sarie comes
up with an old book, the story of Cinderella, belonging to Auntie Anna's long-
grown daughter, and Sarie and Anna read it together Sunday after Sunday. Those
weekly reading sessions pay off when, one day in her class at school, Sarie reads
aloud and "the words poured out as clear as spring water." Daly's watercolors of
the South African landscape provide a frame of reference for Sarie's physical world,
giving a concrete picture of her day-to-day life that is neither quaint nor conde-
scending. The sand-and-blue palette imparts a sunny look to each spread, whether
the setting is inside or out. The treatment of light and sky adds a sense of the
vastness of the terrain, while the distinctive and expressive faces anchor the story in
emotional reality. The story is universal, and the storytelling itself is fluid-Sarie's
life and her dilemma are simply and succinctly presented with immediacy and
humor. Her concluding triumph and her flowering friendship with Emile are
both believable and eminently satisfactory. JMD
ERIKSSON, EVA 
Molly Goes Shopping; tr. by Elisabeth Kallick Dyssegaard; written
and illus. by Eva Eriksson. 
R&S/Farrar, 2003 
[32p]
ISBN 91-29-65819-5 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-6 yrs
Even mundane activities such as grocery shopping can be dauntingly adult achieve-
ments to little kids, as the exploits of Molly the piglet demonstrate. When Grandma
sends her to the store for a bag of beans, she's at first proud of her important
mission ("Everyone will be able to tell she's going shopping. Not everyone is
smart enough to go shopping"), but pride goeth before a shopping mishap: un-
settled by the daunting store, Molly ends up with a bag of potatoes rather than a
bag of beans. A bakery trip seems straightforward, but that goes awry on the first
attempt as well (Molly drops her coin purse en route); fortunately, despite uncer-
tainty, Molly finally manages a successful purchase of a pair of cream puffs for tea.
While the ending is a little flat, Eriksson's text has a quiet vibrancy, like a demure
Kevin Henkes, and it's sympathetic yet knowing about Molly's uncertainty and
evasions (she blames her grandmother, the shop clerk, and anybody else she can
for her troubles). The palette of the softly furry colored-pencil illustrations is
sometimes a little bland, but there's great tenderness in the depiction of Molly's
histrionics and her pigletty little ways (standing on the skirting board in order to
reach the bakery counter, or wrestling with the oversized bag of potatoes, which
seems to be fighting back), and the multispecies cast are more recognizably human
312 
* THE BULLETIN
than many ostensible humans. This is one of those milestones that adults don't
always fully appreciate, so kids will welcome Eriksson's affectionate treatment. DS
FACKLAM, MARGERY 
Lizards: Weird and Wonderful; illus. by Alan Male. 
Little,
2003 
32p
ISBN 0-316-17346-0 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 3-7
See this month's Big Picture, p. 301, for review.
FLORIAN, DOUGLAS 
Bow Wow Meow Meow: It's Rhyming Cats and Dogs; written
and illus. by Douglas Florian. 
Harcourt, 2003 
48p
ISBN 0-15-216395-6 
$17.00 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Having versed his way through the animal kingdom class by class, Florian now
turns his attention to narrower categories, focusing on the dog and cat families.
Dogs go first and win over cats by one poem, but cats get the last word and have a
considerably more intimidating cast (six of the ten poems feature wild cats). These
are lighter (and sometimes slighter) than the poems in Florian's other animal com-
pendia, making this more suitable for younger readers and readees, who will enjoy
the chirpy wordplay and cheerful jocularity of poems such as "The Bulldog" ("I'd
say his face was full of charm/ If he would let go of my arm"). The illustrations,
watercolors (with occasional collage) on brown paper, are luminous and witty,
offering some stylistic variation (the delicate, stylized leopard, the haunting black-
on-black panther, and the spotty Dalmatian in his spotty room have very different
flavors) as well as entertaining extension of the verse. Kids will, according to their
respective lights, wag their tails and purr for this diverting and accessible pet po-
etry. DS
FOWLES, SHELLEY, ad. 
The Bachelor and the Bean; ad. and illus. by Shelley
Fowles. 
Farrar, 2003 
26p
ISBN 0-374-30478-5 
$16.00 
R 
6-10 yrs
While munching on a snack of beans, "a grumpy old bachelor" misses his mouth
and drops his last bean into a well. His loud protestations of loss bring forth the
imp of the well, who, in search of peace and quiet ("I hate a racket!") gives the
bachelor a magical bowl that will fill with whatever food he desires. The bachelor
invites his neighbors to share in his good fortune, but "one jealous old lady" wants
the bowl for herself, so she steals it, replacing it with a non-magical lookalike. The
irate (and unknowing) bachelor returns to the well, and the imp gives him a bowl
that produces gold and silver vessels-a bowl the old woman also steals. Finally,
the imp gives the old bachelor a bowl of water in which he sees the old woman and
his wish-fulfilling bowls. He goes to her house and demands the return of his
stolen goods ("Give me back my pots, you old biddy!"). She refuses ("Who are you
calling an old biddy?"), but the bachelor is so struck by the old woman's forceful
personality ("Such a strong voice! Such a nasty temper! Such awful manners ...
What a wonderful woman!") that he asks her to marry him-and she accepts.
Fowles retells this Jewish folktale from Morocco with an irreverent gusto that spills
over from the text into the visual images. A kaleidoscope of color greets the eye,
from the opening endpapers to the concluding wedding scene, with detailing in
both textiles and text borders that recalls a more freewheeling Brian Wildsmith.
An easy balance between narrative and dialogue results in a text made for reading
aloud and storytelling; try it with some wiseacre kids and let the hilarity begin.
APRIL 2003 
* 313
The source note places oral versions of this tale in Tunisia, Turkey, and Yemen, as
well as in Morocco. JMD
FREYMANN-WEYR, GARRET 
The Kings Are Already Here. Houghton,
2003 
[160p]
ISBN 0-618-26363-2 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
Consecrated to the ballet since she was seven and marked out as a dancer for life
since twelve, Phebe is taken aback by her private realization that, without her
complicity, her attention is wavering from her art ("If I am now in the process of
becoming a regular girl, I promise myself not to go down without a fight"). In
Switzerland, Nikolai, a junior chess genius, stays with Phebe's distant diplomat
father while searching for an elusive grand master who will be the key to his ulti-
mate brilliance. When Phebe spends the summer with her father, the two focused
teens find their lives overlapping, and as Nikolai begins to find new ways to focus
his life on his discipline with Phebe's sometimes questionable help, she begins to
find new ways to focus her life outside of her art. Intensity has always been the
hallmark of the work of Freymann-Weyr (author of My Heartbeat, BCCB 5/02,
and When I Was Older, 7/00), and here she turns her laser perceptions to young
people with specific reasons for that intensity. It's key to her style that the two
narrators be extremely articulate, perhaps somewhat beyond strict realism, but
they're not adults living teenage existences but young people gifted with particular
eloquence about the crossroads in their lives. There's always fascination in the
exploration of people who have decided early to devote themselves to one particu-
lar calling; the book manages to demonstrate the peculiar richness of such a choice
while also, through Phebe, demonstrating the difficulty but also possibilities of
turning one's attention to wider horizons. A book likely to strike a chord with
some advanced younger readers as well as Freymann-Weyr's regular fans, this is a
thoughtful exploration of youthful dedication. DS
FROST, HELEN 
Keesha's House. 
Foster/Farrar, 2003 
116p
ISBN 0-374-34064-1 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 6-9
As a battered twelve-year-old, Joe found refuge in this house, so as an adult he
opens it to kids like the one he was, who need a place where they can stay indefi-
nitely with no questions asked and no authorities involved. Soon Keesha finds her
way there, and the house becomes known as Keesha's rather than Joe's as Keesha's
radar picks up the muted pain signals of those around her who need space, time,
and a safe place to grow up. Through a series of poems we hear the voices of seven
at-risk teens-Stephie, Katie, Dontay, Harris, Jason, Carmen, and Keesha herself.
We also hear from their adults, caregivers who have failed them in various ways
but whose stories generate, if not sympathy, then at least understanding as they
struggle to live with their own inadequacies. The technique of using poetic mono-
logues voiced by various characters has been used before by writers for this age
group, but what sets this book apart is Frost's use of traditional poetic forms-
carefully crafted sestinas, and English, Italian, and hybrid sonnets-rather than
free or blank verse for her characters. Different forms map to different perspec-
tives: in the first seven sections, the voices of the teens animate the sestinas while
the adults speak in sonnets. The final section is a crown of sonnets narrated by the
teens, poignantly suggesting that the development of their own adult voices de-
314 
* THE BULLETIN
pends on the interconnectedness of their lives as the final line of each poem be-
comes the first line of the next. Though their situations are rather programmatic-
teen pregnancy, sexual and physical abuse, addiction, homophobic parents-the
voices are authentic and complex; there is much potential here for sophisticated
analysis of both form and content. An explanation of the rules of the poetic forms
is included. KC
GRAY, LULI 
Timespinners. Houghton, 2003 
[160p]
ISBN 0-618-16412-X 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
Allie and her brother, Fig, are facing their summer plans without enthusiasm. As
usual, their archaeologist parents are off on an adventure, leaving them with their
aunt in sultry New York City. When their mother has an accident and ends up in
a coma, the stress of her condition begins to wear on the family, and Allie and Fig
seek refuge in the American Museum of Natural History, where they follow a
legendary mural artist through a break in the time-space continuum that has some-
how opened up in the lynx exhibit. Soon realizing that they cannot go travel into
the future, they eventually end up 35,000 years back in time, in the very cave
where their mother was hurt. There they meet an engaging shaman-in-training,
who takes it as his mission to return them to their time. The problem is, will he
survive the trip? The time-travel plot is always appealing, and Gray capably ex-
plores its conventions, with additional urgency conferred by the family drama.
Unfortunately, the conclusion falls prey to a common problem of the genre-it's
never really explained how Fig and Allie's past actions changed the present as they
did (for instance, an uncle who died in Vietnam is inexplicably back in the family
picture, complete with a wife and kids-did they preempt the entire Vietnam
War?). It's also not clear why their journey ends their mother's coma or why the
changes should have affected their particular family so positively. However, the
children's trip to the Ice Age provides the backdrop for some tantalizing thought
experiments about time, love, and the importance of family. KC
GUTMAN, 
ANNE 
Gaspard and Lisa's Rainy Day; illus. by Georg
Hallensleben. 
Knopf, 2003 
26p
ISBN 0-375-82252-6 
$9.99 
R 
4 -6 yrs
GUTMAN, ANNE 
Lisa's Baby Sister; illus. by Georg Hallensleben. 
Knopf,
2003 
26 p
ISBN 0-375-82251-8 
$9.99 
R 
4 -6 yrs
Two new titles in the continuing saga of best buddies Lisa and Gaspard address
their daily duress with humor and wit. In Gaspard and Lisa's Rainy Day, the two
are on vacation at Lisa's grandmother's house, where "it rained every single day. It
was too cold and muddy to play outside, and there was nothing to do indoors!"
The grownups suggest a few activities, but the unsupervised duo get into nothing
but trouble until finally the sun comes out and everyone goes outside to play. The
imminent arrival of Lisa's Baby Sister has everyone agog with excitement, except, of
course, Lisa, who is resentful and, at least overtly, uninterested. Arrival of said
sibling produces a change of heart, however, especially when someone says new
baby Lila has Lisa's nose. Gutman has that emphatic little-kid tone down just
right in narrator Lisa's storytelling, and the childish responses are absolutely on
APRIL 2003 
* 
315
target. Hallensleben's naive, heavily brushstroked paintings have a soft, cushiony
feel, from the rounded edges on furniture to the stuffed-toy squishiness of the
anthropomorphized dogs that are the main characters, giving the impression of a
high-comfort space that is safe for young children. Lisa and Gaspard are a winning
duet, deserving of a place alongside other book buddies, such as Toot and Puddle.
JMD
HAREL, NIRA 
The Key to My Heart; illus. by Yossi Abulafia. 
Kane/Miller,
2003 
[24p]
ISBN 1-929132-40-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-6 yrs
Jonathan's father's keychain has keys to the house, the car, the garage, the office,
and Grandma's house, along with a picture of Jonathan "that is more important
than any of them." One day after picking Jonathan up from school, his dad dis-
covers he has lost his keys, so the two retrace his steps: at the post office Jonathan
gets stamps on his hands; at the barber shop he gets a haircut; at the pizza parlor,
pizza, until they finally get home. Luckily his mother is there to let them in, and
not only that, she has the missing keys, lost in the schoolyard and returned by a
teacher who recognized Jonathan's picture: "'. . . and what is the picture for?'
asked Jonathan. Dad laughed. 'The picture? That's the key to my heart.'" Harel's
text has an easy flow which makes this a good choice for reading aloud or even for
those beginning readers looking for a bit more of an independent challenge. A
quick glance at Abulafia's cheerful watercolor cartoons may not register the amount
of subtle activity taking place in the street and interior scenes: each face in the
group scenes has an individual expression; a couple kisses in a parked car; a painter
painting a sign is about to drip paint onto a passerby's unprotected head; a little
black kitten plays with a recently shorn braid on the floor of the barber shop, etc.
This book was first published in Israel, hence the street signs in Hebrew, but the
tale is universally child-centered. Despite an undistinguished cover illustration,
this is a cozy book about a boy, his dad, and a small neighborhood adventure, and
there's just enough tension in the lost-key saga to add a little suspense to Jonathan's
eventful afternoon. JMD
HEARNE, 
BETSY 
The Canine Connection: 
Stories about Dogs and
People. McElderry, 2003 
113p
ISBN 0-689-85258-4 
$15.95
[Note: Books by Bulletin staff are given a descriptive annotation rather than a
review and code rating]
Canines from border collies to Newfoundlands are featured along with humans-
theirs and not theirs-in these twelve tonally varied stories about dog-human en-
counters and relationships. DS
Ho, MINFONG 
Gathering the Dew. Orchard, 2003 
[208p] 
(First Person
Fiction)
ISBN 0-439-38197-5 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-10
Nakri and her sister, Teeda, are studying the art of Cambodian classical dance
when their lives are cruelly interrupted by the Khmer Rouge. Forced to leave their
316 
* THE BULLETIN
home, their family is broken up-their father disappears, and Nakri, Teeda, and
their older brother, Boran, are sent to a labor camp. There Teeda teaches her
younger sister the wisdom of the goddess Mekhala, who patiently gathered dew
drops one by one until her cup was full; for Nakri, gathering the tiny dew drops of
memory and hope enable her to survive hard work and near starvation-which
Teeda does not. When the Khmer Rouge is ousted, Boran and Nakri return to
their grandmother's house, only to move on again to a refugee camp on the Cam-
bodian-Thai border. Relief workers notice an American address on an envelope
Nakri has brought from home, and use it to locate sponsors for her family to come
to America. Ho lyrically and compassionately captures the details of Nakri's expe-
riences as she journeys on the "wheel of suffering" from the loving and genteel
environment of her home in Phnom Penh, to the deprivation of the camps, to the
alienating excess of American culture ("'Extra' was a very American word. Ameri-
cans seemed to have extras of everything"). Especially poignant is her little brother's
reaction to the coffee-table book of brightly colored photographs of a Cambodia
before the war that he finds in their sponsors' living room: "Is this Cambodia?" he
asks, "do they think this is what it was like, where we came from?" As with previ-
ous books in this series (Danticat's Behind the Mountains, BCCB 2/03, Veciana-
Suarez' Flight to Freedom, BCCB 2/03), there is an afterword by the author that
recounts her "parallel journey" and highlights the history, both personal and po-
litical, behind Nakri's story. KC
HOFFMAN, ALICE 
Green Angel. 
Scholastic, 2003 
[12 8p]
ISBN 0-439-44384-9 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 7-10
Fifteen-year-old Green is the green-thumbed elder of two daughters. When her
parents and younger sister, Aurora ("as wild as she was beautiful"), go to an un-
named city to sell vegetables from their garden, they are killed in a nonspecific,
September 11-type disaster: "People who were close by said they could see people
jumping from the buildings, like silver birds, like bright diamonds. The ground
shook, people said, but from where I stood all I could see was smoke." In Hoffman's
world, the disaster causes an overt breakdown in the social order-orphaned teens
roam the countryside, living under bridges, seeking the oblivion of alcohol and
drugs. Green reacts to her personal tragedy by changing her name to Ash, cutting
tattoos of thorny roses colored with black ink into her own flesh, and retreating
into grief-induced semi-blindness. Injured wildlife (swallow, hawk, dog) and a
young man burned in the disaster invade her solitude and connect her to the world.
Time passes, the garden returns, the animals recover, and so does Ash/Green, and
in symbolic manifestation of healing, her tattoos turn from black to green.
Hoffman-whose previous young adult titles are Aquamarine (BCCB 2/01) and
Indigo (6/02)-here attempts to portray loss, grief, and recovery in a nonspecific
way that, while hearkening back to the events of September 11, is not confined to
it. The lack of specificity unfortunately makes the story more generic than univer-
sal. The prose teeters on the edge of magical realism but never really commits;
cliched language and repetitive images lack the sparkle necessary to make implied
magic, or even unusual incidents, credible. Still, there are bound to be adolescents
willing to suspend themselves in Hoffman's ultimately hopeful allegory. In the
end, Ash/Green embraces her former self and her former name, racing to write the
story of her loss and her recovery, spurred by the words of her neighbor: "You are
the ink, she said. Write as you want." JM D
APRIL 2003 
* 317
HOLWITZ, PETER 
The Big Blue Spot; written and illus. by Peter
Holwitz. 
Philomel, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-399-23786-0 
$13.99 
R 
3-6 yrs
The blue spot of the title has a fairly limited life, as the text acknowledges, since "it
spends each day/ just being blue." Nonetheless, it's contented ("It has what it
needs,/ and that's not a lot") until it begins to feel something lacking in its mun-
dane cobalt existence. Cunningly involving the audience in its plan, it convinces
the viewer to tilt the page until, as paint spots do, it starts to run. It turns out the
spot's drippage is actually a search for companionship in the form of another spot;
with the reader's aid, the blue spot runs (literally) into a cheery yellow spot, mak-
ing a happy bonded pair with a nice green connection. This isn't entirely origi-
nal-geometric shapes with a purpose have been around since Abbott's Flatland,
and there are echoes of Lionni's Little Blue and Little Yellow--but there's definite
charm to the simply shaped narrative. Holwitz' text has a casual moseying tone
that never overcomplicates its modest story, and kids just figuring out the bookness
of books will get a kick out of the notion that the narrative's progress depends on
their own assistance. The artwork is spartan in its ingredients, with tidy white
pages displaying nothing but the sharp black text and the titular spot. He's quite
a personable little spot, however, and even his dribbles have an inviting flow and
texture; when he finally opens his eyes, there's a pleasingly Pac-Manesque aspect to
his cutout eyes and mouth. Paint-loving kids quick to see the artistic possibilities
of the concept will be especially taken with this odd yet gentle little story. DS
HUGHES, SHIRLEY 
Annie Rose Is My Little Sister; written and illus. by Shirley
Hughes. 
Candlewick, 2003 
[32p]
ISBN 0-7636-1959-0 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-8 yrs
Toddler Annie Rose's big brother narrates this litany of the brother-sister things
they do together, from hide-and-seek to reading books to playing store. He also
talks about the things Annie Rose does that he doesn't like (such as playing with
his cars); the things she does that he doesn't do anymore (throw her stuffed toys
out of her crib); and the things he can do that she cannot (ride the big waves at the
beach). There is enough variety and individual initiative present in the activities
depicted that the text avoids being just a list of things to do; the activities are
replete with kid-pleasing details that are sure to provoke discussion of what goes
on in listeners' houses (and the various liabilities and assets afforded by listeners'
older and younger siblings). The unnamed older brother is Alfie, hero of earlier
books (Alfie and the Birthday Surprise, BCCB 3/98, etc.), and the illustrations
(gouache and oil pastels) have the same domestic charm evident in previous popu-
lar tides about Alfie and Annie Rose. Hughes' realistic visual characterizations are
by now so familiar to fans (both adult and juvenile) that they take on the feeling of
photo more than illustration; that is, they seem to be pictures of people we know.
The camaraderie and affection between older brother and younger sister, evident
throughout, is summed up in the concluding lines: "But when Annie Rose cries,
or wakes up from her nap in a bad mood, I'm the only person who can cheer her
up. Because she's my little sister, and I'm her big brother, and we'll go on being
that forever... even until we're grown up." Collections (and individuals) seeking
a title 
to promote and reinforce sibling affection will find this a happy choice.
JMD
318 
* THE BULLETIN
ISADORA, RACHEL 
Not ust Tutus; written and illus. by Rachel Isadora. 
Putnam,
2003 
40p
ISBN 0-399-23603-1 
$13.99 
R 4-8 yrs
Ballet dancing involves more than tutus and applause-there's hard work, sore
toes, frightful competition, backstage fights, and stage fright. Even as this book
sets out to deromanticize the ballet scene, it manages to preserve the magic and the
appeal of the art form: "My back is aching/ My feet are sore/ Do I want to go on?/
Oh yes, I'm sure," sighs an exhausted-looking little dancer leaning against the
barre. Each page features tightly metered verse that tells of a young dancer at
work, whether that work be stretching, washing clothes, making up, or fretting.
The blend of comic realism and idealistic fantasy aptly captures all of the emotions
of the dance studio, where girls and boys, painfully aware of their limitations,
nonetheless strive for that grace of form that characterizes the mature dancer. This
same mix is carried over into the illustrations. Pen and ink sketches with scattered
pastel watercolor washes are set against a buff background, giving the entire book
a dreamy, interior atmosphere. The attitudes of the boys and girls tend toward the
sweet and idealized, but enough humor erupts in the illustrations to save them
from being too adorable. There's also realism: they are often clumsy and awkward
at practice and anxious on stage; sometimes, though, when these little ones take
the stage, they are who they want to be-legs high, toes pointed, arms arced just
so. Aspiring little dancers will undoubtedly find themselves in this book, with all
their most heartfelt frustrations and dearest aspirations affirmed. KC
JAMES, SIMON 
Little One Step; written and illus. by Simon James. 
Candlewick,
2003 
[26p]
ISBN 0-7636-2070-X 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 2-5 yrs
Three ducklings hike through the woods toward home. The littlest duckling,
however, is having some difficulty: "'I want my mama,' whispered the little one.
'My legs feel all wobbly.'" His oldest brother teaches him to play "One Step," a
game to help the wobblies go and to get the ducklings on their way. The littlest
duckling catches on so quickly the middle brother says, "We'll call you Little One
Step from now on." The youngest duckling battles loneliness and fatigue one step
at a time: "Little One Step marched through the field... past his brothers... through
the undergrowth ... into a clearing ... 'Mama! It's you!' shouted Little One Step.
'My baby!' said Mama." James (author of The Birdwatchers, 6/02, among others)
has distilled this ducky little drama into a shining jewel of a book. The feathered
siblings are never in any overt danger; they are just far from home and mother, but
that will be quite enough for toddler and preschool listeners. The line-and-water-
color illustrations make the most of the contrast between the small ducklings and
the towering trees, the broad meadow, and the long road home. The monochro-
matic palette of mellow yellow is calmly effective, adding to the subconscious sense
of safety despite the ducks' momentary dilemma. The triumph of the tiny duck-
ling is, proportionally speaking, monumental, and young audiences are sure to
appreciate his accomplishment. JMD
KOLAR, BOB 
Racer Dogs; written and illus. by Bob Kolar. 
Dutton, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-525-45939-1 
$15.99 
Ad 4-7 yrs
It looks like the whole kennel's been let loose, as speed-demon dogs start their
APRIL 2003 
* 319
engines for a crosstown race. Competition is riddled with complications, from
breakdowns to pileups, and in the end it's anyone's guess who actually wins. Racer
dogs don't much care, though; they're content with a car wash and the prospect of
a good night's sleep. This isn't going to beat the classic canine competition, Go,
Dog, Go: the text putters on a bit too long, and many rhymed verses could use a
tune-up and a timing belt: "First gear, second,/ Third gear, fourth./ Dogs just
love/ This motor sport"; "What bad luck!/ Please call the tow truck./ Quickly
now/ And get them unstuck." Blue, gray, and earthtoned pictures (reminiscent of
J. otto Seibold's computer-drawn work) are packed tighter than a junkyard with
zipping and zooming cars, imperiled spectators, and toylike buildings, making it
difficult to follow the action visually. Still, Kolar tucks some clever poochie hu-
mor into his scenes-the chef flipping dog bones at Pa Pa Scruffy's food stand, the
"Rest Stop" arrow pointing to a fire hydrant, the service station offering oil, shocks,
and flea dip, and the Burma Shave-style roadside ads for Better Breath Bone Bis-
cuits-and dogs 'n' cars are just the team to get kids revved. EB
LEEDY, LOREEN 
There's a Frog in My Throat!: 440 Animal Sayings a Little Bird
ToldMe; written by Loreen Leedy and Pat Street; illus. by Loreen Leedy. 
Holiday
House, 2003 
48p
ISBN 0-8234-1774-3 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 2-5
From dog-eared pages to the cat's pajamas, from going hog wild to smelling a rat,
from clammy hands to crow's feet, this compendium of faunal metaphor is im-
pressive indeed. After the requisite opening definitions of axioms, proverbs, and
related linguistic niceties, Leedy and Street launch right into a half-dozen chapters
(if one can apply so formal a moniker to their freewheeling spreads), organized by
the house, the farm, and the wild, in the air, through the ground, and under the
waves. At first glance, the frenetic mixed-media vignettes look like cartoon refu-
gees from a Monty Python episode. There's some very clever logic in the layout,
though, as the "cub reporter" interviews the "wildcat" striker, the "snake oil sales-
man" "speaks with a forked tongue," and the "cooked goose" is slathered in the
sauce that's good for both goose and gander. Even pagination gets in on the act:
the goose that lays the golden egg also lays a "24k" page number, while a can of
"duck soup" on the facing page is "25W" off. There's no niggling over derivations
(language enthusiasts who want to expound on, say, a nautical genesis for "letting
the cat out of the bag" are barking up the wrong tree here)-just comically literal
pictures and on-point explanations of how the sayings are used today. An index
leads readers to their favorite beasties, but the direct approach isn't near as much
fun as a leisurely browse. EB
LICHTENHELD, TOM 
WhatAre You So Grumpy About?; written and illus. by Tom
Lichtenheld. 
Little, 2003 
34p
ISBN 0-316-59236-6 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 2-4
There are many things in the world to be grumpy about, but this book isn't one of
them. A catalogue of daily disappointments, the book zeroes in on those things
that are most likely to elicit frowns from young faces, such as having to eat the
wrong kind of cereal ("Boring Acres 100% Organic Whole Grain Wheat Bran and
Millet Food Substance" versus "Chocolate-Frosted Honey-Glazed, Pre-Sweetened
Marshmallow Nodules"), having your gravy touch your peas ("gravy+peas=poison"),
being touched by your brother or sister ("enlarged view to show full grossness").
320 
* THE BULLETIN
Even the most recalcitrant little curmudgeon-in-training will find something to
laugh about here as he or she explores the delirious details and visual jokes crowded
into each illustration. The caricatured figures, rendered in "ink, colored pencil,
gouache, watercolor, peas, and gravy" are zanily tragic, and the hand-lettered text
provides visual cues as to how the words should be read-large letters beg to be
shouted, while cramped smaller words tumble out in a breathless rush. There is
even an illustration that helps you decide if you are grumpy-that bottom lip
sticking out is a dead giveaway. The endpapers feature "sure cures for grumpi-
ness," such as "a good belch," "singing loudly," and "getting 'kinged'" in checkers;
this book should be added to that list. KC
LOWRY, Lois 
The Silent Boy. 
Lorraine/Houghton, 2003 
[19 2p]
ISBN 0-618-28231-9 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Not since Autumn Street (BCCB 11/80) has Lowry written a novel that injects
childhood experience so deeply with adult tone. In both books, the protagonist
remembers crucial aspects of her past; here Katy recollects events from September
1908 through October 1911, from her first meeting with an apparently autistic
boy, Jacob Stoltz, whose family her physician father visits on a house call, to Jacob's
arrest for the death of his illegitimate newborn niece, whose mother, Nellie Stoltz,
is a servant in the house next door to Katy and the sister of a servant in Katy's own
house, Peggy Stoltz. Class and gender issues underscore a densely constructed
story, with Katy's family upper class and the Stoltzes a poor farming family. Am-
bitious for a glamorous job, Nellie Stoltz is instead "punished" for her liaison with
the wealthy neighbors' profligate son (who is later killed, we learn, in World War
I) by a ruinous pregnancy, while her upright but humble sister Peggy marries an
honest man and inherits the farm. Katy, although she marries a childhood friend,
breaks out of traditional expectations to become a doctor like her father. The
nuance of character dynamics, the implications of adult actions for children caught
unawares, and the dawning revelations of institutional injustice all mark this as a
novel for sophisticated older readers despite the narrator's beginning her account
with her sixth birthday. Details of the doctor's work are precise and evocative,
while historical photographs-one of Lowry's mother, others bought in an an-
tique store-permeate the historical fiction with credible realism. BH
LUTHARDT, KEVIN 
Peep!; written and illus. by Kevin Luthardt. 
Peachtree,
2003 
36p
ISBN 1-56145-046-4 $15.95 
R 
Gr. K-2
A little boy happens on a hatching egg, witnessing the peeping entry of a duckling
into the world. After a bit of cheerful bonding, the duckling follows our hero
home and settles into the family, joining the protagonist at television watching,
starring in Show and Tell, and getting his measure taken in height marks along the
wall. Come autumn, the little guy encounters a flock of ducks flying overhead and
learns a new word ("Quack!"), whereupon it becomes clear it's time for him to join
the world of waterfowl and say goodbye to his human friend. This is a classic
story, but there's a twist here: it's told in no more than a dozen different words
(and any kid who can manage to read "peep" has covered half the text right there).
Luthardt uses his restricted verbal palette wisely, treating the words as punctuation
and emphasis for the story (dialogue balloons set off the most important textual
APRIL 2003 
* 
321
moments). The meticulous shading sometimes lends figures a certain Claymation
stiffness, and there's a strangely sooty tinge to some of the highlights, but the solid
clarity of duck and boy makes them an easy focus. Illustrations give plenty of
narrative signals on their own, whether it be the seasonally changing landscapes,
the growing duck, or the wistful face of the boy sending the duck along his way.
The high cue-quotient and streamlined language make this a useful bridge for
novice decoders of the printed word. DS
MAHY, MARGARET 
Alchemy. 
McElderry, 2003 
[22 4p]
ISBN 0-689-85053-0 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-12
"Changing! I'm changing!" thinks seventeen-year-old Roland as he grapples with
a supernatural force inherited from his father, who denied the same force and
deserted his family. Roland has tried to make up for that desertion by becoming a
perfect son to his mother, a stalwart in face of two younger brothers' onslaughts of
teasing, and a popular prefect in his New Zealand high school. Now, however, he
has been blackmailed by one of his teachers into a relationship with an ostracized
classmate, Jess Ferret (a.k.a. Weasel), who in turn involves him in a deepening coil
of dangerous magic. As in Mahy's landmark novel The Changeover (BCCB 9/84),
there is a vampirish antagonist who adds to his own power by draining that of
others, even unto death. Here, though, the villain is reduced to a pitiful human
rather than destroyed in a cathartic finale, and the hero's journey toward full iden-
tity (not to mention implied reconciliation with his father) undergoes occasional
explanations that the visceral scenes at which Mahy excels render unnecessary.
Fortunately, this distracts from neither the mystery nor the ultimate love story that
will lure teenage readers. Characteristically of Mahy's dense style, several motifs
thread through the plot to build a sense of suspense and to reveal the narrative spell
that words can weave-in this case, watch for "Fabuloso!" and "Roland to the dark
tower came," both of which flash like signals of impending action. BH
MCCARTHY, MEGHAN 
George Upside Down; written and illus. by Meghan
McCarthy. 
Viking, 2003 
34p
ISBN 0-670-03608-0 
$15.99 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
George is a happy kid, who's particularly fond of hanging around upside down.
While he finds inversion a pleasant position for all kinds of activities, sometimes
he "is upside down when he shouldn't be," leading to adult injunctions to right
himself when he's in the car, at the dinner table, in the classroom. Since George
has perfectly logical reasons for wanting to be upside down (he's being a pilot, a
dog, a bat, etc.), he's resistant to cures and reprimands; it takes unexpected adult
action to convince him to lead an upright life. After an original setup, the resolu-
tion is disappointingly off-kilter and unsatisfying: there's no explanation of why
the adults' joining George upside down should dissuade him from his favorite
state, so the solution shifts sympathy to the adult viewpoint and suggests that
George was driven less by his perfectly sensible reasons than by general contrari-
ness. Mostly, though, kids will respond to the succinct and vigorous text and
George's capable yet matter-of-fact imagination, and to the bouncy illustrations.
McCarthy piles on the paint, leaving brushstrokes so thick that some planes of
color suggest woodgrain, but there's nothing woody about the sunsetty tones of
purple and orange that dominate most spreads. The cast is almost literally all eyes,
322 
* THE BULLETIN
with humongous popping whites and googly pupils humorously dominating their
faces; the touches ofupsidedownness in various compositions will also tickle young
viewers. A truly gifted reader-aloud might manage to share this while upside down,
but even right side up this title offers some entertaining insights into youthful
perspective. DS
McKISSACK, PATRICIA C. 
Days ofJubilee: The End ofSlavery in the United States;
by Patricia C. and Fredrick L. McKissack. 
Scholastic, 2003 
134p 
illus. with
photographs
ISBN 0-590-10764-X 
$18.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-9
The McKissacks chip through much of the mythology encrusting textbook sum-
maries of emancipation to explore the plethora of political, military, and legal
machinations that culminated in the Thirteenth Amendment. The opening chap-
ter discusses colonial free blacks' initial faith and quick disillusionment in the prom-
ise of the Declaration of Independence. Following chapters examine the advent of
Civil War, rife with tangled abolitionist proposals for gradual emancipation, colo-
nization, and compensation for slaveholders, and then the war itself, with pockets
of slaves freed by Union military order (orders often rescinded in Washington),
the Emancipation Proclamation (ineffective, but of inestimable symbolic value),
and finally, Confederate defeat. Prose varies from blunt ("In reality the Emanci-
pation Proclamation could not be enforced. And it left 830,000 people enslaved
in the border states") to florid ("The president's tall, gaunt figure could be seen
pensively pacing the halls of the White House, wearing his grief like an ill-fitting
shroud, soaked in the blood of patriots too numerous to count"). Annoying im-
precisions riddle the text, from the claim that Lee's surrender "officially" ended the
Civil War, to the citation of Robert Small's 1862 escape to the Union blockade as
introduction to a section on how "the Emancipation Proclamation [1863] trans-
formed the Union army into a liberating force." Nonetheless, the McKissacks do
grippingly convey the anxiety of slaves awaiting official word of their release from
bondage, and the jubilation that spread like a shock wave as news of freedom made
its way into the deep South and West at the end of the conflict. Period photos, a
timeline, bibliography, and index are included. EB
MILGRIM, DAVID 
SeePip Point; written and illus. by David Milgrim. 
Atheneum,
2003 
32p
ISBN 0-689-85116-2 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. K-1
Little mouse Pip covets the purple balloon belonging to his robot friend, Otto,
and, apparently unable to verbalize his desire, he points (and points and points) to
the balloon until kind Otto hands it over. However, the helium-filled balloon
carries lightweight Pip sky-high, until a midair encounter with a bee's stinger sends
him plummeting earthward. Otto's rescue attempt results in a crash and splash-
down for mouse and robot, and while a hippo parent and child are somewhat
disturbed by this intrusion on their watering hole, Pip (who obviously has not
learned his lesson) only has eyes for the little hippo's red balloon-and once again
readers "see Pip point." Short, easy-to-sound-out words and sentences and pat-
terned and repeated phrases ("See Pip go up. See Pip go way up. See Pip go up,
up, and away") printed in a clean, large font with no more than four lines of text
per page make this a snap for beginning readers; simple but genuine humor (the
phrase "Point, point, point" is repeated three times to indicate the extent of Pip's
APRIL 2003 
* 323
longing for the balloon, for example) makes it a pleasure to read. The chunky
black outlines of Milgrim's "digital pen-and-ink" illustrations give them the look
of woodblock prints and provide a jaunty solidity to Otto, Pip, and their milieu,
and since the illustrations carry the narrative weight of this story ("Point, point,
point" is made meaningful by an illustration of Pip pointing frantically to the
balloon), even pre-readers are easily able to determine what's going on. When
novice readers request a book that's both lively and easy to read, adults can point
to this title; for added appeal, offer it up with a helium balloon. JMH
MILLIGAN, BRYCE, ad. 
The Prince ofIreland and the Three Magic Stallions; illus.
by Preston McDaniels. 
Holiday House, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1573-2 
$16.95 
R 6-10yrs
The prince of Ireland's stepmother isn't pleased that her stepson stands between
her own sons and her husband's throne, so she calls the prince to her and lays ageis
("a kind of magic spell, or curse, under which a person must do what he or she is
ordered or suffer a severe magical punishment") on the lad: he must bring her the
three magic stallions of the giant Sean O'Donal or die in the trying. Well, the
prince turns right around and lays ageis on his stepmother, which fast brings her to
her senses, but a geis once cast cannot be recanted, so they are both stuck, he with
retrieving the horses and she with standing "before the high cross by the hermit's
chapel" and eating only what comes from a sheaf of oats and passes through the
eye of a needle till he returns. The prince sets out, accompanied by his twin step-
brothers (who bear him no malice despite their mother's ambition) to retrieve the
magical stallions. A chance meeting with the giant's sisters brings the brothers into
the stable, where the stallions give the alarm and rouse the giant, who prepares to
roast the three brothers-until the prince offers him a wonder tale that wins both
their freedom and the stallions. The musical language of this Irish story dances
from incident to incident, leavened with humor and brightened with poetic phras-
ing. Despite a somewhat washed-out palette, the illustrations have a precise but
fluid line that gives an operatic sweep to the pictures; the compositions have a
theatrical quality, as if each spread is a stage and all the action is happening in the
foreground. An author's note explains Milligan's process and his efforts to "bring
some of the wild hares into line" from the various versions used as sources for this
tale. JMD
MILLS, CLAUDIA 
Alex Ryan, Stop That! Farrar, 2003 
152p
ISBN 0-374-34655-0 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Alex Ryan is the seventh grade's jokester, always looking for a way to make a
situation funnier or livelier, but sometimes the result is not what he'd intended.
He's trying to show pretty Marcia Faitak that he likes her, but too often he blurts
out a nasty dig rather than the flirtatious teasing for which he's aiming. Deter-
mined to make Marcia understand, Alex decides to play a prank on her during the
class camping trip, a prank that leads to Marcia's breaking her ankle and Alex's
being acclaimed as a hero for saving her-so long as he keeps quiet about his part
in the accident. While the story walks a fairly familiar trail to its destination of
lessons learned, Mills adds her characteristic nuanced yet accessibly styled under-
standing to the conventional plot. The book doesn't merely dismiss Alex's joking
habit, instead acknowledging its strengths (he's sensitive enough to use it effec-
tively in order to lighten moments that classmates find difficult) as well as its weak-
324 
* THE BULLETIN
nesses. While it's clear that Alex's never-back-down father is the source of a lot of
Alex's difficulty ("His dad didn't need comfort objects, but everyone who lived
with him did. There was food for thought there"), there's also a straightforward
statement about Alex's responsibility for finding his own way. The author is also
managing to turn this sequence of titles about the West Creek kids (Lizzie at Last,
BCCB 10/00, You're a Brave Man, Julius Zimmerman, 9/99, etc.) into a smooth
and unforced look at group dynamics and relationships as she moves from charac-
ter to character, resulting in a quiet and valid point: everybody is the star of his or
her own story. DS
MORPURGO, MICHAEL 
Kensuke's Kingdom. 
Scholastic, 2003 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-439-38202-5 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-7
Michael's parents have turned layoffs into opportunity by cashing in their sever-
ance pay and savings for the Peggy Sue, a forty-two-footer that will sail them around
the world. Not long after they leave a port of call in Australia, Michael and his dog
fall overboard while on watch, and after a long night facing death at sea, he finds
himself on an island. This is no deserted island, however-fresh rations mysteri-
ously appear for the eleven-year-old each day. When Michael tries to light a signal
fire, his islandmate-who is definitely not keen to be rescued-promptly appears
to snuff the flames, screaming at the boy in Japanese and broken English. The pair
thereupon establishes a wary truce: Michael will refrain from fire building and
keep to his half of the island; his aged would-be companion will supply him and
his dog with food. When Michael tests the rules by swimming in an off-limits bay,
he receives a near-lethal jelly fish sting, and the recluse, Kensuke, nurses him back
from paralysis, softening as his loneliness melts away and forming a firm friend-
ship with the boy. Morpurgo's spin on the castaway tradition is less a survival tale
(Kensuke's been doing very nicely here since the second World War) than a friend-
ship story, with an unlikely duo bonded into staunch comrades that they question
whether rescue is even in their best interest. There's a sadness and satisfying logic,
though, to their ultimate parting, and readers who come to know Kensuke as well
as Michael does will recognize the honor in his decision to remain behind: "This
is Kensuke's kingdom.... Emperor does not run away." EB
MORRIS, GERALD 
The Ballad ofSir Dinadan. Houghton, 2003 
[256p]
ISBN 0-618-19099-6 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-10
Dinadan is a reluctant knight who'd rather compose pithy poems and raucous
rhymes than battle over something stupid like a lady's scarf; he has little desire to
gain fame in battle and would much rather attain it as minstrel and storyteller.
When his drunken father insists on knighting him, however, Dinadan dutifully
sets out for Arthur's court, his armor hidden under a blanket, his rebec (a stringed
instrument) on his knee. He falls in with good-hearted (if not too bright) would-
be knight Culloch, and the two arrive in the king's court. Despite some misgiv-
ings, Dinadan finds himself accompanying Sir Kai and Sir Bedivere on a quest to
help Culloch become a worthy knight-a task they ultimately discover is not only
thankless but downright impossible. In the course of his travels, Dinadan meets
lovers from legendary romantic sagas who fail dismally to live up to their own
legends and do little to change his mind about romance, women, or the foolish-
APRIL 2003 
* 325
ness of some knights. Morris' Arthurian retellings (Parsifal's Page, BCCB 4/01,
etc.) have run the gamut from lyrical to irreverent, but none have had quite as
cynical (but still funny) a slant on knights of old as this one. Morris has a little
more going on here with three sets of established and/or possible lovers, and occa-
sionally the action gets a little diffused. Nonetheless, Dinadan is an amusing chap
with a slightly jaundiced eye, and while his view of chivalry and the fields of honor
may bring the more romantically inclined (not to mention those unfamiliar with
Morris' work thus far) up short, those seeking a few guffaws at the expense of
foolish lovers and unthinking knights will find them here. JMD
MOLLER, BIRTE 
Parley Farts; written and illus. by Birte Miller. 
Neugebauer/
North-South, 2003 
26p
ISBN 0-7358-1847-9 
$15.95 
R 
5-8yrs
Though otherwise a contented frog, Farley has been embarrassed by recent gas-
eous excess ("When he was eating, PFFFOOOTTT! When he was playing,
PFFFOOOTTT!"). After baffling the doctor, annoying his teacher, and displeas-
ing his grandmother, Farley makes a grim decision: he'll just hold it in. He dis-
covers a startling consequence, however, when his gas-filled body gets picked up
by a passing breeze and floats away like a balloon. Kids will see the solution a mile
away-his family entreats him to give vent, and he does, gently descending as he
emits his homey helium. There's a rather unusual amount of hot air in picture
books of late, but this isn't just getting air miles from breaking a taboo: there's a
genuine structure and momentum to the enjoyably silly story. There's still much
mining of the flatulent vein of humor, of course, and sound effects and stinky
jokes will send young listeners guffawing (and, no doubt, more). Admittedly,
youngsters may draw some socially questionable inferences from the fart-or-float
plot (this is apparently a world short of simethicone or, for that matter, bath-
rooms), so canny readers-aloud may want to be prepared with an explanation of
the difference between people and frogs. Streaky paints lend a dappled, fresco-y
appearance to the planes of color, which helps keep the Muppet-faced frogs from
cartoonish oversimplification. They're still quite funny, though, with their cheru-
bic, lipless smiles and bulbous-tipped fingers, and Miiller adds another dimension
to the humor with entertaining perspectives for Farley's graceful ascent and sud-
den descent. This will be a high-flyer for very, very informal readaloud occasions
or for jocular uncles looking for sure-fire routes to subversive popularity. DS
MUNSCH, ROBERT 
Zoom!; illus. by Michael Martchenko. 
Cartwheel/Scholas-
tic, 2003 
[32p]
ISBN 0-439-18774-5 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 6-9 yrs
Lauretta is ti(ed of her old wheelchair ("Look at this ratty old wheelchair! I've had
it since forever") and demands a new one. Luckily, that is just what her mother
has in mind, and the two go off"to the wheelchair store to get a nice new wheel-
chair." Lauretta turns up her nose at the more conservative models ("Too slow")
and demands a "nice new 92-speed, black, silver, and red, dirt-bike wheelchair."
Her mother complains about the cost, but Lauretta (to the delight of a happy
saleswoman) takes the chair home for a free trial. While doing wheelies on the
road, Lauretta is ticketed for speeding by the police, and her mother declares,
"That wheelchair is too fast. We are going to have to take it back." When Lauretta's
326 
* THE BULLETIN
brother sticks his fork through his finger, however, pandemonium reigns
("BLOOD!"), and Lauretta saves the day by rushing him to the hospital on (you
guessed it) her new wheelchair. Granted, this is a purposive tale with a too-lengthy
text, but Munsch does manage to subsume his purpose in a slapstick send-up that
will appeal not only to those kids with personal experience with wheelchairs, but
also to those who have only had that experience vicariously. Martchenko's slick
cartoons have a hyper-hilarity increased by the exaggerated facial expressions of the
characters as well as the exaggerated designs of the progressively more advanced
wheelchair models. The picture of the customized monster truck-style "X2000 +
2" model wheelchair on the final page is in itself worth the price of admission.
Contrived though this may be, it's still one funny (if possibly breakneck)
mainstreaming ride. JMD
NAYLOR, PHYLLIS REYNOLDS 
BernieMagruder r the Bats in the Belfy. 
Atheneum,
2003 
130p
ISBN 0-689-85066-2 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 4-7
The citizens of Middleburg are plagued by the provision in wealthy Eleanor
Scuttlefoot's will that "Abide with Me" should be the only tune played from the
church bells until her husband dies, so he won't forget her. As it is to be played
every hour on the hour and with excerpts on the quarter hour, the song is driving
everyone in town batty, except for its intended hearer, who is quite deaf. "Bats in
the belfry" becomes more than a metaphor for the bell-inspired lunacy in this
story: mysterious signs appear up all over Middleburg warning citizens of sightings
of the Indiana Aztec bat, whose nest glows with a strange green light and whose
bite is fatal should that nest be disturbed. When such a light is spotted coming
from the bell tower, amateur sleuth Bernie Magruder and his intrepid companions
Weasel and Georgene set out to solve yet another mystery. While Officer Feeney
shadows the unfortunate Mr. Scuttlefoot and the Magruder family tries to protect
the Bessledorf hotel from invasions of bats and keep business booming, Bernie and
his friends uncover the connection between mysterious hotel guest Flute Scoott,
the bells, and what turn out to be remote controlled plastic bats that flutter around
the bell tower every night. Officer Feeney almost steals their thunder by solving
the case himself, but Bernie and his friends hold the key to a number of loose ends,
which are all nicely tied up in the conclusion. Readers familiar with Bernie
Magruder's previous exploits will know what to expect from this well-paced mys-
tery with its clever cast of eccentric characters; witty dialogue and short snappy
chapters make it a good choice for a Halloween readaloud. KC
O'DEL, KATHLEEN 
Agnes Parker... Girl in Progress. Dial, 2003 
[160p]
ISBN 0-8037-2648-1 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-6
There's a new kid in sixth grade, heart-meltingly handsome and genuinely nice to
boot, and suddenly Agnes Parker is starting to catch a glimpse of interests in life
beyond hanging with her best friend, Prejean. The catch is that Agnes' nemesis,
loudmouthed bully Peggy Neidermeyer, is similarly smitten, and although Joe
Waldrip sees no problem in being friends with them both, the girls are having
none of that. As the rivals wage a romantic tug-of-war for Joe's time and attention
(Peggy has no trouble luring him into her sporting activities, while Agnes is his
ideal study mate), heretofore-victim Agnes resorts to some questionable behaviors
APRIL 2003 
* 327
that cause her to realize she's capable of some serious breaches of friendship herself.
There are no particularly deep insights here, and O'Dell too handily unknots the
intertwining love lives by moving Joe back out of town at the story's end. The toll
Agnes' crush takes on her long-standing friendship with Prejean is sharply ob-
served, though, and readers experiencing their own rifts in sisterly solidarity will
wince at Agnes's dilemma. EB
OPPEL, KENNETH 
Firewing. Simon, 2003 
270p
ISBN 0-689-84993-1 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
In this companion to the saga of the Tree Haven bat colony begun with Silverwing
(BCCB 2/98) and Sunwing (BCCB 5/00), young Griffin, son of the heroic Shade,
makes a deadly mistake that results in serious injury to his friend, Luna. Huddled
amongst the roots of Tree Haven when an earthquake hits, Griffin is sucked into
a tunnel from the natural world to the underworld, from the world of the living to
the world of the dead. The frightened young bat desperately seeks a way back to
the surface, encountering deceased bats who don't believe they're dead, Pilgrims
on their way to a promised paradise, and even Luna. Unbeknownst to Griffin, his
father, Shade, has followed him to the underworld in order to rescue him and
return him to the land of the living. Meanwhile, Shade's mortal enemy, Goth, has
been given the chance to return to life by the god of the underworld; all Goth has
to do is kill Griffin, and Goth will return to life. Unfortunately, the characteriza-
tions are limited, and the pace too often falters amid the questions of theology and
philosophy. There is nonetheless an underlying tension in Griffin's obstinate de-
termination to reach his goal that will propel readers through Oppel's darkly op-
pressive yet strangely vibrant underworld. Fans of the previous books will be older
now and may wish to spend some time in the eerily evoked, unrelenting land of
the dead (which, in the final sequence, is revealed to be created by sound and
echoes) in order to tackle the huge themes addressed by this ambitious sequel.
JMD
PATENT, DOROTHY HINSHAW 
Fabulous Fluttering Tropical Butterflies; illus. by
Kendahl Jan Jubb. 
Walker, 2003 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8839-4 
$17.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8838-6 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Butterflies are an almost irresistible lure, within books or without, and here's an
introduction to some of the flashiest. Patent begins with an overview of the
butterfly's life cycle and then goes on to describe different kinds of exotic-looking
butterflies, from the eyecatching morpho to the long-lived longwing, the poison-
ous postman to the cleverly camouflaged owl butterfly; the book finishes with a
discussion of butterfly houses, where one may encounter these beauties outside of
their native lands. This last section is the most intriguing (a whole book could be
made on the fascinating subject of mail-order butterfly farms, which apparently
supply such butterfly houses), but there are some thoughtful tidbits throughout
on various butterfly liveries and habits, and Patent's style is comfortable and en-
gaging. It would be nice, though, to have more hard information about some of
the insects mentioned, since the text sometimes omits facts about a particular spe-
cies' range or size. The watercolor illustrations are vivid and dramatic, with up-
close images of strongly hued butterflies and elaborate caterpillars; unfortunately,
328 
* THE BULLETIN
the backgrounds are often equally strongly hued and less deftly drafted, and the
compositions don't always manage to focus effectively on the subject butterflies
amid the colorful clamor. Endpapers feature a map populated by many of the
featured butterflies, but it's difficult to judge their range from their map positions;
an index, which includes the scientific names of the butterflies mentioned, is ap-
pended. DS
PIERCE, TAMORA 
Shatterglass. Scholastic, 2003 
[368p]
ISBN 0-590-39683-8 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-10
The fourth title in Pierce's The Circle Opens quartet follows Tris, weather mage
and lightning-wielder, in her attempts to train artisan glassmaker Keth Warder.
Keth is newly come into his powers, which were released when he was struck by
lightning in a freak accident. Their struggle to come to terms with Keth's unpre-
dictable magic is complicated by a serial killer who is strangling young female
yaskedasi, entertainers from the tourist-laden, money-producing pleasure center of
town. Keth's volatile magic suddenly begins producing glass globes full of light-
ning and fog that disperse to reveal the murders just before they take place, and
local law enforcement is very interested. Pierce's ability to create a believable set-
ting for her fantasy plots is key to her success; not only does she invent worlds in
which magic is a credible entity, she develops a varied social structure that sup-
ports both the action of her plot and the motivations of her characters. The char-
acters themselves, instead of being the personifications of a set of qualities (as can
so often be the case with fantasy characters) are complex and changing. Of the
series' four young mages (originally debuted in the Circle of Magic series), Tris is
one of the more conflicted: her temperament is reflected in her powerful, some-
times violent magic, and her moral conflicts are concrete. While the murder-
mystery elements here are not as carefully constructed as the fantasy elements, they
allow those moral conflicts a stark playing field. Readers who have followed Tris'
story thus far will be happy to pursue it to this end. JMD
RECORVITS, HELEN 
My Name Is Yoon; illus. by Gabi Swiatkowska. 
Foster/Far-
rar, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-374-35114-7 
$16.00 
R 4-7 yrs
Yoon does not like the way her name appears when it is printed in English, since
the separated letters look as lonely as she feels after moving from Korea to America.
She therefore gently refuses to practice writing her name, revealing a subtle sense
of humor by choosing instead to write "cat," "bird," and "cupcake." With her
parents' encouragement, however, she soon makes a friend, gains her teacher's
love, and begins to feel that "maybe America will be a good home." Recorvits'
simple text will be accessible, both emotionally and linguistically, to kids strug-
gling with new places and new languages, and there's a quiet shape to the story that
makes it satisfying as well as reassuring. Swiatkowska's textured gouache paintings
keep viewers firmly attuned to Yoon's changing perceptions of her situation. The
artist manipulates perspective from page to page so that the audience senses the
distance Yoon feels from other people in her strange new country, the intimacy she
feels first with the creations of her own imagination and then with a new friend
and her teacher as she begins to find her place in her new home. Yoon discovers
that her name, written in Korean or English, "still means Shining Wisdom"; her
APRIL 2003 
* 
329
story will instill a bit of that wisdom in children who are coming to America, as
well as to those who will welcome them as friends. KC
ROBERTS, BETHANY 
Rosie to the Rescue; illus. by Kay Chorao. 
Holt, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-6486-9 
$15.95 
Ad 4-6 yrs
Spending an evening at home in the care of her aunt Lily while her parents have an
evening out, small squirrel Rosie begins to indulge in a sequence of anxious fanta-
sies about their fate ("What if something happened? What if... what if... a tiger
ate them?"). She's a confident girl, however, and with Aunt Lily as a highly recep-
tive audience, she manages to devise a way to rescue her parents from each of her
imagined perils ("I would chase that tiger until he let them free"). This is a gentle
address of some of the fears complementary to Runaway Bunny's separation anxi-
ety, and the swift and cheerful resolution of Rosie's fantasized dilemmas and Aunt
Lily's energetic participation in the game help defuse the real tensions underlying
the situation. The sequence goes on too long, however, and there's no real shaping
of the story beyond the progression of dangers and the eventual return of Rosie's
parents. Chorao's cozy and picturesque illustrations mitigate the unease further,
stretching the pictured dangers even farther into fantasy while the squirrel parents
evince a certain restrained alarm, which quickly transforms to jubilation at their
daughter's triumphs; in fact, there's a bit too much countering of the underlying
fears, with the sweetness sometimes turning shallow and cutesy and the textural
linework becoming fussy as well as fuzzy. There's still some useful and high-spir-
ited reassurance about a primary youthful fear, however, and kids will enjoy plan-
ning their own parental rescues. DS
ROUILLARD, WENDY 
Barnaby's Bunny; written and illus. by Wendy
Rouillard. 
Scholastic, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-439-33307-5 
$12.95 
M 
5-8 yrs
Barnaby the bear and his classmates want to get a classroom pet, but their teacher,
Mrs. Sealey (a seal), isn't sure they are sufficiently responsible. The wise Mrs.
Sealey gives each student an egg as a faux baby, with the injunction "You'll have to
keep it safe, happy, and clean. If you can show me you are responsible, then we
can get a real class pet." Barnaby repeatedly says, "This is going to be easy," but of
course it isn't, and in a careless moment, he cracks his egg. Nonetheless, Mrs.
Sealey appreciates the lessons learned by her students, mending Barnaby's egg with
a bandage and rewarding the children with a real rabbit for a class pet. This title is
part of a series specifically designed for "character education" that, according to a
note directed to parents and educators, "helps children develop skills and values
that enhance their awareness of themselves and others in order to solve real prob-
lems and to make real decisions." The story is straightforward (thankfully, the
awkward rhyme that introduces the tale is easily skipped, and there is no rhyming
in the main body of the text) if less entertaining than pointedly didactic. Unfortu-
nately, the washed-out watercolor illustrations are stylistically reminiscent of cheap
coloring-book images, and the compositions are cluttered, cutesy, and cliched.
While the story itself does have teachable moments, the relentlessly programmatic
nature of the text and the shallowness of the visuals make this prepackaged piece
considerably less effective and imaginative than works such as Newman's Mole and
the Baby Bird (BCCB 11/02). JMD
330 
* THE BULLETIN
SALDA&A, JR., RENI 
Finding Our Way: Stories. 
Lamb, 2003 
117p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90077-5 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73051-9 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Saldafia, author of The Jumping Tree (BCCB 9/01), offers eleven stories (nine
published here for the first time) about growing up-growing up wise, growing up
confused, growing up alone, and growing up surrounded by family and friends.
The author has a sharp eye for the culture of young adults, those junior-high and
high-school students whose lives are frequently lived outside adult intervention or
understanding. The characters are Latino, and their stories are shaped by their
ethnicity but not constrained by it; the issues they wrestle with are universal. There's
a range of experience among the protagonists, from Rey, who stops to help an
undeserving neighbor in "The Good Samaritan," to Arturo, who is trying to
straighten up in "Alternative"; from Andy, who takes his Ruthie just a little too
much for granted in "Andy and Ruthie," to Kiko, who tries to change his future
and life in "Un Faite." Each story depicts an individual character's moment of
truth, where he or she either learns the needed lesson and moves on or crashes and
burns. Saldafia's prose, peppered with Spanish words and phrases (understand-
able in context), is sharp and colloquial. While much is revealed, just as much is
implied, making the stories layered and rich while still rendering them accessible.
These are thought-provoking discussion starters from a writer to watch. JMD
SCHWARTZ, 
DAVID 
M. 
Millions to 
Measure; illus. 
by 
Steven
Kellogg. 
HarperCollins, 2003 
34p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-623784-X 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-12916-1 
$16.99 
R 
Gr. 2-5
Schwartz and Kellogg team up for yet another numerical romp (How Much Is a
Million?, BCCB 7/85; If You Made a Million, BCCB 7/89), but this time "mil-
lions" don't literally figure in. This is, rather, a slick and pretty darned compelling
argument for abandoning English measurement in favor of the metric system. In
a breezy fantasy trek led by the returning wizard Marvelosissimo, Schwartz sketches
the probable development of measurements based literally on feet (probably royal
feet), stones (from rocks to boulders), cups (with a kingly quaff as standard), etc.,
and then demonstrates where the system strains at the seams. After the nonsensi-
cal tangle of competing measures and jargon becomes evident, readers are intro-
duced to the metric system, which looks, by comparison, like simplicity itself.
Closing notes expand on current uses of metric measurement in the U.S. and
provide a chart with hints for memorizing prefixes and their meanings. For the
truly recalcitrant who want it both ways, Schwartz offers a parting argument for a
one-system world: "The engineers and operators who worked on a multimillion-
dollar spacecraft made a big mistake. Some of them used feet and miles, while
others used meters and kilometers. After blastoff the spacecraft was supposed to
orbit Mars, but instead it was lost in space forever." Okay, I'm sold. EB
SNEVE, VIRGINIA DRIVING HAWK 
Enduring Wisdom: Sayings from Native Ameri-
cans; illus. by Synthia Saint James. 
Holiday House, 2003 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8234-1455-8 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Divided into five sections-Mother Earth, The People, War and Peace, Spirit
Life, and Enduring Wisdom-this title provides one or two Native American pre-
APRIL 2003 
* 331
cepts per page, from sources far-reaching and meticulously cited. Most interesting
is the historical juxtaposition of traditional and contemporary selections. The first
entry, for instance, is by Kiowa author N. Scott Momaday speaking in 1997, and
the one following it by Pontiac, chief of the Ottawa in 1760. Though not all are
independently resonant, many selections are powerful indeed: "I am a fox, I am
supposed to die./ Whatever is dangerous, let me do it.-1880s, Tokala, Lakota,
Kit Fox warrior society song." Some young readers may need adult reminders that
these are not representative of one monolithic philosophy, but careful perusal will
reveal the diversity and the layers of meaning in these texts. Unfortunately, Saint
James' illustrations rob the words of their impact. The cutout shapes have strangely
snouted silhouettes, while both the figures and designs are stiffly arranged with
machinelike symmetry that clashes with the organic and varying nature of the
selections. For contrasting depth of illustration, see Beverly Brodsky's artistic ac-
companiment for the Native American sayings in Buffalo, reviewed above. For
some creative language-arts practice, try reading this aloud, with the suggestion
that students choose a favorite to illustrate themselves. BH
STENHOUSE, TED 
A Dirty Deed. Kids Can, 2003 
[186p]
ISBN 1-55337-360-X 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Will and Arthur, an unlikely pair of white and Siksika friends in a 1950s Canadian
town that frowns on "mixed" friendship, have already solved a murder (Across the
Steel River, BCCB 1/02), and now they're bound to ferret out the truth behind a
purloined property deed found in a Blackfoot boy's hands, a mad woman hidden
away in the woods, and the guilty secret of the town's powerful kingpin, Old Man
Howe. Readers of the previous novel are already on to the Grayson bad guys, and
since Arthur spends much of this title locked in the Grayson hoosegow, the cul-
tural tensions between the boys, which was so compelling an element in Steel River,
is sadly lacking. Indeed, it's Will rather than Arthur who bonds (a bit too facilely)
with Arthur's grandfather, goes on a vision quest, and is guided and rescued by an
avatar hound. These supernatural goings-on never settle quite comfortably with
Will's character or the solid (if unimaginative) bait-and-swindle mystery, and
Arthur's active presence is sorely missed. Still, there's plenty of shifty residents and
unresolved anti-Indian sentiment left in Grayson, and a future episode may set the
Will and Arthur team back into balance. EB
STERN, ELLEN 
ISaw a Bullfrog; written and illus. by Ellen Stern. 
Random House,
2003 
[3 2p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-92173-7 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-82173-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-7 yrs
While titles such as Prelutsky's Scranimals (BCCB 10/02) deal with intriguing
combinations that might occur in some fantastical natural history, Stern's poetry
treats combinations that really exist-well, at least in their names, such as the
catfish, the bullfrog, and the rhinoceros beetle. Each exotic hybrid is explored in
four briskly anapestical lines that examine the creature's possibilities ("If a catfish
could choose, would she snooze on my bed/ Or swim round and round in a fish-
bowl instead?"). The verse is sometimes a little forced, lacking the deftness of that
of Jack Prelutsky or Douglas Florian, but there's an entertaining employment of
332 
* THE BULLETIN
multisyllabic terms and a sense of rollicking play that echoes the playful concept.
The illustrations are sometimes somewhat flat and literal, in their fine colored-
pencil detailing, and the portmanteau critters run to a predictable visual formula;
they are, however, capable of a pokerfaced Tennielian absurdity that will tickle
young audiences. It's useful to have a poetic bestiary aimed at a younger audience,
and it's rife with curricular opportunities, from language arts to art and a few other
stops in between. A final spread offers brief descriptions and illustrations of the
actual animals behind the evocative names. DS
SULLIVAN, PAUL Maata'sJournal. Atheneum, 2003 
221p
ISBN 0-689-83463-2 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
A young Inuit woman attempting to find her place in a rapidly changing world,
Maata is assisting a 1924 expedition in subarctic Canada; that assistance has now
become a determined effort to keep her remaining colleague alive until spring
rescue, since the rest of the expedition is either dead or lost. While she waits, she
keeps a journal that describes not just her present situation but also the events that
have led her to this place: the forced resettlement of her people by the Canadian
government, the separation of her traditional brother from the rest of the family,
the death of her parents, and her sojourn in a Quebec City boarding school. The
story's pacing is slow, undercut by the sometimes confusing flashback exposition,
and the writing is sometimes a little mannered. On the other hand, there's a
dignity to the style that gives Maata real presence, and the historically based details
are sparely and unsentimentally related, thereby enhancing the sadness. Nor does
Sullivan resort to a reductive treatment of his cast, even of the white Canadians
and Americans who come on the wave of change that destroys the old life of Maata's
people. This might make an interesting companion to George's Julie (BCCB 10/
94), since Maata too is considering her role and direction in the face of her people's
response to transformations they cannot stop: "I would need to find my own place
and time. And at that moment I knew they were waiting for me to discover them."
A bibliography and a note about Canada's recent granting of the Nunavut Terri-
tory to the Inuit are appended. DS
SWALLOW, PAMELA CURTIS 
It Only Looks Easy. 
Roaring Brook, 2003 
[17 6p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-7613-2866-1 
$22.90
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7613-1790-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
With her seventh-grade year barely under way, Kat (Katia) Randall finds herself
suddenly in the midst of turmoil. First, her dog, Cheddar, is seriously injured after
being hit by a car driven by Mrs. Lawrence, a woman with Alzheimer's disease.
Then, when she borrows a fellow student's bike to ditch school and check up on
Cheddar, the bike is stolen from outside the veterinary clinic, leaving Kat with a
bad reputation around school as a bike thief (especially when a second bike goes
missing) and a new financial burden (she has to earn enough money to replace the
stolen bike). While Kat monitors Cheddar's recovery, she also attempts to salvage
her rep at school and takes on extra jobs to earn some cold hard cash (ironically,
she ends up "babysitting" Mrs. Lawrence once a week so that her husband can get
a much-needed break from caring for her). Although the swiftness of the middle-
school rumor mill is true to life, the supposed ruin of Kat's reputation is never
really adequately established or supported. The ill Mrs. Lawrence is sympathetic
APRIL 2003 
* 
333
and thought-provoking, but other supporting characters are stereotypical (the anx-
ious, math-phobic girl whose mom pushes her too hard, the baggy-pants-wearing
bully who turns out to be the real bike thief, and the practically perfect older sister
who's always "borrowing" Kat's clothes). Generic and unconvincing dialogue ("I
honestly think that our stubborn, comical old character of a dog will get better,"
says Kat's high-school-aged sister) further undermines the novel's credibility. Still,
readers may identify with Kat's intense devotion to her dog and her occasionally
humorous description thereof: "Home, I could sleep next to her. I could give her
love, encouragement, and cheese." JMH
TALBERT, MARC 
Holding the Reins: A Ride through Cowgirl Life; illus. with pho-
tographs by Barbara Van Cleve. 
HarperCollins, 2003 
104p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029256-3 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029255-5 $16.99 
R Gr. 4-7
In his introduction, Talbert speaks eloquently of his admiration for cowgirls and
his desire that his daughters too will experience some of that self-assurance, "hold-
ing the reins with confidence, sitting deep in the saddle, head high, in control,
female and proud." He offers readers a taste of the life that produces that attitude
in this introduction to four young teens, all valuable hands on their family ranches
in states from Montana down to New Mexico. The book deliberately emulates
ranch life in taking its shape from the seasons, examining one girl's hard labor on
a sheep ranch in summer, another's balancing of ranch work and school work in
fall, the third's matter-of-fact toil in a Wyoming winter, and the last subject's
eventful spring of branding, castrating, and inoculating calves. Though Talbert's
rhapsodic style is sometimes more sentimental than informative, this is a picture
that gives credit to the hard labor as well as the romantic atmosphere of life on the
range. Readers will find the details-gory and otherwise-absorbing, and they'll
be intrigued by the differences and similarities among the four families. Mostly,
though, they'll just relish the view of a life that's as fundamentally appealing as it is
vastly different from most of theirs. A map of the relevant states locates the girls'
ranches, and Van Cleve's black-and-white photographs, scattered thickly through
the book, provide eloquent portraits of the young cowgirls. DS
TORREY, MICHELE 
To the Edge of the World. Knopf, 2003 
[240p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-92338-1 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-82338-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 5-8
Mateo Macfas de Avfla's parents have died in the pestilence, and the impoverished,
orphaned boy takes to the road in search of better prospects. He's recruited into
the fleet of Captain Magallanes (better known in history as Ferdinand Magellan),
where he is almost immediately drawn into shipboard intrigues revolving around
ambitious Spaniards' resentment of their Portuguese commander and his suspect
plan for reaching the eastern Spice Islands by sailing westward. Any reader who's
been awake in Social Studies knows that, although the expedition will be success-
ful, at least in the novelty of its route, Magallanes won't live to bask in the glory. If
Torrey's imagined account is anything to go by, it's amazing anyone made it back
alive, having devoted far more page space to boasting, posturing, and plotting than
to seamanship. Torrey fails to take advantage of fictional liberty to posit any ex-
planation for Magallanes' sudden diversion of interest from exploring new sea routes
334 
* 
THE BULLETIN
to converting islanders to Christianity, or for Mateo's friend Rodrigo's sudden
turnabout from scorning their commander to defending him with his life. Mateo
busies himself among such shopworn plot devices as falling in love (ever so chastely)
with an island girl, playing sidekick to the worldly-wise Rodrigo, and losing his
faithful dog at dockside, only to rediscover him waiting at his return two years
later. Readers in search of genuine adventure might want to jump ship and sign
onto the Resolution in Lawlor's Magnificent Voyage (BCCB 2/03). EB
VAN LAAN, NANCY 
Scrubba Dub; illus. by Bernadette Pons. 
Schwartz/Atheneum,
2003 
26p
ISBN 0-689-84459-X 
$15.95 
Ad 
2-4 yrs
Active little bunnies are dirty little bunnies, and it's time for this one to peel off
duds ("off goes romper suit/ tug tug pull"), select a suitable accent ("Pick a toy/ not
the cat"), and dive into the bath ("Splash splish splish splosh/ time to wash").
Mom's tender ministrations ("Washy nosie washy toesies") and the traditional
bathtime pleasures ("Double bubbles bubble up") make the experience bubbly
and enjoyable. Van Laan's playful rhymes are slight, but they make the most of
onomatopoeic near-nonsense, gleefully splashing words around, and even bath-
resistant toddlers will enjoy chanting along and discovering the final post-bath
mess. Though the softly mottled pastels are attractive, the art tends towards the
cloyingly sweet, and the visuals sometimes fail to pursue the possibilities of the text
(there's no reflection of the "Yikes, the eye" incursion, and the end mess isn't all
that messy). Pons' freckle-faced little orange bunny is still quite endearing, and
he/she is certainly dirty enough to merit a bath by anyone's lights; bunny's evident
enjoyment of most aspects of the dunking adds a pleasing froth (and may make
users yearn for a bathable bunny as a bath companion). Youngsters not quite old
enough to sail the seas with Krosoczka's Bubble Bath Pirates (BCCB 3/03) may
want to get their feet wet with this. DS
VESTERGAARD, HOPE 
Driving Daddy; illus. by Thierry Courtin. 
Dutton,
2003 
20p
ISBN 0-525-47032-8 
$6.99 
Ad 
1-3 yrs
VESTERGAARD, HOPE 
Wake Up, Mama!; illus. by Thierry Courtin. 
Dutton,
2003 
20p
ISBN 0-525-47030-1 
$6.99 
Ad 
1-3 yrs
Everyday play is the stuff baby dreams are made of in this pair of rhyming picture
books. The child in Driving Daddy is sitting on his father's shoulders, directing
him hither and yon with a yank on his hair or a pull of his ears: "Dad keeps going.
What's he doing?/ That way, Daddy! See the swing?// Tug those ears and try to
steer him-/ Someone stop this crazy thing!" In Wake Up, Mama! the protagonist
is climbing "Mama Mountain" to wake her up in the morning: "Here's the top of
Mama Mountain!/ Wake up, Mama! No more rest!/ Kiss her, hug her, make her
giggle./ Baby wake-ups are the best!" Each of these volumes takes a cozy delight in
everyday events. Both titles, though, suffer from predictable rhymes and from
rhythms that occasionally stumble into scansion problems. Although the text re-
fers to both boy protagonists as "baby," they are definitely toddlers in action and
depiction, and some big-boy listeners may object to the designation. The pastel
illustrations have a coloring-book simplicity, especially in the dot-eyed smiling
APRIL2003 
* 
335
faces and lollipop trees. Traveling piggyback and waking sleeping parents are cer-
tainly activities of choice for the toddler set, and while these titles are a bit bland
they still have enough bounce to keep lap-sitting youngsters amused-or wanting
a piggyback ride. JMD
VROMBAUT, AN 
Clarabella's Teeth; written and illus. by An Vrombaut. 
Clarion,
2003 
[26 p]
ISBN 0-618-33379-7 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
2-5 yrs
Poor Clarabella! She has a lovely, extra-long set of crocodile teeth, but there are so
many of them that it takes her all day to brush them with her regular-sized brush
("She brushes and brushes her crocodile teeth"). Her friends Zoe (a zebra), Ruby
(a rabbit), Liam (a leopard), and Max (a monkey) finish brushing their regular-
sized teeth with plenty of time to play, tumble, and eat, but by the time Clarabella
is finished they are getting ready for bed. Clarabella's friends are true blue, how-
ever, and they have a surprise for her-a crocodile-sized toothbrush, long enough
that Clarabella can finish brushing her teeth in record time, so "tomorrow we can
all play together." This simple story is effectively presented in an easy, repetitive
text and lively, distinctive illustrations. Although the text doesn't didactically ad-
dress the importance of tooth brushing, it can easily be used by adult caregivers
looking to get the message across. Vrombaut's background in animation comes
through in her energetic and richly hued pastel illustrations. Her animal charac-
ters are cartooned with colorful details from zebra stripes to leopard spots;
Clarabella's tree house is a swirl of golden fruit and embracing branches sure to
inspire longing in young viewers dreaming of their own space. The chronological
structure of the story (the plot proceeds from wake-up time to bedtime) and the
ever-increasing refrain ("She brushes and brushes and brushes and brushes her
crocodile teeth") will give youngsters an easy hook on which to hang both their
attention and their participation. JMD
WEAVER, WILL 
Claws. 
HarperTempest, 2003 
[24 0p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-009474-5 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-009473-7 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Jed Berg is both shaken and skeptical when a Goth-garbed, pink-haired teenager
informs him that his father is having an affair with her mother and demands that
he confront his father and put an end to it. The evidence she steadily produces-
a series of increasingly graphic photos of the adulterous pair-convinces him, but
it's clear that something about the girl herself is not quite right. With a bit of
undercover work and an assist from a computer-hacker classmate, Jed learns that
she's Laura Sanborn, a bright, pony-tailed, athletic junior at another high school.
When he and Laura finally meet with her disguise thrown aside, they agree to talk
to their errant parents. Instead of ending the affair, however, this causes the two
already fragile marriages to crumble, and under the threat of inexorable divorce,
Laura's mentally unstable sister, Jessie, runs away in a canoe, leading melodramati-
cally to Laura's death. When Weaver sticks to the central theme of teens facing
their parents' infidelities, the plotting glides along. However, the extraneous lay-
ers of tragedy, Weaver's failure to examine the whistle-blowers' role in the marital
debacle, and the teens' illogical refusal to call for help in finding Jessie reduce the
336 
* THE BULLETIN
genuine drama to soap-operatic pathos. Still, there's definitely some guilty plea-
sure in watching perfect lives unravel, and readers of a catty bent will sink their
own claws right in. EB
WEN, ELIZABETH E. 
A Coalition ofLions. Viking, 2003 
[256p]
ISBN 0-670-03618-8 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-9
With her father and brothers dead, her aunt Morgause seeking her life, and her
father's enemy King Cynric looking to make her his son's bride, Princess Goewin
flees her native Britain. She travels to Aksum, the site of modern-day Ethiopia, in
order to recall the ambassador Constantine, her father's nephew and chosen heir
in the event that all of his sons are killed. She is also betrothed to Constantine, but
she finds him a distastefully haughty personage, cruelly efficient in his role as vice-
roy to the Emperor but personally despicable. When she discovers in Aksum the
son of her elder brother, Medraut, who was the ambassador to that kingdom six
years prior to her visit, she strikes a dangerous bargain-she will marry Constantine
on the condition that she be allowed to name Telemakos, her newly discovered
nephew, as heir to the throne of Britain. In this sequel to The Winter Prince, the
setting of sixth-century Aksum is richly textured, with all of its contradictions of
refinement and brutality rendered through apt, culturally specific metaphors. As
far as retellings, extensions, and variations of the Arthurian legends go, this one
offers a substantial amount of real history from a region and time seldom depicted
in children's literature-a nice reminder that the history of kings and empires hap-
pened in places other than just the British Isles. At its center is a strong and
thoughtful heroine on whom the mantle of leadership weighs heavily as she tries to
balance the moral demands of freedom with the exigencies of command. A his-
torical note unravels the complex interweaving of myth, history, and storytelling
in Wein's compelling Arthurian cycle. KC
WHITE, RuTH 
Tadpole. Farrar, 2003 
199p
ISBN 0-374-31002-5 
$16.00 
R Gr. 4-7
Although the theme here is as serious as White's earlier Memories ofSummer (BCCB
9/00) and her Newbery Honor book Belle Prater's Boy (BCCB 4/96), the tone is
lighter and the plot more straightforward. We are never in doubt that Tad(pole),
the orphan at the center of a struggle between his abusive paternal uncle and his
soft-hearted maternal aunt, will find his freedom; nor is there any question that his
ten-year-old cousin, Carolina, who narrates the story, will find her special talent in
the shadow of three sisters who are popular, pretty, and brainy, in that order. This
is a fifties Appalachian family story replete with poor but happy clans whose re-
sponse to music is as traditional as their Fourth of July picnic fare of "fried chicken
and baked ham, taters fixed five different ways, and about ten other kinds of veg-
etables, salads, watermelon and muskmelon, all kinds of bread and real butter,
cakes, pies, and cold drinks a'plenty." The threat to Tad is kept looming and
distant, the courtship of Carolina's mother by an upright new suitor resolves in
marriage after she makes sure he pays more attention to his own four boys, and all
four of her own girls learn responsibility from Tad, who also helps Carolina de-
velop her gift for playing the guitar and singing harmony. The occasional inser-
tion of a mysterious fantasy life that keeps Tad's spirits strong gives us a taste of the
deeper currents that have characterized White's other stories. Even without such
APRIL 2003 
* 
337
depths, however, the chipper writing, big loud cast prone to playful dialogue, and
plentiful action keep the story worry-free and easy to read. BH
WILSON, JOHN And in the Morning. Kids Can, 2003 
198p
ISBN 1-55337-400-2 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Jim Hays' father has been killed in battle and his mother has died of a broken
heart; the sixteen-year-old sees little point in marking time at school and so, with
his sweetheart Anne's reluctant consent, he joins other underage recruits from his
neighborhood who are off to "do their bit" with the Highland Light Infantry to
put the Kaiser in his place. Although boredom, vermin, and witnessed atrocities
quickly strip the glamour from Jim's idea of war, even his best friend lain's insight-
ful criticism of command decisions and their chances in upcoming battles cannot
entirely disillusion Jim, who clings to the belief that officers know what they're
doing and soldiers serve with honor. Jim marries Anne while home on leave before
the "Big Push" at the Somme, and then he returns to take his place on the front
line, where readers who picked up on the opening frames concerning a soldier's
diary will realize he must meet his end. After patiently leading his protagonist and
his readers through a year of military service and battle escalation, Wilson plunges
them into the roiling vortex of Jim's demise. The young man has lost all his
neighborhood mates, he watches Iain fall beside him at the advance, he sees his
commanding officer fall (presumably dead), and he suffers a head injury in the
shelling; he's apprehended wandering on the field, tried as a deserter, and promptly
executed as an example to would-be slackers and cowards. Wilson never intrudes
with an overt condemnation of war; indeed, the format of the novel-diaries,
fictionalized news clippings, and other documents-precludes such intrusion.
Nonetheless, his message is inescapable: the idealism of youth has been coopted,
manipulated, and ultimately squandered. And not just in the first Great War. EB
YOLEN, JANE Atalanta and the Arcadian Beast; by Jane Yolen and Robert J.
Harris. 
HarperCollins, 2003 
245p 
(Young Heroes)
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029455-8 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029454-X 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Twelve-year-old Atalanta is an accomplished hunter and tracker, thanks to
mentoring by her loving foster father. Mortally wounded by a ravening beast, he
reminds her that he found her when she was four years old at the side of "a great
she-bear who was long dead"; then he gives her something he has kept secret since
that day: a signet ring she was wearing on a leather thong around her neck. Atalanta
buries her father, but her grief is interrupted by the arrival of a brown bear she
recognizes as a pre-foster-family playmate. The girl and the bear, Urso, travel into
the woods, tracking the beast that killed her father. In the course of her travels,
Atalanta meets the god Pan, joins a hunting party led by the hero Orion, and finds
herself in the royal court. Once there, she recognizes the symbol of royalty over
the throne as the same that is on the signet ring she wears around her neck. Atalanta's
quest to kill the beast that killed her father quickly becomes enmeshed with adult
concerns and adult machinations, a fact which may distance the book's intended
audience. Characterizations are slim, and since it's clear that Atalanta lives to hero
on, there is little suspense to the repetitive huhting sequences that make up the
bulk of the novel. There is still a certain allure to Atalanta's relationship with
Urso, and Atalanta's final escape from the palace (and a future she wishes to delay
338 
* THE BULLETIN
as long as possible) has an outlaw quality that would-be escapees will find very
appealing. 
Readers with a yen for mythological meanderings tempered with a
plethora of chases and escapes will enjoy following Atalanta's hunt. Be ready to
offer Climo's Atalanta's Race (BCCB 6/95) or Martin's Race of the Golden Apples
(11/91) for followup reading. JMD
YOLEN, JANE 
How Do Dinosaurs Get Well Soon?; illus. by Mark Teague. 
Blue
Sky/Scholastic, 2003 
[32p]
ISBN 0-439-24100-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-6 yrs
We previously learned that dinosaurs, despite temptation for misbehavior, are ab-
solute lambs at bedtime (How Do Dinosaurs Say Goodnight?, BCCB 6/00), and
now Yolen and Teague provide insight into their attitudes when they're under the
weather. There are certainly some dire possibilities touched upon-it would be
pretty revolting if the gallimimus dropped "dirty tissues all over the floor" or the
brachiosaurus got "sick in a pail," and nobody wants to drag a reluctant styracosaurus
into the doctor's office. Fortunately, dinosaurs are model patients: the velociraptor
"uses a hankie on mouth and nose," the diplodocus "takes his medicine without a
fight," and the styracosaurus snuggles down under the covers to get some rest and
get well. As with the previous title, the verse is simple yet sprightly, touching on
some realistic aspects of kid life and leaving the illustrations to make the most of
the comically charged situation. Teague makes particularly good use of ceilings in
this outing, whether it be pressing his oversized prehistoric critters up against them
or raising them sufficiently to dwarf the humans within while making, finally,
enough room for your basic tuojiangosaurus. There's an additional charge from
the blandness of the human cast, who are emotively dwarfed by the positively
operatic patients (the wailing dilophosaurus rivals Tosca on the ramparts for dra-
matic intensity). Most of the dinosaurs are identified with a neat little caption
somewhere in the illustration, and there's a complete inventory of the included
sickies on the endpapers. Even non-dinophiles will find this adds some cheerful
absurdity to the sickroom. DS
YOUNG, AMY 
Belinda the Ballerina; written and illus. by Amy Young. 
Viking,
2003 
32p
ISBN 0-670-03549-1 
$15.99 
R 
5-8 yrs
Belinda the Ballerina loves to dance, "but Belinda had a big problem-two big
problems: her left foot and her right foot." When an expert condemns their
hugeness ("Your feet are as big as boats!"), Belinda gives up ballet to become a
waitress at Fred's Fine Food, where she is successful and well liked because she is
"quick and light on her feet." When the "Fred's Friends" band comes to play at
the restaurant, there's barely time for a pirouette before Belinda's big but talented
feet have her dancing for the customers. It isn't long after that that the Maestro of
the Grand Metropolitan Ballet discovers Belinda and brings her to his stage to
dance: "'Magnificent!' the judges cried. 'We have discovered a swallow, a dove, a
gazelle!' They didn't even notice the size of her feet. They were too busy watching
her dance." At first glance this looks like a fluffy piece of wishful thinking, but
Belinda's triumph will resonate with all the kids (and grownups) who have ever
been judged before being given a chance to prove themselves. Both text and illus-
trations have an emotional kick for readers and listeners (in one particularly affect-
APRIL 2003 
* 
339
ing scene, a heartbroken Belinda soaks in a gray tub, her big feet over the edge, the
only real color in the room the pink dance costume and pink-striped towel draped
over the gray chair, under text that reads, "Belinda was sad. She stayed sad for a
long time"). Young's gouache illustrations offer vibrant colors and vigorous ac-
tion. Belinda herself is a graceful Olive Oyl in a pink tutu (with huge pink toe
shoes), who will ingratiate herself with every would-be ballerina who chances to
encounter her. JMD
ZIEFERT, HARRIET 
A Dozen Ducklings Lost and Found; illus. by Donald
Dreifuss. 
Lorraine/Houghton, 2003 
[30p]
ISBN 0-618-14175-8 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-6 yrs
Farmer Donald successfully digs up a dozen fence posts ("He used a shovel and a
pickax and his two strong arms"), leaving one dozen perfect little holes in the
ground. When Mother Duck goes out walking with her dozen new ducklings,
"she was sure they were in a straight line right behind her tail." Well, they cer-
tainly start out from the pond that way, but ducklings meet postholes and, one by
one, eight of them disappear, leaving Mother Duck calling them to no avail. With
Farmer Donald's help Mother Duck retraces her steps, locates her peeping duck-
lings, and all is well. Mother Duck counts those baby ducklings up from one to
twelve and back down again from twelve to one several times in this simple sus-
pense story, and the circular plot (the ducklings wind up back at the pond after
being suitably admired) provides a comforting bit of closure while listeners pain-
lessly absorb both the counting lesson and the concept of"an even dozen." Dreifuss'
naive, impressionistic paintings have a simplicity of composition that makes them
easy to for group viewing, with the fluffy yellow ducklings standing out against the
verdant background. Additional information about the habits of ducks and duck-
lings is appended in a section called "Farmer Donald Says." 
Preschoolers will
appreciate the gravity of the situation even as they reiterate the lost ducklings'
refrain: "Peep! Peep!" JMD
In our March review of Mariah Fredericks' The True Meaning of Cleavage, we
mistakenly indicated that the publication date was the year 20043. Fortunately,
eager readers will not actually have to wait another eighteen thousand years to
acquire this title; the book's correct publication date is 2003.
340 
* THE BULLETIN
CHILDREN'S BOOK AWARDS 2003
The Newbery Medal will be awarded to Avi for Crispin: The Cross of Lead
(Hyperion). The Newbery Honor Books are The House ofthe Scorpion, by Nancy
Farmer (Jackson/Atheneum); Pictures ofHollis Woods, by Patricia Reilly Giff (Lamb/
Random House); Hoot, by Carl Hiaasen (Knopf); A Corner ofthe Universe, by Ann
M. Martin (Scholastic); and Surviving theApplewhites, by Stephanie S. Tolan (Har-
perCollins).
The Caldecott Medal will be awarded to Eric Rohmann for My Friend Rabbit,
writtten by the illustrator (Roaring Brook). The Caldecott Honor Books are The
Spider and the Fly, illus. by Tony DiTerlizzi, written by Mary Howitt (Simon);
Hondo 6e Fabian, written and illus. by Peter McCarty (Holt); and Noah's Ark,
adapted and illus. by Jerry Pinkney (SeaStar).
The Coretta Scott King Award for writing will be presented to Nikki Grimes,
author of Bronx Masquerade (Dial), and the award for illustration goes to E. B.
Lewis for Talkin' about Bessie: The Story ofAviator Elizabeth Coleman, written by
Nikki Grimes (Orchard). The King Honor Books for writing are Talkin'about
Bessie: The Story ofAviator Elizabeth Coleman, written by Nikki Grimes (Dial),
and Red Rose Box, written by Brenda Woods (Putnam). The King Honor Books
for illustration are Rap a Tap Tap: Here's Bojangles-Think of That!, written and
illustrated by Leo and Diane Dillon (Blue Sky); and Visiting Langston, illus. by
Bryan Collier, written by Willie Perdomo (Holt).
The American publisher receiving the Mildred L. Batchelder Award for the most
outstanding translation of a book originally published in a foreign language is The
Chicken House/Scholastic for Cornelia Funke's The ThiefLord; the honor award
goes to David R. Godine for Henrietta and the Golden Eggs, written by Hanna
Johansen and illustrated by Kiithi Bhend.
The Michael L. Printz Award for a book that exemplifies literary excellence in
young adult literature goes to Aidan Chambers for Postcards from No Man 's Land
(Dutton). Honor books are Hole in My Life, by Jack Gantos (Farrar), My Heart-
beat, by Garret Freymann-Weyr (Houghton), and The House of the Scorpion, by
Nancy Farmer (Jackson/Atheneum).
The Robert F. Sibert Award for most distinguished informational book for chil-
dren goes to James Cross Giblin for The Life and Death ofAdolfHitler (Clarion).
Honor books are Six Days in October: The Stock Market Crash of 1929, by Karen
Blumenthal (Atheneum); Hole in My Life, by Jack Gantos (Farrar); Action Jackson,
by Jan Greenberg and Sandra Jordan, illus. by Robert Andrew Parker (Porter/
Roaring Brook); and When Marian Sang: The True Recital of Marian Anderson:
APRIL 2003 
* 341
The Voice of a Century, written by Pam Mufioz Ryan, illus. by Brian Selznick
(Scholastic).
Eric Carle is the recipient of the Laura Ingalls Wilder Award.
The 2004 May Hill Arbuthnot Honor Lecture will be delivered by Ursula LeGuin.
Nancy Garden is the 2003 winner of the Margaret A. Edwards Award for Out-
standing Literature for Young Adults honoring an author's lifetime contribution
in writing books for teenagers.
The Scott O'Dell Award for Historical Fiction goes to Shelley Pearsall for Trouble
Don't Last (Knopf).
The Canadian Library Association's Best Book of the Year for children is Jean
Little's Orphan at My Door: The Home Child Diary of Victoria Cope (Scholastic).
The Amelia Frances Howard-Gibbon Illustrator's Award goes to Frances Wolfe
for Where I Live, written by the illustrator (Tundra). The Young Adult Canadian
Book Award goes to William Bell for Stones (Doubleday).
The Carnegie Medal was awarded to Terry Pratchett for The Amazing Maurice
and His Educated Rodents (HarperCollins).
The Kate Greenaway Medal was awarded to Chris Riddell for Pirate Diary, writ-
ten by Richard Platt (Candlewick).
The Hans Christian Andersen Award for writing goes to Aidan Chambers of the
United Kingdom. The award for illustration goes to Quentin Blake of the United
Kingdom.
NCTE's Orbis Pictus Award for Outstanding Nonfiction for Children goes to
When Marian Sang: The True Recital ofMarian Anderson: The Voice ofa Century, by
Pam Mufioz Ryan; illus. by Brian Selznick (Scholastic); Honor Books are Confucius;
The Golden Rule, by Russell Freedman, illus. by Freddric Clement (Levine/Scho-
lastic); The Emperor's Silent Army: Terracotta Warriors ofAncient China, by Jane
O'Connor (Viking); Phineas Gage: A Gruesome but True Story about Brain Science,
by John Fleischman (Houghton); Tenement: Immigrant Life on the Lower East
Side, by Raymond Bial (Houghton); and To Fly: The Story of the Wright Brothers,
by Wendie C. Old, illus. by Robert Andrew Parker (Clarion).
NCTE's Award for Excellence in Poetry for children goes to Mary Ann Hoberman.
1653
342 
* THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Abuse-fiction: Frost
ADVENTURE: Chen; Morpurgo;
Morris; Torrey; Wein
African Americans: McKissack
ALPHABET BOOKS: Allen
Animals: Leedy
Animals-poetry: Stern
Arithmetic: Schwartz
Art: Brodsky
Asian Americans-stories: Cheng
Babies-stories: Gutman
Balloons-fiction: Milgrim
Baseball-stories: Adler Mama
Baths-stories: Van Laan
Bats-fiction: Naylor; Oppel
BEDTIME STORIES: Yolen How
Biology: Facklam
BIOGRAPHIES: Adler Lewis
Books and reading-stories: Daly;
Allen
Brothers-fiction: Corbet
Brothers and sisters-fiction: Gray
Brothers and sisters-stories: Hughes
Butterflies: Patent
Cambodia-fiction: Ho
Campers and camping-fiction:
Mills
Cats-poetry: Florian
China-fiction: Chen
Civil War: McKissack
Colors-stories: Holwitz
COUNTING BOOKS: Ziefert
Cousins-fiction: White
Cowboys and cowgirls: Talbert
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Lowry; Naylor; Pierce; Stenhouse
Crocodiles-stories: Vrombaut
Cultural studies: Brodsky; Sneve
CUMULATIVE STORIES: Cullen
Dancers and dancing-fiction:
Freymann-Weyr
Dancers and dancing-stories:
Isadora; Young
Death-fiction: Hoffman
Dinosaurs-stories: Yolen How
Disabilities-fiction: Lowry
Disabilities-stories: Munsch
Disasters-fiction: Hoffman
Divorce-fiction: Weaver
Dogs-fiction: Hearne; Swallow
Dogs-poetry: Florian
Dogs-stories: Gutman; Kolar
Ducks-fiction: Luthardt
Ducks-stories: James; Ziefert
Emotions-stories: Lichtenheld
Ethics and values: Crum;
Freymann-Weyr; McCarthy;
Mills; O'Dell; Rouillard; Swallow
Explorers and exploring: Adler Lewis
Explorers and exploring-fiction:
Torrey
Families-poetry: Bennett
Families-stories: Banks
FANTASY: Brown; Chen; Cooper;
Mahy; Oppel; Pierce
Farms-stories: Ziefert
Fathers-fiction: Corbet; Freymann-
Weyr; Mahy
Fathers-stories: Harel; Vestergaard
Daddy
Films and filming-stories: Avi
FOLKTALES AND FAIRY TALES:
Batt; Fowles; Milligan
Friends and friendship-fiction:
Benduhn; O'Dell
APRIL 2003 
* 343
Friends and friendship-stories:
Bluthenthal; Gutman; Holwitz
Frogs-fiction: Miiller
Games-stories: James
Gardens-stories: Cheng
Gays and lesbians-fiction: Benduhn
Gods and goddesses-stories:
Bluitgen
Grandmothers-stories: 
Cheng
Growing up-fiction: Saldania
Health: Vrombaut
HISTORICAL FICTION: Avi;
Crum; Ho; Lowry; Stenhouse;
Sullivan; White
History, U.S.: Adler Lewis;
McKissack
History, world: Torrey; Wilson
Horses-fiction: Cooper
Horses-stories: Milligan
HUMOR: Brown; Lichtenheld;
Morris; Miller
Illness-stories: Yolen How
Imagination-stories: McCarthy;
Roberts
Immigrants-fiction: Avi; Ho
Immigrants-stories: Recorvits
Independence-stories: Eriksson
Inuit-fiction: Sullivan
Ireland-folklore: Milligan
Islands-fiction: Morpurgo
Knights and chivalry-fiction:
Morris; Wein
Language arts: Leedy; Stern
Language-stories: Recorvits
Latinos-fiction: Saldania
Magic-fiction: Pierce
Magic-stories: Fowles
Measurement: Schwartz
Mice-fiction: Milgrim
Mothers and daughters-stories:
Adler Mama
Mothers-fiction: Gray
Mothers-stories: Banks; Vestergaard
Mama
Moving-stories: Recorvits
MYSTERIES: Naylor
Mythology, classical: Yolen
Atalanta
Native Americans: Brodsky; Sneve
Native Americans-fiction:
Stenhouse
Nature study: Facklam; Patent
Orphans-fiction: White
Parties-stories: Bluthenthal
Persecution-fiction: Ho
Perseverance-stories: Young
Pets-stories: Rouillard
Philosophy: Sneve
Pigs-stories: Eriksson
POETRY: Bennett; Florian; Frost;
Stern
Poverty-fiction: Crum
Races-stories: Kolar
Racism-fiction: Stenhouse; Sullivan
Reading aloud: Brown; Cooper;
Florian; Lichtenheld; Naylor
Reading, beginning: Luthardt;
Milgrim
Reading, easy: Brown; Cooper;
Harel
Reading, reluctant: Facklam;
Lichtenheld
Relationships-fiction: O'Dell
Religious education: Bluitgen
RHYMING STORIES: Isadora;
Vestergaard; Yolen How
Robots-fiction: Milgrim
ROMANCE: Corbet
School-fiction: Codell; Mills
School-stories: Daly
Shopping-stories: Eriksson
SHORT STORIES: Hearne;
Saldania
Slavery: McKissack
South Africa-stories: Daly
Storytime: Banks; Cullen; Eriksson;
Harel; Hughes; James; McCarthy;
Munsch; Roberts; Ziefert
Supernatural powers-fiction: Mahy
Teachers-fiction: Codell
Teachers-stories: Rouillard
Teeth-stories: Vrombaut
Time travel-fiction: Gray
TODDLER BOOKS: Vestergaard
Voyages and travel-fiction: Torrey
Water-stories: Cullen
West, the: Talbert
Wishes-stories: Batt
Women's studies: Talbert
World War I-fiction: Wilson
World War II-stories: Adler Mama
Writers and writing-fiction: Codell
I. IBEl
2003 Newbery
Honor Book
ALA Ntablfe Children's 
Book
ALA Boklst dtos Choice
ALA Book Links
Lasting Con.nection
The Horn Book Fanfare Book
Publisher Weekly
Best Book of the Year
iew
- Mean will go out to Dotn Hattie and Acam. 
:
:-Publishers 
Weekly, strred review
tattie is likeable, clear, and consistent; her
r. A solid, affecting read."
-Kirkus Reviews, starred review
""
Louisa May Alcott Made Perfect
2-0 "Louisa May Alcott fans will relish this fictionalized account
of the Alcotts' stay at Fruitlands, a commune where Louisa's
transcendentalist father and his [friends] conducted their [1843]
famous not-so-successful experiment in
forming the perfect community. ...
Vividly [capturing] Louisa's wit,
feisty spirit and keen powers of
observation ... this meticulously
researched book reveals Whelan's
depth of understanding and respect
for Alcott's outlook on life."
-
Starred review / Publishers Weekly
"A rich evocation of a fascinating
experiment." 
-Kirkus Reviews
Ages 8-12. $15.99 Tr (0-06-623815-3)
'$17.89 
Lb (0-06-623816-1)
l~u1, 
A
Starred in BooklistI
S"Cobb takes a fresh
approach to science for
young children in the
Science Play Series.
Each book introduces
a single, simple 
A
concept through
words, pictures, and
experimentation ...
In I Get Wet, a boy
learns some of the
properties of water....
I See Myself features
a girl who finds out a 
b Vicki Cobb 
t 
Jl Gorto
little about vision, light, 
Ae 3b 
orton
and reflection. 
Ages 3-6.
and reflection.. $15.99 Tr (0-688-17838-3);
The crisp, upbeat 
$17.89 Lb (0-688-17839-1)
look of the digital
illustrations . . . reflects 
.
the enthusiastic tone
in Cobb's text, which 
|cr
encourages children to
discover for themselves
the properties of
water and light.
An eye-opening debut
for a primary series."
G 
-Starred review /
ALA Booklist
I 
A 
e 3-6;
$15.99 Tr (0-688-17836-7);
$17.89 Lb (0-688-17837-5)
Fa j 
Gorto
bY 
Clobi Wob r" 
t#
m~i g mrfarve -as well 
-
as a: treewneeling rlomp .:
i~: 
fl~1s w/il 
love to sing, c~ount, and ~dap 
along.
-Sho 
~0~ 
LibroyJ~~ra 
5thred reiw
I-imairaned, 
cleverlyconstrute 
book willke
children 
busy for 
hours, exmining the intricate:
Swrkng and humming the famil~iar
nursery rhyme-counti~ng 
sng
"Zelinsky's 
illustrat~ions 
:are 
swee and friendly,
and the book is bursting
with playfu~l 
touhes."
--The ibm Book Mogozine
Universi
1325 Sol
Champa
U.S-A.
ADDRESS
You may now access The Bulletin Online with an individualized username
and password.
The Bulletin Online is available only to print subscribers, and includes the
1998-2002 volume years plus the current issues as they are published.
The online version allows you to search the current issue or the entire
database by author, title, age or grade level.
To access The Bulletin Online:
I. Go to http://www.prairienet.orglccbl
2. 
When accessing The Bulletin Online for the first time, use the sub-
scriber number that appears in the upper left-hand corer of the
mailing label on your print copy as both your username and password.
This subscriber number will usually be a four- or five-digit number but
may also be a five-character letter/number combination.
3. After logging in for the first time, you will be required to change your
password to something other than your username. This password is
case sensitive and should be one word only. Please store this new
password in a safe place. Your username (which is also your sub-
scriber number) will not change.
Remember, The Bulletin Online is not licensed for public use; only indi-
vidual print subscribers and institutional subscribers' staff are granted
access, so please do not share your access codes. We are working to
expand The Bulletin Online's capabilities and therefore create broader
electronic subscription options for individuals and institutions.
Non-subscribers can learn more about The Bulletin of the Center for
Children's Books at: http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb/
Please e-mail any feedback or questions to: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu.
Universin
1325 Sou
Champaq
U.S-A.
ADDRESSS
University of Illinois Press 
PERIODICALS
1325 South Oak Street 
P
Champaign, IL 61820 
PAID
U.S.A. 
AID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
ADDRESS SERVICE REQUESTED
University of Illinois Press
PERIODIOUS
1325 South Oak 
Street
Po~
Champaign, IL 61820 
PAID
U.S-A.
C~PAIGN, 
IL
ADDRESS SERVICE REQUESITD
i»r-.
ri
"'~·:'
OUS
1GN, IL
;·
·il"l·
i*(i
i
II~~ 
ii·(
11 
0008-9036(200
0008-9036(200304)56:8; 1-6
€^' 
I*i%^^:
