ILLIN 
I S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
Itz 
Oe
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
4& 
. *
sB,1 ~·''i 
+ 
~ lar
~II 
-
Kids will recognize their world. *
1Aro
Poems About Love
By Ralph Fletcher
Photographs by Joe Baker
k"Written from the point of view of a smitten young man, these
33 short, free-verse poems narrate the ups and downs of a teen
romance. ... 
A black-and-white photograph begins each
section . . . and provides visual closure. Students will readily
identify with this fine book" 
-STARRED, 
SCHOOL LIBRARY JOURNAL
"Short, unrhymed verses speak with the touching intensity of
untutored, hard-felt emotions.They will strike home with
most teenagers, who'll recognize the feelings expressed here
and will appreciate a volume of poetry written entirely in their
own language." 
-THE 
HORN BOOK
"The spacious design of the book, with clear type and a few
photographs (including a cover picture in pink and blue), will
lure readers of both sexes to the ever-popular theme. The rhythm
is casual and conversational, the feeling gentle. This is romance."
-BOOKLIST*
Ages 12 up / $12.95 SBE / ISBN 0-02-735395-8
SBE INDICATES A REINFORCED HARDCOVER EDITION.
MACMILLAN BOOKS FOR YOUNG READERS
An imprint of Simon & Schuster Children's Publishing Division
866 Third Avenue * 
New York, NY 10022
SIMON & SCH•USTE IS THE PUBL.SHING OPERATION OF VIACOM INC
--
·
-----
·-
I
, 
i 
I
'I
THE
BUvL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
December 1994
Vol. 48 No. 4
A LOOK INSIDE
117 THE BIG PICTURE
The Christmas Tree Ship written and illustrated by Jeanette Winter
118 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed tides include:
120 
* The Barn by Avi
127 * Nightfather by Carl Friedman
132 
* Deliver Usfrom Evie by M. E. Kerr
141 
* Celebrate America in Poetry and Art comp. by Nora Panzer
148 * Bibles and Bestiaries: A Guide to Illuminated Manuscripts by Elizabeth B.
Wilson
150 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
151 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
STAFF
Roger Sutton, Editor (RS)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Susan Dove Lempke, Reviewer (SDL)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Heather McCammond-Watts, Editorial Assistant
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS ADVISORY BOARD
Leigh Estabrook, Dean, GSLIS, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Selma K. Richardson, Professor, GSLIS
Christine Jenkins, Assistant Professor, GSLIS
Richard C. Anderson, Director, Center for the Study of Reading, UIUC
Jean Osborn, Associate Director, Center for the Study of Reading
P. David Pearson, Dean, College of Education, UIUC
Violet J. Harris, Associate Professor, College of Education
Nancy O'Brien, Education Subject Specialist, Library, UIUC
Peggy Miller, Associate Professor, Department of Speech Communication, UIUC
Ann D. Carlson, Associate Professor, GSLIS, Rosary College
Janice Harrington, Head of Children's Services, Champaign Public Library
Elizabeth Huntoon, Director Systemwide Children's Services, Chicago Public Library
Janie Schomberg, Librarian, Leal Elementary School, Urbana, Illinois
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $35.00; individuals, $29.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Roger Sutton, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 1512 N. Fremont St., #105,
Chicago, IL 60622
Second-class postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1994 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Jeanette Winter, from The Christmas Tree Ship ©1994 and used by permission
of Philomel Books.
DECEMBER 1994 
* 
117
THE BIG PICTURE
The Christmas Tree Ship
written and illustrated by Jeanette Winter
A sailing ship, bound from the northern woods to the big city, laden with pine
trees just in time for the holiday season-how magical, how wintry, how . ..
Christmassy! But Jeanette Winter is not one to let such an inviting motif rest easy.
In such books as Diego, written by her son Jonah Winter (BCCB 11/91), Klara's
New World (9/92) and Mary Ray's Shaker Boy (11/94), this painter has demon-
strated a taste for the offbeat, the difficult, or painful subject, using deeply satu-
rated colors and prismatic shading in a deceptively folklike style to sophisticated
ends, both artistically and in service to the quirky narratives she illustrates.
Based on a true event, The Christmas Tree Ship is no exception. Every
winter since 1887, Captain Herman has chopped Christmas trees from the Michi-
gan woods, loaded them into his schooner, and sailed them down Lake Michigan
to the eagerly waiting citizenry at the Clark Street Bridge in Chicago. In 1912,
however, he encounters a fierce sea storm and, after sending a message in a bottle
(it's not stated if this is a fictional embroidery) to his wife, Hannah, and his daugh-
ters, is lost at sea. That year's trees never arrive, but the next Christmas finds Mrs.
Herman and the girls taking over the voyage: "When the snows of November
blew in again, Hannah knew what she must do."
Odd drama for a Christmas picture book, you might say, but only in
contrast to the lavish, often catalogish fare that puts plenty of lights on the tree but
forgets about the power of a good, strong story. Christmas can be as much a
holiday of shadows as is Halloween, something both Dickens and the Bible knew.
Adults think about the people no longer around for the celebration, older kids
remember Santa Claus; most everyone-not just Scrooge-can think of
Christmasses past but never quite done with. Nostalgic is only half the story,
bittersweet doesn't quite cover it. In this book clearly intended for the traditional
picture-book audience (unlike the gussied-up productions that speak more to
adults), Jeanette Winter wisely relates the sorrow of Captain Herman's death with
a tidy and plain-spoken simplicity ("Hannah grieved for her husband. Hazel and
Pearl and Elsie missed their dear father"), and then she's done with it, giving kids
room to fill in the words with as much or as little sadness as they can handle.
Neither do the pictures dwell on loss. In the rich greens of the trees,
glowing candles in the Chicago windows, and mystery of the swirling winter night,
Winter give the holiday its due magic, brushed with honesty but untouched with
lugubriousness. Her eccentric and expressionist palette (pink sails and blue clouds,
for example) is a welcome relief from the red-and-green of so much Christmas
fare, and gives the book not only a signature but an intriguing middle distance-
not quite fairy tale, not quite reality. A story: that place where dreams and history
(and holiday) meet.
Roger Sutton, Editor
118 
* THE BULLETIN
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ADLER, C. S. 
That Horse Whiskey! Clarion, 1994 
152p
ISBN 0-395-68185-5 
$13.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Thirteen-year-old Lainey makes an agreement with a local stable owner to retrain
a spoiled horse in return for a part of the proceeds from selling him, which she will
put towards buying a horse of her own. Whiskey is smart, stubborn, and beauti-
ful, and Lainey can't help falling in love with him as she diligently tries to prove to
herself and to others-especially to her father-that he is a good horse and that
she is as capable as any boy. While the sideplots-Lainey's budding friendship
with a boy out from New York, her changing relationship with her parents-
aren't always incorporated smoothly into the main story, many readers will appre-
ciate Lainey's determined labor to save Whiskey from the unpleasant fate that
befalls useless horses, and they'll enjoy the growing mutual affection between girl
and horse. Equestrian purists may prefer a more savvy horse tale such as Lynn
Hall's Flying Changes (BCCB 7/91), but all will rejoice when Adler brings Lainey,
Whiskey, and their New York friend together at the happy finale. DS
AGARD, JOHN, comp. 
A Caribbean Dozen: Poems from Caribbean Poets; comp.
by John Agard and Grace Nichols; illus. by Cathie Felstead. 
Candlewick,
1994 
93p
ISBN 1-56402-339-7 
$19.95 
R Gr. 3-6
Actually, as Agard and Nichols confess in their introduction, there is a full baker's
dozen of thirteen poets represented here. It's therefore appropriate that so many
of the poems are concerned with eating (Valerie Bloom's "Ode to Twelve Choco-
late Bars," David Campbell's "Corn and Potato," Opal Palmer Adisa's "Fruits,"
and John Lyons' "Mammie's Coo-coo and Callaloo," among others); there are
also poems about creatures (Pamela Mordecai's "Rabbit Poem" and Grace Nichols'
"For Dilberta"), natural phenomena (Dionne Brand's "River"), identity (James
Berry's "Isn't My Name Magical?") and other topics. The poems have a fresh
lucidity and vitality that, combined with a lyrical sense of rhythm, make them a
treat to read aloud as well as alone, and the occasional use of dialect adds music
without sacrificing clarity ("Mama, don' do it, please,/ Don' cook dat chicken fe
dinner,/ We know dat chicken from she hatch/ She is de only one in de batch/ Dat
de mongoose didn' catch... " from "Chicken Dinner" by Valerie Bloom). Felstead
varies the style and medium of her illustrations from page to page, here offering a
dreamy pastel portrait, there a cheerful line-and-watercolor cartoon, still elsewhere
a mixed-media collage with abstract Matisse-ish figures; this variation emphasizes
the diversity of the poetry while underlining its common origin. Each poet's sec-
tion begins with a short autobiographical blurb that's a bit more sophisticated in
tone and format than the rest of the book; additional brief biographies and an
index of first lines are included. DS
ANGELOU, MAYA 
My Painted House, My Friendly Chicken, and Me; illus. with
photographs by Margaret Courtney-Clarke. 
Potter, 1994 
40p
ISBN 0-517-59667-9 
$16.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
"I am Thandi, a Ndebele girl in South Africa," says the eight-year-old narrator,
DECEMBER 1994 
* 
119
and she shows us her best friend the chicken, her village of painted houses, and her
family and pastimes. Angelou's text has a friendly, singing quality, helped by the
repetition of "of course" ("The women wear their best blankets and best neck rings
and very good leg rings, of course"); Courtney-Clarke's photographs of the villag-
ers and the intricately beautiful paintings on their houses are sharp and immediate,
although they are sometimes reduced to a size that makes details hard to distin-
guish. The format of the book, however, occasionally clouds the issue of audience:
the text is too simple for a readalone audience, but the games with print going
across pages and appearing in different sizes and colors (and not always with suffi-
cient contrast with the background) will be lost on the lap crowd and difficult for
readers-aloud to convey. The text also leaves questions unanswered. Where did
the occasional marginal drawings come from-did Thandi draw them? Where do
the mules that take Thandi to the city live? Which of the pictures are taken in the
city? This is ultimately a glossy entry, with some composition problems, in the old
"children of many lands" genre, but the direct address and sly humor of the text
will woo some young viewers. DS
ARNOLD, CAROLINE 
City of the Gods: Mexico's Ancient City of Teotihuacdn; illus.
with photographs by Richard Hewett. 
Clarion, 1994 
48p
ISBN 0-395-66584-1 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
This pastiche of archeology, history, and travelogue examines the ruins of the an-
cient Mexican city whose past is so deeply buried that even the Aztecs speculated
about its origins when they named the site City of the Gods. Textual organization
is somewhat erratic, with a survey of the geographical setting sandwiched between
"Exploring the Ruins" and "Religion," and a chapter on building the city follow-
ing long after detailed discussion of its monumental architecture. Although Arnold
implies that excavation and research continue at the site, rendering many "facts"
about Teotihuaca:n open to debate, readers are not offered varied interpretations
of building use or social and religious customs; in fact, no reference to specific field
workers or scholars is made at all. Still, there is a motherlode of raw data here
waiting to be mined by report writers exploring the earliest American cultures; a
glossary (pronunciation guides are included within the text itself) and index are
included. Panoramic photographs of the pyramids, avenues, and plazas capture
the eerie solemnity of the site, and steeply angled close-ups of the Citadel temple
and the Pyramids of the Sun and Moon display the ancient masons' artistry to
advantage. EB
ARNOLD, KATYA, ad. 
Knock, Knock, Teremok! A Traditional Russian Tale; ad. and
illus. by Katya Arnold. 
North-South, 1994 
26p
Library ed. ISBN 1-55858-330-0 
$14.88
Trade ed. ISBN 1-55858-329-7 
$14.95 
Ad 
3-7 yrs
One by one animals come across a teremok, or small hut, and crowd inside in this
cumulative rhyme. "Knock, knock, knock. Who lives in the teremok? It's me,
the Fly, queen of the sky. Who are you? I am the Mouse, who needs a new house.
Let's live together." The animals gradually increase in size (and some in ferocity)
up through a fox, a pig, and a wolf, until a bear comes along. When they tell him
to go away, he tries sitting on the roof, but the house is smashed and, in a very
abrupt ending, "everybody barely escaped!" We have seen many versions of this
story, including Mirra Ginsburg's Mushroom in the Rain and Jan Brett's The Mit-
120 
* 
THE BULLETIN
ten, but this may be the bounciest. Arnold's illustrations, with their thick black
lines and strong colors, give each of the clothed animals a lively, quirky feel. How-
ever, each animal, once inside the teremok, is painted exactly the same way in each
succeeding picture, which negates the funny idea of the animals having to squeeze
together and makes the pictures rather static. The house is decorated with wheat,
mushrooms on strings, and a picture of Lenin (which is ripped in half when the
house falls), which may relate to the author's note at the beginning that she sees the
tale as an "allegory of the collapse of the Soviet Union." How that works isn't
particularly clear, but kids will be too busy knock-knocking along to care. SDL
Avi 
The Barn. Jackson/Orchard, 1994 
106 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08711-5 
$13.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-06861-7 
$13.95 
R 
Gr. 5-7
In this short novel set in 1850s Oregon, nine-year-old Ben is sent from boarding
school back to his family's farm when his father suffers a completely incapacitating
stroke. Ben's father cannot talk or move; it falls upon Ben, after discussion with
his older brother and sister, to care for their father, feeding him and changing his
soiled clothing. After some days of this, Ben becomes convinced that his father can
blink his eyes to mean yes; Ben then becomes convinced that Father wants them to
build a barn, a difficult task and probably pointless, too, as each of the children has
expressed a desire to leave the homestead. The theme here is hermeneutical as well
as spiritual: how do we know what we hear? does affirmation come from response,
or from within? These are hard and subtle questions, but Avi asks them in terms of
a taut, untheoretical story, told with spare economy and action that moves with
the ideas. Although the novel-and the words-are short and to the point, the
style is sometimes overdeliberate, too apparently controlled. Even given his rela-
tively expansive education and native intelligence, Ben is not entirely convincing
as a nine-year-old-at least today's nine-year-olds won't find him so-and his closing
conversation with his siblings (after Father has died, never seeing the now-finished
barn) has a taste of the late twentieth century about it. Still, there's a sharp and
unadorned picture of the harshness of homestead pioneer life, and an immediacy
of pain that transcends setting. RS
BARBER, BARBARA E. 
Saturday at The New You; illus. by Anna Rich. 
Lee &
Low, 1994 
[32p]
ISBN 1-880000-06-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-7 yrs
Shauna loves Saturdays, because that is the day she gets to spend at her mother's
beauty parlor, The New You. She tells all about the day there, with all of its
interesting sights and smells. We hear about the customers, in particular aboup
five-year-old Tiffany, who "can sure act like a baby!" Shauna wishes she could help
more, and tells her mother, "I can do that!" but her mother replies with a smile,
"Maybe you can, but Tiffany is my customer." All the events are small ones, but
Shauna's voice is lively and her observations keen. Barber makes readers feel as if
they have really spent the day with Shauna and Momma, and she makes a day
spent working hard at a beauty parlor seem very appealing. Particularly touching
is the end, when Shauna, who is both real and likable, brushes out her exhausted
mom's hair. Rich's paintings are just right, matching the warm story with warm,
soft colors, and the depiction of the African-American cast has an expansive spirit.
SDL
DECEMBER 1994 
* 
121
BERLETH, RICHARD 
Mary Patten's Voyage; illus. by Ben Otero. 
Whitman,
1994 
40p
ISBN 0-8075-4987-8 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Just as Neptune's Car heads into the perilous waters around Cape Horn, Captain
Joshua Patten lies unconscious below deck, stricken with tuberculosis; first mate
Keeler is locked in his cabin; second mate Hare can't read a chart or plot a course.
But the captain's eighteen-year-old wife, Mary, has navigational skills that rival her
husband's; taking command of the ship, she guides it through a five-week ordeal
rounding the Cape and safely into port at San Francisco with no hands lost. Berleth's
tale is a fictionalized account of an actual clipper race from New York to San
Francisco in 1856. While he focuses on Mary's heroism amid the storms that rack
the ship, Berleth also portrays the resistance of some of the crewmen to Mary's
command-resistance that brings a charge of mutiny upon the first mate. Second
mate Timothy Hare's narration tends to gush ("For any ashore who wonder what
love and faith and courage can still achieve, I offer this story"), and his frequent
lapse into seafaring lingo will send landlubbers scurrying for the glossary at the
back of the book. Gouache paintings, with a somewhat fusty look and rigid com-
position, are more useful in explicating the rigging than enhancing the drama. A
brief epilogue that tells of the captain's death in 1857 and Mary's death several
years later does not mention the mates or other crew members featured in this
account, and no source notes are provided; thus the reader is left to navigate an
uncharted course between history and fiction. EB
BRINK, CAROL RYRIE 
Goody O'Grumpity; illus. by Ashley Wolff. 
North-South,
1994 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 1-55858-328-9 
$14.88
Trade ed. ISBN 1-55858-327-0 
$14.95 
Ad 4-7 yrs
Ashley Wolff expands Carol Ryrie Brink's 1937 poem with new illustrations: here
Goody the cake-baker is a Pilgrim in a white cap. And when she bakes a cake
everything around waits in anticipation: "That tall reeds danced by the mournful
lake,/ The pigs came nuzzling out of their pens," but most importantly, "the chil-
dren flocked by dozens and tens." The children wait to lick the bowl when Goody's
through, then they hang around smelling the spices as the cake bakes, and they're
finally rewarded with pieces of the warm cake. The poem is not particularly sub-
stantial, but it's bouncy and sweet. Wolffs watercolored linoleum block prints
possess, as usual, a vigor that informs their simplicity. Unfortunately Wolff has
made the cake into a yeast cake-tasty when cooked, to be sure, but not a batter
that would make children want to "lick the dish when Goody was through," and
one whose three-hour preparation time is at odds with the immediate gratification
suggested in the text. There's a recipe in the back for a spice cake with all the
ingredients-allspice, nutmeg, cinnamon, lemon-mentioned in the poem; the
book would make for a nice reading interlude while the cake bakes, although that
would still leave you with quite a bit of time to fill. DS
BROOKE, WILLIAM J. 
Teller of Tales. HarperCollins, 1994 
170p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023400-8 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023399-0 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Brooke's first two books (A Telling of the Tales, BCCB 5/90, and Untold Tales, 9/
92) were sophisticated, layered, and funny retellings of folklore; in Teller he has
122 
* THE BULLETIN
added another level-he is telling tales about retelling tales. The background story
is that of an old man who is learning to tell old stories through the new medium of
type; he is encouraged, taunted, and eventually loved as a father by a tough and
streetwise young girl whom he takes into his home. Using these two characters
sometimes as tale-telling mouthpieces and sometimes as folkloric dramatis perso-
nae, Brooke tells versions of "The Emperor's New Clothes," "Goldilocks," "Little
Red Riding Hood," and "Rumpelstiltskin," with the tales shaped to shed both
light and mystery upon the relationship between the man, Teller, and the girl,
whose name continually changes. This is conceptually elaborate but smooth and
compact to read; the stories, which Teller says "are meant to illuminate the origi-
nals, not corrupt them," generally perform that task quite well, and the frequent
wit lends a playfulness to the enterprise. The occasional paeans to the power of
story are touched with a self-conscious sentimentality that crops up in the work as
a whole now and then, but the book is still an entertaining and unusual read. In
addition to fans of the earlier books, kids who liked The Magic Circle, or who
regretfully think themselves too old for The Stinky Cheese Man, will appreciate the
blend of tradition and exploration here. DS
BROOKS, MARTHA 
Traveling On into the Light and Other Stories. 
Kroupa/Or-
chard, 1994 
147p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08713-1 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-06863-3 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Eleven stories appear in a new volume by the author of Paradise Cafe (BCCB 12/
90). Brooks has penned a variety of sensitive stories about the past and the present,
parents and lovers, good times and bad, yet through it all she displays her usual
quiet accuracy and intuition. These are not ironic punch-lined stories a la O.
Henry or Saki, but rather slices of life and observation: in "Moonlight Sonata," a
boy takes his girlfriend to the place where his father killed himself; in "The Tiniest
Guitar in the World" a boy explains to the principal how and why he made a
guitar out of a root beer can; in the tite story, a girl goes to visit her artist father
and the man for whom he left her mother; the last three stories are a loose trilogy,
set in the early '60s, about a teenage couple dealing with their growth and their
losses. Brooks' delicate yet strong scenes of life won't disappoint fans of her previ-
ous work; try one as a readaloud for teens on a quiet afternoon. DS
BROWN, JANE CLARK 
George Washington's Ghost; written and illus. by Jane Clark
Brown. 
Houghton, 1994 
87p
ISBN 0-395-69452-3 
$13.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Sick of their unending diet of turnips, the Noodle family decides to take their
traveling marionette show back on the road throughout the young American re-
public even without their master puppeteer, the late Poppa Noodle; Celinda, the
youngest child, envies the important work her older siblings perform while she is
inevitably left holding the horses. But when their big draw-a spiffily uniformed
likeness of General Washington, who fights a red coated lion with his silver sword-
is lost to an unethical wheelwright, Celinda gets her chance to operate the most
difficult puppet of all, the skeleton, in a plot to recover General George and save
the show. Celinda's scrapes are predictable but steadily paced, and Brown nicely
evokes the enthusiasm Washington could generate after the Revolution, providing
insight into how the patriot may have become mythologized in popular imagina-
tion. But the plot suffers from too many promising story lines that come to dead
DECEMBER 1994 
* 
123
ends-a sideshow dwarfs escape from wicked employers, Celinda's tall tales of her
exploits with runaway horses, her run-ins with the villainous Purple Hair, and her
chance encounters with a young cow-tender all tease readers into expecting more
action than Brown delivers. Realistic and friendly pencil sketches appear through-
out. EB
BURNINGHAM, JOHN 
Courtney; written and illus. byJohn Burningham. 
Crown,
1994 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-517-59884-1 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-59883-3 
$16.00 
Ad 
5-7 yrs
"'We would really like to have a dog,' the children said," and they get a dog-but
not an ordinary one. Nobody at the Dogs' Home wanted Courtney, which seems
extraordinary considering that he cooks dinner, waits at table, plays the violin, and
juggles to entertain the baby. The children are delighted with him until one day
he inexplicably disappears (the disloyal parents intone, "If they are not thorough-
breds, you cannot rely on them"), leaving the children heartbroken. That sum-
mer, when danger threatens the happily boating children, a mysterious force saves
them; the text remains innocent, but sharp eyes will spot Courtney on the cliff
above the beach. This is an engaging but rather odd story: the two parts-before
and after Courtney-don't knit together too well, and the book will provoke more
questions than it answers. Why did Courtney leave the family in the first place?
Why doesn't he acknowledge rescuing the children, or was that merely payback
for rescuing him from the Dogs' Home? Will he follow them through their lives,
saving them from all peril? Such a talented canine will charm quite a few viewers,
however, as Burningham, with his usual ability to make silent animals personable
and friendly (see Aldo, BCCB 7/92), depicts Courtney as a walrus-ish yet debonair
individual who never loses his air of mystery. Young viewers will appreciate the
bond between the unsung dog and the perceptive children; make sure they see
Courtney standing watch on the penultimate page so that they can revel in know-
ing more than the narrator. DS
CHMIELARZ, SHARON 
Down atAngel's;illus. byJill Kastner. 
Ticknor, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-395-65993-0 
$14.95 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Two little girls are devoted to their lonely neighbor, Angel, a Bulgarian immigrant
who makes beautiful inlaid wood tables in his cellar and who always slips them
chocolate bars on the sly. As Christmas nears, the children are concerned because
they have no gift to offer Angel in return for his year of treats, and so their mother
suggests they bring him a box of homemade goodies, products of summer cooking
and canning. The four enjoy Christmas Eve together, listening to opera on the
radio, and Angel presents them with one of his magnificent tables. Dangling from
this comfortable tale, however, are loose ends of several other possible story lines:
the girls' father was killed in a war (possibly World War II?), Angel's wife left him
because of his past drinking problem, neighborhood children tease Angel because
of his blind eye and heavy accent (which is not evident in the text's dialogue).
These details are as distracting as they are provocative, raising more questions than
they answer. Kastner's muted, hazy oil paintings set a cozy mood, but neither
Angel's damaged eye nor his intricately inlaid woodcraft is captured in enough
detail to visually reinforce the girls' supposed fascination with them. The theme of
heartfelt gift-giving during hard times makes this an acceptable, if somewhat bland,
Christmas season purchase. EB
124 
* THE BULLETIN
COLEMAN, 
EVELYN 
The Foot Warmer and the Crow; illus. by Daniel
Minter. 
Macmillan, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-02-722816-9 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Coleman spins a grim tale indeed of a slave who-with the aid of a bird-bests his
master. Hezekiah was one of his master's favorites, until he decided to run away.
He is caught and whipped, but a crow who has befriended him whispers of a dark
secret from the master's childhood and counsels Hezekiah to "learn all you can
about your master and use his weaknesses to your advantage." Overhearing that
the master talks in his sleep, Hezekiah asks to become his "footwarmer," a slave
that sleeps at his master's feet. Gathering in the master's midnight ravings, Hezekiah
then confronts him with his deepest fears and runs away again, this time protected
by the crow, who sits outside the master's bedroom window "clawing the win-
dowsill, his blackness spilling into the room" and reminding him of when he was
a little boy and killed the crow's mother, coming back day after day to watch her
chicks die. The master goes crazy, "ranting and raving in that room until he died,"
and it's a welcome jolt to see a story about slavery that ends with such a satisfying
peck of revenge. Clearly, this isn't a picture book for young children, but older
ones will relish the honesty and the ironic humor, and Minter's carved and painted
wood illustrations offer a satirical grotesquerie of characters (the master pink and
blustery, Hezekiah wide-eyed in both fear and freedom) that has a comic edginess
best appreciated by those beyond the traditional story-hour age RS
CONE, PATRICK 
Grand Canyon; written and illus. with photographs by Patrick
Cone. 
Carolrhoda, 1994 
48p
Library ed. ISBN 0-87614-820-8 
$14.21
Paper ed. ISBN 0-87614-628-0 
$7.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
This survey of Arizona's natural wonder introduces readers to the canyon's geol-
ogy, morphology, early inhabitants, and contemporary status as a National Park.
In the opening chapters, Cone describes rock genesis and canyon-wall formation
with a sure hand; students will appreciate his concise explication, well-chosen color
photographs, and easy-to-decipher charts which bring the earthbuilding process,
well, down to earth. But chapters which discuss life around the canyon are weaker,
offering little more than a cursory list of tribal names, flora and fauna, and various
perils of encroaching civilization. In one baffling passage Cone states, "During the
first century A.D., a new people called the Hisatsinom, moved into the canyon
area"; three sentences later, "The Hisatsinom lived in the canyon from around
600 B.C. to A.D. 1140." Canyon trivia, glossary, and index complete this vol-
ume, which will be of greater interest and use to young earth scientists than to
would-be anthropologists. EB
COOPER, ILENE 
The Worst Noel. Viking, 1994 
[128p] 
(The Holiday Five)
ISBN 0-670-85058-6 
$13.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
This second installment in the Holiday Five series (see BCCB 9/94 for the first)
focuses on Kathy, who is dreading the prospect of spending Christmas with her
father and his second family. The visitation agreement specifies that Dad "gets"
her for Christmas, and besides, Kathy's mother has already arranged to spend the
holiday on a cruise with a friend. Kathy loves her father, but feels she has come to
take second place in his affections, and it's a credit to the author that, in fact,
DECEMBER 1994 
* 
125
Kathy is somewhat right. It's refreshing to see a divorce story that perceives the
subtleties of separation, not facilely marking everything down to "misunderstand-
ings." While Kathy's plan to spend Christmas instead with her friend Erin (poor
but happy in her large Irish Catholic family) is not quite convincing in the subter-
fuges Kathy undertakes to manage it, the emotional pull to what Kathy sees as a
real family is very real. Balancing out the angst is a pleasing mixture of five best
friends shopping and talking and enjoying the season, and genre fans should find
the book a pleasing diversion. RS
DECLEMENTS, BARTHE 
Tough Loser. Viking, 1994 
118p
ISBN 0-670-85619-3 
$13.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Jenna's brother Mike can't seem to control his temper, especially when his eter-
nally outclassed hockey team loses yet another game. And Jenna herself can't seem
to control her affection for one of her mother's new chow puppies, even though
she's been warned that the pups, "one-person dogs," are being sold, and it would
be unfair to get attached to one. Written in DeClements' plain, straightforward
style, this novel mixes family and school goings-on in a way that is appealingly
busy, but never quite balanced or blended. There's hockey action, pup-play,
schoolyard pranks, a horseback-riding accident, and Jenna's model-stagecoach
school project, but no individual subplot has enough to do with the others. Al-
though the dog drama is too cozily resolved, the problem of Mike's tantrums is
more realistically left open, and his struggle to control his anger provides the book
with an emotional force that could have been more liberally and evenly distrib-
uted. As ever, though, DeClements is right there with her characters and her
readers, who will appreciate the honest empathy. RS
DEEM, JAMES M. 
3 NBs ofJulian Drew. Houghton, 1994 
227p
ISBN 0-395-69453-1 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 7-10
In what must have been a copyeditor's nightmare, fifteen-year-old Julian writes his
diaries in a kind of code, with abbreviations and numbers substituted for letters:
"ABBREVS + NOs: 170V3them." Sense and story are unfolded simultaneously,
as readers gradually puzzle out the code and Julian's sad story of being neglected
and abused by his father and stepmother, as well as his longing for his dead mother:
"1M155U. Do U understand it? Here's another: 170V3U." ("I miss you"; "I
love you.") The device could easily have become gimmicky or frustrating, but it's
cannily deployed and creates a singularly lonely voice for Julian, who isn't so much
attempting to hide his thoughts from his family as he is trying to hide or distance
them from himself. Never seen beyond the boundaries of his "NBs," his note-
books, though, his situation is somewhat unconvincing. His parents, 43 and 543
(he and she), are unrelievedly monstrous (as when 543, to punish Julian for wet-
ting his bed after she's locked him in his room, forces him to drink what he fears is
urine but is actually apple juice); Julian finally RA, runs away, after she puts bars
on his bedroom window to keep him from sneaking out. The third NB, which
details Julian's flight from Arizona back home to West Virginia where he gets an
apartment and finally makes peace with his mother's memory (or ghost) is entirely
implausible, but there's a hint here and there that this last notebook is in fact a
story, something his English teacher has been encouraging him to write. Most
readers will start this novel perplexed (and some will stay that way throughout) but
Julian's private language will exert curiosity and the hell of his life provoke both
empathy and a slightly morbid fascination. RS
126 
* THE BULLETIN
DISHER, GARRY 
Ratface. Ticknor, 1994 
185p
ISBN 0-395-69451-5 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-9
When Max and Christina meet a reporter lurking around their secluded farm,
they begin to learn the truth about the White League, a cult that the two were
"adopted" into as younger children. And when their "mother" (whom they pri-
vately call "Moaner"), "father" ("Slinger"), and cult leader ("Ratface") bring a new
child to the farm, Max and Christina decided to run away, taking with them the
younger boy, who tells them he was kidnapped. Although the writing is exposi-
tory and sometimes superficial when describing the cult and its attractions and
dangers ("Whenever troubled by doubts, they would look to the White League. It
gave meaning to their lives"), the adventure story is a good one, with Ratface just
a step behind the kids as they flee the compound for the wide world beyond. As
with Edward Myers' Climb or Die, reviewed below, the dual protagonists are more
efficiently differentiated than they are developed as characters, but they ably serve
as a human focus for the action. Robin Klein's People Might Hear You, also about
two young people escaping a cult, is psychologically more subtle and even more
suspenseful, but Disher's book still finds adventure in adversity. RS
DUNLOP, EILEEN 
Finn's Search. Holiday House, 1994 
155p
ISBN 0-8234-1099-4 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Finn and his friend Chris (previously appearing in Finn s Island, BCCB 7/92) are
facing a few new challenges: a piece of land traditionally supposed to be a Roman
camp is in danger of commercial development, and the developer's son, a noted
bully, is paying them an alarming amount of attention. Readers will guess early on
that the lonely bully has renounced his evil ways, and it's no surprise that Finn and
Chris (who verges on crybabyhood in this book) find enough Roman remnants to
make destruction undesirable. The rural Scottish setting and treasure-hunt theme
as the boys search for relics keep the book entertaining, if not as atmospheric as the
original. Kids who haven't read the first book may take a few chapters to figure
out who's who and what's where, but fans of the previous book will enjoy picking
up Finn and Chris's story where it left off. DS
DUQUENNOY, JACQUES 
The Ghost's Dinner; written and illus. by Jacques
Duquennoy. 
Artists & Writers, 1994 
48p
ISBN 0-307-17510-3 
$9.95 
R 
3-5 yrs
This modest picture book first published in France relies on one tiny joke for its
interest-but it's the kind of joke that preschoolers don't get easily tired of. Henry
the ghost has invited his ghost friends, all looking like little sheeted Halloween
visitors, over to dinner, where-here's the gimmick-they each turn the color of
what they are drinking or eating: "Here. Try the spinach juice." Pumpkin soup
turns them orange, the salmon makes them pink, cheese makes them yellow with
little holes, and Henry's "secret ghost dessert recipe" makes them invisible. Hot
chocolate gives them color again, but how to get back to their white sale specials?
Milk! Hey, it's a better plot than you'll find in many a more lavishly appointed
picture-book extravaganza, and Duquennoy's neatly finished paintings have a droll
sophistication that appoints Henry a home (castle, actually) of understated el-
egance and that may well hold your own interest when asked to read the book for
the fourteenth time. RS
DECEMBER 1994 
* 
127
FALWELL, CATHRYN 
The Letter Jesters; written and illus. by Cathryn
Falwell. 
Ticknor, 1994 
48p
ISBN 0-395-66898-0 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
"Letters are everywhere!" announces the opening text in this book on typefaces;
the book explains that styles of letters are called typefaces, that "each typeface has
a name," and that "there are hundreds of typefaces." Examples of various type-
faces, explanations of measurement in points and of lower and upper case follow,
as well as simultaneous description and demonstration of the visual effects of vari-
ous typefaces. Unfortunately, much is confusing here: Falwell lists typefaces be-
fore explaining that they have names, differentiates poorly between variations (such
as roman and italic) of typefaces and typefaces themselves, and she never acknowl-
edges the role color plays in her own presentation (her "playful" letters, for in-
stance, are playful more because of their festive hues than from their typeface).
The format isn't particularly clear, with the jesters, who cavort about among the
letters, distracting from the focus rather than helping point the explanations. This
may, however, help draw kids' attention to an aspect of reading and bookmaking
they had not previously considered; the spread that shows six dogs, each appearing
under "Dog" set in a different appropriate typestyle, is a good illustration of the
effects typefaces can produce. DS
FRIEDMAN, CARL 
Nightfather; tr. from the Dutch by Arnold and Erica
Pomerans. 
Persea, 1994 
133p
ISBN 0-89255-193-3 
$18.50 
R* Gr. 6-9
After the narrator's father describes starving in the concentration camp, "he gets
up, but the bread ration continues to hover over the table like a ghost. I look at it
helplessly and feel a sudden disgust for the cherries my mother is serving. How
very lucky we are." Contained in these brief lines is the conflict and irony of a
novel that focuses not on the experience of the Holocaust itself, but on the memo-
ries that shape survivors' lives and take heavy tolls on their children. How lucky is
the narrator for constant exposure to stories of Nazi torment? "'What do you want
to be when you grow up?' our teacher asks. 'Invisible,' I say. 'So the SS won't
catch me.'" With the father's stories and the children's reactions, we travel along
parallel paths: the experience of the camps, which is specified here in all its horror,
along with the imagined experience and guilt of loved ones "left out." Although
the scenes at first seem disjointed, they gain shape and momentum as the father
works his way toward "liberation" and reunion with his sweetheart, the children's
mother, for an ending that unites the past and present. Unusual in both technique
and perspective, this translation from the Dutch has a stark authenticity that deep-
ens Holocaust literature for children. BH
FROMM, PETER 
Monkey Tag. Scholastic, 1994 
33 6 p
ISBN 0-590-46525-2 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Eli and Thad, twelve-year-old twins, find both of their lives altered when Thad
injures himself severely while playing a game of monkey tag-swinging by the
hands underneath the highest part of the bleachers. After spending a long time in
the hospital, Thad comes home using a wheelchair, and his parents protect him
from everything, including Eli. Eli refuses to accept his parents' treatment of his
brother, and he and Thad goof off, hang out with friends, and work together on
128 
* THE BULLETIN
Thad's mobility as he progresses from wheelchair to crutches to braces to, finally,
walking unaided. The undercurrent running throughout these trials is Eli's reex-
amination and repudiation of his Catholic faith, a serious spiritual questioning
rarely seen to this degree in children's literature, and the topic is fairly treated here.
Eli's loyalty to his brother and the twins' relationship are also convincingly and
compassionately depicted. The novel-which is set in 1970, for no apparent rea-
son-is quite long, however, and while the absence of dramatic climax in either
Thad's recovery or Eli's theological conclusions is realistic, the story loses momen-
tum and leaves questions (will Eli actually leave the church? Will his parents ever
confront him about his disbelief?) unanswered at the end. This is still far more
thoughtful than many disability dramas, and it's got a generous helping of boyish
energy, which will engage many readers. DS
GIOVANNI, NIKKI, comp. 
GrandMothers: Poems, Reminiscences, and Short Stories
about the Keepers of Our Traditions. Holt, 1994 
168p
ISBN 0-8050-2766-1 
$15.95 
Ad Gr. 7-12
Twenty-seven segments are included in this ancestral collage; some emerge as memo-
rable stories while others run to genealogical description or fade into fragmentary
history. The approach is multicultural, with a conscientious balance of African-
American, Native American, Asian-American, and European-American contribu-
tors who range from famous to newly published, from young to old. Since the
tone and form are varied, readers who find the quality uneven can browse to pas-
sages that hold their interest. One of those will surely be Susan Power's "The
Roofwalker," in which a Sioux woman remembers the day her handsome, politi-
cally committed father left the family and drove his van away with a new girlfriend.
It's a gripping scenario. A few of the memoirs, on the other hand, make you feel as
if you had to be part of the family to care. Certainly not every young adult will be
attracted to the subject of grandmothers, but students researching their roots will
appreciate the varied models of narrative. BH
GOODMAN, JOAN ELIZABETH 
Songs from Home; written and illus. by Joan Eliza-
beth Goodman. 
Harcourt, 1994 
2 14p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-15-203590-7 
$10.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-15-203591-5 
$4.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Anna has spent her life vagabonding around Europe with her father, but she's
beginning to question their life together. Her father doesn't have a job, and in
order to subsist, they roam the city singing to tourists for tips. Whenever she asks
anything about her late mother or the rest of her family, her father clams up. Anna
is finally settling down in Rome, making good friends at school and at the pensione
where she lives, when an acquaintance from her father's past turns up and incites
Anna's longing for her distant family. The book suffers from a few problems:
Anna's life with her father is never quite believable, the reason for her father's
estrangement from his family seems insufficient, and the emotional climaxes-
Anna's confession to her friend that she lives not in an expensive mansion but in a
low-rent pensione, and her eventual decision to return to America without her fa-
ther-pass by surprisingly quietly. It's still a picturesque story, however, and the
people, especially Anna's schoolfriend Fiorella, her family, and the pensione's kind
maid, Maria, are good literary company. Despite the book's slightness, young
readers will enjoy the local color of its Roman setting and Anna's exotic and glam-
orously shabby existence. DS
DECEMBER 1994 
* 
129
HALL, DONALD 
I Am the Dog, I Am the Cat; illus. by Barry Moser. 
Dial,
1994 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1505-6 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1504-8 
$15.99 
R 
5-9 yrs
Barry Moser's Rottweiler makes two appearances this season (see also Harper, re-
viewed below); here he shares the stage with the cat, who puts up with her canine
co-star, but only just: "The dog amuses me. He cares about what people think! I
wash his muzzle." Hall's duologue contrasts the ways and means of the two pets,
including their strategies for dealing with those whom they call them, by which
they mean us: "Dog: Making the acquaintance of babies, I allow them to pull my
hair. I do not like it, but I allow it, for I am the dog." "Cat: When babies come
into the house, I try to vanish. Babies are crazy! Babies sit on you!" The declara-
tions are mock-majestic, and you'll want to pick two kids to read them aloud, but
don't let anybody miss Moser's watercolor paintings, boldly composed (as in a
head-on portrait of the dog jawing a bone) and slyly conceived (as when we see,
from the dog's point of view, the cat reclining disdainfully while the dog withholds
the ball from his master). RS
HARPER, ISABELLE 
My Dog Rosie; illus. by Barry Moser. 
Blue Sky/Scholastic,
1994 
[32p]
ISBN 0-590-47619-X 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 3-6 yrs
Isabelle Harper is Barry Moser's young granddaughter, and it falls to her to care
for Rottweiler Rosie when Grandpa goes off to his studio to work. She feeds him
(cat food), reads to him (Carl Goes Shopping, what else?), and takes him out to
play, and through it all (even the indignity of having a rubber nose put over his
face) Rosie remains a stalwart, sometimes stubborn, always loving companion.
Who's taking care of who? is the implicit question here, and it's answered in the
solid contentment of Moser's watercolors, posing the sturdy figures of Isabelle and
Rosie against plain white backgrounds, focusing us on their mutual amity. The
perspectives are close enough that you feel like scratching Rosie's chin, and there's
an imaginative employment of the double-spread splits, pointed in a life-becomes-
art-becomes-life picture of Moser reaching across the page gutter to hold Isabelle's
hand, with a sketch of the same picture placed on the drawing table behind him.
RS
HASELEY, DENNIS 
Getting Him. 
Farrar, 1994 
154 p
ISBN 0-374-32536-7 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
A freak accident-Harold the weird child genius hides out in his parents' car and
accidentally backs it over Donald's dog-sets in motion Donald's plans for re-
venge and social success. Donald is in sixth grade but yearns for the approval of
the local eighth-graders, and they will give it to him on one condition: he must
befriend Harold, learning his greatest weaknesses, and apprise the eighth-graders
so that they can find a cruelly appropriate way to torment Harold in grand style.
At first, Donald relishes the chance to avenge his still-limping dog, but he has
second thoughts as he gets to know the unhappy Harold and his obsession: Harold
waits for a visit from interplanetary beings inhabiting a planetary satellite of Sirius.
The boys go ahead with their plan, pretending to be alien visitors abducting the
willing Harold, and both he and Donald suffer a great and painful disillusionment
130 
* THE BULLETIN
about friendship. This is a sober tale of human responsibility and ethics, sort of a
Killing Mr. Griffin for younger but more cerebral readers. Haseley's prose is sleek
and inviting but his viewpoint, expressed through Donald's first-person narration,
is frequently adult; it's also not clear why the book is set in the 1950s, although it
does make Harold's gullibility and the night roaming of the boys more credible.
Donald's ambivalence is painted in complex and convincing strokes, but although
Harold's unhappiness is evident, the grounds for that misery are insufficiently
explained. Nonetheless, the smooth flow of the words and the quiet suspense
about Donald's betrayal will find the book an audience. DS
HAVILL, JUANITA 
Saving Owen's Toad. Hyperion, 1994 
124 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2024-1 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0029-1 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Nine-year-old Owen does not get along with his thirteen-year-old brother, Rich-
ard. While Owen is the more sensitive, introspective soul, Richard is a wheeler-
dealer, getting himself and others in trouble on a regular basis. Owen is interested
in toads and other creatures and is pleased when his grandmother tells him that his
grandfather also liked observing "creeping, crawling, hopping things," so he only
reluctandy agrees to help Richard with his newest scheme of catching toads to sell
to neighbors as bug-catchers. Finding a three-legged toad, Owen decides to keep
him for a pet even though Richard is determined to have them all, and eventually
an accident brings the brothers to a better understanding. This story of a younger
brother learning to stand up to a forceful older brother develops Owen's point of
view nicely, but its themes are unfocused. At first, it appears to be a story of the
boys' father being away-"Toad parents don't stick around" is on the first page-
but it never develops in that direction. Likewise, a subplot about hunting takes
over the last chapter, but adds little to the overall picture. A little humor t la
Beverly Cleary would have made Owen a warmer character, but children will ad-
mire his spunk by the end of the story. SDL
HAYES, JOE, ad. 
Watch Out for Clever Women!/Cuidado con las Mujeres Astutas!:
Hispanic Folktales; illus. by Vicki Trego Hill. 
Cinco Puntos, 1994 
77p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-938317-21-0 
$16.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-938317-20-2 
$10.95 
R Gr. 3-6
Told in both English and Spanish, these five stories are flavored with southwestern
details that will enrich diets of European lore. The tale of a daughter who counters
her father's greed by asking if the smell of food satisfies his hunger may sound
familiar from the Yiddish variant but has its own distinctive twists. And, as Hayes
notes, there's a Russian counterpart to the story here about the wife who protects
her husband's newfound gold by persuading him that tortillas rain down from the
sky; of course no one believes anything he says, including the news about his gold.
Hayes' experience as a storyteller shows up in his trust of the tales as being best
perpetuated through clear, simple retellings. It's too bad he doesn't discuss any of
his sources more specifically than an acknowledgment that "the traditional part is
based on things people tell me and on what I learn from reading the work of
folklorists and anthropologists." The brief introduction is otherwise helpful, and
capably drafted pencil drawings decorate a spacious text. Bilingual children, stu-
dents of Spanish, and storytellers will get equal mileage out of this one. BH
DECEMBER 1994 
* 
131
HILDICK, E. W. 
Hester Bidgood: Investigatrix of Evill Deedes. 
Macmillan,
1994 
141p
ISBN 0-02-743966-6 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
It's 1692, and the Massachusetts town of Willow Bend is abuzz with rumors of the
witch-hunt in nearby Salem. The discovery of an unconscious cat, its fur burnt
with the symbol of the cross, convinces the citizens that the cat is Mistress Willson's
familiar and that the devil is in their midst. But thirteen-year-old Hester and her
friend Rob, who has been raised among the Indians, apply their respective skills to
the task of uncovering a human agent behind the mischief. Colonial life is, on the
whole, convincingly portrayed (although paper for the detectives' note-taking is
unrealistically widely available), and Hester and Rob make a well-balanced team
with her wit, his tracking skills, and their common sensitivity to the neighbors'
foibles. However, the investigation itself is conducted with dry precision, and the
protracted denouement struggles to provide the excitement the main storyline has
thus far lacked. A concluding reference to "the scoring of [Hester's] first victory"
may portend further chronicles of devilry in Willow Bend. EB
JANSSON, TOVE 
Moominpappa's Memoirs; written and illus. by Tove Jansson; tr.
by Thomas Warburton. 
Farrar, 1994 
162p
ISBN 0-374-35045-0 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 4-6
If the Moomins have been gathering dust on the shelf since the height of their
popularity in the 1960s, the first English edition of this 1968 Jansson entry may
spark a revival among a new generation of readers. Stuck at home suffering from
a terrible cold, Moominpappa puts his time to good use by setting down his ad-
ventures from the time he ran away from the strict and repressive Hemulen or-
phanage until he met and married the inestimable Moominmamma. His memoirs
(which he admits to enhancing for maximum dramatic effect) are recorded with
mock solemnity that sets the absurd antics ofjunk-collecting Muddlers, nose-gnaw-
ing Niblings, and other bizarre characters into high comic relief. And as the Moomin
family responds with delight to each exciting new chapter Moominpappa reads to
them, Jansson interjects through their comments some sly thoughts on the
autobiographer's art. A felicitous introduction for newcomers to the Moomin
tales. EB
JORDAN, SHERRYL 
Wolf Woman. 
Houghton, 1994 
162p
ISBN 0-395-70932-6 
$13.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-10
Set in what is probably early Christian Britain or Ireland, this novel spins a Clan of
the Cave Bear-like tale of a girl, Tanith, found as a child living among wolves by a
clan of violent raiders. Adopted by the tribe chieftain, Tanith is viewed with much
suspicion by some of the other members, who believe her affinity with the feared
wolves is evidence of evil. While there's a certain amount of repetition as Tanith
shuttles between the clan and the freedom of "running with the wolves"-shades
of another bestseller-the story builds momentum as Tanith becomes forced to
choose between the man who loves her and the company of a wolf clan, led by a
wolf she names Ashok, that has accepted her. The dichotomy between rapacious
humans and noble wolves (which only kill prey that "choose" to be killed) is too
easy, but romantic readers will empathize with Tanith's dilemma and her passions,
given full, if somewhat anachronistically '90s, cry after her clan has slaughtered the
132 
* THE BULLETIN
wolves: "Are your brains dead, and your hearts with them? Ashok understood the
plan, the great giving and taking, the harmony! But not you! Not you!" Tanith's
ultimate rejection of human society, even in its kinder manifestations she discovers
in the peaceable clan of her beloved, closes the novel on a note of splendid defi-
ance, and most readers will hope for a sequel. RS
KARL, JEAN 
America Alive: A History; illus. by Ian Schoenherr. 
Philomel,
1994 
120p
ISBN 0-399-22013-5 
$22.95 
R Gr. 5-8
While the plethora of titles focusing on a single event, person, or issue in American
history is certainly welcome, there's always going to be the kid who wants the
whole story. And here it is-selectively told, to be sure; as Karl writes in her
foreword, "This is a personal history; it is history as I see it." Still, at least in regard
to major historical events and social movements, there's darn little she doesn't at
least touch upon, from the prehistoric crossing of the Bering Strait to the election
of Bill Clinton in 1992. The writing is clear and informal, gracefully segueing
between topics ("Educated people did know it [the world] was round, but didn't
know its size. Can't be too big, though, thought Christopher Columbus") and
occasionally displaying a dry wit ("Most colonists liked life in America, but they
did not all like each other"). While the perspective is generally objective, with
gentle reminders of what the blacks and the women and the Indians were doing
while the white men waged wars, Karl is in some places more opinionated than in
others, as in her discussions of the Reconstruction Era and of the threat of world
Communism. There are a few bloopers (most notably, the placement of Sutter's
Mill west of San Francisco) but that's a quibble in a book filled with telling detail.
Karl's sense of historical continuity gives the book a narrative chain that makes it
read like a story-a bigstory-and Ian Schoenherr's compact paintings are darkly,
richly hued, capturing both personages (Anne Hutchinson, Crispus Attucks, and
Joe McCarthy are among the dozens neatly placed in the borders) and emblematic
scenes ("Waiting for the end of winter at Morristown," "Surviving in a sodhouse
on the Great Plains"); sometimes they're a little oblique, as in the picture of a boy
labeled "Puerto Rican." While notes and a suggested reading list would have been
nice, they would have been dauntingly formidable and there are an index and
bibliography of adult sources. RS
KERR, M. E. 
Deliver Us from Evie. 
HarperCollins, 1994 
175p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024476-3 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024475-5 
$15.00 
R* 
Gr. 9-12
A Missouri farm is the setting for this compelling story of the Burrmans, a family
whose stability is disrupted first by the blossoming romances of the three teenaged
children and then by the destructive floodwaters of the Mississippi. Chief among
the book's memorable characters is Evie, the unconventionally attractive Burrman
daughter (a "young Elvis Presley" with a talent for machinery repair) who falls in
love with Patsy Duff, the beautiful and rebellious daughter of the powerful local
banker. The narration of fifteen-year-old Parr, the youngest Burrman, strikes a
tone of gentle irony as he tells of Evie's coming out and the family's and community's
varied responses of bewilderment, hostility, and tentative acceptance, set against a
background of the seasonal burdens of farm work and Parr's own erratic first ro-
mance with the devoutly religious Angel. Although the plotting is somewhat me-
DECEMBER 1994 
* 
133
chanical and the symbolism not always subtle, these are minor quibbles in a re-
markable YA novel that creates a vivid picture of the power of Nature (the uncon-
trollable flooding river) and human nature (the stereotypical "butch" qualities that
Evie will not, or cannot, suppress) on the Burrmans and their community. Un-
usual among YA novels with gay/lesbian content in its depiction of rural, church-
centered life, this is vintage Kerr, a novel whose engaging characters, realistic
dialogue, and thoughtfully presented dilemmas make it a strong candidate for sec-
ondary classroom discussion. CHRISTINE JENKINS
KIMMEL, ERIC A., ad. 
Iron John; illus. by Trina Schart Hyman. 
Holiday House,
1994 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-8234-1073-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
6-9 yrs
While the title page credits Kimmel as adaptor of this Grimm tale, his revisions
and additions are so extensive as to constitute a takeover. He omits the opening
scene describing Iron John's capture (which, as Kimmel notes, is somewhat tan-
gential to the story at hand), but the most significant changes come after Iron John
has made the king's son leave the forest for tainting the spring. Now known as
Walter, the young man meets three princesses (not one), has a Cinderella whirl at
a ball (not in Grimm) and is ultimately injured in battle, with wounds that can
only be healed by "the tears of a maid who loves him truly." That last touch is also
Kimmel's, who by this time has so altered the original story that Walter here falls
in love with a garden girl, not the princess, and takes her off to wedded bliss. With
its romance and many magics, this is more a fairytale than a folktale, but the story
is smooth and may appeal to a post-Robert Bly audience more than would the
sometimes enigmatic Grimm. Marilee Heyer's version (Iron Hans, BCCB 12/93)
stays more closely to its source, but Heyer's pictures are fussy and glamorized. The
tale is far better served by Trina Schart Hyman's oil paintings (a new medium for
this illustrator); drawing as well with as a brush as she does with a pen, Hyman
finds a subdued luminosity in the shadowy greens of the forest setting and textures
shapes and surfaces in a homely way that acknowledges both the fairytale world
Kimmel has created as well as the plainer place encountered by the Grimms. RS
KING-SMITH, DICK 
The Swoose; illus. by Marie Corner. 
Hyperion, 1994 
4 6p
Library ed. ISBN 1-56282-659-X $12.89
Trade ed. ISBN 1-56282-658-1 
$12.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
The time has come for Mom to broach the delicate matter of Fitzherbert's pater-
nity: all the other goslings in the barnyard were sired by the old gray gander, but
Fitzherbert is the offspring of a grande passion between his goose mother and a
magnificent white swan ("Oh, the music of his great wings! It was love at first
flight!") He may, in fact, be the world's only living swoose-swan + goose. A
quest to find his father leads Fitzherbert to Windsor Castle, where the royal orni-
thologist recognizes the rara avis for the treasure he is, and the widowed Queen
Victoria is so charmed by Fitzherbert's comically obsequious bow that she smil-
ingly announces, "We are amused." Had King-Smith ended here with a happily-
ever-after, the reader might be satisfied with this droll historical fantasy, but an
additional chapter involving a French chef and a visit by Victoria's foreign cousins
seems awkwardly tacked on and breaks the tone of the tale. A gallery of energetic
pen-and-ink sketches accompanies the text. EB
134 
* THE BULLETIN
LAFFERTY, LIDA 
Born Early: A Premature Baby's Story for Children; by Lida Lafferty
and Bo Flood; illus. with photographs by Rebecca Young. 
Songbird, 1994 
38p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-9641413-0-2 
$8.95 
R 
3-7 yrs
Despite a text obviously geared to young listeners, this volume will attract readers
well into the middle grades with its dramatic black-and-white photographs and
simple, yet remarkably complete, portrayal of the hospitalization of a premature
baby. Focusing on the experience of Carrie-born three months early, weighing
under threepounds-the authors briefly review facts concerning normal gestation
and then turn to the loving efforts of the neonatal intensive care unit to protect
and nurture the struggling infant. Without minimizing the severity of the preemie's
distress, the text relieves the fears older siblings may have regarding those mysteri-
ous hospital goings-on from which they are largely excluded and, together with
Young's photos, makes sense of the tangle of tubes and machinery they may en-
counter on a hospital visit. Frequent spatial comparisons are deftly geared to the
youthful audience: "Carrie's lungs were tiny, each about the size of a tea bag."
Bibliographies of children's and adult books on conception, birth, and preemies
are appended; a comprehensive glossary of medical terminology will be welcomed
by parents. Although the flimsy, stapled soft-cover binding may limit its library
shelf life, this volume is nonetheless a worthwhile purchase for institutions and
families. EB
LARSON, KIRBY 
Second-Grade PigPals; illus. by Nancy Poydar. 
Holiday House,
1994 
87p
ISBN 0-8234-1107-9 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Quinn is worried because everyone else in her class has brought something in to
celebrate National Pig Day, and she can't think of anything to bring. She is dis-
tracted and cheered by meeting a new girl in school, Manuela, who seems very
friendly, but the next day Manuela has been taken over by Quinn's enemy Annie
May. By the end of this short chapter book, Quinn has won her friend back by
bravely borrowing a book from a scary teacher for the pig celebration and giving it
to Manuela. Adults might find Quinn rather whiny but children may enjoy read-
ing her travails as she agonizes, in true-to-life second-grade fashion, over the pigs
and Manuela. Larson does bring the activity of a school classroom to life well, but
the humor seems forced, and we never get any insight into the book's villainess,
Annie May. Poydar's watercolors, reproduced in black and white, are lively and
depict a multiethnic classroom. 
SDL
LASKY, KATHRYN 
Beyond the Burning Time. 
Blue Sky/Scholastic, 1994 
273p
ISBN 0-590-47331-X 
$13.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
As did Ann Rinaldi in A Break with Charity (BCCB 9/92), Lasky uses the com-
paratively recent scholarship of Boyer and Nissenbaum (whom she cites in a re-
search note and bibliography) to explore the economic rivalries that may have
caused the attention-begging hysterics of a clique of adolescent girls to blow up
into the infamous Salem witchcraft trials of the late seventeenth century. The
story is here told through the experience of the fictional Mary Chase, who, along
with her freethinking widowed mother, watches the gathering darkness of witch-
naming (and the cynical exploitation of same) with dismay and increasing fear.
While Lasky doesn't stint on atmosphere ("The men's black steeple-crowned hats
DECEMBER 1994 
* 
135
poked darkly at the winter sky") she resists melodrama, for the most part allowing
the history center stage. In fact, the primary fictional thread-Mary's mother is
accused, tried, and sentenced to hang, but is rescued by Mary and her brother-is
not the strongest in the story, partially because the rescue seems far-fetched, and
partially because Mary and her mother seem too in touch with the hindsight of the
present day. Still, they are cogent, involved, and involving observers and through
them Lasky leaves readers with a wise eye on the past. RS
LESSEM, DON 
Jack Horner: Living With Dinosaurs; illus. by Janet
Hamlin. 
Scientific American/Freeman, 1994 
48p 
(Science Superstars)
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7167-6546-2 
$14.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-7167-6549-7 
$4.95 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Dr. John Horner, who prefers to go by plain Jack, discovered his first dinosaur
fossil on his father's ranch in Montana when he was eight years old and claims that
from that moment on his interest lay solely in dinosaurs, particularly duckbilled
dinosaurs. Despite dyslexia and a general lack of interest in most school subjects
(flunking out of college seven times), he has become one of the world's foremost
paleontologists. His first major discovery came when he noticed that some fossils
collected at the turn of the century contained dinosaur eggshells, leading him to a
huge area of dinosaur nests with baby bones in them. Thus Maiasaura, or good
mother dinosaur, was found, allowing scientists to learn much more about the way
certain dinosaurs lived. Jack Horner is still very active, working as advisor on
Jurassic Park and continuing to lead expeditions and analyze findings. Author
Lessem, a friend of Horner's, writes with zest, showing the determination and
excitement that accompanied Horner's explorations. He fills in the necessary sci-
entific information with concise explanations, but keeps his focus on the person.
Chapters are short, with many pencil illustrations that add interest and help clarify
the science, making the book a good choice for reluctant readers. An address for
the Dinosaur Society is given, along with a bibliography made up almost entirely
of books by Lessem and Horner. SDL
LEVIN, BETTY 
Away to Me, Moss. 
Greenwillow, 1994 
161p
ISBN 0-688-13439-4 
$14.00 
R Gr. 5-8
The central images here-a border collie, Moss, whose movements are out of con-
trol because his master, Rob, has had a stroke rendering his movements out of
control-make an unusually layered dog story, told from the viewpoint of a ten-
year-old neighbor involved with both victims. Zanna is dismayed when she goes
to pick out a puppy and finds Moss chained miserably in the barn; there's no room
for canine miscreants on a sheep farm, but Rob, the only one who could channel
Moss's fierce work drive, is limited to a wheelchair and a few indecipherable words
that first repel and later intrigue Zanna when she begins to see patterns of meaning
in them. The plot comes close to overload with Zanna's own crisis: her mother,
who administers speech therapy to Rob, and her father, working at a job in Cali-
fornia, are undergoing a trial separation, and this thread seems more hastily spun
than the careful development of the main story. Ultimately, however, the stress of
both Zanna's and Rob's families is skillfully paralleled, and Zanna's relationship
with Moss is-save for a single fortuitous benevolence-realistically resolved.
Meanwhile, the sheepdog trials generate plenty of intense moments, with Moss's
training as vividly detailed as Rob's progress and Zanna's maturation. BH
136 
* THE BULLETIN
LISLE, JANET TAYLOR 
LookingforJuliette. Jackson/Orchard, 1994 
120p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08720-4 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-06870-6 
$14.95 
R Gr. 3-5
The investigators of magic (not the "toy store variety," but the kind that "[hides]
out in the ordinary") return for their second adventure, looking for Angela Harrall's
missing cat, Juliette, who has been entrusted to animal lover Poco while Mr. Harrall
and his daughter temporarily reside in Mexico. Struck by a passing car and tossed
into the air, Juliette was last seen fleeing into nowhere by the young neighborhood
eccentric Walter Kew, who lurks beneath the low brim of his baseball cap to avoid
the bad spirits that follow him. Walter and the girls hold stealthy consultations
with his trusted Ouija board; it has always kept him in touch with his deceased
parents, and he relies on its sagacity to help them trace Juliette to the prime sus-
pect-Miss Bone, a retired schoolteacher who is caretaker of the Harrall's vacant
home. After several darkly atmospheric Ouija sessions and an abortive confronta-
tion with the shadowy Miss Bone exhaust the children's leads, Juliette simply reap-
pears, as cats are wont to do, unharmed, nonchalant, and unapologetic (bear in
mind, Poco talks with her, and would know!), but sporting a mysterious little box
of catnip around her neck. As in Lisle's series debut (The GoldDust Letters, BCCB
7/94), the children's verbal precocity adds understated humor and a touch of melo-
drama, and again, a sober thread runs through the plot, which circles around Walter's
obsession with his parents' death, a mystery which no adult seems at liberty to
discuss. But in this adventure, rather than being subjected to an adult's painstak-
ing elucidation, the children themselves discover Ouija's unreliability and Miss
Bone's innocence. Lisle leaves the door ajar for a third passage into the unknown-
perhaps involving Walter's antecedents and a large casserole dish? EB
LYONS, MARY E. 
Deep Blues: Bill Traylor, Self-Taught Artist. Scribners,
1994 
42p 
(African-American Artists and Artisans)
ISBN 0-684-19458-9 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Bill Traylor was born an Alabama slave in 1856 and spent his life in poverty; his
talent was discovered in 1939 by a young artist, who arranged for a showing of
Traylor's work and fortunately collected it for posterity, thus making possible its
contemporary rediscovery. Apparently few biographical details are available about
Traylor's life, so Lyons extrapolates from his paintings, from the lives of other poor
African-American farmers, and from the events of the time. This blend of fact and
surmise is less successful in this book than it was in Lyons' Stitching Stars (BCCB
12/93) in this same series: here it's difficult to tell which is which, and some of the
biographical readings of the pictures seem far-fetched and labored. The art, how-
ever, is absorbing: Traylor's figures have sinuous shapes and piercing eyes, and
they float on their (mostly cardboard) backgrounds like gleeful spirits. Kids will
particularly enjoy his occasional visual jokes, such as using the logo on his card-
board surface as the navel of his subject. As a biography this is unable to rise above
the paucity of sources, but it's an appealing introduction to an accessible but little-
known American artist. A list of sources and an index are included. DS
McGUIRE, RICHARD 
Night Becomes Day; written and illus. by Richard
McGuire. 
Viking, 1994 34p
ISBN 0-670-85547-2 
$13.99 
R 3-7yrs
A string of associations form the text of this picture book: "Bright becomes sun/
DECEMBER 1994 
* 
137
And sun becomes shine/ Shine becomes sparkle/ And sparkle becomes stream."
Some of the chains link together logically, such as "Street becomes highway," while
others rely on the illustration, as a building goes up to the sky and "building be-
comes cloud." The pictures have a snappy commercial art style reminiscent of the
1930s, with solid blocks of ink forming strong-edged shapes. Humorous touches
are sprinkled through the illustrations, as when children throw a paper airplane at
a car whizzing by. The city scene in particular is a marvel of motion and sweep,
with a street going on into the distance filled with activity, and a building on the
opposite end stretching up into the sky. Even the endpapers tie in, as a "Tree
becomes paper/ And paper becomes news [a newspaper]/ News becomes trash
[going into a recycling bin]/ And trash becomes new"-turned into wrapping pa-
per, which are the endpapers as well. The rhythms of words and pictures could
make this an incantatory bedtime favorite. SDL
MCKENZIE, ELLEN KINDT 
The Perfectly Orderly House; illus. by Megan
Lloyd. 
Holt, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-1946-4 
$14.95 
R 4-7 yrs
With a motto of "What you throw away today, you'll surely need tomorrow," an
Old Woman finds her "small bit" of a house crammed so full she can't find the
things she needs. Craving more organization, she convinces her brother Sam to
build her a house made up of a series of rooms, one for each letter of the alphabet.
The Attic holds aprons, apples, an anvil; in the Basement, the bowls, buckets,
baskets and other items beginning with B will go, and so on through the alphabet.
When the house is completed with a Zoo, the Old Woman invites her neighbors
for a party and returns home to her now extremely orderly small bit of a house.
With her sprightly telling and the very funny party in which the guests search
through the house for the different foods and utensils by letter, McKenzie makes a
good story out of what could have been merely a cute idea. Lloyd's colored-ink
illustrations keep up the cheerful spirit and add innumerable alphabetic details for
children to discover. SDL
MCMILLAN, 
BRUCE 
Sense Suspense; written and illus. by Bruce
McMillan. 
Scholastic, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-590-47904-0 
$15.95 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
A Puerto Rican setting (Culebra Island) provides McMillan with a tropical accent
for the familiar game of photographic synecdoche: look at a close-up photo at an
unfamiliar pattern or shape; turn the page to see the object revealed in its entirety.
Here the game is spiced up with sensory multiple choice-along with guessing the
object, kids are supposed to figure out which of the five senses the object stimu-
lates. Thus a deep-pink curve turns into a flower to be smelled; coarse white
threads are revealed to be a baby goat being touched by some island children. As
McMillan acknowledges in a "Using this book" paragraph, there are no wrong
answers, but since a stubborn kid could build an argument for almost any of the
senses matching any of the pictures, the page-turning can be a bit of a letdown:
that colorful parrot is sitting on someone's hand; are we looking at it, touching it,
or hearing it? The last is the preferred answer, but hearing is probably the most
difficult of the senses to pin down in a photograph. Hana Machotka's Outstand-
ing Outsides (BCCB 3/93) and Margaret Miller's My Five Senses (BCCB 4/94) are
just two of many picture books to take on either of the concepts McMillan covers
138 
* THE BULLETIN
here; while the book is an attractive offering (with English and Spanish texts), it's
probably an optional purchase for most collections. RS
MCNAUGHTON, COLIN 
Captain Abdul's Pirate School; written and illus. by Colin
McNaughton. 
Candlewick, 1994 
33p
ISBN 1-56402-429-6 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Apparently retired from the active pirate biz, Captain Abdul (see Jolly Roger and
the Pirates of Abdul the Skinhead, BCCB 1/89) has opened a school for young
recruits where "Pickles" has been sent by Dad: "He says it will toughen me up."
Despite initial misgivings, Pickles learns a lot: cannon-firing, counterfeiting, "pi-
rate swear words." All is well until Pickles overhears a plan in the teachers' lounge
to kidnap the kids and hold them for ransom, and so decides to lead a mutiny. It's
a breezy, irreverent fantasy punctuated with enough wit and mild ribaldry so that
the picture-book format won't put off those kids old enough to get the jokes.
Harum-scarum ink-and-watercolor illustrations yo-heave-ho the humor, and a sur-
prise reminiscent of Kemp's The Turbulent Term of Tike Tyler is sprung on the
very last page. RS
MAHY, MARGARET 
The Greatest Show Off Earth; illus. by Wendy Smith. 
Viking,
1994 186p
ISBN 0-670-85736-X 
$13.99 
R 
Gr. 4-7
While celebrated for her perceptive realistic fiction and intense, moody fantasies,
Margaret Mahy also has a madcap streak a mile wide, amply demonstrated in this
comic space opera involving orphans, pirates, clowns and great green slugs. The
orphans, Delphinium, "the cleverest calculator on Space Station Vulnik," and Ja-
son, the Station's "library," are accidently whooooshed into space while playing
with the buttons in a skip-ship. They land on a flying circus, where at first all the
fun seems to be missing, but which soon becomes the setting for a grand battle:
pirate queen La Mollerina and her fiance cum lackey Bamba Caramba versus the
children and the clowns. Due to some heavily burlesqued foreshadowing, readers
will know the real identities of Mollerina (Delphinium's careless babysitter), Bamba
(Jason's long-lost big brother) and the clowns (Delphinium's missing, presumed
dead, parents) long before the children do, but that makes the farce more fun, and
there's still the problem of those pesky space-slugs. Mahy's inventiveness is ram-
pant, and there's plenty of tongue-in-cheek suspense to keep the story rolling.
Short chapters, funny names, and knock-knock jokes make the book a zippy pick
for reading aloud. RS
MARTIN, BILL JR 
The Maestro Plays; illus. by Vladimir Radunsky. 
Holt,
1994 42p
ISBN 0-8050-1746-1 
$15.95 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
While maestro properly refers to a music teacher or conductor, the one in this book
is a one-man band, who plays "PROUDLY. HE PLAYS LOUDLY. He plays
slowly/ He plays oh..ly" Oh..ly? Well, it rhymes-which seems to be the govern-
ing logic for a picture book that has plenty of brass, verbally, and plenty of flash,
visually, but doesn't quite find the melody. Bill Martin's simple text is fun to read
aloud for the sounds it makes ("He plays flowingly, glowingly/ knowingly... /
showingly . . / goingly") but it is facilely rhymed and doesn't have enough ideas
DECEMBER 1994 
* 
139
beyond the stream of adverbs, and too many of the words-"nippingly,"
"drippingly"-ain't words. Made-up or not, though, the words bounce right along
with Radunsky's big and bold cut-paper images of the maestro, pictured as a clown,
running through his somewhat limited repertoire accompanied by animal pals,
with the red pigs dancing a la Matisse being particularly fetching. The book is an
eye-catcher and in many ways an ear-catcher as well, but it looks and sounds too
much like a movie from which everything's been cut but the special effects. RS
MATAS, CAROL 
The Burning Time. 
Delacorte, 1994 
[113p]
ISBN 0-385-32097-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 5-8
Seizing dramatic moments in history (Lisa's War, BCCB 9/89; Sworn Enemies,
BCCB 4/93; etc.) is Matas' specialty, and here the experience of a sixteenth-cen-
tury French girl whose mother is accused of witchcraft becomes almost an adven-
ture tale. There's little subtlety or ambiguity about the characters, but readers will
be compelled by the action, which includes harrowing scenes of Rose's witnessing
her mother's torture and then administering a fatal potion to save her from further
pain. Through historical documentation and fictionalization, the dynamics of
witch hunting have become well known, and this story is a model of the social
conflicts classic to such situations. The first-person narrative is accessible and
easier to read than more substantial novels we've seen on New England's victims
(The Witch of Blackbird Pond, Tituba of Salem Village), while the protagonist's
romance and escape will draw kids who are reluctant to read. For lively class
discussion, pair this with Donna Jo Napoli's eerie fantasy, The Magic Circle (BCCB
4/93), an equally brief but more complex tale about a midwife suspected of black
magic. BH
MAYNE, WILLIAM 
Hob and the Goblins. Dorling Kindersley, 1994 
140p
ISBN 1-56458-713-4 
$12.95 
R Gr. 4-7
Hob (previously appearing in The Green Book ofHob Stories, BCCB 10/84, etc.) is
a household spirit, like a brownie, who looks after a dwelling and its inhabitants; as
the story opens, however, he's wandering about in search of a place to belong. He
first tries to inhabit a bus, but that doesn't work out. Eventually he adopts the bus
driver and his family as they move to a new house. Unfortunately their new home
is beset by something evil that only Hob recognizes: their new neighbor is a witch,
the children's new playmates are goblin children, and under the house lies the
vengeful goblin king protecting his treasure. Despite overwhelming odds and clever
plotting against them, Hob and his family, with the aid of some technology (the
bus driver's old bus), eventually defeat the goblins and take back their house.
Mayne's portrayal of Hob, the knowing but simple guardian of house and family,
is sufficiently vivid and individual to keep preciousness generally at bay, and the
family's gradual realization and appreciation of his existence is credible and amus-
ing. The plot loses some momentum at the final showdown involving various
creatures ranging from dwarfs to goblins, but the world of Hob and his humans
(and his continuing arguments with the family budgie) is well-imagined, and Mayne
writes with both charm and menace. Kids who liked Susan Cooper's The Boggart
(BCCB 3/93) may enjoy this; it's an even better bet for youngsters who are begin-
ning to relish the supernatural but aren't quite ready to leave Winnie-the-Pooh
behind. DS
140 
* THE BULLETIN
MILLER, MARY JANE 
Going the Distance. Viking, 1994 
15 1p
ISBN 0-670-84815-8 
$14.99 
R Gr. 4-6
Loren's artistic parents have spent their lives-and hers-moving around. Now,
just when Loren thinks she's going to be able to spend sixth grade in Florida, her
parents leave for Italy and send Loren off to her grandmother in Illinois. Loren
settles in there, getting to know the same-age twins next door, competing on the
swim team, and beginning to date. She starts to chafe under her parents' long-
distance control of her life, and when they decide to move the family to New York
upon their return, she rebels. Miller portrays a more unconventional family than
is usual for her, but Loren is a recognizable and appealing protagonist, who loves
reading romances but is unsure about her feelings for the boy next door; her par-
ents, while not as considerate of their daughter as they should be, are not painted
as monsters. The ending is realistic, too: while Loren's parents realize that she's
growing up in ways they've been blind to (and her mother adjusts to Loren's cut-
ting off the long hair that made her a perfect model for her mother's paintings)
and they decide she can finish out the school year where she is, the family is still
moving to New York. Readers who have enjoyed Miller's other work will find the
easy reading and slightly exotic touches here to their liking. DS
MOZESON, I. E. Jerusalem Mosaic: Young Voices from the Holy City; by I. E.
Mozeson and Lois Stavsky. 
Four Winds, 1994 
[175p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-02-767651-X 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
"It's a crappy country; what can I tell you?" says bitter eighteen-year-old Omer.
Still, he concludes, "If I survive the army and the hellhole in Lebanon that they
throw me into, you'll find me right here. It's the only place." This kind ofam-
bivalence is a brave inclusion for a book whose target audience may be heavily
Zionist, but the thirty-six young people interviewed here show an honest range of
philosophical, ethnic, and social diversity. Most of the subjects have strong opin-
ions and share them: fourteen-year-old Moslem Sa'ana, who believes that a mar-
riage negotiated by her father is the best way for her, condones her brother's
involvement in killing collaborators. Irreverent sixteen-year-old Limor, Israeli-
born of Russian descent, resents Russian newcomers who "smell bad" and "take all
the money and all the jobs from everyone else," but she's equally critical of the
ultra-religious ("The haredim are stupid, and they live a stupid life"). This is a
mosaic that aims to show humanity, not nobility, for a realistic glimpse of a com-
plex Middle Eastern crossroads. The only flaw is perhaps inherent in the medium:
while the pieces of a visual mosaic appear simultaneously to reveal patterns, readers
who absorb these brief segments one at a time may find it hard to make connec-
tions that are not readily apparent and are never analyzed or summarized in the
text. However, students will value the candid representation of Israel's common-
est conflicts, which have also been aired in Ashabranner's GavrielandJemal(BCCB
12/84) and Laurie Dolphin's Neve Shalom/Wahat al-Salam: Oasis ofPeace (4/93).
A demographic profile of interviewees, a glossary, a bibliography, an index, and
black-and-white photographs are included. BH
MYERs, EDWARD .Climb or Die. Hyperion, 1994 
180p
ISBN 0-7868-0026-7 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
In an effort to get to the family's Rocky Mountain cabin amidst a screaming bliz-
DECEMBER 1994 
* 
141
zard, Danielle and Jake's father impulsively detours down a mining road. The car
collides with a tree, badly injuring both their father and mother, and Danielle and
Jake have to go for help. The highway is too far back, so the kids decide to climb
to a weather station atop a nearby mountain instead. Hoping to rely on Danielle's
rudimentary mountaineering skills and Jake's build-a-better-mousetrap ingenuity,
they set out into the snow and into a elemental conflict with nature. Climb or die,
says the title, and that basically sums up the story, as the two kids, squabbling and
working together, battle the mountain. It isn't subtle but it moves fast, and the
cliffhanging chapter endings and enticing cover painting of the kids on the side of
the snowy mountain will rope in reluctant readers. RS
PANZER, NORA, comp. 
Celebrate America in Poetry andArt. National Museum
of Art, Smithsonian Institution/Hyperion, 1994 
96p 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 1-56282-665-4 
$18.89
Trade ed. ISBN 1-56282-664-6 
$18.95 
R Gr. 5-10
Not to be confused--or, more likely, sure to be confused-with Laura Whipple's
similar anthology, Celebrating America, reviewed below, this is a collection of
American poems, illustrated with American art (from the National Museum of
American Art), conveying aspects of the American experience. Panzer has included
a wide variety of poems written by poets famous and obscure, nearly forgotten and
brand new, such as Langston Hughes and Gloria Anzalduia, May Swenson and
Ralph Waldo Emerson; she has a knack for finding worthy but unhackneyed of-
ferings from much-anthologized poets and for finding the one good poem from
otherwise mediocre writers. The art, which includes paintings, photographs, and
photographs of sculptures, is imaginatively chosen but not confusingly so, and the
illustrations tend to favor strong lines, intense color, and a contemporary feel;
artists represented include Thomas Hart Benton, William Johnson, and Elizabeth
Catlett. The text and artwork are knit together with an abundance of white space
and with titling in thick but informal black type, which makes each page strong
but unfussy. While the thematic logic of the book's five sections is not always
clear, and some of the illustrations could have been larger, this collection has an
energy and diversity that gives it child appeal as well as teacher appeal; the back
cover alone, which features Mike Wilkins' rendition of the Preamble of the Con-
stitution via license plates, will get kids interested in the book. Brief, useful biog-
raphies of the writers and artists are included, as is an index of both paintings and
poetry. DS
PENNER, LUCILLE RECHT 
The True Story of Pocahontas; illus. by Pamela
Johnson. 
Random House, 1994 
48p 
(Step into Reading)
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-96166-6 
$7.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-679-86166-1 
$3.50 
M 
Gr. 1-3
The life of Pocahontas from her childhood with her family through her kidnap-
ping by Captain Argall, her marriage, and her trip to England is told in this easy
reader. The historical details seem fairly accurate, although at no point is it men-
tioned that many historians believe the story about Pocahontas saving Captain
John Smith was made up by Captain Smith in his memoirs-it is simply presented
as true. The narrative is oddly written in the present tense ("When Pocahontas is
ten years old, three English ships appear") and is sometimes a little patronizing
("One man points a big stick. Boom! Boom!"). Soft, earth-toned watercolor
142 
* THE BULLETIN
illustrations are competently executed, and the costumes of both Indians and the
English add interest, but while Johnson depicts the men in the story with a variety
of expressions and characteristics, Pocahontas's face is generically pretty, with little
sign of a personality. There are no historical notes. SDL
PLATT, RICHARD 
Stephen Biesty's Cross-Sections Castle; illus. by Stephen
Biesty. 
Dorling Kindersley, 1994 
32p
ISBN 1-56458-467-4 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 5-9
In the tradition of the author/illustrator team's Incredible Cross-Sections and Cross-
Sections Man-of-War (BCCB 1/94), Castle is the double-spread by double-spread
expose of life in a fourteenth century castle. While each spread has a theme ("Trades
and Skills," "Defense and Siege," "Food and Feasting"), the impression is gener-
ally one of cheerful anarchy, with hordes of people crawling like ants through the
cutaway castle as pointered captions explain their tasks and smaller separate illus-
trations allow readers a slightly closer look at particularly intriguing pastimes or
practices. "Testing the purity of beer was the job of the ale conner. He poured a
pool of ale onto a wooden bench and then sat in it... Poor quality beer was sugary
and would glue him to the seat" describes a man arising from a bench leaving his
pants behind. The use of color and Anno-like minutiae, as well as the grab-bag
feel to the format, give this book a different demeanor than Macaulay's Castle; kids
who liked that will probably like this too, but kids who felt intimidated by
Macaulay's dense blocks of text will appreciate the browsability of this entry and
the generous helping of gory and gross details about warfare, waste disposal, and
punishments. The explanations aren't always as clear as they should be, and some
of the British jokes will be lost on American readers, but this will find a wide
audience; you could even show it to readers of Cushman's Catherine Called Birdy
(BCCB 6/94), who might enjoy a different look at medieval life. DS
POLACCO, PATRICIA 
Tikvah Means Hope; written and illus. by Patricia
Polacco. 
Doubleday, 1994 
40p
ISBN 0-385-32059-0 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Justine's neighbor, elderly Mr. Roth, is preparing for the Jewish harvest holiday
Sukkoth. Justine and her friend Duane help Mr. Roth build his Sukkah in the
yard, creating a small room for their feast out of brightly patterned cloth, and tying
fruits and gourds to decorate it. On their shopping trip to the market, they see the
orange glow and realize that the hills of Oakland, where they live, are on fire.
They stay in a school gym while the fire burns for two days, and when they return
to their neighborhood, they find it completely devastated. Miraculously, the Sukkah
has survived untouched, as has Mr. Roth's cat, Tikvah, whose name in Hebrew
means "hope." Polacco's illustrations of watercolor and pencil are loose and lively,
interspersed with real photographs inserted into frames, and real posters on a bed-
room wall to heighten the reader's understanding that many real possessions were
lost. Polacco has recreated a true event skillfully, evoking the terrifying feelings
but also ending on an uplifting note. The one unfortunate aspect of the book is
that its cover gives no hint of the subject matter, and parents sitting down to read
a nice book with a cheerful title and a cat and flowers on the cover may be discon-
certed. In her author's note at the end, Polacco tells about Oakland today as it
recovers from the fire. SDL
DECEMBER 1994 
* 
143
PORTE, BARBARA ANN 
Something Terrible Happened. Jackson/Orchard,
1994 
21 4p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08719-0 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-06869-2 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Gillian is nine at the start of the book; her white father is long gone, but she's
happy with the strong distaff side of her family of "Island women"-mother,
grandmother, and great-grandmother, all proud of their Caribbean heritage. Trag-
edy strikes when Gillian's mother falls ill with AIDS, and as she deteriorates Gillian
is sent off to stay with her father's brother's family in Tennessee. After her mother's
death, Gillian remains in Tennessee, puzzling out her place in the world, finding
peace with her uncle, aunt, and cousin, and rejoicing in her grandmother's im-
pending move to the area. Porte tenderly depicts Gillian's attachment to her fam-
ily, her grief for her mother, and her maturation from nine-year-old to eighth-grader
by the book's end. Despite the similar theme (and cover art) this is not up to the
standard of Toning the Sweep (BCCB 6/93): this book's breadth, combined with
its love of interpolated stories (there are source notes in the back for the included
folktales) and letters makes the pace slow and the plot rambling; it's not clear why
the first-person narration comes from an adult friend of the family or why the
tense shifts from past to present in the final chapter. The final effect is dreamy and
somewhat adult, but there's a verisimilitude in the wandering and an intimacy in
the portrayals that keep the book an absorbing read. DS
RANDOM HOUSE BOOK OF BEDTIME STORIES; illus. byJane Dyer. 
Random House,
1994 
141p
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-90832-3 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-80832-9 
$18.00 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Almost anything can be a bedtime story, which is a good thing for this anthology,
more a compilation of mosdy familiar tales than it is a collection specifically cen-
tered on a go-to-bed theme or tone. The Three Billy Goats Gruff are here, so is
Goldilocks, and so is a retelling of Wilde's "The Selfish Giant," expurgated so that
the giant does not die in the end. Although some of the old favorites have been
newly retold for this collection, there's nothing here that's not better served else-
where, and while Jane Dyer's watercolors are pretty and peaceful, this volume
can't replace the many excellent picture-book versions of the same tales, such as
Beatrix Potter's self-illustrated The Tale of Peter Rabbit. There are twenty-one
stories in all, most from the public domain; more recent selections include stories
by Marjorie Sharmat, Joan Aiken and Joanne Ryder. RS
ROBBINS, KEN 
Water; written and illus. by Ken Robbins. 
Holt, 1994 
48p
ISBN 0-8050-2257-0 
$16.95 
Ad Gr. 4-6
In an elegant change from more "efficiently" written and illustrated science books,
Robbins uses a casual, sometimes poetic, tone in his writing along with his hazily
hand-tinted photographs to pay tribute to one of the four classic elements, with
similar treatments of the other three (earth, fire, and air) planned to follow. The
book is beautiful to look at, giving a nostalgic wash to waterfalls, seascapes, and
even ice cubes, but the text is often bumpy, both in the shifts between subtopics
and within the sentences themselves, which too often employ gracelessly ordered
comma-clauses or use it without a clear antecedent: "In certain places, water
144 
* THE BULLETIN
surfaces in a most unusual, spectacular way. Deep in the earth, it's hot enough to
melt a rock." While the writing could flow better, the pictures are a cool drink in
an often arid genre. RS
SCHERTLE, ALICE 
How Now, Brown Cow?; illus. byAmanda Schaffer. 
Browndeer/
Harcourt, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-15-276648-0 
$14.95 
R* 
Gr. 1-4
Given the common maxim that good poems create their own visual images, it's
unusual to have a picture-book collection in which the art and verse play off each
other with such natural dexterity as these. Schaffer's oil paintings, which could
win a place on gallery walls because of their strong brushstroke textures and com-
positional wit, play up to the poems instead of overwhelming them. For instance,
in "The Cow's Complaint" ("How unkind to keep me here/ When, over there, the
grass is greener"), a full-page spread is devoted to bright green forage in the fore-
ground, topped by two brown boards sandwiching the pink nose, desperate tongue,
rolling eyes, and flattened ears of a cow trying to get at what she can't have. It's a
portrait revealing most of us in bovine guise. The poetry itself ranges-without
milking the subject dry-from whimsical ("Taradiddle," in which "They never
found the dish and the spoon") to lyrical ("Cows Coming Home"), philosophical
("A Cow Looks Down the Highway"), and funny ("Drivin' the Cows"), but it's all
proof positive, in case you ever doubted, that there's always room for moo ... er,
more unexpected specialty items in children's literature. BH
SCHNUR, STEVEN 
The Shadow Children; illus. by Herbert Tauss. 
Morrow,
1994 
88p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-13831-4 
$13.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-13281-2 
$14.00 
R 
Gr. 5-8
In this novel set just after World War II, Etienne, eleven, has always spent his
summers with his grandparents in the French village of Mont Brulant, but this
summer is different: his grandmother has died, and the village seems bereft of
young people, save for a floating band of silent, hungry refugees. Etienne doesn't
understand why Grand-pere refuses to help the children, in fact refuses even to
acknowledge their existence, but as the summer progresses he learns the shameful
secret and ghostly legacy of the village, which had revealed its hidden Jews to the
Nazis during the war. Despite some portentous writing and some speechmaking
by Grand-pere ("there are no easy choices in wartime, only agonizing, heartbreak-
ing ones") the story conveys the unnerving atmosphere of the village and the de-
spair of its ghosts--or memories-that replay for Etienne the night the German
train came to take the children east. There are some technical glitches: one ghost,
a teacher, hands Etienne a book that we never hear about again; the same ghost, in
replying to Erienne's protest that the war is over, replies "Yes, for us it is," on one
page and "Not for us," a couple of pages later. But on the whole, the narrative is
steadily spun and the moral dilemma of the villagers well-worked into the drama
of the story. RS
SHERROW, VICTORIA 
The U.S. Health Care Crisis: The Fight OverAccess, Quality,
and Cost. Millbrook, 1994 
14 4p 
illus. with photographs 
(Issue & Debate)
ISBN 1-56294-364-2 
$15.90 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Sherrow in her first chapter makes a case that there is a health care crisis, then gives
DECEMBER 1994 
* 
145
a good outline of the history of hospitals and medical care in the United States and
the way their improvement has led to higher costs. The debates over access to
health care and whether or not it is a "right" are explored, and Sherrow details the
various attempts to contain costs through the use of HMOs and other medical
plans. The concluding chapter discusses the (recently defeated) Clinton health
care plan. The author explains the issues clearly, but fails to bring her information
to life well; a few health care anecdotes are sprinkled through the book, but they
are generally too brief and lack follow-through. Her research seems thorough,
with a source list and bibliography included, but since only secondary sources of
information such as books and articles were used, the book reads much like a term
paper. Photographs are murky, using anonymous descriptions such as "this doc-
tor"; editorial cartoons liven things up. A few charts or graphs would have helped
clarify the lists of numbers and percentages. Sherrow includes in an appendix a list
of items that a health care plan must address. SDL
SPEDDEN, DAISY CORNING STONE 
Polar, the Titanic Bear; illus. by Laurie McGaw
and with photographs. 
Madison/Little, 1994 
64p
ISBN 0-316-80625-0 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Based on her family's real-life adventures in the early twentieth century, Spedden's
story, narrated by a Steiff teddy bear called Polar, opens as the bear is being made
in the factory. Polar goes everywhere with his young master Douglas, from Ma-
deira, where the boy comes down with the measles and his nurse Muddie Boons
fights off the mice and rats, to Panama, Bermuda, Algiers, and other exotic ports.
Then they board the Titanic, and five days later Douglas is loaded onto a lifeboat
and rescued with the rest of his family and Polar, too. Though having the bear
narrate the tale seems a bit precious to modern readers, Spedden's writing is vigor-
ous and vivid. In the last few pages, Leighton H. Coleman III, Spedden's relative,
fills in some of the details of the privileged world the Speddens inhabited and of
the sinking of the Titanic. Photographs and postcards from Spedden's albums are
mixed together with watercolor paintings. The book's audience may be somewhat
limited by the combination of story and history, but Polar captures a way of life
very well, and Titanic buffs will enjoy this personal account of the disaster. SDL
ST. GEORGE, JUDITH 
Crazy Horse. Putnam, 1994 
180p
ISBN 0-399-22667-2 
$17.95 
R Gr. 5-9
Since most of what is known about the Oglala warrior Crazy Horse centers on his
feats in battle, St. George wisely focuses on his hero status among the Sioux, sup-
porting biographical material with a vivid picture of Native culture and combat
strategy. Although her sympathy clearly lies with the Sioux, she never idealizes her
subject into a poor, swindled Noble Savage. Crazy Horse and his warriors are
portrayed as individualistic, often arrogant, young men, plagued by rivalries, jeal-
ousies, and lack of group discipline, skilled in a style of warfare in which the brav-
ery of counting coup meant little against the superior firepower of the United
States Army. An honest historian, St. George looks squarely at the brutalities of
Plains Indian warfare-scalpings, mutilations, etc.-but always explains their spiri-
tual significance. Likewise, she judges Crazy Horse according to Sioux virtues of
bravery, fortitude, generosity, and wisdom, concluding that bravery and generos-
ity came easily to him, wisdom grew with age, but his lapse in fortitude (he eloped
with another warrior's wife) jeopardized peace within his tribe. While this volume
will not be first choice for report writers seeking quick dates, data, and pictures
146 
* 
THE BULLETIN
(although a lengthy bibliography and an index are included), it will satisfy more
serious readers ready to consider an interpretation of the great warrior's character
and motivation. EB
STEIG, WILLIAM 
Zeke Pippin; written and illus. by William Steig. 
di Capua/
HarperCollins, 1994 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-205077-X 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-205076-1 
$15.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Steig's newest hero, Zeke Pippin, a pig, is "moseying" along when a harmonica
falls off the garbage truck at his feet. Trying it out, he discovers he is a "natural
musician," but when he plays for his family, they fall asleep. Peeved by their
"insulting behavior," he sets off on a raft with his harmonica. He quickly realizes
that the harmonica puts people to sleep, but when he tries to return home, he is
attacked first by a trio of tough-talking dogs, then by a coyote. With the help of
the magical harmonica, he is able to escape each danger and is greeted ecstatically
at home, where he goes on to play his new, unmagical harmonica before "enrap-
tured audiences." Steig's vocabulary is typically rich and unconventional-the
coyote is "death-dealing," and later a "wretched carnivore." His artwork in pen
and ink and watercolor uses a brighter palette than do some previous works, rang-
ing from the cheery blues and greens of Zeke's happy time floating down the river,
to the darker grays and browns of his frightening adventures. Faithful Steig fans,
however, will recognize too many elements from his past works, with Sylvester and
the Magic Pebble, TheAmazing Bone, and Spinky Sulks all contributing parts of the
plot, and though Steig refers to Zeke's ingenuity, the plot does not develop thor-
oughly enough for any ingeniousness or real determination to be seen. Though
not as satisfying nor as original as other Steig works, Zeke's story is still easy on the
ear and a good choice for story hour. SDL
STEWART, ELISABETH J. 
On the Long Trail Home. Clarion, 1994 
106p
ISBN 0-395-68361-0 
$13.95 
M 
Gr. 3-6
This fictionalized account of Stewart's great-grandmother's escape along the trail
of the Cherokee removal in 1838 traces the flight of Meli and her brother Tahli
from an encampment in Kentucky back to their homeland in the mountains of
North Carolina. Although the siblings' hunger, weariness, injuries, and separa-
tions provide the grist for a good adventure story, readers gain little insight into
the infamous Trail of Tears from which the children escape. Dialogue reinforces
those stereotyped images of Indians and frontiersmen popularized at Saturday
matinees: Indians-"So many suns. Then you go. We take you partway. We are
friends to Cherokees. Not friends to white men"; Frontiersman-"Take keer of
the little gal." While the children's eventual reunion with their father may satisfy
readers who thrive on survival stories with happy endings, others will regard Meli's
headlong rush to North Carolina, the land from which her people are being sys-
tematically removed, more an exercise in foolhardiness than heroism. EB
TOLAN, STEPHANIE S. 
Who's There? Morrow, 1994 
235p
ISBN 0-688-04611-8 
$14.00 
R 
Gr. 5-7
After their parents were killed in a tragic accident, Drew and her brother Evan
stayed uncomfortably with friends until family was found to take them in. Now
they're living with their father's estranged father and long-lost sister, and they're
DECEMBER 1994 
* 
147
settling in to small-town life. Drew makes friends with Will, a local boy, and even
Evan, who has refused to speak since the death of his parents, seems happier. Soon,
though, Drew hears mysterious sounds and encounters objects inexplicably mov-
ing, and she realizes the house is haunted. When it seems clear the apparition is
that of her angelic step-grandmother, Amalie, she and her fellow ghost-hunter
Will are relieved, but the threatening actions of the ghost (she attacks Drew and
chases her out of the house) make it clear that Amalie was not the person she
pretended to be. The climax weaves together the intervention of a second ghost
(Evan's namesake, drowned by Amalie as a child), the uncovering of past secrets
(Amalie's spiteful, truth-telling journal is discovered), and Evan's joyous recovery
of his speech. This is a cheerfully unlikely but entertaining ghost story that hits all
the right spooky buttons, and while Amalie's motives aren't entirely clear, her evil
and dangerous spirit makes a good villain. Despite the menace, it's a more soft-
edged and secure tale than Pam Conrad's implacably and wonderfully horrific
Stonewords (BCCB 5/90), so readers just embarking on the unfriendly-ghost genre
may wish to start here. DS
WERLIN, NANCY 
Are You Alone on Purpose? Houghton, 1994 
204 p
ISBN 0-395-67350-X 
$13.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Thirteen-year-old Alison feels that her parents focus all their attention on her au-
tistic twin brother, Adam; Harry, devastated by the death of his mother, is a foul-
mouthed bully, dealing with his pain by tormenting everyone, especially his passive
father. Alison's family begins to attend services at the temple where Harry's father
is the rabbi, and Alison accompanies her brother to the rabbi's house when he
gives Adam private instruction for his bar mitzvah. When a diving accident leaves
Harry a paraplegic, he and Alison are thrown together at his father's house, and
they begin a friendship that eventually ripens into romance. The story is some-
what predictable and the psychology of the characters often obvious, but the emo-
tions run strong enough to keep the story involving. Alison's self-effacement in
light of her hot-tempered mother, abstracted father, and needy brother is credible,
and her eventual standing up for her rights is heartening (and more convincing
than Harry's rapprochement with his father). Overall, it's a bit contrived, but kids
will enjoy the drama and the enemies-become-sweethearts twist of the book. DS
WHIPPLE, LAURA, comp. 
Celebrating America: A Collection ofPoems and Images
ofthe American Spirit. Philomel, 1994 
79p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-399-22036-4 
$19.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-10
Like Panzer's Celebrate America, reviewed above, this is a collection of American
poetry illustrated by American art, here taken from the Art Institute of Chicago.
Like Panzer, Whipple takes her poetry from a variety of sources, making particu-
larly interesting use of Native American lyrics from Central as well as North
America, and of textiles as well as paintings and photographs. Unfortunately the
format, with slender borders framing each page and boxing in the decorated run-
ning head at the bottom, is rather stodgy, lacking the visual punch of Panzer's
collection. Despite the inclusion of much contemporary material, the selections of
art and poetry also have an old-fashioned feel to them that makes the book seem
rather distantly respectful rather than excited about its subject; nor do the poems,
overall, match the caliber of those in the other volume. This is safe rather than
stunning, but it's still an enjoyable series of juxtapositions of art and verse that
148 
* 
THE BULLETIN
offers a brief artistic examination of the American spirit. An index of first lines,
another of poets and artists, and notes on the artwork are included. DS
WILDER, LAURA INGALLS 
Dance at Grandpa 's Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023879-8;
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023878-X.
Winter Days in the Big Woodr, Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023022-3; Trade ed. ISBN
0-02-023022-3.
Each book: illus. by Renee Graef. HarperCollins, 1994 
32p 
Library ed.
$11.89; Trade ed. $12.00 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
Plot is not the strongest aspect of Laura Ingalls Wilder's Little House in the Big
Woods, but these two picture book adaptations dispense with narrative entirely,
focusing instead on the cozy ambiance that makes Laura's Little House so inviting.
Winter Daysis drawn from the second chapter, Dance at Grandpa's from the eighth;
what's missing along with the story are the more startling particulars (such as the
time Laura woke to see a dead deer hanging outside her window) that give the
series its honesty and intimacy. What's left are more generic and idealized images
of pioneer living, all more or less quoted verbatim from the original, but devoid of
context. While Winter Days, especially, seems almost like an activity book in its
catalog of homey projects, both books are gently written (even the typeface is cozy)
and the full-color illustrations, "inspired by the work of Garth Williams with his
permission," are soft and soothing with their woodsy-warm interiors and Christ-
mas-card snow scenes. These adaptations never get too scary for bedtime and
might well serve as taste-whetting introductions to the real saga. RS
WILSON, ELIZABETH B. 
Bibles and Bestiaries: A Guide to Illuminated
Manuscripts. Pierpont Morgan Library/Farrar, 1994 
64p 
illus. with photo-
graphs
ISBN 0-374-30685-0 
$25.00 
R Gr. 5-9
While one might balk at such a hefty price tag for a somewhat arcane topic, this
handsome work is engaging enough to generate young readers' interest in early
bookmaking and justify the cost. Wilson limits her subject to Western European
codices from the fifth century through the Renaissance, reflecting the scope of the
Pierpont Morgan Library collection from which the lush illustrations for this vol-
ume have been carefully selected; Byzantine Christian, Jewish, and Islamic manu-
scripts from the same period are, however, also briefly highlighted. A discussion of
the relationship between medieval books and the spread of Christianity introduces
the material of prime interest to a young audience-the craft of the parchment
makers, scribes, illuminators, and binders, and the details in their handiwork which
reveal their artistry, errors, and even attitudes toward their work. A chapter on
"best sellers" (herbals, apocalypses, etc.) may be particularly valuable to teachers
and students seeking supplemental material on the Middle Ages. A glossary, illus-
tration credits, bibliography, and a brief list of public collections of illuminated
manuscripts are included; Wilson's text, however, lacks citations and sources. EB
WINTER, JEANETTE 
The Christmas Tree Ship; written and illus. by Jeanette
Winter. 
Philomel, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-399-22693-1 
$14.95 
R* 5-8 yrs
See this month's Big Picture, p. 117, for review.
DECEMBER 1994 
* 
149
WOOD, JAKKI 
One Tortoise, Ten Wallabies: A Wildlife Counting Book; written
and illus. by Jakki Wood. 
Bradbury, 1994 
26p
ISBN 0-02-793393-8 
$14.95 
R 
3-6 yrs
From one tortoise to 101 elephants, animals parade across this counting book.
Five "rollicking, rascally raccoons" are followed by six "swinging, clinging, mis-
chievous monkeys"; also seen are animals such as toucans, leopards, seals, and
wallabies. Wood's watercolor-and-ink illustrations joyfully portray each animal
with plenty of amusing details as the animals frolic along. The colors are pleas-
ingly intense, although mixing purples and blues in with the more normal animal
tones of browns and grays may confuse younger children. Another puzzling aspect
for observant viewers is that animals such as bears have their rather scary claws
intact but have no teeth. Her adjectives, such as "flip-flappy, slip-slappy," match
well with the critters and make for lively reading aloud, and her pictures make for
a good counting challenge, as some of the animals are babies, or are camouflaged
against each other. The book ends with a surprise, showing all 101 elephants on
the front and back of two connected fold-out pages. Unfortunately, the final page
with the word "elephant" on it is also the book's endpaper, which may prove a
problem for libraries. SDL
YEP, LAURENCE, ad. 
The Junior Thunder Lord; illus. by Robert Van
Nutt. 
BridgeWater, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-8167-3454-2 
$15.95 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
"Those at the top should help those at the bottom." The axiom's first occurrence
sets the theme; its second appearance could be considered reinforcement; but by
the third iteration it is clear this tale of a generous merchant's encounter with a
huge brute has a Big Message. When he was a young and not-so-bright student,
Yue had been tutored by a clever classmate; now Yue's conscience urges him to
befriend the uncouth Bear Face, whom he meets at an inn during a period of
drought. The grateful lout follows Yue around, saves him from drowning at sea,
and then lifts him into the sky to squeeze rain from the clouds. Bear Face is
actually a minor thunder dragon, exiled by his dragon brothers for bad behavior;
now he promises Yue's village will always have enough rainfall because "when I
was at my lowest, you lifted me up." Yep's tale, taken from a seventeenth-century
Chinese collection, tends to ramble; comically intended idioms such as "What a
botch-up!" and "I go away for a little while and you let things slide" break the
fairy-tale tone. Van Nutt's paintings neatly capture Yue's good-natured inno-
cence and Bear Face's appalling manners, but despite an abundance of detail, they
lack texture and depth. Many children may empathize with Yue's early school
problems and chuckle at Bear Face's breach of etiquette; they certainly will get the
moral. EB
150 
* THE BULLETIN
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
Thwaite, Ann. The Brilliant Career ofWinnie-the-Pooh: The Definitive History of
the Best Bear in All the World. Dutton, 1994. illus. with photographs. 192p.
ISBN 0-525-45248-6. $25.00.
The title here is a bit misleading; this book really is a roughly chronological collec-
tion of Milneiana and Poohiana, tied together with Thwaite's affectionate and
personal text. Pictures of the original stuffed animals, copies of newspaper articles,
reproductions of Milne's letters (and those take some deciphering!), and facsimiles
of early drafts of Milne's work give a good idea of the impact of the original books
and their film, literary, and merchandising spin-offs over the decades. Adult Milne
fans and scholars will welcome the realia and new details, which nicely comple-
ment Thwaite's biography of the writer. DS
Helbig, Alethea K.. This Land Is Our Land: A Guide to Multicultural Literature for
Children and YoungAdults; by Alethea K. Helbig and Agnes Regan Perkins. Green-
wood, 1994. 401p. ISBN 0-313-28742-2. $49.95.
In the preface, the authors state their concern with "the issue of quality in multi-
ethnic books of imaginative literature," and they clearly explain the purpose and
methodology of this guide to those books published from 1985-1993. Sections
are divided by ethnic group (African American, Asian American, Hispanic Ameri-
can and Native-American Indian are the four groups represented here) and then,
within each group, into Books of Fiction, Books of Oral Tradition, and Books of
Poetry. Annotations (alphabetic by author within each category) are opinionated
but measured and thoughtful, usefully weighing good and bad points of every
book included in a refreshing contrast to gushier and less practical bibliographies.
Each of the 570 annotations includes publication information and recommended
age level; indices of titles, writers, grade level, and subjects are included. DS
Herb, Steven. Using Children s Books in Preschool Settings: A How- To-Do-It Manuak
written by Steven Herb and Sara Willoughby-Herb. Neal-Schuman, 1994. 181p.
Paper ed. ISBN 1-55570-156-6. $32.50.
The authors of this manual take a usefully broad approach to the subject: sections
are included on child and language development, literary types, setting up a
storybook corner, bringing literature into children's homes, and various other rel-
evant topics, so that the treatment is a nice mixture of the theoretical and the
pragmatic. While there are occasional book suggestions, bibliographized at the
end of each chapter, the tips on activities and strategies are the book's real strength.
Herb and Willoughby-Herb are enthusiastic but realistic, addressing such prob-
lems as restless listeners, disliked books, and language barriers, while offering imagi-
native play suggestions that will be of use to old pros as well as to neophytes. Six
brief appendices are included, on topics including new childrens' books, maga-
zines for children, books about children's literature, and organizations that serve
the needs of children; there is an index. DS
DECEMBER 1994 
* 
151
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
ADVENTURE STORIES:
Disher; Myers
African Americans-biographies:
Lyons
African Americans-fiction:
Coleman; Porte
African Americans-stories: Barber
AIDS-fiction: Porte
ALPHABET BOOKS: McKenzie
Archaeology: Arnold, C.
Architecture: Arnold, C.
Art: Falwell; Lyons; Panzer;
Whipple; Wilson
Babies: Lafferty
BEDTIME STORIES:
Duquennoy; McGuire; Random
House; Wilder
BIOGRAPHIES: Berry; Lessem;
Lyons; Penner; St. George
Books and reading: Falwell;
Wilson
Brothers and sisters-fiction:
DeClements; Myers
Brothers-fiction: Fromm; Havill
Caribbean Islands-poetry: Agard
Castles: Platt
Catholics-fiction: Fromm
Cats-fiction: Lisle
Cats-stories: Hall
Child abuse-fiction: Deem
China-folklore: Yep
Christmas-fiction: Cooper, I.
Christmas-stories: Winter
Colonial life-fiction: Lasky
CONCEPT BOOKS: McMillan
COUNTING BOOKS: Wood
Cows-poetry: Schertle
Cults-fiction: Disher
Current events: Sherrow
Death-fiction: Avi; Deem; Porte;
Winter
Dinosaurs: Lessem
Disabilities-fiction: Fromm;
Levin; Werlin
Disasters-fiction: Kerr; Spedden
Disasters-stories: Polacco
Dogs-fiction: DeClements; Levin
Dogs-stories: Burningham; Hall;
Harper
Dyslexia-fiction: Deem
Ethics and values: Haseley
FANTASY: Jansson; Jordan; King-
Smith; Mayne
Farm life-fiction: Kerr
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Goodman
FOLKTALES AND
FAIRYTALES: Arnold, K.;
Brooke; Hayes; Kimmel; Yep
Food and eating-stories: Brink;
Duquennoy
Friends-fiction: Cooper, I.;
Haseley
FUNNY STORIES: King-Smith;
Mahy; McNaughton
Geology: Cone
Grand Canyon: Cone
Grandmothers-fiction: Miller
Grandmothers: Giovanni
Growing up-fiction: Miller
Halloween-stories: Duquennoy
Health care: Sherrow
HISTORICAL FICTION: Avi;
Berleth; Brown; Hildick; Lasky;
Stewart; Wilder
History, ancient: Arnold, C.
152 
* THE BULLETIN
History, Middle Ages: Platt;
Wilson
History, U.S.: Avi; Berleth;
Brown; Hildick; Karl; Lasky;
Penner; Spedden; St. George;
Stewart; Wilder
Holocaust, the-fiction: Friedman;
Schnur
Homosexuality-fiction: Kerr
Horses-fiction: Adler
Hospitals: Lafferty
Israel: Mozeson
Italy-fiction: Goodman
Jews-fiction: Friedman; Schnur;
Werlin
Jews-stories: Polacco
Language arts: Falwell
Latinos-folklore: Hayes
Literature, American: Berry;
Panzer; Whipple
LOVE STORIES: Jordan; Werlin
Mexico: Arnold, C.
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Lasky; Porte
Mothers and daughters-stories:
Barber; Winter
Mountain climbing-fiction: Myers
Music-stories: Martin
MYSTERY STORIES: Lisle
Native Americans-biographies:
Penner; St. George
Native Americans-fiction: Stewart
Nature study: Robbins
Photography: Robbins
Pigs-stories: Steig
Pioneer life-stories: Wilder
Pirates-fiction: McNaughton
POETRY: Agard; Berry; Panzer;
Schertle; Whipple
Puppets-fiction: Brown
Reading aloud: Agard; Brooks;
Hall; King-Smith; Mahy;
Random House
Reading, easy: Fromm; Larson;
Penner
Reading, family: Barber; Lafferty
Reading, reluctant: DeClements;
Disher; Lessem; Mahy; Matas;
McNaughton; Miller; Myers;
Platt; Tolan
Russia-folklore: Arnold, K.
SCARY STORIES: Tolan
SCIENCE FICTION: Mahy
Scotland-fiction: Dunlop
SHORT STORIES: Brooks
South Africa: Angelou
Story hour: Barber; Brink;
Burningham; Duquennoy; Hall;
Harper; Kimmel; Martin;
McKenzie; McMillan; Schertle;
Steig; Wood
Toys-fiction: Spedden
Treasure-hunting-fiction: Dunlop
Voyages and travels-fiction:
Berleth
Water: Robbins
West, the-fiction: Avi
Witchcraft-fiction: Hildick;
Lasky; Matas
Wolves-fiction: Jordan
Work-stories: Barber; Winter
World War II-fiction: Friedman;
Schnur
The review of the Annual 94, in the November Professional Connections section,
incorrectly listed the publisher as Picture Book Studio. The Annual is published
by North-South Books.
iiii
00 
EROO~
' 
Starred by ALA Booklist, School Library Journal
and Publishers Weekly
07/w
DAYDREAMIER
SAN 
I 
M 
c 
E 
W 
A 
N
f4traledb,6 
ANTHONY 
BROWNE
"Peter Fortune is a dreamer... [and here are seven of] his fabulous
daydreams. Each is a separate adventure, [among them] taming
a bully and catching a burglar, and young readers should have
no trouble empathizing with his escapades. A delightful blend of
serious whimsy and hilarious gravity."-School Library Journal
"How would it feel to swap bodies with a cat, with a baby, with a
grown-up? To be those creatures and still have your ten-year-old
consciousness? British author McEwan writes a simple, visual
prose-comic, deadpan, and lyrical-that captures the
physicalness of [this] wild fantasy."-Booklist
7. 
Publishers Weekly stars
The
CHRISTMAS
TTOUSE
by Ann Turner
Full-color pictures by Nancy Edwards Calder
"In a series of tender, free-verse poems, a house and its inhabitants
express their thoughts about the holiday. The house itself talks
about the curious children on Christmas morning.... The cat
laments the loud bustle of visitors, while parents, grandparents,
and other family members all focus on what Christmas means.
... Calder's sure-handed paintings fittingly depict an impressive
range of perspectives, in keeping with the varied narrators."
-Publishers Weekly
"A holiday book that gets inside the Christmas spirit."
-ALA 
Booklist
Ages 5-8. $15.00TR (0-06-023429-6); $14.89LB (0-06-023432-6)
l HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York 10022
Eleanor
Cameron
returns
with a
"passionate&l>
1
"probing,"2
'cehallengi9ng(
of this vision was planted in her now classic The
Green and Burning Tree. It flowers in this new
collection."-School Library Journal" )
"A good addition to collections of critical materials.
AXl...Cameron's critiques bring a broad range of
reading and a rigorous intellect to bear on
children's books." -Booklist>2 )
"jleanor Cameron's passion, lucidity, and perspi-
E 
cacity direct engaging inquiries into the seeds of
fiction which blossom into teeming artistic vistas....
What shines forth most clearly are not her critical
evaluations, but her informed appreciations."
-The Horn Book(3 )
Bibliography. Notes. Index. 362 pages. 0-525-44949-3. $24.99
DUTTON
A Division of Penguin USA
"~Exquisire~~
Dream Meadow
BY HELEN V: GRIFFITH
PICTURES BY NANCY BARNET
"A simple depiction of a woman and her dog going gently into that
good night.... Soft color pencils on rough-grained paper give
Bamet's first picture-book
illustrations an appealingly
dreamy, diffuse texture....
Children upset by an
approaching death will find
the tender reassurance here
consoling." --Kirkus Reviews
"Bamnet's lush art exhibits
exquisite finesse.... Griffith
promotes young readers'
understanding of aging and
the natural cycle of life
and death:' -*ALA Booklist
Ages 5 up. 24 pp.
TR$14.00 0-688-122930O
LE $13 93/U c6t8 12294 9
Greenwillow Books
A division of William Morrow & co., Inc.
1350 Avenue of the Amenicas, New York, NY 10019
Compelling Stories about Endangered Animals
Condor's Egg
written by Jonathan London
illustrated by ames Chaffee
ISBN: 0-8118-0260-4
AGES 4-10 + HARDCOVER $13.95
"The text... poetically evokes the
lives of the condors in the wild...
The contrast between the blue
skies with billowing clouds and
rocky cliffs, and the cozy, golden light of the cave is especially effective."
-
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
THE EYES OF
GRAY WOLF
written by Jonathan London
illustrated by Jon Van Zyle
ISBN: 0-81I8-0285-X
AGES 3-8 + HARDCOVER $13.95
"... a potent vision of a winter
interlude as seen through the
eyes of a Gray Wolf."
-
* Booklist, starred review
"Words pour out... evoking genuine feeling without humanizing
animals, and portraying nature without being teacherly."- 
Publisher's Weekly
"The illustrations... portray the vastness and the beauty of the wolf's domain."
-
American Bookseller, Pick of the Lists
IFOR A COPY OF OUR COMPLETE CATALOG OR TO ORDER DIRECTLY, CALL 1-800-722-6657.1
CHRONICLE 
BOOKS
'- Booklist stars "a fine romance... a landmark novel.
M. E.KERR
Told by her brother Parr, this
is the story of 18-year-old Evie,
her Missouri farm family, and
the turmoil created by Evie's
love for the local banker's
beautiful daughter. "Teens will
be swept up in the emotion
and immediacy of Parr's
fast-paced narrative, his voice
perfectly pitched between wit
and melancholy. It's a story
that challenges the stereotypes,
not only about love, but also
about farmers and families
and religion and responsibility
-about 
all our definitions
of 'normal.'"
-Starred, 
focus review, Booklist
"Unquestionably, this is the
best Kerr in years, if not ever."
-Voice of Youth Advocates
Ages 12 up.
$15.00 TR (0-06-024475-5)
$14.89 LB (0-06-024476-3)
Among the books cited for M. E. Kerr's
ALA 1993 Margaret A. Edwards Award
for her lifetime achievement in writing for young adults
ME ME ME ME ME: Not a Novel
$16.89 LB (0-06-023193-9); $4.95 PB (0-06-446163-7)
A Charlotte Zolotow Book
i
$· *
BI
B
a
O0
She posts notes of things to do.
Poems and drawings by Douglas Florian
Meet Mr. Cook, who's in love with books, and Mr. Giles, who
has seven smiles. Come along and join the fun
-this 
book has a poem for everyone.
Find these and other quirky friends in Douglas Florian's
collection of imaginative poems and hilarious drawings.
Ages 6 and up * 0-15-233770-9 * $15.95
More poetry books by Douglas Florian:
Beast Feast 
Monster Motel 
Vegetable Garden
9
G
IIA RCOURT
--- 
BRACF
i
n jf
When his efforts to convince his parents that the guests should
not participate in his people's harvest feast are rebuked Moss runs
sway into the nearby forest.... Dorris's writing is elegant, full of
vocative images and lush metapho." -School Lbrry Journal
GUESTS
By Michael Donis
Ages8-12 * Tr.:0-786-0047-X $13.95 * Lib.: 0-7868-2036-5 $13.89
Illustratiorn fnrm tp: Guets o 
1994 by Ellen Thompon; Lights on the River 
H 
BK 
POR 
HLDRN
S1994 by Michael Doolin; The Shad 
of a Flying Bird 
1994 by Mordtlica l 
Y 
CtL
Gcrston; Day of the Dead 
1994 by Christopher G. Knight. 
114 Fifth Avenue. New York NY 10011
*"The memory of Christmas in her grandmother's village in
Mexico sustains a child through harsh times as she travels across
the U.S. with her family of migrant workers. ... Expresses quiet
realism about physical hadship and distress " - Bod, Stared
LIGHTS ON THE RIVER
By Jane Resh Thomas * Illustrated by Michael Dooling
Ages4-8 * Tr.:0-7868-04-6 $15.95 * Lib.:0-7868-2003-9 $15.89
II 
I I
"This tale of Moses's surpassingly reluctant and argumenta-
tive passage into heaven is from a midrash .... Glorious
paintings. .. .Lyrical, 
comic, cosmic, and deeply
touching."-Kirks Reviews
THE SHADOW OF A FLYING BIRD
A Legend from the Kurdistani Jews
Adapted and illustrated by Mordicai Gerstein
Ages 6 andup Tr.:0-78680016-X $15.95 * Lib.:0-78682012-8 $15.89
"Eloquently details the history and customs associated with this
traditional Mexican celebration ... A good resource for reports
as well as an interesting and appealing selection for pleasure
reading."-sdaio 
ryl ua
DAYS OF THE DEAD
By Kathryn Lasky 
Photos by Christpher G. Knight
Ages-12 * Tr.:0-7868-0022-4 $15.95 
Lib.: 0-7868-2018-7 $15.89
-. 
4
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.S.A.
RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED
* 
i * t
SECOND CLASS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
Do Pirates Take Baths?
by Kathy Tucker
Illustrated by Nadine Bernard Westcott
"Through Tucker's thirteen brief,
bouncy verses, buccaneer wanna-bes
can explore their career choice from
job interview..., through workplace
conditions..., to remuneration.. A
good scratch for any story hour crowd
itching for some silliness."
Recommend, The Bulletin
ISBN 0-8075-1696-1, Ages 3-7, $14.95
Albert Whitman & Company, 6340 Oakton St. Morton Grove, IL 60053
4r 
4
r
