ILLINOI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
I I
o Ca•0ag and \Madelne (M 
Mad) Mainn-their fanmi• hae ben
euding for 
neations. When Bo is orhaned, e suddenly find himsef n a nst
of inkas out on td 
(Calmrnia dsert Are these 
as alB-fired mean as
they re 
to be? 
an two greed ouylaws and a ming traure map actually
brng eryone o her? Sid Heshmns rollidnag tale sho 
tht even Gages
and Marlnlas may be able to help ach other 
ater thrdr 
ms
W~~~~JOs~ S 
ikl' 
lb," 
-2i 
83i- 
9 l~~t 
OdI5
ru o 
•o•r pictures O) 
y Mylin 
La 
ner
Ag« 7 up. $15.95 Tr (0-6«8 -t1694-l); $15 9 Lb( 
6>8 16949 '4
Greenwillow Books An iin 
(Hirped lisM 
s
SAnea"Iti 
AAn 
N, 1dio, 
oarM0Os9 
h
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
May 2001
Vol. 54 No. 9
A LOOK INSIDE
329 THE BIG PICTURE
True Believer by Virginia Euwer Wolff
330 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
336 
* My Family Shall Be Free!: The Life of Peter Still by Dennis Brindell
Fradin
343 
* Emma's Yucky Brother by Jean Little; illus. by Jennifer Plecas
348 
* Lirael by Garth Nix
353 
* James Towne: Struggle for Survival written and illus. by Marcia Sewall
355 
* The Three Pigs ad. and illus. by David Wiesner
359 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
360 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL
61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Janice M. Del Negro, EditJr- JMB)
Deborah Stevenson, AssieetEditor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elaine A. Bearden, Reviewer (EAB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Fern Kory, Reviewer (FK)
Kate McDowell, Reviewer (KM)
CENTER STAFF
Jennifer DeBaillie
Jeannette Hulick
Melanie Kimball
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $60.00; individuals, $50.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $5.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from Bell & Howell, 300 North Zeeb
Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson Associates,
P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to the
University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Centerfor Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
All inquiries about subscriptions and advertising should go to University of Illinois Press, 1325 S.
Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903, 217-333-0950.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin
ofthe Centerfor Children's Books, 51 E. Armory Ave., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. E-mail:
bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2001 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Russell Gordon from True Believer ©2001. Used by permission of Atheneum
Books for Young Readers.
MAY 2001 
* 329
THE BIG PICTURE
True Believer
by Virginia Euwer Wolff
LaVaughn (narrator ofMake Lemonade, BCCB 7/93) is a committed young woman,
determined to break the tradition of her neighborhood and make it to college. She
moves up to a fast-track science class, leaving old friends Myrtle and Annie be-
hind, and commits to strict after-school sessions of Grammar Build-Up, taught by
the inspiring Dr. Rose and using grammar as a focus for life lessons about stan-
dards and determination. Having babysat for young single mother of two Jolly,
LaVaughn knows that fifteen is old enough to be diverted from one's life plans by
a boy, but she doesn't understand how anyone could be so foolish as to let that
happen. And then she finds Jody.
A childhood friend returned to the neighborhood, Jody shares LaVaughn's
determination to leave this hard life behind and get to college; he is also so "gor-
geous/ I can't look at you and talk to you at the same time." LaVaughn is head-
over-heels in love, aching for reciprocity; Jody clearly enjoys LaVaughn's company,
assenting to be her date for a school dance, but he's not stepping into the boy-
friend role. When she slips into his apartment to deliver surprise cookies, the
surprise is on her: "and I recognized Jody but not the other one,/ I only noticed it
was a boy./ I stood ice-still and I saw their mouths go together and stay." Devas-
tated at this mammoth blow to her dreams, LaVaughn shuts down in grief ("Ev-
erything is tragic./ Why didn't anybody ever tell me that before?") and endangers
the rest of her future hopes in consequence.
The disappointment-in-romance plot will resonate with many readers,
but that's not what the book is really about. While many YA books, explicitly or
implicitly, treat the topic of growth and maturation, few capture it as vividly as
this title. LaVaughn's world is riddled with change and newness: in addition to
her interest in Jody, her path is diverging from that of Myrtle and Annie, who are
finding meaning in a restrictive Christian group while LaVaughn finds it in aca-
demic ambition, and her long-widowed mother is dating again. LaVaughn is dis-
covering her capabilities, her strengths, her pride, and she's also discovering their
price (her old friends term her "uppity") and their down side (she's thoughtlessly
condescending to the unglamorous but nice and devoted boy who's her lab part-
ner). She also discovers genuine despair for the first time in her life, and she begins
to realize how much strength living beyond such despair can take-and that she
has such strength.
The free-verse text gets much accomplished in few words, making the
pages airy and inviting to readers who might be daunted by the page count. The
verse blends into the story, seeming natural and unforced, and LaVaughn's narra-
tion is eloquent but unmannered. The effect of the verse format is musing, a
stream of struggling but insightful consciousness, and through it all shines Wolff s
330 
* THE BULLETIN
tenderness towards her characters and the world. LaVaughn is believable but he-
roic, with a wonder about life large and small that makes her thirst for knowledge
and revel in its expansion; her mother is a familial hero of relentless discipline,
stern integrity (her boyfriend becomes persona non grata when he suggests bor-
rowing from LaVaughn's college fund for his unpaid phone bills), and an ample
supply of love. LaVaughn's partners in Grammar Build-Up self-advancement are
an appealing crew, and Patrick, her lab partner, is touching and sympathetic.
The book is firmly grounded in contemporary reality, and many teens
will recognize LaVaughn's turmoil ("Dear God, will I ever understand anything?").
For LaVaughn, however, contemporary reality is the source of revelation. Not
only is there a world of possibilities, good and bad, there is a world of choices she
can make to have power over her own life. "We must make momentous deci-
sions," says Dr. Rose, and LaVaughn realizes that her decisions are momentous:
she chooses to accept the risk of hoping, to embrace those she loves as they are, and
to believe in her future. At her sixteenth birthday, she says, "I think I can live with
the way life is." Maybe she'll convince her readers that they can, too. (Imprint
information appears on p. 357.)
Deborah Stevenson, Associate Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ARMSTRONG, JENNIFER 
Thomas Jefferson: Letters from a Philadelphia
Bookworm. 
Winslow, 2001 
117p 
illus. with photographs 
(Dear Mr. Presi-
dent)
ISBN 1-890817-30-9 
$8.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Here debuts yet another historical-fiction series based on the dubious, but now
ubiquitous, premise that children of olden times had an insatiable urge to write.
Amelia Hornsby, fictional adolescent ward of Dr. Benjamin Rush, meets Meriwether
Lewis at Rush's home and immediately doubts the veracity of his claim to be
President Jefferson's personal secretary. She goes straight to the best source for
confirmation, writing to Jefferson himself, and thus ensues an exchange of letters
in which Amelia reports on the events in Philadelphia and Jefferson offers updates
on the Corps of Discovery's exploration of the Louisiana Territory and other con-
cerns dear to his heart. The series' pedagogical intent fairly oozes from every page,
and it is clumsily underscored by the steady appearance of footers referring readers
to the Winslow Press website (without specifics indicating where on the site) for
still more information. (Woe to the unconnected, or to readers who prefer to
peruse novels in an armchair rather than at a computer terminal!) Although the
letters' content amounts to little more than textbook data reworked into a chattier
format, Amelia has an appealing voice-comically prissy and a trifle arrogant-
and she spices her end of the correspondence with allusions to frequent mishaps
that the reader will recognize are generally of her own making. This and the
MAY 2001 
* 331
gallery of pictures interspersed throughout may be enough to make the lesson go
down easy. EB
ASHMAN, 
LINDA 
Castles, Caves, and Honeycombs; illus. by Lauren
Stringer. 
Harcourt, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-15-202211-2 
$16.00 
R 2-5 yrs
Ashman asserts that "many places make a home" in this rhyming tour of various
dwellings. Most of the abodes ("a silky web" for the spider, "a sandy dune" for the
crab, etc.) are the homes of animals, presented in a series of unforced couplets
describing the range of possible shelters. Each couplet ("A hollow space inside a
tree.// A tidal pool beside the sea") is accompanied by an acrylic painting of the
"home" and the animals that live therein. Full-page illustrations and the occa-
sional double-page spread feature softly rounded compositions with strong curves
and circular images. The paintings are a bit bland and repetitive, but their realistic
style and cozily reassuring sense of animal and human community combine with
the low-key, descriptive text to make this a simple science lesson that will be appre-
ciated for its brevity and clean, easy-to-see illustrations. JMD
Avi 
Don't You Know There's a War On? HarperCollins, 2001 
[208p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029214-8 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-380-97863-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
At the ripe old age of sixteen, narrator Howie Crispers looks back to 1943 when he
was a naive Brooklyn youth of ten and in love (or at least deeply in like) with his
teacher, Miss Gossim. Howie accidentally overhears the school principal insist
that Miss Gossim be fired, and inspired by wartime talk of spies and heroes, he
embarks on his own campaign of espionage to discover the secret that's landed her
in hot water (she's pregnant and secretly married) and to rescue her career. Howie's
quest proceeds so smoothly that it generates but little tension. Moreover, in
casting Howie as a sixteen-year-old (circa 1949), Avi introduces the nagging prob-
lem of why the narrator needs to apprise his hypothetical audience of wartime
details they should already know. Still, homefront activities are intriguing, Howie's
a character with considerable warmth and heart, and Miss Gossim's every fifth
grader's dream teacher-humorous, patient, compassionate, and fair (not to men-
tion beautiful and blonde). Pair this with Bunting's Spying on Miss Miller (BCCB
3/95) for different takes on homefront espionage. EB
Avi Prairie School; illus. by Bill Farnsworth. 
HarperCollins, 2001 
48p 
(I
Can Read Chapter Books)
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027665-7 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027664-9 $14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 1-3
Farm work and the great outdoors suit Noah just fine, and he cannot accept that
there could be any advantage to book learning for a boy growing up on the 1880
Colorado frontier. His parents think otherwise, and Aunt Dora arrives from the
East with books, chalkboard, and determination to teach Noah to read. At first
Noah manages to find plenty of excuses ("I forgot to feed the chickens!"; "Got to
get that snake!") to ditch his lessons, but his wheelchair-using aunt out-strategizes
him. She follows him around outside, asking him questions about the earth and
sky around them, and then reads excerpts from the maligned books that capture
332 
* 
THE BULLETIN
his attention, expand his knowledge, and give him the boost he needs to start
reading on his own. There's a shovelful of wishful thinking and a whopping read-
ing-is-good-for-you message that weight the tale, but Noah's preference for learn-
ing on the lam readily bridges the dozen-decade gap between prairie boy and reader.
Farnsworth supplies plenty of gauzy full-page scenes of a close-knit family (prone
to striking picture perfect poses) to keep newly independent readers paging on
through. EB
BOYNTON, SANDRA 
Yay, You! Moving Out, Moving Up, Moving On; written and
illus. by Sandra Boynton. 
Simon, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-689-84283-X 
$14.95 
M 
Gr. 7-12
Boynton opens with a congratulatory exhortation that ends on a questioning note-
"You did it!/ You're done!/ You made it!/ You're through!// OH, WHAT A GREAT
MOMENT!// Now what will you do?"-followed by a series of potential life choices.
Numerous possibilities (from where to live to discovering the meaning of life) are
offered in jingly rhyme accompanied by Boynton's popular comic cartoon animals.
While the author's other picture-book titles, especially Dinosaur's Binkit (BCCB
12/98), have veered away from Hallmark-y verse and concentrated a bit more on
intended audience and plot, this title is clearly aimed at the crowd that gives Seuss'
Oh, the Places You'll Go!(BCCB 3/90) to adults as a rite-of-passage present. This
is a thirty-two-page extended greeting card, with limited child-appeal and very
little practical use in a children's library collection. JMD
BROWNE, ANTHONY 
My Dad; written and illus. by Anthony Browne. 
Farrar,
2001 
26p
ISBN 0-374-35101-5 
$16.00 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
"He's all right, my dad," is the understated running refrain of this paean to an
ordinary, heroic father. The kid's-eye-view narration lists Dad's stellar gifts and
talents ("He can wrestle with giants, or win the fathers' race on field day, easily")
with loving bias, ending with an inarguable assertion of love on both sides. The
main impact here comes from the illustrations, which feature a rumpled everyday
Dad in striped jammies, slippers, and plaid bathrobe. His performance of extraor-
dinary feats is therefore sweetly comic (the idea continues in other domestic touches,
such as Dad's tightrope being a clothesline), and when the art takes similes literally
(Dad can "eat like a horse," "swim like a fish," and so on), picturing Dad as the
relevant critter, his costume identifies him. The parental portrait is appealing, but
many youngsters will be waiting through the catalogue for a plot that never comes;
the revision of one page in the American edition results in a gratuitous and out-of-
place negative (and a stereotypical one to boot) that's a disservice to the heroic
vision. This nonetheless has a solid, unsentimental approach to its affectionate
overview that will resonate with kids when more flowery paternal offerings fall by
the wayside. DS
CHAMBERS, VERONICA 
Quinceaniera Means Sweet 15. 
Hyperion, 2001 
[192p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2426-3 
$16.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0497-1 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Almost-fifteen-year-old Marisol (from MarisolandMagdalena, BCCB 1/99) is back
in New York after spending an eye-opening year in Panama with her grandmother.
MAY 2001 
* 333
Longtime pal Magdalena (aka Magda) has found companionship with Marisa and
Elizabeth in Marisol's absence, and Marisa is determined to shut Marisol out. The
discovery that Magda is shoplifting expensive items with her new buddies contrib-
utes to Marisol's estrangement from her best friend (who labels Marisol a nerd
when she won't indulge in the "five-finger discount"). Although hurt by Magda's
defection, Marisol carries on: she earns the money for her quinceanera dress, starts
dating a nice boy, learns to tolerate her mother's new love interest, and, with the
help of her padrinos (godparents), gets the quinceanera party of her dreams. In a
predictable turn of events, Magda and her light-fingered friends get picked up for
shoplifting, and Magda's father cancels her elaborate quinceanera party to teach
her a lesson. Unanswered questions (why isn't Magda arrested after shoplifting?)
and dangling plot points (what happened to Marisa and Elizabeth, who simply
drop out of the story?) mar the smooth flow of the action, and awkward phrasing
("she sat with her head in her lap") is unintentionally funny. While depictions of
father figures lack depth, characterizations of the women have a comforting con-
creteness, and the scenes set within the extended families have humor and heart.
The cover photograph, unfortunately, shows two girls who appear much younger
than the teenagers in the book, which may put some readers off; otherwise, this is
decent light fiction that provides an inside look at an important cultural event and
rite of passage. JMD
CHORAO, KAY 
Shadow Night; written and illus. by Kay Chorao. 
Dutton,
2001 
[32p]
ISBN 0-525-46685-1 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
Anyone who has ever lost sleep over the Rorschach shadows on a moonlit bed-
room wall will be able to sympathize with young James, who sees "MONSTERS!"-
until his folks tie back the fluttering curtains and show him how to make his own
shadow pictures. The cast of the back-to-bedtime story the grownups tell (and
show) includes spiders with five "legs" (fingers), along with other one-hand shadow
puppets (snail, bird, goose, dog) and two-handers (alligator and elephant). A pe-
destrian plot and clumsy text ("Everyone laughed. Ha-ha") flatten the impromptu
tale, as do the contrived cartoon-like depictions of the imagined animals, which
supplement the milky hues and muted brights of the more realistically rendered
bedtime frame story. The visual instructions for making these puppets are easy to
follow, however, so this title should bring digital entertainment within the grasp of
its audience. FK
CRUNK, TONY 
Grandpa's Overalls; illus. by Scott Nash. 
Orchard, 2001 
[32p]
ISBN 0-531-30321-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
There's pandemonium down on the farm. Grandpa's overalls have made a daring
break for it, and the chase is on. Grandpa, the extended family, and the neighbors
(all anthropomorphized hounds) chug along behind the runaway duds, but the
pants are simply too quick for them. Still, there's work to be done, and since "a
man can't work in his long-handled drawers," Grandpa has to take the day off
while everyone else pitches in to do his share. At sunset they're all pretty pleased
with their day's work-until they catch the errant overalls in an amorous moon-
light tryst with Grandma's nightgown. "A body can't sleep without her long-
334 
* THE BULLETIN
tailed nightie," says Grandma, and the chase is on again. Never have denim pants
sported quite the personality of Nash's cheeky, ebullient overalls as they dash through
the fields with bib rivets gleaming like white eyeballs and straps pumping like wiry
arms. Their getaway astride a grinning, piggy-bank styled porker, chased by a
pack of huffing, puffing pursuers, should be a crowd-pleaser. Use this to whip up
the storytime set, or perhaps employ it as an offbeat love story for Valentine's Day
giggles. EB
DEVITA, JAMES 
Blue. 
Geringer/HarperCollins, 2001 
[288p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029546-5 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029545-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-7
Morgan is at first predisposed to regard his visions of a watery world and visits by
a mysterious fish-eyed old man as the overactive imaginings of a mind bored and
dissatisfied with his adolescent life. Scaly growths creeping up his body and soar-
ing fevers that can only be assuaged by constant soaks in a cold bath are more
difficult to dismiss; by the time Morgan is rushed to the hospital his voice is little
more than a mumble and his fondest hope seems to be confirmed-he really is
turning into a blue marlin. As doctors posit diagnoses and apply futile treatments
in an effort to restore him to unwanted normalcy (or failing that, at least to make
waves in the medical journals), the boy psychically rushes to embrace his fate. The
night before life-threatening surgery to remove the spiked fin from his backbone,
Morgan is whisked away by a band of partially transformed marlin men who take
him to the sea and mentor him in preparation for his release into the wild Atlantic.
DeVita traverses a fine line between comedy and fantasy with considerable success,
poking fun at the medical community with kid-accessible satire while respecting
Morgan's yearning to be the person, or creature, nature intends him to be. Several
characters-notably Morgan's parents and a friendly, bumbling nurse-are un-
derdrawn, and DeVita reels out a little more plotline than is needed, but readers
not quite up to the darker challenge of Dickinson's Eva (BCCB 5/89) should take
the plunge. EB
ELLIOTT, DAVID The Transmogrification of Roscoe Wizzle. Candlewick,
2001 [128p]
ISBN 0-7636-1173-5 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys 
M Gr. 3-5
Roscoe's simply delighted that his sleepy town is now home to a Gussy's Restau-
rant, which features toothsome Jungle Drum burgers hawked by the endearing
Gussy Gorilla mascot. He's even more pleased when his neglectful parents supply
him with a steady stream of cash so he can gorge on Drums nightly while they
dodge kitchen duties. Gussy International has built its restaurant on a toxic dump,
however, and as mutant bugs find their way into the meat grinder (and hence into
customers), several town children begin to display bug-like features and must be
abducted and hidden by the corporation's honchos. Elliott introduces motifs worthy
of satiric exploration-America's reliance on fast food, and the disregarded dan-
gers of polluted soil-but what could have been feature-length screwball comedy
with a dash of social commentary amounts here to little more than a four-minute
Looney Tune, complete with chase scene. Roscoe's narration is precious and fre-
quently repetitive, and no character, including Roscoe himself, rises above car-
toon. Still, if the library closes in ten minutes and the book report's due in the
MAY 2001 
* 
335
morning, the catchy title, loopy premise, and low page count may tempt a reader
on the run. EB
FINN, ISOBEL 
The Very Lazy Ladybug; illus. by Jack Tickle. 
Tiger Tales,
2001 
[2 6p]
ISBN 1-58925-007-9 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
2-4 yrs
Lazy Ladybug never learned how to fly, so to get from place to place she hitches
rides on passing animals. She hops into a kangaroo's pouch, "but the kangaroo
liked to JUMP! 'I can't sleep in here,' cried the lazy ladybug, 'It's too bumpy,'" so
she hops on a passing tiger who likes to "ROAR," and from there to a crocodile
who likes to "SWISH his tail in the water," etc., until she finally hitches a ride on
an elephant. The elephant sneezes, and "poor old lazy ladybug had to fly at last!"
Tickle's illustrations are rendered in a confectionery palette of frosting pinks, greens,
and blues. The animals are generically cute, including a bright yellow monkey, a
blue bear, and a purple-striped tiger, all peacefully coexisting in a nonspecific but
bucolically leafy setting. The text is unsurprising, but variations in the typeface
add emphasis to the action. Viewers probably won't mind the cumulative predict-
ability, and they'll happily join the ladybug's refrain of "I can't sleep here." JMD
FLEISCHMAN, SID 
Bo &eMzzz 
Mad. Greenwillow, 2001 
[112p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029398-5 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029397-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
The Martinkas and their distant cousins the Gamages have been feuding with each
other over old wrongs for several generations, but that doesn't stop recently or-
phaned Bo Gamage; after his father dies, Bo flees social workers and foster care by
running away to the only family he has left, the Martinkas. In the Mojave Desert
ghost town of Queen of Sheba he meets thirteen-year-old Madeleine (Mzzz Mad),
her artist aunt, Juna, and her grandfather, Paw Paw (aka Charlie). Old Charlie is
depressed, and Juna has a plan to "jumpstart" his life with a (faked) map to the lost
gold mine he's been seeking for years, and she needs Bo's help to make her scheme
work. The arrival of two somewhat bumbling thieves fleeing the local sheriff adds
humor to the family feud, even as they provide a very real sense of danger. Char-
acterizations are slight but sharp, the dialogue between Bo and Mzzz Mad is fast
and funny, and the setting has a romantic cowboys-in-the-desert allure. The dis-
covery of the real map (and evidence that exonerates both families) unites the
Gamages and the Martinkas, and the story ends with Bo happily remaining as one
of the family. The plot's logic doesn't bear close scrutiny (didn't anyone back in
San Francisco notice that Bo's father was dead and he was alone?), and the fast
pace obscures but does not eliminate the contrived eccentricity of it all. Still, there
is a good-natured sense of adventure here that readers will enjoy despite the un-
likely plot, and the movie of the week sensibilities will be just the ticket for those
looking for a quick, enjoyable ride. Fleischman includes a note explaining aspects
of desert lore. JMD
FLETCHER, RALPH 
Uncle Daddy. 
Holt, 2001 
133p
ISBN 0-8050-6663-2 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Rivers was three when his father left. 
Now finishing fourth grade, he's accus-
tomed to his family life with his mother and her great uncle, known to Rivers as
336 
* THE BULLETIN
Uncle Daddy; he's convinced that if he encountered his father, he'd "give him
something I've been planning for a long time. I'd wind up and sock him as hard as
I could, right in the stomach." When his father does turn up-in the midst of the
traditional family celebration of Rivers' Un-Birthday, a pre-departure invention of
his father-Rivers and family are, however, simply stunned. Dad has finally got-
ten clean after years of a drug and booze problem, and he's intent on being a part
of his son's life. Reacquaintance is awkward, and the family already under strain is
thrown into new turmoil when Uncle Daddy suffers a life-threatening heart at-
tack. While the title may elicit snickers from more jaundiced kids, this is a gentle
yet solid story about family life rearranged. Uncle Daddy is a loving and entertain-
ing character, redeemed from saintliness by his hostility towards Rivers' returned
dad. Rivers is a credible kid, fending off and eventually succumbing to the friend-
ship overtures of the annoying Ethan as he reels from the changes in the heart of
his life and gradually acknowledging that his father's return might not be a bad
thing. This has an accessibility unusual for such a serious topic, and middle-
graders looking for a family story with some gravity will find it here. DS
FRADIN, DENNIS BRINDELL 
My Family Shall Be Free!: The Life of Peter
Still. HarperCollins, 2001 
190p 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029328-4 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029595-3 
$16.95 
R Gr. 5-9
In Boundfor the North Star (BCCB 12/00), Fradin offered an abbreviated history
of Peter Still's struggle for freedom from slavery; here this remarkable life receives
the in-depth treatment it richly deserves. Still (a family name assumed by his
relatives) and his brother Levin were left in slavery when their mother and sisters
escaped to freedom; Levin died a slave, but years of patient saving and maneuver-
ing of masters finally garnered Peter release. However, this barely marked the
beginning of his tale, because his wife and children remained in bondage and heart-
breaking years would pass before the entire family (all but one child) was at last
reunited. Fradin deftly toggles between the branches of the Still family in North-
ern freedom and Southern bondage, steadily converging their stories with cin-
ematic precision and pacing until the near-miraculous meeting of freedman Peter
and his abolitionist brother William, whom he had never met. Steering clear of
sentimentality, Fradin nonetheless presents facts so moving that even readers who
know that Peter achieves his "happy ending" will be caught up in the tension. A
bibliography and index will be of service to student researchers, but this gripping
adventure will extend its appeal far beyond the pedestrian biography report. EB
GEORGE, KRISTINE O'CONNELL 
Toasting Marshmallows: Camping Poems; illus.
by Kate Kiesler. 
Clarion, 2001 
48p
ISBN 0-618-04597-X 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Thirty poems, mostly unrhymed, treat the splendors of camping in the woods.
Entries address aspects such as wildlife (deer, owls, and, of course, mosquitoes),
pastimes (fishing, skipping rocks, exploration), and departure (including the keep-
ing of memories). While the poems run to the prosaic, George has made an evoca-
tive selection of elements and cleverly employed realistic details (the mystical milieu
of the bait shop, the otherworldly glow of the flashlight at night, the family dog's
surprising reversion to protector of his pack) that will elicit hidden memories for
experienced campers and beckon the stay-at-homes to pack their tents. Kiesler's
MAY 2001 
* 337
thick acrylics often leave the human figures stiff and indistinct, but the scenery has
a majestic sweep and the wildlife a fluid immediacy; spot art, varied compositions
and interesting perspectives, and changing layouts keep the poetic collection from
becoming a static gallery. Though more plainspoken than lyrical, this is nonethe-
less an effectively atmospheric verse series that could serve as both camping intro-
duction and memento. DS
GILLARD, DENISE 
Music from the Sky; illus. by Stephen Taylor. 
Groundwood/
Douglas & McIntyre, 2001 
[24p]
ISBN 0-88899-311-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
An early riser, the narrator of this down-to-earth tale is told to put on her boots
and help her grampa search the marsh for "the right branch" to whittle into a flute.
While the story has a distinct voice and rhythm, the child's narration sounds a
little forced and verges on the precious ("I've seen the long, shiny silver flute sounding
so pretty, just like music from the sky"); words attributed to Grampa characterize
him a bit more naturally (the marsh is the "perfect place for getting making stuff').
Focused on the border between the material world of the grandchild and the natu-
ral world her grandfather shares with her, this story also looks to the spiritual
world: a note on the dedication page points out that the airborne music the young
girl hears is an allusion to a traditional spiritual, "Over my head, I hear music in
the air." Soft blues, fresh greens, warm browns, white-lots of strategically used
negative space-accentuate the pristine spaciousness of the setting for this quiet
adventure, which takes place in "rural Nova Scotia in one of Canada's oldest black
communities." Representatives of two generations-grandfather and granddaugh-
ter-interact in almost every illustration, though their faces are sometimes frus-
tratingly undefined. Musical youngsters may object that what the protagonist
receives is more a recorder than a flute and that the actual flute pictured is wrongly
positioned. Most young viewers, however, are likely to respond to the strong
appeal of this comfortable relationship between a knowing elder and a confident
child. FK
GRAVES, KEITH 
Pet Boy; written and illus. by Keith Graves. 
Chronicle,
2001 
34p
ISBN 0-8118-2672-4 
$12.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Stanley loves buying new pets, but his interest quickly wanes: "He studied each
one carefully/ and played with it awhile,/ then he locked it in a cage/ and stacked it
in a pile." One day he goes into a very strange pet shop, and the next thing he
knows, he's been kidnapped by an alien (from "Far Out Pets-We deliver"), and
he's on his way to another planet to be somebody's pet. Stanley flees his owner,
Jopnar, only to be captured by an iron moth from Pet Control: "The moth brought
Stanley to the pound/ and dropped him in the clink,/ where strays not claimed by
end of day/ are soon to be extinct." Jopnar comes to the rescue and takes Stanley
back to his "natural habitat" (Earth); Stanley goes home a changed pet owner and
never neglects his animal pals again. This fable-let is more than a little predictable,
but the delivery is funny and the details are original. Graves is a quirky if not
always adept versifier, and while the abcb rhyme scheme gets wearying, his bent
quatrains have enough idiosyncrasies to circumvent the singsong when read aloud.
Acrylic and colored pencil illustrations feature space ships and robots in the style
338 
* THE BULLETIN
of old Flash Gordon movies, and the palette includes intense hues of tropical pink
and acid green. This would work as a group readaloud, but kids are going to want
to get their hands on this far-out pet parable so they can get a better view of the
pictures. JMD
GRIMM, JAKOB LUDWIG KARL 
The Rabbit's Bride; ad. by Lucy Crane and Holly
Meade; illus. by Holly Meade. 
Cavendish, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-7614-5081-5 
$15.95 
R 
3-7 yrs
A girl and her mother live "in a beautiful cabbage garden" that is being consumed
by a marauding rabbit: "At last the woman said to her daughter, 'Go into the
garden and drive out the rabbit.'" Three times the daughter "shoo-shoo"s the
rabbit, and three times the rabbit invites the maiden to go to his hutch; the third
time's the charm and off she goes, riding on the rabbit's tail. Once at the hutch the
girl is sad and lonely, and, despite the rabbit's urging, she delays their wedding
while she makes "a figure of straw" and dresses it in her own clothes. The maiden
then escapes in her ruffled pink panties back to her mother. In Meade's verdant
watercolors, "the maiden" is a little girl, the rabbit is a big white pooka-like figure,
and the overt action is on the level of make-believe play. The language (Meade
uses Lucy Crane's 1886 translation for most of her text) is so spare as to be nearly
bare, but the crisp brevity of the text makes this story work on a narrative level.
Garden and countryside images sweep across the cream-colored paper in shades of
leaves-in-sunshine and leaves-in-shadow green; the red-eyed rabbit provides a sense
of the just barely magical that is reinforced by his changing size from spread to
spread. Although a moment is spared for the sadness of the jilted rabbit (depicted
in an eyes-covered, ears-flopped curl oflapine grief), "back in the beautiful cab-
bage garden, the maiden's mother was happy. And so was the maiden." Meade
balances the deceptively simple but resonant text with the innocence of her charac-
ters, and while her dedication ("To all the maidens who take a ride with the rabbit.
And who with courage and creativity find a way home") indicates that Meade is
well aware of the story's subtleties, she deliberately plays against them, to great
success. Younger listeners will happily follow the little girl on her breathtaking
bareback-bunny ride. JMD
HADDIX, MARGARET PETERSON 
The Girl with 500 Middle Names; illus. by Janet
Hamlin. 
Simon, 2001 
82p
ISBN 0-689-84135-3 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 3-4
Janie's mother is finally fed up with the poor standards and limited resources of
Janie's current school, so the family ups stakes and moves. Though Janie is aca-
demically ready for the challenge of her new third grade, she can't keep up with the
financial and sartorial capabilities of her classmates, and she thinks (with some
justification) that they're looking down on her. To make matters worse, the shop
that was to sell Janie's mother's custom-knit, personalized sweaters-bringing in
enough money to offset their new, higher rent-reneges on the deal, leaving the
family with a pile of unresaleable sweaters and bills they may not be able to pay.
More familiar for her dramatic novels for young adults (Turnabout, BCCB 7/00),
Haddix does a capable job of spinning a yarn for middle-grades readers. Janie's
solid, strong-minded narration is convincing, and there are effective but not
schmaltzy reminders about the difficulties many families endure to achieve ends
that other families may take for granted. Janie's solution to the situation (she
MAY 2001 
* 
339
expands her straitened wardrobe by wearing the personalized sweaters to school,
each day claiming that the embroidered moniker is her middle name) is inventive;
the result is fairy-tale-ish (increased exposure results in increased demand for Janie's
mother's work, and nobody at the school enacts a no-advertising-with-clothes ban)
but satisfying. Janie's prickly defensiveness in the face of a classmate's clear wish to
be friends adds credibility and ensures that Janie isn't a goody-goody. The long,
flowing strokes of Hamlin's charcoal sketches helpfully avoid cuteness and empha-
size dignity. The combination of cozy and challenging elements will make this a
good fit for many young readers. DS
How MANY? How MUCH?; ISBN 0-670-89652-7; Letters and Sounds; ISBN 0-
670-89651-9. 
Each book: based on characters created by Rosemary Wells; illus.
by Michael Koelsch. 
Viking, 2001 
24 p 
(Get Set for Kindergarten!
Books) 
$13.99 
R 2-5 yrs
Parents anxious to assure that their Wunderkinds excel in their academic debuts
will welcome these sane, sound strategies for preparing children to tackle ABCs
and 1-2-3s. This pair of titles, designed more as source books than read-throughs,
suggest mini-lessons that parents/caregivers and tykes can approach as informal
anytime-anywhere play to introduce number concepts and integers, and the rela-
tion between sound and symbol. There are rhyming games and simple letter trea-
sure hunts; pattern sequencing, rudimentary measurement skills, a penny "bake
sale," and very important practice in dialing an emergency phone number. Illus-
trations are based on Rosemary Wells' characters, and although they don't evince
her fine level of spit and polish, many children will recognize and welcome them as
familiar pals. Parents looking for a reality check on their child's school-readiness
should take a look. Now, the only skills left to address would be toy sharing, hand
washing, coat buttoning, sneaker tying, lip zipping, turn taking, hand raising ....
EB
HUCK, 
CHARLOTTE 
The Black Bull of Norroway; illus. by Anita
Lobel. 
Greenwillow, 2001 
40p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-16901-5 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-16900-7 
$15.95 
R 7-10 yrs
Huck's retelling of this Scottish folktale closely follows the pattern previously laid
by a long line of retellers, including Joseph Jacobs, Andrew Lang, and Flora Annie
Steele. Peggy Ann, youngest of three sisters, wishes for a husband good and kind,
and ends up with the Black Bull (actually the enchanted Duke) of Norroway.
Peggy Ann loses her love, finds him again, and, with the help of some magical
gifts, saves him from marrying a witch's ugly daughter. In the end, "the Duke of
Norroway and his Peggy Ann lived happily ever after." This variation on "East o'
the Sun and West o' the Moon" has many familiar moments for folktalerati, and
they will appreciate the memorable motifs. Lobel's illustrations have a sturdy,
literal straightforwardness that matches the no-nonsense text. The drafting is a bit
disproportionate (especially regarding the Black Bull), and the colors are subdued;
the characters' faces are lively and expressive, however, and even the Black Bull
emotes effectively. An author's note gives Huck's sources and states her preference
for seeking out "traditional tales that show plucky girls" rather than "writing mod-
ern fairy tales with brave heroines." This is a solid addition to comparative folktale
and storytelling collections; storytellers and their listeners will appreciate the vari-
ety. JMD
340 
* THE BULLETIN
JOHNSTON, TONY 
My Best Friend Bear; illus. by Joy Allen. 
Rising Moon,
2001 
32p
ISBN 0-87358-775-8 
$15.95 
Ad 3-6 yrs
The pigtailed narrator immediately confides: "My old bear is my best friend. Some-
times I tell him secrets. Sometimes I tell him jokes. Sometimes I read 'The Three
Bears' to him. Sometimes we dance the kookamonga all around the house." Bear
is a reassuring wonder, but "he has danced the kookamonga so gaily, his stuffing is
all danced out." The little girl and her mother embark on a mission to restore the
faithful toy to his former glory, employing new cloth, new buttons, new stuffing,
new mouth, a bubble bath, and a spell on the clothesline in the warm sun. The
voice of the narrator is personable and funny, her declarations and directions both
engagingly officious and disarmingly anxious. The illustrations-watercolor, pen
and ink, and colored pencil, digitally enhanced-are nearly all full-spread, with
unusual perspectives that will catch even those storytimers in the back row. The
lengthy text doesn't entirely manage to skirt the sentimental, and the illustrations,
with their sloppy proportions and caricatured emotions, err on the side ofcutesiness,
an impression reinforced by the curlicue font and changing size and pastel colors of
the typeface. The preciousness may be mitigated by the distance of group viewing,
however, and kids will appreciate the gravity of the narrator's situation. Have
listeners bring their own bears and prepare to dance the kookamonga all over the
library. JMD
KARR, KATHLEEN 
Playing with Fire. Farrar, 2001 
192p
ISBN 0-374-23453-1 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Greer looks after her mother, fortune-teller Madame Camille, more than vice versa,
and she is paying particular attention to her parent at the moment: she believes
that Madame Camille's latest "gentleman friend," Drake Morley, is trouble on two
feet. Morley arranges for mother and daughter to spend the summer of 1924 in a
mansion on Long Island, in order to conduct seances. (Caldecott, the owner of the
mansion, is desperate to contact his beloved late wife.) Greer makes friends with
brother and sister domestics Leo and Peg; her adventures with the siblings and her
kindling romance with Leo help distract her from the fraud being perpetrated by
Morley. When Greer, assisting her mother at the seances, begins to raise real spir-
its, Morley's scheme (and the plot) spins out of control. Revelations about at-
tempted murder and successful matricide send Morley into a delusional state that
conveniently requires institutionalizing, and everyone else lives happily ever after
in a cottage on the beach. All this melodrama needs a quicker pace and more fluid
action than Karr provides here, and very little historical context is provided for the
spiritualism craze of the era. Nonetheless, the characters are functional if sketchy,
and the scenes at the beach and on the water are saltily evoked. Those readers
interested in mystical motifs may make a brief stop here. JMD
KASTNER, JILL 
Princess Dinosaur; written and illus. by Jill Kastner. 
Greenwillow,
2001 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-17046-3 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-17045-5 
$15.95 
Ad 
3-5 yrs
When Princess Dinosaur (a fetching green T. rex in a billowing red skirt and gold
crown) "wakes up from her nap," she "looks for something to do." Her wild antics
offer entertainment-and some annoyance-to the other toys in her room, but
MAY 2001 
* 
341
then Spots, the family dog, grabs Princess Dinosaur, bolts, and buries her in the
yard; fortunately, she's able to dig herself out and make her way back. While there
are some nice elements in the narrative ("Luckily, Princess Dinosaur has long,
sharp, pointy claws"), it's rather formless: the beginning doesn't seem to relate to
her doggy kidnapping, and even that plot point isn't shaped into drama. The
oversized (dino-sized?) art is original and effective, though; Kastner's thickly ap-
plied watercolors sometimes have the texture ofacrylics, lending a lively solidity to
the animated toys and to the bumptious Spots. Princess Dinosaur is an expressive
multi-fanged heroine; her obvious displeasure as she climbs out of her hole in the
ground (in an escapade of self-archaeology?) won't be lost on the young audience,
and they'll root for her return to her fellow toys. Despite the weak plot, the char-
ismatic protagonist and the enduringly alluring concept of toys alive (and the ech-
oes of Toy Story) may draw youngsters. DS
KEHRET, PEG 
The Hideout. Minstrel, 2001 
[160p]
ISBN 0-671-03420-0 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 5-8
Thirteen-year-old Jeremy's parents were recently killed in a random shooting at
the mall; as if that weren't enough, the train Jeremy takes en route to his new home
with his uncle Phil wrecks, killing many passengers. Traumatized and uninter-
ested in going to his uncle's for a summer of isolation, Jeremy plans to hide in the
woods and take stock of his life. He fortuitously finds an abandoned cabin with a
well-stocked cupboard, and prepares to ride out the summer months. Unfortu-
nately, he runs afoul of an illegal poaching operation that is hunting bears in the
vicinity, and, having been taught by his activist parents about the importance of
animal rights (they were shot while leaving their volunteer work at the mall's Hu-
mane Society store), he knows it is his duty to stop them. Thanks to the help of
Bonnie, a girl with whom he instantly becomes friends after meeting her at the
general store, Jeremy is able to save the day, stopping the poachers for good. Al-
though the opening action is absorbing and Jeremy's tragic past gives him some
immediate appeal, the concatenation of coincidental events is overwhelmingly im-
plausible. Additionally, the conclusion of the book is hampered by a heavy-handed
message about responsibility, as Jeremy is infused with an artificially adult voice:
"I wanted to run away from my difficulties, to pretend I was on vacation and
everything was okay.... But all I did was make new problems without solving the
old ones. I guess I can't hide from reality; I have to face it." Although some
readers will be engrossed in this fast-paced adventure story, most will want to
reread old Paulsen favorites instead. KM
KURTZ, JANE Jakarta Missing. Greenwillow, 2001 
[272p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029402-7 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029401-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-9
Twelve-year-old Dakar-polyglot, "worrymeister," storyteller-has recently come
"home" to the U.S. after a childhood spent in Africa, where her father worked as a
researcher and relief worker; her only sibling, Jakarta (adopted four years before
Dakar's birth), has elected to stay behind. Without the big sister who has always
been her fearless leader, Dakar has had to face her demons (and her first North
Dakota winter) alone, cultivating invisibility around her peers (aka "wildebeests")
342 
* 
THE BULLETIN
but also testing-and expanding-her limits. After a bomb goes off near her sister's
boarding school in Nairobi, Dakar tries even harder to control herself and her
world: she sets herself tasks (doing "three really brave things") and seeks wisdom
from surrounding grownups. Dakar's father is too distracted and her mother too
emotionally withdrawn to help much during this crisis: in fact, both are called
away soon after Jakarta (safe and sound) rejoins the family. The second half of the
novel focuses on how Dakar and, eventually, her family, realign themselves, with
much of the external action generated by the girls' basketball team Jakarta leads to
"regionals" while flirting with-and rejecting a chance to claim-a school shoot-
ing record. As filtered through Dakar's responses to them, her family's efforts to
strike a balance between their individual needs and their responsibility to the greater
good of family, team, and humanity ring true. Closer to home (and more diffuse)
than Abelove's Go and Come Back (BCCB 4/98), this too offers glimpses outside
the usual boxes, gently expanding the reader's understanding of how "terrifying
and wonderful" life can be. FK
LESTER, JULIUS 
The Blues Singers: Ten Who Rocked the World; illus. by Lisa
Cohen. Jump at the Sun/Hyperion, 2001 
[48p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2405-0 
$16.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0463-7 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 6-9 yrs
This is a punchy little collective biography: four pages per blues legend (ten sing-
ers, each featured with a portrait by Lisa Cohen) packed with tasty bits and pieces
of biographical information and lore. Lester's introduction ("A Grandfather Talks
to His Granddaughter") places blues music in its musical and historical context
and leads into his chat about the legends: Bessie Smith, Robert Johnson, Mahalia
Jackson, Muddy Waters, Billie Holiday, B. B. King, Ray Charles, Little Richard,
James Brown, and Aretha Franklin. Each artist's chapter opens with a full-page
portrait; the first text page of the biographical sketch has dates and places of births
and deaths, and quotes from other musicians about the singer featured. The tone
is geared for kitchen-table storytelling with the sound system on. Lester's descrip-
tions are juicy ("Brother Sun turned back his rays so Robert wouldn't sweat"; "she
reached deep inside the words until she could feel their hearts beating") and his
selection of anecdotes winning (Bessie Smith chased away KKK members yelling,
"You better pick up your sheets and get out of here!"; popular wisdom said Robert
Johnson made a deal with the devil so he could play his guitar so "unusual and
eerie"). It's difficult to describe music in words, but Lester manages to evoke
enough feeling to pique listeners' musical curiosity. Describing B. B. King, he
says, "When he plays, B. B. closes his eyes and scrunches up his face like he's in
pain. But that's because his feelings are going straight from his heart into his
fingers." The bibliography lists a half-dozen general reference books on the blues,
websites, and titles on each individual artist. A "Recommended Listening" list of
LPs and CDs is included. JMD
LESTER, JULIUS 
When DadKilledMom. Silver Whistle/Harcourt, 2001 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-15-216305-0 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
Jeremy, age eight, and Jenna, age fourteen, are relatively affectionate siblings with
relatively nice lives that include artist mother Rachel, psychologist father Eric,
MAY 2001 
* 343
decent clothes, big house, good schools. Their normal routine is interrupted the
day their father shoots their mother in cold blood on a busy street. Lester's focus
is on the siblings' response to the murder and their subsequent courses of action.
Jeremy is serious, calm, and devastated by the death of his mother. He stays in his
mother's studio, connected to the outside world by his mother's cell phone, his
paternal grandfather overseeing him from the main house. Daddy's girl Jenna is
self-centered, dramatic, and incredibly confused. Shocked out of adolescent self-
absorption, she reels from the loss of both her mother and her father, all the while
wondering whether she contributed in some concrete way to the tragedy. Jeremy
and Jenna each narrate alternate chapters, often retelling the same incident from
their different points of view, always adding more subtle pieces to the tragic puzzle
their lives have become. The drama of the present and the recent past unfolds at a
steadily increasing pace; the author draws out the suspense and keeps the reader
uncertain of the outcome until the bitter end. Insight into the "why" of the mur-
der is supplied by Rachel's own words-the voice of the murdered woman is heard
through her journal, discovered (and kept secret) by Jeremy. Novels have the
luxury of literary closure, and Lester takes advantage of the opportunity to supply
brother and sister with as happy an ending as possible. Readers will be caught up
by the fast-flowing current of emotions, events, and revelations. JMD
LEWIN, TED 
Red Legs: A Drummer Boy ofthe Civil War; written and illus. by Ted
Lewin. 
HarperCollins, 2001 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-16025-5 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-16024-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 6-9 yrs
With quiet trepidation, Union drummer Stephen ponders the coming day and, at
daylight, musters with fellow soldiers, beating the tattoo that takes them into battle.
A furious battle it is, and although the drummers have been left in the protected
rear, a Confederate bullet finds its way to Stephen's chest. His father finds the
fallen lad and "helps him up.... They can all go home because ... this battle was
a reenactment of a Civil War battle." Lewin keeps his surprise carefully hidden
until the final spreads, and even with clear hindsight and careful reexamination,
viewers are unlikely to find a clue of what is to come-unless Stephen's fall and
death pose can be considered in retrospect as slightly stiff and tidy. The success of
Lewin's ploy can be attributed both to his careful attention to detail in the sun-
dappled watercolor scenes and to the high standards of authenticity cherished by
avid reenactors. The closing page comments on Civil War reenactments and on
the Union regiment in which real-life drummer Stephen Barrow participated. Lewin
observes that reenactment is a way to honor the memory of fallen soldiers from
both camps, and reminds listeners that "100,000 child soldiers did not get up and
go home." EB
LITTLE, JEAN 
Emma's Yucky Brother; illus. by Jennifer Plecas. 
HarperCollins,
2001 
64p 
(I Can Read Books)
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028349-1 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028348-3 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 1-2
Noted author Little introduced Emma in Emma's Magic Winter (BCCB 10/98),
but here she's undergoing a change that isn't just seasonal: she's becoming a big
sister. Her parents are adopting four-year-old Max, and she's thrilled, waving his
344 
* THE BULLETIN
picture at her friend Sally (who, a big sister herself, knows that the euphoria won't
last). Emma has a rude awakening when Max visits and rejects her in favor of Sally
and her little brother; when he finally moves in, they begin to get the balance of
pestiferous siblinghood and familial bonds down right. This is a simple and un-
sentimental story about siblings; the theme of older-child adoption (rare for this
age group) is handled straightforwardly, but the emotions (and terminology-
Emma is "yucky" and Max is, of course, a "pest") will be recognizable to all kinds
of families. The easy-reader style and format are unthreatening; "adoption" and
related words are the hardest ones here, so kids familiar with the concept will find
the rest of this pretty smooth going. Plecas continues to be one of the most reliable
illustrators of easy readers: her slender yet sturdy lines create expressive and realis-
tically rumply characters; nice touches range from the multiracial cast (Sally and
her brother are African American) to details such as Dad's glasses pushed up on his
forehead the better to cuddle Max. Many young readers will appreciate the un-
usual theme, and the easygoing narrative will keep them reading. DS
LONDON, JONATHAN 
Park Beat: Rhymin' through the Seasons; illus. by Woodleigh
Marx Hubbard. 
HarperCollins, 2001 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-13995-7 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-13994-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
London's verse takes listeners through the year season by season, starting with fall
("Dogs yappin' and geese flappin',/ Fish jumpin' and apples thumpin' . . . "),
focusing on the action in and around a community park. We're definitely in a
temperate zone, with "breath steamin' and icicles gleamin'" in winter, mud a key
aspect of spring ("And now I'm glidin' in a puddle of mud"), and sprinklers and
baseball key elements of summer. The dropped participial g gimmick is superflu-
ous at best, but the details are atmospheric and seasonal moods effectively evoked;
the verse structure avoids jingliness by switching patterns and winding up to a
seasonal denouement for each section (though it's too bad there's no overall fin-
ish). Hubbard's naive art uses strong saturated color to energetic effect, with indi-
vidual objects so solidly constructed they resemble cut paper. In some spreads, in
fact, the multiplicity of deep hues muddies the focus and reduces the impact of the
landscapes (though youngsters will enjoy poring over the small details in many
scenes). This doesn't rise up to the standard of Helldorfer's Gather Up, Gather In
(BCCB 10/94), but it's still a lively romp through the year. DS
LONDON, JONATHAN 
White Water; by Jonathan and Aaron London; illus. by Jill
Kastner. 
Viking, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-670-89286-6 
$15.99 
R 6-9 yrs
Basing the story on his own experiences with his son, London tells the tale of a
father-son rafting trip. The narrating son is initially uncertain ("I was quiet, thinking
about how scary it would be"), but he finds that he's enjoying himself on the water
("That rapid was my first one, and it sure was fun"), and he's also enjoying the
sights, the camping experience, and his growing expertise. London is skillful and
subtle in depicting the narrator's gradual change of heart; the edge of boredom and
resentment disappears, and the narrator starts being the one to call "White water!"
when they approach rapids; the book also wisely eschews the contrivance of an
accident, allowing the drama to come simply from the mastery of bigger rapids
MAY 2001 
* 
345
and the completion of a successful, wonderful outing. The language doesn't strain
for poetry but offers simple and effective imagery ("the water was white, as if thou-
sands of white rabbits were jumping around us"), and the pleasure of father-son
bonding is left implicit. Kastner's expressionist oils generally leave faces indistinct,
but as a consequence the natural drama is emphasized: this is a world of billowing
white spray and tawny rock, with only touches of blue sky showing beyond the
canyon rim. Between the adventure and the parental closeness, this will be a dream
vacation for a lot of kids; if the book doesn't work to nag parents into an outing, it
can at least provide vicarious satisfaction. DS
MACDONALD, MARGARET READ, ad. 
Mabela the Clever; illus. by Tim
Coffey. 
Whitman, 2001 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8075-4902-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-7 yrs
Folklorist MacDonald retells this cautionary tale from the Limba people of Sierra
Leone with a zesty panache present from the opening lines: "In the early times,
some were clever and some were foolish. The Cat was one of the clever ones. The
mice were mostly foolish." The Cat invites the mice to join "the secret Cat soci-
ety," and the mice eagerly accept. Cat teaches them "the secret Cat Society song":
"When we are marching,/ We NEVER look back!/ The Cat is at the end,/ Fo
Feng!/ FO FENG!" Off they march, singing, the Cat at the end picking off one
mouse for each "FO FENG!" and tossing it into a sack. Clever mouse Mabela is in
the lead, and by remembering her father's words of wisdom (look, listen, pay at-
tention to what you are saying, and "if you have to move, move fast!") she saves the
day. From tone to pace, MacDonald's choices here are right on the money: this is
a cautionary tale that will be rip-roaring fun to tell, listen to, and act out. The
father mouse's words of wisdom bear reiteration, and the short song/chant de-
mands repeating. Crayon-colored, pop-eyed little mice and the green-eyed ginger
cat stand out against the shades-of-gold-and-green background. Feathery brush-
strokes add texture to Coffey's acrylics, and the fantastical setting suits the magical
nature of this tale. Compositions are open and clean, and the uncluttered pictures
will reach the back row of the storytime or classroom audience. Viewers will fol-
low the father mouse's advice to look (at the pictures), listen (to the story) and pay
attention (to the chant); they already know how to move fast. A detailed source
note is included. JMD
MACLEOD, ELIZABETH 
Lucy Maud Montgomery: A Writer's Life. 
Kids Can,
2001 
32p 
illus. with photographs
Trade ed. ISBN 1-55074-487-9 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
The author of the beloved Anne stories gets the biographical treatment in scrap-
book form here. The text is confined to a single column per oversized spread,
which anchors layouts filled with spot art, captions, and quotes. The biography is
choppily written, with events crammed together and awkwardly connected and
some information contradictory ("She never knew how incredibly popular her
characters would become around the world" opposite Montgomery's statement
"Men and women who are grandparents have written to tell me how they loved
Anne, and boys at college have done the same"), but it's a serviceable concise over-
view. The layout will draw browsers, so even kids familiar with Anne only from
readalouds or television will be able to poke around in the Montgomeriana. A
346 
* THE BULLETIN
multitude of pictures of Montgomery, her family, and creations and possessions
are tucked in the margins and jumbled collage-like on full pages; colored borders
and backgrounds preclude stodginess. It's sometimes hard to tell the real realia
from the pretend realia (it will be clear to most adults that these aren't really clip-
pings of early Anne reviews, for instance, but kids may not realize that) and the
cheesy line-drawn Montgomery figure who utters platitudes and factoids in speech
balloons is superfluous. There's such a grand collection of Montgomery and Anne
details (an Anne postage stamp, even), though, that Anne fans will doubtless find
plenty to absorb them. A timeline, list of Montgomery's books, list of websites
and real-life Montgomery sites, and an index are appended. DS
MASUREL, CLIRE A Catanda Dog; illus. by Bob Kolar. 
Cheshire Studio/North-
South, 2001 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 1-55858-950-3 
$13.88
Trade ed. ISBN 1-55858-949-X 
$13.95 
Ad 
2-5 yrs
The titular cat and dog live in the same house and fight like, well, cats and dogs.
They take no respite, fighting day and night, and cover all subjects, battling over
sitting spots, tasty treats, and especially toys. One day, though, they each suffer
toy mishaps they can't resolve on their own. They engage in mutual assistance, the
cat retrieving the dog's ball from up a tree and the dog fetching the cat's mouse
from the pond, and thereby become "the best of friends." The story is slight and
drawn out, and the ending of friendship is predictable from the get-go. The text's
simplicity will appeal to young listeners, though, and readers-aloud have some
good opportunities for animal sound effects. Kitty and pooch are rendered in
complementary-oppositional?-colors, the cat in turquoise, the dog in orange,
and they possess a plump, stylized roundness reminiscent of balloon animals.
They're quite expressive as they romp through their spare white-backgrounded
landscape, which keeps the spreads from becoming static. Despite the shortcom-
ings of the story, the perky art and siblingesque relationship may keep lapsitters
involved. DS
MATAS, 
CAROL 
The War Within: A Novel of the Civil War. 
Simon,
2001 
[160p]
ISBN 0-689-82935-3 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
The Greens, a staunchly Confederate Jewish family, are less than pleased with the
Union occupation of their Tennessee town, but they manage well enough with
their general store and even maintain coolly cordial relations with the occupying
force. Rebel troops make a reentry and temporarily derail General Grant's plans
for an offensive on Vicksburg, but their subsequent withdrawal from the region
leaves the civilian population vulnerable to retaliation. Frustrated by the military
setback and convinced that area Jews are profiteering in cotton, Grant issues an
order to expel all Jews from the occupied region, transforming the Greens at a
penstroke from respected members of their community to exiles within their own
country. Matas explores a fascinating but little-examined facet of the Civil War
and employs it as a springboard to a broader discussion of parallels between Jewish
and black discrimination. As unapologetic slave holders, the Greens are forced to
confront the possibility that they have ignored the essential humanity of their
chattel just as they themselves have been suddenly defined as "inferior." Their
MAY 2001 
* 347
struggle, though convincing, is largely intellectual and plays out in lengthy ha-
rangues that undercut the more immediate tension of their forced trek northward.
Still, there are balls and belles and yards of silk and tulle to entice readers and a
sobering theme to jolt the romance into perspective. EB
MATTHAEI, GAY 
The Sketchbook of Thomas Blue Eagle; by Gay Matthaei and Jewel
Grutman; illus. by Adam Cvijanovic. 
Chronicle, 2001 
62p
ISBN 0-8118-2908-1 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 4-6
This sequel to The Ledgerbook of Thomas Blue Eagle stands on its own, taking up
the story of an eighteen-year-old Lakota horseman, a fictional but realistic charac-
ter who accepts Buffalo Bill Cody's invitation to travel with the Wild West Show
to Europe. Thomas Blue Eagle's people are destitute on their Pine Ridge Reserva-
tion; he needs money to care for his father and marry Echo, the young woman he
met at a boarding school. In a tone that varies from wry observation of white
people's strange ways to heartbreaking loneliness and cultural disorientation, Blue
Eagle describes his ventures in England, France, Spain, and Italy. Of a bullfight,
he says, "The Spaniards did not eat the bull.... There was no honor in this hunt."
On visiting the papal palace, he remarks: "At first I thought Pope's stick was a
lance but Cody told us it was a shepherd's hook for catching loose sheep." All of
the double spreads are handsomely decorated with wash drawings (ostensibly the
work of Blue Eagle), the figures drafted in a naive style with skillful refinements of
composition and color. These illustrations offer visual breaks in a continuous
narrative that will require some sustained attention from readers but will reward
them with a fresh perspective on the world of 1885. An afterword by a Lakota
advisor, Arthur Amiotte, further delineates and authenticates the historical sce-
nario. This fictional account serves as an introduction to a people's often disheart-
ening struggle to continue their way of life despite the dominant culture's efforts
to eradicate it. BH
MIKAELSEN, BEN 
Touching Spirit Bear. HarperCollins, 2001 
241p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029149-4 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-380-97744-3 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-10
Fifteen-year-old Cole Matthews has been in trouble with the law for years, the
consequences of his antisocial behavior mitigated by expensive lawyers hired by his
abusive but wealthy father. When Cole violently assaults Peter, a fellow student,
he is in trouble so deep his father can't get him out. Garvey, an American Indian
parole officer, arranges for the bitterly cynical and devious boy to be tried by Circle
Justice, a traditional way of administering justice to the repentant guilty and solace
to a wounded community. Garvey and Edwin, a generic wise Indian elder, convey
Cole to an island where there is shelter and supplies; he is to remain there alone for
a year, contemplating his life. With no intention of staying on the island, Cole
burns down the shelter and destroys most of his supplies. After his escape plan
fails, he encounters a huge white bear, a Spirit Bear, which severely mauls him. In
his pain and delirium, he has a spiritual awakening that convinces him to change
his life. Rescued by Garvey and Edwin, Cole recovers, and, determined to make
good, he convinces the Circle to send him back to the island. Characterizations
are flat and programmatic, with many of the players merely acting as functionaries
for the drawn-out, farfetched plot. Cole's transformation from punk to pilgrim is
too easily accomplished, and his parroting of American Indian wisdom is irritat-
348 
* THE BULLETIN
ingly earnest; on the other hand, his solitary life on the island is just the ticket for
Paulsen fans, who will appreciate the survival story. JMD
NAYLOR, PHYLLIS REYNOLDS 
Alice Alone. 
Karl/Atheneum, 2001 
[240p]
ISBN 0-689-82634-6 $15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-9
Alice's eighth-grade year brings her a lot of changes ("I wanted change, and I didn't.
Looked forward to it and dreaded it both at the same time"), such as a new school
and her father's official engagement to Miss Summers. The worst change is in her
relationship with Patrick, her boyfriend of two years; they're not in any of the
same classes, it's harder and harder to find time to spend together, and he's friendly
with a cute new girl, Penny. A worried and jealous Alice pushes the issue to the
point of breakup, which leaves her stunned, lonely, and unsure of herself. This
turn is a change for Alice's readers, too, but they'll be reassured by Naylor's sympa-
thetic and uncondescending treatment of Alice's pain. The breakup manages to
be upsetting without undermining the well-established goodness of Patrick's char-
acter, and Alice's sadness is effectively balanced by her continued growth and the
usual helping of narrative humor. The subplots aren't all successful; the revelation
about the long-ago molestation of Alice's friend Elizabeth results in an overly easy
didactic resolution, and though it's grounded in her character, it undermines the
normality of Elizabeth's skittishness about bodies and dating. This is nonetheless
a pivotal entry in Alice's adventures in adolescence, and her followers and spiritual
sisters won't want to miss it. DS
Nix, GARTH 
Lirael. HarperCollins, 2001 
[49 6p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027824-2 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027823-4 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-12
Orphaned Lirael is a Daughter of the Clayr, charter magic adherents with the
Sight that enables them to see the future. Most of the Clayr achieve their Sight at
or near adolescence, but Lirael is fourteen, and the Sight still eludes her. Desperate
to keep from dwelling on her mysterious origins (her mother never identified her
father) and lack of Sight, Lirael requests and receives a position as a Librarian in
the Great Library of Clayr. Her position in the Library keeps her busy (the realia,
which includes magical objects, spell books, and some nasty specimens of Free
Magic, is particularly problematic) but provides unforeseen advantages: Lirael has
access to sources of knowledge that help her further her self-education as a charter
mage, conjure a friend (the very funny "Disreputable Dog"), and take her first
steps toward her destiny. A parallel story focuses on Prince Sameth, the youngest
child of Abhorsen Sabriel and King Touchstone, and the designated heir to the
Abhorsen. After a meeting with Hedge, a dark necromancer, Sameth cannot face
his preordained future and flees. Nix alternates between Lirael and Sameth, driv-
ing both characters toward their inevitable meeting, the moment when Lirael fishes
Sameth out of the river and their destinies become irrevocably entwined. Nix has
the benefit here of a much longer book than Sabriel(BCCB 12/96), and the result
is a richly textured exploration into the hearts and minds of his two heroes. By the
time readers get to the cliffhanger conclusion, they will have accompanied two
very different characters on their physical and metaphysical journeys. The plot is
MAY 2001 
* 349
filled with hair-raising escapes, desperate flights, relentless pursuits, and magical
duels, described in sensual language that makes the scenes live. JMD
O'CONNOR, BARBARA 
Moonpie and Ivy. 
Farrar, 2001 
152p
ISBN 0-374-35059-0 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
When Pearl's mother, Ruby, takes Pearl to visit Ruby's sister, Ivy, and then disap-
pears in the middle of the night, Pearl is no more surprised by this than by any-
thing else her eccentric mother does. Her aunt Ivy, long-estranged from her
rebellious sister, finds this irresponsibility predictable but makes room for Pearl;
Pearl, however, is wary of becoming too close to her new caretaker. Ivy has plenty
of closeness elsewhere, with a romantic attachment on one hand and a maternal
affection for neighbor boy named Moonpie (who is likely to need a home in the
near future when his grandmother passes away) on the other. Pearl resents
Moonpie's easy likability and place in Ivy's heart, convinced by her low priority in
her mother's life that she's unlovable and that that unlovability is why Ivy won't
make a permanent place for her. In fact, it's because Ivy has correctly anticipated
Ruby's return for her daughter, and Pearl is whisked away from the stability of
Ivy's home. The book effectively depicts Pearl's ambivalence, loving her mother
but hoping to fit in at Ivy's, and her unfamiliarity with healthy human dynamics is
sensitively evoked. Her lack of affect is realistic but narratively unsatisfying, since
it leaves her flat and uninvolving; secondary characters Ivy and Moonpie are more
effectively rendered and developed. Although O'Connor makes a brave choice in
not following the fictional formula of fairy-tale endings for an abandoned child,
some readers will be disappointed that Ivy does not intervene more forcefully on
behalf of the helpless Pearl, and they'll want more than the breath of hope con-
tained in the piece of paper with Ivy's phone number that Pearl clutches as she and
her mother drive away. This is still a bracing departure from cliche, however, and
some kids may enjoy this unconventional story of hard times that just get harder.
KM
O'MALLEY, KEVIN 
Humpty Dumpty EGG-SPLODES; written and illus. by Kevin
O'Malley. 
Walker, 2001 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8757-6 
$16.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8756-8 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Mr. Hatchery has come to read to his son's middle-grade class for Read Across
America Day, and the book he has chosen is, oddly enough, The Nursery Rhymes of
Mother Goose. Once the teacher leaves the room, however, Mr. Hatchery departs
from the text and relates the saga of a giant Humpty Dumpty, who seeks revenge
on the nursery-rhyme folks who let him fall. Old King Cole may be merry but he's
no match for Humpty, not even with the help of Jack (the Nimble); only when
Mother Goose gets back from vacation is any effective action is taken (she gets
Humpty Dumpty a wig and he turns into an Elvis impersonator). O'Malley uses
this tale within a tale as an excuse for bad puns, Marx Brothers-like exchanges, and
slapstick silliness. While the humor sometimes falls flatter than Humpty himself,
the nursery-rhyme dialogue is effectively integrated into the narrative whole. Dia-
logue balloons give various Mother Goose-Landians an opportunity to speak their
piece (or rhyme, as the case may be), and they add to the irreverent comic-strip
nature of the book. O'Malley's drafting is less precise than usual and his faces lean
toward the generic; Humpty Dumpty is still one scary ovoid (with teeth, yet), and
350 
* THE BULLETIN
the gleefully grinning Mr. Hatchery sets the humorous tone. This would make a
challenging readaloud for a single reader, but it would work great as a choral read-
ing or story theater for middle graders who know the rhymes and can appreciate
the result of O'Malley's lunatic morphing. JMD
PEARSON, MARY E. 
Scribbler ofDreams. Harcourt, 2001 
[240p]
ISBN 0-15-202320-8 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Kait Malone and her family define themselves by what-and who-they are not:
Crutchfields. Though the Crutchfields and the Malones are descended from sis-
ters, Twin Oaks is not big enough to hold the two families, who have despised one
another since their common ancestors became estranged. The fact that Kait's
father is finishing a jail term for manslaughter after the accidental killing of a
contemporary Crutchfield has exacerbated tensions to the point that Kait and her
sister use their mother's maiden name when they register at Twin Oaks High
School. There, bitter seventeen-year-old Kait meets an artistic boy named Bram
and falls in love with him before he tells her something the reader has long since
figured out: he's a Crutchfield, and it's his father who was killed. As Kait, still
incognito, gets to know Bram's family and learns more about their shared history
(easily locating in an ancestress' journal the secret explanation for the original fam-
ily divide), she learns to forgive. However, Kait still has to deal with a Crutchfield
plot to make her family sell prime farmland, as well as the complications directly
connected to her masquerade, which, after a dramatic denouncement scene, leads
to the loss of Bram's trust (for a time) and a short gothic meltdown for Kait ("I
only vaguely remembered climbing onto my rock in the blackness of the pouring
night"). She finally pulls herself together, taking the floor at a high-school assem-
bly to give an impassioned speech in which she argues that people shouldn't let the
past shape their future, and teen love finally conquers all. Though few will be
surprised by the trajectory of this melodrama, readers with a taste for first-person
angst and a compensating desire for fairy-tale endings (well-to-do Bram is the
"king" of the school, after all) may enjoy the ride. FK
RASCHKA, CHRIS 
Waffe; written and illus. by Chris Raschka. 
Jackson/Atheneum,
2001 
32p
ISBN 0-689-83838-7 
$16.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
While Wemberly alliteratively worried (BCCB 9/00), Waffle, as his name sug-
gests, waffles. He shilly-shallies in a multitude of w ways-he wiggles, he wonders
what if, he wishes that he would, he wobbles, and he is generally in a pretty pickle.
Finally a chorus of his own name shows him the way when w, a, ff 1,, and e cavort
together repeatedly and allow "flew" to come together from "waffle"; Waffle then
takes off, flying "still a little fearfully" but having "worked a wonder (within)."
There's no shortage of young Waffles in the primary grades of this world, so plenty
of youngsters will identify with the protagonist's uncertainty, and the playfully
sonorous text will make a satisfying readaloud mouthful ("Waffle waffled. He felt
awful. He was a waffler and wafflers waffle"). Unfortunately, the typographic
impetus for his alteration will be hard to convey to listening youngsters, and the
story's abstract approach may leave some kids behind. Plenty of them will appre-
ciate the soundplay riffs, however, and they'll be happy to join in on the waffles.
MAY 2001 
* 351
Waffle is, appropriately enough, a big indistinct smear of peachy pigment, delin-
eated by a scrawled topknot, uncertain eyes, and a few other sharp inky features
(not to mention a fetching pair of red-checked trousers). He floats around the
strong-colored backgrounds opposite smiling, Pac-Manesque faces in various ar-
rays; when Waffle finally takes flight, the faces look on in serious wonder. While
some viewers will yearn for Wemberly's concreteness, this has an eccentric charm
to its didacticism that will appeal to youthful fancy. DS
Roos, STEPHEN 
The Gypsies Never Came. 
Simon, 2001 
116p
ISBN 0-689-83147-1 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Sixth-grader Augie is working behind the counter of the dry-cleaners when Lydie
Rose Meisenheimer comes in. The first thing he notices about her are her clothes
(odd); the second thing he notices is his watch (gone). Lydie returns his watch,
laughing at his indignation, and tells him it's "just something an old Gypsy taught
me." She turns up as a new student in his sixth-grade class and proceeds to pester
him with her attention and her insight. Her attention is focused on that which
Augie would prefer remained unnoticed-his misshapen hand, deliberately hid-
den with a glove. Augie's dilemma has little to do with Lydie Rose or her barely
believable life; it has everything to do with Augie's hand keeping him from joining
the baseball team, his father leaving when Augie was a baby, and the rightfully (if
brutally) vengeful brothers of a classmate wronged by Augie in a vote-buying scan-
dal. Lydie Rose tells Augie stories about the Gypsies coming in their wagons and
recognizing Augie for the unique individual he is because of, not despite, his hand.
She makes Augie see his hand through her eyes, and, dreaming of a gypsy father
figure, he burns his glove in a dream fire and wakes transformed. The plot is slim
and the characterizations are often flat, but Roos has moments of deep clarity
when he shows the reader the humanity, even the poetry, of his characters. Augie's
extreme emotions-his deep hurt at his exclusion from a birthday party because he
isn't on the baseball team; his anger at a disappointing potential father figure-
ring with honesty. Readers will root for Augie when he rises to the challenge of
accepting himself. JMD
RYLANT, CYNTHIA 
Little Whistle; illus. by Tim Bowers. 
Harcourt, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-15-201087-4 
$14.00 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
Little Whistle lives a comfortable life in Toytown, "the sweetest and kindest place
in the world for a small guinea pig to live." He sleeps all day in his comfortable
cage at the toy store, and, after hours, he explores the closed shop ("The store was
quite large, so some nights Little Whistle took the train from one end to the other.
And some nights he just walked") and visits with his many toy friends. Oil paint-
ings feature a personable little rodent with melting eyes and a sincere expression,
and his talking toy companions are just as sentimentally portrayed. The magic of
a toy shop where the toys come alive at night is hard to resist, however, despite
Little Whistle's overwhelmingly benevolent and preachy adventures. This first
volume in a new series is deliberately wholesome, winsome, and wise, a children's
story both quasi-instructional and benign, nearly Victorian in its stuffy self-aware-
ness. The awkward stiffness of the figures suits their non-organic status and makes
their perky awkwardness easier to accept. There is no conflict and litde action to
involve readers or listeners; nevertheless, this may be just the ticket for those adults
looking for the cute and the safe. JMD
352 
* THE BULLETIN
SANDLER, 
MARTIN W. 
Vaqueros: 
America's First Cowmen. 
Holt,
2001 
117p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8050-6019-7 
$17.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-9
Though a crucial part of the Old West, the vaqueros haven't had the pull the
cowboys have had on the American imagination; in fact, these Mexican and Mexi-
can-origin horsemen, who largely influenced the cowboys, have had their reputa-
tions tarnished and denigrated over the years. Sandler sets out to change that in
this compact overview of the vaqueros (whose name was the origin of the word
"buckaroo") that examines their origins, their influence on the cowboys, their daily
life, their skills, some vaquero legends, and the fate of the vaquero in popular
culture. Unfortunately, the writing style is drier than the book's interesting sub-
ject merits; Sandler also overstates his case at some points (the metaphorical use of
the verb "to spur" considerably predates the vaqueros) and misses some useful
tidbits (he explains the dar la vuelta, the winding of a rope around the saddle horn,
but never mentions its English mutation, the dally). The collection of informa-
tion is still unusual, however, and the book's address of the cultural obscurity of
the vaquero is downright fascinating. The multitude of black-and-white images,
mostly old photographs or artwork from part of the era under the discussion, is
impressive; while it's too bad color reproductions weren't included, the images
evince both breadth and detail, creating an effective conglomerate picture of the
vaquero and his (though Sandler emphasizes inclusivity, it's definitely all-male
inclusivity) image. Sidebar features tend to distract from the flow of the text, but
they and the subheaded sections make the book nonthreatening and browsable.
Source notes, a glossary, a list for further reading, and an index are included. DS
SAYRE, APRIL PULLEY 
Dig Wait Listen: A Desert Toad's Tale; illus. by Barbara
Bash. 
Greenwillow, 2001 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-16615-6 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-16614-8 
$15.95 
R 
3-6 yrs
Sayre dramatizes a year in the life of a spadefoot toad, which spends most of the
year underground to survive the harsh desert climate, waiting for the rains that will
allow it a few short days to reproduce before burrowing back down into the cool
earth. While waiting, the toad protagonist hears other desert dwelling creatures
hopping, crawling, and slithering across the sands above as it listens for the ono-
matopoeically described sounds and rhythms of falling rain ("Plop thunk, plop
thunk, plop thunk gussssshhhhhhh!"). Bash's watercolor illustrations capture the
detailed scales and markings of desert animals and plants against a backdrop of
sweeping desert landscapes as well as up close. Although adults may need to inter-
vene to help young listeners understand the science behind the story (described in
smaller text on the last few pages of the book), audience members will enjoy meet-
ing each of the unusual desert animals as they wait for the rain to fall. KM
SCIESZKA, JON 
Baloney (Henry P.); illus. by Lane Smith. 
Viking, 2001 
34p
ISBN 0-670-82948-3 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Teachers never believe perfectly good reasons for tardiness, and Henry P. Baloney's
Miss Bugscuttle is no exception. Little green Henry earnestly details how it all
starts with his misplaced pencil, and the ensuing drama sends him in a rocket ship
to a distant planet, where he almost becomes the inhabitants' dinner but ends up
being shipped back on a school-destroying mission; he thenfinds himself plum-
MAY 2001 
* 353
meting towards his home planet at a Henry-smashing rate. No fears about excess
substance here, but youngsters will snork appreciatively at cartoon-concept touches
(Henry saves himself from smithereens by recalling he hasn't yet learned the law of
gravity, so he can't obey it; he aborts the mission of destruction by using his pencil
to erase it). The souped-up alien vocabulary adds another layer of amusement;
Scieszka borrows words from all over (the "Decoder" glossary cites well over a
dozen languages), creating an alien vocabulary that kids will enjoy puzzling out,
and he tosses in a homegrown variation or two (the "sighing flosser" will be par-
ticularly well received). The Sputnik-hip type weaves through the art like comic-
book text, its slanting white capitals (alien words in yellow) standing out against
black backgrounds. The alien universe is a bit airier than Smith's usual dark, edgy
milieu, and strong geometric shapes give a certain gravity to the proceedings; Henry
P. himself, with his shiny black eyes, is so evocative of retro animation that he
occasionally borders on the staid. There's still plenty of conglomerate weirdness in
the visuals, however, and the combination of far-out tale and groaningly corny
ending (Henry P. can't write it all down because he can't find his pencil) will
endear this to its audience. DS
SEWALL, MARCIA James Towne: Strugglefor Survival; written and illus. by Marcia
Sewall. 
Atheneum, 2001 
40p
ISBN 0-689-81814-9 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Few writers can match Sewall in condensing the gritty challenges of American
colonization into powerful yet gracefully written picture book format, and here
she again ably conveys just how tenuous a foothold early settlers had in the New
World. A fictional carpenter recounts the voyage and first years of settlement,
when famine, fire, and sickness claimed a majority of colonists; Indians could be
saviors, trading partners, or vicious foes; and pampered gentlemen in search of
gold received bitter lessons on the necessity of laboring to survive. The narrator
employs the understated, almost dispassionate style of his contemporaries: "While
[Captain Newport] was away, and our guns packed in fat to keep them from rust-
ing in this humid air, a host of Indians overcame us. A boy was killed, and most of
the council injured. . . . Hastily we cut and shaped trees into a palisade to sur-
round our settlement. With God's merciful assistance, the task was done." At the
close of each segment of text Sewall includes a quote from the writings of actual
Jamestown settlers; these function as footnotes authenticating the observations in
the fictionalized memoir. Abundant illustrations in shaggy sepia lines and water-
color fill exhibit a rugged, earthy grace as they capture the vulnerability of the tiny
community in an alien environment. A list of characters and a glossary are ap-
pended. EB
Sfs, PETER 
Ballerina!; written and illus. by Peter Sis. 
Greenwillow, 2001 
26p
ISBN 0-688-17944-4 
$14.95 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
The balletomane protagonist, Terry, is a ballerina-at least in her dreams. Dance
dress-up turns her into a multitude of stars: her pink tutu puts her in The Nut-
cracker, her white feather boa places her in Swan Lake, her violet cape invites her
into Cinderella. Finally she puts on a rainbow of colored scarves and becomes the
best ballerina of all, much to the approbation of her adoring familial audience.
This doesn't have the effective contrast between solid realism and panoramic dreams
that Sfs' similarly styled books about Matt have had (such as Fire Truck, 11/99);
354 * THE BULLETIN
the narrative here is less imaginative, presenting essentially a pleasing list. The
spreads are attractive, with a thickly drawn child Terry on one side and an ethereal
ballerina Terry in a detailed scene opposite, but the foldout doesn't earn its keep,
being merely a long illustration that could have been compressed into a single
spread. The fantasy touches and the ballet showcase (since not all are named in the
text, there's an additional name-the-ballet game) are alluring, however, and this
may be just the thing to keep wannabe Giselles on their toes. DS
STREET, MICHAEL 
Lucky 13: Solitaire Games for Kids; illus. by Alan
Tiegreen. 
SeaStar, 2001 
128p
Trade ed. ISBN 1-58717-013-2 
$14.95
Paper ed. ISBN 1-58717-014-0 
$6.95 
R Gr. 4-8
Street has compiled an amusing assortment of card games for loners of all ages
(kids should not be allowed the monopoly implied by the subtitle), with a careful
introduction to terminology (builds, layouts, stockpiles, and wastepiles) and gen-
erally clear instructions (with strategy tips) on several dozen games, arranged ac-
cording to learning difficulty. He cautions, "Remember that just because a game
is easy to play, it doesn't mean it's easy to win!" Players will soon discover, after
attempting a few selections, a happy medium of instructional clarity and strategic
challenge suited to their own abilities. Tiegreen's card-characters dash through
the pages and provide some visual variety to the all-white human cast, though
befeathered cards sending smoke-signal strategies across the Grand Canyon are an
unfortunate choice. The chipper little vignettes are largely pleasant window dress-
ing, but the diagrams are beautifully designed life savers that often explicate plays
as well as layouts. When the day is rainy, friends aren't around, and "Klondike" is
simpy old hat, this is the place to turn. EB
SUEN, ANASTASIA 
Air Show; illus. by Cecco Mariniello. 
Holt, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-4952-5 
$15.95 
Ad 
5-7 yrs
The airshow scenario and rhymed text ("Cougars howl/ Panthers prowl") are pretty
much extraneous here; the real draw is full-page art featuring vintage aircraft in
flight and accompanying spreads and insets displaying overhead, front, and side
views in more precise detail. This is the stuff young plane spotters revel in, and
browsers will thumb through for their favorites-from the 1916 Sopwith Camel
to the 1980 McDonnell Douglas F-18 Hornet. Suen and Mariniello recognize
that children take their plane books seriously, and although the swooping line and
watercolor action scenes are often at visual odds with the static, angular diagram
boxes, the inclusion of dates and dimensions will be much appreciated. A list of
"famous firsts in flight" tops off the presentation, and kids will probably wear these
pages thin before they move on to more challenging text; this would also make an
absorbing storytime entry for youngsters with a mechanical bent. EB
TAYLOR, KIM 
Cissy Funk. 
HarperCollins, 2001 
[22 4 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029042-0 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029041-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Thirteen-year-old Cissy would be content in her tiny, sun-blistered Colorado town
if only her father would return and Ma would snap out of the profound depression
and erratic behaviors she has exhibited since the death of baby Violet. Aunt Vera-
MAY 2001 
* 
355
twenty-eight, stylish, and worldly-wise-blows into town like a breath of fresh air
and takes Cissy in hand as loving mentor and much-needed protector during Ma's
abusive rages. When Vera fully realizes how impossible life has become for Cissy,
she whisks her off to Denver; but tenuous employment and dark family secrets
make establishing a home together all but impossible. Vera is forced to send Cissy
back, leaving the girl even more confused and embittered than ever. Taylor drops
ample clues throughout her tale to solve all the "secrets and lies around here," and
readers should figure out long before Cissy does that Vera is really her mother-
who happily reclaims her in the end. Vera's lesbianism doesn't come as much of a
surprise, either, although Cissy's easy acceptance (in a three-line paragraph) is a bit
of a stretch, and a conclusion that finds Cissy, Vera, and Vera's lover living to-
gether happily ever after in Depression-era Los Angeles (all resolved in a final handful
of pages) is even harder to swallow. Cissy is a thoroughly sympathetic heroine,
though, and Vera is touching and credible in her earnest but sometimes fumbling
attempts at motherhood; readers can only wish them the happiness Taylor im-
probably promises. EB
WIESNER, DAVID, ad. 
The Three Pigs; ad. and illus. by David Wiesner. 
Clarion,
2001 
[4 0p]
ISBN 618-00701-6 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-3
You know it's not going to be just building materials and wolf exhalations when
David Wiesner does the famous pig trio, and indeed it's not. Things seem to go
according to plan until the wolf huffs at the first little pig and blows him right out
of the story; the oblivious text drones on, but the disappointed wolf looks in puzzle-
ment at the pig-free ruins. The second pig flees the story prior to consumption
too, and the first two pigs meet up with the third pig and go on a bookish adven-
ture. First they turn a page into a paper airplane and fly through white space, and
then they gambol through a library of picture books, finally fetching a dragon
from a knightly coloring-book tale and bringing him back to give the poor wolf
the surprise of his life. This isn't the most innovative or tightly conceived metatextual
folktale (Scieszka and Smith's The True Story of the Three Little Pigs by A. Wolf,
BCCB 9/89, still tops the porcine list), but it's an amusing one nonetheless. The
text is pretty much the poker-faced straight man here, with the art pulling the
weight of the jokes. Wiesner uses style to great effect: initially, the wolf-and-pig
drama unfolds in subdued, translucent watercolor with solid, simplified, literal
lines; the pigs become fuzzy and beady-eyed mischief-makers when they exit their
story, and they change character as they wander the books, most notably turning
candy-sweet in the bland adorableness of the nursery-rhyme scene. Imaginative
compositions include not only the airborne pigs in white space but one oinker
hogging the page and sticking his nose out at the reader, saying, "I think someone's
out there." This has the advantage over many postmodern reworkings of making
a very light reading demand, so kids whose artistic sense is more sophisticated than
their verbal perception will appreciate their chance to be in on the joke. DS
WILHELM, DOUG 
Raising the Shades. 
Farrar, 2001 
18 1 p
ISBN 0-374-36178-9 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Casey Butterfield doesn't hang out like other seventh-grade boys; he knows it's
important to be home when his dad gets there, or else he could be in major-league
356 
* THE BULLETIN
trouble if it's one of his dad's drinking days. He's gotten used to taking care of his
father, but he misses hanging out with his best friend, Oscar, and he resents his
mother for taking off and leaving him in this position. He's nonetheless uncertain
when his aunt begins to plan an intervention, because he's afraid that such a tactic
will destroy what little relationship he has left with his father. Wilhelm capably
depicts both Casey's anguish and his fear of change lest it result in something
worse; he's a believable kid and Oscar is a lively and amusing friend. There's a
programmatic side to the narrative, however, with a lot of explanations about alco-
holism, familial impact, and the blamelessness of the children; prescription turns
to melodrama in a friend's tale of her mother's death from substance abuse and in
the book's tendency to paint Dad's smoking pot in the garage as an unspeakable
horror. This has more youthful accessibility than many such treatments of the
problem, however, and the harsh picture may be an eyeopener for kids in a similar
predicament as well as those out of it. DS
WILLARD, NANCY 
The Moon & Riddles Diner and the Sunnyside Cafe; illus. by
Chris Butler. 
Harcourt, 2001 
[40p]
ISBN 0-15-201941-3 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
In a series of rhyming poems, Willard creates a loosely sketched world of fanciful
adventures, as Shoofly Sally rambles along in her search for the titular diner and
caf6. Initially written from Sally's perspective, the poems later employ the per-
spectives of various creatures and objects that she meets in her travels, and the
lyrical rhythms of the poetry echo the nonsense of nursery rhymes. Willard occa-
sionally refers to traditional rhymes and stories, as when cows are shown "Dancing
All Night" far above the proverbial moon or when a boy who turns into a golden
spoon enjoys hearing his mother recite the lines "and the dish ran away with the
spoon." The longest poem, "The Ballad of the Riddling Ghost and the
Chuggamonga Frog," borrows from folklore motifs when a frog survives a lengthy
battle by enlisting all her frog compatriots to spell her one after the other, appear-
ing to be a single frog of great endurance. Butler's cut-paper illustrations frame the
poems with textured paper collage techniques that are reminiscent of Wisniewski's
work; they're somewhat overbusy, but they're interestingly dimensional from a
distance, and they occasionally include holes in the collages that are then backlit,
creating objects that glow with light. Although the poems are cleverly connected
to create a more impressive effect together than apart, they are also lengthy enough,
taken as a whole, that younger listeners may not make it through the volume in
one sitting. Nevertheless, children who enjoy Sandburg's Rootabaga Stories and
other fanciful adventures will happily dine on this lyrical treat. Willard includes
recipes for foods from the Moon & Riddles Diner and the Sunnyside Cafd at the
end of the book. KM
WOLFE, FRANCES 
Where I Live; written and illus. by Frances Wolfe. 
Tundra,
2001 
[32p]
ISBN 0-88776-529-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
The answer to the implicit question of where exactly the young female narrator
lives ("the SEASIDE") is spelled out by the initial letter of each unrhymed couplet,
and by more overt visual clues in the double-page spreads that offer readers an up-
MAY 2001 
* 357
close and personal view of the treasures and pleasures to be found there. Strikingly
larger than life images predominate (binoculars with 7" diameter lenses, an enor-
mous child's hand holding a seashell), their stability, along with the consistency of
the layout, mitigating the effects of a dizzying variety of perspectives. The simple,
rhythmic text sometimes falls into cliche ("Sunbeams sparkle like diamonds on the
water"), and the oil on masonite illustrations render objects too literally (the "hid-
den figures" in the clouds are readily visible) and human figures too statically (the
narrator's face-seen only sporadically-is almost doll-like). Despite the senti-
mental photorealism, the arresting natural scenes-rendered in clear blues, golds,
and greens-may draw viewers. An accessible model for imitation, this title could
enliven thematic units on seasons or regions. FK
WOLFF, VIRGINIA EUWER 
True Believer. Atheneum, 2001 
264p
ISBN 0-689-82827-6 
$17.00 
R* Gr. 7-12
See this month's Big Picture, p. 329, for review.
WOODSON, JACQUELINE 
Sweet, Sweet Memory; illus. by Floyd Cooper. 
Jump at
the Sun/Hyperion, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-7868-0241-3 
$14.99 
R 
5-10 yrs
Sarah's gardener grandfather has just passed on, but Sarah hasn't forgotten him or
what he told her: "'Like us,' Grandpa said, holding the rich brown earth in his
hand, 'a part of it never dies. Everything and everyone goes on and on.'" Sarah
herself tells the story of her grandfather's wake, softly relating the events of the day
while she quietly struggles with her own grief. Safe in a circle of loving friends and
relatives, Sarah listens to stories about her beloved grandpa. Asked to tell a story
about him herself, Sarah leans into her grandmother and cries instead. "'It'll pass,'
Uncle Mitchell says. ... 
'A little bit at a time. Everything and everyone goes on
and on.' 'That's my story,'" Sarah whispers, and she learns that it was Grandpa's
story, too, and he told it to everyone. Woodson manages to convey, in a brief text
of well-chosen words, the passage of time and the amelioration of heartfelt grief.
The nostalgic golden glow of Cooper's pastels is held in check here with touches of
deep blue, red, and violet, and highlights ofwhite-Sarah's white dress, a woman's
shawl, Uncle's white shirt-that spark off the pages. Again Woodson shows that
it's possible to distill a complex topic into thirty-two pages without missing a thing.
JMD
YOLEN, JANE 
Odysseus in the Serpent Maze; by Jane Yolen and Robert J.
Harris. 
HarperCollins, 2001 
[256p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028735-7 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028734-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Odysseus, Greek hero and storyteller, is given a lively adolescence in this first title
in the "Young Heroes" fantasy series. Thirteen-year-old Odysseus and his loyal
friend, Mentor, hunt for wild boar, survive a shipwreck, rescue Odysseus' future
wife, Penelope, and her well-known cousin Helen (soon to be of Troy) from pi-
rates, and, with the help of satyr Silenius, escape Daedalus' Labyrinth and defeat
the multi-headed serpent, Ladon. Phew! The action is fast and furious, and if the
dialogue has the ring of the modern-day schoolyard, middle-graders won't stop
reading long enough to quibble. Obvious characterizations (Odysseus is brash
358 
* THE BULLETIN
and brave, Mentor is loyal and cautious, Penelope is patient and sensible, Helen is
spoiled and self-absorbed) and occasional clumsy exposition distract somewhat
from the action, but there is humor aplenty to keep the pages turning. Readers
with some background in Greek mythology will appreciate the foreshadowing of
coming events, but that knowledge isn't necessary to get carried along by the break-
neck pace. A concluding note entitled "What Is True About This Story" provides
information about ancient Greece and Greek mythology. JMD
ZAUNDERS, BO 
Feathers, Flaps, &r Flops: Fabulous Early Fliers; illus. by Roxie
Munro. 
Dutton, 2001 
4 8p
ISBN 0-525-46466-2 
$17.99 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Seven headliners (men and women) from the field of aviation are featured here,
tracing the history of early flight from the brilliant inventiveness of the eighteenth
century Montgolfier Brothers to the brazen blarney of "Wrong Way" Corrigan in
the 1930s, with the derring-do of Bessie Coleman, Jimmy Doolittle, and their
aeronautic kin in between. Zaunders is a marvelous storyteller with a keen eye for
detail ("Minutes later [the balloonists] were nearly skewered on a church tower ...
On landing, Pilatre's coat caught fire. Fortunately, he wasn't wearing it"), and
readers who enjoy the gossipy biographical style of Kathleen Krull's popular Lives
of... series will welcome the similar blend of breezy tone and solid information.
Munro's line and watercolor pictures tend to be a bit splashy, but since so many
early flights culminated in a "splash," perhaps that's to be expected. This is bound
to be an engaging cover-to-cover solo read, but science and social-studies teachers
will want to consider incorporating a sketch or two into lessons as well; kids'll be
staring off into space, and for once that will be a good thing. EB
MAY 2001 
* 359
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
Ellis, Sarah. From Reader to Writer: Teaching Writing through Classic Children's
Books. Groundwood/Douglas & McIntyre, 2000. ISBN 0-88899-372-2; $24.95.
176p.
Books about writing often lean towards the abstract and airy-fairy or, especially
when geared toward young people, the dully didactic. Ellis writes with the voice
and knowledge of a reader as well as a writer and the experience of a librarian, and
her book-centered approach to writing is both logical and inviting. Following a
spirited introduction, sixteen chapters deal with sixteen creators of children's lit-
erature (though there's a Canadian slant, most of the subjects are available in U.S.
libraries as well). Each chapter includes a bit of background, usually incorporating
a youthful biographical anecdote, information on the author's early reading, a
focus on a particular title, some classroom ideas, and a short annotated bibliogra-
phy of books with a thematic connection. The book is shrewd and inventive
about classroom possibilities (pointing out the scene in Travers' Mary Poppins that
doesn't appear in the movie and therefore doesn't immediately recall Julie Andrews,
for instance), and it's particularly good at idea-prompting questions, which pepper
just about every chapter; random tidbits ranging from practical to informational
are interpolated in smaller print and set off with an apple symbol. Ellis displays as
much skill and wit in her encouragement of writing as in her writing itself; that's a
rare and welcome combination. This will appeal to budding young writers as well
as inspiring classroom activity. DS
Zipes, Jack. Sticks and Stones: The Troublesome Success of Children's Literature
from Slovenly Peter to Harry Potter. Routledge, 2001. ISBN 0-415-92811-7; $24.95.
213p.
Nine essays (seven based on talks given by Zipes between 1996-2000) address
topics in children's literature from a political and sociological standpoint. Zipes
begins by taking aim at corporations (including publishing conglomerates) that
are preoccupied with profit, viewing children as nothing more than a potentially
lucrative consumer group. Additional essays consider matters such as the place of
children's literature in academia, storytelling and its revival in the United States,
and the Harry Potter phenomenon. Zipes seems to view children's literature as
monolithic, and he's inclined toward sweeping generalizations ("Children's books
are formulaic and banal, distinguishable from one another only by their brand
labels"); the book is also marred by easily avoidable errors in names ("Newberry"
for Newbery, "Greenway" for Greenaway, "Mazier" for Mazer, for example).
Nonetheless, his passion for his topic is clear, and though his theories may exasper-
ate those practitioners who use children's literature with actual children on a daily
basis, his essays spotlight complex issues that deserve wide consideration. An ex-
tensive bibliography and detailed index are included. JMD
360 
* THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Adoption-fiction: Little
Africa-folklore: MacDonald
African Americans: Fradin; Lester
The Blues
African Americans-stories:
Woodson
Airplanes: Suen; Zaunders
Alcoholism-fiction: Wilhelm
Aliens-fiction: Scieszka
Aliens-stories: Graves
American Indians-fiction: Matthaei;
Mikaelsen
Animals: Ashman; Boynton
Animals-stories: Finn; MacDonald;
Masurel
Antisemitism-fiction: Matas
Aunts-fiction: Avi Prairie;
O'Connor
Aviation: Suen; Zaunders
Ballet-stories: Sfs
Beaches-stories: Wolfe, F.
BEDTIME STORIES: Chorao
BIOGRAPHIES: Fradin; Lester The
Blues; MacLeod;
Brothers and sisters-fiction: Lester
When; Little
Camping-poetry: George
Camping-stories: London White
Cards: Street
Cats-stories: MacDonald
Civil War-fiction: Matas
Civil War-stories: Lewin
Clothes-stories: Crunk
CONCEPT BOOKS: How Many;
Letters
Cousins-fiction: Fleischman
Cowboys: Sandler
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Chambers; Fleischman; Karr;
Kehret; Lester When; Mikaelsen
Dancers and dancing-stories: Sfs
Dating-fiction: Naylor
Death and dying-fiction: Kehret
Death and dying-stories: Woodson
Depression, the-fiction: Taylor
Deserts: Sayre
Dinosaurs-stories: Kastner
Disabilities-fiction: Avi Prairie
Drug abuse-fiction: Fletcher
EPISTOLARY FICTION:
Armstrong
Ethics and values: Matas;
Mikaelsen; Roos; Wolfe, V.
Explorers and exploring-fiction:
Armstrong
Families-fiction: Fleischman;
Fletcher; Haddix; Pearson
FANTASY: DeVita; Elliott; Nix;
Yolen
Fathers and sons-fiction: Fletcher;
Wilhelm
Fathers and sons-stories: London
White
Fathers-stories: Browne
Fears-stories: Chorao
Feuds-fiction: Fleischman; Pearson
Fish-fiction: DeVita
Flying-stories: Raschka
FOLK AND FAIRY TALES:
Grimm; Huck; MacDonald;
Wiesner
Food and eating-fiction: Elliott
Friendship-fiction: Chambers;
Naylor; Roos
MAY 2001 
* 361
Friendship-stories: Masurel
FUNNY STORIES: Crunk; DeVita
Games: Street
Graduation: Boynton
Grandfathers-stories: Crunk;
Gillard; Woodson
Guinea pigs-stories: Rylant
Heroes-fiction: Yolen
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Armstrong; Avi Don't; Karr;
Matas; Matthaei; Taylor
History, U.S.: Fradin; Lester The
Blues; Lewin; Matthaei; Sandler;
Sewall
History, world: MacLeod;
Matthaei; Zaunders
Homosexuality-fiction: Taylor;
Wolff
Houses: Ashman
Insects-fiction: Elliott
Jews-fiction: Matas
Language arts: George; Scieszka
Latinos-fiction: Chambers
LOVE STORIES: Pearson
Magic and magicians-fiction: Nix
Monsters-stories: Chorao
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Chambers; Haddix; Karr;
O'Connor; Taylor; Wolff
Moving-fiction: Kurtz
Murder-fiction: Lester When
Music and musicians: Lester The
Blues
Music and musicians-stories:
Gillard
MYTHOLOGY, CLASSICAL:
Yolen
Nature study: Ashman; Sayre
Nursery rhymes-stories: O'Malley
Ocean-stories: Wolfe, F.
Orphans-fiction: Kehret
Parents-stories: Chorao
Pets-stories: Graves
Pigs-fiction: Wiesner
POETRY: George; London Park;
Willard
Princesses-stories: Kastner
Rabbits-stories: Grimm
Racism-fiction: Matas
Rafting-stories: London White
Reading aloud: George
Reading, easy: Avi Prairie; Little
School-fiction: Avi Don't; Haddix;
Kurtz; Naylor; Scieszka
Science: Ashman; Sayre
Scotland-folklore: Huck
Seasons-poetry: London Park
Self-confidence-stories: Raschka
Shadow puppets-stories: Chorao
Sisters-fiction: Kurtz; Pearson
Slavery: Fradin
Space-stories: Graves
Spiritualism-fiction: Karr
Storytelling: Grimm; Huck;
MacDonald; Woodson
Storytime: Ashman; Crunk; Finn;
Grimm; Johnston; Kastner;
MacDonald; Masurel; Sayre
SURVIVAL STORIES: Kehret;
Mikaelsen
TALL TALES: Scieszka
Teddy bears-stories: Johnston
Toads: Sayre
Toys-stories: Johnston; Kastner;
Rylant
Voyages and travel-stories: Graves;
London White
West, the: Sandler
West, the-fiction: Fleischman
World War II-fiction: Avi Don't
Writers and writing: MacLeod
L 
A
ISBN 0-87845-105-6;
Number 39; 143 pages;
paper; $21.95*
STORY: FROM FnREPLACE TO CYBERSPACE
Connecting Children and Narrative
EDITED BY BETSY HEARNE, JANICE M. DEL NEGRO,
CHRISTINE JENKINS, AND DEBORAH STEVENSON
Papers Presented at the Allerton Park Institute
Sponsored October 26-28, 1997, by the
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois
In our interest in children's welfare, we often forget that
children are not simply passive receptacles for whatever
treasure or trash the adult world throws at them but are
lively agents who are continually interacting with their
environment. Children actively create meaning as read-
ers, viewers, and listeners. The 39
h Allerton Park Insti-
tute papers emphasize the critical need to connect chil-
dren and narrative as a way to affect their development
as listeners, readers, viewers, and evaluators of litera-
ture-and information in all forms.
The Bulletin Storytelling Review, Volume 1
Recommend-only reviews of storytelling
audio- and videotapes
EDITED BYJANICE M. DEL NEGRO AND DEBORAH STEVENSON
Add to your library this vital compendium of material
not regularly reviewed in other publications. Designed
to be a tool for selection and collection development,
the first volume of The Bulletin StorytellingReview contains:
* 
162 alphabetically-arranged reviews of tapes by sto-
rytellers such as Joe Bruchac, Len Cabral, Donald
Davis, Barbara McBride-Smith, J. J. Reneaux, and
Laura Simms
* Price, distributor, and grade level information for
each review
* Ordering information for each distributor listed
* An index that allows readers to search for tapes by
type of story or possible use
ISBN 0-87845-106-4; 99 pages;
paper; $14.95*
I I, I ml, I, I 
ý',l IS Pt IN icýl I l(q I,( )t -1((, 1ý, ý111 ;I,;, 
ý,11"( 0 
11 .
Pl, 
I'(1till-Ld, \ 1ý.I, 
I ilid (11ý(k'
t1l, I Im, I'll, ()t
I t I I I I I 1 1 
11 1 1 
1 t 1111 
1 11 11 '-' t 
t 1
i 
I I i I 
ic ý 
I I 
I I 
1 
1 11 
Ll I)LI I 
It t
I 
R
Teachin lng
The Professional Magazine 
for Teachers
K pin in 
leachinPik-
with the
latest in
Teaching!
Teaching K-8 is filled with hundreds of unique ideas and
activities that help teachers present new challenges to their
students, learn new concepts and develop new skills.
Monthly articles include:
Carol Otis Hurst on...
* Children's Books * Teaching in the Library
Plus... * The Parent Connection * Interviews with
children's book authors and illustrators * Science
* Technology and more!
Don't miss this valuable
resource for your library -
subscribe today.
Call 800-678-8793 or visit
our website at
www.TeachingK-8.com
I
The
FIVE OWLS
A publication for readers personally and professionally
involved in children's literature.
THE FIVE OWLS is a bimonthly
publication devoted to children's
literature, bringing together many
of today's finest books with writers
whose contributions are shaping the
future of children's books. A yearly
bscriDtion is available for $35.00.
THE FIVE OWLS for Parents
Schools, libraries and other institutions that have a subscription
to the magazine can receive free quantities of THE FIVE OWLS for
Parents-it's short on advertising and long on book picks,
parenting information, and child development content that
is of real value to families.
For more information,
call 612-377-2004
or visit www.fiveowls.com
Illustramo by Hilary Kn 
fom Eloise (Simon and Schuster, 1955)
As'
s;
by Jean Little
"Y "Emma's family is adopting four-year-old Max,
and Emma has unrealistic big-sister ideas that [aren't appreciated by]
the angry litde boy. Max takes an immediate shine to Emma's friend Sally, and
over time Sally helps Emma learn how to be a big sister. Appealing [full-color]
illustrations perfectly complement [this] first choice for most libraries and an
excellent book to recommend to families with adopted or foster children:'
-Starred 
review I Kirkus Reviews
Vý "An intense story that [shows] both siblings' hurt, anger and displacement,
and, finally, their bonding": 
-Starred 
review I ALA Bookist
Ages 4-8. $14.95Tr (0-06-258348-3); $1489 Lb (0-06-028349-1)
Jean Little and Jennifer Plecas's previous I Can Read Book
Emnm's Magic Winter
Ages 4-8. $14.95 Tr (0-06-025389-4); $14.89 Lb (0-06-025390-8); $3.95 Pb (0-06-443706-X)
a 
HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019 * www.harperchildrens.com
-- An ICan ReadBo
A TALL TALE OF NIGERIA
Aaron Shepard * illustrated by David Wisn
a "Caldecott Medalist Wisniewski is clearly the 'Master Man' of paper-cut
illustration, powerfully demonstrated again with the delightful [full-
color] illustrations for this traditional tale. Shadusa proclaims himself the
strongest man in the world -
Master Man. [But when] he is challenged
by an enormous man who proclaims himself the real Master Man ...
A masterful picture book." 
-Starred 
review/ Kirkus Reviews
r "While the fresh, funny, and perfectly paced narrative simply screams
story hour, the hugely appealing visual presentation will easily win the
most reluctant independent reader." -Starred 
review/ The Horn Book
~* 
"Big meets bigger in this humorous pourquoi tale. An oversized
good time." 
-Starred review/School Library Journal
Ages 5 up. $15.95 Tr (0-688-13783-0); $15.89 Lb (0-688-13784-9)
M HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019 * www.harperchildrens.com
I 
' 
/ 
wail li 
135 Avnue 
the Amneas, New York, NY L 19
www.iiachriprenstcom
University of Illinois Press 
PERIODICALS
1325 South Oak Street 
POSTAGE
Champaign, IL 61820 
PAID
U.S.A. 
CHAMPAIGN, IL
RETURN SERVICE REQUESTED
~t~~~
Univer
1325 S
ChamF
U.S.A.
RETURE
You may now access The Bulletin Online with an individualized username
and password.
The Bulletin Online is available only to print subscribers, and includes the
1998-2000 volume years plus the current issues as they are published.
The online version allows you to search the current issue or the entire
database by author, title, age, or grade level.
To access The Bulletin Online:
I. Go to http://www.prairienet.orglccbl
2. You will be asked for a username and password, both of which are set
as the four- or five-digit number printed in the upper left-hand corner
of the mailing label on your print copy. When entering, do not
include the letter at the end of this number sequence.
3. The first time you log in, you will be required to change your pass-
word to something other than your username.
Remember, The Bulletin Online is not licensed for public use; only
individual print subscribers and institutional subscribers' staff are granted
access, so please do not share your access codes. We are working to
expand The Bulletin Online's capabilities and therefore create broader
electronic subscription options for individuals and institutions. Look for
details later this year.
Non-subscribers can learn more about The Bulletin of the Center for
Children's Books at our homepage: http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb/
Please e-mail any feedback or questions to: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu.
~t~~~
N,IL
0008-9036(200105)54:9;1 -A
-
-
** *'g'' 
• 
"
7
,*y 
/
