I LLJNOI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
JAMES MARSHALL MAURICE SENDAK
"-j 
"Just look at the cover and you know you're in for fun ...
Grown-up kids will like this as much as little ones."
-
Starred review / ALA Booklist
-W -"Sendak's irrepressible art [and] Marshall's understated text...
convey a lone wolf elevated above his base nature by the
transforming power of art" -
Starred review / Publishers Weekly
"Sendak and Marshall are the perfect pair ... The end result is
swinely divine ... It's hog heaven!" -
School Library journal
All ages. $15.95TR (0-06-205171-7) * $15.89LB (0-06-205172-5)
MICHAEL DI CAPUA BOOKS * HARPER COLLINS PUBLISHERS
I 
+ 
J"2-.+ 
I 
I 
lll
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
November 1999
Vol. 53 No. 3
A LOOK INSIDE
81 
THE BIG PICTURE
Frenchtown Summer by Robert Cormier
83 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
87 
* Tune in Anytime by Caroline Cooney
89 
* Bud, Not Buddy by Christopher Paul Curtis
91 
* Bark, George written and illus. by Jules Feiffer
95 
* A Is For... ?: A Photographer's Alphabet ofAnimals written and illus.
with photographs by Henry Horenstein
112 * Arthur Yorinks's The Flying Latke by Arthur Yorinks; illus. by William
Steig and with photographs by Paul Colin and Arthur Yorinks
113 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
114 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL
61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor (JMD)
Deborah Stevenson, Associate Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison
Elaine A. Bearden, Reviewer (EAB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Janice N. Harrington, Reviewer (JNH)
Fern Kory, Reviewer (FK)
CENTER STAFF
Melanie Kimball
Jeannette Hulick
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $60.00; individuals, $50.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $5.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from Bell & Howell, 300 North Zeeb
Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson Associates,
P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to the
University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 51 E. Armory Ave., Champaign,
IL 61820-6601. E-mail: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1999 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Victor Stabin from Frenchtown Summer ©1999. Used by permission of
Delacorte Press.
NOVEMBER 1999 
* 
81
THE BIG PICTURE
Frenchtown Summer
by Robert Cormier
November generally finds the Bulletin cover graced with a seasonal image evoking
the Thanksgiving holiday or preparing readers for the shivers of lengthening nights,
so a book set in the "Sahara afternoons" and "lingering evenings" of summer vaca-
tion seems to be a bit of an aberration. Readers, though, who have accompanied
Cormier on previous tours of the Frenchtown section of fictional Monument,
Massachusetts (featured in Heroes, Fade, and others) know that dark secrets lurk
behind its tenement walls. On this literary visit, narrator Eugene recalls the sum-
mer of his twelfth birthday, with its grim legends of suicide and murder and muffled
rattling of family skeletons in their closets-themes sure to augment the chill of
late autumn nights.
Lonely, sensitive, and bookish, Eugene generally hovers at the fringe of
boyish activities, content to ponder his place within the universe that is Frenchtown
and the unsolved mysteries and half-understood bits of family lore that whirl around
him. His musing takes the form of first-rate free verse, rich in imagery, concrete
and accessible to all but the most adamant poetry resisters. Many of the entries
stand alone, specific to their fictional locale yet universal in their emotional and
situational appeal. "The Eyes Have It" finds Eugene reveling in his first hours of
clear vision through steel-rimmed glasses: "I knelt down to watch/ a glistening
ant/ at the curb's rim,/ and in my glorious generosity,/ my state of grace,/ did not
squash it underfoot." In "Forbidden Territory" Eugene frightens himself at night
by imagining that the perpetrator of an unsolved murder still stalks the town,
"[k]neeling in St. Jude's Church on Sundays,/ buying hamburg steak at Founier's
Meat Market,/ ... and, maybe,/ maybe looking right into my eyes/ as he passed
unidentified/ on Third Street."
These seemingly discrete memoirs harbor deftly placed clues to "unan-
swered questions and mysteries" that unify the freestanding verses into a cohesive
novel. A particularly intriguing plot strand revolves around Marielle Le Moyne,
victim of the unidentified assailant who, according to whispered legend, strangled
her with a necktie. It is clear in "White Shirts" that Eugene has never regarded
bachelor Uncle Med's long-standing habit of wearing his dress shirts without a tie
as anything more than a mild eccentricity. When Uncle Med commits suicide (in
"The Disappearance"), Eugene finds an inexplicable box of ornate tie pins in Med's
dresser and this innocent idiosyncrasy takes on nefarious significance. Whether or
not such circumstantial "evidence" is proof of Med's guilt, Eugene's nightmares
cause him to bury the tie pins in the backyard and his suspicions deep in his heart
(in "Mysteries").
82 
* 
THE BULLETIN
The most perplexing of Eugene's summer conundrums, though, is whether
his father loves him. Throughout the poems Eugene notes his father's open affec-
tion for his "movie star" beautiful, lilac-scented mother, and he never doubts that
brother Raymond secures the affection of all with his easygoing, sociable ways.
But Eugene stays at arm's length from his father, feeling that he "was closer to me
waving from the street/ than nearby in the tenement." The opportunity for rap-
prochement comes when Eugene spots an orange airplane in the backyard of a
tenement and eagerly reports it to skeptical friends; when they arrive at the site, the
plane is nowhere to be found and Eugene is again a pitiable and foolish figure
among his peers. His father, with breathtaking tact and grace, rescues Eugene
from social embarrassment, and the bond between father and son is forged and
revealed with near-magical clarity.
If some mysteries linger unsolved past the summer, at least Eugene real-
izes that his father's love is uniquely packaged and subtly offered just for him.
Although Frenchtown may go down in the YA gazetteer as a place of shadows and
sin, at least Cormier's closing benediction-"And we walked home together/ in
the tender sunlight/ of a Frenchtown summer"--dispels many of its grimmer memo-
ries. (Imprint information appears on p. 88.)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ALDERSON, 
BRIAN, 
ad. 
The Tale of the Turnip; illus. by Fritz
Wegner. 
Candlewick, 1999 
28p
ISBN 0-7636-0494-1 
$12.99 
R 4-8 yrs
Let us be perfectly clear: this is not yet another version of "The Great Big Enor-
mous Turnip"; this is an elegant tale of generosity rewarded and greed getting
what it deserves. An old farmer who doesn't have much ("a ramshackle cottage,
with a few chickens, and suchlike") lived across the way from "an arrogant old
squire" (who "lived in a great swanky house, with stables and gardens, and fields
and meadows, and chickens and pigs, and cows and horses, and who knows what
else"). The old farmer goes out into his field and plants turnips ("Some of them
grew and some of them didn't"), but there was one particular turnip that grew
bigger than the poor farmer's cottage, so the farmer and his wife heave it onto a
wagon and take it to the king ("'Stone the crows!' said the king. 'That's the most
champion turnip I ever did see!'") who gives them a cartload of gold. The squire,
incensed by the farmer's good fortune, takes a "gussied-up" horse as a gift to the
king, and he is rewarded-with the turnip. Alderson's adaptation of this old En-
glish folktale is a storyteller's delight, with spare but vividly adept language that
propels the storyline. The humor is understated but obviously present, especially
in the squire and the king, whose exclamatory comments add a great deal of wit to
the proceedings. Wegner's watercolor and ink illustrations have an old-fashioned
NOVEMBER 1999 
* 83
air, with a jolliness of expression in the less articulated but still expressive dot-eyed
characters that provides a humorous contrast to the formality of the skillfully ren-
dered landscape details. Put this one on the readaloud and storytelling shelves,
and pretty soon your youngsters will be saying things like "By gum!", by jove.
JMD
ATKINS, CATHERINE 
When Jeff Comes Home. 
Putnam, 1999 
[224p]
ISBN 0-399-23366-0 
$17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 9-12
Jeff comes home at sixteen, three years after he was kidnapped from a parking lot
by Ray Slaight, who kept the boy with him as unwilling companion and forced
sexual partner. Jeff is determined, however, that his sexual abuse remain a secret,
so that only he knows about the experiences he feels separate him forever from his
family and friends. Soon, however, pressure from the authorities to provide infor-
mation mounts, as does the attention of the press-which results in Jeffs secret
becoming headlines. There's a certain ironic prurience to the subject, and the
exhortations of various adults to Jeff to tell his secrets seem as much in the aid of
reader eavesdropping as in service of Jeffs psychological health; also, the book
touches on themes but leaves them unexplored or unresolved (was Jeff told by his
captor, as the book hints, that his family didn't want him anymore?). The story
(which bears some loose resemblances to the true story of Steven Stayner) remains
compelling, however, and Atkins writes without melodrama of the suspicion that
permeates Jeffs viewpoint and the agony of conflicting emotions that drives him.
She also draws a sharply credible picture of the uneasiness of Jeff's age-mates, an
uneasiness that purges itself by blaming and ostracizing the victim. Use this as a
quasi-sequel to Susan Beth Pfeffer's The Year without Michael (BCCB 9/87) so
that readers can have a look at both sides of the drama. DS
Avi, ed. 
Second Sight: Stories for a New Millennium. Philomel, 1999 
[112p]
ISBN 0-399-23458-6 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
Avi has assembled a stellar cast for this production of eight thematically connected
short stories. He, Madeleine L'Engle, Richard Peck, Janet Taylor Lisle, Rita Wil-
liams-Garcia, Nancy Springer, Michael Cadnum, and Natalie Babbitt conjure up
visions of past and future as they ponder the impact of the changing calendar.
Avi's opening story, "Oswin's Millennium," takes place in 999, when a young serf,
terrified by the coming of the end of the world, seeks salvation; Rita Williams-
Garcia's richly textured "Clay," a story about the passing on and value of tradition,
is lyrically poetic; Madeleine L'Engle's "Rob and the Millennium Bug" pokes ir-
reverent fun at end-of-the-millennium trauma. The stories are refreshingly indi-
vidual, yet they are united by a common theme that makes this collection a cohesive
chain of tales; the juxtapositions of light and dark, humor and pathos, expectation
and surprise result in a balanced yet varied grouping. This is a timely collection for
adolescents looking toward the new age. JMD
BENNETT, CHERIE 
Zink. 
Delacorte, 1999 
242p
ISBN 0-385-32669-6 
$15.95 
M 
Gr. 5-8
Becky is struggling with the usual sixth-grade hurdles of shifting friendships and
questions of popularity when she's faced with a more serious one: leukemia. Sud-
84 
* THE BULLETIN
denly her life is chemotherapy and hospitalization, hair loss and nausea, and her
worried parents' attempt to protect her by soft-pedaling the awfulness of the expe-
rience makes her feel all the more isolated. Enter the Z'bras, a herd of magical
rapping zebras (and one green monkey) who travel from Africa to Becky's hospital
bedside to inspire and comfort her throughout her treatment, return to school,
and subsequent relapse. This is an unusual illness drama in that Becky does in fact
succumb to her disease (the book finishes with her little brother's gaining consola-
tion and strength from his big sister's diary) and that it's nonetheless her story and
not that of a surviving friend; there are also some intriguing views of patienthood
as Becky becomes a veteran of the hospital and anti-cancer treatment experience.
These merits are buried under the book's flaws, however: the characterizations are
generally facile and the writing, particularly the one-sentence paragraphs, amateur-
ishly dramatic; though there is much examination of the nature of bravery, there's
no explanation of why bravery makes the situation any different. The Z'bras are
glib and platitudinous ("It takes a very plucky person ... to admit she isn't very
plucky") animatrons, the plot thread about the green monkey's wishing to be a
zebra adds to the didacticism without enhancing the plot, and the theology of the
legendary zebra savior Zink is muddled and contrived. Acknowledgments, an af-
terword explaining acute lymphocytic leukemia, a Swahili glossary, and illustra-
tions by children in treatment for cancer make the book's good intentions crystal
clear; unfortunately, those good intentions founder in the book's shallows. DS
THE BIG WIDE-MOUTHED FROG: A TRADITIONAL TALE; illus. by Ana Martin
Larrafiaga. 
Candlewick, 1999 
20p
ISBN 0-7636-0807-6 $10.99 
R 
2-6 yrs
The wide-mouthed frog story is a familiar one to children and has been part of
schoolyard lore for a long time. Larrafiaga sets the cumulative romp in Australia,
peopling (animaling?) her story with a kangaroo, koala, possum, emu, and croco-
dile, in addition to the title froggie himself. The text is essentially a dialogue be-
tween the wide-mouthed frog and the animals he meets and greets: "The first
creature he met had big thumping feet. 'Hey you! Big Thumping Feet! Who are
you, and what do you eat?' shouted the wide-mouthed frog. 'I'm a kangaroo,' said
Kangaroo, 'and I eat grass.' 'Well I'm a big wide-mouthed frog!' shouted the wide-
mouthed frog. 'And I eat flies!'" And so it goes, until the frog meets Crocodile
and discovers that she eats big wide-mouthed frogs. A combination of gouache,
watercolor, and collage, the illustrations are color-saturated and perky, the car-
toony characters outlined in black crayon and set against the flat but brightly hued
horizon, and the wide-mouthed frog the picture of saucy, irreverent braggadocio.
The compositions are uncluttered and the graphics clean, making this a useful title
for group sharing. The possibilities for audience participation abound, and the
popularity of this story among children will make the book a storytime favorite.
Be sure to note the responses of the eavesdropping fly on each spread as frog dis-
cusses his eating habits. JMD
BLACKWOOD, GARY L. 
Moonshine. Cavendish, 1999 
158p
ISBN 0-7614-5056-4 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 6-9
The moonshine in the title of this well-crafted historical novel refers to the illegally
produced corn liquor that thirteen-year-old Thad delivers to locals and "touristers"
in this dry Ozark town during the Depression, as well as to the lies he tells about
NOVEMBER 1999 
* 85
his activities and the lies others tell him about theirs. By the end of the novel, he
has learned the truth about his absent father, a veteran of World War I suffering
from a post-traumatic stress disorder, and has become friends with the undercover
revenue agent tracking down Thad's supplier. Thad is an engaging protagonist,
and the narration capably captures his voice and attitudes, such as when he trips
and flies "arse over tin cup" running from the Sheriff and when he decides to wear
shoes so touristers won't take pictures of him like he was "some local curiosity."
The novel has a great respect for place and an understanding that one can outgrow
the possibilities of a particular locale, as Thad does, unwillingly realizing that "when
he'd said to Momma just then that he had everything he wanted, he'd felt himself
to be off balance somehow, as if he'd been sure he was standing with both feet
firmly planted on the truth and then it had given way a little under him, like one
of those rotten boards on the porch." Clear information about how stills work
(and why they were illegal), solid advice about gun safety and the value of self-
confidence, and even grammar lessons are integrated naturally and effectively into
the novel's theme that "a bit of moonshine might seem harmless enough, but if
you weren't careful it was liable to build up and expand into something that blew
up in your face." Readers will appreciate the novel's quiet humor and consistent
clarity, and its thoughtful depiction of the ways we grow up. FK
BROOKE, WILLIAM J. AIsforAARRGH! Cotler/HarperCollins, 1999 
249p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023394-X 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023393-1 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Those readers who fancied Brooke's thoughtful, witty retellings of traditional tales
(A Telling of the Tales, BCCB 5/90, Untold Tales, 9/92, etc.) may be surprised by
this new novel, a tongue-in-cheek take on the evolution of language, capitalism,
and politics. Caveboy Mog spontaneously begins making up words (nouns, to be
exact) to name the things around him and his tribe. He moves from nouns to
verbs to adjectives, creating a language with complex grammatical rules. The ar-
rival of a young girl who rapidly acquires enough facility with language to become
the tribe storyteller irks Mog somewhat, but eventually the two of them run off
together and set up housekeeping in a cave by the sea. This leaves the tribe at the
mercenary mercy of Drog, who proceeds to twist language to his own ends, taking
over the tribe and all its goods, and winning the dubious honor of being the world's
first politician-cum-slumlord. Brooke has created an extended allegory here, and
there is some real humor in his depictions of man and his foibles. There is not,
unfortunately, enough action to sustain the pace, and the characters are never fully
realized. Still, AARGRH! works fairly well as an example of academic and political
satire, and those readers who can appreciate the humor may find enough to chuckle
over here. JMD
BURLEIGH, ROBERT, ad. 
Hercules; illus. by Raul Col6n. 
Silver Whistle/Harcourt
Brace, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-15-201667-8 
$16.00 
M 
7-10 yrs
An account of the last of Hercules' twelve labors, the retrieval of the dog Cerberus
from the Underworld, is rendered here in a reverent prose-poem. Hercules enters
the Underworld, where Hades himself challenges him to battle the vicious Cerberus
with only his bare hands. With the help of the goddess Athena, Hercules is victo-
rious, and he returns to the upper world and the acclaim of the people. Surpris-
86 
* THE BULLETIN
ingly, for such a lively subject, the text has little momentum. The language is stiff
and distancing, with choppy rhythms and a majestic pace that hinders the story-
telling. Burleigh's Hercules has modern sensibilities; he is an introspective charac-
ter who, attempting to complete the labors so he can "be free to live his own life,"
dwells self-consciously on his fears and motivations. Col6n's neatly drafted water-
color and colored pencil illustrations glow with his usual burnished gold palette;
while several of the action scenes are excitingly composed, they are, however, only
momentarily intriguing. The story's lack of dramatic suspense will keep even the
audience attracted by Col6n's art from connecting to this adventure. JMD
BURTON, MARTIN NELSON 
The Whale Comedian; illus. by Charles
Jordan. 
London Town, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-9666490-8-7 
$15.95 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Although Finston is the quiet, serious type in the classroom, his somewhat bizarre
aspiration for the future is to add a little hilarity to the lives of cetaceans across the
globe. To this end he works up a kind of lounge act, replete with pratfalls ("I did
that on porpoise!") and corny jokes ("I was going to tell you the one about the
whale that ate its trainer, but I decided it would be in bad taste!"). Finston's efforts
don't elicit the response he craves (delighted water spitting) until he discovers the
whales' preference for silly faces and dances that set them spouting and leaping in
their marine park tanks. The concluding spread finds Finston contentedly drip-
ping all over the classroom floor, daydreaming about how happy he had made his
salty friends. Jordan's pen and watercolor cartoon pictures are awash with good
cheer, but Burton's narrative, despite its goofily surreal premise, never quite rises
above an excuse for some well-worn gags. That could be exactly enough to please
the primary crowd, of course, and a groan accompanied by a grin is almost as good
as applause. EB
CLARKE, JUDITH 
The Lost Day. Holt, 1999 
154p
ISBN 0-8050-6152-5 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 8-10
As Jasper makes his unsteady way toward the outbound train from Melbourne
after night-clubbing with his friend Vinny, he suddenly realizes Vinny is no longer
with him. The next twenty-two hours, chronicled in the first section of this novel,
are filled with mild curiosity, growing concern, guesses and excuses, phone calls
and inquiries, and ultimately panic concerning Vinny's whereabouts and safety. A
shorter concluding section traces Vinny's return from the moment he awakens,
half stupefied, on a suburban train car and pieces fragments of memory together
until he realizes he's been drugged, abducted, and dumped onto the transit system
to make his way home. This cautionary tale sends a strong message, reinforced in
a final chapter concerning other kids who go missing that evening, that even street-
wise young adults can make perilous lapses of judgment in trusting strangers; the
increasingly improbable reasons conjured by Vinny's friends and family to reas-
sure themselves and delay a search are particularly gripping. However, Clarke
undermines her portrayal of Vinny as just an ordinary kid by surrounding him
with some less-than-ordinary acquaintances (ranging from a manic joyrider to a
mate who talks with Jack Kerouac) and dabbling with incidents of telepathy. Even
less believable is the easy acceptance by the police that Vinny had not been sexually
molested: "Vinny had just said 'no' in a firm sure voice, and you'd have to know,
wouldn't you? Even ifyou's been unconscious." This will surely have some appeal
NOVEMBER 1999 
* 87
for readers out for a literary walk on the wild side, but it's unlikely many will be
convinced it could happen to them. EB
COLLINS, PAT LOWERY 
Signs & Wonders. 
Houghton, 1999 
[192p]
ISBN 0-395-97119-5 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Taswell hauls around a bundle of self-pity and ill-concealed resentment that she
simply refuses to put down. Dad has given up the bachelor life and has married
Monique, a much younger woman whom he clearly adores and who is more than
willing to open her heart to Taswell. Mavis, the grandmother who raised Taswell,
is as affectionate as ever, but she enrolls Taswell in a small, upper-crusty convent
school for high school. Soon the already withdrawn child embraces the ritual and
routine of the semi-monastic life; in fact, she becomes entirely too enmeshed in
the religious aura of the place, and a passing phrase in a sermon inspires her to
believe that she will be chosen by God "as an instrument to bring forth a prophet
for the New Millennium." Through a series of letters between Taswell and every-
one from her family to her guardian angel, the reader watches her convince herself
of a miraculous pregnancy, interpreting everything from a slight bout of anemia to
dramatic freshman weight gain from Sister Bruno's good cooking as evidence of
her favored status. In less capable hands, this plot could have devolved into irrev-
erent silliness; instead Collins, while respecting her protagonist's sincere but mis-
guided beliefs, keeps the tension clearly focused on how and when this gal will
finally lighten up, realize what's happening to her body, and reach out for the
family love that is so generously extended to her. With some levelheaded nuns
who react to her revelation with a resounding "Puleeze!", classmates who think the
new girl has been sneaking out to see a lover, and the stepmother made in heaven,
this will provide junior-high girls with first-rate entertainment for the New Mil-
lennium. EB
COONEY, CAROLINE 
Tune in Anytime. 
Delacorte, 1999 
186 p
ISBN 0-385-32649-1 
$8.95 
R* 
Gr. 7-12
For adults, author Fay Weldon and the film The War of the Roses have made won-
derful, satisfying fodder of divorce bitterness set free, but literature for young people
has generally taken a more conciliatory approach-until now. When Sophie's
father proudly announces that he is going to marry his older daughter's college
roommate after disentangling himself from the impedance that is Sophie's mother,
Sophie feels that her life has become a soap opera ("This will be a show you cannot
quit. A script you cannot rewrite. You will be stuck on the set, surrounded by bad
lines and bad actors. Every morning, you will say, 'No more episodes! End this!'").
While "The Parent Formerly Known as Dad," as Sophie's sister Marley refers to
him, embraces his beautiful young ex-model and plans to sell the family house and
travel around Europe for a year, Sophie's mother (a middle-aged "pyramidiot" in
search of harmony and ancient forces) refuses to face the situation or put up any
kind of a fight for her legal rights, instead focusing on the creation of a standing-
stone circle in a local gravelyard. As Sophie grows closer to the son of the gravelyard
owner, she seizes upon a magnificently destructive plan to raze the valuable house
with the gravelyard bulldozer, thereby ensuring that Dad can't just cast off his
family and set off on his idyllic new life. While Cooney does make it clear that
Mom has been out of step with responsible adulthood for awhile, it's Dad who she
88 
* THE BULLETIN
wickedly portrays as a beaming villain of monumental egotism; cleansingly and
authentically hateable, he provides a focal point for the rage of every kid whose
family has splintered in front of his or her eyes. The book also provides a touch of
romance for the beleaguered Sophie in the form of Ted, the son of the gravelyard
owner (Ted's wonderful family half-adopts Sophie and her mother in the crisis
and provides a contrasting view of marriage to boot); after surviving her parents,
she deserves the romantic reward. DS
CORMIER, ROBERT 
Frenchtown Summer. 
Delacorte, 1999 
113p
ISBN 0-385-32704-8 
$16.95 
R Gr. 6-10
See this month's Big Picture, p. 81, for review.
COULOUMBIS, AUDREY 
Getting Near to Baby. 
Putnam, 1999 
[224p]
ISBN 0-399-23389-X 
$17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
Family tragedy has sent Willa Jo and her little sister off to their aunt Patty's, and
they're having a hard time settling in. Little Sister has refused to speak and Willa
Jo has refused to be the docile showroom thirteen-year-old girl that her aunt de-
sires, instead befriending the unsuitable girl across the street, getting ejected from
Bible school, and finally driving Patty to distraction by climbing out onto the roof
to ruminate. This last excursion opens the novel, which then stretches into flash-
backs to reveal Willa Jo's grief-stricken anger, Aunt Patty's essentially good heart,
and the deterioration of the girls' life at home with their mother after the death of
their beloved youngest sister. The portrait of desolate yet strong Willa Jo is ten-
derly drawn, especially her anger at her separation from her mother; Couloumbis
also skillfully expands the depiction of Aunt Patty, so that Patty's more sympa-
thetic position at the end results as much from our increased understanding of her
as from her own internal changes. Though a sentimental haze sometimes creeps
over the writing, there's a quiet lyricism to this story of loss that will draw fans of
Cynthia Rylant. DS
CURRY, JANE LOUISE 
A Stolen Life. 
McElderry, 1999 
[208p]
ISBN 0-689-82932-9 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
In danger of losing her deceased father's claim to a land lease and becoming a ward
of the Crown, Jamesina MacKenzie is disguised as a boy by her relatives and passed
off as family friend "Jamie." Jamie's troubles have just begun; soon she is kid-
napped by "spiriters," crammed into steerage on the Sparrowhawk, and bound as
an indentured servant to the family of Colonel Leslie in the Virginia colony. But
Jamie's troubles are far from over; just as she is about to present her case to the
magistrates in court, Leslie sells her indenture bond to his devious ex-servant Biggs,
who whisks her off to his ramshackle cabin in the woods. Jamie's troubles multi-
ply, as Cherokee raiders slaughter the Biggs family, burn their cabin, and carry
Jamie off into slavery. And just as redcoats arrive to wreak revenge on the Chero-
kee, Jamie discovers among them her three brothers who, having discharged their
duty to King George, are headed home for the Highlands. The elements ofJamie's
story, melodramatic though they may be, are fleshed out with involving period
detail of travails at sea and of life in colonial servants' quarters. Curry's portrayal
of Leslie's African slaves-well-born, proud, and scornful of their lower-class mas-
NOVEMBER 1999 
* 89
ters-is sharp-edged and poignant. Readers willing to stretch their credulity will
relish watching Jamie dodge all the treacheries two continents and an ocean can
offer. EB
CURTIS, CHRISTOPHER PAUL 
Bud, Not Buddy. 
Delacorte, 1999 
245p
ISBN 0-385-32306-9 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Bud Caldwell, age ten, has been living in a Flint, Michigan orphanage since his
mother died when he was six years old. Sent to an abusive foster home, Bud runs
away, intending to seek the man he believes to be his father, Herman E. Calloway,
leader of a noted African-American jazz band. On the road Bud gets a ride with
Lefty Lewis, a good-natured, good-hearted man who drives him to Grand Rapids,
the location of Calloway's band, where Bud finally finds the place he belongs. The
story of Bud's search is set against the background of the Great Depression, and
Curtis evokes an atmosphere of need and despair held together by strands of hope
and generosity. Individual scenes have tremendous emotional impact: Bud, too
late to get a place in line for breakfast at the mission, is temporarily adopted by a
family already in line; a confrontation in a freight yard between residents of a Flint
Hooverville and Pinkerton detectives gives a sense of the determination of men
desperate to feed their families; Bud's encounter with Lefty Lewis on a dark road
in the middle of the night circumspectly indicates the dangers of being Negro in a
racist community. While the circumstances surrounding Bud's return to his fam-
ily may gently chafe against credulity, Curtis' characterizations are so strong they
make coincidence acceptable. The resourceful Bud is a hero readers will take im-
mediately to heart, and the people he encounters on his journey have a specificity
that raises them above plot devices and makes them individually memorable. JMD
DADEY, DEBBIE 
King of the Kooties; illus. by Kevin O'Malley. 
Walker,
1999 
84p
ISBN 0-8027-8709-6 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Nate has had a summer in which to discover that his new neighbor, Donald, is
really an alright kid, in spite of his porcupine-styled hair and his often naive ways.
But Nate also knows he'll get eaten alive by the class bully, Louisa Albertson,
who's always on the prowl for fresh victims. Louisa promptly dubs Donald "King
of the Kooties," and, true to form, he doesn't even know what "kooties" are. Nate
and Donald do know they'll never come out on top of a battle of fists, so they
attempt reverse psychology, going out of their way to be nice. Their proffered no-
bake chocolate cookies are greeted with cries of "Kootie Poop" and their compli-
ments elicit an attack, so they escalate to successful Plan B, which involves spilled
paint, dyed skin and shirts, and an invitation to Louisa to become Princess of their
Kingdom of the Kooties. Although Donald's innocent confusion over his moni-
ker ("If [kooties] don't exist, then how can I have them?") should provoke some
giggles and hopefully a little soul-searching among name-calling culprits, there's
more whiny angst than action to this tale. Even Nate's narration lacks the spright-
iness of fourth-grade invective at its finest: "Donald was going to have to toughen
Jp, or Louisa would flatten him like a load of bricks running over a cereal box."
.evertheless, name-calling is a perennial bane in any school, and primary-grade
rictims will cheer their fictional champions. Streamlined ink-and-wash illustra-
:ions are somewhat generic, but they add even more accessibility to this breezy
ead. EB
90 
* 
THE BULLETIN
DORRIE, DORIS 
Lottie's Princess Dress; illus. by Julia Kaergel. 
Dial, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-8037-2388-1 
$15.99 
R* 
5-8 yrs
As any survivor of the morning fashion wars can tell you, trying to get an unwilling
child into clothes she doesn't want to wear is a battle parents are born to lose. In
this story translated from the German (author Darrie is a prominent German
filmmaker), young Lottie and her working mother have different priorities: Lottie
wants to wear her gold princess dress to school because "it is the day for it," and her
mother wants her to wear her sensible skirt and sweater because it's cold outside.
Tension rises. Lottie's decision-making process is making her mother late for work;
Lottie remains stubbornly steadfast in her clothing choice, and her mother throws
a tantrum ("'Wow!' said Lottie. 'You looked like a dragon. I am glad I remem-
bered that princesses are not afraid of dragons'"). A compromise is reached (isn't
it always?): Lottie will wear her princess dress with her warm coat, and her mother
will wear her "red dress with glittery gold spots." Crowns atop their heads, mother
and daughter go to work and school, respectively, causing quite a clamor ("At
work everyone told Lottie's mother how special she looked. 'You should see my
daughter,' she said happily"). Kaergel's semi-abstract illustrations have solidity
that keeps the story firmly rooted in the day-to-day while adding a certain fantasy
flair. Pointy geometrics, sharp angles, and precarious perspectives result in slightly
askew but balanced compositions that have sustained visual energy. The warm
palette of olives, oranges, and greens is offset by bits of shiny gold in the costumes
of mother and daughter. Lottie's and her mother's fashion feud will enliven any
storytime, not to mention the morning routine. JMD
EDWARDS, 
PAMELA 
DUNCAN 
The 
Worrywarts; illus. 
by 
Henry
Cole. 
HarperCollins, 1999 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028149-9 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028150-2 
$14.95 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
"One warm Wednesday morning, the sun winked through Wombat's window
and woke her up. 'What a wonderful day to wander the world,' she thought."
And it turns out that she's right, though she and her friends, Weasel and Wood-
chuck, entertain some escalating doubts before setting out: "WHAT IF ... we're
walking past the wallflowers and a swarm of wasps is waiting?" and then "a wave
whooshes over us and a wallowing walrus swims up and swallows us?" Each ani-
mal faces the fears of the others with more aplomb than they do their own worst
case scenarios, but they decide as a group that they "won't be worrywarts," a stance
that stands them in good stead as they deal with small-scale versions of the disas-
ters they'd imagined. The strongly patterned plot and alliterative text will appeal
to the young reader's developing ear for story, though grownups may wish Wood-
chuck had packed a dictionary or an encyclopedia rather than "the 'W' volume of
Webster's Book of Words." The unnaturally bright pastels of the watercolor and
colored pencil depictions of the animals' lurid fears provide an illuminating con-
trast to the soft textured browns of the cartoonlike animals and the more muted
tones of reality, though none of the trio of animals comes across clearly as an
individual in the text or the illustrations, where they are differentiated mostly by
shape (except in the case of the central female character who has-you guessed
it-a pink bow). The story ends, predictably, with a new set of "What ifs," which
invite kids to compare their fears to those of these wide-eyed furries. FK
NOVEMBER 1999 
* 
91
FEIFFER, JULES 
Bark, George; written and illus. by Jules Feiffer. 
di Capua/Har-
perCollins, 1999 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-205186-5 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-205185-7 
$14.95 
R 
3-5 yrs
George is a young pup and his mother is trying to teach him to bark, but to no
avail. Every time she says "Bark, George," George responds with a meow, or a
quack, or an oink, or a moo, and George's mother is, to say the least, distraught.
She takes George to the veterinarian, who, donning latex gloves, reaches deep in-
side George to pull out a cat, a duck, a pig, and (finally) a cow, after which George
dutifully "arf's (at least until he's out on the street amongst the madding crowd).
A plot summary doesn't do the elegant humor of this simple tale justice; the clean
lines of Feiffer's cartoon graphics combined with the inherent dramatic timing of
the text will make this a storytime boon. The character renditions are hilariously
expressive, both in their faces and body language, from the innocent bewilderment
of young George, to the increasing exasperation of his mother, to the bespectacled
determination of the unflappable vet. Feiffer's cast floats on pastel pages in various
hues, set off by black outlines that anchor them to the otherwise undifferentiated
space. The illustrations are particularly suited for group viewing, and the humor
will tickle preschoolers' fancy for "Old Lady Who Swallowed a Fly" type tales.
JMD
FLORIAN, 
DOUGLAS 
Winter Eyes; written and illus. by Douglas
Florian. 
Greenwillow, 1999 
48p
ISBN 0-688-16458-7 
$16.00 
R* Gr. 2-4
In twenty-eight crisp poems Florian urges readers to "look at winter/ With winter
eyes," appreciating the oft-derided season's peculiar charms. While he's not un-
sympathetic to the frustrations ("What I Love about Winter" is followed by "What
I Hate about Winter"), he makes an excellent case for the pleasures in the sound of
"Winter Songs," the palette of "Winter Hues," the coziness of "Winter Inside,"
and the joys of "Sugaring Time." The verses largely stick to reliable couplets and
ABAB patterns as clean-edged and directive as a neatly shoveled walk, but Florian
occasionally wends the text around the page for conceptual play ("Sled" tracks up
and down a hill). Framed illustrations varying in size decorate the poetry; they
keep winter involved as a pale reminder, but the images are touched with orange
and blue, brown and peach and shot through with smudgy meandering lines (oc-
casionally reminiscent of Patricia Polacco) that write character across the land-
scape. Whether as a readaloud or a readalone, this is a snowball youngsters won't
mind being hit with. DS
FRANKLIN, KRISTINE L. 
Dove Song. 
Candlewick, 1999 
190p
ISBN 0-7636-0409-7 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
When Bobbie Lynn's father is sent to Vietnam, her fragile mother finds it difficult
to cope with parental obligations, but eleven-year-old Bobbie Lynn and her older
brother, Mason, are determined to keep themselves out of foster homes and rela-
tives' clutches. This resolve gets serious testing when the siblings' father is re-
ported Missing in Action and their mother becomes comatose with depression,
forcing them to eke out an existence best as they can. Bobbie Lynn is torn between
protecting her family secrets and unburdening herself to her eccentric new friend
Wendy Feeney, who sees potential in things (including her brain-damaged sister)
92 
* 
THE BULLETIN
where others do not. Franklin's quiet revelation of character is as effective here as
in her previous work (Eclipse, BCCB 3/95, Lone Wolf 5/97); Bobbie Lynn's blend
of desperation, protectiveness, and survival instincts is a credible mixture, and
Wendy's combination of ferocity and vision is intriguing indeed. Bobbie Lynn
and Mason's mother is a bit too much Blanche DuBois cliche, however, and the
plot's balance is thrown off by the emphasis on Wendy's sister and by the end-
loading of events such as Bobbie Lynn's pneumonia, contact with a previously
shunned aunt, and the discovery that the children's father is alive and ready to
return home. This is nonetheless an insightful portrayal of a girl in extremis grap-
pling with a situation that's just too much for her; readers who appreciated Heather
Quarles' similarly themed A Door Near Here (BCCB 10/98) will be absorbed by
Bobbie Lynn's travails. DS
GALLO, DONALD R., ed. 
Time Capsule: Short Stories about Teenagers throughout
the Twentieth Century. 
Delacorte, 1999 
222p
ISBN 0-385-32675-0 $16.95 
R Gr. 7-10
The century gets a bit lost in all the millennial hoopla, but it too is a significant
milestone; Gallo celebrates its completion with this collection of ten original sto-
ries, one per decade. Each entry is introduced by a page or two of historical sum-
mary, so readers move from the Aughts (represented by "The Electric Summer,"
Richard Peck's piece about a farm girl's eyeopening visit to the St. Louis Exposi-
tion) to the Nineties (explored in Alden Carter's "Y2K.CHATRM43," which ex-
amines relationships on and offline) with historical overviews to provide context
along the way. Though not all of the stories sustain interest or period relevance
(and it's not a particularly multicultural stable of authors with which to sum up a
diverse century), there is much satisfying and resonant reading here: Graham
Salisbury's understated "Waiting for the War" offers a quirky but thoughtful por-
trait of a pair of Hawaiian kids who encounter a Texan GI in World War II; Trudy
Krisher effectively limns a friendship that serves as an antidote to Cold War fears in
"We Loved Lucy"; Chris Crutcher provides an account of offbeat '60s rebellion in
"Fourth and Too Long." Readers looking for a quick trip through time will find
this just the vehicle. DS
GEESLIN, CAMPBELL 
How Nanita Learned to Make Flan; illus. by Petra
Mathers. 
Schwartz/Atheneum, 1999 
26p
ISBN 0-689-81546-8 
$16.00 
R 6-9 yrs
Nanita's self-made many-colored shoes "become restless," taking her for an expe-
dition that strands her in a scullery job in a big house (the old woman there fancies
Nanita's shoes and seizes them for herself). Nanita's friendship with the entertain-
ing Sefior Parrot lightens her labors, but still she is worked from dawn to night and
forced to make flan every evening. Finally she retrieves her shoes, frees the parrot,
and escapes back to her home, where her flan is a sensation with everyone, even
bringing the long-sought smile to her weary father's face. There's an air of magical
realism to this Mexican-set story, which gives the proceedings an appealingly dreamy
flavor; unfortunately it also makes the plot a bit long and rambling for a picture
book, and the random sequentialness of the events is a bit, well, random. Mathers'
art has an intensity of color (rosy lilac and coral predominate) and a corporeality
that suits the matter-of-fact oddness; she also plays up the folkloric echoes in the
story, hanging horned demons on the walls of Nanita's place of durance vile, and
NOVEMBER 1999 
* 93
adds comic touches such as shimmers of heat and pain coming from the woman's
overlarge feet stuffed into Nanita's tiny shoes. Listeners hoping for a clear-cut and
orthodox point won't find one here, but they'll be intrigued by Nanita's journey
and tempted indeed by the prospect of flan (recipe included). DS
GRAY, 
LIBBA MOORE 
When Uncle Took the Fiddle; illus. by Lloyd
Bloom. 
Orchard, 1999 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-33137-7 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-30137-0 
$15.95 
Ad 4-7 yrs
"'Tired,' said Grandpa as he settles in his chair. 'Tired,' said Grandma as she
leaned back in her rocker." No sooner has each of the sizable roster of family
members registered weariness than Uncle takes up his fiddle and dispels the ennui.
Guitars, jaw harps, washboards, and gourd shakers appear, and neighbors lured by
the melody descend upon the tiny cabin with their own instruments. There's lots
of foot-stompin' and hip-swingin' energy here, delivered at a gait reminiscent of
Van Laan's Possum Come A-Knockin, and Bloom's hardscrabble cast kick up their
heels against stylized minimal backgrounds with willowy grace. However, there's
no reliable rhyme or predictable pattern of onomatopoeic musical sounds to in-
volve listeners itching to crow along, and it's just not as much fun to watch from
the sidelines as it would be to join in. EB
GREENWOOD, BARBARA 
A Pioneer Thanksgiving. A Story of Harvest Celebrations
in 1841; illus. by Heather Collins. 
Kids Can Press, 1999 
4 8p
Trade ed. ISBN 1-55074-744-4 
$12.95
Paper ed. ISBN 1-55074-574-3 
$5.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Through a tale of two fictional families, factual sidebar information, and craft and
recipe directions, Greenwood explores some common features of an American (in
this case, probably Canadian) thanksgiving feast, before the days when Thanksgiv-
ing was established as a national holiday in either Canada or the U.S. As the elder
Robertsons and Burkholders ready the meal, youngsters help or hinder the prepa-
rations by gathering cranberries (and nearly drowning in the bog), nutting (and
getting lost in the woods), and taking time out for a game of conkers with Ojibwa
friends on a trading visit. Each fictional episode is followed by boxed info-bites on
timing the feast, Indian celebrations, harvest superstitions, mealtime graces, and
the evolution of Thanksgiving over the centuries; activities provided here, from
weaving simple baskets to cooking cranberry sauce, are common fare in Thanks-
giving resource books. Neither the storyline nor its plentiful sepia-toned illustra-
tions, however, make a satisfying main course, and the informative side dishes are
tasty enough, but not very filling. EB
HADDIX, MARGARET PETERSON 
Just Ella. 
Simon, 1999 
185p
ISBN 0-689-82186-7 
$17.00 
M 
Gr. 6-8
In this novel-length retelling of "Cinderella," fifteen-year-old Ella has already been
discovered by the Prince and whisked away to the palace, but happily ever after it
isn't: she is being drilled daily on proper decorum by the icy Madame Bisset, the
royal family has put out a false story about her origins, and the ladies-in-waiting
think she's a poor excuse fora princess. The longer she stays, the more she realizes
she doesn't love the prince (she was just swept away in the moment) and that their
marriage is doomed to failure. When she announces her intention of calling off
94 
* 
THE BULLETIN
the wedding to the handsome but dumb heir to the throne, she is thrown into a
dungeon, fed on maggoty gruel, and terrorized by her jailer, a convicted serial
rapist. Ella escapes with the help of a young servant, and makes her way to the
border to join the relief efforts for refugees from an ongoing war. This is more
social satire than fairy tale redux, and it is poorly paced, uninvolving satire at that.
The overlay of modern sensibilities on this old tale is clumsily obvious, and while
Haddix has some interesting notions about the motivations of these traditional
characters, it appears she cannot decide between the lightheartedness of Levine's
Ella Enchanted (BCCB 5/97) or the dark foreboding of Angela Carter's Bloody
Chamber. This Ella is full of honorable intentions, but her lack of humor makes
her the kind of character that's good for you, but really isn't any fun. JMD
HALLENSLEBEN, 
GEORG 
Pauline; written 
and 
illus. 
by 
Georg
Hallensleben. 
Foster/Farrar, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-374-35758-7 
$16.00 
R 3-5 yrs
The first creature little weasel Pauline meets as she explores her jungle home is the
young elephant Rabusius, whom she immediately mistakes for a monster. Upon
proper introduction, however, they become friends, inseparable until the day hunters
net the elephant and carry their "monster" off in a truck. Inspired by the term
"monster," Pauline hatches an idea to save her friend; with her parents' help she
dons white feathers and paint, drops onto the roof of the truck, and frightens the
hunters away. Hallensleben's paintings, bold as the intrepid Pauline herself, make
the most of the simple plot elements of the adventure. There's gentle humor in
Pauline's initial encounter with Rabusius as she stares up at his looming belly, and
in their game of hide-and-seek, in which the elephant attempts to secrete his girth
behind a tree. There's genuine tension, too, as the hunter's undulating yellow net
descends upon Rabusius' flailing limbs; and there's joyous triumph in the closing
celebration, as the animals party the night away in "monster" makeup as a tribute
to the friends. Thickly applied paints and liberal outlining insure that even those
on the fringe of the storytime rug will catch all the action. Children still a step
away from the longer, more intricately plotted Babar tales will find this an enticing
entree into fantasy animal adventure. EB
HAMANAKA, 
SHEILA 
I Look like a Girl; written and illus. by Sheila
Hamanaka. 
Morrow, 1999 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-14626-0 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-14625-2 
$16.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
In rhyming verse, a multicultural cast of young girls embrace their wild side, imag-
ining themselves transformed into a variety of animals, from tiger to dolphin to
mustang to wolf. Oil paintings with dense, complex textures feature said beasts
galloping, soaring, and prowling, along with tamer images of their girl-counter-
parts, in illustrations that are large enough to share with a group. Several of the
animals are oddly drafted and the compositions are unremarkable; paired with the
well-intentioned text, this is more than a little predictable. As it stands, though,
Hamanaka's ode to girldom has a certain appeal, even if the underlying message
will be obvious to old libbers: "Throw out those glass slippers./ Send the fairies to
sleep./ No prince is waiting for me.// For if you look twice,/ past the sugar and
spice,/ the eyes of a tiger/ you'll see.// I just need the forest,/ the mesa, the jungle,/
the stars dreaming over the sea,// to free what is wild,/ in the heart of a child--/ so
NOVEMBER 1999 
* 95
I can be me, just me." Although it would be more effective if not so didactically
stated, primary school girls (and boys) still need to hear this message. JMD
HAMILTON, MORSE 
The Garden ofEden Motel. Greenwillow, 1999 
154p
ISBN 0-688-16814-0 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Eleven-year-old Dal's father died in World War II; now he's got a stepfather, Mr.
Sabatini, and a young stepsister, and the new family is still awkward. Closeness
accelerates, however, when Mr. Sabatini takes Dal on a trip from their Michigan
home to Eden, Idaho, where Mr. Sabatini will spend two months supervising seed
production. Filled with cowboy dreams, Dal is fascinated with this different world,
getting to know the locals (particularly a lively girl); he's also fascinated with his
stepfather's different persona at work, and the two of them gradually strengthen
their bond through shared experiences. While there are scenes of action (especially
in Dal's final heroic driving of his snake-bitten stepfather to the hospital), this is
ultimately a book about Dal's reaction to his new milieu and his growing relation-
ship with his stepfather. The late author (writer of Yellow Blue Bus Means I Love
You, BCCB 6/95) demonstrates a dead-on accurate sense of detail in his evocation
of Dal, torn between alarm at the new and possibly icky and amazement at the
novelty he encounters. Whether it be Mr. Sabatini (a good if unsentimental guy,
well worth saving from death by copperhead) or Mr. Pucket (good-natured snake-
oil salesman who lures Dal and Mr. Sabatini into buying a share in a uranium
mine), the characters are written with quiet understatement but distinct personal-
ity. This has some of the quirky Western color of Ron Koertge's The Arizona Kid,
albeit for younger readers. DS
HICKMAN, MARTHA WHITMORE 
A Baby Born in Bethlehem; illus. by Giuliano
Ferri. 
Albert Whitman, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-8075-5522-3 
$15.95 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
This retelling of the Christmas story loses some grandeur in the translation from
the majesty of the King James version but gains accessibility through the simplicity
of the language and the clear, linear storytelling. Ferri's watercolor and pencil
illustrations enhance that accessibility with open compositions that include strong
curves and other geometric shapes against backgrounds lit by diffused light. Al-
though the Christmas card-y nature of the illustrations militates against real im-
pact, the handling of light and shadow adds depth and nuance to the landscapes
and domestic scenes: the human characters have simple faces, oval-eyed and alert;
even the animals reflect the emotionality of the moment (oxen oversee the baby's
birth with intelligent interest, sheep stare wide-eyed at the messenger angel). Al-
though the sweep and glory of Biblical accounts of the drama of Jesus' birth is
missing here, this will satisfy parents and Sunday school teachers looking for a less
ornate retelling. JMD
HORENSTEIN, HENRY 
A Is For... ?: A Photographer'sAlphabetofAnimals; written
and illus. with photographs by Henry Horenstein. 
Gulliver/Harcourt,
1999 
[36p]
ISBN 0-15-201582-5 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. K-4
While Z for zebra may not sound like a novel approach, this zoological alphabet
takes a different look at the animal kingdom. More visual puzzle than early con-
96 
* 
THE BULLETIN
cept book, the title presents each letter alongside a photograph of the relevant
creature-ifyou can figure out what the relevant creature is. Some letters are easy,
as in the silently gliding Ray that illustrates R, but some are more challenging:
what N does the four-toed foot belong to? (A newt.) What J sports these shim-
mering filaments of tissue? (A jellyfish.) Even when the answer is fairly guessable,
the view is original: a back view of the ostrich's head makes it look like some fuzzy
plant species, and the closeup of the zebra's bristly mane reveals that the black-
and-white zebra drama plays out in the details as well. Horenstein's photos offer
monochromatic drama themselves, though they're printed on brown-tinting pa-
per that makes them more softly contrasting and narratively magical than tradi-
tional black and white (the golden-bronze tone of the letters on each page similarly
eschews the hard factuality of black and white). Artistic and creative, this may
inspire youngsters to make their own imaginative alphabets. A key in back identi-
fies the subjects, providing full-on pictures for clarification; a photographer's note
is appended. DS
HUGHES, SHIRLEY 
Abel's Moon; written and illus. by Shirley Hughes. 
DK Ink,
1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-7894-4601-4 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Abel Grable is a traveling man, but he is also a family man, and his wife and three
sons are overjoyed when, between trips, he comes home and tells them all about
his travels. Abel decides to write his stories down "so he won't forget them," and,
unable to find a peaceful place to work in the house, he takes his old flap-top table
out to the garden to work under the apple tree and the light of the moon. When
their father leaves on another trip, "Noah made Adam read the stories that Abel
had written for them over and over again till he knew them by heart." The boys
discover their father's table out in the yard, covered over with weeds and green
moss; through imaginary play, it becomes their path to adventure and inspires
stories they can tell their father on his return. Hughes' capable words and haunt-
ing watercolors evoke sympathy for and recognition of the longing children feel
for an absent, beloved parent. Many illustrations are lit with moonlight, adding to
the dreamlike quality of both visual images and story. The characters' body lan-
guage and facial expressions openly reveal their tender feelings, making further
explanation via text unnecessary. Hughes has constructed an understated, poi-
gnant story about a family separated by necessity; it's sure to strike an answering
chord with children and adults. JMD
JACKSON, JEAN 
Mrs. Piccolo's Easy Chair; illus. by Diane Greenseid. 
Jackson/
DK Ink, 1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-7894-2580-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
When an overstuffed easy chair no longer receives the cheese puffs it's accustomed
to, it follows its owner to Friendly Fred's Fine Foods ("When Friendly Fred saw an
easy chair trying to squeeze through his front door, he rushed over. 'Can't you
read?' he said, pointing to a sign on the door. 'No easy chairs!' 'Why, that's a silly
rule,' the chair said. 'What do you have against easy chairs?'") and proceeds to
swallow everyone it encounters. Fortunately, it also burps, releasing its captives.
The lucky escapees restore the easy chair to Mrs. Piccolo's home, whereupon Mrs.
NOVEMBER 1999 
* 97
Piccolo throws an impromptu party, her guests retire, and both the chair and Mrs.
Piccolo take a nap. Less text would make this a perfect cumulative tale for story-
time, but patient listeners who set incredulity aside will still find that the story sits
just right. Greenseid's tangy acrylic illustrations are similar to those in her art for
Woodson's We Had a Picnic This Sunday Past (BCCB 9/98), and the big-eyed,
cartoonish characters have a round plumpness that echoes the plumpness of the
portly purple easy chair. The pictures build on the narrative, and if anyone won-
ders what expressions a dot-eyed chair might show, the gamut runs from laughter
to fear, anger, surprise, and even sadness. Young readers will want to pull up a
chair, grab a cheese puff, and settle in. JNH
JOHNSON, SYLVIA A. 
Mapping the World. Atheneum, 1999 
32p 
illus. with
photographs
ISBN 0-689-81813-0 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
In succinct text and with carefully selected examples, Johnson explores the tradi-
tion of mapping as it developed in Europe and America and demonstrates how
maps manifest the world view of the society and/or historic era that produces them.
Beginning with a discussion of Ptolemy's innovative standards for drawing a pic-
ture of the earth's surface, double spreads chronologically address highlights and
styles of cartography over the following centuries-T-O maps (named for their
shape) that were more religious than geographic documents, early road maps for
pilgrims headed to the Holy Land, navigational charts that reflect a tightly circum-
scribed understanding of Europe's surroundings, explorers' maps of the New World
that combine surprising precision with now-laughable guesswork. Although
Johnson acknowledges European cartographers' debt to Eastern civilizations that
preserved and later exported Ptolemy's long-lost work and notes the Eurocentrism
of geographic names ("Whether the lands already had names given by their origi-
nal inhabitants, Europeans didn't bother to ask"), she has little to say about maps
from other cultures, with a notable exception of a tantalizing wave chart from the
Marshall Islands, relegated to the verso. Far more frustrating, though, is the inad-
equate reproduction of the maps included in each spread, which are woefully un-
dersized for examining the details Johnson points out in the text. Still, Johnson's
lessons in close reading can be readily applied to other maps at hand, and students
who find longitude and legends and scale too soporific for their taste may find
much here to reopen their eyes. EB
KARR, KATHLEEN 
Man ofthe Family. 
Farrar, 1999 
179p
ISBN 0-374-34764-6 
$16.00 
R Gr. 4-7
Istvan Csere, the son of Hungarian immigrants, recalls events from the last year of
his father's life, as Apa orchestrates nearly every aspect of his family's existence,
from the proper incubation of chicks on their farm, to violin lessons, interior decora-
tion, citizenship application, picnics under imaginary mountains, and the con-
struction of a wireless crystal set. If the memoirs (based on the life of Karr's father)
get off to a somewhat sluggish start, they do heat up with a spectacular explosion
from which Istvan narrowly escapes and jog steadily along through such kid-pleas-
ing events as the purchase of a rifle for weasel hunting, and local panic over "evi-
dence" of the folkloric Jersey Devil. Apa is an immigrant version of Clarence Day,
Sr.-opinionated and autocratic, but ruling the roost with a measure of sense, and
clearly suffused with the deepest love for his wife and their many children. By the
98 
* 
THE BULLETIN
time Apa succumbs to complications from appendicitis in the final pages, there
won't be a dry eye in the house. EB
LEVINE, ANNA 
Running on Eggs. 
Front Street/Cricket, 1999 
[13 6p]
ISBN 0-8126-2875-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Their Arab village and Jewish kibbutz have been at odds over a piece of land sepa-
rating them ("no man's land"), but Arab Yasmine initiates friendship with Jewish
Karen by swapping lunchboxes. Though Yasmine's lunch box is later confiscated
by the Israeli bomb squad (the Arabic lettering causing alarm), Karen and Yasmine
begin a tenuous friendship, strengthened by their shared love of running. When
Yasmine must leave the running team because she is forbidden by coach Enrico to
wear a skirt, and forbidden by her father to wear the required athletic shorts, she
begins to coach Karen during their secret meetings in no man's land. Levine's title
serves as a double metaphor, both for the technique Yasmine offers to Karen ("You
should... feel like you're running on a field of eggs") and for the delicate nature of
a friendship forged across a religious divide. The author's twenty-year tenure in
Israel lends authority to her description of a place where "you were so used to
waiting for surprises that they became kind of ordinary and the ordinary became a
surprise," but her characters' struggle with universal yet personal issues such as
trying to fit in and dealing with schoolyard justice is what will appeal to American
kids. EAB
LOURIE, PETER Lost Treasure ofthe Inca. Boyds Mills, 1999 
4 8p 
illus. with
photographs
ISBN 1-56397-743-5 
$18.95 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Think of 750 tons of gold and silver-literally a king's ransom intended as barter
for the life of a god-king. Think of an ancient treasure guide, and ponder whether
it was intended as a true map or as cunning misdirection. Think of swirling fog,
quicksand bogs, treacherous crevasses, and dense overgrowth that frustrate trea-
sure hunters. This isn't R. L. Stevenson, but the real-life adventure of author
Lourie, who followed the tantalizing path suggested by centuries of Inca and Span-
ish lore, a guide written by Spanish soldier Valverde who claimed to know the
location of the hidden cache, and an old Swiss treasure hunter who boasted that he
simply needed "the Ecuadorian Army to help him dig the gold out from under
tons of mud." Lourie recounts how he employed the services of three seasoned
guides to lead him high into the Andes; plagued by mosquitoes, biting ants, and
doubts concerning the reliability ofValverde's directions, he finally succumbed to
altitude sickness and had to descend without discovering a glimmer of the gold.
But he did return with a ripping good yarn to tell (in which he portrays himself as
part heroic adventurer, part possible dupe, and part outlander who's clearly not fit
for the rigors of mountaineering) and some breathtaking photographs of the mist-
shrouded volcanic peaks. This should be a hot pick for armchair travelers, and it
could make a terrific tie-in for a unit on Amerindian culture. EB
MAH, ADELINE YEN 
Chinese Cinderella. Delacorte, 1999 
205p
ISBN 0-385-32707-2 
$16.95 
Ad Gr. 5-8
Born last and female, Wu Mei (Fifth Youngest Sister, later dubbed Adeline in
English) begins life with powerful strikes against her. Add to this her unlucky
NOVEMBER 1999 
* 99
status as the "reason" her mother died in childbirth and her and her siblings' sub-
sequent upstaging upon her father's remarriage, and Wu Mei does indeed seem to
be perfectly cast as the household cinder maiden in her prosperous Chinese family.
Here she relates in twenty-two chapters of copious detail the many trials she suf-
fered at the hands of her parents, brothers, and sisters, from earliest memory through
her teens. In Mah's choppy memoir, most wrongs seem to bear equal weight,
from the sibling name-calling and arm-twisting that smack of ordinary family life,
to the truly heart-wrenching episodes when her father forgets her Chinese name
and birth date, and when her parents neglect to retrieve her from boarding school
during the Communist takeover ofTianjin. Mah credits her survival and sanity to
the love of her Aunt Baba and grandfather and to her single-minded pursuit of an
education. Yet even as she exhorts her young readers to embrace learning as a path
to a better life, she hints at what adult readers of her autobiography Falling Leaves
(which features many of the same episodes) already know-that her eventual school-
ing abroad did little to mitigate the bitterness between herself and her stepmother.
Notes on Chinese names and brief historical background are included. EB
MARTIN, TERRI 
AFamily Trait. Holiday House, 1999 
[112p]
ISBN 0-8234-1467-1 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Small-town Michigan in the early '60s isn't the best place in the world to be ille-
gitimate, but nobody said the word to Iris Weston until haughty Alice Pruitt flings
it at her in an exclusionary snit. Iris is more concerned with getting through sixth
grade (a report on Silas Marner dogs her), trying to wiggle out from under her
mother and grandmother's stern rules (her easygoing grandfather serves as a shield),
and working with the fellow members of her secret club to find a cache of missing
money. The plot threads don't really mesh together, despite the recurrent allu-
sions to family and history, so their resolution doesn't provide much in the way of
reader satisfaction. Folksiness is ladled over the dialogue with a heavy hand, and
there's little depth to the emblematic characters (tough old granny, stuck-up girl,
wonky boy, eccentric pseudo-witch, etc.). Undemanding readers may nonetheless
appreciate the club's exploits and the backwoods hijinks in search of the lost trea-
sure. DS
MAYER, MARIANNA 
YoungJesus ofNazareth. 
Morrow, 1999 
32p 
illus. with
photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-16728-4 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-16727-6 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 3-6
This lavishly illustrated offering, featuring reproductions of religious paintings by
James Tissot and classical painters of earlier periods, retells the life of Jesus from
birth through the beginning of his public ministry. Mayer includes familiar epi-
sodes from the gospels of Luke and Matthew but also incorporates legend and
apocrypha from such diverse sources as pseudo-gospels and the visions of nine-
teenth-century mystic Anne Catherine Emmerich. The narration avoids the for-
mality of many gospel translations, while retaining a stateliness well-suited to a
reverent family or Bible School readaloud ("All eyes were on the twelve-year-old.
Every scholar was astounded that he, a mere boy, could interrogate them and
explain the holy law and the parables of the prophets like a great wise man").
Mayer offers concluding notes and a bibliography that make her derivations clear,
100 
* 
THE BULLETIN
but readers and listeners uncomfortable with the blending of canonical and non-
canonical sources would be better off directed to more orthodox works on the life
of Christ. Those looking for seasonal fare that resonates with centuries of reverent
religious folklore, though, will find this to be an accessible and visually elegant
attempt at that most elusive of biographies. EB
MCCARTY, PETER 
Little Bunny on the Move; written and illus. by Peter
McCarty. 
Holt, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-4620-8 
$15.95 
R 
3-5 yrs
Little Bunny is on the move because, of course, "a bunny goes where a bunny
must." L.B. wanders past livestock, traverses train tracks, and perambulates through
an open field, politely declining a little girl's offer to take him home, until he
finally arrives at the glen filled with other little bunnies ("And this bunny did have
a home. This bunny did have a place to stay"). The incantatory text unfortunately
raises expectations for more poetic repetition than it delivers, and it may confuse
its audience slightly by stating on one page "This bunny could not stop" and on
the next page depicting the bunny well and truly stopped for sleeping (and the end
isn't as sure as the rest of the narrative). There's an understated resonance in some
of the phraseology, however, that combines with the homeward-bound theme to
make this dreamily satisfying. The art aids and abets the reverie: cream pages offer
a peephole bunny vignette on the left and a larger (but still restrained) square of
bunny vista on the right, and McCarty's velvety pencilwork shows Little Bunny as
a small pale presence, with some of the appealing abstractness of a shmoo, who
shines through a twilight world touched only occasionally with a whisper of color.
The soft yet unsquishy story of this cozy quest will be an eminently suitable read-
aloud for little bunnies nestled down in their own homes. DS
MCKISSACK, PATRICIA C. 
Black Hands, White Sails: The Story ofAfrican-Ameri-
can Whalers; written by Patricia C. and Fredrick L. McKissack 
Scholastic,
1999 
[160p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-590-48313-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
At the same time slave ships plied the ocean with their human chattel, whaling
ships offered free blacks and runaways more opportunities for security, advance-
ment, and even prosperity than could be found ashore. It is this irony, and the
relationship between the whaling trade and the abolitionist movement, that the
McKissacks explore in their extensive essay. Many names, such as William Lloyd
Garrison, are more familiar for their political impact than for their connections to
whaling communities. Others, such as toggle harpoon inventor Lewis Temple, or
Captain Paul Cuffe, fleet owner and early leader of a back-to-Africa initiative, will
be new acquaintances for most readers. The title may mislead readers into expect-
ing more information on the day-to-day workings of a whaler, and narrative pre-
sentation is not always as smooth as might be desired, with repetitions and
haphazardly incorporated background material. Moreover, shifts between exposi-
tory text and you-are-there style prose is awkward. Still, there is a wealth of mate-
rial here that is not readily found either in children's books on whaling or on
antebellum black history, and patrons could be well served with this title. Period
photos and illustrations, a time line, a bibliography, and an index will be included
in the bound copy. EB
NOVEMBER 1999 
* 
101
MCNAUGHTON, 
COLIN 
Yum!; 
written 
and 
illus. 
by 
Colin
McNaughton. 
Harcourt, 1999 
28p
ISBN 0-15-202064-0 
$15.00 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
It's Piggy vs. Wolf once again, and from the upbeat grin of Preston Pig on the
cover, you already know who's going to come out on top. As Mr. Wolf lingers
beneath Preston's window around dinner time, pondering how to catch his next
meal, Preston audaciously suggests he find a job and BUY his meals. As Preston
offers a string of ideas, Mr. Wolf imagines how each scenario will result in a pork
entree. "'You could be a pilot,' said Preston. 'Yum!' said Mr. Wolf. 'I do like an
in-flight snack.' . .. 'You could be a cook,' said Preston. 'Yum!' said Mr. Wolf.
'I've got the perfect recipe!'" The litany of examples is a bit overdrawn, and the
abrupt pot-on-the-wolf's-head ending is a convenient, but illogical, wrap-up. This
doesn't have quite the succulence of Preston's outings in Suddenly! (BCCB 7/95)
or Oops! (10/97), but young listeners who go for the broad humor will get a chuckle
over Mr. Wolfs mouthwatering musings, which float alongside his noggin in an
oversized thought bubble. EB
MUNSCH, 
ROBERT 
We 
Share Everything!; 
illus. 
by 
Michael
Martchenko. 
Cartwheel/Scholastic, 1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-590-89600-8 
$11.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
On the first day of kindergarten, Amanda and Jeremiah don't quite have the rules
down pat. When Amanda refuses to give Jeremiah the book she's looking at, "he
opened his mouth really wide and screamed 'AAAAAAAAHHHHH!' Amanda
stuck the book in his mouth." The teacher, sprinkling sweetness and light, blos-
soms and birdies (literally) in her wake, dances over and tells them, "Now, LOOK!
This is kindergarten. In kindergarten we share. We share everything." It takes a
few reiterations for the message to take, but when it does, Amanda and Jeremiah
discover the joy of sharing, right down to their shoes. When the chagrined teacher
asks them "Who said you could share your clothes?", the entire kindergarten class
(in a variety of new sartorial combinations) shouts, "Now, LOOK! This is kinder-
garten. In kindergarten we share... We share EVERYTHING!" Munsch's premise
is funny all by itself, but paired with Martchenko's goofy cartoons, it's positively
unstoppable. Jeremiah and Amanda glower at each other with unveiled hostility;
their kindergarten teacher floats around in a cloud of butterflies, doves, and flow-
ers, her eyes a-twinkle; and the havoc these kindergartners wreak on their class-
room is pictured in bright, living and hilarious color. The altercations between the
two classmates are classic, and the conclusion, instead of simpering preachily, turns
the tables on the teacher and still makes its point. JMD
NAYLOR, PHYLLS REYNOLDS 
Walker's Crossing. Karl/Atheneum, 1999 
232p
ISBN 0-689-82939-6 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-9
If the world were ordered the way seventh-grader Ryan Walker wants it, his par-
ents would acknowledge that it's he and not his older brother Gil who's cut out to
be a rancher, and his best friend Matt Sheldon wouldn't be gravitating away from
his peers and into reclusive Mr. Sheldon's private militia group, the Mountain
Patriots Association. Ryan tries not to rock the boat, working hard at the ranch
where his father is caretaker, trying to put a positive spin on the Patriots' oath to
defend your home and your woman with your life and never betray a oatriot brother:
102 
* THE BULLETIN
"What could be wrong with that? ... [H]e wouldn't ever betray his friends, so why
not?" But when Matt dumps a girlfriend upon discovering her Greek ancestry, and
Gil gets entangled in an anti-government action that results in the death of a friend's
father, Ryan finds that loyalty to friends and family has its limits. Although the
cowboy-wannabe and militia plots are credibly intertwined, ranch scenes from
breakfast table to calving barn play truer and more exciting than the vigilante
gatherings. No real effort is made to explain the lure of the hate-spewing militia,
and since there's never much doubt that Ryan will keep clear of their activities,
most dramatic tension focuses on his goal of being invited onto the next cattle
drive. Naylor's respectful depiction of life in Big Sky country may nonetheless
appeal to readers who yearn for a home on the range. EB
NELSON, VAUNDA MICHEAUX 
BeyondMayfield. Putnam, 1999 
[14 4 p]
ISBN 0-399-23355-5 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
Nelson returns to the characters ofMayfield Crossing (BCCB 3/93) in this well-
wrought sequel. Entwined amidst the larger dynamics of the friendships among
Mayfield kids and their adjustment to a larger school (where some of the students
encounter racial prejudice for the first time) is the story of the civil rights move-
ment and the Freedom Riders. Meg, observant and sensitive to nuance, narrates
the story, describing individuals and their relationships to one another, placing her
somewhat sheltered world in the context of the bigger one provided by television
and newspaper headlines. In between baseball games and snowball fights, Meg
deals with the complacent racism of a bigoted teacher with the help of her friends
and a knowing principal. The issues of desegregation, murder, and tragedy are
handled within the context of a loving home and family, filtered always through a
child's point of view. That point of view is what gives this story its pathos, for the
complexity of the issues being faced during the tumultuous '60s become simple
when viewed through the lens of a child's sense of justice. Strong characterizations
and a solid sense of the Mayfield community add to the mix that makes this a
gently compelling read. JMD
ORGEL, DORIS 
We Goddesses: Athena, Aphrodite, Hera; illus. by Marilee
Heyer. 
Jackson/DK Ink, 1999 
112p
ISBN 0-7894-2586-6 
$22.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-9
In this uneven book, original retellings of Greek myths are framed by extensive
front matter, marginalia, and back matter (including a list of sources and several
pages of photographs of Greek art), all intended to inform and involve young
female readers. In her introduction, Orgel offers solid, up-to-date information-
and her own ideas-on topics ranging from history and culture to literature and
the creative process in sections on "How Goddesses and Gods are Different from
Humans," "What Life was Like for Girls and Women," and "How and Why I
Wrote this Book." As Orgel sees it, these goddesses offer girls "contrasting styles of
being female." Athena is the independent woman who openly questions patriar-
chal society; Aphrodite is the unabashedly sexual woman; and Hera is a woman
who maintains her integrity by being "ever faithful to a faithless husband." Each
goddess' first-person account offers her perspective on those mythic episodes in
which she played a part, which unfortunately gives a fragmented feel to these epic
stories. The impulse to celebrate the goddesses as role models while keeping them
NOVEMBER 1999 
* 
103
historically and culturally situated also makes for some unresolved tension in these
narratives (and many readers will simply find the Afterword, with its invitation to
"get together with Athena, Aphrodite, Hera" in a scripted conversation, corny).
This same conflict between the ancient and the modern is played out visually in
the dramatic golds, blacks, reds, and blues of the color-saturated paintings that
illustrate key episodes: their flowing lines evoke modern fantasy illustration while
the stylized borders and the use of symbols and emblems evoke ancient Greece.
Though the approach is labored, those who have read the traditional male-cen-
tered gods-'n'-heroes stories and seek a fresh perspective will find it here. FK
OWENS, MARY BETH 
Be Blest: A Celebration of Seasons; written and illus. by
Mary Beth Owens. 
Simon, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-689-80546-2 
$16.00 
R 
5-10 yrs
Inspired by St. Francis' canticles to nature, Owens offers a poem-actually, more
of a psalm-for each month of the year. Rather than taking the form of a prayer
with direct reference to God, her verses rely on a quiet, meditative tone to set a
mood of reverence: "Be Blest/ in winter's rest/ when groundhog slumbers,/ squir-
rels nest;/ for sister bear/ with bulbs asleep,/ while spring lies hidden/ in her keep."
The left hand page of each double spread features a verse wreathed in seasonal
motifs of flora and/or fauna, while the opposite page offers a scene which visually
incorporates details from its verse. Although Owens' animals are not rendered
with equal success (bears seem lumpish and stiff next to the more lifelike ground-
hog and open-beaked hatchlings), the layout boasts an elegant simplicity and the
naturescapes warmly invite close examination. For audiences that want to make "a
joyful noise unto the Lord," melody and accompaniment line round out the title.
EB
POLACCO, PATRICIA 
Welcome Comfort; written and illus. by Patricia
Polacco. 
Philomel, 1999 
[34p]
ISBN 0-399-23169-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Welcome Comfort is a fat and rejected kid, picked on in school and adrift in foster
homes outside of it. He's miserable until Quintin Hamp, happy school custodian,
takes a shine to the boy, becoming Welcome's mentor and unofficial father. Wel-
come finds Christmas a real downer in the absence of the Hamp family, but he's
amazed by a magical night of flying in Santa's sleigh and the gift of a Christmas
pin-which is gone, as is Welcome's belief in the reality of the experience, when
he wakes up. After Welcome grows up and takes over Mr. Hamp's janitorial job,
however, he receives the pin back from Mr. Hamp-who is Santa Claus, passing
on that job too to Welcome. This is laden with sentimental tugs on heartstrings
and cliches (Mr. Hamp suggests to Welcome that Santa "hasn't come because you
haven't believed hard enough"), and there's some oddity in the implication that
it's the kid who's most tormented by other kids who ends up flying around in the
frigid December night taking presents to them. Santa and Christmas are probably
the subjects most suited for such lashings of literary sugar, however, and the no-
tion of a Santa tradition (it looks like Welcome's got a prospective successor on the
final spread) is a diverting one. The illustrations evince Polacco's usual blend of
angularity and roundness in the draftsmanship, but the colors are more intense,
relying as they do on seasonally appropriate reds and greens; though faces are some-
104 
* THE BULLETIN
times stilted, they still manage to beam with seasonal joy. This is a suitable Christ-
mas sugarplum that will especially be welcomed by adults seeking an alternative to
the umpteenth readaloud of The Littlest Angel. DS
PRESTON, TIM 
The Lonely Scarecrow; illus. by Maggie Kneen. 
Dutton,
1999 
32p
ISBN 0-525-46080-2 
$14.99 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Ironically, children who judge this book by its textured cover will not be disap-
pointed, because the relief designs are essentially the point of this otherwise unre-
markable volume. The title tells you almost everything you need to know about
the main character, whose "flapping coat" and "scary face" cause the "creatures of
the field" to leave him standing in his field alone through spring and autumn, until
winter when the animals are drawn to the "jolly snowman" whose external appear-
ance better expresses the scarecrow's "kindly heart." Schmaltzy story aside, it's the
extensive use of embossing in the pretty pastel illustrations that will draw kids far
enough into the tale to appreciate the scampering critters and attractive composi-
tions that are enhanced by this selective texturing. Though the text's minimalist
descriptions undermine the emotional resonance of this basic story, it could be a
satisfying quiet-time book for readers and pre-readers. FK
REYNOLDS, MARILYNN 
The Prairie Fire; illus. by Don Kilby. 
Orca, 1999 
[32p]
ISBN 1-55143-137-8 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Percy may not be deemed old enough to help in the fields or to plow a fire break,
but he's certainly old enough to raise the alarm when he spots a blue-black cloud
on the horizon. His father has no choice but to put his only child in charge of the
mare and the sledge with a water barrel near the house, while he and his wife
smother sparks out along the fire break. Percy is terrified of the fire, but when it
becomes clear his parents cannot respond to his cries for assistance, he quiets the
rearing mare, blindfolds her with his shirt, and guides her and the precious barrel
of water between the flare-ups at the soddie and the barn. When the inferno passes
and it's time to bring the released farm animals back from the slough, Percy's
father quietly solicits his help: "It's a job for two men." Reynolds' narrative is
direct and tense, and she effectively conveys to young listeners that an act of the
greatest bravery may be a simple, clearheaded response in the face of necessity.
Unfortunately, Kilby's grainy colored pencil pictures, with their stodgy composi-
tion, rubbery figures, and foreshortened perspectives of the Great Plains, tend to
cool much of the heat generated by the text. Consider reading this aloud with the
caveat "Close your eyes and use your imagination." EB
ROSEN, MICHAEL 
Mission Ziffoid; illus. by Arthur Robins. 
Candlewick,
1999 
20p
ISBN 0-7636-0805-X 
1$10.99 
R 4-7 yrs
This frothy piece of humor puts an outer space spin on the "good news, bad news"
routine. The narrator jumps right into the imaginary conversation-"Guess what?
My brother has a spaceship with four mega-blast booster rockets." "Wow! That's
good." "No, that's bad. On the way to Mars, the spaceship exploded into a
million pieces." "Gosh! That's bad." "No, he escaped in his ejector seat"-and so
on, until the space-traveling brother comes home with some little round alien
NOVEMBER 1999 
* 
105
buddies. Deep space was never like this: Robins' neon palette (familiar from his
The Teeny Tiny Woman, BCCB 10/98) heats up the atmosphere with bubblegum
pink skies, pineapple yellow planets, and avocado green aliens all clamoring for
visual supremacy. Earthbound characters and their environs are depicted in car-
toons reminiscent of Jack Kent, and they have a wholesome middle-America feel
to them that contrasts with the goofily silly extraterrestrials. This is a natural
readaloud with a generous dose of kid-pleasing hilarity; the text zips right along,
and it is a succinct model for kids interested in some "good news, bad news" story-
telling of their own. JMD
ROTH, CAROL 
Ten Clean Pigs: An Upside-Down, Turn-Around Bathtime Count-
ing Book; Ten Dirty Pigs: An Upside-Down, Turn-Around Bathtime Counting Book;
illus. by Pamela Paparone. 
North-South, 1999 
26p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7358-1090-7 
$15.88
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7358-1089-3 
$15.95 
R 
2-5 yrs
It's a difficult call to make-whether Roth's porcine cast takes more delight in a
fragrant bubble bath or a slimy mud wallow. If the book is read from dirty to
clean, it would appear that cleanliness holds sway: "Five dirty pigs brush their
nails. Six dirty pigs clean ears and tails." Flip the book, though, and filth carries
the day: 
"Nine clean pigs head out the door . . . Ten clean pigs aren't clean
anymore!" All the well-groomed porkers drop mannerly pretense to frolic and
luxuriate in a chocolate brown puddle and then must start the bathtime routine
again. Paparone's boxy, snub-nosed pigs are models of prissy decorum as they
apply deodorant, parade about in negligee and shower cap, and wield blow dryers,
cotton swabs, and nail brushes. Splashy crayon colors that vie with each other for
attention are a bit overbearing, but exuberance and droll humor more than com-
pensate. Set this beside the washcloth and soap to lure reluctant tykes to the tub.
EB
RUSSELL, BARBARA TIMBERLAKE 
The Taker's Stone. 
Kroupa/DK Ink,
1999 
[2 2 4p]
ISBN 0-7894-2568-8 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-9
This fantasy gives readers the epic story behind a contemporary Annus Mirabilis
or "Year of Wonders" characterized by earthquakes, extreme weather, and other
natural disasters, all caused by a teenager's theft of some ancient stones from their
Keeper. Fischer (the "Taker"), his cousin David, and Thistle, the daughter of the
Keeper, have three days to return the remaining stone to the Keeper and restore
order to the universe; their task is further complicated by the interfering Belial and
an assortment of his red-eyed minions. Along the way, Fischer learns to have faith
first in unseen forces and then in himself, the latter of which enables him to exer-
cise his free will when confronted by the devil at journey's end. The book lacks
sustained tension, and less motivated readers may find the overt Christian themes
unconvincingly integrated into the story and be put off by the busyness of a book
with a foreword, a prologue, Biblical epigraphs, interpolated news flashes, flash-
backs, and shifting points of view. Nonetheless, the novel is spooky enough to
intrigue readers who like this sort of mythic plot, and many will be prepared to
empathize with the undervalued young male who turns out to have "secret powers
unconfessed." FK
106 
* THE BULLETIN
SCHMANDT-BESSERAT, 
DENISE 
The History of Counting; illus. by Michael
Hays. 
Morrow, 1999 
4 5p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-14119-6 
$16.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-14118-8 
$17.00 
R 
Gr. 4-8
Kids who think counting from 1 to 10 is as easy as, well, 1-2-3, can take fresh pride
in their accomplishment as Schmandt-Besserat traces the development of abstract
numbers and demonstrates how very sophisticated (and recent) a concept it is.
She begins by considering cultures that got along just fine with nary a numeral to
their name and used markers or body parts to represent the small amounts with
which they dealt. Next she introduces people who count concretely by categoriz-
ing the objects to be counted and assigning them different sets of numbers. Then,
after defining abstract numbers, she reviews the processes through which, as many
mathematics historians believe, we arrived at the Arabic numbering system com-
monly used today. Blending archaeology and anthropology with math, she shows
how increasingly complex business transactions rendered various numeration
schemes obsolete-from Sumerian disk and dagger shapes based on the ancient
sheep and oil trade, through the Phoenician system of letters which gave rise to
familiar Roman numerals, to the Arabic introduction of zero as a place holder. At
each stage she notes the limits of each system and raises provocative questions
about the "largest numbers" required among different societies and professions.
Schmandt-Besserat never talks down to her audience, and although the picture-
book format and trim size (and the serviceable but prosaic illustrations) may ini-
tially keep older readers at arm's length, this substantive essay should prove a boon
to students counting on a higher math grade. Glossary and index are included.
EB
SCHUCH, STEVE 
Symphony of Whales; illus. by Peter Sylvada. 
Harcourt,
1999 
32p
ISBN 0-15-201670-8 
$16.00 
R 6-9 yrs
The mid-1980s rescue of almost three thousand beluga whales by the people of the
Chukchi Peninsula in Siberia and the crew of a Russian icebreaker was the inspira-
tion for this harmonious picture book. Glashka is a young girl who can hear the
musical voice of Narna, the whale, "calling to her out of the darkness, beyond even
the voice of the wind." This mystical sensitivity and Glashka's sled dogs lead her
to the trapped whales, at which point the story focuses on the practical efforts of
the villagers to get help (via radio) and keep the whales alive until the icebreaker
arrives. The heart of the book treats the cooperative efforts of the villagers and the
icebreaker's crew to lead the skittish whales to open water using music as a lure.
There is a little stilted simplicity in the snippets of dialogue attributed to the people
of Glashka's village (who say of the whale, "Long has she been a friend to our
people"), but overall the narration and the facing page illustrations offer illuminat-
ing perspectives on the story's multiple protagonists-the men on shipboard, the
villagers and their dogs on shore, and the whales who are in these dire straits. The
wide brush strokes and muted smoky colors of the oils evoke the overwhelming
cold of the setting and the human warmth that survives within it, as well as the
haunting beauty of the whales. An uplifting antidote to man vs. nature stories,
this could lead to further investigation of geography, whales, traditional lifeways,
or music-manmade and whale-made. FK
NOVEMBER 1999 
* 
107
SIERRA, JUDY, ad. 
The Dancing Pig; illus. by Jesse Sweetwater. 
Gulliver/Har-
court, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-15-201594-9 
$16.00 
R 
3-7 yrs
When the ogress Rangsasa kidnaps two kind twin sisters in this Balinese tale, the
family pig leaps-uh, dances-to the rescue. With the help of other animal friends,
the pig distracts the ogress by dancing, saves the twins, burns the ogress's house,
and rounds up a treasure. Of course, everyone lives happily ever after, and so will
listeners of Sierra's rollicking, great-for-telling story of porcine derring-do. The
tale abounds with voice changes, opportunities to participate, and sound effects:
"The Rangsasa went back outside the gate. She practiced making her voice very
sweet. Then she knocked at the door again-tok, tok, tok. 'Kleedeen, Kleencheeng.
Eets yeer meether. Leet mee een.'" Sweetwater's acrylic, watercolor, and gouache
illustrations in citrusy oranges and tropical colors add a Gauguin-ish flavor to the
story. The twin sisters are disarmingly lovely, while Rangsasa is a vision of ugliness
reminiscent of Hindu ogres. Eyecatching patterning gives the illustrations a batik
quality, while the angular poses and positioning of the arms, for both the twins
and Rangsasa, suggest the movements of traditional Balinese dance. Unfortu-
nately, the sometimes garish illustrations suffer from unfocused, crowded compo-
sitions that undercut the strong visual narrative. Informative source notes name
the archive where the story was found and provide information about tale variants,
Balinese culture, and pronunciation. Teachers creating units of study, tellers search-
ing for new stories, and folklore fans will want to pig out on this one. JNH
SIMMONS, JANE 
Ebb and Flo and the New Friend; written and illus. by Jane
Simmons. 
McElderry, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-689-82483-1 
$14.95 
R 
3-6 yrs
Ebb (the dog) couldn't be happier than when she's playing around in the rowboat
with Flo, her giggly owner; that is, until the arrival of Bird ("beep, beep"), a big
orange-billed goose. While Flo thinks Bird is "lovely," Bird takes Ebb's favorite
spot in the boat, disturbs Ebb's sleep, and eats Ebb's treats: "Ebb wished Bird
would fly far away and never come back." Bird does fly away, and Ebb discovers
that she actually misses the beepy goose ("Ebb wasn't happy at all"). Unsurpris-
ingly, Bird returns, "and there sat Bird in Ebb and Bird's favorite spot. Things
couldn't have been better." Predictable this may be, but Simmons (author of
Come Along, Daisy, BCCB 9/98) gives Ebb a curmudgeonly temperament that
makes this tale just grumpy enough to keep it from falling into sentimentality.
The illustrations are rendered in a summery water-and-woods palette, in spacious
compositions that use character placement to particular advantage. Horizontal
land- and waterscapes give a sense of generous expanse, and the faces of Ebb and
Bird are particularly lively. An inspired reader will be able to make the most of the
story's dramatic possibilities, and young listeners will recognize the complications
and rewards of an expanding circle of friends. JMD
Sfs, PETER 
ShipAhoy!; written and illus. by Peter Sfs. 
Greenwillow, 1999 
24 p
ISBN 0-688-16644-X 
$14.95 
Ad 
3-5 yrs
Moving on from Trucks Trucks Trucks (BCCB 5/99), Sfs here provides little navi-
gators with a more nautical take on the world. This take draws wordlessly on a
small child's fantasy play: on the left side of each spread, thick lines draft his real-
108 
* THE BULLETIN
life existence on the sofa, while on the right side, Sfs' delicate hatched tracery
depicts the boy's imagined existence as he rafts, canoes, sails, and submarines his
way through the living room seas. The craft get progressively larger, but the ter-
rible sea monster the boy spots from the couch is larger still; fortunately, Mom
approaches for a cuddle and the sea monster curls up happily in cozy familiar
contentment. This doesn't work as well as Sis' motor madnesses, since the con-
ceptual game of reality vs. fantasy is pretty challenging for the littlest boating bud-
dies that constitute the book's audience; the sea-monster issue is also more neatly
than effectively resolved. The counterpoint of the real and the make-believe is
engagingly presented, however, with appealing details such as a throw-rug sea, and
the foldout sea serpent (who undulates obligingly so that he sinuously submerges
between pages) is an intriguingly beastly centerfold. Sturdy yet imaginative, this
may offer possibilities to young cadets yearning for the seven seas. DS
SOGABE, AKI, ad. 
Aesop's Fox; ad. and illus. by Aki Sogabe. 
Browndeer/Har-
court, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-15-201671-6 
$16.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
Sogabe takes several of Aesop's tales of the oft-disconcerted fox ("The Fox and the
Grapes," "The Crow and the Fox," "The Fox and the Rooster," among others) and
combines them in a loosely connected narrative that features Fox going through
his day, motivated mainly by the demands of his stomach. While the connections
between individual tales is a bit tenuous, Sogabe draws them together with the
consistency of her illustrative style. Her colored paper-cuttings, arranged in un-
crowded, balanced compositions, have a delicacy of line that enhances graceful
details such as the curve of Rooster's plumes, the tilt of Fox's ears, and the currents
of a running stream. The wood is lushly green, and the sense of sun filtered through
foliage is reinforced by the subtleties of light and shadow. The storytelling itself is
simple and unadorned, and it can be adapted to both short excerpts and longer
readings aloud. JMD
SOTO, GARY 
Nerdlandia: A Play. PaperStar, 1999 
[96p]
ISBN 0-698-11784-0 
$5.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 8-12
A comic play in five scenes, this features Martin, the Chicano nerd, and the three
vatos locos (translated in the glossary as "crazy dudes") who agree to help Martin
transform himself so he can win the love of Ceci, "the best looking girl in our
corner of the planet" (Fresno, California). Ceci too has been inspired to reinvent
herself, and she and the two other cholas she hangs with go to "Nerdstrom's" while
Martin's homies re-outfit him, replacing his nerdish attire with slick new clothes.
This alteration doesn't affect his core nerdiness, however, so sterner measures are
called for, and in an increasingly surreal scene his friends grease his hair, give him
a tattoo and a hairnet, bondo his chest and upper arms to add bulk, work a little
"Chicano magnetism" into his armpits, and fit him with a new heart. As Martin
explains to the audience: "This is about becoming someone else. It's like Hallow-
een, like when you put on a mask and go door-to-door with your new identity."
The fashion-crossed lovers meet again and are dismayed to find themselves as stuck
in their new roles as they were in the old. They end by meeting each other "half-
way," as symbolized by the modifications they make to their costumes. This is a
thought-provoking play about the possibilities of assimilation and upward mobil-
NOVEMBER 1999 
* 
109
ity (Martin's friends see him as a "future leader of our people") competing with the
pull of ethnic identity and community. Unfortunately, while the comic satire has
its moments, overall the characterizations are shallow and the dialogue is stilted.
The plot conflates intelligence with being terminally uncool (and non-ethnic) and
the message against judging people by their appearance goes beyond clear to obvi-
ous. Soto's play "These Shoes of Mine/Estos zapatos mios, " from Lori Carlson's
anthology You're On (BCCB 9/99) is better suited to performance by students in
Spanish-language classes, but this one will be welcomed by Hispanic theater groups,
especially since Soto invites directors to update references to pop culture and to
revise local references to refer to their own school mascots and Main Streets. FK
SWINBURNE, STEPHEN R. 
Unbeatable Beaks; illus. by Joan Paley. 
Holt,
1999 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-4802-2 
$15.95 
Ad 
4-8 yrs
"Ask any flamingo, fulmar,/ bobolink, bufflehead,/ ... yellow-breasted chat-/
The world's best tool/ is a beak/ and that's that." Paley's collage birds, familiar and
exotic, certainly support this thesis as they preen, scoop, stab, build, and peck, and
although Swinburne's rhymed verses never soar to heights of rhyme or wit ("The
curlew probes, the hummingbird sips,/ the condor dines without a bib"), they do
point out just how-well, handy a finely shaped beak can be. On the final spread
the birds muster in a sort of profile lineup, challenging the audience to match the
lettered bird names to the appropriate numbered bird beaks ("You can always refer
back to the birds on the previous pages"). The cut-paper birds are rendered in
realistic detail, but the frequently cluttered composition against painted paper back-
drops offers less clarity and visual delight than Steven Jenkins' similar nature spreads.
Still, Swinburne has gathered a sizable flock, and his glossary of annotations can
guide viewers to consider how the shape of each beak could be useful in securing
dinner within a particular habitat. And for that, many a primary-grade science
teacher will chirp thanks. EB
THOMPSON, LAUREN 
Mouse's First Christmas; illus. by Buket Erdogan. 
Simon,
1999 
32p
ISBN 0-689-82325-8 
$12.00 
R 
1-3 yrs
Mouse is out and about one night, exploring. He finds "something sweet and
sparkly" (a sugar cookie), "something warm and melty" (hot cocoa), "something
jingly and glinty" (a jingle bell), etc., and finally, "something whiskery and jolly"
(Santa Claus). The playful language has echoes of Moore's A Visit from Saint Nicholas
in its repetition of the phrases "all through the house" and "not a creature was
stirring," and little listeners will find Santa's parting words ("'Tis your very first
Christmas/ and all through the house/ no one is loved more/ than you,.. . / little
mouse") reassuring. Erdogan's oils give the figures an appealingly fuzzy texture,
and her compositions have a coloring-book simplicity as the inquisitive, smiling
mouse scampers among warmly colored, massive (but still cozy) shapes that em-
phasize his smallness. JMD
TODD, PAMELA 
Pig and the Shrink. Delacorte, 1999 
160p
ISBN 0-385-32657-2 
$14.95 
R Gr. 4-7
Narrator Tucker Harrison is under considerable paternal pressure to produce an
amazing science fair project that will clinch his admission to a prestigious Math
110 
* THE BULLETIN
and Science Academy. Tucker does have a flair for science and an even greater flair
for drama, and he proposes a study of nutrition and adolescent obesity, using the
class heavyweight, Angelo "Pig" Pighetti, as his reluctant guinea pig. Tucker cons
Pig into compliance by pointing out mutual benefits of his weight loss-Pig would
no longer be the victim of bullying by the class hoodlums, and Tucker would
launch his academic career. Tucker quickly learns, though, that retooling the
eating habits of the son of affable, overweight Italian pizza/deli owners requires
more than scientific theory and good intentions; Pig is actually quite happy with
his rotundity, stoically resigned to dodging bullies as best he can, and dewy-eyed
over outspoken classmate Beth Ellen, who likes him just fine the way he is. Tucker's
wisecracking voice keeps the action clipping along, and his gradual realization that
body shape does not necessarily correlate with happiness is a point well made. The
uncomfortable fact that Pig's obesity (which is clearly due to overeating rather
than other disorders) may adversely effect his health gets some hopeful attention
by the conclusion: Angelo becomes a vegetarian, loses some weight, and takes up
tai chi for the love of Beth Ellen. The book's real emphasis, however, is on Tucker's
finally understanding that everyone, even Tucker himself, has the right to be who
he really is. EB
WALTON, RICK 
Bullfrog Pops!; illus. by Chris McAllister. 
Gibbs Smith,
1999 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-87905-903-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
When he climbed off the stagecoach in the town of Ravenous Gulch, "Bullfrog
was hot. He was dirty. He had not showered in many days. And he smelled..."
If listeners guess he smelled bad, they're wrong-he smelled pizza. And so goes
the story of his eating binge, which arouses the wrath of the citizens of Ravenous
Gulch and misdirects the audience with a cliff-hanging phrase at the end of each
double spread, leading to a linguistic twist at the turn of the page: "[The sheriff]
stood up and rested his hand on his holster. 'Bullfrog,' he said, 'draw... //... up
a chair to my table and let's talk.'" Scratchy textured paintings, sporting rich hues
and rakish angles, aid in the misdirection. The viewer watches from behind the
pistol handle on the sheriffs hip as the bug-eyed glutton stretches up his arms in
surrender, and perches smugly on a chair back in the next scene. The prediction-
and-surprise gimmick delivers plenty of genial word play. Once the jokes have
passed, though, the run-on plot stretches as thin as Bullfrog's overstuffed belly,
and this is the same ground Bullfrog hopped over in Once There Was a Bull ...
frog. Still, older listeners might be inspired to pattern a predictive yarn of their
own. EB
WIuARD, NANCY 
Shadow Story; illus. by David Diaz. 
Harcourt, 1999 
34p
ISBN 0-15-201638-4 
$17.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
Holly Go Lolly was born on the "Night When Shadows Linger." Her gift from
her shadow fairy godmother was that she would never be afraid of the dark, and
Holly Go Lolly grows up to be a master of hand shadows so detailed they are
positively magical. The motifs and language of traditional folktales are used to
maximize the effective storytelling, and, though the text is lengthy, the tale's mo-
mentum will carry listeners effortlessly to the climax in which Holly defeats the
villainous Ooboo, whose stomach is never full. Diaz leaves collage and mixed-
NOVEMBER 1999 
* 
111
media backgrounds behind in a series of gouache and pencil illustrations reminis-
cent of Giselle Potter in their airy lightness, while the graceful lines and tidy tableaux
are reminiscent of the spare compositions of Lisbeth Zwerger. The transparent
pastel palette of the full-page illustrations has a sylvan quality, while gradated hues
of violet color the shadow silhouettes used as spot art. Diaz' fairy-tale landscape
has a Kay Nielsen-like sense of detail (individual blossoms on trees, clouds com-
posed of strong curved lines, etc.) but with a more modern sensibility; characters
have large almond-shaped eyes glinting with a light that makes them particularly
spirited. Willard's tale is fanciful and funny, and, although the conclusion is a bit
of a poser (after defeating the Ooboo, Holly turns the Ooboo's castle into a library
and initiates storytimes, an unforeshadowed ambition), the strength of the story-
telling, both in words and pictures, makes up for it. JMD
WOOD, JUNE RAE 
About Face. Putnam, 1999 
[272p]
ISBN 0-399-23419-5 
$19.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-9
Neither Glory nor Marvalene has had much opportunity to hang out with other
thirteen-year-olds. Timid Glory has a birthmark that causes her to back away
from people before they back away from her and she lives across from the fair-
grounds with her divorced grandparents and several elderly tenants in a combina-
tion boarding house and secondhand store, where she feels "surrounded by old.
Old house, old grudges, old people." Without realizing that Marvalene envies her
rootedness, Glory envies the excitement of Marvalene's life working alongside her
dad making and selling corndogs for a traveling carnival while her mother tells
fortunes as "Madame Zulig." The omniscient narration fleshes out these unusual
characters and their milieu effectively (though sometimes too obviously, as when
Marvalene finds and reads Glory's journal), focusing the reader's attention on each
of the girls-the "townie" and the "carnie"-in turn, as they work through their
relationship to each other and to their families. In the end, both come to terms
with the truism Glory's Gram has posted on the cash register in her store: "Hap-
piness is not having what you want, but wanting what you have." They arrive at
this conclusion through plot twists that range from ingenious (Marvalene uses
knowledge gleaned from Glory's journal to convince her that she's psychic) to
melodramatic (a mysterious boarder who only comes out at night turns out to
be ... ) and thematic clarity is sometimes achieved at the expense of realism. Still,
between these two intriguing outsiders, many young readers will recognize aspects
of themselves. FK
YOLEN, JANE 
The Mary Celeste: An UnsolvedMysteryfrom History; by Jane Yolen
and Heidi Elisabet Yolen Stemple; illus. by Roger Roth. 
Simon, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-689-81079-2 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Readers follow the merchant vessel Dei Gratia, which in 1872 boarded the aban-
doned Mary Celeste and reported on the mystifying, often contradictory evidence
they found attesting to the fate of its captain and his family and crew. The Dei
Gratia's investigation is presented in buff-colored boxed text, while Post-it and
steno-pad styled sidebars supply readers with definitions of seafarer lingo and back-
ground information. Six popular theories of the ship's demise are then offered,
together with several questions to help in evaluating their merits, and the audience
is invited to embrace the most likely or posit a theory of their own. The presenta-
112 
* THE BULLETIN
tion is engaging, and the theories, covering the gamut from pirates to reportorial
conspiracy, are provocative. The mood of dark tragedy that maritime disaster
generally evokes (and kids unfailingly welcome) is missing here, though, as a coolly
cerebral exercise leaves little room for sympathy, much less imaginative horror,
over any of the Mary Celeste's several possible fates. An extraneous layer of plot-
ting, in which a young would-be detective babbles about her system for probing
"history mysteries," is tacked on fore and aft, spilling even more sunshine over a
time-honored mystery better enjoyed in shadow. Still, this may introduce many
children to the pleasures of historical detection, and exercise the gray matter as a
bonus. EB
YORINKS, ARTHUR 
Arthur Yorinks's The Flying Latke; illus. by William Steig and
with photographs by Paul Colin and Arthur Yorinks. 
Simon, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-689-82597-8 
$16.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Young Danny and his extended family are all together for the first night of Chanu-
kah, when Uncles Izzy and Shecky get into a shouting match over whether or not
the car that cut them off was a Ford or a Buick. The shouting escalates into a food
fight, resulting in a latke getting thrown out the window. The airborne latke is
spotted by the media flying over the New Jersey Turnpike and declared a hostile
UFO by the Air Force. Attempts by Izzy to contact the authorities and explain
come to naught, and, trapped by "reporters and Hollywood producers," the family
stays inside for eight days and eight nights: "And so tell me, tell me if what hap-
pened next wasn't a miracle. As my mother's latke flew around the world, our
plate of latkes, the only food we had, which should have lasted, with this crowd,
about seven and a half minutes, lasted for eight days!" Danny's narration of this
slapstick tall tale of Chanukah madness has the roll and rhythm of a family story
punctuated by bits of Yiddish and schtick, as he tosses around words like
"meshugge," "nu," and "oy" as easily as Izzy and Shecky toss pickles and salad.
Steig's mixed-media illustrations combine watercolors and color photographs; this
juxtaposition of actual people (the photos) against fanciful backdrops (the paint-
ings) adds a sense of theater that complements the humorous, monologue-ish na-
ture of the text. Well-known faces (John Turturro, Maurice Sendak, etc.-there's
a photo-key on the back cover) add to the underlying sense of family recognition.
To say that this is a tale made to be read aloud would be an understatement of
colossal proportions. JMD
NOVEMBER 1999 
* 
113
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
Harrison, Barbara, and Gregory Maguire, ed. Origins of Story: On Writing for
Children. McElderry, 1999. ISBN 0-689-82604-4; $20.00. 20 6p. illus. with
photographs.
Harrison and Maguire have gathered sixteen speeches made at a decade of Children's
Literature New England conferences, so that those who weren't present to hear
Susan Cooper, Katherine Paterson, Tom Feelings, Margaret Mahy, Virginia
Hamilton, and a host of other luminaries can now read their comments in essay
form. Fantasy and folklore aficionados will find particularly rich pickings here,
between Ursula LeGuin's exploration of gender and otherness in her writing, Gillian
Cross' discussion of folkloric antecedents for Wolf Pat O'Shea's examination of
the influences of Irish myth, and others, but there's also Tom Feelings and John
Rowe Townsend on home, Madeleine L'Engle on heroes, and other appealing
meditations on creativity. In her essay Susan Cooper refers to conferences as an
"enclosed, focused world"; this compilation does somewhat reflect that, as there's
a certain preaching-to-the-choir insularity, but it's nonetheless an engaging collec-
tion of writers writing about writing that their readers will appreciate. Brief biog-
raphies of the contributors are included. DS
PATTING OURSELVES ON THE BACK DEPARTMENT:
Hearne, Betsy. Choosing Books for Children: A Commonsense Guide; 3rd edition;
by Betsy Hearne with Deborah Stevenson. University of Illinois Press, 1999. ISBN
0-252-02516-4; $27.95. 229p. illus. with photographs.
The Bulletin is pleased to announce the publication of the third edition of Betsy
Hearne's Choosing Books for Children: A Commonsense Guide. With coauthor
Stevenson, Hearne has revised and updated extensive annotated bibliographies of
the best of available children's books (including picture books, fiction, poetry, and
folklore) as well as commentary on issues in children's literature. An author-illus-
trator index, a subject index, and a list of recommended web sites are included.
H51
114 
* THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
ADVENTURE STORIES: Curry;
Lourie
ALPHABET BOOKS: Horenstein
African Americans: McKissack
African Americans-fiction: Curtis;
Nelson
Aliens-stories: Rosen
American Indians: Lourie
Animals-stories: Hallensleben;
Hamanaka; Simmons; Sogabe
Animals: Horenstein
Aunts-fiction: Couloumbis
Bali-folklore: Sierra
Bathtime-stories: Roth
BEDTIME STORIES: McCarty
BIBLE STORIES: Hickman
BIOGRAPHIES: Mah; Mayer
Birds: Swinburne
Boats-stories: Sis
Brothers-fiction: Naylor
Bullies-fiction: Dadey
Carnivals-fiction: Wood
Chairs-stories: Jackson
Christmas: Hickman
Christmas-stories: Polacco;
Thompson
Civil rights-fiction: Nelson
Clothes-stories: Dorrie
Comedy-stories: Burton
CONCEPT BOOKS: Horenstein
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Atkins; Blackwood; Clarke
Death and dying-fiction: Bennett;
Couloumbis; Curtis
Divorce-fiction: Cooney
Dogs-stories: Feiffer
Ecology: Schuch
Egypt-fiction: Gregory
England-folklore: Alderson
EPISTOLARY FICTION: Collins
Ethics and values: Naylor; Nelson
Explorers and exploring: Lourie
FABLES: Sogabe
FANTASY: Bennett; Brooke;
Russell
Fathers and daughters: Mah
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Cooney
Fathers and sons-fiction: Cormier;
Hamilton; Karr
Fathers and sons-stories: Hughes;
Reynolds
Fear-stories: Edwards
Fires-stories: Reynolds
FOLK AND FAIRYTALES:
Alderson; Big; Haddix;
McNaughton; Sierra
Food and eating-stories: Alderson;
Big; Geeslin; Yorinks
Food and eating: Swinburne
Friendship-fiction: Dadey;
Franklin; Levine; Nelson; Todd;
Wood
Friendship-stories: Hallensleben;
Simmons
Frogs-stories: Big; Walton
FUNNY STORIES: Jackson;
Walton
Geography: Johnson
Gods and goddesses: Orgel
Grandfathers-fiction: Martin
Grandparents-fiction: Wood
NOVEMBER 1999 
* 
115
Grandparents-stories: Gray
Heroes-stories: Burleigh
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Blackwood; Curry; Curtis;
Franklin; Hamilton; Martin;
Nelson
History, U.S.: McKissack; Reynolds
History, world: Johnson
Holidays: Greenwood; Hickman;
Yorinks
Illness-fiction: Bennett
Immigrants-fiction: Karr
Kidnapping-fiction: Curry
Language arts: Brooke; Edwards
Latinos: Soto
Maps: Johnson
Mathematics: Schmandt-Besserat
Mexico-stories: Geeslin
Mice-stories: Thompson
Militias-fiction: Naylor
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Cooney; Franklin
Mothers and daughters-stories:
Darrie
Music and musicians-fiction: Curtis
Music and musicians-stories: Gray
MYTHOLOGY, CLASSICAL:
Burleigh; Orgel
Nature study: Swinburne
Obesity-fiction: Todd
Ogres-stories: Willard
Orphans-fiction: Curtis
Orphans-stories: Polacco; Willard
Pigs-stories: McNaughton; Roth
PLAYS: Soto
POETRY: Florian
PRAYERS: Owens
Queens-fiction: Gregory
Rabbits-stories: McCarty
Racism-fiction: Nelson
Ranching-fiction: Naylor
Reading aloud: Florian
Religion-fiction: Collins; Levine;
Russell
Religious education: Mayer; Orgel;
Owens
Safety education: Clarke
Scarecrows-stories: Preston
School-fiction: Dadey; Todd
School-stories: Munsch
Seasons-stories: Preston
Sexual abuse-fiction: Atkins
Shadows-stories: Willard
Ships: Yolen
Shoes-stories: Geeslin
SHORT STORIES: Avi; Gallo
Sisters-fiction: Couloumbis;
Franklin
Sisters-stories: Sierra
Social studies: Johnson; Schmandt-
Besserat
Space-stories: Rosen
Sports-fiction: Levine
Stepfathers-fiction: Hamilton
Stepmothers-fiction: Collins
Storytelling: Alderson; Big; Sierra;
Sogabe; Willard
Storytime: Alderson; Big; D6rrie;
Feiffer; Hallensleben; Hamanaka;
Jackson; Munsch; Rosen; Sierra;
Simmons; Thompson
Thanksgiving: Greenwood
Voyages and travel: McKissack;
Yolen
Voyages and travel-stories: Geeslin;
Sfs; Rosen
War-fiction: Levine
Whales-stories: Burton; Schuch
Winter-poetry: Florian
Women's studies: Orgel
Writers and writing-stories: Hughes
: .. 
M1
with the
latest in
Teaching!
Tt`~"~cht------i-.
Teaching K-8 is filled with hundreds of unique ideas and
activities that help teachers present new challenges to their
students, learn new concepts and develop new skills.
Monthly articles include:
Carol Otis Hurst on...
* Children's Books * Teaching in the Library
Plus... * The Parent Connection * Interviews with
children's book authors and illustrators * Science
* Technology and more!
Don't miss this valuable
resource for your library -
subscribe today.
Call 800-678-8793 or visit
our website at
www.TeachingK-8.com
S"Sparkling...Fun to read...Illuminating."*
*"When young Constance accidentally lets the cabin's fire
die out, her father composes a riddle to cheer her up,
spawning a riddle marathon.... Andersen's oil paintings
depict carefully researched, authentic scenes from pioneer
life....Will round out any lesson on early settlers."
-Kirkus Reviews* (pointered review)
*"Memorable.... Andersen matches Karim's homespun,
image-rich language with vibrant, airy scenes of a cozy,
well-appointed log cabin and rolling countryside."
-Publishers Weekly (starred review)
Ages 5 up.40 pp. TR $16.00/0-688-16203-7; LE $15.93/0-668-16204-5
SGreenwillow Books A division of William Morrow & Co., Inc.
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019 * www.williammorrow.com
*"A 
well-rserced
inrgig 
account:A
*"Cogently written and beautifully made."
-ALA Booklist (starred review)
"Nothing in recent memory explains the topic quite so well....
It would be a shame if older children dismissed this book
because of its picture-book format, since they are unlikely to
encounter a better explanation of the subject."
-School Library Journal
Ages 8 up. 48 pp. TR $17.00/0-688-14118-8; LE $16.93/0-688-14119-6
Morrow Junior Books * A division of William Morrow & Co., Inc.
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019 * www.williammorrow.com
* 
LL EN;D EARING77 *
Greenwillow Books 'A division of William Morrow & Co., Inc.
1350 Avenue of the Amedicus, New York, NY 10019 * www.williammorrow.corn
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.S.A.
RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED
II11l1lll
0008-9036(199911)53:3;1-6
"'
PERIODICALS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
is online!
It is our great pleasure to announce that, beginning with the
1999-2000 volume year, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's
Books will be available to our print subscribers as a searchable
online database. Print subscribers will be able to browse the
latest issue online, look through issues from the 1998-99 volume
year, and search for reviews by title, author, and reading level.
The staff of The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
cordially invites you to browse through the September 1998
sample issue at:
http://www.prairienet.org/cgi-bin/ccb/bulletin.cgi
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
The Best of Tradition and Technology
;e 
"
L;;n~r
::i 
--·
:i; 
· 05:~_,~"~~ 
f 
i· 
:1-
· ; 
r-pl~g: 
,
-iil·
·I·e-::~d,:si
·-d
n
