ILLINO
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
Ik;Q
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
d 
r/-~ 
.
: 
--
* x 
' 
/a e^a^
"Baseball and race relations in Boston in the early 1970s are the
backdrop for this lively portrait of two unlikely seventh-grade
pals, Boston native Richard Riley Moncrief and Napoleon
Charlie Ellis, newly arrived from the Dominican Republic.
Richards family is white and working class; Napoleon's father is
an elegant professor of Caribbean literature. The boys become
friends [and] Richard, who lives and breathes baseball, tries to
interest Napoleon, an excellent cricket player, in the beauty and
thrill of the game. In a gut-wrenching climax, racial tensions at
school destroy their friendship. Lynch captures the thrill of
the game with freshness and joy and issues of race and class are
introduced with sensitivity and realism. This is a wonderful
baseball book, but it's the awkward, intense friendship that
drives the story." -
Highlighted review / ALA Booklist
"This novel contains some of the best sports writing readers
will ever find in a YA novel." -School 
Library Journal
Ages 10 up. $15.95 Tr (0-06-028174-X); $15.89 Lb (0-06-028175-8)
± HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019 * www.harperchildrens.com
f
THE
BUvL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
February 2001
Vol. 54 No. 6
A LOOK INSIDE
211 THE BIG PICTURE
The Other Side by Jacqueline Woodson; illus. by E. B. Lewis
212 NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed tites include:
225 * Nick Plays Baseball written and illus. by Rachel Isadora
228 * Stranger in Dadland by Amy Goldman Koss
229 * George Washington & the Founding ofa Nation by Albert Marrin
230 * The Lamp, the Ice, and the Boat Called Fish: Based on a True Story by
Jacqueline Briggs Martin; illus. by Beth Krommes
240 * Every Time a Rainbow Dies by Rita Williams-Garcia
243 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
244 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Centerfor Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL
61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor (JMD)
Deborah Stevenson, Associate Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elaine A. Bearden, Reviewer (EAB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Fern Kory, Reviewer (FK)
Kate McDowell, Reviewer (KM)
CENTER STAFF
Jeannette Hulick
Melanie Kimball
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $60.00; individuals, $50.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $5.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from Bell & Howell, 300 North Zeeb
Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson Associates,
P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to the
University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin ofthe Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
All inquiries about subscriptions and advertising should go to University of Illinois Press, 1325 S.
Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903, 217-333-0950.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin
of the Center for Children's Books, 51 E. Armory Ave., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. E-mail:
bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2001 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by E. B. Lewis from The Other Side 2001. Used by permission of G. P.
Putnam's Sons.
FEBRUARY 2001 
* 211
THE BIG PICTURE
The Other Side
by Jacqueline Woodson; illustrated by E. B. Lewis
Books about race and race relations, whether well-written or not, are books that
carry tremendous historical and political baggage, and they are nearly guaranteed
to provoke strong emotions of one kind or another. The topic of racism is difficult
to serve up in palatable portions for younger listeners and readers, who have lim-
ited ability to provide their own context. Informed by the adult perspective of the
writer, these books tend toward over-explanation in an effort to provide that con-
text; they are often message-driven, with neat conclusions and the assumption of
simpler, happier futures. Oversimplification of complex issues is a charge often
leveled at picture books dealing with weighty subjects; it is a charge that cannot be
leveled at Jacqueline Woodson's latest book.
The title of Woodson's evocation of a not-so-long ago summer refers to
a seemingly impassable division: "That summer the fence that stretched through
our town seemed bigger. We lived in a yellow house on one side of it. White
people lived on the other." Clover, an African-American girl about eight or nine
years old, relates the story of the "summer there was a girl who wore a pink sweater,"
a white girl, on the other side of the fence. After weeks of watching one another,
the two girls finally speak, and, with the pragmatism of children, find a way around
their mothers' injunction that they stay on their own side: "'A fence like this is
made for sitting on,' Annie said. She looked at me sideways. 'My mama says I
shouldn't go on the other side,' I said. 'My mama says the same thing. But she
never said nothing about sitting on it.' 'Neither did mine,' I said. That summer
me and Annie sat together on that fence." Woodson is a writer of exceptional
integrity, and this short story contains the same emotional and moral complexity
found in the author's longer work (Miracle's Boys, BCCB 5/00; If You Come Softly,
BCCB 10/98) distilled into a minimalist yet poignant readaloud. Clover tells the
story that she knows, the story of that particular summer and that particular fence,
from her particular point of view. It is this specificity that makes the tale so effec-
tive and that sets the unstated context into bold relief.
Lewis' watercolors provide a telling backdrop to the action; the rural set-
ting is suggested more than delineated, and the gentle softness of the summer light
helps model both landscape and characters. Perspective and the placement of
characters in the compositions physically establishes the distance between the two
girls, each on her own side of the fence. The body language of the children is also
telling. In one spread, Clover's friends jump rope near the fence where Annie
watches. Annie, asking to play, leans hopefully over the rails; Sandra, refusing
Annie's request, stands adamant with hand on hip. Eventually, the girls all jump
rope together; the spread depicting the six of them balanced on the top rail of the
fence visually foreshadows the final text: "When we were too tired to jump any-
more, we sat up on the fence, all of us in a long line. 'Someday somebody's going
212 
* THE BULLETIN
to come along and knock this old fence down,' Annie said. And I nodded. 'Yeah,'
I said. 'Someday.'"
This is an emotionally intricate tale presented simply and intimately, and
the open-ended conclusion unselfconsciously encourages discussion, examination,
and inquiry. Unlike authors of other picture books dealing with racism and preju-
dice, Woodson doesn't overexplain or stack the emotional deck. She doesn't knock
the fence down for the reader/listener; the town does not suddenly have a collec-
tive change of heart. She just lets Clover tell the story, and then she leaves it up to
readers and listeners to resolve any questions that remain. (Imprint information
appears on p. 242.)
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ALTMAN, JOYCE 
Lunch at the Zoo: What Zoo Animals Eat and Why; illus. by Rick
Chrustowski and with photographs. 
Holt, 2001 
88p
ISBN 0-8050-6070-7 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Zoo visitors may spend more time looking at food dishes and less at the animals
after encountering this amiable introduction to zoo nutrition. Material covered
ranges from the problems of feeding live animals to live animals, the challenge of
handing food over to poisonous snakes, the logistics of providing a diet for hun-
dreds of different animals with hundreds of different kinds of appetites, and the
role of food in daily stimulation for the animals. The information tends to be
livelier than the text (and many of the illustrations), and organization seems a bit
haphazard, but the subject is sufficiently novel and intriguing to compensate. Black-
and-white photographs add personality as well as information (the tiny bird-of-
paradise chick, reaching skyward for a bit of food dangling from a manmade beaklike
tool, is a good example). There are a lot of tasty informational tidbits here that will
intrigue animal lovers of all sorts; you could also make a daring connection with
Solheim's It's Disgusting-and WeAte It! (BCCB 4/98). Nutritional charts and an
index are included. DS
ANDERSON, STEPHEN AXEL 
I Know the Moon; illus. by Greg Couch. 
Philomel,
2001 
32p
ISBN 0-399-23425-X 
$15.99 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Various nocturnal creatures discuss the true nature of the moon: the fox says it's a
rabbit, the moth says it's a cocoon, the mouse says it's a seed, the frog says it's a lily
pad, and so on. They agree to let the Man of Science solve things, but none of
them like his unimaginative and limiting answer. This is a prettily written text,
with reliance on poetic echoes in the prose; it's not, unfortunately, much more
than that, as the poesy becomes strained and fey and the plot somewhat forced
(why does the Man of Science's different view trouble them more than their own
FEBRUARY 2001 
* 213
divergence, and where did they find such an atypically dogmatic Man of Science?).
The art too is dreamily pretty, with acrylic wash dappling the surfaces in fresco-
like textures while the moon, a multitude of stars, and a few eyecatching planets
decorate the pages; the illustrations sometimes sacrifice energy for rhapsody, how-
ever, with images that have a static calendar-art look. The lean and questing ani-
mals have an elegant if distanced allure, though, and the nocturnal world is ripe for
fantasy. This isn't up to moon picture books such as Yolen's OwlMoon (BCCB 1/
88), but it's a glamorous nighttime vision that many adults and some children may
find enticing. DS
ARKIN, ALAN 
Cassie Loves Beethoven; illus. by Hala Wittwer. 
Hyperion,
2000 
188p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2489-1 
$17.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0564-1 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Hallie and David convince their father that what their little farm needs is a cow, so
they go out and buy one-Cassie, "a fine milker." But Cassie stops giving milk on
arrival, and David seeks advice from Vivian Keats (an eccentric wise woman no
one but David takes seriously), who recommends music. Upon hearing Beethoven's
Pastorale, not only does Cassie give milk, she talks-and she learns to play the
piano so well she debuts with the Sydney Symphony Orchestra. Bad reviews send
her into seclusion, but in the end she is tempted back to the piano by her passion
for music, and her playing inspires a would-be-composer swine from next door.
The light whimsy necessary to make this sort of premise fly is unfortunately miss-
ing from this domestic fantasy; the momentum is unsustained and the willing
suspension of disbelief sways under the labored details of Cassie's technique. Both
magic and logic are needed to make fantasy succeed, and this title balances uneas-
ily between the two. Readers may be caught by the strong characterizations of
major and minor players, however (Cassie herself is thoroughly obnoxious in her
single-minded quest for musical nirvana), and they may deem Cassie, "the Classi-
cal Cow," worth a giggle. JMD
BANG, MOLLY 
Nobody Particular: One Woman's Fight to Save the Bays; written
and illus. by Molly Bang. 
Holt, 2001 
47p
ISBN 0-8050-5396-4 
$18.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
In 1989, Diane Wilson, a Texas shrimper, became an environmental activist and a
thorn in the side of the Formosa Plastics company, badgering Formosa and the
EPA for a zero discharge agreement that could help clean the east Texas bay system
and preserve the local fishing industry. Bang's account, as "narrated" by Wilson, is
both an impassioned indictment of industrial polluters and an amalgam of mini-
lessons in ecology which vie for space in a cluttered layout. Wilson's story, which
spans two continents and involves a large cast of players, is related in the black and
white frames of a graphic novel, with minuscule cartoon silhouettes occasionally
conversing outside the box. The history of the bay ecosystem is splayed across the
spreads as a colored backdrop, with thready hand-lettered text that makes data
vital to understanding Wilson's battle an exhausting chore to read. The author has
overloaded her plate with tidbits of a frustratingly complex environmental/social/
legal dilemma, and there's simply too much here for readers to digest in one pic-
ture-book sitting. Bang concludes with a fine-print update ofWilson's story (mag-
nifying glass not included). EB
214 
* THE BULLETIN
BASKIN, NORA RALEIGH 
What Every Girl (Except Me) Knows. 
Little,
2001 
[2 2 4p]
ISBN 0-316-07021-1 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Twelve-year-old Gabby feels like she's speeding into womanhood without a map,
since her mother died when she was small and there's only her older brother and
father at home. She's convinced that girls with mothers have knowledge to which
she's not privy, and one of the benefits of her friendship with new girl Taylor is a
helpful dose of female camaraderie (as well as some indication that having a mother
doesn't solve everything). Her hunger for mothering means that she's thrilled
about her father's engagement to lively Cleo, who seems willing to step into the
maternal role; when Cleo breaks the engagement, Gabby's grief sends her in search
of the truth about her mother's death. Baskin deftly manages to validate Gabby's
loneliness while also implying that her self-conscious awkwardness is common to
her age group. Relationships are a strong suit here: the book's depiction of Gabby's
family dynamics, with nice people unintentionally hurting one another with their
tacit pledge of silence about the past, is perceptive and sympathetic. Cleo is a
charming but not overidealized breath of fresh air (she becomes Gabby's heroine
by immediately understanding the unwearability of the winter coat that makes
Gabby into the "olive drab marshmallow girl, Iditarod contender"), and Gabby
and Taylor's friendship, with catchphrases carefully cultivated but the bond un-
derneath genuine, is absolutely authentic. Even readers with a full complement of
parents will empathize with Gabby's desire for a little assistance on the path to
adulthood. DS
BEAVERSON, AIDEN 
The Hidden Arrow ofMaether. Delacorte, 2000 
177p
ISBN 0-385-32750-1 
$14.95 
R Gr. 6-10
Linnet's beloved father died when she was small, and her passive mother married a
cruel replacement, Domm, who is a Ranite, a worshipper of the demon Rane.
Linnet's own father raised her as a Truen, a follower of the old religion of the land
of Maether, and from him she inherited a sacred Lysetome, a book of Truen beliefs
and traditions. When Domm announces that he has betrothed fifteen-year-old
Linnet to a Ranite, she runs away from home. Throughout her journey, she re-
ceives magical assistance, from the small tugging in her midsection that leads her
forward to the parting of grasses in the direction she should walk. Her adventures
include stowing away on a ship and being rescued from the sea; finally, she meets
Thom, one of the magical lysefolk, who takes her to the sacred City of Trees de-
scribed in the Lysetome. After a series of tests, it is determined that Linnet has
powers against the demon Rane that are desperately needed to save the waning
power of the lysefolk. Beaverson's writing is suspenseful and well paced and, al-
though there are moments of heavy-handed dialogue, the complex plot elements
are deftly woven to create a vivid sense of place and purpose. Fans of fantasy as well
as fans of likable young heroines will enjoy the story of Linnet's quest. KM
BENNETT, JAMES W. Plunking Reggie Jackson. Simon, 2001 
[208p]
ISBN 0-689-83137-4 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 10-12
With a flood of scholarship offers coming in, and major-league scouts up in the
bleachers, pitcher Coley Burke should be soaring through the last term of his se-
FEBRUARY 2001 
* 215
nior year. It's not that easy, though: pressure from his fanatical father (who has
installed a life-size statue of Reggie Jackson in the backyard) never lets up, Coley's
grades are hanging by a thread, and his adoring, sexually accommodating girl-
friend Bree admits she's being beaten by her stepfather. Then it gets worse: Coley
is suspended from playoffs for a failing grade, the family's suppressed guilt over the
death of their older son explodes, Bree confides she was sexually assaulted by her
natural father before her mother's remarriage to the abusive stepfather, and finally
Bree announces she's pregnant. This is as much soap opera as sports story, with
the Burkes' affluence serving as a handy catalyst for Coley's trips to Florida, with
underage teens-on-the-run renting cars and motel rooms while evading detection,
and with stock plotlines pumped dry for dramatic effect and then swept tidily
under the carpet. Bennett's prose veers between stodgy formality ("They stopped
at the concession building briefly for a soft drink") and locker room lingo ("He did
enjoy the generous side view of her tits that the skimpy halter top allowed"). There's
just enough genuine baseball action, however, to keep sports enthusiasts turning
the pages, and teens whose tastes run to daytime drama might even find some
guilty pleasure here. EB
BIAL, RAYMOND 
Ghost Towns oftheAmerican West; written and illus. with photo-
graphs by Raymond Bial. 
Houghton, 2001 
[4 8p]
ISBN 0-618-06557-1 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 3-6
Bial conducts a photo tour of both the truly abandoned settlements and the con-
scientiously preserved and/or reconstructed sites which are now collectively known
as "ghost" towns. The text rambles unsteadily, with shivery allusions to spirit
residents ("at night, the plaintive hoo-hoo may be an owl nesting in a nearby
saguaro cactus-or the moaning of a restless ghost up in the graveyard"), often-
repeated summaries of the boom-and-bust cycle of Western mining and cow towns,
and underexplained nuggets of local lore (just who were those Earp brothers, any-
how?). Towns are not consistently identified in the captioned photos, and pic-
tures do not always coordinate with pages of text. Still, admirers of legendary
gunslingers and card sharps will probably overlook the clichs ("Even the memo-
ries, along with the hopes and dreams of the inhabitants, have blown away, like so
much dust in the wind") and happily breathe in the thick atmosphere that the
decrepit bathhouses and shacks, shadowy gallows, and worn tombstones provide.
EB
BODE, JANET 
For Better, for Worse: A Guide to Surviving Divorce for Preteens and
Their Families; by Janet Bode and Stan Mack; illus. by Stan Mack. 
Simon,
2001 
[160p]
ISBN 0-689-81945-5 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
What with problem novels taking on global-level tragedies and intricate dramas of
human suffering, the plain old agony of divorce sometimes seems literarily passe.
As Bode and Mack remind us, divorce is still very much in human fashion, and
there are still a lot of youngsters struggling with the effects. Readers will hear kid
views on the process and receive collections of kid suggestions for dealing with
specific problems (and though there are mature approaches included, the advice
doesn't seem sanitized for adult protection, which will reassure youngsters); they'll
216 
* THE BULLETIN
also get a chance to hear from kids in intact families making clear both that they're
not free from problems and they're capable of being good friends to people in a
different situation. While there are a lot of good points made here (some kids
mention that they're glad their parents divorced, for instance) and a fair amount of
diversity in response (kids' support systems range from good friends to God), the
organization is muddled and there's a lot of repetition of the same points. The
section aimed at adults contains plenty of material equally if not more useful for
children, and there's no rigor about sources for statements of fact from interviewed
experts. This is nonetheless likely to be bolstering for many youngsters, who will
appreciate what's essentially a hug from authorities and a reminder that they're not
alone. Mack's interpolated comic-strip narratives add accessibility, as does the
included art from children of divorce. Lists of further resources (including some
good advice on search-engine use) are included. DS
BORDEN, LOUISE 
Fly High!: The Story of Bessie Coleman; by Louise Borden and
Mary Kay Kroeger; illus. by Teresa Flavin. 
McElderry, 2001 
40p
ISBN 0-689-82457-2 
$16.00 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
This adulatory biography of the pioneer black aviator, fashioned into ragged-right
text that suggests free verse, emphasizes the inspirational aspects of Coleman's
life-overcoming poverty and a limited formal education, and her commitment
to spreading the message of self-improvement among African-American school
children. Borden spends much time taxi-ing down Coleman's career prepara-
tions, but she never quite takes off with details of her feats as an aviatrix, the very
core of her life's work that children will most want to learn about and admire. The
text seems unaware of Bessie's black predecessors in flight, and it often lapses into
a breathlessly earnest tone that borders on pretentious: "And fly she did!/ Just like
the pilots in the news stories of the Chicago Defender./ Just like the pilots in the
United States/ who were men and who were white./ Bessie Coleman learned the
same skills that they knew/ with courage in her heart." Nor do Flavin's flat, stiff
gouache paintings inject much excitement; she offers the same number of scenes
of manicurist Coleman filing nails as of barnstormer Coleman piloting her planes
(two each). Girls with their heads in the clouds (in the best possible sense) will be
happier skimming the skies with Don Brown's Ruth Law Thrills a Nation (BCCB
12/93). EB
BRISSON, PAT 
Bertie's Picture Day; illus. by Diana Cain Bluthenthal. 
Holt,
2000 
70p
ISBN 0-8050-6281-5 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 2-3
Bertie had a loose tooth, and "no matter how hard he pushed, no matter how hard
he poked, that dumb old tooth hung on." Inevitably, out that tooth comes, cour-
tesy of an out-of-control kickball, and Bertie happily contemplates sticking his
tongue through the "square hole" on school picture day. Subsequent chapters
concentrate on additional changes to Bertie's appearance: his younger sister acci-
dentally whacks him in the eye and gives him a shiner, then she cuts his hair while
he's sleeping, giving him "a very interesting haircut." Brisson has already shown
herself to be closely in touch with the concerns of primary graders (Hot Fudge
Hero, BCCB 6/97), and the saga of Bertie's image problems has that same conver-
sational intimacy. Bluthenthal's black-and-white drawings feature a cheerful Bertie
who bounces back from each new alteration with humor and enthusiasm. Car-
FEBRUARY 2001 
* 217
toony characters with slightly cockeyed expressions add to the good-natured tone
of this early chapter book. Readers will probably agree with Bertie's mom: he
looks just "spiffy." JMD
BRUSS, DEBORAH 
Book! Book! Book!; illus. by Tiphanie Beeke. 
Levine/Scholas-
tic, 2001 
[32p]
ISBN 0-439-13525-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
When you realize that "Book! Book! Book!" is the utterance of a hen, you can
probably guess which joke turns into a story here. Bruss sets it on a farm, where
the animals are sad because the children have gone back to school, so they decide
to go into town in search of diversion. The library looks good to them, but the
librarian can't make heads or tails of the horse's neigh, the cow's moo, the pig's
oink, and so on; only when the hen demands "Book! Book! Book!" does the
librarian understand and provide the required texts, thereby pleasing all the ani-
mals except for the bullfrog (who, of course, has already read it, read it, read it).
The expansion of the joke is reasonably well supported, and the opportunities for
animal noises (why not get your audience primed to oink and bleat along?) add a
performative pleasure; the joke itself will tickle many youngsters, who may not
have encountered it. The watercolor and acrylic art teeters between the naive and
the amateurish; the compositions are sometimes slightly haphazard, and the im-
pressionistic approximation of the figures doesn't always obscure some unduly
creative interpretations of animal anatomy. The fairgrounds palette provides a
springlike cheer, however, and Beeke's departure from the dull restrictions of real-
ism when it comes to animal color enhances the pleasure of this gently fantastical
world (the blue horse is particularly winning). Since this is free from the self-
consciousness that often plagues library-set picture books, it might make a particu-
larly fetching icebreaker in a library introduction. DS
CHANDLER, ELIZABETH 
Dark Secrets: Legacy ofLies. 
Archway, 2000 
182p
ISBN 0-7434-0028-3 
$4.99 
R Gr. 6-9
After sixteen years of rejection from her grandmother, who resents her daughter's
interracial marriage and the couple's adopting of children, Megan finally travels to
the old lady's Maryland estate in response to an out-of-the-blue invitation. The
situation is uncomfortable: not only is her grandmother stern and dismissive, but
Megan's attractive same-age cousin Matt is coldly unwelcoming as well. The un-
ease extends well beyond that, however, as Megan finds herself enmeshed in a
family mystery surrounding the death of her great-aunt Avril, her grandmother's
sister who died sixty years ago; the plot thickens when it starts to look as if appar-
ent coincidences are in fact supernatural manifestations, and that Megan is actu-
ally the reincarnation of Avril, seeking justice for her death. Chandler (author M.
C. Helldorfer writing under a pseudonym) has a pleasingly gothic touch right
from the duMaurieresque opening ("Last night I visited the house again"), and she
keeps the pace moving, with plenty of suspense, foreboding, and eerie occurrences.
Characterization adds substance, with Megan's forthrightness, skepticism, and sharp
tongue giving her some of the flair of a Barbara Michaels heroine and making her
success in finding the truth plausible, and even the supporting cast is intriguingly
drawn. There's a bit of convenience in Megan's quick diagnosis of Matt's dyslexia
and in the concluding plot twists, but the atmosphere, readability, and strong-
218 
* THE BULLETIN
minded protagonist offer fair compensation. Readers looking for a generous help-
ing of supernatural chills with a dollop of romance and family drama will settle
down happily with this. EAB
CHILD, LAUREN 
Beware of the Storybook Wolves; written and illus. by Lauren
Child. 
Levine/Scholastic, 2001 
[32p]
ISBN 0-439-20500-X 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
7-10yrs
One night Herb's mother forgets to take the nighttime storybook with her when
she leaves, and Herb's worst fears are realized when a pair of wolves leap out of the
volume. Herb distracts the slavering (and easily confused) wolves with a claim of
being fit only for dessert, but on a hunt through another storybook for Jell-O
("Jell-O is an appetizer! Everybody knows that"), he rouses more storybook crew.
A fairy godmother gets involved, putting one wolf into a very fetching gown and
finally turning the other into a caterpillar, whereupon Herb returns safely to sleep-
but next time the story only musters up a caterpillar in the wolf's place. The book-
referentiality here is amusing, and Child has some divertingly breezy turns of phrase
("it had all turned out well and went happy-ever-afterly"). There's a whole lot of
text here, however, and the story rambles, often losing pace; the listeners with the
patience for the length probably won't warm to the youthful focus and the arch-
ness of tone, and would-be readers-alone may find the complicated typeface chal-
lenging. The art places cutout line-and-watercolor figures against color-washed
backgrounds, suggesting John Burningham's illustrations, but the brawny yet slap-
dash lines and scribbled faces have an animated vigor. This might be a useful
bridge between the comedy of James Marshall's adaptations or Eugene Trivizas'
The Three Little Wolves and the Big Bad Pig (BCCB 9/93) and the harder-edged
sophistication of Scieszka's The Stinky Cheese Man. DS
COLEMAN, EVELYN 
Born in Sin. 
Jackson/Atheneum, 2001 
[24 0p]
ISBN 0-689-83833-6 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 9-12
Fourteen-year-old Keisha is smart, diligent, and determined, and she's aiming for
medical school at a local Atlanta university, which offers a special program for
gifted high-school students. Her high-school counselor can't see past Keisha's
home in the projects, however, and instead enrolls her in a summer program for
"at-risk children" ("She sound like she talking about some ants who don' showed
up uninvited to her picnic"). Though initially furious, Keisha finds some benefits
in the program: she makes a friend in tough classmate Betty, begins to get inter-
ested in Betty's older brother Malik, and, most significantly, discovers she's a natu-
ral swimmer and starts successfully competing. She's still facing the obstacle of
payment for her deferred medical-school program, though, and she begins to sus-
pect that her mother is dipping into the dishonorable and perhaps the illegal in
order to obtain the money. Keisha is a forceful and attractive character, and her
ebullient narration will pull readers right in. The author provides other evocative
depictions, especially in Keisha's strict, fiercely supportive mother and in some
other secondary characters, particularly the brash but ultimately self-defeating Betty;
there's also some sharp insight into intraracial as well as interracial prejudice (as an
underclass African American, Keisha gets as much condescension from middle-
FEBRUARY 2001 
* 
219
class blacks as from whites). The book falters in other areas, though, failing to
make believable some of the more broadly drawn characters and Keisha's sudden
leap from nonswimmer to Olympic hopeful, and events tumble into implausible
melodrama at the end (Keisha's mother isn't taking drugs or dancing nude but
doing a club's books, Keisha narrowly avoids a rape, her never-identified father is
revealed to be a neighborhood activist, and her mother reveals the childhood trauma
that ended up ruining her marriage). Keisha's vivid and witty voice, however, will
remain memorable long after the book's close. DS
COOPER, MICHAEL L. 
Fighting for Honor: Japanese Americans and World War
II. Clarion, 2000 
118p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-395-91375-6 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Cooper relates the injustice done to Japanese residents of the United States sent to
internment camps during World War II, and the subsequent efforts of their sons
and daughters to prove their patriotism on the battlefields of World War II. The
book starkly presents the rising war hysteria and the racism that led to the intern-
ment of a half-million Japanese in dismal and poorly equipped camps. The author
leaves the camps to follow the young Japanese-American men who volunteered to
fight in World War II. The combat training and military experiences of the two
Japanese-American battalions, the 100 and 44 2 nd, make up the bulk of this his-
tory. The first battalion to see action was the 100'h, referred to as "the Purple
Heart Battalion" because of the heavy casualties its men suffered; the 4 4 2
nd be-
came famous for finding a lost regiment trapped behind enemy lines. The author
tells two parallel stories, juxtaposing the saga of the soldiers who gave their lives
and limbs for their country with the tale of that country's treatment of the soldiers'
families back home. Black-and-white period photographs make the featured indi-
viduals painfully real, quotes from internees and soldiers bring the shame close to
home, and stories of horror and heroism under fire keep the pace moving. A
chronology of events, detailed notes, a bibliography, and an index are included.
JMD
COWELL, CRESSIDA 
What Shall We Do with the Boo-Hoo Baby?; illus. by Ingrid
Godon. 
Scholastic, 2000 
26p
ISBN 0-439-15311-5 
$15.95 
R 
1-3 yrs
Make room in storytime for this participatory tale: "The baby said 'BOO-HOO-
HOO!'" and the cow, dog, cat, and duck that just happen to be standing at the
kitchen door come in to comfort him. The duck offers a toy, but baby only wails.
The animals are desperate for a solution: "'Feed him,' said the dog. So they fed
the baby. 'Moo!' said the cow. 'Quack!' said the duck. 'Meow!' said the cat.
'Bow-wow!' said the dog, and... 'BOO-HOO-HOO!' said the baby." Bathing
and playing with the baby have no better result, and it's not until the duck says
"Put him to bed" that peace-and silence-reigns. This is a well-constructed bit
of cumulative fluff that will easily find a toddler-time niche. It features some of
the most popular participatory sounds (moo, quack, meow) this side of Old
MacDonald, not to mention that fabulous, loud, and funny "BOO-HOO-HOO"
that is sure to make the rafters ring. Godon's illustrations have echoes of G. Brian
Karas' style in their black-outlined, cleanly defined shapes and uncluttered com-
positions. The animals are appropriately stuffed-toyish and the baby appropri-
220 
* THE BULLETIN
ately, well, baby-looking (sort of like Popeye's Swee' Pea, round-headed and single-
curled). Use this title when it's just too quiet, and be ready for the boo-hoo-hoo
barrage. JMD
CREW, LINDA 
Brides of Eden: A True Story Imagined. HarperCollins,
2001 
[160p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028751-9 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028750-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 8-10
Franz Creffield arrived in Corvallis, Oregon in 1903 and lured a number of re-
spectable townspeople from their mainstream churches with his fiery preaching.
Soon his small church turned into a cult, as he renamed himselfJoshua the Second
and promised the young women of his Holy Disciples that one of them would
become the Second Mother to a reincarnation of Jesus. Religious fervor spun out
of control, and Joshua led them into a downward spiral of sexual seduction and
family breakups that ended in insanity, murders (including his own), and suicides.
Crew derives the factual outline of the tale from newspaper reports of the period,
but supplies "imagined" motivations for the participants as she retells the sordid
events through the eyes of teenager Eva Hurt. Readers never see enough ofJoshua
in action to fully understand and accept his charisma, and although Crew doesn't
shy away from confronting the sexual hold Joshua has on these young women, she
explores neither the realistic possibility of jealousies within the cult, nor the fears
or hopes concerning pregnancy one would expect within this group. Melodrama
and tragedy carry the day, but thoughtful readers will ponder the nature of the
Corvallis community's outrage and vengeance: "All they had to do was tell the
doctors and lawyers and judges we wouldn't wear hats or sit in chairs or cook their
suppers, and faster than you could say 'Lord in heaven deliver us,' papers were
signed certifying our insanity." Background notes and period photos are included.
EB
CUMMINGS, PRISCILL 
A Face First. Dutton, 2001 
[224p]
ISBN 0-525-46522-7 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
Kelly's having a normal sixth grade, getting excited about an environmental project
and a boy she likes, when it all changes: a bad car accident sends her to the hospital
with a broken leg and extensive, disfiguring burns that will need multiple surgeries
and months to years of recuperation. Kelly's days are now filled with debridement
and physical therapy, and the challenge to her self-image comes not from the pos-
sibility of pimples but from having to wear a compression mask over her head for
a year. Eight weeks in the hospital is only the beginning of her trials, however, as
her return home forces her to deal with her friends and with the circumstances of
her accident. The book is sometimes programmatic and heavy-handed, especially
in its foreshadowing, but the details of the story are gripping. The technical infor-
mation is plentiful but not obtrusive, and Kelly's emotional and physical ordeal is
authentically portrayed; the hospital world, where despite careful explanations
patients are often left in a sea of mystery, is especially vivid. While Kelly's friends,
in their loyalty, are rather optimistically portrayed, there's enough primary diffi-
culty in Kelly's life anyway, and familial issues-Kelly's divorced and distant fa-
ther never makes an appearance, and her mother struggles with the secret of her
FEBRUARY 2001 
* 221
responsibility for the accident-provide sharp edges of their own. This is a solid
new entry in the disability-drama genre. DS
DEWEY, JENNIFER OWINGS 
Antarctic Journal: Four Months at the Bottom of the
World; by Jennifer Owings Dewey; illus. by Jennifer Owings Dewey and with
photographs. HarperCollins, 2001 
[64p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028587-7 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028586-9 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-7
Dewey relates the experience of her four-month trip to the Antarctic peninsula in
diary entries, letters, sketches, and photographs. Details range from a meeting
with a flock of penguins ("They huddle close, smelling of guano and salt water,
gently tugging at my clothing with their bills") to a tasting experiment with the
blue whale's diet ("We got a small fry pan, then melted butter and cooked up the
krill") to a glacier climb that takes a dangerous turn ("I felt myself dropping straight
down. A crack had appeared under me, a crevasse in the glacier"). The effect is
sometimes more bitty than browsable (readers are left to work out who the recipi-
ents of the letters are, there's no clear map with legend so viewers may not realize
Dewey never actually penetrates the Antarctic Circle, and the landscape's scope
isn't well represented), but the anecdotal approach has its merits. Budding young
naturalists will be particularly intrigued with the captioned colored-pencil sketches
of wildlife that thickly populate the pages (reminiscent of Edward Wilson's fa-
mous Antarctic drawings), and they further suggest a picture of the author herself
picking her way through the ice and rocks to find a suitable place to sketch. Tid-
bits about ice (a particularly interesting photograph captures an optical illusion
caused by ice crystals in the air) and even station life (the author keeps the secret of
the cook's pet cat) fill out the picture further. More inviting and personal than
Markle's Super Cool Science: South Pole Stations Past, Present, and Future (BCCB
4/98), this will suit readers of a variety of capabilities with a taste for frontiers. DS
DITERLIZZI, TONY 
Ted; written and illus. by Tony DiTerlizzi. 
Simon,
2001 
[40p]
ISBN 0-689-83235-4 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 6-9 yrs
Move over, Harvey, there's a new imaginary friend in town: he's big, he's pink,
he's Ted, the humongous bunny (or is it a pig?) of Birthday Boy's dreams. The
narrator (aka Birthday Boy) relates his adventures (aka trouble-making) with his
"imaginary friend," but any trouble they get into (drawing on the walls, turning
the study into an indoor-pool) is the fault of the narrator's neglectful father. Once
past the visual surprise of the slightly dissipated-looking, pooka-like Ted, the plot
trajectory is pretty predictable-the narrator's dad remembers his own "imaginary
friend" Ned, and father and son (and Ted/Ned) live happily ever after-but that
doesn't make this rollicking little tale any less fun. DiTerlizzi (author/illustrator of
Jimmy Zangwow's Out-of-This-World Moon Pie Adventure, BCCB 5/00) anchors
his fantasy in Rockwellian clarity through mixed-media illustrations that feature
expressive characters in a nostalgically-retro environment. The body language of
boy and quasi-bunny articulately evokes their enthusiasm for their projects as well
as their dismay at the father's responses to their various efforts at home improve-
ment. Despite the offbeat nature of the illustrations (there is just something odd
222 
* THE BULLETIN
about a huge pink lop-eared critter with an actual button for a belly-button stand-
ing in a perfectly normal, fifties-style living room), this is a wryly funny tale that
balances the whimsical with the ridiculous. JMD
DOWNING, WICK 
Leonardo's Hand. Houghton, 2001 
[208p]
ISBN 0-618-07893-2 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 6-9
Nard, short for Leonard, turns up at a new foster home; he's not sanguine about
life on a pig farm, but he finds that his inventiveness allows him to contribute
despite his disability (he was born without a left hand). Soon he also finds himself
growing attached to the old lady who runs the place and to her great-niece, Julie,
who's in seventh grade with Nard. He's therefore concerned when Julie develops
a back problem that keeps her from her beloved dancing and that will require
surgery that the family can ill afford, and he determines to win the requisite funds
in a local contest for a human-powered flight machine. He's got a surprising ally
in this endeavor: the dismembered left hand of Leonardo da Vinci (of whom Nard
is a reincarnation), which elegantly draws Nard's plans. This is already a hard plot
to sell, but the book adds even more unlikely and/or cliched elements such as a
looming mortgage on the farm, hostility from the rich suburban locals, a bank
robbery attempt by Julie's mentally unpredictable father, a shady patent agent's
double dealing, the hand's miraculous cure ofJulie's back, and so on. The result is
a jumble of events that lack individual impact but nonetheless try to substitute for
effective characterization. Nard's narration explains the people and relationships
rather than depicting them through action, so there's no real involvement with the
cast to carry readers through the piled-on plot. There are some interesting tidbits
about human-powered flight (and it's too bad there aren't more instead of the
other plot elements); ultimately, however, they're not enough to get this vehicle off
the ground. DS
GROSSMAN, 
BILL 
Timothy Tunny Swallowed a Bunny; illus. by Kevin
Hawkes. 
Geringer/HarperCollins, 2001 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028758-6 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028010-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
The team behind My Little Sister Ate One Hare (BCCB 1/97) returns with this
collection of eighteen illustrated poems. The approach is broadly and solidly jokey,
with an emphasis on eating (the titular Timothy is reminded by his mother to be
glad he didn't swallow a goat) and plays on words (John Paul Mullers was the
victim of a paint-can explosion, and "now everyone knows him as Art"). Grossman
employs a sort of modified limerick form throughout, with all verses six brief lines
long and powered by galloping anapests. The formal repetition starts to pound
after a few poems, and some of the scansion fails to achieve the crispness necessary
in such short forms. The humor will squarely hit the youthful funnybone, how-
ever: there's Edward Lear's taste for disaster with the back-of-the-bus song empha-
sis on simple twists (the boy who becomes what he eats disappears when he eats
nothing) and snorkable punchlines (Old Ned is walking with a horse on his head
because he's too tired to run). Hawkes balances the broad with the bold-popeyed
characters pop out against vivid contrasting backgrounds, with most spreads touched
with electrical notes of violet, orange, chartreuse, and other arresting hues while
FEBRUARY 2001 
* 
223
brushstrokes give a frescolike texture to the paint that adds a depth to the visuals.
While this might be a bit much for a straight-on readthrough, it's a natural for
selected sharing, and the clear print and appealing subject will draw in some early
readers who'll enjoy browsing among the rhymed exploits of the hapless. DS
HANLEY, VICTORIA 
The Seer and the Sword. Holiday House, 2000 
341p
ISBN 0-8234-1532-5 
$17.95 
R Gr. 7-10
When Princess Torina's father, King Kareed ofArcheld, conquers the neighboring
land of Bellandra, he brings back three important things: the legendary Sword of
Bellandra, which is rumored to be invincible or cursed depending on the hand that
wields it; the thirteen-year-old prince Landen of Bellandra; and a magic crystal, in
which Princess Torina quickly finds that she can see future events. Torina refuses
to keep Landen as a slave despite her father's wishes, and Torina and Landen begin
a secret friendship, in which he teaches her the warrior skills she so desperately
wants to know. Torina is betrothed to her father's most trusted advisor, Vesputo;
unfortunately, this trust is misplaced, and Torina correctly surmises (with the help
of her crystal) that her fiance will betray her father. She is too late to warn the
king, and instead witnesses his murder at Vesputo's hand, after which Vesputo
seizes the crown. Torina must flee for her life; Landen, accused of King Kareed's
murder, flees as well. Intricate twists of fate bring the two together, and Torina
ultimately reclaims the land of Archeld with Landen as her betrothed. Hanley's
language is rich and vivid without being flowery, allowing adventure and suspense
to guide this classic fantasy story. Despite a plethora of political machinations,
Hanley's touch is personal, involving the reader with politics only as they affect the
heroine and hero of the story. Young adult fantasy readers will welcome this tal-
ented new writer to the fold of beloved authors who write intricate and moving
coming of age tales set in fantastical realms. KM
HINES, ANNA GROSSNICKLE 
Pieces: A Year in Poems & Quilts; written and illus.
by Anna Grossnickle Hines. 
Greenwillow, 2001 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-16964-3 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-16963-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-6 yrs
This collection of brief seasonal poems and accompanying quilted illustrations
traces the progression of the year from spring to winter. Shorter poems, such as
the poem about autumn foliage called "Pageantry" ("The trees are wearing/ scarlet
gowns/ and golden crowns/ and bits of them/ are falling down"), tend to be more
successful than the longer pieces, which sound somewhat forced. For most of
these poems, Hines has created cloth designs that frame the words, although a few
of the quilt blocks appear to have been digitally altered to create uncluttered back-
ground space for the text. In the poem "Encore," about a hummingbird, the poem
nestles in a quilted garden where hummingbirds feed, and several stitched outlines
of hummingbirds on the white fabric background suggest their rapid motion in an
almost cartoon-like fashion, showing the outline of where the bird was moments
ago. Hines also cleverly arranges the quilted art, as in a two-page spread of poems
about autumn, wherein the left-hand page shows leaves streaming down from the
trees while the facing page uses a similar quilt block upside down, so that the leaves
appear to be falling into piles at the bottom of the page. Despite some unevenness
in the poetry, the visual appeal and detail of the quilt work will engage young
224 
* THE BULLETIN
viewers. Notes about the quilt-making process are presented at the end of the
book. KM
HOFFMAN, ALICE 
Aquamarine. Scholastic, 2001 
[112p]
ISBN 0-439-09863-7 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Hailey and Claire have been best friends forever, but now Claire's grandparents
(her guardians since the death of her parents) are moving to Florida, and Claire is
moving with them. The two friends are spending their last summer together at the
decaying, soon-to-be-demolished Capri Beach Club, trying to wring every last
second of togetherness from the swiftly passing days. A violent storm causes flood-
ing along the coast, and the Capri pool, close to the ocean, is swamped. The two
girls peruse the damage on the morning after and discover a mermaid by the name
of Aquamarine stranded at the bottom of the pool. Aquamarine is self-absorbed
and spoiled, but she falls in love with Raymond (the college guy who runs the
concession stand) anyway. After a Hailey-and-Claire-arranged date both man and
mermaid are besotted, but Aquamarine must return to the sea or die. The tide
rises and the mermaid is gone; soon Claire is gone, too, moved to Florida at summer's
end. Hoffman is very neat, tying up all loose ends tightly if not particularly imagi-
natively. No one suffers for very long: Aquamarine gives Raymond a magical shell
to call her and gives the girls magical shells that will always keep them connected to
each other. This is more short novella or long short story than fully developed
novel; the prose is dialogue-intense and spare, and motivation and logic are swept
before the girls' (and Raymond's) willing acceptance of Aquamarine. Hoffman's
bare-bones style doesn't permit much tonal variety or emotional emphasis, but
mermaids are an inescapably popular subject for young readers, and a wide range
of them will want to dive, however briefly, into this story. JMD
HOLUB, JOAN 
Why Do Cats Meow?; ISBN 0-8037-2503-5; Why Do Dogs Bark?;
ISBN 0-8037-2504-3. Each book: illus. by Anna DiVito and with photographs.
Dial, 2001 
(Easy-to-Read Books) 
[48p] 
$13.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-4
While these books aren't as specifically focused as their titles suggest, they're none-
theless a pair of informative introductions to kitty- and doggy-dom. Each spread
answers a posed question, using color photographs and sometimes line-and-water-
color art to extend and illustrate the concept. The questions range from the au-
thentically specific ("Why do dogs pee so often on a walk?") to the usefully general
("What is the difference between wild cats and pet cats?", complete with two nifty
photographed pairings of domestic and wild felines engaging in the same actions).
The answers sometimes cut a few corners (not just Doberman Pinschers can be
guard dogs, for instance), and these titles don't go very deep, but there's enough
compact and thoughtful material here to keep kids intrigued and to pique their
interest for more (which they may find in Jean Craighead George's slightly more
technical pairing, How to Talk to Your Dog and How to Talk to Your Cat, BCCB 4/
00). The photogenic subjects get plenty of flattering and amusing visuals, and
youngsters who open the books just planning to "awww" over the pictures may
find themselves dipping into the browsable and easy text. A pair of attractive
subjects in good, solid easy-reading form, these will set professionals to purring-
tail wagging is still best left to the judgment of the individual. DS
FEBRUARY 2001 
* 225
IBBOTSON, EVA 
IslandoftheAunts; illus. by Kevin Hawkes. 
Dutton, 2000 
281p
ISBN 0-525-46484-0 
$15.99 
R Gr. 4-7
The aunts of the title are sisters who live on an island where they take care of the
injured creatures that wash up on their shores. Their job (which they consider a
"Sacred Trust") doesn't stop at oil-slicked seagulls, however: baby krakens, mer-
maids, selkies, stoorworms, and sundry other mythical creatures come to the is-
land for help and, afterwards, stay. The women love their life, but they are concerned
that they are getting too old to cope with their work effectively. The aunts are
quite the eccentrics, but their logic is unassailable: 
apprentices need to be ac-
quired. Kidnapping is apparently in order, and three of the women set forth for
the mainland. Possible apprentices Minette and Fabio are deliberately taken from
their unpleasant home situations; Lambert is taken by mistake, and everyone lives
to regret it. Ibbotson has such a domestic manner when dealing with magic that
even the most outrageous developments seem perfectly plausible. The author sets
her idyllic (but not prissy) island society against the excesses of modern life, and it
is quite clear where her sympathies lie. She has little patience with exploitative
media, irresponsible parenting, or ecological piracy, all of which she pillories with
her sometimes caustic wit. A quick pace, colorful characters, and a bang-up res-
cue-at-sea finale makes this a great choice for reading alone or aloud. Hawkes' line
drawings delicately detail the dastardly doings; a cleanly drafted map of the island
sets creatures/characters in their assigned places. Once again Ibbotson (Which
Witch?, BCCB 9/99) takes readers on a voyage to a place where magic is mundane
and it's the people who are strange. JMD
ISADORA, RACHEL 
Nick Plays Baseball; written and illus. by Rachel
Isadora. 
Putnam, 2001 
34p
ISBN 0-399-23231-1 
$15.99 
R 
5-8yrs
Nick and his youth league team, the Rockets, are facing the season's championship
game, and their routines at practice and on the big day serve as object lessons for a
primary grades audience on the rules and protocols of baseball. Isadora toggles
between the fictional storyline (thin, but reasonably effective), set in heavy type,
and equipment, definitions, rules, tips, and etiquette, set in lighter gray. The flow
of this dual narration is not always as smooth as one might wish, and a few terms
are underexplained, but Isadora does manage to make sense of basic strategies and
offer some elementary but sound pointers for rookies all over the field: "The
pitcher must be in contact with the rubber mound when she or he begins deliv-
ery"; "Call for the ball when you run to catch it"; "Don't run with untied shoe-
laces." Isadora's line and watercolor cast of enthusiastic, sportsmanlike champs
giving the game their all will certainly lock hearts with their audience. Listeners
who have a duffel bag of questions from Gibbons' My Baseball Book (BCCB 4/00)
will find more answers here. EB
JACKSON, DONNA M. 
Twin Tales: The Magic and Mystery of Multiple
Birth. Tingley/Little, 2001 
[4 8p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-316-45431-1 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-7
Jackson, author of The Bone Detectives (BCCB 4/96) and herself the daughter of a
twin, gives readers insight into the world of simultaneous siblings. Seven brief
226 
* THE BULLETIN
chapters examine the connection between twins, the genesis of multiples, supertwins
(multiples with more than two), and other issues; personal insights from and sto-
ries of various twins, along with sidebar focuses, provide the narrative with a chatty
browsability. Counterpointing the celebratory cheer are generous but accessible
helpings of science (including sophisticated information such as the X-inactiva-
tion that means even identicals may have different characteristics), realism (an
acknowledgment of the bitterness of surviving one's twin), and history (the chill-
ing past of twins in Mengele's Auschwitz experiments). The picture-book format
is inviting, with photographs set at scrapbook-casual angles and accented with tidy
shadow-borders (one might be forgiven, after perusing these photogenic subjects,
for thinking that multiples run cuter than the general aggregate of humanity).
There are some organizational irregularities (the Holocaust focus is an odd end-
ing) and some confusing sentences, and there's a lamentable absence of further
resources (the only end matter is a glossary with page references). Nonetheless,
this is a surprisingly varied examination of doubled lives that goes well beyond the
"aw, how cute" approach; even multiples may find reassurance and interest here,
and singletons will get a glimpse of how different life can be in tandem with a
birthmate. DS
JENKINS, EMILY 
Five Creatures; illus. by Tomek Bogacki. 
Foster/Farrar,
2001 [26p]
ISBN 0-374-32341-0 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
Numbers take on a whole new meaning in this exploration of the narrator's house-
hold, which holds three people (her and her parents) and two cats. The assess-
ments offer some amusing juxtapositions (the household contains "two who like
to eat mice. Only one who likes to eat beets") and some oddly enlightening paral-
lels (there's "one who sings loud late at night"-the gray cat-"And one who sings
in the morning"-the daddy). This is more a catalogue than a story, but there's a
delicate yet slightly lunatic charm to the sequence and a warm, cozy close ("Five
who kiss each other. And five who sit together in the evening by the fire"). Bogacki's
illustrations are dense with short, painterly strokes that blend nearly together, giv-
ing an overall kitten-fur texture that's cuddly but somewhat homogenizing; there's
also a misty look that's somewhat distancing. The flattened Mercator-style per-
spective adds a casual flair, though, and the happy-go-lucky family, especially the
stiff-whiskered felines, are endearing figures. Young audiences will be unable to
resist responding with their own new Venn diagrams of family practice. DS
JOHNSON, ANGELA 
Those Building Men; illus. by Barry Moser. 
Blue Sky/Scho-
lastic, 2001 
[32p]
ISBN 0-590-66521-9 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Johnson's free-verse poem extols the heroism of the men who built America's en-
during infra- and towering superstructure-"those shadowy building men-Our
fathers .... Poor and sometimes from far away." Her litany encompasses bridge
builders, canal diggers, rail men, high steel workers, surveyors, and lumbermen,
and subtly implies through repeated references to "our fathers" that the days of
hard labor are past-a notion which may come as a surprise to children whose
parents are currently engaged in the same activities. Effort is made to demonstrate
FEBRUARY 2001 
* 227
the breadth of both the undertakings and the participants, but some rather obvi-
ous candidates are missing; for example, no Chinese workers appear on the rail-
road and no mountain or underwater tunneling is shown. Moreover, Moser's
craggy, chiseled laborers (nothing "shadowy" about them) are captured head on
and close up, and scant reference to the ground far below them diminishes the
sense of danger that accompanied their work. This may be a useful discussion
starter for a Labor Day program, but children with an interest in construction
would probably appreciate a bit less lyricism and a bit more information. EB
KATZ, KAREN 
Counting Kisses; written and illus. by Karen Katz. 
McElderry,
2001 
26 p
ISBN 0-689-83470-5 
$14.00 
Ad 2-4 yrs
In this rosily illustrated bedtime story, a mother, father, and grandmother soothe a
tired baby with a kissing countdown to sleep. The various grownups give "ten
little kisses on teeny tiny toes/ nine laughing kisses on busy, wriggly feet/ eight
squishy kisses on chubby, yummy knees" and so on, until "one last kiss" on the
baby's "sleepy, dreamy head." Each spread features a short line about the number
of kisses; beneath the line is a chain of little pink hearts that separates the text from
the featured numeral. The mixed-media illustrations (gouache, collage, and col-
ored pencil) feature the well-kissed baby in her pink sleeper (decorated with hot
pink hearts) being hugged by a (presumed) sibling (wearing red hearts), in a pink-
wallpapered room decorated with flowered curtains and sheets. The candy-heart
palette is overwhelmingly reminiscent of the designer-nursery-school school of deco-
rating, but the occasional touches of deeper hues serve to anchor the froth. All that
kissy stuff (and all those hues of blushing pink) gets pretty gooey and girly, but
that won't keep gooey uncles and girly aunts from stockpiling this "kiss and read"
book for present and future nieces and nephews. JMD
KLASS, DAVID 
You Don't Know Me. 
Foster/Farrar, 2001 
[272p]
ISBN 0-374-38706-0 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
"You don't know me" is narrator John's refrain as he negotiates life while almost
overwhelmed by the ironies of his existence: his school is a place "for becoming
stupid" and is therefore an anti-school, he lives in a house that he doesn't consider
his house, and he shares it with the man who is not his father. There's also his
dramatic irony of knowledge-John knows, while his mother and school doesn't,
that his mother's boyfriend has no compunction about physically abusing him,
and that the abuse is escalating. While John snags a date with the girl of his dreams
(which goes awry when his dreams prove to be an inaccurate predictor of her
personality), gets assigned a tuba solo in band, and attempts to negotiate other
normal fourteen-year-old obstacles, the secret knowledge of his home life looms
ever larger until finally there's a violent confrontation with his soon-to-be stepfa-
ther. Klass is effective with John's deliberately distanced voice, his constant danc-
ing with and away from reality (he's even got an imaginary tribe, the Lashasa Palulu,
whose ways get anthropologically discussed when there's a need to analyze behav-
ior), and his brittle and even dorky defenses, and the rising tension is suspenseful.
Sometimes the humor undercuts the mood, however, and the events are not as
well controlled as John's narrative voice-it's not clear why the music teacher
warms to John, for instance, or what exactly makes his bandmate Violet call him
228 
* THE BULLETIN
"the best boy in this whole school" and scoop him up on the rebound from his
dream girl. The underlying desperation has impact and authenticity, and teens
fond of the glibness of Julian Thompson with a darker edge will welcome John's
hard-won triumph. DS
Koss, AMY GOLDMAN 
Stranger in Dadland. Dial, 2001 
[128p]
ISBN 0-8037-2563-9 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-7
Twelve-year-old John is a little nervous about his first solo visit to his dad's Los
Angeles home (his older sister has given up after years of unsatisfying parental
interaction), but the visit's going as usual, with his father including this summer's
girlfriend in all the family activities and leaving John behind whenever work calls;
even the death of John's beloved dog back in Kansas elicits little fatherly compas-
sion. John does at least manage incipient friendships with Beau, a kid his age in
his dad's apartment complex, and with Iris, his dad's girlfriend's niece, but the real
reward comes when his father tears ligaments in his knee and John finally gets to
spend some serious private time with his incapacitated dad. Koss, author of The
Ashwater Experiment (BCCB 6/99), effectively links the reader's point of view to
narrator John's, so that to both protagonist and reader Dad starts out looking like
a heedless jerk (he learns about the death of John's dog but leaves it to John's
mother to break the news on the phone) and then becomes clearer as a compli-
cated person who genuinely loves his kids but has little understanding of how to
maintain a relationship with them or anybody else. Beau is both an amiable com-
panion and a useful milepost for John's acceptance as John lets go his jealousy of
Beau's easy familiarity with John's father's life. This has a blend of accessibility
and sharp perception that makes it a perfect next step for readers just growing
beyond P. J. Petersen. DS
LASER, MICHAEL 
6-321. 
Atheneum, 2001 
[136p]
ISBN 0-689-83372-5 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Sixth graders at Marc Chaikin's school in Queens may be coyly labeled by room
number by the administration, but all the students know that 6-321 is the smart
class and 6-309 is the bottom of the heap. Principal Mr. Eisenman's stern warning
("I will not tolerate uncouth behavior or disturbance of the peace") hasn't the least
effect on deep-rooted animosities between the classes, and as bullying escalates
throughout the school year, hostile eruptions simply move off school grounds.
All-out war is inevitable, but on the day of the planned rumble President Kennedy
is assassinated; suddenly the heat of childish hatred cools and the kids begin to put
their quarrels into perspective. Marc reviews the past school year with detachment
and analysis that don't quite ring true for a young adolescent: "From being an
average student or worse, I worked my way up into the top handful of the class-
all thanks to Mr. Vigoritti's praise." Moreover, a string of background themes (the
Cold War, the class playJulius Caesar, Tareyton's "rather fight than switch" ciga-
rette commercials, and the Kennedy assassination) are none too subtle in directing
readers' attention to the danger or inanity of solving conflict through violence.
Still, the postures and threats of junior high are realistically portrayed, and the
brevity and straightforward approach of this novel could make it an especially
good choice for reluctant readers. EB
FEBRUARY 2001 
* 
229
LITTLESUGAR, AMY 
Freedom School, Yes!; illus. by Floyd Cooper. 
Philomel,
2001 
[4 0p]
ISBN 0-399-23006-8 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Jolie is frightened-her family is housing a white woman who's come from the
north to teach Freedom School, and local bigots are already demonstrating that
they're willing to break the law to display their displeasure. Though the community's
church is burned, nothing will stop Freedom School, and attendees listen raptly to
teacher Annie's words about Countee Cullen, Jacob Lawrence, Benjamin Banneker,
and other blacks of achievement whose stories are new to them. When there's a
threat to the newly built school, Jolie finally realizes how much this learning-and
Annie-means to her. The climactic danger (which never turns out to be any-
thing but an excuse for Jolie to realize her determination) is forced, and there's no
shortage of didacticism and sentimentality ("when it came to school and learning,
she was never going to let bein' scared get in her way again") in the narrative.
There's also genuine warmth and conviction, however, and the danger of the situ-
ation is convincing. Cooper's glamorized, softly dusty pastels overemphasize the
beautiful and monumental aspects of his figures, which is in keeping with the
book's tone; Jolie is an appealingly thoughtful girl, however, who effectively puts a
face on the situation. With some adult explanation this could make an accessible
introduction to a less-famous chapter of the civil rights movement. An author's
note and bibliography are included. DS
LOOMIS, CHRISTINE 
Astro Bunnies; illus. by Ora Eitan. 
Putnam, 2001 
[26p]
ISBN 0-399-23175-7 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 3-6 yrs
Following up on their picture-book fantasy Cowboy Bunnies, Loomis and Eitan
turn to the stars. In brief verse (with the rhythm, as flap copy points out, of
"Twinkle Twinkle Little Star"), the narrative describes the bunnies' space explora-
tion, from the preparation when they "slip into their suits with pockets" to the
spacewalk where they "roll up, float up/ Through the air" to their meeting with
"bunnies from/ Another place!" Finally they return, because "bunnies ALWAYS/
Come back home." This is sort of Runaway Bunny as done by NASA, and none
the worse for that: the poetry generally avoids jingly and opts instead for sweetly
concise, and the combination of cuddly bunnies and cool high-powered space
rockets is going to be irresistible to certain audience sectors. Eitan's mixed-media
art combines solid, informally streamlined bunnies with expanses of patterned
background; the effect is sometimes more designerly than illustrative, and the bun-
nies are distant and homogenized, but the space world is imaginatively portrayed
with fanciful bunny-touched constellations and atmospheric shadows. This would
make a satisfying lap or bedtime book for many budding young astronauts, and
maybe next time the space-rabbits will work out a way to get to Rosemary Wells'
Bunny Planet. DS
MARRIN, ALBERT 
George Washington & the Founding of a Nation. Dutton,
2001 
276p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-525-46481-6 
$30.00 
R Gr. 6-10
Happily for fans of military history, the founding of this nation required armed
confrontation, and Washington's roles in pre-Revolutionary skirmishes (well,
230 
* THE BULLETIN
massacres) with the French and as commander of the Continental Army are neces-
sarily a central focus of this overview. As he did in his outstanding works on Lee
and Grant (Virginia's General and Unconditional Surrender, BCCB 1/95 and 3/
94), Marrin again displays keen sensitivity to the inherent contradictions of a war-
rior/statesman. He bluntly addresses Washington's early blood lust ("For the first
time, men had died by his command. The experience pleased him no end. .... 'I
heard bullets whistle and believe me there was something charming in the sound'")
but contrasts that with the high standards Washington set for himself as president
("A president must be, and must be seen to be, a good person. ... I hope I shall
always possess firmness and virtue enough to maintain the character of an honest
man, as well as prove that I am"). Copious notes and an extensive bibliography, as
well as an index and a broad sampling of period artwork, will certainly benefit
report writers, but real history buffs will just settle in for a satisfying cover to cover
read. EB
MARTIN, JACQUELINE BRIGGS 
The Lamp, the Ice, and the Boat Called Fish: Based
on a True Story; illus. by Beth Krommes. Houghton, 2001 
[48p]
ISBN 0-618-00341-X 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-5
Trapped and drifting amid the ice floes, the 1913 Canadian Arctic Expedition
aboard the Karluk may well have been doomed, save for the resilience of her crew
and the particular resourcefulness of the Inupiat who were hired as provisioners
and guides. In poetic style reminiscent of Burleigh's Black Whiteness (BCCB 2/
98), Martin recounts their frigid adventures as circumstances slip from bad to
worse: the expedition leader is separated from the crew; the icebound Karluk is
pierced through the hull; the crew sets up and then must abandon Camp Ship-
wreck; a trek across sea ice brings them to Wrangel Island, where near-starvation
awaits. Focus on the Inupiats' contribution to the party results in a wealth of
fascinating detail concerning native strategies for Arctic survival, from iglu con-
struction, to fishing and hunting techniques, to clothing materials and design.
The formal, almost dispassionate narrative refashions flesh and blood travails into
an epic saga suitable for reciting to descendants: "[Kurraluk] was a hunter and
would not quit./ When he had no more bullets for his gun/ he practiced throwing
sticks./ He brought thirty crowbills down with his stick./ He caught birds with a
net." Broken into chapters, this could make a fine readaloud, although Krommes'
finely detailed scratchboard and watercolor scenes, rendered in deep golds, browns,
and moss greens and texturized with intricate hatching, invite close, individual
inspection. Final notes tell the fate of the passengers, crew, and animals aboard the
Karluk, and a trio of photographs close the book with the moving reminder that
this was a true-life adventure. A brief bibliography and author's note appears on
the copyright page. EB
MCBRIER, PAGE 
Beatrice's Goat; illus. by Lori Lohstoeter. 
Schwartz/Atheneum,
2001 
33p
ISBN 0-689-82460-2 
$16.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
Beatrice, a young girl in western Uganda, wishes she could join the children who
attend a nearby school; with barely enough resources to survive, her family is un-
able to afford the uniform and books to make this possible. Her mother happily
announces the household will be one of twelve families to receive a goat, but as
FEBRUARY 2001 
* 231
they build a shed and plant fodder Beatrice cannot imagine just how the coming
goat will change their fortunes. Mugisa ("luck"), the nanny goat, is every bit the
blessing they hoped-she gives birth to twins (one of which will be sold to a neigh-
boring family) and provides milk for nourishment and additional income, and
that income in turn provides them with a sturdier house and, best of all, Beatrice's
education. Lohstoeter's heavily brushed acrylic paintings ably convey the locale,
but Mugisa is too, too cute and Beatrice's baby sibling, who stares cloyingly off the
pages, is too, too precious. An afterword introduces Heifer Project International,
the organization that brings "resources, training, and community support" to fami-
lies such as Beatrice's. Only a hint of Western self-congratulation invades the text
("Some kindhearted people from far away have given us a lucky gift"); the clear
emphasis here is on self-help within family and community. Beatrice's tale is a fine
vehicle for helping children discern the difference between charity and justice. EB
MEISTER, CARI 
Busy Busy City Street; illus. by Steven Guarnaccia. 
Viking,
2000 
26p
ISBN 0-670-88944-X 
$15.99 
Ad 
3-5 yrs
Meister constructs a cacophony of car horns, traffic noises, and sirens in this rhyme
about the exhilarating music of city traffic. Meister's text has a good readaloud
bounce ("Honk honk, Beep beep/ Busy, busy city street.// Siren sounds, fire call./
Taxi jam, traffic stall"), but there is surprisingly little in-text action. Guarnaccia's
illustrations provide the spice in this slice of urban life, from the peripatetic pedes-
trians to the slick automobiles to the graphically enhanced, hand-lettered text.
Guarnaccia's characters look like the denizens of Nickelodeon's Doug cartoon,
with expressive dot-eyed faces in varying skin tones of blue, green, and purple; the
urban milieu is characterized by silhouetted skylines against a sky that changes
color from spread to spread. The retro palette is big on olive green, burnt orange,
and Delft blue, and the text itself changes size and shape and color with each
spread, taking up more and more space, becoming more and more integrated with
the images until it is no longer text at all but part of the overall book design. The
ending of this otherwise visually exciting title (after page after page of aural inten-
sity, the story ends: "Honk! Honk! Beep! Beep!/ Busy, busy city street.// School's
out, buses run./ Heading home, one by one") is disappointing. There is no closing
cacophony, just kids running up their front steps to be greeted by an apparent
parent. While the "beep beep"s will make listeners happy, it's the snazzy deco-ish
art that makes this book shine. JMD
MONTGOMERY, SY 
The Man-Eating Tigers ofSundarbans; illus. with photographs
by Eleanor Briggs. 
Houghton, 2001 
[57p]
ISBN 0-618-07704-9 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Montgomery (The Snake Scientist, BCCB 5/99) visits the flooded mangrove forest
of Sundarbans, India, to investigate the anomalous habits of the man-eating tigers
that inhabit it. The author introduces readers to the geography of India and the
ecology of Sundarbans, gives a brief overview of tiger behavior (which does not
generally include attacking people unless the tiger is injured or sick), discusses the
man-eating habits of the tigers of Sundarbans, and puts forth some possible expla-
nations for their unusual behavior. The text sometimes strays into the fulsome
(the author addresses the reader directly, with many an interrogatory and/or ex-
232 
* THE BULLETIN
clamatory remark), and there is a whiff of exotica in the descriptions of the indig-
enous peoples and their beliefs (reinforced by the "Let's Speak Bengali" adden-
dum). The writing is hampered by clumsy sentence structure and interjections
about the scientific method ("All of these are ideas, not answers. Scientists call
such ideas hypotheses. Which ones seem most likely to you?") that interrupt the
flow of the narrative. The momentum is dissipated among assorted worthy topics,
and the multi-thread approach detracts from the main point of interest: the tigers.
Briggs' color photographs of this protected sanctuary and its wildlife, while occa-
sionally blurry, go a long way toward maintaining the pace of this wide-ranging
photoessay. An index, brief bibliography, and a list of pro-tiger organizations are
included. JMD
NAGDA, ANN WHITEHEAD 
Dear Whiskers; illus. by Stephanie Roth. 
Holiday
House, 2000 
76p
ISBN 0-8234-1495-7 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Fourth-grader Jenny is not at all thrilled about the pen-pal project her class is
doing with a second-grade class. She is not thrilled about pretending to be a
mouse writing letters, and she is especially not thrilled with her pen pal, Sameera.
Sameera, recently moved to the United States from Saudi Arabia, is new to the
school and to the country; her spoken English is very sketchy and her written
English is nearly nonexistent. Encouraged by her teacher, Jenny (as Whiskers, the
mouse) keeps writing letters to Sameera; she also reads to Sameera every day but
still can't seem to connect with her. A story using mouse-shaped sugar cookies is
the breakthrough-Sameera responds with enthusiastic interest, and so does the
rest of the class (nothing like a few cookies to make everyone friendly). Success is
not instantaneous, and the struggle is realistic: Jenny is reluctant to help Sameera
but she agrees to do so because her favorite teacher asks her to; Sameera is not some
angelic little sprite, but an intelligent, frustrated child, and her heart is not won
easily. Adult characters are a solid presence here, from the teacher who coaxes
Jenny towards success, to Jenny's mother, who helps her bake mouse-shaped cookies.
Jenny is a terrific average-kid protagonist, and her character development over
time is convincingly portrayed. Even peripheral characters have that critical dash
of detail that makes them stand out as individuals no matter how short their page-
time may be. Roth's black-and-white wash drawings (full-page, half-page, and
spot art) feature genial characters in a friendly, unthreatening classroom landscape.
JMD
PALATINI, MARGIE 
The Web Files; illus. by Richard Egielski. 
Hyperion,
2001 
[32 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2366-6 
$16.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0419-X 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
Ducktective Web and his poultry partner are on the move in search of a stealer of
vegetables: a hen's been robbed of a peck of purple peppers, some horses have
been relieved of a tub of tartest tasty tomatoes, and a sheep's lost a load of luscious
leafy lettuce. Web's keen instincts lead him to the lair of the Dirty Rat, who
proves to have just consumed his purloined salad. The genre references (Palatini
doesn't just stick to her model, Dragnet, but adds in a few other allusions, ranging
from Casablanca to Gershwin) are amusing, and the book entertainingly echoes
FEBRUARY 2001 
* 233
the TV show's deadpan narration while adding some diverting nursery-rhyme con-
nections (Little Boy Blue is the partners' first suspect). The amusement is almost
all for adult benefit, however, as few primary graders will be up on the mid-century
cultural sources (and they may be disappointed by the title's false suggestion of an
X-Files connection); they'll probably have heard the familiar "DUM DE DUM
DUM" refrain, but they're going to weary of its frequent repetition here. Egielski's
illustrations depict a slightly baroque urbanized farmscape, with horses zipping by
on bicycles and canines as beat cops; the clean outlines and scrubbed textures give
the scene a toylike flavor. The audience will appreciate entertaining details, such
as the mouse driving the milk route and the robbed hen sitting dejectedly on her
egg, but there are opportunities missed here as well: though the rat's tail offers a
clue to the first robbery, there's no sign of him at the other two, and the IDs aren't
clear on some of the nursery-rhyme victims in the police station. The youngest
pop-culture mavens may approve of this, but most youngsters looking for anthro-
pomorphized animal hijinks will be better off with Cronin's Click, Clack, Moo
(BCCB 9/00). DS
PARTRIDGE, ELIZABETH 
Oranges on Golden Mountain; illus. by Aki
Sogabe. 
Dutton, 2001 
40p
ISBN 0-525-46453-0 
$16.99 
R 6-9 yrs
A long drought drives a widowed Chinese mother to the end of her resources, and
she scrapes together her few remaining gold coins to send her son, Jo Lee, to fish
with Fourth Uncle in California, the "Golden Mountain." Desolate at their part-
ing, seasick on his journey, and homesick upon his arrival, Jo Lee finds everything
about the new land disconcerting, from the strange appearance of the blue-eyed,
yellow-haired foreigners, to his uncle's silence, to the arduous nature of the work.
Sometimes when he's at rest, the boy's Hun, or dream spirit, looses itself from his
body and travels to China, where it attempts to comfort and encourage his mother.
When at last the Hun brings the scent of orange blossoms from the trees Jo Lee
planted on Golden Mountain, his mother senses that their fortunes have turned.
Partridge avoids overt pathos but nonetheless weaves a bittersweet and deeply touch-
ing tale in which the ethereal aspects ofJo Lee's spirit flights delicately balance the
myriad details of life in a late nineteenth-century Chinese-American fishing vil-
lage. Intricate collages in Japanese hand-cut-paper style cast the California coast
into an Eastern visual idiom, and although Sogabe's figures are a bit too doll-like
for Partridge's stately, folkloric prose, their spare features are remarkably expres-
sive. An afterword comments on Chinese sojourners' experiences prior to the
Chinese Exclusion Act and on the five spirits (particularly the Hun); for additional
information, readers are referred to Partridge's website. EB
PATERSON, KATHERINE 
The Field of the Dogs; illus. by Emily Arnold
McCully. 
HarperCollins, 2001 
[80p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029475-2 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029474-4 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Josh resents his relocation from Virginia to Vermont, where the local kids aren't
exactly welcoming, and he's not too crazy about his new stepfather and baby half-
brother, either. He's considerably more interested in the discovery he makes about
his dog, Manch, and Manch's canine pals: when they think people aren't around,
234 
* THE BULLETIN
they talk. Josh therefore has inside knowledge about Manch's pack's battles with
a local canine gang, and when Manch is hurt, Josh finds an ally in a formerly
threatening classmate. The text and art here first appeared as a newspaper serial,
and the narrative is less effective as a book: the multiple subthreads are forcibly
tied together and there's no overall sense of pace (and the plot really doesn't need
the talking dogs at all). Paterson is as usual a skillful stylist, however, giving under-
stated but eloquent voice to Josh's various anxieties, and salutary lessons range
from the need to give people a chance to the importance of gun safety. The sim-
plicity of the writing will invite young readers, but it's also worth taking advantage
of the series pacing by turning it into a chapter-by-chapter readaloud. McCully's
rumpled, easygoing line drawings add a homey view of the snowy Vermont coun-
tryside. DS
PEYTON, K M. 
Blind Beauty. 
Dutton, 2001 
[368p]
ISBN 0-525-46652-5 
$17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
National Velvet got quite a bit of mileage from its headstrong young girl with
ambitions for the Grand National despite her unprepossessing horse; for Peyton,
however, that's just the surface of this sprawling story about Tessa and her beloved
horse, Buffoon. Tessa first meets Buffoon when she's twelve and she's been kicked
out of school for the third time, whereupon her nasty stepfather, Maurice, sends
her off as free labor to a local racehorse trainer. She connects with Buffoon (appar-
ently bred by her long-gone Irish father), who does indeed race in the Grand Na-
tional (though under a talented professional jockey, Tom Bryant); Maurice queers
Buffoon's chances, however, so that his own horse will win, and the now-sixteen-
year-old Tessa stabs him in a rage. After two years' incarceration, Tessa (with the
aid of Tom Bryant) returns to the trainer's stables and seeks to bring a run-down
Buffoon back to his peak and win the race he was deprived of before. There's
plenty more plot where this came from, as the book is reminiscent of a miniseries
in its melodramatic eventfulness. Though the human events begin to pile up
almost humorously (there are tossed-in developments about Tessa's love for Tom,
her mother's abandonment of Tessa's stepfather for Tessa's boss, and a few other
elements beside), the core girl-and-her-horse story has a blend of solidity, with its
homely barn details, and fantasy that will appeal to horsey readers. Peyton's writ-
ing is as ungainly as Buffoon's running, with messy sentences and a tendency to
tell rather than show; even if it's not a Grand National winner, however, the book
resembles Buffoon in pulling itself together for an enjoyable gallop, and kids with
their own soapy equestrian dreams may find it a satisfying addition to their literary
stable. DS
ROBERTS, WILLO DAVIS 
Buddy Is a Stupid Name for a Girl. Atheneum,
2001 
[22 4p]
ISBN 0-689-81670-7 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Amy Kate (Buddy) finds herself in the care of her brother Bart when her father
tries to make a go of it as a truck driver. When he doesn't return as promised, the
kids are evicted, and Bart sends Buddy to stay with relatives while he searches for
their father. As Buddy attempts to acclimate to life in her late mother's childhood
home, her uncanny resemblance to her mother, EllaBelle, stirs old family wounds.
FEBRUARY 2001 
* 235
While Aunt Cassie would like to forget the past, Aunt Addie has more difficulty
letting go, providing opportunity for Buddy to learn of their grievance against her
mother: Addie first loved Buddy's father before EllaBelle swept him away, and
EllaBelle was the person last seen with the flowered tote containing Buddy's great-
grandfather's fortune. Just as brother Bart will not believe their father hijacked a
semi-truck filled with valuable inventory (as the trucking company believes), Buddy
is unable to believe her mother would steal, and each sibling seeks the truth. Rob-
erts' story rides on Buddy's predictable idealism and pluck and on a sequence of
plot contrivances (the siblings' eviction, for instance, means they weren't home for
their father's only phone call). However, Buddy's successful sleuthing (her mother's
name is cleared and the money returned to its rightful owners) will appeal to young-
sters, who will identify with the kid solving a mystery and working towards a cause
in which no one else believes. EAB
ROBERTSON, M. P. 
The Egg; written and illus. by M. P. Robertson. 
Fogelman,
2001 
26p
ISBN 0-8037-2546-9 
$15.99 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
George finds an enormous egg in the hen house and takes it in to his bedroom to
keep it warm. The egg, which is as tall as the bed is long, soon hatches a dragon,
and George proceeds to teach the dragon "dragony ways," as shown in comical
illustrations of near misses during flying lessons, roasting hot dogs by dragon fire,
and instruction in distressing a neighborhood damsel. Eventually the dragon longs
for the companionship of other dragons and so disappears in the night, returning
one week later to take George to meet his dragon friends. The dragon brings
George home again, departing on a sentimental note ("George didn't speak Dragon,
but he knew exactly what the dragon had said: 'Thank you'"). Although many of
the elements of familiar picture-book fantasies are present, there is little in the way
of character development or emotional engagement to truly endear this story to
young dragon aficionados, and there is scant tension in the plot beyond the sur-
prise of the initial hatching. The illustrations are engaging and humorous, how-
ever, showing George in a tree with a colander tied upside down over his head as a
knight's helmet, or George dangling from the claws of the flying dragon, glasses
falling in one direction and garbage can lid shield falling in the other. Although
many young viewers will be more satisfied with a visit to the classic My Father's
Dragon, some dragon aficionados may find fodder for their flying reptilian fanta-
sies here. KM
ROOT, PHYLLIS 
Foggy Friday; illus. by Helen Craig. 
Candlewick, 2000 
22p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7636-0777-0 
$10.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-7636-0833-5 
$3.29 
R 4-6 yrs
Meow Monday; illus. by Helen Craig. 
Candlewick, 2000 
22p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7636-0832-7 
$10.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-7636-0831-9 
$3.29 
Ad 4-6 yrs
Each of these two tales features an episode in the life of Bonnie Bumble, a young
girl taking care of the animals on a farm. In Foggy Friday, the rooster loses his
voice, but his characteristic crow appears in the voices of the other animals ("OINK-
A-OODLE-OO" and "MOO-A-MOODLE-MOO"). After a search, Bonnie finds
the rooster's crow in the form of a word balloon draped over the clothesline and
restores it to its rightful owner. The cockerel then wakes the farm up while a
236 
* THE BULLETIN
sleepy Bonnie goes back to bed, saying "SNORE-A-SNOODLE-SNOO!" The
magical logic of the story may not appeal to all young listeners, but the simple
language and amusing refrains will engage storytime participants. In the more
contrived Meow Monday, Bonnie's pussy willows have burst into bloom, sprouting
noisily meowing felines from the end of each branch, and Bonnie discovers that
she can placate the pussy willows by harvesting the bottles of milk from the milk-
weed plant. All's well on the farm until, in the last spread, the dogwoods (with
eager canine faces and front paws emerging from the flowers) burst into bloom.
Young children may not understand the joke, but they might nevertheless enjoy
watching Bonnie's attempts to maintain order on the farm. Although facial ex-
pressions are repetitive and the pictures often merely sweet, the illustrations present
barnyard and outdoor scenes with simple cartoonish lines and softly textured blocks
of color that will appeal to younger viewers. 
Preschool listeners and beginning
readers will appreciate these simple giggle-inducing stories. KM
SHEPARD, AARON, ad. 
MasterMan; illus. by David Wisniewski. 
HarperCollins,
2001 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-13784-9 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-13783-0 
$15.95 
R Gr. 3-6
In this retelling of a Hausa tale, Shadusa, a man who calls himself Master Man
because he is so strong, finds that he is unable to pull a heavy bucket up from the
well. A woman at the well insists that her baby try, and, when the baby easily pulls
up the bucket, Shadusa is shocked; the woman says he shouldn't be-her husband
is Master Man. Infuriated that another man dare use his nickname, Shadusa goes
home with the woman to "teach that fellow a lesson." As he approaches the hut,
Shadusa sees great piles of bones, which the woman says are the bones of the
elephants her husband eats. The earth shakes as Master Man comes home, carry-
ing a dead elephant on his shoulders. Shadusa tries to run away, but Master Man
sees him and chases him, until Master Man runs into another giant man who also
calls himself Master Man, and the two begin to wrestle. The cut-paper illustration
shows the forms of the two wrestling men becoming the gray clouds of a thunder-
storm, and the text explains that the sound of their wrestling is the noise we call
thunder. Wisniewski's illustrations blend his trademark paper collage with con-
ventions from comic books, including multiple frames on some pages, word bal-
loons, and enlarged onomatopoeic words (Master Man's angry "ROAR" takes up
nearly half a page). The modern language of Shepard's text (Shadusa says, "You
weren't fooling. I've got to get out of here!") complements the comic book for-
mat, retelling this Hausa tale from Nigeria as an action adventure. Shepard and
Wisniewski have created a book with wide appeal, and, although the pictures are
too detailed for storytimes, reluctant readers will take this title by storm. KM
SMITH, CHARLES R., JR. 
Short Takes: Fast-Break Basketball Poetry; written and
illus. with photographs by Charles R. Smith, Jr. 
Dutton, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-525-46454-9 
$17.99 
Ad 
Gr. 3-7
With characteristic energy, Smith continues his foray into basketball literature.
Moving from his blend of poetry and prose in Rimshots (BCCB 5/99) and his
short- story focus in Tall Tales (BCCB 5/00), he here concentrates on poetry, with
mixed results. There are gems such as "Buckets of points are piling up quick/ the
court is now soaked and the asphalt is slick./ The Rainmaker's shower has left
FEBRUARY 2001 
* 
237
others wet/ and all this was done without breaking a sweat" ("The Rainmaker")
and "Sneakers squeak on floors/ made ofteak, but asphalt has/ a sound all its own"
("Haiku #3"). Other entries, like the forcibly rhymed "Shadow Dancing," work
less well on the page ("Shadows dance and prance/ in the trance/ of my opponent
in the defensive stance"). Though the poetry is uneven, Smith nonetheless cap-
tures the essence of basketball in words and images. Each spread features a single
poem set against a vibrantly colored background, with Smith's photographs echo-
ing the sounds of the text, creating visual rhythm and energy through perspective
and dynamic layout. This will please sports aficionados who can't wait for recess
as well as prompting classroom experiments with language and book design. A
short glossary is included. EAB
SOMMERDORF, NORMA 
An Elm Tree and Three Sisters; illus. by Erika
Weihs. 
Viking, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-670-89308-0 
$15.99 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Mary, Mabel, and Molly, sisters on a sundrenched, early twentieth century farm,
agree that "what this place needs is a tree," and with their father's permission they
take the wagon to the creek to hunt for a good prospect. They settle upon a
spindly young elm, which they carefully transplant and tend until it grows into a
robust supporter of swings and provider of shade that plays its quiet roles through-
out the gradual evolution of their lives. Disease eventually claims the tree, and the
now white-haired siblings try to focus on good memories rather than loss, but it's
only when Molly's three great-granddaughters plant a new elm in its place that
their humor is truly restored: "'We've seen many good days,' they agreed, 'but this
is one of the best.'" This cycle-of-life tale is drawn in a broad outline with only a
few brief allusions to the sisters' landmark events marking the passage of time, and
although the sisters age at a believable rate, the tree comes into maturity sooner
than is naturally possible. Single and double-page oil paintings sport a shallow
perspective that should recall primitive folk art, but in this case simply looks flat.
Still, the tender bond between family and tree comes across clearly, and Arbor Day
presentations could incorporate just such a title. EB
SOTO, GARY Jessie De La Cruz: A Profile of a United Farm Worker. Braziller/
Persea, 2000 
116p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-89255-253-0 
$17.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Author Soto first met Jessie De La Cruz in 1998. He was struck by the good-
humored, self-possessed woman, and, short months later, he found himself writ-
ing her biography. De La Cruz was an active participant in recruiting workers for
the United Farm Workers Association, whose experience as a migrant worker made
her passionate about the organization that would make life better for her children
and grandchildren. Soto tells De La Cruz' story from working childhood to active
old age, painting a bleak picture of the physical hardship, racism, and abuse she
and other nearly powerless workers suffered. The arrival of Cesar Chavez altered
her future; she found herself rising to the challenge of changing her own life and
the lives of her fellow workers. Soto's somewhat formal style reflects a great deal of
respect for his subject, but the stolid, textbooky explication contributes to a sense
of distance between the reader and De La Cruz. Fortunately, the events of De La
Cruz' life are intriguing in themselves, and her tough compassion and ready hu-
mor comes through time and again. Quotes from De La Cruz herself, and quotes
238 
* THE BULLETIN
about De La Cruz from her friends and family, spark this woman to life. Soto
draws his information from personal interviews with De La Cruz, and primary and
secondary sources about the United Farm Workers movement. Much of De La
Cruz' adult life revolved around La Causa; readers may find themselves wondering
what cause would matter as much to them. JMD
TANAcA, SHELLEY 
In the Time of the Knights; illus. by Greg Ruhl. 
Hyperion/
Madison, 2000 
48p
ISBN 0-7868-0651-6 
$16.99 
R Gr. 5-8
The life of twelfth-century figure William Marshal is the lens through which Tanaka
examines medieval knighthood, and a rousing life it is. She opens with a riveting
scene of young William taken hostage by King Stephen and abandoned by his
father ("Your father claims he can make more sons, and better ones, to take your
place"), notes his training in the household of cousin William de Tancarville ("He
hated sitting indoors hunched over black scratchings on a page. What good would
reading and writing be to him on the battlefield?"), and covers his early success in
war and impoverishment (through the medieval version of downsizing) in peace.
Brought back into his cousin's favor, William catches the attention of royalty and
rises to become protector/mentor of a prince and, eventually, regent during the
early reign of Henry III. There's plenty of bloodshed and court intrigue along the
way, and extensive insets contrast the formal, almost genteel picture of knight-
hood that has come down through romanticized tradition with the rough and
tumble reality of Marshal's lot. Tight focus and engaging storytelling make this
one of the stronger entries in the "I Was There" series, and although Ruhl's pedes-
trian single-page paintings contribute little to the effort, plenty of credited ex-
amples of medieval artwork and color photos of historic sites provide a grand visual
tour. EB
TOOINSKY, Izzi, ad. 
The Turkey Prince; illus. by Edwina White. 
Viking,
2001 
32p
ISBN 0-670-88872-9 
$15.99 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
When the pressures of princely life become too pressing, the unnamed prince of
this tale throws off his royal clothes and takes refuge under a kitchen table, making
gobbling noises like a turkey. Many healers try to cure him and fail, until a wise
man comes to the prince, throws off his clothes, and joins him beneath the table,
telling the prince that he is also a turkey. The wise man slowly coaxes the prince to
return to human habits ("Could a turkey who is cold wear a coat? Of course, why
not?"). Once the prince rejoins human life, he goes on to be a just ruler, despite
believing he is a turkey; the book concludes with the prince helping one of his
young subjects who is convinced he is a turkey, just as the wise man once helped
him. Aside from one awkward interruption (a parenthetical explanation of the
prince's motivation for thinking he's a turkey), Tooinsky's retelling is evenly told
and well paced, if somewhat lacking in humor. White's illustrations feature black
ink outlines against jewel-tone paints, with the occasional use of collaged paper.
Figures are drawn in stylistically simple lines, and the minimalist faces have pre-
dominantly flat and expressionless features that limit emotional involvement. There
is no source note, and the jacket flap says this is an "old Hassidic tale" (it was in
fact written in the nineteenth century by famous Jewish storyteller Rabbi Nachman
of Bratslav). The situation has its own amusement value, however, and listeners
will appreciate the message of compassion just beneath the feathers. KM
FEBRUARY 2001 
* 
239
TURNER, ANN 
Abe Lincoln Remembers; illus. by Wendell Minor. 
HarperCollins,
2001 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027578-2 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027577-4 
$15.95 
M 
Gr. 2-5
In a throwback to the hero-worship history of the 1950s, Turner presents an adu-
latory overview of Lincoln's life, abbreviated, underexamined, and awash in senti-
ment. Here readers find the rail splitter in all his homespun glory-practicing his
numbers "on the back of the fire shovel"; whuppin' Jack Armstrong, "the best
wrestler around"; honing his oratory, "learning how to use words like a leading
rein on a colt to take people where I wanted." The Civil War is dispatched in four
spreads, tidily summed up in the reflection, "Finally our side has won, the country
is not divided, and the slaves are free," and on a closing note of dramatic irony,
Lincoln and wife Mary are off to see a play. Minor's paintings are creakily stiff and
sometimes blatantly sentimental. Angular sunbeams rise in benediction over
Lincoln's childhood log cabin; Lincoln and Mary Todd exchange moony glances
in front of an enormous American flag. A closing note fills in some of the histori-
cal gaps, but even here Turner slips in the notoriously erroneous claim, "Lincoln
signed the Emancipation Proclamation in 1863, officially freeing all the slaves."
Young students have become accustomed to more balanced views of even the most
heroic statesmen, and this well-intentioned portrayal comes up short. EB
VANDE VELDE, VIVIAN 
The Rumpelstiltskin Problem. Houghton, 2000 
116p
ISBN 0-618-05523-1 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 5-8
The tale of the strange being who spins straw into gold (despite some motivation
problems on the parts of its characters) has held readers' and listeners' imagina-
tions over many years. Vande Velde clearly states her position on the plot of
"Rumpelstiltskin": "It makes no sense." Her effort to rectify this problem results
in six variations on the Grimms' story, most funny, all accessible, and each quite
witty in its own right. In "A Fairy Tale in Bad Taste," Rumpelstiltskin is a troll
with a taste for human babies ("kiddie cutlets") who tricks the miller's daughter
with Machiavellian glee, only to have his own appetite betray him in the end.
"The Domovoi" is a house-spirit who cannot bear unhappiness in his abode and
feels obliged to remedy it; "Ms. Rumpelstiltskin" is an old woman who knows
she'd be a better mother than the queen. Succinct characterizations focus each
tale. The miller's daughter especially comes into her own in Vande Velde's varia-
tions: not only does she get a name in each story, but she gets motivation and
personality. Her personas range from a clever young woman coping with her
flighty father to a gold-digging con artist with an eye on the crown. The author
speaks directly to the reader in an informal style that is almost casually clever; the
humor comes more from understatement than slapstick. Present this along with
the traditional Grimms' tale for an adventure in alternative universes. JMD
WILES, DEBORAH 
Freedom Summer; illus. by Jerome Lagarrigue. 
Schwartz/Ath-
eneum, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-689-83016-5 
$16.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Set in the summer of 1964 in the American south, this picture book presents two
best friends, one black and one white, who come up against the lingering legacy of
racism despite the mandates of the new Civil Rights Act. Joe is the son of a middle-
class white family, and his best friend John Henry is the son of the black house-
240 
* THE BULLETIN
keeper who works for Joe's mother. Told from Joe's perspective, the narrative
describes the summertime pleasures of friendship, from swimming in the creek to
eating ice pops that Joe buys for them both, since John Henry is not allowed in the
general store. One night at dinner, Joe's father announces that the town pool will
be opening to everyone, regardless of skin color, the following morning. The two
boys race to the pool in the morning only to find that county dump trucks are
filling the pool with asphalt. Despite their disappointment, and despite the prohi-
bition on doing so, the boys decide to buy ice pops at the general store together.
The childish ease with which the two boys walk into the store is jarringly at odds
with not only the detailed descriptions of racist restrictions throughout the text
but also with the scene just before, showing that whites in the town were willing to
destroy the town pool rather than include black people. Figures in the illustrations
are blocky, with moments of awkward drafting, and the use of blurred oil paints
adds a nostalgic softness that, along with sentimental moments in the text, makes
this story seem more filtered through adult memories than told from a child's
perspective. This joins other recent historical fiction picture books about similar
experiences of children challenging segregation (Woodson's The Other Side, this
month's Big Picture, Coleman's White Socks Only, 4/96), and despite its message-
driven earnestness, it may inspire valuable discussions about race, racism, and the
ways that young people try to change the world around them. KM
WILLIAMS, LAURA E. 
Up a Creek. 
Holt, 2001 
135p
ISBN 0-8050-6453-2 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Starshine Bott's mother, Miracle, is a dyed-in-the-wool activist who flits from cause
to cause with unabated passion. To date Starshine has been resigned, tolerant, or
even cautiously supportive of Miracle's crusades. However, in this, her eighth-
grade year, she is particularly sensitive to her mother's latest "save the oaks" cam-
paign, a hometown anti-development issue that attracts more than local interest
when Miracle "moves into" one of the threatened trees and refuses to come down
until the developer backs off. Nothing, it seems, will bring Miracle down-not
her own mother's hospitalization from heat exhaustion, not Starshine's pleas for
support when she gets her first period. It's only when a very angry Starshine starts
to ask probing questions concerning the identity of her biological father that Miracle
recognizes a family cause could be as important as a community issue. Would that
all adolescents were as forgiving of an offending parent as Starshine, who not only
abandons her bitterness with remarkable ease but even drops all interest in her
mystery father as soon as Miracle touches ground. A conclusion that finds Starshine
and her classmates up in trees provides dramatic flourish but simply fails to ring
with truth. Still, plenty of middle schoolers suffer from acute parental embarrass-
ment, and Starshine is sure to find her share of sympathizers. EB
WILLIAMS-GARCIA, RITA 
Every Time a Rainbow Dies. 
HarperCollins,
2001 
[17 6p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029202-4 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-16245-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 9-12
Since the death of his mother, sixteen-year-old Thulani has essentially cared only
for his rooftop pigeons, but one day from his rooftop he witnesses a girl being
raped. He's too late to avert the crime, but he does chase off her attackers and walk
FEBRUARY 2001 
* 241
the hurt and furious girl home, and by then he's obsessed. While he's briefly
diverted by dating another girl, it's still the girl whose beautiful skirt he's kept as an
icon who haunts him, whom he follows, and whom he finally manages to talk to.
The girl, Ysa, proves to be a young woman of determination and drive, whose
artistic ambitions (she's a budding fashion designer) challenge Thulani's aimless-
ness, and it's clear even when they become lovers that there's a future drawing her
away from him. Williams-Garcia (author of Like Sisters on the Homefront, BCCB
9/95) writes an eloquent and offbeat story of love and awakening, grief and recov-
ery. Her narration gives the outwardly often-bumbling Thulani an articulateness
that will allow readers to empathize with his grief, his frustration (his brother and
sister-in-law, with whom he lives, don't know what to make of him and plan to use
his inheritance for their own purposes), and his passion for Ysa and what she stands
for. Ysa's strength in the face of her tragedies is believable (in a life marked early by
sadness, she survived a boat trip from Haiti when her parents did not), as is Thulani's
growth in response as he finds a possible calling himself (photography), comes to
terms with his mother's death, and plans to return to Jamaica where she died and
where his father still lives. This may not suit readers searching for a traditional
romance, but many teens will be moved by this lyrical account of Thulani's love
and growth. DS
WITTLINGER, ELLEN 
Gracie's Girl. Simon, 2000 
186p
ISBN 0-689-82249-9 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Sixth-grader Bess usually tries to avoid the soup kitchen where her social worker
mother spends an increasing number of hours. Circumstances find Bess spending
time there, however, and she is struck by Gracie Jarvis Battles, an old woman
without home or kin, who reminds Bess of her own grandmother. Bess and her
best friend, Ethan, and later even her older brother, Willy, bring food to Gracie
and sneak her into an old storage shack on the school grounds so she can be out of
the elements. Meanwhile, Bess' mother is working with a community group to get
a hotel refurbished as a shelter for women before winter sets in. Bess herself is
overextended: she's stage-managing the school production of Bye Bye Birdie, try-
ing to create a popular image, dealing with her first crush, and playing Cupid for
Willy. Eloquent characterizations help keep all these plot threads untangled and
smooth. Bess is a believable narrator, and her observations about the people and
activities that surround her ring with the emotional truth of a young adolescent.
The author avoids sentimentalizing the homeless for the most part, and she creates
in Gracie a character of pathos and tragedy. Bess' mother and father are a little too
good to be true, but that's a nice change from the usual dysfunctional parental
grouping. It is difficult to tackle this topic in fiction without self-conscious soap-
boxing, but Wittlinger avoids the obvious pitfalls by concentrating on individuals
instead of causes. JMD
WONG, JANET S. Grump; illus. by John Wallace. 
McElderry, 2001 
26p
ISBN 0-689-83485-3 
$16.00 
Ad 
2-4 yrs
Wong focuses on a mother's long day: "Look how tired this Mommy is/ Tired
and frumpy/ Grouchy chumpy/ Oh, what a grump!" "Smart, good Baby" may be
happy, but he makes messes with abandon and then refuses to go to sleep: "Baby's
eyes are getting heavy/ Heavy sleepy baby eyes/ Mommy starts to tiptoes out-/
And oh of course that baby cries ... Play with me!" Wong's minimal text (in
tasteful baby blue) neatly accents Wallace's sparse line and watercolor illustrations,
242 
* THE BULLETIN
both floating on a sea of white space in an attractive layout. Unfortunately, the
expressions often don't synchronize with the text, and there's frequent visual rep-
etition, dulling the impact of the art. Families will be familiar with this scenario,
but since Wong writes for knowing adults, it is doubtful most toddlers will last
past the first pages. For a more involving title addressing the shared grumpiness of
parent and child, try Betsy Everitt's Mean Soup. EAB
WOODSON, JACQUELINE 
The Other Side; illus. by E. B. Lewis. 
Putnam,
2001 
32p
ISBN 0-399-23116-1 
$16.99 
R 6-9 yrs
See this month's Big Picture, p. 211, for review.
YIN 
Coolies; illus. by Chris Soentpiet. 
Philomel, 2001 
[40p]
ISBN 0-399-23227-3 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
Yin distills the experiences of a host of nineteenth-century Chinese immigrants
into this fictionalized story of two impoverished Cantonese brothers who sail to
America to work on the Transcontinental Railroad. Each event in their lives-
from seasickness, to setting dynamite charges, to abandoning a labor action, to
surviving (miraculously) an avalanche-seems self-consciously drawn from a his-
tory text and cobbled into a single tale. Sandwiching the brothers' story between
opening and closing scenes of their descendants celebrating the Ching Ming Festi-
val (which an afterword explains as a day "Chinese families pay respect to their
ancestors") adds little. Soentpiet's dignified, near-sculptural articulation of the
two brothers deftly assures they are never lost in the crowd of workers among
whom they are generally portrayed; the persistent yellow-orange illumination in
which most scenes are bathed may, however, send viewers running for their Ray-
Bans. Consider this title for introducing the facts, but turn to Partridge's Oranges
on Golden Mountain (reviewed above) for the feel. EB
ZIEFERT, HARRIET 
Someday We'll Have Very Good Manners; illus. by Chris
Demarest. 
Putnam, 2001 
[28p]
ISBN 0-399-235582-2 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
The brother-and-sister pair in this piece of reverse psychology are well aware of
what sort of manners are expected of them when they're grown up: be polite, say
please and thank-you, knock before entering, use a napkin at meals, etc. While the
kids' narration talks about what they'll do when they're grown, the cartoon panels
tell a different story, showing the behavior the children currently indulge in-
throwing liver to the dog, letting the door swing back in someone's face, pushing
to the front of lines, screaming, yelling, shouting-because "for now, we're just
kids!" Demarest does his best to lend cachet to the boorish duo, and his watercol-
ors have a polished flair that enlivens their quickly predictable progression. Ar-
ticulate facial expressions and self-satisfied body language characterize sister and
brother as they blithely and smugly defy conventional mores. Demarest's art buoys
this corny title right up until the final page, when the "we're just kids" excuse hits
an anticlimactic wall. Still, for grownups who have tried conventional etiquette
books, this may just fill the bill. JMD
FEBRUARY 2001 
* 243
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
Graham, Lorenz. How God Fix Jonah; illus. by Ashley Bryan. Boyds Mills, 2000.
ISBN 1-56397-698-6; $17.95. [160p] Reviewed from galleys.
Graham wrote this unique articulation of Bible stories in 1946, after a sojourn as a
missionary in Liberia. The author retold these tales in "the idiom of the West
African narrative," in "the vernacular of those who have been under the influence
of European civilization." The result is storytelling that sings from the page in
language that can only be fully appreciated when read aloud: "Long time past/
Before you papa live/ Before him papa live/ Before him pa's papa live-// Long
time past/ Before them big tree live/ before them big tree's papa live-/ That time
God live." The rhythms of Graham's poetry bring twenty-four familiar tales to
exuberant life, including the return of the Prodigal Son ("Hongry Catch the Fool-
ish Boy"), the battle between David and Goliath ("David He No Fear"), the death
of Absalom ("Don't Nobody Sing"), and the love of Ruth for Naomi ("Good in
She Heart"). The sober palette of the volume-black block prints on stark pages,
with pearl-gray botanical swirls on white cover and endpapers-belies the joyous
content even as it suggests an appropriate sense of formality and import. Each
full-page illustration is surrounded by a wide white border, as if matted and framed;
small elegant woodcuts detail the closings of various stories. The sophisticated
design of this volume is aimed at adult readers rather than children, and profes-
sionals will be glad to have a chance to lay their hands on this significant text for
their historical and research collections. It'll also make a rich source for readal-
ouds, however, and some youngsters encouraged by the musical language may
want to read further on their own. JMD
Lipson, Eden Ross. The New York Times Parent's Guide to the Best Books for
Children. 3rd ed. Three Rivers, 2000. Paper ed. ISBN 0-8129-3018-5; $18.00.
530p.
The third edition of this useful guide features a Scheherezadian collection of 1001
annotated tides divided into six sections (wordless books, picture books, story books,
early reading books, middle reading books, and young adult books). Entries range
from classic to contemporary, each entry receiving publication information and
award information (where relevant) as well as a concise description. The layout
makes the book particularly inviting: wide margins (which the introduction en-
courages readers to use for notes) are decorated with myriad images from the fea-
tured books, and each section's running header features an amusing archetypal
example complete with classic "ipsum quo" mock text. The introduction gives a
brief overview of the guide and an introduction to selection; multiple indices (title,
author, illustrator, age level, and subject) and a bibliography are appended. DS
244 
* THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Abuse-fiction: Klass
Activism-fiction: Williams
African Americans: Borden
African Americans-fiction:
Coleman; Littlesugar; Williams-
Garcia
African Americans-stories: Wiles;
Woodson
Animals: Altman; Holub
Animals-stories: Anderson; Bruss;
Cowell; Palatini; Root Foggy
Antarctica: Dewey
Astronauts-stories: Loomis
Aunts-fiction: Ibbotson
Aviation: Borden
Aviation-fiction: Downing
Babies-stories: Cowell; Katz; Wong
Baseball: Isadora
Baseball-fiction: Bennett
Basketball-poetry: Smith
BEDTIME STORIES: Anderson;
Child; Katz; Loomis
BIOGRAPHIES: Borden; Marrin;
Soto; Tanaka; Turner
Books and reading-stories: Bruss;
Child
Brothers and sisters-fiction: Brisson;
Roberts; Wittlinger
Brothers-stories: Yin
Bullies-fiction: Laser; Paterson
Cats: Holub
China-stories: Partridge; Yin
Civil rights-fiction: Littlesugar
Civil rights-stories: Wiles;
Woodson
Construction-poetry: Johnson
Counseling: Bode
COUNTING BOOKS: Katz
Cows-fiction: Arkin
Crime and criminals-fiction: Klass;
Peyton
Crime and criminals-stories:
Palatini
Death and dying-fiction: Baskin;
Bennett
Detectives-stories: Palatini
Disabilities-fiction: Cummings
Divorce: Bode
Divorce-fiction: Koss
Dogs: Holub
Dogs-fiction: Paterson
Dragons-stories: Robertson
Dreams-stories: Partridge
Ecology: Bang; Montgomery;
Williams
ESP-fiction: Chandler
Ethics and values: Beaverson;
Cooper; Littlesugar
Families-fiction: Roberts
Families-stories: Jenkins
FANTASY: Arkin; Beaverson;
Hanley; Hoffman; Ibbotson;
Paterson
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Baskin; Hanley; Roberts
Fathers and sons-fiction: Bennett;
Koss
Fathers and sons-stories: DiTerlizzi
Flying-fiction: Downing
FOLKTALES AND FAIRYTALES:
Shepard; Tooinsky; Vande Velde
Food and eating: Altman
Friendship-fiction: Baskin;
Hoffman; Wittlinger
FEBRUARY 2001 
* 245
Friendship-stories: DiTerlizzi;
Wiles; Woodson
FUNNY STORIES: Tooinsky
Ghosts: Bial
Grandfathers-fiction: Taylor
Grandmothers-fiction: Chandler
Grandmothers-stories: Sommerdorf
Guns-fiction: Paterson
HISTORICAL FICTION: Crew;
Laser; Littlesugar; Wiles;
Woodson
History, U.S.: Bial; Borden;
Cooper; Johnson; Littlesugar;
Marrin; Partridge; Soto; Turner;
Wiles; Woodson
History, world: Martin; Tanaka
Homeless, the-fiction: Wittlinger
Horses-fiction: Peyton
HUMOR: Grossman
Imaginary friends-stories:
DiTerlizzi
Immigrants-stories: Partridge; Yin
India: Montgomery
Islands-fiction: Ibbotson
Japanese Americans: Cooper
Knights: Tanaka
Latinos: Soto
Libraries-stories: Bruss
LOVE STORIES: Williams-Garcia
Manners-stories: Ziefert
Mermaids-fiction: Hoffman
Middle ages: Tanaka
Moon-stories: Anderson
Mothers-fiction: Baskin
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Coleman; Williams; Wittlinger
Mothers and sons-fiction: Klass
Mothers and sons-stories: Partridge
Moving-fiction: Paterson
Music and musicians-fiction: Arkin
MYSTERIES: Chandler
Mythical creatures-fiction: Ibbotson
Naps-stories: Wong
Nigeria-folktales: Shepard
Orphans-fiction: Downing
Plants-stories: Root Meow
POETRY: Grossman; Hines;
Johnson; Smith
Pollution: Bang
Poverty-stories: McBrier
Presidents, U.S.: Turner
Princesses-fiction: Hanley
Quilts-poetry: Hines
Rabbits-stories: Loomis
Racism-fiction: Littlesugar
Racism-stories: Wiles; Woodson
Reading aloud: Brisson; Ibbotson;
Paterson; Shepard; Smith; Vande
Velde
Reading, easy: Brisson; Holub;
Paterson
Reading, reluctant: Bial; Smith
Reading-stories: Bruss
Religion-fiction: Beaverson; Crew
School-fiction: Brisson; Laser;
Nagda
Science: Altman; Holub; Jackson
Seasons-poetry: Hines
Sexual abuse-fiction: Bennett
Sisters-stories: Sommerdorf
Space-stories: Loomis
Stepfathers-fiction: Paterson
Storytelling: Shepard; Tooinsky;
Vande Velde
Storytime: Anderson; Bruss; Cowell;
Meister; Root
Supernatural-fiction: Chandler
SURVIVAL STORIES: Martin
Swimming-fiction: Coleman
Tigers: Montgomery
Traffic-stories: Meister
Trees-stories: Sommerdorf
Twins: Jackson
Uganda-stories: McBrier
Unions: Soto
Urban life-stories: Meister
Voyages and travel: Dewey; Martin
War: Marrin
Wolves-stories: Child
Women's studies: Borden
World War II: Cooper
Zoos: Altman
A Publishers Weekly Best Children's Book 2000
-, I
ROSE A BEAST
FAIRY TALES RETOLD
By Francesca Lia Block
;1 * 
"[From 'Snow White' to
'Thumbelina'] nine fairy tales are
given shimmering and scary
shape in very modern dress
with Block's luminescent
prose . . . language like a
jeweled sword, glittering
as it cuts to the heart.
The place of California
dreams, desert light, and
movieland glitz, her fairy
landscape is repopulated
with girls who have rose
tattoos and remember
River Phoenix. Readers
will find dark magic here."
-Starred review / Kirkus Reviews
=- 
"The darkness of [Block's]
subjects proves the strength of
the magic she describes: the
transfiguring power of love."
-Starred review / Publishers Weekly
Ages 12 up. $14.95 Tr (0-06-028129-4)
$14.89 Lb (0-06-028130-8)
' 
"A cool book... presented by 18 renowned cartoonists ...
[including] Spiegelman, Walt Kelly, David Macauley,
William Joyce, and Kaz. Each uses a unique style to interpret
a fairy tale, either an original story using traditional motifs
or a familiar tale. A sensational introduction to traditional 
_
literature ... it will live happily ever after in the hands of
readers everywhere." -Starred 
review / School Library Journal
S"Should be a big hit with both the picture book and
non-superhero comics crowd."-Starred review/ Kirkus Reviews
~W~ "Provocative... sophisticated."
-Starred 
review / Publishers Weekly 
T
All ages. 819.95 Tr (0-06-028624-5)
9 Joanna Cotler Books An imprint of Harper CollinsPublishers
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019 * www.harperchildrens.com
Keen utin 
achihne-
with the
latest in
Teaching!
Teaching K-8 is filled with hundreds of unique ideas and
activities that help teachers present new challenges to their
students, learn new concepts and develop new skills.
Monthly articles include:
Carol Otis Hurst on...
* Children's Books * Teaching in the Library
Plus... * The Parent Connection * Interviews with
children's book authors and illustrators * Science
* Technology and more!
7 j.'C * OFFE::
Don't miss this valuable
resource for your library -
subscribe today.
Call 800-678-8793 or visit
our website at
www.TeachingK-8.com
-----Ylm~- ---
r 
I 
""" 
P.L·
* "Peck charms readers once again!"*
0 8037 2558 3/$I6.99/ 
·
ai~s 50 sp
* ~ ~ 
~~~~: 
'5 erodM 
ievst 
rn 
j 
ssrgl
through 
te rec 
of1937..elihtul
~sssghtul 
etha 
souns w
descriptio
-
ibrQ 
rds~vtw
* "The s~~~m 
h 
dene 
:.sa d staeosfrea
Nehr: 
iACict 
..
aintefiio
much 
oft 
es f~~~;rl 
as 
rtanlecaaces..
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.S.A.
RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED
0008-9036(200102)54:6; 1 -M
PERIODICALS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
is Online!
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books is now
available to our print subscribers as a searchable online
database. Print subscribers are now able to browse the latest
issue online, look through archived issues beginning with
the 1998 volume year, and search for reviews by title,
author, and reading level. A sample issue of the online
Bulletin is available at:
http://www.prairienet.org/cgi-bin/ccb/bulletin.cgi
The staff of The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
cordially invites you to browse through the online version.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
The Best of Tradition and Technology
-
;:"
r;··';;; 
.il 
:P-" 
~
5~-
x
;i"~~B~
~iilr
