T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by The Johns Hopkins University Press
July/August 2013
Vol. 66   No. 11
 N. Charles Street • Baltimore, MD  • ... • .. • www.press.jhu.edu/journals
BOOKBIRD
A Journal of International Children’s Literature
Roxanne Harde, E
Published by the International Board on Books for 
Young People (IBBY).
Published quarterly
: - / -: -
The BULLETIN of the 
CENTER for CHILDREN’S BOOKS
Deborah Stevenson, E
Provides concise summaries and critical evaluations 
of current children’s books.
Published monthly (except August)
: - / -: -
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE*
R. H. W. Dillard, E--C
Julie Pfeiffer and Michelle Ann Abate, 
E
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published annually
: - / -: -
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE 
ASSOCIATION QUARTERLY*
Katharine Capshaw Smith, E
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published quarterly
: - / -: -
The LION and the UNICORN
A Critical Journal of Children’s Literature
David L. Russell, Karin E. Westman, 
and Naomi J. Wood, E
An international theme- and genre-centered 
journal committed to a serious, ongoing discussion 
of literature for children.
Published three times a year
: - / -: -
*Please contact us for more information or to join.
The Johns Hopkins University Press Journals in 
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
July/August 2013
Vol. 66 No. 11
497  the BIg PICture
 
 Water in the Park  by Emily Jenkins; illus. by Stephanie Graegin
498  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
502 • The Year of the Baby  by Andrea Cheng; illus. by Patrice Barton
504 • Obsidian Mirror  by Catherine Fisher
504 • The Saturday Boy  by David Fleming
516 • Openly Straight   by Bill Konigsberg
534 •  Pancho Rabbit and the Coyote: A Migrant’s Tale  written and illus.  
by Duncan Tonatiuh
538  suBjeCt And use Index
541  AnnuAL Author And tItLe Index
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R Recommended.
Ad Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR Not recommended.
SpC Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the  
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor (KQG)
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Thaddeus Andracki, Reviewer
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
Alaine Martaus, Reviewer (AM)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Melissa Funfsinn, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print or electronic $98.00; combined print & electronic $137.00; multiple in-
stitutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, $55.00; students, 
$20.00. In countries other than the United States, add $17.60 per subscription for postage; subscrib-
ers in Canada and Mexico add $13.20. Single copy rate: $11.00. Volumes available in microfilm from 
ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche 
from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be 
made payable to The Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Divi-
sion, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 
410-516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/
journals/advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2013 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image from Water in the Park ©2013 by Stephanie Graegin and used by permission of 
Schwartz & Wade/Random House Children’s Books.
July/August 2013 • 497
the BIg PICture
Water in the Park
by Emily Jenkins; illustrated by Stephanie Graegin
A bustling city park on a hot summer day is a center of activity, much of it water-
based, in this engaging picture book. Morning starts with the waking up of the 
pond turtles and the arrival of the dog walkers (whose pups play in the pond); then 
a few early moms and babies turn up as the sprinkler goes on, and “the playground 
is crowded by ten o’clock” as kids dump water in the sandbox. Grownups come to 
eat lunch, feeding the fish in the pond with their bread, and the afternoon brings a 
new shift at the playground. The diehards leave when the sprinkler’s turned off, the 
dogs come out one last time for an evening walk and swim, but now the weather 
has turned to rain: “One heavy drop hits the pond—plop!—and the sky opens” 
and “everyone is now very, very very wet.” 
Jenkins states that this story, inspired by her summer experiences in 
New York’s Prospect Park, is a homage to Tresselt’s White Snow, Bright Snow and 
Zolotow’s The Park Book; it’s also reminiscent of Lynne Rae Perkins’ Snow Music 
(BCCB 12/03) with its lyrical as-it-happens, day-in-the-life approach and in-
triguingly detailed landscapes. The author has always been a master of text that’s 
simultaneously original and authentic (as in her delightful Five Creatures, BCCB 
2/01), and that talent’s on excellent display here, with language that’s musical yet 
simply descriptive (“The park attendant tuns the sprinkler off at six. One baby 
laughs when the water disappears. Another cries”). Spirited scraps of dialogue (“You 
are the dog of all dogs,” says a pet owner encouragingly to his recovering pooch) 
add vitality, while there’s subtle patterning in the day’s trajectory and in recurring 
motifs such as the dog-walking; since those patterns reflect kids’ own experiences 
of daily routine, they’ll immediately catch the gentle rhythm. The water theme is a 
low-key thread throughout, but its inclusion is natural and unforced, emphasizing 
the point that water is central in ways we don’t always think about. 
The illustrations, a blend of ink washes, orderly pencilwork and hatch-
ing, and digital colors, vary between sweeping double-page landscapes and smaller 
spot-art scenes. It’s a great book for people-watching, as a cast of hundreds, in di-
verse sizes, shapes, races, and cultures, meanders through the park; while the facial 
portraiture is speedy, the dress, companions, and activities vary enough to allow 
viewers to follow people through spreads (young Claudie K., who never wants to 
leave the park, and her patient babysitter are a good place to start). Compositions 
are delicately rhythmic, with playground fencing, park paths, and terraced houses 
providing linear movement (the paths in particular are alluringly followable) that 
anchors the jubilant organic messiness of the human and canine figures. The 
water varies effectively from a gleaming sheen on the concrete to a deliciously  
498 • the Bulletin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
rippling blue pool to, finally, a slanting silver downpour that completely alters the 
landscape, galvanizing people into swift movement and umbrellas into opening.
In addition to being a mesmerizing tale in its own right, the book offers 
a wide range of possible uses—it’s rich with opportunities for one-on-one seek and 
find, whether of water or of people, and its immediacy and vividness make it a 
sneaky alternative for days when weather kills off an actual park visit. It could also 
encourage kids to create their own chronicles of local gathering points—or just to 
hit the park. (See p. 468 for publication information.)
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
Barnett, Mac Count the Monkeys; illus. by Kevin Cornell. Disney Hyperion, 
2013 [32p]
ISBN 978-1-4231-6065-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* 4-7 yrs
Counting the monkeys seems like a simple enough task. The project goes awry right 
from the start in this counting book, however: one king cobra has scared the mon-
keys off the page. Then two mongooses (“Or is that 2 mongeese?”) chase the cobra 
away, and things only continue to go downhill from there, with nary a monkey in 
sight along the way. With an escalating series of silly characters to count—including 
swarms of bees, grandma beekeepers, and lumberjacks who just won’t scram—Bar-
nett guides his audience through the jungle to try to regain control of the story. 
After ten polka-dotted rhinoceroses with bagpipes and bad breath, though, we’re 
out of pages, and there are zero monkeys in this book. Although audiences never 
get to count the monkeys, Barnett’s adventure is a complete hoot in its absurdity, 
and, with its predictable structure but unpredictable content, it begs to be read 
aloud. The text is prescriptive, giving a suggested course of action before turning 
each page (“Give each lumberjack a high five and then turn the page”), helping 
novice storytime leaders engage their audiences, while the numeral and name of the 
countable elements are set off in big red print accessible to young count-o-philes. 
The acrylic illustrations set the boldly colored characters—cartoonishly drawn 
with softly painterly outlines—against muted jungle scenery. They also match the 
tone of the book, with even scary creatures like crocodiles sporting winsome grins, 
top hats, canes, and vests. This romp would work well as a base for a rainforest-
themed storytime, but it might be even more fun paired with other books that run 
a standard script slantwise, like Kelly Bingham’s Z Is for Moose (BCCB 4/12).  TA 
July/August 2013 • 499
Beaty, andrea  Dorko the Magnificent. Amulet/Abrams, 2013 213p
ISBN 978-1-4197-0638-7 $16.95   
R  Gr. 3-5
Eleven-year-old Robbie Darko is a stage magician whose tricks always seem to 
go a little bit wrong. Now, after a disastrous talent-show performance the year 
before, he’s starting fifth grade desperate to redeem himself. It’s hard to focus on 
improving your sleight of hand, though, when your teachers are always thwarting 
your efforts, your mother’s attention is always on her job, and your little brother 
(affectionately known as Ape Boy) is always climbing on your stuff and chewing on 
your props. Things only seem to get worse when cranky, bossy Grandma Melvyn 
(who isn’t even his real grandma) moves in, taking over his room and making his 
life miserable. Like a good magic trick, there’s more to Melvyn than meets the eye, 
and soon Robbie not only has an audience but a mentor, as the old lady turns out 
to be a former world-class magician complete with her own cabinet of illusions. 
As Melvyn and Robbie bond over their shared passion, each learns to appreciate, 
trust, and even forgive the other for their mistakes, until an unexpected medical 
condition threatens to take Grandma Melvyn away for good. Narrated in Robbie’s 
own inimitable voice speaking directly to the reader (because “magicians always talk 
to their audiences”), this story captures all the eagerness, confusion, and frustra-
tion of being a kid on the cusp between elementary and middle school. Robbie’s 
yearning to be taken seriously and his impatience at being dismissed by distracted, 
busy adults are utterly relatable, and readers will appreciate his annoyance at having 
his life turned upside down for an unfriendly relative, even as they recognize that 
Grandma Melvyn isn’t as awful as Robbie originally believes. A thoroughly likable 
middle-grade novel, offering a blend of poignancy and giggle-worthy humor, this 
book is a solid back-to-school read.  AM
Bick, ilsa J. Monsters. Egmont, 2013 [832p] (Ashes Trilogy)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-177-8 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-444-1 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
Weighing in at more than 800 pages, this conclusion to the Ashes trilogy is pretty 
monstrous itself. Readers who have followed the fates of Alex, Tom, and Ellie 
since the first book will know to expect gore, but this finale amps up the horrific 
violence and bodily degradation, with plot almost falling by the wayside in favor 
of yet another desperate chase followed by a fight scene that ends in dismember-
ments, puncture wounds (Bick seems especially fond of the sound eyeballs make 
when they rupture), and pain explosions. Chapters usually end with a character 
in a situation that seems impossible to survive, only to turn up several chapters 
later with a time lapse that finds them ready to fight again. The cast of characters 
has, by this point, become extremely complex, and readers will need to call up 
memories from the prior two books to refresh the web of relationships that form 
the complicated motivations of the characters. Tom, Ellie, and Alex have each 
found a pocket of survivors who are trying to stay one step ahead of death and 
mayhem, but the sinister designs of Finn, such as his development of chemically 
induced telepathy that controls an army of people-eaters, have far-reaching effects 
that Tom unwittingly plays a part in. Old hostilities collide as the groups converge 
in Rule, where Tom, Ellie, and Alex finally find one another only to play out one 
final climax that almost claims Alex as she unleashes the monster within. This is a 
500 • the Bulletin
somewhat disappointing conclusion, especially since the motives of the characters, 
as well as the mechanics of their telepathic connections, remain muddy; given the 
extreme changes wrought by the electromagnetic pulse, they seem almost petty in 
their continuance of unresolved grudges in the face of so much devastation and 
loss. Nonetheless, the world-building remains intriguing, the adventure level is 
stratospheric, and even when engagement lags, the sheer desire for completion may 
drive readers of the first two books through the volume.  KC 
Bonwill, ann I Am Not a Copycat!; illus. by Simon Rickerty. Atheneum, 
2013 26p
ISBN 978-1-4424-8053-7 $15.99   
R 5-8 yrs
Imitation is the sincerest form of flattery—and annoyance, as Hugo the hippo 
finds when Bella the bird starts emulating everything he does. Hugo stands on his 
head, Bella stands on hers, Hugo does a split, and Bella does likewise, just as Hugo 
is proclaiming that his accomplishments make him unique (“I want to be unique 
too. Just like you,” chirps Bella). When Hugo heads to the pool to practice (and 
show off) his water ballet, Bella flutters along in his wake, which galls Hugo until 
spectators applaud him and Bella for their wonderful synchronized swimming. 
The text neatly and amusingly touches on several child-relevant issues—attention-
seeking, imitation, and siblingesque shadowing—in lively and humorous dialogue-
only prose. Hugo and Bella are sympathetic as well as realistic, and kids will relate 
to both viewpoints. The digital art combines graphic regularity in its solid black 
lines with thick, furry edges suggesting collage; the palette often involves vivid 
complementary-color contrasts and some luscious fruity tones, but the strong focus 
on huge gray Hugo and little blue Bella keeps compositions balanced. Those who 
loved this pairing in I Don’t Want to Be a Pea will be delighted at their return, and 
those new to Hugo and Bella will be pleased to encounter them.  DS
Brown, teri Born of Illusion. Balzer + Bray, 2013 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-218754-3 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-218756-7 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Given the spiritualist fervor that has taken hold of 1920s New York City, it’s the 
perfect place for Anna Van Housen, an amateur magician, and her mother, a re-
nowned (but fake) medium, to finally make a decent living in one place, leaving 
their nomadic existence with freak shows and circuses behind them. Unfortunately, 
the recent efforts of Harry Houdini (who may or may not be Anna’s father) to 
systematically unmask charlatans will likely destroy their show. Anna is also strug-
gling to continue to hide her true gifts—her ability to speak with the dead and 
to see the future—from her manipulative mother, a task that gets more difficult 
as her powers become increasingly unwieldy, especially in the presence of Cole, 
their handsome new neighbor. Another dapper fella turns up to complete the love 
triangle, but Anna’s visions of a violent and waterlogged death for herself and her 
mother have her understandably distracted. This lacks the scope of Bray’s similarly 
themed The Diviners (BCCB 10/12), and the historical setting is more sketched 
than detailed, mostly focusing on the various hairstyles and fashions of the times. 
Anna’s a likable narrator, though, and she’s at her best when she’s either sparring 
with her mother or creating the latest illusion for her magician’s act. Both the 
July/August 2013 • 501
romance and the mystery behind Anna’s visions are fairly predictable, so it’s really 
Anna’s hostile but fascinating relationship with her mother that makes her story 
compelling. Anna’s encounters with the benevolent Houdini provide a nice coun-
terpoint to the toxicity of her dealings with her mother and also serve to showcase 
Anna’s talents as an illusionist, giving readers a few tips on sleight of hand as an 
additional takeaway.  KQG 
castellucci, cecil Odd Duck; illus. by Sara Varon. First Second, 2013 96p
ISBN 978-1-59643-557-5 $15.99   
R Gr. 2-4
Sure, duck Theodora, the star of this short graphic novel, might swim with a teacup 
on her head, eat her duck pellets with mango salsa, and spend winter at home rather 
than fly south, but she’s not “odd,” like Chad, the new duck next door who dyes 
his feathers, makes avant-garde yard art, and scratches himself with a fork. When 
Theodora realizes that she and Chad have much in common—they both skipped 
migration and they both love to stargaze—the two begin to bond and quickly 
become best buds. However, when they overhear another duck snickering at one 
of them as an “odd duck,” each is convinced the comment was intended for the 
other one, and their ensuing argument breaks up the duck duo. Theodora eventu-
ally realizes how much she misses Chad, and she goes to apologize but finds him 
headed to her house with the same intent, and the eccentric pair happily renews 
their friendship. The friendship plot isn’t original, but the tone is appealingly droll 
and accessibly casual, and the visuals are filled with entertaining minutiae. Varon’s 
art captures the quirkiness of the ducks without overplaying it, as the muted hues 
and tidily outlined figures, carefully posed against simple backdrops, keep the ac-
tion neat and clean, while speech bubbles, comic diagrammatic arrows, and verbal 
commentary add further interest. Theodora, in her perpetual periwinkle attire 
(including hat with attached bee), and olive-spectacled Chad with his striped scarf 
and wacky feathered topknot are an amiable pair. Middle-graders on the verge 
of dog-eat-dog adolescence may find the idea of oddball pals sticking together a 
bolstering and affirmative one; the quirky tale may also serve as a nice prompt for 
a class discussion of friendship or idiosyncratic behavior.  JH
chapMan, clay Mcleod Homeroom Headhunters. Disney Hyperion, 
2013 [304p]
ISBN 978-1-4231-5221-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-8
Having set his last school on fire in a lab accident, Spencer vows to keep his head 
down when he starts at Greenfield Middle School. This proves harder than it seems, 
though, because Greenfield Middle holds a secret: in the drop ceiling tiles and the 
boiler room lives a group of former misfit students who have all disappeared within 
the past three years—and they’re thinking Spencer might be a great addition to their 
tribe. Led by the eldest and best-read of the bunch, a teen known as Peashooter, the 
Tribe has developed an elaborate system of survival, seeking over-the-top revenge 
for the ways they were bullied. Spencer is initially attracted to the band’s dog-eat-
dog approach to life—and especially to a girl named Sully—but begins to question 
their bloodthirsty tactics and their blind devotion to Peashooter’s words. He soon 
finds, though, that once you’re in this clan, you’re in it for good. Literary allusions 
abound through this school-survival tale, both implicitly (Lord of the Flies is a clear 
502 • the Bulletin
inspiration) and explicitly (Peashooter’s strict code is based in part on “The Most 
Dangerous Game” and The Call of the Wild); however, they’re inclined to be didactic 
and aimed over the heads of the audience rather than helpful. The ending is unsat-
isfying—Spencer takes the fall for a chaos-inducing scheme that Peashooter and his 
gang cook up— and leaves too much unreconciled. That said, there’s certainly no 
end to the action here, and Spencer’s sleuthing into the histories of the Tribe adds 
enough depth to keep the book from falling into merely a series of ever-escalating, 
slightly gory quests for revenge. Details of the Tribe’s outlandish way of life (frozen 
corndog nunchuks and ballpoint pen blowguns are weapons of choice) and Spencer’s 
smart sarcasm keep a thread of dark humor running throughout, and there’s even 
a touch of romance. Lying somewhere between the grim humor of Legrand’s The 
Cavendish Home for Boys and Girls (BCCB 11/12) and the frenetic school stories 
of Gordon Korman, this novel may appeal to kids wanting something less ethereal 
than the former and darker than the latter.  TA 
cheng, andrea The Year of the Baby; illus. by Patrice Barton. Houghton, 
2013 [176p]
ISBN 978-0-547-91067-3 $15.99   
R Gr. 3-5
Anna, the Chinese-American star of The Year of the Book (BCCB 7/12), is a fifth-
grader now, and she’s dealing with new challenges, primarily a new baby sister 
(adopted from China) who is failing to thrive, and a difficult science-fair project. 
Baby Kaylee’s stubborn refusal of food wears on the family, especially Anna’s con-
cerned mom, until Anna’s best friend Camille comes up with an idea: distract Kaylee 
with songs while feeding her in hopes that she will eat more. Camille’s plan seems 
to work, so much so that Anna comes up with a way to base her science project 
on the plan. Not only does Anna end up acing her science assignment, but Kaylee 
also begins to gain some weight and the family’s worries ease. Anna continues to 
be a perceptive and intelligent narrator, with an observational eye that is genuine, 
sensitive, and astute. The family and friendship dynamics have realistic depth as 
well: Anna, Camille, and their friend Laura each struggle with extricating themselves 
graciously from a science project group headed by some bossier girls, for example, 
and Kaylee’s adoptive status has Anna asking big questions about identity and 
family. Barton’s numerous pen and ink illustrations (digitally colored) are appeal-
ingly gentle and softly shaded, although Anna and her friends appear somewhat 
younger than fifth-graders. The science-fair and adoption angles make this useful 
in a number of settings, and readers who have followed Anna since fourth grade 
will hope Cheng goes on to keep tabs on her as she reaches sixth grade. A glossary/
pronunciation guide of Chinese terms is included.  JH 
davies, Matt Ben Rides On; written and illus. by Matt Davies. Porter/Roaring 
Brook, 2013 32p
ISBN 978-1-59643-794-4 $16.99   
Ad 5-8 yrs
Ben loves riding to school on his shiny new bicycle, but unfortunately, Adrian 
Underbite, the third-grade bully, takes a liking to Ben’s bike and rides away on it. 
Walking home after school, Ben discovers Adrian has crashed the bike and is now 
dangling from a tree branch on a cliff. Ben initially leaves Adrian hanging but then 
decides to lend him a hand—only to have Adrian dash away with the beat-up bike, 
much to Ben’s frustration. In the morning, however, the bike has been returned, 
July/August 2013 • 503
perfectly repaired. This is a fairly standard and messagey story, and its telling is 
somewhat sketchy and episodic. The language is generally sprightly, however, with 
flowery vocabulary that is sometimes droll (“How extraordinarily terrible,” Ben 
thinks with a huge grin when spying Adrian over the edge of the cliff). Ben, with 
his flyaway brown hair and green-and-white striped hoodie, has a constant, though 
rarely mentioned, companion in a particularly haggard-looking crow, while Adrian 
is a stock schoolyard bully with a barrel chest, jutting forehead, and distinctive 
underbite. Davies is a Pulitzer Prize–winning political cartoonist, and his style 
carries over to the book: scratchy and unruly pen drawings with scribbled details 
and shading that often burst from their outlines are filled in with pale watercolors. 
Despite the book’s flaws, kids may enjoy Ben’s derring-do and find satisfaction in 
the bully-rehabilitation narrative.  TA 
dicaMillo, kate Bink & Gollie: Best Friends Forever; written by Kate DiCamillo 
and Alison McGhee; illus. by Tony Fucile. Candlewick, 2013 84p
ISBN 978-0-7636-3497-1 $15.99   
R Gr. 2-4
Welcome back, Bink and Gollie (from Bink and Gollie, BCCB 10/10, and Bink and 
Gollie: Two for One, BCCB 7/12)! In this new set of adventures, the friends negoti-
ate Gollie’s belief that she is of royal blood, Bink’s employment of a contraption to 
make herself taller, and their shared determination to get their picture featured in 
a Guinness-like tome called Flicker’s Arcana of the Extraordinary. The plots don’t 
have quite the snap of the previous outings, but the text (almost all dialogue) retains 
its comic joy as it veers between Gollie’s formal drawl (“I have long suspected that 
royal blood flowed in my veins”) and Bink’s ebullience (“Good news almost always 
means pancakes!”). As usual, Fucile packs his lines with springy energy, with even 
languid Gollie watchably angular and loose-limbed, while fizzbomb-y Bink, with her 
explosive hair, practically leaps off the pages. The page design has the lively paneled 
momentum and theatrical views of a graphic novel, and it effectively partners with 
the few swift sentences per spread to move novice readers easily through the book. 
Readers should meet Bink and Gollie first in their earlier titles, but those already 
fast friends with the girls won’t want to miss their new adventures.  DS
doktorski, Jennifer salvato How My Summer Went Up in Flames. Simon 
Pulse, 2013 302p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5940-3 $17.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5939-7 $9.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5941-0 $9.99   
R Gr. 7-10
“First I lost my heart. Then I lost my mind.” So says Rosalita, who went from be-
ing Joey’s adored girlfriend to his spurned ex with dizzying suddenness, and who 
responded by torching all Joey’s gifts to her in his driveway—which apparently set 
his car on fire. Even slapped with a restraining order, Rosie is finding it hard to 
resist drivebys and Facebook stalking, so her parents decide she’s accompanying her 
neighbor and longtime platonic friend, Matty, Matty’s friend Logan, and Logan’s 
brother Spencer on a cross-country trip to deliver Logan to school in Arizona. 
Rosie initially fights the trip and resists its wonders, but she eventually finds herself 
enjoying the weird stops, the interesting people, and the guys she’s traveling with—
especially good-looking Logan. Rosie’s lack of self-restraint is both authentic and 
in keeping with her character, and while the book clearly understands she’s gone 
504 • the Bulletin
overboard, it’s also obvious that Joey is using the situation for his own benefit. The 
Great American Road Trip plot is solidly handled, with the changing dynamics 
as the ride goes on believably portrayed. It’s unsurprising that Rosie starts falling 
for Logan, but that development is part of a larger and more original story about 
Rosie’s horizons being broadened generally, as the half-Ecuadorian, half-Italian girl 
who’s never been out of New Jersey or thought about life beyond marrying Joey 
begins to delight in seeing the world. While Rosie isn’t as desperately cautionary 
as some recent stalker girls (Graham’s Stalker Girl, BCCB 9/10 and Hoffman’s It’s 
Not You, It’s Me, BCCB 9/09), she’s a raw and spirited companion on a road trip, 
and readers will want to ride along.  DS
fisher, catherine Obsidian Mirror. Dial, 2013 378p
ISBN 978-0-8037-3969-7 $17.99   
R* Gr. 7- 12
Jake Wilde has finally managed to get himself expelled from his Swiss boarding 
school, and he is headed home to seek revenge for his father’s death on his reclusive 
guardian, Oberon Venn. Meanwhile, seventeen-year-old, feeling from mysterious 
pursuers, is hired to assist Venn with his secret experiment at his isolated mansion 
in the Devonshire countryside. Jake’s unexpected arrival throws Venn’s work into 
chaos, and Sarah, who isn’t the girl everyone thinks she is, finds her plans thwarted 
as well. Instead, the young people get dragged into Venn’s obsession with an obsid-
ian mirror that warps space and time and threatens the very future of humanity. 
After Jake and Venn tumble through the mirror and vanish, a whole new adventure 
begins as Sarah attempts to get them back and Jake scours the streets of Victorian 
London, looking for a way home. With an impressive cast of intriguing characters 
and interwoven plotlines, this marvelous novel blends science fiction, fantasy, time 
travel, mystery, and adventure. Secrets, lies, and hidden intentions create narrative 
layers for the reader to unfold and make each character an enigma. So many elements 
could result in a confusing, frustrating mess, but Fisher deftly crafts each scene to 
create a gradually emerging puzzle with lots of tiny pieces. Quotes from pseudo-
historical texts, folktales, poems, and biographies at the beginning of each chapter 
provide clues for readers looking to piece together the puzzle more quickly, but 
plenty is left unexplained as a set-up for planned sequels. Significantly different in 
focus and tone from Fisher’s Incarceron (BCCB 2/10), this novel will still please fans 
who appreciate her style and pacing, while those who loved the genre-mixing fun 
of Colfer’s Artemis Fowl (BCCB 7/01) will find this to be right up their alley.  AM
fleMing, david The Saturday Boy. Viking, 2013 [240p]
ISBN 978-0-670-78551-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 5-7
Narrator Derek Lamb, a fifth-grader whose father has been flying an Apache 
helicopter in Afghanistan for half of Derek’s life, is having a particularly rough 
year. Besides his usual classroom problems, which derive from his glib mouth and 
wandering mind, he finds himself suddenly tormented by Budgie, who used to be 
his best friend. Mom tells Derek to be the bigger man in the face of the bullying, 
but in the heat of the moment, Derek forgets that advice and plays right into the 
hands of Budgie and their drama-thirsty classmates. There’s a ray of hope for social 
redemption when Derek is cast in the school play, but before he makes his stage 
debut, his mother lapses into a profound depression, his aunt Josie arrives to take 
July/August 2013 • 505
household control, and Derek only finds out through a television newscast that 
his father has been shot down, gone missing, and finally confirmed dead. Never a 
paragon of self-control, Derek focuses his rage into retaliation against Budgie. Their 
backstage confrontation, which spills out into a seriocomic onstage smackdown, 
actually helps bring the extent of the bullying problem to adult attention, to clear 
the air between the two ex-buddies, and to redirect Derek’s energy to pulling him-
self and Mom through this dark time. Debut novelist Fleming ably limns Derek’s 
manic, Joey Pigza–styled interior life with a light hand, capturing the humorous 
aspects of the boy’s self-perpetuating problems. Thoughtful readers, though, will 
recognize that Derek’s been dealt a tough hand to play, and they may even pause 
to wonder whether any of their own goofy classmates are privately burdened.  EB 
fogliano, Julie If You Want to See a Whale; illus. by Erin E. Stead. Porter/
Roaring Brook, 2013 32p
ISBN 978-1-59643-731-9 $16.99   
R 5-8 yrs
The author/illustrator team from And Then It’s Spring (BCCB 3/12) returns with 
another lyrical take on the natural world. Here’s what you’ll need if you want to 
see a whale: “A window and an ocean,” of course, but also “time for waiting and 
time for looking and time for wondering ‘is that a whale?’” You also should resist 
distractions (“You shouldn’t watch the clouds . . . because if you start to look straight 
up you might just miss a whale”), but eventually, your patience may be rewarded. 
Whale-watching is a much rarer experience than watching seeds sprout, and this 
is airier than the last title, with a greater emphasis on fantasy and imagination. 
Fogliano’s text is prettily musing and even lulling, and there’s an effective balance 
between smooth, tranquil pacing and well-conveyed specifics (“Be careful not 
to notice something inching, small and green across the leaf”). Stead populates 
the scenes with a cast similar to (though not the same as) that in the prior title: 
a red-headed boy, a droopy-eared hound, and an inquisitive shorebird, as well as 
the eventual very fine whale, all created with her eyelash-fine pencil linework; the 
open sea and coastline are particularly suited to her dappled woodblock colors in 
gentle shades and occasional delicate-lined sailing ship. Her work is often a study 
in composition, with horizon lines recurring like a chorus, counterpointed with 
subtle or strong diagonals and swoops. The whale itself is legitimately humongous 
yet also clearly wise and benign, politely presenting itself to the presumably well-
pleased whale searchers. This could be an inducement to some imaginary eyes-shut 
travel, or just an offbeat choice for sending kids off to dreamland.  DS 
foster, thoMas c. How to Read Literature Like a Professor: For Kids. Harper/
HarperCollins, 2013 168p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-220086-0 $16.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-06-220085-3 $6.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-220087-7 $5.99   
Ad Gr. 5-7
Foster’s books for general readers on how to read like a professor are often assigned 
for AP and entry-level college English classes, but this book is aimed at the younger 
reader who is new to such discussions. Employing a format that answers imagined 
questions from students (“So vampirism isn’t about vampires?” and “Okay, great. Who 
cares?”), he explores literary issues and tropes such as setting, intertextuality, illness, 
disability, and eating to reveal the meaning behind the choices authors make when 
506 • the Bulletin
they use these elements in their writing. The collection of elements examined is 
fairly random, and since the book’s pedagogy is teacher-driven rather than genuinely 
inquiry-based, it confirms the stereotype it tacitly seeks to correct: that professors 
can read things to death as often as they breathe new life. Indeed, the concluding 
short story by Katherine Mansfield is treated to an exhaustive interpretation that 
is picky, pedantic, and closed off from the reader’s participation, instead focusing 
on Foster’s own prescriptive reading. However, the book is jargon-free and thus 
potentially very useful for students just starting to understand the role of symbol-
ism and interpretation, and the initial chapters will aid students by drawing their 
attention to elements they might have overlooked and providing suggestions rather 
than definitive statements regarding their meaning. The book is also worthwhile 
reading for teachers working with struggling readers to help them isolate relatable 
slices of meaning, as well as for avid young teen readers looking to up their paper-
writing game, and it’s a promising choice for an afterschool book club as it could 
take discussions of novels to the next level.  KC 
gaiMan, neil, comp.  Unnatural Creatures; comp. by Neil Gaiman and Maria 
Dahvana Headley; illus. by Briony Morrow-Cribbs. Harper/HarperCollins, 
2013 462p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-223629-6 $17.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-06-223630-2 $9.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-223631-9 $9.99   
R  Gr. 7-10
In this collection of sixteen classic and contemporary fantasy short stories (most 
previously published), Neil Gaiman establishes a literary Museum of Un-Natural 
History, where impossible creatures that exist only in shadow and imagination are 
on display. The initial draw here is Gaiman himself as collector and curator, a role 
he appears to relish as he provides brief personal anecdotes as introductions for 
each story and the collection as a whole. Those willing to trust Gaiman to be their 
mythical docent will be rewarded with a broad spectrum of clever, well-written 
stories of the monstrous fantastic by a range of notable authors from the late nine-
teenth century to today. In tone, the included pieces run the gamut from chilling 
(Gahan Wilson’s story of a carnivorous spot on the linen) to heartbreaking (Frank 
Stockton’s tale of friendship and kindness between a griffin and a churchman, 
“The Griffin and the Minor Canon”) to absurd and amusing (E. Nesbit’s account 
of a little girl who gets on the wrong bus and faces down a villainous, laughing 
cockatoucan). Hallmarks of various story-types are also evident, including fairy 
tales (Peter Beagle’s story of Death attending an eighteenth-century ball), folk tales 
(Nnedi Okrafor’s story of a snake-charming young girl in contemporary Nigeria), 
and science fiction (Larry Niven’s story of a time-traveler who mistakes a unicorn 
for a horse). Design enhances the atmosphere, with dramatic titling and illustrative 
headpieces the entries. The collection works well as an introduction to historically 
significant fantasy writers (though it’s peculiar that the table of contents fails to 
identify the authors of the stories, so the interested will need to delve to find out 
who’s featured) for those familiar with only contemporary fare; it will also find 
readers in Gaiman fans who have graduated from The Graveyard Book (BCCB 
10/08) and are looking for more challenging material.  AM
July/August 2013 • 507
giBson, ginger foglesong Tiptoe Joe; illus. by Laura Rankin. Greenwillow, 
2013 32p
ISBN 978-0-06-177203-0 $17.99   
R 3-5 yrs
Gathering his animal pals one by one, Joe the bear implores them to follow him 
on tiptoe, beginning with Donkey: “Donkey, Donkey, come with me. I know 
something you should see.” The donkey (“CLOP, CLOP”) is soon joined by Rab-
bit, Turkey, Moose, Owl, and Beaver, each bringing their own unique rhythmic 
accompaniment to a semi-cumulative chorus. After quite a hike on tippy-toe, Joe 
leads the animals to his cave, where his wife is holding two baby cubs: “Tiptoe, 
tiptoe, softly creep. Here’s my secret, fast asleep.” The catchy repeated phrases 
and varying sounds of animal locomotion make this a satisfying readaloud for 
young children, with plenty of opportunity for audience participation. Primary 
graders may also find this within reach as a readalone title, thanks to the fairly 
simple vocabulary and the support offered by the text’s use of pattern and repeti-
tion and by its large, clear font. The watercolor art is warm and cheery, with soft 
hues and sweet animal faces echoing the tender tone of the text. Joe is a winsome 
fellow with his rosy cheeks, shaggy brown fur, and snazzy red Chuck Taylors, and 
the other animals, each with their own item of clothing or stylish accessory, are 
equally attractive. At the story’s end, readers may want to revisit a diagram on the 
book’s opening pages which outlines Joe’s route, including color-coded dots (the 
colors match each animal’s accessory or clothing) for each of his stops. Add this to 
a bear- or baby animal-themed storytime or perhaps use it to remind boisterous 
youngsters how to tread quietly.  JH 
goldBlatt, Mark Twerp. Random House, 2013 [288p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-97143-3 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-97142-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-97144-0 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7
Julian and his friends have done something despicable (though it’s not initially clear 
what), and in addition to getting suspended, Julian has to write a journal chronicling 
his sixth-grade year. His audience is his English teacher, and he knows that he is 
supposed to write about the incident, but he’s got other stories to tell, stories that 
help put what happened into context as he explores his changing relationships with 
his friends. Though the story is set in 1969, Julian’s difficulties as his absolute fidelity 
to his boyhood guy gang is challenged by the bewildering and complicated world 
of girls and growing up will ring true for contemporary readers. Not everything is 
as credible (how likely would it be for an eleven-year-old to have read Cyrano de 
Bergerac?), but the book is well-structured, with metaphors that carry emotional 
resonance and episodes that showcase the fiercely felt loyalties and confusions as 
well as the laughable stupidity of preteen boys in groups. The writing is elegant in 
its simplicity and accessibility; Julian is witty without any distancing snarkiness, and 
he is genuinely sorry for the bullying incident that prompted the writing assign-
ment, proving that good kids can sometimes make grievous mistakes in judgment 
but neither the bullies nor the bullied have to get stuck in those positions.  KC 
508 • the Bulletin
graBenstein, chris Escape from Mr. Lemoncello’s Library. Random House, 
2013 [304p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-97089-4 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-87089-7 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97496-9 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 3-5 
World-renowned game developer Luigi L. Lemoncello returns to his humble Al-
exandriaville roots to reestablish a public library in his old hometown. The grand 
opening of the new building, renovated from a defunct bank, is initially limited to 
a group of twelve-year-old winners of an essay contest, and avid gamer Kyle Keeley 
is among them. The kids enjoy an overnight lock-in, which leaves them free to 
roam around the whimsical facility, but the real fun comes in the morning, when 
the kids take part in a massive game in which they must use library resources to 
find their way out of the building; the competition is stiff and alliances form and 
shift, as each player’s personality and motivation is key to the game. There’s more 
a reek than a whiff of Charlie and the Chocolate Factory and The Mysterious Benedict 
Society (BCCB 5/07) in the air, and the blatant hints that libraries are the key to 
a wonderful world of learning are rather heavy handed. This is pitched to an age 
group that’s prime for the pleasures of literary recognitions and library independence, 
however, and young readers may be less jaded about the tropes. Readers on the 
brink of readiness for Raskin’s The Westing Game (BCCB 9/78) or Balliett’s Chasing 
Vermeer (BCCB 6/04) may want to warm up their sleuthing skills with this title, or 
simply follow the referential clues to compile a solid reading list of kid classics.  EB
green, Jacqueline Truth or Dare. Poppy/Little, 2013 389p
ISBN 978-0-316-22036-1 $18.00   
R Gr. 7-10
Three beautiful teenaged girls have died over the years in the waters around Phan-
tom Rock during the seaside town’s Fall Festival, so the event was shut down in an 
attempt to evade what locals and tourists alike believe is a curse. This year, though, 
the mayor has decided it’s time to try the festival again, and the locals are abuzz 
with excitement. Tenley, who moved away years ago when her father died, is back 
and anxious to regain her status as most intriguing party girl; Caitlin is nearing a 
breakthrough with regard to repressed memories about a kidnapping she endured as 
a child; Sydney is anxious to see whether her relationship with Guinness has a real 
chance now that he will be spending the entire summer in town. At a pre-festival 
bash, Tenley decides to revive her childhood obsession with high-stakes truth or 
dare, but after the party, she, Caitlin, and Sydney start getting anonymous dares 
that are more sinister than playful, threatening to reveal truths from their pasts that 
would destroy them. This is soap-opera drama, but it ably proves why soaps are so 
addictive; the characters are surprisingly deep and carefully drawn for maximum 
reader investment, while the mysteries twist and intertwine with one another, leading 
first one way and then another as the dares suggest insider knowledge that points 
to multiple suspects with viable motives and access. The suspense winds tautly, and 
the story proceeds at a flawless pace as the narrative progresses to its inevitably tragic 
conclusion, leaving just the right amount of loose ends to set up the next book in 
this proposed trilogy and making this a perfect choice for vacation reading.  KC 
July/August 2013 • 509
grey, Mini Toys in Space; written and illus. by Mini Grey. Knopf, 2013 32p
ISBN 978-0-307-97812-7 $16.99   
R 5-8 yrs
After a day of play, a group of seven toys are left forgotten on the lawn, and 
they’re exposed to the dark of night for the very first time. Trying to stave off 
their nervousness, the WonderDoll embarks on a story that, in classic bedtime-
story fashion, features her listeners as the heroes and develops according to their 
questions and comments. In her story, an alien spaceship lands amid the toys; its 
occupant, the Hoctopize, has been collecting lost toys in hope of finding its own 
beloved and missing Cuddles. The toys convince the Hoctopize to send the lost 
back home and then cheer it up with a party before returning home themselves, 
and by then it’s dawn and the WonderDoll’s listeners will soon be found again. 
The interplay between the toy audience and ongoing story is what really gives the 
tale its zing, as the patient WonderDoll keeps adjusting the story to address the 
listeners’ speech-ballooned concerns (“And what about the Cowboy?” asks the 
Cowboy. “What did the Cowboy do?” “The Cowboy organized all the games,” 
the WonderDoll smoothly continues). Additionally, there’s a little twist at the end 
in images that show the Hoctopize finding its Cuddles tucked under a bush near 
the fallen toys. Grey’s art is busy but successfully balanced, counterpointing the 
action within the WonderDoll’s story against bordered sidebars and subsections 
displaying the attentively listening toys. The Hoctopize is basically a glorified and 
endearing glove puppet, and kids who figure that out will be quick to create their 
own Hoctopize equivalents. Kids familiar with classic bedtime stories about their 
own alter egos will grasp the concept immediately and be quick to draft their own 
toys into similar dramas.  DS
guest, elissa haden Bella’s Rules; illus. by Abigail Halpin. Dial, 2013 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3393-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-6 yrs
Bella likes to push the envelope when it comes to family rules and after a particu-
larly raucous evening with a sitter (“I never sleep, Sammy. Ever”), Bella’s parents lay 
down the law and call Granny, who brings Bella a puppy. While Bella and Puppy 
become fast friends, Bella soon learns what it’s like to be on the receiving end of 
rule-breaking, as Puppy knocks her down and steals her cupcake or plays tug-of-war 
with her beloved Teddy. Bella works with Puppy on some new rules (including “No 
chewing on Teddy”) and Puppy becomes a more reliable pal—although puppy and 
girl still like to break the rules once in a while. The puppy tactic is, to put it mildly, 
a surprising child-rearing technique, but it apparently works for Bella’s family. 
Guest’s succinct narrative relies on pleasing patterns of threes (Bella’s and Puppy’s 
actions are presented in threes, and their behavior is often described as “Too wild. 
Too rude. Too risky”) to cozily stitch the story together. Halpin’s watercolor and 
colored pencil art balances full-page scenes with spot art sequences, the tones in 
both slightly muted springy pastels that give the book a sunny freshness. Bubbly 
brunette Bella is an appropriately lively figure, but it’s plump-tummied Puppy, 
with his floppy brown ears and cute brown eyespot, who will captivate kids (they’ll 
especially enjoy the illustration of Puppy breaking the “No peeing indoors” rule). 
Read this as a precursor to a family rules-creating session, or share it as part of a 
puppy-themed storytime.  JH
510 • the Bulletin
hale, Bruce Playing with Fire; illus. by Brandon Dorman. Disney Hyperion, 
2013 [320p] (School for S.P.I.E.S.)
ISBN 978-1-4231-6850-8 $15.99   
R Gr. 5-8
None of Max Segredo’s foster-home placements have worked out (hey, he wasn’t 
the one who started those fires), and now he has reached the Merry Sunshine 
Orphanage, the penultimate stop before juvie hall. Immediately, there are pretty 
clear tip-offs that this isn’t your average orphan school: a classmate attacks Max 
in his bed, and a faculty member slings a knife at him when he opens a random 
door. Merry Sunshine is, in fact, a training academy for juvenile spies, and the 
group is currently strategizing to stop a shipment of Nullthium-Ninety, a potent 
substance scheduled to be stolen and transported by LOTUS, an organization of 
really, really bad people. Unfortunately, Max is distracted by coded notes from an 
anonymous source suggesting that his father is still alive, and running his own side 
mission is more important to him than cooperating with a bunch of oddballs he 
barely knows. Max isn’t the lead character for nothing, however, and after stow-
ing away in barrels, evading infrared motion sensors, surviving a shark tank, and 
booby-trapping a villain’s kitchen with an overcooked midnight snack, Max the 
near traitor turns into Max the hero, who realizes his fellow orphans are now his 
excellent new family. This is a short step up in complexity from Hale’s Chet Gecko 
mysteries (The Chameleon Wore Chartreuse, BCCB 6/00), and fans of that series 
will appreciate that the author’s signature similes (“His scrawls resembled football 
plays drawn by an orangutan with arthritis”) transfer intact. A glorious spy career, 
a return visit from his problematic father, and several sequels are undoubtedly in 
Max Segredo’s future.  EB 
hapka, catherine Mermaids in the Backyard; illus. by Patricia Castelao. Random 
House, 2013 [112p] (Stepping Stones)
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-97120-4 $12.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97637-6 $4.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97638-3 $4.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-3
The sandy shores of Little Hermit’s Island are fine for vacationing, but nine-year-
old Lindy isn’t interested in staying there permanently, especially since it means 
leaving behind her friends in Chicago. Her parents are trying to fulfill their dream 
of being seaside business owners, however, so Lindy’s stuck in the beach town until 
further notice. Lindy’s attitude changes drastically from bored to awed when she 
finds a mermaid stranded on shore during a storm and, after saving the mermaid 
and her fishy friend, becomes fast pals with the aptly named Sealily and her sister 
Coral. Considering that Lindy is not only BFFs with the mythical creatures but 
eventually even gets to visit their underwater world thanks to a magical sponge, 
this is pretty much wish-fulfillment at its best for young fans of mermaids and 
fantasy. The short, accessible sentences and familiar vocabulary (with a few cleverly 
disguised repetition exercises) put this well within the reach of early readers but 
don’t detract from the story; details of the seaside setting bring the beach to life and 
Lindy is entirely relatable, both in her hesitation in a new place and her desire for 
friends. The monochromatic digital artwork is mostly flat, and it tends to obscure 
some important visual details, while several of the compositions are cluttered to the 
point of distraction. Still, the wide-eyed heroines have the familiar look of Disney’s 
various princesses, and Little Mermaid fans will feel right at home here.  KQG 
July/August 2013 • 511
hartzler, aaron Rapture Practice. Little, 2013 390p
ISBN 978-0-316-09465-8 $17.99   
R Gr. 7-10
In this heartfelt memoir, Hartzler writes of a childhood where he adores his pretty, 
loving mother and his handsome, intelligent father. Their strict rules about no 
TV, no movies and no secular music make sense to him because he believes what 
they believe—that not only do they need to be ready at every moment for Christ’s 
return, but also that they have to be strong witnesses to the unsaved people around 
them. As he gets older, however, he drifts from their rules, listening to rock ’n’ roll, 
attending movies, drinking, and rounding second base with girls, and he begins to 
question his family’s beliefs. Through all his doubts, Aaron clings to the knowledge 
that his parents love him, and he loves them. In his head, he asks all of the ques-
tions that have long plagued people of faith, but he knows that these are things he 
can’t discuss with his parents, so he puts on a show for them as repentant, obliging 
son. This title will speak volumes to adolescents pursuing their own path through 
faith and doubt, though they will definitely come down on Aaron’s side, as his 
parents’ rules and responses will raise the same ire in readers as they do in Aaron. 
Aaron’s steadfast insistence that his parents discipline him because they love him 
will just barely be enough to exonerate his father’s strictness in readers’ eyes, and 
there are textual moments when a tiny edge of snark leaks through his defense of 
their lifestyle. While his lack of open exploration of his sexual orientation is a little 
more questionable, young Aaron’s inability to understand that he is gay is absolutely 
credible in the context he establishes. The very subtle acknowledgement that even 
questioning his sexuality would be a bridge too far for both him and his parents at 
that point in his life will need to be enough; perhaps a sequel will take his compel-
ling story forward through what must have been a truly difficult coming out.  KC
heiligMan, deBorah The Boy Who Loved Math: The Improbable Life of Paul 
Erdős; illus. by LeUyen Pham. Roaring Brook, 2013 [48p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-307-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-6
This picture-book biography introduces children to the twentieth-century Hun-
garian mathematician notable for his work with prime numbers and his peculiar 
social habits. The main body of the text focuses on the latter, tracing Erdős’ early 
obsession with numbers, his rebellion against home and school rules, his inability to 
perform such simple tasks as cutting his food or doing his laundry, and the (gener-
ally) good-natured accommodations made by friends and colleagues who hosted the 
savant on his continent-hopping lectures. While younger readers can revel in these 
oddities, older students will delve deeper into the dense back matter that provides 
extensive details about Erdős’ family history and his many mathematical interests. 
Hints at these are often cleverly imbedded within the lively, humorous artwork (a 
solution to his challenge to dissect a square into smaller squares of different sizes 
serves as the background to a dinner scene), and a diagram of mathematicians and 
their “Erdős Numbers,” assigned by whether they personally worked Erdős (#1) 
or worked with somebody else who worked with Erdős (#2), humorously conveys 
his influence. Pair this with Don Brown’s Odd Boy Out (BCCB 10/04) to compare 
genius eccentricities, or hand it to middle-grade lovers of math puzzles—opened 
to the notes.  EB
512 • the Bulletin
hutchinson, shaun david FML. Simon Pulse, 2013 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8318-7 $16.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3287-1 $9.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3288-8 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 10-12
As spring break of his senior year draws to a close, seventeen-year-old Simon 
Cross has a choice: finally take his shot at winning the heart of his suddenly single 
long-time crush or force himself to move on and give another girl a chance. The 
different choices lead to very different consequences, though, and over the course 
of two alternating plotlines, this novel explores where Simon’s diverging paths as a 
result of his decision might take him. Both lead in due course to the biggest party 
of the year, where Simon’s night quickly devolves into a series of misadventures. 
Suddenly he’s confronting a crazy ex-girlfriend, saving an unsuspecting freshman 
from a drink worse than death, playing a few unwise rounds of beer pong, and 
meeting a strange new girl and her ugly blind dog. As Simon navigates his two 
possible realities with the help of his two best friends, he learns that all roads might 
just lead to the same girl after all, just not the one he thought. Replete with every 
teen-movie plot convention imaginable, this split-narrative storyline nevertheless 
provides charming, rowdy, over-the-top fun. The hijinks are just crazy enough to be 
entertaining without becoming fully unrealistic, and readers will enjoy watching the 
same events unfold in different ways as Simon’s decision ripples out to those around 
him. Readers with lovelorn memories will relate to Simon’s romantic singularity 
of focus, while those less enamored will find kindred spirits in his sympathetic but 
exasperated friends who are fabulous in their own right. Familiar yet somehow fresh, 
this novel is the perfect fit for anyone looking for a little vicarious experience with 
drunken, lightly debauched chaos by the pool this summer.  AM
Jahn-clough, lisa Nothing but Blue. Houghton, 2013 [224p]
ISBN 978-0-618-95961-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Disoriented and haunted by vague memories of an explosion and snatches of con-
versation that claim everyone is dead, a girl finds herself alone on an unfamiliar road 
with no clear memory of who she is or how she got there. Hunger and exhaustion 
eventually drive her to seek shelter near a dumpster behind a restaurant, where 
a preternaturally intelligent dog adopts her as she struggles to sort through her 
memories and find her way home. She starts with distant recollections, thinking 
about a boy she was dating until her parents told her she had to move away from 
her seaside home; she decides that she needs to get back to that home if she wants 
to find herself. She meets several people who try to help her, but she’s not ready to 
let them until she is overwhelmed by a news story of house that exploded, killing 
two people and leaving a teenage girl missing. After she passes out with shock, she 
is cared for by a boy named Snake, who takes her to a community of tinkers who 
ride the rails and live mostly off the grid. The story alternates between an account 
of her life on the road and her memories of the days before the move; in both ac-
counts, she seems affectively stilted and flatly underdeveloped as a character. Her 
relationship with the boy from her past is clearly one-sided, but she’s too emotion-
ally clueless to see it, and while this lends psychological consistency to her inability 
to deal with her present tragedy, it makes her a difficult character to really care 
July/August 2013 • 513
about. The premise is compelling, though, and both the road story and the dog 
story evince their usual charm. Those looking for a more in-depth treatment of 
memory loss and the aftermath of trauma would do better with Elizabeth Scott’s 
Miracle (BCCB 06/12), but the plotting and the exploration of a teen’s suddenly 
being stripped of everything she owns and everyone she loves will elicit interest.  KC
JaMes, siMon Nurse Clementine; written and illus. by Simon James. Candle-
wick, 2013 34p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6382-7 $15.99   
R 4-6 yrs
Young Clementine is thrilled with the nurse’s kit she receives for her birthday, so 
pleased that she starts work immediately when her father bangs his toe on a door, 
bandaging his leg from toe to knee and admonishing him to keep the bandage on 
for a week. Her mom gets similar treatment for a headache, and Clementine eagerly 
waits for her risk-taking little brother, Tommy, to require her medical skills. Tommy 
resists Clementine’s caretaking overtures until an adventure leaves him stuck in a 
tree, whereupon quick-thinking Clementine stands on a bucket to catch him as he 
slips, and a grateful Tommy allows her to bandage the resultant scrape on his arm. 
A lack of bandage-cutting scissors causes Clementine to apply “an extra-special 
superhero bandage,” leaving Tommy practically mummified but happy. James’ 
pithy storytelling is carefully crafted, and the clever placement of the descriptions of 
Tommy’s exploits ensures that they are, literally, page-turners: “‘Look out, Tommy!’ 
shouted Clementine. ‘You’re going to hit—’ (page turn) ‘The door!’” The line and 
watercolor art’s soft tones of tan, blue, peach, and green are highlighted by casual 
dark outlines and lots of clean, white space. The figures are attractively loose and 
casual in their drafting and frequently comical as well, particularly the dog lying 
prone with all fours in the air while Clementine bandages one paw, Tommy in 
his daredevil actions, and the family cat running for cover. Share this as part of a 
doctor/nurse storytime (perhaps paired with Root’s Gumbrella, BCCB 12/02), or 
give as a gift along with a nurse’s kit to a wannabe caretaker.  JH
Jay, stacey Of Beast and Beauty. Delacorte, 2013 400p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-99100-4 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74320-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-307-98142-4 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-12
Secluded in her palace rooms and blind from early childhood, Isra knows little of 
her domed city, Yuan, only that its survival depends on a blood sacrifice from the 
queen that will require her to give her life when the city rulers see fit. Outside the 
dome, the tribes of mutant beasts that roam the desert grow restless, and Gem, a 
Monstrous warrior, infiltrates the city on a recon mission only to be captured by 
Isra’s guards. During the course of his imprisonment, Gem strikes up a friendship 
with Isra that eventually blossoms into love—but the powers that be in Yuan, 
especially the dark magic that has the city and its rulers in its hold, aren’t about to 
let the sacrifice go unmet. The bones of the classic “Beauty and the Beast” story 
are all here, imaginatively fleshed out with tropes from science fiction, fantasy, and 
even political drama. Despite his mutated features, it’s not Gem who is the Beast 
but Isra, and Jay plays a delicate game, portraying Isra’s ignorance and selfishness 
first as character flaws and then as vulnerabilities, transforming her from an unlik-
514 • the Bulletin
able brat to a sympathetic heroine. Narration alternates mostly between Isra and 
Gem (with a few jarring interruptions from Bo, Isra’s suitor), revealing the various 
secrets they are both keeping from each other and reminding readers that there is 
far more at stake here than a simple romance, a fact that becomes clear when Isra’s 
reluctance to act at a certain point indirectly leads to the death of Gem’s infant son. 
That they are able to find a happy ending even after that lends a weight of sincerity 
to their undeniable chemistry and will please readers who like to believe that fairy 
tales can come true, even under dire circumstances.  KQG 
Jenkins, eMily Water in the Park; illus. by Stephanie Graegin. Schwartz & 
Wade, 2013 34p
ISBN 978-0-375-87002-6 $19.99
ISBN 978-0-375-97002-3 $16.99   
R* 5-8 yrs
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 497, for review.
Joyner, andrew Boris Gets a Lizard; written and illus. by Andrew Joyner. Branch-
es/Scholastic, 2013 [80p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-48446-6 $15.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-545-48447-3 $4.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-48783-2 $4.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 1-2
   Boris on the Move; written and illus. by Andrew Joyner. Branches/Scho-
lastic, 2013 [80p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-48442-8 $15.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-545-48443-5 $4.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-48782-5 $4.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 1-2
In Boris on the Move, young warthog Boris dreams of adventure, and thus is thrilled 
when his family uproots their previously stationary RV-like bus from boring Hogg 
Bay and head to parts unknown. He’s sadly disappointed, however, when the bus 
only goes as far as Greater Hogg Bay Conservation Park and a grumpy Boris has to 
partake in a family hike. While he doesn’t encounter the lion he’d feared, he does 
meet a nice stray cat, who is quickly adopted and dubbed “Lion.” In Boris Gets a 
Lizard, Boris invites the local zoo to send their Komodo dragon on vacation to 
Boris’ home and excitedly tells all his friends about his impending visitor. When 
it turns out the Komodo dragon doesn’t make home visits, he quickly substitutes 
a skink for his classmates’ viewing, claiming it’s a baby Komodo dragon, but it 
escapes, sending everyone into a panic. The plot in on the Move is lackluster and 
rambling, but Boris is a likable guy, and the development of Gets a Lizard is much 
stronger and more satisfying. While the page count is longer than that of many easy 
readers, the numerous full-color illustrations fill much of that space; the brief text 
will be decodable to many primary-graders despite some challenging vocabulary. 
Joyner’s illustrations are crisply and tidily composed, and the gray shaggy-haired 
but anthropomorphized warthogs have a springy energy. Boris’ desires for adventure 
and for exotic pets will resonate with most kids; readers who want a “thicker” book 
but who aren’t yet quite up to the challenge of a lengthier chapter book will find 
these Australian imports fill the bill nicely.  JH
July/August 2013 • 515
kade, stacey The Rules. Hyperion, 2013 410p (Project Paper Doll)
ISBN 978-1-4231-5328-3 $17.99   
R Gr. 7-10
Ariane was a valuable government experiment—a successful human/alien hybrid 
with mental powers that Dr. Jacobs, her creator, was determined to weaponize. The 
problem was her human side, which won’t allow her to kill or harm a living creature 
without a good reason. That barrier, and her inability to control it, made Dr. Jacobs 
resort to torturing her, and a guard at the facility took pity on her, helped her escape, 
and took her into his life as a de facto—and, as far as the public is concerned, legal 
and custodial—daughter. Now, ten years later, Ariane has come to the attention of 
Dr. Jacobs’ granddaughter, Rachel, who is as adept at social torture as her grandfa-
ther is at the physical side. Rachel tries to set Ariane up for public humiliation by 
getting her friend Zack to date and dump her, but Zack can’t help finding Ariane 
intriguing, and Ariane can’t help setting off little explosions whenever Rachel gets 
her angry. A surprising twist ends with Ariane questioning everything her “father” 
has taught her and realigning her ideas about enemies and allies and about what 
she is and is not willing to give up to stay safe. Both Ariane’s strangeness and her 
powers will fulfill every introverted reader’s most cherished fantasies about social 
revenge, while the relationship between her and Zack (each appealingly vulnerable 
for different reasons) blooms with an irresistible doomed sweetness. Readers who 
like their sci-fi spiced with intrigue, romance, and high-school drama will find this 
solid action adventure quite satisfying.  KC 
kaplan, Bruce eric Cousin Irv from Mars; written and illus. by Bruce Eric 
Kaplan. Simon, 2013 34p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4923-7 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4924-4 $12.99   
Ad 5-8 yrs
Teddy didn’t even know he had a cousin from Mars, but now Irv has come to stay 
with the family. Teddy’s grownup Martian cousin may be an exotic green guy with 
antennae, but he’s also a passive-aggressive kvetch with a ton of annoying habits. 
When Cousin Irv has to escort Teddy to school, however, Irv shows off his fancy 
electromagnetic ray and vaporizes everything in the classroom (including the teacher 
who tries to spoil the fun), causing all of the other students to clamor for Teddy 
and Irv’s attention. Cousin Irv and Teddy become the best of friends (“Cousin Irv 
let Teddy eat pizza in the bath because he didn’t know you didn’t do that”), until 
Irv has to go home and Teddy must learn to live without his new friend—but not 
for long, since it looks like Teddy’s family will be moving to Mars. The lengthy text 
drags a little, and the story’s fairly predictable, but Kaplan has a wry voice, adding 
one-liner commentary to the tale (“Other people’s coats make you feel so much 
safer than your own”). Kaplan, better known as a cartoonist for the New Yorker, 
showcases his distinctive style—his ink drawings with chunky feet, bulging eyes, and 
indistinct objects are here enhanced with messy watercolor that splashes beyond the 
lines in only a handful of pastel hues. Irv, with his leaf-green tint and big, expressive 
mouth, especially steals the show. However, the large amount of white space and 
lack of illustrative detail make the text do most of the heavy lifting for this story, 
a task it’s not quite up to. The illustrations are certainly kid-friendly, though and 
this could easily pair with titles such as Pam Smallcomb’s Earth to Clunk (BCCB 
7/11 and Arthur Yorinks’ Company’s Coming and Company’s Going (BCCB 1/02) 
for an out-of-this-world storytime.  TA
516 • the Bulletin
kittscher, kristen The Wig in the Window. Harper/HarperCollins, 
2013 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-211050-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-211052-7 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-8
Young and Yang are secret agents—or, to put it more accurately, twelve-year-old 
Sophie Young and Grace Yang are wannabe spies who maraud their neighborhood 
in search of wrongdoing. Grace is particularly convinced that Dr. Agford, the sac-
charine new counselor at Sophie’s school, is hiding something, and though the girls 
tip their hand by publicly accusing her of bloody murder (she was chopping beets), 
their investigation has actually revealed a few suspicious things. As they play cat 
and mouse with Dr. Agford, for whom Sophie must do yard work as a penance, 
they realize that she may be connected with a terrible crime in Texas, and they 
discover that the FBI itself is interested—or have they been taken in by the story 
of a vengeful woman with a cast-off FBI badge? Secondary characters (Sophie’s 
brazen and tech-savvy new friend Trista) and Sophie’s obsessive and endearingly 
pretentious love of everything Chinese add some flair to this action-adventure genre 
tale of sleuthy kids stumbling on a real crime, and it’s entertaining to watch the 
girls gallop around the suburban streets hissing code words into walkie-talkies. The 
plot is exceptionally ludicrous, though, with nonsensical twists and turns, and a 
horrific background tragedy clashes with the escapist flavor; additionally, the girls’ 
frequent tendency toward triumphant meanness undercuts their likability. This 
therefore isn’t Benedict Society–level capering, but it’s always enjoyable to watch 
lively, capable preteens outsmart the adults.  DS 
konigsBerg, Bill Openly Straight. Levine/Scholastic, 2013 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-50989-3 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-50990-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 9-12
Rafe has been out and proud since eighth grade, and it was fine: his school friends 
were cool, his parents threw him a party, and his mother has become the president 
of Boulder’s PFLAG chapter. All this has become rather tiresome, though, and Rafe 
longs for a life without labels, where people can see him as Rafe before they see 
him as the gay kid. He hatches a plan to attend a posh boys’ boarding school out 
east where he can start fresh. Though initially perplexed, his parents and his best 
friend ultimately support him as he explores life in boyworld where his orientation 
is not a barrier to his being fully accepted by the jocks as well as the geeks. He 
develops an intensely intimate relationship with a sensitive jock named Ben that 
leads to his falling in love, however, and he realizes that true intimacy has to start 
and end with honesty. This unusual treatment of the subject of labels, integrity, 
and the role of sexuality in identity forthrightly explores life after homophobia; no 
one in Rafe’s life is troubled by his sexuality, but that doesn’t completely answer 
the question of when and under what circumstances his orientation is relevant. 
A creative writing teacher pushes Rafe to explore what he’s doing and why, and 
his comments on Rafe’s writing, while not preachy, offer some clear lessons, as do 
Rafe’s honest and painful reflections after he and Ben take their relationship as far 
as it can go in the context of Rafe’s omission. An important but subtle undercur-
rent here is that Rafe is an introvert in a family and culture that expect him to be 
July/August 2013 • 517
more open about everything in his life; this aspect of his character is not explicitly 
named as such, but astute readers will come to see it as fundamental to all of the 
things he does explore, such as his tendency to carefully manage his self-exposure 
in his writing. Readers and discussion groups looking for new and deeper ways to 
think about what it means to live honestly in a world that sorts by labels will find 
this fresh and evocative.  KC
kredensor, diane Ollie & Moon: Aloha!; written and illus by Diane Kredensor 
and with photos. Random House, 2013 [48p] (Step into Reading)
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-97131-0 $12.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97950-6 $3.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 1-2
In this opening title in a new graphic-novel-styled reader series, Ollie and Moon are 
cool cats (they’re literally cats) and best buds, despite their differences. When they 
decide to play a game of “Dare,” they both rise to the silly challenges (Ollie has to 
swap clothes with his pet snail, while Moon has to wear a dozen leis around her 
neck). When Ollie dares Moon to go bodysurfing, however, timid Moon employs 
every delaying tactic she can, until Ollie realizes his friend’s dilemma and decides to 
take the plunge with her rather than win the game. That’s a fairly predictable and 
programmatic conclusion, and the story rambles somewhat on its way there. The 
Hawaiian setting adds some fresh character, though, and the playful and sometimes 
absurd touches make for enjoyable comedy. The illustrations are an interesting blend: 
the zippily cartooned figures are posed against and amid photographic backgrounds 
depicting the majestic Hawaiian landscape and seascape. The compositions are 
somewhat unfocused, however, with the speech bubbles and text boxes weighing 
overheavy on the eye, while finer details, like the wonderfully absurd Stanley the 
Snail, get overshadowed. The Tiny Toon books (like French’s Barry’s Best Buddy, 
BCCB 5/13) do a more polished job of introducing kids to reading via graphic 
novels, but it’s good to see a classic reading series expand to a more graphic format, 
with the extra bonus of an island getaway.  DS
lagercrantz, rose My Happy Life; tr. from the Swedish by Julia Marshall; illus. 
by Eva Eriksson. Gecko, 2013 136p
ISBN 978-1-877579-35-6 $16.95   
R 5-7 yrs
In this short novel, young Dani recounts some of the happy (and unhappy) times 
of her life, beginning with her starting school, where she makes a firm friend in 
Ella. When Ella moves away midyear, Dani is devastated, particularly as this loss 
reminds Dani of her grief over her deceased mother, and a banged-up knee at 
school finally triggers a flood of cathartic tears: “Dani kept on crying. She cried 
because it hurt. She cried because Ella had moved.” The purchase of some long 
longed-for hamsters helps, as does making some more friends in her class; finally, 
a letter from Ella and the promise of a trip to visit her genuinely cheer her up. The 
concise and observant writing makes this a pleasure to read aloud, and its concerns 
will be readily recognizable by young primary-graders; older kids and advanced 
readers may be able to tackle this thoughtful Swedish import on their own. The 
breadth of Dani’s experiences (the remembered death of a family member, friend-
ship issues, starting school, pet ownership) allow the story to resonate with a broad 
spectrum of children, and the insightful text is both moving and humorous: “When 
518 • the Bulletin
[hamsters are] scared, they squeak. And poop. Actually, they poop the whole time, 
whether they’re scared or not.” Eriksson’s plentiful black and white line drawings 
are simple and warmhearted, and Dani and her friends and family are a cozy and 
realistic group. This would be a satisfying class or family readaloud or a fine first 
chapter book for a strong primary grade reader.  JH
llywelyn, Morgan Cave of Secrets. O’Brien, 2013 262p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-84717-207-5 $12.95   
R Gr. 5-8
In the summer of 1639, thirteen-year-old Tom Flynn flees his father’s grand house 
in a fit of rebellion to explore the nearby caves on Roaringwater Bay, despite the 
rumors that these particular caves are home to Ireland’s nastiest pirates. Instead, 
Tom finds Donal and his family, who are, yes, smugglers, but who also warmly 
welcome Tom into their family—and their illegal operations—almost immediately. 
Meanwhile, the political chaos of Dublin in the mid-seventeenth century begins 
to encroach on Tom’s family’s estate, as his father finds himself embroiled in the 
beginnings of the English Civil War and a Protestant lord threatens to take over 
the Catholic Flynn family’s land—unless Tom and his new comrades can stop him. 
History buffs keen on details will find this novel by celebrated Irish author Llywelyn 
a treasure trove of information, both in the descriptions of everyday life along the 
Irish coast and in the portrayal of the Irish/English conflict, the pre-war English 
parliamentary upheaval, and Tom’s father’s desperate situation. Contextual clues 
allow even young readers who have no concept of Ireland’s history to understand 
the basics of the unruly political landscape, while the domestic drama of Tom’s ef-
forts to gain his father’s approval is nicely balanced against the historical backdrop. 
A few scenes of Tom’s derring-do while helping his new friends smuggle gold add 
a bit of a thrill, but this is not so much a story of swashbuckling adventure on the 
high seas as it is a satisfying tale of a boy struggling to find a proper family.  KQG 
Mack, Jeff The Things I Can Do; written and illus. by Jeff Mack. Porter/Roar-
ing Brook, 2013 [32p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-675-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 3-6 yrs
In this paean to toddler independence, our young narrator brags about his accom-
plishments while the mixed media illustrations (emulating preschool-level DIY) 
suggest there’s still room here for improvement. “I can make my own lunch,” as 
long as fast food and ice cream counts as lunch, and “I can get my own drink,” 
although the milk carton floats in a puddle on the floor. There’s the reliably hilari-
ous underwear on the head, a toothpaste-foam beard to “shave,” a glue-intensive 
attempt at toy repair, and the incessant talk, talk, talk of storytelling. There are even 
a couple of pictorial references to a mom who not only tolerates, but perhaps even 
enjoys, the mayhem. Scrawly, upper-case lettering and a limited vocabulary may 
lure beginning readers on this tour of their recent past, and the deployment of kid 
centered items in the artwork—crayons, masking tape, construction paper, stickers, 
magazine clippings, and, yes, spilled glue—should inspire similar art projects and 
happily sanction the similarly sloppy results.  EB
July/August 2013 • 519
Madison, Bennett September Girls. HarperTeen, 2013 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-125563-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-220129-4 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 9-12
Spending the summer seaside in a town full of gorgeous blonde girls who just want 
to party and hook up would be the ideal summer vacation for some seventeen-
year-old boys. Sam, however, finds the girls vaguely creepy in their similarity; more 
significantly, he’s still thrown by his mother’s leaving five months ago and gunshy 
about women in general. Sam’s older brother Jeff has no such reservations, though 
and he’s soon entangled with Kristle despite her constant attempts to sleep with 
Sam. It’s from DeeDee, Kristle’s maybe-sister and sometimes roommate, that Sam 
finally learns what the readers already know from the interpersed chapters narrated 
by the collective voice of the Girls: the blonde beauties are actually creatures of 
the sea, exiled by their vengeful father as punishment for their mother’s supposed 
betrayal, and their only way to return home is to have sex with a virgin—like 
Sam. The book totally embraces the absurdity of its premise, with a few brilliantly 
deployed allusions to Disney’s The Little Mermaid for good measure. Ultimately, 
though, the sardonic humor is really just an amusing invitation to an exquisitely 
haunting work of magical realism, contemplating love, identity, and what “being 
a man” really means—if it means anything. Brittle, vulnerable, and often preoccu-
pied with masturbation, Sam is no one’s idea of a fairy-tale hero, and his narration 
moves from outrageously crude to strikingly beautiful as his summer of freedom 
turns into a profound moment of self-discovery. The chorus-like voices of the 
Girls that interweave with his story are similar in their postured aloofness as well 
as their obvious and perhaps self-inflicted pain. In addition to being a tale about 
summer flings and first romances, this is also a thoughtful look at that other “first 
love,” that of family, and how the flaws, the idiosyncrasies, and the absences of our 
fathers, mothers, and siblings serve to shape us in ways that are as unknowable as 
the sea itself.  KQG
Mccarthy, Meghan Daredevil: The Daring Life of Betty Skelton; written and 
illus. by Meghan McCarthy. Wiseman/Simon, 2013 40p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2262-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8188-6 $12.99   
Ad Gr. 2-4
It’s safe to guess that few kids in the 1930s were immune to the fascination of air-
planes, few, especially girls, had the means to do anything about it. Betty Skelton, 
though, had the good fortune to live near a Florida naval base and have parents 
who supported her enthusiasm, so she was in the air before she hit her teens. Shut 
out of commercial piloting, she took to stunt flying and record breaking, setting 
a high-altitude flying record, along with several ground-racing and boat-jumping 
records. Recruited to train for the Mercury manned space flights, she readily 
matched male recruits but was infamously cut from the program (“NASA wasn’t 
ready to send a woman to space. Not just yet”). Compressing Skelton’s many in-
terests and careers into so slim a space leaves little room for development, and her 
story streaks by in a litany of achievements, save the surprisingly blasé treatment 
of her NASA disappointment. The transitions are a bit bumpy as well, with Betty 
going from admiring planes at age eight to flying them illegally at age twelve, with 
520 • the Bulletin
no mention of how she actually learned to fly. Nonetheless, McCarthy is creating a 
successful cottage industry around nonfiction picture books with reliably interesting, 
slightly offbeat topics for middle-graders, and when a new title appears featuring 
her signature characters with eyes popped and grins askew kids can be sure there’s 
somebody here worth meeting. Fun facts and quotes, timeline and bibliography 
are included to encourage readers toward fuller accounts.  EB 
Mcdonald, aBBy Jane Austen Goes to Hollywood. Candlewick, 2013 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-5508-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-6381-0 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Hallie and Grace have had precious little time to get used to their father’s new 
family when he dies, leaving them with a will that means that his new wife and 
son get everything and they get nothing, not even the house they grew up in. For-
tunately, their mother has a relative who is willing to take them in, and even more 
fortunately, he is a wealthy Hollywood made-for-TV movie producer, so they have 
access to a glamorous lifestyle that puts them in touch with the beautiful people. 
Flamboyantly emotional Hallie takes full advantage of this, immediately falling in 
love with a rising rock star only to be crushed when he goes on tour, leaving her 
behind. On the other hand, quiet, sensitive Grace is reluctant to give up on the 
possibility of a relationship with Theo, her stepbrother. She fumbled their only 
romantic moment, however, and now a new girl comes to town claiming that she 
and Theo are in love, and Grace, normally so steady and pragmatic, plunges into 
a depression. The updates of Austen are interesting (the girls’ mother is Domini-
can, their stepmother white, a difference that has definite emotional ripples), but 
adherence to the model of Sense and Sensibility limits McDonald’s usual talent for 
developing compellingly believable characters in richly plotted narratives; here both 
Grace and Hallie seem rather flat and caricatured, with their characterization more 
dependent on contrast than individual psychology. Their situations and reactions are 
similarly contrived, but the contrivances are the stuff of many a reader’s cherished 
fantasy as each girl manages to find a suitably rich, interesting, and devoted suitor 
to fulfill her romantic dreams. Readers looking for a little light romance with a 
celebrity vibe will enjoy this.  KC
Meyerhoff, Jenny The Barftastic Life of Louie Burger; illus. by Jason Week. Far-
rar, 2013 [176p]
ISBN 978-0-374-30518-5 $13.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-6
Fifth-grader Louie Burger would like nothing more than make audiences laugh 
like his comic idol, Lou Lafferman, but Louie’s severe stage fright limits his perfor-
mance venues to his empty closet. As his school’s annual talent show approaches, 
however, Louie considers doing his act for the first time in public, urged on by his 
supportive father and perhaps with the ultimate goal of finally showing up the class 
bully. Unfortunately, Louie’s hopes to partner up for his act with his best pal Nick 
are dashed when Nick seems to be too busy with Thermos, a sports-loving girl he 
met at summer camp. This is mostly a retread of already well-worn middle-grade 
territory, with Meyerhoff’s take on the wayward best friend and the manipulative 
bully lacking the candid authenticity of Hasak-Lowy’s 33 Minutes (BCCB 2/13). 
July/August 2013 • 521
Even the stand-up routine is well-worn; as the title suggests at, many of Louie’s jokes 
are barf-themed, and the humor is largely stale and predictable. Louie is a likable 
guy, though, and his observations about his family and school while offstage are 
pretty spot-on, particularly when it comes to the parallels between what he sees as 
his failure to become a comedian and his dad’s unsuccessful attempts to become an 
artist. His unicorn-obsessed little sister is also quite a hoot, so there’s a fair amount 
for readers to giggle at regardless of their taste. Week’s monochromatic art adds to 
the humor with its cast of appealingly goofy big-headed folks.  KQG
Mills, claudia Zero Tolerance. Ferguson/Farrar, 2013  [224p]
ISBN 978-0-374-33312-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7
If a seventh-grader were ever to be named “least likely to cause trouble,” it would 
be Sierra Shepard, good student, class leader, and responsible choir member. When 
she finds that she’s accidentally brought her mother’s lunch, which includes a fruit 
knife, she therefore does the right thing and turns the knife in—which, because of 
the school’s zero tolerance policy on weapons, means expulsion. Sierra’s sentenced 
to in-school suspension while she waits for an appeals hearing to deliver a verdict 
and while her enraged father (a high-powered lawyer) plans to demolish the prin-
cipal behind the ruling; as she gets to know the other kids in suspension and sorts 
through her shame and anger at her current situation, she begins to question the 
people and dynamics in her life that she had previously taken for granted. Mills’ 
skilled authorial hands turn what could be a preachy story of persecuted virtue 
into a nuanced examination of motivation and perspective. With her crush on a 
soft-spoken classmate and her distress at missing classes, Sierra is an appealing and 
credible straight and narrow kid, a characterization that gets interestingly compli-
cated when she begins to grow close to a detention regular, Luke, and when she 
decides to cause some actual trouble. The book is also perceptive about the way 
she gets somewhat lost amid the adult conflict, as her principal and her father see 
the battle on their own terms while Sierra goes through an emotional and ethical 
journey largely unnoticed by either of them. This will make provocative discussion 
fodder, and it will also encourage kids to think more deeply about their relationship 
with rules and approval.  DS 
Mitchell, saundra, ed. Defy the Dark. HarperTeen, 2013 [480p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-212354-1 $17.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-06-212353-4 $9.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-212355-8 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Seventeen YA authors contribute to this collection of short stories structured around 
a single moment: a kiss in the dark from a stranger. There’s therefore a fair amount 
of romance here, but it’s the dark element that really holds the whole thing together 
with a slightly sinister thread running through every story, whether it be a realistic 
piece about a girl contemplating suicide (“The Moth and the Spider”) or a bizarre 
fantasy featuring a boy with the ability to dreamwalk (“There’s Nowhere Else”). 
The two most powerful pieces bookend the collection: Courtney Summers’ open-
ing exploration of an obsessive love that leads to a watery death is a rather ironic 
counterpart to Tess Gratton’s closing story, an optimistic revision of Ophelia’s part 
522 • the Bulletin
in Hamlet that has O’s love for Hal leading her to freedom from the social norms 
of gender and class. A few of the other stories draw on urban legends as their in-
spiration, and while they are salaciously enjoyable, they are also mostly predictable. 
Dia Reeves, Beth Revis, and Carrie Ryan build on worlds better established in their 
full-length novels, but their portrayals of a hellish otherworld, a claustrophobic 
spaceship, and the beginnings of a zombie invasion offer enough action to spur 
readers on. Despite the unevenness of the quality here, the collection’s range of 
genres, from science fiction to vampire stories to realism, gives it broad appeal 
and offers a complement to the dystopian-laden collections popular of late.  KQG 
Mulder, Michelle Pedal It!: How Bicycles Are Changing the World. Orca, 
2013 [48p] (Orca Footprints) illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-1-4598-0219-3 $19.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
Cycling enthusiast Mulder shares her passion for human powered transport and 
offers kids a glimpse at the ways bicycles are used in other countries, showcasing 
feats of innovation and balance that leave our best efforts at recreation and con-
servation in their dust. Opening chapters cover the well-traveled routes of bicycle 
development and social history, but Mulder really gains traction when she hits the 
international cycling scene. Here we see varying systems of bicycle sharing and cheap 
rental; sustainable grown and cost effective bamboo bicycle frames; food businesses 
hauled on bikes; preschooler group bicycle transport in the Netherlands; a bicycle 
ambulance service in Namibia. Uses for stationary bikes are also covered, ranging 
from pedal-powered electricity, to battery charging, blood centrifuging, and knife 
sharpening. Color photographs are often a bit too small or inconveniently cropped 
to convey all the details a reader might want to see, but pictures of bicyclists toting 
a man-sized stack of firewood, a wide load of sugar cane, or a pile of luggage (not to 
mention the massive bread tray balanced on the rider’s head) will leave even casual 
browsers with plenty of new information to ponder. A list of resources in various 
media and an index are included.  EB
Myracle, lauren The Life of Ty: Penguin Problems; illus. by Jed Henry. Dut-
ton, 2013 [128p]
ISBN 978-0-525-42264-8 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-3
Feeling displaced by his new baby sister and confused by a temperamental pal, 
seven-year-old Ty Perry decides to act out when a class field trip to the aquarium 
goes from bad to worse. Slipping behind closed doors at the aquarium, he finds 
some adorable (and unattended) penguins, and when a penguin chick approaches 
him, Ty decides to take it home, sneaking it out in his backpack. At home, his older 
sisters Winnie and Sandra discover the penguin chick, but they agree to sneak it 
back to the aquarium and keep his secret; meanwhile Ty reluctantly spends some 
time with new baby Maggie and begins to realize that she might not be so bad after 
all. Fans of Myracle’s Winnie Years series (Eleven, BCCB 3/04, etc.) will recognize 
Ty and his family and will be pleased to spend some more time with these engag-
ing characters. Ty is a sympathetic kid, and his trials with a new sibling make him 
particularly relatable to big brothers and sisters. Myracle writes perceptively and 
authentically from her young narrator’s perspective: “‘Hug?’ I say in a smallish 
July/August 2013 • 523
way. Mom doesn’t want to. She doesn’t want to hug her own son. I can see it on her 
face.” The penguin-stealing plot is a bit farfetched but it will satisfy the fantasies of 
animal-coveting kids, while the family and friendship dynamics are entirely believ-
able. Henry’s occasional monochromatic illustrations are congenial and sometimes 
comical, as in the picture of the penguin peeing on the bath mat. This should suit 
fans of Megan McDonald’s Stink series (Stink: The Incredible Shrinking Kid, BCCB 
7/05, etc.); it would also make an enjoyable family or classroom readaloud.  JH
nagpal, saraswati, ad. Draupadi: The Fire-Born Princess; illus. by Manu. Camp-
fire, 2013 116p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-93-80741-09-3 $12.99   
Ad Gr. 6-9
This graphic-novel adaption of the Indian epic poem Mahabharata focuses the major 
events of the myth—a dispute between two gods-blessed sets of cousins that spans 
generations and eventually culminates in war—through the lens of Draupadi, a 
princess created from fire for the express purpose of marrying one of the cousins. 
Far from a subservient wife, however, Draupadi is more like the flames that bore 
her; her fiery spirit is key to her survival as her husband bets her in a dice game, she 
endures a thirteen-year-long exile, and she watches her loved ones go to war. The 
family tree provided at the story’s opening is immensely helpful in determining the 
roles of various characters, particularly as the epic poem introduces many players 
at once. The color-saturated panels, the muscled men, and Draupadi’s lithe form 
are all classic comic-book hallmarks, but the vibrant art is often overwhelmed by 
text boxes relaying repetitive information. Indeed, the whole endeavor is somewhat 
overstuffed, as any one episode from Draupadi’s life could have been a graphic 
novel by itself. This is still a lively introduction to a myth that’s an alternative to 
more common Western fare, though, and the political intrigue, romance, adven-
ture, and certainly the lively heroine may appeal to a broad audience; it could be 
effectively paired with Arni’s Sita’s Ramayana (BCCB 12/11) for a treatment of 
Indian myths.  KQG 
nees, susan  Class Pets; written and illus. by Susan Nees.  Branches/Scholastic, 
2013 [80p] (Missy’s Super Duper Royal Deluxe)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-49610-0 $15.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-545-43852-0 $4.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-54010-0 $4.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 1-2
   Picture Day; written and illus. by Susan Nees. Branches/Scholastic, 
2013 [80p] (Missy’s Super Duper Royal Deluxe)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-49609-4 $15.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-545-43851-3 $4.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-54009-4 $4.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-3
Like Jane O’Connor’s Fancy Nancy, primary-grader Melissa Abigail Rose (known 
as Missy) likes to do things with panache. In Picture Day, the budding fashionista 
has grandiose plans for her outfit for school picture day, only to be thwarted by 
her more conservative mother. Disgruntled Missy uses thoughtful classmate Oscar 
as a sounding board for her complaints, but it looks like this will be Missy’s most 
524 • the Bulletin
boring class photo ever—or will it? In Class Pets, Missy excitedly prepares to host 
class pets Eenie-Meenie, Miney, and Mo, but mean girl Tiffany beats her to the 
punch. Once again it looks like Missy’s plans will fail—until Tiffany learns that 
Eenie-Meenie, Miney, and Moe are rats (she thought they were gerbils or hamsters), 
and Missy rescues them from the shrieking, rodent-tossing chaos that ensues. The 
plots in both titles are a bit thin, but the short, snappy text and plentiful illustrations 
fill a niche by providing a supportive textual and visual transition between more 
vocabulary-restricted easy readers and longer, more challenging chapter books. The 
frequently humorous text (“Tiffany was big. Tiffany was loud. Tiffany had hairy 
arms”) and the lively pace will keep novice readers engaged as well. The extensive 
full-color illustrations and lively composition suggest a missing link between early 
readers and graphic novels, and Nees’ cartoonish, button-nosed figures are attrac-
tive and dynamic, especially the sassy, sproingy-haired Missy. Hand this to fans 
of Fancy Nancy (or even Olivia the pig) who are ready for the next step up the 
reading ladder.  JH
o’ryan, ray Hello, Nebulon!; illus. by Colin Jack. Little Simon, 2013 115p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5387-6 $15.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5386-9 $4.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5388-3 $4.99   
R Gr. 2-4
When his family decides to move from Earth to planet Nebulon in 2120, eight-year-
old Zack Nelson isn’t happy; he has to leave his Earthling friends behind, and he 
is terrified that the kids on Nebulon will be insect-pizza-eating monsters. His new 
house, however, is engagingly equipped with Ira, an Indoor Robotic Assistant who’s 
there to cater to his every whim. Add to that a classmate named Drake, a native 
Nebulite, who shares Zack’s favorite class (planetology) and is happy to also share 
his high-tech space bike, and Zack might be able to adjust to life on Nebulon just 
fine. A standard tale of the culture shock of moving somewhere new, this begin-
ning reader tones down the trauma with smile-inducing customs Zack must learn 
(“‘Yippee wah-wah’ is what Nebulite kids say when they are happy,” Drake helpfuly 
explains), and there’s humor in Zack’s sharing some of his own culture (Drake has 
never seen a dog before). Brief chapters with gently oversized print are enticingly 
readable. Cartoony Jetsons-inspired black and white illustrations take up space on 
most pages (the illustrator also designs characters for DreamWorks Animation), with 
Zack’s overactive imagination and the standard fare of a futuristic world, complete 
with space cars and hologram projectors, taking center stage. Particularly endear-
ing are the Nebulites, humanoids with huge eyes, egg-shaped heads, three-piece 
suits, and expertly coiffed black hair. The start of a series of early readers, this is a 
solid choice to hand to kids yearning for a more extra-galactic adventure than The 
Magic Treehouse and its ilk.  TA
ottaviani, JiM Primates: The Fearless Science of Jane Goodall, Dian Fossey, and 
Biruté Galdikas; illus. by Maris Wicks. First Second/Roaring Brook, 2013 140p
ISBN 978-1-59643-865-1 $19.99   
R Gr. 6-10
Ottaviani, who celebrated the accomplishments of a host of women scientists in 
Two Fisted Science, offers another graphic-novel account accessible to a slightly 
younger audience, focused on three pioneers of primatology, all of whom launched 
July/August 2013 • 525
their field studies under the patronage of paleontologist Louis Leakey. Although 
their individual careers are not examined in depth here, each woman’s research area 
and contribution are clearly conveyed: Jane Goodall’s observation of Tanzanian 
chimpanzee tool use redefined the meaning of “human”; Dian Fossey’s work with 
mountain gorillas in Rwanda segued into a fierce battle for species conservation; 
Biruté Galdikas crossed a human/primate barrier to study the elusive orangutan in 
Borneo. Moreover, Ottaviani highlights how Leakey himself was vindicated time 
and again for putting his faith in un-credentialed women, rightly suspecting that 
their patience and perspicacity would gain them access to primate communities. 
Distinctive narration box colors and lettering styles identify and track each woman’s 
story. Wicks’ characterizations of both humans and primates sport an innocence 
that augments the title’s approachability and also underscores the freshness of the 
scientists’ approaches in developing close relationships with their subjects. Readers 
already familiar with this dynamic trio will certainly note, and possibly decry, the 
omission of significant drama—particularly the debated circumstances surround-
ing Fossey’s violent death. Nonetheless, this is an inviting introduction that will 
undoubtedly lure many readers into further investigation of this groundbreaking 
fieldwork.  EB 
panzieri, lucia The Kindhearted Crocodile; tr. from the Italian by Grace Mac-
carone; illus. by AntonGionata Ferrari. Holiday House, 2013 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8234-2767-3 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-7 yrs
Although the titular crocodile has “big, sharp teeth; powerful jaws; and a swift, 
strong body,” he’s actually a sweet and helpful individual, hoping for adoption as 
a pet. Nice families, though, don’t seem to want such toothy companions, so the 
clever croc figures out a way to insinuate his way into a family’s good graces: he 
sneaks in via a picture book, coming out at night to perform good deeds for the 
family. When the amazed family discovers the identity of their magical helper, the 
kids plead to keep him; the parents have reservations—until the croc reveals his 
excellent coffee-making skills. The measured and slightly formal, quietly amusing 
text is a pleasure to read aloud. The contrast between the crocodile’s ferocious 
exterior and his generous nature and altruistic actions—especially as depicted in 
Ferarri’s illustrations—will fascinate both the kids who love and those who loathe 
scary creatures. The mixed-media art (done in India ink, acrylics, crayons, water-
colors, and colored and butcher papers) perfectly captures the bold, sinuous form 
of the splotchy green, golden-eyed crocodile, who often looms over full spreads 
and is striking against the cream (with colored accents) or black backgrounds. 
The sketchy black outlines and casual lines of the human figures are slightly remi-
niscent of Quentin Blake’s art, and they’re amiable enough, but it’s the oversized 
croc—sliding around corners, doing dishes, fighting off nightmares—who is the 
star of the story. Update a crocodile storytime with this title, or use it to spark a 
class discussion about “pets you wish you could have.”  JH
526 • the Bulletin
parry, rosanne Written in Stone. Random House, 2013 [208p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96971-3 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86971-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98534-8 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
When the whaling canoe returns to the Makah village on the Olympic peninsula, 
Pearl’s father is not in it among her uncles and cousins. As the daughter of the 
revered harpooner, Pearl once enjoyed elevated status, but now that she’s ophaned, 
her restlessness and lack of carefully nurtured domestic skills have become problem-
atic for both her and her paternal grandparents who care for her. The village as a 
whole is facing its own set of challenges: the whales seem to have abandoned them, 
white authorities have curtailed or outlawed many of the sacred customs, such as 
the potlatch, and now they must move inland to live among salmon fishers. Pearl 
admires her cousin, Susi, who lives independently in town as postmaster, buying 
her own clothes, and enjoying such modern delights as the latest Charlie Chaplin 
films. Stepping into the white community has its costs, though, as Pearl learns when 
a man claiming to be a collector for the Art Institute in New York arrives to bargain 
for tribal masks and regalia, forcing the cash-strapped Makah people to evaluate 
how to balance financial and cultural survival in post-World War I America. Parry 
successfully melds Pearl’s quieter coming-of-age story with a faster-paced mystery 
plot concerning the true agenda of “art collector” Arthur Glen and the efforts of the 
Makah teens to thwart his predatory activities. Framing chapters focused on Pearl 
in her old age assure readers that the tribal knowledge and customs are endangered 
but not extinct, and closing notes address historical background and respect for 
maintaining the secrecy of certain stories and rituals.  EB 
phillips, gin The Hidden Summer. Dial, 2013 [208p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3836-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7
Home is a disturbing place for sixth-grader Nell, whose mercurial mother switches 
randomly between gentleness and fury; in fact, Nell’s mother is so intemperate that 
Nell’s best friend, Lydia, is now forbidden to spend time with Nell. To get around 
this prohibition, Nell concocts a plan: she and Lydia will fake-attend summer 
school and summer day camp but actually spend their days together at Lodema, 
the abandoned golf course/resort near their houses. Their summer there is a blissful, 
if sweltering, idyll as they find fascinating features, like playground sprinklers and 
old towers, to explore. They also find Gloria and her children, who’ve been living 
on the old course since they lost their home; as Nell bonds with kind, motherly 
Gloria, however, Lydia becomes jealous of their closeness and unhappy that the 
summer plans for the two friends together have turned into something else. Phillips’ 
prose is both fluid and plainspoken, evocative in a way easily accessible to preteen 
readers; her Alabama golf course is a blend of secret garden and Crusoe-esque 
island, simultaneously giving her protagonists both peace and adventure. While 
what happens outside of the golf course isn’t as compelling, the book sensitively 
prioritizes Nell’s new appreciation of her seemingly ferocious friend’s vulnerability 
over changes in the home Nell largely abandoned. Just about every kid wants a 
special place all his or her own, so readers will easily warm to Nell’s story and look 
hopefully around their own neighborhoods for an equivalent local paradise.  DS
July/August 2013 • 527
pileggi, leah Prisoner 88. Charlesbridge, 2013 142p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-58089-560-6 $16.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60734-534-3 $9.99   
R Gr. 5-8
Ten-year-old Jake Evans has just received a five-year sentence for manslaughter; ac-
cording to the justice system in the 1885 Idaho Territory, he’s old enough to know 
right from wrong, and killing a man, even in defense of his father, is certainly the 
latter. Jake’s first train and stagecoach rides en route to the penitentiary open his 
eyes to the world outside of his experience with a neglectful and indifferent father, 
and the full plates of food slipped under the woven metal bands of his door are 
more delicious and nourishing than anything he’s ever encountered. The warden 
and guards are at a bit of a loss on how to treat so young a convict, and as they bend 
rules and make up protocols to serve his unique circumstances, Jake’s life improves 
considerably in the aftermath of his conviction. Idaho Territorial Penitentiary is no 
bed of roses, though: there are hardened criminals who would like to take Jake down 
just for the grim pleasure of it, and Jake is drawn into the turmoil of an jailbreak 
attempt, in which one of his advocates is killed. Pileggi closes with a note on ten-
year-old James Oscar Baker, whose trial and incarceration inspired her to create a 
fictional backstory for the true episode. Recommend this high interest quick pick 
to fans of Western fiction, and especially to students who sullenly foot-drag their 
way through historical fiction assignments.  EB
pryce, trevor An Army of Frogs; by Trevor Pryce with Joel Naftali; illus. by 
Sanford Greene. Amulet/Abrams, 2013 272p
ISBN 978-1-4197-0172-6 $15.95   
R Gr. 5-7
The lush, fertile Amphibilands have been hidden in the peaceful Veil since the end 
of the last frog/scorpion war, when the turtle king cast a spell to protect the frog 
kingdom from any invading forces. Darel, a young wood frog, has grown up with 
the stories of that last war and chafes under the current peace, longing to prove 
himself a fighter and live up to his father’s legendary warrior status. He gets his 
chance when an army of scorpions, helped by the evil spider queen, Jarrah, manages 
to breach the outer layer of the Veil and kidnap Darel’s best pal. The two make it 
out of the scorpion camp alive, but war has come to Amphibilands and it’s up to 
Darel to inform the turtle king and alert the others. Though the violence of the 
battles puts it more in Redwall than Tale of Despereaux territory, this imaginative 
adventure has all the details that fans of animal fantasies will enjoy, including the 
pollywog toys sold at the frog market and the fact that misbehaving tadpoles are 
“ponded” rather than grounded. The plot follows a comfortably familiar trajectory, 
with Darel as the underestimated hero whose determination and heart save the day. 
Greene’s color full-page illustrations have the richly saturated look of Marvel comic 
books, and there’s a superhero feel to the various fighting poses Darel and his pals 
take. The wide-eyed, mottled skinned frogs and the demonic-like scorpions cut 
impressive figures, but the main villain, Jarrah, is out of place, her curvaceous hu-
man female characteristics making a greater impact than her spidery component. 
Nonetheless, followers of Erin Hunter’s Seekers and Warriors series will find this 
frog tale a fine addition to their animal adventures.  KQG 
528 • the Bulletin
quinn, kate karyus Another Little Piece. HarperTeen, 2013 [432p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-213595-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-213594-0 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
A few weeks before her seventeenth birthday, Annaliese Gordon lied to her beloved 
and overprotective parents, went to a party and lost her virginity to the school stud, 
and promptly vanished—although not before making a single bloodied appearance 
at the outskirts of the party. A little under a year later, a girl whose DNA is a match 
for Annaliese shows up several states away and is brought home by her parents to 
recover from what people can only assume is severe trauma. This Annaliese (who 
begins to call herself Anna) remembers nothing, not the trauma or her life before, 
and she is, in fact, quite certain that she is not Annaliese, a suspicion that grows as 
her memories of past lives, a deadly bargain, and a bloody ritual begin to surface. 
The first-person narration here is ingeniously deployed, disorienting readers from 
the get-go as they, along with Anna, try to determine if there is something super-
natural going on or if she’s suffered a true psychological break. The tension doesn’t 
lag, even when signs begin to point clearly towards the supernatural—with each 
memory Anna regains, the questions increase and the depth of both the evil web 
she find herself in and her own culpability in it is slowly revealed. Quinn manages 
an impressive task, keeping her heroine sympathetic despite the monstrous acts 
Anna has committed in the past; this is done largely through the relationship that 
develops between Anna and the mother of the former Annaliese, a portrayal that 
is stunning in its raw emotion as the two broken women try and fail to heal each 
other. The happy ending seems then a little out of place, but readers will nonetheless 
enjoy putting the pieces together of this taut, terrifying supernatural thriller.  KQG 
quirk, katie A Girl Called Problem. Eerdmans, 2013 243p illus. with 
photographs
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-8028-5404-9 $8.00   
R Gr. 6-9
In 1967 Tanzania, thirteen-year-old Shida, whose name means Problem, is thrilled 
at the prospect of relocating with her neighbors to one of President Nyerere’s ujamaa 
villages, where her Sukuma tribesmen can thrive by sharing resources. For Shida, 
a new town means a new start: where her mother can escape the shadow of her 
husband’s death and where Shida can attend school, strengthen her healing skills 
under a nurse’s tutelage, and finally shed her family’s curse. Many of her fellow 
villagers resist the move, however, especially her uncle Bujiko, who risks losing 
his position of wealth and privilege. Others worry that change will only bring 
misfortune as people turn their backs on tradition. Their fears seem to be realized 
when things start to go very wrong in their new village: cattle escape their pens, 
crops wither and die, and Shida’s young cousin falls ill. As the villagers threaten 
to abandon their new homes and neighbors, it is up to Shida to convince them 
that there is no curse and to uncover the true culprit. Full of references to Sukuma 
language, history, culture, and folklore, this tough but ultimately uplifting novel 
provides a fascinating glimpse at a tradition-bound and land-bound people being 
uprooted and forced to change. Despite its setting in a faraway place and time, 
Shida’s story remains relatable for contemporary young readers as she navigates 
her own needs and the expectations of the adults around her. Strong-willed and 
self-confident but respectful of her elders and tribe’s traditions, Shida is a heroine 
July/August 2013 • 529
whom readers will root for as she struggles to discover a way to help the people 
she loves. A map, an extensive glossary, and photographs are appended, as well as 
an author’s note that explores the history and implications of President Nyerere’s 
plans for ujamaa villages and girls’ education.  AM
raf, Mindy The Symptoms of My Insanity. Dial, 2013 [384p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3241-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Izzy is a busy, busy girl. Between preparing a portfolio that could win her a trip 
to Italy, helping her friend stage the school musical, helping her mother arrange a 
school dance/fundraiser, and finally getting the attention of the boy of her dreams, 
she barely has time for her favorite pastime, anxiously searching the internet for 
the worst possible interpretation of her every twitch and pain. When she finds out 
that her mom is not recovering well from her surgery for a rare form of stomach 
cancer, her chronic anxiety becomes acute, and she is forced to focus her energies 
in ways that preclude self-centered worrying in favor of what really matters. Along 
the way, she realizes that her focus on herself has prevented her from being a good 
friend, and good friends are what she needs when she, like other girls before her, 
is targeted by boys at her school. She and the other girls deal with the situation 
collectively, smartly, and effectively, which marks a refreshing change in the usual 
treatment of such scenarios. In fact, all of the women in this character-driven book 
are forces of nature in one way or another; throughout everything that happens, 
they support each other even when they find themselves in eye-rolling opposition. 
Izzy’s voice is pitch-perfect in its wry assessment of the standards against which she 
feels she is being judged. The situations in the book run the gamut from funny to 
cringe-worthy to genuinely moving, and through it all, Izzy emerges as the kind 
of girl everyone wants and deserves for a friend.  KC
raschka, chris Everyone Can Learn to Ride a Bicycle; written and illus. by Chris 
Raschka. Schwartz & Wade, 2013 32p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-97007-8 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-87007-1 $16.99   
Ad 5-7 yrs
In this poetic pep talk for wannabe bike-riders, Raschka pithily and supportively 
encapsulates the experience of learning to ride a bike. Viewers follow a young, 
dark-haired girl clad in a blue striped helmet as she picks out the bike, gets started 
(“Training wheels are helpful”), perseveres in the face of falls, and eventually suc-
ceeds under the supervision of the narrating adult. Unfortunately, the directives on 
the actual bike-riding process are rather glib, offering generalizations (particularly 
in the title) over concrete advice when it comes to getting the rubber to meet the 
road. Raschka’s bold ink and watercolor illustrations capture both the motion and 
emotion of the bike riding process, but some of the compositions are rather mud-
died by the over-abstraction of shape and form. The large, crisp black font, the 
abundance of creamy white space, and the matte finish of the pages keep the look 
polished and elegant, however, and the brevity and simplicity of the text makes it 
useful for younger-aged storytimes or classrooms.  JH
530 • the Bulletin
rhodes, Jewell parker Sugar. Little, 2013 [288p]
ISBN 978-0-316-04305-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
It’s 1870, and although many of Mr. Wills’ slaves left his River Road plantation in 
Louisiana five years ago, ten-year-old Sugar is stuck working the sugar cane. Parent-
less, Sugar is semi-independent in her own shack but still under the watchful eyes 
of the aging former slaves Mr. and Mrs. Beals, who try to keep her under some 
kind of control. It isn’t easy, since Sugar and young Billy Wills take off on rafting 
adventures whenever they can slip from the elders’ gaze, and Sugar is determined 
to make the acquaintance of the crew of Chinese workers Mr. Wills has recruited 
to replace his aging workforce. Mr. Wills falls out with his long-time overseer on 
the issue of abusing the new field hands, and the overseer, in turn, regards Wills’ 
change of heart as a sign of weakness and deterioration of the social order, ultimately 
venting his rage in a fiery act of revenge. Loss of their livelihood may prove to be 
a blessing, though, as Sugar finally convinces the Bealses to head north with her in 
search of their missing children and a possible better life. While the tale of Sugar’s 
unlikely friendships seem a little too neatly orchestrated, the view of a plantation 
in the throes of Reconstruction era reorganization is thought provoking. Middle-
graders who follow the adventures of American Girls ex-slave Addy Walker will 
be particularly interested in this tale of a child for whom the promise of freedom 
takes its own sweet time.  EB 
ross, elizaBeth Belle Epoque. Delacorte, 2013 [336p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-99005-2 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74146-0 $17.99
E-book ed. 978-0-375-98527-0 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Determined that there’s more in her future than merely becoming the butcher’s 
wife, Maude Pichon leaves her French village for the glitter of 1880s Paris. She 
quickly runs through the money she pilfered from her father, and when her job as 
a laundress proves intolerable, she stumbles into a position with the Durandeau 
Agency, which hires plain or ugly women to accompany well-to-do women on social 
engagements, augmenting the clients’ beauty with the proximity of the repoussoir’s 
homeliness. Maude is hired by Countess Dubern to make her daughter Isabelle 
shine in her debut season and, should the pair form an actual friendship, to pressure 
Isabelle into marrying the aristocrat of the mother’s choice. What the Countess 
cannot control, however, is her daughter’s determination to gain admission to the 
Sorbonne, and Maude’s gradual alliance with Isabelle against her mother’s schemes. 
Here Ross transforms an Émile Zola short story into a novel whose themes of 
external and internal beauty and the commoditization of friendship have much to 
offer a contemporary YA audience. There’s enough flirtation and match-making 
to tantalize romance fans, but ultimately it is the story of Isabelle and Maude, sans 
love interests, that carries the day. This is prime book-club fare, and most honest 
participants will have to confess to occasionally confirming their own allure with 
a sidelong glance at someone less favored. (But no names, please.)  EB
July/August 2013 • 531
sanchez, Jenny torres Death, Dickinson, and the Demented Life of Frenchie 
Garcia. RP Teens, 2013 [272p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-7624-4680-3 $9.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7624-4841-8 $9.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
The summer after her senior year, Frenchie Garcia’s morbid fascination with death 
sinks her into a deep depression. Her friends and family attribute her mood to her 
recent rejection from art school, but Frenchie confides the truth to Emily Dickinson, 
her imaginary pal who happens to share the name of Frenchie’s favorite poet. Four 
months ago, Frenchie ran into Andy Cooper, her unrequited crush, at a bar. They 
spent the night together, hitting Orlando hot spots and generally having a good 
time, and the next day, Andy killed himself. Obsessed with figuring out where she 
went wrong, Frenchie tries to recreate that night with Colin, the only friend she 
has left after pushing the rest all away. Chapters alternate between Frenchie’s cur-
rent night with Colin and her time with Andy four months ago, presenting two 
very different versions of Frenchie: a quirky, sarcastic, punky girl blissfully hanging 
out with her crush, and a desperate, grieving girl looking for answers that simply 
don’t exist. Sanchez is spot-on in her portrayal of depression and its repercussions: 
well-intentioned but confused family members surround both Andy and Frenchie, 
Andy can never quite delineate the source of his sadness until it overwhelms him, 
and Frenchie seems to be following a similar path as her negative thinking becomes 
increasingly illogical. The inclusion of several Dickinson poems and the various 
literary allusions throughout will please aspiring English majors, but in the end, 
this is a book about sadness, and it will find an audience with any teen who has 
ever felt hopeless; Frenchie’s choice to live her life, regardless of its difficulties, may 
give them a bit of their hope back.  KQG
sandler, Martin w. Imprisoned: The Betrayal of Japanese Americans During World 
War II. Walker, 2013 [176p] illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-8027-2277-5 $22.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-9
Racial prejudice, nativist resentment over immigrant business success, and wartime 
panic—each was a poisonous element in itself, and combined they led to Execu-
tive Order 9066, which mandated the relocation and virtual incarceration of some 
120,000 Japanese-American citizens and Japanese residents loyal to the United 
States. Rapid announcement and enforcement of the order impelled the internees 
to liquidate personal and business assets at stupefying financial loss and to pack 
their few remaining possessions in preparation for relocation to unknown destina-
tions. While many settled stoically into crude, makeshift accommodations in the 
relocation camps, others eager to prove their dedication to their adopted country 
would take up arms for the national defense. Although this shameful episode in 
American history receives considerable attention in both fiction and information 
books for youth, Sandler probes into aspects of the story less often covered in work 
that focuses narrowly on the camps themselves. Here readers learn about Quaker 
protests against Japanese internment, similar camps in Central and South America, 
Nisei WACs and interpreters working for the American Armed Forces, generational 
differences regarding the redress movement, and current Japanese-American col-
laborations with the Muslim community in support of a group too often viewed 
532 • the Bulletin
as suspect. Cogently organized and heavily illustrated with photographs, with an 
index, source notes, and lists for “further reading and surfing,” this will be a valu-
able title in the American History collection.  EB
scott, Jerry Zits: Chillax; illus. by Jim Borgman. HarperTeen, 2013 252p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-06-222851-2 $9.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-222852-9 $9.99   
R Gr. 7-10
In the first novel based on the long-running comic strip Zits, Scott and Borgman 
expand a storyline from 2001 that features Jeremy and Hector going to their first 
rock concert while their friend Tim’s mother is being treated for cancer. Plagued 
by guilt (well, sorta) over their plans to attend the concert on the same day that 
Tim is having bone marrow extracted for donation, they convince themselves and 
their parents (well, sorta) that they are going on Tim’s behalf. Of course things go 
crazily wrong and end up hilariously right, as a sequence of events leads to their 
being chased by security guards and ends with them scoring a most awesome present 
for Tim in the end. The novel treatment serves the comic well, enabling Jeremy’s 
voice to come through clearly in his narration. His teen-inflected observations offer 
laugh-out-loud humor, and they’ll elicit wry assent from readers who know exactly 
how deep the generation gap remains no matter how cool your parents are (or, in 
Jeremy’s case, aren’t). The cancer narrative provides dimensionality to the humor, 
showcasing the ambivalences of authentic teen response with a respectful yet light 
touch. Spot illustrations and full-page comics fill in gaps and bump up the hilarity; 
this is crazy fun all around, with just the right degree of seriousness to anchor the 
levity. Fans of Zits can rejoice in this new direction.  KC 
seles, Monica Game On; by Monica Seles with James LaRosa. Bloomsbury, 
2013 [272p] (The Academy)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-59990-976-9 $17.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-59990-901-1 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-10
When Maya finally lands a coveted scholarship at the elite sports training facility 
known simply as the Academy, she is suddenly plunged into a world where, in ad-
ditional to state-of-the-art training grounds and equipment, designer fashion stores 
line the streets of the complex and A-list celebrities come to watch and mingle with 
the future stars of Olympic and professional sports. Fortunately, her roommate, 
Cleo, is also on scholarship, having come from China to become a professional 
golfer who earns enough to support her entire family. Cleo schools Maya on the 
ways of the Academy, where image is as important as talent. After a few bumps, 
which include running afoul of Nicole King, tennis superstar and Maya’s personal 
idol, and almost getting kicked out, Maya finds her feet and then some, befriending 
the überwealthy Renee and dating Travis and then Jake, the Academy owner’s two 
very different sons. Just when she thinks things can’t get any better, though, she 
realizes how far she has drifted from who she wants to be, and she has an important 
decision to make about her immediate future. The plot is paced like a tennis match, 
with Maya as the ball moving from one boy and one set of friends to another as she 
settles into her glamorous new red-carpet lifestyle. While her character isn’t deeply 
developed, the drama and setting are too delicious for that to really matter. Though 
this is at one level, at least, a sports book, the narrative doesn’t dwell on anyone’s 
July/August 2013 • 533
dedication to their sport, focusing instead on the intrigues of relationships and the 
party lifestyle. Based on Seles’ own experience at elite sports academies she attended 
in her youth, this series opens a window on the calculated spreadsheet side of sport, 
driven as much by money, image, and branding as by talent and hard work.  KC 
shea, BoB Unicorn Thinks He’s Pretty Great; written and illus. by Bob Shea. Dis-
ney Hyperion, 2013 [40p]
ISBN 978-1-4231-5952-0 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-9 yrs
Goat had it pretty good until annoyingly amazing Unicorn moved into the neigh-
borhood. Goat’s bike-riding pales in comparison to Unicorn’s flying skills, as does 
his baking ability—Goat’s marshmallow squares come out “almost right” while 
Unicorn can make it rain multicolored cupcakes. In a series of small illustrations 
that evoke similar spreads in Mo Willems’ Pigeon books, jealous Goat mocks 
Unicorn: “Dopey Unicorn! Thinks he’s so great! How can anyone be friends with 
that guy?! Look at me! I’m Unicorn! I think I’m so-o-o cool! Blah, blah, blah, blah, 
blah . . .” Goat’s perspective changes when Unicorn raves over Goat’s goat-cheese 
pizza, confesses that his single horn really isn’t that useful, and admires Goat’s 
cloven hooves. Goat imagines a future of kick-butt crime-fighting for the newly 
bonded duo but acquiesces to Unicorn’s simple suggestion to instead play together 
in the park. Youngsters who have themselves been one-upped by a new kid will 
sympathize with Goat and find it satisfying to learn that Unicorn has his own 
perceived shortcomings. The casual tone and slightly snarky humor of Shea’s nar-
ration will also resonate with many upper primary and middle graders. The lively 
art (sharply drawn lines contrasting with planes of citrus-hued color) and font-color 
cues underscore the contrast between modest blue-gray Goat and the fab white 
Unicorn with his bright orange mane and tail and perpetual surrounding cloud of 
rainbows, stars, and sparkles. Pair this with Willems’ The Pigeon Finds a Hot Dog 
(BCCB 7/04), or pull it out to cheer up a bummed kiddo who feels sidelined by 
the skills of his or her peers.  JH
spellMan, david How to Negotiate Everything; by David Spellman with Lisa Lutz; 
illus. by Jaime Temairik. Simon, 2013 32p
ISBN 978-1-4424-5119-3 $16.99   
R Gr. 2-4
In this comedic picture book drawn from material in Lutz’s adult detective novels, 
she takes the persona of David Spellman, a character within the novels who often 
provides the voice of reason in this manual to guide young negotiators. Spellman/
Lutz follows Sammy, a smart young deal broker, to provide a tongue-in-cheek but 
valid explanation of how moving past emotion and using reason can help young 
bargainers make deals for the things they want in life. Flowcharts and speech bubbles 
of dialogue between Sammy and his mark (often his mother) help provide clear 
examples as Sammy wiggles his way out of eating his broccoli at dinner (“I will eat 
all my vegetables except the broccoli. Does that work for you?” “We’ll see”). The 
book is marked by a deadpan wit as the narrator plays his counsel straight (“The 
phrase ‘We’ll see’ is not binding. Sammy needs to close the deal”), and genuine 
advice—sometimes you can negotiate too aggressively—is comically juxtaposed 
with grandiose situations—keeping the long-term in mind can help the shrewd 
finagle their way to President and, subsequently, a pet elephant. Temairik’s digital 
534 • the Bulletin
illustrations, softened by her use of charcoal outlines, make use of textile patterns 
to evoke an almost tactile realism, but they’re filled with big-eyed pets and simple 
but expressive faces that have a lot of whimsical appeal. Visual gags that may go 
over the heads of the intended audience (Sammy reads 8 Habits of Highly Effective 
Elephant Owners, for example) and the dry humor buried in the text point some 
of this to adult readers rather than young audiences, but Lutz makes sure there’s 
plenty of solid advice for an aspiring sharp dealbreaker.  TA
tintera, aMy Reboot. HarperTeen, 2013 365p
ISBN 978-0-06-221707-3 $17.99   
R Gr. 7-10
Shot down at the age of twelve, Wren Connolly was dead for exactly 178 minutes 
before she returned to life as a stronger, faster, emotionally cold Reboot. For the 
last five years, she has been the ideal operative for HARC, the Human Advance-
ment and Repopulation Corporation that now runs what is left of the U.S. after 
a devastating plague. The best at tracking down traitors and killing them if orders 
decree it, Wren claims to feel nothing, but all that changes when Callum, whose 
twenty-two-minute death prior to Rebooting makes him more in touch with his 
human side, is assigned to Wren as her new trainee. When it becomes clear that 
HARC is experimenting on the Reboots and that Callum’s life is in danger, Wren 
decides to spring Callum from HARC’s labs and escape—and finds herself in 
the middle of a full-scale rebellion. A dystopian world with a flinty heroine who 
becomes the reluctant catalyst of a revolution isn’t anything new in YA, but it’s 
a story arc that’s nonetheless well done here, and Wren is an exceedingly likable 
protagonist. Her narration clues readers into the fact that Wren is not nearly as 
devoid of emotion as she claims early on, and the bonds she forms with both her 
roommate and then Callum are affectionately and tenderly portrayed. Her internal 
struggles characterize much of the book’s first half, but the action really gets going 
once she escapes with Callum, and the tension remains high as they deal not only 
with the HARC operatives pursuing them but also Callum’s possible death and/or 
monstrous transformation as a result of HARC’s experiments. The combination of 
wicked chase scenes, a sweet romance, and a dystopian world make this a welcome 
recommendation to readers awaiting the final installment to Roth’s Divergent (BCCB 
5/11) or the next Hunger Games movie.  KQG 
tonatiuh, duncan Pancho Rabbit and the Coyote: A Migrant’s Tale; written and 
illus. by Duncan Tonatiuh. Abrams, 2013 32p
ISBN 978-1-4197-0583-0 $16.95   
R 6-9 yrs
Pancho’s papá, Papá Rabbit, is leaving with Señor Rooster and Señor Ram to cross 
the border—illegally—to find work in El Norte for months. When Papá and the 
other animal fathers don’t come home when they’re expected, Pancho, stocked 
up with tortillas, mole, rice, and beans, sets out to find his father. Accepting the 
help of a coyote (a literal one, in a play on coyote, an often corrupt smuggler who 
takes people across the border for a price), Pancho hops trains, swims rivers, and 
bribes the rattlesnake border officials to cross the desert into El Norte, doling out 
his dwindling stockpile of food and drink at each step as payment to the coyote. 
After it’s finally all gone and the coyote is still hungry, Pancho seems to be on the 
menu himself until the migrant fathers burst in, chase the smuggler away, and 
begin the trek home to reunite with their families. Tonatiuh is so careful in weav-
July/August 2013 • 535
ing his allegory that his empathetic contemporary tale feels like age-old folklore, 
with simple but compelling text and a step-by-step escalation of the story through 
gripping, kid-understandable challenges. The ink and digital collage illustrations 
evoke Aztec drawing with their distorted two-dimensionality: feet and heads are in 
profile, but arms and eyes face forward, and objects skew perspective to tilt toward 
the reader and display their most interesting side. Tonatiuh masterfully combines 
photographic elements to create a richly textured world (Coyote, for example, is 
textured with real coyote fur) and uses broad swaths of the gorgeous tans, browns, 
and oranges of the environment to draw attention to his characters and their 
journeys. An author’s note describes the realities of undocumented workers in the 
United States today and points to web resources for further information. A glos-
sary of Spanish terms is also included. This thoughtful allegory provides a fresh 
approach to introduce kids to a tough issue, but the tale is interesting enough to 
stand as a modern folktale on its own.  TA
whitcoMB, laura Under the Light. Houghton, 2013 [256p]
ISBN 978-0-547-36754-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-12
In A Certain Slant of Light (BCCB 9/05), Helen, a restless spirit, temporarily inhab-
ited the body of a teenaged girl, Jenny, to meet up with her true love. Now Jenny’s 
back in her own body and facing the consequences of what Helen did—mouthing 
off to her mother’s prayer group, and even going to bed with a boy (Billy, who was 
inhabited by Helen’s true love, Jamie). She and Billy start shyly to put together the 
details of the period that neither of them remember and embark on a romance of 
their own; at the same time, Jenny’s abusive fundamentalist father, who’s left the 
family for another woman, begins to insist that Jenny come live with him. Through 
all this, Helen attempts to atone for her behavior by giving Jenny as much ghostly 
aid and comfort as she can muster to compensate for Jenny’s parents’ failure to 
support their own daughter. Though Jenny and Helen take turns narrating, it’s 
Jenny’s travails that are compelling here, as opposed to the ghostly love story of 
the previous title; her growing closeness with Billy is an oasis in a punishing life 
that will make readers indignant on her behalf. The ghost story is actually rather a 
distraction, requiring recent knowledge of the first title and often slowing the plot 
down to a crawl; Helen’s attempts to help Jenny are nearly as self-serving as her 
possession of Jenny’s body in the first place, so there’s little sympathy for Helen 
to leaven the slow passages featuring her regret and her desire for the real afterlife. 
While readers will find this a bit of a letdown after the first book, they may still 
wish to see how things play out for the benighted characters.  DS
young, aMy Don’t Eat the Baby!; written and illus. by Amy Young. Viking, 
2013 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-670-78513-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-6 yrs
At first, Tom is upset that his new baby brother, Nathaniel (or as Tom prefers to 
call him, the Blob), sucks up his family’s attention, diverting it away from Tom 
and his impressive somersaults. Then, however, he notices a sinister trend: first 
his grandmother gushes that she “could just take a big bite out of” the baby, then 
Auntie Lulu turns cannibalistic (“Don’t you just want to eat him up?”). When the 
536 • the Bulletin
relatives at his parents’ party start exclaiming over the baby’s “plump, juicy thighs,” 
Tom leaps into defensive action, barricading himself and his brother in his bed-
room. When his parents push in, Tom learns about the difference between literal 
and figurative and ends up thinking that he’s pretty good at this big brother thing. 
Tom is the clear focus of Young’s acrylic illustrations, with plenty of detail going 
into his worried expressions, teal rubber rain boots, and red cape, while Nathaniel 
is plainly—but cutely—represented with a round head and simple features. The 
art makes literal both Tom’s overactive imagination (he imagines trying to return 
Nathaniel to Mrs. Stork) and his intense emotions as he wrestles with concerns (he 
stands forlorn in the corner of a living room filled to the brim with the flotsam of 
new parents). Great for kids looking for a slightly different take on dethronement, 
this would pair well another book about the baby-brother blues, like Weeks’ Sophie 
Peterman Tells the Truth! (BCCB 1/10).  TA
young, suzanne The Program. Simon, 2013 405p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4580-2 $16.99
 E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4582-6 $9.99   
R* Gr. 9-12
In the near future, an epidemic of depression and suicide is taking the life of one 
out of every three teenagers. Desperate to save young people from themselves, 
the government establishes The Program, which provides treatment but leaves 
little more than a hollow shell behind. Seventeen-year-old Sloane Barstow, who 
has already lost her brother to suicide and her best friend to The Program, hopes 
only to survive into adulthood with her boyfriend James at her side. When James 
is suddenly taken by Program handlers, though, Sloane’s state of mind quickly 
disintegrates. Upon entering The Program herself, she fights to keep control of her 
life and clings desperately to her only ally, a fellow patient named Realm, who may 
not be as trustworthy as she thinks. Upon release Sloane struggles to rebuild her 
life with Realm’s help, but when she inadvertently reconnects with former friends 
and, more importantly, James, she starts to question what’s been done to her and 
decides to fight for her memories, her love, and her freedom. With this powerful 
psychological drama, Young contributes a unique, attention-worthy standout from 
the crowd of young adult dystopias. The focus on fears of teen behavior, rather 
than the fallout from global catastrophes, gives the novel a deeply personal and im-
minently plausible feel. Despite minimal action, the suspense is intense, as readers 
view the agonizing effects of The Program from inside Sloane’s mind. The genre’s 
obligatory love triangle appears as Realm is introduced and memories of James are 
erased, but who Sloane truly loves is never really in question, giving even this often 
overplayed element a new spin. Strong thematic similarities to Oliver’s Delirium 
(BCCB 2/11) and Terry’s Slated (BCCB 5/13) give the novel a likely initial fan 
base, but even readers who are wearying of dystopias will find this a refreshingly 
original read. A shocking conclusion nearly guarantees that the story will expand 
to future installments.  AM
zadoff, allen Boy Nobody. Little, 2013 [352p]
ISBN 978-0-316-19968-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
“Benjamin” has been working under an alias as an assassin for The Program, a 
shadowy arm of the American government, long enough to shake off any squea-
July/August 2013 • 537
mishness at taking a life. He’s hurled into a situation he’s not prepared for, however, 
with his current assignment: murdering New York mayor Jonathan Goldberg, 
father of beautiful classmate Samara, for whom Benjamin has fallen hard. He’s 
on a tighter schedule than normal, too, with only five days to complete the task, 
and although ingratiating himself into the heavily guarded Goldberg apartment 
has been a cakewalk, he’s become much too comfortable with the mayor himself, 
a wise and amiable man who’s just the father figure Benjamin needs and wants. 
Benjamin passes up several opportunities to inject the mayor with undetectable 
poison, and perhaps that’s for the best, since it’s beginning to look as if Goldberg 
isn’t the rightful target after all. Although this novel is closer to a ’70s thriller than 
a ’40s noir mystery, there’s more than a touch of Sam Spade in the character of 
Benjamin, a street-toughened young man with a deeply buried moral compass and 
no compunction about sending the dame he loves up the river, or in this case, off 
to eternity. Zadoff leaves Benjamin with his true identity revealed, a hacker friend 
in the wings, and a line on his missing father. You can bet The Program’s already 
working on his next assignment.  EB
538  •  The BulleTin
Adventure: Bick; Chapman; 
Fisher; nagpal; Pryce; tintera
Africa–fiction: Quirk
African Americans–fiction: rhodes
Aliens–stories: Kaplan
Amnesia–fiction: Jahn-Clough; 
Joyner; Pryce
Animals–stories: Barnett; Bonwill; 
Gibson; tonatiuh
AntholoGies: Gaiman; Mitchell
Anxiety–fiction:  raf
Appearance–fiction: ross 
Athletes–fiction: seles
Aviation: McCarthy
Babies–stories: Gibson; Young, A.
Behavior: spellman
Behavior–fiction: Fleming
Behavior–stories: Guest
Bicycles: Mulder
Bicycles–stories: davies; raschka 
BioGrAPhies: hartzler; heilig-
man; McCarthy; ottaviani 
Biology: ottaviani
Birds–stories: Bonwill
Books and reading–fiction: Graben-
stein
Books and reading–stories: Panzieri
Brothers and sisters–fiction: Cheng
Brothers–stories: Young, A.
Bullies–fiction: Chapman; Fleming; 
Goldblatt; Kade; Meyerhoff
Bullies–stories: davies
Chinese Americans–fiction: Cheng
Cities–stories: Jenkins
CountinG BooKs: Barnett
Cousins–stories: Kaplan
Crime and criminals–fiction:  lly-
welyn; Green; Kittscher; Pileggi; 
Quirk; tintera; Zadoff
Crocodiles–stories: Panzieri
depression–fiction: sanchez; Young, 
s.
dogs–fiction: Jahn-Clough
dogs–stories: Guest
ducks–fiction: Castellucci
dystopias–fiction: tintera; Young, s.
Ecology: Mulder
emotions–stories: lagercrantz 
esP–fiction: Brown
Ethics and values: davies; Gold- 
blatt; Konigsberg; Mills; Young, 
s.; Zadoff 
Faith: hartzler
Families–fiction: Madison; Mcdon-
ald; Myracle; Whitcomb
Families–stories: Guest; James; 
Kaplan
FAntAsY: Fisher; Gaiman; hapka; 
Jay; Madison; Pryce 
Fathers –fiction: Fleming; Pileggi
FolK-liKe tAles: tonatiuh
FolKtAles And FAirY tAles: 
nagpal
Folktales and fairy tales–fiction: Jay
France–fiction: ross
Frauds–fiction: Brown
Friends–fiction: Castellucci; diCa-
millo; hutchinson; Kredensor; 
Meyerhoff; nees; Phillips; raf; 
ross; scott; seles
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in All-CAPs 
refer to genres and appeals. in the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
July/AugusT 2013  •  539
Friends–stories: Bonwill; Kaplan; 
lagercrantz; shea
Frogs–fiction: Pryce
Gays and lesbians–fiction: Konigs-
berg
Ghosts–fiction: Whitcomb
Goats–stories: shea
GrAPhiC novels: Castellucci; 
Kredensor; nagpal; ottaviani
hawaii–fiction: Kredensor
hippopotami–stories: Bonwill
historiCAl FiCtion: Brown; 
Goldblatt; llywelyn; Pileggi; 
Quirk; rhodes; ross; Parry
History, U.S.: sandler
History, world: heiligman 
horror: Bick
huMor: Barnett; Beaty; diCa-
millo; Grey; hutchinson; Kaplan; 
Mack; Meyerhoff; o’ryan; scott; 
spellman; Young, A.
identity: hartzler
identity–fiction: Jahn-Clough; Ko-
nigsberg; Quinn; Young, s.
illness–fiction:  raf; scott
imagination–stories: Fogliano; James
independence–stories: Mack
internment camps: sandler
ireland–fiction: llywelyn
Japanese Americans: sandler
Jealousy–fiction: Phillips
Jealousy–stories: shea
Language arts: Foster
latinos–fiction: doktorski; sanchez
latinos–stories: tonatiuh
libraries–fiction: Grabenstein
Literature, English: Foster; Mc-
donald
Mathematics: heiligman
Memory–fiction: Jahn-Clough
Mermaids–fiction: hapka
Migrants–stories: tonatiuh
Monsters–fiction: Jay
Mothers–fiction: Phillips
MYsteries: Green; hale; Kitt-
scher
MYtholoGY: nagpal
native Americans–fiction: Parry
Nature study: Fogliano; ottaviani  
neighborhoods–stories: Jenkins 
nurses–stories: James
orphans–fiction: hale; Parry 
Parks–stories: Jenkins
Patience–stories: Fogliano
Penguins–fiction: Myracle
Perseverance–stories: raschka
Pets–fiction: Joyner; Myracle; nees 
Class
Pets–stories: Guest; lagercrantz; 
Panzieri 
Puzzles–fiction: Grabenstein
Reading, beginning: Gibson; Kre-
densor; lagercrantz; Mack
Reading, easy: diCamillo; hapka; 
Joyner; Myracle; nees; o’ryan
reconstruction era–fiction: rhodes
relationships–fiction: doktorski; 
hutchinson; Kade; Madison; Mc-
donald; sanchez; tintera; Zadoff
rhYMinG stories: Gibson
romance–fiction: Jay; Mcdonald; 
Whitcomb 
school–fiction: Beaty; Chapman; 
Cheng; Fleming; Kade; Konigs-
berg; Meyerhoff; Mills; nees; 
o’ryan
Science: ottaviani
sCienCe FiCtion: Bick; Kade; 
o’ryan
secrets–fiction: Fisher; Green
short stories: Gaiman; 
Mitchell
sisters–fiction: Mcdonald
slavery–fiction: rhodes
space travel–stories: Grey 
spies and spying–fiction: hale; 
Kittscher
sPorts stories: seles
stage magicians–fiction: Beaty; 
Brown
stalking–fiction: doktorski 
suicide–fiction: sanchez
summer–fiction: Madison; Phillips
suPernAturAl stories: 
Quinn; Whitcomb
susPense: Quinn; Zadoff
tanzania–fiction: Quirk
thrillers: Quinn
540  •  The BulleTin
time travel–fiction: Fisher
toys–stories: Grey
Transportation: Mulder 
unicorns–stories: shea
voyages and travel–fiction: doktor-
ski; Jahn-Clough
voyages and travel–stories: tonatiuh
Water–stories: Jenkins
Whales–stories: Fogliano
Women’s studies: McCarthy
World War ii: sandler
Writers and writing–fiction: Gold-
blatt
July/August 2013 • 541
T h e B u l l e T i n
 
of the Center for Children’s Books
auThor/TiTle index, volume 66
sepTemBer, 2012—july/augusT, 2013
1-2-3 Peas. Baker. 66.
13th Sign. Tubb. 313.
17 & Gone. Suma. 354.
33 Minutes. Hasak-Lowy. 297.
39 Deaths of Adam Strand. Galloway. 332.
A Is for Musk Ox. Cabatingan. 135. 
Abdel-Fattah. Friendship Matchmaker. 4.
Abe Lincoln’s Dream. Smith. 264.
Ability. Vaughn. 440.
About Average. Clements. 13.
Absent. Williams. 486.
Ada. Love, Amalia. 5.
Adaptation. Lo. 32.
Adler. Harriet Tubman and the Under-
ground Railroad. 366.
Adventures of Jo Schmo. Trine. 51.
Aesop. Town Mouse and the Country 
Mouse. 130.
After. Datlow. 293.
Agard. Goldilocks on CCTV. 184.
Agee. Other Side of Town. 234.
Aguirre. Outpost. 64.
Ahlberg. Goldilocks Variations. 184.
Airgood. Prairie Evers. 65.
Akbarpour. That Night’s Train. 130. 
Albin. Crewel. 235.
Alex the Parrot. Spinner. 171.
Alexander. Ghoulish Song. 367.
Ali-Karamali. Growing Up Muslim. 5.
All You Never Wanted. Griffin. 197.
Allegra. Sarah Gives Thanks. 65.
Allen, C. Laura Line. 410.
Allen, K. Kiss Means I Love You. 131. 
Almond. Mouse Bird Snake Wolf. 452.
Almost Home. Bauer. 68.
Almost Truth. Cook. 327.
Altered. Rush. 308.
Alvin Ho: Allergic to Babies, Burglars, and 
Other Bumps in the Night. Look. 471.
Always October. Coville. 78.
Amateau. Come August, Come Freedom. 
66.
Amber House. Moore. 159. 
Anderson. Tiger Lily. 6.
Angelfall. Ee. 80.
Angus. Soldier Dog. 453.
Animals Welcome. Kehret. 91.
Annie and Helen. 199.
Another 365 Days. Payne. 432.
Another Little Piece. Quinn. 528.
Applegate. Eve & Adam. 196. 
Archer. Shadow Girl. 367.
Archived. Schwab. 261.
Arcos. Out of Reach. 131.
Armistead. Being Henry David. 368.
Armstrong. Shards & Ashes. 344. 
Army of Frogs. Pryce. 527.
Arnold. Dirty Gert. 282.
As the Crow Flies. Keenan. 149.
Asim. Fifty Cents and a Dream. 283.
Ask the Passengers. King. 63.
Athlete vs. Mathlete. Mack. 342.
Atinuke. No. 1 Car Spotter and the Fire-
bird. 132. 
Auch. One + One = Blue. 411.
Auracle. Rosati. 112.
Ava and the Little Folk. Christopher. 457.
Ava and the Real Lucille. Best. 70.
542 • the Bulletin
Averett. Cameron and the Girls. 453.
Avi. Sophia’s War. 185.
Awesome Autumn. Goldstone. 84.
Awesome Dawson. Gall. 417.
B.U.G. (Big Ugly Guy). Yolen. 399.
Baby Penguins Everywhere! Guion. 246.
Bach. Giants and Ice. 6.
Bad Girls. Yolen. 316.
Bad Unicorn. Clark. 373.
Bailey at the Museum. Bliss. 72.
Baker. 1-2-3 Peas. 66.
Baker-Smith. FArTHER. 368.
Balaban. Creature from the Seventh Grade. 
185.
Ball. Sullivan. 438.
Balog. Dead River. 411.
Bananas in My Ears. Rosen. 215. 
Banash. White Lines. 412.
Bang. Ocean Sunlight. 132. 
Bania. Kumak’s River. 67.
Banks. Bear in the Book. 186.
———. Magician’s Apprentice. 67.
Barbed Wire Baseball. Moss. 387.
Barftastic Life of Louie Burger. Meyerhoff. 
520.
Barnes. Reasonable Ogre. 68.
Barnett. Count the Monkeys. 498.
Barnhill. Iron Hearted Violet. 186.
Barraclough. Long Lankin. 3.
Barrett. Santa from Cincinnati. 133.
Barry’s Best Buddy. French. 416.
Bartholomew Biddle and the Very Big 
Wind. Ross. 259.
Baskin. Surfacing. 283.
Bats. Markle. 473.
Bauer, J. Almost Home. 68.
Bauer, M. Dinosaur Thunder. 7.
———. Just a Dog. 187.
Bean. Building Our House. 284.
Bean Dog and Nugget. Harper. 465.
Bear and Bee. Ruzzier. 391.
Bear in Love. Pinkwater. 42.
Bear in the Book. Banks. 186.
Beatles Were Fab (And They Were Funny). 
Krull. 424. 
Beaty. Dorko the Magnificent. 499.
Beaudoin. Infects. 69.
Beautiful and the Cursed. Morgan. 430.
Beautiful Lies. Warman. 53.
Beautiful Music for Ugly Children. Cronn-
Mills. 239.
Because of Shoe. Martin. 156. 
Becoming Babe Ruth. Tavares. 312.
Becoming Ben Franklin. Freedman. 462.
Bedtime for Monsters. Vere. 53.
Bedtime Is Canceled. Meng. 304.
Behind the Bookcase. Steensland. 220.
Beholding Bee. Fusco. 376.
Being Henry David. Armistead. 368.
Believing Game. Corrigan. 190.
Bell. Rabbit & Robot. 69.
Bella’s Rules. Guest. 509.
Belle Epoque. Ross, 530.
Belles. Calonita. 12.
Below. McKinlay. 429.
Ben Rides On. Davies. 502.
Bennett, N. Dead Cat Bounce. 133.
Bennett, S. Look. 324.
Beram. Yoko Oko. 369.
Berk. Strike Three, You’re Dead. 369.
Berne, E. Never Let You Go. 284.
Berne, J. On a Beam of Light. 454.
Best. Ava and the Real Lucille. 70.
Beta. Cohn. 189.
Better Nate Than Ever. Federle. 295.
Better to Wish. Martin. 473.
Between You & Me. Calin. 77.
Beyond. McNamee. 103.
Beyond Courage. Rappaport. 167.
Bick. Monsters. 499.
———. Shadows. 7.
Bickle. Hallowed Ones. 70.
Big Mean Mike. Knudsen. 26.
Bigelow. Starting from Here. 71.
Biggs. Stop! Go! 325.
Bill, the Boy Wonder. Nobleman. 40.
Bink & Gollie: Best Friends Forever. DiCa-
millo. 503.
Bird & Squirrel on the Run! Burks. 76.
Birthday Cake Mystery. Tjong-Khing. 173.
Black, B. Just Right for Christmas. 134. 
Black, H. Doll Bones. 451.
Black, M. I’m Bored. 71.
Black, Y. Dance of Shadows. 235.
Black City. Richards. 214.
Black Dog. Pinfold. 164.
Black Helicopters. Woolston. 398.
Black Ice. Lane. 252.
July/August 2013 • 543
Black Rabbit. Leathers. 302.
Blagden. Dear Life, You Suck. 370.
Blake. Marble Queen. 325.
Blakemore. Water Castle. 285.
Blank. Invincible Microbe. 40. 
Blaze. Crompton. 292.
Blessed. Hurley. 148.
Blind Spot. Ellen. 141.
Blink Once. Busby. 135.
Bliss. Bailey at the Museum. 72.
Bloody Chester. Petty. 108.
Bloom. Oh! What a Surprise! 183.
Blume. Wondrous Journals of Dr. Wendell 
Wellington Wiggins. 72.
Blythe, C. Revenge of a Not-So-Pretty Girl. 
370.
Blythe, D. Shadow Breakers. 326.
Bodeen. Raft. 73.
Boelts. Happy Like Soccer. 8.
Bolden. Emancipation Proclamation. 285.
Bomb. Sheinkin. 116.
Bonwill. I Am Not a Copycat! 500.
Boo! Book. Lachenmeyer. 28.
Book Boat’s In. Cotten. 458.
Book of Blood. Newquist. 106.
Boot & Shoe. Frazee. 144.
Boris Gets a Lizard. Joyner. 514.
Boris on the Move. Joyner. 514.
Born of Illusion. Brown. 500.
Boston Tea Party. Freedman. 144.
Bot Wars. Kade. 468.
Boudreau. I Dare You Not to Yawn. 371.
Bowman. Taken. 412.
Boxcar Children Beginning. MacLachlan. 
99.
Boy Nobody. Zadoff. 536.
Boy Who Loved Math. Heiligman. 511.
Boy Who Cried Bigfoot! Magoon. 385.
Boyne. Terrible Thing that Happened to 
Barnaby Brocket. 371.
Bracegirdle. Dead Family Diaz. 8.
Bracken, A. Darkest Minds. 286.
Bracken, B. Wish. 454.
Bramble and Maggie. Haas. 419.
Branford. Violet Mackerel’s Brilliant Plot. 
73.
———. Violet Mackerel’s Remarkable 
Recovery. 286.
Brave Girl. Markel. 303.
Bray. Diviners. 74.
Break My Heart 1,000 Times. Waters. 223.
Breathe. Crossan. 140.
Breathing Room. Hayles. 86.
Breen. Pug & Doug. 287.
Brennan. Unspoken. 74.
Brewer. The Beatles Were Fab (And They 
Were Funny). 424.
Brian. Shadowlands. 326.
Briant. I Am (Not) the Walrus. 75.
Brick by Brick. Smith. 263.
Brides of Rollrock Island. Lanagan. 28.
Bridges. Mary Wrightly, So Politely. 455.
Brodien-Jones. Scorpions of Zahir. 9.
Brody. Unremembered. 372.
Broken Lands. Milford. 103.
Bromley. Open Very Carefully. 287.
Brontë Sisters. Reef. 167. 
Brown, D. Henry and the Cannons. 288.
Brown, J. Perfect Escape. 9.
Brown, T. Born of Illusion. 500.
Browne. How Do You Feel? 10.
———. One Gorilla. 236.
Broxo. Giallongo. 195.
Bruchac. Rabbit’s Snow Dance. 288.
Bruised. Skilton. 352.
Bryan. Who Built the Stable? 134. 
Bryant. Splash of Red. 236.
Buckell. Diverse Energies. 187.
Buckley. Kel Gilligan’s Daredevil Stunt 
Show. 75.
Buffalo Bird Girl. Nelson. 209.
Building Our House. Bean. 284.
Bully Book. Gale. 331.
Bunting. Have You Seen My New Blue 
Socks? 455. 
Burak. Emily’s Dress and Other Missing 
Things. 237.
Burg. Laugh with the Moon. 10.
Burks. Bird & Squirrel on the Run! 76.
Burleigh. George Bellows. 11.
———. Hit the Road, Jack. 76.
———. Look Up! 289.
Burn. Gibson. 195.
Burn for Burn. Han. 85.
Burning Blue. Griffin. 145.
Busby. Blink Once. 135.
Bushman Lives! Pinkwater. 164. 
Busy-Busy Little Chick. Harrington. 420.
544 • the Bulletin
Butter. Lange. 153. 
Button Down. Ylvisaker. 55.
Buzo. Love and Other Perishable Items. 
289.
Cabatingan. A Is for Musk Ox. 135. 
Cadillac Chronicles. Hartman. 247.
Caged Graves. Salerni. 434.
Calhoun. Eva of the Farm. 11.
Calin. Between You & Me. 77.
Calmenson. Ollie’s School Day. 77.
Calonita. Belles. 12.
Cameron. Dark Unwinding. 78.
Cameron and the Girls. Averett. 453.
Campbell. Lester’s Dreadful Sweaters. 136. 
Car Goes Far. Garland. 417.
Card. Ruins. 188.
Cardboard. TenNapel. 49.
Carnival of Souls. Marr. 101.
Carriger. Etiquette & Espionage. 290.
Carter, R. So Close to You. 12.
Carter, S. Wooden Bones. 12.
Castellucci. Odd Duck. 501.
Castle. Macaulay. 34.
Casualties of War. Lynch. 254.
Cat Talk. MacLachlan. 342.
Cate. Look Up! 327.
Caterer. Key & the Flame. 456.
Catherine. Lindner. 340. 
Cats of Tanglewood Forest. de Lint. 374.
Cave of Secrets. Llywelyn. 518.
Cavendish Home for Boys and Girls. 
Legrand. 154. 
Cecil the Pet Glacier. Harvey. 85.
Center of Everything. Urban. 396.
Chadda. Savage Fortress. 237. 
Chainani. School for Good and Evil. 456.
Changeling. Gregory. 19.
Chapman. Homeroom Headhunters. 501.
Charest. Cat Talk. 342. 
Charley’s First Night. Hest. 87.
Charlton-Trujillo. Fat Angie. 372.
Chasing the Skip. Patterson. 210.
Cheer Up. Mouse! Henry. 298.
Chen. Return to Me. 290.
Cheng. Year of the Baby. 502.
Chicken Problem. Oxley. 107.
ChickenHare. Grine. 296.
Chin. Island. 136. 
Chisholm. Ocean Sunlight. 132. 
Chloe. McCarty. 37.
Choke. López. 33.
Christmas Wombat. French. 193.
Christopher. Ava and the Little Folk. 457.
Chu’s Day. Gaiman. 244.
City of a Thousand Dolls. Forster. 295.
Clark. Bad Unicorn. 373.
Class Pets. Nees. 523.
Clayton, C. What Happens Next. 189.
Clayton, D. Make Magic! 238.
Clement-Moore. Spirit and Dust. 413. 
Clements. About Average. 13.
Cline-Ransome. Light in the Darkness. 
238.
Clover Twig and the Perilous Path. Uman-
sky. 51.
Cocca-Leffler. Vacation for Pooch. 291.
Cochrane. Fitz. 137.
Cohn. Beta. 189.
Cold Fury. Goeglein. 18.
Cole. Unspoken. 239.
Coley. Pretty Girl-13. 373.
Colfer. Reluctant Assassin. 457.
Colin Fisher. Miller. 208.
Collomore. Ruining. 374.
Color of Rain. McCarthy. 474.
Colorful Dreamer. Parker. 255.
Come August, Come Freedom. Amateau. 
66.
Coming of the Unicorn. Williamson. 54.
Confessions of a Murder Suspect. Pat-
terson. 107.
Cook. Almost Truth. 327.
Cooke. Little Book of Sloth. 291.
Cookie the Walker. Monroe. 346.
Cooner. Skinny. 190.
Cooney. Janie Face to Face. 292.
Cooper. FitzOsbornes at War. 137.
Corner of White. Moriarty. 430.
Cornwell. Tides. 458.
Corrigan. Believing Game. 190.
Cotten. Book Boat’s In.  458.
Couloumbis. Not Exactly a Love Story. 
191.
Count Me In! Weill. 269.
Count the Monkeys. Barnett. 498.
Courage Has No Color. Stone. 265.
Cousin Irv from Mars. Kaplan. 515.
Coville. Always October. 78.
July/August 2013 • 545
Cowboy Up! Flood. 375.
Cowley. Stories of the Wild West Gang. 
138
Cox. Dead Girls Detective Agency. 138.
Coy. Hoop Genius. 328.
Crap Kingdom. Pierson. 388.
Crash. McMann. 345.
Crash and Burn. Hassan. 336.
Creature from the Seventh Grade. Balaban. 
185.
Creech. Great Unexpected. 139.
Creepy Carrots! Reynolds. 110.
Cremer. Invisibility. 459.
Crewel. Albin. 235.
Crompton. Blaze. 292.
Cronn-Mills. Beautiful Music for Ugly 
Children. 239.
Crossan. Breathe. 140.
Crump. Mystery of Darwin’s Frog. 459.
Crusher. Leonard. 155.
Crutcher. Period 8. 460.
Cummings. Giddy-Up, Daddy! 413.
Curiosities. Stiefvater. 264.
Curse of the Thirteenth Fey. Yolen. 270.
Cushman. Will Sparrow’s Road. 240.
Czekaj. Oink-A-Doodle-Moo. 14.
Dahl. Genie Wishes. 414.
Daley. Pinch and Dash and the Terrible 
Couch. 328.
Daly. Herd Boy. 140.
———. Next Stop—Zanzibar Road! 240.
Dance of Shadows. Black. 235.
Dangerous Boy. Hubbard. 89.
Daredevil. McCarthy. 519.
Darius & Twig. Myers. 477.
Dark. Snicket. 483.
Dark Star. Frenette. 244.
Dark Triumph. LaFevers. 339.
Dark Unwinding. Cameron. 78.
Darkbeast. Keyes. 25.
Darkest Minds. Bracken. 286.
Darkwater. Fisher. 193.
Datlow. After. 293.
Davies, M. Ben Rides On. 502.
Davies, N. Deadly! 329.
———. Who Lives Here? 241.
Davis. I Swear. 191.
Daylight Saving. Hogan. 88.
Days of Blood and Starlight. Taylor. 222.
de Lint. Cats of Tanglewood Forest. 374.
de Sève. Peanut & Fifi Have a Ball. 460.
Dead and Buried. Harrington. 297.
Dead Cat Bounce. Bennett. 133.
Dead City. Ponti. 258.
Dead Family Diaz. Bracegirdle. 8.
Dead Girl Moon. Price. 212.
Dead Girls Detective Agency. Cox. 138.
Dead River. Balog. 411.
Deadly Pink. Vande. 119.
Deadly! Davies. 329.
Dean. Forget Me Not. 241.
Dear Life, You Suck. Blagden. 370.
Death, Dickinson, and the Demented Life 
of Frenchie Garcia. Sanchez. 531.
Deem. Faces from the Past. 242.
DeFelice. Nelly May Has Her Say. 375.
Defy the Dark. Mitchell. 521.
Dennard. Something Strange and Deadly. 
79.
Destiny, Rewritten. Fitzmaurice. 416.
DiCamillo. Bink & Gollie: Best Friends 
Forever. 503.
Dickinson. Earth and Air. 141. 
Diego Rivera. Rubin. 391.
Dinosaur Thunder. Bauer. 7.
Dirty Gert. Arnold. 282.
Divakaruni. Grandma and the Great 
Gourd. 461.
Diverse Energies. Buckell. 187.
Diviners. Bray. 74.
Dodger. Pratchett. 165.
Doeden. Marked Man. 414. 
Dog Called Homeless. Lean. 94.
Dogs of Winter. Pyron. 166.
Dogs on Duty. Patent. 162.
Doll Bones. Black. 451.
Doktorski. How My Summer Went Up in 
Flames. 503.
Don’t Eat the Baby! Young. 535.
Don’t Feed the Boy. Latham. 253.
Don’t Turn Around. Gagnon. 82.
Donaldson. Tabby McTat. 294.
Doodles of Sam Dibble. Press. 350.
Dorko the Magnificent. Beaty. 499.
Dotlich. Grumbles from the Forest. 443. 
Dowell. Second Life of Abigail Walker. 14.
Downside of Being Charlie. Sanchez. 114.
Dr. Bird’s Advice for Sad Poets. Roskos. 390.
546 • the Bulletin
Drama. Telgemeier. 173.
Draper. Panic. 415.
Draupadi. Nagpal. 523.
Drummer Boy of John John. Greenwood. 
245.
Dunrea. Little Cub. 242.
Durst. Vessel. 79. 
Each Kindness. Woodson. 224.
Earth and Air. Dickinson. 141. 
Earthling! Fearing. 16.
Edge of Nowhere. George. 82.
Ee. Angelfall. 80.
Elemental. John. 250.
Elephant Joe, Brave Knight. Wojtowycz. 
54.
Elephant’s Friend. Williams. 121.
Ellen. Blind Spot. 141.
Ellis. My Name Is Parvana. 243.
Ellison. Notes from Ghost Town. 329.
Elston. Rules for Disappearing. 461.
Emancipation Proclamation. Bolden. 285.
Emerson. Fellowship for Alien Detection. 
415.
Emily’s Dress and Other Missing Things. 
Burak. 237.
Empty. Walton. 314.
Encyclopedia of Me. Rivers. 111.
Endangered. Schrefer. 260.
Engle. Lightning Dreamer. 294.
Erlings. Fish in the Sky. 243.
Escape from Mr. Lemoncello’s Library. 
Grabenstein. 508.
Etiquette & Espionage. Carriger. 290.
Eva of the Farm. Calhoun. 11.
Eve & Adam. Grant. 196.
Every Day. Levithan. 30.
Everyone Can Learn to Ride a Bicycle. 
Raschka. 529.
Exclamation Mark. Rosenthal. 390.
Faces from the Past. Deem. 242.
Falconer. Olivia and the Fairy Princesses. 
15.
Falling for You. Schroeder. 352.
Falling Kingdoms. Rhodes. 259.
False Memory. Krokos. 93.
Fama. Monstrous Beauty. 80.
Fancher. One Frozen Lake. 302. 
Fantastic Jungles of Henri Rousseau. 
Markel. 156.
Far Far Away. McNeal. 476.
Far from Home. Robert. 214.
Farish. Good Braider. 15.
Farrey. Vengekeep Prophecies. 192.
FArTHER. Baker-Smith. 368.
Fat Angie. Charlton-Trujillo. 372.
Fathomless. Pearce. 163.
Fearing. Earthling! 16.
Federle. Better Nate Than Ever. 295.
Fellowship for Alien Detection. Emerson. 
415. 
Ferris. Noah Webster & His Words. 142.
Fifty Cents and a Dream. Asim. 283.
Fine. Sanctum. 192.
Fingerprints of You. Madonia. 155.
Fire Horse Girl. Honeyman. 299.
Fire in the Streets. Magoon. 99.
Firecracker. Iserson. 467.
First Mothers. Gherman. 83.
Fish for Jimmy. Yamasaki. 443.
Fish in the Sky. Erlings. 243.
Fisher. Darkwater. 193.
–––––. Obsidian Mirror. 504.
Fitz. Cochrane. 137.
Fitzmaurice. Destiny, Rewritten. 416.
FitzOsbornes at War. Cooper. 137.
Flake. Pinned. 142.
Flame in the Mist. Grindstaff. 464.
Flash Point. Kress. 252.
Fleming, C. Oh, No! 143.
———. On the Day I Died. 16.
Fleming, David. Saturday Boy. 504.
Fleming, Denise. underGROUND. 143.
Fletcher. Guy-Write. 81.
Flood. Cowboy Up! 375.
Flowers. I See the Promised Land. 365.
Flowers in the Sky. Joseph. 423.
Flutter. Linko. 253.
FML. Hutchinson. 512.
Fogliano. If You Want to See a Whale. 505.
Folgueira. Ribbit! 462.
Follow, Follow. Singer. 311.
Following Grandfather. Wells. 223.
Food. Gay. 145. 
For What It’s Worth. Tashjian. 48.
Forest Has a Song. VanDerwater. 396.
Foretold. Ryan. 168.
Forget Me Not. Dean. 241.
Forman. Just One Day. 330.
July/August 2013 • 547
Forsaken. Stasse. 47.
Forster. City of a Thousand Dolls. 295.
Foster. How to Read Literature Like a 
Professor: For Kids. 505.
Fourmile. Key. 92.
Fox. Two Little Monkeys. 17.
Fradin, D. Price of Freedom. 296.
Fradin, J. Zora! 81.
Frank Show. Mackintosh. 98.
Fraser. Wish. 454.
Frazee. Boot & Shoe. 144.
Freakling. Krumwiede. 200.
Freaks. Larwood. 383.
Freaks Like Us. Vaught. 53.
Free-Fire Zone. Lynch. 203.
Freedman. Becoming Ben Franklin. 462.
———. Boston Tea Party. 144.
French, J. Christmas Wombat. 193.
French, R. Barry’s Best Buddy. 416.
Frenette. Dark Star. 244.
Friday Society. Kress. 251.
Friendship Matchmaker. Abdel-Fattah. 4.
Frogged. Vande Velde. 440.
From the Good Mountain. Rumford. 113.
Fry, E. Losing It. 194.
Fry, M. Odd Squad. 331.
Frydenborg. Wild Horse Scientists. 194.
Further Tale of Peter Rabbit. Thompson. 
266.
Fusco. Beholding Bee. 376.
Future We Left Behind. Lancaster. 301.
Gagnon. Don’t Turn Around. 82.
Gaiman. Chu’s Day. 244.
–––––. Unnatural Creatures. 506.
Gale. Bully Book. 331.
Gall. Awesome Dawson. 417.
Galloway. 39 Deaths of Adam Strand. 332.
Game On. Seles. 532.
Gandhi. McGinty. 475.
Ganesha’s Sweet Tooth. Patel. 256.
Garden of My Imaan. Zia. 487.
Garden Princess. Kladstrup. 468.
Gardner. Maggot Moon. 332.
Garland. Car Goes Far. 417.
Garsee. Unquiet. 17.
Gathering Dark. Johnson. 300.
Gay. Food. 145. 
Geeks, Girls, and Secret Identities. Jung. 
250.
Geisert. Thunderstorm. 463.
Genie Wishes. Dahl. 414.
George Bellows. Burleigh. 11.
George. Edge of Nowhere. 82.
Gerber. Seeds, Bees, Butterflies, and More! 
377.
Germein. My Dad Thinks He’s Funny. 418.
Gerstein. How to Bicycle to the Moon to 
Plant Sunflowers. 418.
Gewirtz. Zebra Forest. 419.
Gherman. First Mothers. 83.
Ghoulish Song. Alexander. 367.
Ghoulstone. Undead Ed. 18.
Giallongo. Broxo. 195.
Giant and How He Humbugged America. 
Murphy. 159.
Giants and Ice. Bach. 6.
Gibson, G. Tiptoe Joe. 507.
Gibson, H. Burn. 195.
Gidali. Nora the Mind Reader. 83.
Giddy-Up, Daddy! Cummings. 413.
Giff. Gingersnap. 377.
———. Hunter Moran Saves the Universe. 
83.
Gingersnap. Giff. 377.
Girl Called Problem. Quirk. 528.
Girl from Felony Bay. Thompson. 484.
Girl Named Digit. Monaghan. 39.
Girl With Borrowed Wings. Rossetti. 44.
Goeglein. Cold Fury. 18.
Goelman. Path of Names. 463.
Goldblatt. Twerp. 507.
Goldilocks and the Three Dinosaurs. Wil-
lems. 121.
Goldilocks on CCTV. Agard. 184.
Goldilocks Variations. Ahlberg. 184.
Goldstone. Awesome Autumn. 84.
Gone Fishing. Wissinger. 442.
Good Braider. Farish. 15.
Good News. Bad News. Mack. 98.
Good Night! Marchon. 344.
Goodman. It’s a Dog’s Life. 19. 
———. I Funny. 308. 
Grabenstein. Escape from Mr. Lemoncello’s 
Library. 508.
Grandma and the Great Gourd. Divaka-
runi. 461.
Grant. Eve & Adam. 196.
Gratton. Curiosities. 264. 
548 • the Bulletin
Gravediggers. Krovatin. 153.
Gray, C. Spellcaster. 333.
Gray, L. Maybe I Will. 333.
Great Race. Scott. 46.
Great Unexpected. Creech. 139.
Greatest Liar on Earth. Greenwood. 245.
Green, Jacqueline. Truth or Dare. 508.
Green, Julia. Tilly’s Moonlight Garden. 
196.
Greenhorn. Olswanger. 210.
Greenwood. Drummer Boy of John John. 
245.
––––. Greatest Liar on Earth. 245.
Gregory. Changeling. 19.
Grey. Toys in Space. 509.
Griffin, A. All You Never Wanted. 197.
Griffin, C. Nowhere to Run. 464.
Griffin, N. Whole Stupid Way We Are. 
334.
Griffin, P. Burning Blue. 145.
Grindstaff. Flame in the Mist. 464.
Grine. ChickenHare. 296.
Grossman. World Away. 84.
Growing Up Muslim. Ali-Karamali. 5.
Grumbles from the Forest. Yolen. 443.
Guest. Bella’s Rules. 509.
Guibord. Revel. 334.
Guion. Baby Penguins Everywhere! 246.
Gulledge. Will & Whit. 465.
Guy-Write. Fletcher. 81.
Guys Read: The Sports Pages. Scieszka. 45.
H.O.R.S.E. Myers. 160.
Haas. Bramble and Maggie. 419.
Haines. Girl Is Trouble. 20.
Halbrook. Nobody but Us. 335.
Hale. Playing with Fire. 510.
Halliday. Peanut. 335.
Hallowed Ones. Bickle. 70.
Hamlisch. Marvin Makes Music. 246.
Han. Burn for Burn. 85.
Hand in Hand. Pinkney. 257.
Hanson. It’s Monday. Mrs. Jolly Bones! 
377.
Hapka. Mermaids in the Backyard. 510.
Happy Birthday, Bunny! Scanlon. 392.
Happy Like Soccer. Boelts. 8.
Harmon. Under the Bridge. 197.
Harness. Mary Walker Wears the Pants. 
378.
Harper. Bean Dog and Nugget. 465.
———. Wedgieman. 20.
Harriet Tubman and the Underground 
Railroad. Adler. 366.
Harrington, J. Busy-Busy Little Chick. 
420.
Harrington, K. Dead and Buried. 297.
Harris. Who’s in My Family? 146.
Harrison. Perfect Home for a Family. 378.
Hart. Princess and the Peas. 336.
Hartman, B. Cadillac Chronicles. 247.
Hartman, R. Seraphina. 20.
Hartzler. Rapture Practice. 511.
Harvey. Cecil the Pet Glacier. 85.
Hasak-Lowy. 33 Minutes. 297.
Hassan. Crash and Burn. 336.
Haston. How to Rock Break-Ups and 
Make-Ups. 146.
Hattie Ever After. Larson. 340.
Have You Seen My New Blue Socks? 
Bunting. 455. 
Haworth. Whole Lot of Lucky. 147.
Hayles. Breathing Room. 86.
Haynes. Ganesha’s Sweet Tooth. 256. 
Headley. Unnatural Creatures. 506.
Healey. When We Wake. 379.
Heart on Fire. Malaspina. 100.
Heath. Money Run. 379.
Heilbroner. Pet Named Sneaker. 298.
Heiligman. Boy Who Loved Math. 511.
———. Intentions. 86.
Helen’s Big World. Rappaport. 213.
Hello in There! Witek. 486.
Hello, Nebulon. O’Ryan. 524.
Henkes. Penny and Her Marble. 420.
Henry. Cheer Up. Mouse! 298.
Henry and the Cannons. Brown. 288.
Henry Franks. Salomon. 260.
Heos. Mustache Baby. 466.
———. Stronger than Steel. 380.
Herd Boy. Daly. 140.
Hero on a Bicycle. Hughes. 422.
Hesse. Safekeeping. 21.
Hest. Charley’s First Night. 87.
Hey, Presto! Shireen. 262.
Hiatt. Nine Days. 466.
Hicks, B. Worm Whisperer. 247.
Hicks, F. Nothing Can Possibly Go Wrong. 
482. 
July/August 2013 • 549
Hidden Summer. Phillips. 526.
Hiding Out at the Pancake Palace. Marino. 
472.
Higgins. Wilfred. 421.
Hirsch. Magisterium. 299.
Hiss-s-s-s! Kimmel. 150.
Hit the Road, Jack. Burleigh. 76.
Hobbs. Minnie McClary Speaks Her Mind. 
198.
Hoberman. I Like Old Clothes. 87.
Hogan. Daylight Saving. 88.
Hokey Pokey. Spinelli. 394.
Holding on to Zoe. Lyon. 34.
Holmes. Normal Kid. 248.
Homer. Odyssey. 147.
Homeroom Headhunters. Chapman. 501.
Homesick. Klise. 151.
Honeyman. Fire Horse Girl. 299.
Hood. Just Say Boo! 88.
———. Spike, the Mixed-Up Monster. 89.
Hoole. Kiss the Morning Star. 21.
Hoop Genius. Coy. 328.
Hooper. Velvet. 198.
Hoose. Moonbird. 22.
Hopkinson. Annie and Helen. 199.
———. Knit Your Bit. 337.
Horácˇek. Puffin Peter. 421.
Horvath. One Year in Coal Harbor. 23.
Hosford. Infinity and Me. 147. 
How Do You Feel? Browne. 10.
How Does Baby Feel? Katz. 339.
How Martha Saved Her Parents from 
Green Beans. LaRochelle. 426.
How My Summer Went Up in Flames. 
Doktorski. 503.
How to Be a Cat. McClure. 474.
How to Bicycle to the Moon to Plant 
Sunflowers. Gerstein. 418.
How to Lead a Life of Crime. Miller. 306.
How to Negotiate Everything. Spellman. 
533.
How to Read Literature Like a Professor: 
For Kids. Foster. 505.
How to Rock Break-Ups and Make-Ups. 
Haston. 146.
Howard, A. Splintered. 337.
Howard, J. That Time I Joined the Circus. 
422.
Howe. Otter and Odder. 248.
Howson. Linked. 467.
Hubbard. Dangerous Boy. 89.
Hughes. Hero on a Bicycle. 422. 
Hunter Moran Saves the Universe. Giff. 83.
Hurley. Blessed. 148.
Hutchinson. FML. 512.
Hysteria. Miranda. 306.
I Am Not a Copycat! Bonwill. 500.
I Am (Not) the Walrus. Briant. 75.
I Dare You Not to Yawn. Boudreau. 371.
I Funny. Patterson. 308.
I Have a Dream. King. 150.
I Like Old Clothes. Hoberman. 87.
I Loathe You. Slonim. 263.
I Need My Own Country! Walton. 222.
I See the Promised Land. Flowers. 365.
I Swear. Davis. 191.
I, Witness. McClintock. 207.
I’m Bored. Black. 71.
Ice! Pringle. 165. 
Icky Sticky Monster. Lodge. 95.
Icons. Stohl. 437.
If He Had Been With Me. Nowlin. 477.
If I Lie. Jackson. 90.
If You Want to See a Whale. Fogliano. 505.
Impossible Rescue. Sandler. 168.
Imprisoned. Sandler. 531.
In a Blink. Thorpe. 267.
In the Shadow of Blackbirds. Winters. 397.
Incredible Charlotte Sycamore. Maddison. 
427.
Infects. Beaudoin. 69.
Infidel in Paradise. Laidlaw. 425.
Infinity and Me. Hosford. 147. 
Innocents. Peloquin. 256.
Insignia. Kinkaid. 25.
Intentions. Heiligman. 86.
Invincible Microbe. Murphy. 40.
Invisibility. Cremer. 459.
Iron Hearted Violet. 186.
Iserson. Firecracker. 467.
Island. Chin. 136. 
It’s a Dog’s Life. Goodman. 19. 
It’s a Tiger! LaRochelle. 29.
It’s All About Me-ow. Talbott. 221.
It’s Monday. Mrs. Jolly Bones! Hanson. 
377.
Ivy in the Shadows. Woodworth. 398.
Ivy Takes Care. Wells. 357.
550 • the Bulletin
Jackson. If I Lie. 90.
Jaden. Never Enough. 23.
Jahn-Clough. Nothing but Blue. 512.
Jakubowski. Sidney & Sydney. 338.
James. Nurse Clementine. 513.
Jane Austen Goes to Hollywood. McDon-
ald. 520.
Jangles. Shannon. 261.
Janie Face to Face. Cooney. 292.
Jarzab. Opposite of Hallelujah. 148.
Jay. Of Beast and Beauty. 513.
Jeffers. This Moose Belongs to Me. 249.
Jenkins, E. Lemonade in Winter. 149.
———. Water in the Park. 497.
Jenkins, S. My First Day. 249.
Jepp, Who Defied the Stars. Marsh. 206.
Jet Plane. Macaulay. 204.
Jiang. Red Kite, Blue Kite. 380.
John. Elemental. 250.
Johnson, A. Summer Prince. 381.
Johnson, C. Gathering Dark. 300.
Jones. Star Turn. 422.
Joosse. Lovabye Dragon. 90.
Joseph. Flowers in the Sky. 423. 
Joyner. Boris Gets a Lizard. 514.
———. Boris on the Move. 514.
Jump into the Sky. Pearsall. 108.
Jung. Geeks, Girls, and Secret Identities. 
250.
Just a Dog. Bauer. 187.
Just One Day. Forman. 330.
Just Right for Christmas. Black. 134. 
Just Say Boo! Hood. 88.
Kade, J. Bot Wars. 468.
Kade, S. Rules. 515.
Kaplan. Cousin Irv from Mars. 515.
Katerina’s Wish. Mobley. 104.
Katz. How Does Baby Feel? 339.
———. Now I’m Big! 423.
Keenan. As the Crow Flies. 149.
———. Castle. 34. 
———. Jet Plane. 204. 
Keeping Safe the Stars. O’Connor. 161.
Kehret. Animals Welcome. 91.
Kel Gilligan’s Daredevil Stunt Show. 
Buckley. 75.
Kelley. Lost Girls. 24.
Kelly. Mousetronaut. 199.
Kelsey. You Are Stardust. 91.
Kenneally. Stealing Parker. 251.
———. Things I Can’t Forget. 381.
Kephart. Small Damages. 24.
Kevin Keeps Up. Nagda. 160. 
Key. Fourmile. 92.
Key & the Flame. Caterer. 456.
Keyes. Darkbeast. 25.
Kimmel, Elizabeth. Legend of the Ghost 
Dog. 200.
Kimmel, Eric. Hiss-s-s-s! 150.
Kimmelman. Sam and Charlie (and Sam 
Too!). 424.
Kindhearted Crocodile. Panzieri. 525.
King, A. Ask the Passengers. 63.
King, M. I Have a Dream. 150.
King Arthur’s Very Great Grandson. 
Kraegel. 27.
Kinkaid. Insignia. 25.
Kinsey-Warnock. True Colors. 151.
Kirk. Ten Things I Love about You. 300.
Kiss Like This. Murphy. 307.
Kiss Me Again. Vail. 268.
Kiss Means I Love You. Allen. 131. 
Kiss the Morning Star. Hoole. 21.
Kittscher. Wig in the Window. 516.
Kizzy Ann Stamps. Watts. 120.
Kladstrup. Garden Princess. 468.
Klassen. This Is Not My Hat. 151.
Klise. Homesick. 151.
Knisley. Relish. 469.
Knit Your Bit. Hopkinson. 337.
Knudsen. Big Mean Mike. 26.
Knutsson. Shadows Cast by Stars. 26.
Koertge. Lies, Knives, and Girls in Red 
Dresses. 27.
Konigsberg. Openly Straight. 516.
Korman. Ungifted. 152.
Kraegel. King Arthur’s Very Great Grand-
son. 27.
Kraus. Scowler. 382.
Kredensor. Ollie & Moon: Aloha. 517.
Kress, A. Friday Society. 251.
Kress, N. Flash Point. 252.
Kristoff. Stormdancer. 92.
Krokos. False Memory. 93.
Krosoczka. Platypus Police Squad. 469.
Krovatin. Gravediggers. 153.
Krull. Beatles Were Fab (And They Were 
Funny). 424. 
July/August 2013 • 551
Krumwiede. Freakling. 200.
Kumak’s River. Bania. 67.
L’Engle. Wrinkle in Time. 154.
La Valley. Vine Basket. 425.
LaBan. Tragedy Paper. 301.
Lachenmeyer. Boo! Book. 28.
LaFevers. Dark Triumph. 339.
Lagercrantz. My Happy Life. 517.
Laidlaw. Infidel in Paradise. 425.
Lanagan. Brides of Rollrock Island. 28.
———. Yellowcake. 470.
Lancaster. Future We Left Behind. 301.
Land of Neverbelieve. Messenger. 207.
Landry. Trick or Treat. 93.
Lane. Black Ice. 252.
Lange. Butter. 153. 
LaRochelle. How Martha Saved Her Par-
ents from Green Beans. 426.
———. It’s a Tiger! 29.
LaRosa. Game On. 532.
Larson, K. Hattie Ever After. 340.
Larson, D. One Frozen Lake. 302.
Larson, H. Who Is AC? 470.
Larwood. Freaks. 383.
Last Laughs. Lewis. 31.
Latham. Don’t Feed the Boy. 253.
Laugh with the Moon. Burg. 10.
Laura Line. Allen. 410.
Lawrence. Mystic City. 201.
Laybourne. Monument 14. 29.
League of Strays. Schulman. 169.
Lean. Dog Called Homeless. 94.
Leathers. Black Rabbit. 302.
Leavitt. My Book of Life by Angel. 153.
Legend of the Ghost Dog. Kimmel. 200.
Legrand. Cavendish Home for Boys and 
Girls. 154. 
Lemonade in Winter. Jenkins. 149.
Lenny Cyrus, School Virus. Schreiber. 481.
Leonard. Crusher. 155.
Lester’s Dreadful Sweaters. Campbell. 136. 
Let the Sky Fall. Messenger. 429.
Let’s Sing a Lullaby with the Brave Cow-
boy. Thomas. 118.
Leveen. Manicpixiedreamgirl. 426.
Levinthal. Who Pushed Humpty Dumpty? 
94.
Levithan. Every Day. 30.
———. Invisibility. 459.
Leviton. My First Ghost. 39. 
Levy. Small Medium at Large. 30.
Lewis. Last Laughs. 31.
———. World Rat Day. 383.
Liar & Spy. Stead. 47.
Liberty’s Christmas. Platt. 110.
Lies, Knives, and Girls in Red Dresses. 
Koertge. 27.
Life Happens Next. Trueman. 174.
Life of Ty: Penguin Problems. Myracle. 
522.
Light in the Darkness. Cline-Ransome. 
238.
Lightning Dreamer. Engle. 294.
Like Bug Juice on a Burger. Sternberg. 437.
Lin. Starry River of the Sky. 201.
Lincoln’s Grave Robbers. Sheinkin. 262.
Lindner. Catherine. 340. 
Lindsey Lost. Phillips. 109.
Line 135. Zullo. 488.
Linked. Howson. 467.
Linko. Flutter. 253.
Lipsyte. Twinning Project. 202.
Little Book of Sloth. Cooke. 291.
Little Cub. Dunrea. 242.
Little Gray Bunny. McGrath. 345.
Little Woods. Templeman. 49.
Litwin. Pete the Cat and His Four Groovy 
Buttons. 31.
Lloyd. Momentum. 95.
Llywelyn. Cave of Secrets. 518.
Lo. Adaptation. 32.
Lodge. Icky Sticky Monster. 95.
Loftin. Sinister Sweetness of Splendid 
Academy. 96.
Logue. Sleep Like a Tiger. 202.
Lone Bean. Ross. 112.
Long, E. Wing Wing Brothers Math Spec-
tacular! 32. 
Long, R. Treachery of Beautiful Things. 96.
Long Lankin. Barraclough. 3.
Longest Night. Snyder. 353. 
Look. Alvin Ho: Allergic to Babies, Bur-
glars, and Other Bumps in the Night. 
471.
Look. Bennett. 324.
Look . . . Look Again! O’Brien. 161. 
Look Up! Burleigh. 289.
Look Up! Cate. 327.
552 • the Bulletin
López. Choke. 33.
Losing It. Fry. 194.
Lost Girl. Mandanna. 35.
Lost Girls. Kelley. 24.
Losure. Wild Boy. 341.
Loth. Zelda the Varigoose. 33. 
Lovabye Dragon. Joosse. 90.
Love and Other Perishable Items. Buzo. 
289.
Love, Amalia. Ada. 5.
Lowry. Son. 203.
Lucky Ducklings. Moore. 347.
Lucky Fools. Voorhees. 119.
Lucy Can’t Sleep. Schwartz. 115.
Lucy Variations. Zarr. 487.
Luedeke. Smashed. 97.
Lula Bell on Geekdom, Freakdom + the 
Challenges of Bad Hair. Payne. 211.
Lulu and the Dog from the Sea. McKay. 
428.
Lulu and the Duck in the Park. McKay. 
102.
Lutz. How to Negotiate Everything. 533.
Lynch, C. Casualties of War. 254.
———. Free-Fire Zone. 203.
———. Pieces. 341.
Lynch, J. My Beautiful Hippie. 471.
Lyon. Holding on to Zoe. 34.
Maas. Throne of Glass. 97.
Macaulay. Castle. 34.
———. Jet Plane. 204.
Maccarone. Kindhearted Crocodile. 525.
MacColl. Nobody’s Secret. 384.
Macdonald. Odette’s Secrets. 384.
Mack, J. Good News. Bad News. 98.
———. Things I Can Do. 518.
Mack, W. Athlete vs. Mathlete. 341.
Mackintosh. Frank Show. 98.
MacLachlan. Boxcar Children Beginning. 
99.
———. Cat Talk. 342.
———. Nora’s Chicks. 343.
Madison. September Girls. 519.
Maddison. Incredible Charlotte Sycamore. 
427.
Madman’s Daughter. Shepherd. 310.
Madonia. Fingerprints of You. 155.
Mafi. Unravel Me. 343.
Maggot Moon. Gardner. 332.
Magicalamity. Saunders. 309.
Magician’s Apprentice. Banks. 67.
Magisterium. Hirsch. 299.
Magoon, K. Fire in the Streets. 99.
Magoon, S. Boy Who Cried Bigfoot! 385.
Maid of Secrets. McGowan. 475.
Maizes. On My Way to the Bath. 35.
Make Magic! Clayton. 238.
Malaspina. Heart on Fire. 100.
Manceau. Windblown. 472.
Mandanna. Lost Girl. 35.
Manicpixiedreamgirl. Leveen. 426.
Manning. Millie Fierce. 36.
Manzano. Revolution of Evelyn Serrano. 
100.
Marathon. Yakin. 55.
Marble Queen. Blake. 325.
Marchetta. Quintana of Charyn. 385.
Marchon. Good Night! 344.
Marco Impossible. Moskowitz. 347.
Mariconda. Voyage of Lucy P. Simmons. 
204.
Marillier. Shadowfell. 101.
Marino. Hiding Out at the Pancake Palace. 
472.
Marked Man. Doeden. 414. 
Markel. Brave Girl. 303.
———. Fantastic Jungles of Henri Rous-
seau. 156.
Markle. Bats. 473.
———. What If You Had Animal Teeth? 
303.
Marks. Velveteen. 205.
Marr. Carnival of Souls. 101.
———. Shards & Ashes. 344.
Marsden. My Own Revolution. 205.
Marsh. Jepp, Who Defied the Stars. 206.
Marshall, J. My Happy Life.
Marshall, L. Passover Lamb. 386.
Martin, A. Because of Shoe. 156. 
———. Better to Wish. 473.
Martin, C. Yesterday. 36.
Martinez. Space Between Us. 254.
Marvin Makes Music. Hamlisch. 246.
Mary Walker Wears the Pants. Harness. 
378.
Mary Wrightly, So Politely. Bridges. 455.
Massini. Trixie Ten. 386.
Mathers. McElderry Book of Mother 
Goose. 102.
July/August 2013 • 553
Matti. Mister Orange. 427.
Maybe I Will. Gray. 333.
McAlpine. Tell-Tale Start. 304.
McBride, K. One Moment. 37.
McBride, L. Necromancing the Stone. 157.
McCall.  Summer of the Mariposas. 206.
McCarthy, C. Color of Rain. 474.
McCarthy, M. Daredevil. 519.
McCarty. Chloe. 37.
McClintock. I, Witness. 207.
McClure. How to Be a Cat. 474.
McCormick. Never Fall Down. 38.
McCully. Sam and the Big Kids. 428.
McDonald. Jane Austen Goes to Holly-
wood. 520.
McDonnell. Monsters’ Monster. 157.
McDowell. This Is Not a Drill. 158.
McElderry Book of Mother Goose. 
Mathers. 102.
McElfresh. Strong Deaf. 255.
McGhee. Bink & Gollie: Best Friends 
Forever. 503.
McGinty. Gandhi. 475.
McGowan. Maid of Secrets. 475.
McGrath. Little Gray Bunny. 345.
McKay. Lulu and the Dog from the Sea. 
428.
———. Lulu and the Duck in the Park. 
102.
McKinlay. Below. 429.
McMann. Crash. 345.
McNamee. Beyond. 103.
McNeal. Far Far Away. 476.
McNeil. Ten. 158.
Me and Momma and Big John. Rockliff. 
111.
Medina. Yaqui Delgado Wants to Kick 
Your Ass. 346.
Meng. Bedtime Is Canceled. 304.
Mermaids in the Backyard. Hapka. 510.
Merrell. Wicked Sweet. 38.
Meshon. Take Me Out to the Yakyu. 305.
Messenger, N. Land of Neverbelieve. 207.
Messenger, S. Let the Sky Fall. 429.
Meyer. Scarlet. 305.
Meyerhoff. Barftastic Life of Louie Burger. 
520.
Midwinterblood. Sedgwick. 310.
Mighty Lalouche. Olshan. 478.
Milford. Broken Lands. 103.
Milk of Birds. Whitman. 441.
Miller, A. Colin Fisher. 208.
Miller, K. How to Lead a Life of Crime. 
306.
Miller, M. My First Ghost. 39.
Millie Fierce. Manning. 36.
Mills. Zero Tolerance. 521.
Mind Games. White. 358.
Minnie McClary Speaks Her Mind. Hobbs. 
198.
Miranda. Hysteria. 306.
Miss Moore Thought Otherwise. Pinbor-
ough. 388.
Mister Orange. Matti. 427.
Mitchard. What We Saw at Night. 307.
Mitchell. Defy the Dark. 521.
Mulder. Pedal It! 522.
Mobley. Katerina’s Wish. 104.
Mojo. Tharp. 439.
Mom, It’s My First Day of Kindergarten! 
Yum. 56. 
Momentum. Lloyd. 95.
Monaghan. Girl Named Digit. 39.
Money Run. Heath. 379.
Monroe. Cookie the Walker. 346.
Monsieur Marceau. Schubert. 217.
Monsters. Bick. 499.
Monsters’ Monster. McDonnell. 157.
Monstrous Beauty. Fama. 80.
Monti. Diverse Energies. 187. 
Monument 14. Laybourne. 29.
Moon Moth. Vance. 52.
Moonbird. Hoose. 22.
Moore, E. Lucky Ducklings. 347.
Moore, K. Amber House. 159. 
Morel. Survive. 104.
Morgan. Beautiful and the Cursed. 430.
Moriarty. Corner of White. 430.
Moskowitz. Marco Impossible. 347.
———. Teeth. 281.
Moss. Barbed Wire Baseball. 387.
Mouse Bird Snake Wolf. Almond. 452.
Mulder. Pedal It! 522.
Murguia. Snippet the Early Riser. 476.
Murmurings. West. 357.
Murphy, J. Giant and How He Hum-
bugged America. 159.
———. Invincible Microbe. 40.
554 • the Bulletin
Murphy, M. Kiss Like This. 307.
Murphy, S. Toppling. 105.
Mustache Baby. Heos. 466.
My Beautiful Failure. Young. 316.
My Beautiful Hippie. Lynch. 471.
My Book of Life by Angel. Leavitt. 153.
My Dad Is Big and Strong, But. Saudo. 45.
My Dad Thinks He’s Funny. Germein. 418.
My Epic Fairy Tale Fail. Staniszewski. 395.
My First Day. Jenkins. 249.
My First Ghost. Miller. 39.
My Happy Life. Lagercrantz. 517.
My Name Is Parvana. Ellis. 243.
My Own Revolution. Marsden. 205.
My Sister Lives on the Mantelpiece. 
Pitcher. 109.
Myers, C. H.O.R.S.E. 160.
Myers, W. Darius & Twig. 477.
Myracle. Life of Ty: Penguin Problems. 
522.
Mystery of Darwin’s Frog. Crump. 459.
Mystic City. Lawrence. 201.
Nadin. Paradise. 208.
Naftali. Army of Frogs. 527.
Nagda. Kevin Keeps Up. 160. 
Nagpal. Draupadi. 523.
Nameless. St. Crow. 394.
Nancy Clancy. O’Connor. 41.
Nasreddine. Weulersse. 441.
Navigating Early. Vanderpool. 355.
Neal. Ava and the Little Folk. 457.
Necromancing the Stone. McBride. 157.
Nees. Class Pets. 523.
———. Picture Day. 523.
Nelly May Has Her Say. DeFelice. 375.
Nelson, K. Nelson Mandela. 348.
Nelson, S. Buffalo Bird Girl. 209.
Nelson Mandela. Nelson. 348.
Never Enough. Jaden. 23.
Never Fall Down. McCormick. 38.
Never Let You Go. Berne. 284.
New Lands. Rodkey. 480.
Newman. October Mourning. 105.
Newquist. Book of Blood. 106.
Next Stop—Zanzibar Road! Daly. 240.
Nickerson. Strands of Bronze and Gold. 
348.
Night Letter. Sayres. 216.
Nine Days. Hiatt. 466.
No Man’s Land. Underdahl. 267.
No. 1 Car Spotter and the Firebird. Ati-
nuke. 132. 
Noah Webster & His Words. Ferris. 142.
Nobleman. Bill, the Boy Wonder. 40.
Nobody but Us. Halbrook. 335.
Nobody’s Secret. MacColl. 384.
Nora the Mind Reader. Gidali. 83.
Nora’s Chicks. MacLachlan. 343.
Normal Kid. Holmes. 248.
Northrop. Rotten. 431.
Not Exactly a Love Story. Couloumbis. 
191.
Notes from Ghost Town. Ellison. 329.
Nothing but Blue. Jahn-Clough. 512.
Nothing Can Possibly Go Wrong. Shen. 
482.
Now I’m Big! Katz. 423.
Nowhere to Run. Griffin. 464.
Nowlin. If He Had Been With Me. 477.
Nugget & Fang. Sauer. 351.
Nurse Clementine. James. 513.
O’Brien. Look . . . Look Again! 161. 
O’Connor, B. On the Road to Mineo’s. 
209.
O’Connor, J. Nancy Clancy. 41.
O’Connor, S. Keeping Safe the Stars. 161.
Oates. Two or Three Things I Forgot to Tell 
You. 41.
Obed. Twelve Kinds of Ice. 209.
Obsidian Mirror. Fisher. 504.
Odd Duck. Castellucci. 501.
Ocean Sunlight. Bang. 132. 
October Mourning. Newman. 105.
Odd Squad. Fry. 331.
Odessa Again. Reinhardt. 433. 
Odette’s Secrets. Macdonald. 384.
Odyssey. Homer. 147.
Of Beast and Beauty. Jay. 513.
Oh. Prophecy. 431.
Oh, No! Fleming. 143.
Oh! What a Surprise! Bloom. 183.
Oink-A-Doodle-Moo. Czekaj. 14.
Ol’ Mama Squirrel. Stein. 409.
Oliver. Requiem. 387.
———. Spindlers. 106.
Olivia and the Fairy Princesses. Falconer. 
15.
Ollie & Moon: Aloha. Kredensor. 517.
July/August 2013 • 555
Ollie’s School Day. Calmenson. 77.
Olshan. Mighty Lalouche. 478.
Olswanger. Greenhorn. 210.
On a Beam of Light. Berne. 454.
On My Way to the Bath. Maizes. 35.
On the Day I Died. Fleming. 16.
On the Road to Mineo’s. O’Connor. 209.
One + One = Blue. Auch. 411.
One Came Home. Timberlake. 313.
One Frozen Lake. Larson. 302.
One Gorilla. Browne. 236.
One Moment. McBride. 37.
One Year in Coal Harbor. Horvath. 23.
Open Very Carefully. Bromley. 287.
Openly Straight. Konigsberg. 516.
Operation Oleander. Patterson. 432.
Oppel. Such Wicked Intent. 42.
Opposite of Hallelujah. Jarzab. 148.
Orleans. Smith. 323.
O’Ryan. Hello, Nebulon. 524.
Other Normals. Vizzini. 174.
Other Side of Town. Agee. 234.
Ottaviani. Primates. 524.
Otter and Odder. Howe. 248.
Out of Nowhere. Padian. 349.
Out of Reach. Arcos. 131.
Out of the Easy. Sepetys. 392.
Outpost. Aguirre. 64.
Owly & Wormy: Bright Lights and Starry 
Nights. Runton. 233.
Owsley. Their Skeletons Speak. 268. 
Oxley. Chicken Problem. 107.
Padian. Out of Nowhere. 349.
Paiute Princess. Ray. 43.
Page. My First Day. 249.
Pale. Wooding. 224.
Pancho Rabbit and the Coyote. Tonatiuh. 
534.
Panic. Draper. 415.
Panzieri. Kindhearted Crocodile. 525.
Paper Valentine. Yovanoff. 270.
Paperboy. Vawter. 356.
Paradise. Nadin. 208.
Parker, Marjorie. Colorful Dreamer. 255.
Parker, Michael. You Are a Star! 91.
Parry. Written in Stone. 526.
Part-Time Princess. Underwood. 439.
Passenger. Smith. 218.
Passion Blue. Strauss. 221.
Passover Lamb. Marshall. 386.
Pastis. Timmy Failure. 349.
Patel. Ganesha’s Sweet Tooth. 256.
Patent. Dogs on Duty. 162.
Path of Names. Goelman. 463.
Patterson, James. Confessions of a Murder 
Suspect. 107.
———. I Funny. 308.
Patterson, Janci. Chasing the Skip. 210.
Patterson, V. Operation Oleander. 432.
Paul. Venom. 162. 
Paulson. Valkyrie Rising. 211.
Payne, C. Lula Bell on Geekdom, Freak-
dom + the Challenges of Bad Hair. 211.
Payne, K. Another 365 Days. 432.
Peacock. Red Thread Sisters. 163.
Peanut. Halliday. 335.
Peanut & Fifi Have a Ball. de Sève. 460.
Pearce. Fathomless. 163.
Pearsall. Jump into the Sky. 108.
Pedal It! Mulder. 522.
Peloquin. Innocents. 256.
Penelope Crumb. Stout. 117.
Penny and Her Marble. Henkes. 420.
Perfect Escape. Brown. 9.
Perfect Home for a Family. Harrison. 378.
Perfectly Percy. Schmid. 309.
Period 8. Crutcher. 460.
Permanent Record. Stella. 436.
Perry’s Killer Playlist. Schreiber. 217.
Pet Named Sneaker. Heilbroner. 298.
Pete the Cat and His Four Groovy Buttons. 
Litwin. 31.
Petty. Bloody Chester. 108.
Phillips, G. Hidden Summer. 526.
Phillips, S. Lindsey Lost. 109.
Phoebe and Digger. Springstubb. 353.
Picture Day. Nees. 523.
Pieces. Lynch. 341.
Pierson. Crap Kingdom. 388.
Pileggi. Prisoner 88. 527.
Pinborough. Miss Moore Thought Other-
wise. 388.
Pinch and Dash and the Terrible Couch. 
Daley. 328.
Pinfold. Black Dog. 164.
Pinkney, A. Hand in Hand. 257.
Pinkney, J. Puss in Boots. 257.
Pinkwater. Bear in Love. 42.
556 • the Bulletin
———. Bushman Lives! 164. 
Pinned. Flake. 142.
Pirates vs. Cowboys. Reynolds. 389.
Pitcher. My Sister Lives on the Mantel-
piece. 109.
Pizzoli. Watermelon Seed. 478.
Platt. Liberty’s Christmas. 110.
Platypus Police Squad. Krosoczka. 469.
Playing with Fire. Hale. 510.
Pluto’s Secret. Weitekamp. 356.
Ponti. Dead City. 258.
Powers. That Mad Game. 258.
Prairie Evers. Airgood. 65.
Prairie Thief. Wiley. 120.
Pratchett. Dodger. 165.
Prelutsky. Stardines. 433.
Press. Doodles of Sam Dibble. 350.
Prettiest Doll. Willner-Pardo. 314.
Pretty Girl-13. Coley. 373.
Preus. Shadow on the Mountain. 212.
Price. Dead Girl Moon. 212.
Price of Freedom. Fradin. 296.
Primates. Ottaviani. 524.
Prince for a Princess. Walters. 269.
Prince Puggly of Spud and the Kingdom of 
Spiff. Weston. 397.
Princess and the Peas. Hart. 336.
Pringle. Ice! 165. 
Prisoner 88. Pileggi. 527.
Program. Young. 536.
Prophecy. Oh. 431.
Prose. Turning. 166.
Pryce. Army of Frogs. 527.
Puffin Peter. Horácˇek. 421.
Pug. Worth. 358.
Pug & Doug. Breen. 287.
Puss in Boots. Pinkney. 257.
Pyron. Dogs of Winter. 166.
Quiet Place. Stewart. 172.
Quinn. Another Little Piece. 528.
Quintana of Charyn. Marchetta. 385.
Quirk. Girl Called Problem. 528.
Rabbit & Robot. Bell. 69.
Rabbit’s Snow Dance. Bruchac. 288.
Raf. Symptoms of My Insanity. 529.
Raft. Bodeen. 73.
Rappaport. Beyond Courage. 167.
———. Helen’s Big World. 213.
Rapture Practice. Hartzler. 511.
Raschka. Everyone Can Learn to Ride a 
Bicycle. 529.
Raven Boys. Stiefvater. 48.
Ray. Paiute Princess. 43.
Reasonable Ogre. Barnes. 68.
Reboot. Tintera. 534.
Red Car, Red Bus. Steggall. 171. 
Red Kite, Blue Kite. Jiang. 380.
Red Thread Sisters. Peacock. 163.
Reed, L. Amber House. 159.
Reed, T. Amber House. 159.
Reef. Brontë Sisters. 167. 
Rees. This Is Not Forgiveness. 213.
Regine’s Book. Stokke. 265.
Reinhardt. Odessa Again. 433. 
Relish. Knisley. 469.
Reluctant Assassin. Colfer. 457.
Requiem. Oliver. 387.
Return to Me. Chen. 290.
Revel. Guibord. 334.
Revenge of a Not-So-Pretty Girl. Blythe. 
370.
Revis. Shades of Earth. 350.
Revolution 19. Rosenblum. 389.
Revolution of Evelyn Serrano. Manzano. 
100.
Reynolds. Creepy Carrots! 110.
———. Pirates vs. Cowboys. 389.
Rhodes, J. Sugar. 530.
Rhodes, M. Falling Kingdoms. 259.
Ribbit! Folgueira. 462.
Richards. Black City. 214.
Rivers. Encyclopedia of Me. 111.
Robert. Far from Home. 214.
Robinson. What to Do If an Elephant 
Stands on Your Foot. 43.
Rocco. Super Hair-O and the Barber of 
Doom. 479.
Rockliff. Me and Momma and Big John. 
111.
Rockoholic. Skuse. 311.
Rockwell. Truck Stop. 479.
Rodkey. New Lands. 480.
Rosati. Auracle. 112.
Rosen. Bananas in My Ears. 215. 
Rosenblum. Revolution 19. 389.
Rosenthal. Exclamation Mark. 390.
———. Wumbers. 44.
Roskos. Dr. Bird’s Advice for Sad Poets. 390.
July/August 2013 • 557
Ross, C. Lone Bean. 112.
Ross, E. Belle Epoque. 530.
Ross, G. Bartholomew Biddle and the Very 
Big Wind. 259.
Rossetti. Girl With Borrowed Wings. 44.
Roth. Serendipity & Me. 351.
Rotten. Northrop. 431.
Rubens. Sons of the 613. 215.
Rubin, Sarah. Someday Dancer. 113.
Rubin, Susan. Diego Rivera. 391.
Ruining. Collomore. 374.
Ruins. Card. 188.
Rules. Kade. 515.
Rules for Disappearing. Elston. 461.
Rumford. From the Good Mountain. 113.
Rump. Shurtliff. 435.
Runton. Owly & Wormy: Bright Lights 
and Starry Nights. 233.
Rush. Altered. 308.
Rutkoski. Shadow Society. 216.
Ruzzier. Bear and Bee. 391.
Ryan. Foretold. 168.
Safekeeping. Hesse. 21.
Sailor Twain. Siegel. 170.
Salerni. Caged Graves. 434.
Salomon. Henry Franks. 260.
Sam and Charlie (and Sam Too!). Kimmel-
man. 424.
Sam and the Big Kids. McCully. 428.
Sanchez. Death, Dickinson, and the De-
mented Life of Frenchie Garcia. 531.
———. Downside of Being Charlie. 114.
Sanctum. Fine. 192.
Sandler. Impossible Rescue. 168.
———. Imprisoned. 531.
Santa from Cincinnati. Barrett. 133.
Sarah Gives Thanks. Allegra. 65.
Saturday Boy. Fleming. 504.
Saudo. My Dad Is Big and Strong, But. 45.
Sauer. Nugget & Fang. 351.
Saunders. Magicalamity. 309.
———. Whizz Pop Chocolate Shop. 480.
Savage Fortress. Chadda. 237. 
Sayres. Night Letter. 216.
Scanlon. Happy Birthday, Bunny! 392.
Scarlet. Meyer. 305.
Schlitz. Splendors and Glooms. 114.
Schmid. Perfectly Percy. 309.
Schmidt. What Came from the Stars. 115.
School for Good and Evil. Chainani. 456.
Schrefer. Endangered. 260.
Schreiber. Lenny Cyrus, School Virus. 481.
———. Perry’s Killer Playlist. 217.
Schroeder. Falling for You. 352.
Schubert. Monsieur Marceau. 217.
Schulman. League of Strays. 169.
Schwab. Archived. 261.
Schwartz. Lucy Can’t Sleep. 115.
Scieszka. Guys Read: The Sports Pages. 45.
Scorpions of Zahir. Brodien-Jones. 9.
Scott, J. Zits: Chillax. 532.
Scott, N. Great Race. 46.
Scowler. Kraus. 382.
Second Life of Abigail Walker. Dowell. 14.
Sedgwick. Midwinterblood. 310.
Seeds, Bees, Butterflies, and More! Gerber. 
377.
Seles. Game On. 532.
Selfors. Sweetest Spell. 116.
Sepetys. Out of the Easy. 392.
September Girls. Madison. 519.
Seraphina. Hartman. 20.
Serendipity & Me. Roth. 351.
Servant. Sharafeddine. 481.
Shades of Earth. Revis. 350.
Shadow Breakers. Blythe. 326.
Shadow Girl. Archer. 367.
Shadow on the Mountain. Preus. 212.
Shadow Society. Rutkoski. 216.
Shadowfell. Marillier. 101.
Shadowlands. Brian. 326.
Shadows. Bick. 7.
Shadows Cast by Stars. Knutsson. 26.
Shan. Zom-B. 218.
Shannon. Jangles. 261.
Sharafeddine. Servant. 481.
Shards & Ashes. Marr. 344.
Shaskan. Three Triceratops Tuff. 434.
Shea. Unicorn Thinks He’s Pretty Great. 
533.
Sheinkin. Bomb. 116.
———. Lincoln’s Grave Robbers. 262.
Sheinmel. Stone Girl. 117.
Shen. Nothing Can Possibly Go Wrong. 
482.
Shepherd. Madman’s Daughter. 310.
Shimko. You Know What You Have to Do. 
435.
558 • the Bulletin
Shireen. Hey, Presto! 262.
Short Seller. Weissman. 485.
Shukert. Starstruck. 393.
Shurtliff. Rump. 435.
Shusterman. UnWholly. 46.
Sidney & Sydney. Jakubowski. 338.
Siegel. Sailor Twain. 170.
Since You Left Me. Zadoff. 122.
Singer. Follow, Follow. 311.
Sinister Sweetness of Splendid Academy. 
Loftin. 96.
Skead. Something to Prove. 393.
Skilton. Bruised. 352.
Skinny. Cooner. 190.
Skuse. Rockoholic. 311.
Skylark. Spooner. 219.
Slated. Terry. 438.
Sleep Like a Tiger. Logue. 202.
Slonim. I Loathe You. 263.
Small Damages. Kephart. 24.
Small Medium at Large. Levy. 30.
Smashed. Luedeke. 97.
Smidgen of Sky. Winget. 270.
Smith, A. Winger. 482.
———. Passenger. 218.
Smith, C. Brick by Brick. 263.
Smith, J. This Is What Happy Looks Like. 
436.
Smith, K. Trinkets. 483.
Smith, L. Abe Lincoln’s Dream. 264.
Smith, S. Orleans. 323.
———. Dark. 483.
Snicket. “Who Could It Be At This Hour?” 
219.
Snippet the Early Riser. Murguia. 476.
Snyder. Longest Night. 353. 
So Close to You. Carter. 12.
Soldier Dog. Angus. 453.
Someday Dancer. Rubin. 113.
Something Strange and Deadly. Dennard. 
79.
Something to Prove. Skead. 393.
Son. Lowry. 203.
Sons of the 613. Rubens. 215.
Sophia’s War. Avi. 185.
Space Between Us. Martinez. 254.
Spellcaster. Gray. 333.
Spellman. How to Negotiate Everything. 
533.
Spike, the Mixed-Up Monster. Hood. 89.
Spindlers. Oliver. 106.
Spinelli. Hokey Pokey. 394.
———. Third Grade Angels. 170. 
Spinner. Alex the Parrot. 171.
Spirit and Dust. Clement-Moore. 413.
Splash of Red. Bryant. 236.
Splendors and Glooms. Schlitz. 114.
Splintered. Howard. 337.
Spooner. Skylark. 219.
Springstubb. Phoebe and Digger. 353.
St. Crow. Nameless. 394.
Staniszewski. My Epic Fairy Tale Fail. 395.
Star Turn. Jones. 422.
Stardines. Prelutsky. 433.
Starry River of the Sky. Lin. 201.
Starstruck. Shukert. 393.
Starting from Here. Bigelow. 71.
Stasse. Forsaken. 47.
Stead. Liar & Spy. 47.
Stealing Parker. Kenneally. 251.
Steensland. Behind the Bookcase. 220.
Steggall. Red Car, Red Bus. 171. 
Stein. Ol’ Mama Squirrel. 409.
Stella. Permanent Record. 436.
Stemple, A. B.U.G. (Big Ugly Guy). 399
Stemple, H. Bad Girls. 316. 
Stentz. Colin Fisher. 208. 
Sternberg. Like Bug Juice on a Burger. 437.
Stewart. Quiet Place. 172.
Stiefvater. Curiosities. 264.
———. Raven Boys. 48.
Stohl. Icons. 437.
Stokke. Regine’s Book. 265.
Stone, Tamara. Time Between Us. 172.
Stone, Tanya. Courage Has No Color. 265.
Stone Girl. Sheinmel. 117.
Stop! Go! Biggs. 325.
Stories of the Wild West Gang. Cowley. 138.
Stormdancer. Kristoff. 92.
Stout. Penelope Crumb. 117.
Strahan. Under My Hat. 118.
Strands of Bronze and Gold. Nickerson. 
348.
Strasnick. Then You Were Gone. 312.
Strauss. Passion Blue. 221.
Strike Three, You’re Dead. Berk. 369.
Stringer. When Stravinsky Met Nijinsky. 
354.
July/August 2013 • 559
Strong Deaf. McElfresh. 255.
Stronger than Steel. Heos. 380.
Stung. Wiggins. 442.
Such Wicked Intent. Oppel. 42.
Sugar. Rhodes. 530.
Sullivan. Ball. 438.
Suma. 17 & Gone. 354.
Summer of the Mariposas. McCall.  206.
Summer Prince. Johnson. 381.
Super Hair-O and the Barber of Doom. 
Rocco. 479.
Surfacing. Baskin. 283.
Survive. Morel. 104.
Sweetest Spell. Selfors. 116.
Symptoms of My Insanity. Raf. 529.
Tabby McTat. Donaldson. 294.
Take Me Out to the Yakyu. Meshon. 305.
Taken. Bowman. 412.
Takoudes. When We Wuz Famous. 395.
Talbott. It’s All About Me-ow. 221.
Tashjian. For What It’s Worth. 48.
Tavares. Becoming Babe Ruth. 312.
Taylor. Days of Blood and Starlight. 222.
Teague. Three Little Pigs and the Some-
what Bad Wolf. 484.
Teeth. Moskowitz. 281.
Telgemeier. Drama. 173.
Tell-Tale Start. McAlpine. 304.
Templeman. Little Woods. 49.
Ten. McNeil. 158.
Ten Things I Love about You. Kirk. 300.
TenNapel. Cardboard. 49.
Terrible Thing that Happened to Barnaby 
Brocket. Boyne. 371.
Terry. Slated. 438.
Tharp. Mojo. 439. 
That Is NOT a Good Idea! Willems. 485.
That Mad Game. Powers. 258.
That Night’s Train. Akbarpour. 130. 
That Time I Joined the Circus. Howard. 
422.
Their Skeletons Speak. Walker. 268.
Then You Were Gone. Strasnick. 312.
Things I Can Do. Mack. 518.
Things I Can’t Forget. Kenneally. 381.
Third Grade Angels. Spinelli. 170. 
This Is Not a Drill. McDowell. 158.
This Is Not Forgiveness. Rees. 213.
This Is Not My Hat. Klassen. 151.
This Is What Happy Looks Like. Smith. 
436.
This Moose Belongs to Me. Jeffers. 249.
Thomas. Let’s Sing a Lullaby with the 
Brave Cowboy. 118.
Thompson, E. Further Tale of Peter Rabbit. 
266.
Thompson, J. Girl from Felony Bay. 484.
Thorpe. In a Blink. 267.
Three Little Pigs and the Somewhat Bad 
Wolf. Teague. 484.
Three Triceratops Tuff. Shaskan. 434.
Throne of Glass. Maas. 97.
Thunderstorm. Geisert. 463.
Tides. Cornwell. 458.
Tiger Lily. Anderson. 6.
Tilly’s Moonlight Garden. Green. 196.
Timberlake. One Came Home. 313.
Time Between Us. Stone. 172.
Timmy Failure. Pastis. 349.
Tintera. Reboot. 534.
Tiptoe Joe. Gibson. 507.
Tjong-Khing. Birthday Cake Mystery. 173.
Tonatiuh. Pancho Rabbit and the Coyote. 
534.
Toppling. Murphy. 105.
Town Mouse and the Country Mouse. 
Aesop. 130.
Townsend. Where Do Presidents Come 
From? 50.
Toys in Space. Grey. 509.
Tragedy Paper. LaBan. 301.
Treachery of Beautiful Things. Long. 96.
Trent. Unnaturalists. 50.
Trick or Treat. Landry. 93.
Trine. Adventures of Jo Schmo. 51.
Trinkets. Smith, K. 483.
Trixie Ten. Massini. 386.
Truck Stop. Rockwell. 479.
True Colors. Kinsey-Warnock. 151.
Trueman. Life Happens Next. 174.
Truth or Dare. Green. 508.
Tubb. 13th Sign. 313.
Turning. Prose. 166.
Twelve Kinds of Ice. Obed. 209.
Twerp. Goldblatt. 507.
Twinning Project. Lipsyte. 202.
Two Little Monkeys. Fox. 17.
Two or Three Things I Forgot to Tell You. 
Oates. 41.
560 • the Bulletin
Umansky. Clover Twig and the Perilous 
Path. 51.
Undead Ed. Ghoulstone. 18.
Under My Hat. Strahan. 118.
Under the Bridge. Harmon. 197.
Under the Light. Whitcomb. 535.
Underdahl. No Man’s Land. 267.
underGROUND. Fleming, D. 143.
Underwood. Part-Time Princess. 439.
Ungifted. Korman. 152.
Unicorn Thinks He’s Pretty Great. Shea. 
533.
Unnatural Creatures. Gaiman. 506.
Unnaturalists. Trent. 50.
Unquiet. Garsee. 17.
Unravel Me. Mafi. 343.
Unremembered. Brody. 372.
Unspoken. Brennan. 74.
Unspoken. Cole. 239.
UnWholly. Shusterman. 46.
Urban. Center of Everything. 396.
Vacation for Pooch. Cocca-Leffler. 291.
Vail. Kiss Me Again. 268.
Valkyrie Rising. Paulson. 211.
Vance. Moon Moth. 52.
Vande Velde. Deadly Pink. 119.
———. Frogged. 440.
Vanderpool. Navigating Early. 355.
VanDerwater. Forest Has a Song. 396.
Vaughn. Ability. 440.
Vaught. Freaks Like Us. 53.
Vawter. Paperboy. 356.
Velvet. Hooper. 198.
Velveteen. Marks. 205.
Vengekeep Prophecies. Farrey. 192.
Venom. Paul. 162. 
Vere. Bedtime for Monsters. 53.
Vessel. Durst. 79. 
Vine Basket. La Valley. 425.
Violet Mackerel’s Brilliant Plot. Branford. 
73.
Violet Mackerel’s Remarkable Recovery. 
Branford. 286.
Vivian. Burn for Burn. 85. 
Vizzini. Other Normals. 174.
Voorhees. Lucky Fools. 119.
Voyage of Lucy P. Simmons. Mariconda. 
204.
Walker. Their Skeletons Speak. 268.
Walters. Prince for a Princess. 269.
Walton, K. Empty. 314.
Walton, R. I Need My Own Country! 222.
Warman. Beautiful Lies. 53.
Water Castle. Blakemore. 285.
Water in the Park. Jenkins. 497.
Watermelon Seed. Pizzoli. 478.
Waters. Break My Heart 1,000 Times. 223.
Watts. Kizzy Ann Stamps. 120.
Wedgieman, Harper. 20.
Wee Rhymes. Yolen. 444.
Weill. Count Me In! 269.
Weissman. Short Seller. 485.
Weitekamp. Pluto’s Secret. 356.
Wells. Following Grandfather. 223.
———. Ivy Takes Care. 357.
West. Murmurings. 357.
Weston. Prince Puggly of Spud and the 
Kingdom of Spiff. 397.
Weulersse. Nasreddine. 441.
What Came from the Stars. Schmidt. 115.
What Happens Next. Clayton. 189.
What If You Had Animal Teeth? Markle. 
303.
What to Do If an Elephant Stands on Your 
Foot. Robinson. 43.
What We Saw at Night. Mitchard. 307.
What’s Left of Me. Zhang. 56.
When Stravinsky Met Nijinsky. Stringer. 
354.
When We Wake. Healey. 379.
When We Wuz Famous. Takoudes. 395.
Where Do Presidents Come From? 
Townsend. 50.
Whitcomb. Under the Light. 535.
White. Mind Games. 358.
White Lines. Banash. 412.
Whitman. Milk of Birds. 441.
Whizz Pop Chocolate Shop. Saunders. 480.
Who Built the Stable? Bryan. 134. 
“Who Could It Be At This Hour?” Snicket. 
219.
Who Is AC? Larson. 470.
Who Lives Here? Davies. 241.
Who Pushed Humpty Dumpty? Levinthal. 
94.
Who’s in My Family? Harris. 146.
Whole Lot of Lucky. Haworth. 147.
Whole Stupid Way We Are. Griffin. 334.
July/August 2013 • 561
Wicked Sweet. Merrell. 38.
Wig in the Window. Kittscher. 516.
Wiggins. Stung. 442.
Wild Boy. Losure. 341.
Wild Horse Scientists. Frydenborg. 194.
Wiley. Prairie Thief. 120.
Wilfred. Higgins. 421.
Will & Whit. Gulledge. 465.
Will Sparrow’s Road. Cushman. 240.
Willems. Goldilocks and the Three Dino-
saurs. 121.
———. That Is NOT a Good Idea! 485.
Williams, K. Absent. 486.
Williams, M. Elephant’s Friend. 121.
Williamson. Coming of the Unicorn. 54.
Willner-Pardo. Prettiest Doll. 314.
Windblown. Manceau. 472.
Windling. After. 293. 
Wing Wing Brothers Math Spectacular! 
Long. 32. 
Winger. Smith. 482.
Winget. Smidgen of Sky. 270.
Winter. You Never Heard of Willie Mays? 
315.
Winters. In the Shadow of Blackbirds. 397.
Wish. Bracken. 454.
Wissinger. Gone Fishing. 442.
Witek. Hello in There! 486.
Wojtowycz. Elephant Joe, Brave Knight. 
54.
Wondrous Journals of Dr. Wendell Wel-
lington Wiggins. Blume. 72.
Wooden Bones. Carter. S. 12.
Wooding. Pale. 224.
Woodson. Each Kindness. 224.
Woodworth. Ivy in the Shadows. 398.
Woolston. Black Helicopters. 398.
World Away. Grossman. 84.
World Rat Day. Lewis. 383.
Worm Whisperer. Hicks. 247.
Worth. Pug. 358.
Wrinkle in Time. L’Engle. 154.
Written in Stone. Parry. 526.
Wumbers. Rosenthal. 44.
Yakin. Marathon. 55.
Yamasaki. Fish for Jimmy. 443.
Yaqui Delgado Wants to Kick Your Ass. 
Medina. 346.
Year of the Baby. Cheng. 502.
Yellowcake. Lanagan. 470.
Yesterday. Martin. 36.
Ylvisaker. Button Down. 55.
Yoko Oko. Beram. 369.
Yolen. B.U.G. (Big Ugly Guy).  399.
———. Bad Girls. 316.
———. Curse of the Thirteenth Fey. 270.
———. Grumbles from the Forest. 443.
———. Last Laughs. 31.
———. Wee Rhymes. 444.
You Are a Star! Parker. 91.
You Are Stardust. Kelsey. 91.
You Know What You Have to Do. Shimko. 
435.
You Never Heard of Willie Mays? Winter. 
315.
Young, A. Don’t Eat the Baby! 535.
Young, J. My Beautiful Failure. 316.
Young, S. Program. 536.
Yovanoff. Curiosities. 264. 
———. Paper Valentine. 270.
Yum. Mom, It’s My First Day of Kinder-
garten! 56. 
———. Since You Left Me. 122.
Zadoff. Boy Nobody. 536.
Zarr. Lucy Variations.  487.
Zebra Forest. Gewirtz. 419.
Zelda the Varigoose. Loth. 33. 
Zero Tolerance. Mills. 521.
Zhang. What’s Left of Me. 56.
Zia. Garden of My Imaan. 487.
Zits: Chillax. Scott. 532.
Zom-B. Shan. 218.
Zora! Fradin. 81.
Zubizarreta. Love, Amalia. 5.
Zullo. Line 135. 488.
 
To order
Call 800.548.1784 or 410.516.6987; fax 410.516.3866;  
e-mail: jrnlcirc@press.jhu.edu; or visit us online at  
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
Published by  
Th e Johns hopkins University press
essential.
Deborah stevenson, Editor
UniversiTy of illinois aT Urbana-Champaign
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books provides 
concise summaries and critical evaluations of current 
children’s books. This invaluable resource assists 
readers with questions regarding the ever-evolving 
children’s literature field. Reviews give an in-depth 
look at a selected book’s content, reading level, 
strengths and weaknesses, and quality of the format, 
as well as suggestions for curricular use. 
Published monthly (except August). Volume 66 (2013). 
ISSN 0008-9036; E-ISSN 1558-6766.
the Bulletin of the Center  
for Children’s Books
annUal individUal sUbsCripTions
$55.00 (print); $58.00 (online)
annUal insTiTUTional sUbsCripTions
$98.00 (print); $105.00 (online); 
$137.00 (print & online)
