U
I LL I NOI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
';: .. '*'...A"'' 
.itf. 
-,? ·
; 
.~ .i»· : * ^
By the Newbery Medalist for Walk Two Moons
Sharon Creech's The Wanderer
-': "Thirteen-year-old
Sophie accompanies her
adoptive mother's three
brothers and two nephews
on a sailboat trip from
Connecticut to England.
Along the way, [they]
endure close quarters,
destructive storms, and
the fear that they will
not make it to shore.
[Caldecott Medalist]
David Diaz' handsome
chapter headings add
pleasure to this memorable
voyage of adventure."
-Starred 
review /
ALA Booklist
+ "Telling the tale in alternating journal entries from Sophie and cousin
Cody, Creech takes her often contentious crew past dolphins, deadly
weather, and hard tests of courage. A profound tale of simultaneous inner
and outer journeys." -Pointer 
review / Kirkus Reviews
-'*- "Creech again captures the ebb and flow of a vulnerable teen's
emotional life, in this enticing blend of adventure and reflection."
-Starred 
review / Publishers Weekly
S"Exciting, funny, and brimming with life."
-Starred 
review / School Library Journal
W "Sophie is a quietly luminous heroine, and readers will rejoice in her
voyage."-Starred review/ The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
Ages 8-12. 515.95TR (0-06-027730-0) * $15.89LB (0-06-027731-9)
Joanna Cotler Books
t HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019 www.harperchildrens.com
3
2
C
THE
B uL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
June 2000
Vol. 53 No. 10
A LOOK INSIDE
349 THE BIG PICTURE
Tie Your Socks and Clap Your Feet by Lenny Hort; illus. by Stephen
Kroninger
350 NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
356 * Bad Dreams byAnneFine
358 * The Mermaid's Purse by Ted Hughes; illus. by Flora McDonnell
359 * Stone Bench in an Empty Park comp. by Paul Janeczko; illus. with
photographs by Henri Silberman
366 * The Stones Are Hatching by Geraldine McCaughrean
377 * The Queen ofAttolia by Megan Whalen Turner
382 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
383 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL
61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor (JMD)
Deborah Stevenson, Associate Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elaine A. Bearden, Reviewer (EAB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Fern Kory, Reviewer (FK)
Kate McDowell, Reviewer (KM)
CENTER STAFF
Anita Beaman
Jeannette Hulick
Melanie Kimball
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $60.00; individuals, $50.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $5.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from Bell & Howell, 300 North Zeeb
Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson Associates,
P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to the
University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 51 E. Armory Ave., Champaign,
IL 61820-6601. E-mail: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2000 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Stephen Kroninger from Tie Your Socks and Clap Your Feet ©2000. Used by
permission of Schwartz/Atheneum Books for Young Readers.
JUNE 2000 
* 349
THE BIG PICTURE
Tie Your Socks and Clap Your Feet
by Lenny Hort; illustrated by Stephen Kroninger
Nonsense is a tricky poetic concept. Sometimes poets seem to view the nonsensi-
cal as an excuse to abandon all logic, leaving the verses spinning aimlessly in
fantasyland with nothing to be funny about. More effective nonsensifiers use
nonsense to be funny about sense, creating absurdity in the difference between the
nonsensical object and its logical shadow, and leaving readers happily certain about
their ability to detect deviations from reality and gladly embracing those devia-
tions. Nonsense is, indeed, Wonderland, and its appeal for youngsters is undeni-
able.
It's also alive and gleefully kicking in these dozen and a half verses. Hort
does an excellent job of keeping the requisite sense and playing off of it, whether it
be in lullabies ("Sweet little baby's just seven feet tall/ Baby, don't eat Mommy's
nice bowling ball/ Baby's cute mustache is starting to curl./ What an adorable,
sweet baby girl"-"Sweet Little Baby"), pastoral verse ("A pair of purple oranges-
/ ooh, what a treat!/ Peppery cool/ and lemony sweet . .. "-"A Pair of Purple
Oranges"), or folklore ("The king of New York/ and her nephew, the queen,/ were
painting their castle/ with iced gasoline ... "-"Fairy Tale"). The verse has a vigor
and simple gamesmanship that will appeal even to novice nonsensees (and that
will also make the book gigglingly shareable with younger listeners); its tidy twists
are reminiscent of traditional jingles of inversion such as "One bright day in the
middle of the night/ Two dead boys got up to fight. ... " The poems' various
themes (pets, food, music, clothes) also help keep them on track, and the verses
gleefully touch on reliably entertaining taboos such as toilets (Junior, in "Our New
House," cooks on the toilet seat) and underwear (stolen by a strange beast in "The
Beast"). Scansion isn't perfect but the rhythms are strong and varied, suitable for
all kinds of creative performance ranging from reading aloud to rap.
The marriage of art and text is a blissful one: Kroninger's collages, cre-
ated from cut paper and magazine photographs, take the nonsensical concepts to
their literal apotheosis. "Grandbrother always wears five hats" because his head is
actually a hand with headgear on each finger; the speaker in "A Pair of Purple
Oranges," who "opened up my nose/ and drank" the fruit in question, is, logically,
an elephant (and yes, elephants don't technically drink through their noses either,
but natural history this isn't). Tropical hues provide a loud and friendly back-
ground for the concocted figures, who have a solidity and high-spirited pizzazz
that differentiate them from Lane Smith's more sly and sinister conglomerates; the
sophisticated look will attract older reluctant readers who will stay for the anarchy
of the easily digestible poetry. The pictures are all the more bizarre for making so
much, well, sense: it's hard to argue with eyes that are actual photographed eyes
350 
* THE BULLETIN
and with noses and mouths initially sported by real people, even though they're
borrowed and reshuffled and occasionally utilized by a dog or a red pepper, and
what better than a piece of wool sweater to represent the body of a sheep?
Though it's inventive, this isn't for those searching for delicate nuance:
both text and art are unapologetically, brassily, jubilantly unsubtle. The effect,
though, is an inviting "I could do that" aura of accessibility; this book might well,
in fact, inspire some enjoyable emulation in language-arts or art class assignments.
It'll also be just plain fun for any number of other uses. If you're looking to put a
little less sense in a kid's life, this is your book. (Imprint information appears on p.
358.)
Deborah Stevenson, Associate Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
AHLBERG, ALLAN 
The Bravest Ever Bear; illus. by Paul Howard. 
Candlewick,
2000 
32p
ISBN 0-7636-0783-5 $15.99 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Multiple narratives combine multiple viewpoints (bear, princess, wolf, troll, dragon)
in an informed silliness that lends itself to readers' theater. The stories feature
interplay between the narration and boldfaced meta-commentary on the action
from various characters ("Once upon a time there was a bear. That's me! The
End. Huh? What's going on?"). Each successive tale is a concrete manifestation
of the notion that the outcome depends on who gets to tell the story: Bear makes
himself a hero, the princess controls her own fate, and the troll refuses to stay
under his bridge. Ahlberg's talent for the absurd suits the progressive nature of the
text, and the appearance of "four and twenty black bears" adds to the sense of
nursery tales gone bemusingly awry. Howard's watercolor and pencil illustrations
become more complex as the episodic saga becomes more convoluted: the open-
ing illustrations contain few words and few pictures against a relatively large amount
of white space; the busier middle illustrations feature characters, scenery, and a
soupcon of chaos; and the closing spread comes full circle, with simple text and
pictures. This exercise in point of view is a creative writing teacher's dream, but
beginning readers won't care about the curriculum connection; they'll be too busy
laughing. JMD
ARNOLD, MARSHA DIANE 
The Bravest of Us All; illus. by Brad Sneed. 
Dial,
2000 
32p
ISBN 0-8037-2409-8 
$15.99 
R 4-8yrs
Narrator Ruby Jane has always considered Velma Jean to be the most fearless of
their siblings-equally indifferent to prickly sandburs, to biting catfish reputedly
I
JUNE 2000 
* 351
swimming in the horse tank, and to the angry bull that bars the shortcut to the
sandhill plum bushes. Ruby Jane prefers working alongside her mother in the
kitchen and fetching eggs and vegetables from the cool root cellar, and she regards
Velma Jean with awe and envy-until the day her older sister is tested by an ap-
proaching tornado and admits her secret fear: "If the tornado swallows me, it'll be
into the sky. ... That storm cellar will swallow me into the ground. I'll take my
chances with the tornado." Ruby Jane stubbornly leads Velma Jean to safety and
calms the sharpest edges of her panic; more importantly, she wins her sister's proud
regard. Sneed's watercolors do full justice to the swirling brown funnel that rages
across the open prairie; his figures, however, are eerily misshapen, with heads too
heavy for their spindly limbs, and a disconcerting tendency to change size from
spread to spread. Still, this title offers a fresh twist on the twister tale, eschewing a
trite wrap-up which would have Velma Jean overcome her fear and frankly ac-
knowledging terror's iron grip (Velma Jean retains her dread of the underground
and refuses ever to venture below again). When the storm has blown past, readers
are left with the message that bravery and cowardice are far less important than
sisterly compassion and loyalty. EB
ASHBa, JEANNE 
What's Inside?; written and illus. by Jeanne Ashbd. 
Kane/Miller,
2000 
14p (Curious Nell Books)
ISBN 0-916291-97-9 
$9.95 
R 
1-3 yrs
This simple lift-the-flap concept book is divided into three very short chapters
about "what's inside" various stuff. Chapter One lists three things "we can open
up and look inside" (suitcase, present, watermelon); Chapter Two features three
items that "it's best not to look inside" (teddy bear, television, ball); and Chapter
Three concentrates on "Mommy's tummy when she's going to have a baby." Al-
though "we can't open [Mommy] up and look inside," we can lift the flaps to
show three stages of fetal development. The title has an overtly pedagogic intent,
but Ashbd's minimal text and comfortable watercolors (reminiscent ofElsa Beskow)
carry the day. While the "what's inside" categories may confuse, the chapters are
logically connected; each chapter builds on the previous one, moving from every-
day household items to the mysteries of Mommy's growing rotundity. If you are
seeking a very easy book for toddlers expecting a new sibling, this is it. JMD
AUCH, MARY JANE 
The Road to Home. 
Holt, 2000 
[190p]
ISBN 0-8050-4921-5 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-7
In the year following her mother's death, the weight of family responsibility has
rested heavily on thirteen-year-old Mem; she has fresh cause for optimism, though,
because her father has finally resolved to abandon their failed farm and return with
his children to his wife's family in Connecticut. However, Papa's dreams have
always dominated his good sense. A brief stop in Rome, New York convinces him
his fortune lies in helping dig the Erie Canal, and soon he has relinquished his
children to the care of a boardinghouse keeper while he works the weeks and drinks
the weekends away. Mem realizes Papa that will never change and that she simply
cannot raise her younger siblings alone, so she sets off with the children on foot to
the grandmother she so desperately misses. With this title, Auch completes her
trilogy (Journey to Nowhere, BCCB 6/97; Frozen Summer, BCCB 1/99) with char-
acters now so fully realized that any melodrama in plotting seems inconsequential.
352 
* THE BULLETIN
Yes, the children have more than their share of good luck along the road, and fate
at last drives them happily into the arms of a most unlikely guardian. Nonetheless,
the family dynamic between father and children (he is just not cut out to raise
children on his own) and among siblings (toddler Lily behaves only for her indul-
gent brother Joshua, never for her sterner sister, while Joshua has a naturally obsti-
nate resistance to Mem's authority) is poignant and thoroughly convincing. Mem
bitterly acknowledges her father's "new dream had no room for us at all," but it's
clear she has the strength of will to create a family without him. EB
BATTEN, MARY 
The Winking, Blinking Sea: All About Biolumines-
cence. 
Millbrook, 2000 
32p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-7613-1550-0 
$20.90 
R Gr. 3-5
While the "all" of the subtitle may be overly ambitious, Batten does cogently and
engagingly explain what causes sea-creatures to glow. From flashlight fish to fire
worms, the author provides an accessible overview of bioluminescent sea life, ac-
companied by color photographs that go a long way toward explaining her fascina-
tion with this phenomena. The design of the book adds to the clarity: pages of
text alternate with color photographs to break up dense text blocks, and the use of
different colored backgrounds and typefaces is easy on the eyes. The photo cap-
tions occasionally tend toward the slightly fulsome ("a comb jellyfish ... seems to
hold the universe in its watery self" and "if you let your imagination go, these
bioluminescent jellyfish look like galaxies"), but the magical effects of this lumi-
nous sea life deserve it. No index or additional material is provided. JMD
BRAYBROOKS, ANN 
Plenty of Pockets; illus. by Scott Menchin. 
Harcourt,
2000 
27p
ISBN 0-15-202173-6 
$16.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
The Bunches (Henry and Henrietta, their son, Junior, and his hedgehog, Max)
live in a house crammed full of stuff ("Every inch of space was filled with toys and
games and pots and pans and hangers and clothes and newspapers and magazines").
When the disarray becomes too much, Henry fashions a solution, sewing capa-
cious pockets on his overalls and on Henrietta's favorite dress, which provide places
to put away all the clutter. Things seem a little barren, however, with the furniture
and Junior and Max tucked away into pockets, so the Bunches unburden the con-
tents into the yard and have a delightful yard sale of the extra stuff. The story is
slight and unshaped (and the ending is unclear), but the poker-faced absurdity of
the premise gives a lilt to the text. The visuals get the main emphasis here, with
design-intensive pages rolling the text over hills and tilting the words to and fro;
foldout spreads give Henry and Henrietta their fully pocketed due. Menchin's
trim lines create humor with skewed perspectives and pared-down expressiveness
(the somewhat doll-like characters have a gaily oblivious attitude), and the spreads
are enhanced with collage details that make the crammed roomscapes wonderfully
thingy. Kids dealing with the battle of the irreplaceable collections vs. the de-
mands for a clean room will appreciate this account of a creative solution. DS
BUNTING, EVE 
Wanna Buy an Alien?; illus. by Timothy Bush. 
Clarion,
2000 
92p
ISBN 0-395-69719-0 
$14.00 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Ben receives a joke present (ordered from a magazine ad) from his friend Jason: a
JUNE 2000 
* 353
photograph of Ben with alien being Iku, a cassette tape and a friendly note from
same, and two warm rocks with pulsating veins. Schoolmate Paloma is in on the
joke, and all three friends decide, just for a lark, to do what the note indicates:
meet on the beach at 2 A.M. to guide the alien spaceship to earth. Friendly note
notwithstanding, the alien turns out to be a bad guy looking for specimens, and
only the interference of Ben's beloved dog Homer keeps the kids from being space-
napped. While the characterizations are flat and the plot is illogically developed,
the attractiveness of the alien hunt is undeniable. Ben tells the story directly to the
reader, ending with a concluding warning about buying aliens that is certainly
worth a giggle. Well-drafted black and white illustrations are generously scattered
throughout, and the energetic renderings of the three friends have a sassy appeal
that adds considerably to the atmosphere. This will work with reluctant or cau-
tious beginning chapter-book readers, and it is sure to find fans among the
extraterrestrially inclined. JMD
BURGESS, MELVIN 
Kite. 
Farrar, 2000 
182p
ISBN 0-374-34228-8 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
By 1964 there were only twenty-four red kites living in Great Britain, and they
were legally protected as an endangered species. To a gamekeeper, however, all
birds of prey are "vermin," along with the other animals (weasels, foxes, etc.) that
threaten the lives of pheasants raised for the shooting pleasure of sport hunters;
when a red kite shows up in Hale Magna, Taylor Mase's gamekeeper dad therefore
naturally shoots it. Taylor himself collects eggs-including, eventually, the ones
in the kite's nest-and he's caught between the worldview of the father he wor-
ships and the new perspective introduced by the conservationist uncle of the land-
owner who employs Taylor's dad. Taylor's ambivalence about whether he wants
to collect or protect wildlife-and his guilt-driven desire to bring the kite head
count back to twenty-four-eventually leads him and his friend Adam to raise a
chick (they name her Teresa) from the last of the kite's eggs. With some assistance
from a foreword and afterword, Burgess' novel (published in Britain in 1997)
offers real insight into these very different relationships with nature and, inciden-
tally, a rural class system in which the local landowner was "the boss." Shifting
points of view (which encompass Teresa and a fox as well as Taylor and his dad)
provide moments of drama, natural beauty, and humor, but they also unfortu-
nately diffuse the focus and impede development of the characters. However,
Burgess offers a compellingly detailed view of a way of life and ways of thinking
that may attract young naturalists. FK
BYARS, BETSY 
Me Tarzan. HarperCollins, 2000 
[9 6p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028707-1 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028706-3 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Dorothy has disliked Dwayne ever since he told her she had legs like Barney the
dinosaur, so when she gets the chance to finesse the Tarzan role in the class play
right out from under him she does so with glee, by virtue of her unbeatable Tarzan
yell. Dorothy's yell gets progressively louder (and more effective at drawing ani-
mals from far and near) each time she repeats it; when her teacher finally catches
on, he changes her lines so the yell is eliminated. This obvious unfairness elicits
words of support from Dwayne, and the two enter into a tentative friendship.
354 
* THE BULLETIN
Alternating narrators Dorothy and Dwayne eventually make a good team, and
their budding relationship is promising. Unfortunately, shallow peripheral and
main characters lack defining details, and their generic personalities make them
interchangeable with just about any other middle-grade light fiction characters.
The premise is funny but undeveloped, and the humor flatly refuses to fizz. Still,
the cover is loud and attention-getting, and Dorothy's talent for Tarzan yells is
sure to inspire some bored third grader's penchant for mimicry. Byars' fans will
briefly appreciate this quick read before moving on to the next one. JMD
DEMAS, CORINNE 
IfEver IReturn Again. HarperCollins, 2000 
[208p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028718-7 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028717-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Acknowledging that few letters are likely to reach New Bedford, twelve-year-old
Celia Snow faithfully chronicles her experiences aboard her father's whaler, Jupi-
ter, for her homebound cousin Abigail. While Mother insists on Latin lessons and
propriety, Father is more than willing to tutor Celia in navigation and allow her
the run of the ship. Demas at first appears to embark on the identical voyage of
Peter Roop's Good-bye for Today (BCCB 4/00)-tomboyish journal-writer, yearn-
ing for father's independence and bristling under mother's genteel strictures, braves
the waves and proves her mettle at sea. Certainly details of seafaring life (storms
and whale hunting, dancing on deck and stretches of boredom) are, of necessity,
similar. Celia, however, is a more fully realized character with a believably stormy
relationship with her mother, an aching crush on the third mate, a propensity to
seasickness, and an experience of family tragedy that hastens her maturity. Like-
wise, Demas successfully intertwines several subplots and elements that keep reader
interest afloat: a foiled mutiny, Mother's pregnancy and loss of the infant, and the
hateful Jerusha, whose society is foisted upon Celia in the Sandwich Islands. Celia's
quick mastery of navigation (she guides the Jupiter home upon her father's death)
may defy belief, but her respect for the sea rings true: "You are safe only for the
moment you are in; there's no promise of safety in the next." EB
DICAMILLO, KATE 
Because of Winn-Dixie. 
Candlewick, 2000 
182p
ISBN 0-7636-0776-2 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 4-6
"My name is India Opal Buloni, and last summer my daddy, the preacher, sent me
to the store for a box of macaroni-and-cheese, some white rice, and two tomatoes
and I came back with a dog." There you have it: main characters and conflict, all
in the first sentence. But there's a lot more to this book. Opal has a singular voice
with a simple, infallibly Southern inflection; her daddy is one of the nicest and
quirkiest preachers to grace children's literature; and Winn-Dixie, named after the
grocery store from which Opal rescued him, is an ugly dog with a smile that makes
friends and also makes him sneeze, not to mention a pathological fear of thunder-
storms. In addition, readers will meet an elderly librarian whose stories inject the
small town Florida setting with a past; a "witchy" neighbor who has hung a tree
with beer and whiskey bottles, each representing a mistake she's made in her life; a
mentally challenged musician whose street-singing once led him to jail and who
now plays for the residents of a pet store, including Gertrude the parrot, whose
favorite word is "Dog!" The one person we don't meet is Opal's mother, who
abandoned her family long ago. It is the pain of her absence that propels Opal into
friendships with all the characters whom Winn-Dixie eventually brings together,
JUNE 2000 
* 355
lessening the loneliness of each. By turns funny and moving, vivid from trailer
park to pet store, this will propel readers into a satisfying circle of companionship.
BH
DOWELL, FRANCES O'ROARK 
Dovey Coe. Atheneum, 2000 
181p
ISBN 0-689-83174-9 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Dovey Coe is twelve, the youngest child in a North Carolina hill family in the
1920s. Though she's the outspoken one, there's nothing downtrodden about the
other siblings either: her deaf brother, Amos, spends the day hunting in the hills
with his dogs, and her beauteous sister, Caroline, is determined to go to teacher's
college and see the world beyond their little slice of Appalachia. Caroline's beauty
attracts a pernicious suitor in the form of Parnell Caraway, scion of a local well-to-
do family, but Caroline finally rejects a humiliated Parnell. He makes an attempt
at revenge by luring Dovey into town after one of Amos' dogs; after a scuffle,
Dovey is knocked out and Parnell is dead, with Dovey accused of his murder.
Dowell does a good job of balancing out the pre-crime and post-crime narrative,
with Dovey's account of Caroline's dealings with Parnell absorbing in its own
right rather than merely being windup for the drama of the trial. The book also
keeps pretty clear ofAppalachian stereotypes, making Dovey's family and acquain-
tances distinct individuals (Caroline, with her mixture of coquettishness and in-
domitable pride, is a particularly interesting character). Readers familiar with To
Kill a Mockingbird will pick up the obvious overtones here in the rural location,
the trial, and the real culprit, clues to whose identity are provided early on; even
those that don't will find themselves absorbed in the Coe family drama. DS
FIENBERG, ANNA 
Borrowed Light. 
Delacorte, 2000 
[240p]
ISBN 0-385-32758-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-12
Callisto, named after one of Jupiter's moons (she's the granddaughter of an as-
tronomer), divides people up into stars and moons ("If you're a moon like me, you
won't make your own light. You'll borrow it. You'll go in for a lot of appeasement
gestures, like smiling too much and wagging your tail"). She accurately notes that
that characteristic is what got her into trouble in the first place, "trouble" ranging
from being distant from her unhappy mother and the prime caretaker for her little
brother, Jeremy, but mainly consisting of the fact that, at sixteen, she's now preg-
nant. Saying "I wanted a second chance. I was only sixteen," Callisto decides on
her own to have an abortion, but her isolation makes even the achievement of that
task difficult (she ends up having to bring Jeremy to the clinic); when Jeremy
disappears, the truth, not just about Callisto's abortion but about her mother's
own troubled history, comes out. Australian author Fienberg provides an intense
and poignant picture of Callisto through her first-person narration; the teen's voice
is never unbelievably poetic and the astronomical conceits are deftly employed.
The sadness that permeates Callisto's family is palpable, and there's a wistful ac-
knowledgment of the shortfalls of even the finest people (when Callisto's beloved
grandmother, who first introduced her to the skies, offers support but not com-
fort, Callisto wonders, "Why are people so much better when you make them
up?") and the complications and fear that surround all human connections. Cal-
listo is a distinctive, touching, and sympathetic heroine, and readers will empa-
thize with her quest for her own light. DS
356 
* THE BULLETIN
FINE, ANNE 
BadDreams. Delacorte, 2000 
[144p]
ISBN 0-385-32757-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-7
Melanie is a happy antisocial camper, spending her time with her nose in a book
rather than with her classmates ("You know as well as I do that being a bookworm
in school is like having a protective shield. It sends a message: 'Please leave me out
of things unless I ask. Act as if I'm not here. It's not that I'm lonely. It's just that
I'm happy on my own'"), until Imogen arrives at her school. To Mel's dismay, her
teacher orders her to buddy up with the new girl; Mel finds herself intrigued in
spite of herself, however, as she learns more about Imogen's strange precognitive
powers that make her life miserable and keep everyone at a distance from her.
Soon Mel determines to free Imogen from her curse by disposing of the talismanic
necklace that, unbeknownst to Imogen, sentences her to a lifetime of dread. This
is a lovely concise piece of scaled-down horror that has some pleasingly imagina-
tive supernatural motifs (mere physical contact with a book sends Imogen reeling
into the emotions suffered by the characters) balanced with some penetrating ob-
servations of human dynamics (Imogen's determinedly fey mother finds vicarious
satisfaction in her daughter's magical abilities and ignores her daughter's suffer-
ing). Fine creates a bold and successful character in the solitary Melanie, who
shatters myths about the bookworm's inherent shyness and solves Imogen's di-
lemma (at a substantial cost to herself) more out of bossy interference than from
any moral or empathetic motives. It's a generous touch that this is a book driven
by people's relationships with books, yet it's written colloquially enough that un-
sophisticated readers will also find it accessible. DS
Fox, MEM 
Harriet, You'll Drive Me Wild!; illus. by Maria Frazee. 
Harcourt,
2000 
32p
ISBN 0-15-201977-4 
$16.00 
R 3-6 yrs
Harriet's mother doesn't like to yell, and most of the time, she doesn't. But after
a full day of cleaning up the sorts of messes that "just happen" in the vicinity of
preschoolers like Harriet while their caretakers try to pay the bills or water the
lawn, Harriet's mom does-after a "terrible silence"-let it all out. Both parents
and children will relate to the series of events that lead up to this cathartic mo-
ment, and to the (somewhat anticlimactic) reconciliation that follows, in which
Harriet explains that she's "really, really sorry" and her mom says she that she's
sorry too: "I shouldn't have yelled, and I wish I hadn't. But sometimes it happens,
just like that." The colored pencil and transparent drawing ink illustrations for
this cumulative tale are set in an expanse of negative space, capturing in their
lightness and isolation both the pleasant warmth and the growing intensity of the
parent-child relationship. Their shifting perspectives increase the appeal of the
book for both its audiences: children who are not entirely under control and
parents who occasionally lose theirs. Each will find something to laugh at or learn
from in this domestic tragicomedy. FK
GLENN, MEL 
Split Image: A Story in Poems. HarperCollins, 2000 
[160p]
ISBN 0-688-16249-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
This series of poems from multiple perspectives creates a composite portrait of
troubled teenager Laura Li. By the melodramatic end of the novel, Laura is dead,
JUNE 2000 
* 
357
in many ways a victim of other people's perceptions of an emotionally isolated
young woman one friend calls a "'too' girl . . . / Too smart, too pretty,/ Too
popular, too perfect" but others see-due to their own limitations-as simply a
"China doll," or as "too American." Laura's poems do not give the reader a de-
tailed picture of the domestic routine that stifles her but focus instead on her emo-
tional response to her traditional Chinese mother, her workaholic father, and the
disabled older brother for whom she's responsible. Poems from many other per-
spectives offer a refracted glimpse of Laura while more clearly illuminating the
angst of their speakers, who encompass Laura's family and a pointedly diverse
group of Tower High students and staff, including a sympathetic school librarian
who wishes Laura had "received enough light and warmth" to grow strong. The
poetic images are far from original, but the voices often ring true and the interpo-
lated public address announcements provide a more sophisticated ironic frame for
this sometimes predictable plot. Though nobody except the clueless principal seems
to be having a nice day at Tower High, young adults will recognize the emotional
undercurrents present in even the quietest school library. FK
HALE, BRUCE 
The Chameleon Wore Chartreuse: From the Tattered Casebook of
Chet Gecko, Private Eye; written and illus. by Bruce Hale. 
Harcourt, 2000 
97p
ISBN 0-15-202281-3 
$14.00 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Chet Gecko is a fourth-grade lizard and would-be hard-boiled gumshoe, and he's
been presented with a puzzling case: his classmate Shirley Chameleon's first-grader
brother, Billy, has disappeared. Aided by his clever friend, mockingbird Natalie
Attired, Chet follows the clues to sixth-grade Gila monster Herman, who seeks
revenge for being kicked off of the football team; it turns out Herman's plan to
disrupt the football game (by stealing the school mascot and releasing vermin onto
the field) depends on Billy's eager yet clandestine participation. The mystery is
slight and its construction is haphazard, getting submerged under the trappings of
the story; the trappings, however, are zesty and entertaining. The combination of
school details, animal classmates, and homage to Raymond Chandler is glib but
broadly and sustainedly humorous; Hale capably plays the elements against one
another to increase the amusement value (Chet gets out of a sticky situation by
dropping his tail), and the deadpan monosyllabic style is wittily effective. Black-
and-white illustrations are drolly drafted, particularly in their characters' dramati-
cally expressive eyes. Young readers looking to move up from Eth Clifford's Flatfoot
Fox or fond of Mary Pope Osborne's Spider Kane mysteries will want to scuttle
along with this schoolyard sleuth. DS
HANSEN, JOYCE 
"Bury Me Not in a Land ofSlaves" African-Americans in the Time
ofReconstruction. Watts, 2000 
160p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-531-11539-9 
$25.00 
R 
Gr. 6-10
Hansen takes a close look at the lives of African Americans after the Civil War.
With clarity and focus, the author details the circumstances leading to manumis-
sion, the task of the Freedmen's Bureau, the role of Congress in the shaping of the
Reconstruction South, Southern resistance to that reshaping, and the efforts of
both white and black Americans to improve the economic and educational lot of
the Freedmen. Each chapter opens with a quote from a historical figure (Phillis
Wheatley, Abraham Lincoln, Booker T. Washington, etc.), and additional quotes
in the body of the text itself give an urgent sense of the prevailing sentiments of the
day. Brief biographies of influential African Americans (Frederick Douglass, W.
358 
* THE BULLETIN
E. B. Du Bois, Charlotte Forten Grimke, etc.) are included in the relevant chap-
ters. The layout avoids crowding by arranging the text in two columns in the
biographies and alleviating the density of the remaining text blocks with numer-
ous photographs, engravings, charts, facsimiles, and quotations. Notes for each
chapter are appended, as is a bibliography of primary and secondary sources and
an index. Although the prose occasionally leans toward the mawkish, the book is
for the most part engrossingly written. Hansen provides a contextual frame for her
research, ensuring an in-depth picture of a complex time in American history.
JMD
HORT, LENNY 
Tie Your Socks and Clap Your Feet; illus. by Stephen
Kroninger. 
Schwartz/Atheneum, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-689-83195-1 
$16.00 
R* Gr. 2-6
See this month's Big Picture, p. 349, for review.
HUGHES, TED 
The Mermaid's Purse; illus. by Flora McDonnell. 
Knopf,
2000 
64p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-90569-3 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-80569-9 
$15.95 
R* Gr. 5-12
Britain's late poet laureate takes a posthumous bow in this collection of twenty-
eight marine-flavored verses. The poems are brief (three stanzas or verse para-
graphs is the upper limit, and the line lengths run quite short), providing precise
encapsulations of ocean and shore dwellers such as the sea anemone (" ... Many a
friend, many a stranger,/ Many an enemy / Melts in my embrace./ I am anemone"),
a wrecked ship ("The sailors prayed to come to land/ And their good ship's wreck
soon made it,/ And sat on the rocks like a one-man band,/ While the stormy sea
still played it... "), and the starfish ("A starfish stares/ At stars that pour/ Through
depths of space/ without a shore ... "). Hughes is, quite simply, a writer of such
skill that his work makes other poets' creations wilt in comparison. The gloriously
sonorous verse revels in dramatically orchestrated sound patterns that turn each
poem into a siren inducement for a readaloud. The occasional unfamiliar word
and unaccustomed density of imagery makes this more challenge for more gain
than, say, Douglas Florian's similarly themed In the Swim (BCCB 5/97), but the
soaring rhythm and generous helping of pithy conceits will draw even an inexperi-
enced audience right in. McDonnell's black-and-white art splashes across the com-
pact pages; thick textures of line and solid sprays of white foam counterbalance
sweeps of gray sea, giving a determined (and sometimes slightly sly) concreteness
to the fishes, birds, and bare-breasted mermaids that frolic in the deeps. Catch this
poetic wave. DS
HULME, JOY N. 
Through the Open Door. HarperCollins, 2000 
[176p]
ISBN 0-380-97870-9 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-6
Nine-year-old Dora Cookson has never been able to speak clearly, and her disabil-
ity has led many to believe she suffers from a mental defect. On the eve of her
family's wagon journey from Utah to New Mexico, Dora visits a doctor for the
first time in her life and learns that a simple but somewhat painful operation to
release her tongue from the floor ofher mouth should correct her condition. Now,
facing a new life in a new territory with the long-coveted opportunity to enter
JUNE 2000 * 
359
school, Dora spends her time in the wagon train not only taking in the sights, but
also fending off the jibes of bullies as she laboriously teaches herself to speak. Hulme
bases her novel (first published in 1991) on the life of an acquaintance who made
the journey herself in the early twentieth century. Details unusual in fictional
accounts of Western migration spice the narrative-the supportive network of
Latter-Day Saint communities that helped their brethren along the route, the set-
tlers' cautious relationship with the Navajo, the farmer's desperate search for a well
site that could make or break the success of his enterprise. Though Dora's per-
sonal struggle is both convincing and involving, conversations are often less suc-
cessfully presented. Mr. Cookson, in particular, engages more in travelogue than
dialogue: "This is a bustling coal center. ... There are lots of miner and railroad
people who aren't members of our church, as well as many who are." Historical
fiction buffs who sign on with every passing wagon train won't mind much, though,
as they focus on the adventure. EB
ISADORA, RACHEL 
123 Pop!; written and illus. by Rachel Isadora. 
Viking,
2000 
32p
ISBN 0-670-88859-1 
$15.99 
R Gr. 1-3
Those familiar with Isadora's ABCPop! (BCCB 6/99) will recognize the technique
here: pop-art illustrations in the style of various artists (Warhol, Lichtenstein,
Haring, among others) provide visuals to go with the enumerated concepts. The
emphasis on artistry means that entertaining ideas are offered instead of easy count-
ability: some counted objects only appear in part, some spreads offer red herrings
in the shape of background dots or other secondarily countable collections, and
some examples offer modestly piquant questions about how to describe what's
being counted (18, for instance, counts animal noises); Isadora also follows the
currently fashionable practice of expanding by large increments after twenty, wan-
dering from 100 to 500 to 1,000 and 1,000,000 (the latter two untested for accu-
racy). The book is true to pop concepts as well as style (number 1 sets you on the
"this is not your father's counting book" road with a pop-ized image of the famous
Armstrong-on-the-moon picture), and the variation of styles and effects is impres-
sive; a few spreads even go beyond their pop-connection merits to visual signifi-
cance in their own right, such as the double-spread of the red car speeding along a
darkened and empty highway as eleven lights glow overhead. Unfortunately, there's
no information about Pop Art or the artists Isadora's emulating, which limits the
artistic point, just as the complex approach limits the counting-book feature. Still,
this will make for a lively introduction to one of the most kid-friendly schools of
art. DS
JANECZKO, PAUL B., comp. 
Stone Bench in an Empty Park; illus. with photo-
graphs by Henri Silberman. 
Orchard, 2000 
40p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-33259-4 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-30259-8 
$15.95 
R Gr. 3-7
This collection of haiku takes a different tack, with nearly three dozen poems
treating not the natural world but the urban landscape. Poets included range from
well-known contemporary writers for young people (ane Yolen, Nikki Grimes,
Janeczko himself) to adult authors writing in English (Cor van den Heuvel, Mar-
garet Chula) and in Japanese (Issa, Buson). Some verses are merely serviceable
while others are stellar, but all of them are effective in opening up the possibilities
of haiku for young readers. The distinctive effect here comes from the pairing of
360 
* THE BULLETIN
art and text: Silberman's photographs (printed in duotone, which gives them a
modulated black-and-white reminiscent of early Life magazine) were taken in re-
sponse to the selected haikus, and they offer visuals that are sometimes elucidation,
sometimes illustration, and sometimes counterpoint. The combination often takes
on nearly a third dimension of its own, with arresting images of the bustling city,
ranging from night scenes of city lights to leg-and-shadow views of jump-ropers,
adding their own touch of "nature" to the companion haiku. This will make an
inviting introduction to the pairing of art and poetry as well as to haiku with a
different flavor. DS
JAY, ALISON 
Picture This. . . ; written and illus. by Alison Jay. 
Dutton,
2000 
[34p]
ISBN 0-525-46380-1 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Each page or spread here has a deceptively simple single-word text identifying a
major component in the accompanying illustration ("clock"; "dog"; "hill", etc.),
giving the book the look of an object-identification concept book. What's going
on in the art, however, is considerably more elaborate than that: each illustration
has some kind of connection to or overlap with its predecessor, and the sequence,
which was foreshadowed by the four panels on the clock in the first illustration,
proceeds through the seasons. The look isn't as sophisticated as Banyai's Zoom
(BCCB 2/95), but the relationships are often more conceptually challenging, since
the connections vary: all you can be sure of is that something in the picture you're
looking at will have appeared in the previous illustration in some form (the clock
has a picture of the dog; the dog's illustration has the hill in the background; the
next page sees the hill through a window that has teddy bears on its curtain; the
teddy bear sits on the table in the next illustration). The text words are essentially
superfluous to the enterprise (though incipient readers may find them a helpful
nudge), and they'll function as red herrings for more than a few viewers, since
what's identified in the text is only occasionally the connecting point with the
previous spread (which means that this book might be most effectively used going
backwards). The world depicted is a cozy one, however, with craquelure giving
texture to the scenes and the consequent yellowing suggesting evening's slanting
light illuminating the pastoral views; plump and busy animals add animation to
the visuals (the white rabbit driving the car and stopping in frustration for the
tortoise is a particularly winning entry), and the dramas within each illustration
often have their own impact (or near-impact, fortunately, in the spread where a
snail looks up in horror at a descending boot). The absence of logic in the seek-
and-find keeps this from being as effective as it might be, but kids who like visual
puzzles may enjoy poring over the pictures. DS
KACER, KATHY 
The Secret of Gabi's Dresser. Second Story, 2000 
128p
Paper ed. ISBN 1-896764-15-0 
$4.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Gabi relates to her two grandchildren the story of her youth and survival as a young
Jewish girl in World War II Czechoslovakia. The war had already been going on
for some time when people in her small village began to hear stories about new
restrictions on Jewish people and about the disappearance of neighboring Jews. As
the Jewish and Christian communities separated, first by fear and then by law,
Gabi watched her Christian friends turn their backs and her Jewish friends flee.
JUNE 2000 
* 361
She and her mother were reluctant to leave the farm where Gabi's father recently
died, but eventually Gabi's mother became determined to send her daughter away
to hide. Gabi refused to leave her mother, insisting that she can hide in the family
dresser; when Nazi soldiers arrived, they miraculously overlooked the dresser while
searching every other nook and cranny of the house. Based on true events, the
story is slow to build up to the scene of the Nazi raid, burdened in part by many
pauses for Gabi's internal reflections. However, this tale is much gentler than
many other stories of Jewish survival of the Holocaust, since Gabi and her mother
avoided concentration camp life and went into hiding relatively late in the war.
Although the slow pace and methodical plotting may not offer enough tension to
sustain reader interest, younger readers curious about Holocaust survivors could
start here. KM
KARAS, G. BRIAN 
Bebe's Bad Dream; written and illus. by G. Brian
Karas. 
Greenwillow, 2000 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-16183-9 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-16182-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
"When Bebe got ready for bed," the book begins, "she put on her pajamas and her
armor." This is not your usual bedtime ritual, but then Bebe's plagued by unusual
nighttime demons: she's convinced that aliens are going to come after her in her
sleep. Teasing from her brother, Walter, and bad dreams increase her anxiety until
she's on the lookout during the day as well ("You should do something about your
alien problem," says her friend Alise). Finally she deceives the aliens into taking
Walter instead, and her phobia is cured when she realizes that Walter's continued
presence means that the aliens were, in fact, just a dream. This rambles on longer
than it needs to, and the plot turns are more convenient than inherently credible.
Karas has a spirited style and a good ear for kid interaction, however, that makes
the alien- (and brother-) fighting saga enjoyable. Acrylic swathes add texture to
the backgrounds, giving some oomph to the gouache-tinted pencil scrawls that are
Bebe and supporting players; special effects ranging from a shift to lavender-tinged
near-monochrome for night scenes to strong-lined vigor for the dreamed alien-
encounter scenes add depth to the visual narrative. An unusual take on the con-
quering of nighttime fears, this might make a successful bedtime story for fearless
sleepers with a taste for the offbeat. DS
KETCHUM, LIZA 
Orphan Journey Home; illus. by C. B. Mordan. 
Avon Camelot,
2000 
162p
ISBN 0-380-97811-3 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
The Damrons have been unable to make a success of their farm in the young state
of Illinois; too discouraged to pursue their dream further west, they head back
toward their old home in Kentucky. After only a few days on the road both par-
ents are mortally stricken with "milk sickness," and Jesse and her siblings must
make their way to their grandmother on their own. Ketchum originally released
the Damrons' tale in serial form through the Newspapers in Education program,
so her potboiler format with its cliffhanger chapter conclusions comes as no sur-
prise. The children are carried briskly from one threatening episode to the next,
escaping shady boatmen, a crooked innkeeper, a childless couple who attempt to
claim the youngest siblings, and the constant but elusive threat of being kidnapped
362 
* THE BULLETIN
and "bound out" as indentured servants. True to the serial adventure genre, the
children reach Grandma, who perks right up from her sickbed to welcome the
waifs (and, of course, the stray dog that found them along the way). Plotting
doesn't get much hokeyer than this, but the what-comes-next device is undeniably
effective. Readers just emerging from chapter books will be surprised at how quickly
they can make the pages turn, and teachers in search of an entertaining readaloud
may find this is the just the ticket for five-minute breaks in the day. EB
KOSCIELNIAK, BRUCE 
The Story of the Incredible Orchestra: An Introduction to
Musical Instruments and the Symphony Orchestra; written and illus. by Bruce
Koscielniak. 
Houghton, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-395-96052-5 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Since even those of us familiar with the idea of the orchestra might not be aware of
its evolution, Koscielniak's historical overview of the ensemble and instruments
therein will have some genuinely new information to offer to many readers. He
starts with the pre-orchestra groups of winds and strings, examines the birth of the
orchestra under Gabrieli in the sixteenth century, then traces the changes through
the baroque, classical, romantic, and modern ages. Each spread provides a text
overview of the focus era or type of instrument, with specific instruments getting
more explanation in annotated or labeled illustrations. It's interesting to see what
came when (and what's disappeared), and the constant changing of the orchestral
composition is instructively explained. Koscielniak starts off on a sour note, how-
ever, by making the debatable statement that "we've all seen and heard orchestras
perform, whether on television or in a live concert," and the habit of problematic
assumption continues throughout the book. Definitions are often made in terms
understandable only to those already possessed of the knowledge in question (how
do frets "serve to shorten the strings and change the notes"? What are "harmonies
above the bass line"? What's the difference between the action of the synthesizer
that can "modify and combine sounds" and the computerized sound modules that
"turn musical notes from a computer disk into a wide range of sounds"?). Artistic
compositions are sometimes unfocused, with the muted colors and scratchy line
tipping the crowded visuals into the drab. There's still some relevant and hard-to-
find information here that, when teamed with a knowledgeable adult who can sort
through the hiccups, will give young musicians a better sense of the art's history.
DS
Koss, AMY GOLDMAN 
The Girls. Dial, 2000 
[128p]
ISBN 0-8037-2494-2 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
Maya has reveled in her inclusion in the popular crowd, headed by the charismatic
Candace, until she's not just dropped but actively spurned and despised by her
former friends. As the story unfolds in roughly chronological order, the narration
shifts between various current and former members of the clique: in addition to
Maya, we hear from her formerly closest friend, Rende; Darcy, Candace's most
loyal henchgirl; Brianna, who's uneasy about Maya's ejection; Candace herself,
who wields her power as a struggle against boredom and fear; and finally Nicole,
Candace's new choice for in-group friend. The result is an intriguing picture of
middle-school dynamics at their most cruelly arbitrary, with Candace's certainty
about all things credibly appealing to her more tentative followers. It's also quite
convincing how distant these girls are from their parents-Goldman doesn't take
JUNE 2000 
* 
363
the easy way out and provide dysfunctional home lives that would make poor
relationships inevitable, instead giving the girls everyday families of varying de-
grees of niceness. The final defection of Brianna and Renee to Maya's side is
satisfying if a bit optimistic, and readers will begin to wonder what will happen to
Candace once she's played with and subsequently discarded all the girls in her
class. An absorbing read, this will also make a good discussion-starter on the ques-
tion of what price social glory. DS
LACOME, 
JULIE 
Ruthie's Big Old Coat; written and illus. by Julie
Lacome. 
Candlewick, 2000 
26p
ISBN 0-7636-0969-2 
$13.99 
R 
4-6 yrs
Ruthie's mother tells her she'll grow into her cousin Frances' "big old coat," but
although "Ruthie tried to grow. .. nothing happened." She marches grumpily
outside to complain to friend Fiona, who giggles and says, "It is big.... It's big
enough for me, too!" She scoots inside with Fiona and zips it up. The two pals (in
the one coat) dance ("the tango, the twist, and the four-legged turkey trot") and
play until "they got a big case of the Big Old Coat Giggles." When Ruthie needs
to go to the bathroom, they discover the zipper on the coat is stuck, and the two
friends race to the house ("I won't make it"; "Yes, you will"); Fiona promises not
to look and Ruthie gets there just in time. Ruthie's mom unsticks the zipper and
observes that the coat is indeed too big, but Fiona says "Zoinks! It's perfect!" and
off the girls go for another round of the "Big Old Coat Giggles." Lacome's ingra-
tiating text rollicks along, accompanied by acrylic and gouache illustrations of
anthropomorphized rabbits reminiscent of Pilkey's Dumb Bunnies. The colors
are coolly crisp, and the characters in their red coat provide an ebullient counter-
point. Dialogue balloons house pithy asides worthy of a laugh or two, and the
scene on the potty is going to cause some Big Old Book Giggles when this is read
aloud, individually or to groups. JMD
LASKY, KATHRYN 
Marie Antoinette, Princess of Versailles. 
Scholastic,
2000 
236p 
illus. with photographs 
(The Royal Diaries)
ISBN 0-439-07666-8 
$10.95 
R 
Gr. 6-9
MEYER, CAROLYN 
Isabel, JewelofCastilla. Scholastic, 2000 
[240p] 
illus. with
photographs 
(The Royal Diaries)
ISBN 0-439-07805-9 
$10.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-9
The Royal Diaries series continues its tour of classic queens with these new entries.
Lasky follows Marie Antoinette through her betrothal and final time in Austria to
her early days in France as the bride of the Dauphin, depicting the young princess'
struggle with stultifying French etiquette (particularly the relations between her
and the king's courtesan, Mme. DuBarry) and hints of the unpopularity that was
to become lethal to her a quarter of a century later. Meyer focuses on Isabel's
political balancing between her warring brothers while she yearns for marriage to
bring her a prince charming and not just an alliance of national utility. The titles
are pretty much what fans of the series and queenly histories will expect: they've
got some fluffy details of clothing and anachronistic contemporary priorities creep
into the teenagers' reflections, but there is also some compelling historical insight
and context provided. Marie's is the more successful story: her relationship with
her mother and tentative friendship with her husband give an interesting shape to
364 
* THE BULLETIN
her journal, and the superficial aspects of the account suit her character. Both,
however, will suit readers looking for an enjoyable regal outing. Each book in-
cludes historical notes, a selection of pictures, and a family tree. DS
LEHR, NORMA 
Haunting at Black Water Cove. 
Rising Moon, 2000 
119p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-87358-750-2 
$6.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Kathy Wicklow arrives in Blue Lakes, California with her mother for a December
vacation, only to stumble onto an old mystery involving her great-uncle Duncan
and the disappearance of a girl named Ruby Faye. Local thirteen-year-old Drew
brings Kathy into contact with fellow percipient and near-centenarian Miss
Maryetta, sister of Ruby Faye. When it appears Ruby Faye's ghost is trying to
communicate with Kathy, Kathy leaps at the chance to clear her uncle's name and
find out what really happened the fateful day after the 1906 San Francisco earth-
quake. Only after unknowingly reenacting the almost century-old tragedy do Kathy,
her dog Snuggles, and Drew uncover the truth, though Kathy saves the ghostly
details to share with Miss Maryetta. Lehr's plot provides sufficient momentum for
even the most reluctant of readers. The suspense is predictably built by baiting
chapters with just enough eerie devices to keep kids turning the pages, but unex-
plained phenomena such as the elusive dog-eating lake monster Zaurus, dire warn-
ings from local American Indian Fred, brushes with ghostly hands ("Her fingers,
guided by an unseen force, made the pencil draw heavy black lines") and paranor-
mal communications through e-mail will provide the audience with requisite chills.
EAB
LITHGOW, JOHN 
The Remarkable Farkle McBride; illus. by C. F. Payne. 
Simon,
2000 
[4 4p]
ISBN 0-689-83340-7 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
6-9 yrs
Actor John Lithgow makes his literary debut with this offbeat book about a boy
whose rapid mastery and abandonment of a series of musical instruments is driv-
ing his parents crazy. Farkle McBride goes through instruments like wildfire, starting
with the violin at the age of three, but "no matter what instrument poor Farkle
tried/ His musical passions were unsatisfied." Finally, the boy finds his calling
after the conductor falls ill one day and Farkle conducts all the musicians as they
play the instruments that he previously abandoned, one by one. Written in rhym-
ing verse, the book reads like a song, with verses of action interspersed with musi-
cal nonsense choruses ("Reedle-ee/ Deedle-ee/ Deedle-ee") that work well when
read aloud. Payne creates softly surreal backgrounds for Farkle and his family,
who are shown with enlarged heads that highlight facial expressions to excellent
comic effect, showing the grimaces of Farkle's frustration and the surprise and
dismay on the faces of his bewildered parents (alert youngsters may notice, how-
ever, that some of the musical instruments are problematically positioned for play).
Children whose likes and dislikes change daily will find Farkle's musical searching
familiar, and when Farkle McBride is finally satisfied, they will be too. KM
LUNN, JANET 
The Hollow Tree. 
Viking, 2000 
208p
ISBN 0-670-88949-0 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Phoebe Olcott's family has been divided by the Revolutionary War, and her fierce
loyalty to blood relations supersedes political allegiance. Although she privately
JUNE 2000 
* 365
admires the cause for which her Patriot father died, she's equally willing to carry
out a mission that her Loyalist cousin Gideon was unable to complete before his
Patriot neighbors hanged him. Fleeing from the home of her nearest relatives, she
foolhardily heads from her Vermont village across the Appalachians with nothing
more than the clothes on her back and a kitchen knife, bent on delivering secret
information to the British general said to be stationed at Fort Ticonderoga. This
has the makings of solid historical fiction, but Lunn interjects hokey quotes ("Heart
and mind I stand with Patrick Henry, when he said, 'Give me liberty or give me
death'!"), one-dimensional characters (Phoebe's overdramatic cousin Anne), and
cute pets and woodland creatures that strain credibility. Although Phoebe and her
immediate family express themselves in standard English, their villainous neigh-
bors cackle in a dialect that seems to proceed more from their role within the novel
than the town of origin: "Starve if you must... that ain't no never mind ofourn."
Still, Lunn supplies enough wilderness adventure to draw an audience, and read-
ers who wonder what became of Loyalists after the war will find some answers
here. EB
MASSON, JEFFREY MOUSSAIEFF 
Dogs Have the Strangest Friends & Other True Sto-
ries ofAnimal Feelings; illus. by Shirley Felts. 
Dutton, 2000 
116p
ISBN 0-525-45745-3 
$19.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
Masson, author of popular adult books about animal emotions, takes the opportu-
nity here to relate to kids the kind of anecdotes he considers support for his thesis.
His stories treat subjects ranging from an elephant's attempts to assist a baby rhino
to a cat's heroic efforts to rescue her kittens from a fire to, in the title chapter,
interspecies friendships between a dog and a lion, a dog and a donkey, and a dog
and a rabbit. Masson is a compelling storyteller, and he offers a wide and appeal-
ing array of animal encounters that animal-loving kids will appreciate. Ultimately,
however, this is more a Chicken-Soup-ish collection of heartwarming tales than a
balanced assessment: Masson's analyses are far from rigorous, and he seems largely
unaware of his own anthropocentric bias (he consistently links merit in animals
with similarity to humans); his citations also tend to be sketchy, with his adult
books, rather than the primary reference, given as sources for some stories. This is
still an absorbing series of accounts, however, in the good old-fashioned natural
history tradition of Ernest Thompson Seton's Wild Animals I Have Known and
Joy Adamson's Born Free, and the short chapters provide browsability and readal-
oud opportunity. Full-page and double-spread watercolors, particularly good at
evoking the sun-drenched and shade-dappled settings of the African animals, pro-
vide portraits of the subject critters. DS
MATTHEWS, KEZI John Riley's Daughter. Front Street/Cricket, 2000 
[128p]
ISBN 0-8126-2775-X 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Thirteen-year-old Memphis Riley has lived uneasily with her grandmother, Naomi,
since Memphis' mother's death and her father's departure. Naomi has enough on
her hands taking care of her grown daughter, Clover, who is mentally handicapped,
and Memphis doesn't improve the situation. When Clover disappears after smash-
ing Memphis' mother's guitar, Memphis convinces herself for over a day that her
aunt is only hiding out of spite, until Aunt Birdie (a family friend with an honor-
ary aunthood) convinces her that something serious may have happened. The plot
366 
* THE BULLETIN
is hampered by awkward side stories about Memphis's first romance, which in-
cludes a trip to the woods to visit a flatly stereotyped African-American voodoo-
woman (who speaks in dialect), and about a threatening tramp. The uniqueness
of this story comes at the end, after Clover is found alive but injured; Memphis
then realizes that she will not be forgiven for fighting with Clover, her grandmother's
anger will not abate, and she is no longer welcome in her grandmother's house
(fortunately, Aunt Birdie provides a home for Memphis). Despite shortcomings
of characterization and plotting, Matthews deals candidly with family distress and
makes a brave choice in her conclusion, leaving Memphis safe but permanently
changed by her grandmother's rejection and showing that blood is sometimes thin-
ner than water. KM
MCCAUGHREAN, GERALDINE 
The Stones Are Hatching. HarperCollins,
2000 
231p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028766-7 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06028765-9 
$15.95 
R Gr. 7-10
It is England in 1919, after the Great War. Phelim lives with his abusive, miserly
older sister, Prudence, and his life is unutterably wretched. The appearance of his
house's supernatural protector, the domovoy, starts the unwilling Phelim on a
quest to keep the Stoor Worm from waking and releasing the hatchlings-hags,
dracs, Black Dog, Noonday Twister, merrows-mythological beings that threaten
the land. Joining Phelim on his quest are Mad Sweeney, a shell-shocked soldier,
acting as fool; Alexia, a young witch, acting as maiden; and Obby Orse, a joyful
ancient, acting as horse. The three companions recognize Phelim as "Jack o' Green,"
the only one who can save England, the world, from the coming terrors, and they
coax, threaten, cajole, and bully the boy into becoming a hero. This is a classic
mythic journey wherein a young untried hero finds the strength to defeat his own
self-doubt as well as more concrete foes. McCaughrean knows her folkloric stuff,
and her novel is propelled by encounters with the supernatural creatures of the
dark. The pace is swift, the characterizations strong, and the hatchlings nightmar-
ish. Reluctant Phelim grows into his heroism, and readers will cheer when he faces
down his repellent sister and locates his long-lost father. A folklore dictionary
might be handy, but even without, this is a whopping good read. JMD
McKAY, HILARY 
Pirates Ahoy!; illus. by Alex Ayliffe. 
McElderry, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-689-83114-5 
$16.00 
Ad 
5-7 yrs
Three-year-old Simon (from Where's Bear, BCCB 1/99) and six-year-old Peter are
cousins on a joint visit to their grandmother's. Peter is initially disdainful ("I don't
play with baby things"), but Simon's imagined jungle lures him into action ("When
the lions attacked, Peter turned into a monkey, too"); the duo, accompanied by
Simon's bear, Snowtop, then proceed to a pirate ship, a battle with dinosaurs, and
the vampire castle, until bedtime brings an end to cousinly adventures. The sec-
ondary plot point about Simon's guessing at Peter's favorite thing is perfunctorily
interwoven and somewhat confusingly resolved (the text says "then at last" Simon
guesses that it's Peter's floppy bunny, when in fact that had been Simon's very first
guess back on the second page), but McKay's easygoing style and ear for specific
detail make the cousins' fantasy world amiable and authentic. With its round
faces and crayony colors, Ayliffe's cut-paper art is blander than the text, but details
such as Simon's pirate hat (his purple striped sweater tied on his head) and scary
dinosaur-shaped bushes add some spirit. This slips between real and pretend with
JUNE 2000 
* 367
the same facility as youngsters themselves, and viewers will find a kindred spirit in
Simon. DS
MEYER, CAROLYN 
Isabel, JewelofCastilla. Scholastic, 2000 
[24 0p] 
illus. with
photographs 
(The Royal Diaries)
See review under Lasky, p. 363.
MIERAU, CHRISTINA 
Accept No Substitutes!: The History of American
Advertising. Lerner, 2000 
96p 
illus. with photographs 
(People's History)
ISBN 0-8225-1742-6 
$22.60 
R 
Gr. 4-8
In this engaging introduction to the many ways and wiles used to part Americans
from their earnings, Mierau examines advertisements from their colonial appear-
ance as flowery emigration broadsides, through their print metamorphosis at the
hands of hype experts such as P. T. Barnum, and on to their refinement in broad-
cast media. Along the way, readers learn about various branches of the advertising
industry, from the early typesetters who manipulated page design to achieve maxi-
mum appeal, to the agents who made fortunes as middlemen matching vendors
with potential buyers, to the word- and image-smiths who raised advertising to
what some have styled an "art." Mierau's coverage is neither copiously detailed
nor exhaustive; celebrity endorsement is only discussed in relation to the advent of
television, no mention is made of the Internet's capacity to expand ads from a
national to an international market, and the intriguing topic of grassroots backlash
against advertising is tantalizing but underdeveloped. Nonetheless, readers can
scarcely resist reexamining the daily bombardment of ads in light of their long-
standing American tradition and forming their own opinions as to whether adver-
tising shapes or reflects American values. Black-and-white illustrations, an index,
and a bibliography are included. EB
MUNSCH, ROBERT 
Mmm, Cookies!; illus. by Michael Martchenko. 
Cartwheel/
Scholastic, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-590-89603-2 
$11.95 
R 4-6 yrs
Christopher discovers a pile of play clay in the basement, and, being a mischievous
sort, "he got himself a piece of red play clay and whapped it in his hands-WHAP,
WHAP, WHAP, WHAP, WHAP"-and made fake cookies covered with icing,
sugar and raisins. After fooling his mother and father into tasting his pseudo-
cookies, the little trickster happily goes off to school, unaware that his mother has
telephoned his teacher to warn her about his clay cookie prank. The teacher knows
what to do, and when Christopher arrives at school he finds a beautiful cookie
(clay) on his seat. Readers-aloud are going to have a grand old time with Munsch's
sound effects ("SCRRUUUNNNNCH!" and "Yuck!" and "BURBLE BURBLE
SPLAT SPLICHT BWAHHH"), and listeners are going to roll on the floor laugh-
ing, first at Christopher's successful prank, and then at his comeuppance. Al-
though the production values have that mass-produced, supermarket feel,
Martchenko's watercolors reflect a comicjoie de vivre that suits the tale. The story
is slight and the pictures obvious; still, the slapstick depiction of the characters'
reactions to the ingesting of clay cookies are sure to tickle kids' funny bones, and
the opportunity for (gross) sound effects will trigger enthusiastic audience partici-
pation. Better warn the parents to hide the play clay or be prepared for a culinary
surprise. JMD
368 
* THE BULLETIN
NARAHASHI, 
KEIKO 
Two Girls Can!; written and illus. by Keiko
Narahashi. 
McElderry, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-689-82618-4 
$16.00 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Narahashi celebrates girlhood friendships with the repeated refrain of the title,
"Two girls can." Using different pairs of multiethnic girls, she introduces various
activities two girls can do together, such as holding hands, flying a kite, pretending
to be twins, and climbing a wall. The text is upbeat but bland ("Two girls can
hide,/ spy,/ and surprise!"; "Two girls can/ pretend they're twins/ or be real twins/
or a big and little sister"), and Narahashi's ending, though celebratory, seems tacked
on and anticlimactic ("Two girls can/ dance!/ but so can three-/ and four,/ and
five./ Come on, everybody/ let's dance!"). The strength here lies in the expressive
watercolors of friends having fun together, learning from each other, and helping
each other; there is enough energy in the apple-cheeked kids to keep the predomi-
nantly pastel palette from being too sweet. Use this book with younger audiences
to generate discussions about friendship. EAB
O'MALLEY, KEVIN 
Bud; written and illus. by Kevin O'Malley. 
Walker,
2000 
[3 2p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8719-3 
$16.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8718-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
A "very proper, very sensible" rhinoceros couple, the Sweet-Williams, are startled
by the unconventional behavior of their son, Bud. He "liked dirt. Not just a little
bit, either. He'd jump in it, roll in it, and .. plant things in it." Bud's parents
consider nature "disorderly," and his father hopes he'll grow out of his fixation,
"but if anything, he grew into it," eventually nurturing a gorgeous (if untidy) gar-
den. A visit from extremely orderly Grandfather Sweet-William causes Bud's par-
ents to attempt to hide the evidence, but the secret of Bud's riotous garden is
revealed after a storm damages his flora. O'Malley's flair for depicting expressive
characters is in evidence here: the anthropomorphized rhinos are a picture of
sartorial splendor and intellectual hauteur. Grandfather Sweet-William peers over
his glasses with a jaundiced eye that would cause feelings of inadequacy in the
heart of the most self-assured individual. Dialogue balloons reveal the personali-
ties of the players (Bud's parents use proverbs such as "cleanliness is next to godli-
ness," and Grandfather Sweet-William declares, "I have a special gift for finding
dirt") and enhance O'Malley's sly humor. While tidying the garden as a family
activity seems a bit off after this tribute to horticultural license, the cheery ambi-
ence tempers the contrary conclusion. Forget those treacly titles on the joys of
gardening; read this one aloud and show listeners what getting down and dirty is
really all about. JMD
OVEREND, JENNI 
Welcome with Love; illus. by Julie Vivas. 
Kane/Miller,
2000 
[32p] 
(Cranky Nell Books)
ISBN 0-916291-96-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-9 yrs
Unlike Ashbe's minimalist What's Inside (reviewed above), which gives very intro-
ductory facts about pregnancy, this explicit title aims for the demystification of
homebirth. Young Jack tells the story of his mother's labor and delivery of his new
baby brother, a delivery attended by father, midwife, aunt, and Jack and his two
JUNE 2000 
* 
369
sisters. The Jack's-eye-view of the proceedings reveals a curious, slightly apprehen-
sive narrator who has been appropriately prepared for a momentous event. Jack
observes carefully, his voice matter-of-fact and sincere ("The baby slips into Anna's
[the midwife's] hands, and she lifts the cord from around the baby's neck, and I
can see it's a boy! And then I hear a little sound, like a kitten meowing. 'Hello,
baby,' I say quietly. 'Hello'"). Overend avoids didacticism by making Jack a
credible participant describing specific personal events instead of a distanced nar-
rator who exists only to provide a step-by-step guide to at-home births. Vivas'
illustrations depict a family in assorted stages of anticipation and participation, in
compositions that enhance the intimacy and emotionality of the event. Varying
perspectives, expressive faces, and a palette dominated by a subtle but soothing
violet all contribute to a sense of family unity and satisfaction. JMD
PARK, LINDA SUE 
The Kite Fighters; illus. by Eung Won Park. 
Clarion,
2000 
136p
ISBN 0-395-94041-9 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Young-sup and Kee-sup are brothers, but Young-sup is the younger and is-in
fifteenth-century Korea-expected to treat his eldest sibling with strict courtesy
and respect since he is the one who bears the burden of bringing increased honor
to his prosperous family. These expectations create conflict when Young-sup's
talent for kite flying attracts the attention and, eventually, the awkward friendship
of the Boy King (a character based on a historical figure). This leads to the king
asking the brothers for a kite that flies as well as theirs, which patient and painstak-
ing Kee-sup manages to deliver. However, the king then asks Young-sup, the best
flier, to fly his kite for him during the competition at the New Year celebration.
Young-sup's displeased father reminds his younger son that "always the eldest son
represents the family," but Young-sup does eventually find a way out of this di-
lemma consistent with his duties as a brother and a friend as well as a son and a
loyal subject. The rest of the book focuses on the boys' preparations for the con-
test and the specific question ofwhether or not to coat their kite string with crushed
pottery, an innovation that makes it easier for Young-sup to saw through the strings
of his opponents. The mix of history and fiction in this story about family hierar-
chies, individual talents, and kites is sorted out in a brief but lucid endnote. An
introduction to the domestic side of Korean culture and history, the novel allows
the characters more room to maneuver within their constraints than their histori-
cal counterparts probably had, but Park does carefully describe those parameters
and offer readers an accessible way to think about what it would be like to live in a
world where birth order is destiny. FK
PATRICK, JEAN L. S. 
The Girl Who Struck Out Babe Ruth; illus. by Jeni
Reeves. 
Carolrhoda, 2000 
48p 
(On My Own History)
Library ed. ISBN 1-57505-397-7 
$21.27
Paper ed. ISBN 1-57505-455-8 
$5.95 
R Gr. 2-4
Pitcher Jackie Mitchell made now-overlooked history when in 1931, at the age of
seventeen, she signed a contract with the men's minor league Chattanooga Look-
outs and promptly faced off against two of the Yankees' greatest hitters in exhibi-
tion play. According to this account, Babe Ruth met her with reluctance ("Jackie
shook his hand. But Babe Ruth looked away") and Lou Gehrig behaved gra-
ciously ("He took off his cap. He bowed slightly and shook her hand. His grip
370 
* THE BULLETIN
was as strong as iron"); once these social obeisances were discharged, Mitchell
struck both men out. Patrick focuses narrowly on Mitchell's moment in the lime-
light, saving discussion of controversy over possible payoffs and/or publicity stunts
for a helpful concluding note. Fiery play action and the august presence of Ruth
and Gehrig should keep boys' interest blazing, but girls will especially relish vivid
descriptions of Mitchell's devilish pitching ability. Clipped sentences seem right
at home on this field, sounding more like an announcer's play-by-play than sim-
plified syntax for beginning chapter-book readers. Plenty of colored-pencil illus-
trations draw readers onto the diamond and reinforce the text. This should be a
sure winner when biography report time rolls around. EB
PENNEBAKER, RUTH 
Both Sides Now. 
Holt, 2000 
[160p]
ISBN 0-8050-6105-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-12
Liza is a go-getter and a positive thinker, like her father; she's the advice columnist
for the school paper, the diplomatic intermediary between her wild friend Rory
and her disapproving friends Beverly and Emma, and the rock upon whom her
father depends in family upheaval. The current upheaval is the return of her
mother's breast cancer, which Liza and her doctor father are determined is merely
a temporary setback. Liza's mother, however, realizes that things aren't that simple,
and she incurs the wrath of her family by refusing aggressive treatment and facing
the greater possibility of death as a result. Pennebaker deftly allows Liza's narra-
tion to convey her character, especially with Liza's constant self-assessments ("I
always sound calm and I almost always feel calm. That's one of the best things
about me, I think") and increasing dismay at the difference between her self-iden-
tification and the person she's becoming in the face of her family stress. Though
the occasional interpolation of Liza's mother's thoughts is superfluous (and those
interludes are less convincingly written than Liza's account), the book achieves the
difficult feat of portraying a family dominated by a particular emotional conven-
tion, which is critically failing them; there are harbingers of this problem in Liza's
father's unwillingness to see his own father's deterioration, and reflections in Liza's
dismissive attitude towards her emotional younger sister and her anxiety-ridden
relationship with a new boy in school. Though the shadow of loss darkens the
novel, its focus is less the probability of tragedy than the way in which this family
operates; it's a penetrating and believable examination of an aspect of family life
often transparent to its participants. DS
PEVSNER, STELLA 
Is Everyone Moonburned but Me? 
Clarion, 2000 
202p
ISBN 0-395-95770-2 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Thirteen-year-old Hannah is the dependable sibling, stuck between her willful
older sister, Melanie, and her willfully babyish younger sister, Paige; she's similarly
taken for granted at school by her flaky friend Cheyenne and her headstrong friend
Kelsey. The progress of her divorced parents' independent love lives, her partici-
pation (with her father's girlfriend's son) on the debating team, and her beloved
grandmother's stroke help her put her assets in perspective. There's a loose-
jointedness to the plotting here that keeps the book from effective cohesion, and
the situation seems less resolved than buried under new events (Grandma's final
platitude to Hannah, "But now you need to be there for yourself," comes pretty
much out of the blue). Hannah's sturdy and unassuming narration is well-tuned
JUNE 2000 
* 371
to her character, however, and the portraits of her sisters, especially wannabe babydoll
Paige, are sharp and authentic. Hannah's position (she really is put upon) will
elicit sympathy from readers who feel unappreciated themselves, and they'll be
happy when she gets the credit she's due. DS
PHILBRICK, RODMAN 
REM World. 
Blue Sky/Scholastic, 2000 
192p
ISBN 0-439-08362-1 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Determined to lose weight the easy way, pudgy Arthur sends away for the "Lose
Weight While You Sleep!" REM Sleep Device. The device is actually a helmet,
and its soothing sounds open a door to a parallel world. Somewhat precipitously,
Arthur removes the helmet and steps through into an alternate reality. Arthur's
oversight (leaving the helmet behind him) has let the darkness into the universe,
and while he endeavors to prevent the dark from taking over Arthur grows into
himself (and loses weight, just like the ad said). Purposive as this may be, Philbrick's
parallel world is a lively one, with some quirkily drawn characters. REM is a
dream world with consequences, and Arthur pushes himself beyond himself to
undo what he has inadvertently done. The book's style is declamatory and facile,
and humor is never far away, even in the most dire circumstances. The characters
are more functional than developed personalities, but the fast plot saves this title
from being more thematically obvious than it is. The conclusion (in which Arthur
rejects his nickname, "Biscuit Butt," and embraces "a name he earned himself,
Arthur Courage") is just a bit too much like being hit with a well-intentioned
brick, but this little piece of wish-fulfillment should find an audience just the
same. JMD
POLACCO, 
PATRICIA 
The Butterfly; written and illus. by Patricia
Polacco. 
Philomel, 2000 
48p
ISBN 0-399-23170-6 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Monique awakens in the middle of the night to the sight of a "ghost child" sitting
on the end of her bed, who runs away before Monique can speak to her. When she
tells her mother what she has seen, her mother firmly tells her that it was only a
dream. Living just outside of Paris during World War II, Monique and her friends
are beginning to see frightening changes in their neighborhood, as Nazis dominate
the streets and some Jewish neighbors are taken away. Unbeknownst to Monique,
her mother has been helping the French Resistance; eventually the "ghost child" is
revealed as a Jewish girl named Sevrine who is living, with her family, in a secret
part of Monique's cellar. Watercolor illustrations show figures in muted colors
suffused with deep gray shadows that contrast starkly with blank white backgrounds,
conveying the bleak harshness of the Nazi occupation. The faces of the two girls
are expressively awkward in the spreads depicting their second nighttime meeting,
where they sort out what they are both doing in the house ("Where do you live?"
Monique insisted. "Here!" Sevrine finally said. "Here?" Monique said with such
surprise and so loudly that it might have awakened the whole neighborhood! "But
I live here!"). Unfortunately, the view of the Holocaust is somewhat sanitized (a
note explains that some of the people upon whom the story was based suffered
grim fates unmentioned in the story proper), and the plotting is wordy and illogi-
cal. Despite the sentimentality and convolutions, however, this is a sometimes
moving and dramatic story of a child's perspective on the Holocaust and the French
Resistance that retains the immediacy of Monique's understanding. KM
372 
* THE BULLETIN
RUBALCABA, JILL 
The Wadjet Eye. 
Clarion, 2000 
156p
ISBN 0-395-68942-2 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Damon is grieving the loss of his mother, who has died after a long illness. His
loyal friend Artemas convinces Damon to take the news to his father, a soldier
fighting for Julius Caesar and Rome. The two young men undertake the journey
from Alexandria to Spain, encountering seagoing rogues, deadly whirlpools, man-
eating sharks, and Pharaoh herself, Cleopatra. Damon and Artemas reach Caesar's
army where would-be soldier Artemas risks life and limb to bring injured soldiers
in from the battlefield and Damon uses his medical training to treat their wounds.
Artemas is rewarded with a commission in Caesar's army; Damon with a reunion
with his father. Rubalcaba's characterizations of Cleopatra, Julius Caesar, and
Cicero (who appears briefly) have a human dimension often lacking in depictions
of bigger-than-life historical figures. Damon and Artemas' friendship is the glue
that holds the plot together, and Damon's obvious love for his mother and anger
at his absent father add yet another layer of emotion to the tightly woven plot.
This is a short, action-packed, and accessible adventure that will find a comfort-
able spot on the historical fiction shelf. A glossary, extensive historical note, and
bibliography are included. JMD
RUNNINGWOLF, MICHAEL B., ad. 
On the Trail ofElder Brother: Glous'gap Stories
ofthe Micmac Indians; ad. by Michael B. RunningWolf and Patricia Clark Smith;
illus. by Michael B. Running Wolf. Braziller/Persea, 2000 
144p
ISBN 0-89255-248-4 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-9
Two members of the Micmac tribe tell sixteen stories related to the supernatural
being, Glous'gap, who is a "spiritual teacher, the ultimate warrior, medicine-per-
son, and occasional trickster" of Native American coastal New England and the
Canadian Maritime Provinces. Creation is new, not everything has taken its form
yet, and Glous'gap must fight forces of evil and help human and animal life get
established properly. Water figures prominently: there is a flood story ("Porcu-
pine and Fisher") and a drought story ("Glous'gap and the Water Monster") that
has a glorious tall-tale aspect. "How Glous'gap Saved Pine Marten and Mrs. Bear"
is a five-part odyssey, while "Glous'gap and Wa'sis" is a brief, funny anecdote
about how the great leader could not get a baby to do what he wanted, with an
explanation of why babies say "Goo." As the introduction notes, "these traditional
Micmac stories do not have distinct beginnings, middles, and ends that leave the
characters tidily accounted for." Nevertheless, they are strongly shaped and full of
rhythmic incantations that both readers and storytellers will enjoy: "Ho-ho! Ho-
ho!/ All the waters are mine!/ All the waters are mine!/ Go away! Go away!/ Or I'll
kill you today," shouts a giant water monster that becomes the first bullfrog. Sev-
eral will be familiar in theme if not structure, as in "Glous'gap and the Three
Wishes," a jovial beware-of-what-you-wish-for tale in which one young man lives
to regret his boon of being able to belch and fart copiously in an effort to make
people laugh. In addition to introducing the stories with a section on cultural
background, the authors have included a glossary/pronunciation guide of Micmac
words, a map of Micmac territory, and a list of resources for further reading and
viewing. Sources for the stories are not specifically cited outside of a comment
that "Michael learned most of these tales as a child" from various family members.
The beginning of each tale is illustrated with a stylized pen-and-ink drawing incor-
porating traditional graphic motifs. BH
JUNE 2000 
* 373
SALTZBERG, BARNEY 
The Soccer Mom from Outer Space; written and illus. by Barney
Saltzberg. 
Crown, 2000 
[40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-80063-2 
$15.95
Library ed. ISBN 0-517-80064-0 
$17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
On the eve of Lena's first soccer game her father tells her a bedtime story about
young Ruben Drinkwater, whose very average mother turned into an escalating
embarrassment for her son on the Atomic Pickles soccer team. Her enthusiasm
morphed from "a little 'WOO!' here and a little 'WOO!' there," to sporting a
goofy pickle hat, to outrageous cheerleading in a full-body dill costume, until Ruben
begged her to stop. By then the damage was done--other team parents were so
inspired by her antics that they hired a green blimp to descend upon the field while
they brandished pompoms in their own pickle suits, to the team's great delight.
Lena responds to her father's tale with a skeptical "But I don't think anyone's
parents would act so weird just because of a soccer game." The next day she stares
in disbelief as her own parents arrive at her match, clad like Fruit of the Loom
logos, cheering, "Go Galactic Grapes!!!" Unbridled parental zeal is so common a
source of childhood anguish that many listeners will groan with recognition at
Ruben's trial. Cartoony line-and-watercolor pictures neatly capture the Jekyll/
Hyde transformation of mild, slightly dumpy Mrs. Drinkwater (complete with
fuzzy house slippers and half-spectacles) into the shrieking, flipping fanatic that no
self-respecting child would publicly claim as a mother-at least not until the other
kids approve her as "cool." EB
SCHNUR, STEVEN 
Night Lights; illus. by Stacey Schuett. 
Foster/Farrar,
2000 
32p
ISBN 0-374-35522-3 
$16.00 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
In this nighttime counting book, Melinda "counts the lights" before she goes to
bed. She's going to be up for awhile: she counts not only one (a nightlight in the
nursery) through twenty (twenty airplanes flying overhead), but then moves on to
fifty, one hundred, a thousand, and a million. The text's outdistancing of the
initial Melinda's-counting concept causes some strain; the illustrations also con-
fuse things by making the counting units inconsistent (sometimes the counted
items possess more than one light and aren't lights themselves) and sometimes
unclear (what exactly is a "lightning bar"?). The nocturnal scenes are inviting,
however, with the points of luminescence punctuating landscapes of glimmering
blues and greens. Emphasize the night rather than the counting, and this will
make an effective bedtime book; if a simple readaloud doesn't induce drowsiness,
you can always set youngsters to counting the "one million twinkling stars." DS
SCRUGGS, AFI Jump Rope Magic; illus. by David Diaz. 
Blue Sky/Scholastic,
2000 
34p
ISBN 0-590-69327-1 
$16.95 
R 5-10yrs
Shameka is a champion double-dutch jumper, and she and her friends are jump-
ing rope so hard that "the jump rope beat soared on the breeze,/ scattering magic
through the trees." Mean Miss Minnie comes out to chase the girls home, but
Shameka stands her ground, refusing to be scared away. She enthusiastically chants
some jump-rope rhymes, and Mean Miss Minnie is caught up in the joyful rhythms
in spite of herself. Twirling the jump rope, Miss Minnie chants: "I'm going to
374 
* THE BULLETIN
heaven,/ and I won't come down./ I'll be sitting on the moon/ where I can't see the
ground." Off into the blue sky she goes, leaving Shameka her jump rope and a
new jump-rope chant. The girls reconvene, and Shameka shares her new rhyme
until "Out, out, out!/ Shameka/ jumped/ out!" The plot may be as out there as
Miss Minnie, but Shameka epitomizes the joy of jumping rope, and her enthusi-
asm is irresistible. Diaz' buoyant illustrations are suffused with a golden glow that
makes the setting appear bathed in sunlight; the houses resemble an askew Oz,
complete with fanciful trees and flowers. The marionette-jointed characters are
expressively rendered, their faces reflecting a wholesome enjoyment of their play.
While the text isn't quite as pithy as playground rhymes, Scruggs has caught the
pounding rhythms of call-and-response jump rope chants, so much so that readers
and listeners alike are going to itch to give those ropes a whirl. JMD
Sfs, PETER 
Dinosaur!; written and illus. by Peter Sis. 
Greenwillow, 2000 
26p
ISBN 0-688-17049-8 
$14.95 
R 2-4 yrs
A little boy's nighttime bath starts out innocuously enough as he and his toy dino-
saur soak, but soon he's joined by a live dinosaur emerging from the bath's depths.
Next, other dinos scamper by as the startled boy looks on, and they grow in size
until a foldout spread shows the herd galloping past our bathing hero. Sfs initially
employs the childlike, streamlined style of Trucks Trucks Trucks (BCCB 5/99),
wherein thick black lines float across white space touched with occasional patches
of color, then moves to his more dimensional, subtly colored and richly textured
style in the foldout explosion of dinosaur fantasy, which adds just the right touch
of dreamy culmination. This is a neat little wordless reverie for young dinophiles
seeking to make bathtime more exciting; let's hope it's waterproof. DS
SPEED, TOBY 
Brave Potatoes; illus. by Barry Root. 
Putnam, 2000 
[32p]
ISBN 0-399-23158-7 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
6-9 yrs
If you've ever thought that there just aren't enough picture books about vegetable
liberty (and even if you haven't), you'll be glad to see this saga of tuberous au-
tonomy. The titular potatoes' adventure starts at the County Fair, where they
sneak out in the night to revel in the midway and ride the Zip. Their highlit
hijinks attract the attention of the Chowder Lounge's Chef Hackemup, who's
prepping vegetables for the cauldron ("He's got green and yellow peppers!/ Even
royal rutabagas!/ EVEN RUBY RED TOMATOES!/ But he hasn't got potatoes./
No, he hasn't got potatoes"). Though the chef manages to entice the partying
spuds into his bag, the indomitable potatoes stage a kitchen uprising, toppling the
chef into his own stockpot and leading all the produce to freedom. It's refreshing
to see something genuinely new sprouting under the sun, and the text treats its
deliciously bizarre premise with an energetic, blithely rhythmic form that starts
stealthily with prose and turns into witty, chantable rhyme, springy and flexible,
that'll make your mouth water to read it aloud. In the gouache and watercolor
illustrations, Root's roots have an understandable debt to Mr. Potatohead, but
their freckled exuberance is all their own (and there's something weirdly endearing
about their spindly little limbs and wide-mouthed grins). The chefs gleaming
copper kitchen is a sci-fi-esque vegetable abattoir, where conveyer belts haul ap-
prehensive turnips and beets through clouds of steam towards the waiting shining
knife (villainous as the chef may seem, young audiences may still be relieved that
JUNE 2000 
* 375
he survives his soup-dunk little the worse for wear). If you're inclined towards
underground humor, serve this one up with potato chips-they'll both go down
well. DS
SPINELLI, EILEEN 
Night Shift Daddy; illus. by Melissa Iwai. 
Hyperion,
2000 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2424-7 
$15.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0495-5 
$14.99 
R 
3-6 yrs
This is two bedtime stories in one. After Daddy puts his daughter to bed, he leaves
for work; while she dreams, he sweeps. When he returns home, his daughter
repeats the bedtime ritual in reverse, reading to her father and tucking him in
before going out to play. The story's repetitions and rhythmic couplets will appeal
to young listeners and, along with the large, distinct type, may be useful to emer-
gent readers. Though the figure of the daughter is improbably round-faced and
button-nosed, the muted, opaque colors that fill the double-page spreads suit the
sleepy characters, and shadows soften the edges of the wintry urban milieu while
spot art highlights contrasting details like Daddy's work boots and his daughter's
bright blue bunny slippers. Both sleepy parents and imaginative children will
enjoy the gentle realism and playtime possibilities of this plausible role reversal.
FK
STANLEY, DIANE 
Roughing It on the Oregon Trail; illus. by Holly Berry. 
Cotler/
HarperCollins, 2000 
42p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027065-9 $15.95
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027066-7 
$15.89 
R 
6-9 yrs
Twins Lenny and Liz have been dropped with Grandma for two weeks, and she
proposes a trip back in time to visit with an ancestor of their choice. Lizzy picks
out a portrait of a young girl who shares her name, and Grandma whisks them (via
magic hat) to Independence, Missouri, 1843, to join great-great-great-great-grand-
mother Elizabeth on the wagon trail to Oregon. Stanley does for history what
Joanna Cole and her Magic School Bus do for science-she creates a field trip in
which sizable chunks of solid information are laced with gentle wisecracks and
plenty of dialogue-bubble asides. Within this format, modern-day characters can
freely express reactions to the journey and its hardships that the audience probably
shares yet may not blurt out in class: "Buffalo chips? Is that what I think it is? Are
we really supposed to pick it up?"; "Yow! This [wagon] needs shock absorbers!"
Berry's cartoon cast is a jolly, unsophisticated lot that bounds across the colored-
pencil continent with chipper resilience to every obstacle Nature throws across
their path. None of the star players can claim the sharply developed look and
personality of Bruce Degen's Ms. Frizzle, but then, happily, they don't need to
trek through the MSB's visual clutter. Stanley's wit and authority are very much
in evidence, and the gallery of relatives on Grandma's wall suggests that other
Time-Traveling Twins trips are in the offing. EB
STONE, BJ 
Ola's Wake; illus. by Susan Havice. 
Holt, 2000 
[96p]
ISBN 0-8050-6157-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Josie and her mother drive most of the way across Texas to go to the funeral of
Josie's great-grandmother, Ola. When they arrive there, Josie meets a neighbor
376 
* THE BULLETIN
girl named Sara, whose grief infers an intimacy with Ola that makes Josie jealous,
since Josie hadn't seen her great-grandmother in years. Neighborly mourners stop
by the house and recount stories about Ola, which Josie soaks up like a sponge.
When Josie catches a cold (just like Ola, Josie's mother remarks) that turns into a
fever, she finds herself going on a walk with Ola, sharing the same berry picking
and digs in the garden that Sara has described in her remembrances. Despite
Josie's enthusiasm, a real picture of Ola's personality never emerges, and repeated
references to similarities between Josie and Ola seem forced. The pace of the
fevered dream sequence drags, and Josie's insistence that the walk was "real" sug-
gests a naivetd that doesn't mesh with Stone's earlier characterization of her hero-
ine. However, Stone does effectively illustrate Josie's desperation to be connected
with Ola, and Josie and Sara reconcile their jealousy when Sara tells Josie that she
is "as stubborn as Miss Ola." This is an unusual story of grief for an unknown
dead relative, and children who have experienced this kind of event may be inter-
ested to see how Josie comes to understand the great-grandmother she never knew.
KM
TALBERT, MARC 
Small Change. Jackson/DK Ink, 2000 
170p
ISBN 0-7894-2531-9 
$16.95 
M Gr. 5-8
Self-absorbed ugly-American-in-training Tom finds no pleasure in the family va-
cation in Mexico. He considers Spanish "gibberish," can't understand why his
parents like "this place," and resents the cocky self-assuredness of the Mexican
youths he watches from afar. At the Felicidad Market, Tom and his younger sister
Philippa are caught in a dangerous altercation between soldiers and merchants and
are saved from the gunfire by Ignacio Guerrero, a Mexican boy, and his father.
The four flee the violence in Sefior Guerrero's old truck, and before Tom can
protest, he is at the family ranch. Tom gets an eye-opening and character-shaping
education at the Guerrero ranch as he adjusts to life without the conveniences he
thought so necessary and realizes how rich he is in comparison to Ignacio's family.
The plot is purposively designed to get Tom to a place where he can "go native"
and learn to appreciate his hosts, even though they are uneducated and poor. While
Tom, Philippa, and Ignacio are solidly characterized, some major plot points are
left dangling: when is this story taking place? Is the violence in Felicidad a reflec-
tion of real history? How do Tom and Philippa find their parents? Isn't anyone
looking for these two kids? Well-meaning but sketchily developed, Tom's trans-
formation and the circumstances leading to it are barely credible. JMD
THOMPSON, KATE 
Wild Blood. Hyperion, 2000 
[272p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2497-2 
$16.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0572-2 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Tess is staying with her uncle and aunt and their three children on a remote farm
in Ireland. With only a few days left before turning fifteen and losing her power to
switch (shape-shift into any other living creature), she must decide what form she
will take for the rest of her life-her human form, or another. Confused and
nervous about the decision she must make, Tess is also troubled by the feeling of
unease that comes over her whenever she enters the woods on her uncle's land.
His plan to sell the property is disrupted by the disappearance of his three chil-
dren, and Tess risks everything in an attempt to save them before her final switch.
JUNE 2000 
* 
377
This concluding volume in Thompson's Switchers trilogy (which includes Switch-
ers, BCCB 7/98, and Midnight's Choice) has a suspenseful pace that builds to a
foregone but still engaging conclusion. Thompson captures a certain gloom-and-
doom foreboding and fills the woods with it, giving the book a dark sense of place
that adds considerably to the something-is-not-quite-right atmospherics. Tess'
dilemma involves a choice between eternal life and human mortality, and although
her decision is inevitably anticlimactic, her ambivalence about her reasons for that
decision contributes a frisson of tension. Thompson's characterizations are strong,
and her descriptions of switching are mesmerizing; that and the forthright Tess
make up for the slightly soft conclusion. JMD
TRUEMAN, TERRY 
Stuck in Neutral. HarperCollins, 2000 
[128p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028518-4 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028519-2 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-12
Shawn's narration has the sarcastic edge of many fourteen-year-olds, but Shawn
himself is different in one simple and powerful way-his cerebral palsy prevents
him from voluntarily controlling any of his muscles. His mother and two siblings
are unaware that he not only has the ability to perceive and understand the world
around him but is actually blessed (or cursed) with a perfect memory for every
detail of his life so far. And his life may not go much farther: recent details lead
Shawn to suspect that his father, who left the family years ago, is plotting to kill
him in order to end the misery he's sure his son endures. Poetry written by Shawn's
father (a Pulitzer-Prize-winning writer and frequent TV talk-show guest) opens
each chapter; although the poetry itself is amateurish, the plot is riveting, as Shawn
reveals more about the roots of his suspicions and the facts of his everyday exist-
ence without muscle control. Trueman's characterization is fascinating, portray-
ing Shawn as a believably philosophical young man who, while still hoping for a
chance to make connections to others, can understand his father's wish to end his
pain. In the end, Shawn loses consciousness to one of his many daily seizures at
the moment that his father is approaching his helpless body, and readers are left
suspended in the tension of an unknown outcome. Trueman has created a com-
pelling novel that poses questions about ability and existence while fostering sym-
pathy for people with severe physical limitations; readers will find themselves
immersed in questions of "what if' at the same time that they are drawn through
the story by Shawn's witty voice. KM
TURNER, MEGAN WHALEN 
The Queen ofAttolia. 
Greenwillow, 2000 
280p
ISBN 0-688-17423-X 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 9-12
"The Queen's Thief' has been captured by the ruthless queen of a neighboring
country waging war on his homeland; Eugenides (Gen, from Turner's The Thief,
BCCB 11/96) has been betrayed to his enemy, the Queen of Attolia, by his gods.
His suffering and redemption, the military strategy involved in waging war on
three fronts, and the limited options open to a disputed ruler determined to hold
her throne are three convergent threads of this character-driven novel. Gen is an
enigmatic individual with hidden motives; his love for Attolia, while not obviously
foreshadowed, is convincing, as is his close friendship with the Queen of Eddis, for
whom he thieves. The rival queens have a solid physicality; their enmity is clearly
explained, and their rapprochement is no more than hinted at. Eddis fights for her
378 
* THE BULLETIN
kingdom as Attolia fights for hers, using any available weapon to win; Attolia
regrets her apparently barbaric decisions, but even Eddis understands the bitter
necessities that rule her foe's actions. More complex than its predecessor, this
sequel is also thematically darker, with a more densely layered setup. While the
pace is not swift, it is steady as a heartbeat, pulsing toward an inexorable conclu-
sion. There's a slight arrhythmia when Gen blackmails Attolia into a promise of
marriage, but Turner's resolution is both unexpected and convincing. Fans of The
Thief are a few years older now, and they may well appreciate the subtleties of
Gen's continuing story. JMD
WALTERS, ERuc 
Three on Three. 
Orca, 2000 
122p
Paper ed. ISBN 1-55143-170-X 
$3.99 
Ad 
Gr. 2-5
Third-graders and closet friends Nick and Kia are two of the best basketball play-
ers in their grade, and they determine to enter a school tournament. To that end,
they manage to enlist fifth-grader Marcus, ace b-ball player and all-around good
guy. In the process Nick unfortunately attracts the potentially dangerous atten-
tion of Ron, new kid, bad loser, and bully. Practice sessions and games improve as
Kia, Nick, and Marcus learn how to play as a team; ultimately their success leads to
a scene in the school gym, where rival player Ron tries to take out Nick during a
basketball match. A subplot involving a missing wallet (Marcus lives in the low-
income projects so he is immediately suspect) adds tension to the final court con-
frontation. This is fairly programmatic; the players are variations on stock characters
and their future is never in doubt. A cool fifth-grader becoming fast friends with
two not-so-cool third graders teeters on the edge of wish-fulfillment, but it isn't
entirely unbelievable (the motherless Marcus appreciates Nick's mother and home-
cooked meals), and the conclusion, though overly neat, ties up dangling plot threads
(the misplaced wallet is found, Nick's busy father shows up for the big game).
Predictable plotting aside, this is a very useful early chapter book for young sports
fans. JMD
WESTON, CAROL 
The Diary of Melanie Martin; Or, How I Survived Matt the
Brat, Michelangelo, and the Leaning Tower ofPizza. Knopf, 2000 
[144p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-90509-X 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-80509-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Melanie, her parents, and her younger brother, Matt, are on a family vacation in
Italy, where Melanie learns to appreciate Michelangelo, the Leaning Tower of
Pisa, and even Matt. Melanie relates her trip in a breezy style, addressing her diary
(and the reader) directly and including little drawings, fancy lettering, Italian phrases
(complete with pronunciation guide), and docent-ish information about muse-
ums, churches, and sculpture. Weston captures the voice of the bright, excitable
Melanie with ease, and the dynamics between the siblings are right on the money
(their favorite museum game is "Point Out the Naked People"). Melanie's journal
tends toward travelogue, however, and while readers may come away knowing a
little more about Italy and Renaissance art, they will know less about the main
character. Still, the voice is convincingly girlish, the setting unusual, and the wrap-
up (on the plane home, Melanie writes a thoughtful thirty-line poem about the
trip to complete a homework assignment) satisfying. Weston, advice columnist
for Girls' Life magazine, has her finger on that preadolescent girl pulse, and the
result is fluff with flair. JMD
JUNE 2000 
* 379
WETHERED, PEGGY 
Touchdown Mars!: An ABC Adventure; written by Peggy
Wethered and Ken Edgett; illus. by Michael Chesworth. 
Putnam, 2000 
[34 p]
ISBN 0-399-23214-1 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-9 yrs
Perhaps the only thing more improbable than tentacled, green-headed Martians is
presenting sound information about a flight to Mars within the format of an al-
phabet book. Wethered and Edgett pull it off, though, and primary-schoolers and
their teachers will be delighted. Atop each page is an alphabet line: "A You are an
astronaut!... You are going to Mars"; "B You are ready to board your rocket!" A
boxed caption at the bottom of each page expands on the particular theme or stage
of the trip: "An astronaut can be a woman or a man. You must study and train
very hard to prepare for travel in space"; "When you board the spacecraft, you
need to be sure you have enough supplies for a three-year mission." The ever-
problematic "Q" and "X" are used to advantage to engage listeners' imaginations
and focus their inquiries: "What questions do you have about Mars?... What has
made this planet look so different, yet so similar, to Earth?" "On this map, the 'X'
is in western Candor Chasma.... You examine [rock] fragments with a magnify-
ing glass. What do you see?" The accompanying detailed cartoon scenes explicate
the apparati and trajectories of the journey, as well as the Martian landscape which
the childlike, multicultural astronauts explore. The appended "Mars A-B-Cyclo-
pedia" offers older children more challenging snippets of Mars data to expand and
enrich the elementary coverage in the main text. Chalkboard-styled endpaper
diagrams put the planets in order (although obviously not into orbital scale) and
trace the flight path to Mars and back. Bon voyage! EB
WULFFSON, DON 
Toys!: Amazing Stories Behind Some Great Inventions; illus. by
Laurie Keller. 
Holt, 2000 
[128p]
ISBN 0-8050-6196-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
From tops to Twister and Slinky to Super Ball, Wulffson dashes through the his-
tory (and quite probably some mythology) of two dozen well-known toys and
some of their closest cousins. Each chatty chapter begins with an overview of the
plaything's genesis (many springing from chemical accidents or weapons develop-
ment), embellished with plenty of cartoon spot art, and concludes with a fistful of
trivia bullets. Wulffson stirs up considerable interest, particularly in toys and games
of antiquity ("Hobby horse history is fun and filled with surprises") but offers
readers no solid leads to pursue, for although a bibliography is included, specific
source notes are not. Given, for example, Wulffson's reduction of Chinese em-
peror Ch'in Shih Huang Ti's massive terra cotta army to "life-size toy soldiers"
and the Trojan horse to the "most clever hobbyhorse of all time," serious research-
ers might wonder just how much veracity falls by the wayside. Still, this is an
inviting topic and its breezy treatment should hook even the most book-shy with
an arsenal ofdidjaknow?s to fire off at recess. EB
YEP, LAURENCE 
Cockroach Cooties. Hyperion, 2000 
135p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2419-0 
$16.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0487-4 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Teddy, older brother to Bobby, wisely tries to keep out of the way of bully "Arnie-
zilla," but when Bobby incites Arnie's wrath, Teddy reluctantly steps in. Teddy is
380 
* 
THE BULLETIN
desperate to avoid a physical confrontation with Arnie, but it isn't until Bobby
discovers the bully's secret fear (involving insects of all kinds, cockroaches in par-
ticular, and some cookies with a secret ingredient) that a truce is declared. Chi-
nese-American brothers Bobby and Teddy are cozily ensconced in their family
circle. Narrator Teddy learns to appreciate his pesty younger brother, and their
developing closeness is affectionately presented. The writing is occasionally choppy,
and the transitions between incidents are less than smooth, but the interactions
between the characters have the truthful ring of real conversations overheard; the
final truce between brothers and bully is believably if somewhat imaginatively ac-
complished. The title alone will be enough to attract middle-grade readers of a
certain humor, and they may be surprised at Yep's ability to make even "Arnie-
zilla" sympathetic. JMD
YOLEN, JANE 
How Do Dinosaurs Say Good Night?; illus. by Mark Teague. 
Blue
Sky/Scholastic, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-590-31681-8 
$15.95 
R 
3-6yrs
The bedtime habits of dinosaurs are the subject here, with Yolen exploring in verse
some important questions: does a dinosaur "slam his tail and pout?", clamor for
one more book, or "fall on top of his covers and cry?" It turns out that dinosaurs
actually go quite sweetly to bed, with ritual hugs and kisses and sayings of "Good
night," so perhaps they'll serve as role models. The simple lyric is somewhat forced,
but it makes its point playfully and tenderly. Teague's illustrations make the most
and more of the text, with oversized pages displaying a happily hybrid world where
a multiracial cast of human parents tuck in a multispecies (each spread includes
the dinosaur name somewhere, and the endpapers provide a key as well) cast of
dinosaurs. The bulky dino-kids tower over their modest mothers and fathers in
bedrooms that'll speak to both contemporary and prehistoric youngsters. Those
who warmed to a nightly reading of Boynton's Dinosaur's Binkit (BCCB 12/98)
will find this bedtime fantasy even more Jurassically satisfying. DS
ZIEFERT, HARRIET 
Hats Offfor the Fourth ofJuly!; illus. by Gustaf Miller. 
Viking,
2000 
[26p]
ISBN 0-670-89118-5 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
An oceanside community turns out for the annual Independence Day parade, and
each double spread has the good citizens lining the sidewalks as another entry
marches by: "The twirlers are walking down the street./ They spin and strut and
lift their feet./ Music and drum . . . music and drum./ Who will be the next to
come?" Old favorites are well represented-clowns and horses, high school bands
and motorcycles-along with such local charmers as a whale float, Revolutionary
War reenactors, and Miss Eelgrass, a green-tressed mermaid towed in a fishing
boat. Candy-bright colors and the slightly elongated and stylized figures of Miller's
marchers will keep preschoolers' eyes steadily focused on the action-that is unless
the steady, thumping rhythm of Ziefert's verses sends them off marching to their
own imaginary drummers. Unfortunately there's no hint here as to the reason for
the Fourth ofJuly and its accompanying hoopla, and unless an adult supplies some
background, the flags, Uncle Sams, George Washingtons, and Minutemen are
little more than showmanship. EB
JUNE 2000 
* 381
ZIMMERMAN, ANDREA 
My Dog Toby; by Andrea Zimmerman and David Clemesha;
illus. by True Kelley. 
Silver Whistle/Harcourt, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-15-202014-4 
$15.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
Toby is the narrator's beloved Basset Hound, who has many wondrous attributes
("He knows if you drop a piece of sandwich in his food dish even if he's way
upstairs") but who has never learned to do a single trick. Toby's mistress is famil-
iar with her friends' talented pooches, so she's eager to get Toby performing-
especially if it disproves her older brother's dismissive opinion ("My brother says
maybe he's dumb. Toby's not dumb. My brother's dumb"). The strong point
here is the narrator's voice, with its blend of loyalty and frustration and its authen-
tic echoing of the major importance a pet has in a child's life. Toby's eventual
mastery of the "Sit" command makes for a modest but nonetheless satisfying, to
viewers as well as to the narrator and her brother, conclusion. Kelley's sturdy-
lined watercolors emphasize genial directness over subtlety, and Toby's combina-
tion of droopy ears and pendulum tail gives him a mournful and unassuming
charm. Wannabe dog trainers will wag their tails for this one. DS
^.*
382 
* THE BULLETIN
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
Barchers, Suzanne I. Multicultural Folktales: Readers Theatrefor Elementary Stu-
dents. Teacher Ideas Press, 2000. Paper ed. ISBN 1-56308-760-X; $24.50. 188p.
Barchers, author of Fifty Fabulous Fables: Beginning Readers Theatre and Scary
Readers Theatre, has put together forty story theatre scripts adapted from tradi-
tional folktales from around the world. The scripts are graded according to the
Flesch-Kincaid readability scale and grouped by reading levels, grades 1-5. The
introduction gives a succinct overview of readers theatre, including the benefits of
classroom use, script preparation, and suggestions for getting started. The scripts/
stories range from the familiar (Japan's "The Peach Boy" and Russia's "Baba Yaga")
to the unusual (Micronesia's "The Tree that Bled Fish" and the Hausa "Why Ants
Carry Burdens"). Each script opens with the title of the tale and its country of
origin, followed by a summary of the story, suggestions for presentation, props,
and delivery, and a list of characters. The scripts themselves are cleanly laid out
and easy to read, and, while the success of the adaptations varies, they are all emi-
nently useful as starting points. The division according to readability leads to
some odd choices of tales for developmental as well as grade levels, but teachers
and librarians using this book will no doubt make their own decisions as to what
story would work best with what group. Sources for twenty-eight of Barchers'
adaptations are given in the acknowledgments; the remaining twelve are without
notes. JMD
Buzzeo, Toni. Terrific Connections with Authors, Illustrators, and Storytellers: Real
Space and Virtual Links; by Toni Buzzeo and Jane Kurtz. Libraries Unlimited,
1999. Paper ed. ISBN 1-56308-744-8; $26.50. 185p.
Buzzeo, a school library media specialist, and Kurtz, a children's author, have put
together an authoritative (but friendly) guide to connecting children to books via
"book people," aka authors, illustrators, and storytellers. Their contagious enthu-
siasm for their topic is evident from the introduction, and their belief that success-
ful visits are possible in every setting is very reassuring. The book is divided into
two parts ("Live Connections with Bookpeople" and "Alternate Connections to
with Bookpeople") and ten chapters that cover nearly every possible contingency.
Part One covers elements of the successful visit such as working around limita-
tions, choosing the "Right Bookperson," exposing classes to the relevant books,
making curriculum connections, and other opportunities such as working with
public libraries and hosting a Young Authors Conference. Part Two discusses
mail (fan, personal, electronic), real time, virtual visits via the Internet (including
information about the ongoing "Read In!" project), and other web-based possibili-
ties. The final chapter offers "A Potpourri of Resources and Props." Each chapter
has a list of references; there is an additional reference list at the book's end, as well
as subject, bookpeople, and title indices. JMD
JUNE 2000 
* 383
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Abortion-fiction: Fienberg
ADVENTURE STORIES:
McCaughrean; Speed
Advertising: Mierau
African Americans-history: Hansen
Aliens-fiction: Bunting
Aliens-stories: Karas
ALPHABET BOOKS: Wethered
American Indians-folklore:
RunningWolf
Animal behavior: Masson
Animals: Masson
Art and artists: Isadora
Babies: Ashbe
Babies-stories: Overend
Baseball: Patrick
Basketball-fiction: Walters
BEDTIME STORIES: Karas;
Schnur; Spinelli; Yolen
BIOGRAPHIES: Patrick
Birth-stories: Overend
Brothers and sisters-fiction: Auch;
Dowell; Fienberg; Ketchum;
Stanley; Talbert; Weston
Brothers and sisters-stories: Karas;
Zimmerman
Brothers-fiction: Park; Yep
Bullies-fiction: Walters; Yep
Chinese Americans-fiction: Yep
Cities-poetry: Janeczko
Cliques-fiction: Koss
Clothing-stories: Lacome
CONCEPT BOOKS: Ashbe;
Isadora; Schnur; Wethered
COUNTING BOOKS: Isadora;
Schnur
Cousins-stories: McKay
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Dowell
Death and dying-fiction: Matthews;
Pennebaker; Rubalcaba; Stone
Detectives-fiction: Hale
Diaries-fiction: Weston
Dinosaurs-stories: Sis; Yolen
Disabilities-fiction: Hulme;
Matthews; Trueman
Divorce-fiction: Pevsner
Dogs-fiction: DiCamillo
Dogs-stories: Zimmerman
Dreams-stories: Karas
EPISTOLARY FICTION: Demas
Espionage-fiction: Lunn
Ethics and values: Burgess; Lunn;
Park; Pennebaker; Talbert;
Trueman
Families-fiction: Fienberg;
Trueman; Weston
Families-stories: Overend
FANTASY: Lehr; McCaughrean;
Philbrick; Thompson; Turner
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Auch; Pennebaker; Spinelli
Fathers and sons-fiction:
Rubalcaba; Trueman
FOLKTALES AND FAIRYTALES:
RunningWolf
Food and eating-stories: Munsch
Friendship-fiction: Bunting; Byars;
Koss; McCaughrean; Pevsner;
Polacco; Rubalcaba; Thompson;
Walters
Friendship-stories: Lacome;
Narahashi
FUNNY STORIES: Ahlberg;
Braybrooks; Byars; Hale; Munsch
384 
* THE BULLETIN
Games-stories: Scruggs
Gardening-stories: O'Malley
Ghosts-fiction: Lehr
Girls-stories: Narahashi
Grandfathers-stories: O'Malley
Grandmothers-fiction: Ketchum;
Matthews; Stanley; Stone
HAIKU: Janeczko
HISTORICAL FICTION: Auch;
Burgess; Demas; Dowell; Hulme;
Kacer; Ketchum; Lasky; Lunn;
Meyer; Park; Polacco; Rubalcaba;
Stanley; Stone
History, U.S.: Hansen
History, world: Wulffson
Holidays-stories: Ziefert
Holocaust, the-fiction: Kacer;
Polacco
Italy-fiction: Weston
Korea-fiction: Park
Language arts: Ahlberg
Magic-fiction: Fine; McCaughrean
Marine life: Batten
Mars: Wethered
Media: Mierau
Mexico-fiction: Talbert
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Fienberg; Kacer; Pennebaker
Mothers and daughters-stories: Fox
Mothers and sons-stories: Saltzberg
Music and musicians: Koscielniak
Music and musicians-stories:
Lithgow
MYSTERIES: Hale; Lehr
Nature study: Batten
Orchestras: Koscielniak
Orchestras-stories: Lithgow
Orphans-fiction: Ketchum
Parades-stories: Ziefert
Parents-stories: O'Malley
Pets-stories: Zimmerman
Pockets-stories: Braybrooks
POETRY: Glenn; Hort; Hughes;
Janeczko
Popular culture: Mierau
Presents-fiction: Bunting
PUZZLES: Jay
Queens-fiction: Lasky; Meyer;
Turner
Reading aloud: Hale; Hort; Hughes;
Ketchum; Masson; RunningWolf
Reading, reluctant: Hort
Reconstruction: Hansen
Revolutionary War-fiction: Lunn
School-fiction: Byars; Fine; Glenn;
Hale; Koss
Self-esteem-fiction: Philbrick
Sisters-fiction: Dowell; Pevsner
Sisters-stories: Arnold
Slavery: Hansen
Soccer-stories: Saltzberg
Social studies: Mierau
South, the-fiction: DiCamillo
SPORTS STORIES: Saltzberg;
Walters
Storytelling: RunningWolf
Storytime: Fox; Munsch; Scruggs;
Speed
Suicide-fiction: Glenn
Supernatural-fiction: Fine
SURVIVAL STORIES: Arnold
Time travel-fiction: Stanley
Tornadoes-stories: Arnold
Toys: Wulffson
Vacations-fiction: Lehr; Weston
Vegetables-stories: Speed
Voyages and travel-fiction: Demas
Voyages and travel-poetry: Hughes
War-fiction: McCaughrean;
Rubalcaba
West, the-fiction: Hulme
Whaling-fiction: Demas
Women's studies: Patrick
World War II-fiction: Kacer;
Polacco
Writers and writing-fiction: Ahlberg
ureal run, wiln
subtly placed,
positive
S messages."
-Kirkus 
Reviews
Gloria's VA
by ANN CAMERC
Pictures by Lis To
"A delightful companion to the books f
Julian and his little brother, Huey... He
friend Gloria has her say... Her six shc
stories of everyday struggles and occas
triumphs will appeal to young readers .
choice for children who are ready for ch
books." -Book/st
"This is where peace begins -
in an on
neighborhood where children learn to a
their problems with the help of wise ad
offer them good counsel while respectil
children enough to let them work out t
own solutions... Sparkle[s] with humo
-The 
Horn
$15.00 / 0-374-32670-3 / Ages 6-9
Frances Foster Books
FARRAR * STRAUS * GIROUX
/:
I 
-I-
KeeDDl In 
'1eachtno-,
Teaching K-8 is filled with hundreds of unique ideas and
activities that help teachers present new challenges to their
students, learn new concepts and develop new skills.
Monthly articles include:
Carol Otis Hurst on...
* Children's Books * Teaching in the Library
Plus... * The Parent Connection * Interviews with
children's book authors and illustrators * Science
* Technology and more!
Don't miss this valuable
resource for your library -
subscribe today.
Call 800-678-8793 or visit
our website at
www.TeachingK-8.com
with the
latest in
Teaching!
"Renowned author-illustrator
dePaola...possesses a warmth and
humor that reaches out to children..."*
Imie is depicted in dePaola's
imeless, decorative style."
-Booklist*
"DePaola tells this
cheerful original Irish
tale in a lighthearted
tone; his cozy, colorful
illustrations are a good
match for the unas-
sumingly rhythmic
text."-Horn Book
"[dePaola's] artwork
shines like cut glass."
-Kirkus
Jamie O'Rourke and the Pooka
naes 3-8 / 0-399-23467-5 / $16 99
G.P. Putnam's Sons
a division of Penguin Putnam Books for Young Readers
www.penguinputnam.com
.:s5"
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.S.A.
RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED
0008-9036(200006)53:10;1 -K
PERIODICALS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
The Bulletin of the Centerfor Children's Books
is online!
It is our great pleasure to announce that, beginning with the
1999-2000 volume year, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's
Books will be available to our print subscribers as a searchable
online database. Print subscribers will be able to browse the
latest issue online, look through issues from the 1998-99 volume
year, and search for reviews by title, author, and reading level.
The staff of The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
cordially invites you to browse through the September 1998
sample issue at:
http://www.prairienet.org/cgi-bin/ccb/bulletin.cgi
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
The Best of Tradition and Technology
g.
iII:I 
|||· 
I 
I 
l 
l 
jr 
4
