ILLINO
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
~-e : 
r··;
ii:
-i
;:::
F';~bj,
'-E-i":
d:·
-i. 
1
;IT:·: 
-,~s;-
-
: ~ 
±
- "Fifteen untitled poems, handsomely illustrated with photo-
realistic paintings, express the feelings of a young Chinese boy
from Hong Kong as he adjusts to his new home in New York's
Chinatown. What comes through clearly [to readers] is the boy's
gradual acceptance of his new home place where daily pleasures
can be enjoyed without relinquishing memories of the past. The
first-person voice and strong composition of art with vivid colors
symbiotically make this boy's personal emotional journey a
universal experience." 
-Starred 
review /Kirkus Reviews
S"Readers will come away with a deeper interest in
Chinatown's culture and in immigration stories in general."
-Starred 
review/ ALA Booklist
Ages 5-8. $16.95 Tr (0-06-029190-7); $16.89 Lb (0-06-029191-5)
I' 
6 
rero 
-n 
fldens 
eek
THE
BUvL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
April 2002
Vol. 55 No. 8
A LOOK INSIDE
269 THE BIG PICTURE
Small written and illus. by Clara Vulliamy
270 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
272 * TellAll the Children Our Story: Memories and Mementos of Being Young
and Black in America by Tonya Bolden
272 * Outside the Lines: Poetry at Play by Brad Burg; illus. by Rebecca Gibbon
273 * Gloria Rising by Ann Cameron; illus. by Lis Toft
283 * Journey to the River Sea by Eva Ibbotson; illus. by Kevin Hawkes
283 * The Guy Book: An Owner's Manualfor Teens by Mavis Jukes
283 * Atlantic written and illus. by G. Brian Karas
301 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
302 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Centerfor Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Publications Office of the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of
the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of Illinois Press,
1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS)
Janice M. Del Negro, Contributing Editor (JMD)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elaine A. Bearden, Reviewer (EAB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Jeannette M. Hulick, Reviewer (JMH)
Fern Kory, Reviewer (FK)
Kate McDowell, Reviewer (KM)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
OFFICE STAFF
Sabrina Austin
Jennifer DeBaillie
Natalie Hoyle
Jeannette Hulick
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $66.00; individuals, $50.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $5.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road,
Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson Associates, P.O.
Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to the University of
Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new address.
Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Centerfor Children's Books, University of
Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
All inquiries about subscriptions and advertising should go to University of Illinois Press, 1325 S.
Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903, 217-333-0950.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The
Bulletin of the Centerfor Children's Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email:
bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2002 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Clara Vulliamy from Small ©2002. Used by permission of Clarion Books.
APRIL 2002 
* 269
THE BIG PICTURE
Small
written and illustrated by Clara Vulliamy
Plenty of youth services librarians, parents, and early childhood educators under-
stand the value of a book that will hold the attention of preschoolers, that will
connect with them on a personal level, and that won't condescend to or confuse a
young audience. Clara Vulliamy's Small is just such a book. Its child-centered
drama speaks directly to little listeners, and while its central focus-a child's sepa-
ration from and reunion with a beloved toy (in this case, a diminutive stuffed
mouse)-is not a new one in children's literature, it's one that definitely bears
retelling. Anyone who's ever tried to take a "blankie" away from a toddler knows
that the attachments children forge with comfort objects can be incredibly power-
ful, and young children will easily understand and respond to the bond that exists
between Vulliamy's young Tom and his stuffed mouse, Small.
Tom is going to stay overnight at Granny's house for the first time, and,
as he packs and repacks his tiny suitcase, he inadvertently leaves Small behind.
Unaware at first of Small's absence, Tom has a delightful time with Granny, but
he sadly realizes what has happened when bedtime rolls around. Meanwhile, back
at Tom's house, the forlorn Small can't sleep without his human companion and
so, after climbing out the window and shinnying down the downspout, he bravely
sets off to find Tom. Neither rain, nor wind, nor the "dark, dark woods" can stop
the timid but determined Small ("He's cold and tired and scared. But he doesn't
stop"), and he finally arrives at Granny's house. At the same time, Tom has de-
cided that he must go out to look for Small and, as he nears Granny's front door,
he sees that "there, on the mat below the mail slot . . . is Small!" Sensible adult
Granny claims that Small must have been dropped there when Tom first came in;
Tom, however, "doesn't say anything. Tom knows."
Vulliamy tells her story simply and matter-of-factly, quietly capturing
the urgency of the situation, and her description of Tom and Small's separation
and reunion is emotional but not overly sentimental. Adults will see the happy
ending coming from a mile away, but young children won't mind such predict-
ability a bit and will appreciate the reassurance and security provided by the joyful
conclusion. Short, succinct sentences and selective repetition of words and phrases
("He's climbing and tumbling. And the rain pours down. And the howling wind
pushes him back") offer additional stability and structure to Vulliamy's writing,
and her choice of a present-tense narrative voice further supports her young audi-
ence, who live very much in the here-and-now.
It's no coincidence if Vulliamy's style of illustration brings to mind the
work of British author and illustrator Shirley Hughes; she happens to be Vulliamy's
mother. Watercolor spot illustrations (interspersed with lines of text against a
creamy background) depict details of Tom's indoor activities in warm russet and
gold tones, while Small's scenes are tinged with the sunset hues and dark blues of
270 
* 
THE BULLETIN
evening; full-page paintings effectively illustrate Small's nocturnal expedition. In
these scenes, Vulliamy utilizes a nighttime palette along with varying perspectives-
one dramatic spread uses a slightly overhead view to play up the contrast between
the miniature mouse and the towering trees of the woods-to emphasize the vul-
nerability of poor little pink-eared Small. Given Vulliamy's characters and sto-
ryline, her art could have easily tipped into the gooey and gushy, and the doe-eyed
Tom is in fact somewhat idealized; overall, however, the homey, comfortable illus-
trations are more cozy than cutesy. The rumpled, bean-baggy-looking Small is a
particularly sympathetic and endearing figure as he runs from an interested cat or
struggles with human-sized curbs and a chain-link fence.
Ultimately, it is Vulliamy's childlike point of view (in which only Tom
and Small understand what really happened) that ensures Small's success with tod-
dlers and preschoolers. With her words and images, Vulliamy recognizes and vali-
dates the feelings of her young audience; she understands and zeroes in on the
sorrow that children feel over what adults believe are small losses, as well as the
jubilance and relief that we all feel when the rightness of things is restored. Small
is just the right choice for a bedtime readaloud or a P.J. storytime at the library
where kids bring their best stuffed-animal buddies-just make sure that when the
program's over nobody's left behind. 
(Imprint information appears on p. 298.)
Jeannette M. Hulick, Reviewer
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ADLER, C. S. 
The No Place Cat. Clarion, 2002 
[160p]
ISBN 0-618-09644-2 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Twelve-year-old Tess is tired of living with her orderly father in his orderly house
with his orderly new wife, who expects Tess to help around the house and with her
young step- and half-siblings. Having had enough of feeling unappreciated and
stifled, Tess decides to take a hike, literally, and walk to her mother's condo, where
she plans to live permanently. Life with her exuberant mother isn't as easy as Tess
had hoped, however: she's lonely much of the time when her mother's out social-
izing, and Mom refuses to let Tess keep the cat she picked up and bonded with on
her two-day trek. While it's clear from the start that author sympathies tilt to-
wards Dad's house and that that's where Tess will end up, the book doesn't make
saints out of anybody (Dad really is inclined to be stubborn and rigid) or shake
fingers (Mom's kid-unfriendly lifestyle of heavy traveling and heavy dating, the
reason she didn't seek custody in the first place, clearly doesn't keep her from
loving Tess, just from being the parent her daughter needs). Tess is a lively and
somewhat unusual protagonist, prone to making trouble for entertainment's sake,
less blind to consequences than largely untroubled by them, and genuinely sur-
prised by her sudden attachment to her unexpected feline companion. Matura-
tion and decision-making stories can be on the heavy-handed side-here's a
APRIL 2002 
* 271
nonthreatening and accessible take on the subject to which many youngsters will
relate. DS
AHLBERG, ALLAN 
Treasure Hunt; illus. by Gillian Tyler. 
Candlewick,
2002 
[2 4p]
ISBN 0-7636-1542-0 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
2-4 yrs
In this perky overview of a young child's day, toddler Tilly hunts for treasure:
"Each morning Tilly's mom hides Tilly's breakfast banana somewhere in the kitchen.
And Tilly hunts for it, and hunts for it... and finds it. 'My treasure!' cries Tilly.
And she eats it up." Tilly's dad hides Tilly's stuffed rabbit, Tilly's cat hides herself,
Tilly's mom and dad hide themselves ("But Tilly just hunts for them ... and finds
them right away. 'Easy peasy!' cried Tilly"). Right around bedtime, Tilly hides
and her parents hunt for and find her: "'My treasure!' cries Tilly's mom. 'My
treasure, too,' cries Tilly's dad. And they cuddle her up." Ahlberg's deliciously
cozy text has a few minor glitches-the repetitive rhythm wobbles in parts, and
the text goes on just a touch too long-but youngsters sitting in loving laps won't
care. Tyler's line-and-watercolor illustrations are sweetly suitable, and the charac-
terizations of the ebullient Tilly and her slightly rumpled parents keep the images
from falling into the overly cutesy. The layout and style of the daily-event vi-
gnettes here are very similar to Ahlberg's books with Janet Ahlberg; the pictures are
too small to make this book useful with large groups, but it is certain to be a hit for
one-on-one readalouds. JMD
APPELT, KATHI 
Bubba and Beau: 
Best Friends; illus. by Arthur
Howard. 
Harcourt, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-15-202060-8 
$16.00 
R 4-7 yrs
A succinct text in brief chapters introduces baby Bubba and his best friend, the
hound-dog puppy Beau. Both offspring are the apples of their respective parents'
eyes (a picture of Bubba Senior and Beau's daddy, Maurice, in the back of Bubba's
pickup howling at the moon in celebration of the births is accompanied by the text
"One perfect baby. One perfect hound. And a lot of commotion"). Bubba and
Beau become fast friends, even going so far as to share Bubba's perfect pink blankie.
The day Mama Pearl washes the blankie is "a sad day in Bubbaville"-at least until
the clean, dry blanket is returned to the also-bathed Bubba and Beau. Appelt's
snappy text is a readaloud romp, and Howard's equally snappy watercolors pro-
vide an offbeat, slyly funny subtext. Uncluttered compositions, a clean pastel
palette, solid drafting, and terrifically expressive faces combine with the conversa-
tional, cheeky text to make this one clever package. JMD
ASHMAN, LINDA 
Can You Make a Piggy Giggle?; illus. by Henry Cole. 
Dutton,
2002 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-525-46881-1 
$12.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
3-5 yrs
An overalled boy attempts to provoke a sourpuss porker into laughter: "Can you
make a piggy giggle if you tell a silly riddle?... if you play a little fiddle ... if you
waddle through a puddle?" As the pig remains unamused, the attempts become
more and more outrageous: "Can you make a piggy giggle if you wriggle like a
noodle ... if you polka with a poodle?" Though the pig doesn't respond, other
272 
* THE BULLETIN
species seem to be entertainable ("A chick might snicker ... a calf might laugh ...
a turtle might chortle"). After a plethora of antics, the text suggests a revised method
for successful porcine diversion: "He still won't giggle?/ Then you're much too
slow!/ So let's try it faster./ Ready? Go!" This is more a silly and rather overprotracted
tongue-twister than a story, but there are promising possibilities for energetic per-
formance. The art is predictable and cartoony rather than imaginative, lacking the
spark that might compensate for the limitations of the text, but the spring-colored
watercolor and colored pencil spreads create a playful mood. Despite its short-
comings, this is likely to offer storytime success and to encourage your own gaggle
of giggles. EAB
BOLDEN, TONYA 
Tell All the Children Our Story: Memories and Mementos of Be-
ing Young and Black in America. Abrams, 2002 
128p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8109-4496-0 
$24.95 
R 
Gr. 5-9
Neither a comprehensive history nor a cobbled-together scrapbook, Bolden's work
is an impressionistic tour through the experiences of black children from colonial
times to present, and ultimately an exploration of diversity within black communi-
ties over three centuries. Here readers meet freeborn children of privilege and slave
children toiling in abject misery, children determined to seize the best educational
opportunities at any cost, and children who openly disdain the offer of forced
integration ("I did not want to go to school with white people ... 
I wanted the
right to go anywhere I wished to go. I also wanted the right not to go"). Despite
occasional forays into the florid ("Out of the mouths of babes this song ["Lift Ev'ry
Voice and Sing"], written in one day by James Weldon Johnson, had its debut"),
Bolden's prose flows easily and naturally, and the presentation is thoughtful and
stimulating. Document insets and high-quality reproductions of artwork and realia
suggest how and where to search imaginatively for cultural evidence-among the
ephemera of ticket stubs ("ADMIT ONE-Colored Balcony") and stereographs
("Sugar Cane Plantation, La.") and music scores ("Five Little Pieces" by child prodigy
Philippa Schuyler), as well as photographs and paintings produced within and
outside the black community. Source notes, illustration credits, and a reference
bibliography are included, as well as a suggested reading list of current children's
books and a detailed index. EB
BURG, BRAD 
Outside the Lines: Poetry at Play; illus. by Rebecca Gibbon. 
Putnam,
2002 
32p
ISBN 0-399-23446-2 
$15.99 
R* 
Gr. 2-5
This sparkling synthesis of text, layout, and art offers twenty-two poems about
youthful play that refuse to allow imprisonment in a book to keep them static.
While they might be fairly termed concrete poems (and a few of the entries, such as
"Leaf Pile," engage in the familiar pattern-poem format), that's almost too staid a
term for these verses, with their thematically appropriate interest in depicting ac-
tion and movement rather than things: "Rolling Downhill," for instance, joyously
depicts the swiftly changing, gradually slowing viewpoint of a downhill gyration
("Green green/ blue blue/ ... blue/ green/blue/ blue/ THROUGH"), the words
stacked and slanting on the page, separating as the pace of the tumble slackens.
There's some calorie-burning reading here, as in "Skipping," where the reader fol-
lows the skipper by shifting back and forth from left to right (two words each time,
of course) on a progress up the page ("Left foot/ right foot,/ here I go now"). Some
APRIL 2002 
* 273
entries have an appropriate element of gamesmanship: "Tic-Tac-Toe (A battle
plan)" needs to be read not from left to right or up or down, but in the order of the
placement of the Xs and Os in the game it describes; "Connect the Dots" will
likely tempt some readers to take pencil to page in order to uncover the poem's
hidden shape. Team sports come in for attention, too, as with the game of "Soft-
ball" that lays out the field with a compact couplet attached to each player. The
watercolor and colored pencil illustrations work intelligently with the words and
their arrangement, politely staying out of the way where appropriate, emphasizing
rhythms and structure, and offering inviting youthful playgrounds ranging from
verdant fields to sunny beaches. Bouncier but no less interesting than Janeczko's A
Poke in the I (BCCB 6/01), this will give kids a chance to leap into poetry. DS
CAMERON, ANN 
Gloria Rising; illus. by Lis Toft. 
Foster/Farrar, 2002 
[112p]
ISBN 0-374-32675-4 $15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Gloria (of Gloria's Way, BCCB 2/00) discovers life inspiration in an unusual place:
an onion. This, however, is no ordinary onion-it's a vegetable caught by Dr.
Grace Street, the astronaut ("Almost an autographed onion," says Gloria) when
Gloria is fooling around in the grocery store, which then leads to a conversation
between the two and to Dr. Street's encouraging Gloria to pursue her own dream
of going into space someday. Gloria's new fourth-grade teacher, however, unfairly
disapproves of Gloria, and the young astronaut-to-be must struggle to retain her
focus in the face of her teacher's disbelief. This is more overtly didactic than
previous works about Gloria and her friends, but the dynamics of the lesson are
realistic and Gloria's narration remains fresh and confiding. Dr. Street (who is
somewhat reminiscent of Mae Jemison) is a little too good to be true, but she's a
useful counterpoint to the all-too-authentic teacher who mistakes her own limita-
tions for her students', and kids will be thrilled by the possibility of running into
an astronaut in the checkout line. Toft's soft-textured black-and-white illustra-
tions manage to convey ordinariness and possibility simultaneously in bright-eyed
Gloria; an author's note provides information about space-relevant websites. DS
CAPPO, NAN WILLARD 
Cheating Lessons. 
Atheneum, 2002 
23 4 p
ISBN 0-689-84378-X 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Smart, tough-minded Bernadette loves knowledge, loves being right, and loves a
good fight, which has made her a stellar high-school debater, and it also makes her
hungry to beat Wickham High's archrival, toney Pinehurst Academy, in the Clas-
sics Bowl. She's thrilled to be the keystone of Wickham's team for the Bowl, but
she's got nagging doubts, not just about her team's capability (they're taking every
shortcut from CliffsNotes to movie versions to cover the material) but about their
eligibility for the competition, since Bernadette's logical mind can't figure out
how they could have achieved the necessary scores. Bernadette's suspicions keep
leading her back to the team's charismatic coach, Mr. Malory, whom she wor-
ships, and between happenstance and deliberate investigation she begins to realize
that not only did Mr. Malory cheat to get the school into the competition, he's
using inside information to give them an unfair advantage in the Bowl itself. The
narrative treats plot, subplots, and minor details with the same fierce intensity,
which robs the main theme of its emphasis and slows the pace occasionally; the
elements of both Malory's deception and Bernadette's uncovering of same have
274 
* THE BULLETIN
the flimsy convenience of melodrama rather than any real credibility. Cappo sets
up a provocative ethical dilemma, however, and she takes it in some difficult direc-
tions (Bernadette has her eyes opened about her parents' ethics as well), effectively
balancing the moral imperative against the reader's wish to see this deserving group
of kids succeed. Call this the darker counterpart to The Viewfrom Saturday (BCCB
11/96) and use it to start discussions-or just hand it to young cynics who already
believe that everything is rigged. DS
CLEMENT-DAVIES, DAVID 
The Sight. Dutton, 2002 
[432p]
ISBN 0-525-46723-8 
$21.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 8-12
Palla and Huttser are the Drappa and Dragga, or female and male head wolves, of
a pack that is fleeing through a desperate Transylvanian winter from an evil leader,
Morgra, whose following continues to increase. Morgra has the power of the
Sight, which allows her to see the future; she's hunting Palla and Huttser's pack
because it contains another precognitive wolf, whom Morgra hopes to use to fur-
ther her own power. Clement-Davies creates a convincing culture of the wolves,
with layers of legends and prophesies that parallel human stories, such as the story
of the Red Girl, which reworks Little Red Riding Hood from the wolf's perspec-
tive. Unfortunately, the pacing drags as the wolves spend more time relating sto-
ries and theorizing at length about the meanings of various legends, and readers are
likely to tire along the way of the lengthy narrative. Nevertheless, devoted fantasy
readers as well as fans of darker animal stories may enjoy the complex and chilling
world that Clement-Davies creates around these lupine protagonists. KM
CLEMENTS, BRUCE 
A Chapel of Thieves. 
Farrar, 2002 
[22 4 p]
ISBN 0-374-37701-4 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
Armed with a bushel of religious zeal but far less common sense and no foreign-
language skills, Clayton Desant heads for 1849 Paris, that hotbed of sin just ripe
for salvation. It's clear from his letters to younger brother, Henry, though, that
the congregation he perceives as repentant lambs is actually a den of housebreakers
who've set the American innocent up as a cover for their nefarious operations.
Henry therefore undertakes a rescue mission, steamboating from St. Louis to New
Orleans, shipping out to France, setting up modest housekeeping near Clayton's
chapel, and launching an assault on his brother's poor judgment. The charm of
this romp (tardy sequel to I TellA Lie Every So Often, BCCB 11/74) lies less in the
aggregation of unlikely events or the serendipitous interventions of kindly Dame
Fortune than in Henry's narrative evaluation of adventures in which he's embroiled.
Whether assisting at a shipboard autopsy or at a street riot engineered by Victor
Hugo, Henry recounts his doings with deadpan seriousness, while readers observe
just how close his and Clayton's lives come to spinning comically out of control.
With brisk pacing, a happy ending, and a grin or chuckle on every page, Henry
Desant's literary second coming will be welcomed by readers. EB
COHN, RACHEL 
Gingerbread. Simon, 2002 
172p
ISBN 0-689-84337-2 
$15.95 
R* 
Gr. 9-12
Sixteen-year-old Cyd Charisse has been dubbed a "recovering hellion" by her af-
fectionate stepfather after being expelled from her New England boarding school
APRIL 2002 
* 275
and reinstalled in her San Francisco home, but her uptight mother isn't convinced
that shoplifting and falling for a cute surfer boy called "Shrimp" genuinely consti-
tute recovery. 
Increasingly frustrated with her daughter's waywardness, Cyd's
mother sends her off to visit Frank, Cyd's biological father, whose only interaction
with his daughter since she was five was to provide the funds for Cyd's abortion
(an abortion that her mother still doesn't know about) when she called him in
sheer desperation. Significantly inseparable from her father's long-ago gift to her,
the doll she named Gingerbread, Cyd is thrilled at the chance to find a place in
Frank's life and his New York world, but real life proves more complicated than
the familial fantasy to which she'd been clinging. Cohn writes with verve and an
edible, unique style somewhat reminiscent of Francesca Lia Block's in its ability to
evoke a vivid and believable language that's separate from that of the parental
generation, but also with a touch of the breathless, desperate comedy of Bridget
Jones'Diary. She never crosses the line into taking Cyd herself less than seriously,
however: it's clear both that Cyd is in a great deal of pain and that she is a strong,
imaginative, likable young woman who knows herself and her own worth ("I may,
in fact, be one of those people who will be content just to make great coffee and
hang out on foggy broody beaches and not worry too much about the great issues
of the world. I don't think that makes me a bad person"). Cyd's interactions with
other characters in the colorful cast are the stuff of authenticity: her and her mother's
volatile relationship is one of the most realistically depicted in YA literature, while
her sweet, affectionate connection to her newfound older brother shows Cyd at
her best. This is a sparkling authorial debut featuring a memorable YA heroine.
DS
COLMAN, PENNY 
Where the Action Was: Women War Correspondents in World
War II. 
Crown, 2002 
118p 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-517-80076-4 
$19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-80075-6 
$17.95 
R Gr. 6-10
The Armed Forces grudgingly credentialed them to get the women's angle and
human interest stories, but, as Colman relates here, women war correspondents
brought their own goals and agendas to the World War II theaters of operation
with no intention of sitting demurely on the sidelines. Opening chapters set the
stage for America's entry into the war and comment on women journalists' in-
volvement to that date, but the action doesn't really take off until the War Depart-
ment mandates accreditation for correspondents and photographers, confers the
honorary rank of captain, and outfits journalists for the war zone: "Men routinely
obtained accreditation; women were typically denied it. The women were told
that there were no facilities for them. That they were not physically strong enough.
That they would distract the soldiers. That war was a male subject. That... the
U.S. Army forbade women from going into combat." No matter-they were
going anyhow, and many risked not only their lives but their even more highly
cherished credentials to climb aboard fighter planes and nose behind front lines to
get a scoop. Chronological organization is confounded by the rush of personalities
on and off the stage as Colman tries to keep tabs on more than a dozen featured
journalists, none of whom seem to stay put long enough for readers to get a feel for
her experience. Still, there's plenty of action here, and an abundance of black-and-
white photos-both of and by the correspondents-underscore for perceptive view-
ers how women journalists served as the purveyors and the subjects of wartime
276 
* 
THE BULLETIN
propaganda and PR. A final chapter details the women's postwar lives; a bibliog-
raphy and index are appended. EB
CROWE, CHRIS 
Mississippi Trial, 1955. Fogelman, 2002 
[24 0p]
ISBN 0-8037-2745-3 
$17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Though raised mostly in the north, Hiram has always enjoyed spending his sum-
mers at his grandpa's farm just outside a small town in the Mississippi delta; now
that he's sixteen, however, he begins to see the effects of southern segregation and
the hallmarks of racism more clearly. Meanwhile, there's another northern kid
visiting relatives in the area; Emmett Till is a young black man from Chicago, and
his straightforward ways are seen as insubordination in this rigidly Old South en-
vironment. The novel blends factual history about young Emmett and his murder
with the experiences of fictional Hiram, who slowly comes to realize that his
grandfather's White Citizens Council meetings may be more sinister than they
initially seemed and begins to understand why his father has essentially disowned
Hiram's grandfather. Although the novel starts somewhat slowly, once the main
action begins, the story is gripping right to its final depiction of the flimsy trial
where Emmett's likely murderers are acquitted. History teachers will approve of
the focus on pivotal civil-rights events, and readers will appreciate the insights the
author offers into the minds of people who fought to banish Jim Crow laws as well
those who sought to perpetuate a system of hatred. KM
CURLEY, MARIANNE 
OldMagic. Simon Pulse, 2002 
[320p]
Paper ed. ISBN 0-7434-3769-1 
$5.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Teenager Kate keeps her witchcraft secret from everyone but her friend Hannah
and her grandmother (cum sorceress) Jillian, until new boy Jarrod creates a thun-
derstorm inside a classroom. Handsome but clumsy Jarrod has tremendous pow-
ers but refuses to admit to or recognize them, until a near tragedy forces him to
turn to Kate and her grandmother for help. Kate recognizes that Jarrod and his
family are under a centuries-old curse, so with Jillian's help the two teenagers
travel back to the England of the Middle Ages to confront the sorcerer who placed
the curse and either prevent him from casting it or kill him. The combination of
teen romance, supernatural tale, and time-travel novel is an appealing one, but the
disparate elements never successfully coalesce. The magic has neither foundation
nor logic (how can Jarrod train for only three weeks and be strong enough to
challenge a powerful, experienced sorcerer who's expecting his attack?), and the
time-travel logic is murky (how do Kate and Jarrod wind up in sixth-century Brit-
ain when they start out from twentieth-century New Zealand?). 
Despite these
flaws, the pleasures of time travel, stolen kisses, and a happy ending may serve to
satisfy voracious fantasy readers. JMD
DALKEY, KARA 
Ascension. Avon, 2002 
235p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-06-440808-6 
$4.99 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Fifteen-year-old Nia is a two-legged mermyd (a species of mermaids including
males and females) of the Bluefin clan. Her heart is set on becoming one of the ten
Avatars, advisors who rule Atlantis in telepathic symbiosis with Farworlders, an-
cient water-beings of great power; when her unpromising cousin Garun is chosen
APRIL 2002 
* 
277
to represent their clan in the competition for a newly vacant Avatar position, her
dream is shattered. A disappointed Nia nonetheless attends the ceremonies, to
watch her cousin and her romantic interest, Cephan. Observing the events, Nia
realizes that the competition is being magically manipulated by the current Ava-
tars and their Farworlder partners. Her discovery leads to a revelation by her
grandfather: an oracle has declared her the new Avatar, who will sow the seeds of
the destruction of Atlantis, and the Avatar/Farworlder interference is an attempt
to avoid the unavoidable. The pace of this first novel in the Water series is occa-
sionally sluggish, the characterizations are sometimes shallow, and the compla-
cency of the Atlanteans is hard to believe. Dalkey (author of Little Sister, BCCB
12/96) creates an effective underwater civilization, however, complete with social
hierarchy, manipulated history, and romantic intrigue. In the end, this offers a
credible fantasy world with a creditable heroine suitable for series fans. JMD
DALLAS-CONTE, JULIET 
Cock-a-Moo-Moo; illus. by Alison Bartlett. 
Little,
2002 
[32p]
ISBN 0-316-60505-0 $15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
2-4 yrs
The farmyard rooster is dismayed when he cannot remember how to cock-a-doodle-
doo. His failed attempts ("cock-a-moo-moo," "cock-a-quack-quack," "cock-a-
oink-oink," and "cock-a-baa-baa") only lead to rejection by the local henhouse,
and he retires in embarrassment to the barn for the night ("I'm never going to
crow again"). An attempted henhouse raid by a sly fox galvanizes the dejected
rooster into action, and his multilinguistic calls alert the farmyard in time; in his
joy at his triumphant defense, the rooster rediscovers his true voice. This isn't an
original idea (see Most's Cock-a-Doodle-Moo, for instance), but the book offers a
tidy treatment of a classic toddler-pleasing situation. Bright, textured, broad-brush
paintings enhanced with scratchboard detailing revel in the story's playfulness;
their strong figures will appeal to youngsters from across the room. This will be an
excellent addition to your own preschool barnyard during storytime. EAB
DATLOW, ELLEN, ed. 
The Green Man: Tales from the Mythic Forest; ed. by Ellen
Datlow and Terri Windling. 
Viking, 2002 
[36 8p]
ISBN 0-670-03526-2 
$18.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 9-12
Fifteen short stories and three poems based on the myth of the Green Man, the
mythic wild man or spirit of the wood, make up this fertile collection. Fantasy
fans will recognize a number of popular authors, such as Michael Cadnum
("Daphne"), Patricia McKillip ("Hunter's Moon"), Gregory Maguire ("Fee, Fi,
Foe et Cetera"), and Emma Bull ("Joshua Tree"). The stories, commissioned for
this collection, tackle the mythic theme from a variety of unique standpoints: a
green man with a passion for life searches for a woman who understands the con-
cept of a graceful death (Nina Kiriki Hoffman's "Grounded"); an adolescent runs
into the Queen of the Fairies in Central Park and plays a risky game of riddles to
save herself (Delia Sherman's "Grand Central Park"); a young man realizes that
the sister he mourns as dead lives in the canopy of the Greenwood (Midori Snyder's
"Charlie's Away"). The stories are thematically connected yet tonally varied, and
each strongly plotted tale conjures a credible fantasy world. A brief biography of
and remarks by the writer are included with each story. Datlow and Windling are
278 
* THE BULLETIN
editors to be reckoned with when it comes to short-story fantasy collections, and
this title will be eagerly devoured. JMD
DEALEY, 
ERIN 
Goldie Locks Has Chicken Pox; illus. by Hanako
Wakiyama. 
Atheneum, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-689-82981-7 
$16.00 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Like many a youngster, Goldie turns up spotted with chicken pox, but her parents
have more than most to contend with: first, they have to check to see (after "apolo-
gizing for the chair") if the bears came down with the virus, then they have to fend
off various storybook characters ranging from Henny Penny to Little Bo Peep, and
they also have to mediate between Goldie and her obstreperous younger brother,
who's jealous of all the attention. The tetrameter couplets are too often forced and
jingly, but there are some witty turns here, and Dealey is well in touch with the
indignities of life under polka dots and quarantine. Wakiyama's oils are eerily
convincing in their retro Golden Book style: salmon-pink people with baby-blue
doll eyes inhabit a Betty Crocker world in Fiestaware hues; while the artwork's
more interesting for its imitative success than for its actual contribution to the
story, it creates an intriguing domestic fantasy world. This isn't as deft as Laurie
Halse Anderson's Turkey Pox (BCCB 11/96), but kids trying not to scratch may
be glad of the fanciful literary company. DS
DELANEY, MICHAEL 
Birdbrain Amos; written and illus. by Michael
Delaney. 
Philomel, 2002 
153p
ISBN 0-399-23614-7 
$14.99 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Amos is a hippo with a problem-he has lots of bugs and ticks that make him itch,
but no tick bird to eat them. He advertises for a bird, and, after turning down a
Bach-and-Beethoven singing thrush and a buzzard who apparently enjoys live meat,
he finds Kumba, a female tick bird with an appetite. Unfortunately, Kumba takes
Amos' suggestion to make herself at home literally, building a nest on Amos' head,
but Amos can't bring himself to fire Kumba, especially after she lays three eggs in
her nest. The humor here is somewhat adult, the concept is old, and the text is
rambling. The anthropomorphized animal kingdom and jolly jungle social life
will attract younger readers, however, and the design and reading level are right on
the money for that audience. Delaney's black-and-white line drawings have an
appealingly Thurberesque quality; a generous number of them gracefully break up
text blocks and add some child appeal. This isn't up to classic egg-hatching stories
such as Horton Hatches the Egg, but it may suit readers looking for an undemand-
ing animal-themed romp. JMD
ERICSON, HELEN 
Harriet Spies Again. 
Delacorte, 2002 
[224p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90022-8 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-32786-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
If Ole Golly saved eleven-year-old Harriet from depression in Louise Fitzhugh's
1964 classic Harriet the Spy (BCCB 12/64), Harriet returns the favor here when
her former nanny turns up depressed and withdrawn after fleeing from a brief
marriage to Mr. Waldenstein. The difference is that author Louise Fitzhugh died
years ago and author Helen Ericson, who read Harriet the Spy as a nine-year-old, is
portraying characters originated and developed by someone else but released for
APRIL 2002 
* 
279
further use by the deceased's estate. Ericson's imitation, including some witty scenes
and chic plotting, is not bad at all, but the fierce, unexpected originality ofFitzhugh's
creation is replaced by a more complacent tone, and one vaguely resents the fact
that nowhere on the cover, title page, copyright page, or list of "other books featur-
ing Harriet the Spy" (facing the title page) does Fitzhugh's name appear. As al-
ways, Harriet's parents are distinguished by their absence, in this case a three-month
business trip to Paris. Harriet's sleuthing eventually reveals that Ole Golly is preg-
nant (enceinte rather than "innocent," the word that Harriet thinks she overhears
in a phone conversation and which leads her to believe Ole Golly has inadvertently
committed a crime). Sport is very much in evidence, but Beth Ellen and Janie are
missing; instead, Harriet acquires a new friend just as eccentric and isolated as she
is, a mysterious neighbor whom readers will identify long before Harriet does.
This addition to the cast has potential for imaginative peculiarity, but she ends up
more as a functionary plot device than a fully explored individual, and the pace is
somewhat halting. Neither factor will prevent young readers anxious for the fur-
ther adventures of Harriet from consuming this "companion" book, which suffers
less from comparison with Fitzhugh's own lower-staked sequels, The Long Secret
and Sport, than with her premier depiction of Harriet's deeply felt fall from grace.
BH
FLEMING, MARIA, ed. 
A Place at the Table: Struggles for Equality in
America. 
Oxford, 2002 
[152p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-19-515036-8 
$28.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-10
Six authors contribute a dozen essays on battles for civil rights in the United States,
each spotlighting the experience of an unsung or little-known personage who skir-
mished for his or her full right of citizenship. The essays proceed chronologically,
and since little information is often available for some of the earlier heroes (e.g.,
eighteenth-century Separatist Baptist John Waller; runaway slave Shadrach
Minkins), the opening chapters are a bit padded and rambling. Far stronger are
episodes tightly focused on the twentieth-century activists-Sara Bard Field's "road
trip" to promote women's suffrage, ex-Topaz internee Jukichi Harada's fight for
home ownership, Nisqually Indian Billy Frank Jr.'s fish-ins for tribal treaty rights.
Layout is intimidatingly dense, with double columns of cramped type and a plethora
of lengthy boxed insets featuring documents, testimonies, and episodes from re-
lated historic events. Readers brave enough to take the plunge, though, will find
the essays themselves surprisingly smooth going. An index and credits for the large
collection of black-and-white illustrations is included, as is information on the
Teaching Tolerance project, of which this volume is a component. EB
GELLMAN, MARC 
Bad Stuff in the News: A Guide to Handling the Headlines; by
Marc Gellman and Thomas Hartman. 
SeaStar, 2002 
[120p]
ISBN 1-58717-132-5 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Responding to tragedies at the World Trade Center and Columbine High School,
the authorial pair of clerics (one a Jewish rabbi, one a Catholic monsignor) offers
children strategies for assessing the "bleeding" leads they encounter in the media
and working through resultant anxieties. The God Squad, as this established au-
thor team is known in media appearances, addresses a host of disasters manmade
and natural and, within a format that is part theodicy and part self-help, encour-
280 
* 
THE BULLETIN
ages readers to consider events in a broader context, assess realistically the likeli-
hood of such events happening to them, and take steps either to prevent another
such event or assist victims of the tragedies. The effectiveness of the message rests
heavily on whether readers accept the tone in which it is delivered-all too fre-
quently patronizing and unctuous: "There are a lot of things that need to be fixed
in this world in order to get rid of terrorism, but the grown-ups are the ones who
need to work on that. ... There are three things that you need to get fixed, though:
getting rid of your fear, getting through your sadness, and making your insides
good and happy." Moreover, the unremitting use of the locution "bad stuff" will
strike many middle-graders as unacceptably childish. There is a refreshing spirit of
optimism here, however, and a generous measure of common sense, and both
faith-filled and faith-shaken readers may find the book offers some illumination in
dark times. EB
GERSTEIN, MORDICAI 
What Charlie Heard; written and illus. by Mordicai
Gerstein. 
Foster/Farrar, 2002 
40p
ISBN 0-374-38292-1 
$17.00 
R Gr. 2-4
Even today, the name of composer Charles Ives is hardly a household word, and
his music has never really gained a wide popular audience. Gerstein's compact
introduction to the man may not change that, but it will give kids an insight both
into recent music history and the creative life of a genuine American innovator.
The book offers particular emphasis on the influence of Ives' supportive father,
himself a musician, and on Ives' all-American small-town boyhood, where music
and sports vied for his time and where he absorbed the sounds of America such as
marching bands and tent-meeting hymn singers; it then goes on to discuss his
nurturing marriage to the aptly named Harmony, the public puzzlement at his
music, and the eventual recognition it received. The simple and understated text
capably covers the key points of Ives' life, but it's the illustrations that really evoke
the musician's experience: the spreads are packed with onomatopoeic text floating
through the air in various colors and textures, leaping out of Charlie's head, and
emanating from various natural sources, which makes the art thick with the sounds
of daily life Charlie heard (and sometimes with the scornful reactions he encoun-
tered) and incorporated into his music. The result is sometimes jarring and almost
overwhelming when weighed against Gerstein's speedy yet delicate linework and
mottled, sometimes iridescent hues, which is doubtless deliberate and absolutely
fitting for Ives' challenging music; these are full, jostling, and lively views rather
than well-tamed and pretty ones. This might provoke some interesting discussions
about artistic evocations as well as introducing kids to Ives' music, and if young-
sters want to respond with their own daily-sound cacophony, well, that's probably
the best tribute of all. DS
GRIMES, NIKK 
Danitra Brown Leaves Town; illus. by Floyd Cooper. 
Amistad/
HarperCollins, 2002 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-13156-5 $15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-13155-7 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 2-4
This sequel to Coretta Scott King Honor Book Meet Danitra Brown (BCCB 7/94)
focuses on Danitra's friend, Zuri, who lets us know right away that she is hurt
when Danitra takes off for vacation: "my supposed-to-be best friend/ is leaving
me, and loving it." Eventually, after bonding with a previously overlooked neigh-
APRIL 2002 
* 281
bor girl and receiving her first "I wish that you were here" letter from Danitra,
Zuri no longer feels "alone, with nowhere particular to be." Thirteen accessible
and skillfully paced poems-many representing letters from vacationing Danitra
or from Zuri left behind-depict the highlights of that summer: a block party in
the city, a day at the beach for Zuri and her mom, a family gathering for Danitra in
the country, and, finally, the friends' reunion. Double-page spreads from varied
perspectives animate the story, while the grainy brown pastels that overlay and
surround the vivid if occasionally stiff figures provide visual continuity. An uplift-
ing contemporary spin on the town mouse and the country mouse, this is a natural
for an end-of-semester readaloud or independent summer reading. FK
GUEST, ELISSA HADEN 
Iris and Walter and Baby Rose; illus. by Christine
Davenier. 
Gulliver/Harcourt, 2002 
4 4p
ISBN 0-15-202120-5 
$14.00 
Ad 
Gr. 1-3
Iris (from Iris and Walter, BCCB 12/00, and Iris and Walter: True Friends, 4/01) is
impatiently anticipating the birth of her new baby sister: "It's going to be so much
fun. We'll get to push the baby in a carriage. We'll feed it a bottle. It will be just
like playing with a doll." When baby Rose finally comes, however, the reality falls
far short of Iris' imaginings: "There was no getting around it. Baby Rose was a
fusspot. Day after day, night after night, Baby Rose cried and fussed." A fed-up
Iris is taken on an outing to the amusement park by her understanding grandfa-
ther, who assures her that everything will be okay, and, eventually, everything is:
"Little by little, Baby Rose began to change. She fussed less and less. She ate more
and more. She smiled a lot. Especially at Iris." By the final chapter in this four-
chapter reader, Iris can honestly say, "It's fun being a big sister!" This third epi-
sode in the saga of Iris and Walter's friendship is more programmatic than the first
two; the action here centers on Iris and the new baby rather than on Iris and her
friendship with Walter, and the change of focus is less than satisfying. Davenier's
watercolors retain their original charm, however, and her palette takes on a rosy
tone appropriate to the baby's name. The faces of the returning cast are a bit
unarticulated, but new baby Rose has a strong character all her own. Despite the
more pedestrian direction, this is a cozy new-sib story for early readers. JMD
HENEGHAN, JAMES 
Flood. Foster/Farrar, 2002 
[192p]
ISBN 0-374-35057-4 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
With his mother, father, and home swept away by a raging Vancouver river, flood-
battered Andy Flynn is taken back to Halifax by his maternal aunt, Mona. Andy
takes an instant dislike to her, and before he even reaches her home, he takes off to
find his father, who deserted the family when Andy was five. Vincent Flynn isn't
that hard to find; it seems that every patron of every bar and cheap eatery on the
seedy side of Halifax knows him. He welcomes his son warmly and makes space in
his roach-infested boardinghouse rooms, tickled beyond belief to have a sharp,
capable eleven-year-old son to show off to his cronies. After a few weeks of living
la vida Vincent, Andy is cold, malnourished, bored, and fed up with his father's
promises to abandon welfare, give up his sales of contraband cigarettes and booze,
and get a real job. When Vincent suffers a broken leg running away from a pair of
hit men, a very resentful Andy is packed off to Aunt Mona and Uncle Hugh,
where, of course, in time he thrives. Heneghan sets his drama within a close-
quartered Irish community, and characters that at first appear to be typecast are
282 
* THE BULLETIN
actually drawn with remarkable depth. "Waster" Vincent is a happy drunk and
teller of tales; he's also loving and full of good intentions, but broken past the
point of reform. Aunt Mona is the starchy Irish matriarch, brandishing terse words
and rosary beads to keep her household in line; she's also capable of great tender-
ness and holds a heart full of sympathy for both her nephew and her ne'er-do-well
brother-in-law. A small band of sheehogue, or Little People, hover around Andy
throughout, and their commentary at the end of each chapter assures readers that,
despite his travails, they'll see he comes to no harm. And who's to say it isn't so?
EB
HINDLEY, JUDY 
Do Like a Duck Does!; illus. by Ivan Bates. 
Candlewick,
2002 
[34 p]
ISBN 0-7636-1668-0 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-5 yrs
Mama Duck is out for a walk with her babies when they are joined by a stranger
who claims to be a duck: "Well, he has no feathers/ and he has no beak./ He has
four claws/ on his hairy-scary feet./ He has two ears/ that stick up a mile,/ and a
wicked/ foxy nose and/ a wicked/ foxy smile." Mama Duck knows it's a fox with
dinner designs on her ducklings, but she doesn't let on. Instead, she invites the
"hairy-scary stranger" to "do like a duck does," and she leads her ducklings and the
fox in a series of ducky doings that end in the river, where the ducklings swim and
the fox-doesn't. Hindley's rhyming text bounces right along, and while adult
readers may tire of the predictable rhythms, kid listeners ought to appreciate the
obvious humor, mini-suspense, and opportunities for joining in. Bates' watercol-
ors are a little bland in the palette, but they feature a lively cast of characters, the
appropriately downy ducklings protected by an appropriately suspicious Mama
Duck and threatened by a hungry (but too cute to be really threatening) fluffy-
tailed fox. With the right dramatic reading, this will be a successful storytime
drama. JMD
HODGES, MARGARET, ad. 
The Boy Who Drew Cats; illus. by Aki Sogabe. 
Holiday
House, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1594-5 
$16.95 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
In old Japan, a young boy is sent by his parents to be trained for the priesthood.
His passion lies not in spirituality, however, but in art; specifically, in drawing cats
on any available surface. After a time his exasperated teacher/priest sends the boy
off, saying his future may lie in being a great artist. The boy travels to a larger
temple, to seek shelter with the priests there; when he arrives he finds the temple
empty and dusty and full of blank white screens. The screens are too much to
resist, and he fills them with drawings of cats. In the middle of the night he is
awakened by sounds of a terrible battle, but he is afraid to look; come daylight he
finds a scene of carnage. On the floor is a dead rat goblin, and on the mouths of
the cats drawn by the boy are traces of blood. This retelling of Lafcadio Hearn's
tale is disappointingly choppy and overexplanatory, lacking the grace of the origi-
nal. Sogabe's mixed-media illustrations (cut paper, watercolor, and airbrush), how-
ever, are stylish and fluid. The cats are especially effective, with a rounded felinity,
soft-paw grace, and otherworldly air that makes them believable supernatural agents.
Hodges closes with a note about her source and about the real Japanese artist
represented by the legendary boy. JMD
APRIL 2002 
* 
283
IBBOTSON, EVA 
Journey to the River Sea; illus. by Kevin Hawkes. 
Dutton,
2002 
298p
ISBN 0-525-46739-4 
$17.99 
R Gr. 5-7
Wealthy orphan Maia is turned over to the care of her new governess, Miss Minton,
and sent off to live with relatives on a rubber plantation. Early twentieth century
Brazil is a miracle to both girl and governess, and not even wicked twin cousins
Gwendolyn and Beatrice nor their money-grasping parents, the Carters, can spoil
their joy. In the course of a neatly turned plot Maia saves a young actor from
penury, discovers the truth about the missing heir to an English fortune, and flees
upriver to a life free from constraint among the accepting members of the Xanti
tribe. Ibbotson proves she is as adept at historical romance as she is at fantasy
(Dial-a-Ghost, BCCB 9/01, etc.) in this rousing adventure. The characters, while
true to type (orphan girl, stern governess, wicked aunt, romantic rogue, etc.) are
each individual enough to avoid being flat. While the locals may be a bit idyllically
accepting of the European presence, the setting is capably evoked, and the contrast
between the parochial Carters and their more adaptable neighbors is clearly made.
A strong pace and the occasional cliff-hanging chapter will make this title an excel-
lent readaloud. Full-page, densely hatched black-and-white illustrations employ
the good old convention of pull-quotes as captions, adding to the old-fashioned
allure of this Amazon adventure. JMD
JUKES, MAVIS 
The Guy Book: An Owner's Manual for Teens. 
Crown,
2002 
152p 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-99028-3 
$18.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-679-89028-9 
$12.95 
R 
Gr. 6-12
While all the details of personhood could hardly be crammed within two covers,
Jukes manages to cover an impressive breadth of guy territory here. Keeping to the
automotive metaphor throughout (which makes for some amusing paragraph head-
ings and illustrative juxtapositions), the book addresses myriad subjects: physical
changes, hygiene and nutrition, familial and romantic relationships, emotional
health, sex, contraception, and various safety issues. The tone sometimes leans
towards the alarmist, with an emphasis on exclamation points and sweeping (some-
times questionable) warning statements, but that's in keeping with the book's es-
sentially protective approach, like that of a square but aware parent. The sexually
related material is useful (if largely heterocentric), the help-line numbers are, well,
helpful, but it's the life-conduct tidbits for which readers will be truly grateful,
since it's much harder to find instructions on shaving with different kind of razors
or lists of conversational landmines with girls; this will also provide a lot of useful
information for girls wondering what the heck is up with the boys in their class.
Though readers might occasionally wish for more substantive visuals to clarify
anatomical and other points, the format, with its text in blue ink and its multitude
of sidebars, subheadings, and campy period photographs, is an inviting one. An
index is included. DS
KARAS, G. BRIAN 
Atlantic; written and illus. by G. Brian Karas. 
Putnam,
2002 
32p
ISBN 0-399-23632-5 
$15.99 
R 6-9 yrs
The Atlantic Ocean narrates this book itself, explaining its reach ("I rub shoulders
with North America and bump into Africa/ I slosh around South America and
284 
* THE BULLETIN
crash into Europe"), its history ("I've been crossed and probed,/ charted,/ stud-
ied,/ dirtied"), and its effects ("Sand and pebbles/ rattle and clatter a chorus/ as I
rush in/ and pull away"). While there's only an eyedropperful of actual informa-
tion here, the poetic evocation is surprisingly geologically effective rather than
merely frothy, since Karas has focused on kid-accessible and kid-appealing details
and descriptions that will conjure dreams in inlanders and recognition in the more
coastally proximate. There's a whisper of Remy Charlip in his oversized oceanic
illustrations, which use gouache and acrylic touched up with pencil (and some-
times with other effects). Their creative compositions and perspectives (a cutaway
view of the ocean shows underwater peaks and valleys, submarines roaming and
ships sounding the depths; a fish-eye view looks up through a royal sea to the paler
hues surrounding the bottom of the fisherman's boat; a crosshatching of latitude
and longitude lines delicately trace across the full Atlantic view), often employing
curved horizons to emphasize the Atlantic's magnitude, will expand the audience's
understanding quicker than any "Fun Facts" list ever could. Use this to give some
life to an intro geography unit or just to prep for a day at the beach. An additional
note ("Some Things about Me") provides more information and some explicit
ecological reflections. DS
KRULL, KATHLEEN 
Clip Clip Clip: Three Stories about Hair; illus. by Paul
Brewer. 
Holiday House, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1639-9 
$16.95 
M 
5-8 yrs
It's been a hairy time in picture books of late, and this one raises the stakes with
not one, not two, but three stories about hair. "Kevin's Hair Scare" features a
youngster who likes his hair getting in his eyes "a lot better than the idea of anyone
cutting his hair." Haircut finally completed, Kevin takes some of his hair home in
a baggie "to remind himself whenever he goes for a haircut: it's just hair. Or is it?"
In the second, dialogue-heavy entry, "Ramon's Screamingly Bad Hair Day," Ramon
tries to tell his chums how scary a bad hair day can be, but he keeps getting inter-
rupted by his friends' gross jokes and stories. The concluding tale, "Helen's Book
of Dos," is a collection of drawings and observations about hair and hairdos. A list
of hair "Dos and Don'ts" (which range from the vague-"Most people will get
several hundred haircuts during their lifetime"-to the incorrect-a claim that
hair has emotions) concludes the volume. Despite the occasional humorous touch,
the stories are rambling, pointless, and dull. None of the three entries has a dis-
tinct plot, and the characters' observations about hair are neither original nor funny
enough to maintain interest. The art is energetic but loud and awkward, with
little compensation for the uninvolving text. While deciphering the images may
intrigue some viewers momentarily, they're ultimately better off with Tarpley's
Bippity Bop Barbershop (BCCB 3/02) or Williams-Garcia's Catching the Wild
Waiyuuzee (BCCB 12/00). JMD
LAWLOR, LAURIE 
Old Crump: The True Story of a Trip West; illus. by John
Winch. 
Holiday House, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1608-9 
$16.95 
Ad 4-7yrs
Lawlor uses the fictionalized voice of George Bennett, who journeyed the Over-
land Trail with his family to California in 1850, to retrace their perilous Death
Valley crossing and explain the role "faithful Old Crump," the ox, played in their
safe arrival at a Spanish settlement near present-day Los Angeles. Forced to aban-
APRIL 2002 
* 285
don their possessions and burn their wagons to survive the bitter cold desert nights,
the party relied on compliant Old Crump to carry the youngest children in make-
shift saddlebags while the elders struggled along on foot. There's little plot apart
from the crossing itself, and listeners will readily infer from the narrator's reminis-
cence that they'll make it through all right. The real interest lies in Winch's evoca-
tive mixed-media illustrations, which combine fragile, naively misshapen human
forms set against a desert ruggedly textured with photographed boulders, a deep
sky streaked with flame-tinted sunset or roughly pebbled with stars, and verdant
California hills fur-coated with waving grasses. No specific sources for this "true
story" are offered, apart from Lawlor's opening testimony that "their journey out
of the 'jaws of hell' was recorded in diaries and letters," but listeners will undoubt-
edly take Lawlor and George at their word and simply enjoy scenes of tragedy
narrowly averted. EB
LAWRENCE, 
JOHN 
This Little Chick; written and illus. by John
Lawrence. 
Candlewick, 2002 
[26p]
ISBN 0-7636-1716-4 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
1-4 yrs
This simple story features a little chick who roams around befriending and imitat-
ing all the animals he meets, until finally he comes home to Mama Chicken and
demonstrates to her the many animal sounds he heard around the farm. The
succinct rhyming text repeats ("This little chick from over the way/ went to play
with the pigs one day./ And what do you think they heard him say?"), with varia-
tion only in the line describing the animals encountered. The text will quickly
become as familiar as a favorite nursery rhyme to listeners, and there is ample
opportunity for audience members to join the mimicry of the little chick, pitching
in with their own quacking, mooing, and ribbiting. Wood engravings provide
bold visual outlines as well as more filigreed details that will appeal to both groups
and individual viewers. The animal characters, from doe-eyed cows to cavorting
piglets, are each distinguished in their expressiveness, but the effervescent little
chick, whose orange feet and yellow wings splay wildly with his excitement, steals
the show. This will appeal to a relatively broad audience of the preschool set,
including babies learning animal sounds along with nursery-schoolers guffawing
at the chick's silliness; you may want to purchase a few extra copies. KM
LEEDY, LOREEN 
Follow the Money; written and illus. by Loreen Leedy. 
Holiday
House, 2002 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8234-1587-2 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 1-4
Freshly minted, bagged, and trucked to a Federal Reserve bank and on to a local
bank, a shiny new quarter experiences the first day in its eventful life. It begins its
adventures in the money pouch of a grocery store cashier, who hands it off in
change to a shopper ("$20.00-19.75=$.25"), who buys a balloon from a clown,
who purchases a can of pop from a vending machine, whence our hero emerges as
change for a buck, and, well, you get the idea. Not only does Leedy successfully
fire up the imagination with her plausible tracing of the coin's hectic travels, but
she scatters loads of painless math calculation along the way, as store owners figure
bills and make change, employees collect wages, and friends pay back loans. Even
286 
* THE BULLETIN
pagination gets into the act, with bill and coin combos that compute to the proper
numeral for each page. The action (and kids'll be delighted to find so much of it
in a math book) plays out in bubble-framed, zesty-hued scenes with a retro-styled
cast reminiscent of instructional cartoons and filmstrips of yore. A brief but co-
gent overview of the advantages of currency over barter ("These potatoes will pay
for your college education." "Won't they rot before then?"), some facts about
minting and printing, and a glossary of money words round out the title. As
penny Abe observes to quarter George, "It sounds as if you had a great day!" Read-
ers can check for him in their own pockets tomorrow. EB
LEWIS, J. PATRICK 
Arithme-Tickle: An Even Number of Odd Riddle-Rhymes; illus.
by Frank Remkiewicz. 
Silver Whistle/Harcourt, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-15-216418-9 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 2-5
This may not be Lewis at his most poetic, but in these twenty-plus problems set to
rhyme he delivers plenty of incentive to hold up the fingers, pick up a calculator,
or simply strain the brain and compute. The riddles offer a range of mathematical
challenge: simple subtraction for "Thomasina's Eggs," long division for "The Polka-
Dot Pajama Bird," strings of mixed operations for "The Mailman for the 92-Story
Building." Lewis even tosses in a couple of logic teasers, just to keep kids on their
toes: "Farmer Flynn had 20 sheep./ All but 9 died./ Now you decide:/ How
many sheep does Flynn still keep?" (Nine; but of course you knew that.) Several
selections require readers to do a bit of outside investigation (if, for example, they
don't know "the number of teeth in a regular mouth") or to examine carefully
Remkiewicz's chipper, clue-laden mixed-media scenes ("How Many Coconuts?").
Solutions and computation hints appear in mirror writing at the bottom of each
riddle for kids who need a nudge or the reassurance that they "got it right." Teach-
ers who discover this title before their students do have a month's worth of daily
math challenges right in hand. EB
LITTKE, LAEL 
Lake ofSecrets. 
Holt, 2002 
[208p]
ISBN 0-8050-6730-2 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-9
Carlene Carter has lived her life in the shadow of Keith, her "lost brother," who
disappeared when he was only four (three years before Carlene was even born).
Everyone but Carlene's mother is certain Keith drowned that fateful day on the
lake, but Mrs. Carter thinks her son remains alive somewhere, and she's returned
to the small town of Lake Isadora, scene of the tragedy, to prove it. Carlene is
disconcerted by flashes of memory she couldn't possibly have, memories of the
town, of a boyfriend there, and even of Keith and the time of his loss; it becomes
increasingly clear that these memories belong to Elaine, a woman who died on the
lake that day, and that Elaine's spirit has returned in Carlene to bring the truth of
the terrible event to light. The book's careful setup ensures a successful plot: Carlene
is just baffled enough, the memories are just obscure enough, the false clues are
just tempting enough to keep readers involved and guessing. The secondary dy-
namics are effectively employed, with Carlene's mother convinced that Carlene's
purpose in life is to be an instrument in retrieving her brother, Carlene drawn to
Elaine's handsome grandson, who resembles the sweetheart Carlene sees in Elaine's
memories, and seven-year-old J. P., the town pet, serving as both guide to the
town and reminder of young Keith. It's all tied up a bit conveniently, but in this
APRIL 2002 
* 287
kind of book the journey is more important than the destination, and Littke takes
readers on a satisfying supernatural trip. DS
LONDON, 
JONATHAN 
Froggy Plays in 
the Band; illus. by Frank
Remkiewicz. 
Viking, 2002 
[32p]
ISBN 0-670-03532-7 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
3-5 yrs
This latest installment in the adventures of Froggy has a very traditional plot: Miss
Martin tells Froggy, "If you and your friends start a marching band, and compete
against other schools in the Apple Blossom Parade-you can win the prize!" The
practice sessions that follow this announcement provide lots of reader-pleasing ka-
BOOMs and honks, while demonstrating the cardinal rule of marching: "Don't
look left. 
Don't look right. And DON'T STOP FOR ANYTHING."
Unfortunately, the climactic pile-up of band members that occurs during the parade
when Froggy is halted by a "BONK" from majorette Frogilina's soaring baton
doesn't have the necessary visual impact, and there's no real logic to Froggy's prize-
winning response to disaster (he "started to wail a wild swamp tune"). The
expressive, old-fashioned watercolor illustrations with charcoal outlines on clean
white backgrounds have a cheery charm, however, and readers familiar with this
ragtag band will enjoy their triumph. FK
MALONE, PATRICIA 
The Legend ofLady Ilena. Delacorte, 2002 
232p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90030-9 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-72915-4 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-10
Fifteen-year-old Ilena obeys her father's final words directing her to journey from
the small village she has always called her home to Dun Alyn, a stronghold some
distance away. She disguises herself as a boy to cross dark-ages Britain, en route
finding a traveling companion in Durant, a warrior in service to King Arthur.
Once at Dun Alyn, Ilena is rapidly caught up in the conflict between the old
religion and the new Christianity, and to her confusion and dismay she is de-
nounced as an evil spirit and imprisoned, soon to be sacrificed to the old gods.
After being rescued by an old friend of her father's, she discovers the secret of her
mysterious origins; a battle for her birthright leaves her chieftain of Dun Alyn, and
her romantic future is assured by the presence of Durant. Contextual tidbits are
tossed rather cavalierly into this historical romance, and the characterizations are
sketchy, with Ilena telling more than the author shows. Nonetheless, the pace is
steady, the suspense is palpable, and Ilena's journey from exiled orphan to warrior
chieftain is one worth following. JMD
MARRIN, ALBERT 
Secrets from the Rocks: Dinosaur Hunting with Roy Chapman
Andrews. 
Dutton, 2002 
[80p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-525-46743-2 
$18.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Groundbreaking (hmm) twentieth-century paleontologist Andrews may be best
remembered for the startling finds his Central Asian Expeditions uncovered through-
out the 1920s, but, as Marrin clearly points out, his real contributions lay in orga-
nization and fundraising, without which modern ongoing, systematic field research
would scarcely exist. Charming the cash away from big-name investors and direct-
ing a fleet of camels and jeeps deep into the Gobi, Andrews facilitated the CAE's
288 
* THE BULLETIN
achievements. Discovery of fossilized dino eggs (at first incorrectly thought to be
the prey rather than the offspring of Oviraptor) is in itself momentous enough to
keep readers involved, but the expedition's tale has plenty more thrills to offer,
from attacks by bandits and pit vipers to a first course of sheep's eyes served by a
gracious Mongolian host. Marrin, respected maven of nonfiction titles for teens,
seems a bit uneasy in addressing a younger audience, overdefining terms and clut-
tering the text with background digressions that might be more gracefully rel-
egated to sidebars. Neither is the layout or photography quite as stunning here as
in Ann Bausum's biography of Dragon Bones and Dinosaur Eggs (BCCB 5/00).
Nonetheless, dino and rock hounds will be pleasantly sated with sweaty toil and
glamorous finds, and they'll also garner some collateral knowledge of China's in-
ternal turmoil, which eventually brought an end to the fruitful mission. A bibli-
ography, a list of web sites, and index are included. EB
McGEE, MARNI 
The Colt and the King; illus. by John Winch. 
Holiday House,
2002 
[3 4p]
ISBN 0-8234-1695-X 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
4-7 yrs
An aged donkey recalls the time years before when he was pressed into the service
of the long-legged man who rode him along a palm strewn path into the city of
Jerusalem ("The strangers called him Jesus, but many called him King"). McGee
follows the literary road traversed by Brian Wildsmith in The Easter Story (BCCB
1/94), in which the Biblical account of Jesus' triumphant entry is prelude to the
coming Passion. Whereas Wildsmith preserved Scriptural details, employing the
donkey as a recurrent focal point, McGee dwells ponderously on the interior musings
of the animal itself and leaves Jesus as little more than a shadowy catalyst for its
outpouring of rhetoric ("Happiness made my hooves tap high, and joy was in my
breath. My heart welled up with wonder, like a barrel that fills with rain"). The
procession from countryside into the city is given no context, and although an
author's note offers thoughtful comments on the fulfillment of Old Testament
prophecies, children who cannot connect the ride on the "colt" (a puzzling term to
chose for a donkey that's no youngster) with surrounding events will find no clues
here. Winch provides some appealing visual contrasts between the cool greens of
fields beyond the city walls (though such landscapes are hardly regionally authen-
tic) and ruddy tones of towering block walls and stone arches. Startling angles and
tight layering of figures add an element of surprise but never fully compensate for
inconsistent draftsmanship. Librarians ever on the prowl for "new Easter stuff' for
sizable religious collections might wish to check this title, but tighter budgets call
for fresh copies of Wildsmith. EB
MCLAREN, CLEMENCE 
Aphrodite's Blessings: Love Stories from the Greek
Myths. 
Atheneum, 2002 
202p
ISBN 0-689-84377-1 
$16.00 
M 
Gr. 6-9
McLaren (author of Waitingfor Odysseus, BCCB 2/02 and Inside the Walls of Troy,
11/96) presents a trio of novellas each featuring a heroine from Greek mythology.
These romanticized retellings of the stories of Atalanta, Andromeda, and Psyche
reduce character motivation to the mundane: Atalanta doesn't want to embroider
or wear ladies' fashions, Andromeda dreams of a golden hero rather than an ar-
ranged marriage, and Psyche betrays Eros not because she fears for her life but
APRIL 2002 
* 289
because she fears her husband may be fooling around with other women. The
attempt to make the protagonists' love lives anachronistically rosy results in tales
without tension or pace; the characters are smugly self-aware, and happily ever
after is a foregone conclusion. Earnest overexplanation is provided in pedestrian
language and cliched images, and as a result the mystery and beauty of the original
myths are lost. An extensive author's note gives historical and cultural context.
JMD
MCPHAIL, DAVID 
Edward in the Jungle; written and illus. by David
McPhail. 
Little, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-316-56391-9 $15.95 
Ad 
5-7 yrs
Edward (from Edward and the Pirates, BCCB 7/97) is in his backyard reading
about his favorite hero, Tarzan, when he finds himself menaced by a crocodile:
"The crocodile lunged at Edward, but at that instant Edward was snatched out of
the way by none other than Tarzan himself, and a moment later they were swing-
ing through the trees on a sturdy vine." After some Tarzanish assistance (includ-
ing lessons in the production of the Tarzan yell), Edward surprises hunters who
have captured the crocodile. Despite his past experience with the beast, "Edward's
heart softened. As unfriendly as the crocodile was, he didn't deserve to be bound
and dragged away from his river home." Edward intervenes, courtesy of his newly
acquired yell, and the hunters let the croc go free. Edward's previous literary
adventures had a flair for the satisfyingly fantastical; this particular outing, how-
ever, suffers a bit from clunky, prescriptive motivation: Edward's willingness to
help the crocodile that planned to eat him may not be credible, but it certainly
does make a nice message. The acrylic paintings are dark and crowded, and the
drafting is clumsy and disproportionate, especially as regards the disappointingly
vague wild animals. Still, the combination of Tarzan, jungle yells, and wild beasties
will draw listeners into Edward's imaginary jungle. JMD
MILLS, CLAUDIA 
7x9 = Trouble!; illus. by G. Brian Karas. 
Farrar, 2002 
[11 2 p]
ISBN 0-374-36746-9 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-4
It's not just 7 x 9 but multiplication in general that is trouble for third-grader
Wilson Williams. His whole class has to know their times tables up through the
twelves in only three weeks, and while his classmates are forging ahead, Wilson has
barely mastered the twos. This basically means goodbye to free time for Wilson, as
his parents ensure that he drills and practices (despite the distractions of his younger
brother, Kipper) and succeeds, level by level, in achieving the required standard.
Accomplished adults may raise an eyebrow at a whole novel devoted to a struggle
with multiplication, but Mills' sympathetic and detailed treatment of Wilson's
travails makes this both a suspenseful and satisfying beginning chapter book. The
tone is respectful but also realistically rueful (Wilson "hadn't liked multiplication
an hour ago, and he didn't like it any more now that his baby brother could do it
better than he could") and amusing ("How many boys in America were at this
moment taking a times-table test administered by a beanbag penguin?"). The
hamster-drama subplot (the class hamster, whom Wilson adores, goes missing)
doesn't overbalance the main story, and Wilson's pet-yearning gives his character
even more appeal. Karas' kids have some of the same round-headed gravitas as
290 
* THE BULLETIN
Charles Schultz's, but there's an offhanded, rough-hewn look to the sketching and
textures that brings Wilson's life even closer to home. DS
NAKAMURA, KATHERINE RILEY 
Song of Night: It's Time to Go to Bed; illus. by
Linnea Riley. 
Blue Sky/Scholastic, 2002 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-439-26678-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 2-5
As mother (or perhaps that's father) rabbit readies her bunny for bed, she tells of
the rituals that other animal youngsters follow as they set off on their journey to
Nod. The text is standard lullaby fare-tender and soothing but, without a tune
to croon along to, a tad flat: "Cats in jammies look to see/ what their bedtime
book will be./ A skunk rubs Baby's back just so/ while Daddy turns the lights
down low." Riley, though, provides the magic touch with her faunal cast, round
and plump and textured in fine pencil shading to the velvety softness of a favorite
plush toy. Each uncluttered scene highlights a familiar activity with a logical ani-
mal twist (squirrel is rocked to sleep in a nutshell cradle; the dog family howls a
bedtime song; rabbits gaze at the giant carrot constellation in the deep night sky).
And for listeners who aren't quite ready to cash it in for the evening, there's a bit of
charming goofiness (mice with the "rodental" floss; a ladybug delicately spraying
the skunks' airspace with an atomizer) to end the day with one last giggle. Cuddles
are virtually guaranteed. EB
PELLETIER, ANDREW 
Sixteen Miles to Spring; illus. by Katya Krenina. 
Whitman,
2002 
32p
ISBN 0-8075-7388-4 
$15.95 
M 
5-7yrs
Maddy feels that "something was bubbling, something warm and exciting and
big." Her father invites her on a ride to the garden store and off they go, through
the melting but still wintry-looking landscape. On the way they meet up with an
old jalopy, with the words "Sixteen Miles to Spring" painted on the side. Two
men, Wilbur (dressed in bright yellow) and Wiley (dressed in green overalls), climb
out of the truck, and in the course of conversation it becomes clear that the two
are the harbingers of spring, driving north sixteen miles a day, leaving spring in
their wake. Maddy and her father help Wilbur and Wiley toss their magical seeds
to the wind, and quick as you can say fertilizer, it's spring, complete with crocuses,
robins, and daffodils: "Suddenly Maddy knew what she had been feeling that
morning, what it was she had smelled on the breeze. It was the smell of fresh dirt
and new leaves and every sort of growing thing. It was spring." This obvious,
sentimental text gives no sense of the natural wonder of the changing seasons, and
the hackneyed language adds little charm. The art is vivid but ungainly: awkward
drafting results in twisted faces and disproportionate figures, and the palette is
gaudy. A full-page introduction to the science of the changing seasons does little
to mitigate the forced nature of this flowery fantasy. JMD
RAPPAPORT, DOREEN 
No More!: Stories and Songs of Slave Resistance; illus. by
Shane W. Evans. 
Candlewick, 2002 
[60p]
ISBN 0-7636-0984-6 
$17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 3-6
An assemblage of poems, spirituals, folktales, and historical episodes attest to the
"inventive defiance" by which slaves, with no legal rights to their persons, none-
APRIL 2002 
* 291
theless claimed full ownership of their own spirits. The approach recalls Julius
Lester's To Be a Slave (BCCB 4/69), but edited, modified, and heavily illustrated
to attract and retain a younger audience. Primary source materials, particularly
song lyrics, powerfully convey the grim irony with which slaves regarded their
plight ("Dey skim de pot,/ Dey gib us de likker,/ And say dat's good enough for
nigger"), as well as the faith in Providence and self-help that impelled many onto
the literal road to freedom ("Get on board, little children,/ There's room for many
a more./ The fare is cheap, and all can go"). However, Rappaport's retellings from
history and lore-which, together with necessary background segues, make up the
bulk of the title-seem thin, purposive, and oddly disconnected amid the slaves'
own raw, urgent voices. Evans' full-page oil paintings vary in effectiveness, from a
dramatic scene placing the viewer among a crowd of prospective buyers at a slave
auction, to an improbable depiction of runaways wading effortlessly through an
obligingly shallow river beneath the glaring light of a Georges Milies-styled moon.
Older readers are likely to find Lester's classic the more affecting title, but younger
children just beginning to shed the image of slave as helpless victim will still find
much worth pondering here. End matter includes a timeline, list of sources and
titles for further reading, and an index. EB
ROBERTS, WILLO DAVIS 
Undercurrents. Atheneum, 2002 
[24 0p]
ISBN 0-689-81671-5 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-9
Nikki is stunned when, eight months after the death of her mother from cancer,
her father marries Crystal, a young illustrator. Her pains of bereavement and
sudden transition are complicated by puzzlement: Crystal is mysteriously reticent
about her past, and Nikki realizes with astonishment that her young stepmother is
downright afraid when an aunt leaves Crystal a house on the California coast and
Nikki's father decides that the family will spend a vacation there. Crystal's behav-
ior becomes even stranger and more secretive in California; after Nikki's father is
forced to leave on a business emergency, an infuriated Nikki refuses to obey Crystal's
arbitrary stricture that she quit her job (typing for a neighbor), until revelations
about Crystal's past suggest that the darkness that looms over Crystal may now
threaten Nikki as well. Roberts is a dab hand at foreshadowing, effectively exploit-
ing Nikki's natural resentment of an abruptly appearing stepmother, and Nikki's
essential fair-mindedness (she realizes that Crystal often does get a raw deal in the
family) makes her a sympathetic narrator. The payoffs are not really worth the
foreshadowing, however, thereby becoming letdowns rather than fulfillment; this
is particularly true of the climactic drama, which really has very little connection to
the book's buildup and merely offers an overly convenient solution to the prob-
lems of Crystal's past. Between an isolated house on the coast, an interloper in the
family, and hints of terrible secrets from the past, however, there's still enough
pleasingly foreboding atmosphere to entertain mystery fans. DS
RODDA, EMILY 
Rowan and the Keeper ofthe Crystal. Greenwillow, 2002 
197p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029777-8 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029776-X 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
This third entry in the Rowan of Rin series (BCCB 10/01) follows a by-now-
familiar pattern: young, timid, unwilling Rowan is anointed as leader of a quest,
the successful outcome of which will save his people (his town, his family, etc.).
292 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Rowan's mother Jiller has kept a terrible secret from him: the eldest of his family
is the hereditary chooser of the Keeper of the Crystal, the stone that empowers the
coastal tribes and keeps the city of Rin safe. When Jiller is called to choose the next
keeper, her firstborn must accompany her, so Rowan once again finds himself on
a dangerous journey to fulfill a important mission. In the process of fulfilling her
destiny, Jiller is poisoned, and not only must Rowan take her place as chooser, he
must find the antidote that will save her. The adventure/quest elements will easily
draw readers into Rowan's neatly evoked world, and the physical trials he under-
goes to save his mother offer some satisfying action. Generally, however, this is
solid but uninspired, and the pace is on the slow side until nearly midway through
the book. Nonetheless, fans of the first two books will settle happily into the
novel's predictability. JMD
ROMANEK, TRUDEE 
Zzz . . : The Most Interesting Book You'll Ever Read About
Sleep; illus. by Rose Cowles. 
Kids Can, 2002 
[40p] 
(Mysterious You)
Trade ed. ISBN 1-55074-944-7 
$14.95
Paper ed. ISBN 1-55074-946-3 
$6.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-7
Sherbet-colored spreads, cartoon figures, and text parceled out a few bold-headed
paragraphs at a time seem to suggest a breezy little overview for halfhearted brows-
ers. There's an impressive amount of solid information here on a topic of interest
to anyone who's ever snoozed, though, and children with some natural questions
about Dad's snoring, brother's sleepwalking, the necessity of regulated bedtime,
and the mechanics of dreaming will find some clear explanations-at least, as
Romanek has occasional cause to point out, as far as they're currently known.
Prose is kid friendly; sleep jargon (from REM to obstructive apnea) is meted out in
manageable doses and accurately defined within the text. While exotic sleep disor-
ders such as narcolepsy and cataplexy are discussed, it's surprising that garden-
variety problems that may be more immediately troubling-bedwetting and wet
dreams-are never mentioned. Given the number of research studies to which
Romanek refers and the world records, oddities, and health-related recommenda-
tions incorporated, one could reasonably wish that source notes or a bibliography
had been included. A well-crafted index is provided, though, which report-writers
and readers harboring concerns about their own sleep habits will appreciate. EB
RooP, CONNIE 
Take Command, Captain Farragut!; by Connie and Peter Roop;
illus. by Michael McCurdy. 
Atheneum, 2002 
[48p]
ISBN 0-689-83022-X 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
In a series of fictionalized letters to his father, adolescent David Glasgow Farragut
recounts his first years of adventures in the American Navy, leading up to his
capture and imprisonment by the British in 1814. The Civil War naval hero-to-
be has a first-rate yarn to spin; as one of the youngest midshipmen ever to receive
a warrant, he was virtually forced by nature of his position into command of adult
seamen, and through his own prodigious talents and the mentoring of Captain
David Porter of the Essex, Farragut took his first command by age twelve, as acting
captain of a prize vessel. However, the conceit of letters home, written from cap-
tivity in Valparaiso, Chile, shows signs of strain. Farragut lamely apologizes for
not having written since his enlistment (after all, he's been pretty busy), and his
APRIL 2002 
* 293
detailed explanations of shipboard life and the fortunes of war are surely redun-
dant as addressed to a father who served in the Navy during the Revolution; more-
over, his chronologically disjointed narrative is often awkward to follow. The true
tale of a boy in command of his elders has enormous appeal, though, and episodic
organization and McCurdy's rousing full-page scratchboard illustrations should
entice both armchair seafarers and biography report writers to weigh anchor for
this cruise. A bibliography and nautical glossary are included. EB
Roos, STEPHEN 
Recycling George. 
Simon, 2002 
[14 4 p]
ISBN 0-689-83146-3 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
The mill provides half the jobs in East Siena, Ohio (and all the sludge in its river),
so when environmentalists close the mill down, lots of folks leave town in a hurry,
following rumors of jobs up north. In fact, George's older sister and her husband
decamp from the Versailles Trailer Park before the sixth-grader gets home from
school. George is supposed to take the bus to join them, but he instead uses his
bus fare to buy an expensive present for a rich kid who was shamed into inviting
George to his birthday party, and then he impulsively decides to camp out in the
mansion's boathouse instead of trailing after his family. Once found, George is
taken in by the rich Whitfields, one of whom feels like "a jerk" for having (quite
implausibly) neglected to consider the socioeconomic consequences of closing the
mill. The novel goes downhill once George goes to the wealthy Heights and parts
company with the novel's most interesting character, Lizzie ("Lizard"), a quirky
loner who poses the novel's central question: "Aren't poor people part of the
environment?" Most of the other characters are cliches, particularly the wizened
matriarch, Mrs. Whitfield, who tries to "recycle" George, buying him new clothes
and (after George wins a class prize for a recycled art project) offering him the art
lessons he craves, but rejecting his idea that he learn to fix cars since she wants him
to make him "a little gentleman .. . not some dreadful grease monkey." There is
integrity in George's decision to take his chances with his own family instead of
becoming a Whitfield by adoption, but there is too much unfilled emotional space
between these lines, and the novel finally reads more like a script. Readers who can
fill in these blanks from their own experience may find the novel engaging; others
will appreciate the cinematic combination of thematic clarity and wish-fulfillment
fantasy. FK
SCHULTZ, JAN NEUBERT 
Firestorm. Carolrhoda, 2002 
203p
ISBN 0-87614-276-5 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Maggie's about as resentful as a thirteen-year-old can get when her father moves
the family to the raw lumbering boom town of Hinckley, Minnesota, away from
her house, friends, and places that keep the memory of her deceased mother close.
Maggie may think little of Hinckley, but Hinckley thinks much of itself, particu-
larly boasting an infrastructure that's the epitome of 1896 technology, with under-
ground water reservoirs servicing a state-of-the-art fire department. It's all worthless,
though, in the face of a wildfire that ravages the deforested, drought-stricken re-
gion, razing Hinckley and neighboring towns and decimating the fleeing populace
for miles around. Only after Maggie suffers the horror of searching for her broth-
ers among charred corpses and forlorn survivors does she realize that a particular
house or town means less than a family still intact. Schultz bases Maggie's tale on
294 
* THE BULLETIN
an actual wildfire that swept through Hinckley, and her reconstruction of the de-
tails of the inferno's course is gripping indeed ("Nine cars and another engine
followed them, still out on the trestle--on a burning trestle. ... 
If it gave out
under the last engine . . . they would all be hurtled into that cauldron of fire and
lightning and smoke and whirlwind"). So entirely does the fire dominate center
stage, in fact, one might just as soon dispose of Maggie and the paper-thin reloca-
tion plot altogether. This is stuff few pyrophiles can resist, and Maggie and her
concerns won't get much in their way. An historical note is appended. EB
SHIELDS, CAROL DIGGORY 
Bugliest Bug; illus. by Scott Nash. 
Candlewick,
2002 
[28p]
ISBN 0-7636-0784-3 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 1-2
When a contest is held to find the bugliest of them all, bugs of every variety flock
to the excitement. Damselfly Dilly, however, notices something odd: "Those
judges have wings/ That are tied to their backs/ with gossamer strings." Sure
enough, the judges turn out to be a gang of hungry spiders, and Dilly's warning
comes just in time to keep the contest entrants from being ensnared in the judges'
web; the bugs then oust the arachnids and declare young Dilly the hero of the day.
The story is amusing, if somewhat slight, and although the metric march of the
rhyming text occasionally grows tedious, Shields uses the structure to good effect
when presenting the punchline ("'We've been flim-flammed, bamboozled, dis-
tracted./ Those judges aren't insects,' she cried... 'They're Arachnids!'"). Nash's
gouache and pencil bugs have an appealing visual solidity and a range of friendly
expressions that bring to mind the digitally created characters from the movie A
Bug's Life, and viewers will enjoy spotting their favorite bugs on page after page. A
set of tear-out trading cards in the back of the book, replete with interesting insect
factoids, is likely to disintegrate quickly in library copies. Nevertheless, this buggy
story is well suited to creepy-crawly story hours as well as to more in-depth explo-
ration, and young insect aficionados will be all a-buzz. KM
SHUSTERMAN, NEAL 
The Shadow Club Rising. Dutton, 2002 
200p
ISBN 0-525-46835-8 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
It's been several months since narrator Jared and his circle of second-best and also-
ran chums played a series of pranks on their junior high betters and were horrified
to discover their own propensities for violence. Now a shadow Shadow Club has
emerged, and blame for this wave of malicious copycat pranking falls on the like-
liest suspects-the original Shadow Club members. Jared and companions are
forced back into reluctant action, ultimately striking an unlikely alliance with school
administrators to unmask the true perps. Whereas the first Shadow Club outing
(BCCB 5/88) explored some meaty issues of jealousy, rivalry, and the dark side of
human nature, the sequel tosses motivation into the back seat with a quick nod
and then turns the headlights on the escalating pranks themselves. A trumpet is
crushed, a pet is blown up, food is poisoned, Jared is nearly killed by bees, but in
the end it's disappointing to learn that the villains are no more than clueless kids
with a hyperbolic nasty streak. Although this packs less of a punch than the Shadow
Club's debut, readers who think junior high can't get any worse may relish a glimpse
of a school more toxic than their own. EB
APRIL 2002 
* 
295
SINGER, NICKY 
Feather Boy. 
Delacorte, 2002 
[20 8p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90043-0 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-72980-4 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
Robert Nobel is the weedy kid, known scornfully as "Norbert," bullied ruthlessly
by classmate Johnny Niker, and basically just trying to keep afloat in life. This last
goal is complicated when, on a class project at a local nursing home, he's seized by
the demanding Edith Sorrel and ordered to go to a place called Chance House
("You can go there. Walk. It's not far"). Chance House proves to be an aban-
doned building, rumored to be haunted by the ghost of a boy who threw himself
from the top floor thinking he could fly, and timid Robert finds himself braving
the spooky building and entering in a dare with Niker about staying the night
there. Edith's mystery goes beyond Chance House, however, and as Robert grows
closer to her, he becomes increasingly involved with her own strange beliefs about
herself, her past, and her fate. Singer deftly braids her plot strands together, achieving
the difficult feat of making the everyday-life threads about Robert's troubles with
Niker and his issues with his distant dad effectively intertwine with the supernatu-
rally tinged involvement with Edith's past. The latter plot development's the more
compelling for its reticence about the fantasy's actuality: is there a spooky connec-
tion between Robert and the Chance House boy, who proves to be Edith's late
son? Is Robert's creation of a feathered garment, in response to Edith's obsession
with the Firebird myth, intimately tied to Edith's well-being? The easygoing,
plainspoken style adds appeal and brings the mystically touched story within reach
of a broad range of readers. DS
SMITH, JANE DENITZ 
Fairy Dust. HarperCollins, 2002 
[160p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029280-6 $15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029279-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Nine-year-old Ruthie's usual afterschool care isn't available when her mother leaves
on an unexpected business trip, and, after firing the first replacement sitter, Ruthie's
dad finally settles on sixteen-year-old Alice. Alice opens up a whole new world for
Ruthie, one that includes art, fairies, and magic, but also thievery, lying, and the
construction of a hyper-elaborate fantasy life. Alice encourages Ruthie to steal-
change from her father's change jar, a crystal apple from her teacher-until the
sitter goes too far and convinces her charge to steal a blouse from a store. Security
calls Ruthie's father, who, after retrieving the girls from the mall, fires Alice. A
distraught Ruthie discovers what astute readers will already realize: Alice is a troubled
girl from a broken home whose pathological lying has already gotten her in deep
trouble. This doesn't have the fluidity and conviction ofJacqueline Wilson's simi-
larly themed The Story of Tracy Beaker (BCCB 4/01); Smith lays her plot brick by
recognizable brick, sprinkling clear foreshadowing and obvious clues throughout
regarding Alice's troubled personality and Ruthie's easy complicity. There are also
some big bumps in the plot, with the first sequence oddly unconnected to the rest
of the story, some issues raised but never pursued, and Alice's final turnaround
(she returns a necklace given to Ruthie by her mother) simply not credible. Still,
in the midst of what doesn't work is the thread of a story that does: Alice brings
magic into solitary Ruthie's life and, for a brief time, assuages her loneliness. Some
readers will discard the rest of the tangles and follow that thread instead. JMD
296 
* THE BULLETIN
SMITH, SHERRI L. 
Lucy the Giant. 
Delacorte, 2002 
217p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90031-7 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-72940-5 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Stigmatized for her height and for her status as daughter of the most notorious
drunk in Sitka, Alaska, fifteen-year-old Lucy Otsego sees no way out of a dead-end
future in a fast-food emporium. While pondering her fate one evening in the
airport coffee shop, a freak misunderstanding offers her the chance to make a break
for Kodiak, and an even more freakish encounter in a Kodiak saloon leads her to
employment aboard the Miranda Lee, setting and hauling crab traps in the icy
Bering Sea. There Lucy passes as Barb, an adult on the lam from some undisclosed
unhappiness, and since the captain of the Miranda Lee is more interested in her
strength and aptitude than her past, all goes fairly well until the resentment of a
male crew member threatens her cover, the captain's career, and their very lives.
Stylistic glitches somewhat mar the presentation: Lucy/Barb's brief stay (complete
with dinner party) in a Kodiak mogul's mansion is a questionable intrusion in an
otherwise gritty and action-filled plot, and the logic-defying premise that Lucy
narrates nearly two hundred pages of flashback while drowning is bound to set
eyes rolling. Still, this is a quirky and largely successful melding of fairy-tale
happenstance with survival adventure, and the determination and pride swelling
just beneath Lucy's lightly self-deprecating tone should win her many cheering
fans. EB
SPINELLI, EILEEN Here Comes the Year; illus. by Keiko Narahashi. Holt, 2002 [26p]
ISBN 0-8050-6685-3 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 5-8 yrs
In twelve poems, month by month, the year speaks of its January to December
cycle personified in natural phenomena ("I am the January dark/ dappled and
deep ... "). Brief eight-line stanzas embrace traditional associations (March wind,
April rain, May flowers) as well as a few unexpected pleasures (August meteor
showers), expanding them into lyrics of sustained imagery. While the poetic vo-
cabulary occasionally overrelies on the tried and true, Spinelli makes good use of
her limited space, producing some felicitous turns of phrase (the November leaves
are a "crunchy rumpus of shades and shapes") and keeping her rhymes unforced
and her rhythms fluid. The bright-faced youngsters of Narahashi's multicultural
cast are a bit too sweet to be true, but the watercolors revel in seasonal atmosphere,
deftly changing the light from spread to spread (and sometimes effectively explor-
ing the nocturnal world, as with the October's shadowy view of trick-or-treaters
tripping past a rather human-faced house). This has definite performance possi-
bilities, but it will also surely prompt spirited contretemps about what monthly
personifications are appropriate 'round your parts. DS
STADLER, ALEXANDER 
Beverly Billingsly Borrows a Book; written and illus. by
Alexander Stadler. 
Silver Whistle/Harcourt, 2002 
[32p]
ISBN 0-15-202510-3 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-7 yrs
Responsibility lies heavy on the shoulders of young Beverly, who has just received
her very own card for the Piedmont Public Library. She's certainly enjoying her
first book, Dinosaurs of the Cretaceous Period, building models, copying pictures,
and taking her iguanadons very seriously indeed. But when she awakens on the
APRIL 2002 
* 297
morning of April 8th and realizes her book was due April 7th, she works herself
into a full-scale nightmare-ridden state of angst, convinced that she faces bank-
ruptcy or prison for her tardiness. Beverly is, of course, every librarian's dream
patron-mannerly, bright, conscientious to a fault--one who clearly deserves and
gets her happy ending, complete with a delightful and quite logical twist. And
who could find fault with her slightly ursine aspect? Certainly not spindly legged,
bird-billed librarian Mrs. Del Rubio or the other zanily caricatured animal deni-
zens of Piedmont. Pair this with Barbara Porte's Harry in Trouble (BCCB 2/89)
and you've got the foundation for an offbeat program on Library Anxiety. EB
STEVENSON, 
JAMES 
Corn-Fed; 
written 
and 
illus. 
by 
James
Stevenson. 
Greenwillow, 2002 
[4 8p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-000598-X 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-000597-1 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-5
In his latest entry in a series of cornily titled poetry collections (Candy Corn, BCCB
5/99, etc.), Stevenson offers readers twenty-five more opportunities to share his
offbeat perspective on mini-mysteries like "Why Bicycles Are Locked Up" (be-
cause "Once a bike has discovered/ What it's like/ To run fast and free / It just
might try to escape") and what you might do with a hydraulic cherry-picker ("Want
to take a picture/ of your chimney?/ Want to get your cat/ Out of a tree?/ Want to
get a little closer/ to the moon?"). Dynamic ink squiggles undergird the lucid
watercolor illustrations; their composition and placement complements the care-
ful pacing of these free-verse observations, providing visual punch lines (a fork
asking a spoon "What does ice cream taste like?") or just slowing things down so
the reader can give these small matters the careful attention they deserve. The use
of a different font for each poem does, unfortunately, visually disassociate some
poems from their titles (which are all the same size and font, and tucked too tightly
into a top corner of the page), but that won't seriously impede readers' enjoyment
of this whimsical cornucopia. FK
TOMPERT, ANN The Pied Piper of Peru; illus. by Kestutis Kasparavicius. Boyds
Mills, 2002 [32p]
ISBN 1-56397-949-7 $15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
Juana, a mouse dwelling with her extended family in a seventeenth-century Peru-
vian monastery, recalls how their contented life among the kitchen crumbs was
threatened by the greed of a newcomer who brazenly decimated the cheese. The
Dominican brothers procure a cat (unsubtly dubbed Pizarro) to rid the monastery
of rodents, and now the mice are under siege, cornered and starving far away from
their food supply ("We made soup from bits and pieces of sheets and blankets and
clothing. My father and I were forced to harvest leather from a belt"). Soft-
hearted Brother Martin is ordered to trap and poison the mice, who have now
invaded the living quarters, but through his knack for animal communication he
keeps Pizarro at bay and leads the mouse colony to safe haven in the barn. This
story, "inspired by accounts of an incident in the life of St. Martin de Porres" (no
source given), is more fairy tale than saint legend, and those looking for informa-
tion on the Spanish-African saint will find only a slim offering of fact in the author's
closing note. Juana is an able narrator, though, and the mice have a sympathetic,
Beatrix Potter-esque charm, hauling their diminutive furnishings from place to
298 
* THE BULLETIN
place. Kasparavicius's saint-to-be Martin is no holy-card icon but a gentle, serious
man with work-hardened hands and a quietly confident demeanor, who seems to
accept calmly any miracle God throws his way. This may not be quite on target
for saint report writers, but the combination of mice on the lam and holy interven-
tion is winning and effective. EB
VAIL, RACHEL 
Sometimes I'm Bombaloo; illus. by Yumi Heo. 
Scholastic,
2002 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-439-08755-4 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Katie Honors is a good kid, if she does say so herself, and her list of accomplish-
ments is long: "I brush my teeth without being reminded too much. I can velcro
my own shoes, and put my toys where they belong, including the ones with sixty-
forty-eight small pieces." Sometimes, though, Katie gets angry with her little brother
and she turns into the terrible Bombaloo: "I show my teeth and make fierce noises.
My face scrunches tight like a monster's. I use my feet and fists instead of my
words. My toys end up all over the floor-and so does my brother." The contrast
between the temper and temperate is effectively drawn: Heo's paintings are a
cheery assortment of images in springlike colors in the calm scenes; in the angry
scenes oranges and reds dominate the palette. Clumsy construction mars the nar-
rative, however, and the list-like approach to temper tantrums is more textbooky
than emotionally satisfying. For a less programmatic look at temper and its tam-
ing, readers and listeners may want to turn to Bang's When Sophie Gets Angry-
Really, ReallyAngry (BCCB 4/99) and Blumenthal's The Chocolate-Covered-Cookie
Tantrum (BCCB 9/96). JMD
VULLIAMY, CLARA 
Small; written and illus. by Clara Vulliamy. 
Clarion,
2002 
32p
ISBN 0-618-19459-2 
$15.00 
R 
2-5 yrs
See this month's Big Picture, p. 269, for review.
WALKER, SALLY M. 
Fossil Fish Found Alive: Discovering the Coelacanth; illus. by
Laura Westlund and with photographs. 
Carolrhoda, 2002 
[72p]
ISBN 1-57505-536-8 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 4-9
As Western scientists pondered the fossil remains of a fish believed (by them, at
least) to be extinct, African fishermen regarded a catch of gombessa with mild
disdain ("too oily to taste good"), and raja laut turned up regularly in Indonesian
market places. Not until 1939, when a South African fisherman turned over his
catch to museum curator Marjorie Courtenay-Latimer, was the coelacanth recog-
nized by ichthyologists for what it was, a primitive fish very much alive and well in
coastal deep waters better known to local fishermen than to scientists. The coela-
canth immediately rocketed to stardom in a drama that would involve interna-
tional politicking, carefully choreographed scientific courtesies and dirty rivalries,
serendipitous discoveries, developments in deep-dive technology, and a tragic death.
At Walker's hands the continuing efforts to study the ungainly fish-with its lobed
fins, extra "tail," scaly head plates, primitive spinal system, mysterious rostral or-
gan, and bizarre headstanding behavior-unfold into a riveting scientific adven-
APRIL 2002 
* 
299
ture tale. Readers "learn along" with earlier discoverers about the coelacanth's
anatomy, physiology, and habits, amassing at a steady pace the facts that are seam-
lessly interwoven with the scientists' stories. Illustrations are plentiful and well
selected, from a £100 reward poster ("Look carefully at this fish. It may bring you
good fortune") to ichthyologist J. L. B. Smith dozing protectively beside his crated
and iced specimen. A fascinating selection for report writers, this is an exciting
catch for paleontology and nature buffs as well. Source notes are included, along
with a time line, glossary and index. EB
WESTON, MARTHA 
The Dinosaurs Meet Dr. Clock; written and illus. by Martha
Weston. 
Holiday House, 2002 
32p 
(Holiday House Readers)
ISBN 0-8234-1661-5 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 1-2
Scientist Dr. Clock has created a time machine and, after gathering the necessary
accoutrements ("He takes a sandwich. He takes important science stuff. He is
ready to go!"), zips back in time to the age of the dinosaurs. Upon his arrival he
discovers-or is discovered by-a pair of head-butting Pachycephalosauri who
seem to think he's a delightful new pet, one that they do not wish to share with
each other. As the dinosaurs yank Dr. Clock back and forth, he tries to make his
scientific observations, but "it is hard for Dr. Clock to take notes." Finally he
escapes, and, with a stern admonition to "pull yourself together, Clock!", he re-
traces the dinosaurs' tracks back to the time machine and makes a getaway-into
the midst of a medieval jousting match. While the challenge level of this easy
reader is generally appropriate for its audience, occasionally Weston relies too heavily
on the illustrations to convey somewhat arcane textual implications ("Dr. Clock
feels floaty"). The illustrations themselves are streamlined and amusing as the
short, balding, and bespectacled Dr. Clock is tossed about like a sack of potatoes
between the pop-eyed, boldly colored Pachycephalosauri (who look more friendly
than fierce); the scenery is standard dinosaur territory with ferny greens and mud
browns predominating against a mostly white background. Despite the book's
glitches, Weston's deadpan tone (somewhat reminiscent of Daniel Pinkwater), the
appealing subject matter, and comical illustrations will make this title a hit with
many young readers. JMH
WILLIAMS, SUE 
Dinnertime!; illus. by Kerry Argent. 
Harcourt, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-15-216471-5 
$16.00 
R* 3-6 yrs
Six fat rabbits are simply not paying attention and, despite warnings from various
concerned fauna, they (nearly) get picked off by a hungry fox: "Six fat rabbits,
doing what they please,/ don't see the fox sneak out of the trees.// Run, fat rabbits!
Run, run, run!/ That fox wants to eat you, one by one!// Dinnertime!" One by
one the rabbits disappear, until finally only one remains: "One fat rabbit, all in its
own,/ out in the dark, a long way from home.// Run, fat rabbit! Run, run, run!/
That fox wants to eat you, little one!// Dinnertime!" The final spreads reveal, to
the relief and delight of young audiences, that the "Dinnertime!" cry is mother
rabbit's as she calls her baby bunnies home for dinner ("How many times do I have
to say? When it's dinnertime-come straightaway!"); the bunnies have merely
been disappearing into their burrow in response to her call. Williams' text is one
dandy readaloud: the rhyme is catchy, and the repeated refrain ("Dinnertime!")
will be one listeners will happily crow. Argent's watercolors sprawl across the
300 
* THE BULLETIN
pages, large enough and clear enough to be seen by a group, with lots of opportu-
nities for counting. Her animals are expressive, with an intriguing toylike solidity:
the roly-poly rabbits are playfully daring without being too certain of escape, the
fox is ferociously toothy without being too scary. There is enough going on in
each spread that the reader may have to point out the compositionally disguised
fact of each rabbit's safe departure, but youngsters will relish going back over the
images once they're clued into the secret. Cries of "Run, fat rabbits, run!" are sure
to echo gleefully from library storytimes. JMD
YOLEN, JANE 
Hippolyta and the Curse ofthe Amazons; by Jane Yolen and Robert
J. Harris. 
HarperCollins, 2002 
248p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028737-3 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028736-5 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 4-7
When Queen Otrere gives birth to a second son, she defies Amazon law, which
requires his sacrifice to Artemis, and instead charges her thirteen-year-old daugh-
ter, Hippolyta, with taking the infant to his father, the king of Troy. After Hippolyta
safely delivers the baby to his father, she angers the king so much that she's left as
breakfast for a sea monster until she tricks her half-brother Tithonus into helping
her escape. The two then go on an Artemis-commanded quest to find the lost city
of Arimaspa, in order to lift a curse laid on the Amazons. In the end, Hippolyta
defies even Artemis, and she battles Apollo's gryphons to save her half-brother. In
this second entry in the Young Heroes series (starting with Odysseus in the Serpent
Maze, BCCB 5/01), the authors hit a loping stride into adventure that begins on
the first page and doesn't let up until the conclusion. Characterizations in this
entry are somewhat deeper; Hippolyta changes because of her experiences in the
world of men, and the motivating force behind the actions of the main characters
are more self-originating than plot-driven. Granted, the novel is a touch over-
plotted, and the denouement smacks of deus (literally) ex machina (figuratively),
but overall the adventure carries the day and the reader. A concluding note, "What
Is True about this Story?," discusses the history, mythology, and fantasy surround-
ing the Amazons. JMD
In the March review of Lee Bennett Hopkins' Hoofbeats, Claws, and Rippled Fins:
Creature Poems (HarperCollins), we incorrectly stated that four of the fourteen
poems are original to the collection; in fact, all fourteen are original. The Bulletin
regrets the error.
APRIL 2002 
* 
301
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
DRAGAN, 
PAT 
BARRETT 
Literacy from 
Day 
One. 
Heinemann,
2001 
118p 
illus. with photographs
Paper ed. ISBN 0-325-00343-2 
$15.00
Dragan, a first-grade teacher, clearly and capably lays out her model program for
the Overnight Book Program that is the foundation of her reading and literacy
curriculum. Driven by its own success, Dragan's program (sending books home
with each student every night) has developed into the dominant motivating force
in her classroom, with nearly all curriculum elements meeting in this literary vor-
tex. The introduction, which explains Dragan's initial inspiration and subsequent
actions, is followed by theory and practice chapters on jump-starting the reading
program on the first day of school, saturating the classroom with books of all
types, managing the Overnight Book Program, and fostering literacy at home and
in the classroom. Concluding chapters focus on concrete classroom activities that
can reinforce and enhance the reading experience. While this title is obviously
aimed at early childhood educators and teachers of reading, the audience certainly
includes librarians who wish to support such a curriculum in the school library
media center or who desire to incorporate some of Dragan's literacy-nurturing
ideas into the presentation of materials in the public library. An extensive list of
reading resources, appendices showing how to make projects mentioned in the
text, and an index are included. JMD
STEINER, STANLEY F. 
Promoting a Global Community through Multicultural
Children's Literature; illus. by Peggy Hokom. 
Libraries Unlimited, 2001 
179p
Paper ed. ISBN 1-56308-705-7 
$35.00
This is essentially an extended, theme-based annotated bibliography of materials
that can be used in the library, the classroom, and at home to promote tolerance
and understanding of different cultures. The selection of materials is rather loosely
organized, but the included material will be helpful and easily accessible to profes-
sionals seeking to develop curricula. The book is divided into five parts: Ties that
Bind: Celebrating Life Around the World; Refugees and Homeless: Nomads of
the World; Navigating the Road to Literacy; Books that Bring People Together;
and Multicultural Books in a Series. Brief, descriptive annotations include biblio-
graphic information and suggested age and grade levels, and each section ends
with "Book Extensions" to further explore the suggested titles and issues. Given
the pointed nature of the bibliography itself, it is not surprising that many of the
suggested titles are pointed themselves; nevertheless, this is a useful compendium.
Resource lists, an author index, and a literature index are included. JMD
302 
* THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Abortion-fiction: Cohn
ADVENTURE: Ibbotson; Malone;
McPhail; Rodda; Smith, S.; Yolen
African Americans: Bolden;
Rappaport
African Americans-fiction:
Cameron; Crowe
African Americans-poetry: Grimes
Alaska-fiction: Smith, S.
Anger-stories: Vail
Animals-fiction: Clement-Davies;
Delaney
Animals-stories: Ashman;
Lawrence; London; Nakamura
Arithmetic: Leedy; Lewis
Arithmetic-fiction: Mills
Art and artists-stories: Hodges
Astronauts-fiction: Cameron
Aunts and uncles-fiction:
Heneghan
Babies-fiction: Guest
Babies-stories: Appelt
Babysitters-fiction: Smith, J.
BEDTIME STORIES: Nakamura;
Vulliamy
BIBLE STORIES: McGee
BIOGRAPHIES: Fleming;
Gerstein; Marrin
Birds-fiction: Delaney
Books and reading-stories: Stadler
Brothers and sisters-fiction: Cohn;
Littke; Yolen
Brothers and sisters-stories: Dealey;
Vail
Bullies-fiction: Singer
Cats-fiction: Adler
Cats-stories: Hodges
Chickens-stories: Dallas-Contd;
Lawrence
Civil rights: Bolden; Fleming
Civil rights-fiction: Crowe
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Clements; Smith, J.
Crocodiles-stories: McPhail
Current events: Gellman
Dinosaurs: Marrin
Dinosaurs-fiction: Weston
Disasters: Gellman
Dogs-stories: Appelt
Donkeys-stories: McGee
Ducks-stories: Hindley
Easter-stories: McGee
ESSAYS: Fleming
Ethics and values: Cappo; Crowe;
Fleming; Gellman; Roos;
Shusterman
Families-fiction: Adler; Cohn; Roos
FANTASY: Clement-Davies;
Curley; Dalkey; Datlow; Malone;
Rodda; Singer; Yolen
Farms-stories: Dallas-Contd;
Lawrence
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Cohn
Fathers and sons-fiction: Heneghan
Fires-fiction: Schultz
Fish: Walker
FOLKTALES AND FAIRY TALES:
Datlow; Hodges
Foxes-stories: Hindley; Williams
Friendship-poetry: Grimes
Friendship-stories: Appelt
Frogs-stories: London
FUNNY STORIES: Appelt;
Weston
APRIL2002 
* 
303
Games-poetry: Burg
Games-stories: Ahlberg
Gays and lesbians-fiction: Cohn
Geography: Karas
GHOST STORIES: Littke
Grandfathers-fiction: Crowe
Hair-stories: Krull
Health: Jukes
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Clements; Crowe; Ibbotson;
Lawlor; Malone; Roop; Schultz;
Tompert
History, U.S.: Bolden; Colman;
Fleming; Rappaport
Illness-stories: Dealey
Insects-stories: Shields
LOVE STORIES: McLaren
Magic and magicians-fiction:
Curley
Magic and magicians-stories:
Pelletier
Mermaids-fiction: Dalkey
Mice-stories: Tompert; Vulliamy
Money: Leedy
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Adler; Cohn
Mothers and sons-fiction: Rodda
Music and musicians: Gerstein
Music and musicians-stories:
London
MYSTERIES: Littke; Roberts
MYTHOLOGY: Datlow
MYTHOLOGY, CLASSICAL:
McLaren
Mythology, classical-fiction: Yolen
Nature study: Walker
Oceans: Karas
Orphans-fiction: Ibbotson; Malone
Paleontology: Marrin; Walker
Pigs-stories: Ashman
Pioneers-stories: Lawlor
POETRY: Burg; Grimes; Lewis;
Spinelli; Stevenson
Poverty-fiction: Roos
PUZZLES: Lewis
Rabbits-stories: Williams
Racism-fiction: Crowe
Reading aloud: Burg; Grimes;
Ibbotson; Spinelli
Reading, easy: Cameron; Guest;
Mills; Weston
Reading, reluctant: Burg; Ibbotson;
Jukes
Relationships: Jukes
Religious education: McGee;
Tompert
RHYMING STORIES: Ashman;
Dealey: Hindley; Lawrence;
Shields
RIDDLES: Lewis
Saints-stories: Tompert
School-fiction: Cameron; Cappo;
Mills; Shusterman
Science: Marrin; Romanek; Walker
Scientists-fiction: Weston
Seasons-poetry: Spinelli
Seasons-stories: Pelletier
Sex education: Jukes
SHORT STORIES: Datlow
Slavery: Rappaport
Sleep: Romanek
Social studies: Bolden; Colman;
Fleming; Rappaport
South, the-fiction: Crowe
Spiders-stories: Shields
Spring-stories: Pelletier
Spying-fiction: Ericson
Stepmothers-fiction: Roberts
Storytelling: Hodges
Storytime: Appelt; Ashman; Dallas-
Contd; Hindley; Lawrence;
Shields; Spinelli; Stadler;
Vulliamy; Williams
SUPERNATURAL STORIES:
Littke; Singer
SURVIVAL STORIES: Lawlor;
Smith, S.
SUSPENSE: Littke; Roberts
Teachers-fiction: Cappo
Time travel-fiction: Curley; Weston
Toys-stories: Vulliamy
Voyages and travel-fiction: Rodda;
Roop; Yolen
Voyages and travel-stories: Lawlor;
Vulliamy
Water: Karas
West, the-stories: Lawlor
Witches-fiction: Curley
Wolves-fiction: Clement-Davies
Women's studies: Colman
World War II: Colman
Writers and writing: Colman
CONGRATULATIONS,
PAM MUNOZ
RYAN!
0-439-12041-1 * $15.95
A 2002 PURA BELPRE AWARD WINNER
AN ALA BEST BOOK FOR YOUNG ADULTS
* "Ryan uses the experiences of her own Mexican
as the basis for this compelling story of immigratio
lation...This well-written novel belongs in all coll
-" School Library Journal, starred review
1 
40 
ffSC 
ITOL 
STHI C
A 2002 Caldecott
Honor Book
THE STRAY
DOG
written &
illustrated
in full color by
Marc Simont
Ages 4-8.
$15.95
Tr (0-06-028933-3)
$15.89
Lb (0-06-028934- I
ALA NOTABLE
CHILDREN'S
BOOKS 2002
A 2002
Michael L. Printz Award
Honor Book
For Excellence
in Literature for
Young Adults
FREEWILL
by Chris Lynch
$15.95
Tr (0-06-028176-6)
$15.89
Lb (0-06-028177-4)
ALA BEST BOOKS
FOR YOUNG
ADULTS 2002
A 2002
Robert F. Sibert Award
Honor Book
SURVIVING
HITLER
A Boy in
the Nazi
Death Camps
by Andrea
Warren
photographs
Ages 10 up.
$16.95 Tr
(0-688-17497-3)
$16.89 Lb
(0-06-029218-0)
ALA NOTABLE CHILDREN'S BOOKS 2002
May Hill Arbuthnot
Honor Lecturer for 2003
4AURICE
ENDAK
cipient of
e 2002
argaret A.
wards Award
his lifetime
ievement in writing
Young Adults
EL
Among Paul Zindel's
cited novels: The Pigmar
$15.89 Lb (0-06-026828-X
- HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019 * www.harperchildrens.cor
PERIODICALS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.S.A.
RETURN SERVICE REQUESTED
Books for Children
Hardcover, $19.95
N 
(80) 54-470
0008-9036(200204)55:8; 1-A
-
:0 
J
I~:I I~I 
--
~4iX 
gdn~ -I~
· ··rl:
i
i-.. 
i, 
x-
i
i~·~;:·i
.i~·· 
i"
