T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by The Johns Hopkins University Press
September 2011
Vol. 65   No. 1
T
he Bulletin of the Center for 
Children’s Books provides 
concise summaries and 
critical evaluations of current children’s 
books. T is invaluable resource assists 
readers with questions regarding 
the ever-evolving children’s literature ﬁ eld. 
Reviews give an in-depth look at a selected book’s content, reading 
level, strengths and weaknesses, and quality of the format, as well as 
suggestions for curricular use. 
Published monthly (except August).  
To order:
Volume  (). 
Call: -- or --
., individuals (print or online) 
Fax: --
., institutions (print or online)  
Email: jrnlcirc@press.jhu.edu
., institutions (print & online) 
Online: www.press.jhu.edu/journals
ISSN - / E-ISSN -
Published by 
T H E JOHNS HOPKINS UNIVERSITY PRESS
THE BULLETIN OF THE CENTER 
FOR CHILDREN’S BOOKS:
ESSENTIAL.
 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
September 2011
Vol. 65 No. 1
3 
 the BIg PICture
 
 What We Keep Is Not Always What Will Stay by Amanda Cockrell
4 
 new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
10  •  America Is Under Attack: September 11, 2011: The Day the Towers Fell 
written and illus. by Don Brown
27  •  The Haunted Hamburger and Other Ghostly Stories by David LaRochelle; 
illus. by Paul Meisel
36  • This Dark Endeavor by Kenneth Oppel
45  •  Drawing from Memory written and illus. by Allen Say and with photo-
graphs
54  • Goliath by Scott Westerfeld
57  ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons
59  suBjeCt And use Index
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R Recommended.
Ad Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR Not recommended.
SpC Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the  
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor (KQG)
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Claire Gross, Reviewer (CG)
Hope Morrison, Reviewer (HM)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Claire Gross, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print or electronic $93.00; combined print & electronic $130.00; multiple in-
stitutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, $55.00; students, 
$20.00. In countries other than the United States, add $16.50 per subscription for postage; subscrib-
ers in Canada and Mexico add $12.00. Single copy rate: $10.00. Volumes available in microfilm from 
ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche 
from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be 
made payable to The Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Divi-
sion, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 
410-516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/jour-
nals/advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2011 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image from What We Keep Is Not Always What Will Stay ©2011 and used by permission of 
Flux.
SepTemBer 2011 • 3
the BIg PICture
What We Keep Is Not Always What Will Stay
by Amanda Cockrell
The young-adult novel has taken quite the media beatdown recently for being 
too dark, too violent, too depressing, and generally just too much. Cockrell’s first 
foray into the genre doesn’t initially seem to do much to dispel that myth, treating 
as it does death, divorce, and suicide. Yet at no point does this slim novel buckle 
under the weight of all this gloom to become simply another YA downer; instead, 
framed by an utterly engaging narrative with a witty and thoughtful protagonist, 
these bleak elements strike a balance with more quotidian dramas of school pranks 
and eccentric relatives to make a provocative, realistic, and even somewhat hopeful 
story that will leave readers with plenty to ponder. 
Fifteen-year-old Angie has been talking to the statue of St. Felix in her 
church’s basement since she was nine—not crazy, religious-fanatic sort of talking 
but the more mundane I-hate-my-mom kind of talking. It appears, however, that 
the statue has recently come to life and is apparently ready and willing to talk back, 
and Angie is now reconsidering her status as a sane person. Still, this live-action 
version of her former confidant (or whoever he is—a homeless guy seems to be the 
best bet, but then how does he know how far Angie let Noah Michalski get on their 
date last year?) seems pretty wise, and Angie could use all the advice she can get 
right now. Her family life is in disarray since her well-intentioned but hotheaded 
mother moved out, and her own romantic life is about to follow suit as she finds 
herself falling for Jesse, a teenaged veteran of the Afghan war who has more than 
his fair share of demons. 
While a miraculous apparition and a family split certainly have Angie 
on edge, it is really her relationship with Jesse that brings her to a spiritual and 
moral crisis. This could have easily become yet another tale of the perils in store 
for good girls falling for bad boys, but instead Cockrell offers up a realistic picture 
of a generally amiable teen suddenly having to come to terms with an indifferent 
universe and her own lack of control in it. Fiercely independent and stubborn 
to boot, Angie is well aware when things start to go downhill between her and 
Jesse, and she makes the difficult decision to get out while she can. Jesse is the 
quintessential idea of damaged goods: he has a rather terrifying temper that may 
not simply be the result of his experiences in Afghanistan, and when he crosses the 
line, he does so with violence and rage. He is also undeniably sweet and caring, 
though, and his efforts to overcome his own trauma are admirable even as they are 
fruitless. He remains sympathetic to the very end, so that as Angie watches him 
self-destruct, it is with the painful knowledge that her choice to leave may have 
very well hastened his downfall. 
4 • The BulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
The conclusion’s ambiguity regarding both Felix’s true identity and Jesse’s 
accidental death/suicide underscores the book’s tendency to eschew easy answers. 
Ultimately, this is about grief, loss, and hurts that are too big to be fixed. Yet it is 
also about love, family, and the power of laughter. A well-told story—much like a 
well-lived life—includes all these things for better or for worse, and readers ready 
to tackle the bigger questions will do well to begin here. (See p. 13 for publication 
information.)
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor
AdA, AlmA Flor Dancing Home; by Alma Flor Ada and Gabriel M. Zubizarre-
ta. Atheneum, 2011 [160p]
ISBN 978-1-4169-0088-7 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 3-5
Margie’s hard-won all-American image falls apart when her cousin Lupe comes from 
Mexico and joins Margie’s fifth-grade class. Over time, though, Margie begins to see 
the challenges that Lupe faces every day at their California school and learns how 
different Lupe’s childhood was from her own, and her resentment of her cousin 
slowly shifts to sympathy. While the story of the friendship between the two girls 
is thoughtfully presented, the plot is contrived and programmatic, hitting heavily 
on the messages about embracing differences and accepting all people. Margie’s 
new friend, Camille, comes across as cloyingly wise beyond her years as she ex-
plains American culture to Margie (“Haven’t you figured it out yet? The United 
States is made up of all different kinds of people. And most of their ancestors came 
here from other places”). More effective is the device of a journal assignment that 
serves as a useful method to reveal Margie’s thought processes, as she often uses her 
journal to reflect on her shifting views of her heritage as well as her observations 
about Lupe’s adjustment to California. The third-person narration includes both 
Margie’s and Lupe’s points of view, adding depth to the narrative. Rubén Darío’s 
poem “To Margarita,” which is referenced throughout the story, is included in full 
in both English and Spanish at the end of the novel.  HM 
AlexAnder, Jill S. Paradise. Feiwel, 2011 [256p]
ISBN 978-0-312-60541-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Paisley has always wanted to be a drummer for a country rock band, and her dreams 
are coming true; her band, the Waylon Slider Band, has found a lead singer and 
is all set to play at Texapalooza. Unfortunately, that lead singer’s charisma, sultry 
SepTemBer 2011 • 5
vocals, smokin’ hotness, and phenomenal accordion playing threaten to steal the 
show and turn the other musicans into nothing but his back-up band. Once he lets 
go of that notion, he starts to be a team player, and the band is poised for great-
ness. Paisley has to keep it all a secret, though, because her mom wants her girls to 
get out of Prosper County and take nothing with them when they go, even if they 
have other ideas. This is a different side of Prosper County than that portrayed in 
Alexander’s debut (The Sweetheart of Prosper County, BCCB 12/09); the characters 
are older, and they live and party on the outskirts of the county rather than in 
town. There is, however, the same local culture of long memory and generational 
identity, where the kids are known more for their people than for themselves, and 
they struggle against that predestination even as they seek their families’ support 
and approval. Interspersed are the poignant lyrics of a boy who’s secretly crushing on 
Paisley but who watches his dreams die as she develops a relationship with Paradise, 
the lead singer. Readers expecting a fully happy ending will be both shocked and 
disappointed by the sudden tragedy at the end (though those familiar with music 
history will catch foreshadowing in allusions dropped along the way). However, 
the group’s perseverance, development of trust earned and given, and practice of 
living wide open will inspire readers with dreams of their own.  KC 
AnderSon, Jodi lynn Americapedia: Taking the Dumb Out of Freedom; by 
Jodi Lynn Anderson, Daniel Ehrenhaft, and Andisheh Nouraee. Walker, 
2011 [256p] illus. with photographs
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-8027-9792-6 $24.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-8027-9793-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-12
At first glance, Anderson and coauthors seem to be swelling the ranks of writers (see 
also Sheinkin, with Two Miserable Presidents, BCCB 9/08) trying to nudge U.S. 
history from the doldrums with a bracing gust of humor. This title, however, is 
aimed more at citizenship than scholarship, in the hope that “readers can watch the 
news or listen to government officials without getting swept away by misleading 
spin or petty nonsense.” To that end, half a dozen chapters get young adults up to 
speed on everything that they may have dozed through in class: civics (campaign 
finance, caucuses and primaries, gerrymandering) and economics (budget deficit and 
the International Monetary Fund), foreign affairs, persistent global religious strife, 
and “Issues Americans Like to Yell About Most.” Anderson et al. are an opinionated 
crew, and their vessel definitely lists to port, but teens who have already latched 
on to The Daily Show and The Onion will settle right into their brand of sniping 
satire. Scrapbook-style inclusion of charts, maps, photos, cartoons, and ephemera 
(mostly in color) break the double-columned text into manageable chunks; many 
of the images, captioned in wisecracks or clumsily doctored for comic effect, will 
lure browsers deeper into the articles themselves. Although newshounds may 
tackle the book in its entirety, an index (promised for the bound book) will help 
YAs navigate toward their specific interests, and source notes will offer a leg up to 
report writers.  EB
6 • The BulleTin
A r m S t ro n g, K e l l e y 
The Gathering. 
Harper/HarperCollins, 
2011 359p (Darkness Rising)
ISBN 978-0-06-179702-6 $17.99  
R Gr. 8-10
Though accustomed to her small town, Maya is now realizing that there are few 
ways to hide her secrets there: expert at keeping its own secrets, the place is deter-
mined to track those, like Maya, who turn out to be part of the reason this whole 
mysterious town exists. In Maya’s case, her birthmark and cloudy background 
point to her being a skin-walker, an ancient supernatural being that can turn into 
a mountain lion, heal through touch, and interact in significant ways with nature, 
and that scientists are now trying to secretly reactivate through genetic mutation. 
Maya, her hot new crush, and his mysterious sister (whose non-human tenden-
cies demonstrate the ways in which the experiment is rapidly going awry) are all 
enmeshed in the plot, but Maya barely has time to sort through her own emotions 
about these relationships before her life is threatened. She must find a way to stay 
alive long enough to untangle all of the mysteries, dead ends, and family histories 
(Maya was adopted and is only beginning to learn about her biological ties) that 
suddenly make up her life. All of the teen protagonists are richly developed as they 
stumble through choices beyond their ages and grapple with identity both on a 
typical teen level and on a supernatural, scientifically altered level. The taut writing, 
careful backstory and exposition around the Native American stories out of which 
these skin-walkers emerged, and gripping cliffhanger combine to make this novel 
the first in a trilogy that readers will likely be anxious to finish.  AS
AronSon, mArc Trapped: How the World Rescued 33 Miners from 2,000 Feet 
Below the Chilean Desert. Atheneum, 2011 [144p] illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-1-4169-1397-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-9
Only the most news-averse adolescents would have failed to note last year’s disaster 
at the San Jose copper mine in northern Chile and its nail-biting aftermath in which 
teams of rescue workers struggled to make contact with the trapped miners, sustain 
them physically and emotionally, and finally devise a system to bring them safely 
to the surface. Here Aronson reassembles the events into a single comprehensive 
report, which not only covers the rescue effort but also offers background on 
sketchy mining practices and even the regional geology that gives birth to the veins 
of copper that makes its way into manufactured goods in industrialized nations. 
There’s something here to rivet just about anyone, from gearheads who follow the 
approaches to drilling, to humanists who empathize with the trapped men and their 
anxious families, to nascent activists who recognize that behind the heroics lies a 
corrupt, neglectful system of mine operation that endangers workers to maximize 
profit. Students using this title as a foundation for a written report will appreciate 
the annotated sourcing, timeline, index, glossary, and perhaps most important, the 
motherlode of useful websites. Teachers and librarians might also want to direct 
their students’ attention to Aronson’s appended essay on how he conducted his 
own Internet-based research. Black-and-white photos and a color insert will be 
included in the final copy.  EB
SepTemBer 2011 • 7
BAlog, cyn Starstruck. Delacorte, 2011 [256p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90734-7 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73850-7 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89494-7 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Gwen Reilly has literally expanded to suit her nickname, “Dough,” in the three years 
since her boy friend and possibly boyfriend, Wish, moved to the West Coast, so 
she’s not as sanguine about his return to her town as he is. Wish, as his online pics 
hinted, has grown from a slightly geeky sweetie into a major-league hottie, and all 
the girls in her snooty New Jersey high school are already drooling over him. The 
weird thing is that he doesn’t even seem to notice Gwen’s weight gain, and he’s just 
as into her as ever. He’s changed in other ways, though, and Gwen is at a loss to 
understand his new peculiarities until Christian, a new hire at her mom’s bakery, 
explains to her that he thinks Wish is dabbling in the practices of the Luminati, 
a cult of astrologers who try to manipulate the stars but end up channeling forces 
beyond their control. At first Gwen can’t believe it, but when the weather starts 
changing dramatically, girls fall ill with dangerously high fevers, and Wish’s strange 
behavior starts getting stranger, she knows that she has to confront Wish. There’s 
a lot to like here in light of this title’s contrast with recent trends—finally, a slim 
fantasy with a heroine who’s not, a boy who’s more addicted to popularity than his 
girlfriend is, and a girlfriend who pulls her boyfriend back from the supernatural 
rather than following him into it. Gwen, though vulnerable and flawed, ultimately 
emerges as the strong, confident, playful person you want her to be. Christian, 
though a secondary character, turns out to be another nice surprise in this novel 
that speaks to geeks, letting them know in multiple ways that fitting in may not be 
worth the cost and that finding one kindred spirit is enough.  KC 
BAndy, michAel S. White Water; by Michael S. Bandy and Eric Stein; illus. by 
Shadra Strickland. Candlewick, 2011 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-3678-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 6-9 yrs
In a story based on the author’s experiences, a young boy in the Jim Crow South 
joins his grandma on a trip into town on a hot summer day. Disappointed by the 
warm and dirty water at the “Colored” fountain, Michael decides that the water 
at the “Whites Only” fountain must be “pure and icy cold, like mountain water,” 
and he’s seized with the desire to experience this wonderful forbidden drink. To 
achieve his goal, he fakes sick one day and takes the trip into town by himself to 
make a lightning-fast slurp attack on the Whites Only fountain—whereupon he 
discovers that the water there is just as nasty as at the other fountain and that it’s 
the same pipe bringing water to both. Bandy and Stein effectively portray the 
milieu with simple details, conveying the daily reality of segregation—where you 
can wave to the white boy at the front of the bus but not sit with him—in a way 
that matter-of-factly brings home both its irrationality and its absurd complexity. 
Though the ending’s grand expansion is a little sudden (“And from that day on, I 
wouldn’t let anything stand in my way”), it’s believable that such an event could be 
a turning point in understanding the value of questioning limits. While the people 
are sometimes awkwardly posed, watercolor and gouache illustrations touched 
8 • The BulleTin
with ink lines capably capture the bleaching heat of a small-town summer and the 
flowered dresses and blunt-nosed buses of the era; line drawings overlaid against the 
reality depict Michael’s imagined images, sometimes a little confusingly, sometimes 
to dramatic effect. This will be an accessible and personal way to open discussion 
about some recent history that contemporary kids often find hard to imagine.  DS
BlAcK, holly Welcome to Bordertown: New Stories and Poems of the Borderlands; 
ed. by Holly Black and Ellen Kushner. Random House, 2011 528p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96705-4 $22.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86705-7 $19.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89745-0 $19.99  
R* Gr. 9-12
Teens may not be familiar with the Bordertown books, a project created almost 
thirty years ago by Terri Windling as a shared-world anthology that chronicled a 
city set on the border between Faerie and the human world. The collection then 
was creative, edgy, and ground-breaking, and it sparked several additional volumes 
and plenty of fiercely loyal readers, some of whom grew up to be authors now 
contributing to this anthology revisiting the fictional place. A series of introduc-
tions quickly guides readers through the history and basic outline of Bordertown, 
and thus informed, they are set free to explore, in over a score of entries, tolerance 
and diversity, isolation, identity, and, of course, the supernatural in this super-cool 
reexamination of an area that is just as current, compelling, and fascinating as it 
was decades ago. Whether in Cory Doctorow’s “Shannon’s Law,” which focuses 
on the trials of bringing the Internet to a place like Faerie or Charles de Lint’s “A 
Tangle of Green Men,” which has a more traditional fantasy vibe, the characters 
all exist in the same basic situation: all are either headed into, out of, or lingering 
in Bordertown. The usual variety of format (nods to graphic storytelling and po-
etry add to the mostly short-story focus), length, writing style, and familiar/new 
authors (included short bios are both personable and useful in terms of directing 
readers to more of their work) is in evidence, and this careful structuring widens 
the potential audience to include fantasy, sci fi, and even horror fans. It is the strong 
common thread, though, that pushes this collection into exceptional territory in 
a field relatively well supplied with anthologies for teens.  AS
Borden, louiSe Big Brothers Don’t Take Naps; illus. by Emma Dodd. McElderry, 
2011 32p
ISBN 978-1-4169-5503-0 $16.99  
Ad 4-6 yrs
Told from the perspective of younger brother Nicholas, this story celebrates the 
friendship between Nicholas and his older brother, James, who is clearly the center 
of Nicholas’ world. Behind Nicholas’ laundry list of things that James does that 
are particularly awesome (shares his Halloween loot, holds Nicholas’ hand when 
they cross the street, helps him find a book at the library before he looks for his 
own) is his own longing to grow up and share James’ big-brotherly activities and 
privileges, a goal that may be closer than Nicholas realizes as the final pages reveal 
that a baby sister has joined the family. The relationship is endearing if idyllic, 
but there isn’t much story here, just a listing of characteristics; nor does the book 
effectively explain why the baby’s birth will confer James-level competence as well 
as big-brother status on Nicholas. Dodd’s digitally rendered illustrations feature 
a dot-eyed pair of rosy-cheeked brothers cavorting together, and the streamlined 
SepTemBer 2011 • 9
compositions and cheerful colors match the text’s happy mood; the draftsmanship 
is a little bland, though, especially in the rather samey human faces. Still, little 
listeners with a rockstar older sibling of their own will readily identify with both 
Nicholas’ adulation and his longing to grow up.  HM 
Boyne, John Noah Barleywater Runs Away: A Fairy Tale; illus. by Oliver Jef-
fers. Fickling/Random House, 2011 222p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75247-3 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75246-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89934-8 $16.99  
Ad Gr. 4-7
Despite being a whole eight years old, Noah Barleywater has done very little to 
speak of with his life, which is why he sets off from home early one morning in 
search of a glorious adventure. His departure does not, he insists, have anything 
to do with the sad thing happening at home that he’d rather not talk about, just 
to be clear. During his travels, he comes across three towns, the first two offering 
little more than a magical apple tree and some very rude residents, while the last 
one is home to a magnificent—albeit slightly creepy—toy shop whose elderly 
owner invites Noah to join him for lunch. The two exchange life stories and, as one 
might expect, Noah soon realizes running away is not the answer to his problems 
and so returns home, just in time to see his mother before she passes away from a 
terminal illness. Even unsophisticated readers will deduce Noah’s tragedy before 
this revelation, but all will appreciate the tenderness and compassion with which 
his grief is treated. The fable-like structure to the story along with the occasional 
appearance of talking animals adds a comforting bit of whimsy for younger readers; 
the elevated vocabulary and often unnecessarily complicated wordplay may prove to 
be too difficult without assistance, though, and there’s basically an adult-appealing 
flavor to the entire enterprise. As with his Holocaust novel, The Boy in the Striped 
Pajamas (BCCB 10/06), Boyne tips into didactism, particularly in the closing 
scenes in which the old man essentially instructs Noah on what to do. Nonetheless, 
this is still a moving and well-told story that parents may wish to share with their 
children—potential runaways or not.  KQG
BrAdBury, JenniFer Wrapped. Atheneum, 2011 309p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4169-9007-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4391-5902-6 $9.99 
 R Gr. 7-10
Just weeks before her debut, Agnes Wilkins finds herself embroiled in a mystery that 
threatens not only her place in the upper echelon of English society but the very 
security of the mother country itself. Not that Agnes at all minds the upheaval—as 
an avid fan of A Lady (Jane Austen’s early pseudonym) and other novelists, Agnes 
is keen for some excitement before proper society determines her fate. When she 
discovers—with help from a handsome museum worker—that the trinket she stole 
from Lord Showalter’s mummy-unwrapping contains a secret message, she’s thrilled 
at the prospect of a real adventure. Excitement soon turns to fear, however, when 
she realizes that the secret message concerns not some long-ago pharaoh but the 
current leader of France, Napoleon, and his advancement upon Britain. A winning 
combination of Egyptian mythology, English Regency, and just a hint of romance, 
this charming caper delivers both historical detail and boisterous entertainment. 
Agnes is probably a bit more forward-thinking than the heroines of her beloved 
10 • The BulleTin
Jane Austen, but her wit and charisma serve her well as she negotiates the fallout 
of a mummy’s curse and a possible foreign invasion while adhering to her mother’s 
strict notions of propriety—at least while in polite company. The book provides a 
bad guy who is easy to hate, a love interest who is easy to love, and a happy ending 
that gives Agnes both romance and adventure, so readers need only to bring a cup 
of tea and a cozy chair to complete the picture.  KQG
BrennAn, SArAh reeS The Demon’s Surrender. McElderry, 2011 387p (The 
Demon’s Lexicon)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4169-6383-7 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2393-0 $9.99  
R* Gr. 8-12
The characters have been developed, the battle lines drawn, and the enemies and 
allies identified, but there are still many surprises, twists, and new alliances to be 
formed and broken in this final installment of Brennan’s trilogy (The Demon’s Lexi-
con, 7/09; The Demon’s Covenant, 6/10). The narration in this volume is focalized 
through Sin, a dancer in the Goblin Market who is set to take over as its leader and 
continue to protect it from the Magicians. Merris, the former market leader who 
now shares her body with a demon, is not convinced that Sin is ready, however, 
and has arranged a competition between her and Mae: whichever girl can take 
the pearl that protects Celeste Drake, a powerful magician, from the influence of 
demons will become the leader of the Market. The competition does not end there 
for Sin: she is beginning to have feelings for Alan, who has set his heart on Mae 
from their first meeting, even though Mae prefers his brother, Nick. Additionally, 
the key players work together to perpetrate a dangerous lie that could mean their 
undoing or their ultimate victory, but no matter the outcome, things are going 
to get bloody along the way. Obviously, this is not a book for the uninitiated in 
Brennan’s world, but as the culmination of a breathlessly suspenseful series punc-
tuated throughout with keen humor and heartbreaking emotional resonance, it’s 
a stunner. The author manages to turn the impossible into the inevitable at every 
turn, keeping readers in the same position of nail-biting tension and indecision as 
the characters. That tension is not as plot-driven as one might expect, however; it’s 
more focused on the actions of the characters who variously lead with their hearts, 
their heads, and their bodies, and whose emotional range is hamstrung in mad-
dening ways by history and disposition. Readers can expect to have their mettle 
tested and their own hearts broken and mended multiple times as they surrender 
to the force of this final chapter.  KC
Brown, don America Is Under Attack: September 11, 2011: The Day the 
Towers Fell; written and illus. by Don Brown. Flash Point/Roaring Brook, 
2011 64p (Actual Times)
ISBN 978-1-59643-694-7 $16.99  
R Gr. 3-6
The fourth entry in Brown’s Actual Times series marks the tenth anniversary of the 
2001 terrorist attacks. In a format somewhat reminiscent of Wilborn Hampton’s ac-
count for older readers (September 11, 2001, BCCB 1/04), Brown follows the plight 
and flight of a number of survivors and victims—office workers and emergency 
responders—of the Twin Towers destruction, while also weaving in information on 
the concurrent episodes playing out at the Pentagon and Shanksville, Pennsylvania. 
Ten years’ distance from the events allows Brown to include in his carefully crafted 
SepTemBer 2011 • 11
narrative some details missing in even the best of the children’s titles released closer 
to September 11, 2001. An author’s note talks briefly about America’s responding 
attack on Afghanistan and “improvements to intelligence gathering, national se-
curity, building construction, and emergency response” that followed in the wake. 
Still, a single decade isn’t enough to blunt the immediacy of the attack; Brown’s 
watercolor images are more intimate, individuated, and poignant here than in his 
previous titles on the Titanic and Revolutionary War, both of which involved persons 
facing death. Brown notes that action against Afghanistan failed to capture Osama 
bin Laden; however, updated information on the al-Qaeda leader’s recent death 
is not included. A bibliography of print and Internet resources is appended.  EB 
Brown, monicA Waiting for the Biblioburro; illus. by John Parra. Tricycle, 
2011 32p
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-58246-398-8 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-58246-353-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 5-8 yrs
Ana can hardly believe it when a librarian rides into her rural Colombian village with 
two donkeys and a portable collection of books (“I am a librarian, a bibliotecario, 
and these are my burros, Alfa and Beto. Welcome to Biblioburro, my biblioteca”); 
though she loves to read, she owns only one book and has read it so many times 
that she knows it by heart. The librarian reads a story to the children, then allows 
them to select books to borrow until his return in a few weeks time; in his absence, 
Ana writes a story of her own about the Biblioburro which she then presents to the 
librarian upon his return. While there are many books available about traveling 
librarians (Ruurs’ My Librarian Is a Camel, BCCB 12/05; Houston’s Miss Dorothy’s 
Bookmobile, BCCB 2/11, etc.), this title stands out, going beyond noting the func-
tionality of the program to show the impact of stories and storytelling on a child. 
For Ana, a fanciful girl readily whisked away by stories of “pink dolphins and blue 
butterflies, castles and fairies, talking lions and magic carpets,” the Biblioburro is 
clearly the gateway to imagination. The title skirts the librarian’s work of helping 
children through their traumas from the regional unrest (as depicted in the docu-
mentary Biblioburro), but the focus on the impact of the program and the young 
patron’s delight is effective for this audience. The illustrations, composed in rich 
acrylics on board, are folksy and fanciful, both in their representations of reality and 
of Ana’s imagination; the lush detail of the scenes contrasts effectively with the flat 
textures of the surface and the cool, earthy colors. An author’s note identifies the 
real founder of the Colombian Biblioburro program as well as providing a link to a 
further resource; a glossary of Spanish terms is also included. Share this celebration 
of books and readers as a start-of-school kickoff, and the kids may look at their 
brick-and-mortar offerings with newly appreciative eyes.  HM 
BruchAc, JoSeph Dragon Castle. Dial, 2011 346p
ISBN 978-0-8037-3376-3 $16.99  
Ad Gr. 6-9
It is hard to be the only sensible, intelligent member of the royal family, particu-
larly when the fate of the kingdom relies on there being someone in charge who 
can make sharp decisions. Prince Rashko appreciates his brother and parents for 
their generosity and compassion, but when their region is attacked by a mysteri-
ous group that is more than they appear (the leader is, in fact, the Dark Lord, 
12 • The BulleTin
who first fought with Rashko’s relative eons ago and has been regaining strength 
since), their spacey, too-trusting approach to life seems to be of little use. Through 
visions of his ancestors and use of his impeccable military and strategic training, 
Rashko is poised to save the day, but to his chagrin, he realizes that he will need 
the strengths of many to actually defeat the formidable powers amassed against 
him. The descriptions of the European landscape and the rambling castle itself are 
lush, carefully developed, and so richly elaborated that readers can almost feel the 
chill of the stone walls and envision themselves on the verdant hills. Unfortunately, 
Rashko is so deeply condescending, pretentious, and unfriendly that readers will 
likely find it hard to root for him, even while they hope that he succeeds because 
of all that is riding on his efforts. Though it is intriguing to see Bruchac pursue 
Slovakian characters, language, and customs (a note suggests that he was drawing 
from his own heritage), the book falls back on the stodgy old device of translating 
foreign words after their use, breaking the narrative flow. In spite of these issues, 
this is likely to appeal to readers who simply can’t get enough dragons, princes, and 
European-tinged adventure tales.  AS
chriStenSen, Bonnie Fabulous!: A Portrait of Andy Warhol; written and illus. by 
Bonnie Christensen. Ottaviano/Holt, 2011 36p
ISBN 978-0-8050-8753-6 $16.99  
R Gr. 3-5
The famed pop artist gets a more speedy biographical treatment here than in 
Greenberg and Jordan’s Andy Warhol: Prince of Pop (BCCB 12/2004) and even 
Rubin’s Andy Warhol: Pop Art Painter (BCCB 12/06). Christensen treats Warhol’s 
life in verbal snapshots, with a titled block of compact text on each spread focus-
ing on a particular time (“College”) or subject (“Art”). There’s a strong focus on 
Warhol’s childhood as a shy kid teased for his bad skin and then on his youth as 
a struggling artist, all the better to contrast with his eventual fame. The impres-
sionistic approach means that some additional information would occasionally 
be welcome (for instance, though his original last name comes up in context, it’s 
never mentioned that he truncated Warhola to Warhol), but it’s an atmospheric 
introduction to a kid who became bigger than he ever dreamed. The illustrations, 
collagework with oil painted over photo-transfer, have the soft smudginess of oil 
pastels and the sturdy vigor of charcoal, with haunting urban backgrounds, and 
there’s an interesting ongoing tension between the organic shapes of figures and the 
regular patterning of Warhol’s work and the city skyline. Use this with Greenberg 
and Jordan’s Action Jackson (BCCB 11/02) for a unit on twentieth-century American 
art innovators. An author’s note gives a little more information, and a bibliography 
and a timeline are included.  DS
coAKley, lenA Witchlanders. Atheneum, 2011 [416p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2004-5 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2006-9 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Ryder has grown up the skeptical son of a witch mother, who was part of the co-
ven that protected their Witchlander village before she lost her faith during a war 
between the Witchlanders and the neighboring Baen. When she shares her visions 
of a Baen assassin, and the village is shortly thereafter attacked, Ryder heads to the 
mountainous border to fight the threat himself. There he discovers Falpian, a young 
SepTemBer 2011 • 13
Baen dispatched to the border by his father for a mission he does not yet know but 
assumes is central to the impending Baen invasion. Struggling to survive threats 
both natural and magical in the perilous winter environment, Ryder and Falpian 
achieve a wary peace as it becomes apparent that they are “twins in spirit,” their 
psyches and innate magical abilities inextricably linked. They could be incredibly 
powerful—if they weren’t on opposite sides of a seemingly inevitable second war. 
Coakley’s world-building is lush and provocative, exploring the ways in which 
ethnic and cultural conflict can calcify over a generation through a splendidly real-
ized friendship between antagonists, fraught with mistrust and torn loyalties but 
cemented by a gut-level recognition of shared humanity (as Ryder asks, “Are we 
only allowed to care about people who are on our side?”). The book also achieves 
a sophisticated intertwining of religious and magical mythologies that illuminate 
both the fantasy world and the ways in which its history and belief systems have 
been manipulated over time. At its heart, though, Witchlanders is all about character, 
and the struggle of two equally sympathetic, equally flawed protagonists to reconcile 
inherited enmity with grudging mutual affection—all while battling giant earth-
monsters—is what gives this book its urgency and depth. Fans of contemplative, 
psychologically rich (but no less action-packed) fantasies à la Ursula Le Guin will 
welcome this warm, inventive debut and wait eagerly for the implied sequel.  CG
cocKrell, AmAndA What We Keep Is Not Always What Will Stay. Flux, 
2011 [264p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-7387-2615-1 $9.95
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 7-10
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 3, for review.
coSentino, rAlph Wonder Woman: The Story of the Amazon Princess; written and 
illus. by Ralph Cosentino. Viking, 2011 36p
ISBN 978-0-670-06256-0 $16.99  
R Gr. 2-4
After tackling Superman and Batman in similar picture-book-style stories, Cosen-
tino turns his eye to Wonder Woman, Amazon princess and, by day, ambassador 
extraordinaire. Her upbringing on Paradise Island, where she was raised by her 
mother, Hippolyta, adds emotional depth, as her close relationship with her mother, 
who sought to keep her daughter protected and nearby even as she knew she was 
destined for greater things, is explored at length. Never fear, however; there is plenty 
of superhero action as Wonder Woman’s abilities, nemeses, and adventures make 
up the remainder of this brief outing. The villains are particularly appealing aspects 
of the superhero’s larger story, as each is introduced in a double-page spread that 
identifies their mode of attack and highlights one way Wonder Woman can defend 
against it (for example, Silver Swan can’t fly quicker than Wonder Woman’s lasso). 
Reluctant and early readers will appreciate the personable and clear narration style. 
The color illustrations, with comic-book stylization and cartoon intensity, aren’t 
subtle, but they’re not supposed to be; their high-contrast use of bright colors is 
attractive, resulting in visuals that encourage lingering. Fans will likely be pleased 
with the backstory to the tough chick and her bracelets of power, and readers who 
have only heard of Wonder Woman in passing will certainly find many tantalizing 
hints that will encourage further investigation. While there’s a bit more emphasis 
on traditionally feminine traits than in the other two offerings, there is no denying 
14 • The BulleTin
that even though she might want to impart lessons via kindness, Wonder Woman 
won’t hesitate to rough the bad guys up as needed.  AS
crewS, ninA, ad. Jack and the Beanstalk; ad. and illus. by Nina Crews. Ot-
taviano/Holt, 2011 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-8765-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad 6-9 yrs
Crews uses her familiar digitally manipulated photocollage in a reimagined ver-
sion of Jack’s infamous adventures with the beanstalk. In this telling, Jack climbs 
the beanstalk to find a castle inhabited by two giants, a wildly narcissistic man 
and his accommodating wife. After Jack steals the giant’s hen, escapes, and cuts 
the beanstalk down, the giants fall from the sky and resume normal size, proving 
to be a long-lost pair who’d suffered a folkloric fate after a misguided wish. This 
accessible narrative, told in simple, short sentences, offers listeners familiar with 
the traditional tale an urban variant with an unusual ending; similar to Osborne’s 
Kate and the Beanstalk (BCCB 1/01), there is a backstory for the giant’s residency 
in the sky that gives kids some additional and interesting context. The variant is 
otherwise less effective, though, leaving audiences with some questions (why, for 
instance, do the giants have different personalities than their human-sized selves?). 
While the giant’s characteristic machismo is intended to be humorous, it comes 
across as grating, and the short sentences result in choppy dialogue. The photog-
raphy is where the real appeal lies, and the play with perspective is particularly 
satisfying, with Jack is effectively shown as tiny beside the giants; it’s also pleasing 
that the urban-based tale has a multicultural (and expressive) cast. The posing is 
often stiff, however, and the collagework is a crude at times, with lighting harsh 
and compositions poorly focused, while the occasional drawn elements don’t blend 
well with the photography. Nonetheless, the dramatic and immediate images and 
the realistic setting make this an intriguing new “Jack” for storytimes as well as a 
fresh offering for fairy-tale units.  HM 
croSBy, JeFF Wiener Wolf; written and illus. by Jeff Crosby. Disney Hyperion, 
2011 32p
ISBN 978-1-4231-3983-6 $15.99  
R 6-9 yrs
“Life with Granny had become too tame” for Wiener Dog, so, inspired by a nature 
documentary, he takes off to the forest, finds some new lupine companions, sheds 
his hand-knitted doggie sweater, and becomes Wiener Wolf. That’s clearly the life 
for him, running with the wolf pack and gamboling with the puppies—until he 
discovers that the pack’s energetic chase of the deer isn’t just for fun but for food. 
That’s enough to turn Wiener Wolf back into Wiener Dog and send him back 
home to Granny, his water bowl, and a new sweater (and the occasional outing with 
the pups in the dog park). While the motivations for the plot turns are somewhat 
flimsy, the concept of a wee little sausage dog running with the wolves is amusingly 
incongruous, and the text plays up the contrast in short, punchy phrases. The muddy 
tones of the thickly painted illustrations prevent Wiener Dog from standing out as 
he ought to, but his lengthy form has both authenticity and humor on its side, and 
the fine detailed brushstrokes for fur and foliage provide depth and texture. This 
would actually be an effective elementary readalone for young fans of the Kevin 
O’Malley school of sardonic irony, as well as being an enjoyable readaloud tale to 
kids who understand both the lure of the wild world and the comforts of home.  DS
SepTemBer 2011 • 15
croSS, KAdy The Girl in the Steel Corset. Harlequin Teen, 2011 [480p] (The 
Steampunk Chronicles)
ISBN 978-0-373-21033-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
She may be only a maid, but Finley Jayne has surprising assets; unfortunately, 
superhuman strength is tough to market in 1897 London. When she’s forced into 
the night to escape an employer with roving hands, she is rescued by someone who 
understands her power more than she does—Griffin King, a well-heeled young 
duke who has collected a small group of friends and relatives all with supernatural 
powers. Griffin’s parents were part of an expedition to the center of the earth that 
uncovered several unique power sources that Queen Victoria thought best left 
underground, but someone apparently disagreed; now most of the party has been 
murdered, and a mysterious archvillain is weaponizing the formerly benevolent 
automatons that many people in the society keep as servants. Finley’s origins are a 
mystery to Griffin and his friends, but they eventually sort out her connection to 
Griffin’s father, all while tracking the movements of the criminal, who is plotting 
to replace the queen with an automaton during her Jubilee. Disney aficionados 
will recognize the plot similarities to The Great Mouse Detective, but that aside, the 
steampunk elements and the interpersonal dynamics of the band of superfriends 
provide the real fun here. Overt references to the Jekyll and Hyde nature of Finley’s 
condition are the tip of an allusive iceberg that combines elements of The League of 
Extraordinary Gentleman with the X-Men and Sherlock Holmes on a Dickensian 
background to produce a thoroughly engaging action adventure punctuated by 
budding romantic entanglements among the characters. The ending promises a 
sequel set in America, as the friends lose one of their own to the American legal 
system. This series opener has all the elements that will make it a must-read for 
steampunk fans, who will clamor for the next entry.  KC
dAly, cAthleen Prudence Wants a Pet; illus. by Stephen Michael King. Porter/
Roaring Brook, 2011 [32p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-468-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* 6-9 yrs
When Prudence’s parents forbid her a pet, she tests out some creative alternatives. 
Unfortunately, her attempts all founder: Branch the branch trips her father and goes 
to the woodshed—literally; Formal Footwear the old shoe lacks interactivity; and 
her little brother, Milo, doesn’t respond well to his grass-and-seeds diet. Fortunately, 
Prudence’s efforts are enough to convince her parents that she’s earned a real pet, and 
her birthday brings her a little brown kitten—which she names “Branch.” The plot 
trajectory is a familiar one, but Prudence’s travails are described with a straightfaced, 
declarative simplicity (“Branch doesn’t eat much. Just a little air. Prudence puts out 
a bowl of water for Branch. So far Branch has not been thirsty”) that turns the story 
into deliciously absurd comedy. Illustratively, there’s a slight echo of Jules Feiffer 
and Shel Silverstein in the scrawled lines that constitute the characters and the few 
additional elements that set the scenes against airy white backgrounds, while soft 
colors, occasionally touched with pattern or washy edges, digitally fill in the shapes 
and add emphasis as well as cheer. The short, wide trim size, à la Millions of Cats, 
provides an excellent frame for sequences to unfold, and the art wittily employs 
the convention of focusing strongly on the kids, never showing more than a waist-
down view of adults. In real life Prudence would probably be viewed as the weird 
16 • The BulleTin
kid with the branch, but in the literary realm she’s an imaginative and determined 
heroine, and audiences will be glad to see her persistence rewarded.  DS
Finn, mAry Belladonna. Candlewick, 2011 369p
ISBN 978-0-7636-5106-0 $16.99  
R Gr. 6-9
An eighteenth-century wheelwright’s son, fourteen-year-old Thomas is fed up with 
school, where he’s derided for his failure at reading and writing, and he’s dreading 
going into his father’s trade. Then, into his small village comes Hélène, anglicized to 
“Ling,” a beautiful French girl who was traveling with the circus until her mother’s 
death and the troupe’s disbanding. Ling’s goal is to find Belladonna, the beloved 
horse she rode in her circus act, who has been sold to a man in Thomas’ village—
a man they call “the horse butcher.” Finn writes with rich period flavor, vividly 
depicting Thomas’ seaside agricultural village and its preindustrial isolation. The 
story of Thomas’ growing relationship with teasing, quixotic Ling is a sparkling and 
offbeat historical romance; it’s a strange but not ineffective partner with the tale 
of genuine historical artist George Stubbs, who famously learned his anatomical 
craft by carefully dissecting equine corpses and who, in this novel, takes Thomas 
on as helper and guides his woodworking skills. The book is particularly effective in 
demonstrating just how shocking Stubbs’ explorations would be in such a secluded 
rural enclave, and Thomas’ fascination with new possibilities, whether it be Ling’s 
enchanting foreignness or Stubbs’ anatomical explorations, is keenly developed. 
Unusual and colorfully told, this is a historical tale with something to offer both 
hard-nosed history fans and those who like colorful period adventure.  DS
FiSher, cAtherine The Dark City. Dial, 2011 372p (Relic Master)
ISBN 978-0-8037-3673-3 $16.99  
R Gr. 7-10
FiSher, cAtherine The Hidden Coronet. Dial, 2011 [432p] (Relic Master)
ISBN 978-0-8037-3675-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
FiSher, cAtherine The Lost Heiress. Dial, 2011 362p (Relic Master)
ISBN 978-0-8037-3674-0 $16.99  
R Gr. 7-10
FiSher, cAtherine The Margrave. Dial, 2011 [464p] (Relic Master)
ISBN 978-0-8037-3676-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
In this epic story told in four installments (originally published in the UK 1998-
2001), the citizens of the planet Anara are in trouble. The land itself is fighting back 
against long misuse; the Order (those connected to natural energies of the planet) 
has been hunted to near-annihilation; members of the severe, militaristic Watch 
abuse their power to crush the opposition; and the rest of the inhabitants just try 
to stay out of the way. Galen and Raffi, members of the Order, quest, in succes-
sive adventures, toward a city, an heiress, a relic, and a force of great malevolence, 
but always toward the same goals: to save the world by restoring the old reverence 
for the land and its creators, the Makers. They are joined by a former (perhaps) 
member of the Watch, Carys, who was indoctrinated as a young child and is now 
struggling to find her own way, and one of the Sekoi, a race of gold-obsessed, pri-
vate, and deeply intelligent animals. These four protagonists provide the anchor 
SepTemBer 2011 • 17
for this multi-volume set, and Fisher invests deeply in making each of the primary 
protagonists so complex that readers will still be learning about them right up to 
the final confrontations. There is no pure good or pure evil anywhere, and this is 
one of the stellar aspects of this series: one is forced to accept and invest in folks 
who are well-intentioned and intriguing but also frequently misinformed, unable 
to control their emotions, or simply confused about what the right thing to do 
might be. Anara itself, a gorgeous and tortured land, is carefully developed, and 
the mysteries of the relics, the Makers, and the way the various inhabitants evolved 
are unveiled through intricate maps as well as poetry and quotes that precede each 
chapter and through lush, elegant descriptions. Fantasy fans will be thrilled they 
won’t have to wait long for the each volume, though this just means the end will 
come all too soon.  AS
FiSher, VAlorie Everything I Need to Know Before I’m Five; written and illus. by 
Valorie Fisher. Schwartz & Wade, 2011 [36p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96865-5 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86865-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 2-5 yrs
Kindergarten looms on the horizon (cue ominous music) and anxious parents 
everywhere fear their offspring won’t ace the kindergarten-readiness testing. Surely 
there must be a prep course! If not, try Fisher’s compendium of pre-school concepts 
that, once mastered, should provide enough fuel for a successful academic launch. 
Colorful photographs of toy tableaux guide children through number identification 
and counting from one to twenty, ten common pairs of opposites, a baker’s dozen 
of plane shapes and solid shapes, eight colors and a rubber-ducky color-mixing 
chart, four seasons, six weather conditions, and the upper- and lower-case alphabet. 
The plastic toys give a pleasing dimensionality to the clean compositions, and the 
tiny retro-styled dolls that pose among paper collage and found objects invite close 
inspection. Though there are a couple of glitchy entries, there are many more solid 
ones, and the wry playfulness of the figures interacting in their surreal world (a little 
man has evidently sucked the liquid through the straw in a preposterously large glass; 
the wee photographer shooting the interior of an alligator’s mouth in “open” has 
disappeared in “shut”) should keep little learners enthralled. Now, if they can only 
memorize their address and phone number—and not the speed-dial version.  EB
gAntoS, JAcK Dead End in Norvelt. Farrar, 2011 [352p]
ISBN 978-0-374-37993-3 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 6-9
In what promo copy describes as a mixture of “the entirely true and the wildly 
fictional,” Jack Gantos returns to a story of his childhood, or something like it. It’s 
summer vacation, and fictional Jack Gantos is grounded as a result of a problematic 
and unauthorized encounter with his father’s war souvenir, a Japanese rifle. His only 
approved offsite activity is his work for elderly Miss Volker, whose arthritis cripples 
her hands. That’s a much more exciting job than it sounds, however: Miss Volker is 
the official writer of obituaries for the newspaper and the unofficial historian of the 
small town of Norvelt, founded as a New Deal community and named for Eleanor 
Roosevelt; she’s also the medical examiner, and the town’s elderly are dropping at 
a rate that keeps her plenty busy with deaths as well as obits. There’s actually a 
18 • The BulleTin
murder mystery at the heart of all this, but the story is just as much focused on 
Jack’s burgeoning interest in history, his relentless susceptibility to nosebleeds, his 
uneasy seesawing between allying with his mother and his father, and his general 
capacity for performing weird yet comedic acts (his appearance as the Grim Reaper 
in a dying old lady’s house is a high-water mark). The book also offers a tribute 
to the real-life town of Norvelt and the communitarian spirit of its founding, the 
passing of which is decried by the political firebrand Miss Volker. This doesn’t roar 
like Gantos’ Joey Pigza tales; instead it’s a more quietly (but still absurdly) funny and 
insightful account of a kid’s growth, kin to Gantos’ Jack stories, that will stealthily 
hook even resistant readers into the lure of history.  DS
gArcíA, criStinA Dreams of Significant Girls. Simon, 2011 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4169-7920-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4169-8587-7 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-12
Three girls who couldn’t be more different from one another find themselves 
roommates at a posh Swiss boarding school for three summers beginning in 1971. 
Vivien is a chubby, half German Jewish, half Cuban Catholic girl who grew up in 
Miami before moving to New York and who wants to be a chef; Ingrid is a German 
Canadian wild child with a taste for alcohol and sex and an artistic bent toward 
the absurd; and Shirin is a serious-minded and highly privileged Iranian with no 
tolerance for the frivolities of the West. Their lives are often turbulent (Shirin 
nearly dies of an accidental overdose) and their relationship is sometimes rocky 
(Ingrid is temporarily expelled for vandalism that Shirin actually committed), but 
their shared experience and maturation bind them together—even into adulthood, 
as an epilogue describes. Although the ’70s time period and the boarding-school 
setting remove these girls from immediate readerly experience, their intriguing 
life circumstances sustain interest, and their emotional range gives contemporary 
readers plenty to relate to as the ups and downs of the girls’ personal lives and their 
friendship play themselves out. García’s lyrical prose is shaded slightly differently 
for each girl’s narrative voice, with Shirin’s formal precision belying her fierce and 
turbulent emotions, Vivien’s plaintive worries revealing her essential kindness, and 
Ingrid’s bravado setting the stage for the woman she will become. Readers who 
prefer character-driven stories that trace girls developing and changing over time 
into strong, successful women will take these girls to their hearts.  KC
goode, lAurA Sister Mischief. Candlewick, 2011 [384p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-4640-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R Gr. 9-12
The four teenagers who make up the suburban Minnesota all-girl hip-hop group 
Sister Mischief might not seem to have much in common. Esme, our narrator, is 
lesbian, Jewish, and riddled with abandonment issues from her mother’s long-ago 
departure; Marcy, her lifelong friend and fellow motherless misfit, is Catholic, 
straight but the epitome of a teenage tomboy; loyal teen-queen Tess is the only one 
of the group who fits into the town’s SWASP (straight white Anglo-Saxon Protestant) 
majority; and Rowie, short for Rohini, is brilliant, Hindu, and the embodiment 
of the phrase “still waters run deep.” When their school introduces a policy to ban 
all hip-hop music and attire from school property, the girls fight back by found-
SepTemBer 2011 • 19
ing a school group dedicated to studying hip-hop as an art form. Additionally, 
a secret love affair blossoms between Esme and the deeply closeted, questioning 
Rowie. Footnotes incorporate a background babble of text messages, Facebook 
updates, and lyric snippets scribbled in notebooks, playing with the omnipresence 
and multi-threadedness of text culture in modern teen life; the group’s lyrics are 
provocative and smart while still believably teen-written. The book is distinguished 
by its ambitious engagement with issues of race, both in the complexities of white 
girls appropriating hip-hop as their mode of self-expression, and in its exploration 
of the racial, religious, and socioeconomic divisions that fragment the town and 
the school. The image of a white, middle-class Midwesterner laying down rhymes 
like “She ain’t no prima donna, Michelle Robinson Obama/ An educated mama 
who’s a mama role model” brings up a wealth of issues, but Goode lays them right 
out on the table, allows her characters to put forth their own arguments for and 
against their right to use the music and language that speaks to them, and leaves it 
to readers to decide whether they agree or not. An odd yet appealing combination 
of programmatic and subversive, this eminently discussable debut novel captures 
the vibrancy and messiness of teen life.  CG
hAlpern, Julie Don’t Stop Now. Feiwel, 2011 232p
ISBN 978-0-312-64346-1 $16.99  
R Gr. 7-10
In an act of pity, confident, pretty Lil befriended mousy, abused Penny during their 
senior year. Now, just after graduation, Lil has reason to regret her benevolence: 
Penny stages her own kidnapping, implicating Lil by calling her on her cell phone 
just before she leaves. Though Lil is being questioned by the police and the FBI, she 
decides that the thing to do is to keep her mouth shut and go after Penny herself. 
Lil has ulterior motives, however: she enlists her long-time best friend, Josh, to 
take her from Chicago to Portland in hopes that her long-simmering crush will be 
requited along the way. As they travel, Lil reveals her love for Josh to a somewhat 
cool reception; the laconic, present-oriented personality that Lil adores in Josh 
stands in the way of his taking her, or anything else, seriously. Josh’s spontane-
ous, in-the-moment attitude is reminiscent of Sutter Keely’s in Tim Tharp’s The 
Spectacular Now (BCCB 2/09), minus the alcohol abuse, and Lil slowly begins to 
realize that while Josh is definitely her past and present, her future plans are much 
more definite than Josh’s will ever be. Their banter is sharp and witty, overprocessed 
in the way of mid-century romantic comedy films, and their responses to the bits 
of Americana they encounter (much of the book celebrates the wonder of often 
eccentric landmarks such as the House on the Rock, the Corn Palace, and Mount 
Rushmore) have that combination of wide-eyed wonder and jaded irony that char-
acterizes hipster teens. Though Penny’s situation is never really given the gravitas it 
merits, it does serve as catalyst and background for a slick buddy road trip; readers 
in the mood for a vicarious summer fling will enjoy the ride.  KC 
hAnnAn, peter My Big Mouth: 10 Songs I Wrote That Almost Got Me Killed; 
written and illus. by Peter Hannan. Scholastic, 2011 235p
ISBN 978-0-545-16210-4 $16.99  
R Gr. 5-8
Starting a new school in the spring of your freshman year is no easy task. For Davis 
Delaware (who is not from Delaware, thank you very much), the confusion sur-
rounding his name is only the beginning of his tribulations in high school, which 
20 • The BulleTin
he chronicles in humorously exaggerated comic-like spot illustrations, sarcastic, 
long-suffering narrative prose, and angry, witty song lyrics. He starts a band with 
beautiful Molly (his at-first-sight crush) and dweeby Edwin (her chatterbox best 
friend), and he’s targeted for severe intimidation by the school bully Gerald “The 
Butcher” Boggs; along with his sad but doggedly parental dad, he continues to 
deal with the ongoing grief of his mother’s death the previous year. The obvious 
comparison here is to Kinney’s Wimpy Kid series (Diary of a Wimpy Kid, BCCB 
6/07), but Hannan adds a bit more domestic pathos and focuses more explicitly 
on that awkward place between cooties and crushes, resulting in a little less depth 
on the insight front. There is plenty to like here, though, from smartly developed 
relationships to absurd hijinks to subtly conveyed emotional beats (plus, for the 
observant, a backwards flip book in the lower right-hand corner that depicts an 
extreme dodgeball victory over Gerald). For readers who enjoyed Wimpy Kid but 
want a read-alike that is more than just a ripoff, this is just the ticket.  CG
hArrington, hAnnAh Saving June. Harlequin Teen, 2011 [384p]
ISBN 978-0-373-21024-4 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
After Harper’s older sister, June, dies of an overdose, Harper decides to get away 
from home and take June’s ashes to California, helping her sister posthumously 
realize her dream of moving there. Jake, a mysterious boy at June’s funeral, over-
hears her planning and offers to drive, so she and her best friend, Laney, join him 
for a cross-country odyssey from Michigan to San Francisco. While Jake seems 
to have known a different June than Harper and Laney did, he refuses to divulge 
information about their relationship. What he does share, however, is his love of 
music and his friends across the country as they take spontaneous side trips to 
satisfy Laney’s free-spirited sense of adventure and prolong their time together 
and away from Harper’s mom. Sandwiched between Jake’s mercurial emotional 
registers ranging from frosty distance to tender solicitude and Laney’s steadfast love 
and support, Harper slowly strips away the layers of her grief to their raw core. 
Harper’s frequent snipes at Christianity, reinforced by the portrayal of her aunt as a 
bullying believer, set up a subtle thematic contrast between youth and age. Seeking 
spiritual comfort may be fine for her mother and her aunt, but Harper’s grief work 
depends on the stubborn embrace of what’s in front of her—first love, sex, music, 
friendship, the open road, and even disappointment, betrayal, and the struggle for 
forgiveness, which she finds as Jake ultimately reveals his secret motive for taking 
her to California. Readers seeking a plausible explanation for June’s suicide will be 
disappointed, but the weight of the book is carried by Harper’s extended response, 
which is carefully and sufficiently nuanced to warrant its hopeful resolution.  KC 
hArriS, cArrie Bad Taste in Boys. Delacorte, 2011 [208p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90801-6 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73968-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89806-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Figuring it will help her chances of getting into med school, Kate takes a job as 
trainer for her high-school football team, only to find that the coach has some 
unlabeled vials in his medicine chest. Suspecting steroids, she starts to investigate 
SepTemBer 2011 • 21
and finds something much more gruesome going on. Players injected with the drug 
spew black, foul-smelling vomit and then appear to die, only to get back up a few 
minutes later, considerably grayer and less coherent than before, and more inter-
ested in biting their classmates than playing football. By the time she can admit to 
herself the outrageous diagnosis of zombie, her own brother has become infected. 
The question is, why hasn’t she, since she too has been bitten? Solving the mystery 
brings her close to the cute quarterback, who turns out to like his girls brainy in a 
nonculinary way. High-school zombie tropes that we have come to know and love 
are melded together here in a fast-paced plot arc that has all the requisite elements: 
lumbering zombie chase scenes, light gore and putrefaction, just deserts for the 
coach and the over-reaching scientist behind it all, and a plucky heroine who solves 
the case and wins the guy. Readers who enjoyed Waters’ Generation Dead (BCCB 
6/08) and Jay’s You Are So Undead to Me (BCCB 5/09) will lurch toward this one 
as well, and they’ll give it the award for the best title pun of the bunch.  KC
hudSon, tArA Hereafter. HarperTeen, 2011 404p
ISBN 978-0-06-202677-4 $17.99  
Ad Gr. 7-10
With the recent spate of dead girls in YA literature hanging around to figure out 
the details of their deaths, one might think the afterlife here on earth would be 
pretty crowded. Alas, this is not the case, as poor Amelia well knows: she has spent 
the last decade haunting a decrepit old bridge (the scene of her drowning) unable 
to communicate with any being, living or dead. Things change, however, when 
the dashing Joshua Mayhew accidentally drives his car into the river and Amelia 
somehow wills his stopped heart to start beating again, effectively saving his life. 
Inexplicably, she can now feel his hand, as well as grass and wind, sensations she 
has not had since her death. Unfortunately, she is also newly aware of the evil 
spirit lurking near the river, a boy named Eli, who is intent on making Amelia 
his apprentice as he reaps souls from the bridge. Complicating matters is Joshua’s 
grandmother, Ruth, a Seer who aims to exorcise both Eli and Amelia, when all 
Amelia really wants to do is explore the romantic possibilities of a ghost-human 
relationship with Josh. The instantaneous, intense attachment between Amelia and 
Joshua will certainly be familiar to readers of paranormal romances and Amelia’s 
flowery, rhapsodic narration (particularly in regards to Joshua’s looks) elevates the 
drama of their relationship. This focus on their love affair, however, leaves little 
room for world-building, and since the laws that govern Eli’s existence and Ruth’s 
powers remain unexplored, it’s hard to grasp the urgency of the situational threats. 
Fans of otherworldly love affairs will no doubt gravitate towards this one nonethe-
less, but be sure to also recommend Laura Whitcomb’s A Certain Slant of Light 
(BCCB 9/05) and Jessica Warman’s Between (BCCB 7/11) to get the full breadth 
of the genre.  KQG
hulBert, lAurA Who Has These Feet?; illus. by Erik Brooks. Holt, 2011 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-8907-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 2-5 yrs
In this elementary dip into zoology, the title question gets paired several times 
with a close-up rendering of animal feet; a page turn reveals a follow-up spread 
that identifies the animal and offers a single-sentence observation on how a unique 
pedal feature helps the animal move through its environment. This is a model of 
22 • The BulleTin
effective simplicity, precisely geared to preschoolers long on animal interest but 
short on attention span: “A parrot has these feet. A parrot has two toes in front 
and two toes in back so it can hold on to branches.” Animals even courteously 
pose to display the soles of their feet when sticky pads (tree squirrel) or fur (polar 
bear) are relevant. Youngsters may reasonably object that the sea turtle’s flippers 
seem to count more as armlike appendages than true feet, but that single quibble is 
unlikely to undermine the pleasure of guessing the other eight sets of feet. Brooks’ 
watercolor scenes, which ably highlight both adaptation and environment, will 
perform well for individual readers and small class groups. A closing spread invites 
viewers to test their newfound knowledge with a matching game of faces and feet, 
and a foldout of the proud-looking cast elicits a final “Ooh.”  EB
iSop, lAurie How Do You Hug a Porcupine?; illus. by Gwen Millward. Simon, 
2011 32p
ISBN 978-1-4424-1291-0 $15.99  
R 5-8 yrs
The puzzled protagonist in this rhyming picture book has a problem; while he 
can easily imagine hugging a wide assortment of animals, he just can’t figure out 
how one hugs a porcupine. After all, “he wears a coat of thorny quills./ To hug this 
one will take some skills!” Digressing to offer light commentary on the hugging 
experience with other animals (“A hedgehog is a little prickly./ An ostrich is a little 
tickly./ A chimpanzee will hug you back./ I’ve never tried to hug a yak”), the boy 
eventually answers his own question (“CAREFULLY!”) and successfully goes in 
for a great big porcupine snuggle. The jaunty tetrameter couplets bounce along, in 
most cases scanning neatly, and there is plenty of gentle humor in the jokey concept. 
Millward’s pencil, watercolor, and ink illustrations draw on pastoral settings for 
design (including curlicued floral borders) and texture, giving some retro touches 
to the otherwise casual and contemporary art. The multicultural children are largely 
nondescript, with simple dot-and-line facial features; the animals are more carefully 
detailed, and the variety of fauna is impressive. The boy himself is amusingly baffled, 
clearly becoming more and more perplexed as the story progresses. There is a fair 
helping of visual humor (the illustration of the boy sticking marshmallows on the 
porcupine’s quills is particularly funny), making this an engaging group readaloud 
selection. Pair it with Macdonald’s How to Hug (BCCB 3/11) for an entertaining 
exploration of embraces.  HM
JenKinS, SteVe Time for a Bath; by Steve Jenkins and Robin Page; illus. by Steve 
Jenkins. Houghton, 2011 24p
ISBN 978-0-547-25037-3 $12.99  
R 6-9 yrs
   Time to Eat; by Steve Jenkins and Robin Page; illus. by Steve Jen-
kins. Houghton, 2011 24p
ISBN 978-0-547-25032-8 $12.99  
R 6-9 yrs
   Time to Sleep; by Steve Jenkins and Robin Page; illus. by Steve Jen-
kins. Houghton, 2011 24p
ISBN 978-0-547-25040-3 $12.99  
R 6-9 yrs
Veteran nature documentarians Jenkins and Page return with this trio of simple 
animal-behavior concept books. Each title offers under ten spreads, each featuring 
an animal or two alongside a brief text explaining the peculiarities of these particu-
SepTemBer 2011 • 23
lar critters’ practice: the koala wedges itself into a tree fork to make sure it doesn’t 
fall out when it dozes, for example, and the tomato grouper gets a regular buffing 
from the helpful (and self-interested) cleaner shrimp. These offer a quick cluster 
of snapshots rather than any organized exploration, but the bite-sized morsels of 
information are appealingly accessible to young biologists. While contextual ele-
ments aren’t always clear, the portraits of the animals are cunning collage assemblies, 
palpable with the texture for which Jenkins is famous. These will be an effective 
way to introduce animal habits and to link them to human behavior, and they may 
elicit audience interest in further discussion and exploration. Each book concludes 
with appendices offering additional information about the featured animals.  DS
JenningS, pAtricK Lucky Cap. Egmont, 2011 213p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-054-2 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-275-1 $15.99  
Ad Gr. 4-6
In his new position as general manager of a high-end athletic-gear company, Enzo’s 
dad spent the summer hitting up sports arenas and hobnobbing with some of the 
greatest athletes of all time—and Enzo was right there with him. After spending 
six weeks with his dad on the “most amazingest trip in the history of time,” the 
eleven-year-old is not at all looking forward to the end of summer and the beginning 
of middle school. A funny thing happens on his first day of sixth grade, however: 
instead of being picked on or ignored, Enzo is suddenly attracting all the right kind 
of attention—the jocks invite him into their circle, the cheerleaders seem to be 
checking him out, and within the first week, he makes the basketball team and is 
nominated for class president. Enzo attributes all this newfound glory to his lucky 
cap, a one-of-a-kind prototype from his dad’s company and signed by LeBron 
James. When the hat is stolen from his locker, Enzo’s luck takes a drastic change 
for the worse, and soon his status as the school’s new superstar is in jeopardy. Pre-
dictable from beginning to end, this familiar story doesn’t cover any new ground, 
but its well-worn message of believing in oneself is still a valuable one. Enzo’s voice 
is categorically that of a preteen boy, and while he isn’t always totally likable, his 
hapless flounderings and often self-centered motivations instill the narration with 
a certain sense of authenticity. This lacks the breezy wackiness of Jennings’ recent 
Guinea Dog (BCCB 6/10), but aspiring sports heroes—and future politicians, for 
that matter—might want to try their luck with this tale of the perks and downfalls 
of middle-school fame.  KQG
JohnSon, AngelA Lottie Paris Lives Here; illus. by Scott M. Fischer. Simon, 
2011 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-689-87377-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad 4-7 yrs
Lottie Paris lives across from the park with her Papa Pete, and since Lottie is what 
you might call a live wire, she finds a lot of excitement in her daily life. She swaps 
shoes with Papa Pete, clumping around in his boots; she plays pretend in her room 
(“Lottie’s room is also a castle, where the fish are her guards and the quilt is her 
robe”); and she delights in the ways of the park (“Noodles from food carts are good 
cold”). There is also, of course, some misbehavior, which puts Lottie for a time out 
in the quiet chair more than once, but generally happiness reigns in the little house 
across from the park. There’s a dearth of plot event here, with Lottie a character  
24 • The BulleTin
clearly in search of adventure that the book never delivers. As a character study, 
however, it’s a lively one, with Johnson’s engaging storyteller’s voice and touches 
of direct address (“Do you like Lottie’s hat? Uh-huh, me too”) providing energy. 
Fischer puts gouache to paper with just about any tool he can find, with the result-
ing spreads in verdant colors gaining structure from strong self-colored lines, while 
patterns add fresco-like textures and punchy accents. Sharp edges on the figures 
suggest collage layering, and there’s an appealingly cartoonish simplicity to the 
draftsmanship on the faces; Lottie herself is absolutely the bouncy little girl, her 
warm brown skin tones standing out against the sweet green backgrounds, that 
the text suggests. The cozy tone and gentle specifics recommend this for family 
reading, and it could engender discussions about the characteristics of youngsters’ 
own neighborhoods and daily doings.  DS
JohnSon, elAnA Possession. Simon Pulse, 2011 405p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2125-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2391-6 $9.99 
 Ad Gr. 8-10
Vi has never been great at following the rules, and where boys are concerned, she 
is rebellious to the point of being considered dangerous in this carefully controlled 
and regulated dystopian future. Although Vi always thought she was fated to be 
with Zenn, it seems that the Thinkers (the ruling force) might have other plans for 
her. She is thrown into close contact with a hottie named Jag (whom she obligingly 
falls for immediately), then allowed to escape and develop her supernatural powers 
to control others, and finally confronted with family members who she thought 
had died years before and who have specific ideas of who Vi should be. In spite of 
the super-cool, surprise ending that stays entirely true to the plot and will leave 
readers grudgingly admitting that any other option would be unlikely at best, the 
sometimes ambiguous (and rather ambitious) mix of magic, sci fi, romance, and 
realism (family drama plays a key role) is often unbalanced. In addition, Jag and 
Vi themselves actually seem to be badly matched, although since they are both 
difficult to like, perhaps readers will conclude they deserve each other. Nonethe-
less, the romantic tribulations have their appeals and may serve to draw romance 
fans into the sci-fi side; in addition, the setting is developed with care and detail, 
making for a vividly drawn alternative world. Fans of Matched (BCCB 11/10) and 
other recent romantically focused additions to the dystopian sub-genre may wish 
to add this to their reading list.  AS
JohnSon, J. J. This Girl Is Different. Peachtree, 2011 315p
ISBN 978-1-56145-578-2 $16.95  
Ad Gr. 7-10
Evie, formerly homeschooled, wants to experience regular school, and while her 
hippie mother has some objections, Evie assures her that she won’t compromise her 
principles; she just wants to test them in a more challenging environment. A few 
days before she enters her senior year, she meets Jacinda and Rajas, open-hearted 
cousins who become, respectively, her first friend and first crush. With their help, 
she navigates her first few days, but soon she begins to feel the effects of the uneven 
power dynamic between students and teachers. Unable to tone her pointed rhetoric 
down enough to write a letter suitable for printing in the school paper, she takes 
to the Internet, posting an anonymous blog that outs a gym teacher for sizeism 
and sexism, and invites others to join her crusade against systematic oppression 
SepTemBer 2011 • 25
of students by teachers and other students. Things snowball out of control, but 
fortunately Ellie’s mother and patient principal are there to help sort matters out. 
A truly made-for-afterschool-specials ending renders her crusade more than a little 
gooey, but the objections Evie raises and the relationship hits she takes because of 
them will resonate with the target audience; these are the age-old problems with 
schools and other institutions in a democratic society, and this exploration of the 
means of redress, while pat and purposive, will surely inspire discussion.  KC 
King, cAro Seven Sorcerers. Aladdin, 2011 324p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2042-7 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2044-1 $9.99  
R Gr. 4-7
It’s one thing to wish that your annoying little brother would just go away, but it’s 
another thing entirely to wake up one morning to find that he’s vanished and that 
nobody else remembers his existence. Unfortunately, this is exactly what happens 
to Ninevah Redstone, but as the plucky young upstart that she is, Nin immediately 
recognizes the kidnapping as the work of the Bogeyman and embarks on a quest 
to rescue her young sibling. She soon finds herself in the alternate world of the 
Drift, where she learns from her new pal Jonas that the stolen children are taken 
to the Terrible House of Strood, never to be seen again. Pursued not only by the 
Bogeyman but also the vampiric tombfolk and the hell-hounds of the Storm, Nin 
crosses the Drift but then must face the terrifying vengeance of Mr. Strood before 
rescuing her brother. Woven into the tale of her quest is the history of the Drift and 
its connection to the fall of the Seven Sorcerers. There’s no shortage of imagination 
here overall, but the true stars of this British import are the villains: complete with 
razor-sharp teeth and a Cockney accent, Skerridge, the aforementioned Bogeyman 
(or BM for short) is both deliciously frightening and oddly endearing, and readers 
will cheer when Nin’s steadfast courage persuades the erstwhile baddie to make the 
switch from evil to good. On the other hand, Strood, a monster created from an 
act of selfish depravity by the Seven Sorcerers, is a bad guy easy to hate, while the 
abrupt ending makes it clear that he may not be so easy to get rid of. Although 
Nin has her brother at the book’s conclusion, she is still very much in danger, and 
readers will breathlessly await the next installment from across the pond.  KQG
KirKpAtricK, KAtherine Mysterious Bones: The Story of Kennewick Man; illus. by 
Emma Stevenson. Holiday House, 2011 [64p]
ISBN 978-0-8234-2187-9 $17.95
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
Concert gatecrashers stumble upon a human skull as they trudge through the 
muck along the riverbank to save the price of admission. That could be a strong 
opening for a novel, but in this case it’s the opening act in ongoing controversies 
over a nearly intact human skeleton that was washed loose by rainstorms along the 
Columbia River in Kennewick, Washington, and was soon dated as approximately 
9500 years old. Kirkpatrick discusses the competing claims that were promptly 
made on the find by both the Native American community represented by the 
Confederated Tribes of the Umatilla Reservation and a group of scientists who 
proceeded to invasively study the remains. The claims were further complicated 
by the ambiguity of Kennewick Man’s (or the Ancient One’s) contradictory ethnic 
features (comprising traits of both European and Asiatic groups) and the fact that 
26 • The BulleTin
his great antiquity makes it more difficult to argue for a clear line of connection to 
an extant indigenous community under the Native American Graves Protection 
and Repatriation Act. Kirkpatrick is particularly nimble at untangling the Gord-
ian knot of threads that are vital to understanding the Ancient One’s importance, 
particularly his contribution to the ongoing anthropological debate over human 
migration onto and across the American continents. Stevenson’s paintings (a me-
dium chosen, no doubt, out of respect to a culture that prohibits photographing 
human remains) are beautifully detailed, and her spread of proposed facial recon-
structions cunningly demonstrates how easy it is to project one’s own expectations 
onto the Ancient One’s skull. Inserts, maps, source notes, index, timeline, and a 
selected bibliography are included.  EB
Knight, KArSten Wildefire. Simon, 2011 393p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2117-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2119-6 $9.99  
R Gr. 9-12
Ashline thought she had enough trouble being the only Polynesian girl at school 
and having a lame boyfriend. Now, however, she’s learned that he older sister wants 
to kill her; more problematic still, she’s one of a group of gods and goddesses who 
were all drawn to this boarding school by a blind siren—who may or may not be 
one of the good guys. In a cool divergence from the usual Greek/Roman mythical 
embodiments, these teens represent Shinto, Zulu, Norse, Egyptian and, of course, 
Polynesian gods and goddesses, and they remain very much themselves (a cultur-
ally diverse group with typical American teen interests) while also trying on their 
newly revealed identities. Ash, stuck between two sisters who both think nothing 
of killing as a resolution to all problems, is relieved that she can rely on her hot-
tie park-ranger boyfriend, but even he isn’t who he seems to be. There are many 
complex threads and clever red herrings sprinkled throughout that will keep read-
ers guessing about who is good or bad, who represents what mythical figures, and 
whether Ash is doomed before she even settles into being Pele, but Knight handles 
it all with aplomb, keeping the focus on the not always wise but deeply amiable 
Ash while the world seems to keep falling apart around her. The universality and 
timelessness of these figures, who keep being reborn without their old memories, 
is intriguing, as are the tragic relationships between Ash and her sisters, who are all 
seemingly stuck replaying their destined roles over and over again. Pair this with 
Paranormalcy (BCCB 12/10) by Kiersten White for two strong heroines who can 
kick butt with the best of them but would very much rather deal with all of the 
mundane issues of ordinary teen life.  AS
Koertge, ron Now Playing: Stoner & Spaz II. Candlewick, 2011 209p
ISBN 978-0-7636-5081-0 $16.99  
R Gr. 9-12
It’s been nearly a decade since Koertge introduced Ben Bancroft, dubbed Spaz for 
his cerebral palsy symptoms, and Colleen Minou, the druggie who appreciates 
Ben as a full-functioning (yep, in every possible way) guy who isn’t about to get 
a scrap of her sympathy (see Stoner and Spaz, BCCB 3/02). Their story picks up 
just days after Ben’s triumphant gallery showing of a documentary on high-school 
life, at which event Colleen abandoned him to go partying with a passing bad-
boy acquaintance. Colleen’s as repentant as she’s ever going to get, and Ben is still 
reliant on her support, but he now has a new female interest in the wings—A.J., 
SepTemBer 2011 • 27
another student filmmaker from the well-to-do kind of family of which Ben’s 
grandmother would approve. Suddenly Ben is starting to look normal, even to 
himself: following news of his film success, kids at school talk to him, he’s having 
coffee with A.J., he’s watching movies at night with her friends, and he’s starting 
to stand up to Grandma, who has always sheltered and stifled him. But Colleen’s 
trying hard to get her act together, and it’s she who truly understands Ben’s need 
to find out about the mother who left him on Grandma’s doorstep. Again Koertge 
keeps his cast small and his plotting tidy, making the search for and discovery of 
Ben’s mother more an occasion for reflection on family roles and responsibilities 
than an epic quest. There’s an implied finality to this volume (could it be the full 
circle return to the Rialto where the teens met, or the emphatic “The End”?), and 
that’s perfectly okay. Ben’s going to be just fine, and although Colleen still flirts 
with the edges of the Wild Side, she now has a solid support network and a sense 
that what she has is better than what she had. Let it be.  EB
KriShnASwAmi, umA The Grand Plan to Fix Everything; illus. by Abigail Hal-
pin. Atheneum, 2011 266p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4169-9589-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4169-9591-3 $9.99  
Ad Gr. 4-6
Despite her obsession with all things Bollywood, eleven-year-old Dini is utterly 
horrified when her parents announce that their family is moving to India. Leaving 
her best friend Maddie behind, Dini is dragged along by her parents, who don’t 
even have the decency to set up their new home in Mumbai, “the center of the 
filmi universe,” but rather move to Swapnagiri, a small (fictional) town in southern 
India. To distract herself from her current woes, Dini sets out on a mission to find 
her favorite movie star, Dolly Singh, who, after a series of tragic heartbreaks, is 
rumored to be taking a much-needed hiatus in a small, southern village. As literary 
fate would have it, Dolly is staying in Swapnagiri, and it only takes a missing cell 
phone, a malfunctioning car, a kindly postman, and a random celebration to bring 
Dini and Dolly together. In true Bollywood fashion, this breezy romp is a bit over the 
top, from Dini’s fanatical devotion, to her parents’ cluelessness, to Dolly’s diva-like 
attitude. The setting plays an integral role, and Krishnaswami easily incorporates 
both the everyday and the more unfamiliar aspects of India into the story, making 
the country as much of a character as Dini herself. The third-person narration, 
however, can border on instructional, often doing the thinking for the reader and 
leaving too few opportunities to explore the emotional depths of its characters. As 
a result, Dini herself seems two-dimensional, as do most of the supporting cast. 
Nonetheless, readers with their own cinematic passions will most likely find Dini’s 
encounter with her film star hero total wish fulfillment, making this an entertaining 
read for fellow Bollyphiles.  KQG
lArochelle, dAVid The Haunted Hamburger and Other Ghostly Stories; illus. by 
Paul Meisel. Dutton, 2011 40p
ISBN 978-0-525-42272-3 $16.99  
R Gr. 2-4
They may be ghosts, but Frankie and Franny are just as bedtime-averse as living 
kids, so Father Ghost settles down to tell them a trio of spooky bedtime stories. 
The kids listen raptly to “The Scary Baby” (featuring the dreadful fate of Uncle 
Ned Ghost), “The Haunted Hamburger” (wherein boastful cousin Nell Ghost is 
28 • The BulleTin
bested by a burger), and “The Big Bad Granny” (starring Father Ghost as a boy 
beset by the terrible entity that visits little ghosts who don’t go to bed), only to risk 
a frightening visit from Big Bad Granny themselves—or so they think. LaRochelle 
has a good sense of goofy; the stories are unabashedly ludicrous yet keenly in touch 
with kid tropes and trials even as they play with the inverted priorities of ghostly 
life. “The Scary Baby,” which sees Uncle Ned turned into a diaper, is the most suc-
cessful, but the genial silliness and easy-reading accessibility will keep kids engaged 
throughout all three. The ghosts are drawn in a loose-limbed, near-monochromatic, 
crosshatch-heavy style that recalls Gahan Wilson’s cartooning; they’re an amusing 
contrast to the more feature-rich style of the world of the living, even though they 
too sport the odd accessory. Kids who can’t get enough of Kevin O’Malley’s hu-
morous outings will find this a ghoulishly pleasing sequence for a giggly bedtime 
readaloud or a diverting and shareable readalone.  DS
lloyd-JoneS, SAlly How to Get a Job—by Me, the Boss; illus. by Sue 
Heap. Schwartz & Wade, 2011 36p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96664-4 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86664-7 $17.99  
R 5-8 yrs
Continuing her self-help series which offered tips on successful siblingship (How 
to be a Baby—by Me, the Big Sister, BCCB 4/07) and navigating nuptials (How to 
Get Married—by Me, the Bride, BCCB 6/09), our bespectacled heroine now turns 
her attention to the world of work. She begins by explaining to a fleet of playmates 
exactly what a job is (“A Job is so you can have something to do and get money 
for your family”), emphasizing costuming (“And sometimes a Job is so you can 
get all dressed up and wear your new shoes to work”). She continues by detailing 
various types of work, her kid-friendly perspective sometimes outrunning her logic 
(“Or if you love holding your breath, you could be a Scuba Diver”). The pages 
are as busy as the kids themselves, with text varying between a typical Garamond 
font and handmade signs and scraps of paper outlining do’s and don’ts and lists 
of items and skill sets necessary to perform various kinds of jobs. The precocious 
protagonist doesn’t neglect process—she moves from identifying your passion to 
the proper way to prepare a resume and conduct oneself at an interview as well. 
Some of her pronouncements are a little arch and overplayed, but our know-it-all 
narrator remains an amusing authority. The chaotic clutter of a well-appointed 
playroom forms the backdrop for most of the candy-colored spreads, where her 
multicultural cast of human companions, aided by stuffed and live animals, enact 
her employment fantasies; audiences with an eye toward the corner office and a 
penchant for power suits will find her delivery intoxicating.  KC
looK, lenore Polka Dot Penguin Pottery; illus. by Yumi Heo. Schwartz & 
Wade, 2011 36p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96332-2 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86332-5 $16.99 
 R 6-9 yrs
Aspen is suffering from serious writer’s block, so her beloved grandparents take her 
out for a change of scene to a paint-your-own-pottery place. Initially it looks like 
writer’s block is also pottery-painter’s block (“I turn my egg over and over; it is blank, 
like a piece of paper”), despite the busy artistry of the regulars around Aspen; worse 
still, once she touches brush to pottery she’s convinced that she’s ruined everything 
right from the get-go. Her friend Ivy then offers her valuable advice—“You can 
SepTemBer 2011 • 29
only make a masterpiece if you’re willing to make a mess”—and Aspen rises above 
her perfectionism to create something wonderful in a breakthrough that extends to 
her writing as well. The daunting fear of failure knows few barriers, so kids won’t 
have to be young artists or writers to relate to Aspen’s quandary; creative types, 
however, will be particularly likely to sympathize with the offputting challenge 
of the blank page and canvas. Look’s story takes the point beyond didacticism, 
offering a picturesque, smoothly told tale that makes it clear Aspen is generally 
leading a fine and cozy life but that her artistry is genuinely important to her. 
The book’s vertical orientation is more playful variation than necessary element, 
but Heo’s art (employing, according to a note, oil, pencil, and collage) is an apt 
medium for exploring the tension between creativity and perfectionism. Her trim 
and tidy figures are counterpointed with touches of pattern in scenes of designerly 
clarity, yet backgrounds teem, in Heo’s familiar style, with small elements that here 
represent possibility, mood, and opinion. A worthy successor to Karas’ The Class 
Artist (BCCB 9/01), this is a title that will be useful in helping kids negotiate with 
their perfectionist demons—and in spurring attendance at pottery studios.  DS
lore, pittAcuS The Power of Six. Harper/HarperCollins, 2011 [416p] (The 
Lorien Legacies)
ISBN 978-0-06-197455-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 6-9
This sequel to I Am Number Four (BCCB 10/10) begins with a few pages of exposi-
tion that will refresh readers on the specifics of the Loriens, their brutal attackers, 
and the war that led to nine children, imbued with special powers and abilities, 
being sent with their guardians to hide on Earth until they can avenge the loss 
of their planet. As the children grew, the Mogadorians found several of them, 
though the fact that the children must be murdered in a specific order means that 
the Mogadorians have only been able to kill a few. Thus we come to Four and Six 
(both key figures in the previous novel) and Seven, who shares the spotlight in this 
outing and describes her struggles with good and evil from a convent in Spain. The 
global focus on these kids, scattered, lost, and not yet in control of their impressive 
talents, is effective, as each must discover untapped inner strength and creativity 
that might not be necessary if they could join forces and share resources. This is a 
solid middle book in a series—there are no significant new developments (a bit of 
romance juggling, a great deal of introspection on what it means to be human or 
alien, and the death of some intriguing but inessential characters) or resolutions, 
but the action is taut, the characters are fascinating, and the fact that the teens are 
slowly finding one another and learning about Lorien secrets is sure to yield an 
impressive all-out battle down the road. Fans of the new movie or the first book 
will certainly flock to this one, and while they may leave with as many questions 
as they came with, they will also be satisfied that this series continues to head in 
interesting directions.  AS
mccrAnie, Stephen Mal and Chad: The Biggest, Bestest Time Ever!; written and 
illus. by Stephen McCranie. Philomel, 2011 223p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-399-25221-1 $9.99  
R Gr. 3-6
Being a genius is not the breeze it seems: Malcolm may be able to invent whatever 
strikes his fancy (including an elevator-shaped time machine and a sauce that makes 
everything delicious), but his impressive brain power doesn’t always help when he 
30 • The BulleTin
wants to avoid the school bully or catch the eye of his crush. Even worse, he can’t 
show off his amazing creations to his elementary schoolmates because he has to 
keep his genius abilities under wraps lest nosy grownups ship him off to college. 
Most days he spends talking to his dog, Chad—who can, courtesy of another of 
Mal’s inventions, return the favor—or fiddling with his latest invention. The first 
installment of a proposed series, this graphic novel, a web-comic crossover, docu-
ments Mal’s misadventures as a social outcast, mischievous son, and traveler of 
prehistoric lands. Monochromatic illustrations feature thick ink lines that form an 
expressive-faced protagonist (though he’s a little heavy on the huge manga-esque 
eyes), while his canine companion may have had Tintin’s dog as a long-ago ancestor. 
Panels move the story along nicely as they oscillate between stark simplicity and 
lush detail, and the easy-to-follow sequence will be manageable by even the most 
novice of comic readers. Visual humor abounds throughout the illustrations, and 
although Malcolm is more sweet than funny, Chad more than makes up for his 
owner’s blandness with some well-timed snark. Well-aimed in tone and content, 
this gentler descendant of Calvin and Hobbes is sure to have young readers thinking 
up their own crazy inventions.  KQG
medinA, meg Tía Isa Wants a Car; illus. by Claudio Muñoz. Candlewick, 
2011 32p
ISBN 978-0-7636-4156-6 $15.99  
R 5-9 yrs
Money is tight in the narrator’s household; she’s living with her uncle, Tío Andres, 
and his sister, Tía Isa, in a small apartment as they save up money to bring the rest 
of the family over from their island home. The hot city summer, however, makes 
Tía Isa long for the beach, and she’s determined to get a car so that the family can 
head out for freedom whenever they want. The protagonist chips in with money 
earned from small jobs around the neighborhood, and soon there’s an aqua-blue 
convertible in front of their building, ready “to carry us all to the sea.” Smooth, 
subtly creative style and evocative incidental detail make this a generous and savvy 
slice of life, where the family here misses the family and home on the island des-
perately (“A beach,” says the narrator, “has foamy water that reaches all the places 
I cannot go”) but are also making a good home for themselves where they are. The 
book echoes Williams’ A Chair for My Mother (BCCB 12/82) in both story and 
style, but it’s got its own sensibility as well. The picture of family life is easygoing 
but evocative, with Spanish words in dialogue effectively woven into the English 
text, and the close comradeship between the glamorous young aunt and the nar-
rator is one that many youngsters will envy. In his illustrations, Muñoz creates our 
narrator’s urban world in sun-bleached watercolors, pale hues of tropical shades, 
touched with loose, rangy line; elements of hand-painted pattern, especially in 
the clothes, add energy. The convertible’s aqua is a theme from the endpapers to 
page borders to the sea itself, tying the book together visually; Tía Isa is a spirited 
stunner just ripe for hero-worshipping by the young protagonist, and the setting 
emerges vividly through details of baking streets and geometric lines of buildings. 
Kids with faraway family members will especially relate to this, but anybody who’s 
felt trapped at home in a hot summer will recognize the lure of freedom and the 
glee of an open-air drive.  DS
SepTemBer 2011 • 31
meloy, colin Wildwood; illus. by Carson Ellis. Balzer + Bray/HarperCollins, 
2011 [560p] (The Wildwood Chronicles)
ISBN 978-0-06-202468-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-7
Meloy, singer for the band The Decemberists, draws from his own Pacific North-
west upbringing and his story-driven songwriting to create this intricate fantasy. 
A massive battle is brewing among the inhabitants (both animal and human) of 
an area outside of Portland, and a young “Outsider” girl may be the only one 
who can stop an all-out genocide. Prue just wants to save her baby brother after 
he is kidnapped by giant crows while under her watch—she has no idea that the 
fact that she and her friend, Curtis, can access Wildwood means that they are not 
ordinary humans. What they find there are common human failings—vengeful 
individuals who think murder will remedy heartbreak, distrust of neighbors lead-
ing to willful misunderstandings and distances, and ineffective government that 
ultimately hinders rather than enhances the lives of the citizens—even if the players 
are coyotes, mystics, owl royalty, and various other uncommon players. The impec-
cable world-building, carefully developed characters (irascible Prue and tortured 
Alexandra, who is trying to end the world with an infant sacrifice that will awaken 
killer ivy, are particularly complex and memorable), and effective pacing easily keep 
this from being a preachy novel wedged into a fantasy setting. Liberally sprinkled 
throughout are intricate but accessible illustrations that primarily reflect but oc-
casionally distort the text in intriguing ways. While there are relatively few loose 
ends in this lengthy novel, there is mention that further books about Wildwood are 
forthcoming, and Meloy has left just enough uncertainty to guarantee continuing 
interest. Final art not seen.  AS
meSSer, Stephen The Death of Yorik Mortwell; illus. by Gris Grimly. Random 
House, 2011 [192p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96858-7 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86858-0 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89928-7 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
Waking up dead and beholden to a bratty deity is probably not the best way to begin 
a day, but poor Yorik didn’t have much good fortune in his twelve years of life, where 
he was a servant at Ravenby Manor, so he doesn’t really expect any better from the 
afterlife. His new master, referred to only as the Princess, has ordered him to haunt 
his former bosses; while the task initially seems ideal (Master Thomas did, after all, 
kill him), Yorik soon realizes that the Ravenby estate is being overrun by shadowy 
spirits that seem to be making the people there behave terribly. While the Princess 
could use her powers to battle the evil, she stubbornly refuses to do so, citing some 
sort of punishment by her father and leaving Yorik to watch helplessly as the estate 
and the beloved sister he left behind face the darkness alone. This slim novel packs 
plenty of chills; though the story follows a simple trajectory, readers will be both 
terrified and oddly fascinated by the nightmarish Yglhfm and the treacherous acts 
they induce. Lacking any special powers, even in death, Yorik is just an average 
32 • The BulleTin
(although non-corporeal) kid going up against some rather formidable foes, mak-
ing this a classic underdog story with a little extra macabre seasoning. Youngsters 
who cut their teeth on Edward Gorey will find this tale of death, redemption, and 
mischief just to their liking.  KQG
metzger, SteVe Little Boy Detective Blue; illus. by Tedd Arnold. Orchard/
Scholastic, 2011 [28p]
ISBN 978-0-545-17286-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 4-7 yrs
Boy Blue of nursery rhyme fame has retired his horn in favor of a fedora and 
Clouseau-style trenchcoat. He’s therefore the go-to guy when a frantic Jack Sprat 
raises the alarm that Miss Muffet is missing, and indeed the abandoned tuffet and 
untouched bowl of curds and whey are, at the very least, cause for serious concern. 
Blue interviews everyone who might have a clue about the disappearance: Bo Peep 
is distracted with her own problems of missing sheep, Humpty Dumpty suggests 
that the pie-loving Muffet might have been to see Jack Horner, and Horner sends 
Blue to King Cole’s castle on the hunch the she’s gone to hear some merry music. 
But it’s Spider (who, you’ll recall, “sat down beside her”) who connects Muffet’s 
disenchantment with the unappetizing curds and whey to her actual whereabouts. 
The climax turns on the clever revelation of Miss Muffet’s unexpected first name, 
but the punchline is delivered with more of a fizzle than a bang. That might not, 
however, trouble kids who are having plenty of fun picking out familiar characters 
in both major roles and cameo appearances. Arnold’s bug-eyed, bullet-shaped char-
acters are droll and expressive, and the comic-book format lends a touch of mock 
noir-ish panache. If the little tykes aren’t catching these broadly comical Mother 
Goose references, here is the perfect incentive to bring them up to speed.  EB
milgrim, dAVid Eddie Gets Ready for School; written and illus. by David Mil-
grim. Cartwheel/Scholastic, 2011 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-545-27329-9 $8.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 4-7 yrs
Told entirely in to-do list format, including little check boxes before each bullet 
point, this comic-style offering recounts the steps Eddie must take to get ready for 
school. The tasks themselves seem straightforward (wake up, wash up, get dressed, 
eat); it is Eddie’s interpretations of them as depicted in the illustrations that add the 
hilarity. Eddie’s first attempt at getting dressed finds him wearing underpants on his 
head and carrying a sword, which then requires a later bullet point to “Really get 
dressed.” His sneak effort to drink root beer for breakfast later finds him at the sink, 
with Mom looking on: “Pour out root beer.” Eddie packs an entire watermelon as 
his snack for school and, when deciding what to bring for show and tell, considers 
the cat, his goldfish, a bird, and the flat-screen TV (he ultimately goes with a pair of 
underpants). The narrative is, by virtue of the style, a bit choppy, but it’s tied together 
with sheer buoyant humor, and the story has lots of potential as a lively family read 
for getting back into the routine at the start of a new school year. Milgrim’s splashy 
digital compositions feature large planes of solid color and plenty of visual amuse-
ment. At the center of each spread is Eddie himself, generally depicted with either 
a huge, toothy grin or a tongue-out expression while concentrating—usually on  
SepTemBer 2011 • 33
a piece of mischief. Little Eddies everywhere will readily identify with his efforts to 
do things his way, even when the to-do list says something else.  HM
moodie, crAig Into the Trap. Roaring Brook, 2011 [208p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-585-8 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
The Atwell family has hit a hard patch. Dad needs to go off island for shoulder 
surgery just when their lobster catches (and those of their neighbors) are being rou-
tinely stolen before they can be brought to market. Twelve-year-old Eddie feels the 
possibility of making a little extra money by catching striped bass is worth the risk 
of disobeying his father’s orders to stay ashore, and while out on an early morning 
jaunt on the family’s boat, Eddie stumbles upon the lobster thieves and their cache. 
Before he can clearly plan his next move, he’s called upon to rescue Briggs Fairfield, 
a well-to-do young teen who is running away from summer sailing camp. A bargain 
is struck: if Briggs will help Eddie offload the purloined crustaceans, Eddie will ferry 
Briggs over to the mainland. The boys’ adventures, based on the perennial premise 
that kids should not alert the authorities or seek professional help, will surprise 
nobody. What sets the novel apart from similar offerings is the tidy compression 
of events into a precise twenty-six hour and twelve minute time frame, and the 
contrast between plainspoken, assertive Eddie and formally eloquent, game but 
bumbling Briggs. The nonstop action clocks in at just under two hundred pages, 
making this a fine quick pick for readers with places to go and things to do.  EB
myerS, wAlter deAn Carmen. Egmont, 2011 [144p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-192-1 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-115-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-199-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-12
The celebrated and prolific Myers returns with a reframing of the story of Carmen 
(of Bizet’s opera) set in modern-day Spanish Harlem and presented in play format. 
When a shakedown of a local business brings the luminous, cynical, uncontainable 
Carmen into contact with police officer José, she recognizes him from her child-
hood and pursues him as a way of pursuing the echo of a younger self, a Carmen 
who still believed in dreams. Eventually, though, it becomes apparent that José is 
dangerously short-tempered and proud, and he sees her not as herself but as “a 
flower . . . a rose . . . something that you can own.” Exercising her solid instincts 
for self-preservation and self-respect, she sets herself free. However, this only fuels 
José’s downward spiral; as anyone familiar with the opera will know, this love story 
does not end well. Myers clothes the bones of the story with new purpose, subtly 
exploring the characters’ tendency to objectify each other, a tendency not limited 
by gender or social role. Absent any surrounding descriptions or tags, the dialogue 
can seem flat, but its simplicity is deceptive: Myers chooses each word carefully, so 
that every exchange hides a wealth of motivation and inflection that invites inter-
pretation and debate. In addition, many of the monologues and song texts (music 
not seen in galley) take on a poetic aspect rich with rhythm and wordplay that will 
be familiar and welcome to fans of Myers’ other works. Complex but accessible, 
with various options for reader participation and group involvement, this slender 
volume is equally strong as a gateway to other versions of the classic story and as a 
tragic, thought-provoking tale in its own right.  CG
34 • The BulleTin
neimArK, gilliAn The Secret Spiral. Aladdin, 2011 [208p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4169-8040-7 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4169-8526-6 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
M Gr. 4-6
When ten-year-old Flor Bernoulli stops into her neighborhood pie shop to pick 
up dessert, she instead gets a glimpse into the future and finds herself enmeshed 
in an intergalactic dilemma that may change the space-time continuum forever. 
Dr. Pi, the owner and baker of the Sky-High Pie Shop, has always been a bit odd, 
but when he starts talking to Flor about a magical spiral, the curve of time, and a 
precious fire, she’s convinced he’s officially lost it. Shortly after leaving his shop, 
however, she encounters Mr. It and Mr. Bit, two beings from another planet, in 
a meeting that was predicted by Dr. Pi. Soon she is traveling with the two alien 
brothers, along with her neighbor, the thin Ms. Plump, in a magical flying hat to 
Paris, where she will meet her estranged father and learn the secret history of her 
famous mathematically inclined family and their connection to the Spiral. The 
climactic scene, however, fails to deliver any serious revelations and instead clumsily 
shifts gears to focus on family dynamics, making an already messy plot even more 
convoluted. The cloyingly quirky names of the characters and the play on time and 
space add a bit of whimsy, but still, these fantasy elements feel utterly derivative 
and never hang together as a solid framework for the action. The true villain doesn’t 
even show up until the final pages, making the majority of this story no more than 
a tedious setup. Direct time travel enthusiasts instead to L’Engle’s classics or to John 
Stephens’ recent The Emerald Atlas (BCCB 5/11).  KQG 
neri, g. Ghetto Cowboy; illus. by Jesse Joshua Watson. Candlewick, 
2011 [224p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-4922-7 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 5-9
After his mother has had enough, Coltrane finds himself dropped off to stay in 
Philadelphia with the father he never knew. The already reeling twelve-year-old is 
thoroughly confused to find himself sharing quarters with a horse in the middle 
of the city. It turns out his father is one of the legendary black cowboys of North 
Philadelphia, championing an urban tradition that’s kept many kids in the stables 
instead of in trouble, and one that’s now threatened by the city fathers, who want to 
develop the land on which the stables stand. The city cowboys of Philadelphia and 
elsewhere are a fascinating and little-documented topic, and this is an eye-opening 
glimpse into that world; readers will particularly appreciate the close male bonding 
of the group, with its multigenerational relationships and friendly racing rivalries. 
Coltrane’s narration is written in easy-reading colloquial language, making the book 
a likely sell to reluctant readers and possibility for older readalouds. The treatment is 
largely superficial, though, with characters and relationships never really developing 
and events lacking compelling or credible setup. Watson’s black-and-white paintings 
use strong borders on figures, enhancing the moralistic flavor of his style; while the 
draftsmanship is a little stiffly literal at times, the portraiture is dramatic. Despite 
the book’s flaws, it’s got broad application and considerable appeal, and kids may 
be moved to look into their own town’s lesser-known traditions. An author’s note 
attests to the reality of the Philadelphia cowboys but unfortunately doesn’t offer 
any sources or further directions for those whose interest has been piqued.  DS
SepTemBer 2011 • 35
neSBitt, Kenn The Ultimate Top Secret Guide to Taking Over the World; illus. by 
Ethan Long. Jabberwocky/Sourcebooks, 2011 [208p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4022-3834-5 $7.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 3-6
Who knew that world domination was just ten short steps away? Of course, 
some of these steps involve rather hefty to-do lists, including but not limited to 
stopping time by eating plate after plate of Brussels sprouts, creating flesh-eating 
kittens and subsequently cloning them, and choosing between purple and green 
(or maybe both!) as your signature villainous color. Nesbitt lays out the path to 
ultimate despotism in ten accessible chapters ideal for that tiny tyrant on the go. 
Unfortunately, most of the jokes are one-liners and often of the bathroom variety, 
and while booty and doo-doo jokes have their place, the repetition here causes the 
humor to simply peter out. Similarly, Long’s spot illustrations featuring a bug-
eyed, pouty everyvillain are pretty generic, failing to add much to the proceedings. 
There are, however, some glimpses of cleverness: the chapter devoted to dealing 
with secret agents takes a few sly shots at the tropes of the spy genre while the 
final chapter instructing readers on how exactly to rule the world (e.g., making up 
new holidays, changing the laws, etc) will leave many youngsters dreaming about 
their own turns at world leadership. Lieb’s I Am a Genius of Unspeakable Evil and 
I Want to Be Your Class President (BCCB 12/09) and Walden’s Higher Institute of 
Villainous Education series (BCCB 7/07, etc.) offer much more substantive takes 
on the nature of mischievous depravity, but mini-overlords in a rush to rule the 
world may find this guide useful enough.  KQG
niVolA, clAire A. Orani: My Father’s Village; written and illus. by Claire A. 
Nivola. Foster/Farrar, 2011 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-374-35657-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 6-9 yrs
This elegantly composed tribute to the village where Nivola’s father was born recalls 
the images and experiences that she remembers from visiting there as a small child in 
the ’50s. Her depictions of Orani, which is located on the Italian island of Sardinia 
in the middle of the Mediterranean, offer little glimpses of daily life, from wandering 
the narrow streets with cousins to peeking in at the tailor to having staredowns with 
the resident goats. The prose, while simple, is both lyrical and sensory, incorporating 
carefully selected words and phrases to evoke not just the facts of life in Orani but 
the very feel of it (“Off we went to pick warm plums and cool grapes and to sit on 
the low stone walls of the kitchen gardens, where tiny lizards dozed in the searing 
sun”). Ther immediacy of the narrative allows listeners, despite the literal passage 
of time and the reality of distance, to experience the Orani of the author’s memory, 
both mundane and beautiful. The intricately detailed paintings accompanying the 
narrative are reminiscent of old vacation snapshots, capturing the details, both small 
and large, of the trip, yet there’s a cool stillness to them that suggests a frozenness in 
time. People are heavily featured in the compositions, emphasizing the characters 
that loom large in Nivola’s memory along with their setting, but that setting itself 
is a character in its own right (especially when dramatically viewed from above in 
several scenes). In a note, the author reflects on Orani’s role in her own childhood 
as well as offering commentary on how the tiny village has changed with the pas-
sage of time. While this would serve as a model for personal narrative writing, it 
36 • The BulleTin
mostly deserves to be read for the rhapsodic, evocative story that it tells of a place 
that to kids will seem long ago and far away. HM
nix, gArth Troubletwisters; by Garth Nix and Sean Williams. Scholastic, 
2011 293p
ISBN 978-0-545-25897-5 $16.99  
Ad Gr. 5-8
Twins Jaide and Jack Shields are none too happy when a sudden emergency forces 
their parents to ship the siblings off to their estranged grandmother. To be fair, 
the twins are not distressed simply due to having to stay with a creepy relative: the 
aforementioned emergency was actually the total destruction of their house after 
Jack and Jaide were pulled into a swirling vortex of wind and what appeared to be 
eyes. Their parents’ refusal to discuss the event is more than a little unsettling, and 
despite her vague references to their troubletwisting powers, their grandmother 
remains tight-lipped as well. Meanwhile, Jaide and Jack find themselves at the center 
of increasingly bizarre circumstances including being attacked by swarms of bugs, 
rats, and rabid dogs. It turns out the twins are from a long line of Wardens—guard-
ians of the world against the Evil—and while Warden lore recommends that young 
guardians come into their powers without assistance, the Evil isn’t waiting for Jack 
and Jaide’s natural matriculation and has instead unleashed its chaos, threatening 
both the twins and their family. Despite its generic name, the Evil really is quite 
frightening, with its legions of skittering cockroaches, dead and mutilated rats, 
and other assorted cringe-inducing terrors. Unfortunately, the surrounding story 
doesn’t achieve the success of its villain, offering a rather uninventive take on the 
standard kids-save-the-world tale that lacks both foundation and depth. Jack and 
Jaide are utterly unremarkable, and the lack of detail regarding the backstory of 
their powers ensures that they remain so. Still, the action is intense, the villain evil 
(literally), and the ending happy, so that readers familiar with series adventure may 
find enough here to keep turning the pages.  KQG
oppel, Kenneth This Dark Endeavor. Simon, 2011 [304p] (The Appren-
ticeship of Victor Frankenstein)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-0315-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-0317-8 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 9-12
This prequel to Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein has nothing of satire or parody to it; it 
builds faithfully on the spirit of the original as it imagines the episode that planted 
in the adolescent Victor Frankenstein the seeds of the adult scientist who would 
create and then reject a monster. Oppel (Half Brother, BCCB 10/10) posits a twin 
for Victor: Konrad, smarter, stronger, and kinder than the mercurial Victor, and 
an emerging rival for the affections of their distant cousin, the fierce and capable 
Elizabeth. When Konrad falls mysteriously ill, Victor’s search for a cure leads him 
(along with Elizabeth and their phobia-ridden friend Henry) into the bowels of 
Chateau Frankenstein, where a hidden library starts him on the study of alchemy 
and a desperate race against time (and human fallibility) to create the Elixir of Life. 
There is a questing element to the trio’s struggles to obtain the three ingredients 
needed for the elixir, each of which must be acquired through escalating feats of 
daring, that keeps the pace tripping urgently along, while the atmosphere is pure 
old-school cinematic horror, all hidden stairwells, ancient dungeons, and creaky, 
SepTemBer 2011 • 37
cobwebbed doors. Spare, formal language is well suited to the material, giving it a 
sense of connection to the original without alienating modern readers. The novel also 
shares its source’s underlying anxiety about the shadowy intersections of faith, sci-
ence, and magic in a world teetering on the precipice of a level of scientific endeavor 
that seems akin to playing God. Dark psychological drama, though, is the main 
engine here: Victor’s determination to succeed is as much an urge to outperform 
Konrad as to save him. Oppel grapples with the human duality of animal and soul 
in ways that recall (but don’t repeat) Shelley’s similar thematic explorations as he 
revitalizes the classic horror tale for a new generation.  CG
ottAViAni, Jim Feynman; illus. by Leland Myrick, color by Hilary Syca-
more. First Second/Roaring Brook, 2011 266p
ISBN 978-1-59643-259-8 $29.99  
R Gr. 9-12
Physicist and bon vivant (two descriptors seldom seen in the same sentence) Richard 
Feynman made a short but significant appearance in Ottaviani’s Two-Fisted Science, 
but here he earns his own full-length, full-color graphic-novel-styled biography 
and the opportunity to tell his own life story. High-school science students may 
be familiar with, and can easily follow here, the outline of his accomplishments, 
particularly his work on the Manhattan Project, the Nobel Prize he shared for his 
explorations in quantum electrodynamics, his breakthrough testimony on the 
panel investigating the Challenger disaster, even his turns as dilettante safecracker, 
Brazilian drummer, and all ’round ladies’ man. Ottaviani takes the even bolder 
step in this opus, however, of playing through Feynman’s New Zealand lectures 
on quantum electrodynamics, an attempt Feynman describes here as an enormous 
personal challenge: “If you can’t prepare an introductory lecture on something, if 
you can’t reduce it . . . well, it means you really don’t understand it.” So how does 
Ottaviani fare in delivering a summary of a theory whose explication daunted its 
creator? Readers can expect stretches of mind-boggling challenge (“There’s the 
amplitude J for an electron being at the same point in space-time as a photon, 
and the photon being absorbed by the electron. What’s the amplitude of that?”) 
alternating with bursts of clarity (“Reflection is light interacting with an electron, 
shaking it up, and the electron emitting a new photon going in a new direction”) 
Myrick’s neatly boxed artwork effortlessly handles the flashbacks through which an 
aging Feynman recalls episodes in his life, with color changes cueing transitions. 
An annotated list of sources directs interested readers toward a more detailed path 
and may at the very least encourage them to view excerpts from Feynman’s lectures 
available on the Internet.  EB
pApAdemetriou, liSA Siren’s Storm. Knopf, 2011 [272p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-94245-7 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-84245-0 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89778-8 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
Still haunted by his brother’s disappearance and presumed death in a boating ac-
cident last summer (a tragedy he doesn’t remember), Will finds that the return of 
summer brings more questions and anxieties to the surface. There’s the haunting 
melody everyone seems to have on their lips; the disturbing mental deterioration 
of a local kid who, it’s said, heard an angel singing when he climbed to the top of a 
38 • The BulleTin
lighthouse last year; and the mysterious new girl, Asia, whom Will could swear he 
saw walking calmly out into the storm-tossed ocean one rainy night. Luckily, Will’s 
longtime friend Gretchen is also back for the summer, but even she seems a bit off, 
drawing a winged woman from a dream in her sketchbook and leaving burn marks 
behind when she grabs the wrist of her obnoxious ex-boyfriend. Papademetriou 
does a stellar job at creating atmosphere here, with eerie details gradually adding 
up to a supernatural conclusion that, by the time it is reached, seems entirely pos-
sible. Unfortunately, simpler, creepier supernatural explanations are eschewed in 
favor of a complicated mythology that dates back to Homeric times. Furthermore, 
the backstory is conveyed to the readers in a monumental info-dump monologue 
that introduces an entirely new set of characters and concepts from those hinted at 
earlier (including a centuries-old secret identity for Gretchen that isn’t adequately 
unpacked). Readers willing to overlook this anticlimax, however, will enjoy the 
cursed-island tropes and the very real, sympathetic human characters who must 
deal with the tragic and inexplicable.  CG
pAtterSon, JAmeS Middle School: The Worst Years of My Life; by James Patterson 
and Chris Tebbetts; illus. by Laura Park. Little, 2011 283p
ISBN 978-0-316-10187-5 $15.99  
R Gr. 4-7
Rafe Khatchadorian is already bored out of his mind on the first day of middle 
school, so he and his friend Leonardo the Silent decide that Rafe’s task for the year 
will be to break every rule in the school handbook. As aficionados of video games, 
they raise the stakes by assigning point values to each rule, adding bonus points 
for special projects, and limiting Rafe to three lives that can be lost by wimping 
out on rule-breaking. The game gets complicated by Rafe’s nascent crush on a girl 
who doesn’t share his outlaw spirit, a bully intent on besting Rafe for the title of 
baddest kid in school, a teacher who recognizes talent even when it’s couched in 
lawlessness, and guilt over disappointing his hard-working, long-suffering mom. 
Rafe has Leo supporting and abetting him, though, so success may well be within 
his grasp. Lively illustrations rendered in a credibly tween cartoonish fashion pep-
per the text and augment the comic hyperbole of Rafe’s assessment of the torments 
of middle school, placing this squarely in the mixed textual/visual style that has 
come to dominate the genre. There is substance as well as appeal here, though: 
Rafe is understandably suspicious of his mother’s new boyfriend and disappointed 
by her lack of insight into his character, and both his talent and his acting out 
have recognizable antecedents. His almost plaintive requests for a sympathetic 
reader hit their mark, as Patterson deftly manages the pace of revelations that take 
readers deeper into Rafe’s fragile trust. Especially nice is the inclusion of percep-
tive adults who see through the naughty behaviors to the possibilities they augur. 
Readers ready for something in the same vein but more substantive than Kinney’s 
Diary of a Wimpy Kid (BCCB 6/07) or Peirce’s Big Nate (BCCB 5/10) should be 
introduced to Rafe.  KC 
SepTemBer 2011 • 39
pAulSen, gAry Flat Broke: The Theory, Practice, and Destructive Properties of 
Greed. Lamb, 2011 [128p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90818-4 $15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74002-9 $12.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89869-3 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 4-6
Kevin (from Liar, Liar, BCCB 3/11) desperately wants to ask Tina Zabinski, the 
World’s Most Beautiful Girl, to the eighth-grade dance, but he is pretty sure his 
current cash-flow problems (his allowance has been suspended and he’s lost his 
babysitting job) make him date non grata. Never fear, though, because Kev is noth-
ing if not resourceful: after perusing a series of business books, Kevin takes stock of 
his assets (his own intelligence and vision), gets a loan (from his sister), hires staff 
(his best friend), and sets out to become a fourteen-year-old millionaire. He doesn’t 
do so badly, either; besides the three poker games he sets up for a few buddies, he 
manages to turn his sister’s bathroom into a makeshift salon, develop a baked-goods 
delivery service for the local college campus, and become the neighborhood solution 
to hoarding —all for a small fee, of course. Things inevitably go awry, however, and 
eventually Kevin is in the same place he started out in: grounded, apologizing, and 
near broke. While its predecessor’s fresh and funny narrative style is still very much 
in effect here, the story feels a little purposeless, neither operating effectively as a 
standalone nor concluding the first volume’s threads satisfactorily. Sure, Kevin’s 
attempts at super-capitalism are entertaining, but the more emotional subplots 
from the first installment, like the marital troubles between Kevin’s parents and his 
relationship with his babysitting charge, make no appearance here. Nonetheless, 
aspiring moguls and budding entrepreneurs will find plenty of ideas to elevate their 
business models beyond the lemonade stand (heck, school administrators may want 
to have a look for fundraising possibilities).  KQG
peArce, JAcqueline Mystery of the Missing Luck; illus. by Leanne Franson. Orca, 
2011 61p (Orca Echoes)
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-55469-396-2 $6.95  
Ad Gr. 1-3
SzpirglAS, JeFF Something’s Fishy; by Jeff Szpirglas and Danielle Saint-Onge, illus. 
by Dave Whamond. Orca, 2011 55p (Orca Echoes)
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-55469-787-8 $6.95  
R Gr. 1-3
These two titles from the Orca Echoes series for early chapter-book readers offer 
easily accessible stories for early readers. In Mystery of the Missing Luck, second-
grader Sara is helping her Japanese grandmother, Obaachan, search for her missing 
lucky cat statue, which disappeared from their bakery shop window. Sara enlists the 
help of her new friend Jake, and together the pair of sleuths manages both to find 
the statue and drum up some much-needed business for the bakery. In Something’s 
Fishy, quirky second-grader Jamie takes his obsession with sharks to a whole new 
level when he accidentally swallows the class betta fish. His misdemeanor is discov-
ered when he belches up fish-food odor, and Jamie realizes he must do something 
to make amends with his infuriated classmates. What works in each story is the 
40 • The BulleTin
tightly focused plot, well supported by a manageable cast of characters. Pearce’s 
novel tends to grow repetitive, with speculative queries repeated over and over that 
do little to advance the plot. Szpirglas’ novel, though, uses humor to great effect, 
and the character dynamics are striking since the protagonist isn’t particularly lik-
able—in fact, his over-the-top obsession with sharks makes him altogether annoying 
to his classmates. Each slim novel offers an abundance of illustrations; Franson’s 
somewhat busy full-page compositions are filled with shading and details whereas 
Whamond’s lean towards a cleaner comic style. These will fit nicely into reading 
programs as well as offering newly independent readers engaging options for first 
chapterbook reads.  HM 
perl, ericA S. When Life Gives You O.J. Knopf, 2011 [208p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-95924-0 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-85924-3 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89783-2 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 3-6
Ten-year-old Zelly wants a dog more than anything, so her grandfather, Ace, creates 
a “practice dog” made out of an orange-juice carton that Zelly must feed, walk, 
and clean up after, so that Zelly can prove to her parents that she’d be a responsible 
pet owner. Zelly is wholly unenthused by this ridiculous proposition, particularly 
because she has just begun caring what people, particularly peers, think about her, 
but desperation forces her to agree to Ace’s proposal. The result is a wholly engaging 
novel about intergenerational family dynamics featuring two extremely likable and 
relatable characters. Ace is a character of sitcom proportions; his speech, printed 
in all caps as an indicator of his constant volume, is heavily sprinkled with Yiddish 
expletives and demanding turns of phrase. Yet he also has a softer side, which Zelly, 
who was much closer to her recently deceased grandmother, is just learning to see. 
In addition to the dog storyline, Zelly is developing a friendship with a new boy in 
town, Jeremy Fagel, who helps her both with her confidence and her handling of 
family situations, and this friendship shows readers a different side of Zelly as well. 
The believable resolution finds all members of Zelly’s family a little better off than 
they were in the beginning, particularly Zelly, who is all too happy to retire O.J. 
to a place of honor on her top shelf upon the arrival of her brand-new pup.  HM
porter, SArAh Lost Voices. Harcourt, 2011 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-547-48250-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
This first novel of a promised trilogy offers a new interpretation of mermaids, 
conceiving them as girls who were deeply traumatized as humans and transformed 
as a last resort. Luce, fourteen and orphaned, becomes a mermaid after a rape at-
tempt; though she is grateful to be alive and part of a group, she’s soon troubled 
by aspects of mermaid life. In fact, most mermaids are deeply committed to killing 
as many humans as possible by singing to passing ships, lulling the passengers into 
bliss even while they drown. Luce participates willingly at first, but she cannot let 
go of her belief that not all humans are evil and that an obsession with vengeance 
does not lead to a happy existence. But can she convince the others or, if she fails, 
survive on her own? The tension present for Luce as a human and then as a mermaid 
is almost tangible—readers will be fervently hoping she catches a break as a girl 
SepTemBer 2011 • 41
and will then immediately shift to hoping that she’ll fare better underwater. This 
is a dark and compelling take on a world usually depicted as more lighthearted: 
infant and toddler mermaids are abandoned to die, the life events the girls endure 
in order to change are often horrific, and humans, nature, and other mermaids 
all pose significant and constant risks to the protagonists. Porter nonetheless care-
fully doles out enough possibilities to keep the overall tone hopeful, and given the 
already numerous perky mermaids, these gritty, wounded souls are a creative and 
welcome addition to the field.  AS
powerS, J. l. This Thing Called the Future. Cinco Puntos, 2011 213p
ISBN 978-1-933693-95-8 $16.95  
R Gr. 7-10
In a tiny house on the poverty-stricken outskirts of Pietermaritzburg, South Africa, 
fourteen-year-old Khosi lives between two worlds: the world of science, progress, 
and formal education that her mother wants for her, and the world of traditional 
Zulu medicine and magic that Gogo (her grandmother) believes in. She excels in 
science at school, but her dreams warn her of a malevolent witch who means her 
and her family harm, and she is plagued by a drunken man whom no one has ever 
seen before but who has singled her out for abuse. When her mother falls ill of 
“the disease of the day” (AIDS) and refuses to go to the doctor, Khosi is frantic to 
learn what has caused this terrible fate to befall her family. She and Gogo undergo 
a traditional purification ritual that reveals to Khosi not only the truth behind her 
mother’s illness but also her own calling to become a sangoma, a traditional healer. 
This is a fascinating glimpse into a worldview that, while foreign to many readers, 
is made plausible through Khosi’s practical and conflicted perspective. As much 
as she wants to please both her mother and Gogo, she ultimately learns to rely on 
her own experience, even when it is called into question by the boy she wants to 
please most of all, Little Man. Her common-sense approach to acknowledging the 
value of both old and new ways of thinking convince Little Man (and readers) not 
to be narrow-minded and dismissive of things that don’t fit neatly into a scientific 
paradigm and that emotions, particularly anger, are powerful forces that must be 
acknowledged in order to set things right. Ultimately, Khosi’s strength and self-
reliance serve as a strong example that heading toward the future doesn’t mean 
turning one’s back on the past.  KC
rAy, deliA Here Lies Linc. Knopf, 2011 [304p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96756-6 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86757-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89844-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
Seventh grade is a real departure for Linc, who until now has been schooled in a small 
eccentric collective of professors’ kids. He’s trying to break from his previous geeky 
identity, but that effort is endangered with the very first big class project: a study of 
the local cemetery, guided by none other than Linc’s anthropologist mother, who’s 
studied the graves. Linc decides to play the expert to the hilt, insisting to popular 
classmates that he can get them into a locked mausoleum; for his topic, he decides 
to tackle the Black Angel, a huge, creepy monument that’s the center of local lore. 
Ray takes some classic tropes of daily-life fiction—a kid trying to eke out a niche 
in a new school situation, a changing relationship with a parent, the stirrings of 
42 • The BulleTin
first romance—and gives them an offbeat seasoning. The result is a pleasing touch 
of graveyard unease that gives additional shape to the story, leading to both some 
haunting-hinted scenes and some exploration of legend and truth (based, according 
to an author’s note, on real Iowa history). Additionally, a side plot about Linc’s own 
family background and a mysterious local connection enhances the point about links 
to the past being worth uncovering. History buffs will particularly appreciate the 
creative approach to the topic, but readers in general will enjoy the spooky-edged 
tale-telling that suggests their own towns may be more interesting than they realize. 
An author’s note fills in the factual background, and a list of sources for the story’s 
elements and cemetery research generally is included.  DS
reed, Amy Clean. Simon Pulse, 2011 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-1344-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-1346-7 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
This novel about rehab features the voices of a quintet of struggling teens. Kelly turns 
to alcohol, cocaine, and sex in response to her family’s refocusing on her disabled 
siblings; Jason’s drinking leads to an accident that leaves his three-year-old sister 
brain damaged. Eva seeks solace in pills and marijuana after her mother’s death; 
Christopher has a morbidly obese, deeply religious mother, a methamphetamine 
addiction, and a secret. Olivia is the less-than-perfect daughter of famously perfect 
parents, so her mother tried to fix her with prescription diet pills. They are all 
trying to escape the future that their substances have chosen for them. The text 
includes personal narration from the various teens, excerpts from personal essays, 
transcripts from group sessions, and answers to questionnaires about the negative 
consequences of addiction and what they plan to do to stay sober, all drawing 
from the classic problem-novel ethos of Chris Crutcher and his ilk. In most cases, 
there are clear lines of cause and effect that lead straight from poor parenting to 
addiction, but their plainspoken counselor lets them know in no uncertain terms 
that it’s their social privilege that has them here instead of on the street or in jail. 
Their path through rehab is structured in realistic if somewhat whitewashed terms; 
the trajectory moves from immediate withdrawal symptoms to sullen emotional 
distance and eventually to the development of interdependency and real friendships 
that they fear to lose. While not all young addicts are fortunate enough to receive 
and succeed at rehab, this is a thoughtful portrait of those who do, and it offers 
hope for what often seems a hopeless situation.  KC 
rodriguez, BéAtrice, illus. Fox and Hen Together. Enchanted Lion, 2011 26p
ISBN 978-1-59270-109-4 $14.95  
R 3-7 yrs
In this wordless picture book, the refrigerator’s offerings are a little sparse in Hen 
and Fox’s tree-trunk abode, so Hen leaves the comfort of her rocker, entrusts the 
egg she’s been tending to Fox, and takes up her fishing pole to score some dinner. 
Accompanied by a little red crab (who’s strangely untroubled by the prospect of a 
seafood dinner), Hen hooks a fat green fish, only to have it promptly caught up 
in the talons of an eagle, who swoops fish, Hen, and crab off to its eaglets’ nest. 
The squawky eaglets toss the intruders out, and they land in the sea where they’re 
chased by a ferocious, eel-like sea monster who takes them for a Nantucket sleigh 
ride until Hen gains control of the fishing-line reins and rides the monster onto 
SepTemBer 2011 • 43
shore. Hen triumphantly returns home and finds her egg cracked and lying beside 
a frying pan. Suspecting the worst, she prepares to bean Fox, only to discover that 
he’s in the rocker tending her hatchling, and they can all celebrate with flutes of 
bubbly and a feast of fish and sea monster, roasted on a very long spit on the beach 
by starlight. This is nonstop action fun, touched with cartoon-type humor and 
revolving appealingly around food. The long lines of the horizontal trim allow 
Rodriguez to pack a lot of visual activity into each full-bleed spread—sometimes 
a series of actions, and sometimes a broad panorama. Slightly dusty shades of sea 
green, grayish blue, and rusty orange make for a sophisticated palette that will 
attract viewers who may think themselves immune to the charms of a wordless 
story. Rooster’s Revenge is promised to follow hot on Fox and Hen’s heels; fans will 
be ready and waiting.  EB
rohmAnn, eric Bone Dog; written and illus. by Eric Rohmann. Roaring Brook, 
2011 [32p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-150-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad 5-8 yrs
Ella (a dog) makes Gus (a boy) a promise: “I’m an old dog and won’t be around 
much longer. But no matter what happens, I’ll always be with you.” Soon Ella 
is gone, and a distraught Gus doesn’t want to do anything, much less go out on 
Halloween night, but go he does. Dressed as a skeleton, he is mistaken for the real 
thing by a group of skeletons near the graveyard, who call upon him to join them 
in doing “skeleton stuff.” When he reveals himself as a boy, the skeletons set upon 
him, until Ella, his former pet turned skeleton dog, comes to the rescue. While 
the skeletons are unafraid of her, she howls out for a pack of “real live dogs!!!” that 
rush to the graveyard and make short work of the skeletons. Part friendship story, 
party spooky story, part funny story, this narrative suffers somewhat for its lack of 
consistent commitment to any one style; the humor in particular is oddly placed in 
the middle of seemingly scary moments, thus compromising the tone and leaving 
the audience uncertain how to respond. The pacing is also a little off, especially 
when the bone dog shows up but fails to scare the skeletons. Rohmann’s artwork is 
stylistically similar to the art in his Caldecott-winning My Friend Rabbit, featuring 
large relief prints and abundant thick black lines. The controlled palette is pre-
dominately dark blue, black, and white, with occasional touches of contrast color 
and additional tones for effect. Despite their seeming immobility, the skeletons are 
particularly animated, as they jump and dance and run about the spreads. While 
scary-story aficionados may be disappointed, dog lovers will likely delight in this 
quiet story of a dog’s devotion even beyond the grave.  HM 
rumley, cricKett Never Sit Down in a Hoopskirt and Other Things I Learned in 
Southern Belle Hell. Egmont, 2011 296p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-131-0 $8.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-255-3 $8.99  
R* Gr. 7-10
Jane Fontaine Ventouras may have spent her early years in her mother’s ancestral 
home in Bienville, Alabama, but after getting expelled from thirteen boarding 
schools, she is not the type of girl one would expect to represent the Old South 
on Bienville’s Magnolia Maids Court. Yet this is where she finds herself when the 
judges decide they want to shake things up with the Court, with few of the girls 
44 • The BulleTin
fitting the traditional mold. Tensions run high among the girls, exacerbated by the 
Official Etiquette Mistress and Head Advisor, but efforts to get the “unsuitable” (for 
reasons of race, income, or behavior) Maids to quit only steel Jane’s determination 
to stick it out. The truth is that after watching her mother’s lingering deterioration 
and eventual death, Jane’s been kind of lost; her acting out hasn’t caught her tycoon 
father’s attention, so maybe being a good Magnolia Maid will. Jane’s energetic nar-
ration and charismatic personality provide the fizz in this frothy tale of girls trying 
to overcome social enmity to work toward a common goal. Each girl approaches 
her position on the Court with a level of enthusiasm or irony consummate with 
her character, and their situations range from the silly to the sympathetic. Read-
ers looking for some lighthearted summer fun with a likable heroine will enjoy 
watching Jane turn what could have been a comedy of errors into a triumph of 
lace parasols and hoop skirts.  KC
ruSSell, rAndy Dead Rules. HarperTeen, 2011 374p
ISBN 978-0-06-198670-3 $16.99  
Ad Gr. 8-10
Jana knows that she and Michael are meant to be together, their romantic and 
theatrical lives entwined for all time, so when she dies in a freak bowling accident, 
she’s not quite sure how to go on with the afterlife without him. Said afterlife is, for 
teens, a quirky boarding school known as Dead School where students are grouped 
in a hierarchy of Virgins (self-explanatory), Risers (basically good kids on a track 
to rise to heaven), and Sliders (kids who died doing something bad and have been 
given only a perfunctory chance to avoid a mostly inevitable downslide into the 
hot place) in order to complete their maturation process before moving on to their 
final destination. The intermixing of groups is strictly verboten, but Jana, a Riser, 
strikes up a friendship with a dreamy Slider named Mars, hoping he can help her 
communicate with Michael. Russell plays fluidly and hilariously with the underly-
ing craziness of idolizing Romeo and Juliet as a romantic ideal: Jana is an obsessive 
girlfriend even in life, and in death she is downright psycho as she contemplates in 
disturbing detail how best to kill Michael (nail gun? Poison? Ice pick?) so that they 
can be reunited. Unfortunately, the morality is inclined to be arbitrary, and the 
forces that drive Jana’s character to such extremes are left undeveloped: her mother’s 
addiction, neglect, and image-obsession are referenced but never explored, while 
her history with Michael is barely sketched. Still, the world of Dead School is a 
well-developed, engagingly odd place that will appeal to fans of Zevin’s Elsewhere 
(BCCB 9/05) and the show Dead Like Me; the mystery of Jana’s true cause of death 
sustains the tension, and the wealth of dryly macabre details gives this debut novel 
plenty of personality.  CG
SAller, cArol FiSher Eddie’s War. Namelos, 2011 [194p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-60898-108-3 $18.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-60898-109-0 $9.95
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
Free-verse poetry, dated by month and year, traces the life of Eddie Carl in small-
town Ellisville, Illinois as he grows from boy to adolescent throughout World War 
II. The dramas within the farming community are largely of a domestic nature: 
persistent grief over the death of a wife and mother; a fall from a treehouse with 
a resultant injury; a tomboy morphing into a love interest. A few secrets, though, 
SepTemBer 2011 • 45
only surface as rumor and whisper: Grampa’s abuse of Grama Lucy; bigotry directed 
against the clan of gypsies that encamp near town; theft and arson that simply 
couldn’t be perpetrated by one of their own citizens. As the town struggles quietly 
with its own issues, the war siphons off most of the young men, including Eddie’s 
brother Thomas, who enlists to become a fighter pilot and ends up right back home, 
disabled and discharged. Saller’s poems build from finely delineated episodes of no 
immediately apparent weight into a cumulative portrait of a tightly interlocked 
community, where routine, patriotism, and neighborly support cannot always 
confine darker attitudes and deeds to the shadows. The contemplative tone of the 
entries and the misplaced accusations against an innocent man are reminiscent of 
Betsy Byars’ Keeper of the Doves (BCCB 1/03); readers who step into Eddie’s shoes 
will appreciate that coming of age often involves seeing your family and friends 
for exactly what they are.  EB
SAntAt, dAn Sidekicks; written and illus. by Dan Santat. Levine/Scholastic, 
2011 218p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-439-29811-7 $24.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-439-29819-3 $12.99  
R Gr. 3-6
When old age and a peanut allergy threaten to take Captain Amazing out of commis-
sion, the hero of Metro City starts looking for a sidekick and potential replacement 
in this graphic novel. After watching their owner take down bad guys for years, 
Captain Amazing’s pets are certain they’re ready for the job—even if their master 
has no idea they’re even interested, much less in training. Roscoe, a.k.a. Metal Mutt, 
has been using his super strength to fight crime for some time now, while the near-
invisibility powers of Shifty the chameleon are sure to come in handy while fending 
off villains. Fluffy the hamster isn’t quite sure what his superpower is yet, but he’s 
got guts and determination, and when he runs into Static Cat, former member 
of the Captain’s animal cohort and current runaway vigilante, he begs the kitty to 
take him under his wing—er, paw. Static Cat’s return to the household brings up 
some long buried (and probably natural) tensions between Manny (Static Cat’s 
alias) and Roscoe, but in the end, the four pets team up to save Captain Amazing 
from certain doom and live to fight another day. Panels populated with “BAM!”, 
“POW!”, and “KABOOM!” and defined, angular linework call up images of the 
golden age of superheroes. The rusty palette that characterizes the daytime scenes 
gets a bit monochromatic, but is nicely broken up by the more intense jewel tones 
indicating the pets’ nightly adventures. There’s a pleasingly understated parallel 
to human relationship in the sibling-like dynamics between the pets, and most 
youngsters will readily identify with one of the four creatures, be it the overbur-
dened older brother in Roscoe or the underestimated little guy in Fluffy. Lively, 
insightful, and just plain fun, this convergence of capes and creatures will find a 
wide audience in animal lovers and superhero fans alike.  KQG
SAy, Allen Drawing from Memory; written and illus. by Allen Say and with 
photographs Scholastic, 2011 [64p]
ISBN 978-0-545-17686-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 5-9
Caldecott-winning artist Allen Say has often drawn on his own family history in 
his books, but here for the first time he recounts his story directly, chronicling his 
46 • The BulleTin
youth in Japan and especially his artistic education both at school and in his ap-
prenticeship with the noted cartoonist Noro Shinpei. He writes of growing up in 
wartime and post-war Japan (“When the war ended . . . everything was broken”), 
of a family that disapproved of his passion for art, and of his determination to 
pursue it nonetheless, even to the point of boldly approaching his idol and asking 
for tutelage. It’s a fascinating story, filled with startling developments (Say’s being 
put up alone in a Tokyo apartment at the age of twelve, his becoming the model 
for a cartoon character in his master’s popular cartoons) but also the ebb and flow 
of young life—talented classmates, inspiring teachers, girls that one likes from 
afar, knowing no other way. There’s a thoughtful, measured quality to Say’s mod-
est storytelling, but it’s never dry; compact, simple sentences convey an existence 
teeming with human interaction (even from afar, his father exerts an influence) and 
human endeavor as the young boy develops his artistic skills. The narrative is as 
visual as it is textual, with period photographs, art from Say’s youth, and occasional 
images from his books joining forces with new illustrations that document his past 
in clean-lined graphic-novel-styled panel art. While this will obviously appeal to 
fans of Say’s books, young artists in general will warm to the account of artistic 
apprenticeship, and those who enjoyed Lat’s Kampung Boy (BCCB 1/07) may also 
appreciate this strongly visual account of youth in a very different time and place. 
A closing note talks more about Noro Shinpei and Say’s relationship with him.  DS
ShreVe, SuSAn The Lovely Shoes. Levine/Scholastic, 2011 352p
ISBN 978-0-439-68049-3 $16.99  
R Gr. 6-10
In small-town Ohio in the 1950s, Franny stands out, and not for good reasons—she 
was born with a malformed foot and ankle that prevents her from fully conforming 
in a community that’s all about conformity. This is especially true now that she’s 
a teenager, whose focus is supposed to be dances (Franny has to wear orthopedic 
shoes) and cheerleading. Franny’s mother, who as a freethinking and fashionable 
Danish immigrant knows something about nonconformity but also about the 
desire to feel beautiful, takes a creative approach to the problem: she writes to elite 
shoe designer Salvatore Ferragamo in Italy, asking him to create shoes for Franny, 
and thus sets in motion a journey that will change Franny’s life. Since this is Susan 
Shreve, master of subtle and wise perception, she’s not simply offering a story of a 
girl who finally gets pretty shoes; Franny’s exploration of what, for her, is possible 
and what is actually desirable is a trajectory of maturation. She experiences classi-
cal adolescence, with its storms treated humorously yet sympathetically (she shuts 
herself in her room for days, disowning her parents and using her beloved little 
brother as a conduit to the world), but she also undergoes a dawning awareness of 
herself, helped by her experiences in Italy, as a beautiful young woman possessed 
of independent free will. The clothing and shoe details are significant but modestly 
described, eschewing the brand-name blast common in contemporarily set chick-
lit, and even the gown-allergic will be able to empathize with Franny’s desire to at 
least have the choice to follow or reject conventional paths. A note explains the 
autobiographical elements of the story (as a young polio victim, Shreve did indeed 
get shoes made for her by the Ferragamo company).  DS
SepTemBer 2011 • 47
Sitomer, AlAn lAwrence Nerd Girls: The Rise of the Dorkasaurus. Disney 
Hyperion, 2011 220p
ISBN 978-1-4231-3996-6 $16.99 
 Ad Gr. 5-8
Chubby, nerdy Maureen is more or less happy with her solitary status; after all, what 
better friend can a girl have than a chocolate cupcake? However, when the pretty, 
popular, perfect girls (known as the ThreePees) in her eighth-grade class hatch a 
plot to torture a new girl dubbed Allergy Alice because of her never-ending list of 
sensitivities, Maureen takes a stand, with disastrous results. Her courage, though, 
attracts the attention not only of Alice but also of another dork she calls Beanpole, 
and they basically steamroller her into friendship. As the girls wear down Maureen’s 
resistance, the trio decides to take on the ThreePees in the school talent show, even 
though they really have no identifiable talent. With some unexpected help from 
Maureen’s brother, they develop an act that just might have a chance, and along 
the way they develop a friendship that motivates Maureen to repair her relationship 
with her mother and attempt a healthier lifestyle. There are some funny moments 
here, but most of them are predicated on Maureen’s sharp tongue as she makes fun 
of the dorkiness of her new friends and they learn to give as good as they get. None 
of the characters is drawn with much complexity, though, so when Alice’s tragic 
backstory emerges, it feels convenient and even a bit caricatured in its truly horrific 
proportions, and Maureen’s public confession of friendship is hardly credible as a 
sufficient antidote to Alice’s psychic devastation. However, younger readers might 
not register this as a flaw, and they may be content with the takeaway that nerds 
can rock and that the loyalty of true friends, however dorky, is all you really need 
to survive the middle-school popularity gauntlet.  KC
SKuSe, c. J. Pretty Bad Things. Chicken House/Scholastic, 2011 244p
ISBN 978-0-545-28973-3 $17.99  
R Gr. 9-12
Twins Paisley and Beau were thrust into the national spotlight at age six when they 
came home to find their abusive mother dead, called 911, and then disappeared 
for three days as they wandered in the woods near their home trying to find their 
beloved father. He had been arrested for burglary, though, so they were placed with 
their sadistic, media-crazed, ex-soap-star-turned-Botoxed-cougar of a grandmother 
who paraded the children onto every talk show she could finagle before sending 
Paisley to boarding school and keeping Beau cowed with threats and abuse. While 
Beau has been rendered timid through his experiences, Paisley has become a foul-
mouthed, outspoken hellcat with a violent temper and a taste for risk, and when 
Beau discovers that their grandmother has been hiding letters from their father for 
the past ten years, Paisley decides they must do whatever it takes to find him. She 
hatches a plan to return them to the media spotlight through a benign crime spree 
that captures the attention of hordes of damaged kids (and adults) who live their 
most vibrant lives online. Beyond its entertainment value as a fast-paced action 
adventure story, this novel, narrated by Paisley and Beau alternately, provides a 
subtle sociological study of the effects of living in a hyper-mediated culture, where 
manipulating your media image is the key to getting what you want. Paisley and 
Beau become iconic in the manner of Bonnie and Clyde, Butch and Sundance, 
Thelma and Louise—lovable rogues who beat the system that has tried to beat them 
and thus offer a skewed kind of hope to kids who have lost loving parents and been 
48 • The BulleTin
left to the care of indifferent or abusive adults. While some readers will find their 
online fan base as inscrutable as Paisley herself does, others will get it, and all will 
have a lot to ponder after the outlaws ride off into the sunset.  KC 
Smyth, FionA The Never Weres; written and illus. by Fiona Smyth. Annick, 
2011 253p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-55451-285-0 $21.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-55451-284-3 $12.95  
Ad Gr. 6-8
A storybot named Sasha introduces readers to the basics of this world in which the 
last children are coming of age after a virus renders the population barren, and the 
remaining folks are split between exploring cloning options (almost all of the early 
efforts of which have been disastrous) or allowing humanity to die out. Three of 
the teens who grew up knowing all of this, Mia, Jesse, and Xian, are the focus of 
this graphic novel, which offers an in-depth examination of their efforts to balance 
everyday life with efforts to save the world. The three are gifted in complementary 
and impressive ways, and their individual talents lead them to a secret area and 
the decades-old mystery of a missing girl who, when discovered to be alive, is an 
example of a successful early clone. The overarching story of a world that is still 
consumer driven and torn apart by ethical debates, even in what seem to be the 
last days, is compelling. Unfortunately, the illustrations, while pleasingly varied in 
size and layout, are clunkily drawn and mostly broadly literal in their intepretation 
of the text, doing little to justify the graphic-novel format. In addition, the kids 
themselves are so oversimplified and stuck in their assigned roles that there is little 
dramatic tension or personal connection—it is clear that they will succeed, and 
even without the follow-up on their adult lives, readers will have no trouble guess-
ing exactly who they will each become. Nevertheless, a potential end-of-the-world 
scenario that is geared for a younger audience and actually has a happier-than-usual 
ending is a good thing in an increasing field of grim, sophisticated looks at where 
humanity is headed.  AS
SzpirglAS, JeFF Something’s Fishy; by Jeff Szpirglas and Danielle Saint-Onge, 
illus. by Dave Whamond.
See review under Pearce, p. 39.
StAnley, diAne The Silver Bowl. Harper/HarperCollins, 2011 307p
ISBN 978-0-06-157543-3 $16.99  
R Gr. 4-6
Molly’s just a poor scullion, sent to work at the castle by her destitute father, but 
she makes the castle her home and prides herself on work well done, rising to a 
position as a polisher of the castle’s silver. Molly also has a secret: like her poor, 
mad mother, she can see visions of the future. An exquisitely crafted silver bowl, 
the pride of the royal family’s collection, begins to speak to her, showing her scenes 
that suggest a curse on the royal family and urging her to help avert disaster. When 
she’s given a moments-in-advance warning of a wolf attack at a royal dinner, she’s 
able to save arrogant young Prince Alaric, and, aided by fellow young servants 
Tobias and Winifred, she tries to solve the mystery of the curse. It’s all fairly 
straightforward, but the pacing is masterful, with new information and character 
development doled out in exactly the right doses, intercut with thrilling escapes 
SepTemBer 2011 • 49
and clever plots. Stanley maintains a realistic sense of the social gap dividing Alaric 
and Molly; this is not a rags-to-princess tale but rather a satisfying yarn of loyalty 
rewarded and mutual understanding gained. The old-fashioned earnestness here 
will hold enormous appeal for the budding fantasy reader who is still a couple years 
shy of inhaling Diana Wynne Jones’ oeuvre.  CG
SteAd, philip chriStiAn Jonathan and the Big Blue Boat; written and illus. by 
Philip Christian Stead. Porter/Roaring Brook, 2011 [32p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-562-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad 4-7 yrs
After his parents trade his beloved stuffed bear for a toaster, a despondent Jonathan 
sets sail on the Big Blue Boat to find his lost friend. Along the way, he picks up a 
goat and an elephant as shipmates and gets a lift from a whale. When they arrive 
at a distant port, they happen on a shop, which is staffed by a little girl holding 
Jonathan’s bear buddy; though she’s not willing to give him up, she’s happy to join 
Jonathan and his friends on the boat. The text has a gentle, meandering flavor with 
a repeated cumulative refrain (“And that is how Jonathan, a mountain goat, and 
a circus elephant came to sail the sea on a Big Blue Boat”) that gives it a folkloric 
touch. The plot itself, however, is aimless and illogical, and the aforesaid gentle 
meandering turns too often to momentum-less rambling (audiences are also going 
to find the resolution of Jonathan’s loss pretty unsatisfactory). The illustrations 
are striking, though; trickly lines and collagework involving paper materials such 
as stamps and book texts have some resemblance to Douglas Florian’s work, the 
strongly hued acrylic paints have a jubilant intensity worthy of the Fauvists, and 
the human cast, especially the two brown-skinned kids, recall John Steptoe’s expres-
sionism. Even audiences who find the pace of the journey itself a little slow may 
wish to voyage through the dreamlike visual world.  DS
SteinhöFel, AndreAS The Spaghetti Detectives; tr. from the German by Chantal 
Wright. Chicken House/Scholastic, 2011 [176p]
ISBN 978-0-545-28975-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
Rico is a child “proddity,” which means, according to him, “I think an awful lot, 
but I need a lot of time to figure things out.” What he’s trying to figure out at the 
moment is the source of the strand of pasta on the sidewalk below his apartment 
building in Berlin; as he’s trying to puzzle out this mystery he meets Oscar, a risk-
averse kid (sporting a crash helmet wherever he goes) who’s a genuine prodigy, and 
who’s as intrigued by the spaghetti as Rico is. Excited to have a new friend, Rico is 
devastated when Oscar fails to turn up for a planned visit, but he soon realizes that 
Oscar has actually disappeared—and that his disappearance is, like the spaghetti, 
connected to the ongoing child abductions in the city. Neurologically atypical kid 
sleuths aren’t new these days (think Haddon’s The Curious Incident of the Dog in the 
Nighttime and Dowd’s The London Eye Mystery, BCCB 4/08), but Rico’s outing, 
by award-winning German author Steinhöfel, is more easygoing and playful than 
most. Despite the darkness of the child abductions, the kidnapper proves to be 
fairly benign and unthreatening, and the general quirkiness of the tone promises a 
safe landing that the novel faithfully delivers. Rico’s capabilities aren’t particularly 
consistent, but his limitations are clear enough that readers will understand his 
50 • The BulleTin
daring in leaving his neighborhood on his own to go sleuthing. The setting, an 
apartment-building community wherein everybody knows everybody else’s habits, 
is affectionately conveyed, adding a warm domestic undertone to the story. Read-
ers looking for an offbeat detective story and a quick visit abroad will be happy 
to join Rico.  DS
SulliVAn, SArAh Passing the Music Down; illus. by Barry Root. Candlewick, 
2011 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-3753-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 6-9 yrs
In “the old, old mountains/ slumbering east of Tennessee,” a veteran fiddler dis-
covers a hopeful young fan in the audience who’s yearning for tutelage: “Will you 
teach me all your tunes? . . . I want to play like you.” Discovering that the young 
boy has both gift and dedication, the old musician mentors the kid, taking him to 
stay in his cabin and teaching him everything the fiddler knows; when the maestro 
dies, the boy, now older, promises to pass the music on in turn. The story is gentle 
and descriptive rather than fast-moving and active, but it’s written with a pretty 
immediacy and evocative descriptive detail that bring the scenes to vivid life; the 
recurring refrain of “Passing the music down” adds its own musicality to the text. 
Kids will especially warm to the notion of being taken seriously as an inheritor of 
a tradition, a concept they may find thought-provoking in their own relationships. 
Root’s watercolor and gouache scenes shine with luminous warmth, with affectionate 
treatments of the sun-dappled hills and red earth of the region. There’s a touch of 
impressionism to the sunny, ochre-tinted views that results in an emphasis on the 
story’s themes over its biographical particulars—these are images that speak to cross-
generational bonding of all kinds. This will be at its most effective in partnership 
with other explorations of the theme, whether it be music or tradition; it therefore 
offers an excellent opportunity to dive into music and family history and to spin 
some lively tunes. The book concludes with an extensive author’s note describing 
the real-life friendship between fiddler Melvine Wine and his protégé Jake Krack, 
on which the book is based, and a substantial list of resources in various media and 
online (including Jake’s own website, which includes audio and video clips).  DS
tAylor, lAini Daughter of Smoke and Bone. Little, 2011 [420p]
ISBN 978-0-316-13402-6 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 9-12
Karou is human, attending an art school in Prague, but she was raised by monsters—
four beings whose forms include both human and animal parts. Calling themselves 
chimaera, they live in a little shop with a door that opens to portals all over the 
world and trade animal and human teeth for wishes. Running an errand for her 
family one day, Karou has a near-deadly confrontation with a beautiful, winged man 
with dead eyes and then finds herself caught in an ancient war between chimaera 
and seraphim that rages in the parallel world of Eretz. There is more to Akiva, her 
seraph attacker, than initially meets the eye, though, and soon his curiosity about 
her life with his enemies and her need to learn more about his world draw them 
together; the mutual magnetism they feel doesn’t hurt, either. Taylor (Lips Touch 
Three Times, BCCB 11/09) crafts both her world and her romance with meticulous 
care, building the first on a wealth of thought-provoking details and making the 
SepTemBer 2011 • 51
second equal parts tender and antagonistic. The plotting is layered and ambitious, 
encompassing multiple worlds, generations, and character incarnations and offering 
some pointed commentary on colonialism, the cost of war, and the slippery defini-
tion of monstrosity (as one character observes, “It is a condition of monsters that 
they do not perceive themselves as such”). Fans of torturously star-crossed lovers 
à la those in Marr’s Wicked Lovely (BCCB 7/07) and Black’s Tithe (BCCB 1/03) 
will find much to enjoy here, but those who flock to innovative, character-driven 
fantasy with thematic depth will be equally enthralled.  CG
tucK, JuStin Home-Field Advantage; illus. by Leonardo Rodriguez. Simon, 
2011 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-0369-7 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3429-5 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 5-8 yrs
What’s the secret to NFL success? Punishing physical training? Mental discipline? 
Fortitude and resilience? In the case of New York Giant Justin Tuck, it helped to 
have big sisters. Here the defensive end regales listeners with a childhood anecdote 
that finds him as a young boy with his defenses down, sweet-talked by his twin sibs 
Christale and Tiffany into allowing them to give him a haircut: “‘Sit,’ said Christale. 
‘We’ll be done in a jiffy.’ . . .The twins seemed so sure they could do a good job 
that I sat.” One badly botched job and a bucket of tears later, Justin’s parents arrive 
to survey the damage and confront the twin stylists responsible for their young 
son’s “reverse mohawk.” Tuck’s narration is brief and breezy, concluding with a 
serious nod toward family bonds and a humorous one toward never quite trusting 
big sisters. Rodriguez’s watercolors are a stitch, tipsy-tilty with frenetic action, and 
fully capturing the smirky delight of the mischievous twins and the wide-eyed 
terror of the victimized little brother. When the action turns too horrifying to 
face directly, Rodriguez cleverly borrows the cinematic ploy of rendering the dark 
moment (disastrous haircut, looming parents) in elongated shadows. Legions of 
youngsters at some point suffer a sibling-, friend-, or self-mutilated hairdo. They’ll 
share the pain.  EB
VAn diepen, AlliSon The Vampire Stalker. Point/Scholastic, 2011 257p
ISBN 978-0-545-28375-5 $17.99  
Ad Gr. 8-10
In van Diepen’s fictional world, the pinnacle of teen girl fan culture is occupied 
not by the Twilight saga but by The Mists of Otherworld, the tale of an alternate 
Chicago where the vampire incursion froze technological progress around the 1920s. 
James and Hannah, Otherworld’s star-crossed human/vampire couple who are at-
tempting to forge peace between the species, are most readers’ favorite characters, 
but super-fan Amy is completely in love with James’ brother Alexander, an angsty 
vampire hunter. The twist? It turns out that the author of the Otherworld series 
wasn’t just inspired, she was actually subconsciously picking up on a real story 
from a parallel world. When Alexander accidentally chases the most dangerous 
of all his vampire foes through a portal into Amy’s Chicago, he runs into Amy, 
who helps him figure out his unfamiliar surroundings and track his target. A lot 
of incident is shoehorned into the novel, from interludes surrounding Alexander’s 
adjustment to modern conveniences and social mores to a road trip with the school 
librarian (who worked on a degree in “literary physics” before being kicked out 
52 • The BulleTin
of academia for her radical—and, it seems, apparently correct—theories) to meet 
the flabbergasted author. The romance between Amy and Alexander is beyond 
unbelievable, and none of the characters evince much depth, with many of them 
simply conveniently placed to provide some needed plot point. Still, as a snappy, 
affectionate send-up of both vampire fandom and the Mary Sue phenomenon (in 
which fanfiction romantic interests are thinly disguised authorial avatars), this is 
quite fun, riffing on fan culture without dismissing what it means to its members. 
Vamp-lovers and vamp-haters alike may therefore want to be in on the joke.  CG
wAlKer, meliSSA Small Town Sinners. Bloomsbury, 2011 [272p]
ISBN 978-1-59990-527-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
Lacey Anne Byer is beyond thrilled at the prospect of finally being old enough to 
play a major role in her church’s Hell House, an evangelical version of a haunted 
house where church members dramatize in grotesque and horrifying skits the 
consequences of living a sinful life. This year, Lacey wants to play the part of Abor-
tion Girl, the scene that really gets tears flowing in the audience. Her excitement 
is somewhat dampened, however, when Ty, a boy she hasn’t seen since first grade, 
returns to town and starts asking questions that challenge her easy acceptance of 
the teachings of the church and her youth pastor father. When her friend Dean is 
bullied by another boy in their youth group and her father isn’t responsive, she’s 
even more confused, and her slide into doubt turns into a freefall when another 
friend’s sister gets pregnant and she herself starts to have lustful feelings for Ty. 
Although Lacey’s doubts and questions are presented heavy-handedly through 
somewhat clunky dialogue, they will be familiar to many readers growing up in 
sheltered homes in a conservative faith tradition; her parents’ responses are frus-
trating in their doctrinaire piety, but her friends are more than willing to engage 
with her in looking beyond platitudes and learning what it means to really love 
flawed people, including herself. Although clearly purposive, the narrative tone is 
questioning enough to avoid overt didacticism, and this emerges as one of very few 
books that allow Christian teens an opportunity to see their faith commitments 
portrayed without mockery or derision while remaining supportive of questions; 
indeed, a reading-group guide and an interview with the author are included to 
encourage follow-up discussion.  KC 
weBB, Sophie Far from Shore: Chronicles of an Open Ocean Voyage; written and 
illus. by Sophie Webb. Houghton, 2011 80p
ISBN 978-0-618-59729-1 $17.99  
Ad Gr. 4-6
Webb shares her observations on yet another scientific cruise (My Season With 
Penguins, Looking for Seabirds, etc.); this mission to the Eastern Tropical Pacific col-
lects data to help determine why dolphin populations continue to decline, despite 
decades of maritime law that now protects them from purse-seine tuna fishing. 
Webb pursues a collateral interest—counting seabirds—which may ultimately 
contribute information related to the dolphin problem. Descriptions of marine 
mammals, seabirds, and flying fish are supported by meticulous illustrations of 
their pelagic habitat. Even children accustomed to high-quality nature photography 
will appreciate the advantage of detailed illustration to compare related species, 
suggest the range of life within an ecosystem, and imagine underwater scenes that 
SepTemBer 2011 • 53
could not be seen by a human eye in the darkness of extreme depth. Although this 
close-up of a researcher at work bears some kinship to the Scientists in the Field 
series, lack of attention to what becomes of the data post-voyage may frustrate 
children interested in following the dolphin study, and Webb’s failure to discuss 
exactly how one enumerates sea life (how, for instance, do you count flying fish 
when they “erupt” from the ocean in hundreds or thousands?) is a notable omis-
sion. Nonetheless, readers who enjoy general works on marine biology will find 
Webb’s journey to be an inviting lens through which to view some of their favorite 
sea creatures. A hybrid glossary/index is included.  EB 
wellS, roSemAry Hands Off, Harry!; written and illus. by Rosemary Wells. Te-
gen/HarperCollins, 2011 40p (Kindergators)
ISBN 978-0-06-192112-4 $14.99  
Ad 4-7 yrs
In Miss Harmony’s kindergarten classroom, the Kindergators (alligators in kinder-
garten, of course) work together to help one other when something goes wrong. 
That is, except for troublemaker Harry, who bumps into his classmates during 
Friendly Circle, makes Miracle spill her glue, and tackles Nigel during yoga. Spend-
ing time in the thinking chair doesn’t reform Harry, who doesn’t even apologize 
with sincerity (“‘He doesn’t mean it!’ said Babette. ‘He’s not using an I’m sorry 
voice’”). Fortunately, Babette comes up with the perfect solution to Harry’s space 
issues: she borrows an inflatable tube from the gym which Harry wears around 
his middle the rest of the day as a reminder to leave some space between him and 
other people. While clearly intended for classroom use and discussion, this first 
installment in the new Kindergators series is didactic to the hilt; Miss Harmony is 
the perfect teacher, with a calm approach to even the most trying moments, and 
her measured speech and unruffled composure are clearly presented as an ideal for 
educators sharing this book with kids. Similarly, the students’ day is framed by best 
practices for peaceful classrooms, with group meetings, redirection, and reflection. 
The story consequently reads more like a case study for creating peaceful classrooms 
than a storybook, which is likely to be somewhat off-putting to listeners. There 
is, however, plenty of functionality to the text, particularly for those elementary 
classrooms needing a focused lesson on personal-space issues. Wells combines her 
usual sturdily whimsical illustrative style with collage elements, from an array 
of patterned fabric to the green, scaly surface (raised on the cover) of the ’gators 
themselves. Order this more for its usefulness than its aesthetic and keep an eye out 
for other specific classroom issues in future titles. A note on “Creating Classroom 
Harmony” is appended.  HM 
welSh, m. l. Mistress of the Storm: A Verity Gallant Tale. Fickling/Random 
House, 2011 [320p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75245-9 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75244-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89917-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
As a misfit both at school and at home, Verity Gallant never expected to find herself 
the heroine in adventure involving ancient evil, undying revenge, and familial love. 
But that is exactly what happens when a mysterious stranger hands her a dusty old 
book in the library of Wellow, a town where stories can come true. Suddenly, all 
54 • The BulleTin
sorts of strange things start happening in her small coastal village, including the 
arrival of a woman who, while claiming to be Verity’s grandmother, seems to be 
hell-bent on destroying the young girl and her family. Fortunately, with some help 
from her similarly outcast friends, Henry and Martha, Verity begins to unravel the 
mystery surrounding her heritage, realizing that her grandfather wrote her role in 
this story long before she was even born and that it is now up to her to defeat the 
tale’s villain. Steeped in maritime lore and with a delightful cast of characters, this 
series opener will certainly find followers among fans of Cornelia Funke and N. 
E. Bode. Vivid details and an intriguing backstory make Grandmother a truly ter-
rifying opponent, while Verity herself is just right as the shy, put-upon underdog 
destined for great things. Though pacing does hit a few snags, most readers will be 
satisfied with Verity’s impressive transformation from scapegoat to seafaring hero 
and will look forward to her next adventure.  KQG
weSterFeld, Scott Goliath; illus. by Keith Thompson. Simon Pulse, 
2011 [560p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4169-7177-1 $19.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3436-3 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 5-9
Westerfeld brings to a thrilling and fitting conclusion his alternative history of 
World War I, pitting the German-led, mechanically dependent Clankers against 
Britain and her allies, the Darwinists, who employ a technology based on geneti-
cally engineered biota (see Leviathan, BCCB 12/09, and Behemoth, 12/10). Having 
assured that the Ottoman Empire would not join forces with the Clankers, the 
airship Leviathan now makes its way toward Japan, determined to “assist” its ally 
in fighting off its enemies and demonstrate that this is essentially a European war 
with European interests most at stake and the British will take the lead in battle. 
They’ve picked up a peculiar and ultimately dangerous passenger, Nikola Tesla, 
who claims to have developed an electrical weapon so powerful that a nonlethal 
demonstration of its potential should be enough to bring enemies to armistice. 
Alek, heir to the throne of Austria-Hungary, is a believer, despite the advise of his 
handlers, but in an eleventh-hour showdown with Clanker amphibious walkers, 
he is forced to kill the scientist to save Leviathan and, most importantly, his dearest 
friend Dylan, whom he now knows to be Deryn, a girl in midshipman disguise. 
Alek’s discovery of Deryn’s identity comes early enough in the novel to allow the 
erstwhile buddies to struggle their emotional way through the implications of 
forbidden romantic impulses between prince and commoner and to realize fully 
that Deryn must keep up her ruse in the interest of critical British diplomacy. The 
introduction of other such historical notables as William Randolph Hearst, Pancho 
Villa, and “girl reporter” Adela Rogers St. John advances rather than tangles the 
dynamic plotting, and readers familiar with the catastrophic event that leveled 
the region near Tunguska, Siberia will be delighted to see how Westerfeld fits 
it into his storyline. As Leviathan completes its eastbound circumnavigation of 
the world, Alek and Deryn find a path through their personal dilemma that will 
leave the audience thoroughly satisfied. New, intriguing employment awaits them 
with one of the series’ more enigmatic characters, and the myriad possibilities for 
future fieldwork leave the door ajar for Westerfeld to rejoin them later, should he 
so choose. Oh, please, choose.  EB
SepTemBer 2011 • 55
williAmS, mArciA, ad. Ancient Egypt: Tales of Gods and Pharaohs; ad. and illus. 
by Marcia Williams. Candlewick, 2011 48p
ISBN 978-0-7636-5308-8 $16.99  
R Gr. 4-7
Williams, who’s been the go-to woman for comic book adaptations since back in 
the day when pickin’s were slim, offers nine engrossing myths and historic legends 
in her signature style of humorous illustration and schtick-laced word bubbles 
paired with serious narrative. The first four entries include a creation story, the 
well-known tale of Isis and Osiris, and stories of treachery and vengeance between 
Seth and Horus, which surely rival anything classical mythology can offer in terms 
of family dysfunction among the gods. The following five entries focus on histori-
cal figures—Zoser, Hatshepsut, Thutmose, Tutankhamen, and Cleopatra—with 
an eye toward capturing their legends rather than reconstructing historical events. 
Williams makes the most of her layouts, with a full-spread battle scene between 
Horus and hippo-morphed Seth, foldouts of Zoser’s step pyramid and Tutankha-
men’s burial, and a painted papyrus map of the Nile region. A running strip of 
papyrus at the bottom of the pages is allotted to Ra’s cat, who offers some largely 
unnecessary (and sometimes visually distracting) remarks on life in ancient Egypt. 
Children who enjoy Williams’ volume of classic myths will welcome this trek deep, 
deep into the past.  EB
wilSon, KArmA Hogwash!; illus. by Jim McMullan. Little, 2011 36p
ISBN 978-0-316-98840-7 $16.99  
R 4-7 yrs
It’s time for spring cleaning, and while Farmer easily washes his way through most 
of the farm animals, he is met with absolute resistance from the pigs, who post a 
sign on the pen that reads “No hogwash for us today. Pigs love dirt—so go away!” 
The determined farmer tries a variety of tactics, from poking the hose in through 
the pigpen window (which only makes mud) to disguising himself as the pizza man 
(he’s told to leave the pizza by the sty), but to no avail. His final effort involves fill-
ing his cropduster with water and shampoo and bombarding the hogs from above, 
and it’s a worthy plan except that he runs out of gas and ends up crash-landing in 
the middle of the pigs’ mud puddle . . . at which point he discovers that rolling 
around in the mud is heaps of fun (“There was Farmer, soaked in grime,/ having 
quite a splendid time!”). The jaunty rhymed verse of this barnyard tale lends itself 
perfectly to the humorous power play between Farmer and the swine. There are 
echoes of Cronin’s Click, Clack, Moo (BCCB 9/00) in the notion of ornery barnyard 
residents protesting by means of signage, and the pigs’ wit comes across in full force. 
McMullan’s watercolor illustrations limit their colors, emphasizing the succulent 
pink of the pigs and the brown of their earthy domain against creamy pages, and 
the soft edges (the figures are outlined in strokes of coordinating watercolor) and 
gentle textures make the action warm as well as humorous. Listeners will happily 
cheer for Farmer as he realizes the messy truth that if you can’t beat them, you 
might as well join them.  HM
56 • The BulleTin
wright, Bil Putting Makeup on the Fat Boy. Simon, 2011 [240p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4169-3996-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2398-5 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Even though he’s only sixteen, Carlos Duarte knows he has what it takes to be a 
makeup artist for the stars. He’s working at Macy’s FeatureFace counter, but his 
talent is too much for Valentino, his competitive boss, and he runs into trouble 
when a shopping celebrity asks for his help instead of Valentino’s. Meanwhile, his 
home life is falling apart as his mother loses her job, and his sister’s boyfriend, 
who has always bullied the flamboyant Carlos, has started to abuse her as well. His 
mom expects him to be the man of the house and intervene, and Carlos ends up 
with a lot to juggle, including a crush on a rocker boy classmate, Gleason, who is 
giving him mixed signals. Carlos is well up to any task, however, and even though 
everything doesn’t work out exactly the way he wants it to, he’s got both the hope 
and the chutzpah to move forward. Although Carlos’ series of successes represents 
a work-oriented wish-fulfillment fantasy only loosely keyed to possible reality, his 
effervescent enthusiasm makes readers believe that he can pull off the make-up 
miracles he describes and enter the industry at sixteen; moreover, the realism of 
his sister’s situation and his failed crush anchor the story in ways that keep it from 
being too over-the-top unbelievable. The title is somewhat misleading, as Carlos is 
only formerly fat; now he’s cruising into his career with a keen sense of style and a 
strong sense of self that can’t help but buoy those readers who themselves live and 
dream outside the mainstream.  KC 
Apology To An AuThor And To my grAndmoTher:
In my review of Meghan McCarthy’s The Incredible Life of Balto in the July/August 
issue, I not just once but twice used an incorrect last name for the author. I sincerely 
apologize to Meghan McCarthy, whose book I liked quite a bit; I also apologize 
to my grandmother, Lucy McCarthy, who is glowering at me from the afterlife 
for messing up my own family’s name. My deepest regrets to Meghan McCarthy; 
please stop turning over now, Grandma.
SepTemBer 2011 • 57
ASSociAtion For liBrAry SerVice to children And the horn BooK In the 
Words of the Winners: The Newbery and Caldecott Medals 2001-2010. ALA Edi-
tions, 2011 219p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-8389-3586-6 $50.00
A companion to the 2001 The Newbery and Caldecott Medal Books, 1986-2000: 
A Comprehensive Guide to the Winners, this compilation of reviews, biographical 
essays, and acceptance speeches about the last decade’s award winners and their 
creators will appeal to librarians, scholars, and anyone interested in the world of 
children’s literature and publishing. Former Bulletin editor and current Horn Book 
editor Roger Sutton provides an introductory piece discussing the significance of 
the awards even in light of criticism regarding recent winners. The award win-
ners and their associated speeches and essays are listed in chronological order. 
Highlights include Rebecca Stead’s multiple—and often humorous—iterations of 
her acceptance speech (for When You Reach Me, the 2010 Newbery winner) and 
Cynthia Kadohata’s heartfelt dedication to her family in her acceptance speech for 
Kira-Kira, the 2005 Newbery winner.  KQG
Blowing our own horn depT:
mcdowell, KAte “Children’s Voices in Librarians’ Words, 1890-1930.” Libraries 
and the Cultural Record 46.1 (2011): p. 73-101. 
Kate McDowell, former Bulletin reviewer and current assistant professor at the Uni-
versity of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science, looks into 
the documentation by American librarians of children’s own words regarding their 
reading experiences, spanning from 1890 to 1930. These accounts not only reflect 
the attitudes of children towards literacy but also relay information about librarians’ 
fundamental beliefs regarding children’s reading habits, immigrant cultural prac-
tices, and the perceived need for children to meet middle-class expectations.  KQG
Dr. McDowell was also recently featured in an interview about storytelling on 
ILoveLibraries.org, the American Library Association’s website for the public. 
Among other things, she discusses the cultural significance of storytelling and its 
possibilities in the digital age. “Storytelling has always been used as way to pass 
down folklore and history before it was written down in books,” she says. “Today 
both books and digital media continue this tradition, but a live person telling a 
story still provides an experience that’s unlike anything else.” For the complete 
interview, please visit: http://www.ilovelibraries.org/news/topstories/storytelling.cfm
ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons: resourCes for teAChers And LIBrArIAns
58 • The BulleTin
SteVenSon, deBorAh “Caldecott 2011.” The Horn Book Magazine 87.4 (Jul.-
Aug. 2011): p. 11- 16.
Bulletin editor Deborah Stevenson discusses the award-winning qualities of A Sick 
Day for Amos McGee (Roaring Brook, 2010), the 2011 Caldecott winner, along 
with the honor books, Dave the Potter: Artist, Poet, Slave (Little, Brown, 2010) 
and Interrupting Chicken (Candlewick, 2010). The article also highlights some 
of the stronger picture book selections for the year and comments on the overall 
increase of nonfiction titles as possible contenders for awards generally reserved 
for fiction.  KQG
September 2011 • 59
Actors and acting–fiction: Krishnas-
wami
Addiction–fiction: Reed
Adoption–fiction: Armstrong
AdventuRe: Bruchac; Cross; 
Fisher, C.; Lore; Moodie; nix; 
Santat; Stanley; Westerfeld
Africa–fiction: Powers
African Americans–fiction: neri
African Americans–stories: Bandy; 
Johnson, A.
Alcoholism–fiction: Reed
Animals: Hulbert; Jenkins
Animals–fiction: Meloy; Santat
Animals–stories: Isop; Rodriguez
AntHoLogIeS: Black
Anthropology: Kirkpatrick
Appearance–stories: tuck
Archeology: Kirkpatrick
Art: Crews
Art and artists: Christensen; Say
Art and artists–fiction: Finn
Art and artists–stories: Look
Asian Americans–stories: Look
Behavior: Jenkins
Behavior–fiction: Patterson
Behavior–stories: Wells
BIogRAPHIeS: Christensen; ot-
taviani; Say
Blogs–fiction: Johnson, J.
Boarding school–fiction: garcía; 
Knight
Boats–fiction: Moodie
Books and reading–fiction: van 
diepen; Welsh
Books and reading–stories: Brown, 
M.
Brothers–fiction: oppel
Brothers–stories: Borden
Brothers and sisters–fiction: King; 
Meloy
Brothers and sisters–stories: tuck
Business–fiction: Paulsen
Careers–fiction: Wright
Cars–stories: Medina
Cats–fiction: Pearce, Jacqueline
Cemeteries–fiction: Ray
Civics: Anderson
Clothing–fiction: Jennings
ConCePt BooKS: Fisher, v.
Cousins–fiction: Ada
Crime and criminals–fiction: Cross; 
gantos; Halpern; Skuse
Current events: Aronson; Brown, d.
death–fiction: Boyne; Russell
demons–fiction: Brennan
disabilities–fiction: Koertge; Shreve; 
Steinhöfel
disasters: Aronson; Brown, d.
dogs–fiction: McCranie; Perl
dogs–stories: Crosby; Rohmann
dragons–fiction: Bruchac
drug abuse–fiction: Reed
dystopias–fiction: Johnson, e.; 
Smyth
england–fiction: Bradbury
Ethics and values: Ada; Black; 
Coakley; Cockrell; Johnson, J.; 
Powers; Saller; Skuse; Walker
etiquette–fiction: Rumley
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
60 • the bulletin
extraterrestrials–fiction: Lore
Faith–fiction: Walker
Families–fiction: Alexander; Cock-
rell; Koertge; Perl; Powers; Ray; 
Saller; Walker
Families–stories: Borden; Johnson, 
A.; Medina
FAntASy: Armstrong; Black; 
Boyne; Brennan; Bruchac; Coak-
ley; Fisher, C.; King; Knight; 
Meloy; neimark; nix; Papademe-
triou; Porter; Russell; Stanley; 
taylor; van diepen; Welsh
Farm life–stories: Wilson
Fathers–fiction: neri
Fishing–fiction: Moodie
FoLKtALeS And FAIRy tALeS: 
Crews
Food and eating–stories: Rodriguez
Friends–fiction: Balog; garcía; 
goode; Halpern; Hannan; 
Paulsen; Sitomer; Steinhöfel
Friends–stories: Stead
gays and lesbians–fiction: goode; 
Wright
ghosts–fiction: Hudson; LaRochelle; 
Messer
Government: Anderson
grandparents–fiction: Perl; Welsh
gRAPHIC noveLS: McCranie; 
ottaviani; Santat; Smyth; Wil-
liams
grief–fiction: Harrington
Halloween: Rohmann
HIStoRICAL FICtIon: Bandy; 
Bradbury; Finn; gantos; garcía; 
oppel; Saller; Shreve
History, U.S.: Brown, d.
History, world: Williams
Horses–fiction: Finn; neri
HuMoR: Crosby; daly; gantos; 
Hannan; Harris; LaRochelle; 
Lloyd-Jones; McCranie; Metzger; 
Milgrim; nesbitt; Patterson; 
Paulsen; Perl; Rodriguez; Rumley; 
Russell; Szpirglas; tuck; Wilson
Identity–fiction: Ada; goode
Illness–fiction: Powers
Imagination–stories: daly
India–fiction: Krishnaswami
Inventors and inventing–fiction: 
McCranie
Islands–fiction: Papademetriou
Japan: Say
Jobs–stories: Lloyd-Jones
Kidnapping–fiction: King
Latinos–fiction: Ada; Wright
Latinos–stories: Crews; Medina
Libraries and librarians–stories: 
Brown, M.
Lists–stories: Milgrim
Literature, English: oppel
Love StoRIeS: Myers
Magic–fiction: Stanley
Media–fiction: Skuse
Mermaids–fiction: Porter
Mining: Aronson
Mothers–fiction: Shreve
Mothers–stories: Milgrim
Music and musicans–fiction: Alexan-
der; goode; Hannan
Music and musicians–stories: Sul-
livan
MySteRIeS: gantos; Metzger; 
Pearce; Steinhöfel
Mythology, classical: Papademe-
triou
Mythology, Egyptian: Williams
Mythology, world: Knight
native Americans: Kirkpatrick
Nature study: Hulbert; Jenkins; 
Webb
nursery rhymes–stories: Metzger
Parks–stories: Johnson, A.
Pets–fiction: Santat
Pets–stories: daly
Physics: ottaviani
Pigs–stories: Wilson
PLAyS: Myers
Popularity–fiction: Sitomer
Quests–fiction: Fisher, C.
Racism–stories: Bandy
Reading aloud: LaRochelle
Reading, easy: Cosentino; LaRo-
chelle; Pearce; Szpirglas
Reading, reluctant: Hannan; 
Moodie; nesbitt
Regency–fiction: Bradbury
September 2011 • 61
Rehabilitation–fiction: Reed
Relationships–fiction: Alexander; 
Balog; Cockrell; Halpern; Koertge; 
Rumley; Russell; Walker
Relationships–stories: Borden
RHyMIng StoRIeS: Isop; Wilson
Romance–fiction: Bradbury; Bren-
nan; Hudson; Johnson, e.; Myers; 
taylor; van diepen
Royalty–fiction: Bruchac; Stanley
Runaways–fiction: Boyne
Rural life–stories: Sullivan
Saints–fiction: Cockrell
SCARy StoRIeS: Messer; Rohmann
School: Say
School–fiction: Hannan; Harris; Jen-
nings; Johnson, J.; Patterson; Ray; 
Russell; Sitomer; Szpirglas; Wright
School–stories: Wells
Science and scientists: ottaviani
Science and scientists–fiction: oppel
SCIenCe FICtIon: Johnson, e.; 
Lore; Smyth; Westerfeld
Secrets–fiction: Ray
Self-image–fiction: Shreve
Ships and sailing–stories: Stead
SHoRt StoRIeS: Black; LaRochelle
Sisters–fiction: Harrington; Knight
Social studies: Anderson; Brown, d.
South America–stories: Brown, M.
South, the–stories: Bandy
Spies and espionage–fiction: Bradbury
Sports–fiction: Jennings
SteAMPunK: Cross; Westerfeld
Storytime: Hulbert; Wilson
Summer–stories: Medina
Superheroes–fiction: Cosentino; 
Santat
SuPeRnAtuRAL StoRIeS: 
Armstrong; Balog; Cross; Hudson; 
Messer; Porter
Superstition–fiction: Jennings
terrorism: Brown, d.
time travel–fiction: neimark
toddLeR BooKS: Fisher, v.
twins–fiction: nix
urban life–fiction: neri
vampires–fiction: van diepen
voyages and travel: nivola; Webb
voyages and travel–fiction: Boyne; 
Halpern; Harrington; King; Krish-
naswami; neimark; Shreve
voyages and travel–stories: Rodriguez; 
Stead
War–fiction: Coakley; taylor; West-
erfeld
WoRdLeSS BooKS: Rodriguez
World cultures: Powers
World War II–fiction: Saller
Writers and writing–stories: Look
Zombies–fiction: Harris
E
ncouraging serious scholarship 
and research, Children’s 
Literature publishes 
theoretically-based articles that address 
key issues in the ﬁ eld. Each volume 
includes articles, essays, and abstracts 
of dissertations of note. 
Children’s Literature is the annual publication of the 
Modern Language Association Division on Children’s Literature and the 
Children’s Literature Association (ChLA).
Published annually. Volume  (). 
To become a member:
Individuals and institutions may 
Call: --
receive Children’s Literature as a  
Fax: --
beneﬁ t of membership to the ChLA.  
Online: www.childlitassn.org
ISSN - / E-ISSN - 
Or write: ChLA
 
P.O. Box 
Battle Creek, MI -
Published by 
T H E JOHNS HOPKINS UNIVERSITY PRESS
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE:
TRACING THE 
SHAPING OF 
YOUNG MINDS.
 
R. H. W. Dillard, Editor-in-Chief
Julie Pfeiﬀ er and Michelle Anne Abate, Editors
HOLLINS UNIVERSITY
T
he Children’s Literature 
Association Quarterly 
publishes ﬁ rst-rate 
scholarship in children’s literature 
studies. Each issue features an 
editorial introduction, juried articles about research and 
scholarship in children’s literature, and book reviews. T e Quarterly is 
available to members of the Children’s Literature Association (ChLA) 
as a beneﬁ t of membership.
Published quarterly. Volume  (). 
To become a member:
Individuals and institutions 
Call: --
may receive Children’s Literature  
Fax: --
Association Quarterly as a beneﬁ t 
Online: www.childlitassn.org
of membership to the ChLA.  
Or write: ChLA
ISSN - / E-ISSN - 
P.O. Box 
 
Battle Creek, MI -
Published by 
T H E JOHNS HOPKINS UNIVERSITY PRESS
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE ASSOCIATION 
QUARTERLY:
MEMBERS GET IT.
 
Katharine Capshaw Smith, Editor, 
UNIVERSITY OF CONNECTICUT
Kenneth Kidd, UNIVERSITY OF FLORIDA; 
Anne K. Phillips, KANSAS STATE UNIVERSITY; 
Lynne Vallone, RUTGERS UNIVERSITY / 
Associate Editors
T
he Lion and the Unicorn, an 
international theme- and 
genre-centered journal, 
is committed to a serious, ongoing 
discussion of literature for children. 
T e journal’s coverage includes the 
state of the publishing industry, regional authors, 
comparative studies of signiﬁ cant books and genres, new developments 
in theory, the art of illustration, the mass media, and popular culture. 
It is especially noted for its interviews with authors, editors, and other 
important contributors to the ﬁ eld, as well as its outstanding book 
review section. 
Published three times per year.  
To order:
Volume  (). 
Call: -- or --
., individuals (print or online) 
Fax: --
., institutions (print or online) 
Email: jrnlcirc@press.jhu.edu
., institutions (print & online) 
Online: www.press.jhu.edu/journals
ISSN - / E-ISSN -
Published by 
T H E JOHNS HOPKINS UNIVERSITY PRESS
THE LION AND THE UNICORN: 
A CRITICAL JOURNAL OF 
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE
EXPLORING LITERATURE 
FOR CHILDREN.
state of the publishing industry, regional authors, 
 
David L. Russell, FERRIS STATE UNIVERSITY,
Karin E. Westman, KANSAS STATE UNIVERSITY, 
and Naomi J. Wood, KANSAS STATE UNIVERSITY, 
Editors
