I 
LI 
NOI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
:IJ
_
·1
Katherine Paterson
winner of the
1998 Hans Christian Andersen Award
·'I
II
Presented to Katherine Paterson, "whose complete works
have made an important contribution to children's literature.'
-The 
International Board on Books for Young People
Katherine Paterson's books published by HarperCollins include:
BRIDGE TO TERABITHIA
1978 Newbery Medal
Age 10 up.
$14.95 TR (0-690-01359-0)
$14.89 LB (0-690-04635-9)
$4.95 PB (0-06-440184-7)
THE GREAT GILLY HOPKINS
1979 National Book Award
1979 Newbery Honor Book
Ages 10 up.
$14.95 TR (0-690-03837-2)
$14.89 LB (0-690-03838-0)
$4.95 PB (06-440201-0)
JACOB HAVE I LOVED
1981 Newbery Medal
Ages 12 up.
$14.95 TR (0-690-04078-4)
$14.89 LB (0-690-04079-2)
$4.95 PB (O-06-440368-8)
For descriptions of Katherine Paterson's
ten HarperCollins titles write:
* HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York, N.Y. 10022
http://www.harperchildrens,com
I 
-
- -. _-~II
THE
BUvL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
July/August 1998
Vol. 51 No. 11
A LOOK INSIDE
385 THE BIG PICTURE
The Squire's Tale by Gerald Morris
386 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
388 * The Deetkatoo: Native American Stories about Little People comp. and
ad. by John Bierhorst; illus. by Ron Hilbert Coy
408 * The Education ofRobert Nifkin by Daniel Pinkwater
414 * Big Bushy Mustache written by Gary Soto; illus. by Joe Cepeda
414 * Knots in My Yo-Yo String: The Autobiography ofa Kid by Jerry Spinelli
417 * The Secret Knowledge of Grown-ups written and illus. by David
Wisniewski
418 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
420 ANNUAL AUTHOR AND TITLE INDEX
40·f~~
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin ofthe Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor (JMD)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Pat Mathews, Reviewer -(PM)
CENTER STAFF
Shirley Chan
Linda Fenster
Kate McDowell
Jordan Martin
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $40.00; individuals, $35.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 51 E. Armory Ave., Champaign,
IL 61820-6601. E-mail: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu
Visit our homepage at http://edfu.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1998 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Lou Beach from The Squire's Tale ©1998. Used by permission of Houghton
Mifflin Co.
JULY/AUGUST 1998 
* 385
THE BIG PICTURE
The Squire's Tale
by Gerald Morris
Tales of Arthur and Camelot have an appeal that crosses genders, genres, and age
levels. Librarians are forever being approached by young readers who want stories
of knights jousting, castles besieged, and enchantresses ensorcelling, and some-
times we are hard-pressed to come up with a title to suit the need. Available
variations on the Arthurian theme include dense but wonderful Sutcliffian sagas,
accessible but not always successful San Soucian picture books, and faithful retell-
ings that require a degree in medieval studies to follow. Who will help fill this
literary need?
Enter our champion with plumes flying-Gerald Morris, author-knight, with
the token of his ladylove, Humor, fastened firmly to his funnybone. Forget the
ponderous pace of Paterson's Parzival and the stateliness of Pyle's Knights of the
Round Table-if your readers are looking for some notable swashing and buckling
with a little chivalrous slapstick thrown in, this retelling of Arthurian legend is the
book for you.
The focus here is on the adventures of King Arthur's nephew Gawain, or to be
more precise, the adventures of Gawain and his inexperienced but pluckily game
squire, Terence. Morris' Sir Gawain is the pre-Malory goodly knight, gentle and
courteous, but with a limit to his patience; his squire is Terence (a nontraditional
character created by the author) raised by a holy hermit and fey with faerie blood.
Readers follow Gawain and Terence as they go questing, picking up Sir Tor and
Sir Marhault along the way. Encounters with knights without honor, damsels in
(sometimes self-inflicted) distress, enchantresses, sorcerers, poisonous eels, and
(happily) unrequited lovers are related in stylish prose that surprises with its unex-
pected humor. Readers get a taste of what's to come at the end of Chapter One,
when Gawain defeats an obnoxious knight with the aid of an empty stewpot: "Sir
Hautubris flashed his sword from his scabbard and chopped down mightily at
Gawain's head. Gawain stepped quickly to one side, and the sword buried itself in
the dirt next to him. Gawain rapped Sir Hautubris's helm with the stewpot. The
visor flapped down, and a loud clang rang out."
Morris' setting is a terrain imbued with an ever-present sense of magic both
wonderful and terrifying, a terrain that his characters inhabit with lively vigor.
More than cardboard heroes, Morris' players in this Arthurian adventure have
tremendous heart; they are not one-dimensional glory seekers but questioning as
well as questing individuals with conflicts of both conscience and desire. The
female characters (who, admittedly, play minor if catalytic roles in this particular
version of the tale) are at least interesting, from Gawain's enchantress aunt Mor-
gan le Fay and mother Morgause to the Three Questing Ladies (maiden, mother,
and crone) who travel with and educate questing knights. True, Guinevere doesn't
386 
* THE BULLETIN
really shine in Morris' Camelot (he seems to agree with Tennyson that she wasn't
exactly an asset to the king), but Morris' handling of the story of Gawain and the
Loathly Lady is very nicely turned indeed.
The dialogue sidesteps expected formality with colloquial humor that positively
begs for reading aloud, as when Sir Tor, despite entreaties by a vengeful woman,
exasperatedly refuses to kill a knight who has already yielded to him: "'Madam, I
tell you, he's already yielded to me,' Tor said. 'What difference does that make?'
the lady demanded. 'This is Sir Abelleus!' 'Well, good for him,' Tor said impa-
tiently .... [Tor] looked at the kneeling Abelleus. 'Do you promise not to be so
naughty anymore and to stop striking down good knights?' 'Oh, yes,' Abelleus
said, nodding emphatically. ... 'And do you apologize for killing this lady's brother?'
'Oh yes. Very sorry, madam.'"
Although this subtly irreverent take on Arthurian legend pokes deliberate fun at
noble knights and fair ladies who take themselves entirely too seriously, Morris
avoids the obvious Monty Pythonesque possibilities, balancing between noble sen-
timent and the cheap shot with witty grace. Terence and Gawain do finally settle
down to the serious business of saving Arthur and Camelot from an evil sorceress
and discovering the identity of Terence's father, but that's just the rousingly satis-
fying conclusion to an Arthurian road trip that will have readers wondering why
there aren't more books like this one and hoping that Morris will do it again.
(Imprint information appears on p. 406.)
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ANDERSEN, HANS CHRISTIAN 
The Little Mermaid; ad. and illus. by Rachel
Isadora. 
Putnam, 1998 
[32p]
ISBN 0-399-22813-6 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
One reason that Hans Christian Andersen's tales have become classics is their
exquisitely complex writing style, which goes far to compensate for heavily
misogynistic themes. Now, of course, Disney has changed all that, and "The Little
Mermaid" has been injected with another century of life based on visual images of
singing sea life. For Disney-imprinted preschoolers, Isadora's picture-book
version-whose text reads like Cliff Notes of Andersen's, true to plot but not
form--offers graphics emphasizing childlike merfolk, pastel sunsets, balletic scenes
of the prince with his adoring mermaid, and underwater interiors foaming like
bubble bath. It's so light-filtered and lovely that listeners may not even wonder
JULY/AUGUST 1998 
* 
387
why those cherubic babies, the "children of the air," have to work for three hundred
years to earn a soul. Isadora's vision is neither ironic like Andersen's nor hyperactive
like Disney's, but tranquil and placid, lacking the emotional conflict and tragic
impact that makes the original effective. Her impressionistic full-page watercolors
in green, blue, and gold face short blocks of text embedded in squares of color that
reflect various shades of sea and sky. If one simply must have a watered-down
"Mermaid" for this age group, this quiet variant may be useful. BH
ARNOLD, KATYA, ad. 
Meow!; illus. by Katya Arnold. 
Holiday House, 1998 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1361-6 $16.95 
R 2-5 yrs
How can a puppy get any shut-eye with this distracting "Meow!"-ing in his ears?
As he pursues the sound around house and yard, he encounters a rooster, mouse,
fish, frog, and others, all of whom protest their innocence. Meanwhile, rascal cat
hides in the scenery, carrying on its mischievous campaign, doubtless to the de-
light of the lap-sitting audience. The story (also retold in Maria Polushkin's 1988
version, illustrated by Ellen Weiss), based on the 1955 animated film Who Said
Meow?, remains faithful to its cartoon pedigree with springy animal figures, thickly
and shaggily outlined, romping across improbably striped backgrounds as dirt flies,
water splashes and drips, and hapless Puppy is doomed by a concluding "Mooo!"
to another bout of sleeplessness. With frisky animals, lots of sounds for mimick-
ing, and a search-and-find challenge, how can you go wrong? EB
BAAN, BRUCE 
Buoy: Home at Sea; illus. by Rail Col6n. 
Delacorte, 1998 
69p
ISBN 0-385-32539-8 
$14.95 
NR Gr. 5-8
Buoy (yes, a buoy, you know, the kind that rings bells and flashes lights to keep
boats from bumping into it) floats out in the middle of the sea, far from land. He
isn't lonely, though-his friends Gull and Seal are there to keep him company, to
chat with him and ponder the secrets of the sea, the universe, and life. Along with
Seal and Gull, there are visits from Porpoise, Shark, Whale, and Wind, with the
occasional encounter with humans in various stages of sailing distress thrown in
for good measure. Buoy's daily conversations and contemplations on the meaning
of life are reminiscent of an ocean-going Jonathan Livingston Seagull or a salty
Freddie the Leaf, with exchanges such as the following setting the tone: "'Ship
coming,' said Buoy. No one moved. 'Ship coming,' Buoy said again, and rang his
bell. 'Oh.' said Seal. 'So ... ?' said Gull. 'Don't you care?' asked Buoy. 'No,' said
Seal." Col6n's illustrations, both full color and black and white, effectively evoke
a sense of being out to sea, but even his intense sunsets and menacing shark will
not keep readers from drowning in teeny print and platitudes. The gifty design of
the book itself is handsome, with lower-case chapter titles, big white borders, and
artsily placed pictures. The sixteen brief chapters should be able to float a narrative
theme or plot, but this title has more handsome packaging than substance. JMD
BARRETT, JUDI 
Things That Are Most in the World; illus. by John
Nickle. 
Atheneum, 1998 
32p
ISBN 0-689-81333-3 
$16.00 
R 
5-7yrs
In this baker's dozen of silly superlatives, each spread offers an imaginative extreme
in text ("the wiggliest thing in the world is a snake ice-skating") opposite an in-
vigorated depiction of the example (long curly loops of black-and-yellow serpent
whizzing across the ice on a single skate with scarlet scarf flying). Examples of
388 
* THE BULLETIN
excess include the silliest, the quietest, the jumpiest, the stickiest, and so on, excel-
ling in the imagery (yes, a skunk convention would be pretty darn smelly) if not
always in the logic (why is a Tyrannosaurus rex heavier when he weighs himself
than at any other time?). Nickle's acrylic paintings have a high-gloss weirdness
that emphasizes the bizarreness of the extremes; his additional pictorial details (a
pair of polar bears eye the "hottest" fire-breathing dragon, who desperately at-
tempts to cool himself with a hand-held fan) enhance the conceits' pleasurable
absurdity. Tailor-made for language arts usage, this even has a fill-in-the-blanks
last page that prompts kids to create their own "most" tropes. DS
BENNETT, JAMES W. 
Blue Star Rapture. Simon, 1998 
134p
ISBN 0-689-81580-8 
$16.00 
R Gr. 9-12
African-American high school juniors T.J. Nucci and Tyron are at Full Court, a
basketball camp for star players, their coaches, and their agents. Tyron is there
because he has star potential and T.J. is there because he's Tyron's friend and
keeper. And Tyron does need keeping-though a gifted player, he is academically
slow, and T.J. is there to keep him motivated and focused. While exploring Full
Court grounds, T.J. meets Ruth Ann, or LuAnn as she was called before she was
saved. Ruth Ann is from a fundamentalist Bible camp across the wooden bridge
from Full Court. She and T.J. meet on the bridge just a few times, but he is moved
by her, and their conversations about faith, God, and choices are more than just
casual talk. T.J. is a complex, thinking character who changes as a result of events
that occur in the course of the novel. He recognizes that everyone is out to get
what he can, and yet he still seeks the moral high ground without ever becoming
some kind of noble stereotype. Bennett's plot evolves gently, never condescending
to characters or reader, and never taking the easy way out. Unpleasant truths are
left unvarnished, and the players are seen through the wise-before-his-time T.J.'s
eyes. T.J. is a fine friend and a loving son, and when at the book's conclusion his
mother tells him, "You are a good boy, T.J.," readers will agree wholeheartedly.
This will be an easy sell to those readers just back from seeing Spike Lee's He Got
Game. JMD
BIERHORST, JOHN, comp. and ad. 
The Deetkatoo: Native American Stories about
Little People; illus. by Ron Hilbert Coy. 
Morrow, 1998 
153p
ISBN 0-688-14837-9 
$16.00 
R* Gr. 3-8
This is an unusual collection of twenty-two vibrant tales about "little people" and
their role in the lives and stories ofAmerican Indians. Called tlaloque by the Aztec,
surem by the Maya, pipilzitzin by the Pipil of El Salvador, and deetkatoo by the
Tillamook, the little people are helper figures that often bring food, rain, and good
luck to the big people who treat them with kindness and respect. These short
retellings have a winning combination of elements: magic, humor, and inherent
morals that reinforce the values of being respectful to elders, being generous to the
unfortunate, and keeping promises. The tales are brief but elegantly delivered. In
his informative introduction, Bierhorst describes them as being somewhere be-
tween the memorate ("a direct account of someone's experience with the super-
natural") and the traditional structured folktale; they have the immediacy of personal
narrative, and that gives them a delightful vigor. Full-page pictographic black-
and-white illustrations simply depict the most unlikely events. Bierhorst lets the
stories speak for themselves but includes a very brief guide to tribes and cultures, a
JULY/AUGUST 1998 
* 389
short section on little people lore, extensive notes, and references for further read-
ing. Tales of the little people exist in many American Indian cultures, yet they
have not previously been compiled in any systematic way. Bierhorst has done the
genre of folklore for youth a great service with this collection. JMD
BUNTING, EVE 
The Day the Whale Came; illus. by Scott Menchin. 
Harcourt,
1998 
32p
ISBN 0-15-201456-X 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 2-5
The carcass of a whale is passing through Johnstown, Illinois on a flatbed car
attached to a train engine, and all the townspeople turn out to get a look at it "for
educational purposes." Tommy, the narrator, and his friend Ben are going too,
Tommy because he knows a lot about whales and this may be his only chance to
see one, and Ben because he wants to get himself "a chunk of whale." The boys
join the throng crowding eagerly to pay their money and take their look, despite
the smell of the iced but still rapidly decomposing beast. When the locomotive
breaks down, the townspeople bury the whale, and the next year Tommy sees
wildflowers growing profusely in the shape of a whale over the place where the
cetacean was laid to rest: "The whale didn't know land. But its death made this
land rich. Once the whale had been beautiful. It is beautiful again." The plot
exposition is a bit contrived-Tommy won't help his friend cut off a piece of
whale, he stands up for the whale and that's the same as standing up for himself,
and he gets a new (better) best friend as a result-but Menchin's mixed-media
illustrations combine collage and painting to create a montage of distinctive char-
acters, train, and townsfolk in compositions that reflect and add to the story's
overall impact. Although the sense is one of historical fiction based on a real
episode (there actually was a frozen whale on exhibit in Chicago's Exposition Hall
in 1880 that was taken on just such a train ride), no historical notes are included.
JMD
BUNTING, EVE 
So Far from the Sea; illus. by Chris K. Soentpiet. 
Clarion,
1998 
32p
ISBN 0-395-72095-8 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 3-5
This isn't Laura's first trip to the remains of the Manzanar War Relocation Center,
but the infamous World War II site makes her uneasy: "I should be used to this
place, but I'm not. I shouldn't be nervous, but I am." Her father brings the family
to visit the grave of his father, who died in the camp; on this particular visit,
Laura's younger brother Thomas is old enough to understand his father's child-
hood reminiscences of the relocation, and his sister's anger and hurt at an injustice
she never personally experienced. Bunting does a creditable job of negotiating the
delicate matter of blame, as the family's dialogue points out that in a war there is
plenty of that commodity to go around. Soentpiet's richly detailed paintings switch
from full color in family scenes to a film noir-ish black and white for the war years,
a device which makes it easier for children with little knowledge of these events to
sort out action from memory. There is a contemporary look and sound to this
account, and careful attention to the concluding note (or some timely adult inter-
vention) may be necessary to adjust reader's understanding of the dates of the war
and the fictional family's memorial visit in 1972. Team this with Mochizuki's
Baseball Saved Us (BCCB 9/97) for readers who aren't quite ready for Jerry Stanley's
IAm an American (BCCB 11/94). EB
390 
* 
THE BULLETIN
BUTTS, NANCY 
The Door in the Lake. Front Street, 1998 
[160p]
ISBN 1-886910-27-8 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
When he was twelve, Joey Finney went missing; two years later he reappears with
no memory of the intervening time and no sign of having grown any older in the
interim. Joey's plagued not only by this temporal dislocation (his younger brother
is now bigger than he is, he's got a baby sister he's never seen before, and his old
best friend has become a teenager and doesn't want to know him) but also by
seizures from a head injury, which when x-rayed suggests that something has been
implanted in Joey's skull. Alien abduction stories this earnest and devoid of camp
are rare in children's literature, and this goes through its paces with diligence and
awareness, capably counterpointing the larger horror with the smaller one ofJoey's
dislocation from his earthly role. The characters and concepts are televisually shal-
low, however, and much of the story is coincidence-driven and predictable. Skep-
tics won't find much to convince or entice them here, but this will be eagerly
absorbed by youngsters sure that the truth is out there somewhere. DS
CARLE, ERIC Hello, Red Fox; written and illus. by Eric Carle. 
Simon,
1998 
28p
ISBN 0-689-81775-4 
$16.00 
Ad 
5-7 yrs
Little Frog is having a birthday party, and he receives a menagerie of colorful
visitors-Red Fox, Purple Butterfly, Orange Cat, and so on. The twist here is that
the animals originally appear in their complementary colors (which explains the
bright green fox on the cover), and Little Frog's mother keeps thinking that her
son has mistaken his guests. The illustrations may not disprove her view entirely,
but they also support his. After an introduction (in which Carle explains and gives
instruction in the creation of afterimages), each spread revealing an arriving friend
provides a strongly contrasting complementary-colored figure on the left and white
space on the right, so that the viewer "creates" the illustration that fits Little Frog's
description (matching the refrain "and, indeed, Little Frog was right!"). It's an
entertaining trick, sort of pre-tech Magic Eye effect, and kids will get a kick out of
both the gimmick and the little frog who knows better than his mom. The images
are awfully vague and evanescent (there's also occasionally interference from the
bright colors on the verso, which show through in the white space) and the game
goes on a bit too long, however, which not only drags down the slender plot but
also starts taking a toll on the eyes. Carle's spring-garden colors tend to make their
counterparts pale by comparison, though the softer hue works niftily on the final
joke ("And Little Frog blushed"). There's more gimmick than story here, but
youngsters who gravitate to visual puzzles will want to cast an eye in the direction
of this book. A note on Goethe's color theories and a sample color wheel are
included. DS
CARLSON, LAURIE 
Boss of the Plains: The Hat That Won the West; illus. by Holly
Meade. 
Kroupa/DK Ink, 1998 
32p
ISBN 0-7894-2479-7 
$16.95 
R Gr. 2-4
John Stetson was a consumptive eastern hatmaker when he decided to go West in
1859, joining an expedition to Colorado. He used his hatmaker's felting skills to
make a tent and then a funny-looking but immensely useful and durable felt hat.
When Stetson returned back East, he decided to market that hat, which he called
JULY/AUGUST 1998 
* 391
"The Boss of the Plains." The rest is, as they say, history, since the hat we now
know as the Stetson became the cowboy's reliable friend and an icon of the West.
Carlson resists the temptation to be cute, but she's clearly appreciative of this cha-
peau chapter of history: her brief description of the felting process is simple and
lucid, and her enumeration of the many uses for a Stetson ("It shielded a cowpoke's
eyes from blinding sun and caught the rain before it trickled down his back... Or
came in handy when the sweetest huckleberries were ready to be picked") is quietly
picturesque. Meade's mixed-media illustrations use cut paper to give the earth-
toned scenes an immediacy and grounded gaiety often missing from images of the
past, but her careful employment of colored-pencil shading and watercolor high-
lights gives the spreads more subtlety, unity, and textural blending than pure col-
lage sometimes displays. As well as being an enjoyable story of an American symbol,
this is a compact demonstration of the lesser-sung role of entrepreneurship in west-
ward expansion. A brief followup and bibliography cap things off. DS
CHORAO, KAY 
Little Farm by the Sea; written and illus. by Kay Chorao. 
Holt,
1998 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8050-5053-1 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-7 yrs
As children meander through this book, they can gather snippets of information
about a seasonal year of rural activity. Better yet, they can get a feel for life in the
country, because in this idyllic look at a little farm near Long Island, the hustle and
bustle of urban life is kept solidly outside the farm gates. Delicate paintings, ren-
dered in gouache and softly detailed in pen and ink, reveal all the goings on at
Smallholdings farm: planting the fields, gathering the eggs, milking cows, picking
the strawberries, feeding the animals, and mingling with customers. Especially
attractive are the double-page spreads of the barn porch, where farm cats and other
creatures relax amidst a seasonal panoply of earth's bounty that spills from tables,
carts, and makeshift shelves; it's easy to conclude that this would be a fine place to
spend a weekend. The hijinks of some escaped piggies cause the only disturbance
in the agrarian tranquillity of this little homestead, which may bother those who
like their farms a little less perfect, but young city dwellers needing a break from
life's busyness won't have any trouble slowing down for this pastoral fantasy. PM
DECLEMENTS, BARTHE 
Liar, Liar. Cavendish, 1998 
14 4 p
ISBN 0-7614-5021-1 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 4-6
"Everything had been easy until sixth grade. That was when Marybelle moved
into our neighborhood," begins this story of an insidious troublemaker's effect on
the lives of Gretchen Griswald and her friends. Marybelle is an outsider who
desperately wants to be an insider, and her attempts to gain attention range from
slicing off a chunk of Susan November's curly locks (in what was supposed to be a
pretend hair-cutting demonstration) to being the important carrier of secret and
damaging information about others-in what initially seems to be delicious gossip
and what eventually proves to be largely lies. When Marybelle ruins Gretchen's
reputation with her sly stories, Gretchen struggles to find a way to restore the
undermined social fabric of what had formerly been known in school as "a nice
class." DeClements has a good feel for middle-school social rhythms and keeps
the situation realistically complicated: moved by pity, need, and convenience,
Gretchen socializes with Marybelle despite the joylessness of the association, and
the girl Gretchen turns to when others shunned her fully expects to be dropped
392 
* THE BULLETIN
when the situation rights itself. The ddnouement (a sort of intervention, where
Marybelle's lies are brought to light in front of everybody) is contrived, and the
book lets Marybelle's credulous listeners off awfully easily, but there's truth enough
in both the portrayal of the yearning and spiteful newcomer and in the havoc the
change of dynamics can wreak. Readers who aren't quite ready for the take-no-
prisoners truth of Fine's The Tulip Touch (BCCB 9/97) will appreciate this more
circumscribed but far from simplistic social saga. DS
DEPAOLA, TOMIE 
Bill and Pete to the Rescue; written and illus. by Tomie
dePaola. 
Putnam, 1998 
[48p]
ISBN 0-399-23208-7 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Crocodile Bill and his symbiotic buddy, plover Pete, now go up the Mississippi
pursuing The Bad Guy's Big Bad Brother, a black-marketeer trading in endan-
gered animals, who has captured Bill's cousin Little Jane Allison. Donning their
backpacks and leaving a note for Bill's mother, the pair board the steamer Cleopatra
and track The Bad Guy's Big Bad Brother to the Louisiana bayous. Assisted by
friendly 'gators, Bill not only rescues Little Jane but is also reunited with Pete, who
had been temporarily waylaid by the Rich Lady, who in turn proves to be their
benefactress. This outing is a bit overdrawn in both plot and illustration; in fact,
five consecutive spreads (in which Bill also finds his father, who is happily not a
suitcase) are nearly identical. Reference to Pete as a "toothbrush" is unexplained,
and although the Garden District and French Quarter are mentioned, New Or-
leans is never named. Still, Bill and Pete are endearing pals, and dePaola parlays
search-and-rescue drama into a scenario accessible to quite young listeners. EB
DEWAN, 
TED, ad. 
The Sorcerer's Apprentice; ad. and illus. by Ted
Dewan. 
Doubleday, 1998 
32p
ISBN 0-385-32537-1 
$15.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
An inventor (the Sorcerer) in a workshop decides to create a robot to perform his
domestic labor; once created, his robot (the Apprentice) avails himself of the same
technology to build himself a robot helper, and so on, and so on, "until all the
tubes and wires and gears were used up." Then the robots erupt in a frenzy of
destructive vacuuming that threatens to destroy the original Apprentice until the
Sorcerer puts an end to the matter (by blowing them all, save the Apprentice, up).
The heavy-metal workshop action and the ever-increasing number of robots clearly
headed towards chaos will hold the interest of many youngsters, and though the
Sorcerer's smithereens solution suffers from severe dramatic convenience, young
block-tower-smashers will adore it. This interpretation of Goethe's tale makes
some of the story's aspects inexplicable-why is the mess the fault of the robot
who made the robots rather than the human who started it all, and what makes the
first robot special while the other ones are dispensable? Dewan's line-and-watercolor
art has a rawboned Mad magazine exaggeration to it, and the cumbersome and
homely marvels of the elaborate machines will make contemporary net-surfing
youngsters giggle. The visuals get in their own way, however, with obtrusive text
blocks and monochrome drawings that skew the compositions' focus, resulting
too often in a haphazard jumble rather than in the glorious mess of the more
successful spreads. This isn't going to displace the Fantasia sequence, but the
unusual appeal of the subject and the time-honored motif might well boot up a
storytime. The back jacket flap provides some source information. DS
JULY/AUGUST 1998 
* 393
DILLEY, BECKI 
Sixty Fingers, Sixty Toes: See How the Dilley Sextuplets Grow; by
Becki and Keith Dilley; illus. with photographs by E. Anthony Valainis. 
Walker,
1998 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8614-6 
$16.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8613-8 
$15.95 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
The Dilley sextuplets may have recently been outnumbered by the McCaughey
septuplets, but six is still a passel of active little kids in a very busy household. This
photoessay introduces the children individually and shows them as a pack. The
details and logistics are daunting and intriguing, ranging from three cribs with two
babies apiece in infancy to the floor-to-ceiling steel gates keeping the toddlers in
their section of the house and out of trouble. The text is bland and flat and the
information and chronology are sometimes confusingly scattered, however; we
never hear the date the babies were born, they're referred to as three long before we
see their third birthday, and it takes several pages to clarify everybody's gender.
There's also a disappointing absence of contrast between these children's existence
and the life most young viewers lead, since no other children ever appear in the
book. The photographs often seem posed, but they reveal a photogenic sextet of
distinct and disparate personalities; trying to match names to faces in the group
shots will provide an additional entertainment. This missed a lot of opportunities
to make itself really appealing to youngsters, but it's still an attractive baby book
with a difference. DS
DUNCAN, Lois, ed. 
Trapped!: Cages ofMind and Body. 
Simon, 1998 
[240p]
ISBN 0-689-81335-X 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 9-12
Here's a toothsome baker's dozen from popular young-adult authors for readers
willing to chew over the many possibilities of claustrophobia-from smothering
relationships to mythical labyrinths, from broken marriages to broken minds.
Among the more notable offerings, Rob Thomas's "Sheep" features a high school
protagonist who cannot comprehend the entrapment of the residents in a shelter
for battered women where he volunteers. In "The Box," Francesca Lia Block's
Alicia struggles to combat both anorexia and loss of identity in an all-consuming
affair now on the wane. Gregory Maguire darkly twists the story of Theseus and
the Minotaur, robbing "The Athlete" of his victory. Walter Dean Myers' "The
Escape" features parallel monologues of a hospitalized abuse victim's session with
his psychiatrist, in which his verbalized and internalized thoughts are presented.
And just when it seems this collection can't get much heavier, along comes Joan
Bauer's yeasty "Pancakes," a study in comic pandemonium in which a fanatically
organized teen waitress faces the Sunday rush in a pancake restaurant without
help. Mature readers looking for more daring material than Fraustino's Dirty
Laundry (reviewed below) could break this one open. EB
ECKERT, ALLAN W. Return to Hawk's Hill. Little, 1998 
[160p]
ISBN 0-316-21593-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
Nearly thirty years have passed since Eckert published his Newbery honor awardee
Incident at Hawk's Hill, but protagonist Ben MacDonald has aged only a single
year since his encounter with the badger, making it now 1871. Eckert has amended
his style drastically, however, and he plunges directly into the action of this sur-
394 
* THE BULLETIN
vival sequel, which finds seven-year-old Ben drifting toward Lake Winnipeg in his
father's rowboat, eluding the trapper, Burton. Ben is rescued by a Metis (Cree)
youth, who brings him to his village; while Ben amazes his hosts with his gift for
animal communication, his family launches yet another frantic search. 
Mr.
MacDonald and eldest son John draw closer together as they comb the shores of
Red River for any sign of Ben, and Esther MacDonald is captured by Burton, who
has metamorphosed from a sleazy menace into a villain of the first water. Although
fauna and woodlands remain important here, the close nature observations which
distinguished Eckert's previous work are absent-a fact which will come as a dis-
appointment to the outdoorsy set, but a boon to readers who never quite made it
as far as the action of Incident. With its workmanlike and accessible plotting,
Return is bound to appeal to a wider audience, many of whom may then be lured
back to its more challenging predecessor. EB
ENGLAND, LINDA 
The Old Cotton Blues; illus. by Teresa Flavin. 
McElderry,
1998 
26p
ISBN 0-689-81074-1 
$16.00 
R 4-7 yrs
Dexter loves the sound of old Johnny Cotton's clarinet ("That clarinet could make
Dexter feel the blue-down blues, and the deep-down-shaking, slow-laughing feel-
goods") and wants one of his own, but Mama reminds him that "our money's for
rent and the pork chops you love." Johnny Cotton offers Dexter another option
in the form of his deceased daddy's "Mississippi harp," and before long little Dex-
ter is "coaxing songs from his silver harmonica." This simple little story is carried
along by rhythmic, toe-tapping prose, which captures the longing of a boy who
has music in his soul. Both the text, with its simple economy of words, and the
facing illustrations, spackled gouache paintings in a range of deep pastels on tinted
paper, capably capture the nuances of the relationship between the African-Ameri-
can characters of Dexter and his sympathetic mentor. As Johnny reminisces about
his daddy, brown-toned scenes of his father beaming from the glory assure us that
the passing of the harmonica to Dexter meets with Daddy's approval. The elation
of Dexter and Johnny as they finally play the Old Cotton Blues side by side should
also elicit approval from kids, especially aspiring musicians. PM
FLETCHER, SUSAN 
Shadow Spinner. Karl/Atheneum, 1998 
219p
ISBN 0-689-81852-1 
$17.00 
R Gr. 5-9
An intricately imagined and constructed tale within a tale, this first-person narra-
tive reveals thirteen-year-old Marjan's efforts to help Shahrazad, ofArabian Nights
fame, find stories to entertain the Sultan lest he kill her as he has so many other
wives. Marjan's quest for one particular story becomes dangerous when she must
escape the harem to seek it. The plot is complex and suspenseful, but not to the
neglect of characterization. The large cast features a vivid array of personalities
ranging from an elderly pigeon keeper to Shahrazad's headstrong younger sister
and the bitter Sultan himself. Buried deep in the book's heart is the moving secret
of Marjan's painfully crippled leg and her mother's death. Marjan's development
is credible, her adventures engrossing, and her story frame (brief "Lessons for Life
and Storytelling" opening each chapter) a clever device not unlike Shahrazad's
own subtle messages to the man she loves as well as fears. Greet readers of Donna
Jo Napoli's Zel (BCCB 7/96), Robin McKinley's Beauty (12/78), and other fairy-
tale fiction with this new winner. BH
JULY/AUGUST 1998 
* 395
FLORIAN, 
DOUGLAS 
Insectlopedia; written and illus. by Douglas
Florian. 
Harcourt, 1998 
48p
ISBN 0-15-201306-7 
$16.00 
R Gr. 3-6
In his elegant and cleanly formatted volumes, Florian has versified on behalf of
mammals (beast feast, BCCB 7/94), birds (On the Wing, 4/96), and fish (In the
Swim, 5/97), and he now turns his attention to the world of insects (as well as their
common-law cousins, the arachnids). Subjects range from weevils ("We are ruin-
ous./ We are rotten./ We drill holes/ In bolls of cotton") to the monarch butterfly
("He is a monarch./ He is a duke./ Swallows that swallow him/ Frequently puke")
to the mayfly ("A mayfly flies/ In May or June./ Its life is over/ Far too soon"), and
forms vary subtly from couplets to ballad meter to concrete poetry. While some of
the verses scan better than they conceptualize, they're always neat and often quite
witty indeed. Florian's artistic style (each spread includes a full-page portrait op-
posite a poem) has changed sdmewhat; working on brown paper, he has added
collage to his watercolors, which sometimes ends up diffusing the energy of the
illustration but also provides an opportunity for visual humor and some vivid and
subject-appropriate teeming. Those who have relished the other poetic bestiaries
will want to buzz on over to this one. DS
FRADIN, DENNIS BRINDELL 
Samuel Adams: 
The Father of American
Independence. 
Clarion, 1998 
182p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-395-82510-5 
$18.00 
R Gr. 5-8
Don't let the daunting sobriety of the cover art or the sheer heft of this volume
chase prospective readers away from Fradin's smoothly readable and often delight-
fully personal biography of the consummate strategist who kept the demand for
independence simmering on colonial Massachusetts' back burner until revolution
finally came to a boil. The price of Adams' indefatigable passion for independence
is never far from sight-the failed careers that kept him steadily impoverished, his
neglected family, his notoriety for using his dearest friends to further the cause. As
Adams played (or was at least reputed to have played) a role in nearly every famous
textbook event from the Boston Tea Party to the adoption of the Constitution, the
account of the man necessarily becomes a history of the era. Fradin steadily re-
minds his readers that revolution was never a foregone conclusion and that Adams'
incendiary rhetoric and often sly maneuverings tipped a scale that was not always
weighted in favor of separation from England. Period cartoons and engravings,
portraits and later historical paintings, letters, and even beer labels illustrate the
text; a bibliography, index, and an afterword on Fradin's quest to track down
Adams sites and artifacts round out the volume. EB
FRAUSTINO, LISA ROWE, ed. 
Dirty Laundry: Stories about Family Secrets. 
Viking,
1998 
[160p]
ISBN 0-670-87911-8 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 8-12
Fraustino presents eleven short stories by young adult authors that invite readers
to indulge in a little recreational voyeurism. Leading off is an ostensibly provoca-
tive, but ultimately tepid, entry by Bruce Coville, in which a teenager first meets
his Uncle George-soon to be Aunt Gladys-on the eve of his sex-change opera-
tion. Without the luxury of the novel format in which to develop the relationship
(a la Koertge's TheArizona Kid), the tale devolves into self-conscious preachiness.
396 
* THE BULLETIN
Several stories fare little better-Dian Curtis Regan's lifeless take on a suicide at-
tempt with a rosy ending; M. E. Kerr's shiverless account of a revenant; Fraustino's
own offering of a girl who most improbably learns of a mentally ill family member
when she visits a mental hospital to read "The Yellow Wall-Paper" to some elderly
patients. However, the anthology is brightened by Rita Garcia-Williams' simple
and poignant depiction of a beloved brother's slide into mental illness and Laurie
Halse Anderson's wickedly sharp and funny teen narrator, who describes life be-
tween the two households of his newly divorced parents. A portion of this title's
proceeds will be donated to the National Coalition Against Censorship, but ironi-
cally, Lois Duncan's anthology Trapped (reviewed above) is a riskier, more chal-
lenging offering. EB
GELBER, CAROL 
Love and Marriage Around the World. Millbrook,
1998 
72p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-7613-0102-X 
$21.40 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Love, and then marriage. If that's the assumption made by young mainstream
American readers, it's in for a big challenge here, as Gelber demonstrates that
marriage, and then possibly love, has been the norm for most cultures over time
and across continents. Following an opening chapter on the genesis of the institu-
tion of marriage, she surveys various cultures regarding kinship pre- and proscrip-
tions for selecting a mate, the role of matchmakers, dowry and bridewealth
payments, marriage rites, and the roles of co-spouses and in-laws. Myriad ex-
amples do tend to run on a bit, but each chapter is tightly and clearly focused on
an individual theme. Rituals cited vary from the startling ("As the [rural Egyp-
tian] girl arrives at her husband's house, his mother stands in the doorway and
blocks the entrance with a raised leg. The bride must crawl into her new home")
to the comic ("To punish the bride for stealing their nephew, the [Hopi] groom's
aunts attacked his house with water and mud in a mock battle"). Despite several
full-page color photos, which provide welcome breaks in the dense text, this title's
plain pipe-racks design is far less enticing than its subject matter. Still, the What's-
love-got-to-do-with-it approach should be an intriguing eye-opener for many read-
ers. There are no notes, but a list for further reading and an index are included.
EB
GIBBONS, GAIL 
Yippee-Yay!: A Book about Cowboys and Cowgirls; written and
illus. by Gail Gibbons. 
Little, 1998 
[32p]
ISBN 0-316-30944-3 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 1-3
Focusing on life in the Old West, Gibbons offers a concise precis of the cowboy
existence. She helpfully enumerates the traditional accoutrements of your basic
range rider and some of the standard tasks and terminology; maps of famous cattle-
drive trails and descriptions of the various jobs on a drive are a particularly useful
addition. The illustrations are disappointingly awkward, however, with confusing
components (the picture of cowtown life seems mainly to feature yoked oxen,
which look distractingly like the cattle the cowboys just got rid of) and a lack of
research evident in the details (the art wrongly shows rodeo bareback broncs rid-
den with halters, for instance). A gallery of "Famous Cowboys and Cowgirls"
interprets the definition a bit differently than the rest of the book but includes
some of the classics; a page of factual miscellanea is sometimes intriguing but some-
JULY/AUGUST 1998 
* 397
times frustratingly vague. Cody's The Cowboy's Handbook (BCCB 3/96) is a live-
lier and more effective introduction to life amid the sagebrush, but this will jangle
the jinglebobs of youngsters not yet up to that level. DS
GIFALDI, DAVID 
Rearranging and Other Stories. 
Karl/Atheneum, 1998 
160p
ISBN 0-689-81750-9 
$16.00 
R Gr. 7-10
Nine short stories are thematically linked by the depiction of adolescents facing
moments of truth in their young lives. Each story focuses on one character in
crisis-Laura waits for her deadbeat father to make good on his promises, Seth is
set-up for a fall by an old friend, Paige considers a sexual relationship with her
boyfriend-and each achieves an epiphany of sorts based on their moral choices.
Gifaldi has an appealingly easy style, an attractive flair for detail, and an ear for
authentic teen language. Although the stories have a tonal sameness when taken
collectively, individually they have humor and impact. The final story, "And An-
gels Too," in which two lonely individuals find themselves drawn together by ice
cream cones and a poem one hot summer night, has all the promise of young
adults just waiting to discover the world. This would be an interesting, non-
condescending choice for reading aloud to junior high students facing moral di-
lemmas of their own. JMD
GODWIN, LAURA 
Little White Dog; illus. by Dan Yaccarino. 
Hyperion,
1998 
28p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2256-2 
$15.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0297-9 
$14.95 
R 
2-4 yrs
In each spread, a brief verse asks a question ("Little White Dog/ in the snow,/
snow's so white/ where did you go?") while the artwork plays the hide-and-seek
game the poem hints at. After the dog, several other creatures also seemingly
disappear into their background settings, until finally they all go off to find one
another in a culminating burst of cumulation. This is a deftly turned entry-level
puzzle of perception, visually simpler (and therefore conceptually a bit more com-
plicated) than some of Tana Hoban's photographic guessing games. Yaccarino's
gouache illustrations retain their retro flair, but instead of his usual high-sheen
near-acrylic rotundity he's used flat planes of color in construction-paper hues,
resulting in a cut-paper effect. The soaring color borders appropriately dominate
the compositions, with part of every creature clearly delineated (this isn't a book
out to stump the toddlers) and part undifferentiated from the background, only to
allow the complete creatures to pop out in full contrast later on in the book. There's
no particular reason why turning on the light should result in finding the other
critters as well as the "Little Black Cat in the night," but an audience deep in the
cozily circumscribed hidden-picture game won't notice. Quite a few conceptual
riffs might be spun out of this, but lots of lapsitters will be plenty happy just
successfully demonstrating their detective prowess and watching the menagerie
romp. DS
GOODMAN, JOAN ELIZABETH 
Hope's Crossing. Houghton, 1998 
212p
ISBN 0-395-86195-0 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 6-8
In the middle of the night twelve-year-old Hope, her mother, and her brother and
sisters are rousted out of their beds by Tories, the house is sacked and burned, and
Hope is kidnapped. She is taken by Noah Thomas, the raid leader, who, foiled in
398 
* THE BULLETIN
his plot to seize her rebel father, plans to ransom her instead. His wife, Elspeth, is
thrilled at the stolen family heirlooms he brings her, but his mother is shocked by
his kidnapping of Hope and quickly conceives a plan to return the girl to her
family. Hope and the old woman flee to New York City, planning on seeking help
from Mother Thomas' cousins in Connecticut, but the plan goes awry when Mother
Thomas dies of smallpox and Hope is taken in by a self-serving British general's
wife. Ultimately, all ends well with Hope being returned to her family by the
irascible Pruitt Jones, old love and old friend of Mother Thomas. Hope is a well-
realized protagonist set among other colorfully drawn characters. Although the
somewhat contrived plot elements-Mother Thomas' roundabout plan to get Hope
home, their stay in a boarding house as they seek transportation through rebel
lines, their relocation to the pox house with its taciturn but kindly nurse, and even
Hope's being taken in by the general's lady-do not stand up to close scrutiny,
they still contribute to an overall sense of adventure. An historical note is in-
cluded. JMD
HADDAD, CHARLES 
Meet Calliope Day; illus. by Steve Pica. Delacorte,
1998 
[160p]
ISBN 0-385-32518-5 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
In an attention-grabbing opener, nine-year-old Calliope loses her favorite pair of
pink plastic fangs to the very person she's fantasized about biting in the neck-her
teacher, who confiscates them into a desk drawer. The rest of the book is dedi-
cated to an effort at retrieving this Draculonian treasure, starting with Calliope's
escape from the after-school program and developing into a scheme involving her
rabbit Mortimer, who hisses, two policemen, who are onto Calliope's habit of
coming home early while her mother is at work and her older brothers are some-
where unspecified (her father is dead), and an elderly neighbor, Mrs. Blatherhorn,
who has reported both Mortimer and Calliope to the authorities. The tone is
obstreperous, the pace frantic, the focus scattered, and the humor calculated for
kid appeal; Pica's cartoony illustrations have a Rugrats flavor that marks them as
seriously contemporary. Authorial asides-"Guess what?" and "Oh, don't worry"
and "Not bad, huh?"-give the third-person narration a self-conscious confidenti-
ality while shifting attention from the protagonist's viewpoint, but young readers
will forgive anything for slapstick scenes such as Calliope's attempt to vacuum an
ant out of Mrs. Blatherhorn's nose. BH
HANSEN, JOYCE 
Breaking Ground, Breaking Silence: The Story ofNew York's Afri-
can Burial Ground; by Joyce Hansen and Gary McGowan. 
Holt,
1998 
130p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8050-5012-4 
$17.95 
R Gr. 6-10
In 1991, an archeological team evaluating the New York City site of a new federal
office building uncovered the African Burial Ground, which, dating from the eigh-
teenth century, is the oldest known cemetery for people of African descent in the
United States. Both the story of the discovery of the cemetery and the stories of
those buried there are pieced together in this intriguing volume. Hansen and
McGowan (who is the head conservator of the team studying the Burial Ground)
interweave past and present, going back and forth between the written history of
Africans, both enslaved and free, in New York in colonial times and the light shed
JULY/AUGUST 1998 
* 
399
on their daily lives by the analysis of skeletons and artifacts uncovered in the Afri-
can Burial Ground today. There is a great deal of speculation here-perhaps the
female skeleton with the bullet in her ribcage died in a slave uprising, perhaps the
little girl with earbobs was part American Indian, perhaps the male skeleton with
the brass buttons was a sailor-but it is speculation based on available evidence,
and, combined with known history, it makes enlightening reading. Black and
white photographs of the site and period illustrations are poorly reproduced but
still enliven the dense but accessible text; notes on each chapter, a bibliography,
and an index are included. JMD
HANSON, MARY ELIZABETH 
Snug; illus. by Cheryl Munro Taylor. 
Simon,
1998 
[32p]
ISBN 0-689-81164-0 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 3-6 yrs
Like any normal kid, the bear cub, Snug, wants to play. "'No,' says Mother.
'Time for a lesson."' Mother wants him to dig up bulbs; Snug hops after a frog.
Mother leads him to an anthill; Snug scampers after a chipmunk, getting his head
stuck in a hollow log. Mother tries to teach him to fish; Snug dives in the water
("He is brave. He is daring. He is ... 
going too fast") and nearly goes over a
waterfall. Eventually Mother relents and joins Snug for "wrestling and rumbling
and playing." The rough-and-tumble text is accompanied by handmade, hand-
cut, and hand-colored papers, which form earthtoned forest collages. The lum-
bering brown shapes of mother and son predominate the various textures of
woodland and water detailing. Snug's rambunctious machismo is humorously
portrayed in both the text and the art, and kids will appreciate his aptitude for
getting into tight spots as well as Mother's role in easing the toddler tension by
quickly coming to Snug's rescue. The final mother-son frolic against a background
of the sun's emanating rays may incite some local rumble-tumble activity, so either
join in or get out of the way. PM
HILL, DONNA 
Shipwreck Season. 
Clarion, 1998 
215p
ISBN 0-395-86614-6 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Daniel Stafford enters into a new and uncomfortable relationship with his re-
spected Uncle Elisha, the keeper of a Cape Cod life-saving station, when Daniel is
sent to spend some months away from the questionable influence of his friends.
The teenager is expected to offer his uncle the same unquestioning obedience as
the highly disciplined team of men who staff the station; although his mocking
comments and pampered ways do not instantly endear him to his new comrades,
the men are more than willing to train him and in fact encourage his natural
strength and athleticism in the service of safeguarding the coast. Hill details the
drills, patrols, work rotations, and daily domestic duties of the 1880s maritime
rescue teams, clearly conveying the long stretches of monotonous routine broken
by periods of intense activity. Daniel's personal development, though, is predict-
able and mechanically presented, and despite scenes of a shipwreck's tragic after-
math and a heroic rescue mission, the nonfictional elements of the novel are more
involving than the prosaic coming-of-age plot. Readers bumming the summer
away on the beach might want to give this a look, however, and consider that their
pleasant vacation comes courtesy of the Coast Guard and its forerunners. EB
400 
* THE BULLETIN
HOBAN, JULIA 
Acting Normal. 
HarperCollins, 1998 
206p
ISBN 0-06-023519-5 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 9-12
Stephanie Holt used to be a model and an actress in television commercials, but
the eighteen-year-old hasn't worked in awhile. She missed a year of high school
when she had a nervous breakdown, a breakdown that was triggered by a repressed
"sense memory" of sexual abuse recalled in a method acting class. Stephanie, feel-
ing isolated and lost, is just barely managing to get herself through class and therapy
sessions when she is befriended by the sarcastic but compassionate Dahlia, who is
just what the fragile Stephanie needs-a nonjudgmental, sympathetic ally. The
interaction between the two girls has solid appeal as each becomes the friend the
other seeks. The action of the novel is built around the revelation of Stephanie's
recovered memory of her being sexually abused by a nanny when Stephanie was
five, which in turn is the catalyst that helps her save Dahlia from an attempted
rape, which leads to Stephanie's realization that sexual assault is never the victim's
fault. While Stephanie's recovery from her breakdown and her mixed feelings
about rejecting commercials and pursuing serious acting are sensitively evoked,
the textbook therapy sessions and the overly simplistic end-tying don't do either
subject justice. For the first two-thirds of this novel Hoban moves her characters
through their relationships (with parents and each other) and their New York City
environment with assuredness, only coming to real grief in the programmatic final
third, when she turns from character development to bibliotherapy. JMD
IGUS, TOYOMI 
ISee the Rhythm; illus. by Michele Wood. 
Children's Book Press,
1998 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-89239-151-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
As Igus implies in her introductory notes, the themes within this "look at the
history of African American music through the eyes of an artist" are set by illustra-
tions rather than by text, as Wood's gallery visually defines and contrasts the rhythms
of the developing stages of popular music (no mention is made of black contribu-
tions to classical composition). Wood opens with African "Origins," a mixed-
media composition in which the drum beat is represented by centrally placed,
repetitive images in both kente-cloth patterns and the cramped figures of a slave
ship diagram. Page turns then bring visual surprises and even a few psychic jolts,
as the sensuous curves and midnight hues of "Jazz Women" give way to the brassy,
angular spread "BeBop," or the formal, vertical lines of New Orleans architecture
in "Jazz Beginnings" are followed by the tangled swirl of dancers and musicians in
"Sounds of Swing." Unfortunately, Igus's text-which shares equal space with
Wood's work--can't keep up with Wood's key changes. There is little variation in
the steady, stiff thump of her free verse: "I see the rhythm of the blues/ in the
hardship of our times-/ in the calls and chants on the railroad lines"; "I see the
rhythm of cool jazz/ in the music of young musicians/ crying out for freedom of
expression." Crowding the text is a minuscule but informative timeline of social,
political, and musical events, which subtly shape Wood's visual celebration of sound
into a composite lesson in racial oppression and civil rights victories. The inclu-
sion of the occasional song lyric will make readers long for more-pop in a few
CDs and settle back for a good long look at the pictures. EB
JULY/AUGUST 1998 
* 401
JANiECZKO, PAUL B. 
That Sweet Diamond: Baseball Poems; illus. by Carole
Katchen. 
Atheneum, 1998 
40p
ISBN 0-689-80735-X 
$16.00 
R Gr. 3-8
"He approaches the plate,/ ponderous,/ swinging smoothly/ in slow motion/ know-
ing his choice is simple:/ swing or/not." The batter may be the star on the field,
but he shares the glory in this collection with everyone from the peanut vendors
"ignoring the battle/ being waged/ on the field of flawless green," to the aching
catcher whose "knees sing the blues/ They sing 'em when I stoop and bend," to the
nuns in the stands, "settled in a row/ behind the first-base dugout/ straight as
piano keys." Most of the entries are free verse-rich in imagery but slight of
rhythm-the sameness of which is delightfully relieved by the singability of
"Catcher Sings the Blues," the wry humor of the prescriptive "How to Spit," and
the unexpected poignancy of the old woman in "Section 7, Row 1, Seat 3," who
"measures life/ in baseball time:/ born the year Yankee Stadium opened,/... alone
since the Yankee's last pennant." Each poem is accompanied by a full-page illus-
tration in thickly applied pastels of dusty lavender and mauve, picked out with
startling patches of crimson and yellow and glaring white; Katchen's muscular
lines and rock-solid figures boast a self-assurance befitting the cockiness of the
pitcher and the unflappable faith of the fans. EB
JOOSSE, BARBARA M. 
Ghost Trap: A Wild Willie Mystery; illus. by Sue
Truesdell. 
Clarion, 1998 
66p
ISBN 0-395-66587-6 
$15.00 
R Gr. 2-4
Willie is elated that his "first best friend," Kyle, is moving back to town; his best
friend since Kyle's departure, Lucy, is less enthused by this challenge to her status.
The two best friends jostle for position with Willie caught in the middle, but the
three become a team in order to investigate the haunting of Kyle's new house.
Joosse capably combines the mundane (the friend-hierarchy dilemma) with the
exaggerated (a singing telegram, the ghost hunt, the kids' plan for a detective agency),
and her writing has an understated and offhanded wit that gives the book a zest a
great many easy readers lack. Readers may guess before the characters do that the
phantom presence in Kyle's house is really a very-much-alive talking parrot, but
that makes the ghost-hunting sequences all the funnier ("'Ghost slime!' I screamed,
pointing my flashlight to the white, goopy stuff on the floor"). Pages are chock-
full of Truesdell's black-and-white cartoons; the rumbustious line-and-wash pic-
tures ofgoogly-eyed kids add an extra joke by making Kyle and Lucy nearly identical.
Young readers in search of a short and sweet literary adventure will revel in this; it
could also make a prime choice for those kids to read aloud to their younger school-
mates. DS
KING-SMITH, DICK Mr. Ape; illus. by Roger Roth. 
Crown, 1998 
128p
Library ed. ISBN 0-517-70987-2 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-70986-4 
$16.00 
R Gr. 3-6
Mr. Ape (short for Archibald Peregrine Edmund) Spring-Russell is a rich English-
man left alone by his not-so-loving wife in the ancestral manse, Penny Royal. He
is happily converting the dining room into a hen house and sleeping in the kitchen
when he meets Joe and his son Jake, Gypsies whose caravan is camped nearby. Joe
takes over Penny Royal's neglected landscaping and Jake takes over the animals
402 
* THE BULLETIN
(which increase to include rabbits, canaries, guinea pigs, a dog, and a donkey),
much to everyone's content. When a spark from a Guy Fawkes' fire burns down
Penny Royal (don't worry-the animals get out safely), local inhabitants leap to
blame the Gypsies, who decide to leave. Mr. Ape, bereft of home and hearth, buys
himself a caravan, hooks it up to his Rolls Royce, and drives off into the sunset.
The plot may reach a bit, but the characters are solidly drawn, especially Mr. Ape
and Jake, whose shared passion for animals of any kind quickly cements their
friendship. The scenes wherein Mr. Ape converts the formal rooms of the man-
sion into roosts and hutches are described in hilarious detail, and Mr. Ape himself
appears destined to take his place alongside King-Smith's other eccentric senior
citizens. Roth's full-page, black-and-white pencil illustrations feature a handsome
assortment of animal and human characters drawn with a cheerful mien that is the
visual counterpart to King-Smith's easy style and language. This will make a good
chapter readaloud, but you'll have to stash it away to keep listeners from finishing
it on their own. JMD
LAFAYE, A. 
The Year ofthe Sawdust Man. 
Simon, 1998 
220p
ISBN 0-689-81513-1 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
"It was the roses that told me she'd gone. She kept a bed of purple roses and every
single bush was bare. Mama had gone through and cut away each flower. The
stems themselves cluttered the ground around the bushes. She'd harvested the
petals." Thus begins the period in 1934 when eleven-year-old Nissa Bergen
chronicles her mother's abandonment of the family, her father's courtship and
remarriage, and her own reactions that alternate between self-destruction and ten-
tative acceptance of a new kind of stability represented by her soon-to-be step-
mother. Most of all, she mourns her mother and her mother's spirited imagination,
which Mama has passed on to Nissa. Nissa's repetitive self-questioning is authen-
tic to the character but eventually wearing to the reader and perhaps tonally psy-
choanalytic for the period. However, there are a number of moving scenes, and
their eventual accumulation is convincing. The small-town, deep-south ambiance
is clearly depicted, especially in the ambiguous portrayal of neighbors who can be
at once intolerant and supportive within a closed community that scorns anyone
different or, of course, black. This is not as concisely subtle as Kimberly Holt's My
Louisiana Sky (BCCB 6/98)-also a first novel dealing with pre-adolescent family
loss in rural Louisiana-but the voice is strong and the experience enveloping
despite the expository narrative. BH
LASKY, KATHRYN 
A Brilliant Streak: The Making ofMark Twain; illus. by Barry
Moser. 
Harcourt, 1998 
4 1p
ISBN 0-15-252110-0 
$18.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
This brief account of Twain's early life (pre-Twain Twain, if you will) focuses
especially on his active boyhood and his Mississippi and Western adventures, which
provided source material for his later fiction. Lasky capably evokes the rough-and-
ready milieu in which the young Clemens took such delight, and she makes it clear
that Twain was a storyteller from early on. It's unfortunate, then, that the author
doesn't include any sources, so that we have no idea how she differentiated be-
tween Twain's inflated yarns and the biographical facts; the wordiness of the ac-
count (its picture-book-sized pages are densely packed with text) also means that
many kids ready to read this could tackle more complete biographies such as Clinton
JULY/AUGUST 1998 
* 403
Cox's (BCCB 9/95) or Richard Lyttle's (2/95). It's still a flavorful introductory
biography, however, and Moser's watercolor rogues' gallery of young Twain and
his colorful acquaintances allows art on just about every spread to enliven the
pages (though some of the faces suffer from grotesque stiffness). This might also
be an effective entree to a middle-grades history of the West as well as a chronicle
for younger readers-or even listeners-of a great writer's early life. DS
LEWIS, J. PATRICK 
The Little Buggers: Insect &r Spider Poems; illus. by Victoria
Chess. 
Dial, 1998 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1770-9 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1769-5 
$15.99 
R Gr. 3-6
This collection of two dozen buggy poems versifies about rhinoceros beetles and
mayflies, termites and ladybugs. Lewis' tone ranges from playful to contempla-
tive, and there's a variety of poetic and musical verse forms represented. While a
few of the poems depend overmuch on forced scansion, concept, or wordplay,
most of them are zingy and effective. "Them!" is comic in its role reversal ("But
Silverfish, beware of Them!/ they stumble in at 2 A.M."), "The Pond Glider" ("On
wings of veins / minutely shattered windowpanes") has a precise yet lacy lyricism
appropriate to its damselfly subject, and readers will immediately recognize the
behavior of "The Almost Indestructible Last Horsefly of Summer," who "wipes
his feet/ on my pack of/ NutraSweet." If anyone is born to draw personified
insects, it's Victoria Chess, who generously supplies any number of extra legs with
eerily human hands and even accoutrements (shoes are apparently all the rage in
the bug world); her subjects' smirking faces are characterful yet still disconcert-
ingly alien. Even bouncier than Florian's Insectlopedia, reviewed above, and cer-
tainly sillier than the classic Joyful Noise (BCCB 2/88), this would make a lively
buzzing readaloud as well as a readalone-especially in an attempt to divert class
attention from one of the ubiquitous classroom flies. DS
MCCAUGHREAN, GERALDINE, ad. 
The Bronze Cauldron: Myths and Legends of the
World; illus. by Bee Willey. 
McElderry, 1998 
130p
ISBN 0-689-81758-4 
$19.95 
R 
Gr. 4-6
"Taru took his lightning in one hand and his thunderbolt in the other and went
out to fight the dragon Illuyankas. From Aleppo to Kayseri it lay, a mountain
range of a monster, armored with scales as large as oven doors, and green as the
mold that grows on graves." Although the conflict in this Hittite myth is basic, the
styling is as eloquent as in tales found in this title's companion volumes, The Golden
Hoard (BCCB 7/96) and The Silver Treasure (6/97), and the cultural scope as
wide-ranging, includingViking, Inuit, Hindu, Rwandan, and Romany peoples.
Some tales are triumphant, others tragic; some gentle, others violent. There are
twenty-seven in all, including the quintessential Welsh shape-changing legend from
which Lloyd Alexander and other fantasy writers have drawn their cauldron im-
age: "Three paces from the door, three paces from the window, three paces from
where Boy Gwion slept on the floor, stood the witch's bronze cauldron on three
bronze legs." Notes on the cultures of origin do not include print sources of the
stories themselves, so that it would be difficult to check on changes, adaptations,
and oddities such as the reference to a "hogan" (Navajo) in a Mandan myth. Willey's
illustrations, dominated by deep blues and greens that are lit with an occasional
404 
* THE BULLETIN
coppery red, have an eerie sheen; the human figures hint at humor leavened by
respect for the often momentous tone of such ancient tales. BH
MCPHAIL, DAVID 
Tinker and Tom and the Star Baby; written and illus. by David
McPhail. 
Little, 1998 
32p
ISBN 0-316-56349-8 $14.95 
R 4-7 yrs
Tinker (a boy) and Tom (a bear) follow the trail of a shooting star into their
backyard and discover a lost Star Baby in a mini-rocket ship looking for its mother.
The Star Baby (in a baby bunting and star bonnet) takes an immediate liking to
fuzzy-faced Tom, and the trio go into the kitchen to bang the dents out of the
rocket and concoct some rocket fuel out of handy kitchen goods. The Star Baby
snacks on cat food, floats things around the room with the point of a gravity-
defying finger, and observes the proceedings. When the mini-rocket is fueled and
ready, the Star Baby takes off gurgling gleefully and finds its mother, and Tom and
Tinker go back to bed. As nighttime fantasies go, this is a pretty good one: a
young protagonist with a big bear friend gets to rescue a Star Baby, play with
rockets, and make a mess in the kitchen, all without fear of reprisal, and the tiny
bit of pathos in the sad farewell is just enough to keep this from being too frothy.
McPhail's watercolors capture the magic in a nighttime palette of blues and purples,
with touches of red (Tinker's pajamas), yellow (Star Baby's star bonnet), and green
(the rocket). The characters are expressive and cheerfully mischievous, and the
kitchen scene, wherein a variety of utensils, appliances, and food float weightlessly
around the room, is sure to please young would-be insomniacs and Star Baby
rescuers. JMD
MATAS, CAROL 
Greater Than Angels. 
Simon, 1998 
133p
ISBN 0-689-81353-8 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 6-9
It is 1940 when Anna Hirsch and her family are rounded up by the Nazis and sent
to Gurs, a camp in the south of France for Jewish deportees. Conditions are
inhumane, the inmates die of dysentery and other diseases with great regularity,
and the fear that they will be transferred to a death camp like Auschwitz or Dachau
fills their days. When the opportunity arises for the children to be sent to Le
Chambon-sur-Lignon, a town that has agreed to shelter the younger refugees, their
parents leap at the chance to send them to safety. Anna goes to the small town
with her friends Klara, Peter, and Rudi and adjusts quickly to a semi-normalcy
that includes regular meals, school, and delivering forged papers to escaping Jews.
But the war cannot be kept at bay indefinitely, and when the Nazi threat gets
closer, the friends attempt to escape to Switzerland. Anna has a vigorous adoles-
cent voice that never fails to communicate the complexity of her situation. Her
resistance to despair, her sorrow over the loss of her grandmother, and her deter-
mination to seek restitution through working with the Resistance all resonate truly
for this character. Matas does not avoid unpleasantness but concentrates instead
on the sheer appetite for life that keeps Anna from defeat. The scene at the train
station when Anna realizes she will never see her mother again is agonizing, yet
Anna's promise to her mother-to stay safe, to find her brother and sister in En-
gland and America, to be a family-is hopeful and sustaining. There is a cheeki-
ness to Anna's narration that will hold readers despite the occasional bumps in the
plot; an author's note describing her research into the heroic role Le Chambon-
sur-Lignon played in resisting the Nazis is included. JMD
JULY/AUGUST 1998 
* 
405
MATCHECK, DIANE 
The Sacrifice. 
Farrar, 1998 
198p
ISBN 0-374-36378-1 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-9
Weak-one is certain that it is she, not her deceased twin, who was prophesied to
become a notable Apsaalooka leader, the Great-one. Determined to prove her
mettle in battle, she surreptitiously follows a war party, only to fall captive to a
band of Pawnee. At first, Weak-one cannot fathom her role among the Pawnee-
she is not claimed as either a daughter or a wife, but closely watched and respect-
fully treated by the community and befriended by a young man whom she dubs
Wolfstar. Months later, though, she discovers that she is intended as a sacrificial
victim in a seasonal Pawnee rite. Throughout the book, improbable dialogues
strike false notes. In a climax of cinematic scale, Wolfstar rescues Weak-one from
death and is mortally wounded by his father's arrow but nonetheless spouts para-
graphs of melodramatic regrets and justifications for his actions: "Are Pawnee
dreams more important than Apsaalooka dreams? Are our gods more important
than your gods? All I know is I could not bear to deliver you to your death."
Weak-one's verbal defiance of her father suggests a teenager crusading for mall
money rather than a young woman destined for greatness. Matcheck provides
endnotes which comment on the Pawnee Morning Star ceremony, but her blood-
and-thunder tale seems to require a bit stronger verification of Weak-one's
Apsaalooka prospects than "although it was rare for Crow girls to become war-
riors, it was not forbidden." Despite these flaws, readers drawn to star-crossed
lovers will find much to sigh over here. EB
MELTZER, MILTON 
Ten Queens: Portraits of Women ofPower; illus. by Bethanne
Andersen. 
Dutton, 1998 
[13 4p]
ISBN 0-525-45643 
$24.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 5-10
This historical gallery features a half-score of memorable women ranging from
Esther and Cleopatra to more recent monarchs such as Maria Theresa of Austria
and Catherine the Great of Russia. In the ten to fifteen pages on each subject's
life, Meltzer often packs in some personal and political evaluation in addition to
major historical and/or legendary high points, providing a neat and individual
overview of his biographees. The writing, however, is a frustrating blend of strengths
and weaknesses-Meltzer's lively engagement with his subjects is undercut by er-
ror ("Nearly two thousand years have passed since she died in 30 B.c.," the book
says of Cleopatra, and it wrongly implicates Eleanor ofAquitaine's son John, rather
than his brother Geoffrey, in revolt against his father), and by awkward or confus-
ing phraseology and explanations (Isabel of Spain's standing in the order of succes-
sion seems to skip a step, it's never mentioned that Christina of Sweden attempted
to reclaim her crown after the death of her successor, and terms such as "papal
bull" and "regent" appear without gloss). The book is undeniably beautiful, with
gracefully formatted airy white pages; Andersen's full-page oil-on-gesso illustra-
tions have a textured luminescence that makes the queens seem borne on the winds
of the past, and smaller insets add color and atmosphere (though they're some-
times not as illustrative as their blandly factual captions suggest), while maps are
extremely helpful in locating the action. The volume's elegance and the power of
queenly legend will nonetheless lure readers, and the accounts may well spark fur-
ther research. A brief note on historiography, a bibliography divided by chapter,
and an index are included. DS
406 
* THE BULLETIN
MORRIS, GERALD 
The Squire's Tale. Houghton, 1998 
212p
ISBN 0-395-86959-9 
$15.00 
R* Gr. 6-10
See this month's Big Picture, p. 385, for review.
MULFORD, PHILIPPA GREENE 
The Holly Sisters on Their Own. 
Cavendish,
1998 
158p
ISBN 0-7614-5022-X 
$14.95 
R Gr. 5-8
Charmaine is dreading her glamorous older half-sister's summer visit: Cissa is
perfect, well-dressed, and elegant where Charmaine is dumpy, pimply, and mouthy.
After initial prickles, however, the girls become close, bonding together in the face
of New York excitements and, more threateningly, a visit from Cissa's demanding
mother, who wants her daughter to leave early. Some of the events are a bit tossed
in, and the revelation of Charmaine's parents' separation at the end undermines
the sisterly drama, but the girls' relationship remains compelling. Charmaine's
narration has a preadolescent smartmouthedness reminiscent of a less intense Harriet
Welsch, but she's also authentically dorky in her wit and perception. Though the
larger family issues play their part in the book, the enjoyment here lies in watching
two young women roaming the Big Apple and discovering important family con-
nections when they really need them. Most readers will just want to trade their
own siblings in for the characters, but a few may even be moved to a little sisterly
appreciation of their own. DS
MUNSCH, 
ROBERT 
Andrew's 
Loose 
Tooth; 
illus. 
by 
Michael
Martchenko. 
Cartwheel/Scholastic, 1998 
32p
ISBN 0-590-21102-1 
$10.95 
R 5-8 yrs
Andrew's loose tooth hurts so much he can't eat his breakfast of shiny red apples.
The valiant efforts of mother, father, dentist, and motorcycle-riding tooth fairy
prove unsuccessful; it is only when his best friend Louis sprinkles pepper up Andrew's
nose that Andrew sneezes "that tooth all the way across town." The exaggeratedly
silly text is easily matched by Martchenko's lively watercolors, which feature comi-
cal characters with varying expressions of amazement, bemusement, and frustra-
tion. Munsch's flair for the slapstick does not desert him here as the long-suffering
Andrew puts up with his mother yanking on his tooth with both hands, his father
using a giant pliers, the visiting dentist (in his siren-equipped emergency vehicle
with a giant bicuspid on top that reads "555-TOOTH") tying one end of a rope to
the tooth and the other end to his bumper, and the hammer-wielding of the leather-
jacketed, tooth-necklace-bedecked Tooth Fairy. Looking for a snortingly funny
lost-tooth/loose-tooth/tooth-fairy title? Look no further than this easy-listening
picture book, wherein Munsch's Evel Knievel-like Tooth Fairy leaps her motor-
cycle over traffic as she chases that sneeze-propelled tooth with a butterfly net.
JMD
NYGAARD, ELIZABETH 
Snake Alley Band; illus. by Betsy Lewin. 
Doubleday,
1998 
32p
ISBN 0-385-32323-9 
$15.95 
R 
4-7 yrs
The snake bands in Snake Alley "Shhh-BOOM Shhh-BOOM Shhh-BOOM" until
winter sets in, leaving the smallest member hibernating under a log. Snake awak-
ens in the spring looking for the snake band to find only Cricket ("Chew-up chew-
JULY/AUGUST 1998 
* 407
up"), Frog ("Cha-BOP cha-BOP cha-BOP"), Fish ("POP-POP-DOO-WOP"),
Bird ("Tweet-tweedle-dee-deet"), and Turtle ("TA-TOOM TA-TOOM TOOM").
"'Stop that racket!' shouted Snake. 'I said snake band, not sky-skipping, hip-hop-
ping, splish-splashing, flip-flapping, stamp-stomping turtle band."' Snake wriggles
away and finds his snake band buddies, but after a night of Shh-BOOMing, a
bored Snake realizes the Snake Band's limitations and suggests they add some
other creature sounds, resulting in Snake being ss-ss-shunned by the other snakes.
Not to worry, though-the sky-skipping, hip-hopping, splish-splashing, flip-flip-
ping, stamp-stomping, wig-wagging Snake Alley band wants him back. Watercol-
ors with a light touch offer cartoonish creatures with lots of scribbly black lines
detailing the action, serving to extend the lightness of this jazzy title. Passing a test
run with local first graders, who reveled in taking on the assorted roles in the Snake
Alley band, this combination of a cumulative text, zany creatures, and silly sounds
should add up to loads of irresistible toe-tapping, finger-snapping, tongue-wag-
ging fun for your local storytime attendees as well. PM
PAULSEN, GARY 
The Transall Saga. 
Delacorte, 1998 
248p
ISBN 0-385-32196-1 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-10
Fourteen-year-old Mark is out camping by himself in a remote part of the desert
when he is transported by a column of light to what he believes to be a distant
planet. His fascination with survival lore serves him well as he learns to forage for
food and to create weapons in order to hunt. His discovery of a friendly tribe
alleviates his loneliness, but his relief is short-lived; the more sophisticated Tsook
people attack and defeat Mark's new friends, taking the survivors, Mark among
them, as slaves. During an escape attempt, Mark saves the Tsook from marauding
cannibals; as a reward, he is set free and trained to be a Tsook warrior. Mark's
search for the column of light leads him to the truth about the world of the Tsooks-
it is the Earth of the future after a devastating plague and nuclear holocaust. Just
as randomly as he left it, Mark is transported back to his own time, where he
becomes a doctor researching a cure for the plague to come. That the plot is
derivative, the prose choppy, and the conclusion illogical may not bother sci-fi/
adventure fans. The fast action will draw in reluctant readers as Mark, a somewhat
soft adolescent, becomes an almost mythical warrior figure, all the while seeking
his way home. JMD
PINKNEY, ANDREA DAVIS 
Duke Ellington: The Piano Prince and His Orchestra;
illus. by Brian Pinkney. 
Hyperion, 1998 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2150-7 
$16.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0178-6 
$15.95 
R Gr. 3-5
In a text as playful and sassy as a swing riff, Pinkney traces Ellington's career from
his boyhood boredom with piano lessons to his triumphant 1943 Carnegie Hall
debut of the symphonic length opus Black, Brown, and Beige. Focusing particular
attention on his career-launching engagement at the Cotton Club, Pinkney cap-
tures Ellington's innovative practice of highlighting the individual skills of his
band members, instead of settling for the more unified sound of contemporary
swing bands: "One by one, each cat took the floor and wiped it clean with his own
special way of playing"; "Bubber turned out a growl from way down in his throat.
His gutbucket tunes put a spell on the room." Brian Pinkney's signature scratch-
board illustrations sport an airy lightness here, with bright yellow and hot pink
backgrounds for interiors and jewel-toned blues and teals and limes that shimmer
408 
* 
THE BULLETIN
under marquee lights. Although the Pinkneys somewhat surprisingly omit any
reference to the Cotton Club's exclusively white clientele and neglect to provide
an introductory discography of Ellington's work, they successfully deliver kid-
friendly information with "hot-buttered bop" worthy of the jazz master himself.
EB
PINKWATER, DANIEL 
The Education of Robert Nifkin. 
Farrar, 1998 
16 8p
ISBN 0-374-31969-3 
$16.00 
R Gr. 7 up
In a story that smacks of thinly veiled autobiography, Robert Nifkin tells of his
high-school experiences in 1950s Chicago. Robert is initially afflicted with atten-
dance at Riverview High School, where the conspiracy theorists, anti-Semites, and
nutcases who comprise the faculty teach the students by making them silently
copy large chunks of arcane material off of the blackboards and into their note-
books. Eventually, however, a connection with a girl he met at a diner leads him
to the Wheaton School, a before-its-time alternative school where education is
optional but at least possible, where intellectual curiosity and people worth being
curious about are actually present, and where Robert makes himself into a candi-
date for college attendance (the book is written in the form of his college-applica-
tion essay). Many adults will enjoy this book, and they're the only ones who will
get some of the jokes (the Clifton Fadiman reference, for instance, will fly over
most teenagers' heads), but Pinkwater's sardonic evocation of the incomprehen-
sible world of high school will strike a chord with contemporary inmates of the
institution. Jean Shepherd edged with Damon Runyon, he effectively conveys the
bizarreness of-well--everybody, ranging from the Rhinoceros Milk Man (who
hangs out at the intellectual bookstore flogging his patent remedy) to terrible En-
glish teacher Mrs. Kukla (whom Pinkwater mercilessly pillories in her own un-
grammatical and illogical speech) to Robert's own father (a "son-of-a-bitch from
eastern Europe" who greets the news of his son's entry into ROTC with "Goot.
Dey'll kick your ass, and make you from a man, fet little sissy"). Pinkwater's
recollection of place and time is particularly vivid (Chicago-area kids will enjoy
recognizing landmarks), but most rewarding to readers will be his firm conviction
that they're not crazy and that they're correct in thinking that none of this makes
sense-which doesn't mean it's not survivable and certainly doesn't mean it's not
funny. DS
PROSE, FRANCINE, ad. 
You Never Know: A Legend ofthe Lamed- Vavniks; illus. by
Mark Podwal. 
Greenwillow, 1998 
24p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-15807-2 $14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-15806-4 
$15.00 
R* Gr. 3-6
The town of Plotchnik is in deep, dry trouble-there has been no rain for forty
days and forty nights. In the synagogue the rich and learned pray, but no rain falls.
"Poor Stupid Schmuel" the shoemaker offers to pray, but "no one cared if Poor
Schmuel prayed. If God ignored the town elders, why would He listen to Schmuel-
who couldn't even read the prayers?" But God does listen, the rains come, and the
rich and learned pat themselves on the back. It rains for forty days and forty
nights, and won't stop until Schmuel prays, "God, please make it stop raining."
The rabbi realizes that Schmuel is one of the righteous whose prayers are heard by
God, but when he tells the villagers and they rush to Schmuel's shop, he is gone.
"A few months after Schmuel left, a new cobbler came to Plotchnik. His name
JULY/AUGUST 1998 
* 409
was Yakov, and he was poor, but no one called him Poor Stupid Yakov. Everyone
was kind to him. After all, you never know." Podwal's gouache and colored-
pencil illustrations bring Plotchnik to vivid life in a clean, unmuddy palette, show-
ing the small town both brown and dry and blue and wet, its inhabitants rendered
in a few emphatic pencil strokes. The book design indulges in some cheerful
compositional whimsy, with a large typeface and a generous amount of white space
among which the pictures, engagingly varied in size from spot art to double-page
spreads, are effectively placed. Prose has the language and rhythms of the oral
storyteller down pat, and her text is a readaloud gem. The explanatory author's
note places this tale firmly within its cultural context; a detailed source note is
included. Don't save this one for a rainy day-read it now. JMD
RADUNSKY, VLADIMIR, ad. 
Yucka Drucka Droni; ad. and illus. by Vladimir and
Eugenia Radunsky. 
Scholastic, 1998 
34p
ISBN 0-590-09837-3 
$15.95 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
The text (based, according to a tiny note on the copyright page, on a tongue-
twister occurring in Yiddish, Russian, and Danish) tells the story of three brothers,
Yuck, Yucka-Druck, and Yucka-Drucka-Droni. The boys settle down with three
sisters (Zippa, Zippa-Drippa, and Zippa-Drippa-Limpomponi) and have a trio of
babies (Shuck, Shuck-Schuckmut, and Shuck-Schuckmut-Shuckmoni) and all live
happily together along with a slew of pets named Daisy. That may be a lot of
activity for a tongue-twister, but it's not much for a story; the book depends,
therefore, on the energy of the nonsensical wordplay, which leaves a lot of room
for reader-aloud creativity (rereading at increasingly faster speed comes to mind).
The mixed-media art counterparts broad fields of sharply bordered colors with
fabric, photographs, and textured paint elements, resulting in an electrified yet
crisply clean otherworldliness. The multiracial cast is eccentrically diverse in ap-
pearance (each sibling group contains various heights, races, and fashion inclina-
tions), and their quiet cheer in the face of all the silliness makes them perfect foils
to the book's nonsense. If you can get around the absence of plot, this might make
a particularly entertaining participatory readaloud, with different kids assigned to
chime in on different names until, ultimately and loudly, the proceedings have
twisted everybody's tongues. DS
ROSEN, MICHAEL J., ed. 
Down to Earth: Garden Secrets! Garden Stories! Garden
Projects You Can Do!; illus. by Michael J. Rosen et al. 
Harcourt, 1998 
64p
ISBN 0-15-201341-5 
$18.00 
R 
Gr. 2-6
More than three dozen children's book authors and illustrators offer single page
reflections on the gardens, plants, and horticultural rituals that have anchored
roots in their lives. There are flowery memories-Eve Bunting missed a train
while picking primroses near an English railroad embankment, and Will
Hillenbrand mistakenly delivered a "daisyless bouquet" to the grandmother of his
heart's desire. There are perennial dilemmas-Denise Fleming faces offwith giant
zucchinis, and Erich Hoyt faces off with black bears for orchard-fresh apples. There
are palate-pleasing vegetables (Reynold Ruffins reports that "acorn squash alone
defeated my mom's ability to make it unappetizing") and winter-brightening rites
(Lois Ehlert organizes annual "amaryllis races" for her friends). Each brief text
entry is lavishly illustrated with artwork representative of the author/illustrator-
from Michael McCurdy's dark, etching-like farmyard scene to Amy Butler's grin-
410 
* 
THE BULLETIN
ning pole beans--or by Rosen for those whose medium is exclusively verbal. A
potpourri of activities inspired by the texts (Amy Butler advises readers how to
grow their own hideouts; Judy Sierra offers a fried mustard green recipe for the
culinarily adventurous) and a list of gardening resources (for garden-minded par-
ents and teachers) round out the volume. Let readers with too much summer on
their hands open this up and get growing. EB
RUMFORD, JAMES 
The Island-below-the-Star; written and illus. by James
Rumford. 
Houghton, 1998 
32p
ISBN 0-395-85159-9 
$15.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
The Polynesians first came to the Hawaiian Islands over 1,500 years ago, and this
original pourquoi tale tells of a possible how. Five brothers-Hoku, who loved the
sun, moon, and stars; Na'ale, who loved the sea; Opua, who loved the clouds;
Makani, who loved the wind; and young Manu, who loved the birds--decide to
sail to a far-off island under a distant star. The four older brothers plan to leave
young Manu behind, but he hides in the canoe and is not discovered until they are
far at sea. Each brother contributes to the navigation of the canoe with his knowl-
edge of celestial bodies, wind, sea, and clouds, while Manu makes himself useful
fishing. Young Manu proves his worth when they are blown off course by a ter-
rible storm and he is the only one who can see a high-flying seagull they follow as
it heads for shore. This unusual, lyrically written story structurally echoes tradi-
tional oral tales with its building action, repetitive language, and cumulative
rhythms. Rumford not only has a beautiful way with words, he also has an impres-
sive command of his medium; his watercolor illustrations powerfully evoke an
idyllic setting where sky and sea are paramount over all. This is an adventure story
for reading aloud, for those beginning readers looking for excitement, and for
those educators interested in discussing the hows and whys of story and history. A
concluding note gives some historical and cultural context. JMD
SAGE, JAMES 
Sassy Gracie; illus. by Pierre Pratt. 
Dutton, 1998 
[26p]
ISBN 0-525-45885-9 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
5-8 yrs
In this original variant on the well-known tale of "Clever Gretchen," Sassy Gracie
is the red-shoed heroine who eats the chickens prepared for an important guest
and, thanks to her quick thinking, goes to bed with a full tummy, free of
consequences. Sage's heroine is the cook's helper who tricks both Master and
guest as she dances around kitchen and environs in "a pair of big red shoes with big
red heels that she loved to pieces .. . CLUNKETY-CLUNK! CLUNKETY-
CLUNK!" The text is readaloud friendly with repetitive phrases and opportunities
for group participation abounding. Pratt's saturated palette serves the story well as
the yellow-dressed Sassy Gracie dances on the orange kitchen floor, cavorts in
front of the blue kitchen counters, and frolics through the green countryside. Black
outlines give the illustrations (nubbly-textured paintings that resemble pastel) a
strong, clearly defined edge; that and the lively compositions, with their changing
but always skewed perspectives, suit Sassy Gracie's lively antics to a (dancing) turn.
While a simple source note indicating awareness that this is a direct descendant of
a traditional tale would have greatly expanded the curriculum uses for this title,
this is a robust retelling with flair and style that will easily become a readaloud,
tellaloud favorite. JMD
JULY/AUGUST 1998 
* 411
SCOTT, C. ANNE 
Old Jake's Skirts; illus. by David Slonim. 
Rising Moon,
1998 
[36p]
ISBN 0-87358-615-8 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 6-9 yrs
The chest that Old Jake finds lying in the road turns out to contain an unlikely
treasure that changes his lonely life: calico skirts. When no one claims them after
a year, Old Jake first grabs them to soak up water in his flooded cabin, then uses
one for a scarecrow outfit, another for neckerchiefs, and others for a feedbag, over-
all patches, a sun-scarf for his mule, and cheerful pillow covers. The last skirt goes
to its rightful heir, a little girl to whose dead mother the skirts belonged. The
development is leisurely for a picture book and there's quite a bit of text, but
Scott's downhome storytelling style and empathetic characterizations will make
fine reading aloud for an older-than-usual picture book crowd. Deepening the
text's impact are Slonim's richly textured oil paintings, which alternately absorb
the viewer into darkened color blends and surprise the eye with chiaroscuro con-
trasts. The drafting, modeling, and compositions are skilled, while humans, ani-
mals, and hilly landscapes get expressively humorous but never slapstick treatment.
From both author and artist, this is an unusually fresh first book. BH
SENISI, ELLEN B. Just Kids: Visiting a Class for Children with Special Needs; writ-
ten and illus. with photographs by Ellen B. Senisi. 
Dutton, 1998 
40p
ISBN 0-525-45646-5 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Cindy's stinging cry of "Retard!" wounds Ashley, a second grader in the school's
special needs program; rather than punish Cindy, teachers and principal arrange
for her to spend a portion of each day in the special needs classes, learning about
the children and their wide ranging disabilities. Senisi remarks in a closing section
that this photoessay is based on an incident in an actual school, and she manages to
disseminate vast amounts of information, while credibly presenting both girls first
mutually distrustful but then cautiously open to friendship. As the lead teacher,
Mrs. Monaghan, explains to Cindy the reasons for various behaviors she observes
in the students (an ADHD boy needs to be helped through a tantrum; an autistic
child spins and hums and fiddles with his shoelaces), readers learn not only about
learning disorders, but also about the strategies used to facilitate learning. The text
is involving, but dense and purposive, and Senisi's careful explanations are pack-
aged into a format with no natural breaks. Although Mrs. Monaghan's discus-
sions with Cindy are measured and ever respectful of her students, it seems unlikely
that a special education professional would discuss individual diagnoses so can-
didly with an outsider of any age. Still, the text with its sharp color photographs is
a particularly thorough introduction to special needs classes, and it will be of inter-
est and use in most school collections. EB
SHANNON, MARGARET 
Gullible's Troubles; written and illus. by Margaret
Shannon. 
Houghton, 1998 
32p
ISBN 0-395-83933-5 
$15.00 
R 
5-8yrs
Gullible Guineapig is as credulous as his name suggests, and his aunt, uncle, and
cousin, whom he's visiting "all by himself," can't resist teasing him. He attempts
to become invisible (by eating carrots, as his aunt instructs him), tries unsuccess-
fully to wash some coal clean (on his uncle's instructions), and outwits the cellar
monster by walking on his hands (cousin Lila explains the safety measure); when
412 
* THE BULLETIN
he hears what's certainly the cellar monster coming up to get him, he uses his
newfound knowledge to make himself invisible and escape to his nice safe home.
The book treats Gullible's experiences with sympathetic yet witty supportiveness.
The earnest little guinea pig really does deserve better treatment, as the audience
will surely feel, but the teasing of his relatives is funny and understandable. (Audi-
ences are unlikely to mourn, however, when the end reveals a very real cellar mon-
ster lurking behind Gullible's aunt and uncle as Gullible runs home to renewed
visibility in his mother's arms.) Shannon's line-and-watercolor illustrations fea-
ture a stocky and expressive little rodent, who sports a dapper sailor suit and the
same caught-in-the-headlights mien as some of Rosemary Wells' beleaguered ani-
mal protagonists. A lighthearted but empathetic look at the frightening alienness
of other people's households (even the path leading up to Gullible's relatives' house
has sinister eyes peering out from the trees), this is one kids can relate to-maybe
even from both viewpoints. DS
SHEPARD, AARON, ad. 
The Crystal Heart: A Vietnamese Legend; illus. by Joseph
Daniel Fiedler. 
Atheneum, 1998 
[32p]
ISBN 0-689-81551-4 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-8
Mi Nuong, the beautiful daughter of a powerful mandarin, hears a haunting love
song ("My love is like a blossom in the breeze. My love is like a moonbeam on the
waves") floating up from a fishing boat on the river below her tower room. Imag-
ining the songster to be a wealthy suitor in disguise, she pines for him, becoming
ill. The mysterious singer, a poor fisherman named Truong Chi, is found and
ordered to sing for Mi Nuong, and he instantly falls in love with her even as she
rejects him in a burst of laughter. The lovesick fisherman dies soon after, his heart,
turned to crystal, sitting atop his chest. The crystal is then set adrift in the fisherman's
boat, found by the mandarin, and made into a teacup for his daughter: "On the
surface of the tea was the face of Truong Chi, gazing at her with eyes filled with
love." A remorseful Mi Nuong weeps ("a single tear dropped into the cup"),
releasing Truong Chi's spirit and his song forever. Shepard's retelling of this leg-
end captures all the romantic feeling in an economical use of text without forfeit-
ing any of the haunting mood of the tale. Enhancing the story's effectiveness are
elegant yet somber paintings, which emphasize the story's tragic tone. The dusky,
roughly edged backgrounds contrast with the smudged but brilliant tones of red,
blue, and green, which strike a regal note and strongly suggests the story's south-
east Asian origin. This could provide a lovely segue into thoughtful discussion on
expectations, disappointment, and reparation. An author's note regarding the story's
origins and musical notation for Shepard's original song are appended. PM
SINGER, MARLYN 
GoodDay, GoodNight; illus. by Ponder Goembel. 
Cavendish,
1998 
32p
ISBN 0-7614-5018-1 
$15.95 
R 3-6yrs
In this early introduction to the concept of different daily cycles, a simple text
offers rhyming couplets ("Robin hops/ Rabbit stops") on each spread, contrasting
the meaning of the day to the diurnal and to the nocturnal. Singer covers a fair
range of territory in her examples, involving butterflies, fish, gastropods, and plants
as well as the more obvious mammals; her text is spare, precise, and brisk, so that
the enumeration isn't prolonged past audience tolerance. Though the palette is
JULY/AUGUST 1998 
* 413
sometimes more fluorescent than subtle, Goembel's colored-pencil art has a na-
ture-drawing literalness (though scale isn't consistent throughout the book) that
will assist youngsters in identifying the subjects; the audience will be tickled to see
that many pages quietly include guest appearances from stars of other page spreads.
The metaphoric use of "good night" to mean "sleep well" at the end somewhat
undercuts the point that sleep doesn't mean night for everything, but this is still a
neat little package that effectively makes an abstract concept clear and concrete.
Couple this with Rachel Isadora's South African Night (BCCB 4/98) for a look at
action and rest around the clock. DS
SLEATOR, WILLIAM 
The Boxes. 
Dutton, 1998 
[189p]
ISBN 0-525-46012-8 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 5-8
Annie's beloved Uncle Marco leaves in her care two boxes, which he cautions her
not to open, before he departs on another of his mysterious trips. Impelled by no
apparent motivation other than a desire to drive Sleator's plot along, Annie opens
the boxes, unleashing in her basement a horde of crab-like creatures who build a
huge cathedral-like edifice and, in her closet, a tentacled, clock-like device that
controls time and demands the sacrifice of some of its terrified worshippers, the
crabs. Annie serves as psychic go-between for clock and critters, when she's not
busy fending offa neighborhood takeover by snaky Crutchley Development, whose
president adds stealing the clock (to rule the world, or at least the real-estate mar-
ket) to his nefarious agenda. Sleator pads his shakily constructed narrative with
Annie's asides: "Was I really, seriously going to try to do this? This thing that
wonderful Uncle Marco has told me so strongly not to even think about doing?"
Sleator's customary knack for deft plotting and believable character motivations,
which can drag the most grotesque impossibilities effectively into prosaic daylight,
is sadly lacking here. We never know where the boxes came from, why Uncle
Marco had them, how he came to have a clock of his own and hang out on Victo-
rian rooftops, why he expected Annie to open the box, why Annie and boyfriend
Henry and Uncle Marco crawl into the crabs' tower . . . Sleator followers can
probably give this one a miss, and newcomers can start with Others See Us (BCCB
11/93) or his classic Interstellar Pig (BCCB 7/84). EB
SMITH, ROLAND E. 
Sasquatch. Hyperion, 1998 
[176p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2315-1 
$16.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0368-1 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 4-6
Dylan's mother is off to Egypt for an archaeological dig, and Dad has been acting
strange ever since he got back from a hunting trip near Mount Saint Helens (you'd
act strange too if you had seen Sasquatch and you thought it had saved your life).
When researcher Theodore Flagg and his bunch of crazies decide to hunt Bigfoot,
Dylan's dad joins them in a secret attempt to protect Bigfoot from harm. In the
meantime Dylan has met an old field biologist, Mr. Buck Johnson, who joins
Dylan to shadow Flagg's party. It's clear we're entering cheesy plot territory when
we find out that old Buck not only hijacked a plane years ago and stashed the
money away in a desperate attempt to save the life of his dying son, but while
recuperating in a remote cabin near Mount St. Helens (he was injured in the
parachute escape from the plane), he met a group of Sasquatch and they began to
414 * THE BULLETIN
trust him. Events multiply and credibility decreases when the Mount starts to
spew hot lava, Dylan finds underground tunnels inhabited by the Sasquatch and
the hidden money, Dylan's injured Dad is rescued again by Sasquatch, and Buck
mysteriously disappears leaving a signed confession. If readers can remain unfazed
by the superficiality and one-dimensionality of all the characters, they'll still stumble
over the plot's predictability and B-movie implausibility. Reluctant readers may
be champing at the bit when you tell them that Sasquatch is about the infamous
and elusive Bigfoot, but those who wallow through this may be more reluctant
than ever the next time. PM
SOTO, GARY 
Big Bushy Mustache; illus. by Joe Cepeda. 
Knopf, 1998 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-88030-5 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-88030-5 
$17.00 
R 
5-7 yrs
"People always said that Ricky looked just like his mother," which Ricky considers
a problem because he is a boy and he wants to be told he looks just like his father.
When his kindergarten class starts rehearsing for a play to celebrate Cinco de Mayo,
Ricky refuses all offered costumes until his teacher "took out a big, bushy mus-
tache" and "something clicked." Ricky wears the mustache all day; he even sneaks
it out of school. On the way home he's admired by passersby, but when he goes to
show his mother he discovers that he has lost the mustache. His mustachioed Papi
tries to cheer him up with a story, but Ricky cannot be consoled. How will he tell
his teacher? In the morning his mother presents him with a new mustache-and
his now clean-shaven Papi reminds him to "next time listen to your teacher." Ricky
walks to school, carrying the mustache safely in his pocket, because "it wasn't just
a bushy disguise anymore, but a gift from his Papi." Cepeda's acrylic illustrations
feature an expressive cast of characters dressed in brilliant colors and set against
vibrant backgrounds. His figures have an articulate body language that lends them
a great deal of buoyant energy, from Ricky's classmates gesturing dramatically in
the schoolroom to Ricky himself, sitting despondent on the curb after a fruitless
search for the lost prop. Even while grownups wonder how Ricky's parents got
that shaved mustache to stay together so neatly, Soto's tale of joy found, lost, and
found again is going to resonate with a lot of young listeners. JMD
SPINELLI, JERRY 
Knots in My Yo-Yo String: The Autobiography ofa Kid. Knopf,
1998 
148p 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-98791-6 
$16.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-679-88791-1 
$9.99 
R Gr. 6-10
Newbery-medal-winner Jerry Spinelli brings his senses to bear on the story of his
own life, describing the sights, sounds, and smells of Norristown, Pennsylvania in
the 1950s. Spinelli relates the triumphs and tragedies of growing up-the year he
was the fastest runner in the neighborhood, his first girlfriend and his first kiss, the
time he wrote a poem for a school assignment and was accused of plagiarism-in
such an accessible voice that Spinelli fans will sigh with justifiable content. The
black-and-white photographs add to the feeling of a life caught on the run, of
times briefly held both on film and in print. Spinelli has a casual self-awareness
that makes his descriptions of life lessons learned more palatable than preachy, and
his asides about how he came to be a writer evince such natural aplomb that would-
be authors will be encouraged. Short chapters and a friendly, conversational tone
make this a good choice for reluctant readers, who will easily warm to these gently
age-informed reminiscences. JMD
JULY/AUGUST 1998 
* 
415
SWEENEY, JOAN 
Bijou, Bonbon & Beau: The Kittens Who Dancedfor Degas; illus.
by Leslie Wu. 
Chronicle, 1998 
20p
ISBN 0-8118-1975-2 
$12.95 
Ad 
5-8yrs
The opening lines ("On a blustery day long ago, a weary cat crossed a bridge over
the River Seine in Paris") will rivet any group of primary-grade listeners. A ginger
cat seeks a warm place to have her kittens, and she finds it in "a theater where ballet
was performed." Marmalade, as she is named by ballerinas and wardrobe mistress,
has three kittens, Bijou, Bonbon, and Beau. The cats are protected from the stage
manager (apparently not a cat lover) by the dancers and stage hands, and by the
artist, unnamed in the text, who sketches the dancers. One night the stage manager's
fears are justified as the kittens race onto the stage during a performance to play
with the ballerinas' feet, but disaster turns to triumph when all of Paris wants to
see "the kittens who danced." Granted, the story is a tad precious, but young
felinophiles and balletomanes are going to sigh with satisfaction over the homage-
to-Degas pastels of kittens and ballerinas. Sweeney's text is a straightforward if
somewhat bland narrative that lends itself to reading aloud as it focuses on the
kitty activities. The coy note and absence of real historical background will prob-
ably not be appreciated by art teachers and history buffs; still, those little pastel
paw prints on the endpapers are pretty hard to resist. JMD
TURNER, ANN 
Angel Hide and Seek; illus. by Lois Ehlert. 
HarperCollins,
1998 
[3 2p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027086-1 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027085-3 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
In sixteen brief poems, Turner invites her audience to examine a variety of natural
settings and discover--or imagine-winged figures that hide there. In a pond, "A
beaver glides through/ a path of moonlight,/ pulling the water/ into shining wings";
in the clouds, "white mist streams/ like hair and wings./ I think I hear singing/ far
away." The free verses offer imagery familiar enough for young listeners to grasp,
and concluding annotations supplement the text with information about each set-
ting. Ehlert's dusky, moody collages, however, unpredictably reveal or conceal
the "angels" in each spread, and viewers will find that, while some of the sprites
fairly leap off the page (carefully arranged shells of the "Sea Angel"), some are
frustratingly faint (the shadow figure in "Barn Angels"), and still others seem en-
tirely imaginary (no discernible "Fire Angels" ascend from the crimson flames).
Primary schoolers of a patient and introspective bent may warm to the airy musings
and intricate visual compositions, but viewers expecting to ferret out celestial Waldos
will have to search elsewhere. EB
VAN DRAANEN,WENDELIN 
Sammy Keys and the Hotel Thief. Knopf, 1998 
163p
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-98839-4 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-88839-X 
$15.00 
R Gr. 5-8
Seventh-grader Sammy is secretly living with her grandmother in a senior citizens'
high-rise when, spying through the window of the seedy Heavenly Hotel, she sees
a thief stealing money. Binoculars firmly fixed to her eyes, she realizes that he
realizes he is being watched, and then (even she admits it was stupid) she waves to
him. Thus begins a fast-paced mystery in which the somewhat down-on-her-luck
Sammy is suspended from school on her first day, gets on the bad side of a disbe-
lieving police officer, investigates local burglaries, and discovers who the bad guy
416 
* THE BULLETIN
is, all without losing her smart mouth or fertile imagination. The plot may be a bit
simplistic (people do have a way of being just where Sammy needs them) but this
is a breezy novel with vivid characters, from the blind ice-cream man to the flashy
astrologer to the junk-food-eating younger brother of Sammy's best friend. Fe-
male protagonists who use their fists to settle their problems have been popping up
quite a bit lately, and Van Draanen's heroine doesn't hesitate to use hers. Sammy
has a hard-boiled, distinctive voice that not only suits this genre but is bound to
make her a hit with young whodunnit lovers. JMD
VAN LAAN, NANCY 
The Magic Bean Tree: A Legend from Argentina; illus. by
Beatriz Vidal. 
Houghton, 1998 
32p
ISBN 0-395-82746-9 
$15.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
One hot summer no rain falls on the pampas, and the grasses grow brown and dry.
In despair, the worried people stop praying, and only little Topec keeps the faith.
Finally he goes in search of rain. Across the pampas, through dying grass and dry
dust he walks until he finds himself under the Carob Tree, "the only tree growing
in the wide pampa-and its leaves were still moist and green!" The Carob Tree
tells Topec that the Great Bird of the Underworld that sleeps in the tree's branches
at night is hiding the earth from the gods, who thus cannot hear the prayers or see
that the pampas need rain. Topec returns with the people of his village, all bearing
torches, drums, and rattles and making "such noise the earth shook." The Great
Bird flies away, the gods see the earth, hear the prayers, and send the rain. The
dramatic language of this retelling has flair, as do some ofVidal's gouache illustra-
tions, which are at their compositional best in double-page vistas. The single-page
illustrations are much less effective, however, with pedestrian compositions and
drafting. Van Laan's nicely circular conclusion brings this tale from the realm of
folklore to the present, as the story concludes in modern-day Argentina, where the
shade of the carob tree is said to bring good luck. A detailed source note is in-
cluded. JMD
WATTS, IRENE N. 
Good-bye Marianne: A Story of Growing up in Nazi
Germany. 
Tundra, 1998 
105p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-88776-445-2 
$7.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Fifth-grader Marianne comes to school one morning only to find herself locked
out: "As of today, November 15, 1938, Jewish students are prohibited from at-
tending German schools." Already her relatives have fled from Berlin to Holland,
her father has been arrested once and then forced into hiding, and her mother tries
not to be noticed on her way to and from volunteer work at an orphanage. The
Gestapo raid their apartment, from which the Nazi landlady shortly afterwards
evicts them, and her mother desperately makes the decision to send her on a
kindertransport in place of an orphan too sick to go. While the writing is flat and
many such earlier incidents have been more forcefully detailed in other children's
books about the Holocaust, the separation of mother and daughter here is realisti-
cally moving, with the inevitable anger at abandonment mixed into tearful expres-
sions of love. The ending promises safety for Marianne and leaves her parents' fate
unstated, so that no one with whom the reader strongly identifies dies in the course
of the story. A Jewish baker reopens his smashed shop. A friend whom Marianne
confronts because of his loyalty to Hitler bestows his most precious possession on
her as a parting gift. Together with the compressed plot and easy reading level,
JULY/AUGUST 1998 
* 417
this unrealistic optimism may earmark the novel as an introduction for readers
unready for more graphic scenes of danger or violence such as those in Pausewang's
Final Journey (BCCB 12/96) or Leitner's The Big Lie (BCCB 1/93). BH -
WHITELAW, NANCY 
Lady Diana Spencer: Princess of Wales. 
Morgan Reynolds,
1998 
[112p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 1-883846-35-8 
$18.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-12
All earthlings are doubtless familiar with the main points of the very public life and
death of the Princess of Wales, but without going into the elaborate detail or axe-
grinding of the adult biographies, this title gives young princess-watchers a glimpse
beyond the headlines. Whitelaw covers the expected territory, cradle to early grave,
discussing Diana's youthful hopes for her marriage, her personal crises, and her
interest in charitable causes. The author draws on many of the adult biographies,
and she makes a point of identifying speculation as such; though this is a pro-
Diana biography (there's no mention, for instance, of the times she welcomed the
publicity she also bemoaned), it generally eschews the adulation in which it might
have indulged. Stylistically, the book is awkward, with creaky sentence construc-
tion ("Less and less frequently they pretended to get along") and paragraphs tossed
in seemingly at random, but this is one teens will read for subject, not for style. It's
sad that one of the main appeals of a Diana biography is its gossipy sordidness, but
this one at least restrains itself from excess and gives the information in a larger
context. A family tree of the Spencers, glossary of titles of the British nobility,
bibliography, and endnotes are included; black-and-white photographs appear
throughout; the bound book will have an index. DS
WISNIEWSKI, 
DAVID 
The Secret Knowledge of Grown-ups; written and illus. by
David Wisniewski. 
Lothrop, 1998 
48p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-15340-2 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-15339-9 
$16.00 
R Gr. 3-6
Wisniewski rips the lid off the dark secrets behind some traditional adult injunc-
tions, such as "Drink your milk," "Don't jump on your bed," and "Don't pick
your nose." Each section opens with a brief military pr&cis of the undercover
operation to find the truth and the crumpled cover sheet of the file documenting
the Grown-Up Rule; then the page turns to reveal the frightening full story (drink-
ing milk is necessary because it provides an outlet for the five super-producing
radioactive cows who supply the milk for the country, jumping on the bed might
waken the living and troublesome mattress, picking your nose will make your
brain deflate). The book clearly relishes its outlandish details of attack vegetables,
Hell's Pinkies (roaming gangs of little fingers grown from bitten-off pieces of fin-
gernail), and the "suckfaced survivors" of tragic blowing-bubbles-in-beverage acci-
dents, and the text tosses in dopey corroborating detail with effective insouciance.
Wisniewski's cut-paper artwork abandons its usual delicate strength for sheer un-
subtle impact; the relentless inharmoniousness of the colors (clashing reds and
oranges shriek alongside synthetic blues and greens) suits the book's shameless
preadolescent brashness. This looks sophisticated enough without actually being
so to endear itself to kids looking for major yucks with a veneer of coolness. They'll
appreciate both the grossness and the breadth of reference here; they might also
savor the chance to use this "information" to torment gullible younger listeners.
DS
418 
* 
THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Actors and acting-fiction: Hoban
ADVENTURE STORIES:
Eckert; Matcheck; Morris;
Paulsen; Smith
African Americans: Hansen; Igus;
Pinkney
African Americans-fiction:
Bennett
African Americans-stories:
England
Aliens-fiction: Butts
American Indians: Bierhorst
American Indians-fiction: Eckert;
Matcheck
American Revolution-fiction:
Goodman
Angels-poetry: Turner
ANIMAL STORIES: Arnold;
dePaola; Godwin
Animals-fiction: King-Smith
Animals: Singer
Argentina-folklore: Van Laan
Art: Carle
Asian Americans-fiction: Bunting
So Far
Babies: Dilley
Ballet-stories: Sweeney
Baseball-poetry: Janeczko
Basketball-fiction: Bennett
Bears-stories: Hanson
BEDTIME STORIES: McPhail
BIOGRAPHIES: Fradin; Lasky;
Pinkney; Spinelli; Whitelaw
Cats-stories: Sweeney
Child abuse-fiction: Hoban
Clothing: Carlson
Clothing-stories: Scott
Colors-stories: Carle
Commerce: Carlson
CONCEPT BOOKS: Carle;
Godwin; Singer
Cowboys: Gibbons
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Eckert; Goodman; Smith; Van
Draanen
Death and dying: Hansen
Disabilities: Senisi
Dogs-stories: Arnold
FABLES: Balan
Families: Dilley
FANTASY: Dewan; Fletcher;
Morris; Sleator; Smith
Farms-stories: Chorao
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
LaFaye
Fathers and sons-stories: Soto
Fear-stories: Shannon
FOLKTALES AND
FAIRYTALES: Andersen;
Bierhorst; Prose; Rumford;
Sage; Shepard; Van Laan
Food and eating-stories: Sage
Friendship-fiction: Bunting Day;
DeClements; Hoban; Joosse
FUNNY STORIES: Munsch;
Pinkwater; Wisniewski
Gardens and gardening: Rosen
Ghosts-fiction: Joosse
Grandmothers-fiction: Van
Draanen
JULY/AUGUST 1998 
* 419
Gypsies-fiction: King-Smith
Hawaii-stories: Rumford
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Bunting So Far; Eckert;
Goodman; Hill; LaFaye; Matas;
Matcheck; Pinkwater; Watts
History, U.S.: Hansen; Fradin
Holocaust-fiction: Matas; Watts
Insects-poetry: Florian; Lewis
Judaism: Prose
Knights and chivalry-fiction:
Morris
Language arts: Barrett; Radunsky
Latin America: Van Laan
Latinos-stories: Soto
Legends: Morris
Literature, American: Lasky
LOVE STORIES: Shepard
Magic and magicians-stories:
Dewan
Marriage: Gelber
Mermaids-fiction: Andersen
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
LaFaye; Watts
Mothers and sons-stories: Hanson
Music and musicians-stories:
England; Nygaard
Music and musicians: Igus;
Pinkney
MYSTERIES: Van Draanen
MYTHS AND LEGENDS:
McCaughrean
POETRY: Florian; Igus; Janeczko;
Lewis; Turner
Reading aloud: Bierhorst; Florian;
Janeczko; Joosse; King-Smith;
Lewis; McCaughrean; Prose;
Wisniewski
Reading, easy: Gibbons; Haddad;
Joosse
Reading, reluctant: Wisniewski
Rural life-stories: Chorao
School-fiction: DeClements;
Haddad; Pinkwater
School: Senisi
SCIENCE FICTION: Butts;
Paulsen
Science: Singer
Sexual abuse-fiction: Hoban
Ships and shipwrecks-fiction: Hill
SHORT STORIES: Duncan;
Fraustino; Gifaldi
Sisters-fiction: Greene
Snakes-stories: Nygaard
Sports-stories: Bennett
Stepparents-fiction: Greene
Storytelling-fiction: Fletcher
Storytelling: Bierhorst;
McCaughrean; Prose; Rumford;
Sage; Shepard; Van Laan
Storytime: Arnold; Barrett;
England; Hanson; Munsch;
Nygaard; Radunsky; Sage;
Shannon; Soto
Suicide-fiction: Bennett
SURVIVAL STORIES: Paulsen
Teeth-stories: Munsch
Trees-stories: Van Laan
Uncles-fiction: Sleator
Vietnam-folklore: Shepard
West, the: Carlson; Gibbons
Whales-fiction: Bunting Day
Women's studies: Meltzer;
Whitelaw
World cultures: Gelber
World history: Meltzer
World War II-fiction: Bunting So
Far; Matas; Watts
Writers and writing: Lasky;
Spinelli
420 
* THE BULLETIN
T H E BUvL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
AUTHOR/TITLE INDEX, VOLUME 51
SEPTEMBER, 1997-JULY/AUGUST, 1998
"I Can't Take You Anywhere!" Naylor. 169.
33 Things Every Girl Should Know. Bolden.
353.
Aardema. Anansi Does the Impossible. 152.
Abelove. Go and Come Back. 272.
Achingly Alice. Naylor. 290.
Ackerman, D. Bats. 4.
Ackerman, N. Spirit Horse. 234.
Acorn Eaters. Pelgrom. 96.
Acquaintance with Darkness. Rinaldi. 66.
Acting Normal. Hoban. 400.
Ada. Lizard and the Sun. 40.
. Malachite Palace. 234.
Adler, C. Her Blue Straw Hat. 5.
Adler, D. Chanukah in Chelm. 116.
. Hiding from the Nazis. 153.
Adventures of Midnight Son. Patrick. 171.
African Beginnings. Haskins. 281.
Ahlberg. Monkey Do! 272.
Akiak. Blake. 43.
Alamo! Sullivan. 25.
Alborough. Watch Out! Big Bro's Coming! 5.
Alcock. Stranger at the Window. 311.
Alex and the Cat. Griffith. 126.
Alfie and the Birthday Surprise. Hughes. 246.
Alford. I Can't Believe I Have to Do This. 190.
Alice Ramsey's Grand Adventure. Brown. 44.
Alice Rose & Sam. Lasky. 327.
All Around the Town. Johnson. 283.
Allen. Anthology for the Earth. 273.
Alligator Baby. Munsch. 63.
Allison. Say. 175.
Aloha Summer. Wallace. 143.
Alter. Beauty Pageants. 41.
Altman. Forever Outsiders. 162.
Amber Cat. McKay. 91.
American Wei. Pomeranc. 292.
Amistad Rising. Chambers. 316.
Amistad. Myers. 325.
Anansi Does the Impossible. Aardema. 152.
And If the Moon Could Talk. Banks. 273.
And Not Afraid to Dare. Bolden. 312.
Andersen. Little Mermaid. 386.
Anderson, J. Going Through the Gate. 191.
. Sunflower Sal. 41.
Anderson, W. Pioneer Girl. 192.
Andreae. Rumble in the Jungle. 41.
Andrew's Loose Tooth. Munsch. 406.
Androcles and the Lion. Nolan. 253.
Angel Hide and Seek. Turner. 415.
Angel Just Like Me. Hoffman. 245.
Angel Pig & the Hidden Christmas. Waldron.
142.
Angela and Diabola. Banks. 192.
Angela's Top-Secret Computer Club. Keller.
247.
Angels on the Roof. Moore. 168.
Anne Frank. McDonough. 166.
Annie's Shabbat. Lamstein. 211.
Ant Plays Bear. Byars. 7.
Anthology for the Earth. Allen. 273.
Antle. Staying Cool. 5.
Appelbaum. Cocoa Ice. 235.
Armstrong, C. Women of the Bible. 311.
Armstrong, J. Mary Mehan Awake. 116.
Armstrong, R. Drew and the Homeboy Ques-
tion. 6.
Arnold, K. Duck, Duck, Goose? 6.
. Meow! 387.
Arnold, T. Parts. 42.
Arrow over the Door. Bruchac. 275.
As Ever, Gordy. Hahn. 363.
As Long as There Are Mountains. Kinsey-
Warnock. 89.
Asch. Barnyard Lullaby. 235.
At the Hotel Larry. Pinkwater. 23.
Autumn. Schnur. 25.
Avi. What Do Fish Have to Do With Anything?
42.
Awful Aardvarks Go to School. Lindbergh. 213.
JULY/AUGUST 1998 
* 421
Ayer. Firestorm Unleashed. 162.
.From the Ashes. 162.
.Inferno. 162.
Aylesworth. Gingerbread Man. 192.
Baba Yaga and the Wise Doll. Oram. 215.
Baby Tamer. Teague. 104.
Back of Beyond. Ellis. 83.
Back to the Wild. Patent. 23.
Bad Case of Stripes. Shannon. 260.
Bad, Badder, Baddest. Voigt. 142.
Badger's Bad Mood. Oram. 333.
Bailey. Gordon Loggins and the Three Bears.
117.
Balan. Buoy. 387.
Balgassi. Tae's Sonata. 80.
Ballad of the Civil War. Stolz. 222.
Ballpark. Cooper. 239.
Banana Moon. Marshall. 250.
Bang. Common Ground. 117.
Banks, K. And if the Moon Could Talk. 273.
Banks, L. Angela and Diabola. 192.
Bare. Sammy the Dog Detective. 236.
Barnyard Lullaby. Asch. 235.
Barnyard Song. Greene. 51.
Barrett. Pickles to Pittsburgh. 118.
. Things That Are Most in the World.
387.
Bashi, Elephant Baby. Radcliffe. 257.
Bat 6. Wolff. 378.
Bat in the Dining Room. Dragonwagon. 123.
Bats. Ackerman. 4.
Battle of the Alamo. Santella. 25.
Bauer, J. Rules of the Road. 192.
Bauer, M. Bear's Hiccups. 352.
. If You Were Born a Kitten. 153.
.Turtle Dreams. 193.
Be Gentle! Miller. 62.
Be Not Far from Me. Kimmel. 326.
Beaded Moccasins. Durrant. 319.
Bear's Hiccups. Bauer. 352.
Beard. Flimflam Man. 311.
Bearskin. Pyle. 98.
Beasties. Sleator. 102.
Beaten by a Balloon. Mahy. 250.
Beautiful Days of My Youth. Novac. 64.
Beautiful Warrior. McCully. 250.
Beauty of the Beast. Prelutsky. 172.
Beauty Pageants. Alter. 41.
Because You're Lucky. Smalls. 102.
Bechard. My Mom Married the Principal. 273.
Bedard. Divide. 193.
. Glass Town. 154.
Bedtime. Blos. 273.
Beekeepers. High. 282.
Beezy. McDonald. 91.
Beggar's Magic. Chang. 45.
Being Youngest. Heynen. 129.
Beller. Never Were Men So Brave. 236.
Belonging Place. Little. 164.
Belton. Ernestine & Amanda: Members of the
C.L.U.B. 194.
.Ernestine and Amanda: Summer Camp,
Ready or Not! 6.
Bennett, C. Life in the Fat Lane. 194.
Bennett, J. Blue Star Rapture. 388.
Benoit. Who Killed Olive Souffld? 118.
Benson. African Beginnings. 281.
Berger. Lot of Otters. 154.
Berry. First Palm Trees. 195.
Best Way to Play. Cosby. 121.
Betsy Ross. St. George. 178.
Bial. Strength of These Arms. 42.
. Where Lincoln Walked. 195.
Bierhorst. Deetkatoo. 388.
Big Blue Whale. Davies. 48.
Big Bushy Mustache. Soto. 414.
Big Rivers. Hiscock. 12.
Big, Scary Wolf. Stevenson. 28.
Bigger. Kirk. 367.
Bijou, Bonbon & Beau. Sweeney. 415.
Bill and Pete to the Rescue. dePaola. 392.
Birdie's Lighthouse. Hopkinson. 14.
Birdsong. Wood. 71.
Birthday Happy, Contrary Mary. Jeram. 325.
Black Cowboy, Wild Horses. Lester. 327.
Black Whiteness. Burleigh. 196.
Black, Blue, & Gray. Haskins. 204.
Blackwood. Shakespeare Stealer. 353.
Blake, Q. Mrs. Armitage and the Big Wave. 312.
Blake, R. Akiak. 43.
Blakeslee. Different Kind of Hero. 80.
Blaze Engulfs. Sherrow. 162.
Blood on the Forehead. Kerr. 366.
Blos. Bedtime. 273.
Blue Star Rapture. Bennett. 388.
Blue True Dream of Sky. Maynard. 60.
Bodies from the Bog. Deem. 357.
Boitano's Edge. Boitano. 236.
Boitano. Boitano's Edge. 236.
Bolden. 33 Things Every Girl Should Know.
353.
.And Not Afraid to Dare. 312.
Bond, A. Sugarcane House. 119.
Bond, N. Love of Friends. 154.
Bone Button Borscht. Davis. 82.
Bone Dance. Brooks. 155.
Bone Man. Simms. 140.
Bonners. Silver Balloon. 81.
BOO to a Goose. Fox. 241.
Boogie Bones. Loredo. 17.
Boom Town. Levitin. 328.
Booth, D. Dust Bowl. 43.
Booth, M. War Dog. 81.
Bootmaker and the Elves. Lowell. 132.
Borden. Good-bye, Charles Lindbergh. 313.
Bortz. Martian Fossils on Earth? 274.
422 
* THE BULLETIN
Boss of the Plains. Carlson. 390.
Bouki Dances the Kokioko. Wolkstein. 31.
Bow-Wow Birthday. Wardlaw. 299.
Bowman's Store. Bruchac. 237.
Box Top Dreams. Glassman. 241.
Boxes. Sleator. 413.
Boy of My Dreams. Sheldon. 26.
Boy Who Wouldn't Go to Bed. Cooper. 8.
Boynton. Snoozers. 237.
Bradley and the Billboard. Farrell. 278.
Bradley. Ruthie's Gift. 313.
Brain. Simon. 101.
Brandford. Fire, Bed, & Bone. 314.
Branley. Floating in Space. 275.
Brave Georgie Goat. Roche. 257.
Brave Little Parrot. Martin. 251.
Breakfast at the Liberty Diner. Kirk. 209.
Breaking Boxes. Jenkins. 88.
Breaking Ground, Breaking Silence. Hansen.
398.
Brilliant Streak. Lasky. 402.
Brisson. Summer My Father Was Ten. 314.
Broken Mirror. Douglas. 49.
Brooks. Bone Dance. 155.
Bronze Cauldron. McCaughrean. 403.
Brothers' Promise. Harber. 280.
Brown, D. Alice Ramsey's Grand Adventure.
44.
Brown, L. What's the Big Secret? 82.
Bruchac. Arrow over the Door. 275.
. Bowman's Store. 237.
. Lasting Echoes. 237.
Bubba and Trixie. Ernst. 50.
Bubba the Cowboy Prince. Ketteman. 131.
Buchanan. Gratefully Yours. 82.
Buck. Santa's Short Suit Shrunk. 119.
Buddy. Joyce. 15.
Buehner. I Did It, I'm Sorry. 354.
Buffie. Dark Garden. 44.
Bugs! Greenberg. 86.
Bunny Money. Wells. 71.
Bunting. Day the Whale Came. 389.
.December. 119.
.Ducky. 155.
_ .So Far from the Sea. 389.
.Your Move. 354.
Buoy. Balan. 387.
Burgess. Earth Giant. 196.
.Smack. 275.
Buried Onions. Soto. 102.
Burks. Walks Alone. 315.
Burleigh. Black Whiteness. 196.
Burns. Spaghetti and Meatballs for All! 120.
Burnt Toast on Davenport Street. Egan. 9.
Busy Building Book. Tarsky. 261.
Butler. Darkling. 276.
Butterfly Boy. Kroll. 16.
Butts. Door in the Lake. 390.
Byars. Ant Plays Bear. 7.
. Disappearing Acts. 315.
C. S. Lewis. Gormley. 202.
Cadnum. In a Dark Wood. 354.
. Lost and Found House. 45.
Caesar's Antlers. Hansen. 204.
Caffey. Yikes-Lice! 355.
Calvert. Sooner. 355.
Cameron. Secret Life of Amanda K. Woods.
315.
Camouflage. Miklowitz. 331.
Can You Keep a Secret? Petersen. 96.
Carbone. Starting School with an Enemy. 277.
Carle. Flora and Tiger. 156.
. Hello, Red Fox. 390.
Carlson, Laurie. Boss of the Plains. 390.
Carlson, Lori Marie. Sol a Sol. 316.
Carreiro. Hand-Print Animal Art. 238.
Caseley. Dorothy's Darkest Days. 7.
Cat Heaven. Rylant. 100.
Catching the Fire. Lyons. 57.
Chaikin. Clouds of Glory. 316.
Chambers. Amistad Rising. 316.
Chan. Glory Days. 156.
. Golden Girl. 156. -
Chang. Beggar's Magic. 45.
Chanukah in Chelm. Adler. 116.
Character in the Book. Zemach. 225.
Charles A. Lindbergh. Giblin. 201.
Charlotte Bronte and Jane Eyre. Ross. 174.
Chicoine. From the Ashes. 162.
Chidi Only Likes Blue. Onyefulu. 95.
Children Just Like Me. Gavin. 10.
Chocolate. Piano Man. 196.
Choosing Up Sides. Ritter. 372.
Chorao. Little Farm by the Sea. 391.
Christelow. Not Until Christmas, Walter! 120.
Christiansen. Mitten Tree. 82.
Chuck Close: Up Close. Greenberg. 321.
Cinder-Eyed Cats. Rohmann. 174.
Cinderhazel. Lattimore. 90.
Circle of Days. Lindbergh. 286.
Circle of Magic: Sandry's Book. Pierce. 97.
Circle of Magic: Tris's Book. Pierce. 292.
Circus Shapes. Murphy. 169.
Circus. Granfield. 280.
Clement. Grandpa's Teeth. 197.
Clouds for Dinner. Perkins. 217.
Clouds of Glory. Chaikin. 316.
Cobb. Don't Try This at Home! 277.
Cochran. Roughnecks. 45.
Cocoa Ice. Appelbaum. 235.
Cody's Secret Admirer. Duffey. 319.
Cohen. Crookjaw. 46.
Colbert. Dear Dr. King. 317.
Cole, Babette. Un-Wedding. 317.
Cole, Brock. Facts Speak for Themselves. 46.
Cole, H. I Took a Walk. 238.
JULY/AUGUST 1998 
* 423
Colliding with Chris. Harder. 363.
Collier. Jazz. 156.
Collington. Small Miracle. 157.
Colman. Corpses, Coffins, and Crypts. 197.
Commander in ChiefAbraham Lincoln and the
Civil War. Marrin. 167.
Common Ground. Bang. 117.
Completely Different Place. Nodelman. 21.
Conford. Crush. 238.
Cook's Family. Yep. 344.
Cook. Roller Coasters. 356.
Cookie Count. Sabuda. 259.
Cooney. Prisoner of Time. 198.
. Terrorist. 47.
_ What Child Is This? 121.
Cooper, E. Ballpark. 239.
.Country Fair. 8.
Cooper, H. Boy Who Wouldn't Go to Bed. 8.
Cooper, I. I'll See You in My Dreams. 8.
Corentin. Papa! 9.
Corpi. Where Fireflies Dance. 47.
Corpses, Coffins, and Crypts. Colman. 197.
Cosby. Best Way to Play. 121.
. Treasure Hunt. 121.
. Meanest Thing to Say. 121.
Costello. Triumph on Ice. 249.
Counting Crocodiles. Sierra. 219.
Country Fair. Cooper. 8.
Coursen. Mordant's Wish. 48.
Court Duel. Smith. 340.
Coville. Macbeth. 177.
Cow, a Bee, a Cookie, and Me. Hooper. 13.
Cow. Older. 215.
Cowan. My Life with the Wave. 48.
Cowboy Baby. Heap. 323.
Cowley. Singing Down the Rain. 157.
Coyne. Daughter, Have I Told You? 356.
Cracking the Wall. Lucas. 249.
Crawford. Robber and Me. 206.
Creepers. Gray. 160.
Crews, D. Night at the Fair. 357.
Crews, N. Snowball. 122.
Crookjaw. Cohen. 46.
Crowe. Sharp Horns on the Moon. 318.
Crush. Conford. 238.
Crystal Heart. Shepard. 412.
Curlee. Into the Ice. 357.
D is for Doufu. Krach. 210.
Dalai Lama. Demi. 277.
Dancing on the Edge. Nolan. 135.
Dancing Through the Shadows. Tomlinson.
222.
Daphne Eloise Slater, Who's Tall for Her Age.
Willner-Pardo. 106.
Dark Garden. Buffie. 44.
Dark Light. Newth. 332.
Darkling. Butler. 276.
Darling. Don't Try This at Home! 277.
Daughter of the Sea. Doherty. 122.
Daughter, Have I Told You? Coyne. 356.
Davenier. Leon and Albertine. 239.
Davies. Big Blue Whale. 48.
Davis. Bone Button Borscht. 82.
Day of the Dead. Johnston. 54.
Day the Whale Came. Bunting. 389.
Dead of Night. Marsden. 92.
Dear Dr. King. Colbert. 317.
December. Bunting. 119.
DeClements. Liar, Liar. 391.
Deem. Bodies from the Bog. 357.
Deetkatoo. Bierhorst. 388.
DeFelice. Ghost of Fossil Glen. 240.
Demi. Dalai Lama. 277.
dePaola. Bill and Pete to the Rescue. 392.
Dessen. Someone Like You. 358.
Devil's Den. Pfeffer. 335.
Dewan. Sorcerer's Apprentice. 392.
Dewey. Poison Dart Frogs. 278.
Diez Deditos. Orozco. 254.
Different Kind of Hero. Blakeslee. 80.
Dilley. Sixty Fingers, Sixty Toes. 393.
Dines. Talk to Me. 9.
Dinorella. Edwards. 122.
Dirty Laundry. Fraustino. 395.
Disappearing Acts. Byars. 315.
Discovering Graph Secrets. Markle. 214.
Discovering the Inca Ice Maiden. Reinhard.
337.
Divide. Bedard. 193.
Do Monkeys Tweet? Walsh. 70.
Dog Who Walked with God. Rosen. 294.
Doherty. Daughter of the Sea. 122.
. Tales of Wonder and Magic. 358.
Doing Time. Thomas. 141.
Dolphin. Our Journey from Tibet. 158.
Don't Try This at Home! Cobb. 277.
Donovan. Won't You Come and Play with Me?
318.
Door in the Lake. Butts. 390.
Dorothy's Darkest Days. Caseley. 7.
Dorris. Window. 158.
Double Act. Wilson. 224.
Doucet. Why Lapin's Ears Are Long. 49.
Douglas. Broken Mirror. 49.
Down to Earth. Rosen. 409.
Dragon Prince. Yep. 144.
Dragonwagon. Bat in the Dining Room. 123.
Drew and the Homeboy Question. Armstrong.
6.
Duck, Duck, Goose? Arnold. 6.
Ducky. Bunting. 155.
Duey. Earthquake. 278.
Duffey. Cody's Secret Admirer. 319.
Duke. One Guinea Pig Is Not Enough. 240.
Duke Ellington. Pinkney. 407.
Dume's Roar. Mollel. 289.
424 
* THE BULLETIN
Duncan. Trapped! 393.
Dunphy. Here Is the Coral Reef. 358.
Dunrea. Trow-Wife's Treasure. 359.
Durrant. Beaded Moccasins. 319.
Dust Bowl. Booth. 43.
Eagle's Shadow. Martin. 59.
Earth Giant. Burgess. 196.
Earthquake. Duey. 278.
Earthsong. Rogers. 337.
Easter Parade. Greenfield. 362.
Echoes of the Elders. Normandin. 136.
Eckert. Return to Hawk's Hill. 393.
Education of Robert Nifkin. Pinkwater. 408.
Eduar. Jooka Saves the Day. 50.
Edwards. Dinorella. 122.
Egan. Burnt Toast on Davenport Street. 9.
Egielski. Gingerbread Boy. 198.
Ehlert. Hands. 158.
Eisenberg. Puppy Riddles. 203.
Elephant Woman. Pringle. 256.
Ellie and the Bunheads. Warner. 30.
Ellis. Back of Beyond. 83.
Emberley. My Mother's Secret Life. 359.
Emily Just in Time. Slepian. 339.
Engel. Holding On. 84.
England. Old Cotton Blues. 394.
Enormous Carrot. Vagin. 377.
Erlbach. Kids' Invention Book. 199.
Ernestine &Amanda: Members of the C.L.U.B.
Belton. 194.
Ernestine and Amanda: Summer Camp, Ready
or Not! Belton. 6.
Ernst. Bubba and Trixie. 50.
Evans, Dilys. Weird Pet Poems. 159.
Evans, Douglas. So What Do You Do? 240.
Evans, L. Snow Dance. 123.
Even a Little Is Something. Glass. 201.
Ever-Clever Elisa. Hurwitz. 206.
Exiles in Love. McKay. 287.
Facts Speak for Themselves. Cole. 46.
Fair Bear Share. Murphy. 169.
Farrell, J. Invisible Enemies. 360.
Farrell, M. Bradley and the Billboard. 278.
Fat Man. Gee. 126.
Feiffer. I Lost My Bear. 360.
Feliciana Meets d'Loup Garou. Thomassie. 377.
Figley. Noah's Wife. 319.
Finding Walter. Turner. 69.
Fine. Tulip Touch. 3.
Fire! Haas. 243.
Fire! Masoff. 289.
Fire, Bed, & Bone. Brandford. 314.
Firehorse Max. London. 132.
Firestorm Unleashed. Ayer. 162.
First Palm Trees. Berry. 195.
Fishman. On Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kip-
pur. 199.
Five Little Piggies. Martin. 331.
Fleischman. Whirligig. 361.
Fleischner. I Was Born a Slave. 124.
Fleming, C. Gabriella's Song. 199.
. Hatmaker's Sign. 320.
Fleming, D. Time to Sleep. 124.
Fletcher. Shadow Spinner. 394.
Flimflam Man. Beard. 311.
Floating in Space. Branley. 275.
Florian. Insectlopedia. 395.
Flora and Tiger. Carle. 156.
Fly Named Alfred. Trembath. 68.
Foggo. One Thing That's True. 320.
Follow the Leader. Winslow. 224.
For Mike. Sykes. 341.
Foreman. Little Reindeer. 124.
Forever Outsiders. Altman. 162.
Forrester. My Home Is Over Jordan. 125.
Foster's War. Reeder. 372.
Fox and the Rooster. Pearson. 255.
Fox, M. BOO to a Goose. 241.
. Whoever You Are. 200.
Fox, P. Radiance Descending. 84.
Fradin. Samuel Adams. 395.
Frankie. Jones. 208.
Fraustino. Dirty Laundry. 395.
Freedman. Martha Graham. 361.
Freedom's Sons. Jurmain. 325.
Freeman. Year My Parents Ruined My Life. 200.
Friend for Minerva Louise. Stoeke. 179.
Froggy's First Kiss. London. 286.
Frogs. Martin. 250.
From Slave Ship to Freedom Road. Lester. 212.
From the Ashes. Ayer. 162.
Frozen Stiff. Shahan. 339.
Gabby Growing Up. Hest. 205.
Gabriella's Song. Fleming. 199.
Gallo. No Easy Answers. 159.
Galloway. Snake Dreamer. 321.
Gammell. Is That You, Winter? 200.
Gantos. Jack's Black Book. 125.
Gardener. Stewart. 68.
Garner. Little Red Hen. 126.
Gauthier. Year with Butch and Spike. 362.
Gavin. Children Just Like Me. 10.
Gee. Fat Man. 126.
Gelber. Love and Marriage Around the World.
396.
Gelman. Queen Esther Saves Her People. 241.
George. Julie's Wolf Pack. 51.
Gershator. Greetings, Sun. 279.
Gerstein. Jonah and the Two Great Fish. 84.
Getz. Life on Mars. 10.
Ghost in Room 11. Wright. 300.
Ghost of a Chance. Roberts. 173.
Ghost of Fossil Glen. DeFelice. 240.
Ghost of Sifty Sifty Sam. Medearis. 168.
Ghosts of the White House. Harness. 244.
Ghost Trap. Joosse. 401.
JULY/AUGUST 1998 
* 425
Ghostwise. Yashinsky. 263.
Giant Carrot. Peck. 255.
Gib Rides Home. Snyder. 220.
Gibbons, F. Hook Moon Night. 85.
Gibbons, G. Marshes & Swamps. 279.
.Yippee-Yay! 396.
Giblin. Charles A. Lindbergh. 201.
Gifaldi. Rearranging. 397.
Gingerbread Boy. Egielski. 198.
Gingerbread Man. Aylesworth. 192.
Girl Who Dreamed Only Geese. Norman. 215.
Glad Monster, Sad Monster. Miranda. 63.
Gladiator. Watkins. 70.
Glass Town. Bedard. 154.
Glass, A. Right Fine Life. 160.
Glass, T. Even a Little Is Something. 201.
Glassman. Box Top Dreams. 241.
Glory Days. Chan. 156.
Go and Come Back. Abelove. 272.
God's Story. Mark. 330.
Godwin. Little White Dog. 397.
Going Through the Gate. Anderson. 191.
Gold. Memories of Anne Frank. 85.
Golden Girl. Chan. 156.
Golden Sandal. Hickox. 364.
Gone A-Whaling. Murphy. 290.
Good Day, Good Night. Singer. 412.
Good Knight. Rymill. 295.
Good Night, Mr. Night. Yaccarino. 182.
Good-bye, Charles Lindbergh. Borden. 313.
Good-bye Marianne. Watts. 416.
Goodbye, Buffalo Sky. Loveday. 132.
Goodman. Hope's Crossing. 397.
Gordon Loggins and the Three Bears. Bailey.
117.
Gormley. C. S. Lewis. 202.
Gottfried. James Baldwin. 11.
Gourley. Wheels of Time. 160.
Graham. Queenie, One of the Family. 202.
Grandpa's Teeth. Clement. 197.
Granfield. Circus. 280.
Granville Jones: Commando. Honeycutt. 365.
Grassroots. Sandburg. 373.
Gratefully Yours. Buchanan. 82.
Gray. Creepers. 160.
Great Corgiville Kidnapping. Tudor. 68.
Great Turkey Walk. Karr. 326.
Greater Than Angels. Matas. 404.
Greenberg, D. Bugs! 86.
Greenberg, J. Chuck Close: Up Close. 321.
Greene, R. Barnyard Song. 51.
. When a Line Bends...A Shape Begins.
161.
Greene, S. Owen Foote, Soccer Star. 321.
Greenfield. Easter Parade. 362.
Greenlaw. Welcome to the Stock Show. 51.
Greenwald. Rosy Cole: She Grows and Gradu-
ates. 86.
Greetings, Sun. Gershator. 279.
Gregory. Orphan Runaways. 242.
Griffin. Sons of Liberty. 203.
Griffith. Alex and the Cat. 126.
Grimes. It's Raining Laughter. 161.
Gritz-Gilbert. Starfish Summer. 363.
Grove. Reaching Dustin. 242.
Grover. Max's Wacky Taxi Day. 203.
Guiberson. Teddy Roosevelt's Elk. 52.
Gullible's Troubles. Shannon. 411.
Guns. Schulson. 139.
Haas, D. You Can Call Me Worm. 161.
Haas, I. Summertime Song. 12.
Haas, J. Fire! 243.
Habibi. Nye. 94.
Haddad. Meet Calliope Day. 398.
Haddix. Leaving Fishers. 127.
Hahn. As Ever, Gordy. 363.
Hall, K. Puppy Riddles. 203.
Hall, Z. Surprise Garden. 243.
Halloween House. Silverman. 101.
Hamilton. Ring of Tricksters. 86.
Hampton. Kennedy Assassinated! The World
Mourns. 52.
Hand-Print Animal Art. Carreiro. 238.
Hands. Ehlert. 158.
Hansen, B. Caesar's Antlers. 204.
Hansen, J. Breaking Ground, Breaking Silence.
398.
Hanson. Snug. 399.
Harber. Brothers' Promise. 280.
Hard Ball. Weaver. 343.
Harder. Colliding with Chris. 363.
Hardman. Sunshine Rider. 322.
Harms. Dear Dr. King. 317.
Harness. Ghosts of the White House. 244.
. Young Teddy Roosevelt. 280.
Harper. Boitano's Edge. 236.
Harrison. It's My Life. 244.
Harry's Pony. Porte. 65.
Hartnett. Princes. 281.
Haskins. African Beginnings. 281.
. Black, Blue, & Gray. 204.
Hathorn. Sky Sash So Blue. 322.
Hatmaker's Sign. Fleming. 320.
Hayes. Onstage & Backstage. 204.
Heap. Cowboy Baby. 323.
Hearne. Seven Brave Women. 53.
Hearsay. Porte. 335.
Heart of the City. Koertge. 285.
Heidenreich. Nero Corleone. 127.
Heller. Mine, All Mine. 244.
Hello, Red Fox. Carle. 390.
Henkes. Sun & Spoon. 128.
Henry and Mudge and the Sneaky Crackers.
Rylant. 258.
Her Blue Straw Hat. Adler. 5.
Herbst. Mystery of UFOs. 128.
426 * THE BULLETIN
Hercules. Moore. 20.
Here Is the Coral Reef. Dunphy. 358.
Hero. Rottman. 175.
Hershenhorn. There Goes Lowell's Party. 282.
Hesse. Out of the Dust. 128.
Hest. Gabby Growing Up. 205.
. When Jessie Came Across the Sea. 245.
Hewett. Lives of Our Own. 323.
Heynen. Being Youngest. 129.
Hickox. Golden Sandal. 364.
Hiding from the Nazis. Adler. 153.
High. Beekeepers. 282.
Hill. Shipwreck Season. 399.
Hiscock. Big Rivers. 12.
Hob and the Peddler. Mayne. 134.
Hoban. Acting Normal. 400.
Hobble. Toot & Puddle. 205.
Hoberman. Miss Mary Mack. 324.
. One of Each. 53.
Hodges. Silent Night. 129.
. True Tale of Johnny Appleseed. 12.
Hoffman. Angel Just Like Me. 245.
Holden. Pied Piper of Hamelin. 324.
Holding On. Engel. 84.
Holeman. Saying Good-Bye. 53.
Holly Sisters on Their Own. Mulford. 406.
Holman. Real. 130.
Holt. My Louisiana Sky. 364.
Holub, Joan. Pen Pals. 130.
Holub, Josef. Robber and Me. 206.
Home on the Range. Janeczko. 87.
Home Wars. Miller. 62.
Honeycutt. Granville Jones: Commando. 365.
Hook Moon Night. Gibbons. 85.
Hooper. Cow, a Bee, a Cookie, and Me. 13.
Hooray for Diffendoofer Day! Seuss. 374.
Hope's Crossing. Goodman. 397.
Hopkins. Marvelous Math. 13.
Hopkinson. Birdie's Lighthouse. 14.
Horvath. Sir Galahad, Mr. Longfellow, and Me.
324.
House You Pass on the Way. Woodson. 71.
How We Crossed the West. Schanzer. 100.
Howarth. Maphead: The Return. 246.
Hughes. Alfie and the Birthday Surprise. 246.
Hurwitz. Ever-Clever Elisa. 206.
Huynh. Water Buffalo Days. 163.
Hyppolite. Ola Shakes It Up. 206.
I Am Mordred. Springer. 375.
I Can't Believe I Have to Do This. Alford. 190.
I Did It, I'm Sorry. Buehner. 354.
I Have Heard of a Land. Thomas. 376.
I Know an Old Lady Who Swallowed a Pie.
Jackson. 87.
I Lost My Bear. Feiffer. 360.
I Love My Hair! Tarpley. 298.
I Rode a Horse of Milk White Jade. Wilson.
379.
I See the Rhythm. Igus. 400.
I Took a Walk. Cole. 238.
I Was Born a Slave. Fleischner. 124.
I'll See You in My Dreams. Cooper. 8.
If I Forget, You Remember. Williams. 223.
If I Only Had a Horn. Orgill. 22.
If You Give a Pig a Pancake. Numeroff. 370.
If You Were Born a Kitten. Bauer. 153.
Igus. I See the Rhythm. 400.
Images of God. Paterson. 334.
Imp That Ate My Homework. Yep. 302.
In a Dark Wood. Cadnum. 354.
In Daddy's Arms I Am Tall. 207.
In the Language of Loons. Kinsey-Warnock.
284.
In the Stone Circle. Kimmel. 248.
Incredible Ned. Maynard. 93.
Inferno. Ayer. 162.
Ingwersen. Dark Light. 332.
Inkpen. Nothing. 247.
Insectlopedia. Florian. 395.
Into the Ice. Curlee. 357.
Invisible Enemies. Farrell. 360.
Is That You, Winter? Gammell. 200.
Isaacs. Treehouse Tales. 54.
Isadora. Little Mermaid. 386.
. South African Night. 282.
. Young Mozart. 14.
Island Bound. Levin. 90.
Island-below-the-Star. Rumford. 410.
Islander. Rylant. 338.
Israel. Silverman. 375.
It's Disgusting-and We Ate It! Solheim. 296.
It's My Life. Harrison. 244.
It's Raining Laughter. Grimes. 161.
Jack's Black Book. Gantos. 125.
Jackson, A. I Know an Old Lady Who Swal-
lowed a Pie. 87.
Jackson, S. Old Woman and the Wave. 247.
Jacques. Long Patrol. 283.
Jaffe. Voice for the People. 14.
James Baldwin. Gottfried. 11.
James. Michelle Kwan. 211.
Janeczko. Home on the Range. 87.
.That Sweet Diamond. 401.
Janisch. Noah's Ark. 130.
January Rides the Wind. Otten. 171.
Janulewicz. Yikes! 15.
Jazz. Collier. 156.
Jenkins, A. Breaking Boxes. 88.
Jenkins, S. What Do You Do When Something
Wants to Eat You? 131.
Jeram. Birthday Happy, Contrary Mary. 325.
Jewels. Rochelle. 258.
Jiang. Red Scarf Girl. 207.
Johnson, A. Songs of Faith. 365.
Johnson, D. All Around the Town. 283.
Johnson, P. Perfect Pork Stew. 284.
JULY/AUGUST 1998 
* 427
Johnston. Day of the Dead. 54.
. Sparky and Eddie: The First Day of
School. 88.
Jonah and the Two Great Fish. Gerstein. 84.
Jonah, the Whale. Shreve. 296.
Jonell. Mommy Go Away! 131.
Jones. Frankie. 208.
Jonkonnu. Littlesugar. 165.
Jooka Saves the Day. Eduar. 50.
Joosse. Ghost Trap. 401.
Jordan. Chuck Close: Up Close. 321.
Joseph. Wildsmith. 222.
Joshua T. Bates in Trouble Again. Shreve. 219.
Joyce. Buddy. 15.
.World ofWilliam Joyce Scrapbook. 208.
Joyride. Olson. 333.
Jubilee Journey. Meyer. 19.
Julie's Wolf Pack. George. 51.
Jurmain. Freedom's Sons. 325.
Just Kids. Senisi. 411.
Just Like Me. Rohmer. 217.
Just You and Me. McBratney. 368.
Kamida. Night Mare. 54.
Karr. Great Turkey Walk. 326.
. Lighthouse Mermaid. 365.
Katarina. Winter. 262.
Katz. Snowdrops for Cousin Ruth. 326.
Keeper of the Light. Pfitsch. 172.
Keeping Room. Myers. 169.
Kehret. Searching for Candlestick Park. 88.
Keller. Angela's Top-Secret Computer Club.
247.
Kellerhals-Stewart. My Brother's Train. 55.
Kennedy Assassinated! The World Mourns.
Hampton. 52.
Kerr. Blood on the Forehead. 366.
Ketteman. Bubba the Cowboy Prince. 131.
Kherdian. Rose's Smile. 89.
Kidnap Kids. Strasser. 260.
Kidnappers. Roberts. 257.
Kids' Allowance Book. Nathan. 369.
Kids' Invention Book. Erlbach. 199.
Killing Frost. Marsden. 288.
Kimmel, Elizabeth. In the Stone Circle. 248.
Kimmel, Eric. Be Not Far from Me. 326.
.Ten Suns. 366.
King of the Birds. Ward. 105.
King-Smith. Mr. Ape. 401.
. Puppy Love. 209.
Kinsey-Warnock. As Long as There Are Moun-
tains. 89.
. In the Language of Loons. 284.
Kinship. Krisher. 210.
Kipling. Rikki-Tikki-Tavi. 163.
Kirk. Bigger. 367.
. Breakfast at the Liberty Diner. 209.
Klass, D. Screen Test. 248.
Klass, S. Uncivil War. 209.
Knight. Mischief, Mad Mary, and Me. 15.
Knots in My Yo-Yo String. Spinelli. 414.
Koertge. Heart of the City. 285.
Kooharian. Sammy's Story. 55.
Krach. D is for Doufu. 210.
Krisher. Kinship. 210.
Kroll. Butterfly Boy. 16.
Kropp. Moonkid and Prometheus. 367.
Kudler. Seven Gods of Luck. 56.
Kurtis-Kleinman. When Aunt Lena Did the
Rhumba. 16.
Kushner. Night Voyagers. 89.
Kvasnosky. Zelda and Ivy. 285.
Kwan. Michelle Kwan. 211.
Lady Diana Spencer. Whitelaw. 417.
LaFaye. Year of the Sawdust Man. 402.
Lamstein. Annie's Shabbat. 211.
Land of Many Hands. Sigerman. 220.
Lanning. What's the Matter, Davy? 378.
Lasky. Alice Rose & Sam. 327.
. Brilliant Streak. 402.
.Marven of the Great North Woods. 211.
Lewis. Little Buggers. 403.
Last of the Wild. McClung. 18.
Lasting Echoes. Bruchac. 237.
Lattimore. Cinderhazel. 90.
Laura Ingalls Wilder. Wadsworth. 30.
Laura Ingalls Wilder. Wallner. 181.
Lawrence. Wreckers. 367.
Layden. NBA Game Day. 212.
Layton. Swap. 56.
Leaving Fishers. Haddix. 127.
Lemonade for Sale. Murphy. 169.
Leon and Albertine. Davenier. 239.
Leon's Story. Tillage. 142.
Lester, H. Tacky in Trouble. 327.
Lester, J. Black Cowboy, Wild Horses. 327.
.From Slave Ship to Freedom Road. 212.
Let's Talk About It: Stepfamilies. Rogers. 174.
Levin. Island Bound. 90.
Levinson. She's Been Working on the Railroad.
163.
Levitin. Boom Town. 328.
Levy. My Life As a Fifth-Grade Comedian. 164.
Lewin, B. What's the Matter, Habibi? 17.
Lewin, T. Storytellers. 286.
Liar, Liar. DeClements. 391.
Life in the Fat Lane. Bennett. 194.
Life on Mars. Getz. 10.
Lighthouse Mermaid. Karr. 365.
Lightning Time. Rees. 173.
Lindbergh. Awful Aardvarks Go to School. 213.
. Circle of Days. 286.
Lindsay. Milly Stories. 328.
Lipinski. Triumph on Ice. 249.
Little Buggers. Lewis. 403.
Little Farm by the Sea. Chorao. 391.
Little Mermaid. Andersen. 386.
428 
* THE BULLETIN
Little Oh. Melmed. 61.
Little Red Hen. Garner. 126.
Little Reindeer. Foreman. 124.
Little Ship under Full Sail. Panagopoulos. 254.
Little White Dog. Godwin. 397.
Little. Belonging Place. 164.
Littlesugar. Jonkonnu. 165.
Lives of Our Own. Hewett. 323.
Liza's Star Wish. Stevens. 103.
Lizard and the Sun. Ada. 40.
Lizard Sees the World. Tews. 140.
Lizardi-Rivera. Momentos Maigicos. 287.
Lizzie Logan Gets Married. Spinelli. 28.
London, J. Froggy's First Kiss. 286.
. Puddles. 17.
London, S. Firehorse Max. 132.
Long Patrol. Jacques. 283.
Loredo. Boogie Bones. 17.
Lost and Found House. Cadnum. 45.
Lot of Otters. Berger. 154.
Love and Marriage Around the World. Gelber.
396.
Love from Your Friend, Hannah. Skolsky. 296.
Love of Friends. Bond. 154.
Loveday. Goodbye, Buffalo Sky. 132.
Lowell. Bootmaker and the Elves. 132.
Lowry. Stay! 165.
Loya. Momentos Migicos. 287.
Lucas. Cracking the Wall. 249.
Lullaby Raft. Nye. 64.
Lyon. Sign. 287.
Lyons. Catching the Fire. 57.
. Poison Place. 166.
Macaulay. Rome Antics. 133.
Macbeth. Shakespeare. 177.
Maestro. New Americans: Colonial Times,
1620-1689. 329.
Magic Bean Tree. Van Laan. 416.
Maguire. Six Haunted Hairdos. 167.
Mahy. Beaten by a Balloon. 250.
Mailing May. Tunnell. 69.
Making Up Megaboy. Walter. 342.
Malachite Palace. Ada. 234.
Mama Provi and the Pot of Rice. Rosa-
Casanova. 24.
Mama. Why Goats Smell Bad. 330.
Man on the Moon. Suen. 261.
Maphead: The Return. Howarth. 246.
Mariconda. Turn the Cup Around. 92.
Marino. Searching for Atticus. 134.
Mark. God's Story. 330.
Markle. Discovering Graph Secrets. 214.
.Super Cool Science. 288.
Marrin. Commander in ChiefAbraham Lincoln
and the Civil War. 167.
Marsden. Dead of Night. 92.
.Killing Frost. 288.
Marsh. Way Out in the Desert. 330.
Marshall. Banana Moon. 250.
Marshes & Swamps. Gibbons. 279.
Martens. Milo and the Magical Stones. 97.
Martha Graham. Freedman. 361.
Martian Fossils on Earth? Bortz. 274.
Martin, D. Five Little Piggies. 331.
Martin, J. Frogs. 250.
Martin, N. Eagle's Shadow. 59.
Martin, R. Brave Little Parrot. 251.
Marvelous Math. Hopkins. 13.
Marven of the Great North Woods. Lasky. 211.
Marvin's Best Christmas Present Ever. Paterson.
216.
Mary Mehan Awake. Armstrong. 116.
Masoff. Fire! 289.
Master Maid. Shepard. 26.
Mastoon. Shared Heart. 251.
Matas. Greater Than Angels. 404.
Matcheck. Sacrifice. 405.
Mathis. Running Girl. 60.
Matthew Unstrung. Seago. 259.
Max the Mighty. Philbrick. 291.
Max's Wacky Taxi Day. Grover. 203.
Mayer. Pegasus. 369.
Maynard, B. Incredible Ned. 93.
Maynard, M. Blue True Dream of Sky. 60.
Mayne. Hob and the Peddler. 134.
Mazer, H. Twelve Shots. 60.
Mazer, N. When She Was Good. 61.
McBratney. Just You and Me. 368.
McCaughrean. Bronze Cauldron. 403.
. Unicorns! Unicorns! 133.
McClung. Last of the Wild. 18.
McCully. Beautiful Warrior. 250.
. Popcorn at the Palace. 57.
McCurdy. Sailor's Alphabet. 368.
. Trapped by the Ice! 18.
McDermott. Musicians of the Sun. 213.
McDonald. Beezy. 91.
. Swallowing Stones. 91.
McDonough. Anne Frank. 166.
McGough. Until I Met Dudley. 166.
McGowan. Breaking Ground, Breaking Silence.
398.
McKay. Amber Cat. 91.
. Exiles in Love. 287.
McKinley. Rose Daughter. 58.
McKissack, F. Young, Black and Determined.
329.
McKissack, P. Run Away Home. 213.
McMahon. Six Words, Many Turtles, and
Three Days in Hong Kong. 58.
McMillan. My Horse of the North. 58.
. Salmon Summer. 329.
McNaughton. Oops! 59.
McPhail. Tinker and Tom and the Star Baby.
404.
JULY/AUGUST 1998 
* 
429
Mean Margaret. Seidler. 218.
Meanest Thing to Say. Cosby. 121.
Medearis. Ghost of Sifty Sifty Sam. 168.
Meet Calliope Day. Haddad. 398.
Meeuwissen. Remarkable Animals. 331.
Melitte. Shaik. 176.
Melmed. Little Oh. 61.
Meltzer. Ten Queens. 405.
Memories of Anne Frank. Gold. 85.
Memories of Clason Point. Sonnenfeld. 375.
Mennyms Alive. Waugh. 105.
Meow! Arnold. 387.
Meyer. Jubilee Journey. 19.
Michelle Kwan. Kwan. 211.
Miklowitz. Camouflage. 331.
Miller, D. Home Wars. 62.
Miller, V. Be Gentle! 62.
Miller, W. Richard Wright and the Library
Card. 252.
Milly Stories. Lindsay. 328.
Milo and the Magical Stones. Pfister. 97.
Mind Reader. Slepian. 140.
Mine Eyes Have Seen. Rinaldi. 293.
Mine, All Mine. Heller. 244.
Miranda. Glad Monster, Sad Monster. 63.
.To Market, to Market. 92.
Mischief, Mad Mary, and Me. Knight. 15.
Miss Mary Mack. Hoberman. 324.
Mitten Tree. Christiansen. 82.
Mochizuki. Passage to Freedom. 19.
Mollel. Dume's Roar. 289.
Momentos Migicos. Loya. 287.
Mommy Go Away! Jonell. 131.
Monkey Do! Ahlberg. 272.
Monkey Sunday. Stanley. 297.
Moonkid and Prometheus. Kropp. 367.
Moore, L. Poems Have Roots. 94.
Moore, M. Angels on the Roof. 168.
Moore, R. Hercules. 20.
Mora. This Big Sky. 290.
. Tomis and the Library Lady. 63.
Mordant's Wish. Coursen. 48.
Morris. Squire's Tale. 406.
Mouse Match. Young. 144.
Mouse Mess. Riley. 137.
Mouse That Jack Built. Szekeres. 179.
Moving Mama to Town. Young. 32.
Mr. Ape. King-Smith. 401.
Mrs. Armitage and the Big Wave. Blake. 312.
Mrs. McNosh Hangs Up Her Wash. Weeks.
343.
Mulford. Holly Sisters on Their Own. 406.
Mullins. One Horse Waiting for Me. 252.
Munsch. Alligator Baby. 63.
.Andrew's Loose Tooth. 406.
Murphy, J. Gone A-Whaling. 290.
. West to a Land of Plenty. 253.
Murphy, S. Circus Shapes. 169.
_ Fair Bear Share. 169.
_ Lemonade for Sale. 169.
Musicians of the Sun. McDermott. 213.
Mustang Flats. Wisler. 31.
My Brother's Train. Kellerhals-Stewart. 55.
My Home Is Over Jordan. Forrester. 125.
My Horse of the North. McMillan. 58.
My Life as a Fifth-Grade Comedian. Levy. 164.
My Life in Dog Years. Paulsen. 254.
My Life with the Wave. Cowan. 48.
My Louisiana Sky. Holt. 364.
My Mom Married the Principal. Bechard. 273.
My Mother's Secret Life. Emberley. 359.
My Name Is York. Van Steenwyk. 30.
Myers, A. Keeping Room. 169.
Myers, W. Amistad. 325.
Mysterious Thelonious. Raschka. 66.
Mystery of UFOs. Herbst. 128.
Naming the Cat. Pringle. 65.
Napoli. Stones in Water. 214.
Nathan. Kids' Allowance Book. 369.
Naylor. "I Can't Take You Anywhere!" 169.
. Achingly Alice. 290.
. Saving Shiloh. 20.
NBA Game Day. Layden. 212.
Nero Corleone. Heidenreich. 127.
Never Were Men So Brave. Beller. 236.
New Americans: Colonial Times, 1620-1689.
Maestro. 329.
Newman. Beautiful Days of My Youth. 64.
Newth. Dark Light. 332.
Night at the Fair. Crews. 357.
Night Mare. Kamida. 54.
Night Voyagers. Kushner. 89.
Nikola-Lisa. Shake Dem Halloween Bones. 135.
Nix. Shade's Children. 94.
No Easy Answers. Gallo. 159.
Noah's Ark. Janisch. 130.
Noah's Wife. Figley. 319.
Nodelman. Completely Different Place. 21.
Nolan, D. Androcles and the Lion. 253.
Nolan, H. Dancing on the Edge. 135.
Nolen. Raising Dragons. 370.
Noll. Surprise! 21.
Norman. Girl Who Dreamed Only Geese. 215.
Normandin. Echoes of the Elders. 136.
Not Until Christmas, Walter! Christelow. 120.
Nothing. Inkpen. 247.
Novac. Beautiful Days of My Youth. 64.
Numeroff. If You Give a Pig a Pancake. 370.
Nye. Habibi. 94.
.Lullaby Raft. 64.
.Space Between Our Footsteps. 332.
Nygaard. Snake Alley Band. 406.
O'Brien. Sam's Sneaker Search. 21.
O'Leary. With Wings as Eagles. 136.
430 
* THE BULLETIN
O'Malley. Velcome. 95.
Ola Shakes It Up. Hyppolite. 206.
Old Cotton Blues. England. 394.
Old Jake's Skirts. Scott. 411.
Old People, Frogs, and Albert. Wilson. 224.
Old Woman and The Wave. Jackson. 247.
Older. Cow. 215.
Olive, the Other Reindeer. Seibold. 176.
Olson. Joyride. 333.
On Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur. Fishman.
199.
On the Wings of Eagles. Schrier. 338.
Once on This River. Wyeth. 301.
One Guinea Pig Is Not Enough. Duke. 240.
One Horse Waiting for Me. Mullins. 252.
One of Each. Hoberman. 53.
One Room School. Pringle. 293.
One Thing That's True. Foggo. 320.
Onstage & Backstage. Hayes. 204.
Onyefulu. Chidi Only Likes Blue. 95.
Oops! McNaughton. 59.
Open Me ... I'm a Dog! Spiegelman. 28.
Oppel. Silverwing. 170.
Oram. Baba Yaga and the Wise Doll. 215.
.Badger's Bad Mood. 333.
Orcas Around Me. Page. 22.
Orgel. Nero Corleone. 127.
Orgill. If I Only Had a Horn. 22.
Ormerod. Peek-a-Boo! 216.
Orozco. Diez Deditos. 254.
Orphan Runaways. Gregory. 242.
Osborne. Rocking Horse Christmas. 136.
Otten. January Rides the Wind. 171.
Our Journey from Tibet. Dolphin. 158.
Out of the Dust. Hesse. 128.
Owen Foote, Soccer Star. Greene. 321.
Page. Orcas Around Me. 22.
Panagopoulos. Little Ship under Full Sail. 254.
Papa! Corentin. 9.
Paperquake. Reiss. 372.
Paraskevas. Tangerine Bear. 95.
Parker. Stolen Dreams. 216.
Parts. Arnold. 42.
Parzival. Paterson. 334.
Passage to Freedom. Mochizuki. 19.
Patent. Back to the Wild. 23.
Paterson, J. Images of God. 334.
Paterson, K. Marvin's Best Christmas Present
Ever. 216.
. Parzival. 334.
Patrick. Adventures of Midnight Son. 171.
Paulsen. My Life in Dog Years. 254.
.Sarny. 96.
.Transall Saga. 407.
Paz. My Life with the Wave. 48.
Pearson. Fox and the Rooster. 255.
Peck, J. Giant Carrot. 255.
Peck, R. Strays Like Us. 291.
Peek-a-Boo! Ormerod. 216.
Pegasus. Mayer. 369.
Pelgrom. Acorn Eaters. 96.
Pen Pals. Holub. 130.
Perfect Pork Stew. Johnson. 284.
Perkins. Clouds for Dinner. 217.
Petersen. Can You Keep a Secret? 96.
Pevsner. Sing for Your Father, Su Phan. 171.
Pfeffer. Devil's Den. 335.
Pfister. Milo and the Magical Stones. 97.
Pfitsch. Keeper of the Light. 172.
Philbrick. Max the Mighty. 291.
Piano Man. Chocolate. 196.
Pickles to Pittsburgh. Barrett. 118.
Pied Piper of Hamelin. Holden. 324.
Pierce. Circle of Magic: Sandry's Book. 97.
. Circle of Magic: Tris's Book. 292.
Pig Pigger Piggest. Walton. 104.
Pilkey. Silly Gooses. 292.
Pinkney, A. Duke Ellington. 407.
. Raven in a Dove House. 335.
Pinkney, J. Rikki-Tikki-Tavi. 163.
Pinkwater. At the Hotel Larry. 23.
. Education of Robert Nifkin. 408.
. Young Larry. 23.
Pioneer Girl. Anderson. 192.
Place to Bloom. Siomades. 101.
Poems Have Roots. Moore. 94.
Poison Dart Frogs. Dewey. 278.
Poison Place. Lyons. 166.
Polacco. Thank You, Mr. Falker. 370.
Pomeranc. American Wei. 292.
Pomerantz. You're Not My Best Friend Any-
more. 371.
Popcorn at the Palace. McCully. 57.
Popcorn. Stevenson. 297.
Poppleton Everyday. Rylant. 294.
Porte. Harry's Pony. 65.
.Hearsay. 335.
Porter. Treasures in the Dust. 98.
Preller. NBA Game Day. 212.
Prelutsky. Beauty of the Beast. 172.
.Hooray for Diffendoofer Day! 374.
Princes. Hartnett. 281.
Pringle. Elephant Woman. 256.
.Naming the Cat. 65.
.One Room School. 293.
Prins. Acorn Eaters. 96.
Prisoner of Time. Cooney. 198.
Prose. You Never Know. 408.
Puddles. London. 17.
Pullman. Subtle Knife. 98.
Puppies. Wegman. 181.
Puppy Love. King-Smith. 209.
Puppy Riddles. Hall. 203.
Pushkin Meets the Bundle. Ziefert. 345.
JULY/AUGUST 1998 
* 431
Pyle. Bearskin. 98.
Qualey. Thin Ice. 172.
Quattlebaum. Underground Train. 137.
Queen Esther Saves Her People. Gelman. 241.
Queenie, One of the Family. Graham. 202.
Rabinovici. Thanks to My Mother. 256.
Radcliffe. Bashi, Elephant Baby. 257.
Radiance Descending. Fox. 84.
Radunsky. Yucka Drucka Droni. 409.
Rael. When Zaydeh Danced on Eldridge Street.
65.
Rafkin. Tiger's Eye, the Bird's Fist. 24.
Raising Dragons. Nolen. 370.
Rama and the Demon King. Souhami. 221.
Rankin. WOW! It's Great Being a Duck. 336.
Rapunzel. Zelinsky. 182.
Raschka. Mysterious Thelonious. 66.
. Simple Gifts. 336.
Raven in a Dove House. Pinkney. 335.
Reaching Dustin. Grove. 242.
Read to Your Bunny. Wells. 300.
Real. Holman. 130.
Rearranging. Gifaldi. 397.
Red Scarf Girl. Jiang. 207.
Reeder. Foster's War. 372.
Rees. Lightning Time. 173.
Reinhard. Discovering the Inca Ice Maiden.
337.
Reiss. Paperquake. 372.
Remarkable Animals. Meeuwissen. 331.
Resource Guide. Shulman. 162.
Return to Hawk's Hill. Eckert. 393.
Richard Wright and the Library Card. Miller.
252.
Riding Freedom. Ryan. 337.
Right Fine Life. Glass. 160.
Rikki-Tikki-Tavi. Kipling. 163.
Riley. Mouse Mess. 137.
Rinaldi. Acquaintance with Darkness. 66.
. Mine Eyes Have Seen. 293.
Ring of Tricksters. Hamilton. 86.
Riordan. Twelve Labors of Hercules. 138.
Ritter. Choosing Up Sides. 372.
Robber and Me. Holub. 206.
Roberts, L. Ghost of a Chance. 173.
Roberts, W. Kidnappers. 257.
Robinson. Street Called Home. 99.
Roche. Brave Georgie Goat. 257.
Rochelle. Jewels. 258.
Rocking Horse Christmas. Osborne. 136.
Roddie. Toes Are to Tickle. 24.
. Too Close Friends. 372.
Rogers, F. Let's TalkAbout It: Stepfamilies. 174.
Rogers, S. Earthsong. 337.
Rohmann. Cinder-Eyed Cats. 174.
Rohmer. Just Like Me. 217.
Roller Coasters. Cook. 356.
Rome Antics. Macaulay. 133.
Rope Burn. Siebold. 374.
Rosa-Casanova. Mama Provi and the Pot of
Rice. 24.
Rose and Sebastian. Zarin. 72.
Rose Daughter. McKinley. 58.
Rose's Smile. Kherdian. 89.
Rosen. Dog Who Walked with God. 294.
. Down to Earth. 409.
Rosenthal. Yo, Aesop! 373.
Ross. Charlotte Bronte and Jane Eyre. 174.
Rosy Cole: She Grows and Graduates.
Greenwald. 86.
Rottman. Hero. 175.
Roughnecks. Cochran. 45.
Rules of the Road. Bauer. 192.
Rumble in the Jungle. Andreae. 41.
Rumford. Island-below-the-Star. 410.
Run Away Home. McKissack. 213.
Running Girl. Mathis. 60.
Ruthie's Gift. Bradley. 313.
Ryan. Riding Freedom. 337.
Ryden. Wild Horse Summer. 99.
Rylant. Cat Heaven. 100.
. Henry and Mudge and the Sneaky
Crackers. 258.
. Islander. 338.
.Poppleton Everyday. 294.
.Scarecrow. 373.
. Silver Packages. 138.
Rymill. Good Knight. 295.
Sabuda. Cookie Count. 259.
Sacagawea. St. George. 103.
Sacred Shadows. Schur. 139.
Sacrifice. Matcheck. 405.
Sage. Sassy Gracie. 410.
Sailor's Alphabet. McCurdy. 368.
Saint Patrick. Tompert. 298.
Salem Witch Trials. Wilson. 31.
Salisbury. Shark Bait. 138.
Salmon Summer. McMillan. 329.
Sam the Zamboni Man. Stevenson. 298.
Sam's Sneaker Search. O'Brien. 21.
Sammy Keys and the Hotel Thief. Van Draanen.
415.
Sammy the Dog Detective. Bare. 236.
Sammy's Story. Kooharian. 55.
Samuel Adams. Fradin. 395.
San Souci. Two Bear Cubs. 259.
. Weave of Words. 295.
Sandburg. Grassroots. 373.
Santa's Short Suit Shrunk. Buck. 119.
Santella. Battle of the Alamo. 25.
Santore. William the Curious. 139.
Sarny. Paulsen. 96.
Sasquatch. Smith. 413.
Sassy Gracie. Sage. 410.
432 
* THE BULLETIN
Saturday Night at the Dinosaur Stomp. Shields.
177.
Saving Shiloh. Naylor. 20.
Say. Allison. 175.
Saying Good-Bye. Holeman. 53.
Scarecrow. Rylant. 373.
Schanzer. How We Crossed the West. 100.
Schlein. Sleep Safe, Little Whale. 176.
Schnur. Autumn. 25.
School Spirits. Tunnell. 262.
Schrier. On the Wings of Eagles. 338.
Schulson. Guns. 139.
Schur. Sacred Shadows. 139.
Scott. Old Jake's Skirts. 411.
Screen Test. Klass. 248.
Seabrooke. Under the Pear Tree. 218.
Seago. Matthew Unstrung. 259.
Searching for Atticus. Marino. 134.
Searching for Candlestick Park. Kehret. 88.
Secret Knowledge of Grown-ups. Wisniewski.
417.
Secret Life of Amanda K. Woods. Cameron.
315.
Seibold. Olive, the Other Reindeer. 176.
Seidler. Mean Margaret. 218.
Senisi. Just Kids. 411.
Seuss. Hooray for Diffendoofer Day! 374.
Seven Brave Women. Hearne. 53.
Seven Gods of Luck. Kudler. 56.
Shade's Children. Nix. 94.
Shadow Spinner. Fletcher. 394.
Shahan. Frozen Stiff. 339.
Shaik. Melitte. 176.
Shake Dem Halloween Bones. Nikola-Lisa. 135.
Shakespeare Stealer. Blackwood. 353.
Shakespeare. Macbeth. 177.
Shange. White Wash. 218.
Shannon, D. Bad Case of Stripes. 260.
Shannon, G. True Lies. 26.
Shannon, M. Gullible's Troubles. 411.
Shared Heart. Mastoon. 251.
Shark Bait. Salisbury. 138.
Sharp Horns on the Moon. Crowe. 318.
She's Been Working on the Railroad. Levinson.
163.
Sheldon. Boy of My Dreams. 26.
Shepard. Crystal Heart. 412.
.Master Maid. 26.
Sherrow. Blaze Engulfs. 162.
. Smoke to Flame. 162.
Shields. Saturday Night at the Dinosaur Stomp.
177.
Shingebiss. Van Laan. 29.
Shipwreck Season. Hill. 399.
Shots on Goal. Wallace. 143.
Showers. Sleep Is for Everyone. 27.
Shreve. Jonah, the Whale. 296.
.Joshua T. Bates in Trouble Again. 219.
Shulman. Resource Guide. 162.
. Voices and Visions. 162.
Siebold. Rope Burn. 374.
Sierra. Counting Crocodiles. 219.
Sigerman. Land of Many Hands. 220.
Sign. Lyon. 287.
Silent Night. Hodges. 129.
Silly Gooses. Pilkey. 292.
Silver Balloon. Bonners. 81.
Silver Packages. Rylant. 138.
Silverman, E. Halloween House. 101.
Silverman, M. Israel. 375.
Silverwing. Oppel. 170.
Simms. Bone Man. 140.
Simon. Brain. 101.
Simple Gifts. Raschka. 336.
Sing for Your Father, Su Phan. Pevsner. 171.
Singer. Good Day, Good Night. 412.
Singing Down the Rain. Cowley. 157.
Siomades. Place to Bloom. 101.
Sir Galahad, Mr. Longfellow, and Me. Horvath.
324.
Six Haunted Hairdos. Maguire. 167.
Six Words, Many Turtles, and Three Days in
Hong Kong. McMahon. 58.
Sixty Fingers, Sixty Toes. Dilley. 393.
Skofield. Thanks to My Mother. 256.
Skolsky. Love from Your Friend, Hannah. 296.
Sky Sash So Blue. Hathorn. 322.
Sleator. Beasties. 102.
.Boxes. 413.
Sleep Is for Everyone. Showers. 27.
Sleep Safe, Little Whale. Schlein. 176.
Sleepy-O! Ziefert. 73.
Slepian. Emily Just in Time. 339.
.Mind Reader. 140.
Smack. Burgess. 275.
Small Miracle. Collington. 157.
Smalls. Because You're Lucky. 102.
Smith, M. This Is Your Garden. 339.
Smith, R. Sasquatch. 413.
Smith, S. Court Duel. 340.
Smoke to Flame. Sherrow. 162.
Snake Alley Band. Nygaard. 406.
Snake Dreamer. Galloway. 321.
Snoozers. Boynton. 237.
Snow Dance. Evans. 123.
Snowball. Crews. 122.
Snowdrops for Cousin Ruth. Katz. 326.
Snug. Hanson. 399.
Snyder. Gib Rides Home. 220.
So Far from the Sea. Bunting. 389.
So What Do You Do? Evans. 240.
Soda Science. Zubrowski. 32.
Sol a Sol. Carlson. 316.
Solheim. It's Disgusting-and We Ate It! 296.
Someone Like You. Dessen. 358.
Somtow. Vampire's Beautiful Daughter. 67.
JULY/AUGUST 1998 
* 433
Sons of Liberty. Griffin. 203.
Songs of Faith. Johnson. 365.
Sonnenfeld. Memories of Clason Point. 375.
Sooner. Calvert. 355.
Sorcerer's Apprentice. Dewan. 392.
Sort of Forever. Warner. 342.
Soto. Big Bushy Mustache. 414.
. Buried Onions. 102.
Souhami. Rama and the Demon King. 221.
South African Night. Isadora. 282.
Space Between Our Footsteps. Nye. 332.
Spaghetti and Meatballs for All! Burns. 120.
Sparky and Eddie: The First Day of School.
Johnston. 88.
Sparrows in the Scullery. Wallace. 180.
Speed. Water Voices. 221.
. Whoosh! Went the Wish. 27.
Spider Storch's Carpool Catastrophe. Willner-
Pardo. 223.
Spiegelman. Open Me ... I'm a Dog! 28.
Spinelli, E. Lizzie Logan Gets Married. 28.
Spinelli, J. Knots in My Yo-Yo String. 414.
.Wringer. 67.
Spirit Horse. Ackerman. 234.
Spirit Window. Sweeney. 341.
Springer. I Am Mordred. 375.
Squire's Tale. Morris. 406.
St. George. Betsy Ross. 178.
. Sacagawea. 103.
Stanley. Monkey Sunday. 297.
Starfish Summer. Gritz-Gilbert. 363.
Starting School with an Enemy. Carbone. 277.
Stay! Lowry. 165.
Staying Cool. Antle. 5.
Stephen Fair. Wynne-Jones. 301.
Steptoe. In Daddy's Arms I Am Tall. 207.
Stevens. Liza's Star Wish. 103.
Stevenson, H. Big, Scary Wolf. 28.
Stevenson, J. Popcorn. 297.
.Sam the Zamboni Man. 298.
. Unprotected Witness. 178.
Stewart. Gardener. 68.
Stoehr. Tomorrow Wendy. 340.
Stoeke. Friend for Minerva Louise. 179.
Stolen Dreams. Parker. 216.
Stolz. Ballad of the Civil War. 222.
Stones in Water. Napoli. 214.
Storyteller's Daughter. Thesman. 222.
Storytellers. Lewin. 286.
Stranger at the Window. Alcock. 311.
Strasser. Kidnap Kids. 260.
Strays Like Us. Peck. 291.
Street Called Home. Robinson. 99.
Strength of These Arms. Bial. 42.
Strongest Mouse in the World. Weigelt. 344.
Subtle Knife. Pullman. 98.
Suen. Man on the Moon. 261.
Sugarcane House. Bond. 119.
Sullivan. Alamo! 25.
Summer My Father Was Ten. Brisson. 314.
Summertime Song. Haas. 12.
Sun & Spoon. Henkes. 128.
Sunflower Sal. Anderson. 41.
Sunshine Rider. Hardman. 322.
Super Cool Science. Markle. 288.
Surprise Garden. Hall. 243.
Surprise! Noll. 21.
Swallowing Stones. McDonald. 91.
Swann. Touching the Distance. 376.
Swap. Layton. 56.
Sweeney, Joan. Bijou, Bonbon & Beau. 415.
Sweeney, Joyce. Spirit Window. 341.
Sweet Dream Pie. Wood. 262.
Sykes. For Mike. 341.
Szekeres. Mouse That Jack Built. 179.
Taback. There Was an Old Lady Who Swal-
lowed a Fly. 261.
Tabor. We Are a Rainbow. 179.
Tacky in Trouble. Lester. 327.
Tae's Sonata. Balgassi. 80.
Tales of Wonder and Magic. Doherty. 358.
Talk to Me. Dines. 9.
Tangerine Bear. Paraskevas. 95.
Tarpley. I Love My Hair! 298.
Tarsky. Busy Building Book. 261.
Tashjian. Tru Confessions. 180.
Teague. Baby Tamer. 104.
Teddy Roosevelt's Elk. Guiberson. 52.
Teeny Tiny Ghost. Winters. 106.
Ten Queens. Meltzer. 405.
Ten Suns. Kimmel. 366.
Terrorist. Cooney. 47.
Tews. Lizard Sees the World. 140.
Thank You, Mr. Falker. Polacco. 370.
Thanks to My Mother. Rabinovici. 256.
That Sweet Diamond. Janeczko. 401.
There Goes Lowell's Party. Hershenhorn. 282.
There Was an Old Lady Who Swallowed a Fly.
Taback. 261.
Thesman. Storyteller's Daughter. 222.
Thin Ice. Qualey. 172.
Things That Are Most in the World. Barrett.
387.
This Big Sky. Mora. 290.
This Is Your Garden. Smith. 339.
Thomas, J. I Have Heard of a Land. 376.
Thomas, R. Doing Time. 141.
Thomassie. Feliciana Meets d'Loup Garou. 377.
Tiger's Eye, the Bird's Fist. Rafkin. 24.
Tillage. Leon's Story. 142.
Time to Sleep. Fleming. 124.
Tinker and Tom and the Star Baby. McPhail.
404.
To Market, to Market. Miranda. 92.
Toes Are to Tickle. Roddie. 24.
Tomis and the Library Lady. Mora. 63.
434 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Tomlinson. Dancing Through the Shadows.
222.
Tomorrow Wendy. Stoehr. 340.
Tompert. Saint Patrick. 298.
Too Close Friends. Roddie. 372.
Too Many Secrets. Wright. 72.
Toot & Puddle. Hobbie. 205.
Tortilla Cat. Willard. 344.
Touching the Distance. Swann. 376.
Transall Saga. Paulsen. 407.
Trapped! Duncan. 393.
Trapped by the Ice! McCurdy. 18.
Treasure Hunt. Cosby. 121.
Treasures in the Dust. Porter. 98.
Treehouse Tales. Isaacs. 54.
Trembath. Fly Named Alfred. 68.
Triumph on Ice. Lipinski. 249.
Trow-Wife's Treasure. Dunrea. 359.
Tru Confessions. Tashjian. 180.
True Lies. Shannon. 26.
True Tale of Johnny Appleseed. Hodges. 12.
Tudor. Great Corgiville Kidnapping. 68.
Tulip Touch. Fine. 3.
Tunnell. Mailing May. 69.
__ . School Spirits. 262.
Turn the Cup Around. Mariconda. 92.
Turner. Angel Hide and Seek. 415.
. Finding Walter. 69.
Turtle Dreams. Bauer. 193.
Twelve Labors of Hercules. Riordan. 138.
Twelve Shots. Mazer. 60.
Two Bear Cubs. San Souci. 259.
Two Brothers. Waldman. 69.
Un-Wedding. Cole. 317.
Uncivil War. Klass. 209.
Under the Pear Tree. Seabrooke. 218.
Underground Train. Quattlebaum. 137.
Unicorns! Unicorns! McCaughrean. 133.
Unprotected Witness. Stevenson. 178.
Until I Met Dudley. McGough. 166.
Vagin. Enormous Carrot. 377.
Vampire's Beautiful Daughter. Somtow. 67.
Van Draanen. Sammy Keys and the Hotel Thief.
415.
Van Laan. Magic Bean Tree. 416.
. Shingebiss. 29.
Van Steenwyk. My Name Is York. 30.
Velcome. O'Malley. 95.
Virtual World. Westwood. 106.
Voice for the People. Jaffe. 14.
Voices and Visions. Shulman. 162.
Voigt. Bad, Badder, Baddest. 142.
Waddell. Yum, Yum, Yummy. 299.
Wadsworth. Laura Ingalls Wilder. 30.
Waldman. Two Brothers. 69.
Waldron. Angel Pig & the Hidden Christmas.
142.
Walks Alone. Burks. 315.
Wallace, Barbara. Sparrows in the Scullery. 180.
Wallace, Bill. Aloha Summer. 143.
Wallace, I. Winter's Tale. 180.
Wallace, R. Shots on Goal. 143.
Wallner. Laura Ingalls Wilder. 181.
Walsh. Do Monkeys Tweet? 70.
Walter. Making Up Megaboy. 342.
Walton. Pig Pigger Piggest. 104.
War Dog. Booth. 81.
Ward, H. King of the Birds. 105.
Ward, J. Way Out in the Desert. 330.
Wardlaw. Bow-Wow Birthday. 299.
Warner. Ellie and the Bunheads. 30.
. Sort of Forever. 342.
Watch Out! Big Bro's Coming! Alborough. 5.
Water Buffalo Days. Huynh. 163.
Water Voices. Speed. 221.
Watkins. Gladiator. 70.
Watts. Good-bye Marianne. 416.
Waugh. Mennyms Alive. 105.
Way Out in the Desert. Marsh. 330.
We Are a Rainbow. Tabor. 179.
Weatherly. Women Pirates. 300.
Weave of Words. San Souci. 295.
Weaver. Hard Ball. 343.
Weeks. Mrs. McNosh Hangs Up Her Wash.
343.
Wegman. Puppies. 181.
Weigelt. Strongest Mouse in the World. 344.
Weird Pet Poems. Evans. 159.
Welcome to the Stock Show. Greenlaw. 51.
Wells. Bunny Money. 71.
. Read to Your Bunny. 300.
Weninger. What's the Matter, Davy? 378.
West to a Land of Plenty. Murphy. 253.
Westwood. Virtual World. 106.
What Child Is This? Cooney. 121.
What Do Fish Have to Do With Anything? Avi.
42.
What Do You Do When Something Wants to
Eat You? Jenkins. 131.
What's the Big Secret? Brown. 82.
What's the Matter, Davy? Weninger. 378.
What's the Matter, Habibi? Lewin. 17.
Wheels of Time. Gourley. 160.
When a Line Bends...A Shape Begins. Greene.
161.
When Aunt Lena Did the Rhumba. Kurtis-
Kleinman. 16.
When Jessie Came Across the Sea. Hest. 245.
When She Was Good. Mazer. 61.
When Zaydeh Danced on Eldridge Street. Rael.
65.
Where Fireflies Dance. Corpi. 47.
Where Lincoln Walked. Bial. 195.
Whirligig. Fleischman. 361.
White Wash. Shange. 218.
JULY/AUGUST 1998 
* 435
Whitelaw. Lady Diana Spencer. 417.
Who Killed Olive Souffld? Benoit. 118.
Whoever You Are. Fox. 200.
Whoosh! Went the Wish. Speed. 27.
Why Goats Smell Bad. Mama. 330.
Why Lapin's Ears Are Long. Doucet. 49.
Wild Horse Summer. Ryden. 99.
Wildsmith. Joseph. 222.
Willard. Tortilla Cat. 344.
William the Curious. Santore. 139.
Williams. If I Forget, You Remember. 223.
Willner-Pardo. Daphne Eloise Slater, Who's
Tall for Her Age. 106.
. Spider Storch's Carpool Catastrophe.
223.
Wilson, D. I Rode a Horse of Milk White Jade.
379.
Wilson, J. Double Act. 224.
Wilson, L. Salem Witch Trials. 31.
Wilson, N. Old People, Frogs, and Albert. 224.
Window. Dorris. 158.
Winslow. Follow the Leader. 224.
Winter's Tale. Wallace. 180.
Winter. Katarina. 262.
Winters. Teeny Tiny Ghost. 106.
Wisler. Mustang Flats. 31.
Wisniewski. Secret Knowledge of Grown-ups.
417.
With Wings As Eagles. O'Leary. 136.
Wolff, F. Year for Kiko. 107.
Wolff, V. Bat 6. 378.
Wolkstein. Bouki Dances the Kokioko. 31.
Women of the Bible. Armstrong. 311.
Women Pirates. Weatherly. 300.
Won't You Come and Play with Me? Donovan.
318.
Wood. Birdsong. 71.
. Sweet Dream Pie. 262.
Woodson. House You Pass on the Way. 71.
World of William Joyce Scrapbook. Joyce. 208.
WOW! It's Great Being a Duck. Rankin. 336.
Wreckers. Lawrence. 367.
Wright. Ghost in Room 11. 300.
_ 
. Too Many Secrets. 72.
Wringer. Spinelli. 67.
Wyeth. Once on This River. 301.
Wynne-Jones. Stephen Fair. 301.
Yaccarino. Good Night, Mr. Night. 182.
Yashinsky. Ghostwise. 263.
Year for Kiko. Wolff. 107.
Year My Parents Ruined My Life. Freeman. 200.
Year of the Sawdust Man. LaFaye. 402.
Year with Butch and Spike. Gauthier. 362.
Yep. Cook's Family. 344.
. Dragon Prince. 144.
SImp That Ate My Homework. 302.
Yikes! Janulewicz. 15.
Yikes-Lice! Caffey. 355.
Yippee-Yay! Gibbons. 396.
Yo, Aesop! Rosenthal. 373.
You Can Call Me Worm. Haas. 161.
You Never Know. Prose. 408.
You're Not My Best Friend Anymore.
Pomerantz. 371.
Young Larry. Pinkwater. 23.
Young Mozart. Isadora. 14.
Young Teddy Roosevelt. Harness. 280.
Young, Black and Determined. McKissack. 329.
Young, E. Mouse Match. 144.
Young, R. Moving Mama to Town. 32.
Your Move. Bunting. 354.
Yucka Drucka Droni. Radunsky. 409.
Yum, Yum, Yummy. Waddell. 299.
Zacklin. Sol a Sol. 316.
Zarin. Rose and Sebastian. 72.
Zelda and Ivy. Kvasnosky. 285.
Zelinsky. Rapunzel. 182.
Zemach. Character in the Book. 225.
Ziefert. Pushkin Meets the Bundle. 345.
. Sleepy-O! 73.
Zubizarreta. Lizard and the Sun. 40.
. Malachite Palace. 234.
Zubrowski. Soda Science. 32.
9ir-
^CP~
"TALL is terrific...
It's energized
and it's gutsy."
-Jonathan Kozol
O 
y clearly
defining
academic expecta-
tions and setting
specific professional
standards TALL is
leading the way in
the teaching and
the learning of
children's and young
adult literature.
"TALL is the Rolls Royce of the field."
- Joan F Smutny
National-Louis University
Uniquely organized, each issue brings you 16 inspiring,
practical, jargon-free articles guaranteed to enrich and
expand your professional practice.
For more information and a catalog
call 1-800-337-6525 or write to:
Essmont Publishing, P.O. Box 186, Brandon, Vermont 05733
Teaching K8
The Professional IdeaBook for Teachers
Every issue of Teaching K-8
Sprovides 
informative articles on
Sthe cutting edge of education.
'T 
I
Youll also find insighttul
columns and thoughtful
reviews written by some of
today's leading educators.
Teaching K-8 is filled with
hundreds of unique ideas and
activities that help teachers
present new challenges to
their students, learn new
concepts and develop new
skills.
Monthly columns include...
Children's Books
Teaching in the Library
The Parent Connection
Science, Math, Technology and more!
Plus, interviews with children's book authors and illustrators
Dnn't mice nut nn thic vrallabhle
resource for your library -
subscribe to Teaching K- today.
TeachdngK8
>x 54808, Boulder, CO 80322-4808
8-8793
* Outside U.S. add $5.00 postage per subscription.
I
I -='ý 
kALA 5,,k 
stars
byJOYCE CAROL THOMAS
Full-color pictures by F L O Y D C 0 0 P E R
"This lyrical tribute to the pioneer spirit, here personified by a black
woman, describes what it was like to arrive in untamed territory
and try to turn it into a home. The strength and tenderness of
Thomas' text are matched by Cooper's always evocative artwork.
Thomas' wonderful author
grandparents, who ran for
Territory [where her story i
the experience of African i
and thriving' in a place wi
than a word."-Booklist
Ages 7-11. $14.95 TR 0-06-02,
$14.89 LB 0-06-023478-4
Joanna Cotler Books
Full-color picture books by
Joyce Carol Thomas & Floyd Coc
BROWN HONEY AND
BROOMWHEAT TEA
Ages 4-8. $15.00 TR (0-06-021(
$14.89 LB (0-06-021088-5)
$4.95 PB (0-06-443439-7)
GINGERBREAD DAYS
Ages 4-8. $14.95 (0-06-23469-
$4.95 PB (0-06-446188-2)
Joanna Cotler Books
i HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York, NY 1C
www.harpercollins.com
I
A FRIE~ND FOR/I
MINEJIVA 
/
~t fula...A 
FRIEND FoR
~rfl wterolos 
(~EI~nNEFw
~x n 
ah ae. 
LOUISE
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.SA.
rumRN 
POSTAGE GuARANTEED
lll I 111111111
0008-9036(199807/08)51:11*;1 -T
#
PERIODICALS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
invites you to visit our home page at
http://edfu.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Regular features include:
* Bulletin Stars-what we starred this month
* Bulletin Dozen-a genre- or theme-based list of titles
* Quote of the Month
* Bulletin Blue Ribbons 1990-1997
* the Baby Buletin-a sample collection of recent reviews
Occasional features include:
* Rising Star-an examination of the work of a talented new author
or artist
* True Blue-reflections on a time-honored talent
* Dueling Reviews-a look at the discussion behind the scenes when a book
polarizes the editors
* And more... updated monthly!
·- 
·I·, 
;1 
si
I~-~"" 
·a~ri; 
ii;
i.li"e 
ir
Ir 
~I~4i~
~Z 
,*'
·~ 
i·
.re 
i~ij~P
L-~
,,
