U
ILLINO
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
'I
... C
Finalist for the
1997 National Book Award
TOR SEIDLER
Mean Margaret
PICTURES BY JON AGEE
SLJ Best Books '97 
PW Best Books'97
SALA Booklist 
* School Library Journal
SPublishers Weekly 
*Kirkus Reviews
"A wildly funny story of a newly wed woodchuck couple
who find a willful, wailing human toddler and take her into
their home and into their hearts." -SLJ's Best Books '97
"Tor Seidler writes in the great tradition of Kenneth Grahame,
Walter R. Brooks, and E. B. White, creating worlds where
friendship matters, animals talk, and little girls who listen-
even ones as mean as Margaret-can learn a life-changing lot
about loving-kindness." -Booklist
Ages 5 up $14.95 TR (0-06-205090-7)
Michael di Capua Books * HarperCollins Publishers
I
·-
II
: I
THE
B UL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
February 1998
Vol.51 No. 6
A LOOK INSIDE
189 THE BIG PICTURE
Baba Yaga &e the Wise Doll ad. by Hiawyn Oram and illus. by
Ruth Brown
190 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
192 
* Rules ofthe Road by Joan Bauer
199 * Gabriella's Song by Candace Fleming; illus. by Giselle Potter
208 
* The World of William Joyce Scrapbook written and illus. by
William Joyce
212 * From Slave Ship to Freedom Road by Julius Lester; illus. by Rod Brown
215 
* The Girl Who Dreamed Only Geese and Other Tales of the Far North
ad. by Howard Norman; illus. by Leo and Diane Dillon
226 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
228 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin ofthe Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor (JMD)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Pat Mathews, Reviewer (PM)
Janice Harrington, Guest Reviewer (JH)
CENTER STAFF
Shirley Chan
Linda Fenster
Kate McDowell
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $40.00; individuals, $35.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 51 E. Armory Ave., Champaign,
IL 61820-6601. E-mail: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu
Visit our homepage at http://edfu.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1998 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration from Baba Yaga & the Wise Doll by Hiawyn Oram, illustrated by Ruth Brown.
Illustrations ©1997 by Ruth Brown. Used by permission of Dutton Children's Books.
FEBRUARY 1998 
* 
189
THE BIG PICTURE
Baba Yaga & the Wise Doll
ad. by Hiawyn Oram; illus. by Ruth Brown
Witches, like it or not, have a strong hold on our collective imagination. Whether
they are wise women in primeval forests or wicked women in dark towers, the
stories in which they appear and the visual images in which they are rendered
intrigue us from a very early age.
The opening image of Baba Yaga in this picture-book retelling of the
traditional Russian folktale is a riveting one. The witch, dressed in variegated
black with red shoes, sits in a high-backed chair. Her hat, broom, and cauldron,
symbols of her power, surround her, as do her "trusty Toads," who tell her, "You
are truly terrifying," to which she replies "I hope so. That's what I'm here for!"
And indeed, that is what this particular witch is here for, to be a terrifying symbol
of the unknown, the dangerous, and the forbidden. She anticipates and relishes
the challenge she knows will come.
While the lack of any source note is disconcerting in an era when folktales
are not just story collections or storybooks but are used as examples and bridges to
specific cultures, variants of this familiar tale are easy to locate. The story of Baba
Yaga and the wise doll has been oft retold, both in standard collections such as
Virginia Haviland's Favorite Fairy Tales Told in Russia and in dramatic picture
book versions for older readers, including Marianna Mayer's Baba Yaga and Vasilisa
the Brave, which has highly ornamental illustrations and language. Oram himself
has a gift for pithy turns of phrase, compressing description into action and dia-
logue. He has retold this story in eminently oral language, bypassing character
development and the dysfunctional family of usual protagonist Vasilisa in favor of
a barreling plot and a child heroine named Too Nice.
Too Nice is driven from her home by her bullying sibs, Horrid and Very
Horrid, who tell her, ". .. visit Baba Yaga. Bring us back one of her Toads in a
jeweled jacket and a diamond collar. If you do that, we might play with you."
Too Nice speaks to her "dearest possession," her Doll, a farewell gift from her dead
mother, saying, "Now what? ... It's unbearable to stay and unbearable to go."
The Doll replies (in only one of the down-to-earth wisdoms scattered throughout
this book), "No one can stay and go at the same time.... Put me in your pocket,
listen to my advice when I have any, and let's be off." And off they go. Baba Yaga
sees Too Nice coming and, in all her witchy glory, goes to meet her. Brown plays
up the visual shenanigans when Too Nice meets Baba Yaga-not only has Baba
Yaga "pulled her nose down and her chin up until they met in a terrifying cres-
cent," but she rides her house like a bucking bronco, her child-gobbling toadies
hanging on just behind. Too Nice's first terrifying glimpse of Baba Yaga provokes
190 
* THE BULLETIN
an "I can't do this," but the Doll says, as good friends are wont to, "Oh yes, you
can." So Too Nice knocks on the door of the House on its scaly chicken legs and
is admitted to the mysterious, terrifying, and fascinating realm of Baba Yaga.
Full of the emblems of Baba Yaga's witchery-a sneering, sharp-toothed
Cauldron, salivating Toads in diamond collars, jars with heaven only knows what
in them, and piles and piles of dirty dishes ("Do them all by morning or Cauldron
will cook you" says the witch)-the inside of the House on chicken feet does not
disappoint. Shadow and light play tag in these compositions, with the dark Baba
looming over the dark house, and the golden firelight blanketing the girl as the
Doll, her shadow huge on the golden wall, assists her in each task. As is often the
case, the bad guy is more fun than the good guy, who in this case is a sweet-faced,
wide-eyed youngster. Ruth Brown's illustrations give readers a Baba Yaga of ar-
chetypal mien. With her sweeping black cloak, wild eyes and hair, and long,
talon-like fingernails, she is an opponent whose defeat will be the stuff of leg-
end-or folktale.
And who will defeat her? Why, the heroine, of course, that sweet-faced
young girl, that innocent, protected by her mother's love. In the tradition of
traditional tales, Too Nice (with the help of the magical Doll) overcomes three
tasks set by Baba Yaga, and as a reward is granted one of the child-eating, diamond
collared Toads. But Too Nice's triumph is different from slaying the dragon or
severing the giant's head, for Baba Yaga dances with glee when Too Nice passes the
final test. The young girl learns wisdom from the old crone and wins the day, to
both of their delights. "And when Too Nice led the Toad back to Horrid and
Very Horrid, he wasted no time. ONE! TWO! He gobbled them up, then
quietly hopped back to the forest." This is folkloric justice at its finest-the horrid
little Horrids don't merit any sympathy-they get what they deserve. And Too
Nice, "not surprisingly after all she'd been through, stopped being Too Nice and
became ... well ... 
Just About Right." Looking for stories with strong female
protagonists? Tell this one. (Imprint information appears on p. 176.)
Janice Del Negro, Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ALFORD, JAN 
I Can't Believe I Have To Do This. 
Putnam, 1997 
180p
ISBN 0-399-23130-7 
$16.95 
R Gr. 6-9
On his twelfth birthday, Dean Matthews receives a journal from his mother, and if
that weren't bad enough, she wants him to write in it every day for a year. The
device of a journal imparting the narrator's innermost thoughts is not a new one,
but that's okay, because there's a lot going on here. Dean's best friend, Aaron, falls
in with some bad company in the person of Stach, a new, older neighbor boy who
FEBRUARY 1998 
* 191
dabbles in shoplifting and vandalism, alcohol and drugs. Dean caves in to peer
pressure and winds up in the wrong place at the wrong time, much to his regret,
but Aaron is willingly sucked into Stach's destructive wake, and serious conse-
quences ensue. Dean finds some new friends, pays for his unintentional foray into
criminal behavior with some deserved community service, and gives the strong
impression that he has seen the dark side and wants nothing further to do with it.
The first-person narration uses immediate, believable language, and even the grown-
ups have a few good lines. While the plot exposition is somewhat programmatic,
it is heartening to find a book that capably depicts a likable character who finally
learns the danger of just going along with the crowd, and it is even better when the
dynamics of family and friends support his self-realization without preachiness or
coyness. JMD
ANDERSON, JANET S. 
Going Through the Gate. Dutton, 1997 
132p
ISBN 0-525-45836-0 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 4-6
In an isolated rural town, five youngsters prepare to graduate from sixth grade.
Their graduation takes the form of shape-changing into an animal of their choice,
experiencing part of the life cycle of the chosen animal, and returning to their own
forms. All the townspeople have "gone through the gate" (as the shape-changing is
called) and returned, some more successfully than others. The children make their
peace with their needs and wishes: Becky hopes to conquer her fear, Eddy looks
for revelation, Penny wants excitement, Tim grudgingly yearns to belong, and
Mary Margaret seeks to escape from unbearable drudgery. When Mary Margaret
does not return through the gate, the other children must rescue her, calling her
back with knowledge of the things she loves. Anderson takes what could be a
cluttered, confusing premise and gives it clarity and form in this gently engaging
fantasy. The tightly woven plot moves rapidly to its conclusion, allowing little
time or inclination for dissection. The characters of the students are distinctly
drawn, and the skill with which Anderson pulls the reader into this alternate real-
ity makes the book subtly compelling. JMD
ANDERSON, WILLIAM 
Pioneer Girl: The Story of Laura Ingalls Wilder; illus. by
Dan Andreasen. 
HarperCollins, 1998 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027244-9 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027243-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-5
No doubt Laura lovers can and will enjoy another picture biography of their pio-
neer heroine. Large, warm-toned paintings feature scenes from Wilder's life from
the Big Woods of Wisconsin to Rocky Ridge Farm, while the text carries readers
through her "Little House" experiences in a big, easy-to-read format. Harrowing
facts ("The girls could not walk to school anymore because the ground was cov-
ered with grasshoppers"), tragic experiences ("Laura and Almanzo's second child,
a boy, died soon after he was born"), and tiny triumphs ("One boy told Laura he
would rather read her Little House books than eat!") are simply told while the
sentimentally idealized but effective pictures create that "back-in-the-olden-days"
aura that her books exude. Spark up your next biography booktalk by proffering
this rendition with Wallner's Laura Ingalls Wilder (BCCB 1/98), and just try to
keep Laura on the shelves. PM
192 
* THE BULLETIN
AYLESWORTH, 
JIM, 
ad. 
The Gingerbread Man; illus. 
by Barbara
McClintock. 
Scholastic, 1998 
[32p]
ISBN 0-590-97219-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 4-7 yrs
Aylesworth has taken the traditional tale of the ubiquitous roaming cookie and
spiced it up with a concisely written text and a jazzy refrain that will make this a
readaloud, tellaloud favorite. From the opening pages (where "One day the little
old woman said, 'Let's make a gingerbread man!' 'Yes, let's do!' said the old man"),
Aylesworth makes it clear that this is a tribute to the old tale, and his language is
precise and charming without being cute. McClintock's watercolor and ink illus-
trations have an old-fashioned sensibility (as compared to Egielski's more modern
version, reviewed below) that combines beautifully with Aylesworth's retelling, as
the Gingerbread Man in his yellow pants and jaunty blue hat races from the wood-
burning stove through the town, through the countryside, and finally to his ap-
pointed doom as a wily (and nattily dressed) fox's snack. When the cocky
Gingerbread Man says, "No! No!/ I won't come back!/ I'd rather run/ Than be
your snack!", be prepared for listeners to burst out in a chorus of giggles and to join
right in. You may have other versions of "The Gingerbread Man" on your shelves-
make lots of room for copies of this one. JMD
BANKS, LYNNE REID 
Angela andDiabola. Avon, 1997 
163p
ISBN 0-380-97562-9 
$14.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
When Mrs. Cuthbertson-Jones gives birth to twins, she and her husband plan to
name them Jane and Jill; the vicar, in a spontaneous and accurate response to their
essential natures, christens them Angela and Diabola. Not just naughty and nice,
the twins are the embodiment of human good and evil, with Angela adored by all
and Diabola a source of escalating destruction, driving Mr. Cuthbertson-Jones
from home and reducing their house to rubble. The humor here isn't outrageous
enough for the events, and Diabola's disasters tend to pile up without expanding
the story at all. The vaguely epistemological ending (Angela and Diabola become
one) successfully wraps things up, but it has a didactic overtone that may disen-
chant readers who've enjoyed the hijinks. The chaos of Dybo's reign (and the
satirical touches, such as the headmistress who thinks her evil is actually artistic
genius) is enjoyable, however, and her relationship with her twin is intriguingly
depicted. Young readers who enjoy slapstick farce with more than a hint of dark-
ness may appreciate this story about the good and bad in each of us. DS
BAUER,JOAN 
Rules ofthe Road. Putnam, 1998 
[208p]
ISBN 0-399-23140-4 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 7-12
"Most people think selling shoes is pretty ho-hum," says sixteen-year-old Jenna,
"but when you hang with shoe people long enough you plug into the high drama."
Jenna's commitment to quality footwear leads her down an unexpected road-
literally-when Mrs. Gladstone, the president of Gladstone Shoes, hires Jenna to
be her summer driver and to take her from Illinois to Texas for the company stock-
holders' meeting, stopping at Gladstone stores all along the way to drum up sup-
port for her control of the company. On the way, Jenna learns more about Mrs.
Gladstone, whose business opponent is her money-mad, condescending son, and
about herself and her own strength. This is an eccentric variant on the classic road
FEBRUARY 1998 
* 
193
novel, and the additions of the intergenerational female team and the Solid Gold
Cadillac stockholder-vote plot enhance the verve and momentum. Bauer's ener-
getic particularity and affection for her characters imbue the book with warmth
and atmosphere. The shoe-sales component is funny but never silly, proving that
good writers can write about anything; watching Jenna's high standards and fierce
vocation in action (she gallops into shoe stores like a podiatrist Lone Ranger, sav-
ing a dozen customers from shoddy service and inappropriate footwear and blow-
ing on her shoehorn at the finish as if it were a smoking .45) will make immediate
partisans of readers. The subplot about Jenna's family life and her struggles with
her alcoholic and abandoning father isn't up to the same level of originality, but
the book still gallops along. Jubilant, strong, and funny, this is a road trip to
remember. DS
BAUER, MARION DANE 
Turtle Dreams; illus. by Diane Dawson Hearn. 
Holiday
House, 1997 
48p 
(A Holiday House Reader)
ISBN 0-8234-1322-5 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 1-2
Turtle doesn't know why her great-great-grandmother has sent her out to gather
dreams for winter, but in the next three chapters she gets the information she
needs. She meets Otter, who shares his wintry dream of slip-sliding in the ice and
snow; Squirrel, who dreams of climbing to the highest branch to nibble nuts; and
Bird (a cardinal), who offers the cherished dream of his first winged flight. By
Chapter Five, a disappointed Turtle has sadly (and wrongly) concluded that "there
are no winter dreams for turtles," so she sinks to the bottom of the pond to snooze.
The story goes on a bit too long for such an abstract premise, and the art is capable
but uninspired. This beginning reader, featuring a trio of fetching creatures against
the earthy panoply of autumn, nonetheless offers young readers an easy, repeti-
tious text and a surprise ending where Turtle incorporates everyone else's dreams
into a very turtle-ish one of her own. Read before bedtime . . . and expect sweet
dreams. PM
BEDARD, MICHAEL 
The Divide; illus. by Emily Arnold McCully. 
Doubleday,
1997 
32p
ISBN 0-385-32124-4 
$16.95 
R 
5-9 yrs
The nine-year-old Willa, who reluctantly boarded the train to Nebraska with her
family and "sat by the window, still as stone, and watched her world slide away,"
could scarcely foresee that the experiences of her first year on The Divide would
profoundly influence her novels as the adult author Willa Cather. Bedard wisely
relegates comment on Willa's future to an afterword and focuses instead on the
adjustment of a nineteenth-century pioneer girl to the silent land that at first she
sensed "did not want them there. It wanted to be left alone." Certain they will
leave this desolation, Willa refuses to unpack her favorite possessions; but as spring
and summer introduce her to a blooming landscape and sympathetic, if far-flung,
immigrant neighbors, her books and music box and shells are, one by one, released
from storage ("In the long grass she could hear the crickets sing. She felt that her
heart hid down here too, with its own song waiting to be sung"). McCully's
watercolors convey a strong sense of place, from Willa's empty house on moving
day, to the crowded train with its plush seats and spittoons, to the sea of grass that
is freshly tinted each season. One can easily believe that Willa, with her deep-set,
keenly observant eyes thoughtfully fixed on the landscape, is amassing the images
and responses that will color her prose in the years ahead. EB
194 
* THE BULLETIN
BELTON, SANDRA 
Ernestine &Amanda: 
Members of the CL.U.B. Simon,
1997 
168p
ISBN 0-689-81611-1 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Ernestine and Amanda (of Ernestine & Amanda, BCCB 1/97, and Ernestine &
Amanda: Summer Camp, Ready or Not!, 9/97) are going into sixth grade at W.E.B.
Du Bois Elementary School. Ernestine is blue because she doesn't have a best
friend in her class; Amanda is delighted because she's come up with an idea for a
club that Ernestine will never qualify for, the "clever, likable, utterly beautiful"
club, C.L.U.B, which membership includes only the cutest girls in their grade.
Ernestine makes friends with the regally tall Wilhelmina, however, and Amanda is
chagrined to find that her C.L.U.B. is not met with enthusiasm by adults or even
all its own members. Relationships are the emotional core of this series, and in this
title readers see more of Ernestine's strong family ties and her closeness with her
college-student big brother, Marcus. We also get a closer look at the somewhat
self-centered Amanda, still reeling from her parents' pending divorce and still try-
ing to shut Ernestine out. Readers of the previous titles about E & A will be
familiar with the alternating points of view in the narrative, wherein each girl gives
her own impressions of shared experiences. There are some hints that events might
be taking a more serious turn as the characters move into the late 1950s:
Wilhelmina's parents, active in the NAACP, have moved from New York City to
North Carolina and don't want her with them "until they get everything settled,"
and interest and pride in black history is making itself felt at W.E.B. Du Bois
Elementary School. Belton strikes just the right balance between humor and pa-
thos as the two girls find their way through the triumphs and pitfalls of sixth grade
society. JMD
BENNETT, CHERIE 
Life in the Fat Lane. 
Delacorte, 1998 
[320p]
ISBN 0-385-32274-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Popular Homecoming Queen Lara Ardeche finds her life changing when recur-
rent hives lead to a prescription for prednisone and a ten-pound weight gain; when
she goes off the prednisone, her weight continues to soar, until she's finally diag-
nosed, at 190 pounds, as having a rare metabolic problem that means tremendous
weight gain regardless of food intake. Though her boyfriend and her plump friend
Molly stick by her, her parents are devastated by her departure from the implicit
family standard of attractiveness, and their strained marriage starts to crack. An
out-of-state move initially makes things worse for Lara, since she's just the new fat
girl, but soon she begins to reexamine her and her family's standards of worth.
Bennett is particularly good at the teen viewpoint here, depicting Lara's self-loath-
ing and the cruelty of her former friends (as well as Lara's early condescending
kindnesses) with immediacy and credibility. Her underlying message gets confus-
ing, however, since the book spends a great deal of time documenting Lara's (fic-
tional, according to notes) disease, and therefore deliberately setting her apart from
other sufferers of obesity; while there's some suggestion at the end that it's not an
important difference, the fact that Lara's weight is beginning to melt away magi-
cally counters that small impression. Her embattled and superficial parents (and
the other mean thin people) are often rather prescriptively drawn; the more com-
plicated portrayals of Molly and of Lara's boyfriend Jett, who really does have
FEBRUARY 1998 
* 
195
some problems with her weight, are more effective. Less a problem novel than
walk-a-mile-in-their-shoes story, this may resonate with teens of many sizes. DS
BERRY, JAMES 
First Palm Trees: An Anancy Spiderman Story; illus. by Greg
Couch. 
Simon, 1997 
[4 0p]
ISBN 0-689-81060-1 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Berry has taken the traditional African and Afro-Caribbean trickster figure ofAnancy
and constructed an original pourquoi tale about the origin of palm trees. The
king's priest tells him of a dream in which he saw "new and beautiful trees ... with
branches like a peacock's tail" growing on the land. The king desires that the
dream trees become reality and promises a rich reward to the one who makes it so.
Anancy Spiderman hears about the offer, and "the hope of a rich reward went to
his head instantly, taking charge of him." Anancy goes to Sun Spirit, Water Spirit,
Earth Spirit, and Air Spirit, hoping that each alone will be able to accomplish the
king's wish, but each spirit says, "My work is not only my work" and "My work
makes other works work," so Anancy is forced to accept not one but four partners
in his venture. When the palm trees finally grow, many people take credit for
them, and the king rewards all with a feast, even though deep down everyone
knows it was Anancy. Berry's approach is highly literary, his stylistic complexity
and ornate, repetitive language adding a formal stateliness to this tale. The lengthy
text is strongly complemented by Couch's involving illustrations, which feature
the trickster Anancy as a man with the spidery characteristics of eight eyes and
eight arms that fairly whirr from the page. The earthy palette is warmed with gold
overtones, achieved with layers of washes, and brightened by touches of purple
and yellow. The fantastical nature of the illustrations suits the fantastical nature of
the tale, Couch's beautifully expressive visual characterizations melding seamlessly
with Berry's poetic descriptions. JMD
BIAL, RAYMOND 
Where Lincoln Walked; written and illus. with photographs by
Raymond Bial. 
Walker, 1998 
[48p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8631-6 
$17.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8630-8 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-6
This pictorial biography captures the essence of greatness of Illinois' favorite son.
In a combination of eloquent storytelling and brilliant photography, Bial manages
to bring Lincoln not only subliminally into his contemporary photographs of
Lincoln's Midwestern haunts but into readers' souls as well. Lincoln memorabilia
(in this case, shaving razors lying on a wooden table) breathe with the simple ritu-
als of daily life: "Every morning, square-jawed Abe shaved off his whiskers with a
sharp razor. However, when he became president, a girl wrote to Abe and con-
vinced him that he would appear more dignified if he grew a beard." A shadowy
photo of the Lincoln children's bedroom in Springfield seems pregnant with a
father's footfalls. Events that shaped Abe's life, from his boyhood ("Brokenhearted,
Abe helped his father by making pegs and planing boards for his mother's coffin")
to his presidency dominate this celebration of Lincoln, with his death receiving
only a few lines. This is an attractive alternative to Freedman's Lincoln: A
Photobiography (BCCB 1/88), and youngsters won't easily forget their walk with
Abe. Lists of places to visit and further reading are appended, as is an index. PM
196 
* THE BULLETIN
BURGESS, MELVIN 
The Earth Giant. Putnam, 1997 
150p
ISBN 0-399-23187-0 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
When young Amy discovers a giant amongst the roots of a tree uncovered by a
raging storm, she keeps the secret to herself until found out by her older brother,
ten-year-old Peter. Amy and the giant have a loving relationship in which they
empathetically exchange thoughts and emotions; Peter, on the other hand, is bent
on discovering the giant's origins, the reason for her presence, and what she can do
for him, such as making him rich and famous. Peter's greed and lack of under-
standing cause the giant to flee, and she takes Amy with her. When Peter confesses
to the giant's existence, the adults around him-parents, police, news media-
assume the giant is a very tall, mentally unbalanced woman who has kidnapped
Amy for nefarious if unknown reasons. Amy is rescued, the giant returns to the
earth, and in a contrived dcnouement both Peter and Amy help the giant's alien
parents (yes, she is an extraterrestrial) retrieve their lost child. The extraterrestrial
stranded on earth is something of a sci-fi chestnut, and Burgess does little to revi-
talize it. While those looking for a unique plot premise won't find it here, they will
find an inherent emotionality that is quite involving, presented in almost lyrical
language. The relationship between the loving Amy and the nurturing giant is a
fascinating and touching one, and readers will be happily relieved when the in-
jured giant is returned to her otherworldly kin. JMD
BURLEIGH, ROBERT 
Black Whiteness: Admiral Byrd Alone in the Antarctic; illus.
by Walter Lyon Krudop. 
Atheneum, 1998 
36p
ISBN 0-689-81299-X 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Byrd's six months alone and inland during the Antarctic winter of 1934 still stand
high in the annals of exploration; Burleigh tells that story succinctly, interweaving
description with excerpts from Byrd's own journal. Short paragraphs are left un-
justified and separated by spaces, which makes them look like free verse, and the
simplicity and focus of the descriptions are occasionally poetic as well (" ... pale
green beams, called auroras, that wind in great waves through the towering dark").
Krudop's oil paintings emphasize the isolation, the thickness of their brushstrokes
conveying the otherworldly distance of extreme cold; steel blue pencil sketches
also appear throughout the text. The book sticks to older, more purely heroic
views of Byrd's experience (recent examinations have been less flattering), but its
emphasis on the concrete renders motivational interpretations largely superfluous
anyway. The danger, the cold, and the dark are the story here, and youngsters will
appreciate Byrd's braving of implacable nature. DS
CHOCOLATE, DEBBI 
The Piano Man; illus. by Eric Velasquez. 
Walker,
1998 
[3 2p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8647-2 
$16.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8646-4 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 5-8 yrs
The narrator tells of her grandfather's musical career: piano player for silent mov-
ies, pianist at the Ziegfeld Follies, vaudeville accompanist (where he met his dancer
wife), and touring musician. After the birth of his daughter, he returns to piano
accompaniments for the silents, often playing with his young daughter by his side;
the advent of the talkies puts him out of business, but, years later, his now-grown
daughter's gift of a piano means that he can share his talent with his granddaugh-
FEBRUARY 1998 
* 
197
ter. The specificity of the situation gives this an inherent interest that many retro-
spective picture books lack. The musical legacy (including hobnobbing with fa-
mous figures such as Jelly Roll Morton and Scott Joplin) that passes through three
generations of the African-American family is treasured but unsentimentalized,
and the changing world of the musical journeyman depicted here is a small but
distinctive part of American history. Velasquez' art uses Norman Rockwell hues
and drafting, but his compositions are cleaner though the faces tend to be strained
and poorly modeled; the jaunty figure of the musician in his bowler and armbanded
shirtsleeves is still both ebullient and bittersweetly bygone. Kids generally love
grandfathers plenty just for being grandfathers, but this might open their eyes to
the fact that Granddad had a pretty interesting life even before the grandkids came
along. A note from the author explains some of the family history behind the
story. DS
CLEMENT, 
ROD 
Grandpa's Teeth; written 
and 
illus. 
by 
Rod
Clement. 
HarperCollins, 1998 
[32p]
ISBN 0-06-027671-1 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
The household comes running to Grandpa's shout, "It'sth my teeth-they've been
sthtolen." The house is searched, the police are summoned, posters of the errant
dentures are plastered all over town, and soon the entire neighborhood is under
suspicion. "It seemed the only way to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the
teeth in your mouth were your own was to smile broadly at every person you met.
Anyone who didn't smile was immediately dragged off to the police station." This
artificial amiability scares off the tourists, businesses suffer, and at last the locals
happily make donations for a couple of new sets of teeth for Grandpa. He gra-
ciously orders a set for Mrs. Carbuncle, who "has such a pretty smile"; romance is
in the air, and the good citizens can happily relax their jaws. Clement's toothy cast
should get everyone grinning as his caricatured townsfolk, parrots, dolls, teddy
bears, and even the fish on ice flash their pearly whites. Just when you think
Clement has gone his giddy way and ditched the mystery plot, the solution pops
up in the closing vignette-Grandpa's dog Gump (who has the eerie ability to
mimic Grandpa's every expression) smiles "for the first time EVER" with a set of
choppers that could turn the Cheshire Cat green with envy. Add this as a happily
eccentric twist to the lost-tooth picture book collection. EB
COLMAN, PENNY 
Corpses, Coffins, and Crypts: A History of Burial. 
Holt,
1997 
212p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8050-5066-3 
$17.95 
R Gr. 6-12
This is an oddly intriguing, amusingly disconcerting title on the rites and rituals
associated with death and dying. The book takes an anecdotal approach to its
topic: in the midst of history and information on the fate of corpses, cremation,
cemeteries, and rituals and customs, it intersperses personal tales of individuals
and how they have dealt with death and loss, grief and tragedy. The author has a
compassionate eye, and she manages to endow her topic with both humanity and
humor. Without ever writing down to her audience, Colman covers a great deal of
ground, relating ancient and modern ideas about death, the burial customs of
different cultures, and even a recipe for funeral pie. A concluding chapter on
epitaphs is followed by a list of gravestone carvings and their meanings, a chronol-
198 
* THE BULLETIN
ogy, a glossary, a bibliography, and notes. Black-and-white photographs and his-
torical illustrations enliven an already weirdly enthralling and highly readable text.
JMD
COONEY, CAROLINE 
Prisoner of Time. 
Delacorte, 1998 
[224p]
ISBN 0-385-32244-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Readers of the first two books (Both Sides of Time, BCCB 10/95, Out of Time, 5/
96) will have been looking forward to the third book to see what happens to con-
temporary Annie and her true love from the past, Hiram Stratton III. Unfortu-
nately, this book doesn't tell them-it instead develops a new plot thread, the
story of Strat's little sister, Devonny, who's walking down the aisle to wed a man
she doesn't love, and Annie's younger brother Tod, who comes through time to
sweep Devonny from the nineteenth century to the present. As Devonny learns
with horror and delight about America a century later, she and Tod grow closer;
meanwhile, in the nineteenth century, her would-be groom begins to take stock of
himself as he searches for his supposedly kidnapped bride. Readers who enjoyed
the high-tension gothic romance of the earlier two books will find this a very dif-
ferent and possibly disappointing experience: Annie appears only in an email and
Strat not at all, and the younger crop of would-be lovers end up separating in the
end as well (a fortified Devonny returns through time and lays down the law to her
newly reformed suitor). The subplot of Devonny's friend's attempt at elopement
diminishes the focus still further, despite its thematic relevance. What's fun here
isn't the gothic glamour but the contemporary details, especially when seen through
Devonny's alien viewpoint and phrased in Cooney's snappy style, and Tod's and
Devonny's expanding relationship. This isn't quite up to the first two entries for
time-travel thrills and it certainly doesn't finish off the trilogy as readers would
like, but it's an often witty and serviceably entertaining melodrama. DS
EGIELSKI, RICHARD, ad. 
The Gingerbread Boy; ad. and illus. by Richard
Egielski. 
Geringer/HarperCollins, 1997 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-026031-9 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-026030-0 
$14.95 
R 
4-7 yrs
Egielski has taken this familiar tale from its usually rural environs and set it in New
York City, and (gingerbread) boy, does it cook! The gleeful cookie protagonist
runs away from the apartment of his bakers into the streets of Manhattan, past a
garbage-picking rat, concrete-pounding construction workers, subway station mu-
sicians, and a mounted policeman, meeting his culinary destiny after a run-in with
a fox from the Central Park Zoo. Egielski's retelling sticks close to traditional
form, and his repeating refrain ("Run run run as fast as you can. You can't catch
me! I'm the Gingerbread Man") has all the gusto necessary for a rousing preschool
storytime. The illustrations are saturated with muted colors, the combination of
subdued primary and gold-toned secondary hues effectively recreating the attrac-
tive urban environment. The characters have pizzazz and personality, whether
climbing down a fire escape, dancing on a clothesline, or running for the E train.
And the Gingerbread Boy? Well, let's just say he makes you want to run run run
right to your kitchen to bake some cookies of your own. JMD
FEBRUARY 1998 
* 
199
ERLBACH, ARLENE 
The Kids'Invention Book. 
Lerner, 1997 
64p 
illus. with
photographs
ISBN 0-8225-2414-7 
$14.95 
R Gr. 2-5
Science/invention-fair season looms on the horizon, and this quick read could
provide some inspiration and direction. At the book's core are a baker's dozen of
illustrated double spreads (a bit stodgily composed) on elementary school children
who have competed in invention contests with varying degrees of success. Larry
Villella's "Conserve Sprinkler" is being mass-produced by a North Dakota manu-
facturing firm; Kevin Germino's biodegradable fishing lure lost to a talking mea-
suring cup; Elizabeth Low became the nation's youngest patent holder with her
posable "Happy Hand"; Robbie Marcucci gave up on inventing after a product
almost identical to his "Crayon Saver" appeared in a local paper. Strategies for
scoring well at contests, tips on starting or joining invention clubs, information on
applying for patents (including the current costs), and addresses of invention orga-
nizations offer budding mad scientists a reality check and a helping hand. EB
FISHMAN, CATHY GOLDBERG 
On Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur; illus. by Melanie
W. Hall. 
Atheneum, 1997 
[32p]
ISBN 0-689-80526-8 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
"Every year," our narrator says, "people we know send cards to wish me and my
family a happy and healthy new year. La Shana Tova, they say in Hebrew." The
autumn colors, hearty textures, and dreamy compositions that accompany this
first-person catalog of holiday activities create almost a greeting-card effect that
matches the narrator's seasonal mail. She describes various traditions of the High
Holy Days, including fasting, significant foods, and synagogue rituals. The sce-
nario is idyllic-no fighting or whining on this occasion-and the text focuses on
description rather than story. Clearly American and non-Orthodox, this will fit
into preschool or primary-grade units on multicultural celebrations, as well as into
families observing Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur with young children. A glos-
sary explains pronunciation and meanings of special terms. BH
FLEMING, CANDACE 
Gabriella's Song; illus. by Giselle Potter. 
Schwartz/Ath-
eneum, 1997 
34p
ISBN 0-689-80973-5 
$16.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
The Italian city of Venice is the setting for this musical fantasy about a young girl
who blends the sounds of the city into a melody that she sings for her mother. The
baker hears the song and whistles it to the widow Santucci, who hums the tune to
the gondolier, who plays it on the accordion. The song wafts through the window
of famous composer Giuseppe Del Pietro, who is inspired to turn the simple melody
into a symphony. When the symphony is played in the Piazza San Marco, it is a
huge success: "The audience shivered from the music's beauty. In the familiar
tune they heard laundry and pigeons, lire and church bells. They heard happiness
and sadness and love." The composer thanks the unknown singer who inspired
him, and the crowd turns to the gondolier, who turns to the widow, who turns to
the baker, who turns to Gabriella. "'Take a bow, mio amore,' her mother urged.
'Take a bow.'" This musical fantasia is accompanied by the airy illustrations of
Giselle Potter, who uses watercolor, colored pencil, and inks to create a Venice of
200 
* THE BULLETIN
the imagination where gondolas cheerfully bump into bridges, stucco buildings
lean merrily upon one another, and an entire city is moved by a child's simple
melody. Musical notes dance above characters' heads, are spread across sheets
hung out to dry, and become the stuff that (musical) dreams are made of in Potter's
earth-toned cityscape. This lovely cumulative tale would make a fine readaloud, a
fine tellaloud, and oh, heck, a fine singaloud, too. Make up your own melody and
see if the kids will hum along. JMD
Fox, MEM 
Whoever You Are; illus. by Leslie Staub. 
Harcourt, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-15-200787-3 
$16.00 
Ad 
2-4 yrs
Four children of diverse ethnic backgrounds are whisked off on an aerial tour of
the world in the arms of a blue-suited, red-booted narrator, who offers them glimpses
of children in far-off lands ("Their lives may be different from yours, and their
words may be different from yours. But inside, their hearts are just like yours,
whoever they are, wherever they are, all over the world"). Although older listeners
may find the text a bit prissy and forced, it might be just the ticket for the littlest
tykes, who haven't yet peeked out from behind their community boundaries and
who won't stumble over the cliches. But readers and listeners, regardless of age,
will be charmed by Staub's luscious oil paintings bordered in golden, jewel-stud-
ded, hand-carved wooden frames. Almond-eyed figures seem to pause amid their
homely activities to fix the viewer with their steady gazes, and stylized foreign
landscapes, rendered in a glowing, saturated palette, are comfortable and welcom-
ing. The guide on this dreamlike tour can just turn off the mike and let the arm-
chair travelers enjoy the view. EB
FREEMAN, MARTHA 
The Year My Parents Ruined My Life. 
Holiday House,
1997 
184p
ISBN 0-8234-1324-1 
$15.95 
R Gr. 5-8
When her parents move the family from sunny California to freezing Pennsylva-
nia, twelve-year-old Kate is not happy. She plots with her best friend Molly to
return to the sun, frolic, and boyfriend of her California life, and in desperation
she uses her mother's credit card for a plane ticket. Kate is in California when
Molly finally reveals that no, her mother doesn't want to take Kate in, and yes,
Molly is dating Kate's old boyfriend. Kate plummets to reality and heads back to
Pennsylvania. The slight plot of the unappreciated move is given a big boost by
Freeman's energetic characterizations, including the humorously determined Kate,
her goody-two-shoes little sister, her somewhat frantic mother (who is having ad-
justment pains of her own), and her potential new boyfriend Pete, who eats like
there's no tomorrow. Freeman gives Kate a strong voice and some realistic (but
not overwhelming) adolescent angst that is bound to keep readers chuckling. The
dialogue is brisk, and the action (even if snowbound) is quick. Here's some well-
written, character-driven light fiction that you can offer without a qualm in place
of generic series grindouts. JMD
GAMMELL, STEPHEN 
Is That You, Winter?; written and illus. by Stephen
Gammell. 
Silver Whistle/Harcourt, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-15-201415-2 
$16.00 
R 4-7 yrs
Crotchety Old Man Winter wakes up in a bad mood and climbs into his pickup
truck to spread some cold, snow, and freezing air. Old Man Winter, in his green
FEBRUARY 1998 
* 201
down vest, red overalls, and rubber boots, blasts the earth with white snow show-
ers against a dark blue sky. "But sometimes Old Man Winter is puzzled. 'Who do
I make it snow for?"' he wonders. Climbing up to his mountaintop cabin, "the
snow is too deep ... and he tumbles to the ground. Some children are playing in
the backyard. One little girl hears him land." The child runs to pick up Old Man
Winter, now "a ratty old doll," exclaiming "'He's Old Man Winter, my friend...
you make it snow for me.' ... And, once more, Old Man Winter is in a good
mood." This easygoing tale of the origin of wintry weather is illustrated in
Gammell's signature style: pastels, pencil, and watercolors combine to create a
wildly vibrant, textured landscape (both before and after snow) with the big hat-
ted, red-nosed, sour Old Man Winter and his rickety truck as its focal point. Gusts
of wind and snow swoop through the air as the scarf-bedecked youngsters frolic in
the winter weather. Grownup readers may seek a more logical connection be-
tween Old Man Winter the doll and Old Man Winter the weathermaker, but
child listeners probably won't mind the disjunction. Add this little fantasy to a
storytime about weather and the seasons, and your listeners, though shivering, will
thank you. JMD
GIBLIN, JAMES CROSS 
Charles A. Lindbergh: A Human Hero. 
Clarion,
1997 
212p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-395-63389-3 $20.00 
R 
Gr. 5-9
If all a young reader knows about Lucky Lindy is his transatlantic flight on the
Spirit ofSt. Louis, and possibly the tragedy of his baby son's kidnapping, Giblin
fills in the details ofan event-filled life in this smoothly narrated account. Early on
he introduces the theme that unifies Lindbergh's life-that he was the first Ameri-
can media-generated celebrity, and a reluctant one at that. It was this hounding by
a news-hungry press that not only confounded and embarrassed the intensely pri-
vate man but precipitated his not-all-that-romantic secret wedding with Anne
Morrow and their temporary resettlement in England. But Giblin certainly doesn't
let a victimized Lindbergh entirely off the hook for his cordial and controversial
relationship with the rising Nazi leadership, nor for the blatantly racist commen-
tary that often peppered his public addresses, and readers will certainly realize that
the aviation hero had feet of clay. Plenty of carefully selected photographs are
included, and a bibliographic essay and chapter notes even remark on the varied
reliability of sources. EB
GLASS, TOM 
Even A Little Is Something: Stories of Nong; illus. by Elena
Gerard. 
Linnet, 1997. 
[119p]
ISBN 0-208-02457-3 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Set in a Thai village surrounded by rice fields, these twenty-three short stories are
sketchy in plot but vivid in character. Eleven-year-old Nong, her beautiful older
sister Oi, and their widowed mother struggle to make ends meet in a tightknit
community. The child's-eye view is consistent and frequently focused on food,
from the icicle cream of strange Mr. Pu, whose nonsense somehow makes sense; to
the rice cakes Nong tries to sell to the Buffalo Woman, who cannot afford them; to
the irresistibly successful soup pot of Aunt Oom. We also get quick studies of the
local bully, abused by his father, and of a teacher whose obsession with scorpions
instills fear in his students. Nong watches her sister resist the advances of a police-
202 
* THE BULLETIN
man and the condescension of an upper-class employer for whom she irons. These
situations are understated enough to leave young readers dangling occasionally,
but the subtle dynamics may make up for the lack of cohesive action. BH
GORMLEY, BEATRICE 
C. S. Lewis: Christian and Storyteller. 
Eerdmans,
1997 
[190p] 
illus. with photographs
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8028-5121-5 
$15.00
Paper ed. ISBN 0-8028-5069-3 $8.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-9
Young devotees of The Chronicles of Narnia will enthusiastically sink their liter-
ary teeth into this biography about writer C. S. Lewis. Here is a clearly written,
solidly researched, and insightful picture of the popular author. Gormley weaves
human texture into the book by layering the threads of Lewis' life whether trivial,
tragic, literary, or spiritual into a highly readable exposition of a warm, amiable,
and brilliant man. His difficult relationships with his father and with Mrs. Moore
(the mother of a friend killed in World War I), his closeness to older brother,
Warnie, his surrender to the God of Christianity, and his brief but happy marriage
to Joy Davidman are carefully elucidated. Narnia aficionados and budding au-
thors will relish learning how Lewis's books often included characters, places, or
things from his own experience, among them the magic wardrobe (in The Lion, the
Witch, and the Wardrobe) and Puddleglum (in The Silver Chair). This is a far
better choice than the recent biography by Michael Coren (The Man Who Created
Narnia, BCCB 3/97), and it will not only fill that Lewis-sized gap on the biogra-
phy shelves but may lead fans to his other works. Suggestions for further reading
are appended. PM
GRAHAM, BOB 
Queenie, One of The Family; written and illus. by Bob
Graham. 
Candlewick, 1997 
24p
ISBN 0-7636-0359-7 $15.99 
R 4-7 yrs
Caitlin's dad rescues a hen from certain drowning in the opening pages of this
perilous page-turner. Queenie, as the hen is christened, takes up residence in dog
Bruno's sleeping basket and witnesses Caitlin's first steps. Mom, however, knows
that the hen belongs to the farm on the other side of the city, and home to the farm
she goes. Queenie must be part homing pigeon, though, because back she comes
to Caitlin's house, through the doggie door, and into Bruno's basket: "And in
Bruno's basket, Queenie laid a single, perfect egg." Queenie comes every day to
lay an egg in Bruno's basket, but in the hubbub created by the arrival of Caitlin's
new baby brother, Caitlin forgets to collect the eggs, Bruno reclaims his basket,
warms up the eggs, and voila! baby chicks. The chicks-all but one-go back to
the farm, and "Bruno made room for yet another addition to the family. One day
the chick will be full-grown and will see Caitin's brother take his first steps. But
that's another story." This may be unlikely (as anyone who has ever tried to hatch
baby chicks can tell you), but Graham's cheerfully chipper watercolor and ink
illustrations make this lightly suspenseful souffle easy to swallow. From the pony-
tailed daddy to the long-suffering Bruno, Graham's characters are raffishly appeal-
ing. The layout of the book is nicely diverse, with a variety of full-, quarter-, and
half-page illustrations sharing space in full and double-page spreads. This is a
progressively more enjoyable tale with visual details and homey touches that will
make it a lapsit readaloud pleasure. JMD
FEBRUARY 1998 
* 
203
GRIFFIN, ADELE 
Sons ofLiberty. 
Hyperion, 1997 
230p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2292-9 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0351-7 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Rock Kindle tries really hard to please his demanding father. He forces himself
awake to nail shingles to the roof during "interrupted nights," when Dad hauls his
sons from their sleep just to test their fortitude, and he accepts with little com-
plaint the emotional badgering as Dad pits his sons against each other. Older
brother Cliff, though, is on to Dad's mind games and struggles to make Rock
understand just how dysfunctional their family actually is. Only when the boys
become involved in helping their physically abused friend Liza run away does Rock
begin to admit to his own craving to be free of Dad's tyranny, and he ultimately
joins Mom, Cliff, and little sister Brontie as they pack into the station wagon for a
midnight escape to relatives in Arizona. The manipulative father and his defeated
and withdrawn wife are chillingly portrayed; close consideration of the Kindle
family would have provided sufficient melodrama without the added plot burden
of Liza's problems, however, and the psychological morasses of the novel's many
victims are often too blatantly defined. Fans of the family-trauma genre, however,
will probably want to eavesdrop on this clan. EB
GROVER, MAX 
Max's Wacky Taxi Day; written and illus. by Max
Grover. 
Browndeer/Harcourt, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-15-200989-2 
$15.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Max the taxi driver seems to take his day in stride, passing through spring showers,
turning at a fork in the road, enjoying a strawberry float, and trying to avoid a
traffic jam. The illustrations, however, show that these happenings are rather out
of our ordinary world: the spring shower is a shower of metal springs, the fork in
the road is a huge eating utensil in the middle of the street, the strawberry float a
large entry in a parade, and the traffic jam a big jar of cherry preserves at a cross-
roads. Along with those visual jokes on dual meaning are some plays on hom-
onyms, such as a big toe truck, a creek in the stairs, and a tooth ferry. It's an
amusing conceit, and one that might well inspire young listeners to add their own
entries. The blend of homonyms and reinterpretations is a little confusing, how-
ever, and the jokes generally keep to the obvious. The acrylic illustrations have a
sharp-edged cut-paper quality; the childlike drawing and the reliance on primary
colors provide energy and help focus the sometimes overbusy compositions. Kids
not ready for more sophisticated riddle books or even Amelia Bedelia may enjoy
the conceptual play here. DS
HALL, KATY 
Puppy Riddles; by Katy Hall and Lisa Eisenberg; illus. by Thor
Wickstrom. 
Dial, 1998 
48p 
(Dial Easy-to-Read)
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-2129-3 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-2126-9 
$13.99 
R Gr. 1-3
"Where do little dogs sleep on camp-outs? In pup tents" is one of the no-brainer
riddles in this crazy salute to pooches. Other entries in this latest Easy-to-Read
offering are for the more savvy riddlers: "Which little sheepdog can't find her
sheep? Little Bo Pup!" Most are goofy enough to produce the attendant groans
("What kind of soap should you use on your puppy's fur? Sham-poodle") and the
cartoonish, doggone-good humor on every page (note the "Hound and Shoul-
ders" shampoo bottle in an "old shoe scent") will aid the unenlightened so they too
204 
* THE BULLETIN
can get in on the joke. The more obscure puns will probably need some explana-
tion, but is there a more kidproof way to delve into word meanings? Here are
forty-two goofy jokes accessorized with plenty of visual silliness to match, so open
your next canine storyhour with two or three of these. What will Puppy Riddles
become? Very pup-ular. PM
HANSEN, BROOKS 
Caesar'sAntlers; written and illus. by Brooks Hansen. 
Farrar,
1997 
218p
ISBN 0-374-31024-6 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Caesar, a reindeer pulling a package-laden sled, hooks a sparrow family's nest to
his antlers to aid them in their search for father and husband Piorello, who has
inadvertently become the pet of a young girl. The rest of the story involves the
quest of the separated sparrow couple to be reunited while autumn turns to winter.
Uninspired dialogue often interrupts the story's flow; even lovey-dovey sparrows
deserve better lines than "'The two of us, Bette-we are one now.' 'Yes, we are
one, the two of us.' 'One forever-Bette and I.' 'And I and Piorello,' she'd reply."
The combination of talking-animal fantasy and nature study jars, and the human
characters' actions and motivations are, at times, ambiguous. Still, readers may
enjoy the parallel adventures of bird and beast: Piorello's ill-fated attempt to fly
with the geese is especially poignant, a sniggering wolf pack's encounter with Caesar's
entourage will produce some shivers, and no doubt there will be sighs of relief
when Bette and Piorello are finally reunited: "Bette!" "Piorello!" Sigh. PM
HASKINS, JIM 
Black, Blue, & Gray: African Americans in the Civil War. 
Simon,
1998 
[160p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-689-80655-8 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-10
Briefly discussing the role of black soldiers in the American Revolution and the
slavery issue from colonial times in general, Haskins quickly moves to a political
history of black men at arms on both sides of the Civil War-privately organized
militia, army and navy enlistees, and slave laborers. Haskins deals candidly with
such frequently overlooked issues as the Union's reluctance to arm black soldiers,
Frederick Douglass' tendency to mislead black recruits concerning their certain
inequality within the Union ranks, General Sherman's rejection of slaves seeking
Union protection, and General Lee's insistence on recruiting slaves into the Con-
federate army toward the end of the war. There are few of the stirring battle scenes
here that readers might expect from the volume's title; rather, this is a well-orga-
nized account of the gradual, grudging acceptance of blacks as an integral compo-
nent of each side's fighting machine. Haskins concludes by considering how black
participation in the Civil War was largely written out of the history books after
Reconstruction. Source notes, a bibliography, a chronology, an index, and several
period illustrations are included. EB
HAYES, ANN 
Onstage & Backstage; illus. by Karmen Thompson. 
Harcourt,
1997 
40p
ISBN 0-15-200782-2 
$15.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
Hayes and Thompson, co-creators of Meet the Orchestra (BCCB 3/91), here intro-
duce youngsters to the basics of a theatrical production (in this case, Cinderella).
With its multispecies dramatis personae, the book depicts the process from casting
FEBRUARY 1998 
* 205
to readthroughs to blocking to promotion to curtain calls, making clear that there's
a lot of backstage work that the audience doesn't see. While it's sometimes diffi-
cult to tell who's who (or, from a species point of view, what's what) and the term
explanations in the glossary will be necessary to understand the main text, the
information is intriguing and the momentum effective. The line-and-watercolor
illustrations are busily theatrical, with the colors sufficiently muted to make the
variety lively rather than garish; the foldout spread depicting the actual perfor-
mance is a fitting culmination. There's not much in the way of seriously introduc-
tory theatrical material available for the early years, and this is a useful peek behind
the curtain. DS
HEST, AMY 
Gabby Growing Up; illus. by Amy Schwartz. 
Simon, 1998 
32p
ISBN 0-689-80573-X 
$16.00 
R 5-8 yrs
Gabby is off to the city with Mama again, only this time they are not only running
errands but also meeting Grampa for his birthday, and Gabby's knitted a pair of
orange mittens for him. It's not just the mittens that need to meet with Grampa's
approval, though. Entering King's department store, Gabby, with her Purple Coat
(BCCB 2/87) resolve still firmly in place, insists, "I want short hair. Really short,
to my ears." Once again Hest uses a family occasion to highlight the warm rela-
tionships while layering the story with gentle conflict and a delightful little sur-
prise ending (Mama has a cake, not a hat, in her hat box). Grampa with perfect
grandfatherly diplomacy handles both the haircut ("I certainly liked those braids,
Gabrielle .... On the other hand, I think ... 
well ... 
I think your haircut
is... splendid. Really, really fine") and the mittens ("I love them . . . Such a
splendid shade of orange!"). The brightly patterned apparel of the characters en-
liven scene after scene of nostalgic city life where department store splendors, a
mirrored barber shop, a curvy luncheon counter complete with a crabby waitress,
and a shimmery ice rink act as a perfect background for almost grownup Gabby.
PM
HOBBIE, HOLLY 
Toot & Puddle; written and illus. by Holly Hobbie. 
Little,
1997 
32p
ISBN 0-316-36552-1 
$12.95 
R 4-7 yrs
This two-piglet character study focuses on the title piggies, Toot and Puddle. Best
friends, the two live together but have very different personalities: Puddle is a
homebody and Toot a wannabe world traveler. When Toot decides to make his
dream a reality with "his biggest trip ever," he invites Puddle to come along, but
Puddle declines. As Toot travels, the reader sees his activities on one side of the
double page spreads, with Puddle's happy homebody activities on the other: in
Africa, Toot swims with some hippos, while on the opposite page, Puddle does
delighted double axels on frozen Pocket Pond; as Toot scuba dives in the Solomon
Islands, "Puddle was having mud season. Yay!" Toot sends postcards with pithy
little messages like "Dearest Pudsio, Italy is heaven-it's one big treat! Your friend,
Tootsio." Toot finally decides to come home, and the two friends rejoice in their
reunion. Admittedly, this is amazingly cute, but Hobbie somehow manages not to
fall into the treacle, pulling off this little travel tour de force with aplomb. Toot
and Puddle are porcine enough that the anthropomorphism isn't cloying, and the
clever visual details (the mountain goat staring balefully at a mountain-climbing
Toot, for example, or the classical pig sculptures at the Louvre) add personality
206 
* THE BULLETIN
and charm. The watercolors are deftly done, and the piggy personalities glow
from the various compositions. This story of friendship is engagingly presented
through postcards and visual vignettes, and if you're not reading it aloud to younger
children, let the beginning readers read it for themselves. JMD
HOLUB, JOSEF 
The Robber and Me; tr. from the German by Elizabeth D.
Crawford. 
Holt, 1997 
212p
ISBN 0-8050-5599-1 
$16.95 
Ad Gr. 6-9
In nineteenth-century Germany, a young orphan is sent to live with his unknown
uncle, mayor of the village of Graab. Eleven-year-old Boniface is somewhat con-
fused by the change, but he is managing to cope, finding a sympathetic ear in the
guise of housekeeper Frederika and possibly making a new friend in Christian
Knapp, son of the title's Robber. When Robber Knapp cannot be apprehended
after being accused of two enormous thefts, his children are taken from their mother
and she is put into the village jail. Only Boniface realizes that Robber Knapp has
been accused unjustly (at least this time), and he finally finds the courage to face
his formidable mayor uncle with his knowledge. Holub gives a detailed picture of
daily life in a nineteenth-century German farming community, including details
about harvest, marriage laws, and public schooling. The text is formal and dense,
with description clearly taking the lead over action. Characterization is minimal,
with the good guys all good and bad guys all bad, and the change in Boniface's
uncle from cold fish to warm father figure is just barely credible. Still, readers
seeking some unusual historical fiction may be happy finding their way through
this title. A glossary of unfamiliar terms in German and English is included. JMD
HURWITZ, JOHANNA 
Ever-Clever Elisa; illus. by Lillian Hoban. 
Morrow,
1997 
84p
ISBN 0-688-15189-2 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Elisa, star of Elisa in the Middle (BCCB 10/95) and little sister of the famous
Russell, is six and one-half years old and a full-fledged first-grader. Her adventures
here include lending her mother's diamond engagement ring (without permis-
sion) to her adored teacher, going with her father to vote, serving her mother
breakfast in bed, and buying a raffle ticket. Hurwitz is particularly good at balanc-
ing the seeming completeness of a first-grader's world with the awareness of things
not yet known; Elisa's personality is certain even as her ability to tell time, for
instance (leading to a very early Mother's Day), is not. It's particularly nice to
have a glimpse into the process of voting (though Mr. Michaels' mistaken yank of
a lever nullifies his vote), which is an adult mystery that few children's books ex-
plain. Whether read alone or read aloud, the account of Elisa's struggles will evoke
sympathy from youngsters. Hoban's large, friendly pencil illustrations have a slightly
geeky real-world charm. DS
HYPPOLITE, JOANNE 
Ola Shakes It Up; illus. by Warren Chang. 
Delacorte,
1998 
[12 8p]
ISBN 0-385-32235-6 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
When nine-year-old Ola's parents land more prestigious jobs, the family moves
from familiar turf in a Boston neighborhood to a "cooperative" development sev-
eral hours away. Not only are the rules regulating community life restrictive, but
FEBRUARY 1998 
* 207
the Bensons are the first black family in the neighborhood. Ola is determined not
to go calmly into this "cookie cutter" development, and when her plans to sabo-
tage the move fail, her next mission is to shake up her stodgy surroundings as
much as possible. Aiding her efforts are Lillian, their Haitian housekeeper with
some adjustment problems of her own, an eccentric senior citizen, and the mayor's
sulky daughter. There's plenty of promise to the plot, as Dad struggles to balance
his job and family, bookish older sister Aeisha gets her first poor grades from an
apparently bigoted teacher, brother Khatib ditches the basketball team in favor of
dance lessons on the sly, and Lillian takes her first faltering steps toward assimila-
tion. No plot line is sufficiently developed, however, and a facile, feel-good end-
ing ties all the loose ends in a snug little knot that defies credibility. Mischievous,
mouthy Ola will garner some fans, though, and readers will certainly wish this
close-knit family well. EB
IN DADDY'S ARMS I AM TALL: AFRICAN AMERICANS CELEBRATING FATHERS; illus. by
Javaka Steptoe. 
Lee & Low, 1997 
[32p]
ISBN 1-880000-31-8 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
A dozen poems are linked by theme and anchored by Javaka Steptoe's arresting
collages. All except Dakari Hru's merry, musical "Tickle Tickle" are reverent cel-
ebrations of the "Black Father Man," as Lenard D. Moore calls "the supreme earth
dweller." They vary in quality but adhere to mythic tone, from Carole Boston
Weatherford"s "The Farmer" ("His backbone is forged/ of African iron/ and red
Georgia clay") to Sonia Sanchez' "My Father's Eyes" ("I have looked into/ my
father's eyes and seen an/ african sunset"). Some are surprising ("The Things in
Black Men's Closets" by E. Ethelbert Miller) and others predictable (Dinah
Johnson's "My Granddaddy Is My Daddy Too," a title that older children will
probably enjoy misinterpreting). For the most part, Steptoe has given the poetry
room to breathe despite the highly textured, vigorously hued images alongside or
backing the text. David Anderson's "Promises" appears in one of the simplest and
best double spreads, with the poem set against a plain deep red that's reflective of
the repentance expressed by a son and the blood bond sworn by his father; the
accompanying torn-paper collage in brown tones shows the boy in his father's
arms. Though occasionally busy, the overlaid shapes that comprise these compo-
sitions are controlled to good effect. Put this parent-pleaser up front in your Father's
Day display. BH
JIANG, J LI Red ScarfGirl: AMemoir ofthe Cultural Revolution. 
HarperCollins,
1997 
285p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027586-3 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027585-5 
$14.95 
R Gr. 7-12
This is an autobiographical account of growing up during Mao's Cultural Revolu-
tion in China in 1966. Ji Li Jiang, daughter of a wealthy family and an outstand-
ing student, had a bright future. But with the coming of the revolution, all that
changed. Because her grandfather was a landlord, her family were considered trai-
tors to the new China, her scholastic achievements were devalued as being the
result of her "relationships" with her teachers, and her class status made her anath-
ema to those who used to be her friends. Jiang describes in terrifying detail the
ordeals of her family and those like them, including unauthorized search and sei-
208 
* 
THE BULLETIN
zure, persecution, arrest and torture, hunger, and public humiliation. And just as
suddenly as it began, it ended: a new political regime took over, political prisoners
were released, and Jiang's life returned to some vague semblance of normalcy.
Jiang's autobiography successfully conveys what it is like to live under a totalitar-
ian regime in which the individual has no rights and information is tightly con-
trolled. Her voice is that of an intelligent, confused adolescent, and her focus on
the effects of the revolution on herself, her family, and her friends provides an
emotional focal point for the book, and will allow even those with limited knowl-
edge of Chinese history to access the text. An epilogue tells readers about Jiang's
discovery of the political power struggle that led to her family's downfall and of
her subsequent emigration to the United States. JMD
JONES, J. SYDNEY 
Frankie. Lodestar, 1997 
[19 2p]
ISBN 0-525-67574-4 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Neither Luke Hayes nor his younger sister Beth approves of the attention the stray
waif Francine (call her Frankie) is getting from their parents, who seem to know
more of the girl's background than they are willing to share. Luke's inevitable
fascination with her changeable nature, street smarts, and ill-concealed interest in
the Ludlow, Colorado coal strike gradually turns to love, but Beth remains so
jealous and hostile toward the newcomer that she is sent away to an aunt in Den-
ver. As the strike reaches a climax with the imprisonment of Mother Jones and the
withdrawal of National Guardsmen sympathetic to the strikers, it seems likely that
Frankie has been using the Hayes' hospitality as a cover in a selfish, dangerous, and
ultimately fatal game of espionage between the mine owner and worker interests.
Jones allows the reader to know only as much about Frankie as Luke does, using
Beth's rumors and outright lies, as well as Frankie's own deceits, to keep her true
loyalties ever in doubt. And yet, along with Luke, readers finally come to accept
the girl for what she is-a street-hardened survivor who, in the last hours of her
life, throws her support to the strikers. A brief epilogue comments on the 1913
strike and on the unidentified body that provided the inspiration for the fictional
Frankie. EB
JOYCE, WILLAM 
The World of William Joyce Scrapbook; written and illus. by Wil-
liam Joyce and illus. with photographs by Philip Gould. 
Geringer/HarperCol-
lins, 1997 
4 8p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027433-6 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027432-8 
$16.95 
R* Gr. 2-5
"Every author," says Joyce, "has his own way of doing a book. For the next few
dozen pages, I'll try to answer the questions about how I do mine." The author/
illustrator definitely fulfills his pledge in a series of spreads that encompass the
formation of his drawing style from age four through twenty-two, the genesis of
ideas for individual books, his family and their caricatured appearances in his work,
and even some ideas currently on the drawing board. In a text that is perfectly
suited to the age span of his picture-book audience, Joyce encourages viewers to
look closely for changes between preliminary and final drawings and for the favor-
ite toys and movies that influence his work. Glimpses of the decidedly eccentric
Joyce household's merrymaking at Halloween ("I take the whole month of Octo-
ber off to decorate the house"), the Fourth of July (he and his friends build a
FEBRUARY 1998 
* 
209
Styrofoam fort full of toys and blow it up), and Christmas (a tree in every bed-
room, five in the living room) should set readers aching to be invited over. Given
Joyce's manic approach to story, art, and apparently, to life, the busy melange of
snapshots, photo vignettes, and drawings is completely appropriate. EB
KING-SMITH, DICK 
Puppy Love; illus. by Anita Jeram. 
Candlewick, 1997 
34 p
ISBN 0-7636-0116-0 
$15.99 
R 
4-8 yrs
Featuring some of the puppies King-Smith has known over the last fifty years, this
is a parade of prize-deserving canines described in relaxed, friendly prose. From
Humphrey the Great Dane to Dodo the dachshund to a German shepherd puppy
named Fly, King-Smith lovingly details his lifelong attack of puppy love, with
some judicious advice about puppy training, health care, and the simple things
that will make a puppy happy thrown in for good measure. Although the chronol-
ogy is a bit confusing (King-Smith never mentions the aging, departure, and re-
placement of his pets), there is an explanation in the liner notes that helps clarify
things. Illustrator Jeram notes that dogs are her favorite animals, and that's easy to
believe when looking at her watercolors of lovingly scruffy mutts, roly-poly pups,
and cutely rendered canines. Depicted in clean, unmuddy colors the puppies frolic
in a place where the sun always shines, the grass is always green, and the kids are
always smiling. And that's how it should be, at least in puppy dreams. JMD
KIRK, DANIEL 
Breakfast at the Liberty Diner; written and illus. by Daniel
Kirk. 
Hyperion, 1997 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2243-0 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0303-7 
$14.95 
M 
4-8 yrs
Bobby Potter, his little brother George, and his mother alight from the train and
head to the Liberty Diner to meet Uncle Angelo. As the boys fidget, whine, and
cause a little mischief, a rumor circulates among the customers that President
Roosevelt is coming to town to address factory workers about their jobs. Wouldn't
you know it, FDR stops at the Liberty Diner for his breakfast and, during a photo
opportunity with Bobby and George, he admires Bobby's toy plane and extols
him, "Don't just fly in an airplane, be the pilot. I know a boy like you can do
anything he puts his mind to!" It is doubtful that the picture-book audience will
independently make the intended poignant connection between Bobby, who wears
a leg brace, and the president, who "'gets around pretty good for a guy with po-
lio.'" Nor are children likely to associate the angular, monumental (yet sweetsy
and overbland) paintings with the WPA mural art of the period. Of more interest
are the tipped salt shakers, spilled milk, and short-order lingo that rush by in a
disjointed blur. A concluding author's note serves up tidbits of information on
diners, Roosevelt, and Kirk's personal admiration for FDR, but by then listeners
will probably have had their fill and may ask to skip the final course. EB
KLAss, SHEILA SOLOMON 
The Uncivil War. Holiday House, 1997 
[160p]
ISBN 0-8234-1329-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-7
Asa (named for a medieval Scandinavian queen) was a sickly child, but now she's a
hearty sixth-grader and her mother doesn't seem to recognize that overprotectiveness
and overfeeding aren't useful any more. When the cute new boy in class, Robert
Lee, starts giving her a hard time about her weight and her name, Asa decides she
210 
* THE BULLETIN
has had enough and takes drastic measures-a hunger strike-to gain her mother's
understanding. The several strands of the story don't always fit together as well as
they might and the solutions are pretty easy, but the charm and credibility of the
characters pull things together. Asa's quandary is understandable on several differ-
ent levels (not only does her mother love her dearly, the elaborate breakfasts in bed
are delicious), and the drama of her premature baby brother's hanging by a thread
in the ICU makes Asa's mother's overprotectiveness understandable and sympa-
thetic-to Asa as well as to the reader. The battle with Robert Lee is only a small
part of the funny and credible story of Asa's maturation. DS
KRACH, MAYWAN SHEN 
D is for Doufu: An Alphabet Book of Chinese Culture;
illus. by Hongbin Zhang. 
Shen's, 1997 
32p
ISBN 1-885008-06-6 
$17.95 
R 
Gr. 4-8
While this elegantly illustrated volume will hardly launch readers on the road to
fluency, it does cogently explain the "construction" of Chinese pictograms and
interpret how their component symbols combine to make a word with a meaning
larger than the sum of its parts. As Krach explains, the pictogram for en, or grace,
is formed as follows: "A person resting [symbol] upon a square mat [symbol]
means to rely upon. It is combined with the heart [symbol] below. Whoever relies
on his heart achieves grace." Not all terms are so ethereal-dou fu (tofu), guo
(China), and ma jiang (mahjongg) are among the more worldly entries-and a
paragraph or two sets each term into its cultural context. A concluding page offers
Mandarin pronunciation keys and a guide to tonal changes. Readers who may
have abandoned Ed Young's recent work on pictograms (Voices ofthe Heart, BCCB
4/97) when they discovered it was more about art than Chinese language will
probably find this is the book they were looking for. EB
KRISHER, TRUDY 
Kinship. Delacorte, 1997 
[304p]
ISBN 0-385-32272-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
In this follow-up to Spite Fences (BCCB 1/95), Pert Wilson (a secondary character
in the previous book) is sixteen years old in 1961, when her daddy shows up at her
family's trailer door. Pert, desperate for her father to be all she has imagined him
to be during the years of his absence, ignores warning signs easily picked up by her
mother, her grandmother, and her older brother that indicate her scalawag father
is not to be trusted. Sure enough, he cons Pert into loving him and cons the trailer
park residents out of some hard-earned cash before he disappears again. The story
of Pert and her father has enough emotional bite to carry a novel on its own, but a
disconcerting number of plot threads weave their tangled way through this title,
including an unclaimed inheritance, an unwanted pregnancy, and an effort by the
town council to close down the trailer park. Krisher tells Pert's story in a sort of
narrative chorale, with residents of the trailer park adding their observations to
Pert's first-person narration, and the alternating points of view are sometimes dif-
ficult to follow. Even if the sixties were a more innocent age, Pert's voice seems
much too young for a sixteen-year-old, especially a sixteen-year-old who has lived
(and is living) through hard times. Plot overload aside, Krisher has a nice way with
her characters, giving even the least of them a specificity resulting from strong
verbal imagery and concrete visual cues, from their physical descriptions to their
very names (in describing Pert's home economics teacher, Nympha Claggett, Pert
FEBRUARY 1998 
* 211
says, "her tiny eyes scurried like mice into every corner of the front room"). While
readers may have a hard time weaving the numerous plot threads into a consistent
whole, the characterizations are lively and touching enough to keep them trying.
JMD
KWAN, MICHELLE Michelle Kwan: Heart of a Champion: An Autobiography; as
told to Laura James. 
Scholastic, 1997 
151p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-590-76340-7 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
It's all here, the detail that championship figure skater Kwan's adoring fans crave.
From the sacrifices her family made to put her under the finest tutelage and coach-
ing to the frustration of getting accustomed to new boots, from Kwan's perspec-
tive on the Kerrigan/Harding debacle to her own very public fall at the 1997
Nationals, Kwan revisits the landmarks along her route to becoming a world class
competitor. The text is readily accessible to the middle-grade audience, and reluc-
tant readers who aren't daunted by length should find this an easy go. It is difficult
to determine, however, where Kwan's voice ends and James' begins, and readers
may wonder whether the pervasive follow-your-dreams preachiness has been added
for their edification, or if Kwan is actually inclined to sound so worldly-wise: "If
there's one thing I know about life, it's that everything is changing all the time...
. If you don't like being fourteen, don't worry. In a year you'll turn fifteen, like I
did in 1995." A chronologically arranged color photo section offers an intriguing
visual record of Kwan's maturation. EB
LAMSTEIN, SARAH MARWIL 
Annie's Shabbat; illus. by Cecily Lang. 
Whitman,
1997 
[4 0p]
ISBN 0-8075-0376-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Six mini-stories celebrate the Sabbath, the event that highlights every traditional
Jewish week. A young narrator recounts her family's preparation for dinner, the
prayers they say and food they eat, her father's and grandmother's storytelling, the
synagogue service, and the three stars that mark the end of Shabbat. What distin-
guishes this book from other descriptions of cultural experience is the clear sense of
episode and the fact that individual characters replace the more usual generic rep-
resentation. The illustrations, which are dominated by a deep and pleasing blue,
offer clean contrasts of light and dark, shape and pattern. The simple text avoids
the simplistic in projecting a child's voice. The father and grandmother both
begin their tales (one about God's gift of manna to the Israelites, one about a child
who must conceal her Shabbat celebration during the Spanish Inquisition) with
"Wump upon a time"--clearly a one-family tradition. BH
LASKY, KATHRYN 
Marven of the Great North Woods; illus. by Kevin
Hawkes. 
Harcourt, 1997 
48p
ISBN 0-15-200104-2 
$16.00 
R 
6-9 yrs
Ten-year-old Marven is sent away from 1918 Duluth to keep him safe from the
deadly influenza epidemic. He takes the train to a family friend's Minnesota log-
ging camp, where he is to keep the payroll books since "he's got a head for num-
bers." The camp is full of French Canadian loggers, "immense men, with long
beards and heads of wild hair." Marven makes friends with one of the biggest,
Jean Louis, after he mistakes the logger for a grizzly bear. With the coming of
212 
* 
THE BULLETIN
spring, Marven returns home to find his family has survived the epidemic un-
harmed ("'You're not dead!' Marven said. His sisters, Mama, Papa, Aunt Ghisa,
and Uncle Moishe crowded around him in a tight circle. He turned slowly to look
at each face. 'Nobody's dead,' Marven repeated softly"). Based on the childhood
of author Lasky's father, Marven, this family story has a wide range of appeal. The
child being sent from home to escape danger is an inherently riveting plot, and the
rambunctious setting of the logging camp is an exotic one for picture books. Lasky
does not short her characters for the sake of the plot. Indeed, it is the relationships,
so cleanly and lovingly delineated, that give this story its warm, delightful heart.
The acrylic paintings make the most of the contrasts between the blue-white win-
ter landscape, the golden, firelit interiors of the logging camp buildings, and the
scenes of family in early twentieth-century Duluth. A concluding author's note
about Lasky's father (who at more than ninety years old still has a good head for
figures) explains why only son Marven was sent to safety and not any of his four
sisters. JMD
LAYDEN, JOE 
NBA Game Day; by Joe Layden and James Preller. 
Scholastic,
1997 
64p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-590-76742-9 
$10.95 
R Gr. 2-6
The authors have charged twenty-six professional sports photographers with the
"open-ended, though daunting, task: Show us what it is really like to play in the
NBA." And here's the scoop. Long before the tip-off come the travel, the training,
the therapy, the press conferences, the school visits, the warm-ups, the focusing, all
captured in a glossy, flashy gallery ofcandids and action shots. The photoessay-
long on photo and short on essay-should hit the I-hate-to-read set right on the
numbers with dramatic photos of Dennis Rodman horizontally airborne, Charles
Barkley wincing in pain, Kevin Garnet stoking up on an enormous breakfast,
Stephon Marbury practicing a "long-distance-backwards-over-the-head-from-the-
base-line bomb." There are precious few "real" sports books out there for the
youngest b-ball fans, and even those who aren't quite ready for Creative Education's
NBA Today series can tackle Layden and Preller's brief and breezy text. One copy
won't be enough-you can make book on that. EB
LESTER, JULIUS 
From Slave Ship to Freedom Road; illus. by Rod Brown. 
Dial,
1998 
40p
ISBN 0-8037-1893-4 
$17.99 
Ad Gr. 8-12
Lester uses empathy-provoking exercises, open-ended questions, and the paintings
of Rod Brown to help readers understand the experience ofAfrican-American slaves.
Brown's paintings tell a brutal narrative of slave experience, showing the middle
passage, scenes of plantation labor, life in the slave quarters, punishment and tor-
ture, murder, escape, the contribution of black Civil War soldiers, and, finally,
freedom. The paintings are grim, disturbing, and captivating; no romanticized
icons of black beauty, his slaves are not pretty, and the juxtaposition of the bloody
body of a whipped slave with the picture of an apparent lynching turns viewers
into grim witnesses. His use of color tells a subliminal story: the green of freedom
or hope touches the knees of an escaping slave or surrounds a group of runaways;
the transitional colors of fall express loss or change. Lester's text uses Brown's
paintings to invoke introspection, urging readers to place themselves in the slave's
or master's position. The "Imagination Exercises" which Lester provides are ex-
plicitly addressed to either white or black readers, involving assumptions that may
FEBRUARY 1998 
* 213
confuse some readers and that may raise questions: Is the dialogue about slavery
only for blacks and whites? What of readers from other ethnicities or mixed races
or of new immigrants? Though sometimes abstruse and disjointed, Lester's writ-
ing can be direct and vivid. What is new to juvenile titles dealing with these issues
is the book's visceral nature, which will touch even media-conditioned and infor-
mation-numbed readers. JH
LINDBERGH, REEVE 
The AwfulAardvarks Go to School; illus. by Tracey Campbell
Pearson. 
Viking, 1997 
[32p]
ISBN 0-670-85920-6 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-7 yrs
"The day that the Aardvarks came into our school was Alphabet Awful-they
broke every rule!" Breaking "every rule" certainly has its appeal in any juvenile
setting, and these aardvarks are good at it, too: "They Angered the Anteater, Ate
All the Ants,/And Bullied the Bunny (they pulled down his pants)." As the alpha-
betical aardvark antics play out their schoolhouse rampage below, the alphabet
itself, sitting primly across the top of the double-page spread like those bulletin-
board charts of old, is dislodged letter by letter by one of the errant aardvarks.
Though there are some weak moments in the rhyme schemes (E and U-V-W,
notably), and the compositions are somewhat disorganized, the visual hijinks and
verbal silliness are still entertaining. You gotta love those "Quail Quints" who
"Quit Quarreling Quickly and stared." (They're pretty qute.) As the aardvarks
are "eXpelled" and zoom on to the zoo, your audience will definitely want to go
along ("And there what did they do?/ I don't even dare to imagine--do you?").
You bet. PM
MCDERMOTT, GERALD, ad. 
Musicians of the Sun; ad. and illus. by Gerald
McDermott. 
Simon, 1997 
40p
ISBN 0-689-80706-6 
$17.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
Based on an Aztec myth, this story explains the origin of music and happiness.
Wanting to bring joy and music to the earth's people, Night sends Wind to rescue
four musicians held captive by the Sun. Armed with three weapons and assisted by
three female animal helpers, Wind overcomes his self-doubt and the Sun's power
to help the four musicians escape. McDermott's palette moves from Night's brood-
ing blues, Earth's ashen grays, Sun's powerful orange reds, through the black of
conflict and transition, to Earth's multicolored transformation. Vibrant cover il-
lustrations lead immediately into inky darkness, this loss of light and brightness
underscoring Earth's lack of music, color, and beauty. The story relies on dialogue
and poetic language, with the traditional folktale sequence of three evident through-
out the text ("Out of the starry night he came, invisible, untouchable. Lord of the
Night. King of the Gods. Soul of the World"). This work bears the hallmarks of
McDermott's style: vivid colors, illustrations informed by cultural iconography
and mythology, an engaging story, and complete source notes. JH
McKISSACK, PATRICIA C. 
Run Away Home. 
Scholastic, 1997 
160p
ISBN 0-590-46751-4 
$14.95 
Ad Gr. 6-9
In this fictionalized account of a McKissack family story, eleven-year-old Sarah
Crossman sees a young Apache escape from a train carrying him and others of his
tribe to confinement on a reservation. She discovers he is hiding in their barn but
does not tell her parents. It is not until the Apache, fifteen-year-old Sky, becomes
214 
* THE BULLETIN
ill that Sarah's parents are admitted to the secret. The remainder of the story is a
disjointed account of Sky's adjustment to and acceptance by the Crossman family
and their community, of the local African-American families' standing up to the
Ku Klux Klan, and of Sarah's father's saving his farm by building desks for Tuskegee
Institute. There is a lot going on here, but it is unfortunately not connected by
any strong, emotionally engaging plot thread, and plot contrivances strain credu-
lity. Sky escapes from a train headed for a reservation, he travels in the company of
Geronimo, and he is recognized as a dangerous warrior and leader of his people. It
is highly unlikely that federal agents would have allowed Sky to remain with the
Crossmans, and it's even more unlikely he would have been allowed to remain in
the community, as torn by racial division as it is depicted. Characterization is flat
and somewhat stereotypical, with people being either saints or demons. Still, Sa-
rah has a strong voice, even when relating a questionable plot, and young histori-
cal-fiction fans may find her point of view involving. JMD
MARKLE, SANDRA 
Discovering Graph Secrets: Experiments, Puzzles, and Games
Exploring Graphs. Atheneum, 1997 
36p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-689-31942-8 
$17.00 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Despite its somewhat dry title, this slim volume could be a dream come true for
students looking for math projects or teachers looking for enrichment activities.
Markle introduces four types of graphs-bar, picto-, line, and circle-and then
presents a variety of games and puzzles that guide students to interpret graphs and
to produce their own. Most challenges begin with a story scenario and an accom-
panying graph, with specific questions to be answered; for example, readers must
identify the gender of bottlenose dolphin calves by applying information in the
text to spectrograms of the calves' whistles. Solutions are provided at the back of
the book, along with an explanation of the correct answer. Color illustrations and
overall design are little more than serviceable, but there are enough visual clues to
help readers tackle the games with minimal adult intervention. This will be a
particularly good investment for the math classroom library. EB
NAPOLI, DONNA Jo 
Stones in Water. Dutton, 1997 
[15 4 p]
ISBN 0-525-45842-5 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Since very little World War II literature for children has dealt with the experience
of the Italians, this account of two Venetian boys abducted by their ostensible
allies, the Germans, for slave labor provides an unusual look at the war. Roberto
and his Jewish friend Samuele are rounded up in a theater, forced onto a train, and
transported to German territory where they are overworked, starved, frozen, and
beaten. Although the friends do their best to protect each other, Samuele is ulti-
mately killed by his fellow captives for his boots. More unlikely but also more
intriguing is Roberto's subsequent escape by foot and boat through Soviet terri-
tory to the Caspian Sea, where he falls in with a Roman deserter on his way to the
Mediterranean to join the partisans. Despite the realistic depiction of victims shot
and imprisoned, the reader is kept at an emotional distance by quickly developed
scenes and flat characterization (plus an overly swift, unsatisfying conclusion). Still,
this has the tone of an adventure story and it depicts some dramatic events, so it
may capture some readers. In an introductory section of acknowledgments, the
author describes the story as "based loosely (very, very loosely) on experiences of
Guido Fullin" and discusses her research. BH
FEBRUARY 1998 
* 215
NORMAN, HOWARD, ad. 
The Girl Who Dreamed Only Geese and Other Tales ofthe
Far North; illus. by Leo and Diane Dillon. 
Gulliver/Harcourt, 1997 
147p
ISBN 0-15-230979-9 
$22.00 
R* Gr. 4-7
Ten dramatic stories, styled with understated humor, reflect Inuit lore as adapted
by a collector who knows and respects the tellers' traditions. In a very funny
Biblical variant, Noah not only shows rudeness in refusing to cook and share the
tasty animals on his Ark, but also proves inept at spear-throwing when a woolly
mammoth charges him (even the animal is insulted by such a poor show of hunt-
ing). Children-and adults-will reverberate to the dilemmas presented by "the
not-invited guest" in "Why the Rude Visitor Was Flung by Walrus" and to the
quiet tension in "The Girl Who Watched in the Nighttime." Tragedy and com-
edy fit naturally together in stories such as "Home Among the Giants," in which a
lost child whose parents have gone down in a kayak makes a home in the giants'
village. Haunting tales such as "How the Narwhal Got Its Tusk" find satisfying
resolution without straying into a false happily-ever-after mode: "They talked and
laughed, and then his mother and father fell asleep. But the boy stayed awake all
night, looking at their faces." Family bonds overcome even death as strong emo-
tions are cast into folkloric motifs. Norman's clear notes on culture and sources
are a credit to his knowledge and to the genre of children's literature as a vehicle for
folklore. The Dillons' art also projects action into symbolic form, with small,
black, almost pictogrammatic scenes inspired by Inuit art carvings heading many
pages and a snowflake imprinted on each verso facing a new story. Occasional
full-page acrylic paintings use eerie perspectives and proportions to effect a surreal
suspension of time and space. The stylized figures and rhythmic designs add sheen
without overstepping into glamour. Overall, this is stone-polished in text, art, and
book design. BH
OLDER, JULES 
Cow; illus. by Lyn Severance. 
Charlesbridge, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-88106-957-4 $15.95 
R Gr. 2-4
The Ben & Jerry's connection (writer and illustrator have worked on B&J books
and the B&J container typeface is, apparently, named after the illustrator) is evi-
dent as cheerful simplified graphics and ebullient text devote themselves to the
source of ice cream: the milk cow. Amid the flash is some genuine information,
such as the date of the first cow's arrival in the U.S. (1611), origins of six major
breeds, the processes of bovine digestion and lactation, and a variety of random
tidbits (including recipes for sundaes and sodas, as well as the statistic for the
average daily manure output for a cow). There's too much deliberate wackiness to
the tone and a bit too much jumping around, but underneath it all is some real
dairy information. The illustrations are designer cartoon style, energetic and clear
in portraits and diagrams. This trips a little on the line between edu- and -tainment,
but it's a lively introduction to the trendy but little-chronicled filler of cartons.
DS
ORAI , HIWYN, ad. 
Baba Yaga and the Wise Dolk" illus. by Ruth Brown. 
Dutton,
1998 
[30p]
ISBN 0-525-45947-2 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-7 yrs
See this month's Big Picture, p. 189, for review.
216 
* THE BULLETIN
ORMEROD, JAN 
Peek-a-Boo!; written and illus. by Jan Ormerod. 
Dutton,
1998 
12p
ISBN 0-525-45936-7 
$6.99 
R 6-24 months
Five spreads follow roughly the same pattern: the left side asks, "Where is the
baby?" while the right shows a little one hiding its face; lift the flap and s/he smiles
out, saying "Peek-a-boo!" Adults will appreciate the slight variation in the re-
sponses ("I see you!" "Boo-baby-boo!"), but the teeny audience will enjoy both the
repetition and the chance to play this classic infant game with fellow babies, albeit
fictional ones. Ormerod's multicultural cast is generalized yet recognizable, and
the peek-a-boo details (one baby pulls her blouse up over her face, for instance)
provide a lively charm. The book's glossy cardboard pages (with rounded corners)
are sturdy, and the liftable flaps are sufficiently securely attached to survive being
used as handles. The final spread sends baby off to sleep, but adults may have to go
through the book another time or two before their babies finally doze off. DS
PARKER, DAVID L. 
Stolen Dreams: Portraits of Working Children; by David L.
Parker with Lee Engfer and Robert Conrow; illus. with photographs by David L.
Parker. 
Lerner, 1998 
112p
ISBN 0-8225-2960-2 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 5-9
Opening with the gripping story of Iqbal Masih-bonded laborer in a Pakistani
carpet factory at age four, activist at age ten, and murdered at age twelve-Parker
draws readers into the worldwide plight of child laborers. Carefully distinguishing
between working children and exploited children, he considers the cultural and
economic forces that drive some children into part-time work for spending money
and others into exhausting, demeaning, and even crippling work for their families'
survival. Haunting black-and-white photo portraits of street vendors, brick mak-
ers, prostitutes, scavengers, weavers, and farm workers, most of whom are the same
age or even younger than the book's readership, are as provocative as the text;
unexpected portraits of a St. Paul carnival worker and a Chicago newsboy should
startle American viewers into considering the rigors of child labor much closer to
home. A concluding chapter suggests ways in which American children can help
combat this problem; if the suggestions seem slim and even ineffectual, they ably
serve to demonstrate the enormity and complexity of the international child labor
system. EB
PATERSON, KATHERINE 
Marvin's Best Christmas Present Ever; illus. by Jane Clark
Brown. 
HarperCollins, 1997 
48p 
(I Can Read Books)
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027160-4 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027159-0 
$14.95 
R Gr. 1-3
Paterson, whose last beginning reader was The Smallest Cow in the World (BCCB
1/92), here takes a more seasonal approach. Young Marvin is initially frustrated
by his inability to make a nice Christmas present, but with the aid of his sister,
May, he creates a lovely Christmas wreath. The boy begins to experience the
sorrow of transient art, however, when Christmas passes and people start hinting
it's time for the wreath to go. Unable to part with his work, Marvin is rewarded
come spring when a nesting bird lays her eggs in the browning wreath. Paterson's
right on the money about the trauma of post-holiday discarding, which many kids
feel keenly but few books depict. There's an additional pleasure here in the mat-
ter-of-fact rural setting, with Marvin's family living in a trailer on a dairy farm and
FEBRUARY 1998 
* 
217
farm chores threaded naturally through the book. Brown's colored pencil and
watercolor artwork is casual and unassuming, allowing Marvin's expressive fea-
tures and body language to convey his emotions. There aren't many good post-
Christmas stories; use this as an antidote to New Year letdown. DS
PERKINS, LYNNE RAE 
Clouds for Dinner; written and illus. by Lynne Rae
Perkins. 
Greenwillow, 1997 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-14904-9 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-14903-0 
$15.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
Janet's family is poetic and haphazard; "dinner was not always easy to recognize at
Janet's house," and "clouds came up a lot where Janet lived, and when they did,
Janet's mother and father always had something to say about them." Janet casts a
covetous eye at the more traditional household of her aunt and uncle, where "din-
ner was unmistakably dinner... where the beds were always made, the dishes were
always washed." She revels in her visit there, until she wakes up alone early in the
morning and has a lyrical moment watching the leaves on the trees prove to be
birds and fly away-and no one at her aunt and uncle's house understands. This
is a tender and personable book about the uniqueness of families; it's honest about
how alluring and also how alien differences can be. Perkins, author/illustrator of
Home Lovely (BCCB 9/95), is deft at dialogue (the routine exchange about the
large number of steps leading to Janet's front door has a time-honored feeling) and
at details (Janet's cousins "let her play with them, even though they were older and
even though they were boys"). Her distinctive line-and-watercolor art provides
vivid impressions of both lifestyles and the pleasures thereof, but the scudding
clouds in their twilit palette make their appeal inarguable. Kids will sympathize
with the pull of there as well as the wonders of here. DS
ROHMER, HARRIET, ed. Just Like Me: Stories and Self-Portraits by Fourteen
Artists. Children's Book Press, 1997 
32p 
illus. and with photographs
ISBN 0-89239-149-9 
$15.95 
R Gr. 4-8
For this involving, accessible collective biography, Rohmer approached fourteen
visual artists (seven men and seven women) and asked for a self-portrait and a
description of how they first became involved with art. The artists represent a
wide range of cultural backgrounds-from Mexican-American Enrique Chagoya
to Plains Cree Indian George Littlechild to African-American Michele Wood-
and styles-from paintings to printmaking to collage and mixed media. Each
artist is represented on a double page spread, one side of which is a full-page self-
portrait, and the other side of which is a narrative about the artist's art and life,
with small photographs of the subject as a child and as an adult. The text is
involving and friendly, each individual artist giving a tiny gift of self as they relate
his or her "why I make art" story: Mira Reisberg tells how her mother, a Holo-
caust survivor, gave her her first art supplies, saying "I can't give you a beautiful
world, but you can make one for yourself"; Stephen Von Mason talks about draw-
ing horses and cowboys and having his work exhibited in school; Carmen Lomas
Garza remembers her mother as the first person she ever saw paint, the one "who
inspired me to become an artist." The artwork is fascinating not only in terms of
the media used, but in the ways that each of the artists chose to represent them-
selves. This has broad application across curriculum lines, as well as a large amount
of appeal for those readers who may be artistically inclined themselves. JMD
218 
* 
THE BULLETIN
SEABROOKE, BRENDA 
Under the Pear Tree; illus. by Roger Essley. 
Cobblehill,
1997 
93p
ISBN 0-525-65213-2 
$13.99 
R 
Gr. 5-8
This sequel to Judy Scuppernong (BCCB 10/90) picks up a year after the previous
volume left off, but the world of small-town Georgia in the 1950s and the trio of
Deanna, Stacy, and Lala are much the same. As the sequence of poems shows,
however, the cast is changing both collectively (Deanna's cousin Rusty comes from
the city for the summer, bringing resentment and insecurity with him, and a neigh-
bor brings back a glamorous new wife) and individually (Stacy is growing up into
teenagerhood faster than the other two). Seabrooke's ability to combine simple
words into penetrating and unforced observation is evident in this book as well
("Stacy had crossed a line/ that we hadn't even known/ was there"), and that abil-
ity brings the scene and the changes to vivid life. As well as an approachable poetic
read, this would make an effective readaloud for-or by-middle-graders. Soft-
focus black-and-white illustrations teeter too often into undifferentiated grayness
but have a moody sensibility appropriate to the text. DS
SEIDLER, TOR 
Mean Margaret;, illus. by Jon Agee. 
di Capua/HarperCollins,
1997 
165p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-205091-5 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-205090-7 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Fred is a worthy if slightly prissy woodchuck, whose life changes when he falls in
love with the delightful Phoebe and they set up housekeeping together. His idyllic
new existence is rudely interrupted when the motherly Phoebe takes in a stray-a
stray human, in fact, who was dumped by her brothers and sisters (she's the loud
and demanding ninth child of the family). Margaret, as Phoebe names her, is a
huge, unkempt, and demanding burrowful of trouble. Helped by friendly neigh-
bors (a skunk, a squirrel, a pair of bats, and a crusty snake), the woodchucks struggle
through as parents despite Margaret's penchant for stepping on animal tails and
flinging solid objects at her benefactors. Eventually Margaret is returned to her
human family, but not before one last visit to put the old woodchuck burrow
right. The tonal control here is uneven, with the book often heading towards
broad comedy without quite getting there, as with Margaret's overweight human
parents and Phoebe's sister Babette. The lighthearted silliness of the enterprise
will appeal to kids, however, especially those whose understanding has expanded
to recognize the satire on human youth (likelier to be realized from an acquain-
tance with a younger sibling than through self-knowledge). Agee's vigorous line-
and-wash drawings provide the woodchucks and their cohorts with a matter-of-facdy
anthropomorphic charm, while Margaret has a Matilda-esque air that bodes ill for
those near her. Short chapters make for comfortable readalone or readaloud pac-
ing. DS
SHANGE, NTOZAKE 
White Wash; illus. by Michael Sporn. 
Walker, 1997 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8491-7 
$16.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-80270-8490-9 
$15.95 
R Gr. 2-4
On their way home from school, Helene-Angel, a young African-American girl,
and her brother are assaulted by a gang of white hoodlums who spraypaint her face
white. Her brother, beaten but not painted, carries her home, where their grand-
mother ministers to the two children. Helene-Angel is traumatized, and she hides
FEBRUARY 1998 
* 219
in her room, afraid to come out, afraid to walk to school. After a week, her grand-
mother says, "Helene-Angel, I don't care who did what to you. Today you are
going to open this door and be strong." When Helene-Angel opens the door of
her room, her teacher and classmates are right there; one classmate says, "If we all
stick together, no one will dare bother you or anybody else, right?" Illustrated
with cels from the Carnegie-Medal-winning animated video of the same name, the
book suffers from the lack of animation, the illustrated players more cartoony
caricatures than well-articulated characters. While the lesson/message will require
some context and clarifications, this is a strongly plotted and emotionally told
story that may do more to effectively educate unaware youngsters about the hor-
rors of racism than any number of optimistic picture books containing well-mean-
ing, rainbow-colored platitudes. JMD
SHREVE, SUSAN Joshua T Bates in TroubleAgain; illus. by Roberta Smith. 
Knopf,
1997 
90p
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-98520-4 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-88520-X 
$17.00 
R 
Gr. 4-6
After intensive tutoring, Joshua (of The Flunking ofJoshua T. Bates, BCCB 5/89,
and in events that are happening before Joshua Bates Takes Charge, 7/93) is ready
to join up with his classmates who have moved on to fourth grade. He's worried
about his place in fourth-grade society, however, especially with its domination by
the intimidating Tommy Wilhelm. His fears lead him to seek status through
foolish actions, most notably bringing his father's Swiss Army knife to school,
losing it, and getting in serious school and home trouble as a result. Shreve is the
expert chronicler of kids with the weight of the world on their shoulders, kids who
can't take anything easy, ever: the erosion of Joshua's confidence is painful and
believable, as are his resultant actions. It's also clear, however, that doing a bad
thing doesn't mean he's not a good kid, and the book's restraint, absence of carica-
ture, and inclusion of sympathetic adults emphasizes the fact that he himself is his
only real enemy. This is an uncondescending and understanding look at the social
stresses of grade school; many uneasy young readers will appreciate the sympa-
thetic account. Occasional pencil drawings are on the unsubtle side, but they have
their touching moments. DS
SIERRA, JUDY 
Counting Crocodiles; illus. by Will Hillenbrand. 
Gulliver/Harcourt,
1997 
[40p]
ISBN 0-15-200192-1 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
A monkey dwelling on a tiny island tires of the lemons that are her sole food there.
When she spies a banana tree across the Sillabobble Sea, she develops a plan: soon
she's convinced the crocodiles to line up to be counted (in order to prove that
there are more of them than there are of the monkeys), and they become a step-
ping-stone bridge to the banana island and back-twice. Sierra confuses things,
however, by telling the story in uneven verse and by adding enumerative details
("She counted one crocodile with a great big smile,/ Two crocks resting on rocks,/
Three crocs rocking in a box, four crocs building with blocks ... ") unrelated to
the rest of the story. Hilenbrand's illustrations display smirking golden-eyed croco-
diles and offer some entertaining humor (the sea waves contain a multitude of croc
eyes, the reptiles are reading all manner of books related to the current situation,
220 
* THE BULLETIN
and a fox and a snail silently assist the monkey while a starfish beckons them to the
banana isle). Unfortunately, the cheerfully ludicrous crocodiles decorated in fair-
ground colors are usually bobbing around in a way that makes their use as a foot-
bridge sufficiently implausible that the audience is bound to inquire about it.
Overall, in fact, there's a lack of consistency (where do all the accoutrements, in-
cluding the big rocks, go in the other pictures?) and flow that makes spreads indi-
vidually successful but overall out of place, since the point of all this-the monkey's
journey-is lost in the crocodilian splendor. Kids who can overlook the storytell-
ing rule-bending will enjoy finding the visual jokes and will, once they divine
what's going on, applaud the resourceful monkey. DS
SIGERMAN, HARRIET 
Land of Many Hands: Women in the American
West. 
Oxford, 1998 
188p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-19-509942-7 
$24.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Sigerman covers a lot of ground in this whirlwind survey of women's Western
settlement-so much, in fact, that she seldom has the luxury of lingering in one
place long enough for close examination. Opening discussion considers women's
roles in early Spanish settlements and among a smattering of Native American
peoples, and then shifts to the experiences of those homesteaders and Pacific-bound
pioneers who are generally associated with pushing the boundary of the American
frontier. A serious report writer may find many leads for further research among
Sigerman's hodgepodge of observations concerning everything from how the home-
stead laws promoted women's independence, to the relative ease of civil divorce
and Catholic annulment in the West, to the asylums for women broken by the
strains and solitude of prairie life. However, stories of individual women pass by
too fast for readers to form an acquaintance with any of the myriad personalities
on Sigerman's extensive roster. An impressive thematic list for further reading and
plenty of period photos are included. EB
SNYDER, ZILPHA KEATLEY 
Gib Rides Home. 
Delacorte, 1998 
[25 6p]
ISBN 0-385-32267-4 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-7
This story begins in 1909 when Gib Whittaker returns to the orphan home whence
he'd been farmed out several months ago, then tells in flashback of Gib's early life
at the orphanage and his move to the Thorntons' ranch. There he begins to settle
in, reveling in the closeness to the horses he loves and he handles so capably as well
as in the gentle attention of some of the ranch residents; he's puzzled, however, by
Mr. Thornton's coldness towards him and by the hints of a past household mys-
tery. Both problems come together when Mr. Thornton discovers his daughter on
the horse that paralyzed his wife, and Gib is hustled back to the orphan home that
resents his presence as a failure, hoping that something will change so that he can
return to the ranch life he loved. There's nothing in this book that couldn't have
been written forty years ago: the child's taming of the dangerous black horse and
the shadowy secret that clouds the ranch are traditional components, but Snyder
keeps their melodramatic notes to a minimum. The equestrian aspects of the book
keep pretty well to real-life rules (the dangerous horse is merely spooky, unfortu-
nately resulting in a bad riding accident); the orphan story (based, according to
Snyder's note, on her father's childhood experience) is plainly told and involving,
and Gib is an appealingly resilient character. Readers looking for a less fancy
alternative to A Little Princess will enjoy this orphan's final homecoming. DS
FEBRUARY 1998 
* 
221
SOUHAMI, JESSICA, ad. 
Rama and the Demon King: An Ancient Tale from India;
ad. and illus. by Jessica Souhami. 
DK Ink, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-7894-2450-9 
$14.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
The Indian epic Ramayana recounts the exile of Prince Rama, with his wife Sita
and brother Lakshman, to a forest full of demons; the kidnapping of Sita by the
king of demons, Ravana; and her rescue by the two brothers together with the
leader of the monkeyarmy, Hanuman. Enormously complex in style and episode,
this saga seems an unlikely candidate for a picture book, and indeed the text here is
perforce flattened: "The demons hated anyone good and they were looking for a
fight." Equally planed is the designerly art with its stylized effect of cut-paper
profiled figures in sharp color contrasts against a stark white background. With
illustration and narrative reduced to a basic common denominator, this is never-
theless a dramatic version to read aloud and show a group of young children, who
may have little access to the story cycle. BH
SPEED, TOBY 
Water Voices; illus. by Julie Downing. 
Putnam, 1998 
[32p]
ISBN 0-399-22631-1 
$12.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
These poetic riddles in lyrical language take a little girl from dawn to evening-
from morning mist to ocean wave to bedtime bath. Delicate watercolors drench
these seven watery puzzlers with a pleasing balance of word and picture followed
by the solution depicted across the next double-page spread. The combination of
adroit textual clues ("When the slide's so hot it burns your legs ... and fans do a
slow dance on tabletops, I whirl like a string of pearls in the yard. Who am I?" "I
am Sprinklerspray. Want to play?") and winsome visual allusions won't do any-
thing to dampen young imaginations. While the art tips into the sweet, clever
metrical vignettes, an uncluttered composition, and experiences dripping with kid-
recognition provide a solid bridge to these riddle one-liners. PM
STOLZ, MARY A Balladofthe Civil War; illus. by Sergio Martinez. 
HarperCollins,
1997 
[6 4p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027363-1 $13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027362-3 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Stolz supplies an extended storyline for lyrics sung by members of her family since
the Civil War-the ballad of brothers on opposing sides of the war who acciden-
tally meet as one lies dying: "Did you think I would/ leave you dying,/ when
there's room on my horse for two?" Twenty-one-year-old Union soldier Tom
Rigby discovers a wounded Confederate by the roadside and whispers, "Jack? Is it
you, Jack?" The tale then flashes back to Tom's childhood, when he and his twin
brother, Jack, first part company over the issue of slavery. Their "personal" house
slave, Aaron, has been sent to the fields on the boys' ninth birthday, and although
Tom is grief-stricken to lose his friend, Jack seems to understand this is the natural
order of life. As rumors of war circulate among their plantation neighbors, Jack
only hopes the war will wait for him to grow up. It does; the young men enlist on
separate sides, and Tom incurs Jack's "changeless enmity." Stolz' spare prose skirts
much of the blatant romanticism of the ballad, but she does not entirely avoid the
sentimentality inherent in little Tom's broken hobby horse ("'Come on, Jack.
There's room on Pompety. He'll go just as well with two") or in Tom's saintliness
222 
* THE BULLETIN
("When Mama and Daddy have gone for their siestas, I'm going to take some toys
down to the children in the quarter"). This slim novella could see service as a
springboard for discussion on the romanticization of war; more likely, though, it
will simply be read as a maudlin two-hanky weeper. EB
THESMAN, JEAN 
The Storyteller's Daughter. Houghton, 1997 
180p
ISBN 0-395-80978-9 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
It is 1933. The Depression is taking its toll, and Prohibition is still on the books.
Fifteen-year-old Quinn discovers that her beloved father, desperate to support his
family and unable to find a legitimate job, has been smuggling bootleg liquor.
When her father, Beau John, doesn't come home as expected, Quinn investigates,
and she discovers a somewhat seedy side of her neighborhood as she peers inside a
pool hall and pays a visit to a shanty town. The conclusion is anticlimactic and
something of a stretch-Beau John, on the run from Federal Agents, sees Quinn
briefly to give her a letter for her mother, then disappears; he figures he's such a
little fish that the Feds'll drop the chase when Prohibition is repealed, which is due
to happen any day. The pacing in this novel is uneven, as the introspective Quinn
slows down even the most anxiety-fraught situations with an enormous amount of
situational and self-analysis. Smuggling, secret romances, and handsome gang-
sters should make for a pretty riveting plot, but in spite of these elements there is
no suspense. Although Quinn tells the reader a lot about Beau John, Thesman
doesn't show us, and the relationship between father and daughter, so pivotal to
the plot, never clarifies enough to have any emotional impact. Depression-era
Seattle is depicted with a utilitarian solidity, and most of the supporting characters
are nicely realized, so this may still work for diehard historical fiction fans. JMD
TOMLINSON, THERESA 
Dancing Through the Shadows. DK Ink, 1997 
120p
ISBN 0-7894-2459-2 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Ellen is full of plans-for the family vacation, for her dance recital, for recruiting
boys for the dance troupe-until her mother is diagnosed with breast cancer. The
family's reactions are realistically if somewhat programmatically depicted as Ellen's
mother undergoes surgery, chemotherapy, and counseling. A subplot in which
Ellen and a friend assist a teacher (another breast-cancer survivor) in uncovering
an ancient well has charm, even if the notion that such an archaeological find
would be left to the amateur digging of some teenagers is a bit farfetched.
Tomlinson's language is casual without being careless, and American readers should
have no trouble with the occasional Briticism. Although the plot seems contrived
to fit around the clinical aspects of the diagnosis and treatment of breast cancer
and the character development is minimal, this may still strike a chord in readers
seeking some bibliotherapeutic comfort. JMD
WIDSMITH, BRIAN, ad. Joseph; ad. and illus. by Brian Wildsmith. 
Eerdmans,
1997 
34p
ISBN 0-8028-5161-4 
$20.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
The biblical Joseph has been basking in Broadway notoriety for some time, but
this gorgeous piece of bookmaking may rightly enjoy some basking of its own.
Shimmering watercolors with fine pen detailing illumine every exquisite, double-
page spread while gold-trimmed pages exude the aura of Egyptian opulence and
the story's royal overtones. There is a panoramic distancing throughout the book
FEBRUARY 1998 
* 223
and the painstaking detailing of Egypt's finest (whether people or pillar) will pro-
vide hours of visual feasting. Faithfully retold, this is the dramatic saga of Jacob's
sons and the rise of Joseph as a prophet-a parable of jealousy, betrayal, compas-
sion, and the redemptive silver cup of restoration. At times readers are kept at
arms' length from any emotional involvement (Joseph's languishing in prison is
never shown), but the solid storytelling never falters. Though more sedate than its
dreamcoat cousin, it is every bit as amazing. PM
WILLIAMS, CAROL LYNCH 
IflForget, You Remember. Delacorte, 1998 
[160p]
ISBN 0-385-32534-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
It's the summer after sixth grade, and Elyse isn't happy; she doesn't have any real
friends, she's at odds with her older sister Jordyn, and she's the target of neighbor-
hood bullies. Her grandmother has been her greatest solace, but now Elyse realizes
that Granny is suffering from Alzheimer's disease and it's getting worse. It be-
comes clear just how serious the problem can be when Granny moves in, changing
in the blink of an eye from Elyse's loving grandmother to a suspicious little girl
among strangers and back again; come fall, the family, including Granny, decides
that it's time for her to be in a secure care facility. Williams is particularly good at
depicting the day-to-day reality of Alzheimer's and the possibly untenable burden
it can place upon a sufferer's family. Elyse's realistic unreasonableness and tan-
trums are counterbalanced by the warmth of her gradual friendship with two fel-
low writers (which suffers a setback when Bruce A., who'd been interested in Elyse,
is caught embracing Anna-Leigh) and her increasing willingness to ease up on the
world. This is a believable portrait of a family facing inexorable change. DS
WILLNER-PARDO, GINA 
Spider Storch's Carpool Catastrophe; illus. by Nick
Sharratt. 
Whitman, 1997 
60p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8075-7575-5 
$11.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-8075-7576-3 $3.95 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Spider-real name Joey-knows that third grade will never be the same again.
His mother is on the verge of becoming friends with the mother of a classmate,
and as luck would have it that classmate is prissy, officious, unbearable Mary Grace
Brennerman. This means carpools with Mary Grace, visits from Mary Grace, and
embarrassing childhood anecdotes about Spider told to Mary Grace's mother (and
by extension Mary Grace). Spider decides this has to be nipped in the bud and
begins to sabotage his mother's friendship (describing his mother unflatteringly to
Mrs. Brennerman and altering her passed-on recipe into a disaster), then escalates
to a school prank in order to prove that he does not love Mary Grace Brennerman.
This is one of the few children's books to acknowledge that adults aren't automati-
cally equipped with friends and that friendship isn't an instant process at any age,
which makes for an unusual slant on the irritating-classmate dilemma. The book
never loses sight of the kid's side of things, however, making Mary Grace realisti-
cally and genuinely annoying and Spider's quandary credible. Willner-Pardo sen-
sibly understates the slapstick (the boys put a gooey mess adorned with fake spiders
in the girls' desks) so that the book doesn't get lost in the special effects but instead
keeps its focus on the people. Compact chapters adorned with streamlined near-
cartoons make the book undaunting; it might also, with its accurate primary-school
humor, make a nice chaptery readaloud. DS
224 
* THE BULLETIN
WILSON, JACQUELINE 
Double Act. 
Delacorte, 1998 
[19 2 p]
ISBN 0-385-32312-3 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 4-7
Ruby and Garnet are identical twins, and they take great pride in their together-
ness and their similarity--or at least Ruby does, and Garnet generally goes along
with her more forceful sister. The girls take turns narrating, with Ruby in Roman
type and Garnet in italics, telling of their widowed father's new romantic interest
(Rose, whom they can't stand), their move to a little village where Rose and their
father open a bookstore, their attempts to audition for a TV series featuring twins,
and finally their application to a classic girls' boarding school-which admits Gar-
net and not Ruby, whose idea it was in the first place. The relationship between
the girls is realistically conflicted and uneven, and their anger at change is believ-
able. Some of the episodes are a little contrived, however, and Ruby's voice, which
dominates, tends to stay annoyingly on the same note, lacking the depth of the
characterizations in Wilson's earlier The Suitcase Kid (BCCB 7/97). This is still
going to intrigue youngsters who wonder what twinship would be like, and there
are enough down and dirty double details here to satisfy them. DS
WILSON, NANCY HOPE 
Old People, Frogs, and Albert; illus. by Marcy D.
Ramsey. 
Farrar, 1997 
58p
ISBN 0-374-35625-4 
$14.00 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Albert is in the fourth grade. He loves frogs, enjoys a relationship with the elderly
Mr. Spear, who is helping him with reading ("Pretty soon, I bet, you'll read with-
out even noticing the words"), has a with-it traveling Grammy, and hates walking
past the Pine Manor Nursing Home as he goes home from school. These story
components are resolved with unlikely rapidity. When Mr. Spear suffers a stroke,
he ends up in the dreaded nursing home; in the meantime Grammy sends Albert a
book about a bullfrog, which so intrigues him that he reads it without noticing the
words. This first-ever feat empowers Albert to overcome his fear of Pine Manor,
visit Mr. Spear, and read the story aloud to him and the other residents. The story
does have its touching moments, and there is a certain sense of honesty in the
portrayal of the mostly unfounded fears that young people face when confronted
with the aged. Unfortunately, Wilson's dialogue often lacks authenticity, and her
well-meaning attempt at resolving Albert's conflict only results in an overly neat
package with scant emotional contents. Youngsters facing fears of their own may
nonetheless find this reassuring. Copious black-and-white illustrations keep things
appropriately unthreatening. PM
WINSLOW, VICKI 
Follow the Leader; illus. by Colin Bootman. 
Delacorte,
1997 
215p
ISBN 0-385-32285-2 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Sixth-grader Amanda is participating in the desegregation of her school district in
1971 North Carolina. She is unworried at first-she and the other white students
will be bused across town, it's true, but as long as her best friend, Jackie, is going
with her, she's happy. But then Jackie's parents decide to send her to private
school, and Amanda is left to deal with the situation on her own. Her parents,
both liberals strongly in favor of desegregation, feed her platitudes about being a
pioneer, but they have no idea of the problems inherent in this massive change.
Amanda is a sympathetic character, and her dilemma is one not often seen in
FEBRUARY 1998 
* 225
books for youth-desegregation from the point of view of the white student in-
stead of the black. The players surrounding her, however, are much less devel-
oped, and as a result suffer from flat characterization. The classroom situations are
somewhat contrived (the sixth grade is reading Mark Twain's Huckleberry Finn
aloud, and no one will say the word "nigger") and the speeches given by her well-
meaning but apparently clueless parents are boring and rote with little emotional
impact. The book does have its dramatic moments-the unlikely alliance be-
tween Amanda and classmate Henry Bailey, Amanda's own jealousy-inspired, nas-
tily racist remark to a little girl, and Amanda's rejection of the revealed-to-be-a-racist
Jackie-and that may be enough to put this well-intentioned book over the top.
JMD
ZEMACH, KAETHE 
The Character in the Book; written and illus. by Kaethe
Zemach. 
di Capua/HarperCollins, 1998 
[32p]
ISBN 0-06-205060-5 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
4-7 yrs
Our hero is the Character in the Book, who "had a nice life on the smooth, white
pages." The Character enjoys his existence both in stories and out of them, and
when he gets a letter from his Auntie, "who was a character in a different book,"
he's eager to visit her. After a few false starts, he realizes that the way out of his
Book is to go forward, and forward he goes, through mountains, over rivers, across
page after page, until he jumps out of the book. This kind of self-referentiality
isn't original any more, but this treatment's gentle cheer and streamlining makes it
more suitable than many for younger children. Unfortunately, this reads like
backstory rather than story, and the absence of plot and payoff is going to disap-
point most listeners old enough to understand the joke-when you've got a book
so metafictive that it's essentially about turning the pages, there needs to be a
bigger finish than just running out of paper. The Character is a perky jester-like
figure, bouncing across the white space in rainbow hues of line-and-watercolor;
it's a pity his actions don't carry much of a story. DS
// I \
./'
226 
* THE BULLETIN
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
Barchers, Suzanne I. Fifty Fabulous Fables: Beginning Reader's Theatre. Teacher
Ideas Press, 1997. illus. ISBN 1-56308-553-4. Paper ed. $21.50.
This is a handy collection of fifty reader's theatre scripts based on traditional fables
and compiled (using the Flesch-Kincaid readability scale) for use by Grades 1-4.
Barchers' introduction gives some background on her methodology and offers tips
for getting started, along with ideas for presentation, props, and delivery. The fifty
fables (mostly from Aesop) are laid out in photocopiable scripts, with a large type-
face and a generous amount of white space for easy reading. Barchers includes
such well-known fables as "Belling the Cat," "The Goose that Laid the Golden
Eggs," "The Boy Who Cried Wolf," and "The Ant and the Grasshoppers," among
others. The necessity of sticking to a readability scale may account for the some-
what lackluster scripts but, as Barchers points out, many child actors will sponta-
neously ad lib so that should help make things lively. The appendix includes a
unit on fables with background information and history, as well as suggestions for
activities and additional reading. An index is included. JMD
Brady, Martha. Dancing Hearts: Creative Arts with Books Kids Love. Fulcrum
Publishing, 1997. illus. ISBN 1-55591-947-2. Papered. $17.95.
In this information-packed title, Brady uses twenty fairly well-known picture books
as the catalyst for arts activities in the classroom. From Lane Smith's The Big Pets
to Kevin Henkes' Chrysanthemum to Pam Conrad's The Tub People, she employs
story and pictures as a springboard to activities that include song, dance, creative
drama, visual arts, poetry, and creative writing. Brady includes her own scripts for
plays, song music and lyrics, and poetry as part of the recommended activities.
Each chapter opens with a background section that explains the author's personal
responses to each book, which is followed by a "hook" activity to get a group
interested. The suggested reading is complemented by a variety of activities, each
of which is followed by brief paragraphs on personal learning capacities and pos-
sible points for evaluation. Brady packs a lot into the two columns of text per
page, and while her assumption of available resources is a bit optimistic, her enthu-
siasm comes through loud and clear. Brief lists of related books and'music con-
clude each chapter; an index is also included. JMD
Flack, Jerry D. From the Land ofEnchantment: Creative Teaching with Fairy Tales;
illus. by Gay Graeber. Teacher Ideas Press, 1997. ISBN 1-56308-540-2. Paper
ed. $23.50. (Gifted Treasury Series).
In nine chapters built around nine well-known folk and fairy tales, Flack, a profes-
sor of gifted education at the University of Colorado, discusses various theories of
learning and their implications for and impact on classroom activities. Each chap-
FEBRUARY 1998 
* 227
ter uses a familiar tale to provide structure for discussion of a variety of educational
issues: the Cinderella chapter focuses on Gardner's theory of multiple intelli-
gences; the Three Bears chapter focuses on creative problem-solving; the Frog Prince
chapter discusses thinking and problem solving with art; the Beauty and the Beast
chapter revolves around the creation of classroom museums, etc. Each chapter is
replete with a discussion of a particular theory, annotated bibliographies of addi-
tional resources, "Happily Ever Afters" (which contain additional activities for
students), and suggested readings and references. The black-and-white line draw-
ings break up the text; some charts and tables are included. Flack's text is blessedly
clear and as jargon-free as possible given his topic; both the bibliographies and the
activities are eminently usable, and the activities are easily adapted to a library or
other non-classroom setting. JMD
Gillespie, John and CorinneJ. Naden. Characters in YoungAdult Literature. Gale,
1997. 535p. ISBN 0-7876-0401. illus. with photographs
Jones, Raymond E. Characters in Children's Literature. Gale, 1997. 529p. ISBN
0-7876-0400-3. $60.00. illus. with photographs.
These are arranged rather differently than one might expect: alphabetical author
listings subdivide into titles and from there into plot and character summaries.
Included authors generally lean towards the classic or nearly so (the editors reluc-
tantly precluded folklore and legend, however), with lots of nineteenth-century
writers and only a few (such as Mary Hoffman) whose work debuted in this de-
cade. Double-columned pages allow for surprisingly substantial entries on each
work and the characters within, and they're personal and evaluative, not simply
descriptive. With the authorially divided arrangement, the index becomes of ma-
jor importance: each book contains an index for both volumes, avoiding the frus-
tration of index-swapping, and where names duplicate, title references or epithets
are provided; there's a puzzling stinginess in the cross-references, though, since few
characters are listed by last name at all but rather under honorifics or first names
(Miss Rumphius, for example, is under M but not R). These are really encyclope-
dias with a character emphasis, and they'll be useful as in-depth companions to the
more traditional reference works-with browsing a pleasurable extra. DS
Haven, Kendall. Stepping Stones to Science: True Tales andAwesome Activities.
Teacher Ideas Press, 1997. ISBN 1-56308-516-X. Paper ed. $22.00.
Fourteen readable, tellable stories are used to introduce concepts in the physical,
biological, and earth sciences in this lively compilation. Haven has written stories
about the lives of such notables as Robert Goddard, the Wright Brothers, Shirley
Jackson, Archimedes, and Eugenie Clark, using them as a springboard to discus-
sions of flight, gravity, electricity, evolution, genetics, etc. Each of the fourteen
chapters contains points to ponder, curriculum links, definitions of unfamiliar
words (with questions and information designed to make them memorable), the
story itself, and follow-up activities. Haven has a gift for concrete, specific lan-
guage that makes each concept clear, even to the unscientific, and he uses humor
whenever possible to make ideas even more accessible. Sample student worksheets
and an index are included. JMD
228 
* THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Adoption-fiction: Seidler
ADVENTURE STORIES: Napoli
African Americans: Haskins
African Americans-fiction: Belton;
Hyppolite; McKissack; Shange
African Americans-poetry: In
Daddy's Arms
African Americans-stories:
Chocolate
ALPHABET BOOKS: Krach;
Lindbergh
American Indians-fiction:
McKissack
Animals-fiction: Anderson, J.;
Hansen; Seidler
Animals-stories: Bauer, M.
Antarctica: Burleigh
Art and artists: Joyce; Rohmer
Aviation: Giblin
Basketball: Layden
BIBLE STORIES: Wildsmith
BIOGRAPHIES: Anderson, W.;
Bedard; Bial; Giblin; Gormley;
Jiang; Joyce; Kwan; Rohmer
Books and reading-fiction:
Wilson, N.
Books and reading-stories:
Zemach
Brothers and sisters-fiction:
Burgess; Hyppolite; Krisher
Brothers-fiction: Griffin; Stolz
Bullies-fiction: Shreve
Cancer-fiction: Tomlinson
Chickens-stories: Graham
Child abuse: Parker
Child abuse-fiction: Griffin
Children's literature: Anderson,
W.; Gormley; Joyce
China: Jiang; Krach
Christmas-fiction: Paterson
Civil War-fiction: Stolz
Commerce: Parker
CONCEPT BOOKS: Lindbergh;
Ormerod; Sierra
COUNTING BOOKS: Sierra
Cows: Older
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Alford; Holub
Death and dying: Colman
Depression, the-fiction: Thesman
Desegregation-fiction: Winslow
Dogs: Hall; King-Smith
Dogs-stories: Graham
Dolls-stories: Gammell; Oram
Ethics and values: Fox; Lester;
Shange; Stolz; Winslow
Explorers and exploring: Burleigh
Families-fiction: Belton
Families-stories: Graham; Perkins
FANTASY: Anderson, J.; Banks;
Burgess; Cooney; Hansen;
Seidler
Farms-fiction: Paterson
Farms-stories: Graham
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Krisher; Thesman
Fathers and sons-fiction: Griffin
Fathers-poetry: In Daddy's Arms
FOLKTALES AND FAIRY
TALES: Aylesworth; Berry;
Egielski; McDermott; Norman;
Oram; Souhami
Food and eating-fiction: Klass
FEBRUARY 1998 
* 229
Food and eating-stories:
Aylesworth; Egielski
Food and eating: Older
Friendship-fiction: Alford;
Anderson, J.; Belton; Bennett;
Freeman; Seabrooke; Shreve;
Willner-Pardo
Friendship-stories: Hobbie; Lasky
FUNNY STORIES: Clement
GAME BOOKS: Ormerod
Giants-fiction: Burgess
Grandfathers-stories: Chocolate;
Clement; Hest
Grandmothers-fiction: Williams;
Wilson, N.
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Belton; Holub; Jones; Kirk;
Lasky; McKissack; Napoli;
Seabrooke; Snyder; Thesman;
Winslow
History, U.S.: Bedard; Bial;
Haskins; Lester; Sigerman
Holidays: Fishman
Horses-fiction: Snyder
Ice skating: Kwan
India-folklore: Souhami
Inuit-folklore: Norman
Inventors and inventions: Erlbach
Italy-fiction: Napoli
Italy-stories: Fleming
Judaism: Lamstein
Labor unions-fiction: Jones
Language arts: Grover; Krach
LOVE STORIES: Cooney
Mathematics: Markle
Mexico-folklore: McDermott
Military history: Haskins
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Freeman; Hurwitz; Klass;
Krisher; Tomlinson
Mothers and daughters-stories:
Hest
Mothers and sons-fiction:
Willner-Pardo
Moving-fiction: Freeman;
Hyppolite
Music and musicians-stories:
Chocolate; Fleming;
McDermott
Orphans-fiction: Snyder
Pigs-stories: Hobbie
Plays: Hayes
POETRY: In Daddy's Arms; Seabrooke;
Speed
Presidents-stories: Kirk
Racism-fiction: Shange
Rain-poetry: Speed
Reading aloud: Belton; Berry; Hurwitz;
Joyce; Norman; Older
Reading, beginning: Paterson
Reading, easy: Bauer, M.; Willner-Pardo
Reading, reluctant: Kwan
Religious education: Fishman; Gormley;
Lamstein
RHYMING STORIES: Sierra
Riddles: Hall; Speed
Russia-folklore: Oram
School-fiction: Alford; Bennett; Hurwitz;
Klass; Shreve; Winslow
Science fair: Erlbach
SCIENCE FICTION: Burgess
Self-image-fiction: Bennett
SHORT STORIES: Glass
Sisters-fiction: Banks; Glass; Wilson, J.
Slavery-fiction: Stolz
Slavery: Lester
Social studies: Colman
Sports: Kwan; Layden
Storytelling: Aylesworth; Egielski;
Norman
Storytime: Aylesworth; Egielski; Fleming;
Fox; Hobbie; Speed
Teeth-stories: Clement
Thailand-fiction: Glass
Theater arts: Hayes
Time travel: Cooney
Twins-fiction: Wilson, J.
Voyages and travel: Giblin
Voyages and travel-fiction: Bauer, J.
Voyages and travel-stories: Hobbie
Weather-stories: Gammell
Women's studies: Sigerman
World War II-fiction: Napoli
Writers and writing-fiction: Williams
Writers and writing-stories: Bedard
Writers and writing: Gormley
L_ 
(-^-^4r _
"TALL is terrific ...
It's energized
and it's gutsy."
-Jonathan Kozol
O 
y clearly
defining
academic expecta-
tions and setting
specific professional
standards TALL is
leading the way in
the teaching and
the learning of
children's and young
adult literature.
"TALL is the Rolls Royce of the field."
- Joan F Smutny
National-Louis University
Uniquely organized, each issue brings you 16 inspiring,
practical, jargon-free articles guaranteed to enrich and
expand your professional practice.
For more information and a catalog
call 1-800-337-6525 or write to:
Essmont Publishing, P.O. Box 186, Brandon, Vermont 05733
And 
other 
)1 
:
Andoterways parents say (If love you"
"Gellman's warm, witty, and instructive primer for
children about the whys and wherefores of parenting
will help them understand their parents' motivations
for discipline.... His explanations are so lucid and
insightful that this wise and refreshing book will be
!Igreat for shared reading."-Schoo! Library journal
"Gellman's language is down to earth, and he speaks
directly to kids in a warm, often comical way that
doesn't make him sound like a grown-up trying to
teach a lesson."-ALA Booklist
C
Teaching 8
The Professional IdeaBook for Teachers
_Every 
issue of Teaching K-8
^..... 
^ 
provides informative articles on
ch~nflgO\ 
the cutting edge of education.
FF 
1
-
ll 
Az 
l 
t]-lf 
d4 
h fl
IUU 
sI 
dIU 
in IIsig ••II
columns and thoughtful
reviews written by some of
today's leading educators.
Teaching K-8 is filled with
hundreds of unique ideas and
activities that help teachers
present new challenges to
their students, learn new
concepts and develop new
skills.
Monthly columns include...
Children's Books
Teaching in the Library
The Parent Connection
Science, Math, Technology and more!
Plus, interviews with children's book authors and illustrators
Irn' 
+ mice 
n, 
r\n 
h-ic xriI 
i 
ohll
l.JLt 
Al 
JL. 
L 
It•. 
.J 
L VIl LIIL 
V(a 
ll lU
resource for your library -
subscribe to Teaching K-8 today.
TeachtngK8
x 54808, Boulder, CO 80322-4808
-8793
* Outside U.S. add $5.00 postage per subscription.
I 
I
*SCHOLASTIC
*"Tound to,,,ctlicr bv a common thread
()f \Nr\- NNlt I... 
with the kind 
()f l\Tr1caI
gracc for which Hamilton is so well
luiown.... Moser's animated Lind SoLdfill
watercolors are set ()ff like Jewels
against a generous baclýdrop. ... It's
another splendid achievement from
this cxccl)tlonall\- talented pair."
-Piddishcr., 1ýcvkl.v. imi-cd 1-tii,\%
-71-ic format, 
size, 
and 
attractivc 
llhistrýitl(ffls
make this title a good choice for lgrmll) shanng."
-sch .... 
I Lib)-my.1"111-ti'd
"clconsummatc coIlcctl()Il ...
millb,11*111(y \\itt\, prosc with
bi-catht.tkinty watercolm-S."
Al
A 
\c\ý 
YM-k 
hiblic
Best 
Book 
of 
tile 
)c*,11,
A Pub1j,4,,1:v HIrk/l.
Adm. 
Bcs[ BoA ofthe )c-m-
RIM, ()I
TRICKSTERS
MEANWHILE...
N.
"When Raymond's mom calls him, he ignores her, engrossed in his
comic book. [Then] he notices a boxed word in the middle of the
page: MEANWHILE... 
If comic books can use a word to change
scenes, why can't he? Frantic action and the clever theme make
this A GREAT READ-ALOUD."- 
SchoolLibrary Journal
"With ingenuity and the magic talisman MEANWHILE, Raymond
escapes from one dilemma into another, from the high seas to the
wild west to outer space. GREAT FUN, ACTION FILLED."
-The 
Horn Book
"HUMOR ABOUNDS [in Raymond's] adrenaline-packed
foray into fiction."-Publishers Weekly
"Little ones will appreciate Feiffer's FUNNY, FREEWHEELING,
ACTION-PACKED ARTWORK."-(Highlighted review) ALA Booklist
Ages 3 up. $14.95TR (0-06-205155-5); $14.89LB (0-06-205156-3)
UMICH' 
9aE 
P•l [PU*BOSl* 
lOilLIS 
I 
F•H•lll,.
ýL_ 
ýýM
^
-^
4411111111
A UC1Y IN WINI'M 
U-67U4(-434. ZZ.5U
V- Iking -Children's Favorites Since 1933
A member of Penguin Putnam Inc.
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.SA.
RETURN POSTAGE GUARAmNT
0008-9036(199802)51:6*;1-C
.;,f~
/·
;·'·"'·i·~
:n~·~
PERIODICALS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
/
,&C
