I LLINOI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
* "This lively recasting lends itself equally
well to reading alone or out loud."
-Kirkus Reviews, pointer
ZZWNcr 
NGO XxAr
A Yoruba Tale
retold by 
illustrated by
Phillis Gershator 
Theresa Smith
This classic African
tale recalls why
lovelorn Mosquito
began to add some
bite to her buzz.
"Children will laugh at the silliness of Mosquito wanting to
marry Ear, then Arm, then Leg, share her frustration at being
eericted, and
enjoy her
biting, sting-
ing, buzzing
revenge as the
bright illustra-
inna tran 
n+r+
them into the world of traditional fantasy." -Booklist
The "economical but engaging text has repetitive refrains and
opportunities for group participation galore."
-Bulletin of the Centerfor Children's Books
Ages 3-6 $15.95 TR 0-531-09523-1 $16.99 RLB 0-531-08873-1
Orchard
Books
A Grolier Company
11 I~ 
~ 
~ 
·111 
11111 Ilrsr~ I~ 
II
THE
BUvL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
January 1999
Vol. 52 No. 5
A LOOK INSIDE
159 THE BIG PICTURE
Ouch!: A Tale from Grimm ad. by Natalie Babbitt; illus. by Fred
Marcellino
161 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
163 * Burning Up by Caroline B. Cooney
167 * Iktomi and the Coyote: A Plains Indian Story ad. and illus. by Paul Goble
171 * Dance by Bill T. Jones and Susan Kuklin; illus. with photographs by
Susan Kuklin
176 * John Willy and Freddy McGee written and illus. by Holly Meade
178 * Within Reach: My Everest Story by Mark Pfetzer and Jack Galvin
180 * Big Head! by Pete Rowan; illus. by John Temperton
186 
BULLETIN BLUE RIBBONS 1998
188 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin ofthe Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor (JMD)
Deborah Stevenson, Associate Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elaine A. Bearden, Reviewer (EAB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
CENTER STAFF
Melanie Kimball
Kate McDowell
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $40.00; individuals, $35.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 51 E. Armory Ave., Champaign,
IL 61820-6601. E-mail: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu
Visit our homepage at http://edfu.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1999 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Fred Marcellino from Ouch!: A Talefrom Grimm ©1998. Used by permission
of Michael di Capua/HarperCollins Publishers.
JANUARY 1999 
* 
159
THE BIG PICTURE
Ouch!: A Tale from Grimm
ad. by Natalie Babbitt; illustrated by Fred Marcellino
Not to get too theological, but folklore tradition does excel in combining hell and
happy endings in a way that's uncommonly satisfying. And we know from The
Devil's Storybook (BCCB 12/7 4 )-may it live forever-that Natalie Babbitt has
more than a nodding acquaintance with the prince of darkness in his less princely
moments. Now we learn that Fred Marcellino is equally adept at depicting just
such moments with graphic aplomb in this adaptation of "The Devil with the
Three Golden Hairs." It's the story of a lowborn baby boy whom a fortune-teller
predicts will marry a princess. Needless to say, said princess' father (the king) is
displeased with this news and tries to kill the child, first by putting him in a box
and throwing it into the river, then by sending him (sixteen years later) to the
queen with a message ordering his execution, and finally by demanding that he
fetch three golden hairs from the devil's head. None of these schemes works. The
box floats, delivering the baby to a couple who names him Marco and happily
raises him to young manhood. Robbers swap the death note for another one
instructing the queen to marry the princess to Marco rather than disposing of him.
And thank goodness the Devil has a grandmother. She's probably Marco's only
hope for mercy, at least in the world of the Brothers Grimm.
With characteristic economy, Babbitt excises two incidents that are in the
Grimms' version of Marco's journey to hell, which focuses the story for a stronger
pace and ending. Details such as changing the baby's caul to a birthmark shaped
like a crown make the tale more accessible, and the scene where the devil's grand-
mother does her part to help our worthy hero by pulling three golden hairs from
her sleeping grandson's head ("Ouch!") is abbreviated to give full play to Marcellino's
witty paintings, which feature several double spreads reflecting sly domestic inter-
change between the two horned tricksters. Marcellino's own tricks of light and
shadow, expressive portraiture, full-bodied palette, and varied format make this
brilliantly designed book a visually piquant feast as well as a verbally fleet feat.
It is surely no accident that the typeface is as gray-well, taupe-as a
grandmother's hair before Clairol came along, because the real hero here is an
aging matronly demon in the service of the good guys. Of course, it helps that the
boy is handsome, tall, sweet, and confident, but without that old woman's inter-
vention, even a child of fortune would have fallen prey to the forces of evil ("He'd
snap your nose off," says Grandmother). In fact, the Grimms' own variant rein-
forces this notion by doubling the old women: the boy is first saved by another
old woman who allows him into the robbers' den and then protects him from their
initial inclination to kill him.
160 
* THE BULLETIN
What do these old women signify? According to Babbitt's and Marcellino's
playful interpretation, old age is good when it gives way to youth with willing
grace. Babbitt's king is not giving way-he's as captious and vain as the devil.
Babbitt's text tips us off on the first page, when the king reacts to the prophecy
about his daughter marrying a poor lad: "What! His princess, who'd just been
born herself? He would never let her marry nobody special." Marcellino clarifies
the identification of the king and the devil by depicting them with the same long
noses. The Devil's grandmother has an identical nose, which just goes to show
that it's not your position in life but what you do with it that counts.
Like the fortunate Marco, Babbitt and Marcellino have fun here. The visual
humor works subtly, as when the grandmother sits beside a cozy fireplace in the
halls of hell, or the gray donkey stands like a yak with sculpted horns, or the king
disguises himself in a monk's habit and struggles to smile instead of sneer at the
baby boy he's trying to kidnap. Babbitt's verbal humor, too, is evinced more
through rhythmic, often alliterative understatement than overt parries. "I'll take
you," says the ferryman to the young lad who wishes to cross the river to hell, "but
not till you tell me how I can stop this endless backing and forthing. It's boring
me to death." Only the Devil knows how, but his grandmother finds out and tells
Marco, who tells the ferryman: "To get rid of this job, just hand the pole to
someone else." Good advice-perhaps the key to the kingdom. When you get old
and bored with endless backing and forthing, just hand the pole to someone else.
The results will depend on the heart of the quester. The good-natured lad gets a
loving wife, the avaricious king gets stuck with ferrying folks to hell and back.
It's a cliche to say that a good children's book appeals to something different at
every age level, but so long as one does, let us give credit where it's due. Youngsters
will love the book because they get to inherit the kingdom and enjoy Babbitt's
rollicking retelling on the way; elders will recognize the underlying message about
the value of using their years to someone else's advantage. So catalogue this under
intergenerational values. Read it to everybody you can find. Show them the pic-
tures. Such artistry is a little bit of heaven on earth. (Imprint information appears
on p. 161.)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ALIKI 
Marianthe's Story One: Painted Words; Marianthe's Story Two: Spoken
Memories; written and illus. by Aliki. 
Greenwillow, 1998 
64p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-15662-2 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-15661-4 
$16.00 
R 
5-9 yrs
"Eyes speak many words, and a smile is a smile in any language," says Marianthe's
mother on Mari's first day of school in a new country where she does not even
know the language. Fortunately the teacher, Misapeechi (Mr. Petrie), is commit-
ted to and skilled at integrating "strangers" into the class; Mari's first presentation
involves paintings of her past that confirm her classmates' growing empathy and
JANUARY 1999 
* 161
her own self-confidence. The second story, which opens by flipping the book
upside down so that the back cover becomes the front, involves Marianthe's later
presentation detailing-in her newly learned English-her life in her old country.
Aliki has managed to project, in both the initial third-person and subsequent first-
person narratives, a vivid sense of struggling to adapt. Her fidelity to the child's
viewpoint makes a listener or reader feel the bewilderment of lacking basic com-
munication tools in a strange new place. A supportive family and educational
environment give the book a happy ending, but there is plenty of conflict in the art
to sustain tension. Mari's large, dark eyes express her fear, self-doubt, loss, and
gradual recovery, while intensely hued color pencil drawings evoke scenes from the
classroom, in which she's befriended but also tormented with the word "Dummy,"
and the rural village where she grew up after a war and famine had taken its toll on
her family and neighbors. Although there have been many novels on the immi-
grant experience, few picture books have captured it with such well-crafted and
telling simplicity. BH
AUCH, MARY JANE 
Frozen Summer. 
Holt, 1998 
202p
ISBN 0-8050-4923-1 
$15.95 
R Gr. 4-7
The Nye family's often harrowing journey to New York's frontier Genesee Coun-
try, described in Journey to Nowhere (BCCB 6/97), came to a successful end, and
with the help of far-flung neighbors, the Nyes procured shelter, a clearing, and the
promise of a more productive farm than the one they left in Connecticut. Mama
has never reconciled to the move, however, and when a new baby arrives and three
consecutive plantings are destroyed by the freakish summer blizzards of 1816, she
succumbs to depression. Papa vacillates between shame and denial, refusing to call
upon neighbors for help and leaving the responsibility for tending Mama, younger
brother Joshua, and newborn Lily to twelve-year-old Remembrance. Mem dodges
Papa's flaring temper while clumsily cooking, coaxing Mama out of her bouts of
profound withdrawal, teaching Joshua to undertake chores quite beyond his years,
and seizing any opportunity she can to attend the local school. Much to her credit,
Auch portrays Mem not as a heroine who shoulders her trials with noble cheerful-
ness but as an over-tasked adolescent whose genuine love for her family continu-
ally runs head-on into her own limitations and desires. This second title in a
projected trilogy leaves the Nyes a beaten family-Mama dead, and Papa resigned
to packing up his household and his guilt and returning to the "civilized" East.
Closing with its note of sadness, the novel joins Pam Conrad's Prairie Songs as an
unflinching look at the price of Western settlement. EB
BABBITT, NATALIE 
Ouch!: A Talefrom Grimm; illus. by Fred Marcellino. 
di
Capua/HarperCollins, 1998 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-205067-2 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-205066-4 
$14.95 
R* 
4-7 yrs
See this month's Big Picture, p. 159, for review.
BAER, EDITH 
Walk the Dark Streets. 
Foster/Farrar, 1998 
[288p]
ISBN 0-374-38229-8 
$18.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 7-10
That the new German Chancellor, Adolph Hitler, will change the course of her
life is not a matter of immediate concern for Eva Bentheim, suffering from acute
162 
* THE BULLETIN
tonsillitis. But with her recovery comes the realization that there will be no room
for Jews in the new order. As Eva grows to womanhood over the ensuing years, she
witnesses the steady diaspora of extended family and friends-aunts and uncles
emigrate to Bolivia, Palestine, and Holland; the gentile housekeeper chooses to
marry rather than be forced from the household by racial laws. Others are not as
fortunate-one grandfather dies on the day he is barred from the Rathskeller he
frequented all his life; the family doctor takes his own life; Zionist friend Thea is
arrested on the eve of her emigration to Palestine. As borders close and options
disappear, Eva's parents arrange to send her alone to America on the only route
out-the trans-Siberian passage to the Pacific. Maxine Rose Schur's Sacred Shad-
ows (BCCB 12/97) offers a parallel coming-of-age story with a similar conclusion,
but keeps the events closer to a teenager's experience of hostility at school and
among gentile acquaintances. Streets is a more ponderous tale, in which Baer's
many adult characters (admittedly, a rather intellectual circle of bookstore owners
and friends) discuss and debate their experiences at length, often resulting in more
oration than conversation. Readers who were tantalized by Baer's earlier account
of the Bentheims in A Frost in the Night (BCCB 1/81) may still want to follow
their fortunes. EB
CARBONE, ELISA 
Stealing Freedom. Knopf, 1998 
[272p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-99307-X 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-89307-5 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-9
Ann Maria Weems, daughter of a freeman and a slave, has grown up on the Prices'
farm in a close-knit slave community that has been mercifully resilient to the whims
and occasional abuses of their owners. But the era of peace has been deceptive, and
when Master Price sells away the mother of his mulatto son to appease his jealous
wife, the remaining slaves realize how tenuous their community's stability really is.
The Prices' financial troubles force them to sell Ann Maria's three brothers; Papa
seeks the help of Mr. Bigelow, a white abolitionist who aided relatives on their
flight to Canada, to help him raise funds to buy his family's freedom. Bigelow
negotiates a deal with the Prices for Mama's and sister Catharine's sale, but Ann
Maria must remain and the family's newfound freedom is bittersweet. Eventually
Ann Maria accepts Bigelow's offer to "steal" her freedom, and the thirteen-year-
old makes the long and risky journey along the Underground Railroad to join
relatives in Canada. Carbone's intensive research into the real Ann Maria Weems
yields enough reliable information to support a credible and far more complete
account of a runaway's experiences than is offered in most novels of slave escape.
Physical danger, although never negligible, pales in comparison to anxiety over
forced separation and the incomplete joy of a freedom that cannot be shared by the
whole family. The author's concluding notes clearly delineate gaps in Weems'
story and liberties taken in its fictionalization. EB
CHAMBERS, 
VERONICA 
Marisol and Magdalena: The Sound of Our
Sisterhood. Jump at the Sun/Hyperion, 1998 
14lp
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2385-8 
$15.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0437-8 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Best friends Marisol and Magdalena are planning to spend the summer between
eighth and ninth grades hanging out together and making plans for ruling Roberto
JANUARY 1999 
* 
163
Clemente Junior High come September, but Marisol's mother has other ideas.
She sends Marisol to Panama to live with her grandmother for a year in hopes that
Marisol will connect to her family and her cultural heritage. Marisol's reluctance
to go to Panama is tempered by a secret plan: she will search for her father, Lucho,
whom she has never met. Marisol's grandmother is a loving if no-nonsense kind
of woman, and she makes Marisol feel cherished and at home. Although her
search for her father is unsuccessful, Marisol's adjustment to life in Panama is
remarkably smooth, the bumps consisting of mild bouts of homesickness and the
fact that best friend Magdalena is a poor correspondent. Marisol makes friends
with Ana, neighbor and classmate; her Spanish tutor, Ruben, becomes her first
boyfriend; and her mother and Magdalena will come and visit for Christmas. This
is the adjustment-to-new-school plot set in an attractively described Panama, with
a smooth smattering of Spanish phrases throughout, but the novel does little else
to differentiate itself from other variations on this theme. The writing style is
choppy and the first-person narration is a bit too self-aware. Still, there are some
lovely kitchen moments when the adult women talk to each other about men and
food, and the relationships between family members, especially the mothers, daugh-
ters, and aunts, are warmly affectionate. Marisol is a likable character and some
readers will be happy to accompany her on her journey of self-discovery. JMD
COONEY, CAROLINE B. 
Burning Up. 
Delacorte, 1999 
[240p]
ISBN 0-385-32318-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
When Macey's community-service project in inner-city Hartford nearly leaves her
toast in an arson fire, her interest in a fire that happened in her own backyard is
rekindled. She encounters perplexing resistance when she tries to uncover more
information about the conflagration that destroyed a neighbor's barn and the apart-
ment above it, occupied by a local science teacher. The shooting death of one of
her fellow survivors of the Hartford fire compels Macey's investigations further
when she discovers that the science teacher was black and that the racially moti-
vated barn fire, hushed up by her affluent community, was assented to and per-
haps even committed by her own grandparents. 
This isn't quite
Gentlehands-Cooney makes the moral choices easier and offers some reassuringly
tidy resolutions to some of the plot questions (such as the identity of the barn
arsonist). On the other hand, she by no means lets everybody off the hook, and
there's an appropriate hollowness to the somewhat optimistic ending. The pictur-
esque town's desire to avoid the unpleasant facts about its own past is convincingly
depicted, and Macey's pursuit of the truth is compellingly chronicled (and a love
interest adds some accessibility as well). The enterprise may be somewhat pro-
grammatic, but Macey's moral crusade to expose the hypocrisy of her elders will
satisfy many cynical young readers. DS
CREWS, NINA 
You Are Here; written and illus. by Nina Crews. 
Greenwillow,
1998 
34p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-15754-8 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-15753-X 
$16.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Bored and cooped up on a rainy day, Mariah and Joy decide to take a trip using a
magic map. First they run into a giant who requires a treasure from the girls if
they're to get home; this leads them to the fierce monster who guards the treasures,
164 
* THE BULLETIN
and whose defenses they must get around if they're to retrieve an offering for the
giant. The story here is slight and random, with the treasure necessity dispensed
with airily towards the end and a variant of the "and then I woke up" ending
concluding things. The book is redeemed by Crews' computer-assisted photocollage
illustrations: though they're unsubtly combined, failing to take full advantage of
the technology, they give the fantasy plot interest by depicting it in realistic terms.
The girls' faceoffwith the fierce monster-a languid gray cat-will provide your
audience with an entertaining paradigm shift, and young viewers will enjoy matching
aspects of the world M&J journey into with objects scattered around the dining
room they're playing in. It might even be worth dispensing with the tacked-on
story here and letting the audience tell their own narrative to accompany the In-
credible Shrinking Kids' adventure. DS
CURRIE, PHILIP J. 
The Newest and Coolest Dinosaurs; by Philip J. Currie and
Colleayn O. Mastin; illus. by Jan Sovak. 
Orca, 1998 
32p
ISBN 1-895910-41-2 
$18.95 
M 
Gr. 2-5
Fifteen dinos, formally described within the last decade, hit the spotlight in this
attractively formatted volume. A sleek layout, with text and a "Dino Data" box to
the left of the spread and a black-bordered painting to the right, draws browsers
and researchers smoothly through pages. Sovak has the bloodlust of the dinosaur
set accurately gauged, and he presents an alluring gallery of munching carnivores
and hapless herbivore prey, brushed with considerable delicacy. The visual appeal,
however, does not compensate for the sloppy execution and precious prose of the
text. Entries conform to no discernible organization, and terms such as sauropod,
theropod, Cretaceous, ceratopsians, and paleontologist are tardily defined, when
defined at all. Illustration captions do not always match the text (the turtle Trionyx
is described as a carnivore in the text, but is an implied herbivore in the caption),
and indexing is inaccurate. Currie and Mastin squander limited space with cloy-
ing commentary: "Maybe [Achelousaurus] used its lost horn as a stick to roast
marshmallows on, and forgot to take it back home when it was done." If your
dinosaur collection has not evolved past Stegosaurus and T-Rex, this could pro-
vide a needed update, but it will probably be doomed to extinction when a more
substantive title comes along. EB
DENTON, KADY MACDONALD, comp. 
A Child's Treasury ofNursery Rhymes; comp.
and illus. by Kady MacDonald Denton. 
Kingfisher, 1998 
91p
ISBN 0-7534-5109-3 
$17.95 
R* 2-8 yrs
Denton hosts a joyous reunion of old timers from Mother Goose's clan, a couple
of foreign cousins, and some unexpected visitors. Four sections feature beloved
ditties honoring babies, toddlers, school newbies, and anyone who loves fun and
games; each is chock full of pictures, rhymes, and songs (sans notation), with some
riddles, tongue twisters, and limericks tossed in for good measure. Familiars like
Georgie Porgie, Little Boy Blue, and the Duke of York rub shoulders with Little
Miss Tuckett (Muffett's peaches-and-cream-eating alter ego) and "two little mice"
from Spain who "went tripping down the street,/ Pum catta-pum chin chin." Lyrics
to "Baby Face" snuggle comfortably along side of the slightly melancholy Nan-
tucket lullaby and a rowdy rendition of "She'll Be Coming Round the Mountain"
(asides for shouting graciously supplied). There's no pictorial iconoclasm here-
the line and watercolor pictures offer literal interpretations of their subjects-but
JANUARY 1999 
* 
165
a more expressive, fun-inducing cast of characters (which seem to pay particular
homage to Maurice Sendak's little folk) would be hard to spot. Denton turns the
travails of the "three little kittens" into a comical melodrama, leaves "baa, baa,
black sheep" standing naked and decidedly startled beside a pair of shears, and
transforms "Jack and Jill" into impish kittens scaling the sofa to get at the flower
vase. Plenty of white space handily absorbs this abundance of energy and ensures
that each entry's illustration can be appreciated (and remembered) on its own
merits. This has "classic" written all over it; extra copies are the order of the day.
An index of titles and first lines is included. EB
DESIMINI, LISA 
Sun &r Moon: A Giant Love Story; written and illus. by Lisa
Desimini. 
Blue Sky/Scholastic, 1999 
[40p]
ISBN 0-590-18720-1 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 4-6
The opening spread shows a giantess in a blue dress speckled with shimmering
stars walking barefoot through cultivated green fields in the moonlight. The ac-
companying text reads, "There was once a girl who was so tall her feet were on the
ground and her head was in the heavens. The girl had mooniness, which means
she was lonely and followed the moon." On the other side of the world is a giant
young man; he follows the sun, and he too is lonely: "They were giants on the
same planet, but they had never met." The inevitable does happen-sun and
moon come together in an eclipse, and giant boy and giant girl come together as
well. "They stopped walking in circles. Instead they talked while the sun and
moon moved across the sky. They were giants on the same planet . .
and they
belonged together." Desimini's story is painfully obvious, but her execution of the
artwork has, albeit inconsistently, her touch of mad elegance. Between the open-
ing blue endpapers peppered with frothy white clouds to the closing black endpa-
pers peppered with stars, Desimini fills the spreads with glowing visuals featuring
the two giants and their walks around an earth floating in infinite yet cozy space.
The language is reminiscent of Susan Polis Schutz, but the art, though also obvi-
ous, has a certain retro-charm. This nostalgic fable will mostly appeal to those
romantic adults who secretly imagine themselves giants seeking their own. JMD
DUGGLEBY, JOHN 
Story Painter: The Life of acob Lawrence. Chronicle,
1998 
55p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8118-2082-3 
$16.95 
R Gr. 4-8
Lawrence is one of the most significant American painters of the century, and
Duggleby traces his life from his family's move north in the Great Migration to his
formative years in Harlem and his professional life as a struggling and then suc-
cessful artist. The book is particularly good at capably conveying the complicated
relationship of Lawrence's art and his African-American culture, including his de-
sire to be an artist whose merit was recognized not just within racial lines and the
resentment of some African Americans at Lawrence's absence of political action.
The writing tilts toward old-fashioned fictionalization (the absence of notes com-
pounds the flaw) and some of the textual images are more awkward than poetic
("His mother's words burned Jake like the sizzling summer pavement of Harlem's
sidewalks"). There's an inviting look to the book, however, with its pages in a
collection of colors, its incorporated design motifs, and its scrapbooky setting of
photographs, that lends it a casual accessibility. The ample helping of Lawrence
166 
* 
THE BULLETIN
paintings vividly reproduced takes up the text's slack in conveying the artistry of
Lawrence's work. Readers who found Lawrence's The Great Migration (BCCB
11/97) or Walter Dean Myers' Toussaint L'Ouverture (BCCB 11/93) memorable
will find this a useful way to become more acquainted with a great American artist.
A brief bibliography and notes on the paintings reproduced are included; there is
no index. DS
FENNER, CAROL 
The King ofDragons. McElderry, 1998 [22 4 p]
ISBN 0-689-82217-0 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Ian is surviving on his own in the huge empty Hall ofJustice-it has bathrooms, it
is heated, and there are a lot of ways in and out. He has been homeless for three
years, moving from place to place with his Vietnam-veteran father. His father fails
to return after a nightly forage, and Ian is forced to make his own way. When a
local museum takes over the court building and sets up an international kite ex-
hibit, lan is fascinated; initially observing from a safe distance, he finally bluffs his
way into helping out with the tours as a docent. Ian forgets paternal warnings
about not leaving traces, and he interacts and forms relationships with people out-
side the isolated dyad he lived in with his disturbed parent. His father, who has
suffered a breakdown and been admitted to a veteran's hospital, recovers enough
to retrieve his abandoned son. Ian has decidedly mixed feelings about his rescue,
and although his immediate needs are met (Ian will live with his aunt and go to
school while Dad recuperates), Fenner's conclusion is not all neat and tidy about
his future. The pace is quick and the plot tightly controlled as Fenner shows Ian
coping with his dilemma. The setting is masterfully evoked, the unused, echoing
building transformed by the presence of the exhibit featuring the magnificent dragon
kite of the title. There's a little confusion about the post-Vietnam chronology, but
Ian is a complex, thoughtful character, and his survival in the empty courthouse
and the crowded streets will draw the adventure crowd as well as more introspec-
tive readers. JMD
FLAKE, SHARON G. 
The Skin I'm In. Jump at the Sun/Hyperion, 1998 
171p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0444-0 
$14.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-7868-2392-5 
$15.49 
Ad Gr. 6-9
Maleeka Madison is coping with the recent death of her beloved father, a grief-
stricken mother whose only solace is sewing (badly), and a school bully named
Charlese who gives Maleeka clothes, protection, and abuse. Enter Miss Saunders,
a take-no-prisoners teacher with high standards who sees qualities in Maleeka that
the thirteen-year-old doesn't see in herself. When Charlese and her flunkies de-
cide to teach Saunders a lesson by destroying her classroom, Maleeka goes along
despite her better judgment, and Maleeka is the one caught when the plan goes
wrong. Flake has a strong sense of the group dynamics among junior-high stu-
dents-the posturing and attitudes of Maleeka's classmates shape their world, and
teachers and parents have little to do with the teenagers' daily reality. The plot is
disjointed, however, with incidents standing in singular relief rather than flowing
naturally from one to the next. Characterization is two-dimensional, with each
player seeming to stand for a type rather than an individual. The exception is the
smart, talented Maleeka, who is caught in her own poor self-concept. Readers
looking for their own identities may find Maleeka's struggle and eventual triumph
a heartening mirror to their own quest for self. JMD
JANUARY 1999 
* 
167
FONTEYN, 
MARGOT, ad. 
Coppelia; illus. by Steve Johnson and Lou
Fancher. 
Gulliver/Harcourt, 1998 
40p
ISBN 0-15-200428-9 
$17.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
The late ballerina Fonteyn tells the story depicted in the ballet Coppelia, about
lovers Swanilda and Franz, dollmaker Dr. Coppelius, and the life-size doll Coppelia.
Franz' interest in CoppClia, whom he takes to be Dr. Coppilius' daughter, pro-
vokes a breach with Swanilda; Swanilda's investigation of Coppelia reveals the
truth and inspires her to play a prank wherein she impersonates Coppelia come to
life. The story is prettily told, though some of the dance-driven elements don't
make a great deal of sense in the print version. Johnson and Fancher's art uses
thick oils and fabric swatches for rich texture, with browns and ochres as the domi-
nant colors; the subdued palette, motionless solidity, and sculpted, gazeless faces
make the atmospheric ballet somber and stiff and add to the nearly dialogueless
text's tendency to distance the reader. Since the book does effectively relate a story
that wouldn't necessarily be clear to youngsters just learning the language of dance,
this would be useful as an introduction or companion to a direct experience with
the ballet or as a souvenir of the experience for budding balletomanes. DS
FREEMAN, MARTHA 
The Polyester Grandpa. Holiday House, 1998 
145p
ISBN 0-8234-1398-5 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Molly is stunned when her grandmother's new husband proves to be, as Molly's
mother moans, "a vulgarian," a cheerful discount-clothes merchant with a taste for
loud Hawaiian shirts and junk food. Molly's little brother adores Jimmy Barkenfalt,
whom he calls "Grandpa," but Molly mirrors her mother's resentment, trying to
Tigure out ways to get this embarrassing presence out of her family's life. Most of
the story is hoary stock sitcom plot, down to the silly contrivance of Molly's belief,
based on a bit of overheard phone conversation, that Mr. Barkenfalt is a drug
runner, and the ending of happy rapprochement is visible from miles away. Free-
man adds some edge with her emotional complications, however, making it clear
that Molly's ultimately not a very happy kid, that her demanding mother runs
roughshod over the family, and that her grandmother probably has good reason
for appreciating her new love's cheerful equanimity. There's not much sustenance
here, but it would make an easy, somewhat cheesy quick reading snack for those in
search of undemanding fare. DS
GOBLE, PAUL, ad. 
Iktomi and the Coyote: A Plains Indian Story; ad. and illus. by
Paul Goble. 
Orchard, 1998 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-33108-3 
$16.95
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-30108-7 
$16.95 
R 5-8 yrs
Like Paul Goble's other five books in the series, this projects Iktomi as both tradi-
tional and contemporary, a trickster who alternates between pride and greed, a
character who generally falls victim to his own cunning schemes. Here, for in-
stance, he persuades a group of prairie dogs to let him roast them but loses the
meat to Coyote in a gamble on who can win a race. Coyote cheats, so there goes
Iktomi, dampened by thunderous rain: "Let me THINK... WHAT was I going
to do? Yes! Of course!! I'm HUNGRY!!! I want a double cheeseburger, jumbo
fries, humongous pop." As usual, Goble lists the sources from which he adapted
the tale. Moreover, he recounts the occasion when he first heard an Iktomi story
nearly forty years ago from Edgar Red Cloud of the Lakota and gives some back-
168 
* THE BULLETIN
ground on the ambiguous role tricksters play in many American Indian cultures.
Equally importantly, Goble designs an aspect of traditional context-audience
participation-into the varied typefaces. There are in fact four voices in the text:
the narrator's, in large black typeface; the call for response, in large gray italics;
Iktomi's monologue, in large black typeface with quotation marks around it; and
Iktomi's asides in small black typeface. These asides often reveal the true nature of
Iktomi, especially his foolishness, as much as does the action of the story. Goble
has worked to incorporate a new context for "Iktomi Power" while retaining a
traditional tone that combines derision with affection and respect. Stencil-like fig-
ures that satirize stereotypes are filled in with red, blue, and black (Iktomi), brown
(prairie dogs), and gray (Coyote) against lots of white space. The bony roasted
prairie dogs are gross, shady Coyote is not to be believed for a minute, and Iktomi
is just as absurd as the rest of us, a fact children will recognize immediately. BH
HANSEN, JOYCE 
Women of Hope: 
African Americans Who Made a
Difference. Scholastic, 1998 
31p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-590-93973-4 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-9
A dozen portraits of notable African-Americans include both the long-famous (Ida
B. Wells-Barnett) and the more recently significant (Mae C. Jemison), those no-
table for activism (Marian Wright Edelman) and for art (Toni Morrison). Each
profile uses a double spread, one side a black-and-white photograph and the other
an overview of the subject's life and contributions. The book comes out of an
exhibit of posters of the photographs, and the images, topped by a quote and
captioned with vital statistics, are memorable and arresting. The text doesn't match
the art for resonance; the reliance on quotes adds flavor, but the overviews don't
always provide them with context (there's unfortunately no explanation of what
Fannie Lou Hamer's Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party actually did) and the
phraseology tips occasionally into the sentimental. A listing of more Women of
Hope and a brief bibliography are appended. DS
HARNESS, CHERYL 
Mark Twain and the Queens of the Mississippi; written and
illus. by Cheryl Harness. 
Simon, 1998 
40p
ISBN 0-689-81542-5 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Samuel Clemens took his more famous name from the cry of the riverboat men,
and it's fair to say that the Mississippi River and her famous form of transportation
were an important influence on his life. Harness starts by discussing the history of
the river and its transport, segueing into a description of young Sam's interest in
the steamboats and his pilot days. The book then shifts back and forth between
discussion of Clemens' post-Mississippi life and career and descriptions of steam-
boat events and the changes in river usage. The combination is only sometimes
effective-the result often seems like two different books under one cover-and
the river tidbits aren't always cohesively presented (it's not clear why we hear occa-
sionally about Teddy Roosevelt's great-great uncle and aunt, for instance). The
compositions have more vigor than fluidity or organization, which becomes a par-
ticular problem with some of the maps. On the other hand, there are some
characterful bits of Twainiana and some tasty steamboat details, including a num-
bered diagram and stories of steamboat races and disasters. Steamboats are cur-
rently rather underserved in children's books, and this might be an entertaining
introductory jaunt on one of the more romantic aspects of transport history. A
brief bibliography is included. DS
JANUARY 1999 
* 
169
HOBBS, WILL 
The Maze. 
Morrow, 1998 
198p
ISBN 0-688-15092-6 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 6-10
Fourteen-year-old Rick Walker has been dealt a tough hand by life; with no one
on his side and an ambush waiting around the corner to punish him for whistle-
blowing on corruption in his youth detention center, he escapes. He eventually
finds himself in the Utah canyons, where Lon Peregrino, lone biologist, is
shepherding domestic-born condors back into the wild. Lon and Rick begin to
form an alliance based on some common experiences and interests, and it's that
alliance that saves them when local troublemakers prove to be a serious danger.
Hobbs has crowded his story to the point of melodrama, and the misunderstood
youth, the overemphasis on flying symbolism (complete with references to the
Daedalus myth), and the stereotypical bad guys who are really anti-government
militia bog things down in cliche. The rugged outdoor scenery, the young man
getting a second chance, and the hardy adventuring may nonetheless appeal to
some readers, and Rick's eventual triumph will be no less satisfying for being pre-
dictable. DS
HOLEMAN, LINDA 
Mercy's Birds. Tundra, 1998 
198p
ISBN 0-88776-463-0 
$5.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Mercy is increasingly the mainstay in her dysfunctional household: her unem-
ployed mother has sunk into a depression that blinds her to her daughter's needs,
and her dreamer of an aunt takes refuge in alcohol, missing her distant boyfriend,
when she's not earning a little money by telling cheap fortunes. That distant
boyfriend, however, has made sexual overtures to Mercy, and in her terror that his
return will mean continued pursuit, she has made her appearance deliberately
offputting and cut herself off from the world while trying to keep her family going
as best as she can. This story isn't a new one and Holeman piles on the dysfunc-
tion past the brink of overkill, but her restrained and perceptive writing keeps
Mercy's narration compelling. The details of Mercy's uneasy outsiderhood at school,
tentatively breached by an eager classmate, and her growing security in her job
help flesh out the story, and the core of determination that keeps her going makes
her an admirable protagonist. Readers who relish stories of kids in charge where
adults have failed may appreciate Mercy's story. DS
HOLLYER, BELINDA, comp. 
Dreamtime: A Book of Lullabies; illus. by Robin Bell
Corfield. 
Viking, 1999 
42p
ISBN 0-670-88363-8 
$16.99 
R* 2-6 yrs
Eleanor Farjeon, Eve Merriam, Rudyard Kipling, and good old Anonymous are a
few of the authors featured in this oversized British import. Some texts are songs
("I See the Moon"), some are poems (Walter de la Mare's "Dream-song"), some
are prayers ("God Bless This House From Thatch to Floor"), and at least one is a
book-text effectively compressed (Molly Bang's "Ten, Nine, Eight"). Spreads vary
from a single verse to three or four poems, sometimes decorated with spot art and
sometimes set against full-page bleeds. Corfield's illustrations manage sweetness
without sweetsiness (reminiscent in that way of his countrywoman Shirley Hughes,
though his cast lacks the racial diversity of hers), with fluid watercolors feathered
with delicate brushstrokes and textured with dapples and overlays in other media,
making the pictured worlds as rich and tender as twilight. Literarily speaking,
170 
* THE BULLETIN
lullabies often seem to exist in the shade of nursery rhymes; this is an alluring
collection that transforms that shade into a most satisfying bedtime sunset. DS
HOPPING, LORRAINE JEAN 
Wild Weather: 
Blizzards!; illus. by Jody
Wheeler. 
Cartwheel/Scholastic, 1998 
47p 
(Hello Reader! Science)
Paper ed. ISBN 0-590-39730-3 
$3.99 
R Gr. 2-4
A mixture of history and science, this book introduces the dramatic weather phe-
nomenon of the blizzard in five easy-reading chapters. Starting with an overview
and some anecdotes from the terrible blizzards of 1888 (the same storm featured in
Wetterer's compelling Snow Walker, BCCB 12/96, for the same age range), the
narrative then turns to the physical hazards of blizzards, the forces behind their
formation, and blizzard prediction. The style runs a bit towards the choppy and
exclamatory, but the general science is balanced well with specific and intriguing
tidbits (two schoolteachers who saved their classes from the blizzard of '88, a moun-
tain climber who, having lost his feet to frostbite, returned to climbing with the aid
of special prostheses). Wheeler's illustrations use the snow to good effect, blowing
and smearing drifts across the gentle lines of the watercolor figures; diagrams, maps,
and explanatory illustrations have a cozy touch that doesn't interfere with their
informational capability. Like Nirgiotis' Volcano (BCCB 7/96), this is an early
reader that offers a satisfying flurry of factual drama. DS
HOUSTON, GLORIA 
Bright Freedom's Song: A Story of the Underground
Railroad. Silver Whistle/Harcourt, 1998 
145p
ISBN 0-15-201812-3 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
From six years old, Bright Cameron has known how to keep tight-lipped concern-
ing the dark faces that mysteriously appear and disappear around her father's smithy,
and her parents have gently but insistently nurtured in her an obligation to assist
runaway slaves. By age fifteen, when the Civil War has escalated the number of
runaways seeking passage to the next safe house along the mountain ridge, Bright
is fully involved in the real family business of running an Underground Railroad
station; as the novel opens and closes, she demonstrates the courage and savvy
needed to drive a wagon of hidden escapees right under the noses of Confederate
troopers. Houston makes a credible (but admittedly unproved) case for assuming
that ex-indentured laborers, like Mr. Cameron, were natural supporters of the safe-
house system, and she weaves throughout her tale some thought-provoking com-
parisons between indentured servitude and slavery. However, the close
father-daughter relationship that drives the story is often treacly ("'Bright has to be
the only name by which you could be called, my child. And bright in my heart ye
shall ever be.' . . . 'And you shall be bright in my heart as well, Papa'"), and a
surprise visit by Levi Coffin is contrived and awkwardly presented. Still, the legacy
of a harsh and unjust indenture system is one worth exploring, and readers will
find much to admire in the cunning, compassionate Camerons. EB
JENKINS, STEVE 
Hottest Coldest Highest Deepest; written and illus. by Steve
Jenkins. 
Houghton, 1998 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-89999-0 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Connecting with kids' inherent interest in comparison, Jenkins employs the same
format he used in Biggest, Strongest, Fastest (BCCB 6/95) to highlight more record-
JANUARY 1999 
* 
171
breakers in the natural world. Beginning with the Nile River, "the longest river in
the world," he then moves onto Russia's Lake Baikal ("the oldest and deepest
lake"), and Mount Rainier ("the snowiest place on earth") as he explores natural
phenomena. The book communicates information on each topic through text,
graphs, and maps superimposed on Jenkins' characteristic paper collages. Larger
text provides a basic narrative, while smaller text places the record-breaker in con-
text, often narrating the accompanying pictorial graph or map. Maps locate the
phenomenon on a globe and zoom in for a more detailed look. The well-con-
structed collages capture the imagination, but the attempt to provide both specific
and contextual information in a textual and graphic format is sometimes visually
cluttered and confusing, as when the same type of graph represents both height
and time or when both paragraphs on the Mauna Kea spread begin with "Mount
Everest." Nonetheless, this is filled with dramatic tidbits, and it would serve as a
good point of departure for kids to discuss and create their own superlatives and
collage art. EAB
JOHNSON, ANGELA 
The Other Side: Shorter Poems. 
Orchard, 1998 
4 4 p 
illus.
with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-33114-8 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-30114-1 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
The "Shorter Poems" of the title isn't a reference to length, though these aren't
long verses, but to the town of Shorter, Alabama, where Johnson spent most of her
childhood. Those familiar with her novels will hear echoes of her characters in the
portraits of people in the small Southern town. The multihued gallery includes
Nickie, Johnson's mother's revolutionary friend, whom a young Johnson nearly
turned into the FBI in retaliation for being deprived of her "sexist" dolls; Johnson's
friend Donna Anderson, who kept a "death chest" stuffed with memorabilia to
remember her by in the event of her sudden demise; Miss Annie Morgan, a woman
viewed with wariness by the town; and Johnson's own grandmother, clearly a for-
mative influence in her life. The poems are often more prosy than lyrical, and they
sometimes tail off rather limply, but the picture of small-town childhood, expand-
ing to include larger issues of racism and the scars of war, is cumulatively effective.
This would make an interesting pairing with Cynthia Rylant's Soda Jerk (BCCB
3/90) or with Brenda Seabrooke's Judy Scuppernong (10/90), which similarly in-
vestigate small-town life in verse. Arrays of photographs, which possess both the
authenticity and blurry dimness common to home snapshots, open and close the
collection. DS
JONES, BILL T. Dance; written by Bill T. Jones and Susan Kuklin; illus. with
photographs by Susan Kuklin. 
Hyperion, 1998 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2307-0 
$15.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0362-2 
$14.95 
R 
4-6 yrs
This celebration of dance combines Kuklin's luminous photography with Jones'
spare but lyrical first-person narrative to create a sense of three-dimensional move-
ment arrested in space. It's all done by contrast: Jones' fine-tuned brown body in
black pants makes fantastic shapes outlined against a stark white background.
"When I am dancing, I can make lines, and I can make curves"-and so he does,
with a dramatic demonstration that sweeps us across two double spreads of a long-
limbed arm and a sequence of unfolding full-body motion from semi-crouch to
half circle. "When I am dancing, I can fly high and soar through the air. But I've
172 
* THE BULLETIN
got to come down and dance on the ground": here we're treated to a phenomenal
leap in three stages on one double spread, and a full-stop modified break-dance
position on the next. In addition to evocative description, there's a bit of artistic
philosophy thrown in, as well. The spread, "I am everywhere, and I am hardly
there," shows him dancing onto the verso and halfway off the recto in a simulated
fade-out. Unlike many dance books, this one extends an invitation to both boys
and girls. Who could resist a riveting performance by one of the best dancers in
the world? Besides, he and Kuklin make it look like not only an extraordinary feat
but also a lot of fun. BH
JOSEPH, LYNN 
Jump Up Time: A Trinidad Carnival Story; illus. by Linda
Saport. 
Clarion, 1998 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-65012-7 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-7 yrs
Mama and Daddy have been working on big sister Christine's carnival costume
for fully six months-researching hummingbirds, ordering rhinestones and beads,
dyeing feathers, fitting the intricate costume to perfection-and envious Lily has
had quite enough. Too young to participate in the jump up festivities, Lily still
looks forward to the big day "because that go be de end of that old Carnival cos-
tume." When Carnival finally arrives and Christine, brilliantly attired as a hum-
mingbird, gets cold feet at the stage, Lily overcomes her jealousy and sulkiness in
order to help her sister overcome her jitters. Joseph elaborates neither on the
Carnival nor the jump up, and listeners may puzzle over the cause for all this
hoopla, but beneath the feathers and the finery is a familiar tale of sibling rivalry
(and sartorial oneupmanship) that sprints lightly across cultural borders. As Saport's
bronze, Gauguin-esque figures move through swirls of tropical color, it's abun-
dantly clear that Lily has reason to covet the spotlight alongside her sister, and
runt-of-the-litter listeners will probably sense that the vivid green of Christine's
hummingbird feathers is the very shade for Lily's jealousy. EB
KAPLAN, WILLIAM 
One More Border: The True Story of One Family's Escape from
War- Tor Europe; written by William Kaplan with Shelley Tanaka; illus. by Stephen
Taylor. 
Douglas & McIntyre/Groundwood, 1998 
60p
ISBN 0-88899-332-3 
$18.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
The Kaplans are among the more fortunate Jewish families in the port city of
Memel, Lithuania; as the Nazis approach, they have the resources to move further
inland to Kaunas, and when the Russians occupy the country, the Kaplans have
relatives in the United States to sponsor their immigration. Even with these bless-
ings, however, the trans-Siberian passage that leads to safety is blocked by a bu-
reaucratic tangle of visa applications, complicated by the different nationalities of
Mr. and Mrs. Kaplan. The author, son of the Igor Kaplan featured in this ac-
count, marks the milestones of their arduous progress: the Japanese consulate in
Kaunas, where Chiume Sugihara hurriedly signs the visa for the father and his
children; the train ride to Moscow, where valuables are confiscated, never to be
seen again; the stop at Irkutsk, where Igor's friend is forcibly removed with his
family from the train; the Japanese consulate in Vladivostok, where Mother (a
Russian national), has to bribe an official with her wedding ring for her visa. The
Kaplans' story is illustrated with stiff and lumpish pastels, curiously devoid of ten-
sion. Period photos and boxed captions, coyly set scrapbook-style throughout the
text and unnecessarily tinted in various hues, supply much-needed historical con-
JANUARY 1999 
* 
173
text, but are nonetheless visually disruptive; the juxtaposition of National Geo-
graphic-style photos of indigenous fauna against the backdrop of the escape is of-
ten tonally jarring as well. For a more poignant look at the Holocaust refugees and
heroes along the same passage, consider Sugihara's story in Mochizuki's Passage to
Freedom (BCCB 9/97). A glossary is provided but there are no source notes; maps
appear on the endpapers. EB
KIMMEL, ERIC A. 
When Mindy Saved Hanukkah; illus. by Barbara
McClintock. 
Scholastic, 1998 
[32p]
ISBN 0-590-37136-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-8 yrs
The Kleins, a diminutive turn-of-the-century family who reside in a wall of New
York's Eldridge Street Synagogue, are preparing to celebrate Hanukkah. Papa
goes in search of a candle to melt and remold for their tiny menorah, and returns
looking like he "went through a potato grater." "They got a cat!" he cries. "A
fierce Antiochus of a cat!" As Bubbe and Zayde argue over the relative ferocity of
Old Country cats, Mindy volunteers to brave the fearsome mouser. Cleverly out-
fitted with climbing gear (string on a paperclip), she scales the synagogue steps and
shimmies up a cord to the ark; no sooner does she secure a candle and slide back
down the cord than the cat attacks. Zayde, helmeted with a thimble and armed
with pickled herring on a toothpick, springs to Mindy's rescue, distracting the cat
with that irresistible fish. Family and neighbors who join the Kleins for the holi-
day all hail Mindy the savior of the day: "As the Maccabees of old proved to King
Antiochus, you don't have to be big to be mighty." McClintock's watercolor and
ink pictures, which reprise the tinted lithograph look of her art in Aylesworth's
The GingerbreadMan (BCCB 2/98), encompass a fantasy world in which the Bor-
rowers would feel very much at home, with funnels and stamps and matchboxes
and pocketwatches furnishing a cozy abode. Kimmel concludes with a glossary
that deciphers the Kleins' Yiddish banter and illuminates many of the synagogue's
appointments. Consider this title as a light-hearted lead-in to Rael's tour of the
famed synagogue, When Zaydeh Danced on Eldridge Street (BCCB 10/97). EB
LEVITIN, SONIA 
The Singing Mountain. Simon, 1998 
261p
ISBN 0-689-80809-7 
$17.00 
Ad Gr. 9-12
In Israel on a school trip, Mitch surprises even himself with his decision to remain
in the country to study Judaism. His parents think he is being brainwashed into
an orthodox Jewish cult; all his cousin Carlie knows is that she misses him. Mitch
is immersed in study, intent on becoming a devout Jew. He becomes discreetly
enamored of an orthodox Jewish girl, makes friends, and rediscovers the joy of
artistic creation. When Carlie and her aunt Vivian, Mitch's mother, go to Israel to
convince him to return home, they find him greatly changed from the Mitch they
remember. An explosion on a bus provides a violent climax, turns Mitch and
Carlie into heroes, and shows them what they mean to each other. This is a delib-
erate, somewhat ponderous exploration of faith and self-discovery, but Levitin
limns Mitch's transformation from confused American consumer to Jewish truth
seeker with a reasonably light hand. Carlie is less clearly delineated, her personality
nebulous and indecisive. Most of the action in an exploration of faith and reli-
gious truth is going to be internal and this book is no exception, but Levitin holds
the reader with the amiable character of the seeking Mitch, who embraces the
moral compass he finds in the study of Talmud. JMD
174 * THE BULLETIN
LOWRY, Lois 
Looking Back: A Book of Memories. Lorraine/Houghton,
1998 
181p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-395-89543-X 
$16.00 
R Gr. 6-10
Lowry's autobiography is more like a conversation over an old photo album than it
is a chronology of her life's events, and as such it is very satisfactory. The text is
written around photographs--of Lowry as a child, of her siblings, her parents, her
children, her grandchildren-and while talking about the events they depict, Lowry
gives her thoughts about their meaning to both her life and her art. Chapters (each
two pages or less) open with quotes from Lowry's books; each has a kernel of
humor or emotion that will carry readers through till the open-ended conclusion.
If readers are looking for the usual birthdate, major accomplishments, future plans
school report information they won't find it here, but Lowry's candid, friendly
revelations will give readers intimate insight into a favorite writer's history. JMD
LUENN, NANCY 
A Gift for Abuelita: Celebrating the Day of the Dead/Un regalo
para Abuelita: En celebraci6n del Dia de los Muertos; illus. by Robert
Chapman. 
Rising Moon, 1998 
32p
ISBN 0-87358-688-3 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 2-5
Rosita and her grandmother are very close, and they spend much time together as
grandmother teaches Rosita what is a weed and what isn't, how to make tortillas,
and how to braid. Abuelita is going to teach Rosita to make salsa, but before she
can, she dies, leaving Rosita sad and lonely. Celebrating the Day of the Dead gives
Rosita and her family a chance to remember those they love who are gone, and the
realization that "like the braid, the cord of their love was too strong to be broken"
brings comfort to the young girl mourning her grandmother. Luenn's warm, con-
versational style communicates the process of grief and acceptance with a mini-
mum of sentimentality, clearly placing Rosita and her sorrow at the center of her
comforting family and this story as well. Chapman's illustrations, a sort of bas-
relief in cast paper with three-dimensional details provided by seeds, cord, and
other found objects, has a dense richness that suits the content and pace of the
story. The text, in English and in Spanish, is laid out in framed text boxes with
decorative detailing. Author's and illustrator's notes are included, as is a brief
glossary. JMD
LYONS, MARY, ed. 
Talking with Tebi: Clementine Hunter, Memory
Artist. Houghton, 1998 48p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-395-72031-1 
$16.00 
SpR 
Gr. 3-6
Lyons takes a different tack from her previous work about African-American art-
ists and craftspeople (Catching the Fire, BCCB 10/97, etc.), here using Clementine
Hunter's paintings to illustrate Hunter's own accounts of her life. Born in Louisi-
ana Creole country in 1886, Hunter spent her life attached to Melrose Plantation,
where she started painting in the thirties. She began to receive recognition in the
forties and found her work increasingly popular in shows and galleries in the sev-
enties and onward, until her death at the age of 101. Her narrative is rich and
flavorful, both about painting ("If I don't get this painting out of my head, I'll sure
go crazy") and other aspects of life ("I don't travel, 'cause I know here and I don't
know yonder"). While Lyons provides a perceptive introductory note, there's not
much discussion of the actual works of art, so that readers may have a hard time
understanding why Hunter is important just from the book (and what exactly a
JANUARY 1999 
* 
175
"memory artist" is, since the term remains unexplained). Hunter's recollections in
fact outshine her art here, and they, like her paintings, could enlighten many young
readers on a kind of American existence that often goes unchronicled. Detailed
source notes are included. DS
McKAY, HILARY 
Where's Bear?; illus. by Alex Ayliffe. 
McElderry, 1998 
32p
ISBN 0-689-82271-5 
$15.00 
R 3-5 yrs
McKay, author of rollicking fiction for older readers (The Exiles, BCCB 11/92),
turns to the genre of the picture book in this story about a toddler's relationship
with his stuffed bear. Simon adores Snowtop right down to his fur's accents of
"wet grass color" and "leaky paint box and jam color," but the grownups take a
slightly different view. In what is clearly a plot, Gran takes Simon out for the day
(an outing punctuated by Simon's periodic queries of "Where gone, Snowtop?"),
and Simon returns to find a Strange Bear, who "was soft and fluffy and white and
smelled of soap." Our hero takes Strange Bear with him on a search for Snowtop,
and crawling through all the sticky bits of the house returns SB to his former
characterful state of Snowtop. The depiction of Simon's bear-centered point of
view is authentic and tender, and the narration is wry and lively. The humor is at
a higher level than the protagonist's perceptions, so that kids who get the bear-
identity joke may be too old to admit Snowtop's grave importance, but those
willing to acknowledge such attachments will appreciate the book's grasp of the
boy-bear bond. Ayliffe's art tips occasionally towards the generically cheerful, but
there's a sharp-edged solidity to the collage that's reminiscent of Dan Yaccarino's
rotund figures. If you can get an audience old enough to understand it's the same
bear but still resistant to the transformative washing of transitional objects, they'll
be just right for this playful lapsitting saga. DS
MALAM, JOHN 
Beatrix Potter. Carolrhoda, 1998 
24p 
illus. with
photographs 
(Tell Me About)
ISBN 1-57505-275-X 
$19.93 
Ad Gr. 1-3
POWLING, CHRIS 
Roald Dahl. Carolrhoda, 1998 
24p 
illus. with
photographs 
(Tell Me About)
ISBN 1-57505-274-1 
$19.93 
Ad 
Gr. 1-3
Biographies for beginning readers are scarce as hen's teeth, and this series, first
published in Britain, will helpfully provide a bit of poultry dentition. Though
some of the series' subjects (Chopin, Mozart, Monet) aren't likely to lure the pri-
mary-grades set, this duo on children's authors will be more congenial to young
tastes. The books cover the high points of childhood, early artistic endeavors, and
adult life of their subjects, not shrinking away from the sad bereavements both
writers encountered. Though somewhat exclamatory and oddly eliding over Dahl's
embarkation into children's books (we hear about the increasing popularity of his
books but we're never told which one was first), Powling's book evinces an enthu-
siasm for its subject that youngsters will find engaging, and the sly note that some
adults don't approve of Dahl will likely enhance that writer's popularity. The
Malam is more bland and encyclopedic, and the choppy sentences do their lively
subject a disservice, but the reproduced details of Potter's early efforts (a painting
of a street scene, a greeting card she designed) will intrigue her young fans. Each
book includes a timeline of important dates and an index; the Malam includes a
short glossary; neither book includes a list of the writer's works for children. DS
176 
* THE BULLETIN
MEADE, HOLLY John Willy and Freddy McGee; written and illus. by Holly
Meade. 
Cavendish, 1998 
32p
ISBN 0-7614-5033-5 
$15.95 
R 
4-7 yrs
John Willy and Freddy McGee are two guinea pigs who are bored bored bored
with straw, water bottles, and carrots, so when the door to their cage is left open by
accident they take off to explore the wide world. Unbeknownst to the happily
scampering guinea pigs, their course through the house is being tracked by a black-
and-white cat who is very interested in their adventure. When the two gp's climb
into the pool table and start running around and around in the tunnels for the
billiard balls, the cat leaps upon the table and scatters balls into the pockets. The
two guinea pigs head home, and, with the cat distracted by the family dog, they
make it back to the safety of their cage. Meade has terrific control of her space on
these single and double-page spreads, using the variegated text in the cut-paper
and gouache illustrations as part of the compositions. John Willy and Freddy
McGee, though very guinea-pig like in demeanor, have personality and nerve as
they leave the claustrophobic environs of their cage for the wide open spaces of the
living room. The warm colors invite perusal, and the scenes of the two adventur-
ers inside the pool table are a feast of visual schtick. Meade's text has a vibrant
immediacy that will make this an unusually successful readaloud, and lapsitters
will appreciate being able to trace the journey of the little rovers along the broken
line of their route. JMD
MOLLEL, TOLOLWA M. 
Shadow Dance; illus. by Donna Perrone. 
Clarion,
1998 
32p
ISBN 0-395-82909-7 
$15.00 
Ad 4-7 yrs
Like Baba Wagu6 Diakit6's The Hunterman and the Crocodile (BCCB 2/97), this
draws on a traditional tale-type with many variants in which a crocodile tricks a
human into helping him out of trouble, then threatens to eat his victim once
they're in the water. The victim, in this case a little girl named Salome who has
helped the trapped reptile out of a gully and down to the river, appeals for mercy
to bystanders (including a tree and a cow) who condemn her for humans' injus-
tice. At last the final bystander, a dove, tricks the crocodile into showing exactly
how the situation unfolded, and a wiser Salome leaves the crocodile to his fate.
Though lacking the compelling rhythm and bold art of Diakitd's version, this is
jollier, with colored-pencil and oil-crayon art parading sunrise-pastel colors and
naively drafted, sometimes static figures. Illustrations feature a carefree child sing-
ing a Tanzanian song to her shadow, along with a toothy green predator that you
wouldn't trust to sell you a used car. Both the song avec musical notation and the
story are explained in an author's note, which does not, however, identify any of
the specific sources on which Mollel drew in adapting the tale. BH
NAYLOR, PHYLLIS REYNOLDS 
Sang Spell. 
Karl/Atheneum, 1998 
176p
ISBN 0-689-82007-0 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Sixteen-year-old Josh is hitchhiking to his aunt's house in Texas when he is beaten
and robbed by a man who gave him a ride. Staggering through the chill of an
Appalachian mountain night, he is picked up by a silent woman in a horse-drawn
wagon and taken to the community of Canara. Canara is a farming community
that time forgot-there is no electricity, no indoor plumbing, and no way out.
Josh discovers that it is a lost community ofMelungeons, a put-upon race that has
JANUARY 1999 
* 177
finally found a homeland in this Appalachian Shangri-La. The community is
isolated in time and space, and no matter which road Josh attempts to leave by, he
always winds up back at the same place. Kaspar, another recent unwilling arrival,
has a violent plan to escape; when Josh discovers it, he takes steps to stop a double-
murder, and with that act unwittingly finds the key to his return to the "real"
world. Naylor gives Canara a strong sense of place, discussing the physical details
of communal living, working, and celebrating in such a way as to make it realisti-
cally tangible. Unfortunately, while the physical realities of Canara are clear, the
psychological realities are not. The stock characters are flat and undifferentiated
except by their assigned roles and tasks in the community, the cultural structure of
Canara is vague and confusing, and the logistics of coming and going lack logic
and clarity. (Apparently Josh needs to deal with the death of his mother before he
can leave, returning to some pre-tragedy innocence that will make him a better
human being.) While the idea of the Brigadoon-like Canara has possibilities, the
pacing here is uneven and the questions left unanswered loom large. JMD
NIcoAI, MARGARET 
Kitaq Goes Ice Fishing; illus. by David Rubin. 
Alaska North-
west, 1998 
[32p]
ISBN 0-88240-504-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Five-year-old Kitaq is determined to go ice fishing with his Apa, his grandfather,
even though his father warns him that he "must be big enough to walk all the way
there and all the way back. You must be old enough not to cry when your feet are
cold and tired." Kitaq walks all the way to the river, patiently sits, and quietly
fishes, much to his and his grandfather's delight catching three fish. When it is
time to go home, Kitaq has spent all his energy on fishing, and he is cold and
weary. His grandfather has him step on the runners of the sled, and as he pulls the
boy home he remembers when he caught his first fish with his own grandfather.
In Nicolai's extensive note, she states that writing this book is a way to preserve the
stories her Yup'ik husband tells of growing up in Kwethluk, Alaska. The note
includes information about the Yup'ik culture and discusses their village commu-
nity lifestyle. This is a solid if purposive piece of storytelling about a young boy's
early rite of passage. Rubin's full-page oil paintings feature interior scenes dark,
red, and warm with firelight and outdoor scenes blue with cold and ice, but the
compositions are sometimes crowded and the figures are often awkward. The
close family relationships will nonetheless appeal to young readers and listeners,
and the adventurous aspects of Kitaq's catching of his first fish will also find a
ready ear among young listeners. JMD
NIEUWSMA, MILTON J. 
Kinderlager: An Oral History of Young Holocaust
Survivors. Holiday House, 1998 
161p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8234-1358-6 
$18.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Three Jewish girls from the same Polish town ofTomasz6w Mazowiecki are rounded
up and eventually deported-at the ages of five, seven, and ten-to Auschwitz-
Birkenau in June and July of 1944. After encountering each other in the concen-
tration camp, they are liberated by the Russians on January 27, 1945, among the
youngest of the six hundred prisoners under eighteen still left alive. Here Tova,
Frieda, and Rachel recount their experiences of being rounded up by the Nazis,
losing their homes and relatives, and struggling to survive, which they do because
178 
* 
THE BULLETIN
of luck, their mothers' determination, and their own capacity to endure. At one
point Frieda and her mother, cousin, and aunt, all selected for death by Mengele,
wait for hours to be gassed but are saved when the sonderkommando blow up some
of the crematorium ovens. The stories intertwine when the narrators recall being
together. At one point Tova mentions not knowing why Frieda's little sister Dorka
was called "Bombowiec"; readers later learn, from Frieda's story, that the nick-
name derived from Dorka's birth during a bombing attack and that Dorka was
shot outside a labor camp. Although the accounts repeat some details, each of the
narrators has different experiences. All adopt a compact reportorial style and end
their stories by examining the toll that childhood trauma took on their lives. We
do not get to know the individuals as well as we do Rabinovici in Thanks to My
Mother (3/98) and Lobel in No Pretty Pictures (BCCB 10/98), and the writing is
not as sustained or involving. Nevertheless, this collective narrative will contrib-
ute to a young reader's understanding the weight of systematic destruction of chil-
dren younger than themselves during the Holocaust. BH
PFETZER, MARK 
Within Reach: My Everest Story; by Mark Pfetzer and Jack
Galvin. 
Dutton, 1998 
22 4p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-525-46089-6 
$16.95 
R Gr. 7-12
Mark Pfetzer is the wunderkind of mountain climbing: after discovering the joys
of rock-climbing at the age of twelve, he was trekking in Nepal at thirteen,
summiting in the Andes at fourteen, and making his first attempt on Everest at
fifteen (though closer on his second attempt at sixteen, he's relying on the third
time for Everest success). In diary format, the book tells of his growing passion
and skill, painting an absorbing portrait of the climbing world along the way as
Pfetzer learns how to approach sponsors (climbing is an expensive proposition)
and how to assess his guides and fellow climbers as well as how to deal physically
with the challenge of ascent. The Everest experiences in particular are eyeopening-
the inadequacy and casualness of many who approach the task (one of Pfetzer's
first group members, the guide's girlfriend, took up ten pounds of facial creams) is
obvious and the sheer population of hopefuls flocking about the mountain star-
tling-but details ranging from his mother's overseeing him in a Nepalese base
camp to the odd challenge of climbing Everest while dragging the sponsor's video
camera make this a most intriguing picture from start to finish. Small print and a
lot of text mean that some readers will need to put on their crampons to traverse
the pages, but they'll be rewarded by true-life adventure unlike anything they've
known; teens gripped by Krakauer's YA-appealing Into Thin Air (about the ill-
fated Everest climbers whose tragedy puts a pall over Pfetzer's second Everest at-
tempt) will relish the account of a young man chasing his own mountainous dream.
A glossary, timeline, and chapter-by-chapter key to the cast are included. DS
POWLING, CHRIS 
RoaldDahl
See Malam, p. 175, for review.
PRESSLER, MIRJAM 
Halinka; tr. by Elizabeth D. Crawford. 
Holt, 1998 
214 p
ISBN 0-8050-5861-3 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Halinka, born in Poland of Gypsy background, lives quietly in a home for girls in
postwar Germany, writing her observations in her precious "thoughts book" and
longing to return to her beloved Aunt Lou. She gets caught up in a charitable-
JANUARY 1999 
* 
179
collection drive, hoping to win the prize for most donations collected and beat out
the bully of the home; she also gradually and tentatively begins to come out of
herself and make a friend of gentle Renata. The point in this German import isn't
so much plot as milieu and growth. The other girls' distaste for Halinka the Gypsy,
the general detestation of the "Amis," Americans, and Halinka's recollections of
her time in a convalescent sanatorium mark this as a world unfamiliar to most
American readers, and the book does a good job of making life in the home, with
its various girls of various tastes, sadnesses, and characters, believable and vivid.
Pressler makes Halinka a distinctive and determined, if imperfect (she steals money
from the charity collection in order to afford a visit to Aunt Lou), protagonist, and
readers will rejoice to see her begin to accept some of the world's goodness. DS
ROBBINS, KEN 
Autumn Leaves; written and illus. with photographs by Ken
Robbins. 
Scholastic, 1998 
[40p]
ISBN 0-590-29879-8 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
As in many of his other books, Robbins here focuses his lens on nature, this time
capturing the full splendor of autumn leaves. With spare text, he details basic leaf
characteristics such as shape, texture, and size. What lifts this book above the
ordinary is the crisp, up-close photography of leaf species, shown in their fall col-
ors facing a photograph of their tree of origin. By placing more than one example
of a leaf on a page, the book invites its audience to pore over the details and notice
similarities and differences even within a species. At the end, the author includes
a brief introduction to the chemistry of leaf color, explaining how the fall colors
"were there all the time." Though a detailed diagram of a leaf would have strength-
ened the book, kids will eat this up as they romp through the pages looking for the
mitten-shaped leaves of the sassafras tree, the red oak's acorns, or the fan-shaped
gingko, food to their prehistoric friend the dinosaur. EAB
ROBERTS, WILLO DAVIS 
Pawns. Karl/Atheneum, 1998 
[160p]
ISBN 0-689-81668-5 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Fourteen-year-old Teddi is the foster child of Mamie, a widowed mother of two
grown sons who took Teddi in after her parents' deaths. Only weeks after Mamie's
son Ricky dies in a plane crash, an obviously pregnant stranger named Dora ap-
pears at their door, claiming to be Ricky's wife. Teddi is relocated to an upstairs
storage room ("Stairs aren't so handy for someone who's pregnant"), and Dora
welcomes herself into their lives ("I was hoping to find a family here"). Teddi
observes, with growing concern, her displacement in the household and Dora's
odd behavior: disappearing from the house in the middle of the night, insisting on
delivering her baby with only Teddi's help, and having no.identification in her
purse. After initially chalking up her suspicions to jealousy, Teddi, with the aid of
handsome neighbor Jason, realizes that there may indeed be a scam afoot and
starts to investigate. Roberts' writing is uneven: though Mamie's character is at
first well drawn, her acquiescence to Dora's wishes isn't believably explained and
her seeming ignorance of Teddi's plight is more convenient than credible; Jason
never develops beyond the level of a device; and the ending lacks climactic excite-
ment. The concept is fascinating, however, and Roberts exploits Teddi's uncer-
tainty to suspenseful effect. Though this isn't as tightly plotted as Roberts' The
180 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Kidnappers (BCCB 3/98), undemanding readers looking for some mild crime drama
may want to breeze through this. EAB
ROOT, PHYLLIS 
WhatBaby Wants; illus. byJill Barton. 
Candlewick, 1998 
36p
ISBN 0-7636-0207-8 
$15.99 
R 
3-6 yrs
The scene is an idyllic farm with a crowded farmhouse kitchen full of a shiny-faced
extended family. There is a small problem, though: "Mama was tired, but Baby
wouldn't sleep." All the family members tell Mama to go to bed, they'll take care
of Baby. So off the grateful Mama goes, but how she manages to sleep through
what follows is a miracle. "'WAAAAAH!' said Baby," and in response each family
member fetches what s/he thinks Baby wants-wildflowers to look at, a feathery
goose to cuddle, a cow to kiss, sheep to keep him warm, birds to sing him to
sleep-but Baby is not to be distracted. Finally, Little Brother takes charge: "Little
Brother picked Baby up. He cuddled Baby and kissed Baby. He wrapped Baby in
his quilt and sang Baby a soft little lullaby .... Hushabye, shushabye, Baby's eyes
closed. Baby's crying stopped." The unstoppable momentum of Root's cumula-
tive text is matched by Barton's clean watercolors as each expressively dot-eyed
family member adds to Baby's upset with a gorgeously confusing profusion of
goods and good will. The final spread shows the exhausted family snuggled up
next to sheep, cow, songbirds, and cradle as they "take care" of the now content-
edly snoozing Baby "all night long." The cheerfully crowded but balanced com-
positions in single and double-page spreads will work with groups, but however
you use it, your listeners will appreciate the uproar and the child-hero who finally
brings peace. JMD
ROSENBERRY, VERA 
When Vera Was Sick; written and illus. by Vera
Rosenberry. 
Holt, 1998 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-5405-7 
$15.95 
R 
3-6 yrs
A spunky little Vera tumbles across the title page, but the opening spread captures
her quick plunge: "Vera was sick." Spots erupt, the doctor orders bed rest, and the
fever, itching, and boredom of chicken pox follow close behind. "Vera lay in
bed . .. and lay in bed... and lay in bed... AND LAY IN BED. Her spots itched
and itched." She's too sick to read, she's too sick to color ("even though she had
new crayons"), and Mother even has to help her wobble to the bathroom. But of
course recovery's just around the corner; soon Vera's room is littered with her toys
and she's hanging upside-down off the bed, itching only to get up and go. Ink and
gouache paintings portray with admirable candor the shadowy eyes and that pecu-
liar combination of restlessness and lethargy that typify feverish little tykes. Life
relentlessly goes on at home despite Vera's absence from family activities, and
Rosenberry's visual documentation of life outside the sickroom underscores the
loneliness of sickness even as it comfortingly implies that all is still really right with
the world. EB
ROWAN, PETE Big Head!; illus. by John Temperton. 
Knopf, 1998 
4 4p
ISBN 0-679-89018-1 
$20.00 
R Gr. 4-8
With a brief reminiscence of weighing his first head in medical school and sugges-
tions of varying merit on how you might weigh your own head, Rowan's off to a
rip-roaring start. In seventeen spacious layouts and crisply rendered diagrams (two
JANUARY 1999 
* 
181
transparency overlays raise the clarity of presentation along with the book's price),
the major features and functions of the noggin are explored in lively detail. Rowan
doesn't shy away from scientific vocabulary, and this title should reinforce most
common textbook anatomy terms, but the real draw here is in Rowan's effortless
melding of anatomical and physiological information and kid-friendly asides about
how brain function impacts the daily routine. Readers will be particularly appre-
ciative of Rowan's suggestion that the relationship between the reticular formation
(brain filter) and cerebral cortex actually justifies doing homework with the televi-
sion turned on and comforted to know there's a good reason why your goldfish
isn't as affectionate as your dog. Although the delicate typeface may cause some
ocular strain for the adult purchaser, it will probably present negligible challenge
to the targeted readers' much younger pupils, lenses, and optic nerves. An index
from "abducens nerve" to "zygomatis major muscle" is included. EB
RYLANT, CYNTHIA 
In Aunt Lucy's Kitchen; illus. by Wendy Anderson
Halperin. 
Simon, 1998 
56p 
(The Cobble Street Cousins) 
$14.00
ISBN 0-689-81711-8 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
A Little Shopping; illus. by Wendy Anderson Halperin. 
Simon,
1998 
56p 
(The Cobble Street Cousins)
ISBN 0-689-81710-X 
$14.00 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Cousins Lily, Rosie, and Tess are living with their aunt Lucy while their parents,
ballet dancers all, are on tour. The three girls share Aunt Lucy's attic, which is
divided by lacy curtains and painted screens into three bedrooms and "the play-
ground" (sort of a communal recreation area), and they adore their aunt, her house,
and her flower shop. The girls are perky fourth graders and distinct personality
types: Tess is dramatic, Lily is creative, and Rosie is a happy homebody. In In
Aunt Lucy's Kitchen the girls decide they need a project for the summer and start a
cookie baking business. During their first round of deliveries they meet Michael
the botanist, home from the hospital with a broken leg, and Mrs. White, who is
celebrating her ninetieth birthday. The girls engineer the meeting of Aunt Lucy
and Michael, and romance blooms. A Little Shopping finds the threesome making
Aunt Lucy a miniature model of her flower shop, complete with tiny flower pots
and figures of Aunt Lucy and Michael. Said project necessitates a trip to the
hobby store, where the girls encounter a shop full of tiny treasures and an escaped
parakeet, and they make an impromptu visit to the ice cream parlor. Rylant has
already proved to have a deft hand with easy readers with her Henry and Mudge
adventures, and while these titles lack the humor and wit of that series, the charm-
ing if predictable stories are going to make second and third grade girls blissfully
happy. Halperin's illustrations, while often indistinct as far as the characters' ex-
pressions are concerned, suit the tone of the book, her soft black-and-white details
providing cunning visuals for the idyllic world of Cobble Street. JMD
SAN SoucI, ROBERT, ad. 
Cendrillon: A Caribbean Cinderella; illus. by Brian
Pinkney. 
Simon, 1998 
[40p]
ISBN 0-689-80668-X 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
The narrator of this variation on a French Creole Cinderella story is the title
character's godmother, her nannin, and she tells her godchild's story in appeal-
182 
* THE BULLETIN
ingly rhythmic language sprinkled with the occasional Creole phrase. San Souci's
retelling has a zest that gives the old familiar tale new energy as Cendrillon and her
nannin' scrub laundry at the river, make a grand entrance at the ball, and finally
find that true love needs no help from magic. The mixed-media illustrations are
infused with a sunny palette of rose, yellow, and blue, with the characters depicted
against vivid lilac and pink and the text blocks often surrounded by borders of
assorted flora. Cendrillon is a fresh-faced, down-to-earth girl determined not to
use magic to win love she can't get on her own, and her nannin' is just as deter-
mined to "give [her] the gift of love that would change [her] life for true." When
you read this one aloud, don't tell your listeners what they are hearing-give them
the opportunity to say "I know that story! That's Cinderella!" And in a fine new
dress, too. A short glossary of French Creole phrases is included. JMD
SEIDLER, TOR 
The Silent Spillbills. di Capua/HarperCollins, 1998 
[224p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-205181-4 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-205180-6 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Katya Farnsworth, thirteen-year-old daughter of an aeronautics company presi-
dent and a renowned psychiatrist, pays far less heed to the upscale life that so
impresses her teachers and schoolmates than she does to the shorebirds that have
long fascinated her and her father. One particular species, which they have evi-
dently discovered and informally dubbed "spillbills," has inspired the prototype
for Farnsworth Aeronautics' latest venture-an aircraft with near vertical takeoff
and breathtakingly rapid descent. Those same birds, however, have twice flown
into the jets of the test models and are responsible for the death of a pilot; Katya's
grandfather, the company's chairman, arranges to destroy the rare clutch of birds,
and Katya is just as determined to save them. Seidler's imaginary bird species is
convincing, and the headlong clash between ecological conservation and economic
reality is equally credible. The plot devolves into a too, too easy corporate fairy
tale, however, in which a rousing speech persuades stockholders to vote to plow
their profits into moving the whole operation further along the coast to save the
birds. Further muddying the action are underdeveloped subplots involving Katya's
stuttering problem, her budding (but prissily chaste) romance with the gardener's
son, and her father's temporary absence in a space station that's lost communica-
tion with NASA. Although Seidler doesn't manage to keep all his plot elements
aloft, his readers may still appreciate this refreshing portrait of a child of privilege,
doubly blessed with sensible, loving parents and an acute social conscience. EB
SHULEVITZ, URI 
Snow; written and illus. by Uri Shulevitz. 
Farrar, 1998 
32p
ISBN 0-374-37092-3 
$16.00 
R* 
3-6 yrs
From a gray sky into a gray city falls one bright, white snowflake. "'It's snowing,'
said boy with dog," but all the grownups keep saying "It's only a snowflake.... It's
nothing." The little boy knows better, however, and his enthusiasm cannot be
dampened. Radio and television announcers keep saying there is no snow in the
forecast, "but snowflakes don't listen to radio, snowflakes don't watch television.
All snowflakes know is snow, snow, and snow. Snowflakes keep coming and com-
ing and coming." The gray city is covered in soft white flakes. "The whole city is
white. 'Snow,' said the boy." Shulevitz is at his lyrical best in this poetic paean to
winter. Passersby are caricatured into humorous figures bent into impossible pos-
JANUARY 1999 
* 
183
tures, their tall hats, parasols, and funny shoes giving them an almost circus-clown
appearance. The little boy and his dog dance through the streets seeking other
celebrants, and he invites and is joined by the figures of Mother Goose, her gan-
der, and Humpty Dumpty from the facade of a bookstore. The elegantly stark
text suits the elegant architectural lines of the cityscape, while brief glimpses of the
boy's orange flower wallpapered room and his orange hat warm the gray, grim
city. The final scenes, of passersby covered in snow, of rooftops covered in snow,
of a city turned white and bright with snow, are truly magical. JMD
Sfs, PETER 
Fire Truck; written and illus. by Peter Sfs. 
Greenwillow, 1998 
24 p
ISBN 0-688-15878-1 
$14.95 
R 
1-3 yrs
The world is filled with junior firefighters, and they'll fully understand this book's
young hero, Matt, whose "first words in the morning were 'fire truck.'" Much to
his glee, Matt wakes up one morning as a genuine fire truck, equipped with lus-
cious accoutrements such as flashing lights, sirens, and hoses. Matt the truck hap-
pily races around rescuing and dousing until a plate of pancakes calls him back to
the joys of a less automotive existence. Though the end isn't much of a finish, it's
probably only a caesura until Matt starts tooling around again anyway; the point
of this book is its bright red vroomability for the toddler set, and that it delivers
most satisfactorily. Sis employs a completely different visual style from his usual
intricate tracery: sturdy simple lines set against lots of white space delineate the
figures, most of which rely strongly on, of course, fire-engine red (the foldout with
the one-to-ten inventory of the truck's goodies will be a favorite chant-along spot).
Readers-aloud should feel free to insert or encourage appropriate sound effects and
to change the protagonist's name as appropriate for their favorite engine manqud.
DS
STERMAN, BETSY 
Saratoga Secret. Dial, 1998 
24 9p
ISBN 0-8037-2332-6 
$16.99 
Ad Gr. 5-8
Sixteen-year-old Amity Spencer's parents may still refer to her as "Child," but her
best friend's brother, Matt, and the thoughtful pedlar, Cheppa John, see her with
quite different eyes. But just at the time in her life when she should be deciding
between life on a farm with Matt and life on the road with Cheppa John, General
Burgoyne upsets her plans for the future by marching several thousand Red Coats
down from Canada, almost to her doorstep. Matt and Amity's father enlist with
the Patriots, but Cheppa John seems to keep apart from military embroilments,
trading freely with both adversaries. When Matt returns from battle, gravely ill
but miraculously alive, he carries a purloined note from Burgoyne to General Howe,
pleading for support in a coming battle-a note whose provenance suggests that
Cheppa John may be spying for the British. Matt entrusts Amity with delivering
the note to the Continental Army, and after some predictably unjustified mistrust
of Cheppa John (her true love, after all), adventures with vagabonds on the road,
and a near-slapstick encounter with traitors at a tavern, Amity completes her mis-
sion, quite probably saves the young nation, and most importantly, gets her guy.
Figures of historic note, such as Patriot rifleman Tim Murphy, wade into the
action just long enough to bolster authenticity; there's never much doubt that
Cheppa John is on the side of the angels, or that Matt, once presumed dead, will
reappear. Still, readers who prefer their historical fiction served up with a generous
portion of romance should savor this title. EB
184 
* THE BULLETIN
TANAKA, 
SHELLEY 
Lost Temple of the Aztecs; illus. by Greg Ruhl and with
photographs. 
Madison/Hyperion, 1998 
48p
ISBN 0-7868-0441 
$16.95 
R Gr. 3-6
Beyond Ruhl's stiff and garish paintings and an ungainly pastiche of sidebar pho-
tos, captions, and background data lies a riveting account of the early sixteenth
century Spanish invasion of the Aztec empire, told exclusively from the point of
view of the vanquished and based largely on their own accounts. Tanaka handily
clarifies how Moctezuma could have been so tardy in realizing that Cortes was not
the awaited plumed serpent god Quetzalcoatl, how different styles of warfare put
the small Spanish force at military advantage, and how smallpox so weakened the
indigenous population that Cortes' victory became inevitable. Reasons for the
Aztec practice of human sacrifice are respectfully presented, and the irony of the
Spaniard's revulsion at the sight of gory offerings-even as they plan and conduct
their own military bloodbath-shines forcefully through. A glossary and a brief
list for further reading is included. EB
TESSENDORF, K C. 
Over the Edge: Flying with the Arctic Heroes. Atheneum,
1998 
116p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-689-31804-9 
$17.00 
Ad 
Gr. 6-12
Since the poles have been among the last areas on the globe explored by humans,
their era of exploration coincided with the burgeoning of air travel. Tessendorf
examines several early aeronautical polar expeditions, ranging from Salomon
Andrde's ill-fated 1897 balloon expedition to various dirigible flights and Byrd's
successful-or was it?-flyover. There's plenty of derring-do, with weird techni-
cal innovations, plunges into frozen water, and planes that threaten never to take
off again; there's also plenty of tragedy, both on the polar expeditions themselves
(all of the Andrde expedition and nearly half of Nobile's Italia expedition died up
north) and in the rescue attempts (most notably explorer Roald Amundsen's dis-
appearance while searching for Nobile). The writing style is congested with tech-
nical information, however, which assumes a fairly high aptitude and background
on the part of the audience (readers had better know what a dirigible is going in),
and the book often deals cursorily with the people (the fate of those who died with
the Italia must be inferred). The author does make it clear how dangerous-and
how political, expensive, and lucrative-these expeditions could be, and the com-
bination of exploration and barnstorming is going to lure adventurous readers.
Endnotes are provided for quotations, but they oddly lack page numbers; a bibli-
ography and index are included. DS
WELLS, ROSEMARY 
Mary on Horseback: Three Mountain Stories; illus. by Peter
McCarty. 
Dial, 1998 
53p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-2155-2 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-2154-4 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Mary Breckinridge established the Frontier Nursing Service in the Appalachian
Mountains of Kentucky circa 1923, and Wells has written three stories based on
Breckinridge's and her nurses' experiences bringing medical care to the residents
of then isolated areas. The stories are written in the first person (two from the
point of view of mountain children and one from the point of view of a new
nurse), and their somewhat sentimental tone is mitigated by the drama of their
circumstances: a boy witnesses Breckinridge's saving his father's leg from being
JANUARY 1999 
* 
185
amputated; a new nurse braves unfamiliar terrain and prejudice against newcom-
ers in an effort to vaccinate children against diphtheria; and a young girl, silent
since her mother's death in childbirth, finally speaks to assist an idolized Breckinridge
in her work. The tales are based on actual events, and while the facts of Mary
Breckinridge's life as put forth in the biographical note make more interesting
reading than these pointed short stories, this is still an interesting angle of ap-
proach to a most remarkable, and not very well-known, success story. Wells gives
specific sources in her acknowledgments. JMD
WHITCOMB, MARY E. 
Odd Velvet; illus. by Tara Calahan King. 
Chronicle,
1998 
26p
ISBN 0-8118-2004-1 
$13.95 
R 
4-7 yrs
Velvet is strange. She is so different from the other students in her class that they
don't know quite what to do with her, and "although everyone was polite to her,
no one was silly enough to pick Velvet for partner play or to walk home with her
after school. No one wanted to be different the way Velvet was different." When
Velvet wins a class drawing contest with an apple that looks so real you could eat it,
the children start to come around. With a lot of imagination and a strong sense of
self, Velvet makes friends and influences people, and the kids conclude that "Vel-
vet was different, but maybe she wasn't so odd after all." The message isn't hiding
here, but Whitcomb's text is amusing and Velvet's personality is more eccentric
than strange. King's colored pencil and pastel illustrations enhance Velvet's eccen-
tricities, showing her as a cheerful round-faced girl with huge round eyeglasses and
a perpetually interested smile. The visual characterizations of her teacher and
classmates make the illustrations quirkily intriguing as the caricatured kids ob-
serve, participate, and muse on questions of individuality and inclusion. When
Velvet's clownless birthday party is a success, everybody is happy. Listeners will be
happy too, and maybe they'll get a few new ideas for flexing their own imaginative
muscles. JMD
The correct subtitle for author and editor Leonard Marcus' book A Caldecott
Celebration, listed in the Professional Connections section of the November Bulletin,
is Six Artists and Their Paths to the Caldecott Medal. Our apologies for the error.
186 * THE BULLETIN
BULLETIN BLUE RIBBONS 1998
It is nearly impossible to isolate the specific combination of attributes that makes a
book a Bulletin Blue Ribbon. Fortunately, the books that are unanimously se-
lected for the list early in the discussion process (and there are some titles that are
unanimously selected, despite the disparate tastes of the committee members) set
the tone for what will join them. When we are weary of literary chat and doggedly
hanging on to our most treasured titles, someone will invariably say, "But how
does this book compare to the books already named for the list?" It's a good
question, and one that, more often than not, pushes a questionable title one way or
the other. Here is the list of Bulletin Blue Ribbon books for 1998, including two
late entries from 1997. There are picture books, fiction, nonfiction, and even a
couple of easy readers. We think these titles exemplify those elusive qualities that
make a book stand out from the rest, even if the rest are very, very good. Happy
New Year.
Janice Del Negro, Editor
PICTURE BOOKS
Babbitt, Natalie, ad. Ouch!: A Tale from Grimm; illus. by Fred Marcellino. di
Capua/HarperCollins. (January 1999)
Bodkin, Odds, ad. The Crane Wife; illus by Gennady Spirin. Gulliver/Harcourt.
(October)
Feiffer, Jules. I Lost My Bear; written and illus. by Jules Feiffer. Morrow. (June)
Hassett, John. Cat Up a Tree; written and illus. by John and Ann Hassett. Lorraine/
Houghton. (November)
McCully, Emily Arnold. Beautiful Warrior: The Legend of the Nun's Kung Fu;
written and illus. by Emily Arnold McCully. Levine/Scholastic. (March)
Shannon, David. No, David!; written and illus. by David Shannon. Blue Sky/
Scholastic. (September)
Shulevitz, Uri. Snow; written and illus. by Uri Shulevitz. Farrar. (January 1999)
Steig, William. Pete's a Pizza; written and illus. by William Steig. di Capua/
HarperCollins. (December)
Summers, Susan, ad. The Fourth Wise Man; illus. by Jackie Morris. Dial.
(December)
Van Laan, Nancy. So Say the Little Monkeys; illus. by Yumi Heo. Schwartz/Ath-
eneum. (September)
EASY READERS:
Cazet, Denys. Minnie and Moo Go Dancing; Minnie and Moo Go to the Moon;
written and illus. by Denys Cazet. DK Ink. (September)
Kvasnosky, Laura McGee. Zelda and Ivy; written and illus. by Laura McGee
Kvasnosky. Candlewick. (April)
JANUARY 1999 
* 
187
FICTION:
Abelove, Joan. Go and Come Back. Jackson/DK Ink. (April)
Bauer, Joan. Rules ofthe Road. Putnam. (February)
Cameron, Ann. The Secret Life ofAmanda K Woods. Foster/Farrar. (May)
Fletcher, Susan. Shadow Spinner. Karl/Atheneum. (July/August)
Griffin, Adele. The Other Shepards. Hyperion. (November)
Lawrence, Iain. The Wreckers. Delacorte. (June)
McCaughrean, Geraldine. The Pirate's Son. Scholastic. (September)
Ritter, John H. Choosing Up Sides. Philomel. (June)
Sachar, Louis. Holes. Foster/Farrar. (September)
Vail, Rachel. The Friendship Ring: If You Only Knew; The Friendship Ring: Please,
Please, Please. Scholastic. (October)
Werlin, Nancy. The Killer's Cousin. Delacorte. (September)
Woodson, Jacqueline. If You Come Softly. Putnam. (October)
NONFICTION
Burleigh, Robert. Black Whiteness: Admiral Byrd Alone in the Antarctic; illus. by
Walter Lyon Krudop. Atheneum. (February)
Colman, Penny. Corpses, Coffins, and Crypts: A History of Burial. Holt, 1997.
(February)
Denton, Kady MacDonald, comp. A Child's Treasury of Nursery Rhymes; comp.
and illus. by Kady MacDonald Denton. Kingfisher. (January 1999)
Farrell, Jeanette. Invisible Enemies: Stories oflnfectious Disease. Farrar. (June)
Freedman, Russell. Martha Graham: A Dancer's Life. Clarion. (June)
Greenberg, Jan. Chuck Close: Up Close; by Jan Greenberg and Sandra Jordan. DK
Ink. (May)
Lobel, Anita. No Pretty Pictures: A Child of War. Greenwillow. (October)
Mark, Jan, ad. God's Story; illus. by David Parkins. Candlewick. (May)
Martin, Jacqueline Briggs. Snowflake Bentley; illus. by Mary Azarian. Houghton.
(December)
Solheim, James. It's Disgusting-and We Ate It!: True Food Facts from Around the
World-and Throughout History!; illus. by Eric Brace. Simon. (April)
Norman, Howard, ad. The Girl Who Dreamed Only Geese and Other Tales of the
Far North; illus. by Leo and Diane Dillon. Gulliver/Harcourt, 1997. (Febru-
ary)
Philip, Neil, comp. War and the Pity of War; illus. by Michael McCurdy. Clarion.
(November)
Stanley, Diane. Joan ofArc; written and illus. by Diane Stanley. Morrow. (Sep-
tember)
Wick, Walter. Walter Wick's Optical Tricks; written and illus. by Walter Wick.
Cartwheel/Scholastic. (October)
188 
* THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
African Americans: 
Duggleby;
Hansen; Jones; Lyons
African Americans-fiction: Flake
African Americans-poetry:
Johnson
African Americans-stories: Crews
Alaska-stories: Nicolai
Alcoholism-fiction: Holeman
American Indians-folklore: Goble
Appalachia: Wells
Appalachia-fiction: Naylor
Arctic: Tessendorf
Art and artists: Duggleby; Lyons
Aunts-fiction: Rylant
Aztecs: Tanaka
Babies-stories: Root
Ballet-stories: Fonteyn
BEDTIME STORIES: Hollyer;
Root
BIOGRAPHIES: Duggleby;
Hansen; Harness; Kaplan;
Lowry; Lyons; Malam; Pfetzer
Biology: Rowan
Birds-fiction: Hobbs; Seidler
Blacks-stories: Joseph
Bullies-fiction: Flake
Carnival-stories: Joseph
Children's literature: Lowry;
Malam
Cousins-fiction: Rylant
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Hobbs; Roberts
Dancers and dancing: Jones
Death and dying-fiction: Luenn;
Naylor
Dinosaurs: Currie
Ecology-fiction: Hobbs; Seidler
Ethics and values: Cooney;
Levitin; Naylor; Seidler
Explorers and exploring:
Tessendorf
FANTASY: Crews; Kimmel;
Naylor
Farms-stories: Root
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Houston; Seidler
Fathers and sons-fiction: Fenner
Fishing-stories: Nicolai
FOLKTALES AND
FAIRYTALES: Babbitt; Goble;
Mollel; San Souci
Friendship-fiction: Chambers
Friendship-stories: Whitcomb
Geography: Jenkins
Grandfathers-stories: Nicolai
Grandmothers-fiction: Chambers;
Luenn
Grandparents-fiction: Cooney;
Freeman
Guinea pigs-stories: Meade
Hanukkah-stories: Kimmel
HISTORICAL FICTION: Auch;
Baer; Carbone; Houston;
Pressler; Sterman
History, world: Tanaka
Holidays-stories: Joseph; Kimmel
Holocaust: Kaplan; Nieuwsma
Holocaust- fiction: Baer
Homelessness-fiction: Fenner
Illness-stories: Rosenberry
Immigrants-stories: Aliki
Inuit-stories: Nicolai
Judaism-fiction: Levitin
Latinos-fiction: Chambers; Luenn
JANUARY 1999 
* 
189
Leaves: Robbins
Literature, American: Harness
LOVE STORIES: Desimini
LULLABIES: Hollyer
Mental illness-fiction: Fenner;
Holeman
Mexico: Tanaka
Monkeys-stories: Diakite
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Auch; Chambers; Flake;
Holeman
Mothers and sons-fiction: Levitin
Nature study: Robbins
NURSERY RHYMES: Denton
Orphans-fiction: Pressler
Physical education: Jones
Pioneers-fiction: Auch
POETRY: Denton; Hollyer;
Johnson
Racism-fiction: Cooney
Reading aloud: Fenner; Johnson;
Wells
Reading, beginning: Hopping
Reading, easy: Malam; Rylant
Reading, family: Denton; Hollyer
Revolutionary War-fiction: Sterman
School-fiction: Flake
School-stories: Aliki; Whitcomb
Science: Currie; Hopping; Robbins;
Rowan
SHORT STORIES: Wells
Sisters-stories: Joseph
Slavery-fiction: Carbone; Houston
Snow-stories: Shulevitz
Sports: Pfetzer
Storytelling: Babbitt; Goble; Mollel;
Root; San Souci
Storytime: Meade; Sfs
SURVIVAL STORIES: Fenner; Hobbs
Toys-stories: McKay
Transportation: Harness
Trucks-stories: Sfs
Voyages and travel: Harness; Pfetzer;
Tessendorf
Voyages and travel-stories: Meade
Weather: Hopping
Winter-stories: Shulevitz
Women's studies: Hansen
World War II: Kaplan; Nieuwsma
Writers and writing: Lowry
I 
I
Teaching R
The Professional IdeaBook for Teachers
enchinBiK8
Every issue of Teaching K-8
provides informative articles on
the cutting edge of education.
You'll also find insightful
columns and thoughtful
reviews written by some of
today's leading educators.
Teaching K-8 is filled with
hundreds of unique ideas and
activities that help teachers
present new challenges to
their students, learn new
concepts and develop new
skills.
Monthly columns include...
Children's Books
Teaching in the Library
The Parent Connection
Science, Math, Technology and more!
Plus, interviews with children's book authors and illustrators
Don't miss out on this valuable
resource for your library -
subscribe to Teaching K-8 today.
Teachtng -K8
ix 54808, Boulder, CO 803224808
-8793
One year
(8 Issues)
* Outside U.S. add $5.00 postage per subscription.
I 
I
skills.
v
CIRGL
"Runs cir
around t
"Lively go
-School
I 
ý- 
BooMknaliHtafndPublishrsWeekly star
te's in a bad mood. Just
then he's supposed to play
ball with the guys, it
decides to rain.' Enter
Pete's parents, who
cheer him up by
pretending to turn
him into a pizza. As
mother looks on, Pete
is kneaded, tossed in
the air, and sprinkled
with flour (talcum
owder) by his father, who
his son in growing ever
-d L 
L 
d-
mulrt uigIyle uy mLe inspiu
goofiness of the game. One of the most joyously appealing
picture books Steig's done in recent years."
-Starred 
review / ALA Booklist
"Mr. Steig introduces a game guaranteed to produce a
good mood...[one that] will amuse chef and entree alike."
-Starred 
review / Publishers Weekly
"A great book to share with would-be
pizzas of all ages. As always, the [full c
illustrations develop characters and situati
with telling economy." -The Horn Book
"What leaps from the page, with a
dancer's grace, is the warmth and
imagination wrapped in an act of
tuned-in parenting." -Kirkus 
Reviews
All ages. 
$13.95 TR 0-06-205157-1
$13.89 LB 0-06-205158-X
Michael di Capua 
Books- 
H 
Pubisher..
I
"Luminous."
"The account of Mary's early life reads fluidly and evenly, and
the artistic reproductions from masters such as Rossetti, Giotto,
Titian, and Barocci contribute to a well-rounded portrayal."
-Publishers Weekly
"Particularly good reproductions of the artwork coupled with a
well-written story make this an appealing, empowering volume."
-Kirkus Reviews*
Morrow Junior Books
A division of William Morrow & Co., 
Inc.
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York 
NY 
10019
www.williommorrow.com
All ages. 32 pp.
TR 
$16.00/0-688-14061-0
LE 
$15.93/0-688-14062-9
~ 
I 
L 
L· 
~L
TAIT R 
o 
QE
SAINT ERLIUC
S own
A New York Times Book Review Best Illustrated Book of 1998
A Handful of Beans
Six Fairy Tales
Retold by Jeanne Steig * Pictures by William Steig
Rumpelstiltskin
Riding Hood
Beauty and the Beast
The Frog Prince
01XV
Hansel and Gretel
Jack and the Beanstalk
"What a book to turn kids on
to the power of story....
"It's the sense that fairy tales happen to people like us that will
enthrall young children (and those who read to them) in ...
this small volume [with] a decidedly down-to-earth tone. The
telling is rhythmic, colloquial, and direct, and the loose line-
and-watercolor illustrations in Steig's cartoon-style bring the
dwarves, giants, witches, and princesses right into the kitchen."
-Starred review / ALA Booklist
"Jeanne and William Steig deliver droll retellings and puckish
new art for ... a handful of tales certain to please adults as
much as children." 
-- Starred review / Publishers Weekly
All ages. $17.95 TR (0-06-205162-8) $17.89 LB (0-06-205163-6)
Michael di Capua Books * HarperCollins Publishers
Little Red!
*~ru Ixu~' 
iii MMY 
[61 MII w~ 
ru u ir er i 
ru 
s. '
N 
A 
MuScLuRLo~
Fi 
UGS 
HOS 
PULSHR
CELESTIAL RIVER
Creation Tales of the Milky Way
Andrea Stenn Stryer
Traditional stories from Native
America, Africa, Japan, Polynesia,
Australia, South America, and
Greece convey wisdom and
understanding of the natural world
while also entertaining.
For ages 8+
96 pages, 53/%" x 8'"
Hardback $14.95/ISBN 0-87483-529-1
Paperback $7.95/ISBN 0-87483-528-3
ASIAN TALES
AND TELLERS
Traditional stories from sixteen
Asian countries from India to Japan.
Asian themes such as harmony,
friendsnip, simplicity, and hard
work are emphasized. Includes
information about traditional
storytellers at work in Asia today.
For ages 12+
224 pages, 53/8
" x 83/8"
Hardback $24.95/ISBN 0-87483-527-5
Paperback $14.95/ISBN 0-87483-526-7
AVAILABLE FOR IMMEDIATE SHIPMENT
AUGUST August House Publishers, Inc.
H 
T 
201 E. Markham Street * Little Rock, AR 72201
&J Si 
Phone 1-800-284-8784 * Fax 501-372-5579
W 
email: order@augusthouse.com
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.S.A.
RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED
. J*'
*************3-DIGIT 618
40590 BCCB 520.5 REM=35 PO:CKM 8
CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
51 E ARMORY AVE
CHAMPAIGN IL 61820-6601
0008-9036(1
1 )52:5*;1-C
0008-9036(199901 )52:5*"1 -C
Yi·~~i~i 
~C_;·r 
lii·r:f
("" 
~:-- 
l.a7'i 
:;r
··- 
li"r 
it 
*$-i 
:I~~~ 
g 
ii
:'i
PERIODICALS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
invites you to visit our home page at
http://edfu.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Regular features include:
* Bulletin Stars-what we starred this month
* Bulletin Dozen-a genre- or theme-based list of titles
* Quote of the Month
* Bulletin Blue Ribbons 1990-1997
* the Baby Bulletin-a sample collection of recent reviews
Occasional features include:
* Rising Star-an examination of the work of a talented new author
or artist
* True Blue-reflections on a time-honored talent
* Dueling Reviews-a look at the discussion behind the scenes when a book
polarizes the editors
* And more ... updated monthly!
r .:i
