T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by Johns Hopkins University Press
October 2013
Vol. 67   No. 2
 
To order
Call 800.548.1784 or 410.516.6987; fax 410.516.3866;  
e-mail: jrnlcirc@press.jhu.edu; or visit us online at  
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
essential.
Deborah Stevenson, Editor 
UniversiTy of illinois aT Urbana-Champaign
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books provides 
concise summaries and critical evaluations of current 
children’s books. This invaluable resource assists 
readers with questions regarding the ever-evolving 
children’s literature field. Reviews give an in-depth 
look at a selected book’s content, reading level, 
strengths and weaknesses, and quality of the format, 
as well as suggestions for curricular use. 
Published monthly (except August). Volume 67 (2014).  
ISSN 0008-9036; E-ISSN 1558-6766.
the Bulletin of the Center  
for Children’s Books
annUal individUal sUbsCripTions
$55.00 (print); $60.00 (online)
annUal insTiTUTional sUbsCripTions
$100.00 (print); $110.00 (online);  
$140.00 (print & online)
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
October 2013
Vol. 67 No. 2
69  the BIg PICture
 
 The Dust Bowl  written and illus. by Don Brown
70  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
89 • Locomotive  written and illus. by Brian Floca
90 • From Norvelt to Nowhere  by Jack Gantos
117 • The Dream Thieves  by Maggie Stiefvater
124 • Mr. Wuffles!  written and illus. by David Wiesner
126 •  This Is the Rope: A Story from the Great Migration   
by Jacqueline Woodson; illus. by James Ransome
128  ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons
129  suBjeCt And use Index
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R Recommended.
Ad Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor (KQG)
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Thaddeus Andracki, Reviewer (TA)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
Alaine Martaus, Reviewer (AM)
Hope Morrison, Reviewer (HM)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Kim Naples, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print $100.00 or electronic $110.00; combined print & electronic $140.00; 
multiple institutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, 
$55.00; students, $20.00. In countries other than the United States, add $17.60 per subscription for 
postage; subscribers in Canada and Mexico add $13.20. Single copy rate: $11.00. Volumes available 
in microfilm from ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes avail-
able in microfiche from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription 
checks should be made payable to Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address 
should provide both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin 
of the Center for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. 
Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 
2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 410-
516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/journals/
advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2013 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image from The Dust Bowl ©2013 by Don Brown and used by permission of Houghton Mif-
flin Harcourt.
OctOber 2013 • 69
the BIg PICture
The Great American Dust Bowl
written and illustrated by Don Brown
Comics and graphic novels are now comfortably ensconced in most youth library 
collections, enjoying an ever-increasing readership among kids and, at last, ungrudg-
ing respect from adults. Book awards and discussion guides even offer a kind of 
imprimatur for their curricular use. The lion’s share of attention and enthusiasm, 
however, seems reserved for fictional works, or biographies and memoirs with a 
strong narrative trajectory. Straight-up nonfiction without even a fiction chaser 
is harder to find, and it is too often marketed as a hi-lo approach, abridging or 
simplifying material for struggling readers. Anyone looking for an exemplar of how 
comics can bring a true story compellingly to life—with depth and sophistica-
tion—need look no further than Don Brown’s account of the epic natural disaster 
of the 1930s, the Dust Bowl.
A great story starts with a great hook, and Brown’s opening double-page 
spread depicts a roiling brown mass consuming a quarter of the page space, in 
hot pursuit of a terrified farmer and a host of fleeing rabbits and birds. Animals 
fly into and leap out of the ink border of the frame, the lead rabbit diving off the 
page for safety and the farmer exclaiming in a word bubble, “Oh my God! Here 
it comes!” The narration box describes this alarming scene of April 14, 1935 in a 
tone reminiscent of a vintage newsreel: “A wild wind whipped up billions upon 
billions of specks of dust to form a savage storm on America’s plains.” Context, 
however, is key to understanding the calamity, and a page turn takes readers back 
for the facts. A stack of three narrow horizontal frames and two brief paragraphs 
swiftly and efficiently explain the genesis of the Rockies and Great Plains, where 
the drama will play out, and a half dozen more spreads trace, often with quiet 
irony, the interaction of human history and natural terrain that leads to disaster. 
Bison discover the grasslands, Indians discover the bison, white settlers remove the 
Indians and the bison to make way for a series of economic enterprises that doom 
the land; the sad backstory is laid out as thoroughly and concisely as any textbook 
account. And now comes the main event.
Brown faces quite a challenge: how to make the tedium of years of drought 
remain engrossing; how to make blackout conditions vivid. The solution lies in his 
masterful use of the comic-panel format to slow or accelerate the sense of time, and 
of color to evoke emotion. A farmer’s grinding tasks plod along in small framed 
vignettes, moments plucked from a single day, and on the facing page he guides 
horse and plow in a broad zigzag across a trio of vertical panels, expanding the 
day into endless monotony. “There wasn’t much time for fun,” he dryly remarks. 
The drought arrives and drags on for years, which Brown captures on a single 
70 • the bulletin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
three-panel page that features a man and his pregnant wife (“one year”); man, wife 
and baby (“two years”); man, wife, and toddler (“three years”) posed on parched 
ground that refuses to yield. When the sky turns to fury and the action takes off, 
however, Brown frees his images from their tidy constraints. Farmers are blown 
right off their feet and knocked clear out of their frame and into the narration box 
below. Delicate tendrils of dusty wind tease the ground loose and lick at people’s 
heels, while the forward edge of the dust cloud seems to sprout arms that torment 
the farmer in its sights.
The palette for the drama is dictated by the dust monsters themselves 
(“Depending where it came from, the flying dirt was brown, black, yellow, gray, 
or red”), and faded, dust-scoured clothing and a searing sun offer no relief from 
these color constraints. Once again, though, Brown makes magic with these very 
restrictions, maximizing the use of searing, blinding yellow to evoke relentless 
heat, bleached-out golds to capture the arid farmland, grayish browns to suggest 
the ubiquitous grit invading houses, and dense black hatching to convey the suf-
focating dust clouds. Clouds of grit infiltrate the clear skies of Eastern cities, car 
headlights pierce unnaturally twilit streets, and of course the punishing dusters, 
some crackling with lightning, suddenly blot out the sun. An historic disaster, 
certainly, but a fabulous opportunity for an artist with an eye for the inherent 
chiaroscuro of the event.
When the rains return and a farm family spreads their arms to welcome the 
hazy gray diagonal lines on a refreshing blue spread, readers share their near palpable 
relief. Brown’s not quite done yet, however: as he recaps the toll of the disaster, Grant 
Wood’s American Gothic farmers glance nervously up and off the page—could be 
that the photograph of a 1935 duster, set below the selected bibliography, reminds 
them of what passed. Or perhaps the final photograph, following the source notes, 
of a 2011 dust storm in Phoenix suggests what’s to come. “Here and there on the 
high southern plain, some veterans of the 1930s dusters remain . . . still keeping a 
finger to the wind and an eye to the sky.”  (See p. 78 for publication information.)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer
Adler, dAvid A. Danny’s Doodles: The Jellybean Experiment;  written and illus. 
by David A. Adler. Sourcebooks, 2013 [112p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4022-8721-3 $4.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-4
The new kid in Danny’s class, Calvin Waffle, is friendly enough, but he’s a little 
weird: he’s asked Danny to keep a massive bag of jellybeans in his pockets for 
OctOber 2013 • 71
a week as part of an unexplained experiment. When Calvin invites Danny and 
some classmates to his house for a homework party, he reveals that his experiment 
was designed to see if smelling like jellybeans would make Danny more popular 
(it worked), and the group discovers that Calvin’s actually a really perceptive and 
kind-hearted guy in spite of his quirks. Adler adds some depth to the befriend-the-
new-kid story with inventive phrasing, humorous characterization, and a gentle 
backstory about Calvin’s absent father. Although some more complex vocabulary 
might push this toward stronger readers or reading aloud, moderately oversized 
text and manageable, chunky chapters enhance readability, and the doodles that 
lend this series its name pepper the text in the form of cleverly captioned squiggles 
and stick figures. Danny and Calvin are classic non-superhero chapter book pro-
tagonists, and they’re remarkably easy to relate to; the factual information about 
experimentation might also make this an interesting literature complement to a 
classroom study of the scientific method.  TA
Almond, dAvid The Boy Who Swam with Piranhas; illus. by Oliver Jeffers. 
Candlewick, 2013 234p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6169-4 $15.99   
R Gr. 4-6
When Stanley Potts’ guardian uncle cans—literally—all but one of the beautiful 
goldfish Stanley has rescued from a carnival stall, Stanley runs away from home 
with the goldfish survivor in tow. He joins up with the kind owner of the stall, 
Dostoyevsky, who lets Stanley take care of the goldfish. Stanley then discovers 
his destiny when the mysterious Pancho Pirelli, who swims with piranhas, joins 
the fair; it seems Stanley may share Pirelli’s gift for gliding among the toothy fish 
unscathed. This has some of the fantasy quality of a Roald Dahl novel but without 
the dark heart that lies at the core of many of Dahl’s works. Almond’s narrative 
is both quirky and dreamlike, and the kindness of many of the characters propels 
it forward with positive energy. The present-tense narration is sometimes lyrical 
(“He looks into the sky and into the universe. He imagines it going on forever and 
forever to the stars, and way beyond the stars, and way beyond the stars beyond the 
stars, and he knows that his wondering and wondering will never have an end”), 
sometimes straightforward or confiding, and the combination of these styles is 
surprisingly effective. Almond has a deft touch with the moonlight and mysticism, 
allowing readers to linger a bit in the mystery but at the same time unspooling the 
tale’s trajectory purposefully and thoughtfully. Jeffers’ frequent and slightly offbeat 
monochromatic illustrations are well matched to Almond’s whimsical text. Middle-
grade fans of Almond and those who appreciate Dahl’s imagination but prefer a 
gentler read will find this fish story a real catch.  JH
Appelt, KAthi The True Blue Scouts of Sugar Man Swamp. Atheneum, 
2013 327p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2105-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8121-3 $9.99   
M Gr. 4-6
There’s really only one building in Sugar Man Swamp—the Paradise Pies Café, 
where twelve-year-old Chap and his mother live and make fried sugar pies from 
the scrumptious muscovado sugarcane for the occasional passerby. Also inhabiting 
the swamp are Bingo and J’miah, two scrappy young raccoons, who keep watch 
over the swamp under the auspices of the Sugar Man, a sleepy, Bigfoot-like cryp-
72 • the bulletin
tid. When the owner of the swampland wants to clear the café to make room for 
an alligator-wrestling sideshow and a pack of wild hogs heads for the sugarcane 
grove, Chap and his mom must come up with “a boatload of cash” to satisfy their 
landlord, while Bingo and J’miah must wake the Sugar Man so he can protect the 
swamp from the stampede. Appelt weaves together many strands of story in this 
animal fantasy tall tale, often shifting gears at breakneck speed, but she leaves some 
dangling (a repeated thread about Chap’s grandfather’s spotting of the presumed 
extinct ivory-billed woodpecker never pays off) even at the long-in-coming, twee 
ending that’s foreseeable from the get-go. The backwoodsy tone has its charm, 
but the sticky-sweet narration alternates between overshooting its vocabulary and 
condescending to readers with mannered direct address. Brief chapters and folksy 
language might make this a readaloud in the hands of an experienced teller, but 
even then the over-repetition of the cleverest onomatopoeias and turns of phrase is 
likely to push the quaintness beyond its stretching point. Critter-loving kids anxious 
for an adventure in the swamp with a strong twang would probably do better to 
pick up Wells’ Rascal: A Dog and His Boy (BCCB 10/10).  TA
Archer, dosh Urgency Emergency!: Big Bad Wolf; written and illus. by Dosh 
Archer. Whitman, 2013 [48p]
ISBN 978-0-8075-8352-4 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 1-3
           Urgency Emergency!: Itsy Bitsy Spider; written and illus. by Dosh Archer. Whit-
man, 2013 [48p]
ISBN 978-0-8075-8358-6 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 1-3
Doctor Glenda, a clever canine, and Nurse Percy, an intrepid chicken, handle emer-
gencies at City Hospital, where they serve fairy-tale and nursery-rhyme characters 
in need of medical assistance. In Big Bad Wolf, the Big Bad Wolf is brought in for 
choking (“It may not be something stuck in his throat—it may be someone” ); 
Doctor Glenda and Nurse Percy pull a granny from Wolf’s gullet mostly unharmed 
(“She was damp and a bit chewed around the edges, but otherwise OK”), then 
promptly call police for Wolf’s arrest. In Itsy Bitsy Spider, Itsy has suffered a cut to 
the head after the rain washed her right out of the waterspout, but Doctor Glenda 
stitches and bandages the cut while Nurse Percy provides comfort (he “held all 
of Itsy’s hands”). Big Bad Wolf has a slight edge on humor, but both are solid, 
amusing texts that would work well as read-alones or readalouds, and the writing 
is clear, concise, and accessible to a primary-grade audience. The folkloric connec-
tions broaden the use possibilities for libraries and classrooms, and the titles could 
inspire student writing or dramatic projects in a similar vein, while the medical 
situations are surprisingly educational. The bold, childlike art is appealingly comic, 
if unsophisticated, and the lipsticked, flop-eared Glenda and fuschia-combed Percy, 
in his turquoise scrubs, are a stalwart duo. Use this to inject some humor into a 
familiar folklore unit, or give it to the primary-grade readers who are tickled by 
fractured fairy tales.  JH
OctOber 2013 • 73
Arndt, ingo Best Foot Forward: Exploring Feet, Flippers, and Claws; tr. from 
the German by J. Alison James; written and illus. with photographs by Ingo 
Arndt. Holiday House, 2013 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8234-2857-1 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-4
This introductory nature-study photoessay takes a look at feet from a literally dif-
ferent perspective—most of the feet are photographed from the underside, showing 
the characteristics of the foot that really make it valuable to its owner. The format 
is the classic tease and reveal, with a spread asking “Whose foot is this?” followed 
by a spread with the answer and some images of a few other feet in the relevant 
category (“feet that walk,” “feet that climb,” “feet that swim,” etc.). The text in 
this German import is streamlined and focused, acting mainly as captions for the 
photographs, which are the real stars of the show. The photos typically feature the 
limb in question isolated against an inky black background for maximum focus, 
and the details—the prickly spininess of a lobster’s foot, the almost botanical purity 
of the gecko’s foot, the leathery delicacy of the pink pads of the tiger—are visually 
arresting. The few photographs that deviate from the underside approach fail to 
identify the alternative perspective, but the underlying—heh—interest still carries 
the day. This is easily browsable even for kids not up to the reading level, who will 
enjoy the visual guessing game, and it’s a logical partner for Steve Jenkins titles such 
as What Do You Do with a Tail Like This? (BCCB 3/03) or step-up to Nic Bishop. 
A brief index allows readers to hunt by animal.  DS
BAcigAlupi, pAolo Zombie Baseball Beatdown. Little, 2013 [296p]
ISBN 978-0-316-22078-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-7
Rabi and his friends Miguel and Joe are just looking to improve their baseball skills 
on the field next to Milrow Meats, the factory farm in Iowa that produces beef 
to feed seven states. After a massive stink-wave emanating from the farm courses 
through the whole town, their investigation into what’s really going on at Milrow 
leads them right into the path of their zombified coach, which in turn leads to the 
discovery of a whole herd of zombie cows, mutated by attempts to increase their 
productivity and ready to be ground up and distributed in a supermarket near you. 
The boys turn every which way in order to take down the corporation responsible, 
only to be thwarted by sleazy lawyers and the restless undead who’ve already been 
infected. This zombie tale is satisfyingly funny in all of the middle-school boy ways 
and gory enough to please fans of Left 4 Dead. Rabi and his friends are strongly 
characterized with vivid contexts: Rabi is half-Bengali, and he’s therefore seen as an 
outsider and de facto nerd; Miguel and his family are undocumented immigrants, 
and his parents and relatives get picked up by the authorities when they try to expose 
the factory’s shady undertakings from the inside. This facet allows Bacigalupi to add 
smart commentary on quotidian racism and the intensity of recent immigration 
laws, but the overlay gets heavy-handed when it comes to moralizing on food safety; 
the call-to-action epilogue is both didactic and confusing, since Rabi’s disclaimer 
that none of this actually happened seems to be meant as a cover story but goes 
far enough that it actually undermines belief in the story’s events. The ending, 
too, fizzles out into an offstage squelching of the zombie apocalypse. The book is 
74 • the bulletin
nonetheless has possibility for introducing reluctant readers to activism through 
literature, as well as being a dark comedy with a bit of heart.  TA
BArclAy, eric Hiding Phil; written and illus. by Eric Barclay. Scholastic, 
2013 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-545-46477-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 3-6 yrs
Three siblings are playing outside one fine day when they discover an affable 
turquoise elephant on a park bench, whose luggage tags proudly proclaim that his 
name is “Phil.” Phil makes a fabulous playmate, with a trunk that doubles as a 
slide and a shower for their dog, but when the kids suddenly realize that Mom and 
Dad might not like having Phil around, the children attempt to keep him hidden. 
After a few failed attempts, they finally settle on draping him in a sheet and paint-
ing “CLUBHOUSE” on Phil’s side, which doesn’t fool Mom and Dad for long. 
The parents pack Phil up and send him away on the Pachyderm Bus Line, only 
to make a last-minute reversal. It appears to be too late, though, and Phil’s bus is 
long gone—but Phil pokes his head from the top of the page, reassuring audiences 
that he is around to stay. The fuzzy pencil outlines and muted but lively palette of 
the oil illustrations soften the cartoonishness of Phil’s big, round eyes and rounded 
rectangular body to make him a comically cuddly pal, while the siblings quietly 
evoke the Peanuts gang with their emotive gesturing and slightly oversized heads. 
The sparseness of the text, with only a few lines of dialogue on most pages, makes 
the paintings do most of the work here, a task they accomplish with both their 
friendly straightforwardness and amusing attention to detail (though kids may 
not immediately understand the humorously wide-eyed realization that jolts the 
kids after their exclamation that “Mom and Dad will love Phil!”). This charming 
story will work best in a close lapsit because of the pictorial detail that drives the 
narrative, but it’s likely to leave youngsters hoping they’ll run into a gentle giant 
of their own on their next outing.  TA
BAscomB, neAl The Nazi Hunters: How a Team of Spies and Survivors Captured 
the World’s Most Notorious Nazi. Levine/Scholastic, 2013 [256p] illus. with 
photographs
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-43099-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-56239-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-10
Among the many war criminals who slipped through the net at the close of World 
War II was Adolph Eichmann, the SS officer in charge of transporting Jews to slave 
labor and extermination camps for Hitler’s Final Solution. A chance sighting of 
Eichmann in Argentina is brought to the attention of the German government, 
but the evidence isn’t enough to act upon. The Israelis, more focused on nation 
building than prosecutions, also are initially reluctant to pursue leads. When more 
credible intelligence is finally collected, however, and placed in the hands of people 
with a will to follow through, the wheels of justice begin to turn. In this reworking 
of his adult title, Hunting Eichmann, for a youth audience, Bascomb reconstructs 
the 1960 pursuit and capture of Eichmann by Israeli defense forces with edge-of-
your-seat immediacy. Readers follow the patient surveillance, carefully laid traps, 
tricky transportation issues, split-second coordination, thorough backup plans, 
OctOber 2013 • 75
and of course, creative reaction when, inevitably, pieces fall apart. Fans of Steve 
Sheinkin will be equally appreciative of Bascomb’s strong storytelling, his careful 
notes (which frequently comment on conflicting evidence), and his inclusion of 
some seriously cool images ranging from artwork created by one of Eichmann’s 
captors to spy camera photos of Eichmann’s tiny brick residence in Argentina. An 
extensive bibliography, arranged by media type, is included, as well as an index.  EB
BeAudoin, seAn Wise Young Fool. Little, 2013 412p
ISBN 978-0-316-20379-1 $18.00   
R Gr. 9-12
Ritchie Sudden is a straight-edge rocker in a world gone askew. A drunk driver has 
killed his sister, his dad has left, and his mother’s girlfriend has moved in. Ritchie 
himself is serving a ninety-day sentence in a juvenile detention center, where his 
smart-aleck aloofness has made him the favorite entry in an illicit fighting ring. 
His counselor suggests that he keep a journal, in which his explanation of how 
he came to be in the detention center is withheld until the end, and in which he 
traces his romantic exploits (he’s hopelessly in love with an unreachable girl, and 
he has sex with the wrong girl before he ends up with his crush, who disillusions 
his dreams). Just as the plot summary suggests, this hits all of the expected plot 
points of the Angry Young Man genre, hewing so close to the line Frank Portman 
traced in King Dork (BCCB 5/06) that the two are almost indistinguishable in 
tone and conceit (there’s even a chapter devoted entirely to band names, as well 
as an appendix devoted to a snarky hipster critique of existing band names). Such 
imitation is unusual for Beaudoin, who has proven nothing if not starkly original in 
his previous works (You Killed Wesley Payne, BCCB 1/11, etc.), but he nonetheless 
plays language like Hendrix plays a guitar, so what might seem stale in conception 
makes up many thousand bonus points in linguistic style, inventiveness, and dex-
terity. Ritchie is ultimately likable in his grief, even when he is being a bad friend, 
a raging son, or a chauvinistic jerk, and the characters around him, especially his 
mom’s girlfriend, add perspectives that Ritchie knows are important even if he 
can’t quite accept them yet. Give this to fans of Tim Tharp, Chris Lynch, and, of 
course, Frank Portman.  KC 
BecKer, AAron Journey; illus. by Aaron Becker. Candlewick, 2013 40p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6053-6 $15.99   
R 6-9 yrs
In this wordless picture book, a restless young girl draws a door on her bedroom 
wall with her special red marker, then opens the door and steps through it into a 
strange and fantastical land. Her literally magic marker allows her to create a boat 
(for travel on canal and aqueduct) and then a hot air balloon; floating through the 
clouds, she sees a beautiful purple bird taken captive by people on another airship. 
She manages to board the ship and free the bird, but she’s taken captive herself 
and loses her marker in the process. The grateful bird retrieves it for her, and she 
flees on a newly drawn flying carpet, following the bird back to earth and through 
a strange purple door—which leads to the very city she left and a boy wielding his 
own powerful, purple marker. Occupying an intriguing middle ground between 
Crockett Johnson’s Harold and the Purple Crayon and David Macaulay’s fictional-
ized feats of urban engineering, Becker’s world is fully realized in alluring land- and 
skyscapes. The city the girl paddles to is an intricate confection of gold domes 
and vertiginous turrets, with a solidly conceived waterway (complete with sluices 
76 • the bulletin
and locks) flowing through its elegant center, while the bird-capturing airship is 
a steampunk froth of gears and spines and wheels; the occasional cutaway adds to 
the appeal. The line and watercolor style has a soft dreaminess to it, and the distant 
perspectives and controlled palette (shaded earth tones save for the girl’s red and 
the bird’s purple) enhance the fantasy flavor. Audiences may be more interested in 
the worldbuilding than the plot, but they’ll pick up on the concept and enjoy the 
fantastical voyage.  DS
Berger, sAmAnthA Crankenstein; illus. by Dan Santat. Little, 2013 34p
ISBN 978-0-316-12656-4 $16.99   
R 5-8 yrs
The grumpy monster inside all of us who rears its ugly head when things go 
wrong—the one who says “MEHHRRR!” to every cheerful suggestion—takes 
center stage in this picture book describing a kid at his most ornery (“You would 
say, Good morning!! How are you? Crankenstein would say, MEHHRRRR!”). 
Never fear, though, because when Crankenstein meets another Crankenstein, 
laughter ensues, banishing the Crankensteins for another day. A run-down of all 
those situations—rainy days, long lines, and bedtime—when Crankenstein might 
show up will be recognizable to most kids, and the implicit lesson that we all 
have bad days is effectively carried out by the matter-of-fact, personable narration 
(“Yes, that Crankenstein is some pretty scary business, all right”). The oversized, 
full-bleed digital illustrations and easy-to-follow wobbly hand-lettering make this 
exceptionally conducive to sharing, and the pale green-skinned protagonist with 
black hair plastered to his forehead is easy to relate to with his everyday clothes and 
tight close-ups of his face as he over-expresses his emotions. Soft lines and friendly 
colors make the monster snuggly in spite of his disposition, and the impressive use 
of contrast lighting helps keep the tone of the book warm. Particularly silly is the 
scene when the two Crankensteins meet, in a tight close-up on a green boy and 
girl with bloodshot eyes, runny noses, and flyaway hair. Kids will appreciate that 
this all-too-familiar cantankerousness is presented as a mere fact of life, and parents 
may be intrigued by the possibility of a remedy in showing just how over-the-top 
a Crankenstein is.  TA
Berry, Julie All the Truth That’s in Me. Viking, 2013 [288p]
ISBN 978-0-670-78615-2 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 9-12
Kidnapped from her small farming community at the age of fourteen, Judith Finch 
returned after two years only to find herself spurned by her family and neighbors 
when they discovered that she has been savagely robbed of her ability to speak. 
Two more years later, still burdened by the terrible secrets of her experience, silent 
Judith has become the perceptive observer of village life, though her attention is 
focused most keenly on Lucas, the boy she’s loved from a distance all her life. When 
invading forces threaten to destroy the village, Judith uses her secret knowledge 
to save the day, but her revelations bring long-buried mysteries and simmering 
hatreds back to the surface. In the face of her persistent silence, the townspeople 
condemn her and cast further suspicion on the innocent Lucas, forcing Judith to 
finally reveal the truths she’s been hiding in order to save herself and the person 
she loves most. An emotional journey conveyed in lyrical prose, this historical 
novel, set in an unspecified pre-industrial rural community, is also an absorbing 
OctOber 2013 • 77
adventure with elements of mystery and romance, providing a compelling mixture 
of the heart-wrenching and the heart-pounding. Brief, evocative chapters, often 
no longer than a passage, intertwine deeply personal narration with glimpses into 
Judith’s tragic past, never lingering too long on any specific moment and slowly 
raising the suspense. The focused attention on Judith’s perspective allows her to 
remain admirably resolute but at the same time sympathetically vulnerable, a strong 
heroine who still wants to be understood, appreciated, and even loved. This will be 
an excellent recommendation for fans of Salerni’s The Caged Graves (BCCB 5/13), 
who like their girl-centered historical fiction with a heavy helping of sentiment, 
passion, and intrigue.  AM
BlocK, FrAncescA liA Love in the Time of Global Warming.  Holt, 
2013 [240p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-9627-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
After a massive earthquake and tsunami devastate Los Angeles and possibly the entire 
U.S., Penelope is alone in her seaside home when looters come, one of them a mys-
terious man named Merk, who insists that she take his van and go find her parents 
with a map he has provided. The map launches Pen on a journey that loosely follows 
the exploits of Odysseus, re-imagined, in Block’s familiar dreamlike fashion, in the 
ruined locales of her beloved city. Pen encounters the brutal, genetically engineered 
giants who are responsible for the earthquake and whose creation is linked to her 
father, a former scientist who incurred the wrath of his partner, Kronen, when he 
protested his experiments. She also attracts a crew of survivors: Hex, a beautiful 
transman living among the lotus eaters; Ez, a boy enslaved by a Circe-like character 
named Beatrix; and Ash, a strikingly handsome boy with an alluring voice. Over 
the course of their journey, Pen and Hex and then Ez and Ash fall in love and face 
the terrors of their new world together, but Pen’s goal of finding her family never 
wavers. Block’s self-conscious efforts to fuse multiple mythologies and genres has 
the logical weakness common to dreams: the plot is disjointed and often unsatisfy-
ing, with convenient appearances of Merk whenever Pen comes to a dead end, and 
magic elements appearing randomly to explain the otherwise inexplicable, not to 
mention the completely unrealistic and wish-fulfilling conclusion. Like a dream, 
however, what holds the novel together is a consistent emotional tone, here one of 
exhausted determination in the face of loss and mourning, rendered aesthetically 
beautiful, though gory, by Block’s prose. The result is more collage than story, offer-
ing only tenuous narrative or thematic coherence, but diverse readers will certainly 
latch on to different, undeniably sparkly bits.  KC 
BrAdBury, JenniFer A Moment Comes. Atheneum, 2013 278p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4169-7876-3 $16.99
E-book ISBN 978-1-4169-8302-6 $9.99   
R Gr. 7-10
Three culturally disparate teens, caught in the perilous political drama of the 1947 
partition of India, find their destinies irrevocably interlocked as they temporarily 
reside in the same household. Tariq, a Muslim, avidly accepts a position as assistant 
to Mr. Darnsley, a British cartographer working on the proposed boundary lines, in 
hope that his employer will recommend him for admission to Oxford. Anupreet, a 
homebody who shares her Sikh family’s traditional values, is urged by her family to 
78 • the bulletin
work in the Darnsley residence, where she will presumably be safe from the kind 
of assault that left her scarred and shaken. Margaret Darnsley, the cartographer’s 
daughter, has been dragged to India by her parents until the scandal of her romance 
with an American soldier has sufficiently cooled. Margaret is smitten with Tariq 
and wouldn’t mind a fling; Tariq only has eyes for Anupreet but understands that 
their religious backgrounds render a relationship taboo; Anupreet finds her horizons 
expanding as she builds a cautious friendship with wild child Margaret, but she 
really just wants to go home. Then Tariq’s thuggish acquaintance Sameer corners 
him into playing a dangerous criminal-political game, the massacre of Anupreet’s 
relatives in a train hijacking radicalizes her brother and upsets the family balance, 
and Margaret’s ill-advised attempts at charity work cost a beggar child his limbs 
and nearly cost Anupreet and Tariq their lives. Bradbury is equally adept at limn-
ing characters ill at ease with their own motivations and at infusing historical 
background smoothly into the interlocking teen mini-dramas. An historical note 
is appended, but most necessary background is seamlessly incorporated into the 
alternating chapters in the three teens’ voices, and readers who pick this up for the 
romantic triangle will come away with a surprising grasp of Britain’s withdrawal from 
the mighty flagship of its empire, and the tragic cost of the “population exchange” 
that accompanied independence.  EB
Brown, don The Great American Dust; Bowl written and illus. by Don 
Brown. Houghton, 2013 [80p]
ISBN 978-0-547-81550-3 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 4-7
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 69, for review.
Brown, peter Mr. Tiger Goes Wild; written and illus. by Peter Brown. Little, 
2013 42p
ISBN 978-0-316-20063-9 $18.00   
R 4-8 yrs
Mr. Tiger is tired of his prim world of biped animals in petticoats and top hats, and 
he comes up with a wild idea: he’ll walk on all fours. After gallivanting about for a 
few days, much to everyone else’s dismay, he decides to go a step further and shed 
his suit. This is too much for the community, which insists he leave. Mr. Tiger lives 
in the jungle for some time, only to realize that he misses his friends, so he returns 
to the city, where he finds that he’s instigated a revolution where he and everyone 
else feel free to be whomever they like. Although the story hits some familiar notes, 
Brown’s illustrations—gouache, watercolor, ink, and pencil elements digitally as-
sembled—ensure that it’s divertingly and smartly told. The animals populating the 
early twentieth-century city are comically boxy and flat, with beady eyes and stoic 
expressions, while the wilder environments are whimsically textured with speckles 
and squiggles, as well as the thick feathering of gouache and the mottled richness of 
watercolor. Mr. Tiger’s transition to all fours is visually narrated through iterations 
of his vertical figure progressively lower on the page while his eyes shiftily move 
about—followed by a striking full-spread of a grinning (still-suited) Mr. Tiger in 
an experimental four-legged pose. Use this as an entertaining contrast to Willems’ 
Naked Mole Rat Gets Dressed (BCCB 2/09), or just brush up on your best snooty 
storytime accent and let the stodginess satire rip.  TA
OctOber 2013 • 79
cArmichAel, clAy Brother, Brother. Roaring Brook, 2013 [320p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-743-2 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
When seventeen-year-old Brother Grace loses the wise, warm, lively grandmother 
who reared him, he doesn’t know where to turn. Mem, his grandmother, had always 
been tight-lipped about his background, stressing only that going to visit the island 
where she grew up as the daughter of the housekeeper of a wealthy family was out of 
the question. Now that she’s gone, however, Brother makes an unsettling discovery 
about what the island holds, and he makes the trek to the island to uncover the 
secrets of his family. Carmichael deftly creates an atmospheric setting; the property, 
ironically but aptly called Eden, is a paradise infected by sadness and corruption 
and haunted by tragedy. There Brother finds relatives he never knew: his great-
uncle (a powerful senator who brooks no challenge to his control over his family) 
and Brother’s own drug-addicted twin brother. Brother arrives with his own posse, 
including a childhood friend and his little brother with problems of their own, a 
strong-willed, intelligent girl he meets on the way, and his dog, Trooper, who is 
simply everything a dog should be—faithful, heroic, and more than a little psychic. 
The working-class characters, including some in the senator’s own household who 
are charmed by Brother’s unflappable kindness, act as a critique of the senator’s 
personal and political decision-making as well as a loving and practical support 
network; this network enables Brother to stand against the senator’s plans and even 
restore a wholesome sweetness to the corrupted Eden. Fans of Sarah Dessen and 
Rachel Vail will enjoy this family story with its touch of mystery, well-developed 
sense of place, and appealing characters.  KC 
coccA-leFFler, mAryAnn Theo’s Mood; written and illus. by Maryann Cocca-
Leffler. Whitman, 2013 [24p]
ISBN 978-0-8075-7778-3 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-7 yrs
On Mondays in Miss Cady’s class, students share their “mood news,” but Theo, 
who became a big brother over the weekend, isn’t exactly sure what he feels. His 
classmates give suggestions, each offering an emotion and its cause (“‘Maybe you 
feel jealous like me,’ said Lily. ‘My sister won another trophy’”). After Theo listens 
to each friend, he finally explains that he feels all the moods described (“I feel happy. 
My grandma is staying for a whole week. But I also feel jealous. Mommy has no 
time to play with me. And I feel afraid. I don’t want to drop the baby,” etc.). The 
new-brother storyline adds a nice framework to the typical grocery list of feelings, 
and the storyline helpfully results in each mood’s getting more than one possible 
motivation. This is a useful resource for talking about emotions, and the narra-
tive partners effectively with the mixed-media art, with a clean page design that 
enhances focus on the theme: an image of the student making the suggestion faces 
a scrapbook-style snapshot of the described event. The simple emotions and kid-
oriented examples make this accessible for young listeners, and there are plenty of 
springboard activities about feelings that could follow a sharing of Theo’s tale.  HM
80 • the bulletin
collins, suzAnne Year of the Jungle; illus. by James Proimos. Scholastic, 
2013 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-545-42516-2 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* 5-7 yrs 
Collins, well known for her middle-school and YA fantasies, offers here a radical 
change of pace in this picture book story inspired by her own childhood, document-
ing the year young Suzy’s father goes off to the Vietnam War. At first, the prospect 
doesn’t sound all that bad to a rising first-grader with little grasp of time; how long 
could one year be? Additionally, Dad is headed for the jungle, and some of Suzy’s 
favorite animals live (at least by her reckoning) in the jungle. A year turns out to be 
a very long time, though, especially when postcards come only sporadically, people’s 
efforts at cheering her up only fill her with heretofore unconsidered anxieties, and 
Dad’s brief missives seem increasingly distanced and confused. Theirs is a happy-ish 
ending—Dad does come home, although “he looks different. Tired and thin and his 
skin has turned the color of pancake syrup. . . . He stares into space. He is here but 
not here.” Collins’ text is simple, but it’s rich in the telling details that establish the 
pervasive fear (“So many things are scary now”) that spills over into other aspects 
of the little girl’s life—getting a birthday card from Dad that should have gone to 
her sister, being showered with too much Halloween candy from a sympathetic 
neighbor, having a terrifying experience of being tossed into a local swimming 
pool. Proimos’ ink-lined, digitally colored illustrations are the pitch-perfect tonal 
complement to Collins’ narration, with the family portrayed as wide-eyed, child-
like cartoons that carry on with daily life in crayon-bright hues, while young Suzy’s 
angst-filled imaginings take shape in full-spread, full-bleed gray-tone scenes that 
twist her innocent favorite animals into recurrent nightmarish motifs and symbols 
of war. With text and illustrations that invite close reading, this will be a powerful 
title to share with children well beyond picture-book age.  EB
cooK, trish A Really Awesome Mess; by Trish Cook and Brendan Hal-
pin. Egmont, 2013 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-363-5 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-364-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Adopted from China just when her parents found out they were pregnant, Emily 
has always felt unsure of her place in her family and the world. She responds to 
a cruel sexting episode by becoming anorexic and launching an online bullying 
campaign against the offending boy and winds up at Heartland Academy, where 
she meets Justin. Justin has his own problems: he hopes for more connection with 
his distant father, and he suffers from bouts of clinical depression. Justin and Emily 
alternate as narrators of this ultimately feel-good story of kids whose identity issues 
and behavioral responses are just a tad more intense than the norm. Their sharp-
eyed, humorous insights are more intense than the norm as well, and through those 
insights, readers meet the members of their therapy group, who all have diverse 
mental health issues but who are challenged by their therapist to hold one another 
accountable in order to achieve the perk of going to the state fair. Snappish and 
cranky, the teens tweak each other as much as they come to depend on each other, 
and their adventures at the fair are a hilarious cross between Ferris Bueller’s Day 
Off, The Breakfast Club, and City Slickers. In fact, this novel could become a John 
OctOber 2013 • 81
Hughes film, with the witty snark bleeding over into pathos just often enough to 
be emotionally compelling as both Emily and Justin reveal the pain beneath their 
defenses. There are messages conveyed, sure, but they’re reassuring ones: that broken 
can be funny as well as tragic, resilience is possible, and support is where you find 
it, as long as the grownups don’t find out. Oh, and there is also a pig-napping. 
What more could you want?  KC
cooper, elishA Train; written and illus. by Elisha Cooper. Orchard, 
2013 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-545-38495-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* 4-8 yrs
Now arriving at Dewey number 385—the latest Cooper picture-book evocation of 
cool stuff for kids to explore. This time the topic is trains, and we start with a mad 
dash to the commuter train, just as the conductor calls, “All aboard!” Passengers 
relax, tickets are punched, the city morphs into small towns just outside the train 
window. A faster, bigger train blitzes by—a passenger train headed much farther 
afield to another large city. As passengers alight at the cavernous station, a freight 
train is being loaded across the rail yard, and soon it’s hauling its load across the 
prairie, where an overnight train zips by on the opposite track. This ride features 
a dining car, fold-down beds, “little sink, little shower. Everything little.” As pas-
sengers enjoy their breakfast, a high-speed train streaks by with a “Schwooosshhh” 
and eases into its west coast destination, a curvilinear terminus worthy of such a 
modern marvel. Just the mention of a train sets sight and sound senses on high 
alert, and Cooper maximizes the effect with the horizontal sweep of elongated 
double-page spreads and the onomatopoetic thunks, chatters, and da dum da 
dums of wheels on rails. He really delves into the train experience with reference 
to the quirks and rituals of rail riding: the “Tickets, please” of the conductor, the 
whispered cell-phone conversations, the garbled announcement “We are arriving 
at Ghblighrrfzze.” Cooper includes a glossary, complete with commentary (“Food 
eaten on a train tastes better. That’s a fact”), and, even better, a brief note on the 
real and imaginary stations that inspired his artwork. Kids who gaze hopefully into 
passing engines while pulling a make-believe train horn will clamor to hear this 
book. Again and again. And again.  EB
cousins, lucy Peck, Peck, Peck; written and illus. by Lucy Cousins. Candle-
wick, 2013 32p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6621-7 $15.99   
Ad 2-4 yrs
A daddy woodpecker teaches his young woodpecker how to peck a hole in a tree 
(“Now hold on tight./ That’s very good./ Then peck, peck, peck, peck, peck the 
wood”). The young woodpecker heads off to a small house where he pecks a hole first 
in the gate, then the front door, then just about everything he can find within the 
home (“I peck, peck, peck a magazine,/ a picture of Aunt Geraldine,/ an armchair, 
a teddy bear,/ and a book called Jane Eyre”). The playful repetition of the pecking is 
enhanced by die-cut apertures, with every woodpecker hole is literally hole-punched 
through the page. In the earlier part of the book, there are only a few holes, but by 
the time the young woodpecker has mastered his pecking, the page are blanketed 
with perforations. The rhymed text is a little simplistic, relying on assonant lists 
(“an eggplant, a tangerine, / a butter dish, a nectarine, / a green bean, a sardine, / 
82 • the bulletin
and seventeen jelly beans”), and there is little plot to drive the pecking of objects. 
The draw here is therefore mostly visual, with Cousins’ signature expansive fields 
of bold, bright gouache outlined in thick black lines. This is no morality tale; on 
the contrary, there are absolutely no repercussions for the havoc-wreaking young 
bird, a detail that some young listeners, who know that birds are not supposed to 
peck holes in dustpans, dirty laundry, and dog bowls, may enjoy disputing. The 
novelty of the holes will likely distract them from this challenge, however, and 
they’ll enjoy poking at the pecking and winding down as the little woodpecker’s 
daddy tucks the tired bird into bed for the night.  HM
cox, Judy Ukulele Hayley; illus. by Amanda Haley. Holiday House, 2013 82p
ISBN 978-0-8234-2863-2 $16.95   
Ad Gr. 2-4
When Hayley purchases a ukulele at a yard sale, everything changes for the former 
“no-talent shrimp”; her music teacher helps her get started, she progresses quickly 
on the instrument, and her subsequent performance at the school talent show is so 
well received that she starts a wildly popular ukulele band. Hayley and the other 
members of the Bridgewater Ukulele Group (BUG) then learn that the Board of 
Education is planning on cutting the music program, so Hayley stages a musical 
protest. Hayley’s successes are impressive, but there is little description of either 
the process of achievement or the trials encountered along the way; she progresses 
rapidly from feelings of inadequacy and bashfulness to musical star and group leader 
with little explanation as to how she got there. The Board of Education storyline 
is completely preposterous, from the villainous board president (who watches the 
talent show with a scowl on his face) to the complete turnaround, wherein the 
board reverses their vote the very night of the impromptu conference. That said, 
there is a lot of can-do spirit in the story, and while readers may not leave with a 
deep understanding of how Hayley overcame her obstacles, they will nonetheless be 
happy that she did. Pen and ink illustrations showcase Hayley, with her wild curly 
hair and smattering of freckles, and tips on how to play the ukulele are included 
at the novel’s end. Readers who like their protagonists with a lot of mettle will 
particularly appreciate Hayley’s rapid rise from shyness to stardom.  HM
creech, shAron The Boy on the Porch.  HarperCollins, 2013 [160p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-189237-0 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-189235-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-220777-7 $8.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
One summer day, young couple John and Marta find a young boy curled up asleep 
on the porch, in his pocket a note: “Plees taik kair of Jacob” and a promise to return. 
Over the next few days, Jacob quickly integrates into the family, although it becomes 
clear that he’s either unwilling or unable to speak, preferring to communicate instead 
by tapping in rhythmic patterns that indicate his mood. He’s also an imaginative 
painter and natural guitarist, and after months of trying to find his parents, the 
couple begins to think of him as family. When a man proving his paternity with 
Jacob’s birth certificate shows up, though, they’re forced to turn the boy over to his 
him, and their house feels startlingly empty—until a friend suggests the two apply 
to be foster parents, sparking a new life course for the couple. Creech’s signature 
voice from Walk Two Moons (BCCB 1/95) and Ruby Holler (BCCB 7/02)— lyrical 
OctOber 2013 • 83
and quaint, without being inaccessible or contrived—reappears here (“The three 
foundlings—beagle, boy, and cow—formed an easy alliance, glomming on to each 
other like old pals”), while slim chapters and easygoing folksy dialogue enhance 
readability. Jason is an almost otherworldly interlude in John and Marta’s lives, 
with an intelligence and charming demeanor that shimmers through in spite of 
his silence, while the couple themselves are a personable pair, both emotionally 
complex and kindly relatable. This sensitive tale, suitable for both reading aloud 
and reading alone, is a tender exploration of the power of a found family and the 
depth and value of temporary connections, a testament to the connections that 
can be forged when openness and magnanimity prevail.  TA
croggon, Alison Black Spring. Candlewick, 2013 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-6009-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-6708-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Exhausted by the dissipation of his urban life, Hammel seeks out the lonely environs 
of the Northern Plateau for a summer retreat. After spending a terrifying night in 
the home of his menacing landlord and seeing the ghost of a woman in the mirror 
of his quarters, he learns the story of Lina and Damek, victims of circumstance 
and passion but purveyors of heartache and destruction. Readers familiar with 
Wuthering Heights will recognize the plot arc, character constellations, and even 
storytelling form and language, but Croggon adds her own sinister touches in the 
form of the dark magic of wizards and witches and a horrific custom called vendetta, 
which aims to keep the citizenry living in fear while it fills the royal treasury. Lina’s 
violet eyes mark as her a witch, but she denies her power and ultimately appeals to 
a wizard to hold it in check so she can live a normal life; however, her childhood 
passion for her father’s ward, Damek, proves too strong even after she has settled 
into a marriage with the gentle and kind Tibor. Damek is undone by his desire for 
Lina, but Lina’s circumstance is more complicated; Anna, her companion from 
childhood and the person who relates the bulk of the tale to Hammel, has her own 
views about why the suspicious folk of the North reject Lina, who has powers and 
passions only thought fitting for a man, and the courage to live by them even when 
the men around her do not. The insistent power of the Gothic is on full display 
here, with the added dimension of the kinds of magic that appeal to contemporary 
teen readers. The language is challenging in the best sense, echoing the prose of its 
source text. Once readers get the hang of it, the world is compellingly made and 
fully immersive, and readers will be as attracted and repulsed by Lina and Damek 
as they have been for nearly two centuries by Catherine and Heathcliff.  KC 
dominguez, AngelA Maria Had a Little Llama/María tenía una llama pequeña; 
written and illus. by Angela Dominguez. Holt, 2013 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-9333-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 3-6 yrs
The ever-popular Mary and her little lamb have been transplanted to Peru, becoming 
Maria and her mischievous llama in this bilingual adaptation. Dominguez maintains 
the nursery rhyme fairly intact in the English text, which is set in slightly bolder 
type than its Spanish counterpart, altering only the girl and her pet’s names and 
changing just a few verbs. She also opts for a direct translation, so the Spanish text 
84 • the bulletin
doesn’t scan but definitely aids language learning in either direction. The gouache 
and ink illustrations add interest to an old standby by providing an authentic An-
dean mise-en-scène, complete with panflutes and village markets. Scratchy outlines 
and slanted verticals keep things playful, and Maria, with her cute face framed by 
a distinctive red chullo, and the llama, with a charming gait and a disarming, oddly 
human smile, are frankly adorable. Use this as a multicultural element in a nursery 
rhyme storytime, or as a solid addition to a bilingual storytime program.  TA
donovAn, gAil The Waffler. Dial, 2013 [224p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3920-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 3-5
Fourth-grader Monty is a “mind-changer” when everyone wants him to be a “mind-
maker-upper.” His inability to make quick choices on other people’s timelines 
draws the unfortunate attention of the school principal, who dubs him a waffler 
and places Monty on a probationary system to help him be more decisive; each 
morning, his classroom teacher (who is particularly unsupportive of his tenden-
cies) places three “decision aids” (Band-Aids) on his arm, and each time he has 
difficulty making a decision, one is removed. The everyday-life plots, following 
Monty’s relationship with his family and his accidental adoption of not one but 
four kindergarten buddies, are comedic and enjoyable. Less effective, though, is the 
treatment of Monty’s indecisiveness—for one thing, it doesn’t seem to be enough 
of a problem to warrant such an intervention, and for another, the intervention 
itself is unlikely and questionably physical. Characterization is strong, though, with 
Monty a wholly likable protagonist dealing with a frustrating trait. The storyline 
about the kindergarteners is particularly sweet, with the doting six-year-olds helping 
Monty him feel better about himself. Readers, especially those who feel pressured 
by peers and adults to act a certain way, will easily empathize with Monty’s personal 
frustrations as he navigates the waters of fourth grade completely overwhelmed by 
the choices before him.  HM
durst, sArAh Beth Conjured. Walker, 2013 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-8027-3458-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-10
With no memory of her life before waking up in a hospital room, Eve is certain 
only of two things: that she has magical powers others do not and that her handlers, 
despite being federal agents, aren’t telling her the whole truth about her situation. 
They’ve informed her that she is in witness protection, hiding from a serial killer 
in the safe house to which they’ve relocated her, but Eve gets the uneasy sense that 
her protectors would just as soon use her as bait to lure the murderer out, particu-
larly if she remains unable to provide any useful information. She’s additionally 
troubled by her visions of a man called the Magician, visions that precede bouts 
of short term memory loss, and by the two boys she meets while in hiding, who 
have secrets of their own. The third-person narration is tightly focalized through 
Eve, and readers will soon realize that she is quite possibly as unreliable in her 
perspective as the myriad of deceivers that surround her. Durst goes for the slow 
burn here, keeping the killer and his crimes largely offstage except for a few bare 
flashes, thereby making his threat loom even larger. The supernatural element 
seems initially superfluous, but as Eve’s identity is revealed, her powers and her past 
OctOber 2013 • 85
play into a larger philosophical debate among the characters regarding the nature 
of reality and the ways in which our fate is too often determined by unknowable 
forces. Eerie and provocative, this is a thinker of a thriller that will appeal to teens 
whose past has left them feeling adrift.  KQG 
eAton, JAson cArter How to Train a Train; illus. by John Rocco. Candlewick, 
2013 [48p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-6307-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-7 yrs
“This handy guidebook contains everything you need to know to choose, track, 
and train your very own pet train.” So asserts the he pith-helmeted, khaki-clad 
little guide, who has a steam train on a leash with the dog-tag “Fido” and delivers 
deadpan directions on how to select and raise a pet train, which, if one substituted 
the word “dog” for “train,” would read pretty much like an actual pet guide. The 
premise is delightful (though hopefully no listener will try actually to corner a train 
by standing directly in front of it), and it works particularly well when studying 
trains in their, shall we say, natural habitats (e.g., coaxing a nervous steam engine 
across a rickety wooden trestle) or when portraying them hilariously out of their 
element (leaving muddy track marks on the kitchen floor). One little pet owner, 
all glitter and pink and fairy wings, names her diesel engine “Sparkles” as its grill 
frowns in disapproval, while a boy and his teddy bear sit on the cow catcher of his 
steam engine, reading Ghost Train by the light of its headlamp. Rocco’s characteristic 
art is digitally colored, imbuing it with a slick, almost metallic smoothness while 
graphite outlines provide solidness and occasional texture; compositions are nicely 
balanced throughout, with full spreads of Fido, Sparkles, and Smokey allowing 
viewers to fully appreciate the enormity of by this particular type of pet. Pair this 
with Elise Broach’s When Dinosaurs Came with Everything (BCCB 10/07) for a 
wacky pets storytime.  EB
ehrlich, Amy, ad. With a Mighty Hand: The Story in the Torah; illus. by Daniel 
Nevins. Candlewick, 2013 198p
ISBN 978-0-7636-4395-9 $29.99   
R Gr. 4-9
Whether approaching them through Torah, Old Testament, Bible, or Tanakh, many 
readers learn the books of Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy 
piecemeal, as stories and references removed from the context of the larger Scripture. 
Here Ehrlich succeeds admirably in an ambitious effort to “write a version of the 
Torah” by teasing out the narrative thread of Yahweh’s covenant with Israel and 
following it “through thickets of genealogy, law, and ritual.” Organized by book 
and broken into Ehrlich’s own chapter demarcations, the stumbling journey from 
Eden to the borders of Canaan, from a clan to a blossoming nation is retold with 
an unwavering balance of reverence and fluency. Although a few notes are appended 
to clarify several arcane points of ancient history and ritual, the retelling is free 
of interpretation, and Ehrlich even makes a conscious effort to retain some of the 
odd repetitions, contradictions, and theological bafflements that keep scholars and 
believers involved in discernment and debate. Nevins’ paintings, spare in compo-
sitional elements but rich in visual rhythm, highlight scenes not generally selected 
for standard Bible story illustration: Sarah laughing in disbelief as three strangers 
predict her imminent pregnancy, Jacob blessing his grandsons with crossed arms, 
86 • the bulletin
the stoning of the man who dared blaspheme Yahweh. The elegant pair of double-
page spreads, however, are ingeniously selected to complement each other—the 
parting of the Sea of Reeds that launched the journey through the wilderness, and 
Moses, at the border he will never cross, exhorting the multitude of Israelites to 
uphold their sacred Covenant. Beautiful craftsmanship makes this an excellent title 
for gift giving, but consider it also as a wonderful selection for young people who 
would like to reconnect their scriptural puzzle pieces into one vibrant picture.  EB
engle, mArgAritA Mountain Dog; illus. by Olga and Aleksey Ivanov. Holt, 
2013 [224p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-9516-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
When Tony’s mother goes to prison for running dog fights, Tony is sent off to the 
wilds of the Sierra Nevadas to stay with Tío Leonilo, the great-uncle he’s never 
met. The eleven-year-old soon takes to his easygoing uncle and bonds with his 
dog, a chocolate Lab named Gabe, who’s Tío’s partner in search and rescue. As 
Tony settles in to life with Tío, he struggles with his relationship with his volatile 
imprisoned mother, and his involvement with Search and Rescue echoes his work 
at self-recovery. Known for her free-verse narrative, Engle here gives poetic voice 
both to Tony and to enthusiastic dog Gabe, who has his own take on Tony’s experi-
ence; the narrations are clearly differentiated, with Tony’s halting and literal while 
Gabe’s is impressionistic and joyous. There’s a link to the author’s traditional topic 
of Cuba through Tony’s heritage and Tío’s past (he was a Cuban refugee), but this 
is definitely a contemporary story of a modern California kid with modern kid 
troubles. While Tony’s story tilts occasionally toward sentimentality, it’s the dog story 
that really makes the book; the details of the search and rescue process, training, 
and psychology are fascinating in their own right, and they’re an evocative contrast 
to Tony’s previous experience with dogs. Tony’s definitely a kid who deserves better 
than he’s had, so readers will be relieved to see him finally settled permanently with 
Tío, a deal cinched with a puppy of his own. Interpersed monochromatic line and 
watercolor art balances friendliness and naturalistic detail; a guide to hiking safety 
and an author’s note are appended.  DS 
FArizAn, sArA If You Could Be Mine. Algonquin, 2013 [256p]
ISBN 978-1-61620-251-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
While the Koran explicitly forbids homosexuality, it is mute on the subject of 
surgically changing one’s gender, according to the Islamic Republic of Iran. Sahar 
therefore decides that gender reassignment is the only way for her to prevent the loss 
of Nasrin, whom Sahar has loved since they were children together, when Nasrin 
is betrothed to a doctor. Nasrin has other ideas; pampered, vain, and narcissistic, 
she wants to keep Sahar as her secret lover while she pursues a posh, respectable 
public life as wife and mother. Sahar won’t settle for such an arrangement, so when 
her cousin Ali introduces her to his circle of friends, whose gender orientations and 
lifestyles put them in danger, Sahar seeks the advice of Karveen, a MTF transsexual 
who is willing to help her no matter what she decides. Sahar comes to understand 
through Karveen’s unselfish friendship that while she is willing to undergo a painful 
and life-altering procedure for Nasrin, the only sacrifice Nasrin is willing to make 
OctOber 2013 • 87
for her is to live a life of lies, secrets, and regrets. Farizan frankly tackles many timely 
issues in this book, and many Western readers will be shocked by the dangers Sahar 
faces. Unfortunately, the author ends up telling more than showing her story, as 
Sahar reflects on her situation and engages in purposive conversations about social 
issues, surgical procedures, and her options; the scene-setting is also scant as a 
result of this overreliance on the relating of information. The book does, however, 
offer a thought-provoking look at a country where the government will pay for 
gender-reassignment surgery but put people who are gay or commit adultery to 
death, where transsexuals see their gender dysphoria as a medical condition while 
viewing homosexuality as a despicable moral perversion, and where young people 
risk beatings and imprisonment for freedoms Westerners take for granted.  KC
FArley, BriAnne Ike’s Incredible Ink; written and illus. by Brianne Farley. Candle-
wick, 2013 30p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6296-7 $16.99   
R 5-7 yrs
Ike, a minimalist little guy with a body like a splotch of ink, wants to write a story. 
Like many writers, he finds himself facing the blank page with frustration, until he 
decides that what he needs is his own special ink. Ike gathers some rather unusual 
ingredients—a shadow, black feathers from a “booga-bird,” and an unnamed 
something from the dark side of the moon (reached in a rocket ship of his own 
making)—and gets down to business: “He mashed, he bludgeoned, he crushed, 
and he steamed. And he was definitely messy.” Ink finished, Ike sits down at his 
desk and begins to write (or rather, draw, since he mostly uses pictures) the story 
of what he has just done. There’s more style than substance to this attractively 
rendered tale, but procrastinating kids may relate to Ike’s initial inability to begin 
his writing project, and the touch of fantasy in his unorthodox ink recipe will ap-
peal to imaginative youngsters as well. The streamlined text reads aloud smoothly, 
it and is complemented by Farley’s crisp illustrations, rendered in ink and digital 
collage. The outline of Ike’s inkdrop-like body appropriately “splashes out” more 
when he is more active, and the messiness of ink concoction is made evident by the 
numerous splatters and blots on those pages. Ike’s tale lends itself to any number 
of writing or art projects, and the truly brave may want to engage their kids with 
an ink-making activity of their own.  JH
Feder, JAne Spooky Friends; illus. by Julie Downing. Scholastic, 2013 40p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-47815-1 $16.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-545-47816-8 $3.99   
R Gr. 1-2
This easy reader recounts the adventures of Scarlet, a vampire, and Igor, a mummy, 
best friends who can’t agree on anything. The first chapter introduces their bicker-
ing style (“If Scarlet said, ‘Up!’ Igor said, ‘Down!’ When Igor made a short snow-
man, Scarlet made hers tall”) and ends with a compromise over sandwiches. In the 
second chapter, the two argue over what to name a new kitten that they discover 
in the attic. They come up with a list of eight names, which proves to be a good 
thing as it turns out the mama cat had not one but eight kittens. The final chapter 
finds the two friends arguing over art—Scarlet wants to draw while Igor wants to 
paint—and the two finally bring their pictures together in a mixed-media collage 
that satisfies both of them. The disagreements never move beyond light banter, so 
the stories are gently silly rather than quarrelsome. Underlying the disagreements is 
88 • the bulletin
a real strength: while Scarlet and Igor are not good at agreeing, they are really good 
at resolving disagreements, and that is what carries their friendship. The illustrations 
are pen and watercolor, enhanced digitally, and the focus in each composition rests 
squarely on the twosome: Scarlet, a skinny-legged, green-faced, pointy-toothed 
vampire in a purple cobweb dress, and Igor, a slightly rotund mummy with only 
one eye and a corner of his expressive mouth peeking out from under his wraps. 
Plenty of repetition, picture clues, and extensive spacing between lines make this an 
ideal choice for beginning readers, and with only two or three sentences per page, 
the narrative itself is very accessible—even Scarlet and Igor can agree on that.  HM 
Fisher, sAm Scare Scape; illus. by Sam Bosma. Scholastic, 2013 298p
ISBN 978-0-545-52160-4 $16.99   
R Gr. 4-7
Scare Scape is the most popular horror-themed comic book around, and Morton 
is its biggest fan. When his family moves into a house that turns out to have be-
longed to the late John King, the Scare Scape author and artist, Morton’s thrilled, 
especially when he discovers a gargoyle in the yard that promises to grant wishes. 
A few rash wishes later, though, Morton’s sister Melissa has got a seemingly infinite 
closet (complete with fashions all the way back to the Middle Ages), his brother 
James is slowly transforming into a monstrous Greater Spotted Wargle Snarf, and 
Morton’s collection of Scare Scape monster toys have come to horrific life and are 
starting to wreak havoc on the neighborhood. The three sibs—along with two 
newfound friends—must investigate King’s past (and his mysterious death) and 
fend off the increasingly hungry and reproducing monsters, all in order to discover 
how to reverse the black magic that set their wishes off. Straddling the genres of 
horror, low fantasy, and action thriller, with slight nods to The Twilight Zone and 
E. Nesbit, this book holds high appeal for kids like Morton who are fascinated with 
the creepy and the weird, and the strong characterization, authentic conflict within 
a family reeling from the loss of a mother, and Morton’s impressive inner strength 
while under pressure add dimension. An imaginative illustrated field guide to Scare 
Scape’s monsters introduces the book. Give this one to kids looking for something 
a step up from Goosebumps.  TA 
FitzgerAld, sArAh moore Back to Blackbrick. Simon, 2013 [208p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8155-8 $15.99
E-book ISBN 978-1-4424-8157-2 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
Young Cosmo is unwilling to accept that there is no cure for his grandfather’s Al-
zheimer’s, and he tries to prime Granddad’s memory so that the man can at least 
stay in his own home. When Granddad gives him a key and a mysterious command 
to go to the south gates of Blackbrick Abbey, however, Cosmo discovers that maybe 
there is a way to help his grandfather after all. Entering the gates of Blackbrick, 
Cosmo is transported back in time and meets Kevin—Granddad as a sixteen-year-
old stable boy. Cosmo manages to wangle a temporary job at Blackbrick, and he 
takes frantic notes about his granddad’s past in order to help the old man pass the 
doctor’s memory test in the present. Unfortunately, Cosmo’s own existence in that 
present is placed in jeopardy when he helps Kevin meet up with his crush, Maggie, 
who is not Cosmo’s future grandma. Cosmo finally manages to get back into his 
own time, his notes do in fact help Granddad pass his memory test, and Granddad 
OctOber 2013 • 89
is able to remain in his own home. The book is a thoughtful blend of time travel 
adventure and family drama, and Cosmo’s voice balances wry humor with deeply 
felt angst over his grandfather’s illness (“There are one or two people in your life 
who should always know who you are. You’ll probably never know how important 
that is unless one of those people starts to forget you”). Fans of gentle fantasies 
and readers with relatives suffering similar physical challenges will find Cosmo a 
worthwhile companion.  JH
FlocA, BriAn Locomotive; written and illus. by Brian Floca. Jackson/Atheneum, 
2013 64p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4169-9415-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8522-8 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 3-7
So, how much do you want to know about America’s first transcontinental railroad? 
Just the general picture? Then follow Floca’s poetic account of the fictional journey 
of a mother and two children riding coach class from Omaha to San Francisco 
just weeks after the line’s completion. There’s plenty to see out the window on the 
four-day trip, from the ever-changing landscape, to the newfangled telegraph poles, 
to the pitch-black tunnels and vertiginous drop from the trestle over Dale Creek. 
Step outside at the frequent stops to take on water, fuel, or a new engine and ob-
serve the hubbub that keeps the steam train rolling, and the makeshift towns that 
spring up to service travelers. If you need to know more about the “how” of steam 
travel, consult the annotated front endpapers that display the full route and the 
way the Union and Central Pacific lines came to connect; linger to browse the UP 
advertisements. Not enough? Take lots of time to study the cutaway and exploded 
details of the steam engine itself on the back endpapers (next to the CP time and 
fare schedule), and if you’re truly among the nerdiest of train nerds, go back and 
compare the engines underway in the main text with the innards in the diagram. 
Still not sated? Floca holds forth in a dense concluding note on everything from 
the social history of rail travel to innovations that made running the trains safer 
for the crews. And if you don’t care to read a word of text, be sure watch your 
fellow passengers packed cheek-by-jowl on the stiff bench seats, checking out the 
“convenience,” pondering the suspect chicken dinner in a stopover diner, or, if 
they’re luckier than you, headed for the Pullman sleeper and a good night’s rest.  EB
gAimAn, neil Fortunately, the Milk; illus. by Skottie Young. Harper/Harper-
Collins, 2013 [128p]
ISBN 978-0-06-222407-1 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
The day starts out innocently enough: the young narrator and his sister discover 
there is nothing but OJ in the fridge and ask their dad to go to the corner store to 
save them from the tragedy of milk-less Toastios. When Dad belatedly returns, he 
spins a story about his his return trip, wherein he was kidnapped by aliens, acciden-
tally accessed the time/space continuum, journeyed with a talking stegosaurus in a 
hot-air balloon, escaped pirates, befriended sparkly ponies, and saved the universe 
from certain disaster, all while holding onto the all-important dairy product. By 
this point, Dad has wrested full narration authorities from the boy, but the sister 
still pipes up to say, “You know, we don’t believe any of this.“ The cheerful pell-
90 • the bulletin
mell absurdity of this brief but delightful bit of whimsy is contagious, and readers 
will be swept along with the action just as the dad is swept up into Steg’s balloon. 
Young’s pen and ink illustrations have an energetic flair, with scritch-scratchy 
linework and a fatherly hero who bears quite the resemblance to Gaiman himself; 
the goofiness is mostly all in fun, but one illustration of prehistoric tribesmen 
unfortunately teeters toward stereotyping. Offspring of parents with a penchant 
for hyperbole will sympathetically roll their eyes even as they delight in the dad’s 
constant reassurance that the milk is just fine while he describes battling off buc-
caneers and an angry god. This would also make a wonderful readaloud, but don’t 
be surprised if the kids insist that it be read in one sitting—and maybe with a side 
of cookies and milk.  KQG 
gAntos, JAcK From Norvelt to Nowhere. Farrar, 2013 [288p]
ISBN 978-0-374-37994-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 6-9
In Dead End in Norvelt (BCCB 9/11), young Jack Gantos became the sidekick of 
elderly Miss Volker, the firebrand who was the town’s chronicler, and who investi-
gated the mystery of the old-lady fatalities plaguing the town. Now they’re taking 
their show on the road: a journey that begins as a trip to New York, to pay respects 
to the grave of Miss Volker’s recently passed idol, Eleanor Roosevelt, explodes into 
a madcap jaunt. Incensed by the escape of Mr. Spizz, Miss V’s quondam suitor and 
the murderer of multiple old ladies, Miss Volker decides that taking him down is 
her mission, and she and Jack head to Florida by train and Volkswagen to exact her 
revenge. In classic Gantos fashion, this is a joyously bizarre romp, with twelve-year-
old Jack diligently obeying his mother’s dictate to assist Miss Volker as he drives the 
VW across the pre-interstate countryside, helps her ready her harpoon (she’s taken 
her role as “Mrs. Captain Ahab,” chasing her white whale Spizz, very literally), and 
attempts to dodge detectives. There are twists aplenty in the story, including some 
questions as to Spizz’s actual guilt, but the mayhem is even more magnificent than 
the mystery. Underneath the chaos, however, is some offhand acknowledgement 
of the duo’s odd but warm friendship and some low-key yet legitimate explora-
tion of the morality of the situation (mostly inspired by Jack’s familiarity with the 
Classic Comics version of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde). While readers of Dead End 
will have the advantage of backstory, this offers both independent pleasures and 
clearer genre cues than its predecessor, and many newcomers will relish this hilari-
ous havoc-ridden road trip.  DS
gensler, soniA The Dark Between. Knopf, 2013 [352p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96702-3 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86702-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89733-7 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 8-12
Three teens converge at Summerfield College in Cambridge in 1901: Kate, who has 
just lost her job playing a spirit at Mrs. Martineau’s sham seances; Elsie, the ailing 
niece of Mrs. Thompson, the college president; and Asher, an American paying 
a courtesy call on behalf of his parents. What appears at first to be coincidence 
begins to seem inevitable once the trio discover that their respective parents and 
the Thompsons have long shared an interest in spiritualism and its possible relation 
OctOber 2013 • 91
to the fascinating new field of psychology. Asher is a skeptic, more concerned with 
figuring out what to do with his immediate future than pursuing phantoms. Kate 
is a pragmatist, willing to consider any possibility that can explain the connection 
between a murdered tramp and her missing friend, Tec. Elsie is convinced she sees 
the dead, but she’s been so heavily dosed with Chlorodyne for her epileptic-like 
seizures that she can barely manage to get through the day without incident. The 
melodrama here somewhat overshadows what could have been a fascinating exami-
nation of the overlapping study of mind and soul, body and disembodiment, at 
the close of the Victorian period. The character of Elsie, however, adds a welcome 
measure of complexity, as she tries to wean herself off the Chlorodyne and to face 
her tendency to form sexual attachments to men in the hope they will finally free 
her from her parents, who repress her psychic gift. An author’s note comments on 
historical inspiration for details of the novel, particularly the Society for Psychical 
Research.  EB
goldmAn, Judy, ad. Whiskers, Tails, & Wings: Animal Folktales from Mexico; illus. 
by Fabricio VandenBroeck. Charlesbridge, 2013 58p
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-58089-372-5 $16.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60734-617-3 $9.99   
R Gr. 5-7
Five animal-centric traditional tales from five different native peoples of Mexico—
Seri, Tarahumara, Huichol, Triqui, and Tseltal—are presented in this intriguing 
anthology. The stories, mostly pourquoi tales, are nicely varied: a cricket defeats a 
puma in “When Señor Grillo Met Señor Puma”; a sea turtle helps the god of creation 
create the land in “Mosni’s Search”; an opossum helps bring fire to the people (but 
loses his furry tail) in “Tlacuache’s Tail.” Goldman’s retellings are vivid and well 
crafted, and readers-aloud and storytellers will easily be able to bring them to life. 
The nonfiction information about the various peoples represented is fascinating as 
well, if sometimes overly reverential (“Their [the Tseltal] language is called Bats’il 
k’op, or ‘the original word,’ and it sounds sweet and melodic. It’s a language spoken 
from the heart”). VandenBroeck’s illustrations (crafted using watercolor and acrylic 
paints on textured paper and then digitally manipulated) are attractive; the single, 
full-page illustrations that accompany each story are much more individualized and 
detailed than the smaller and blander spot art that accompanies the nonfiction text. 
Adult storytellers may find this the most useful, but the solid narrative voice of 
the tales will connect with audiences of a wide age-range and Goldman’s extensive 
notes about the various peoples and regions of Mexico may intrigue older children 
as well. Each tale is followed by factual information about the people and region 
from which this tale hails, as well as separate glossaries for both the story and the 
informational text. A bibliography list of web resources, and thorough source notes 
for each tale are also included.  JH
grAnt, sArA Half Lives. Little, 2013 383p
ISBN 978-0-316-19493-8 $18.00   
R Gr. 8-12
In the wake of a bioterrorism attack, seventeen-year-old Icie makes her way across 
the Nevada desert with nothing but a map and a key to the family’s secret bunker. 
Along the way she’s joined by three other would-be survivors, rebel cheerleader 
Marissa, spoiled rich kid Tate, and secretive adventurer Chaske; when the foursome 
reach the bunker they lock themselves in without realizing that their seemingly 
92 • the bulletin
safe haven holds a deadly secret of its own. Meanwhile, generations in the future, 
Beckett leads a ragtag group of young people surviving in the postapocalyptic society. 
Convinced they are safe as long as they don’t leave their mountain hideaway, the 
group keeps watch against savage monsters, finding their only solace in faith in the 
Great I AM, whose Just Sayings give them guidance and hope. When a girl from 
Out There finds her way into the camp, sparking Beckett’s interest and everyone 
else’s distrust, the group must decide if and how to reemerge into the wider world. 
Told in chapters alternating between Icie’s present and Beckett’s future, this novel 
offers a harrowing survival story that raises powerful questions about what it takes 
physically and spiritually to survive a global catastrophe. Icie’s narrative packs a 
particularly powerful emotional punch, with its cast of compelling characters who 
struggle with their best and worst impulses in the face of dire circumstances. The 
other half of the novel is less emotional than intellectual, exploring the evolution 
of language and culture in the absence of its original context, offering an interest-
ing contrast to Icie’s intensely personal journey. On the whole, this highly original 
read gives science fiction fans a thoughtful apocalyptic tale for both the heart and 
the head.  AM
hAle, Bruce Clark the Shark; illus. by Guy Francis. Harper, 2013 32p
ISBN 978-0-06-219226-4 $17.99   
Ad 5-7 yrs
There’s at least one in every class: the kid who expresses his boundless enthusiasm 
for life a little too physically. Clark, a robust shark in a red and white striped shirt 
and crimson ball cap, is that kid at Theodore Roosterfish Elementary under the sea. 
Eventually his overeager responses to lessons, recess, and lunch alienate his smaller 
friends and vex his teacher, who reminds him that the rule is “Keep cool.” Clark 
finally discovers that making up a rhyme (such as “Easy does it, that’s the way.// 
Then my friends will let me play”) each time he’s tempted to get physical will help 
him pause and remember. This is heavy on the didacticism, and kids who, like 
Clark, struggle with self-control won’t find much in the way of concrete advice other 
than in the catchy rhymes that Clark creates. Still, many youngsters will recognize 
themselves or classmates in Clark, the various school situations presented will offer 
plenty of fodder for discussion, and the ocean-themed setting will appeal to many 
primary-graders. Francis’ lively scenes of underwater classroom life (including Clark 
sending best bud Joey Mackerel—wide-eyed and open-mouthed in terror—sailing 
a little too high on the swings) are engaging and humorous. The watery, slightly 
subdued tones of the backgrounds are pepped up with pops of brighter color, such 
as Clark’s red clothing accents. This piscatorial parable lacks subtlety, but teachers 
who struggle to help Clarks each year may find this a useful way to reinforce the 
notion of restraint.  JH
hArley, Bill Charlie Bumpers vs. The Teacher of the Year; illus. by Adam Gustav-
son. Peachtree, 2013 [160p]
ISBN 978-1-56145-732-8 $13.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-4
Ever since an incident last year in which he discovered Mrs. Burke’s intimidating 
disciplinary demeanor, Charlie’s tried to avoid the teacher, but now that he’s as-
signed to her classroom for fourth grade it looks like there’s no escape. Convinced 
that Mrs. Burke hates him, Charlie’s stunned to find that the truth is vey different: 
OctOber 2013 • 93
she’s intent on helping him become more organized and less scatter-brained, her 
reprimands are sarcastic humor that he just hasn’t picked up on yet, and she seated 
him next to the new kid from Chile because Charlie’s the friendliest student in the 
class. Narrator Charlie is personable and well-rounded as a Ramona Quimby-esque 
protagonist who faces a series of kid-familiar challenges in trying his best to do 
the right thing, but who lets his actions get away from him every once in a while. 
Black and white spot art in India ink and watercolor effectively adds a bit of silly 
realism with its capture of emotional expressions and individual details (discussion 
of receiving a wedgie from a bully is illustrated by a lone pair of briefs). Charlie 
Bumpers’ first adventures are the start of a proposed series, and readers will welcome 
him as a bumbling but generous addition to the ranks of novels for novices.  TA
hArrington, KAren Sure Signs of Crazy. Little, 2013 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-21058-4 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-21057-7 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-8
When Sarah was two, her mentally unstable mother tried to drown Sarah and her 
twin; only Sarah survived, and since then her alcoholic father has moved them out 
of town anytime somebody begins to connect them with the infamous tragedy. 
Now twelve, Sarah is inspired by her teacher to write letters to a literary figure, 
and her messages to Atticus Finch give her a place to reflect and let out her anger, 
disappointment, and fear; glamorous college babysitter Charlotte and her cute, 
smart younger brother, Finn, give Sarah additional perspective on her family and 
on the pains and pleasures of growing up. Sarah finally tries to visit her mother 
at the mental institution, but, at the advice of her mother’s doctor, she merely 
observes her mother from a distance; still, there’s hope for change as her alcoholic 
father undergoes rehab and Sarah begins to put down some roots. The letters to 
Atticus Finch are heartfelt but gimmicky, and the narration meanders, leaving its 
point and destination often unclear. The premise is a riveting one, however, and 
the interplay between Sarah, Charlotte, and Finn is particularly believable and 
astute. Harrington’s pithily turned observations offer promise for her future offer-
ings as well: “Her [Charlotte’s] embrace is solid, tight in a good way. I might come 
apart if she lets go. It’s funny how you don’t know you are a bunch of pieces until 
someone hugs you together.” Fans of Stone’s The Boy on Cinnamon Street (BCCB 
4/12) might find the family drama and first crushes here similarly appealing.  JH
hAssett, Ann Come Back, Ben; written and illus. by Ann Hassett and John Has-
sett. Holiday House, 2013 [32p] (I Like to Read)
ISBN 978-0-8234-2599-0 $14.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. K-1
mccully, emily Arnold Pete Won’t Eat; written and illus. by Emily Arnold 
McCully. Holiday House, 2013 [32p] (I Like to Read)
ISBN 978-0-8234-2853-3 $14.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. K-1
These two offerings from the Holiday House “I Like to Read” series offer simple 
storylines, lots of vowel sound repetition, and an extra-large font size to make 
reading more approachable for new readers. In Hassett’s Come Back, Ben, a boy 
94 • the bulletin
flies off on a balloon past a series of passers-by until eventually landing on the 
moon, where he fills his pocket with moon rocks and sends himself floating back 
to earth. Cut-paper and ink illustrations in bold primary and secondary colors 
depict a fantasy-touched world where windows, kites, and mountains can talk. In 
McCully’s Pete Won’t Eat, a pig named Pete refuses to eat his bowl of green slop; 
just when Mom caves and makes Pete a sandwich, Pete decides to give the slop a 
try and finds that he likes it. McCully’s line and watercolor illustrations feature a 
pastel cast of pigs and a particularly putrid bowl of green slop, and there is plenty 
of text-to-image pairing within the story to guide young readers. Both stories excel 
at their purpose—they are truly first readers designed to give newly independent 
readers a sense of early mastery with reading alone. Of the two, the Hassett offers 
a more fanciful storyline that departs from simple domestic themes, but either 
would be a welcome addition to a first reader collection.  HM
hAys, tommy What I Came to Tell You.  Egmont, 2013 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-433-5 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-434-2 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 5-8
When his mother is hit by a car and killed, Grover blames himself and retreats into 
his art; he constructs frames from the bamboo stand next to his home and weaves 
branches and leaves into the frames in intricate and beautiful patterns. His father 
worries about this method of managing grief, especially as it becomes almost obses-
sive, but Grover’s younger sister, Sudie, and his new friends Clay and Emma Lee 
see the beauty in what he is doing as well as its therapeutic value. Sudie, Clay, and 
Emma Lee are old souls, each helping Grover in a distinct way as his sharp edges 
are worn away by grief. Clay and Emma Lee lost their father twice, first to PTSD, 
which left him angry and abusive upon his return from Iraq, and then again when 
he was killed there after returning, so their prior experience with grief gives them 
insight into Grover’s moods and wishes, while Sudie simply needs to be with her 
brother, anchoring them both in their loss. Hays is a gifted storyteller, offering up 
an effective balance of credible emotion, understated wisdom, and gentle humor 
as Grover seeks help and resists it, alternating between lashing out and reaching 
out to the people who love him. Grover’s father is credible both as he retreats into 
his work upon the death of his wife and resurfaces when he realizes his son’s needs 
and the possibility of a new life with Clay and Emma Lee’s mother. A strong sense 
of community also pervades the novel, a community of open-hearted as well as 
selfish individuals who all work to keep each other in check and ultimately encour-
age both better behavior and humble acceptance of human failings in the face of 
life’s tragedies.  KC
higgins, JoAnnA Waiting for the Queen. Milkweed, 2013 [256p]
ISBN 978-1-57131-700-1 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-10
A number of aristocrats fortunate enough to escape during the French Revolu-
tion found refuge in the wilderness of Pennsylvania, where in 1793 they formed 
a makeshift community that would await the arrival of Queen Marie Antoinette 
and her children and maintain her until their hope for a reestablished regency 
would be fulfilled. This quirky historical footnote inspires Higgins’ fictional tale 
OctOber 2013 • 95
of pampered Eugenie, aghast at the rude cabin in which she’s expected to live, and 
Hannah, a Quaker girl whose father and brother help construct the shelters and 
who will work for a year as servant to two aristocrat families. That a friendship will 
form between the two is, of course, a literary inevitability, but amity is hard won, 
and Higgins draws each character with sensitive precision. Eugenie is certainly 
a spoiled brat by frontier standards, but she is very understandably a product of 
an imbedded worldview. Likewise, Hannah’s tendency to ponder and weigh each 
ritual and duty before complying often seems tedious, but it is in keeping with 
her family’s habit of reflection and conscience formation. As the French aristocrats 
and their American hosts muddle through the physical discomforts and language 
difficulties of the first year, the community is further divided on the issue of a 
slaveholder who abuses his slaves and whether they can set their own community 
rules in a land that officially sanctions slavery. Sci-fi writers would be hard pressed 
to envision as jarring a culture clash as is supplied here by early American history. 
An historical note is included.  EB
hill, lABAn cArricK When the Beat Was Born: DJ Kool Herc and the Creation of 
Hip Hop; illus. by Theodore Taylor III. Roaring Brook, 2013 [32p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-540-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 6-10 yrs
Musical styles tend to develop rather than spring up fully formed, so it’s actually 
quite amazing to be able to identify the creator of hip hop and the precise inno-
vations that ushered it in. Equipped with his father’s ear-blasting sound system, 
young Jamaican immigrant Clive Campbell—already known by his nickname 
Herc—threw a party for his sister’s birthday in a rented Bronx rec center in 1973: 
“That’s where Kool Herc became DJ Kool Herc.” Working two turntables, he 
switched between duplicate vinyl to keep the instrumental breaks playing and the 
dancing going indefinitely, and breakdancers, shout-outs, MCs, and DJ rivalries 
all became part of the Kool Herc legacy. Hill’s narration deftly balances detail and 
momentum, addressing technical innovations while conveying the excitement of 
listeners on the scene at the birth of something new. Taylor’s delicate linework is 
swept with streaks of earthy browns and muted greens and reds, suggesting swirls 
and blasts of sound bombarding the old school crowds. In a closing note, Hill com-
ments on his own experience of the vibrant Bronx community in the early 1980s, 
at a time when popular media portrayed it as a “one of the most dangerous and 
desolate places in America.” A timeline of hip hop through the 1988 (the year Hill 
marks as hip hop going fully mainstream) and a select bibliography are included, 
and readers whose parents (or grandparents) are game enough might track down 
Beat Street or The Freshest Kids to watch DJ Kool Herc in action.  EB
hollAnd, l. tAm The Counterfeit Family Tree of Vee Crawford-Wong. Simon, 
2013 357p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-1264-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-1266-8 $9.99   
R Gr. 6-9
Both Vee’s Chinese father and his Texan mother are silent about their pasts, so when 
Vee faces a family history assignment, the sophomore cops one off the internet, 
inventing a grandfather who escaped the Nanking massacre. His powers of inven-
tion go even further, however, when he has his platonic-so-far friend Madison, who 
96 • the bulletin
attends Chinese school, forge a letter from Vee’s Chinese grandparents that states 
they want to see Vee and his father. Vee maintains his deception until his parents 
agree to take him and Madison to China to see Madison’s relatives and meet Vee’s 
own grandparents. Vee’s sharp tongue and bad attitude make him hard to like at 
first, but it’s precisely his aggressive stubbornness that enables him to break through 
his parents’ silences and force them to tell him what he certainly has a right to 
know. His parents’ love for him and his father’s goofy sense of humor ultimately 
rescue them all as they find Vee’s grandfather (his grandmother has passed away) in 
a nursing home with a slim grasp on his memory, and Vee comes to understand the 
value of what he has rather than lamenting what he has missed. With his questions 
answered and a romance with Madison in its first blush, Vee’s character arc takes a 
sharp and gratifying turn toward maturity. Vee’s narrative voice is lyrical, full of witty 
snark and credible sophomore angst, and Holland works in an effective metaphor 
of unearthing family histories that may never satisfy by giving Vee a fascination 
with Peking Man. Besides being a stylistically compelling coming-of-age narrative 
with a warm nuclear family dynamic, this will be a boon for collections in need 
of high-quality titles featuring contemporary Asian-American protagonists.  KC 
hopKins, h. Joseph The Tree Lady: The True Story of How One Tree-Loving Woman 
Changed a City Forever; illus. by Jill McElmurry. Beach Lane/Simon, 2013 32p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-1402-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8727-7 $12.99   
R 5-8 yrs
This picture-book biography of Katherine Olivia Sessions traces the nineteenth-
century horticulturist from curious child with an affinity for trees, to the first woman 
to graduate with a science degree from the University of California, to schoolteacher 
with a vision for a greener, cooler, shadier San Diego than the sun-scorched patch 
she viewed from her classroom window. Determined to identify plants suitable 
to the local climate and soil, she “became a tree hunter” on the lookout for “trees 
that like hot, dry weather and steep hills and canyons.” Soon she had San Diego’s 
City Park blooming, and when the city hosted the Panama-California Exposition, 
she galvanized volunteers and took charge of landscaping. The lively text, with its 
frequent repetitions of “Kate did,” “she did,” they did,” etc., exudes an optimistic, 
can-do attitude that will make listeners feel they’re in the presence of a newfound 
hero. McElmurry’s paintings, which add a dash of playfulness to a folk-art style, 
convey both the possibilities of the bare orange landscape and the lushness and 
variety of Sessions’ mature plantings. An author’s note offers additional detail, but 
the main text handily describes how a scientist-turned-teacher-turned-activist cre-
ated her leafy legacy well into the twentieth century.  EB
horáčeK, petr Animal Opposites: A Pop-Up Book; written and illus. by Petr 
Horáček. Candlewick, 2013 20p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6776-4 $15.99   
R 2-4 yrs
Pairs of oppositional adjectives are partnered with Horáček’s vibrant mixed-media 
illustrations of animals in spreads enhanced by pop-up elements. There’s a dy-
namic range to the opposite word pairs, from standard fare (“quiet” vs. “loud”) 
to more varied choices (“smooth” vs. “spiky,” or “still” vs. “bouncy”). The animal 
selections are similarly varied, ranging from animals more familiar to toddlers and 
preschoolers, such as dog, lion, and rabbit, to the more exotic meerkat, gorilla, 
OctOber 2013 • 97
and porcupine. While kids may be disappointed by the one spread that features 
no interactive elements, many of the pop-ups are stunning in not only their con-
struction and positioning but also in the motion of their revelation. The “bouncy” 
kangaroo, for example, appears to literally bounce up and forward off the page as 
you open the flap, while the “strong” gorilla pushes himself, with his muscular 
arms, up off the ground and into an up-on-all-fours position as the flap is opened. 
Clues are occasionally offered on the flaps as to the animal that lies beneath—a 
brown-spotted yellow flap folds back to reveal a “tall” giraffe, while a length of 
spotted tail on a sky-blue flap announces the “fast” cheetah behind it. The pages 
are thick and sturdy, and the pop-up construction, though less durable than the 
pages, is still solid enough to hold up to a fair amount of use; little ones may need 
a hand in reassembling the final, oversized foldout of a large elephant to keep it 
in good shape. The large, high-contrast illustrations work effectively at a distance 
and up close, making this useful for both group settings and lap-sit sessions; the 
instructional content is strong enough for curricular use; and the striking animals 
and well-designed pop-ups will appeal to older sibs as well as to youngsters in the 
concept-book range.  JH
hurwitz, JohAnnA The Two and Only Kelly Twins; illus. by Tuesday Mourn-
ing. Candlewick, 2013 [96p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-5602-7 $14.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-6764-1 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-4
Second-graders Arlene and Ilene Kelly are best friends and identical twins; not 
even their closest friends can tell them apart. The girls undergo adventures ranging 
from the challenge of selecting a pet (Arlene wants a kitten, Ilene wants a puppy), 
to dealing with the consequences of Ilene’s claim to a new classmate that they’re 
actually triplets, to Ilene’s separation anxiety when Arlene is hospitalized with ap-
pendicitis (“The next morning Ilene walked to school without having her sister by 
her side. She had never walked to school alone, or in fact done much of anything 
alone, in her entire seven years”). Hurwitz is remarkably gifted at composing kid-
specific narratives with ease and grace, and the chapters read more like short stories 
than successive components of a novel. Warmth and humor pervade the stories, 
which simply written and yet subtle in their presentation of the girls’ experiences. 
Though the black and white illustrations have a contemporary edge (as in the girls’ 
fashionable cat’s-eye glasses), there’s a softness that pairs well with the gentle tone 
of the story. This is an excellent first chapter book offering that, due in large part 
to its self-contained chapters, would also work very well as a group readaloud.  HM
JinKs, cAtherine How to Catch a Bogle; illus. by Sarah Watts. Harcourt, 
2013 [320p]
ISBN 978-0-544-08708-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-7
Ten-year-old Birdie knows she’s quite well off as poor Victorian orphans go. She’s 
apprenticed to Mr. Bunce, an intelligent and kindly, if somewhat morose, bogler, 
a sort of supernatural exterminator ridding households and businesses of trouble-
some bogles that hide in the properties’ deep recesses and eat children. With good 
training, steady nerves, and an exquisite singing voice, Birdie lures bogles into 
98 • the bulletin
the salt circle where Mr. Bunce reduces them to slime and ash with a strike of a 
charmed spear. Their work schedule is humming along nicely when Miss Eames, 
a bluestocking who is researching the faerie realm, pays to accompany them on 
their rounds. Miss Eames’ presence is a mixed blessing to Birdie and Bunce: the 
opinionated and annoying woman ultimately turns out to be a quick-thinking, 
life-saving force of nature when Birdie’s kidnapped by nefarious necromancer Dr. 
Morton. Jinks subtext of the Victorian social themes—from the evils of child labor 
to the application of scientific thinking to host of unlikely problems—puts a smarter 
and funnier spin on preternatural shenanigans than a simple description of plot 
elements might suggest. The first entry in a planned trilogy, this title introduces a 
cast of secondary characters robust enough to expand the adventures in any direc-
tion Jinks chooses to wander.  EB 
Kessler, liz North of Nowhere. Candlewick, 2013 264p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-6727-6 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-6910-2 $15.99   
Ad Gr. 4-7
Eighth-grader Mia and her mother are spending spring break in the small English 
seaside town of Porthaven as they help Gran run the family inn and search for Mia’s 
suddenly missing grandfather. During the week, Mia encounters a series of strange 
things—a boat that seemingly appears and disappears, a decades-old journal, and a 
strange boy who seems oddly familiar—that lead her to believe that her grandfather 
has somehow time traveled, an assumption that turns out to be true but not at all 
in the way she presumed. The eventual revelation of Grandad’s secret is a rather 
delightful headscratcher that will have readers revisiting various plot points to see 
just exactly how the puzzle pieces all fit together. Unfortunately, Mia exists mostly 
as an engine to get to the big reveal, and she’s forced to make one illogical choice 
after another to move along the plot. Although it lacks the same poignancy and 
depth as Rebecca Stead’s When You Reach Me (BCCB 9/09), readers who enjoyed 
the mind-bending twists in that one may appreciate the shifts in the space-time 
continuum here.  KQG
King, A. s. Reality Boy. Little, 2013 [353p]
ISBN 978-0-316-22270-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-12
Anger has long been the driving force in Gerald’s life, a fact that first came to 
prominence on national television, when he was five and his family starred in the 
reality show Network Nanny. His method of conveying his anger then has left him 
with the lifetime nickname of “the Crapper,” but his rages subsequently turned to 
more direct physical violence, including the savaging of a classmate’s face a few years 
ago. Now sixteen and the beneficiary of some reasonably successful anger manage-
ment therapy, Gerald is beginning to examine the cause of that anger: a psychotic 
older sister who’s tried to kill him his entire life, a mother who’s so determined to 
exonerate her beloved daughter that she’d rather paint Gerald as a monster to the 
whole country, and a father who let his son be destroyed rather than stand up to 
his wife. Though a realistic story, this novel is also an effective psychological horror 
tale, a modern saga of domestic gaslighting; the most satisfying moments are those 
when an external observer, whether it be Network Nanny herself or an appalled 
long-ago viewer of the show encountering Gerald now, sees through the pretense 
OctOber 2013 • 99
to the real rot in the family. His anger is therefore satisfyingly, righteously justified 
and understandable (if uncontrolled), but King wisely takes her protagonist past 
that confirmation to the difficult task of building a different future. His tentative, 
growing relationship with a girl, Hannah (a masterfully characterized blend of 
independence, uncertainty, and annoyance), provides opportunity for both success 
and failure but in new, more functional ways, and it also gives him the strength to 
pull himself out of the story that’s been written for his life. The TMZ-level draw 
of the premise will definitely pull readers in, but they’ll find a surprising amount to 
relate to in this smart and sympathetic story about breaking free from the world’s 
expectations.  DS
KirBy, mAtthew J. The Lost Kingdom. Scholastic, 2013 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-27426-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-53956-2 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-7
With the French and their Indian allies claiming ever more territory to the West, 
British colonists are seeking support wherever they can find it. In this historical 
fantasy, Benjamin Franklin, botanist John Bartram and his son William, and several 
colleagues from the American Philosophical Society plan an expedition to track 
down a band of Welsh-speaking Indians, reputed to be descendants of a colony 
founded by Prince Madoc centuries earlier. Pursued by French military forces and 
a voracious predator, the “bear-wolf,” the scientists fly through the Ohio Valley 
on an airship based on the design of seventeenth-century inventor Francesco Lana 
de Terzi. There is clearly a spy aboard the airship, and John Bartram, whose father 
was killed by Indians, suspects their interpreter, Andrew, who is half Indian. This 
bigoted belief frequently jeopardizes the success of the mission and fractures the 
relationship between John and William, who prefers to make his own judgments 
and form his own friendships. Kirby crafts an intriguing alternative history, using 
real-life players such as the Bartrams, real-life events such the the French and Indian 
Wars, and even real-life legends and rumors such as Prince Madoc, herds of extant 
mastodons, and a fabled fountain of youth. Unfortunately, the climax capsizes the 
delicately balanced plot, with too many fantasy elements simultaneously engaging, 
bringing the adventure to a disappointing end. This is nonetheless an inventive take 
on colonial history that cunningly highlights the eccentric beliefs of some of the 
most enlightened eighteenth-century minds. An historical note is appended.  EB
Kizer, AmBer A Matter of Days. Delacorte, 2013 276p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90804-7 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73973-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89825-9 $9.99   
R Gr. 7-10
Over the past eight weeks, a manmade global pandemic has decimated the world’s 
human population. Now, with their parents dead, sixteen-year-old Nadia and her 
younger brother, Rabbit, must set off on a cross-country journey in search of a fam-
ily compound hidden deep in the West Virginia mountains, where they hope some 
of their family has survived the plague. Scavenging for supplies and avoiding cities 
full of rotting corpses, they travel down the highway, relying only on each other 
and the survival skills their father has taught them. Along the way, they find a little 
relief from the gloom, adopting an enormous injured dog and making friends with 
100 • the bulletin
a strange young man who has reclaimed a small town as his own private kingdom. 
Not everyone they meet is helpful, though, and the roads are teeming with hungry 
animals and violent survivors who would kill for the siblings’ provisions. As Nadia 
struggles to protect her brother, she must decide if the trip is worth the risk or if 
they should find a new place of their own to call home. Less grim than many post-
apocalyptic narratives currently on offer, this novel is a good fit for readers who 
want the suspense of a dystopian survival story without the suffering that heroines 
of the genre usually endure. The young people encounter their share of danger but 
manage to survive trials and tribulation with little effort and find a happy resolution 
at tale’s end. Character-wise, the novel has broad appeal: Nadia serves as a quirky, 
snarky narrator, while Rabbit reigns as adorable brother supreme, impetuous and 
innocent yet wise beyond his youth. The novel works then as a milder, more ac-
cessible entry point to the genre for readers who are more likely to prefer The Swiss 
Family Robinson to Susan Beth Pfeffer’s Life As We Knew It (BCCB 12/06).  AM
Koertge, ron Coaltown Jesus. Candlewick, 2013 [128p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-6228-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Walker’s brother, Noah, was an angry addict; now Noah has been dead for two 
months, and Walker’s mother still cries. When fourteen-year-old Walker prays, 
he is surprised and disconcerted when Jesus himself shows up in answer. He and 
Jesus begin a casual friendship, talking about big and small things, and broaching 
some of life’s abiding questions, such as who Jesus is, how He can be everywhere, 
and what happens when people die. Jesus is sometimes enigmatic, answering 
questions with questions and deferring more philosophical inquiries, but mostly 
he treats Walker as a friend and the world as a wonder, reveling in candy bars and 
ice cream, making small jokes, and drawing out Walker’s conflicted feelings about 
his difficult older brother. As much as Walker insists that Jesus needs to be helping 
his mother, Jesus gently focuses on Walker himself, reminding him that he, too, 
has a need to grieve, forgive, and move on. Koertge’s free verse draws this sweetly 
poignant and delicate story forward at just the right pace, highlighting the simple 
sensual pleasures of sunsets, junk food, and the feel of a dog, and punctuating those 
moments with warm, affectionate humor that hits its mark. Rather than taking an 
irreverent approach to the character of Jesus, Koertge’s depiction actually serves to 
elevate the character of Walker; in the loving presence of Jesus, Walker is allowed 
to be angry, distrustful, and hesitant as he grows in self-awareness and grace and 
ultimately learns to see the goodness of the world through Jesus’ eyes. Pair this 
with Cynthia Rylant’s God Went to Beauty School (BCCB 7/03) for perspectives 
that refresh a sense of the numinous in everyday life.  KC
KrishnAswAmi, umA The Problem with Being Slightly Heroic; illus. by Abigail 
Halpin. Atheneum, 2013 274p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2328-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4169-9591-3 $9.99   
R Gr. 4-6
Eleven-year-old Dini is back in the States for an extended visit after spending the 
last ten months in her new home in India (in The Grand Plan to Fix Everything, 
BCCB 9/11). Besides getting to enjoy nightly sleepovers with her best pal Mad-
die, Dini is heading up the children’s dance group that will be part of the open-
OctOber 2013 • 101
ing reception for the Smithsonian’s exhibit on Indian cinema, which will feature 
Dolly Singh, the biggest star of Bollywood and Dini’s friend and neighbor back 
in India. Dini just wants to make sure Dolly’s visit is perfect, but a lost passport, a 
tiff with Maddie, a wayward elephant, and a serious lack of Dolly’s beloved Indian 
rose-petal milkshakes make that task seem nearly impossible. In true Bollywood 
fashion, however, all the drama makes for an even happier ending, and the breezy, 
short chapters happily skip among the individual mishaps to come together in a 
most spectacular and danceworthy conclusion. Although the characters are a bit 
one-note, each is immensely likable even in their less than charming moments, 
and Dini’s struggles with Maddie as well as her concern with impressing the right 
people will resonate with young readers. The tone here is less programmatic than 
in the first installment, making this a particularly delightful return visit with Dini 
and company.  KQG 
Kurtz, JAne Anna Was Here. Greenwillow, 2013 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-056493-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-223914-3 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
Just a few weeks before her tenth birthday, Anna learns that her family is moving 
to her father’s hometown of Oakwood, Kansas, a place she has never been before. 
Her dad, a minister, has been asked to help the local church there get through 
some difficult times, and he promises his family that it will only be a temporary 
stay. Despite being a complete preparation nut (she keeps a Safety Club Notebook 
wherein she imagines dangerous scenarios then develops detailed response plans), 
Anna finds herself utterly unprepared for the sudden change. In Oakwood, Anna 
learns that she is distantly related to a fair percentage of the town and that not 
everyone is happy to see her family back; one distant cousin, in particular, bullies 
her every chance he gets. Faith is at the very center of Anna’s story; she frequently 
either turns to or questions God as she navigates the murky waters of her new world. 
Forgiveness is a central theme, both between Anna and her father and among the 
clan-like extended family that is riddled with old wounds and still-painful memories 
of long-ago betrayals. Kurtz is particularly adept at developing setting, and readers 
will readily embrace her portrayal of a child thrust into an unfamiliar context.  HM
legrAnd, clAire The Year of Shadows. Simon, 2013 [418p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4294-8 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4296-2 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-7
Nine months after her mother took off for parts unknown, Olivia Stellatella is 
forced to move into the back of a rundown music hall so her broody, cash-strapped 
father—whom Olivia refers to as Maestro—can continue to conduct the orchestra 
and make what little money the family has stretch further. Having already alienated 
most of her friends and family, Olivia, clad always in black and constantly draw-
ing creepy pictures in her sketch pad, isn’t looking for any new pals, but the four 
ghosts that haunt the hall seek out her company anyway. They’re willing to help 
her save the hall from a particularly menacing shade that has also recently taken 
up residence there, and she’s willing in turn to help them move on to the next 
spiritual realm—but she has to find the ghosts’ various anchors to this world in 
102 • the bulletin
time. Although this lacks the campy humor of Legrand’s last outing, The Cavendish 
Home for Boys and Girls (BCCB 12/12), the blend of spooky but mostly harmless 
thrills, and family drama makes for a compelling storyline, and Olivia’s grief over 
her mother’s departure and her subsequent anger at her father are both realistic and 
relatable. Olivia is likable even at her snarkiest, and the ways in which she comes 
to care for the ghosts and even a few living people are sometimes touching. The 
secret behind the shade’s existence adds a bit of complexity to the missing mother 
story, and the happy ending feels well deserved for a central character who has had 
her fair share of sadness.  KQG
lewin, Betsy Thumpy Feet; written and illus. by Betsy Lewin. Holiday House, 
2013 [32p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-8234-2901-1 $16.95
E-book ISBN 978-0-8234-2962-8 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R 3-5 yrs
“Here comes Thumpy Feet!” announces an unseen narrator as a big, stripy orange 
cat lumbers happily onto the scene, the kitty’s oversized, pink-toed paws “thumpy 
thump”-ing their way onto the page. The wide-eyed feline next discovers a bowl 
of “foodie food” that is so delicious he smacks his mouth over the course of two 
two-page spreads as he gobbles it down. This segues into a need for some “licky 
lick”-ing, as an impromptu bath takes place next to the food bowl, until he spies a 
stuffed mouse and pounces on it, flipping it into the air again and again. All this 
playing tuckers out the big guy, so with a “YAAAWWWNY yawn!” he nods off 
to sleep, snoozing away until the final pages when a ball of red yarn reenergizes 
him into action. This is more a brief, euphonious day-in-the-life list than a full-
fledged story, but the repetition and kid-friendly wordplay are amusingly clever. 
Lewin is a master of the casually drawn but acutely observed feline form and her 
watercolor, lanky, furry fellow (visually a goofier cousin of The Aristocats’ Thomas 
O’Malley) is equally winning whether munching his chow (eyes closed in bliss), 
licking those hard-to-reach spots, or slumbering away with all fours in the air. A 
clean, snowy backdrop keeps all the attention on the friendly marmalade cat, and 
the large images (thickly outlined in black) gracefully utilize the space of each 
spread. This would work equally well one-on-one or with a crowd, perhaps paired 
with Nikki McClure’s similarly minimal How to Be a Cat (BCCB 6/13) or, for a 
slightly older audience, Karla Kuskin’s So What’s It Like to Be a Cat? (BCCB 9/05), 
also illustrated by Lewin.  JH
loBel, AnitA Lena’s Sleep Sheep; written and illus. by Anita Lobel.  Knopf, 
2013 [24p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-449-81025-5 $11.99
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-449-81026-2 $14.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-449-81027-9 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 3-5 yrs
Little Lena’s usual bedtime routine of sheep-counting hits a hitch when the sheep 
panic at the full moon (“There’s a round monster in the window making faces at 
us! . . . He looks hungry and ready for a sheep snack!”). Lena cleverly advises them 
to dress up in costumes to fool the moon, but the unwieldy outfits cause chaos 
during the nightly lineup. A passing cloud that covers the moon saves the day—er, 
OctOber 2013 • 103
night—as Lena convinces the sheep that they have scared the moon away, so they 
finally take their proper bedtime positions while Lena counts herself to sleep. The 
gentle plot and quiet cadence of the text make this bedtime book a effective sopo-
rific that may actually induce slumber in its young audience. There are occasional 
moments of lyricism (“Light as air, they rose up to form a nice, neat line above the 
bed”) in Lobel’s streamlined text ,and the fairly simple vocabulary and generally short 
sentences may even make it accessible to older brothers or sisters who are helping 
put smaller siblings to bed. The gouache and watercolor art is cozy and attractive, 
with a folk-art solidity, and Lobel’s slightly smudgy layering and blending of colors 
gives depth and richness to the pictures. Lena’s mop-top of blondish-brown curls 
is echoed in the sheep’s white curly coats, and overall the artwork evokes a feeling 
of nocturnal peace. Besides bedtime reading, this might also lend itself as a closing 
title for an evening library storytime session.  JH
long, susAn hill Whistle in the Dark. Holiday House, 2013 181p
ISBN 978-0-8234-2839-7 $16.95   
R Gr. 4-7
Set in 1920s Missouri, this debut novel opens on Clem’s last day in attendance at 
the village school; on the following day, his thirteenth birthday, he joins his father 
deep underground in the lead mines. Clem’s younger sister, Esther, has epilepsy, 
and the mounting medical bills have made it necessary for Clem to bring home 
a paycheck. Clem’s father is extremely pleased to have Clem following the family 
tradition of mining; Clem, on the other hand, wants nothing to do with mining 
and hates it from the first day forward (“There was nothing about the mine that 
would ever change Clem’s first impression: it was a busy little hell straight out of 
the Bible”). Shortly after his mining tenure begins, Clem inadvertently discovers 
a classmate, Lindy, and her father running a moonshine still down by the river. 
An awkward but meaningful friendship begins between Clem and Lindy, and he 
is in fact skipping work to sell moonshine with Lindy when his little sister dies in 
her sleep, a turn of events that riddles him with guilt and sends his family down a 
dark, tragic spiral. This coming-of-age story is eloquently told, and the characters 
are particularly well crafted; Lindy is the most complex of the lot, particularly as 
the details of her backstory are revealed. The story never feels episodic or over-
drawn despite the multiple plot threads; the events are precisely paced, and the 
story unfolds naturally. Clem’s sense of hopelessness darkens much of the story, 
but the warm moments—his friendship with Lindy, his affection for his beloved 
dog Pal, the gentle exchanges between Clem and Esther—are much brighter for 
it. The happy ending is a bit improbable, but readers who have witnessed Clem’s 
struggles and growth over the course of the novel wouldn’t have it any other way. 
An author’s note about the fact behind the fiction is included.  HM 
mAclAchlAn, pAtriciA The Truth of Me. Tegen/HarperCollins, 2013 128p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-199859-1 $16.99
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-199860-7 $17.89
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-229268-1 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 2-3
Young Robbie would like to be closer to his parents (professional musicians who 
travel often for performances), particularly his distant mother, who “likes her violin 
better than she likes me.” Still, he’s glad to be able to spend the two months of their 
104 • the bulletin
latest tour with his grandmother, Maddy, and his dog, Ellie, at Maddy’s cottage 
near the woods. Maddy has a way with animals both tame and wild, and with her 
guidance Robbie soon has Ellie trained to control her squirrel-chasing tendencies 
and to safely go for walks sans leash. When Maddy falls and hurts her ankle on a 
camping trip in the nearby woods, Robbie is able to send Ellie solo for help, and 
in her pain, Maddy reveals a family secret that helps Robbie better understand his 
mother. The large print, the easy-to-follow plot, the straightforward vocabulary, 
and the brief page count will make this a very accessible book for novice chapter 
book readers. Unfortunately, little actually happens; the big reveal of the family 
secret lacks drama, and it’s a contrivance on top of the already clichéd plot twist 
of the injured ankle. Still, plenty of kids will relate to Robbie’s problem with 
preoccupied parents, and Maddy’s magic touch with various fauna will appeal to 
animal lovers.  JH
mcBrAtney, sAm There, There; illus. by Ivan Bates. Candlewick, 2013 32p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6702-3 $15.99   
R 2-4 yrs
Little Hansie Bear is not having an easy day: he falls into a deep ditch and bangs his 
knee while trying to walk like a duck, gets sand blown into his eyes while digging 
a hole, and bumps his head on a branch while pushing his pal on the swing. Each 
time, however, Hansie’s dad is there to offer comfort with a hug, a “there, there,” 
and a specific suggestion for solving each problem (a bandage for the banged knee, 
blinking to get the sand out of Hansie’s eyes, and rubbing for the bump on his 
head). When Dad comes home with a thorn in his foot, Hansie knows just what to 
do (after Mom pulls out the thorn): “He gave his dad one of his tightest hugs ever. 
And then Hansie said, ‘There, there, we’ll be all right now.’” This could have been 
overly sentimental, but McBratney keeps it real with concise and natural language: 
when Dad comes home with a hurt foot, Hansie sympathetically asks, “Were you 
trying to walk like a duck?” while his father responds wryly, “I was not trying to 
walk like a duck.” Kids who have suffered their own playground injuries will also 
relate to the commonality of the accidents that befall Hansie (“Hansie bumped his 
head on a branch, and it was a hard bump”) and will appreciate Dad’s ever-present 
gentle assistance. The soft autumnal tones and softly scribbled detail in the flora 
and fauna of Bates’ mixed-media illustrations effectively echo the gentleness of the 
text. Hansie is a cuddly little brown cub, and his red shirt contrasts nicely with 
Dad’s yellow-green plaid jacket and well-worn straw hat. Families and classrooms 
will find this a solid offering for days when kids need a bit of comforting.  JH
mccully, emily Arnold Pete Won’t Eat; written and illus. by Emily Arnold 
McCully.
See Hassett, p. 93, for review.
mcginnis, mindy Not a Drop to Drink. HarperCollins, 2013 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-219850-1 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-219852-5 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-10
Water is scarce in Lynn’s world, so she has spent much of her sixteen years closely 
guarding the freshwater pond near her cabin home in the wilderness. The freestand-
ing drink also occasionally attracts the wrong kind of attention from wandering 
OctOber 2013 • 105
strangers and marauding animals, all of whom are dealt with by a rifle shot to the 
heart. When Lynn’s mother is killed and Lynn injured in a coyote attack, Lynn is 
forced to rely on the help of her nearest neighbors, but more trouble is heading her 
way as a group of violent men sets their sights on Lynn and her pond. This is a grim 
and merciless world with no place for sentiment, a fact made abundantly clear by 
the scene in which Lynn’s mother lies bloody and dying and instructs Lynn in how 
to properly kill a coyote—nary a tear is shed, nor a goodbye uttered. The threat 
of the encroaching men, and particularly the sexual violence they will likely bring 
with them, looms heavy over much of the novel, infusing even the most quotidian 
scenes of vegetable gathering and water collecting with a disturbing and ominous 
air. Lynn is a steely, unyielding girl, and while she thaws a bit in the hands of a 
visiting boy, she remains unflinching to the very end, when she is forced to put 
a bullet through that very boy’s body as an act of mercy and then turns the gun 
on her monstrous, violent father. An epilogue provides as happy of an ending as a 
book like this can provide, but the brutality of Lynn’s story will likely have readers 
looking at that bottle of Evian a little differently.  KQG 
mcKAy, hilAry Binny for Short; illus. by Micah Player. McElderry, 2013 291p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8275-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8277-7 $9.99   
R Gr. 4-7
It’s been three years since Binny’s father died, leaving Binny, her brother and sister, 
and her mother in tight financial straits. Now eleven, Binny has only dim memories 
of her father; her greatest grief is still for the subsequent loss of her beloved border 
collie, Max, who was rehomed, much to her rage, by her great-aunt Violet when 
it became clear that Binny’s grandmother could no longer care for him. Ironically, 
Great-Aunt Violet leaves her house to Binny (and her family) when she dies, and the 
family takes root in the house of the woman Binny considered her greatest enemy 
and settles in for a lovely summer in the seaside village. Fortunately for Binny, she 
finds a new enemy in next-door neighbor Gareth, and the two companionably spar 
and drive each other to increasingly more ambitious adventures, until one final 
risky outing prompts Gareth to share an important secret with Binny. As usual, 
McKay brings a warm dimensionality to all the members of her cast, with Binny’s 
chicken-mad and dreamily manipulative little brother, James, a particularly fine 
comic turn. The book both sympathizes with Binny’s loss and quietly makes clear 
why rehoming Max was appropriate, and Great-Aunt Violet moves effectively from 
nemesis to interesting character, even after her death. Binny herself is realistically 
mercurial, with moods that buffet her like storms, and it’s utterly believable that 
her sense of loss has focused on the possibly reclaimable beloved dog rather than the 
beloved father who’s gone forever. As with the author’s Dog Friday (BCCB 10/95), 
this novel combines effervescent everyday-life storytelling with subtle exploration 
of the ripples of loss that shape young lives, and McKay fans will celebrate the 
introduction of an engaging new heroine. The monochromatic art, thickly lined 
with gray washes, has a contemporary design flair and a youthful appeal.  DS
106 • the bulletin
miller, pAt zietlow Sophie’s Squash; illus. by Anne Wilsdorf. Schwartz & 
Wade, 2013 32p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97897-4 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97896-7 $16.99   
R 5-8 yrs
Comfort objects can come in many forms. Just ask Sophie, who bonds with a squash 
from the farmers’ market, draws a face on with markers, and then “wrapped it in a 
blanket and rocked it to sleep.” Bernice the squash and Sophie are soon inseparable 
(“Well, we did hope she’d love vegetables,” Sophie’s mother says wryly), and the 
family tries their best to get Bernice out of Sophie’s arms and into the food stream 
but eventually admits defeat. When Bernice starts getting soft (it happens to the 
best of squash) Sophie plants her in the ground, hoping for recovery; next spring 
brings a flourishing green plant and two baby squash (“You look just like your 
mom!”) for Sophie to love. Sophie’s contentment at putting Bernice underground 
is sudden and a little wishful, but this remains a humorously told story with its 
roots in realism. Miller writes some fine comedic dialogue and offers a subtly droll 
portrayal of Sophie’s supportive, progressive, nonetheless somewhat daunted family. 
Line and watercolor drawings are energetic without being frenetic, with Sophie’s 
bravely upstanding pigtails a mark of her vivacity. Bernice is never animated be-
yond the vegetable, but she’s got a nice curvy shape and a cheerful presence, with 
a drawn-on smile that makes Sophie’s attachment seem pretty defensible. This is 
a gentle yet perky, weird yet homey story, and kids who’ve had their own strange 
comfort objects will relate to Sophie’s attachment.  DS
montiJo, rhode The Gumazing Gum Girl: Chews Your Destiny; written and 
illus. by Rhode Montijo. Disney Hyperion, 2013 [128p]
ISBN 978-1-4231-5740-3 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-4
When a piece of “MIGHTY-MEGA ULTRA-STRETCHY SUPER-DUPER 
EXTENDA-BUBBLE BUBBLE GUM” combines with a low-hanging power line 
to produce a shock that completely coats Gabby Gomez in pink goo, she’s worried 
about getting herself cleaned up before her mami finds her. On the way home, 
she stops a purse thief, in the process discovering that she’s not covered in gum; 
instead, she’s become Gum Girl, complete with sticky, elastic appendages that are 
perfect for saving the world. Gabby must discover how to hide her powers from 
her classmates and family (peanut butter turns her back to normal) and how to get 
them back so that she can stop planes from crashing (popping a bubble allows her 
to metamorphose). The chapter book-cum-graphic novel is an exploding format, 
and Montijo’s tale fits right in, with lines of text alternating with full-page art that 
moves the story along with speech bubbles, comics-style omniscient narrations, 
and mood-setting sound effects (several chapters end with a dramatic “DUN! 
DUN! DUN!”). Montijo’s thickly outlined and stylistically simple drawings are 
playful, pleasing, and easy to parse, making them a foil for the detailed text and rich 
vocabulary. The story is also lightly peppered with Spanish words, easily decoded 
from their context by non-speakers, bringing some diversity to a world populated 
mostly by characters like Babymouse and Captain Underpants. Gabby’s also more 
gender-neutral than either of those, lacking the frills of the former and the potty 
humor of the latter, but she maintains the spunk of both. Her good heart and re-
alistic struggles with her mom and classroom bullies make her eminently relatable, 
OctOber 2013 • 107
and her exuberant voice (she bursts into song when excited) makes her a welcome 
addition to the ranks of early-elementary superkids. A final “DUN! DUN! DUN!” 
sets Gum Girl up for future exploits.  TA
nApoli, donnA Jo Skin. Skyscape/Amazon, 2013 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4778-1721-6 $16.99
E-book ed. 978-1-4778-6721-1 $7.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Sep is freaked out to awaken on the first day of eleventh grade to find that her lips 
have turned white. The doctor identifies the problem as vitiligo, and an unhappy 
Sep figures that even with the cover of lipstick the disease’s spread will doom her 
as-yet-nonexistent dating life. When Joshua starts to flirt with her, she therefore 
accelerates the relationship much faster than she ordinarily would have as more 
white spots appear on her body. She insists on darkness when they make out, and 
they enjoy a month of clandestine sex before she decides it’s time to break it off 
without telling him why. Sex and the yoga she learns from her dance teacher help 
her learn to love the way her body moves, and her conversations with a girl at the 
make-up counter give her an additional boost; the girl, young and edgy as she looks, 
turns out to be a mom with strong opinions about teen sex, tattoos, and the love 
of Jesus. Napoli weaves contemplation of mind, body, and spirit into Sep’s growing 
acceptance of her new reality; Sep is smart enough to intellectually detach from 
what is happening, but she’s also a teenage girl who makes a really selfish decision 
in using Joshua that he calls her out on. Sep’s happy ending is an understanding 
that a benign skin condition isn’t the end of her hopes for the future, and her story 
is as nuanced and refreshing as her hard-earned perspective.  KC 
ness, pAtricK More Than This. Candlewick, 2013 [480p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-6258-5 $19.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-6767-2 $19.99 
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
A broken heart has led sixteen-year-old Seth to suicide, but ending his life doesn’t 
necessarily put an end to his problems. After drowning himself off the coast of his 
Pacific Northwest home, Seth wakes up across the world in the small English town 
where he spent his childhood. To be returned to the scene of his greatest failure and 
his family’s deepest grief surely indicates that he’s in hell, and the charred, desolate 
landscape, without a soul in sight, is only further proof—in Seth’s mind—that he 
has been sentenced to a doomed and painful afterlife. Even when he does finally 
encounter two other living people, he remains unconvinced by their explanations 
that his “death” was merely his waking up from a computer program and that 
the entire world—and essentially reality—has gone online. This complex, genre-
bending book opens with Seth’s violent drowning death at sea, described in such 
spare but devastating detail that readers may feel themselves gasping for a breath 
as Seth draws his last. The tone remains quietly but deeply unsettling throughout 
the first half, with flashbacks to both Seth’s childhood mistake and his more recent 
relationship with his boyfriend often providing more questions that answers in 
regards to Seth’s present situation. Several early hints point toward the Matrix-like 
premise that is introduced in the latter part, but Ness subverts familiar sci-fi/survival 
tropes and storytelling conventions, leaving readers with an ambiguous ending that 
108 • the bulletin
is either incredibly frustrating or deliciously disturbing. The thematic explorations 
of the nature of reality and the afterlife offer some heady discussion fodder, while 
the nail-biting tension and high-stakes action sequences make this an easy sell to 
the legions of dystopia fans as well.  KQG 
north, phoeBe Starglass. Simon, 2013 441p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5953-3 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5955-7 $9.99   
R* Gr. 7-12
For five hundred years, the space vessel/floating community Asherah has traversed 
the universe with the last of Earth’s inhabitants on board. Now, just as its final 
destination is within reach, long-simmering class tensions within the ship threaten 
to derail the mission; dissidents plan for full-scale rebellion, while those in control 
stand ready to sacrifice anyone and anything to maintain power. Meanwhile, fifteen-
year-old Terra Fineberg, on the cusp of sanctioned adulthood, has her own struggles 
to face, including an increasingly unstable father, an assigned profession she doesn’t 
understand, and a looming compulsory marriage. The discovery of deep personal 
connections to the rebels throws Terra’s life into even further turmoil, and Terra 
finds herself caught in the middle: between her grieving father’s wishes and her own, 
between an impossible love and a surprising new suitor, between the revolution 
and her own conscience. Notable for its effective use of Jewish culture and Hebrew 
vocabulary in its world-building, this absorbing page-turner also finds power in 
balance, avoiding the clichéd extremes of much recent young adult science fiction. 
Asherah’s strict society is flawed but not dystopian, making it clear why Terra might 
support change but is reluctant to facilitate wholesale destruction, especially once 
she realizes that the rebels are not the liberators they claim to be. Terra herself is 
equal parts strength and vulnerability, neither preternaturally heroic nor innately 
naïve. Genuinely surprising revelations near the end and a lack of resolution sug-
gest probable sequels to this first-rate science fiction novel, a worthy successor for 
Revis’ Across the Universe (BCCB 1/11).  AM
pArK, lindA sue Xander’s Panda Party; illus. by Matt Phelan. Clarion, 
2013 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-547-55865-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* 5-8 yrs
 “Xander planned a panda party. Yes, a dandy whoop-de-do!” Problem is, Xander is 
the only panda at his zoo, so the guest list is a bit on the slim side. As the rollicking 
rhyme continues, Xander opens up the invitation to wider and wider groups of 
guests: first bears, then mammals, then mammals and birds, then mammals and 
birds and reptiles, and, eventually, everyone in the zoo, including human guests. 
Each broadening of the invitee list is rooted in entertaining and scientifically based 
reasoning—when Koala informs Xander that she is in fact not a bear, he widens 
it to mammals, when Rhino refuses to attend without his oxpecker bird, Xander 
adds birds to the list, etc. In the end, it winds up being a panda party after all, as 
the zoo welcomes a new panda from China and the public turns out in droves to 
celebrate the new arrival. An author’s note offers more in-depth details on some 
of the scientific references within the text, but really it is the jaunty cadence and 
spirited verses that are going to attract listeners to Xander’s tale. Much of the 
rhyme is internal, and readers-aloud will definitely want to practice a time or 
OctOber 2013 • 109
two before trying the tongue-twisting verses (“Amanda Salamander lent a hand 
to Xander Panda. / Xander’s party plans went from grand to even grander”) on a 
crowd. Phelan’s ink and watercolor compositions offer the perfect counterpoint 
to the tightly wrought verses, with playfulness inherent in the fluid, inky outlines 
encasing broadly applied brushstrokes. Xander himself is an expressive chap, and 
his frequently perplexed countenance pairs perfectly with the descriptions of how 
overwhelming it is to put on a good party. Fortunately for Xander, it all turns out 
in the end, in a “dandy whoop-de-do” indeed.  HM
pAtricK, cAt Just Like Fate; by Cat Patrick and Suzanne Young. Simon Pulse, 
2013 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-7271-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-7273-0  $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
As her beloved grandmother lies close to death, Caroline Cabot is given a choice: 
maintain her bedside vigil and endure her sister’s catty criticism for a fourth 
straight day or escape the heartache (and her sister) for one night of fun with her 
best friend. When that one night turns out to be her grandmother’s last, though, 
Caroline’s minor decision suddenly seems to make a life-altering difference. Over 
the course of two alternative plotlines (conveniently labeled “stay” and “go”), the 
novel follows Caroline down divergent paths as she navigates heartbreaking grief, 
strained relationships, and the possibility of a new romance. While it seems at first 
that one decision was absolutely the wrong one, both narrative strands ultimately 
allow Caroline to explore the consequences of big mistakes and lead her to realize 
that with the right attitude, the right guy, and a little self-forgiveness it’s possible to 
overcome even the worst errors in judgment. With an effective mixture of pathos 
and humor, this journey of self-discovery emerges as an engaging, surprisingly 
fast-paced read. The novel really shines in its portrayal of Caroline’s relationship 
with family and friends. Flawed but loving, they obviously want to help but often 
become overwhelmed with their own issues and mistakes, giving Caroline the 
chance to emerge from her self-involved shell and give as much as she receives. 
Readers looking for a Sarah Dessen–lite story will get caught up in this touching 
emotional drama.  AM
perKins, mitAli, ed. Open Mic: Riffs on Life Between Cultures in Ten Voices. Can-
dlewick, 2013 [144p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-5866-3 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-12
This slim collection of ten contemporary stories—most published here for the first 
time—brings together familiar and new voices in YA literature to talk candidly 
about race. Perkins’ smart introduction lays her framework for using humor as a 
method to broach a touchy subject (complete with ground rules like “Good humor 
pokes fun at the powerful—not the weak”), and although some stories are more 
humorous than others, the approach is effective. The stories vary in tone, from 
Cherry Cheva’s chuckle-inducing entry about a Jewish boy’s perspective on an Asian 
girl’s stand-up comedy routine, to Francisco X. Stork’s amusing but poignant tale 
of a young Mexican-American boy’s conversation with his sister in which he first 
recognizes that he’s gay. In addition to standard prose fare, there’s Gene Yuen Yang’s 
110 • the bulletin
graphic-novel-style story of his reaction to whitewashing in the casting for the Avatar 
film, G. Neri’s free-verse, hilariously told account of a black father’s ability to clear 
a German subway bench for his mixed-race family, and Naomi Shihab Nye’s elegy 
to her Palestinian father’s exuberance, which is also a recognition of how public 
perceptions of him would have been tainted by news headlines. It’s often said 
that good literature for young people can act as a mirror to one’s own experiences 
and a window into others’—this anthology fills the bill, providing an accessible 
assessment of contemporary race relations, while also being as honest, refreshing, 
and frank as the titular open mic suggests. It also offers myriad uses: a potential 
readaloud in a social science classroom, a pick-me-up text for a teen of color in a 
tough environment, or a book-club selection that’s sure to spark conversation.  TA
pierpoint, eric The Last Ride of Caleb O’Toole. Sourcebooks, 2013 [304p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4022-8171-6 $7.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-9
Opening during the 1877 cholera epidemic in Kansas, this debut novel follows 
twelve-year-old Caleb O’Toole and his sisters Julie and Tilly, who, upon the un-
timely death of their parents, hit the Oregon Trail alone to head west and find their 
aunt in Montana Territory. Prior to leaving Kansas, Caleb witnesses a murder at 
the hands of the notorious Blackstone brothers, making him and his sisters targets 
for the vengeful villains who remain hot on their trail the entire time. Add in a 
mysterious gunslinging man in black on a tall stallion, bouts of illness, kidnappings, 
and countless other action-packed adventures and you’ve got a pioneer story that 
will keep readers on the edge of their seat. Part Wild West tale, part quest, part 
historical fiction, part family drama, the novel moves easily among the genres; it 
is probably strongest as a Western, drawing detailed descriptions of lawless towns, 
packed saloons, and bloody gunfights. The novel is particularly good at sensitively 
and accurately detailing the kids’ encounters with Native American groups along 
the way, from the Pawnee who help the younger sister when she gets cholera to 
the Sioux who offer their protection to the O’Tooles after the kids care for one of 
their wounded soldiers. The Blackstones prove to be formidable opponents, and 
the final showdown at the Montana ranch is as exciting as it is satisfying. Caleb is 
a remarkable protagonist who gains considerable maturity over the course of the 
adventure, and his interactions with his sisters add warmth to the story. This isn’t 
a historical lesson but an adventure, and it’s a fine one at that, sweeping readers 
along with breakneck pacing. A detailed author’s note offers additional information 
on the history behind the story.  HM
polAcco, pAtriciA The Blessing Cup; written and illus. by Patricia Polacco. Sim-
on, 2013 48p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5047-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5048-6 $12.99   
R 5-8 yrs
This companion story to The Keeping Quilt recounts the details of how young 
Anna (Polacco’s great-grandmother as a child) and her family are driven from their 
home in Czarist Russia. A kind doctor comes to their aid, offering them food, 
shelter, and warmth, and he proves their savior once again when, upon receiving 
notification from authorities that he cannot house Jews, he purchases tickets for the 
entire family to travel to America. As a token of gratitude, they leave the family’s 
OctOber 2013 • 111
treasured tea set, save for one cup that remains with the family and is passed down 
through the generations (eventually landing with Polacco herself). Polacco has a 
particular flair for turning family stories into universal tales, and the tea set serves 
as an effective framing device for describing the family’s journey. The story is suf-
fused with warmth, and while many of the events described are tragic, there is an 
air of familial joy (if also occasional sentimentality) that supersedes the sadness. The 
pencil and marker illustrations are largely monochromatic, with selective splashes 
of color incorporated into each spread; readers of the earlier story will recognize 
Anna’s brightly hued babushka, and the tea set itself is elaborately patterned in blue, 
red, and green. This is an accessible tale of the way one family’s faith and devotion 
carried them through the most difficult of times, and it will appeal on many levels 
to young readers.  HM
QuicK, mAtthew Forgive Me, Leonard Peacock. Little, 2013 [278p]
ISBN 978-0-316-22133-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Not only can Leonard Peacock recite most of Hamlet, in many ways, he is Hamlet, 
and he has decided that today is the day when he will answer the ultimate question 
of to be or not to by killing himself (and his former best friend). His only remaining 
friend is an older neighbor with whom he watches Bogart movies, but he has also 
formed one-sided attachments to an Iranian immigrant in his high school who allows 
him to listen to him play violin as long as he doesn’t talk to him, a fundamentalist 
Christian girl who hands out tracts at the subway station, and his history teacher, 
Herr Silverman, who hides a secret under his sleeve. These are the people Leonard 
wants to interact with on his last day on earth, but as each encounter leads him 
closer to his fatal plans, he realizes that he can’t orchestrate the day as elegantly as 
he’d like, and his disappointments lead to reflections, both comforting and tragic, 
on what brought him to this day. Leonard’s story is in some measure predictable 
for the genre, with intemperate swipes at a caricatured Christianity and a home 
situation that begs intervention from social services, but his narrative voice is ut-
terly convincing, and his letters to himself from the future, an assignment Herr 
Silverman has devised to help him realize that a future is possible, are an effective 
intervention. Hamlet may be Leonard’s muse, but Holden Caulfield is his mentor; 
he’s a bright, articulate, thoughtful, deeply sad young man in desperate need of 
adults for whom life is actually working even when it’s difficult. Fortunately, he 
has two—Herr Silverman and his neighbor—who provide very different kinds of 
support in this compelling reminder that there’s an adult light at the end of the 
teenaged tunnel.  KC 
reeve, philip Goblins. Scholastic, 2013 [352p]
ISBN 978-0-545-22220-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
“Years without number” have passed since the armies of men defeated the Lych 
Lord, driving nearly all the magic out of the world; the only remaining traces of 
that power lie in Clovenstone, the Lych Lord’s crumbling estate that is overrun by 
goblins and their ilk. Skarper is one such goblin, and he’s recently been kicked out 
of his tribe for attempting to educate his leader about books (or “bumwipe,” as 
the other goblins refer to written word). He runs into Henwyn, a cheesewright’s 
112 • the bulletin
son intent on earning himself the title of hero, if only he could find an adventure 
to be had. Once they’re joined by three wizards, a princess, and a giant, the goblin 
realizes that they are already in the middle of an adventure, and it’s one that will 
affect the future of Clovenstone. With a bit more of a wink than a nod to classic 
fantasy tropes, Reeve peppers stylized, formal prose with delightfully funny asides 
and wry bits of humor: the initial explanation for Clovenstone and its history, for 
example, is relayed during Skarper’s very long fall after being launched from a tower 
by the other goblins (“‘Aaaaaaah!’ he screamed . . . but after the first thousand feet 
or so he realized he was just going ‘aaaaaaaaaa’ from force of habit, so he stopped”). 
The characters are revised archetypes, with the princess an aging spinster with no 
interest in being rescued, and the giant a friendly sort who takes an interest in lost 
causes. The solid storytelling and careful pacing makes this an excellent intro to 
fantasy for those new to the genre, while avid fantasy readers will take particular 
delight in the inside jokes.  KQG 
rex, AdAm Moonday; written and illus. by Adam Rex. Disney Hyperion, 
2013 [40p]
ISBN 978-1-4231-1920-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-8 yrs
On a night when “the moon hung full and low and touched the tips of the trees,” 
the unnamed narrator (a little girl with a blue jacket and brown pigtails) falls asleep 
on a car trip home, only to wake up the next morning to find the moon hovering 
in her backyard. The sun never comes up that day, leading to a town full of dazed 
and sleepy neighbors. The narrator and her family soon find that having the moon 
in their backyard is more trouble than it’s worth, flooding the backyard when it 
brings the tide in and causing all the neighborhood dogs to coming howling, so 
they go for another drive, taking the moon in the window, and tell it to stay at the 
top of the hill. This fantasy interlude is perfect for a bedtime story, with mood more 
important than logic, and the narration is appropriately ethereal and evocative (“I 
looked through my heavy lashes, through the window, through lean trees to see 
my blue moon staring back at me”). The sometimes-rhyming text is lavish in its 
simplicity, and Rex’s paintings hit the same tone with their impressionistic brush-
work and fine attention to detail. Interior scenes are rich with warm colors, which 
are particularly cozy when they’re juxtaposed against the ink-black background 
with white text, while outdoor scenes center the bright moon, using contrast and 
temporality to heighten the book’s mysticism, like a scene in which the narrator is 
shown in multiple places on the surface of the moon at once to suggest her initial 
exploration of the moon’s landing. Henkes’ Kitten’s First Full Moon (BCCB 3/04) 
might be a more concrete lunar nighttime selection, but the approach here is at-
tractive, and kids will enjoy falling asleep to this imaginative fantasy.  TA 
rippin, sAlly Angel Creek. Text, 2013 140p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-921-75805-8 $9.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-921-83428-8 $9.99   
R Gr. 3-5
The holidays aren’t quite the same this year for twelve-year-old Jelly, whose Aus-
tralian family recently moved from their comfortable suburb to a country town 
miles away with only Jelly’s cousins, moody Gino and pestering Pic, to keep her 
company. Bored on Christmas Eve, Jelly, Gino, and Pic make a clandestine night-
OctOber 2013 • 113
time trip to a nearby creek, where they find a shivering, injured creature along the 
banks. The cousins believe the winged, childlike thing to be an angel, but this is 
no chubby, joyful cherub but a feral, wild little creature who becomes inexplicably 
attached to Jelly, inciting jealousy from Gino. Over the next few weeks, Jelly cares 
for the celestial being in a nearby shed but soon realizes that her relationship with 
Gino may not be the only thing suffering from the angel’s presence; convinced 
her family’s recent spate of bad luck must have something to do with the creature, 
she sets off to return the angel child to its mother. A gentle tale with just a hint 
of spookiness, this Australian import will please fans of Patricia MacLachlan’s do-
mestic dramas as well as readers of David Almond’s more cerebral and fantastical 
works. Bits of Australian slang and local references give the story a regional flair, 
while Jelly’s struggles with her family, anxieties about her new school, and feelings 
of ambiguity toward adulthood make her broadly relatable. The depiction of the 
angel subscribes to no particular denomination, nor is there any overt discussion 
of spirituality or religion; rather, the untamed and unearthly being merely serves 
as a reminder of the unpredictable forces at work in the universe. Brief but mov-
ing, this perfectly captures the murky emotional territory of pre-teendom, where 
kids are on the verge of cynicism but still longing for childhood wonder.  KQG
shAnnon, dAvid Bugs in My Hair!; written and illus. by David Shannon. Scho-
lastic, 2013 [32p]
ISBN 978-1-545-14313-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* 4-8 yrs
With the academic year nicely underway, what better time to turn to a perennial 
schoolhouse plague—head lice. The ginger-haired narrator is under attack, and 
he suffers not only from rampant itching but also from rampant embarrassment 
(“Oh, the shame! The humiliation!”). His mother is frantic and he’s understand-
ably nervous at the thought of various home remedies and outdated advice—harsh 
chemical “bombs,” convict-style buzz cuts, mayonnaise. Fortunately, Mom does 
her research (surprisingly, not on the internet), the boy gets an oily treatment, and 
his locks are once more all his own. Shannon’s kid-friendly approach, sensitive 
but zany, will make this the go-to book for similar sufferers. The featured lice step 
straight out of a kid’s worst anxiety dream, huge and arrogant and wildly oversized, 
draped over the boy’s head like a floppy beret, playing with their buddies in a scalp-
infesting jug band, or hanging out on the couch with a magazine and cigar. While 
the loony exaggeration of the illustrations set a better-to-laugh-than-cry tone, the 
text sneaks in a fair amount of reliable and realistic information: the word “lousy” 
comes from louse, the eggs are called nits, the lice are after blood, and, sorry to say, 
it may take a couple of tries to rid a head of all the pests. Hilarious and consoling, 
this title should find a home in every school nurse’s office and, unfortunately, all 
too many private residences as well.  EB
shelley, mAry Gris Grimly’s Frankenstein; ad. and illus. by Gris Grimly. Harper 
Collins, 2013 193p
ISBN 978-0-06-186297-7 $24.99   
R* Gr. 7-12
While most everyone knows the story of Frankenstein and his monstrous creation, 
approaching the original text can be a daunting prospect. Grimly succeeds admirably, 
following the novel by first setting the scene through letters from Captain Walton 
114 • the bulletin
(the eventual finder of the monster) reproduced in a sepia font resembling handwrit-
ing on parchment, before moving into a more recognizable graphic narrative format. 
When the monster tells his story, text disappears in favor of wordless sequential 
art, mirroring the process whereby he came into language through watching the 
happy family of a blind man. A limited watercolor palette of nature-inspired neu-
trals foregrounds the exaggerated features of the inked figures, and Grimly, being 
the good postmodernist that he is, adds touches of steampunk-inflected humor, 
contemporary parodies of nineteenth-century newspaper caricatures, and old-school 
horror movie posters. The monster himself is always shown at oblique, incomplete 
angles, a technique that stresses his ragged construction and forces readers to fill 
in his physicality with their own imaginings. In this, as in the construction of the 
graphic narrative itself, Grimly proves himself a more adept assembler of parts 
than his subject proved to be; his product is no monster, but a pastiche of style and 
substance that will reanimate the original for yet another generation of readers.  KC
shulevitz, uri Dusk; written and illus. by Uri Shulevitz. Farrar, 2013 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-374-31903-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 3-6 yrs
In this counterpart to Shulevitz’s Dawn (BCCB 4/75), an old man and his grandson 
bundle up against the winter chill and take an evening stroll in the city. Even at 
nightfall the city is still bustling, and the darkening sky proves to be an excellent 
backdrop for the brilliant display of street and holiday lights that turn the city into 
a glittering wonderland. The text is a dreamy trickle that bursts out occasionally 
in ripples of antic nursery-style rhyme (several busy shoppers utter bouncy verses 
about their shopping plans) and then slows to a soothing stillness of only a few 
words (“Lights// here and there”). The words are just a voiceover for the drama of 
the visuals, though: Shulevitz plays his limpid watercolors like a violin, allowing 
the smoky teal of a winter sky to give way to a chiaroscuro of lavender and ochre 
that renders the stylized city streets radiant with twilight. The holiday is magical yet 
kid-level robust—shop displays with falling snow and vibrant nutcracker figures; 
the gleam of menorahs and Christmas trees in beaming windows, which combine 
with marquee displays and rows of shining headlights to illuminate the city. This 
is an experience rather than a plot, but it’s wise about the seductive enchantment 
of seasonal joys and the enticing mysteries of an adult life that goes on downtown 
after youthful bedtimes.  DS
slonim, dAvid Patch; written and illus. by David Slonim. Roaring Brook, 
2013 32p
ISBN 978-1-59643-643-5 $15.99   
R Gr. 1-2
This gentle chapter-divided, picture book–format title offers three brief stories 
featuring the narrator’s adventures with his beloved dog, Patch. In the first story, 
the narrator explains that Patch can’t resist chasing rabbits and always ends up 
bristling with thorns from the prickly bush; in the second, Patch gets fleas, and 
when remedies don’t work, he’s exiled to the doghouse (where the narrator joins 
him); finally, the narrator and Patch train for a big “dog contest,” but on the big 
day Patch’s stage fright leaves him trembling and incapable. The individual stories 
are a bit light on action, but they’re suffused with sweetness, since the point in each 
case is the narrator’s deep loyalty to and caretaking of his beloved canine friend; 
OctOber 2013 • 115
the overall message, which kids will appreciate, is one of unwavering devotion to 
friends. The text is spare, with short simple sentences that gain energy from the 
narrator’s informal voice, and the chapter format makes this a promising title for 
youngsters oscillating between readalouds and readalones. Slonim’s line and wa-
tercolor art is lighter in tone and intensity than his goofy cartoons for books such 
as Goodman’s It’s a Dog’s Life (BCCB 9/12); compositions mostly focus on Patch 
and his boy together or Patch alone, with only a few bits of scenery (which makes 
the contrast of the teeming crowd at the dog contest effectively daunting). While 
touches of visual hyperbole add humor, the illustrations, with their soft blurs of 
watercolor and casual penciled textures, are at heart comradely more than comic. 
It’s great to have a pet story that emphasizes caretaking as well as affection; use 
this in partnership with a friendship story like Frog and Toad to talk about our 
comradeship with man’s best friend.  DS 
smith, chArles r., Jr. I Am the World; written and illus. with photographs by 
Charles R. Smith, Jr. Atheneum, 2013 36p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2302-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8295-1 $12.99   
Ad 5-8 yrs
This photoessay juxtaposes full-page photographs with Smith’s rhymed verse 
celebrating the diversity of today’s children in metaphoric terms. Kids speak for 
themselves in metaphors that range from foods (“I am the tradition in pierogi”) to 
fibers (“I am the thread in kente cloth”) to music (“I am the rhythm in capoeira”) 
to language (“I am hello, jambo, bonjour, zdravo. Namaste, ni hao, hola, buon 
giorno”), and each line of text is paired with a portrait of a child or children from 
the relevant culture. The metaphors are somewhat conceptual, keeping the text 
out for reach of much of the intended audience, and the necessity of explanation 
during readalouds will impair the spare eloquence of the poetry. The photography 
captures children from around the world set against glossy black; the more literal 
pairings offer some visual assistance (“I am the pleat in Highland kilts” showcases 
a young man wearing a kilt), while the more abstract may leave viewers pondering 
what exactly Smith was trying to portray. This could serve as a nice introduction 
for a unit on community in the primary grades, but it will likely get more action 
in the hands of browsers. A glossary is included.  HM 
sones, sonyA To Be Perfectly Honest: A Novel Based on an Untrue Story. Simon, 
2013 [496p]
ISBN 978-0-689-87604-2 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Colette, whom readers may remember as the heroine’s friend in Sones’ previous 
verse novel, One of Those Hideous Books Where the Mother Dies (BCCB 7/04), takes 
center stage here as her movie-star mother insists that Colette and her seven-year-old 
brother, Will, accompany her on location for her latest movie. Colette has built up 
her defenses against her mother’s reputation over the years by crafting a fabulous 
fictional life for herself—that is, she’s a chronic liar. When she meets Connor, she 
lies about her mother’s identity so that she can test whether he’s actually interested 
in her rather than her mother’s celebrity, but when she finds she’s actually falling 
for him, she worries that her lies might destroy their relationship, especially because 
he seems so honest and open—“seems” being the operative word. Characterization 
116 • the bulletin
is weak—Colette is all surface, Connor is a mean-spirited cliché, and Will’s lisp 
is overplayed—and the plot becomes messagey when Colette is distressed to find 
a mirror of herself in Connor. The non-rhyming verse of varying forms and the 
well-paced plot make this a quick read, though; readers will relate to the ups and 
downs of a new romance, the disappointment of unanswered texts and a phone 
that won’t ring, the elation of stolen kisses, and the angst of deciding how far to 
go physically. The celebrity angle adds another dimension to the appeal, making 
this a light-hearted take on disappointed romance for readers with active fantasy 
lives of their own.  KC
sonnenBlicK, JordAn Are You Experienced? Feiwel, 2013 [304p]
ISBN 978-1-250-02564-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Rich thinks his parents are too strict, and their rules seem completely arbitrary. He 
knows his dad has never gotten over his brother’s death from a drug overdose, but 
that was forty-five years ago, and Rich wants his dad to move on and live in the 
present. When an arrest following a protest rally to legalize medical marijuana gets 
Rich in serious trouble, he decides it can’t get any worse and he invades his dad’s 
private sanctuary, where he finds, of all things, a guitar signed by Jimi Hendrix—the 
guitar, in fact, that Hendrix played at Woodstock. Suddenly, he’s transported back 
in time to the 1969 festival, where he meets his dad and his uncle and learns the 
secrets that have held his father in an emotional prison for years. As a cultural his-
tory, Rich’s experience captures the mood and magic of the famous weekend from 
a distinctly contemporary perspective. Readers will marvel along with Rich at the 
innocence with which the Woodstock crowd embraced dangerous drugs without 
the benefit of foresight; as he listens with wonder to the performances and meets 
many of his music idols, he reflects on the devastating toll substance abuse will 
take on many of these gifted artists. However, this is a family story as well, and 
Rich must come to terms with the fact that he can’t change history, and that his 
best chance is to understand it and then go home and help his father understand 
it as well. The backstory Rich uncovers is one of abuse and neglect that leads to 
tragic circumstances, but the message is an inverted story of resilience, where a 
teen helps his father overcome the pain of abuse, which proves that the magic of 
Woodstock might not be a thing of the past after all. A coolly creepy historical 
note is included.  KC 
steFFensmeier, AlexAnder Millie and the Big Rescue; written and illus. by Alex-
ander Steffensmeier; tr. from the German. Walker, 2013 [40p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-8027-3403-7 $17.89 
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-8027-3402-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-6 yrs
Millie the cow loves to play hide-and-seek with the other farm animals, but one 
day she hides a little too well in the top of a large tree and becomes stuck. One by 
one the other animals, and even the farmer, try to rescue her, only to become stuck 
themselves. The farmer enlists the hens (the only ones capable of going up and down 
at will) to carry a message to a neighbor while Millie and the animals enjoy cake 
and tea (also fetched by the hens) as they await rescue. When finally back on the 
ground, the farmer offers cake to the rescuing firefighters and the neighbor, only to 
OctOber 2013 • 117
discover the cake is still up in the tree. The entire party returns to the branches to 
enjoy a snack and the lovely view. The writing in this German import is steady and 
amusing: “‘This is so relaxing,’ the farmer said. ‘As long [as] nobody has to use the 
bathroom.’” The various antics of the farm animals, particularly the chickens (one 
continually sports a Sherlock-style deerstalker, one tries unsuccessfully to hide head-
first in a birdhouse), and Millie’s pop-eyed bewilderment are sure to evoke chuckles 
as well. The deftly drafted illustrations sport thickly dappled color framed by thin 
black lines; the large page size will lend the book to group sharing, although kids 
will need to get close to appreciate all the details of the animals’ actions. This could 
be easily incorporated into farm- and cow-themed storytimes or units, but plan 
to share it twice in any case, once for the story and once for the illustrations.  JH 
stieFvAter, mAggie The Dream Thieves. Scholastic, 2013 [448p] (The 
Raven Cycle)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-545-42494-3 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-57717-5 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 7-10
At the end of The Raven Boys (BCCB 9/12), readers learned that Ronan, the sar-
castic private-school student, is the new Greywaren, having inherited his father’s 
gift for bringing objects out of dreams. Unfortunately, very bad men are after the 
Greywaren, alerted by the erratic energy bursts along the newly awakened ley line 
in Virginia. The appearance of a particularly nasty hunter, known as the Gray 
Man, amps up the tension, especially when he discovers a mutual attraction to the 
mother of Blue, the psychically gifted townie girl who’s befriended Ronan and his 
buddies Adam and Gansey. Blue and the boys’ search for Glendower has always 
been a dangerous game, but now the danger has escalated; in addition to the men 
searching for the Greywaren, there is another dream thief who is tapping into the 
energy of the line for his own purposes. Meanwhile, Adam, who made the sacrifice 
that awakened the line, is still not sure what his role is, in either the magic realm 
or the human one, and Blue is becoming increasingly attracted to Gansey even 
though she knows that her kiss will kill him. After having so deftly introduced and 
developed this constellation of characters in the first novel, Stiefvater plies their 
strengths and weaknesses into an ever more complex web of magical intrigue and 
heartstopping action. In this sequel, every character, except the ones disposed of in 
the previous book, has an increasingly important role to play, and the new characters 
the author introduces are just right for moving her plot lines forward and drawing 
out productive tensions between the ordinary world of rural Virginia and the wild, 
magical world they have awakened but have not yet learned to navigate. Plot and 
pacing are perfect, and there are just enough threads plucked from the weave to 
stimulate breathless desire for the sequel.  KC
strAsser, todd Fallout. Candlewick, 2013 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-5534-1 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-6722-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
Alternative history has been largely coopted by steampunk of late, but here Strasser 
offers a far less fanciful take on the recent past—a what-if reconsideration of the 
Cuban Missile Crisis. Scott Porter’s dad takes the threat of nuclear war seriously, 
118 • the bulletin
and under the eye of his bemused neighbors, he constructs a bomb shelter under 
his sons’ new bedroom addition. His precaution is justified on the night the sirens 
blare and he and his family scramble for safety through the trapdoor in the closet 
floor. Nearby neighbors who know of the shelter race to claim a place, and by 
the time Mr. Porter manages to shut the hatch, the space and provisions planned 
for four people must now accommodate eleven. The ensemble drama that fol-
lows, interspersed with chapters on the lead-up to the disaster, is gut-wrenchingly 
credible. The water tank malfunctions; nobody grabbed a watch or a clock in the 
midnight evacuation, so nobody can judge elapsed time; the first aid kit is woefully 
inadequate to helping them care for Mrs. Porter, who suffered a severe head injury 
on her descent into the shelter. And of course, there’s ambiguity of leadership, 
vacillation between crushing boredom and emotional outbursts and threats, the 
abandonment of modesty, and the persistent fear that survival might be more hor-
rifying than death. This title gains its power not simply from its precise detailing 
of disaster, but from the nuanced treatment of the entire cast of castaways, whose 
personal backstories are skillfully intertwined with their current behaviors. Acces-
sible to a range of readers, this could be a provocative classroom read as well as a 
natural pick for disaster fans.  EB
stroud, JonAthAn 
The Screaming Staircase. 
Disney Hyperion, 
2013 [384p] (Lockwood & Co.)
ISBN 978-1-4231-6491-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-8
In an alternative England plagued by hauntings, ghostbusting agencies are staffed 
mostly by Sensitive kids and teens, since only people under the age of eighteen 
have the psychic abilities to deal with the spirits properly. Young Lucy Carlyle is 
particularly gifted, though a recent mishap (accidentally burning a house down) 
while fighting a nasty shade alongside her pal/boss Lockwood might suggest oth-
erwise. The incident brings their agency to the attention of a wealthy businessman 
who offers to pay for the damage to the house (and save Lockwood & Co. from 
financial ruin) if they spend the night investigating his recently acquired country 
home—which also happens to be one of the most haunted places in England. Stroud 
brings together the seemingly disparate plot points together with his usual combina-
tion of thrilling adventure and snarky humor. Fans of his Bartimaeus Trilogy will 
recognize Lockwood’s assistant, George, as a kindred (albeit human) soul to that 
series’ wise-cracking djinni, and indeed, all members of this spirit-smashing trio 
get in their fair share of zingers, providing a comedic balance to the many narrow 
escapes, false leads, and shape-shifting specters that otherwise occupy Lockwood 
& Co. The ghosts themselves are scary but not gory, and the descriptions are vivid 
without being intense, so that even readers who are traditionally scaredy-cats may 
very well find the horror here palatable. The world-building skips on the details a 
bit, but answers to the hows and whys of the spirit epidemic will likely appear in 
the future installment of this proposed series.  KQG
sutcliFFe, williAm The Wall. Bloomsbury, 2013 291p
ISBN 978-0-8027-3492-1 $17.99    
R Gr. 6-9
Thirteen-year-old Joshua has spent four years living in the shadow of an enormous 
wall that he believes protects his peaceful, modern city from the violent inhabitants 
OctOber 2013 • 119
of the ramshackle village just beyond. When he discovers a hidden tunnel that 
leads beneath the Wall, Joshua feels the lure of the forbidden and ventures into 
the unknown territory. After being chased by street thugs, he is saved by Leila, 
a girl who hides him and helps him return. Repeated visits bring him closer to 
Leila and her family, and he learns that the conflict between the two sides is not 
as straightforward, and his new friends are not as savage, as he’s been told. Soon, 
however, his visits unwittingly place him and Leila’s family in danger, and Joshua 
must take a final risk himself to save those who have risked so much for his sake. 
Grounded in the harsh realities of the Israeli/Palestinian conflict over the occupied 
territories, this lovely, deeply moving novel tells a universal story of understanding 
and friendship that will be accessible even to those unfamiliar with the underlying 
political and cultural struggle. The novel definitely has a lesson to teach, but the 
parable-like structure resists being heavy-handed. Instead, Joshua’s curiosity, inno-
cence, and even ignorance are entirely genuine, as he moves from his small personal 
rebellion to bolder, socially grounded ones, and his questions, his confusion, and 
his eventual enlightenment become the reader’s own. A good fit for middle-school 
readers interested in global issues, the novel also works well as a starting point for 
discussions of a long-standing conflict.  AM
toBin, Jim The Very Inappropriate Word; illus. by Dave Coverly. Ottaviano/
Holt, 2013 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-9474-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 5-8 yrs
Michael loves words, loves them so much that he collects them and keeps them 
in a box under his bed. His logophilic tendencies get him into trouble, however, 
when he collects a rather inappropriate word on the bus (uttered by a student ex-
amining his report card). Michael starts telling other kids about the word, an act 
that eventually lands him in after-school detention; Michael’s teacher cleverly then 
asks him to look for new spelling words for her in the library, and Michael’s stacks 
of new words drive the inappropriate one from his mind. Listeners are likely to be 
more drawn to the mystique of a naughty word (and subsequently disappointed 
that it is never in fact revealed) than the joys of building a robust vocabulary, and 
the entertaining concept subsequently falls short, turning instead to focus on the 
adult problem. The text shifts from prose to verse in the library section, and the 
transition is somewhat startling and the rhyme forced despite the creative high-
lighting of Michael’s found words (“words underwater/ words in the sky/ words 
underground/ words that spy/ words that fight/ words that sing/ words for doing 
crazy things”). Cartoonist Coverly plays fast and free with the abstract elements of 
the tale, and the art breathes life into the idea of collecting words, ranging from 
the literal (the word “squeegee” printed on a squeegee) to the metaphorical (a word 
bubble says “ditto” to a word bubble that says “ditto”; a word bubble with a black 
eye reads “fisticuffs”). There’s an appealingly sophisticated, scribbly edge to the line 
and watercolor art, and an abundance of hatch lines (the inappropriate word’s text 
bubble is one big scratchy mess) add energy to the spreads. This may be a lively 
addition to a language arts lesson or simply an entertaining celebration of words, 
appropriate and otherwise.  HM
120 • the bulletin
trAcy, Kristen Too Cool for This School. Delacorte, 2013 [288p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98962-9 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74070-8 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89984-3 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7
Lane has it made: she’s got popular friends, a cute possible boyfriend, and the 
honor of being chosen sixth-grade captain, which is an entrée to a secret world of 
upperclassmen. Her perfect life hits an obstacle when her same-age cousin, Mint, 
comes to stay for a month and joins Lane at school. Despite Lane’s generosity in 
explaining all the rules of middle school to Mint, Mint persists in being an individual 
(“She should have been thankful I was trying to help her”). Though Lane and her 
friends initially fear that Mint’s behavior will sink their own popularity, what hap-
pens is even worse: quirky, outgoing Mint eclipses them completely, winning the 
heart of the boy Lane’s best friend adores and the attention of Lane’s fellow grade 
captains. Tracy’s snappy, intelligent prose manages the delicate feat of allowing 
Lane a truthful narration (“I did stuff the way you were supposed to do stuff in 
order to live a fantastic life”) while making clear that her viewpoint is colored by 
selfishness and jealousy, demonstrating the disastrous effects of the crossroads of 
anxiety and ego. This is also a particularly fine outing for demonstrating the way 
mean-girling can swiftly gather speed as Lane manages to rationalize some horrible 
behavior and, in loyalty to her ousted friend, makes only the feeblest resistance to 
a plan that would leave Mint with an undeserved criminal record. Lane’s perspec-
tive makes this an excellent title for language arts use, and it could be a productive 
entry in a book club for a discussion of perspective and the way we’re all the good 
guys in our own lives.  DS
tucholKe, April genevieve Between the Devil and the Deep Blue Sea. Dial, 
2013 [368p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3889-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
After her bohemian artist parents skip town for Europe, seventeen-year-old Violet 
White is facing down a long, hot summer with her hostile twin brother in the 
family’s decaying old mansion, with no AC and dwindling funds. Violet decides 
to rent out the guesthouse for some extra cash and in walks River, a beautiful boy 
with a seductive wit and “panther hips,” and suddenly, Violet’s summer is looking 
up. Unfortunately, shortly after River’s arrival, strange things, like children going 
missing and appearances of “the Devil,” start happening in Violet’s small town of 
Echo. She’s unsurprised when River cops to some of the occurrences—unsurprised 
but still alarmingly drawn to him, even after he uses his supernatural powers to 
murder the town drunk. Like any good gothic fare, this is as much about morality 
as it is about atmosphere, and Tucholke strikes just the right balance between the 
windswept, seaside setting and Violet’s interior struggles with right and wrong (and 
wrong-but-oh-so-right feelings toward dangerous River). A small town focused on 
old money and older traditions, Echo perfectly reflects its name and feels like a 
fascinating remnant from another time, as does Violet, whose morbid obsessions 
with the clothes and possessions of her dead grandmother reveal her to be pain-
fully lonely. River is the classic Byronic hero, a fact the book tacitly acknowledges 
through several literary allusions, and as such, he’s dangerously enticing despite 
OctOber 2013 • 121
(and perhaps because of) his deplorable actions. An unforeseen twist involving 
his family offers River a bit of redemption, but it will be up to Violet and readers 
of the remaining installments of this proposed series to determine if he actually 
deserves absolution.  KQG 
twohy, miKe Outfoxed; written and illus. by Mike Twohy. Simon, 2013 40p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-7392-8 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-7393-5 $12.99    
R Gr. 1-2
A conniving fox breaks into a henhouse one night and makes off with what he 
thinks is a chicken. When he arrives home, he discovers that the bird he stuffed into 
his coat pocket is actually a duck—or is it? The clever duck pretends to be a dog, 
carrying his ruse to elaborate lengths, from barking and wagging his tail (well, his 
tailfeathers) to chewing up the fox’s clothes and peeing on the carpet. The puzzled 
fox is bamboozled by this behavior and returns the duck/dog to the farm, explaining 
that “foxes don’t eat dogs and foxes don’t have pets.” After returning home, the fox 
wonders if maybe he should have kept the little guy after all—until he spots the 
egg that the “dog” left behind and realizes he’s been played. The story unfolds in 
panel sequences like a comic, with in-image dialogue the only words, and Twohy 
adeptly uses that format to successfully convey both the humor and the drama of 
this interlude between fox and duck. The narration of the text is peppered with 
asides in speech balloons from the duck and the fox, and the duck’s formal address 
of the fox (“You are mistaken, sir. I am NOT a DUCK!”) also adds to the humor. 
The duck’s doglike ehavior (especially the peeing on the carpet) will cause giggles, 
and kids will enjoy being in on the duck’s deception. The lively illustrations, ren-
dered in marker and colored pencil, have a casual but controlled line, and the clear 
compositions and expressive figures make the action easy to follow. The mostly 
accessible vocabulary and brevity of the text will put this within reach of many 
primary grade readers and the comic-like format may appeal to reluctant readers. 
This would be a “quacker-jack” addition to a duck- or fox-themed storytime, or 
an interesting title to contrast with Beatrix Potter’s lengthier The Tale of Jemima 
Puddle-Duck.  JH
vestergAArd, hope Digger, Dozer, Dumper; illus. by David Slonim. Candle-
wick, 2013 32p
ISBN 978-0-7636-5078-0 $15.99   
R 4-8 yrs
Muddy wheels, hefty loads, thrumming engines, and automotive grunt work inspire 
Vestergaard’s poetic paeans, praising the humble hard work and civic contributions 
of sixteen awesomely loud and impressively tough trucks. Although Slonim’s perky 
accompanying cartoon illustrations play to a younger crowd, Vestergaard’s careful 
wordsmithery, precise terminology, and sly humor assure that the poems themselves 
will be appreciated by even more sophisticated listeners. Listen for the internal 
rhyme in “Street Sweeper”: “Early morning, empty streets,/ His whir disturbs 
the hush.” Chuckle at the playful “Excavator”: “Too big? She’ll fill that hole./ Big 
rocks? She’ll make them roll./ Her name? The excavator./ Her job? Smooth opera-
tor.” Consider the roiling imagery of “Cement Mixer”: “Around/ and around/ and 
around it goes—/ his iron belly’s churning.” Vestergaard changes up her rhyme 
and meter enough to keeps things interesting, and the scansion is reliable enough 
to coax even poetry-shy adults into trying a read aloud. Newly independent read-
122 • the bulletin
ers might want to step up to the mic, too, and share in the fun of a high-energy, 
clanging and banging poetry performance.  EB
voigt, cynthiA Mister Max: The Book of Lost Things; illus. by Iacopo Bru-
no. Random House, 2013 [384p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-97123-5 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97681-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97683-3 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-7
After the mysterious disappearance of his actor parents, twelve-year-old Max Starling 
insists to his grandmother that he can remain in the Hotel Excelsior, his home, 
and earn his own money and his own keep. He’s not particularly skilled in any way 
that would get him hired in the early nineteenth century, but Max discovers that 
he has a knack for stumbling across small sums of money by applying his peculiar 
assets of observation and empathy. Returning a lost child to his distraught mother 
earns him a monetary reward, and it also connects him to another person with a 
problem—a lost spoon and a lost nephew—which in turn leads him to yet another 
mystery. Max sees how one person’s problem has its resolution in another person’s 
strength or need, and he turns his unique talent for matchmaking into a modest 
living as a self-styled “solutioneer.” While so many child detective novels revolve 
around a single crime, Voigt’s vision is equally interesting yet more humane, as Max 
follows clues with his heart as well as his brain, and everyone who benefits from his 
involvement is much the better for it. The overarching intrigue of the elder Starlings’ 
fate will lead Max into further series adventures, but it’s the mysteries within his 
immediate reach that will entice readers back for the next title.  EB
wAllAce, rich Wicked Cruel. Knopf, 2013 195p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96748-1 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86748-4 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89800-6 $10.99   
R Gr. 4-7
A small New England town with a ghostly history serves as the setting for this 
trio of spooky stories. Taking its inspiration from an urban legend, the first tale 
follows Jordan, a sixth-grader who starts seeing the face of a bullied classmate in 
online videos—a classmate who supposedly died from a brain hemorrhage after 
he moved away. The ghostly horses of Brickyard Pond prove themselves to be kind 
but protective spirits in their tale, while a middle-school dance leads young Owen 
to form a friendship with a girl from another time in “Rites of Passage.” Each 
story runs about eighty or so pages, making this frightening fare that will appeal 
to readers who’ve enjoyed Alvin Schwartz’s stories but who’d prefer a bit more meat 
on the bones of their scares. Wallace knows his pacing and utilizes genre tropes 
for maximum impact, pairing the sordid past of an aging town with the perils 
of modern society and technology to create atmospheric chills. The protagonists 
are aren’t deeply drawn, but they’re not there to be memorable characters; they’re 
average everyday kids rendered accessible by their dealing with average everyday 
problems outside of the supernatural, like bullies, sibling conflicts, and confusion 
with the opposite sex. Pair this with a recommendation of local lore, or use it as a 
classroom readaloud leading up to Halloween.  KQG 
OctOber 2013 • 123
wAssermAn, roBin The Waking Dark. Knopf, 2013 [464p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96877-8 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86877-1 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89962-1 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 10 up
A hot summer day in the small town of Oleander, Kansas, turns tragic when five of 
its seemingly normal residents murder twelve of their friends and family members. 
Four of the murderers then kill themselves, but seventeen-year-old Cass Porter sur-
vives, her attempt to end her life leaving her merely injured and with no memory 
of smothering the infant boy left in her charge. A year later, an F5 tornado sweeps 
through Oleander, destroying the facility that Cass has been held in for the last 
twelve months and bringing her together with four other teens who had their own 
experiences with the Killing Day: closeted West, who watched his secret boyfriend 
get run down by the football coach; passive Daniel, who was in the grocery store 
when Mr. Gathers let loose with his hunting rifle; devout Ellie, who witnessed 
a true crucifixion; and Jule, who saw the stabbing death of her uncle as largely 
in keeping with her already violent upbringing. When a quarantine is suddenly 
declared and the town descends into chaos, it becomes clear that Killing Day was 
only the beginning of the bloodbath that is about to take place. The narrative tone 
is compellingly sociopathic: aloof but chilling in its directness, the third-person 
voice describes the horrors in their most simplest, visceral terms, making them 
even more horrific. Wasserman’s view of humanity is about as optimistic as that of 
Daniel Kraus, and readers who were fascinated by both the emotional and physical 
violence in Rotters (BCCB 5/11) and Scowler (BCCB 4/13) will find themselves 
impressed by the ingenuity and resourcefulness of Oleander’s bloodthirsty residents. 
Masterful pacing and brilliant scene-setting work to make sure readers can’t leave 
Oleander until the final page, after which they’ll be left wondering if it was nature 
or nurture that caused the town’s downfall.  KQG
wein, elizABeth Rose Under Fire. Hyperion, 2013 [368p]
ISBN 978-1-4231-8309-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Eighteen-year-old Rose Justice, native of Hershey, Pennsylvania, has managed to 
pull some strings on the English side of her family to get seconded to Britain’s 
Air Transport Auxiliary to ferry planes in 1944. There she befriends Maddie, still 
grieving from Julie’s death (in Code Name Verity, BCCB 6/12), and learns the ATA 
ropes. It’s on a solo flight over France, however, that she’s intercepted by German 
fliers and brought down. She’s sent to the infamous German concentration camp 
Ravensbrück, where she meets Róza, a defiant young Pole, who is also known as 
a “Rabbit,” one of the inmates who were subjected to horrific, often lethal experi-
ments in the camp hospital. When both Rose and Róza turn up on the camp’s death 
list, they must make a harrowing escape in order to survive. Though this lacks the 
origami-like unfolding and shocking dénouement of Verity, it is nonetheless an 
impressive story of wartime female solidarity. As a young American, Rose brings a 
contrasting perspective from a country that’s been unscathed by a war that’s been 
raging in Europe for years, a contrast emphasized by the suddenness of her capture 
(she’s even still got red polish on her toes). Rose’s love of poetry threads through 
124 • the bulletin
the novel as she captures her own experiences and also uses the art to memorial-
ize her blockmates; indeed, the strongest underlying theme is that of witnessing 
to the outside world, through poetry, prose, wall graffiti, or, in the final chapters, 
literally witnessing in the Doctors’ Trial in post-war Nuremberg. The focus on the 
Rabbits, making them vivid individuals rather than depersonalized horror stories, 
is particularly original and compelling. This is therefore an atypical concentration 
camp story but a gripping one for contemporary American readers, who will easily 
connect with Rose and will be eager to discuss the ethical challenges raised by her 
story. End matter includes a note explaining historical sources, a glossary, and lists 
of relevant print and Internet sources.  DS
wiesner, dAvid Mr. Wuffles!; written and illus. by David Wiesner. Clarion, 
2013 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-618-75661-2 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 7-10 yrs
Pricey toys mean nothing to Mr. Wuffles, a handsome tuxedo cat who has instead 
fixed on the Saturn-styled metal object that’s appeared on the floor—understandably, 
since the spiky little item is actually the spaceship of a crew of tiny green explorers. 
When Mr. Wuffles starts to buffet their vessel, the expedition disembarks and runs 
for cover under the radiator, where they meet and parley with an advanced civili-
zation of insects. The cordial exchange results in the acquisition of replacements 
for their damaged ship parts (the aliens’ tools allow them to take cross-sections of 
under-radiator detritus such as an M ’n’ M and a marble), and together they execute 
a Wuffles-bamboozling plan to allow the visitors a safe return to their ship and out 
the window. Fans of Tuesday (BCCB 5/91) will recognize Wiesner’s easy shift from 
the mundane to the fantastical here as well as his deft and plausible creation of a 
skewed reality, with Lascaux-like paintings of cat vs. insect battles adorning the 
insects’ lair, and the ants providing a cheese cracker for a celebratory feast. Aside 
from the occasional human comment to Mr. Wuffles, the only text is in speech 
balloons for the aliens (strings of geometric figures) and ants (scratch marks), and 
the narrative unfolds largely in comic-style panel sequences employing Wiesner’s 
poker-faced realism; on a more dramatic note, there’s a Spielberg/Lucas level of 
glory to the bold ant-back and ladybug-flying escape scenes (you can practically 
hear the John Williams score). Is Yorinks’ Company’s Coming not weird enough for 
you? Try this.  DS
winnAcKer, susAnne Impostor. Razorbill, 2013 [288p] (Variants)
ISBN 978-1-59514-654-0 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-12
As one of a new class of human called Variants, Tessa was born with the remarkable 
ability to transform her appearance into a replica of anyone she touches. Now, after 
two years in a sheltered government school with her fellow Variant teens, she’s be-
ing sent on her first mission: to hunt a serial killer on the loose in a small Oregon 
town by impersonating his latest teenage victim, who has seemingly survived. Tessa 
goes undercover as the popular Madison but finds herself distracted by gorgeous 
fellow operative Alec and by the challenge of living another girl’s life, complete with 
adoring, overprotective parents, a cute but nosy twin brother, and an ex-boyfriend 
who just won’t let go. Soon, though, she finds herself enjoying Madison’s life a 
OctOber 2013 • 125
little too much, putting her mission and her life at risk as she tracks a murderer 
who may just have powers like her own. Comparisons to the popular X-Men are 
unavoidable, and the novel covers a lot of familiar mutant-superhero ground, but 
the addition of the serial-murder investigation element gives it a fresh and inventive 
feel. The novel begins somewhat slowly, but once the characters start their actual 
investigation, the action picks up and the strongly written mystery component 
takes center stage. A good number of possible suspects and well-played red her-
rings make the eventual unmasking of the villain effectively surprising, and the 
case’s solution unearths unexpected secrets; those unresolved plot threads, along 
with Tessa’s unresolved romantic woes and the revelation of new Variants, provide 
fodder for expected sequels.  AM
winter, JeAnette Henri’s Scissors; written and illus. by Jeanette Winter. Simon, 
2013 34p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-6484-1 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-6485-8 $12.99   
Ad 6-9 yrs
While Parker’s Colorful Dreamer: The Story of Artist Henri Matisse (BCCB 1/13) 
focused on Matisse’s overall artistic trajectory, this title chronicles the artist’s late in 
life decline into ill health that caused his move from painting to collage work. The 
book traces his embrace of this new medium (“Matisse cut paper all day. . . . Paper 
cut-outs covered his walls”) during his productive and happy final years, ending 
with his death (“A rainbow of shapes cradled the old artist and carried him into 
the heavens”). The accessibility of cut paper makes it a particularly child-appealing 
medium, and Matisse is certainly the grand master of the art, so audiences will be 
pleased to see the championing of this oeuvre. However, this is mostly limited to 
such celebration, since the information about Matisse and his art process is sketchy 
at best; the fanciful curve of the ending (“Are some of the stars we see at night 
coming to us from Henri’s scissors?”) is sentimental and confusing. Additionally, 
the subdued backgrounds of the illustrations, especially the beige of the pre-collage 
chronicle, are dry and distancing, turning Matisse’s vibrant hues into muted wall-
paper. When Winter’s more usual vivid shades come to the fore, the art is strong 
and vigorous, with a hat-tip to Matisse himself in the form of the open window 
(a famous Matisse subject) that allows the old man to view the sea; the playfulness 
and imaginative employment of actual Matisse collage shapes effectively convey the 
way art and life vision can blend together. This will need completion with Parker’s 
biography or another Matisse work, but it could be a prompt for an art project—or 
even some lively room redecoration.  DS
wolFF, Ashley Baby Bear Counts One; written and illus. by Ashley Wolff. Beach 
Lane/Simon, 2013 40p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4158-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4159-0 $12.99   
R 3-6 yrs
Baby Bear and his Mama are in their den when—“Thockthockthockthockthock!”—
they hear one woodpecker outside preparing for winter by collecting beetles. The 
pair goes out to investigate, and they encounter other sounds of animals getting 
ready for colder weather. With each new discovery, the number of critters discovered 
rises, until the snow starts to fall and Baby Bear counts ten snowflakes before curling 
up back in the den with his mother for a long winter’s nap. The story progresses 
126 • the bulletin
cozily in a pattern that quickly becomes recognizable to listeners: Baby Bear hears 
a noise, asks his mother who is producing it, and Mama explains which animal is 
preparing for snowfall; a page turn then reveals the busy preparers and Baby Bear’s 
counting (“Baby Bear counts 6”). There’s an occasional playful touch—four and 
five are combined, and some countable elements require serious investigation (the 
seven bees get a bit lost in the rich detail of the background field they’re buzzing 
over, and one of the nine geese is only noticeable by its tail, for example). The 
linocut illustrations tinted with watercolor are strikingly realistic and lavish in their 
detailed, dramatic lining and rich, earthy coloring. The comfy, easy-to-follow text 
and vivid pictures will make this a snug bedtime story or a feel-good selection for 
an autumnal storytime.  TA
woodson, JAcQueline This Is the Rope: A Story from the Great Migration; illus. 
by James Ransome. Paulsen/Penguin, 2013 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-399-23986-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 6-9 yrs
An old piece of rope serves as a framing device for a story that follows an African-
American family from South Carolina to New York City mid-century. The rope 
remains with the family for three generations, from its earliest use as a jump rope 
“under the shade of a sweet-smelling pine” in the South to its more utilitarian func-
tions as clothesline and sign holder in the city. The text on each spread begins with 
“This is the rope” and goes on to tell, in spare, eloquent ragged-right prose, how 
the rope played a role in the family’s personal history. Short of the introductory 
author’s note, there is not much history here; this is simply a beautifully told family 
tale about a loving, close-knit African-American family over several decades. The 
fictional tale is told from the point of view of the original pair’s granddaughter, a 
character who herself appears skipping rope on the penultimate spread under the 
watchful eyes of her parents and grandparents. The language is deliberate and lyrical, 
and the gentle pacing calls for a slow, deliberate readaloud. Ransome’s oil paintings 
feature landscapes indicative both of the changing geography and the passing of 
time; while some figures are a little stiff, others are remarkable, with light falling 
on faces at the perfect angle and facial features carrying abundant emotion. Young 
listeners may need assistance to conceptualize the family relations and the passing 
of time, but they will nevertheless be drawn to this warm and hope-filled tale.  HM
young, JessicA My Blue Is Happy; illus. by Catia Chien. Candlewick, 2013 32p
ISBN 978-0-7636-5125-1 $15.99   
R 4-7 yrs
This color-concept book is based on the simple premise that the same color can 
evoke different emotions in different people (“My sister says that blue is sad/ Like 
a lonely song./ But my blue is happy/ Like my favorite jeans/ And a splash in the 
pool on a hot day”). The young narrator chronicles the contrasting takes on a 
variety of colors, comparing other people’s interpretations to her own: red is angry 
to the boy next door but brave to her, orange is fun to her cousin but serious to 
her. The emotional statements about colors are effectively grounded in evocative, 
kid-oriented similes that add substance for listeners trying to make sense of the 
abstract relationship between colors and feelings. Chien’s acrylic compositions 
tightly correlate with the color theme of each spread. The art’s dry, textural brush-
ing, with scratchy lines overlying and outlining painted sections, is often almost 
OctOber 2013 • 127
crayonlike, emphasizing the child perspective. Faces are simply drawn, but much 
of the emotion comes from compositions rather than expression. At the core of the 
narrative is the celebratory idea that people experience the world differently and 
that there is no end of possibilities in perspective, making this a remarkably useful 
text not only for color units but for exploring themes of community and the ways 
people are alike and different.  HM
yum, hyewon This Is Our House; written and illus. by Hyewon Yum. Foster/
Farrar, 2013 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-374-37487-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 4-7 yrs
Yum’s latest picture book recalls events in the life of a family over several generations. 
Told from the perspective of a young girl, the story starts with “This is the house 
where my grandparents arrived from far away with just two suitcases in hand,” then 
follows the family’s lifeline in the house, as children are born and raised, sibling 
relationships are tried and tested, a daughter (the speaker’s mother) goes to college 
and returns with a fiancé, and a new baby (the speaker herself) is born. The story 
itself is light on plot, no more than an extended reflection, albeit one told in a 
bright and chipper voice. The pencil and watercolor art provides some additional 
interest, contrasting family photographs with vivid as-it-happens illustrations of the 
same event. The narrative and the illustrations, which are set entirely in front of or 
within the same two-story brick home on a city street, have an appealing and gentle 
domesticity. The watercolors, like the story, are muted and understated, and while 
the portraiture is occasionally stiff, the figures in general move organically through 
the detailed scenes and through time. Depictions of different seasons further detail 
the passage of time through the narrative. This would lend itself to a community 
unit in the early grades, as it reminds an itinerant generation of what it means to 
belong to a single space through multiple generations.  HM 
Gus, the Dinosaur Bus
CorreCTion
Julia Liu’s Gus, the Dinosaur Bus, reviewed in the September issue, is priced not 
at $9.99 as we stated but at $12.99. He’s totally worth it, and we regret the error.
128 • the bulletin
ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons: resourCes for teAChers And LIBrArIAns
sánchez gonzález, lisA, ed. The Stories I Read to the Children: The Life and 
Writing of Pura Belpré, the Legendary Storyteller, Children’s Author, and New York 
Public Librarian. Center for Puerto Rican Studies, 2013 285p 
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-8784-83805 $24.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-878483-45-4 $7.99
Pura Belpré, the first Latina librarian at the New York Public Library and author of 
the first known Latina/o children’s book from a mainstream publisher, has received 
a strikingly small amout of scholarly attention.  This book, a collection of Belpré’s 
stories and essays, introduced by a biography, seeks to fill that gap and draw attention 
to this important historical figure.  Sánchez González provides a brief biographical 
sketch of Belpré, drawing from relatively unexplored archival sources and accessibly 
situating Belpré’s life and work within larger contexts of the history of Puerto Rican 
diaspora, the genesis of children’s librarianship as a profession, feminist folklore 
studies, and the development of an ethnically conscious Latina/o literature, sug-
gesting directions for further research.  She also has carefully selected thirty-two of 
Belpré’s Puerto Rican folktales, seventeen previously published (though, to date, 
out of print) and fifteen never-before published, all of which are wondrous in their 
simple magic and showcase the Spanish, Indigenous, and African roots of Puerto 
Rican oral culture, as well as Belpré’s phenomenal talent as a storyteller.  Her es-
says, also mostly previously unpublished, are thoughtful reflections in her work 
in bilingual outreach and storytelling that provide important historical context 
yet often feel surprisingly relevant thirty-five years on.  Folklore enthusiasts and 
storytellers are sure to find this collection of tales and history useful as a resource 
for a fairly untapped folkloric tradition, and teachers, librarians, and scholars with 
interests in fields as diverse as ethnic studies, library and information science, liter-
ary history, and performance studies (Belpré also wrote a few short plays and was 
an important puppeteer) are likely to find a wealth of information and directions 
for further study in this portrait of a remarkable and foundational woman.  TA
OctOber 2013 • 129
Abuse–fiction: King; Sonnenblick
Actors and actresses–fiction: Krish-
naswami
Adventure: Appelt; Bacigalupi; 
Fisher; Kirby; Pierpoint; reeve; 
Stiefvater
African Americans: Hill
African Americans–stories: Woodson
Aliens–stories: Wiesner
ALternAtIve HIStOrY: Kirby
Alzheimer’s disease–fiction: Fitzger-
ald
Amnesia–fiction: durst
Angels–fiction: rippin
Anger–fiction: King
Animals: Arndt; Horáček
Animals–fiction: Appelt; MacLach-
lan
Animals–folklore: Goldman
Animals–stories: Brown, P.; Lewin; 
McBratney; Park; Steffensmeier; 
twohy; Wolff
Appearance–fiction: napoli
Art and artists: Winter
Art and artists–stories: Farley
Asian Americans–fiction: Holland
Australia–fiction: rippin
Babies–stories: Cocca-Leffler
BedtIMe StOrIeS: Cousins; 
Lobel; rex; Shulevitz
Behavior–fiction: donovan
Behavior–stories: Hale; tobin
BIBLe StOrIeS: ehrlich
BILInGuAL BOOKS: dominguez
BIOGrAPHIeS: Hill; Hopkins; 
Winter
Biology: Arndt
Birds–stories: Cousins
Brothers–fiction: Carmichael; 
Koertge
Brothers and sisters–fiction: Kizer; 
Pierpoint
Brothers and sisters–stories: Cocca-
Leffler
Carnivals–fiction: Almond
Cats–stories: Lewin; Wiesner
Choices–fiction: Patrick
Civics: Perkins
Colors–stories: Young
Concentration camps–fiction: Wein 
COnCePt BOOKS: Cocca-Leffler; 
Horáček; Young
COuntInG BOOKS: Wolff
Creativity–stories: Farley
Crime and criminals–fiction: Berry; 
durst; Gantos; Gensler; McGillis; 
Pierpoint; Winnacker; Wasserman
Current events: Sutcliffe
death–fiction: Hays; ness; Wasser-
man
depression–fiction: Quick
differences–stories: Young
disasters–fiction: Block
dogs–fiction: engle; Slonim
dust Bowl: Brown, d.
dystopias–fiction: Grant; Kizer; 
McGinnis
eating disorders–fiction: Cook
Ecology: Hopkins 
elephants–stories: Barclay
emotions–stories: Berger; Cocca-
Leffler
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
130 • the bulletin
Environmental studies: Hopkins
Ethics and values: Farizan; Higgins; 
Patrick; Perkins; Sutcliffe
FABLeS: Sutcliffe
Faith–fiction: Grant; Koertge; Kurtz
Families–stories: Woodson; Yum
Families–fiction: Beaudoin; Carmi-
chael; Creech; donovan; engle; 
Gaiman; Holland; Kessler; King; 
Kurtz; Legrand; Long; MacLach-
lan; McKay; Patrick; Polacco; 
Sonnenblick
FAntASY: Barclay; Croggon; Fisher: 
Hassett; Jinks; Kessler; reeve; 
rex; rippin; Stiefvater; Stroud; 
Winnacker
Farms–stories: Steffensmeier
Fathers–stories: Collins; Cousins
Fear–stories: Collins
Fish–fiction: Almond
Fish–stories: Hale
FOLKtALeS And FAIrY tALeS: 
Archer; Goldman
Food and eating–fiction: McCully
Football–fiction: Wallace
Foundlings–fiction: Creech
Friends–fiction: Adler; Bacigalupi; 
Cook; Hays; Higgins; Krishnas-
wami; McKay; Slonim
Friends–stories: Miller
Future–fiction: north
Gays and lesbians–fiction: Farizan
Ghosts–fiction: Legrand; Stroud
Goblins–fiction: reeve
Grandparents–fiction: Fitzgerald; 
MacLachlan
GrAPHIC nOveLS: Brown, d.; 
Montijo; Shelley
Grief–fiction: Hays; Koertge; Le-
grand; McKay
Halloween: Feder
Health: Archer
HIStOrICAL FICtIOn: Berry; 
Collins; Gensler; Higgins; Jinks; 
Long; Pierpoint; Polacco; voigt; 
Wallace; Wein; Woodson
History, U.S.: Brown, d.; Floca
History, world: Bradbury
Holidays: Shulevitz
Home–stories: Yum
HOrrOr: Fisher; Wasserman
HuMOr: Archer; Barclay; Berger; 
Brown, P.; eaton; Farley; Gaiman; 
Gantos; Hale; Harley; Montijo; 
reeve; Shannon; Slonim; twohy; 
Wiesner
Identity–fiction: napoli
Imagination–stories: Becker; Miller
Immigrants–fiction: Polacco
India–fiction: Bradbury
Indian Americans–fiction: Krishnas-
wami
Individuality–fiction: tracy
Individuality–stories: Brown, P.
Iran–fiction: Farizan
Islands–fiction: Carmichael
Jealousy–fiction: tracy 
Jews–fiction: north; Polacco
Journals–fiction: Beaudoin
Juvenile detention–fiction: Beaudoin
Language arts: tobin; tracy
Latinos–fiction: Montijo; Wallace
Latinos–stories: dominguez
Lice–stories: Shannon
Literature, English: Croggon; Shel-
ley
Literature, world: Block
Lying–fiction: Holland; Sones
Machines–poems: vestergaard
Magic–fiction: Stiefvater
Mexico–folklore: Goldman
Mining–fiction: Long
Missing persons–fictions: voigt
Monsters–fiction: Feder
Moon–stories: rex
Mothers–fiction: Harrington
Moving–fiction: Harrington; Kurtz
Moving–stories: Woodson
Music and musicians: Hill
Music and musicians–fiction: Cox; 
Sonnenblick
Muteness–fiction: Berry
MYSterIeS: Gantos; voigt; Win-
nacker
Mythology, Greek: Block
Nature study: Arndt; Park
night–stories: Shulevitz
nuclear war–fiction: Strasser 
OctOber 2013 • 131
nurSerY rHYMeS: dominguez
Oregon trail–fiction: Pierpoint
Orphans–fiction: Jinks
Pets–stories: eaton 
POetrY: engle ; Floca; vestergaard
POP-uP BOOKS: Horáček
Prejudice–fiction: Sutcliffe
race–fiction: Perkins
Reading aloud: Appelt; Archer; 
Creech; Gaiman; Hurwitz
Reading, beginning: Hassett; Mc-
Cully
Reading, easy: Adler; Archer; Cox; 
Feder; Hurwitz; Slonim; twohy; 
vestergaard
Reading, reluctant: Bacigalupi; 
Perkins
reassurance–stories: McBratney
relationships–fiction: Beaudoin; 
Bradbury; Farizan; King; napoli; 
Patrick; Quick; Sones; Strasser
Religious studies: ehrlich
rHYMInG StOrIeS: Park; Smith
romance–fiction: Croggon; tuchol-
ke
runaways–fiction: Almond
School–fiction: Adler; Cook; Cox; 
donovan; Harley; Hale; tracy
Science experiments–fiction: Adler
SCIenCe FICtIOn: ness; north; 
Shelley
Seasons–stories: Wolff
Secrets–fiction: Berry; Carmichael; 
durst; Harrington; Holland
Sheep–stories: Lobel
SHOrt StOrIeS: Perkins
Sisters–fiction: Hurwitz
Sleep–stories: Lobel
Social studies: Perkins
Space travel–fiction: north
Spies: Bascomb
Spiritualism–fiction: Gensler
SPOrtS StOrIeS: Wallace
Storytelling: Goldman
Storytelling–fiction: Gaiman
Storytime: dominguez; Lewin; 
vestergaard
Suicide–fiction: Quick
Summer–fiction: tucholke
Superheroes–fiction: Montijo
SuPernAturAL StOrIeS: 
durst; Stroud; tucholke
SurvIvAL StOrIeS: Grant; ness; 
Strasser 
teachers–fiction: Harley
television–fiction: King
therapy–fiction: Cook
time travel–fiction: Fitzgerald; Kes-
sler; Sonnenblick
tOddLer BOOKS: McBratney
trains: Floca
trains–stories: Cooper; eaton
Transportation: Cooper; Floca
twins–fiction: Hurwitz
urban life–stories: Shulevitz
vegetables–stories: Miller 
verSe nOveLS: Koertge; Sones
vietnam War–stories: Collins
voyages and travel–fiction: Block; 
Gantos; Hassett; Holland; Kirby; 
Kizer; Pierpoint
voyages and travel–stories: Becker; 
Cooper
War–stories: Collins
Water–fiction: McGinnis
WOrdLeSS BOOKS: Becker 
World cultures: Farizan; Smith
World history: Bascomb
World War II: Bascomb
World War II–fiction: Wein 
Writers and writing–stories: Farley
Zombies–fiction: Bacigalupi
Zoos–stories: Park
 N. Charles Street • Baltimore, MD  • ... • .. • www.press.jhu.edu/journals
BOOKBIRD
A Journal of International Children’s Literature
Roxanne Harde, E
Published by the International Board on Books for 
Young People (IBBY).
Published quarterly
: - / -: -
The BULLETIN of the 
CENTER for CHILDREN’S BOOKS
Deborah Stevenson, E
Provides concise summaries and critical evaluations 
of current children’s books.
Published monthly (except August)
: - / -: -
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE*
R. H. W. Dillard, E--C
Julie Pfeiffer and Michelle Ann Abate, 
E
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published annually
: - / -: -
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE 
ASSOCIATION QUARTERLY*
Katharine Capshaw Smith, E
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published quarterly
: - / -: -
The LION and the UNICORN
A Critical Journal of Children’s Literature
David L. Russell, Karin E. Westman, 
and Naomi J. Wood, E
An international theme- and genre-centered 
journal committed to a serious, ongoing discussion 
of literature for children.
Published three times a year
: - / -: -
*Please contact us for more information or to join.
Johns Hopkins University Press Journals in 
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE
Keep your syllabus (or your 
CV) professional and legible 
with high-quality paper reprints 
of articles published in the more 
than seventy scholarly journals 
from the Johns Hopkins 
University Press.  
To order, visit:
www.sheridan.com/jhup/eoc 
Call: ... • Fax: ..
E-mail: jrnlcirc@press.jhu.edu
Website: www.press.jhu.edu/journals
ESCAPE FROM THE 
PHOTOCOPIER!
Keep your syllabus (or your 
CV) professional and legible 
with high-quality paper reprints 
of articles published in the more 
than seventy scholarly journals 
from the Johns Hopkins 
University Press.  
To order, visit:
www.sheridan.com/jhup/eoc 
Call: ... • Fax: ..
E-mail: jrnlcirc@press.jhu.edu
Website: www.press.jhu.edu/journals
