T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by Johns Hopkins University Press
September 2014
Vol. 68   No. 1
 
To order
Call 800.548.1784 or 410.516.6987; fax 410.516.3866;  
e-mail: jrnlcirc@press.jhu.edu; or visit us online at  
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
essential.
Deborah Stevenson, Editor 
UniversiTy of illinois aT Urbana-Champaign
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books provides 
concise summaries and critical evaluations of current 
children’s books. This invaluable resource assists 
readers with questions regarding the ever-evolving 
children’s literature field. Reviews give an in-depth 
look at a selected book’s content, reading level, 
strengths and weaknesses, and quality of the format, 
as well as suggestions for curricular use. 
Published monthly (except August). Volume 67 (2014).  
ISSN 0008-9036; E-ISSN 1558-6766.
the Bulletin of the Center  
for Children’s Books
annUal individUal sUbsCripTions
$55.00 (print); $60.00 (online)
annUal insTiTUTional sUbsCripTions
$100.00 (print); $110.00 (online);  
$140.00 (print & online)
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
September 2014
Vol. 68 No. 1
3 
 the BIg PICture
 
 Brown Girl Dreaming  by Jacqueline Woodson
4 
 new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
8 
• Quest  illus. by Aaron Becker
19 • Blind  by Rachel DeWoskin
27 • The Glass Sentence  by S. E. Grove
33 • The Life and Times of Benny Alvarez  by Peter Johnson
73 • The Shadow Hero  by Gene Luen Yang; illus. by Sonny Liew
75  BLowIng our own horn
77  suBjeCt And use Index
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R Recommended.
Ad Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor (KQG)
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Thaddeus Andracki, Reviewer (TA)
Amy Atkinson, Reviewer (AA)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
Hope Morrison, Reviewer (HM)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Melissa Albarran, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print $103.00 or electronic $115.00; combined print & electronic $144.00; 
multiple institutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, 
$55.00; students, $20.00. In countries other than the United States, add $17.60 per subscription for 
postage; subscribers in Canada and Mexico add $13.75. Single copy rate: $11.00. Volumes available 
in microfilm from ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes avail-
able in microfiche from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription 
checks should be made payable to Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address 
should provide both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin 
of the Center for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. 
Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 
2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 410-
516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/journals/
advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2014 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image: photo illustration by Theresa Evangelista from Brown Girl Dreaming copyright ©2014 
and used by permission of Paulsen/Penguin. 
September 2014 • 3
the BIg PICture
Brown Girl Dreaming
by Jacqueline Woodson
Noted novelist Woodson here turns the narrative lens on herself, chronicling her 
childhood in a sequence of titled free-verse poems. She begins with the story of her 
family before she arrived in it, her Ohio-born father coming from a long line of 
pioneering free African Americans, her southern mother missing South Carolina, 
leaving young Jacqueline with two regional identities (“I am born Negro here and 
Colored there”). Not long after Jacqueline is born, her parents split up, and little 
Jacqueline, her two siblings, and their mother move in with their mother’s parents 
in South Carolina, against the backdrop of early 1960s sit-ins and marches. Soon, 
though, their mother seeks a new life in New York City, and the kids sadly leave 
their beloved grandparents behind to find themselves—and a new baby brother—in 
Brooklyn. It’s there that young Jacqueline meets her best friend, Maria, and where 
her love of stories turns into a talent for writing. 
The effect of this confiding and rhythmic memoir is cumulative, as casual 
references blossom into motifs and characters evolve from quick references to main 
players. Losses demarcate Jacqueline’s experience, such as the death of an uncle 
who died before her birth, the leaving behind of her father, the tragic accidental 
death of a beloved aunt, the slow decline of the adored grandfather Jacqueline calls 
Daddy. That’s not to say her life is unhappy, though; these events are prominent 
landmarks in the family narrative that little Jackie loves to absorb, and she’s bolstered 
by supportive family at every step. The result is a sequence of revealing slices of 
life, redolent in sight, sound, and emotion, as the narrator moves from being the 
subject and recipient of stories to the teller of them.
Woodson subtly layers her focus, with history and geography the back-
ground, family the middle distance, and her younger self the foreground; the result 
situates Jacqueline firmly in an era and familial context without destabilizing her 
centrality. She’s thrilled to discover Steptoe’s Stevie (“Someone who looked like 
me/ had a story”) because of its implications for her storytelling; “Learning from 
Langston” showcases her early love of writing and attachment to her best friend; 
when her uncle and then her mother adopt Afro hairstyles, it’s memorable because 
Jacqueline is forbidden to join in this glamorous grownup mode. Most vivid are 
those moments of Jacqueline’s growing realization of her talents and value, when her 
teachers praise her ability or when her uncle (“Keep making up stories”) encourages 
yarn-spinning that others view as lying. 
Eager readers and budding writers will particularly see themselves in 
the young protagonist and recognize her reveling in the luxury of the library and 
unfettered delight in words (an intoxication that at one point leads her to graffiti). 
4 • the bulletin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
Additionally, the similarities to Marilyn Nelson’s How I Discovered Poetry (BCCB 
3/14)—the young African-American girl coming into her own during a turbulent 
time and discovering writing—will bring in that book’s fans. Woodson’s lyricism, 
resonance, and vibrant portraiture, though, make the book all her own; it’s a story 
of the ongoing weaving of a family tapestry, the following of an individual thread 
through a gorgeous larger fabric, with the tacit implication that we’re all traversing 
such rich landscapes. It will make young readers consider where their own threads 
are taking them. (See p. 73 for publication information.)
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
Allen, RAchAel 17 First Kisses. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 2014 319p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-06-228134-0 $9.99   
R Gr. 7-10
This debut novel follows the fate of whip-smart, athletic Claire as she negotiates 
friendships with both boys and girls throughout her junior high and high school life. 
Some of the plot here is familiar: Claire is part of a popular clique, and she has to 
manage both a jerkish boy and a long-suffering best male friend with an enduring 
crush on her. What sets this book apart, however, is the way these problems are 
solved on a human rather than a hyperbolic scale, with grace, tenderness, forgiveness 
and humor tempering the inevitable angst of a best friend who’s prettier and more 
popular than you, a seemingly sincere boy who’s playing the two of you off against 
one another, and a reputation that requires continual care and rehabilitation in a 
school where everyone knows whom you’ve kissed over the years. A large part of 
Claire’s story is embedded in the circumstances surrounding those kisses, which 
are treated as inserted memories that interrupt and contextualize the ongoing pres-
ent narrative. Through these memories, Claire relates the complicated causes and 
sometimes momentous, sometimes forgettable effects of kissing, from second-grade 
surprises to seventh-grade mistakes to the higher stakes of high school kissing that 
lead to slut-shaming and the temporary loss of your best friends. In the end, the 
most important breakups and makeups for Claire are with her female friends, and 
their sensible, forthright confrontations model the possibility for strong, supportive 
female friendships. Claire’s voice is fresh and funny, with just the right amount 
of self-aware irony and emotional range to create a relatable, likable, completely 
ordinary heroine.  KC
September 2014 • 5
AndeRson, Jodi lynn The Vanishing Season. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 
2014 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-200327-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-223917-4 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 9-12
After Maggie’s mother loses her job, the family is forced to move from Chicago to a 
decrepit house they’ve inherited in Wisconsin. The day they move in, though, they 
hear about the first of several mysterious deaths of teen girls soon attributed to a 
serial killer. Maggie is less concerned about the killer, however, than with getting 
to know her neighbors Pauline and Liam. Rich and beautiful Pauline lost her faith 
in the future when her father died, but her manic pixie dream girl qualities render 
her irresistible to the far sturdier Liam and Maggie. When Pauline’s mother sends 
her away because of the serial killer, Maggie and Liam are drawn to each other with 
heartbreaking results. The narrative is punctuated throughout with the wonder-
ings of a spirit who doesn’t know quite who or what she is or why she is connected 
to Maggie’s house, but her suggestions point to the certain knowledge that not 
everyone will survive the year. This is a book to be read twice through, once for 
the sweetly tragic love story and mystery, and a second time for the subtle imagery 
and metaphorical connections that counterpoise the fragility of first love and life 
itself with their paradoxical solidity and permanence. The three protagonists are all 
achingly lovable as they seek to act nobly and preserve kindness in an impossible 
situation; readers who saw the ineffable poignancy in Nova Ren Suma’s 17 & Gone 
(BCCB 3/13) will find similar satisfaction here.  KC 
AndeRson, John dAvid Minion. Walden Pond/HarperCollins, 2014 278p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-213311-3 $16.99   
R* Gr. 5-9
Abandoned at a White Castle as an infant and adopted by a mad scientist, Michael 
Marion Magdalene Morn is already not your average fourteen year old, but he also 
possesses some seriously superhuman powers of persuasion. In this companion to 
Anderson’s Sidekicked (BCCB 9/13), the city of New Liberty has been forsaken 
by its supers and is now economically depressed, leaving its inhabitants turning 
to petty crime if they’re to survive at all. Michael and his dad live much the same 
way, using their talents to pull bank robberies—just enough to pay the bills—until 
a new cadre of silver-masked goons controlled by the Dictator start making hits, 
followed by the blue-suited, flashy Comet. When the Dictator makes Michael’s 
dad an offer he can’t refuse, Michael must sort out his notions of good and evil and 
figure out if people’s action are ever really truly either. Deliberate pacing propels 
readers along, and the theme of the ambiguity of right and wrong is contempla-
tively interwoven with some real kick-butt action. With the success of franchises 
like Despicable Me and Maleficent, there’s a niche to be filled with good bad guys; 
Michael, precocious in a street-smart and world-weary kind of way, but prone to 
middle-school snark and susceptible to an other-side-of-the-tracks romance, fills 
the bill admirably. Drama, intrigue, and an antihero: this one’s got it all for kids 
with a bit of a taste for the dark.  TA 
6 • the bulletin
AveRbeck, Jim A Hitch at the Fairmont; illus. by Nick Bertozzi. Atheneum, 
2014 [416p]
ISBN 978-1-4424-9447-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-8
After his actress mother runs her car off a California cliff, fatherless Jack is left to 
the mercy of his cold-hearted aunt Edith, who impounds all his and his mother’s 
belongings and whisks him off to her suite at the Fairmont Hotel in San Francisco. 
There he makes the best of his new life as her dogsbody, fetching her chocolates, 
tidying her suite, cleaning up after her nasty pet chinchilla, and putting up with her 
persistent questions about any number codes he might recall from his mother. He 
returns from a routine errand to find Edith has disappeared, and since nobody in 
authority takes this seriously, he enlists the help of the guest in the suite next door, 
whom Jack recognizes as a maven of the mysterious: Alfred Hitchcock. Averbeck’s 
enthusiasm for the auteur shines in such details as chapter titles drawn from movie 
titles, references to Hitchcock’s work and life (or at least his own self-styled legend), 
and endnotes on the cited movies, with a spoiler alert regarding Hitchcock’s famed 
cameo appearances. However, none of this is successfully tied to the story of Jack’s 
predicament, and Hitchcock is an amiable gimmick rather than a character integral 
to the plot. Kids who have watched Alfred Hitchcock Hour reruns will make the most 
enthusiastic readers, but even naïfs will enjoy sniffing out the clues and puzzling 
out Nick Bertozzi’s storyboards, which open each chapter.  EB
bAchmAnn, stefAn The Cabinet of Curiosities: 36 Tales Brief & Sinister; written 
by Stefan Bachmann, Katherine Catmull, Claire Legrand, and Emma Trevayne; 
illus. by Alexander Jansson. Greenwillow, 2014 488p
ISBN 978-0-06-233105-2 $16.99   
R Gr. 4-8
For readers who have gloried in and graduated from Alvin Schwartz’s collections 
of scary stories, the tales collected here will provide a deliciously tingly next step. 
The four authors style themselves as curators, collectors of strange objects and the 
stories behind them, and hint at the dangers they have encountered to procure their 
tales from this and other realms. The stories mostly feature children, some inno-
cent and some decidedly not, some contemporary and some from those timeless, 
quasi-medieval villages that feature prominently in wonder tales. The cabinet of 
the title is conceived as a flying house, with the stories contained in various themed 
rooms, including travel, love, luck, song, fairy tales, tricks, cake, and flowers. Each 
category features stories of varying length and degrees of disquiet: a cake consumes 
an insufferable brat, a hanged man overtakes the body of the hangman’s young son, 
a boy boards a skeleton train for a wild night ride, enchanted roses suffocate an 
entire town, and a cell phone continues to keep a boy in contact with his beloved 
beyond the grave. Standard horror tropes are given fresh twists in both the stories 
themselves and the accompanying spot art in the style of Edward Gorey and Tim 
Burton; all of the tales are engagingly unsettling in some way, with a select few 
crossing over into genuine nightmare territory. Many of the stories are reprinted 
from the website of the same title and are available there in podcasts read by their 
authors; having them in print, however, makes them accessible for browsing and 
sharing during those in-between times of the school day.  KC 
September 2014 • 7
bARnholdt, lAuRen Through to You. Simon Pulse, 2014 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3463-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3465-3 $10.99
Reviewed from galley   
Ad Gr. 7-10
So uptight that she worries about how uptight she is, Harper sees no value in 
making bad decisions. Penn is a known player both on and off the field, or at least 
he was until an injured shoulder dashed his dreams for a baseball scholarship. A 
bored flirtation on his part turns Harper’s head more than she’d like to admit, 
and before long both of them are involved in an off-again, on-again relationship 
neither saw coming. Penn’s horndog ways have honed his dating skills if not his 
ability to have a meaningful relationship, making it clear why an inexperienced girl 
like Harper would be swept off her feet, and her relative reserve in the face of his 
charm offensive likewise solves the puzzle of why he might be interested in her as a 
challenge. Other than that, they have little in common other than a fierce physical 
attraction, and all seems doomed until Penn finally learns to open up about his 
feelings and Harper forgives him for treating her so cavalierly as he worked out his 
own problems. Alternating narration between the two creates empathy with Penn, 
who, unbeknownst to Harper, is struggling with a dysfunctional family, and relat-
ability for Harper, for whom the whole idea of having a boyfriend is new territory; 
each voice is distinctive and credible, adding dimension to Penn’s frustration and 
Harper’s insecurities. However, the plot and its fulfillment are absolutely formulaic, 
moving from one cliché of high school romance to another, making this run-of-
the-genre-mill. Nonetheless, readers may enjoy watching Harper and Penn learn 
the rules of being a couple and getting a healthy dose of he-thought/she-thought 
insight along the way.  KC 
bAusum, Ann Stubby the War Dog: The True Story of World War I’s Bravest 
Dog. National Geographic, 2014 72p illus. with photographs
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4263-1486-5 $17.99   
R Gr. 4-7
In a development that surprised even her, prominent chronicler of human his-
tory Bausum turns here to the story of a dog. Admittedly, Stubby was a singular 
dog, rising from life as a stray in Connecticut to accompany his master, J. Robert 
Conroy, to Europe along with the rest of his regiment in 1917. Once in action, 
the plucky terrier and his beloved master faced trench rats, poison gas, shells, and 
enemy soldiers, and he won the friendship of the troops and the indulgence of 
superior officers. Following the war, Stubby returned to acclaim and traveled with 
Conroy for nearly another decade, until the dog’s old-age death in his master’s arms; 
Conroy then devoted much of his life to seeking honor for his old companion, 
finally ensuring that the Smithsonian housed Stubby’s stuffed remains and attendant 
memorabilia. Bausum pulls back the lens a little, focusing not just on Stubby but 
also on the men in the trenches and what he meant to them. She’s a smart and 
good-humored historiographer, and she thoughtfully chronicles Conroy’s persistent 
support of the Stubby legend, distinguishing fact from lore while expressing her 
appreciation of both. This is the dog biography for readers who didn’t think they’d 
like a dog biography as well as those who did, and its careful inclusion of World 
War I’s long-term ripple effects would make it an enriching addition to a war unit. 
End matter includes a detailed timeline of Stubby’s life and posthumous fame; a 
detailed note about Bausum’s research; an extensive bibliography; a research guide; 
endnotes; and an index.  DS
8 • the bulletin
beckeR, AARon Quest; illus. by Aaron Becker. Candlewick, 2014 [40p] (The 
Journey Trilogy)  
ISBN 978-0-7636-6595-1 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-9 yrs
In this second volume in the planned trilogy beginning with Journey (BCCB 
10/13), the boy and girl who met in that first wordless picture book are now off 
on a fantastical adventure together. It begins when they encounter an imprisoned 
king, who before he’s snatched back by guards manages to hand them a map and 
his orange marker, a mate to the magical red and purple markers the kids use to 
draw things into life. The map sends the pair to the locations of a yellow, green, and 
blue (well, teal) marker, requiring them to escape the sacked castle, dive undersea, 
and climb a mountaintop, all while dodging the pursuing soldiers. When all the 
markers are obtained, the boy’s purple quetzal flies through the sky with them, 
creating a rainbow that confounds the aggressors and frees the besieged king and 
subjects. While the magical drawing isn’t be the revelation here that it was in the 
previous book, the friends’ adventure is definitely fantasy-worthy. The intricate 
scenery, which includes an elaborately constructed castle, soldiers’ tiny dirigibles, 
an undersea civilization, and a flimsy and vertiginous rope bridge, provides a highly 
satisfactory imagined playground. The watercolors have a slightly smoky haze that 
adds to the epic quality of the landscape, while the inclusion of the map (a cleverly 
constituted color-coded infographic) allows kids to puzzle out the quest and match 
map components to the kids’ stops. While Journey makes a better introduction to 
the magic, the story here is sufficiently free-standing that audiences can enjoy the 
quest in its own right.  DS
beckeR, bonny A Library Book for Bear; illus. by Kady MacDonald Den-
ton. Candlewick, 2014 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-4924-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys    
R 4-7 yrs
“Bear was quite sure he had all the books he would ever need,” but the irresistible 
Mouse talks him into a visit to the library nonetheless. Daunted by the large num-
ber of books there (“Most excessive!”), Bear seeks only another book about pickles 
to go with the one he already has and frustratedly rejects the alternatives Mouse 
proffers him. However, the siren song of a storytime—a bear and pickle themed 
storytime—sucks Bear right in, and soon he’s a book-carrying convert to the library. 
The plot is a little less crisp than in previous Bear and Mouse adventures, but Bear 
continues to be a brilliantly conceived character: he is the Narrow Comfort Zone 
Kid, but since he’s writ literally large and ornamented with the absurdly formal 
language of an elderly clubman, he makes unease about novelty into a character 
trait rather than an a childish developmental stage. He’s also just a fascinating guy, 
with his interest in pickle literature and matter-of-fact use of red rollerskates to get 
around, and his quirks help explain what Mouse, who’s more a narrative catalyst 
than a co-star, gets out of the friendship. Denton’s assured understanding of these 
character warms her watercolor art, with Bear’s operatic poses (he has a particularly 
nice line in histrionic leaning) humorously incongruous yet somehow graceful. Soft, 
glimmery earth tones are suitably self-effacing for Bear-like kids who want art that 
is rewarding but not overwhelming. Kids who love the library will relish feeling 
superior to the uninitiated Bear, while those similarly daunted will appreciate the 
ursine validation.  DS
September 2014 • 9
bently, PeteR Meet the Parents; illus. by Sara Ogilvie. Wiseman/Simon, 
2014 32p
ISBN 978-1-4814-1483-8 $17.99   
R 4-7 yrs
This British import celebrates in rhymed verse the many wonderful things parents 
do for their children. The laundry list of reasons is notably kid-centered, with par-
ents serving as everything from “grandstands to make you grow tall” to “towels for 
wiping your grime on,” from “hunters for toys that you left in the roses” to “lovely 
big heaters for warming your hands on.” Much of the humor is clearly aimed at 
the grownups reading aloud, who will undoubtedly find themselves chuckling at 
some of the interpretations (such as the suggestion that the father, who is carrying 
three kids clad in cowboy costumes, is “a horse,” while Mom, who ends up carrying 
the groceries, the coat and teddy bear, and eventually the child and scooter, is “a 
donkey”). Ogilvie’s mixed-media illustrations (pencil, pastel, ink, paint, monoprint, 
and digital) depict a multicultural cast of satisfied children and exhausted but happy 
parents. While some spreads feature a single family, many offer snapshots of mul-
tiple groupings, and there is plenty to pore over in the playful compositions. This 
isn’t the most original of jokes, but there is a nice blend of humor and affection to 
carry the narrative, and young listeners will readily identify with the child-centric 
perceptions presented in this entertaining take on contemporary families.  HM
blAckAll, soPhie The Baby Tree; written and illus. by Sophie Blackall. Paulsen/
Penguin, 2014 [34p]
ISBN 978-0-399-25718-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys    
R 5-8 yrs
Upon learning that he is going to become a big brother, a boy asks where babies 
come from and gets a variety of responses—his babysitter describes a seed that grows 
into a baby tree, his teacher tells him of a hospital, his grandfather brings up the 
stork, the mailman talks about eggs. Fortunately, his mother and father give him a 
concise yet thoughtful overview of the process, and the reflective child then realizes 
the truth of much of what he was told (“So, Olive was right about the seed. And 
Roberto was right about the egg. Mrs. McClure was right about the hospital. But 
Grandpa . . . I’m going to have to tell Grandpa where babies really come from”). 
Honest and accurate language combines with a rueful acknowledgment of the 
varied takes on the topic to make this a sound introduction to the “Where do 
babies come from?” question. The text remains kid-focused; the tone is steadily 
inquisitive, never pedantic, and the boy is particularly endearing in his curiosity. 
Blackall’s line and watercolor illustrations are winsome without being saccharine, 
and there’s considerable humor in their depiction of the various evasive explana-
tions. The clean design draws on rhythmic, geometrically tidy but still interesting 
compositions, against fields of creamy white, and the final spread, depicting the 
boy happily pushing a pram, offers the perfect ending note. A more scientific and 
in-depth note at the end of the book provides detailed information about some of 
the more common questions young people may ask. Blackall effectively finds the 
sweet spot between practical and pleasant in this lovely new addition to the sex 
education shelf.  HM 
10 • the bulletin
blAkemoRe, megAn fRAzeR The Spy Catchers of Maple Hill. Bloomsbury, 
2014 305p
ISBN 978-1-61963-348-3 $16.99   
R Gr. 4-6
McCarthyism is an easy sell to conspiracy-minded fifth-grader Hazel Kaplansky, so 
when word gets out that the Eisenhower government is investigating the workers at 
the missile factory in her small Vermont town, Hazel springs into action to identify 
and observe the spies she is certain are working locally. First on her list of suspects 
is Mr. Jones, the hired hand who works at the cemetery owned by her parents and 
whom Hazel sees engaging in some odd behavior. When fellow fifth-grade intel-
lectual Samuel moves to town, Hazel quickly enlists him as an assistant, although 
he is skeptical about her suspicions. As wannabe-sleuth Hazel doggedly pursues 
her (faulty) suppositions, she uncovers a variety of sensitive secrets and backstories 
about the folks in her town; the results of her snooping, particularly the effect her 
discoveries have on other people, eventually lead her to some self-reflection about 
her actions and, consequently, some newfound maturity. Hazel is an engaging, if 
not always likable, girl, and her kid’s-eye-view of life offers an accessible entryway 
to the McCarthy/Cold War era. Blakemore’s characters are refreshingly three-
dimensional, as there is more than meets the eye to not only the kids (including 
one of the snotty girls who bully Hazel) but also the adults. Hazel’s single-minded 
(if misguided) enthusiasm for detective work will also appeal to the mystery lovers 
of the middle grade crowd, even as they acknowledge that Hazel sometimes goes 
too far. An author’s note about the historical time period is included.  JH
bloom, c. P. The Monkey Goes Bananas; illus. by Peter Raymundo. Abrams, 
2014 40p
ISBN 978-1-4197-0885-5 $14.96   
R 4-7 yrs
The problem: the monkey is on a beach, the banana tree is on an island, and the 
water separates the two. A quick dip of the toe reveals that the water also contains 
the shark. The solution? Well, the stilts sink into the hole, and the fishing pole just 
pulls the shark up onto the beach, but the vines seem to work as a lasso to bend 
the banana tree and catapult the monkey to the island—the bunch, however, drops 
onto the beach and the one banana that the monkey manages to hang onto on his 
flight to the island falls right into the shark’s mouth. Using only descriptive nouns 
in all caps to draw attention to the key player on the page (“THE MONKEY”), 
the story relies primarily on a visual narrative, and the digitally enhanced paint-
ings accomplish the telling admirably. Hazy but thick outlines filled with dappled 
coloration combine to create the ultimate animated-film aesthetic, with comics-
style panels interspersed with full pages throughout. High action pages (when the 
monkey escapes the shark’s jaws to end up dripping and clinging to the wreckage, 
you’d swear his huge eyes are actually twitching) combine with the happy-go-lucky 
tone and a deadpan twist ending for a thoroughly engaging experience.  TA
bodeen, s. A. Shipwreck Island. Feiwel, 2014 [192p]
ISBN 978-1-250-02777-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-6
It’s not the first time this literary ship has sailed: a fractured family goes on a sail-
ing trip to bind its wounds, and disaster ensues. The source of the dysfunction in 
Bodeen’s version is Mr. Robinson’s new marriage to Yvonna Murillo, a flight atten-
September 2014 • 11
dant he met only recently. The union is greeted with an open mind by the younger 
Murillo boy, Nacho, but execrated by his elder brother, Marco (who believes Mr. 
Robinson only wants a trophy wife) and by Sarah Robinson (who is certain her new 
stepmother is a gold digger.) Their Fiji-bound sixty-footer promptly hits a storm, the 
captain dies, and the Robinson family (yes—Robinson—you get it now) is stranded 
on an invitingly lush island. Any kid who knows the genre knows the drill: family 
members salvage what they can from the boat, pair up or self-isolate according to 
character trait, and wait for the terrors to begin. The fact is, though, that many 
middle-graders have not yet experienced the pleasant chills of the stranded-on-a-
mysterious-island trope, and this entry title in a new series, for all its predictability, 
delivers just what makes the theme so hardy. There are provisions at the ready for 
creative deployment, protective parents out of their depth, kids testing their mettle, 
and lots of creepy things that go bump in the tropical night. The debut book takes 
some time to establish the toxic family relationships, and the scare factor gets less 
page space than many readers might wish. However, giant tree-crawling crabs, an 
empty house that bodes no good, and an unconscious girl who has left a warning 
in the sand should leave readers plenty impatient for the next volume.  EB
bRown, PeteR My Teacher Is a Monster! (No, I Am Not.); written and illus. by 
Peter Brown. Little, 2014 34p
ISBN 978-0-316-07029-4 $18.00   
Ad 5-9 yrs
Bobby thinks his teacher is an absolute monster, and that may literally be the case, 
as Ms. Kirby appears as a gargantuan green gal with a huge snout, claws, unibrow, 
and pointy teeth, who’s squeezed into a properly conservative dress and sensible 
heels. One day, when Bobby takes a trip to the park, he runs into Ms. Kirby. Awk-
ward silence ensues, until a gust of wind blows Ms. Kirby’s favorite hat right off, 
and Bobby is able to snag it. Some companionable duck-viewing, rock-climbing, 
and paper-plane-making later, Bobby realizes that Ms. Kirby might not be quite 
so monstrous. Dialogue between Bobby and his teacher moves the story along, 
giving the tale a flow that’s stiff at the outset with their tense relationship but that 
evolves into a casual, easygoing rhythm; the text is a bit too long for the predicable 
conclusion, however. The gradual change in illustrations reflects the characters’ 
evolutions with some spreads showing brief episodes on white backgrounds, others 
with striking wordless scenes, and Ms. Kirby slowly de-greening and gaining hu-
man form as Robert begins to view her differently. The mixed-media illustrations 
have a whimsical and mottled style, while Robert’s pleasing roundness and spiky 
hairdo amp up the cheeriness factor, and Ms. Kirby’s peach handbag adds a pop of 
color to the otherwise drab palette of olives, browns, and greys. This might hold 
more appeal to teachers than their charges, but the story will still likely strike some 
chords with kids who’ve learned the same lesson, and it could make a diverting 
contrast to something like Allard’s classic Miss Nelson Is Missing! for an exploration 
of truly horrifying educators.  TA
bRowne, Anthony What If . . . ?; written and illus. by Anthony Browne. Candle-
wick, 2014 32p
ISBN 978-0-7636-7419-9 $16.99   
R 5-8 yrs
“Joe was going to his first big party,” and since young Joe is not a party guy, he’s pretty 
nervous. As he and his mother walk along looking for the house (they misplaced 
12 • the bulletin
the invitation with the house number), Joe catastrophizes to his mother (“What if 
I don’t like the food? . . . What if they play scary games?”), who patiently reassures 
her son. And, in fact, it’s Mom who’s anxious once Joe’s off at the party, but they’re 
both delighted when event’s end reveals a beaming Joe who can’t wait to have a 
party of his own. Since this is Anthony Browne, this fairly straightforward story 
becomes a fantastical proto-gothic tale in its gouache and crayon artwork. Joe and 
his mother, in subdued nocturnal blues, peer into the front rooms of houses on the 
street that are simultaneously comically unexpected and precisely what Joe fears: a 
bacchanal of porcine jerks engage in horseplay around a weirdly set table (as a pig 
hides underneath) as he worries about food, and a medieval roister ensues with 
life-sized snakes and ladders (referring to the British version of the game Chutes 
and Ladders) as Joe tremulously asks about games. The neat geometric framing 
of the houses, crafted with Browne’s usual delicate precision, both controls and 
emphasizes the surreal absurdity of the strange living rooms’ contents, cunningly 
keeping anxiety at arm’s length without completely letting it go. Even non-anxious 
kids have experienced the utter weirdness of other people’s houses, and audiences 
will be amused by the conceit and understanding of Joe’s trepidation.  DS
buRninghAm, John Picnic; written and illus. by John Burningham. Candle-
wick, 2014 32p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6945-4 $16.99   
R 2-4 yrs
Who knew having a picnic could be such a challenge? When Boy, Girl, Sheep, Pig, 
and Duck attempt an al fresco meal, they first encounter a bull and must hide out 
in the woods until the bull leaves. Then they chase down Sheep’s blown-away hat 
and search for Pig’s missing soccer ball and Duck’s lost scarf. Afterwards, the picnic 
proceeds, until it’s time to go home to Boy’s and Girl’s house for an impromptu 
sleepover. The simplicity of the short, streamlined text and the large, clear illustra-
tions make it easy to successfully share this with little ones. Direct addresses to the 
reader increase the interactivity: when the kids and animals hide from the bull, 
for example, the text asks, “Can you find Boy, Girl, Pig, Sheep, and Duck?” Even 
toddlers will be able to respond with a confident “Yes!” because all the characters 
are mostly visible with only a small portion of each hidden behind the trees. The 
tale ends with the unseen narrator asking viewers to identify which character is in 
each bed, and then prompting, “Shall we see if we can find your bed?” Burning-
ham’s trademark lively and unaffected painting style continues here, with squiggly 
outlines, spots of bright color, and slightly mottled backgrounds adding vigor to the 
clean, open compositions; the nattily attired pig is particularly winning. This isn’t 
at the classic level of Burningham’s Mr. Gumpy’s Outing (BCCB 1/72) and others, 
but it’s still cheerful and entertaining, and parents will appreciate the sly segue into 
bedtime. Share this at a picnic-themed story hour or use it to wind down after a 
summer day spent outdoors.  JH
cAmPbell, scott Hug Machine; written and illus. by Scott Campbell. Ath-
eneum, 2014 32p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5935-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5936-6 $10.99   
R* 4-7 yrs
What, you may ask, precisely is a Hug Machine? It’s a little boy with a propensity 
for loving squeezes whose hugs are good enough to stop crying babies and make 
September 2014 • 13
small turtles feel big inside. No one is too spiky or huge for a Hug from the Hug 
Machine, not even a porcupine or a whale. There’s a matter-of-fact glee in this pic-
ture book that keeps it silly and sweet but never saccharine (“People often ask what 
the Hug Machine eats to keep the hugging energy high. Well, the answer is pizza”), 
and the gentle but insistent repetition and theatrical beat give it a playful rhythm. 
Watercolor illustrations on textured paper feature our Peanuts-headed protagonist 
in suspenders and big red boots against a warm, earthy palette heightened by ex-
tensive use of pink, particularly for backgrounds. The cloudiness of the medium, 
the thick and bumpy outlining, and an exaggerated roundness of features ramp up 
the coziness, but the use of perspective and close-ups, as in a spread where the Hug 
Machine comes right for the audience, helps keep things from getting too treacly. 
Whether for bedtime or storytime, affectionate kids and adults will thoroughly 
embrace (ahem) this fuzzy and goofy paean to cuddling.  TA
cARRoll, emily Through the Woods; written and illus. by Emily Car-
roll. McElderry, 2014 208p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-6595-4 $21.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-6596-1 $14.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-6597-8 $10.92   
R Gr. 7-10
In this collection of five graphic (in both senses of the word) horror stories comple-
mented by an evocative introduction and a downright spooky conclusion, comics 
artist Emily Carroll spools out the dark threads that underlie fairy tales and folklore 
and winds them toward more unsettling destinies. The book riffs on “Little Red 
Riding Hood” and “Bluebeard” as well as more generic terrors of infestations, pos-
session, and kidnapping. Monstrous doppelgangers, eerie hauntings, and intimate 
betrayals come to vivid life in Carroll’s manipulation of perspective, color, and 
panel size as well as her frank depictions of figures whose bodily boundaries have 
been breached by supernatural invaders. Eyes blacken and bleed, faces contort and 
discolor, teeth jumble and connect with almost audible clicks, shadowy presences 
overtake whole bodies. Her use of bright red smears splashed against black or more 
sedately colored backgrounds is highly effective, evoking images of blood and 
stimulating uncanny narrative connections. Perhaps more frightening, however, 
are the panels where the horrors are merely suggested, allowing the carryover of 
imagination from more explicit imagery. The tales are all delightfully ambiguous 
in their endings, forcing reader investment to bring about closure in a technique 
that practically guarantees that fan-pleasing frisson will last beyond the closing of 
the book.  KC 
cARteR, cAelA My Best Friend, Maybe. Bloomsbury, 2014 343p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-59990-970-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-235-6 $12.99   
R Gr. 9-12
Seventeen-year-old Colette is still stung after being ditched by her best friend, Sadie, 
three years earlier, but she’s survived. In fact, everything in her post-Sadie life is 
perfect, if boring is a synonym for perfect: her boyfriend’s and her religious convic-
tions have rendered their relationship mostly chaste, her future is well mapped, and 
her present is completely predictable. Then Sadie slams back into her life with an 
offer for Colette to join her family on their trip to Greece to celebrate a cousin’s 
wedding.  Hoping to find some clue as to what happened to their friendship as 
14 • the bulletin
well as to recapture some of the carefree fun of bygone days, Colette agrees, and 
she’s stunned to learn why Sadie invited her: Sadie has come out as a lesbian, and 
she needs Colette to be her pretend date for the wedding so that she can get back 
at the girl who broke her heart.  The tumble of emotions that ensues as the girls 
work through revelation after revelation leads Colette to question nearly everything 
that has held her world together to this point.  Colette’s identity quest takes center 
stage as she reflects on who she’s been and who she wants to be. Physical distance 
gives her the perspective she needs to question her feelings about her boyfriend 
and her restrictive mother, but close proximity to an angry and selfish Sadie and 
her very cute and interested older brother leads Colette into the heart of a meta-
phorical volcano that mirrors the breathtaking landscapes of Santorini. Readers 
bidding farewell to their own childhood selves will empathize with Colette as she 
emerges from the cocoon of past thinking into the confusing world of making up 
her own mind.  KC
cAstAldo, nAncy f. Sniffer Dogs: How Dogs (and Their Noses) Save the 
World. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2014 154p illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-544-08893-1 $16.99   
R Gr. 4-8
Lots of people know about search and rescue dogs and bomb-sniffing dogs, but 
what about forensics dogs that find old human burial sites? Dogs that detect peanut 
products and warn allergic owners? Castaldo covers canines’ amazing olfactory 
contributions from better-known workers to more unusual specialists, focusing 
at length on the animals’ training, personality, and bond with their handlers. The 
author’s extensive personal interviewing adds liveliness to the accounts, and many 
of the dogs are vivid characters in their own right (the book is rich with sprightly 
color snapshots). The text is a little disjointed and it wanders off subject at times, 
but it’s got an engaging combination of substance and browsability. The adventur-
ous element of search and rescue and military duty adds an edge to draw readers 
unenticed by (or unwilling to be caught with) mere cute puppies, and there’s also 
enough science here to give it heft, so there’s plenty of utility. End matter includes 
an extensive bibliography, a list of suggested reading, some dog-related geographic 
sites and websites, a glossary, and an index.  DS 
chAbeRt, JAck Eerie Elementary: The School Is Alive; illus. by Sam Ricks. Scho-
lastic, 2014 (Branches)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-62393-3 $15.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-545-62392-6 $4.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-62394-0 $4.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-3
When third-grader Sam Graves is appointed Hall Monitor at Eerie Elementary, he’s 
worried about being considered a tattletale by his classmates, but that turns out to 
be the least of his problems. Encounters with treacherous quicksand, a menacing 
tree branch, and a homicidal fire hose has Sam thinking something evil is up with 
the school; his suspicions are confirmed when Mr. Nekobi, the old school janitor, 
tells Sam that he must protect the students from a school building that is actually 
a monstrous, human-eating beast. Sam manages to convince his friend Antonio 
of the truth, and the two pair up to save students, parents, and teachers when a 
performance of Peter Pan goes awry and everyone’s threatened by carnivorous 
September 2014 • 15
folding chairs. Chabert hits just the right horror note for transitional readers, with 
thrills that include a dash of absurd humor and fall tactfully short of being truly 
frightening. Sam fulfills every kid’s fantasy of being the chosen one to save the day, 
defeat an ancient evil, and win the admiration of friends and family. Simple sentence 
structure, some repetitive (but not tedious) vocabulary and a direct storytelling 
style make this a worthy and creepy addition to the Branches series, and the scary 
story aspect will likely pull in a few reluctant readers. Ricks’ illustrations add an 
appropriately gloomy but playful touch.  KQG
chAPmAn, lARA The XYZs of Being Wicked. Aladdin, 2014 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-0108-1 $17.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-0107-4 $6.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 3-5
Now that’s she’s eleven, Hallie Simon can leave her regular school—and her bul-
lying former best friend, Kendall—to make a fresh start at the Dowling Academy 
School of Witchcraft. Since Hallie is the descendent of an illustrious hedge witch, 
her family and new teachers have high hopes for her, though even they are surprised 
by the type and intensity of power she displays. Her joy in the discovery of new 
powers and new friends is hampered by the presence of Kendall, who, it turns out, 
is not only also a witch but Hallie’s new roommate. Social struggles mingle with 
magic in this fanciful boarding-school story, where massive dining halls, sentient 
portraits, and the discovery of one’s inner darkness call to mind a certain boy wiz-
ard, but which has a plot that focuses on tween drama rather than an epic struggle 
between good and evil. As a protagonist, Hallie is approachable and inoffensive, if 
not compelling, while her antagonist counterparts lack both nuance and motive; 
without much dimension, the characters provide their audience with moderate 
entertainment but no challenge. Similarly, a plotline involving Hallie’s accidental 
and rather implausible theft of a Dowling heirloom may capture readers’ interest, 
though not necessarily their investment. Superficial but sufficient, this makings-
of-a-series gives tweens enough wish fulfillment (wouldn’t you want your enemy’s 
curse to backfire and make you gorgeous?) to satisfy if not to long remember.  AA
chung, ARRee Ninja!; written and illus. by Arree Chung. Holt, 2014 32p
ISBN 978-0-8050-9911-9 $16.99   
Ad 5-8 yrs
A ninja’s full array of skills—stealth, surprise, agility—are on display in this picture 
book; our nameless hero cunningly uses a paddleball to fend off the family dog as 
he launches a sneak attack on his napping dad and employs a jump rope to scale 
his way to the kitchen island for cookies and milk. His younger sister watches him 
gleefully, and when her attempt to imitate the impressive acrobatics falls flat (liter-
ally), our ninja earns a (wordless) scolding . . . but is inspired to train the young 
one in his learned art. Spreads include geometric backgrounds that experiment 
with perspective, providing a manga-like reading experience and breaking up the 
text into short, choppy chunks that evoke the tightness associated with ninja films. 
That choppiness, however, carries over into the narrative, with disparate scenes 
cobbled together and an ending that, though heartwarming, doesn’t satisfactorily 
complete the story. Digitally assembled acrylic and found paper manifests a mod-
ern home with Japanese touches—sliding doors that look like they could be rice 
paper and ikebana arrangements—while our ninja has a exaggerated roundedness 
16 • the bulletin
with precisely circular eyes and a button nose that, though comical, clashes with 
the more sophisticated tone. The grandeur of the glowing dragon that activates in 
the background when ninja powers are being used is breathtaking, though, and 
a mostly black spread with our narrator’s head hung perfectly captures the shame 
of a dishonored kid/warrior. Despite its flaws, this could have some rambunctious 
draw, perhaps for a clad-in-black storytime when paired with Phillipps’ Wink: The 
Ninja Who Wanted to Be Noticed (BCCB 6/09).  TA 
colfeR, eoin The Hangman’s Revolution. Hyperion, 2014 [384p] (W.A.R.P.)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4231-6163-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4231-8796-7 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
At the conclusion of this series’ first entry, aspiring FBI agent Chevie Savano was 
headed back from Victorian London, where high value witnesses were stashed via 
wormhole, to her own contemporary milieu. The time-travel trip doesn’t go as 
planned, though, and this second installment has Chevie landing in an alternate 
modern time, in which evil Colonel Box now controls a reconfigured Britain—ster-
ile, homogeneous, and at war with France. Worse still, Chevie is a cadet in Box’s 
army, but strange inner voices (memories, actually) impel her to defy authority. 
Meanwhile, back in 1899 London, her ex-partner Riley is having his own issues 
with gang kingpin Otto Malarkey, who insists that Riley is his minion and owes a 
share of his theatre’s profits. With a flick of the authorial wrist, Colfer reassembles 
many of the star performers from his last outing and tasks them with fiddling with 
history to preempt Box’s revolution and save the world as we know (or will know, 
or could know if the correct alternate events ensue) it. Again, Chevie and Riley are 
the durable adhesive that holds the plot line together, and their unromantic friend-
ship is a joy to encounter. It’s the loony supporting cast that provides character and 
color, though, with Malarkey at his grandest, Box at his most deranged, and several 
newcomers (especially Malarkey’s Irish butler, Figarty) who will be worth tracking 
in coming adventures. Terry Pratchett fans will be a natural crossover audience for 
this developing series, and they will appreciate how Colfer tidily tucks some serious 
consideration of historical myth-making and of religious zealotry as a political force 
into his comedy-laced mayhem. Two down, and hopefully several more to go.  EB 
connoR, leslie The Things You Kiss Goodbye. Tegen/HarperCollins, 
2014 358p
ISBN 978-0-06-089091-9 $17.99   
R Gr. 9-12
After Bettina Vasilis’ junior high walk on the wild side, shy Brady Cullen seems 
like a safe choice for her high school romance. His tentative sweetness marks him 
as different from the boys she’s used to, and what’s more, his politeness appeals to 
her super-strict Greek father, who, to Bettina’s surprise, allows her to date him. 
As Brady’s basketball star rises, however, so does his confidence, and Bettina finds 
herself consenting to sex she’s not ready for, trying out for cheerleading, and making 
up excuses when Brady loses his temper and hurts her. The first time Brady turns 
rough and hurts her, she runs away from school and meets an older guy whom she 
names “Cowboy” and who knows immediately what’s going on, even if Bettina 
won’t admit it. Her subsequent visits to Cowboy’s garage are more intentional, and 
she soon finds herself falling in love with him, even as she becomes more deeply 
September 2014 • 17
ensnared in the trap of the abuse victim—denying what’s happening and blaming 
herself. Bettina’s relationships with Brady, Cowboy, her father, her mother, and 
a feisty elderly woman from her old neighborhood shape her gradual emergence 
into a compassionate young woman who isn’t afraid to stand up for herself, but 
her true awakening comes about when a completely unexpected tragedy occurs, 
forcing her to reset the terms of her whole life moving forward. Readers will relate 
to Bettina throughout her emotional ups and downs, but it’s her path through grief 
and healing, particularly as she becomes an adult in the eyes of her parents, that 
will really draw them in.  KC
cutleR, JAne Susan Marcus Bends the Rules. Holiday House, 2014 108p
ISBN 978-0-8234-3047-5 $16.95   
Ad Gr. 4-6
Upon arriving in the small town of Clayton, Missouri, in 1943, former New Yorker 
Susan experiences deep culture shock: in her Bronx neighborhood, everyone got 
along and everyone thought about the war all of the time, while in Missouri there are 
still lingering Jim Crow laws and you’d hardly know there is a war going on. When 
she and her new friend Marlene become friends with Loretta, the young African-
American girl who lives illegally in the basement apartment with her mother, Susan 
wants to challenge the Clayton status quo, and the thee girls decide to peacefully 
take on Jim Crow by riding a bus together through town. The story is largely an 
episodic series of summer snapshots infused with Susan’s growing social awareness, 
and the slim novel is generally successful at portraying a period in history through 
an individual point of view. Susan’s perceptions seem at times anachronistically 
contemporary, though, and the bus event fizzles as a great act of defiance, leaving 
the story without a major conflict and resolution. The novel may nevertheless ap-
peal to young readers who, like Susan, seek ways to challenge injustice as well as 
those who simply appreciate a solid friendship story.  HM
dAlRymPle, fARel The Wrenchies; written and illus. by Farel Dalrymple. First 
Second/Roaring Brook, 2014 302p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-59643-421-9 $19.99   
R Gr. 10 up
In this graphic novel that eludes straightforward plot summary, readers immediately 
enter a world where epic violence is the norm, science fiction tropes abound, and 
kids may save one of a few different times/world—if they aren’t murdered first. 
There are the Wrenchies, and they exist both in the real world and in a comic being 
read by Hollis, a nervous, superhero-costume-wearing kid who is certain he will 
one day be great. There are also Sherwood and Orson, who encounter a demon 
that will change their lives forever. Best to just take the leap immediately and hope 
it all lines up at the end, and it does, though not without a great deal of ambiguity. 
The non-linear format means that either careful reading or multiple reads may be 
necessary, but both are well worth it as the art is stunning, even in its gore. The 
use of swampy colors and sharp lines highlights the hellscapes in which these kids 
live, but Dalrymple also employs the occasional light hand, offering a portrait so 
delicately vulnerable that the reader gets immediate insight into the character. A mix 
of full-page spreads and comic book–style panels are used effectively to highlight 
key events while also keeping pace with the lightning quick text. Fans of Rapp’s 
Ball Peen Hammer will be equally enthralled with this nightmarish but impeccably 
rendered look at a few overlapping worlds and the kids who seem doomed despite 
their efforts.  AS
18 • the bulletin
dAly, cAthleen Emily’s Blue Period; illus. by Lisa Brown. Porter/Roaring 
Brook, 2014 [55p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-469-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-3
Emily, a devotee of Picasso, may enjoy mixing things up in her art, but she’s not 
happy when it’s her family that’s mixed up and her father leaves the house to live 
“in his own little cube” of an apartment. Emily’s funk affects her painting, sending 
her into her own version of Picasso’s Blue Period. An assignment in art class (“I 
want you to make a collage of your house”) leads her into introspection about the 
nature of her home, and it’s this work that eventually allows her to make peace 
with the new arrangement. The clipped text has a robust and knowing energy that 
makes this a bracing complement to more tender stories of post-split adjustment 
(Stanton’s Monday, Wednesday, and Every Other Weekend, BCCB 2/14); Emily’s 
artistry is treated appreciatively, and her relationship with her little brother, Jack 
(who’s also none too pleased about the family developments) adds both humor 
and authenticity. The book’s format is a cross between a picture book and an 
early reader, with a trim size between the two, chapter breaks dividing the sparely 
texted episodes, and much of the dialogue appearing in speech bubbles. The art 
doesn’t always match the imagination of the text, but the focused, modest scenes 
set against copious white space add accessibility, and there’s effective pacing in the 
shifting layouts that move between busy assemblages of spot art and the occasional 
dramatic double-page spread (as when an angry Jack loses it mid-store). While this 
could inspire some art projects for kids who want to symbolically represent their 
own lives, it’s also a nicely underplayed look at family change that will speak to 
many youngsters’ experience.  DS
dAvies, nicolA Tiny Creatures: The World of Microbes; illus. by Emily Sut-
ton. Candlewick, 2014 34p
ISBN 978-0-7636-7315-4 $15.99   
R 6-9 yrs
The world that we can’t see is even more populous than the world we can, a point 
made by biologist Davies in her introduction to microbes for very young audiences. 
Simple descriptions and comparisons (“There are creatures so tiny that millions 
could fit on this ant’s antenna”) help explain this group of organisms, with points 
made about their variability, their durability, and their human-relevant achieve-
ments; the book also makes a point of noting that microbes that make you sick are in 
the minority (“Most microbes are busy doing other things”). The subject is broader 
than usual for Davies’ early biology treatises, and the absence of the slightly more 
sophisticated secondary narrative found in those makes this an entry-level approach 
for kids who are just starting to think about the world beyond the visible. While 
the book oversimplifies at times, the colorful examples and vivid explanations (the 
book gives microbes big credit for their ability to multiply at speed) help bring this 
unseen world to life. Though scale is confusing in a few illustrations, the figures, in 
a retro autumnal palette on cream matte pages, have a charming naïveté. Microbes 
are an undertreated topic in literature for the younger crowd, and this could be a 
good introduction for that first revelatory look through a microscope.  DS
September 2014 • 19
dAvis, kAthRyn gibbs Mr. Ferris and His Wheel; illus. by Gilbert Ford. Hough-
ton Mifflin Harcourt, 2014 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-547-95922-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-8 yrs
If Paris could mark the hundredth anniversary of the country’s revolution with a 
grand fair and the world’s tallest manmade structure, Eiffel’s astonishing iron tower, 
then the pressure was on for Chicago to outdo them with its 1893 fair celebrating 
the 400th anniversary of Columbus’ arrival in the New World, and its own record-
beating edifice. With time ticking, the best design came from engineer George 
Washington Gale Ferris “for a structure that would dazzle and move, not just stand 
still like the Eiffel Tower.” Davis’s picture-book account of the Ferris Wheel con-
struction does a first-rate job of capturing the many risks—to civic pride, financial 
success, and public safety—that attached to the first iteration of what most readers 
have already enjoyed as a local carnival attraction. The story rolls along in an easy 
readaloud cadence, with technical and historical sidebars that can be savored im-
mediately or saved for a revisit. There are a few glitches—the steel blue and mauve 
palette that dominates the stylized rendering of the fair makes it hard to pick out 
elements, and the fair’s actual name (The World’s Columbian Exposition) is never 
provided—but kids who favor thrill rides will begin to appreciate just how nervy 
their forebears were in climbing aboard Ferris’ contraption. Quote sources and 
bibliographies are included.  EB
dewoskin, RAchel Blind. Viking, 2014 [416p]
ISBN 978-0-670-78522-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 8-12
Tenth grade is a new beginning for Emma, who’s rejoining her old high school 
following an interlude at a school for the blind after an accident destroyed her 
sight. What she’d hoped would be a triumphant return to her normal life, however, 
proves to be an exhausting, overwhelming experience: the usually retiring Emma is 
horrified at how much attention she draws (“In some very unfair way, being blind 
is the opposite of being invisible”), and she hates having to rely on her protective 
best friend, Logan, to sort through the chaos of the halls. She’s also deeply troubled 
by the recent death, possibly by suicide, of a popular classmate, Claire; as someone 
dealing with her own demons, she’s disturbed by the implication that they might 
become too much for her to bear, and she’s upset by the community’s refusal to talk 
about the incident and the pain that Claire may have been suffering. DeWoskin 
takes this problem-novel plot and turns it into a deeply empathetic, shimmeringly 
perceptive exploration of a teenager climbing the rocky mountain of adulthood. 
Emma’s blindness is candidly depicted as an ongoing onslaught of challenges, but 
it’s also clear that she’s surmounting them better than she realizes, and that many 
of the issues she’s facing are those of maturation rather than disability (“Everyone 
acts like reality is unmanageable,” Emma thinks, “which it is, maybe, but putting 
sugar all over it is also terrifying”). Emma’s narration is crafted with grace and 
authenticity, and the way the teens grapple with Claire’s fate is acutely believ-
able. Characterization is almost universally impressively nuanced, even in minor 
characters: everybody’s flawed but nobody’s evil, and Emma herself only begins to 
consider other people’s feelings once she realizes she’s not drowning. This will draw 
fans of both Jessica Warman’s intensity and Frances O’Roark Dowell’s insight.  DS
20 • the bulletin
dicAmillo, kAte Leroy Ninker Saddles Up; illus. by Chris Van Dusen. (Tales 
from Deckawoo Drive) Candlewick, 2014 [96p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-6339-1 $12.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-7408-3  $12.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-4
Pint-sized Leroy Ninker, previously appearing in Mercy Watson Fights Crime, dreams 
of riding off into the sunset like the silver screen cowboys he so admires, but he’s 
missing one key cowboy essential—a horse. Fortunately, his pal Beatrice knows 
just where to find one and soon Leroy has procured himself “the most beautified 
horse in the whole wide green world,” Maybelline. Maybelline, however, proves 
to be a very particular horse, one that expects to be blandished with purdy words 
at every turn, enjoys a fair amount of grub, and detests, absolutely detests, being 
left alone. Readers will have a hootenanny of a good time as this rookie cowboy 
learns to deal with these characteristics, and they’ll be especially pleased to find 
that the pair’s adventures (or misadventures) land them back on Deckawoo Drive 
meeting up with a few familiar faces from the Mercy Watson series, including that 
toast-loving pig. The text is lengthier here than in those books and the sentence 
structure more complicated, but there’s still the same skillful use of repetition, 
goofball humor, and easy accessibility. Mercy fans will be quick to cowboy up to 
this title. Final art not seen.  KQG 
diPucchio, kelly Gaston; illus. by Christian Robinson.  Atheneum, 
2014 36p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5102-5 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5103-2 $9.99   
R 4-7 yrs
Mrs. Poodle is proud of all her pups, even Gaston, who, as the size of a teapot, 
doesn’t quite fit in with his teacup siblings, Fi-Fi, Foo-Foo, and Ooh-La-La. One 
day at the park, the Poodle family encounters Mrs. Bulldog and her brood, the 
robust Rocky, Ricky, Bruno—and the fluffy, teacup-sized Antoinette. “It seems 
there’s been a terrible mistake,” the mamas concur, and, after some evaluative cir-
cling, Gaston and Antoinette decide to swap families. Yet Gaston doesn’t take to 
typical bulldog romping, and Antoinette struggles in the refined atmosphere of the 
Poodles’ pink-saturated home. While they return to the comfort of their original 
families, they learn a valuable lesson about being oneself (that they then pass on 
to their own offspring when they grow up and get married to each other) in this 
charming exploration of the deceptiveness of appearances.   Robinson’s gorgeous 
acrylic illustrations evoke Parisian life, from the simple refinement of apartments 
to the ornate wrought iron of park benches, in a palette reminiscent of French 
macarons, grounded by sophisticated greys. These winking depictions of privileged 
canine life (for instance, Gaston in a smart neckerchief) convey both humor and 
haute homeyness, as does DiPucchio’s playful prose, which immediately engages 
with its tone of familiarity. Useful for a lighthearted look at feelings of not quite 
fitting in (or even at adoption), this delightful readaloud will have audiences très 
enchantés, indeed.  AA
esbAum, Jill I Am Cow, Hear Me Moo!; illus. by Gus Gordon. Dial, 2014 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3524-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* 5-7 yrs
When Nadine the cow insists there is nothing she fears, her bovine friends try to 
September 2014 • 21
call her bluff by having her lead them into the woods, where her nervous friends 
leave her behind in a cave. When something tickles her backside (her own tail, 
unbeknownst to her), she heads for home pell-mell and finally bumps into her two 
lost cow pals, who greet the accidentally arriving Nadine as a hero for “finding” 
them. This is a delightful, jaunty romp, and Esbaum’s rollicking, rhyming text is 
both lyrical (“She thundered through thickets,/ deep gullies,/ tight squeezes,/ and 
ragweed that triggered spectacular sneezes”) and funny (“‘Ta-da!’ Nadine sang. 
‘Here I am, girls. Let’s go.’/ Were her friends waiting there where she’d left them? 
Um, no”). Gordon’s art is equally captivating, and the rich combination of water-
color, pencil, crayon, and collage is pleasingly balanced by the simple rendering of 
the cow figures, with their rounded tummies, jutting hip bones, pink noses, and 
guileless, dot-eyed expressions. Nadine’s changing emotions are effectively captured 
in the positioning of her body, whether swinging gleefully on a vine or running, 
wild-eyed, through the brush. Pair this with a title from Stoeke’s Loopy Coop Hens 
series (BCCB 3/11, etc.) or with Steffensmeier’s Millie and the Big Rescue (BCCB 
10/13) for a goofy storytime about hapless farm animals.  JH
ficheRA, liz Played. Harlequin Teen, 2014 [352p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-373-21094-7 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
Riley Berenger is thoroughly bored with her role as Designated Good Daughter, so 
she’s seeking ways to break her dork girl habits. Sam Tracy, a Native guy from the 
Gila River Indian Reservation, has big plans to do something to better his com-
munity. The two immediately hate each other, each mistaking the other’s reticence 
and introversion for arrogance. When they are forced to be partners on a leadership 
weekend, Riley falls into a ravine and Sam rescues her, staying with her through 
a stormy night, sharing secrets and keeping her warm with a combination of pine 
needles and naked body heat. Though no actual bodices are ripped here, Fichera 
writes almost entirely to the Harlequin romance script, at least until until Riley vows 
to repay Sam’s valiant gesture by giving him an extreme makeover and helping him 
attract the girl of his dreams, who is happily in love with Riley’s brother—though 
it turns out Sam is just denying his real feelings for Riley. Despite the piling on of 
clichéd plot points, Fichera writes a readable story about two teens chafing against 
identities that no longer fit them. Narration alternates between Riley and Sam, 
both of whom readers may remember from Fichera’s first novel, Hooked, which 
focused on Riley’s brother and Sam’s first crush. It’s a plus to see a Native character 
as protagonist in a contemporary story, and readers fond of traditional romance 
tales may find the formula here comforting.  KC 
fioRe, kelly Just Like the Movies. Bloomsbury, 2014 279p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-354-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-355-1 $12.99   
Ad Gr. 7-12
Track star Marijke desperately wants an “I love you” from her boyfriend, sexy musi-
cian Tommy, while math wiz Lily wants to make an impression on motocross bad 
boy Joe. Unfortunately, Tommy’s flirtatious and unreliable nature makes Marijke 
question his devotion, and Lily spends so much time watching her younger brother 
while her mother dates unsuitable men that she has little thought for her own social 
life. When the two girls wind up at the same revival showing of Titanic, they be-
come co-conspirators in a quest to make their own love lives more like the movies, 
22 • the bulletin
complete with meet-cutes, makeovers, and dramatic, John Cusack-inspired gestures 
(with iPods rather than boom boxes). As the narration switches between the two 
protagonists, their inner thoughts and struggles emerge, illuminating their family 
challenges and general uncertainty about the future, as well as the importance of 
romance to their identity. Fiore engagingly promotes female self-respect and personal 
growth without villainizing the male half of the species, acknowledging and even 
celebrating romance as part of life’s many experiences. However, the seriousness 
and introspection of the characters and the ultimate message of self-empowerment 
conflict with the movie-themed premise; without the unadulterated hijinks called 
for by such rom-com inspiration, the thin plot device creates an uneven and un-
believable, though not unenjoyable, storyline. Cute boys and plentiful kisses will 
appeal, though, and teen readers, particularly of the female variety, will likely relate 
to the belief that with just the right orchestration and execution of an interaction, 
undeniable mutual love will reveal itself.  AA 
fisheR, vAloRie I Can Do It Myself; written and illus. by Valorie Fisher. Schwartz 
& Wade, 2014 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-449-81593-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 2-4 yrs
In this early concept picture book, Fisher takes a peripatetic tour of the mile mark-
ers of pre-school independence. Some achievements involve life skills, others are 
academic, and they appear in no discernible order of either type or complexity. 
Photographs mostly featuring plastic dolls and toys, with occasional close-ups of 
real children’s faces or body parts, offer generally clear visual cues to how to ac-
complish each task. “I know my left and I know my right” are deftly oriented to 
a kid’s viewpoint; viewers look down and across to a left foot and left hand on 
the verso, mirror imaged on the recto, while plastic animals and dolls along the 
top of the page raise their arms respectively. “I write my numbers” is also neatly 
diagrammed to demonstrate the step-by-step pencil strokes for each figure. Not all 
offerings are that successful, though. “I use scissors” has little to say about safety; “I 
use my shapes and colors” involves several shapes that were not introduced in the 
previous shapes section; the two-step direction on jacket zipping shows a frontal 
view of the zipper that the child does not see at the critical moment, and of course 
it fails to take into account that some skills (like shoe tying) require dexterity that 
arrives in its own good time. Still, the cheery palette, spacious layout, and comically 
pedantic retro toys should hold viewers’ attention, even as the lessons themselves 
are variously instructive, affirming, or simply aspirational.  EB 
fleming, cAndAce The Family Romanov: Murder, Rebellion, and the Fall of Impe-
rial Russia. Schwartz & Wade, 2014 [304p] illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96782-5 $21.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86782-8 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89864-8 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 7-12
Mention of the last Russian emperor, Tsar Nicholas II, and his family conjures 
a life secluded and opulent; a mode of governance oblivious and despotic; and a 
death tragic and, if not inevitable, at least sadly predictable. Fleming adheres to 
this well-established framework, but she crafts a retelling of the history that excels 
September 2014 • 23
in providing background for readers who approach with little more than a vague 
image of glamorous royalty gunned down in their prime. Any attempt at portray-
ing the Romanovs must necessarily grapple with such contextual complexities as 
anti-Semitism and pogroms; the fusion of piety and superstition that empowered 
Rasputin’s influence on the family; Marxist theory and Lenin’s interpretation of 
it; World War I and its drain on agriculture; an enervated Duma devoid of au-
thority to control a sprawling, diverse nation. Fleming supplies clear explanations 
and slips them into the text exactly where needed, circling quickly back to the 
Romanovs themselves before the gripping biography turns into a formal history 
lesson. Groupings of black and white photos coordinate with the content of the 
book’s four sections, and boxed insets of primary-source testimony provide vivid 
contrasts between the lavish life at court and the grinding poverty of peasants 
and urban laborers that would fuel the Russian revolution. With comprehensive 
source notes and bibliographies of print and online materials, this will be a boon 
to student researchers, but it’s also a heartbreaking page-turner for YAs who prefer 
their nonfiction to read like a novel.  EB
gAll, chRis Dog vs. Cat; written and illus. by Chris Gall. Little, 2014 32p
ISBN 978-0-316-23801-4 $17.00   
R 5-7 yrs
When Mr. Button brings home a dog and Mrs. Button adopts a cat, the two critters 
have to learn to share the only available room in the house. Their very different 
habits, however, cause them to go paw to paw, each trying to oust the other from 
the household. Finally, they resort to a dividing wall but then find that they miss 
each other’s company; the addition of a disturbing new “pet” (a baby) further unites 
the pair, and together they build a pieced-together but peaceful joint palace in the 
Buttons’ backyard. The transition from initial antagonism to ultimate alliance is 
entertainingly depicted here, though with not quite as much punch as Jenkins’ 
That New Animal (BCCB 3/05). There’s plenty of comedy in the individual epi-
sodes of the two animals trying to figure each other out as well: Cat’s declaration 
that he has “indoor privileges” when it comes to potty habits and his horror at the 
dog poo between the pair’s outdoor chaise lounges (to which Dog archly replies, 
“I have outdoor privileges”) will elicit more than a few giggles. Gall’s detailed il-
lustrations, in digitally enhanced colored pencil, are lively yet orderly, and black 
Cat’s perpetually grumpy mien and tan Dog’s slovenly habits add further humor 
to the text. Pet-loving kids, especially those with annoying younger siblings, may 
relate well to this title, or it could be paired with Bruel’s Poor Puppy and Bad Kitty 
for a cats vs. dogs storytime showdown.  JH
golden, che The Feral Child. Quercus, 2014 [272p]
ISBN 978-1-62365-120-6 $15.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
The shadowy, dank ruins of Blarney Castle are the only thing thirteen-year-old 
Maddy finds appealing in her new environs, after the death of her parents forces 
her to move from the hustle and bustle of London to her grandparents’ rundown 
little Irish village. Despite Granda’s warnings, Maddy wanders one day among the 
castle’s stones and meets a strange, sharp-toothed child—a child whom she swears 
she sees again that night outside the window of her neighbor, the same night the 
boy next door goes missing. She’s relieved when Granda shares her suspicions that 
24 • the bulletin
the creature was a faerie, but she’s horrified when he suggests that she turn a blind 
eye and let the neighbor boy remain missing. Arming herself with iron and some 
spotty internet info, Maddy prepares to enter the faerie realm and get the boy back 
herself. Carved out by anger and grief, Maddy’s a hardened gem of a girl, clever 
as heck and as resourceful as she is feisty. Good thing too, because she needs all 
the guts and gumption she can muster as she faces down nasty kelpies, headless 
horsemen, and hungry wolves. Both the Tír na nÓg setting and the figures from 
Celtic mythology are vibrantly evoked, luminous and alluring in their danger. As 
an added bonus, a wicked wit permeates the third-person narration (the description 
of Maddy’s overbearing aunt is particularly amusing). Readers who like both their 
fairy tales and their humor dark will find plenty to love here.  KQG 
gRAff, lisA Absolutely Almost. Philomel, 2014 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-399-16405-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
When Albie isn’t able to keep his grades up at his prestigious prep school despite his 
best efforts, he has to leave his fifth-grade classroom and his best pal Erlan to attend 
local public school. Despite Albie’s parents’ insistence that he just isn’t working hard 
enough and his Korean grandfather’s belittling, however, his new nanny, Calista, 
believes in his ability to do well,. The new school turns out to be a good fit, with 
an understanding teacher for math club, chances to read Captain Underpants, and 
new friend in Betsy, who gets teased for her stutter. With his upcoming appearance 
in a reality show featuring Erlan’s family, Albie gets a brief pass into the cool kids’ 
clique at school and drops Betsy, but he’s quickly abandoned by his fair-weather 
friends after his bit in the show gets cut. Calista gets sacked by his parents for al-
lowing Albie to stay home to avoid dealing with the fallout, and he’s left to mend 
relationships with his parents, Erlan, and Betsy on his own. Graff (The Thing about 
Georgie, BCCB 4/07) again draws on her ability to create rich lifeworlds for her 
characters to present a boy who is gifted in many ways—just not the ways that 
people around him value—and who is just beginning to realize that the adults in 
his life are fallible. Though Albie’s difficulties in school aren’t completely explained 
(his difficulty with social cues and love of detailed rules possibly place him on the 
spectrum), it’s a realistic portrait for kids with learning difficulties. As with Sloan’s 
Counting by 7s (BCCB 9/13), this is a sharp portrait of an outsider’s inner perspec-
tive, and Albie’s coming to terms with himself will be cheered by many.  TA 
gRAtton, tessA The Strange Maid. Random House, 2014 404p (The 
United States of Asgard)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97751-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97753-3 $9.99   
R Gr. 9-12
This companion novel to The Lost Sun (BCCB 9/13) treats the same events but from 
a dramatically different perspective—instead of seeing the world from the point of 
view of Soren, the berserker who wishes he wasn’t, the reader is introduced to Signy, 
a Valkyrie-to-be who just needs to solve a riddle in order to take her place beside 
Odin. Signy begins with the single-minded mission of finally figuring out what the 
stone heart in her riddle might be, but along the way she finally learns to see beyond 
the grief and desperation that have long marked her behavior to understand that 
others might care about her a great deal. Because of the new protagonist, Gratton 
September 2014 • 25
is able to smoothly orient new readers to this alternative United States (of Asgard), 
where Norse gods and goddesses are physically present in the lives of the characters 
(while most are only mentioned briefly, berserkers, trolls, and goddesses dripping 
with sexual power abound). The sharp pace and snappy narration from the other 
novel carry over as Signy, like Soren, is bright, intense, and more interested in ac-
tion than contemplation. Her tendency to dive in first and consider later is expertly 
contrasted with a philosophical tone about fate. Readers will probably benefit from 
a love of, or at the very least, a deep curiosity about Norse mythology in order to 
maximize the references they catch, but for Thor fans and other Norseophiles there 
is much humor and wry analysis as well as a lively story.  AS
gRAvel, elise Jessie Elliot Is a Big Chicken; written and illus. by Elise Grav-
el. Roaring Brook, 2014 176p
ISBN 978-1-59643-741-8 $14.99   
R Gr. 5-8
Jessie Elliot—coyote lover, comic illustrator, and “nerd extraordinaire”—is relishing 
her “last summer as a child” before high school. The summer doesn’t go quite as 
she planned, though, after she has a falling out with her best friend, Julie, when 
she refuses to go riding on an ATV at Julie’s family cabin because the driver is a 
thirteen-year-old boy who doesn’t provide the girls with helmets. When Julie goes 
anyway, the friendship gets temporarily broken—to the point where Julie even 
hangs out afterwards with their mutual sworn enemy, Isabelle Lemoine. Mean-
while, Jessie is elated to spend some time with her crush, neighborhood boy Ben, 
when the two bond after a close call with an intimidating security guard on the 
grounds of a mental hospital (where the local kids sometimes trespass for thrills). 
The humorous and poignant short text is heavily illustrated on a notebook-paper-
like background as though Jessie is doodling an account of her summer. Stylish 
tones of pink, turquoise, and chartreuse are outlined and accented with dark navy, 
and the cartoonish magic-marker style of the drawings adds appeal to an already 
engaging read. Both text and pictures paint an authentic picture of this transitional 
time, and Gravel excels at pithily portraying the rocky ground of the early teenage 
years, from friendships going off the rails to childish pranks on elderly neighbors 
that get carried a bit too far. Reluctant readers will want to check out this quick 
pick, as will the thoughtful, artistic adolescent crowd.  JH
gReen, Rod Giant Vehicles; illus. by Stephen Biesty. 16p
ISBN 978-0-7636-7404-5 $15.99   
R Gr. 3-6
There comes that sad moment in childhood when a kid believes it’s requisite to 
abandon the toy-book format in favor of traditional text and illustration. Green 
and Biesty put paid to that notion with a middle-grade title that incorporates the 
pedagogical advantages of the lift-the-flap strategy. Massive movers highlighted here 
include a fifteen-mile-long supertrain, the Airbus 380 passenger plane, the Russian 
Halo cargo helicopter, the Saturn V rocket, the Caterpillar 797F dump truck, the 
Oasis of the Seas luxury liner, the Typhoon submarine, and the Maersk Triple-E con-
tainer ship. Each double-page spread illustration is surrounded by insets and details, 
along with heaps of effective, economical explanation and jaw-dropping facts and 
stats. Lift the flaps (many rather cleverly concealed and requiring sensitive fingers 
to ferret out initially) for a peek not only into the interiors of the vehicles (so that’s 
where the engineer’s toilet is on the supertrain) but also at the structural materials, 
26 • the bulletin
such as aluminum ribbing on the Airbus fuselage. STEM teachers might even want 
to consider the classroom possibilities despite this unlikely format, comparing the 
ways various airborne or waterborne vehicles solve problems of movement, lading, 
and stability in different ways.  EB
gReene, stePhAnie Princess Posey and the First Grade Boys; illus. by Stephanie 
Roth Sisson. Putnam, 2014 [96p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-399-16364-7 $13.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-14-242735-4 $4.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 1-2
First grade continues to offer up its challenges to young Posey (Princess Posey and 
the First Grade Parade, BCCB 6/10, etc.), and this time the trial comes in the antics 
of the opposite sex, namely classmate Henry, whose snooty know-it-all attitude 
gets under Posey’s skin. She makes up a little chant about how weird Henry is and 
proceeds to sing it on the playground, but she’s horrified when her teacher catches 
her and accuses her of being a bully. She’s even more upset when her mother and 
grandfather don’t quite see how she’s the real victim here, and she promptly spends 
the next few days pouting in her room. Greene proves herself yet again to be an 
adept chronicler of the ups and downs of the first year of school, and her simple, 
straightforward prose gives just the right amount of emotional heft to these mini-
dramas, neither exaggerating nor reducing Posey’s situation. There’s a disappointing 
drift toward gender stereotyping in Posey’s struggle with math and Henry’s love of 
science, but Greene moves quite smoothly from a story about boys versus girls to 
one of Posey working through some tough emotions and coming to terms with her 
own bad behavior. Posey continues to be a winning protagonist, and her escapades 
are a series worth having on hand.  KQG 
gRey, mini Hermelin: The Detective Mouse; written and illus. by Mini 
Grey. Knopf, 2014 32p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75434-7 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75433-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75435-4 $10.99   
R 5-8 yrs
Our mouse hero’s earliest memory is awakening in his cheese box nest and reading his 
name, Hermelin, on the lid. Finding a lovely little hidey hole in an attic, Hermelin 
realizes he can type on an old typewriter there, and his instinctive abilities to read 
and type lead him to believe he is destined for great things. His mission becomes 
clear the day he peers through toy binoculars at a row of houses, observing details 
that become critical in solving a host of mysteries on the block. Solving the puzzles 
may mark Hermelin’s (and readers’) moment of triumph, but his heroism isn’t so 
easily rewarded: when he attends a thank-you party in honor of his crime-solving 
and reveals himself as a rodent, he learns the sad truth that rodents are considered 
household pests. Happily, the owner of the attic is a bit of a detective herself and 
not only makes her guest welcome but invites him to join her as a team of private 
investigators, priming for sequels we trust are forthcoming. Viewers will delight in 
being one step ahead of Hermelin in solving each mini case, having undoubtedly 
noticed vital clues embedded in the two opening scenes of domestic activities on 
Offley Street. Grey, acknowledged maven of the significant detail (as in Traction 
Man, BCCB 5/05), not only creates a charming miniature world for Hermelin’s 
September 2014 • 27
comfort but also manages to give him a chiseled jaw and noble bearing in comical 
contrast to the hapless humans. This British import will be a hit with children 
taking their first steps into the mystery genre.  EB
gRove, s. e.  The Glass Sentence. Viking, 2014 489p (Mapmakers)
ISBN 978-0-670-78502-5 $17.99   
R* Gr. 5-8
In this stellar first volume of an anticipated trilogy, Sophia just wants her uncle 
back after he is kidnapped, but the thirteen-year-old quickly realizes that she might 
have a significant role to play in this world gone off-kilter. No one quite knows 
what caused what’s known as the Great Disruption, but after a century, folks are 
at least used to the fact that the continents are all in different eras now, and they 
have mostly relearned how to navigate through the world. Something is shifting, 
however, and only a few special people know that things may be changing anew. 
One of those individuals is Blanca, an enormously complex villain who inspires 
sympathy even as she horrifies with her actions; she is the reason Sophia and her 
uncle are separated, and if Blanca is right in what she predicts, much direr conse-
quences await this nineteenth-century world. Impeccable character development 
and sophisticated, intricate setting details make this a lengthy novel, but there are 
plenty of action scenes and revelations along the way; with an effective balance 
of drama and information, the resulting novel is richly layered and emotionally 
engaging from the first page through to the intriguing cliffhanger end. Readers 
who find cartography to be cool will be enthralled, and those who had no idea how 
nifty and intricate maps could be will likely become fans.  AS
gRün, Anselm The Legend of Saint Nicholas; tr. from the German by Laura 
Watkinson; illus. by Giuliano Ferri. Eerdmans, 2014 [26p]
ISBN 978-0-8028-5434-6 $16.00
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 4-8 yrs
The operative word here is “legend,” or more properly, several of the legends sur-
rounding the works of fourth-century bishop Nicholas of Myra (in what’s now 
known as Turkey). Some of the tales may be familiar to children who celebrate 
the saint, particularly in his December gift-bringing guise. Grün relates the story 
of Nicholas tossing bags of gold through the open window of a poor man’s house 
as dowries for his three daughters, and the story of tempest-tossed sailors who are 
saved by Nicholas walking on the water and calming the sea. Here also appear less 
frequently told episodes of the saint’s saving a town from famine, and a posthumous 
miracle involving a stingy father and his drowned son. The luminous but slightly 
blurred, doll-like figures in Ferri’s artwork are appropriate to the tone of Grün’s 
narration, and they will make a pleasant seasonal contrast to the snow and starlight 
settings that mark most Christmas picture books. What’s missing, though, is any 
emphasis on Saint Nicholas’ actual life and non-legendary works (he was, after all, a 
cleric: imprisoned at one point, active in the Council of Nicaea at another), and at 
the very least an endnote comment to that effect would have been welcome. That, 
however, will have to wait for a later moment. Of immediate concern is getting 
those shoes outside the door at night on December fifth, in anticipation of Saint 
Nicholas’s generosity.  EB
28 • the bulletin
hAle, bRuce Thicker Than Water; illus. by Brandon Dorman. Disney Hyperion, 
2014 [352p] (School for S.P.I.E.S.)
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-4231-6851-5 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4231-8786-8 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
In Max Segredo’s series debut (Playing with Fire, BCCB 7/13), the teen had risen 
to be a promising spy at the Merry Sunshine Orphanage, a school for the S.P.I.E.S. 
organization, and discovered that his thought-to-be-dead father was still alive but 
working for the enemy, LOTUS. Max opens Book Two in a state of disillusionment 
with dear old Dad, but with a strong commitment to S.P.I.E.S. and its director, 
Hantai Annie; he’s totally onboard with their new assignment to steal an electro-
neuromanipulator before it’s offered on public auction or, worse, falls into the evil 
clutches of LOTUS. While the squabbling orphans and their teachers put together 
a plan, the Health Ministry is investigating the program for safety and general 
orphan well-being, Mr. Segredo is trying to reclaim his son’s loyalty, a gorgeous 
new student has Max moon-eyed, and Hantai Annie has issued Max a suspicious 
order to turn traitor if captured by LOTUS. This entry boasts a generous balance 
of droll narration, comedic dialogue, and racing action, and it’s also clearly a set-up 
for the dysfunctional Segredo family storyline to expand. Hale somewhat glosses 
over the brainwashing device that is central to the plot at hand, but he does drop 
some tantalizing clues regarding Max’s mother (who may turn out to be as not-dead 
as his father), and another fractured family spat within LOTUS should certainly 
prove entertaining in Volume Three. Stay tuned.  EB
hAll, michAel It’s an Orange Aardvark!; written and illus. by Michael 
Hall. Greenwillow, 2014 40p
ISBN 978-0-06-225206-7 $17.99   
R 4-8 yrs
A group of five carpenter ants are stuck in a tree stump, convinced there is an ant-
eating aardvark waiting for them just outside. The ant in the red hard hat (both the 
leader and the instigator of drama) decides to drill a hole through the wood and have 
a peek. Spying something orange, he then modifies his aardvark description to suit 
his findings (“Aardvarks turn orange when they are hungry for ants, you know”). As 
he drills more and more holes (actual die-cut openings in the pages) and spies more 
and more colors, his explanations grow wilder and wilder, eventually declaring in 
a state of outright panic, “It’s a pajama-wearing, ketchup-carrying, gecko-guiding, 
dozer-driving, orange aardvark pouring purple grape juice!” The more reasonable 
yellow-hat ant isn’t going for it; when he leaves the stump to explore, he instead 
discovers a brilliant rainbow arcing across the sky. The surprising final page finds 
the red-hat ant stuck in the stump with an actual orange aardvark drinking juice up 
top. Hall’s latest outing is entertaining both for its unusual cast of characters and 
its amusing yarn-spinning; the red-hat ant’s preposterous explanations are delight-
fully silly and perfectly suited to the audience. The digitally assembled illustrations 
(which incorporate acrylic painted textures and torn paper, according to a note) are 
strongly geometric, with large-scale shapes pieced together to form the characters 
and the setting, while softened textures and blurred pigments recall Eric Carle’s 
collage work. This could entertain a group, who will giggle at the commanding 
ant’s accumulating catalogue of frenzy in this clever tale.  HM
September 2014 • 29
heRbAch, geoff Fat Boy vs. the Cheerleaders. Sourcebooks, 2014 [320p]
ISBN 978-1-4022-9141-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Gabe started gaining weight when his mother left and he and his emotionally ma-
nipulative father sank into a depression, and now he’s universally known as Chunk. 
He still has his place in the high school hierarchy, hanging out with his two best 
friends, playing trombone in the school band, and only occasionally falling prey 
to the jocks’ abusive sense of humor. When the cost of sodas goes up in the school 
machines, however, and it becomes clear that the money is being rerouted from the 
band to the formation of a new dance team, Chunk decides it’s time to take action. 
He turns to his gruff grandfather, a former bodybuilder, to help him get in shape, 
and he tries to think of ways to protest the reallocation of funds as well as to raise 
the money to reinstate band camp. Less witty than angry, Gabe’s story depends 
too heavily on caricatures and tropes from high school dramatic comedies, from 
the sputtering, testosterone-fueled gym teacher and his football-playing minions to 
the corrupt principal, from the misunderstood queen bee to the supportive activ-
ist English teacher. Herbach does introduce some new figures into the mix with a 
sensitive black jock who schools Gabe on how to lead a successful civil rights–style 
protest, but only a few of the characters achieve the kind of psychological depth that 
make their actions wholly credible. However, Gabe’s address to the voiceless lawyer 
throughout the novel allows for a bit of tantalizing unreliability in his account of 
the hijinks, giving the impression of a deeper story behind the sensational one for 
readers to work out on their own.  KC
hilmo, tess Skies Like These. Ferguson/Farrar, 2014 [240p]
ISBN 978-0-374-36998-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 3-5
This summer, twelve-year-old Jade finds herself in Wyoming visiting her aunt, a 
former lawyer who left the rat race to run a doggy dude ranch. Though at first uneasy, 
if not unhappy, at leaving Philadelphia, Jade soon finds herself enjoying the west, 
with its fast-moving storms, open spaces, and vast, starry night skies. It helps that 
she receives a warm welcome from her aunt and the pooches at her dog-boarding 
business, as well as from the neighboring Parkers, whose son Joshua goes by “Roy” 
and insists that his lineage traces to a more famous Roy Parker—the Robin Hood 
cowboy, Butch Cassidy. Upset that a new big box store put his father’s hardware 
shop out of business, Roy tries to rope Jade into scheme after scheme worthy of 
Butch and his sidekick, the Sundance Kid; though Jade’s spirit of adventure certainly 
grows over the summer, she draws the line at robbing a bank, and she struggles 
to find a more constructive way to help her new friend. This novel succeeds in its 
celebration of the west, but it falls short in skillful execution of story, with stilted 
exposition, unnatural dialogue, and limited characterization for Jade (though spunky 
Roy proves engaging and sympathetic). Audiences looking for a quick escape may 
nonetheless enjoy the Wyoming landscape and its trappings, and puppy-lovers will 
enjoy the four-legged background characters whose names and personalities imbue 
this novel with a little spirit.  AA
30 • the bulletin
hilton, mARilyn Found Things. Atheneum, 2014 [240p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-6087-4 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-6089-8 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
After her brother disappears, River Rose goes ever more frequently to the river 
that is her namesake, where family legend says she was found and where she now 
collects pieces of dolls and jewelry and other items that wash up on shore. Taunted 
by the school bully, River finds her loneliness eased by the arrival of Meadow Lark 
Frankenfield; with physical deformities and an unnervingly assured comportment 
that guarantee she will remain an outsider, Meadow Lark becomes fast friends with 
River. The more time River spends with Meadow Lark, the more secrets surface and 
unfold in River’s family life, while wishes she makes seem to come true, leaving her 
to wonder who exactly Meadow Lark is—and to ask the same about herself. Lyrical 
and poignant, this novel weaves lessons about family, friendship, and forgiveness 
with elements of magical realism; otherworldly infusions into the novel, namely 
the mysterious Meadow Lark, emerge subtly but powerfully, maintaining focus on 
River’s reality while imbuing the narrative with an eerie wonder and possibility. 
Hilton has a remarkable gift for language, employing memorable, heart-piercing 
turns of phrase (the red hearts drawn on Meadow Lark’s lunch napkins show she 
is a “cared-about girl”) and using sophisticated conceits, such as speech alteration 
after trauma, to approach serious subjects of loss and self-discovery. Sensitive to 
its characters and attuned to the needs of the eleven-year-old heart, this evocative 
novel will fare well with readers who love language or uncovering family secrets, 
and who don’t mind a bit of thought-provoking ambiguity in a story’s end.  AA
holm, JennifeR l., ed. Comics Squad: Recess!; ed. by Jennifer L. Holm, Matthew 
Holm, and Jarrett J. Krosoczka; illus. by Jennifer L. Holm, Matthew Holm, Jarrett 
J. Krosoczka, et al Random House, 2014 [144p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-37003-5 $7.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-37005-9 $7.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-5
Young fans of middle-grade graphic novels—particularly those books that share 
a small, square-ish trim, a palette dominated by one bright color, and a general 
attitude of snark—will recognize the luminous constellation of author/illustrator 
contributors here, all riffing on the theme of school recess. The collection of eight 
entries starts off strong, with a tightly written number by Gene Luen Yang about 
a secret lunchtime ninja club and the nerdy guy determined to gain admission. It’s 
followed by an equally successful Dav Pilkey romp, in which Captain Underpants 
protagonists Harold and George produce one of their signature comics, which, 
while technically fulfilling the class assignment to write a piece to promote read-
ing, leaves their beleaguered teacher in an angry froth. The Holmses’ Babymouse 
shines in her attempt to regain the recess privileges she keeps losing (“Typical!”), 
and Dan Santat offers up clever recess class debate on the merits of The Giving 
Tree (although the ending somewhat fizzles). With these and entries by Jarrett 
Krosoczka, Ursula Vernon, Eric Wight, and Raina Telgemeier and Dave Roman, 
the collection functions as a terrific introduction to the styles of their individual 
creators, inviting GN newbies to wander through in search of a series that hits their 
own comic sweet spot.  EB
September 2014 • 31
holm, JennifeR l. The Fourteenth Goldfish. Random House, 2014 [224p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-87064-4 $16.99
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-97064-1 $19.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97436-5 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
It’s already been a year of adjustments for eleven-year-old Ellie, and it gets worse 
when her scientist grandfather moves in with her family following an age-reversal 
experiment that undid his physical aging so effectively that he’s back to having 
the body of a thirteen-year-old. Soon, though, she’s getting to know her brilliant, 
crotchety grandfather and learning about scientific giants such as Oppenheimer, 
Salk, and Galileo and the questions their work both answered and raised. In the 
process, she discovers her own passion for science, as well as an ability to adapt to 
the inescapable changes of life in middle school and beyond. Ellie is funny, un-
pretentious, and easygoing, and her curious nature and quick mind make her an 
enjoyable and approachable heroine unconcerned with being anyone other than 
herself. Holm’s writing is crisp, accessible, and well paced, and her enthusiasm for 
science and its impact emerges clearly and consistently but not overbearingly, with 
clear, appreciative nods to the world of theater and its purpose in our lives. Indeed, 
this novel explores weighty elements of human existence with a light touch, al-
lowing readers to engage with the issues at multiple levels; an excellent appendix 
of recommended readings encourages exploration and dialogue. This novel would 
make an ideal classroom read aloud, particularly to expose students to the rich and 
rewarding STEM fields.  AA
howson, imogen Unravel. Simon, 2014 [480p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4658-8 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4659-5 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 8-10
In this uneven sequel to Linked (BCCB 6/13), twin sisters decide to return to their 
home planet to try and help the citizens recover from the dramatic changes they 
wrought. Even if it isn’t their fault, there is little doubt that Elissa and Lin’s find-
ing of each other sparked a planet-wide shift in how the psychically supercharged 
“spares” or twins are secretly tortured and used for illicit purposes. Elissa and Lin 
have found a way to use their powers beneficially and safely, but they don’t really 
have an opportunity to share this information, as the world is in turmoil. Elissa 
is also distracted by her stalled romance, while Lin is preoccupied with the fact 
that she may have been secretly programmed by the government to be a murderer. 
The world thrown into uproar is effectively conveyed, and it is realistic—it is clear 
this dystopian society was teetering on far too many edges in terms of population 
control, government influence, and the sheer number of secrets being kept from 
almost everyone. Unfortunately, while Lin is haunting as a person desperately trying 
to find a sense of humanity after having been raised in a hellish situation, the very 
nature of Elissa’s sheltered life makes her a very hard person with whom to connect, 
even though she’s the non-murderer of the pair. In addition, the overall fragmented 
experience of the novel, while perhaps deliberate as a reflection of the mess this 
world is in, is disconcerting and somewhat confusing: readers will likely wish for 
smoother transitions and cleaner plot presentations. Even so, fans of the first book 
and psychic buffs may find this novel worth the extra work to sort it all out.  AS
32 • the bulletin
ieRonimo, chRistine A Thirst for Home: A Story of Water across the World; illus. 
by Eric Velasquez. Walker, 2014 32p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-8027-2308-6 $18.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-8027-2307-9 $17.99   
R 5-8 yrs
Alemitu lives with her mother in a small Ethiopian village, and her days are filled 
with heat, hunger, and treks to the watering hole, where she gazes into the cool 
pool and imagines “a secret passage that connected to a place” she had never been. 
As food becomes more and more scarce, Alemitu’s mother makes the decision to 
give up her daughter for adoption, and soon Alemitu, now Eva, is living with a 
middle-class American family on the other side of the world. One morning, Eva is 
gazing into an enormous puddle at her new family’s home and realizes that she is 
on the other side of the watering hole. In that moment, she sees her mother smiling 
in the water’s surface: “The water has connected my two worlds, and I know who 
I am.” Though it’s oversimplified and idealized, this story, based on the author’s 
own experience of adopting a child from Ethiopia, provides an opportunity for 
addressing themes of poverty and resource inequity with a very young audience. 
The perspective is spot-on, and the presentation of Alemitu’s culture shock is re-
alistically detailed. Velasquez’s lush full-bleed oil compositions offer photorealistic 
portraits of the story’s characters. The visual shift from Ethiopia to the United States 
is appropriately startling, as the rich oranges and browns of the African landscape 
are replaced with puffy clouds, green grass, and a vinyl-sided house. While this by 
no means offers a complete picture of the complexities of leaving one’s home and 
family to start a new life, it certainly raises some important talking points for young 
listeners as well as some thoughtful reminders to appreciate easy access to food and 
water. An author’s note provides further information about Ethiopia and several 
websites for information on water issues around the world.  HM 
Jenkins, mARtin The History of Money: From Bartering to Banking; illus. by Satoshi 
Kitamura. Candlewick, 2014 53p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6763-4 $16.99   
R Gr. 4-8
This is not your standard children’s review of the historical shift from barter to cur-
rency, with emphasis on exotic media for trade, culminating in our own paper and 
coinage. Instead, this is a post-2008 financial meltdown essay, broken into short, 
lively chapters tinged with tart humor, that walks kids through development of 
money and money-lending. Cautious in his speculation about trade before the age 
of written records, Jenkins keeps his focus on just who stood to profit at each stage 
of finance’s evolution and thereby shines a floodlight on how the transformation 
from money as a tangible object to money as a faith-based transaction brought us 
to our present system. A spacious layout and Kitamura’s delightful cartoon vignettes 
make the dense topics of taxation, interest, and inflation, and international cur-
rency valuation less daunting. Kids growing up in a world of plastic, QR codes, and 
ATMs will undoubtedly find Jenkins’ work more relevant than many titles lingering 
around the 332s for a decade. With pockets ever less apt to jingle, it’s high time for 
this reappraisal of the “strange slippery stuff, hard to pin down, always appearing 
and disappearing and existing only when people agree it exists.”  EB
September 2014 • 33
Johnson, PeteR The Life and Times of Benny Alvarez. Harper/HarperCollins, 
2014 208p
ISBN 978-0-06-221596-3 $16.99   
R* Gr. 4-7
Seventh grader Benny Alvarez is reasonably good in school, and he has good 
friends, supportive parents, siblings he likes, teachers he appreciates, a grandfather 
he cherishes, and a comfortable home in an unassuming neighborhood. So how 
does this fictional kid rate a novel? Where’s the drama, the angst? As plenty of very 
ordinary kid readers know, even the most ordinary of lives is pitted with ordinary 
challenges you simply can’t dodge, and adolescence is fraught less often with crises 
than with potholes of a more quotidian nature. So here’s Benny’s list. The English 
teacher he and his buddies worship from afar has lost her demigoddess status by an-
nouncing her engagement. There’s a boy/girl party in the offing, and Benny doesn’t 
know how to dance. A poetry assignment has spun out of control, and now he’s 
the spokesperson for the guys in class who insist that poetry should be rhyme free. 
His longtime nemesis, Claudine, is starting to look good. Claudine’s dog is dying, 
and Benny doesn’t know how to approach her in sympathy. Benny’s grandfather 
has suffered from strokes that, although not life-threatening, have made him frail 
and reminded the whole family about age and mortality. Benny copes with these 
issues the same way most readers will cope with their own—by keeping one eye 
on his many assets while juggling everything at once. Mom teasingly calls him Mr. 
Negativity, but readers who are privy to Benny’s inner workings will recognize that 
there’s less pessimism than smart snarkiness at work, and that Benny’s penchant for 
argument is his way of working through problems out loud. Johnson handles this 
with humor, respect, and restraint, allowing his protagonist to engage readers rather 
than dazzling them with authorial swagger. If Hilary McKay wrote guy books, this 
is what we’d get—and that is praise indeed.  EB
Johnston, tony Winter Is Coming; illus. by Jim LaMarche. Wiseman/Simon, 
2014 32p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-7251-8 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-7253-2 $10.99   
R 6-9 yrs
As fall winds down to winter, a keen-eyed girl quietly observes the animals’ prepa-
ration from her cleverly situated platform in a tree at the edge of a meadow. She 
watches deer and skunks, and spies a fox and a lynx, as the season grows colder 
and the animals scurry to find whatever food they can to fill up for the tough times 
ahead. Though the text is lengthy, Johnston makes it work, demonstrating her 
authorial chops with ragged-right prose that moves smoothly between naturalistic 
observation and lyricism (the deer “nibble the brittle grass. They nibble at the edges 
of ferns. They nibble at nothing”); careful use of rhythm and the periodic repeti-
tion of “winter is coming” help structure the account of the move through fall. 
The illustrations, employing colored pencil, ink, and acrylic paint, use the realistic 
figures of girl and animals as the centerpieces of creative compositions: viewers peer 
down on the flying Canada geese to see the girl looking up at them from below, or 
perch alongside her in a neighboring pine as she sketches some busy chipmunks. 
The tree’s curving limbs and solid trunk anchor hazy full-spread landscapes suffused 
with autumnal golds and russets. Literarily inclined youngsters will appreciate this 
as an entrée to a nature study unit or a field trip involving wildlife observation.  DS
34 • the bulletin
Jones, diAnA wynne The Islands of Chaldea; by Diana Wynne and Ursula 
Jones. Greenwillow/HarperCollins, 2014 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-229507-1 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-229509-5 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7
Aileen is sure that she is the misfit in her family, not quite living up to the expec-
tations or abilities of the other magically talented folks who have preceded her. 
Nevertheless, when conscripted to go along on a quest to remove a supernatural 
barrier that has divided the land for years, Aileen knows that even if she won’t be 
much help, off she must go. Of course, there is much more magical potential brew-
ing beneath her surface than she would have believed, and an epic journey peopled 
with a motley crew of representatives from each of the primary lands is an ideal 
situation for her to explore who she can become. This warm, exciting novel was 
begun by Diana Wynne Jones and expertly completed by her sister, Ursula, after 
Diana’s death in 2011. The setting is perfection—this beautiful and intricate world 
is revealed through Aileen’s knowing take, and her narration offers wry insight into 
how this world has been shaped (for good and ill) by magic and misconceptions 
about how everyone else might be using it. It is fitting that the details of such a 
strong, elegant fantasy will linger with readers, as this is exactly what Wynne Jones 
fans would seek as a poignant goodbye to a beloved author.  AS
JoRdAn-fenton, chRisty Not My Girl; by Christy Jordan-Fenton and Margaret 
Pokiak-Fenton; illus. by Gabrielle Grimard. Annick, 2014 36p
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-55451-625-4 $21.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-55451-624-7 $9.95   
R 7-10 yrs
Two years ago, in When I Was Eight, Olemaun was taken by white settlers from 
her Inuit village into a boarding school. Now she’s returned home, but with her 
hair cut short, thin frame, inability to understand Inuktitut, and a Christian name 
of Margaret; her mother’s words of “not my girl” sting as Margaret readjusts to 
her traditional ways of life. Facing rejection from family and neighbors, she turns 
to sledding and to a new puppy (which she accidentally almost kills) to help her 
settle back into her old home. The authors’ text, based on Margaret’s own experi-
ence, is unsparing in its depiction of the alienation faced by Inuit kids affected by 
the residential school experiences, but the story uses gradual development of kid-
understandable challenges to make its history lesson accessible. There’s also strong 
imagery in Olemaun’s words (“I wondered what kind of bird I had become”) that 
carries over to the illustrations: the delicate lining of the pencil and gouache adds 
a haziness that still manages to make visible her sense of isolation, while stunning 
coloration makes a scene in which the girl looks up to the Northern Lights for 
guidance gorgeous and affecting. For kids who are ready to tackle the not so sunny 
portion of history, this is a deeply felt exploration of identity and cultural crisis 
rendered as a deep, satisfying sigh appropriate for sharing aloud.  TA 
kAPlAn, bRuce eRic Meaniehead; written and illus. by Bruce Eric Kaplan. 
Simon, 2014 36p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8542-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8543-3 $9.99   
R 4-7 yrs
When siblings Eve and Henry reach for the same action figure, their bickering 
September 2014 • 35
takes an epic turn. Before long, they have burned down the house, flattened the 
town, decimated the country, and destroyed the planet in their heedless, needless 
fighting, and only as they float in space, far from one another, do they decide that 
they don’t want to argue anymore. Author and illustrator Kaplan brings his signa-
ture New Yorker cartoon style to this absurdist story, depicting Henry and Eve as 
iris-less, stumpy figures whose line mouths and eyebrows convey their emotions in 
ink and watercolor art against gleaming white backgrounds. Though the dryness 
of the humor and spareness of the art may send this over some kids’ heads, others 
will appreciate the hyperbolic humor, and those familiar with sibling squabbles 
may just nod their heads in complete agreement.  AA
kAtcheR, bRiAn Everyone Dies in the End: A Romantic Comedy. Dark Conti-
nents, 2014 252p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-615-71017-4 $15.99   
R Gr. 9-12
When the journalism assignment for his summer academic program at the Univer-
sity of Missouri proves to be nothing more than a few fluff pieces, seventeen-year-
old Sherman decides to do some snooping of his own in the library and discovers 
what appears to be a minor scandal and unsolved death from 1935 involving a 
now-disappeared minister. Sherman’s search for more information draws attention 
from a mysterious society, and he suddenly finds himself at knifepoint—twice—and 
being shot at. Determined to figure out who’s trying to kill him, Sherman finds a 
wrongfully institutionalized psychiatric patient who helps him decipher the links 
between a number of killings spanning from the 1830s through the 1970s that 
all center on one name—P. Saberhagen—and an enigmatic insignia. Aided by the 
student librarian Christine, nicknamed Charlie (who Sherman finds seriously cute), 
Sherman discovers that Saberhagen made a deal that grants his immortality, for a 
price . . . and he wants Sherman in on it, one way or another. Katcher, author of 
Almost Perfect (BCCB 1/10), captures the flawed but honest voice of a guy who’s 
driven to succeed in his career—and with a girl—and finds himself in over his 
head; plenty of pop culture references, hubris, and hormones add authenticity. 
The breathtaking pace is balanced with flashbacks to the minister and his posse’s 
parallel investigation of Saberhagen, and though the shift to supernatural (and 
even Christian mystic) elements in the thriller is a little abrupt, it’s not unpleasant. 
Romance? Check. Comedy? Sure. Overall, though, this is a grittier (and slimmer) 
contemporary version of Bray’s The Diviners (BCCB 10/12), giving it reluctant 
reader appeal for the Stephen King crowd.  TA
kenneAlly, miRAndA Breathe, Annie, Breathe. Sourcebooks Fire, 2014 [304p]
ISBN 978-1-4022-8479-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Vomiting, sore muscles, a bum knee—and a wall of grief: eighteen-year-old Annie 
Winters must push through all these types of pain as she trains for the upcoming 
Nashville Country Music Marathon, fulfilling the goal of her boyfriend, Kyle, whose 
own training—and life—ended with a fatal car accident. As she embraces the disci-
pline of running in her quest to honor Kyle’s memory, she meets forward, persistent 
Jeremiah. The attraction is mutual, but Annie still grieves Kyle and wrestles with 
feelings of responsibility for his death: if she hadn’t refused his marriage proposal, 
he wouldn’t have broken up with her, they wouldn’t have gotten back together, 
36 • the bulletin
and he wouldn’t have been at her trailer that fateful rainy night. Annie’s logic may 
be flawed and occasionally frustrating, but Kenneally makes her a sympathetic 
character who understands and respects her own boundaries while still pushing 
herself out of her own comfort zone in order to heal and to grow. The book makes 
skillful use of the marathon plot device, moving both the reader and Annie through 
her training and her grief at a pace that feels authentic to the experience of deep 
loss coinciding with emerging adulthood and all its accompanying discoveries and 
excitement. Engaging, contemplative, and hopeful, this sensitive story recognizes the 
joy of romantic and physical love while reinforcing the importance of self-reliance, 
friendships, and personal achievement, encouraging readers to build well-rounded 
lives and perhaps even inspiring a future marathoner or two.  AA
kennedy, Anne vittuR The Farmer’s Away! BAA! NEIGH!; written and illus. by 
Anne Vittur Kennedy. Candlewick, 2014 28p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6679-8 $15.99   
R 3-6 yrs
The title is all the verbal explanation one gets in this story of farm animals partying 
down, their rhyming exclamations the only text, after the farmer heads off to the 
fields on his tractor. Each sound correlates to a particular animal (the mama pig 
cries “oink” while the piglets cry “ree”); a picture “glossary” depicting each animal 
next to its sound appears on the book’s endpages for extra support. The storyline is 
simple and easy to follow, and the text (“Neigh neigh baa baa quack quack tweet/ 
arf oink ree ree cluck cluck cheep!” cry the critters as the farmer heads off) rejoices 
in its own verbal musicality. The animals revel in anthropomorphic pleasures such 
as having a picnic, riding a roller coaster, and dressing up and dancing as the sun 
goes down, only to make a mad dash for the pasture when the farmer returns. The 
only indication the tired farmer gets that something unusual has happened is the 
last-minute appearance of a dress-wearing mouse crying “eek!” as she rushes past. 
The rhythmic animal sounds pair pleasingly with the detailed and amusing colored 
pencil and acrylic illustrations, and kids will appreciate the opportunity to make 
one-to-one connections between the animal sounds and the animals. This would 
be an energetic choral reading selection, and the limited vocabulary puts it within 
reach of beginning solo readers as well; share along with LaRochelle’s Moo (BCCB 
11/13) for a barnyard full of farm animal fun.  JH
kRull, kAthleen Lives of the Explorers: Discoveries, Disasters (And What the Neigh-
bors Thought); illus. by Kathryn Hewitt. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2014 93p
ISBN 978-0-15-205910-1 $20.99   
R Gr. 4-8
The latest in Krull’s popular and charming Lives of . . . series offers a promise of 
dangerous adventure and doesn’t disappoint. Krull makes her way through sev-
enteen chronologically arranged entries, covering explorers from the well known 
(Columbus, Magellan, James Cook, Sally Ride), to the somewhat familiar (Zheng 
He, Mary Kingsley, Matthew Henson), to those in need of more kid-lit attention 
(Richard Francis Burton, Isabella Bird, the father and son Piccards). The entries 
on Leif Ericson, Henry Hudson, and Burton are notably shorter than the rest, but 
all include gossipy bits that don’t hit the textbooks and retain the author’s winning 
tone of confiding secrets that other writers won’t. Thus we find just how cruel Ma-
gellan was to his crew, how many wives and children Ibn Battuta left behind on his 
travels, how shabbily Arctic explorer Robert Peary treated his colleague Henson, 
September 2014 • 37
and how Kingsley spent the night in the company of bagged body parts. Hewitt’s 
humorous caricatures, large of head and slight of body, continue to amuse, and the 
maps included in many entries are a welcome addition. The list for further reading 
focuses on adult works and will be of limited value to kids who immediately want 
to find out more. But isn’t that what librarians (and—sigh—Google) are for?  EB
kutneR, seño lAuRA The Soda Bottle School: A True Story of Recycling, Teamwork, 
and One Crazy Idea; by Seño Laura Kutner and Suzanne Slade; illus. by Aileen 
Darragh. Tilbury House, 2014 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-88448-371-7 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R 6-9 yrs
Set in the small Guatemalan village of Granados, this inspirational true story 
recounts the way an impoverished community in need of a larger school building 
comes together and constructs a building from plastic soda bottles and trash. Over 
fifteen months, community members collect plastic bottles, stuff them full of trash 
to add strength, line them up along chicken-wire walls, and fortify them with ce-
ment. Other nearby villages then latch on to the idea and build similar structures 
in their towns. Based on the author’s own experience as a visiting school teacher in 
Guatemala, this account offers plenty of content for character education lessons, 
from themes of cooperation to perseverance to ingenuity. The repeated statement 
that the project not only addressed the building need but also the problem of gar-
bage lying around the town adds further heft to the story as well as a reminder to 
readers to think about the trash they produce. Darragh’s cheerful line and watercolor 
illustrations feature casually lined figures informally accented with paintstrokes; the 
overall effect is that of simplicity, with no extensive detailing and the watercolor 
variegation the only texture. A lengthy author’s note provides further information 
about the actual project as well as a few photographs of “eco-ladrillos” (the name 
for soda-bottle bricks made of reused materials) and the school itself. Additional 
end matter directs readers to the website for Kutner’s nonprofit organization, which 
includes resources and activities for teachers; a glossary and pronunciation guide 
for a few included Spanish words is also included.  HM 
lAcouR, ninA Everything Leads to You. Dutton, 2014 [320p]
ISBN 978-0-525-42588-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
As an intern for a Hollywood production designer, Emi spends her time comb-
ing estate sales, online shops, and flea markets for the perfect accessory. When an 
estate-sale purchase reveals a letter from a late famous film actor, delivering the letter 
leads to the star’s granddaughter, Ava, a troubled runaway who never knew who her 
grandfather was. Emi is smitten, and she’s also enchanted with the rags-to-riches 
story the discovery will facilitate for the beautiful and winsome Ava. Emi wants 
it to mirror a Hollywood-style fantasy, but at the same time she doesn’t want to 
share Ava with the fame that will swallow her once it becomes known who she is, 
especially when Ava lands the lead role in an indie film Emi is working on. As Emi 
designs sets for Ava’s character, she works equally hard on learning who Ava really 
is beyond her fantasy, and ultimately comes to understand that real love transcends 
anything movies can capture. This tenderly wrought romance is as much an hom-
age to the power of movies as it is to true love. As an industry insider, Emi feels 
38 • the bulletin
the weighty burden of creating environments that enable people to believe in the 
illusion of life offered on the screen. At the same time, though, she’s all too aware 
of the disappointment of finding out that actors and their stories are messy, compli-
cated, and disappointingly life-sized. Her explanations and reflections on the work 
she does as a production designer are illuminating on practical, psychological, and 
emotional levels; readers will gain a new appreciation for the strategic importance 
of set design even as they lose their hearts to Emi and Ava.  KC
lAmARche, unA Like No Other. Razorbill, 2014 [368p]
ISBN 978-1-59514-674-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
On a stormy night in a Brooklyn hospital, sweet, nerdy Jaxon and pious Devorah 
get stuck in an elevator during a power outage. Jaxon is eager to be the hero who 
saves the day, while Devorah is fearful of breaking the prohibition of her Hasidic 
faith regarding being alone with an unrelated male, let alone a handsome black guy 
her own age. Jaxon’s gentleness wins her over, however, and soon she finds herself 
chafing against her frum ways and contriving ways to see Jaxon again. Her strict 
brother-in-law is suspicious, and when she tries to run away with Jaxon, he enlists 
the local Shomrim to give Jaxon a beat-down and convinces Devorah’s parents that 
she needs to be sent to a facility where wayward Hasidic girls are rehabilitated back 
into the faith. While the crush between Jaxon and Devorah has the heady, irrational 
intensity of first infatuation, the book wisely recognizes it as an opportunity for 
both of them to break from their old personas and figure out who they want to 
be as young adults. Devorah’s bonds are far more confining than Jaxon’s, but in 
confronting them Jaxon gains the assertiveness he has heretofore lacked, and he is 
rewarded in multiple ways on his home turf. Devorah, for her part, is able to cast 
a critical eye on her future and figure out what’s possible for her within her faith 
tradition. Readers will likely move through the story on Jaxon’s side, given the 
authentic, personable energy of his narrative voice and his experience of Devorah’s 
culture as an outsider, but Devorah’s narration is eye-opening, especially for young 
women who have always taken the rules, spoken and unspoken, of their communities 
for granted. The fact that both Jaxon and Devorah both get their happy endings 
even though they don’t end up together makes the book all the more effective for 
not glossing over the very real difficulties of religious and cultural differences in 
contemporary multicultural society.  KC
leno, kAtRinA The Half Life of Molly Pierce. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 
2014 [256p]
ISBN 978-0-06-223117-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
For about a year, Molly has had occasions where she finds herself in her car or in 
class unable to remember the past several hours or how she came to be there. When 
she witnesses a boy getting hit by a truck and goes to help him, she is mystified 
to find that he seems to know her while she has no idea who he is. When the boy 
dies in the hospital and she contacts his brother, she begins having memories of 
both boys. Through memory flashes and common sense, she begins to realize that 
something is very wrong with her, and that everyone but her seems to know about 
it. As it turns out, she suffers from dissociative identity disorder and her alter, Mabel, 
September 2014 • 39
is beginning the process of letting go by allowing Molly access to memories that 
only Mabel knows. This is less a clinically based than dramatically created portrait 
of DID; additionally, Mabel’s similarity to Molly makes her less interesting, and 
her agency in integrating Molly doesn’t jibe will with her focus on her own survival. 
This is therefore a less satisfying book about DID than Coley’s Pretty Girl—13 
(BCCB 4/13); however, the idea of having a secret life, especially one that involves 
a secret boyfriend, will hold appeal for readers with only a passing interest in rare 
mental conditions, and the mystery is a well-paced puzzle for readers as well as for 
Molly herself.  KC 
levy, dAnA Alison The Misadventures of the Family Fletcher. Delacorte, 
2014 [272p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-37654-9 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-37652-5 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-37653-2 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
Four hale and hearty boys live with their two dads and deal with a cantankerous 
new neighbor in this warm-hearted work of domestic fiction. The adopted brothers 
have interests and dilemmas as varied as their backgrounds: blond, twelve-year-old 
Sam learns he might fit in just as well in the uncool world of theatre as in soccer; 
ten-year-old African-American Jax loses his best friend to the world of texting and 
cool jeans; blond, ten-year-old Eli struggles to make peace with his decision to at-
tend an academically strenuous private school; and five-year-old Indian-American 
Frog (for Jeremiah) attempts to convince his family both that he should get a kitten 
and that his new friend in kindergarten is not imaginary. Levy takes the comforting 
conventions of many beloved children’s books and updates them with same-sex 
parents and a multi-racial, multi-religious, non-biological family makeup, making 
sure to include a prerequisite cool aunt who lives in New York City and makes 
cupcakes for a living. The book cleverly reveals details through notes and emails 
between characters at the onset of each chapter, with occasional dialogue or nar-
ration clarifying in a tone wisely quick and matter-of-fact. While the family lives 
in something of a progressive paradise, the lack of community criticism regarding 
their household composition allows themes of growing pains, self-discovery, and 
familial love to shine, with plenty of hockey to enliven this charming, male-driven 
take on the domestic novel. This begs to be read aloud at home, or savored by a 
child looking for the quiet, rewarding escapism embedded in stories of four siblings, 
loving parents, and contained chaos.  AA
lindelAuf, benny Nine Open Arms; tr. from the Dutch by John Nieuwenhuizen; 
illus. by Dasha Tolstikova. Enchanted Lion, 2014 [256p]
ISBN 978-1-59270-146-9 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6 
When her perpetual dreamer father attempts yet another business venture, it’s 
off to another house for Dutch eleven-year-old Fing, her six siblings, father, and 
maternal grandmother Oma Mei, who has looked after the “half-orphans” follow-
ing the death of their mother some nine years prior. The children depend on their 
sharp-tongued but devoted Oma Mei for guidance, brusque affection, and the 
occasional family story to bolster them as they wait to finally feel at home. Their 
40 • the bulletin
newest residence, dubbed “Nine Open Arms” for the girls’ method of measuring 
its length, contains elements that hint at a “tragical tragedy,” one that Fing soon 
realizes her grandmother already knows. However, Oma Mei only shares the stories 
she wants when she wants, and Fing, beginning to understand that not every tale 
her grandmother tells is true, pushes for honesty, even if it exposes the cracks in the 
family’s foundation. Set in the mid-1930s Netherlands, this subdued but heartfelt 
work of domestic fiction subtly explores family dynamics and personal yearning, 
with particular insight into sisterly relationships and the obligations of eldest 
daughters. The story of the house and its original owners, when finally revealed, 
is an engaging and poignant tale in its own right, adding textures of romance and 
friendship to Fing’s family-focused narration. This is a quiet novel for readers who, 
like Fing, know that patience and perseverance can have considerable rewards. 
With the help of a provided glossary, aspiring linguists may enjoy wrestling with 
the Dutch slang peppered throughout.  AA
little, kimbeRley gRiffiths The Time of the Fireflies. Scholastic, 2014 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-16563-1 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-63406-9 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-7
A move back to the family’s Louisiana hometown was supposed to bring some 
peace to Larissa’s family, still grieving the recent loss of two babies. All it really 
does, though, is cause more pain when an encounter with bullies and an accident 
in the bayou leaves Larissa’s face scarred and her heart bitter. A year later, Larissa is 
still hiding out in her parents’ antique shop when an old—disconnected—phone 
rings, and a mysterious voice on the other end tells her to follow the fireflies. On a 
walk that evening, she spots a cluster of fireflies near the site of her accident and the 
insects swarm her and transport her nearly a century back in time to a sugar-cane 
plantation that apparently once belonged to her mother’s family. Larissa discovers 
the possible source for generations of tragedies in her family, but how she’ll put a 
stop to it, she’s not sure. The story here is both sweet and atmospheric, with the 
intriguing mystery behind Larissa’s family history capably balanced with the more 
quotidian, accessible elements of her dealing with the arrival of a new sibling and 
coping with bullying. Larissa’s narration is particularly effective at capturing her 
overreactions without making her seem melodramatic, and her concern over her 
appearance and how it relates to her budding identity will be familiar to preteen 
readers. Moss-covered cypresses and gator-filled swamps make for a beautifully 
dangerous Southern setting, but the book is uncomfortably evasive on the issue of 
race, never directly acknowledging the racial divide between the wealthy planta-
tion owners and their servants. This still makes for an absorbing read, however, 
and it would make an appealing readalike to Thompson’s The Girl from Felony Bay 
(BCCB 6/13).  KQG
longo, JennifeR Six Feet Over It. Random House, 2014 [352p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-449-81872-5 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-449-81871-8 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-449-81873-2 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 8-12
When Leigh’s father moves the family away from their beloved ocean home to run a 
September 2014 • 41
cemetery in the hot California inland, high school freshman Leigh runs the business 
while her father generally flakes out and her mother retreats to her art studio. Leigh 
accepts it because she’ll do anything to keep her older sister, Kai, happy, now that 
Kai is newly in remission from leukemia; Leigh also has begun to believe that death 
is her own natural element, and that she is responsible for the unexpected death of 
her best friend, Emily, her anchor during Kai’s illness. Only Dario, the cemetery’s 
new wonder worker, is able to get past Leigh’s defenses. Leigh improves her Spanish 
as they dig graves together, relies on him to teach her to drive, and chokes down her 
crush on him when it turns out that the twenty-something Dario has a fiancée in 
Mexico hoping to join him in California. A vibrant voice keeps Leigh’s narration 
from becoming morose, but it also reveals the desperate loneliness and fear of the 
girl beneath the sass, the girl who believes “everyone good always leaves. Or dies.” 
Her work at the cemetery is suffused with her frustration toward her parents, but 
it’s also a perceptive and at times deeply moving view of people in loss, with insider 
insights like the difference between Pre-Need (those who purchased their plots in 
advance and are now merely using the service) and At Need (those arriving at the 
cemetery in fresh grief). Leigh’s an eloquent spokesperson for the pitfalls of being 
the kid whom worried about in a family in crisis; her raw deal will elicit indignant 
sympathy, and readers will rejoice at her triumphant reentry into the world. A 
delightfully robust author’s note describes Longo’s own cemetery experience.  DS
lough, AmbeR The Fire Wish. Random House, 2014 [320p] (Jinni Wars)
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-36977-0 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-36976-3 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-36978-7 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Najwa has spent nearly her entire sixteen years training to enter the Eye of Iblis 
Corps, a group of powerful jinni who study the mortal world and use their knowl-
edge to fight the ongoing war with humans. Zayele, a human, wants nothing more 
than to remain in her small village of Zab, but her father has essentially bartered 
her off as a bride to the prince in Baghdad, where she’s certain she’ll live her days 
out in a gilded prison. A reconnaissance trip to the surface of the mortal world 
brings Najwa in contact with Zayele, who wishes to change places with the jinni, 
who happens to look exactly like her. The wish is granted, of course, and it sets 
in motion a series of events that affect the two girls, their warring worlds, and the 
development of a weapon that would effectively destroy the jinni realm. Debut 
author Lough proves to be a deft hand at pacing, carefully doling out details of both 
worlds and the girls’ backstories to create a compelling and captivating experience. 
Narration alternates between Najwa and Zayele, which is initially confusing given 
that they’re both in a bit of a panicked state after the switch happens, but as they 
become distinct characters in their own right, their voices gain strength and clarity. 
An unresolved ongoing war, the possibilities of not one but two romances, and the 
promises of more secrets to be revealed hint toward a sequel, a wish that readers 
will want to see fulfilled.  KQG
42 • the bulletin
mAckAll, dAndi dAley The Secrets of Tree Taylor. Knopf, 2014 [288p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96897-6 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86897-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89982-9 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-9
It’s 1963, and thirteen-year-old Tree Taylor wants to be a writer; she has a book of 
inspirational quotations, and she’s determined to write something that will earn her 
a spot on her school newspaper. When she hears a shot near her home, though, and 
her doctor father runs to the neighbor’s house in his robe and slippers, she’s more 
afraid for his safety than she is interested in getting the story. When she follows 
him, she sees things that don’t quite jibe with the official story and her interest is 
piqued. As her investigation progresses, she learns that seeking the truth puts her 
in a position of great responsibility, especially in a small town where everyone has 
secrets, and those secrets require wisdom and compassionate handling. This is effec-
tive both as a period piece and a coming-of-age story, and the 1963 setting allows 
readers an opportunity to enter a world of party lines, family drive-ins, small-town 
doctoring, and a wholly different attitude toward privacy and journalistic ethics. 
Tree’s close friendship with an older boy doesn’t cause anyone undue concern; 
indeed, intergenerational friendships are natural and encouraged, and Tree’s fully 
functional family works through their conflicts with mutual respect for one an-
other’s boundaries and roles. Certainly not all is sweetness and light in this small 
town as Tree learns about submarine races, infidelity, and domestic abuse, but one 
of Tree’s quotations, “To observe people in conflict is a necessary part of a child’s 
education,” seems to reflect the philosophy of her father as a character and Mackall 
as an author; the induction into adult concerns here is both gentle and wise.  KC
mAckey, heAtheR Dreamwood. Putnam, 2014 [336p]
ISBN 978-0-399-25067-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7
Lucy wants to be an adventurer and ghost hunter like her dad, and his leaving her 
at a boarding school for her own good isn’t going to stop her for long. Off she goes 
to find him in the wilds of the Pacific Northwest in this parallel version of the past 
where ghosts exist, the Lupine people protect nature, and magic and realism coex-
ist, even if they are awkward partners. Lucy has a little help from allies she acquires 
along the way, but it’s mainly her on this quest that quickly turns epic and may 
involve her saving the world (or at least the nearby territories) from a horrific blight 
that is killing all of the trees. Although things do end mostly for the good, Lucy 
makes a refreshing number of wrong turns as she goes, learning to challenge her 
assumptions in ways that make her a more open, thoughtful, and generous person. 
In a much-needed afterword, Mackey mentions her liberal use of artistic license in 
referencing familiar cultural elements, traditions, and iconography of indigenous 
people of North America, even while she states that her “what if” representation of 
an alternative past is entirely fictional. While this is a slightly tricky stance to take, 
in particular when there is just a hint of “noble savage” generalizing throughout, 
it does at least make clear that this is an intentional exercise. The novel itself is 
gorgeous, replete with effective plot twists, a memorable protagonist, and a richly 
developed setting; thoughtful readers will catch the hints of realism and blend it 
smoothly with the fantasy details.  AS
September 2014 • 43
mAgAzineR, lAuRen The Only Thing Worse Than Witches. Dial, 2014 [272p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3918-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
Despite his mother’s dire warnings, Rupert wants to hang out with the witches 
around town. A chance to serve as apprentice to one of the young witches therefore 
seems too perfect to pass up, and Rupert’s relatively unfazed by the fact that she’s 
an undertrained witchling who may not even pass her exams. While he helps her 
prepare, Rupert is also contending with a person who is truly the worst teacher 
ever (think Dahl’s Miss Trunchbull times ten), so gathering potion ingredients 
and practicing spells is an excellent distraction. Neither witches nor human adults 
approve of this human and witch partnership, though, and indeed there’s someone 
who seeks to break up the buddies—or worse. There isn’t a whole lot to the plot 
itself, but the kids’ slowly forming friendship has real grace and authenticity; each 
character brings a great deal to the nascent relationship that actually helps the 
other grow. In addition, Eva Ibbotson fans will appreciate the quirky humor, and 
the hints about the astonishingly confused notions witches have about humans 
accumulate into a pretty hilarious misconception of just about everything readers 
will know to be true about themselves. A hint of true darkness (particularly in the 
head witch/teacher) keeps it all from being too silly; while there is never a doubt 
that good will prevail, there is suspense in that the odds are stacked against the 
intrepid but hapless duo.  AS
mAlloRy, Alex Wild. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 2014 [448p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-221874-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-221876-6 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Dara and her long-term boyfriend, Josh, hike deep into Daniel Boone National 
Forest to camp over spring break, but instead of repairing their relationship, the trip 
exposes its fault lines, particularly when Dara is convinced that they are not alone. 
Sure enough, Cade, who has no memory of living anywhere but in the woods, and 
who has been alone since his parents died three years earlier, is watching them, and 
when they are attacked by a bear, he saves their life, nearly losing his own in the 
process. Getting him medical help exposes him to a society that his mother had 
told him was both doomed and dangerous, so he is wary and uncommunicative, 
except with Dara. As Cade learns to trust his foster mother and his relationship with 
Dara blooms, the media frenzy over the “primitive boy” becomes more intrusive, 
and it becomes clear that he won’t be happy until he can go home to his woods. 
Meanwhile, Dara’s father, the sheriff, slowly unravels Cade’s backstory, and Cade 
has to confront the most difficult truth of his life: that his mother lied to him. 
This utterly compelling contemporary take on the Tarzan story has all the appeal 
of a paranormal romance without the supernatural cheats; instead, Cade’s appeal 
is 100% natural, all ropy muscles and innocent delight in touchscreens, hot baths, 
and the miracle that is peanut butter. Cade’s sense of humor and his quest for honest 
relationships, honed by his parents’ storytelling as well as their love for him, poke 
subtle holes in contemporary relationship protocols, as do the sensitive portrayals 
of Dara’s father, torn between love for his daughter and the requirements of his 
job, and Cade’s foster mom and her boyfriend, who engage with Cade wisely and 
with love. Poor Josh gets a bit hard done by as he is upstaged by Cade’s easy grace 
44 • the bulletin
and poignant need, but no reader could fault Dara for choosing this irresistible 
natural wonder.  KC
mAtson, moRgAn Since You’ve Been Gone. Simon, 2014 449p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3500-1 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3502-5 $9.99   
Ad Gr. 7-12
“Number One: Kiss a stranger” is the first of thirteen action items on the list that 
is all Emily’s best friend Sloane left Emily before mysteriously disappearing. Now 
Emily, shy, quiet, and known mostly for being Sloane’s friend, must get through the 
summer without her daring and gregarious counterpart. Emily sets out to perform 
each of the challenges, from wearing a backless dress to riding a horse to using a 
fake ID, in hopes that completion of the list will lead to her friend. Unexpected 
help arrives in the form of Frank Porter, president of their junior class, probable 
valedictorian, and all-around good guy who solicits Emily’s help in distance running 
and makes the list his personal project in the process. As she repeatedly ventures 
beyond her comfort zone, meeting new people and even having a bit of romance, 
Emily learns more about herself, certainly, but also about her friend, and how the 
people who seem to have it all together may be the ones struggling most. Filled with 
established tropes such as warm nights, skinny-dipping, and a job at an ice cream 
parlor, this is a familiar teenage summer story, told through Emily’s believable voice. 
Readers used to playing the role of sidekick or wallflower will identify with her as 
she moves from painful self-consciousness to blossoming self-confidence, even if 
her reasons for fulfilling the list are unclear. Indeed, Sloane’s hold over Emily doesn’t 
ring entirely true, and those readers with any sort of backbone will question the 
control Emily gives her absent friend; similarly, the maturity and poise of Frank 
strains credulity among those familiar with most seventeen-year old boys, as does the 
convenient distraction of Emily’s playwright parents. Still, it’s the stuff of summer 
dreams, and Matson pulls it off in this part mystery, part personal growth, entirely 
readable novel about all the living that awaits outside one’s shell.  AA
mccAhAn, eRin Love and Other Foreign Words. Dial, 2014 [336p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-4051-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 7-10
Hyperintelligent Josie has had to work hard at maintaining relationships with the 
average kids at her school. She poses her problem as one of code-switching be-
tween the various languages she has had to learn, and she can speak Josie without 
translation only with her tightly knit family and her long-time neighbors. When 
her beloved sister, Kate, informs the family that she is engaged, Josie is horrified 
at Kate’s choice of a seemingly insufferable know-it-all twit, but her attempts to 
sabotage Kate’s engagement are hilarious disasters, as Josie has met her match in 
Kate’s fiancé. Meanwhile, her own love life is getting interesting, and she approaches 
it in the manner of an anthropological experiment, overthinking every feeling and 
analyzing every conversation. Laced through the rich humor are fascinating insights 
into the social functioning of the intellectually gifted but emotionally immature and 
muddle-headed; sensitive readers won’t need to be as gifted as Josie to feel repeated 
shocks of recognition as she parses the exhaustion of having to constantly translate 
other people’s language into words she understands and vice versa. Her remarkably 
tolerant and longsuffering family and friends act as perfect foils and/or buffers for 
September 2014 • 45
her sharp-tongued, sharp-witted excesses, creating an enviable community of sup-
port as her heart catches up with her head.  KC
mccoRmick, scott Mr. Pants: It’s Go Time!; illus. by R. H. Lazzell. Dial, 
2014 [128p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-4007-5 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 2-3
It’s the last day of summer, and the feline Mr. Pants is desperate to get to laser tag 
before school starts up again, but his (human) mother has other plans for him. 
First, he needs to clean his room, then he’s supposed to join his (kitten) sisters Foot 
Foot and Grommy at the Fairy Princess Dream Factory (a reward for Grommy, 
who’s already cleaned her room), and then it’s time for some back-to-school shop-
ping. Mr. Pants does find the Fairy Princess Dream Factory more interesting than 
expected—apparently, you can repurpose magic wands into nunchucks—but 
when they finally get around to laser tag, he’s a little disappointed that he’s bested 
by Grommy and Mom. The day ends on a positive note, though, as he and Foot 
Foot collaborate on the most awesome bedtime story. Mr. Pants manages to make 
the everyday activities of middle-class life fun in the ways that come so naturally to 
kids, and his goofy rambunctiousness and one-track mind will definitely be familiar 
to readers, too. The day-in-the-life view ends up drawing some episodes out too 
long, though, and they sometimes become disjointed in their transitions, making 
it difficult to find the overarching momentum of the tale. The art in this graphic 
novel uses thick black outlines and uniform saturation to pull out full comics action 
for younger audiences, but the figures are disappointingly flat, lacking the verve to 
match the story. Still, silly cats in full color have a lot of purchase for kids’ attention, 
and there are plenty of laughs in this every-day-is-an-adventure reader, so expect 
this to appeal especially to kids who still look forward to the Sunday funnies.  TA 
mccReely, hAvelock My Zombie Hamster. Egmont, 2014 [208p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-491-5 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-492-2 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 3-5
In Edenvale, the walls around the city, giant zap traps, and life-monitoring chips 
implanted in every animal are designed to keep out the zombies—or deadbeats, 
as they’re colloquially called. Matt and his family are safely inside . . . until Matt’s 
dad goes to the sleazy, cheap pet store for a hamster, which dies and is immediately 
reborn as Anti Snuffles. Matt and his group of friends must fly under the radar of 
the Zombie Squad in search of his undead rodent, who appears to be amassing an 
army of zombie pets. As you’d expect, there are jokes left and right in this kooky 
zombie novel, but they’re occasionally pitched over the heads of the target audience. 
Matt is a pretty average kid, with his reluctance to go to school and frustration with 
his parents, but beyond his quirky, geeky dad, other characters are one-note, and 
there’s a bit of a slow start. There’s also a jarring shift in tone—from Bunnicula-
esque to a kid version of Warm Bodies—when Matt’s best friend dies and returns 
as a non-flesh-eating zombie, and the rush toward an abrupt end is likely to leave 
some bewildered. Still, the zombie thing just won’t die, and with the need to keep 
Goosebumps fans entertained without going too creepy, this may fill an important 
niche.  TA
46 • the bulletin
mccully, emily ARnold Ida M. Tarbell: The Woman Who Challenged Big Busi-
ness—and Won! Clarion, 2014 279p illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-547-29092-8 $18.95   
Ad Gr. 7-12
Turn-of-the-century journalist Ida Tarbell never set out to become a muckraker, 
and indeed that term, used pejoratively at the time, is not one she embraced. Young 
Ida wanted to be a naturalist, a career whose doors were pretty tightly closed even 
against women with considerable education. Her talent for clear, concise science 
writing, though, sent her on a path through the Chautauqua system and on to 
McClure’s Magazine, where she rose through staff positions and on to investigative 
journalism. Somewhat detached in tone—and in keeping with the reticence for 
personal revelation Tarbell exhibited in her autobiography—this reads more like an 
intellectual history than an intimate biography. McCully tacitly credits her readers 
with a fair amount of prior background knowledge on the Progressive Era and its 
major players, making this title a better choice for researchers than casual readers. 
As Tarbell makes her steady and frequently lonely progress as a nationally prominent 
writer, she’s continually upstaged here by her nemesis John D. Rockefeller; her boss 
Sam McClure; and of course the larger-than-life presence, Theodore Roosevelt. 
McCully frequently explains or apologizes for Tarbell’s rejection of women’s suf-
frage, an approach that would have gained more traction had this title focused more 
systematically on that issue. Nor is Tarbell’s investigative style compared with other 
contemporary women writers such as the redoubtable Nellie Bly, leaving McCully’s 
claim that “in her time, Ida M. Tarbell was the only woman doing investigative 
reporting” in sore need of defense. Nonetheless, McCully’s workmanlike narration 
and the generous inclusion of photographs will make this a useful overview for 
students examining the development of American journalism and the role of the 
press in the struggle to regulate big business.  EB
mcgAnn, eRikA 
The Demon Notebook. 
Sourcebooks Jabberwocky, 
2014 [224p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4022-9538-6 $6.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7
You always think that if your magic spells (especially ones involving making class-
mates urinate in class or history teachers speak nonsense) would just work, then 
life would be pretty sweet. This Irish import shows all too well, however, what can 
happen when your useless spells suddenly start coming to fruition at an alarming 
rate. Worst of all is that the five girls who made their wishes, never really dreaming 
they’d work, chose their number one spell request to be a bus running down the 
school bully. They’d like to undo their sudden abilities, but they’re really not good 
at this stuff. At all. Enter a snarky crazy cat lady, a useful teacher, and some key 
information about their school and demon portals therein, and the girls manage to 
save the day. There is a perfect balance of spookiness and humor in this novel, and 
the five protagonists are carefully and individually developed, ensuring that readers 
are sure to see themselves in at least one of them. There is never much doubt that 
all will end well, but that won’t stop readers from hoping that there will be more 
warily entered magical adventures with this crew.  AS
September 2014 • 47
mcgoveRn, cAmmie Say What You Will. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 
2014 343p
ISBN 978-0-06-227110-5 $17.99   
Ad Gr. 8-12
Matthew is a shy and awkward boy whose anxiety and OCD makes it difficult for 
him to face the future; Matthew’s classmate Amy is a bold and bossy overachiever 
whose cerebral palsy means she speaks through a device and needs aides to help 
her through school. In Amy’s senior year, she decides to have peer aides instead of 
professionals, and becoming Amy’s aide allows Matthew proximity to a girl he’s long 
been intrigued by. As the year progresses, the two bond, teetering toward a romance 
that both desire but each is too afraid of rejection to admit to. When Amy goes off 
to college, she’s thrown by just how bad the experience turns out to be; she’s also 
pregnant, and though it’s not with Matthew’s baby, he’s the one who stands beside 
her through delivery and placing the baby for adoption. The individual portraits of 
Matthew and Amy are effectively wrought, and their dynamic is plausible; Amy, as 
the talented and overprotected kid who has no idea what she has to lose, is especially 
vivid. The details about Amy’s adaptations and limitations are matter-of-fact but 
never overpowering, and her isolation and failure to thrive at Stanford are both 
understandable and heartbreaking. The plot, however, undermines the impact of the 
characters; the storytelling confusingly shifts back and forth in time, the will-they/
won’t they drama gets overplayed to the point of contrivance, and the momentum 
stalls before the significant post-graduate events occur, losing the impact of final 
third of the book. The portraits remain compelling, though, especially with the 
perceptive insights into Amy’s experience and her growth; readers looking for a 
place to go after Johnston’s landmark Accidents of Nature (BCCB 6/06) may find 
Amy and Matthew’s story a thoughtful next step.  DS
milleR, Jeff The Nerdy Dozen. Harper/HarperCollins, 2014 [292p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-227262-1 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-227264-5 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-6
Chameleon is the hottest video game, accessible only through an exclusive kids-
only gaming website and rumored to actually be a military flight simulator, and 
thirteen-year-old Neil is one of the best at it. However, when an actual Chameleon, 
a top-secret plane with invisibility capabilities, is hijacked running a mission over 
the ocean, the Air Force kidnaps the twelve top scorers of the game—including 
Neil—as reconnaissance pilots to run a retrieval operation. Clever intelligence work 
and some bumpy landings reveal that the mastermind is none other than a kid 
himself, bent on using the top-secret technology to gain a monopoly on the world 
video-game market. This is an amiable action comedy (a hippie gamer named Biggs 
is especially wry), but it’s light on momentum; Neil and the crew are likable enough, 
but beyond providing a mirror for kids more interested in screens than pages and 
couple of token nods to racial diversity, they don’t offer much depth. This therefore 
doesn’t reach the height of Johnson’s The Great Greene Heist (BCCB 7/14) for a 
nerdy ensemble caper. However, with a combination of joysticks and fighter jets, 
this will likely grab some fans who are willing to wait for the next installments in 
this proposed series.  TA 
48 • the bulletin
milwAy, Alex Pigsticks and Harold and the Incredible Journey; written and illus. 
by Alex Milway. Candlewick, 2014 78p (Pigsticks and Harold)
ISBN 978-0-7636-6615-6 $12.99   
R Gr. 2-4
Descended from a line of pigs with important careers, Pigsticks is determined to 
make an equally famous name for himself as an explorer, but he needs an assistant 
to carry all his stuff. He sweet-talks Harold, a delivery hamster, into the position, 
promising cakes along the journey to “the ends of the earth.” The pair treks through 
a variety of terrains, with Harold clearly doing the majority of the work, until they 
face a herd of persistent—and hungry—goats on a mountain peak. Pulling the 
emergency handle on Harold’s supply backpack unleashes a pair of wings, and the 
pair (safely) plummets back to their home of Tuptown. Younger audiences, who 
will certainly enjoy the adventure, will fare better as listeners to a readaloud, while 
independent readers will be comfortable tackling it solo. Milway’s humorously 
dramatic writing (“‘Nonsense!’ said Pigsticks. ‘Explorers like us eat up danger like 
it’s sticky toffee pudding’”) keeps the story moving along at a snappy pace. The 
plentiful pictures, rendered in ink and colored digitally, offer a stylized, cartoonish 
world. Pigsticks’ oversized snout, baby-blue eyes, and changing headgear (suited to 
the various climes) give him presence, while rotund, brown Harold elicits sympathy 
with his clearly overstuffed backpack. Budding adventurers and lovers of comic 
stories will enjoy this duo’s escapades, and a spot of cake afterwards would not go 
amiss.  JH
moRRis, RichARd t. This Is a Moose; illus. by Tom Lichtenheld. Little, 
2014 44p
ISBN 978-0-316-21360-8 $18.00   
R* 6-9 yrs
Poor film director Billy Waddler: the cinematically inclined duck is simply trying 
to make a movie about a moose in the wild, but neither his animal cast and crew 
nor his (unseen) narrator will cooperate. The moose has no interest in acting like 
a regular moose (he wants to be an astronaut), and not even the film’s introduc-
tion (“This is a moose. His father is a moose. His mother is a moose”) is safe from 
interruption, as the moose’s lacrosse-playing grandma and a giraffe crash the scene. 
When Grandma Moose and her pal launch Mighty Moose into space (with the help 
of a couple of sturdy pine trees and a large rubber band), the feathered director loses 
it completely: “Cut!!! Will somebody please find me an animal that acts like it’s 
supposed to!!!” A glance at the surrounding crowd of animals all doing decidedly 
un-animal-like things (the chimpanzee wielding the camera, the overalls-wearing 
elephant holding the boom mike, etc.) humbles the dramatic duck, and the critters 
load up a jet-engine powered canoe to follow the moose into space, where they 
begin filming a new movie: This Is an Astronaut. The increasingly exasperated duck, 
deadpan animal characters, absurd situations, and disembodied narration recall an 
animated short with voiceover, and the dialogue-heavy text and plentiful humor 
make this excellent material for a rowdy readers’ theater production. The serene 
forested backgrounds of Lichtenheld’s art (in ink, colored pencil, and gouache, with 
digital enhancement) resemble those of a nature documentary, and the seriousness 
strikes just the right contrast with the animals’ goofy poses and expressions. Slap 
some construction paper costumes together for a hilarious performance, or simply 
pair it with Bingham’s Z Is for Moose (BCCB 4/12) for a duo of melodramatic 
moose tales.  JH
September 2014 • 49
moulton, eRin e. Chasing the Milky Way. Philomel, 2014 [288p]
ISBN 978-0-399-16449-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 6-9
Middle-grader Lucy Peevey has a talent for science, and she and her neighbor Cam 
are determined to enter a science competition in Seahook, NH, seeing the prize 
as a ticket out of their trailer park. With her grandmother dead and her mother 
losing her fight with mental illness, though, things aren’t looking promising. Cam 
is relentlessly optimistic, and his creative problem-solving almost sets things right, 
until he and Lucy run afoul of a bully at school and a cascading series of events 
sends Lucy, Cam, Lucy’s little sister Izzy, and Lucy’s mother fleeing with the police 
hot on their trail. Miraculously, they evade their pursuers, even when they steal an 
RV that Lucy has to drive when her mother fully retreats into her delusions, but 
when they reach Seahook the gig is up. There are considerable implausibilities in 
the plot, and the narrow escapes from pursuing policemen, school personnel, and 
hospital staff push suspension of disbelief to the breaking point. Lucy, though, is a 
multidimensional character: she’s whip-smart, wisely compassionate with her little 
sister, and strong-willed and resourceful, and her memories of a more together 
mother and loving grandmother, as well as her honest exasperation over her situ-
ation, will elict reader sympathy. The weakness of the action/adventure formula 
undermines the family story, but readers may appreciate the underlying sensitive 
portrayal of a tween living with mental illness.  KC
mulligAn, Andy Ribblestrop. Beach Lane/Simon, 2014 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-9904-1 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-9906-5 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 6-9
Boarding schools have been a common component of British youth lit, but there 
has never been a school quite like Ribblestrop. Sure, the roof may be gone and 
the rent can’t be paid and there aren’t very many students yet, but the headmaster 
has enough grand vision to compensate for all of that. The school motto is “life is 
dangerous,” and it’s certainly true at Ribblestrop: the few students there are bonked 
on the head, stumble upon horrific secret underground experiments, are forced to 
sip rum to ward off freezing, and are part of multiple near-death events. Luckily, 
this is a particularly resilient bunch of kids, and they face obstacles with a fairly 
intact sense of humor if not always gritty determination. The book is cheerfully 
outrageous, and drunken kiddos making up the school song and adults trying to 
drill holes in children’s brains to make them more obedient aren’t for everyone, 
but Mulligan craftily pushes boundaries without being gratuitous. Somehow, it all 
makes perfect sense at Ribblestrop, and the intense friendships that form out of 
shared adversity offer these kids more family than most of them have ever known. 
One can only hope that the sequel wends its way across the ocean too, and that it 
is every bit as rollicking, ridiculous, and captivating as this outing was.  AS
50 • the bulletin
muncAsteR, hARRiet I Am a Witch’s Cat; written and illus. by Harriet Mun-
caster. Harper/HarperCollins, 2014 [26p]
ISBN 978-0-06-222914-4 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 4-7 yrs
A cat-costumed little kid explains, “My mom is a witch, and I am her special witch’s 
cat.” There’s plenty of proof: Mom keeps lots of mysterious bottles in the bath-
room (“that I am NOT allowed to touch”), buys weird things in the supermarket 
(“EYEBALLS and GREEN FINGERS”), cooks up concoctions (“bubbling, hissing 
potions”) on the stove, and cures the narrator’s injuries (“she MAGICS it all bet-
ter”). It’s an amusing concept, setting the strangeness of adult behaviors and tastes 
in a much more exciting context, and the art makes clear just how benign Mom’s 
activities are and how much delight the kid takes in the imagining. Regrettably, the 
story’s trajectory lacks the interest of the idea; it’s essentially a list, and it fades into 
an unsatisfyingly weak ending as Mom goes out on Friday and the narrator gets 
a babysitter. The art is an intriguing mix of two and three-dimensional elements; 
the painted figures of the child and mother exist as cutouts in a world that mixes 
carefully constructed realia with other paper-doll-style inserts, and flatly silhouetted 
figures often wear 3-D clothes and wield real objects. Though the result is over-
busy at times, it has considerably more cohesion than some such mixtures, with 
a strong palette (Mom’s vivid orange hair stands out brilliantly) and thoughtful 
compositions adding to the flow. The pictures are best viewed up close, and kids 
whose attention has drifted when the story goes south may still want to pore over 
the art’s enticing details.  DS
muRRAy, Alison Hickory Dickory Dog; written and illus. by Alison Mur-
ray. Candlewick, 2014 32p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6826-6 $16.99   
Ad 3-6 yrs
In a rhyming riff on “Hickory Dickory Dock,” Murray outlines a day in the life of 
a boy and his dog, Rufus, with numberless clocks keeping time in the background 
throughout. Supposed to stay home while the boy attends school, Rufus sneaks 
into the schoolyard, and follows the boy around, participating in recess, dress-up, 
art time, lunch, and gardening activities; he is quite a mess of paint, glue, and 
lunch by the time school is out, so a bath is required when the two return home. 
A snack and a story follow, and then it’s bedtime: “Now it’s time for the end of the 
rhyme. . . . Hickory, dickory, dog.” This isn’t quite as clever as Murray’s previous 
nursery-rhyme-themed outings (Apple Pie ABC, BCCB 6/11; and One Two That’s 
My Shoe!, BCCB 7/12) and the writing is more contrived, with some elements ap-
pearing simply for the sake of rhyme. Murray’s usual retro-toned digital artwork 
is attractive, though, and shaggy, golden Rufus is a charmer, whether helpfully 
retrieving a dripping bottle of paint or gleefully riding in a bike-pulled cart, ears 
tossed back by the motion. While younger children won’t be able to make use of 
the clocks in the backgrounds that mark the passing time, older ones may enjoy 
reasoning out the times based on the clocks’ hand positions. This might make an 
enjoyable addition to a nursery-rhyme or school-themed story session or part of a 
study of Murray’s books.  JH
September 2014 • 51
neAl, bethAny My Last Kiss. Farrar, 2014 361p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-374-35128-1 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-374-35129-8 $9.99   
R Gr. 7-10
Waking up dead is disconcerting, especially when you have no idea how or why you 
came to be drowned and separated from your body. Cassidy’s quest for answers about 
her untimely demise is hampered by her inability to control her movements; she 
drifts from memories to the present on whims that she can’t consciously manipulate. 
She is, however, able to make physical contact with her boyfriend, Ethan, who is 
devastated by losing her but unwilling to talk about their last night together. Their 
relationship was/is ineffably sweet, mostly because Ethan is a great guy—caring 
and forgiving, and willing to help his dead girlfriend figure out why she was on a 
bridge with another boy the night she died so that she can move on and leave him 
once again and forever. The mystery here is well played, with possible guilt and 
culpability shifting deftly among the usual cast of high school characters until the 
final reveal. The heartbroken boyfriend, the best friend, the chirpy student govern-
ment gossip, the misunderstood stoner, the boorish jocks, and the frenemy are all 
suspects by turn, causing Cassidy to see both her classmates and herself in a new 
light. As a result, the book draws out insights on the ethics of relationships as well 
as the raw power of emotions to have lasting consequences.  KC 
nelson, s. d. Digging a Hole to Heaven: Coal Miner Boys; written and illus. by 
S. D. Nelson and with photographs. Abrams, 2014 64p
iSBn 978-1-419-0730-8 $19.95   
R Gr. 3-5
Conall has already advanced in the hierarchy of his Pennsylvania coal mine, starting 
as a breaker boy sifting coal from debris, and now leading a mule, Angel, that hauls 
carloads of coal to the lift that takes it out of the mine. It’s filthy work, but he’s proud 
to follow his older brother Danny and his father, who is recovering from a mining 
injury and relies on his sons to help support the family. “One day, without warn-
ing, a great shudder wrenched the insides of the mountain”; a cave-in has trapped 
miners, including Danny, behind a huge pile of rubble, and Conall and Angel join 
the rescue effort. This fictional tale, drawn to typify a child miner’s work experience 
at the turn of the last century, has a happy ending, but Nelson structures his narra-
tive to apprise readers that all too many were not. Nearly every spread of Conall’s 
story, illustrated in textured acrylics that convey the eerily illuminated gloom of 
the mines, is matched by an historical photograph of a child miner from the early 
1900s and a paragraph that describes the perilous industry and decades of attempts 
to regulate it. Four double-columned pages of historical notes draw together many 
threads of labor history, from the swift adoption of coal-powered engines in the 
Industrial Revolution, to child labor laws, mine safety legislation, animal rights 
concerns, labor unions, and the current role of coal among industrializing nations. 
A timeline, source notes, bibliography, and brief index (which usefully covers the 
endnotes as well as the text) make this a versatile work that can be appreciated as a 
short piece of historical fiction or as a starting point for understanding the grimy 
underside of the Gilded Age.  EB
52 • the bulletin
newgARden, mARk Bow-Wow’s Nightmare Neighbors; written and illus. by Mark 
Newgarden and Megan Montague Cash. Roaring Brook, 2014 [64p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-640-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 2-4
In this wordless book, golden little Bow-Wow is peacefully sleeping when a trio of 
wee ghostly kittens sneaks his cushion out from underneath him. The determined 
dog tracks the thieves to the creepy old mansion next door, where he encounters 
a multitude of cats, who have a fondness for biting his tail. Bow-Wow eventually 
finds his cushion among an array of others—which are all serving as the padding 
for a humongous white cat. After biting the big cat’s tail, Bow-Wow makes his 
hasty exit, but when lightning strikes the old mansion the cats befriend the dog and 
cozily join him in his house. The transitions are confusing at times, so it takes some 
sophisticated visual decoding, but it’s a humorous tale; it unfolds with the cheerful 
anarchy of an old-school cartoon, with lively smaller events (Bow-Wow scares off 
a burglar and flushes an annoying kitty down the toilet) keeping viewer interest as 
the pup tours the house. The thickly lined digital art evinces a whimsical yet sturdy 
charm; the palette livens up its ominous gray backgrounds with touches of color in 
Bow-Wow’s gold and the green of the cushion (and occasional cushion lookalikes), 
while rounded edges and toylike simplicity control the scare factor. This isn’t quite 
up to the standard of Varon’s wordless Robot Dreams (BCCB 11/07), but it’s an 
amusing readalone for kids who find words get in the way of their enjoyment.  DS
noRth, Phoebe Starbreak. Simon, 2014 [432p]
ISBN 978-1-4424-5956-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-10
In this sequel to Starglass (BCCB 10/13), the centuries-long wait to reach a habitable 
planet has finally ended, though our travelers may be optimistic in assuming that 
they’ll be welcomed at their new destination. Terra wants to step up and help lead 
in the power vacuum created by overthrowing a corrupt governing system, but she 
is deeply distracted by her recurring dreams of Vadix, her beloved alien. Meanwhile, 
on a planet that is hostile in a number of ways, plans are mostly decided against 
allowing the residents of the ship Asherah to stay, which would leave the travelers no 
choice but to fight or flee back to a destroyed planet. The book offers an intriguing 
analysis of who is actually alien, particularly given the elements of Jewish culture and 
hints about historical situations that had Jewish individuals on Earth ostracized or 
made “outsider.” There’s also plenty of character development and love story here, 
so much so that readers might wish for more details about the incredible ship and 
the mysteries of the new planet. However, at the core this is a powerful romance 
novel, particularly for those who fervently believe in soulmates, preordained love, 
love at first sight, or, in the case of Terra and Vadix, all of the above.  AS
o’connoR, geoRge If I Had a Raptor; written and illus. by George 
O’Connor. Candlewick, 2014 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-6012-3 $15.99   
R 4-8 yrs
The narrator of this picture book—an African-American girl with pigtails and 
a purple jumper—explains all of the things that would happen if she got a baby 
pet raptor: “If I had a raptor, she would like to sit on my lap, and I would let 
September 2014 • 53
her.”  The cleverness of this book lies in the fact is that you could easily replace 
“raptor” with “kitten,” and it almost wouldn’t change the story, with several of the 
raptor’s behaviors—“she would stalk the little things that catch her eye, like birds, 
or bugs, or even a dust bunny”—all too familiar for cat owners.  The roundly 
cartoonish illustrations, thick and loose pencil outlines and filled in with bright, 
textured watercolors on glossy paper, show off the similarities. The blue, feathered 
raptor—a ball of fluff as a baby—grows up to curl its tail felinely around itself as 
it snuggles on the laundry and shine its dinner-plate eyes at night as its owner gets 
a glass of water. Though the most giggles will come from older kids who get the 
conceit in the modest comparison, even youngest ones who would thrill at the 
idea of a dinosaur pet will take to a storytime sharing of this imaginative tale.  TA
olin, seAn Wicked Games. Tegen/HarperCollins, 2014 343p
ISBN 978-0-06-219237-0 $17.99   
M Gr. 9-12
Now seniors, Carter and Lilah have been together ever since ninth grade, but their 
relationship has been turbulent in light of Lilah’s increasing instability. When Lilah 
melts down at a party, her friends take her home, leaving Carter free to sleep with 
Jules, a decision he regrets but can’t forget. Lilah starts a cyber-bullying, vandalism, 
and stalking campaign against Jules; heartbroken Jules breaks off all contact with 
Carter; when Lilah arranges a devastating public humiliation of her at graduation, 
a restraining order against Lilah allows Carter and Jules to finally admit their love 
for one another. The sensationalism doesn’t end there or even with the suspenseful 
climax, and the ending takes a shark-jumping turn that shocks mostly for its lack 
of logic and psychological credibility rather than its narrative twist. The rest of the 
details are staged for at least some plausibility, however, with Jules’s and Carter’s 
misguided attempts at protecting each other as well as their parents, occasional 
flashes of insight about how much they can actually help Lilah, and the limits of 
adult effectiveness when they finally do get involved. That said, the prose is pe-
destrian, and the book sets any progress made against the stigmatization of mental 
illness back more than a few notches while also excusing Carter and Jules as hapless 
victims whose behavior is justified by their attraction, making the morality cheaply 
convenient even for a superficial leisure read.  KC
PAulsen, gARy Family Ties. Lamb, 2014 [144p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-37381-4 $15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-37380-7 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
After giving up lying (Liar, Liar, BCCB 3/11) and scheming for money (Flat 
Broke, BCCB 9/11), fourteen-year-old Kevin Spencer is a reformed man and fully 
focused on his family. Okay, it’s possible his sudden interest in making his relatives 
the best they can be has more to do with impressing his girlfriend of two dates, the 
stunning Tina Zabinski, but he really does want to make some quality time for his 
large and very busy extended family. A wedding always brings everyone together 
(right?) and Uncle Will has just announced his marriage to his latest girlfriend, so 
Kevin decides a party is the perfect opportunity to get all his relatives (including his 
divorced grandparents, his grandfather’s new girlfriend, a kooky aunt, and a guitar-
strumming hippie cousin) all under one roof while proving to Tina how devoted 
he is to his kin. The wacky chaos that ensues, which starts with a shattered china 
54 • the bulletin
cabinet and a small fire and ends with a new litter of puppies, is sitcom-worthy in 
both its warm humor and generous plot devices, and readers familiar with Kevin’s 
previous exploits will settle right in for the goofy, rollicking ride. Kevin’s combina-
tion of confidence and cluelessness is endearing: he’s convinced that after hearing 
Tina talk about her own family that he needs to prove to her that he’s a man she 
can settle down with, and his intentions, though sparked by hormones, are genuine 
as he seeks to heal longtime rifts among his relatives. Young bridal-party members 
dealing with their own tux/dress fittings and wedding tensions will find this a per-
fect partner to Ziegler’s recent Revenge of the Flower Girls (BCCB 6/14) for some 
matrimonial mayhem.  KQG 
PAyton, belle A Whole New Ball Game. Simon Spotlight, 2014 149p (It 
Takes Two)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-0642-0 $16.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-0641-3 $5.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-0643-7 $5.99   
R Gr. 4-6
Seventh-grade twins Alex and Ava just moved from Boston to Texas so that their 
father can start a new position as the head coach of a high school football team. 
Despite being as different as night and day, the two girls have always been the best 
of friends, but the many changes going on seem to be driving them apart, a fact 
that they both struggle with as they attempt to figure out their new environs. The 
third-person narration alternates between the sisters’ viewpoints in this middle-
school novel, and while the characterizations are fairly formulaic (Alex is a girly-
girl who loves fashion and decorating, while Ava is a sloppy tomboy who spends 
her days watching football practices), they’re credibly developed. The twin device 
is effectively deployed as each girl seeks to understand herself independently, in 
relation to her twin, and in the context of her new town; there’s also appeal in the 
plot’s sit-com elements of overheard conversations, secret observations, and all the 
uncertainty that comes with being in a new place. Never fear, by book’s end the twins 
are besties again and ready to fearlessly face the start of school in Book Two.  HM 
PeRePeczko, Jenny Moses: The True Story of an Elephant Baby.  Atheneum, 
2014 [48p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-9603-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-9604-0 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad 6-9 yrs
When baby elephant Moses loses his mother to poachers, he finds a new home at 
the Jumbo Foundation Elephant Orphanage in Malawi. There he’s raised by a hu-
man foster mother (the pair even sleeps in the same house, since “baby elephants 
can never be left alone”), and he socializes with the humans and other animals there 
until he can go back to the wild. The book is largely a series of titled short episodes 
as Moses gets into trouble (sticking his noise into a pot of chili) and plays with his 
companions at the orphanage (achieving détente with Mr. Bo Jangles the donkey), 
accompanied by close-up photos of the indelibly cute little Moses. The narrative has 
a strongly fictionalized air, with Moses’ thoughts articulated in detailed statements 
and imaginings (“Why am I the only one without a nose?” worries Moses), and 
since the pictures often don’t depict the actions described in the text, it’s not clear 
if Moses’ experiences are drawn from true life or not; additionally, the phraseology 
September 2014 • 55
is very young (an animal’s abusive past is summarized as “Some people had been 
very mean to him”) for such a long and detailed text. However, it’s hard to resist the 
lure of an inquisitive little elephant, and the brief chapters could provide engaging 
readalouds for kids close enough to gaze with wonder. The photographs are clearly 
informal snapshots, so their clarity varies (and a few are disappointingly small), 
but Moses’ photogenic talents are never in any doubt. Librarians will want to pay 
sharp attention to the concluding author’s note that mentions Moses’ sadly early 
death; a page of elephant facts is also included.  DS
PeRl, eRicA s., ad. Goatilocks and the Three Bears; illus. by Arthur How-
ard. Beach Lane/Simon, 2014 34p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-0168-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8989-9 $10.99   
R 4-7 yrs
In this amusing retelling of the traditional story, our protagonist is not a little girl 
but a long-lashed, floppy-eared goat with a penchant for trespassing. After try-
ing out the bears’ porridge, chairs, and beds, Goatilocks not only settles on Baby 
Bear’s offerings but eats them in their entirety—porridge, spoon, chair, cushions, 
bed, bedding, and all. In the familiar scene of the bears’ discovery, the bears return 
home and the parents note that someone has been messing with their stuff as in 
the traditional version, while Baby Bear questions “Hey, where’s my porridge?” and 
“Hey, where’s my chair?” Pleasingly, the story does not end just with Goatilocks’ 
rapid departure but instead with a moment of redemption wherein she brings the 
bears a huge bouquet of wildflowers—which they eat. Perl has perfectly nailed 
the humor, with a light tone and selective word choice that carry the story’s jokes. 
Howard’s cartoonish watercolor illustrations incorporate a pastel palette of splashy 
pink, purple, and aqua, and their thick wiggly lines and comic perspectives are 
joyously bumptious. There’s plenty of storytime appeal here, and young listeners 
are certain to get a kick out of Goatilocks’ appetite for fun.  HM 
PeteRs, Julie Anne Lies My Girlfriend Told Me. Tingley/Little, 2014 [242p]
ISBN 978-0-316-23497-9 $18.00
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad  Gr. 8-10
Alix is still reeling from the news that her girlfriend, Swanee, has suddenly died 
when she learns that Swanee had a secret additional relationship. This news sends 
Alix into an irrational tailspin, causing her to impersonate Swanee over texts to 
Liana (who, like Alix, believed she was Swanee’s only love). When the truth finally 
comes out, the girls bond over Swanee’s betrayals, and Alix lets Liana believe it was 
someone else who did the impersonating. When the revelation inevitably occurs 
that it was Alix pretending to be Swanee, the girls’ budding relationship may be 
over before it truly begins. True romance fans may appreciate this seemingly fated 
pair finding each other even through multiple setbacks. However, Alix is startlingly 
self-centered, and she doesn’t experience much consequence for her protracted cruel 
lying; the device of Liana’s contrasting perfection’s somehow magically enlightening 
Alix about her family, her life, and her romances is unconvincing. In addition, the 
messiness of Swanee’s family is offered mostly for exposition, with the book never 
really giving the characters real depth or growth. Nevertheless, readers who are 
seeking a lesbian version of a typical romance plot (instant attraction, problematic 
person in both lives, contrived obstacle, and profound declarations of everlasting 
love and fidelity) could find an easy escape and the happy ending they seek here.  AS
56 • the bulletin
PetRuck, RebeccA Steering Toward Normal. Amulet/Abrams, 2014 328p
ISBN 978-1-4197-0732-2 $16.95   
R* Gr. 6-10
Diggy has spent all thirteen years of his life with his father, having been left on Pop’s 
doorstep as a baby when Diggy’s mother famously left town riding a tractor. Diggy’s 
classmate Wayne—almost a year older—now finds himself in a similar situation 
when his mother’s death leads to his dad’s alcoholism spiraling out of control and 
dumping Wayne at Pop’s place in a drunken fit, with the bombshell that Pop is 
actually Wayne’s father. Diggy must learn to adjust to having a brother—especially 
one “from town”—at the height of an already stressful season for him: he’s being 
groomed by the reigning champion 4-H steer-raiser (on whom he also has a major 
crush) to take over her top slot with his calf, Joker. Meanwhile, Wayne gets a steer 
of his own in order to fit in better with his new family while still trying to get a 
handle on his grief and shifting relationships. Petruck expertly manifests the gruff 
ways that teenage guys—especially brothers—express vulnerability coated with a 
veneer of hobbies and practical joking, and she slowly draws her characters together 
over steer grooming and model rockets. The parallels between Diggy and Wayne’s 
feelings of abandonment are subtly but divergently developed; as Diggy throws 
himself into obtaining future goals to win approval, Wayne dives into the past, 
hoping that by finding Diggy’s mother, he can achieve closure on his own mother’s 
death. Pop is also a character in his own right, dispensing world-wise advice, learned 
from his flawed past. It’s the warm but difficult relationship between Diggy and 
Wayne that makes this one a purple ribbon (with a 4-H glossary and practical joke 
handbook for city folks in the back matter).  TA
PolAcco, PAtRiciA Mr. Wayne’s Masterpiece; written and illus. by Patricia Po-
lacco. Putnam, 2014 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-399-16095-0 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
Young Patricia can’t read her essays aloud in front of the class, no matter how 
much kind encouragement her teacher, Mr. T., gives her. When he introduces her 
to drama teacher Mr. Wayne, she finds herself painting sets for the school play and 
eventually becoming the line prompter after Mr. Wayne discovers she has memo-
rized the entire script. Her knowledge and courage are called upon when the star 
of the show suddenly leaves school and her classmates turn to Patricia. With Mr. 
Wayne’s support and coaching, she conquers her stage fright and learns the joy of 
performance in this illustrated memoir of the author’s own struggles with public 
speaking. Though the text rambles on a little, the conversational tone of first-person 
narration establishes a pleasing intimacy. Polacco’s pencil and marker illustrations are 
expressive and immediate, leaving readers with no doubt of her protagonist’s fear, 
excitement, and ultimate sense of triumph. Details of mid 20th-century school life, 
most notably in the characters’ saddle shoes and knee-length circle skirts, create a 
sense of time and place while remaining accessible, and the depictions of Mr. T. and 
Mr. Wayne are particularly dynamic and even tender. Dedicated to the real Mr. T. 
and Mr. Wayne, this title makes a lovely tribute to teachers and their life-changing 
impact on the author and countless other young people.  AA
September 2014 • 57
PoRtis, Antoinette Froodle; written and illus. by Antoinette Portis. Porter/
Roaring Brook, 2014 32p
ISBN 978-1-59643-922-1 $16.99   
R 4-6 yrs
A group of birds stick to their typical sounds at the beginning of this book, with 
Crow saying “caw,” Dove calling “coo,” Cardinal chirping “chip,” and Little Brown 
Bird uttering “peep,” until the day that Little Brown Bird decides to verbally branch 
out. Her playful exclamation of “Froodle sproodle!” sends propriety-minded Crow 
into a tizzy. Little Brown Bird’s subsequent vocal creativity inspires Cardinal and 
Dove to join in the linguistic fun, while Crow is quite put out by this phonetic 
flight of fancy, and leaves in a huff—but doesn’t fly too far away. As the smaller 
birds continue their silliness (“‘Buppy,’ ‘Scruppy,’ ‘Huphup-’”), Crow creeps closer 
until even he contributes a “Wuppy!” From then on, all the neighborhood birds 
enjoy sharing in the linguistic lunacy, and even the local cat (“Shmoodle!”) and 
dog (“Skerpoodle!”) get into the act. The text, preponderantly dialogue in and out 
of speech balloons, has a goofy humor that makes this a readaloud bonanza, and 
kids will love both the silly wordplay and the smaller birds’ persistent flouting of 
the Crow’s authoritarianism. The story also provides plenty of opportunities for 
discussing word construction, phonics, and rhyme, and the format would lend 
itself to a readers theater or other performance. Portis’ artwork, digitally colored 
pencil, charcoal, and ink, keeps the visuals fairly simple, although some smudgy 
textures and careful shading add interest to the retro-toned pictures printed on matte 
paper. Thoughtful compositions draw attention to dramatic moments, such as the 
enormous word balloon that marks Little Brown Bird’s first comical outburst, or 
the looming (and not amused) black Crow as he dominates the responsive spread, 
pushing Little Brown Bird nearly off the page. Pair this with Thomas’ Rhyming 
Dust Bunnies (BCCB 1/09) for a goofily garrulous story session.  JH
Powell, williAm cAmPbell Expiration Day. Tor, 2014
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7653-3828-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4668-3840-6 $9.99   
R Gr. 8-10
Tania is used to being special, believing herself to be one of the few actual children in 
a world of sophisticated robots. Except oops, she’s not a real girl at all, just another 
teknoid who has been carefully raised to believe she wasn’t one. Luckily, Tania is 
mostly surrounded by people who are happy to support her in her quest to live 
honestly as a non-biological being, challenge the rules that would have her returned 
to the company that made her when she turns eighteen, and trust her judgment 
as she changes and grows. A diary format works well to keep readers at the same 
place as Tania, first a perky eleven-year-old who’s clueless about her true self and 
then a savvier, slightly world-weary older adolescent who sees the world for what it 
is but still wants to keep her place in it. This dystopic future is a memorable one, 
placed about forty years ahead in a world where the robotic children’s inevitable 
end is mitigated only slightly by the still very real, intense love parents feel for their 
teknoid offspring. While sci-fi buffs might be the likeliest audience, an extra push to 
realistic fiction fans may have them contemplating the ways in which Tania comes 
of age and how little it differs from what they are themselves experiencing.  AS
58 • the bulletin
RAschkA, chRis Give and Take; written and illus. by Chris Raschka. Atheneum, 
2014 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-1655-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-0932-2 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 6-9 yrs
A farmer and his dog, excited when their apple tree bears ripe fruit, meet a small 
man who claims that his name is Take, and he gives advice appropriate to his name: 
to take all of the pumpkin-seller’s pumpkins in exchange for their apples, and to 
take the seller’s advice to make pumpkin soup. The next day, a similar little man 
named Give encourages the farmer to give his entire crop to a pig farmer and give 
his opinions. The guidance from Give and Take just leaves the farmer hungry and 
lonely, but the next day, the man strategically uses both Give and Take to gather 
ingredients for an apple pie and a happy ending. There’s a twinge of folklore in this 
plainly told story, but the lesson is both clichéd—like a more balanced The Giving 
Tree—and a bit glitchy (the farmer indeed gives the woman his apples when he takes 
her pumpkins). This also disappointingly lacks the flights of whimsy (Arlene Sardine, 
BCCB 9/98) or pithiness (Everyone Can Learn to Ride a Bicycle, BCCB 7/13) that 
usually characterizes Raschka’s work. Raschka’s thick, calligraphic brushwork adds 
a touch of cartoonishness, while splashes of watercolor in greens, reds, and oranges 
aesthetic more minimal. The farmer’s elongated, ruddy nose and bushy white 
beard make him almost Santa-esque in a crowd-pleasing way, and the elvish men 
have mischievousness winking behind their grins. There is elegance in the sturdy 
black-and-whiteness of the spreads as a whole, and the square trim size and fairy 
tale ethos make this a serviceable selection for smaller storytime experiences.  TA
Reef, cAtheRine Frida & Diego: Art, Love, Life. Clarion, 2014 168p illus. 
with photographs
ISBN 978-0-547-82184-9 $18.99   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Even if teen readers are unfamiliar with Mexican artists Frida Kahlo and Diego 
Rivera, they’re sure to be intrigued by this book’s cover photograph of the beauti-
ful, petite young woman snuggled adoringly against the older, pot-bellied gent, 
alongside the implied subtitle promise of a love story. And what a tumultuous love 
story it is, from teenaged Frida teasing the older professional muralist at her high 
school, through their stormy, infidelity-racked marriage and subsequent divorce, 
and on to their platonic remarriage, when they realized they could no more live 
apart than together. Reef tackles the unconventional love story head-on, with a 
candor that pulls no punches with its youth audience. The pair were, however, art-
ists—mutually supportive and referential in their art—and it is here that this title 
tends to stumble, largely from inconsistent organization, which frequently separates 
illustrations from textual references, and even more gratingly, lacks reproductions 
of pivotal works described at length within the text. There is, for example, no 
view of Rivera’s controversial mural in the Palace of Cortez, depicting Spaniards 
massacring indigenous people, nor of Kahlo’s “Henry Ford Hospital,” described 
as a “breakthrough” painting that marked her shift toward intensely personal and 
symbolic works. This may nonetheless be well-received by biography readers, who 
would be hard-pressed to find a more striking contrast in real life love stories than 
between Frida & Diego and Heiligman’s Charles and Emma (BCCB 2/09). Index, 
September 2014 • 59
source notes for the myriad color and black and white illustrations, bibliography, 
timeline, illustration credits, and mini galleries of the artists’ work are included.  EB
Reilly, nicholA Drowned. Harlequin Teen, 2014 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-373-21122-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
In a climate-ravaged future, the residents of Tides pack tightly onto a raised plat-
form each day as the ocean temporarily swallows their ramshackle homes with 
the high tide. When the water recedes, they return to their normal routine, which 
means fifteen-year-old Coe continues mucking the outhouses and suffering the 
ridicule and bullying that come with her having only one arm. When the rarely 
seen Princess Star mysteriously requests Coe’s presence as her royal aide, Coe is 
hesitant to believe her luck has changed—and she’s right to be wary, because when 
the king dies, throwing the island into anarchy, Coe’s new status as an enabler to 
the ineffective and spoiled royals puts her life in danger. There’s a starkness to Coe’s 
direct narration that painfully reflects the bleakness of the world around her, and 
her melancholy comes not from self-pity but from the true despair of living in a 
place that is slowly being eroded away by an unstoppable force. There is no hope 
here, and even as she pursues a romantic relationship with a boy she has loved 
from afar for years, Coe is constantly aware of the expiration date that looms for 
them both. The environmental catastrophe and the ensuing decline of humanity 
among its survivors are typical YA fare at this point, but Coe’s captivating voice, 
along with a surprising twist that brings Coe into the secret interior of the island, 
ensures that readers will anxiously return to see what lies beneath the surface of 
these Tides.  KQG 
Renn, diAnA Latitude Zero. Viking, 2014 [448p]
ISBN 978-0-670-01558-0 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
M Gr. 8-10
Tessa agrees to ride “bandit” (unregistered) at the cancer benefit cycling event to save 
what’s left of her relationship with Jake, but if she’s honest with herself, it’s really 
to get a glimpse of Juan Carlos, an Ecuadorean rider she’s crushing on. Just before 
the race, Juan Carlos meets her off the course, puts a heavy gold crucifix around 
her neck, and urgently says he needs to meet with her later. That never happens, 
though; Tessa causes a pile-up accident, Juan Carlos dies from his injuries, and 
the theft and recovery of one of his bicycles suggests that his death may not have 
been Tessa’s unintentional fault after all. The plot is riddled with coincidences and 
improbabilities, the most egregious of which are teen Tessa’s well-established career 
as host of a children’s cable TV show, and Jake’s bad boy reputation, which does 
little more than make his red herring role a bit stinkier. Moreover, Tessa’s somewhat 
tedious narration, through which she goes over each clue and hypothesis minutely 
and repetitively, is likely to feel condescending to mystery readers who enjoy puzzling 
things out on their own. Professional bicycle racing is a topic that gets relatively 
little literary love, so this still might draw in readers more intrigued by the cycling 
than the whodunit; however, those looking for a more effective balance of mystery 
and sports will do better with Walter Dean Myers’ Kick (BCCB 3/11).  EB
60 • the bulletin
Reynolds, PAul A. Sydney & Simon: Full Steam Ahead!; illus. by Peter H. Reyn-
olds. Charlesbridge, 2014 48p
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-58089-875-7 $12.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60734-750-7 $9.99   
M Gr. 1-3
As the STEM movement trends through educational circles, the STEAM movement 
follows hot on its heals, inserting “Art” as a vital partner to Science, Technology, 
Engineering, and Math. In this chapter book, twin mice Sydney and Simon attack 
a problem with a multi-disciplinary arsenal: the flowers in an upper floor window 
box need watering, but the window is stuck shut. Acting with logical and intel-
lectual discipline that is perhaps more the domain of fictional mice than actual 
kids, the sibs investigate how humidity impacts wooden windows, how the public 
water supply system works, and how both Archimedes and Leonardo (aha! science 
and art!) worked on the idea of a screw pump—just the ticket for two youngsters 
to water their drooping flowers. The weather breaks, the window opens, the Art in 
Bloom show goes on, and Sydney and Simon use high and low tech presentations 
styles to demonstrate what they’ve learned about plants. The plot, transparently a 
walk-through for applying STEAM thinking to a curricular situation, is not com-
pelling enough to claim storytelling merit, and youngsters will certainly sense that 
adult concerns, rather than the joys of tinkering, drive this effort. The appended 
letter from the Reynoldses, “Are You a STEAM Thinker?” is ostensibly directed to 
readers, but with its discussion of integrating arts and technology, it is clearly aimed 
at teachers and parents. The debate between STEMers and STEAMers certainly 
deserves thoughtful attention, but this set piece, with more pedantry than plot, 
will probably be of more interest to educators than to their young students.  EB
RichARds, dAn The Problem with NOT Being Scared of Monsters; illus. by Robert 
Neubecker. Boyds Mills, 2014 32p
ISBN 978-1-62091-024-5 $15.95   
R 4-7 yrs
The problem with not being scared of monsters, our young narrator finds, is that 
monsters become entirely too comfortable with you, and those monsters can be 
some pesky pals. Their tendency to pop out of desks, eat homework, and throw food 
at snacktime makes life complicated for the boy, but when his little brother comes 
knocking late at night afraid of the bogeymen, the older boy shows the younger 
that they’re not so scary—and hands down his adoring followers to his little brother. 
The simple and spare text renders the challenges of monstrous pals understand-
able, and the boy’s complaints will sound familiar in their groaning tone (“Your 
favorite pajamas are always in the wash”). The ink illustrations, digitally colored in 
bold Crayola hues, have a pleasing squared-edge look that’s made less sharp by the 
speckling of the watercolor paper, and details such as furrowed brows and eye rolls 
effectively convey the kiddo’s exasperation. Tentacled and fanged monsters made 
silly with glibness reminiscent of Dr. Seuss’ There’s a Wocket in My Pocket will leave 
kids smiling after a monster-themed storytime.  TA
Rosen, michAel Send for a Superhero; illus. by Katherine McEwen. Candle-
wick, 2014 34p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6438-1 $16.99   
R Gr. 2-3
Elmer and Emily’s dad is reading them a bedtime story about Filth and Vacuum, 
September 2014 • 61
the villainous Terrible Two who are going to slime the city of Townton and suck up 
all of the money.  As the story goes on, with Townton youngster Brad 40 calling in 
superhero after hero to take on the villains, the art alternates between the events of 
Townton and the kids’ bedroom, with the comics-like panels depicting their dad’s 
bedtime tale while chunkily and boldly illustrated Emily and Elmer provide added 
commentary.  When Steel Man, Super-Flying-Through-The-Air-Very-Fast Man, 
and Incredibly-Big-Strong-Green Man all fail to stop Filth and Vacuum, Brad 40’s 
idea of calling in Extremely Boring Man (who can send anybody to sleep) may just 
work for the kids, too—until they clamor for one more story. The playful silli-
ness of the superhero romp complements the gentle intended bedtime tale, and a 
similar contrast develops between the grainy newsprint-inspired illustrations, with 
thin outlines and washed-out coloration, and the crayon-box (and even Day-Glo) 
thickness of the siblings’ world. Though likely too adventuresome for use as an 
actual bedtime story, this will be a nice intro for kids gearing up for skills in reading 
graphic formats and understanding metafictional devices.  TA 
Ruby, lois The Doll Graveyard. Scholastic, 2014 [256p] (Hauntings)
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-545-61786-4 $6.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-62065-9 $6.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
Shelby thinks that her biggest problems are her parents’ divorce and an accompa-
nying unwanted move into an inherited rural house far from her beloved Denver. 
Little does she know, however, what awaits her there: creepy dolls that seem to want 
to enact revenge on her for the misdeeds of girl residents past. At first, the dolls 
just pop up in unexpected places, but when they actually seem to be controlling 
elements of the house in alarming ways, Shelby knows she needs to get through the 
secret diary she found, use all of the clues she can gather from the locals, and find a 
way to calm these dolls. Along the way, Shelby does gain a bit of insight about the 
complexities of parental dynamics and about how she has agency in choosing her 
own path and creating her own relationships with friends and parents, but this is 
primarily an effectively spooky, poignant ghost story. The addition of a few colorful 
side characters works well as contrasts to the fairly literal, serious Shelby, and their 
help is instrumental both in convincing her mother that Shelby isn’t crazy and in 
actually putting the dolls to rest in their little graveyard for good. Make sure this 
book gets is displayed cover out for full self-promotion impact—the satisfyingly 
disturbing dolls will draw many readers.  AS 
Rudy, mAggie I Wish I Had a Pet; written and illus. by Maggie Rudy. Beach 
Lane/Simon, 2014 32p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5332-6 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5333-3 $10.99   
R 4-6 yrs
An unseen narrator voices the wish of a little mouse to obtain a pet (in mouse 
world, an insect) of her very own and offers multiple nuggets of useful advice to 
would-be pet owners along the way (“A pet is not a doll. It might not like to play 
dress-up”). Although this gently humorous guide works well as a readaloud selec-
tion, the succinct, straightforward text will also make it accessible to primary-grade 
readers unafraid to tackle a few larger vocabulary words. It’s the illustrations that 
take center stage here, however, with digital photos capturing the three-dimensional 
62 • the bulletin
handmade cloth mice in action with their creepy-crawly critters against a backdrop 
of found and created objects that will have miniature enthusiasts drooling with 
delight. Some scenes are simple, such as the group of mouse children offering 
“Free Roly-polies” from a cardboard carton, while others are more ornate: amidst 
sumptuous Victorian-looking surroundings, a rococo mouse drapes a fuzzy yellow 
caterpillar around her neck like a feather boa. Humorous touches add to the fun: 
for example, “And when your pet makes a mess, clean up after it” is accompanied 
by a picture of a mouse holding his nose while picking up his caterpillar’s frass 
with a baggy-covered paw. Readers will be fascinated by the imaginative tableaux 
and by the “how did she make that?” aspect. This would be a unique addition to a 
unit or story hour on pets or mice, and crafty kids may be inspired to make their 
own tiny scenes afterwards.  JH
sAndfoRd, John Uncaged; by John Sandford and Michele Cook. Knopf, 
2014 [416p] (The Singular Menace)
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75307-4 $21.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75306-7 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75308-1 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-12
Odin’s new activist girlfriend convinces him to help her group break into the corpo-
rate labs of Singular, an Oregon company ostensibly seeking a cure for Parkinson’s 
Disease, and free the lab animals on which they are experimenting. Odin and his 
crew find more than they expected and now they’re on the run, drawing Odin’s 
younger sister, Shay, into the maelstrom. She leaves their foster home to track Odin 
down in California, and she is fortunate to find shelter in a hostel run by quirky 
guerilla artist, Twist. Assisting Twist with one of his high-profile projects gets Shay’s 
picture out in the press, and high profile is just what she doesn’t need to be if she’s 
going to help Odin. When Odin makes contact and hands over a dog called X with 
a nasty attitude and wires coming out of its head, Shay is now in as much trouble 
as her brother—pursued by Singular operatives who will definitely kill anyone who 
threatens to leak their real agenda. So just how mad are these mad scientists? They’re 
on the way to reaching the hypothetical “Singularity,” with a hybrid of man and 
machine that could assure human immortality and, of course, world domination 
for the developers. The authors artfully juggle people, places, and plotlines, keeping 
each thread in sharp focus and spooling out details at an ever-accelerating pace. 
Shay, Twist, and the street kids from the hostel are well-limned protagonists, but 
X may be the one to watch. There’s more to his wiring than the authors are letting 
on just yet, and readers will be pacing until the next installment.  EB
schAnen, AdRiAnA bRAd Quinny & Hopper; illus. by Greg Swearingen. Disney 
Hyperion, 2014 230p
ISBN 978-1-4231-7829-3 $15.99   
R Gr. 3-5
Almost-third-grader Hopper is the kind of quiet kid who would prefer to stay in 
his room and build a model of a human foot than socialize. When bouncy-haired, 
mile-a-minute talker Quinny moves in next door and decides to befriend Hopper, 
however, he is basically powerless against her designs, and the two enjoy spending 
the summer together. When back-to-school time rolls around, Hopper abruptly 
ends the friendship, sure Quinny won’t want to spend time with him when she 
September 2014 • 63
finds out what a loser he is at school. A bewildered Quinny reluctantly takes up 
with mean girl Victoria until a series of events lead her and Hopper to reestablish 
their friendship, this time stronger than ever. Quinny and Hopper take turns nar-
rating their story, and although the maturity of their narration doesn’t quite match 
their young ages, the strength of their individual identities and their likability as 
characters override their occasional precocity. Hopper’s thoughtful and observant 
voice (about Victoria: “She acts like it costs her money to be nice to people, and 
she doesn’t think I’m worth it”) and Quinny’s lively and amusing one (“‘Didded is 
not a word,’ I inform my grimy little sister. ‘And put a shirt on, you chimpanzee’”), 
combined with the quick-paced plotting, make this an engaging page-turner. Judy 
Moody fans will have a ball with Quinny and Hopper, and elementary teachers 
or librarians looking for a spirited readaloud selection will want to pick up a copy 
as well.  JH
schofield-moRRison, connie I Got the Rhythm; illus. by Frank Morri-
son. Bloomsbury, 2014 32p
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-179-3 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-178-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-209-7 $4.99   
R 4-7 yrs
Rhythm is everywhere in this celebratory jaunt through an urban neighborhood 
with a round-faced, puffy-pigtailed African-American girl. First she’s just think-
ing about rhythm as she walks hand in hand with her mother, then she’s hearing 
rhythm as she passes a street drummer, and finally she’s making her own rhythm, 
singing, clapping, snapping, tapping, then all out dancing. There’s not much story 
here beyond the listing of rhythmic expressions, but the narrative sticks closely to 
its chantable pattern, and the little girl at the center of it all is wholly likable in 
her joyful approach. The oil paintings convey movement and life, with palpable 
energy in the girl’s flapping arms, swinging dress, and bouncing feet as she claps, 
snaps, tips, and taps through the city street with a grin on her face. This will work 
well in an interactive storytime for preschoolers, as listeners are invited to shake 
and stomp along with the happy protagonist.  HM
scieszkA, Jon Frank Einstein and the Antimatter Motor; illus. by Brian 
Biggs. Amulet, 2014 [192p]
ISBN 978-1-4197-1218-0 $13.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-6
Science geek and amateur inventor Frank Einstein is certain that his creation of 
a Smartbot, an independently thinking robot, will land him the $100,000 Mid-
ville Science Prize that will enable him to pay off his Grampa Al’s bills for good. 
Unfortunately, a lightning storm puts the kibosh on his experiment, and Frank 
goes to bed thinking he’s left with a fried toaster and ruined plans. He wakes up, 
however, to find Klink and Klank, two “self assembled artificial entities” (okay, 
Klank is “mostly self assembled,” since he needed some help) made up of bits of 
stopwatches, video games, toasters, exercise equipment, Shop Vacs, and whatever 
else happened to get thrown into the mix. Since they won’t work as entries for the 
contest (he didn’t technically create them), Frank decides to enlist their help in 
making his ultimate invention, an antimatter motor—but will his dreaded arch 
nemesis and fellow kid genius T. Edison thwart his plans? Scieszka strikes just the 
64 • the bulletin
right balance between goofy humor and technical jargon, a combination that will 
particularly please the geek squad as they giggle over antimatter jokes and nod along 
to allusions to scientific discoveries and history. The characters aren’t particularly 
deep, but there’s a warmth to Frank’s relationships with Grampa Al and his best 
friend Watson, and the two robots play the ideal odd couple with their Felix and 
Oscar–like repartee. Cartoony illustrations add to the humor and diagram some of 
the more complex concepts. This series open is sure to find fans among kids who 
spend most their time in the 609s.  KQG
scott, kieRAn Only Everything. Simon, 2014 326p (True Love)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-7718-6 $17.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-7716-2 $9.99   
R Gr. 7-10
In this mythology-inspired story, Eros isn’t the chubby male baby that shows up in 
greeting cards but a headstrong, albeit junior, goddess with a sense of mischief. When 
she dares to defy Zeus to fall in love with Orion, a mortal, Zeus enslaves Orion and 
banishes Eros to a live as an ordinary teenager in New Jersey (along with her mother, 
Aphrodite) until she can orchestrate three solid love matches without her arrows or 
her ability to read people’s minds. Rechristening herself as True Olympia, Eros sets 
herself the task of finding love for Charlie, a sweet guy torn between trying to be 
himself and trying to live up to his football-coach father’s expectations. Fumbling 
without her goddess insights, she completely misses his attraction for Katrina, a 
wounded Latina grieving the recent death of her father and relying on an abusive 
boyfriend. The chapters alternate between the sharp-tongued, imperious voice of 
True, the hesitant hopes and misgivings of Charlie, and the lonely desperation of 
Katrina. The mix of humor, romance, and coming-of-age quandaries offers compel-
ling plot twists and entertaining shifts between fantasy and reality, and the surprise 
ending and True’s only partially fulfilled mission point to promising sequels.  KC
sheA, bob Dinosaur vs. School; written and illus. by Bob Shea. Disney Hyper-
ion, 2014 [40p]
ISBN 978-1-4231-6087-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 2-4 yrs
Sassy red Dinosaur roars his way to victory over various scholastic challenges, 
including making new pals, using art supplies, and playing musical instruments. 
One activity nearly bests him and his new classmates (“Now Dinosaur and his 
friends will do something they have NEVER done before . . . CLEAN UP”), but 
when everyone works together, “Everyone wins!” The familiar pattern (Dinosaur 
easily overcomes every obstacle, mostly by roaring at it) is starting to wear thin, 
and while there is something to be said for arming kids with the confidence to take 
on challenging tasks, it’s a disservice to imply that something like making friends 
can be achieved so simply. Shea’s art is as bright and cheery as a brand-new box of 
Crayola crayons, though, and the bold lines, cute critter pals (a cat, fox, horse, pig, 
and—inexplicably—a cloud make regular appearances on the pages), and humorous 
touches (Dinosaur covers himself in googly eyes during craft time) will please a 
young audience. Some of the spreads are crammed to busyness with figures, sound 
effects, dots, and stars, but the art’s energy may appeal to equally lively children. 
Grownups will definitely be on board with the “everybody cleans up” ending, and 
kids who have reveled in Dinosaur’s noisy shenanigans thus far will likely want to 
roar their way through this title as well.  JH
September 2014 • 65
sheRRy, kevin Turtle Island; written and illus. by Kevin Sherry. Dial, 
2014 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3391-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 3-6 yrs
A giant turtle is “as big as an island,” an apt comparison when a shipwreck leaves 
a cat, a frog, an owl, and a bear (all much smaller than the turtle) clinging to the 
turtle’s shell. Each of the four shipwrecked animals has a special skill (Frog cooks, 
Cat draws, Owl knits, and Bear builds), and they work together to build a cozy 
home atop the turtle’s shell. The critters miss their families, though, and one day 
they build a boat and sail away to their old homes. The turtle is heartbroken (“I 
didn’t understand. Wasn’t I their family? ‘We have to go home,’ Bear added. But 
wasn’t I their home?”), but then overjoyed as the animals return with their friends, 
families, and some additional “inhabited” giant turtles to create an entire floating 
community. Sherry’s simple but touching first-person narrative is well suited to 
its young audience, and the gentle, fantastical story coupled with the large, clear 
illustrations (created with pencil, then inked, then painted with watercolors that 
are occasionally speckled with salt) will make this particularly useful in story hours 
and classroom readalouds. The wide-eyed animals have friendly faces, and the snug 
details of the home (and eventual town) they create on the turtle’s back will pique 
the interest of youthful viewers. Plug this into a turtle- or house-themed storytime 
or just sit back and enjoy this whimsical, watery world.  JH
shiRley, s. chRis Playing by the Book. Magnus/Riverdale Avenue, 2014 305p
ISBN 978-1-62601-071-0 $19.99  
Ad Gr. 9-12
Jake’s dad, “The Preacher,” has finally relented, and Jake, prepping for a senior 
year as editor-in-chief of the high school newspaper in his tiny Alabama town, gets 
permission to attend a competitive summer institute for aspiring journalists in New 
York. If Jake doesn’t take home an award from the program, however, The Preacher 
will take it a sign from God that Jake’s meant to follow in his daddy’s footsteps and 
become a minister for his fundamentalist congregation. Complicating matters is 
Jake’s hot new suitemate Sam, who happens to be gay and unknowingly pushes on 
Jake’s “thorn in his side,” his attraction to other guys. After some intense prayer, 
Jake believes that he may have been “cured,” but a failed attempt to establish a 
relationship with a girl leads to a downward spiral of a desperate one-night stand, 
a paranoid HIV test, a very public outing, and suicidal ideation, until Jake’s finally 
able to assert himself against The Preacher and make a small inroad into reconciling 
his faith and his sexuality. There’s been some exploration of this topic before in 
LGBT YA, but the intensity of Jake’s internal debates will strike new chords with 
teens from similar backgrounds, and his growth from closed-minded and closeted 
to confident though still confused is genuine. Some long-windedness with the de-
tails of the journalism school protracts the story, though, and an over-attention to 
explaining Jake’s family’s “One Way” version of Christianity (and Sam’s Jewishness) 
awkwardly drags the pace. Still, given the slight number of books at the nexus of 
queerness and religion, this will be a useful follow-up for some to Sánchez’s The 
God Box (BCCB 1/08) and Hartzler’s Rapture Practice (BCCB 7/13).  TA 
66 • the bulletin
sloAn, holly goldbeRg Just Call My Name. Little, 2014 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-12281-8 $18.00
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-20313-5 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
With their father in jail and Sam and Riddle (from I’ll Be There, BCCB 6/11) all 
but adopted by Emily’s parents, things appear to be looking up for the boys. Soon, 
though, an outgoing, attractive girl named Destiny tries to cause trouble between 
Sam and Emily, but the real trouble is far worse than any of them imagine: Sam 
and Riddle’s dad, Clarence, has successfully escaped from prison and is coming to 
get revenge on the family that he thinks stole his boys. The narrative technique 
here consists of quick cuts between scenes featuring Sam, Emily, Destiny, Riddle, 
and Clarence, as well as Bobby, Emily’s former boyfriend, and Jared, her younger 
brother. In addition to relating the events, the characters reflect on their feelings 
about the other characters, establishing a pattern of suspicion and doubt about 
whom to trust. The quick-cut technique creates an edgy anticipation that comes 
to full, heart-stopping effect when Clarence kidnaps Emily. The chase that ensues 
is riveting not just because of what’s happening but also because readers never get 
to settle into a continuous or fixed perspective, which turns out to be the theme of 
the book, as new alliances have to form out of former antagonisms. Such insights 
are likely to occur only after readers close the book, though, since the emotional 
rush during reading is too intense to do anything but gobble up the words and 
breathe when and if you remember to. Sam, Riddle and Emily remain as endearing 
as they were in the first book, and, as a pleasant surprise, Jared, Bobby and Destiny 
all undergo redemption after shaky starts. If readers are willing to just accept that 
Sam and Emily are a committed couple with a troubled past, the story will stand 
on its own for those who haven’t read the prior book.  KC  
smith, dAvid J. If . . . : A Mind-Bending New Way of Looking at Big Ideas and 
Numbers; illus. by Steve Adams. Kids Can, 2014 40p
ISBN 978-1-894786-34-8 $18.95   
Ad Gr. 2-5
Smith, who has produced such popular curricular staples as If the World Were a Vil-
lage (BCCB 2/02), turns his attention to scale—more precisely, to scaling down, 
via analogies, from a very large number to more manageable concept. If 3.5 billion 
years of life on Earth is too much time to comprehend, scaling the time down to 
twenty-four hours allows the author to convey just how late in the day recognizable 
creatures showed up (fish at 51 minutes, 10 seconds; earliest human ancestors at 59 
minutes, 56 seconds). A hundred light bulbs demonstrate world energy consump-
tion, with two bulbs representing hydroelectric power, and a whopping eighty-one 
representing fossil fuels. Not all analogies—expressed not only in text but also by 
Adams’ playful, ever-so-slightly surreal paintings—are equally clear, though. It 
will take many young readers some puzzling out, for instance, to connect North 
Americans’ leading the pack in life expectancy with 78 footsteps in the sand, while 
the sidebar information is expressed in terms of countries, with the United States 
notably missing. A concluding note to parents and teachers promotes the use of 
scaling activities, but, frustratingly, formulas for conversion appear in neither note 
nor text. A selected list of resources is included.  EB
September 2014 • 67
smith, mAtt Barbarian Lord; written and illus. by Matt Smith. Clarion, 
2014 176p
ISBN 978-0-547-85906-4 $17.99   
R Gr. 6-8
In this action-packed graphic novel that blends Nordic and Viking lore with fantasy 
references and a solid dose of sly humor, the Barbarian Lord wants what is his and 
will stop at nothing to get it. Barbarian Lord (don’t try to call him anything else) 
just wants his land and his honor back, and he’ll staunchly face monsters, ghosts, 
poets, and whoever else decides to stand between him and this goal. In this case 
it’s Skullmaster, and Skullmaster’s allies work mightily to stop Barbarian Lord 
with varying degrees of success; their snarky jabs at one another as their efforts 
continue to be unsuccessful are funny even to an outsider, but they will be highly 
amusing to those well versed in Viking traditions or Dungeons and Dragons–type 
scenarios. The black and white illustrations reflect the text, showing Barbarian 
Lord as a mostly expressionless rock of a man who moves from panel to panel with 
the flat determination referenced in the story. Comic book–style fighting sound 
effects and quick changes between panels to suggest long engagements emphasize 
the frequent battles. An author’s note all but admits that even readers who know 
the key topics may not be quite as far down the rabbit hole as the author himself, 
who enthusiastically references He-Man, Tolkien, Norse mythology, and skaldic 
poetry all in, essentially, one breath. It’s to his credit that this is still an accessible, 
memorable thrill of a graphic novel, even if you are a novice at all of the above.  AS
snydeR, elAine Anna & Solomon; illus. by Harry Bliss. Ferguson/Farrar, 
2014 32p
ISBN 978-0-374-30362-4 $17.99   
R* 6-9 yrs
“Once—and not once upon a time, because this is a true story—in 1897 in Russia 
there lived a handsome young man who fell in love with a beautiful young woman.” 
Shortly after the two marry, the Czar’s soldiers destroy the homes of Jewish families 
in their village and Anna and Solomon decide to emigrate to America. They only 
have enough for one ticket, however, so Solomon goes ahead, with Anna promising 
to join him later. Solomon arrives in New York, works hard, and soon sends money 
for a ticket . . . but when the day comes to meet Anna at the ship, he is surprised 
to find that she instead sent her younger brother. When Solomon once again 
saves up the cost of a ticket sends for Anna, her older brother shows up instead; a 
third time, Solomon finds himself welcoming his mother-in-law (“‘Could Anna 
leave her old mother behind? Of course not,’ he said to himself, and bravely took 
her home”). Finally, after Solomon sends money for a fourth ticket, the couple 
is happily reunited. Based on the author’s family story (even the illustrator, the 
author’s son-in-law, is part of the family), the narrative is drenched in warmth and 
familial affection, and the folkloric patterning and rich imagery enhance Anna 
and Solomon’s story. Bliss’ easygoing, slightly cartoonish renderings capture the 
feel of the small Russian village as well as the crowded Lower East Side New York 
neighborhood where Solomon lives and effectively depict the gamut of emotions 
Solomon experiences—from confusion to anger to sadness to resolution—as he 
welcomes his in-laws over and over again when expecting his beloved wife. Young 
listeners will no doubt share Solomon’s joy at the long-awaited happy reunion in 
this lovely love story.  HM 
68 • the bulletin
soveRn, megAn JeAn The Meaning of Maggie. Chronicle, 2014 218p
ISBN 978-1-4521-1021-9 $16.99   
R* Gr. 3-6
It’s 1988, and eleven-year-old Maggie faces a shift in her life when her father’s mul-
tiple sclerosis worsens, requiring him to use a wheelchair and necessitating that her 
mother take a grueling job at a local hotel. Although Maggie loves spending more 
time with her dad, rocking out to Led Zeppelin and hearing about her parents’ 
counterculture past, his increasing bouts of illness make it clear that his condition 
is more serious than she’s been told. She adds the new goal of fixing her father to 
her list of aspirations, devoting her science fair project to learning about MS—in-
cluding, she’s devastated to find, its lack of cure. Sovern handles this personal topic 
(it’s her family’s story written as Maggie’s memoir) exceptionally well, creating in 
the audacious Maggie a relatable, admirable heroine with the self-involvement and 
simultaneous lack of self-consciousness credible for someone just leaving childhood. 
Her engaging use of first-person narration adeptly syncs the reader’s understand-
ing with Maggie’s, while skillfully revealing things about Maggie that she herself 
doesn’t seem to see. Of particular note is the book’s graceful handling of Maggie’s 
weight: Maggie has few, if any, explicit observations about her body, none of which 
she connects to her unapologetic love of desserts; even when her elitist, estranged 
grandmother asks, “Oh Maggie, what happened to you?” all Maggie sees in the 
mirror is her same old self. Written with skill and sensitivity, this precocious and 
poignant story of familial love will make good company for those readers dealing 
with health issues in their home lives, as well as those wanting a smart, refreshing 
voice to take them on a meaningful journey.  AA
st. Antoine, sARA Three Bird Summer. Candlewick, 2014 246p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6564-7 $16.99   
R Gr. 5-7
Quiet, shy middle-schooler Adam struggles a bit with peer interactions, especially 
those that involve girls. He’s initially frustrated, therefore, by the intrusion of a 
girl, Alice, into his peaceful summer at his grandma’s idyllic lakefront property. 
The athletic but somewhat geeky Alice is staying at the cabin next door, and she 
turns out to be such a splendid companion that Adam comes to look forward to 
the time spent with her, especially as it takes him away from the tension in the 
cabin between his tough but increasingly forgetful grandmother and his worried 
mother. When Adam’s grandmother begins leaving strange notes in his bedroom 
(written as though she is still a young woman and addressed to someone called 
“G”) and he finds a “treasure map” among her files, he and Alice try to identify 
the mysterious person from his grandma’s past and find the treasure that “G” hid 
many years ago. Although a relatively happy ending is in store, it’s also somewhat 
bittersweet, as Adam’s grandma isn’t actually going to get better and Adam is forlorn 
at the prospect of parting from Alice. St. Antoine effectively evokes the visceral pull 
that nature and special summer places can have, and she understatedly examines 
the sometimes tricky navigation of middle-school boy-girl relationships. Adam’s 
narration is thoughtful and generally credible (his palpable discomfort with his 
grandmother’s worsening condition is particularly well drawn), and the kids who 
would rather go on a nature hike than play team sports will especially relate to 
him. Readers can save this contemplative read for a rainy summer day, enjoy it on 
the lakefront beach, or hang out with it in a hammock.  JH
September 2014 • 69
stein, dAvid ezRA I’m My Own Dog; written and illus. by David Ezra 
Stein. Candlewick, 2014 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-6139-7 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-8 yrs
Our canine protagonist leads a happily independent life, throwing his own sticks 
and curling up at his own feet at the end of a long day. After he lets a human 
scratch him in a hard-to-reach itchy spot, though, a bond forms (“The little guy 
followed me home. I felt sorry for him”). Now he has a delightful new pet, who’s 
quickly learned the stick game and who’s worth the trouble he causes—in fact, says 
the dog confidentially, “between you and me, I’m his best friend.” The popular 
viewpoint-reversal gag is particularly amusing here, with some excellent silliness in 
the dog’s solitary habits (“When I look in the mirror, I lick my own face because I 
am so happy to see me”) and some genuine and funny legitimacy in the dog’s take 
on the situation. A fascinating illustrative note explains the artwork, including the 
fact that a marker was “hacked” to dispense India ink; the result is a particularly 
childlike iteration of Stein’s familiar vigor, with big scrawled lines colored with 
cheerfully slapdash washes in sunny and verdant outdoor hues. The round-headed, 
gray-spotted pup is aggressively cute, with a bit of bulldoggish fang showing at 
times, while the human he adopts is a wonderfully hapless grownup man with a 
stuck-in-the-’70s vibe. Kids may rightly ask where the pooch got his collar and 
tag (and house), but it’s not too surprising for such a canine go-getter, and such 
trivialities don’t matter in the face of such an enjoyable and deftly crafted joke.  DS
stiefvAteR, mAggie Sinner. Scholastic, 2014 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-65457-9 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-65458-6 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
This companion novel to the Shiver trilogy (BCCB 10/09, etc.) picks up the ro-
mantic thread left dangling between the troubled rock star Cole St. Clair and the 
icy Isabel Culpeper. Following his OD, Cole is attempting a comeback, one that 
probably won’t be helped by his new chemical escape: an injectable drug that turns 
him into a wolf. Isabel has found modeling the perfect job for her cynical personality; 
the more disaffected she appears in the hipster fashions, the more clients want to 
purchase what she’s wearing. When Cole reenters her life, she struggles to maintain 
her aloof persona despite their irresistible attraction, while Cole works through a 
series of personal epiphanies about who he really is behind the glib exterior that 
sells his brand. Style and psychology, then, are at the heart of this basically plotless 
romance. Fortunately, Stiefvater excels at both: Isabel and Cole emerge as fully 
dimensional characters wrestling some pretty ferocious demons. While Cole comes 
to understand that his are of his own making, Isabel’s pain is more carefully scripted 
as a response to ineffective parenting. What ultimately makes their psychologies 
plausible, however, are the cleverly constructed secondary characters who act as 
foils for these angry protagonists to show their softer, more caring sides. The end-
ing may be abrupt but it will certainly delight fangirls, and the book’s depths of 
insight with regard to emotional growth and the delicious language can certainly 
bear a wider audience.  KC 
70 • the bulletin
sutcliffe, JAne The White House Is Burning: August 24, 1814. Charlesbridge, 
2014 120p  illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-1-58089-656-6 $19.95   
R* Gr. 5-8
If it seems that the War of 1812 doesn’t thrive in the classroom, crammed as it is 
between the massive units on the Revolutionary and Civil wars, look to Sutcliffe’s 
title as an antidote. With just enough requisite scene setting, the author launches 
straight into a gripping reconstruction of the events of August 23 to 24, 1814, 
when the British invaded Maryland and the nation’s capital, burned its government 
buildings, terrified those citizens who hadn’t already fled, and then snuck silently 
out of Washington in the middle of the night. The reporting is kept lively by its 
heavy reliance on primary source material, with witnesses and participants rang-
ing from an American soldier who went to battle in his formal dancing pumps, to 
British admiral Cockburn, who couldn’t resist taunting the people he vanquished, 
to Dolley Madison, who kept up a running letter to her sister even as she ordered 
dinner as usual and packed up the silver (and George Washington’s portrait), just 
in case. Throughout the narration Sutcliffe keeps a keen eye open for those details 
that convey the terror of an attack, and she reminds readers how coverage of such 
an event might play out today: “Admiral Cockburn might have called a press 
conference aboard his flagship, the Albion. There might have been . . . a banner 
proclaiming ‘Mission Accomplished.’” With a gallery of well-selected images, source 
notes, bibliography, index, and illustration credits which supplement the captions, 
this account will be a first-rate addition to the American History collection.  EB
telgemeieR, RAinA Sisters; written and illus. by Raina Telgemeier. Graphix/
Scholastic, 2014 [208p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-54059-9 $24.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-545-54060-5 $10.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-54066-7 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7
At four years old, Raina wanted a new sister, badly—and then she got one. Now 
she’s fourteen, and she and Amara still fight frequently; while they occasionally 
establish common ground, such as their mutual mixed feelings about the arrival 
of their little brother, more often they bicker over colored pencils, pet snakes, and 
punch bugs—a real problem when the girls, their brother, and their mom take a 
road trip from San Francisco to Colorado for a family reunion. That journey is 
the anchor for this graphic novel memoir, which flashes back through the girls’ 
relationship, contentious from its earliest days. Telgemeier clearly remembers how 
it feels to be fourteen, as well as how it feels to have and be a sister, and she adeptly 
relays those emotions and experience though accessible dialogue and expressive 
depiction of characters. While the artwork breaks no new ground, the approachable 
style Telgemeier used in Smile (BCCB 3/10) successfully conveys this particular 
chapter in her coming of age, and photos of the real-life Raina and Amara add an 
engaging point of further access. Her streamlined, cartoony style is easygoing and 
flexible, effectively representing time shifts and capturing the rare but important 
moments where the sisters draw on each other for strength: characters grow and 
change but remain recognizable, just like Raina and Amara over the course of their 
road trip. Give this to any kid with siblings and wait for the knowing nods, sighs, 
and laughter to begin.  AA
September 2014 • 71
thomson, Ruth Photos Framed: A Fresh Look at the World’s Most Memorable 
Photographs. Candlewick, 2014 61p
ISBN 978-0-7636-7154-9 $18.99   
R Gr. 3-6
Sidestepping formal exegesis on photographic history and technique, Thomson 
invites readers simply to engage directly with twenty-seven well-known images 
that elicit critical and emotional response. She divides her work into four sec-
tions—portraits, nature, art, and documentary—occasionally inserting a question 
or remark that encourages viewers to see beyond these tidy demarcations. Each 
beautiful reproduction is accompanied by a single facing page that includes title 
and date or work, photographer, two brief paragraphs of background on the image 
and its creator, “Blow Up” and “Zoom In” inset boxes, and a trio of open-ended 
questions to start the wheels turning. The springboard questions laudably avoid 
cookie-cutter formatting, focusing instead on attributes or puzzles unique to a 
particular work. The result is a wide-ranging set of inquiries, from the intellectual 
property concern around Gjon Mili’s photograph of Pablo Picasso creating an 
ephemeral work of illumination, to provocative speculation regarding Ansel Adams’ 
“The Tetons and the Snake River” (“Why do you think this picture was chosen as 
one of the 115 images sent aboard the Voyager spacecraft into outer space?”). The 
final entry, Martin Parr’s “Barcelona,” which features a group of camera-wielding 
tourists bent on documenting their encounter with Gaudí architecture, is a clever 
wrap up, asking “Do you think that taking photographs is the best way to hold on 
to an experience?” Hmmm. How about that selfie? Glossary, index, and, of course, 
photo credits are included.  EB 
venkAtRAmAn, PAdmA A Time to Dance. Paulsen/Penguin, 2014 [320p]
ISBN 978-0-399-25710-0 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 7 up
Veda Venkat has wanted to study traditional Bharatanatyam dance ever since she 
was a young girl. When she’s returning home after winning first place at the regional 
dance competition in Chennai, her vehicle crashes; Veda is caught under the wreck-
age and ultimately ends up having her leg amputated. Though she initially believes 
she has lost the art she loves, she eventually acquires a prosthetic, and a new dance 
teacher helps Veda to use her pain to learn to dance in an entirely new way. This is 
a deftly wrought free-verse exploration of Veda’s physical and emotional suffering 
juxtaposed with her passion for dancing. The novel effectively conveys the depth 
of Veda’s love for her art, making her initial loss of dance emotionally wrenching 
and her return to it triumphant. The language is lilting and rhythmic, especially in 
the descriptions of dance, and the sensory elements evocatively describe the sights 
and sounds of Veda’s rich Indian surroundings. Her existential ponderings, as she 
attempts to figure out and make peace with her new reality, are woven seamlessly 
into the tale, and her moments of jealousy and rage are presented honestly. Heart-
achingly hopeful and beautifully written, this story will remain with readers long 
after the final line of verse.  HM
72 • the bulletin
white, kieRsten In the Shadows; by Kiersten White and Jim De Bartolo; illus. 
by Jim Di Bartolo. Scholastic, 2014 376p
ISBN 978-0-545-56144-0 $21.99   
R Gr. 8-10
In this collaborative effort, White offers a prose novel interspersed with a nearly 
wordless graphic story by Di Bartolo, the two plots sometimes overlapping. The 
events mostly happen in a small town and to five of that town’s young residents, 
though there are hints that the sinister forces working against the kids are plan-
ning larger efforts. Adventure elements abound in the grand declarations, explosive 
scenes, and high stakes, and the prose novel offers an additional touch of young 
romance. Though the scarcity of backstory means the bad guys’ motives (aside from 
survival) aren’t exactly clear, it’s a gorgeous endeavor: White’s wispy narrative hints 
at the (mostly carefully hidden) desperation faced by most of her characters, and Di 
Bartolo’s rich, heavy paintings detail decades of misadventures in thought-provoking 
panels. Indeed, the thick lines, dark notes, and splashes of lives that play out in 
the arresting illustrations complement the intricate, everyday feeling of the prose 
narrative. If readers may leave slightly unsure what the story actually was, there is 
still much to contemplate and some awesome atmospherics to enjoy, and there is 
plenty to warrant a repeat read to continue puzzling it all out.  AS
wilkinson, keRRy Reckoning. St. Martin’s Griffin, 2014 [368p] (The Silver 
Blackthorne Trilogy)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-250-05353-4 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4668-3854-3 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 8-10
Silver knows she has a pretty good chance of being picked for one of the top work 
tiers, and she’s excited about the idea of being selected in the Offering, a process 
whereby teens from different regions are chosen to serve the central king. Chosen she 
is, and she is quickly whisked away to a feast that instantly goes awry when one boy 
is executed for making noise at a bad time. Silver quickly learns that mere survival 
is the absolute best-case scenario in this awful place, and she immediately focuses 
all of her energy on one task: escape. Wilkinson pulls off the merge of technology 
and medieval setting well, offering effective scenes where the two smoothly coex-
ist. Unfortunately, everything else in this novel has been seen before, and plenty 
of times: the central government enacting punishment on the regions by taking 
chosen children, the scrappy, too-smart-for-her-own-good girl who decides she 
must save more than herself, and even the evil despot who chops off heads with 
caricatured verve are all disappointingly hackneyed. Nevertheless, Silver is a cool 
mix of tech genius and boy-crazy teen, and her narrative voice, defiant even as it 
wavers, will likely be the most memorable thing readers take from this novel.  AS
winteR, JeAnette Mr. Cornell’s Dream Boxes; written and illus. by Jeanette 
Winter. Beach Lane/Simon, 2014 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-9900-3 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-9902-7 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 6-9 yrs
American artist Joseph Cornell had a strong affinity for kids and created particularly 
kid-friendly art, so he’s an understandable subject for this picture-book introduction. 
September 2014 • 73
In second-person narration addressed to a hypothetical child, Winter describes that 
child’s view of Cornell’s life and art (“You might have seen Mr. Cornell through that 
window, working in the dim light”), exploring Cornell’s memory-driven creation of 
glass-fronted boxes of found objects reassembled into compelling and idiosyncratic 
scenes. The book quietly evokes Cornell’s unflashy life in his unflashy Queens house, 
focusing on accessible details such as his love of sweets and his inviting local chil-
dren to his exhibitions. That’s not event enough to carry the chronicle on its own, 
however, and the book is less successful at conveying Cornell’s actual art, which 
here seems more like shadowbox craft than surrealist and detailed assemblages. 
Creamy matte pages and vignettes, in Winter’s familiar organically ungeometric, 
flatly textured digital figures, make the theorized child audience and Cornell himself 
appealing and approachable, but it’s difficult to parse or appreciate the particulars 
of his work. A concluding trio of muddy photographs don’t help much, focusing 
as they do on the kids attending Cornell’s exhibition rather than what they’re see-
ing there. Fortunately, the internet is rich with Cornell images in still shots and 
video, so this title might partner with an online exploration of the artist’s work; a 
subsequent art project is practically inevitable. A brief author’s note is appended, 
and a selected bibliography appears on the copyright page.  DS
woodson, JAcqueline Brown Girl Dreaming. Paulsen/Penguin, 2014 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-399-25251-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 7-12
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 3, for review.
yAng, gene luen The Shadow Hero; illus. by Sonny Liew. First Second/Roar-
ing Brook, 2014 158p
ISBN 978-1-59643-697-8 $17.99   
R* Gr. 7-12
Comic-book trivia fans may have heard of the Green Turtle, a superhero from the 
1940s who was only seen with his face blocked or masked because (as the story 
goes) the artist wanted to make him Asian-American but the publisher wouldn’t 
allow it. Yang and Liew here reinvent this character in a brilliant homage that finally 
allows the Green Turtle to get his long overdue face time. Hank just wanted to run 
a Chinatown grocery with his beloved father, but his ambitious mother has much 
bigger dreams for her boy, to the extent that, among other attempts, she exposes 
him to deadly chemicals in the hopes of triggering a superpower. However, it takes 
a horrific tragedy, during which Hank is joined by a shadow spirit, one of four who 
were born in China and who have protected the country for centuries, for him to 
find his abilities. Danger, adventure, a hint of romance, and a strong dose of hard 
justice await—the perfect mix for a superhero comic. The addition of intriguing 
cultural and historical elements, a vulnerable protagonist, and superb use of spac-
ing, color palette, and panel formatting to heighten impact all combine to make 
this an exceptional outing, a graphic novel that echoes the episodic format of the 
comic books that inspired it. A substantial and riveting author’s note breaks down 
the rumors about the original comic book and explains the approach the Yang and 
Liew took in their new look at this old character. Bonus material in the form of a 
sample from the 1940s comic gives readers firsthand material to pore through in 
all its sometimes offensive, sometimes luminous glory—a rare treat indeed.  AS
74 • the bulletin
yum, hyewon The Twins’ Little Sister; written and illus. by Hyewon Yum. Fos-
ter/Farrar, 2014 34p
iSbn 978-0-374-37973-5 $17.99   
R 3-6 yrs
The twins from The Twins’ Blanket (BCCB 10/11) have returned, and they’re still 
not very good at sharing, especially sharing their mother (“We have only one mom. 
This is a big problem”). Now there’s a new little sister, and the twins don’t have 
much mom attention to fight over, so what do they do? Fight about taking care 
of their little sister, of course (“The only problem now is we need another one”). 
It’s refreshing to see a new baby book that focuses on the effect on existing sibling 
dynamics, and the strong-willed twosome, with the text entirely their dialogue, 
continues to be authentically endearing and annoying at the same time. Yum’s il-
lustrations are spare and airy, with casually careful compositions making clear the 
childlike ease of the drafting is a deliberate choice; daubs of warm-toned paint (the 
kids are glowingly rosy-cheeked) gain rhythm from occasional uses of pattern, as 
in the girls’ polka-dotted dresses. Kids similarly afflicted with the requirement to 
share will find kindred spirits in the twins.  DS
CORRECTIONS:
The co-author’s name on Jenna McCarthy’s Maggie Malone and the Mostly Magical 
Boots, reviewed in our July issue, has changed from Olivia Swann to Carolyn Evans.
In our review of Sarah Tregay’s Fan Art, from the same issue, we incorrectly state that 
the protagonist, Jamie, was the creator of the short story that elicited controversy 
in the school literary magazine; in fact, he is the editor of the magazine—not that 
being editor gets him (or any other editor) off the hook.
September 2014 • 75
BLowIng our own horn: whAt we dId thIs summer
CCB director and BCCB editor Deborah Stevenson attended the Children’s Lit-
erature Association Conference in Columbia, South Carolina, June 18-21, where 
she presented her paper, “To See Ourselves: Minority Representation Patterns in 
Contemporary Literature for Youth,” as part of a panel that she also chaired. The 
panel included presentations from BCCB reviewer and Illinois State University 
professor Karen Coats (“The Neglected Protected: Religious Diversity in YA Lit-
erature”) and GSLIS and CCB alum Ayanna Coleman (“Diversity and Inclusion: 
A Publishing Industry Q&A”). Stevenson also attended the American Library 
Association annual conference in Las Vegas, June 26-July 1, where she joined the 
rest of the Scott O’Dell Award committee to celebrate the most recent winner, 
Kirkpatrick Hill, for Bo at Ballard Creek.
Kate McDowell, CCB affiliate and GSLIS interim assistant dean for student af-
fairs and associate professor, gave an invited talk at the International Symposium 
on Library Services for Children and Young Adults in Seoul, South Korea, June 
19–20. McDowell’s presentation, “Exploring the App Gap,” discussed the planning 
phase and early implementation of “Closing the App Gap,” a project funded by 
the Institute of Museum and Library Services, for which she serves as co-PI with 
principal investigator Deborah Stevenson, CCB Director and BCCB editor. In 
collaboration with the Douglass Branch of the Champaign Public Library, the team 
is investigating use of tablets and tablet-based apps in summer reading programs 
for children in underserved populations to help mitigate summer reading setback 
and the lack of access to technology.
Carol Tilley, CCB affiliate and GSLIS assistant professor, shared her expertise in 
comics and comics history in several panels and presentations at Comic-Con Inter-
national in San Diego, CA, July 24–27. Tilley gave talks on her research of Fredric 
Wertham and joined several other experts in discussing the use of graphic novels 
in both libraries and the classroom. She also gave the keynote address at the 2014 
Comics and Medicine Conference at Johns Hopkins University on June 27. Her 
lecture was titled “Private Reading, Public Health: Exploring Psychiatrist Fredric 
Wertham’s Comics Legacy.” Tilley also appeared virtually on a panel, “Comics 
and Censorship,” at Heroes Con in Charlotte, NC, June 20–22. In May, Tilley 
published an article in the Journal of Research on Libraries and Young Adults titled, 
“Comics: A Once-Missed Opportunity.”
Elizabeth Hoiem will join the GSLIS faculty this fall as an assistant professor 
teaching and conducting research in youth services. She also presented her paper, 
“Chartist Children: Rethinking Middle-Class Definitions of Play and Work in 
Early Children’s Literature,” at the Children’s Literature Association Conference 
in Columbia, South Carolina, June 18–21. 
76 • the bulletin
CCB affiliates Georgeann Burch, GSLIS School Library Media Coordinator, and 
Karla Lucht, GSLIS PhD student, led a workshop on “American Literary Resources 
for the Classroom” on June 25 for the Global Institute for Secondary Educators, 
organized by the Center for Global Studies and sponsored by the U.S. Department 
of State, Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs. Burch and Lucht introduced 
a variety of U.S. literature appropriate for social studies, history, and English class-
rooms to secondary teachers from around the world.
CCB Outreach and Communications Coordinator and BCCB reviewer Tad And-
racki co-presented “A Queer Library Alliance for Young People: Using Books with 
LGBTQ Content” with GSLIS alum Rae-Anne Montague at the biennial Confer-
ence on Literature and Hawaii’s Children in Honolulu, June 5–7. 
September 2014 • 77
Abuse–fiction: Connor
Actors and acting: Polacco
Actors and acting–fiction: LaCour
Adoption–stories: Ieronimo
ADVENTURE: Averbeck; Bodeen; 
Colfer; Gratton; Grove; Hale; 
Miller; Sandford; Smith, M.; 
Wilkinson; Yang
Africa–stories: Ieronimo
African Americans: Woodson
African Americans–fiction: Cutler; 
LaMarche
African Americans–stories: Scho-
field-Morrison
Aliens–fiction: North
ALTERNATIVE HISTORY: Colfer
Animals–stories: Hall; Kennedy; 
Johnston; Sherry
Appearance–fiction: Herbach
Arguments–stories: Kaplan
Art: Reynolds
Art and artists: Reef; Thomson; 
Winter
Art and artists–fiction: Daly
Asian Americans–fiction: Graff; Yang
Babies–stories: Blackall; Yum
Bears–stories: Becker, B.
BEDTIME STORIES: Rosen 
Behavior–stories: Shea
Bicycles–fiction: Renn
BIOGRAPHIES: Grün; Krull; Mc-
Cully; Polacco; Reef; Telgemeier; 
Winter; Woodson
Biology: Davies
Birds–stories: Portis
Boarding school–fiction: Mulligan
Boats–fiction: Bodeen
Books and reading–fiction: Dal-
rymple
Books and reading–stories: Becker, 
B.; Kaplan; Chung 
Brothers–fiction: Levy; Petruck
Bullying–fiction: Greene
Castles–stories: Becker, A.
Cats–fiction: McCormick
Cats–stories: Gall
Child labor–fiction: Nelson
Cold War–fiction: Blakemore 
Communication–fiction: McCahan
Communication–stories: Portis 
Cowboys–fiction: DiCamillo
Cows–stories: Esbaum
Crafts: Winter 
Crime and criminals–fiction: Ander-
son, Jodi; Anderson, John; Grove; 
Herbach; Miller; Olin; Sloan
Dancers and dance–fiction: Venka-
traman
Death–fiction: DeWoskin; Longo; 
Neal; Peters
Detectives–stories: Grey
Dinosaurs–stories: O’Connor; Shea
Disabilities–fiction: DeWoskin; Mc-
Govern; Reilly; Venkatraman
Divorce–fiction: Daly
Dogs: Bausum; Castaldo
Dogs–fiction: Newgarden
Dogs–stories: DiPucchio; Murray; 
Gall; Jordan-Fenton; Sandford; 
Stein
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
78 • the bulletin
Dolls–fiction: Ruby
Dystopias–fiction: Dalrymple; How-
son; Powell; Reilly
Ecology: Kutner
Ecology–fiction: Mackey
Economics: Jenkins 
Ecuador–fiction: Renn
Elephants: Perepeczko
Emotions–stories: Browne
Engineering: Davis; Green
Environmental studies: Kutner
ESP–fiction: Howson
Ethics and values: Herbach; Powell
Fairies–fiction: Golden
Faith–fiction: LaMarche; Shirley
Families: Woodson 
Families–fiction: Bodeen; Connor; 
Daly; Levy; Lindelauf; Little; 
Longo; McCahan; McCormick; 
Paulsen; Petruck
Families–stories: Bently; Blackall; 
DiPucchio
FANTASY: Becker, A.; Chapman; 
Golden; Gratton; Grove; Jones; 
Little; Lough; Mackey; Magaziner; 
McGann; Smith, M.; Stiefvater; 
White; Wilkinson
Fathers–fiction: Anderson, John; Shir-
ley; Sloan; Sovern
Fear–stories: Browne; Esbaum
Films and filmmakers–fiction: Aver-
beck
Films and filmmakers–stories: Morris
FOLK-LIKE TALES: Raschka
FOLKTALES AND FAIRY TALES: 
Perl
Food and eating–stories: Raschka
Foster care–fiction: Mallory
Friends–fiction: Allen; Carter; De-
Woskin; Gravel; Hilmo; Hilton; 
Magaziner; Matson; Mulligan; 
Schanen; Sloan; St. Antoine
Friends–stories: Becker, B.; Burning-
ham; Sherry 
Ghosts–fiction: Anderson, Jodi; 
Mackey; Ruby
Gifted children–fiction: Graff; Mc-
Cahan
GLBTQ people–fiction: Carter; 
Katcher; LaCour; Levy; Peters; 
Shirley
Grandparents–fiction: Holm  
Fourteenth; St. Antoine
GRAPHIC NOVELS: Carroll; Dal-
rymple; Holm Comics; Smith, M.; 
Telgemeier; White; Yang
Grief–fiction: Hilton; Kenneally; 
Longo; Peters
Guatemala: Kutner
Halloween–stories: Muncaster 
HISTORICAL FICTION: Averbeck; 
Blakemore; Cutler; Lindelauf; 
Mackall; Nelson; Snyder; Sovern
History, U.S.: Davis; Nelson; Sut-
cliffe; Woodson
History, world: Bausum; Fleming; 
Jenkins; Krull; Reef; Smith, D.; 
Thomson
Homes–stories: Sherry
HORROR: Bachmann; Carroll;  
Chabert; McCreely
Horses–fiction: DiCamillo
Hugs–stories: Campbell
HUMOR: Bently; Blackall; Bloom; 
Brown; Campbell; Chabert; 
Chung; DiCamillo; DiPucchio; 
Esbaum; Gall; Gravel; Hall; Hilmo; 
Holm Comics; Holm Fourteenth; 
Kaplan; Kennedy; Levy; McCor-
mick; McCreely; McGann; Mil-
way; Morris; Mulligan; Muncaster; 
Newgarden; O’Connor; Paulsen; 
Perl; Portis; Richards; Rosen; Scie- 
szka; Scott; Smith, M.; Stein
Identity–fiction: Carter; Graff; Gravel; 
Johnson; Leno; Schanen
Identity–stories: Jordan-Fenton 
Illness–fiction: Sovern
Immigrants–stories: Snyder
India–fiction: Venkatraman
Inuit–stories: Jordan-Fenton
Ireland–fiction: Golden
Jealousy–stories: Yum
Jews–fiction: Cutler; LaMarche
Jews–stories: Snyder
Journalism: McCully
Journalism–fiction: Katcher
Korean Americans–fiction: Graff
September 2014 • 79
LEGENDS: Grün
Magic–fiction: Chapman; Jones; 
Lough; McGann
Maps–fiction: Grove
Mathematics: Smith, D.
Mental illness–fiction: Leno; McGov-
ern; Moulton
Mice–fiction: Reynolds
Mice–stories: Becker, B.; Grey; Rudy
Microbes: Davies
Mining–fiction: Nelson
Money: Jenkins
Monkeys–stories: Bloom
Monsters–stories: Richards
Moose–stories: Morris
Mothers–fiction: Moulton
Mothers–stories: Muncaster
Movies–fiction: Fiore
Music: Schofield-Morrison
MYSTERIES: Anderson, Jodi; Aver-
beck; Blakemore; Grey; Katcher; 
Leno; Neal; Renn; St. Antoine
Mythology, Celtic: Golden
Mythology, classical: Scott
Mythology, Norse: Gratton
Native Americans–fiction: Fichera
Nature study: Castaldo; Johnston; 
Perepeczko
Ninjas–stories: Chung
NURSERY RHYMES: Murray
Orphans–fiction: Hale; Mallory
Parties–stories: Browne 
Pets–fiction: McCreely
Pets–stories: O’Connor; Rudy
Photography: Thomson
Picnics–stories: Burningham
Pigs–fiction: Milway
POP-UP BOOKS: Green
Problem solving–stories: Bloom
Race relations–stories: Jordan-Fenton 
Racism–fiction: Cutler
Ranches–fiction: Hilmo
Readers theater: Portis
Reading aloud: Bachmann; DiCa-
millo; Levy; Milway; Schanen
Reading, beginning: Kennedy
Reading, easy: Chabert; DiCamillo; 
Greene; Rudy
Reading, reluctant: Castaldo; Gravel; 
Katcher; Newgarden
Relationships–fiction: Allen; Barn-
holdt; Connor; Hilmo; Johnson; 
McCahan; McGovern; Neal; 
Paulsen; Sloan
Religious studies: Grün
RHYMING STORIES: Bently; Ken-
nedy; Murray
Robots–fiction: Powell; Scieszka
Romance: Snyder
Romance–fiction: Anderson, Jodi; 
Barnholdt; Fichera; Fiore; Kenneal-
ly; LaCour; LaMarche; Mallory; 
Matson; North; Olin; Peters; Scott; 
Stiefvater
Royalty: Fleming
Royalty–fiction: Reilly; Wilkinson
Running–fiction: Kenneally
Russia: Fleming
Saints: Grün
School–fiction: Greene; Chabert; 
Chapman; DeWoskin; Fiore; Graff; 
Herbach; Hilton; Holm Comics; 
Johnson; Payton
School: Kutner
School–stories: Brown; Shea
SCIENCE FICTION: Holm Four-
teenth; Howson; North; Sandford; 
Scieszka
Science: Castaldo; Davies; Holm 
Fourteenth; Reynolds; Smith, D.
Seasons–stories: Johnston 
Secrets–fiction: Lindelauf; Mackall; 
Matson; Petruck
Sex education: Blackall
Sharks–stories: Bloom 
SHORT STORIES: Bachmann; 
Holm Comics
Shyness: Polacco
Sisters: Telgemeier
Sisters–fiction: Payton
Soldiers: Bausum; Sutcliffe
Space travel–fiction: North
Spies–fiction: Hale
SPORTS STORIES: Kenneally
Stalkers–fiction: Olin
Storytime: Hall; O’Connor; Perl; 
Raschka; Richards; Schofield-
Morrison
80 • the bulletin
Summer–fiction: Hilmo; Schanen 
Superheroes–fiction: Anderson, John; 
Yang
Superheroes–stories: Rosen
SUPERNATURAL STORIES: Bach-
mann; Carroll; Katcher; Ruby
SURVIVAL STORIES: Bodeen 
Teachers: Polacco
Teachers–stories: Brown 
Time travel–fiction: Colfer; Little
Toys: Fisher 
Treasures–fiction: St. Antoine
Twins–fiction: Howson; Payton; 
Reynolds
Twins–stories: Yum
VERSE NOVELS: Woodson
Video games–fiction: Miller
Voyages and travel: Krull; Telgemeier
Voyages and travel–fiction: Carter; 
Jones; Moulton
Voyages and travel–stories: Becker, A. 
War: Sutcliffe 
War–fiction: Lough
Weddings–fiction: Paulsen
Werewolves–fiction: Stiefvater
Witches–fiction: Chapman; Magaziner
Witches–stories: Muncaster
Women’s studies: McCully 
WORDLESS BOOKS: Newgarden
World cultures: Ieronimo
World War 1: Bausum 
Writers and writing–fiction: Mackall
Zombies–fiction: McCreely
