ILLI 
N 
I S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
U iversity of llinois Press
.r 
A" 
1
__
"A fine melding of text and art."
-School Library Journal
SAINT ALENTINE
Retold and illustrated in full color by
Robert Sabuda
*"Stunning mosaics crafted from marbleized and hand-painted paper depict
this legend of Valentine, a humble Roman physician and 'priest of the
Christians' whose atients include a iailer's blind dauahter....The marbleized
THE
BUvL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
February 1993
Vol. 46 No. 6
A LOOK INSIDE
167 THE BIG PICTURE
Marvin Redpost: Why Pick on Me?, written by Louis Sachar and illustrated
by Neal Hughes
168 NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
168 
* Singer to the Sea God by Vivian Alcock
186 * Sunflakes compiled by Lilian Moore; illus. by Jan Ormerod
187 * Nightjohn by Gary Paulsen
190 * The Elephant's Wrestling Match by Judy Sierra; illus. by Jerry Pinkney
196 * Pet Hamsters by Jerome Wexler
198 PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
199 SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
-s~p
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 54 East Gregory Drive,
Champaign, IL 61820.
STAFF
Betsy Hearne, Editor and Associate Professor, GSLIS (BH)
Roger Sutton, Executive Editor (RS)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Kathryn Jennings, Reviewer (KJ)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS ADVISORY BOARD
Leigh Estabrook, Dean, GSLIS, U. of Illinois. at Urbana-Champaign
Selma K. Richardson, Professor, GSLIS
Richard C. Anderson, Director, Center for the Study of Reading
Jean Osborn, Associate Director, Center for the Study of Reading
P. David Pearson, Dean, College of Education
Violet J. Harris, Assistant Professor, College of Education
Nancy O'Brien, Education Subject Specialist, U of Illinois. Library
Peggy Miller, Associate Professor, Dept. of Speech Communication
Ann D. Carlson, Assistant Professor, GSLIS, Rosary College
Carol Fox, Youth Services Consultant, Illinois State Library
Janice Harrington, Head of Children's Services, Champaign Public Library
Elizabeth Huntoon, Director Systemwide Children's Services, Chicago Public Library
Janie Schomberg, Librarian, Leal Elementary School, Urbana
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $35.00; individuals, $29.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $3.00. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 54 E. Gregory Drive, Champaign, IL 61820.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 54 E. Gregory Drive, Champaign, IL 61820.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Betsy Hearne, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 1512 N. Fremont St., #105,
Chicago, IL 60622
Second-class postage paid at Champaign, Illinois, and additional mailing offices
© 1993 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Neal Hughes, from Marvin Redpost: Why Pick on Me?, © 1993 by Neal
Hughes and used by permission of Random House.
FEBRUARY 1993 
* 
167
THE BIG PICTURE
Marvin Redpost: Why Pick on Me?
written by Louis Sachar; illustrated by Neal Hughes
Easy-readers are too often watered down where they should be pared down, appar-
ently unable to tell a vivid story in simple language; books about grade-school
trauma are frequently cute instead of funny, patting the trivially troubled young-
sters indulgently on the head while winking past them to adults. Louis Sachar, a
consistently talented writer of books for grade-school readers, has circumvented
these pitfalls to produce a tour de force of the genre, a trim tome of energy, hilar-
ity, and wisdom. About nose-picking.
Don't let the subject of-er-digital nasal hygiene put you off; this is a
trenchant and truthful look at grade-school social relations. Third-grader Marvin,
hero of Marvin Redpost: Kidnapped at Birth? (BCCB 10/92), suffers a popularity
plummet when the cheating class bully labels him a nose-picker after losing to
Marvin in a playground game. Marvin's undeserved bad rep spreads as his former
friends refuse to associate with him and even his teacher believes the rumors.
Marvin's original response is ineffective ("The more you say you don't pick your
nose, the more everyone thinks you do!"), but his brilliant solution is to use his
class survey project to ask people if they've ever picked their noses: under the
constraint of truthfulness, everyone-including Marvin's family, his teacher, and
the school principal-everyone but the obviously lying bully admits having picked
his or her nose.
Aside from being resoundingly funny, Sachar has a rare honesty about
what children really encounter in the world, and how unhelpful adults can be.
When Mr. Redpost (generally a better and more original parent than this) says
about the defection of Marvin's buddies, "Well, if that's how they feel, then they're
not really your friends," Marvin justifiably snaps back, "Great. I have no friends."
Marvin's older brother Jacob tells of a classmate, mercilessly teased by all including
Jacob, who finally moved away to what one hopes were better times. Sachar knows
that the kid who comes home saying "Everybody hates me" may be right and may
be doomed. "The kids usually weren't mean to him when they were alone. It was
only when they were in a group," the narration states matter-of-factly, summing
up in a few worlds the bitter anthropological truth that has reduced Marvin's so-
cial life to playing with his four-year-old-sister-when she doesn't have friends
over.
Sachar keeps his kids honest too-Marvin, in the privacy of his room
and without really thinking about it, does actually insert finger into nostril-but
doesn't leave them completely adrift. Mr. and Mrs. Redpost put parenting before
self-image and tell their son the truth: they, like everyone, have picked their noses.
168 
* THE BULLETIN
"Sometimes a tissue just won't get it," explains Mrs. Redpost. "You blow and you
blow, but nothing comes out." And Mr. McCabe, the school principal, wins
prizes for modesty as well as heroism: he never actually appears in the book, but
he's the first faculty member to come clean in Marvin's survey (Marvin's funda-
mentally decent teacher, Mrs. North, owns up after a brief struggle with her teacherly
dignity), which provides a splendid punch line for chapter nine.
Aside from being a terrific book, Why Pick on Me? has some appealing
extra qualities: it's available in paperback at a kid-affordable price, it's a book
about a boy that boys will read (Sachar's always a good bet for those), and the cover
and title are allusive but not specific, and all the funnier once you know. Although
it's not a gross-out book, it'll lure readers of those without upsetting more delicate
constitutions. All manner of readers (adult, too-if you've got the nerve, you
could read it aloud) will laugh. Marvin's plight is distant enough to be safe for
guffaws but close enough to be real, always a good (and difficult) comedic tight-
rope to walk. Leave this one lying prominently around; kids may fear they'll suffer
Marvin's fate if they ask for the book, but it will be an underground classic, an easy
reader that kids are dying to read.
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ALCOCK, VIVIEN 
Singer to the Sea God. Delacorte, 1993 
[20 8 p]
ISBN 0-385-30866-3 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 6-9
With confidently sustained imagination, Alcock develops the story of a young
slave, Phaidon, whose sister is turned to stone when she serves wine at the banquet
where Perseus confronts King Polydectes with the head of Medusa. Phaidon flees
the palace with several other slaves who bond into a family during their survival on
a deserted island and their dangerous voyage to the Greek mainland, where Phaidon
fulfills a prophecy that he will sing a queen back to health. Phaidon's quest to bury
the marble statue of his sister, whom no magic can restore, melds with his love for
a wild girl who claims to have been found in a bear's cave and raised by a pirate (his
own parents had been killed by pirates). Ancient Greek culture-both its majesty
and its cruelty-blooms in Alcock's vivid prose, where action is underscored by
descriptions such as that of the "dark red poppies scattered in the bleached grass
like a hero's blood." This convincing mix of myth, realism, adventure, and char-
acter study turns good literature into a good read-and a good read-aloud. BH
ALEXANDER, SALLY HOBART 
Mom's Best Friend; illus. with photographs by George
Ancona. 
Macmillan, 1992 
4 8p
ISBN 0-02-700393-0 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 2-4
As she did in Mom Can't See Me (BCCB 11/90), Sally Alexander writes from her
FEBRUARY 1993 
* 
169
daughter's point of view; here it's to tell the story of Mom's acquisition of a new
guide dog after the death of old Marit, who was loved by the entire family. The
book depicts Mom learning to work with Ursula at guide-dog school (dog guides
aren't, as a friend of Leslie's thinks, "little machines that zoomed blind people
around"); the family handling the household in Mom's absence; and, after Mom's
return home, the integration of the new canine member into the family ("Like
magic," says Leslie, "I was crazy about this shrimpy new dog"). This book focuses
more on the guide dog's work with her final owner than do Caroline Arnold's A
Guide Dog Puppy Grows Up (BCCB 3/91) and Elizabeth Simpson Smith's A Guide
Dog Goes to School (BCCB 1/88). The dog-training scenes touch on problems
such as trash collection day ("Every twenty feet there's a garbage can reeking of
pizza, hoagies, old cheese") that sighted readers won't have contemplated. Photo-
graphs are clear and informative, picturing everyday life for both sighted and blind
persons as they go about the business of dog- and housework, and Alexander's
lively prose on an appealing subject will keep young readers absorbed. DS
ARNOLD, TEDD 
Green Wilma; written and illus. by Tedd Arnold. 
Dial,
1993 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1314-2 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1313-4 
$13.99 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
"One morning Wilma woke up green, and much to her surprise/ She sat up on her
bed and croaked and started eating flies," begins this cheerfully silly, rhymed story
about a transformation. Froggy Wilma, clearly gleeful at her amphibian state,
splashes through school, encouraging a copy-cat trend (kids splatter green paint on
each other) and tongue-zapping at flies; she finally chases her quarry to a pond,
where she falls in, barely escapes a fish-and wakes up. Unfortunately the confus-
ing ending may bewilder both adults and kids-it seems likeliest that Green Wilma's
whole day is the dream of a young frogette, but neither text nor pictures preclude
the many other waking/dreaming frog/human scenarios that might be behind this
adventure. Bug-eyed Wilma is adorable, however, with rich verdant skin, flyaway
hair, a little button nose, and the loudest wardrobe permitted by law; the pencil
and watercolor art is absurd and action-packed, milking the slapstick for its con-
siderable worth as Wilma sits excitedly atop the bus driver or bounces offoflunch-
room-workers' heads. It's a pity about the feeble finish, because otherwise this is a
lively school-havoc read-aloud likely to keep the tadpoles entertained. DS
AUCH, MARY JANE 
Out ofStep. 
Holiday House, 1992 
12 4 p
ISBN 0-8234-0985-6 
$13.95 
R 
Gr. 5-7
Jeremy is twelve the summer his widowed father remarries, bringing Jeremy and
his little brother a new stepsister named Allie. Allie is exactly Jeremy's age, and the
two kids get signed up for the same soccer team. Much to the family's pride, Allie
soon becomes the star of the team-but one of the few times Jeremy gets to play,
he's crunched by a much bigger member of the opposing team and then throws up
on the referee's Nikes. Having had enough ofAllie's success, Jeremy throws him-
self into competition with his stepsister for his father's attention. Jeremy's pain is
real and described in subtle ways throughout the story-"Dad stood there watch-
ing Allison, bursting with pride. I never saw him look like that over anything I
did. As he sat back down, Dad glanced over at me, but he turned away as if he
didn't know who I was." The momentum and sensitivity of the story are main-
170 * THE BULLETIN
tained through the last chapter, when Jeremy and Dad finally communicate about
the isolating pain each felt when Jeremy's mother died. Apparently it will be a
while before they can discuss the more recent hurt they've caused each other since
the addition of their stepfamily. This is a compelling story, with a complex and
authentic protagonist. KJ
BOICE, TARA 
If You Find a Baby Bird: How To Protect and Care for Wild Baby
Birds; illus. by Marjorie Sagar and Ernest C. Simmons. 
Seawind Publishing,
1992 
36p 
(Educational Ecology)
Paper ed. ISBN 0-9631916-0-8 
$7.95 
R 
Gr. 3-5
"Stop! Before you pick up that tiny bundle, wait a moment." Reliable natural
history books start with a respect for wild animals' needs, and Boice explains why
most fledglings should be left alone and how nestlings can be relocated for their
parents to care for. In case of the necessity for rescue, Boice also makes it clear that
taming is the wrong tack, that warmth is a necessity, and that feeding is a constant
(up to every ten minutes during the day). In general, the how-tos are well pre-
sented, though there's a serious question as to whether the instructions about lo-
cating the pigeon's crop "on the right side of the throat" means the bird's right side
or the right side when the child faces the bird, as shown in the illustration (squirt-
ing the food down the trachea will choke it). Other directions and all formulas are
specifically clear, as are descriptions of the various common species pictured in the
pen-and-ink drawings, which are stiff but accurate. BH
BRESNICK-PERRY, ROSLYN 
LeavingforAmerica; illus. by Mira Reisberg. 
Children's
Book Press, 1992 
32p
ISBN 0-89239-105-7 
$13.95 
R 6-9 yrs
Like Winter's Klara's ourney and Leighton's An Ellis Island Christmas (both BCCB
9/92), this is a story of a little girl's emigration from her European homeland to
America. Bresnick-Perry's book is autobiographical, though, and is devoted to the
departure from her Russian shtetl home rather than to the arrival in America. Im-
minent departure brings a wealth of farewells and shared memories, such as the
time the narrator was conned by her "best and worst friend" Zisl into taking off her
dress and painting the outhouse: "I got a good spanking for that adventure."
Friends teach the girl's mother the essentials of English: "You say 'yes' for yo, 'no'
for neyn and 'okay' for everything else." Reisberg's folksy paintings bordered with
homey details enhance the scrapbook flavor of the story, which is finely focused
and has the poignancy of memory without the haze of nostalgia. The author's
afterword, which states that Zisl, along with many of the author's relatives left
behind in Russia, was killed in the Holocaust, is a sobering footnote to the legend
of America's "Golden Door." RS
CASELEY, JUDITH 
My Father, the Nutcase. Knopf, 1992 
185p
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-93394-8 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-83394-3 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Like the author's first young adult novel, Kisses (BCCB 5/90), this has a prickly,
strong-minded protagonist who is trying to sort out the kind of sexuality she wants
from the kind she doesn't and who is meanwhile caught up in a family crisis-her
father's nearly catatonic depression. Caseley's strength is characterization, and fif-
FEBRUARY 1993 
* 
171
teen-year-old Zoe Cohen's friends and family are developed with precision, con-
sistency, and nuance. The structure of the book typifies the structure of a teenager's
life, revolving around episodes in school, encounters at home, and anticipation of
(and repercussions from) dates. The only dramatic action is her father's sudden
recovery through shock treatments, which may be realistic but leaves one wonder-
ing how an increasingly desperate Zoe would have coped without this happy end-
ing (she also gets the right boyfriend, after an authentically slow and steady growth
of understanding). The voices here, which strike a natural balance between indi-
vidualistic and quintessential, will speak directly to readers, especially adolescent
girls, who will hear themselves thinking throughout the book. BH
CERVANTES, MIGUEL DE 
Don Quixote and Sancho Panza; ad. by Margaret Hodges;
illus. by Stephen Marchesi. 
Scribner's, 1992 
72p
ISBN 0-684-19235-7 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Marchesi's mix of full-color and black-and-white illustrations on canvas offer a
vigorous blend of action and bittersweet portraiture that will go far in helping
contemporary students relate to a classic text (in abridged form). Six chapters
capture famous incidents from Cervantes' novel: the innkeeper's knighting of
Don Quixote; the proverbial tilting of windmills; the unfinished story Sancho tells
to keep Don Quixote from rushing into danger at night; the episode where the
blindfolded knight and squire are tricked into riding a wooden horse, which they
think is flying through the air; Sancho's brief governing of a village he believes to
be an island; and Don Quixote's death. Hodges' introduction may not prepare
young readers for the pathetic-to-bitter range of humor that her adaptation has
captured so well, as both main characters get mercilessly beaten, thumped, and
victimized despite their good hearts and harmless intentions. Inevitably, the ac-
count sometimes becomes summary, but the last three chapters, especially, reach a
depth of detail that is close enough in spirit to the original to exert considerable
power. Better a sensible selection of Cervantes than none at all. BH
CHOCOLATE, DEBORAH M. NEWTON 
My First Kwanzaa Book; illus. by Cal
Massey. 
Cartwheel/Scholastic, 1992 
25p
ISBN 0-590-45762-4 
$10.95 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
For younger children than Porter's Kwanzaa (BCCB 12/91), this is a pleasant
introduction to the holiday, as a young boy describes his family's Kwanzaa activi-
ties: dressing in African clothes, hanging a red, black, and green flag, lighting the
Kwanzaa candles, enjoying the visits and gifts from relatives, and just generally
appreciating the holiday family atmosphere. Like many Christmas and Hanukkah
books, this is more a catalog than a story, but holiday picture books are always
popular, and this one has the advantage of valuable appended pages that, for par-
ents and older children, explain the holiday's history, activities, and symbols.
Massey's paintings are boldly and neatly drawn, but the characters display a mo-
notonous vacuity of expression and sometimes seem posed. RS
CLARKE,J. 
Rijfraff 
Holt, 1992 
106p
ISBN 0-8050-1774-7 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Sophia Throstle is not your average child, nor would she wish to be: "she liked her
stiff, spiky, orange hair, which stuck out in all directions, and she even liked the
172 
* THE BULLETIN
big brown freckles she had over her face, really huge ones, as large as ten-cent
coins." She also likes her forthright personality: "She made remarks about people's
hair and clothes and faces and the way they walked and spoke-and most of all she
talked, on and on and on in her loud, rackety voice." Then she meets shy, middle-
aged writer Theodore Snackle, with whom she develops an odd companionship,
and he suggests she could make a friend of Sam Froggett, a lonely boy with consid-
erable drawing talent in Sophia's class. Sophia is at first skeptical, but after some
help from Theodore and his stories she and Sam finally embark on friendship.
Unfortunately the pace of the book skids to a halt with the inclusion of two fif-
teen-page stories by Theodore that, for all their metaphorical relevance, lack the
appeal of Sophia and Sam's story. Sophia's complete absence of superego makes
her an endearing and wish-fulfilling heroine reminiscent of Pippi Longstocking
and Matilda, and it's rather a shame that she seems to be developing some social
sensitivity toward the end; her friendship with Sam is less interestingly outrageous
than her original nature would suggest. It's still a funny story, with the wild and
slangy humor Clarke displayed in the Al Capsella books (BCCB 7/90), and read-
ers who enjoyed those-or have a taste for wild heroines-will find Sophia worth
knowing. DS
CONOVER, CHRIS 
Sam Panda and the Thunder Dragon; written and illus. by Chris
Conover. 
Farrar, 1992 
32 p
ISBN 0-374-36393-5 $16.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
When "the rackety rain machine that rolls across the sky stopped stone-cold" Thun-
der Dragon comes down to earth to find a way to get it going again. What he
finds, however, is Sam Panda, who, in packing to leave his drought-stricken or-
chard for the city, unwittingly sews Thunder Dragon up in his coat. Sam frees
Thunder Dragon, who promises to grant him three wishes (and immediately for-
gets in his quest for fame and fortune), but finally Sam fixes the rain machine and
returns home, apparently blessed by Thunder Dragon with good fortune for the
rest of his life. There's a nice folk-like tale at the heart of all this, but it's elabo-
rately presented and confusing: the segues from one plot-point to another depend
on illustrative elucidation that is not always forthcoming. The pictures and blocks
of text on most of the pages are framed by delicate and somber landscapes, both
rural and urban, in rainy colors; these in themselves are detail-filled and absorbing,
but they make the pages visually cluttered. Conover's multi-specied cast, espe-
cially the non-humans, have real charm in their precise lines and gentle wash col-
ors. Despite the overall lack of cohesion, kids will enjoy the high points, such as
the hunt-the-details possibilities in the busy urban scenes and the jokes about
Thunder Dragon's meteoric rise to stardom (newspapers featuring his latest ex-
ploits float across the pages), in this Chinese-flavored version of the old genie
story. A board game that has little to do with the plot inexplicably appears on the
endpapers. DS
COOPER, KAY 
Why Do You Speak as You Do?: A Guide to World Languages; illus.
by Brandon Kruse. 
Walker, 1992 
6 6 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8165-9 
$14.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8164-0 
$13.95 
M 
Gr. 4-7
Addressing the origin of language itself, language families, dialects and accents,
and borrowings, Cooper attempts to give an overview of the "system of vocal
FEBRUARY 1993 
* 
173
sounds you use to communicate to people." She moves from language in general
to the history of English and its dialects, then devotes one chapter to hints on
learning another language and two more to brief descriptions of other world lan-
guages a reader might encounter. Unfortunately, her descriptions are sketchy and
confusing and her examples are inane and unclear ("Do you go to skOOuuhl 
You
call western Texas home"; or "When you hear the sound eye in English, you think
right away of two round objects that allow you to see"). Statistics invoked never
differentiate between native and non-native speakers of a language (when Cooper
says that in India "5 percent of the people speak English" does she mean as their
native tongue?). Important language terms such as "creole," "pidgin," and "dia-
lect" aren't well explained, which is particularly unfortunate as they begin to seem
like linguistic merit rankings. Some informational statements are doubtful as well
("In English, only one adjective has had two forms-blonde and blond4" when
other French borrowings have had similar variants). It's a pity, because there's a
wealth of fascination in language, at which we get occasional glimpses here (for a
good examination of our language, its history, and its borrowings, see Janet
Klausner's Talk about English, BCCB 1/91). A glossary and index is included, but
there are no source notes or bibliography; slickly droll black-and-white art appears
periodically. DS
DAVOL, 
MARGUERITE W. 
The Heart of the Wood; illus. by Sheila
Hamanaka. 
Simon, 1992 
34p
ISBN 0-671-74778-9 
$14.00 
R 
3-7 yrs
What makes this picture book successful is the merging of a subject-singing and
dancing-with a style that sings and dances. Echoing the cumulative cadence of
the old nursery rhyme, "This Is the House That Jack Built," the text builds on
more lyrical rhythms: "This is the tree, the sycamore tree, that grows in the Winderly
Woods./ This is the mockingbird perched in the tree that grows in the Winderly
Woods./ This is the song, so wild and free, sung by the mockingbird perched in
the tree that grows in the Winderly Woods." From woodcutter ("sunburned and
lean"), ax ("sharpened and keen"), tree ("toppled and still"), and sawmill ("noisy
and shrill"), to woodcarver, fiddle, fiddler, and music, the poem reels in a pace well
partnered by the jubilantly swirling, autumn-radiant paintings. Bark paper has
absorbed the artist's brush strokes and softened the glare of the reds and oranges
without diminishing their hue, resulting in impressionistic contrast that heightens
the effect of movements from slow to fast to slow again. The magic cycle of wood
turned music makes a rich theme, and the characters-an Asian woodcutter, a
black woodcarver, a white fiddler-make a subtly blended cast against the golden
browns and deep browns dominating the scenes. Where truth and beauty meet,
children will tap their feet. BH
DOYLE, DEBRA 
Knight's Wyrd;by Debra Doyle and James D. Macdonald. 
Yolen/
Harcourt, 1992 
209p
ISBN 0-15-200764-4 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Eighteen-year-old Sir Will Odosson seems to have everything a young knight would
want: a position with Duke Anlac, loyal companions, a beautiful betrothed, and
regular success at tournaments. Things are too good to last, however. On the
night before he is sworn into the Duke's service, Will learns his "wyrd" (fate) from
the wizard, Master Finn: "You can take up the sword and be Sir William Odosson
174 
* THE BULLETIN
all your life long-but you'll meet death before any other title comes to you."
True to his heroic nature, Will doesn't use caution to stay out of danger and avoid
his wyrd; he even seems to seek it out. When his loyal companions and his fight-
ing prowess are the only weapons he has left, Will and his friends go after a mad,
man-eating ogre. Folkloric elements with a Celtic flavor appear throughout the
story, especially when Will has a mystical journey through a magically time-locked
world while he searches for the ogre's life, which has been well-hidden far away
from his body in an egg. The folklore is woven well into the story, but some of the
plot devices are less effective. For example, the political reasons Will loses the
duke's favor are contrived, and Will's loyal companions don't have individual per-
sonalities but come across as faceless drinking/fighting buddies. On the other
hand, there are distinct surprises: when Will finally does meet Lord Death, it is
not how he imagined it would be. Will's wyrd foreshadows a bloody sequel when
Lord Death promises "you and I ride close together, Will Odosson; the ogre will
not be the last to look on you and see my face." KJ
ENDE, MICHAEL 
The Night of Wishes, or the Satanarchaeolidealcohellish Notion
Potion; tr. from the German by Heike Schwarzbauer and Rick Takvorian; illus. by
Regina Kehn. 
Farrar, 1992 
218p
ISBN 0-374-19594-3 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
This whimsical fantasy takes place within a seven-hour period, enumerated in 10
to 20-minute intervals throughout the story. Time is up for Beelzebub Preposteror,
the Shadow Sorcery Minister, who has made a deal with "His Hellish
Excellency... the Minister of Pitch Darkness Himself." In exchange for "ex-
traordinary powers," Beelzebub is expected to wreak environmental chaos on the
earth, destroying animals, rivers, trees, climate, and humans-and he has not met
his quota for the year. It is New Year's Eve, and Beelzebub has to do some serious
damage before midnight or the devil will foreclose on his soul. Into the scenario
enter Beelzebub's eccentric Aunt Tyrannia Vampirella and their familiars, a cat
and a raven. While the threat of environmental destruction is truly evil, the use of
the two familiars as spies for the High Council of Animals is a bit cloying and
contrived. 
Ende's cleverness sometimes goes too far, with the name
("Satanarchaeolidealcohellish") and contents of a potion, and again when he men-
tions his more famous title The Neverending Story, in a short list of library books.
His wordplay, when noticeable, is usually funny, but while the malevolence holds
the story together, the whimsy almost dissolves it. KJ
FENNIMORE, FLORA 
The Art of the Handmade Book: Designing, Decorating, and
Binding One-of-a-KindBooks. Chicago Review Press, 1992 
99p 
illus. and with
photographs
Paper ed. ISBN 1-55652-146-4 $11.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7 up
For students and artists interested in producing handmade books, this gives a lot
of useful advice. Although the text begins with a short history of books, most of it
is devoted to simple bookmaking techniques. The author shows how to make a
variety of books out of common materials such as cardboard, butcher paper and
glue, and includes many binding methods, including soft cover and soft spine,
hard cover and hard spine, binding with signatures, and scroll books. Unfortu-
nately, an effort to be thorough results in redundancy, so that the beginning steps
FEBRUARY 1993 
* 
175
of binding and covering are repeated in each section, several times in a single chap-
ter. Most of the directions are clear enough to follow, but the section on making
pop-up books is confusing. For example, the phrase "Cut a slit 1/4 inch wide and
1 1/4 inch deep" should say "Cut two slits 1/4 inch long and 1 1/4 inches apart."
(The discrepancy can be cleared up by examining the accompanying drawings.)
In most cases, the many simple line drawings are useful in defining further the
written steps, but the few photographs are amateurish and taken from odd per-
spectives, so that readers will feel they aren't quite seeing everything that's there,
and the presence of the unusual black-and-white prints scattered throughout the
book isn't explained until the last chapter. Overall, though, this book gives the
novice bookmaker a sound background from which to springboard into more cre-
ative projects. KJ
FoRAN, JAMES D. 
Becca's Story. 
Scribner's, 1992 
180p
ISBN 0-684-19332-9 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Based on letters and a diary kept by one of the author's ancestors from 1859 to
1866, this is the story of a girl whose two suitors volunteer for Michigan's Seventh
Regiment to fight during the Civil War. Where Forman develops the complex
dynamics among the three young people, who have grown up together in a small
town and who sustain a genuine affection for one another, the book comes alive.
Becca's resentment over losing her true love at Gettysburg overshadows any sense
of what he died for, but she consoles herself with a second-best love who survives
two terrible wounds and who, from the sound of things, is a more promising
candidate for a steady life together. Unfortunately, the informational properties of
the primary sources and background material often seem at war with the plot, as
when the main characters' experiences of a battle or home situation are interrupted
by generalized descriptions of the war's progress, slowing the pace considerably, or
when random events drop suddenly into and out of the main narrative. We hear
in one sentence that Becca has seen Tom Thumb, and in the next that General
Burnside has moved his grumbling army south; neither situation is fictionally real-
ized, and such incidents are multiplied to the point of becoming distracting facts.
Despite the problematic focus, however, the characters' own words (in the form of
quoted passages) are often vivid and reveal a firsthand glimpse of ordinary people
caught up in forces beyond their control or understanding. BH
GABLER, MIRKO 
The Alphabet Soup; written and illus. by Mirko Gabler. 
Holt,
1992 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-2049-7 
$14.95 
R Gr. 2-4
Assigned by their teacher to make a bowl of alphabet soup, monster twins Gurgla
and Blog, along with their witch-mother, get right down to work: ants, bagworm,
crunchy crabs, dandruff... "'How about an EARWIG!' suggested their mother.
A whole flock of earwigs lived between her toes, and splash! into the pot they
went." Unfortunately, a curious humanoid schoolmate, Zach, has followed the
twins home, and it takes him all of twenty-five letters to discover the final ingredi-
ent. He survives but is basically beside the point in any case: what kids will love
about this book is the disgusting catalog of soup mixings, and happy cries of eeuwww
will punctuate your story hour. Impulsively scrawled crayon-and-wash illustra-
tions have a gleeful flair; the family is a manic, fast-moving, greenfaced trio; slurps
and splashes and stinky gases percolate across the pages. RS
176 
* THE BULLETIN
GEISERT, ARTHUR 
Pigs from 1 to 10; written and illus. by Arthur
Geisert. 
Houghton, 1992 
32p
ISBN 0-395-58519-8 
$14.95 
R Gr. 1-3
Geisert's inventive pigs are at it again (see Pigs from A to Z, BCCB 2/87), here
building a bridge to, well, a "lost place with huge stone configurations." Why?
Who knows? In any case, the story is simply a contrivance to link the artist's
double-spread etchings of tiny, diligent piglets so absorbed in their project that
they don't notice all the little numbers, zero through nine, hidden in the crabbed,
gloomy landscapes that fill each picture. As with A to Z, readers will have to look
sharp for the numbers craftily lined into clouds, cliffs and the baroque machinery
these pigs are so fond of; other numbers are left casually lying around where any-
one might stumble over them. The tone and texture of the book are a little too
sophisticated and monochromatic for those in actual need of a counting book, but
older kids will enjoy the hunt-and the bonus game of finding each of the ten pigs
in every picture. RS
GOLDBERG, WHOOPI 
Alice; illus. by John Rocco. 
Bantam, 1992 
48p
ISBN 0-553-08990-0 
$15.00 
M 
Gr. 2-4
While this Alice has a white rabbit, a mad hatter, and a couple of seriously scary
queens, it's hardly the Lewis Carroll story followed more closely in Sheppard's
Aliti in Dreamlanad reviewed below. Interestingly, and perhaps tellingly, Goldberg's
Alice parts company from her nineteenth-century predecessor not because of her
urban hipness (though there's plenty of that) but because of her earnest didacti-
cism. Alice figures that money will buy her anything she wants. With the help of
her faithful friends Salvador the invisible rabbit ("who sounded a lot like that actor
Robert De Niro"-how cute) and top-hatted Robin, Alice learns what Judy
Garland's Dorothy could have told her all along (and probably did): "Everything
she really wanted had been with her the whole time." We've learned that preach-
ing is part of the package when celebrities write for kids; at least Goldberg is a
smoother stylist than most. John Rocco's paintings are agreeably groovy and even
more agreeably drawn; unfortunately, an excess of shadow and airbrush effects
dims the wit of the linework. RS
GREEN, CONNIE JORDAN 
Emmy. 
McElderry, 1992 
152p
ISBN 0-689-50556-6 
$13.95 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Eleven-year-old Emmy and her large family live in a Kentucky coal mining town,
where her Pa has recently lost an arm and injured a leg in a mining accident.
While Pa lies depressed in the bedroom, Ma and the rest of the family make a
living by feeding daily boarders. As the family's luck goes from bad to worse,
Emmy, who is a middle child and feels the heavy responsibility of being the oldest
girl, wishes she had her brother Everett's gift to make life exciting. A feeling of lost
childhood permeates the story; both the children and Ma use up their emotional
strength on Pa. Although the book focuses on Emmy, Pa's mood swings and
outbursts make him the true central character, and his gradual good progress is
believable. The family's poverty and mutual loyalty sometimes border on the
melodramatic ("I ain't gonna let them take my son and do the same thing to
him"), but the author maintains realism by giving the family some happiness with-
out a trite ending. A good fit for the thoughtful, sophisticated reader. KJ
FEBRUARY 1993 
* 
177
GRIFFIN, PENI R. 
The Treasure Bird. McElderry, 1992 
136p
ISBN 0-689-50554-X 
$13.95 
R Gr. 4-6
When Jessy's stepmother inherits her great-uncle's old Texas farm, the whole fam-
ily-ten-year-old Jessy, her older stepbrother Matt, and Jessy's father and step-
mother-move down to San Antonio for the summer. The old man has also
willed his talking parrot to Matt and some old samplers to Jessy, and the kids begin
to think that the samplers and Goldie the parrot are providing clues to the location
of an old family treasure. The treasure hunt, with Jessy, Matt, and Matt's new
friend Curtis clambering along dry creekbeds and crawling into caves as they try to
decode Goldie's cryptic utterances, takes on new importance as the pursued loot
becomes the family's only hope of staying, as they want to, in San Antonio. Jessy
is a credibly smart and stubborn child, whose speech problem ("She didn't care if
anybody said stuttered instead of speech impediment. She was all for short words")
weaves its way naturally into the story, and the relationship between her and her
older stepbrother is a realistic mixture of kindness and irritation (the unlikely sub-
plot about Jessy's commune-dwelling mother, however, is unnecessary). Griffin's
Texas settings are always atmospheric, and young readers will enjoy the story of
kids triumphantly puzzling out a mystery and saving the family fortunes. DS
HAAS, JESSIE 
Skipping School. Greenwillow, 1992 
181p
ISBN 0-688-10179-8 
$14.00 
R Gr. 7-10
Seeking to avoid the smothering attentions of relatives while nursing Dad through
the last stages of emphysema, Philip's family has moved to a small town in rural
Vermont, but it turns out that their new start brings only isolation. Philip's father,
now permanently linked to an oxygen tank, watches TV and stares out the win-
dow; his mother, accustomed to busy days as a farm wife, compulsively cooks and
does needlework. Philip, fifteen, finds distraction through his job at a local animal
clinic (these scenes, funny and moving, are the best in the book), through soccer,
and through his discovery of an abandoned house, where he brings two kittens
rescued from euthanasia. This is an exploration of a situation rather than a story,
but while the writing is occasionally pretentious, the family's loneliness-espe-
cially for each other-is a convincing and sad dilemma, well-cast against the gray
landscape of a Vermont winter. RS
HALL, LYNN 
Windsong. Scribner's, 1992 
73p
ISBN 0-684-19439-2 
$11.95 
R Gr. 5-8
Marty's life is centered on the greyhound kennel where she spends her spare time
on weekends and after school. Although she's only thirteen, Marty knows she
wants to make a career of dog racing. When the kennel owner gives her a runt
named Windsong, Marty's determination to keep the puppy pits her against her
dysfunctional family. Her mother's secret affair with the local evangelist seems to
Mary like an opportunity to break up the family and get away from her spoiled,
dog-allergic brother. Marty resolves her ethical dilemma (whether or not to tell
Dad about Mom's affair) with developing maturity and insight: "George wouldn't
leave his wife and take up with Mom, and if he did, he'd just be unfaithful to her
like he was being now to his wife." The emergence of Marty's character is believ-
able and well-rounded within the story. Dog devotees will relate to Marty's pas-
sion for Windsong, and they'll get a good story in the bargain. KJ
178 
* THE BULLETIN
HALLIBURTON, WARREN J. 
Africa's Strugglefor Independence. Crestwood House,
1992 
48p 
illus. with photographs 
(Africa Today)
ISBN 0-89686-679-3 
$13.95 
M 
Gr. 5-8
A note on the contents page foreshadows some of the problems with this series
entry: "The images in this book are meant to convey visually the spirit of the
struggle for independence in Africa, and are therefore not captioned." That's empty
rhetoric: how could captioning betray the cause? (The photos are identified in the
back of the book.) Although Halliburton supplies an adequate summation of
Africa's history-rather remarkable, given the book's brevity-the information is
generalized and sometimes obscured by sentimental and sloppy writing. In de-
scribing the slave trade, for example, he says "the heart of the Africans was torn
from them." He also neglects to mention the African complicity in the trade, but
his assessment of problems in contemporary African states is evenhanded (although
the book has little information on North African states). There are no notes or
reading list; an index is appended, as is a frequently inaccurate and badly written
glossary, which defines "subsistence crops," for example, as "crops that are used to
support a small group, such as corn or potatoes." RS
HELFMAN, ELZABETH 
On Being Sarah. Whitman, 1993 
173p
ISBN 0-8075-6068-5 
$11.95 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Sarah is twelve, with cerebral palsy so severe that her movement is confined to one
arm and her communication must take place through a system of symbols affixed
to her wheelchair. She's excited by the prospect of attending a regular school (in a
special education class), eager to get out more, and afraid that her father, worried
about her mother's exhaustion, will send her to an institution. Sarah's viewpoint
is a mixture of maturity and innocence realistic in one who's seen so many of the
pressures of life and so little of the world; the family members are more credibly
drawn than in most medical drama books, with a loving yet jealous sister, an all-
giving mother who depends on being needed by her daughter, and a father who
never has-and probably never really will-come to terms with the daughter who
isn't what he'd hoped for. Helfman, an expert on the Blissymbols system that
Sarah uses to communicate, writes in a somewhat old-fashioned style but deals
well with emotional subtleties. Sarah's small gains-making new friends, having a
successful birthday party-are large enough in her world to give a narrative thrust
to the book, and kids will find this story of someone who shares their desires-but
not their ability to achieve them-involving. DS
HISER, CONSTANCE 
Sixth-Grade Star. Holiday House, 1992 
117p
ISBN 0-8234-0967-8 
$13.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Big and little sisters alike will enjoy this easy read about the intense rivalry between
sixth-grader Jill and her nine-year-old sister Jessica. Jill thinks Jessica, a beauty-
contest pro since babyhood, gets all their (widowed) mother's attention, and, basi-
cally, she's right: Mrs. Armstrong is hard put to display the same enthusiasm for
Jill's landing the part of Auntie Em in the school production of The Wizard of Oz
as she does for Jessica's run at the Little Miss Apple Blossom tide. And Jessica
herself can't resist some needling: "Big deal! That was your wonderful news?
Excuse me if I don't faint." The fight scenes are well done, but they do get repeti-
tive; the story rather too singlemindedly sticks to its theme of the sisters' need to
FEBRUARY 1993 
* 
179
take better care of each other's feelings. After several crises, everything works out,
and the story ends with Jessica and Mrs. Armstrong cheering for Jill's performance
as-no surprises here-Dorothy, a classmate's father's job relocation having handily
accomplished this unlikely but satisfying change of roles. RS
HOPKINS, LEE BENNETT, comp. 
Through Our Eyes: Poems and Pictures about
Growing Up; illus. with photographs by Jeffrey Dunn. 
Little, 1992 
32p
ISBN 0-316-19654-1 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 1-3
What's especially advantageous about this slim but energetic anthology of sixteen
poems is its visual appeal, including attractive color photographs and large print
set into plenty of uncrowded white space. The verses have room to breathe. Chil-
dren are often turned off by the non-narrative format of poetry, but this picture
book, with the surefire popularity of contributors such as Nikki Giovanni, Jack
Prelutsky, Felice Holman, and David McCord, guarantees an audience. All the
poems have appeared elsewhere, but Hopkins' own "City Blockades" exemplifies
the grace, simplicity, and brevity that characterize them and make them worth
repeating: "I feel so small/ standing beneath the tall/ buildings that wall/ me and
the pigeons in/ from the light of the/ sky." Photographs of children from a variety
of ethnic backgrounds are expressively composed and clearly reproduced; the faces
here will reach out to readers even before the words do. BH
INGOGLIA, GINA 
Sacajawea and the Journey to the Pacific: A Historical Novel;
illus. by Charlie Shaw. 
Disney, 1992 
76p 
(American Frontier)
Library ed. ISBN 1-56282-263-2 
$12.89
Paper ed. ISBN 1-56282-262-4 
$2.95 
M 
Gr. 4-6
Disney's American Frontier #7 is an account of Sacajawea's journey with Lewis
and Clark from her home in North Dakota, where she is taken after the Hidatsa
kidnap her from her Shoshone family in Montana and marry her off to a French
trapper, Charbonneau. To the author's credit, there's no romanticizing of the
Native American's relationship with either the leader of the expedition or with
Charbonneau, portrayed as a boastful, excitable man whom Sacajawea accepts as
part of her fate. Unfortunately, the style is wooden and full of anachronisms: "I
really hate pine nut mush," complains Sacajawea's friend-the same one whom
Sacajawea later asks, after years of separation, "Now tell me, Happy Song, what
have you been doing while I was away?" The information may be well researched-
we don't know, since there's no bibliography or specific distinctions made be-
tween fact and fiction in the endnote-but its incorporation into the dialogue is
contrived: "Those rattles," says Charbonneau, after Sacajawea has been given ground
snake rattles to aid her in childbirth. "They really did the trick!" The book turns
Sacajawea's hardships into a personal vision quest, which may or may not have
been likely but is believable in context of the story told here. Occasional pen-and-
ink drawings are competently drawn, though there's a noticeable breakdown when
the text says that Sacajawea's brother, a chief whom she's just thrown her arms
around after long absence (would she display open affection on the formal occa-
sion of a tribal leader's meeting with white men?), turns her around to look at her
baby, who is not on her back in the picture. Biographies of and historical novels
about this subject more or less abound; try Scott O'Dell's Streams to the River,
Rivers to the Sea (BCCB 4/86). BH
180 
* THE BULLETIN
JUSTER, NORTON 
Alberic the Wise; illus. by Leonard Baskin. 
Picture Book Stu-
dio, 1992 
26 p
ISBN 0-88708-243-2 
$16.95 
M 
Gr. 4-6
Originally written in 1965 (according to the copyright date), this is the story of
Alberic, a land-tied peasant whose imagination is fired by a traveler, so he sets
upon a journey to find wonders. First he finds a stained-glass maker and appren-
tices himself to that trade, but he proves talentless; then he learns stonecutting
with the same depressing result; then metalwork, pottery, weaving, and a host of
other pursuits with no luck at all. When, as an old man, his stories of his fruitless
journeying bring him a reputation for wisdom, he is puzzled and unhappy until he
realizes that a) he needs to define himself and b) he needs "the freedom and joy of
not knowing where each new step will take him." The story is in a highly literary
and elaborate-and at times convoluted-style more suited to adults than to chil-
dren, but the real problem is the plot itself. Alberic's wanderings, his stint as wise
man, and his eventual departure don't seem to belong to the same story, particu-
larly since the final epiphany is both ambiguous and banal. The illustrations are
moody and impressive; they're somber and immediate watercolors with a lumi-
nosity that makes them seem like smudgy stained glass. The text is in forbidding
full-page blocks (on an oversized page, to boot) with a slender typeface that makes
the print look even smaller. For older kids interested in richly written fairy tales,
there's better material ranging from Nancy Willard to Isak Dinesen. DS
KAPLOW, ROBERT 
Alessandra in Between. 
HarperCollins, 1992 
[160p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023298-6 $13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023297-8 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-12
In this sequel to Alessandra in Love (BCCB 5/89), Alessandra juggles her passion
for out-of-reach rock star Throb with her crush on the apparently just-as-out-of-
reach junior class fair-haired boy Terrence. Meanwhile, the perfectly decent Barry
keeps hoping for a date for himself with Alessandra. Melissa, Alessandra's best
friend, is back with her own romantic dramas, and both girls are full of advice for
each other: much of the book, in fact, consists of conversations between the two as
recorded by Alessandra in her journal. Plot is not the strong suit here, but the
lengthy repartee about who's going out with whom and why is made fresh and fun
by Alessandra's inexhaustible supply of wit and sarcasm. Here, for example, are
Alessandra's thoughts on love. "People certainly throw that word around. Poor
word. It probably walks around with little crutches and a tiny cast on its arm. The
other emotions sign the cast: 'Get well soon. But not too soon.-Envy.'" She
does get Terrence in the end (andThrob: looks like another sequel), but readers
will probably share the book's implicit assumption that Barry would have been the
better choice. RS
KHERDIAN, DAVID, ad. Feathers and Tails: Animal Fables from Around the World;
illus. by Nonny Hogrogian. 
Philomel, 1992 
[96p]
ISBN 0-399-21876-9 
$19.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Kherdian has peppered this anthology with just enough unusual fables to make it
a worthwhile purchase even for those libraries that have books containing the more
FEBRUARY 1993 
* 
181
common tales ("Anansi Rides Tiger," "The Monkey and the Crocodile," "The
Wolf and the Seven Little Kids"). Most of the twenty-one selections are East
European, African, Asian, and Native American. The termfables is a bit deceptive,
since pourquoi tales, trickster tales, proverbs, and a riddle all find their way into
the pot, but that's all to the good, since fables are often either serious or ironic; the
tone here is varied with open humor, and the adaptation is elegantly low-key.
Hogrogian's modulated colors and rounded animal figures are saved from soft
handsomeness by an occasional sly edge in pose or expression. An endnote de-
scribes the fables' authors, where known, but does not cite sources for the folklore,
which comprises about half the collection. BH
KISLING, LEE The Fool's War. HarperCollins, 1992 
16 6 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-0208376 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-020836-8 
$14.00 
R* 
Gr. 5-8
In the tradition of Natalie Babbitt's The Search for Delicious, Kisling has written a
well-crafted tale, set in the Middle Ages, about a rustic hero named Clemmy. Af-
ter his father dies, fifteen-year-old Clemmy is left in charge of the prosperous fam-
ily farm and his difficult old mother. Clemmy is a capable farmer, but he is not
satisfied doing only that. He rescues the village idiot from his abusive father, asks
a monk to teach him to read Latin, and eventually sets off with his little family to
the city of Mulberia to serve Fernholz. Not only does Clemmy loyally help the
king woo his Lady Libby, but he also bravely works to avert a war with "the Turk"
(Suleiman the Magnificent) that King Fernholz hardly sees coming. The combi-
nation of magic, mixed-up miracles, and historical details brings a genuine medi-
eval flavor to the tale, and the author's short, exact sentences give the story and its
hero wisdom and nobility ("'Will the boy be smarter or less clumsy after you've
beaten him?' Clemmy asked"). Subtle and not-so-subtle humor lighten the seri-
ous threat of war with the Turks--one of Clemmy's friends is tortured by the
Turks by being tickled on the bottom of his feet with a feather, and a desperate
prayer works backwards and turns all the Turks' swords into spoons and their
horses into sheep. Adventure, humor, history, and magic give this book a multi-
faceted appeal. KJ
LASKY, KATHRYN 
Surtsey: The Newest Place on Earth; illus. with photographs by
Christopher G. Knight. 
Hyperion, 1992 
6 4p
Library ed. ISBN 1-56282-301-9 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 1-56282-300-0 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
The (beautiful) cover and title page attributing the photographs to Knight are
somewhat misleading; while he and Lasky did visit and photograph Surtsey, all the
photos documenting Surtsey's eruption (half the photos in the book, including
the cover) were taken by Sigurdur Thorarisson or Sigurgeir J6nasson, who are
credited in small print on the copyright page. All the photos are National Geo-
graphic gorgeous: vast towers of volcanic ash rising out of the sea, a lava flow livid
against the night, mats of sea sandwort grasping the black volcanic soil. Lasky's
text is sometimes pedantic, but more often smooth and informative, sparked by
the apt and occasional simile: "It was through the lava that the island was shaped
and sculpted, that cliffs were formed and black beaches like magician's capes swept
out to sea." Her explanations of the eruption and subsequent geological events of
182 
* THE BULLETIN
the island are laced with strands of Norse stories, a poetic and intriguing synthesis
that reveals the stubborn hold of both science and myth. What's missing here is a
sense of personal engagement: while Lasky and Knight are two of only a hundred
people who have visited Surtsey, they don't tell us what it's like to be there, and
their account feels distanced and a bit cold. An index is appended. RS
LEVIN, BETTY 
Mercy's Mill. Greenwillow, 1992 
241p
ISBN 0-688-11122-X 
$14.00 
Ad Gr. 5-9
Sarah is angry about her family's move to rural Massachusetts, where her mother
and stepfather Roger are refurbishing an old mill as a tourist attraction. Sarah and
Roger don't get along, and there's the added complication of Janey, a younger,
troubled foster child. When she falls into the ice while exploring near the mill,
Sarah is rescued by a teenaged boy who, it eventually is revealed, is a time traveler
from the past, an escaped slave searching for another time traveler, Mercy, from
colonial New England, who is being chased through time by an evil man. Mercy's
story is told in interpolated italicized paragraphs, a confusing device, and Levin's
opening chapters for this timeslip fantasy are somewhat convoluted: between the
problematic relationships of Sarah's family and the intricacies of the time-travel
itself (not to mention the ongoing construction of the mill and dam), there's a lot
to sort out. However, time-fantasy fans tend to enjoy these kinds of machinations,
and the real-life dynamics of Sarah's family make a strong contemporary matrix.
The layering of three time periods is unusual, and after the initial settling in, the
novel's suspense builds steadily and scarily, leading to a strong showdown that
confounds wicked forces from both the past and the present. RS
LINDEN, ANN MARIE 
One Smiling Grandma: A Caribbean Counting Book; illus.
by Lynne Russell. 
Dial, 1992 
25p
ISBN 0-8037-1132-8 
$15.00 
R 
3-5 yrs
This visual invitation to visit the Caribbean also serves as a cozy read-aloud during
which children can count the persons or objects spelled out in the text (unfortu-
nately, numbers are not included). Starting with "one smiling grandma in a rock-
ing chair" and ending with "ten sleepy mongooses," the rhyming couplets follow
an Afro-Caribbean child through an idyllic day until she nods off in her
grandmother's lap. The flashing colors and rounded shapes are as rhythmic as the
sounds, and the large compositions will involve toddlers in both laps and large
groups. There's no cumulative story effect, as there is in some counting books-
Ten, Nine, Eightby Molly Bang, for instance-but the catalogue is an unusual one
that can be voiced for either lulling or lively effects. BH
LIVINGSTON, MYRA COHN 
Let Freedom Ring: A Ballad ofMartin Luther King, Jr.;
illus. by Samuel Byrd. 
Holiday House, 1992 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-0957-0 
$15.95 
M 
6-9 yrs
Livingston tries to pack information along with inspiration into this poetic trib-
ute, which unfortunately opens with a misplaced modifier: "Born in Atlanta on
Sunset Adams Street,/ Daddy taught him dignity. Daddy was a preacher." The
poem is a series of sometimes clunky quatrains (that occasionally bog down in
heptametric excess) punctuated with devotional couplets: 
"From every
mountainside, let freedom ring./ Your road is our road, Martin Luther King."
Often splicing together (and always boldfacing) quotes from King himself,
FEBRUARY 1993 
* 
183
Livingston sometimes gives the impression that King preached in verse: "Mine
eyes have seen the glory [not King to begin with, but never mind]/, The sunlit
path is there. Let us not stay and wallow/ In the valley of despair." Those quotes
are from three different speeches. As well, Byrd's paintings seem an uneasy mix of
reality and artistic interpretation, sometimes looking like copies of photographs
but with occasional awkwardness in the drawing. Together text and pictures are
heartfelt, even adulatory, but Marzollo and Pinkney's Happy Birthday, Martin Luther
King, reviewed below, will communicate itself more readily to children. RS
LONDON, JONATHAN 
The Owl Who Became the Moon; illus. by Ted
Rand. 
Dutton, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-525-45054-8 
$13.99 
R 
3-5 yrs
It's hard to resist a night journey, and here's an alluring one: a "ride on a train/
through a forest/ in the dark/ under the stars/ when the only sound is the sound of
the train/ CHOO-CHOOOO/ except for an owl/ WHOO-WHOOOO." With
the train whistle and the owl call punctuating the rhythmic text, the train climbs
through a snow-covered forest, over bridges across icy streams, and past animals
awake and asleep. While the language sometimes substitutes imagery for sense-
it's not clear, for instance, what is meant by the owl becoming the moon-the
skillful repetition of sounds, dreamy feel, and train setting make this a hypnotic
read-aloud for little ones. The art, mixed-media but primarily watercolor, keeps
mainly to a luminous palette of black, white, and cobalt; the illustrations of the
inky locomotive, silvery puffs of steam (no diesel, this train), and star-studded
night skies keep the nocturnal tone of the words while evoking a frosty open-air
atmosphere of their own. Both adventurous and lulling, this is a bedtime story
that should strike a particular chord with kids who also view nighttime as a hori-
zon to cross. DS
MCGREGOR, MERIDETH 
Cowgirl; written and illus. with photographs by Merideth
McGregor. 
Walker, 1992 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8171-3 
$15.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8170-5 
$14.95 
R Gr. 1-3
A young girl named Casey describes her life with her parents on a Texas ranch.
Mom and Dad are equal partners on the ranch, and Casey works right beside
them, starting at 5:30 a.m. Readers will learn about planting, harvesting, making
hay, and tending horses and cattle. The last third of the book upholds the promise
of the title and shows Casey preparing to barrel race in a rodeo. The full-color
photographs are bright and crisp; unfortunately, the book design is a little intru-
sive, with yellow-parchment text-blocks distracting from the pictures. In general,
however, this is a realistic, informative overview of life on a ranch. KJ
MCKENNA, COLLEEN O'SHAUGHNESSY 
The Brightest Light. Scholastic,
1992 191p
ISBN 0-590-45347-5 
$13.95 
R* 
Gr. 7-12
Kitty Lee's sixteenth summer is fraught with confusion, what with her old friend
Cody asking her to the movies, her father's depression, and her best friend Dottie
wrapped up in a mysterious romance: "Dottie, on a real date? With a twenty-five-
year-old man nobody in town even knew? I shivered then, spooked. Just when
you think you know someone like a book, they go and add another chapter." And
184 
* THE BULLETIN
Kitty Lee herself is adding a few pages, as she spends the summer babysitting the
kids of an attractive older man and his sad, alcoholic wife. Both tone and topic are
something new for author McKenna, best known for her likeable Collette Murphy
series for younger readers. Written with an easy Southern swing reminiscent of
Bobbie Ann Mason, McKenna's portrait of a clear-headed yet vulnerable West
Virginia teenager has subtle strength: Kitty's narration is wholly her own, with the
aims of the author completely subsumed in the protagonist's authentic voice. Teen-
aged girls will enjoy Kitty's sexy-but innocent-moments with Mr. Curtis; even
more, they will love Kitty's first kiss with Cody. The "girl's book" sometimes
seems to have been abandoned as old-hat by young adult fiction, but McKenna
here proves the resilience of the genre with a story that is steadily told, entirely
contemporary, and deeply romantic. RS
MAcLEAN, JOHN When the Mountain Sings. 
Houghton, 1992 
16 8p
ISBN 0-395-59917-2 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Sam, thirteen, enjoys skiing but in no way feels ready for competitive racing. "'I'm
not nervous.' I push my eggs toward the back of my plate. 'I just don't want to
race. I mean eat.'" In this formulaic but likable story, Sam becomes a better and
better skier, gets a spot in the tri-state championships after his best friend breaks
his leg, does quite well, and wins a special trophy as the best thirteen-year-old in
the race. There's lots of ski talk and action, most of which will be clear to those
who don't know the sport. The frosty Berkshire setting and the cozy atmosphere
of Sam's family (an older brother and a mother with a great sense of humor) are
both artlessly evoked. Although Sam's teammates cum competitors are not char-
acterized to any distinguishing degree, the races are suspenseful and Sam, a vulner-
able but determined participant, is easy to cheer for. RS
MADO, MICHIO 
The Animals: Selected Poems; tr. from the Japanese by the Em-
press Michiko of Japan; illus. by Mitsumasa Anno. 
McElderry, 1992 
4 8p
ISBN 0-689-50574-4 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Twenty poems by one of Japan's foremost writers for children (Mado was nomi-
nated by the Japanese section of IBBY for the 1990 Hans Christian Andersen
Award) find a graceful new home in this dual-language book illustrated with taupe
papercut decorations by Anno. The pictures become repetitious, since the same
design appears across the bottom of each double spread, but they provide an el-
egant setting for the text. The poems, in Japanese on the verso and in English on
the recto, are brief and singularly delicate. A good example is "Zebra": "In a cage/
Of his/ Own making." The tone varies, however, with glints of humor, as in "A
Dog Walk," which suggests tying a bell on each of four legs ("ChiRin/ KoRon/
KaRan/ PoRon") to see "Which leg/ Comes after which." Empress Michiko is an
accomplished translator; the book will complement the Japanese studies that in-
creasingly find their way into today's school curricula and will make a fresh con-
trast to the traditional haiku so often represented in western anthologies. BH
MARKO, KATHERINE McGLADE 
Hang Out the Flag. Macmillan, 1992 
160p
ISBN 0-02-762320-3 
$13.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
In this World War II story, Leslie, age eleven, is trying to think of the perfect
FEBRUARY 1993 
* 
185
welcome-home present for her father, who has been completing boot camp for the
Seabees. Her surprise, a huge American flag painted onto a water tower, has a
patriotic flair, and the tone here in general is more nostalgic than is usual in today's
historical fiction about the era. Take, for example, Leslie and a friend's spying on
an old German neighbor: in any other book the kids would learn that the neigh-
bor is just another neighbor, but in this one he's revealed to be a genuine Nazi spy.
"'Whoever called the police,' Mama said, 'did us all a favor."' (The informant was
Leslie.) The book rather too singlemindedly hews to its time and place, with the
narrative threads seeming mainly an excuse to talk about rationing, shortages, vic-
tory gardens and scrap drives. Still, the easy reading and plethora of homey details
would make this a good first step up from the American Girls series and other
formulaic historical fiction. RS
MARZOLLO, JEAN 
Happy Birthday, Martin Luther King; illus. by J. Brian
Pinkney. 
Scholastic, 1993 
[32p]
ISBN 0-590-44065-9 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-9 yrs
As simple and direct as the Livingston book reviewed above is obscure and convo-
luted, this very easy biography of Martin Luther King is distinguished by its suc-
cinct explanations of King's achievements: "Once there was a law in some places
that said that black children and white children couldn't go to school together.
Martin Luther King and other people, including many very brave children, had
this law changed, too. Now black children and white children can go to school
together." Occasionally, there's a tone of talking down to children ("His dream
was that people everywhere would learn to live together without being mean to
one another") but the narrative of King's life is smooth and accessible. Pinkney's
scratchboard paintings are fluidly drawn, warm, and dignified, the restless lines of
the scratchboarding animating and humanizing what could have been (and is, in
Livingston's book) a daunting canonization. RS
MERRIAM, EVE 
The Singing Green: New and Selected Poems for All Seasons; illus.
by Kathleen Collins Howell. 
Morrow, 1992 
102p
ISBN 0-688-11025-8 
$14.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
This is a puzzling collection to assess, since it's hard to determine the ratio of new
poems to "selected" poems already published in books that may be out of print but
still circulating on library shelves (no prior titles are acknowledged). 
"Rainbow
Writing," for instance, is memorable from the 1976 book of that title, but "A Vote
for Vanilla," also an old favorite, is harder to track down. Of the two mentioned
on the jacket as being new-"Grump" and "Gift Wrapping"-both are rather
prosaic compared to Merriam's wittier writing, much of which has been antholo-
gized elsewhere. On the other hand, this cross section does give a strong sense of
the poet's playful sound effects and word juggling. Sometimes both elements are
exaggerated to the point of gimmickry, but more often they're clever: "Ah oneday
come moonday/ come chooseday come whensday/ my hersday my freeday/ my
satyrday SUN!" The black-and-white drawings are decorative if not particularly
inventive. Libraries without the late poet's previous works will find enthusiasts for
this one. BH
186 
* THE BULLETIN
MICKLETHWAIT, LucY 
I Spy: 
An Alphabet In Art. 
Greenwillow,
1992 
57p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-688-11679-5 
$19.00 
R 
Gr. 1-4
A series of twenty-six paintings offers parents and teachers the opportunity to ex-
pand the game of I Spy with some close observation of fine art, which has been
selected from a range of classic and modern work with an eye for what children
will find intriguing. A is easy: the green apple smack in the face of Magritte's Son
ofMan will start things off with a chuckle; and Win Hockney's A Bigger Splash is
a snap. For G, however, kids may have a harder time finding the guinea pigs in
Kessel's Still Life with Fruit and Flowers; and the ink well in Botticelli's Madonna
of the Magnificat, the key in Steen's The World Upside Down, and the yacht in
Seurat's Sunday Afternoon on the Island ofLa Grandejatte (sort of cheating, since
those are really small sailboats) will present a challenge. I personally did not find
the turtles in Savery's The Animals Entering Noah's Ark, but I found a turkey, so
that's okay. The contrasts here are apparent from the examples: the elephants in
an Indian piece (Workmen Building the Palace of Fatehpur Sikrz) come the page
before Picasso's Sitting Woman with a Fish Hat, but since each letter has a double
spread of its own-text facing picture-there's no jarring discontinuity. The book
is expensive, but the art is well reproduced, spaciously set, and rewarding to look
at; the age range is broad; and the book's usefulness makes it durable. Searching
for hidden clues is a great way to introduce masterpieces and get kids to look at
them carefully, and this could well launch an imaginative game in the museum.
BH
MONSON, A. M. 
The Deer Stand. Lothrop, 1992 
171p
ISBN 0-688-11057-6 
$14.00 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Thirteen-year-old Bits is miserable when her family moves from Chicago to rural
Wisconsin. The kids in her small school are reluctant to accept a newcomer,
especially one with three earrings in one ear. Her best friend in Chicago seems
already to have forgotten about her, and lonely Bits starts taking after-school walks
in the woods around her home and is thrilled to see her first deer. After much
perseverance, Bits manages not only to tame the deer so that it eats out of her
hand, but also to make a friend at school. She is surprised to learn about deer
hunting season from her new friend and to realize that she has been taming her
deer around a deer stand-a kind of tree house where the hunters hide from their
prey. Bits works desperately to draw her pet away from the stand and into a pen
she makes to keep him safe during the hunting season. The one-track devotion
Bits has for the deer is believable in a thirteen-year-old, and her friendships, ro-
mance, and enmities develop as tenuously as in real life. Although the situation
occasionally reaches melodramatic proportions, Monson avoids a traditional happy
ending in favor of a realistic one. KJ
MOORE, LILIAN, comp. 
Sunflakes: Poems for Children; illus. by Jan
Ormerod. 
Clarion, 1992 
96p
ISBN 0-395-58833-2 
$18.95 
R* 4-8 yrs
A varied assortment of seventy-six poems bursting with sound and sense, these will
appeal to young children because of their lively tone and their visual setting in
Ormerod's spacious, gracious pictures. A good example is the brooding-blue double
spread with a black cat whose eyes reflect the only white spots on the page; here are
FEBRUARY 1993 
* 
187
clustered three winter poems-"Grandpa Bear's Lullaby" (Jane Yolen), "At Night"
(Aileen Fisher), and "Snow in the East" (Eve Merriam). By contrast, the next
double spread features a light wash on white, with "Magic Story for Falling Asleep"
by Nancy Willard and "Waking" by Lilian Moore, whose several contributions to
the anthology are among its best. That's saying a lot, since her consistent selection
suggests an ear perfectly tuned to lyrical nuance, on the one hand, and children's
sensibilities, on the other. There aren't any surprise contributors here, for those
included are tried and true, but there are plenty of surprises of language and art,
including the mock-fierce door-knocker illustrating Patricia Hubbell's "Granny."
The organization flows organically; the poems seem to group themselves naturally
into sections on bugs, rain, food, etc., each titled with a quote and none seeming
contrived. Aesthetically and poetically, this will serve as a family or classroom
staple. BH
PATENT, DOROTHY HINSHAW 
Nutrition: What's in the Food We Eat; illus. with
photographs by William Mufioz. 
Holiday House, 1992 
40p
ISBN 0-8234-0968-6 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
A no-nonsense text illustrated by full-color photographs explains the function of
food in generating energy, specifying the roles of carbohydrates, protein, fat, vita-
mins, and minerals. In one case the simplification becomes confusing, when a
brief passage about fat causing cholesterol appears above a group picture of fatty
foods including margarine labeled "no cholesterol." Otherwise the information is
clear. The level of the text puts this in reach of primary-grade reports (glossary and
index included), the recipe for soft pretzels will reinforce the idea of healthy snacks,
the food guide pyramid will update those old circular charts, and the examples of
calorie/fat content will serve as a warning contrast of the differences between ice
cream and frozen yogurt, French fries and baked potatoes, etc. There's nothing
new here, and the design is stodgy, but the synthesis is well packaged for a basic
introduction. BH
PAULSEN, GARY 
Nightjohn. Delacorte, 1993 
[80p]
ISBN 0-385-30838-8 
$14.00 
R* Gr. 7 up
Nightjohn is an African-American hero, a slave who escapes and comes back at the
risk of torture and death to teach his people to read. The narrator is twelve-year-
old Sarny, slated by her cruel plantation owner to become a breeder like her mother,
who was sold off long before. But as Sarny waits with apprehension for "the
trouble"-the first menstruation period that will seal her fate-she sneaks into the
last days of her childhood an effort to learn how to read from John, who gets two
of his toes cut off for teaching her. The greatest change is not in the narrator or
John, who both remain steadfast in their determination to pursue reading, but in
Delie, the slave who raises the babies born to breeders and who is stripped, har-
nessed to a buggy, and whipped when she won't tell who has been teaching Sarny.
Delie, who had once prohibited John from teaching Sarny, now expresses her
admiration for him as he escapes again and establishes an underground (literally
and figuratively) school. Paulsen is at his best here: the writing is stark and
bareboned, without stylistic pretensions of any kind. The narrator's voice is strong
and true, the violence real but stylized with an almost mythic tone. In fact, these
are characters of folkloric dimension, idealized in their sheer determination to sur-
vive, or, in the case of the oppressor, villainous in devilish proportion. Because the
188 
* 
THE BULLETIN
story unfolds with the compression of a legend, these figures seem more archetypal
than stereotypical, and the simplicity of the text will make the book ideal for older
reluctant readers who can handle violence but can't or won't handle fancy writing
in long books. Best of all, the metaphor of reading as an act of freedom speaks for
itself through striking action unembroidered by didactic messages. BH
PIERCE, TAMORA 
WildMagic: The Immortals. Karl/Atheneum, 1992 
26 0p
ISBN 0-689-31761-1 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Thirteen-year-old Daine has a knack with animals that her new employer, Onua,
finds exceptional. As Daine and Onua travel across country with a pack of ponies,
Daine's unusual talents for communication with and healing of animals seem to
stem from rare wild magic. Unaware of the power of her gifts, Daine feels awed
when she meets Onua's surrogate family, including Alanna the Lioness, Numair
the Mage, King Jonathan, and Queen Thayet (some of the main characters in the
author's Song of the Lioness quartet). In this book, Pierce, McCaffrey-style, has
taken her imagined community of wizards and female warriors into the first book
of a new series within the same setting. Pierce demonstrates her mastery of fantasy
conventions by presenting several larger-than-life-but-humble characters and a king-
dom-threatening crisis of cataclysmic proportions. Not only are Daine's powers
necessary to save everyone's skins, but she is also a worthy and refreshing addition
to a familiar cast. KJ
PRATHER, RAY 
Fish & Bones. 
HarperCollins, 1992 
257p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-025122-0 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-025121-2 
$14.00 
R 
Gr. 7-10
A midday bank robbery starts this flamboyant YA novel set in the small, swampy
Florida town Sun City; the town is just as much a character as are any of the story's
human characters, a high-profile, mostly African-American group with names such
as Fish, Bones, Toad Man, Long Mose, and the local white bully, Skip. Bones tells
the story, and his narration is attentive if occasionally long-winded. Marked bills
from the robbery keep popping up in the most unlikely pockets (embarrassing
citizens both saintly and scurrilous) and Bones, along with old Toad Man, is deter-
mined to collect the thousand-dollar reward for capture of the thief. Bones is also
determined to win the annual Sun City Regional Rattlesnake Rodeo, and his race
to capture the longest snake before his chief competitor Skip finds one first gives
the book some further focusing suspense. The tone is Southern comic-grotesque,
the characters are distinctly drawn, and while there is really too much going on in
the story, there's an underlying strand of myth (with particular echoes of "Big
Sixteen") that gives depth to the comedy. RS
ROSENBERG, 
MAXINE B. 
Living with a Single Parent. Bradbury,
1992 
113p 
illus. with photos
ISBN 0-02-777915-7 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 5-7
One aspect that distinguishes this book from the others that are conscientiously
included in its bibliography (one listing for children, one for adults) is the empha-
sis on sibling relationships. Rosenberg has interviewed all the children in some of
the families, which reveals several things: how living with a single parent can affect
individuals differently, depending on temperament, gender, and age; how sisters
FEBRUARY 1993 
* 
189
and brothers form different dependence patterns with each other in the absence of
a second parent; and how a family can stay bonded despite financial and emotional
stress. Only-children "speak up" too, as well as two children who live with their
lesbian mother and her two gay friends. The seventeen children interviewed and
pictured here (the black-and-white photos are small and informal) are not all satis-
'fled with their situations, but they are generally coping well and are honest about
what they've been through ("I felt that anyone who had a dad was better than
me"), including, in many cases, embarrassment over telling peers about having
only one parent, despite the fact that 21% of U.S. children live in single-parent
households. Inasmuch as kids can be convinced to pick up self-help books, this
one offers the friendly company, varied in ethnic background, that they may need
so badly. BH
ROSENTHAL, PAUL 
Where on Earth?: A Geografunny Guide to the Globe; illus. by
Marc Rosenthal. 
Knopf, 1992 
106 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-90833-1 
$15.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-679-80833-7 
$11.00 
R 
Gr. 4-8
After a general introduction to the planet ("The International Date Line is not a
telephone number you call to hire an escort for the school dance"), this book
makes fun of each continent in turn, dispensing some remarkably cogent informa-
tion amidst the sometimes stupid, but often pointed, jokes: "Empires are like
umpires. Both tell others what to do." The humor in the many well-drawn, full-
color cartoon illustrations is better-sustained than in the text: "the dense forest"
has trees that say "duh"; Mississippi is a strange creature with four eyes, four "esses",
and two pees. Annoying and adolescent are just a couple of words adults may use to
describe this oversized paperback introduction to geographical literacy, but facts
about names, places, dates, flora, and fauna are accurate, and so are the maps. The
book has an open and sophisticated design that encourages browsing; like Where's
Waldo but with a brain, it's the kind of thing that's useful for study-hall miscre-
ants, a shut-up-and-read book that actually has a chance for success. RS
SACHAR, Louis 
Marvin Redpost: 
Why Pick on Me?; illus. by Neal
Hughes. 
Random House, 1993 
[80p] 
(First Stepping Stone Books)
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-91947-3 
$9.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-679-81947-9 
$2.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 2-4
See this month's Big Picture for review.
SAVIN, MARCIA 
The Moon Bridge. Scholastic, 1992 
232p
ISBN 0-590-45873-6 
$13.95 
R Gr. 5-7
Ruthie's in fifth grade and Pearl Harbor has just been bombed; on the San Fran-
cisco homefront, a Japanese-American classmate, Mitzi Fujimoto, suffers taunts
and threats. Ruthie befriends Mitzi (at the expense of another friendship) and
their bond grows until Mitzi and her family are suddenly interned with the rest of
the local Japanese-American population. The two friends write at first but lose
touch when Mitzi's family is moved to an out-of-state camp; Ruthie continues to
write-but not to mail--occasional letters to her friend until the war's end, when
Mitzi returns to San Francisco and the long-separated friends are reunited. The
190 
* THE BULLETIN
mild new-friends story makes a surprisingly effective backdrop for the more trou-
bling account of everyday people dividing into the haters and the hated. The
reunion at the end is telling: after four years of adolescence, the girls have so
physically and emotionally changed that they hardly recognize each other, and for
Mitzi those four years are lost time. The characterization isn't deep but it has some
realistic turns, with a beloved teacher spitting poison about "the Japs" and grade-
school torment becoming sinister. Readers not up to Houston's Farewell to
Manzanar may find this more mundane fictional account easier going and still
emotionally involving. A historical note about the internments is appended. DS
SCHWARTZ, ALVIN, comp. and ad. 
Stories To Tell a Cat; illus. by Catherine
Huerta. 
HarperCollins, 1992 
72p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-020851-1 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-020850-3 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 2-5
Schwartz has adapted twelve short stories and two poems from folklore about cats,
which Huerta illustrates with competently drawn pencil and wash drawings in
black and white. Some of the selections are familiar, as in "The Cat Came Back"
and "The King of Cats"; "The Make-Believe Cats," about a boy whose drawings
come alive, is an Americanized version of a well-known Japanese folktale with the
same motif. "The Ship's Cat" and others are more unusual, but overall, the retellings
are uneven. While "The Green Chicken" ("It's nota green chicken," thinks the cat
about a talking parrot. "It's a green person!') is tightly written and funny, "Rosie
and Arthur" (about a bad dream) is anticlimactic, and "The Nest" (a variant of
"Belling the Tiger") is meandering. Nevertheless, Schwartz has an easy-to-read
style and the book's format will invite cat-lovers to browse through and pick out
their favorites. The author's notes are, as always, informal and helpful; only the
first title in the bibliography is annotated. BH
SHEPPARD, NANCY, ad. and tr. 
Alitji in Dreamland/Alitjinya Ngura
Tjukurmankunjala; illus. by Donna Leslie. 
Ten Speed Press, 1992 
105p
ISBN 0-89815-478-2 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4 up
Unlike Whoopi Goldberg's Alice, reviewed above, Sheppard's book is a close adap-
tation of Lewis Carroll's story. That is, the events of the narrative are the same,
but both cast and setting have been given an Australian aboriginal translation (as
has the text, with English and Pitjantjatjara versions running side by side). It's an
interesting novelty, with the White Rabbit becoming a White Kangaroo, the Cat-
erpillar a Witchety Grub, and the Mad Hatter a Stockman, but the book and the
conceit inevitably go on for too long, lacking the fusion of language and story that
makes the original so original. For its cultural tidbits, though, and for the illustrator's
often striking deployment of aboriginal motifs in the paintings, the book might
make an offbeat contribution to both literature and social studies classes. RS
SIERRA, JUDY, ad. 
The Elephant's Wrestling Match; illus. by Brian
Pinkney. 
Lodestar, 1992 
32p
ISBN 0-525-67366-0 
$14.00 
R* 
3-7 yrs
"One, two, three, four"-stamping his feet with a mighty roar, the elephant
challenges all the animals to a wrestling match, with monkey relaying the message
far and wide on his talking drum. Leopard loses quickly, crocodile rolls over and
FEBRUARY 1993 
* 
191
is stroked to sleep, rhinoceros falls beneath elephant. But bat, rattling and buzzing
in elephant's ear, brings the giant pachyderm to the ground, whereupon monkey
drums a message of victory and elephant smashes the drum ("That is why,
nowadays,/ You don't see monkeys playing the talking drum"). Sierra's adaptation
of the Bulu tale, which her note says was collected in Cameroon and published in
a 1914 volume of the Journal ofAmerican Folklore, has been skillfully shaped for a
picture book audience, who can focus on the escalating repetition of events as they
occur and echo on the monkey's drum. The drama is simple enough for toddlers
to follow but sturdy enough to hold older kids' attention as well. Brian Pinkney's
scratchboard drawings avoid over-elaboration, contrasting the huge elephant with
a tree diminished by distance in the first double spread, and throughout keeping
the figures monumental in size and monochromatic in hue against a wide blue sky.
The scope of the book, both story and art, will suit a broad range of read-aloud
groups. BH
SINGER, MARILYN 
California Demon. 
Hyperion, 1992 
149p
Library ed. ISBN 1-56282-299-3 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 1-56282-298-5 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 5-7
In a world where magic lies close to the surface of everyday life, Rosie Rivera
accidentally lets a demon (more properly, "impus mischievous") out of a bottle
where it has been safely trapped since 1928. The demon disappears by climbing
into the purchases of a customer of the Riveras' Vermont magic shop and reap-
pears again in California, having been shipped with the presents to the customer's
children. Danny, twelve, and his sister Laura, ten, think the imp is a genie who
will obey their every command. The demon pretends to be submissive, for a while,
but soon his inherent evil nature takes over. The fulfillment of Danny and Laura's
wishes takes on a sinister side they don't intend, and soon they realize that the
demon was never under their control, but instead they are helplessly under his.
Rosie and her mom, Lydia, feel responsible for releasing the demon, so they track
him down. The final confrontation takes place on a California mountainside,
with Rosie and Lydia's witchcraft matched against the imp's powers. Although
the plot has many elements similar to Mahy's The Changeover (the book is even
mentioned as Rosie's favorite), Rosie's initiation as a witch does not seem as des-
perate, nor do Danny and Laura seem to be in as much mortal danger as do Mahy's
characters. The demon, with his wild hair and electric blue eyes, is a comical bad
guy, especially when he is scolded by his mother, The Queen of the Genies,
Ammomgib ("Big momma" spelled backwards). The humor keeps the story buoy-
ant, magic gives it sparkle. KJ
SMITH, ROLAND 
Inside the Zoo Nursery; illus. with photographs by William
Muiioz. 
Cobblehill, 1993 
64p
ISBN 0-525-65084-9 
$15.00 
R Gr. 3-7
Starting with (and periodically returning to) the story of a baby baboon who re-
quires human intervention when she becomes the object of a dangerous primate
custody battle, this book explains the role of a zoo nursery, which raises baby
animals when their parents can't or won't. The book describes feeding practices
(complete with exotic brand names such as Monkey ChowTM ), the important avoid-
ance of imprinting on humans so that animals will still identify with their own
species (note the photo of the condor chick being fed by a condor puppet), and the
192 
* 
THE BULLETIN
reintegration of an animal with its own kind; there's also a chapter comprising
zoo-baby anecdotes about various successfully raised pups, kits, cubs, and chicks.
Stressed throughout is the fact that "the best zoo nursery is an empty one," that it's
always better for animals to be raised by their own species, and that while baby
animals can be enchanting, raising them is not for amateurs. This is a clear and
competent look at a field-trip subject, and both the zoologically inclined and the
simply baby-loving will appreciate a behind-the-scenes encounter. Photographs
of various babies suckling and playing are both informative and appealing (al-
though not always relevantly placed); an index is included. DS
SPIER, PETER 
Peter Spier's Circus!; written and illus. by Peter Spier. 
Doubleday,
1992 
4 6 p
ISBN 0-385-41969-4 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. K-2
Spier here turns his hand to that most child-appealing of events: a circus. He
depicts the caravan's arrival at the grounds, the creation of the "circus village" and
the Big Top, and the various human and animal components of circus work ("This
is where the Laszlos live. They are Hungarian jugglers from Budapest. Mr. Uzelli
from Naples, Italy, is one of the clowns. His wife sells tickets"). After the preparation
the performance takes place, with clowns, acrobats, animal acts, and everything
else a fully-stocked circus would possess; then the audience leaves, the place gets
cleaned up, and the circus is gone again. The square oversized pages are filled with
packed and detailed line-and-watercolor pictures of circus life; when combined
with a six-picture per page composition, as it sometimes is, the detail can be
overwhelming, particularly as there's not much variation in the line-driven, people-
packed compositions (when a contrasting illustration appears, such as the
predominantly blue, sky-gazing picture of the trapeze artists, it really stands out).
Circuses are crowded places, however, and a one-on-one booksharing may produce
some pleasurable hunts for interesting extras such as the unicyclists or the bison.
The act-by-act account sometimes seems catalogued, but the frenetic life of the
international cast is well captured, and kids will enjoy getting a chance to examine
at leisure a spectacular that in real life just whizzes by. DS
ST. GEORGE, JUDITH 
Dear Dr. Bell ... 
Your Friend, Helen Keller. 
Putnam,
1992 
96 p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-399-22337-1 
$15.95 
R Gr. 5-8
It's good to have a biography of Helen Keller that links her to someone other than
Anne Sullivan. Alexander Graham Bell was already famous as the inventor of the
telephone when he met six-year-old Helen, but St. George shows that his interest
in helping the deaf communicate was more important to him than his public achieve-
ments. It was Bell who suggested to Helen's parents that they obtain a teacher for
her from the Perkins Institute; later, Bell would help Helen adjust to an extremely
public life. This is a candid portrait of both Keller and Bell, and St. George is
particularly revealing of the frustrations each felt with celebrity. Keller, whose
interests were wide-ranging, felt straitjacketed in public appearances: 
"I found
myself utterly confined to one subject-myself, and it was not long before I had
exhausted it." Bell could empathize: "One would think I had never done any-
thing worthwhile but the telephone." While interest in Keller will probably be
what draws most kids to this book, they will find tandem biographies that bring a
new context to two legendary subjects. Photos of the principals, along with other
FEBRUARY 1993 
* 
193
period pictures (including a poster of Keller's hand demonstrating the Manual
Alphabet) are placed throughout the graciously designed pages. RS
TAYLOR, C. J., ad. 
Little Water and the Gift of the Animals: A Seneca Legend; ad.
and illus. by C. J. Taylor. 
Tundra, 1992 
24p
ISBN 0-88776-285-9 
$13.95 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
In this adaptation of a Seneca story, Little Water has a special gift of talking with
the animals, a gift his tribal elders ask him to employ in their desperate search for
a cure for the sickness that has overtaken the village. Little Water goes into the
forest, falls, and is injured; while he lies unconscious, the animals come and impart
their secrets to his dreaming mind. The animals' gifts don't always seem quite to
the point, nor is it clear how Little Water uses the gifts to cure his people. As a
cultural myth to explain human dependence on the natural world, the story may
have more coherence, but the thematic rightness is not here translated into a to-
tally comprehensible tale. Illustrations, thinly applied paint on canvas, have a
literal, Sunday-painter quality that is sometimes awkward and naive, but the au-
tumn colors are vivid and young viewers will enjoy the woodland atmosphere and
the animal helpers. RS
TERBAN, MARTIN 
Funny You ShouldAsk: How to Make Up Jokes and Riddles with
Wordplay; illus. by John O'Brien. 
Clarion, 1992 
6 4 p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-395-60556-3 
$13.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-395-58113-3 
$5.95 
R Gr. 3-6
This is a riddle book with a nice little twist: it explains the structure of basic
riddles in a way that will allow young jokesters to make up their own material.
Terban devotes a chapter to each of four types of jokes: Jokes with Sound-Alike
Words (plays on "fowl" and "foul" serve as the primary examples), Jokes with
Almost-Sound-Alike words ("peas" and "peace" are a suggested pair), Jokes with
Homographs (striking bakers, for instance, needing more dough), and Jokes with
Idioms (humor involving acrobats "head over heels" in love). Each chapter has a
clear explanation of that particular kind of joke, twenty-five sample riddles, a key
to the verbal plays involved in the samples, and suggested words, twists, and punch
lines for making up your own (in Almost-Sound-Alike words, for instance, one
suggested pairing is "rust/rest" with a possible punch line of "Rust in peace!").
The print is big enough and sufficiently laden with jokes that joke book enthusi-
asts won't be put off by the expository text, which is lively and understandable.
Like Agee's Go Hang a Salami (BCCB 10/92), this book will involve kids in lan-
guage play, and if they just want to read the jokes, there's enough to make it worth
their while. The illustrations, line-drawings with a slightly Learian flavor, offer
entertainingly literal depictions of surrounding jokes. A note about sources (mainly
children and childhood) and a list of more joke books are included. DS
TERRELL, RUTH HARRIS 
A Kid's Guide to How To Stop the Violence; illus. by John
Paul Genzo. 
Preiss/Avon, 1992 
138p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-380-76652-3 
$2.99 
R 
Gr. 4-6
This sensible, straightforward discussion tackles violence at different levels: in
families, schools, communities, entertainment media, and world politics. Terrell
starts out with the point that violence is a real problem, not a television show, and
194 
* THE BULLETIN
she gives some background on this country's history of violence, the cycles of abuse
that affect individuals, and some suggestions for taking action against violence;
addresses of organizations to write to (verbalizing opinions gets a lot of emphasis
here) or to telephone for help are listed in the back. The occasional black-and-
white photographs are more effective than the rather awkward cartoon drawings;
the text is disarmingly formatted with frequent section headings and boxed notices
of statistics or specific advice. This is extremely simple without becoming conde-
scending, and it will serve as a basis for classroom or homefront dialogues about a
deeply disturbing issue that all kids have to face today. BH
THESMAN, JEAN 
I'm Not Telling; Paper ed. ISBN 0-380-76523-3; Mirror, Mir-
ror; Paper ed. ISBN 0-380-76271-4; Who Am I, Anyway?; Paper ed. ISBN 0-380-
76524-1. 
Each book: Avon, 1992 
Paper ed. $2.99 
124p 
(The Birthday
Girls) 
M 
Gr. 4-7
In The Rain Catchers (BCCB 3/91), Thesman interweaves the lives of several com-
plicated women, but this mass-market trilogy instead frays the threads of one mod-
erately interesting story. Jill, Ceegee, and Nancy were all born the same day in the
same maternity ward. At the age of twelve they meet because Ceegee's mother has
hit upon the novel if somewhat unlikely idea of rounding up all the kids who share
Ceegee's birthday and birthplace for a party in a local park. Half-a-dozen kids
show up with their families, and one mother-daughter team, Maggie and Mrs.
Tracey, begins maliciously to push everyone around. They make fun of Ceegee's
nose, question Jill about her beloved "ex-convict" Uncle, and throw out dark sus-
picions that Nancy's mother died during childbirth. It's the fallout from these
hurtful remarks that provides the plot for each novel. Ceegee's nasal obsession
can't really sustain Mirror, Mirror; the fact that Uncle Duffy was thrown in jail for
a night for a misunderstanding about some traffic tickets isn't enough impetus for
I'm Not Telling; while Nancy is angry at her father and "mother" (actually her
aunt) for lying about her real mother in Who Am IAnyway?, it seems curious that
she feels no guilt nor sorrow about her mother's death. The style is okay, the
device is appealing, but none of the books tell the story most readers will want to
hear: Maggie Tracey's. RS
THOMAS, JOYCE CAROL 
When the Nightingale Sings. HarperCollins, 1992 
148p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-020295-5 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-020294-7 
$14.00 
M 
Gr. 4-6
This African-American Cinderella story is set in a Southern swamp and is focused
on an orphan who is rightful heir to the role of Queen Mother Rhythm in a gospel
choir. She's been raised with two mean stepsisters and mistreated by her aunt,
"Cousin Ruby," who had a falling out with her own two sisters when Marigold's
mother ran off with Ruby's husband long ago. This realistic plot seems unneces-
sarily to complicate the fairy tale tone of the book, and the ensuing contrivance
overshadows some truly imaginative writing. Lyrical names and passages become
overwritten or are brought up short by cliches ("Good gracious alive! That's no
log, that's a crocodile") and by unlikely coincidences crowded in quick succession
("'Quicksand!' she gasped"), including a sudden hurricane that uproots an old
coffer of important letters. Balancing this problem and some information-laden
dialogue is a dynamic Sunday morning sermon at the Great Gospel Convention, a
vivid sense of setting, and a mild love story between a music director searching for
the "new Nightingale" and the heroine who sings her way out of misery. BH
FEBRUARY 1993 
* 
195
THOMAS, ELIZABETH 
Green Beans; illus. by Vicki Jo Redenbaugh. 
Carolrhoda,
1992 
32p
ISBN 0-87614-708-2 
$13.95 
R 4-7 yrs
"Don't just snatch some grapes willy-nilly like that," Gramma says. "Use the
grape snips." Strict and rather demanding, Gramma generates a certain amount of
friction with young narrator Dorothea, which is just what makes this picture book
a welcome relief from the nostalgia so often cast over such picture book relation-
ships. Gramma's beans, however, refuse to obey her; it's not till a higher power, in
the form of a week's rain falling in her absence, asserts itself that they're willing to
grow into the "whippersnappers" Gramma loves. This transformation softens
Gramma and eases Dorothea into a new understanding of her, though Gramma
remains starchy to the end: "That's quite enough. . . . You are not a starving
barbarian. You will leave the pattern on the plate, please." The color-pencil illus-
trations that enact this minidrama also have a starchy quality in the characters'
postures and expressions. The horizontal compositions are spiked with vertical
lines that insinuate exactly the same low-key tension implied by the text. It's a
felicitous first book for both author and artist. BH
TURNER, ROBYN MONTANA 
Mary Cassatt. Little, 1992 
32p 
illus. with
photographs 
(Portraits of Women Artists for Children)
ISBN 0-316-85650-9 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 4-6
This latest entry in a visually appealing series (Georgia O'Keeffe, BCCB 12/91, and
Rosa Bonheur, 1/92) chronicles the life and considerable achievements of Mary
Cassatt. Turner begins with a brief historical note about the difficulty of pursuing
an artistic career for a nineteenth-century woman, then proceeds chronologically
through Cassatt's career. She discusses her subject both biographically and artisti-
cally, mentioning the artist's perseverance in the face of rejection for her sex and
for her pioneering impressionistic style (some mention should have been made,
however, of the part Cassatt's wealth played in getting around difficulties). Brief
and understandable analyses of individual paintings are also included. The book is
filled with color reproductions of Cassatt's work, which are well-chosen to reflect
changes in her style and interests and to represent some of her best known paint-
ings, such as The Bath. The open and spacious format, interesting subject, and
simple language in easy-to-read print make this an attractive read as well as a useful
resource. DS
TYRRELL, ESTHER QUESADA 
Hummingbirds: Jewels in the Sky; illus. with photo-
graphs by Robert A. Tyrrell. 
Crown, 1992 
36p
Library ed. ISBN 0-517-58391-7 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-58390-9 
$14.00 
R 
Gr. 3-6
The jewel metaphor in the subtitle may seem overly poetic, but this book's lavish
photographs of these tiny birds do indeed show them shimmering like a gallery of
gems. Tyrrell covers habitat, plumage, aviation skill (hummingbirds can, unlike
other birds, fly backwards and upside down), feeding habits, and breeding pat-
terns, in addition to describing their history and the twelve species currently found
in the U.S. The text, in big print on large square pages, is accessible, interesting,
and easy to read. The main draw here, however, is the photography--the Tyrrells,
who are hummingbird experts, present a sensational series of images, such as the
title page shot of a cerise-capped creature holding a penny nearly as big as its own
196 
* 
THE BULLETIN
body. Many photographs (of eggs and nests as well as birds) emphasize the scale of
these tiny flyers along with their festive coloration and propensity for feeding on
dramatically crimson flowers; all photos are taken at high enough speed for crystal
stop-action clarity of those rapidly beating wings. The book conveys the charm of
its subject well enough that it might get readers--or classes-to the local aviary. A
note on how to attract hummingbirds, an illustrated double-page guide to hum-
mingbirds in this country, and an index are included. DS
WALSH, JILL PATON 
When Grandma Came; illus. by Sophy Williams. 
Viking,
1992 
32p
ISBN 0-670-83581-1 
$13.00 
Ad 4-7yrs
When this peripatetic Grandma comes around, she announces her presence with
an extravagant comparison to say how happy she is to see her granddaughter: "I
have been to Mount Desert Island, far away, and seen the shape of a great whale
rolling in the deep ... but I have never, no never, seen anything as tremendous as
you!" Each return visit brings another flattering comparison ("Never, no never")
and finds the granddaughter a little older; by the end, the girl is able to respond "I
love you too, Grandma." Sweet, soft, gently rounded pastel paintings illustrate
this soothing litany, which would make a perfect bedtime story ... for Grandma.
Kids, though, may find the story repetitive and the mood a little too cozy. RS
WESTWOOD, CHRIS 
Shock Waves. 
Clarion, 1992 
180p
ISBN 0-395-63111-4 
$13.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Seventeen-year-old Leigh Taylor is an art student at a small college in Britain, and
she's troubled by the mysterious recent deaths of two fellow students, one of them
a dear friend. Leigh's grief over Joan's death, however, is tempered by her blos-
soming love for boyfriend Stephen, but it soon appears that it is Stephen himself
who is the killer, somehow sucking the life force out of the women he loves. Leigh
is only saved when Stephen's previous victims (whose bodies have disappeared)
combine forces and rise from the sea to take their revenge. It's unfortunately not
clear exactly what Stephen is or how he performs his incubus-like maneuver (there's
little attempt to explore, a la Klauss' The Silver Kiss, the sexual aspect of the equa-
tion), and the cumulative final vengeance of Stephen's past loves is sudden and
confusing. Stephen, however, is an appealingly unwilling killer ("Do you know
how it feels to destroy all you touch, and to loathe what you are, knowing there's
no end to it?"), and the book is nicely creepy and familiar, with loyal sleuthing
friends, ghoulish corpses, and convincing red herrings; fans of milder supernatural
horror will find it a pleasantly spooky read. DS
WEXLER, JEROME 
Pet Hamsters; written and illus. by Jerome Wexler. 
Whitman,
1992 
4 8p
ISBN 0-8075-6525-3 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Wexler, author of Pet Mice (BCCB 5/89) and Pet Gerbils (BCCB 11/90), has four
important characteristics: an in-depth personal knowledge of his subject, an abil-
ity to write, talent with a camera, and an understanding of his young audience.
Now he brings these gifts to bear on hamsters, which are actually a more popular
American pet than the stars of his previous books. He deals with acquisition,
feeding, hygiene, breeding, and hamster-pup development, with an addendum
FEBRUARY 1993 
* 
197
about photographing your pets; the information is punctuated by lively personal
anecdotes ("She wasn't eating the pups after all! She was placing them in her cheek
pouches so she could move them") and a sense of pragmatism born of experience
("Never reach in with your bare hands to separate fighting hamsters!"). Attractive
photos ofwhiskery, bright-eyed hamsters stuffing their cheek pouches to an amaz-
ing degree and just generally enjoying the world may even lure rodent-resistant
parents (but better flip past those closeups of huge incisors). Kids yearning for
fuzzy pets will appreciate the advice and interest offered here by an adult who not
only knows the subject but also shares their enthusiasm. DS
WILDE, NICHOLAS 
Down Came a Blackbird. Holt, 1992 
182p
ISBN 0-8050-2001-2 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
James is a bitter and angry boy, packed off to a distant great uncle by his probation
officer because his alcoholic mother has been hospitalized. He doesn't like his dry
old great-uncle and he doesn't like the eager-to-please housekeeper, but his inter-
est is aroused by the old house and the dreams he begins to have about its inhabit-
ants. In these dreams he is the young son of the house's owner, a bitter and unloving
man, and he finds his only pleasure in friendship with a local boy who works on
the grounds, until eventually tragedy strikes. James' realization that these are his
great-uncle's dreams of his own childhood provides him with an understanding
about his great-uncle and himself that allows him to begin to connect with the old
man. While James' fury is forthrightly drawn (he torments animals and steals), the
rest of the story is less successful: the dreams, so similar to (but less successful than)
those in Pearce's Tom 's Midnight Garden, are overelaborate and slow the novel's
pace, while it's clear to the reader, for far too long a time, who the people in the
dreams are in James' waking life. Readers unfazed by the loose construction of the
fantasy element may still find satisfaction in this story of a boy learning to try again
despite the harshness of his life. DS
WOLFF, FERIDA 
The Woodcutter's Coat; illus. by Anne Wilsdorf. Joy Street,
1992 
32p
ISBN 0-316-95048-3 
$15.95 
R 4-6 yrs
In a chain reaction common to folklore, Wolffs original story features a woodcutter's
warm coat that is first stolen and then passed from one person to the other until
the woodcutter finds it at the tailor's (mended beyond recognition) and, all un-
knowing, swaps a load of wood for it. The story will fit well into read-aloud
sessions because of its stylistic economy and satisfying circularity. The watercolor
illustrations, though they stand up to group inspection because of their dashing
composition, yield a lot more funny details up close, especially in the mini-tales of
animal and human behavior transpiring as the coat gets passed around. This artist
thrives on surprises-a formally attired little girl wheeling a lobster in her doll
buggy, a bald man waiting in the barber shop to have his one hair trimmed, a dog
stealing a child's doll while a cat takes the dog's bone, a postman with a bird on his
hat (airmail!)-there's rampant mischief in every spread, but none of it seems
crowded or crowds out the story. Something of Allan and Janet Ahlberg's slyness
shows up here, in a picture book that's both witty and child-appealing. BH
198 
* THE BULLETIN
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
Reading for Parents, Teachers, and Librarians
Popular Reading for Children III, edited by Sally Estes, is a compilation of anno-
tated bibliographies, originally appearing in Booklist magazine, of books with spe-
cial appeal for children. Some of the topics include "Just Good Reads," "After
Henry Huggins," "Growing Up Funny," and "After Sweet Valley"; an author/title
index is included. (American Library Association; 6 4p.; paper ed. ISBN 0-8389-
7599-2; $4.95.) RS
The American Library Association has also issued a new compendium of media
choices for children, Best ofthe Best for Children, edited by Denise Perry Donavin
and published by Random House. The loose organization and scattershot cross-
referencing will probably drive most librarians a little nuts, but parents (the obvi-
ously intended audience for the book) will appreciate the friendly informality of
the format and the clear annotations. Books, magazines, videos, audiocassettes,
software, toys, and travel destinations (the last seems a peculiar addendum) are all
included, and "connection" notes link the differing media in welcome ways. Each
section includes adult resources and directories where applicable, and there's an
author/title index. (36 6p., paper ed. ISBN 0-679-74250-6, $20.00.) RS
The Zena Sutherland Lectures 1983-1992, edited by Betsy Hearne and published
by Clarion Books, is a compilation often lectures given in honor of Zena Sutherland,
Professor Emeritus of the University of Chicago and former Editor of The Bulle-
tin. Lecturers include Maurice Sendak, Lloyd Alexander, Katherine Paterson, Vir-
ginia Hamilton, Robert Cormier, Paula Fox, David Macaulay, Jean Fritz, Trina
Schart Hyman, and Betsy Byars; Hearne contributes an introduction to each.
(224p.; trade ed. ISBN 0-395-64504-2, $18.95; paper ed. ISBN 0-395-64987-0,
$9.95.) All proceeds from the book will go to the Zena Sutherland Lectureship
Fund. The next Sutherland Lecture will take place on May 7, 1993 at the Harold
Washington Library in Chicago, where the lecturer will be Walter Dean Myers.
RS
Advance orders are now being taken for the proceedings of the 34th annual Allerton
Institute, Evaluating Children's Books: A Critical Look, sponsored by the Univer-
sity of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science. The proceed-
ings, edited by Betsy Hearne and Roger Sutton, feature papers on many topics in
book evaluation, including reviewing nonfiction and multicultural materials; the
impact of reviewing on publishing; evaluating books from Latino cultures; the use
of book reviews in public and school libraries; and the evaluation of illustrative
and design elements in picture books. Also included is a roundtable discussion
among the children's book review editors of Booklist, The Bulletin, Horn Book,
Kirkus Reviews, and SchoolLibrary Journal The paperbound proceedings will sell
for $18.50 plus $3.00 shipping and handling; reserve a copy by contacting the
University of Illinois, GSLIS Publications Office, 249 Armory Bldg., 505 E. Ar-
mory St., Champaign, II. 61820, or call toll-free 1-800-982-0914.
FEBRUARY 1993 
* 
199
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this new index, which
will appear in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In no way meant to be a cataloging aid, this rather
idiosyncratic index is instead intended to lead readers to those books that could fill
a particular gap in a collection, to help teachers and librarians find books that
might be useful in various school or recreational settings, and to help in those
requests for a "love story" or a "scary story." In the case of subject headings, the
subhead "stories" refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those
books intended for independent reading.
African-Americans: Marzollo
African-Am ericans-fictio n:
Goldberg; Paulsen; Prather; Tho-
mas, J.
African-Americans-p oetry:
Livingston
African-Americans-stories: Choco-
late
Africa-history: Halliburton
ALPHABET BOOKS: Gabler;
Micklethwait
Animals-fables: Kherdian
Animals-poetry: Mado
Art appreciation: Micklethwait
Art history: Turner
Australia-fiction: Sheppard
BEDTIME STORIES: Linden;
London; Walsh
BIOGRAPHIES: 
Livingston;
Marzollo; St. George; Turner
Birds: Boice; Tyrrell
Bookmaking: Fennimore
Books and reading-fiction: Paulsen
California-fiction: Singer
Caribbean Islands-stories: Linden
Cats-fiction: Schwartz
Circuses: Spier
Civil War-fiction: Forman
Clothing-stories: Wolff
COUNTING BOOKS: Geisert;
Linden
Deer-fiction: Monson
Disabilities: Alexander; St. George
Disabilities-fiction: Helfman
Dogs: Alexander
Dogs-fiction: Hall
Dragons-stories: Conover
Dreams-fiction: Wilde
Dreams-stories: Arnold
Ecology: Lasky
EVERYDAY LIFE STORIES:
Hiser; Sachar
Fables: Juster; Kherdian
Family life: Rosenberg
Family reading: Moore
FANTASY: Doyle; Ende; Goldberg;
Kisling; Levin; Pierce; Sheppard;
Singer; Wilde
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Caseley
Fathers and sons-fiction: Auch; Haas
Florida-fiction: Prather
FOLKTALES AND FAIRYTALES:
Conover; Sierra; Taylor
Food and eating: Patent
Food and eating-stories: Thomas, E.
Friends-fiction: Clarke; Savin
Frogs-stories: Arnold
FUNNY 
STORIES: 
Clarke;
Rosenthal; Sachar
GAME BOOKS: Micklethwait
Geography: Rosenthal
Geology: Lasky
Grandparents-stories: Walsh; Tho-
mas, E.
Growing up-fiction: Caseley; Hall;
McKenna
Growing up-poetry: Hopkins
Guidance: Rosenberg; Terrell
Hamsters: Wexler
200 
* THE BULLETIN
Handicrafts: Fennimore
Health: Patent
HISTORICAL FICTION: Forman;
Green; Ingoglia; Marko; Paulsen;
Savin
History, African: Halliburton
History, U. S.: Ingoglia; Paulsen;
Marko; Savin; St. George
Holidays: Chocolate
Horses: McGregor
Hunting-fiction: Monson
Illness-fiction: Haas
Immigrants-stories: Bresnick-Perry
Japanese-Americans-fiction: Savin
Japan-poetry: Mado
Kentucky-fiction: Green
Knights and chivalry-fiction:
Cervantes; Doyle
Kwanzaa-stories: Chocolate
Language arts: Cooper; Fennimore;
St. George; Terban
LOVE STORIES: Caseley; Kaplow;
McKenna
Mental illness-fiction: Caseley
Middle Ages-fiction: Kisling
Monsters-stories: Gabler
Music and musicians-fiction: Tho-
mas, J.
Music and musicians-stories: Davol
Mythology, Greek-fiction: Alcock
Native Americans-fiction: Ingoglia
Native Americans-folklore: Taylor
Nature study: Boice; Tyrrell
New York City-fiction: Goldberg
Nose-picking-fiction: Sachar
Nutrition: Patent
Pet care: Wexler
Pigs-stories: Geisert
POETRY: Hopkins; Livingston;
Mado; Merriam; Moore
Reading aloud: Alcock
Reading, easy: Hiser; Sachar;
Schwartz
Reading, reluctant: Rosenthal;
Terban
Rural life: McGregor
Rural life-fiction: Green; McKenna;
Monson
SCARY STORIES: Westwood
SCHOOL STORIES: Sachar
Sisters-fiction: Hiser
Skiing-fiction: MacLean
Slavery-fiction: Paulsen
Social issues: Terrell
Spain-fiction: Cervantes
SPORTS STORIES: MacLean
Stepfamilies-fiction: Auch
Story hour: Davol; Gabler; Geisert;
Hopkins; Kherdian; Linden;
Marzollo; Sierra; Spier; Thomas,
E.; Wolff
Texas-fiction: Griffin
Time travel-fiction: Levin
Trains-stories: London
Treasure-hunting-fiction: Griffin
Vermont-fiction: Haas
Veterinarians: Smith
Veterinarians-fiction: Haas
Volcanoes: Lasky
Weather-stories: Conover
West Virginia-fiction: McKenna
Wisconsin-fiction: Monson
Women's studies: St. George;
Turner
Wordplay: Terban
World War II-fiction: Marko; Savin
Zoos: Smith
OTTERS
u lJim 
ArniK WWJIosky
Jim Arnosky
* 'Arnosky's art is splendid...luminous, sunny impressionistic colors; play-
ful arrangements of bubbles, reflections, and otters; and the delectable
patterns created by intersections of rays of light with the circles and hori-
zontals in the water's surface plane:--Kirkus Reviews, pointer review*
* "Charming...The short, simple, oversized text...succinctly describes the
pictured activity without detracting from the eye-catching view...will appeal
to beginning readers and is a delightful lap book for preschoolers as well:'
-School Library Joumal, starred review
'Through Arnosky's effective full-color artwork that combines pastels with
watercolors, viewers become naturalists and observers'"-Booklist
'Arnosky's watercolor illustrations deftly entice even reluctant, landlocked
readers into his aquatic underworld'k-Publishers Weekly
0-399-22339-8/$14.95 ($19.50 CAN)/Ages 3-6
G.P. PUTNAM'S SONS
Members of The Pulnam & Grosset Group 200 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016
© 1993 The Putnam & Grosset Group
Ashley Bryan's first collection
of original poems
SING TO THE SUN
Poems and full-color pictures by Ashley Bryan
And warm your w,
Your joy will rise
Like the sun 
I
and glow
Within you
"With an energetic beat that's hard to resist, Bryan drums out
poetry with a Caribbean beat. These [twenty-three] short poems sing
the praises of everyday joys... [they] dance, shout, and cry, but also
give us time to reflect. The illustrations fairly jump from the pages.
What a beautiful way to remind us that life is a feast." -ALA Booklist
"Children are sure to enjoy its rhythmic verse. Illustrations depict
characteristics of African-American culture combined with flowers,
birds, rising suns, and full moons to create a splendid work with wide
appeal." -School Library Journal
All Ages. $15.00* (020829-5); $14.89t (020833-3)
For a free catalog of culturally diverse
children's books write:
9 HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York 10022
HarperCollins ISBN prefix: 0-06. *Trade ed. tLibrary
ed. Publisher's price only and in no way reflects the
price at which available from any other source,
Molly is racing to keep up
"Fifth-grader Molly has suddenly reached the point where
it's time to be something more than be the family baby.
Warm and believable."-Kirkus Reviews
"An affectionate, positive story. Just right for middle-grade
girls."-ALA Booklist
"A gentle story of growing up."--School Library Journal
"A thoughtful and reassuring treatment of the kind of
childhood social dynamics that many adults dismiss and
all kids experience."--The Bulletin
I 
A division of William Morrow & Co., Inc. * 1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019
-
Kida* *
'Afine continuing saga."
In the latest volume of this winning series,Gretchen "Hippo"
Hubbard discovers that a diet and a new hairstyle can solve
some problems-and create new ones! "Cooper takes a
formulaic idea-the ugly duckling makeover-
and oives it nlentu of zin." 
-*Kirkus Reviews
Other books about THE KIDS FROM KENNEDY MIDDLE SCHOOL
CHOOSING SIDES 
QUEEN OF THE SIXTH GRADE
224 pp. RTE $12.95/07934-2 
128 pp. RTE $12.95/07933-4
MEAN STREAK 
THE WINNING OF MISS LYNN RYAN
208 pp. RTE $13.95/08431-1 
128 pp. RTE $11.95/07231-3
Each: Ages 8 up. ISBN prefix: 0-688
Morrow Junior Books
A division of William Morrow & Co., Inc. * 1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019
1t(
'A singular melding of art and Biblical inspiration, this
book combines the talents of individuals from divergent
times and backgrounds. Moser's paintings, as well as his
thoughtful book design and afterword, make Messiah
an extraordinary accomplishment.. .Truly a book for
everyone." -SLJ. 
Pointer review, Kirkus Reviews
All ages. $20.00* (021779-0)
And with Handel's Joyous Music
MESSIAH: Audio Cassettes and Book
Messiah: The Wordbook for the Oratorio with a double-cassette recording
of a complete performance by London's Academy of Ancient Music,
conducted by Christopher Hogwood, and sung by soloists with
England's Choir of Christ Church Cathedral.
All ages. 
$35.00* (021148-2)
Willa Perlman Books 
Ha 
Collins ISBN prefix: 0-06. Trade ed.
I Harper CollinsChildren'sBooks 
Publisher's price only and in no way reflects the pnrice
SarperCollinsCildren 
'sBooks 
at which available from any other source
10 East 53rd Street, New York 10022
;1;1 Illi
THE
DARK-THIRTY
Southern Tales of
the Supernatural
Illustrated by Brian Pinkney ,
Inspired by dramatic events in black
history, the Coretta Scott King Award-
winning author weaves nine original
ghost stories as eerie as those moments
just before nightfall known in the South
as "the dark-thirty"
"A stellar collection... strong char-
acterizations are superbly drawn in
a few words. The atmosphere of each
selection is 
skillfully developed
and sustained to the very end...
Illustrations... heighten the
suspense. Storytellers will fin
it 
a goldmine."-School Library
Journal (Starred)
"McKissack knows how to tell a
good story and isn't afraid to 
-~ .
r 
dramatize scary details, on
the one hand, or throw in some
history, on the other."
'-BCCB (Recommended)
Historical notes included.
Ages 8-12. $15.00 (0-679-81863-4)
GLB $15.99 (0-679-91863-9).
Alfred A. Knopf
~'•/•" :" © 1992 Barin 
Plnkny
"Moser' picue are an appopiael
eei and evocative match for this poem
firstpubihdin 
1945 
[which, wihits]
hypnoi rhtm and understated
lagae has considerably more
arisr than much of the 'scary
pjoetry' chilrn kno. .. The
artwork, done in ink and
trnsarn watercolor, is
anoter fine exampl of
Moser's skill He is a master
of both color and light, and
in this borok those elements
are used with such delicacy
and retrint that they
create a perfect mood for
the text. Introduce this book
to Prltsky fans, and you'l
be giving them a real gift"--SL
Ages 6 up. $14 00*
(0200-3); $13.89t 
(020803-1)
"There is no book more important to me
than this one." -
Alice Walker
accorded treatment as a classic.
"More than just an ordinary reprint....
A celebration of a long-neglected novel
and author who are finally receiving their
deserved recognition." -
Library Journal.
Ius. $2495
Order to free 800/545-4703
University of Ilinos Press
54 ast Gregory Drive * Champaign, IL 61820
University of linois Press 
SOND Cuss
54 East Gregory Drive 
POSTAGE
Champaign, IL 61820 
PAD
U.S.A. 
CHAMPA~N, IL
RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED
Their Eyes Were
Watching God
ZORA NEALE HURSTON
Foreword by Ruby Dee
Introduction by Sherley Anne WUllams
illustrated by Jeny PInkney
Upon its initial publicatio n 1937 this novel
about a proud, independent black woman was
generally dismissed by male reviewers. It was
out of print for over thirty years. Since its reissue
in a paperback edition by the University of inois
Press in 1978, Their Eyes Were Watdcing God has
been the most widely read and highly acclaimed
novel in the canon of African-American litera-
ture. With this publication of a richly illustrated
deluxe edition, a novel by a black woman is
