I L 
I N OI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
r 
C 
~
ia
_i'jr-, ~"~~6~
Books make great gifts, but Dick-
ing the perfect books for your
favorite youngsters can be daunt-
ing. Let the expert staff of The
Bulletin of the Center for Children's
Books help you navigate the book-
store wilderness full of shiny new children's
books.
Updated and expanded from last year's edi-
tion, the Guide Book to Gift Books contains
annotations for over 225 of the best books
for giving (and receiving) and is available as a
downloadable PDF file that you can print out
and use for every holiday, birthday, or other
gift-giving occasion on your calendar this
year.
Listed books have all been recommended in
full Bulletin reviews from the last three years
and are verified as currently in print. Entries
are divided into age groups and include au-
thor, title, publisher, and the current list price.
To purchase, go to:
www.lis.uiuc.edu/giftbooks/
THE
B UL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
February 2004
Vol. 57 No. 6
'I
A LOOK INSIDE
221 
THE BIG PICTURE
Kissing the Rain by Kevin Brooks
222 NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
232 * Made You Look: How Advertising Works and Why You Should Know by
Shari Graydon; illus. by Warren Clark
234 * Blushing: Expressions ofLove in Poems &d Letters comp. by Paul B.
Janeczko
237 * A Pot o' Gold: A Treasury oflrish Stories, Poetry, Folklore, and (of Course)
Blarney comp. and ad. by Kathleen Krull; illus. by David McPhail
249 * Double Helix by Nancy Werlin
252 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
253 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except
August by the Publications Office of the Graduate School of Library and Information Science
(GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of
Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS)
Janice M. Del Negro, Contributing Editor (JMD)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Krista Hutley, Reviewer (KH)
Hope Morrison, Reviewer (HM)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
OFFICE STAFF
Molly Dolan
Krista Hutley
Hope Morrison
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $70.00; individuals, $50.00; students, $15.00. In countries other than the
United States, add $7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya
Company Ltd. Single copy rate: $5.50. Volumes available in microfilm from ProQuest, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
All inquiries about subscriptions and advertising should go to University of Illinois Press, 1325 S.
Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903, 217-333-0950; toll free 866-244-0626.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The
Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email:
bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2004 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by James L. Amos/Corbis from Kissing the Rain ©2004. Used by permission of
The Chicken House/Scholastic Inc.
FEBRUARY 2004 
* 
221
THE BIG PICTURE
Kissing the Rain
by Kevin Brooks
Hard choices have been the mainstay of the young adult novel since the inception
of the genre, back when Jerry chose to defy the Vigils in Cormier's The Chocolate
War (BCCB 7/74); it was also true when Susan went with the crowd in Duncan's
Killing Mr. Griffin (10/78), or, more recently, when Young yielded his indepen-
dence to his charismatic best friend in Giles' Shattering Glass (5/02). These novels
set up situations wherein there is a right choice, though that right choice may be
the painful one, the one regrettably left untaken, or even the doomed one. Some-
times, however, a right choice is a luxury that an individual simply doesn't have,
and the only free will one can exercise is to favor one evil over another-and nei-
ther is the lesser. Such is the situation of Kevin Brooks' Moo Nelson in Kissing the
Rain.
Moo is a largely miserable teenager, tormented at school as the fat kid (by
predictable downpours of abuse he terms "the rain"), depressed by the sameness
and limitations of his home. His favorite occupation is to hang out on the foot-
bridge over the highway, watching the cars go by (he's a bit of a car aficionado) and
enjoying the soothing noise and motion, and one day from this vantage point he
observes a strange event, a peculiar altercation between the driver of one car and
the people in another. After talking to the police, he finds himself caught in a
power struggle. One police officer wants him to change his story to ensure the
rigged altercation gets the driver, a known criminal, put in prison as planned.
Other officers want Moo to keep to his story (especially if it means implicating the
crooked cop who staged the event and who wants Moo to lie), and so does the
driver's posh lawyer and the driver himself, a menacing figure who makes it clear
that Moo will have to pay a high price if he lies.
British author Brooks (Martyn Pig, BCCB 9/02) creates a believable, id-
iosyncratic voice for Moo, making him vivid as a person in his own right and not
just as the object of events. Though his quandary is intricate, it's also clearly and
bleakly presented: the truth gets Moo the enmity of a police officer who has the
ability to put Moo's father away for welfare fraud and a frightening connection to
a dangerous underworld figure; a lie gets him the enmity of that underworld figure
but puts him away, while keeping his father out of jail ("I know I AIN'T doing the
right thing," thinks Moo despairingly, "cos there AIN'T no right thing to DO.
There's just 2 wrong things"). Brooks adds interesting complications with the
changes in Moo's status at school (as a result of his chief persecutor's connection to
one of the police officers as well as his increased notoriety) and his awkward rela-
tionship with his fellow bully-prey, Brady, who makes a foolish decision as a result
of Moo's changed status in an attempt to garner his own increased credibility.
222 
* 
THE BULLETIN
There's an understandable change in Moo as, trapped, he begins to grow weary
and indifferent to the price he may pay, and as he sets out to resolve the situation
with a third possibility, one so dark and drastic neither side will expect it.
Most bracing of all is the book's refusal to compromise its toughness.
Moo isn't in a dilemma because he's a kid and therefore can't see the long-term
view, but because this situation offers no acceptable way out. That's not a quan-
dary that usually appears in literature for young people, but it's certainly one that
occurs in real life. The psychological-thriller element of this absorbing novel will
definitely appeal to readers, but many will also grimly empathize with the no-exit
nature of Moo's life. (Imprint information appears on p. 224.)
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ASHBY, JOHN 
Sea Gift. 
Clarion, 2003 
202p
ISBN 0-395-77603-1 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 7-10
A palpable love for the sea and the folk who take their living from her permeates
this traditional coming-of-age tale. Lauchie has grown up in a close-knit commu-
nity on the shores of Cape Breton, Nova Scotia. During his first summer as a
working fisherman, he pulls a sealed crock from the sea that contains the 400-year-
old record of a doctor who survived a pirate invasion and a storm at sea to become
a physician to the local Mi'kmaq people. His investigation leads to a sense of
intercultural understanding and respect, but, more importantly for Lauchie, a stron-
ger connection to the land, the sea, and their mutual history, and a keen awareness
that he is no longer a child. Lauchie's self-conscious transition to adulthood might
feel a bit heavy-handed were it not for Ashby's creation of wise and likable adult
characters who can wink at such notions while nonetheless facilitating and honor-
ing them. Lauchie's neighbor Ian, who has stood in for Lauchie's deceased father,
has a gentle wit and a genuine passion for the work he does, which he passes on to
Lauchie. Lauchie's mother is likewise warm and witty, and Ashby draws her char-
acter with subtlety and grace as she reluctantly allows Lauchie to follow his dream
against her own desires. Readers are immediately submerged in the Cape Breton
dialect and the technical jargon of lobster fishing, which may make for slow going
at first, but the music of Ashby's language rewards rereading as he sketches the
coastal landscapes and the moods of the sea. In prose that matches the cant and
roll of the sea herself, Ashby deftly weaves the archetypal dream of finding buried
treasure with the more realistic concerns of growing up, learning one's vocation,
and living in a community; this is a fine example of good old-fashioned storytell-
ing. KC
FEBRUARY 2004 
* 223
BANNERMAN, HELEN 
The Story of Little Black Sambo; illus. by Christopher
Bing. 
Handprint, 2003 
40p
ISBN 1-929766-55-6 
$17.95 
R 4-6 yrs
Arguably one of the most controversial books in the history of children's literature,
this century-old story has been criticized for its stereotyped illustrations and for
the ongoing racist implications of the derogatory name Sambo. In 1996, artist
Fred Marcellino tried to politically correct the narrative by retitling it The Story of
Little Babaji (BCCB 9/96) and setting it in India, where it was first written. That
same year, the African-American team of author Julius Lester and illustrator Jerry
Pinkney sought to redeem the story with a fantastical send-up that capitalized on
its strong characters, images, and action (Sam and the Tigers, BCCB 7/96). Now
award-winning illustrator Christopher Bing casts the original text in an oversized
format complete with antiqued pages, scrapbook-like endpapers that include a
reference to support for the project from Dr. Henry Louis Gates, Jr., and framing
pages with a long editor's note on the book's background. Bing's double-page
spread compositions pulse with restrained energy and reflect meticulous attention
to detail in the Indian flora and fauna and the African human cast, all textured
with the effects of an old engraving. The colors that play such a large part in the
story-red coat, blue trousers, green umbrella, and purple shoes with crimson
soles and crimson linings-are set against black-framed sepia backgrounds that
play up the gold of these imperial tigers. While respecting the story's past, Bing
also seems to be mocking it with his back-jacket-flap self-portrait in a colonial
sahib-helmet. Yet there's no question that he has empowered the tale with fresh
individuality and dynamic book design. There's also no question that many chil-
dren respond breathlessly to this story of a little boy who rescues his fine new duds
from some fierce predators. For those who are comfortable reading aloud or retell-
ing the story of Little Black Sambo, Bing's pictures will project-to a group or an
individual-its fast pace and infectious rhythm with visual bravado. BH
BOTTNER, BARBARA 
Pish andPosh; by Barbara Bottner and Gerald Kruglik; illus.
by Barbara Bottner. Tegen/HarperCollins, 2004 
48p 
(I Can Read Books)
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-051417-5 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-051416-7 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 2-3
Pish and Posh are best friends who live together, Pish apparently being the older
and Posh apparently being the younger. One night "there was a loud thudoutside
the front door." The thud is made by a book, The Fairy Handbook, which has
landed on the stoop. "We are not becoming fairies," says Pish decisively, but an
enthusiastic Posh has other ideas, and her foray into magic soon results in the
conjuring of sprites, mermaids, giants, and such. Intervention by the practical
Pish restores order, but at the book's end, it's Pish who's now portentously ab-
sorbed in the book's pages. While the organizing premise here is certainly engag-
ing and the characters of Pish and Posh promising, the writing is disconcertingly
choppy. There are no chapter divisions, so the episodes run into one another,
which hampers the following of the plot. Bottner's illustrations have a sly energy
most evident when depicting the redheaded friends engaged in conversation or
argument. The eyes of Pish and Posh express their emotional state with a subtlety
belied by the simple lines of their facial features (although the appearance, disap-
pearance, and reappearance of pointy ears on both characters does not seem to
have much, er, point). The narrative is not as smooth as novice readers might
224 
* THE BULLETIN
wish, but Pish and Posh have a certain flair (not to mention really enjoyable names)
that may help new readers over any rough spots. JMD
BROOKS, KEVIN 
Kissing the Rain. 
Chicken House/Scholastic, 2004 
[33 6p]
ISBN 0-439-57742-X 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 7-12
See this month's Big Picture, p. 221, for review.
BRUCHAC, JOSEPH 
Pocahontas. Silver Whistle/Harcourt, 2003 
173p
ISBN 0-15-216737-4 
$17.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-10
The scene is locked in legend: the Indian "princess" throws herself between John
Smith and a war club, thus heroically saving a life and securing the amity of white
settlers and natives for years to come. In the alternating voices of Smith and
Pocahontas, Bruchac presents a fictionalized reconstruction of the events leading
up to the encounter and offers a plausible explanation of what the dramatic gesture
actually meant. As Bruchac explains in concluding notes, Smith's account is largely
drawn from his own writings, with language paraphrased and slightly modernized.
Pocahontas's voice springs, of course, directly from the author's imagination, but
he injects just enough vanity to put a sharp, intriguing edge on her character. Both
tend to be long-winded-Smith with his braggartly mannerisms and whiny accu-
sations against fellow settlers; Pocahontas with her involved discourses on Powhatan
customs. Although drama is certainly inherent in the cultural misunderstandings
that threatened to explode into open hostility, action is often in short supply.
Bruchac (author of the similarly formatted Sacajawea, BCCB 4/00) does, however,
delve thoroughly enough into Powhatan rituals that, when Smith ends up with his
head on a rock and Pocahontas intervenes with words and actions he cannot com-
prehend, readers will clearly understand that this was part of a symbolic rite that
culminates in his honor, not in a rescue. Slow pacing and the dense prose of
Smith's chapters may discourage some readers from tackling the entire text, but
persistent middle-schoolers will appreciate this thought-provoking re-creation. EB
CANNON, A. E. 
Let the Good Times Roll with Pirate Pete and Pirate Joe; illus. by
Elwood H. Smith. 
Viking, 2004 
32p 
(Viking Easy-to-Read)
ISBN 0-670-03679-X 
$13.99 
R 
Gr. 1-3
The privateering reprobates from On the Go with Pirate Pete and PirateJoe (BCCB
9/02) return in another easy-reading adventure. This time they decide to head off
to visit the Pirate Queen (and her "pet stunt duck," Duck-o) at her forbidding
lighthouse. Since she's the boys' mother, she's quite happy to see the seagoing
scalawags and cook them up a mess of piratical treats. It's also her idea to go
bowling, but will that be the downfall of Pirate Pete, the secret non-bowler? The
anarchic gaiety of the boys has the same charm as in the previous book, and their
comradely relationship with their mother will be the envy of many youngsters.
Short sentences with lots of repetition help the text go down easy without ever
sounding strained, instead falling into the cadence of humorous patter. Pirate
Pete's newly developed bowling skills are a pleasing sideline, but the modest mes-
sage of his trying something new and liking it obligingly takes a back seat to the
rumbustious piracy. The slightly subdued palette allows the popeyed freneticism
of the illustrations to dominate--the characters constantly vibrate with excitement,
FEBRUARY 2004 
* 225
and they, pets, and vehicle (the good auto Jolly Roger) often levitate into the air
with sheer exuberance. Speech balloons, captions, and spelled-out sound effects
further add to the comedy and reassuringly intertwine textual and visual cues, and
readers will get a kick out of various buccaneering touches (such as the Pirate
Queen's skull lamp) in the scenes. Novice readers will find this a seaworthy choice.
DS
COWLEY, JOY 
The Wishing of Biddy Malone; illus. by Christopher
Denise. 
Philomel, 2004 
36p
ISBN 0-399-23404-7 
$15.99 
R 
6-10 yrs
Biddy Malone can't carry a tune and she has two left feet, but she gleefully sings
and dances just the same. One afternoon, Biddy comes upon a faerie village,
wherein she meets a handsome boy, a "loveling," with "skin like an acorn and hair
as soft as midnight." When the boy asks her to name her three wishes, Biddy
wishes to be a fine singer, to become a graceful dancer, and to have a loving heart,
and the faerie prince assures her she will attain all three. Biddy then returns home,
believing she has been gone for half an hour, only to discover she has been gone for
several months. Although her voice and feet have not been magically transformed,
she practices so much that soon "she was the best singer and dancer in the coun-
try." She even manages to control her temper, and soon her loving heart is evident
to all. Biddy is not completely content, however, since she is bereft because she
can love no other than the faerie prince. When the faerie village returns, Biddy
seeks out the loveling; he professes his love for her, and all ends happily. Cowley's
text-intensive tale is set in the Ireland of faerie folk and magic, and while her prose
is overly fulsome, her story has an involving premise and an admirable heroine.
Denise's illustrations evoke misty moor and quiet village in acrylic and charcoal
images that breeze across the pages, the soft twilight hues of the countryside con-
trasting with the warmly lit faerie interiors. Ignore the faux brogue of the narrative
and enjoy the story of Biddy Malone, who wins her heart's desire through her own
perseverance. JMD
CROWLEY, BRIDGET 
Feast ofFools. McElderry, 2003 
261p
ISBN 0-689-86512-0 
$15.95 
M 
Gr. 4-8
When an accident leaves John crippled and his father dead, John joins the monas-
tery school, where he is befriended by the gentle Hugh and menaced by the bully-
ing Matthew. After the Boy Bishop dinner at the Earl's to kick off the Feast of
Fools celebration, the nasty Canon Senan turns up dead and Hugh missing. Later,
Hugh's body is discovered in the town's well bearing stigmata, which points to a
ritual sacrifice by the Jews. When Reuben ben Ezra is arrested, John becomes
determined to find the real killer and clear Reuben's name, since Reuben has al-
ways been kind to him despite tensions between Jews and Christians. Crowley
draws threads from the medieval English legends of both Little Saint Hugh of
Lincoln and William of Norwich to weave her mystery, but the importation of
contemporary or otherwise anachronistic sensibilities regarding the practice of drama
in the church, priestly uses of young boys, and religious intolerance on the part of
the main characters make this more costume drama than historical fiction. The
author's note is too sketchy to be of any use in sifting medieval truth from trope,
and the boys use decidedly contemporary slang and motifs in their banter. Crowley
also handles the mysteries clumsily, relying on conveniently overheard conversa-
226 
* THE BULLETIN
tions, accidental meetings, and the annoying ploy of John's half-recognizing shad-
ows or being unable to recall whose voice he is surreptitiously overhearing to per-
petuate suspense, rather than laying a legitimate and convincing trail of clues for
the reader (or John) to follow. John himself seems much too enlightened and
suspicious of the medieval minds around him; as a result, the novel is long on
sensationalism and short, with the exception of the accurate description of the
malicious prosecution and routing of the Jews, on authentic historical substance.
KC
CULLEN, LYNN, ad. 
Little Scraggly Hair: A Dog on Noah's Ark; illus. by Jacqueline
Rogers. 
Holiday House, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1772-7 
$16.95 
R 4-7 yrs
Cullen sets the story of Noah and the ark-and how Dog got a wet nose-in the
Appalachian Mountains: "Way, way back, long before your great-granddaddy's
time, dogs had warm, dry noses. Blame if they didn't stick 'em everywhere-
sniffin', snortin', snitchin' table scraps." Dogs and people therefore don't get along,
but that doesn't keep one "little scraggly-haired feller" from attaching himself to
Noah and helping him (fetching scraps of wood, carrying bags of nails) build a
boat. The neighbors, of course, think "Ole Noah's gone crazy. Buildin' arks.
Keepin' dogs." When the rains come it is Little Scraggly Hair that helps Noah
round up the animal multitude, and when the ark is finally full, the hard-working
dog squeezes "'tween a pair of cranky bears and two snortin' buffalos. Fit's so
tight, he has to stick his nose through a knothole." After forty days and forty
nights of having his nose rained on, Little Scraggly Hair has a cold, wet nose-and
so has every dog that's come since. Cullen's retelling of this tale has an easy flow
that will make it a successful (if a tad lengthy) readaloud or told tale. Dialogue
between Noah and his family members enlivens the narrative, and the colloquial
tone of the text will allow listeners to settle right in. Rogers' watercolor illustra-
tions are natural-history thorough on the animals, if touched with bland sweet-
ness; while the human faces are sometimes awkward and the colors a bit washed
out, Little Scraggly Hair himself is a winningly scruffy canine. A note gives several
recorded and written sources. JMD
DANKO, DAN 
Sidekicks: Operation Squish!; by Dan Danko and Tom Mason;
illus. by Barry Gott. 
Little, 2003 
106p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-316-16847-5 
$10.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-316-16846-7 
$4.99 
R Gr. 3-7
Guy Martin (secret identity: Speedy, sidekick to superhero Pumpkin Pete) has
returned from his last adventure (BCCB 10/03), and he's still trying to win his
beauteous classmate Prudence Cane, to which end he's running a school contest to
win a date with a sidekick. He's also beginning to get disillusioned with the more
earthbound aspects of superheroism (apparently insurance, an agent, and a good
tailor are key), but that's not going to keep him from action when an eighty-foot-
tall robot appears on the scene, driven by a mad scientist who's determined to
squish all those that oppose him in order to ensure him a comparative height that
forestalls taunting. This is more episodic than the first book, and plot-wise it's
even thinner, with a goodly portion either reprise of the previous outing or fore-
shadowing of the book to come. There's still plenty of the comradely confiding
narrative and bubbly and unabashed cheesiness, however, and a bit more develop-
FEBRUARY 2004 
* 227
ment of comedic aspects such as the interminably picayune tendencies of the side-
kick collective and Guy's doomed attempts to woo Prudence. Mad scientist Dr.
Robot (also known as Dadah Robah, because from the top of his robot that's what
it sounds like he's saying) doesn't have the literary stature of a true nemesis, but
he's a satisfyingly ludicrous villain. The first book is a better place to start, but
those who ate that one up will revel in this second helping of superheroic silliness.
DS
DAVIES, NICOLA 
Surprising Sharks; illus. by James Croft. 
Candlewick,
2003 
28p
ISBN 0-7636-2185-4 
$15.99 
R Gr. 1-3
Sharks get defanged, sort of, in this continually surprising look at the variety of the
species. Just when we think it's safe to think of sharks as interesting but relatively
harmless creatures that might "have built-in fairy lights ... or blow up like a party
balloon ... or lie on the sea floor like a scrap of old carpet," Davies turns to their
defining behavior, and readers learn what all those 3,000 teeth are for as she de-
scribes the meticulous efficiency of their killing machinery, whether their prey is
plankton or people. One more surprise twist awaits, however, when readers learn
that while sharks may kill about six people a year, people kill 100 million sharks
per year, for everything from cosmetics to wallets to fertilizer to food. In Croft's
bright, creamy acrylic and pastel illustrations, both people and ocean life have big
googly eyes that lend everyone a slightly goofy appearance, but his sharks are ana-
tomically correct renderings drawn to the scale of the illustration in which they are
featured. Endpapers feature over twenty different species with their average sizes
noted. The illustrations move in and out of ocean scenes and technical illustra-
tions with captions. The main narrative appears in large block-style type, with
important words highlighted, while small type gives more facts and details about
the pictures. This certainly isn't the only book one will ever need on sharks, but it
does provide some unusual and interesting factoids about shark variety, behavior,
and abilities, as well as a sound introduction to their defining features, without the
gore of photorealism. It also reinforces the idea that sharks are more afraid of
humans than we are of them, or at least they ought to be. An index and brief note
are included. KC
DUNKLE, CLARE B. 
The Hollow Kingdom. 
Holt, 2003 
230p
ISBN 0-8050-7390-6 
$16.95 
R Gr. 7-10
Kate and Emily Winslow are orphaned nineteenth-century sisters sent to live with
elderly aunts on Kate's newly inherited estate. Hallow Hill is an isolated area with
a history of strange supernatural doings, including the periodic disappearance of
local maidens. Shortly after their arrival the two girls meet Marak, the goblin king,
who seeks "an ideal King's Wife." That ideal is none other than Kate, the elder of
the two sisters. Kate, however, has no intention of marrying Marak, and by wit
and by nerve she manages to avoid the fate he has planned for her-until the night
Emily disappears. Kate assumes Emily has been kidnapped by the goblins, and she
ventures into the goblin kingdom and bargains for Emily's safe return with the
surprisingly witty Marak. Emily is rescued, but not quite the way Kate assumed,
and Kate descends underground to fulfill her side of the bargain. How the reluc-
tant girl becomes a true queen and saves her husband and her people is the crux of
this involving story, which suggests Christina Rossetti's "Goblin Market" writ large.
228 
* THE BULLETIN
Dunkle creates a weirdly attractive otherworld with touches of humor that make it
fully dimensional. Characterizations are solid with intriguing complications: Kate
is a wispy blonde with a backbone of steel and Marak is an ironic monster with
oddly tender sentiments. The author takes the fairy-tale idea of equating beauty
with goodness (and wispiness with frailty) and turns it on its head, while offering
(for the era) a "shockingly overeducated" protagonist who is able, through her own
intelligence, to come to terms with the consequences-and rewards--of her own
endeavors. Smooth writing and clever dialogue spark the action and make this an
unusually wry look at the fantasy world beneath the ground. JMD
ECHLIN, KIM, ad. 
Inanna: From the Myths of Ancient Sumer; illus. by Linda
Wolfsgruber. 
Groundwood/Douglas & McIntyre, 2003 
72p
ISBN 0-88899-496-6 
$19.95 
R Gr. 8-12
Echlin combines various fragments of Sumerian myth into a retelling of the story
of the goddess Inanna. A series of titled entries presents Inanna in all her passion-
ate glory: winning a drinking contest with the god Enki, falling in love with
shepherd Dumuzi, traveling to the underworld to acquire still more power, re-
turning triumphant. Echlin's verse has a stately, hymn-like rhythm that lends
itself easily to reading aloud. The adapter captures the erotic joy of young Inanna's
joining with Dumuzi but does not shirk from revealing the mature goddess in all
her terrifying, sometimes violent power. The strong emotions of this ancient myth
are reflected in the successful marriage ofvisuals to text. The figures in Wolfsgruber's
mixed-media illustrations, set in free-floating compositions, have an exuberant
freedom of line; washes of color and stamp-like iconography add texture to the
stylized images. Echlin includes a note discussing the discovery of Inanna's story,
giving it some cultural and historical context. Collections seeking an unusual and
powerful point of access to ancient myth for young adult readers should begin
here. JMD
FOGELIN, ADRmAN 
Sister Spider KnowsAll. Peachtree, 2003 
[224p]
ISBN 1-56145-290-4 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Roxanne lives with her grandmother, Mimi, and her cousin, John Martin, and she
has generally been contented with that arrangement; she particularly enjoys her
weekend duties operating a booth at the local flea market in order to bring the
family in a few more dollars by selling knickknacks and crafts. It's a shock at first
when John Martin starts bringing home Lucy, a young woman he met at commu-
nity college, but soon Lucy's cheerful determination and appetite for exploration
have brightened up the family--and encouraged Rox to find out more about her
mother, who left when Rox was just a baby. Fogelin sometimes struggles to bal-
ance all her plot threads and the device of Rox's finding her mother's old diary is a
bit worn, but the book gives Rox a natural and flowing narrative voice that vividly
and affectionately describes her world. Characterization has some pleasing subtle-
ties and surprises: class-crossing Lucy is indeed condescending in her pop-psych-
inspired zeal, but she's also a lively and devoted friend to Rox's whole family; Rox
may not be a whiz in seventh grade, but her savvy marketing at the booth demon-
strates her imagination as well as her clear-headedness; Rox's mother's diary re-
veals not just an unhappy teenaged girl but a rather mean one as well. As a result,
this is a richly drawn story of human dynamics, offering both support for people as
they are and hope for their growth. DS
FEBRUARY 2004 
* 229
FOON, DENNIS 
The Dirt Eaters. Annick, 2003 
[313p]
Trade ed. ISBN 1-55037-807-4 
$19.95
Papered. ISBN 1-55037-806-6 
$9.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
Fifteen-year-old Roan knows that his village of Longlight has been destroyed, and
that he and his missing, captured younger sister, Stowe, are the only survivors.
Roan is taken in by Saint, the charismatic leader of the Brothers, a local group of
warrior-priests, and quickly becomes part of the fold. Saint has ulterior motives,
however, and the astute Roan soon discovers he is being groomed for some un-
known part in Saint's war against the City that controls what remains of a ruined,
postapocalyptic world. After a violent confrontation with Saint, the boy flees into
the Devastation (a desolate, mostly uninhabited waste) and quickly reaches the
end of his resources. A chance encounter brings him a true friend-Lumpy, a
physically scarred young man living in survivalist isolation. Together Roan and
the disfigured Lumpy pursue a future guided by Roan's predictive dreams and his
desire to rescue his sister. In this first installment of the Longlight Legacy trilogy,
Foon establishes Roan as a prophesied hero with emotional and ethical conflicts
that drive him on his quest. The plot is as varied as the terrain of the ruined world,
and mystical moments are smoothly and plausibly integrated into the action. Roan
is a believable adolescent whose grief fuels his desire for vengeance even as un-
avoidable violence makes him sick at heart. His destiny as a world-redeemer and
peace-bringer is clear, but that knowledge does not undermine the suspense of his
ultimate fate or the complexity of the shattered world that he seeks to save. Read-
ers with a taste for both fantasy and science fiction will relish this savory mdlange.
JMD
FRANCE, ANTHONY 
From Me to You; illus. by Tiphanie Beeke. 
Candlewick,
2003 
32p
ISBN 0-7636-2255-9 
$15.99 
R 
5-8 yrs
Poor Rat has been suffering from the bathrobe blues ("The bathrobe blues are
when you don't wash your face or comb your whiskers and just mope around all
day long in your bathrobe"), but his interest is piqued when he gets an admiring
letter from a fond but anonymous friend. He spruces himself up and goes out to
find and thank the kind friend who wrote him; while he doesn't manage to iden-
tify the sender, he does manage to assist his friend Mouse and lend a hand to his
friend Frog. He also finds his friend Bat as sulky and depressed as Rat himself had
been, so Rat decides that it's his turn to write an anonymous letter of friendship.
While the story is fairly message driven and kids will be left wondering exactly who
did write Rat's letter, there's a felicitous turn of phrase to the prose that gives it
character as well as sweetness ("For breakfast, Rat had a stale muffin and a cold cup
of yesterday's leftover tea"), and audiences will feel at home with the gentle Frog
and Toad flavor of the story. Beeke's springy watercolors are a far cry from Lobel's
muted tones, however: the childlike drafting of the animal figures gives them a
toylike appeal, while the different textures of the pigment, from soft wash to nappy
graininess to blocky solids, keep the scenes from becoming saccharine. Cunning
details of animal houses (Frog lives in a teakettle with windows curtained in leaves)
and village create an alluring animal-populated neighborhood into which viewers
will long to move, especially if it means getting flattering mail. DS
230 
* THE BULLETIN
FRENCH, SIMON 
Where in the World. Peachtree, 2003 
[19 2 p]
ISBN 1-56145-292-0 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-9
As Ari and his mother travel from his grandfather's home in Germany across Eu-
rope and to Australia, Ari stores up images, both pleasant and unpleasant, that he
later translates into music for his violin. Though remarkably gifted, Ari is shy
about his talent, and when he and his mother leave his beloved Opa and move to
Australia to start a new life, he keeps his gift scrupulously secret from his mates at
school. Though he and Opa keep in touch through email and telephone, Ari is
devastated when the elderly Opa dies so far away from him. Finally, Jamie, Ari's
stepfather, convinces him that his music can help him hold on to both his father,
whom he barely remembers, and his Opa, whose death is far too painful for Ari to
process any other way. The back-and-forth narration of this kunstlerroman takes a
bit of getting used to, but it aptly traces the way Ari's present circumstances are
influenced by his memories and the experiences of his past. French does a credible
job of balancing Ari's artistic sensibilities with his little-boyness, although Ari,
perhaps in keeping with his persona as a prodigy, is remarkably self-aware as he
reflects on his own childhood. French portrays Ari's shyness and his propensity
for introspection by including remembered or imagined dialogues in his self-talk
without explicit punctuation, and it may be a bit claustrophobic for some readers
to stay so tightly enclosed in one shy, lonely character's head. For those who enjoy
exploring the emotional life of sensitive characters, however, this is a gently win-
ning literary encounter. KC
GIDEON, MELANIE 
The Map that Breathed. Holt, 2003 
24 4 p
ISBN 0-8050-7142-3 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Almost-twelve-year-old Nora Sweetkale gets a blank book in the mail that has an
oddly addictive effect; skinny Billy Nolan can sketch windows and doors to other
worlds in the air. Nora is a Traveler and Billy is a Gatemaker, and the two are
hesitant partners in visits to Sanasarea, the world through the gates: Billy creates
the gates, and Nora steps through them. The two worlds are brought together
when Nora steps through a gate and has an encounter with the Provisioner, an evil
menace that sucks the souls from children. She is older than the Provisioner's
usual prey, however, and she does not lose her soul, only her memory. She is
found and taken in by Asa Trout, the creator of a magical artifact, the Map That
Breathed, that for many years held the Provisioner prisoner. Billy and Nora stumble
into their powers without guidance, and while they rescue Sanasarea from a ter-
rible evil, they unleash that evil upon their own world. Gideon's parallel world has
an easily absorbed magical structure that makes the stakes both understandable
and important. The action is quick, and both the juvenile and adult characters
have strong, memorable personalities. The dynamics between parents and chil-
dren are complex but not dizzying, and the believable emotional ties make the
fantasy risks more poignant. This is a promising first novel that bodes well for the
future-and possibly even a sequel. JMD
GIFF, PATRICIA RELLY 
Maggie's Door. Lamb, 2003 
158p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90095-3 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-32658-0 
$15.95 
R Gr. 5-9
Nory Ryan's Song (BCCB 10/00) left the young nineteenth-century teen poised for
FEBRUARY 2004 
* 
231
an arduous trek to Galway, where she hopes to join up with her father, grandfa-
ther, sister, and family friends who have taken her younger brother under their
wing. The entire party will then embark for New York and put poverty and fam-
ine behind them. Escape, even with a steamship ticket in hand, is not so easily
accomplished; already worn by hunger and anxiety, Nory can barely pull herself
along the road, and Nory's sweetheart, Sean, is faring no better. Entrusted with
the care of his mother and Nory's brother Patch, Sean reluctantly obeys a local
landowner who orders him to fetch a fresh horse, and the young man returns to
find his charges are gone. Chapters alternately follow Nory and Sean, and readers
watch as their paths finally merge in Liverpool aboard the Samson, although it will
take Nory and Sean time and further heartache to realize they're both aboard the
same vessel bound for America. There's a fair amount of serendipity driving char-
acters toward their destination. Granda's discovery of Nory in the crowded port is
improbable, at best, and Sean's shipboard injury, which calls for Nory's healing
skills, is a bit overplotted. Still, enough starving, impoverished souls did indeed
make it out of Ireland that Fate should, perhaps, be given its due. EB
GORBACHEV, 
VALERI 
The Big Trip; written and illus. by Valeri
Gorbachev. 
Philomel, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-399-23965-0 
$15.99 
R 4-7 yrs
"I am going to take a trip far away," declares Pig to his good friend Goat; unfortu-
nately for Pig, worrywart Goat is doubtful of the safety of each of Pig's proposed
modes of transportation-he could fall off a bike, get stuck in a train tunnel, have
to parachute out of a faulty airplane. After effectively deterring Pig from traveling
by land or by air, Pig proposes a trip by sea, but "Don't do it!," exclaims Goat,
enumerating the multiple dangers of shipwreck, storm, killer sharks, and pirate
attack. In the end, Pig abandons his plans ("Having a big trip is a very scary
thing"), only to have Goat suggest they travel together, thus reducing the danger.
The illustrations humorously capture the alternating sense of fantasy/pessimism in
each of their points of view; each of Pig's proposals, featuring a smiling, confident
Pig in bright sunshine, is squelched on the following page by Goat's dire predic-
tions, composed under a shadow of threat. Pen and ink hatching adds texture to
the watercolor spreads, and the inclusion of a reproduced highway map adds to the
visual appeal. The book unfortunately ends up emphasizing the scariness of ad-
venture as much as the importance of friendship, and the ending doesn't really
resolve the essential tension; most listeners, however, will pick up on the silliness
of Goat's worries and simply enjoy the ride with these two good friends. HM
GRANFIELD, LINDA, comp. 
I Remember Korea: Veterans Tell Their Stories of the
Korean War, 1950-53. Clarion, 2003 
136p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-618-17740-X 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Granfield has collected memoirs of U.S. and Canadian military personnel who
served in the "forgotten war," supplied brief introductions and timelines, and ar-
ranged the entries into sections on battle, military life, family issues, and post-war
operations. Beyond that, the contributors speak for themselves in a few well-
focused pages apiece, offering a highlight or two from his or her unique perspec-
tive. Readers will cull information regarding a host of military duties-e.g., physical
therapist, railroad maintenance worker, helicopter pilot, communications special-
ist-and on such regional perils as flash flooding, subzero temperatures, poisonous
232 
* THE BULLETIN
snakes, and cracking ice that mimics gunshot. Particularly affecting are the range
of the soldiers' attitudes toward their enemies. For one young sergeant assigned to
escort captured prisoners, the Communists were "nice young men, very similar to
me." A National Guardsman, however, candidly admits, "I threw grenades at huts
where women were shooting at us; there were probably children as well, but we did
not look for them because we were under fire." Although no memoirs of black
soldiers have been included, leaving issues of race relations within the armed forces
unaddressed, one touching entry does comment on the plight of African Ameri-
can-Japanese children who had been abandoned by their parents (and both gov-
ernments) at the end of World War II. The addition of several small snapshots
from each contributor makes the informal text all the more intimate. A glossary
and index are appended. EB
GRAYDON, SHARI 
Made You Look: How Advertising Works and Why You Should
Know; illus. by Warren Clark. 
Annick, 2003 
[120p]
Trade ed. ISBN 1-55037-815-5 
$24.95
Paper ed. ISBN 1-55037-814-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-10
Wryly opening with "Do you remember the day one of your parents sat you down
to have a serious talk about advertising?", this book then goes on to redress the lack
of such conversations, offering a thought-provoking overview of a subject many
young readers take for granted. Detailed discussions of advertising's history, tech-
niques, and gaffes and successes are enlivened by a direct address to the reader
encouraging consideration of specific questions ("When kids started to wear their
pants so low that the tops of their underwear showed, which clothing manufactur-
ers got more 'exposure'?"), as well as by a cheerfully busy design featuring piquant
quotes and informative sidebars. Nifty little exercises and suggestions for interest-
ing experiments (for instance, counting the number of encounters with advertis-
ing, including clothing logos and telephone-pole posters, in a day) are intriguing in
their own right, and they also lay the groundwork for Graydon's suggestions for
active consumerhood, including helpful tips on how to write an effective com-
plaint letter about problematic PR. It's not all about advertising gone wrong,
however-the book is less anti-advertising than pro-thoughtful-consumer, and kids
who read this book will be better prepped than most to deal with the marketing
onslaught. Energetic cartoons add zing to the pages; detailed end matter includes
lists of regulatory and consumer organizations, endnotes, and an index. DS
GUEST, ELISSA HADEN 
Iris and Walter and Cousin Howie; illus. by Christine
Davenier. 
Gulliver/Harcourt, 2003 
44p
ISBN 0-15-216695-5 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 2-3
Best friends Iris and Walter have a falling out when Walter's idolized cousin Howie
comes to visit. Iris is all set to join in the fun, but cousin Howie ("Does she have to
do everything with us?") doesn't quite see it that way. Iris' feelings are hurt, and she
races home in tears to her mother and baby sister: "When Baby Rose saw her big
sister crying, she started to cry, too. 'Oh, dear, it's a house full of tears,' said Iris's
mother. 'Iris, my love, tell me what happened.'" After Iris pours out her woes to
mother, father, and grandfather, she is soothed and comforted, but nothing works
quite so well as a regretful Walter's coming over to make up. Guest (author of Iris
and Walter, BCCB 11/00, Iris and Walter: True Friends, 9/01, etc.) once again
FEBRUARY 2004 
* 233
encapsulates the complexities and emotions of young friendship in an easy-to-
read, four-chapter book. The text is lively and specific, the relationships among
the characters are dynamic, and the children's dialogue rings true. Davenier's pen-
and-ink illustrations have a squiggly-lined intensity that makes even moments at
rest seem fraught with activity. The deeply hued palette is enhanced with sweeps
of blue and splashes of rose that anchor the images to the crisp white pages. This
will be a welcome addition to Iris and Walter's growing saga. JMD
HOLIDAY, BILLIE 
God Bless the Child; by Billie Holiday and Arthur Herzog, Jr.;
illus. by Jerry Pinkney. 
HarperCollins, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-06-028797-7 
$16.99 
Ad 
7-10 yrs
Few would deny that Billie Holiday's rendition of "God Bless the Child" is a
masterpiece, and most would acknowledge the fine portraiture and landscapes in
this portrayal of the "Great Migration" of African Americans from the rural south
into northern cities, starting around 1900 and extending into the 1950s. How-
ever, Pinkney's studied double-page spread compositions, some wordless and oth-
ers featuring a verse from the song, add up more to a gallery experience for informed
adults than to a picture book for children. Viewers' engagement will depend en-
tirely on an adult's skill in storytelling the book, since all of the historical informa-
tion is crowded into a one-page artist's note in small print at the end, and the
verses to the song rely deeply on adult experience for a listener to plumb their
meaning. The CD that accompanies the book offers just the one song, and no-
where is the name of Arthur Herzog Jr. really explained despite its prominent
appearance on the cover. This said, children could do worse than listen to Billie
Holiday or pore over these detailed scenes, where extended families and vibrant
communities labor ceaselessly to survive hardship and more, to celebrate. Home-
steads droop deserted, streets bustle under swerving El tracks, characters make
occasional sly eye-contact with the viewer-all offering a window into the past for
children lucky enough to have some narrative guidance. Pinkney's colors are al-
most shimmering, nuanced without losing value, and his drafting has reached a
depth and fluidity that invite empathy with the subjects. There still remains the
problem that for children the book itself has no inherent voice, which is keenly
ironic given the music upon which it depends for inspiration. BH
HUSER, GLEN 
Stitches. 
Groundwood/Douglas & McIntyre, 2003 
[200p]
ISBN 0-88899-553-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Best friends Travis and Chantelle were the kids everyone picked on in elementary
school, Chantelle because of her facial disfigurement, her dip-and-dive walk, and
her questionable paternity, and Travis because of his effeminacy, his ready tears,
and his hobby of sewing. Now facing junior high, they have each other to lean on,
as well as the support of their not-so-traditional families, energetic teachers, and a
small circle of friends that grows as they work on a puppet version ofA Midsummer's
Night Dream. Together, they persevere through three years of joys and setbacks to
a triumphal graduation that nearly turns to tragedy. Huser develops his characters
in this gentle, episodic novel with both forthrightness and subdety. Narrator Travis's
deepening understanding of his homosexuality is never allowed to take over the
more central narrative of his friendship with Chantelle. Likewise, Chantelle's dis-
ability and disfigurement, though playing a pivotal role in some plot develop-
234 * THE BULLETIN
ments, never upstages the mutual coming-of-age of two friends at the hub of a
circle that includes caring, flawed allies as well as bullying, violent enemies. Most
of the secondary characters are allowed breadth and treated with unusual gentle-
ness: Travis' uncle, Miserable Mike, may be abusive and ignorant, but he's not
irredeemable, and Travis' mother may be unsuited to mothering, but she makes
sure Travis is well cared for and steps in when needed. The only exceptions to this
complex treatment are the boys who go after Travis; they are jerks from beginning
to end, and they meet with their just reward. The pace neither rushes nor flags as
Chantelle and Travis move through three years of junior high; Huser hits the
highlights that would certainly last in the characters' memories of those years and
satisfyingly gives more weight to the triumphs than the tears. KC
JANE, PAMELA 
Spring Is Here: A Barnyard Counting Book; illus. by Melissa
Sweet. 
Little Simon, 2004 
[12p]
ISBN 0-689-85388-2 
$7.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 2-4 yrs
This perky pop-up depicts the end-of-day antics of a farmful of critters, obligingly
arrayed in ever-increasing numbers from the single cat who "curls on the window-
sill" to the ten birds who "call, 'Peep-peep!'" The rhymed text is cheerful and
serviceable, and the focus on the little girl (who is "fast asleep" amidst it all) gives
it a pleasing underlying shape in addition to the counting component. The visu-
als, with their neatly cunning paper engineering, are the hot number here, how-
ever. Sweet's watercolors sometimes suggest Brian Karas in their smudgy pencil
textures, narrow lines, and slightly quirky drafting; while the cozy farmscapes are
occasionally zoologically questionable (what the heck are bunnies doing living up
a tree, and why does an andered buck still have his fawn spots?) and the arrays not
always easy to count (the five pigs rather blend together), the scenes are teeming
with appealing life. The pop-ups make some clever use of their medium: the
sleepy cat winks an eye as her spread opens, the tumbling puppies really do tumble,
and viewers look from inside the beehive, seeing past the honeyed inhabitants to
the outdoors beyond the hive opening. The inviting artwork and enticing pop-up
usage make this one bedtime/number book to count on. DS
JANECZKO, PAUL B., comp. 
Blushing: Expressions of Love in Poems &
Letters. Orchard, 2004 
[112p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-439-53056-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 9-12
Poet and anthologist Janeczko here compiles a collection of fifty-nine classic and
contemporary poems and five letters about love. The book is divided into five
parts revolving around stages of love: The Beginning of Love; In Love; Alone in
Love; the End of Love; and Remembering Love. The selection leans toward work
from famous poets, including such poems as Wordsworth's "She Was a Phantom
of Delight," Donne's "The Good-Morrow," Byron's "When We Two Parted,"
and Shakespeare's "When to the Sessions of Sweet Silent Thought." More con-
temporary selections include poems by Nikki Giovanni ("Kidnap Poem"), Pablo
Neruda ("I Do Not Love You ... "), Sophie Hannah ("The End of Love"), and
Naomi Shihab Nye ("I Still Have Everything You Gave Me"). There is a formal
restraint in many of the poems offered here that does not match the nearly desper-
ate energy of young love, but there is also a deep understanding of the emotional
FEBRUARY 2004 
* 
235
arc that may intrigue readers. The small trim size and the theme (and the prom-
ised rosy-tinted interior photographs) are sure to attract young adult readers seek-
ing some expression of their own interior lives. Put this alongside McCullough's
Love Is Like the Lion's Tooth (BCCB 6/84) and Hearne's Love Lines for a heart-
stopping display. JMD
JANUARY, BRENDAN 
Globalize It!: The Stories of the IMF, the World Bank, the
WTO-and Those Who Protest. Twenty-First Century, 2003 
144p 
illus. with
photographs
ISBN 0-7613-2417-8 
$26.90 
R Gr. 6-9
This in-depth but accessible account of the lofty beginnings and tangled middles
of the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, and the World Trade Or-
ganization-and their role in international economic and social development-
sparks a debate on the question "Is globalization the problem or is it the solution?"
January presents passionate arguments for both sides, from antiglobalization activ-
ists who argue that globalization privileges powerful, rich corporations at the ex-
pense of poor people and countries, the environment, and non-American cultures;
to globalization enthusiasts who argue that it stabilizes the world economy by pro-
viding jobs, raising the standard of living, and helping the poorest countries suc-
ceed in the free-trade market. Starting with the 1999 Battle of Seattle, when "tens
of thousands filled the city's downtown" to protest the meeting of the World Trade
Organization, January covers such topics as the history and missions of the World
Bank and the IMF, the global influence ofNike and Michael Jordan, the concerns
of environmental activists, and the significance of September 1 th to the global-
ization debate. While the book oversimplifies at times, turning nuances of the
debate into black and white binaries, the clear writing, up-to-date primary sources,
photographs, and maps provide a comprehensible look at the specialized proce-
dures and terminology that govern the complicated world of economics, finance,
and trade. Speaking especially to young adults already engaged in political activ-
ism, the book will nevertheless pull in others with its smooth style and appealing
format. Including source notes for each chapter, a bibliography, a section of books
and websites for more information, and an index, this is a thorough account of an
important topic in today's political climate. KH
JENNINGS, PATRICK 
The Wolving Time. 
Scholastic, 2003 
197p
ISBN 0-439-39555-0 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Laszlo Emberek lives with his parents on a small farm in the French Pyrenees in
the late sixteenth century. The family raises sheep and vegetables, trading for
other necessaries in the nearby town of Saint-Eustache. Laszlo and his parents
keep a low profile: the village priest, Pere Raoul, is a virulent persecutor ofwitches,
and since the Emberek family members are loups garoux, shapeshifters who can
turn into wolves at will, they avoid drawing attention to themselves. Pere Raoul
keeps Muno, a young woman whose parents he had burned at the stake when she
was a child, in order to save her soul from damnation; her attempt to escape the
priest brings her into contact with Laszlo and his family, and she discovers their
secret. She promises to keep the secret safe, and she does so until Pare Raoul
tortures an accusation from her. When the family is brought to trial, it is clear that
they will be found guilty; in a dank dungeon they shapeshift, retrieve the impris-
oned Muno, and make their escape. Jennings (author of Putnam and Pennyroyal
236 
* THE BULLETIN
BCCB 12/99, and others) departs from his lighter fare with this darker, more
intricate novel of religious persecution. Characterizations obtain depth from the
shadows that color them: Laszlo and his parents are shaded by their alternative
personae, Muno's future is obscured by her parents' fate, and righteous persecutor
Pare Raoul is darkly drawn. Although the prose occasionally spends too much
time lauding the pastoral and Laszlo's introspection becomes a touch repetitive,
the historical, semi-supernatural landscape is richly evoked, and the action is com-
pelling. The boy's relationship with his parents is a moving one, and his growing
realization that the wolves are not necessarily the beasts is a topic worthy of discus-
sion. While the fantastical elements give the history some flexibility, Jennings
includes a concluding note on his research and sources. JMD
JINKS, CATHERINE 
Pagan's Crusade. Candlewick, 2003 
[256p]
ISBN 0-7636-2019-X 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
Pagan in Exile. 
Candlewick, 2004 
[33 6p]
ISBN 0-7636-2020-3 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
Pagan Kidrouk is short of money; the Knights Templar are short a squire. Theirs
is no match made in heaven, but the deal is done and Pagan is assigned to Lord
Roland Roucy de Brom, a golden-haired paragon of bravery, chastity, spiritual
dedication, and all other knightly virtues. The streetwise squire teeters between
disbelief and admiration of his master, but the bottom line is that a job is a job,
and Pagan tends the horses, polishes the armor, and keeps his opinions to himself.
Happily, though, the reading audience is privy to his musings, and his running
commentary on the Templars, the Infidel, and the inscrutable Lord Roland drips
with sarcasm and razor sharp observation. In Crusade the idealistic Roland help-
lessly watches his superiors "sell out" to Saladin by surrendering Jerusalem, and
then turns his efforts toward damage control by raising money to ransom hostages.
It's Pagan, though, who ends up fast-talking Saladin for his master's release. Exile
finds the pair back at Roland's family estate, where he hopes to convince his father
and brothers to join the crusade to regain the Holy Land. They are far too em-
battled in local affairs, however, to spare a thought for kingdoms godly or other-
wise. Roland, ever the servant of righteousness, stays on to negotiate a truce between
his father, the local monastery, and a cult of heretics, and ends up engaged in as
violent a battle as they witnessed at Saladin's siege. Pagan's growing respect and
affection for Roland, as well as Roland's own tenuous embrace of profane con-
cerns, humanizes the action-heavy events and tempers the acerbic wit of the narra-
tion. Fans of Michael Cadnum's Book ofthe Lion (BCCB 2/00) can whisk through
these Australian imports, and then bide their time for two installments yet to come.
EB
JOHNSON, ANGELA 
Violet's Music; illus. by Laura Huliska-Beith. 
Dial,
2004 
32p
ISBN 0-8037-2740-2 
$16.99 
R 5-7 yrs
Baby Violet spends much of her growing life making music by any possible means--
rattle, cardboard-tube horn, pretend guitar-and seeking other kids who want to
make music, too. Her search through nursery, classroom, and beach proves fruit-
less until, one summer day, "Violet was playing her guitar/ (a real one now)/ in the
FEBRUARY 2004 
* 237
park./ Twang/ Twang/ Yeah/ Yeah/ Twang Twang/ Yeah!", when she is joined by a
drummer, a saxophone player, and a singer. Angel, Randy, and Juan recognize a
kindred spirit in Violet, and the four join together to make music. This rhythmic
romp through one musical soul's search for others who share her passion is win-
ningly presented. Johnson's irrepressible Violet is an irresistible (if noisy) charac-
ter whose enthusiasm for her muse never wanes. The musical world of the
protagonist is evident in Johnson's rhythmic language and in the plinks, rattles,
whistles, and toots that accompany Violet wherever she goes. Huliska-Beith's
mixed-media illustrations (acrylic, collage paper, and fabric) have a vibrant energy
in their intense hues that effectively supports the bright-eyed, chocolate-skinned
Violet. Use this in a musical storytime, but make sure you have enough instru-
ments for everyone to join the band. JMD
KIMMEL, ELIZABETH CODY 
Lily B., on the Brink of Cool. HarperCollins,
2003 
245p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-000587-4 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-000586-6 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
Lily Blennerhassett suffers under the curse of having respectable, ritual-driven,
drama-free parents, a fate that she fears may prevent her from reaching her goal of
being a world-famous author. She is thus primed to become enamored of her
exotic and sophisticated relatives, Charles, Veronique, and Karma LeBlanc, espe-
cially when she is warned off them by her boring parents. Obvious to readers
despite (or perhaps because of) Lily's gushing infatuation with the urbane family is
the fact that the LeBlancs are working a con; abetted by the oblivious Lily, they
devise a scheme that threatens to bankrupt her family with a spurious lawsuit. Lily
records everything in her summer journal, ostentatiously addressed to her Future
Biographers, with enough exclamation points and cutesy asides to compensate for
her boring existence. Reading back over her own work reveals to her that her life
is, after all, full of the drama that she has been craving, and that she has been a
duped protagonist. Readers will have known this all along, and hence the intru-
sion of Lily's insights comes off as slightly condescending. Though funny in patches
and deft in the presentation of family quirks, the prose simply tries too hard to
approximate the hyperbolic angst of a verbally precocious but clueless thirteen-
year-old. Her concluding metafictive reflections badger readers with the tail-be-
tween-the-legs humility of a lesson learned: appreciate the stability and wisdom of
the ordinary. The lively plot pacing and witty critiques of family life will likely
keep the book circulating, but it will remain no more or less memorable than the
latest after-school special. KC
KRULL, KATHLEEN, comp. and ad. 
A Pot o' Gold: A Treasury of Irish Stories, Po-
etry, Folklore, and (of Course) Blarney; illus. by David McPhail. 
Hyperion,
2004 
181p
ISBN 0-7868-0625-7 
$19.99 
R 
Gr. 4-6
A potpourri of stories, poems, and recipes from Ireland, this anthology is carefully
balanced, well documented, and liberally illustrated with watercolor paintings that
are appealing to children without becoming sentimental in reflecting the fairy lore
and "blarney" prevalent in that tradition. Pieces from famous writers including
James Joyce, Jonathan Swift, William Butler Yeats, Oscar Wilde, and John Synge
jostle for attention with folklore about selkies, the children of Lir, Finn McCool,
238 
* THE BULLETIN
Saints Bridget and Patrick, and a handful of ancient curses, cures, battle cries, and
riddles. There are a few unfortunate entries-the "Marshmallow Crackers" recipe,
for instance, in which "blobs of butter" and the picture of a revoltingly fat Border
Collie reflect the worst of Irish culinary habits. In general, however, Krull's choices
are happily varied, ranging from the lighthearted to the spooky, all readably adapted
and complete with source notes. For the most part David McPhail's graphics
gainfully employ his sense of humor in service of the typically Irish, tongue-in-
cheek narrative style, though he punctuates the pages with occasionally hushed
land- or seascapes. Although there's no reason children couldn't enjoy this on their
own, the most likely use is as a family readaloud or classroom resource for children
and adults to pore over together. March 17 is the most obvious occasion, but
don't let that stop anyone from recognizing the general appeal of "The Man Who
Had No Story," "The Star Child," or "All Things Bright and Beautiful." BH
LAMM, DREw 
Bittersweet. Clarion, 2003 
214p
ISBN 0-618-16443-X 
$15.00 
Ad Gr. 7-10
Buoyed up by her effervescent grandmother, Taylor Rose appreciates life most
when it is painted in the colors and images of Chagall. Grams encourages her
vision, and they both have high hopes for Taylor's future as an artist. When Grams
has a stroke and ends up a shadow of herself in a sterile nursing home, Taylor falls
apart in anger and denial. Her ability to produce art freezes, and she finds herself
doing improbable things, like accepting a date to the prom with a handsome sleaze
whom she has unfailingly rejected in the past. Through the help of remarkably
persistent and caring friends, and a renewed relationship with her heretofore dis-
tant father, Taylor works through her grief to reclaim her art and revive her
grandmother's legacy. Lamm paints an improbable and coyly cliched grandmother,
who walks through sprinklers naked to celebrate her eightieth birthday and lives
entirely on roses, raspberries, and platitudes about sucking life's juices. Her unfail-
ing enthusiasm for living on life's romantic side finds a dark mirror in Taylor's
utter inability to be anything but an egocentric brat after her illness. Indeed, Taylor's
character is written in the same caricatured strokes as the grandmother's; she is
utterly talented, utterly beautiful, utterly detached from mundane high-school
concerns in an ultra-cool way. Despite Taylor's rather unrealistic sensibilities,
however, Lamm captures her mood swings and her inability to sort out her feelings
regarding the two boys seeking her attention with some degree of realism, and the
extremes of melodrama in this tale of grief and renewal will speak volumes to the
book's target audience. KC
LOOMIS, CHRISTINE 
Scuba Bunnies; illus. by Ora Eitan. 
Putnam, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-399-26465-9 
$15.99 
R 
3-5 yrs
The bunny travelers have been to outer space (Astro Bunnies, BCCB 2/01) and the
old west (Cowboy Bunnies); now they sojourn into the briny deep for a little mari-
time meandering: "Scuba bunnies/ Long to see/ What's beneath/ The deep blue
sea." The bunnies check their gear and off they go, diving beneath the waves,
searching for treasure, avoiding sharks, riding dolphins, and returning safely home.
While this doesn't have quite the savor of earlier outings, Loomis' text is a rhyth-
mic read, the unforced rhymes gently rippling from page to page. Eitan's mixed-
media illustrations (including computer techniques) have a folk-art flatness in the
domestic scenes that contrasts with and enhances the smooth geometric curves
FEBRUARY 2004 
* 239
and shapes of sea-life and sea-bunnies. There is an age-appropriate suspense to the
seafaring here that is sure to appeal to laid-back and daring preschoolers alike.
Offer this with Rose's One Nighttime Sea (BCCB 10/03), or have a bunny adven-
tures read-off. JMD
LOREDO, ELIZABETH 
Giant Steps; illus. by Barry Root. 
Putnam, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-399-23491-8 
$16.99 
R 4-6 yrs
Loredo (author of Boogie Bones, BCCB 9/97) offers a fantastical tale of five moun-
tain-top giants playing a game of-what else?-giant steps. After a quick "one
potata, two potata, three potata, four," the giant who is "IT" begins to count, and
the other giants take off in the four directions, across iceberg, plain, desert, and
mountain. That fifth giant finishes counting and yells "FREEZE! And wherever
that yell, it echoes, wherever that yell, it echoes all over, everywhere-everybody,
they just... FROZE!" The fifth giant procures a "great big golden ball" and hurls
it at "that one giant who run not quite so fast or so far as the rest. That ball. It
misses." The fifth giant ("he never is lucky") is IT again, but he doesn't mind-
because he's the only giant who can count. Loredo's silly giant story has a tall-tale
feel that is reinforced by the giggle-inducing surprise ending. The prose has a
storytelling rhythm that just begs for reading aloud, and the simple concepts of
North, South, East, and West (the directions the giants run in) mean that class-
rooms needing a curricular connection can easily find it. Root's giants resemble
refugee Titan cave-dwellers-with tattoos-and their jolly demeanors suit the tenor
of the tale. Mixed-media illustrations (employing watercolor, gouache, and pastel
pencil) have a panoramic sweep and a giant-skewed perspective that keep the gar-
gantuan point-of-view clearly in mind. Combine this with Lorenz' Jack and the
Beanstalk (BCCB 11/02) for a super-sized storytime. JMD
MANN, ELIZABETH 
Empire State Building; illus. by Alan Witschonke and with
photographs. 
Mikaya, 2003 
[48p] 
(Wonders of the World)
ISBN 1-931414-06-8 
$19.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
From audacious speculation to American icon, the glamour girl of the New York
skyline gets the star treatment in this overview of her planning and construction.
Mann first reviews how land pressures in the crowded city called for vertical devel-
opment, and how new materials (structural steel), inventions (the safety brake
elevator), and building techniques (curtain wall construction) made soaring sky-
scrapers possible. Then the focus shifts to what makes the E.S.B. unique-not
only its design, but the breakneck pace at which it rose, its race against the Chrysler
Building for the height record, and the financial collapse of the 1930s which left
the shiny new marvel virtually tenantless for years. A mixed bag of illustrations
comprises stunning full-page black-and-white photographs, many by Lewis Hine,
smaller snapshots "mounted" with album tab corners, Witschonke's foldout line-
and-watercolor painting of the E.S.B., and his full-page color paintings and dia-
grams. Original artwork tends to look rather clunky and garish alongside the
elegantly composed photographs, but there's no question that the cearly labeled
diagrams of load-bearing walls, foundation piers and columns, and flashy lime-
stone, nickel-steel, and aluminum curtain wall are helpful. Some fast facts, a glos-
sary and map, index and selected bibliography are included. Children who have
240 
* 
THE BULLETIN
read their way through Lynn Curlee's architecture books (e.g., Capital, BCCB
2/03, Brooklyn Bridge, 6/01) will want to take a look. EB
MASS, WENDY 
Leap Day. 
Little, 2004 
[21 6p]
ISBN 0-316-53728-4 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
Josie Taylor is one of "the few, the proud, the leapers"; she was born February
29th, Leap Day, which occurs once every four years. Her sixteenth, then, is cause
for extra celebration, as it's also her fourth Leap Day birthday. During this auspi-
cious day, Josie takes her driver's test, auditions for the school play, participates in
the sophomore scavenger hunt, has her birthday party, and completes the tradi-
tional "sweet sixteen" initiation at the lake. Josie has a fresh, likable voice and a
believable teenage character: she enjoys being the center of attention, sometimes
overlooking or misunderstanding what's going on around her. While Josie has no
way of knowing about these misunderstandings, readers do: Mass divides each
chapter into A and B, A telling Josie's story in the first person, and B telling every-
one else's-her parents, friends, teachers, classmates-in omniscient, often pre-
cognitive, narration ("Jason Count... is careful not to get too close to the bleachers
so Josie won't think he's flirting with her. Twelve years later he will see Josie at
their high school reunion, won't recognize her, and will ask her out"). Knowing
everyone's thoughts isn't just a guilty pleasure, it has a purpose: to illustrate how
inextricably our lives are interconnected despite the divisions separating us. While
the omniscient chapters are flat, summarizing what everybody is doing and think-
ing without going into real detail, they do offer irony and humor, and the depth of
the book comes from the shared narrative rather than the singular. Mass' book is
a unique portrayal of what motivates people, and it will satisfy readers' gossip
fetish as it sparks their interest in the others around them. KH
NILSSON, PER 
Heart's Delight; tr. by Tara Chace. 
Front Street, 2003 
[160p]
ISBN 1-886910-92-8 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
As the sixteen-year-old protagonist of this Swedish novel discovers, somewhat re-
quited love may be worse than no love at all. As the novel begins, he's looking
back on his relationship with the beautiful Ann-Katrin, whom he terms "Heart's
Delight," and he's destroying the mementos of their relationship. Amid his grief,
their history reveals itself in flashbacks: his early longing for her, their blossoming
into a relationship that includes his-though not her-first experience of sex (she's
"so adorable and soft and a little moist"), his summer sojourn in America, and his
return to find her the companion of another boy. There's a coolly cinematic as-
pect to the exposition (sometimes overtly so, with the narrator relating a scene via
screenplay) and a taste for film-type motifs that doesn't work as well on the page,
since they draw more attention to the artifice than to the heartfelt story under-
neath. Nilsson effectively creates a hero of raw vulnerability, however; there's
sympathy and perception in the depiction of the boy's naivet6 (he at first doesn't
grasp the meaning of Ann-Katrin's male visitor and, heartbreakingly, tags along
with the couple on their date) and both his affection and pain. The book expresses
the boy's agony in vivid terms ("And now the Green-Eyed Monster started to
show him terror-pornography," as he finds himself compulsively picturing Ann-
FEBRUARY 2004 
* 241
Katrin in bed with her new love) to which readers will viscerally respond, and it's
all the more a relief when he begins to climb the rocky path to recovery. First
heartbreak is best experienced vicariously; readers willing to flow with the narra-
tive devices will get an intense introduction here. DS
NOLAN, Lucy A Fairy in the Dairy; illus. by Laura J. Bryant. 
Cavendish,
2003 
32p
ISBN 0-7614-5130-7 $16.95 
R Gr. 2-4
Nolan, according to her note, shuns the wisdom of Chaucer and evokes instead
the grand literary tradition of Shakespeare and Jonson that contends "where there's
a dairy, there's a fairy" in this cheesy (pun intended) look at a small farming com-
munity under pressure from their mayor to sell out to a toothpick factory. A well-
timed word to a cow named Pixie about the need for a fairy godmother sets off a
chain of mysterious goings-on that involve odd gifts-a tub of frozen yogurt un-
der the pillow, a gown made of Swiss cheese, a Muenster under the bed-appear-
ing in the night all over town. The town decides to stage a festival to celebrate
their fairy, but the mayor has other ideas. He lays a trap for Pixie, who shows up
in a pink tutu riding a bicycle, proving to the mayor that she is obviously no fairy,
since fairies fly. Pixie has no end of talent, however, and wins over even the grumpy
mayor with her bovine wiles and a bit of Limburger cheese. Chipper watercolors
featuring comically solid, well-fed country folk in exaggerated postures animate
this already silly tale. Pixie's eyes are appropriately soulful and knowing for a cow,
and Bryant manages to give her a surprisingly graceful posture in flight, despite her
phenotypic challenges in that regard. The humor is obvious and slapstick; each
member of the community is named for a dairy product, and the text abounds in
puns, making for many groans and giggles. This offers lots of amusing possibilities
for a unit on the food groups-aw, just lots of plain old fun, but certainly not for
the lactose intolerant. Serve with ice cream. KC
OLLER, ERIKA 
The Cabbage Soup Solution; written and illus. by Erika
Oiler. 
Dutton, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-525-47005-0 
$15.99 
R 
5-8 yrs
Elsie lives a simple life with her two beloved cats and her vegetable garden, where
she particularly enjoys growing cabbage. Something else apparently enjoys her
cabbage too, however, leaving Elsie dismayed at her despoiled patch. Though she
plans to stay up and catch the miscreants, she dozes off, and it's actually her cats
who halt the pillaging bunnies and coerce them into a little compensatory com-
munity service, bringing Elsie's vegetable crop to her door for soup makings. It
turns out Elsie's happy not only to make soup but to open her home to the rabbits,
who, in a triumph of effective rehabilitation, now assist in the garden (they "even
added a little fertilizer here and there"), take only their fair share of the cabbage,
and help keep Elsie warm at night. This is a cozier, if less likely, scenario than that
in Fleming's similarly themed Muncha! Muncha! Muncha!(BCCB 3/02), and the
notion of the policing cats protecting their owner's interest will tickle young ani-
mal lovers. Most of the character comes from Oiler's droll watercolors, which
feature rotund, blocky critters both human and animal and comic poses for every-
body, whether it be Elsie's operatic grief at the vision of her chomped cabbages,
the gimlet-eyed cats' dressing down of the rabbits, or the rabbits' wilted-ear shameful
response to same. Softly blurred textures gain energy from warm festive hues,
242 
* THE BULLETIN
which contrast nicely with the greens and browns of the garden. While kitty fans
will particularly relish the comic cats, young audiences in general will warm to this
cuddly tale of wrongs righted, soup simmered, and home shared. DS
PARK, LINDA SUE 
Mung-Mung: A Foldout Book ofAnimal Sounds; illus. by Diane
Bigda. 
Charlesbridge, 2004 
20p
ISBN 1-57091-486-9 
$9.95 
Ad 
3-5 yrs
This introduction to various languages' terms for animal sounds gets a little extra
kick from a layout flourish: on each of eight spreads, the text asks, "What kind of
animal says ... " and offers responses from five different languages (always includ-
ing English), each labeled with its origin; a lift of the foldout flap reveals an over-
sized image of the noisemaker. Ultimately this has no structure to shape its listlike
entries, and it's never explained that the foreign terms are spelled phonetically for
English speakers, but the guessing-game aspect adds a nice twist to an already
appealing subject. The artistically hand-drawn text sometimes puts artistry ahead
of clarity (it's a pity the letters aren't simple and clear enough to encourage reading
attempts) and some of the visual clues to the answer won't get audiences very far
(while a bare branch hints reasonably at a bird, kids aren't likely to guess a horse
from a clown), but there's an engaging sweetness to the cheerfully chaotic, spring-
hued spreads. Young audiences will get a kick out of trying the noises and sharing
their own views of what various animals say. A couple of brief final paragraphs
discuss the variability of these terms and encourage further discussion. DS
PAULSEN, GARY 
Brian's Hunt. Lamb, 2003 
103p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90882-2 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-74647-4 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Two years and four books after his first experience in the Canadian wilderness,
sixteen-year-old Brian is back there again, canoeing north through a sequence of
interconnected lakes and dreaming about Kay-gwa-daush, "the daughter of the
Cree trapping family he had found that first winter in the bush." Meanwhile,
Brian has learned much from both books and trail experience, so he knows what to
do when he finds a badly mauled dog; he patches up its injuries, and then follows
his intuition toward the Cree Camp. There he discovers the bodies of Kay-gwa-
daush's father and mother, mangled by a huge bear, and tracks Kay-gwa-daush
(also known as Susan) along the lakeshore where she has escaped the bear's attack
by fleeing in a canoe without paddles. After rescuing her, he turns to tracking the
bear and-with the help of the dog-kills it with a shot from his bow-and-arrow,
plus one arrow delivered by hand to its heart. Paulsen's afterword relates the fac-
tual incident on which this story is based; he also assures us that he's been per-
suaded by an overwhelming response from readers to keep writing books about
Brian despite previously announcing the end of the series. On one hand, the new
novel is totally predictable if not contrived, but on the other, that's exactly what
reluctant readers need: ninety-nine pages of nonstop, linear action with a minimal
cast of characters, an undemanding vocabulary, and short sentences that keep the
beat moving. This latest book is, in many ways, an extended short story, lacking
depth of development but consistently sharp in focus. Paulsen fans, spurred on
perhaps by the "National Marketing Campaign" outlined for consumers, will be
lining up for a copyinn school and public libraries, as well as trade stores. BH
FEBRUARY 2004 
* 243
PFEFFER, 
WENDY 
Wiggling 
Worms 
at Work; 
illus. 
by 
Steve
Jenkins. 
HarperCollins, 2004 
[32p] 
(Let's-Read-and-Find-Out Science)
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028449-8 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028448-X 
$15.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-06-445199-2 
$4.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 1-3
Kids who like to cavort in the dirt will find earthworms to play with, and Pfeffer
gives them the context to understand what on earth the worms are doing. Ex-
plaining in simple language why worms are important to soil quality and healthy
plant life, the author covers almost everything there is to know about worms: what
and how they eat, how they move without legs or a backbone, where they live
underground, and how they loosen the soil ("They are called nature's plow") to
create tunnels for air and water to reach plant roots. There is one oversight to her
comprehensiveness: while she covers the worm's hermaphroditic nature and how
it "gives birth" with a cocoon of eggs, she doesn't explain how two worms mate,
just that they must: "Each worm is both male and female. But each one still needs
a mate. After mating, each worm crawls back into its burrow." The book favors
analogies drawn from children's experience, making the rather alien worm an al-
most familiar creature: "They slurp the hairlike strands of mold the same way you
might slurp strands of spaghetti." Jenkins' mixed-media collages show pink and
brown segmented worms in dirt, sometimes adding a farmer's red shoe or a hun-
gry robin for scale and perspective; the clearly visible paper fibers and textures
attempt to simulate the natural appearance of dirt and plant-life. While a bit too
stiff and abstract to add much to the text, they do present worms as they are: the
worms tunnel through dirt, eat plants, and appear indistinguishable from one an-
other-and from back to front. This is a straightforward and informative look at
one of nature's overlooked workers. Pair it with Cronin's Diary ofa Worm (BCCB
10/03) for a well-rounded wormy presentation. KH
RUELLE, KAREN GRAY 
Easter Egg Disaster; written and illus. by Karen Gray
Ruelle. 
Holiday House, 2004 
[32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8234-1806-5 
$14.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-8234-1823-5 
$4.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 1-3
Emily's got Easter eggs plans, and her big brother, Harry, is helping with the ex-
ecution, suggesting they opt for hard-boiled eggs rather than raw (Emily's better at
squashing eggs than blowing them) and guiding her through the color-mixing
process. They're so excited by the result that they decide to surprise their parents
by hiding the eggy works of art (and some chocolate eggs to boot); unfortunately,
their parents do not appreciate the accidental discovery of hard-boiled eggs under
the chair seat and chocolate eggs in the oven, and the sibs fear that the disaster has
put off the Easter Bunny. Ruelle deftly manages to include details of Easter-egg
preparation and some tidbits about color theory without ever bogging down her
main holiday story or departing excessively from reality (the result of the kids'
color experimentation is that "all six eggs were mud-brown"). The impulse for
premature holiday celebration will be immediately understandable to young read-
ers, and the tension over the endangered holiday will gently strike home. Ruelle's
cat family is a little flatly depicted, but the spruce lines and warm sunny tones
244 
* THE BULLETIN
(Harry's a fluffy orange guy while Emily's a trim little tiger kitty) are welcoming to
novice readers. Style and subject matter will make this a suitable Easter readaloud
as well as readalone for kids eagerly anticipating their own egg hunts. DS
SCRIMGER, RICHARD 
Eugene's Story; illus. by Gillian Johnson. 
Tundra,
2003 
24p
ISBN 0-88776-544-0 
$15.95 
R Gr. 1-3
Eugene (from Bun Bun's Birthday, BCCB 4/01) is trying to write a story about
himself, but his big sister keeps butting in with pesky details about the truth that
interfere with his way of seeing the world. So what if he can't really dress himself,
or pour cereal neatly, or build a tower of blocks as big as the room? It's his story,
after all. As Winifred pokes more and more fun at each of Eugene's revisions, he
begins to phase her out of his story. When she insists on continuing to challenge
his version of events, he discovers a strange power: if he tries hard enough, he can
make her disappear, voice and all. Now he can write his story the way he wants to,
which he does, featuring himself as a contented only child. Author and illustrator
work together effectively to draw a sharp line between Eugene's gratifying fantasy
and Winifred's insistent reality. In Eugene's stories, the narration is enclosed in a
text box using a comic sans serif font, and the accompanying line-and-watercolor
illustrations reflect the tidy competence of Eugene's perception of himself.
Winifred's interruptions feature more chaotic depictions of rumpled clothes, messy
surroundings, and a dubious Eugene, accompanied by text in the more standard
Times font. Winifred is maniacal throughout in a big-sister sort of way, taking on
the frenzied features of a Quentin Blake creation before she finally disappears, to
the intense satisfaction of both Eugene and the reader. Indeed, this delightful
fantasy of the power of story to remake the world the way you want it will appeal
to beleaguered siblings everywhere. KC
SEIDLER, TOR 
Brainboy and the DeathMaster. Geringer/HarperCollins,
2003 
311p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-019182-6 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029181-8 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Computer-game whiz-kid Darryl has recently lost his family in a tragic fire, and
he's been placed in a youth home financed by wealthy computer genius Keith
Masterly. After the boy successfully beats all levels of Masterly's computer game,
MondoGameMaster, Masterly shows up unexpectedly to adopt Darryl. When
something seems too good to be true it usually is, and Darryl soon discovers that
Masterly doesn't really want to adopt him but to make him a member of a juvenile
think-tank formed to stabilize a molecule that will conquer time-the key ingredi-
ent in a chemical fountain of youth. All seems well at first, but Darryl, thanks to
think-tank member Nina, realizes that Masterly's plot is even more nefarious than
it seems: once the molecule has been stabilized, Masterly intends to kill all the
young scientists and abscond with the formula. While the plot is loaded with
contrivance, it moves so fast that it isn't until it's over that readers will question it
(for example, now that Darryl has a formula for an effective fountain of youth,
what will he do with it? What happens to Masterly, who has overdosed on the
youth serum and reverted to infancy?). Predictable as the conclusion may be, the
happily-ever-after (except the villain) ending is satisfying. Seidler's main charac-
ters have spunk and humanity, even when they're a bit too saintly, and the affec-
FEBRUARY 2004 
* 
245
tion among them will make readers care about their fates. Young readers fond of
techno-fantasy such as the Artemis Fowl series may find this a welcome diversion.
JMD
SMALLCOMB, 
PAM 
The Last Burp of Mac McGerp; illus. by Lizzy
Bromley. 
Bloomsbury, 2003 
117p
Trade ed. ISBN 1-58234-856-1 
$15.95
Paper ed. ISBN 1-58234-868-5 
$6.95 
R Gr. 3-5
Fifth-grader Lido Katz narrates the story of the battle of wills between his best
friend, Mac McGerp, and the new school principal, Mrs. Goodbody. Mac, burper
extraordinaire, is determined to drive the mean-spirited Mrs. Goodbody from
Walters Elementary School; Mrs. Goodbody is equally determined to suspend
Mac and ruin his chances for winning the National Burping Competition. The
battle between boy and bureaucrat escalates from prank to perfidy, with each do-
ing all possible to defeat the other. Their final confrontation involves a burp of
galactic proportions that sends Mrs. Goodbody into a trash can and Mac into
outer space. Smallcomb has an easy way with grade-school dialogue that adds
verisimilitude to Lido and Mac's friendship as well as their predicament. Mrs.
Goodbody is the elemental evil villainess, the epitome of malice whose bad end is
thoroughly justified. The humor is constant, and while a certain suspension of
disbelief is necessary for Mac's burping to be given the importance it deserves, the
author assumes the reader's complicity, and a good time is had by all. This title is
made to order for a classroom readaloud and for the patron who sighs, "Don't you
have anything funny?" Let the burping contests begin! JMD
STANLEY, JERRY 
Cowboys & Longhorns: A Portrait of the Long Drive. Crown,
2003 
88p 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-91565-6 
$20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-81565-1 
$18.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
The figure of the cowboy is an enduring one, controversially so, as Stanley points
out in his introduction. He's therefore trying to set the record straight ("If he
fought Indians, it was because he had no other choice. If he didn't talk much, it
was because he couldn't be heard over the sound of three thousand cattle pound-
ing the earth") and tell "the true story of cowboys and longhorns," the key ingredi-
ents of the nineteenth-century drive from Texas to the railroads that helped create
the cowboy myth. Stanley follows the process from the roundup of the wily open-
range longhorns in West Texas to the long, attrition-ridden slog north to the Kan-
sas railroads, en route describing the different men, different jobs, and different
disasters of the journey. His careful research shows in his concatenation of often
overlooked facts and his lively depiction of the dangerous, dirty, and underpaid
work of the cattle drovers, and there are some good observations about the effects
of the Long Drive on American ranching and habits of consumption. His empha-
sis on specifics and colorful terminology, however, sometimes blots out the bigger
picture (nowhere does the text say where Indian Territory actually was) and results
in contradictions (if the cowboys were, as stated, mostly African Americans or
vaqueros, it seems odd to claim that the typical cowboy "didn't like nonwhites,"
and it's never explained that the vaqueros were themselves often of Native Ameri-
can ancestry). Since photographs of the actual Long Drive are in short supply,
movie stills and more peripheral photographs have been drafted, not always suc-
246 
* THE BULLETIN
cessfully, to fill out the visual ranks. Overall, this trail is fairly well trodden in
literature, too, with works by Albert Marrin (Cowboys, Indians, and Gunfighters,
BCCB 9/93), Martin Sandler (Vaqueros, 5/01), and Russell Freedman (In the Days
of the Vaqueros, 12/01), but the specific focus on and dramatic portrayal of the
drive itself will set some readers' spurs a jingle-janglin'. There are no specific
source notes, but an extensive bibliographic note is included, as is an index. DS
SWAIN, GWENYrH 
Chig and the Second Spread. Delacorte, 2003 
199p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90094-5 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73065-9 
$14.95 
R Gr. 4-8
Chig, so named because she "ain't no bigger than a little red chigger," worries that
with her small stature and quiet ways, she's destined to become invisible. She
figures that might not be a bad thing when the big boys tease her, but she feels that
she's bigger inside than she seems. With the help of a warm assemblage of quirky
small-town folk and a wise teacher, Chig gets a perspective on her height. What's
more, she leaves off thinking about herself to puzzle out what to do about neigh-
bor kids who have been hit hard by the Depression, leaving them with demonstra-
bly depleted lunches ("What was more, his sandwich had only one thing spread
between its covers.... A sandwich with only a single spread pointed to a disturb-
ing lack of reserves"). Her thoughtfulness and well-planned action lead to both
short and long term solutions to the second-spread problem, and Chig learns the
difference between the awful kind of quiet that comes from being scared to speak
and the pleasant kind that comes from keeping your good deeds to yourself. Swain
has a delicate, folksy storytelling style that upholds and complements Chig's char-
acter; like Chig herself, the narration is sturdy and thoughtful and never overly
impressed with its own cleverness. While the historical detail (supplemented by
an author's note) makes this a solid addition to a unit on the Depression, it would
also make an engaging readaloud that will transport listeners to a back porch in
rural Southern Indiana. Chig's quiet triumph over her shyness, her shortness, and
schoolyard bullies who call her names and cheat at marbles will make her a popular
protagonist with both boy and girl readers. KC
SWEENEY, JOYCE 
Waitingfor June. Cavendish, 2003 
145p
ISBN 0-7614-5138-2 
$15.95 
NR 
Gr. 7-10
Senior Sophie Cooper awaits the birth of her daughter, whom she's already named
June, with genuine longing. Although she refuses to divulge the name of the
father, she does insist that it's not Joshua, a popular African-American jock and
her closest friend. Her shrewish mother finds this hard to believe, particularly in
light of the fact that Sophie has convinced Joshua to be her Lamaze coach. Joshua's
girlfriend, Acacia, also finds this a bit of a stretch, but in Fictionland all things are
possible, so Acacia helps Sophie shop for a new wardrobe and then agrees to join
Joshua in his delivery-room duties. Since this is evidently not enough plotting to
fill one novel, Sophie also has dreams of becoming a whale-so vivid that she
actually transports to the sites about which she dreams. She's also plagued by a
series of death threats (which disturb her enormously for a couple of pages at a
time) and she's determined to find out who her own father is, since Mom's not
telling. Sophie goes into labor at prom (she's attending with Joshua and Acacia,
who else), she's attacked in the Ladies Room by the jealous girlfriend of June's
FEBRUARY 2004 
* 247
father (we learn that he's a dead high school athlete with whom Sophie had a one-
night fling), blackbirds attack Sophie's attacker, Sophie gives birth to a black baby
(turns out Sophie's own father was black), and June's paternal grandmother shows
up to teach Sophie and June about June's Tequesta Indian heritage, through which
June has given Sophie magical dreams and powers. Only the most rabid melo-
drama devotees need pursue this improbable tale; for pregnant teen drama, try
Doherty's Dear Nobody (BCCB 1/93) or Williams-Garcia's Like Sisters on the Home-
front (9/95) instead. EB
TADJO, VWRONIQUE, comp. 
Talking Drums: A Selection ofPoemsfrom Africa South
ofthe Sahara; comp. and illus. by VWronique Tadjo. 
Bloomsbury, 2004 
96p
ISBN 1-58234-813-8 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
A noted writer from the C6te d'Ivoire, Tadjo (Lord of the Dance, BCCB 10/89)
takes on the daunting challenge of representing poetry from many different Afri-
can peoples, including East, West, and South Coast groups from Senegal to
Botswana and Somalia. Her brief introduction gives some background for the
anthology's organization into seven sections: the universe, animals, love, people,
death, ethnic identity ("Negritude"), and ongoing political unrest. Included verses
come from named authors (such as Chinua Achebe and Wole Soyinka, as well as
poets less likely to be known to readers) and from traditional sources. Sometimes
the poems need more context than is provided, and the more political selections
tend toward the overtly didactic: "And because we have too much information,/
And no clear direction,/ Too many facts,/ And not enough faith,/ Too much con-
fusion,/ And crave clear vision;/ Too many fears,/ And not enough light-/ I whis-
per to myself modest maxims/ As thought-friends for a new age." Often enough,
however, readers will have little difficulty making metaphorical leaps between im-
ages, such as those in "Love-song" from the Soga: "All things in nature love each
other:/ The lips love the teeth./ The beard loves the chin./ And all the little insects
go brrrrr together." It's too bad that there's no explanation about translations, but
there is enough folkloric and original substance in the collection of seventy-five
poems to recommend it as a resource for African cultural study. A map (which
unfortunately fails to note the location of the tribes given as poetic sources), list of
poets by place, glossary, and index of first lines make the poetry accessible for both
reports and efferent browsing. Pen-and-ink drawings project stylized black-and-
white graphic motifs as a decorative extension of the words. BH
TEKAVEC, HEATHER 
What's ThatAwfulSmell?; illus. by Margaret Spengler. 
Dial,
2004 
32p
ISBN 0-8037-2660-0 
$15.99 
R 3-5 yrs
One hot afternoon Dog heads for the barn, seeking shade, a hidden bone, and a
nap. What he finds, however, is something dreadful: "'What's that AWFUL
smell?' he growled." Dog is frantically searching for the source of the smell when
he is joined by Duck, who quacks and chokes and repeats the original question:
"And what's that AWFUL smell?" The sheep and cows join the search for the
smell's source, and, when Dog discovers a little pink piglet, they think they have
found it. Subsequent attempts to deal with the smell include giving the piglet a
bath, covering it with flowers, moving it to the chicken coop (the chickens object),
and squishing strawberries on it. Nothing helps, and the animals resign them-
248 
* THE BULLETIN
selves to staying outside the barn, until Cat comes along to retrieve her dinner
from beneath the hay: a liver, onion, and tuna-fish sandwich, hidden in the barn
"a few days ago." Not even Cat will eat the fragrant sandwich now, but she knows
just what to do with it: "Cat pushed the sandwich in front of the piglet, who ate it
up in one gulp. 'Oink,' it said happily. And the smell was gone." Tekavec's tale
combines a clean plot trajectory with simple repetitive language that results in a
strong readaloud with easy audience-participation possibilities. Spengler's pastels
have a smooth, rich surface, the colors densely applied and crisply blended. The
cartoony animals inhabit spreads large enough to be seen by groups, in balanced
compositions that keep the action close. If you want to crack up your storytime
listeners, try this one, but be ready for the "pee-yoos!" that are sure to accompany
it. JMD
VAN DRAANEN, WENDELIN 
Swear to Howdy. 
Knopf, 2003 
126p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-92505-8 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-82505-3 
$15.95 
Ad Gr. 4-7
Rusty Cooper and Joey Banks are best friends in the old-fashioned boyish tradi-
tion-sharing swimming holes, practical jokes, and a dearth of common sense-
and their lives revolve around school, family, and their tight friendship. The chapters
are a blithe series of individual adventures, most of them humorous, some under-
scored with an uneasy sense of impending tragedy: Joey's father is unpredictably
abusive, and Joey is obviously afraid of him. The boys' shenanigans will have
readers chortling nevertheless: from an intimate encounter with a crappie in the
swimming hole to the capture of a mind-blowingly huge bullfrog named Tank,
the adventures here are full of farts, bugs, and bodily fluids, enough to please the
most discriminating reader. The climactic plot point is unfortunately random and
convenient: a practical joke involving a local road, a legendary ghost, and a dark
night backfires, and Joey's older sister, Amanda Jane, dies in a resulting car crash.
The death is deemed accidental, and both families go into deep mourning. Joey
and Rusty "swear to howdy" to keep their involvement in the death secret, but
Joey cannot carry the guilt; his attempt at suicide is foiled by a worried Rusty, who
then confesses all to both sets of parents. Despite obvious foreshadowing, the
transition from friendship story to dark tragedy is abrupt, and the accidental death
of Amanda Jane is overly contrived. Joey's father is a one-dimensional character
who apparently exists only to torment his son, and the movie-of-the-week wrap-
up is just too darn convenient. Still, Joey and Rusty's friendship is the stuff grade-
school memories are made of, and their ultimate reconciliation-and Van Draanen's
final iteration of what friendship really is-will give thoughtful readers something
to consider. JMD
WEEKS, SARAH 
If I Were a Lion; illus. by Heather M. Solomon. 
Atheneum,
2004 
[40p]
ISBN 0-689-84836-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
The narrator's mother has accused her of being "wild" and sentenced her to the
time-out chair, and the understandably offended girl explores the ridiculousness of
the charge in tidy couplets ("Wild?/ Who me?/ That's so absurd./ How could she
even use that word?"). She primly notes that she isn't following the wild ways of
FEBRUARY 2004 
* 249
lion, bear, or wolf, and that she is "precocious and polite" while "wild's ferocious/
and will bite." Most importantly, wild won't apologize, whereas our little girl,
anger diminished, finally sports a note bearing a trickly-lettered "Sorry." The
note's scrawled print will make that climactic apology tough for young audiences
to grasp, but the poetry flows smoothly and the animal images are engaging; kids
will particularly appreciate the undercurrent of self-righteousness in the narrator's
self-defense (and, for that matter, the literal accuracy of her differentiation-at
least when it comes to the animals). Solomon's dramatic watercolor and gouache
art adds richness as well as imaginative interpretation to the simple text, since the
animals the narrator describes and a host of others gallop through the house, wreak-
ing havoc of which the angelic-looking narrator can only dream. The protagonist's
limpid blue eyes may help her cause, but there's a willful set to that rosebud mouth
that suggests this is one tough cookie despite her babydoll appearance. Touches of
photorealistically drafted detail add startling immediacy to the scenes, but con-
trolled compositions, intense colors, and lush textures make that authenticity a
gateway to rich fantasy rather than a flat literality. This is more prosaic than the
classic Sendak, but if you're looking for an alternative with some exciting real-life
animal appearances, this would be a welcome addition to the storytime zoo. DS
WERLIN, NANCY 
Double Helix. 
Dial, 2004 
[256p]
ISBN 0-8037-2606-6 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7 up
Eli's formerly brilliant mother is now in a nursing home, suffering from the final
stages of Huntington's Disease, and eighteen-year-old Eli and his father are war-
ring over the family secrets connected with the disease and the possibility of Eli's
having inherited it. Eli's understandable interest in genetics helps him land a
postgraduate job at Wyatt Transgenics, but he's unprepared for his father's vehe-
ment objections to Dr. Wyatt or for the remarkable personal interest Dr. Wyatt's
taking in his newest hire. A chance discovery of a hidden part of the lab, some
further uncovering of family secrets, and a meeting with Kayla, an attractive young
woman who seems strangely familiar, all propel Eli down the road to a shocking
revelation: Eli's mother had arranged with Dr. Wyatt that her eggs should be
removed, fertilized, and genetically assessed, with a result free from the genetic
taint of Huntington's to be reimplanted in her in exchange for Wyatt's unfettered
use of all the other eggs. Werlin carefully crafts this emotion-packed and thought-
ful story, effectively weaving in Eli's believable reaction to his family's devastation
and the possibility he may be carrying a genetic time-bomb (he's deliberately avoided
telling his beloved long-term girlfriend about his mother's disease, and he's made
a point of keeping girlfriend and family completely and totally separate). It's there-
fore particularly plausible that he's drawn to Dr. Wyatt's utopian, if also scarily
eugenic, view of a genetically manipulated future. Most touching of all, however,
is his discovery of his bond with Kayla and the horrific implications of their differ-
ences ("I knew now. I understood why Kayla was older than me. Simply, Kayla's
egg had not fit my mother's specifications. It had not been negative for HD").
The taut pacing gives this thrilleresque appeal, the emotional intensity and con-
temporary plausibility will suck in even readers usually skittish about speculative
fiction, and the challenging exploration of genetic ethics will definitely prompt
some thoughtful discussion. DS
250 
* THE BULLETIN
WHITNEY, KIM ABLON 
See You Down the Road. Knopf, 2004 
[192p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-92467-1 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-82467-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 7-12
Bridget's from an old Irish Traveler family, and she's spent her life roaming around
America in the family trailer as her family brings in money from modest scams
ranging from shoddy repair work to misleading sales to returning shoplifted goods
for cash. At sixteen, she's of marriageable age, and her parents are keen to arrange
a traditional marriage with Patrick, the handsome and capable son of family friends.
Bridget has always been very taken with Patrick, but she's starting to chafe under
her familial restrictions, especially since her scapegrace older brother, Jimmy, gets
forgiven tremendous breaches while she's disciplined for the slightest transgres-
sion, and since she's discovered that her mother has a secret connection to some-
one in the non-Traveler world. She's also concerned by her tendency to worry
about the victims of her family's scams, a worry that might interfere when her
uncle leads her, Patrick, and Jimmy in a high-stakes scam out west and out of their
usual league. This is a life not usually seen in literature for young people, and
Whitney sidesteps some cliches by making Bridget genuinely and understandably
drawn to the young man of her parents' choice; there's also an interesting com-
plexity in the contradiction between the tough-minded cynicism about "country"
(non-Traveler) people and the straitlaced restrictions of the young women. The
plotting lets the book down, however, with little rhyme or reason for Bridget's re-
embracing of the family ways and with nothing useful made of the revelation that
her mother's secret involves an older sister who left the Travelers when Bridget was
young; there are also touches of condescension that clumsily reveal the authorial
hand behind Bridget's first-person narration. Nonetheless, this is a thoughtful
look at a life very different from those of most readers, and they'll be intrigued to
contemplate their own reactions to such an existence. DS
WYATT, MELISSA 
Raising the Griffin. 
Lamb, 2004 
[288p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90115-1 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73095-0 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Alex Varenhoffs easy, undemanding life changes abruptly when his father, the
hereditary but exiled monarch of the fictional country of Rovenia, is asked to help
the post-revolutionary country by assuming its throne, and Alex's family leaves
behind their comfortable British life to become the royal family of a wounded and
divided Eastern European state. Alex is bitter from the get-go, particularly resent-
ing the controlling hand of his equerry and protocol advisor; he finds his only ally
in Sophy, the daughter of the family's American PR advisor, but he's too dazzled
by a naughty playgirl princess, who entices him into a tabloid-fodder romp, to
appreciate Sophy. The triviality of these problems is brought sharply home, how-
ever, when an anti-monarchist manages to evade the defenses and shoot Alex in
the head, nearly killing him and causing his family to question the wisdom of their
decision to accept their royal roles. This is the serious side of The Princess Diaries
(BCCB 12/00), and Wyatt does an excellent job of outlining the hardships and
political demands of this kind of contemporary monarchy; it's also clear that she's
extensively planned out the language, geography, and history of her vaguely Ro-
manian country, which helps give the story a rich context. Unfortunately, some-
FEBRUARY 2004 
* 251
times the stage set overwhelms the drama, as the outlining of the Rovenian back-
ground gets in the way of the human dynamics and the people aren't always as well
developed as the context: Alex is generally a whiny and unsympathetic character,
whose injury merely makes him self-involved in a different way, and the character
of Sophy is largely wasted. This is, however, an intriguing premise and a thought-
ful exploration of the perennially alluring topic of royalty, and readers will enjoy
imagining how much better they'd be at the job than Alex. A glossary of Rovenian
words and a genealogical table of the Varenhoff dynasty are included. DS
ZINNEN, LINDA 
Holding at Third. Dutton, 2004 
[160p]
ISBN 0-525-47163-4 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Since his older brother, Tom, was diagnosed with bone cancer, Matt's been the
sturdy, reliable, and self-sufficient one ("Everything's great" is his mantra) of the
family, finding solace in his beloved game of baseball (he's an ace hitter) and being
Tom's best support. Now the family's moved across the state to see Tom through
the bone marrow transplant that's his last chance (which Matt persists in hearing
as "last treatment"), and Matt's ability to hang in there is starting to decline: he
can't bring himself to visit Tom in the hospital, and he's fallen into a slump bat-
ting for his new team. Zinnen (author of The Truth about Rats, Rules, & Seventh
Grade, BCCB 6/01) provides a sympathetic focus on the kid who's holding it
together so hard his knuckles are turning white, and what happens when he starts
to let go. There's an honest look at the variety of responses to serious illness,
ranging from Matt's refusal to acknowledge the possibility of his brother's death to
his grandmother's fatalism to eighteen-year-old Tom's own attempts to fit in life
experiences for which he may be unable to wait (he secretly marries his girlfriend,
much to the chagrin of his parents), and it's leavened by flashes of wit. Unfortu-
nately, the narrative is somewhat muddy and confusing, with flashbacks awkwardly
interweaving with current events; the narration's midbook switch from third per-
son to first person is more baffling than effective, and Matt's emotional catharsis
so hasty that it seems as if he's merely successfully reverted to his keeping-it-all-in
strategy. Still, the baseball theme and its effective reflection of Matt's turmoil
make this an appealing read, and it might make an interesting partner to Koertge's
Shakespeare Bats Cleanup (BCCB 7/03). DS
1<^
/ /
252 
* 
THE BULLETIN
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
LESESNE, TERI S. 
Making the Match: The Right Book for the Right Reader at the
Right Time, Grades 4-12. 
Stenhouse, 2003 
232p
Paper ed. ISBN 1-57110-381-3 
$21.00
In a volume peppered with reminiscences and musings about books and reading
by such authors as Chris Crutcher, Jack Gantos, Sharon Creech, Sonya Sones, and
Joan Bauer, Lesesne leads readers through the steps of familiarizing oneself with
the young adult audience (her rather broad definition of young adult covers ages
ten through twenty) and the books that matter to them. The book is divided into
three parts: Knowing the Kids, Knowing the Books, and Making the Match.
"Knowing the Kids" includes sections on adolescent development, what young
adults have to say about books and reading, and the use of surveys and question-
naires for information gathering. "Knowing the Books" discusses what makes a
book successful, fiction genres, and information books. "Making the Match" ex-
amines reading aloud, booktalking, and other methods for motivating young adult
readers. Included throughout are examples of techniques successfully used by
Lesesne to connect young adults and books, as well as case histories of young adult
students she has encountered. Extensive appendices offer annotated lists of books,
including Mysteries, Books on Tape, Poetry, Tough Books for Tough Times, Books
to Accompany Havighurst's Developmental Tasks, and so on, as well as Print and
Online Resources, Alternatives to Book Reports, and more. The lists vary oddly
between alphabetization by author and alphabetization by title, and the choices
are fairly standard, but the main text usefully covers some key issues in young adult
reading. A list of contributors' works and professional books cited is also ap-
pended; there is no index. JMD
FEBRUARY 2004 * 253
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Abuse-fiction: Van Draanen
ADVENTURE: Danko; Jinks;
Werlin
African Americans: Holiday
African Americans-fiction: Sweeney
African Americans-stories: Johnson
Africa-poetry: Tadjo
Animals: Park
Animals-stories: France; Jane;
Weeks
ANTHOLOGIES: Janeczko
Architecture: Mann
Art and artists-fiction: Lamm
Baseball-fiction: Zinnen
BEDTIME STORIES: Jane
Behavior-stories: Weeks
BIBLE STORIES: Cullen
Birthdays-fiction: Mass
Brothers and sisters-fiction: Foon;
Ruelle; Scrimger
Brothers-fiction: Zinnen
Bullies-fiction: Brooks; Huser
Burps-fiction: Smallcomb
Cats-stories: Oiler
Civics: January
Clothing-stories: Bannerman
Computers-fiction: Seidler
Consumer education: Graydon
COUNTING BOOKS: Jane
Cousins-fiction: Guest
Cowboys: Stanley
Cows-fiction: Nolan
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Brooks; Seidler; Whitney
Current events: January
Death and dying-fiction: Lamm;
Van Draanen
Depression, the-fiction: Swain
Disabilities-fiction: Huser
Dogs-fiction: Paulsen
Dogs-stories: Cullen; Tekavec
Easter-fiction: Ruelle
Emotions-stories: France
Ethics and values: Brooks;
Graydon; Van Draanen; Werlin;
Whitney; Wyatt
Fairies-fiction: Bottner
Fairies-stories: Cowley
Families-fiction: Fogelin
FANTASY: Dunkle; Foon; Gideon;
Jennings
Fathers-fiction: Werlin
Fear-stories: Gorbachev
Fish: Davies
Fishing-fiction: Ashby
FOLKTALES AND FAIRY TALES:
Cowley; Cullen; Echlin; Krull
Food and eating-fiction: Nolan
Food and eating-stories: Oiler
Friends-fiction: Bottner; Guest;
Huser; Van Draanen
Friends-stories: France; Gorbachev
Games-fiction: Seidler
Gardening-stories: Oiler
Gays and lesbians-fiction: Huser
Genetics-fiction: Werlin
Giants-stories: Loredo
Gods and goddesses-fiction: Echlin
Grandfathers-fiction: French
Grandmothers-fiction: Lamm
Growing up-fiction: Mass
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Bruchac; Crowley; Giff; Swain
History, U.S.: Bruchac; Granfield;
Holiday; Mann; Stanley
254 
* THE BULLETIN
History, world: Jinks
HUMOR: Cannon; Danko; Loredo;
Nolan; Smallcomb; Tekavec
Illness-fiction: Lamm; Werlin;
Zinnen
Imagination-fiction: Scrimger
Immigrants-fiction: French; Giff
Ireland: Krull
Ireland-fiction: Giff
Ireland-stories: Cowley
Irish Travelers-fiction: Whitney
Jews-fiction: Crowley
JOURNALS: Kimmel
Kidnapping-fiction: Foon
Knights and chivalry-fiction: Jinks
Korean War: Granfield
Language arts: Park
Literature, children's: Bannerman
Love-poetry: Janeczko
Magic-fiction: Bottner; Dunkle;
Gideon
Marine biology: Davies
Marketing: Graydon
Medieval life-fiction: Crowley; Jinks
Monarchy-fiction: Wyatt
Mothers-fiction: Cannon; Fogelin
Music and musicians-fiction:
French
Music and musicians-stories:
Cowley; Johnson
MYSTERIES: Crowley
MYTHOLOGY: Echlin
Native Americans-fiction: Bruchac
Nature study: Davies; Pfeffer
Oceans-fiction: Ashby
Oceans-stories: Loomis
Orphans-fiction: Dunkle
Persecution-fiction: Jennings
Pirates-fiction: Cannon
POETRY: Janeczko; Tadjo
POP-UP BOOKS: Jane
Prejudice-fiction: Crowley
Princes-fiction: Wyatt
Rabbits-stories: Loomis; Oiler
Reading aloud: Danko; Echlin;
Smallcomb; Swain
Reading, easy: Bottner; Cannon;
Guest; Ruelle
Reading, family: Krull
Reading, reluctant: Danko
Relationships-fiction: Nilsson
Relatives-fiction: Kimmel
RHYMING STORIES: Jane
Romance-fiction: Nilsson; Whitney
Royalty-fiction: Wyatt
Sailors and sailing-fiction: Ashby
School-fiction: Brooks; Huser;
Smallcomb
Science: Davies
Science and scientists-fiction:
Werlin
SCIENCE FICTION: Seidler;
Werlin
Sharks: Davies
Sisters-fiction: Dunkle
Social studies: January
SONGS: Holiday
Sounds: Park
SPORTS STORIES: Zinnen
Storytime: Bannerman; France;
Gorbachev; Johnson; Loomis;
Loredo; Park; Tekavec; Weeks
SUPERNATURAL STORIES:
Sweeney
SURVIVAL STORIES: Paulsen
Teen pregnancy-fiction: Sweeney
Tigers-stories: Bannerman
Urban life: Mann
Voyages and travel-fiction: Giff
Voyages and travel-stories:
Gorbachev; Loomis
Werewolves-fiction: Jennings
West, the: Stanley
Wishes-stories: Cowley
Wolves-fiction: Jennings
Work-fiction: Fogelin
World cultures: Tadjo
Worms: Pfeffer
Writers and writing-fiction:
Kimmel; Scrimger
*
PHILIP EEVE
"Reeve's debut novel is a staggering feat of engineering, a
brilliant construction that offers new wonders at every turn ....
Reeve's prose is sweeping and cinematic, his ideas bold
and effortless ... " -Starred review / Publishers Weekly
-"Exciting and visually descriptive .... Action-packed ....
The book has an ambience similar to that of
Philip Pullman's'His Dark Materials' trilogy"
- Starred review / School Library Journal
book's tone of high adventure and danger; the grimy yet
cal 
post-apocalyptic setting; the narrow escapes,
eepening loyalties, and not-infrequent bitter
-all keep readers' attention riveted"
-The Horn Book
CORETTA SCOTT KING HONOR AUTHOR
RITA WILLIAMS-GARCIA
no laughter here
Ages 12 up.
$15.99 ($23.89) Tr (0-688-16247-9)
$16.89 ($25.89) Lb (0-688-16248-7)
The Meanest Doll In the World
is Seeing Stars!
The creative trio pulls out all the stops ....
will be left yearning for another installment."
-Publishers Weekly,
starred review
With its indelible mingling of wit, action,
ration, and art, this [book] stands alone,
specially thrill fans expectant of the original
le." 
-Kirkus Reviews,
starred review
.. Nothing short of brilliant.... This fantasy
d to be a favorite for years to come."
-School Library Journal,
starred review
in nanerhbak!
0-7868-0878-0 * $15.99
HYPERION
BOOKS FOR CHILDREN
www.hyperleabooksfo 
e
Sequel to The Doll People
by Ann M. Martin and Laura Godwin
Pictures by Brian Selznick
FREE
TRIAL ISSUE
MT 
IH
wA
of an award-winning
publication!
Visit
www.TeachingK-8.com
Click on
FREE TRIAL ISSUE
Teaching K-8 is 
filled with hundreds of unique ideas
and activities that help teachers present new challenges
to their students, learn new concepts and develop new skills.
To receive your
FREE TRIAL ISSUE visit
www.TeachingK-8.com
Teaching K-8 Magazine
40 Richards Avenue * Norwalk, CT 06854
Lirary Jour
'Young children will delight at~
to be an oft-requested title."-
Center of Children 's Booksr
IRRESISTIBLE*
1
URiMISi
1325 So
Champa
U.SA.
ADDRESS
0008-9036(200402)57:6; 1-A
University of Illinois Press 
PERIODIC
1325 South Oak Street 
POA
Champaign, IL 61820 
PSTAGE
U.SA.
CHAMPAIGN, IL
ADDRESS SERVICE REQUESTED
-,j
us
;NIL
:g 
;V
; I
You may now access The Bulletin Online with an individualized username
and password.
The Bulletin Online is available only'to print subscribers, and includes the
1998-2003 volume years plus the current issues as they are published.
The online version allows you to search the current issue or the entire
database by author, title, age or grade level.
To access The Bulletin Online:
I. Go to http://www.prairienet.orglccbl
2. When accessing The Bulletin Online for the first time, use the sub-
scriber number that appears in the upper left-hand corner of the
mailing label on your print copy as both your username and pass-
word. This subscriber number will usually be a four- or five-digit
number but may also be a five-character letter/number combination.
3. After logging in for the first time, you will be required to change your
password to something other than your username. This password is
case sensitive and should be one word only. Please store this new
password in a safe place. Your username (which is also your sub-
scriber number) will not change.
Remember, The Bulletin Online is not licensed for public use; only indi-
vidual print subscribers and institutional subscribers' staff are granted
access, so please do not share your access codes. We are working to
expand The Bulletin Online's capabilities and therefore create broader
electronic subscription options for individuals and institutions.
Non-subscribers can learn more about The Bulletin of the Center for
Children's Books at: http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb/
Please e-mail any feedback or questions to: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu.
