I LLINOI S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
I 
,a
HI JANET.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
4F 
0
*~ 
£
0·1i
:*
ii:;x 
·"I
A*€
E.L. KONIGSBURG
(ta
Beginning with her 1968
Newbery Award acceptance
speech, and ending with her
1992 Anne Carroll Moore lec-
ture, this collection of Elaine
Konigsburg's speeches reflects
the state of children's book
publishing past and present.
Konigsburg's acute observa-
tions; her wide-ranging knowl-
edge of books, art and human
nature; her wit and eloquence
make this a collection that will
delight and intrigue all lovers
of children's literature.
0-689-31993-2 / $29.95
A Jean Karl Book
Illustrated with
full-color art
reproductions
ATHENEUM BOOKS FOR YOUNG READERS
An imprint of Simon & Schuster Children's Publishing Division
866 Third Avenue 
New York, NY 10022
a
I 
I 
I 
I
THE
BUvL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
June 1995
Vol. 48 No. 10
A LOOK INSIDE
335 THE BIG PICTURE
From Pictures to Words: A Book about Making a Book
written and illustrated by Janet Stevens
336 ANNOUNCEMENT
337 NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
337 * You're a Genius, Blackboard Bear written and illustrated by Martha
Alexander
344 * Pierced by a Ray ofSun: Poems about the Times We Feel Alone compiled
by Ruth Gordon
353 
* Missing Pieces by Norma Fox Mazer
355 * Almost a Hero by John Neufeld
366 PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
368 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
$r-IY
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin ofthe Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
STAFF
Roger Sutton, Editor (RS)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Susan Dove Lempke, Reviewer (SDL)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Heather McCammond-Watts, Editorial Assistant (HMW)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS ADVISORY BOARD
Leigh Estabrook, Dean, GSLIS, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Selma K. Richardson, Professor, GSLIS
Christine Jenkins, Assistant Professor, GSLIS
Richard C. Anderson, Director, Center for the Study of Reading, UIUC
Jean Osborn, Associate Director, Center for the Study of Reading
P. David Pearson, Dean, College of Education, UIUC
Violet J. Harris, Associate Professor, College of Education
Nancy O'Brien, Education Subject Specialist, Library, UIUC
Peggy Miller, Associate Professor, Department of Speech Communication, UIUC
Ann D. Carlson, Associate Professor, GSLIS, Rosary College
Janice Harrington, Head of Children's Services, Champaign Public Library
Elizabeth Huntoon, Director Systemwide Children's Services, Chicago Public Library
Janie Schomberg, Librarian, Leal Elementary School, Urbana, Illinois
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $35.00; individuals, $29.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Roger Sutton, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, Children's Research Center, 51
Gerty Drive, Champaign, IL 61820
Second-class postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1995 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Janet Stevens, from From Pictures to Words: A Book about Making a Book
©1995 and used by permission of Holiday House.
JUNE 1995 * 
335
THE BIG PICTURE
From Pictures to Words: A Book about Making a
Book
written and illustrated by Janet Stevens
"Hi Janet." What a way to start the day-walking into your workspace being
followed by a koala and a rhino (and a walrus and guinea pig, whom we couldn't
fit on the cover). Surrounded by her inimitably drawn animals, illustrator Janet
Stevens settles down for a day in the studio, and, boy, does she have help: "Psst.
Psst. J-a-a-a-n-e-t." It seems that the menagerie is not content with being illus-
trated; now they want Janet to write a story, starring, of course, them: "We need
to be in a book. We want something exciting to do. We need places to go, people
to meet. We're like actors without a stage, burgers without buns, aliens without
spaceships!" Stevens grudgingly gives in ("OK, but don't expect too much"), se-
lects her cast ("Koala Bear, Cat, and Rhino. You've been in my imagination the
longest"), and begins.
Where do you get your ideas? is a question posed to authors and illustra-
tors by kids and adults alike. Artists, generally, dismiss the question as banal, but
that may be because they simply do not know how to answer it. As Stevens replies
to Cat's suggestion that the story be about aliens and spaceships, "Hmmm." From
Pictures to Words is a breezy but blunt introduction to how books are created.
While we've seen a number of books about the book production process (see Aliki's
How a Book Is Made, BCCB 11/86, and for specific information about art repro-
duction, Ruth Heller's Color, reviewed below) and another bunch about creative
inspiration (see Cynthia Rylant's Best Wishes, BCCB 9/92), Stevens' is a book that
gets down to business, conveying what it means by what it does. Those animals
are her ideas, and they give her ideas. They wander around inside her head, pursue
her at the studio door, hound her at the drawing table. Sometimes they are helpful
(as when Koala suggests introducing a pizza in the finale), sometimes they need to
shut up (as when Stevens rebuffs Cat's attempt to bring aliens into the story),
sometimes they need to be left out ("Anansi, you stay out of this. You have your
own book").
Stevens is lucky in having an uncommonly commonsensical zoo to play
around with. After she sketches out a narrative in which the animals prepare to go
camping, search for the perfect spot, and end up in their own backyard, Koala puts
her foot down: "CUT! This story's boring! Most of it is a lot of yak, yak, yak
about finding the perfect camping spot. Nothing really happens..." Those italics
are ours, but they should be everybody's in this era of glamorous picture books
that have lots to look at but little to say. More authors and publishers should be
paying attention to Koala's demand: "You need to add a problem, tension, and
drama!" To her credit, Stevens listens, as she does to her editor (Holiday House's
Margery Cuyler in a cameo appearance), and the finished story begins to take
336 
* THE BULLETIN
form. Truth be told, it's not a story that will go down through the ages, but it does
have a beginning, middle, and end, and something does happen.
Something happens in this book-about-a-book as well. It's a drama about
the jump from mind to hand to page, and the decisions, both creative and techni-
cal, (one sequence shows the same scene in watercolor, colored pencil, markers,
and black pencil) that allow the leap to be made. True to the theme, the book
looks unstudied, with the imaginary characters rendered in color, the illustrator
and her tools in black-and-white, and the whole with an impromptu, maybe-this-
might-work line that captures the intuitive process of creating a book. While her
information is forthright and sensible, Stevens doesn't attempt to answer all the
big questions, such as why Koala, Rhino, et al. are in her head in the first place. It's
enough that she lets them out to make the story.
Roger Sutton, Editor
ANNOUNCEMENT
Please note that the editorial office of The Bulletin is moving. As of June 1, 1995,
review copies and correspondence about reviews should be sent to:
Roger Sutton, Editor
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
Children's Research Center
51 Gerty Drive
Champaign, IL 61820
e-mail: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu
This move will have no effect on your subscription; the address for subscription
and advertising inquiries remains the same:
University of Illinois Press
BCCB
1325 S. Oak St.
Champaign, IL 61820
S~b
JUNE 1995 
* 
337
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ACKERMAN, DIANE 
Monk Seal Hideaway; illus. with photographs by Bill
Curtsinger. 
Crown, 1995 
36p
Library ed. ISBN 0-517-59674-1 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-59673-3 $15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Daydreaming about monk seals and unable to get any information about them at
Sthe library, Diane Ackerman (author of the adult bestseller A Natural History ofthe
Senses) decides that she just has to go see the monk seals for herself. She joins a
research expedition to a monk-seal habitat near Hawaii, observing and tagging the
seals, and here reports back on their appearance and behavior. While the tone is
amiable and engaging, the ratio of facts to scenery is fairly low, and what informa-
tion there is seems stretched even for what is essentially a picture-book format.
Budding naturalists will appreciate the eyewitness report, though, and the large
color photographs, while repetitive, do a good job of capturing seal and sea. There's
an index, but you won't need it. RS
ALEXANDER, MARTHA 
You're a Genius, Blackboard Bear; written and illus. by
Martha Alexander. 
Candlewick, 1995 
[26p]
ISBN 1-56402-238-2 
$12.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 3-6 yrs
Making his first appearance in several years (see also BCCB 3/77, etc.), Black-
board Bear steps down from the chalkboard to help Anthony fulfill his wish to visit
the moon. First he draws the parts of a spaceship, and then takes the pieces outside
where the two friends assemble them into a eggshaped rocket. Anthony gathers
his sleeping bag, water, and food in preparation for the journey, but decides to let
Blackboard Bear go on alone after it strikes him that monsters may be on the
moon. Anthony is snoozing soundly when his bear friend crawls back through the
window, but, as the final picture shows, when he awakes he will find a souvenir
from Blackboard Bear's starry trip left on his blanket. Alexander paints silvery
nighttime watercolors with delicacy and humor and leaves some pages wordless
and others with a single line of text, making this a book children can pore over
alone once they have heard the story. Blackboard Bear combines the security and
competence of an adult with the bossability of a toy, making him the perfect friend
for preschoolers. SDL
ALMAGOR, GILA 
Under the Domim Tree; tr. by Hillel Schenker. 
Simon,
1995 
164p
ISBN 0-671-89020-4 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Set in an Israeli youth village in 1953, this explores the post-Holocaust lives of
three girls: the narrator, whose mentally unstable mother will tell her nothing
about her father, and two of her orphaned friends. The first friend, Yola, discovers
suddenly that her own father is still alive, but he dies before she can visit him in
Poland. The second friend, Mira, remembers, after years of amnesia, details of her
own family just in time to avoid being forced to live with two concentration-camp
survivors who claim she's their daughter. Each of these situations involves a mov-
338 
* THE BULLETIN
ing climactic scene, as does the narrator's own search for her father's grave. Some-
times the plot, already stretched by the large cast, tries to incorporate too many
stories and becomes unfocused. We especially need to know more about the
narrator's background than occasional references ("I hated the old neighborhood.
It was filled with bad people, and bad people have bad kids") and the two very brief
scenes we witness between her and her mother. The translation, too, is occasion-
ally stiff ("Like during a war, we ran from the dining room into the big hall"). On
the positive side, the episodes are vividly realized, with an emotional tension un-
derscoring the courage that children needed to start over after World War II. BH
BARTON, BYRON, ad. 
The Wee Little Woman; ad. and illus. by Byron
Barton. 
HarperCollins, 1995 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023388-5 
$12.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023387-7 
$12.95 
R 
2-5 yrs
The wee little woman's wee little cat drinks the milk she got from the wee little
cow, making the wee little woman shout in her loudest wee little voice "Scat cat!"
The cat does scat for a "wee long time," but returns to find the wee little woman
sitting at her wee little table with a (no doubt wee little) tear trickling down her
cheek. The cat gets a big drink of milk, and even the cow looks happy. As in his
previous easy folktale adaptations, Barton uses a bold, graphic style, with the brightest
of colors against yellow and green backgrounds and with faces drawn in black.
The cat and cow are endearing, but Barton's large, chunky style of illustration
doesn't make anything in the book look especially wee or little. This is still a good
fit for toddler storytime, and with its big print, short words, and repetitive text, it
makes a great pre-primer as well. SDL
BLOS, JOAN W. 
The Hungry Little Boy; illus. by Dena Schutzer. 
Simon,
1995 
26p
ISBN 0-671-88128-0 
$14.00 
R 
18 months-3 yrs
A grandmother carefully and lovingly prepares lunch for her grandson. Each step
is detailed: "Next she peeled the carrot until it was smooth and shiny. Then she
cut it neatly into pieces nice to eat." When she is finished, the little boy eats the
lunch just as methodically, drinking milk between each course, and putting the
apple in his pocket "because now he wasn't hungry, but he might want it later."
Small children will greatly enjoy the everydayness of the story as well as the warmth
exemplified both by Grandma's caretaking and her eventual outdoor play with her
grandson. Readers who rush through the book will be missing all the opportuni-
ties for stopping, pointing out the parts of the lunch, doing some simple counting,
and predicting what will happen next. Schutzer's smeary oil paintings in gold,
brown, purple, and green match the tone perfectly, creating a cozy atmosphere
accented with softly realistic detail that is never too bold. The pleasures of ordi-
nary days, caught so well in Marisabina Russo's similarly themed The Lineup Book,
are captured here for even younger children. SDL
BODE, JANET 
Trust &dBetrayal: 
Real Life Stories ofFriends andEnemies. Delacorte,
1995 
159p
ISBN 0-385-32105-8 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 7-12
In Heartbreak and Roses (BCCB 9/94) Bode interviewed teens on the subject of
love; here she deals with the perhaps even more important subject of friendship.
JUNE 1995 
* 339
Her interviewees tell compelling stories of friends who help them through bad
times, friends whose loyalty disappears in a haze of jealousy, friends who can't take
it anymore, and friends who might be lovers; the format, more streamlined than it
was in the previous book, follows most interviews with two or three feedback quotes
from counselors, psychologists, or teens who are responding to the interview. The
voices sound authentic, with a blend of self-knowledge, blindness, strong feeling,
and often oddly dispassionate speech. The responses from clinicians are, unsur-
prisingly, often rather clinical, but the student respondents, negative as well as
positive, are inclined to be bluntly honest: for instance, about a girl confronting
her emerging lesbianism, one respondent says, "She should go back into the closet."
This has the grit of true-life drama with the appeal of soap opera (including a great
cliffhanger in the form of the sixteen-year-old boy who starts dating a twenty-
eight-year-old woman he met on a computer bulletin board) combined with an
easy-to-read format, making it an accessible and provocative book on a topic of
import. DS
BRANDENBURG, JIM 
An American Safari: Adventures on the North American Prai-
rie; written and illus. with photographs by Jim Brandenburg; ed. by JoAnn Bren
Guernsey. 
Walker, 1995 
[4 4p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8320-1 
$17.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8319-8 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-6
This portrait of the prairie and its wildlife is in some ways a self-portrait of the
photographer himself, who grew up in southern Minnesota and who hunted (first
with a gun, then with a camera) in the Blue Mounds prairie area as a boy.
Brandenburg's first wildlife photo, a black-and-white picture of a red fox, is in-
cluded alongside his many full-color contemporary photographs that show the
range of life in this shrinking American landscape. As in his previous photoessays
on Arctic wolves and Namibia (BCCB 11/93 and 4/94), Brandenburg has a casual
and accessible writing style, telling us as much about photography as about his
titular subject; the story of how he got the photo of the rising rattlesnake is even
more dramatic then the picture itself, and everyone will stop for the cute shots of a
busy prairie-dog town. RS
CLIMO, SHIRLEY, ad. 
Atalanta's Race: A Greek Myth; illus. by Alexander
Koshkin. 
Clarion, 1995 
32p
ISBN 0-395-67322-4 
$15.95 
R 
6-10 yrs
Atalanta's abandonment by her father, her childhood with the hunter Ciron, and
the famous race against Melanion in which she loses her reputation as undefeated
runner but wins a chance at love, are smoothly recounted in this retelling of the
classical myth. The heroine is portrayed as headstrong and dangerously defiant:
"I can take care of myself" she claims, but Ciron warns, "Only with the help of the
gods." While listeners new to this tale will be drawn into the excitement of the
race, Climo never allows her audience to lose sight ofAtalanta's pride, which ulti-
mately brings Aphrodite's curse down upon the two lovers. Koshkin's figures are
theatrically posed and set within architectural borders, narrow red columns with
ornate capitals between a marble base and cornice. His Atalanta is a broad-shoul-
dered, self-assured athlete-in strong contrast to the pert, leggy sprinter of Claire
Martin's The Race of the Golden Apples (BCCB 11/91), illustrated by the Dillons.
A note on variations of the Atalanta myth is appended. EB
340 
* 
THE BULLETIN
COLE, JOANNA 
My New Kitten; illus. with photographs by Margaret
Miller. 
Morrow, 1995 
40p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-12902-1 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-12901-3 
$15.00 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
Kitties and kiddies-it's a match made in heaven, and Cole brings them together
with a text expertly geared to animal-loving lap-sitters. From mother cat Cleo's
pregnancy and delivery (discreetly photographed and simply captioned, "Soon Cleo
had her kittens. She pushed each one out of her body"), through the kittens'
development and growing independence, Cole traces the stages of physical and
behavioral maturity a kitten must attain before it is ready to become some lucky
child's pet. Although Dusty, the featured feline, and his siblings are as adorable as
any youngster could wish, their close resemblance to Cleo and to each other often
makes them difficult to distinguish in Miller's generously-sized photographs. Back-
drops of plain carpet and unadorned wall keep the kittens at center stage, but they
inadvertently create a visual monotony that detracts from the book's overall ap-
peal. Still, listeners are likely to overlook these objections in light of the furry star's
appeal, and emergent readers may be enticed to stretch their skills on the accessible
text. EB
CREWS, NINA 
One Hot Summer Day; written and illus. by Nina
Crews. 
Greenwillow, 1995 
26p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-13394-0 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-13393-2 
$15.00 
R 3-6 yrs
Nina Crews comes by her strong sense of graphic design naturally as the daughter
of award-winning picture-book artists Donald Crews and Ann Jonas; her medium
here is photographic collage. An exuberant African-American preschool girl is
featured in this book about a hot summer day in the city. Dogs pant, hydrants are
opened, and though her mother wants her to play inside, "instead, I stand outside
and tease my shadow." Though it seems "hot enough to fry an egg on the side-
walk" the uncooked egg lying on the rocky surface agrees with the next sentence,
"Well, maybe not." The highlighted edges of the cut-out photographs make them
pop off the page, and the intensity of the glaring sunshine contrasts with the splash
of the sudden rainstorm, so that the reader can really appreciate the little girl's glee
as she tries to catch raindrops with her tongue and dances in puddles. Crews
makes the urban atmosphere both gritty and beautiful, and the changing angles
and perspectives give an almost kaleidoscopic effect; the touches which might ini-
tially seem gimmicky, such as photos cut into puzzle pieces, are always purposeful
(the puzzle shapes appear as the transition between the outside and the inside,
where the girl's mother wants her to play quietly). The blurriness of some of the
photos does occasionally detract from the images' clarity, but it generally adds to
the book's energetic feeling. SDL
CROSS, GILLIAN 
New World. Holiday House, 1995 
171p
ISBN 0-8234-1166-4 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Miriam is excited, if apprehensive, about participating in a test of a new virtual
reality game. As the game's creator, Hesketh, has repeatedly insisted, the testing
must be top secret, so Miriam finds a wedge being driven between herself and her
family and friends, something that becomes a real problem as the game becomes
increasingly frightening. Miriam is convinced that Hesketh-or someone-knows
JUNE 1995 
* 341
her deepest childhood fears and is playing on them for the purposes of the game;
her fellow player Stuart finds himself plagued by his own nightmares as dreadful
spiders pursue him through the virtual-reality world. This is a coming subgenre in
YA fiction (see also E. M. Goldman's The Night Room, BCCB 2/95) and few can
match Cross's skill at teasing out the requisite suspense. She also has a real sense of
the obsessive nature of computer gaming, with Miriam and Stuart (and a mysteri-
ous third player) drawn deeper into the game's reality and determined to conquer
its monsters even while it consumes their lives. The ending is a bit of a letdown,
with some preachiness substituting for surprise, but the atmosphere throughout
has been so convincingly edgy that readers may just be relieved the ride is over. RS
CROWTHER, ROBERT 
Robert Crowther's Incredible Animal Alphabet; written and
illus. by Robert Crowther. 
Candlewick, 1995 
12p
ISBN 1-56402-427-X 
$14.95 
R 3-6 yrs
As in his previous lift-the-flap books, Crowther's tabs and flaps are more than
gimmicks: they hide an abundance of visual humor that relates closely to the
subject. When you pull the chameleon tab, the chameleon appears to change
color; under the dinosaur flap is a dino talking to a dodo; the lemmings (true to
legend if not to science) all run off a cliff; and a mole pops out of the ground. A
few flaps go together, as when the seal under one door is swimming up to the
school of "sardines" above, and the sheep are running from the skunk next door.
The flexibility of the format, with varying numbers of flaps on each spread, makes
a refreshing change from alphabet books where the reader easily anticipates which
animal is likely to appear for each letter; however, Crowther does cheat a bit by
using "gnu" for "u" and "ox" for "x." The final flap reads "zoo," and children will
have a great time trying to identify each of the previously encountered animals
crowded together. Sturdy construction will help this survive many more circula-
tions than the typical paper-engineered book. SDL
DALY, NIKI 
My Dad; written and illus. by Niki Daly. 
McElderry, 1995 
32p
ISBN 0-689-50620-1 
$16.00 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
The unnamed narrator and his sister Gracie love their father, but Dad's Friday
night parties with his friends are getting worse: "I like Dad when he is jolly, but I
don't like him when he is boozy and silly." Dad's drinking is escalating, and the
crisis comes when the two kids are in a school show and Dad interrupts their song-
and-dance performance with drunken encouragements from the back of the hall.
Dad finally realizes he needs help, he goes to an AA meeting, and there's hope for
the future. This slice of bibliotherapy is a blend of realism and formula, its rough
subject smoothed into picture-book compactness; the story reads a bit like an out-
line for a YA problem novel of the 1970s. The watercolor-and-pencil pictures
have warm tones and an easy line, but some of the drunken-Dad pictures seem
cliched, and the man doesn't always resemble himself from page to page, even
apparently changing shirts in the middle of a boozy Friday night. RS
DEVLIN, WENDE 
The Trouble with Henriette!; written and illus. by Wende and
Harry Devlin. 
Simon, 1995 
32p
ISBN 0-671-729937-6 
$15.00 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
When Jolie's grandfather moved hound dog Henriette from the farmhouse to the
barn, hay fever destroyed her ability to sniff out truffles. No longer useful, Jolie's
342 * THE BULLETIN
beloved dog is to be taken to Paris and given away. The fresh-air trip clears
Henriette's nose, though, and when she smells truffles inside a hotel, she can't be
stopped. Though the dog wreaks havoc in the hotel's restaurant ("Skidding into a
pastry cart, Henriette sent gooseberry tarts and fudge cakes sailing through the air.
A whipped-cream banana pie landed in a woman's lap"), she proves her skill and
even receives a toast from the truffle-appreciating patrons. The giddy story is
matched by vivacious pictures-both seem slightly old-fashioned but appealing.
However, placing the dramatic early part of Henriette's life before the book opens
("Grandfather had forgotten that Jolie had raised this dog from a thin, not-sup-
posed-to-live puppy and that they had been best friends on a very lonely farm")
distances the reader from the story and characters. There's also never so much as a
glimpse of a truffle; they are merely defined as "mushroom-like delicacies." It's
insubstantial, but dog lovers, Francophiles, and slapstick aficionados (and what
child isn't?) will gobble this story up. SDL
DUBOSARSKY, URSULA 
The White Guinea-Pig. Viking, 1995 
177p
ISBN 0-670-85738-6 
$14.99 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Geraldine is already the indifferent possessor of two guinea-pigs when her school-
mate dumps huge white Alberta on her for six weeks. Geraldine accidentally lets
Alberta out of her cage, which signals the beginning of a strange and eerie period:
Geraldine is haunted by dreams of a looming and vengeful Alberta, people keep
seeing an apparition in her backyard, and two men seem to be watching her house.
Additional complications are provided by Geraldine's neighbor, Ezra, a boy still
mourning his baby sister's death and sublimating his grief through participation in
an animal-rights group, and by Geraldine's sister, Violetta, whose affection is trans-
ferring from her pedantic boyfriend Marcus to one of Ezra's fellow workers for
animal rights. Dubosarsky, a talented writer, weaves these strands together into a
story of humor and notable eccentricity. Geraldine's viewpoint, which considers
her father's arrest for fraud and Alberta's eventual end (under the wheels of the two
men's car) to be approximately on a par for tragedy, is authentic and thoughtful;
her increasing closeness with Ezra, who finds in Alberta's death a release from the
guilt and grief he felt over his sister's, is touching but convincingly thorny. Teens
who like their plots clearly laid out for them may find the book too enigmatic, but
readers with particularly offbeat but literary tastes will appreciate this Australian
import. DS
FRANK, LUCY 
IAm an Artichoke. 
Holiday House, 1995 
187p
ISBN 0-8234-1150-8 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Sarah's family strikes her as bland and perfect, which she herself certainly isn't ("At
least no one says about me, 'Isn't she adorable! ' I'd rather be called loathsome or
odious or unspeakable. That, at least, has dignity") so she leaps at the chance to
spend the summer away from home. Her job in New York City is ostensibly as a
mother's helper, though it evolves into being more of a paid companion to Emily,
who at twelve is just three years younger than Sarah. Florence, Emily's mother, is
flamboyant, overweight, and opinionated, and Sarah, who quickly proves to be a
voice of reason in the household, realizes that Emily is using food to attain some
form of control over her mother. Despite being annoyed that Florence didn't
initially tell her the truth about Emily's anorexia, Sarah desperately wants to help
JUNE 1995 
* 343
Emily and is terrified that she won't be able to. By the conclusion, the two girls
have attained a certain balance to their relationship as Emily helps Sarah's self-
confidence with her own family grow. Tart, witty narration, strong characteriza-
tions, and well-paced, realistic plot development make this writer's initial entry
into fiction bode well for her future work. SDL
FRENCH, JACKIE 
Somewhere around the Corner. Holt, 1995 
2 30p
ISBN 0-8050-3889-2 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Trapped in an increasingly violent labor demonstration in contemporary Sydney,
Barbara takes the advice of an elderly picketer to shut her eyes and "just walk
around the corner." She does, but still finds herself amidst a demonstration, only
it's 1932 and Australia is in the depths of its Depression. Barbara meets a boy who
kindly takes her along on his long trip home to Poverty Gully, a "susso camp" for
the unemployed, where Young Jim lives with his despondent father (Big Jim),
hardworking mother, and assorted siblings. While the time-traveling is neatly
turned, the real focus of the book is its portrait of a strong family in desperate
times. The camp contains a motley assortment of well-meaning folk: Dulcie, a
dairy-farmer who provides for those in need; Gully Jack, who holds out hope in
his gold-panning; Young Jim and his sister Elaine who become Barbara's friends
and partners in finding diversion from their plight. If the characters and situation
seem idealized, the author does explain in a historical note that Poverty Gully was
far better off than most of the susso camps, and while the camp has its share of
good times (Friday night dances, building a school), its poverty is not rendered
picturesque. Some of the most moving moments come when Barbara tells stories
to the younger children about her life "around the corner" only to see the adults
listening with the greater intensity: "'Go on,' said Dad quietly. 'Tell us some
more.'" In a neat-maybe too neat--conclusion, Barbara does come back to the
present, but soon discovers that she can have the best of both worlds. An extensive
glossary provides definitions for Aussie-isms, but most will be clear from their
context. RS
FURLONG, MONICA 
Robin's Country. Knopf, 1995 
140p
ISBN 0-679-84332-9 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Dummy-so called because of his inability to speak-runs away from his master
after a severe beating and happens onto the forest hideout of Robin Hood. Robin,
Marian, and the merry men are at first suspicious, but they warm to Dummy, and
he becomes part of the band. Dummy takes part in Robin's adventures (including
the famous archery contest), makes a close friend, and delights with the others
when good King Richard, ready to bring order back to the land, reveals himself to
Robin at the end. Many youngsters will relish the idea of someone their age
(Dummy is eleven) breaking free of constraints to play as a boy and fight as a man
alongside Robin Hood, and the book is faithful to most aspects of the old legend.
It's quite unsubtle, however, with saintly good guys (although Robin sometimes
seems less cheeky than snotty) and bone-wicked bad guys, and Dummy's psycho-
logical speech-block and final revelation of his noble origins (he's the son of a
murdered supporter of King Richard) are downright corny. It's not the deftest
take on the old tales, but readers who find Sherwood irresistible will appreciate a
chance to romp through the forest. DS
344 
* THE BULLETIN
GLIORI, DEBI 
Mr. Bear's Picnic; written and illus. by Debi Gliori. 
Artists and
Writers, 1995 
32p
ISBN 0-307-17558-8 
$13.95 
R 3-6 yrs
In this sequel to the lovable Mr. Bear Babysits (BCCB 5/94), Mr. Bear decides to
give Mrs. Bear a break and take the baby out for a picnic. Fred, Ted, and Fuzz, the
mischievous bears next door who gave Mr. Bear such a hard time in the first book,
invite themselves along ("Mr. Bear groaned") and pout about the various spots
Mr. Bear chooses for the picnic ("It's boring," moans Fred), complaining even
more loudly when it turns out that Mr. Bear brought the wrong basket ("'You
can't eat toys,' said Fred, glaring at Mr. Bear"). Mr. Bear's prowess at honey-
gathering finally wins the little rascals over, and a good time is had by all. While
the story here is not as aptly structured as that of the first book, the simple adven-
ture and gentle humor will win young listeners, and Mr. Bear is a dad that any cub
could wish for. The honey- and chocolate-browns of the bears and the spring-
green pastoral landscape are soothing but livened up by some pratfall humor, as
when Mr. Bear falls into a pond while (unsuccessfully) pawing for some fish. RS
GORDON, RUTH, comp. 
Pierced by a Ray of Sun: Poems about the Times We Feel
Alone. 
HarperCollins, 1995 
105p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023614-0 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023613-2 
$16.00 
R Gr. 7-12
Gordon, compiler of significant anthologies such as UnderAll Silences (BCCB 10/
87) and Peeling the Onion (10/93), here turns her attention to the subject of
aloneness. She takes a "big-tent" approach to the topic, including poems about
difference, pity, knowledge, loss, and fear (though little on Wordsworthian plea-
sures of solitude), with the loneliness sometimes that of the poem's speaker and
sometimes that of the poem's subject. Poets included range widely, from Keats
and Dickinson through Rainier Maria Rilke and Yevgeny Yevtushenko to May
Sarton, J. Patrick Lewis, and musician Paul Simon, making for a refreshing variety
of verse form as well as viewpoint. Poetry, with its tendency towards private obser-
vation, is peculiarly suited to this theme, and young adults, who are struggling to
find their place in the world, will find it particularly relevant, especially when they
encounter it in such a fine poetic assortment. DS
GRANGER, MICHELLE 
Fifth-Grade Fever. Dutton, 1995 
135p
ISBN 0-525-45279-6 
$14.99 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Marty and her friend Nina are thrilled to find that their fifth-grade teacher is
hunky young Mr. Truesdale, and they're determined to beat out "kiss-uppy" Beverly
Bridges for the honor of being teacher's pet. This effort has a salutary effect on
Marty's schoolwork and even her character: Marty responds to Mr. Truesdale's
encouragement with more faith in herself, becomes less of a sidekick to Nina, and
begins to realize that Mr. T is a good teacher because he appreciates all his stu-
dents. This is a trip through familiar territory, but it's well-executed and unpreachy,
as well as containing a few suggestions of complexity (it seems possible that Marty
craves Mr. Truesdale's attention because her father is so distant with her) that are
either belabored or ignored in many other light school stories. Kids more com-
fortable with The Babysitters Club series and other paperbacks may find this lur-
ing them into hardcover territory. DS
JUNE 1995 * 345
GRIFFIN, PENI R. 
Vikki Vanishes. McElderry, 1995 
[160p]
ISBN 0-689-80028-2 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 5-7
Nikki is tired of being the youngest in the family, tired of everything she does
turning into trouble, tired of not measuring up to the standard set by her half-
sister, Vikki, who's nearly ten years older. She's particularly angry that Vikki's
father has returned to see his daughter but isn't interested in Nikki, whose own
father is nowhere in sight. It's Nikki, however, who has the clues and pushes
towards the right answer when Vikki disappears. Griffin, particularly good at
plainspoken middle-grades fantasy (The Maze, BCCB 1/95, etc.), tries a different
kind of story here with limited success. The problem-novel aspect of Vikki's dis-
appearance-her father beats her and leaves her in a remote place after she rejects
his sexual advances-is undermined by the superficiality of the detective story;
characterization tends towards the obvious and predictable, as in the helpful pri-
vate eye from next door and Vikki's no-good father, whose assault seems carefully
calculated, in its severe but not lethal brutality, to suit the book's demands. More
interesting characters are a well-meaning but questionably talented psychic, truly
obnoxious Nikki, and Vikki herself, whose strong attempt to save herself com-
bines with her little sister's tenacity (and a foreshadowed contrivance) to bring
about a happy ending. This sits in an uncomfortable middle ground between safe
junior mysteries such as Pamela Service's Phantom Victory (BCCB 6/94) and Lois
Duncan's truly scary adventures for older kids. DS
GROVE, VICKI 
The Crystal Garden. Putnam, 1995 
[22 4 p]
ISBN 0-399-21813-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Eliza isn't at all happy that her mother has decided to pull up stakes-and her-to
follow her boyfriend Burl to grimy, hot, little Gouge Eye, Missouri, leaving Kan-
sas City and a dead-end job behind. Eliza hates Gouge Eye, hates the fact that
Burl spends their money on his new "career" as a country-western singer in nearby
Branson, and doesn't much care for Dierdre, the only other kid her age in the
town. While Dierdre, serious and literal-minded, is oblivious to the subtleties of
seventh-grade social life, Eliza will do anything to fit in with the popular and well-
off girls who live in a richer suburb, even when she has to betray herself and Dierdre's
respect to do it. This is a familiar theme in girls' realistic fiction, but the character-
izations of Eliza and Dierdre have a rough-edged honesty that their mass-market
sisters lack. The rural poverty of Gouge Eye is neither prettified nor stereotyped,
and both girls' problems (Dierdre's father is an alcoholic who burns down their
house for the insurance money) are faced honestly. The stormy climax-a tor-
nado-is a bit much, but Grove has been turning up the heat carefully and con-
vincingly enough that it comes as welcome relief. RS
HANSARD, PETER Jig, Fig, andMrs. Pig; illus. by Francesca Martin. 
Candlewick,
1995 
2 6 p
ISBN 1-56402-540-3 
$13.95 
R 
3-6yrs
Jig is one sad pig. All pinkish, sweet, and uncomplaining, she labors at endless
tasks of drudgery, while Mrs. Pig and her wretched son Fig lounge around and get
nastier with every turn of the page. One day Jig performs a generous deed and the
346 
* THE BULLETIN
recipient of her goodness suddenly zaps into a wizard and rewards Jig with dia-
monds and gold nuggets tumbling out of her mouth whenever she speaks. Greedy
Fig goes in search of the elusive riches and he, too, gets his just reward-toads and
snakes hurl out of his miserable mouth. Patterned after Perrault's "The Fairies,"
this Pig-erella story has a fast paced plot and playfully comedic watercolors: Mrs.
Pig is a squinty-eyed mass of uptight disapproval, all of the pigs balance precari-
ously on their hooves, and Jig is charmingly discreet in her victory as she waves a
handkerchief at the retreating villains. The text, however, has a tendency to im-
pede the folktale with cutesy phrases such as "Higgledy-piggledy, figgery-joke!"
and "He's my Figsy-pigsy darling." Jig's final triumph will nonetheless light up
the eyes of those preschoolers who dream of freedom from troublesome family
members and who, like little Jig, wish they could have the house all to themselves
for once. HMW
HARNESS, CHERYL 
TheAmazing Impossible Erie Canal; written and illus. by Cheryl
Harness. 
Macmillan, 1995 
32p
ISBN 0-02-742641-6 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Although the frenetic, eye-scorching illustrations threaten to overwhelm this title,
Harness's fluent and lively text nonetheless stays afloat. An opening section ex-
plains the young nation's need for a cheap commercial route connecting the East
Coast and the Great Lakes and follows the political ups and downs of the canal's
visionary, De Witt Clinton. A longer section traces the maiden voyage of the barge
Seneca Chief as it is towed from Lake Erie to the Atlantic for a ceremonial "Wed-
ding of the Waters." Harness handily evokes the excitement of the New Yorkers
gathered along the towpath to marvel at this feat of hydraulic engineering. Less
glamorous aspects of the canal also appear, such as the pathmaster's task of shooing
livestock off the towpath while "plugging leaks made by pesky minks and musk-
rats." Ambitious watercolors, replete with details that invite close inspection, are
often quite amusing despite their garish hues; maps, which fancifully combine
geographic data with a crazy quilt of miscellanea, sacrifice clarity in favor of visual
pizazz. The back cover sports the melody and lyrics to "Low Bridge, Everybody
Down," and a bibliography is included. EB
HAYES, 
ANN 
Meet the Marching Smithereens; illus. 
by Karmen
Thompson. 
Harcourt, 1995 
34p
ISBN 0-15-253158-0 
$15.00 
R 
4-8 yrs
The creators of Meet the Orchestra (BCCB 3/91) take their animal musicians and
turn to the instruments of a marching band. A kangaroo with a joey in her pocket
leads the way: "The drum major struts in front of the band. With her mace, she
beats time and sets the pace for the Marching Smithereens. She uses hand signals
and whistle blasts to say, turn! halt! march! play!" The instruments (included are
such band staples as the sousaphone, mellophone, tom-toms, and bell-lyra) follow,
and Hayes provides a clear description of each one's appearance and sound with-
out resorting to the overelaborate metaphors that made Meet the Orchestra confus-
ing. Thompson's watercolors are less successful than in the previous book: the
animals are stiffer, the instruments not nearly so splendid and shiny. The author-
illustrator pair, though, have filled a niche by giving young children the specifics
they like without overwhelming them with too much information; many a story-
hour crowd will enjoy marching with rhythm instruments after reading this book.
SDL
JUNE 1995 
* 347
HELLER, RUTH 
Color; written and illus. by Ruth Heller. 
Putnam, 1995 
34 p
ISBN 0-399-22815-2 
$18.95 
R Gr. 2-4
Heller, accomplished author of concept books on parts of speech (Up, Up and
Away: A Book about Adverbs, BCCB 1/92) and other subjects, here tackles the
subject of printed color. In her customary verse, she first discusses media ("pencils
and markers and crayons and chalks," for instance, each producing its own distinc-
tive style in the accompanying illustrations) and then moves on to printing. She
explains and shows color separation, as an angelfish gets layers of yellow, magenta,
cyan, and black, and she discusses secondary and complementary colors, warm
and cool colors, and tints and shades. Transparent multihued overlays and an
entertainingly playful sensibility enhance the book's appeal as well as help it make
its points. Heller's meter isn't as smooth here as it's been before, and some of her
concepts ("Cool colors recede, and warm ones advance") are less intuitive and
more needful of explanation than the text would have you believe. This is still one
of the neatest and most effective explanations of color printing for kids, however,
and would usefully complement Janet Stevens' From Pictures to Words, reviewed in
this month's Big Picture. DS
HOESTLANDT, Jo 
Star ofFear, Star ofHope; tr. from the French by Mark Polizzotti;
illus. by Johanna Kang. 
Walker, 1995 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8374-0 
$16.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8373-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 2-4
"My name is Helen, and I'm nearly an old woman now. When I'm gone, who will
remember Lydia?" The narrator gives us all a chance to remember her best friend,
Lydia, as she recounts the events of a fateful night in Nazi-occupied France of
1942 when she and Lydia, a Jewish girl, spent the night together in anticipation of
Helen's ninth birthday. Several mysterious night visitors with yellow stars on their
armbands alarm the girls, and Lydia demands to go home, whereupon Helen calls
out, "I don't care! You're not my friend anymore!"-words she will always regret.
The next morning, all the neighboring Jews have disappeared, including Lydia,
and Helen is left unwrapping a birthday present of a homemade cardboard doll
with Lydia's photograph superimposed on its head and a full paper wardrobe,
including a coat with a yellow star. There's lip service to hope at the end, when the
narrator anticipates a possibility of someday hearing from the real Lydia, but the
experience of the book is more realistic. Within the framework of catastrophe, we
all do things that are far from heroic because we are human. It's a lesson many are
still learning, both in context of the Holocaust and of more recent disasters. The
fact that this story is framed in terms to which any child can relate makes
Hoestlandt's tale an effective picture book as well as a poignant record of World
War II. The restrained, buff-and-gray illustrations-composed with their own
paper-doll shapes-suggest sadness without sentimentalizing it. Art and text to-
gether comprise a telling portrayal of a telling moment in time. BH
HOFFMAN, MARY 
Boundless Grace; illus. by Caroline Binch. 
Dial, 1995 
26p
ISBN 0-8037-1715-6 
$14.99 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
Although Grace might not seem so boundless without her first story, Amazing
Grace (BCCB 9/91), she is nevertheless irrepressibly exuberant in her pursuit of a
father, who did not appear in the first book. Papa has started a new family back in
348 
* THE BULLETIN
Africa, after divorcing Grace's mother, and Grace unexpectedly gets tickets to visit
him with Nana. Despite an inevitable resentment of the new stepmother, Grace
enjoys her young half-siblings, especially revelling in the chance to tell them sto-
ries, and she's sad to say goodbye at the end of the visit. Part travelogue and part
case study of family adjustment, this nevertheless supersedes both modes with a
kind of naive energy and reassurance that families and stories are what you make
them. Even the watercolors are caught between real and ideal, some appearing
stiffly literal and others exuding mischievous invention. This may not be as imagi-
native a journey as Grace's earlier flights of fancy, but her fans will follow her
anywhere. BH
JENKINS, STEVE 
Biggest, Strongest, Fastest; written and illus. by Steve
Jenkins. 
Ticknor, 1995 
32p
ISBN 0-395-69701-8 
$14.95 
R 
5-7 yrs
A golden, graceful cheetah bounds across the front cover and his spotted tail wraps
all the way around to the back of this meticulously designed book, in which cut-
paper collages depict animal record-holders and their often surprising characteris-
tics. Jenkins carefully balances art with science, and his double-page spreads celebrate
the diverse beauty of the animals pictured. One particularly striking illustration
shows the anaconda's intricately patterned body coiling past the page edges in hues
of magenta, rose, and black. Clear factual tidbits are accessible to younger chil-
dren ("The Etruscan shrew, the world's smallest mammal, could sleep in a tea-
spoon"), and small silhouetted diagrams demonstrate proportions (a human is
pictured lifting his own weight, while one ant lifts up five of his companions) for
older kids who understand mathematical comparisons. At times, the lack of scale
distinctions in the collages is jarring (the ant and the African elephant are shown
the same size on consecutive pages) but the corner diagrams make up for these
minor lapses with keen differentiation between species' sizes. There is a handy
chart at the back which adroitly compares animal records, sizes, diets, and ranges.
The tantalizing page bleeds (many of the animal images begin on the recto and
end on the verso) keep readers guessing, and the variety of animals portrayed shows
kids that, when it comes to world record holders, four legs are sometimes better
than two. HMW
JONAS, ANN 
Splash!; written and illus. by Ann Jonas. 
Greenwillow, 1995 
26 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-11052-5 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-11051-7 
$15.00 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
A backyard pond is home to four goldfish, two catfish, three frogs, and a turtle.
On a bright sunny day a variety of animals end up in the pond, and as the number
in the pond changes, the reader is asked, "How many are in my pond?" When the
narrator's cat and dog slip in, the little girl slips in too, and at the end as they dry
off at the side, she says (lamely), "My dog is sad. My cat is mad. I feed the fish."
The numbers range from a low of six to a high of twelve, providing an opportunity
both for counting the critters and for kindergartners and first graders to do a little
easy adding and subtracting. Jonas uses an electric blue for sky and water, with a
brown pebbly pond bottom, muted green for grass, and the four orange goldfish
giving a nice jolt of hot color; the splashes are satisfyingly splashy. The overly
repetitive story remains just mildly entertaining, in part because none of the ani-
mals slipping into the pond look as if they are about to in the previous picture: in
JUNE 1995 * 349
fact, it's hard to see how the little girl could have fallen in at all. Still, a counting
book with a dash of humor is always welcome. SDL
JOOSSE, BARBARA M. 
The Morning Chair; illus. by Marcia Sewall. Clarion,
1995 
32p
ISBN 0-395-62337-5 
$14.95 
R 5-7 yrs
Bram, who looks from the pictures to be about five or six, lives in a seaside village
in Holland in 1950. He especially enjoys sitting in "the morning chair" with his
mother, sipping tea, looking out the window, and sometimes talking about
America- 
where people eat green olives, and there are mountains and cowboys.
Bram is disappointed when, after his family emigrates, the America they find is full
of cars and noise, there are no mountains or cowboys (in New York City), and he
dislikes the taste of green olives. Eventually the morning chair arrives, so Bram
and his mother can cuddle up, sip tea, eat windmill cookies, and talk. His mother
tells him, "America is a big, big place. There's room for mountains and cowboys
and taxis. There's room for people who like green olives, and for people who
don't." Many children will relate strongly enough to Bram's feelings of disorien-
tation and disillusionment that they will sit through this very gentle, low-key,
slightly melancholy story; it helps that food is featured throughout-raw herring,
olives, hot dogs, and cookies. Sewall's gouache paintings are simple and tender,
making effective use of restrained tones, thick black borders, and a quiet period
flavor. A fine choice for curricular use in units on immigration, this is also a book
about change and the discomforts that can accompany big adjustments. SDL
KEELER, PATRICIA A. 
Unraveling Fibers; written by Patricia A. Keeler and Francis
X. McCall,Jr. 
Atheneum, 1995 
36p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-689-31777-8 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-4
This attractive and browsable title invites exploration of a topic which might not,
of itself, generate much interest. A definition of fiber and a brief overview of
methods of converting it into thread, yarn, and fabric introduce three main chap-
ters on fibers from plants, animals, and laboratories. Each section focuses on cur-
rent production of the fiber-from age old methods of flax and jute retting still in
use to the mechanized harvesting of cotton-and offers information on the source,
advantages, and uses of the material. Although the claim that "all molecules, even
polymers, are too small to be seen even with the most powerful microscope" is an
unfortunate error, technical information is reliably and clearly presented. Layout
is spacious and bright; comparative close-up photos of plants and fibers through
stages of growth and processing are remarkably sharp, and shots of winsome an-
gora rabbits, alpacas, and other wool providers reassure young readers that the
plucked and sheared animals remain unharmed. An index is included. EB
KEILLOR, GARRISON 
Cat, You Better Come Home; illus. by Steve Johnson and Lou
Fancher. 
Viking, 1995 
40p
ISBN 0-670-85112-4 
$15.99 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
What do you do when your cat wants to become a feline femme fatale? Puff
scornfully chastises her owner for neglecting her finicky whims: "I'd rather be a
cat who meets a terrible fate/ Than live with a man who can't appreciate/ That a
350 
* 
THE BULLETIN
cat is independent and a true highbrow/ And needs a little high-class chow." So
Puff takes off in a huff, and true to every child's running-away fantasy, she is sorely
missed and her owner feels guilty. Puffs new life in the fast lane is glamorous,
garish, and purrfectly divine as she travels in sophistication throughout Europe.
All the while, her owner begs, "O CAT, YOU BETTER COME HOME!" and in
the end, of course, she does (the pathos-tinged illustration shows her wistfully
pawing the outside of a dripping windowpane). The paintings are richly devel-
oped scenes highlighting Puffs turquoise eyes and disdainful demeanor as she sashays
across luxurious double-page spreads with characteristically sardonic humor. The
folksy narration is appealing, but the inconsistent rhythm makes reading aloud a
bumpy ride: "With tears in her ears and big puffy eyelids,/ Stood a former top cat
who had hit the skids." References to such things as muscatel and Chateaubriand
further muddy the text with unnecessary winks and nods aimed at adults, and kids
may totally miss the final moral that "the very worst thing that a cat can do/ Is
make all its dreams come true." Still, Puffs adventures are wryly fanciful, and the
illustrations hypnotic in their ability to draw readers into her wanderings. HMW
KERR, DAISY 
Keeping Clean. Watts, 1995 
48p 
illus. 
(Very Peculiar His-
tory)
ISBN 0-531-15353-8 
$14.42 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
A square and manageable trim size, a plethora of line-and-watercolor illustrations
on every page, and a cheerfully bustling composition help make this an appealing
and accessible history of plumbing, bathing, and waste removal. Each double
spread deals with a particular region and/or time, starting with "The Ancient World:
Planning and Plumbing" through, for instance, "The Middle Ages: Religion and
Running Water" to "Past and Future: Managing Waste," and familiar subjects
such Roman baths, nautical lavatories, and spaceship hygiene turn up in their
appropriate places. The text sometimes jumps around a bit, sometimes repeats
itself, and sometimes fails to explain concepts not already familiar to the audience
(this is not the place to discover aqueducts or bidets for the first time); the drafts-
manship of the art also tends to be awkward. This is less comprehensive but more
fun than Penny Colman's Toilets, Bathtubs, Sinks, and Sewers (BCCB 2/95); kids
will enjoy hunting for gross tidbits, of which there are plenty, and they'll pick up
information as they do. A glossary, index, and list of fun facts are included. DS
KESSLER, CRISTINA 
One Night: A Story from the Desert; illus. by Ian
Schoenherr. 
Philomel, 1995 
[32p]
ISBN 0-399-22726-1 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Muhamad, a boy of the Tuareg people who live in the desert (the Sahara, but the
book doesn't get that specific) senses that his test for manhood is coming when his
father gives him a herd of goats to care for. He takes his charge seriously and
rejoices in the responsibility as well as in his daily solitude: "I taste the wind on my
tongue and feel the sun touch my heart as finally I sit with my goats while they
graze. Yes, I am the wealthiest of boys." There's a surfeit of such ponderous
meditation and a shortage of action here, with the climactic event (Muhamad
must stay out in the desert overnight while he waits for a goat to give birth) lacking
tension: he's not worried and neither are we. While the story makes much of the
Tuaregs' deep connection with nature and with their Muslim faith, the preaching
is blandly universal ("the most powerful secrets are with nature, not with man")
JUNE 1995 
* 
351
rather than illuminating of a particular culture. Children will probably find the
book difficult to sit through, but they may be held by Schoenherr's paintings;
resembling Leonard Everett Fisher's full-color work but with a more graceful line,
the pictures capture the mystery and beauty of the desert landscape that the text
works too hard to convey. RS
KING-SMITH, DICK 
Harriet's Hare; illus. by Roger Roth. 
Crown, 1995 
104p
Library ed. ISBN 0-517-59831-0 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-59830-2 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Harriet Butler is delighted to find herself playing hostess to an alien visitor from
the planet Pars who, disguised as a hare, is vacationing among the "simple, igno-
rant natives" of a more primitive culture. While true-farm-girl Harriet clues in the
hare, Wiz, to the dangers of combines and poachers, Wiz repays her kindness by
playing matchmaker between her widowed father and their neighbor Jessica Lam-
bert, thus securing for Harriet the maternal affection she craves. Sci-fi takes a back
seat to warm family tale, and this Partian is more the benevolent pooka than space
alien as he manipulates Jessica's destiny in the cause of true love. Realistic details
of the pleasures and responsibilities of farm life, together with the appearance of
plenty of field and farm animals, further extend the story's interest to the critter
crowd. Appealing pencil sketches provide frequent visual breaks which will be
welcomed by beginning chapter-book readers. EB
KRUPINSKI, LORETTA 
BluewaterJournal: The Voyage ofthe Sea Tiger; written and
illus. by Loretta Krupinski. 
HarperCollins, 1995 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023437-7 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023436-9 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Benjamin Slocum logs his adventures aboard the clipper ship Sea Tiger as his fa-
ther, Captain Slocum, sails her from Boston to the Sandwich Islands. As Ben-
jamin describes the mundane and the extraordinary details of the fictional 1860
voyage, readers form a vivid picture of four months at sea-the genteel but cramped
nest of a stateroom, livestock for fresh milk, eggs, and meat, polite society that
entertains them in Rio Janeiro and Honolulu, the treacherous waters off Cape
Horn, and a race for port against the rival Morning Star. The text will entice
independent readers, and the single-page journal entries will work well as a class-
room read aloud; although the figures in Krupinski's gouache paintings are as stiff
as a mainmast (Benjamin stands frozen at the wheel, oblivious to the gigantic
whale surfacing just beyond his shoulder), the audience will be fascinated by the
precision of nautical details, and viewers in the back of the room will appreciate
the illustrations' size and clarity. Budding navigators can use Krupinski's map to
trace Sea Tigers route as she sets sail "on a rising tide and strong," laden with fresh
cargo and bound for Hong Kong. Source notes, a glossary of nautical terms, and
a note on the antebellum clipper-ship trade are included. EB
LAVENDER, DAVID 
The Santa Fe Trail. Holiday House, 1995 
6 4p 
illus. with
photographs
ISBN 0-8234-1153-2 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 4-8
Readers familiar with settlers' tales from the Oregon Trail will enjoy this engaging
and informative history of the route that, for some sixty years, serviced the com-
mercial and military wagon trade between Missouri and New Mexico. Lavender
352 
* 
THE BULLETIN
traces the Trail's expansion from William Becknell's 1821 gamble on open trade
with Mexico to the road's demise at the advent of the steam locomotive in 1879,
liberally embellishing his narrative with period photographs and engravings. Al-
though not divided into chapters, the text falls naturally into sections on the Trail's
early importance in U.S.-territorial trade and in the War with Mexico, and its later
roles in provisioning territorial forts and channeling Confederate troops westward.
Lavender has a knack for blending just the necessary amount of political/military
background information with those homelier details Western fans hanker after:
"before rolling into Santa Fe, [traders] washed, shaved, and put on the clean clothes
they had kept in the kitchen wagon. ... They wanted to strut!" A large map and
an index are included. EB
LEWIS, C. S. 
The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe; ad. and illus. by Robin
Lawrie. 
HarperTrophy, 1995 
[6 4p]
Paper ed. ISBN 0-06-443399-4 
$7.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Beginning with Classics Illustrated many works of literature have been abridged
into comic-book format with some measure of success. This graphic-novel version
of Narnia is no different in that it stumbles into the same pitfalls and rises to the
same heights of the form. Obviously, this is not Lewis' original book, nor should
it replace it any way. Lawrie's illustrations provide all of the battle excitement and
background detail that propel the story into a well-paced and visually involving
comic, but the tension and depth of the novel are lost and the characters flattened
out. Edmund looks appropriately priggish and Lucy mousy yet full of mettle, but
their personalities are conveyed mostly in their attire and facial expressions. The
text (some Lewis, some Lawrie) is talky and too densely packed, particularly dur-
ing scene transitions. Occasional double-page spreads are bold and inventive, but
work best when the dialogue is trimmed to a minimum. The story is long and
involved, and the speech balloons often distract from the marvelously detailed
borders (which change for every chapter) and cozy interior scenes (one can almost
hear the kettle boiling in Mr. Tumnus' cave). Although the rich complexity of the
original is watered down and the message may be too big for the medium, reluc-
tant readers might be visually enticed into an exploration of Narnia; an extended
visit with the real thing could follow later. HMW
LOVE, D. ANNE 
Bess's Log Cabin Quilt; illus. by Ronald Himler. 
Holiday House,
1995 
123p
ISBN 0-8234-1178-8 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Papa is missing somewhere along the Oregon Trail, Mama is stricken with swamp
fever, and the moneylender is threatening to evict the family, but plucky ten-year-
old Bess is sure she can keep the wolf from the door: for a whopping twenty-five
dollar fee she can enter her log cabin quilt at the local fair in hopes of winning
hundreds of dollars. Mama agrees to let her stake the last of the emergency money
on this long-shot, and through the contrivance of a kindly neighbor, the second-
prize money goes to Bess. She saves the farm, Papa shows up, Mama gets well, and
they all sing and laugh and clap into the night. Stock characters and situations
abound, and an unprovoked threat by whooping Indians (Bess scares them off
with a blast from Papa's rifle as Mama faints in a heap) is straight out of matinee
Westerns. Adventure buffs may enjoy the action, but the diehard cabin-in-the-
woods crowd will probably want fresher material. EB
.JUNE 1995 
* 
353
LUCHT, IRMGARD 
The Red Poppy; written and illus. by Irmgard Lucht; tr. from
the German by Frank Jacoby-Nelson. 
Hyperion, 1995 
28p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2043-8 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0055-0 
$13.95 
Ad 
4-8 yrs
Although this could be considered a science picture book detailing the life cycle of
the poppy, and it does lay out the botany clearly, the star attraction of the book is
its enormous, intensely colored flower paintings. As her author's note reveals,
Lucht achieved the ultra-realistic look of her paintings with the help of a binocular
microscope, which, unlike a regular microscope, "allows the viewer to see in three
dimensions instead of one" (two, actually). Using acrylic paint to capture each
fold and crease of flower petals, stamens, and even the dusting of pollen in the
flower's heart, her artwork is somewhat reminiscent of Georgia O'Keeffe in its
close-up detail. In her end notes, Lucht points out the various flowers, animals,
and insects which can be spotted in the pictures, but most are named too generally
("beetle," for instance), and her attention appears to be on the art more than the
science. One's appreciation of this book will be very much a matter of taste: what
some will see as garish and unsubtle will strike others as spectacular and magnifi-
cent. Although the book is an import from Germany and focuses on a kind of
poppy that does not grow wild in America, it would still fit into storyhours on
seasons and flowers, and certainly no one will complain that they can't see the
pictures. SDL
MAYO, MARGARET, ad. 
Tortoise's Flying Lesson: Animal Stories; illus. by Emily
Bolam. 
Harcourt, 1995 
[76p]
ISBN 0-15-200332-0 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-7 yrs
As the opening note tells us, Mayo has collected and "freely adapted and retold"
eight stories from around the world with animal protagonists, in some cases com-
bining elements from different cultures. Though purists may dispute such alter-
ations, each individual story is sprightly, funny, and satisfyingly concluded. In the
title story, Tortoise insists that Eagle teach him to fly, and after he plummets to the
ground, he berates Eagle for not having taught him to land. Some of the animals
are foolish or initially bad, but brains solve most problems, kindheartedness is the
usual response, and adult figures help without scolding. For example, in "The
Friendly Lion," based on English and Indian tales, the story of Chicken Little is
retold using Indian animals, such as a tiger and a mouse; in the end, the silly
animals are not eaten by a fox; instead King Lion points out the coconut that made
the mouse think the sky was falling and then they take a nap. Mayo accomplishes
an upbeat tone without ever seeming gooey or didactic, and her style is so lively
that it begs for audience participation. There is plenty of material for storytellers
here, and the typeface is large enough that primary-grade students could read the
text themselves, but Bolam's cheery illustrations will encourage most people to use
this as a picture book. Bold colors, patterned page borders, and most of all, comi-
cally expressive animals lend lots of child appeal in this well-designed book. SDL
MAZER, NORMA Fox 
Missing Pieces. 
Morrow, 1995 
196 p
ISBN 0-688-13349-5 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Jessie grew up hearing the family story of her father's abandonment ("He never
came back and you cried for three days!"). Now that she's a teenager, she wants
354 
* THE BULLETIN
more explanation, and, noting with longing her friends' relationships with their
fathers, she begins tracking hers down. In the meantime, with perhaps one plot
thread too many, she feels torn between her oldest friend, Meadow, and her new
friend, Diane; her Aunt Zis shows signs of losing her short-term memory; and the
boy Meadow has a crush on likes Jessie instead. She also must cope with a mother
who sees betrayal in her search for her father. By the novel's conclusion, she has a
more adult understanding of her parents, and while her curiosity hasn't been en-
tirely sated, she is willing to wait for a time someday when she may get to present
her father with the person she has become. Mazer sets up her characters and their
situation vividly and poetically, as when Jessie thinks about people who disappear:
"Blurred figures on back roads, moving, always moving away, becoming smaller
and finer, whittled down by distance, until at last, at the horizon, where sky met
land, nothing remained but a black dot, the tiniest punctuation mark in the world."
Jessie is a thoughtful and compelling narrator, neither passive nor reckless. Her
mother is especially realistic, with her "pilly blue sweater with the cigarette burn
holes," and, despite her mom's imperfections, Jessie clearly adores her. In this
classic coming-of-age story, there are no big moments or spectacular plot twists,
just solid characterization and a well-paced progression toward maturity. SDL
MORGAN, PIERR, ad. 
Supper for Crow: A Northwest Coast Indian Tale; ad. and
illus. by Pierr Morgan. 
Crown, 1995 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-517-59379-3 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-59378-5 
$15.00 
R 
3-6 yrs
As she explains in her author's note, Morgan illustrates a story about the trickster
Raven she heard from a Makah Indian woman. When Mama Crow goes looking
for some seal meat to give to her hungry babies, Mischievous Raven follows her
and substitutes a rock for the meat. Mama Crow sends the babies to Raven's
house, where they smell the stolen meat cooking ("Oh MY, how good it smelled");
Raven distracts them by suggesting they dance, and then eats the meat himself.
Morgan tells the story with a sprightly lilt and creates a cast of jaunty birds, painted
in gouache with ink, who are comical without ever being cartoonish. Particularly
noteworthy is Morgan's skill in painting landscapes with the sea, sand, and pine
trees of the Pacific Northwest, and she captures both the peacefulness and move-
ment of the coastal area. In the background, she depicts a potlatch set in 1899
(which is unmentioned in the text), but only those who have read the opening
notes will realize that Morgan is not trying to show modern-day Indians. Like
many trickster tales, this communicates in a funny way the message that it's not
smart to be too gullible. SDL
MUCHMORE, Jo ANN 
Johnny Rides Again. Holiday House, 1995 
106 p
ISBN 0-8234-1156-7 
$14.95 
R Gr. 4-6
Rose, ten, is devastated by the deaths of her mother and the family's beloved dog,
and she's especially angry that her brothers and father seem inclined to quickly
replace them both. First comes the dog, known as New Johnny, and then her
father starts dating a teacher from the local school. This is a fairly familiar adjust-
ment story, and it's no surprise that Rose softens both towards the dog and her
father's girlfriend, but Muchmore gives a lively Texan tone to the proceedings that
keeps things fresh. There's plenty of humor here, with the slapstick moments
smart as well as broad, and Rose is tough and honest without being clichdd; kids
will enjoy her company. DS
JUNE 1995 * 355
MURPHY, CHUCK 
One to Ten Pop-Up Surprises!; illus. by Chuck Murphy. 
Little
Simon, 1995 
10p
ISBN 0-671-89908-2 
$12.95 
R 2-5 yrs
Pop-ups often run the risk of trying to do too many things at once; this small,
modest book, on the other hand, takes one extremely simple idea and shapes it
into an elegant and gracefully designed counting book. Blocky black and white
numbers are completely unadorned on the outside, but the secret interior cutouts
are vividly dramatic in colorful contrast. Lift flap "1" to reveal a fluorescently
spotted gecko, arms splayed out in mid-jump; flap "4" shows jet-black cats lazing
around bright red, blue, green, and yellow chairs; and "6" contains an amusing
variety of black and white dogs-spotted, scruffy, sophisticated, and snappy-all
wagging their tails in sync. Everything is easy to count, and the book's paper and
hinges seem sturdy. There is a slightly disruptive surprise at the end, because
initially it appears that "0" has replaced "10." Have patience, because once the
flap is opened, the missing digit appears along with ten laughing, bouncy children
who wave enthusiastically as they peek out from behind the gaping "0." Young
children, upon reaching the end, might just be proud enough in their success to
wave back with even greater enthusiasm. HMW
NAPOLI, DONNA Jo Jimmy, the Pickpocket of the Palace; illus. by Judith Byron
Schachner. 
Dutton, 1995 
166p
ISBN 0-525-45357-1 
$14.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
The author of The Prince ofthe Pond(BCCB 1/93) follows with a sequel as Jimmy,
the smartest of the "fawglets," is transformed into a boy through the magic of a
wicked hag and the kiss of a spoiled princess. The tone here is not as fresh and
witty as in the first book. There's heavy emphasis on the mechanics of the trans-
formation, and readers already know what it takes Jimmy so long to figure out:
first, that he has been transformed; and second, that the empathetic prince is really
his father, changed from frog back into his original princely shape. The real sus-
pense is not in what will happen to the threatened pond or the evil hag, which is
predictable, but in what form Jimmy and his father will choose to remain. That
question is answered in a climactic deliverance: "I had wished that the ring would
turn each of us who touched it into what we really were at heart.... The ring had
turned me into a frog. The ring had turned the hag into an iron rock.... Would
the ring turn him into Pin again? Was my daddy a frog at heart?" In a brave
ending, we read in the last sentence the poignant fact that parents and children
must sometimes separate according to differences of the heart. BH
NEUFELD, JOHN 
Almost a Hero. Atheneum, 1995 
147p
ISBN 0-689-31971-1 
$15.00 
R Gr. 6-9
Benjamin is displeased when his history teacher assigns the class volunteer work
during spring vacation: he'd planned to waste time doing normal twelve-year-old
things, but instead he's working at a day-care center for homeless kids. Soon he's
involved in spite of himself, and he sticks his neck out when he thinks one of his
charges is being abused. While some of the book is a bit neat and predictable (Ben
is wrong about his suspicions, and one of his school friends proves to be homeless
himself), some of it is not: Ben doesn't adore all of the kids, and he learns that the
center can't cure all problems. Neufeld, author of such classic problem novels as
Edgar Allan and Lisa, Bright and Dark, proves he can still write a compelling story
356 * THE BULLETIN
but can also season it with some contemporaneous ambiguity; Ben ponders some
difficult questions in ways that young readers, who may face similar moral chal-
lenges themselves, will relate to. DS
ORLEV, 
URI 
The Lady with the Hat; tr. from Hebrew by Hillel
Halkin. 
Houghton, 1995 
183p
ISBN 0-395-69957-6 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Orlev's previous three novels translated into English are a tough act to follow. The
drama of The Island on Bird Street (BCCB 6/84), the complexity of The Man from
the Other Side (6/91), and the subtlety of Lydia, Queen ofPalestine (11/93) perhaps
raise our hopes unfairly for yet another feat. The Lady with the Hat is basically an
adventure story. Although it starts out with the main character, Yulek, returning
to his prewar home to find all the Jews gone, unregretted, and unwelcome, there's
a strangely detached tone to his grieving. Yulek's subsequent journey from Poland
to Italy to Palestine, his struggle to run the British blockade, and the attempts of
his sole surviving relative to find him (she spent the war in England as the wife of
an aristocratic barrister) are almost like a puzzle; there's suspense in the missing
pieces, but we know they'll fall into place, though we're not quite sure how or
when. In effect, Orlev has described an experience rather than recreating it. Nev-
ertheless, Yulek's story tells a lot more than most history books, with some realistic
secondary characters who layer the plot mechanics considerably. BH
PARK, BARBARA 
Mick Harte Was Here. Apple Soup/Knopf, 1995 
89p
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-97088-6 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-87088-1 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Eighth-grader Phoebe and her younger brother, Mick, are as emotionally close as
siblings can be, and she's devastated when he's killed in a bicycle accident. She
describes the month following the tragedy, and her family's reaction to it, with an
up-front statement: "This isn't the kind of book where you meet the main charac-
ter and you get to like him real well and then he dies at the end." And yet, because
of Park's subtle development, it is that kind of book. Although we know from the
beginning Mick is dead, we begin really to feel it as we get to know him through
his sister; and to the exact extent that her grief is realistically detailed, we feel for
her as well and finally cry. The tone, honoring Mick's zany sense of humor, is
light and the reading is easy. The only false note, strangely enough, is the author's
note, in which Park suddenly seems to mistrust her own storytelling and breaks
the spell of a powerful ending with a mini-lecture of exactly the sort that kids pay
no attention to. Fortunately, the rest of the book comes first-and will last. BH
PAULSEN, GARY 
The Tent: A Parable in One Sitting. Harcourt, 1995 
86 p
ISBN 0-15-292879-0 
$14.00 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Steven's father, oppressed by grinding poverty despite his labor, decides that the
way to riches is to become a traveling preacher, so father and son, assisted by a
stolen Bible and a few audience shills, make their way through Texas healing and
saving souls. Steven is at first embarrassed, then gradually comes to despise the
flocks he and his father fleece; finally, however, both he and his father hear a
different message in the gospel, see their false evangelism as wrong, and decide to
visit towns simply to "talk about God and maybe read some more about Jesus."
There's little mainstream fiction for youth that takes Christianity, particularly fun-
JUNE 1995 
* 357
damentalism, seriously (Cynthia Rylant's A Fine White Dust, BCCB 9/86, and
Stephanie Tolan's Save Halloween, 10/93, being notable exceptions), so it's good
to see the subject tackled; Paulsen is also good at evoking a flat and dusty world of
small southwestern towns, where a visiting preacher is a welcome relief from every-
day life. Unfortunately his treatment of the subject often lacks subtlety, making
the book seem-well-preachy and the evil more appealing than the good. Steven's
father's corruption manifests itself in predictable forms, there's no exploration of
what difference the audience finds between Steven's father the charlatan and Steven's
father the genuine believer, and while a more dramatic ending might have been
theologically unsatisfying, the final scene here is abrupt and anticlimactic. This is
still a sincere and thoughtful story of spiritual growth, however, that could prompt
some serious discussion. DS
POLIKOFF, BARBARA GARLAND 
Riding the Wind. 
Holt, 1995 
131p
ISBN 0-8050-3492-7 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Twelve-year-old Angie adores her favorite horse, Lila, owned by the local stable,
and she hopes soon to be able to buy her. When Angie's nemesis, Sage, takes Lila
for a ride one day, the mare is hurt in a fall, and Angie spends weeks at the stable
nursing "her" horse back to health. This is a slight variation on the traditional
horse story, since the victory here isn't a championship but the horse's return to
soundness (and Polikoff acknowledges the strong chance that Lila will never again
be the jumper that Angie dreamed of). Unfortunately, the characters are rather
shallowly depicted, the subplot of Angie's rapprochement with troubled Sage is
predictable, and Sage's dramatic life is overdrawn. More successful is the story of
Angie's budding romance with Horatio (of Life's a Funny Proposition, Horatio,
BCCB 9/92), who proves a loyal friend in these difficult times. Since most horsey
kids relish the caretaking as much as the adventure, they'll enjoy reading about
Angie's efforts and her success in finally bringing her horse home. DS
SCHMIDT, JEREMY 
Two Lands, One Heart: An American Boy's Journey to His
Mother's Vietnam; written by Jeremy Schmidt and Ted Wood; illus. with photo-
graphs by Ted Wood. 
Walker, 1995 
[4 4 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8358-9 
$16.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8357-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-5
What could simply have been a well-executed travelogue gains additional interest
through its focus: TJ, who is the son of an American father and a woman who
came as a child-refugee to the U.S. during the Vietnam War. TJ and his mother,
Heather, travel from Denver to Vietnam to visit Heather's parents and brothers on
their farm, a two-day car journey north from Saigon. Excellent and plentiful color
photos show just about every step of the way, with especially close attention given
to the work of the farm, silkworms, musk oxen, and all. The family feeling is
warm but unsentimentalized, and what readers will get is an unusual picture of a
"visit-to-Grandpa's" summer vacation, where bonds both old and new are enjoyed
in a context of everyday living. RS
SEABROOKE, BRENDA 
The Haunting ofHolroyd Hill. Cobblehill, 1995 
137p
ISBN 0-525-65167-5 
$14.99 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
It's summer, Melinda and Kevin and their parents have moved to semi-rural Holroyd
358 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Hill in Virginia, and the two kids and a new friend, Dan, have discovered a ghost
that wanders through their house each evening just before midnight. Library re-
search, a fortuitously published local history, and an equally fortuitous discovery
of a diary lead the three to the romantic story of a Union soldier, his Confederate
wife, and her enraged father, the ghosts of whom seem destined to enact their
tragic triangle into eternity. The story is formulaic but diverting, as Melinda and
the boys piece together the evidence-and the bones-that help them to lead these
souls to rest. In books such as Ammie, Come Home and Patriot's Dream, adult
writer Barbara Michaels has handled similar plots with greater cunning and sense
of atmosphere; junior-high kids who start the summer with Seabrooke could find
in Michaels a writer to take them all the way to fall. RS
SIMEON, S. In and Out and Roundabout: A Pop-Up Book of Directions; ISBN
0-671-89832-9. 
Pink Drink: A Pop-Up Book of Color Rhymes; ISBN
0-671-89833-7. 
Each book: 
illus. by Chris Reed. 
Little Simon,
1995 
10p 
$8.95 
Ad 
2-5 yrs
These neatly square board books open to show double-spreads of two doors, with
one word written on each. When the doors in Pink Drink open, a scene featuring
something that rhymes with the door-color pops out; behind the yellow door is a
yellow cello. Most scenes contain plenty of movement as the door is opened, and
Reed has included some entertaining details to examine. In a few instances, the
pop-ups do not straighten out enough to be seen without overbending the pages,
as in the "brown town" where the buildings remain tilted down, or the "red bed"
which never fully unfolds; this is a problem which will not only frustrate young
readers but will add to the wear-and-tear for libraries, though the books are other-
wise reasonably durable. In In and Out some of the concepts are served well by
the format-the "up" rocket really shoots up when the door opens, and the "down"
parachutist plunges down-but not all concepts are clear: there are as many ob-
jects "over" as there are "under" on the "under" page, for instance. The books are
not entirely successful, but libraries looking to liven up their toddler storytime
may find these useful. SDL
SIMON, NORMA 
Wet World; illus. by Alexi Natchev. 
Candlewick, 1995 
[2 6p]
ISBN 1-56402-190-4 
$12.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 2-4 yrs
Natchev's gray, smoky blue, and cloudy white watercolors streak and bleed across
page after page of damp and wet: "wet windows/ wet trees/ wet leaves/ wet grass/
wet street/ wet rooftops/ wet world." A small child awakens in a bedroom deluged
with a thunderstorm; walls, ceiling, and floor are drenched with the visual repre-
sentation of the wet world outside. In contrast to the external haze of slick streets
and shimmery skies are the warm interior hues of browns, golds, and reds. Simon's
1954 poem (BCCB 4/55) was originally illustrated by Jane Miller with stylized
scenes of a wealthy estate. Natchev changes venues in favor of an ordinary bustling
city and he portrays the child venturing out into the rain to go to school. The
poem and pictures together present a melodic celebration of the dripping city and
the soft comforts of home ("A warm kiss kissed me/And now I'm in bed") and
hearth, although viewers may wonder why the toast mentioned in the text is ab-
sent from the laden table. Nonetheless, lapsitters will snuggle closer under the
covers to hear this one read at the end of a drizzly, dull day. HMW
JUNE 1995 * 
359
SMITH, ROLAND 
Thunder Cave. 
Hyperion, 1995 
2 50p
ISBN 0-7868-0068-2 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
It's rare-and kind of refreshing-to see a children's novel in which parental death
is not subject but springboard, in this case sending the young hero off on a Jonny
Quest-like adventure in the wilds of Africa. When his mother is fatally struck by a
car, Jacob evades his stepfather's plan to have him go live with relatives in Ne-
braska by flying off to Kenya to find his father, a scientist researching the dimin-
ishing herds of elephants. Jacob's father is in the bush and incommunicado, and
most of the book follows Jacob's unlikely but exciting journey to find him. While
it sits squarely in the old-fashioned adventure genre, the story is cognizant of con-
temporary issues of prejudice and power; Jacob's outwitting of a band of evil poach-
ers ("they were a rough-looking bunch") is both environmentally and dramatically
correct. But action is paramount-this is precisely the kind of book people are
thinking of when they ask for a "boys' book." RS
SORENSEN, HENRI 
New Hope; written and illus. by Henri Sorensen. 
Lothrop,
1995 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-13926-4 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-13925-6 
$15.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
Jimmy never tires of hearing Grandpa tell the story about the park statue that
commemorates Lars Jensen, the founder of New Hope. When a minor wagon
mishap befell the Danish immigrant and his family near a forested riverbank, Lars
decided to settle on that spot. In spring he built a small ferry boat to transport
other settlers across the river; the ferry business attracted a blacksmith to set up his
forge. As lumbermen and farmers moved into the area, Lars serviced the building
boom with a general store; New Hope burgeoned, the Jensen family blossomed,
and five generations later Jimmy admires the statue of Lars-his own ancestor
"who started this town because his axle broke." Young listeners will easily grasp
the interplay of serendipity and purpose that fuels the growth of this fictional
community. Sorensen's impressionistic townscapes, brushed in broad, confident
strokes and peopled with keenly individuated villagers, traces New Hope's inexo-
rable expansion and modernization. This title will be an engaging addition to the
primary-grade social studies curriculum; older audiences might also look to Renata
von Tscharner's New Providence (BCCB 3/87) for a more detailed picture-book
presentation of urban development. EB
SPINELLI, JERRY 
Tooter Pepperday; illus. by Donna Nelson. 
Random House,
1995 
85p 
(First Stepping Stone Books)
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-94702-7 
$9.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-679-84702-2 
$3.99 
R 
Gr. 2-4
When first we meet Tooter, she has handcuffed herself to a pipe under the bath-
room sink in an attempt to prevent her family from leaving their old house for a
new home on a farm with Aunt Sally. Clearly, this will be a feisty heroine for a
new series of early chapter books. Once on the farm, she is furious that pizza can't
be delivered, that McDonald's is nowhere to be found, and that she is expected to
take care of an egg in an incubator, turning it every day or "the egg will never
become a chick." She gradually finds things to fascinate her on the farm, such as
the tiny purple flower in the middle of the Queen Anne's lace, and before the
chick is born, "the old Tooter went away and never came back," and the new
360 
* THE BULLETIN
Tooter is as happy as "a hog in slop." Spinelli occasionally sacrifices authenticity
for effect, as in the unrealistically odiferous compost heap, but the broad humor
and mischievous heroine will appeal to new readers both urban and rural. Soft-
edged but vigorously cartoonish pencil drawings appear throughout. SDL
SPOHN, KATE 
Night Goes By; written and illus. by Kate Spohn. 
Macmillan,
1995 
32p
ISBN 0-02-786351-4 
$15.00 
R 
2-4 yrs
It's a cloudless day, so Sun, "on all day with no nap," is glad to see Moon, "wide-
awake and ready to take over the sky." Moon, in turn, is waiting for her friend
Star, and when she pops up the two dance and play the night away until it's time
for Sun to come back on the job. You can't get much simpler, and while science-
minded parents might want to consign this to the cabbage patch, others will enjoy
the sweetly symmetrical story and Spohn's bravely naive oil paintings. Sun looks
like a golden egg overflowing its cup; Moon is dressed in a silvery sheath; Star is
royal blue in her glittery skirt. The three are painted in warm, bold strokes against
a sky awash with pinks and aquas, greens and grays. With the current emphasis on
complex picture books for older kids, it's good to see something that still has the
younger set in mind. RS
STEVENS, JANET 
From Pictures to Words: A Book about Making a Book; written
and illus. by Janet Stevens. 
Holiday House, 1995 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1154-0 
$15.95 
R 
6-9 yrs
See this month's Big Picture, p. 335.
STEVENSON, JAMES 
The Bones in the Cliff 
Greenwillow, 1995 
[128p]
ISBN 0-688-13745-8 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 6-8
Eleven-year-old Pete has been moving around with his alcoholic father for two
years: his mother is in a mental hospital and his father seems to be on the run from
something. Forbidden to contact anyone from their old life, Pete has the respon-
sibility for watching to see if a man with whom his father claims he has had a
"business misunderstanding" gets off the ferry at their East Coast island. He meets
a girl his own age, Rootie, who has a troubled family herself, and gradually they
learn to confide in each other. When the crisis finally comes, Pete attempts to
save his father from the bad guy, and Rootie is there to help. This grimly realistic
novel is a surprising departure from Stevenson's usual gently humorous (picture)
books. In one especially vivid scene, Pete recalls waiting in the car for his father,
passing the time with a prostitute and trying not to stare at her "bare behind,"
until his father emerges from a garage while being beaten up: "Two men took
turns hitting him. With each punch, I could see a fine spray of blood against the
lights of the garage." 
The author has attempted to combine adventure and sus-
pense with a coming-of-age story, but unfortunately, his tone remains so flat that
the two children never come to life. Psychological insights studded throughout
Pete's narration ("That made him really mad. Because it was so close to the truth")
do too much in informing readers what everything means. Though there are sev-
eral evocative passages, such as when the children crawl into a decaying movie
theater, they get no help from the heavy-handed characterization and bare-boned
plot. SDL
JUNE 1995 
* 361
STRASSER, TODD 
How I ChangedMy Life. 
Simon, 1995 
186 p
ISBN 0-671-88415-8 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr.7-12
Life is change: Kyle Winthrop fears that the knee injury which ended his star
career with the school football team has essentially ended his life as well; Bolita
Vine, known occasionally as Bo and more often, alas, as Bo Vine, has a crush on
Kyle and a steely determination that she will finish up high school as more than
the plump, mousy behind-the-scenes stage manager of the school play. Bo and
Kyle take turns narrating as Kyle takes a role in this year's play, The Diary ofAnne
Frank, and he and Bo develop a friendship as a result. The significant figure in
both their lives is Kyle's girlfriend, Chloe, the head cheerleader and queen of per-
fection who gets starring roles in the school play by natural right, who seems per-
haps to be losing interest in Kyle, and who makes Bo madly and completely jealous.
What's interesting here, though, is that the plot isn't what you'd predict: Kyle's
drifting from Chloe doesn't lead him to Bo but to a reassessment of his life, and Bo
undergoes a gradual but effective physical makeover, makes an abortive pass at
Kyle, and ends up becoming friends with the driven but not unlikable Chloe. The
writing is slick but agreeable, with smartmouthed Bo providing some good comic
touches; the blend is reminiscent of Kaplow's Alessandra books (BCCB 2/93 and
5/89). Strasser has given his story and characters enough integrity that the uncon-
ventional ending is satisfying rather than disappointing, and although he's kept
the story complex the writing has a smooth and unintimidating flow that will reel
in a variety of readers. DS
SWIFT, JONATHAN 
Gulliver in Lilliput; ad. by Margaret Hodges; illus. by Kim-
berly Bulcken Root. 
Holiday House, 1995 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1147-8 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Gulliver's Lilliputian adventure might well be the original tall tale, and that's how
Hodges treats it. Sometimes quoting Swift and sometimes paraphrasing him, she
has focused on the absurdity of the size disparity and the strangeness of this strange
land, sensibly leaving most of the political satire out of her adaptation. Gulliver's
capture, gradual acceptance into Lilliputian society, conquest of the neighboring
island of Blefuscu, and departure from the diminutive communities in order to
escape a charge of treason makes a pretty good story in itself. Root's line-and-
watercolor illustrations use spidery hatching (which slyly suggests period engrav-
ing) and occasional subtle but multi-colored borders, making them a meet
accompaniment to the Augustan formality of Hodges' prose; they also offer a poker-
faced presentation of funny details, such as the rats sated from devouring Gulliver's
tiny sheep. This is a classic example of "what if?" taken to its limits, and kids may
relish the idea of being on the side of the giants for once. The text here, as does
Swift's original Lilliputian account, ends with Gulliver going off on another ad-
venture; we may see him in Brobdingnag yet. DS
THOMPSON, JULIAN 
Philo Fortune's Awesome Journey to His Comfort
Zone. 
Hyperion, 1995 
200p
ISBN 0-7868-0067-4 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Philo Fortune has been counting on hitting the road with his buddy Eddie the
summer before senior year, but when Eddie's dad ships him off to ah Outward-
Bound style camp, Philo is on his own. With his parents' gingerly blessing, he
362 
* THE BULLETIN
drives west with a cooler full of snacks, a promise to call home twice a week, and a
vague intention to pin down the secret of success so that he can possess half a
million dollars by the time he's thirty. Philo picks up the hitchhiking Thea, a
young woman whose philosophy, she says, is diametrically opposed to Philo's own,
and their relationship just begins to extend beyond travelers' camaraderie when it
falls apart in a failed sexual encounter; Philo flees the scene and ends up alarming
a family of good ol' boy (and girl) drug dealers, who imprison him until the faith-
ful Thea arrives to save the day. The road story is the best and most appealing stuff
here: Philo's dreams of rambling and the strong touch of fantasy to their realiza-
tion will strike a chord with many readers, and Philo's dialogue, with its leisure-
suit level of hipness, will be both rued and appreciated. The book has some tonal
problems, however: the more serious notes don't blend well with the flipness,
which particularly undermines the entire ending sequence with the drug dealers,
as the threat is neither quite farcical enough to be taken lightly nor serious enough
to be suspenseful. It's still an easy book to like, with its romantic roaming, eccen-
tric cast of characters, and sense of adventure, and many a teen will enjoy the ride.
DS
WELLS, ROSEMARY 
Max and Ruby's Midas: Another Greek Myth; written and il-
lus. by Rosemary Wells. 
Dial, 1995 
25p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1783-0 
$12.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1782-2 
$12.99 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
Max once again (see Max and Ruby's First Greek Myth, BCCB 11/93) fails his
classical mythology lesson when big sister Ruby, trying to discourage Max from
too many cupcakes, spins a little story about "someone whose sweet tooth got out
of control." Little Prince Midas can't stand his mother's healthy cooking and hits
upon the trick of laser-beaming the good-for-you food with his eyes, turning prune
whip into a hot fudge sundae-and his mother into a cherry float ("Unfortu-
nately, his mother's hand had gotten in the way of the laser-beam"). He eventually
turns his whole family into desserts, but manages to reverse the trick and even
transforms the now-dreaded sundae into broccoli. The message is lost on Max,
who eats another cupcake, and it may be lost on young listeners as well, who will
likely have a hard time sorting the interior story (Midas looks just like Max) from
the frame even as they appreciate Max's last laugh, er, gulp. The myth itself loses
quite a bit in adaptation and while Wells' characteristically cozy wit is exhibited to
advantage in the ink-and-watercolor illustrations, Midas' red laser-beams resemble
nothing more than spurts of blood from his eyes. RS
WESTALL, ROBERT 
Falling into Glory. 
Farrar, 1995 
[30 4 p]
ISBN 0-374-32256-2 
$18.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 9-12
Robbie Atkinson is seventeen and in his last year at his British grammar school
when he begins to find himself drawn to Emma Harris, one of his schoolteachers.
Chance keeps bringing them together until they finally embark on an illicit affair.
The late Robert Westall was always a master of atmosphere, of fleshing out simple
situations into rich and complex chronicles, and his take on this story is no excep-
tion. The slow, inexorable progress of Robbie and Emma towards each other-
and towards the affair's inevitable end-makes the book very sexy, but, like the
romance itself, it's also intelligent and poignant. The characters are remarkably
JUNE 1995 * 
363
credible: the despairing but needy Emma; Robbie, who senses a world beyond
that of his mates and school but can't quite put together what it is or how to get
there; and a host of significant, realistic minor characters such as Robbie's pro
forma girlfriend, the weedy outcast who attempts to blackmail him, and the work-
ing-class soccer player who lifts Robbie's rugby team out of obscurity. Rugby in
fact plays a major part in the book, and Robbie's casually intense narration makes
the games swift and suspenseful, with more than the score at stake every time.
Although the book is set just after World War II the emotions are as current as
ever, and teens with patience for a subtle and thoughtful unfolding of a story will
find this well worth their time. There's a glossary in the back to help readers with
the British terms. DS
WILLNER-PARDO, GINA 
Jason and the Losers. 
Clarion, 1995 
120p
ISBN 0-395-70160-0 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Jason must move in with his cousin's family when his parents split up. A sports-
loving, girl-hating fifth grader, he quickly realizes that cousin Everett and his circle
of friends are science-loving, stamp-collecting "losers." When challenged by popular
kid Matt to prove, by being "really mean," that he doesn't have "loser blood,"
Jason remarks loudly that Everett smells and then trips him in gym class. How-
ever, his science fair project brings him in contact with the other group, and though
they still seem strange to him, he inevitably realizes that it is Matt who is the creep.
Like Judy Blume, the author does a good job of realistically conveying the unpleas-
ant side of children, and at the book's midpoint her hero is rather unsympathetic,
but by giving insight into Jason's churning emotions surrounding his parents' break-
up, his growing regret of his actions, and his new discovery that some nonsports
activities are interesting too, she lures the reader into liking him by the end. Un-
like Blume, Willner-Pardo doesn't use much humor, and her tone is generally
somber and a little flat, while the action is predictable. Since children often do fall
into divided camps, however, they may appreciate this look at clique dynamics.
SDL
WILSON, BUDGE 
The Dandelion Garden. Philomel, 1995 
[16 8p]
ISBN 0-399-22768-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 9 up
Wilson, author of the short-story collection The Leaving (BCCB 6/92), returns
with ten more stories. The entries here all have, with the exception of the title
story, been published before in Wilson's Canadian collection Cordelia Clark or in
magazines, but they'll be new to most young-adult readers. Her subjects, often
conveyed by adult narrators looking back, are children and childhood: in "Cordelia
Clark," the nameless narrator remembers the perfidy of the story's namesake, whom
she's soon to meet for the first time since childhood; in "The Canoe Trip" a man
out for a day's aquatic jaunt with his son realizes how one replicates one's parents,
for good or bad; in "Janetta's Confinement" a child staying with family friends
waits desperately for her mother to return home from the hospital after giving
birth. The adult viewpoint will limit this collection to high school and up, and
Wilson's didacticism sometimes makes her plotting heavy-handed and predict-
able, as in the title story and "The Happiness Pill." The smooth, tranquil prose,
however, explores some less-than-tranquil situations with subtle fluidity; the sto-
ries offer some sharp insights and nuanced understanding of changing relation-
364 
* THE BULLETIN
ships of all kinds. Teens who appreciate Martha Brooks' story collections (Travel-
ing on into the Light, BCCB 12/94, etc.) will appreciate'another keen Canadian
observer in Wilson. DS
WRIGHT, BETTY REN 
Nothing But Trouble; illus. by Jacqueline Rogers. 
Holiday
House, 1995 
119p
ISBN 0-8234-1175-3 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Vannie gets dumped in the middle of nowhere to live with an old cantankerous
aunt for the summer. Worse still, Aunt Bert is hostile towards Vannie's yippy
poodle, Muffy, and it looks as if Vannie is going to have one boring, rotten vaca-
tion. Enter mysterious night noises, slashed tires, and threatening graffiti. Vannie
slowly discovers the culprit behind these frightening events and in the process she
and Aunt Bert each learn to respect one another. As a family drama, the
intergenerational conflict is sketchy and undeveloped primarily because Aunt Bert
is not really a believable character. She is too much of a backwoods grump who is
cliched and clueless: "'This is cool,' Vannie said. 'Really cool.' Aunt Bert looked
annoyed. 'You won't be cool under my mama's comforter,' she snapped. 'Too
warm, if anything.' And she was off to find sheets and the comforter before Vannie
could explain what she'd meant by 'cool'." Wright is at her best writing suspense
scenes, and the mystery subplot offers some light tingling anticipation for younger
middle graders just beginning to venture into mysteries. Although this is not as
enticing as some of Wright's ghost stories (The Ghost ofPopcorn Hill BCCB 6/93)
and the mystery behind Muffy's disappearance is disappointingly pat (she wasn't
kidnapped-she ran away), Vannie's shining moment of heroism (accompanied
by a humorous drawing of the fateful event) is classic slapstick fun. HMW
YATES, 
JANELLE 
Woody Guthrie: American Balladeer. Ward Hill,
1995 
142p 
illus. with photographs (Unsing Americans)
Library ed. ISBN 0-9623380-0-1 
$14.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-9623380-5-2 
$10.95 
R Gr. 6-9
The series title, "Unsung Americans," is rather ironic for this biography of one of
the most sung Americans of all time. Yates traces Guthrie's life from his childhood
in Oklahoma, his entry into the music business and social activism in California,
his increasing fame, his problematic family life, and his gradual deterioration and
eventual death from Huntington's Disease. The author does a good job of ex-
plaining the politics that both assisted in Guthrie's popularity and made him sus-
pect in the eyes of many, and she also paints a picture of the emerging folk scene
with people such as Leadbelly, Cisco Houston, Lee Hays, and Pete Seeger (who
was interviewed for the book) appearing throughout the pages. There are a few
lacunae-it's never stated, for instance, where Guthrie was living in his last few
years or when he finally had to be hospitalized-but it's a competent overview of a
significant American life. Black-and-white photographs (with occasionally un-
helpful captions) appear throughout the text; notes for quotations (although not
for other information), a chronology, a bibliography (containing audio as well as
print sources), and an index are included. DS
YEP, LAURENCE 
Hiroshima: A Novella. 
Scholastic, 1995 
56 p
ISBN 0-590-20832-2 
$9.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Subtitled a novella, this book is actually a straightforward nonfiction chronology
JUNE 1995 * 
365
of the Hiroshima bombing interspersed with brief fictional scenes of a girl, Sachi,
who survives the attack and later becomes one of the "Hiroshima maidens," women
who came to the U.S. after the war for free surgery to correct disfigurements caused
by the blast and radiation. Yep's clipped, present-tense writing resists editorializ-
ing, letting the terrible facts speak for themselves ("Two hundred yards away [from
ground zero] people vanish. However, in that instant, their outlines are burnt into
the cement like shadows"). As the afterword states, Sachi is "a composite of several
children who were in Hiroshima when the bomb dropped," and perhaps inevita-
bly, she lacks individuality, particularly as she is surrounded by so much nonfic-
tion exposition about the bomb, how it works, and the effects of the explosion.
But this is easy reading-as far as language and sentence structure go-and kids
not ready for more comprehensive accounts can here gain a clear and fair introduc-
tion to a epoch-defining event. A bibliography of sources is included. RS
YOLEN, JANE 
And Twelve Chinese Acrobats; illus. by Jean Gralley. 
Philomel,
1995 
54p
ISBN 0-399-22691-5 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 2-4
A family story about Yolen's mischievous Uncle Lou coming of age in a Ukrainian
village, this centers on the pranks that lead to his leaving (in disgrace) for military
school in Moscow. Everyone misses his wild sense of humor, especially his younger
brother Wolf-the author's father-and when Lou returns (again in disgrace), the
troop of Chinese acrobats he brings with him attests to his new career in a Russian
circus. The relationship between the two brothers, Lou and Wolf, lends an imme-
diate dynamic to the historical setting; while simply told, the story is nevertheless
detailed and individualized enough that it does not become oversimplified. The
compressed narrative, brief chapters, spacious format, large print, and vivaciously
drafted pen-and-ink illustrations dancing across almost every page all make this a
prime choice for young readers venturing into historical fiction for the first time,
or, for that matter, considering a probe into their own family stories. BH
444w 
2ý
366 
* THE BULLETIN
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
Avery, Gillian. Behold the Child: American Children and Their Books 1621-1922.
Johns Hopkins, 1995. 226p. illus. with photographs. ISBN 0-8018-5066-5.
$29.95.
"For American books there is no Darton," says Avery in her preface, and one can't
help but compare this history ofAmerican children's books to F. J. Harvey Darton's
famous Children's Books in England. It comes off reasonably well: Avery has achieved
a useful breadth and an acknowledgment of most significant tendencies in the
literature, and if her writing doesn't quite possess Darton's smooth readability it
has a dry humor all its own. Her British point of view leads her to make frequent
and interesting comparisons between British and American children and books; it
also occasionally leads her to use British titles or editions (Good Wives for the
second half of Little Women, for instance) and to miss bits of American culture.
Although occasional editing glitches mar the pages (an asterisk without a footnote,
names changing from page to page, a quotation mark on a line by itself, etc.),
there's a wealth of information packed into them; frequent illustrations balance
out the small double-columned print. A selected bibliography and an index are
included. DS
Copeland, Jeffrey S. Speaking ofPoets 2: More Interviews with Poets Who Write for
Children and YoungAdults; by Jeffrey S. Copeland and Vicky L. Copeland. NCTE,
1995. 20 4p. illus. with photographs. ISBN 0-8141-4620-1. Paper ed. $15.95.
In a companion to Speaking of Poets (NCTE, 1993), Copeland and Copeland
interview twenty more poets, both well-known and emerging, about their child-
hood writing and reading experiences, their techniques and inspirations for po-
etry, and their advice for young poets. Those interviewed include J. Patrick Lewis,
Cynthia Rylant, Paul Janeczko, and Nikki Giovanni. RS
Whalen, Sharla Scannell. The Betsy-Tacy Companion: A Biography ofMaud Hart
Lovelace. Portalington Press, 1995. 
515p. illus. with photographs. ISBN 0-
9630783-0-5. $39.95.
In her jacket-copy bio, Whalen notes that her husband "looks forward to choosing
a vacation spot without reference to its Betsy-Tacy significance." Those who have
not fallen under the Betsy-Tacy spell will empathize with the long-suffering spouse,
but those who have will revel in Whalen's no-stone-unturned compendium of
what seems to be every detail that ever found its way from Maud Hart Lovelace's
real life into that of her fictional alter ego, Betsy Ray. For example, after citing
(from Betsy Was a Junior) the names on Betsy's dance card at a party, Whalen
presents the contents of Maud's own: "According to the actual program, Bob
Hughes did take the first dance, as her escort, as well as three additional dances.
Maud two-stepped with Pin and Mike. She had two schottisches with Bob. She
had a waltz with Mike and a barn dance with Edward Dodds. She danced a half-
step with Clayton Burmeister. The fifth extra she danced with Paul Ford." This
JUNE 1995 
* 
367
certainly puts the clef in the roman, and all Betsy-Tacy fans will welcome Whalen's
monumental efforts. RS
Stewig, John Warren. Lookingat Picture Books. Highsmith, 1995. ISBN 0-917846-
29-X. 26 9p. illus. with photographs. $49.00
Students just starting to look at picture books critically have little, excepting
MacCann and Richard's The Child's First Books, to aid them; here Stewig addresses
that deficit with this broadly researched, widely knowledgeable text discussing pic-
ture-book art. Chapters include an overview, Pictorial Elements, Composition,
Media, Book Design Elements, and The Influence of Art Movements, and exam-
ine children's books ranging from Caldecott's John Gilpin and Other Stories to
Allen Say's Tree ofCranes. The book sacrifices some clarity of image in order to fit
in the multitude of black-and-white reproductions, and one must often search the
text to find an illustrator's or book's name, but it's exceedingly useful to have so
many specific examples of Stewig's points; there's also an insert containing twelve
color plates which are discussed at length in their appropriate place in the text.
Marginal commentary, suggestions, and pointers to further research are
bibliographized at the end of each chapter, as are the children's books discussed;
appendices of "Books about Art and Artists," "Ethnic Bibliography," and "Picture
Book Genres" are included, as is an index that comprises terminology as well as
book titles and illustrators. DS
*.·Y
368 
* THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
ADVENTURE STORIES: Smith
African Americans-stories: Crews
Alcoholism-stories: Daly
ALPHABET BOOKS: Crowther
Animals: Jenkins
Arithmetic: Jonas
Art: Heller; Stevens
Aunts-fiction: Wright
Australia-fiction: Dubosarsky;
French
Bears-stories: Gliori
BEDTIME STORIES: Alexander;
Spohn
BIOGRAPHIES: Yates
Books and reading: Heller; Stevens
Brothers and sisters-fiction: Park
Bullies-fiction: Willner-Pardo
Cats-stories: Keillor
Cats: Cole
Child abuse-fiction: Griffin
Christians-fiction: Paulsen
Cliques-fiction: Willner-Pardo
Computers-fiction: Cross
CONCEPT BOOKS: Crowther;
Heller; Jonas; Murphy; Simeon
COUNTING BOOKS: Jonas;
Murphy
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Thompson
Death-fiction: Dubosarsky;
Muchmore; Park
Depression era-fiction: French
Dogs-fiction: Muchmore
Dogs-stories: Devlin
Emotional problems-fiction:
Frank
Erie Canal: Harness
Ethics and values: Paulsen
FANTASY: French; King-Smith;
Lewis; Napoli
Farm life-fiction: Spinelli
Fathers and sons-fiction: Napoli;
Smith; Stevenson
FOLKTALES AND
FAIRYTALES: Barton;
Hansard; Mayo; Morgan
Food and eating-stories: Blos;
Devlin; Wells
Friends-fiction: Frank; Granger;
Grove; Stevenson; Strasser
Friendship: Bode
Frogs-fiction: Napoli
Geography: Brandenburg
Ghosts-fiction: Seabrooke
Grandfathers-stories: Devlin
Growing up-fiction: Mazer
Guidance: Bode; Daly
Guinea pigs-fiction: Dubosarsky
Hiroshima-fiction: Yep
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Almagor; Furlong; Krupinski;
Love; Westall; Yep; Yolen
History, U.S.: Harness; Krupinski;
Lavender; Sorensen; Yates
History, world: Kerr
Holocaust-fiction: Almagor
Homelessness-fiction: Neufeld
Horses-fiction: Polikoff
Immigration-stories: Joosse
Israel-fiction: Almagor
Japan-fiction: Yep
Jews-fiction: Almagor
Kenya-fiction: Smith
JUNE 1995 * 
369
Literature, children's: Lewis;
Stevens
Literature, English: Swift
LOVE STORIES: Polikoff;
Strasser; Thompson; Westall
Manufacturing: Keeler
Middle Ages-fiction: Furlong
Missouri-fiction: Grove
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Mazer
Mothers and sons-stories: Joosse
Music: Hayes; Yates
Muslims-stories: Kessler
MYSTERY STORIES: Griffin
Mythology: Climo
Native Americans-folklore:
Morgan
Nature study: Ackerman;
Brandenburg; Jenkins; Keeler;
Lucht
Niger-stories: Kessler
Pet care: Cole
Photography: Brandenburg
Pigs-stories: Hansard
POETRY: Gordon; Simon
Rain-stories: Simon
Reading aloud: Krupinski; Swift;
Yolen
Reading, beginning: Barton; Cole
Reading, easy: King-Smith;
Krupinski; Spinelli; Willner-
Pardo; Wright; Yep; Yolen
Reading, family: Blos
Reading, reluctant: Bode; Cross;
Granger; Park; Smith
Rural life-fiction: Grove
Russia-fiction: Yolen
Sanitation: Kerr
SCARY STORIES: Seabrooke
School-fiction: Strasser; Willner-
Pardo
SCIENCE FICTION: Cross
Science: Heller
Seals: Ackerman
SHORT STORIES: Wilson
Sisters-fiction: Griffin
Social studies: Sorensen
SPORTS STORIES: Westall
Story hour: Alexander; Barton;
Blos; Climo; Devlin; Gliori;
Hansard; Hayes; Joosse; Keillor;
Kessler; Lucht; Mayo; Simeon;
Simon; Spohn; Stevens
Summer-fiction: Wright
Summer-stories: Crews
Teachers-fiction: Granger
Texas-fiction: Muchmore; Paulsen
Time travel-fiction: French
TOY BOOKS: Crowther;
Murphy; Simeon
Vietnam: Schmidt
Virginia-fiction: Seabrooke
Voyages and travels-fiction:
Krupinski
West, the: Lavender
World War II-fiction: Yep
/
at.d b5 
are1t Eiarbour
oems in free verse celebrate the diversity of city life,
ng its sights, sounds, smells, tastes and seasons in
g imagery. [From] tall buildings ... [to] 'clouds of
rom carts of cooking foods' [here are] the
--- 
-- 
A.L 
^.:4t
many raceis of an urian envionmenlt--
its action, pulsing rhythms, and
multiethnicity. Two-page spreads in hot
colors provide a vibrant background for
Barbour's numerous lively sketches that
accompany each selection. An exciting,
accessible collection." -SLJ
Ages 5-9. $16.00TR (0-06-021522-4)
$15.89LB (0-06-021523-2)
3 
AI~~ 
3... 
A....lI 
dAA~ff~ 
,prpinf 
nf 
th
1988 
NCTE 
Award 
for 
Poetry 
for 
Children
BLACK IS BROWN IS TAN 
THE POTRlY OF
Full-color pictures by Emily Arnold 
BLACK AMERICA
McCully Ages 4-8. 
Anthology of the 20th Century
$15.00TR (0-06-020083-9) 
Edited by Arnold Adoff
$14.89LB (0-06-020084-7) 
Introduction by Gwendolyn Brooks
$3.95PB (0-06-443269-6) 
Ages 12 up.
SPORTS PAGES 
$25.00TR (0-06-020089-8)
Pictures b 
zma 
$24.89LB (0-06-020090-1)
Pictures by Steve Kuzma
Ages 8-12.
$14.89LB (0-397-32103-1)
•$5.95PB (0-06-446098-3) 
r 
".r
A-I 
L 
A_ 
#rAl A-fJ 1 
*2" 
ft
S, 
_
.HarTperCollinsCh ildren sBooks
0n 
1 
ast 53rdl 
Street. New 
York 10022
I
In an instant Jane Hartley's world is turned upside down. During
the bittersweet days of the Great Depression her family suddenly
must struggle to make ends meet. Her father loses his job. The
milkman stops coming to their door. And Jane has to wear old
stockings riddled with ugly runs.
But Jane is a girl of faith and hope who keeps alive her dream of
becoming an author by making daily entries in her diary about the
changing world around her and by writing stories for her favorite
magazines. She also spends every spare moment helping the kindly
Mr. Walz, the owner of the Book Shop. She loves to read the
books he gives her as payment.
When a rare school book is found one day hidden away in the
Book Shop, life for Jane and her family takes yet another turn -
this time for the better.
Ages 10 - 13 
115 pages
ISBN 0-8028-5096-0 
51½" x 8%" 
Hardcover 
$12.99
ISBN 0-8028-5113-4 
5¼4" x 8" 
Paperback 
$5.99
5 028g 
At your bookstore, or call 800-253-7521 
FAX 616-459-6540
I 
|\ 
WM. B. EERDMANS PUBLISHING CO.
S 
I 
255 JEFFERSON AVE. S.E. / GRAND RAPIDS, MICHIGAN 49503
From 1995 Laura Ingalls Wilder Medalist
Virginia Hamilton
"A boon for primary-grades discussion of
animal endangerment in the face of dimin-
ishing resources."
-The 
Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
"This compelling picture book is an animal
fantasy rooted in physical reality." 
-Booklist
"A valuable curriculum item, which will fill
many needs." 
-School 
Library Journal
0-590-47366-2 
* Ages 5-8 
40 pages 
* $14.95
THE BLUE SKY PRESS
An Imprint of Scholastic Inc.
'11
fh~F
"Eac chapter mae for a neatly sefcntie story suitable for
book-talking or reading aloud. ... Smat funny, and widely appealing,
this will please old fans and make new Wayside converts."
-
The Bulfletin ofth C-enlter for Childredns Books
'"Sachar's offenng contains hi~aiy malevolence, romance, relentless
puning, goofiness, inspiration, retve~nge, and poigntancy.... 
on
readr will revel in the pranks, wade through the romance, [ad
identifyf with the students' thoughts." 
-
School Librar ourna
Argesa8p 
l76pp. RTSIS; 
oo68B1364-
Univ 
ty of llinois Pre
1325 South Oak Smtee
Champaign, IL 61820
U.SA
REUrN PocmAG GUARANT
Albert Whitman & Company, 6340 Oakton St. Morton Grove, IL 60053
SECOND CASS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
Do Pirates Take Baths?
by Kathy Tucker
Illustrated by Nadine Bernard Westcott
"Through Tucker's thirteen brief,
bouncy verses, buccaneer wanna-bes
can explore their career choice from
job interview..., through workplace
conditions..., to remuneration.. .A
good scratch for any story hour crowd
itching for some silliness."
Recommend, The Bulletin
ISBN 0-8075-1696-1, Ages 3-7, $14.95
i"·I
·i:~r 
M
rrs 
s 
di~:li
cb
~ 
~1
I 
··
s: 
~$ 
t;:i
-· 
~ 
--··- -
-· 
·--- 
`· 
--- -- 
---
T fl
i
i
ir
,
n
At 
At^
AF "
*n^ .^.·
-~:·i 
~
I:st~
