T h e
B u l l e t i n
of the Center for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
School of Information Sciences
by Johns Hopkins University Press
May 2022
Vol. 75   No. 9
75 
YEARS
o
f
 
d
e
d
i
c
a
t
i
o
n
 
t
o
 
y
o
u
t
h
 
l
i
t
e
r
a
t
u
r
e
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
Bookbird: 
A Journal of International Children’s Literature
The Bulletin of the Center for  
Children’s Books
Children’s Literature
Children’s Literature  
Association Quarterly
Journal of the History of  
Childhood and Youth
The Lion and the Unicorn
A Look Inside
T h e B u l l e t i n
of the Center for Children’s Books 
May 2022
Vol. 75 No. 9
277  The Big Picture
 
 Gabe in the After by Shannon Doleski
278  New Books for Children and Young People
 
 Reviewed titles include
279 •  Hollow Fires by Samira Ahmed
287 •  Alice Austen Lived Here by Alex Gino
292 •  Family of Liars by E. Lockhart
298 •  The Sweetest Scoop: Ben & Jerry’s Ice Cream Revolution written by Lisa 
Robinson and illus. by Stacy Innerst
306 •  The World Belonged to Us written by Jacqueline Woodson and illus. by 
Leo Espinosa
308  Subject and Use Index
Explanation of code symbols used with reviews
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
 Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or 
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
© 2022 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois School of Information Sciences by Johns Hopkins University Press, 
2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, MD 21218-4363, USA. Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, 
MD 21233-9651, and at additional mailing ofﬁces. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The 
Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363.
Reviewing Staff
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Editor (KQG)
Quinita Balderson, Reviewer (QB)
Natalie Berglind, Reviewer (NB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Kara Forde, Reviewer (KF)
Fiona Hartley-Kroeger, Reviewer (FHK)
Alaine Martaus, Reviewer (AM)
Adam McConville, Reviewer (AMM)
Danica Ronquillo, Reviewer (DR)
Sarah Sahn, Reviewer (SS)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Amanda Toledo, Reviewer (ART)
Aaren Tucker, Reviewer (AT)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
Office Staff
Anna Wiegand, Editorial Assistant
Subscription rates
For up-to-date pricing information, please visit the journal webpage at: http://www.press.jhu.edu/
journals/subscribe. Subscription checks should be made payable to Johns Hopkins University Press. 
All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new address.
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 
2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 410-
516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/journals/
advertising. Or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Kate Quealy-Gainer, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.ischool.illinois.edu
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration © Minnie Phan, from Gabe in the After by Shannon Doleski. Used with permis-
sion of Amulet/Abrams.
May 2022 • 277
The Big Picture
Gabe in the After
By Shannon Doleski
“Is that what you call it? The end of the world?” inquires oddly optimistic Relle 
of fourteen-year-old Gabe, who’s pretty skeptical of humanity’s fate after a virus 
ripped through the world, collapsing modern society. Current readers might share 
Gabe’s sentiments, as events once relegated to history books—a global pandemic, 
an international war, an unstable world order—are now very much in the present, 
complicated by the existential threat of climate change. If it is not the end of the 
world, then, it certainly feels unsteady, and Gabe must find his footing on shaky 
ground.
When the virus hit two years ago, Gabe’s mother and sister fell ill, and 
his physician father sent him to an island off the coast of Maine to stay safe. Gabe, 
seventeen kids, and adults Sylvia and Peter have built a life there, and they’ve never 
seen any evidence of other survivors on their trips to the mainland for supplies. 
Gabe is therefore understandably shocked when he finds Relle in the mainland 
forest, seemingly healthy and, at least to Gabe, confusingly upbeat. Her arrival on 
the island makes for a much-needed injection of joy—she even begins to plan a 
talent show with the other kids—and Gabe finds himself falling for her, exchang-
ing his relentless pessimism for some of her cheerful live-in-the-moment attitude. 
Tragedy strikes, however, when Peter dies from a heart condition and Gabe blames 
himself—he’d considered himself the group’s de facto medical expert. So, leaving 
Relle behind, he decides to follow the rumors of a military base on the mainland 
to get medicine and possibly a doctor for future emergencies. 
The post-apocalyptic world Doleski offers up, both on the island and on 
Gabe’s mainland journey, is a surprisingly generous and perhaps even realistic look 
at humanity. Yes, there are some people who lapse into looting and violence, but 
there are plenty of others trying to do their best in a barely sustainable situation. 
The military base, for example, isn’t particularly welcoming to Gabe, but they do 
share their resources, including a ham radio that Gabe uses later when a child on 
the island falls ill. Doleski could have easily followed a familiar track, pitting the 
peaceful island folks against the big, bad industrialists at the base, but instead she 
lets that commentary rest, trusting her reader to recognize that both approaches 
to survival are valid but also flawed in their own way.
For all his cynicism, Gabe is still an innocent when it comes to romantic 
relationships, thrilled at the prospect of holding Relle’s hand and attempting to 
impress her with his prowess at Scrabble. The third-person narration approaches 
his awkwardness with compassion and respect, acknowledging that he’s particularly 
unprepared to navigate adolescent relationship dynamics, having spent the last two 
278 • The Bulletin
New Books for Children and Young People
AdAms, LeisL Batter Royale. Amulet/Abrams, 2022 [240p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781419750755 $24.99
Paper ed. ISBN 9781419750762 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781647001216 $15.54
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr 6-9
Seventeen-year-old Rose is an aspiring pastry chef from Toronto, Canada, who 
dreams of running a restaurant to showcase her culinary talent. She’s got a lot on 
her plate, though: her parents are on the verge of divorce, tuition to attend her 
culinary dream school is pretty steep, and the diner where she works with her 
best friend and childhood crush Fred is close to bankruptcy. When a food critic 
sees potential in Rose after tasting her strawberry shortcake, she invites Rose and 
Fred to be contestants on Batter Royale, a baking reality show with a grand prize 
of half a million dollars. The competition in London is intense with wild baking 
challenges and ruthless contestants like snobby Nicole, who is certain that she’ll 
win both the competition and Fred’s heart. The stakes are high, and Rose will do 
years honing his survival skills over his social ones. His bond with Relle unfolds 
sweetly, bright in its simplicity and heartening amidst such bleakness. Relle, for 
her part, hovers close to the manic pixie dream girl trope, but that’s tempered by 
several moments of true vulnerability, and it’s clear her earnestness is as much a 
coping mechanism as Gabe’s wariness.
So perhaps it is not so much Relle’s question that needs answering here, 
but Gabe’s: “Was he allowed to feel joy? To feel happiness in the After?” The 
book’s parallels to current events invite readers to try to find that tender, elusive 
spot between resigned nihilism and blind hope in a world that is both brutal and 
beautiful. Whole religions and cultural movements have been built around that 
search, so readers can’t expect a clear answer here, but they’ll likely find solace and 
encouragement as Gabe and Relle move toward a future that offers little safety but 
plenty of wonder. 
—Kate Quealy-Gainer, Editor
May 2022 • 279
anything to prove that amateur bakers can rise to the top. Consistent rectangular 
panels, flashy backgrounds and fonts, and mouth-watering dessert illustrations tap 
into readers’ senses while the tightly focused plot follows Rose’s passion for baking 
and her relatable teenage life. Food puns, rhymes, and alliterations are sprinkled 
throughout the narrative, with a dash of sound effects from kitchen tools and 
appliances that immerses readers in the competition. Served alongside the more 
decorative elements, however, is a thoughtful look at the complexities of a fractur-
ing family, the value of teamwork and sportsmanship, and the persistence needed 
to pursue one’s dreams despite the unfavorable circumstances. Fans of The Great 
British Bake Off will consume this delectable graphic novel featuring Rose’s recipes 
to bake with the whole family.  DR
Ahmed, sAmirA Hollow Fires. Little, 2022 [416p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780316282642 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780316282840 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Safiya is her high school newspaper editor, whose strident critiques of academic 
and social misfeasance have made her a burr in the sock of the principal at elite 
DuSable Prep. When she comes squarely into the crosshairs of an anti-Muslim 
white supremacist who hacks the newspaper’s website, Safiya has more to worry 
about than her own precarious position as a trouble-making senior beholden to a 
scholarship for continued enrollment. A pattern emerges that connects the screed 
against Safiya with escalating acts of Islamophobic vandalism and violence around 
Chicago’s Hyde Park community, including the disappearance of a Muslim boy, 
Jawad, who never made it home from nearby Bethune High School. Signs strongly 
point toward the involvement of Nate, a prickly classmate who knows a heckuva 
lot about Nietzsche, the philosopher quoted in many of the threats and crimes. 
Unfortunately, but perhaps predictable, collecting irrefutable evidence for police 
detectives who drag their feet in the Jawad investigation is no easy matter; between 
unexpected flirtation from charming, blue-eyed sports captain Richard and ghostly 
messages from Jawad, Safiya is drawn ever deeper into a deadly maelstrom. Ahmed 
offers up a twisty, thrilling mystery while deploying the details of the crime as a 
framework for her exploration of Islamophobia and how wealth and privilege 
shield criminals from suspicion. The Chicago setting and the ultimate revelations 
of the horrific act call up elements of the Leopold and Loeb murders, and readers 
of Candance Fleming’s recent Murder Among Friends (BCCB 3/22) might find this 
a compelling, though grim, read alike; it also makes a timely whodunnit that will 
satisfy any reader looking for a mystery, rich in secrets and social commentary.  EB
ALmond, dAvid Brand New Boy; illus. by Marta Altés. Candlewick, 
2022 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781536222708 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781536226942 $18.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad Gr. 3-5
Daniel and his friends are looking forward to the end of term at Darwin Avenue 
Primary Academy in Newcastle, but outdoor freedom is put on the back burner 
when a nonemotive, blank-eyed new kid named George arrives for the last days of 
class, amid lots of encouraging hoopla from faculty. The kids veer between curious 
280 • The Bulletin
and welcoming, and Daniel is singled out by staff as someone who could extend 
a friendly hand off hours, so they arrange after school tea at Daniel’s house. How-
ever, Daniel begins to suspect George might be something other than human: his 
strangely scripted conversation, his killer football moves way beyond a kid’s abilities, 
and his constant adult companions who seem more like handlers than guardians 
all indicate George might be robotic. That fact is proudly—and surprisingly—
confirmed at a school assembly in which a disassembled George is put on display 
and the creators and school staff celebrate their joint participation in launching a 
scientific wonder. What nobody in charge counted on is the salutary effect hanging 
with other kids would have on George’s development, and how driven the kids 
are to restore and save their buddy. Almond’s approaches to existential questions 
(Darwin school, adult baptism into new life, George’s offline mortality) are unde-
veloped, and the emotional reveal is blunted by Altés’s stiff black and white cartoon 
illustrations. There is, however, a thoughtfully generous conclusion in which the 
kids find comfort in knowing they gave George his best possible existence, a step 
forward in maturity that readers will appreciate.  EB
Amos, shAwn Cookies & Milk; illus. by Robert Paul Jr. Little, 2022 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780759556775 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780759556768 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 3-6
Summer of 1976 has officially begun, and for Ellis Johnson, whose parents have just 
split up, this means working with his father on yet another new business venture—a 
chocolate chip cookie store on a less-than-glamourous stretch of Sunset Boulevard. 
The community could use some Black-owned businesses, and everyone could ap-
preciate an excellent cookie, but it’s really Dad who needs the entrepreneurial win 
here. Turning a dilapidated A-frame into an inviting draw and scaling up cookie 
production in six weeks will be a challenge, especially when available (unpaid) staff 
is limited to Ellis, Dad, a cane-wielding, family-nagging grandmother, and a pair 
of father/son family friends. Ellis himself is of variable use, vacillating between 
complaining about his lost summer and creating costly, time-eating mishaps. For 
readers who make a speedy connection between the author’s last name and “Famous 
Amos” chocolate chip cookies, this semi-autobiographical account of the author 
and his famous father is obviously on a path to a happy-for-now ending, and the 
fun is getting to the grand opening. As author Amos suggests in his opening and 
closing remarks, however, the themes of divorce and family strains are as germane 
to the tale as hijinks, pecans, and community support. With Paul’s black and white 
drawings as visual rest stops, snappy chapters balance sweet with a touch of bitter, 
and a dash of salt is added by a local radio DJ who supplies a playlist of funk and 
a family mystery. This is a solid recommendation for family or classroom chapter 
reading, and a recipe for you know what is included.  EB
Armstrong, JAde Scout Is Not a Band Kid; written and illus. by Jade Arm-
strong. Random House Graphic, 2022 [272p]
Library ed. ISBN 9780593176245 $23.99
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593176238 $20.99
Paper ed. ISBN 9780593176221 $12.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593176252 $8.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr 4-8
When middle-schooler Scout learns that her school band will be attending the same 
May 2022 • 281
festival as her favorite author, she takes drastic measures: she joins the band as a 
novice trombone player, a move that immediately distances her from her current 
popularity-obsessed pals. As she takes up trombone lessons with trombone leader 
Merrin—who she thought despised her—the two eventually bond over fandom, and 
Scout learns to let go of friendships that no longer serve her and cherish new ones 
where she least expects them. References to current pop culture and video gaming 
highlight Scout’s enthusiasm for fandom, and the layout and design of this graphic 
novel uniquely showcase the diverse cast of characters in the band with role-playing 
game profiles. Visualized sound effects and humorous reactions in the background 
give the scenes energy, but the busyness can overcrowd the pages, occasionally los-
ing the narrative. A pleasing balance of warm and cool color palettes emphasize 
the new dynamics between Scout and Merrin, and the two characters harmonize 
over time as they encourage each other to not give up on their dreams no matter 
what criticism comes their way. Aspiring young musicians, artists, and DND fans 
will appreciate this story of self-confidence and the value of new experiences. The 
back matter includes concept art, bonus comic strips, and the author’s inspiration 
behind this delightful debut.  DR
BArnes, derrick The Queen of Kindergarten; illus. by Vanessa Brantley- 
Newton. Paulsen/Penguin, 2022 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593111420 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593111437 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 4-6 yrs
Suited up in her most stylish outfit and with a head of bouncy, beautiful braids, MJ 
is ready for kindergarten. She just needs one more thing, according to her Momma, 
who bestows on her a sparkling tiara and dubs her “the Queen of Kindergarten.” 
Queens, MJ is told, brighten up every room they enter, care for their classmates, 
and help others. Throughout the day, she finds ways to do all three: as window 
monitor, she gets to open the shades, literally bring brightness to the room; she gives 
a smile and some cheer to homesick Rayna; and she helps Leo put away the blocks. 
Of course, she does other things as well, Double Dutching with Miss Lovingood, 
drawing a picture of her brother, and singing the highest notes in music, until the 
day ends and she heads home for kisses and hugs with her family. As with Barnes’ 
The King of Kindergarten (BCCB 7/19), this story exudes joy, celebrating the kid 
who walks into the room and owns it with sunny confidence and genuine warmth. 
The art is rich with textures, creating an effusive sense of movement as geometric 
patterns in various objects and clothing contrast with dappled splotches and soft 
blending in the background. There’s not a dull color in this palette of vivid tones, 
and dynamic figures convey the cheerful busyness of the classroom. A nod to Barnes’ 
Crown: An Ode to the Fresh Cut is cleverly slipped in, making this a nice intro to 
Barnes’ other stellar works.  KQG
BArton, Bree Zia Erases the World. Viking, 2022 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593350997 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593351000 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
One minute Zia is fine, but the next, feelings of sadness and darkness isolate her 
from her friends; not knowing how to describe it, she calls this feeling the Shadoom. 
A solution to her pain comes in the form of a magical dictionary she finds in her 
grandmother’s attic: when she erases a word in the book, that thing disappears in 
282 • The Bulletin
the real world. When she’s humiliated at the pool, for example, she erases the word 
pool, and when she returns to gym, not only is the pool gone, but so is anyone’s 
memory of it. Convinced she’s helping herself and those she loves, she begins to 
erase any source of pain or discomfort, but her actions lead to unforeseen and dan-
gerous mishaps. Zia’s relationships with her mother, her yiayia, and a new friend, 
Alice Pham, carry the emotional weight of the story, driving the plot. Definitions 
are interspersed throughout the book, and an entry includes several meanings for a 
word, with common definitions followed by something directly pertaining to Zia’s 
life. Her experiences make a solid addition to middle grade fiction tackling mental 
health and intergenerational healing, and Barton leaves readers with an intriguing 
cliffhanger about Zia’s friend that could suggest a sequel.  ART
BiLAn, JAsBinder Tamarind and the Star of Ishta. Chicken House/Scholastic, 
2022 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781338769432 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781338769456 $18.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 5-7
Tamarind didn’t know her Indian mom at all, and she’s grown up with her single 
dad who has never really wanted to talk about her or help Tamarind understand that 
part of her cultural heritage. When her dad remarries and leaves for his honeymoon, 
Tamarind goes to visit her mom’s family for the first time ever, dropped into a net-
work of unknown relatives who live in a mansion tucked away in the Himalayas. 
She hopes to learn everything about her mother, but her extended family seems 
just as exasperatingly reluctant to share anything as her father is. A ghost provides 
her with the answers no one else is willing to, and it’s her description of the spirit 
that finally gets her mother’s family talking openly about her mom, confronting 
the grief that has consumed each of them in different ways. This story is a lush 
world of colors, spices, magic, and the power of knowing oneself better through 
knowing the places and people that are part of your heritage. Tamarind doesn’t 
share the anguish of having lost someone she knew and loved, but her sadness is no 
less acute for lack of specific knowledge. Character-driven readers will appreciate 
this examination of mourning from different perspectives, and grace is extended 
to each character, as all of them have been mourning a woman who seems to have 
been a truly bright light during her short life.  AS
BondestAm, LindA My Life at the Bottom: The Story of a Lonesome Axolotl; tr. from 
the Swedish by A. A. Prime. Yonder/Restless, 2022 [46p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781632061386 $19.95
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 6-9 yrs
Our little axolotl narrator begins at the very beginning: “Once upon a time, the 
world was newborn. There was sea and there was land, and little creatures, bobbing 
and babbling.” The story then takes a large leap to modern day, when the axolotl 
is born “in the beautiful lake behind the tower with the glowing hamburger.” It’s a 
good life, with plenty of food to eat and things to do, including going to the surface 
to observe the “big lugs’’ (i.e., humans) walking about. Things start to deteriorate, 
though: there’s more junk everywhere, the water tastes like soot, and the world 
on the surface is on fire. One day a giant wave sweeps the axolotl away, sending 
the little one swirling away to a new place, a submerged city with not a big lug 
May 2022 • 283
to be seen. It’s not a happy ending for humans and it might take some reluctant 
adult explaining, but there’s an appropriately indignant tone to the book, if not 
the narrator. The axolotl itself has a blissful naivete, enjoying its life until there’s 
a clear crisis with few easy solutions (sound familiar?) but making the best of it 
even when the world is literally on fire. The soft palette and mottled textures of the 
water contrasted against the more angular and crowded human world make striking 
visuals, and details are darkly humorous, such as the cell phone that drops to the 
lake floor and provides entertainment to our narrator and the sardine cans used 
as desks in the underwater schools. The initial playfulness invites young viewers 
to see the world as the axolotl does so when disaster (after disasters) strikes, they 
understand the stakes.  KQG
cAte, Annette LeBLAnc A Dragon Used to Live Here; written and illus. by An-
nette LeBlanc Cate. Candlewick, 2022 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781536204513 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781536224450 $17.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 3-5
While their noble parents are gone from the castle, Emily and Thomas lose an 
arrow and stumble upon a mysterious tower labeled “dungeon.” Rather than a 
dungeon, however, the tower contains the castle’s scribes, busily writing invitations 
for the lord and lady’s anniversary. With some light scone bribery and voluntary 
scribing labor, the siblings convince Meg, a feisty woman with ink-covered hands, 
to share the incredible story of how their parents met, in which Lady Catherine 
is captured by a dragon and rescued by elves. The kids also hear of Meg’s fallout 
with their mother after a tennis tournament gone sour, so they plot to repair the 
grown-ups’ relationship at the anniversary party, despite Meg’s stubborn nature. 
Light-hearted and fun, the story has a medieval setting and tone reminiscent of an 
extended scene from Disney’s adaptation of The Sword in the Stone. Meg seemingly 
makes elements of the story up on the spot, and though the siblings in turn supply 
details and poke holes in her logic, more of the tale may be true than they realize. 
Frequent ink illustrations look as though they were sketched by the quirky scribes 
themselves, using detailed crosshatching, cartoonish faces, and elaborate flowery 
borders to illuminate scenes from Meg’s story. Listening to an elder tell a potentially 
embellished tale will ring true for many, and the heartwarming resolution between 
two old friends is the icing on the lemon scone.  NB
chAri, sheeLA Karthik Delivers. Amulet/Abrams, 2022 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781419755224 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781647003449 $15.54
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
Karthik is spending the summer before high school delivering groceries for his fam-
ily’s store, although his mother would prefer he study cellular biology in preparation 
for a predetermined MD career. Gifted with an unmatched memory, Karthik has a 
wealth of knowledge in all sorts of things, but that doesn’t help him when it comes 
to figuring out his future or telling his mom that being a doctor is not on his list 
of life goals. Serendipity finds him at the doorstep of a Boston University theater 
student who insists he would be the perfect “Lenny” in her play about Leonard 
Bernstein, the composer of West Side Story’s orchestral music, which sparks his secret 
284 • The Bulletin
interest in the performing arts and motivates him to use his grocery runs as cover 
to perform in the play. Chari delivers an authentic examination of the complexities 
of immigrant family life during the Great Recession, taking a realistic but com-
passionate look at parents vicariously chasing the American dream through their 
children. Sacrifice, the badge of honor Karthik’s parents wear and experience in 
different ways, is a fact of life that both Karthik and his older sister must navigate 
as they defy parental expectations and determine their own dreams. Surprisingly, 
that defiance brings them closer to their parents, leading Karthik to eventually point 
out to his mother that it is not too late for her to attain her dreams for herself. This 
is an encouraging endorsement of reciprocal support that celebrates the possibility 
(and necessity) of allowing our goals to change.  QB
cLAyton, dhonieLLe The Marvellers; illus. by Khadijah Khatib. Holt, 
2022 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781250174949 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781250174956 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
Eleven-year-old Ella is the first Conjuror to be officially invited to the Arcanum 
Training Institute, a magical school in the clouds, and her steadfast rosy disposi-
tion is going to be tested fully; being an ambassador for a form of magic deemed 
unnatural, less worthy, and indeed, bad, is exhausting and rarely pleasant. She 
makes a few key friends in her peers and the faculty, however, and she loves her 
studies, but when her mentor disappears, Ella begins to uncover unsettling secrets 
about this school that she always dreamed of attending. Clayton’s eye for inten-
tional, thoughtful diversity makes this a refreshingly different take on the familiar 
magical boarding school story, and this is a world where tapping into and deeply 
understanding one’s own cultural heritage can improve your magic. Sure, the rich 
kids are still insufferable and discrimination is everywhere, but the anchoring theme 
centers how the intersection of family dynamics, cultural history, and geographical 
place of origin can shape identity and potential. Ella is a bit too perfect to con-
nect with deeply on this first outing, but there’s more than enough in the cool sky 
school, long history of different forms of magic, and nifty side elements (splashy 
newspaper articles between chapters, for example,) to draw readers back to see how 
she may grow as her studies progress.  AS
cohen, mArinA Shadow Grave. Roaring Brook, 2022 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781250783004 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781250783011 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad Gr. 4-7
After the family car violently crashes into a tree on a Thanksgiving trip to New 
Hampshire, twelve-year-old Arlo, his nine-year-old sister Lola, and his mother walk 
to a small town called Livermore, where they immediately get weird vibes from 
the locals, who use archaic phrases and don’t have phones or cars. More concern-
ing are overheard, ominous conversations and even direct warnings about lurking 
dangers, so Arlo takes it into his own hands to determine what is really going on 
and get his family to safety. Cohen effectively brings shivers with the isolated, in-
sular small town and its creepy residents, but the plot meanders into a literary take 
with an anticlimactic ending. Additionally, Arlo, who spews facts about nature and 
May 2022 • 285
is quick-thinking enough to use his first aid knowledge after the accident, takes 
a frustratingly long time to acknowledge Livermore’s secret even when presented 
with evidence that hammers readers over the head. Nonetheless, there’s emotional 
resonance in Arlo’s debate about leaving his mother, who is suffering from an un-
named illness, in Livermore, where she can be immortal, and that dilemma might 
spark discussions about what makes a well-lived life.  NB
cornwALL, gAiA The Best Bed for Me; written and illus. by Gaia Cornwall. Can-
dlewick, 2022 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781536207156 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781536226805 $17.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 3-6yrs
It begins with a familiar parental request— “Time for bed, Sweet Pea”—answered 
by an unusual juvenile inquiry: “Where’s my tree?” A page turn reveals the child’s 
imagined plan to sleep high up in a tree— “like the koalas!” The mother’s response 
is patient, even as the little one swings, koala-esque, from a bed post. The child 
continues to propose various sleeping arrangements, from holding hands with a 
sea otter to burrowed underground with puffins and even upside-down like bats, 
while the mother, clearly skilled in bedtime antics, uses details from the visualiza-
tions to recenter on bedtime. The premise is simple, yet Cornwall’s digitally colored 
pencil and watercolor art renders these gentle fantasies of wild animal slumber 
tremendously effective. A slightly subdued color palette, primarily of sage, brown, 
blue, and sea green, suits the tone of winding down for sleep while allowing the 
red-clad protagonist to be the focal point in every scene. The textures balance real-
ism and a magical sparkly quality, and the page layouts recurringly switch from 
cozy vignettes of the family to full-bleed illustrations that convey the lucidity of the 
child’s imaginings. Although the conversation solely occurs between the child and 
their foregrounded mother, another mother, who shares the black-haired, brown-
skinned complexion of the child, is reassuringly present in the visual background, 
rocking an infant to sleep. An aesthetic and inclusive picture book, this makes a 
charming bedtime reverie.  KF
cuevAs, mAyrA Does My Body Offend You?; by Mayra Cuevas and Marie Mar-
quardt. Knopf, 2022 [432p]
Library ed. ISBN 9780593425862 $21.99
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593425855 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593425879 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 8-12
Malena is stuck in Florida after a hurricane devastates her Puerto Rican home. The 
added inconvenience of a first-degree sunburns on her back turns into a nightmare 
when she’s called into the dean’s office for going braless and told to cover her nipples 
with pantyliners. Seattle transplant Ruby wants to break out of her activist sister’s 
shadow, so when she happens to run into Malena crying in the restroom, Ruby 
sees a cause she could champion and insists this injustice must be rectified. Ruby 
encourages Malena to join her in confronting the school administration and building 
a student action against the dress code. Unfortunately, their actions only bring on 
more harassment, and the girls experience separate, but still traumatizing, moments 
of powerlessness: Malena, when the school administrators physically examine her 
286 • The Bulletin
body, and Ruby when a male student grabs her breast at the student protest. Both 
teenagers end up working through their sense of self after these violations as well 
as figuring out romance and family expectations. Cuevas, who is Latinx, captures 
the joyful connection and camaraderie of Latinx youth, while Marquardt, who is 
white, deftly weaves Ruby’s journey of removing the white saviorism embedded in 
her activism and feminism. Malena and Ruby face complex questions about sexu-
ality, abuse, empowerment, and privilege without the story veering into preachy 
morals, and teens seeking representations of their lived realities will find support 
and solace with Ruby and Malena.  ART
doLeski, shAnnon Gabe in the After. Amulet/Abrams, 2022 [240p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781419754388 $17.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R* Gr 5-8
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 277, for review.
emerson, kevin Drifters. Walden Pond/HarperCollins, 2022 [592p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780062976963 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780062976987 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 6-8
Jovie feels strongly that her missing best friend Micah is still alive and needs her 
help, even if the two had drifted apart in the months before Micah’s disappearance. 
When Jovie and a new pal, Sylvan, begin to look deeper into the history of their 
small town and the odd events that happen with increasing regularity (radiation 
exposure, disappearances, and mysterious illnesses, for example), it becomes clear 
that this is much bigger than Micah being gone. Indeed, the fate of the world may 
rest on Jovie and Sylvan’s ability to bridge a portal and face beings who want Earth 
for themselves. Behind the zippy sci-fi plot line, there is a stark examination of 
loneliness, and how people can grow so disconnected from other people that they all 
but become invisible (in this book, literally so) and are therefore not missed when 
they are gone. Emerson slowly metes out details of how Micah went from popular 
and confident to self-doubting, removed, and isolated, and this is made particularly 
poignant given Jovie had been holding back her love and support for Micah after 
their estrangement. A satisfying action plot, complete with a shady (but well-
developed) government agency and villainous (but strangely sympathetic) beings, 
is effectively grounded in the emotional realism of the girls’ shifting friendships.  AS
everett, sArAh How to Live Without You. Clarion, 2022 [400p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780358256229 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780358174165 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Despite living miles away from each other, sisters Emmy and Rose have always been 
close, so there’s no way—at least in Emmy’s mind—that Rose would have run away 
three months ago without a goodbye. Emmy’s parents have given up looking for 
Rose and the police were never all that interested in finding a missing Black girl 
anyway, so Emmy returns to the girls’ childhood home to begin her own search. 
She enlists the help of her nerdy former best friend, Levi, now the unbearably hot 
and conveniently tech-savvy guy next door. Snagging a few leads makes her realize 
Rose didn’t just have secrets, but entirely unknown struggles—and it’s possible 
May 2022 • 287
she might not want to be found. It’s a familiar trajectory from start to finish, but 
Emmy’s narration is steeped in emotion, moving tonally from frantic desperation 
to a cold aloofness as she copes with the unsettling and deeply sad revelations she 
continues to uncover about Rose. Besides offering several lusty encounters, Levi 
gives Emmy a chance to reckon with her memories of Rose as the perfect older 
sister and instead accept her as a flawed but still loving human being. A concluding 
twist brings a not totally earned sense of optimism, but this is still a compelling 
exploration of mental illness and family dynamics that can blind us to who our 
loved ones are and what they might need.  KQG
gehL, LAurA Donut: The Unicorn Who Wants to Fly; illus. by Andrea Zuill. Ran-
dom House Studio, 2022 [40p]
Library ed. ISBN 9780593376263 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593376256 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593376270 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 2-6 yrs
You might think being a unicorn with a pretty rad rainbow-colored horn and a cadre 
of forest critter pals would be enough for shaggy-haired Donut, but she desperately 
wants to fly like her bird friends. So off at a gallop over an old stump “Donut 
jumps,” but then immediately “thumps.” Undeterred and ever resourceful, Donut 
and friends fashion wings out of leaves and branches: “Donut sails! Donut flails. 
Donut wails.” A dejected Donut heads to bed but wakes up determined, inspired by 
her dreams of aerial travel, and soon successfully takes to the air. The spare text has 
a buoyant rhythm, and the art supports the narrative with visual detail and humor, 
making this an easy pick for storytime as well as a useful selection for beginning 
readers. With her colorful horn poking out of a messy mane that covers her eyes, 
Donut is delightfully expressive in body language, from preening prances as she 
builds her confidence to dejected slumps and pathetic wails. The characteristically 
pink unicorn palette is softened here, replaced with verdant greens and sunny 
blues while thin but dynamic lines recall Ben Hatke’s works. Donut’s solution to 
her flightlessness requires her birdy comrades to do some rather heavy lifting, but 
viewers will nonetheless delight as she takes to the skies, heading toward—what 
else—a rainbow.  KQG
gino, ALex Alice Austen Lived Here. Scholastic, 2022 [176p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781338733891 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781338733839 $17.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
Sam and their best friend TJ are the only non-binary seventh graders in their school 
on Staten Island, and both enbys are decidedly tired of hearing about dead, straight, 
cis white men in class. Their latest history assignment—research a historical figure 
for a statue contest—seems like another dreary exercise in DSCWM culture, but 
a look into the life of Alice Austen, a nineteenth-century photographer who lived 
with her female life partner in Sam’s exact apartment, makes them realize history 
might be as queer as they are. Gino successfully continues the shift seen in Rick 
(BCCB 4/20) from stories about discovering identity to discovering one’s place in 
their community. The overall stakes here are low but well-developed and personal, 
with a tight focus on Sam’s growth as they develop new relationships and redefine 
288 • The Bulletin
old ones. Sam is confident in their identity but still dealing with a twelve-year-
old’s insecurities and general unawareness of the wide world around them. They’re 
surprised the sharp-as-a-tack octogenarian in the first-floor apartment is a lesbian, 
as they never considered that old people could be queer, and they learn to see the 
twenty-eight-year-old fat femme who lives one floor down as a cool queer mentor 
who encourages Sam to love their body and their community. An author’s note 
explains how Gino’s youth on Staten Island informs Sam’s story, as a connection 
with Alice Austen linked Gino to queer history at a young age. Alice, her “Darned 
Club” of women-loving women, and her photography are given their full due, 
though the choice of a wealthy white woman as queer history standard bearer 
means the novel sometimes has to talk around intersectionality. Still, this is a solid 
portrayal of LGBTQ+ youth taking their first steps into queer adulthood, and 
it’s heartening to see Sam and TJ both teach and learn from a multi-generational 
queer family.  AMM
gLAser, kArinA yAn A Duet for Home. Clarion, 2022 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780544876408 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780358697176 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr 4-7
After being evicted from their home, eleven-year-old violist June, her Chinese 
immigrant mother, and her younger sister move into the Huey House, a homeless 
shelter in New York City, where she meets sixth grader Tyrell who has lived there for 
over three years. Tyrell doesn’t make a good first impression when a drink dispenser 
prank goes awry, but eventually he shows June the best of the Huey House and 
they bond over their love for classical music. When a government housing policy 
threatens to move out the shelter’s residents into dangerous living conditions, it is up 
to June and Tyrell to keep the Huey House family safe and together. The alternating 
chapters between June and Tyrell’s perspectives depict the cultural backgrounds and 
lived experiences from Huey House families, and short and concise descriptions 
of politics inform young readers about how government impacts a community’s 
livelihood. The novel tackles concrete topics like the misconceptions about people 
experiencing homelessness and the importance of advocacy, while also giving room 
to consider how music can heal and revitalize both friendships and communities. 
For further exploration, the author’s note provides background information about 
working at New York City’s largest provider of transitional housing and her interac-
tions with children who lived in the shelter.  DR
hAncox, Lewis Welcome to St. Hell: My Trans Teen Misadventure; written and 
illus. by Lewis Hancox. Graphix/Scholastic, 2022 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781338824445 $27.99
Paper ed. ISBN 9781338824438 $14.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781338824452 $14.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R* Gr. 8-12
Many of us wish we could go back and talk with our teen selves, mostly just to 
reassure them that whatever misery they may be enduring, it is temporary, and 
they will survive it. This brilliant memoir does just that, sending a wiser, more 
grounded Lewis, now an adult trans man, back to tell his tortured teen self that she 
won’t always be stuck feeling alone and in the wrong body. Lewis himself knows 
May 2022 • 289
how lucky he is to have had parents who didn’t understand him perfectly but who 
unequivocally had his back, but his teen self didn’t know that, let alone feel ready 
to admit these enormous truths. Lewis’ path to enlightenment is both familiar and 
specific, involving plenty of bad fashion, awkward interactions at school, feelings 
of hopelessness and anger, and a growing worry that romance and happiness are 
never going to happen. Popping in to narrate along the way, adult Lewis makes 
a sharp visual contrast to his younger self, oozing confidence in equal measure to 
her misery and underscoring that a whole life beyond teen trauma is possible. The 
graphic novel format allows for quick interruptions from the comic versions of 
modern people (his friends and parents, for example) who describe their fumbles or 
demand an edit in how they are being portrayed back in the 2000 version of Lewis’ 
story. Lewis has achieved an admirable mix of humor, grace, and vulnerability for 
telling his own story now that he has some distance, and he is living in the promise 
that it does (hopefully) get far better than our teen selves could dream.  AS
heArd, wendy Dead End Girls. Ottaviano/Little, 2022 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780316310413 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780316417884 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Maude is so excited about vacationing with her mom and stepfamily in Hawaii that 
she could just die—or at least she plans to. Desperately wanting to be free from 
ping-ponging between divorced parents and knowing her presence is an unwanted 
reminder of her mother’s unrefined existence before marrying into the Maxwell fam-
ily, Maude plans to fake her own death, get a new identity, and set out for London. 
The Maxwells creep her out—with the exception of Frankie, to whom she initially 
tries to suppress her attraction. Frankie observes something’s up and confronts her, 
creating a liability that could either ruin Maude’s plan or turn it into an escape for 
two. There is no shortage of angsty drama here, but the characters’ complexities 
build given time. Frankie is more than a predictable rich girl seeking thrills to ir-
ritate her stuffy, bougie family, and her grandmother’s coldness and disapproval of 
Frankie’s sexuality and gender identity make clear that image is more important 
than affection for the Maxwells. And then there’s Maude. Even Maude is unsettled 
by how easily she takes to cruelty, and her shift into a coldly calculating, amoral 
person when things go wrong is chilling. Readers will need to block out the whole 
day for this one because they won’t put it down until it’s done.  QB
henkes, kevin Little Houses; illus. by Laura Dronzek. Greenwillow, 
2022 [40p]
Library ed. ISBN 9780062965738 $19.89
Trade ed. ISBN 9780062965721 $18.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 3-6 yrs
Beachcombing is a highlight of the little girl narrator’s visits with her grandparents 
at their small wooden house at the ocean shore. She examines the shells, mindful 
to keep only the empties, and ponders her grandmother’s observation that they are 
little houses: “But who lived there?” Where did the former resident go, she asks, 
and what’s that sound when she holds the shell to her ear: “Is its ghost still inside 
the curved walls?” When she turns her thoughts seaward, she considers what’s 
below, unseen. There are fish, of course, but also “lost toys, lost coins, lots of lost 
290 • The Bulletin
things that were cried over.” The curiosity and imagination that spark her questions 
suggest that we may be in the company of a budding scientist, who might fulfill 
Grandpa’s prediction that “there is so much to know. And someday you’ll know it 
all.” The gentle poetic lilt of the girl’s musings is effectively complemented by the 
precise depiction of seashore wonders in Dronzek’s acrylic paintings, with colors 
both cheerful and vivid enough to chase away incipient shivers over lingering 
ghosts and melancholy over articles swept off by the waves. Pair this with Lawson’s 
A Day for Sandcastles (BCCB 3/22) for a thoughtful wind-down after a satisfying 
day at the beach.  EB
henry, kAtie Gideon Green in Black and White. Tegen/HarperCollins, 
2022 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780062955739 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780062955753 $12.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R* Gr. 9-12
If sixteen-year-old Gideon Green’s life was a noir film, no one would think it was 
odd that he wears a trench coat and fedora, even in southern California; his awkward 
conversations could be scripted smooth; and femme fatales would knock down his 
door for his detective skills. Instead, his clothes and quirks cast him as an outsider, 
and the only person seeking his help is former best friend, Lily, who needs help 
on a big story for the school paper. Soon, Gideon is undercover as a copy editor 
and chasing down leads: casing local bars, rooting through trash, and discovering 
a dead body. More surprisingly, he’s making friends, falling for editor-in-chief Tess, 
and enjoying his life. The need to put the case first proves hard to resist, however, 
and while dedication to the truth at all costs may work for a detective/reporter, it 
may just stop the presses for Gideon’s relationships with family and friends. Henry 
offers a worthy heir to Veronica Mars’ noir-inspired throne with a story that’s as 
much about the growth of the detective as solving the crime. Gideon manages to 
be both endearing and infuriating as he works to repair strained relationships and 
worries he is too weird to like, and his snarky internal monologue, witty banter, and 
honest conversations make for a novel both funny and poignant. The core mystery 
is initially less than compelling, but tension builds to nail-biting levels as Gideon 
takes bigger risks and the felonies pile up. This crowd pleaser gives both a satisfying 
ending for aspiring sleuths and a character arc that will win readers’ hearts.  AM
henning, sArAh It’s All in How You Fall. Poppy/Little, 2022 [320p]
Paper ed. ISBN 9780759556676 $10.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780759556669 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
“Gymnastics is my life. That is not me being dramatic. That’s the truth,” narrates 
Caroline Kepler when a chronic back injury forces her into retirement at age fifteen. 
With her identity suddenly ripped away, Caroline is prepared to spend the summer 
moping at home and avoiding reminders of her old life, including her gymnast 
friends. Her sports-oriented family, however, encourages her to find something else 
to occupy her time, and Alex, her older brother’s best friend, offers to coach her as 
she tries out different sports. Suddenly, Caroline sees a path forward, and the two 
agree to try out a new sport every week until she finds one she likes. Desperate 
to somehow pay Alex back, Caroline decides to set him up with her best friend, 
May 2022 • 291
but her own growing feelings for him are getting in the way of her matchmaking 
plans. Caroline and Alex’s relationship is at the delightfully sweet center of this 
highly digestible novel, and while the story is light and fun, it brings authenticity 
in its portrayal of the pair’s struggles outside of their bond. The sports jargon can 
be opaque, but it adds veracity to this romanticized (although not dishonest) view 
into the world of elite sports; Henning offers readers a lovely, escapist novel for 
romance and sports fans alike.  AT
hussAin, nAdiyA Today I’m Strong; illus. by Ella Bailey. Viking, 2022 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593525944 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593525951 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R* 3-6 yrs
“I love to go to school. I do,” a little girl with dark brown skin and round red glasses 
tells her imaginary friend, a giant tiger who stays comfortably close. She loves to 
run through the gate and greet her teacher, play with her friends, and climb the 
jungle gym, always while her tiger friend looks on. Unfortunately, school also 
means Molly, a bully who steals her cupcakes, blocks her way up the jungle gym, 
and makes mean faces. Luckily, the little girl has her tiger to help her find her voice 
and hold her head up high when Molly is mean to her. Hussain brings warmth and 
wisdom to this sweet lesson about negotiating personal boundaries while valuing 
kindness. Ella Bailey’s textured digital artwork effortlessly depicts the liveliness of 
the classroom and playground with vibrant pastel hues in the full bleed spreads, and 
the expressive, multicultural cast of children (and one orange tiger) exudes energy. 
The little girl narrates in simple, rhythmic text while her tiger mirrors her expres-
sions and body language, cuddling her when she feels sad and walking fiercely by 
her side when she tells Molly not to block her way. Visual details make this perfect 
for a lap sit with a young child beginning school, but it’s equally well-suited to a 
classroom read and invites age-appropriate conversations about bullying and the 
importance of being kind in either context.  SS
key, JAnet Twelfth. Little, 2022 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780316669313 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780316669344 $11.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R* Gr. 6-9
Rising seventh-grader Maren Sands knows she’s only being packed off to Charlotte 
Goodman Theatre Camp to get her out of the way while her older sister Hadley 
is in treatment for depression. Maren just wants to keep her head down and get 
through the summer unnoticed, but that plan quickly goes out the window; before 
the end of her first day, someone slips her a mysterious note with a line from Twelfth 
Night, the summer’s production for the camp’s 60th anniversary. Maren can’t resist 
a mystery, and she and her bunkmate Theo are drawn into a scavenger hunt that 
seems to be connected to the rumors that Goodman’s is closing, and the legends 
that Charlotte Goodman hid a diamond ring somewhere on the grounds and still 
haunts the camp. Alternating chapters tell Charlotte “Charlie” Goodman’s story of 
growing up queer, Jewish, and gender nonconforming in 1940s Hollywood, fighting 
to be able to direct a film version of Twelfth Night and falling in love with the lead 
actress. Meanwhile, Theo and Maren are contending with transphobic Allegra, who 
constantly misgenders Theo and actively tries to get them both kicked out of camp. 
292 • The Bulletin
Key weaves an intriguing mystery together with a sensitive exploration of gender 
identity, mental health, and family relationships in the historical and present-day 
settings. An exciting final act brings past and present together with life-and-death 
stakes, unexpected connections, and a satisfying coda to Charlie’s story. Readers 
familiar with Twelfth Night will find the mystery especially rewarding, but give this 
book to theatre kids of all stripes and any readers interested in LGBTQ+ stories. 
A historical note provides additional context about early Hollywood and the Red 
Scare, and back matter includes mental health resources.  SS
kuLper, kendALL Murder for the Modern Girl. Holiday House, 2022 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780823449729 $19.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780823452873 $11.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R* Gr. 9-12
In 1928 Chicago, Ruby Newhouse is a “barely eighteen-year-old girl in the city, 
glamming around parties, only interested in fast cars and fast boys.” Or so she would 
have others think. In truth, Ruby is the vigilante known as the “angel killer,” stalking 
the streets to find evil men with her mind-reading abilities and taking them out with 
her expert knowledge of poisons. When her state’s attorney father is nearly killed 
by an exploding car bomb, Ruby vows to the media she will continue his investiga-
tion into government corruption. The investigation brings her into contact with 
Cook County Morgue janitor, Guy Rosewood, and when she sees through Guy’s 
shy, unassuming mask to the honest, incisive mind behind it, she can’t help but fall 
for him. However, Guy has been conducting his own after-hours investigations to 
discover more about his unique ability to essentially shape shift, and his discoveries 
are leading straight to the angel killer. This supernatural noir thriller is serving up 
the very best the genre has to offer: unsavory characters, dark humor, sordid secrets, 
and an intrepid femme fatale anti-heroine who charms as a red-headed, murderous 
flapper version of Legally Blonde’s Elle Woods. Alternating between the first-person 
points of view of Ruby and Guy, the historical world-building is immersive, with 
the slang-filled narration and dialogue being a highlight; readers will have the sense 
that every supporting character is living their own story. The gripping plot escalates 
with the thrills, culminating in a violent whirlwind of a happy ending.  AT
LockhArt, e. Family of Liars. Delacorte, 2022 [320p]
Library ed. ISBN 9780593485866 $22.99
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593485859 $19.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593485873 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R* Gr. 8-12
The year Caroline Sinclair turns seventeen is not an easy one: her ten-year-old sister 
drowned off the coast of her wealthy family’s island last summer, her parents and 
other sisters refuse to talk about it, and Caroline has developed a nasty addiction 
to the pills she was given after a painful facial surgery her father insisted she have. 
Returning to the island after her junior year only calls up painful memories of 
Rosemary’s death, so Carrie is grateful when a friend brings a handsome distraction 
in the form of Lawrence Pfefferman, known as Pfeff to friends. Her days might be 
busy with flirting and summer fun, but her nights are still painful, as she is haunted 
by the ghost of her sister, who cannot yet understand why she hasn’t moved on. A 
painful betrayal leads to a devastating turn of events, and Caroline and her sisters 
May 2022 • 293
must clean up their mess before their lives are ruined. Set a generation before the 
events of We Were Liars (BCCB 6/14), this prequel begins with narrator Caroline as 
an adult, relaying the events of that fateful summer to the ghost of her son, Johnny. 
Readers know, then, that this is going nowhere good, as she admits upfront her 
story is a tragic one, but the complicated web of secrets unspools with care and 
precision, amping up the tension and pulling on a deep sadness. Caroline manages 
to be both fragile and steadfast, committed to helping her sisters even at the cost of 
herself, and her poetic narration echoes with melancholy but flickers occasionally 
with anger and panic. While knowledge of the earlier title enriches the drama here, 
this is still absolutely engrossing, and readers will wonder what other tragic secrets 
the Sinclairs are hiding.  KQG
LucAs, chAd Let The Monster Out. Amulet/Abrams, 2022 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781419751264 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781647005429 $15.54
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
Quentin “Bones” Malone, his little brothers, and his mother recently moved to 
Langille, a small town where the unwanted attention they receive as one of the 
only Black families soon gets the twelve-year-old a reputation for fighting. Baseball 
has been Bones’ saving grace, and although his initial encounter with teammate 
Kyle wasn’t especially friendly, the two quickly bond over taking down a shady 
tech company that is tightening its stranglehold on the town. Lucas executes the 
mystery and sci-fi elements well here, tying the cool phenomenon of multiple 
people experiencing the same dream to tech companies exploiting fear for profit. 
The thoughtful commentary on feeling othered takes multiple forms. Kyle suspects 
he may be autistic and wants to know for sure, but his parents are afraid what that 
diagnosis could mean for him. Bones, meanwhile, has been running from a past 
that involves his abusive father, but a revelation eventually unburdens him. The 
book’s environmental directives around climate change feel a bit forced, but this 
story successfully shows how empathy is an essential element of community.  QB
meLLeBy, nicoLe The Science of Being Angry. Algonquin, 2022 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781643750378 $16.95
E-book ed. ISBN 9781643752860 $15.95
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
After Joey punches the security guard who caught her and her two triplet brothers 
in the pool after hours, her blended family is forced to leave their apartment com-
plex and squeeze into the same motel room. Mama, who carried the triplets, is a 
cuddler and never angers, but Mom has little patience for Joey’s hostile outbursts. 
Noticing that her Mama and biological brothers don’t share her temper, Joey be-
gins to consider whether it could be a trait inherited from the anonymous sperm 
donor. A science class unit exploring the role of “Nature vs. Nurture” in students’ 
personal characteristics spurs Joey to investigate her family tree, and she enlists 
former friend Layla (experienced in her own ancestry research) to get help with a 
genetic test. With the two girls reconnected, Joey ruminates on her new desire to 
kiss Layla, convinced that expressing her feelings would result in rejection. Themes 
of mental health, sexuality, and familial belonging are accessibly explored through 
the direct analogy between Joey’s worries and the science unit. The third-person 
294 • The Bulletin
narrative distances readers from Joey’s inner turmoil, but the storyline realistically 
depicts the family’s gradual acceptance of professional mental healthcare. Though 
the plethora of characters leaves little room for development beyond the core fam-
ily, the relationship between Joey and her nonbiological Mom evolves tenderly 
and takes center stage, with a conclusion that successfully affirms that love, not 
genetics, makes a family.  KF
moreno, suniyAy The Youngest Sister; tr. from the Spanish by Elisa Amado; illus. 
by Mariana Chiesa. Greystone, 2022 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781771648752 $19.95
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 5-8 yrs
There are fourteen children for mum to feed this morning, five of her own and 
more among extended family and kids of a hired worker. After breakfast the mum 
scatters her flock to complete various tasks before lunch, and as the youngest, 
Picu is sent to borrow a communal flavor bone from a neighbor. “Neighbor” may 
signal proximity to American listeners, but Picu’s walk will take about two hours 
each way from her Argentinian mountain home. Juicy fruit to pick and neighborly 
conversation prove distracting, and a shady tree makes a nice spot for a refreshing, 
perhaps longer than necessary, rest. By the time she returns home, lunch is in the 
pot, and Picu knows she’s in deep trouble for being late. As she hides in a bush 
from mum’s whip, two bits of fortune come her way—a guinea pig, easy to catch; 
and her grandmother, perfect for protection. Mum’s humor is restored by the end 
of lunch, and she even awards Picu the coveted flavor bone that will become the 
centerpiece of a new game among the children. Moreno’s text, translated from Span-
ish, establishes a narrative distance between listeners and characters, which gives 
a folkloric resonance to this contemporary tale of life in an indigenous Quechua 
community. Chiesa’s richly textured crayon illustrations, with skin tones rich in 
bronzes backgrounded by lush greens and teals, not only convey the locale, but 
also celebrate the sturdy dignity of the hardworking, close-knit family. A glossary 
and a brief translator’s note are included.  EB
mosquedA, AndreA Just Your Local Bisexual Disaster. Feiwel, 2022 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781250822055 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781250822062 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad Gr. 8-12
Seventeen-year-old Maggie has to pick a date for her little sister’s quinceañera, but 
she has a slight problem: she has romantic feelings for her ex-boyfriend Matthew, 
her best friend Amanda, and cool new girl Dani. Maggie, a photographer, decides 
to utilize a school project to figure out who of the three she should ask, making 
a private fake Instagram and posting her pictures and feelings about the three of 
them to help her reach a conclusion. What is already a terrible plan is made worse 
by the fact that Matthew and Amanda are both in relationships of their own, so 
someone’s feelings are bound to get hurt. The premise could have made for some fun, 
if improbable, rom-com moments, but the narrative is unfortunately bogged down 
by excessive pop culture references, many of which are dated. The three potential 
love interests for Maggie lack complexity, and Maggie’s preying on their existing 
relationships often unintentionally puts her in a negative light. Still, the novel is 
atmospheric, sweeping readers right into the Rio Grande Valley setting, and many 
May 2022 • 295
of Maggie’s struggles, from her messy bisexuality to her anxiety over choosing an 
affordable college, will be relatable to a teen audience.  NB
pAn, emiLy x.r. An Arrow to the Moon. Little, 2022 [400p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780316464055 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780316464048 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R* Gr. 9-12
“In Fairbridge, where we lay our scene,” opens this story inspired by both Shake-
speare’s Romeo & Juliet and the Chinese myth of Houyi and Chang’e. Starcrossed 
lovers Hunter Yee and Luna Chang meet on a fateful night in 1991 and fall for each 
other before realizing their families are longtime enemies. Born on the same day, 
Hunter and Luna have had vastly different lives: Hunter and the Yees have spent 
their lives in hiding from a ruthless debt collector, Huang, while Luna’s Taiwanese 
immigrant parents are suffocating her with their expectations. With troubles both 
corporeal and cosmic—Huang closing in on his prey, while giant cracks are literally 
spreading throughout the town—Hunter and Luna will have to risk everything to 
be together. In her sophomore endeavor, Pan imbues a timeless story with magi-
cal realism, packing the tale with subtle nods to other adaptations of the source 
materials while remaining firmly rooted in the real and important concerns of its 
teenage protagonists. The writing is both poetic and frank (“The thing was: Hunter 
was a wayward star, shooting in the wrong direction”) and a rich cast of characters 
expands the world. The points of view of the supporting cast add depth and texture 
to the intricately woven tapestry of first love, intergenerational struggles, and the 
joys and heartaches of growing up. Rest assured: the tragedy ends not in death, but 
in a triumphant, if bittersweet, fulfillment of destiny.  AT
pAnitch, AmAndA Gone Dark. McElderry, 2022 [448p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781534466319 $19.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781534466333 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Zara carries the anxiety and stress of the survivalist training her dad drilled into 
her, even years after she and her mother fled his compound. Those skills come in 
handy when the U.S. electrical grid is attacked; while most people are only a few 
days away from having no water, food, or medicine, Zara’s prepared to survive on 
her own. She’s unwilling, though, to just give up on humanity, and as she heads 
across the country back to her father and relative safety, she gathers a ragtag group 
of people who need her protection but who also provide their own skills, whether 
practical or emotional. Her time with them ultimately helps her question her 
upbringing (and her father’s constant disapproving voice in her head) enough 
that when they finally get to his compound, she has achieved enough emotional 
distance to see him as more monstrous than admirable, even while he may indeed 
have been right about how unequipped humanity is for survival. The instinct to 
stay alive may be all that drives Zara at first as she mourns her mother, killed in a 
battle over resources that happens shockingly quickly after the power goes out, but 
that’s a strong impulse, and it keeps her and her group moving until she’s able to 
feel more layers of emotion than that crushing grief again.  AS
296 • The Bulletin
petty, dev How Old Is Mr. Tortoise?; illus. by Ruth Chan. Abrams, 2022 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781419746703 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781683359722 $15.54
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 4-6 yrs
It’s Mr. Tortoise’s birthday and he’s all set to party with his pals, but there’s one 
problem: no one, including Mr. Tortoise, knows how old he is and thus, how many 
candles to put on the cake. The friends take guesses, but that soon becomes a free 
for all when the walrus starts arguing with the pig about their suggestions, and the 
crab starts tossing out random numbers. They turn then to their deduction skills, 
asking Mr. Tortoise what people wore when he was younger (“Top hats, monocles, 
knickers. Parasols were all the rage”) or how big the trees were in the forest (they 
weren’t there yet). Finally, Mr. Tortoise remembers moving to his current enclosure 
when he turned one hundred, and with some fancy math skills, the critters finally 
come up with 115 as his age—now it’s just a matter of fitting that many candles on 
the cake. Striking the right balance between joyful irreverence and absurd, quirky 
humor, this provides obvious opportunities both in storytime and classrooms, as the 
animal pals bring liveliness to a stealthy math lesson. Layout is used effectively, with 
initial panels that provide structure, then alternate with full spreads that emphasize 
the humor and whimsy of the story. Draftsmanship, however, is a bit awkward, 
with slightly skewed figures, and the subdued palette doesn’t fit the frenetic energy 
of the pals. Still, cake makes everything—even math lessons—better, so you might 
want to have treats on hand for this one.  KQG
potter, méLisAnde Cher Ami: Based on the World War I Legend of the Fearless 
Pigeon; illus. by Giselle Potter. Ottaviano/Little, 2022 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780316335348 $18.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad 5-8 yrs
The story of a homing pigeon whose delivery of a plea for rescue saved the lives 
of American soldiers trapped in the Argonne Forest has long ranked high among 
heroic tales from World War I. Here the Potters offer text and illustration that are 
heavy on inspiration, but as the subtitular “based on” honestly hints, considerably 
lighter on known fact and background explanation. In this rendering, the pigeon, 
later dubbed Cher Ami, was called to duty as a messenger, trained at a camp in 
France (“Cher Ami marched in line, left-right, left-right”), improved her speed 
and distance, and was sent to the front line: “Cher Ami was not afraid. She was 
given her first order to deliver a message—and she was ready!” In describing her 
first flight from the battlefield, Cher Ami is again limned in terms customarily re-
served for soldiers: “Cher Ami struggled to fly above the range of fire, determined 
to succeed. . . . With great courage, she raced at top speed until she reached her 
home loft.” Author and illustrator notes do little to address how homing pigeons 
perform their startling feats of spatial recall, a skill certain to capture the imagina-
tion of young listeners. The book does, however, enumerate many liberties taken 
in the interest of a thrilling tale, from details of pigeon transport and training to 
the disappointing fact that Cher Ami may not have worn the wooden leg carved 
to replace her amputated one. Engaging watercolor and ink artwork that portrays 
Cher Ami at her valorous best will rivet the picture book audience, making this a 
useful Veterans Day centerpiece, when strict veracity might briefly take a backseat 
to a rousing war story.  EB
May 2022 • 297
rees, cLAre Practical Demonology. Amulet/Abrams, 2022 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781419745584 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781683359364 $15.54
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 8-10
Non doesn’t want to leave her father to go quarantine with other healthy teens from 
two nearby castles, but it’s the smartest thing to do when a cyclical plague reappears. 
She tries to ignore her immediate crush on Sam, a boy from another castle, focusing 
instead on learning as much as possible about the ferocious demons that roam the 
lands and keep everyone inside even when plagues aren’t a factor. Information on 
the demons is scant and incomplete, so Non, inveterate researcher, aims to gather 
enough information to write a true handbook on them—starting with old notes 
written by her mother, who was killed by a demon herself. What Non discovers 
shows an undeniable connection between the plague cycles and the demons, as 
well as potentially malicious leadership in the castles. Rees has an eye for unusual 
apocalyptic landscapes and developing protagonists who are products of their envi-
ronments, shaped by their unique circumstances. The inevitable romance with Sam 
happens but happily remains an element in Non’s life rather than becoming her 
sole focus—Non’s sharp mind can easily handle more than one project at a time. 
While the secondary characters are thinly developed, Non and the demons are fully 
realized and lavishly detailed, and readers will be entirely invested in their fate.  AS
reyes, sonorA The Lesbiana’s Guide to Catholic School. Balzer + Bray, 
2022 [400p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780063060234 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780063060272 $12.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 8-10
High school junior Yamilet Flores doesn’t particularly want to start over at an ex-
pensive Catholic school that she knows her family can’t afford, but she also doesn’t 
want her brother to go there alone. Plus, it will be a good reset for herself: after an 
attempt to come out to her former best friend went poorly, Yami has decided she is 
back in the closet for good. A gorgeous and amazing classmate, a startling revelation 
about her brother and why he was in trouble back in his old school, and restrictive 
school policies all test Yami’s resolution to keep her identity hidden, and it is a relief 
to both Yami and the reader when she finally relents and begins to show her full 
self. Yami’s first-person narration is compelling, as she acknowledges her own flaws 
freely and saves her best opinions for everyone else. The slow realization that she is 
also worth admiration and even love is all the more satisfying for the work taken 
to get there. There are still familial difficulties to contend with, like rejection from 
a father who was deported years ago, but the ultimate tone is a celebratory one, 
highlighting the mom who loves her kids ferociously and the alternative prom held 
after same-sex couples are forbidden at school events. Reyes doesn’t dismiss those 
harsher realities, but rather tempers them with a steady drumbeat that life does not 
have to be anywhere near perfect to still be deliriously joyful a lot of the time.  AS
298 • The Bulletin
rhudAy-perkovich, oLugBemisoLA Mae Makes a Way: The True Story of Mae 
Reeves, Hat & History Maker; illus. by Andrea Pippins. Crown, 2022 [48p] il-
lus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 9780525645863 $21.99
Trade ed. ISBN 9780525645856 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780525645870 $11.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad 4-8 yrs
Beautifully designed and lovingly made apparel were one of many admirable ways 
that early twentieth-century Black communities restored dignity in the wake of soul-
crushing slavery and on-going discrimination. Hats, in particular, made a statement, 
and that statement was notably emphatic in Black churches, where the women, 
regardless of their day jobs, wore glorious feathered and beribboned crowns. For Lula 
Mae Grant Reeves, who joined the Great Migration from Atlanta to Philadelphia, 
millinery training and consummate skill opened the door to personal prosperity 
as her hat-making and accessory business flourished. Reeves catered to Black and 
white customers across the gamut of income and fame, proud to create pieces for 
the well-heeled and quietly extending both credit and support to women of lesser 
means who made equal claim to the Mae Reeves label. Rhuday-Perkovich offers a 
flat outline of the basics in her text, and Pippins’ digital artwork falls short of con-
veying the beauty and imagination of Mae’s work. The end matter, however, truly 
brings Reeves’ story to life through interviews with her daughter, Donna Limerick 
(who worked in the family business), and Reneé S. Anderson, Head of Collections 
at the National Museum of African American History and Culture, where Reeves’ 
creations are on display on a set of her Philadelphia shop. A bibliography’s links to 
the NMAAHC easily steer readers to pristine, multi-angle photos of the “Sunday-
morning showstoppers” that will surely lead aspiring fashionistas to consider the 
importance of a good accessory.  EB
roBinson, LisA The Sweetest Scoop: Ben & Jerry’s Ice Cream Revolution; illus. by 
Stacy Innerst. Abrams, 2022 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781419748035 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781647000431 $15.54
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 6-9 yrs
Two childhood friends get in touch after a natural separation by school and young 
adulthood to find that neither has really launched, much less realized his dreams. 
Both need a job, and while a bagel delivery service sounds do-able, the starting 
costs are prohibitive. Ice cream is a better, cheaper bet, and finding a college town 
that hasn’t got an ice cream shop must be a sure thing. Thus arts-inclined Ben 
Cohen and science-minded Jerry Greenfield teach themselves how to make ice 
cream, purchase a dilapidated gas station in Burlington, Vermont, and build a 
crowd-pleasing business that eventually stocks grocery freezers across the nation 
with quirkily named pints. This upbeat account neatly balances serendipity, deter-
mination, and instinctual business acumen, and Innerst deploys the swirly, melty, 
chunky attributes of her ink and watercolor medium to keep the inviting textures 
of ice cream on constant display. Both text and end matter underscore Ben & Jerry’s 
commitment to social justice issues, which are meant to continue even through the 
company’s sale to Unilever and their own philanthropic foundation. Pun-heavy dad 
May 2022 • 299
jokes, delivered by dairy cows, keep the tone light and may persuade jaded adults 
to keep opinions about the sell-out to themselves. An author’s note, timeline, and 
sources are included.  EB
roBson, LAurA Brooke The Sea Knows My Name. Dial, 2022 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780525554066 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780525554080 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 8-12
Three years ago, the people of Valonia ignored Thea’s mother’s warning that the 
island’s volcano was going to erupt; when it ultimately did, Thea was safe on a ship 
off the coast, watching fire and ash destroy her home and the people she loved. Her 
headstrong mother, Clementine, took to the sea—and piracy—easily, but Thea has 
neither decent sea legs nor proper blood lust, so when she realizes she’ll never please 
her mother, Thea escapes with her love interest Bauer. His idea of romance, however, 
is more control than affection, and after he sexually assaults her, she literally jumps 
ship, swimming three miles to Providence, where she struggles to form an identity 
independent of her mother while reconnecting with survivors of Valonia’s destruc-
tion. Adventurous seafaring takes a backseat to contemplative self-reflection as Thea 
comes to terms with her mother’s neglect and Bauer’s manipulation, and she begins 
to heal the emotional and physical wounds they both inflicted while regaining her 
own agency. The first-person narrative ambles back and forth through time between 
Thea’s childhood and present adolescence, and her story is intertwined with that 
of the warrior goddess Thea. All of it makes a thoughtful examination of what is 
lost—on a societal, familial, and personal level—when women are afforded little 
agency or value, when believing them over a man is unheard of.  KQG
ruBin, JuLiA Lynn Primal Animals. Wednesday/St. Martin’s, 2022 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781250757296 $19.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781250757289 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Sixteen-year-old Arlee Gold would rather not spend two and a half months at Camp 
Rockaway, living in the woods with girls she doesn’t know and contending with the 
panic attacks brought on by her phobia of bugs. Nonetheless, she needs the test prep 
classes and networking to give her a leg up for college admissions, and her mother 
is thrilled Arlee is going to attend the camp that changed her own life. Something 
definitely feels off when Arlee arrives, though: there are whispers that follow her 
around about her mom, who is apparently a camp legend, but most unsettling is 
the strange, robed figure in a horse mask she sees in the woods. Still, Arlee makes 
friends in her cabin and quickly develops a crush on her bunkmate Winnie, and 
when Arlee’s slipped a note inviting her to join a secret society, she starts to feel 
like she could belong at the elite camp—but at a horrific cost. Arlee’s first-person 
narration is strung tight with uneasiness that undergirds her giddy joy at fitting in 
with her party-hard cabinmates and her growing relationship with Winnie. Her 
macabre initiation to the Order of Equus is terrifying, but it leaves Arlee feeling 
seen in a way she never has before, as if the other girls understand the powerful, 
animal rage she bottles up inside. Not for the faint of heart, Rubin crafts a tense 
horror story where the deepest terror lies in the truths it reveals about whose lives 
hold value and how far those with power will go to protect themselves.  SS
300 • The Bulletin
schrefer, eLiot Queer Ducks (and Other Animals): The Natural World of Animal 
Sexuality; illus. by Jules Zuckerberg. Tegen/HarperCollins, 2022 [240p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780063069497 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780063069510 $12.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R* Gr. 7-12
In previous titles such as Endangered (BCCB 1/13) Schrefer has explored the inter-
section of human and nonhuman animal communities. Here he veers away from 
fiction to discuss the ever-increasing body of evidence that testifies to the varied 
ways sexuality manifests among nonhuman animals—as partners in reproduction, 
as competitors for status, as committed asexual mates, as surrogate parents, as lusty 
pleasure seekers, and undoubtedly as players whose motives researchers haven’t even 
begun to observe and (correctly) identify. Schrefer makes an explicit argument: 
nonhuman animal behavior commonly extends well beyond monogamous, hetero-
sexual, procreative sex; and therefore human animals who practice parallel behavior 
simply cannot be labeled “unnatural.” Chapters are framed around nonhuman 
animal species, examining how their sexual behaviors may benefit their communi-
ties. The book supplements these facts with interviews with field researchers (who 
also represent diverse sexual orientation and gender identification) and Schrefer’s 
reflections on how his own developing insights on natural behaviors reenforce his 
comfort and dignity as a gay man. Those threads offer multiple accessibility points, 
lacing scientific reporting with dashes of goofy adolescent irreverence, and, really, 
who can resist great tales of animals gone wild. Mind-expanding, guffaw-inducing, 
and truth-telling—Schrefer’s title guides readers to a frontier where no STEM 
curriculum has gone before. Glossary, end notes, bibliography, index, and cartoon 
interludes are included.  EB
smith, ZAdie The Surprise; by Zadie Smith and Nick Laird; illus. by Magenta 
Fox. Viking, 2022 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593525975 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593525982 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 4-7 yrs
Young Kit is excited when she is gifted with Maud, a guinea pig who wears a judo 
suit, for her birthday, but Kit’s other pets are decidedly not. Paul the bird, Dora 
the cat, and Bob the pug immediately consider Maud an oddball: she doesn’t look 
like any of the other pets, she can’t fly, and she doesn’t know how to follow a daily 
TV-watching schedule. Desperate to fit in or at least make herself interesting, Maud 
ties herself to birthday balloons to prove she can fly, only for a gust of wind to 
blow her out of the apartment window. When she lands on the balcony of Emily 
Brookstein, a neighbor who is also an oddball, Maud begins to embrace her own 
unique qualities; when she’s returned to Kit, the other pets learn that being differ-
ent can be pretty awesome, as Kit loves them all equally. Dynamic composition, a 
minimalistic color palette, and eye-catching fonts create a lively reading experience 
as viewers follow Maud’s unexpected journey to Emily’s apartment. Additional 
interest can be found in the other apartment units, with the neighbor’s individual 
personalities conveyed by various décor. The wholesome conversations between 
Emily and Maud about being different spur Maud’s growth, as she moves from 
defeated self-doubt to joyful confidence, giving the hopeful message that “life’s too 
short not to be an oddball.”  DR
May 2022 • 301
snipes, kevin christopher Milo and Marcos at the End of the World. Harper-
Collins Teen, 2022 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780063062566 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780063062580 $12.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Seventeen-year-old Milo’s religion is really important to him, but his reputation 
as the ideal Presbyterian kid is threatened when Marcos, an atheist boy Milo felt a 
romantic connection to at Bible camp three years ago, moves to his Florida town. 
The two eventually admit their mutual attraction, but the world seems intent on 
keeping them apart: a sinkhole opens up in the school parking lot, an unseasonable 
hailstorm ruins beach day, and a meteor strikes Marcos’ car at a GSA dance. Milo 
initially convinces himself that these natural disasters are divine intervention telling 
him not to be gay, but he becomes tired of hiding their relationship and the two 
publicly out themselves, causing a slew of social problems with school bullies and 
parental disapproval. As a narrator, introverted Milo has a compulsively likable voice 
as he throws in smart quips to lighten serious topics. Snipes doesn’t shy away from 
difficult conversations as Milo attempts to maintain his beliefs while battling off 
the religious trauma that goes hand-in-hand with his gay awakening. There are no 
easy solutions here, and certainly no easy acceptance from those around Milo and 
Marcos, but queer teens who value their faith may find solace in Milo’s story, as he 
grows into himself and accepts his sexuality in tandem with his religious beliefs.  NB
steAd, phiLip c. Every Dog in the Neighborhood; illus. by Matthew Cordell. 
Porter/Holiday House, 2022 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780823444274 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780823452989 $11.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 4-7 yrs
After finishing up their daily walk, both Louis and his grandmother have a mis-
sion: he’s going to write to City Hall to get an official count of all the dogs in their 
neighborhood, and she’s going to write to City Hall to clean up that empty lot down 
the street. When City Hall’s responses are less than helpful, the two take matters 
into their own hands. Louis sets out with a pen and paper, snacks, and sturdy shoes 
to tally up everyone’s canine pals, while Grandma brings a lawn mower, recycling 
bin, and garden shears to the lot. Viewers follow Louis’s quest as he records the 
neighborhood’s dogs, many of which have delightfully quirky names and unique 
personalities, but Grandma’s progress can also be tracked in the background scenes 
when Louis stops by her work with a snack or a hello. The detailed artwork and 
subtle humor make this more suitable for close reading as opposed to storytime, 
but there’s plenty of visual happenings for young viewers to pore over. Cordell’s 
characteristic scribbly art in pencil and watercolor perfectly captures the movement 
and organized chaos of city streets, while thinly lined framing provides structure 
and focus, emphasizing particular narrative elements. Shaggy-haired Louis has a 
purposeful stride as he goes door to door to gather up his doggy statistics, and 
Grandma’s grim-lipped determination and hands-on-hips stance make it clear she 
doesn’t stand for nonsense. A sweet ending sees Louis adding one more dog—his 
own—to the count, so adults should be ready to field the perennial “can we get a 
dog” request.  KQG
302 • The Bulletin
steAdmAn, A.f. Skandar and the Unicorn Thief. Simon, 2022 [448p] (Skan-
dar)
Trade ed. ISBN 9781665912730 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781665912754 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 6-8
Like any other Mainland kid, Skandar has been waiting for his chance to test into 
a unicorn riding program for years, but he is mysteriously rejected from the test 
site on his thirteenth birthday. Enter the shadowy figure who promises Skandar 
all he ever wanted and sneaks him into the program. Once there, Skandar has to 
get by on his own merits, slowly realizing that he isn’t ungifted but rather far too 
much so in areas frowned upon by the school. The details about the animals and 
the school elevate the story from familiar to intriguing: this is an invigoratingly 
unusual world where bonded unicorns are ferocious and unpredictable, and wild 
unicorns are terrifying, rotting, immortal beasts who are essentially dying forever 
and hungry for blood. Most of the secondary characters are thinly developed, serving 
primarily as foils or allies as Skandar uncovers layers of secrets about unicorns, the 
school, and his own shocking family heritage. Indeed, this clever reveal, plus the 
cool anti-noble, anti-fluffy unicorns will likely lure readers back to the next install-
ment of this series. Skandar himself may in time become a memorable protagonist 
but for now, it’s all about the villain who wants to raise a rogue unicorn army, and 
the beasts themselves.  AS
stein, dAvid eZrA Don’t Worry, Murray; written and illus. by David Ezra 
Stein. Balzer + Bray, 2022 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780062845245 $17.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 3-5 yrs
Murray is a skittish little dog. Going out in the rain reminds him of slipping in 
puddles and getting wet. The unseen narrator assures him, “Don’t worry, Murray! 
You can wear your raincoat,” but the thunder of the rainstorm is just as frighten-
ing. Floppy-eared Murray overcomes his fear of a bigger dog to make a friend at 
the park, until that dog barks at him loudly, and he’s scared to go to the barbecue 
because of potential fireworks. Every time Murray begins to enjoy an activity, he’s 
reminded of a reason why he shouldn’t do it, but at the end of a rather stressful 
day, the narrator applauds his bravery: “You know, even though it wasn’t easy, you 
tried a lot of new things today. I’m proud of you.” Stein’s distinctive art combines 
watercolor, ink, crayon, and graphite to make up the wobbly lines and sketchy 
backgrounds of Murray’s little world, emphasizing noisy elements with negative 
space and inviting viewers to consider how their everyday activities might be over-
whelming for a small dog. The book also provides young kids a lens through which 
to approach their own anxieties: Murray’s experience with the other dog actually 
leads to a positive outcome in the form of a friend, but some things are just scary, 
as the narrator acknowledges when assuring Murray that the barbecue won’t have 
fireworks. Viewers with any kind of fear will find a kindred soul in Murray, and 
they’ll also learn that being brave can bring its own rewards.  NB
May 2022 • 303
stout, shAwn k. The Impossible Destiny of Cutie Grackle. Peachtree, 
2022 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781682633205 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781682634455 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
Ten-year-old Cutie is essentially left to fend for herself while staying with her 
mentally unstable uncle Horace, who believes their family is cursed. After another 
night of Horace’s incoherent mutterings and messes, Cutie finds respite outside 
and encounters a raven who gives her a fortune cookie that, when touched, reveals 
a vision about her family’s past and the veracity of the curse. As Cutie accumulates 
raven-supplied objects and visions, she learns she might just be able to break the 
curse—but she’ll need the help of Galen, a boy she stole food from, and chaotic 
Horace. Cutie is a practical and intuitive narrator, picking up on clues the ravens 
leave her and making astute observations about her life in poverty and the factors 
that keep her there. Stout depicts the tumultuous circumstances of Cutie’s life 
sensitively, from her tactics to keep from going hungry to her acting as unofficial 
caregiver for her uncle when their relationship should be reversed. Galen provides 
comic relief, stability, and an opportunity for Cutie to empathize with someone who 
has his own challenges: he has fibular hemimelia but doesn’t want the operations his 
parents signed him up for to make his legs even lengths. The West Virginian setting 
and the elements of nature magic are reminiscent of Jimmy Cajoleas’ middle grade 
works (The Rambling, BCCB 2/19) and will appeal to fans of those books.  NB
sutAnto, Jesse q. Theo Tan and the Fox Spirit. Feiwel, 2022 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781250794284 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781250794307 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
Theo is still reeling over the loss of his beloved brother, and the last thing he wants is 
to be magically bonded to Jamie’s spirit companion, a snarky fox spirit who doesn’t 
think much of Theo either. Unfortunately, neither has much say in the matter, but 
they were both devoted to Jamie and they both want to understand what happened 
to him. Convinced there is more to the generic accident the police described, they 
go to a strange summer camp Jamie attended that is pretending to help kids connect 
with their cultural heritage. As long as they can stay one step ahead of the ominous 
Reapling Corp. that blatantly values profit and power more than human lives, their 
pairing might actually yield them better results than working alone would have. 
Kai, the wily fox spirit, is a star, all sass and blustery confidence covering up her 
shattered heart, bereft of her human companion. Her shapeshifting is a boon to 
their quest, and it carries them both as Theo slowly comes into his own as a smart, 
capable co-hero in their adventure. This world, where natural magic is seen as a 
mere cheap commodity, is exactly the capitalist sort of system that would chew up 
idealists like Jamie, but Theo and Kai are much too skeptical to become cogs—who 
knew cynicism was such a superpower?  AS
304 • The Bulletin
syLvester, nAtALiA Breathe and Count Back from Ten. Clarion, 2022 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780358536864 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780358536789 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
As a daughter of Peruvian immigrants, seventeen-year-old Verónica knows how 
much her parents have sacrificed for her, especially since multiple surgeries for her 
hip dysplasia have sapped their finances. Still, she’s suffocating under their expecta-
tions, and when a spot opens to perform at Mermaid Cove, the tourist attraction 
that Verónica has loved for years, she auditions, forgoing any chance she might have 
at a more practical, parent-approved internship. She lands the gig and now must 
hide both her job and her new boyfriend Alex, a relationship that would send her 
protective father into a conniption. But bad news about her hip reveals Verónica 
isn’t the only one in her family who has been keeping secrets. Narrator Verónica is 
authentically messy as she moves from utterly clueless navel gazing to looking more 
generously at the people around her, who—she’s surprised to discover—have needs 
of their own that have nothing to do with her. She’s finally presented with that reality 
when her sister, who is tired of lying to their parents for Verónica, unleashes on her, 
and when Alex, who is struggling with depression, can’t be the perfect boyfriend. 
The Floridian setting and mermaid attraction make a fun, kitschy atmosphere that 
adds some needed lightness to the story, and readers will be pleased to see Verónica 
strike the right balance of being authentic to herself while valuing relationships as 
a two-way street.  KQG
sZABo, rose We All Fall Down. Farrar, 2022 [416p] (River City Duology)
Trade ed. ISBN 9780374314323 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780374314330 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad Gr. 10-12
Four young people become entangled in an archetypal pattern destined to restore 
magic to an island city where revolutionary past and uneasy present overlap. New 
kid Jesse, tough girl Jack, physics prodigy David, and a tentacled girl sometimes 
called Turing each have their part to play, largely unknowingly, as the power-laden 
night of Carnival approaches. What little action there is to the plot is more like 
maneuvering pieces into place before something big happens, and the laborious 
pace will stymie some readers, as will the lack of explanation. Others will glory 
in the weirdness of River City, though, reading how its social inequities, overzeal-
ous cops, and creepy normative research hospital conflict with vibrant elements 
of difference and non-normative bodies and lives. Queerness and racial diversity 
flourish among the main characters, and Szabo (What Big Teeth, BCCB 1/21) gives 
particular attention to Jesse and Turing’s gender identity journeys. As the larger 
archetypal pattern the characters are part of warps reality around them, the story 
ends poised on explosive magical restoration—though readers will have to wait for 
the sequel to learn whether this is a good thing.  FHK
underwood, deBorAh Bearplane!; illus. by Sam Wedelich. Dial, 2022 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593112267 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593112274 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R* 4-7 yrs
A bear cub is about to embark on an adventure, but first, another adventure 
May 2022 • 305
awaits: boarding an airplane. The cub’s bespectacled adult bear ensures the duo is 
packed, and they travel to the bearport, which is a little overwhelming: “Here’s the 
bearport. What a crowd! / Take my paw. You’re right, it’s LOUD!” Bear cub and 
adult bear check their bags, wait in line for security, and put toy Teddy in a plastic 
tub for inspection. While they wait for boarding time, they indulge in everything 
the bearport has to offer, from souvenirs to fine dining, and once boarded, they 
eat honey offered by flight attendants and bother a grumpy passenger, ultimately 
reaching their destination of Granny Bear and a big family reunion. Underwood 
adds another meaningful picture book to her lineup as she dismantles the scariest 
aspects of airplane travel, making the process both accessible and fun. Rhyming 
couplets flow well from page to page, and there’s plenty of storytime potential as 
the adult bear addresses the bear cub with reassurances and advice: “Watch your 
elbows, watch your feet. / Careful, cub! Don’t kick the seat!” Wedelich’s digital 
art complements the talent of Underwood’s writing as she captures the bear cub’s 
glossy-eyed excitement, a plethora of background details for viewers to indulge in 
(including the hilarity of a passenger sneaking fish onto the plane), and the huge 
round heads and adorably rotund bottoms of polar, panda, and brown bear alike. 
Viewers anticipating an upcoming trip will want to read this book to alleviate some 
of the stress of travel.  NB
wALden, tiLLie Clementine; written and illus. by Tillie Walden. Image/Sky-
bound, 2022 [256p]
Paper ed. ISBN 9781534321281 $14.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R* Gr. 9-12
Fans of The Walking Dead comics or video game series will know Clementine right 
away, but foreknowledge is not necessary to become immediately smitten with 
this gritty as hell protagonist who lost part of her leg to zombies but is ferociously 
determined to remain alive and find something beautiful amid the endless nightmare 
of life. She meets Amos, an endearing and obviously trustworthy boy who is out 
on Rumspringa, a surprising remnant of a world mostly disassembled seven years 
earlier when zombies . . . happened. In spite of her resolution to go it alone, Clem-
entine can’t help but pair up with Amos, even as her attempts to help him remind 
her why life is far more painful when you make connections. Wordless panels in 
this graphic novel are wisely deployed, inviting readers to pore over the images of 
bowed bodies, exchanged gazes, or blurred far away images that could be nothing 
or could be zombies. That’s the world Clementine exists in—she’s been alone for a 
while, so the silences are nothing new, and she has to rely on her intuition to judge 
the potential goodness of other people while also knowing she’s just one misstep 
away from death by zombies. Deep shadows and sharp lines highlight the grimness, 
while the occasional zoomed in, finely detailed drawing of a vulnerable, or even 
rarer, happy face reminds readers why anyone is even still trying. Even though this 
is only volume one of an anticipated trilogy, Walden pulls no punches, not letting 
readers forget for a second that this is the zombies’ world now, and the precious 
few humans left are essentially just killing time until their luck runs out too.  AS
306 • The Bulletin
west, wALLAce Mighty Red Riding Hood: A Fairly Queer Tale; written and illus. 
by Wallace West. Little, 2022 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780316628358 $17.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 2-4
Decked out in his favorite red cloak resplendent with frills and bows, Little Leroy 
LeRouge, known as Little Red, heads out through the forest to bring baked good-
ies to his grandmother. Predictably, he meets a big wolf on his trek, but this one 
doesn’t want to eat Little Red; rather, he lectures him, insisting that boys do not 
wear “silly, swishy” or “fluffy, puffy” clothes. With a quick dismissal of the wolf’s 
opinions (“Well, it makes me feel like a firecracker!”), Little Red confidently skips 
to his grandmother’s, but the wolf follows, demanding that Leroy hand over the 
cloak and find clothes appropriate for boys. Little Red, however, has a clever plan 
to upend the wolf’s restrictive thoughts on fashion and maybe even make a friend 
in the process. The message is not at all subtle and the ending is far too tidy, but 
the book is, as Little Red would say, “durn” funny, and our self-assured, chic pro-
tagonist is a joyful model of a “I’ll do me, you do you” attitude. The narrative tone 
has a sassy irreverence, adding to the story’s overall charm, and the bits of folksy 
dialogue volley with energy and wit. Dominated by blues, reds, and pinks, the bold 
digital art effectively uses soft curves and harsh angles, particularly as Little Red 
moves through the forest and confronts the wolf’s ignorance. This serves nicely as 
a step-up from books like Patrick’s The Spectacular Suit (BCCB 12/21) for a story 
with a bit more bite.  KQG
white, Andrew Joseph Hell Followed with Us. Peachtree, 2022 [416p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781682633243 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781682634493 $11.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Benji is well aware that he likely will not make it to seventeen, given the devastat-
ingly grim post-apocalyptic world that he lives in, but he’s at least free to live as a 
trans boy after fleeing the cult that doomed the world. He is also, unfortunately, 
undergoing a terrifying and horrifically painful transformation into a bioweapon 
intended to kill off the scraps of humanity not already culled by a plague the cult 
released. If readers think remaining human is the happy ending, best to dispense 
with that immediately, as changes are coming for Benji that will be graphic, violent, 
and irreversible. The trope of the heroic rebels is tempered with realism as Benji and 
his allies (a motley group of teens living in an abandoned LGBTQ+ center) don’t 
plan to be role models for anyone except themselves. This isn’t about marching 
or changing hearts and minds—this is about survival, period, stripping bare the 
electric wire of aliveness that is literally the only goal for much of this novel: just 
keep breathing through agony and then, perhaps, against all odds, a bit of love, 
joy, and freedom may follow. It’s a compelling, powerful, and ultimately reassuring 
message for teens deep in their own varied versions of misery.  AS
woodson, JAcqueLine The World Belonged to Us; illus. by Leo Espinosa. Paulsen/
Penguin, 2022 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780399545498 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780399545504 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 5-8 yrs
The narrator’s voice belongs to an adult looking back to her growing up days “In 
May 2022 • 307
Brooklyn/ in the summer/ not so long ago,” as she focuses on that magical transi-
tion from last day of school to first days of summer vacation and lures listeners to 
scamper back and forth with her over a multigenerational bridge of contrasting 
and shared experience. Her street is packed with kids of every skin tone gliding on 
bikes, skateboards, and roller skates, wearing tees and Chuck Taylors and plaid pants, 
swinging metal-clasped book bags destined to spend summer break collecting dust. 
There are sidewalk game boards chalked on the pavement and an open fire hydrant 
that instantly transforms springy hot comb spiral curls (that mom said “should last 
awhile”) into an exuberant natural style, “because it was finally summer/ and hair 
too/ had a right to be free.” Scraped skin and tears were soothed by bigger kids, 
whose therapeutic technique involved telling stories of how they weathered similar 
mishaps. Even going home at twilight had rituals, as kids exchanged formulaic segues 
(“So we said To be continued./ We said You’re still it./ We said Don’t forget—it was 
my turn”) into the next day’s activity. The details rendered in Espinosa’s cheerfully 
busy scenes are tiny invitations to the contemporary audience to talk about how 
very different/just the same things are now—clothes and gear; free time and parental 
supervision; neighborhood play space and neighborhood friends; and how “our 
block was the whole wide world/ and the world belonged to us.”  EB
ZAppiA, frAncescA Katzenjammer. Greenwillow, 2022 [400p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780063161658 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780063161665 $12.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Cat is stuck in her high school with a small group of other teens, none of whom 
can find any doors that lead out. Some have retained their humanity while oth-
ers, Cat included, have morphed into something . . . less so (think cardboard box 
heads, tentacles, or cat features). Similar dynamics that existed before the school 
closed in on itself exist here—the bullies are still awful and the marginalized kids 
are still creeping along hoping to not be targeted. Cat’s memories come back with 
glacial slowness as she tries to piece together why they are all trapped there and 
to use those clues to try to escape, all while fighting to stay alive in a school that 
drips blood, grows and shrinks, and, even more horrifying, houses schoolmates 
who have tormented her for years. In this eerie, savage novel, alternating chapters 
begin worlds apart, as the memories and present experiences seem impossibly dis-
connected. As Cat’s fuzzy recollections finally clear, it becomes shockingly obvious 
that she is living out a twisted version of a real tragedy. Sharp, grim illustrations, 
all scrawls and angles, mirror Cat’s growing rage as she realizes that her strategy 
of just wanting to be invisible and waiting out the bullying did not protect her at 
all: despite undeniably bright points, her regular life was miserable and this horror 
movie reinterpretation of it is worse, but at least she has her fury that warms her. 
Teens stuck in the Sisyphean cycle of bringing themselves to a place full of cruel 
people, uninspiring academia, and soul-crushing uniformity day after day will rec-
ognize this hellscape right away—it’s all high school, whether or not the monsters 
are human or disguised as something else.  AS
308 • The Bulletin
Activism—fiction: Cuevas
Actors and acting—fiction: Chari; Key
ADVENTURE: Steadman
Airports—stories: Underwood
Aliens—fiction: Emerson
Anger—fiction: Melleby
Animals: Schrefer
Animals—stories: Cornwall
Anxiety—fiction: Cohen
Argentina—stories: Moreno
Autistic people—fiction: Lucas
Axolotls—stories: Bondestam
Beaches—stories: Henkes
Bears—stories: Underwood
BEDTIME STORIES: Cornwall
Birthdays—stories: Petty
Bisexual people—fiction: Mosqueda
Black people: Rhuday-Perkovich
Black people—fiction: Amos; Clayton; 
Everett; Glaser; Lucas; Woodson
Black people—stories: Barnes
Boarding schools—fiction: Clayton
Bullying—stories: Hussain
Camps and camping—fiction: Key; 
Rubin
Chicago—fiction: Ahmed; Kulper
Chinese Americans—fiction: Glaser; 
Pan; Sutanto
Cities—stories: Stead
Climate change—stories: Bondestam
Clothing—stories: West
Communication—fiction: Cate
Cookies—fiction: Amos
Crime and criminals: Heard
Curses—fiction: Stout
Demons—fiction: Rees
Detectives—fiction: Henry
Dictionaries—fiction: Barton
Disability—fiction: Sylvester
Disasters—fiction: Snipes
Disasters—stories: Bondestam
Dogs—stories: Stead; Stein
Dystopia—fiction: Panitch
Emotions—stories: Stein
Ethics and values: Barton; Lockhart; 
Robinson
Faith—fiction: Snipes
Families—fiction: Bilan; Lockhart; 
Melleby; Pan
Families—stories: Barnes
FANTASY: Barton; Clayton; Rees; 
Steadman; Sutanto; Szabo
Fashion: Rhuday-Perkovich
Fathers—fiction: Panitch
Fear—stories: Stein
Florida—fiction: Cueva; Sylvester
Flying—stories: Gehl
FOLKLIKE TALES: Cate; West
Food and eating—fiction: Adams; 
Amos
Foxes—fiction: Sutanto
Friends—fiction: Almond; Armstrong; 
Smith
Gay people—fiction: Snipes
Gender roles—stories: West
Genetics—fiction: Melleby
Ghosts—fiction: Bilan
Grandparents—stories: Henkes; Stead
GRAPHIC NOVELS: Adams;  
Armstrong; Hancox; Walden
Great Recession, The—fiction: Chari
Grief—fiction: Bilan
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
May 2022 • 309
Guinea pigs—stories: Smith
Gymnastics—fiction: Henning
Hats: Rhuday-Perkovich
HISTORICAL FICTION: Amos; 
Kulper; Potter
History, U.S.: Robinson;  
Rhuday-Perkovich
Homelessness—fiction: Glaser
HORROR: Cohen; Rubin; Zappia
HUMOR: Barnes; Cate; Gehl; Petty; 
Robinson
Ice cream: Robinson
Imagination—stories: Cornwall
Immigrants—fiction: Chari; Sylvester
Immortality—fiction: Cohen
Indian Americans—fiction: Chari
Indian people—fiction: Bilan
Journalists—fiction: Ahmed
Latinx people—fiction: Cuevas; 
Mosqueda; Reyes
Lesbians—fiction: Reyes
LGBTQIA people—fiction: Gino; 
Hancox; Heard; Key; Melleby; 
Mosqueda; Reyes; Rubin; Snipes; 
Szabo
Magic—fiction: Clayton; Stout;  
Sutanto; Szabo
Mathematics: Petty
Medieval life—fiction: Cate
MEMOIRS: Hancox
Memory—fiction: Zappia
Mental illness—fiction: Barton; 
Everett
Missing persons—fiction: Emerson; 
Everett; Rubin
Murders—fiction: Kulper
Music and musicians—fiction:  
Armstrong; Glaser
Muslims—fiction: Ahmed
MYSTERIES: Henry; Key; Lockhart; 
Lucas; Sutanto
Mythology, Chinese: Pan
Nature study: Schrefer
Neighbors—stories: Moreno; Stead
New Hampshire—fiction: Cohen
New York City—stories: Woodson
Nonbinary people—fiction: Gino
Parents—fiction: Chari
Peruvian Americans—fiction: Sylvester
Pets—stories: Smith
Pigeons—stories: Potter
Pirates—fiction: Robson
Plagues—fiction: Rees
Play—stories: Woodson
Poverty—fiction: Stout
Puerto Rican people—fiction: Cuevas
Quechua people—stories: Moreno
Reading, aloud: Hussain
Reality television—fiction: Adams
Relationships—fiction: Gino
Religion—fiction: Reyes
Robots—fiction: Almond
ROMANCE: Henning; Mosqueda; 
Pan
Romance—fiction: Adams; Henry; 
Kulper; Rees; Sylveste
Schools—fiction: Ahmed; Almond; 
Armstrong; Hancox; Henry; Reyes; 
Zappia
Schools—stories: Barnes; Hussain
Science: Schrefer
SCIENCE FICTION: Almond;  
Emerson; Lucas
Secrets—fiction: Heard; Lockhart; 
Steadman
Self-acceptance—stories: Smith
Sexism—fiction: Cuevas
Sexual assault—fiction: Robson
Sexuality: Schrefer
Shells—stories: Henkes
Ships and sailing—fiction: Robson
Sisters—fiction: Everett
Sleep—stories: Cornwall
Social media—fiction: Mosqueda
Sports—fiction: Henning
Statues—fiction: Gino
Storytime: Gehl; Petty; Stead;  
Underwood
Summer—stories: Woodson
Supernatural beings—fiction: Szabo
SUPERNATURAL STORIES: Kulper
SURVIVAL STORIES: Panitch; 
Walden
THRILLERS: Ahmed; Heard; Kulper
Tigers—stories: Hussain
Tortoises—stories: Petty 
Trans people—fiction: Hancox
Trauma—fiction: Zappia
310 • The Bulletin
Unicorns—fiction: Steadman
Unicorns—stories: Gehl
Vermont—fiction: Walden
Voyages and travel—stories: Moreno; 
Underwood
Washington—fiction: Emerson
West Virginia—fiction: Stout
Wolves—stories: West
World War II—stories: Potter
Zombies—fiction: Walden
