ILLINOI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
-_Y -/ 
/4, ,-O` 
-
-"S 
"'
„.*, 
.
.
.> 
·
-* 
i 
* 
·
*' 
. *, 
-.t: * 
-*
*'~ ~ ~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
,*<;.« ~~~~~: 
IV. 
» 
^ 
f... 
* 
»^.- 
» 
* 
-*
* 4 
itri ng-
there's no
other word
for it."
-Starred, Bulletin
of the Center for
Children's Books
UNCONDITIONAL
?URRENDER
U. S. Grant and the Civil War
By ALBERT MARRIN
Ilustrated with photographs
*"Part history, part biography, this is a fine study of Grant and his
pivotal role in the Civil War. Marrin points out the many ironies of
Grant's life... Using these paradoxes to explore who Grant was and
how he shaped events, Marrin creates a detailed and lively picture of
the man and those who fought under him throughout the war. Well
researched and vividly written, the book includes many quotations as
well as photographs from the period."-Starred, Bookdist
S"Marrin considers Grant's mistakes and failures along with his
hard-won successes, humanizing his portrait with details of a loving
family life and struggles with political and military enemies."
-Pointer, Kirkus Reviews
$19.95 SBE 
89-31837-5/Ages 10-14/SBE indicates a reinford hardcover edition.
The companion volume, coming this fall-
VIRGINIA'S GENERAL: Robert E. Lee and the Civil War
A 
ATHENEUM
An imprint of Simon & Schuster Children's Publishing Division
A Paramount Communications Company
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
July/August 1994
Vol. 47 No. 11
A LOOK INSIDE
347 THE BIG PICTURE
Stella's Bullwritten by Frances Arrington; illus. by Aileen Arrington
348 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
349 
* It Was a Dark and Stormy Night written and illus. by Janet and Allan
Ahlberg
356 * Knoxville, Tennessee written by Nikki Giovanni; illus. by Larry Johnson
370 * The Sunday Outing written by Gloria Jean Pinkney; illus. by Jerry
Pinkney
374 * Worse Than the Worst written and illus. by James Stevenson
379 * Animal Fare written by Jane Yolen; illus. by Janet Street
381 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
383 ANNUAL AUTHOR AND TITLE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin ofthe Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
STAFF
Betsy Hearne, Editor and Associate Professor, GSLIS (BH)
Roger Sutton, Executive Editor (RS)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS ADVISORY BOARD
Leigh Estabrook, Dean, GSLIS, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Selma K. Richardson, Professor, GSLIS
Richard C. Anderson, Director, Center for the Study of Reading, UIUC
Jean Osborn, Associate Director, Center for the Study of Reading
P. David Pearson, Dean, College of Education, UIUC
Violet J. Harris, Associate Professor, College of Education
Nancy O'Brien, Education Subject Specialist, Library, UIUC
Peggy Miller, Associate Professor, Department of Speech Communication, UIUC
Ann D. Carlson, Assistant Professor, GSLIS, Rosary College
Janice Harrington, Head of Children's Services, Champaign Public Library
Elizabeth Huntoon, Director Systemwide Children's Services, Chicago Public Library
Janie Schomberg, Librarian, Leal Elementary School, Urbana, Illinois
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $35.00; individuals, $29.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Roger Sutton, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 1512 N. Fremont St., #105,
Chicago, IL 60622
Second-class postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1994 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Aileen Arrington, from Stella's Bull© 1994 and used by permission of
Houghton Mifflin Company.
JULY/AUGUST 1994 
* 347
THE BIG PICTURE
Stella's Bull
written by Frances Arrington, illustrated by Aileen Arrington
The stories through which we pass on family history most often remain in the oral
tradition, but occasionally they find their way into print. One of the most quickly
growing genres in children's literature is family history in picture-book format.
Sometimes the narrative is a direct first-person recollection, as in the case of Allen
Say's 1994 Caldecott Award book, Grandfather's Journey (BCCB 9/93), and Alison
Lester's lighthearted memoir My Farm, reviewed below. The challenge of these
first-person family narratives is to project characters, as Say does, or episodes, as
Lester does, rather than succumbing to nostalgic description. But that's a tall
order, and an author or artist may choose instead to cast family history into a more
formal story, as the Pinkneys do in The Sunday Outing (also reviewed in this issue)
and as Frances and Aileen Arrington do in their evocative picture book Stella's
Bull based on a story their mother told them from her childhood in the South
during the Depression.
Stella's Bull begins with Mary Wilson Montgomery's terror of some-
thing she's never seen but has all the more richly imagined, a bull that supposedly
lurks in the shadows of "the woods and fields past Black Creek on the way to
town"-the property of a woman named Stella. Stella herself remains a mystery,
which only serves to make the situation seem more real; explanation would have
distanced us from the fictional world. By the same token, Mary Wilson's family
stays offstage (idealized parents hog the spotlight in too many family narratives).
This is Mary Wilson's story, carefully and realistically defined. No adult can gauge
or assuage her fear, for like most true childhood terrors, it's subliminal. We're
watching Mary Wilson's private self. She knows better than to go swimming near
Stella's field but is defeated when a boy accidentally throws her spelling book there
after the first day of school. Between her teacher's punishment and classmates'
teasing, Mary Wilson finally goes back for the book-and finds the bull.
The classic theme of facing down one's own fear benefits from careful
pacing here, along with an understated but selectively emphatic style that's tai-
lored to project the child's point of view: "Mary Wilson never set one foot on the
property where Stella lived. With her bull." Mary Wilson's anxiety builds in a
sequence of everyday scenes both in and out of school, and the climax is skillfully
rendered: "Something big and dark was moving closer and closer." The facing
full-page illustration makes abundantly clear what that something is. Aileen's
Arrington's fine-textured, colored-pencil drawings, which up to this point have
been filled with sunny pastorals, suddenly blacken with the head and shoulders of
a huge bull, staring, as cattle do, with an intense curiosity that could easily be
interpreted as intense hostility. The two strands of barbed wire fencing seem frail
by way of a barrier. As the sky itself darkens with rainclouds, Mary Wilson comes
348 
* THE BULLETIN
to terms with a dissolving myth. "The bull wasn't tearing down fences. He was
standing there minding his own business. The wind blew the grass, and the bull
stopped grazing to look at Mary Wilson. 'I know you,' whispered Mary Wilson.
'You're Stella's bull."' Naming the enemy conveys power. The child's triumph
over self has an intoxicating effect as she watches until the storm drives her home,
and then says, regretfully: "'Bye, bull."
The atmospheric subtlety of Frances Arrington's writing has a graphic
counterpart. Aileen Arrington's illustrations-staid at first glance-play off De-
pression-era Saturday Evening Post art with hints of scary shadows that add interest
to the clean drafting and pebbly surfaces. Working in tandem, this author-artist
team has passed on what their mother remembered when she gave them the story:
childhood may seem sunny from a distance, but up close it's full of shadows. Today's
young listeners are not looking back longingly at the past. They are staring at a
present where dangers seem to lurk in many shapes, where the protective barriers
seem frail. As adults evaluating family-history picture books, we should remember
that children are not drawn to sentimental catalogues of good times long gone, but
to stories with conflicts that reflect their own lives and vitally connect them with
lives past. 
Betsy Hearne, Editor
A PERSONAL NOTE
After twenty-six years of reviewing children's books-first at ALA Booklist and
then at The Bulletin-I feel it is time to let fresher voices prevail and to refocus my
own perspective on full-time teaching, research, and other kinds of writing at the
Graduate School of Library and Information Science. I am delighted that Roger
Sutton will bring his intelligence and experience to the editorship, starting with
the September, 1994, issue, and am grateful to continue our rich collaboration in
my new role as a consulting editor and occasional contributor to The Bulletin. Let
me also take this opportunity to thank our subscribers for staunch support and to
express appreciation to the whole children's book community-creators, publish-
ers, critics, and consumers-for a unique blend of warm-hearted idealism and
practical realism that nourishes a great body of literature. BH
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
AASENG, NATHAN 
Science Versus Pseudoscience. Watts, 1994 
144p 
illus. with
photographs 
(Impact Books)
ISBN 0-531-11182-2 
$13.40 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Useful to both science and current events classrooms, Aaseng's debunking survey
of such timely phenomena as creationism, astrology, and biorhythms will fuel de-
JULY/AUGUST 1994 
* 
349
bate, and force advocates on all sides to define their terms. He proceeds from a
ten-point outline of the scientific method ("Ten important criteria for determin-
ing what is science") and cautions readers to recognize the distinction between
science and pseudoscience, which is not necessarily the same thing as "truth" ver-
sus "non-truth," given that there are many concerns in our lives (evaluating the
relative quality of literature is one example he names) which science cannot mea-
sure. While the book is sensible, it's also a bit sweeping, particularly in Aaseng's
first criterion, "science is logical and rational." That's not as value-free a statement
as Aaseng believes it to be; many scientific discoveries (Barbara McClintock's work
with "jumping" genes, for example) come from what many believed to be illogical
premises. Aaseng does acknowledge the importance of recognizing "new-frontier
science," but that's a term he uses without defining. Additionally, Aaseng's argu-
ment is weakened by a reliance on secondary sources: if you want to debunk the
predictions ofJeane Dixon, you should really quote her directly, not from a book
that's already dedicated to your way of seeing things. While Aaseng's take on
creationism fails to give quality time to its adherents and will convince only those
who already accept evolutionary theory, his analysis of biorhythmic theory is a
model of sustained argument, and will teach students to look closely at "scientific"
claims. Notes, a reading list, and an index are appended. RS
AHLBERG, JANET 
It Was a Dark and Stormy Night; written and illus. by Janet and
Allan Ahlberg. 
Viking, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-670-85159-0 
$13.99 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Antonio is sort of a cross between 1001 Arabian Nights Scheherazade and The
Ransom ofRed Chiefs Red Chief: an eight-year-old boy kidnapped by brigands,
he's instructed to tell them a story, which he does. However, his story, beset by
false starts, corrections for taste, counterstories from the chief of the brigands, and
interruptions by everybody, turns out to be about the brigands themselves, and it
eventually describes them behaving in such a terrible fashion to the chief that the
real chief explodes with fury and accidentally allows Antonio to escape. Upon
arriving home to his family, of course, he's asked to tell the story of where he's
been, and the whole tale looks like starting all over again. The setting is attrac-
tively dramatic, and the text's knowing self-commentary will make kids feel in on
the joke, as in the Ahlbergs' Ten in a Bed (BCCB 10/89). Unfortunately, in this
book, narrative cleverness sometimes overshadows rhythm, momentum, and char-
acters, so we don't really get our brigand's worth; the interruptions frequently
detract from the impact of everybody's storytelling and the funny bits within story
threads are lost in the larger framework. The colored-pencil illustrations are breez-
ily busy, sparkling with stolen loot and confused brigands encountering their fic-
tional counterparts. The kid-outwits-adults theme may attract Home Alone fans,
and the humor, particularly in a lively readaloud, may entertain young listeners.
DS
ARRINGTON, FRANCES 
Stella's Bull; illus. by Aileen Arrington. 
Houghton,
1994 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-67345-3 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
5-8 yrs
See this month's Big Picture, p. 347, for review.
350 
* 
THE BULLETIN
BAILLIE, ALLAN 
Rebel; illus. by Di Wu. 
Ticknor & Fields, 1994 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-69250-4 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
6-9 yrs
In a vignette reminiscent of the famous Danish response to the Nazi edict that all
Jews must wear yellow stars, a schoolful of Burmese children outwit an invading
general. Soldiers go through the town, "kicking down doors and waving guns,"
rounding up the populace for an audience with the General: "You are my people
now. I have the tanks and the soldiers, and you have nothing. I make all the laws,
punish who I wish, tell you when to plant the rice and when to harvest it." Well,
that's that-until a single sandal flies out of a school window and knocks off the
General's hat. He orders all the children from the building, seeking the one with
just one thong, only to have all the children and teachers come out barefoot. The
General and his men (grinning at their leader's embarrassment) depart to unani-
mous laughter. The pencil and watercolor illustrations are spacious and well-drawn
(the General cleverly burlesqued) and have an offhand sophistication that makes
the book appropriate for kids beyond the usual picture book age. But even for
older readers, a questions is begged: given the huge menace the General presents,
it just doesn't seem likely that he would respond to such a challenge by leaving
town, particularly given what we know of how the Burmese military has responded
to other challenges to their authority. A note on the jacket flap says the story is
based on an "incident that occurred in Rangoon," but further elucidation would
have been helpful; in fact, it should have been required. RS
BERNHARD, EMERY, ad. 
The Tree That Rains: The Flood Myth ofthe Huichol Indi-
ans ofMexico; illus. by Durga Bernhard. 
Holiday House, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1108-7 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
As in the Biblical story of Noah, this Mexican Indian myth rewards the righteous
with a supernatural warning of incipient floodwaters. Watakame works hard in
the fields, along with his faithful dog, and they are both saved when Great-Grand-
mother Earth joins them in their fig-tree boat for four years, after which Watakame
plants the seeds he has saved. In a final episode, he returns early one day to see who
has been providing him with hot tortillas and finds that the dog has cast off her
skin to become a young woman, whom he marries and helps to repopulate the
world. It's an intriguing story, with many parallels to the lore of other lands-the
animal-bride tale-type is a relative of "Beauty and the Beast"-so it's especially
frustrating that the author's note does not cite a printed source or informant for
the tale (it's also surprising, since the Bernhards' first two adaptations were precise
in this respect). The deep-hued gouache paintings radiate sweeping motion to the
edges of, and off, the double spreads, which are not restricted by the kinds of
borders that have sometimes competed with the numerous small figures that pat-
tern Durga Bernhard's compositions. A small map shows the location of Lake
Chapala, where the Huichols celebrate their annual harvest festival and listen to a
shamanic recitation of the myth. BH
BERNIER-BRAND, CARMEN T., ad. Juan Bobo: Four Folktales from Puerto Rico;
illus. by Ernesto Ramos Nieves. 
HarperCollins, 1994 
64p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023390-7 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023389-3 $14.00 
R 
Gr. 1-3
Juan Bobo was entertaining young listeners long before literacy struck, and now
JULY/AUGUST 1994 
* 
351
he's beckoning to new readers with four deliciously silly tales accompanied by
cleverly comical art. If the vocabulary is simple, the humor is complex, inviting
children to laugh at a traditional fool because they know what he doesn't. In one
story, Juan Bobo tries to carry water in baskets, in another he dresses his pig for
church, in a third ("Do Not Sneeze, Do Not Scratch... Do Not Eat!") he misses
out on a wonderful meal by mistaking his mother's signals at a friend's dinner
party, and in a fourth he sells syrup to wasps. Nieves' illustrations add a lot to all
this nonsense; with thickly outlined organic shapes and occasional neon flashes
highlighting deep color, he's created a lush Puerto Rican setting for Juan Bobo's
shenanigans. The drafting is smooth, too, with slightly-but never stiffly-styl-
ized human and animal figures that are full of motion. A Spanish text appears in
rather crowded format at the end of the book. Though the author's note places
the tales in general context, no sources are cited anywhere (see Alvin Schwartz' In
a Dark, Dark Room or Gretchen Will Mayo's Here Comes Tricky Rabbit, BCCB 6/
94, for examples of easy-to-read folklore with good source notes). BH
BRIGHTON, CATHERINE 
The Brontes: Scenes from the Childhood of Charlotte,
Branwell, Emily andAnne; written and illus. by Catherine Brighton. 
Chronicle,
1994 
28p
ISBN 0-8118-0608-1 
$11.95 
R 
6-9 yrs
This is an fictionalized account, from Charlotte's point of view, of the four Brontes'
daily childhood activities and games "on the wild northern moors." They run
outside in the wind, once getting caught in a ferocious thunderstorm; they play
rough "forbidden games" such as sliding down the banisters and letting geese into
the house; they play intricate war games with toy soldiers; they make up (and write
down) elaborate fantasies about imaginary places and people. Although most chil-
dren won't know who the Brontes were, the detailed description of pastimes from
almost two centuries ago is interesting for both differences from and similarities to
contemporary kids' lives; the confederacy of the siblings and the emphasis on the
world of imagination has the appeal of fiction. Kids may find that the plethora of
unfamiliar words-gauntlet, parsonage, lepidoptera-merely increases the myste-
rious atmosphere that Brighton's grave prose creates. The pale, precise, slightly
flat watercolors appear in ovals, circles, and round-cornered rectangles and show
the children's fancies corporealized, peering in through windows or seated on the
couch; the careful boxing of the text and controlled shape of the illustrations in-
creases the book's formal feeling. No source notes are provided. DS
CAZET, DENYS 
NothingAtAll; written and illus. by Denys Cazet. 
Jackson/Or-
chard, 1994 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08672-0 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-06822-6 
$14.95 
R 
3-5 yrs
If you're chronically short of rollicking, rhythmic selections for young story hours,
this upbeat barnyard buffoonery will be more than welcome. It starts out with a
blazing sunrise observed by a rooster who's perched atop a scarecrow and shouting
through a megaphone: "Cock-a-doodle-dooooo! Good morning to you!" Other
animals, sequenced in pairs, then respond in verse that's punctuated by a refrain:
"Out in the meadow,/ The breeze strolled by, And the scarecrow listened./ Can
you guess what he said?... Nothing at all!" Just as kids get into the rhythm of this
call-and-response pattern, a cat leaps at the mouse on the scarecrow's shoulder,
352 
* THE BULLETIN
whereupon . . . "Can you guess what he said? 'THERE'S A MOUSE IN MY
PANTS!"' Both the surprise and the concept will cause all manner of hilarity
among young listeners, who can then revel in the chaos that follows. The water-
colors keep pace, with sunny colors and goofy figures, all drawn large enough to
see from a distance; the cover illustration should tip you off about the fantastical
details, as a cow in her flowered shower cap reaches to turn on the water-in the
middle of a green field. This has lots of potential for group sound effects, so find
a place where "do not disturb" does not dominate. BH
CHRISTOPHER, JOHN 
A Dusk ofDemons. 
Macmillan, 1994 
175p
ISBN 0-02-718425-0 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
After the death of the Master (who was Ben's hitherto-unknown father), Ben and
his adoptive family are forced to leave their home on the Old Isle for the Main-
land, where worship of the Dark One holds sway, and where terrifying demons fly
overhead during religious services known as Summonings. The setting is a dismal
future Britain, where people are forbidden to use machines, buildings may be no
higher than "six times the height of a man," and dim stories of humans landing on
the moon are dismissed as lies, for everyone knows that the Moon is the home of
the demons. The menace is convincing but the premise is complicated, really too
big for the book, and the storytelling is unwieldy: Ben and his "sister" Paddy are
chased and caught all over the place, but we are never quite sure why. Most of the
mystery is cleared up at the end, but the revelations (the meaning of Ben's inher-
ited amulet, the true nature of the demons) seem arbitrary, almost as if the author
didn't know where he was going until he got there. While the book doesn't have
the expert adventure of Christopher's popular Tripods books, it does have an ap-
pealingly impetuous young hero, lots of action, and the promise of at least one
sequel. RS
COLLIER, JAMES LINCOLN 
The Jazz Kid. 
Holt, 1994 
[25 6 p]
ISBN 0-8050-2821-8 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
The Hull House marching band (Chicago, circa 1922) first shakes Paulie Horvath
from his adolescent indolence and gives him a hobby he can stick with-playing
the cornet. But when he is coerced into helping his father fix pipes in the base-
ment of a seedy nightclub, a cornet rendition of "China Boy" filters down "so
delicate, light, precise, with just a sprinkling of vibrato dusted on the end" that
Paulie instantly trades dreams of a gaudy band uniform for entree into the jazz
milieu. His parents forbid his involvement with "nigger music," but a local jazz
musician recognizes his ability and provides the guidance and connections to
jumpstart a career. The focus of the novel is on Paulie's defiant and passionate
pursuit of music, and on the practice, technical development, and repertoire-build-
ing that lead to his modest success. But Collier also touches on such themes as the
highly debated origins of jazz, public response to the "shocking" new style, the
relationship between black and white musicians, and the infiltration of organized
crime into the jazz clubs. Many references to actual jazz musicians and Chicago
locales add authenticity, and the narrator's voice-that of Paulie himself, now
presumably an octogenarian-is intimate and convincing. In an afterword, Collier
sorts out the historic from the fictional elements, and he suggests his readers seek
out early jazz recordings. EB
JulY/AuGusT 1994 
* 353
Cozic, CHARLES P., comp. 
Israel: Opposing Viewpoints. 
Rev. ed. 
Greenhaven,
1994 
2 88 p 
(Opposing Viewpoints)
Trade ed. ISBN 1-56510-133-2 
$17.95
Paper ed. ISBN 1-56510-132-4 
$9.95 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Students of international affairs and those with a special interest in Jewish history
will use this for reference, debate, and reports as the Israeli-PLO accord plays itself
out. Because it's hard to find up-to-date information outside of newspapers and
magazines, the historical documents gathered here are particularly important as
background for examining the pros and cons of six central questions that organize
the book: Is a homeland for Jews necessary? Does Israel need Zionism? What are
the prospects for Arab-Israeli Peace? Should Israel give up land for peace? Are
Palestinian rights being violated? Should the United States support Israel? Like
the rest of the Opposing Viewpoints series, this is fair-minded in selection and
presentation, with editorial commentary giving context for speeches by Zionist
founder Theodore Herzl and Palestinian scholar Sami Hadawi alike. Occasional
political cartoons and a map illustrate the text, which is supplemented by current
bibliographies, a chronology, list of involved organizations, and index. A valuable
compilation of both primary and secondary materials. BH
CREW, GARY 
No Such Country 
Simon, 1994 
2 4 8p
ISBN 0-671-79760-3 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
The small Australian fishing village of New Canaan is clearly in the Father's thrall.
Adults are reluctant to discuss him, and children (very few, and now in their teens)
have grown to regard his meddling and intimidation as the natural order. But
when Eva Burgess dies of a seasnake bite while tending her husband's nets, and her
dearest friend slips into a trance, the townsfolk begin to speak openly of "signs and
wonders." Eva's daughter Rachel and her close friend Sarah dig-literally-for
the truth with the help of Sam, a geology student who has chosen New Canaan's
fossilized oyster beds as a good project site and a likely place to uncover his own
half-Aboriginal roots. The visionary ravings of Sarah's mother, Sam's suspicions
about his parentage, the discovery of ropes beneath a shell mound, and mystical
revelations from the Father's hidden book finally disclose the town's guilty secret:
years ago the village men had drowned the Aboriginal population of the town and
buried them under the shell bed. In an apocalyptic climax, the Father is swallowed
up in a volcanic eruption. Because the Father's sin of omission (he knew of the
slaughter but failed to bring the offenders to justice) and spiritual blackmail pale
beside the crime of his congregation, and the townsfolk are portrayed as more
relieved than repentant, this resolution may strike readers as unsatisfying. A sec-
ondary theme concerning the fragile relationship between Rachel and Sarah, as
Sam's attentions to Rachel divide them, is handled with greater success, and Sarah's
painful acceptance of her friend's inevitable departure is bittersweet and believ-
able. But Crew emphasis on the town-with-a-secret never quite blends the natural
and supernatural elements into a convincing whole. EB
CROFFORD, EMILY 
A Place to Belong. Carolrhoda, 1994 
152p
ISBN 0-87614-808-9 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 5-7
"Between hard times and a poor market for chewing tobacco... I ain't been able
to keep up the payments on our place," says Papa, and the family is forced from
their home in Tennessee to do fieldwork first in Mississippi and then on an Arkan-
354 
* THE BULLETIN
sas plantation. Despite their poverty, Talmadge has made it to seventh grade-a
higher level of education than his parents or siblings have managed-but has suf-
fered as an outsider with a club foot. His determination engenders bitterness in
Mama and older brother Dwight, both of whom feel he's not doing his share to
earn a living, but his sisters and father are sympathetic. Then the youngest is
struck with infantile paralysis, they're all quarantined, and the crisis forces them
out of their dead-end labor toward a more hopeful life in Memphis. Crofford has
avoided loading information into this historical novel and instead concentrated on
the strained dynamics of a single family in the economic stranglehold of 1935.
The protagonist's torment at school is realistically portrayed, as is his slow, hardwon
success, and there's enough action to keep the story moving without getting melo-
dramatic. It's a low-key portrayal that will nevertheless impress readers with indi-
vidual faces of the Depression. BH
DERBY, PAT 
Grams, Her Boyfriend, My Family, and Me. 
Farrar, 1994 
195p
ISBN 0-374-38131-3 
$16.00 
R* 
Gr. 6-10
Mom has gotten a job. Grams (widow-Dad's side) has become a temporary
resident while her house is being repaired after a fire. Younger sister Molly is
asking questions about boys. Dad is obstinately opposed to Grams' decision to
remarry. Nothing sensational here-but reported by Andy, the self-centered son
who views all events through the filter of their possible impact on himself, these
family doings become the stuff of a top-notch domestic comedy. It's great that
Mom wants to earn money, but how can Andy reconcile babysitting the twins
with his soccer practice? If everyone is under the strain of best behavior while
Grams is resident, why doesn't Dad rejoice over her engagement? Andy outlines
the problems, and Derby prudently allows the reader to supply the analysis. And
so we realize long before Andy does that Molly has a (reciprocated!) crush on
Andy's friend; that Dad's reaction to Gram's remarriage is both irrational and
normal; and that despite the family's grudging cooperation, Mom still bears the
brunt of family crises. At first sight, a pair of frisky grandparents (Mom's side),
socially relevant religion classes, and the older sister's long-suffering boyfriend seem
thrown in merely for comic effect, but in Derby's carefully drawn masterplan,
each detail makes an important contribution to the satisfying conclusion in which
the siblings orchestrate Grams' elopement and wedding in Reno-assuring, of
course, that she's married by a priest. And in a final flash of insight, which he
resists examining too closely, Andy concludes that he may actually be turning into
"a caring kind of guy." EB
FAKIH, KIMBERLY OLSON 
High on the Hog. Farrar, 1994 
16 0p
ISBN 0-374-33209-6 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Trapp's parents are away in New York, hunting for the family's new house, and
twelve-year-old Trapp is dreading the move. She's spending her last summer in
Iowa on her great-grandparents' farm, where she befriends a boy also staying in the
area, works on the farm, and wonders about a family secret she thinks she's stumbled
onto. The truth is more dramatic than she had suspected-it's revealed to Trapp
(and no one else in her family) that her beloved grandmother was actually born out
of wedlock to neighbors and adopted as a baby by her great-grandparents. This is
a thoughtful novel about a girl's contemplation of change, of mortality, and of her
place in the world, and Fakih has a smooth writing style. Unfortunately there's
JULY/AUGUST 1994 
* 355
too much emphasis on thought and not enough on action, and Trapp's angst
about a three-generations-back adoption seems a little excessive. The wry, lengthy
chapter titles ("Wherein the beans and the Stuttgards come on kind of sudden,
and local entertainment substitutes for Saturday morning cartoons") are amusing
but not really in keeping with the more somber tone of the novel. The picture of
farm life and close family ties will appeal to readers content with a slower pace. DS
FLORIAN, DOUGLAS 
beastfeast; written and illus. by Douglas Florian. 
Harcourt,
1994 
4 8p
ISBN 0-15-295178-4 
$14.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
"The rhea rheally isn't strange-/ It's just an ostrich, rhearranged." 
For those
unfamiliar with the subject of this couplet, a handsome watercolor portrait sug-
gests a tail-less turkey-holding a picture of an ostrich in its beak. Such is the
tenor of these twenty-one poems, each facing a humorously restrained painting
that extends the verbal play: "The pounding spatter/ Of salty sea/ Makes the
walrus/ Walrusty"; "Just when you think you know the boa,/ There's moa and
moa and moa and moa." Some of the poems are longer and more substantial, but
they're all fun and greatly augmented by art reminiscent of Leonard Baskin's. This
is a playful collection that kids can hear or read in mouthfuls like popcorn or
peanuts. There will be no straining to understand, but there will be real potential
for perceptive expansion in the coupling of verbal and visual image: what first
appears to be a maze illustrating "The Ants" turns out, at second glance, to spell
Ant City, the leaf hole chewed by a caterpillar is shaped like a cat; the rude barracuda's
chewing on a globe. Swift and simple, these will work well in group presentations
and as a booktalking compaion to Yolen's even wilder Animal Fare, reviewed be-
low. BH
FRY, ANNETTE R. 
The Orphan Trains. New Discovery, 1994 
9 6 p 
illus. with
photographs 
(American Events)
ISBN 0-02-735721-X 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Orphan trains, always a romantic subject, here receive factual treatment. Fry tells
of Charles Loring Brace's despair at the problem of New York street children and
of his solution: send them west, where farmers needed hands and families wanted
more children. Groups other than Brace's Children's Aid Society, each with their
own variations on the orphan train theme, took up the practice, resulting in a
juvenile westward migration that continued from the 1860s through the 1920s.
The voices of orphan-train riders, telling of the exciting or frightening trip and
their new lives, appear throughout the book. Although there is a chapter on juve-
nile delinquents sent west, most of the reports here are of successful transplanta-
tion and happy kids. The text links the phenomenon to the present by making
clear which child welfare agencies are still in existence and placing children for
adoption, although no longer on orphan trains, and by mentioning the founding
and existence of the Orphan Train Heritage Society of America. Period photos
and drawings lend atmosphere to the competent and readable account, which would
make a useful counterpart to fictional treatments such as Joan Lowery Nixon's
Orphan Train series (BCCB 10/87, etc.). Extensive endnotes, two appendices
(one of the Foundling Hospital's charter, another of a list of addresses to which to
write for more information), a list of books and periodicals for further reading,
and an index are included. DS
356 
* THE BULLETIN
GANTOS, JACK 
Heads or Tails: Stories from the Sixth Grade. Farrar, 1994 
15 1p
ISBN 0-374-32909-5 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Jack is trying to survive his sixth-grade year, and he narrates, through a series of
short-stories-cum-chapters, his difficulties in dodging the obstacles life throws in
his path. He tries to tidy his schoolwork by changing his handwriting completely,
but then the teacher doesn't believe it's his work; his school crush suckers him into
taking her patrol job and then gets him in trouble; he spends a day anticipating his
rabid death because of a nip he receives from a hostile dog. Along with these
relatively mundane kid-dilemmas are some darker moments, with his father's friend
and then later his dog dying suddenly, his parents' financial scrimping and saving,
and the drama of a hurricane roaring through the family's Florida home. The
stories are individually self-contained but seem cumulative (although chronology
is confused when Jack's bike, wrecked in the hurricane, pops up unscathed later
on). The writing is zingy and specific, with snappily authentic dialogue and a
vivid sense of juvenile experience ("Brent took a pen and wrote BUTTHOLE on his
hand. 'Sniff this,' he whispered and rubbed it across my face"), and Jack and his
family have a recognizably thorny relationship. 
This is a distinctive and lively
sequence of everyday-life stories. DS
GIOVANNI, NIKKI 
Knoxville, Tennessee; illus. by Larry Johnson. 
Scholastic,
1994 
32p
ISBN 0-590-47074-4 
$14.95 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
An enticing catalogue of images begins, "I always like summer best," with a be-
atific picture of a white-frocked young African-American girl running through a
field of flowers with her dog. "You can eat fresh corn," she says in the next spread,
an idyllic view of the child picnicking on an enormous expanse of green lawn with
a white house in the background. Thus the book proceeds from one bucolic scene
to the next-a garden, a barbecue, a church picnic, a walk to the mountains with
a white-haired grandmother, and prayers at bedtime. It's a blissful glimpse back,
nostalgically beautiful, with no hint of childhood conflict or pain. Johnson's dra-
matic compositions and thick-textured greens enrich Giovanni's simple narrative
free verse and will draw some children by sheer tonal warmth; more restless view-
ers waiting for a story to unfold may exhibit impatience with what amounts to a
lovely, impressionistic description. BH
GOLDMAN, E. M. 
Money to Burn. 
Viking, 1994 
[22 4 p]
ISBN 0-670-85339-9 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Matt and his best friend Lewis don't have much to look forward to this hot sum-
mer, what with no money and no prospects for summer jobs. So when they find
an old suitcase filled with $400,000+ in the woods, they figure their fortunes-
and future-are made. No such luck-the boys discover that having the money is
a weighty secret and spending the money almost too complicated: how will they
explain where they got the funds for the new walkman, the new computers, etc.?
How they manage makes for an entertaining if increasingly far-fetched story, as
the boys enlist the local codgery hermit/poet to "hire" them to work on his place
with funds the old man supposedly won in a lottery. With the entrance of two
drug dealers looking for their money gone awry (and a confusing shift in perspec-
tive) the book changes tone and goes into overdrive: the exploding fireworks,
JULY/AUGUST 1994 
* 357
intended as a wedding present for Matt's dad, seem a tad unlikely as a device to
catch the crooks. Still, the two boys (Matt is fourteen, Lewis a year younger) are
efficiently differentiated, the dog-days summer atmosphere is well-evoked, and
the action is zippy enough for reluctant readers, particularly fans ofNeal Shusterman,
whose The Eyes of Kid Midas (BCCB 1/93) is a higher-octane science fantasy on
the same theme. RS
GONZALEZ, LUCIA M., ad. 
The Bossy Gallito: A Traditional Cuban Folktale; illus.
by Lulu Delacre. 
Scholastic, 1994 
[32p]
ISBN 0-590-46843-X 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-7 yrs
A favorite cumulative pattern with storytellers who can keep it straight, this is the
tale of the bossy little rooster who-after pecking two kernels of corn from the
mud-tells the grass to clean his beak. But the grass won't, so he asks the goat to
eat the grass, the stick to hit the goat, the fire to burn the stick, the water to quench
the fire, and the sun to dry up the water. Naturally, the sun's willing, since the
rooster crows him up every morning, and this sets off the requisite chain reaction
that finally gets the rooster's beak clean so he can proceed to his Uncle Parrot's
wedding. The author heard this Cuban version from her great-aunt and has trans-
lated it into English above the boldface Spanish text. Each page of print is framed
in an egg shape by tropical birds and flowers, while the facing full-page illustration
depicts a scene from the story. The art is full of flaring colors and feathery shapes,
with the crowded urban setting aired by plenty of white space. It's a richly bilin-
gual book, including a glossary and generous background notes in English and
Spanish to provide cultural context for both story and pictures. BH
GRIMES, NIKKI 
Meet Danitra Brown; illus. by Floyd Cooper. 
Lothrop,
1994 
32 p
ISBN 0-688-12073-3 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 2-4
With a smooth, scatterbrush effect in browns and russet reds, Cooper offers a
filmy artistic backdrop for these thirteen poems, all about narrator Zuri's best
friend Danitra. The girls are African American, and the neighborhood is inner-
city, but the friendship will seem familiar to a broad spectrum of readers: Zuri
admires Danitra, gains support and protection from her company, and sometimes
fights with her. The verse is naive and tuned to tell a story, the rhyming deter-
mined but rarely strained: "Danitra's scared of pigeons. I promised not to tell,/
then I opened my big mouth and out the secret fell." Zuri's few shadowy mo-
ments and flashes of insecurity are as natural as the dense hues of the illustration;
yet in total effect, the illustration is as upbeat as the poetry, with skillful drafting
especially evident in facial expression and body postures. While some kids may get
impatient with Danitra's idealized persona, for many children-especially those
afraid of more formal or lyrically complex poetry-this book will prove a satisfying
introduction and sturdy friend. BH
GUBACK, 
GEORGIA 
Luka's Quilt; written and illus. by Georgia
Guback. 
Greenwillow, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-688-12154-3 
$14.00 
R 4-7 yrs
Luka, a little Hawaiian girl, relates how her grandmother's gift of a lovingly made
quilt threatens their warm relationship. Tutu (Hawaiian for grandmother) prom-
358 
* THE BULLETIN
ises Luka a special quilt of her own, which the two would work on together. At
Tutu's prompting, Luka selects a single color-green-which she assumes will
form a leafy background for her fabric flower garden. But when Tutu's efforts
produce a stunning traditional quilt of only green and white, Luka cannot hide her
disappointment, and Tutu becomes very hurt. After days of silence, Tutu suggests
a truce, and they attend Lei Day festivities in the park. There Luka makes a beau-
tiful multi-colored (thoroughly non-traditional) lei and gives Tutu an idea that
will restore their friendship. Tutu and Luka choose more fabric, which Tutu
quilts into a beautiful lei to embellish Luka's traditional quilt. Luka now proudly
explains, "Sometimes I have it plain ... And sometimes I put Tutu's quilted lei on
top . .. I like it both ways. But what I like most is that Tutu and I are friends
again." Luka's narration is smooth and direct, and details of the Lei Day festival
are especially intriguing. Watercolor and cut-paper collage illustrations, while some-
times stiff, have a colorful and naive busyness that harmonizes well with the tale's
scrap-bag motif. This is a good choice for a cozy intergenerational read-together.
EB
HALL, DONALD 
The Farm Summer 1942; illus. by Barry Moser. 
Dial,
1994 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1502-1 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1501-3 
$15.99 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
It's 1942; Peter's father is off at the war and now his mother is called to New York,
so nine-year-old Peter must spend the summer on his grandparents' New Hamp-
shire farm. There Peter encounters rural life ("Lady Ghost pulled them in the
buggy along the road past old farmhouses to a long white house with green shut-
ters where his grandmother waited with gingersnaps and rhubarb pie") and hears
about the war distantly over the radio. When the summer ends, Peter regrets
leaving the farm but enjoys returning to his San Francisco home, especially when
his father, home on leave, welcomes Peter back. This is an evocative account of
daily farm life, gently tidied through backward-looking eyes but still full of inter-
esting detail. There's little plot, however; the quiet mention of how much Peter
misses his father makes that absence part of the background rather than the thrust
of the story, and the narrative sometimes keeps its smoothness by leaving terms
("streamliner," for instance) unexplained. Barry Moser paints an all-American kid
on an all-American farm, although the art has a stillness that conveys historical
distance; the pictures sometimes extend the story and once contradict it where the
illustration shows Peter and a local girl playing outside and the text keeps them
firmly inside. Kids might enjoy sharing this with grandparents or grandparent
figures, who can explain the period features and expand with stories of their own.
DS
HAUGEN, TORMOD 
Keeping Secrets; tr. by David R. Jacobs; illus. by Donna
Diamond. 
HarperCollins, 1994 
[128p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-020882-1 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-020881-3 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
"It had never occurred to her before that she had fingertips." That's about as
straightforward as things get in this minimalist novel first published in Norway in
1976. Nina and her parents, Martin and Eva, have just come to their summer
JuLY/AUGUST 1994 
* 359
cottage when they discover that someone has been sleeping there, someone who
has left behind a pair of blue sneakers with the word "Zeppelin" written on one of
them. Nina eventually meets the boy to whom the sneakers belong, and who has
"almost" run away from his home down the street because his parents "don't un-
derstand that they have children." The story isn't oblique, really, but it is heavily
thematic, with its 150 brief section/chapters reading like an outline as Nina learns
to separate from her parents while the boy attempts to become closer to his. The
style is given to terse abstractness: "If there are angels, they look like Nina, said
Uncle Ole. Nina thought about glossy postcards covered with glitter. Glossy
angels covered with glitter were the worst thing she knew." That's chapter six, all
of it. Given such cryptic passages, it's a credit to the author that the situation gains
any momentum at all, but the story does manage to generate some emotional
power as the two children force their respective parents to see them as they really
are. Although the characterization is abstracted, delineating the children and par-
ents only in terms of each other, there's enough of an emotional tug that readers
may forgive the shortchanged treatment. RS
HEIDE, FLORENCE PARRY 
The Bigness Contest; illus. by Victoria Chess. 
Little,
1994 
32p
ISBN 0-316-35444-9 $14.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Poor Beasley. Even though his aunt Emerald points out that "hippopotamuses are
supposed to be big," he thinks he's too big to be good at anything. And he doesn't
fare well in the Running Contest, the High Jump Contest, the Jump Rope Con-
test, the Somersault Contest, or even the Best Costume Contest. He wins the
Aunt-Emerald-sponsored Bigness Contest-until his even bigger cousin Borofil
turns up. Beasley then decides to devote his life to sitting lazily in the river with
Borofil; he finally wins Aunt Emerald's Laziness Contest, and he and Borofil are
"very, very big" and "very, very happy, but they are too lazy to smile." It's an
entertainingly silly story, and the aristocratically named hippopotami make ap-
pealing dramatis personae, but the plot doesn't quite have the strength of its char-
acters. The offhand Laziness Contest after the big-deal Bigness Contest is rather
anticlimactic, and it's not clear why Beasley would beat out long-time sitter Borofil
for laziness. They're still a fun crew to contemplate: Victoria Chess-who else?-
has a gift for making her gimlet-eyed hippos slightly disgusting even as she renders
them pinkly attractive (and Aunt Emerald, in her verdant muumuu and Lady
Bracknell-ish accoutrements of lorgnette and fan, is a daffy and determined dowa-
ger). Kids may wish Beasley had won both contests, but you could use this to coax
them into making revolting hippo noises or to trick them into inaction with a
laziness contest of your own. DS
HERON, ANN, ed. 
Two Teenagers in Twenty: Writings by Gay and Lesbian
Youth. 
Alyson, 1994 
[18 8 p]
ISBN 1-55583-229-6 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 9-12
In an expansion and revision of a title published in 1983 as One Teenager in Ten,
forty-three young people write, some anonymously, about how and when they
realized they were gay or lesbian, what problems they have encountered in coming
out (or not coming out), and almost without exception, declare that they're glad to
be gay. As in the first edition, the best of the brief first-person narratives are
360 
* THE BULLETIN
specific and personal. Even so, many of the accounts seem similar, perhaps reflect-
ing a commonality of experience but also giving a repetitive effect; perhaps fewer
but more in-depth stories would have had greater impact. Gay and lesbian teens,
though, will welcome these voices that speak to joys (a lover, an understanding
parent) and torments (thoughts of suicide, religious conflicts-oddly, AIDS is
hardly mentioned). Tips contained within the narratives, as well as at the back of
the book, will give young gays and lesbians some ideas about where to look for
friends and find support. RS
HOPKINS, LEE BENNETT, comp. 
April Bubbles Chocolate: An ABC ofPoetry; illus.
by Barry Root. 
Simon, 1994 
40p
ISBN 0-671-75911-6 
$14.00 
R Gr. 2-4
Hopkins has paved many a poetic avenue with handsome anthologies. This one is
formatted as an alphabet book, but that's really just a good excuse to set some first-
class verse into paintings that add visual allure. The first four selections-"April"
by Eve Merriam, "Bubbles" by Carl Sandburg, "Chocolate" by Arnold Adoff, and
"Dreams" by Langston Hughes-give an idea of the range in subject and taste. It's
mostly lighthearted, but there's a variety of moods, from X. J. Kennedy's "Lasa-
gna" ("Wouldn't you love/ To have lasagna/ Any old time/ The mood was on
ya?") to Sylvia Cassedy's lyrical description, "Tunnel in the park:/ a sandwich of
night between/ two slices of light." The illustrations are deep in both color and
texture, with a calm dominance of organic shapes and a satisfying simplicity of
composition. They'll absorb readers who have long since mastered the alphabet
but haven't been embarrassed out of playing around with words. Teachers can
also use the book as a model to set their classes making alphabetical anthologies for
themselves, though they'll have a hard time matching Judith Thurman's "Zebra"
for the last letter. BH
HORSTMAN, LISA 
Fast Friends: A Tail and Tongue Tale; written and illus. by Lisa
Horstman. 
Knopf, 1994 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-95404-X 
$13.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-85404-5 
$13.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
This is the tale of a cow named Blueberry Sprig, who set off to make his way in the
big city, and a chameleon named Smithfield, whom he met and befriended along
the way. Once in town, Blueberry and Smithfield agree to be roommates, and
Blueberry works as a cow-about-town for the local paper while Smithfield is em-
ployed as a chef for the richest woman in town. The core of their relationship,
however, is "bug-thwakking," when Blueberry swishes a fly with his tail and
Smithfield slurps it up. This idyllic picture is clouded when Smithfield loses pa-
tience with the slovenly Blueberry and leaves home; soon a serendipitous bug-
thwakking encounter reunites the two friends, who remain "happy with the
arrangement." The dynamics lack the depth and character of other tales of per-
sonified-animal friendship such as Lobel's about Frog and Toad, but Blueberry
and Smithfield are warm and personable. The colored-pencil and watercolor illus-
trations are occasionally stiffly drafted and their colors sometimes tip into the gar-
ish, but they show some nicely varied composition and depict the portly
purple-spotted Blueberry and the verdant Smithfield with charm. A cheerful if
contrived tale. DS
JULY/AUGUST 1994 
* 361
JACOBS, FRANCINE A Passion for Danger: Nansen's Arctic Adventures. 
Putnam,
1994 
[160p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-399-22674-5 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-9
FridtjofNansen's 1882 voyage on a sealer into the icy seas off the coast of Greenland
only whetted the Norwegian's appetite for Arctic adventure; a later trip took him
across Greenland's interior, and 1893 found him taking off on his greatest adven-
ture of all, an attempt to boat across the Arctic Ocean and find the North Pole.
Let's hope this book, reviewed from an unillustrated galley, has a map (although
resort to a globe might be better, polar geography being what it is), because Nansen's
trips led him in some daunting directions, from Siberia north to Greenland, for
example. While Jacobs should have given more information on mapping and
navigating, her account of Nansen's journeys, taken from his memoirs, are de-
tailed and exciting, evoking both the impetus of discovery and the dangers of the
ice, sea, cold, and polar bears. This is an old-fashioned biography in that the
heroism of the man is joyfully painted larger than life; the mention in the after-
word that Nansen won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1922 (for work with WWI refu-
gees) adds another dimension to the intrepid adventurer. The finished book will
include many period photographs, a bibliography and an index; notes are limited
to explanatory asides. RS
JOHNSON, 
DOLORES 
Papa's Stories; written and illus. by Dolores
Johnson. 
Macmillan, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-02-747847-5 
$14.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
The first things Papa does after a hard day's labor are take a shower and sit down to
read Kari a book while Mama cooks supper. The stories Papa reads are pretty
jazzy-"Little-Miss-Too-Big-for-Her-Red-Britches," for instance-and they change
all the time. Sometimes LMTBFHRB is going on a picnic and sometimes she's
visiting "her grandmama, who had grown whiskers so fierce no one wanted to kiss
her." Then comes the fateful day when a neighbor tells Kari that the story is called
"Little Red Riding Hood" and the words always stay the same. Kari confronts
Papa, finds out he's illiterate but trying to learn how to read, and resolves her crisis
by assuring him that she wants to hear his storytelling as well as his reading. The
warmth of this unpretentious story is augmented by soft watercolor scenes that
portray, with low-key affection, an idealized African-American family. It's a pic-
ture book that says a lot without becoming thematically belabored: what's impor-
tant about stories is to pass them on, one way or another, and what's important
about parent-child relationships is to love honestly. BH
JOHNSON, SYLvIA A. 
A Beekeeper's Year; illus. with photographs by Nick Von
Ohlen. 
Little, 1994 
[32p]
ISBN 0-316-46745-6 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-6
John Wetzler is a Minnesota beekeeper, and this book shows how he cares for his
bees through the seasons and extracts the honey they make. The text uses simple,
clear language to explain the importance of the queen, the collection of nectar, the
physical structures beekeepers use for housing hives and their honey, and the simple
procedure for getting honey out of the hives and into jars. The format is nicely
362 
* THE BULLETIN
balanced between text and informative photographs, which show not only apiary
details but also set a little of the country scene (some smaller photographs, how-
ever, make it hard to see the details described in the caption). A note about com-
mercial beekeeping, as opposed to hobbyist beekeeping such as Wetzler's, appears
in the back and includes information on Africanized bees; a glossary defining words
italicized in the text and three honey-rich recipes are appended. DS
JOHNSTON, TONY, ad. 
The Tale of Rabbit and Coyote; illus. by Tomie
dePaola. 
Putnam, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-399-22258-8 
$14.95 
R 
3-6 yrs
A powder-blue Coyote and purple Rabbit bound through this Mexican trickster
tale that's simple enough for children still too young for the more complicated
machinations of, for example, some of the Anansi stories. Rabbit first gets in
trouble when he attacks the beeswax scarecrow cum tar baby a farmer has placed in
his chile field; the farmer takes Rabbit home in a sack to make a meal of him,
Rabbit convinces Coyote to take his place ("Look, the water's ready to make hot
chocolate"), and Coyote realizes he's been tricked: "Ay, ay ay! Coyote flew right
out of that water and took off after Rabbit." The race goes on through the rest of
the book with Rabbit just one step ahead of Coyote, who falls for every trick
Rabbit tosses his way. The pacing is fast and robust, and the flip from trickster
story into pourquoi tale is neatly accomplished, as Rabbit escapes on a ladder to
the moon, leaving Coyote to howl the night away. dePaola's southwestern palette
of chalky blues and pinks is accented with hot-pepper reds, and the pictures jump
with the energy of several Perils of Pauline episodes, accented by mild invective
(" Conejo malvado," says Coyote) and swift ripostes ("Hasta luego!" says Rabbit)
sketched into the scenes. RS
KIMMEL, ERIC A., ad. 
I-Know-Not-What, I-Know-Not-Where: A Russian Tale;
illus. by Robert Sauber. 
Holiday House, 1994 
64 p
ISBN 0-8234-1020-X 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Based on a complex Russian folktale that appears to have been embroidered al-
ready by an earlier adaptor, Charles Downing, Kimmel's version of"I-Know-Not-
What-I-Know-Not-Where" further elaborates this story of a tsar's archer who shoots
a magical dove but rescues her when she pleads for her life. In Downing's version,
the dove almost immediately transforms into a woman who marries the hero and
helps him survive numerous tests as the tsar tries to get rid of him to claim his
beautiful wife. Kimmel has suspended the transformation until the end of the
story, leaving the tsar to covet the hero's friendly dove, and has assigned the tsar's
counselor a witch-like wife who designs ways to eliminate the hero (through an
encounter with the tsar's dead father in hell, with a giant talking cat, and with
Baba Yaga on the way to I-Know-Not-Where). These changes have some interest-
ing gender implications, as the power of the women seems to have become either
darker (the counselor's wife, rather than the counselor's drunken friend, plans the
hero's downfall) or diluted (the hero's dove rather than the hero's wife engineers
his rescue). There's also a proliferation of marvels (a cloak of invisibility and the
water of life, as well as one-eyed, two-eyed, and three-eyed giants) and poetic word
play on the character of Nobody, with one passage borrowed from Dickinson:
"I'm Nobody. Who are you? Are you Nobody too?" Sauber's paintings are darkly
romantic in the vein of fantasy calendar art, and readers who hold to their love for
JULY/AUGUST 1994 
* 
363
fairy tales past the picture book stage can enjoy reading this along with other no-
vellas such as Doris Orgel's Ariadne, Awake (BCCB 6/94) or Nancy Willard's
retelling of Beauty and the Beast (BCCB 11/92). BH
KRONENWETTER, MICHAEL 
The Peace Commandos: Nonviolent Heroes in the
Struggle Against War and Injustice. New Discovery, 1994 
[17 6 p] 
(Timestop
Books)
ISBN 0-02-751051-4 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-12
The author's sympathetic discussion of pacifism begins with the 1970 Kent State
story of National Guard soldiers killing Allison Krause, who, the day before her
death, had put a flower into the barrel of a rifle pointing at anti-Vietnam demon-
strators and said "Flowers are better than bullets." Summarizing religious and
humanitarian reasons for nonviolence, Kronenwetter cites the ideas of Henry David
Thoreau, Jane Addams, Eugene Debs, Dorothy Day, Mohandas Gandhi, and
Martin Luther King, Jr., and their work for peaceful protest against social injus-
tice. While the analysis of national interests is effective, the descriptions of con-
temporary crises are grossly overgeneralized: "The peace commandos have seen
some encouraging signs lately. In 1989, the mighty Soviet Union collapsed and
the Iron Curtain came crashing down without widespread war or bloodshed. This
seems to mean that the cold war-which held the threat of nuclear annihilation
over the world since the end of World War II-is over." (In fact, some fear that
the U.S.S.R.'s collapse may have increasedthe threat of uncontrolled nuclear weap-
ons.) Even borrowing the term commando from military sources seems strangely
paradoxical here, but the simply written argument will start young readers think-
ing along paths of their own, and they'll be helped along the way by Kronenwetter's
source notes and bibliography, which includes Milton Meltzer's excellent history,
Ain't Gonna Study War No More (BCCB 7/85), for the same age group. BH
LEE, LAUREN Stella: On the Edge of Popularity. Polychrome, 1994 
[100p]
ISBN 1-879965-08-9 
$10.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Seventh grade is proving complicated for Korean-American Stella Kim, who lives
in a Chicago suburb where her parents-to Stella's embarrassment-operate a
drycleaning establishment. Stella's former best friend Eileen has become queen of
the class, giggling with her new friends about the way Stella's house smells of
kimchi, and only bothering to be nice to Stella when she wants something, the
math homework, for example. This first novel blends a school story with a theme
of ethnic pride, but both plot and moral suffer from overstatement and careless
editing. We hear too many times, for example, about Eileen "flipping back" her
hair; similarly, there are a host of awkward metaphors for the state of Stella's stom-
ach: "butterflies flew around Stella's stomach," "a feeling like dozens of steel tooth-
picks dug into her stomach." The classroom scenes, as well as the interactions
between Stella and her bumptious little brothers, are genuine, and the viciousness
possible among twelve-year-old girls is precisely caught, if somewhat exaggerated
in Eileen's complete rejection of Stella. Scenes of racial conflict are variously con-
vincing, with the unthinking condescensions of Stella's teacher ringing more true
than a didactic subplot about Mr. Kim's involvement in a discrimination suit, the
other side being conveniently representee by Eileen's father. Stella is a sympa-
364 
* 
THE BULLETIN
thetic protagonist, but see Marie Lee's Saying Goodbye, reviewed below, for a more
adroit blend of message and story. RS
LEE, MARIE G. 
Saying Goodbye. Houghton, 1994 
[24 0p]
ISBN 0-395-67066-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 8-12
"Getting into Harvard, my parents told me, meant that I'd be set for life." The
protagonist of Lee's first novel, FindingMy Voice (BCCB 10/92), arrives in Boston
to find college no less complicated than the small-town Minnesota high school
she's left behind. In fact, the racism that strained the social dynamics there also
provides the central drama in this sequel. Whereas her boyfriend and best girl-
friend back home were both white (Ellen's was the only Korean-American family
in town), her college roommate, Leecia, is African American and the boy she be-
gins to love, Jae, is Korean American. This ultimately puts Ellen on a collision
course with Leecia when the African American Alliance invites to campus a black
rap singer famous for a piece threatening violence to inner-city Korean merchants.
Jae's parents were burned out in the L.A. riots, and as Ellen explores her ethnic
roots for the first time, she sides with him in a seeming betrayal of her roommate.
Simultaneously, her best home-town friend feels betrayed by the first story Ellen
has had published after pursuing her writing interests throughout pre-med studies.
If the plot and parallels seem a little schematic, the detailing itself is authentic,
with smooth dialogue and solidly realized scenes. Only when the characters obvi-
ously set up the action ("It's like the calm before the storm") or occasionally speak
in concepts does the fictional tone becomes purposive ("Young people idolize these
rap stars, and the violence their music represents. Rap stars have to take responsi-
bility for this power. And if they don't, we, the Korean, Jewish, and women's
groups, will"). Such points are only noticeable because the tension is generally cast
in deeper terms of human interaction. Lee doesn't cop out on the ending: neither
of her friendships will ever be quite the same, nor does her stabilized relationship
with Jae alleviate the pain of alienation she feels from the women in her life. Read-
ers will be curious to see if a third book continues the story of these honest and
interesting personae. BH
LEECH, BRYAN JEFFERY John Jeremy Colton; illus. by Byron Glaser and Sandra
Higashi. 
Hyperion, 1994 
34p
Library ed. ISBN 1-56282-402-3 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 1-56282-650-6 
$14.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Mrs. Hythe-Potter has been vocal in her criticism of the town's title nonconform-
ist. But when her house catches fire and the amiable Colton saves her and her
family, she willingly concedes, "Heroes appear in the least likely places, and you
can't tell who's brave by looking at faces." The rhymed verse is pleasant, if occa-
sionally strained ("The thatch on the roof was in need of repair. It looked like a
spider with too little hair"), and Leech's description of the fire and rescue has a
shivery excitement that will appeal to young listeners. The shift from black-gray-
white graphics associated with the townsfolk to riotous candy-shop colors associ-
ated with Colton is effective; the repetition of this color shift in the endpapers is a
thoughtful touch. However, the host of splashy mixed-media shapes, textures,
perspectives, and colors mounts a relentless visual assault, and gratuitous font
changes are merciless on the eyes. Glaser and Higashi's penchant for snaking the
type around the page means that the book must be turned in all directions--quite
Ju.Y/AUGUST 1994 
* 365
a challenge to coordinated reading/showing-which will make the book nigh-
impossible for story-hour use. Although the exuberant illustrations overwhelm
rather than enhance the little morality tale, the designers' playful spirit is nonethe-
less infectious. EB
LESTER, ALISON 
My Farm; written and illus. by Alison Lester. 
Houghton,
1994 
[33p]
ISBN 0-395-68193-6 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
5-8 yrs
"When I was little I lived on a farm overlooking the sea." Thus begins a lively
Australian recollection that manages to steer clear of nostalgia-the yearning of
older folks for times past-in favor of remembered mini-stories that will set newer
folks yearning for some agricultural action of their own. "Something spooked the
cattle and in a flash they were racing down the road. I chased them on Tricky,
riding bareback in my pajamas, and finally brought them home. I felt like a hero."
The accompanying full-page illustration shows a moonlit landscape with the young
narrator galloping full tilt to head off the herd while a wombat watches. Other
intriguing memories include training a family pet "for the dog high jump" by
fastening a bone (or stick) high on a eucalyptus tree as the local koala peeks out;
finding and fostering an abandoned calf; and hypnotizing chickens, feet up. The
format is vigorously varied with miniature scenes that manage to include funny
details without appearing crowded. Mom is not just milking a cow, for instance;
she's squirting its teat at the nearest cat. Each picture tells a story of its own,
which-along with a vivid palette-keeps the toy-like figures from becoming static.
With picture-book memoirs a growing genre, it pays to consider distinguishing
features: here, it's the lively narrative action and rampant visual humor that ener-
gize everyday events for current listeners. BH
LEVITIN, SONIA 
Escape from Egypt. 
Little, 1994 
26 7p
ISBN 0-316-52273-2 
$15.95 
R Gr. 7 up
Jesse, a Hebrew teenager, has had the good fortune to be apprenticed to an Egyp-
tian goldsmith, a position that assures him security, status, and escape from the
near-certain early death of Pharaoh's quarry laborers. But Jesse's ill-concealed
attraction to Jennat, a half-Egyptian servant who has been given to her master as
concubine, has prompted his parents to arrange an unwelcome engagement with
his beautiful and devout cousin Talia. Self-absorbed, Jesse pays little attention as
his elders discuss the rise of an upstart leader named Moses. But when the destruc-
tion of the Egyptian first-born sons impels Pharaoh to grant the Hebrews' release,
they must decide whether to abandon the stability of life in Egypt to follow zealot
Moses and his harsh god Adonai into the desert. Jesse and his extended family
leave their homes for compelling reasons-faith, family duty, lure of better land,
fear of Egyptian retaliation. Wandering in his own psychic wilderness, Jesse now
plans his future in light of the miracles, carnage, idolatry, religious frenzy, and
xenophobia that whirl around him. While reducing mythic events to human-
scaled drama, Levitin illuminates those enduring themes that drive the Pentateuch
epic-theodicy, faith versus reason, power politics, nation-building. The death of
Jesse's baby sister breaks his mother's faith; Moses' miracles are always subject to
doubt; long-standing clan leader Uncle Rimon questions Moses' leadership; loose
tribal organization must yield to the centralized authority ofAdonai's demanding
law. Jesse's marriage choice (which Levitin skillfully leaves in doubt until the final
366 
* 
THE BULLETIN
pages) effectively synthesizes themes of personal desire and commitment to Adonai
and the Hebrew nation, as he claims Jennat with the quote, "Justice and compas-
sion you shall show to the stranger, for ye were strangers in Egypt." Although
some basic knowledge of the Exodus story may enhance a reader's enjoyment of
the novel, well-chosen (but uncited) passages which introduce most chapters pro-
vide adequate Scriptural background. EB
LISLE, 
JANET 
TAYLOR 
The Gold Dust Letters. Jackson/Orchard,
1994 
116p 
(Investigators of the Unknown, Book One)
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08680-1 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-06830-7 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Pilaria of the Kingdom of the Faeries, Eighth Tribe, Fourth Earth is not the kind
of fairy who coyly hides from mortals. She has been leaving quite substantial
letters, sprinkled with gold dust, on Angela Harrall's mantlepiece. So convincing
are these proofs of her reality that Angela and her friends Georgina and Poco feel it
likely that, with cunning and effort, they will catch sight of her making a midnight
delivery. Their fairy-sighting plans make a pleasant diversion for Angela, who feels
neglected by her father and is increasingly aware of the tensions between her par-
ents. Pilaria is sensitive to Angela's home problems and commiserates that fairies,
too, have their troubles. "Though we do not speak of it to one another, we often
long for the bright, merry days of our past in the First and Second Earths." Dur-
ing an overnight at Angela's house, the trio finds an invitation to a fairy feast in the
kitchen. And, as most readers will have deduced well before this, their host is none
other than the taciturn Mr. Harrall, who is trying to make amends to Angela for
his chilly behavior. During the meal he explains all the tricks and ruses he em-
ployed as Pilaria. The girls are delighted, and when the Harralls' inevitable separa-
tion occurs, Angela is on good terms with her father. Mr. Harrall's painstaking
deconstruction of all the novel's "magic" is a little long-winded, but one tantaliz-
ing bit remains unexplained-the gold dust that "never runs out." This inspires
the friends to band together for more adventures (three more, according to the
jacket copy) as "investigators of the unknown." May their forthcoming investiga-
tions uncover a little more of the magical and a little less of the prosaic. EB
LITTERAL, LINDA LAMBERT 
Boobies, Iguanas, & Other Critters: Nature's Story in
the Galdpagos; written and illus. with photographs by Linda Lambert
Litteral. 
American Kestrel, 1994 
71p 
(Biosphere Reserve Books)
ISBN 1-883966-01-9 
$23.00
Spanish ed. ISBN 1-883966-02-7 
$23.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
First in a new series on the planet's designated biosphere reserves, this spaciously-
if sometimes distractingly-designed book covers the flora, fauna, and geology of
the Galipagos Islands, with special attention to those features that Charles Darwin
found so intriguing. What's best about the book is the synthesis of scientific method
with natural history; Litteral explains not only Darwin's early research but also
later work, such as Fritz and Krisztina Trillmich's investigation of convergent evo-
lution, that grows from basic evolutionary theory. While the science is clearly and
carefully described, the writing is plodding and repetitive, with information re-
peated within a paragraph or laboriously summed up at the end of a section. The
chapter covering volcanoes and other geological features is not as focused as the
rest, but the chapters on animal evolution and behavior go beyond the usual look-
and-see nature study book, and accompanying color photos, while sometimes too
JULY/AUGUST 1994 
* 367
small, are well-placed within the pages. Instructions on how to write a term paper
are somewhat irrelevantly appended to the main text, and an index and extensive
reading list are included. RS
LOWERY, LINDA 
Laurie Tells; illus. by John Eric Karpinski. 
Carolrhoda,
1994 
4 0p
ISBN 0-87614-790-2 
$14.21 
R 
Gr. 4-6
In a present-tense soliloquy arranged in free verse style a la Virginia Euwer Wolffs
Make Lemonade (BCCB 7/93), Laurie remembers good times with her dad: mak-
ing bonfires, or the time he found her when she got lost coming home from kin-
dergarten. "But now things are different"-Laurie's father has been molesting her
for the past two years, and when her mother refuses to believe her ("'Of course he
touches you,' she said. 'He gives you backrubs'") she decides to tell her beloved
Aunt Jan, who promises it will never happen again: "She looks straight at me, and
I know she means it." The story ends with the comfort of Aunt Jan's promise,
wisely leaving Laurie and readers in a safe place, and effectively delivering the
message that the most important step in stopping abuse is to talk about it with
someone you trust. While the colored-pencil illustrations are well-composed,
employing some nice collage effects, they make the book look a little young, as
does the slender, square-ish size of the book. The reading is easy, though, and the
natural line breaks ("Last night when he came into my room,/ I wanted to shout it
again:/ 'STOP, DADDY!'") and generous white space will make the book acces-
sible to poor or reluctant readers. RS
MACLACHLAN, PATRICIA 
All the Places to Love; illus. by Mike Wimmer. 
Zolotow/
HarperCollins, 1994 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021099-0 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 00-06-021098-2 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-7 yrs
Like Nikki Giovanni's Knoxville, Tennessee, reviewed above, and many other nos-
talgic picture books of childhood past, this is lyrically written and glamorously
illustrated to emphasize all that was golden in a time and place that pain never
invaded. "On the day I was born/ My grandmother wrapped me in a blanket/
made from the wool of her sheep./ She held me up in the open window/ So that
what I heard first was the wind./ What I saw first were all the places to love:/ The
valley,/ The river falling down over rocks,/ The hilltop where the blueberries grew."
It's an enticing description, and Wimmer's beatific paintings of farm life seem to
come straight from the world of Norman Rockwell; neither the verbal nor the
visual images offer anything beyond quaint perfection. Stories generate suspense
through conflict, and poems catch our thoughts by surprise. What's here is an
idyll that will comfort adults and perhaps, through their warm response, lull chil-
dren into sweet dreams. BH
MANUSHKIN, FRAN 
Peeping and Sleeping; illus. by Jennifer Plecas. 
Clarion,
1994 
32p
ISBN 0-395-64339-2 
$14.95 
R 
3-6 yrs
In a bedtime book reminiscent of Charlotte Zolotow's classic The Summer Night
(BCCB 2/75), little Barry and his father go outside to investigate the source of the
Peep-PEEP! Peep-PEEP! Peep-PEEP! that's filling the night. Aided by the stars
368 
* THE BULLETIN
and a trusty flashlight, they find the spring peeper frogs popping out of the pond,
and then the guys hop home, only to discover later that one of the little frogs has
hitched a ride in Barry's slipper. Gently effervescent sound effects of the peepers
peeping and plopping and hopping punctuate the mild story, and the pastel and
colored-pencil illustrations have lots of nighttime mystery made safe by Daddy's
comfortable presence and the lemony glow of the flashlight's beam. RS
MERRIAM, EVE 
Higgle Wiggle: Happy Rhymes; illus. by Hans Wilhelm. 
Morrow,
1994 
32p
ISBN 0-688-11948-4 
$15.00 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
These twenty-five posthumously published poems are cheery in content and neat
in rhyme, with physical movement suggested by frequent repetition: "Dance out
of bed,/ dance on the floor,/ dance down the hallway,/ dance out the door." Adults
can use many of the verses to set kids into motion, but the collection doesn't really
sparkle with the verbal surprise for which Merriam is famous. "How to Be An-
gry," for instance, is fun to do ("Puff out your cheeks,/ puff puff puff,/ then take a
deep breath/ and huff huff huff') but too mild to exert any real tonal force or
contrast. Wilhelm's illustrations emphasize pastel colors and merry expressions,
adding to the toddler-time gaiety without much variation so that a certain mo-
notony sets in despite the sprightly pace. Overall, it's a book that will please those
with a poetic sweet tooth and will provide plenty of potential for action with tod-
dler groups. BH
MYERS, CHRISTOPHER A. 
Forest of the Clouded Leopard; written by Christopher
A. and Lynn Born Myers. 
Houghton, 1994 
112p
ISBN 0-395-67408-5 
$13.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
In this contemporary novel set on the island of Borneo, Kenchendai has been
fetched home by his grandfather from his westernized boarding school to partici-
pate in the traditional pig hunt that will mark his transition from boy to man. His
head filled with dreams of foreign lands, Kenchendai has become doubtful, even
scornful, of traditional Iban ways, but he finds his skepticism falling away when
his grandfather is killed in the hunt, and his father follows a dream into the rain
forest and the land of the dead, where Kenchendai must go to bring him back.
The magical-realism picture of the rain forest grows steadily more surreal, recalling
some of Carlos Castafieda's journeys into the desert, but while the survival details
are thoroughly rendered, the story occasionally founders under the weight of dreams,
rituals, and encounters with omen-birds and spirits. Although these elements of
Iban tradition are interesting, they sometimes disperse the narrative rather than
propelling it forward. Still, readers who want to combine a taste for Gary Paulsen
with something more mystical would do well to wander into these woods, which
Malcolm Bosse recently visited in his Deep Dream ofthe Rain Forest (BCCB 6/94).
RS
NICHOLSON, DORINDA MAKANAONALANI STAGNER 
Pearl Harbor Child: A Child's
View of Pearl Harbor-from Attack to Peace. Woodson House/Arizona Memo-
rial Museum Association, 1993 
64 p 
illus. with photographs
Paper ed. ISBN 0-9631388-6-3 
$9.00 
R Gr. 4-8
The author was in first grade when Pearl Harbor was bombarded by Japanese
planes in 1941, and as a resident of Pearl Harbor City, adjacent to the harbor, she
JULY/AUGUST 1994 
* 369
had a close view of the attack: "When those Japanese planes flew directly over us,
the sound of the bullets was muffled by the roar of the engines. Even though we
couldn't hear them, the incendiary bullets found their targets. Our kitchen was
now on fire and parts of the roof were gone." This account of the events of De-
cember 7 and the aftermath-evacuation, increased U. S. military presence, black-
outs, and rationing-is told with directness and simplicity, and has a child-engaging
attention to detail ("Mom would save paper, usually newspaper, and rub it back
and forth against itself to soften it, and that became our toilet paper") that will
draw kids into the experience of wartime life. Family and news photographs add
to the evidence and throughout, Nicholson keeps to specifics and resists nostalgia,
always sticking to the story as it happened then. RS
NUWER, HANK 
Sports Scandals. Watts, 1994 
192p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-531-11183-0 
$13.00 
Ad Gr. 6-12
With chapters on gambling, recruiting, drug use, racism, sex scandals, cheating,
and "out-of-control" fans, this book is bound to find readers who come for the
gossip and who, maybe, stick around for the moral. Recounting such scandals as
the "Black Sox" of 1919, Rosie Ruiz' Boston Marathon win, and Mike Tyson's
rape conviction, Nuwer also covers more systematic problems of recruitment vio-
lations, hockey violence, and hidden as well as overt racial prejudice. While Nathan
Aaseng in The Locker Room Mirror and Ann Weiss in Money Games (both BCCB
6/93) do a better job of synthesizing much of the same material in order to draw
larger conclusions about the meaning of sports in American culture (Nuwer's book
ends somewhat abruptly with Tonya Harding's nomination to the 1994 U.S. Olym-
pics team), Nuwer packs in more stories, which are never sensationalized and pro-
vide plenty of stimulus for discussion of ethics both in- and outside of sports.
Thorough notes, a bibliography, and an index are appended. RS
PENNYPACKER, SARA 
Dumbstruck; illus. by Mary Jane Auch. 
Holiday House,
1994 
14 9p
ISBN 0-8234-1123-0 
$14.95 
M 
Gr. 4-7
After an archly goofy prologue about the time a scientist on Mt. Everest discovered
the Know Zone, only to have "this vital and stunning information" garbled into
ozone in its transmission to "the International Bureau of Scientific Things," we
come to an equally wacky story about Ivy Greene, an intrepid young girl who
wakes up to discover that her parents have disappeared. The Know Zone and the
missing parents converge later on, but in between come many wild and crazy do-
ings, as Ivy escapes the clutches of her older sister Myrtle ("Her legs were smeared
with a layer of hair remover thick enough to attract skiers") only to be tossed into
the Wretched Dear Darlings' Blessed Haven Orphanage, run by Armilda Clott
and her husband, Borage, who sports nose hairs: "They rustled about in the breeze
of his breath, so that when you first looked at his head you might easily confuse it
with a clump of old oatmeal in which a large tarantula was struggling. A curious
odor of ripe cheese and toads hung about Borage Clott." While this first novel
certainly does not suffer from a paucity of colorful imagery, with all the grossness
that kids will love, it's silly rather than witty, relentless rather than compelling. By
the time Ivy escapes from the orphanage and finds her way to her beloved Aunt
Zilpa who lives in Cheese Bend with her pet ostrich Pierre, who specializes in
fitting round objects into round holes, we've forgotten all about her missing par-
370 
* 
THE BULLETIN
ents, the Know Zone, and the bicycle-decorating contest Ivy was planning to enter
with her surefire design of red, white, and blue ribbons tied to empty pint bottles
of Old Busthead Rye, the libation of choice of Commander Bimwhistle, judge of
the contest. Zaniness needs relief in order to be effective, and this book needs
desperately to relax. RS
PINKNEY, GLORIA JEAN 
The Sunday Outing; illus. by Jerry Pinkney. 
Dial,
1994 
[3 2p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1199-9 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1198-0 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
In this prequel to the Pinkneys' picture book Back Home (BCCB 9/92), young
Ernestine yearns to take the train down south for a visit with her relatives. At last
her aunt, with whom she makes Sunday picnic expeditions to the Philadelphia
train station, suggests that she think of some way to save her folks money, "so
they'll be able to buy that ticket." Ernestine gives up her new school clothes,
Mama volunteers the money she's saved toward an electric sewing machine, Daddy
postpones getting a new tool set at work, and Ernestine is on her way, slightly
scared and wildly excited. We know from the previous book that she has an unfor-
gettable time, but you'd better have it on hand for young listeners who want to
find out what happens after Ernestine boards the Silver Star. Gloria Pinkney knows
how to play out a scenario, and Jerry Pinkney's art is as lyrically decorative in an
urban setting as it was in the rural outdoors. With subtle color blends, he empha-
sizes contrasting patterns in wallpaper backgrounds, mottled textures, and playful
chiaroscuro. Fabrics are showcased in almost every illustration. In fact, Ernestine's
sacrifice seems slightly diminished by her eyecatching wardrobe, but the real cen-
terpiece of the action is a warmly supportive African-American family, and any
young listener who's longed for an excursion will identify with Ernestine's antici-
pation. BH
PIUMINI, ROBERTO 
The Knot in the Tracks; tr. from the Italian by Olivia Holmes;
illus. by Mikhail Fedorov. 
Tambourine, 1994 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-11167-X 
$13.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-11166-1 
$14.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Petrushka has what is, arguably, the world's dullest job-track inspector along a
desolate stretch of the Trans-Siberian Railroad-until the ugly, furry-eared de-
mon Rashka knots the rails "like big steel strings." Petrushka must make an ardu-
ous journey to gather mint leaves for the demon's tea before the train makes its
weekly pass. Rashka is appeased, the train is saved, but the demon reprises his
demands the following month. Again Petrushka gets the goods, this time red
pebbles for a necklace. But when some pebbles slip through a hole in the bag,
Petrushka calls on St. Nikolai for help, and Rashka agrees to unknot the tracks and
search for the lost pebbles himself. He is promptly "run over from behind by the
eastbound train and smashed into a thousand pieces." Piumini chummily quips,
"Demons that drink tea and wear necklaces are mortal, you know," but this tonal
break is awkward and fails to soften the harsh and abrupt ending. Fedorov's soft,
earthy watercolors nicely convey both the beauty of the vast steppe and the homey
warmth of Petrushka's cottage; they seem to promise a gentler and more light-
hearted tale than Piumini delivers. EB
Ju.Y/AG;UST 1994 
* 371
QUINLAN, PATRICIA 
Tiger Flowers; illus. by Janet Wilson. 
Dial, 1994 
[3 2p]
Library ed. ISBN -8037-1408-4 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1407-6 
$13.99
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
6-9 yrs
The golden sunset backlighting the pensive boy on the cover of this picture book
sets the tone for a sentimental story about Joel and his uncle Michael, who dies of
AIDS. When Joel's little sister wakes him up asking when Michael is coming
home and Joel has to explain once again that Michael is dead, he recalls all the
good times he shared with Michael and Michael's "best friend" Peter, and how
Peter died, and then how Michael moved in with Joel's family after he got sick
himself. This is a well-intentioned, if formulaic and somewhat saccharine, prob-
lem-picture book that seems meant to reassure children confronted with a friend
or relative with AIDS; it also offers comfort, as when the dead Michael appears to
Joel in a dream and tells him that he's "free now," which unfortunately would only
mean something in terms of an adult understanding of pain that's not shown here.
That made-to-order dream therapy, as well as the governing metaphor of the tiger
lilies that Joel and Michael love, seems more like adult neatening than childhood
experience, but young children faced with someone's death or impending death
may feel cheered up or at least cozied by the warm story. The conscientiously if
stiffly composed pictures amply reflect the tenor of the story, but they have a corny
aura (lots of Dentyne smiles) reminiscent of early '60s textbook illustration. RS
RAY, MARY LYN 
Pianna; illus. by Bobbie Henba. 
Harcourt, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-15-261357-9 
$14.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
In both verbal and visual tone, this is reminiscent of Barbara Cooney's personal-
history picture books Miss Rumphius (BCCB 1/83) and IslandBoy (BCCB 10/88).
Introduced to an elderly Anna rocking with her memories beside the house where
she was born, we next see her as a toddler and later as a young girl getting her first
piano, whereupon she takes a weekly train trip from Danbury to Boston for les-
sons. The piano centers her life as she grows up playing in church, recitals, and
social functions. After her marriage, she plays between chores, with babies on her
lap, and finally-as a widow whose children have left home-she plays on alone.
The narrative hovers along a fine line between description and storytelling, with
the musical theme and cozy paintings adding interest to a text that might not
otherwise hold children's attention as the measured pace of a traditional life cycle
excludes elements of suspense or conflict. The art celebrates an idealized rural
setting, with green mountains and valleys serving as a rich backdrop for ruddy
close-up scenes and many-windowed interiors reflecting seasonal change. A spring-
board for discussion of family and regional roots. BH
ROSENBERG, MAXINE B. 
Hiding to Survive: Stories of Jewish Children Rescued
from the Holocaust. Clarion, 1994 
166p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-395-65014-3 
$15.95 
R* Gr. 6-12
Fourteen survivors of the Holocaust describe hiding as children from Nazi perse-
cution in Greece, Belgium, Poland, Holland, Hungary, Lithuania, and France.
The variety of experience and setting alone serves to show the scope of the cata-
clysm. Beyond a brief introduction, Rosenberg has let the interviews speak for
themselves, and they speak plainly and poignantly. Each story is harrowing in its
bare facts: one woman remembers a farm dog protecting her family from a Ger-
372 
* THE BULLETIN
man shepherd unleashed to search the hay loft where they're hiding; another re-
calls lying for hours in a tiny, airless bunker in hopes that her uncle, who escaped
from the chicken coop where they're hiding, will return to lift the trap door. The
physical suffering and emotional pain of separation are invariably complicated by
new relationships with rescuers, some of whom are as loving as the victims' origi-
nal families, others of whom seem to view helping more as an act of political
defiance than personal involvement. Black-and-white photographs show every
subject as a child and adult, while a postscript summarizes the current situation of
each, emphasizing whatever connection continued with those who acted as pro-
tectors: some children never again saw those who saved them; some made a life-
time commitment to regular visits. From beginning to end, this is a starkly clean
piece of bookmaking, with a more individualized focus than Greenfeld's The Hid-
den Children (BCCB 1/94) because the stories are not fragmented by narrative but
allowed to unfold singly, each to its own depth. A glossary and up-to-date list of
young adult titles for further reading are appended. BH
RYDEN, HOPE 
Joey: The Story ofa Baby Kangaroo; written and illus. with photo-
graphs by Hope Ryden. 
Tambourine, 1994 
40p
ISBN 0-688-12744-4 
$15.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
This photoessay follows the physical and social development of a baby kangaroo-
a joey-from the time he emerges from his mother's pouch until he is indepen-
dent of his mother's care. The narration touches on habitat, feeding, predators,
play and socialization, and mother and joey's growing need for independence.
Each page features a single large color photo, uncaptioned but carefully coordi-
nated with the text. Browsers should be delighted by such scenes as the joey's
headlong dive into mother's pouch as he flees from a harmless but intimidating
emu. After piquing the reader's interest, Ryden leaves many questions left unan-
swered. Why will the joey need to "box in earnest with other adult males"? How
does mother kangaroo close up her pouch "as easily as if it were a drawstring purse"?
How could the joey fail to notice that a "newborn baby has taken over his mother's
pouch"? (And where did she get it?) Further details are offered in the concluding
two-page essay, "More about Kangaroos." But since this essay's prose is more
challenging than that of the text, independent readers may need assistance to inte-
grate this information into the joey's story. A pronunciation guide to the names of
Australian animals is included. Readers who want more information in an acces-
sible format might consider Darling's Kangaroos on Location. EB
SAN SoucI, ROBERT D., ad. 
The Hobyahs; illus. by Alexi Natchev. 
Doubleday,
1994 
32p
ISBN 0-385-30934-1 
$14.95 
R 
4-7yrs
While San Souci doesn't exactly say in his otherwise exemplary source note why he
substituted five dogs for the one in Joseph Jacobs' "The Hobyahs," a reading of
that earlier variant makes clear that Jacobs' is a tale not quite suited to contempo-
rary sensibilities: Turpie the dog barks to keep the fearsome Hobyahs away from
his master's family, but the man gets annoyed with the barking and on successive
nights cuts off each of Turpie's legs and finally his head, enabling the Hobyahs to
invade, eat the master and his wife, and kidnap their little girl. In San Souci, the
master whips and "chases off" each of five dogs on successive nights; they later
reappear to rescue the captured girl by nibbling through the sack that holds her.
JULY/AUGUST 1994 
* 
373
It's not as grisly, but it's almost as scary, retaining the Hobyahs' eerie chant
("Hobyah! Hobyah! Hobyah! Tear down the hemp stalks, eat up the old man
and woman, and carry off the little girl!") and introducing some brief mood-set-
ting verses of San Souci's own ("Hushed as autumn raindrops patting fallen leaves,/
Hushed as fluttered bat wings underneath the eaves,/ The Hobyahs came
again... "). The menace is further mediated by Natchev's pictures, which por-
tray the Hobyahs as not-too-scary cats (in nightshirts), appropriate nemeses for
the amiable dogs, while the cruel old man and woman look like they deserve to be
eaten. The most compelling spread is probably the one of little Topie being chased
into the woods, sadly looking back at the little girl crying as the old man pulls her
away, but the cozy interiors and dark outside scenes are rendered with a comfort-
ing folkloric distance. Kids will find the Hobyahs funny and the dogs friendly. RS
SKURZYNSKI, GLORIA 
Know the Score: 
Video Games in Your High-Tech
World. Bradbury, 1994 
6 4p 
illus. with photographs 
(Your High-Tech
World)
ISBN 0-02-782922-7 
$16.95 
R Gr. 4-7
Skurzynski returns with a new entry in her High-Tech World series, this one delv-
ing into both the human side and technology of video games, computer games,
arcade games, and hand-held games. The book describes the history of the indus-
try, the stages of creating an individual game, the different kinds of games, from
CD-ROM glories to arcade flight simulators to the up-and-coming virtual reality
games. Many authors of computer games (a hefty proportion of them female,
nicely challenging opinions about the exclusion of females at all level of games-
manship) lend their voices to the book, and their explanations, as well as the text's,
are clear, understandable, and enthusiastic about high-tech play. A lavish helping
of color photos keeps the book lively and accessible. Kids will enjoy learning more
about a favorite pastime and may be galvanized into doing their own computer
thing; bewildered adults might profit by taking a look and getting acquainted with
the phenomenon as well. A glossary and index are included. DS
SNEVE, VIRGINIA DRIVING HAWK 
The Seminoles: A FirstAmericans Book; illus. by
Ronald Himler. 
Holiday House, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1112-5 
$15.95 
R Gr. 2-6
Like The Sioux and The Navajos (BCCB 10/93) by the same author, this profiles
a Native American group, beginning with a summarized creation myth and con-
tinuing with tribal history and traditions. The Seminoles' sturdy resistance to
white encroachment on their Everglades home dominates the account, which in-
cludes portrayals of leaders such as Osceola and descriptions of the Indians' alli-
ance with escaped African-American slaves. Quotes underscore the bitter paradox
faced by those forced to abandon their way of life by either leaving as the white
settlers wished or staying to become guerilla soldiers. Coacoochee's words open
the book ("Why cannot we live in peace?") and then close it ("I never wish to tread
upon my land unless I am free") with a poignant reminder of how much multicul-
tural diversity was eradicated in the name of founding the U.S. The writing is
smooth, if necessarily generalized, and Himler's watercolors are especially suited to
the swampy backdrops and dramatic action that characterized the Seminoles'
struggle to survive. Well organized for reports or browsing by students interested
in Native American lifeways. BH
374 
* THE BULLETIN
SOTO, GARY 
Crazy Weekend. 
Scholastic, 1994 
[144p]
ISBN 0-590-47814-1 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Hector and Mando escape the boredom of an East L.A. February by spending a
few days in Fresno with Hector's hospitable young uncle. Tio Julio, a freelance
photographer who ekes a living from aerial vanity shots of prosperous farm spreads,
takes the boys along on a shoot. Accidentally capturing frames of an armored car
robbery, Julio scents the possibility of earning extra cash by selling the story to the
press. Our junior high heroes are carried away by their sudden chance at fame and
blurt out too much information to their charming newspaper interviewer. When
thugs Freddie Bork and Huey "Crybaby" Walker identify the witnesses, the comic
chase is on. The boys ultimately foil their foes in a scene abounding with boobytraps
and pratfalls, sure to appeal to Home Alone fans. The contrast between the boys'
warmly realistic relationship with Uncle Julio and the slapstick portrayal of the
bumbling criminals makes the tone somewhat uneven. Dialogue is peppered with
Spanish phrases, and although a comprehensive glossary is appended, some read-
ers may become impatient with frequent flipping to the back pages. Still, this
should satisfy the young adolescent who wants something kind of funny, pretty
exciting, and not too long. EB
STAFFORD, KIM R. 
We Got Here Together; illus. by Debra Frasier. 
Harcourt,
1994 
33p
ISBN 0-15-294891-0 
$13.95 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
Frasier's vibrant paper collage ofJapanese resist-dyed papers, fibrous matte papers,
and silver metallics dominates Stafford's comforting but slight text. A father tucks
his daughter into bed and begins a story about a bubble that floats slowly toward
the ocean's surface, and a raindrop that falls to meet it. The bold patches of the
child's quilt, which incorporate most of Frasier's papers, begin to dip and swirl
into ocean waves and stormy sky while the father's story progresses. As the silvery
bubble and droplet journey inexorably through their environments, the adult reader
might predict the tale will turn into an elementary lesson on reproduction. ("The
bubble swelled and filled with light. The raindrop gathered, ready and round.")
Instead, bubble finally becomes sky and raindrop becomes ocean, just as they were
destined to be. And father ends his gentle fable with, "We got here together, too,
didn't we? We got here safe... where we belong"-a statement that doesn't seem
to have all that much to do with what's come before. The intense energy of the
swirling forms, trapped in each double-page spread by blood-red vertical borders,
is more invigorating than soothing as bedtime fare, but the simple story and undu-
lating shapes will attract youngsters, and Frasier's appended explanation of the
shibori-style dyeing process is fascinating in itself. EB
STEVENSON, JAMES 
Worse Than the Worst?; written and illus. by James
Stevenson. 
Greenwillow, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-688-12249-3 
$14.00 
R* 
5-8 yrs
Has the worst met his match? His great-nephew Warren arrives for a visit, and
immediately rancid oil has met foul water: "Small, aren't you?" says the worst.
"At least I don't look like an old mummy," says Warren. Warren and his huge
dog, Arnold, blast through the worst's house, commandeering his bedroom, or-
dering in pizza, and frolicking messily with the local kids. Finally Warren, under
JULY/AUGUST 1994 
* 
375
duress, cleans up, sends Arnold to find the worst's missing dog, and comes to a
meeting of minds with his fellow curmudgeon. Stevenson books like this one help
fill the void left by James Marshall; the snappy patter, outrageous sass, and loony
high-action art will appease mourning Cut-Ups fans, among others. Routines
such as the worst's collect call to Warren's father ("They won't accept the call,"
says the operator. "Tell them it's their uncle," says the worst. "They know that,"
says the operator) will convulse kids-and readers-aloud-even on repeat read-
ings. What's nice, too, is that Stevenson doesn't overdo the worst's niceness-
there are only actions to judge by, as when the worst hunts through the snow for
his dog or creates snow-sculpture with Warren. May the worst continue to plum-
met to ever deeper depths. DS
STOLZ, MARY 
Coco Grimes. HarperCollins, 1994 
90p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024233-7 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024232-9 
$14.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Featuring the same characters who appeared in Stolz's novel Stealing Home (BCCB
1/93) and two earlier picture books, all set on Florida's west coast, this begins with
Thomas' tenth birthday, for which Grandfather takes him to a baseball game and
throws a dinner party. One of the guests invites Thomas to Miami, where he
meets an old player from the Negro Leagues and starts to think about becoming a
writer. Characterization is more continued than developed here, since there's no
real conflict. The scene of Thomas' interviewing Coco Grimes toward the end of
the book does contain some bittersweet moments, as Thomas watches the nearly
hundred-year-old ball player he had longed to meet vacillate between being chatty,
grouchy, nostalgic, and confused. Fans of the first books will be glad to see Tho-
mas and his grandfather again, but newcomers may feel like they've walked into
the middle of a movie. BH
UNICEF 
I Dream of Peace: Images of War by Children of Former
Yugoslavia. 
UNICEF/HarperCollins, 1994 
80p 
illus. and with photographs
ISBN 0-06-251128-9 
$12.95 
R 
Gr. 4 up
"There are so many people who did not ask for this war, or for the black earth that
is now over them. Among them are my friends." This UNICEF anthology of
writing and art by children caught in the Serb-Croat-Muslim conflict will serve as
a springboard to classroom discussion and creative expression, especially among
youngsters who've been affected by television news. "In former Yugoslavia, harm-
ing children has become a strategy of war," says the UNICEF executive director's
introduction. The poems and pictures make clear, in simple straightforward terms
and telling graphics, how deep is their suffering-and how senseless: "My father is
a Croat, my mother is a Serb, but I don't know who I am." These are words to
which any child from a mixed family can relate, but the intensity is fatally height-
ened here. "Suddenly, it's so important, everybody asking who you are, what you
do, where you come from. So many people have been killed fighting for justice.
But what justice?" Prefaced by Maurice Sendak and illustrated by naively vivid
drawings and paintings, these voices tell a story that will strike different levels of
response across a broad age range of reader/listeners. The children's expressions of
suffering are less sustained but more varied than Zlata Filipovic's in Zlata's Diary
(BCCB 5/94), excerpts from which would complement the UNICEF collection.
BH
376 
* THE BULLETIN
THE VISUAL DICTIONARY OF THE HORSE. 
Dorling Kindersley, 1994 
6 4 p 
illus.
with photographs 
(Eyewitness Visual Dictionaries)
ISBN 1-56458-504-2 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 4 up
This dictionary offers a guide to equine anatomy (both outside and in), breeds,
equestrian sports, tack, and equipment. Most subjects occupy a double-page spread
that has an informative paragraph and an array of photographs demonstrating,
say, points of the horse, or draft breeds, or the progression of the gaits. The pic-
tures and diagrams (some of which have appeared in previous Dorling Kindersley
books) show horses and accoutrements of various shapes and sizes (although it's
difficult to tell size due to the absence of scale), with captions and pointers noting
important details and providing terminology. Although the emphasis is British,
both Western and English riding are depicted. The breadth of information here
makes up for weaknesses, such as the breed section, which uses three or four brief,
vague, and unhelpful pointers to convey breed characteristics ("powerful hind-
quarters," for instance, mentioned as a specific characteristic of several breeds ranging
from American Saddlebred to Welsh Pony to draft horses, probably seems to the
young reader to be characteristic of horses in general). There's plenty of helpful
information, however, and the world of barn and stable is well-evoked; an addi-
tional treat is the photo credits, which actually give the names of the horses pic-
tured. This festival of taxonomy and gadgetry will please many an eager young
equestrian. DS
WATKINS, YOKO KAWASHIMA 
My Brother, My Sister, and L 
Bradbury,
1994 
275p
ISBN 0-02-792526-9 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 6-9
This sequel to So Farfrom the Bamboo Grove (BCCB 6/86) picks up thirteen-year-
old Yoko's story of survival in post-World War II Japan after her mother's death at
the end of their flight from Communists in Korea. Yoko's older brother Hideyo
gets work as a laborer and her sister Ko as a seamstress until they are burned out of
the factory loft where they've found refuge, and Ko must be hospitalized. The real
suspense revolves around details of scraping together food and shelter, with noth-
ing to help but a spirit of togetherness and determination. The mystery of who set
fire to the factory and killed the owners seems almost tangential to the more cen-
tral mystery of how Yoko will find enough food to stay alive and enough fortitude
to fight the prejudice she suffers at school because of her poverty. There's no deus
ex machina here, except true grit. The appearance of Mr. Kawashima, an army
officer aged and broken by six years in a Siberian prison camp, makes it all too
clear at the end of the book that the three Kawashima children have no one else to
rely on but themselves. If the central characters are unremittingly heroic, any
survivor of traumatic childhood is a kind of hero, and Watkins' work attests to the
fact that vivid autobiography is one of the most forceful forms of history. BH
WHITE, CAROLYN 
The Tree House Children; illus. by Christiane Kr6mer. 
Simon,
1994 
34 p
ISBN 0-671-79818-9 
$15.00 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Two children live safe and sound in a tree-house with their father, who-before he
goes fishing each day-warns them never to let down their ladder to anyone ex-
cept him. But a witch disguises her voice, tricks the children into letting her climb
up, snatches them, and even fools their father (who does seem unaccountably gull-
Ju.Y/AucusT 1994 
* 377
ible) after he has rescued them from her cooking pot. It's the girl who recognizes
her and slips a fish hook into the soup she's greedily swallowing. The dying witch
then reveals how to cut a magical charm from her hair and revive all the children
she's eaten. With so many gripping elements and such a smooth telling, it's too
bad we don't have any idea where this "African tale" comes from or how it's been
adapted. Like Gleeson's Koi and the Kola Nuts (BCCB 3/93), The Tree House
Children raises questions about archetype and stereotype-especially in relation to
the witch-that can only be answered in terms of cultural traditions. Children
will recognize motifs in common with "The Wolf and the Seven Little Kids" as
well as "Rapunzel," so this would be a great story hour companion to those old
standbys if we had some source note or information about its cultural authenticity.
The illustrations are fluidly drafted, dramatically composed, and subtly colored,
with unobtrusive borders reflecting several traditional folk art patterns. And thank
goodness for baobab trees; that witch is seriously dangerous. BH
WILKES, ANGELA 
The Children's Step-by-Step Cookbook. 
Dorling Kindersley,
1994 
128p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 1-56458-474-7 
$18.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
The book starts with an explanation of its symbols and arrangement, a list of kitchen
rules (including the traditional warning to get adult help, here enforced in the
recipes by a symbol as well), and a picture of all the kitchen equipment needed for
the book's recipes. The recipes themselves are divided into sections: Snacks; Eggs
and Cheese; Pasta, Rice, and Pizza; Vegetables; Meat and Fish; Cookies, Breads,
and Cakes; and Desserts and Treats. Then at the end there are picnic and party
suggestions, menu suggestions, a "picture glossary" of cooking terms italicized in
the recipes, and an index. The dishes, which range from straightforward pleasures
(french toast, for instance) to more elaborate concoctions (such as meringue-based
fruit baskets), are good fun and within the conceptual scope of young cooks of
various levels of ability. Wilkes gives a lot of space to entertaining presentation,
such as icing gingerbread people or making faces on open-faced sandwiches. The
emphasis on the visual in both food and book layout sometimes makes things
confusing: ingredients for several variants of a recipe are placed right next to each
other, and caption placement makes it difficult to tell what belongs where. Nor is
relative perspective observed, so that size and amount of ingredients can be confus-
ing, especially since food is photographed directly from above, so a reader has no
idea how full a bowl is. The book's British origin allows some recipes to appear
exotic (cupcakes with raisins) to American readers but makes some ingredients
atypical-American bacon can't really be cubed as the recipe instructs, for ex-
ample, and self-rising flour is not an American staple. Young cooks, though, will
find the potential for artistry and gustatory satisfaction pleasing. A cheerful visual
adjunct to-not a replacement for-your basic Betty Crocker Junior. A "picture
glossary" and an index are included. DS
WOOD, AUDREY 
The Tickle Octopus; illus. by Don Wood. 
Harcourt, 1994 
40p
ISBN 0-15-287000-8 
$14.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Bup, a cave-boy, lives with his parents, Ughmaw and Ughpaw, and since his brothers
and sisters disappeared he's now an only child. Left alone in the cave while his
parents hunt for food, Bup encounters a strange "pinkish creature with wiggly
arms" emerging from the pond in the cave. The creature reaches out and tickles
378 
* THE BULLETIN
him, whereupon "for the first time in the history of people . .. someone smiled."
Thrilled with this discovery, Bup takes the creature to his angry father, who, after
being tickled, becomes the first recorded laugher; his mother, after being tickled in
turn, becomes the first person to play. The Tickleoctopus' merriment-provoking
skill subdues the fierce local tribe and helps the family find their other children,
who had merely been misplaced. The story isn't overburdened with logic, but the
silliness of the cave colony is a comic accent to a great giggly game; the final sugges-
tion of a modern-day tickleoctopus begs for a climactic frenzy of tickling. The
mixed-media illustrations use a wildly contrasting palette: Don Wood's recently
favored oranges, pinks, and yellows are counterpointed with slate-gray cave walls
and blue-dappled darkness. The fuzzily bristling features of the cave family are
riotously exaggerated, with the first picture ofUghpaw, gaping-mouthed in a jaw-
cracking, uvula-displaying yawn, setting the goofy tone. A jagged-edged (because
of cave rocks, see?) die-cut cover reveals Bup's poignant gaze and will frustrate
shelvers; fold-out die-cut pages throughout need to be read flap-side before inside,
so be careful. This will be fun when foul weather prevents outdoor action; shut
the door, use your tickling tentacles, and let your audience shriek. DS
WRIGHT, COURTNI C. Jumping the Broom; illus. by Gershom Griffith. 
Holiday
House, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1042-0 
$15.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
A young African American slave describes her sister's wedding, called "jumping
the broom" because that symbolic act is a significant part of the ceremony. "Mama
says that the broom is for sweeping away their past lives as they begin a new life
together. Grandma Sadie says it sweeps away evil spirits, too." The story includes
a lot of information about work, crafts, food, and communal values, but there's
almost no context for the slavery itself. Only one passage hints at emotional hard-
ship: "My oldest brother Sam won't be there. Master sold him away last year."
Yet this appears above a beatifically smiling protagonist being teased by her other
two brothers, and there's no textual development or resonance of sadness. Al-
though it's understandable that excitement should dominate a day of celebration,
some historical note might have counteracted the effect of contentment in the
plantation quarters. Even Frederick Douglass' own words-that slave holidays
"represent the most effective means in the hands of the slaveholder in keeping
down the spirit of insurrection"-would give considerable perspective. The wa-
tercolor paintings, which are somewhat stiffly composed, reinforce the general air
of well-being, with a happy, healthy, mostly well-dressed cast of characters. The
narrator does emphasize that such leisure and abundance are rare ("We usually
work from sunup to sundown everyday except Sunday.... We don't usually have
much free time for fun with all the long hours and hard work"), but the listener
doesn't see anything except the narrator's day off. Parents and teachers exploring
African-American history may very well find this useful as a starting point for
discussion, but they'll have to fill in the background themselves. BH
WYMAN, ANDREA 
Faith, Hope, and Chicken Feathers. Holiday House,
1994 
259p
ISBN 0-8234-1117-6 
$15.95 
R Gr. 5-7
Harper, YL, and Sophie are the three New Kids in Whispering Springs Elemen-
tary School's sixth grade, and fate-not to mention class queen Melody ("Call me
Melo") Briscoe-seems determined that they'll stick together. Harper's just come
JUI.Y/AUGUST 1994 
* 
379
to town (Morgantown, West Virginia) with her widowed mother; YL, one of two
African-American kids in the class, has just moved there with his divorced dad;
Sophie's parents just took over the local motel. They're all outsiders who to some
extent stay that way, and while each of the three gets time in this affable school-
and-family novel set a decade ago, it's Harper who most commands attention for
her Gilly Hopkins-like bravado and for her dramatic story: a class visit to Wash-
ington D. C., where Harper, Sophie, and YL sneak off for a visit to the Vietnam
memorial, puts the lie to Harper's mother's story that Harper's father was killed in
the war. Wyman nicely balances family drama and classroom comedy, although
the insertion, chapter-by-chapter, of the novel that teacher Mrs. TenBroeck is
reading aloud to the class is distracting and dispensable, and that novel itself-a
story about a brave Inuit girl-not terribly interesting. (Mrs. TenBroeck herself is
ever-picturesque.) An open ending-Harper has gone off with her father and we
still haven't learned what "YL" stands for (jazz fans will know)-leaves room for a
sequel. Why not feature Sophie, a low-key presence here, but one who (like Louise
Fitzhugh's Beth Ellen Hansen) could blossom outside of the benevolent but bossy
shadow of her best friend?. RS
YAGYU, GENICHIRO 
The Holes in Your Nose; written and illus by Genichiro
Yagyu. 
Kane/Miller, 1994 
28p
ISBN 0-916291-50-2 
$11.95 
M 
4 -7 yrs
Like Gomi's Everyone Poops (BCCB 4/93), also published in the U.S. by Kane/
Miller, this picture book takes on an orifice younger children find endlessly fasci-
nating, and Yagyu gives 'em exactly what they want: snot, nose hair, boogers.
There's even a flatulence joke-"Wed the holes in my dose are sdubbed ub, I
candt sbell id eved wed I fart"-that will speak pungently to the target audience
even if its relevance is less than immediate. While there's some real information
here ("If you pick your nose too roughly, you can get a nosebleed") the treatment
is shamelessly pandering ("Look! It's bleeding," captions the graphic yet simple
illustration of roughshod picking) and much of the book is just silly, as in a neat
grid of black dots captioned "Boogers are made of dirt, so they're dirty. Even if
you line them up neatly like this, they're still dirty." The pictures are broadly
drawn, childlike, and often disgusting. Yummy. RS
YOLEN,JANE 
Animal Fare; illus. by Janet Street. 
Harcourt, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-15-203550-8 
$14.95 
R* 
Gr. 1-4
With fresh wordplay that ranges from clever twists to wild wit, Yolen spoofs non-
sense itself in these sixteen poems about animals of unknown parts. On second
thought, the parts seem sort of familiar, but they're arranged in unusual combina-
tions: The Anteloop, Mustank, Rhinocerworse, Hippopotanoose, Mockit Bird,
Grizzly Bare, Blimpanzee, Giraft, etc., feature physical and behavioral characteris-
tics in keeping with their etymology. We are given, for instance, fair warning
about the Gazealous. "He's gamusing, gamazing, and full of gabeans/ And his
antics will simply gastound./ So get out of the way when Gazealous goes by/ Or
you'll surely be stamped to the ground." The rhythms are galloping and the im-
ages flying, so prepare for some fast movement with a favorite listener or group of
readers. This will appeal to the kids who are chewing on tongue twisters, who like
messing around irreverently with words, or who have lucked out with a little expo-
sure to the Learian tradition. Street's art at first seems slightly garish but soon
grows on you, because there's more subtlety in the compositions than initially
380 
* 
THE BULLE1IN
meets the eye. The illustration for "The Bumple Bee" hints of Alice's tea party,
with which it shares an air of absurdity, while the illustrative background for "The
Whysel" shows a questionmarked creature pouncing on the stomach of a child
with clearly intellectual interests (Albert Einstein dominates the posters on the
wall, a chess set crowds the bed, etc.). The bright pink Blimpanzee hits a thorn
and deflates ("In this condition, he is known technically as a limpanzee") to an
extreme flatness emphasized by the nearby bed of contrastingly curled ferns. The
Mustanks, for whose "smell there are not words," sport broad white skunk stripes
atop rolling brush strokes of odoriferous green. These are really goofy pictures and
really goofy poems and kids are going to love both. BH
ZELVER, 
PATRICIA 
The Wonderful Towers of Watts; illus. by FranC
Lessac. 
Tambourine, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-688-12649-9 
$15.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
Simon Rodia, known as Old Sam, "collected things that people thought were
better thrown away," such as "blue Milk of Magnesia bottles, broken bits of col-
ored pottery, even pieces of broken mirrors." But little does his Watts neighbor-
hood know that Old Sam is an artist, making "something strange and beautiful."
For thirty-three years the Italian immigrant labors on the eccentric and proudly
handmade towers, which still stand as a cherished part not only of Watts but of
America. Zelver tells the story in simple language, but the fascination of collecting
and creating, of turning garbage into something splendid, shines through the book.
Lessac's intensely colored gouaches are busy but measured, allowing the towers to
sparkle like Christmas lights as their lacy shapes pierce the sky. As well as being a
story of individual human achievement, this could serve as an inspiration for some
classroom art projects. DS
4"WEb
JULY/AUGUST 1994 
* 381
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
ADVENTURE STORIES:
Christopher
Adoption: Fry
Africa-fiction: Rupert
Africa-stories: White
African Americans-fiction: Stolz
African Americans-stories:
Giovanni; Johnson, D.;
Pinkney; Wright
AIDS-stories: Quinlan
Alcoholism: Harris
ALPHABET BOOKS: Hopkins
Animals-poetry: Florian
Arctic region: Jacobs
Art and artists: Zelver
Asian-Americans-fiction: Lee, L.;
Lee, M.
Aunts-fiction: Lowery
Australia-fiction: Crew
Australia-stories: Lester
Baseball-fiction: Stolz
BEDTIME STORIES:
Manushkin; Stafford
Beekeeping: Johnson, S.
BIOGRAPHIES: Brighton; Jacobs
Books and reading-stories:
Johnson, D.
Borneo-fiction: Myers
Burma-stories: Baillie
Chicago-fiction: Collier
Child abuse-fiction: Lowery
Computer: Skurzynski
Contests-stories: Heide
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Goldman; Soto
Cuba-folklore: Gonzalez
Current events: Aaseng; Cozic;
Nuwer; UNICEF
Death-stories: Quinlan
Depression, the-fiction
Dogs-stories: San Souci
Ethics and values: Kronenwetter;
Nuwer
EVERYDAY LIFE STORIES:
Gantos
Evolution: Litteral
Explorers: Jacobs, F.
Family life-fiction: Derby
Farm life-fiction: Fakih
Farm life-stories: Hall; Lester;
MacLachlan
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Lisle
Fathers and daughters-stories:
Johnson, D.
Fathers and sons-fiction: Myers
Fathers and sons-stories: Hall;
Manushkin
Florida-fiction: Gantos; Stolz
FOLKTALES AND
FAIRYTALES: Bernhard;
Gonzalez; Johnston, T.;
Kimmel; San Souci
Food and eating-poetry: Hopkins
Food and eating: Johnson, S.;
Wilkes
Friends-fiction: Goldman; Lisle;
Wyman
Friends-stories: Horstman
Frogs-stories: Manushkin
382 
* 
THE BULLETIN
FUNNY STORIES: Derby;
Pennypacker; Soto
Galapagos Islands: Litteral
Games-stories: Brighton
Games: Skurzynski
Grandfathers-fiction: Stolz
Grandmothers-fiction: Derby
Grandmothers-stories: Guback
Grandparents-stories: Hall
Growing up-fiction: Derby; Fakih
Guidance: Heron; Lowery
Hawaii-stories: Guback
Hawaii: Nicholson
Health: Yagyu
Hippopotamuses-stories: Heide
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Collier; Crofford; Levitin;
Rupert; Watkins
History, U.S.: Fry; Harris; Sneve;
Wright
History: Rosenberg
Holocaust: Rosenberg
Homosexuality: Heron
Horses: Visual Dictionary
Iowa-fiction: Fakih
Israel: Cozic
Japan-fiction: Watkins
Jews: Rosenberg
Kangaroos: Ryden
Kidnapping-fiction: Ahlberg
Latinos-fiction: Soto
Literature, English: Brighton
Mexico-folklore: Bernhard;
Johnston, T.
Music and musicians-fiction:
Collier
Music and musicians-stories: Ray
Native Americans: Sneve
Nature study: Litteral; Ryden
Orphans: Fry
Orphans-fiction: Pennypacker
Pacifism: Kronenwetter
Parents and children-fiction:
Haugen
Physical disabilities-fiction:
Crofford
Physical education: Nuwer
POETRY: Florian; Hopkins;
Merriam; Yolen
Prejudice-fiction: Lee, L.; Lee, M.
Prohibition: Harris
Puerto Rico-folklore: Bernier-
Brand
Quilts-stories: Guback
Railways-stories: Piumini
Reading aloud: Ahlberg; Florian;
Hopkins; Kimmel; Merriam;
Yolen
Reading, beginning: Bernier-
Brand
Reading, easy: Napoli
Reading, family: Guback;
Johnson, D.; Merriam
Reading, reluctant: Goldman,
Lowery
Religious education: Levitin
Runaways-fiction: Haugen
Russia-folklore: Kimmel
Russia-stories: Piumini
School-fiction: Wyman;
SCIENCE FICTION: Christo-
pher; Crew
Science: Aaseng
Scotland-folklore: San Souci
Sex education: Heron
Slavery-stories: Wright
South, the-fiction: Crofford
Story hour: Ahlberg; Bernhard;
Cazet; Florian; Heide;
Horstman; Johnston, T.;
Merriam; San Souci; Stevenson;
White; Wood; Yolen
Summer-fiction: Goldman;
Napoli
Summer-stories: Giovanni
Swimming-fiction: Napoli
Tennessee-stories: Giovanni
Traveling-stories: Pinkney
Uncles-fiction: Soto
Uncles-stories: Quinlan; Steven-
son
Video games: Skurzynski
War-stories: Baillie
War: Kronenwetter; Nicholson;
UNICEF
Witches-stories: White
World War II-stories: Hall
World War II: Nicholson;
Rosenberg
Yugoslavia: UNICEF
JU.Y/AUGusT 1994 
* 
383
THE
BULLET
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
AUTHOR/TITLE INDEX, VOLUME 47
SEPTEMBER, 1993-JULY/AUGUST, 1994
700 Kids on Grandpa's Farm. Morris. 228.
A Is for Africa. Onyefulu. 19.
Aaseng. Science Versus Pseudoscience. 348.
ABC Dinosaurs. Pienkowski. 131.
ABCDrive! Howland. 322.
Abenaki Captive. Dubois. 284.
Ackerman, Karen. By the Dawn's Early Light.
280.
. Night Crossing. 248.
Across America on an Emigrant Train.
Murphy. 164.
Ada. Dear Peter Rabbit. 249.
Adam and Eve and Pinch-Me. Johnston. 290.
Adam Zigzag. Barrie. 181.
Adoption Controversies. Liptak. 265.
Adventure in Alaska. Kramer. 159.
After the Flood. Geisert. 185.
Agassu. Dupre. 8.
Ahlberg. It Was a Dark and Stormy Night.
349.
Albert's Field Trip. Tryon. 60.
Alice In-Between. Naylor. 296.
Alien Secrets. Klause. 15.
All the Places to Love. MacLachlan. 367.
Alvin Ailey, Jr. Lewis-Ferguson. 264.
Alvin Ailey. Pinkney. 95.
Always Prayer Shawl. Oberman. 164.
Am I Blue? Bauer. 251.
Amazing Felix. McCully. 129.
Amazing Paper Cuttings of Hans Christian
Andersen. Brust. 217.
Amazon Basin. Reynolds. 97.
Amber Brown Is Not a Crayon. Danziger.
317.
America Street. Mazer. 90.
Amy Dunn Quits School. Shreve. 100.
Anansi and the Talking Melon. Kimmel. 324.
Ancona. Pablo Remembers. 114.
Anderson, Janet. Key into Winter. 249.
Anderson, Joan. Earth Keepers. 114.
.Twins on Toes. 36.
Anderson, R. Paper Faces. 74.
Andronik. Kindred Spirit. 75.
Angelou. Life Doesn't Frighten Me. 146.
Anholt. Come Back, Jack! 214.
Animal Fare. Yolen. 379.
Anne Frank. van der Rol. 104.
Anno's Twice Told Tales. Anno. 75.
Anno. Anno's Twice Told Tales. 75.
Antle. Tough Choices. 36.
Anything Can Happen in High School.
McCants. 128.
Appelbaum. Giants in the Land. 4.
Apprentice. Llorente. 161.
April and the Dragon Lady. Namioka. 267.
April Bubbles Chocolate. Hopkins. 360.
Araujo. Nekane, the Lamifia & the Bear. 214.
Archbold. Deep-Sea Explorer. 249.
Arena Beach. Staples. 102.
Ariadne, Awake! Orgel. 330.
Around the Oak. Muller. 329.
Around the World in a Hundred Years. Fritz.
319.
Arrington. Stella's Bull. 349.
Ashabranner. Still a Nation of Immigrants.
37.
Asher and the Capmakers. Kimmel. 126.
Ashpet. Compton. 315.
Asking the River. Kherdian. 125.
Atkin. Voices from the Fields. 5.
Atlan. Passersby. 146.
Auch. Latchkey Dog. 250.
Avi. Bird, the Frog, and the Light. 180.
.City of Light, City of Dark. 37.
Axelrod. Pigs Will Be Pigs. 181.
Aylesworth. My Son John. 281.
Babbitt. Bub. 312.
Babushka Baba Yaga. Polacco. 95.
IN
384 
* THE BULLETIN
Baby Grand, the Moon in July, and Me.
Barnes. 147.
Baby. MacLachlan. 16.
Back to Before. Slepian. 24.
Backyard. Collier. 284.
Baillie. Rebel. 350.
Baker. Staying with Grandmother. 250.
Banjo Player. Hill. 46.
Banks. Magic Hare. 37.
Barnes. Baby Grand, the Moon in July, and
Me. 147.
Barnyard Banter. Fleming. 285.
Barrie. Adam Zigzag. 181.
Bat-Ami. When the Frost Is Gone. 251.
Bauer. Am I Blue? 251.
.Question of Trust. 181.
.Taste of Smoke. 147.
Bawden. Real Plato Jones. 75.
Be a Friend to Trees. Lauber. 159.
Be a Friend. Wiener. 272.
Be Seated. Giblin. 121.
Beake. Song of Be. 215.
beast feast. Florian. 355.
Beauty Trap. Landau. 191.
Bedard. Painted Devil. 281.
Beekeeper's Year. Johnson. 361.
Beethoven Lives Upstairs. Nichol. 196.
Bel-Air Bambi and the Mall Rats. Peck. 54.
Bell. Boys from St. Petri. 232.
Bellville. Flying in a Hot Air Balloon. 215.
Bennett. Dakota Dream. 182.
Berman. James McNeill Whistler. 252.
Bernhard. How Snowshoe Hare Rescued the
Sun. 38.
.Tree That Rains. 350.
Bernier-Brand. Juan Bobo. 350.
Best. Be a Friend. 272.
Betsy Ross. Wallner. 237.
Between Madison and Palmetto. Woodson.
136.
Bial. Frontier Home. 38.
. Shaker Home. 216.
Bianchi. Nubians. 313.
Bible. Easter Story. 182.
Bierhorst. On the Road of Stars. 216.
. Way of the Earth. 252.
Big Baby. Browne. 183.
Big Book for Our Planet. Durell. 151.
Big Bug Book. Facklam.
Big Trouble for Tricky Rabbit! Mayo. 328.
Bigger. Calvert. 218.
Bigness Contest. Heide. 358.
Bill. Reaver. 299.
Billy Beg and His Bull. Greene. 258.
Billy. Roybal. 300.
Bird, the Frog, and the Light. Avi. 180.
Birthday Blizzard. Pryor. 131.
Birthday Rhymes, Special Times. Goldstein.
121.
Bjork. Other Alice. 115.
Black Hen. Pogorelsky. 198.
Black Ships Before Troy. Sutcliff. 169.
Black Swan. Dhondy. 8.
Blackwater Swamp. Wallace. 304.
Block. Missing Angel Juan. 115.
Bloomers! Blumberg. 5.
Blumberg. Bloomers! 5.
Blume. Here's to You, Rachel Robinson. 39.
Boelts. Dry Days, Wet Nights. 253.
Bolden. Rites of Passage. 281.
Bomans. Eric in the Land of Insects. 313.
Bond. Truth to Tell. 313.
Bone Stranger. Remkiewicz. 332.
Boobies, Iguanas, & Other Critters. Litteral.
366.
Book Takes Root. Kehoe. 13.
Booth. Doctor Knickerbocker. 6.
Born in the Gravy. Cazet. 117.
Borton. Fat Chance! 76.
Bosse. Deep Dream of the Rain Forest. 39.
Bossy Gallito. GonzAlez. 357.
Boulton, A. Frank Lloyd Wright. 147.
Boulton, J. Only Opal. 338.
Bowen. Tracks in the Wild. 76.
Boy and the Giants. Moodie. 19.
Boy Who Drew Cats. Levine. 192.
Boy Who Swallowed Snakes. Yep. 206.
Boyers. Life Doesn't Frighten Me. 146.
Boys from St. Petri. Reuter. 232.
Boys Will Be. Brooks. 116.
Bracelet. Uchida. 25.
Brandenburg. Sand and Fog. 253.
___ 
.To the Top of the World. 77.
Brenner. If You Were There in 1776. 314.
Brett. Christmas Trolls. 39.
Brighton. Brontes. 351.
Brontes. Brighton. 351.
Brooke. Brush with Magic. 148.
Brooks. Boys Will Be. 116.
.Making Sense. 148.
Broome. Tangles. 182.
Brown Angels. Myers. 54.
Brown, D. Ruth Law Thrills a Nation. 116.
Brown, R. What Rhymes With Snake? 216.
Browne. Big Baby. 183.
Bruchac. First Strawberries. 6.
. Fox Song. 40.
Brush with Magic. Brooke. 148.
Brust. Amazing Paper Cuttings of Hans
Christian Andersen. 217.
Bryan. Story of Lightning and Thunder. 40.
Bub. Babbitt. 312.
Bunting. Smoky Night. 217.
. Sunshine Home. 253.
Ju.Y/AuGusT 1994 
* 
385
Burke. Tugboats in Action. 116.
Burning Baby. Gordon. 44.
Butler. Witch's Fire. 40.
By the Dawn's Early Light. Ackerman. 280.
By the Dawn's Early Light. Kroll. 191.
Byars. Golly Sisters Ride Again. 314.
. McMummy. 41.
California Blue. Klass. 263.
Calmenson. Marigold and Grandma on the
Town. 217.
SRosie. 315.
Calvert. Bigger. 218.
Can You Guess? Miller. 52.
Captive. Hansen. 223.
Capturing Nature. Roop. 132.
Car. Paulsen. 297.
Carl Goes to Daycare. Day. 78.
Carrick. Two Very Little Sisters. 41.
Carson. Great Shaking. 282.
Carter, J. Talking Peace. 183.
Carter, P. Hunted. 218.
Casey. Over the Water. 282.
Cat, the Crow, and the Banyan Tree. Lively.
266.
Catherine, Called Birdy. Cushman. 316.
Cattail Moon. Thesman. 336.
Cazet. Born in the Gravy. 117.
. Nothing At All. 351.
Celebrating Kwanzaa. Hoyt-Goldsmith. 85.
Celebrating the Hero. Jenkins. 86.
Cezanne Pinto. Stolz. 202.
Champion. Gee. 80.
Champions. Littlefield. 51.
Chandra. Miss Mabel's Table. 254.
. Rich Lizard. 6.
Charge! Gonen. 121.
Charles Dickens. Stanley. 101.
Cheap Raw Material. Meltzer. 195.
Cheripko. Voices of the River. 283.
Chess-Dream in a Garden. Sutcliff. 102.
Chetwin. Chimes of Alyafaleyn. 117.
Chicken Soup, Boots. Kalman. 157.
Children of India. Hermes. 258.
Children of Mauritania. Goodsmith. 258
Children of the Morning Light. Manitonquat.
327.
Children's Step-by-Step Cookbook. Wilkes.
377.
Chimes of Alyafaleyn. Chetwin. 117.
Christmas Carol. Teasdale. 25.
Christmas Trolls. Brett. 39.
Christopher. A Dusk of Demons. 352.
Cinder-Elly. Minters. 267.
Circle Within a Circle. Killingsworth. 262.
Circlemaker. Schur. 201.
Circus Comes Home. Duncan. 120.
City Dog. Kuskin. 292.
City of Light, City of Dark. Avi. 37.
City within a City. Krull. 291.
Clifford. Flatfoot Fox and the Case of the
Missing Whoooo. 77.
Climbing Kansas Mountains. Shannon. 168.
Coco Grimes. Stolz. 375.
Coerr. Sadako. 117.
Cohn. From Sea To Shining Sea. 149.
Coil. Mardi Gras! 149.
Cole. Winni Allfours. 283.
College Girls. John. 124.
Collier, James. Jazz Kid. 352.
Collier, John. Backyard. 284.
Colman. Woman Unafraid. 118.
Color Sampler. Westray. 26.
Coman. Tell Me Everything. 149.
Come Back, Grandma. Limb. 192.
Come Back, Jack! Anholt. 214.
Come Go With Me. Thomas. 235.
Come with Me to Africa. Kreikemeier. 127.
Compton. Ashpet. 315.
Conway. Where Is Papa Now? 219.
Cooper, M. Life Riddles. 254.
Cooper, S. Danny and the Kings. 184.
Corcoran. Wolf at the Door. 77.
Cowboy Country. Scott. 98.
Cowboy. Granfield. 222.
Cowboys, Indians, and Gunfighters. Marrin.
17.
Cowboys. Sandler. 234.
Cox. Forgotten Heroes. 118.
Cozic. Israel: Opposing Viewpoints. 353.
Cramer. Night in Moonbeam County. 315.
Crazy Weekend. Soto. 374.
Creepy Crawly Song Book. Oram. 93.
Creepy Cuisine. Monroe. 53.
Crew. No Such Country. 353.
.Strange Objects. 7.
Crofford. Place to Belong. 353.
Crossing the Starlight Bridge. Mead. 328.
Crowe. Jirohattan. 196.
Cushman. Catherine, Called Birdy. 316.
Cutler. Darcy and Gran Don't Like Babies.
42.
Daddy and Me. Moutoussamy-Ashe. 196.
Dakota Dream. Bennett. 182.
Dalokay. Sister Shako and Kolo the Goat.
254.
Danny and the Kings. Cooper. 184.
Danziger. Amber Brown Is Not a Crayon.
317.
Darcy and Gran Don't Like Babies. Cutler.
42.
Dare You! Mayhew. 18.
Davidson. Take a Look. 184.
DaVolls. Tano & Binti. 317.
Day. Carl Goes to Daycare. 78.
386 
* THE BULLETIN
. Frank and Ernest on the Road. 219.
Deadly Deception. Haynes. 260.
Dear Peter Rabbit. Ada. 249.
Dear Willie Rudd,. Gray. 82.
DeClements. Pickle Song. 7.
Deem. How to Read Your Mother's Mind.
219.
Deep Dream of the Rain Forest. Bosse. 39.
Deep-Sea Explorer. Archbold. 249.
Deep-Sea Vents. Waters. 237.
Deerskin. McKinley. 16.
DeFelice. Light on Hogback Hill. 119.
. Lostman's River. 317.
Denim. Dumb Bunnies. 150.
Denzel. Land of the Thundering Herds. 78.
dePaola. Strega Nona Meets Her Match. 119.
Derby. Grams, Her Boyfriend, My Family,
and Me. 354.
Deuker. Heart of a Champion. 7.
Dhondy. Black Swan. 8.
Dinah in Love. Mills. 130.
Doctor Knickerbocker. Booth. 6.
Doll Trouble. Griffith. 155.
Donnelly. Survive! Could You?. 150.
Dorflinger. Tomorrow Is Mom's Birthday.
255.
Dorros. Radio Man. 151.
Dove Dream. Rumbaut. 334.
Dowden. Poisons in Our Path. 255.
Dragon Feathers. Dugin. 118.
Dragon Kyn. Fletcher. 153.
Dragon's Gate. Yep. 136.
Dragon's Halloween. Pilkey. 55.
Drat These Brats! Kennedy. 125.
Dreamer. Rylant. 132.
Dropping Out of School. Goldentyer. 222.
Dry Days, Wet Nights. Boelts. 253.
Dubois. Abenaki Captive. 284.
Duffey. How to Be Cool in the Third Grade.
42.
Duffy, C. I Wouldn't Thank You for a
Valentine. 184.
Duffy, J. Radical Red. 151.
Dugin. Dragon Feathers. 118.
Dumb Bunnies. Denim. 150.
Dumbstruck. Pennypacker. 369.
Dumpling Soup. Rattigan. 56.
Duncan. Circus Comes Home. 120.
Dupre. Agassu. 8.
Durell. Big Book for Our Planet. 151.
Dusk of Demons. Christopher. 352.
Ear, the Eye and the Arm. Farmer. 220.
Earth Keepers. Anderson. 114.
Easter Story. Bible. 182.
Echoes of World War II. Marx. 295.
Eggs Over Easy. Kenah. 124.
Ehlert. Mole's Hill. 256.
Eleanor Roosevelt. Freedman. 44.
Elizabeth Imagined an Iceberg. Raschka. 298.
Emberley. Welcome Back Sun. 43.
Emily Good as Gold. Rubin. 97.
Endangered Peoples. Liptak. 128.
Ener. Sister Shako and Kolo the Goat. 254.
Engel. Fishing. 8.
Ephron. Girl Who Changed the World. 43.
Eric in the Land of Insects. Bomans. 313.
Escape from Egypt. Levitin. 365.
Evans. Naomi's Geese. 43.
Ever After. Vail. 272.
Evernden. Of Swords and Sorcerers. 12.
Extraordinary Egg. Lionni. 326.
Facklam. Big Bug Book.
Fair Game. Tamar. 103.
Faith, Hope, and Chicken Feathers. Wyman.
378.
Fakih. High on the Hog. 354.
Farber. When It Snowed That Night. 78.
Farentinos. Winter's Orphans. 152.
Farm Summer 1942. Hall. 358.
Farmer. Ear, the Eye and the Arm. 220.
Farris. In Dolphin Time. 185.
Fast Forward. Miller. 53.
Fast Friends. Horstman. 360.
Fat Chance! Borton. 76.
Fearsome's Hero. Schenker. 201.
Feathers. Gordon. 122.
Feelings. Soul Looks Back in Wonder. 152.
Feiffer. Man in the Ceiling. 120.
Ferris. Relative Strangers. 79.
Field Full of Horses. Hansard. 188.
Fifth of March. Rinaldi.
Filipovic. Zlata's Diary. 285.
Fine. Flour Babies. 317.
Finley. Soaring Eagle. 221.
Fireside. Is There a Woman in the House... or
Senate? 256.
First Houses. Monroe. 91.
First Strawberries. Bruchac. 6.
Fisher. Gutenberg. 9.
. Kinderdike. 185.
Fishing. Engel. 8.
Flatfoot Fox and the Case of the Missing
Whoooo. Clifford. 77.
Fleming. Barnyard Banter. 285.
Fletcher, R. I Am Wings. 318.
Fletcher, S. Dragon Kyn. 153.
Flip-Flop Girl. Paterson. 198.
Florian. beast feast. 355.
Flour Babies. Fine. 317.
Flying in a Hot Air Balloon. Bellville. 215.
Forest. Lisle. 160.
Forest of the Clouded Leopard. Myers. 368.
Forgotten Heroes. Cox. 118.
Forsyth. Know about Gays and Lesbians. 189.
Four-Legged Ghosts. Hoffman. 156.
Fox Song. Bruchac. 40.
JULY/AUGUST 1994 
* 
387
Fox, M. Time for Bed. 43.
Fox, P. Western Wind. 9.
Fraction Action. Leedy. 224.
Fradon. The King's Fool. 153.
Frank and Ernest on the Road. Day. 219.
Frank Lloyd Wright. Boulton. 147.
Franklin. Shepherd Boy. 318.
Fraustino. Grass and Sky. 285.
Freak the Mighty. Philbrick. 165.
Freedman. Eleanor Roosevelt. 44.
Fritz. Around the World in a Hundred Years.
319.
From a Child's Heart. Grimes. 188.
From Head to Toe. Kuklin. 291.
From Sea To Shining Sea. Cohn. 149.
From the Earth To Beyond the Sky. Wolfson.
171.
Frontier Home. Bial. 38.
Frozen Land. Reynolds. 97.
Fry. Orphan Trains. 355.
Frydenborg. They Dreamed of Horses. 319.
Fun/No Fun. Stevenson. 303.
Funny Papers. Scott. 167.
Gallo. Join In. 78.
Gangs. Goldentyer. 222.
Garland. Shadow of the Dragon. 80.
Garner. Once Upon a Time. 153.
Gantos. Heads or Tails. 356.
Gathering of Garter Snakes. Lavies. 192.
Gauch. Noah. 320.
Gauthier. Zachary. 221.
Gee. Champion. 80.
Geisert. After the Flood. 185.
George. Big Book for Our Planet. 151.
Geras. Golden Windows. 81.
Gershator. Rata-pata-scata-fata. 257.
__ . Tukama Tootles the Flute. 257.
Ghost Comes Calling. Wright. 239.
Ghost Fox. Yep. 240.
Ghost Witch. Wright. 123.
Ghosts of Mercy Manor. Wright. 27.
Giants in the Land. Appelbaum. 4.
Gibbons. Pirates. 10.
_ 
. St. Patrick's Day. 186.
Giblin. Be Seated. 121.
Gideon and the Mummy Professor. Karr. 12.
Gifaldi. Toby Scudder, Ultimate Warrior. 80.
Gift of Changing Woman. Seymour. 99.
Gilchrist. Indigo and Moonlight Gold. 186.
Gillette. Search for Seismosaurus. 221.
Gilman. Something From Nothing. 186.
Gilson. It Goes Eeeeeeeeeeeee! 286.
Ginsburg. King Who Tried to Fry an Egg on
His Head. 187.
Giovanni. Knoxville, Tennessee. 356.
Girl Who Changed the World. Ephron. 43.
Girls Get Even. Naylor. 92.
Glassman. My Working Mom. 286.
Gleaming Bright. Sherman. 302.
Gliori. Mr. Bear Babysits. 287.
Goble. Iktomi and the Buzzard. 320.
Gold. Meltzer. 228.
Gold Dust Letters. Lisle. 366.
Golden Carp. Vuong. 105.
Golden Windows. Geras. 81.
Goldentyer. Dropping Out of School. 222.
. Gangs. 222.
Goldin. Passover Journey. 258.
Goldman. Money to Burn. 356.
Goldstein. Birthday Rhymes, Special Times.
121.
Golly Sisters Ride Again. Byars. 314.
Gonen, Rivka. Charge! 121.
Gonzalez. Bossy Gallito. 357.
Good Night, Gorilla. Rathmann. 299.
Goodsmith. Children of Mauritania. 258.
Gordon, J. Burning Baby. 44.
Gordon, R. Feathers. 122.
. Peeling the Onion. 45.
Gorman. Jennifer-the-Jerk Is Missing. 287.
Gorog. Please Do Not Touch. 10.
Gottfried. Libya. 287.
Grams, Her Boyfriend, My Family, and Me.
Derby. 354.
Grandfather's Journey. Say. 23.
Grandma Essie's Covered Wagon. Williams.
62.
Granfield. Cowboy. 222.
Grant. Uncle Vampire. 82.
Grass and Sky. Fraustino. 285.
Gray. Dear Willie Rudd,. 82.
Great Genghis Khan Look-Alike Contest.
Sharmat. 134.
Great Migration. Lawrence. 89.
Great Shaking. Carson. 282.
Greenberg. Sculptor's Eye. 82.
Greene, C. Nora. 45.
Greene, E. Billy Beg and His Bull. 258.
.Legend of the Cranberry. 122.
Greene, J. One Foot Ashore. 320.
Greene, P. Sabbath Garden. 187.
Greenfeld. Hidden Children. 154.
. Paul Gauguin. 252.
Greenlaw. Ranch Dressing. 154.
Griffith. Doll Trouble. 155.
Grimes. From a Child's Heart. 188.
.Meet Danitra Brown. 357.
Grimm. Iron Hans. 122.
Guback. Luka's Quilt. 357.
Guernsey. To the Top of the World. 77.
Guiberson. Salmon Story. 155.
Gutenberg. Fisher. 9.
Guthrie. Nobiah's Well. 188.
Haas. Uncle Daney's Way. 259.
Hafen. Over the Joshua Slope. 288.
Hahn. Time for Andrew. 260.
388 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Hajime in the North Woods. Wilds. 237.
Halkin. Lydia, Queen of Palestine. 93.
Hall. Farm Summer 1942. 358.
Hamilton, M. Black Hen. 198.
. Yellow Blue Bus Means I Love You.
321.
Hamilton, V. Plain City. 83.
Han. Rabbit's Judgment. 288.
Hand, Heart, and Mind. Walker. 203.
Handler. Young People Speak. 11.
Hansard. Field Full of Horses. 188.
Hansen. Captive. 223.
Haphazard House. Wesley. 61.
Happy Hocky Family! Smith. 58.
Harper & Moon. Ross. 23.
Harris and Me. Paulsen. 164.
Harrison. O Canada. 11.
Harry's Birthday. Porte. 298.
Haseley. Horses with Wings. 155.
Haugen. Keeping Secrets. 358.
Haunted Year. Phillips. 230.
Hausherr. What Food Is This? 288.
Hausman. Turtle Island ABC. 260.
Haveli. Staples. 102.
Havill. Jamaica and Brianna. 83.
Haynes. Deadly Deception. 260.
Heads or Tails. Gantos. 356.
Heart of a Champion. Deuker. 7.
Heide. Bigness Contest. 359.
Heim. Uncle Fedya, His Dog, and His Cat.
61.
Heisel. Wrapped in a Riddle. 84.
Heneghan. Torn Away. 189.
Henkes. Owen. 45.
Here Comes Tod! Pearce. 229.
Here Comes Tricky Rabbit! Mayo. 328.
Here's to You, Rachel Robinson. Blume. 39.
Hermes. Children of India. 258.
Hero of Bremen. Hodges. 47.
Heron. Two Teenagers in Twenty. 359.
Hesse. Lester's Dog. 84.
. Phoenix Rising. 321.
. Sable. 289.
Hest. Nana's Birthday Party. 46.
Hexwood. Jones. 290.
Hidden Children. Greenfeld. 154.
Hiding to Survive. Rosenberg. 371.
Higgle Wiggle. Merriam. 368.
High on the Hog. Fakih. 354.
Hill, E. Banjo Player. 46.
Hill, K. Winter Camp. 85.
His Majesty's Elephant. Tarr. 170.
Hiser. Missing Doll. 123.
Hite. It's Nothing to a Mountain. 322.
Hoberman, Mary Ann. My Song Is Beautiful.
261.
Hobyahs. San Souci. 372.
Hodges. Hero of Bremen. 47.
. Of Swords and Sorcerers. 12.
. Saint Patrick and the Peddler. 156.
Hoffman. Four-Legged Ghosts. 156.
Hoggle's Christmas. Shelton. 100.
Holes in Your Nose. Yagyu. 379.
Holmes. Knot in the Tracks. 370.
Holt and the Cowboys. McCafferty. 161.
Honeycutt. Lydia Jane and the Baby-Sitter
Exchange. 156.
.Whistle Home. 47.
Hopkins. April Bubbles Chocolate. 360.
_ .Weather. 223.
Horenstein. How Are Sneakers Made? 47.
. How Is a Bicycle Made? 47.
.My Mom's a Vet. 224.
Horses with Wings. Haseley. 155.
Horses. Patent. 228.
Horstman. Fast Friends. 360.
Hostilities. MacDonald. 162.
Houston. Mountain Valor. 322.
How Are Sneakers Made? Horenstein. 47.
How Is a Bicycle Made? Horenstein. 47.
How Rabbit Tricked Otter. Ross. 333.
How Snowshoe Hare Rescued the Sun.
Bernhard. 38.
How to Be Cool in the Third Grade. Duffey
42.
How to Make an Apple Pie and See the
World. Priceman. 199.
How to Read Your Mother's Mind. Deem.
219.
Howard. Tower Room. 85.
Howland. ABCDrive! 322.
Hoyt-Goldsmith. Celebrating Kwanzaa. 85.
Hugger to the Rescue. Patent. 330.
Humpbacked Fluteplayer. Russell 233.
Hunted. Carter. 218.
Hunting the White Cow. Seymour. 57.
Hurwitz. New Shoes for Silvia. 86.
.Word to the Wise. 289.
Husain. Mecca. 189.
Hutton. Persephone. 261.
Hyde. Know about Gays and Lesbians. 189.
I Am Lavina Cumming. Lowell. 193.
I Am Wings. Fletcher. 318.
I Dream of Peace. UNICEF. 361.
I Had Seen Castles. Rylant. 98.
I Hadn't Meant to Tell You This. Woodson.
239.
I-Know-Not-What, I-Know-Not-Where.
Kimmel. 362.
I Lost My Arrow in a Kankan Tree. Lichtveld.
325.
I Thought I'd Take My Rat to School.
Kennedy. 87.
I Want Answers and a Parachute. Petersen.
21.
JULY/AUGUST 1994 
* 389
I Wouldn't Thank You for a Valentine.
Duffy. 184.
I'm Emma: I'm a Quint. Pevsner. 94.
Iblis. Oppenheim . 268.
If I Should Die Before I Wake. Nolan. 267.
If I'd Known Then What I Know Now.
Lindbergh. 326.
If You Were There in 1776. Brenner. 314.
Iktomi and the Buzzard. Goble. 320.
In Dolphin Time. Farris. 185.
In Search of the Giant. Willis. 339.
In the Village of the Elephants. Schmidt. 234.
Indigo and Moonlight Gold. Gilchrist. 186.
Into the Valley. Williams. 26.
Inunguak. Petersen. 130.
Iron Dragon Never Sleeps. Krensky. 263.
Iron Hans. Grimm. 122.
Irwin. Jim-Dandy. 262.
Is A Blue Whale the Biggest Thing There Is?
Wells. 105.
Is There a Woman in the House ... or
Senate? Fireside. 256.
Isaacson. Short Walk Around the Pyramids.
48.
Israel: Opposing Viewpoints. Cozic. 353.
It Goes Eeeeeeeeeeeee! Gilson. 286.
It Was a Dark and Stormy Night. Ahlberg.
349.
It's Nothing to a Mountain. Hite. 322.
Jack and the Meanstalk. Wildsmith. 305.
Jack-in-the-Pulpit. Wexler. 26.
Jackal Woman. Pringle. 96.
Jackson Jones and the Puddle of Thorns.
Quattlebaum. 230.
Jackson. Tree of Life. 124.
Jacobs, D. Keeping Secrets. 358.
Jacobs, F. A Passion for Danger. 361.
Jacques. Martin the Warrior. 157.
Jaffe. While Standing on One Foot. 124.
Jafta: The Homecoming. Lewin. 225.
Jamaica and Brianna. Havill. 83.
James McNeill Whistler. Berman. 252.
James. Runa. 12.
Jaspersohn. My Hometown Library. 190.
Jazz Kid. Collier. 352.
Jenkins. Celebrating the Hero. 86.
Jennifer-the-Jerk Is Missing. Gorman. 287.
Jim-Dandy. Irwin. 262.
Jimmy Crack Corn. Ransom. 331.
Jirohattan. Mori. 196.
Joey. Ryden. 372.
John. College Girls. 124.
John Jeremy Colton. Leech. 364.
Johnson, D. Now Let Me Fly. 86.
.Papa's Stories. 361.
Johnson, Scott. Overnight Sensation. 323.
Johnson, Sylvia. Beekeeper's Year. 361.
Johnston, J. Adam and Eve and Pinch-Me.
290.
Johnston, T. Tale of Rabbit and Coyote. 362.
Join In. Gallo. 78.
Joke's on George. Tunnell. 60.
Jones, D. Hexwood. 290.
Jones, K. Say It Loud. 323.
Jordan. Sculptor's Eye. 82.
Joseph. Mermaid's Twin Sister. 324.
Joyce. Santa Calls. 48.
Juan Bobo. Bernier-Brand. 350.
Juliet's Story. Trevor. 336.
July Is a Mad Mosquito. Lewis. 193.
Jumping the Broom. Wright. 378.
Just One Tear. Mahon. 295.
Kalman. Chicken Soup, Boots. 157.
Karr. Gideon and the Mummy Professor. 12.
Keeping Secrets. Haugen. 358.
Kehoe. Book Takes Root. 13.
Kelly and Me. Williams. 238.
Kelso. Walking for Freedom. 13.
Kenah. Eggs Over Easy. 124.
Kendall. Russian Girl. 157.
Kennedy, D. I Thought I'd Take My Rat to
School. 87.
Kennedy, X. Drat These Brats! 125.
Kerr. Linger. 14.
Ketteman. Year of No More Corn. 14.
Key into Winter. Anderson. 249.
Key to the Playhouse. York. 273.
Kherdian. Asking the River. 125.
Killingsworth. Circle Within a Circle. 262.
Kimmel. Asher and the Capmakers. 126.
. Anansi and the Talking Melon. 324.
.I-Know-Not-What, I-Know-Not-
Where. 363.
.Three Princes 262.
Kinaaldai. Roessel. 158.
Kinderdike. Fisher. 185.
Kindl. Owl in Love. 49.
Kindred Spirit. Andronik. 75.
King Arthur and the Legends of Camelot.
Perham. 20.
King Who Tried to Fry an Egg on His Head.
Ginsburg. 187.
King's Fool. Fradon. 153.
King. Shannon. 158.
King-Smith. Sophie in the Saddle. 224.
Kirkland. Little Ballerina and Her Dancing
Horse. 159.
Klass, D. California Blue. 263.
Klass, S. Rhino. 87.
Klause. Alien Secrets. 15.
Klein. Seeing Things. 263.
Kline. Song Lee in Room 2B. 15.
Knight. Searching for Laura Ingalls. 49.
Knot in the Grain. McKinley. 327.
390 
* THE BULLETIN
Knot in the Tracks. Piumini. 370.
Know about Gays and Lesbians. Hyde. 189.
Know the Score. Skurzynski. 373.
Knoxville, Tennessee. Giovanni. 356.
Knudson. Wonderful Pen of May Swenson.
126.
Knutson. Sungura and Leopard. 126.
Koertge. Tiger, Tiger, Burning Bright. 290.
Konigsburg. T-Backs, T-Shirts, COAT and
Suit. 88.
Kornblith. Eric in the Land of Insects. 313.
Kramer. Adventure in Alaska. 159.
. Survive! Could You? 150.
Kreikemeier. Come with Me to Africa. 127.
Krensky. Iron Dragon Never Sleeps. 263.
_ 
. Lionel in the Winter. 190.
Kroll. By the Dawn's Early Light. 191.
Kronenwetter. Peace Commandos. 363.
Kronenwetter. Under 18. 88.
Krull. City within a City. 291.
. Other Side. 291.
Kuklin. From Head to Toe. 291.
. Speaking Out. 49.
Kurosaki. Jirohattan. 196.
Kuskin. City Dog. 292.
_ 
. Paul. 324.
Land of the Thundering Herds. Denzel. 78.
Landau. Beauty Trap. 191.
. Sexual Harassment. 15.
Langham. Anne Frank. 104.
Lankford. Quinceafiera. 325.
Lasky. Memoirs of a Bookbat. 264.
_ Monarchs. 88.
. Searching for Laura Ingalls. 49.
Last Christmas Present. Novak. 130.
Last Tales of Uncle Remus. Lester. 192.
Latchkey Dog. Auch. 250.
Lauber. Be a Friend to Trees. 159.
Laurie Tells. Lowery. 367.
Lavies. Gathering of Garter Snakes. 192.
Lawrence, G. Little Ballerina and Her
Dancing Horse. 159.
Lawrence, J. Great Migration. 89.
Learning by Heart. Young. 136.
Lee, L. Stella. 363.
Lee, M. Saying Goodbye. 363.
Leech. John Jeremy Colton. 364.
Leedy. Fraction Action. 224.
Legend of the Cranberry. Greene. 122.
LeMieux. TV Guidance Counselor. 50.
Lerner. Plants That Make You Sniffle and
Sneeze. 50.
Lester, A. My Farm. 365.
Lester's Dog. Hesse. 84.
Lester. Last Tales of Uncle Remus. 192.
Leuck. Sun Is Falling, Night Is Calling. 325.
Leventhal. What Is Your Language? 160.
LeVert. Teens Face to Face with Chronic
Illness. 50.
Levine, Abby. Ollie Knows Everything. 292.
Levine, Arthur. Boy Who Drew Cats. 192.
. On Cat Mountain. 232.
Levitin. Escape from Egypt. 365.
Levy. Tree Place. 225.
Lewin. Jafta: The Homecoming. 225.
Lewis, J. July Is a Mad Mosquito. 193.
Lewis, N. Puss in Boots. 298.
Lewis-Ferguson. Alvin Alley, Jr. 264.
Libya. Gottfried. 287.
Lichtveld. I Lost My Arrow in a Kankan Tree.
325.
Life Doesn't Frighten Me. Angelou. 146.
Life Riddles. Cooper. 254.
Light on Hogback Hill. De Felice. 119.
Lights Go On Again. Pearson. 331.
Lillie. When This Box Is Full. 127.
Limb. Come Back, Grandma. 192.
Lincoln In His Own Words. Meltzer. 91.
Lindbergh, A. Nick of Time. 225.
Lindbergh, R. If I'd Known Then What I
Know Now. 326.
Lindblad. Serengeti Migration. 292.
Linger. Kerr. 14.
Lionel in the Winter. Krensky. 190.
Lionni. An Extraordinary Egg. 326.
Liptak. Adoption Controversies. 265.
Liptak. Endangered Peoples. 128.
Lisle. Forest. 160.
Lisle. Gold Dust Letters. 366.
Litteral. Boobies, Iguanas, & Other Critters.
366.
Little Ballerina and Her Dancing Horse.
Kirkland. 159.
Little House on Rocky Ridge. MacBride. 16.
Little Lama of Tibet. Raimondo. 157.
Little Tiger in the Chinese Night. Zhang.
240.
Littlechild. This Land Is My Land. 161.
Littlefield. Champions. 51.
Lively. Cat, the Crow, and the Banyan Tree.
266.
Llorente. Apprentice. 161.
Lombardo's Law. Wittlinger. 63.
Long Search. Pullein-Thompson. 96.
Longshaw. Apprentice. 161.
Lostman's River. DeFelice. 317.
Lottridge. Ten Small Tales. 293.
Lowell. I Am Lavina Cumming. 193.
Lowery. Laurie Tells. 367.
Lucas. Snowed In. 89.
Luka's Quilt. Guback. 357.
Lydia Jane and the Baby-Sitter Exchange.
Honeycutt. 156.
Lydia, Queen of Palestine. Orlev. 93.
Lyons. Stitching Stars. 128.
JULY/AUGUST 1994 
* 391
Macaulay. Ship. 90.
MacBride. Little House on Rocky Ridge. 16.
MacDonald, C. Hostilities. 162.
Macdonald, M. Rosie and the Poor Rabbits.
226.
MacGrory. Secret of the Ruby Ring. 294.
MacLachlan. All the Places to Love. 367.
. Baby. 16.
. Skylark. 194.
Magic Hare. Banks. 37.
Magic Purse. Uchida. 203.
Magic Storysinger. McNeil. 294.
Magnificent Mummy Maker. Woodruff. 205.
Maguire. Missing Sisters. 327.
Mahon. Just One Tear. 295.
Making Friends with Frankenstein.
McNaughton. 266.
Making Sense. Brooks. 148.
Man in the Ceiling. Feiffer. 120.
Manitonquat. Children of the Morning. 327.
Manushkin. Peeping and Sleeping. 367.
Mardi Gras! Coil. 149.
Margaret and Margarita/Margarita y
Margaret. Reiser. 56.
Margolies. Olbalbal. 226.
Marigold and Grandma on the Town.
Calmenson. 217.
Mark. Oxford Book of Children's Stories.
162.
Marrin. Cowboys, Indians, and Gunfighters.
17.
. Unconditional Surrender. 227.
Marshall. Rats on the Range. 18.
Martin the Warrior. Jacques. 157.
Martin. Now Everybody Really Hates Me.
129.
Marvin Redpost: Alone in His Teacher's
House. Sachar. 334.
Marx, P. Now Everybody Really Hates Me.
129.
Marx, T. Echoes of World War II. 295.
Mathers. Victor and Christabel. 51.
Mathews. Nathaniel Willy, Scared Silly. 195.
Max and Ruby's First Greek Myth. Wells.
106.
Mayhew. Dare You! 18.
Mayo. Big Trouble for Tricky Rabbit! 328.
. Here Comes Tricky Rabbit! 328.
Mazer. America Street. 90.
. Oxboy. 52.
McCafferty. Holt and the Cowboys. 161.
McCants. Anything Can Happen in High
School. 128.
McClelland. This Baby. 293.
McCully. Amazing Felix. 129.
McKinley. Deerskin. 16.
_ Knot in the Grain. 327.
McKissack. Royal Kingdoms of Ghana, Mali,
and Songhay. 194.
McMillan. Penguins at Home. 16.
McMullan. Nutcracker Noel. 129.
McMummy. Byars. 41.
McNaughton. Making Friends with
Frankenstein. 266.
McNeil. The Magic Storysinger. 294.
McNulty. Snake in the House. 194.
McPhail. Santa's Book of Names. 51.
Mead. Crossing the Starlight Bridge. 328.
Mecca. Husain. 189.
Medearis. Our People. 295.
Meet Addy. Porter. 55.
Meet Danitra Brown. Grimes. 357.
Meltzer. Cheap Raw Material. 195.
_ Gold. 228.
SLincoln In His Own Words. 91.
Memoirs of a Bookbat. Lasky. 264.
Mennen. One Round Moon and a Star for
Me. 266.
Mennyms. Waugh. 304.
Mermaid Tales from Around the World.
Osborne. 197.
Mermaid's Twin Sister. Joseph. 324.
Merriam. Higgle Wiggle. 368.
Meschel. Young People Speak. 11.
Mexican Revolution 1910-1920. Stein. 335.
Meyer. White Lilacs. 163.
Miller, Margaret. Can You Guess? 52.
. My Five Senses. 266.
Miller, Mary Jane. Fast Forward. 53.
Mills, C. Dinah in Love. 130.
Mills, L. Tatterhood and the Hobgoblins. 18.
Minters. Cinder-Elly. 267.
Miss Mabel's Table. Chandra. 254.
Missing Angel Juan. Block. 115.
Missing Doll. Hiser. 123.
Missing Person. Pfoutz. 21.
Missing Sisters. Maguire. 327.
Mitchell. Uncle Jed's Barbershop. 19.
Mole's Hill. Ehlert. 256.
Monarchs. Lasky. 88.
Money to Burn. Goldman. 356.
Monroe, J. First Houses. 91.
Monroe, L. Creepy Cuisine. 53.
Moodie. Boy and the Giants. 19.
Moonshiner's Son. Reeder. 22.
More Rootabagas. Sandburg. 133.
Mori. Jirohattan. 196.
Morris, Ann. 700 Kids on Grandpa's Farm.
228.
Moser. Tucker Pfeffercorn. 329.
Mountain Valor. Houston. 322.
Mountains. Simon. 270.
Moutoussamy-Ashe. Daddy and Me. 196.
Mr. Bear Babysits. Gliori. 287.
Mr. Lunch Takes a Plane Ride. Seibold. 167.
392 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Mr. Tucket. Paulsen. 198.
Muller. Around the Oak. 329.
Murder on the Highway. Siegel. 168.
Murphy, C. Songs in the Silence. 296.
Murphy, J. Across America on an Emigrant
Train. 164.
Miihlberger. What Makes a Bruegel a
Bruegel? 163.
. What Makes a Monet a Monet? 163.
My Brother, My Sister, and I. Watkins. 376.
My Farm. Lester. 365.
My Five Senses. Miller. 266.
My Hometown Library. Jaspersohn. 190.
My Mom's a Vet. Horenstein. 224.
My Son John. Aylesworth. 281.
My Song Is Beautiful. Hoberman. 261.
My Working Mom. Glassman. 286.
Myers, C. Forest of the Clouded Leopard.
368.
Myers, W. Brown Angels. 54.
Namioka. April and the Dragon Lady. 267.
Nana's Birthday Party. Hest. 46.
Naomi's Geese. Evans. 43.
Nasaw. Shakedown Street. 92.
Nathaniel Willy, Scared Silly. Mathews. 195.
Navajos. Sneve. 58.
Naylor. Alice In-Between. 296.
__ . Girls Get Even. 92.
Nekane, the Lamifia & the Bear. Araujo. 214.
Neumann. Playing a Virginia Moon. 330.
Never Take a Pig to Lunch. Westcott. 338.
Nevernever. Shetterly. 134.
New Shoes for Silvia. Hurwitz. 86.
Newman. Saturday Is Pattyday. 92.
Nichol. Beethoven Lives Upstairs. 196.
Nicholson. Pearl Harbor Child. 368.
Nick of Time. Lindbergh. 225.
Night Crossing. Ackerman. 248.
Night in Moonbeam County. Cramer. 315.
Night of the Full Moon. Whelan. 170.
Nixon. Shadowmaker. 297.
No Such Country. Crew. 353.
Noah. Gauch. 320.
Nobiah's Well. Guthrie. 188.
Nolan. If I Should Die Before I Wake. 267.
Nora. Greene. 45.
Nothing At All. Cazet. 351.
Novak. Last Christmas Present. 130.
Now Everybody Really Hates Me. Martin.
129.
Now Let Me Fly. Johnson. 86.
Nubians. Bianchi. 313.
Nutcracker Noel. McMullan. 129.
Nuwer. Sports Scandals. 369.
Nye. Sitti's Secrets. 228.
O Canada. Harrison. 11.
O'Shaughnessy. Third Planet. 333.
Oberman. Always Prayer Shawl. 164.
October Moon. Scott. 302.
Of Swords and Sorcerers. Hodges. 12.
Olbalbal. Margolies. 226.
Ollie Knows Everything. Levine. 292.
On a White Pebble Hill. Sun. 235.
On Cat Mountain. Richard. 232.
On the Road of Stars. Bierhorst. 216.
Once Upon a Time. Garner. 153.
One Foot Ashore. Greene. 320.
One Round Moon and a Star for Me.
Mennen. 266.
Only Opal. Whiteley. 338.
Onyefulu. A Is for Africa. 19.
Oppenheim. Iblis. 268.
Oram. Creepy Crawly Song Book. 93.
Oregon's Journey. Rascal. 332.
Orgel. Ariadne, Awake! 330.
Orlev. Lydia, Queen of Palestine. 93.
Orphan Trains. Fry. 355.
Osborne. Mermaid Tales from Around the
World. 197.
Other Alice. Bjork. 115.
Other Side. Krull. 291.
Others See Us. Sleator. 101.
Our Granny. Wild. 305.
Our People. Medearis. 295.
Out of Nowhere. Sebestyen. 235.
Outside Dog. Pomerantz. 55.
Outside the Window. Smucker. 335.
Over the Joshua Slope. Hafen. 288.
Over the Water. Casey. 282.
Overnight Sensation. Johnson. 323.
Owen. Henkes. 45.
Owens. Passersby. 146.
Owl in Love. Kindl. 49.
Oxboy. Mazer. 52.
Oxford Book of Children's Stories. Mark.
162.
Pablo Remembers. Ancona. 114.
Painted Devil. Bedard. 281.
Pale Phoenix. Reiss. 231.
Paparone. Who Built the Ark? 320.
Papa's Stories. Johnson. 361.
Paper Faces. Anderson. 74.
Parental Unemployment. Wijnberg. 222.
Passersby. Atlan. 146.
Passion for Danger. Jacobs. 361.
Passover Journey. Goldin. 258.
Patent. Horses. 228.
. Hugger to the Rescue. 330.
. Prairie Dogs. 20.
.What Good Is a Tail? 197.
Paterson, K. Big Book for Our Planet. 151.
. Flip-Flop Girl. 198.
Patneaude. Someone Was Watching. 94.
Paul Gauguin. Greenfeld. 252.
Paul. Kuskin. 324.
Paulsen. Car. 297.
JULY/AUGUST 1994 
* 393
. Harris and Me. 164.
. Mr. Tucket. 198.
. Sisters/Hermanas. 94.
Peace Commandos. Kronenwetter. 363.
Pearce. Here Comes Tod! 229.
Pearl Harbor Child. Nicholson. 368.
Pearson. Lights Go On Again. 331.
Peck, Richard. Bel-Air Bambi and the Mall
Rats. 54.
Peck, Robert. Soup Ahoy. 229.
Peeling the Onion. Gordon. 45.
Peeping and Sleeping. Manushkin. 367.
Penguins at Home. McMillan. 16.
Pennypacker. Dumbstruck. 369.
Perham. King Arthur and the Legends of
Camelot. 20.
Perkins. Sunita Experiment. 21.
Perrault. Puss in Boots. 298.
Persephone. Hutton. 261.
Petersen, P. J. I Want Answers and a
Parachute. 21.
Petersen, Palle. Inunguak. 130.
Peters. Anne Franky. 104.
Pevsner. I'm Emma. 94.
Pfeffer. Riddle Streak. 95.
. Twice Taken. 229.
Pfoutz. Missing Person. 21.
Phantom Victory. Service. 334.
Philbrick. Freak the Mighty. 165.
Phillips. Haunted Year. 230.
Phoenix Rising. Hesse. 321.
Pianna. Ray. 371.
Pickle Song. DeClements. 7.
Pienkowski. ABC Dinosaurs and Other
Prehistoric Creatures. 131.
Pigs Will Be Pigs. Axelrod. 181.
Pilkey. Dragon's Halloween. 55.
Pinkney, A. Alvin Ailey. 95.
. Seven Candles for Kwanzaa. 55.
Pinkney, G. Sunday Outing. 370.
Pioneers. Sandler. 200.
Pirates. Gibbons. 10.
Piumini. Knot in the Tracks. 370.
Pizzo. Be a Friend. 272.
Place to Belong. Crofford. 353.
Plain City. Hamilton. 83.
Plants That Make You Sniffle and Sneeze.
Lerner. 50.
Platt. Stephen Biesty's Incredible Cross-
Sections Man-of-War. 165.
Playing a Virginia Moon. Neumann. 330.
Please Do Not Touch. Gorog. 10.
Pogorelsky. Black Hen. 198.
Poisons in Our Path. Dowden. 255.
Polacco. Babushka Baba Yaga. 95.
Pomerantz. Outside Dog. 55.
Porte. Harry's Birthday. 298.
Portere. Meet Addy. 55.
Prairie Dogs. Patent. 20.
Pribichevich-Zoric. Zlata's Diary. 285.
Priceman. How to Make an Apple Pie and See
the World. 199.
Pringle. Jackal Woman. 96.
Pryor. Birthday Blizzard. 131.
Pullein-Thompson. Long Search. 96.
Pullman. Tin Princess. 199.
Puss in Boots. Perrault. 298.
Quattlebaum. Jackson Jones and the Puddle
of Thorns. 230.
Queen Anne's Lace. Wexler. 338.
Question of Trust. Bauer. 181.
Quinceafiera. Lankford. 325.
Quinlan. Tiger Flowers. 371.
Rabbit's Judgment. Han. 288.
Radical Red. Duffy. 151.
Radio Man. Dorros. 151.
Raimondo. Little Lama of Tibet. 157.
Ramsay Scallop. Temple. 271.
Ranch Dressing. Greenlaw. 154.
Random House Book of Easy-to-Read Stories.
166.
Ransom. Jimmy Crack Corn. 331.
Rappaport. Tinker vs. Des Moines. 22.
Rascal. Oregon's Journey. 332.
Raschka. Elizabeth Imagined an Iceberg. 298.
Rata-pata-scata-fata. Gershator. 257.
Rathmann. Good Night, Gorilla. 299.
Rats on the Range. Marshall. 18.
Rattigan. Dumpling Soup. 56.
. Truman's Aunt Farm. 231.
Ray, K. To Cross a Line. 269.
Ray, M. Pianna. 371.
Real Mummies Don't Bleed. Whitcher.
Real Plato Jones. Bawden. 75.
Reason for Janey. Wilson. 339.
Reaver. Bill. 299.
Rebel. Baillie. 350.
Reeder. Moonshiner's Son. 22.
Reiser. Margaret and Margarita/Margarita y
Margaret. 56.
Reiss. Pale Phoenix. 231.
Relative Strangers. Ferris. 79.
Remember the Red-Shouldered Hawk. Smith.
270.
Remkiewicz. Bone Stranger. 332.
Return of Rinaldo. Scheffler. 133.
Reuter. Boys from St. Petri. 232.
Revenge of Ishtar. Zeman. 172.
Reynolds. Amazon Basin. 97.
. Frozen Land. 97.
Reynoldson. Women and War. 300.
Rhino. Klass. 87.
Rich Lizard. Chandra. 6.
Richard. On Cat Mountain. 232.
Riddle Streak. Pfeffer. 95.
Ride. Third Planet. 333.
394 
* 
THE BUI.IETIN
Rinaldi. Fifth of March. 132.
.Stitch in Time. 269.
Ripslinger. Triangle. 269.
Rite of Passage. Wright. 205.
Rites of Passage. Bolden. 281.
Robinson. Nathaniel Willy, Scared Silly. 195.
Rodda. Timekeeper. 97.
Roessel. Kinaaldi. 158.
Roop. Capturing Nature. 132.
Rosenberg. Hiding to Survive. 371.
Rosie and the Poor Rabbits. Macdonald. 226.
Rosie. Calmenson. 315.
Ross, G. How Rabbit Tricked Otter. 333.
Ross, L. Sarah, Also Known As Hannah. 232.
Ross, R. Harper & Moon. 23.
Roth-Hano. Safe Harbors. 200.
Rowan. Women in the Marines. 270.
Roy Lichtenstein. Walker. 236.
Royal Kingdoms of Ghana, Mali, and
Songhay. McKissack. 194.
Roybal. Billy. 300.
Rubin. Emily Good as Gold. 97.
Rumbaut. Dove Dream. 334.
Runa. James. 12.
Running for Our Lives. Turner. 337.
Rupert, Rona. Straw Sense. 166.
Russell. Humpbacked Fluteplayer. 233.
Russian Girl. Kendall. 157.
Ruth Law Thrills a Nation. Brown. 116.
Rydell. Wind Says Good Night. 301.
Ryden. Joey. 372.
Rylant. Dreamer. 132.
. I Had Seen Castles. 98.
. Something Permanent. 301.
Saami of Lapland. Vitebsky. 304.
Sabbath Garden. Greene. 187.
Sable. Hesse. 289.
Sachar. Marvin Redpost: Alone in His
Teacher's House. 334.
Sadako. Coerr. 117.
Safe Harbors. Roth-Hano. 200.
Saint Patrick and the Peddler. Hodges. 156.
Salmon Story. Guiberson. 155.
Samuel Eaton's Day. Waters. 105.
San Souci. Hobyahs. 372.
. Snow Wife. 166.
Sand and Fog. Brandenburg. 253.
Sandburg. More Rootabagas. 133.
Sandin. Other Alice. 115.
Sandier. Cowboys. 234.
. Pioneers. 200.
Santa Calls. Joyce. 48.
Santa's Book of Names. McPhail. 51.
Sarah, Also Known As Hannah. Ross. 232.
Saturday Is Pattyday. Newman. 92.
Sauerwein. The Way Home. 234.
Save Halloween! Tolan. 59.
Say It Loud. Jones. 323.
Say. Grandfather's Journey. 23.
Saying Goodbye. Lee. 364.
Scheffler. Return of Rinaldo. 133.
Schenker. Fearsome's Hero. 201.
Schmidt. In the Village of the Elephants. 234.
Schroeder. Stone Lion. 201.
Schur. Circlemaker. 201.
Science Versus Pseudoscience. Aaseng. 348.
Scooter. Williams. 62.
Scott, A. Cowboy Country. 98.
Scott, E. Funny Papers. 167.
Scott, M. October Moon. 302.
Sculptor's Eye. Greenberg. 82.
Seal Journey. Sobol. 168.
Search for Seismosaurus. Gillette. 221.
Searching for Laura Ingalls. Lasky. 49.
Sebestyen. Out of Nowhere. 235.
Secret of the Ruby Ring. MacGrorye. 294.
Secret Room. Shulevitz. 202.
Seeing Things. Klein. 263.
Seibold. Mr. Lunch Takes a Plane Ride. 167.
Seidler. Wainscott Weasel. 99.
Seminoles. Sneve. 373.
Sendak. We Are All in the Dumps with Jack
and Guy. 56.
Serengeti Migration. Lindblad. 292.
Service. Phantom Victory. 334.
Seven Candles for Kwanzaa. Pinkney. 55.
Sexual Harassment. Landau. 15.
Seymour, Tres. Hunting the White Cow. 57.
Seymour, Tryntje. Gift of Changing Woman.
99.
Shadow of the Dragon. Garland. 80.
Shadowmaker. Nixon. 297.
Shakedown Street. Nasaw. 92.
Shaker Home. Bial. 216.
Shannon, G. Climbing Kansas Mountains.
168.
Shannon. King. 158.
Sharmat. Great Genghis Khan Look-Alike
Contest. 134.
Sheldon. Under the Moon. 302.
Shell Woman & the King. Yep. 63.
Shelton. Hoggle's Christmas. 100.
Shepherd Boy. Franklin. 318.
Sherman. Gleaming Bright. 302.
Shetterly. Nevernever. 134.
Ship. Macaulay. 90.
Short Walk Around the Pyramids. Isaacson.
48.
Shreve. Amy Dunn Quits School. 100.
Shulevitz. Secret Room. 202.
Siegel. Murder on the Highway. 168.
Simon. Mountains. 270.
SWeather. 57.
. Wolves. 100.
Singing Tortoise. Yeoman. 341.
Sioux. Sneve. 58.
JULY/AUGUST 1994 
* 395
Sister Shako and Kolo the Goat. Dalokay.
254.
Sisters/Hermanas. Paulsen. 94.
Sitti's Secrets. Nye. 228.
Sis. Small Tall Tale from the Far Far North.
24.
Skurzynski. Know the Score. 373.
Sky Legends of Vietnam. Vuong. 236.
Skylark. MacLachlan. 194.
Sleator. Others See Us. 101.
Slepian. Back to Before. 24.
Small Tall Tale from the Far Far North. Sis.
24.
Smith, B. Somewhere Just Beyond. 101.
Smith, D. Remember the Red-Shouldered
Hawk. 270.
Smith, L. Happy Hocky Family! 58.
Smoky Night. Bunting. 217.
Smucker. Outside the Window. 335.
Snake in the House. McNulty. 194.
Sneve. Navajos. 58.
. Seminoles. 373.
. Sioux. 58.
Snow Wife. San Souci. 166.
Snowed In. Lucas. 89.
Soaring Eagle. Finley. 221.
Sobol. Seal Journey. 168.
Someone Was Watching. Patneaude. 94.
Something From Nothing. Gilman. 186.
Something Permanent. Rylant. 301.
Somewhere Just Beyond. Smith. 101.
Song Lee in Room 2B. Kline. 15.
Song of Be. Beake, 215.
Songs in the Silence. Murphy. 296.
Sophie in the Saddle. King-Smith. 224.
Sorcerer's Apprentice. Willard. 170.
Soto. Crazy Weekend. 374.
. Too Many Tamales. 59.
Soul Looks Back in Wonder. Feelings. 152.
Sounds of Summer. Updike. 61.
Soup Ahoy. Peck. 229.
Speaking Out. Kuklin. 49.
Spooner. Story of the Little Black Dog. 303.
Sports Scandals. Nuwer. 369.
St. Patrick's Day. Gibbons. 186.
Stafford. We Got Here Together. 374.
Stanley. Charles Dickens. 101.
Staples, D. Arena Beach. 102.
Staples, S. Haveli. 102.
Starlit Somersault Downhill. Willard. 170.
Staying with Grandmother. Baker. 250.
Stearns. Wizard's Dozen. 169.
Stein. Mexican Revolution 1910-1920. 335.
Stella. Lee. 363.
Stella's Bull. Arrington. 349.
Stephen Biesty's Incredible Cross-Sections
Man-of-War. Platt. 165.
Stevenson. Fun/No Fun. 303.
Stevenson. Worse Than the Worst? 374.
Still a Nation of Immigrants. Ashabranner.
37.
Stitch in Time. Rinaldi. 269.
Stitching Stars. Lyons. 128.
Stock. Where Are You Going, Manyoni? 59.
Stolz. Cezanne Pinto. 202.
. Coco Grimes. 375.
Stone Lion. Schroeder. 201.
Story of Lightning and Thunder. Bryan. 40.
Story of the Little Black Dog. Spooner. 303.
Strange Objects. Crew. 7.
Straw Sense. Rupert. 166.
Strega Nona Meets Her Match. dePaola. 119.
Striking Out. Weaver. 204.
Strom. Uncertain Roads. 203.
Sun Is Falling, Night Is Calling. Leuck. 325.
Sun. On a White Pebble Hill. 235.
Sunday Outing. Pinkney. 370.
Sungura and Leopard. Knutson. 126.
Sunita Experiment. Perkins. 21.
Sunshine Home. Bunting. 253.
Survive! Could You. Donnelly. 150.
Sutcliff. Black Ships Before Troy. 169.
. Chess-Dream in a Garden. 102.
Sweetest Fig. Van Allsburg. 104.
T-Backs, T-Shirts, COAT and Suit.
Konigsburg. 88.
Take a Look. Davidson. 184.
Tale of Rabbit and Coyote. Johnston. 362.
Talking Peace. Carter. 183.
Tamar. Fair Game. 103.
.Things I Did Last Summer. 271.
Tangles. Broome. 182.
Tano & Binti. DaVolls. 317.
Tap-Tap. Williams. 238.
Tarr. His Majesty's Elephant. 170.
Taste of Smoke. Bauer. 147.
Tatterhood and the Hobgoblins. Mills. 18.
Taylor. Timothy of the Cay. 103.
Teasdale. Christmas Carol. 25.
Teens Face to Face with Chronic Illness.
LeVert. 50.
Tell Me Everything. Coman. 149.
Temple. Ramsay Scallop. 271.
Ten Small Tales. Lottridge. 293.
Thesman. Cattail Moon. 336.
They Dreamed of Horses. Frydenborg. 319.
Things I Did Last Summer. Tamar. 271.
Third Planet. Ride. 333.
This Baby. McClelland. 293.
This Land Is My Land. Littlechild. 161.
Thomas. Come Go With Me. 235.
Three Faces of Vietnam. Wormser. 171.
Three Little Wolves and the Big Bad Pig.
Trivizas. 25.
Three Princes. Kimmel. 262.
Thunderstorm! Tripp. 272.
396 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Tickle Octopus. Wood. 377.
Tiger Flowers. Quinlan. 371.
Tiger, Tiger, Burning Bright. Koertge. 290.
Time for Andrew. Hahn. 260.
Time for Bed. Fox. 43.
Timekeeper. Rodda. 97.
Timothy of the Cay. Taylor. 103.
Tin Princess. Pullman. 199.
Tinker vs. Des Moines. Rappaport. 22.
To Cross a Line. Ray. 269.
To the Top of the World. Brandenburg. 77.
Toby Scudder, Ultimate Warrior. Gifaldi. 80.
Toby. Wild. 339.
Tolan. Save Halloween! 59.
Tomorrow Is Mom's Birthday. Dorflinger.
255.
Too Many Tamales. Soto. 59.
Torn Away. Heneghan. 189.
Tough Choices. Antle. 36.
Tower Room. Howard. 85.
Tracks in the Wild. Bowen. 76.
Tree House Children. White. 376.
Tree of Life. Jackson. 124.
Tree Place and Other Poems. Levy. 225.
Tree That Rains. Bernhard. 350.
Trevor. Juliet's Story. 336.
Triangle. Ripslinger. 269.
Tripp. Thunderstorm! 272.
Trivizas. Three Little Wolves and the Big Bad
Pig. 25.
Truman's Aunt Farm. Rattigan. 231.
Truth to Tell. Bond. 313.
Tryon. Albert's Field Trip. 60.
Tucker Pfeffercorn. Moser. 329.
Tugboats in Action. Burke. 116.
Tukama Tootles the Flute. Gershator. 257.
Tunnell. Joke's on George. 60.
Turner. Running for Our Lives. 337.
Turtle Island ABC. Hausman. 260.
TV Guidance Counselor. LeMieux. 50.
Twice Taken. Pfeffer. 229.
Twins on Toes. Anderson. 36.
Two Moms, The Zark, and Me. Valentine.
134.
Two Teenagers in Twenty. Heron. 359.
Two Very Little Sisters. Carrick. 41.
Uchida. Bracelet. 25.
.Magic Purse. 203.
Uncertain Roads. Strom. 203.
Uncle Daney's Way. Haas. 259.
Uncle Fedya, His Dog, and His Cat.
Uspensky. 61.
Uncle Jed's Barbershop. Mitchell. 19.
Uncle Vampire. Grant. 82.
Unconditional Surrender. Marrin. 227.
Under 18. Kronenwetter. 88.
Under the Moon. Sheldon. 302.
UNICEF. I Dream of Peace. 375.
Updike. Sounds of Summer. 61.
Uspensky. Uncle Fedya, His Dog, and His
Cat. 61.
Vail. Ever After. 272.
Valentine. Two Moms, The Zark, and Me.
134.
Van Allsburg. Sweetest Fig. 104.
van der Rol. Anne Frank. 104.
Vennema. Charles Dickens. 101.
Verhoeven. Anne Franky. 104.
Victor and Christabel. Mathers. 51.
Visual Dictionary of the Horse. 376.
Vitebsky. Saami of Lapland. 304.
Voices from the Fields. Atkin. 5.
Voices of the River. Cheripko. 283.
Voigt. The Wings of a Falcon. 25.
Vuong. Golden Carp. 105.
.Sky Legends of Vietnam. 236.
Waas, Uli. Where's Molly? 133.
Wainscott Weasel. Seidler. 99.
Waiting for the Evening Star. Wells. 135.
Walker. Hand, Heart, and Mind. 203.
. Roy Lichtenstein. 236.
Walking for Freedom. Kelso. 13.
Wallace. Blackwater Swamp. 304.
Wallner. Betsy Ross. 237.
Walsh. Mr. Lunch Takes a Plane Ride. 167.
Waters, J. Deep-Sea Vents. 237.
Waters, K. Samuel Eaton's Day. 105.
Watkins. My Brother, My Sister, and I. 376.
Waugh. Mennyms. 304.
Way Home. Sauerwein. 234.
Way of the Earth. Bierhorst. 252.
We Are All in the Dumps with Jack and Guy.
Sendak. 56.
We Got Here Together. Stafford. 374.
Weather. Hopkins. 223.
Weather. Simon. 57.
Weaver. Striking Out. 204.
Welcome Back Sun. Emberley. 43.
Wells, Robert E. Is A Blue Whale the Biggest
Thing There Is? 105.
Wells, Rosemary. Max and Ruby's First Greek
Myth. 106.
.Waiting for the Evening Star. 135.
Wesley. Haphazard House. 61.
Westcott. Never Take a Pig to Lunch. 338.
Western Wind. Fox. 9.
Westray. Color Sampler. 26.
Wexler. Jack-in-the-Pulpit. 26.
.Queen Anne's Lace. 338.
What Food Is This? Hausherr. 288.
What Good Is a Tail? Patent. 197.
What Is Your Language? Leventhal. 160.
What Makes a Bruegel a Bruegel?
Miihlberger. 163.
JULY/AUGUST 1994 
* 397
What Makes a Monet a Monet? Miihlberger.
163.
What Rhymes With Snake? Brown. 216.
Whelan. Night of the Full Moon. 170.
When It Snowed That Night. Farber. 78.
When the Frost Is Gone. Bat-Ami. 251.
When This Box Is Full. Lillie. 127.
Where Are You Going, Manyoni? Stock. 59.
Where Is Papa Now? Conway. 219.
Where's Molly? Waas. 133.
While Standing on One Foot. Jaffe. 124.
Whistle Home. Honeycutt. 47.
Whitcher. Real Mummies Don't Bleed. 135.
White. Tree House Children. 376.
White Lilacs. Meyer. 163.
Whiteley. Only Opal. 338.
Who Built the Ark? Paparone. 320.
Wiener. Be a Friend. 272.
Wijnberg. Parental Unemployment. 222.
Wild. Our Granny. 305.
.Toby. 339.
Wilds. Hajime in the North Woods. 237.
Wildsmith. Jack and the Meanstalk. 305.
Wilkes. Children's Step-by-Step Cookbook.
377.
Willard. Sorcerer's Apprentice. 170.
_ 
. Starlit Somersault Downhill. 136.
Williams, C. Kelly and Me. 238.
Williams, D. Grandma Essie's Covered
Wagon. 62.
Williams, K. Tap-Tap. 238.
Williams, M. Into the Valley. 26.
Williams, V. Scooter. 62.
Williamson. First Houses. 91.
Willis. In Search of the Giant. 339.
Wilson. Reason for Janey. 339.
Wind Says Good Night. Rydell. 301.
Wings of a Falcon. Voigt. 25.
Winni Allfours. Cole. 283.
Winter Camp. Hill. 85.
Winter's Orphans. Farentinos. 152.
Witch's Fire. Butler. 40.
Wittlinger. Lombardo's Law. 63.
Wizard's Dozen. Stearns. 169.
Wolf at the Door. Corcoran. 77.
Wolfson. From the Earth To Beyond the Sky.
171.
Wolves. Simon. 100.
Woman Unafraid. Colman. 118.
Women and War. Reynoldson. 300.
Women in the Marines. Rowan. 270.
Wonderful Pen of May Swenson. Knudson.
126.
Wonderful Towers of Watts. Zelver. 379.
Wood. Tickle Octopus. 377.
Woodruff. Magnificent Mummy Maker. 205.
Woodson. Between Madison and Palmetto.
136.
. I Hadn't Meant to Tell You This.
239.
Word to the Wise. Hurwitz. 289.
World of Daughter McGuire. Wyeth. 205.
Wormser. Three Faces of Vietnam. 171.
Worse Than the Worst? Stevenson. 374.
Wrapped in a Riddle. Heisel. 84.
Wright, B. Ghost Comes Calling. 239.
SGhost Witch. 123.
. Ghosts of Mercy Manor. 27.
Wright, C. Jumping the Broom. 378.
Wright, R. Rite of Passage. 205.
Wyeth. World of Daughter McGuire. 205.
Wyman. Faith, Hope, and Chicken Feathers.
378.
Yagyu. Holes in Your Nose. 379.
Year of No More Corn. Ketteman. 14.
Yellow Blue Bus Means I Love You.
Hamilton. 321.
Yeoman. Singing Tortoise. 341.
Yep. Boy Who Swallowed Snakes. 206.
. Dragon's Gate. 136.
. Ghost Fox. 240.
. Shell Woman & the King. 63.
Yolen. Animal Fare. 379.
York. Key to the Playhouse. 273.
Young People Speak. Handler. 11.
Young. Learning by Heart. 136.
Zachary. Gauthier. 221.
Zeitlin. While Standing on One Foot. 124.
Zelver. Wonderful Towers of Watts. 380.
Zeman. Revenge of Ishtar. 172.
Zhang. Little Tiger in the Chinese Night.
240.
Zlata's Diary. Filipovic. 285.
4.
"'l Starred in ALA Booklist and Publishers Weekly
Story and Pictures by
"A disappointment to
his father, a daydreamer
in the classroom, and
failure on the ball field,
bbett decides that he is
boy. He finds comfort,
however, in his talent for drawing
/ "Wickedly funny...
Much of the humor
is reminiscent of
Roald Dahl's edgy
mpooons.'-Booklist
6rillantl 
potae 
the 
trimp 
of th 
hu 
anspri.
OUT 
OF 
NOWHER0 
E 
'
A NOE*YOID 
EETE
"Lf on th d 
ser 
tofn 
o isl 
fehsfe-prtdmte
run ofwt 
th 
owe 
of 
a 
BMW 
1 3 
a 
-l 
Hale 
join 
foce
with 
~ 
fou 
ote 
catofs 
Ih 
a. pi 
6 
dupe 
6y 
hi 
ower 
Ma,
evcto 
afe 
he 
is 
reeae 
fro 
a 
hoptl 
an 
Sigr 
on
drifter.... 
Thi 
tede 
6 
k[xlrs 
cm 
ainhp
coprto 
an 
compassio. 
S 
SS 
*S 
*
*-Pbihr 
Weekly 
-
' 
S 
.
and- 
re 
ul 
thi 
.Se 
lie 
. Thi 
poinan
-
Scho 
Libar 
Journal,-
pag 
-tu 
ne. 
.
'. 
... 
.
Ages 
0 
0up
*R 
$1 
.9 
0-53 
6 
3 
-
RL 
$15.99S 0-3 
-08689-
ORCAR 
BO 
K
A 
GROIER 
CMPAN
''Horn Book star
* Kirkus Reviews pointer
*-Publishers Weekly star R1IiR
"A parenting dispute arises between
a young king and queen over the care
of the toddler prince.They both want
S'the 
one and only very best
2 
thing' for their son, but
Swhat 
would that be?...
Babbitt's elegant writing style and the
totally engaging characterizations in
her illustrations combine to create
a memorable picture book."
I 
-The Horn Book
"A unique and enlightening
picture book... The timeless
Smessage is delivered with humor
7 
and a light touch."
-School Library Journal
"Babbitt has created some
extraordinary children's
Sbooks, 
and this one is
no exception. It is,
I 
quite simply,
) H : 
Babbitt at her best."
.J , 
-Publishers Weekly
All ages
S(0-06-205044-3)
3 (0-06-205045-1)
Pi 
.•T 
RtH-FRýS
~-- 
-
---------------- 
-
---
University of llinois Prss 
SECOND CLASS
1325 South Oak Street 
POSTAGE
Champaign, IL 61820 
PAID
U.S.A. 
CAMPAGN, IL
R 
OTURN 
POSTAGE GUARANTEE
"A striking book that raises
arguments about King and the
movements he sprang from."
- Julian Bond
"An excellent book that will do
more to keep Martin Luther
King and his 'dream' alive in a
different era than would more
fulsome tributes." - American
Historca Review
Well-researched, clearly written,
and well-balanced." - New
York Times Book Review
A volume in the series
Blacks in the New World,
edited by August Meier
and John H. Bracey
Paper, $11.95
order toll-free 800/5454703
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS PRESS * 1325 South Oak Street * Champaign. IL 
61820
