ILLIN 
I S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois Press
AVkA 
A
pd
THE
BUvL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
July/August 1995
Vol. 48 No. 11
A LOOK INSIDE
373 THE BIG PICTURE
Companions of the Night by Vivian Vande Velde
374 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
375 * The Arkadians by Lloyd Alexander
380 * Rosie the Riveter: Women Working on the Home Front in World War II
by Penny Colman
389 * Poppa's New Pants written by Angela Shelf Medearis; illus. by John
Ward
393 
* The Same Place but Different by Perry Nodelman
401 * From the Notebooks ofMelanin Sun by Jacqueline Woodson
402 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
404 ANNUAL AUTHOR AND TITLE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
STAFF
Roger Sutton, Editor (RS)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Susan Dove Lempke, Reviewer (SDL)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Heather McCammond-Watts, Editorial Assistant (HMW)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS ADVISORY BOARD
Leigh Estabrook, Dean, GSLIS, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Selma K. Richardson, Professor, GSLIS
Christine Jenkins, Assistant Professor, GSLIS
Richard C. Anderson, Director, Center for the Study of Reading, UIUC
Jean Osborn, Associate Director, Center for the Study of Reading
P. David Pearson, Dean, College of Education, UIUC
Violet J. Harris, Associate Professor, College of Education
Nancy O'Brien, Education Subject Specialist, Library, UIUC
Peggy Miller, Associate Professor, Department of Speech Communication, UIUC
Ann D. Carlson, Associate Professor, GSLIS, Rosary College
Janice Harrington, Head of Children's Services, Champaign Public Library
Elizabeth Huntoon, Director Systemwide Children's Services, Chicago Public Library
Janie Schomberg, Librarian, Leal Elementary School, Urbana, Illinois
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $35.00; individuals, $29.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Roger Sutton, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, Children's Research Center, 51
Gerty Drive, Champaign, IL 61820
Second-class postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1995 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Cliff Nielsen, from Companions of the Night ©1995 and used by permission of
Harcourt Brace and Company.
JULY/AUGUST 1995 
* 373
THE BIG PICTURE
Companions of the Night
by Vivian Vande Velde
No, you're not suffering from dtja vu-we did just feature a YA vampire novel on
the cover back in April (Mary Downing Hahn's Look for Me By Moonlight), and
Vivian Vande Velde's Companions of the Night is another excursion, albeit a very
different one, into the genre. Apparently, excellent vampire books, like bats, come
in flocks.
This one has a terrific start: sixteen-year-old Kerry drives out in the
middle of the night to retrieve her weeping little brother's mislaid stuffed bear, and
she stumbles into a gang of people who have assaulted and are now planning to kill
a young man whom they insist is a vampire. Quick-witted Kerry helps their vic-
tim, Ethan, escape, but the vampire hunters, convinced that she too is a vampire,
kidnap her father and little brother in an attempt to bargain with her. What you
can't tell your patrons is that Ethan is a vampire. Kerry, to her horror, discovers
this fact when she turns to Ethan for assistance, and she makes a bargain with him:
if he will help Kerry get her family back, she (with her ability to go out in the
daylight) will help Ethan find and face his chief antagonist, Professor Marsala.
There's more to the story, and there's definitely more to the book. Vande
Velde employs classic vampire motifs-vulnerability to sunlight, instantaneous
healing, immortality-but makes Ethan, with his accessible college-boy charm
and genuine rapport with Kerry, a different kind of vampire hero. Kerry herself is
in many ways an iconoclastic vampire-story heroine: she has no secret well of
yearning for Ethan to tap into, no smoldering resentments for the vampire to feed.
She is relentlessly ordinary without being shallow, worried about her parallel park-
ing and, in a small ironic foreshadowing, her post-orthodontia dentition.
And Kerry and Ethan just plain like each other. Not always-Ethan has
his scarier moments, as Kerry wisely reminds herself to remember-but most of
the time their simple compatibility is as evident as it is impossible. Where Hahn's
book, true to the gothic tradition, was lush and allusively seductive, the tone here
is crisp and often funny (the wit is appropriately mordant although never camp)
without ever slackening the excitement. It's still genuinely touching, however,
when Ethan, in a line that would have been a throwaway in a more sentimental
story, finally acknowledges his affection for Kerry by admitting "it would be
nice ... to see your hair in the sunlight."
The book, while never dry, difficult, or uninteresting, is an intellectual
adventure more than a sensual one, its challenges more cerebral than hormonal.
Vande Velde keeps the moral ambiguity coming and the reader's loyalty as divided
and shifting as Kerry's. Ethan has his attractions, but he poses a genuine threat to
Kerry as well as to the general populace, and she's never sure, especially with his
constant and easy lies, how much she can trust her life to his goodwill. Yet the
374 
* THE BULLETIN
vampire hunters are dangerously lawless, bitterly vengeful, and frequently mis-
taken about important facts (Professor Marsala is avenging not, as he thinks, a
vampirical murder, but a tragedy of teen rebellion). Both the vampire hunters and
the vampires commit murder (all offstage, although there's one accidental death
and one grisly discovery of a corpse), and both sides coldly use Kerry for their own
ends. So who is right? Will she help either side, and if so which and for what
reasons? And what does it make her if she does?
It's a freshly written thriller, an offbeat love story, an engaging twist on
the vampire novel, and an exciting tale of moral complexity. Use it as the center-
piece of a discussion of ethics if you dare; otherwise, point the book at the Lois
Duncan fans as well as Anne Rice followers, and get out of the way. (Imprint
information appears on page 399.)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
AARDEMA, VERNA, ad. Jackal's Flying Lesson: A Khoikhoi Tale; illus. by Dale
Gottlieb. 
Apple Soup/Knopf, 1995 
33p
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-95813-4 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-85813-X 
$15.00 
R 
4-7 yrs
In a momentary lapse of judgment, a mother dove allows herself to be tricked by
Jackal into tossing her two babies down into his gaping jaws. Not to worry,
though-Crane devises an even better trick to retrieve the babies: convincing
Jackal to learn to fly. Gummed and feathered, Jackal plummets off Crane's back
and lands "with such a jolt that the two baby doves popped, kwa-cha, right out of
his mouth." Aardema relates this southwest African tale in straightforward prose
peppered with onomatopoeic expressions which are easily understood in context.
While the image of babies who come to harm due to a mother's gullibility is in-
deed disturbing, Gottlieb's crayon-bright, stylized paintings and Jackal's comical
comeuppance (comedownance?) allow listeners to maintain a comforting distance
from the harsher aspects of the tale. And the reader-aloud who can play up the
ideophones, included in the glossary/pronunciation guide, will leave 'em chuck-
ling rather than shuddering. EB
ADAM, ADDIE 
Hilda and the Mad Scientist; illus. by Lisa Thiesing. 
Dutton,
1995 
32p
ISBN 0-525-45386-5 
$14.99 
R 
4-8 yrs
Hilda has "big muscles, big feet, and, best of all, a big heart," and her motto is "I go
where I'm needed and stay until I'm not." Her beneficent impulses eventually
lead her to Dr. Weinerstein's creepy mansion, where, much to his dismay, she
imposes order and clean living on Dr. Weinerstein's evil existence: "When he
JULY/AUGUST 1995 
* 375
reached for a slice of apple pie, she made him eat his broccoli first. She made him
brush his teeth-what was left of them." Finally, in a desperate attempt to drive
her away, he makes a monster-but Hilda has tidied up his potions for him, so his
monster ends up being a duplicate of her, which enables her to return to town
knowing that the good doctor will be well taken care of. Hilda is an engagingly
unstoppable heroine, and kids will be tickled by her wanton tidying and her hap-
less assistance (she flings the baker's goods about with abandon and her monster
twin "cleans" Dr. Weinerstein's lab with glass-smashing panache). The line-and-
watercolor art depicts Hilda as balloony and cartoony, a sturdy, buxom lass in
clogs and headscarf who radiates good will and against whom poor greenish Dr.
Weinerstein simply stands no chance. Illustrative jokes range from the simple (a
dachshund helping himself to Hilda's provisions when she's not looking) to the
more allusive (the Hilda-monster's coiffure is h la Elsa Lanchester in The Bride of
Frankenstein). Bill this one as a different kind of monster story; even kids who
freak at the suggestion of bats and scary castles will feel safe behind Hilda's volumi-
nous skirts. DS
ALEXANDER, LLOYD 
TheArkadians. Dutton, 1995 
272p
ISBN 0-525-45415-2 
$15.99 
Ad Gr. 4-7
Lucian, a bean-counter for the king, is on the lam from the crooked ministers he's
discovered with their hands in the treasury; Fronto, a pompous poet transformed
into a jackass, is on the hoof from a cruel owner; Joy-in-the-Dance, a displaced
oracle whose sanctuary was ransacked by a warring tribe, is on her way home to
mother. Banding together in a sort of Crosby-Hope-Lamour team on the road to
Metara, the trio share adventure and hear tales that are, in fact, twists on classical
myths and epics. The entire odyssey seems little more than a raison d'tre for
Alexander's clever spoofs on the Trojan Horse, Narcissus, the Minotaur, and a
particularly shady Jason; however, these tales are never directly named, so readers
must hone their Homer and be up on their Olympians to catch the references.
Fronto's wisecracking, Joy-in-the-Dance's condescension, and Lucian's bumbling
chauvinism wear thin quickly, and the poets-are-really-jackasses theme limps with
overuse. Although a happy ending sees Lucian united with Joy-in-the-Dance,
Fronto returned to human form, and a host of hangers-on basking in bliss, little
character development has occurred over the nearly three hundred pages to justify
the felicitous conclusion. EB
ANDERSON, RACHEL 
Black Water. Holt, 1995 
168p
ISBN 0-8050-3847-7 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
"If only," thinks Albert, "by merely keeping close to one's keeper guardian, every-
thing could be all right for a child who had madness." Albert is in fact epileptic,
not mad, but since this is late Victorian England it takes him a long time to dis-
cover the difference and it's not one that leaves him much better off. His narra-
tion tells of his life with his protective, well-bred mother, who ekes out a living as
a teacher and tries desperately to cure her son of his distressing malady; after her
death Albert is in the care of his stepfather, whose attempts to cure Albert are more
orthodox but no more successful, and who believes it a waste of time to educate
the boy since he can never hold a job or earn his keep. Anderson paints a vivid
picture of the frustration and misery of suffering from the "falling sickness" when
there was neither cure, control, nor explanation; Albert's despair at his lost days,
his social solecisms, and his ostracism by everyone he meets is tangible throughout
376 
* THE BULLETIN
the story. Less successful is the author's linkage of Albert with Edward Lear, him-
self a nineteenth-century epileptic, through both the latter's books and his appear-
ance in Albert's story; the book's end is also uncertain and anticlimactic. Nonetheless
Anderson, the talented author of The Bus People (BCCB 10/92) and Paper Faces
(11/93) has again succeeded in making a strange existence vivid and understand-
able to contemporary young readers. DS
ANHOLT, LAURENCE 
The New Puppy; illus. by Catherine Anholt. 
Artists and
Writers, 1995 
32p
ISBN 0-307-17516-2 
$12.95 
R 4-6 yrs
Anna pleads relentlessly for a dog and, many fantasies and promises later, gets one.
Everybody's happy at first, but the moment comes when Anna shouts-while throw-
ing her chewed-up favorite slippers into the air-"I DON'T WANT THAT DOG!"
It takes a sad whimper in the night to change her mind, but "when Anna's dad
came down for breakfast, he found Anna and Tess fast asleep in the new red bas-
ket." This is all predictable but in an absolutely authentic way, and the loose-lined
pen-and-watercolor scenes make it funny, along with giving children a catalogue
of details to look over (six puppies to choose from, twelve pet-store items to browse,
a two-page spread full of puppy pandemonium) in a kind of Richard Scarry up-
grade. The story and art share a traditional coziness with just enough mischief to
keep things lively; hand this one to children expecting a canine addition to the
family. BH
ARMSTRONG, JENNIFER 
Wan Hu Is in the Stars; illus. by Barry Root. 
Tambourine,
1995 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-12458-5 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-12457-7 
$15.00 
R 
4-8 yrs
Poet Wan Hu is so absentminded that he often writes "his verses with water in-
stead of ink." He forgets one of his shoes, or goes out with a pot rather than his hat
on his head. His thoughts are preoccupied with the stars-what they are made
from, how they stay in the sky, how a man could reach them and what he could
learn. To the bemusement of his fellow villagers, he tries different ways to travel to
the stars. When harnessing geese and cranes is unsuccessful, he tries a more dan-
gerous but effective idea. Armstrong's protagonist in this original tale is both funny
and touching, and she keeps the pace flowing with tight focus and minimal de-
scription. Root's gouache paintings portray an idyllic mountain setting brimming
with flowers; the book's center spread, where Wan Hu imagines himself being
pulled elegantly toward the stars by birds, is especially spectacular, contrasting en-
tertainingly with the reality a few pages later when "the geese went east, and the
cranes went west." A new star formation in the sky makes a nicely ambiguous
ending for children to ponder. SDL
Avi 
Tom, Babette 6& Simon: Three Tales of Transformation; illus. by Alexi
Natchev. 
Macmillan, 1995 
100p
ISBN 0-02-707765-9 
$15.00 
Ad Gr. 4-7
Taking a break from his more ambitious works such as The Barn (BCCB 12/94),
Avi here offers three ironic fantasy turns on the old be-careful-what-you-wish-for
theme. Tom is lazy, and happily trades bodies with a cat; princess Babette is born
without a blemish--and without a face; Simon wants everyone to notice him, and
JULY/AUGUST 1995 
* 
377
after he's turned into a bird-man, they do. "Tom" is the most tightly structured
while "Simon" offers the most drama; "Babette" begins with more promise than it
eventually fulfills. While the stories aren't very substantial, they're easy to read
and wear their morals relatively lightly. Natchev supplies each story with a raffish
ink sketch. RS
BIERHORST, JOHN, ad. 
The White Deer and Other Stories Told by the
Lenape. Morrow, 1995 
137p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-688-12900-5 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 8 up
If we mean what we say, that children deserve our best efforts, then Bierhorst
should be getting more attention for his folkloristic contributions. His are not
comfortably popularized Native American tales that Disney might choose to ani-
mate, but selections of East Coast Indian lore "connected to the story sources as
nearly as possible, accepting their strengths as well as their occasional oddities, in
the hope that the reader may thereby be brought closer to ... tradition and may
gain an appreciation of its long continuity." Context, too, is given strong respect:
"Generally, the time for telling was after dark and almost always during the coldest
months. That stories must be told in winter is a very old rule, widespread in native
America." Beyond its use as a research source for tribal traditions, the stories will
provoke cultural comparison: "How the Big House Got Started" has a Delaware
witch-burning that offers many parallels to the New England persecution of inno-
cents. And the stylistic quirks provide a tonal array from stately to ironic, as in this
tale about a fish monster: "So. They found out he was going to be kind of hard to
handle." Students will be intrigued by the occasional alternative openings to "once
upon a time"-"My story camps, called by name Jack." As Bierhorst explains,
"the tale has a life of its own and has merely decided to 'camp' here for a while
before traveling to another location." This is a rich collection, meticulous as to
notes, bibliography, and glossary. If some of the more fragmentary or puzzling
tales leave young readers wondering, welcome them to the maze called knowl-
edge-and give them a hand to help them find their way through it. BH
BOBER, NATALIE S. 
Abigail Adams: Witness to a Revolution. 
Atheneum,
1995 
248p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-689-31760-3 
$17.00 
R Gr. 9-12
Bober follows her biography of Thomas Jefferson by remembering the ladies-in
fact, the one who coined that very phrase in a letter to her husband in the momen-
tous year of 1776. While Adams predates organized feminism, her famous letter
to her young congressman still resonates: "That your Sex are Naturally Tyrannical
is a Truth so thoroughly established as to admit of no dispute, but such of you as
wish to be happy willingly give up the harsh title of Master for the more tender and
endearing one of Friend." Bober makes no effort to emancipate Adams from her
times; this is a traditional, scrupulous account of a life in its domestic particulars as
well as in its proximity to significant decisions and events. The biography assumes
readers already have a working knowledge of the Revolutionary era, but most read-
ers won't know that John Adams as a young lawyer defended the British soldiers
accused in the Boston Massacre, and Bober drops the fact in without any elucida-
tion. Likewise, she makes reference to Alexander Hamilton's "treachery" prior to
the 1797 elections, but does not tell us what he did. The focus, though, is Adams
herself, and Bober provides a patient and full rendering of her. Documentation is
378 
* THE BULLETIN
provided; photographs of the various Adams' homes and reproductions of many
Copley and Mather portraits are carefully and engagingly placed throughout the
text. RS
BOLOGNESE, DON 
Little Hawk's New Name; written and illus. by Don
Bolognese. 
Cartwheel/Scholastic, 1995 
48p 
(Hello Reader!)
Paper ed. ISBN 0-590-48292-0 
$3.50 
R Gr. 1-3
What begins as a simple yarn about a Plains Indian boy who helps his grandfather
at the buffalo hunt develops into a tale with more narrative complexity than easy-
readers usually offer. Little Hawk refuses to trade his cherished horse at the annual
rendezvous and later rides in a horse race, winning the contest but incurring the
wrath of the losers. The defeated Indians take revenge on Little Hawk's grandfa-
ther; in a daring (and successful) rescue mission the boy earns a new name and his
deceased father's talisman. Young readers may not fully comprehend why Grand-
father grabs his captor's headdress, or that Little Hawk's theft of his enemies' po-
nies is as much a matter of honor as exigency. Energetic line and watercolor pictures,
while not notable for true-to-scale accuracy, do occasionally explicate the text.
Those readers ready for a little intricacy in their chapter books will appreciate the
challenge. EB
BUNTING, EVE 
Once Upon a Time; illus. with photographs by John
Pezaris. 
Richard C. Owen, 1995 
(Meet the Author) 
32p
ISBN 1-878450-59-X 
$13.95
KUSKIN, KARLA 
Thoughts, Pictures and Words; written and illus. by Karla Kuskin
and with photographs by Nicholas Kuskin. 
Richard C. Owen, 1995 
(Meet
the Author) 
32p
ISBN 1-878450-41-7 
$13.95
MAHY, MARGARET 
My Mysterious World; written and illus. by Margaret Mahy
and with photographs by David Alexander. 
Richard C. Owen, 1995 
(Meet
the Author) 
32p
ISBN 1-878450-58-1 
$13.95 
R Gr. 2-4
Three authors write chatty autobiographies, sharing treasured childhood memo-
ries, describing their current lives, and answering that favorite question of school
children: where do you get your ideas? Liberally illustrated with color photo-
graphs (as well as drawings and other art work by Kuskin and Mahy), each book
presents a vibrant portrait, with each author setting her own tone. Bunting tells
about the messages she tries to convey in her books (mentioning Caldecott winner
Smoky Night); Kuskin tells part of her story in poems; Mahy's personality comes
through powerfully as she exuberantly describes her life and routine, with the ex-
otic New Zealand location making this the strongest book visually as well. Child-
hood photos, pictures of the authors' families, and maps round out the accounts of
each writer. Entertaining and informal, this series (see also Martin, BCCB 9/92) is
the next best thing to meeting a live author. SDL
BURGESS, MELVIN 
An Angel fr May. 
Simon, 1995 
154p
ISBN 0-671-89004-2 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Tam, angry with his divorced parents, spends much of his time roaming the ruins
of a nearby farm, and he's alarmed to run into the strange local bag lady there.
JULY/AUGUST 1995 
* 379
He's even more alarmed when her dog leads him into the past, a time during
World War II when the farm was up and running and a young evacuee named
May was staying with Mr. Nutter, the wise farmer. May has survived a childhood
of abuse and neglect and is beginning to grow strong on the Nutter farm; she
befriends Tam, who, after finally making it back to the present, attempts unsuc-
cessfully to return to the past in time to warn May and Mr. Nutter about the fire
that will destroy the farm and take Mr. Nutter's life. This is a blend of Goodnight,
Mr. Tom and Tom's Midnight Garden, but it doesn't quite work. It will be evident
to most readers from early on that the bag lady is, in fact, May grown old, but it's
not clear what Tam is going to do with this fact or what the point was of Tam's
trip through time. The time-travel story is still absorbing, however, particularly in
its images of Tam running desperately through the blacked-out night trying not to
let people see his anachronistic parka and sneakers; kids who appreciate a good
yarn about a fish out of temporal waters will enjoy reading about Tam's peregrina-
tions. DS
CAPEK, MICHAEL 
Artistic Trickery: The Tradition of Trompe L'OeilArt. Lerner,
1995 
6 4p
ISBN 0-8225-2064-8 
$16.13 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Trompe-l'oeil art is one of the most accessible of artistic genres: the point is clear,
immediately comprehensible, and frequently amusing to viewers of all ages. Capek
includes a wide variety of kid-appealing examples in the book, describing classical
examples of trompe-l'oeil and devoting chapters to some of the most popular sub-
jects of these trickster works of art ("Damaged Goods," "Money and Stamps,"
"Food," "People," "Doors," etc.). Unfortunately, the art's reproduction often adds
a layer of confusion to that of trickery-it's difficult to distinguish between repro-
ductions of photorealistic art and photos of sculptures, for example, and the im-
portant textural aspect of many paintings is lost. Aside from the mention of
trompe-l'oeil in antiquity, there's little sense of the history of the genre, since the
thematic organization of the chapters puts artists from the 16th century next to
artists from the 20th. There's still an impressive variety of art represented, and
brief biographies of particular artists (such as contemporary sculptor Marilyn Levine
and muralist Richard Haas) give interesting glimpses into process. An index and
glossary are included; source notes for the reproductions aren't as informative as
one would like, but could point readers to museums where they can see the art in
person. DS
CARLE, ERIC 
The Very Lonely Firefly; written and illus. by Eric Carle. 
Philomel,
1995 
28p
ISBN 0-399-22774-1 
$19.95 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
Carle states on the jacket flap that this is a book about "belonging," but it's actu-
ally about the same thing as The Very Quiet Cricket (BCCB 11/90), that which
Carle calls "love" and scientists call sex. The very lonely firefly is "searching for
other fireflies," but in its quest for fellow flashers it runs across a lightbulb, a candle,
a flashlight, a lantern, animal eyes in the night, headlights, and fireworks before
finding its own kind twinkling (batteries included) on the last page. It's barely a
story, but toddlers will appreciate the predictability and rhythm of the text and the
bold shapes of the firefly and other figures set against the streaky blue-black sky.
The limits of technology evidently determined that only the fireflies appearing on
380 
* THE BULLETIN
the very last right-hand page get to actually flash (randomly and prettily), and kids
may wonder why their hero, who appears on the left-hand page, doesn't get a
twinkle of its own. You won't be able to fully appreciate the book's special effects
in a story hour setting, but as a very-last bedtime story-what a good excuse for
putting out the light. RS
CASANOVA, MARY 
Moose Tracks. 
Hyperion, 1995 
120p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2035-7 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0042-9 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Against his father's (and the law's) direct instructions, Seth, responding to peer
pressure, has taken a shotgun out with his friends and made his first kill, a rabbit.
His rabbit's-foot trophy weighs heavily in his pocket, though, and Seth sees a
chance to redeem himself and gain his father's respect when he saves a moose calf
from poachers and determines to bring the ruffians to justice-Seth's dad is the
local game warden in their neck of the Minnesota woods. Although the character-
ization is shallow, so that the father-and-son theme never develops any intensity,
there's plenty of outdoor action and chasing of bad guys with guns by good kids
on horses. The timespan is short and the writing clipped if unsubtle; give the book
to kids who'd rather be riding than reading and they just might settle down for a
stretch. RS
COLMAN, PENNY 
Rosie the Riveter: Women Working on the Home Front in World
War II. 
Crown, 1995 
120p 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-517-59791-8 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-59790-X 
$16.00 
R Gr. 5-8
Tightly focused and smoothly written, this account of women's participation in
World War II homefront industry captures the range of motives that drew women
into the labor force, from "My sister always said that Hitler was the one that got us
out of the white folks' kitchen," to "I wasn't working 'cause I wanted to. I was
working 'cause I thought it was necessary." As Colman observes, the women's
personal attitudes were influenced throughout the war by Office of War Informa-
tion propaganda, which skillfully made work outside the home seem glamorous
and patriotic, and which directed workers into those jobs most in need of employ-
ees. Numerous black-and-white photos are deftly coordinated with the text and
allow readers to experience the force behind these visual messages. Colman never
launches a diatribe against government manipulation, but offers an even-handed
discussion of wartime measures meeting wartime needs. The text itself is unen-
cumbered by statistics, but for those who prefer their history quantitatively ar-
gued, an appended "Facts & Figures About Women War Workers" features a
twenty-point summary of the rise, crest, and denouement of women's WW II
employment. An index, bibliography, chronology, and list of women's job tites
are included. EB
CONRAD, PAM 
Call Me Ahnighito; illus. by Richard Egielski. 
Geringer/
HarperCollins, 1995 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023323-0 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023322-2 
$14.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Ahnighito (pronounced, according to this picture book's indispensable prefatory
note, "Ah-na-HEET-o") is a large meteorite, recovered from the Arctic by Robert
JULY/AUGUST 1995 
* 381
Peary, that is now housed in New York's American Museum of Natural History.
This is its autobiography. "They tell me I am made of star stuff," says the meteor-
ite, and it goes on to relate its years of cold boredom in Greenland, its centuries of
being chipped away at by "the snow people" (native Greenlanders), and its even-
tual and twice-delayed rescue by Peary's crew which finally brought it to its present
resting place: "It's a good life, being a famous old meteorite." The premise is
undeniably quirky, but those children who do not find the story terminally per-
plexing may catch a glimpse of the eons in Conrad's lyrical but easygoing prose
and Egielski's crisply glowing paintings which halo Ahnighito in cobalt-blue light
with snowflaked accents. There's not a lot of context here: why the snow people
chipped away at the meteorite is left unanswered, and neither relevant dates nor
Peary are ever mentioned in the story proper. There's plenty of mystery, however,
and not a little sympathy for the beleaguered old rock. RS
DENTON, KADY MACDONALD 
Would They Love a Lion?; written and illus. by
Kady MacDonald Denton. 
Kingfisher, 1995 
26p
ISBN 1-85697-546-0 
$14.95 
R* 
3-6yrs
With the aid of her reversible red plaid bathrobe, Anna transforms herself into
animals both fierce and mild. Anna, who looks about four, dreams she is a bird,
and after waking up, she flaps her bathrobe wings and turns her bed into a nest.
When the nest seems too small, she creates a bear cave, but when her mother
(holding a small baby) and big brother don't seem to notice at breakfast that they
are sitting with a red plaid bear, she goes for something bigger and noisier. Denton's
pictures flow from softly realistic to purely impressionistic and everything in be-
tween as she captures the spirit of a day of imaginary play, combining watercolors,
crayon, and pen-and-ink to accomplish this variety. The climax is a glorious one,
as Anna decides "a lion can hide and a lion can roar," sneaks up on her peaceful
family, and on the next double-page spread shatters their quiet with an enormous
roar, depicted with black-ink sound waves exploding through the room and jagged
streaks of color shooting out. Booklovers will especially appreciate the high qual-
ity of the book itself, its thick and pebbly paper conveying some of the cozy texture
of Anna's wonderful bathrobe. SDL
ELLIS, ELLA THORP 
Swimming with the Whales. 
Holt, 1995 
194 p
ISBN 0-8050-3306-8 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Paolo is furious that his father wants to send him to stay with his mother and
attend school in San Francisco next fall, far from the wild and beautiful Patagonian
coast where Paolo has always lived. Samantha is angry that her parents have up-
rooted her from California to live in Patagonia. And finally, Luis, Paolo's former
best friend, is just plain mad at the world. The three young teens form a turbulent
triangle-as when Luis, trying to prove his manhood to Samantha and superiority
to Paolo, is almost drowned while attempting to swim with the whales that mi-
grate along the coast. There's a little too much going on in this novel, and while
the exposition of the setting is vivid, the landscape is the only character with suffi-
cient definition. The conflict between Paolo and his separated parents (and theirs
with each other), for example, remains murky even as it is resolved; the battle
between Paolo and Luis, however, is handled with drama and finesse. It's the
whales who will call to the audience first of all, and it's in those scenes of kids
confronting nature at its biggest that the book seems most at home. RS
382 
* 
THE BULLETIN
ENGLISH, JUNE 
Transportation: Automobiles to Zeppelins. 
Scholastic,
1995 
154p 
illus. and with photographs 
(Scholastic Kid's Encyclopedia)
ISBN 0-590-27550-X 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
A crisply and thoughtfully designed volume, this makes a good introduction to a
variety of transportation topics, though those looking for sufficient information to
write reports will need to turn elsewhere. Each of the covered topics, "Balloons,"
for example, gets a double-page spread with a picture noting the form of transpor-
tation (air, water, or land), a diagram with labeled parts, a page of general informa-
tion, a section for notes of historic interest, and photographs. The book also includes
non-vehicular subjects, such as bridges, engines, and tunnels, and some less con-
ventional forms of transportation such as submersibles and snowmobiles. No doubt
true devotees of particular vehicles will find the coverage skimpy for their favorites,
but this will answer quick questions and offers a good overview. The introduction
explains the format and includes a timeline, and although a few words are not
sufficiently defined in the text, such as "derailleurs" on the bicycle page, the book
has a good glossary and index at the back. SDL
FOREMAN, LELIA ROSE 
Shatterworld. Eerdmans, 1995 
162p
ISBN 0-8028-5097-9 
$13.99 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
"I'm only twelve years old, and my life is over," broods Rejoice Holly as she con-
templates her bleak new life on an alien world. Her parents are dedicated to their
spiritual calling as neo-Puritan colonists on a planet removed from Old Earth's
violence and immorality; Rejoice and her brother Stronghold, however, are resent-
ful of the life decisions their parents have made without their consent. Rejoice
desperately wants to become an astronomer, but it is only after an asteroid's ap-
proach threatens their planet that her constraining society acknowledges the im-
portance of her calling. The premise is a blend of cultural Puritanism, modern-day
Christianity, and utopian science fiction. Foreman places the story of adolescent
metamorphosis alongside a parable of environmental and social harmony, wan-
dering occasionally into the realm of the pedantic. Intelligent hexacrabs (New
Earth native creatures), community conflict (nobody likes Sister Olsen's self-righ-
teousness), and careful descriptions of the linguistic struggles between species add
texture and depth that soften some of the more didactic edges. Foreman's allegori-
cal construction (the pilgrim colonists arrive on a spaceship called the Starflower)
distractingly slips in and out of the story, but the layering of family drama with
questions of communal responsibility and individual belief provides an unusually
philosophical treatment to this human-as-alien dilemma. HMW
GELLMAN, MARC 
How Do You Spell God?: Answers to the Big Questions from
Around the World; written by Marc Gellman and Thomas Hartman; illus. by Jos.
A. Smith. 
Morrow, 1995 
20 6p
ISBN 0-688-13041-0 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
The garden variety of children's books on comparative religion focus on history
and ritual, but this title emphasizes the philosophical underpinnings of the major
religions of Indo-Eurasian origin. Gellman (a rabbi) and Hartman (a monsignor)
contend that all religions seek answers to questions concerning afterlife, ethical
living, prayer, and the individual's place in the world; through chapters such as
"Can I Talk to God?" and "What Happens After We Die?" the authors demon-
strate how religions agree and diverge on their answers, and how differences among
religions are often matters of emphasis rather than substance. While enthusiastic
JULY/AUGUST 1995 
* 383
in their approbation of organized religion and moral living, the two clerics never
proselytize for a particular denomination. Issuing an opening caveat to those who
prefer their religion solemn, Gellman and Hartman infuse their text with humor-
ous commentary which stumbles uncertainly from wry ("The father says a prayer
to thank God for the commandment to circumcise his son. The baby does not say
thank you!") to misleading ("The only people who have ever gotten a good look at
the ark [of the Covenant] were Moses, King David, King Solomon, and maybe
Indiana Jones"). The authors seem undecided about their audience's level of so-
phistication: readers are expected to handle terms such as vedas and upanishads
without the aid of glossary or index, while types of prayer are patronizingly re-
ferred to as Thanks, Oops, Gimme, and Wow. Librarians considering this purchase
may wish to excuse these foibles, however, in light of the fact that the volume digs
deeper into the fundamental beliefs of world religions than many of its cousins on
the 200s shelf. EB
GEORGE, JEAN CRAIGHEAD 
Everglades; illus. byWen¶Iell Minor. 
HarperCollins,
1995 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021229-2 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021228-4 
$14.95 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
George frames her account of the creation and partial destruction of Florida's Ev-
erglades as a story told by a contemporary storyteller taking children on a canoe
ride through the area. He tells them of the earliest days of the formation of the
Floridian peninsula, through the creation of the river between Lake Okeechobee
and the sea, to the beginnings of the saw grass and the gradual appearance of the
animals: "Every wild thing ate well, and there was still an enormous abundance."
George piles on the enumerative nouns-multitude, plenitude, plethora, profu-
sion-to rhapsodize about the sumptuousness. When the children wonder what
has become of the Everglades the storyteller described, he tells them about the
hunters, the engineers, the farmers, and the businesspeople who killed the animals,
picked the orchids, and polluted the water, but he leaves them with the hope that
when the children grow up, they will be the ones to restore the area. 
Minor's
watercolors are attractive but stiff, and they do not help enliven the heavy-handed
text; most effective are the small paintings of Everglades "symbols," which are
named in a key at the back. If George had simply told the history of the Everglades
without using the overwhelmingly preachy storyteller device, she might have cre-
ated a more useful (and inspirational) picture book. SDL
GIFF, PATRICIA REILLY 
Look Out, Washington, D. C.! illus. by Blanche Sims. 
Dell,
1995 
122p 
(A Polk Street Special)
Paper ed. ISBN 0-440-40934-9 
$3.99 
R 
Gr. 1-3
Emily Arrow has fancy new underpants, new pajamas and a new purse for her
class's overnight trip to Washington, D.C., but she missed her teacher's instruc-
tion that students would need a diary for the trip, and, even worse, when the kids
pair up for trip partners, she is stuck with Derrick: "He really wasn't good or bad
at anything. Derrick was just a blob." Emily experiences a mix of emotions in-
cluding excitement and homesickness, but by the story's end, Derrick has proved
to be more than a blob, and she has solved her diary problem. The book finishes
up with "The Polk Street Guide to Washington, D.C." complete with addresses,
which gives kids a chance to do a little armchair traveling or help plan a family trip.
Giff writes with a second-grade sense of humor and reading level in mind; the
384 
* THE BULLETIN
short, choppy sentences sacrifice smoothness for readability, but she successfully
creates a sympathetic and plausible heroine who realistically resolves her feelings,
and her light touch will help overcome the resistance to chapter books that some
children feel. Plenty of funny drawings and illustrations of diary entries assist in
making this seem like a l-o-n-g, grownup book that is nonetheless very easy
to read. SDL
GRAEBER, CHARLOTTE 
Olivia and the Real Live Pet; illus. by DyAnne DiSalvo-
Ryan. 
Macmillan, 1995 
120p
ISBN 0-689-80002-9 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Olivia's eighth birthday is coming up, and her entire birthday list consists of one
phrase repeated over and over: "Real live pet." Thrilled when her parents finally
agree that Aunt Jess can buy her a pet, Olivia can think of little else until she enters
into a (fairly contrived) feud with classmate Kevin Spencer. When he comes to her
party, wins all the prizes, and even comes up with the winning name for her new
pet parakeet, Olivia is enraged, but she learns a new fact about Kevin that helps her
understand him better. Graeber sets up an authentic set of second-grade problems
and feelings, and if none of it is especially fresh for adult readers, it probably will
seem so to its audience who will just be stepping into longer chapter books. The
length will seem too challenging for some second-graders, though, and older chil-
dren may be reluctant to read about a younger main character. DiSalvo-Ryan's
lightly sketched illustrations are equally pleasant and conventional; the watercolor
cover with Olivia surrounded by the potential pets will help sell this title to the
many animal-lovers who know just how Olivia feels. SDL
GROSSMAN, BILL 
The Banging Book; illus. by Robert Zimmerman. 
Geringer/
HarperCollins, 1995 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024498-4 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024497-6 
$15.00 
R 
3-6 yrs
Its tide says it all: this is a book for people who love "banging, bopping, smashing,
clanging./ Never stopping. Banging, banging." Those fond of whacking, pound-
ing, smashing, and bashing will also have fun. Told in an appropriately pounding
rhythm which never falters, four children take a variety of tools-hammers, bats,
mallets and so on-and smash their toys to pieces, and then use their tools again in
a more positive direction: "If banging can be used for breaking,/ Banging can be
used for making." They reassemble their toys with a success adults can only hope
children will not take literally. Three of the kids look worn-out at the end, but the
littlest picks up his mallet and gets back to his banging. Retro-style illustrations
featuring roundheaded children, '60s colors and bold lines lend even more energy
to the fun. SDL
HENDERSON, AILEEN KILGORE 
The Summer ofthe Bonepile Monster; illus. by Kim
Cooper. 
Milkweed, 1995 
138p
Trade ed. ISBN 5-57131-603-5 
$14.95
Paper ed. ISBN 1-57131-602-7 
$6.95 
M 
Gr. 4-6
Hollis and his sister Lou have been bused down south to stay with their paternal
grandmother while their unhappy parents try to work on a better relationship.
Not only do the children have to adjust to a strange place, but they also find
themselves taking care of invalid Grancy. Moreover, Hollis is haunted by a sinis-
JULY/AUGUST 1995 
* 
385
ter mystery next door, is visited at night by a singing mouse, and is kidnapped by
a child abuser who is in turn almost killed accidentally by another boy who has
suffered from the villain's cruelty. The novel starts out with promise but zigzags in
too many directions and finally degenerates into melodrama. The style itself be-
comes fraught with obvious tease-lines: "He determined to find out, not suspect-
ing that his search for mouse popcorn would result in more drastic twists and turns
in his already complicated life in the Dolliver woods"; or again, "Hollis promised,
not suspecting that coming events would prevent him from keeping his word." In
the end, domestic realism, mystery, and fantasy prove an overload of elements,
especially when they're all resolved by an unnaturally neat ending. BH
HOOKS, 
WILLIAM H. 
The Girl Who Could Fly; illus. by Kees de
Kiefte. 
Macmillan, 1995 
53p
ISBN 0-02-744433-3 
$14.00 
R Gr. 2-4
In a first-person narration, Adam Lee tells about his mysterious new neighbor,
Tomasina, who doesn't seem to care that ten-year-old boys do not usually have
girls for best friends. Strange things happen around Tomasina, such as a thrown
ball stopping in midair, and she has an unnerving habit of reading Adam Lee's
mind, but she's friendly and fun. She's even willing to help out his baseball club,
though only by coaching, not playing, which she thinks would be unfair given her
special (extra-terrestrial, it turns out) abilities. Hooks's writing is brisk and vigor-
ous, neatly filling a gap between easy readers and chapter books with a science-
fiction plot that is sure to appeal. de Kiefte's pencil and ink drawings add interest
without seeming babyish; with its attractive cover and catchy title, this should fly
off the shelves. SDL
HYPPOLITE, JOANNE 
Seth and Samona; illus. by Colin Bootman. 
Delacorte,
1995 
121p
ISBN 0-385-32093-0 
$13.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Seth and Samona are both fifth-graders in Boston: Seth, the narrator, is a serious
boy from a Haitian family, and Samona is a strong-minded and eccentric girl
whose mother is a famous African-American poet. Seth finds Samona embarrass-
ing but inspiring, and their friendship changes but endures through Seth's family
upheavals (his great-aunt dies and his brother despises his sister's boyfriend) and
through Samona's participation in a local beauty pageant. While the plotting is a
bit disjointed and the book is often purposive (especially its final message that
beauty lies in being oneself), it's a story of grit, with gang membership and mem-
bers appearing as a lure and a problem, and of warmth, with Samona's and Seth's
very different families providing a strong sense of secure foundation. The depic-
tion of the multicultural black community, with characters from Haiti, Nigeria,
and the U.S. all appearing prominently, has a particular richness. The story is
never unpredictable, but it's sincere and compelling in a way that will please many
young readers. Soft, realistic pencil drawings appear throughout. DS
JENKINS, 
PRISCILLA 
BELZ 
A Nest Full of Eggs; illus. by Lizzy
Rockwell. 
HarperCollins, 1995 
32p 
(Let's-Read-and-Find-Out Science)
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023442-3 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023441-5 
$14.95 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
"Up in a tree outside my window, a pair of American robins is very busy." The
386 
* THE BULLETIN
narrator and his friend keep watch over the bird family's progress and along the
way provide straightforward information about robins and a sprinkling of facts
about other birds. One spread shows the development inside the egg of a baby
robin at three, five, eight, and twelve days; as the birds hatch, we learn about their
care and a little about their anatomy, and at the end the birds migrate south.
Jenkins gives a nice balance of specific and general information; the writing is clear
if a bit flat. Rockwell's pictures tend toward the sweet and bland, with the birds
having more personality than the featured children. The spread of labeled bird
feathers would have fit the scope of the book better had it included more backyard
birds rather than exotic birds such as peacocks, macaws, and flamingoes. How-
ever, the narrator's room is appealingly crowded, filled as it is with bird books,
drawings, and toys, and Rockwell does a good job depicting the robins' growth.
Overall this will catch children's interest, and the author's suggestions for materi-
als to leave out to help robins build their nests are ones many children will want to
follow. SDL
JENNINGS, PAUL 
Unbearable!: More Bizarre Stories. Viking, 1995 
116p
ISBN 0-670-86262-2 
$14.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Goat poop, fly guts, smelly feet, hypnotized chickens-of such things are the short
stories of Paul Jennings (author of Undone, BCCB 2/95, etc.) made. As usual, he
cheerfully borrows from classic legends ("Nails," about a mermaid's son) and ur-
ban legends ("Only Gilt," in which a boy fears that his dog murdered his sweetheart's
parakeet) as well as creating bizarre original stories ("Yuggles," about shape-shift-
ing mushrooms). These stories aren't quite as tightly knit as those in Undone,
indulging as they do in a certain arbitrariness of plot in order to get to the denoue-
ment. They're still grotesque, funny, and enticingly crude; many young readers
(especially Goosebumps fans) will relish them. DS
JOHNSTON, TONY 
The Iguana Brothers: A Tale of Two Lizards; illus. by Mark
Teague. 
Blue Sky/Scholastic, 1995 
32p
ISBN 0-590-47468-5 
$14.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Tom and Dom lead an enjoyable iguana lifestyle on a sunny roof in Mexico, but
occasionally something interrupts the smooth flow of reptilian life. First Tom
decides he is sick of eating bugs, so the brothers search for alternative sustenance
(after contemplating pigs and snakes they settle on flowers); then Tom decides
that iguanas are really dinosaurs and that he needs to rule the earth (he eventually
settles for ruling a leaf); and finally Dom yearns for a "twinkly and beautiful"
friend like the Big Iguana constellation (known to us as Ursa Major) but eventu-
ally realizes that his brother makes quite a satisfying friend in his own right. What
gives this book its own twinkle is the dry humor and easy rhythm of the dynamic
duo's story. Johnston weaves in Spanish words and terms easily, adding to the
atmosphere of the story rather than interrupting it ("You will get thin, Tom. You
will getflaco, flaco, flaco. " "I would rather beflaco than eat bugs"). The brothers
have an engaging rapport and a quietly bantering dialogue that make them very
entertaining. Teague's acrylic art has a solidity and restrained sense of the ridicu-
lous that match the text well, and the siblings' big bulgy eyes and rows of spines
become endearing under the artist's careful hand. The plot continues rather than
cumulates, so the story's end seems somewhat arbitrary, but the lizards' company
JULY/AUGUST 1995 
* 387
is rewarding enough that it doesn't really matter. Kids bored with blander animal
books will greet this with relief and pleasure; some of them may even want to try
reading the easy text on their own. DS
KRAMER, 
STEPHEN 
Caves; illus. with photographs by Kenrick L.
Day. 
Carolrhoda, 1995 
4 8p 
(Nature in Action)
Trade ed. ISBN 0-87614-447-4 
$14.21
Paper ed. ISBN 0-87614-896-8 
$7.95 
R 
Gr. 3-7
Caves, with their inherent secrecy and weird formations, have a certain allure, and
Kramer (author ofAvalanche and Lightning, BCCB 9/92, etc.) here explains many
aspects of speleology. He discusses various kinds of caves but focuses on limestone
caves, describing the creation of stalactites, stalagmites, and other speleothems,
giving an overview of cave flora and fauna, and offering guidelines for those inter-
ested in exploring caves themselves. The photographs depict shimmering sheets of
stone, pale, blind cave insects, and jaunty spelunkers with informative clarity. The
book occasionally mentions terms without defining them ("moonmilk," "cave
popcorn," and "gypsum flower" are tantalizingly mentioned as cave formations
but never explained) and the photographic captions rarely give specific informa-
tion about the caves pictured. This is nonetheless a vivid and effectively visual
introduction to one of the world's more fascinating geologic phenomena. A glos-
sary and index are included. DS
KRULL, KATHLEEN 
V Is for Victory: America Remembers World War II. 
Apple
Soup/Knopf, 1995 
116p illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-96198-4 
$25.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-86198-X 
$24.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
A note on the cover calls this "a book for families commemorating the 50th anni-
versary of the Allied victory," and, as a browsing book for adults to use with chil-
dren to discuss World War II, it works well. Children without the background
knowledge to put references such as the Cold War into context will be hopelessly
confused, especially because much of the information is scattered in captions. The
captioned material-pictured memorabilia such as postcards, ration books, post-
ers, and newspaper headlines, and profuse photographs of both the famous (movie
stars, politicians and generals) and ordinary people (the soldiers and the civilians
waiting at home)-is the book's strong point; the book's design, with such items
framed in period shades of chartreuse, pink, and maize, contributes greatly to its
impact. In her introduction, Krull discusses the effect the war continues to have
on life today and suggests that children talk to older relatives about the war. She
outlines a few of the events leading to the war, and for the most part presents the
American perspective, though the subject most fully covered is the Holocaust.
Other chapters cover civilian life, soldiers, weapons, and the Japanese-American
internment camps, and Krull gives a good overview of important people from
both the Allied and Axis sides. Because there has been little summation of the
events of the war, the chapter on the its conclusion loses impact: Paris' liberation
is not so thrilling when its occupation has been barely touched upon. The final
chapter, tided "Lasting Effects," contains a loosely related hodgepodge of informa-
tion from post-war devastation to the U.N. to Doctor Spock to General Colin
Powell. Also included are a sketchy chronology, a bibliography (with children's
books highlighted), a period map, and an index. SDL
388 
* THE BULLETIN
KUSKIN, KARLA 
Thoughts, Pictures and Words.
See Bunting, p. 378, for review.
LAWLOR, LAURIE 
Gold in the Hills. Walker, 1995 
14 7p
ISBN 0-8027-8371-6 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Motherless siblings Hattie and Pheme are left with leathery Cousin Tirzah while
lovable, undependable Pa searches for gold in the Colorado hills, circa 1880. Greedy
mine owner Pug Ryan negotiates with Tirzah for the children's slave labor, but
Tirzah's gruff, reclusive neighbor Old Judge befriends and protects the pair, subtly
helping them recover their shaken self-esteem. While there's nothing new in the
plot department, Lawlor's tale still manages to sparkle with deftly detailed charac-
terizations. Tirzah is at once hateful in her verbal abuse of her charges and pathetic
in her efforts to allure Pug Ryan; ten-year-old Hattie is artfully resistant to her
cousin's governance. Hattie's narration is laced with idioms that add authenticity.
Nail-gnawing descriptions of our heroine's near-drowning in a deadly current and
brother Pheme's encounter with a nine-foot grizzly should make this title as ap-
pealing to outdoorsy adventure buffs as it will be to orphan-story fans. EB
MACDONALD, CAROLINE 
Secret Lives. 
Simon, 1995 
155p
ISBN 0-671-51081-9 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Ian's relatively settled life is being invaded by a reckless, perhaps supernatural,
stranger, an older boy named Gideon who takes Ian on such escapades as joyriding
in a stolen car and stealing money from Ian's grandparents. We eventually learn
that Gideon is actually a character in one of Ian's school writing assignments and
whose identity Ian is assuming to deal with his own submerged troubles. This is
something revealed more than halfway through the book itself, and until that point
Macdonald is effectively edgy about the true nature of Gideon's persona: trouble-
maker or doppelginger? The story becomes unnecessarily convoluted when
Macdonald introduces a second fictional character whom Ian creates to challenge
Gideon; Jacqueline does do battle with Gideon but then inconclusively disap-
pears. The realistic plane of the story is as convoluted as Ian's imaginary land-
scape, but readers who can navigate the twists and turns will appreciate the
conjunction of psycho- and melodrama. RS
MCNAUGHTON, COLIN 
Suddenly!; written and illus. by Colin McNaughton.
Harcourt, 1995 
26p
ISBN 0-15-200308-8 
$13.95 
R 4-6 yrs
Reminiscent of Pat Hutchins' Rosie's Walk (BCCB 6/68), this is the story of Preston,
an amiable young pig who remains completely oblivious to the wolf that lingers
around every corner, waiting to gobble him up. The recurring joke is one of
suspense suspended as pictures show the wolf looming threateningly while the text
describes Preston embarking on some innocuous activity "when SUDDENLY"-
and a turn of the page demonstrates that Preston has suddenly changed his path
(for his own innocent reasons) and the wolf has come to violent and slapstick grief.
Line-and-watercolor art in tastefully moderated colors depicts the creatures' cheer-
fully exaggerated actions (check out the frustrated wolf bearing down on Preston
in a steamroller), keeping the lupine threat distant enough to be safely humorous
for young listeners. Cartoon fans will appreciate the Road-Runnerish plot here as
JULY/AUGUST 1995 
* 
389
the predator wreaks more damage on himself (he's carried off to the Wolf Hospital
at the end) than on his prey; many a young piglet will enjoy both the joke and the
ironic justice. DS
MAHY, MARGARET 
My Mysterious World.
See Bunting, p. 378, for review.
MALLETT, 
DAVID 
Inch by Inch: 
The Garden Song; illus. by Ora
Eitan. 
HarperCollins, 1995 
26p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024304-X 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024303-1 
$13.95 
Ad 
3-7 yrs
Mallett's song has become a preschool and primary grade favorite over the past
two decades: "Inch by inch, row by row,/ gonna make this garden grow./ All it
takes is a rake and a hoe/ and a piece of fertile ground." Illustrator Eitan pictures
a small child doing the planting and other gardening chores with a big smile, a big
yellow hat, and a companionable dog. Painting in broad, rough-edged strokes, she
uses bright, slightly shaded colors restrained with a little gray so their effect is
muted. The artist undercuts some of the song's success by depicting fancifully
rather than realistically the mundane miracles of planting and growth of seeds.
The child is shown sliding down a rainbow, pulling a humongous turnip, and,
even stranger, watering a surreal tree as a winged twin of the dog hovers above.
However, songs can perk up a storyhour, and the small gardener's contented smile
at the end brings this tale to a close on a happy note. Music and lyrics are in-
cluded. SDL
MARRIN, ALBERT 
The Sea King: Sir Francis Drake and His Times. Atheneum,
1995 
168p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-689-31887-1 
$18.00 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Sir Francis Drake is seen variously as explorer, naval military genius, and pirate;
Marrin paints a picture including all those characteristics and more, tracing Drake's
life from his early days on the sea, through his unsuccessful and successful quests
for Central American gold and his global circumnavigation, to his unofficial spear-
heading of the defeat of the Spanish Armada. The book sets up Drake's story by
describing the era generally, making it clear that Elizabethan daily life was filled
with brutalities and that exploration and trade (or more often simply plunder)
relied upon cruelty and indifference to humanity. Drake then appears as a com-
parative moderate in this context, generally treating prisoners well and often giv-
ing them handsome presents ("Drake was a thief, but no one ever accused him of
being a cheapskate"), eschewing torture, and finding anti-Spanish allies in escaped
slaves. This book isn't as compelling as Marrin's recent biographies of Grant and
Lee (BCCB 3/94 and 1/95): the scarcity of first-person reports keeps events dis-
tant, the multitude of detail makes things (and people) sometimes confusing, and
the section of the book describing Drake's Spanish Main adventures lacks the
momentum and excitement of the writing on the Armada. There are periodic
maps of specific events but they occasionally include errors (Nombre de Dios ap-
pearing on the Pacific side of Panama) or unexplained details (commanders' names
on the map of the Battle of the Spanish Armada which don't appear in the text).
It's still a capable account of an important man in a polarized and bloody time,
offering insight into the roles of both the Inquisition and its opponents as well as
390 
* THE BULLETIN
the importance of more pragmatic details such as ship design and poor hygiene.
Kids with an interest in the military or in history, or even a few pirate fans, may
appreciate this in-depth examination of a legend. DS
MASTERS, SUSAN ROWAN 
Libby Bloom; illus. by Beata Szpura. 
Holt,
1995 
(Redfeather) 
86p
ISBN 0-8050-3374-2 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 2-4
An accidental burp, an inability to sing on-key, and a provoking classmate lead to
Libby's move from school choir to band. Quirky Mr. Cheney assigns her the tuba,
gives her private lessons in the basement of their overcrowded school, and shares a
little advice: "The things in life that come hard, that really challenge us, we end up
valuing the most. Like learning to play the tuba or working to make right what we
believe is wrong." Inspired by his newspaper editorial on budget cuts, Libby works
on turning her cartooning hobby into political activism of her own. While sus-
taining a light tone, Masters sends her own message about taking action; fourth-
grader Libby is a buoyant heroine with a realistically drawn family and school.
Szpura's energetic and funny line drawings make a pleasant change from the often
bland illustrations in early chapter books. It's fast, breezy reading, and who knows-
perhaps Libby's success will inspire a new generation of tuba players/activists. SDL
MEDEARIS, ANGELA SHELF 
Poppa's New Pants; illus. by John Ward. 
Holiday
House, 1995 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1155-9 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
The house is in an uproar in anticipation of a family visit, so Grandma Tiny sends
her husband and her grandson George out to the store, where Poppa can't resist
buying a pair of fancy gray-and-red plaid pants along with the requested victuals.
Trouble is, the pants are too long, and Poppa, once home, can't prevail upon his
fatigued wife, nor his mother-in-law, nor his sister-in law, to shorten them in time
for church the next day. Family comedy gets a little eerie when George, bedded
down in the kitchen after giving up his room for the visitors, three times hears
strange noises in the night ("snip, snip, snip") and can't bring himself to put on his
glasses to check out the ghosts. Come morning, George has a fancy new pair of
knickers-Poppa's now too-short pants-and everybody has a good laugh.
Medearis tells the story with a natural grace, and even listeners who guess the
identity of the "ghosts" will enjoy the '40s atmosphere and the family feeling.
John Ward's paintings are composed with a sure hand, giving the midnight tailors
an appropriately ghostly presence (as seen through George's nearsighted eyes) and
capturing the humor as well, as in the first painting of Grandma Tiny firmly push-
ing Poppa and George out so she can get some work done. RS
METIL, LUANA 
The Story of Karate: From Buddhism to Bruce Lee; written by
Luana Metil and Jace Townsend. 
Lerner, 1995 
112p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8225-3325-1 
$17.21 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
This is no manual of wham-and-slam technique, but rather a survey of the Asian
roots of martial arts, from the Bodhidharma and the Shaolin monks, through the
adaptations of their skills to the military exigencies of Chinese, Korean, and Japa-
nese warriors, to contemporary American schools of karate which stress recreation,
discipline, and sporting competition as well as self-defense. The broad scope of
this work, spanning 1500 years and two continents, leads to thin coverage; the
JULY/AUGUST 1995 
* 391
authors leap across centuries with minimal transitions and casually mix references
to contemporary practice with their history. Allusions to such fascinating figures
as the single American trained in authentic ninjutsu are made and then abruptly
dropped. However, plenty of well-told legends, an engrossing section on ninjas
(female as well as male), and a host of browsable photos and reproductions will
appeal to practitioners interested in the background of their sport and to high-low
readers drawn to this popular topic. EB
MIcuccI, CHARLES 
The Life and Times of the Honeybee; written and illus. by
Charles Micucci. 
Ticknor, 1995 
32p
ISBN 0-395-65968-X 
$13.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
In a similar format to his The Life and Times of the Apple (BCCB 4/92), Micucci
here takes a breezy look at honeybees and the tasty fruit of their labors. Actually,
the book is better on honey than it is on bees; the material on bee reproduction
and social behavior is confusingly scattered throughout various spreads and is not
always accurate, omitting, for example, mention of the queen's mating flight and
implying that hives swarm every summer. (And it's cute but misleading to state
that drones are "lazy.") The descriptions of nectar-gathering, pollination, honey
production, and harvesting are quite clear, and Micucci ably distributes informa-
tion among text, pictures, and captions, giving the book a browsable accessibility.
RS
MILLER, BRANDON MARIE 
Buffalo Gals: Women of the Old West. 
Lerner,
1995 
88p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8225-1730-2 
$14.21 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Westward migration, housekeeping difficulties, professions, forms of entertain-
ment, and intercultural relations are some of the topics discussed in this accessible
overview of women's experiences in getting to and surviving in the West. Myriad
quotes and sepia-toned photographs enliven the account, which addresses aspects
as far-ranging as prostitution and sod-home maintenance. Unfortunately, there
are no specific sources or times cited for many of the quotes and photographs, so
that there's little sense of temporal changes or regional differences and the West
seems misleadingly homogeneous. It's still an evocative and undemanding intro-
duction to an important epoch in American history. A bibliography and index are
included. DS
MILLER, ROBERT 
Buffalo Soldiers: The Story ofEmanuel Stance; illus. by Michael
Bryant. 
Silver, 1995 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-382-24391-9 
$14.95
Trade ed. ISBN 0-382-24400-1 
$12.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-382-24395-1 
$4.95 
R 6-9 yrs
This tale of the young sergeant who, in 1870, became the first black soldier to win
the Medal of Honor packs the elements of a rousing group readaloud. Weapons
drills, horse thieving, Indian raids, and battle bravery will charm martially inclined
listeners, while the energetic narration, spiced with a few well-chosen similes ("Soon
trouble started brewing like a country stew, the kind you don't serve at the kitchen
table") should reel in even those less interested. Bryant's expressionistic watercol-
ors are calculated to place the viewer in the vortex of the action-in line at rifle
practice, under the hooves of the Kiowas' horses, amid the cavalry as they repel a
392 
* THE BULLETIN
Comanche raid. A brief author's note introduces the role of the Buffalo Soldiers in
patrolling the West, and endpaper maps designate tribal territories and military
outposts in 1870s Texas. EB
MILLER, WILLIAM 
Frederick Douglass: The Last Day of Slavery; illus. by Cedric
Lucas. 
Lee & Low, 1995 
32p
ISBN 1-880000-17-2 
$14.95 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
Miller is true to the spirit, if not the letter, of Douglass' autobiographies in this
account, which focuses on the seventeen-year-old slave's affray with the slave breaker
Covey-an event which Douglass himself described as "the turning point in my
career as a slave." Miller depicts Covey as a plantation employee when, according
to Douglass, Covey was in fact a neighboring farmer to whom intractable slaves
were hired out. Likewise, the author has Douglass dramatically struck with a whip
at the outset of the fight, and the slaves watching the fracas "in disbelief"; Douglass,
however, prided himself on delivering the first blow and acknowledged that other
slaves joined his resistance. Nonetheless, Miller has ably fictionalized an episode
that stands as a gripping action tale, a candid revelation of the cruelties of slavery,
and an introduction to the early years of the famed abolitionist. Lucas's pastels,
pumiced for a scratchboard effect, adequately convey menace even as their formal,
stylized composition softens the gruesome details of the fight. A brief author's
note remarks on Douglass' role in the anti-slavery movement. EB
MOORE, ROBIN 
The Cherry Tree Buck and Other Stories: Adventures in the Woods
with My Grandfather; illus. by Kies deKiefte. 
Knopf, 1995 
106p
ISBN 0-679-85641-2 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 4-7
"We decided to protect the deer because, even in Central Pennsylvania, we very
rarely get a deer with a cherry tree growing out of the top of his head." The events
that lead up to that sentence, and those following it, are a funny blend of realism
and fantasy that has unusual appeal. Most woodsy writers take the creatures they
track seriously, but these six tall tales manage to respect nature and at the same
time tease her with some touches of fantasy. The cherry tree that grows from the
buried deer bears fruit with miniature antler pits; a sawdust-stuffed bear responds
to a female mating-grunt call; a defanged diamondback rattler learns Morse code
from the Boy Scouts; an eagle raised with chickens learns to fly off a cliff; a ground-
hog wins free vegetables through a garden siege; and a trout that has learned how
to live on dry land almost drowns in the lake. The wry tone keeps all this from
becoming whimsical, while the relationship between the narrator and his grandfa-
ther gives the disparate tales a steady shape and takes a poignant turn at the end.
In addition to being an imaginative storyteller, Moore really does know his wild-
life. Although a broad range of kids will enjoy this, especially read aloud, the
collection is particularly valuable for its potential to win over outdoors devotees
(most often boys) who don't generally connect with literature. BH
MYERS, WALTER DEAN 
The Story of the Three Kingdoms; illus. by Ashley
Bryan. 
HarperCollins, 1995 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024287-6 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024286-8 
$15.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
Elephant rules the land, Shark rules the sea, and Hawk rules the air, and each is so
powerful in his own way that they are undisputed in their territories. They argue
JULY/AUGUST 1995 
* 393
amongst themselves about who is the greatest leader, but the new creatures who
come to Earth, the People, clearly have no claim to greatness: "They were not as
strong as Elephant. They were not as fierce as Shark. Nor could they fly, like
Hawk." However, when Elephant must be rescued from a pit, the People remem-
ber a story about moving heavy objects and figure out a way to rescue the Elephant
despite their weakness. By telling each other stories and learning from them, they
later manage to outwit Shark and Hawk as well, and they realize that sharing
stories leads to wisdom. Myers' fable exalts the role of storytellers, and he tells his
own story in a powerfully resonant style. Though the fable could certainly be told
rather than read to older groups, Bryan's swirling pictures in bright colors add
liveliness without detracting from the solemnity of the tale. He shows the People
with a variety of ethnic features and clothing, and in a handsome piece of book
design places patterned rectangular borders on the text pages that match the pic-
tures on the left. Classes focusing on conflict resolution will want to grab this
book with its drama in which the powerful are overcome without fighting. SDL
NODELMAN, PERRY 
The Same Place but Different. Simon, 1995 
[192p]
ISBN 0-671-89839-6 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Johnny and his parents are worried about Johnny's baby sister Andrea "who just
sat there in her crib all the time and never blinked and never said a word and never
did anything but poop in her diapers." An encounter in a park with a supposedly
dead neighbor reveals that Andrea has been taken by the fairies and a changeling
left in her place. Soon the fairies and, worse, the Sky Yelpers, are plaguing all
Winnipeg and it's up to Johnny not only to save his sister but to save the world.
While interested readers could and probably will spend months spotting and trac-
ing the folkloric motifs that blow through critic Nodelman's first novel for young
people, the book is never an academic exercise. Written with dash and humor, the
story gives the word "fairy" back its spooky, mischievous roots-at one point,
Johnny secretly watches "Andrea" climb out of her high chair and toddle on over
to the fridge for a beer. Where many contemporary fantasies get lost in portentous
mists, this one confidently juggles, tosses, and flips old material with a fresh hand,
balancing the levity with some seriously scary moments and a solid quest-adven-
ture core. RS
OCKO, STEPHANIE 
Water: Almost Enough for Everyone. Atheneum,
1995 
140p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-689-31797-2 
$15.00 
M 
Gr. 7-12
Ocko examines the causes of drought and water shortages from long-term climatic
changes, periodic phenomena such as El Nifio, pollution and deforestation, and
interventions such as damming and irrigation. While including basic scientific
information on weather and the water cycle, the author focuses her discussion
primarily through analysis of water shortages in four places (rural Iowa, Antigua,
California, and the Sahel), using each case study to explore various problems and
solutions. Antigua, for example, is attempting to solve its chronic droughts (caused
by replacing rain forest with sugar-cane fields) through desalination of ocean wa-
ter; farmers in the Sahel are using the fertile soil of the bed of Lake Chad to get
them through the dry seasons. The book offers a synthesizing approach, but both
the organizing and conceptualizing of the material need work. Aquifers, for ex-
394 
* THE BULLETIN
ample, figure largely in the first-chapter overview, but the term is not defined until
the end of chapter two. In the chapter on California's "water wars," both the legal
and technical aspects of water rights and irrigation are confusingly explained, and
the use throughout the book of subheads and short sections is jumpy and distract-
ing. There are no notes, and such statements as "fifty percent of all the people on
the earth today live in cities; and specialists predict that by the turn of the century,
that number will go up to 80 percent" do need documentation-"specialists pre-
dict" doesn't wash. There is neither bibliography nor reading list, but an index
and directory of organizations are appended. RS
PARKER, NANCY WINSLOW 
Money, Money, Money: The Meaning of the Art and
Symbols on United States Paper Currency; written and illus. by Nancy Winslow
Parker. 
HarperCollins, 1995 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023412-1 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023411-3 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-5
It concerns everyone's favorite topic, but like money itself, this volume doesn't
stretch quite as far as one might wish. With breezy text and cheery cartoon illus-
trations, Parker works her way through greenbacks from $1 to $100,000, present-
ing a thumbnail sketch of each bill's featured statesman and famous building, and
unraveling the perennial mysteries of the pyramid, the eye (no Masonic references
here), and the laurel leaf. However, unless they have a $500 or $10,000 note in
their pockets, readers will be unable to compare textual and visual information
with the real thing; minuscule reproductions of treasury notes inadequately con-
vey the details discussed. Only some of the motifs that appear, carefully labeled, in
Parker's sketches actually appear on bills: the little 1928 auto does chug across a
$10 note, but where on the same note are those soldiers lounging against the Trea-
sury Building columns? After passing the $100 mark, Parker drops all reference to
the reverse sides of the even more intriguing big-bucks denominations. Counter-
feiting deterrents, the federal reserve system, and Greek architectural orders are
discussed, and an index is included. Many librarians will want to dish out the
dough for this title as a courtesy to report writers, but truly avaricious readers will
still want more, more, more. EB
PATENT, DOROTHY HINSHAW 
Return of the Wolf; illus. by Jared Taylor
Williams. 
Clarion, 1995 
67p
ISBN 0-395-72100-8 
$15.95 
R Gr. 5-8
Science-writer Patent here turns her hand to fiction for the first time, but it should
come as no surprise that the characters go on four feet rather than two. Sedra is a
young lone wolf who was forced from her pack to seek her own territory; she
survives, eventually finds a mate, Jasper, and bears pups, starting a pack of her own
and continuing the natural cycle. Aside from naming the wolves, Patent entirely
resists anthropomorphism, finding drama in the instinctive drives-for food, pri-
marily-that shape a wolfs life rather than in New Age sentimentality. A scene
where one of Sedra's pups dies after being injured by a moose is moving because
the wolves act like wolves: "Jasper and Sedra circled Raven's body, poking and
whining. He lay completely still. Finally, after one last look, the adult wolves
turned away." There are several clear-eyed scenes of the wolves hunting prey, and
it is to Patent's credit that we find our sympathies divided and even beside the
point. The writing is brisk and direct, finding a narrative line without imposing
JULY/AUGUST 1995 
* 
395
an unnatural plot. Full-page black-and-white sketches are respectful without be-
ing staid. RS
PHILIP, NEIL, comp. 
SingingAmerica: Poems that Define a Nation; illus. by Michael
McCurdy. 
Viking, 1995 
160p
ISBN 0-670-86150-2 
$19.99 
R Gr. 5-9
American-themed collections of poetry have been well represented lately: there's
been Panzer's Celebrate America and Whipple's Celebrating America (both BCCB
12/94), both of which were illustrated with a variety of American art, and Hopkins'
Hand in Hand (1/95), which followed American history through poetry. Philip's
book is slanted towards older readers, and its organization relies on connections,
sometimes obvious, sometimes funny, and sometimes subtle, between each poem
and its neighbors: Whitman's "I Hear America Singing," for instance, precedes
Langston Hughes' "I, Too." Entries represent a variety of eras and styles, with
ballads and jingles standing alongside poetic contributions (sometimes true to lin-
guistically rougher times, as with Benet's fondly recalled "bluegum nigger" in
"American Names") from a blend of stalwarts and mavericks including Whittier,
Longfellow, Dickinson, Masters, Stevens, Ferlinghetti, and Brooks; lesser-known
poets such as Kitty Tsui ("Don't Let Them Chip Away at Our Language") and
John Raven ("An Inconvenience") also show their considerable merits here. While
the relevance of a few poems is difficult to understand, and some of the verses are
rather opaque or distanced from their context for kids reading on their own, the
collection overall does indeed sing with an impressive thematic momentum and
sense of serendipity in the arrangement as contrary voices speak about immigra-
tion and settlement, urban and rural life, poverty and achievement. McCurdy's
scratchboard art lends texture to the book's pristine composition; his white lines
are reminiscent of Thomas Bewick, but the angularity and vigor of his images give
them an appropriately American, WPA-ish flavor. Whether used as a source for
junior-high readalouds, enhancing an American Studies curriculum, or just read
for private enjoyment, this will give kids an unusual insight into the character of
the country. Author, title and first line, and subject indices are included, as is a list
of suggested reading. DS
POWELL, RANDY 
Dean Duffy. 
Farrar, 1995 
170p
ISBN 0-374-31754-2 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 7-12
When you hit a record-breaking home run out of the park-against a doctored
ball, no less-in your freshman year, what do you do for an encore? That's what
Dean Duffy has been trying to figure out. Now that he's graduated (after batting
a measly .052 his last two years of school) Dean figures baseball is behind him,
until a recruiter from a small college offers him a trial one-semester scholarship.
Unlike the angsty sports fiction of Chris Crutcher, Dean's story is played out with
unassuming simplicity, as he housesits for friends in Seattle, works a part-time job,
gets to know a girl, and gradually makes up his mind about his future. Powell's
writing is easy but fresh, and while there's perhaps a bit too much preaching deliv-
ered via conversation, it's done with an offhand air, and Dean himself is such a
darned nice guy you can't help wanting to give him some advice. What he actually
decides to do is left up in the air, and readers will have a ball figuring out which
way the wind is blowing. RS
396 
* THE BULLETIN
POWLEDGE, FRED 
Working River; written and illus. with photographs by Fred
Powledge. 
Farrar, 1995 
136p
ISBN 0-374-38527-0 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
The river of the title is the Patuxent, which flows through Maryland to empty into
the Chesapeake Bay. Powledge affectionately describes his local waterway, begin-
ning the book with an introduction to the river and its ecosystem, going on to
discuss the river's history, and finally outlining the current threats to its well-being
and the efforts made to combat those threats. This is more personal and therefore
more engaging than many dispassionate series titles on rivers great and small; the
author's inclusion of other local voices speaking on the river's importance empha-
sizes the specific focus. The book suffers from organizational problems, however;
we tend to go over the same figurative ground several times, and the narrative
quality of the book sometimes pushes important facts farther back than they should
be (Powledge doesn't explain the pronunciation of "Patuxent" until page 57, for
example). The writing also often enthuses rather than explains, relying on the
words "beautiful" and "interesting" without necessarily supporting them (we don't
know why "the sleek skipjack is clearly the most beautiful boat on the Bay," for
instance). It's still an appealing fluvial closeup, though, and kids will appreciate
the you-are-there approach. Occasional black-and-white photographs and maps
appear throughout; there is an index, but unfortunately no source notes. DS
REEF, CATHERINE 
Walt Whitman. Clarion, 1995 
148p 
illus. with photo-
graphs
ISBN 0-395-68705-5 
$16.95 
R Gr. 7-10
Whitman is arguably the most significant American poet, and he's certainly the
most significantly American of poets; Reef examines his life and his lifetime revi-
sions of Leaves ofGrass, his enduring legacy. His history is in some ways typical of
nineteenth-century writers: like Twain, he worked at a variety of jobs including
newspaper work, and like Alcott, he nursed soldiers in the Civil War. Yet Whit-
man was different in his arrogant-but accurate-certainty that his poetry de-
served an audience, and his poetry reflected his changing times as well as
transcending them; the author does a good job of explaining the relationship be-
tween the events of the day and Whitman's poetic concepts. There's less of a sense
of Whitman's private thoughts and feelings-his homosexuality is mentioned but
downplayed, for instance-than of Whitman's actions and publication history,
but as a record of a great poet's life, this is competent, clear, and accessible. Black-
and-white photographs and engravings bring the nineteenth century closer to the
reader; a bibliography (although no source notes) and an index are included. DS
SAGE, JAMES, ad. 
Coyote Makes Man; illus. by Britta Teckentrup. 
Simon,
1995 
26p
ISBN 0-689-80011-8 
$15.00 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Coyote calls all the other animals together to get their advice on the creation of
Man. Unfortunately, each animal conceives Man in his own image: Bear thinks
he should have a thick woolly coat, Deer thinks he should have antlers, Fox thinks
he should have a big bushy tail, and so on. Coyote sensibly takes the appropriate
qualities fron each animal's suggestion and composes Man from all of them, where-
upon the animals are suitably impressed. It's an interesting version of the creation
myth (Sage's helpful source note suggests that it's initially Crow in origin, although
JULY/AUGUST 1995 
* 397
he's drawn from other versions as well), possessing a certain kindergarten concept
of fairness that might make it particularly recognizable to a young audience. The
tone, however, is rather flat and the suggestions of the animals go on too long,
making the tale seem stretched to fill its pages; the final line, with Coyote doubt-
ing the perfection of the world, will probably go right over youngsters' heads and
leave them wondering where the last page went. Teckentrup's illustrations, made
of oil paints on newsprint and then formed into collages, display a combination of
rough texture and tender luminescence in creatively geometric shapes, with the
final effect both original and absorbing. Although the visuals enhance the pedes-
trian text, this would still work best partnered with more resonant tellings of cre-
ation myths. DS
SANDIN, JOAN 
Pioneer Bear: Based on a True Story; written and illus. by Joan
Sandin. 
Random House, 1995 
48p 
(Step into Reading)
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-96050-3 
$7.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-679-86050-9 
$3.99 
R 
Gr. 1-3
News of a dancing bear has reached frontier photographer John Lacy, who brings
his new-fangled camera to the Irwin cabin to take the bear's picture. Andrew
Irwin, Bearly's young owner and trainer, can't find the cub just then and so, after
the family conducts a thorough search from henhouse to outhouse, they decide to
pose for a family portrait instead. When the photo is delivered some days later, the
family is delighted to discover that Bearly wasn't about to be left out of the picture
after all. Primary schoolers will enjoy sighting Bearly, in the softly rendered water-
color scenes, as he peeks from behind outbuildings and foliage and peers through
windows in familiar Where's Waldo? fashion. The title-page indication that this is
"based on a true story" is a tantalizing lead-in, but no source note or further com-
mentary is offered. EB
SELSAM, MILLICENT E. 
How to Be a Nature Detective; illus. by Marlene Hill
Donnelly. 
Rev. ed. HarperCollins, 1995 
32p 
(Let's-Read-and-Find-Out
Science)
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023448-2 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023447-4 
$14.95 
R 4-8 yrs
First, Selsam explains what detectives do-they ask questions such as "What hap-
pened?" and they look for clues. Nature detectives ask questions about animals,
and look for clues "almost anywhere-in a backyard, in the woods, in a city park."
She then gives problems for nature detectives to solve, all of which are based on
animal pawprints, such as the mystery of who drank the milk from the cat's bowl,
and who ate the dog food. The essence of science writing for the youngest chil-
dren is clear, sequential explanation, and Selsam accomplishes this expertly. She
has selected tracks from more common animals (rabbits, frogs, snakes, raccoons,
foxes, and deer) to give children the best chance of using the information, and she
repeats the facts in several different ways to reinforce them. This revised edition
has new illustrations by a staff artist at Chicago's Field Museum of Natural His-
tory; Donnelly adds interest to her watercolor washes with delicate pen-and-ink
lines. Her animals are softly realistic, their tracks are easily distinguished, and at
the end there is a guessing game of tracks, with answers on the last page. The
book's one flaw is its brevity; limiting itself to pawprints, it gives only the most
cursory nod to other ways of detecting animals. SDL
398 
* THE BULLETIN
SPIRN, MICHELE SOBEL 
The Know-Nothings; illus. by R. W. Alley. 
HarperCollins,
1995 
64p 
(I Can Read Books)
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024500-X 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024499-2 
$13.95 
R Gr. 1-2
Boris, Doris, Morris, and Norris are four friends who have a lot in common with
such literary folk as the Stupids, Amelia Bedelia, and the people of Chelm. They
are lovable fools who can't seem to get lunch on the table: they know you can't
make a hamburger without ham and they worry that if you remove the "coat"
from a banana, the fruit will shiver so much you can't eat it. What's unusual is
finding these silly people making their mistakes in a format for the newest readers,
with an easier reading level than venerable Amelia Bedelia and jokes that may
make a little more sense to contemporary children. Alley gives each character a
jaunty wardrobe and works in funny gags, such as a clock without hands, that
children will quickly spot. It takes four chapters for the Know-Nothings to get
their lunch, but young readers will enjoy every step of their journey to "France" for
French fries, and no doubt will look forward to their next adventure. SDL
STURGES, PHILEMON 
Ten FlashingFireflies; illus. byAnna Vojtech. 
North-South,
1995 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 1-55858-421-8 
$14.88
Trade ed. ISBN 1-55858-420-X 
$14.95 
R 
3-7 yrs
One of the most common and treasured of childhood experiences is rarely given a
book of its own, and now we have two-see Carle, reviewed above. Here, a brother
and sister fill their large jar with ten fireflies, caught one at a time, of course, so the
number flying free goes down as the number in the jar goes up. "What do we see
in the summer night?/ Seven bright fireflies. What a sight!/ Catch the one by the
bush./ Now there are" (turn page) "Four flickering fireflies in our jar." The text is
pleasantly rhythmic, though it might have been strengthened by using the many
variations on firefly light (twinkling, flashing, sparking) in more of a pattern. Sturges
doesn't forget the other part of catching fireflies-letting them go ("Fly away, fly
away, fly, firefly"). Vojtech accomplishes the difficult task of depicting a night-
time activity; the children, their dog, the jar, the house, and assorted visiting ani-
mals can be glimpsed through the darkness, but it is enjoyable rather than frustrating
trying to pick them out. Since dark pictures are often easier to distinguish from a
distance, librarians shouldn't rule this out as a summer storytime option, perfect
for bedtime storyhours. SDL
TALBERT, MARc A Sunburned Prayer. Simon, 1995 
108p
ISBN 0-689-80125-4 
$14.00 
R Gr. 5-7
"Walking to Chimay6... it's over sixteen miles... seventeen miles, at least"-but
eleven-year-old Eloy, over the objections of his family, is determined to join the
annual Good Friday pilgrimage to the sanctuary which houses clay said to be blessed
and curative. Eloy's beloved abuela is dying of cancer, and he will do and promise
anything to make her well. While Eloy's exhausting journey through the New
Mexico desert is as much internal as physical, Talbert does a fine job of sustaining
suspense in both the narrative (Will Eloy make it to the sanctuary? What will he
find there?) and the spiritual crisis ("Come on, you lousy beads," he mutters to his
rosary). While there is no miracle at the end of his quest, Eloy does find hope from
JULY/AUGUST 1995 
* 
399
several unlikely quarters (including a dog who pushes her way into his affections),
and Talbert treats the boy's faith (and doubt) with respect, conveying it with vigor
and a permeating evocation of the landscape. RS
THESMAN, JEAN 
Summerspell. Simon, 1995 
16 9p
ISBN 0-671-50130-5 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Jocelyn has been living with her sister and Gerald, a Bible-thumping racist, but she
runs away after rejecting Gerald's sexual advances. Her friend Baily unexpectedly
joins her on the trip to her grandparents' summer cabin, and once there Spider
shows up: he is nervous, twitchy, incessantly chattering, and insistent upon stay-
ing at the cabin with them. The three coexist uneasily for a weekend until the
inevitable confrontation with Gerald, which ends in two deaths. Thesman con-
veys the flood of feelings Jocelyn has on returning to a much-loved place and
capably sustains the tension among the three teens. Though the reader feels some
empathy with Jocelyn, Baily remains a stolid male enigma. The book's most in-
triguing character, Spider, holds two secrets, one of which Thesman subtly hints
at, and the other of which is far too easy to guess. While Spider is obnoxious, he is
treated so atrociously by the other two that it undermines the reader's sympathy
for all three. The book's conclusion is less than satisfying, with explanations for
and reaction to the deaths insufficient. Despite uneven characterization (Gerald is
powerfully drawn, but a stereotype), many readers will enjoy the tense atmosphere
and a trio who are not too sweet. SDL
TURNER, ANN 
One Brave Summer. 
HarperCollins, 1995 
163p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023875-5 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023732-5 
$13.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Bristly, insatiably curious, and unworldly, Katy Ann is determined to have some
adventures this summer. The only thing standing in her way is her own fear-of
beginnings and endings, of cemeteries, even of quilts (they remind her of the dead
people who made them). Fortunately, she is about to befriend the "jumpingest
person" she's ever met; Lena May bounds into Katy's life full of exuberance and
daring ideas. The girls' friendship blossoms instantaneously and they spend every
spare moment together unraveling life's mysteries of love, death, and growing up.
At times, Katy appears young and naive: "I'm going to say just what I want and
where I want to go when I get bigger," and yet her observations are often unchar-
acteristically mature: "Now I knew why my parents got divorced. Love died, just
the way it once grew-sudden and surprising." It's all a little too reassuring, and
conflict never fully develops into crisis. Katy's disappointment with her always-
busy mom is a promising plot thread but it never quite goes anywhere and the
story is nonchalantly resolved via a walk through the cemetery: "I sighed and
patted the earth. The little bones didn't seem scary anymore. Not even sad,
really." There are some lyrical touches ("The mountains tumbled away into the
distance, a soft blue") and the bond of friendship is fresh and clear, but this brave
summer turns out to be quite tame. HMW
VANDE VELDE, VIVIAN 
Companions oftheNight. Yolen/Harcourt, 1995 
212p
ISBN 0-15-200221-9 
$17.00 
R* 
Gr. 7-12
See this month's Big Picture, p. 373, for review.
400 
* THE BULLETIN
WEGMAN, WILLIAM 
One, Two, Three; illus. with photographs by William
Wegman. 
Hyperion, 1995 
14p
ISBN 0-7868-0103-0 
$6.95 
R 
3-5 yrs
Triangle, Square, Circle; written and illus. with photographs by William
Wegman. 
Hyperion, 1995 
14p
ISBN 0-7868-0104-2 
$6.95 
Ad 
3-5 yrs
The world's most patient dogs, photographer William Wegman's Weimaraners,
star in two concept board books. In One Two Three, Wegman gives children dogs
to count and uses the dogs to make the shapes of the numbers as well; for instance,
there are two dogs sitting at school desks, while at the bottom of the page four dogs
lying on their sides make the numeral two in a picture small enough that children
won't be tempted to count those dogs instead. As always, Wegman has posed the
dogs creatively, the photographs are beautifully lit and so crisp that each hair can
be seen, and for the most part the counting work is clear. Triangle, Square, Circle
is less effective as a concept book. Though the pictures are equally entertaining,
the shapes of the dogs themselves overwhelm the shapes of circles, arches, and
semicircles. There are better books available for teaching both numbers and shapes,
but many of them lack Wegman's wit, and a visit with his dogs (who retain their
dignity no matter what silly situation he puts them in) is always welcome. SDL
WELCH, WILLY 
Playing Right Field; illus. by Marc Simont. 
Scholastic,
1995 
32p
ISBN 0-590-48298-X 
$13.95 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Add another to the growing stack of picture books taken from songs. This one
(which Peter, Paul & Mary sing) takes the viewpoint of the kid stuck out in right
field: "Playing right field, it's easy, you know./ You can be awkward and you can
be slow." Unfortunately, though the message is upbeat and the conclusion funny,
the lyrics do not translate well to the page. Flaws in meter can be disguised in
music by holding a syllable longer, but when read aloud they can't be hidden:
"But they were so graceful, and they were so fast;/ they never batted last." A bad
rhyme, such as "dull" and "pull," and a phrase the audience won't understand,
such as "it was always a measure of my self-esteem" may also be less noticeable
when sung. Simont's graceful charcoal-and-watercolor pictures compensate for
textual problems as he shows the narrator alone in a grassy sea of dandelions, dream-
ing up images of himself making great plays. Music is not included. SDL
WEXLER, JEROME 
Sundew Stranglers: Plants that Eat Insects; written and illus.
with photographs by Jerome Wexler. 
Dutton, 1995 
4 8p
ISBN 0-525-45208-7 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Having previously focused on Queen Anne's lace (BCCB 6/94) and jack-in-the-
pulpits (9/93), Wexler now turns his attention to plants of a more sinister nature.
He first gives a brief overview of insect-eating plants in general, such as the famed
Venus'-flytrap, the butterwort, and the pitcher plant. He then zeroes in on the
sundew, discussing its range, size, carnivorous method, and suitability for home
cultivation. As usual, his text is clear and comprehensive, making readily under-
standable not only how insectivorous plants work but why. His photos aren't
quite up to his usual excellence-black backgrounds provide contrast but render
the colors a bit pallid, and some shots are inclined to blur-but they're still very
good, allowing a close-up glimpse of a strange and fascinating phenomenon. DS
JULY/AUGUST 1995 
* 401
WOODSON, JACQUELINE 
From the Notebooks ofMelanin Sun. 
Blue Sky/Scholas-
tic, 1995 
141p
ISBN 0-590-45880-9 
$14.95 
R Gr. 5-9
Named by EC, his mother, for the beauty and strength of his black skin, thirteen-
year-old Melanin Sun is beginning to feel that his mother has a secret, and he's not
at all easy about her new friend, Kristin: "She was white. White white. Like Breck
Shampoo-girl white but with glasses." When EC tells him the truth ("I'm in love,
Mel... I'm in love with Kristin") he feels angry and betrayed, embarrassed that his
friends will find out, scared that--despite his sexy feelings for friend Angie-he
could be gay too. Most of all, he's frightened that the close bond he's had with his
mother will now be lost forever. Problem never overwhelms story in Melanin's
touching and vulnerable account of finding a new understanding of himself and
his mother's implacable need for adult bonds ("I need friends my age and a lover").
While friend Sean responds with derision and anger, Melanin's other friend Ralph
lightens things up with a report of his mother's reaction: "She said she saw EC day
before yesterday and she looked happier than anything. Mama said she should go
out and find herself a woman if that's what it's all about." Both EC and Kristin are
a bit idealized in their patience with Mel's sullen rebellion, but his gradual rap-
prochement with the women is realistically paced and his resolution with his friends
and girlfriend about the subject is left open. This is one of the most unpreachy-
and in the person of EC, unapologetic-accounts we've had of gay parents; it's
also a rare YA novel in its belief that parents deserve lives of their own. RS
YEP, LAURENCE 
Later, Gator. Hyperion, 1995 
122p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2083-7 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0059-3 
$13.95 
R Gr. 4-6
"Older brothers," thinks Teddy, "are put on this earth to prepare younger brothers
for reality," and he does his best to prepare his younger brother, eight-year-old
Bobby, by getting him the scary birthday present of a baby alligator. Much to
Teddy's chagrin, Bobby adores Oscar, his new pet, and relishes the attention Os-
car brings him from the rest of the large extended family. Oscar proves to be a
challenge to board and eventually meets his doom after disappearing for several
days, but his influence causes Teddy to regard his younger brother in a new and
more respectful light. Told with wit and affection, this is a warm story of an
Asian-American family living in San Francisco's Chinatown; Yep evokes the set-
ting well, with everyone in the insular community knowing one another, and uncles,
aunts, and grandparents always coming by. While there's little indication that the
story isn't contemporary (aside from the presence of Oscar himself), the author
adds a note suggesting that this happened years ago and that the casual giving of
animals as gifts is not a good idea. Since the real plot is the timeless topic of sibling
rivalry rather than the alligator, it doesn't make much difference; this is a good
solid story of realistic rather than philosophical brotherhood. DS
402 
* 
THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
African Americans-fiction:
Hyppolite; Thesman; Woodson
African Americans-stories:
Medearis; Miller, R.; Miller, W.
Africa-folklore: Aardema
Alabama-fiction: Henderson
Argentina-fiction: Ellis
Art and artists: Capek
Asian Americans-fiction: Yep
Baseball-poetry: Welch
Bears-fiction: Sandin
BEDTIME STORIES: Carle;
Sturges
Bees: Micucci
BIOGRAPHIES: Bober; Bunting;
Marrin; Miller, W.; Reef
Birds: Jenkins
Birds-stories: Aardema
Boston-fiction: Hyppolite
Brothers and sisters-fiction:
Henderson; Nodelman
Brothers-fiction: Yep
Brothers-stories: Johnston
Canada-fiction: Nodelman
Caves: Kramer
China-stories: Armstrong
Clothing and dress-stories:
Denton; Medearis
CONCEPT BOOKS: Wegman
COUNTING BOOKS: Sturges;
Wegman
Creative writing-fiction:
Macdonald
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Casanova; Macdonald
Dogs: Wegman
Dogs-fiction: Talbert
Dogs-stories: Anholt
Ecology: George; Ocko; Powledge
Emotional problems-fiction:
Macdonald
England-fiction: Anderson;
Burgess
Ethics and values: Foreman;
Gellman; Vande Velde
Everglades-stories: George
FANTASY: Alexander; Avi;
Nodelman; Vande Velde
Fathers and sons-fiction:
Casanova
Fear-fiction: Turner
Florida-stories: George
FOLKTALES AND
FAIRYTALES: Aardema;
Bierhorst; Myers; Sage
Friends-fiction: Ellis; Hyppolite;
Thesman; Turner
Frontier life-fiction: Sandin
FUNNY STORIES: Jennings;
Spirn
Gardening-stories: Mallett
Geology: Kramer
Government: Parker
Grandmothers-fiction: Talbert
Growing up-fiction: Powell
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Anderson; Lawlor
History, England: Marrin
History, U.S.: Bober; Colman;
Krull; Miller, B.; Miller, R.;
Parker; Philip; Reef
JULY/AUGUST 1995 
* 403
Homosexuality-fiction: Woodson
Hunting-fiction: Casanova
Illness-fiction: Anderson
Imagination-stories: Denton
Insects-stories: Carle
Latinos-fiction: Talbert
Literature, American: Reef
Literature, children's: Bunting
Lizards-stories: Johnston
LOVE STORIES: Vande Velde
Martial arts: Metil
Maryland: Powledge
Meteorites-stories: Conrad
Mexico-stories: Johnston
Minnesota-fiction: Casanova
Money: Parker
Monsters-stories: Adam
Mothers and sons-fiction:
Woodson
Music and musicians-fiction:
Masters
MYSTERY STORIES: Henderson
Native Americans-fiction:
Bolognese
Native Americans-folklore:
Bierhorst; Sage
Nature study: George; Jenkins;
Kramer; Mallett; Micucci;
Ocko; Patent; Powledge;
Selsam; Sturges; Wexler
New Mexico-fiction: Talbert
Orphans-fiction: Burgess; Lawlor
Pets-fiction: Graeber; Yep
Physical education: Metil
Pigs-stories: McNaughton
POETRY: Philip; Reef; Welch
Poets-fiction: Alexander
Reading aloud: Avi; Moore; Philip
Reading, beginning: Johnston;
Sandin; Spirn
Reading, easy: Bolognese;
Bunting; Giff; Graeber; Hooks;
Masters
Reading, family: Anholt; Krull
Reading, reluctant: Casanova;
English; Jennings; Metil; Moore
Religious education: Foreman;
Gellman; Talbert
Rivers: Powledge
SCARY STORIES: Vande Velde
School-fiction: Masters
SCIENCE FICTION: Foreman;
Hooks
SHORT STORIES: Avi; Jennings;
Moore
Slavery-stories: Miller, W.
SPORTS STORIES: Powell
Story hour: Aardema; Adam;
Anholt; Armstrong; Conrad;
Denton; George; Grossman;
Johnston; Mallett;
McNaughton; Miller, R.;
Myers; Sage; Sturges
Summer-fiction: Thesman;
Turner
Time travel-fiction: Burgess
Transportation: English
Vampires-fiction: Vande Velde
Voyages and travels: Marrin
Voyages and travels-fiction: Giff
Washington, D.C.-fiction: Giff
West, the: Miller, B.
West, the-fiction: Lawlor
West, the-stories: Miller, R.
Whales-fiction: Ellis
Wolves-fiction: Patent
Wolves-stories: McNaughton
Women's studies: Bober; Colman;
Miller, B.
Work: Colman
World War II: Colman; Krull
404 
* THE BULLETIN
T H E B U L L E T
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
AUTHOR/TITLE INDEX, VOLUME 48
SEPTEMBER, 1994-JULY/AUGUST, 1995
3 NBs of Julian Drew. Deem. 125.
92 Queens Road. Case. 230.
Aardema. Misoso. 78.
. Jackal's Flying Lesson. 374.
Abigail Adams. Bober. 377.
Able. Hate Groups. 262.
Absolutely True Story. Roberts. 213.
Ackerman. Monk Seal Hideaway. 337.
Ada. Where the Flame Trees Bloom. 190.
Adam. Hilda and the Mad Scientist. 374.
Addy's Cook Book. Pleasant Company. 212.
Adeline Street. Williams. 289.
Adler, C. That Horse Whiskey! 118.
.Youn Hee and Me. 226.
Adler, D. Child of the Warsaw Ghetto. 298.
_ 
Hilde and Eli. 78.
Adoff. Street Music. 226.
Adoption. Rogers. 285.
Adventures of Robin Hood. Williams. 326.
African Mask. Rupert. 25.
African-American Inventors. McKissack. 94.
After a Suicide. Kuklin. 170.
Agard. Caribbean Dozen. 118.
Agee. So Many Dynamos! 156.
Airborne. Kornbluth. 314.
Aitkens. Kerry, a Teenage Mother. 190.
Alavedra. They Followed a Bright Star. 36.
Alexander, L. Arkadians. 375.
Alexander, M. You're a Genius, Blackboard
Bear. 337.
Alexander, S. Taking Hold. 156.
Alice Nizzy Nazzy. Johnston. 311.
Alice the Brave. Naylor. 283.
Alien Game. Dexter. 233.
All the Colors of the Earth. Hamanaka. 49.
All the Small Poems and Fourteen More.
Worth. 218.
Almagor. Under the Domim Tree. 338.
Almanac of the Gross, Disgusting and Totally
Repulsive. Elfman. 43.
Almost a Hero. Neufeld. 356.
Alphabet of Angels. Willard. 69.
Always My Dad. Wyeth. 219.
Amazing Impossible Erie Canal. Harness.
346.
America Alive. Karl. 132.
American Safari. Brandenburg. 339.
Ancona. Cutters, Carvers & the Cathedral.
263.
And Twelve Chinese Acrobats. Yolen. 365.
Anderson. Black Water. 375.
Andres. Humphrey & Ralph. 4.
Andronik. Prince of Humbugs. 157.
Angel for May. Burgess. 378.
Angelou. My Painted House, My Friendly
Chicken, and Me. 118.
Anholt, C. What Makes Me Happy? 298.
Anholt, L. New Puppy. 376.
Anna Pavlova. Levine. 315.
Annie's Gifts. Medearis. 282.
Anno's Magic Seeds. Anno. 263.
Anno. Anno's Magic Seeds. 263.
Antle. Sam's Wild West Show. 264.
Apache Rodeo. Hoyt-Goldsmith. 201.
Are You Alone on Purpose? Werlin. 147.
Arkadians. Alexander. 375.
Armstrong. King Crow. 299.
. Wan Hu Is in the Stars. 376.
Arnold, C. City of the Gods. 119.
Arnold, K. Knock, Knock, Teremok! 119.
Arnosky. I See Animals Hiding. 191.
Aronson. Scientific Goofs. 157.
Arthur's First Sleepover. Brown. 81.
Arthur, High King of Britain. Morpurgo.
317.
Artistic Trickery. Capek. 379.
As the Roadrunner Runs. Hartman. 167.
IN
JULY/AUGUST 1995 
* 405
Asch. Water. 264.
Ashabranner. New Frontier. 37.
Atalanta's Race. Climo. 339.
Auch. Monster Brother. 79.
Avi. Barn. 120.
.Tom, Babette & Simon. 376.
Away from Home. Lobel. 17.
Away to Me, Moss. Levin. 135.
Bachrach. Tell Them We Remember. 100.
Baker. Story of Rosy Dock. 227.
Ballad of the Pirate Queens. Yolen. 290.
Bamboozled. Legge. 241.
Banana Beer. Carrick. 267.
Bang. One Fall Day. 37.
Banging Book. Grossman. 384.
Banks, J. Egg-Drop Blues. 299.
Banks, L. Broken Bridge. 227.
Banshee Train. Bodkin. 264.
Banyai. Zoom. 191.
Barber. Saturday at The New You. 120.
Barboza. Door of No Return. 4.
Barefoot Dancer. O'Connor. 60.
Barn. Avi. 120.
Barry. Rajah's Rice. 191.
Barton. Wee Little Woman. 338.
Bat-Ami. Dear Elijah. 300.
Bauer. Thwonk. 157.
Baylor. Table Where Rich People Sit. 5.
Bear. Briggs. 229.
Beast. Wild. 218.
Begay. Navajo. 228.
Behind the Border. Kossman. 52.
Behind the Lines. Holland. 14.
Bellmaker. Jacques. 278.
Benedek. Ghosts, Vampires, and Werewolves.
178.
Berleth. Mary Patten's Voyage. 121.
Bernal & Florinda. Kimmel. 15.
Berry. E. E. Cummings. 158.
Bess's Log Cabin Quilt. Love. 352.
Best School Year Ever. Robinson. 63.
Beyond the Burning Time. Lasky. 134.
Bial. Underground Railroad. 228.
Bibles and Bestiaries. Wilson. 148.
Bierhorst. White Deer. 377.
Big Boy. Mollel. 244.
Big Cats. Milton. 283.
Big David, Little David. Hinton. 200.
Big Red Truck. Schlossberg. 103.
Biggest, Strongest, Fastest. Jenkins. 348.
Binch. Gregory Cool. 5.
Bing Bang Boing. Florian. 78.
Birthday Surprises. Hurwitz. 310.
Bischhoff-Miersch. Do You Know the
Difference? 300.
Bit by Bit. Sanfield. 321.
Bitter Bananas. Olaleye. 61.
Blabber Mouth. Gleitzman. 275.
Black Stars in Orbit. Burns. 193.
Black Water. Anderson. 375.
Black. Royal Nap. 192.
Blast Off Hopkins. 277.
Blessing in Disguise. Tate. 216.
Block. Hanged Man. 6.
Blos. Brooklyn Doesn't Rhyme. 80.
.Hungry Little Boy. 338.
Blue for Beware. Haas. 236.
Bluewater Journal. Krupinski. 351.
Bober. Abigail Adams. 377.
Bode. Heartbreak and Roses. 6.
.Trust & Betrayal. 338.
Bodkin. Banshee Train. 264.
Boelts. Summer's End. 228.
Bolognese. Little Hawk's New Name. 378.
Bones in the Cliff. Stevenson. 360.
Bones. Sandeman. 321.
Book of Fruit. Lember. 206.
Book of North American Owls. Sattler. 322.
Book of Tens. Podwall. 23.
Book That Jack Wrote. Scieszka. 26.
Boraks-Nemetz. Old Brown Suitcase. 158.
Born Early. Lafferty. 134.
Bosse. Examination. 37.
Bound for Oregon. Van Leeuwen. 107.
Boundless Grace. Hoffman. 347.
Bowen. Stranded at Plimoth Plantation 1626.
38.
Boy Called Slow. Bruchac. 265.
Boys Against Girls. Naylor. 98.
Bradley. Wait and See. 6.
Brammer. Peanut Butter Friends in a Chop
Suey World. 265.
Brandenburg. American Safari. 339.
Breathed. Red Ranger Came Calling. 80.
Brenner. Mr. Tall and Mr. Small. 81.
Bridges to Change. Krull. 204.
Briggs. Bear. 229.
Brink. Goody O'Grumpity. 121.
Broken Bridge. Banks. 227.
Broken Umbrellas. Spohn. 26.
Brooke. Teller of Tales. 121.
Brooklyn Doesn't Rhyme. Blos. 80.
Brooks. Traveling On into the Light. 122.
Brown, J. George Washington's Ghost. 122.
Brown, Marc. Arthur's First Sleepover. 81.
Brown, Margaret. Days Before Now. 159.
Brown, T. L'Chaim. 159.
Bruchac. Boy Called Slow. 265.
. Girl Who Married the Moon. 160.
. Gluskabe and the Four Wishes. 192.
. Great Ball Game. 7.
Buettner. Sovietrek. 81.
Buffalo Bill and the Pony Express. Coerr. 267.
Buffalo Gals. Miller. 391.
Buffalo Soldiers. Miller. 391.
Buffie. Someone Else's Ghost. 193.
406 * THE BULLETIN
Bunting. Day's Work. 38.
.Night of the Gargoyles. 82.
_ Once Upon a Time. 378.
_ Spying on Miss Miiller. 229.
Burchard. Charlotte Forten. 266.
Burgess, B. Fred Field. 8.
Burgess, M. An Angel for May. 378.
Burning Time. Matas. 139.
Burningham. Courtney. 123.
Burns, K. Black Stars in Orbit. 193.
Burns, M. Greedy Triangle. 230.
Busenberg. Vanilla, Chocolate, & Strawberry.
8.
Byars. Dark Stairs. 82.
Cabin Key. Rand. 63.
Call Me Ahnighito. Conrad. 380.
Cameron. Kidnapped Prince. 272.
Campbell. Shark Callers. 39.
Can I Have a Stegosaurus, Mom? Can I?
Please!? Grambling. 128.
Cannon. Trupp. 301.
Capek. Artistic Trickery. 379.
Captain Abdul's Pirate School. McNaughton.
138.
Caribbean Dozen. Agard. 118.
Carl Makes a Scrapbook. Day. 84.
Carle. Very Lonely Firefly. 379.
Carlson. Cool Salsa. 8.
Carmody. Gathering. 9.
Carrick. Banana Beer. 267.
Carter. Dogwolf. 160.
Casanova. Moose Tracks. 380.
Case of the Mummified Pigs. Quinlan. 246.
Case. 92 Queens Road. 230.
Cat and the Cook. Heins. 310.
Cat Running. Snyder. 178.
Cat, Mouse and Moon. Powell. 63.
Cat, You Better Come Home. Keillor. 349.
Caves. Kramer. 387.
Cech. Jacques-Henri Lartigue. 160.
Cecil. Frog Princess. 266.
Celebrate America in Poetry and Art. Panzer.
141.
Celebrating America. Whipple. 147.
Ch'i-lin Purse. Fang. 273.
Chang. Cricket Warrior. 39.
Chapman. Snow on Snow on Snow. 193.
Charles. What Am I? 40.
Charlotte Forten. Burchard. 266.
Cherry Tree Buck. Moore. 392.
Chickens! Chickens! Porte. 284.
Child of the Warsaw Ghetto. Adler. 298.
Children of Micronesia. Hermes. 13.
Chmielarz. Down at Angel's. 123.
Chocolate. Elizabeth's Wish. 194.
Choi. Gathering of Pearls. 83.
Chorao. Number One Number Fun. 194.
Christiansen. I See the Moon. 161.
Christmas Alphabet. Sabuda. 64.
Christmas in the Big House, Christmas in the
Quarters. McKissack. 56.
Christmas Spirit. Westall. 69.
Christmas Tree Ship. Winter. 148.
Cisneros. Hairs/Pelitos. 83.
City Green. DiSalvo-Ryan. 10.
City of the Gods. Arnold. 119.
Citymaze! Madgwick. 280.
Cleopatra. Stanley. 67.
Climb or Die. Myers. 140.
Climo. Atalanta's Race. 339.
Coaster. Duffey. 42.
Coat of Many Colors. Parton. 22.
Coerr. Buffalo Bill and the Pony Express. 267.
Cofer. An Island Like You. 267.
Cole, H. Jack's Garden. 301.
Cole, J. Magic School Bus in the Time of the
Dinosaurs. 40.
. My New Kitten. 340.
Cole, S. What Kind of Love? 268.
Coleman. Foot Warmer and the Crow. 124.
Coles. Story of Ruby Bridges. 230.
Collier. With Every Drop of Blood. 9.
Colman. Rosie the Riveter. 380.
. Toilets, Bathtubs, Sinks, and Sewers.
195.
Color. Heller. 347.
Colors Everywhere. Hoban. 238.
Come in from the Cold. Qualey. 100.
Coming Home. Cooper. 162.
Companions of the Night. Vande Velde. 399.
Condor's Egg. London. 55.
Cone. Grand Canyon. 124.
Connell. Mathnet Casebook: #4 The Map
With a Gap. 84.
Conrad. Call Me Ahnighito. 380.
Cooke. Mr. Pam Pam and the Hullabazoo.
84.
SSo Much. 161.
Cool Salsa. Carlson. 8.
Cooney. Driver's Ed. 10.
Cooper, F. Coming Home. 162.
Cooper, I. Trick or Trouble? 10.
.Worst Noel. 124.
Cooper, M. I Got Community. 302.
Cormier. In the Middle of the Night. 302.
Cottonwood. Quake! 268.
Counting Our Way to Maine. Smith. 250.
Courtney. Burningham. 123.
Covington. Lasso the Moon. 231.
Coyote Makes Man. Sage. 396.
Coyote. McDermott. 94.
Crazy Horse. St. George. 146.
Creech. Walk Two Moons. 162.
Cresswell. Watchers. 195.
Crews, D. Sail Away. 268.
Crews, N. One Hot Summer Day. 340.
JULY/AUGUST 1995 
* 407
Crews. Hinojosa. 238.
Cricket Warrior. Chang. 39.
Crimi. Outside, Inside. 303.
Croco'nile. Gerrard. 164.
Cross. New World. 340.
Crossing the New Bridge. McCully. 18.
Crowther. Robert Crowther's Incredible
Animal Alphabet. 341.
Crutcher. Ironman. 269.
Crying for a Vision. Wangerin. 180.
Crystal Garden. Grove. 345.
Curtain Going Up! Hill. 237.
Cushman. Midwife's Apprentice. 303.
Custodian. Lakin. 204.
Cutler. My Wartime Summers. 85.
Cutters, Carvers & the Cathedral. Ancona.
263.
Dahl. Roald Dahl's Revolting Recipes. 231.
Daisy-Head Mayzie. Dr. Seuss. 233.
Daly. My Dad. 341.
Dance at Grandpa's. Wilder. 148.
Dandelion Garden. Wilson. 363.
Danger at the Fair. Kehret. 202.
Danziger. Thames Doesn't Rhyme with
James. 163.
. You Can't Eat Your Chicken Pox,
Amber Brown. 269.
Dark Stairs. Byars. 82.
Darnell Rock Reporting. Myers. 59.
Davis. My Brother Has AIDS. 163.
Dawson. Food & Feasts in the Middle Ages.
68.
Day of Delight. Schur. 103.
Day's Work. Bunting. 38.
Day, A. Carl Makes a Scrapbook. 84.
Day, N. Lion's Whiskers. 232.
Daydreamer. McEwan. 56.
Days Before Now. Brown. 159.
Days of the Dead. Lasky. 53.
Dean Duffy. Powell. 395.
Dean, Jan. Finders. 304.
Dean, Julia. Year on Monhegan Island. 232.
Dear Bear. Harrison. 166.
Dear Benjamin Banneker. Pinkney. 100.
Dear Elijah. Bat-Ami. 300.
Dear Levi. Woodruff. 28.
DeClements. Tough Loser. 125.
Deedy. Library Dragon. 195.
Deem. 3 NBs of Julian Drew. 125.
Deep Blues. Lyons. 135.
DeFelice. Mule Eggs. 41.
. Three Perfect Peaches. 270.
Deliver Us from Evie. Kerr. 132.
DeMarsh. Three Perfect Peaches. 270.
Demuth. In Trouble with Teacher. 304.
Denenberg. Voices from Vietnam. 233.
Denton. Would They Love a Lion? 381.
Desimini. My House. 41.
Devlin. Trouble with Henriette! 341.
Dewey. Naming Colors. 196.
Dexter. Alien Game. 233.
Dickinson. Shadow of a Hero. 163.
Dinner at Magritte's. Garland. 274.
DiSalvo-Ryan. City Green. 10.
Disher. Ratface. 126.
Dive. Donovan. 42.
Do Pirates Take Baths? Tucker. 68.
Do You Know the Difference? Bischhoff-
Miersch. 300.
Dog Years. Warner. 325.
Dogwolf. Carter. 160.
Doherty. Street Child. 86.
Don't Fidget a Feather! Silverman. 105.
Donahue. An Island Far from Home. 196.
Donovan. Dive. 42.
Door of No Return. Barboza. 4.
Dorris. Guests. 86.
Down at Angel's. Chmielarz. 123.
Dr. Seuss. Daisy-Head Mayzie. 233.
Draper. Tears of a Tiger. 164.
Dream Mouse. Esbensen. 272.
Dreamtime. Oodgeroo. 61.
Driver's Ed. Cooney. 10.
Drucker. Family Treasury of Jewish Holidays.
86.
Drummers of Jericho. Meyer. 282.
Dubosarsky. White Guinea-Pig. 342.
Duffey. Coaster. 42.
Duncan. National Civil Rights Museum
Celebrates Everyday People. 196.
Dunlop. Finn's Search. 126.
Dunrea. Painter Who Loved Chickens. 270.
Duquennoy. Ghost's Dinner. 126.
E. E. Cummings. Berry. 158.
Eagle Kite. Fox. 234.
Earthshine. Nelson. 98.
Eclipse. Franklin. 235.
Edible Pyramid. Leedy. 206.
Egg-Drop Blues. Banks. 299.
Elfman. Almanac of the Gross, Disgusting
and Totally Repulsive. 43.
Elizabeth's Wish. Chocolate. 194.
Ellis, E. Swimming with the Whales. 381.
Ellis, S. Out of the Blue. 270.
Elzbieta. Jon-Jon and Annette. 87.
Emberley. Three Cool Kids. 271.
Emeka's Gift. Onyefulu. 319.
Emergency! Gibbons. 89.
English. Transportation. 382.
Equiano. Kidnapped Prince. 272.
Erin's Voyage. Frank. 88.
Esbensen. Dream Mouse. 272.
Evans. Rain Song. 234.
Everglades. George. 383.
Everglades. Lourie. 55.
Examination. Bosse. 37.
408 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Exiles at Home. McKay. 172.
Falla. Woodlore. 243.
Falling into Glory. Westall. 362.
Falwell. Letter Jesters. 127.
Family Treasury of Jewish Holidays. Drucker.
86.
Fang. Ch'i-lin Purse. 273.
Farmer. Warm Place. 304.
Fat Chance. Newman. 98.
Fear Place. Naylor. 174.
Feliciana Feydra LeRoux. Thomassie. 324.
Fernando's Gift/El Regalo de Fernando.
Keister. 312.
Ferris. Signs of Life. 305.
Feuer. Lost Summer. 273.
Fifth and Final Sun. Greger. 47.
Fifth-Grade Fever. Granger. 344.
Fig Pudding. Fletcher. 306.
Finders. Dean. 304.
Finn's Search. Dunlop. 126.
Fire on the Mountain. Kurtz. 53.
Firebird. Isadora. 50.
Firehouse. Winkleman. 70.
First Apple. Russell. 177.
Fisher. Moses. 305.
Fison. Roald Dahl's Revolting Recipes. 231.
Fitch. Kicks. 305.
Fletcher. Fig Pudding. 306.
Flights of Fancy. Livingston. 171.
Flood. Born Early. 134.
Floppy Teddy Bear. Lillie. 242.
Florian. Bing Bang Boing. 78.
Flying Tortoise. Mollel. 58.
Focus. Wolf. 109.
Food & Feasts in Ancient Rome. Steele. 68.
Food & Feasts in the Middle Ages. Dawson.
68.
Foot Warmer and the Crow. Coleman. 124.
Foreman, L. Shatterworld. 382.
Foreman, M. War Game. 43.
Forestwife. Tomlinson. 252.
Forrester. Sound the Jubilee. 306.
Forri the Baker. Myers. 210.
Forward. Traveling Backward. 44.
Fox, M. Sophie. 88.
Fox, P. Eagle Kite. 234.
Foxbury Force. Oakley. 99.
Frank, J. Erin's Voyage. 88.
Frank, L. I Am an Artichoke. 342.
Frankenlouse. James. 90.
Franklin. Eclipse. 235.
Fred Field. Burgess. 8.
Frederick Douglass. Miller. 392.
Free Speech. Zeinert. 262.
Freedman. Kids at Work. 44.
French, J. Somewhere around the Corner.
343.
French, V. Red Hen and Sly Fox. 273.
. Spider Watching. 306.
Friedman, A. King's Commissioners. 196.
Friedman, C. Nightfather. 127.
Fritz. Harriet Beecher Stowe and the Beecher
Preachers. 45.
Froehlich. That Kookoory! 307.
Frog Princess. Cecil. 266.
From Pictures to Words. Stevens. 360.
From the Notebooks of Melanin Sun.
Woodson. 401.
Fromm. Monkey Tag. 127.
Frozen Man. Getz. 165.
Frozen Waterfall. Hicyilmaz. 13.
Furlong. Robin's Country. 343.
Ganeri. I Remember Bosnia. 235.
. I Remember Palestine. 235.
Garfunkel. On Wings of Joy. 88.
Garland, M. Dinner at Magritte's. 274.
Garland, S. I Never Knew Your Name. 11.
. Indio. 274.
Garza. Latinas. 236.
Gather Up, Gather In. Helldorfer. 49.
Gathering of Pearls. Choi. 83.
Gathering. Carmody. 9.
Gauch. Tanya and Emily in a Dance for Two.
164.
Gellman. How Do You Spell God? 382.
Gemini Game. Scott. 104.
Genuine Half Moon Kid. Williams. 28.
George Washington's Ghost. Brown. 122.
George, J. Everglades. 383.
• Julie. 45.
_ . To Climb a Waterfall. 274.
George, L. In the Woods. 307.
Geringer. Seven Ravens. 48.
Gerrard. Croco'nile. 164.
Gerson. How Night Came from the Sea. 46.
Getting Him. Haseley. 129.
Getz. Frozen Man. 165.
Gherman. Mysterious Rays of Dr. Rintgen.
46.
Ghost's Dinner. Duquennoy. 126.
Ghosts, Vampires, and Werewolves. Spariosu.
178.
Gibbons. Emergency! 89.
Giblin. Thomas Jefferson. 47.
Giff. Look Out, Washington, D.C.! 383.
Giovanni. Grandmothers. 128.
Girl in the Golden Bower. Yolen. 71.
Girl Who Could Fly. Hooks. 385.
Girl Who Married the Moon. Bruchac. 160.
Girl-Son. Neuberger. 210.
Gleitzman. Blabber Mouth. 275.
.Sticky Beak. 275.
Gliori. Mr. Bear's Picnic. 344.
Glory Field. Myers. 97.
Gluskabe and the Four Wishes. Bruchac. 192.
Goatherd and the Shepherdess. Hort. 238.
JULY/AUGUST 1995 
* 409
Going the Distance. Miller. 140.
Going Where I'm Coming From. Mazer. 209.
Gold in the Hills. Lawlor. 388.
Gold Star Sister. Murphy. 59.
Gold Unicorn. Lee. 170.
Goldman. Night Room. 197.
Good Driving, Amelia Bedelia. Parish. 245.
Good Luck Gold and Other Poems. Wong.
181.
Goodbye, Mitch. Wallace-Brodeur. 325.
Goodman. Songs from Home. 128.
Goody O'Grumpity. Brink. 121.
Gopher Draws Conclusions. Scribner. 65.
Gordon. Pierced by a Ray of Sun. 344.
Governor. Sobol. 66.
Graeber. Olivia and the Real Live Pet. 384.
Graham. Splish Splash. 47.
Grambling. Can I Have a Stegosaurus, Mom?
Can I? Please!? 128.
Grand Canyon. Cone. 124.
Grandaddy's Stars. Griffith. 274.
Grandmothers. Giovanni. 128.
Granger. Fifth-Grade Fever. 344.
Great Ball Game. Bruchac. 7.
Great Fire. Murphy. 318.
Greatest Show Off Earth. Mahy. 138.
Greedy Triangle. Burns. 230.
Greene. Manabozho's Gifts. 198.
Greenfield. Teardrop Baby. 11.
Greenwald. Rosy Cole: She Walks in Beauty.
165.
Greenwood. Pioneer Sampler. 308.
Greger. Fifth and Final Sun. 47.
Gregory Cool. Binch. 5.
Grifalconi. Not Home. 236.
Griffin. Maze. 166.
.Vikki Vanishes. 345.
Griffith. Grandaddy's Stars. 274.
Grimm. Seven Ravens. 48.
Grossman. Banging Book. 384.
Grove. Crystal Garden. 345.
Grown-Ups Get to Do All the Driving. Steig.
323.
Guernsey. An American Safari. 339.
Guess Who? Miller. 20.
Guests. Dorris. 86.
Gulliver in Lilliput. Swift. 361.
Gypsy Davey. Lynch. 93.
Haas. Blue for Beware. 236.
Hahn. Look for Me by Moonlight. 276.
Hairs/Pelitos. Cisneros. 83.
Hale. Mary Had a Little Lamb. 308.
Halkin. The Lady with the Hat. 356.
Hall, D. Lucy's Christmas. 48.
_ . I Am the Dog, I Am the Cat. 129.
Hall, E. Venus among the Fishes. 276.
Hamanaka. All the Colors of the Earth. 49.
Hamilton. Jaguarundi. 198.
Hamlet and the Enormous Chinese Dragon
Kite. Lies. 55.
Han. Rabbit's Escape. 308.
Hand in Hand. Hopkins. 168.
Hanel. Mia the Beach Cat. 166.
Hanged Man. Block. 6.
Hansard. Jig, Fig, and Mrs. Pig. 345.
Happy Yellow Car. Horvath. 89.
Harness. Amazing Impossible Erie Canal.
346.
Harper. My Dog Rosie. 129.
Harriet Beecher Stowe and the Beecher
Preachers. Fritz. 45.
Harriet's Hare. King-Smith. 351.
Harriet. Johnston. 50.
Harris, J. This Drinking Nation. 12.
Harris, R. It's Perfectly Normal. 49.
Harrison. Dear Bear. 166.
Hartman, G. As the Roadrunner Runs. 167.
Hartman, T. How Do You Spell God? 382.
Harvey Girls. Morris. 21.
Haseley. Getting Him. 129.
Hate Groups. Able. 262.
Hathorn. Way Home. 12.
Haugaard. Revenge of the Forty-Seven
Samurai. 309.
Haunting of Holroyd Hill. Seabrooke. 358.
Havill. Saving Owen's Toad. 130.
Hayashi. Superbird to the Rescue. 309.
Hayes, A. Meet the Marching Smithereens.
346.
Hayes, J. Watch Out for Clever Women! 130.
Hayloft. Peters. 212.
Hearing Us Out. Sutton. 106.
Heartbreak and Roses. Bode. 6.
Heifetz. When Blue Meant Yellow. 199.
Heins. Cat and the Cook. 310.
Helldorfer. Gather Up, Gather In. 49.
Heller. Color. 347.
Helpful Betty Solves a Mystery. Morgan. 20.
Helpful Betty to the Rescue. Morgan. 20.
Henderson. Summer of the Bonepile
Monster. 384.
Henkes. Protecting Marie. 237.
Henry and Mudge and the Best Day of All.
Rylant. 320.
Here and Then. Lyon. 93.
Hermes. Children of Micronesia. 13.
Hester Bidgood. Hildick. 131.
Hewett. Tunnels, Tracks, and Trains. 276.
Hickman. Jericho. 89.
Hicyilmaz. Frozen Waterfall. 13.
High. Maizie. 277.
Highwater. Rama. 199.
Hilda and the Mad Scientist. Adam. 374.
Hilde and Eli. Adler. 78.
Hildick. Hester Bidgood. 131.
Hill, D. See Ya, Simon. 13.
410 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Hill, E. Curtain Going Up! 237.
Hindley. Wheeling and Whirling-Around
Book. 14.
Hinojosa. Crews. 238.
Hinton. Big David, Little David. 200.
Hiring Fair. O'Hara. 22.
Hiroshima. Yep. 364.
Hirschi. When the Wolves Return. 200.
Hob and the Goblins. Mayne. 139.
Hoban. Colors Everywhere. 238.
Hoboes. Wormser. 70.
Hodges. Gulliver in Lilliput. 361.
Hoestlandt. Star of Fear, Star of Hope. 347.
Hoffman. Boundless Grace. 347.
Hold Fast to Dreams. Pinkney. 320.
Holland. Behind the Lines. 14.
Homeless. Wolf. 255.
Homeplace. Shelby. 322.
Hooks. Girl Who Could Fly. 385.
Hopkins. Blast Ofl 277.
_ Hand in Hand. 168.
._ Small Talk. 310.
Horse for All Seasons. Welch. 180.
Hort. Goatherd and the Shepherdess. 238.
Horvath. Happy Yellow Car. 89.
Horwood. Willows in Winter. 168.
How Do You Spell God? Gellman. 382.
How I Changed My Life. Strasser. 361.
How Night Came from the Sea. Gerson. 46.
How Now, Brown Cow? Schertle. 144.
How to Be a Nature Detective. Selsam. 397.
How Turtle's Back Was Cracked. Ross. 213.
Hoyt-Goldsmith. Apache Rodeo. 201.
Hughes. Sweet and Sour Animal Book. 168.
Humming Whispers. Johnson. 278.
Humphrey & Ralph. Andres. 4.
Hungry Little Boy. Blos. 338.
Hurwitz. Birthday Surprises. 310.
. Llama in the Family. 15.
. Ozzie on His Own. 239.
Hutchins. Within a Painted Past. 278.
Hyppolite. Seth and Samona. 385.
I Am an American. Stanley. 105.
I Am an Artichoke. Frank. 342.
I Am the Dog, I Am the Cat. Hall. 129.
I Got Community. Cooper. 302.
I Hate Company. Petersen. 99.
I Know an Old Lady. Karas. 202.
I Love Guinea Pigs. King-Smith. 279.
I Love You, Bunny Rabbit. Oppenheim. 211.
I Never Knew Your Name. Garland. 11..
I Remember Bosnia. Ganeri. 235.
I Remember Palestine. Ganeri. 235.
I See Animals Hiding. Arnosky. 191.
I See the Moon. Christiansen. 161.
I Walked to Zion. Madsen. 57.
Iceman. Lessem. 17.
Iguana Brothers. Johnston. 386.
Immigrants. Sandler. 248.
In and Out and Roundabout. Simeon. 358.
In the Middle of the Night. Cormier. 302.
In the Woods. George. 307.
In Trouble with Teacher. Demuth. 304.
Inch by Inch. Mallett. 389.
Indio. Garland. 274.
Insects Are My Life. McDonald. 280.
Into the Widening World. Loughery. 207.
Intrater. Two Eyes, a Nose, and a Mouth.
239.
Iron John. Kimmel. 133.
Ironman. Crutcher. 269.
Is it Time? Janovitz. 91.
Is That Josie? Narahashi. 60.
Isaacs. Swamp Angel. 90.
Isadora. Firebird. 50.
Island Far from Home. Donahue. 196.
Island Like You. Cofer. 267.
It's Perfectly Normal. Harris. 49.
Jack Horner. Lessem. 135.
Jack's Garden. Cole. 301.
Jackal's Flying Lesson. Aardema. 374.
Jacoby-Nelson. Red Poppy. 353.
Jacques-Henri Lartigue. Cech. 160.
Jacques. Bellmaker. 278.
Jaguarundi. Hamilton. 198.
Jaha and Jamil Went Down the Hill. Kroll.
314.
James, J. Mia the Beach Cat. 166.
James, M. Frankenlouse. 90.
Janeczko. Poetry from A to Z. 240.
Janney. Trail of Fear. 201.
Janovitz. Is it Time? 91.
Jansson. Moominpappa's Memoirs. 131.
Jason and the Losers. Willner-Pardo. 363.
Jenkins, P. A Nest Full of Eggs. 385.
Jenkins, S. Biggest, Strongest, Fastest. 348.
Jennings, L. Tom's Tail. 311.
Jennings, P. Unbearable! 386.
. Undone! 202.
Jeremy Kooloo. Mahurin. 209.
Jericho. Hickman. 89.
Jerusalem Mosaic. Mozeson. 140.
Jig, Fig, and Mrs. Pig. Hansard. 345.
Jimmy, the Pickpocket of the Palace. Napoli.
355.
John Henry. Lester. 54.
Johnny Rides Again. Muchmore. 354.
Johnson, A. Humming Whispers. 278.
Johnson, D. Seminole Diary. 50.
Johnston, N. Harriet. 50.
Johnston, T. Alice Nizzy Nazzy. 311.
__ . Iguana Brothers. 386.
Jon, Flora, and the Odd-Eyed Cat. Pevsner.
62.
Jon-Jon and Annette. Elzbieta. 87.
Jonas. Splash! 348.
JULY/AUGUST 1995 
* 411
Joosse. Morning Chair. 349.
Jordan. Wolf Woman. 131.
Josepha. McGugan. 94.
Juanita Fights the School Board. Velisquez.
179.
Julie. George. 45.
Junior Thunder Lord. Yep. 149.
Juster. Otter Nonsense. 51.
Juveniles in Trouble. Wormser. 29.
Karas. I Know an Old Lady. 202.
Karl. America Alive. 132.
Katie Henio. Thomson. 287.
Katz. Time Ghost. 312.
Keeler. Unraveling Fibers. 349.
Keeping Clean. Kerr. 350.
Kehret. Danger at the Fair. 202.
Keillor. Cat, You Better Come Home. 349.
Keister. Fernando's Gift/El Regalo de
Fernando. 312.
Kerr, D. Keeping Clean. 350.
Kerr, M. Deliver Us from Evie. 132.
Kerry, a Teenage Mother. Aitkens. 190.
Kessler. One Night. 350.
Kicks. Fitch. 305.
Kidnapped Prince. Equiano. 272.
Kids at Work. Freedman. 44.
Kilborne. Peach & Blue. 91.
Kimmel. Bernal & Florinda. 15.
.Iron John. 133.
.One Good Tern Deserves Another.
169.
.Valiant Red Rooster. 313.
King Crow. Armstrong. 299.
King Midas. Philip. 23.
King's Commissioners. Friedman. 196.
King-Smith. Harriet's Hare. 351.
.I Love Guinea Pigs. 279.
.Sophie Is Seven. 313.
.Swoose. 133.
.Three Terrible Trins. 203.
Kirkpatrick. Plowie. 51.
Kirsten's Cook Book. Pleasant Company.
212.
Klass. Next Stop: Nowhere. 203.
Knight. Welcoming Babies. 169.
Knock, Knock, Teremok! Arnold. 119.
Know-Nothings. Spirn. 398.
Kodomo. Kuklin. 279.
Kornbluth. Airborne. 314.
Kossman. Behind the Border. 52.
Kraken. Reed. 247.
Kramer. Caves. 387.
Kraske. Voyager's Stone. 240.
Krisher. Spite Fences. 169.
Kroll, S. Lewis and Clark. 92.
Kroll, V. Jaha and Jamil Went Down the Hill.
314.
. Pink Paper Swans. 52.
Krull. Bridges to Change. 204.
. Lives of the Writers. 53.
. One Nation, Many Tribes. 204.
. V Is for Victory. 387.
Krupinski. Bluewater Journal. 351.
Kuklin. After a Suicide. 170.
. Kodomo. 279.
Kulpa. Short Takes. 280.
Kurtz. Fire on the Mountain. 53.
Kuskin. Thoughts, Pictures and Words. 378.
L'Chaim. Brown. 159.
L'Engle. Troubling a Star. 16.
Lady with the Hat. Orlev. 356.
Lafferty. Born Early. 134.
Lakin. Custodian. 204.
. School Nurse. 204.
Langseth. White Knuckles. 280.
Lanning. Do You Know the Difference? 300.
Larson. Second-Grade Pig Pals. 134.
Lasky. Beyond the Burning Time. 134.
. Days of the Dead. 53.
. Librarian Who Measured the Earth.
16.
Lasso the Moon. Covington. 231.
Last Safe Place on Earth. Peck. 211.
Later, Gator. Yep. 401.
Latinas. Garza. 236.
Lauber. Who Eats What? 314.
Lavender. Santa Fe Trail. 351.
Lawlor. Gold in the Hills. 388.
.Shadow Catcher. 205.
Lawrence. Patchwork People. 205.
Lawrie. Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe.
352.
Leagues Apart. Ritter. 247.
Lee. Gold Unicorn. 170.
Leedy. Edible Pyramid. 206.
.Who's Who in My Family? 240.
Legge. Bamboozled. 241.
Lember. Book of Fruit. 206.
Leona. Trevifio. 27.
Lessem. Iceman. 17.
. Jack Horner. 135.
Lester. John Henry. 54.
. Man Who Knew Too Much. 92.
.Othello. 241.
Letter Jesters. Falwell. 127.
Letters from the Inside. Marsden. 58.
Levin. Away to Me, Moss. 135.
Levine. Anna Pavlova. 315.
Levinson. Turn of the Century. 171.
Lewis and Clark. Kroll. 92.
Lewis. Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe.
352.
Lewison. Rooster Who Lost His Crow. 206.
Libby Bloom. Masters. 390.
Librarian Who Measured the Earth. Lasky.
16.
412 * THE BULLETIN
Library Dragon. Deedy. 195.
Library. Stewart. 323.
Lies. Hamlet and the Enormous Chinese
Dragon Kite. 55.
Life and Times of the Honeybee. Micucci.
391.
Lifelines. Marcus. 18.
Like Butter on Pancakes. London. 207.
Lillie. Floppy Teddy Bear. 242.
Lion's Whiskers. Day. 232.
Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe. Lewis.
352.
Lisle. Looking for Juliette. 136.
Little Hawk's New Name. Bolognese. 378.
Little Kit. McCully. 208.
Little Plum. Young. 71.
Little Rock. O'Neill. 99.
Lives of the Writers. Krull. 53.
Livingston. Flights of Fancy. 171.
Liza's Blue Moon. Stevens. 251.
Llama in the Family. Hurwitz. 15.
Lobel. Away from Home. 17.
Loch. Zindel. 110.
London. Condor's Egg. 55.
. Like Butter on Pancakes. 207.
Look for Me by Moonlight. Hahn. 276.
Look Once Look Twice. Marshall. 282.
Look Out, Washington, D.C.! Giff. 383.
Looking for Juliette. Lisle. 136.
Lost Summer. Feuer. 273.
Loughery. Into the Widening World. 207.
Lourie. Everglades. 55.
Love. Bess's Log Cabin Quilt. 352.
Low. Spooky Stories for a Dark & Stormy
Night. 171.
Lucht. Red Poppy. 353.
Lucy Forever, Miss Rosetree, and the Stolen
Baby. Shreve. 65.
Lucy's Christmas. Hall. 48.
Lynch. Gypsy Davey. 93.
Lyon. Here and Then. 93.
. Mama Is a Miner. 18.
Lyons. Deep Blues. 135.
Lyttle. Mark Twain. 208.
Macdonald. Secret Lives. 388.
MacGill-Callahan. When Solomon Was King.
242.
Mack. Heartbreak and Roses. 6.
MacKinnon. What Size?. 172.
Madgwick. Citymaze! 280.
Madsen. I Walked to Zion. 57.
Maestro Plays. Martin. 138.
Maestro. Why Do Leaves Change Color? 95.
Magic School Bus in the Time of the
Dinosaurs. Cole. 40.
Maguire. Seven Spiders Spinning. 57.
Mahurin. Jeremy Kooloo. 209.
Mahy. Greatest Show Off Earth. 138.
. My Mysterious World. 378.
. Pirate Uncle. 315.
Maisie. Schertle. 249.
Maizie. High. 277.
Mallett. Inch by Inch. 389.
Mama Bear. Sun. 68.
Mama Is a Miner. Lyon. 18.
Mama Rocks, Papa Sings. Van Laan. 217.
Man Who Knew Too Much. Lester. 92.
Manabozho's Gifts. Greene. 198.
Mandel. Red Cat, White Cat. 95.
Manley. She Flew No Flags. 243.
Manushkin. Rachel, Meet Your Angel! 315.
Marcus. Lifelines. 18.
Marino. Mona Lisa of Salem Street. 316.
Mark Twain. Lyttle. 208.
Markle. Outside and Inside Birds. 96.
. Outside and Inside Snakes. 316.
Marrin. Sea King. 389.
. Virginia's General. 173.
Marsden. Letters from the Inside. 58.
. Tomorrow, When the War Began.
281.
Marshall. Look Once Look Twice. 282.
Martha Calling. Meddaugh. 19.
Martin. Maestro Plays. 138.
Mary By Myself. Smith. 178.
Mary Had a Little Lamb. Hale. 308.
Mary Patten's Voyage. Berleth. 121.
Masters. Libby Bloom. 390.
Matas. Burning Time. 139.
Mathew Brady. Sullivan. 106.
Mathnet Casebook: #4 The Map With a Gap.
Connell. 84.
Max and Ruby's Midas. Wells. 362.
Mayne. Hob and the Goblins. 139.
Mayo. Tortoise's Flying Lesson. 353.
Maze. Griffin. 166.
Mazer, A. Going Where I'm Coming From.
209.
Mazer, N. Missing Pieces. 353.
McCall. Unraveling Fibers. 349.
McClain. No Big Deal. 56.
McCully. Crossing the New Bridge. 18.
. Little Kit. 208.
McDermott. Coyote. 94.
McDonald. Insects Are My Life. 280.
McEwan. Daydreamer. 56.
McGugan. Josepha. 94.
McGuire. Night Becomes Day. 136.
McKay. Exiles at Home. 172.
McKenzie. Perfectly Orderly House. 137.
_ 
. Under the Bridge. 208.
McKissack. African-American Inventors. 94.
. Christmas in the Big House,
Christmas in the Quarters. 56.
McMillan. Nights of the Pufflings. 243.
. Sense Suspense. 137.
JULY/AUGUST 1995 
* 413
McNaughton. Captain Abdul's Pirate School.
138.
. Suddenly! 388.
Meddaugh. Martha Calling. 19.
Medearis. Annie's Gifts. 282.
. Poppa's New Pants. 390.
Meet the Marching Smithereens. Hayes. 346.
Mennyms in the Wilderness. Waugh. 253.
Metil. Story of Karate. 390.
Meyer. Drummers of Jericho. 282.
___ . Rio Grande Stories. 19.
Mia the Beach Cat. Hinel. 166.
Miami-Nanny Stories. Milstein. 96.
Mick Harte Was Here. Park. 356.
Micucci. Life and Times of the Honeybee.
391.
Midwife's Apprentice. Cushman. 303.
Mikaelsen. Stranded. 317.
Miles. Black Stars in Orbit. 193.
Miller, B. Buffalo Gals. 391.
Miller, C. Woodlore. 243.
Miller, Margaret. Guess Who? 20.
Miller, Mary Jane. Going the Distance. 140.
Miller, R. Buffalo Soldiers. 391.
Miller, S. Three Stories You Can Read to
Your Dog. 244.
Miller, W. Frederick Douglass. 392.
Mills. Secret Life of Bethany Barrett. 173.
Milstein. Miami-Nanny Stories. 96.
Milton. Big Cats. 283.
Misoso. Aardema. 78.
Missing Pieces. Mazer. 353.
Mister Fred. Pinkwater. 174.
Miyamoto. Papa and Me. 244.
Mollel. Big Boy. 244.
. Flying Tortoise. 58.
Mona Lisa of Salem Street. Marino. 316.
Money, Money, Money. Parker. 394.
Monk Seal Hideaway. Ackerman. 337.
Monkey Tag. Fromm. 127.
Monster Brother. Auch. 79.
Monster of the Month Club. Regan. 175.
Moominpappa's Memoirs. Jansson. 131.
Moonglow Roll-O-Rama. Pilkey. 245.
Moore. Cherry Tree Buck. 392.
Moose Tracks. Casanova. 380.
Mora. Pablo's Tree. 20.
More Short and Shivery. San Souci. 65.
Morgan, M. Helpful Betty to the Rescue. 20.
. Helpful Betty Solves a Mystery. 20.
Morgan, P. Supper for Crow. 354.
Moriah's Pond. Smothers. 286.
Morning Chair. Joosse. 349.
Morpurgo. Arthur, High King of Britain.
317.
Morris. Harvey Girls. 21.
Moses. Fisher. 305.
Mouse TV. Novak. 60.
Mozeson. Jerusalem Mosaic. 140.
Mr. Bear's Picnic. Gliori. 344.
Mr. Lincoln's Drummer. Wisler. 180.
Mr. Pam Pam and the Hullabazoo. Cooke.
84.
Mr. Tall and Mr. Small. Brenner. 81.
Muchmore. Johnny Rides Again. 354.
Mud Flat Olympics. Stevenson. 106.
Mule Eggs. DeFelice. 41.
Murphy, Chuck. One to Ten Pop-Up
Surprises! 355.
Murphy, Claire. Gold Star Sister. 59.
Murphy, J. Great Fire. 318.
Music from a Place Called Half Moon.
Oughton. 283.
Musical Instruments. 97.
My Brother Has AIDS. Davis. 163.
My Dad. Daly. 341.
My Dog Rosie. Harper. 129.
My House. Desimini. 41.
My Mysterious World. Mahy. 378.
"My Name Is Amelia." Sobol. 215.
My New Kitten. Cole. 340.
My Painted House, My Friendly Chicken,
and Me. Angelou. 118.
My Two Uncles. Vigna. 325.
My Wartime Summers. Cutler. 85.
Myers, E. Climb or Die. 140.
. Forri the Baker. 210.
Myers, W. Darnell Rock Reporting. 59.
.Glory Field. 97.
.Story of the Three Kingdoms. 392.
Mysterious Horseman. Waters. 108.
Mysterious Rays of Dr. Rontgen. Gherman.
46.
Naming Colors. Dewey. 196.
Namioka. Yang the Third and Her Impossible
Family. 319.
Napoli. Jimmy, the Pickpocket of the Palace.
355.
.When the Water Closes over My
Head. 21.
Narahashi. Is That Josie? 60.
National Civil Rights Museum Celebrates
Everyday People. Duncan. 196.
Native American Feast. Penner. 212.
Navajo. Begay. 228.
Naylor. Alice the Brave. 283.
. Boys Against Girls. 98.
. Fear Place. 174.
Ned Feldman, Space Pirate. Pinkwater. 62.
Nelson. Earthshine. 98.
Nest Full of Eggs. Jenkins. 385.
Neuberger. Girl-Son. 210.
Neufeld. Almost a Hero. 356.
New Frontier. Ashabranner. 37.
New Hope. Sorensen. 359.
New Puppy. Anholt. 376.
414 
* THE BULLETIN
New World. Cross. 340.
Newman. Fat Chance. 98.
.Too Far Away to Touch. 318.
Next Stop: Nowhere. Klass. 203.
Nichols. Caribbean Dozen. 118.
Night Becomes Day. McGuire. 136.
Night Goes By. Spohn. 360.
Night of the Gargoyles. Bunting. 82.
Night Room. Goldman. 197.
Nightfather. Friedman. 127.
Nights of the Pufflings. McMillan. 243.
Nimmo. Rainbow and Mr. Zed. 210.
No Big Deal. McClain. 56.
Nodelman. Same Place but Different. 393.
Not Home. Grifalconi. 236.
Nothing But Trouble. Wright. 364.
Nothing Grows Here. Thesman. 107.
Novak. Mouse TV. 60.
Number One Number Fun. Chorao. 194.
O'Connor. Barefoot Dancer. 60.
O'Hara. Hiring Fair. 22.
O'Neill. Little Rock. 99.
Oakley. Foxbury Force. 99.
Ocko. Water. 393.
Oh, the Places He Went. Weidt. 217.
Oh, What a Noisy Farm! Ziefert. 328.
Olaleye. Bitter Bananas. 61.
Old Brown Suitcase. Boraks-Nemetz. 158.
Old. Stacy Had a Little Sister. 319.
Olivia and the Real Live Pet. Graeber. 384.
On the Long Trail Home. Stewart. 146.
On Wings ofJoy. Garfunkel. 88.
Once Upon a Time. Bunting. 378.
One Brave Summer. Turner. 399.
One Fall Day. Bang. 37.
One Good Tern Deserves Another. Kimmel.
169.
One Hot Summer Day. Crews. 340.
One Nation, Many Tribes. Krull. 204.
One Night. Kessler. 350.
One to Ten Pop-Up Surprises! Murphy. 355.
One Tortoise, Ten Wallabies. Wood. 148.
One, Two, Three. Wegman. 400.
Only Alien on the Planet. Randle. 246.
Onyefulu. Emeka's Gift. 319.
Oodgeroo. Dreamtime. 61.
Oppenheim. I Love You, Bunny Rabbit. 211.
Orlev. Lady with the Hat. 356.
Othello. Lester. 241.
Otter Nonsense. Juster. 51.
Oughton. Music from a Place Called Half
Moon. 283.
Our Patchwork Planet. Sattler. 286.
Out of the Blue. Ellis. 270.
Out of the Dark. Wright. 219.
Out of the Storm. Willis. 326.
Outside and Inside Birds. Markle. 96.
Outside and Inside Snakes. Markle. 316.
Outside, Inside. Crimi. 303.
Ozzie on His Own. Hurwitz. 239.
Pablo's Tree. Mora. 20.
Paco and the Witch. Pitre. 320.
Painter Who Loved Chickens. Dunrea. 270.
Palacios. The Red Comb. 100.
Panzer. Celebrate America in Poetry and Art.
141.
Papa and Me. Miyamoto. 244.
Parenteau. Prisoner for Peace. 22.
Parish. Good Driving, Amelia Bedelia. 245.
Park. Mick Harte Was Here. 356.
Parker. Money, Money, Money. 394.
Parton. Coat of Many Colors. 22.
Patchwork People. Lawrence. 205.
Patent. Return of the Wolf. 394.
Paulsen. Tent. 356.
Peach & Blue. Kilborne. 91.
Peanut Butter Friends in a Chop Suey World.
Brammer. 265.
Peck. Last Safe Place on Earth. 211.
Penner. Native American Feast. 212.
.True Story of Pocahontas. 141.
Perfectly Orderly House. McKenzie. 137.
Peters. Hayloft. 212.
_ 
.This Way Home. 62.
Petersen. I Hate Company. 99.
Pevsner. Jon, Flora, and the Odd-Eyed Cat.
62.
Pfeffer. Sara Kate, Superkid. 174.
Philip. King Midas. 23.
. Singing America. 395.
. Songs Are Thoughts. 319.
Philo Fortune's Awesome Journey to His
Comfort Zone. Thompson. 361.
Pic6. Red Comb. 100.
Picture Puzzler. Westray. 69.
Pierced by a Ray of Sun. Gordon. 344.
Pilkey. Moonglow Roll-O-Rama. 245.
Pink and Say. Polacco. 24.
Pink Drink. Simeon. 358.
Pink Paper Swans. Kroll. 52.
Pinkney. Dear Benjamin Banneker. 100.
. Hold Fast to Dreams. 320.
Pinkwater, D. Ned Feldman, Space Pirate. 62.
Pinkwater, J. Mister Fred. 174.
Pinocchio's Sister. Slepian. 322.
Pioneer Bear. Sandin. 397.
Pioneer Sampler. Greenwood. 308.
Pip's Magic. Walsh. 27.
Pirate Uncle. Mahy. 315.
Pitre. Paco and the Witch. 320.
Place to Hide. Westall. 109.
Plantpet. Primavera. 24.
Platt. Stephen Biesty's Cross-Sections Castle.
142.
Playing Right Field. Welch. 400.
Pleasant Company. Addy's Cook Book. 212.
JULY/AUGUST 1995 
* 415
Pleasant Company. Kirsten's Cook Book.
212.
Plowie. Kirkpatrick. 51.
Podwall. Book of Tens. 23.
Poetry from A to Z. Janeczko. 240.
Polacco. Pink and Say. 24.
. Tikvah Means Hope. 142.
Polar, the Titanic Bear. Spedden. 145.
Polikoff. Riding the Wind. 357.
Polizzotti. Star of Fear, Star of Hope. 347.
Pomerans. Nightfather. 127.
Poppa's New Pants. Medearis. 390.
Porte. Chickens! Chickens! 284.
. Something Terrible Happened. 143.
Powell, Randy. Dean Duffy. 395.
Powell, Roxanne. Cat, Mouse and Moon. 63.
Powledge. Working River. 396.
Primavera. Plantpet. 24.
Prince of Humbugs. Andronik. 157.
Prisoner for Peace. Parenteau. 22.
Protecting Marie. Henkes. 237.
Prowlpuss. Wilson. 327.
Quake! Cottonwood. 268.
Qualey. Come in from the Cold. 100.
Quests & Spells. Sierra. 250.
Quinlan. Case of the Mummified Pigs. 246.
Rabbit's Escape. Han. 308.
Rachel, Meet Your Angel! Manushkin. 315.
Rain Song. Evans. 234.
Rainbow and Mr. Zed. Nimmo. 210.
Rajah's Rice. Barry. 191.
Rama. Highwater. 199.
Rand. Cabin Key. 63.
Randle. Only Alien on the Planet. 246.
Random House Book of Bedtime Stories.
143.
Raskob. Papa and Me. 244.
Ratface. Disher. 126.
Ray, K. Sleep Song. 246.
Ray, M. Shaker Boy. 101.
Real Friends. Sharpe. 104.
Red Cat, White Cat. Mandel. 95.
Red Comb. Pic6. 100.
Red Hen and Sly Fox. French. 273.
Red Poppy. Lucht. 353.
Red Ranger Came Calling. Breathed. 80.
Reed. Kraken. 247.
Reef. Walt Whitman. 396.
Regan. Monster of the Month Club. 175.
Return of the Wolf. Patent. 394.
Revenge of the Forty-Seven Samurai.
Haugaard. 309.
Reynolds. Too Soon for Jeff. 101.
Rice. Year the Wolves Came. 175.
Riding the Wind. Polikoff. 357.
Rio Grande Stories. Meyer. 19.
Ritter. Leagues Apart. 247.
Road Home. White. 253.
Roald Dahl's Revolting Recipes. Dahl. 231.
Robbins. Water. 143.
Robert Crowther's Incredible Animal
Alphabet. Crowther. 341.
Roberts, B. Waiting-for-Christmas Stories.
102.
Roberts, W. Absolutely True Story. 213.
Robin's Country. Furlong. 343.
Robinson. Best School Year Ever. 63.
Rochelle. When Jo Louis Won the Tide. 64.
Rodowsky. Sydney, Invincible. 284.
Rogasky. Winter Poems. 175.
Rogers. Adoption. 285.
Roman. Voices under One Sky. 286.
Rooster Who Lost His Crow. Lewison. 206.
Rosie the Riveter. Colman. 380.
Ross, G. How Turtle's Back Was Cracked.
213.
. Girl Who Married the Moon. 160.
Ross, S. Shakespeare and Macbeth. 176.
Rosy Cole: She Walks in Beauty. Greenwald.
165.
Rounds. Sod Houses on the Great Plains.
248.
Royal Nap. Black. 192.
Ruby. Skin Deep. 176.
. Steal Away Home. 214.
Runaway Opposites. Wilbur. 288.
Rupert. African Mask. 25.
Russell. First Apple. 177.
Rylant. Henry and Mudge and the Best Day
of All. 320.
Sabuda. Christmas Alphabet. 64.
Sachar. Wayside School Gets a Little Stranger.
248.
Sad Underwear and Other Complications.
Viorst. 288.
Sage. Coyote Makes Man. 396.
Sail Away. Crews. 268.
Salisbury. Under the Blood-Red Sun. 102.
Sam's Wild West Show. Antle. 264.
Same Place but Different. Nodelman. 393.
San Souci. More Short and Shivery. 65.
Sandeman. Bones. 321.
Sandin. Pioneer Bear. 397.
Sandier. Immigrants. 248.
Sanfield. Bit by Bit. 321.
. Strudel, Strudel, Strudel. 214.
Santa Fe Trail. Lavender. 351.
Sara Kate, Superkid. Pfeffer. 174.
Sattler. Book of North American Owls. 322.
. Our Patchwork Planet. 286.
Saturday at The New You. Barber. 120.
Savage. To Race a Dream. 102.
Saving Owen's Toad. Havill. 130.
Schenker. Under the Domim Tree. 338.
Scherdtle. How Now, Brown Cow? 144.
. Maisie. 249.
416 
* THE BULLETIN
Schlossberg. Big Red Truck. 103.
Schmidt. Two Lands, One Heart. 357.
Schnur. Shadow Children. 144.
School Nurse. Lakin. 204
Schur. Day of Delight. 103.
Schwartz. Teeny Tiny Baby. 25.
Scientific Goofs. Aronson. 157.
Scieszka. Book that Jack Wrote. 26.
Scott. Gemini Game. 104.
Scribner. Gopher Draws Conclusions. 65.
Sea King. Marrin. 389.
Seabrooke. Haunting of Holroyd Hill. 358.
Second-Grade Pig Pals. Larson. 134.
Secret Life of Bethany Barrett. Mills. 173.
Secret Lives. Macdonald. 388.
See Ya, Simon. Hill. 13.
Selsam. How to Be a Nature Detective. 397.
Seminole Diary. Johnson. 50.
Sense Suspense. McMillan. 137.
Seth and Samona. Hyppolite. 385.
Seven Ravens. Grimm. 48.
Seven Spiders Spinning. Maguire. 57.
Seymour. Smash-Up Crash-Up Derby. 249.
Shadow Catcher. Lawlor. 205.
Shadow Children. Schnur. 144.
Shadow of a Hero. Dickinson. 163.
Shaker Boy. Ray. 101.
Shakespeare and Macbeth. Ross. 176.
Shark Callers. Campbell. 39.
Sharpe. Real Friends. 104.
Shatterworld. Foreman. 382.
She Flew No Flags. Manley. 243.
Shea. Whispering Cloth. 250.
Shelby. Homeplace. 322.
Sherrow. U.S. Health Care Crisis. 144.
Short Takes. Kulpa. 280.
Shorty Society. Sinykin. 26.
Shoup. Wish You Were Here. 104.
Shreve. Lucy Forever, Miss Rosetree, and the
Stolen Baby. 65.
Sierra. Quests & Spells. 250.
Signs of Life. Ferris. 305.
Silverman. Don't Fidget a Feather! 105.
Simeon. In and Out and Roundabout. 358.
. Pink Drink. 358.
Simon. Wet World. 358.
Singing America. Philip. 395.
Sinykin. Shorty Society. 26.
Sfs. Three Golden Keys. 177.
Skin Deep. Ruby. 176.
Skurzynski. Zero Gravity. 66.
Sleep Song. Ray. 246.
Slepian. Pinocchio's Sister. 322.
Small Talk. Hopkins. 310.
Smash-Up Crash-Up Derby. Seymour. 249.
Smith, J. Mary By Myself. 178.
Smith, L. Women Who Write: Volume II.
215.
Smith, M. Counting Our Way to Maine. 250.
Smith, R. Thunder Cave. 359.
Smothers. Moriah's Pond. 286.
Snow on Snow on Snow. Chapman. 193.
Snyder. Cat Running. 178.
So Many Dynamos! Agee. 156.
So Much. Cooke. 161.
Sobol, D. "My Name Is Amelia." 215.
Sobol, R. Governor. 66.
Sod Houses on the Great Plains. Rounds.
248.
Some of the Kinder Planets. Wynne-Jones.
328.
Someone Else's Ghost. Buffie. 193.
Something Terrible Happened. Porte. 143.
Somewhere around the Corner. French. 343.
Songs Are Thoughts. Philip. 319.
Songs from Home. Goodman. 128.
Sophie Is Seven. King-Smith. 313.
Sophie. Fox. 88.
Sorensen. New Hope. 359.
Sound the Jubilee. Forrester. 306.
Sovietrek. Buettner. 81.
Spariosu. Ghosts, Vampires, and Werewolves.
178.
Spedden. Polar, the Titanic Bear. 145.
Spider Watching. French. 306.
Spinelli. Tooter Pepperday. 360.
Spirn. Know-Nothings. 398.
Spite Fences. Krisher. 169.
Splash! Jonas. 348.
Splish Splash. Graham. 47.
Spohn. Broken Umbrellas. 26.
.Night Goes By. 360.
Spooky Stories for a Dark & Stormy Night.
Low. 171.
Springer. Toughing It. 67.
Spying on Miss Miller. Bunting. 229.
St. George. Crazy Horse. 145.
St. Lawrence River and Seaway. Willis. 254.
Stacy Had a Little Sister. Old. 319.
Stanek. Thinking Like a Writer. 251.
Stanley, D. Cleopatra. 67.
Stanley, J. I Am an American. 105.
Star of Fear, Star of Hope. Hoestlandt. 347.
Stavsky. Jerusalem Mosaic. 140.
Steal Away Home. Ruby. 214.
Steele. Food & Feasts in Ancient Rome. 68.
Steig. Grown-Ups Get to Do All the Driving.
323.
. Zeke Pippin. 146.
Stephen Biesty's Cross-Sections Castle. Platt.
142.
Stevens, D. Liza's Blue Moon. 251.
Stevens, J. From Pictures to Words. 360.
.Tops & Bottoms. 287.
Stevenson. Bones in the Cliff. 360.
. Mud Flat Olympics. 106.
JULY/AUGUST 1995 
* 417
. Sweet Corn. 252.
.Village Full of Valentines. 216.
Stewart, E. On the Long Trail Home. 146.
Stewart, S. Library. 323.
Sticky Beak. Gleitzman. 275.
Stoehr. Weird on the Outside. 252.
Story of Karate. Metil. 390.
Story of Rosy Dock. Baker. 227.
Story of Ruby Bridges. Coles. 230.
Story of the Three Kingdoms. Myers. 392.
Stranded at Plimoth Plantation 1626. Bowen.
38.
Stranded. Mikaelsen. 317.
Strasser. How I Changed My Life. 361.
Street Child. Doherty. 86.
Street Music. Adoff. 226.
Strudel, Strudel, Strudel. Sanfield. 214.
Sturges. Ten Flashing Fireflies. 398.
Suddenly! McNaughton. 388.
Sullivan. Mathew Brady. 106.
Summer of the Bonepile Monster.
Henderson. 384.
Summer's End. Boelts. 228.
Summerspell. Thesman. 399.
Sun. Mama Bear. 68.
Sunburned Prayer. Talbert. 398.
Sundew Stranglers. Wexler. 400.
Superbird to the Rescue. Hayashi. 309.
Supper for Crow. Morgan. 354.
Sutton. Hearing Us Out. 106.
Swamp Angel. Isaacs. 90.
Sweet and Sour Animal Book. Hughes. 168.
Sweet Corn. Stevenson. 252.
Swift. Gulliver in Lilliput. 361.
Swimming with the Whales. Ellis. 381.
Swoose. King-Smith. 133.
Sydney, Invincible. Rodowsky. 284.
Table Where Rich People Sit. Baylor. 5.
Taking Hold. Alexander. 156.
Talbert. Sunburned Prayer. 398.
Tanya and Emily in a Dance for Two. Gauch.
164.
Tate. Blessing in Disguise. 216.
Taylor. Well. 216.
Teardrop Baby. Greenfield. 11.
Tears of a Tiger. Draper. 164.
Teeny Tiny Baby. Schwartz. 25.
Tell Them We Remember. Bachrach. 100.
Teller of Tales. Brooke. 121.
Temple. Tiger Soup. 26.
. Tonight, by Sea. 287.
Ten Flashing Fireflies. Sturges. 398.
Tent. Paulsen. 356.
Thames Doesn't Rhyme with James.
Danziger. 163.
That Horse Whiskey! Adler. 118.
That Kookoory! Froehlich. 307.
Thesman. Nothing Grows Here. 107.
. Summerspell. 399.
They Followed a Bright Star. Alavedra. 36.
Thinking Like a Writer. Stanek. 251.
This Drinking Nation. Harris. 12.
This Way Home. Peters. 62.
Thomas Jefferson. Giblin. 47.
Thomassie. Feliciana Feydra LeRoux. 324.
Thompson. Philo Fortune's Awesome Journey
to His Comfort Zone. 361.
Thomson. Katie Henio. 287.
Thoughts, Pictures and Words. Kuskin. 378.
Three Cool Kids. Emberley. 271.
Three Golden Keys. Sis. 177.
Three Perfect Peaches. DeFelice. 270.
Three Stories You Can Read to Your Dog.
Miller. 244.
Three Terrible Trins. King-Smith. 203.
Thunder Cave. Smith. 359.
Thurman. Mathnet Casebook: #4 The Map
With a Gap. 84.
Thwonk. Bauer. 157.
Tiger Soup. Temple. 26.
Tikvah Means Hope. Polacco. 142.
Time Ghost. Katz. 312.
To Climb a Waterfall. George. 274.
To Race a Dream. Savage. 102.
Toilets, Bathtubs, Sinks, and Sewers. Colman.
195.
Tolan. Who's There? 146.
Tom's Tail. Jennings. 311.
Tom, Babette & Simon. Avi. 376.
Tomlinson. Forestwife. 252.
Tomorrow, When the War Began. Marsden.
281.
Tonight, by Sea. Temple. 287.
Too Far Away to Touch. Newman. 318.
Too Soon for Jeff. Reynolds. 101.
Tooter Pepperday. Spinelli. 360.
Tops & Bottoms. Stevens. 287.
Tortoise's Flying Lesson. Mayo. 353.
Tough Loser. DeClements. 125.
Toughing It. Springer. 67.
Townsend. Story of Karate. 390.
Trail of Fear. Janney. 201.
Transportation. English. 382.
Traveling Backward. Forward. 44.
Traveling On into the Light. Brooks. 122.
Tree of Dreams. Yep. 290.
Trevifio. Leona. 27.
Triangle, Square, Circle. Wegman. 400.
Trick or Trouble? Cooper. 10.
Trouble with Henriette! Devlin. 341.
Troubling a Star. L'Engle. 16.
True Friends. Wallace. 108.
True Story of Pocahontas. Penner. 141.
Trupp. Cannon. 301.
Trust & Betrayal. Bode. 338.
Tucker. Do Pirates Take Baths? 68.
418 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Tunnels, Tracks, and Trains. Hewett. 276.
Turn of the Century. Levinson. 171.
Turner. One Brave Summer. 399.
Two Eyes, a Nose, and a Mouth. Intrater.
239.
Two Lands, One Heart. Schmidt. 357.
U.S. Health Care Crisis. Sherrow. 144.
Unbearable! Jennings. 386.
Uncle Smoke Stories. Welsch. 180.
Under the Blood-Red Sun. Salisbury. 102.
Under the Bridge. McKenzie. 208.
Under the Domim Tree. Ahnagor. 338.
Underground Railroad. Bial. 228.
Undone! Jennings. 202.
Unraveling Fibers. Keeler. 349.
V Is for Victory. Krull. 387.
Valiant Red Rooster. Kimmel. 313.
Vampire Bugs. Wyeth. 289.
Van Laan. Mama Rocks, Papa Sings. 217.
Van Leeuwen. Bound for Oregon. 107.
Vande Velde. Companions of the Night. 399.
Vanilla, Chocolate, & Strawberry. Busenberg.
8.
Vaughan. Whistling Dixie. 324.
Velisquez. Juanita Fights the School Board.
179.
Vennema. Cleopatra. 67.
Venus among the Fishes. Hall. 276.
Very Lonely Firefly. Carle. 379.
Vigna. My Two Uncles. 325.
Vikki Vanishes. Griffin. 345.
Village Full of Valentines. Stevenson. 216.
Viorst. Sad Underwear and Other Complica-
tions. 288.
Virginia's General. Marrin. 173.
Voices from Vietnam. Denenberg. 233.
Voices under One Sky. Roman. 286.
Voigt. When She Hollers. 107.
Voyager's Stone. Kraske. 240.
Wagon Train. Wright. 327.
Wait and See. Bradley. 6.
Waiting-for-Christmas Stories. Roberts. 102.
Walk Two Moons. Creech. 162.
Wallace-Brodeur. Goodbye, Mitch. 325.
Wallace. True Friends. 108.
Walsh. Pip's Magic. 27.
Walt Whitman. Reef. 396.
Wan Hu Is in the Stars. Armstrong. 376.
Wangerin. Crying for a Vision. 180.
War Game. Foreman. 43.
Warburton. Moominpappa's Memoirs. 131.
Warm Place. Farmer. 304.
Warner. Dog Years. 325.
Watch Out for Clever Women! Hayes. 130.
Watchers. Cresswell. 195.
Water. AscI. 264.
Water. Ocko. 393.
Water. Robbins. 143.
Waters. Mysterious Horseman. 108.
Waugh. Mennyms in the Wilderness. 253.
Wave of the Sea-Wolf. Wisniewski. 109.
Way Home. Hathorn. 12.
Wayside School Gets a Little Stranger. Sachar.
248.
Wee Little Woman. Barton. 338.
Wegman. One, Two, Three. 400.
Wegman. Triangle, Square, Circle. 400.
Weidt. Oh, the Places He Went. 217.
Weird on the Outside. Stoehr. 252.
Welch, S. Horse for All Seasons. 180.
Welch, W. Playing Right Field. 400.
Welcoming Babies. Knight. 169.
Well. Taylor. 216.
Wells. Max and Ruby's Midas. 362.
Welsch. Uncle Smoke Stories. 180.
Werlin. Are You Alone on Purpose? 147.
Westall. Christmas Spirit. 69.
. Falling into Glory. 362.
_ Place to Hide. 109.
Westray. Picture Puzzler. 69.
Wet World. Simon. 358.
Wexler. Sundew Stranglers. 400.
What Am I? Charles. 40.
What Kind of Love? Cole. 268.
What Makes Me Happy? Anholt. 298.
What Size? MacKinnon. 172.
Wheeling and Whirling-Around Book.
Hindley. 14.
When Blue Meant Yellow. Heifetz. 199.
When Jo Louis Won the Title. Rochelle. 64.
When She Hollers. Voigt. 107.
When Solomon Was King. MacGill-Callahan.
242.
When the Water Closes over My Head.
Napoli. 21.
When the Wolves Return. Hirschi. 200.
Where the Flame Trees Bloom. Ada. 190.
Whipple. Celebrating America. 148.
Whispering Cloth. Shea. 250.
Whistling Dixie. Vaughan. 324.
White Deer. Bierhorst. 377.
White Guinea-Pig. Dubosarsky. 342.
White Knuckles. Langseth. 280.
White. Road Home. 253.
Whitefish Will Rides Again! Yorinks. 181.
Who Eats What? Lauber. 314.
Who's There? Tolan. 146.
Who's Who in My Family? Leedy. 240.
Why Do Leaves Change Color? Maestro. 95
Wilbur. Runaway Opposites. 288.
Wild. Beast. 218.
Wilder. Dance at Grandpa's. 148.
.Winter Days in the Big Woods. 148.
Willard. An Alphabet of Angels. 69.
Williams, C. Adeline Street. 289.
JULY/AUGUST 1995 
* 419
Williams, Marcia. Adventures of Robin
Hood. 326.
Williams, Michael. Genuine Half Moon Kid.
28.
Willis, P. Out of the Storm. 326.
Willis, T. St. Lawrence River and Seaway.
254.
Willner-Pardo. Jason and the Losers. 363.
Willows in Winter. Horwood. 168.
Wilson, B. Dandelion Garden. 363.
Wilson, E. Bibles and Bestiaries. 148.
Wilson, G. Prowlpuss. 327.
Winkleman. Firehouse. 70.
Winter Days in the Big Woods. Wilder. 148.
Winter Poems. Rogasky. 175.
Winter. Christmas Tree Ship. 148.
Wish You Were Here. Shoup. 104.
Wisler. Mr. Lincoln's Drummer. 180.
Wisniewski. Wave of the Sea-Wolf. 109.
With Every Drop of Blood. Collier. 9.
Within a Painted Past. Hutchins. 278.
Wolf Woman. Jordan. 131.
Wolf, B. Homeless. 255.
Wolf, S. Focus. 109.
Women Who Write: Volume II. Smith. 215.
Wong. Good Luck Gold and Other Poems.
181.
Wood, J. One Tortoise, Ten Wallabies. 148.
Wood, T. Two Lands, One Heart. 357.
Woodlore. Miller. 243.
Woodruff. Dear Levi. 28.
Woodson. From the Notebooks of Melanin
Sun. 401.
Woody Guthrie. Yates. 364.
Working River. Powledge. 396.
Wormser. Hoboes. 70.
.Juveniles in Trouble. 29.
Worst Noel. Cooper. 124.
Worth. All the Small Poems and Fourteen
More. 218.
Would They Love a Lion? Denton. 381.
Wright, B. Nothing But Trouble. 364.
__ 
. Out of the Dark. 219.
Wright, C. Wagon Train. 327.
Wyeth. Always My Dad. 219.
.Vampire Bugs. 289.
Wynne-Jones. Some of the Kinder Planets.
328.
Yang the Third and Her Impossible Family.
Namioka. 319.
Yates. Woody Guthrie. 364.
Year on Monhegan Island. Dean. 232.
Year the Wolves Came. Rice. 175.
Yep. Hiroshima. 364.
.Junior Thunder Lord. 149.
.Later, Gator. 401.
___ . Tree of Dreams. 290.
Yolen. And Twelve Chinese Acrobats. 365.
. Ballad of the Pirate Queens. 290.
. Girl in the Golden Bower. 71.
Yorinks. Whitefish Will Rides Again! 181.
You Can't Eat Your Chicken Pox, Amber
Brown. Danziger. 269.
You're a Genius, Blackboard Bear. Alexander.
337.
Youn Hee and Me. Adler. 226.
Young. Little Plum. 71.
Zeinert. Free Speech. 262.
Zeke Pippin. Steig. 146.
Zero Gravity. Skurzynski. 66.
Ziefert. Oh, What a Noisy Farm! 328.
Zindel. Loch. 110.
Zoom. Banyai. 191.
1:;
Ages 11-14 TR $16.95 0-531-06869-2 RLB $16.99 0-531-08719-0
Orchard Bm 
A 
Compan
-NAVAJO-
Visions and Voices Across the Mesa
SHONTO BEGAY
v 7
*"Powerful....Navajo philosophy and an artist's
personal experience infuse this collection of
paintings and (mostly free) verse."
-
School Library Journal, starred review
"The noted Navajo artist fulfills his stated goal of
taking the reader 'into the corners of my world, the
Navajo world'....Reveals an intimate knowledge of
a people in harmony with the land."
-
Publishers Weekly
"Navajo artist Begay show[s]
a range of...styles from a richly
textured, earthy pointillism
to romanticized portraiture."
-
Bulletin of the Center
for Children's Books
0-590-46153-2 * Ages 9-up
48 pages * $15.95 
J
TrIII 
l VC II··1n ( O n
·1·11~1 11 
J L,) 
t b c r 
1; 
t L,) 
r i c
MARTHA BROOK
ALA Best Book for Young Adults 
191~
ALA RcommndedBook or te 
Reuctan YA eade
Ears likes to hear from Mother the secret song, passed
from mouse to mouse for as long as anyone can remem-
ber. As she plays in the golden wheat, she wonders what
the song means.
When her world is shattered and she is launched on
a frightening adventure, Ears wonders if she will ever be
happy and safe again -
that is, until she discovers the
meaning of the secret song.
Featuring the beautiful watercolor illustrations of
William Geldart, the allegorical story of Ears will teach
children a significant truth as well as entertain them.
Ages 4- 6 * 32 pages * Full-color illustrations throughout
ISBN 0-8028-5110-X * 8 1/4"x 9" * Hardcover * $14.99
At your bookstore, or call 800-253-7521 FAX 616-459-6540
5A2l 
W7M. B. EERDMANS PUBLISHING CO.
S255 JEFFERSON AVE. S.E. / GRAND RAPIDS, MICHIGAN 49503
llllillM
mmmmm
`V Starred by ALA BookIst
"Am I the only such person on Earth?' This question begins Gordon's very
brie, on-target note to her readers and sets the stage for a superb compilation
of poems that crosses the world's cultures and eras.... Joan Aiken and
Cynthia Rylantare represented along with Emily Dickinson and Adrienne
Rich Paul Simon as well as John Keats, Rainer Maria Rilke, Carl Sandburg,
and other poets, miany in translation from a variety of eastern and western
langages. The organization of the selections is noteworthy.. .topics range
from the timeless to the timely, emotions from hope to despair.... The
colction will speak with immediacy to YAs of all ages." -Booklist
Ages 12 up. $15.TR 0-06-0236132); $14.89LB (0-06-023614-0)
Other poetry collections edited by Ruth Gordon
PEELING THE ONION 
TIME IS THE LONGEST
A Charlotte Zolotow Book 
DISTANCE
Ages 10 up $15 00TR (0-06-021727-8) 
A Charlotte Zolotow Book
$14 89LB (0-06-021728-6) 
Ages 12 up. $13.95TR (0-06-022297-2)
$13.89LB (0-06-022424-X)
S10 
sdNewarkN.Y 
22
ordon 'sII 
1
rb compilation
ms 
·: :: 
s an era ....- Joa Aie andPa 
lB~~
$trrper 
oetoseie 
yRtrGro
PWELCN TH ONION 
TIME IS÷ TH U' ; 
••:INGE
Ce- hCeadt of a famidq
Mf 1 TI(ITE,
.U-L 
1:ULJ. IL 
YOJLj
dh-udiiabed boo
cM~liee^Dl/'kUfedk 
.
c4 moving, familiar portrait of a splendid
woman and four generations of the lives she
touched." -
Kirkus Reviews
"Charming ... Listeners will be glad they have
had the opportunity for this glimpse of a
well-lived life" -
Schnool Library .rournl
"Lovers of Barbara Cooney's
Miss Rumphius will find in Maisie
Sanother 
person they wish they
ulletin
8
"-¸'4!
ioks
019 
/
_>r
P~i~is
'Ashansom 
a boo 
on 
the 
Negro 
Leagu
Leaues
Apaort
The Men and Times of the
Ne4ro Baseball Leaaues
Text by Lawrence S. Ritter
Illustrations by Richard Merkin
"A brief history of the Negro Leagues, basically through the
introduction of some of their stellar performers ... A fine
melding of text and illustration that makes accessible an
important part of baseball history." 
-School Library Journal
"Handsome, vibrantly hued oil pastel portraits by New Yorker
artist Merkin. .. This respectful tribute makes a worthwhile
addition to any young ballplayer's library."-Publishers Weekly
All Ages 40 pp. TR $15.00/0-688-13316-9; LE $14.93/0-688-13317-7
Morrow Junior Books
A division of William Morrow & Co., Inc.
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019
~EI:
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.SA.
RETURN PosTAcG Gua~ANrE
ESCAPE FROM
SOBIBOR
Richard Rashke
S"Breathtakingly suspenseful and horri-
fying at the same time." -
Publishers
Weekly
* "A sensitive, thoughtful, and well-
researched account of the 'biggest prisoner
escape of World War II.'" -
Samuel Gold,
Jewish Chicago
0 "Gives us a very good idea of how the
will to survive can lead quite ordinary
people to surmount the most extraordinary
obstacles." -
Meir Ronnen,]erusalem Post
O"This moving and angry book deserves to
be read." -
Susan Osnos, Washington Post
Paper, $16.95
P 
A
ESCAPE
FROM
SECOND CLASS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
(800) 545-4703
p
-"
Ir-- 
------- 
-j
~i~i~2~dT/
~---
r
ib~
;p~
rr~I:. 
d
·r
'i 
9B~B
I·? 
k( 
; 
-
·r*-·ii
aP~1 
i:·E' 
ial 
~r~B
~""b 
V 
r·~·~ 
I
~" 
P"
